Are Aftershocks of Large Californian Earthquakes Diﬀusing?

1

Agn`es Helmstetter1, Guy Ouillon2 and Didier Sornette1−3
1 Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095
2 Laboratoire de Physique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS UMR6622 and Universit´e des Sciences, Parc Valrose,
06108 Nice Cedex 2, France.
3 Department of Earth and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095

Abstract

We analyze 21 aftershock sequences of California to test for evidence of space-time diﬀusion.
Aftershock diﬀusion may result from stress diﬀusion and is also predicted by any mechanism of
stress weakening. Here, we test an alternative mechanism to explain aftershock diﬀusion, based
on multiple cascades of triggering. In order to characterize aftershock diﬀusion, we develop two
methods, one based on a suitable time and space windowing that has been calibrated on the
ETAS model of triggered seismicity, the other using a wavelet transform adapted to the removal
of background seismicity. Both methods conﬁrm that diﬀusion of seismic activity is very weak,
much weaker than reported in previous studies. A possible mechanism explaining the weakness
of observed diﬀusion is the eﬀect of geometry, including the localization of aftershocks on a
fractal fault network and the impact of extended rupture lengths which control the typical
distances of interaction between earthquakes.

3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

Aftershocks display spectacular clustering proper-
ties both in time and space. The temporal clustering
obeys the well established (modiﬁed) Omori law [Utsu
et al., 1995] which states that the rate of aftershocks
decays as

n(t) =

A
(t + c)p ,

(1)

where the Omori exponent p is generally found be-
tween 0.5 and 2. In expression (1), the origin of time is
the occurrence of the main event. The oﬀset time c is
often not well-constrained and may partly account for
the incompleteness of catalogs close to mainshocks.

The spatial organization of aftershocks is more
complex and less understood. On the one-hand, it
is recognized that many aftershocks occur right on
the fault plane or in its immediate vicinity (at the
scale of the mainshock rupture length) and this is
used for 3D visualization of the rupture surface (see
for instance [Fukuyama, 1991]). The observation that
the spatial distribution of earthquakes in California is
characterized by a fractal dimension close to 2.2 [Ka-
gan and Knopoﬀ, 1980] and the fact that this mea-
sure is dominated by aftershock clustering suggests
a rather complex ramiﬁed network of active faults
[Sornette, 1991]. The clustering of aftershocks on or
close to the mainshock rupture probably reﬂects local
stress concentration at asperities that served to stop
the rupture and lock the fault. On the other hand,
aftershocks also occur away from the strict conﬁne of
fault ruptures, due to various triggering mechanism,
the simplest one being stress transfer and increasing
Coulomb stress [King et al., 1994; Stein et al., 1994;
Stein, 1999; Toda et al., 2002].

Both temporal and spatial properties argue for the
presence of triggering processes, which could also be
expected to lead to combined space and time depen-
dence of the organization of aftershocks. Indeed, sev-
eral studies have reported so-called “aftershock dif-
fusion,” the phenomenon of expansion or migration
of aftershock zone with time [Mogi, 1968; Imoto,
1981; Chatelain et al., 1983; Tajima and Kanamori,
1985a,b; Ouchi and Uekawa, 1986; Wesson, 1987; Ry-
delek and Sacks, 1990; Noir et al., 1997; Jacques et
al., 1999].
Immediately after the mainshock occur-
rence, most aftershocks are located close to the rup-
ture plane of the mainshock, then aftershocks may in
some cases migrate away from the mainshock, at ve-
locity ranging from 1 km/h to 1 km/year [Jacques et
al., 1999; Rydelek and Sacks, 2001]. This expansion

2

is not universally observed, but is more important
in some areas than in others [Tajima and Kanamori,
1985a]. Most of these studies are qualitative and are
based on a few sequences at most. Marsan et al.
[1999, 2000] and Marsan and Bean [2003] have de-
veloped what is to our knowledge the ﬁrst systematic
method to analyze space-time interactions between
pairs of earthquake and report evidence for strong
diﬀusion (see our discussion below on these results).
A similar method has also been used by Huc and
Main [2002]. The present state of knowledge on af-
tershock diﬀusion is confusing because contradictory
results have been obtained, some showing almost sys-
tematic diﬀusion whatever the tectonic setting and
in many areas in the world, while others do not ﬁnd
evidences for aftershock diﬀusion [Shaw, 1993]. This
may reﬂect the intrinsic variability in space and time
of genuine diﬀusion properties and also possible bi-
ases of the analyses, for example, due to background
seismicity.

From a physical view point, the diﬀusion of af-
tershocks is usually interpreted as a diﬀusion of the
stress induced by the mainshock, either by a vis-
cous relaxation process [Rydelek and Sacks, 2001], or
due to ﬂuid transfer in the crust [Nur and Booker,
1972; Hudnut et al., 1989; Noir et al., 1997]. How-
ever, such a stress diﬀusion process is not necessary
to explain aftershock diﬀusion. Recent studies have
indeed suggested that aftershock diﬀusion may re-
sult from either a rate and state friction model [Di-
eterich, 1994; Marsan et al., 2000] or a sub-critical
growth mechanism [Huc and Main, 2002], without
invoking any process of stress diﬀusion. Actually,
aftershock diﬀusion is predicted by any model that
assumes that (i) the time to failure increases if the
applied stress decreases and (ii) the stress change in-
duced by the mainshock decreases with the distance
from the mainshock. Therefore, aftershocks further
away from the mainshock will occur later than those
closer to the mainshock, because the stress change is
smaller and thus the failure time is larger. An in-
crease of time to failure with the applied stress is
predicted by many models of aftershocks, including
rate and state friction [Dieterich, 1994], sub-critical
crack growth [Das and Scholz, 1981; Yamashita and
Knopoﬀ, 1987; Shaw, 1993], damage or static fatigue
laws [Scholz, 1968; Lee and Sornette, 2000]. For in-
stance, the sub-critical growth model of [Das and
Scholz, 1981] predicts that the time to failure tc of
an aftershock decreases with the stress change dσ ac-

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

dσ(r) ∼ r

−1/2

tc(r) ∼ rn/2

R(t) ∼ tH ,

cording to

tc ∼ dσ

−n ,

If the stress
where n is the stress corrosion index.
change decreases with the distance r from the main-
shock according to

in the near ﬁeld (at distances from the fault smaller
than the mainshock rupture length), then the average
time to failure increases with r as

By inverting r as a function of t, the typical distance
R(t) of aftershocks occurring at time t after the main-
shock is thus expected to increase according to [Huc
and Main, 2002]

with H = 2/n. Expression (5) thus predicts a very
slow sub-diﬀusion, with a diﬀusion exponent H =
2/n ≈ 0.06 for a corrosion index close to 30 as gen-
erally observed [Huc and Main, 2002]. The diﬀusion
exponent is even smaller at large distances from the
mainshock because the stress decreases as ∼ 1/r3 and
thus H = 1/(3n). If the time to failure decreases ex-
ponentially with the applied stress, as expected for ex-
ample for static fatigue laws [Scholz, 1968], the typical
distance R increases logarithmically with time. Such
a slow diﬀusion is diﬃcult to observe in real data due
to the limited number of events and the presence of
background seismicity. Take H = 0.2 for instance:
one needs ﬁve decades in time range to observe one
decades in space range. The smallness of the diﬀu-
sion exponent H expected this and other models (see
Appendix A) already explains why it may be quite
diﬃcult to observe it.

Another alternative explanation of aftershock dif-
fusion, that does not rely on any stress diﬀusion pro-
cess, is multiple triggering. Ouchi and Uekawa [1986]
ﬁrst reported that the diﬀusion of aftershocks is of-
ten due to the occurrence of large aftershocks and
the ensuing localization of secondary aftershocks close
to them. The apparent diﬀusion of the seismicity
may thus result from a cascade process; the main-
shock triggers aftershocks which in turn trigger their
own aftershocks, and so on, thus leading to an expan-
sion of the aftershock zone. A recent series of papers
have investigated quantitatively this concept of trig-
gered seismicity [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002a,b,c;

3

2003a; Helmstetter et al., 2003] in the context of the
so-called epidemic-type aftershock (ETAS) model of
earthquakes seen as point-wise events, which was in-
troduced in [Ogata, 1988] and in a slightly diﬀerent
form in [Kagan and Knopoﬀ, 1981; 1987]. The ETAS
model assumes that each earthquake triggers after-
shocks, with a rate that decays in time according to
Omori’s law, and which increases with the mainshock
magnitude. The distribution of distances between
triggered and triggering earthquake is assumed to be
independent of the time. Using this model, Helm-
stetter and Sornette [2002b] showed that, under the
right conditions (see Appendix A), the characteris-
tic size R of the aftershock cloud may increase as a
function of time t since the mainshock according to
expression (5), where H is a function of both the ex-
ponent of Omori’s law and of the exponent describing
the spatial interactions between events (see Appendix
A). Figure 1 presents results from numerical simula-
tions of the ETAS model to show how cascades of
multiple triggering can produce aftershock diﬀusion.
The analysis of the ETAS model in [Helmstetter and
Sornette, 2002b] oﬀers some predictions that can we
tested in real aftershock sequences. Diﬀusion should
be observed only if the Omori exponent p is smaller
than 1, and the diﬀusion exponent H should decrease
with p if p < 1. In addition to the diﬀusion law (5),
the ETAS model also predicts a decrease of the Omori
exponent p with the distance from the mainshock.

Motivated by these diﬀerent empirical and theoret-
ical works, we revisit the issue of the existence of after-
shock diﬀusion and of its characterization. For this,
we develop two diﬀerent and complementary meth-
ods to test these predictions. We analyze aftershock
sequences in California and interpret the results in
the lights of the predictions obtained from the ETAS
model [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] (see the Ap-
pendix A for a brief description of the relevant pre-
dictions).

The organization of the article is as follows. We
ﬁrst discuss the problems encountered in previously
published analyses of diﬀusion in real data. We then
explain and use a direct method of analysis of several
aftershock sequences in California, followed by a sec-
ond method based on wavelet analysis. This second
method aims at optimizing the removal of the per-
turbing inﬂuence of the seismicity background. We
then discuss the limits of the theoretical and numeri-
cal analysis, and interpret our empirical results in the
light of various available models.

Our analyses are carried out on two diﬀerent cat-

alogs, (i) the catalog of Southern California seismic-
ity provided by the Southern California Seismic Net-
work for the period 1932-2000, and (ii) the cata-
log of Northern California seismicity provided by the
Northern California Seismic Network since 1968. The
minimum magnitude for completeness ranges from
M = 3.5 in 1932 to M < 2 for the two catalogs
since 1980. The average uncertainty on earthquake
location is about 1 km for epicenters, but is larger for
hypocenters. Therefore we consider only the spatial
distribution of epicenters.

2. Methodological Issues

A priori, the observed seismicity results from a
complex interplay between tectonic driving, fault in-
teractions, diﬀerent spatio-temporal ﬁeld organiza-
tions (stress, ﬂuid, plastic deformation, phase trans-
formations, etc.) and physical processes of damage
and rupture. Notwithstanding this complexity, from
the view point of empirical observations, it is cus-
tomary to distinguish two classes of seismicity: the
seismicity resulting from the tectonic loading which
is often taken as a constant source (uncorrelated seis-
micity) and the triggered seismicity resulting from
earthquake interactions (correlated seismicity). An
alternative classiﬁcation of seismicity deﬁnes earth-
quakes as either foreshock, mainshock, aftershock or
background seismicity. The deﬁnition of aftershocks
and foreshocks requires the speciﬁcation of a space-
time window used to select foreshocks (resp. after-
shocks) before (resp. after) a larger event deﬁned
as the mainshock. The background is the average
level of seismicity prior to the mainshock or at large
times after the mainshock. Of course, such classiﬁca-
tion is open to criticism in view of the unescapable
residual arbitrariness of the selection of foreshocks,
mainshocks and aftershocks [Helmstetter et al., 2003;
Helmstetter and Sornette, 2003]. Nevertheless, it of-
fers a useful reference for testing what is it that one
measures in earthquake diﬀusion processes.

Following previous studies, our analyses presented
below assume that earthquake occurrence follows a
point process, because we deal with the space and
time organization of aftershock epicenters. Physically,
this would be justiﬁed when all spatial and temporal
scales are larger than source rupture dimension and
duration. In reality, this is not the case and the point
process representation may lead to incomplete or mis-
leading conclusions, as we point out in section 6.3.

4

2.1. Eﬀect of uncorrelated seismicity

The major problem when analyzing real seismicity
data in search of some evidence for diﬀusion comes
from the mixture of correlated seismicity which can
display diﬀusion and of the uncorrelated seismicity
(noise). The latter which can signiﬁcantly alter the
evaluation of the characteristic distance of the after-
shock zone. To illustrate this problem, we analyze
in Figure 2 a synthetic catalog generated by super-
posing a large number of independent aftershock se-
quences, without adding a constant seismicity back-
ground. This synthetic catalog has been generated
by superposing 1000 mainshocks with a poissonian
distribution in time and space and with a Gutenberg-
Richter distribution of magnitudes, and by adding af-
tershocks sequences of each mainshock, with a num-
ber of aftershock increasing as 100.8M with the main-
shock magnitude M . If we study, as in previous stud-
ies, the average distance between all pairs of events
in the catalog as a function of their average time dif-
ference, the superposition of uncorrelated aftershock
sequences induces an apparent and spurious diﬀusion,
over almost four orders of magnitude in time. This
apparent diﬀusion comes from the superposition of a
large number of aftershock sequences, with a power-
law distribution of duration and spatial extension,
resulting from the increase of the number of after-
shocks and of the length of the aftershock zone with
the mainshock magnitude, together with a power-law
distribution of earthquakes sizes (Gutenberg-Richter
law).

In order to study the diﬀusion of aftershocks, trig-
gered directly or indirectly by the same source, one
strategy is to study individual aftershock sequences
of large earthquakes selected by some clustering al-
gorithm, in order to remove the inﬂuence of uncorre-
lated seismicity. This is the approach followed in the
present paper.

2.2. Discussion of the method of Marsan et
al.

In contrast, Marsan et al.

[Marsan et al., 1999;
2000; Marsan and Bean, 2003] have proposed a dif-
ferent method, which uses all available seismicity and
considers all pairs of events independently of their
magnitude, with the advantage that (1) the corre-
sponding data set is much larger than for individual
aftershock sequences and (2) their method does not
require the sometimes arbitrary deﬁnition of main-
shocks and aftershocks. In principle, their approach

provides a systematic search of possible space-time
correlations between earthquakes. However, there is
a potential problem with their method stemming from
the eﬀect of the background seismicity and of uncor-
related seismicity, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2. Indeed,
they study the average distance between all points
as a function of the time between them. Therefore,
their count is performed over a mixture of very diﬀer-
ent earthquake populations, a signiﬁcant fraction of
events being probably unrelated causally.

In order to remove the inﬂuence of this uncorre-
lated seismicity, they use the global catalog to esti-
mate the average distance between two points, and
they remove the contribution of the average seismic-
ity to estimate the spatio-temporal distribution of the
correlated seismicity. Speciﬁcally, Marsan et al. cal-
culate a pair-wise time-dependent space-space corre-
lation function corrected for the background by sub-
stracting the long-time average value of this space-
space correlation function, from which they estimate
an average distance between pairs as a function of
time. The growth of this average distance with time
may then qualify a causal dependence between earth-
quakes, through a diﬀusive process. Marsan et al.
[Marsan et al., 1999; 2000; Marsan and Bean, 2003]
studied in this way several catalogs at diﬀerent scales,
from the scale of a mine to the world-wide seismicity,
and observed that the average distance between two
earthquakes increases as a power-law of the time be-
tween them, with an exponent often close to H = 0.2,
indicative of a sub-diﬀusion process. They interpreted
their results as a mechanism of stress diﬀusion, that
may be due to ﬂuid transfer with heterogeneous per-
meability leading to sub-diﬀusion.

In this sense, Marsan et al. do not try to establish a
causal dependence between earthquakes but rather to
detect a correlation in their spatio-temporal organi-
zation. Recall that correlation shows that two events
are related, but it does not determine their cause and
eﬀect relationship. This is because there are basi-
cally three possible explanations for the observation
of correlation: (i) The correlation is a coincidence; (ii)
One event causes the other; (iii) The two events are
both caused by some third event. In their detection
of spatio-temporal correlations in seismicity, Marsan
et al. do not exclude neither explanation (ii) nor (iii)
while in contrast the present paper emphasizes expla-
nation (ii).

We have performed many tests of Marsan et al.’s
method on synthetic catalogs. A typical test is shown
as the diamond symbols in ﬁgure 2. At early times

5

(t < 1 day), the average distance between earthquake
pairs is constant, as it should be, and the method re-
moves adequately the inﬂuence of uncorrelated seis-
micity. But at large times when aftershock activity
is small, the average distance exhibits large ﬂuctua-
tions as a function of time. This is due to the cor-
rective term which becomes ill-conditioned at large
times and leads to a large sensitivity to noise and ﬁ-
nite sample sizes. We have found that, in most of our
synthetic catalogs constructed without genuine diﬀu-
sion, the average distance obtained by Marsan et al.’s
method is approximately constant at early times as it
should, but then crosses over to another noisy plateau
at long times, as a result of the ill-deﬁned correction
term. This noisy crossover from a constant to another
higher plateau obviously gives an apparent growth of
the average distance between pairs of earthquakes as
a function of time, which may compete with or hide
a genuine signal. It seems to us that several of the
ﬁgures on the time dependence of the average dis-
tance, which are presented in [Marsan et al., 1999;
2000; Marsan and Bean, 2003], exhibit this feature of
a more or less constant or very weak growth followed
by a more abrupt jump to another noisy plateau. If
one interprets Marsan et al.’s results in terms a causal
diﬀusion processes, the evidence on diﬀusion provided
in [Marsan et al., 1999; 2000; Marsan and Bean, 2003]
is only suggestive and additional tests of the methods
on synthetic and real data should be performed in or-
der to understand its eﬀects on the analysis of real
data and to improve the correction term. Marsan et
al.’s analysis is perhaps better interpreted as evidence
of a spatio-temporal correlation of seismicity result-
ing from viscous relaxation, stress pulses and other
processes operating at large scales. But then, their
analyses should not be interpreted using models of
causal diﬀusion based on rate- and state-dependent
friction law [Marsan et al., 2000] or on sub-critical
crack growth [Huc and Main, 2002], that model only
mainshock-aftershock pairs and not arbitrary pairs of
earthquakes.

3. Our windowing method

3.1. Method

In this study, we analyze individual aftershock se-
quences and consider the diﬀusion of the seismicity
triggered directly or indirectly by the mainshock. We
adjust the values of the time window T and the space
window D used to select aftershocks so that the rate
of background activity is negligible in comparison

with the aftershock rate. The background seismic-
ity rate is estimated by the average seismicity before
the mainshock. We also adjust the minimum magni-
tude m0 and the minimum time tmin after the main-
shock in order to obtain a catalog that is complete for
tmin < t < T and m > m0.

In order to estimate the average size R of the after-
shocks area as a function of the time from the main-
shock, we deﬁne the barycenter of the aftershock se-
quence as the reference point because the mainshock
epicenter has no reason a priori to be the source of
the aftershock sequence. The average size of the af-
tershock area R is obtained as the average distance
between the aftershocks and the barycenter. We ﬁnd
that this procedure yields a diﬀusion exponent Hr
that is always a little larger than the diﬀusion ex-
ponent estimated from the average distance between
the aftershocks and the mainshock epicenter, as done
in [Marsan et al., 1999; 2000; Marsan and Bean,
2003;Huc and Main, 2002].

We also introduce a reﬁnement to take into ac-
count the anisotropy of the aftershock zone and the
spatial extension of the mainshock rupture. For this,
we compute the axes a and b of inertia of the whole
aftershock sequence as a function of the time after
the mainshock, in the spirit of [Kagan, 2002]. Geo-
metrically, this corresponds to approximate the whole
map of aftershocks as ﬁlling an ellipse with small axis
b and large axis a. This provides two additional dif-
fusion exponents Ha and Hb. For strike-slip main-
shocks, b(t) measures the average distance between
aftershocks and the fault plane, while the large axis
gives the average distance between aftershocks and
the barycenter on the fault plane.

We also measure the Omori exponent by plotting
the rate of aftershock activity as a function of time
in a log-log plot, and by measuring the slope p by a
linear regression for tmin < t < T . We have also used
a maximum likelihood method to estimate both the
p and c values of the modiﬁed Omori law. In most
cases, the two methods provide similar values of p.
We also estimate the variation of p with the distance
r between the mainshock and its aftershocks by se-
lecting aftershocks at diﬀerent distances between the
mainshock. As described in the Appendix A, a pre-
diction of the ETAS model concerns the modiﬁcation
of the distribution of distances r between aftershocks
and the mainshock epicenter with time. We plot the
distribution of distances r between the mainshock and
its aftershocks for several time windows to test if there
is an expansion of the aftershock area with time.

6

We have tested this method using synthetic cata-
logs generated with the ETAS model, including a con-
stant seismicity background. We have checked that
our method provides a reliable estimate of the diﬀu-
sion exponent and is almost insensitive to the back-
ground activity as long as the duration of the time
window is suﬃciently short so that the seismic rate is
dominated by aftershocks.

3.2. Results

We have analyzed 21 aftershock sequences of ma-
jor earthquakes in California with a number of after-
shocks larger than 500, in addition to the two after-
shock sequences of large earthquakes (Kern-County,
M=7.5, 1952, and San-Fernando, M=6.6, 1971) which
have less than 500 events. The results for all these 21
sequences are listed in Table 1. The diﬀerent values
of H, measured either by the average distance from
the barycenter (Hr) or from the inertial axes (Ha and
Hb), generally give similar results. Exceptions are the
Morgan Hill, Loma-Prieta, and Joshua-Tree events
which have Hb > Ha, and the Imperial Valley event
which gives Hb < Ha. The diﬀusion exponent H is
always positive, and generally smaller than 0.1. The
estimated standard deviation on H, measured for syn-
thetic catalogs with the same number of events and
similar p-values, is about 0.05. Thus, most aftershock
sequences do not exhibit a signiﬁcant diﬀusion.

Details of the analysis for the aftershock sequence
following the 1992 M = 7.3 Landers event are shown
in Figures 3 and 4. For this sequence, we measure an
Omori exponent p = 1.1, which is stable when look-
ing at diﬀerent distances r. The characteristic cluster
size is also stable over more than two orders of mag-
nitude in time leading to H ≈ 0. Similar results are
obtained for the elliptical axes a and b. The analysis
of the distance distribution at diﬀerent times also con-
ﬁrms that there is no discernible diﬀusion of seismic
activity.

Figure 5 summarizes the results for p and H listed
in Table 1. The ﬁrst result we should stress is that
all our values of the diﬀusion exponent H are quite
small when compared with previous studies [Marsan
et al., 1999; 2000; Marsan and Bean, 2003]. For the
reasons explained in section 2, we believe that Marsan
et al.’s results may have been aﬀected by the back-
ground seismic activity, and are quantifying diﬀerent
processes. One can observe a weak negative corre-
lation between p and H for p < 1 but this negative
correlation disappears when including data with p > 1
which gives a very strong scatter with two among the

largest H obtained for the largest p > 1.

4. Our Wavelet method

The detection of aftershock diﬀusion may be bi-
ased (i) by other (possibly) independent aftershock se-
quences and (ii) by background seismicity. In our ﬁrst
windowing method, we have addressed these problems
by analyzing (a) individual aftershock sequences of
large earthquakes over a space-time window (b) with
seismicity rate much larger than the background es-
timated over a ten-year average.

We now present a second method based on wavelet
analysis, which introduces two innovations. First,
it uses a smoothing kernel (or mother wavelet) con-
structed in order to remove Poissonian background
seismicity. Second, it uses the expected scaling re-
lationship relating space and time that characterizes
diﬀusion to derive scaling laws obeyed by the wavelet
coeﬃcients. The exponents p of the observed Omori
law and H of aftershock diﬀusion are then obtained by
optimizing the compliance of the wavelet coeﬃcients
to these scaling laws. The wavelet approach displays
the data all at once on the two space and time-scale
dimensions in order to determine p and H simulta-
neously. In contrast, the windowing method displays
the data twice, once on the time dimension to obtain
the exponent p and a second time to obtain R(t) and
the exponent H. In other words, the wavelet method
can thus be seen as a simultaneous two-dimensional
time scale-space determination of p and H, in con-
trast with the previous windowing method consisting
in two independent one-dimensional time series anal-
yses, one for p and the other for H.

4.1. General diﬀusion scaling ansatz

In the following, we will assume that a main event
occurs at time t0 = 0, and is followed by a cascade
of aftershocks, superimposed to the long term back-
ground seismicity rate, which is for now considered
as a set of poissonian, independent events. We thus
neglect the possible interactions between the back-
ground noise and the cascade events, and that inde-
pendent events trigger their own cascades. We will
come back to this point at the end of the derivation
and show that it is a reasonable assumption from a
geophysical point of view for short catalogs such as
those we consider. At any time t following the main-
shock, the spatial and temporal evolution of the seis-
micity rate n(r, t) can be approximated by

n(r, t) dr dt = A(r, t) dr dt + B(r, t) 2πr dr dt , (6)

7

where r is the spatial distance from the mainshock
epicenter. A(r, t) is the aftershock rate per unit time
and per unit distance from the mainshock: A(r, t)dr
is thus the number of events per unit time at time
t within an annulus of radii r and r + dr.
In the
following, only the temporal Poissonian structure will
be assumed for the background seismicity rate B(r, t)
per unit time and surface and no restrictions will be
imposed on its spatial structure. This is an interesting
aspect of the present wavelet method.

The term A(r, t) reﬂects the spatio-temporal struc-
ture of the Omori law, describing the relaxation of the
stress and of other physical ﬁelds, which occurs in the
vicinity of the main source and beyond. The qualify-
ing signature of diﬀusion is expressed by the following
general scaling ansatz coupling time and space:

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(7)

drdt ,

r
DtH

A(r, t)drdt = Q

1
tp+H f
where H is the diﬀusion exponent, p is the Omori
law exponent and the diﬀusion constant D is such
that DtH has the dimension of a length. Q is a
constant and f is an integrable function which de-
pends on the physics of the diﬀusion processes. The
1/tp+H prefactor stems from the fact that the inte-
gral of A(r, t) over all space should retrieve the usual
Omori law ∼ 1/tp. For H = 0, no diﬀusion occurs,
while the value H = 1/2 gives standard diﬀusion.
H > 1/2 characterizes a superdiﬀusive regime and
H < 1/2 corresponds to a subdiﬀusive regime which
is the regime relevant to aftershocks.

The problem is that the background term B(r, t)
in (6) is not of the form (7) and therefore may spoil
the detection of diﬀusion. In other words, the spatial
and temporal structure of B(r, t) scrambles the signal
A(r, t). We now describe the wavelet approach that
addresses this problem by minimizing the impact of
B(r, t).

4.2. Kernel smoothing in time

Introducing the temporal kernel or mother wavelet
W (t), we consider the wavelet transform of the signal
N (R, t) (where N (R, t) is the spatial integration of
n(r, t) for r between 0 and R) computed at time t = 0
and time scale a using the wavelet W

Ca(R) =

N (R, t)W

dt ,

(8)

∞

1
a Z

0

t
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

As each event can be considered as a Dirac function
in time, the integral in (8) reduces to a discrete sum.

The scale factor a allows us to dilate or contract the
W kernel in order to get insight into the temporal
structure of N (R, t) at various time scales a.

We use a kernel with zero average so that any sta-
tionary process S(R, t) uncorrelated in time does not
contribute to Ca(R):

∞

Z
0

t
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

S(R, t)W

dt = 0 .

(9)

Here, S(R, t) is the rate of background events oc-
curring within a circle of radius R at time t. This
property allows us to get rid of the background seis-
micity without presuming anything about its spa-
tial structure, nor about the speciﬁc time occurrence
of such events.
In this way, background events are
erased on average without needing to identify them
in the seismic catalog. This is an important quality
of the present wavelet analysis compared with previ-
ous studies of aftershocks. Strictly speaking, for the
background seismicity to disappear by this procedure,
we need (i) to consider large mainshocks, (ii) to have a
small probability that a large event due to the back-
ground is generated during any aftershock sequence
and (iii) to assume that the number of events in the
triggering cascade generated by any background event
is low and that all these events have small magnitudes.
These conditions ensure that the triggering cascades
resulting from the background S(R, t) do not interact
with the cascade of aftershocks induced by the main-
shock and that the duration of S(R, t)-induced cas-
cades is short compared with any time scale a used
in the wavelet analysis. These conditions would be
too restrictive if applied to the whole span of a seis-
mic catalog, but we expect them to be approximately
realized over the short time span of each aftershock
sequence whose duration is generally observed to be
no more than the order of weeks to years.

Now, taking the wavelet transform of A(r, t) given

by (7) gives

Ca(R) = QDa

∞

−p

Z
0

−p G

τ

R/aH
Dτ H (cid:19)

(cid:18)

W (τ ) dτ ,

(10)
where G is the primitive of f and τ = t/a. Expression
(10) implies the scaling law

Ca(R) = a

−p C1(R/aH) ,

(11)

which relates the wavelet coeﬃcient at time scale a
of the time series of earthquake rate within a circle
of radius R centered on the mainshock to the wavelet
coeﬃcient for time scale 1 and radius R/aH, by a

8

simple normalization by a−p. We will refer hereafter
to this scaling law as the H-scaling law. This law (11)
implies that, for any possible diﬀerent values of a and
R, plotting apCa(R) as a function of R/aH leads to a
collapse of all points onto a single “master” curve.

Expression (11) can be transformed into

p

R

H Ca(R) = CaR−1/H (1) ,

(12)

which now provides a relationship between the wavelet
coeﬃcient computed at time scale a and radius R
and the wavelet coeﬃcient computed at time scale
aR−1/H for a unit radius. This scaling law (12) will
thereafter be referred to as the 1/H-scaling law. Ex-
pression (12) shows that, for any possible diﬀerent
H Ca(R) as a function of
values of a and R, plotting R
aR−1/H leads to a collapse of all points onto another
single “master” curve.

p

Both scaling laws (11) and (12) capture mathe-
matically in a universal way the possible diﬀusion of
aftershocks around their mainshock. These scaling
laws give access to the diﬀusion exponent H but do
not say anything on the shape of the “master” curves,
which should derive from the speciﬁc properties of
f (r/DtH ) and of W (t). The interest in using the two
scaling laws (11) and (12) is that they magnify and
thus stress diﬀerently the small and long time and
well as the short and large distance part of the data.
The 1/H-scaling law (12) must have a master curve
If R ≫ DaH (i.e., for small
with two asymptotes.
normalized time scales compared to the radius), it
can easily be shown that the master curve is a power-
law of exponent −p. This result is compatible with
the exponent expected for the whole sequence, that is,
for the Omori law describing the decay of the seismic
rate of all events within a circle of inﬁnite radius R.
If R ≪ DaH , then the master curve is again a power
law, but with exponent −(p + H). The computation
of Ca(R) for small and large R’s should thus provide
p and H. We will use below a more sophisticated
method that uses any range of R values.

4.3. Choice of the smoothing kernel

Our choice of the kernel or mother wavelet W has
been dictated by the following considerations. First,
the modiﬁed Omori law (1) as well as the ETAS model
(16) introduce a short-time cut-oﬀ c that accounts for
seismicity just after the mainshock. Since this cut-oﬀ
breaks down the exact self-similarity of the Omori
kernel, it leads to corrections to the expected diﬀu-
sion resulting from event triggering cascades at short

times [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b]. Since c is in
general found small, the seismicity rate is very large
just after the mainshock which may lead to ﬁnite-
size and instrumental saturation eﬀects just after the
mainshock. In addition, even if these limitations are
removed there may be so many aftershocks near t = 0
that many of them are generally interwoven in seis-
mic recordings, and most of them can not be inter-
preted and located properly. We thus construct a
wavelet kernel W which minimizes the weight given
to the seismicity rate at short times after mainshocks.
Speciﬁcally, we choose the wavelet kernel shown in
Figure 6, which vanishes at t = 0, has also zero time
derivative at the origin and has zero average:

W (t) = (3t2 − t4) exp(−

) .

(13)

t2
2

This kernel looks like an aliased sinus function. This
wavelet kernel is reasonably well localized both in
time and scale and its simple expression allows for
fast computations on large data sets. The time unit
shown in this ﬁgure 6 has no special meaning since our
wavelet analysis is using scale ratios rather than on
absolute scales. Note that the chosen wavelet kernel
has properties quite diﬀerent from those, for instance,
of the classical Mexican hat wavelet, widely used in
the analysis of singularities, which has a maximum
amplitude at t = 0, and would thus be inappropriate
for the reasons listed above.

This choice of the wavelet kernel leads to the decay
of the wavelet coeﬃcients Ca(R) ∼ 1/a3 at large times
after the last events in the catalog, thus giving an
apparent Omori exponent p = 3. As we know by
experience that the Omori exponent is smaller than 2,
an exponent p = 3 will thus be interpreted as spurious
and due to the limited duration of the catalog. This
asymptotic property, which is very diﬀerent from the
Omori law we are studying, is a desirable property of
the wavelet kernel (13) which provides a clear signal of
a possible problem in the data analysis. For example,
if no event is present in the catalog between times t1
and t2, and provided that t2 is suﬃciently larger than
t1, then we will measure a spurious p = 3 for time
scales a larger than t1 and lower than t2. This may
lead to some bias in the determination of p, that we
shall come back to in the discussion.

4.4. Synthetic tests

The determination of the exponents p and H is
performed by two algorithms described in Appendix
B. This ﬁrst (respectively second) algorithm uses the

9

1/H-scaling (respectively H-scaling law) normalized
curves.

We have performed tests of the wavelet method on
synthetic catalogs generated using the ETAS model
and various modiﬁcations thereof, with and without
genuine diﬀusion and with or without background
seismicity. A particular result is that the wavelet
method works all the better the larger is the back-
ground noise. While for large catalogs with a sig-
niﬁcant background component, the wavelet method
is superior to the windowing method by providing
more precise values of p and H, it turns out to be
inferior to the windowing method for synthetic cata-
logs without background when catalogs have limited
sizes, as it exhibits signiﬁcant scatter in the determi-
nation of the exponents p and H. Technically, this
scatters occurs due to the existence of large oscilla-
tions in the dependence of the wavelet coeﬃcients as
a function of R and/or a, which makes diﬃcult the
determination of the relevant scaling intervals. This
paradoxical result reﬂects the larger sensitivity of the
wavelet method to the size of catalogs due to its in-
trinsic two-dimensional nature, while the windowing
method is more robust for small catalogs due to its
one-dimensional structure.

Comparing the H-method with the 1/H-method,
we note that, due to the fact that the H-method uses
original curves and not their ﬁt approximations (and
are thus more subjected to ﬂuctuations), the “vari-
ance landscapes” deﬁned in Appendix B exhibit much
more elongated valleys around minima than with the
1/H-method. As will be shown below, both meth-
ods most often yield the same results, but the 1/H-
method yields better-deﬁned minima and should be
preferred in general.

4.5. Results

Table 2 summarizes the results on the values of
p and H obtained from the wavelet analysis applied
to 21 large earthquakes in California. These events
are the same as those studied with the windowing
method and reported in Table 1. Table 2 shows that
results obtained with the two methods based on the
H-scaling law and 1/H-scaling law compare rather
well, except for four cases: Westmorland, Round Val-
ley, North Palm Springs, Mammoth Lakes. However,
for each earthquake, a detailed analysis of the cor-
responding contour lines of the average variance of
the collapse of wavelet coeﬃcients (see Figure 7 for
the Round Valley mainshock) shows that the 1/H-
scaling law method is in general more reliable with a

more constrained and better deﬁned minimum. We
thus tend to believe the p and H values given by the
1/H-method as more reliable.

Figure 8 shows the correlation between the expo-
nents p and H obtained for each shock. There is
a good consistency between both methods. Strictly
speaking, negative values of H are associated with
“anti-diﬀusion”, that is, migration of aftershocks to-
wards the mainshock. One possible reason for our
ﬁnding of negative H’s is a spurious bias due to the
mismatch between the mainshock epicenter and the
barycenter of the aftershock cloud. In other cases, a
small negative value of H reﬂects the statistical un-
certainties that we expect to be of the order or more
than 0.05 for H.

5. Discussion

5.1. General synthesis

Our main conclusion is that, in contrast with pre-
vious claims, diﬀusion of aftershocks is in general ab-
sent or very weak at the borderline of detection. This
conclusion is reached notwithstanding our signiﬁcant
eﬀorts to develop two independent techniques which
have been optimized for extracting a signal on diﬀu-
sion in the presence of background noise. Maybe, to
be fair, we should state more correctly that our rather
negative conclusion is reached precisely because we
have made large eﬀorts to remove spurious signals.
As many tests have shown, some of which presented
in section 2, it is easy to construct a diﬀusion sig-
nal in the form of a power law of the characteris-
tic size of the aftershock cloud as a function of time.
Our present work has stressed the importance of not
jumping to conclusions and that serious tests should
be performed to assess the reliability of a putative
diﬀusive power law. The simplest explanation is of-
ten that such a power law is due to cross-over eﬀects
in the presence of inhomogeneity of the catalogs, of
their limited sizes and of the contagion induced by
background and uncorrelated seismicity. We also note
that most sub-diﬀusion exponents H reported in pre-
vious studies as well as in the present one are very
small, in the range 0.05 − 0.2. For instance, a value
H = 0.1 implies that ten decades in time scales are
needed for each decade in space scale. This “small
exponent curse” is one of the many explanations for
the diﬃculty in obtaining a clear-cut diﬀusion signal.
Having said that, Tables 1 and 2 show that a few
aftershock sequences exhibit a signiﬁcant and unam-
biguous diﬀusion. In order to aggregate the informa-

10

tion derived from the windowing and wavelet meth-
ods, we compare the exponent Hb for the former
and the exponent H obtained from the 1/H-scaling
method for the later and qualify the existence of dif-
fusion (somewhat arbitrarily) when the two criteria
Hb ≥ 0.1 and H1/H ≥ 0.05 are simultaneously ver-
iﬁed. Comparing these two methods, six clear-cut
cases emerge: Westmorland (Hb = 0.12, H1/H =
0.10), Morgan-Hill (Hb = 0.44, H1/H = 0.08), Round-
Valley (Hb = 0.11, H1/H = 0.24), Superstition-Hill
(Hb = 0.10, H1/H = 0.06), Joshua Tree (Hb = 0.27,
H1/H = 0.08) and Mammoth Lakes (Hb = 0.16,
H1/H = 0.20). For the other sequences, either both
windowing and wavelet analyses give a very small H
or they strongly disagree with each other. The rea-
son for the disagreement between the two methods
when it occurs is not obvious to us. With a sin-
gle method, one can quantify its systematic errors.
Using two distinct methods and comparing them en-
ables us to quantify the uncertainties resulting from
causes that are diﬃcult to assess a priori. This is our
main justiﬁcation for developing two distinct methods
and for comparing their results. We note that such a
strategy of using several models emphasizing diﬀerent
physical mechanisms with distinct implementations is
well-known and largely used in meteorological fore-
casts, precisely with the aim of accounting for the
unknown or non-understood sources of uncertainties.
It may be helpful to put these results in the light
oﬀered by the ETAS model [Helmstetter and Sornette,
2002b] whose main predictions are summarized in the
Appendix A. The most robust prediction is that one
should expect aftershock diﬀusion when the Omori’s
exponent p is less than 1, because this value signals
the existence of a cascade of triggering which is the
mechanism at the origin of diﬀusion in the ETAS
In the above list of 6 clear-cut cases, three
model.
(Morgan-Hill, Round-Valley and Mammoth Lakes)
have an exponent p smaller than 1 according to both
methods, while the three others have a p-value larger
than or very close to 1. This ﬁfty-ﬁfty deadlock seems
to discredit the usefulness of the ETAS model for this
problem. It may be useful to look in more details at
the results of each methods separately.

5.2. Discussion of the results in the light of
the ETAS model

Most sequences shown in Table 1 for the window-
ing method and in Table 2 for the wavelet method are
in the regime p > 1 and are characterized by H ≈ 0.
These results are compatible with the predictions of

the ETAS model that no diﬀusion should be observed
if the Omori exponent is larger than 1.
Indeed, a
measured value p > 1 can be interpreted as belonging
to the sub-critical regime n < 1 such that the charac-
teristic time t∗ is small and the relevant time window
covers mostly the regime t > t∗ for which the cascade
process is exhausted and diﬀusion is absent.

As seen in Table 1 for the windowing method and
in Table 2 for the wavelet method, a few aftershock se-
quences are characterized by a small p < 1 exponent.
As we have said, according to the ETAS model (see
Appendix A), this is the relevant regime for observing
aftershock diﬀusion.

The Morgan-Hill sequence, analyzed in Figures 9
and 10 and which has the smallest p-value with both
the windowing method (p = 0.6) and the 1/H-wavelet
method (p = 0.5), has a small but signiﬁcant diﬀusion
exponent measured with the windowing method. We
obtain Hr ≈ Ha ≈ 0.1 estimated by the aftershock
distances from the barycenter or the large elliptical
axis, and a large value Hb = 0.44 obtained by using
the time evolution of the small elliptical axes b which
measures the average distance of aftershocks from the
rupture plane. The value of H = 0.08 obtained by
the wavelet 1/H-method is similar. The larger value
Hb = 0.44 could be due to the fact that the diﬀu-
sion perpendicular to the fault is less perturbed by
the aftershocks along the whole length of the fault
which occur in absence of genuine diﬀusion. For this
aftershock sequence, the empirically determined val-
ues of p = 0.6 and Hb = 0.44 would correspond for
instance to θ ≈ 0.4 and µ ≈ 1 (see equation (20))
according to the ETAS model [Helmstetter and Sor-
nette, 2002b], where θ and µ are deﬁned in equation
(16) in Appendix A.

The other sequences in Table 1 with p < 1 for
which the cascade model predicts the existence of dif-
fusion are Kern-County, Round-Valley, Oceanside and
Mammoth Lakes (see table 1 for the corresponding
parameters). Except for Oceanside, the correspond-
ing p and Hb values are compatible with the predic-
tion of the ETAS model [Helmstetter and Sornette,
2002b] with µ ≈ 1 leading to Hb ≈ 1 − p. While these
results are suggestive for the validity of the ETAS pre-
dictions, more disturbing is the fact that large values
of the diﬀusion exponents H are found for p > 1 (see
Table 1). The Imperial Valley sequence is a case in
point, with the largest p = 1.44 and large diﬀusion
exponents Hr = 0.41, Ha = 0.37 and Hb = 0.19. Its
detailed analysis is shown in Figures 11 and 12. For
this sequence, one can clearly observe an expansion

11

of the aftershock area when comparing the distance
distribution at diﬀerent times. There is also a clear
decrease of the exponent p with r as predicted by
the ETAS model as a signature of the aftershock cas-
cade leading to diﬀusion, but this should be associ-
ated with p < 1 and not with p > 1 as found here.
It is true that a signiﬁcant diﬀusion exponent H > 0
with p > 1 can be observed in the ETAS model in the
crossover regime for t ≈ t∗ where p is already larger
than 1, but where a diﬀusion of seismic activity is
still observed. Indeed, synthetic aftershock sequences
in the sub-critical regime exhibit a diﬀusion of seis-
mic activity which persists up to t ≈ 100 t∗ even if
the Omori exponent in larger 1. But the diﬀusion ex-
ponent H in the crossover regime for t ≈ t∗ should
be smaller than in the early time t < t∗ regime when
p is smaller than 1. We thus do not fully understand
the origin of this discrepancy.

Using the wavelet method, only ﬁve sequences are
in the regime p < 1 where diﬀusion is predicted to oc-
cur according to the ETAS model and, there, the ex-
pected correlation is weak and noisy. The evidence of
aftershock diﬀusion is very weak as 75% of the after-
shock sequences seem to be in the non-critical regime
(t > t∗ and p > 1) characterized by an absence of dif-
fusion. The remaining ﬁve sequences are loosely com-
patible with the existence of diﬀusion and the quan-
titative values are consistent with the predictions of
[Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b], when taken col-
lectively. Figure 13 tests the possible existence of a
correlation between the diﬀusion exponent H and the
Omori law exponent p obtained with the 1/H method
for all the aftershock sequences described in table 2.
The thick lines are the prediction of the ETAS model
[Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] that H ≈ 0 for
p > 1 and H = (1 − p)/2 for p < 1, obtained by
choosing µ ≥ 2 and by assuming p = 1 − θ (which is
correct if t ≪ t∗). In the ﬁve cases with p < 1, we ﬁnd
positive exponents H in the range from 0.08 to 0.24.
A linear ﬁt over these ﬁve events with p < 1, forced
to pass through the “origin” (p = 1, H = 0) gives
H = (p − 1)/2.52, which must be compared with the
prediction H = (1 − p)/2. In the other 15 cases with
p > 1, H is very noisy with almost as many negative
and positive values in the range from −0.15 to 0.1,
and almost vanishing average.

In conclusion, the results obtained with the 2 meth-
ods do not show any clear correlation between H and
p, in contradiction with the prediction of the ETAS
model. This disagreement between the observations
and the theory may result from the insuﬃcient num-

ber of aftershocks available. The small number of
events used yields a large uncertainty of the measure
of H and p, as shown by the large diﬀerence in the
value of p and H obtained for some sequences us-
ing the diﬀerent methods (windowing, H and 1/H
wavelet method). In addition, these are other factors,
such as the fact that the typical mainshock-aftershock
distance increases with the mainshock magnitude, or
the geometry of the rupture, which are taken into ac-
count neither in the ETAS model nor in the empirical
analysis, but which may signiﬁcantly alter the results.

6. Factors limiting the observation of
diﬀusion

This section examines important limitations of
both the theoretical analysis of [Helmstetter and Sor-
nette, 2002b] and our present study of California seis-
micity and discuss possible remedies.

6.1. Independence between the mainshock
size and the aftershock cluster size and
selection rules

A limitation of the analytical approach developed
in [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] is that the distri-
bution of distances between a mainshock and its af-
tershocks are assumed independent of the mainshock
magnitude. However, it is a well established property
of aftershock sequences that the size of the aftershock
area is approximately proportional to the mainshock
rupture length [Utsu, 1961; Kagan, 2002].

We can modify the ETAS model to include a
dependence between the mainshock magnitude and
the aftershock size, as observed in real seismicity,
in order to take into account the extended rupture
In this goal, we modify
length of the mainshock.
the distance distribution ∼ 1/(r + d)1+µ deﬁned in
(16) of Appendix A by taking the characteristic size
d(M ) proportional to the mainshock rupture length
d(M ) ∝ L ∼ 100.5M . This means that an after-
shock of generation i is created by an aftershock of
generation i − 1 of magnitude Mi−1 at a distance r
from it via the rate (16) with the distance distribution
∼ 1/(r + d(Mi−1))1+µ.

We can understand intuitively the eﬀect of intro-
ducing a dependence between d and the magnitude,
knowing the solution N (t, r) given by Helmstetter and
Sornette [2002b] for a constant d-value. Starting from
a mainshock of magnitude M at the origin, the typ-
ical distance between aftershocks of the ﬁrst genera-
tion and the mainshock is d(M ) ∝ L, where L is the

12

rupture length of the mainshock. Aftershocks of sec-
ond and later generation have a smaller magnitude on
average, otherwise they do not qualify as aftershocks
of the ﬁrst event, by our present deﬁnition. We can
thus deﬁne an average rupture size hℓi < L for the
aftershocks. As long as the average size of the af-
tershock zone R(t) is smaller than L, the aftershocks
of the ﬁrst generation dominate the spread of seis-
mic activity following the mainshock and diﬀusion is
not observable. At large times, when the aftershock
area of second and later generations becomes larger
than the inﬂuence zone of the mainshock of size L and
when most aftershocks are triggered indirectly by af-
tershocks of the mainshock, the diﬀusion for the cou-
pled model should be the same as for the decoupled
model studied in [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b].
The dependence of d with the progenitor’s magnitude
thus introduces a crossover time τ such that there is
no signiﬁcant diﬀusion below τ because the aftershock
spatial expansion is dominated by aftershocks of the
ﬁrst generation while for time larger than τ the multi-
ple cascades of aftershocks dominates the spatial ex-
cursion of aftershocks and we recover the diﬀusion law
(5) of the decoupled model. This gives the equation
for τ :

hℓi

H

τ
c (cid:17)

(cid:16)

≈ L ,

1/H

τ = c

L
hℓi (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(14)

(15)

leading to

where L is the mainshock size and hℓi is the average
rupture length of aftershocks. For large mainshocks
L ≫ hℓi and slow diﬀusion, this characteristic time τ
can be very large and, in practice, diﬀusion may be
unobserved in real aftershock sequences.

6.2. Rules of aftershock selection

There are two other factors that may further weaken
the observed diﬀusion in comparison with the predic-
tion of the ETAS model given in [Helmstetter and
Sornette, 2002b]. First, the constraint that the after-
shocks must be smaller than the mainshock induces
an under-estimation of the true diﬀusion exponent.
If we include this rule of aftershock selection in the
numerical simulations, the average seismicity rate is
smaller than the predicted seismicity rate and de-
creases as 1/t1+θ at large times instead of the theoreti-
cal prediction N (t) ∼ 1/t1−θ for t < t∗ or n = 1. This
eﬀect induces a slower diﬀusion at large times when
the observed Omori exponent becomes larger than 1.
The other factor which may lower the diﬀusion in the

real aftershock sequence is the introduction of a max-
imum distance rmax for the selection of aftershocks
close to the mainshock. Introducing this rule in the
simulations of the ETAS model obviously lowers the
diﬀusion exponent by comparison with the true ex-
ponent, because it rejects all aftershocks triggered at
large distance from the mainshock which have an im-
portant role in the diﬀusion process, especially for
small value of µ < 2. The eﬀect of the rupture geome-
try and the rules of aftershock selection are illustrated
in Figure 14 for numerical simulations of the ETAS
model obtained for α = 0.5, b = 1, n = 1, µ = 1,
c = 0.001 day, m0 = 0, M = 6, d = 0.01 × 100.5M
km. This Figure shows that the combined eﬀect of
the dependence between the inﬂuence distance d and
the rupture length L, and the rules of aftershock se-
lection results in a strong reduction of the diﬀusion in
comparison with the predictions given in [Helmstetter
and Sornette, 2002b].

6.3. Inﬂuence of the fault geometry

Another important limitation of the ETAS model
and of other models of aftershocks such as the rate-
and-state friction model [Dieterich, 1994] is that these
models do not take into account the anisotropy of the
spatial distribution of aftershocks nor the localization
of earthquakes on a fractal fault network. These fac-
tors may also have an important inﬂuence on after-
shock diﬀusion.

There is strong evidence that earthquakes occur
on faults and faults are organized in a complex hi-
erarchical network [Ouillon et al., 1996]. A simpli-
ﬁed representation of this network uses fractal geom-
etry. A better description of aftershock diﬀusion, if
any, should thus deal with the problem of diﬀusion
on a fractal network. Some general results have been
obtained in the physical literature on this problem
of diﬀusion of probe particles in non-Euclidean frac-
tal spaces (see [Bouchaud and Georges, 1990; Sahimi,
1993; 1994] and references therein). The main conse-
quence is that the diﬀusion exponent H may be modi-
ﬁed to take into account the fractal geometry through
the introduction of the so-called spectral dimension
(which is often diﬀerent from the geometrical fractal
dimension). In general, this leads to reduced diﬀusion
when measured with Euclidean distances. Another
possible caveat is the anisotropy of fault networks,
resulting from the localization properties of mechan-
ical systems which tend to organize oriented shear
bands. For instance, there is a very strong South-
East to North-West preferred orientation of the San

13

Andreas fault network in California.

While previous empirical analyses including the
present one as well as the ETAS model of cascades
of triggering have neglected geometry, our tests sug-
gest that geometry is a crucial ingredient. By geom-
etry, one should include both the eﬀect of a possible
localization of a fraction of aftershocks on mainshock
rupture faults, their localization of pre-existing hier-
archical fault networks as well as the dependence of
the range over which aftershocks are triggered by the
mainshock on the mainshock magnitude.

7. Conclusion

We have analyzed 21 aftershock sequences of Cali-
fornia and found that the diﬀusion of seismic activity
is very weak, when compared with previous studies.
For most sequences, the spatial distribution of after-
shocks is mostly limited to the mainshock rupture
area. The rate of aftershocks is very small at dis-
tances larger than the rupture length, even at large
times after the mainshock.

We have examined the hypothesis that aftershock
diﬀusion may result from multiple triggering of sec-
ondary aftershocks. In principle, this mechanism of-
fers clear quantitative predictions, if one controls the
parameter regime of the model. One problem is that
our theoretical and numerical studies of cascade pro-
cesses indicate that most predictions are very sensi-
tive to small changes in the parameters of the seis-
mic activity which cannot be easily determined from
seismicity catalogs. This variability of the ETAS pa-
rameters from sequence to sequence may thus ratio-
nalize the variability of the diﬀusion exponent from
one sequence to another one. In conclusion, the large
uncertainty on the estimation of p and H, resulting
from diﬀerent factors (small number of events, small
available time and space scale, background seismic-
ity and fault geometry, high ﬂuctuations from one se-
quence to another one), does no allow us to conclude
clearly neither on the validity or on the irrelevance of
the mechanism of triggering cascade embodied by the
ETAS model to describe aftershock diﬀusion.

Acknowledgments. We thank D. Marsan for pro-
viding his code and the preprints of his papers and for
several exchanges and J.-R. Grasso for useful discussions.
This work is partially supported by NSF-EAR02-30429,
by the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC)
and by the James S. Mc Donnell Foundation 21st century
scientist award/studying complex system.

Appendix A: Summary of main results
of the ETAS model concerning
aftershock diﬀusion

The ETAS (Epidemic-Type Aftershock Sequence) model
was introduced in [Ogata, 1988] and in [Kagan and Knopoﬀ,
1981; 1987] (in a slightly diﬀerent form) based on mutually
exciting point processes introduced by Hawkes [Hawkes,
1971; 1972; Hawkes and Adamopoulos, 1973]. Contrary
to what its name may imply, it is not only a model of
aftershocks but a general model of triggered seismicity.

This parsimonious physical model of multiple cascades
of earthquake triggering avoids the division between fore-
shocks, mainshocks and aftershocks because it uses the
same laws to describe all earthquakes without distinction
between foreshocks, mainshocks and aftershocks.
It is
found [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002a,b,c; 2003a; Helm-
stetter et al., 2003] to account surprisingly well for (i)
the increase of rate of foreshocks before mainshocks (ii)
at large distances and (iii) up to decades before main-
shocks, (iv) a change of the Gutenberg-Richter law from
a concave to a convex shape for foreshocks, and (v) the
migration of foreshocks toward mainshocks. The emerg-
ing concept is that the cascade of secondary, tertiary and
higher-level triggered events gives rise naturally to long-
range and long-time interactions, without the need for any
new physics. This emphasis on cascades of triggered seis-
micity provides a general understanding of the space-time
organization of seismicity and oﬀers new improved meth-
ods for earthquake prediction.

In the ETAS model, a main event of magnitude m trig-
gers its own primary aftershocks according to the following
distribution in time and space

φm(r, t) dr dt = K 10αm θ cθ dt
(t + c)1+θ

µ dµ dr
(r + d)1+µ ,

(16)

where r is the spatial distance to the main event (consid-
ered as a point process). The spatial regularization dis-
tance d accounts for the ﬁnite rupture size. The power law
kernel in space with exponent µ quantiﬁes the fact that
the distribution of distances between pairs of events is well
described by a power-law [Kagan and Jackson, 1998]. In
addition, the magnitude of these primary aftershocks is
assumed to be distributed according to the Gutenberg-
Richter law of parameter b. The ETAS model assumes
that each primary aftershock may trigger its own after-
shocks (secondary events) according to the same law, the
secondary aftershocks themselves may trigger tertiary af-
tershocks and so on, creating a cascade process. The ex-
ponent 1 + θ is not the observable Omori exponent p but
deﬁnes the local (or direct) Omori law. The whole se-
ries of aftershocks, integrated over the whole space, can
be shown to lead to a “renormalized” (or dressed) Omori
law, which is the total observable Omori law [Helmstetter
and Sornette, 2002a]. This global law is diﬀerent from

14

(17)

the direct Omori law 1/(t + c)1+θ in (16): the observable
(dressed) Omori exponent crosses over smoothly from the
value 1 − θ below a characteristic time t
to 1 + θ at times
much larger than t∗

∗

∗

t

= c

n Γ(1 − θ)

(cid:18)

|1 − n| (cid:19)

1/θ

∗

where the branching ratio n, deﬁned as the average num-
ber of aftershocks per earthquakes, is a function of the
parameters of the ETAS model n = K b/(b − α). The
renormalization of the direct Omori law with exponent
1 + θ into the observable dressed Omori law with expo-
nent 1 − θ (for t ≤ t
) results from the cascade process.
Intuitively, it is clear that the existence of cascades of sec-
ondary aftershocks may lead to observable diﬀusion, anal-
ogously to random walks whose succession of jumps create
diﬀusion upon averaging. This analogy was established in
[Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] which predicted diﬀer-
ent diﬀusion regimes according to the values of the model
parameters. The simplest mathematical characterization
of diﬀusion is through the evolution of the characteristic
size R of the aftershock cloud as a function of time t since
the main shock:

R ∼ tH ,

(18)

where H is the diﬀusion exponent (equal to 1/2 for classi-
cal diﬀusion). The theory and numerical simulations de-
veloped in [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] predict, for
t < t

and θ < 1 :

∗

H = θ/2

for µ > 2

(19)

H = θ/µ for µ < 2 .

where

∗

r

= σ

1/µ

,

n
1 − n (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(20)

and σ is proportional to the spatial regularization distance
d in (16) up to a numerical constant function of µ [Helm-
stetter and Sornette, 2002b].
In all cases, the diﬀusion
∗
saturates progressively as t becomes much larger than t
.
Here, the important message is that, despite the fact that
time and space are uncoupled in the direct triggering pro-
cess (16), the succession of cascades of events can lead
to a macroscopic coupling of time and space, that is, to
diﬀusion. This is illustrated in Figure 1 which presents
results from numerical simulations of the ETAS model to
show how cascades of multiple triggering can produce af-
tershock diﬀusion. Since the condition t < t∗ also ensures
that the observable Omori exponent 1 − θ is diﬀerent from
the direct one 1 + θ, this triggering cascade theory pre-
dicts that diﬀusion should be observed most clearly when
Omori’s exponent p is smaller than 1. Note that, for p
close to 1 as often observed empirically, that is for θ small,
the predicted diﬀusion exponent H is signiﬁcantly smaller
than 1/2. The results in [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b]
were obtained for a one dimensional process, but most re-
sults, in particular the diﬀusion law (18), are valid in any

dimension. Another complication elaborated upon below
is the fractal geometry of fault networks.

A possible caveat in the predictions of the ETAS model
given in [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002b] is that we pre-
dict only the average behavior of the space-time distri-
bution of seismicity. In the regime where α/b > 0.5 rel-
evant to real seismicity [Helmstetter, 2003], we observe
huge ﬂuctuations of the seismicity rate around the aver-
age that may weaken the usefulness of predictions based
on ensemble averages. Having said that, we have veri-
ﬁed by intensive numerical simulations that the prediction
H ≥ (1−p)/2 remains valid in all cases including the large
deviation regime α > b/2. Thus, for the problem treated
here of detecting a possible aftershock diﬀusion, this issue
is not a limiting point.

Our tests on real aftershock sequences are interpreted
in particular in the light shed by the ETAS model. We
stress that the analysis of real data is much more diﬃ-
cult than the study of synthetic sequences, due to the
smaller number of earthquakes available, the presence of
background activity, the eﬀect of geometry and problems
of catalog completeness especially just after large main-
shocks. In addition, real seismicity is probably more com-
plicated than assumed by the ETAS model. These limi-
tations imply that it is diﬃcult to obtain reliable quan-
titative results on the diﬀusion exponent. However, a
few qualitative predictions of the ETAS model should be
testable in real data:

• only sequences in the “early” time regime t < t∗
characterized by an Omori exponent p < 1 should
diﬀuse;

• the diﬀusion of seismic activity should be related to
a decrease of the Omori exponent p as the distance
r from the mainshock increases;

• the characteristic size of the cluster is expected to
grow according to expression (18) with the diﬀusion
exponent H positively correlated with the θ-value.

Appendix B: Implementation of the
wavelet method

Method using the 1/H-scaling law normalized
curves

The determination of the exponents p and H is per-
formed by using the following steps when using the 1/H-
scaling law normalized curves:

1. Compute Ca(R) as a function of scale a for a series
of given R values. Typically, we considerer a values
varying with a multiplicative factor of 1.1, while R
varies with a multiplicative factor of 1.01. This last
value will be justiﬁed below. For each R value we

15

thus obtain a curve showing the variation of Ca(R)
with a. Those curves are called R-curves.

2. Select the range in scale a over which all R-curves
display a power-law behavior as a function of a.
Note that the exponent of the power law may vary
from one R to another R (which is the hallmark of
an underlying diﬀusion process). We could also se-
lect a diﬀerent range of a for each value of R, but
this would drastically complicate the data process-
ing.

3. For each R-curve, ﬁt Ca(R) over the selected range
in a by a power law. This step proves necessary as
some data sets can sometimes display strong ﬂuc-
tuations which will ultimately alter the results (this
has been checked on synthetic data sets). Each in-
terval in a for each R-curve is now replaced by its
power-law ﬁt approximation.

4. Choose a trial (p, H) and normalize each curve ac-
cording to these exponents and their respective a
and R values according to (12) (1/H-scaling law).
The normalized time scale axis is then re-sampled
using a geometrical sampling with a multiplicative
factor of 1.1, so that all normalized R-curves are
deﬁned at common abscissae.

5. For each normalized value of the time scale, search
for all normalized power law approximations of R-
curves which are deﬁned at that value. Let us as-
sume there are Ns such segments, each one corre-
sponding to a diﬀerent R-curve (thus R value).

6. Compute the average value of these normalized R-
curves that are deﬁned at the same normalized time
If none
scale, as well as the associated variance.
or only one power law approximation of R-curves is
deﬁned for the considered normalized time scale, the
calculation is not performed as the variance cannot
be estimated. Then, go to the next normalized time
scale.

7. When all values of the normalized time scale have
been considered, compute the average of all the vari-
ances that have been deﬁned up to now. This aver-
age variance gives us an estimation of how the var-
ious normalized segments collapse on top of each
other in the goal of deﬁning a single master curve.
It is approximately equivalent to the square of the
average width deﬁned by superimposing all the nor-
malized curves.

8. This algorithm is implemented using a (p, H) grid,
with p varying from 0 to 2 by steps of 0.01, while
H varies within [−1 : 1], with the same step. When
H = 0, no computation is made. A systematic
search provides the couple of exponents (p, H) with

the lowest average variance, i.e., the best collapse of
the wavelet coeﬃcients as a function of time scale
and distance. For H = 0, the value of the variance
for any couple (p, 0) is estimated as the mean of
the variances obtained for (p, −0.01) and (p, 0.01).
This estimation has no real statistical meaning but
is useful for representation purpose. The top left
panel of Figure 7 constructed for the Round Val-
ley mainshock show the contour lines representing
equivalues of the average variance (quantiﬁed in log-
arithmic scale in base 10).

9. Once the best (p, H) couple has been found, the nor-
malized wavelet coeﬃcients Ca(R) are calculated as
a function of a using the original non-normalized
real curves (and not their power-law ﬁt approxima-
tions). This is performed for the purpose of visualiz-
ing the predicted collapse of the wavelet coeﬃcients
on the real data-set, as shown in the left lower panel
of Figure 7 constructed for the Round Valley main-
shock.

Note that this collapse method applied to the 1/H-
scaling law can not work for H = 0 strictly, since 1/H
diverges. To address this minor technical problem, we
choose a very small logarithmic step for the R values to
allow us to consider H values as small as ±0.01. Indeed,
the smaller is |H|, the more dilated is the normalized time
scale axis. If H is too small, the scaling regions of two suc-
cessive wavelet coeﬃcients for two successive R values will
undergo so much oﬀset that they will not be deﬁned on
any common normalized time scale, preventing an estima-
tion of an average variance. Considering small values of H
thus necessitates the computation of wavelet coeﬃcients
for successive R with a very small step in R (hence the
choice of a multiplicative factor of 1.01).

Method using the H-scaling law normalized
curves

The determination of the exponents p and H is per-
formed by using the following steps when using the H-
scaling law normalized curves:

1. We now re-organize all the Ca(R) values by plotting
curves of Ca(R) as a function of R for various values
of a. These are now the a-curves.

2. The a-curves do not display any peculiar behavior
with R. They are monotonically increasing with R,
and saturate at large R values. Among those a-
curves, there is always a subset of curves which are
nearly parallel (or at least don’t cross each other),
which is a behavior predicted by diﬀusive processes.
If all the curves are strictly parallel, one can con-
clude there is no underlying diﬀusion at all. Other
curves either cross this subset, or are simply too
noisy and are thus eliminated. This allows us to

16

select the a-curves we will use to invert for p and
H using the H-scaling law. Note that we will con-
serve “raw” a-curves, which can’t be approximated
by any power-law.

3. Choose a trial (p, H) and normalize each curve ac-
cording to these exponents and their respective a
and R values according to (11) (H-scaling law). The
normalized space scale axis is then re-sampled using
a geometrical sampling with a multiplicative factor
of 1.01, so that all normalized a-curves are deﬁned
at common abscissae.

4. For each normalized value of the space scale, search
for all normalized a-curves which are deﬁned at that
value. Let us assume there are Ns such segments,
each one corresponding to a diﬀerent a-curve (thus
a value).

5. Compute the average value of these normalized a-
curves that are deﬁned at the same normalized time
scale, as well as the associated variance. If none or
only one a-curve is deﬁned for the considered nor-
malized space scale, the calculation is not performed
as the variance cannot be estimated. Then, go to
the next normalized time scale.

6. When all values of the normalized space scale have
been considered, compute the average of all the vari-
ances that have been deﬁned up to now. This av-
erage variance gives us an estimation of how the
various normalized curves collapse on top of each
other in the goal of deﬁning a single master curve.
It is approximately equivalent to the square of the
average width deﬁned by superimposing all the nor-
malized curves.

7. This algorithm is implemented using a (p, H) grid,
with p varying from 0 to 2 by steps of 0.01, while
H varies within [−1 : 1], with the same step. When
H = 0, no computation is made. A systematic
search provides the couple of exponents (p, H) with
the lowest average variance, i.e., the best collapse of
the wavelet coeﬃcients as a function of time scale
and distance. In this case, there is no problem for
H = 0. The top right panel of Figure 7 constructed
for the Round Valley mainshock show the contour
lines representing equivalues of the average variance
(quantiﬁed in logarithmic scale in base 10).

8. Once the best (p, H) couple has been found, the nor-
malized wavelet coeﬃcients Ca(R) are calculated as
a function of R using the original non-normalized
a-curves. This is performed for the purpose of vi-
sualizing the predicted collapse of the wavelet coef-
ﬁcients on the real data-set, as shown in the right
lower panel of Figure 7 constructed for the Round
Valley mainshock.

References

Bouchaud, J.-P. and A. Georges, Anomalous diﬀusion in
disordered media: Statistical mechanisms, models and
physical applications, Physics Reports, 195, 127-293,
1990.

Chatelain, J.L., R.K. Cardwell and B.L.Isacks, Expan-
sion of the aftershock zone following the Vanuatu (New
Hebrides) earthquake on 15 July 1981, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 10, 385-388, 1983.

Das, S. and Scholz, C.H., Theory of time-dependent rup-
ture in the Earth, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 6039-51, 1981.
Dieterich, J., Constitutive law for rate of earthquake pro-
duction and its application to earthquake clustering, J.
Geophys. Res., 99, 2601-2618, 1994.

Fukuyama, E., Inversion for the rupture details of the
1987 east-Chiba earthquake, Japan, using a fault model
based on the distribution of relocated aftershocks, J.
Geophys. Res., 96, 8205-8217, 1991.

Hawkes, A.G., Point spectra of some mutually exciting
point processes. Journal of Royal Statistical Society,
series B 33, 438-443, 1971.

Hawkes, A.G., Spectra of some mutually exciting point
processes with associated variables, In Stochastic Point
Processes, ed. P.A.W. Lewis, Wiley, 261-271, 1972.
Hawkes, A.G. and Adamopoulos, L., Cluster models for
earthquakes - regional comparisons, Bull. Internat.
Stat. Inst., 45, 454-461, 1973.

Helmstetter, A., Is earthquake triggering driven by small
submitted to Phys. Res. Lett., 2003

earthquakes?
(http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0210056).

Helmstetter, A. and D. Sornette, Sub-critical and su-
percritical
in epidemic models of earth-
quake aftershocks, J. Geophys. Res., 107, 2237,
doi:10.1029/2001JB001580, 2002a.

regimes

Helmstetter, A. and D. Sornette, Diﬀusion of epicenters
of earthquake aftershocks, Omori’s law, and generalized
continuous-time random walk models, Physical Review
E., 6606, 061104, 2002b.

Helmstetter, A. and D. Sornette, Predictability in
interacting triggered seis-
2002c

the ETAS model of
micity,
(http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0208597).

submitted to J. Geophys. Res.,

Helmstetter, A, and D. Sornette, Foreshocks explained by
Cascades of Triggered Seismicity, submitted to J. Geo-
phys. Res.
(http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0210130),
2003.

Helmstetter, A., D. Sornette and J.-R. Grasso, Main-
foreshocks:
shocks are aftershocks of
how do foreshock statistical properties emerge from
aftershock laws,
2046,
doi:10.1029/2002JB001991, 2003.

J. Geophys. Res.,

conditional

108,

Huc, M. and I.G. Main, Anomalous stress diﬀusion
in earthquake triggering :
correlation length, time-
dependence, and directionality, submitted to J. Geo-
phys. Res.

17

Hudnut K.W., L. Seeber and J. Pacheco, Cross-fault trig-
gering in the November 1987 Superstition Hill earth-
quake sequence, southern California, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 16, 199-203, 1989.

Imoto, M., On migration phenomena of aftershocks fol-
lowing large thrust earthquakes in subduction zones,
Report of the National Research Center for Disaster
Prevention, 25, 29-71, 1981.

Jacques, E, J.C. Ruegg, J.C. Lepine, P. Tapponnier,
G.C.P. King, and A. Omar, Relocation of M ≥ 2 events
of the 1989 Dobi seismic sequence in Afar: evidence for
earthquake migration, Geophys. J. Int., 138, 447-469,
1999.

Kagan, Y.Y., Aftershock zone scaling, Bull. Seismol. Soc.

Am., 92, 641-655, 2002.

Kagan, Y.Y. and D.D. Jackson, Spatial aftershock distri-
bution: Eﬀect of normal stress, J. Geophys. Res., 103,
24453-24467, 1998.

Kagan Y.Y. and Knopoﬀ L., Spatial distribution of earth-
quakes : the two-point correlation function, Geophys.
J. R. Astr. Soc., 62, 303-320, 1980.

Kagan, Y.Y. and L. Knopoﬀ, Stochastic synthesis of
earthquake catalogs, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 2853-2862,
1981.

Kagan, Y.Y. and L. Knopoﬀ, Statistical short-term earth-

quake prediction, Science, 236, 1563-1467, 1987.

King, G.C.P., Stein, R.S. and Lin, J., Static stress changes
and the triggering of earthquakes, Bull. Seismol. Soc.
Am., 84, 935-953, 1994.

Lee, M. W. and D. Sornette, Novel mechanism for discrete
scale invariance in sandpile models, Eur. Phys. J. B, 15,
193-197, 2000.

Marsan, D., C. J. Bean, S. Steacy and J. McCloskey,
Spatio-temporal analysis of stress diﬀusion in a mining-
induced seismicity system. Geophys. Res. Lett., 26,
3697-3700, 1999.

Marsan, D., C.J. Bean, S. Steacy and J. McCloskey, Ob-
servation of diﬀusion processes in earthquake popula-
tions and implications for the predictability of seismic-
ity systems, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 28,081-28,094, 2000.
Marsan, D. and C.J. Bean, Average dynamical seismicity
changes following a stress perturbation, for a world-
wide catalogue, in press in Geophys. J. Int., 2003.
Mogi K., Sequential occurrences of recent great earth-

quakes, J. Phys. Earth, 16, 30, 1968.

Noir, J., E. Jacques, S. Bekri, P.M. Adler, P. Tappon-
nier, and G.C.P. King, Fluid ﬂow triggered migration
of events in the 1989 Dobi earthquake sequence of Cen-
tral Afar, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24, 2335-2338, 1997.
Nur A. and J.R. Booker, Aftershocks caused by pore ﬂuid

ﬂow? Science, 175, 885-888, 1972.

Ogata, Y., Statistical models for earthquake occurrence
and residual analysis for point processes, J. Am. stat.
Assoc., 83, 9-27, 1988.

Ouchi, T. and T. Uekawa, Statistical analysis of the spa-
tial distribution of earthquakes - variation of the spa-
tial distribution of earthquakes before and after large
earthquakes, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 44, 211-225,
1986.

Ouillon, G., C. Castaing and D. Sornette, Hierarchical
scaling of faulting, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 5477-5487,
1996.

Rydelek, P.A. and I.S. Sacks, Asthenospheric viscosity
and stress diﬀusion – A mechanism to explain cor-
related earthquakes and surface deformations in NE
Japan, Geophys. J. Int., 100, 39-58, 1990.

Rydelek, P.A. and I.S. Sacks, Migration of large earth-
quakes along the San Jacinto fault; stress diﬀusion from
1857 Fort Tejon earthquake, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28,
3079-3082, 2001.

Sahimi, M., Flow phenomena in rocks:

from continuum
models to fractals, percolation, cellular automata and
simulated annealing, Rev. Mod. Phys., 65, 1393-1534,
1993.

Sahimi, M., Applications of Percolation Theory (Taylor

and Francis, London), 1994.

Scholz, C.H., Microfracturing and the inelastic deforma-
tion of rocks in compression, J. Geophys. Res., 73,
1417-1432, 1968.

Shaw B.E., Generalized Omori law for aftershocks and
foreshocks from a simple dynamics, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 20, 907-910, 1993.

Sornette, D., Self-organized criticality in plate tectonics,
in the Proceedings of the NATO ASI “Spontaneous for-
mation of space-time structures and criticality,” Geilo,
Norway 2-12 april 1991, edited by T. Riste and D. Sher-
rington, Dordrecht, Boston, Kluwer Academic Press,
Vol. 349, pp.57-106, 1991.

Stein, R.S., The role of stress transfer in earthquake oc-

currence, Nature, 402, N6762, 605-609, 1999.

Stein, R.S., King, G.C.P. and Lin J., Stress triggering of
the 1994 M=6.7 Northridge, California, earthquake by
its predecessors, Science, 265, 1432-1435, 1994.

Tajima, F. and H. Kanamori, Global survey of aftershock
area expansion patterns, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter.,
40, 77-134, 1985a.

Tajima, F. and H. Kanamori, Aftershock area expansion
and mechanical heterogeneity of fault zone within sub-
duction zone, Geophys. Res. Lett., 12, 345-348, 1985b.
Toda, S., Stein, R.S. and Sagiya, T., Evidence from the
AD 2000 Izu islands earthquake swarm that stress-
ing rate governs seismicity, Nature, 419, N6902, 58-61,
2002.

Utsu, T., A statistical study on the occurrence of after-

shocks, Geophys. Mag., 30, 521-605, 1961.

Utsu, T., Y. Ogata and S. Matsu’ura, The centenary of the
Omori Formula for a decay law of aftershock activity,
J. Phys. Earth, 43, 1-33, 1995.

18

Wesson,R. L., Modeling aftershock migration and after-
slip of the San Juan Bautista, California, earthquake of
October 3, 1972, Tectonophysics, 144, 214-229, 1987.
Yamashita, T. and L. Knopoﬀ, Models of aftershock oc-
currence, Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc., 91, 13-26, 1987.

Agn`es

Helmstetter, Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia. (e-mail: helmstet@moho.ess.ucla.edu)

Guy Ouillon, Laboratoire de Physique de la
Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS UMR 6622 Universit´e
de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice,
France (e-mail: Ouillon@aol.com).

Didier Sornette, Laboratoire de Physique de la
Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS UMR 6622 Universit´e
de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Parc Valrose,06108 Nice,
France, and Department of Earth and Space Sciences
and Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics,
University of California, Los Angeles, California. (e-
mail: sornette@naxos.unice.fr)

This preprint was prepared with AGU’s LATEX macros

v5.01. File Obsdiﬀusion6 formatted February 21, 2014.

19

Table 1. Analysis of aftershock sequences of California with the windowing method. The ﬁrst and second
columns give the name and time of the mainshock. M is the mainshock magnitude, T and R are the temporal
and spatial windows used to select aftershocks, M0 is the minimum magnitude of aftershocks, p is the Omori
exponent measured over tmin < t < T , N is the number of aftershocks. Hr, Ha and Hb are the diﬀusion exponents
measured using the average distance between aftershocks and the barycenter, the large elliptical axis a, and the
short elliptical axis b respectively.

R M0

N

p

Hr

Ha

Hb

earthquake

Kern-County
San Fernando
Oroville
Imperial Valley
Westmorland
Coalinga
Morgan-Hill
Round-Valley
North Palm Springs
Oceanside
Chalfant Valley
Superstition-Hill
Loma-Prieta
Joshua-Tree
Cape Mendocino
Landers
Big Pine
Northridge
Nevada (Carter)
Mammoth Lakes
Hector-Mine

date
(dd/mm/yy)
21/07/52
09/02/71
01/08/75
15/10/79
26/04/81
02/05/83
24/04/84
23/11/84
8/07/86
13/07/86
21/07/86
24/11/87
18/10/89
23/04/92
25/04/92
28/06/92
17/05/93
17/01/94
12/09/94
15/05/99
16/10/99

M

7.5
6.6
5.7
6.4
5.7
6.7
6.2
6.1
5.6
5.4
6.4
6.6
7.0
6.1
6.5
7.3
6.2
6.7
5.5
5.6
7.1

T
(days)
5478
1096
1826
36
73
1826
182
182
365
3650
1826
18
36
36
36
365
365
1826
365
735
1826

(km)
70
40
15
80
20
22
30
15
15
20
20
50
50
30
70
60
25
30
25
10
35

3.5
3.0
2.0
2.5
1.7
2.0
1.5
2.0
1.5
2.0
2.0
1.8
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.2
1.5
2.0
2.5
1.5
2.5

tmin
(days)
1.0
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.2
1.0
0.02
0.1
1.0
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.1
3.0
0.6
3.0
2.0
2.0
5.0
0.2
1.0

281
274
785
677
587
3133
633
1398
2331
1926
2985
794
728
3658
1197
7278
780
3254
502
1570
1812

0.92
1.04
1.09
1.44
1.40
1.03
0.60
0.94
1.10
0.79
1.16
1.21
1.05
1.11
1.20
1.05
1.22
1.13
1.11
0.84
1.14

0.06
0.01
0.04
0.41
0.16
0.04
0.11
0.09
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.20
0.11
0.09
0.05
0.00
0.02
0.05
-0.01
0.09
0.00

0.05
0.03
0.04
0.37
0.16
0.04
0.12
0.09
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.20
0.09
0.03
0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.06
0.05
0.07
-0.01

0.08
-0.01
0.04
0.19
0.12
0.01
0.44
0.11
0.04
0.02
0.16
0.10
0.29
0.27
0.13
0.02
0.04
0.07
0.00
0.16
0.09

20

Table 2. Analysis of aftershock sequences of California with the wavelet method. The ﬁrst
column gives the name of the mainshocks. p (H method) is the Omori’s exponent obtained
with the H-scaling law. p (1/H method) is the Omori’s exponent obtained with the 1/H-
scaling law. H (H method) is the diﬀusion exponent obtained with the H-scaling law. H
(1/H method) is the diﬀusion exponent obtained with the 1/H-scaling law.

earthquake

p(“1/H”)

p(“H”) H(“1/H”) H(“H”)

Kern-County
San Fernando
Oroville
Imperial Valley
Westmorland
Coalinga
Morgan-Hill
Round-Valley
North Palm Springs
Oceanside
Chalfant Valley
Superstition-Hill
Loma-Prieta
Joshua-Tree
Cape Mendocino
Landers
Big Pine
Northridge
Nevada (Carter)
Mammoth Lakes
Hector-Mine

a range
(days)
9.5 − 73
2 − 15
110 − 365
2 − 55
0.75 − 75
3 − 360
0.75 − 256
1 − 30
2.5 − 1825
1 − 5.5
4 − 1460
2 − 25
0.25 − 37
7 − 26
3 − 128
15 − 1100
3 − 365
15 − 730
18 − 90
1 − 4
2 − 220

R range
(km)
40 − 150
5 − 30
4 − 30
41 − 200
5 − 15
3 − 20
3 − 120
2 − 20
2 − 10
5 − 20
3 − 30
5 − 40
7 − 200
1.7 − 12
12 − 70
3 − 180
5 − 50
7 − 90
4 − 45
2 − 8
2 − 30

1.17
1.1
1.21
1.47
1.43
0.95
0.51
0.72
1.14
1.11
1.15
1.58
1.03
0.98
1.11
1.10
1.11
1.28
1.19
0.59
1.20

1.22
a

1.18
1.54
0.22
0.81
0.57
0.35
0.47
1.12
1.12
1.57
1.04
0.93
1.12
1.16
1.10
1.31
1.37
1.94
1.19

−0.09
0.02
0.03
−0.07
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.24
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.06
−0.02
0.08
−0.01
−0.07
0.03
−0.03
−0.15
0.20
−0.01

−0.07
a

0.03
−0.07
0.52
0.11
−0.02
0.32
0.26
0.01
0.03
0.04
−0.01
0.07
−0.01
−0.06
0.02
−0.03
−0.17
−0.72
0.00

a The H and p values cannot be estimated with the H-wavelet method for he San-Fernando sequence because there is no

clear minima of the variance.

21

)

m
k
(
 
y

30

20

10

0

−10

−20

−30

)

m
k
(
 
y

30

20

10

0

−10

−20

−30

−20

0
x (km)

20

−20

0
x (km)

20

Figure 1. Maps of seismicity generated by the ETAS model with parameters b = 1, θ = 0.2, µ = 1, d = 1
km, α = 0.5, c = 0.001 day and a branching ratio n = 1. The mainshock occurs at the origin of space with
magnitude M = 7 (black star). The minimum magnitude is ﬁxed at m0 = 0. The distances between mainshock
and aftershocks follow a power-law with parameter µ = 1 and the local Omori law is ∝ 1/t1+θ. According to the
theory developed in the text, the average distance between the ﬁrst mainshock and the aftershocks is thus expected
to grow as R ∼ tθ/µ ∼ t0.2. The two plots are for diﬀerent time periods of the same numerical simulation, such
that the same number of earthquakes N = 3000 is obtained for each graph: (a) time between 0 and 0.3 days; (b)
time between 30 and 70 yrs. At early times, aftershocks are localized close to the mainshock, and then diﬀuse and
cluster around the largest aftershocks.

22

(a) 

e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

1000

500

0

0

2
10

(c) 

)

m
k
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

i

 

1
10

200

600
400
time (days)

800

H=0.15

(b) 

)

m
k
(
 
y

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

10

−4

10

−3

10

−2

−1

10

0
10

1
10

2
10

3
10

time (days)

20 40 60 80 100 120 140

x (km)

Figure 2. Analysis of a synthetic aftershock sequence. We have built a synthetic catalog by superposing a large
number of independent aftershock sequences. We have used 1000 mainshocks, with a poissonian distribution in
time and space. Each mainshock generates only direct aftershocks with a rate given by (16), with K = 10, α = 0.8,
θ = −0.1, c = 0.001 day, µ = 2 and d equal to the rupture length of the mainshock. The distribution of distances
between aftershocks and mainshocks is thus independent of the time between mainshock and aftershocks. The
global number of events in the catalog is 40000 including the 1000 mainshocks. The seismicity rate (a) displays
several peaks corresponding to the occurrence of large mainshocks, as observed for California seismicity. The map
(b) shows large clusters corresponding to the aftershock sequences of the largest mainshocks. The average distance
between all pairs of events (c) shown as circles increases with the average time between events as R ∼ tH with
H = 0.15 (solid line), for a large interval of the time between events [0.001 − 10] days. For larger times, the average
distance saturates to R ≈ 80 km, half the size of the catalog. The diamonds show the results obtained with the
method of Marsan et al.
[2000]. At early times (t < 1 day), the average distance is constant and the method
is eﬀective to remove the inﬂuence of uncorrelated seismicity. But at large times when the aftershock activity is
small, there are large ﬂuctuations of the average distance, because the method is very sensible to the noise.

(a) 

(b) 

23

−100

0
x (km)

100

2

3
magnitude

4

5

(c) 

(d) 

0
distance from mainshock (km)

100

50

0
10

1
10
time (days)

2
10

(e) 

(f) 

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

n
o

i
t

u
b
i
r
t
s
d
e
v
i
t

 

i

l

a
u
m
u
c

)
r
,
t
(

N

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

p

1.1

1.3

1.2

1

0.9

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10

)

m
k
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
n
a
e
m

i

1
10

−1

10

1
0
10
10
time (days)

2
10

0

12.5 25 37.5 50
r (km)

Figure 3. Analysis of the June, 28, 1992, M = 7.3 Landers aftershock sequence. (a) Map of aftershocks, the
mainshock epicenter is shown by a star. (b) Magnitude distribution for diﬀerent time windows (time increasing
from black to gray) showing that the magnitude distribution is stable over time, and that the catalog is complete
above m = 2.2 after 3 days after the mainshock. (c) Rate of seismic activity as a function of the distance from
the mainshock for diﬀerent times after the mainshock (increasing time from top to bottom (black to gray)). The
background activity preceding the mainshock is shown as a dashed line. (d) Rate of aftershocks for the whole
sequence (solid black line at the top) and ﬁt by an Omori law (dashed gray line), and rate of aftershocks for
diﬀerent distances from the mainshock (increasing distance from gray to black).
(e) Characteristic size of the
aftershock cluster as a function of the time from the mainshock, measured by the average distance from the
barycenter (circles), or from the small (’+’) and large (’x’) inertial axes. (f) Variation of the Omori exponent with
the distance from the mainshock.

0.0022 <t< 2.39 days

2.4 <t< 5.64 days

24

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

−100

0

100

−100

0

100

5.6 <t< 11.6 days

12 <t< 26.4 days

−100

0

100

−100

0

100

26 <t< 56.1 days

56 <t< 135 days

−100

0

100

−100

0

100

135 <t< 362 days

Background, 10 yrs

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

)

m
k
(
 
y

100

50

0

−50

−100

−100

0
x (km)

100

−100

0
x (km)

100

Figure 4. Map of the aftershocks of the Landers earthquake, for diﬀerent time windows with 1000 events in each
plot, showing the stationarity of the spatial distribution of aftershocks. The epicenter is shown by a cross. The
gray and black lines show the large and small elliptical axes respectively (multiplied by a factor 2 for clarity).

25

0.4

H

0.2

0

0.5

1
p

1.5

Figure 5. Diﬀusion exponents H as a function of the Omori exponent p for the aftershock sequences described in
Table 1. The circles give the diﬀusion exponent Hr evaluated with the mean distance from the barycenter (radius
of gyration), the crosses correspond to the diﬀusion exponent Ha and the ’+’ correspond to Hb.

26

1.5
W(t)

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

t

Figure 6. Wavelet kernel used for the wavelet analysis of aftershock diﬀusion, deﬁned by (13). This wavelet kernel
and its derivative both vanish at time t = 0 and has a zero mean over the interval [0, +∞[.

27

Round Valley

−1.3

−1.4

−3
−3.4−3.3−3.2
−2.9
−3.1
−1.8

−1.7
−1.4

−2.8−2.7−2.6−2.5
−2.3
−2.1
−2.4
−2.2
−2−2
−1.9

−1.3

−1.1

−1.2

−1.6

−1.5

H

0

−0.8

−0.5

−1
−0.9

−0.8
−0.7−0.6

−0.9

−1
−1.1
−1.2

H

0

−1.5
−1.6

−1.7

−1.8

1
p

−0.7

−0.6

−1.6

−2.2−2.1
−1.9
−2
−1.5
−1.4

−1.7
−1.8

−0.7
−0.6

−0.8
−0.9
−1.1
−1
−1.2
−1.3
−1.4
−1.5

−1.6

−1
−0.9

−0.8

−1.1

−1.2

−1.3

1
p

0

0.5

1.5

2

0

0.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

−1

10

10

8
10

6
10

4
10

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
o
c
 
t
e
e
v
a
w
 
d
e
z

l

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
e
R

2
10

−10

10

1

0.5

−0.5

−1

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
o
c
 
t
e
e
v
a
w
 
d
e
z

l

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
e
R

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−5

10
Renormalized time scale aR−1/H

0
10

1
10

2
10

3
10

Renormalized space scale R/aH

Figure 7. Determination of the exponents H and p for the Round Valley mainshock using the 1/H-scaling
method (upper and lower left panels) and the H-scaling method (upper and lower left panels). The upper panels
represent the contour plots in log10 scale of equi-values of the average variance of the matching of wavelet coeﬃcients
(calculated as a function of time scale for diﬀerent distances R; see text for details) as a function of trial values of
p and H. The minimum determines our best estimation for H and p for this sequence. We get two estimates, one
using the H-scaling method (p = 0.35, H = 0.32) and another using the 1/H-scaling method (p = 0.72, H = 0.24).
Note that the minimum found by the 1/H-scaling method is better deﬁned than when using the H-scaling method.
The lower panels show the resulting quality of the collapsed wavelet coeﬃcients as a function of time scale for
diﬀerent distances R, using these best estimates of p and H.

28

0.2

0.4

0.6

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

0.8

1
p (1/H method)

1.2

1.5

2

1

0.5

)
d
o
h
t
e
m
H

 

(
 
p

0

0

0.5

0

)
d
o
h

t

 

e
m
H
1
(
 

/

H

−0.5

−0.5

−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0
H (1/H method)

0.1

Figure 8. Upper panel: correlation between the Omori exponent p obtained with the 1/H method (horizontal
axis) and with the H method (vertical axis). The line of slope 1 is drawn as a reference. Lower panel: correlation
between the exponents H obtained with the 1/H method (horizontal axis) and with the H method (vertical axis).
The line of slope 1 is drawn as a reference.

29

−50

0
x (km)

50

2

3
magnitude

4

0
60
distance from mainshock (km)

40

20

−2

10

10

−1

0
10
time (days)

1
10

2
10

i

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
c

l

2
10

1
10

0
10

)
r
,
t
(

N

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

0.8

0.7

p

0.6

0.5

)

m
k
(
 
y

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

1
10

0
10

)

m
k
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
n
a
e
m

i

−1

10

−2

10

10

−1

0
10
time (days)

1
10

2
10

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

r (km)

Figure 9. Analysis of the Morgan-Hill aftershock sequence. Same legend as in Figure 3.

0.0035 <t< 1.51 days

1.5 <t< 10.3 days

30

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

−50

0

50

−50

0

50

10 <t< 23.2 days

23 <t< 45.6 days

−50

0

50

−50

0

50

46 <t< 73.7 days

74 <t< 114 days

−50

0

50

1.1e+02 <t< 181 days

−50

0

50

Background, 10 yrs

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

)

m
k
(
 
y

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

−50

0
x (km)

50

−50

0
x (km)

50

Figure 10. Map of the Morgan-Hill aftershock sequence. Same legend as in Figure 4.

31

−100

0
x (km)

100

3

4
magnitude

5

0
distance from mainshock (km)

150

100

50

10

−1

0
10
time (days)

1
10

n
o

i
t

u
b
i
r
t
s
d

i

 

e
v
i
t

l

a
u
m
u
c

1
10

0
10

)
r
,
t
(

N

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

2

p

3

2.5

1.5

1

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

y
a
d

 

 
r
e
p
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

1
10

)

m
k
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
n
a
e
m

i

0
10

−2

10

−1

10

0
10

1
10

time (days)

10

20
r (km)

30

Figure 11. Analysis of the Imperial Valley aftershock sequence. Same legend as in Figure 3.

0.00098 <t< 0.066 days

0.066 <t< 0.19 days

32

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

−100

0

100

0.19 <t< 0.33 days

−100

0

100

0.33 <t< 0.54 days

−100

0

100

0.54 <t< 1.1 days

−100

0

100

1.1 <t< 3.5 days

−100

0

100

3.5 <t< 29 days

−100

0

100

Background, 10 yrs

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

100

0

)

m
k
(
 
y

−100

−100

0
x (km)

100

−100

0
x (km)

100

Figure 12. Same as Figure 4 for the Imperial Valley aftershock sequence. Note that the epicenter shown as a
cross is far oﬀ from the locations where aftershocks cluster. This justiﬁes our use of the aftershock barycenter as a
more natural reference point for measuring diﬀusion.

33

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

H

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

p

Figure 13. Diﬀusion exponent H as a function of the Omori law exponent p obtained with the 1/H method for
all the aftershock sequences described in table 2. The thick lines are the approximative predictions of the ETAS
model for µ ≥ 2 (20), assuming that p = 1 − θ if p < 1 and p = 1 + θ if p > 1.

34

4
10

)

m
k
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
n
a
e
m

i

3
10

2
10

H=0.17 

H=0.03 

1
10

−2

10

0
10

2
10

4
10

time (days)

6
10

8
10

Figure 14. Average distance R(t) between a mainshock of magnitude M = 6 and its aftershocks for numerical
simulations of the ETAS model with n = 1, α = 0.5, b = 1, c = 0.001, θ = 0.2, m0 = 0 and µ = 1, obtained
by averaging over 1000 simulations. The circles show the results for d = 10 km, independently of the mainshock
size, and without any constrain on aftershock selection. The diﬀusion exponent H = 0.17 is close to the prediction
H = θ/µ = 0.2. The crosses correspond to another simulations of the ETAS model with the same parameters
except that the characteristic distance d now depends on the magnitude of each event according to d = 0.010.5M .
For this simulation, we have also selected aftershocks up to a distance of 100 km (10 times the mainshock rupture
length) and we have rejected all aftershock sequences containing at least an event larger than the mainshock. All
these factors weaken the diﬀusion by comparison the the prediction of the ETAS model.

