3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NEUTRINOS FROM SAN MARCO AND BELOW

G. FIORENTINI
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Ferrara and INFN-Ferrara, Via Paradiso 12
Ferrara, I-44100 Italy
E-mail: ﬁorentini@fe.infn.it

M. LISSIA
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Cagliari and INFN-Cagliari, Strada provinciale per Sestu
Km 0.700
Monserrato (Cagliari), I-09042 Italy

F. MANTOVANI

Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Universit`a di Siena, Via Laterina 8
Siena, I-53100 Italy
and INFN-Ferrara, Via Paradiso 12
Ferrara, I-44100 Italy

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Ferrara and INFN-Ferrara, Via Paradiso 12
Ferrara, I-44100 Italy

and

B. RICCI

ABSTRACT

Order of magnitude estimates of radiogenic heat and antineutrino production
are given, using the San Marco cathedral as an example. Prospects of determin-
ing the radiogenic contribution to terrestrial heat by detection of antineutrinos
from natural radioactivity (geoneutrinos) are discussed. A three kton scintillator
detector in three years can clearly discriminate among diﬀerent models of terres-
trial heat production. In addition, the study of geoneutrinos oﬀers a possibility
of improving the determination of neutrino mass and mixing, by exploiting the
knowledge of Th/U abundance in the Earth.

1. A few facts about San Marco

After the visit of the San Marco cathedral, accompanied by a most interesting
historical and artistic overview, nothing should be added but our gratitude to Milla
Baldo Ceolin for organizing this most interesting and timely conference and for spicing
it with exceptional events. Physicists however are tenacious, and we cannot resist
adding a few additional information, some of these a touristic guide will never tell
you.

First of all, San Marco contains radioactive materials. The cathedral mass being
in the range of 100 kton , we expect it contains about 100 kg of Uranium, as the typical
Uranium abundance in rocks is in the range of one part per million, however with
large variations. We also expect some 400 kg of Thorium, since almost everywhere

in the solar system (meteorites, Moon, Venus and also Earth) the typical abundance
4. In addition, there are about 100 Kg of 40K, corresponding to the
ratio is T h/U
104 which one ﬁnds in Earth rocks and to the natural abundance
typical ratio K/U
40K/K = 1.2

≃
≃
10−4.

San Marco is also a heat source. In fact, each decay chain releases energy over
long time scales (e.g. for 238U ∆ = 52 MeV and τ1/2 = 4.5 Gyr ), the total heat ﬂow
being:

·

H = 9.5M(U) + 2.7M(T h) + 3.6M(40K)

(1)

with masses in 100 kg and H in mW. This gives 24 mW for San Marco, really a very
weak heat source, although it does not matter in these sunny days.

More interesting to people attending this conference, San Marco is an anti-neutrino
source. Each decay chain releases antineutrinos together with heat, with a well ﬁxed
ratio. (e.g. 238U

206 P b + 8 4He + 6¯ν + 52 MeV). The antineutrino luminosity is:

→

L = 7.4M(U) + 1.6M(T h) + 27M(40K)

where again M is in 100 Kg and L in 109¯ν/s. This gives about 4
1010¯ν/s for San
Marco. Antineutrinos from the progenies of Uranium (Emax = 3.3MeV ) and Thorium
(Emax = 2.2MeV ) can be detected by means of inverse beta decay reaction:

·

¯ν + p

n + e+

1.804 MeV

→

−

At least in principle, the two components can be discriminated, due to the dif-
ferent end points. Unfortunately, antineutrinos from β decay of 40K are below the
threshold for (3), whereas neutrinos from electron capture are obscured by the Sun.
10−44cm2) corresponds
The cross section of (3) for 2.5 MeV antineutrinos ( σ
1018 m. There is plenty of water near the
to an interaction length in water λ = 7
·
104 m2) is often covered with Acqua Alta
cathedral and San Marco square (S
(high water), a 10 cm height corresponding roughly to 1 kton, the size of KamLAND.
Should Acqua Alta reach the clock of Torre dell’Orologio, the size of Superkamiokande
is reached. With a height of 100m a megaton detector is obtained, the cathedral be-
ing now deeply submerged. A pointlike source emitting 1010¯ν/s with E=2.5 MeV at
the center of a megaton water sphere will produce one event every four years. Also
in view of the environmental impact of such a project, better we look at some other
direction.

≃

≃

5

·

2. The sources of terrestrial heat

Earth re-emits in space the radiation coming from the sun (K⊙ = 1.4 kW/m2)
80mW/m2). By inte-
adding to it a a tiny ﬂux of heat produced from its interior (Φ
grating this latter over the Earth surface one gets a ﬂow HE = 40T W , the equivalent
of some 104 nuclear power plants.

≃

(2)

(3)

The origins of terrestrial heat are not understood in quantitative terms. In 1980
J. Verhoogen concluded a review of terrestrial heat sources by saying 1): “...what
emerges from this morass of fragmentary and uncertain data is that radioactivity itself
could possibly account for at least 60 per cent if not 100 per cent of the Earth’s heat
output. If one adds the greater rate of radiogenic heat production in the past, possible
release of gravitational energy (original heat, separation of the core...) tidal friction ...
and possible meteoritic impact ... the total supply of energy may seem embarassingly
large...”. One can appreciate the complexity of the problem by comparing Sun and
In fact, a constant heat ﬂow H can be sustained by an
Earth energy inventories.
Ht. For sustaining the sun over an
energy source U for an age t provided that U
109 yr, gravitational and chemical energies are short by a factor 102
age tsolar = 4.5
and 106 respectively and only nuclear energy can succeed, as beautifully demonstrated
by Gallium experiments in the nineties. On the other hand, the terrestrial heat can
be sustained over geological times by any energy source, be it nuclear, gravitational
or chemical.

≥

·

Observational data on the amounts of Uranium, Thorium and Potassium in Earth
interior are rather limited, since only the crust and the upper part of the mantle
are accessible to geochemical analysis. As U, T h and K are lithoﬁle elements, they
accumulate in the continental crust (CC). Estimates for the Uranium mass in the
crust are in the range2,3)

Mc(U) = (0.2

0.4)1017 kg

.

(4)

(5)

−

−

Concentrations in the mantle are much smaller, however the total amounts are
comparable due to the much larger mass of the mantle. Estimates for the whole
mantle are in the range1)

Mm(U) = (0.4

0.8)1017 kg

.

One has to remark, however, that these estimates are much more uncertain than
for the crust as they are obtained by: i)collecting data for upper mantle (hu = 600km),
ii)extrapolating them to the completely unexplored lower mantle (hl = 3000km).

Concerning the abundance ratios, one has generally T h/U

4, consistent with
the meteoritic value. A remarkable exception is the oceanic crust where T h/U
2,
however both U and T h abundances are an order of magnitude smaller with respect
to CC, which is also much thicker.

≃

≃

Concerning Potassium, generally one ﬁnds K/U

10, 000. Earth looks thus
signiﬁcantly impoverished in Potassium with respect to Carbonaceous Chondrites,
and also to other meteorites. This has long been known as the Potassium problem4,5).
In fact, elements as heavy as Potassium should not have escaped from a planet as
big as Earth. It has been suggested that at high pressure Potassium behaves as a
metal and thus it could have been buried in the Earth core, where it could provide

≃

the energy source of the terrestrial magnetic ﬁeld. However, Potassium depletion is
also observed in Moon and Venus rocks. The most reasonable assumption is that it
volatized in the formation of planetesimals from which Earth has accreted.

In conclusion, the determination of the Uranium, Thorium and Potassium in the
Earth is an important scientiﬁc problem, as it can ﬁx the radiogenic contribution to
terrestrial heat production.

3. Antineutrinos from below

“If there are more things in heaven and Earth than are dreamt of in our natural
philosphy, it is partly because electromagnetic detection alone is inadequate”. With
these words in 1984, Krauss, Glashow and Schramm6) proposed a program of antineu-
trino astronomy and geophysics, which could open vast new windows for exploration
above us and below. Now that we understand the fate of neutrinos it is time to tackle
the program (including Earth energetics, a detailed study of the solar core, neutrinos
from past supernovae...) Determination of the radiogenic contribution to terrestrial
heat production is the ﬁrst step.

One can build several models for the radiogenic heat production. Since for any
element there is a well ﬁxed ratio heat/(anti)neutrinos each model also provides a
prediction for the antineutrino luminosities, the basic equations being (1) and (2),
where the same numerical coeﬃcients can be used when masses are in units of 1017
kg, powers are in TW and luminosities in 1024/s. At this level, everything is ﬁxed
in terms of three inputs. The range of plausible models is covered in ﬁg.1, which
deserves the following comments:

i)In a simple chondritic model one assumes that Earth is obtained by assembling
together the same material as we ﬁnd in these meteorites, without loss of heavy
enough elements. The amounts of U, T h and K are determined from their ratio to
Si in meteorites, by rescaling to the known abundance of this latter element in the
Earth. This simple model easily accounts for 3/4 of HE , mainly supplied from 40K,
104, a factor seven larger than the value observed in
however it implies K/U = 7
Earth rocks.

·

ii) In the standard model of geochemists, the so called Bulk Silicate Earth (BSE)
104, the radiogenic production is about one half of the terres-

model, with K/U = 1
trial heat ﬂow, being supplied mainly from U and Th.

·

iii) A fully radiogenic model, where the BSE abundances are rescaled imposing

by imposing Hrad = 40 TW, is not excluded by observational data.

In all models, see ﬁg.2, antineutrino production is dominated by 40K decays. Th
1024/s. By dividing over
and U anti-neutrino luminosities are in the range (10
the earth surface, one gets ﬂuxes of order 106 cm−2s−1, in the same range as that of
solar boron neutrinos.

20)

−

·

Clearly, in order to estimate ﬂuxes at a speciﬁc site one needs assumptions about

Figure 1: Contributions to terrestrial heat production (TW), as estimated in diﬀerent models of
Earth interior. CON= chondritic, BSE=bulk silicate Earth, RAD= fully radiogenic. The non
radiogenic contribution is indicated as NR.

the distribution of the radioactive materials, the total amounts being an insuﬃcient
information. In a paper submitted on December 2002 we provided estimates corre-
sponding to diﬀerent models for several sites7). The numbers of predicted events for
yr, a detection eﬃciency ǫ = 78%
Kamland (normalized to an exposure of 0.14
and a survival probability Pee = 0.55) are 3.5, 4 and 6 for the chondritic, BSE and
fully radiogenic model respectively.

1032p

·

·

The paper ended with: “The determination of the radiogenic component of ter-
, the ﬁrst fruit we

restrial heat is an important and so far unanswered question....
can get from neutrinos, and Kamland will get the ﬁrstlings very soon”.

A few days later the ﬁrst results from Kamland appeared8), containing a ﬁrst
glimpse of Earth interior in addition to important information on neutrino oscilla-
tion. Out of a total of 32 counts, in the prompt energy region below 2.6 MeV, 20
events are associated with antineutrinos from reactors and 3 correspond to the esti-
mated background. The remaining 9 counts are the ﬁrst indication of geo-neutrinos!
Clearly the uncertainty is large, since the expected statistical ﬂuctuations are about
√32. Within this error, the result is consistent with any model for the radiogenic
contribution to terrestrial heat, from 0 to 100 TW. One has to remind that data have
been collected in just six months and that signiﬁcant accumulation can be achieved

Figure 2: Neutrino luminosity. Antineutrinos production rates from U, Th and K according to
diﬀerent models of Earth interior. In the last column neutrinos from e.c. of 40K are shown. Units
are 1024s−1.

in the future.

4. Prospects for measuring terrestrial heat with geoneutrinos

The ﬁrst Kamland results really open a new window on Earth interior. A natural
question is thus: what can be learnt on heat production from geoneutrino measure-
ments?

Let us consider Uranium geoneutrinos, since expected event numbers are higher
and energies can be chosen in a range where background is negligible. The basic
equations relating event number N(U), Uranium mass in the crust Mc(U), in the
mantle Mm(U), and Uranium contribution to heat production rate H(U) are:

H(U) = h[Mc(U) + Mm(U)]

N(U) = ncMc(U) + nmMm(U).

(6)

(7)

The ﬁrst equation simply adds the contribution of crust and mantle, the propor-
tionality constant being h = 9.5T W/1017 kg. The diﬀerent coeﬃcients nc and nm
reﬂect the diﬀerent distances of the detector from sources in the crust and in the
mantle. They also depend on the detector characteristics and on neutrino properties:
as a normalization we shall consider an exposure of 1032p
yra, a 100% detection
eﬃciency and a neutrino survival probability Pee = 0.55.

·

Assuming a uniform distribution in the mantle one has, independently of the site,
nm = 18/(1017kg). On the other hand, nc depends on the location. Our preliminary
1032 free protons.

a1kton of mineral oil contains 0.86

·

calculations, based on a crustal map of the whole Earth, give nc = 52/(1017kg) and
nc = 63/(1017kg) for the Kamioka mine and the Gran Sasso respectively.

There are two unknowns in eqs.(6) and (7), Mc(U) and Mm(U). From a single
experiment one cannot extract both (in principle this could be achieved with two
experiments, at markedly diﬀerent geological sites, i.e., with very diﬀerent values of
nc).

One has to remind that Mm(U) has been estimated by extrapolating to the whole
mantle rather uncertain data obtained from the upper mantle. A reasonable program
is thus: i)use available geochemical information to ﬁx Mc(U) and ii) use geo-neutrinos
to get information on Mm(U), and thus on H. In this way, from the above equations
one gets:

H(U) = (h/nm)[N(U)

(nc −

nm)Mc(U)]

−
A signiﬁcant experiment should be capable of discriminating among models of
heat production. In the BSE model one expects H(U) = 8.6 TW. Predictions for the
Uranium contribution are between 6 and 16 TW, the lower (upper) value correspond-
ing to the chondritic (fully radiogenic) model. A signiﬁcant experiment should thus
provide a measurement with a (1σ) error of about 2-3 TW.

(8)

By considering the full range of estimated Uranium mass in the crust as a 3σ
0.07)1017 kg. From eq.(8), which tells how to
interval, one has Mc(U) = (0.30
get H(U) once that N(U) has been measured with geoneutrinos, one derives the
uncertainty on the extracted value of H(U) :

±

where:

and

∆H(U) = (∆H 2

1 + ∆H 2

2 )1/2

,

∆H1 = (h/nm)∆N(U)

,

∆H2 = h

∆Mc(U)

.

nm)

(nc −
nm

∆N = C 1/2 = (N + R + B)1/2

.

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Geoneutrino events are obtained from the counts number C after subtracting

reactor R and background B events, so that:

As demonstrated by KamLAND, background can be negligible in the energy region
where most of U-events occur. The expectations for various experiments at diﬀerent
sites, collected in table 1, suggest the following comments:

i)KamLAND can reach an exposure corresponding to 1032p

yr (and full eﬃ-
ciency) in a rather short time. With this exposure, unless the nearby reactors power
is reduced, the total uncertainty on H(U) would ∆H(U)
8 TW, dominated by
ﬂuctuations of reactor events. A ten times large exposure (achievable in several
years, with KamLAND, or in a much shorter time using a mineral oil detector with

≃

·

Superkamiokande size) becomes most interesting. One can estimate an accuracy of
about 3 TW even with the present reactor power. This would really provide signif-
icant information on the radiogenic heat production. Note however that some 270
Uranium events will have to be extracted from a total of about 2000 counts and that
in the present calculation accidental background has been neglected.

ii)At Gran Sasso, where the reactor antineutrino ﬂux is much smaller, an exposure
yr and full eﬃciency should be reached in a reasonable time
5 TW. An experiment with ten

corresponding to 1032p
·
by Borexino. The uncertainty would be ∆H(U)
times more data could reduce the uncertainty to about 2 TW.

≃

iii)As a limiting case, let us consider and ideal site where crust and mantle have
the same weight in the determining neutrino events, so that N(U) is proportional
to the total Uranium mass in the crust plus mantle. The ideal place is thus such
that nc = nm, so that uncertainty on Mc(U) do not aﬀect the result, see eq.(11).
Presumably this means a place in the middle of oceans, far away from the continental
crust. This place is presumably also remote from nuclear plants, so that the error on
N is essentially due to statistical ﬂuctuations. Already with 1032p
yr one can reach
an accuracy of about 2 TW.

·

In conclusion, there are good prospects for reaching an accuracy ∆H(U) = (2
−
TW and thus ﬁxing an important missing point on the sources of terrestrial heat.

3)

Table 1: The achievable accuracy ∆H on the determination of U contribution to heat ﬂow. Calcula-
tion are performed for 1032p
yr, 100% eﬃciency and a survival probability Pee = 0.55. Background
counts are set to zero. In the last two lines, calculations are rescaled for an exposure of 1033p
yr,
the achievable accuracy being now ∆H(33). Errors on heat ﬂows are in TW.

·

·

Remarks

Location

Kamioka Gran Sasso

52
18
180 a)

63
18
35 b)

Ideal
18
18
0

nc
nm
R

B
N (best)

C = R + B + N (best)
∆N = √C
∆H1 = (h/nm)∆N
∆H2 = h(nc
−
∆H = p∆H 2
1 + ∆H 2
2
∆H1(33) = (h/nm)∆N
∆H(33) = p∆H 2

1 + ∆H 2
2

nm)/nm ∆Mc

0
26.4

206.4
14.4
7.6
1.3
7.7
2.4
2.7

0
29.7

64.7
8.04
4.2
1.7
4.6
1.3
2.1

Reactor events:
a)from KamLAND data
b)from Raghavan et al. estimate9)
No background is assumed
16.2 Geo-events from best BSE estimate

0

(Mc(U ) = 0.3 and Mm(U ) = 0.6)

16.2 Total counts

4
2.1
0
2.1
0.7
0.7

Statistical ﬂuctuations only
Error from geo-neutrinos
Error from crust
Total error
for 1033p
for 1033p

yr
yr

·
·

5. Can we learn on neutrinos from geoneutrinos?

Uncertainties on the individual Uranium and Thorium ﬂuxes Φ are large. In prac-
tice, one cannot use Φ(U) and/or Φ(T h) as additional input for extracting neutrino
mass and mixing from the lowest energy region (Evis < Egeo = 2.6 MeV) in a reactor
experiment.

However, one can still gain some information on θ and ∆m2 by observing that the

ratio of events from U and Th is well constrained:

r = N(T h)/N(U) = 0.25

0.05 .

(13)

±

This follows from the fact that the abundance ratio T h/U is well ﬁxed in the solar
system, being very similar on meteorites, Venus, Moon as well as on Earth , all this
information pointing to a common origin of the solar system.

≃

±

The 20% uncertainty corresponds essentially to uncertainties on the T h/U ratio in
the various components of the Earth which contribute appreciably to neutrino produc-
tion (continental crust and mantle). This uncertainty accounts for the comparison of
diﬀerent estimates and also of diﬀerent regions of the Earth interior. With respect to
the average value T h/U = 3.8 value, the extrema are T h/U = 2 for the oceanic crust
(which is however poor in both U and T h and also it is thin, so that it contributes
little to neutrino production) and T h/U
6 for the crust estimate by one author,
0.7 should
most authors giving values in the range 3.8–4.2. An estimate T h/U = 3.8
be more accurate than 1σ.

The constraint in eq.(13) was derived in 10) assuming a uniform T h/U distribution
inside the Earth and assuming that the survival probability of geo-neutrinos reaching
the detector is the same, independently of energy and distance. However, as remarked
in 7), the constraint holds within its error even if these simplifying assumptions are
relaxed.

Concerning the eﬀect of regional T h/U variations, from 11) it was found that r
is changed by less than 2% when the detector is placed at Kamioka, or Gran Sasso,
or Tibet (on the top of a very thick continental crust) or at the Hawaii (sitting on
the middle of a thin, U- and T h- poor oceanic crust). Coming to the eﬀect of local
variations, by assuming that within 100 km from the detector the Uranium abundance
is double, T h/U=2 , one gets r = 0.22, whereas if its is halved, T h/U=8, one ﬁnds
r = 0.28. Neutrino oscillations clearly do not aﬀect eq. (7) if the oscillation lengths
for both U and T h neutrinos are both very short or very long in comparison with
some typical Earth dimension. By numerical calculation, one ﬁnds that the eﬀect of
10−5eV 2.
ﬁnite oscillation lengths does not change r by more than 2% for ∆m2 > 1
In conclusion, all these eﬀects are well within the estimated 20% uncertainty on r.

The constraint (13) has been used in 10) in order to extract information from the
full data set of KamLAND. A slight preference for the LMA-I solution with respect

·

)

2

V
e
(
 

2

m

 

-4

10

-5

10

95.0% C.L., E

>0.9 MeV

Prompt

95.0% C.L., E

>2.6 MeV

Prompt

0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

2sin

(2 

1
)q

Figure 3: The eﬀect of the T h/U constraint on the determination of mass and mixing parameters,
from ref.10

to LMA-II has been found, however it is not statistically signiﬁcant. On the other
hand, a signiﬁcant reduction of the mixing parameters space has been found, in spite
of the limited statistics. This constraint could become really useful when more data
are available.

6. Concluding remarks: from neutrons to neutrinos

We all owe very much to Bruno Pontecorvo, the man who addressed the de-
tectability of neutrinos, discussed available sources (Sun, reactors and accelerators),
conceived the Cl-Ar method and invented the beautiful phenomenon of neutrino os-
cillations. There is an additional lesson we can learn from him. In 1941, a few years
after the celebrated Rome studies on slow neutrons, Bruno was a research physicist
at Well Surveys Inc., and published a paper entitled “Neutron Well Logging - A New
Geological Method Based on Nuclear Physics”12). He had invented the neutron well
log, an instrument still used for the prospection of water and hydrocarbons, see the
page of the Society of Professional Well Log Analysts at http://www.spwla.org/. It
consists of a neutron source and neutron or gamma detector (well shielded from the
rays coming directly from the source) to be placed in the well. As hydrogen atoms
are by far the most eﬀective in the slowing down of neutrons, the detected radiation

D
is primarily determined by the hydrogen concentration, i.e. water and hydrocarbons.
In this way, the discoveries of the Rome group were applied to the study of quite
diﬀerent problems. Possibly now we have similar opportunities with neutrinos, due
to the important achievements of the last few years:

i)The fate of neutrinos is now essentially understood. We don’t need anymore
to rely on standard solar model calculations or on the comparison among diﬀerent
experiments. SNO has directly observed the transmutation of solar neutrinos and
KamLAND has neatly conﬁrmed the result with man made antineutrinos from nuclear
reactors.

ii) KamLAND has demonstrated that it can reach purity levels such that detection

of geo-neutrinos is feasible, a most impressive experimental result.

All this opens the road for using low energy neutrinos as real probes of nature,
be it Earth, Sun, future and past supernovae as well as - may be - the big bang.
Measurement of the radiogenic component of terrestrial heat will be the ﬁrst step.
It can be achieved with few kiloton (mineral oil) detectors in a few years, best if far
from nuclear reactors.

This goal can be reached without submerging San Marco inside megaton detectors
and it will provide a deﬁnite answer to an important and long standing scientiﬁc
problem.

We are grateful to L. Carmignani, T. Mitsui, T. Lasserre, F. Riccobono, S.

Sch¨onert, and A. Suzuki for useful comments and suggestions.

7. Acknowledgements

8. References

1) J. Verhoogen, “Energetics of the Earth”, National Academy of Sciences, Wash-

ington D.C., 1980.

2) S.R. Taylor and S.M. McLennan, Reviews of Geophys. 33 (1995) 241.
3) K.H. Wedepohl, Geoch. Cosm. Acta 59 (1995) 1217.
4) G.C. Brown and A.E. Mussett, “The Inaccessible Earth”, George Allen &

5) “Understanding the Earth”, edited by G. Brown et al., Cambridge University

6) L.M. Krauss, S.L. Glashow and D.N. Schramm, Nature 310 (1984) 191.
7) G. Fiorentini, F. Mantovani and B. Ricci, nucl-ex/0212008, Phys. Lett. B 557

Unwin, London 1981.

Press, Cambridge 1992.

(2003) 139.

8) KamLAND coll., hep-ph/0212021, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003) 021802.
9) R.S. Raghavan et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 635.

10) G. Fiorentini, T. Lasserre, M. Lissia, B. Ricci and S. Sch¨onert,

hep-ph/0301042, Phys. Lett. B 558 (2003) 15.

11) C.G. Rothschild, M.C. Chen and F.P. Calaprice, nucl-ex/9710001. Geophy.

Research Lett. 25 (1998) 1083.

12) B. Pontecorvo, Oil and Gas Journal 40, (1942) 32.

