3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

Bath’s law Derived from the Gutenberg-Richter law and from
Aftershock Properties
Agn`es Helmstetter1 and Didier Sornette1,2,3
1 Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1567
2 Department of Earth and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1567
3 Laboratoire de Physique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS UMR 6622 Universit´e de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Parc
Valrose, 06108 Nice, France

The empirical Bath’s law states that the average magni-
tude diﬀerence h∆mi between a mainshock and its largest
aftershock is 1.2, regardless of the mainshock magnitude.
We ﬁrst point out that the standard interpretation of Bath’s
law in terms of the two largest events of a self-similar set
of independent events is incorrect, because it neglects the
selection procedure entering the deﬁnition of aftershocks.
We reconcile Bath’s law with (i) the existence of a univer-
sal Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law for all earthquakes and (ii)
with the empirical observation (productivity law) that each
earthquake of magnitude m triggers other earthquakes at a
rate ∼ 10αm with α ≈ 0.8.

1. Introduction

The empirical Bath’ s law [Bath, 1965], states that the
average of the diﬀerence ∆m = mM − mA in magnitude
between a mainshock and its largest aftershock is 1.2, in-
dependently of the mainshock magnitude.
In addition to
providing a useful information for understanding earthquake
processes, Bath’ s law is also important from a societal view
point as it gives a prediction of the expected size of the
potentially most destructive aftershock that follows a main-
shock.

Here, we ﬁrst show that the standard interpretation of
Bath’s law in terms of the two largest events of a self-similar
set of independent events is incorrect. Using numerical sim-
ulations of the Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence model
(ETAS) of seismicity introduced by [Kagan and Knopoﬀ,
1981;Ogata, 1988], we show that Bath’s law can be recon-
ciled with a universal application of the Gutenberg-Richter
(GR) distribution for all earthquakes (including mainshocks
and aftershocks). We demonstrate that Bath’s law is com-
patible with a productivity law ∼ 10αm giving the number
of earthquakes triggered by an event of magnitude m, with
α < b where b is the b-value of the GR law. We stress the
importance of the existence of the selection process of after-
shocks in a space and time domain, of the constraint that
aftershocks are smaller than the mainshock and of the ﬂuc-
tuation of aftershock rates due to cascade of triggering in
the determination of the numerical value of h∆mi and in
its apparent independence as a function of the mainshock
magnitude.

2. Bath’s law and Gutenberg-Richter law

Vere-Jones [1969] oﬀered a statistical interpretation, ele-
gant in its simplicity, which consisted in viewing the mag-
nitudes of the mainshock and largest aftershock as the ﬁrst

Copyright 2014 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/14/$5.00

1

and second largest values of a set of independent identically
distributed (iid) random variables distributed according to
the same GR distribution ∼ 10−b(m−m0 ). If the same min-
imum threshold m0 applies for both aftershocks and main-
shocks, this model predicts that ∆m has the same density
distribution P∆m(m) ∼ 10−bm as the GR distribution of
the sample [Vere-Jones, 1969] with a mean h∆mi equal to
1/(b ln 10) ≈ 0.43 for b ≈ 1. Thus, rather than a distribution
peaked at ∆m ≈ 1.2, Vere-Jones’ interpretation predicts
an exponential distribution with an average signiﬁcantly
smaller than Bath’s law value ≈ 1.2. Such discrepancies
have been ascribed to diﬀerent magnitude thresholds cho-
sen for the deﬁnition of mainshocks and largest aftershocks
and to ﬁnite catalog size eﬀects [Vere-Jones, 1969; Console
et al., 2003]. Improved implementation of Vere-Jones’ model
has led Console et al. [2003] to suggest that Bath’s law can-
not be completely reconciled with the use of the GR law for
all earthquakes (that is, both mainshock and aftershocks).
If the minimum magnitude threshold is larger for main-
shocks than for aftershocks, the model predicts [Console et
al., 2003] a value of h∆mi which is closer to observations
than initially calculated by Vere-Jones [1969]. Nonetheless,
the results of [Console et al., 2003] for the worldwide catalog
of the National Earthquake Information Service (NEIC) and
for a catalog of seismicity of New-Zealand are not completely
explained by this model, the observed value of h∆mi being
still larger than predicted. Console et al.
[2003] interpret
this result as possibly due to “a change in the physical en-
vironment before and after large earthquakes” but they do
not rule out the existence of a possible bias that may explain
the discrepancy between their model and the observations.
However, notwithstanding the appealing simplicity of
Vere-Jones’ interpretation, it is fundamentally in contradic-
tion with the process it is supposed to describe. Indeed, con-
sider N earthquakes in a catalog and let us sort their mag-
nitudes by descending rank order: m1 > m2 > ... > mN .
Let us select the largest one with magnitude m1 = mM as
the mainshock. Aftershocks are by deﬁnition selected ac-
cording to speciﬁc procedures, such as a restricted time and
space window (and also magnitude range), and thus form a
subset mij which is diﬀerent from the set of all earthquakes
(which is needed in Vere-Jones’ interpretation) with magni-
tudes smaller than m1. As we show now, because the subset
of naft aftershocks is in general signiﬁcantly smaller than the
original catalog of size N , Vere-Jones’ interpretation is in-
correct. Assuming that all aftershock magnitudes are drawn
from the same GR distribution 10−b(m−m0 with a minimum
magnitude m0, then for large naft, the average value of the
largest aftershock magnitude is hmAi = m0+(1/b) log10 naft.
This gives

h∆mi =

log10(N/naft)

(1)

1
b

This result can be retrieved by a reasoning highlighting the
importance of the aftershock selection procedure in the rank-
ing, based on two steps: (i) the expected overall rank of
the largest aftershock among the initial ranks from 1 to

X - 2HELMSTETTER AND SORNETTE: BATH’S LAW, GUTENBERG-RICHTER LAW AND AFTERSHOCK PROPERTIES

N is ≈ N/naft; (ii) the distribution of m1 − mj is given
by (1 − exp[−b ln 10x])j−1 [Vere-Jones, 1969]. The impor-
tant point here is that the selection of aftershocks destroys
Vere-Jones’ interpretation at a very elementary level, since
the rank of the largest aftershock is not 2 in general.
In
this sense, the mainshock in a sequence is not a member
of the set of aftershocks [Utsu, 1969; Evison and Rhoades,
2001]. Thus, expression (1) does not retrieve Bath’s law nei-
ther qualitatively nor quantitatively. In particular, in Vere-
Jones’ interpretation adapted to take into account the deﬁ-
nition of aftershocks in which all earthquakes obey the same
GR law, one can expect that h∆mi may depend on N and on
the mainshock magnitude. The exception to this general re-
sult occurs for a speciﬁc value naft = 10−bh∆mi10b(mM −m0)
[Michael and Jones, 1998; Felzer et al., 2002], for which
Bath’s law is recovered if h∆mi = hmM − mAi = 1.2. One
can then hardly see this interpretation as generic and par-
simonious. The fact that the mainshock does not belong to
the subset of aftershocks does not imply that mainshocks
are physically diﬀerent from other earthquakes, in contra-
diction with previous claims of Utsu [1969] and Console et
al. [2003].

Taking Bath’s law as given led Felzer et al. [2002] to de-
duce that the number of earthquakes triggered by an earth-
quake of magnitude m is proportional to ∼ 10αm, with
α = b. We shall see below that a derivation of Bath’s law,
which does not use its interpretation in terms of the two
largest events of a self-similar set of independent events, is
also compatible with α < b.

3. Bath’s law and the ETAS model

In order to shed light on what can be the explanation
of Bath’s law and what are the eﬀects of diﬀerent selection
procedures of the aftershocks, it is useful to study a minimal
model of seismicity. We thus study the ETAS model, which
incorporates an external source to model the tectonic load-
ing and interactions between earthquakes leading to earth-
quake triggering.

The ETAS model assumes that each earthquake triggers

aftershocks with a rate (productivity law) increasing as

ρ(m) = K10α(m−m0 )

(2)

with its magnitude m. The magnitude of each earthquake
is chosen with the GR law, with the same distribution for
all earthquakes independently of the past seismicity. The
seismicity results from the sum of an external constant av-
erage loading rate and from earthquakes triggered by these
sources in direct lineage or through a cascade of genera-
tions.
It can be shown that the average total number of
aftershocks N (mM ) (including the cascade of indirect after-
shocks) has the same dependence with the mainshock mag-
nitude ∼ 10αmM as the direct number of aftershocks ρ(mM )
given by (2) [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002].

Using this model, Felzer et al. [2002] have argued that α
must be equal to b in order to obtain an average diﬀerence
in magnitude h∆mi between a mainshock and its largest af-
tershock that is independent of the mainshock magnitude.
This result is in apparent disagreement with the empirical
observation α ≈ 0.8 < b ≈ 1 reported by Helmstetter [2003]
using a catalog of seismicity for Southern California.

For α < b and neglecting both the ﬂuctuations of the
total number of aftershocks and the constraint that after-
shocks are smaller than the mainshock, the productivity
law together with the GR law predict indeed an increase of
h∆mi with the mainshock magnitude. The average magni-
tude hmAi of the largest event in a catalog of N events with
magnitudes distributed according to the GR law having a

minimum magnitude m0 is given by [Feller, 1966]

hmAi − m0 = −

N (1 − x)N−1ln(x)
b ln(10)

dx ≈

log10(N )
b

.(3)

1

Z
0

Using (2) for large mM implying N ≫ 1, the average mag-
nitude diﬀerence h∆mi = mM − mA is thus given by

h∆mi =

(mM − m0) −

log10

b − α
b

1
b

K
1 − n (cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

(4)

where n is the number of directly triggered earthquake per
earthquake averaged over all magnitudes (“branching ra-
tio”). The only way to obey Bath’s law on the independence
of h∆mi with respect to mM seems to require α = b [Felzer
et al., 2002]. However, this argument neglects the ﬂuctua-
tions of the total number N of aftershocks. Using numerical
simulations of the ETAS model, we ﬁnd that the large ﬂuctu-
ations in aftershock numbers due to the cascades of triggered
events modify signiﬁcantly the prediction (4). Adding the
constraint that aftershocks are usually chosen to be smaller
than the mainshock further alters the prediction (4).

We have generated synthetic catalogs with the ETAS
model to measure h∆mi for diﬀerent values of the main-
shock magnitude. In this ﬁrst test, we start the simulation
with a mainshock of magnitude mM , which generates a cas-
cade of direct and indirect aftershocks. We select as “after-
shocks” all earthquakes triggered directly or indirectly by
the mainshock, without any constraint in the time, loca-
tion, or magnitude of these events. For α = 0.8 < b = 1,
we ﬁnd surprisingly a large range of mainshock magnitudes
mM for which h∆mi is almost independent of the mainshock
magnitude mM , in agreement with Bath’s law, but in con-
tradiction with the prediction (4) (see Figure 1a).

In order to unravel the origin of these results, Figure 1b
compares the average total number of aftershocks with the
predictions given by Helmstetter and Sornette [2002]. The
mean number of aftershocks is found in good agreement with
the predictions, but the median number of aftershocks is
much smaller, which indicates the existence of large ﬂuctu-
ations in the number of aftershocks from one realization to
another. Indeed, Saichev et al. [2003] have recently demon-
strated that the total number of aftershocks in the ETAS
model in the regime α > b/2 has an asymptotic power-
law distribution in the tail with an exponent of the cumu-
lative distribution smaller than 1, even in the subcritical
regime (deﬁned by a branching ratio n < 1). These huge
ﬂuctuations arise from the cascades of triggering and from
the power-law distribution of the number of triggered earth-
quake per triggering earthquake appearing as a combination
of the GR law and the productivity law (2). These large ﬂuc-
tuations of the total number of aftershocks are at the origin
of the discrepancy between the observed h∆mi and the pre-
diction (4), which neglects the ﬂuctuations of the number
of aftershocks. Practically, this means that the aftershock
number ﬂuctuates widely from realizations to realizations
and the average will be controlled by a few sequences that
happen to have an unusually large number of aftershocks.
As a consequence, h∆mi is not controlled by the average
number of aftershocks, but by its “typical” value. We check
that this is the case by using expression (3) to obtain an
eﬀective h∆mi using for N , not the average but the median
of the number of aftershocks obtained in our set of synthetic
catalogs. Doing this, we obtain an eﬀective h∆mi which is
in good agreement with the value measured directly from
the synthetic catalogs, which is signiﬁcantly larger than the
predicted value given by (4) (as shown in Figure 1a). Not

HELMSTETTER AND SORNETTE: BATH’S LAW, GUTENBERG-RICHTER LAW AND AFTERSHOCK PROPERTIESX - 3

1

2

4

6
3
mainshock magnitude

5

7

8

9

1.5

 (a)

>
M
∆
<

 

0.5

1

0

−0.5
0

 (b)

7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
10
0
10

s
k
c
o
h
s
r
e
t
f
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

0

1

2

3
6
mainshock magnitude

4

5

7

8

9

Figure 1. Results obtained for numerical simulations of
the ETAS model with parameters n = 0.8 (branching ra-
tio), α = 0.8, b = 1, m0 = 0 and with a direct Omori’s
law exponent p = 1.2. (a) Average magnitude diﬀerence
h∆mi between the mainshock and its largest aftershock
as a function of the mainshock magnitude (open circle).
The continuous line is the prediction using the exact for-
mula in (3) for hmAi using (2) for N . The crosses show the
predicted h∆mi where N is replaced by the median num-
ber of aftershocks shown as the crosses in (b). (b) Aver-
age (circles) and median (crosses) number of aftershocks
per mainshock averaged over more than 1000 simulations.
The prediction of [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002] for the
average number of aftershocks is shown as a solid black
line.

only it is larger but it is almost independent of the main-
shock magnitude in the range 2 < mM < 6. For large
mainshock magnitudes, the ﬂuctuations of the total number
of aftershocks per mainshock are weaker (the median value
is close to the mean number). Therefore, the obtained aver-
age magnitude diﬀerence h∆mi tends to recover the linear
dependence (4) with the mainshock magnitude, represented
by the continuous line in Figure 1a. Our numerical simu-
lations thus show that Bath’s law is compatible with the
ETAS model with α < b in a wide range of magnitudes but
also predict that Bath’s law should fail for large mainshock
magnitudes according to (4) if α is indeed smaller than b.
It is however doubtful that this predicted deviation from
Bath’s law can be observed in real data as the number of
large mainshocks is small.

While the impact of ﬂuctuations in the number of af-
tershocks produce a value of h∆mi almost independent of
the mainshock magnitude, as requested by Bath’s law, the
average magnitude diﬀerence h∆mi ≈ 0.7 remains smaller
than the empirical value. However, we have not taken into
account the constraints of aftershocks selection, which will
further modify h∆mi. In the simulations giving Figure 1, all
earthquakes triggered (directly or indirectly) by the main-
shock have been considered as aftershocks even if they were
larger than the mainshock.
In real data, the diﬃculty of
identifying aftershocks and the usual constraint that after-
shocks are smaller than the mainshock can be expected to
aﬀect the relation between h∆mi and the mainshock mag-
nitude. The selection of aftershocks requires the choice of
a space-time window to distinguish aftershocks from back-
ground events. A signiﬁcant fraction of aftershocks can thus

1.5

2

1

0.5

>
m
∆
<

 

be missed. As a consequence, the empirical ∆m will in-
crease.

In order to quantify the impact of these constraints, we
have generated synthetic catalogs using the ETAS model,
which include a realistic spatio-temporal distribution of af-
tershocks. Speciﬁcally, according to the ETAS model, the
number of aftershocks triggered directly by an event of mag-
nitude m, at a time t after the mainshock and at a distance
r is given by

φm(t, r) = n

(b − α)
b

10α(m−m0 )

θcθ
(t + c)p

µ

µdm

(r + dm)1+µ . (5)

where n is the branching ratio, p is the exponent of the
direct Omori’s law (which is generally larger than the ob-
served Omori exponent) and dm is the characteristic size of
the aftershock cluster of a magnitude m mainshock given by
dm = 0.01 × 100.5m km.

We have then applied standard rules for the selection of
aftershocks. We consider as a potential mainshock each
earthquake that has not been preceded by a larger earth-
quake in a space-time window RC ×Tc. This rule allows us to
remove the inﬂuence of previous earthquakes and to obtain
an estimate of the rate of seismicity triggered by this main-
shock. The constant Rc is ﬁxed equal to the size ≈ 100 km
of the largest cluster in the catalog and Tc = 100 days. We
then deﬁne aftershocks as all events occurring in a space
time window R(mM ) × T (mM ) after a mainshock of magni-
tude mM , where both R(mM ) = 2.5×10(1.2mM −4)/3 km and
T (mM ) = 10/3×10(2/3)(mM −5) days increase with the main-
shock magnitude mM [Kagan, 1996; Console et al., 2003].

The results for diﬀerent values of α are represented in Fig-
ure 2. For intermediate mainshock magnitude, the average
magnitude diﬀerence h∆mi for α = 0.8 is signiﬁcantly larger
than found in Figure 1a without the selection procedure, be-
cause mainshocks which trigger a larger event are rejected,
and because the rules of selection (with a time-space window
R(m) and T (m) increasing with m) reject a large number of
aftershocks, especially for small mainshocks. For small mag-
nitude mM , h∆mi is small and then increases rapidly with
m. This regime is not pertinent because most mainshocks
do not trigger any aftershock and are thus rejected from
the analysis. Most studies have considered only mainshocks

0
2

3

4

5

6

mainshock magnitude

7

8

Figure 2. Average magnitude diﬀerence h∆mi between
a mainshock and its largest aftershock, for numerical
simulations of the ETAS model with parameters b = 1,
c = 0.001 day, p = 1.2, a minimum magnitude m0 = 2
and a maximum magnitude mmax = 8.5. Each curve cor-
responds to a diﬀerent value of the ETAS parameters:
α = 0.8 and n = 0.76 (circles), α = 0.5 and n = 0.8
(diamonds) and α = 1 and n = 0.6 (crosses). The error
bars gives the uncertainty of h∆mi (1 standard devia-
tion). The horizontal dashed line is the empirical value
h∆mi = 1.2.

X - 4HELMSTETTER AND SORNETTE: BATH’S LAW, GUTENBERG-RICHTER LAW AND AFTERSHOCK PROPERTIES

with magnitude m ≥ m0 + 2, where m0 is the minimum
detection threshold. For α = 0.8 or α = 1, the magnitude
diﬀerence is ≈ 1.2 in a large range of mainshock magnitudes,
in agreement with Bath’s law. For α = 1, there is a slight
decrease of h∆mi with mM . For α = 0.5, we observe a fast
increase of h∆mi with mM , which is not consistent with the
observation of Bath’s law [Felzer et al., 2002; Console et al.,
2003]. The shape of the curves h∆mi is mostly controlled by
α. The other parameters of the ETAS model and the rules
of aftershock selection increase or decrease h∆mi but do not
change the scaling of h∆mi with the mainshock magnitude.

4. Discussion and conclusion

We have ﬁrst shown that the standard interpretation of
Bath’s law in terms of the two largest events of a self-similar
set of independent events is incorrect. We have reconciled
Bath’s law with (i) the existence of a universal GR law for
all earthquakes and (ii) with the hypothesis embodied in the
ETAS model that each earthquake of magnitude m triggers
other earthquakes at a rate ∼ 10αm with α ≤ b. The average
magnitude diﬀerence h∆mi is not only controlled by the GR
law but also by the relation between the mainshock magni-
tude and aftershock productivity. In the ETAS model, the
cascades of multiple triggering induce large ﬂuctuations of
the total number of aftershocks. These large ﬂuctuations in
turn induce a modiﬁcation of the scaling of h∆mi with the
mainshock magnitude by comparison with the predictions
neglecting these ﬂuctuations. The constraints due to af-
tershock selection further aﬀect the value of h∆mi. In sum-
mary, an almost constant value of ∆m ≈ 1.2 can be obtained
with a universal GR law for all earthquakes and with a scal-
ing ∼ 10αm of aftershock productivity with 0.8 < α < 1.
Bath’s law is thus consistent with the regime α < b in which
earthquake triggering is dominated by the smallest earth-
quakes [Helmstetter, 2003].

Acknowledgments. This work is partially supported by
NSF-EAR02-30429, by the Southern California Earthquake Cen-
ter (SCEC) and by the James S. Mc Donnell Foundation 21st
century scientist award/studying complex system. We acknowl-
edge useful discussions with Y.Y. Kagan.

References

Bath, M., Lateral inhomogeneities in the upper mantle, Tectono-

physics, 2, 483-514, 1965.

Console, R., A. M. Lombardi, M. Murru and D. Rhoades, Bath’s
law and the self-similarity of earthquakes, J. Geophys. Res.,
108, 2128, doi:10.1029/2001JB001651, 2003.

Evison F. and D. Rhoades, Model of long term seismogenesis,

Ann. Geophys., 44, 81-93, 2001.

Feller, W. An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Appli-

cations, vol II, John Wiley and sons, New-York, 1971.

Felzer, K.R., T.W. Becker, R.E. Abercrombie, G. Ekstr¨om and
J.R. Rice, Triggering of the 1999 MW 7.1 Hector Mine earth-
quake by aftershocks of the 1992 MW 7.3 Landers earthquake,
J. Geophys. Res., 107, doi:10.1029/2001JB000911, 2002.
driven
earthquake

Helmstetter, A.,

Is
small earthquakes?,
(http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0210056).

by
triggering
in press in Phys. Res. Lett., 2003

Helmstetter, A. and D. Sornette, Sub-critical and supercritical
regimes in epidemic models of earthquake aftershocks, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 107, 2237, doi:10.1029/2001JB001580, 2002.

Kagan, Y. Y., VAN earthquakes predictions: An attempt at sta-
tistical evaluation, Geophys. Res. Lett., 23, 1315-1318, 1996.
Kagan, Y. Y. and L. Knopoﬀ, Stochastic synthesis of earthquake

catalogs, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 2853-2862, 1981.

Michael, A. J. and L. M. Jones, Seismicity alert probability at
Parkﬁeld, California, revisited, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 88, 117-
130, 1998.

Ogata, Y., Statistical models for earthquake occurrence and resid-
ual analysis for point processes, J. Am. Stat. Assoc., 83, 9-27,
1988.

Saichev, A., A. Helmstetter and D. Sornette, Anoma-
lous
in
branching processes, submitted to Phys. Res. Lett., 2003
(http://arXiv.org/abs/condmat/0305007).

and generation numbers

oﬀspring

scaling

of

Utsu, T., Aftershocks and earthquake statistics (I): source pa-
rameters which characterize an aftershock sequence and their
interrelations, J. Fac. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Ser.VII, 3, 129-
195, 1969.

Vere-Jones, D., A note on the statistical interpretation of Bath’s

Law, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 59, 1535-1541, 1969.

Agn`es Helmstetter, Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
(e-

Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, California.
mail: helmstet@moho.ess.ucla.edu)

Didier Sornette, Department of Earth and Space Sciences and
Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of Cal-
ifornia, Los Angeles, California and Laboratoire de Physique de
la Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS UMR 6622 and Universit´e de Nice-
Sophia Antipolis, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice, France (e-mail: sor-
nette@moho.ess.ucla.edu)

