4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Using a Numerical Weather Model to Improve Geodesy

Arthur Niell
MIT Haystack Observatory, Westford, MA, USA 01886 (aniell@haystack.mit.edu)

Leonid Petrov
NVI, Inc./NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA (Leonid.Petrov@gsfc.nasa.gov)

Abstract. The use of a Numerical Weather
Model (NWM) to provide in situ atmosphere in-
formation for mapping functions of atmosphere
delay has been evaluated using Very Long Base-
line Interferometry (VLBI) data spanning eleven
years. Parameters required by the IMF map-
ping functions (Niell 2000, 2001) have been cal-
culated from the NWM of the National Centers
for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and incor-
porated in the CALC/SOLVE VLBI data analy-
sis program. Compared with the use of the NMF
mapping functions (Niell 1996) the application of
IMF for global solutions demonstrates that the
hydrostatic mapping function, IMFh, provides
both signiﬁcant improvement in baseline length
repeatability and noticeable reduction in the am-
plitude of the residual harmonic site position
variations at semidiurnal to long-period bands.
For baseline length repeatability the reduction
in the observed mean square deviations achieves
80% of the maximum that is expected for the
change from NMF to IMF. On the other hand,
the use of the wet mapping function, IMFw, as
implemented using the NCEP data, results in a
slight degradation of baseline length repeatabil-
ity, probably due to the large grid spacing of the
NWM that is used.

1

Introduction

The accuracy of the estimate of the local verti-
cal coordinate from GPS and VLBI observations
increases as the minimum elevation cutoﬀ of in-
cluded data is reduced, due to improved decorre-
lation of the estimates of troposphere path delay
and the site vertical coordinate. From the other
side, the errors in mapping the zenith tropo-
sphere delay increase rapidly with decreasing el-
evation angle and cause a degradation of the pre-
cision of the estimate of site position coordinates.
Thus, it is important to assess the optimum min-

imum elevation above which data should be in-
cluded.

The total atmosphere path delay is expressed
as the product of the zenith path delay and the
mapping function, m(e), deﬁned as the ratio of
the excess path delay at geometric elevation, e,
i.e., the vacuum elevation, to the path delay in
the zenith direction. The hydrostatic and wet
mapping functions are calculated separately be-
cause the vertical distributions of refractivity dif-
fer (MacMillan and Ma, 1994; Niell, 1996). Many
geodetic analyses for GPS and VLBI currently
use very simple models for mapping functions
that are based on site location and time of year
(Niell, 1996; hereafter referred to as NMF). This
climatological approach is used due to the dif-
ﬁculty of obtaining in situ meteorological infor-
mation along the path traversed by the incoming
radio waves.

The next best thing would be mapping func-
tions based on the vertical distribution of refrac-
tivity above the site, assuming azimuthal sym-
metry. While measurement of such a proﬁle, for
example by launching radiosondes several times
per day, has not been deemed feasible, some
amount of information on the state of the atmo-
sphere can be obtained from the meteorologic nu-
merical weather models (NWM), which provide
estimates of the vertical distribution of tempera-
ture, pressure, and water vapor content at spec-
iﬁed horizontal grid points over the entire globe
every six hours. Niell (2000, 2001) demonstrated
how this information can be used to improve the
mapping functions.

In this note we show that these mapping
functions (IMF), using data from NCEP on a
2.◦5 by 2.◦5 grid interpolated to the site loca-
tion, provide the expected improvement in base-
line length repeatability, and that, furthermore,
they provide a noticeable reduction in the am-
plitudes of residual harmonic site position varia-

1

tions.

While the wet mapping function (IMFw) has
the potential to be an improvement over NMFw,
as demonstrated using radiosonde proﬁles (Niell,
2000), this is not achieved in the current im-
plementation using the NCEP NWM in the
VLBI analysis package CALC/SOLVE (Ma et
al., 1990).

In section 2 we give a brief description of IMF
and in section 3 outline the implementation in
CALC/SOLVE. The VLBI analysis is described
in section 4 and some of the geodetic implications
are presented in sections 5. Section 6 contains a
summary of the results and suggestions for future
developments.

2 The Isobaric Mapping Functions (IMF)

Currently the closest approximation to a ”true”
mapping function is obtained by using ra-
diosonde data to deﬁne the vertical proﬁle of ra-
dio refractivity and, assuming spherical symme-
try about the radiosonde launch site, integrat-
ing along the path determined by the refractivity
to determine the delay through the atmosphere
both in the zenith direction and at the elevation
for which the mapping function is to be calcu-
lated. The delays due to the hydrostatic and wet
components of the atmosphere (Niell 1996) are
retained independently in the raytrace integra-
tion, and the mapping functions are calculated
separately.

Marini (1972) showed that, for a spherically
symmetric but vertically arbitrary proﬁle of at-
mospheric refractivity, the mapping function can
be approximated by a continued fraction of the
form

m(e) =

sin e +

(1)

1 +

1 +

a

b
1 + c
a

sin e +

b
sin e + c

The numerator is included to normalize the frac-
tion at an elevation angle of 90◦, and the num-
ber of terms (only three are shown) should be
determined by the desired accuracy of the ﬁt.
Niell (1996) found that three terms is suﬃcient
to keep the error to less than 1 mm for elevations
down to 3◦ if the delays are calculated at eight
elevations in addition to the zenith direction.

The goal of mapping function research is to
ﬁnd the functional form and dependence on ex-
ternal information of the parameters a, b, c . . .
that best matches the actual values of the map-
ping function for real atmospheres at arbitrary
locations and times.

In order to provide a useful tool for estimat-
ing or calculating the atmosphere path delay for
geodetic observations, the parameters a, b, and
c should be calculable in terms of available in-
formation. The following procedure was used to
determine the relation of the parameters to ex-
ternal data.

1. For radiosonde proﬁles from a large number
of sites and spanning at least one year, cal-
culate, by raytracing, the hydrostatic and
wet mapping functions at nine elevations
from 90 degrees down to 3 degrees.

2. Calculate by least-squares ﬁt the continued
fraction parameters a, b, and c for each pro-
ﬁle for both hydrostatic and wet mapping
functions.

3. Assume that the parameters are linear func-
tions of some other parameters, qi, that are
available to characterize the mapping func-
tion, such as geographic location, time of
year, or a combination of meteorological pa-
rameters. Expand each of the parameters a,
b, and c in terms of the qi.

4. Use linear regression of all a values on pa-
rameters qi for all sites and proﬁles to de-
termine the regression coeﬃcients that de-
scribe a in terms of the qi. Repeat for b
and c; do for both the hydrostatic and wet
parameters.

To determine the parameter dependence, the
hydrostatic and wet mapping functions were cal-
culated from radiosonde proﬁles for twenty-six
sites for a one year period (1992) with usually
two proﬁles per day, at 00 and 12 UT. Based
on the expectation that the hydrostatic mapping
function would be strongly correlated with the
thickness of the atmosphere, a possible empiri-
cal relation to the geopotential heights of con-
stant pressure levels (isobaric surfaces) for each
of the parameters ah, bh, and ch was investi-
gated. The 200 hPa level gave the best agree-
ment (Niell, 2000). The relation was found to
require a dependence on the cosine of twice the
latitude. The coeﬃcients relating the parameters

2

ah, bh, and ch to the geopotential height and
the latitude were obtained by linear regression
on the 200 hPa heights from the radiosonde data
and cos(2*latitude). Since the 200 hPa isobar
has little sensitivity to the topography below, a
correction for height of a site above sea level was
calculated by linear regression of the site heights
and the residual mapping function error using
the derived coeﬃcients. This was found to be
consistent with that used for NMF, and the NMF
height correction (Niell 1996) was adopted.

Although the concept of atmospheric thickness
failed to produce a reasonable relation for the wet
mapping function, we found that there exists a
linear regression between the parameters aw, bw,
and cw and a ”wet pseudo-mapping function”.
The wet pseudo-mapping function, ρ, is given by

where

r(ǫ) =

ev(h)
T 2(h)

k3

Z

(2)

dh

− cos2 ǫ

ρ =

r(3◦.3)
r(90◦)

1 +

h
R

⊕
2

1 +

h
R
ev(h)
T 2(h)

⊕ (cid:19)

dh

s(cid:18)
k3

Z

(3)
ρ is the ratio of the integral of the wet refractivity
along an elevation of 3.3◦ to the integral in the
vertical direction, and r(ǫ) is the integral of wet
refractivity along elevation angle ǫ. Here ev is
speciﬁc humidity, T is temperature, h is height,
and the integration is done through the whole
atmosphere. r(ǫ) is a pseudo-mapping function,
because bending of the raypath due to the spatial
change in the index of refraction is not included
in the calculation. This parameter was inves-
tigated in order to be able to avoid the large
amount of computing required for an accurate
ray-trace.

These regression coeﬃcients allows us
to
compute mapping functions using geopotential
height and the ratio of the wet refractivity inte-
grals obtained from a numerical weather model
(NWM) for the case when no radiosonde atmo-
sphere proﬁle near an observing station is avail-
able, as is usually the case during VLBI and GPS
observations.

3

Implementation at GSFC for VLBI

The NWM data used are the gridded data from
the U.S. National Center for Environmental Pro-

tection (NCEP) that are output every six hours.
We used the Reanalysis model (Kalnay et al.,
1996) in our study. It appears on their Web site
with a time lag of 3 to 7 days. All Reanalysis
model products have been analyzed with a con-
sistent, though not necessarily the most recent,
model. The current model was adopted in 1996.
The ﬁles that are downloaded contain geopoten-
tial height and temperature at eighteen pressure
levels, speciﬁc humidity at eight pressure levels,
and the surface height for each grid point. The
values of geopotential height at 200 hPa are ex-
tracted, and the values of ρ are calculated at each
grid point. For the VLBI application the param-
eters are subsequently interpolated to the hori-
zontal position of each VLBI site at each NCEP
epoch (0, 6, 12, 18 UT). During interpolation,
the unit vector of the normal to the surface of
geopotential height at 200 hPa is computed. We
assume that the hydrostatic atmosphere path de-
lay is azimuthally symmetric with respect to the
normal to the geopotential height, rather than lo-
cal zenith. Thus, we imply that the atmosphere
is tilted with respect a local observer. Typical
values of the tilt are 0.1 to 1.0 mrad.

4 VLBI analysis and results

The troposphere path delay at each station is
modeled as a linear spline with typical time span
of 20 minutes, and parameters of the linear spline
are estimated together with other parameters of
interest in a single least-squares solution. The
hydrostatic mapping function is used for com-
puting the apriori hydrostatic path delay (the
apriori wet path delay is set to zero) and the wet
mapping function is used as the partial derivative
for estimation of the wet zenith path delay.
If
the hydrostatic mapping function is wrong, then
the apriori total path delay in the direction of
the observed source will be biased. Since the
hydrostatic mapping function and the wet map-
ping function are slightly diﬀerent at low eleva-
tions (the diﬀerence is 4–7% at elevation 5◦), the
estimation procedure will not remove this bias
completely. Thus, systematic errors in the hy-
drostatic mapping function result in systematic
errors in estimates of site position. Due to the
errors in the wet mapping function, which is used
as the partial derivative, the contribution of the
wet troposphere path delay to the observables is
not completely removed by estimating the wet
path delay in the zenith direction.

3

Figures 1 and 2 show the diﬀerences between
the hydrostatic NMF and IMF mapping func-
tions at two sites.
If the IMF is closer to the
true mapping function, we could expect that us-
ing IMF would reduce systematic errors in GPS
and VLBI results.

Figure 1: NMFh (thick line) and IMFh (dots) at
elevation angle 5◦ at station Gilcreek (Alaska).

ﬁrst degree with time span 20 minutes, clocks,
Earth orientation parameters, source positions,
and other nuisance parameters. The hydrostatic
zenith path delay was computed using the for-
mula of Saastamoinen (1972), and IMFh was
used to transform the apriori zenith hydrostatic
path delay to the path delay in the source di-
rection. However, in the right hand-side of the
equations of conditions, instead of the diﬀerences
between observed and modeled delay we inserted
the diﬀerences between hydrostatic path delays
calculated using NMFh and IMFh but with the
same apriori zenith hydrostatic path delay com-
puted from the Saastamoinen formula. All VLBI
observations for the period of 1993–2003 were
used. We obtained from this solution the series of
baseline length estimates which have the mean-
ing of changes in baseline lengths due to changes
in the hydrostatic mapping function, and we
computed the weighted mean value of the length
change for each baseline. Since replacement of
the mapping function aﬀects mainly the estimate
of vertical site coordinate, the changes in base-
line length, δl, will depend on baseline length as

⊕

∆l =

(∆h1 + ∆h2), where L is the baseline

L
2R
is the radius of the Earth. Fig-
length and R
ure 3 shows the mean changes in baseline length
as a function of the total baseline length for all
baselines in the solution.

⊕

Figure 2: NMFh (thick line) and IMFh (dots) at
elevation angle 5◦ at station Fortleza (Atlantic
coast, Brazil).

To evaluate quantitatively what kind of im-
provement in geodetic results is provided by the
use of IMF instead of NMF, we performed a se-
ries of VLBI solutions and investigated changes
in baseline length repeatability and changes in
the estimated amplitudes of the harmonic site
position variations.

4.1 Baseline length repeatability test

First, we need to evaluate how a replacement of
the NMFh with IMFh aﬀects baseline lengths.
For this purpose we made a special solution. We
used the standard parameterization in the esti-
mation model: we solved for site positions, tro-
posphere path delay modeled by spline of the

Baseline length in km

Figure 3: Changes in baseline lengths due to re-
placement of NMFh with IMFh (in mm) as a
function of baseline length.

We then made two other solutions.

In solu-
tion A we used NMFh and in solution B we used
IMFh. Parameterization was exactly the same as
in the previous special solution. For each base-
line we got the series of length estimates and

4

evaluated the formal uncertainties of these esti-
mates. A linear model was ﬁtted to each series,
and the wrms deviation from the linear model
was computed for each baseline. We call this
wrms baseline length repeatability. We formed
the diﬀerences of the squares of repeatabilities
in the sense solution A (IMFh) minus solution
B (NMFh). The diﬀerences, smoothed with a
Gaussian ﬁlter, are presented as a function of
baseline length in ﬁgure 4.

Baseline length in km

Figure 4: Diﬀerences in squares of baseline
lengths in mm2 using IMFh versus NMFh for
computing apriori hydrostatic path delay, in the
sense IMFh-NMFh.

We see that the diﬀerences are negative. This
means that using IMFh instead of NMFh re-
duced the baseline length repeatability and, thus,
improved the quality of the geodetic results. But
we would like to have a quantitative measure of
how replacement of NMFh by IMFh brings us
closer to the true mapping function. We in-
troduce a coeﬃcient of reduction of variance R
(see Petrov and Boy (2003) for more details) as
a quantitative measure of changes in baseline
length repeatability:

R =

∆σ2 + σ2
m
2 σ2
m

(4)

where ∆σ2 is the diﬀerence in the squares of
baseline length repeatability of the solution with
NMFh minus the solution with IMFh, and σ2
m is
the square of diﬀerences in baseline lengths, de-
rived from the special solution, which has the
meaning of the square of expected changes in
baseline lengths. This coeﬃcient runs from 0 to
1. In the case that the change of mapping func-
tion did not result in a change of baseline length
repeatability, the coeﬃcient is 0.5. In the case

5

that NMFh is much closer to the (unknown to
us) ”true” mapping function than IMFh is, the
use of IMFh will result in degradation of base-
line length repeatability by the amount σ2
m, and
then R ≈ 0. If IMFh is closer to the true map-
ping function than NMFh by an amount equal
to the diﬀerence (NMFh - IMFh), then the dif-
ference in baseline length repeatability is equal
to σ2

m, and R = 1.

We have computed the coeﬃcient of reduction
of variance for each baseline observed 16 or more
times and have calculated the weighted mean
value of R over all baselines. We found that
R = 0.81 ± 0.02. This means that 80% of the
power in the change of baseline lengths due to
the change in mapping function is present in the
data, and the baseline length repeatability has
improved by approximately 80% of the expected
change under the assumption that the new map-
ping function, IMFh, is closer to the true map-
ping function than the old NMFh by the amount
of the diﬀerences between these two functions.

This result is very encouraging.

It demon-
strates that using only one value, the geopoten-
tial height of the 200 hPa surface, we can re-
construct a mapping function (an inﬁnite set of
values) with a surprisingly good precision: not
worse than 80%.

4.2 Changes in harmonic site position varia-

tions

As we see in ﬁgures 1 and 2, NMFh does not
model seasonal changes perfectly, and it com-
pletely ignores harmonic variations of the map-
ping function at frequencies others than annual.
Thus, we can expect that these errors will cause
harmonic variations in the estimates of site posi-
tions. As we saw in the previous section, the use
of IMFh improves baseline length repeatability.
Therefore we can expect that observed residual
harmonic site position variations will be reduced
when IMFh is used instead of NMFh.

In order to evaluate this eﬀect quantitatively,
we made two solutions. In both solutions we esti-
mated troposphere path delay, clock parameters,
Earth orientation parameters, station position
and velocities, source coordinates, and harmonic
site position variations at 32 frequencies for each
station. NMFh/NMFw were used in the ﬁrst so-
lution, and IMFh/NMFw were used in the sec-
ond solution. We included all observations from
1980 through 2003 for 40 VLBI stations with
a long history of observations. Our theoretical

model included site displacements due to solid
Earth tides, ocean loading, atmosphere loading,
and hydrology loading. Thus, we obtained resid-
ual harmonic site position variations.

For each frequency we computed the ratio of
the weighted sum of squares of the observed am-
plitudes of harmonic site position variations to
its mathematical expectation, χ2/f . In the ab-
sence of a signal χ2/f should be less than 1.2.
Detailed analysis of the technique for solutions of
this type can be found in Petrov and Ma (2003).
We noticed diﬀerences in these statistics at
six frequencies. They are presented in table 1.
We see that the power of the residual signal is
reduced at all frequencies when IMFh is used
instead of NMFh. To our surprise the power
was reduced not only at annual (Sa), diurnal
(S1) and semi-diurnal (S2) frequencies, where we
expected improvement, but also at semi-annual
(Ssa), sidereal (K1) and semi-sidereal (K2) fre-
quencies. Changes of the power of residual signal
at the K1 frequency may have a signiﬁcant con-
it means that using IMFh instead of
sequence:
NMFh may result in a non-negligible change in
the estimate of the precession rate, since preces-
sion corresponds to the harmonic variation in the
Earth rotation at the sidereal frequency.

Table 1: χ2/f statistics of residual harmonic site
position variations in two solutions which used
diﬀerent mapping functions.

Tide

K2
S2
K1
S1
Ssa
Sa

NMFh, NMFw
horiz
2.01
1.73
3.45
2.32
1.12
2.56

vert
1.80
2.55
2.13
3.80
2.42
6.34

IMFh, NMFw

vert
1.61
2.15
1.89
3.58
1.85
5.77

horiz
2.05
1.76
3.34
2.22
1.09
2.43

4.3 Changes in the scale factor of the TRF

Systematic changes in the estimates of the ver-
tical component of site positions may result in a
change of the scale factor of the output site po-
sition catalogue. In order to evaluate quantita-
tively this eﬀect, we have analyzed the catalogue
of site positions obtained in the solutions de-
scribed in the previous section. We estimated the
7-parameter transformation of the site position

catalogue from the solution that used IMFh with
respect to the catalogue from the solution that
used NMFh. This transformation includes trans-
lation, rotation, and the scale factor. We found
that for the site position catalogue from solutions
with IMFh the scale is greater by 0.21 ± 0.05
ppb with respect to the solutions using NMFh.
This changes in the scale factor corresponds to
an approximately 1 mm increase of vertical co-
ordinates of site positions.

4.4 Wet IMF

We made the baseline length test for using IMFw
in place of NMFw, but instead of improvement
in the baseline length repeatability, we found
a slight degradation.
It should be noted that
the expected improvement, 1.0 mm at baseline
lengths 10000 km, is very small, a factor of 5 less
than the improvement due to replacement of the
hydrostatic mapping function. At the same time
comparison of IMFw and NMFw with respect to
the mapping function derived using radiosonde
data at the sites of radiosonde launches indicates
that IMFw better approximates the radiosonde
mapping function than NMFw, in contradiction
to the results of the VLBI data analysis. We
think that this contradiction is related to the
fact that the relatively large grid of the NCEP
Reanalysis NWM, 200x270 km at mid-latitudes,
is not adequate to represent the wet refractivity
ﬁeld.

If there were no model errors, it would be ad-
vantageous to make observations to as low an
elevation as permitted by the equipment and the
physical surrounding, for both GPS and VLBI.
Including the widest range of elevations reduces
the uncertainty in the height estimate and im-
proves separation of the estimates of the vertical
component of position from the estimates of the
zenith path delays and the clock oﬀsets. How-
ever, any error in the azimuthally symmetric at-
mosphere model will propagate into errors in the
estimated vertical coordinate, and these errors
will increase with decreasing minimum elevation.
Thus, there is a trade-oﬀ between atmosphere
uncertainty and the accuracy of determination
of the vertical, and it is possible to choose the
optimum minimum elevation if the error model
is suﬃciently well known.

The formal uncertainty in the vertical, taking

χ2/f

5 Geodetic implications

6

into account atmosphere stochastic variability,
assuming the clock is modeled as white noise,
and adding a ﬁxed amount of delay noise,
is
calculated in the precise point positioning mode
(PPP) of the GPS analysis software Gipsy (Zum-
berge et al., 1997), although other eﬀects, such as
satellite orbit error, are not included explicitly.
For twenty-four hour sessions the uncertainties
for minimum elevations of 15◦ down to 5◦ de-
crease from 4.0 mm to 2.0 mm (the data were
taken with an Ashtech Z-12 with good sky visi-
bility).

The eﬀect of the atmosphere model error has
been calculated by comparing the IMF and NMF
mapping functions obtained from the NWM at
twenty-six radiosonde launch sites for the year
1992, with the mapping functions calculated by
raytracing along the path of the radio waves at
various elevations, assuming a vertical distribu-
tion of refractivity given by the radiosonde tem-
perature, pressure, and humidity proﬁles. Using
the surface pressure for the zenith hydrostatic de-
lay, and the zenith wet delay from the radiosonde
data, the rms delay errors for an elevation of 5◦
are shown in ﬁgure 5 for the hydrostatic com-
ponent of IMF and for the hydrostatic and wet
components of NMF. The errors for IMFw are
very close to those of NMFw.

25 radiosonde sites (1992)

NMFh
IMFh
NMFw

)

m
m

 

(
 
v
e
l
e
 
m
u
m
i
n
i
m
°
5
 
t
a
 
y
a
l
e
d
 
S
M
R

40

30

20

10

0

−50

0
latitude

50

Figure 5: Rms delay error for mapping functions
at radiosonde sites for 5◦ elevation.

How do these delay errors aﬀect the height es-
timates? For errors that increase with decreasing
elevation, such as those that are due to the at-
mosphere, the lowest elevation observations have
the greatest eﬀect on the height uncertainty. As
a result, the eﬀect on the height uncertainty can

7

be calculated as the product of the delay error at
the lowest observed elevation and the sensitivity
of the height estimate to delay change at that
elevation.

MacMillan and Ma (1994) evaluated the sen-
sitivity of the vertical error to the error in at-
mosphere path delay at the minimum elevation.
They found that an error of 1 mm in atmo-
sphere path delay at the minimum elevation an-
gle causes 0.22 mm error in the vertical coordi-
nate if the minimum elevation is 5◦, and 0.4 mm
if the minimum elevation is 10◦. We made a sim-
ilar test for a later set of VLBI data and found
a sensitivity of 0.3–0.35 for a minimum elevation
of 5◦. A simulation of GPS observations using a
simple model of estimating vertical, zenith tro-
posphere delay, and clock for a single epoch gave
sensitivity of 0.4 to 0.8 over the minimum eleva-
tion range 5◦–15◦. For GPS the actual sensitivity
will depend on what satellites are visible at the
time of observation, but for illustration of the
technique we will use the values from our GPS
simulation.

To show the eﬀect of the mapping function
errors on height at mid-latitude the rms delay
diﬀerences were found between both the NMF
and IMF mapping functions and mapping func-
tions obtained by raytracing the radiosonde data
(as described in section 2) for the site ALB (Al-
bany, state New York, USA) at latitude 42◦. The
diﬀerences were converted to height uncertain-
ties using the sensitivities described in the previ-
ous paragraph (ﬁgure 6). We calculated inﬂated
formal uncertainties of the height estimates by
adding in quadrature the point-positioning un-
certainties and the uncertainty due to errors in
the mapping function. These total errors are also
shown in ﬁgure 6. From this study we conclude
that the use of NMFh signiﬁcantly increases the
total height uncertainty when data are included
below about 10◦ for a twenty-four hour session.
At the same time the use of IMFh does not result
in an increase of total height uncertainties until
data below about 7◦ are included.

This type of evaluation can be important for
deciding how much data to include in a solution.
For example, the lower elevation data might be
desirable for improving estimates of atmosphere
gradients, but only if the uncertainty of vertical
estimates is not degraded.

An important point to notice from ﬁgure 6 is
that for a minimum elevation of 15◦, which is the
standard for many GPS analyses, the error in the

ALB

7 Acknowledgment

pt posn
NMF total
IMF total

)

m
m

(
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
 
t
h
g
i
e
h

10

8

6

4

2

0
0

← NMFh height error

IMFh height error → 

5
10
minimum elevation (°)

15

20

Figure 6: Height uncertainty for diﬀerent mini-
mum elevations for precise point-position and for
mapping functions.

vertical estimation due to the atmosphere is less
than 2 mm and is therefore not signiﬁcant for
daily solutions. However, in computing weekly
site position averages, the atmosphere modeling
error may contribute more than expected since
weather systems often persist over many days,
and the actual uncertainty of the average will
decrease more slowly than 1
√n , because the errors
are correlated over longer than one day.

6 Summary, conclusions, future work

Atmosphere delay mapping functions, desig-
nated IMF, based on in situ meteorological in-
formation from the NCEP numerical weather
model, have been implemented in the VLBI anal-
ysis package CALC/SOLVE. When applied to
global VLBI solutions that include all data above
a minimum elevation of 5◦, their use, compared
to the model NMF, improves baseline length re-
peatability and reduces the power in residual
harmonic site position variations.

If used for GPS, IMF will allow lower elevation
data (down to approximately 7◦) to be included
in the solutions while maintaining the formal un-
certainty in the vertical that is obtained for 15◦
minimum elevation, and will reduce amplitudes
of observed residual harmonic site position vari-
ations at annual and semi-annual periods.

With improvement in modeling of annual and
semi-annual atmosphere errors, it is time to be-
gin modeling systematic temperature-dependent
antenna height errors for GPS and VLBI.

8

We used NCEP Reanalysis data provided by
the NOAA-CIRES Climate Diagnostics Center,
Boulder, Colorado, USA, from their Web site at
http://www.cdc.noaa.gov/

References

Kalnay E. et al., (1996). The NCEP/NCAR 40-
Year Reanalysis Project, Bullet. Amer. Me-
teorol. Soc., 77, p.437–471.

Ma, C., J.M. Sauber, L.J. Bell, T.A. Clark,
D. Gordon, W.E. Himwich, and J.W. Ryan,
(1990). Measurement of Horizontal Motions
in Alaska Using Very Long Baseline Interfer-
ometry, J. Geophys. Res., 95(B13), p. 21,991–
22,011.

MacMillan, D. S., and C. Ma, (1994). Evalua-
tion of very long baseline interferometry atmo-
spheric modeling improvements, J. Geophys.
Res., 99(B1), p. 637-651.

Marini, J. W., (1972). Correction of satellite
tracking data for an arbitrary tropospheric
proﬁle, Radio Science, 7, p. 223–231.

Niell, A.E., (1996). Global mapping functions for
the atmosphere delay at radio wavelengths, J.
Geophys. Res., 101, No. B2, p. 3227–3246.
Niell, A. E., (2000). Improved atmospheric map-
ping functions for VLBI and GPS, Earth,
Planets, and Space, 52, p. 699–702.

Niell, A. E., (2001). Preliminary evaluation of
atmospheric mapping functions based on nu-
merical weather models, Phys. Chem. Earth,
26, p. 475–480.

Petrov, L., and C. Ma, (2003). Study of har-
monic site position variations determined by
VLBI, J. Geophys. Res., vol. 108, No. B4,
p. 2190, doi: 10.1029/2002JB001801.

Petrov L., and J.-P. Boy, (2003). Study of the
atmospheric pressure loading signal in VLBI
observations, submitted to J. Geophys. Res..
Saastamoinen, J. (1972). Atmospheric correction
for the troposphere and stratosphere in radio
In The Use of Artiﬁ-
ranging of satellites.
cial Satellites for Geodesy, Geophys. Monogr.,
AGU, 15, p. 247–251.

Zumberge, J. F., M. B. Heﬂin, D. C. Jeﬀer-
son, M. M. Watkins, and F. H. Webb, (1997).
Point positioning for the eﬃcient and robust
analysis of GPS data from large networks. J.
Geophys. Res., 102, p. 5005–5017.

