4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atmospheric pressure loading for routine data analysis

Leonid Petrov
NVI/NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, USA (Leonid.Petrov@gsfc.nasa.gov)

Jean-Paul Boy
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, USA (boy@bowie.gsfc.nasa.gov)

Abstract. We have computed 3-D displace-
ments induced by atmospheric pressure loading
from 6-hourly surface pressure ﬁeld from NCEP
(National Center for Environmental Predictions)
Reanalysis data for all Very Long Baseline In-
terferometry) and SLR (Satellite Laser Ranging)
stations. We have quantitatively estimated the
error budget our time series of pressure loading
and found that the errors are below 15%. We
validated our loading series by comparing them
with a dataset of 3.5 million VLBI observations
for the period of 1980–2003. We have shown that
the amount of power which is present in the load-
ing time series, but does not present in the VLBI
data is, on average, only 5%. We have also suc-
ceeded, for the ﬁrst time, to detect horizontal dis-
placements caused by atmospheric loading. The
correction of atmospheric loading in VLBI data
allows a signiﬁcant reduction of baseline repeata-
bility, except for the annual component.

1

Introduction

Atmospheric pressure variations which can reach
50 mbar induce deformation of the solid Earth at
the level of several centimeters, which certainly
should be taking into account in routine analy-
sis of space geodesy observations. Atmospheric
loading eﬀects are computed by convolving the
surface pressure ﬁeld with Green’s functions (see,
for example, Farrell (1972)).

van Dam and Herring (1994) and van
Dam et al. (1994) have computed atmospheric
loading using a former atmospheric model from
the NMC (National Meteorological Center) with
2.◦5 by 2.◦5 spatial resolution and 12 hour sam-
pling and applied to VLBI (Very Long Base-
line Interferometry) and GPS (Global Position-
ing System) site position data. Analysis of reduc-
tion of variance of baseline lengths showed that
atmospheric loading signal was clearly present

in VLBI and GPS datasets. However, only 62%
of the power of the signal computed using their
model was found in the VLBI data. This unex-
plained discrepancy and very high computational
cost of pressure loading calculation are the rea-
sons why modeling atmospheric pressure load-
ing computed using the global numerical weather
model did not come into practice of routine data
analysis.

There are several reasons which motivated us
the accuracy of VLBI
to re-visit this topic:
geodetic observations has increased during the
last ten years which has improved our ability to
detect tiny crustal motions. The NCEP/NCAR
for Environmental Predic-
(National Center
tions / National Center for Atmospheric Re-
search) Reanalysis project (Kalnay et al. (1996))
provides us a continuous and uniform dataset of
surface pressure with a 6 hour temporal resolu-
tion on a 2.◦5 by 2.◦5 grid for the period 1948–
now. Because of the computer and network im-
provements, it is now possible to compute on a
operational basis the series of the atmospheric
loading and apply them in a routine data analy-
sis process, for example, for the Earth orientation
service.

In section 2, we describe our model of the at-
mospheric pressure loading and present the er-
ror budget of the loading time series.
In sec-
tion 3, we validate the time series of site dis-
placements induced by pressure loading by re-
analyzing a dataset of 3.5 million of VLBI obser-
vations for the period 1980–2003. We have esti-
mated global admittance factors for vertical and
horizontal components. We also computed the
reduction of variance of baseline lengths in order
to compare our results with van Dam and Her-
ring (1994). Discussion and concluding remarks
are given in section 5. Brief outlines of the at-
mospheric pressure loading service are given in
section 6.

1

2 Computation of atmospheric pressure

loading

loading

2.1 Characteristics of atmospheric pressure

Displacements at the Earth’s surface induced by
surface pressure loading are computed by con-
volving Green’s functions (Farrell (1972)) with
the surface pressure ﬁeld from NCEP Reanalysis
(Kalnay et al. (1996)).

We model the ocean response to pressure forc-
ing as the inverted barometer (IB). It has been
shown that this model is adequate for describing
sea height variations for periods typically longer
than 15–20 days (see, for example, Wunsch and
Stammer (1997)). However the ocean response
to atmospheric pressure forcing signiﬁcantly de-
viates from the IB hypothesis at higher frequen-
(2000)). We also assume
cies (Tierney et al.
that enclosed and semi-enclosed seas respond to
atmospheric pressure as a ”non-inverted barome-
ter”, i.e. pressure variations are fully transmitted
to sea ﬂoor.

Figure 1 and 2 shows the time series and their
power spectrum for the period 2000–2003 at the
Hartrao and Wettzell stations. They are repre-
sentative of mid-latitude and equatorial inland
stations.

Figure 1: Vertical (left) and north (right) dis-
placement induced by atmospheric loading for
Hartrao station.

All

station displacements show signiﬁcant
narrow-band diurnal (S1), semidiurnal (S2) and
annual (Sa) signals. Displacements for low-
latitude stations are characterized by a strong

2

wide-band annual and semi-annual signal and
relatively weak amplitudes for periods below
10 days (except the S1 and S2 peaks).

Figure 2: Vertical (left) and east (right) dis-
placement induced by atmospheric loading for
Wettzell station.

Mid latitude stations show the opposite be-
havior; the mid-latitude atmospheric circulation
is determined by the circulation of low and high
pressure structures with typical period of 5–
10 days. These periods are also the limit of the
validity of the IB assumption.

2.2 Error budget

We would like to quantitatively asses the error
budget of our atmospheric loading series. We
identiﬁed four major sources of errors: 1) errors
in the Green’s functions, 2) errors in the surface
pressure ﬁeld, 3) errors in the land-sea mask and,
4) mismodeling of the ocean response to pressure
forcing.

The Green’s functions are computed for a
spherically symmetric, non rotating, elastic and
isotropic (SNREI) Earth model, adopting PREM
(Dziewonski and Anderson (1981)) elastic pa-
rameters. Therefore, we neglect the eﬀects in-
duced by Earth’s anelasticity and ellipticity. The
diﬀerences between our Green’s functions and
Green’s functions for an anelastic Earth model
(see, for example, Pagiatakis (1990)) are typ-
ically below 1-2%. The eﬀect induced by the
Earth’s ellipticity is of the order of magnitude of
the Earth’s ﬂattening, i.e. 0.3%.

Another source of possible errors is the errors
in the surface pressure ﬁeld from NCEP Reanaly-

sis. The ﬁrst way to estimate them is to compare
NCEP pressure ﬁeld with ground pressure mea-
surements. Velicogna et al. (2001) compared the
diﬀerences between this atmospheric model and
direct barometric observations. We would like to
quantitatively asses the error budget, but since
the spatial coverage of barometric measurements
is not homogeneous, we choose another way to
characterize possible errors, and we estimated
the diﬀerences between two NCEP numerical
weather models: NCEP Reanalysis and NCEP
Operational Final Analysis. We have computed
the station displacements with the NCEP Opera-
tional surface pressure ﬁeld with a spatial resolu-
tion of 1.◦0. The RMS of the diﬀerences between
the 3-D displacements computed with both pres-
sure ﬁelds is, on average, about 10%. However,
these diﬀerences are larger in mountainous areas;
this is due to the fact that the 2.◦5, or even the
1.◦0 spatial resolution of the NCEP Reanalysis
and NCEP Operational datasets is not suﬃcient
to model the topography in mountainous areas
and, therefore, the surface pressure variations.

Since the 2.◦5 resolution of the NCEP Reanaly-
sis data is not suﬃcient to correctly represent the
coastline, we choose a land-sea mask with a 0.◦25
resolution derived from FES99 (Lef`evre et al.
(2002)) ocean tidal model. In order to estimate
the errors induced by the land-sea mask, we have
computed 3-D site displacements with two land-
sea masks with 0.◦25 and 0.◦50 resolution. The
diﬀerences between the two time series do not
exceed 5%. However the diﬀerences between the
loading estimates with the 2.◦5 and 0.◦25 land-
sea masks can reach 10% for the vertical compo-
nents and for the 30% horizontal components,
even for an inland station like Wettzell (Ger-
many) 500 km far from the coasts.

In order to estimate the errors induced by the
mismodeling of the ocean response to pressure
at high frequency, we compared ocean bottom
pressure variations, as well as the induced load-
ing eﬀects, from two runs of the CLIO (Coupled
Large-scale Ice Ocean) global circulation model
(Goosse and Fichelet (1999)). The ﬁrst run is
forced by atmospheric pressure, surface winds
and heat-ﬂuxes (de Viron et al.
(2002)), and
the other one is forced only by winds and heat-
ﬂuxes, i.e. assuming an IB response. The diﬀer-
ences between these two runs are, therefore, in-
terpreted as the departure of the ocean response
to pressure forcing to the IB hypothesis. We have
found that the mean vertical and horizontal dif-

ferences are respectively below 10% and 20%. As
expected these diﬀerences can be larger for island
stations or stations close to the coast.

Table 1: Global error budget of atmospheric
loading estimates.

Error source
Green’s functions
Surface pressure ﬁeld
Land-sea mask
Ocean response
Total

rms
2 %
10 %
5 %
10 %
15 %

Table 1 gives a summary of the global error
budget. Combining all sources of errors, we can
evaluate the uncertainty of the site displacements
induced by atmospheric pressure loading at 15%.

3 VLBI data processing

3.1 VLBI data processing

The processing of VLBI observations of time
delays mostly follows the procedure described
and Sovers et al (1998) and outlined in the
IERS Conventions (McCarthy, 1996).
Semi-
empirical IERS96 nutation expansion was used.
We modeled ocean tidal loading with GOT00
(Ray (1999)) model for diurnal and semi-diurnal
waves, NAO99 (Matsumoto et al. (2000)) model
for long-period zonal waves, and equilibrium tide
for the polar tides and 18.6 year wave. NMF
Mapping functions developed by Niell (1996)
were used for modeling tropospheric path delay.

3.2 Analysis of global admittance factor

In solution G1 we computed admittance factors
of the vertical, east and north components of
the atmospheric pressure loading time series dis-
placements into VLBI time delay, averaged over
all sites.

These admittance factors entered the estima-

tion model the following way:

τ =

Ai1ai1

− Ai2ai2

+ . . .

(1)

∂τ
∂ri1

∂τ
∂ri2

3

X
i=1

where τ is VLBI time delay, aij is the topocentric
vector of the modeled site displacements due to
atmospheric pressure loading for the jth station,
rij is the topocentric site coordinate vector. The
index i runs through up, east and north com-
ponents of the topocentric radius-vector. The

3

unknown vector of the admittance factors A was
estimated in a single weighted LSQ ﬁt together
with site position and velocities, source coordi-
nates, Earth orientation parameters (EOP) as
well as 1.2 million nuisance parameters.

It can be shown that these admittance fac-
tors can be interpreted as correlation coeﬃcients
between the true (unknown) site displacements
and our loading estimates within the validity of
the assumption that the time series of the mod-
eled site position displacements caused by atmo-
spheric pressure loading and unmodeled contri-
bution to time delay are not correlated. We refer
the reader to Petrov and Boy (2003) for more
details.

We performed 4 diﬀerent solutions.

In solu-
tion G1 we treated the three-dimensional vector
of the admittance factor as a global parameter,
which is common for all sites. Then we passed
the time series of the site position variations
through a narrow-band ﬁlter and extracted the
annual component of the pressure loading sig-
nal. In the solution G2 we estimated admittance
factors for these time series. In the solution G3
we estimated the admittance factor to the atmo-
spheric pressure loading series with the annual
component ﬁltered out. Results are presented in
Table 2. We also performed another solution in
which we estimated admittance factors for each
individual station.

The estimates of the admittance factors of the
time series of atmospheric pressure loading with
removed annual component are closer to unity.
Annual signals in site positions may be induced
by other unmodeled signals such as hydrologic
loading or thermal antenna height deformation
(Nothnagel et al.
(1995)) which are not mod-
eled in this study. For example, van Dam et al.
(2001) showed, that the contribution of continen-
tal water loading can reach several cm at seasonal
time scales.

Contrary to wide-band signals,

independent
narrow-band signals are almost always corre-
lated. Thus, condition of validity of this test is
violated when we consider the annual signal.

Table 2: Global Admittance Factors from VLBI
solutions.

Solution
G1
G2
G3

Up

0.95 ± 0.02
0.46 ± 0.09
0.98 ± 0.02

East

1.16 ± 0.06
1.08 ± 0.26
1.21 ± 0.06

North
0.84 ± 0.07
-0.89 ± 0.26
1.02 ± 0.07

Although the mean admittance factors are
very close to unity, the admittance factors for
individual stations are not always close to unity.
We can often link anomalous admittance with
the site positions. Stations located in mountain-
ous areas or in the vicinity of the oceans are
usually characterized by low admittance factors,
even sometimes negative values. This can be ex-
plained, as we showed in section 2.2, by errors in
the atmospheric pressure ﬁeld on mountainous
areas and errors induced by the mismodeling of
oceanic response to atmospheric pressure load-
ing.

3.3 Analysis of reduction of variance coeﬃ-

cients

In order to compare our results with results of
van Dam and Herring (1994), we made another
three solutions; in solution B1, we did not apply
the atmospheric loading contribution, but we did
it in the solution B2. In solution B3 we have ap-
plied the contribution of the atmospheric pres-
sure loading time series with the annual compo-
nent ﬁltering out.

We used the reduction of variance coeﬃcient R
of baseline lengths as a measure of agreement of
the atmosphere pressure loading displacements
series with observations:

R =

∆σ2 + σ2
m
2σ2
m

(2)

where ∆σ2 is the diﬀerence between the mean
square of baseline length residuals before and af-
ter adding the contribution due to station dis-
placements caused by the atmospheric pressure
loading, and σm is the variance of the atmo-
spheric loading.

A linear model was ﬁtted in the series with dis-
continuities at epochs of seismic events for sev-
eral stations. The weighted root mean square of
residual baseline lengths was computed for all
baselines with more than 100 sessions for B1,
B2 and B3 solutions. 69 baselines ﬁtted this
criterion. The coeﬃcients of reduction of vari-
ance were computed using baseline length vari-
ances. The mean coeﬃcient of reduction of vari-
ance of the B2 solution with respect to the ref-
erence solution B1 is 0.86 ± 0.04 . The mean
coeﬃcient of reduction of variance of the B3 so-
lution with respect to the reference solution B1
is 0.92 ± 0.04 .

Van Dam and Herring (1994) found a reduc-
tion of variance of R = 0.62 and R = 0.76 with-

4

out the annual component. Our estimates are
signiﬁcantly closer to unity than theirs. We at-
tribute these diﬀerence partly to improvements
in modeling atmospheric loading, and partly to
improvements of geodetic observations. Van
Dam and Herring used an older atmospheric
model provided by NMC (National Meteorologi-
cal Center) with the same spatial resolution and
a 12 hour temporal sampling compared to the
6-hours for the NCEP Reanalysis model. The
NCEP Reanalysis is also a uniform and continu-
ous dataset, whereas the NMC pressure ﬁeld had
several discontinuities related to changes in the
model. We used a land-sea mask with a higher
resolution (0.◦25) for modeling the IB response.

4 Discussion and Conclusion

A priori estimates of the errors of our time se-
ries of the site displacements induced by atmo-
spheric pressure loading are less than 15%. The
estimates of the admittance factors from the so-
lution G1 demonstrate that on average 95% of
the power of the modeled pressure loading signal
presents in the data well within the error bud-
get.
It allows us to make an important con-
clusion that in average our model of the at-
mospheric pressure loading quantitatively agrees
with observations. The existence of the signiﬁ-
cant discrepancy between the model of the dis-
placements caused by the atmospheric pressure
loading and observations reported by van Dam
and Herring (1994) has not been conﬁrmed. Ex-
cept for the annual component, applying the at-
mospheric loading model results in a reduction of
the power of the residual harmonic site position
variations. For the ﬁrst time we have detected
horizontal component of atmospheric pressure
loading in VLBI observations.

Although we have an excellent agreement be-
tween the model of atmospheric pressure loading
and the observations in average, the estimates of
the admittance factors signiﬁcantly deviate from
unity for some individual stations, suggesting de-
ﬁciency of the model for these sites. These sta-
tions are located either close to the coastline or in
mountainous regions. In the ﬁrst case, improve-
ment of atmospheric loading modeling requires
to model the high-frequency ocean response to
pressure forcing which signiﬁcantly deviates from
the IB assumption. In the other case, the spatial
resolution of NCEP Reanalysis data (2.◦5) is too
coarse to model the topography and therefore at-

mospheric pressure variations.

We evaluate the eﬀects of modeling atmo-
spheric loading on EOP estimation. We made
two solutions, one with applying the contribu-
tions of the 3-D atmospheric loading displace-
ments, the other without. The RMS diﬀerences
in polar motion and the UT1 angle between these
two solutions are typically about 100 prad, which
is 2–4 smaller than the current EOP uncertain-
ties.

5 Service of the atmospheric pressure

loading displacements

The tests described above allowed us to make
a conclusion that the model of the atmospheric
pressure loading has passed validation tests. We
have computed continuous atmospheric pressure
loading series for all VLBI and SLR sites start-
ing from 1976.05.05. We found that when the at-
mospheric pressure loading series are computed
for two sites separated by 0.◦05, the diﬀerences
in site displacements never exceed the 1% level.
Therefore, in the case if several VLBI or SLR sta-
tions are located within 3 km from each other,
the atmospheric pressure loading was computed
only for one station and considered common for
all stations located within this site.

The ﬁrst epoch of the atmospheric pressure
loading time series is three days before the ﬁrst
observation used in data analysis and the last
epoch is three days after the last observation of
the site in the case if all stations at the site has
ceased operations. Thus, these epochs are diﬀer-
ent for each site.

The series of the atmospheric pressure loading
for the sites, which are considered as active, i.e.
continuing observations, are updated every day.
The ﬁle with surface pressure from the NCEP
Reanalysis for the last year is retrieved by ftp,
split into monthly sections and stored. The at-
mospheric pressure loading time series for active
sites are augmented if the surface pressure ﬁles
contain data for the epochs for which the pres-
sure loading has not been computed. The NCEP
Reanalysis numerical weather model are updated
daily with the time lag 3–7 days. Our atmo-
spheric pressure loading time series also updated
with the time lag 3–7 days.

Starting from December 2002 the atmospheric
pressure loading contribution is incorporated in
the model of VLBI data reduction in all so-
lutions of the Goddard VLBI group, including

5

Nothnagel, A., M. Pilhatsch, and R. Haas (1995).
Investigations of thermal height changes of
geodetic VLBI radio telescopes. Proceedings
of the 10th Working Meeting on European
VLBI for Geodesy and Astrometry, edited by
R. Lanotte and G. Bianco, Agenzia Spatiale
Italiana, Matera, pp .121–133.

Pagiatakis, S.D. (1990). The response of a real-
istic Earth to ocean tide loading. Geophys. J.
Int., 105, pp. 541–560.

Petrov, L. and J.-P. Boy (2003). Study of the
atmospheric pressure loading signals in VLBI
observations. Submitted to J. Geophys. Res.
A global ocean tide
model from TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimetry:
GOT99.2. NASA/TM-1999-209478, Green-
belt, USA.

Ray, R.D.

(1999).

Sovers, O.J, J.L. Fanselow, and C.S. Jacobs
(1998). Astrometry and geodesy with radio
interferometry: experiments, models, results.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 70, pp. 1393–
1454.

Tierney, C., J.M. Wahr, F. Bryan and V. Zlot-
nicki (2000). Short-period oceanic circulation:
implications for satellite altimetry. Geophys.
Res. Lett., 27, pp. 1255–1258.

van Dam, T.M., J. Wahr, P.C.D. Millly,
A.B. Shmakin, G. Blewitt, D. Lavallee, and
K.M. Larson (2001). Crustal displacements
due to continental water loading. Geophys.
Res. Lett., 28, pp. 651–654.

van Dam, T.M. and T.A. Herring (1994). De-
tection of atmospheric pressure loading using
Very Long Baseline Interferometry measure-
ments. J. Geophys. Res., 99, pp. 4505–4518.
van Dam, T.M., G. Blewitt and M. Heﬂin (1994).
Detection of atmospheric pressure loading us-
ing the Global Positioning System. J. Geo-
phys. Res., 99, pp. 29,939–29,950.

Velicogna,

I., J.M. Wahr and H. Van den
Dool (2001). Can surface pressure be used
to removed atmospheric contributions from
GRACE data with suﬃcient accuracy to re-
cover hydrologic signals? J. Geophys. Res.,
106, pp. 16,415–16,434.

Wunsch, C. and D. Stammer (1997). Atmo-
spheric loading and the ”inverted barometer”
eﬀect. Rev. Geophys., 35, pp. 117–135.

operational EOP solutions. The atmospheric
pressure loading time series are available on the
Web at http://gemini.gsfc.nasa.gov/aplo/
for all everybody without restrictions.

References

de Viron, O., H. Goosse, C. Bizouard and S.
Lambert (2002). High-frequency non-tidal ef-
fect of the ocean on the Earth’s rotation, EGS
27th General Assembly. Nice, France.

Dziewonski, A.M. and D.L. Anderson (1981).
Preliminary Reference Earth Model. Phys.
Earth Planet. Inter., 25, pp. 297–356.

Farrell, W.E. (1972). Deformation of the Earth
by surface loads. Rev. Geophys. Space Phys.,
10, pp. 751–797.

Goosse, H. and T. Fichelet (1999). Importance
of ice-ocean interactions for the ocean circula-
tion: a model study. J. Geophys. Res., 104,
pp. 23,337–23,355.

Kalnay, E., M. Kanamitsu, R. Kistler,
W. Collins, D. Deaven, L. Gandin, M. Iredell,
S. Saha, G. White, J. Woollen, Y. Zhu,
A. Leetma, R. Reynolds, M. Chelliah,
W. Ebisuzaki, W.Higgins,
J. Janowiak,
K. C. Mo, C. Ropelewski, J. Wang, R. Jenne
amd D. Joseph (1996). The NCEP/NCAR
40-Year Reanalysis Project.
Am.
Meteorol. Soc., 77, pp. 437–471.

Bull.

Kalnay et al., (1996). The NCEP/NCAR Re-
analysis Project. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc.,
77, pp. 437–471.

Lef`evre, F., F.H. Lyard, C. Le Provost and
E.J.O. Schrama (2002). FES99: a global
tide ﬁnite element solution assimilating tide
gauge and altimetric information. J. Atmos.
Oceanic Technol., 19, pp. 1345–1356.

MacMillan, D.S. and J.M. Gipson (1994). Atmo-
spheric pressure loading parameters from very
long baseline interferometric observations. J.
Geophys. Res., 99, pp. 18,081–18,087.

Matsumoto, K., T. Takanezawa, and M. Ooe
(2000). Ocean Tide Models Developed by
Assimilating TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimeter
Data into Hydrodynamical Model: A Global
Model and a Regional Model Around Japan.
J. of Oceanog., 56, pp. 567–581

McCarthy, D.D. (1996). IERS Convention, IERS

Technical Note, 21, Paris.

Niell, A.E. (1996). Global mapping functions for
the atmosphere delay at radio wavelengths. J.
Geophys. Res., 100, pp. 3227–3246.

6

