4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Frictional sliding modes along an interface between
identical elastic plates subject to shear impact loading

D. Cokera, G. Lykotraﬁtisb, A. Needlemana and A.J. Rosakisb
aDivision of Engineering, Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
bDivision of Engineering and Applied Science
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Frictional sliding along an interface between two identical isotropic elastic plates
under impact shear loading is investigated experimentally and numerically. The
plates are held together by a compressive stress and one plate is subject to edge im-
pact near the interface. The experiments exhibit both a crack-like and a pulse-like
mode of sliding. Plane stress ﬁnite element calculations modeling the experimental
conﬁguration are carried out, with the interface characterized by a rate and state
dependent frictional law. For low values of the initial compressive stress and impact
velocity, sliding occurs in a crack-like mode. For higher values of the initial com-
pressive stress and/or impact velocity, sliding takes place in a pulse-like mode. A
variety of sliding modes are obtained in the calculations depending on the impact
velocity, the initial compressive stress and the values of interface variables. One
pulse-like mode involves well-separated pulses with the pulse amplitude increasing
with propagation distance. Another pulse-like mode involves a pulse train of essen-
tially constant amplitude. The propagation speed of the leading pulse (or of the
tip of the crack-like sliding region) is near the longitudinal wave speed and never
less than √2 times the shear wave speed. Supersonic trailing pulses are seen both
experimentally and computationally. The trends in the calculations are compared
with those seen in the experiments.

1 Introduction

Frictional sliding along an interface between two rapidly deforming solids is a basic prob-
lem of mechanics that arises in a variety of contexts including moving machinery surface
interaction (both macro and micro machines), material processing (e.g. cutting), the
failure of ﬁber reinforced composites (e.g. ﬁber pullout) and earthquake dynamics (fault
rupture). However, a framework for quantifying the wide range of observed dynamic
frictional phenomena is only beginning to emerge. The classical Amontons-Coulomb de-
scription of friction states that the shear stress at an interface is proportional to the
normal stress, with the coeﬃcient of proportionality being the coeﬃcient of friction. Two
coeﬃcients of friction are identiﬁed; a static coeﬃcient of friction that governs the onset of
sliding and a dynamic coeﬃcient of friction that characterizes the behavior during sliding.
At the microscale, an evolving population of deforming and fracturing contacts, pos-
sible phase transitions and the presence of various lubricants play an important role in
setting the static and dynamic coeﬃcients of friction as well as in governing the transition
between them. Rate and state models of friction aim at incorporating the eﬀects of these
microscale processes through appropriately chosen state variables, e.g. Dieterich (1979),
Ruina (1983), Rice and Ruina (1983), Linker and Dieterich (1992), Prakash and Clifton
(1993), and Prakash (1998).

Rate and state models of friction have come to the fore because they substantially
inﬂuence the predicted mode and stability of sliding. Of particular interest is whether
sliding occurs in a crack-like mode in which the surfaces behind the leading edge of sliding
continuously slide or in a pulse-like mode, ﬁrst proposed by Heaton (1990), in which sliding
occurs over a relatively small propagating region. One signiﬁcance of the sliding mode is
that the calculated frictional dissipation in the pulse-like mode is signiﬁcantly less than
in the crack-like mode and is consistent with some values of heat generation inferred from
geophysical ﬁeld measurements (Heaton, 1990).

The classical Amontons-Coulomb description of friction is inadequate for address-
ing fundamental issues of sliding along interfaces between elastic solids because with
Amontons-Coulomb friction sliding along such an interface is unstable to periodic per-
turbations for a wide range of friction coeﬃcients and material properties, with a growth
rate proportional to the wave number (Renardy, 1992; Adams, 1995). When generalized
Rayleigh waves exist, Ranjith and Rice (2001) found that there are unstable modes for
all values of the friction coeﬃcient. Mathematically, instability of periodic perturbations
renders the response of a material interface with Amontons-Coulomb friction ill-posed.
Physically, it implies that during sliding energy is transferred to shorter wave lengths,
leading to pulse sharpening and splitting. Numerically, the splitting of individual pulses
creates an inherent grid-size dependence (Andrews and Ben Zion, 1997; Ben Zion and
Andrews, 1998). Ranjith and Rice (2001) showed that an experimentally based rate
and state dependent friction law (Prakash-Clifton, 1993; Prakash, 1998), in which the
shear strength in response to an abrupt change in normal stress evolves continuously with

2

time, regularizes the problem. Convergence through grid size reduction is then achieved
(Cochard and Rice, 2000).

Although rate- and state-dependent frictional laws provide regularization, slip pulses
may still grow with time. Perrin et al. (1995) and Zheng and Rice (1998) found from anti-
plane strain (mode-III) calculations conditions on the frictional law and the loading con-
ditions needed for well-posedness. They also found that under certain conditions, which
include the rate of steady state velocity weakening, sliding can be partially crack-like and
partially pulse-like. Ben-Zion and Huang (2002) numerically analyzed a conﬁguration of
two identical solids separated by a variable-width fault zone layer and assumed constant
external compressive and shear ﬁelds. They showed that the friction law used by Ranjith
and Rice (2001) and Cochard and Rice (2000) regularizes the Adams instability for iden-
tical as well as for dissimilar materials. The same conclusion was reached analytically by
Rice et al. (2001). The use of rate and state dependent friction not only regularizes the
ill-posedness of the sliding problem but can also eliminate supersonic propagation (Rice
et al., 2001). However, the physical reason for excluding supersonic propagation is not
clear.

The issue of limiting propagation speeds arises in the dynamic fracture mechanics
of growing shear cracks (Freund, 1998; Broberg, 1999; Rosakis, 2002) which has many
similarities with the frictional sliding process. Early analytical and numerical studies of
intersonic shear crack growth using continuum slip weakening (Burridge, 1973; Andrews,
1976; Broberg, 1995, 1996) and velocity weakening cohesive zone models (Samudrala et
al., 2002) concentrated on elucidating the mechanism of transition from sub-Rayleigh to
super-shear wave propagation speeds, see also Madariaga and Olsen (2000) and Dunham
et al. (2003), and on the identiﬁcation of stable intersonic propagation speed regimes.
Of particular relevance to the present study is the persistent occurrence of intersonic
shear rupture along interfaces between identical solids which was ﬁrst observed experi-
mentally by Rosakis et al. (1999) and by Coker and Rosakis (2001). This phenomenon
was subsequently modeled numerically by Needleman (1999) and by Hao et al. (2004).
Atomistic models of intersonic shear rupture (Abraham and Gao, 2000; Abraham, 2001;
Gao et al., 2001), ﬁeld observations of intersonic rupture events during recent large crustal
earthquakes (Archuleta, 1984; Olsen et al., 1997; Hernandez et al., 1999; Bouchon et al.,
2001; Lin et al., 2002; Bouchon and Valle, 2003), as well as recent laboratory models
of earthquake rupture (Xia et al., 2004) have demonstrated the remarkable length scale
persistence (over eleven orders of magnitude) of intersonic rupture phenomena and of the
main features observed in laboratory experiments and in continuum theories.

Here, frictional sliding between identical rectangular plates subject to an initial com-
pressive stress and impact shear loading is studied both experimentally and numerically.
In the experiments, a uniform compressive stress is applied to two Homalite plates and
the impact loading is imposed using a gas gun and a steel projectile. Dynamic photoelas-
ticity is used to record fringe patterns on a micro-second time-scale. The fringe patterns
give indirect evidence of the sliding mode and the propagation speed of the sliding tip

3

is measured. Plane stress calculations modeling the experimental conﬁguration are car-
ried out with friction characterized by a rate- and state-dependent relation, including the
Prakash-Clifton (Prakash and Clifton, 1993; Prakash, 1998) normal stress dependence. A
parameter study is undertaken to predict possible modes of sliding in this conﬁguration
together with the associated propagation speeds. The dependence on loading conditions is
explored and the computational results are compared with the experimental observations.

2 Formulation

2.1 Boundary value problem

We consider two solids undergoing relative motion across an interface Sint. A framework
is used where two constitutive relations are speciﬁed; one for the plate material and one
to characterize frictional sliding in terms of the traction and velocity jump across the
interface. Plane stress conditions are assumed, geometry changes are neglected1 and the
principle of virtual work is written as

σ : δǫdA

ZA

− ZSint

·

T

δ∆udS =

T

δudS

ZSext

·

− ZA

ρ

∂2u
∂t2 ·

δudA

(1)

where t is time, σ is the stress tensor, ǫ is the strain tensor, u is the displacement vector,
T is the traction vector, ∆u is the displacement jump across the interface, σ : ǫ denotes
σijǫji, and A, Sext and Sint are the area, external boundary, and interface line, respectively,
in the reference conﬁguration.

Computations are carried out for the specimen geometry shown in Fig. 1 with ℓ = 75
mm and w = 137 mm. A Cartesian coordinate system with the x1
plane being
the plane of deformation is used and the origin is taken as shown in Fig. 1. The plates
are subject to a uniform compressive stress of magnitude Σ0. For t
Σ0 and
Tn = Σ0 along the interface. Displacements are measured from the uniformly compressed
state at t = 0−.

0, S22 =

x2

−

−

≤

−

At t = 0+, a normal velocity is prescribed along the portion of the edge x1 = 0 for
0, with b = 25 mm, and the shear traction is taken to vanish there.

x2

which
Hence,

b
−

≤

≤

t

− Z
0

u1 =

V (ξ)dξ

,

T2 = 0

on x1 = 0 and

b
−

≤

x2

≤

0

(2)

1The calculations are carried out using a ﬁnite element code developed for ﬁnite deformations in
which the constitutive relation is expressed in terms of second Piola-Kirchhoﬀ stress and Lagrangian
strain components; otherwise ﬁnite deformation eﬀects are neglected in the calculations here.

4

where in eq. (2)

Vimp t/tr,
Vimp,
(t
0,

−

t < tr;
tp
t

for 0
≤
for tr ≤
for t

Vimp [1

V (t) = 


Here, tr is the rise time, tp is the pulse time and ts is the step down time.
calculations tr and ts are ﬁxed at 10 µs and (tp −
surfaces of the specimen T = 0.

In the
tr) is 50 µs. On the remaining external

for tp < t < (tp + ts)

(tp + ts)

tp)/ts],

(3)

−

≤

≥

The plate material is characterized as an isotropic elastic solid with Young’s modulus E
and Poisson’s ratio ν, with properties representative of Homalite: E = 5.2 GPa, ν = 0.34
and density ρ = 1230 kg/m3. These give elastic wave speeds of

cl = 2187 m/s

cs = 1255 m/s

cR = 1155 m/s

(4)

where cl is the longitudinal wave speed, cs is the shear wave speed and cR is the Rayleigh
wave speed.

A rate- and state-dependent friction law is taken to characterize the response along
the interface x2 = 0. With n and s, respectively, denoting in-plane directions normal and
tangential to the interface, ∆ ˙un and ∆ ˙us are the diﬀerence in velocity between material
points that are on opposite sides of the interface in the initial conﬁguration. Since the
change in the positions of material points along the interface is not accounted for, the
Σ0/Cn, the interface
formulation is restricted to small amounts of sliding. When ∆un >
is in tension and

−

along Sint. Otherwise,

Tn = 0

Ts = 0

˙Tn =
Cn∆ ˙un
−
˙Ts = Cs[∆ ˙us −

sgn(Ts)∆ ˙uslip].

Here, as in Povirk and Needleman (1993), the interface is presumed to have an elastic
stiﬀness and ∆ ˙uslip is the magnitude of the sliding velocity speciﬁed by the rate- and
state-dependent friction law (∆ ˙uslip
0). In the elastic-friction relation eq. (7) ∆ ˙uslip is
an internal variable determined from the frictional constitutive description, while ∆ ˙us is
the jump in particle velocity across the interface. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the values
Cn = 0.3 MPa/m and Cs = 0.1 MPa/m are used in the calculations here.

≥

The ﬁnite element discretization is based on linear displacement triangular elements
that are arranged in a ‘crossed-triangle’ quadrilateral pattern. When the ﬁnite element
discretization of the displacement ﬁeld is substituted into eq. (1) and the integrations are
carried out, equations of the form

(5)

(6)
(7)

(8)

M

∂2U
∂t2 = R

5

are obtained where U is the vector of nodal displacements, M is the mass matrix and R is
the nodal force vector consisting of contributions from the area elements and the interface.
Four point Gaussian integration is used along the interface. These ﬁnite element equations
are integrated numerically by an explicit integration procedure, the Newmark β-method
(Belytschko et al., 1976). A lumped mass matrix is used instead of the consistent mass
matrix, since this has been found preferable for explicit time integration procedures, from
the point of view of accuracy as well as computational eﬃciency (Krieg and Key, 1973).
The mesh used in the calculations consists of a ﬁne region with uniform rectangular
elements near the interface at impact edge, with the mesh spacing then gradually increas-
ing in size. The mesh has 18, 320 quadrilateral elements and 56, 580 degrees of freedom,
20 rectangles, each of which is 0.30
with the uniform mesh region consisting of 200
0.20 mm, so that the uniform mesh extends 60 mm from the impact edge. The
mm
conﬁguration analyzed and the ﬁnite element mesh used are shown in Fig. 1.

×

×

2.2 Rate- and state-dependent friction law

The classical Amontons-Coulomb frictional relation has the form

= µTn

Ts|

|

(9)

where Tn is the component of T in the direction of the normal to the interface, Ts is
the component of T tangent to the sliding direction and µ is the (constant) coeﬃcient of
friction. The relation (9) holds when the normal traction is compressive, i. e. with the
sign convention here when Tn > 0.

The problem of two elastic half-spaces sliding with a constant coeﬃcient of friction,
µ, is ill-posed for a signiﬁcant range of values of µ, Adams (1995). This manifests itself in
numerical solutions through a lack of convergence with increasing mesh reﬁnement. Rate
and state dependent friction laws were introduced, mainly in the geophysics literature, to
account for experimental observations that could not be rationalized in the context of a
Coulomb friction description. At each point on the bounding surface, the coeﬃcient of
friction µ in eq. (9) is taken to depend on the frictional sliding velocity at that point,
∆ ˙uslip, and a set of state variables, θi so that

= µ(θi, ∆ ˙uslip)Tn

Ts|

|

The state variables are regarded as phenomenological parameters that account for the
change of contact quality between the surfaces over time. Rate and state dependent fric-
tion models can account for the following fundamental observations on friction (Dieterich,
1979; Rice and Ruina, 1983; Ruina, 1983):

(i) there is an instantaneous increase in the coeﬃcient of friction in response to a step

increase ∆ ˙uslip (the direct eﬀect),

6

(ii) there is a subsequent change to a steady-state value of the coeﬃcient of friction with

this steady-state value being a decreasing function of ∆ ˙uslip, and

(iii) the approach to this steady-state value occurs over a characteristic distance that is

independent of ∆ ˙uslip.

Another key observation is that transmitted shear stresses do not instantaneously
follow a step drop in the normal stresses, Prakash and Clifton (1993), Prakash(1998).
, as the slip accumulates the shear
Instead, immediately following a step drop in
stress gradually approaches a new steady-state level characteristic of the new normal
pressure and the current sliding velocity, Prakash and Clifton (1993). The relation, eq.
(9), is replaced by, Prakash and Clifton (1993), Prakash(1998),

Tn|

|

with the evolution of the state variables θ1 and θ2 given by

= µ(θ0, ∆ ˙uslip)(θ1 + θ2)

Ts|

|

˙θ1 =

˙θ2 =

1
L1
1
L2

−

−

−

−

[θ1

CTn]∆ ˙uslip,

[θ2

DTn]∆ ˙uslip.

Tn.

where L1 and L2 are characteristic lengths. In the steady state, when ˙θ1 = 0 and ˙θ2 = 0,
eqs. (10) to (12) imply Ts ∝
In Dietrich (1979), Rice and Ruina (1983) and Ruina (1983) µ was taken to have a
logarithmic dependence on the sliding velocity. In such a relation, µ is not bounded at
∆ ˙uslip = 0 which leads to diﬃculties in numerical computations. Rice and Ben-Zion (1996)
and Ben-Zion and Rice (1997) appealed to an activated rate process interpretation which
resulted in a relation bounded at ∆ ˙uslip = 0. Here, we adopt a purely phenomenological
expression for µ proposed by Povirk and Needleman (1993) that has the form

with

where the evolution of θ0 is given by,

µ(θ0, ∆ ˙uslip) = g(θ0)

1/m

∆ ˙uslip
V0

 

+ 1

!

µd + (µs −

µd) exp

g(θ0) =

L0/θ0

p

"− 

V1 !

#

,

1/m

L0/θ0
V0

"

+ 1

#

˙θ0 = B

1

 

−

θ0∆ ˙uslip

L0 !

7

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

and µs, µd, L0, V0, V1 and B are prescribed constants.

The steady state value of θ0, i.e. the value at which ˙θ0 = 0 is L0/∆ ˙uslip. Substituting
this value into eqs. (13) and (14) gives the steady state value for the friction coeﬃcient,
µss, at sliding velocity ∆ ˙uslip as

µss = µd + (µs −

µd) exp

"− 

V1 !

#

∆ ˙uslip

p

The frictional relation eq. (7) is only invoked if there is contact (Tn ≥

there is contact, ∆ ˙uslip may still vanish. Deﬁne

0). Even when

then from eqs. (10) and (13), and requiring ∆ ˙uslip to be non-negative, ∆ ˙uslip is given by

β =

Ts|
g(θ0)(θ1 + θ2)

|

,

∆ ˙uslip =

V0(βm
0

1)

−

(

for β > 1
for β
1

≤

Ts| −
Note that β > 1 implies
θ1 + θ2 = Tn and β simpliﬁes to

|

g(θ0)(θ1 + θ2) > 0. When the normal traction is constant
Ts|

/Tng(θ0) as in Povirk and Needleman (1993).

|

We refer to circumstances where ∆ ˙uslip = 0 as sticking and circumstances where

The procedure used to carry out time integration of this frictional constitutive relation

∆ ˙uslip > 0 as frictional sliding.

is described in the Appendix.

2.3 Friction law parameters

Samudrala et al. (2002) and Rosakis (2002) ﬁt sliding experiments of Homalite on Homa-
lite (Rosakis et al., 1999; 2000) with an expression of the form

µss = µ0

1 + α

(cid:20)

∆ ˙uslip
cs

G
2τ0 (cid:21)

where 2G = E/(1 + ν) and τ0 is the shear strength of Homalite. From the observed
inclination of tensile micro-cracks emanating from the interface, the parameter values
α =

0.4, G/τ0 = 136, and µ0 = 0.6 were obtained.

−
Parameter values in eq. (16) were chosen to match the response in eq. (19) for ∆ ˙uslip <
40 m/s. Figure 2a shows µss as a function of ∆ ˙uslip from eq. (19) and from eq. (16) with
µs = 0.6, µd = 0.5, p = 1.2 and V1 = 26 m/s. The parameters V0 and m in eq. (13)
were chosen to be consistent with the observed response for ∆ ˙uslip ranging from 10 m/s
to 40 m/s (Fig. 2a). Figure 2b shows the friction coeﬃcient, Ts/Tn, as a function of of
∆ ˙uslipdt. There is an instantaneous increase
the accumulated frictional sliding ∆uslip =

R
8

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

in Ts/Tn in the same direction as the change in ∆ ˙uslip (the direct eﬀect) followed by a
gradual decrease to a steady-state value. The apparent coeﬃcient of friction Ts/Tn can
attain values outside the range deﬁned by the static and dynamic coeﬃcients of friction
due to the direct eﬀect in the rate- and state-dependent friction law.

The parameter values for the normal stress dependent response, C, D, L1, are chosen
close to values obtained in the experiments of Prakash and Clifton (1993). The initial
values for the internal variables were set to θ0(0) = L/10 ˙V1 and θ1(0) = CΣ0 and θ2(0) =
DΣ0. Figure 3 shows the response using eqs. (10) to (15) under a step jump in compressive
normal traction at a constant sliding velocity. The plots show the imposed normal traction
(dashed line) and the shear traction (solid line) as functions of the accumulated frictional
sliding ∆uslip. There is a gradual change of the state variables and the shear resistance
after a step decrease in the normal compressive stress. The apparent coeﬃcient of friction,
Ts/Tn, however, has a sudden jump.

The choice of the initial values for the state variables is arbitrary but can be of signif-
icance when comparing to other friction models such as slip-weakening models (Bizzarri
et al. 2001). The parameters characterizing the frictional constitutive relation used in the
calculations are those in Table 1 unless speciﬁcally stated otherwise.

3 Experimental Methods and Results

×

The experimental procedures are similar to those used to study shear crack propagation
(Rosakis et al., 1999). Two Homalite plates, each with ℓ = 139.7 mm w = 76.2 mm (see
Fig. 1a) and 9.525 mm thick are held together by a uniform compressive stress. Homalite
is a brittle polyester resin that exhibits stress induced birefringence and is mildly rate
sensitive. At a strain rate of 103 s−1 the elastic wave speeds are given by eq. (4). The
impact loading is imposed via a cylindrical steel projectile of diameter 25 mm and length
51 mm ﬁred using a gas gun with impact speeds ranging from 10 m/s to 60 m/s. A steel
buﬀer plate, 25.4 mm
76.2 mm and 9.525 mm thick, is bonded to the impacted plate
to prevent shattering at the impact side (x1 = 0 in Fig. 1a) and to induce a more or
less planar loading wave. A uniform compressive stress is applied by a press which was
calibrated using a load cell. The loading wave, as measured from a strain gage glued
to the specimen, is of a trapezoidal form with a rise time of 10-20 µs followed by an
essentially steady velocity for 40 µs. Dynamic photoelasticity is used to extract stress
ﬁeld information around the interface. The photoelastic fringe patterns were recorded in
real time using a high-speed Cordin CCD camera capable of capturing 16 images at a rate
of 100 million frames per second. A collimated laser beam with a diameter of 130 mm is
used to illuminate the specimen. Two pairs of circular polarizer plates, placed on either
side of the specimen as described by Rosakis et al. (1999), produce isochromatic fringes.
The photoelastic optical setup is arranged for light ﬁeld.
The isochromatic fringes are related to contours of σ1

σ2, with σ1 being the maximum

−

9

in-plane principal stress and σ2 the minimum in-plane principal stress, through the stress
optical relation

σ1

σ2 =

−

NFσ
h

,

(20)

where Fσ is the stress optical coeﬃcient of Homalite, h is the specimen thickness, and N
is the isochromatic fringe order.

3.1 Experimental results

The experimental results are presented in detail in Lykotraﬁtis et al. (2004). Here, a few
experimental results that illustrate characteristic features are presented for comparison
with the numerical calculations.

Results with a compressive stress of 9.4 MPa and impact velocities of 32.7 m/s and
42.2 m/s are presented. Figure 4 shows the isochromatic fringe patterns obtained with
an impact velocity of 32.7 m/s. Experiments conducted at lower impact velocities exhibit
similar characteristics. In Fig. 4, the loading wave front, which travels at cl, arrives from
the left. Behind the loading wave front a shear Mach cone, formed by a sharp change in
fringe density is observed. The inset to Fig. 4 focuses on the region near the propagating
tip with a thick line drawn over the Mach line. The sliding tip follows the loading wave
and the tip can be located by tracing the Mach line to the interface. In this case the
sliding tip follows shortly behind the dilational loading wave. The propagation speed of
the sliding tip is
1810 m/s as measured by two methods. One measurement involves
following the position of the sliding tip in various frames and knowing the frame timing,
the propagation speed is obtained. In the second method the Mach angle is used to obtain
the tip speed. The two methods give consistent propagation speeds.

≈

In Fig. 4, there is a concentration of isochromatic fringes some distance behind the
sliding tip that propagates at approximately cR and that is a consequence of loading
wave reﬂections. Other characteristic features in Fig. 4 are: (i) there is a cusp in the
stress contours at the interfaces, indicating that the propagation speed is slightly faster
along the interface than in the bulk; (ii) the fringe density is higher in the plate where
the impact loading is applied, showing that energy is not transferred easily through the
interface; and (iii) the fringe discontinuity at the interface shows that sliding is occurring
in a crack-like mode.

Isochromatic fringe patterns for an experiment with an impact velocity of 42 m/s are
shown in Fig. 5 at 40 µs, 48 µs and 60 µs after impact. The thick lines in the insets are
drawn to show the Mach line locations and orientations. Both methods of calculating
the propagation speed of the sliding tip give a propagation speed of about 1950 m/s.
Although the general characteristics seen in Fig. 4 are preserved, new features enrich the
picture. Behind the impact wave a shear Mach line emanating from the sliding tip is
observed. In addition, a second Mach line emanates behind the sliding tip that is not
parallel to the ﬁrst one (Fig. 5a). This Mach line is at a shallower slope corresponding to

10

a supersonic propagation speed of
2600 m/s. In Fig. 5b the tip of the second Mach line
approaches the tip of the ﬁrst Mach line at the interface. These two points merge as the
second point catches up with the ﬁrst point (Fig. 5c) and only one Mach line continues
to be observed in subsequent frames (not shown).

≈

Behind the second Mach line there is a fringe concentration, associated with the load-
ing, that travels at the Rayleigh wave speed. Some fringes pass continuously from the
upper plate to the lower plate which is consistent with a contact region forming. In exper-
iments with the magnitude of the initial compressive stress increased, there is an increase
in the number of discontinuous regions of fringe concentration that may indicate sepa-
rate regions of sliding and regions of sticking (i.e. multiple pulses). In each experiment,
the speed of the leading sliding tip is found to be essentially constant. In addition, the
propagation speed of the leading sliding tip was found to increase with increasing impact
speed (or decreasing compressive stress) and in all cases to be between √2cs and cl.

4 Numerical Results

The focus here is on illustrating the range of behaviors that are obtained by varying
the magnitude of the initial compressive stress Σ0 and the impact velocity Vimp. Results
are presented for combinations of Σ0 and Vimp that give rise to the following ﬁve sliding
modes:

Case I: A crack-like mode – Σ0 = 6 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s.

Case II: A pulse-like mode – Σ0 = 30 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s.

Case III A train of pulses – Σ0 = 10 MPa, Vimp = 20 m/s.

Case IV: Multiple pulses coalescing to form a crack – Σ0 = 0.9 MPa, Vimp = 10 m/s.

Case V: A pulse-like mode followed by a crack-like mode – Σ0 = 40 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s.

In all cases but Case V, the friction parameters are as speciﬁed in Table 1. For Case
V, the exponent p in eq. (14) is taken to be 0.5 and V1 = 1 m/s. Also, for Case IV the
values of the interface elastic constants are Cn = 0.03 MPa/m and Cs = 0.01 MPa/m,
one tenth their value in all the other cases. In the results presented here, the frictional
sliding region remains within the ﬁne uniform part of the mesh.

Results are presented for: (i) propagation speeds; (ii) the spatial distribution and time
evolution of various interface quantities; and (iii) isochromatic fringe patterns (contours
of σ1
σ2 with σ1 being the maximum in-plane principal stress and σ2 the minimum
in-plane principal stress).

−

Curves of propagation speed versus time for all ﬁve cases analyzed are shown in Fig. 6.
For reference, the longitudinal, cl, shear, cs, and √2cs (= 1775 m/s) wave speeds are

11

marked. Also shown in the ﬁgure are data points corresponding to measured propagation
speeds for the experiment with Σ0 = 9.4 MPa and an impact velocity of 42 m/s. The ﬁrst
step in computing the propagation speeds is to record the location of the point furthest
from the impact edge where ∆ ˙uslip > 0. This gives the position of the leading sliding
tip at various times and the propagation speed, Vtip, is then calculated from this data
by a progressive least squares ﬁt using ﬁve points. At least some of the oscillations in
propagation speed in Fig. 6 may be due to this numerical diﬀerentiation procedure.

≈

Sliding generally initiates somewhat away from the impact edge and then occurs over
several small sliding regions that link up. Thus, the process of sliding initiation is not
one of propagation of a sliding region but involves jumps in the location of the leading
sliding edge. As a consequence, the ‘speeds’ calculated during the early stages of sliding
are unphysically high. Subsequently, the propagation speeds decrease and for Cases II
and V, the mean Vtip is about cl whereas for Case IV, after the initial stages of sliding,
Vtip reduces to
2000 m/s, in good agreement with the experimental value of 1950 m/s.
There are multiple pulses in Case IV and the tip of the second pulse travels at about 2700
2600 m/s in the experiments. It is worth emphasizing that both
m/s, as compared with
the experiments and the calculations indicate that the second pulse travels at a supersonic
speed. However, for the calculation of Case IV, Σ0 = 0.9 MPa and Vimp = 10 m/s as
compared with 9.4 MPa and 42 m/s in the experiments. Hence, there is consistency of
propagation speeds for this mode of interface sliding although the loading conditions to
achieve this are quite diﬀerent in the calculations and the experiments. One possibility
for this discrepency is that the eﬀect of the impedence mismatch between the steel plate
bonded to the specimen and Homalite is not accounted for in the computations.

≈

In the following, distributions are shown both for the evolution of ∆ ˙us, which is the
particle velocity jump, and for ∆ ˙uslip, which is the sliding rate obtained from the frictional
constitutive relation. From eq. (7), the diﬀerence between these is the ‘elastic’ sliding rate
˙Ts/Cs. There are cases where ∆ ˙us ≈
∆ ˙uslip with the elastic sliding rate being negligible.
However, in other cases the diﬀerence between ∆ ˙us and ∆ ˙uslip is substantial and the
elasticity of the interface then plays a signiﬁcant role.

The principal stress contours that evolve are a consequence of both the imposed loading
and sliding along the interface. To provide a perspective on the contribution of interfacial
sliding, the contours of σ1
σ2 that emerge from impact loading with no sliding are
considered ﬁrst.

−

4.1 Symmetric loading with respect to the interface

In order to illustrate the isochromatic fringe patterns that result without sliding, the
symmetric loading conﬁguration shown in the inset of Fig. 7a is analyzed. Figure 7a
shows the simulated isochromatic fringe pattern at t = 16 µs for a calculation carried
out with Σ0 = 10 MPa and Vimp = 5 m/s. At this time, the loading wave front has
propagated 34 mm into the specimen. The isochromatic fringe pattern for a symmetric

12

loading experiment with Σ0 = 0 MPa and Vimp = 58 m/s is shown in Fig. 7b. In both
the experiments and simulations the continuity of fringes across the interface behind the
loading wave front indicates that no sliding occurs along the interface under symmetric
loading.

In both the simulations and the experiments, at the loading wave front there is a
cusp in the stress contours at the interface (marked by the arrow A), indicating that the
propagation speed is faster along the interface than in the bulk. The cusp in the fringes at
the interface in Fig. 7b is also seen when frictional sliding occurs (Figs. 4 and 5). Another
characteristic feature is marked by box B in Fig. 7. The curvature of the fringe lines
associated with this feature is greater in the computations in Fig. 7a, but this curvature
decreases with time. A similar feature, with a curvature closer to what is seen in the
computations, is in Fig. 5b. Our simulations indicate that the cusp in the fringe line and
the feature in box B are a consequence of the impact loading conditions and thus not
directly associated with frictional sliding.

A relatively broad head wave that emanates from the interface following the loading
wave front is shown by the arrow C. The width of the head wave in the simulations was
found to depend on Cn and Cs in eq. (7) and thus can be used to set the values of the
interface elastic stiﬀnesses.

4.2 Case I: Crack-like mode

Figure 8a shows the variation of ∆ ˙uslip, and the shear traction, Ts, along the interface at
t = 22 µs (dashed lines) and at t = 32 µs (solid lines) for Case I (Σ0 = 6 MPa, Vimp = 2
m/s). Frictional sliding initiates at the impact edge (x1 = 0) 16 µs after impact. The
distributions of ∆ ˙uslip and Ts along the interface are similar at 22 µs and 32 µs, indicating
at least quasi-steady behavior.

Ahead of the frictional sliding tip, ∆ ˙uslip = 0. At the tip, ∆ ˙uslip jumps to its peak
value of about 7 m/s within two mesh spacings (eight interface integration points) and
5 m/s. As seen in Fig. 8a, the peak value of ∆ ˙uslip gradually
then gradually reduces to
increases with time. This behavior is crack-like in that frictional sliding persists at a point
on the interface after the sliding front has past that point.

≈

The shear traction steadily increases from the loading wave front, which is at x1 = 71
mm at t = 32 µs, and reaches a maximum value of about 3.9 MPa at the frictional sliding
tip after which it decreases to a steady value of 3.6 MPa. The normal traction along the
interface gradually increases from its initial value of 6 MPa to 6.39 MPa at the frictional
sliding tip and subsequently decreases to 6.14 MPa along the sliding region. The apparent
coeﬃcient of friction, µapp = Ts/Tn, is
0.609 at the frictional sliding tip and reduces to
0.585 along the sliding region with small variations. Thus, in this case µapp remains very
close to µs. The value of Tn itself is nearly constant along the interface, diﬀering by less
than 0.6 MPa from Σ0 = 6 MPa, except near the impact edge (0
10 mm) where
the magnitude of Tn decreases.

x1

≈

≤

≤

13

The actual velocity jump across the interface is ∆ ˙us, which consists of an elastic part
in addition to ∆ ˙uslip. Figure 8b shows the distribution of ∆ ˙us as well as the traction
increment dTs = ˙Tsdt distribution. Because of the elasticity in the interface constitutive
relation, eq. (7), ∆ ˙us increases gradually to it peak value, rather than exhibiting a sharp
jump. However, behind the frictional sliding tip, ∆ ˙us and ∆ ˙uslip are nearly equal. Consis-
tent with this, since the elastic contribution is ˙Ts/Cs,
0 behind the frictional sliding
tip.

˙Ts ≈

−

Isochromatic fringe patterns (contours of σ1

σ2) at t = 32 µs are shown in Fig. 9.
Behind the loading wave front (which is at 71 mm) a concentration of fringes at 44
mm indicates the location of the frictional sliding tip. A shear Mach cone, formed by a
sharp change in fringe density, emanates from the sliding tip at an angle of 34◦. Using
∆a/∆t = sin θ/cs, where θ is the Mach angle, gives a tip speed of 2244 m/s which is
close to, but less than, the directly calculated tip speed in Fig. 6. Another Mach cone,
formed by a more gradual change in fringe density at an angle of 67◦ and, presuming that
cl is the relevant speed of sound for this Mach cone, a propagation speed of 2360 m/s is
obtained from ∆a/∆t = sin θ/cl. Behind the frictional sliding tip there is no signiﬁcant
stress concentration, indicative of sliding occurring along the interface.

4.3 Case II: Pulse-like mode

In Fig. 10a, the variation of the frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip, and the shear traction, Ts,
along the interface at t = 32 µs (dashed lines) and at t = 34 µs (solid lines with circles)
are shown for Case II (Σ0 = 30 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s). Frictional sliding initiates at t = 28
µs, which is later than for Case I because the larger compressive stress requires a larger
shear stress for initiation. In Case II, frictional sliding occurs in a pulse-like mode which
involves a relatively narrow zone (the pulse) where ∆ ˙uslip > 0, with ∆ ˙uslip = 0 ahead of
and behind the pulse. The circles in Fig. 10a show the integration point locations (since
∆ ˙uslip is a constitutive quantity it is stored at interface element integration points) to
indicate the extent to which the pulse is resolved; the sharp pulse consists of 9-10 points.
A pulse initiates at the impact edge and as it travels across the interface the peak
value of ∆ ˙uslip increases. The pulse proﬁle consists of ∆ ˙uslip gradually increasing from
zero to 40 m/s in 4.5 mm after which it sharply rises to 700 m/s over a distance of 0.5
mm and then drops abruptly to zero over a distance of 0.4 mm. Additional pulses initiate
and evolve in a similar manner; there are two pulses at t = 32 µs and three at t = 34 µs.
The shear traction distribution along the interface is also shown in Fig. 10a (note that
the range for Ts is larger than in Fig. 8a). At t = 32 µs, the shear traction along the
interface gradually increases from zero at the loading wave front (which is at 71 mm) to 18
MPa at the tip of the leading pulse. The value of Ts remains approximately constant over
the pulse, abruptly decreases to 14 MPa at the trailing edge of the pulse and then very
gradually increases until the second slip-pulse is reached. The variation of the apparent
coeﬃcient of friction, µapp = Ts/Tn, is quite diﬀerent from that for the crack-like mode.

14

≤

≤

Here, at t = 32 µs, µapp is 0.60 at the front of the frictional sliding tip, very slightly
increases to 0.61 over the pulse and then, with the drop in Ts, falls to 0.44.
In this
case, neither µs nor µd serve as bounds on the apparent coeﬃcient of friction. Behind
the leading pulse the apparent coeﬃcient of friction steadily increases to 0.60 until the
trailing pulse is reached. The magnitude of Tn is nearly constant at Σ0 = 30 MPa over
most of the interface but decreases near the impact edge (0

10 mm).

x1

In contrast to the crack-like mode, for the pulse-like mode there is a qualitative diﬀer-
ence between the distributions of ∆ ˙uslip and ∆ ˙us along the interface. As seen in Fig. 10b,
which shows distributions of ∆ ˙us and dTs = ˙Tsdt at t = 34 µs, no pulse occurs in the
distribution of ∆ ˙us. However, there is an abrupt change in ∆ ˙us at the location of each
pulse. On the other hand, there are pulses in the traction increment dTs and hence in the
elastic contribution to ∆ ˙us = ˙Ts/Cs. The abrupt change in ∆ ˙us corresponds to a pulse
in d∆ ˙us/dx, i.e. to a ‘weak’ pulse as opposed to the ‘strong’ pulse in ∆ ˙uslip.

Isochromatic fringe patterns (contours of σ1

σ2) at t = 32 µs are shown in Fig. 11
where only the stress contours behind the loading wave front are visible in the region
shown. There is a concentration of fringes at approximately x1 = 22 mm, which corre-
sponds to the location of the leading slip pulse. The change in the fringe spacing and
concentration along a shear Mach line of 26◦ indicates a propagation speed of about
2800 m/s (sin θ/cs). The dense set of fringe near the impact site arises from a slip pulse
initiating there.

−

4.4 Case III: A train of pulses

Figure 12a shows distributions of frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip, and shear traction Ts for
a train of pulses (Σ0 = 10 MPa, Vimp = 20 m/s). The distributions are shown at two
times, at t = 32 µs and at t = 33 µs. As in Fig. 10a, the circles indicate the positions
of the integration points at which ∆ ˙uslip and Ts are evaluated. A key diﬀerence between
the pulses in Case III and those in Case II is that in Case III the peak value of ∆ ˙uslip,
120 m/s, does not increase with propagation distance or time. The variations
which is
in the peak value of ∆ ˙uslip seen in Fig. 12a is mainly due to some pulses attaining their
peak value between the plotted integration points. Typically, a pulse extends over four
elements (sixteen integration points). The slip pulses at 33 µs (dashed lines) lie on top
of the pulses at 32 µs with a one pulse oﬀset, illustrating the self-similar propagation of
these pulses.

≈

The shear traction along the interface has a mean value of about 7 MPa with oscil-
lations of 1.5 MPa. The apparent coeﬃcient of friction, µapp = Ts/Tn oscillates between
0.59 and 0.48 for the slip-pulses behind the leading pulse, except for the leading pulse
where the maximum is 0.63. The value of Tn is fairly uniform over the interval shown,
having a maximum of about 14 MPa at x1
45 mm and decreasing smoothly to around
≈
11.5 MPa at x1 = 30 mm and x1 = 60 mm, so that the variation in µapp arises principally
from the oscillations in Ts. Due to the direct eﬀect in the friction relation, there is a

15

lag between the onset and cessation of frictional sliding and the maximum and minimum
values of µapp. The maximum value of 0.59 for µapp is reached 0.43 mm behind the sliding
tip for the pulses following the leading pulse and the minimum value of 0.48 occurs 0.25
mm behind the location where ∆ ˙uslip peaks (for all pulses, including the leading pulse).
As also seen in Fig. 12a, except for the leading pulse, the shape of the pulses is the
same, where the width of the frictional sliding region (∆ ˙uslip > 0) is 1.33 mm and the
width of the region with ∆ ˙uslip = 0 is 0.92 mm. The spacing between the pulses is 2.21
mm. The leading pulse has more structure to its front edge, and this structure is preserved
as the pulse propagates.

The velocity jump across the interface, ∆ ˙us, and the traction increment dTs = ˙Tsdt
are shown in Fig. 12b. The traction increment distribution reﬂects the pulse structure of
∆ ˙uslip, while the oscillations in ∆ ˙us are smoother.

−

≈

Figure 13 shows the isochromatic fringe patterns (contours of σ1

σ2) at t = 32 µs.
At the front of the ﬁrst pulse at 55 mm, a shear Mach wave occurs at 37◦, corresponding
cl. Behind the slip front vortex like stress contours are seen
to a propagation speed of
that correspond to the back and front of each pulse together with shear Mach waves at
each transition from slip to stick. Behind the propagating front, there is a vortex-like
structure. The change in the contours at x2 = 2 mm is due to the change in resolution
of ﬁeld quantities associated with the transition from the uniform mesh to the coarser,
graduated mesh. This calculation was also carried out for a ﬁner mesh in which the
uniform mesh region extends to x2 = 4 mm, with the element size in the uniform region
ﬁxed. The results are essentially unchanged, but the ﬁner mesh results in the details of
the stress distribution behind the propagating front being visible over the larger region
resolved.

The accumulated frictional sliding, ∆uslip =

t
0 ∆ ˙uslipdt, the displacement jump across
the interface, ∆us and the shear stress Ts distributions for the crack-like propagation
R
mode (Case I) and for the train of pulses (Case III) are compared in Fig. 14. In both
cases, the diﬀerence between ∆us and ∆uslip is due to the assumed interface elasticity. In
Fig. 14a for Case I, both ∆us and ∆uslip vary smoothly along the slipped surface. For
Case III, Fig. 14b, although the displacement jump itself varies smoothly, steps in ∆uslip
are evident. The elasticity smooths out the steps in ∆us along the interface, but these
are reﬂected in the oscillatory distribution of shear traction, Ts, along the interface.

4.5 Case IV: Multiple pulses coalescing to form a crack

In Case IV, the values of the interface elastic constants are Cn = 0.03 MPa/m and
Cs = 0.01 MPa/m, one tenth their value in all the other cases. Figure 15 shows the slip
velocity ∆ ˙uslip along the interface at 22 µs, 32 µs, and 41 µs. Sliding initiates at 14 µs
and at 22 µs (Fig. 15a) three pulses are observed. The tip of the leading pulse at 18 mm
and the distance between the end of the ﬁrst pulse and the front of the second pulse is 3.4
mm. As in Cases II and III, the leading pulse includes a gradual rising part in the front

16

before there is a steep rise in ∆ ˙uslip whereas the second and third pulses do not exhibit
such a gradual rise in ∆ ˙uslip. At 32 µs in Fig. 15b, the tip of the leading pulse has moved
to 41 mm with the distance between the ﬁrst and second pulse decreasing to 0.4 mm.
cl and the average
During this time the average speed of the tip of the leading pulse is
2700 m/s. Thus, the second and third sliding
speed of the second pulse is supersonic,
pulses which are traveling at supersonic speeds catch up with the lead pulse and coalesce
to form a single crack-like sliding region as shown in Fig. 15c (at 41 µs) and then continue
to travel at cl. This crack-like region expands with time as more pulses are generated at
the impact edge, travel at supersonic speeds and coalesce with the main sliding region.

≈

≈

−

Isochromatic fringe patterns (contours of σ1

σ2) are shown in Fig. 16a, b, and c, at
22 µs, 32 µs, and 41 µs, respectively. The contours are shown for x2 > 0 because the
Mach line are clearer in this plate. At t = 22µs the tip of the sliding pulses is at 18 mm
as shown by the change in the spacing of the stress contours in Fig. 16a. In Fig. 16b,
the tip has moved to 41 mm. There are three regions where an abrupt change in the
density of the contours takes place forming three shear Mach lines at three angles to the
interface as shown in the inset. The intersections of these lines with the interface are at
the locations of the tips of the three sliding pulses shown in Fig. 16b. The shear Mach
angles of 34◦, 29.3◦ and 23.4◦ correspond to propagation speeds of 2190 m/s, 2560 m/s
and 3160 m/s for the ﬁrst, second and third pulses, respectively. In Fig. 16c, at 41 µs,
the stress contours show a concentration of fringes only at 60 mm corresponding to the
sliding tip. At this time the second and third pulses have coalesced with the ﬁrst pulse to
form a crack-like sliding region propagating at the longitudinal wave speed. For x1 < 25
mm there are disturbances that are pulses traveling at supersonic speeds that eventually
coalesce with the crack-like sliding region, thereby expanding it.

4.6 Case V: A pulse-like mode followed by a crack-like mode

In Case V, p = 0.5 and V1 = 1.0 m/s in eqs. (14) and (16). Sliding initiates as a slip pulse
at 31 µs. Figure 17 shows the distribution of ∆ ˙uslip along the interface at three times;
t = 32 µs, t = 38 µs and t = 44.6 µs. Also shown is the distribution of the shear traction,
Ts, along the interface at t = 44 µs. A growing pulse is obtained with the pulse width
decreasing from 8.5 mm at t = 32 µs to 2.5 mm at t = 44 µs and the peak value of ∆ ˙uslip
increases from 155 m/s to 392 m/s. The propagation speed of the pulse varies slightly
over the range of times in Fig. 17; 2600 m/s at t = 32 µs and 2450 m/s at both t = 38
µs and t = 44.6 µs. After some oscillation behind the growing pulse, ∆ ˙uslip is constant at
about 21 m/s. The shear traction increases to a maximum value of 23.5 MPa at the tip
of the pulse, then drops to 18.5 MPa in the pulse region, after which it remains almost
constant at 20 MPa over the rest of the sliding region. The apparent coeﬃcient of friction
changes from a maximum value of 0.595 at the sliding tip to a minimum value of 0.47 at
the point of maximum frictional sliding rate until it settles at a steady state value of 0.50
along the rest of the sliding surface.

17

−

The isochromatic fringe patterns (contours of σ1

σ2) are shown in Fig. 18 at three
times of 32 µs, 38 µs and 44.6 µs. The arrow in each ﬁgure point to a line (drawn oﬀ the
interface) that indicates the width of the pulse and its position along the interface. The
pulse width decreases as the crack catches up to the pulse with time and distance. At
t = 38µs (Fig. 18b), there are two separate Mach waves corresponding to the slip pulse
and the initiation of crack-like slip. As the pulse width diminishes in length the tip of the
crack-like region approaches the leading tip of the pulse. From the shear Mach angles,
the propagation speed of the back of the pulse in Fig. 18b is approximately 3500 m/s,
while the front of the pulse is traveling at about 2600 m/s.

4.7 Dependence of the sliding mode on the initial compressive

stress and impact velocity

The dependence of the frictional sliding mode on the initial compressive stress, Σ0, and
the impact velocity, Vimp, is shown in Fig. 19. All calculations in Fig. 19 were carried out
using the interface friction properties listed in Table 1 and Cn = 0.3 MPa/m, Cs = 0.1
MPa/m. The dashed line indicates the boundary between the occurrence of crack-like and
pulse-like modes. It is near the dashed line that mixed crack-like and pulse-like modes
occur. Quite generally, for low impact velocities and low values of the applied compressive
stress, the crack-like mode is obtained. On the other hand, for a high magnitude of the
initial compressive stress and a suﬃciently low impact velocity, the growing pulse mode
occurs.

Figure 20 illustrates the nature of the transition for a ﬁxed value of Σ0 and varying
Vimp, corresponding to the line A in Fig. 19. In Fig. 20, Σ0 is ﬁxed at 10 MPa and Vimp
varies between 2 m/s to 40 m/s. Values of ∆ ˙us, ∆ ˙uslip, Ts and µapp = Ts/Tn at x1 = 16.1
mm on the interface are plotted as functions of time. With Vimp = 2 m/s, essentially
steady values of the velocity jump across the interface, ∆ ˙us, and the frictional sliding
rate, ∆ ˙uslip, are attained as seen in Figs. 20a and 20b, respectively. With the impact
velocity increased to 10 m/s, the mode has changed to one involving a train of pulses, as
seen in Fig. 20b. With a further increase in impact velocity, the pulse amplitude increases
as does the pulse frequency. Correspondingly, the oscillations in the velocity jump across
the interface increase. However, as seen by comparing the response for Vimp = 20 m/s
with Vimp = 40 m/s in Fig. 20a, the amplitude of the oscillations in ∆ ˙us do not continue
to increase with increasing impact velocity, in contrast to the pulse amplitude in Fig. 20b.
Rather, there is an increase in the ‘elastic’ part of the velocity jump and this is reﬂected
in the increased magnitude of the shear traction Ts in Fig. 20c. The oscillations in the
apparent coeﬃcient of friction, µapp = Ts/Tn, increase in magnitude with increasing Vimp;
µapp changes from an almost steady value of 0.598 at Vimp = 2 m/s to µapp oscillating
between 0.598 and 0.470 at Vimp = 40 m/s. In addition, the frequency of the oscillations
in µapp increases with increasing impact velocity.

The nature of the transition for Vimp ﬁxed at 2 m/s and with varying Σ0, the line

18

B in Fig. 19, is illustrated in Fig. 21. As in Fig. 20, the evolution with time of ∆ ˙us,
∆ ˙uslip, Ts and µapp at a ﬁxed point along the interface (x1 = 16.1 mm) is shown. With
increasing initial compressive stress, frictional sliding initiates later (Figs. 21a and 21b).
For both Σ0 = 6 MPa and Σ0 = 10 MPa, crack-like behavior is obtained. The values of
∆ ˙us and ∆ ˙uslip at the beginning of frictional sliding exceed their subsequent steady-state
values, which is a consequence of the direct eﬀect in the rate- and state-dependent friction
relation. With Σ0 = 16 MPa, a train of pulses in frictional sliding rate (Fig. 21b) occurs,
with oscillations both in ∆ ˙us (Fig. 21a) and in Ts (Fig. 21c). When the compressive load
is increased to Σ0 = 30 MPa, steeper and narrower pulses are obtained, Fig. 21b, and the
peak value of ∆ ˙uslip reaches
820 m/s, much exceeding the scale in Fig. 21b. These slip
pulses increase in amplitude as they propagate and the peak ∆ ˙uslip can be of the order
of cs. For a suﬃciently high value of Σ0, the closely trailing slip pulses are suppressed.
Then, a trailing slip pulse only occurs after some distance and time has passed so that the
pulses are well-separated. Such growing pulses have been obtained in studies of sliding
between dissimilar elastic solids using rate- and state-dependent friction laws (Ben-Zion
and Huang, 2002; Adda-Bedia and Ben Amar, 2003). It is worth noting that if the scale
of observation is suﬃciently small compared with the pulse spacing, only a single pulse
is observed which resembles the slip pulses discussed in relation to earthquakes (Heaton,
1990).

≈

The nature of the slip pulses that occur when Σ0 is increased (line B in Fig. 19) diﬀer
from those obtained when Vimp is increased (line A in Fig. 19). With ﬁxed Σ0, increasing
Vimp increases the magnitude of the slip pulses while the pulse spacing and the pulse
width decrease. For Σ0 = 16 MPa, it was found that the pulse width to pulse spacing
ratio remained constant with varying Vimp and this ratio was equal to one-half. This
behavior is analogous to the oscillatory stick-slip behavior observed by Baumberger et al.
(1994). The extent to which the pulse width to pulse spacing ratio depends on Σ0 remains
to be determined. In both Figs. 20c and 21c, the peak values of the apparent coeﬃcient
of friction do not increase with increasing Vimp (Fig. 20c) or Σ0 (Fig. 21c) even though
the magnitude of Ts does, thus implying that there is a corresponding increase in Tn.

To illustrate the evolution of sliding in a transition mode, we describe this evolution
for the calculation with Σ0 = 10 MPa, Vimp = 7 m/s (marked by one of the triangles in
Fig. 19). Oscillations occur in ∆ ˙uslip along the interface, with the highest peak near the
sliding tip and decreasing in amplitude behind the tip. When sliding has progressed about
50 mm along the interface, the amplitude of the ﬁrst three oscillations is large enough
for ∆ ˙uslip to vanish at the crests leading to sticking regions (however the maximum value
of ∆ ˙uslip generally remains a small fraction of an elastic wave speed). The amplitude of
the following oscillations is much smaller and sticking does not occur. Thus, we obtain a
crack-like sliding region following three slip-pulses of decreasing magnitude.

Other loading combinations of Σ0 and Vimp on the transition line in Fig. 19, lead to
similar oscillations in the slip rate or to unsteady behaviors, such as mixed crack-like
and pulse-like sliding modes that evolve with both time and distance. This behavior

19

is reminiscent of that found in the analysis of spring-slider system obeying a rate- and
state-dependent friction law (Ruina, 1983; Gu et al., 1984) where it was shown that
the transition from steady sliding to stick-slip goes through several oscillations, period
doubling and self-sustained periodic oscillations. Gu and Wong (1991,1994) also found
this transition to be dependent on the load point driving velocity in addition to the
stiﬀness and constitutive parameters.

5 Discussion

The experiments and calculations for symmetric loading with no sliding, permit the fea-
tures of the response associated with sliding to be identiﬁed. Also, the good agreement
between the experiments and the calculations for symmetric loading provides conﬁdence
that the wave propagation aspects of the experiments are well-represented in the calcu-
lations. Features that are common between the symmetric loading experiments and the
corresponding calculations include the cusp in the photoelastic fringes at the interface,
the formation of a head wave emanating from the loading wave front and the distortions
in the photoelastic stress ﬁeld behind the loading wave due to the trapezoidal nature of
the input.

A guideline for assessing mesh resolution (Zheng and Rice, 1998) is that the mesh
spacing (0.3 mm along the interface in the uniform mesh region) should be signiﬁcantly
less than a characteristic length, h∗, associated with the friction law,

h∗ =

2GL0/[π∆ ˙uslip(dτss/d∆ ˙uslip)]
|

|

≈

where G is the shear modulus and τss is the shear stress under steady state sliding. For
a normal stress of 10 MPa, h∗ attains its minimum of 0.81 mm for ∆ ˙uslip = V1 = 26 m/s.
Using ∆ ˙uslip = V1 = 7 m/s as a representative value for Case I, h∗ = 1.8 mm. For Case
1 MPa and ∆ ˙uslip ranges from about 10 m/s to 100 m/s,
IV, where the normal stress is
the minimum value of h∗ is 8.1 mm and for much of the velocity range is signiﬁcantly
greater than that.
It is worth noting that it is for Case IV that a supersonic pulse is
obtained. For the other cases, h∗ typically has values between those for Cases I and IV.
Several calculations were carried out to assess the mesh dependence of the results. For
Case I (crack-like mode) and for Case III (pulse-like mode), calculations were carried out
with the mesh spacing halved along the interface (0.15 mm in the uniform region) so that
the number of elements was doubled. For Case I, with the ﬁner mesh the transition region
at the sliding tip consisted of four elements (sixteen integration points) as opposed to two
elements (eight integration points) with the coarser mesh. The values of ∆ ˙uslip obtained
from the two calculations nearly coincide. The mean values of the curves of Vtip versus
time computed using the ﬁner mesh also essentially coincide with the curves in Fig. 6 but
the oscillations about the mean diﬀer somewhat. In addition, the eﬀect of mesh size was
further explored for a crack-like mode and a pulse like mode using frictional parameters

20

×

that diﬀer from those used in Cases I and II. The reference mesh shown in Fig. 1b and
two other meshes were used for this. All the meshes have the smallest elements near
the interface and the impact edge as for the reference mesh in Fig. 1b. The coarse mesh
consisted of 1, 152 elements and 4, 812 degrees of freedom, with the smallest element size
1.0 mm. The ﬁne mesh consisted of 56, 832 elements and 229, 364 degrees of
2.1 mm
freedom, with the smallest element size 0.075 mm
0.1 mm. The slip rate at a point along
the interface was plotted as a function of time for both meshes. In the calculation with the
crack-like sliding mode, the results from all three calculations are in very good agreement
for the propagation speed except that increased ﬂuctuations around a steady slip rate
occur with the coarse mesh. For the pulse-like mode calculation, there is only a small
diﬀerence between the calculations using the three meshes for the predicted magnitude
and timing of the pulses.

×

The values used for the interface stiﬀnesses Cn and Cs in eqs. (6) and (7) play a signif-
icant role both for symmetric loading (with no sliding) and for asymmetric loading (with
frictional sliding). For symmetric loading, Fig. 7, the width of the head wave emanating
from the loading wave front decreases with increasing interface stiﬀness. Because in the
experiments the width of this head wave expands with decreasing applied load, the sym-
metric loading geometry can be used to calibrate the stiﬀness values. The values used
in most of the calculations, Cn = 0.3 MPa/m and Cs = 0.1 MPa/m, give rather good
agreement for symmetrically loaded specimens with Σ0 in the range 5

40 MPa.

To assess the dependence of the sliding mode on the interface stiﬀness values employed,
asymmetric loading calculations were carried out using various values of Cn and Cs. For
given values of Σ0 and Vimp, the frictional sliding mode that occurs depends on Cn and Cs.
With Cn = 3.0 MPa/m and Cs = 1.0 MPa/m, only crack-like behavior was obtained for
the range of values of Σ0 and Vimp used in Fig. 19. On the other hand, various calculations
were carried out with Cn = 0.03 MPa/m and Cs = 0.01 MPa/m and a train of pulses was
not obtained, although as shown for Case IV pulses coalescing to form a crack-like sliding
mode did occur. Also, pulse steepening became more pronounced when Cn and Cs were
decreased.

−

The elasticity of the interface plays a fundamental role because the frictional slip
∆ ˙uslip is an internal variable determined by the frictional law (analogous to the plastic
strain rate in plasticity theory). The observable quantity is the jump in displacement rate
across the interface, ∆ ˙us. The pulses occur in ∆ ˙uslip not in ∆ ˙us and, hence, according to
our numerical results, are not directly observable in terms of a velocity jump distribution
along an interface. What is observable is a pulse-type traction rate distribution (Figs. 10b
and 12b). At a given spatial location, the oscillatory nature of the pulse-like modes is
seen in the time evolution of ∆ ˙us (Fig. 20a).

Calculations modeling dynamic slip in earthquakes, e.g. Cochard and Madariaga
(1994, 1996), Perrin et al.
(1995), Beeler and Tullis (1996) (see also Ben-Zion, 2001;
Rice, 2001; Nielsen and Madariaga, 2003), exhibit both crack-like and pulse-like sliding
In analyzing conditions that set the mode of sliding, Zheng and Rice (1998)
modes.

21

considered the special case of identical material properties on both sides of the slip surface.
Speciﬁcally, Zheng and Rice (1998) considered elastic half-spaces that are subject to a
uniform shear stress τ b
0 outside a perturbed region where slip nucleates. The criterion
delineating between crack-like and pulse-like sliding involves the magnitude of τ b
0 , the
elastic moduli and shear wave speed of the half-spaces, the sliding speed and the sliding
speed dependence of the interface friction law. The criterion of Zheng and Rice (1998)
predicts that low values of τ b
0 favor pulse-like sliding and higher values crack-like sliding.
The circumstances considered here are quite diﬀerent from those in Zheng and Rice
(1998). In particular, it is important to note that the parameters in Fig. 19 are the initial
compressive stress and the impact velocity. In this parameter space, a clear demarcation
is found between the regime where the crack-like and pulse-like modes occur; a low initial
compressive stress and/or a low impact velocity favor the crack-like mode.

The experiments and calculations exhibit a variety of common features including:

(i) Direct calculation from the time history of the position of the sliding tip and Mach
σ2 indicate that the sliding tip travels at a speed greater

lines in the contours of σ1
than √2cs and that a trailing pulse travels faster than cl.

−

(ii) The fringe patterns in front of the sliding region have similar characteristic shapes.

(iii) Crack-like sliding occurs at low impact velocities and a sliding mode with a pulse is

obtained at higher impact velocities.

(iv) Two shock waves eventually merge into a single shock wave as the trailing shock
catches up to the leading one. The tip of the trailing pulse travels at a speed
exceeding cl.

The calculations exhibit two sliding modes with two approaching shock waves. One
involves trailing pulses traveling faster than the leading pulse that eventually coalesce to
form one sliding region (Figs. 15 and 16). The other involves a steepening and narrowing
pulse followed by a crack-like sliding region (Figs. 17 and 18).

There is some evidence in other contexts regarding the range of sliding modes that
emerge from our calculations, more speciﬁcally regarding the pulse and pulse train modes
of frictional sliding. Rubio and Galiano (1994) carried out experiments on sheared gels
sliding along smooth glass surfaces and observed sliding via propagation of a quasi-periodic
pattern of sliding zones of ﬁnite width separated by non-moving regions, having a propaga-
tion speed of the order of cl of the gel. This is consistent with our observations of relative
speeds of pulse propagation that are three order of magnitude higher than the imposed
impact velocities. The experiments of Rubio and Galiano (1994) motivated an analysis
by Caroli (2000) of sliding of a viscoelastic solid on a rigid substrate with a rate and state
friction law that showed a pulse train. Sliding between a rectangular Polyurethane slab
and a compressed Araldite plate was studied experimentally by Mouwakeh et al. (1991).

22

The velocity measured at a ﬁxed spatial point was strongly oscillatory. Also, the mea-
sured traction exhibited oscillations. The traction versus time curve in Mouwakeh et al.
(1991) resembles one of the oscillatory curve in Fig. 21c. The velocity versus time curve is
qualitatively similar to the intermediate curves in Fig. 21b. However it is unclear whether
∆ ˙uslip or ∆ ˙us is plotted in Mouwakeh et al. (1991, Fig. 5a).

Fiber pull-out experiments exhibit a variety of complex frictional phenomena, e.g.
Tsai and Kim (1996) and Li et al. (2002). In particular, Tsai and Kim (1996) observed
three frictional sliding modes: steady sliding of the entire contact surface, stick-slip sliding
of the entire contact surface, and sliding through the generation of concentrated sliding
pulses. In one set of experiments, with sliding along the entire contact surface, the pull-
out force was steady for a low interface pressure and was oscillatory for a high interface
pressure, analogous to the behavior in our calculations where a crack-like sliding mode
occurs for low values of Σ0 and a pulse-like mode for high values of Σ0. However, Tsai
and Kim (1996) found that the oscillation amplitude decreased with increasing pull-out
speed. This trend, also found in Baumberger et al. (1994) and Povirk and Needleman
(1993), under quasi-static loading conditions, is opposite to what occurs in our analyses
under dynamic loading conditions.

Brune et al.

(1993) and Anooshehpoor and Brune (1994) observed two modes of
sliding along the interface between identical foam rubber blocks; one involving wrinkle-
like waves and the other a crack-like sliding mode. Characteristics of the wrinkle-like wave
mode in these experiments are similar to those obtained for slip-pulses in our calculations;
for example, an increasing normal component of particle motion with increasing normal
stress which is analogous to the slip pulse amplitude increasing with Σ0 in our calculations.
Interestingly, it was found that the frictional heating did not change with shear stress in
the wrinkle-like wave mode whereas it increased linearly with shear stress in the crack-like
mode (see also Andrews and Ben-Zion, 1997, Fig. 12). In experiments on sliding of two
dissimilar blocks of foam rubber, Anooshehpoor and Brune (1999) observed that sliding
occurred through a series of multiple opening pulses. They also found that the sharpness
and the amplitude of the pulses either increased or decreased with time and was not steady.
Such opening pulses, often referred to as Schallamach (1971) waves, have been observed
experimentally in various bimaterial systems (e.g. Schallamach, 1971; Anooshehpoor and
Brune, 1999) and in simulations (Coker et al., 2003). There is evidence for slip pulses, on
which attention is focused here, in the experiments of Mouwakeh et al. (1991) and Tsai
and Kim (1996).

Figure 14 shows that the displacement distribution from a pulse train slip mode and
from a crack-like slip mode are quite similar. This might be the reason that there is
ample experimental evidence of slip pulses in soft materials such as gels, whereas there
is no conclusive experimental evidence for slip pulses in engineering materials where the
displacement magnitudes are very small compared to those in soft materials. However,
the shear traction distribution along the interface in Fig. 14 does provide an indicator of
the slip-mode. The variation of the shear resistance and the step increase in displacement

23

in Fig. 14 is similar to the response seen in rock friction experiments (Tullis, 1996) and in
ﬁber pull-out experiments (Tsai and Kim, 1996). Since the resulting slip from a train of
pulses is hard to distinguish from that occurring with the crack-like slip mode, our results
suggest the possibility that slip pulses may be more common than previously appreciated.
It remains to be determined whether there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the heat
generation associated with the pulse-train mode and that associated with the crack-like
mode.

6 Conclusions

Frictional sliding between two Homalite plates subject to a compressive stress was investi-
gated both experimentally and computationally. Sliding under shear loading was induced
by impacting one plate parallel to the interface. The experiments yield information on
the sliding speed and the stress state in the material using dynamic photoelasticity. A
plane stress initial/boundary value problem is analyzed using a framework where sliding
is modeled by a rate- and state-dependent frictional interface constitutive relation.

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

The experiments exhibit both pulse-like and crack-like modes of sliding.

In the experiments, the speed of the leading pulse or the leading edge of the crack-
like sliding region ranges from somewhat above √2cs to cl. This propagation speed
increases with increasing impact velocity and decreasing compressive stress. A speed
exceeding cl was seen for a trailing pulse.

A variety of frictional sliding modes were obtained in the calculations, depending
on the initial compressive stress, the impact velocity and the interface characteriza-
tion: a crack-like mode; a pulse-like mode with well-separated pulses that increase
in amplitude; and a train of pulses that propagate with an essentially constant am-
plitude. In addition, combinations of these modes occurred as well as transitions
between modes. This variety of sliding modes emerges even though there is no
elastic mismatch across the interface.

The slip resulting from the pulse-train mode and that resulting from the crack-like
mode are hard to distinguish.

In all calculations the speed of the leading pulse or the leading edge of the crack-
like sliding region exceeds √2cs and is close to (or slightly exceeds) cl. As in the
experiments, trailing pulses with a speed exceeding cl are found.

The elasticity of the interface plays a signiﬁcant role in setting the mode of sliding.

The range of sliding modes obtained appear to be generic, arising in a wide variety
of conﬁgurations and applications, and at a wide variety of size scales.

24

Acknowledgments

DC and AN are pleased to acknowledge support from the Oﬃce of Naval support from the
Research through grant N00014-97-1-0179 and from the General Motors Cooperative Research
Laboratory at Brown University. GL and AJR are grateful for support from the Oﬃce of Naval
Research through grant N00014-02-1-0522. We are indebted to Professor J.R. Rice of Harvard
University and to Professors K.S. Kim and T.E. Tullis of Brown University for stimulating
comments and insightful suggestions during the course of this work.

References

Abraham, F.F., 2001. The atomic dynamics of fracture. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 49, 2095-2111.

Abraham, F.F., Gao, H.J., 2000. How fast can cracks propagate? Phys. Rev. Lett., 84,
3113-3116.

Adams, G.G., 1995. Self-excited oscillations of two elastic half-spaces sliding with a constant
coeﬃcient of friction. J. Appl. Mech., 62, 867-872.

Adda-Bedia, M., Ben Amar, M., 2003. Self- sustained slip pulses of ﬁnite size between dissimilar
materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 51, 1849-1861.

Andrews, D.J., 1976. Rupture velocity of plain strain shear cracks. J. Geophys. Res., 81,
5679-5687.

Andrews, D.J., Ben-Zion, Y., 1997. Wrinkle-like slip pulse on a fault between diﬀerent materials.
J. Geophys. Res., 102, 553-571.

Anooshehpoor, A., Brune, J.N.,1994. Frictional heat-generation and seismic radiation in a foam
rubber model of earthquakes. Pure Appl. Geophys., 142, 735-747.

Anooshehpoor, A., Brune, J.N., 1999. Wrinkle-like Weertman pulse at the interface between
two blocks of foam rubber with diﬀerent velocities. Geophys. Res. Letts., 26, 2025-2028.

Archuleta, R.J., 1984. A faulting model for the 1979 Imperial Valley earthquake. J. Geophys.
Res., 89, 4559-4585.

Barquins, M., Courtel, R. 1975. Rubber friction and rheology of viscoelastic contact. Wear, 32,
133-150.

Baumberger, T., Heslot, F., Perrin, B., 1994. Crossover from creep to inertial motion in friction
dynamics. Nature, 367, 544-547.

Beeler, N.M., Tullis, T.E., 1996. Self-healing slip pulses in dynamic rupture models due to
velocity-dependent strength. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Amer., 86, 1130-1148.

Belytschko, T., Chiapetta, R.L., Bartel, H.D., 1976. Eﬃcient large scale non-linear transient
analysis by ﬁnite elements. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engr., 10, 579-596.
Ben-Zion, Y., 2001. Dynamic ruptures in recent models of earthquake faults. J. Mech. Phys.
Solids, 49, 2209-2244.

Ben-Zion, Y., Andrews, D.J., 1998. Properties and implications of dynamic rupture along a
material interface. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Amer., 88, 1085-1094.

25

Ben-Zion, Y., Huang, Y., 2002. Dynamic rupture on an interface between a compliant fault
zone layer and a stiﬀer surrounding solid. J. Geophys. Res., 107, B2 article no 2042.

Ben-Zion, Y., Rice, J. R. 1997. Dynamics simulations of slip on a smooth fault in an elastic
solid. J. Geophys. Res., 102, 17,771-17,1784.

Bizzarri, A., Cocco, M., Andrews, D.J., Boschi, E., 2001. Solving the dynamic rupture problem
with diﬀerent numerical approaches and constitutive laws. Geophys. J. Int., 144, 656-678.

Bouchon, M., Bouin, M.P., Karabulut, H., Toks¨oz, M.N., Dietrich, M., Rosakis, A.J., 2001. How
fast is rupture during an earthquake? New sights from the 1999 Turkey earthquakes. Geophys.
Res. Lett., 28, 2723-2726.

Bouchon, M., Vallee, M., 2003. Observation of long supershear rupture during the magnitude
8.1 Kunlunshan earthquake. Science, 301, 824-826.

Broberg, K.B., 1995. Intersonic mode II crack expansion. Arch. Mech., 47, 859-871.

Broberg, K.B., 1996. How fast can a crack go? Mater. Sci., 32, 80-86.
Broberg, K.B., 1999. Cracks and fracture. Academic Press, London.
Brune, J.N., Brown, S., Johnson P.A., 1993. Rupture mechanism and interface separation in
foam rubber models of earthquakes - a possible solution to the heat-ﬂow paradox and the paradox
of large overthrusts. Tectonophys., 218, 59-67.

Caroli, C., 2000. Slip pulses at a sheared frictional viscoelastic/nondeformable interface. Phys.
Rew. E 62, 1729-1737.

Cochard, A., Madariaga, R., 1994. Dynamic Faulting under Rate-Dependent Friction. Pure
Appl. Geophys., 142, 419-445.

Cochard, A., Madariaga, R., 1996. Complexity of seismicity due to highly rate-dependent
friction. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 101, 25321-25336.

Cochard, A., Rice, J.R., 2000. Fault rupture between dissimilar materials: Ill-posedness, regu-
larization, and slip-pulse response. J. Geophys. Res., 105, 25891-25907.

Coker, D., Rosakis, A.J., 2001. Experimental observations of intersonic crack growth in asym-
metrically loaded unidirectional composite plates. Phil. Mag. A, 81, 571-595.

Coker, D., Rosakis, A.J., Needleman, A., 2003. Dynamic crack growth along a polymer composite-
homalite interface. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 51, 425-460.

Dieterich, J.H., 1979. Modeling of rock friction 1. Experimental results and constitutive equa-
tions. J. Geophys. Res. 84, 2161-2168.

Dunham, E. M., Favreau, P., Carlson, J.M., 2003. A supershear transition mechanism for cracks.
Science, 299, 1557-1559.
Freund, L.B., 1998. Dynamic fracture mechanics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Gao, H.J., Huang, Y., Abraham, F.F., 2001. Continuum and atomistic studies of intersonic
crack propagation. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 49, 2113-2132.

Gu, J.-C., Rice, J.R., Ruina, A.L., Tse, S. T., 1984. Slip motion and stability of a single degree
of freedom elastic system with rate and state dependent friction. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 32,
167-196.

26

Gu, Y.J., Wong, T.F., 1991. Eﬀects of loading velocity, stiﬀness, and inertia on the dynamics
of a single degree of freedom spring-slider system. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 21677-21691.

Gu, Y.J., Wong, T.F., 1994. Development of shear localization in simulated quartz gouge - eﬀect
of cumulative slip and gouge particle-size. Pure Appl. Geophys., 143, 387-423.

Hao, S., Wing, K.L., Klein, P.A., Rosakis, A.J., 2004. Modeling and simulation of intersonic
crack growth. Int. J. Solids Struct., 41, 1773-1799.

Heaton, T.H., 1990. Evidence for and implications of self-healing pulses of slip in earthquake
rupture. Phys. Earth Planet In., 64, 1-20.

Hernandez, B., Cotton, F., Campillo, M., 1999. Contribution of Radar interferometry to a two-
step inversion of the kinematic process of the 1992 Landers earthquake. J. Geophys. Res., 104,
13083-13099.

Krieg, R.O., Key, S.W., 1973. Transient shell response by numerical time integration. Int. J.
Numer. Meths. Engrg., 7, 273-286.

Li, Z., Bi, X., Lambros, J., Geubelle, P.H., 2002. Dynamic ﬁber debonding and frictional push-
out in model composite systems: Experimental observations. Exp. Mech., 42, 417-425.

Lin, A., Guo, J., Zeng, Q., Dang, G., He, W., Zhao, Y., 2002. Co-Seismic strike-slip and rupture
length produced by the 2001 Ms 8.1 central Kunlun earthquake. Science, 296, 2015-2017.

Linker, M.F., Dieterich, J.H., 1992. Eﬀects of variable normal stress on rock friction: Observa-
tions and constitutive equations. J. Geophys. Res. 97, 4923-4940.

Lykotraﬁtis, G., Coker, D., Rosakis, A.J., Needleman, A., 2004. in preparation.

Madariaga, R., Olsen, K.B., 2000. Criticality of rupture dynamics in 3-D. Pure Appl. Geophys.,
157, 1981-2001.

Mouwakeh, M., Villechaise, B., Godet, M., 1991. Quantitative study of interface sliding phe-
nomena in a two-body contact. Eur. J. Mech. A/Solids 10, 545-555.

Needleman, A., 1999. An analysis of intersonic crack growth under shear loading. J. Appl.
Mech., 66, 847-857.

Nielsen, S., Madariaga, R., 2003. On the self-healing fracture mode. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Amer.,
93, 2375-2388.

Olsen, K.B., Madariaga, R., Archuleta, R. J., 1997. Three-dimensional dynamic simulation of
the 1992 Landers earthquake. Science, 278, 834-838.

Peirce, D., Shih, C.F., Needleman, A., 1984. A tangent modulus method for rate dependent
solids. Comp. Struct., 18, 875-887.

Perrin, G., Rice, J.R., Zheng, G., 1995. Self-healing slip pulse on a frictional surface. J. Mech.
Phys. Solids, 43, 1461-1495.

Povirk, G.L., Needleman, A., 1993. Finite element simulations of ﬁber pull-out. J. Eng. Mat.
Tech. 115, 286-291.

Prakash, V., Clifton, R.J., 1993. Pressure-shear plate impact measurement of dynamic friction
for high speed machining applications. Proc. 7th Int. Congress on Exp. Mech., Society of
Experimental Mechanics, Bethel, CT, pp. 556-564.

27

Prakash, V., 1998. Frictional response of sliding interfaces subjected to time varying normal
pressures. J. Tribol., 120, 97-102.

Ranjith, K., Rice, J.R., 2001. Slip dynamics at an interface between dissimilar materials, J.
Mech. Phys. Solids, 49, 341-361.

Ill-posedness at the boundary for elastic solids sliding under Coulomb

Renardy, M., 1992.
friction. J. Elast., 27, 281-287.

Rice, J.R., 2001. New perspectives on crack and fault dynamics. In: H. Aref and J. W. Philips
(Eds.), Mechanics for a New Millennium. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1-24.

Rice, J.R., Ben-Zion, Y., 1996. Slip complexity in earthquake fault models. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, 93, 3811-3818.

Rice, J.R., Lapusta, N., Ranjith, K., 2001. Rate- and state-dependent friction and the stability
of sliding between elastically deformable solids, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 49, 1865-1898.

Rice, J.R., Ruina, A.L., 1983. Stability of frictional sliding. J. Appl. Mech., 50, 343-349.

Rosakis, A.J., 2002. Intersonic shear cracks and fault ruptures. Adv. Phys., 51, No. 4, 1189-
1257.

Rosakis, A.J., Samudrala, O., Coker, D., 1999. Cracks faster than the shear wave speed. Science,
284, 1337-1340.

Rosakis, A.J., Samudrala, O., Coker, D., 2000. Intersonic shear crack growth along weak planes.
Mat. Res. Innov., 3, 236-243.

Rubio, M.A., Galeano, J., 1994. Stick-slip dynamics in the relaxation of stresses in a continuous
elastic medium. Phys. Rev. E, 50, 1000-1004.

Ruina, A.L., 1983. Slip instability and state variable friction laws. J. Geophys. Res., 88,
10359-10370.

Samudrala, O., Huang Y., Rosakis, A.J., 2002. Subsonic and intersonic shear rupture of weak
planes with a velocity weakening cohesive zone. J. Geophys. Res., 107, B8 article no. 2170.

Schallamach, A., 1971. How does rubber slide? Wear, 17, 301-312.

Tsai, K.-H., Kim, K.-S., 1996. The micromechanics of ﬁber pull-out. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 44,
1147-1177.

Tullis, T.E., 1996. Rock friction and its implications for earthquake prediction examined via
models of Parkﬁeld earthquakes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 93, 3803-3810.

Xia, K., Rosakis, A.J., Kanamori, H., 2004. Laboratory earthquakes: The sub-Rayleigh-to-
supershear rupture transition. Science, 303, 1859-1861.

Zheng, G., Rice, J.R., 1998. Conditions under which velocity-weakening friction allows a self-
healing versus a crack-like mode of rupture, Bull. Seismol. Soc. America, 88, 1466-1483.

28

Appendix: Time integration of the friction law

The equations are integrated in time using of a rate tangent method (Peirce et al., 1984) and
automatic time step control. The sliding velocity, ∆ ˙uslip, in the interval [t, t + dt], is expressed
as a linear combination of its values at t and t + dt via

∆ ˙uslip = (1

γ)∆ ˙uslip(t) + γ∆ ˙uslip(t + dt)

(21)

−

where γ is a chosen integration parameter that can range in value from 0 to 1.

A ﬁrst order expansion of ∆ ˙uslip in terms of Ts, θ1, θ2, and θ0 gives

∆ ˙uslip(t + dt) = ∆ ˙uslip(t) + dt

∂∆ ˙uslip
Ts|
|
where all derivatives are evaluated at t.
Combining (22) with (7) gives

 

∂

sgn(Ts) ˙Ts +

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ0

˙θ0 +

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ1

˙θ1 +

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ2

˙θ2

!

(22)

with

and

Here,

˙Rp = C tan

s

sgn(Ts)

∆ ˙un

slip + γdt

 

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ0

˙θ0 +

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ1

˙θ1 +

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ2

˙θ2

!

The partial derivatives in eq. (25) are

where g(θ0) and β are given by eqs. (14) and (17), and

(µs −

µd)

∂g
∂θ0

=

p

p
θ0 (cid:18)

L0
V1θ0 (cid:19)

Q1/m

exp

(cid:20)− (cid:18)

p

L0
V1θ0 (cid:19)

+ µ∗ L0

(cid:21)

mV0θ2
0

1
Q1/m+1

˙Ts = C tan

s ∆ ˙us −

˙Rp,

C tan

s =

Cs
1 + γdt ∂∆ ˙uslip

∂|Ts| Cs

∂

∂∆ ˙uslip
Ts|
|
∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ0
∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ2

=

−
= −

mV0βm−1
Tng(θ0)
mV0βm
g(θ0)
mV0βm
(θ1 + θ2)

−

=

∂g
∂θ0

∂∆ ˙uslip
∂θ1

=

+ 1

Q =

L0
V0θ
µ∗ = µd + (µs −

µd) exp

L0
V1θ

p

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)− (cid:18)

29

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

The integral along the interface in eq. (1) is written as the sum over linear displacement
interface elements. All ﬁeld quantities and constitutive state variables are known at time t.
Also, the values of ∆ ˙un and ∆ ˙us have been determined from solving eq. (8). Thus, ∆un and
∆us are know at time t + dt. Then, at a given integration point along the interface:

1. Calculate ∆ ˙us = [∆us(t + dt)

∆us(t)]/dt and ∆ ˙un = [∆un(t + dt)

∆un(t)]/dt.

−

−

2. If ∆un(t + dt) > Σ0/Cn then set Tn = Ts = 0 and go to the next integration point.

3. Using the values for the state variables at time t, calculate g(θ0).

4. Compute

β =

Ts|
|
g(θ0)(θ1 + θ2)

.

5. If β < 1 then ∆ ˙uslip = 0. Go to 7.

6. If β > 1 calculate C tan

s

and ˙Rp in eq. (23).

7. Update the tractions and state variables via

T k+1
n
T k+1
s
θk+1
i

= T k
= T k
= θk

n + ˙Tndt
s + ˙Tsdt
i + ˙θidt, i = 0, 1, 2

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

30

Property
µs
µd
V0 (m/s)
V1 (m/s)
B
p
m
L0 (m)
L1 (m)
L2 (m)
C (MPa−1)
D (MPa−1)

Value
0.6
0.5
100
26
4.60
1.2
5
20
20
20
0.7
0.3

×
×
×

10−6
10−6
10−6

Table 1: Friction parameter values used in the ﬁnite element calculations.

Σ

o

x2

b

Vimp(t)

Σ

o

(a)

x1

w

2l

Figure 1: (a) Geometry and loading conﬁguration used in the plane stress ﬁnite element
(b) The ﬁnite element mesh used in the calculations (56, 580 degrees of
calculations.
freedom).

s
s

µ

0.55

0.65

0.6

0.5

0.45

0

0.65

0.6

n

T

/

T

s

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0

 

(a) 

6

(b) 

5

10

15

20

25

30

40

35
. 
∆u
slip

 (m/s)

   10 m/s                     100 m/s                         30 m/s 

2

4

8

12

10
∆u

/L
0

slip

Figure 2: (a) Comparison of the steady-state coeﬃcient of friction, µss, as a function of
∆ ˙uslip for eq. (19) (dashed line) and for eq. (16) using the properties in Table 1 (solid
line). (b) The eﬀect of an abrupt change in ∆ ˙uslip on the apparent coeﬃcient of friction
Ts/Tn for the rate- and state-dependent friction relation used in the calculations.

)
a
P
M

(
 

T
 
r
o
 

T

s

n

2

4

3

1

0

0

 
T
n

 
T
s

2

4

8

10

12

6

∆u

/L
0

slip

Figure 3: Variation of the shear traction, Ts, (solid line) as a function of ∆uslip for a step
jump in compressive normal traction, Tn, (dashed line) at constant frictional sliding rate
∆ ˙uslip for the rate- and state-dependent friction relation used in the calculations.

Figure 4: Experimental isochromatic fringe patterns from a dynamic friction experiment
on Homalite subject to a static compressive stress of 9.4 MPa and an impact velocity of
32.7 m/s. In the inset lines are drawn to highlight Mach lines. The ﬁeld of view is 130
mm in diameter.

Figure 5: Experimental isochromatic fringe patterns from a dynamic friction experiment
on Homalite subject to a static compressive stress of 9.4 MPa and impact velocity of 42
m/s, at (a) t = 40µs, (b)t = 48µs, (c)t = 60µs. In the inset a line or lines are drawn to
highlight Mach lines. The ﬁeld of view is 130 mm in diameter.

3

2

1

)
s
/
m
k
(

i
t

p
V

√2 cs

cl

cs

Case I
Case II
Case III
Case IV
Case V
Experiment - 1st Mach Line
Experiment - 2nd Mach line

0

0

10

20

40
30
t (µs)

50

60

70

Figure 6: Propagation speeds, Vrupt, versus time for the ﬁve cases analyzed. The symbols
are the experimentally measured propagation speeds from the Mach cone angle with
Σ0 = 9.4 MPa and Vimp = 42 m/s (Fig. 5).

)

m
m

(

2
x

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

80
70
x1 (mm)

C

A

50 mm

B

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Isochromatic fringe pattern due to symmetric loading with respect to the in-
terface. (a) Numerical contours at t = 16 µs for Σ0 = 10 MPa, Vimp = 5 m/s, with the
conﬁguration analyzed shown in the inset, (b) Experimental isochromatic fringe patterns
for Σ0 = 0 MPa, Vimp = 58 m/s. In (b) the ﬁeld of view is 130 mm in diameter.

)
s
/
m

(

.
s
u
∆

10

5

0

-5

-10

0.01

0.005

0

)
a
P
M

(

s

T
d

-0.005

0

10

20

50

60

70

40
30
x1 (mm)
(b)

Figure 8: Distributions along a portion of the interface for Case I – Σ0 = 6 MPa, Vimp = 2
m/s. (a) The frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip, and the shear traction, Ts at t = 22 µs and at
t = 32 µs. The symbols mark values at integration points along the interface to illustrate
the resolution of the discretization. (b) The shear traction increment, dTs = ˙Tsdt, and
the velocity jump across the interface, ∆ ˙us, at t = 32 µs.

Figure 9: Contours of σ1

σ2 (isochromatic fringe patterns) at t = 32 µs for Case I.

−

)
s
/
m

(

.
s
u
∆

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

0

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

-0.01

-0.02

)
a
P
M

(

s

T
d

-0.03

30

10

20

x1 (mm)

(b)

Figure 10: Distributions along a portion of the interface for Case II – Σ0 = 30 MPa,
Vimp = 2 m/s.
(a) The frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip, and the shear traction, Ts at
t = 32 µs and at t = 34 µs. The symbols mark values at integration points along
(b) The shear traction
the interface to illustrate the resolution of the discretization.
increment, dTs = ˙Tsdt, and the velocity jump across the interface, ∆ ˙us, at t = 34 µs.

Figure 11: Contours of σ1

σ2 (isochromatic fringe patterns) at t = 34 µs for Case II.

−

32 µs
33 µs

30

40

50

(a)

-10

60
x1 (mm)

10

5

0

-5

)
a
P
M

(

s

T

0.02

0.01

)
a
P
M

(

s

T
d

0

250

200

150

100

)
s
/
m

(

p

i
l

.
s
u
∆

50

0

40

30

20

10

0

)
s
/
m

(

s
.
u
∆

-10

30

40

50

-0.01

60
x1 (mm)

(b)

Figure 12: Distributions along a portion of the interface for Case III – Σ0 = 10 MPa,
Vimp = 20 m/s. (a) The frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip, and the shear traction, Ts at t = 32
µs and at t = 33 µs. (b) The shear traction increment, dTs = ˙Tsdt, and the velocity jump
across the interface, ∆ ˙us, at t = 32 µs.

Figure 13: Contours of σ1

σ2 (isochromatic fringe patterns) at t = 32 µs for Case III.

−

∆uslip
∆us
Ts

-0.1

0

10

20

40

30

(a)

50

60
x1 (mm)

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

)

m
m

(

p

i
l

s
u
∆
d
n
a
s
u
∆

)

m
m

(

p

i
l

s
u
∆
d
n
a
s
u
∆

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

)
a
P
M

(

s

T

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

)
a
P
M

(

s

T

∆uslip
∆us
Ts

-0.1

0

10

20

30

40

50

60
x1 (mm)

(b)

∆ ˙uslipdt, the
Figure 14: Distributions of the accumulated frictional sliding, ∆uslip =
displacement jump across the interface, ∆us and the apparent coeﬃcient of friction, µapp =
Ts/Tn, across the interface. (a) Case I – Σ0 = 6 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s. (b) Case III – Σ0 = 10
MPa, Vimp = 20 m/s.

R

0

0

100

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

100

)
s
/
m

(

p

i
l

.
s
u
∆

)
s
/
m

(

p

i
l

.
s
u
∆

)
s
/
m

(

p

i
l

.
s
u
∆

20

40

(a)

60
x1 (mm)

20

40

(b)

60
x1 (mm)

0

0

20

40

(c)

60
x1 (mm)

Figure 15: Distribution of the frictional sliding rate, ∆ ˙uslip for Case IV – Σ0 = 0.9 MPa,
Vimp = 10 m/s. Also, for Case IV Cn = 0.03 MPa/m and Cs = 0.01 MPa/m. (a) t = 22
µs. (b) t = 32 µs. (c) t = 48 µs.

σ2 (isochromatic fringe patterns) for Case IV. The contour
Figure 16: Contours of σ1
lines are drawn to focus on details of the distribution for x2 > 0. (a) t = 22 µs. (b) t = 32
µs. (c) t = 48 µs. The inset in (b) indicates the Mach line orientations.

−

)
s
/
m

(

p

i
l

.
s
u
∆

32 µs

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

0

44 µs

38 µs

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

)
a
P
M

(

s

T

10

20

30

40

50

60

x1 (mm)

Figure 17: Distribution of ∆ ˙uslip at t = 32 µs, t = 38 µs and t = 44 µs and Ts at t = 44
µs along a portion of the interface for Case V – Σ0 = 40 MPa, Vimp = 2 m/s.

)

m
m

(

2
x

)

m
m

(

2
x

)

m
m

(

2
x

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

20
18
x1 (mm)

(a)

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

40
38
x1 (mm)

(b)

40

42

44

46

48

50

52

54

56

60
58
x1 (mm)

(c)

Figure 18: Contours of σ1
σ2 (isochromatic fringe patterns) for Case V. (a) t = 32 µs.
(b) t = 38 µs. (c) t = 44.6 µs. The dark lines indicate the location and width of the
pulses in ∆ ˙uslip in Fig. 17.

−

Crack-like mode
Growing pulse
Pulse train
Transition: crack and pulse

B

50

40

30

)
a
P
M

(

O

Σ

20

10

A

0

0

10

30

20
Vimp (m/s)

40

50

Figure 19: Dependence of the mode of sliding on the initial compressive stress Σ0 and the
impact velocity Vimp. Transition cases where mixed crack-like mode and pulse-like modes
occur are shown as triangles.

Figure 20: Eﬀect of varying impact velocity, Vimp, on the frictional sliding mode for Σ0
ﬁxed at 10 MPa. (a) ∆ ˙us, (b) ∆ ˙uslip, (c) Ts and µapp = Ts/Tn.

Figure 21: Eﬀect of varying initial compressive stress, Σ0, on the frictional sliding mode
for Vimp ﬁxed at 2 m/s. (a) ∆ ˙us, (b) ∆ ˙uslip, (c) Ts and µapp = Ts/Tn.

