4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

PostScript ﬁle created: September 19, 2012

Importance of small earthquakes for stress transfers and
earthquake triggering
Agn`es Helmstetter1, Yan Y. Kagan2 and David D. Jackson2
1 Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1567
2 Department of Earth and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1567

Abstract. We estimate the relative importance of small and large earthquakes for static
stress changes and for earthquake triggering, assuming that earthquakes are triggered
by static stress changes and that earthquakes are located on a fractal network of dimen-
sion D. This model predicts that both the number of events triggered by an earthquake
of magnitude m and the stress change induced by this earthquake at the location of other
earthquakes increase with m as ∼ 10Dm/2. The stronger the spatial clustering, the larger
the inﬂuence of small earthquakes on stress changes at the location of a future event as
well as earthquake triggering. If earthquake magnitudes follow the Gutenberg-Richter law
with b > D/2, small earthquakes collectively dominate stress transfer and earthquake
triggering, because their greater frequency overcomes their smaller individual triggering
potential. Using a Southern-California catalog, we observe that the rate of seismicity trig-
gered by an earthquake of magnitude m increases with m as 10αm, where α = 1.00 ±
0.05. We also ﬁnd that the magnitude distribution of triggered earthquakes is indepen-
dent of the triggering earthquake’s magnitude m. When α ≈ b, small earthquakes are
roughly as important to earthquake triggering as larger ones. We evaluate the fractal cor-
relation dimension D of hypocenters using two relocated catalogs for Southern Califor-
nia. The value of D measured for distances 0.1 < r < 5 km is D = 1.54 for the Shearer
et al. [2003] catalog and D = 1.73 for the Hauksson et al. [2003] catalog. The value of
D reﬂects both the structure of the fault network and the nature of earthquake inter-
actions. By considering only those earthquake pairs with inter-event times larger than
1000 days, we can largely remove the eﬀects of short-term clustering. Then D ≈ 2, close
to the value D = 2α = 2 predicted by assuming that earthquake triggering is due to
static stress. The value D = 2b implies that small earthquakes are as important as larger
ones for stress transfers between earthquakes, and that considering stress changes induced
by small earthquakes should improve models of earthquake interactions.

1. Introduction

Large shallow earthquakes are followed by increased seis-
mic activity known as “aftershocks”. Aftershock sequences
of small earthquakes are less obvious because the aftershock
productivity is weaker, but can be observed after stack-
ing many sequences [Helmstetter, 2003]. Several mecha-
nisms have been proposed to explain earthquake triggering
due to the static stress change induced by a prior event:
rate-and-state friction [Dieterich, 1994], sub-critical crack
growth [Das and Scholz, 1981; Shaw, 1993], viscous relax-
ation [Mikumo and Miyatake, 1979], static fatigue [Scholz,
1968], pore ﬂuid ﬂow [Nur and Booker, 1972], or simple sand-
pile SOC models [Hergarten and Neugebauer, 2002]. Ka-
gan and Knopoﬀ [1987a] proposed that random, Brownian
motion- like stress ﬂuctuations cause Omori-law aftershock
rate decay. Coulomb stress change calculations have been
used to predict the locations, focal mechanisms and times
of future earthquakes (see a review [Stein, 1999]). Because
large earthquakes modify stress over a much larger area
than smaller ones, and because computing Coulomb stress
changes requires a good model of slip distribution available
only for large earthquakes, most studies have neglected the
inﬂuence of “small” earthquakes. Most researchers include
only the mainshock and its largest foreshock or aftershock

Copyright 2012 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/12/$9.00

1

to predict the location of future aftershocks. The success
of this approach is signiﬁcant but limited. Only about 60%
of aftershocks are located where the stress increased after
a mainshock [Parsons, 2002]; stress shadows (decrease of
the seismicity rate where Coulomb stress change is nega-
tive) are seldom or never observed [Marsan, 2003; Felzer et
al., 2003b]; and the correlation of Coulomb stress change
with aftershock locations is rather sensitive to the assumed
slip distribution [Steacy et al., 2004]. Coulomb stress change
from the MW 7.3 Landers earthquake does not explain the
triggering of the MW 7.1 Hector-Mine earthquake [Harris
and Simpson, 2002] which occurred 7 years after Landers
and 20 km away. Several alternative models have been pro-
posed to explain this triggering: viscoelastic eﬀects [Zeng,
2001], dynamic triggering [Kilb, 2003], or secondary after-
shocks [Felzer et al., 2002]. Felzer et al. [2002] suggested
that Hector-Mine may have been triggered indirectly by an
aftershock of Landers, i.e., secondary aftershocks and small
earthquakes may be important for stress triggering.

A few studies have estimated the scaling of the after-
shock number with the mainshock magnitude [Solov’ev and
Solov’eva, 1962; Papazachos et al., 1967; Utsu, 1969; Singh
and Suarez, 1988; Yamanaka and Shimazaki, 1990; Davis
and Frohlich, 1991; Molchan and Dmitrieva, 1992; Shaw,
1993; Drakatos and Latoussaki, 2001]. In these studies, the
“mainshock” was deﬁned as the largest event of a sequence,
and “aftershocks” were then selected in a space-time win-
dow around the mainshock. These studies proposed that
the number of aftershocks increases exponentially ∼ 10αm
with the mainshock magnitude m, with an exponent α in

X - 2 HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

the range [0.65, 1]. Other researchers [Jones et al., 1995;
Michael and Jones, 1998; Helmstetter, 2003; Felzer et al.;
2004] later suggested that the same mechanisms may ex-
plain two kinds of triggering: that of aftershocks by a pre-
vious larger earthquake and that of a large earthquake by a
previous smaller one. Indeed, the distribution of times be-
tween an earthquake (“foreshock”) and a subsequent larger
earthquake follows the Omori law as for usual aftershocks
[Jones and Molnar, 1979], and the magnitude of triggered
earthquakes is independent of that for the triggering event
[Helmstetter, 2003]. In the work of Helmstetter [2003] and
Felzer et al. [2004], “aftershocks” were selected as earth-
quakes occurring in a space-time window after a “main-
shock” (any earthquake not preceded by a larger one), and
could be larger than the mainshock. Using diﬀerent meth-
ods (see section 3.4), Helmstetter [2003] found α = 0.8 ± 0.1
and Felzer et al. [2004] found α = 1 for Southern California
seismicity.

Other studies measured the exponent α using a statisti-
cal model of seismicity [Ogata, 1989; Kagan, 1991b; Ogata,
1992; Console et al., 2003; Zhuang et al., 2004], which as-
sumes that any earthquake can trigger other events with a
rate which decays in time according to Omori’s law and
which increases with magnitude as ∼ 10αm. Ogata has
coined the term“ETAS” for “epidemic type aftershock se-
quence” to describe this class of models. However, these
models are now being used to describe the statistics of all
earthquakes, not just aftershocks. Here we will use the des-
ignation “ETES” for “epidemic type earthquake sequence”.
Optimizing the likelihood of the ETES model gives an esti-
mation of the model parameter α. When applied to long-
time catalogs, this method usually gives a smaller value of
α, in the range 0.5-0.7 [Console et al., 2003; Zhuang et al.,
2004], than would result by simply counting the number
of aftershocks. When applied to individual aftershock se-
quences [Guo and Ogata, 1997], this method gives from one
sequence to another a large variation of α, ranging from 0.2
to 1.9 with a mean value of 0.86.

Yamanaka and Shimazaki [1990] explained the value α =
1 observed for interplate earthquakes by assuming that after-
shocks are located on patches of the mainshock fault plane.
If the stress drop is independent of magnitude, the density
of aftershocks on the fault plane is a constant. Therefore,
the number of aftershocks is proportional to the area of the
mainshock rupture plane, i.e. α = 1. Hanks [1992] used the
same model to show that, if α is equal to the exponent b of
the Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law, small earthquakes are just
as important as larger ones in redistributing tectonic forces
on faults. Helmstetter [2003] later generalized this model
by assuming that earthquakes are located on a fractal net-
work of dimension D. This model predicts that stress trans-
fers between earthquakes and earthquake triggering scales
as ∼ 10Dm/2. Therefore, if earthquakes are very clustered
in space with D < 2b, small earthquakes will be more impor-
tant than larger ones for transferring static stress between
events and thus for earthquake triggering.

In this work we revisit the work of Helmstetter [2003]
by using a diﬀerent method to deﬁne mainshocks and af-
tershocks, and by discussing the model in more detail. We
then test the model by estimating the fractal correlation di-
mension D of earthquake hypocenters, using two relocated
catalogs for Southern California. We compare the observed
value of α with the prediction α = D/2 [Helmstetter, 2003].

2. Scaling of stress transfers and earthquake
triggering with the mainshock magnitude

We estimate the relative importance of small earthquakes
for stress transfers and for earthquake triggering. Our model
is based on the following assumptions:

• Earthquakes are triggered by static stress changes (trig-
gering from dynamic stress changes may have a diﬀerent
scaling with magnitude). We do not impose a relation be-
tween the number of aftershocks and the stress change; we
simply assume that the rate of aftershocks at point ~r at time
t after a stress change σ is a function which depends only
on t and σ. For instance, in the rate-and-state model [Di-
eterich, 1994], the instantaneous increase in seismicity rate is
proportional to exp(σ), but the total number of aftershocks
(integrating over time) is proportional to the stress change.
• A triggered earthquakes size is independent of the mag-
nitude of the triggering event (“mainshock”). The size of the
mainshock controls only the probability of triggering other
quakes. This ﬁnding is justiﬁed by [Helmstetter, 2003], who
found that the magnitude distribution of aftershocks is in-
dependent of the mainshock magnitude. This suggests that
the crust is everywhere close to failure, such that any small
earthquake, triggered by a previous small one, can grow into
an event much larger than its trigger.

• We consider earthquakes with rupture width smaller
than the thickness of the seismogenic crust, for which the
rupture length L is proportional to its width W .

0

• The rupture length scales with the seismic moment as
L(M ) ∼ M 1/d
. For earthquakes smaller than the thick-
ness of the seismogenic crust and for a constant stress drop,
d = 3. For larger earthquakes, several models have been
proposed, with d = 1, d = 2 or d = 3 (see Kagan [2004a] for
a review).

• Earthquakes are located on a fractal network of dimen-
sion D. The spatial clustering of seismicity is due both to
the geometry of the fault network and to earthquake inter-
actions. Over long time-scales, aftershocks should cover uni-
formly the active fault network, and thus should share the
spatial distribution of the non-correlated background seis-
micity. In our model, we deﬁne D as the fractal dimension
of the long-term time-independent seismicity, not including
short-term clustering due to earthquake interactions.

For a constant stress drop, the Coulomb stress change at
point ~r due to a ﬁnite dislocation of length L and width
W ∼ L depends only on the ratio r/L and the direction φ
(set of 3 angles) between the rupture plane and the fault
plane at point ~r on which we compute the stress [Kagan,
1991c]. This means that the average stress change at a dis-
tance r ∼ L from an earthquake of length L is independent
of this earthquakes magnitude. The only diﬀerence between
small and large events is that larger ones increase the stress
over a larger area. We can thus write the stress change (ten-
sor) as a function σ(r/L, φ). We ﬁrst estimate the scaling of
stress transfers between quakes as a function of the magni-
tude of the event which increases the stress. The expectation
of the norm of the stress tensor induced by an earthquake
of length L, integrating over the location of all earthquakes
is given by

σ(L) = E(||σ(r/L, φ)||) =

dφ

||σ(r/L, φ)|| pr(r)dr ,(1)

∞

Z
0

Z

where pr(r) is the time-independent density of earthquakes
at a distance r from another earthquake. For a fractal dis-
tribution,

pr(r) ∼ rD−1,

(2)

where D is the correlation dimension of earthquake hypocen-
ters. The function pr(r) in (1) describes the long-term spa-
tial distribution of seismicity, not including clustering due
to aftershocks.
Introducing (2) in (1) and using the new
variable x = r/L, we have

σ(L) = LD

dφ

σ(x, φ)pr(x)dx .

(3)

2π

∞

Z
0

Z
0

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING X - 3

The integral in (3) is now independent of the events length;
the only dependence on magnitude is in the factor LD. The
integral is convergent both in the near ﬁeld (the stress has a
r−1/2 singularity close to the crack tip which is integrable)
and in the far ﬁeld if D < 3 because σ(x) ∼ 1/x3 for x ≫ 1.
Assuming that L ∼ M 1/3
0 ∼ 100.5m (for a constant stress
drop and for L ∼ W ), we can rewrite the average stress
σ(M0) induced by an earthquake of moment M0 at the lo-
cation of another event (distributed according to pr(r)) as
[Kagan, 1994]

σ(M0) ∼ M D/3

.

0

(4)

If earthquakes are distributed uniformly in a volume (D =
3), or if we compute the integral of the stress change induced
by a quake on a volume rather than at the location of other
events, then σ(M0) ∼ M0. In other words, stress change in-
tegrated on a volume is proportional to seismic moment, and
is therefore dominated by the largest earthquakes in a cata-
log if the exponent β of the cumulative moment distribution
is β < 1 (i.e., b < 1.5 for magnitudes). In contrast, if we
compute the stress changes at the location of other quakes,
and if D ≈ 2, then the increase in the stress change with
M0 is balanced by the decreased number of events ∼ M −2/3
with seismic moment (equivalent to GR law with b = 1). In
this case D = 3β, small earthquakes are just as important
as larger ones for stress transfers between earthquakes.

0

If earthquake triggering is due to static stress changes,
the seismicity rate N (r, φ) at point (r, φ) and time t due
to the stress change can be written as a function f (σ, t) of
the stress change σ and of the time t after the stress change.
The cumulative number of earthquakes Naft(L) triggered by
an earthquake of length L in the time window [c, T ] is given
by the integral over time and space of the seismicity rate

Naft(L) =

dt

dφ

f (σ, t)pr(r)dr

T

2π

∞

Z
c

Z
0

T

Z
0

2π

∞

Z
c

Z
0

Z
0

= LD

dt

dφ

f (σ, t)pr(x)dx .

(5)

The time-independent distribution pr(r) in (5) does not in-
clude any change in seismic density due to earthquake in-
teractions. The change in the seismicity rate due do the
mainshock is modeled by the term f (σ, t). The minimum
time c is introduced to avoid the singularity of the seismic-
ity rate at time t = 0 predicted by some models of stress
triggering (e.g., in the case of the rate-and-state model [Di-
eterich, 1994] when a singularity occurs in the stress ﬁeld).
The maximum time T is needed to regularize the integral at
large times for some models which predict an Omori law de-
cay with p ≤ 1 (but we can take T = ∞ in Dieterich’s [1994]
model). As for the stress change σ(L) in (3), the number
of triggered earthquakes depends on magnitude only in the
factor LD. The scaling of aftershock productivity with the
size of the triggering earthquake is the same as for stress
transfers. For seismic moment

Naft(M0) ∼ M D/3

,

0

and for magnitude

Naft(m) ∼ 10αm with α = 0.5D .

(6)

(7)

In the next section, we measure the scaling of the aftershock
rate with the mainshock magnitude for Southern California
seismicity. We then estimate the fractal dimension D of the
spatial distribution of hypocenters in section 5 and compare
the results with the model’s prediction (7).

3. Scaling of earthquake triggering with
for
mainshock magnitude:
California seismicity

observations

We have measured the average rate of triggered earth-
quakes (“aftershocks”) following a “mainshock” in Southern
California to measure the scaling of the number of triggered
earthquakes with the triggering magnitude. We ﬁrst dis-
cuss some potential problems in analyzing aftershock prop-
erties. We describe the catalog in section 3.2. We then de-
ﬁne “mainshocks” and “aftershocks” and explain our declus-
tering procedure. We present our results on the scaling of
earthquake triggering with the magnitude of the triggering
event in section 3.4, and ﬁndings on the magnitude distri-
bution of triggered earthquakes in section 3.5

3.1. Problems with estimating aftershock properties

Several properties of aftershocks are diﬃcult, if not im-
possible, to estimate and may be very sensitive to the param-
eters of the declustering procedure. It is particularly diﬃ-
cult to deﬁne the total number of aftershocks. If earthquake
triggering follows Omori’s law ∼ 1/(t + c)p, with p ≥ 1 and
without cut-oﬀ at short times, there is an inﬁnite number
of aftershocks shortly after the mainshock when the seismic
network is saturated. These aftershocks are not reported
in the catalogs. For p ≤ 1, there are also inﬁnitely many
aftershocks at very long times (between an arbitrary time T
following the mainshock up to t = ∞) which are mixed up
with uncorrelated, background quakes. Therefore, we miss
most aftershocks if we select earthquakes in seismicity cat-
alogs in a ﬁnite time window after the mainshock. Because
it is impossible to measure the total number of triggered
events, an alternative solution is to measure the rate of af-
tershocks in a ﬁnite time window after the mainshock, when
the catalog is complete and before the rate goes back to the
constant background level. If the temporal variation in the
number of triggered events is the same for all mainshock
magnitudes (as expected if the rate of aftershocks depends
only on the stress and the time since the stress step), then
the scaling of the total number of aftershocks (exponent α
in (7)) can be measured from that of the rate of triggered
events with the mainshock magnitude.

It is also impossible to distinguish between the “direct”
(triggered by the “mainshock” only) and “secondary” after-
shocks (triggered by a previous aftershock from the main-
shock). Because an earthquake is probably not triggered
by a single prior quake, but rather by the cumulative ef-
fect of all previous events (with a weight depending on the
time, distance and magnitude of this particular quake) it is
impossible to tell which earthquake was triggered by which
other one. Only a stochastic answer can be obtained, as-
suming a particular model of earthquake interactions: that
earthquakes obey the Epidemic Type Earthquake Sequences
(ETES or ETAS) model [Kagan and Knopoﬀ, 1976; Zhuang
et al., 2004]. After estimating the parameters by maximizing
the likelihood of the ETES model, Kagan and Knopoﬀ [1976]
and later Zhuang et al. [2004] have proposed a method to
provide the probability that an earthquake was triggered by
a previous one, or that it was a background event. However,
if the number of secondary aftershocks is proportional to the
number of direct aftershocks, then we can measure the total
(observed) rate of triggered seismicity, including direct and
secondary aftershocks, which will have the same dependence
on the mainshock magnitude as does the number of direct
aftershocks [Helmstetter and Sornette, 2003].

Rather than by ﬁtting a multi-parameter stochastic clus-
tering model, we have estimated earthquake clustering prop-
erties here directly from the earthquake catalog, with some

X - 4 HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

simple selection criteria. In contrast, many authors (for ex-
ample, Kagan and Knopoﬀ [1976] and Zhuang et al. [2004])
assume an ETES type model in order to estimate the α
parameter or to select aftershocks. Although the ETES
type models usually describe earthquake clustering well, us-
ing them to determine parameters like α can be problem-
atic. First, the estimates so determined are not very ro-
bust, because the model parameters are strongly correlated
and poorly resolved. Second, the parameter estimates may
be biased. Inevitable errors in magnitude and location and
temporary incompleteness after larger events may each bias
earthquake statistics by underestimating clustering at short
distances and times. Furthermore, the ETES models gener-
ally assume isotropic clustering, whereas earthquakes occur
preferentially on spatially clustered faults. Neglecting this
spatial clustering can lead to underestimating α, because
the contribution to the total predicted seismicity rate from
all small aftershocks better predicts the location of future
aftershocks than does the isotropic contribution from the
mainshock. A smaller α gives more weight to smaller earth-
quakes and therefore better accounts for the following fac-
tors: incompleteness of the catalog after a large earthquake,
the heterogeneity of the spatial distribution of aftershocks,
ﬂuctuations of aftershock productivity, and magnitude er-
rors (see Helmstetter et al. [2004] for more details).

3.2. Data

We used the catalog of seismicity for California pro-
vided by the Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS)
(available at http://quake.geo.berkeley.edu/anss/catalog-
search.html). This catalog merges data from several net-
works (for this work, essentially Southern and Northern
California and Nevada). We used earthquakes larger than
a magnitude threshold md = 2, within the time win-
dow 1980/1/1-2004/5/26, and within the rectangular area
32◦ < latitude < 37.5◦ and −122◦ < longitude < −114◦.
This zone does not include Long Valley volcanic seismicity.
We checked that the catalog is complete for m ≥ 2 in this
area and time period (except at short times after a large
earthquake). We removed explosions from the catalog.

When available, we used moment magnitudes provided by
the Harvard catalog (available at http://www.seismology.-
harvard.edu/CMTsearch.html, see Ekstr¨om et al. [2003] and
references therein). Otherwise we used the magnitudes pro-
vided by the ANSS catalog (see http://quake.geo.berkeley.edu/-
ftp/pub/doc/cat5/cnss.catalog.5 for more details). The
magnitudes for smaller earthquakes are generally mL, or
local magnitudes estimated from short-period body waves.
Our use of magnitudes other than moment magnitude is
a potential problem, because the scaling relationships and
simple static stress models we employ are based on the seis-
mic moment, which we assume is simply related to mag-
nitude. Hutton and Jones [1993] show mL is a fairly good
unbiased surrogate for moment magnitude in the magnitude
range 4.5 to 6, but there may be a signiﬁcant bias for quakes
smaller than 4.5. At this point we have to assume that any
bias does not aﬀect the results much, but in the future this
assumption needs to be tested using moment magnitudes for
smaller earthquakes.

3.3. Selection of mainshocks and aftershocks

The objective of the declustering procedure is to select
as mainshocks only events not preceded by any large earth-
quake; then quakes following mainshocks within a speciﬁed
time and distance are identiﬁed as aftershocks. The space
and time windows are chosen in order to minimize the inﬂu-
ence of non-correlated earthquakes. There are always arbi-
trary choices in a declustering procedure, so we tested dif-
ferent values for all adjustable parameters. As a test we
also applied this declustering method to synthetic catalogs
to estimate the accuracy of our results.

Because we want to investigate the temporal decay of trig-
gered seismicity and the scaling of aftershock productivity
with the mainshock magnitude, we want a declustering pro-
cedure which makes minimal assumptions about the prop-
erties of aftershock triggering in time, space and magnitude,
without introducing a-priori any scaling of the number of af-
tershocks or their duration with the mainshock magnitude.
We assume that larger earthquakes inﬂuence seismicity in
a wider area, proportional to the mainshock rupture area
[Kagan, 2002a].

Practically, we select as mainshocks any earthquake of
magnitude mM not in the inﬂuence zone RF × TF of a
previous event of magnitude m ≥ Mi + ∆m. We use
generally ∆m = 1. This choice ensures that aftershocks
of the foreshock are negligible compared to aftershocks of
the “mainshock” because aftershock productivity increases
rapidly with the mainshock magnitude. We compute dis-
tances between earthquake epicenters, because depth has a
larger error than horizontal coordinates. The spatial inﬂu-
ence zone RF of a foreshock is deﬁned as

RF (m) = max(DF , NL,F × L(m)) ,

(8)

where the constant DF accounts for a locations accuracy,
L(m) is the rupture length [WGCEP, 2003] of an earthquake
of magnitude m

L(m) = 0.01 × 100.5m (km) ,

(9)

and NL,F is an adjustable factor. Mainshocks are selected
with a rectangular area 32.1◦ < latitude < 37.4◦ and
−121.9◦ < longitude < −114.1◦ slightly smaller (by 0.1◦)
than the box used to select foreshocks and aftershocks so as
to avoid ﬁnite size eﬀects.

We then select as aftershocks of a mainshock all quakes
of magnitude m ≥ md in the inﬂuence zone RA × TA of the
mainshock, or of a previous aftershock of the mainshock,
even if they are larger than the mainshock. The size of a
cluster can thus increase with time, due to aftershock diﬀu-
sion or due to secondary aftershocks, as in Reasenberg [1985].
We use a space window

RA(m) = max(DA, NL,A × L(m)) .

(10)

We use parameters DA and NL,A in (10) generally larger
than the parameters DF and NL,F used to deﬁne main-
shocks, because we do not want to consider as a mainshock
any earthquake inﬂuenced by a previous one, and we do not
want to include as aftershocks distant quakes mixed with
the background. Thus, our declustering method has 7 ad-
justable parameters: DA, DF , NL,A, NL,F , TA, TF and ∆m.
With our algorithm, a small fraction of earthquakes are con-
sidered as aftershocks of several mainshocks. For instance,
Landers aftershocks are also considered as aftershocks of a
m = 2.8 earthquake which occurred 6 hours before Landers.
Our method is very similar to the one of Reasenberg
[1985], except that we do not require that aftershocks be
smaller than the mainshock, and we do not include a priori
hypotheses on either the scaling of aftershock productiv-
ity with the mainshock or on the temporal decrease of the
seismicity rate with time. By contrast, Reasenberg [1985]
assumes that aftershock productivity increases as 102m/3
and that the rate of aftershocks follows the Omori law with
p = 1. The main diﬀerences between this work and the
previous analysis of [Helmstetter, 2003] are that Helmstetter
[2003] used a constant value for RF = 50 km (independent
of the foreshock magnitude), Helmstetter [2003] also used
∆m = 0, and selected as aftershocks earthquakes in the in-
ﬂuence zone of the mainshock only (not in the inﬂuence zone

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING X - 5

of a previous aftershock). We also use here a diﬀerent cata-
log from [Helmstetter, 2003] (with diﬀerent minimum magni-
tude, space and time windows). Our deﬁnition of triggered
events is also very similar to that of Felzer et al. [2004], but
the parameters (minimum magnitude, time interval) and the
method used to compute α diﬀer. The only diﬀerence in the
algorithm of aftershock selection is that Felzer et al. [2004]
selected aftershocks within the inﬂuence zone of either the
mainshock or of its largest aftershock, while we select af-
tershocks in the inﬂuence zone of both the mainshock and
all its aftershocks. This diﬀerence should have only a minor
eﬀect, as aftershock diﬀusion is very weak if there is any at
all [Helmstetter et al., 2003]. Secondly, if a mainshock trig-
gers a larger event, most of the following events will occur in
the inﬂuence zone of the largest earthquake, which generally
includes the inﬂuence zone of the previous “mainshock”.

3.4. Scaling of earthquake triggering with the
magnitude of the triggering events

We stack all aftershock sequences which have the same
mainshock magnitude mM , for each class of mainshock mag-
nitude ranging from 2 to 7 with a bin size of 0.5. The results
for DF = 3, DA = 3, NL,A = 2, NL,F = 4, TF = 0.1 yr,
TA = 1 yr, ∆m = 1 and md = 3 are shown in Figure 1. In
choosing this parameter, we have checked that our “main-
shocks” are almost uniformly distributed in time, and are
therefore not strongly inﬂuenced by other earthquakes. We
have, however, a problem after Landers, because a few Lan-
ders aftershocks occurred up to 1000 km from the epicenter,
outside our deﬁned inﬂuence zone of RF = 179 km. Some of
these distant aftershocks are thus considered “mainshocks”
by our declustering algorithm. Therefore, the number of
aftershocks from these earthquakes can be over-estimated
because aftershocks are mixed up with direct aftershocks
of Landers. We have checked that this eﬀect does not sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀect the results by looking at the time interval
1980-1992.45; it gives almost the same results (see Table 1).
For each magnitude, we see that the aftershock rate trig-
gered by a mainshock magnitude decays with the time since
the triggering event approximately as

λ(t, mM ) =

K(mM )
tp

,

(11)

with p ≈ 0.9. This expression (11) is only correct in a ﬁnite
time window [tmin(mM ), tmax(mM )], for which the catalog
is complete above md and the seismicity rate greatly exceeds
the constant “background” rate. The Omori law has been
reported in many observations of aftershock sequences, see
Utsu et al.
[1995] for a review), and can be derived from
several physical models of earthquake triggering (e.g., rate-
and-state model of Dieterich [1994]). Due to our rule of
aftershocks and mainshocks selection, the seismicity rate af-
ter the mainshock is much larger than before. For times
t ≤ tmax(mM ), the rate of seismicity is also much larger
than the constant background rate. We conclude that, for
t ≤ tmax(mM ), the earthquakes which we deﬁne as “after-
shocks” are probably causally related to (triggered by) the
“mainshock” rather than simply correlated to it.

Based on analyzing several aftershock sequences in South-
ern California, Helmstetter et al. [2004] have proposed a re-
lation between the magnitude of completeness mc(t, mM ) as
a function of the mainshock magnitude and of the time (in
days) since the mainshock

mc(t, mM ) = mM − 4.5 − 0.76 log10(t)
and mc(t, mM ) ≥ 2.

(12)

Earthquakes smaller than this threshold are generally not
detected due to overlapping of seismic records and satura-
tion of the network. Of course some ﬂuctuations of mc occur
from one sequence to another, but this relation gives a good

ﬁt to all sequences we analyzed within 0.3 magnitude units.
For Landers m = 7.3, expression (12) predicts that the com-
pleteness magnitude recovers its usual value md = 2 about
10 days after the mainshock. For each value of mM , we ﬁt
the rate of aftershocks by (11) with p = 0.9, in the time
interval [tmin(mM ), tmax(mM )], to estimate K(mM ). The
minimum time tmin(mM , md) is the time after which the
catalog is complete for m ≥ md, estimated using (12). Pa-
rameter tmax(mM ) is either ﬁxed to 10 days or given by the
condition λ(t, mM ) > rmin, where rmin = 0.05 day−1 is the
seismicity rate below which that rate does not obey Omori’s
law (11). At large times, the seismicity rate goes to a con-
stant level, due to the background rate or the inﬂuence of
uncorrelated aftershock sequences (see Figure 1). For small
mM , the seismicity rate increases at large times because the
cluster size increases with time, as we enlarge the cluster
with new earthquakes related to previous ones. The peak at
t ≈ 7 years for 6 ≤ mM < 6.5 and 7 ≤ mM < 7.5 is due to
the M = 7.1 1999 Hector-Mine aftershock sequence, which
is included in the clusters of the 1992 Landers M = 7.3 and
Joshua-Tree M = 6.1 earthquakes.

Figure 1b shows that aftershock productivity increases
exponentially with mainshock magnitude. The value of
K(mM ) (representing the seismicity rate per day for m ≥
md at time t = 1 day after a mainshock of magnitude mM )
is given by K(mM ) = K010αmM 10−bmd , with K0 = 0.008
day−1 and α ≈ 1. We recover the same α value as Felzer
et al.
[2004], who uses a similar method of aftershock se-
lection with parameters ∆m = 0, TF = 30 days, TA = 2
days, NF = NA = 2, DF = DA = 5 km and two values
of md = 3.5 and md = 4.5. They measured α by esti-
mating the scaling of the total number of aftershocks in a
2-day period with the mainshock magnitude. This value of
α = 1 is very close to the GR b-value (see Figure 1b). The
b-value measured by mean-square linear regression of the
cumulative distribution for m ≥ 2 in the time window 1980-
2004 gives b = 0.95. A maximum likelihood method gives
b = 1.06. This value of b ≈ α implies that all earthquakes
in a given magnitude range collectively attain the same im-
portance for earthquake triggering, as suggested previously
by Agnew and Jones [1991], Michael and Jones [1998] and
Felzer et al. [2002, 2004]. For α = b, the increase of after-
shock productivity with mM compensates for the decreased
number of earthquakes with magnitude. Even if an earth-
quake of magnitude m = 7 triggers on average 105 times
more aftershocks than a magnitude 2, an earthquake of any
magnitude is as likely to be triggered by a m = 7 earth-
quake as by a m = 2, because there are 105 more m = 2
than m = 7 earthquakes in the catalog.

The roll-oﬀ of the seismicity rate at times t < tmin(mM )
can be explained by catalog incompleteness at shorter times.
To check this, we have corrected the seismicity rate us-
ing GR law with b = 1 to estimate the rate of seismic-
ity for m ≥ md from the observed rate of events for
m ≥ mc(mM , t). We have removed from the catalog all
events with m < mc(mM , t), measured the rate of seismicity
λm≥mc (t, mM ) as a function of time and mainshock magni-
tude, and then estimated the rate of m ≥ md earthquakes
by

λm≥md (t, mM ) = λm≥mc (t, mM )10mc (t,mM )−md . (13)

The results are shown in Fig. 2: the rate of seismicity now
follows the Omori law for t ≥ 2 × 10−3 days for all main-
shock magnitudes. The cut-oﬀ at t ≈ 10−3 days (86 sec)
is probably due to the fact that earthquakes at such small
times cannot be distinguished from the mainshock and are
therefore not reported in the catalog.

X - 6 HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

We have tested diﬀerent values of the parameters of af-
tershock and mainshock selection (see Table 1). All tests
give α = 1.00 ± 0.05, but variations of K0 of up to a factor
of 2 occur if we change the space window for aftershock and
mainshock selection. The value of α signiﬁcantly exceeds
the value α = 0.8 ± 0.1 found by Helmstetter [2003]. This
discrepancy is due to diﬀerences in the selection of after-
shocks and mainshocks. Helmstetter [2003] used a constant
value of RF = 50 km, independent of the “foreshock” mag-
nitude. This value RF = 50 is too small to exclude distant
Landers aftershocks. Helmstetter [2003] also used a larger
value of tmax = 1 yr, independent of mM , so that a signiﬁ-
cant fraction of background events may have contaminated
aftershocks of small mainshocks.

We have applied the same method (selection of main-
shocks and aftershocks, correction for undetected early af-
tershocks, and ﬁt by Omori’s law) to synthetic catalogs gen-
erated with the ETES model. In this model, the seismicity
rate λ(t, ~r, m) is the sum of a constant background term µ
and of aftershocks from all previous earthquakes:

λ(t, ~r, m) = pm(m)

k10α(m−m0 )

µ +
h

Xti<t

×

θcθ
(t + c)1+θ

νL(mi)ν
(|~r − ~ri| + L(mi))1+ν i

,

(14)

where L(mi) = 0.01 × 100.5mi is the rupture length of earth-
quake i, pm(m) is the magnitude distribution, c, θ, k, α, ν
are adjustable parameters. Our method recovers the α value
of the model with an accuracy ≈ 0.03, but underestimates
the total number of aftershocks, because distant aftershocks
outside the “inﬂuence zone” used for aftershock selection are
missed (see results in Table 1).

3.5. Magnitude distribution of triggered earthquakes

We have analyzed the magnitude distribution of triggered
earthquakes for each class of the mainshock magnitude be-
tween 2 and 7. As above, we select aftershocks in a time
window [tmin(mM ), tmax(mM )] such that the catalog is com-
plete above md and that the seismicity rate greatly exceeds
the background rate (λ(t, mM ) > 0.1 day−1). The results
for md = 2 are shown in Figure 3. We observe that the
magnitude distribution of triggered earthquakes follows the
GR law with b ≈ 1, independent of the mainshock magni-
tude. For 7 ≤ mM < 7.5 (Hector-Mine and Landers), the
b-value seems larger than 1. However, if we use md = 3 and
a smaller minimum time tmin, the magnitude distribution is
close to the GR law with b = 1. These results imply that
a small earthquake can trigger a much larger earthquake.
It thus validates our hypothesis that the size of a triggered
earthquake is not determined by the size of the trigger, but
that any small earthquake can grow into a much larger one.
The magnitude of the triggering earthquake controls only
the number of triggered quakes.

3.6. Proportion of triggered events in catalogs

We use the scaling of the average number of triggered
earthquakes per mainshock and the hypothesis that the
magnitude distribution of all quakes follows the GR law
to derive the long-term fraction of aftershocks (assuming
boundaries in time and space for the deﬁnition of after-
shocks). The rate of m ≥ md aftershocks triggered, directly
or indirectly, by an earthquake of magnitude m at time t
after this quake follows approximately

λm(t) =

K010αm10−bmd
tp

,

(15)

with p = 0.9 and K0 = 0.0083 day−1. This relation holds at
least for times t > 0.001 day (86 sec), for all mainshock mag-
nitudes, after correcting for the incompleteness of the cata-
log at short times. For m ≥ 7, the Omori law decay holds at
least up to T ≈ 100 days. If we assume that this “aftershock
duration” does not depend on the mainshock magnitude, the
average total number of m > 2 aftershocks (including sec-
ondary aftershocks) triggered by m ≥ md mainshocks in the
time window c < t < T is

Naft(m) =

λm(t)dt = K010αm−bmd T 1−p − c1−p

.(16)

1 − p

∗

t

Z
c

Averaging over all magnitudes of the mainshock we can com-
pute the average total number Naft of m ≥ md aftershocks
(including secondary aftershocks) per mainshock of magni-
tude md < m < mmax. Assuming a GR law with b = 1 and
with a cutoﬀ at m = mmax, Naft is given by

mmax

Z
md

Naft =

p(m)Naft(m)dm

(17)

= K0

T 1−p − c1−p
1 − p

mmax

Z
md

b ln(10)10−bm10αmdm

=

K0b10(α−b)md
b − α

1 − 10(α−b)(mmax −md)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

T 1−p − c1−p
1 − p

.

The special case α = b gives

Naft = K0b ln(10)(mmax − md)

T 1−p − c1−p
1 − p

.

(18)

Using the parameters α = 1., b = 1., c = 0.001 day, K0 =
0.0083, and md = 2 estimated for Southern-California (see
Table 1) and assuming a maximum magnitude mmax = 8
and an aftershock duration T = 100 days, we obtain Naft =
In other words, a fraction Naft/(Naft + 1) = 55%
1.24.
of m ≥ 2. earthquakes in California are aftershocks of a
m ≥ 2 earthquake.
If we assume that Omori’s law with
p = 0.9 holds up to T = 1000 days, then Naft = 1.71 (63%
of earthquakes are aftershocks). The results do not depend
on c if p < 1. The fraction of aftershocks increases if we
include mainshocks with m ≤ 2. Assuming that equation
(16) and the GR law still hold down to md = −2, we ob-
tain Naft = 2.07 for T = 100 days: 67% of earthquakes of
any magnitude are triggered by earthquakes of magnitude
m ≥ −2. The fraction of triggered events goes to 1 as the
minimum magnitude md goes to −∞ [Sornette and Werner,
2004].

Our results are relatively close to the generic model of
Californian aftershocks Reasenberg and Jones [1989] (RJ),
which assumed

λm(t) =

10a+b(m−md )
(t + c)p

,

(19)

with c = 0.05 days, p = 1.07, b = 0.9, a = −1.76. Their
model gives K0 = 10a−bmd = 2.7 × 10−4 for md = 2, but
with smaller α and b values (α is assumed to be equal to b),
so that the rate of m ≥ 2 aftershocks at t = 1 day and for
m = 7 is λm(t) = 550 day−1 for RJ model and λm(t) = 850
day−1 for our model with K0 = 8.3 × 10−5. RJ model pre-
dicts Naft = 1.33 for c = 0.001 day and T = 100 days (57%
aftershocks).

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING X - 7

4. Scaling of
stress
mainshock magnitude

transfers with the

5. Spatial distribution of seismicity

Computing stress changes induced by a small earthquake
at the location of still another quake is very diﬃcult.The
stress ﬁeld created by an earthquake is sensitive to the slip
distribution on the fault, at least for small distances from
the fault plane [Steacy et al., 2004]. Slip distribution is usu-
ally available only for large m ≥ 6 earthquakes in California.
For small earthquakes, we can use a point-source model if we
know the focal mechanism, which is valid for distances from
the fault much larger than the rupture dimension. We can
also estimate the most likely focal plane from the fault ori-
entations in the area or from the orientation of the tectonic
stress. Then we can model the rupture by a rectangular
dislocation with a uniform or tapered slip. But this sim-
ple source model would still be incorrect close to the fault,
where most aftershocks are located.

Marsan [2004] solved this problem by computing the dis-
tribution of the stress induced by an earthquake at the loca-
tion of another earthquake, and by studying only the tail of
the distribution (small absolute value of stress) correspond-
ing to distances larger than the rupture length of the event.
Marsan [2004] concluded that small earthquakes are at least
as important as larger ones for redistributing stress between
events. This result is in agreement with our result for scal-
ing the number of triggered earthquakes with the mainshock
magnitude. But even in the far ﬁeld, these calculations of
the Coulomb stress change induced by an earthquake are
very inaccurate, because the accuracy of focal mechanisms
is on the order of 30◦ [Kagan, 2002b]. Another problem in
[Marsan, 2004] is that he considers earthquakes of magni-
tude m = 3, which have a rupture length L ≈ 300 m, much
smaller than the average accuracy on vertical coordinates of
4 km. These location errors can signiﬁcantly bias any esti-
mate of the stress change induced by small m < 5 quakes
[Huc and Main, 2003].

The observation that earthquake triggering scales with
the magnitude m of the trigger as ∼ 10αm with α = b sug-
gests that small events should not be neglected in studying
stress interactions between quakes. However, directly calcu-
lating the stress induced by a small events is impossible due
to the inaccuracy of earthquake locations and focal mecha-
nisms. Even if we cannot compute the spatial distribution
of the stress induced by a small earthquake, we can esti-
mate how such small events trigger others. On average the
total number of events triggered by an earthquake (inte-
grated over space) will be independent of the earthquake
source. For instance, we can account for the inﬂuence of
small earthquakes in the rate-and-state model of Dieterich
[1994] by using for such small events a point source model
which, as we know, depends only on the focal mechanism.
We can then compute the seismicity rate on each point of
a grid by integrating on each cell that rate estimated us-
ing equation (12) of [Dieterich, 1994] (using space-variable
stress for a point-source model). If the size of each cell is
equal to a few km, a point source model approximates m ≤ 4
earthquakes well, because the integral of the seismicity rate
over each cell depends only slightly on the geometry of the
rupture fault and the variations of fault slip.

Another alternative is to use empirical laws like the ETES
model [Kagan and Knopoﬀ, 1987b; Felzer et al., 2003a;
Helmstetter et al., 2004], rather than stress calculations and
physical models of stress interactions. We can estimate the
spatial distribution of future aftershocks for a large earth-
quake by smoothing the locations of early aftershocks. A
magnitude m = 7 quake has enough aftershocks in the
ﬁrst hour to estimate the distribution of future aftershocks
[Helmstetter et al., 2004]. In contrast, predictions based on
Coulomb stress change calculations require a good model of
slip distribution on the fault, which is not available until a
few hours after the mainshock at best.

We have estimated the distribution of distances be-
tween hypocenters pr(r), using the relocated catalogs for
Southern California of Hauksson et al. [2003] (HCS) and
Shearer et al. [2003] (SHLK). These catalogs apply waveform
cross-correlation to obtain precise diﬀerential times between
nearby events. These times can then be used to greatly im-
prove the relative location accuracy within clusters of sim-
ilar events. Locations in these two catalogs do not always
agree in detail, reﬂecting their diﬀerent modeling assump-
tions and seismic velocity structures. However, their overall
agreement is quite good, particularly when compared to the
standard catalog locations. In many regions, these new cat-
alogs resolve individual faults in what previously appeared
to be diﬀuse earthquake clouds. In both catalogs, we have
selected only m ≥ 2 earthquakes relocated with an accuracy
of ǫh and ǫz smaller than 100m. In the HCS catalog, there
are 71943 m ≥ 2 earthquakes between 1984 and 2002, out
of which 24127 (34%) are relocated with ǫh < 0.1 km and
ǫz < 0.1 km. In the SHLK catalog, there are 82442 m ≥ 2
earthquakes in the same period [1984, 2002], out of which
33676 (41%) are relocated with ǫh < 0.1 km and ǫz < 0.1
km. The probability density function of distances pr(r) be-
tween hypocenters is close to a power-law pr(r ∼ rD−1 in
the range 0.1 ≤ r ≤ 5 km. The correlation fractal dimen-
sion is D = 1.54 for SHLK and D = 1.73 for HCS (see black
lines in Figures 4 and 5). The faster decay for r < 0.1 km
is due to location errors, and the roll-oﬀ for distances r > 5
km is due to the ﬁnite thickness of the seismogenic crust.
The diﬀerence in the D-value between the two catalogs may
come from larger location errors in HCS, but also from errors
in estimating the D-value (see Kagan [2004b] for a discus-
sion of errors and biases in determining the fractal correla-
tion dimension). To check the accuracy of the D-value, we
tested a synthetic catalog, generated with the same number
of events as the real catalog. We used random longitudes
and latitudes, with a uniform distribution within the same
boundaries as real data. Depths in the synthetic catalog
were chosen by shuﬄing the depths of earthquakes from the
real catalog to keep the same depth distribution. The fractal
dimension in the range 0.1 ≤ r ≤ 5 km was D = 2.93 ± 0.04:
a little smaller than the value D = 3 expected for a purely
uniform distribution in a volume. This discrepancy is due to
three factors: the ﬁnite number of events, the non-uniform
distribution of depths, and ﬁnite size eﬀects.

The spatial clustering of earthquake hypocenters mea-
sured for the full catalog is due both to the fault network
structure and to earthquake interactions. The latter mod-
ify long-term spatial distribution by increasing the fraction
of small inter-event distances, that is decreasing the frac-
tal dimension [Kagan, 1991a]. The clustering of aftershocks
around mainshocks, and of secondary aftershocks close to
the direct aftershock of the mainshocks, and so on, can cre-
ate a fractal distribution. This results from the scaling of the
aftershock zone with magnitude coupled with the GR law,
without any underlying fractal fault structure [Helmstetter
and Sornette, 2002]. Over very long time intervals, triggered
earthquakes should be located uniformly on the fault net-
work, and the fractal dimension of the whole catalog should
reach a constant value. In our model described in equation
(5), pr(r) represents the “long-term” time-independent spa-
tial distribution of seismicity. pr(r) gives the average density
of earthquakes at a distance r from the mainshock due to
fault structure geometry and the faults time-independent
heterogeneity. This does not take into account earthquake
interactions. The eﬀect of the mainshock, which increases or
decreases the seismicity rate at close distances by modifying

X - 8 HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

the stress, is described in the factor f (σ, t) in (5). Therefore,
we should not use in (5) the function pr(r) estimated from
the catalogs of Southern California seismicity because these
catalogs cover less than 20 years and contain a majority of
aftershocks. If we had included that function, we would be
double-counting earthquake interactions.

∞

To estimate and remove the time dependence of the spa-
tial distribution of inter-event distances, we have measured
that distribution pr(r, t) using only earthquake pairs with
an inter-event time τ in the range [t, t + dt]. We have also
pr(r, t′)dt′ cu-
measured the distribution pr(r, τ ≥ t) =
mulated over all times larger than t (i.e., using only events
with inter-event times larger than t). The results are shown
in Figure 4 for the SHLK catalog and in Figure 5 for the
HCS catalog. As the minimum inter-event time increases,
the fraction of small distances will decrease. The fractal di-
mension of the cumulative distribution pr(r, τ ≥ t) increases
with t from the value measured for the whole catalog to a
maximum value close to 2 for inter-event times larger than
1000 days. For pr(r, t), D increases between D ≈ 0 at times
t = 5 minutes up to D = 2 for t = 2500 days (see Figures 6
and 7).

t
R

that equal magnitude bands contribute equally to stress
at the location of a future hypocenter, e.g., earthquakes
with 2 < m < 5 have collectively the same importance as
5 < m < 8 events for stress changes and for triggering, be-
cause the frequency of small earthquakes compensates for
their lower triggering potential. Even if explicit stress cal-
culations based on cataloged earthquakes have limited ac-
curacy, we can estimate how small earthquakes aﬀect earth-
quake triggering. This can be done with a spatial resolution
of a few km, using an ETES model or the more physical
rate-and-state model.

Acknowledgments.
We acknowledge the Advanced National Seismic System, Egill
Hauksson, Peter Shearer, and the Harvard group for the earth-
quake catalogs used in this study. We thank Jim Dieterich,
Karen Felzer, Jean-Robert Grasso and Emily Brodsky for use-
ful discussions. We acknowledge David Marsan for sending us a
preprint of his paper. We are grateful to Kathleen Jackson for
editing the manuscript. This work is partially supported by NSF
EAR 0409890 and by the Southern California Earthquake Center
(SCEC). SCEC is funded by NSF Cooperative Agreement EAR-
0106924 and USGS Cooperative Agreement 02HQAG0008. The
SCEC contribution number for this paper is ***.

6. Conclusion

Although large earthquakes are much more important
than smaller ones for energy release, small quakes have col-
lectively more inﬂuence than large ones for stress changes
between earthquakes, due to seismic spatial clustering. Be-
cause the stress drop is constant, the stress change induced
by an earthquake of magnitude m at the location of other
earthquakes (located on a fractal network of dimension D)
increases with m as ∼ 10Dm/2. Measuring directly the scal-
ing of such stress change with magnitude is diﬃcult, because
the accuracy of earthquake locations and focal mechanisms
is limited. We can, however, estimate indirectly the rela-
tive importance of small and large events for stress transfer
by studying the properties of triggered seismicity. If quakes
are triggered by static stress changes, then the number of
such triggered events should also scale as ∼ 10Dm/2 with
the magnitude of the trigger.

We have measured the average seismic rate triggered by
an earthquake for Southern California seismicity. We found
that the rate of triggered events decays with time according
to Omori’s law ∼ 1/(t + c)p with p = 0.9 and c < 3 min-
utes (after correcting for the increase in the magnitude of
completeness after a large mainshock). This decay is inde-
pendent of the mainshock magnitude m for 2 < m < 7.5.
We also found that the magnitude of triggered aftershocks
follows the Gutenberg-Richter law with b = 1 and is in-
dependent of the mainshock magnitude. The rate of trig-
gered quakes increases with m as ∼ 10αm, with an exponent
α = 1. ± 0.05.

We have measured the fractal correlation dimension D for
two diﬀerent catalogs of relocated earthquakes in Southern
California, given by the exponent of the cumulative distri-
bution of the distances between all pairs of hypocenters.
This fractal dimension D ≈ 1.6, measured in a limited time-
window, characterizes the spatial clustering of earthquakes
due to fault network structure and earthquake interactions.
By using only earthquake pairs with inter-event times larger
than a threshold to compute D, we have tried separating the
eﬀects that fault geometry and earthquake triggering have
upon spatial clustering. For inter-event times larger than
1000 days, we obtain D ≈ 2. Thus, our result α = D/2
supports the assumption that earthquakes are triggered by
static stress from past events.

The fact that α is nearly equal to the b-value has im-
It means

portant consequences for earthquake triggering.

References

Agnew, D. C. and L. M. Jones (1991), Prediction probabilities

from foreshocks, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 11,959-11971.

Console, R., M. Murru and A. M. Lombardi (2003), Reﬁning
earthquake clustering models, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 2468,
doi:10.1029/2002JB002130.

Das, S. and C. H. Scholz (1981), Theory of time-dependent rup-

ture in the Earth, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 6039-51.

Davis, S. D. and C. Frohlich (1991), Single link cluster analysis,
synthetic earthquake catalogues, and aftershock identiﬁcation,
Geophys. J. Int., 104, 289-306.

Dieterich, J. (1994), A constitutive law for rate of earthquake pro-
duction and its application to earthquake clustering, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 99, 2601-2618.

Drakatos, G. and J. Latoussakis (2001), A catalog of aftershock
sequence in Greece (1971-1997): Their spatial and temporal
characteristics, Journal of Seismology, 5, 137-145.

Ekstr¨om, G., A. M. Dziewonski, N. N. Maternovskaya and M.
Nettles (2003), Global seismicity of 2001: centroid-moment
tensor solutions for 961 earthquakes, Phys. Earth Planet. In-
ter., 136, 165-185.

Felzer, K.R., T.W. Becker, R.E. Abercrombie, G. Ekstr¨om and
J.R. Rice (2002), Triggering of the 1999 MW 7.1 Hector Mine
earthquake by aftershocks of the 1992 MW 7.3 Landers earth-
quake, J. Geophys. Res., 2190, 10.1029/2001JB000911.

Felzer, K. R., R. E. Abercrombie, and G. Ekstr¨om (2003a), Sec-
ondary aftershocks and their importance for aftershock predic-
tion, Bull. Seis. Soc. Am., 93, 1433-1448.

Felzer, K.R., R.E. Abercrombie and E. E. Brodsky (2003b), Test-
ing the stress shadow hypothesis, Eos Trans. AGU, 84(46),
Fall Meet. Suppl., Abstract S31A-04.

Felzer, K. R., R. E. Abercrombie, and G. Ekstr¨om (2004), A com-
mon origin for aftershocks, foreshocks, and multiplets, Bull.
Seis. Soc. Am. , 94, 88-99.

Guo, Z. and Y. Ogata (1997), Statistical relations between the
parameters of aftershocks in time, space and magnitude, J.
Geophys. Res., 102, 2857-2873.

Hanks, T. C. (1992), Small earthquakes, tectonic forces, Science,

256, 1430-1431.

Harris, R. A., R. W. Simpson (2002), The 1999 Mw 7.1 Hec-
tor Mine, California, earthquake: A test of the stress shadow
hypothesis? Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 92, 1497-1512.

Hauksson, E., W-C. Chi, P. and Shearer (2003), Comprehen-
sive waveform cross-correlation of southern California seismo-
grams: Part 1. Reﬁned hypocenters obtained using the double-
diﬀerence method and tectonic implications, Eos Trans. AGU,
84(46), Fall Meet. Suppl., Abstract S21D-0325.

Helmstetter A. (2003), Is earthquake triggering driven by small

earthquakes?, Phys. Rev. Let., 91, 058501.

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING X - 9

Helmstetter, A. and D. Sornette (2002), Diﬀusion of epicenters of
earthquake aftershock, Omori law and generalized continuous-
time random walk model, Phys. Rev. E., 66, 061104.

Helmstetter, A., and D. Sornette (2003), Importance of direct and
indirect triggered seismicity in the ETAS model of seismicity,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 30, 1576, doi:1029/2003GL017670.

Helmstetter, A., G. Ouillon and D. Sornette (2003), Are after-
shocks of large Californian earthquakes diﬀusing?, J. Geophys.
Res., 108, 2483, 10.1029/2003JB002503.

Helmstetter, A., Y. Y. Kagan and D. D. Jackson (2004), Compar-
ison of short-term and long-term earthquake forecast models
for southern California, to be submitted to Bull. Seism. Soc.
Am.

Hergarten, S. and H. J. Neugebauer (2002), Foreshocks and Af-
tershocks in the Olami-Feder-Christensen Model, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 88, 238501.

Huc, M., and I. G. Main (2003), Anomalous stress diﬀusion in
earthquake triggering: Correlation length, time dependence,
and directionality, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 2324, 1-12.

Hutton L.K., and L. M. Jones (1993), Local magnitudes and ap-
parent variations in seismicity rates in southern California,
Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 83, 313,329.

Jones, L. M., and P. Molnar (1979), Some characteristics of fore-
shocks and their possible relationship to earthquake prediction
and premonitory slip on fault, J. Geophys. Res., 84, 3596-3608.
Jones, L. M., R. Console, F. di Luccio and M. Murru (1995), Are
foreshocks mainshocks whose aftershocks happen to be big?,
EOS, 76 (abstract), 388.

Kagan, Y. Y. (1991a), Fractal dimension of brittle fracture, J.

Nonlinear Sc., 1, 1-16.

Kagan, Y. Y. (1991b), Likelihood analysis of earthquake cata-

logues, Geophys. J. Int., 106, 135-148.

Kagan, Y. Y. (1991c), 3-D rotation of double-couple earthquake

sources, Geophys. J. Int., 106, 709-716.

Kagan, Y. Y. (1994) Distribution of incremental static stress
caused by earthquakes, Nonlinear P. Geophys., 1, 172-181.
Kagan, Y. Y. (2002a), Aftershock zone scaling, Bull. Seismol.

Soc. Amer., 92, 641-655.

Kagan, Y. Y. (2002b), Modern California earthquake catalogs

and their comparison, Seism. Res. Lett., 73(6), 921-929.

Kagan, Y. Y. (2004a), Earthquake slip distribution, submitted to

J. Geophys. Res.

Kagan, Y. Y. (2004b), Earthquake spatial distribution: correla-

tion dimension, in preparation.

Kagan, Y. Y. and L. Knopoﬀ (1976), Statistical search for non-
random features of the seismicity of strong earthquakes, Phys.
Earth Planet. Inter., 12, 291-318.

Kagan, Y. Y., and L. Knopoﬀ (1987a), Random stress and earth-
quake statistics: Time dependence, Geophys. J. Roy. Astr.
Soc., 88, 723-731.

Kagan, Y. Y., and L. Knopoﬀ (1987b), Statistical short term

earthquake prediction, Science, 236, 1563-1467.

Kanamori, H. and D. Anderson (1975), Theoretical basis of some
empirical relations in seismology, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 65,
1073-1095.

Kilb, D. (2003), A strong correlation between induced peak dy-
namic Coulomb stress change from the 1992 M 7.3 Landers,
California, earthquake and the hypocenter of the 1999 M 7.1
Hector Mine, California, earthquake, J. Geophys. Res., 108,
2012, doi:10.1029/2001JB000678.

Marsan, D. (2003), Triggering of seismicity at short timescales
following California earthquakes, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 2266,
10.1029/2002JB001946.

Marsan. D. (2004), The role of small earthquakes in redistributing

crustal elastic stress, in press in Geophys. J. int.

Michael, J. and L. M. Jones (1998), Seismicity alert probabilities
at Parkﬁeld, California, revisited, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 88,
117-130.

Mikumo, T. and T. Miyatake (1979), Earthquake sequences on
a frictional fault model with non-uniform strengths and relax-
ation times, Geophysical Journal of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 59, 497-522.

Molchan, G.M. and O.E. Dmitrieva (1992), Aftershock identiﬁ-
cation – Methods and new approaches, Geophys. J. Int., 109,
501-516.

Nur A. and J.R. Booker (1972), Aftershocks caused by pore ﬂuid

ﬂow? Science, 175, 885-888.

Ogata, Y. (1989), Statistical model for standard seismicity and
detection of anomalies by residual analysis, Tectonophysics,
169, 159-174.

Ogata, Y. (1992), Detection of precursory relative quiescence be-
fore great earthquakes though a statistical model, J. Geophys.
Res., 97, 19845-19871.

Papazachos, B., N. Delibasis, N. Liapis, G. Moumoulidis, G. Pur-
caru (1967), Aftershock sequences of some large earthquakes
in the region of Greece, Annali di Geoﬁsica, 20, 1-93.

Parsons, T. (2002), Global Omori law decay of triggered earth-
quakes: Large aftershocks outside the classical aftershock zone,
J. Geophys. Res., 107, 2199.

Reasenberg, P. A. (1985), Second-order moment of central Cali-
fornia seismicity, 1969-82, J. Geophys. Res., 90, 5479-95.
Reasenberg, P. A., and Jones, L. M. (1989), Earthquake hazard
after a mainshock in California, Science, 243, 1173-1176.
Scholz, C. H. (1968), Microfractures, aftershocks, and seismicity.
Seismological Society of America Bulletin, 58, 1117-1130.
Shaw, B.E. (1993), Generalized Omori law for aftershocks and
foreshocks from a simple dynamics, Geophys. Res. Lett., 20,
907-910.

Shearer, P., E. Hauksson, G. Lin and D. Kilb (2003), Comprehen-
sive waveform cross-correlation of southern California seismo-
grams: Part 2. Event locations obtained using cluster analysis,
Eos Trans. AGU, 84(46), Fall Meet. Suppl., Abstract S21D-
0326.

Singh, S.K. and G. Suarez (1988), Regional variation in the num-
ber of aftershocks (mb ≥ 5) of large, subduction-zone earth-
quakes (Mw ≥ 7.0), Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 78, 230-242.
Solov’ev, S.L. and O.N. Solov’eva (1962), Exponential increase of
the total number of an earthquake’s aftershocks and the de-
crease of their mean value with increasing depth, Izv. Akad.
Nauk. SSSR, seriya geoﬁzicheskaya, 12, 1685-1694. English
translation 1053-1060.

Sornette, D. and M.J. Werner (2004), Eﬀects of undetected seis-
micity on the parameters of the ETAS model: constraint on
the size of the smallest triggering event, submitted to Geophys.
Res. Lett.

Steacy, S., D. Marsan, S. S. Nalbant and J. McCloskey
(2004), Sensitivity of static stress calculations to the earth-
quake slip distribution, J. Geophys. Res., 109, B04303,
doi:10.1029/2002JB002365.

Stein, R.S. (1999), The role of stress transfer in earthquake oc-

currence, Nature, 402, 605-609.

Utsu,T. (1969), Aftershocks and earthquake statistics (I) source
parameters which characterize an aftershock sequence and
their interrelations, J. Fac. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Ser.VII, 3,
129-195.

Utsu, T., Y. Ogata and S. Matsu’ura (1995), The centenary of
the Omori formula for a decay law of aftershock activity, J.
Phys. Earth, 43, 1-33.

Working Group On California Earthquake Probabilities (2003),
Earthquake probabilities in the San Francisco Bay Region:
2002-2031, U. S. Geol. Surv. Open-File Report 03-214.

Yamanaka, Y. and K. Shimazaki (1990), Scaling relationship be-
tween the number of aftershocks and the size of the main shock,
J. Phys. Earth, 38, 305-324.

Zeng, Y. (2001), Viscoelastic stress-triggering of the 1999 Hector
Mine earthquake by the 1992 Landers earthquake, Geophys.
Res. Let., 28, 3007-3010.

Zhuang J., Y. Ogata and D. Vere-Jones (2004), Analyzing earth-
quake clustering features by using stochastic reconstruction,
J. Geophys. Res., 109, B05301, doi:10.1029/2003JB002879.

Agn`es Helmstetter, Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
(e-

Physics, University of California, Los Angeles, California.
mail: helmstet@moho.ess.ucla.edu)

Yan Y. Kagan, Department of Earth and Space Sciences,
University of California, Los Angeles, California. (e-mail: yka-
gan@ucla.edu)

David D. Jackson, Department of Earth and Space Sciences,
University of California, Los Angeles, California. (e-mail: djack-
son@ucla.edu)

X - 10HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

Table 1. Scaling of aftershock productivity and earthquake
frequency with magnitude, for Southern California seismicity
and for synthetic ETES catalogs (see eq. (14), generated with
parameters b = 1, θ = 0.1, m0 = 0.5, mmax = 8, c = 0.001
day, ν = 3 and erh = 1.5 km (added uniform noise on loca-
tions). Times are in days and distances in km.

# md

time

∆m DF DA NL,F NL,A TF

TA tmin

tmax

rmin

α

N Nms mc K0

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

12

22

23

1980-2004
2
1980-2004
3
1980-2004
4
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
3
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
1980-2004
2
2
1980-2004
2 1980-1992.4
2 1992.4-2004

2

2

2

1980-2004

1980-2004

1980-2004

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
0
1
1

1

1

1

3
3
3
2
2
2
2
3
4
2
4
4
4
3
2
4
3
2
2
3
3

4

4

4

3
3
3
2
2
1
2
3
2
4
4
4
8
10
2
2
3
2
2
3
3

2

2

2

4
4
4
2
2
2
2
4
4
2
4
4
4
3
2
4
4
2
2
4
4

4

4

4

California
36 1825 0.002
2
36 3650 0.0003
2
36
365 0.002
2
36
365 0.002
2
36
365 0.002
2
36
365 0.002
1
365 0.002
36
2
36 3652 0.002
2
365 0.002
36
2
365 0.002
36
4
365 0.002
36
2
365 0.002
36
4
365 0.002
36
4
365 0.002
36
5
365 0.002
2
18
365 0.002
2 182
365 0.002
2 365
365 0.002
36
2
365 0.002
36
2
365 0.002
36
2
365 0.002
36
2

10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.
10.

0.94 112807 28845
0.5
1.00 112807 28845
0.05
0.005 1.00 112807 28845
1.02 112807 33013
0.5
0.99 112807 33013
0.05
1.05 112807 33013
0.5
1.02 112807 33013
0.5
1.01 112807 28845
0.5
1.03 112807 26292
0.5
0.98 112807 33013
0.5
1.01 112807 26292
0.5
1.01 112807 26292
0.5
0.99 112807 26292
0.5
0.97 112807 29072
0.5
1.01 112807 37005
0.5
1.05 112807 15676
0.5
1.03 112807 14138
0.5
1.03 112807 32536
0.5
0.96 112807 40514
1.
53165 14122
0.97
0.5
59642 14723
1.00
0.5

ETES, α = 0.5, k = 0.018

ETES, α = 0.9, k = 0.0042

ETES, α = 1, k = 0.0022

2

2

2

36

365 0.002

10.

0.5

0.52 125350 83379

0.15

36

365 0.002

10.

0.5

0.91 141866 62817

0.026

36

365 0.002

10.

0.5

1.02 161351 45589

0.012

0.018
0.0099
0.001
0.0071
0.011
0.0042
0.0071
0.00076
0.0060
0.012
0.0083
0.0080
0.011
0.015
0.0075
0.0047
0.00055
0.0056
0.016
0.00087
0.00086

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*

*

*

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERINGX - 11

2
10

)

1
−

y
a
d
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

4
10

3
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

)

1
−

y
a
d
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
c
m
s
e
s

i

i

5
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

s
e
k
a
u
q
h
t
r
a
e
 
d
e
r
e
g
g
i
r
t
 
f
o
 
e
t
a
r

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

s
e
k
a
u
q
h
t
r
a
e
 
d
e
r
e
g
g
i
r
t
 
f
o
 
e
t
a
r

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

−5

10

−4

10

−3

−2

−1

10

10
time after mainshock (days)

10

1
10

0
10

2
10

3
10

2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7

magnitude

Figure 1. (a) Average rate λ(mM , t) of m ≥ 3 triggered
earthquakes as a function of the time t after the trigger-
ing earthquake, for diﬀerent values of the magnitude mM
of the triggering earthquake increasing from 2 to 7 with a
step of 0.5 from bottom to top. Black lines show the ﬁt of
λ(mM , t) by K(mM )/t0.9 in the time interval [tmin(mM ),
tmax(mM )]. The roll-over for t < tmin(mM ) is due to the
incompleteness of the catalog. (b) Aftershock productiv-
ity K(mM ) as a function of mM (circles) and cumulative
magnitude distribution P (m) (crosses). Solid lines are
linear regressions of K(mM ) and P (m) with exponent
respectively equal to α = 1.00 and b = 0.95.

−5

10

−4

10

−3

−2

−1

10

10
time after mainshock (days)

10

1
10

0
10

2
10

3
10

2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7

magnitude

Figure 2. Same as Figure 1 except that we have used
md = 2 and we have corrected the seismicity rate for
missing early aftershocks (assuming GR law with b = 1).
We ﬁt the seismicity rate in the time interval 0.002 < t <
10 days and for λ(t, mM ) > 0.5 day−1. The ﬁt of K(mM )
give K0 = 0.008 day−1 and α = 1.01.

6
10

5
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

i

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
m
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
c

l

6
10

5
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

i

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
m
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
c

l

X - 12HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

5
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

i

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
m
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
c

l

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

5.5

6

6.5

7

4.5
magnitude

5

Figure 3. Cumulative magnitude distribution of trig-
gered earthquakes, for mainshock magnitudes ranging
from 2 (below) to 7 (top) with a bin size of 0.5. The
curves have been normalized by a factor 100.5mM for clar-
ity. Dotted lines represent a GR law with b = 1 for refer-
ence. Duplicate events (which belong to several clusters
within the same bin of mainshock magnitude) have been
removed. The number of events decreases with mM (be-
tween N = 12191 for 7 ≤ mM < 7.5 down to N = 1626
for 7 ≤ mM < 2.5) due to the smaller fraction of small
earthquakes considered as mainshocks, and due to the
shorter time window used for aftershock selection of small
mainshocks.

D=1.5

D=2

−1

10

−2

10

f
d
p

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−2

10

−1

10

−2

10

f
d
p

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−2

10

−1

0
10

2
10
10
interevent distance (km)

1
10

3
10

−1

0
10

2
10
10
interevent distance (km)

1
10

3
10

Figure 4.
(a) Distribution of distances between
hypocenters pr(r, t) for SHLK catalog, using only earth-
quake pairs with inter-event times in the range [t, 1.25t],
where t increases between 1.4 minutes (blue curve) to
2500 days (red curve). The black line is the function pr(r)
measured for all earthquake pairs, which has a fractal di-
mension D = 1.54 for 0.1 ≤ r ≤ 5 km. The right panel
(b) is the same as (a) but for the cumulative function
pr(r, τ ≥ t) using all earthquake pairs with inter-event
times larger than t.

HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERINGX - 13

−1

10

−2

10

f
d
p

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−2

10

D=1.5

D=2

−1

10

−2

10

f
d
p

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−2

10

−1

0
10

2
10
10
interevent distance (km)

1
10

3
10

−1

0
10

2
10
10
interevent distance (km)

1
10

3
10

Figure 5. Same as Figure 4 for HCS catalog. The distribution pr(r) (black lines) has a fractal dimension D = 1.73.

1.5

2

1

0.5

i

n
o
s
n
e
m
d
 
n
o

i

i
t

l

a
e
r
r
o
c
 
s
r
e

t

n
e
c
o
p
y
h

0

−3

10

−2

10

−1

10

0
10

1
10

2
10

3
10

interevent time (days)

Figure 6. Fractal dimension of the non-cumulative
function pr(r, t) (crosses) and of the cumulative function
pr(r, τ ≥ t) (circles) as a function of time t, using SHLK
catalog.

X - 14HELMSTETTER, KAGAN, AND JACKSON: STRESS TRANSFERS AND EARTHQUAKE TRIGGERING

1.5

2

1

0.5

i

n
o
s
n
e
m
d

i

 

n
o

i
t

l

a
e
r
r
o
c
 
s
r
e
n
e
c
o
p
y
h

t

0

−3

10

Figure 7. Same as Figure 6 for HCS catalog.

−2

10

−1

10

0
10

1
10

2
10

3
10

interevent time (days)

