Deghosting of Ocean Bottom Cable Data :Two
approaches

Jagmeet Singh* and K. Subramanyam

Geodata Processing and Interpretation Centre, KDMIPE Campus, ONGC Ltd.,

Dehradun - 248 195, India

Abstract

Two ﬁlter based approaches for deghosting of Ocean Bottom Cable data
are presented. One of them is phase shifting of geophone followed by least
square matching of cross ghosted geophone and hydrophone data.In the sec-
ond approach,phase shifting of geophone is followed by direct matching of
geophone’s amplitude spectrum with that of the hydrophone within the seis-
mic bandwidth.Results obtained from both approaches were found to be at
par with one of the proprietary softwares available with ONGC.

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

*E-mail: jagmeetus@yahoo.com

1

1 Introduction

Towed streamer operations in congested areas lead to gaps in 3-D coverage and hence

the OBC(Ocean Bottom Cable) method employing detectors on the ocean bottom

becomes a necessity.In order to ensure that high quality seismic data is obtained

using this method one has to address the problem of water column reverberation at

the acquisition stage itself.Every primary arrival at a detector location is followed

by secondary arrivals due to reverberation of the seismic energy between the water

surface and water bottom.If the water depth is small(i.e. below 10m),the time gap

between the primary and secondary arrivals is small and the undesired secondaries

can be removed by deconvolution algorithms.

However if the water depth is high,deconvolution can not remove the multiples

because the time gaps are large.The solution is to record both geophone and hy-

drophone data at every receiver location.Since the geophone records velocity whereas

the hydrophone records pressure,the sum of the two is devoid of the downgoing part

of the waveﬁeld which is recorded with opposite polarities on the hydrophone and

geophone.In frequencydomain terms there are notches in the frequency spectrum of

hydrophone data, at f = nf0 ,where f0 = v/2z(v is the acoustic velocity in water

and z is the receiver depth),which fall within the seismic bandwidth.The notches in

the geophone spectrum occur at f = (n + 1/2)f0 so that the sum of the two spectra

is free of notches.

Most of the earlier methods aimed at deghosting were scalar methods.A scalar

was designed to be multiplied with the geophone data in such a way that the au-

tocorrelogram of the sum of hydrophone and geophone data was as spiky as pos-

sible(Barr and Sanders(1989)[1],Dragoset and Barr(1994)[2],Barr(1997)[4]).Clearly

these methods were inadequate,in theory,as well as in practical results obtained from

2

such methods.Hydrophone and geophone response are diﬀerent,geophone ground

coupling varies from place to place due to which it is clear that a ﬁlter should be

designed(at every receiver location) and applied to either of the two (preferably

geophone) before the two are summed.

One such ﬁlter based technique has been suggested by Robert Soubaras(1996)[3].

In this paper we have used this approach with some modiﬁcations and tested the

same on synthetic and real data,as well as a frequency domain approach.The results

obtained from these methods were compared with the results obtained from propri-

etary software available with ONGC.The paper is organized as follows.In section 2

we describe the method followed by results obtained by the two methods in section

3.

2 Designing the ﬁlter

Figure 1 shows an incident waveﬁeld I(z) just above the water bottom,where the

delay z corresponds to the sampling interval.If U and D denote upgoing and down-

going waveﬁelds just above the water bottom,then the hydrophone and geophone

record pressure H and velocity G respectively given as

H = U + D

G =

U − D
I0

,

(1)

(2)

where I0 is the acoustic impedance of water.The constant I0 will be dropped

from further calculations.From the formulae (1) above we see that if D=0,H and G

seem to be in phase.Clearly pressure and velocity have to have a phase diﬀerence of

90 degrees,so we have to bear in mind,at the outset,that phase shifting is required.

If Z denotes the delay corresponding to two way time of travel in the water column

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

then U(z) and D(z) are given as follows:-

U(z) = I(z)(1 − RZ + R2Z 2 + .......) =

D(z) = I(z)(−Z + RZ 2 − R2Z 3 + .....) =

I(z)
1 + RZ
−I(z)Z
1 + RZ

,

where R is the reﬂection coeﬃcient of the water bottom.Using the above 4 equa-

tions it follows that

H(z) =

G(z) =

(1 − Z)I(z)
1 + RZ
(1 + Z)I(z)
1 + RZ

From (5) and (6) it follows that

(1 + Z)H(z) = (1 − Z)G(z)

For the reason of phase shift mentioned above and also because the hydrophone

and geophone response are never the same, it would be more appropriate to write

Eqn.(7) as

(1 + Z)H(z) = (1 − Z)G(z)P F (z),

where P is a phase shifting(90 degrees) operation and F(z) is a ﬁlter that accounts

for the diﬀerence in impulse response of the two phones.So our scheme of operation

is the following.We introduce the necessary phase shift and the convolutions.The

ﬁlter F is then designed in the time domain in such a way that the R.H.S. of (8)

matches L.H.S. of (8) in the least square sense i.e. a Wiener ﬁlter is designed.

The phase shifted geophone is then convolved with the ﬁlter,multiplied by a

suitable scalar and added to the hydrophone.We have to keep in mind the follow-

ing.In using delay Z(corresponding to v/2z),we have assumed vertical or near vertical

bouncing of rays in the water column.With increasing oﬀset,we must go deeper i.e.

4

take design windows deeper(in designing F(z) as per (8)) so that our assumption is

satisﬁed.Our experiments have conﬁrmed that separating the ﬁltering action into P

and F leads to better results as it puts less burden on the Wiener ﬁlter F.

The scalar required follows from (5) and (6).We see that

H(z) +

G(z) =

1 + R
1 − R

2
1 − R

I(z)

(9)

From the above equation we see that the required scalar (1+R)/(1-R) accom-

plishes the rest of the job once ﬁltering is done.R is typically 0.4.We have, however,

used amplitude equalisation of the two phones over a moving window as a second

step once ﬁltering is applied.

3 Results and Discussion

Figure 2 shows synthetic seismograms for geophone data for a small water depth.Figure

3 shows synthetic hydrophone data for the same water depth.Figure 4 shows the sum

of the hydrophone and ﬁltered geophone which is free of the ghost.Figure 5 shows the

deghosted and stacked output for a real dataset using Wiener ﬁlter approach.The

same compares well with the output shown in Figure 7 obtained from a proprietary

software of ONGC using identical velocities.In the frequency domain approach apart

from phase shifting, the amplitude spectrum of the geophone is matched with that

of the hydrophone in the seismic bandwidth.The stack obtained from this method

is shown in Figure 6.Figure 8 shows the autocorrelation averaged over a range of

CDP values obtained from the Wiener ﬁlter(above part of ﬁgure), and also the

autocorrelation averaged over the same range obtained from the proprietary soft-

ware mentioned above.Figure 9 shows the averaged autocorrelation obtained from

the frequency domain approach. Autocorrelations obtained from our methods are

5

sharper.

As stated above,reverberations in the water column are assumed to follow near

vertical ray paths for ensuring which we take our ﬁlter design windows deeper with

increasing oﬀset.A more appropriate method would be to reject 1-d approximation

altogether and adapt our scheme for angled reverberations.The results of such a

scheme will be presented in a forthcoming paper.

4 Acknowledgements

We express our gratitude to Director(Exploration),ONGC Ltd.for his kind permis-

sion to publish this paper.We are indebted to Dr. C.H. Mehta,Head Geopic,ONGC

Ltd.for many useful discussions and suggestions on the subject.We are very grateful

to Shri Kunal Niyogi,Head Processing,Geopic,ONGC Ltd.for his encouragement and

support throughout this work.

6

Figure 1: The incident waveﬁeld is shown to bounce back and forth between the water
surface and the water bottom.

7

Figure 2: Synthetic geophone gather.

Figure 3: Synthetic hydrophone gather.

8

Figure 4: Output obtained after ﬁltering the geophone and adding to the hydrophone.

9

Figure 5: Stacked output obtained from the Wiener ﬁlter approach.

10

Figure 6: Stacked output obtained from the frequency domain approach.

11

Figure 7: Stacked output obtained from the proprietary software.

12

Figure 8: The upper part of the ﬁgure shows the averaged autocorrelation obtained from
the Wiener ﬁlter approach whereas the part below shows the same obtained from the
proprietary software.

Figure 9: Averaged autocorrelation obtained from the frequency domain approach.

13

References

[1] Barr,F.J. and Sanders,J.L,,1989, Attenuation of water column reverberations

using pressure and velocity detectors in a water-bottom cable,Expanded Ab-

stracts of 59th Annual SEG meeting,pp. 653-656.

[2] Dragoset,B. and Barr,F.J.,1994, Ocean-bottom cable dual-sensor

scal-

ing,Expanded Abstracts of 64th Annual SEG Meeting,pp. 857-860.

[3] Soubaras,R.,1996, Ocean bottom hydrophone and geophone processing,Paper

presented at 66th Annual SEG Meeting.

[4] Barr,F.J.,1997, Dual-sensor OBC technology,The Leading Edge,pp. 45-51.

14

