5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

Earthquake recurrence as a record breaking process
J¨orn Davidsen
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik Komplexer Systeme, Dresden, Germany

Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Canada, N2L 2Y5

Peter Grassberger
John-von-Neumann Institute for Computing, FZ J¨ulich, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany

Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Canada, N2L 2Y5

Maya Paczuski
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Canada, N2L 2Y5

We extend the notion of waiting times for a point process
to recurrent events in space-time. Earthquake B is a recur-
rence of a previous one, A, if no intervening earthquake hap-
pens after A and before B in the spatial disc centered on A
with radius AB. The cascade of recurrent events, where each
later recurrence to an event is closer in space than all pre-
vious ones, forms a sequence of records. Representing each
record by a directed link between nodes deﬁnes a network of
earthquakes. For Southern California, this network exhibits
robust scaling laws. The rupture length emerges as a fun-
damental scale for distance between recurrent events. Also,
the distribution of relative separations for the next record in
−δt ), with δr
space (time)
0.6. While the
in-degree distribution agrees with a random network, the
out-degree distribution shows large deviations from Poisson
statistics. Comparison with randomized data and a the-
ory of records for independent events occurring on a fractal
shows that these statistics capture non-trivial features of the
complex spatiotemporal organization of seismicity.

−δr (

∼

≈

∼

≈

δt

r

t

Fault systems as the San Andreas fault in California or
the Sunda megathrust (the great tectonic boundary along
which the Australian and Indian plates begin their de-
cent beneath Southeast Asia) are prime examples of self-
organizing systems in nature [Rundle et al., 2002]. Such
systems are characterized by interacting elements, each of
which stays quiescent in spite of increasing stress acting on
it until the stress reaches a trigger threshold leading to a
rapid discharge or ”ﬁring”. Since the internal state vari-
ables evolve in time in response to external driving sources
and inputs from other elements, the ﬁring of an element may
in turn trigger a discharge of other elements. In the context
of fault systems, this corresponds to earthquakes, or the de-
formation and sudden rupture of parts of the earth’s crust
driven by convective motion in the mantle.

Fault systems — and driven threshold systems in gen-
eral — exhibit dynamics that is strongly correlated in space
and time over many scales. Their complex spatiotemporal
dynamics manifests itself in a number of generic, empirical
features of earthquake occurrence including clustering, fault
traces and epicenter locations with fractal statistics, as well
as scaling laws like the Omori and Gutenberg-Richter (GR)
[Turcotte, 1997; Rundle et al., 2003]
laws (see e.g. Refs.
for a review), giving rise to a worldwide debate about their

Copyright 2014 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/14/$5.00

1

explanation. Resolving this dispute may require measuring
the internal state variables — the stress and strain at every
point within the earth along active earthquake faults — and
their exact dynamics. This is (currently) impossible. Yet,
the associated earthquake patterns are readily observable
making a statistical approach based on the concept of spa-
tiotemporal point processes feasible, where the description
of each earthquake is reduced to its size or magnitude, its
epicenter and its time of occurrence. Describing the patterns
of seismicity may shed light on the fundamental physics since
these patterns are emergent processes that reﬂect the struc-
tures, dynamics and properties of the underlying many-body
nonlinear system.

Recently, such an approach has identiﬁed a number of
new generic properties of seismicity [Bak et al., 2002; Cor-
ral , 2003, 2004; Davidsen and Goltz , 2004; Davidsen and
Paczuski, 2005; Baiesi and Paczuski, 2005]. One aim has
been to quantify diﬀerences between subsequent events, in-
cluding temporal and spatial distances. Here, we propose
a new method that goes beyond previous analyses by ex-
tending the notion of waiting times (or distances) between
subsequent events to recurrences of events in space and time.
Our method is based solely on relations between events and
reduces the inﬂuence of the observer by not imposing any
space, time, or magnitude scales other than those explic-
itly associated with the earthquake catalog (i.e.
its mag-
nitude, spatial, and temporal ranges). We generalize the
notion of a subsequent event to a record breaking event, one
which is closer in space than all previous ones. According
to the speciﬁc sequence of activity, each earthquake has its
own sequence of records that follow it in time. Such pairs
of earthquakes are linked, making a network of earthquake
recurrences. For Southern California, our method reveals
non-trivial and robust features of seismicity. In particular,
the rupture length emerges as a fundamental scale for the
distance between recurrent events.

Consider a pair of events, A and B, occurring at times
tA < tB. Earthquake B is a recurrence of A if no inter-
vening earthquake happens in the spatial disc centered on
A with radius AB during the time interval [tA, tB]. Each
recurrence is characterized by the distance l = AB and the
time interval T = tB
tA. Since the spatial window is cen-
tered on the ﬁrst event, any later recurrence to it is closer
in space than all previous ones. This gives rise to hierar-
chical cascade of recurrences, where each recurrence is, by
construction, a record. Representing each earthquake as a
node, and each recurrence by a link between pairs of nodes,
directed according to the time ordering of the earthquakes,
deﬁnes a network of earthquake recurrences. Distinct events
can have diﬀerent numbers of in-going and out-going links,

−

X - 2

DAVIDSEN, GRASSBERGER AND PACZUSKI: EARTHQUAKE RECURRENCE

≈

The scaling function F has two regimes, a power-law in-
2.05 for small arguments and a
crease with exponent
constant regime at large arguments. The transition point
between the two regimes can be estimated by extrapolat-
ing them and selecting the intersection point, giving L0 =
0.012km. For the characteristic distance that appears in F
100.45m. This is close to the estimated
we ﬁnd l
×
10m/2km given
behavior of the rupture length LR
0.02
×
≈
100.46 mkm given
by Kagan [2002] and LR = √AR
0.018
by Wells and Coppersmith [1994], where AR is the rupture
area.

L0

×

≈

≈

∗

≡

The close agreement between our result and that of
Wells and Coppersmith [1994] suggests that the character-
istic length scale of distances between recurrent events is
the rupture length, deﬁned in terms of the rupture area
l∗ = LR
√AR. The distribution does not signiﬁcantly
vary with the length of the observation period despite huge
diﬀerences in the number of events. As Fig. 1 shows, the
distribution for m = 2.5 is largely unaltered if only the sub-
catalog up to 1988 is analyzed. This implies that Eq. (1) is
a robust, empirical result for seismicity.

The identiﬁcation l∗ = LR is also consistent with the
fact that the description of earthquakes as a point process
in space breaks down (at least) at the rupture length. Be-
low that scale, the relevant distance(s) between earthquakes
is not given solely by their epicenters but also by the rela-
tive location and orientation of the ruptures associated with
the events. Below the rupture length, we can naively ex-
pect random correlations between epicenters. If events are
happening randomly in space, or are recorded as happening
randomly in space due to location errors, the set of points
at small scales appears uniform in space and the average
distance between any two points grows linearly with l in
2D. This is also true for the distance between any point and
its nearest neighbor in space. Indeed, a linear behavior at
small l describes Pm(l) as indicated by the straight line with
a slope of 2.05 in the inset of Fig. 1.

≈

The lengths l

observed for the considered values of m
are larger than the length (
100m) at which we clearly see
random behavior due to location errors. In fact, the data
do not show any anomaly near 100m. Moreover, P4(l) (blue
triangles) does not change substantially if the epicenters in
the catalog are randomly relocated by a small distance up
to one kilometer. Yet, the maximum for P2.5(l) shifts to
∗
larger l with this procedure, destroying the scaling of l
.
The data collapse we observe for the original data veriﬁes
that the relative location errors are indeed less than 100m.
Furthermore, these observations indicate that the spatial
correlation structure of seismicity, described as a point pro-
cess, is already lost for distances 100m < l < l∗, although
the frequency of pairs of recurrent events with these small
distances is much higher than by random chance. 2

We also examined the statistics of the network con-
structed from a randomly shuﬄed catalog. 3 Random shuf-
ﬂing makes relatively small changes on the overall shape of
Pm(l). However, the plots for the shuﬄed data (not shown)
have slightly shallower peaks and fatter tails from those
shown in Fig. 1, and do not collapse as well. Moreover,
the location of the peaks is strongly inﬂuenced by the time
span of the catalog (or equivalently the number of events
N ), in contrast to the original data. This implies that the
clustering of events in time determines the value of l∗ and,
thus, reﬂects the physical properties of the rupture length.
To clarify these observations, a comparison with a ran-
dom model is helpful. Assume that events are distributed
according to a stationary,
independent & identically dis-
tributed process with a fractal distribution in space with
dimension D. If we assume for the moment that space and

∗

Figure 1. Distribution of distances l between recurrent
events for sets with diﬀerent magnitude thresholds m.
The distribution for m = 2.5 up to 1988 is also shown.
Filled symbols correspond to distances below 100 m and
are unreliable due to location errors. The inset shows a
data collapse, obtained by rescaling distances and dis-
tributions according to Eq. 1. The full straight line
has slope 2.05; the vertical dashed line indicates the pre-
factor L0 in the scaling law for the characteristic distance,
∗
l

100.45m.

= L0

×

which designate their relations to the other events. The out-
going links from any node deﬁne the structure of recurrences
in its neighborhood.

Notice the diﬀerence to the deﬁnition of an ǫ-recurrence,
where any event B is considered a recurrence of A if it oc-
curs at a spatial distance less than some ﬁxed threshold
ǫ [Eckmann et al., 1987]. Our deﬁnition allows us to dis-
cuss spatial and temporal clustering, without introducing
any length, time or magnitude scale. Also, as time goes on,
one wants to be more strict in declaring B a recurrence of
A, which is precisely what our deﬁnition achieves.

To test the suitability of our method to characterize seis-
micity, we study a “relocated” earthquake catalog from
Southern California 1 which has improved relative loca-
tion accuracy within clusters of similar events, the rela-
tive location errors being less than 100m [Shearer et al.,
2003]. The catalog is assumed to be homogeneous from
January 1984 to December 2002 and complete for events
larger than magnitude mc = 2.5 [Wiemer and Wyss, 2000].
Restricting ourselves to epicenters located within the rect-
◦
◦
W, 115.0
angle (120.5
N ) and to mag-
nitudes m
mc gives N = 22217 events. We analyze this
sub-catalog and subsets of it, which are obtained by select-
ing diﬀerent threshold magnitudes, namely m = 3.0, 3.5, 4.0
giving N = 5857, 1770, 577 events, or a shorter period from
January 1984 to December 1987 giving N = 4744 events for
m = mc.

◦
N, 36.0

◦
(32.5

W )

≥

×

Fig. 1 shows the distribution of distances l between recur-
rent events for diﬀerent thresholds m. The typical distance,
∗
l
(m), where the distribution peaks, increases with magni-
tude. For suﬃciently large l, all distributions show a power
law decay with an exponent
1.05 up to a cutoﬀ. This
cutoﬀ is the size of the region of Southern California that
we consider.

≈

With a suitable scaling ansatz, the diﬀerent curves in
Fig. 1 fall onto a universal curve, except at the cutoﬀ. The
inset in Fig. 1 shows results of a data collapse using

Pm(l)

∼

−1.05F (l/100.45m) .

l

(1)

DAVIDSEN, GRASSBERGER AND PACZUSKI: EARTHQUAKE RECURRENCE

X - 3

a

b

c

Figure 2. (a) Distribution of recurrence distance ratios li+1/li. The straight line corresponds to a decay with exponent
0.6. (b) Distributions of in- and out-degrees of the network for m = 2.5. The original data are indicated by open symbols,
the shuﬄed data by solid symbols. (c) Distribution of recurrence time ratios Ti/Ti+1. The straight line has slope -0.62.

−

−

time are both inﬁnite (this assumption will be relaxed soon),
we can use the theory of record statistics [Glick , 1978; Nev-
zorov , 1987] to obtain surprisingly simple formulas for the
distances and times of recurrences.

Let us denote by ˜P (T ) the density of recurrences in time,
i.e. ˜P (T )dT is the probability that a recurrence occurs in
dT, T ] after the deﬁning event. 4 If
the time interval [T
a recurrence occurs in this small interval, then this is nec-
essarily the closest event in space during the entire interval
[0, T ]. Since the process is stationary, the probability for
this to happen is dT /T , and therefore [Glick , 1978; Nev-
zorov , 1987] ˜P (T ) = 1/T. The probability density ˜P (l) that
a recurrence occurs at a spatial distance l from the deﬁning
event is similarly obtained: To be a recurrence, an event
within distance l from the deﬁning one must be the closest
in time. The chance that the closest event in time is within
dl, l] is Ddl/l, and thus ˜P (l) = D/l.
in a distance interval [l
The joint density ˜P (l, T ) for a recurrence to occur at
is obtained as follows. As-
distance l and at time T ,
sume a recurrence occurred at space-time location (l
).
The probability to ﬁnd the next recurrence in time
at (l, T ) is given by the recursion relation ˜P (l, T ) =
T
′D), where
0 dT
R
the constant c depends on the event rate. A solution of
this recursion relation with normalization ﬁxed by ˜P (T ) and
˜P (l) is ˜P (l, T ) = cDlD−1 exp

)cDlD−1 exp(

−
Corrections appear at large T and small l due to the ﬁnite
time span of the series of events, while corrections at small
T and large l arise from the ﬁniteness of the area where the
events occur. Thus we should compare the above Eqs. with
the observed distributions only for intermediate values of l
and T . A short calculation shows that for small values of l,
the corrections lead to ˜P (l)

∼
Although the random model with ﬁnite space and time
span generates a distribution ˜P (l) which has the same
overall shape as the original data, the behavior of l
is
very diﬀerent. For the original data, l
does not depend
strongly on N or on the average degree of the network,
= #links/#nodes, but rather on m – as is shown by
k
h
the comparison of diﬀerent observation periods in Fig. 1
(
= 6.56 (7.40) for events up to 1988 (2002)). Yet, in
the model l∗ depends exclusively on N (or equivalently the
h
observation period), as it does for the shuﬄed data.

(cT lD).

∞
l dl

lD−1.

′ ˜P (l

c(T

i
k

, T

, T

−

−

)l

T

R

i

∗

∗

′

′

′

′

′

′

−

A more detailed comparison with the random model
can be made by examining distributions of distance ratios
li/li−1, where recurrences are ordered by time (i.e. recur-
rence i follows i
1), and l0 = 448.5 km which is the size
of the region covered by the catalog (Fig. 2a). These ratios
1. We denote by Pi(x) the probability density
are always
≤
that li/li−1 = x. The data for i = 1 (black circles) scale over
x−0.6 as already shown in [David-
a wide region as P1(x)
sen and Paczuski, 2005], which is indicated in Fig. 2a by
the straight line. Although each distribution Pi(x) is diﬀer-
2 also show (more restricted) scal-
ent, the curves for i
≥
1 they also
ing regions comparable to P1. For li+1/li

∼

→

show a peak, which becomes more pronounced with increas-
ing i. The power law decay and the formation of a peak
completely disappears for the shuﬄed catalog. Further, the
behavior of the original data contrasts sharply with the ran-
dom model, which gives Pi(li/li−1)
i−1. The latter
result, however, agrees with the behavior of the shuﬄed cat-
1.2 (see [Davidsen
alog (not shown), using an exponent D
and Goltz , 2004; Davidsen and Paczuski, 2005]).

lD−1

/lD

∼

≃

i

h

i

kshuﬄed

Fig. 2b shows the degree distributions from the original
(open symbols) and shuﬄed catalogs (solid symbols) with
m = 2.5. The network analysis clearly distinguishes the two
cases. For the shuﬄed catalog, both histograms are approx-
imately described by a Poisson distribution (solid lines in
Fig. 2b) with mean degree
= 9.60, consistent with
the asymptotic distribution for the number of record setting
events of a random process [Glick , 1978]. Furthermore, the
number of nodes with in- (out-) degree one, N (1), for the
shuﬄed catalog compares well with the expected value for a
random process [Krug and Jain, 2004; Glick , 1978], consid-
ering that for those nodes the closest event in space is also
the closest in time. For event j, this happens with probabil-
ity 1/Nj , where Nj is the number of remaining events in the
process. Thus Nrandom(1) = P
ln(Nnodes)+C
Nj =1 1/Nj
(where C
0.58 is Catalan’s constant) which gives 10.6 for
the network considered here. Of course, the average degree

Nnodes

≈

≈

Figure 3. Distributions of recurrence times for diﬀerent
threshold magnitudes m. The solid symbols correspond
to times below 90 seconds which are underestimated and
unreliable due to measurement restrictions. The straight
line has slope -0.95. The inset shows the same distribu-
tions for the shuﬄed catalog.

X - 4

DAVIDSEN, GRASSBERGER AND PACZUSKI: EARTHQUAKE RECURRENCE

−

h

i

i

is the average number of record breaking events. For
k
h
event j with Nj events following it, the average number of
recording breaking events is ln(Nj ) + C. Averaging over all
events gives

= ln(Nnodes) + C

1 = 9.60.

k

i

For the original catalog these statistics deviate from
the predictions of the model, which assumes uncorrelated
events. First, the average degree of the network is lower,
= 7.40. Also, there is a preponderance of nodes
koriginal
h
with small out degree as well as an excess of nodes with
large out-degree compared to a Poisson distribution. This
eﬀect increases with magnitude, as an analysis of subsets
with higher magnitude threshold shows. Note, however,
decreases with m, simply because the cat-
that
alog size shrinks with m. In particular, we ﬁnd
=
h
6.24, 5.20, 4.35 for m = 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, respectively.

koriginal

koriginal

i

h

i

≈

The distribution of recurrence times T for diﬀerent m are
shown in Fig. 3. These distributions all decay roughly as
1/T α with α
0.95 for intermediate times as indicated by
the solid line. The supposed scaling region in Fig. 3 shows
some curvature, though. Surprisingly, Pm(T ) is indepen-
dent of m and N and therefore also of the rate of earth-
quakes. This is very diﬀerent from the random model as
well as earlier results for waiting time distributions between
earthquakes [Bak et al., 2002; Corral , 2003] and reﬂects a
new non-trivial feature of the spatiotemporal organization of
seismicity. By contrast, the shuﬄed catalog (inset in Fig. 3)
shows a clear dependence on m at small T .

Finally, we show in Fig. 2c distributions of ratios of the
times T for subsequent recurrences. This is analogous to
Fig. 2a, where spatial distances were considered instead of
temporal ones. The clearest scaling can be seen for T1/T2,
0.6. The distributions
again with exponent approximately
for larger i follow roughly the same scaling law for ratios
1, but deviate (less strong than for the spatial data in
≪
Fig. 2a) when the ratios tend to 1. Again it is obvious
that this behavior cannot be explained by the fractal model
with uncorrelated events. This structure also changes sig-
niﬁcantly when the catalog is shuﬄed. 5

−

Acknowledgments. We thank the Southern California

Earthquake Center (SCEC) for providing the data.

Notes

1. http://www.data.scec.org/ftp/catalogs/SHLK/
2. Note that a systematic dependence of the location error on
magnitude has not been reported in the literature and is also
not present in the catalog at hand.
It is unlikely that the
characteristic length we see (l∗) is merely a crossover due to
location errors at small scales.

3. The shuﬄing was performed in the following way: Consider all
events in the catalog with magnitude m ≥ mc = 2.5. Shuﬄe
the magnitudes and the epicenter locations separately, keeping
the times of occurrence, and then apply the recurrence anal-
ysis for the diﬀerent subsets deﬁned by diﬀerent magnitude
thresholds as before.

4. Note that ˜P (T ) is not normalized to R dT ˜P (T ) = 1, and is

indeed not normalizable at all.

5. Our results are robust with respect to modiﬁcations of the
rules used to construct the network, e.g., using spatial neigh-
borhoods such that the construction becomes symmetric under
time reversal or taking into account magnitudes. These mod-
iﬁcations have the drawback that they do not deﬁne a record
breaking process consisting of recurrences to each event.

References

Bak, P., K. Christensen, L. Danon, and T. Scanlon (2002), Uni-
ﬁed scaling law for earthquakes, Physical Review Letters, 88,
178501.

Baiesi, M., and M. Paczuski (2005), Complex networks of earth-
quakes and aftershocks, Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics,
12, 1.

Corral, A. (2003), Local distribution and rate ﬂuctuations in a
uniﬁed scaling law for earthquakes, Physical Review E, 68,
035102.

Corral, A. (2004), Long-term clustering, scaling, and universality
in the temporal occurrence of earthquakes, Physical Review
Letters, 92, 108501.

Davidsen, J., and C. Goltz (2004), Are seismic waiting time distri-
butions universal?, Geophysical Research Letters, 31, L21612.
Davidsen, J., and M. Paczuski (2005), Analysis of the spatial
distribution between successive earthquakes, Physical Review
Letters, 94, 048501.

Eckmann, J.-P., S. O. Kamphorst, and D. Ruelle (1987), Recur-
rence plots of dynamical systems, Europhys. Lett., 4, 973.
Glick, N. (1978), Breaking records and breaking boards, Amer.

Math. Monthly, 85, 2.

Kagan, Y. Y. (2002), Aftershock zone scaling, Bulletin of the

Seismological Society of America, 92, 641.

Krug, J., and K. Jain (2004), Breaking records in the evolutionary

race, e-print arXiv:q-bio.PE/0409019.

Nevzorov, V. B. (1987), Records, Theory Prob. Appl., 32, 201.
Rundle, J. B., K. F. Tiampo, W. Klein, and J. S. S. Martins
(2002), Self-organization in leaky threshold systems: The in-
ﬂuence of near-mean ﬁeld dynamics and its implications for
earthquakes, neurobiology, and forecasting, Proceedings Na-
tional Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 99, 2514.

Rundle, J. B., D. L. Turcotte, R. Shcherbakov, W. Klein, and
C. Sammis (2003), Statistical physics approach to understand-
ing the multiscale dynamics of earthquake fault systems, Re-
view of Geophysics, 41, 1019.

Shearer, P., E. Hauksson, G. Lin, and D. Kilb (2003), Comprehen-
sive waveform cross-correlation of southern California seismo-
grams: Part 2. event locations obtained using cluster analysis.,
Eos Trans. AGU, 84, 46.

Turcotte, D. L. (1997), Fractals and chaos in geology and geo-
physics, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Wells, D. L., and K. J. Coppersmith (1994), New empirical rela-
tionships between magnitude, rupture length, rupture width,
rupture area, and surface displacement, Bulletin of the Seis-
mological Society of America, 84, 974.

Wiemer, S., and M. Wyss (2000), Minimum magnitude of com-
pleteness in earthquake catalogs: examples from Alaska, the
western United States, and Japan, Bulletin of the Seismologi-
cal Society of America, 90, 859.

J. Davidsen, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik Komplexer Sys-
teme, N¨othnitzer Strasse 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany. (david-
sen@pks.mpg.de)

