5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modiﬁcation of the Pattern Informatics Method for

Forecasting Large Earthquake Events Using

Complex Eigenvectors

J. R. Holliday a,b J. B. Rundle a,b K. F. Tiampo c W. Klein d

a Center for Computational Science and Engineering, University of California, Davis,

b Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, California, USA.

c Department of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,

d Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

e Earth and Space Sciences Division, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California,

A. Donnellan e

California, USA.

CANADA.

USA.

Abstract

Recent studies have shown that real-valued principal component analysis can be applied

to earthquake fault systems for forecasting and prediction. In addition, theoretical analysis

indicates that earthquake stresses may obey a wave-like equation, having solutions with

inverse frequencies for a given fault similar to those that characterize the time intervals

between the largest events on the fault. It is therefore desirable to apply complex principal

component analysis to develop earthquake forecast algorithms. In this paper we modify the

Pattern Informatics method of earthquake forecasting to take advantage of the wave-like

Preprintsubmitted toElsevier Science

2February 2008

properties of seismic stresses and utilize the Hilbert transform to create complex eigenvec-

tors out of measured time series. We show that Pattern Informatics analyses using com-

plex eigenvectors create short-term forecast hot-spot maps that differ from hot-spot maps

created using only real-valued data and suggest methods of analyzing the differences and

Key words: complex principal components, Pattern Informatics, earthquake forecasting

calculating the information gain.

PACS: 05.45.Tp, 91.30.Px

1 Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a mathematical procedure that transforms a

set of correlated variables into a smaller set of uncorrelated variables called prin-

cipal components. The ﬁrst principal component accounts for as much of the vari-

ability in the data as possible, and each succeeding component attempts to account

for the remaining variability. Savage (1988) introduced PCA to the seismic com-

munity by using it to decompose time series data into a complete set of orthonormal

subspaces that isolate spatial and temporal eigensources.

Complex principal component analysis is an extension of classical principal com-

ponent analysis in which the spatial basis vectors represent the eigenfunctions of

a complex correlation matrix. It is closely related to principal oscillation pattern

(POP) analysis, in which the oscillating basis pattern states are the eigenfunctions

of a deterministic feedback matrix (Penland, 1989) (both techniques empirically

Email addresses: holliday@cse.ucdavis.edu (J. R. Holliday),

jbrundle@ucdavis.edu (J. B. Rundle), ktiampo@uwo.ca (K. F. Tiampo),

klein@buphyc.bu.edu (W. Klein), donnellan@jpl.nasa.gov (A. Donnellan).

2

identify time-dependent spatial patterns in a multivariate time series of geophys-

ical or other data). POP analysis has been shown to be reasonably successful in

forecasting El Ni˜no-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events up to a year in advance

(Wu et al., 1994). In complex PCA, a real-valued time series is analytically con-

tinued into the complex-valued domain by means of a Hilbert transform (Horel,

1984), then the N × N complex correlation matrix is formed via cross-correlation

of the N independent time series. These methods have been applied extensively

in the atmospheric and ocean sciences (Penland, 1989; Burger, 1993; Zhang et al.,

1997; Egger, 1999; Kim and North, 1999).

The primary beneﬁt of complex PCA compared to other analysis procedures is that

it allows propagating features within the time series to be detected and dissected in

terms of their spatial and temporal behavior (Horel, 1984). In particular, localized

propagating phenomena, if they exist, can be easily detected. Classical PCA, for

example, allows only the detection of standing oscillations.

Recently it has been shown that the same kinds of real-valued PCA analysis can be

applied to earthquake fault systems for forecasting and prediction (Rundle et al.,

2000b; Tiampo et al., 2002a,b). It is known that earthquakes recur in complex cy-

cles, similar to ENSO events, albeit with the larger earthquake events having sub-

stantially longer time scales (Scholz, 1990) than those that apply to ENSO–typically

a decade or less. In addition, theoretical analysis (Klein, 2004) indicates that earth-

quake stresses may obey a wave-like equation, having solutions with inverse fre-

quencies for a given fault similar to those that characterize the time intervals be-

tween the largest events on the fault. It is of considerable interest to apply complex

PCA and POP analysis to develop earthquake forecast algorithms, taking account

of the complex cyclic and quasi-periodic nature of these events.

3

A problem with this approach is that earthquake event time series are typically

not continuous and differentiable, but instead are point processes, both in space

and in time. In addition, high quality measurements of earthquakes have only been

comprehensively observed with instruments for a few decades, so the complete

(high-density) time series that are available are relatively short compared to the re-

currence periods for large earthquakes of hundreds of years and longer. The Pattern

Informatics (PI) method for earthquake forecasting is well suited for these types

of impulsive time series and performs very well with data sets much shorter than

the recurrence periods for large earthquakes events (Holliday et al., 2005). As such,

it is an ideal candidate for modiﬁcation to use complex eigenfunctions and eigen-

vectors. Assuming that seismic phenomena are analytic, causality considerations

allow us to apply the Cauchy Riemann dispersion relations (Arfken and Weber,

2001) and analytically continue the measured time series from the real axis into the

entire upper half-plane of complex space. In this new space we propose to utilize

the PI method.

2 Modiﬁed Method

Our modiﬁed PI method is based on the idea that the future time evolution of

seismicity can be described by pure phase dynamics (Mori and Kuramoto, 1998;

Rundle et al., 2000a,b), hence a complex seismic phase function ˆS(xi, tb, t) is con-

structed and allowed to rotate in its Hilbert space. This modiﬁed representation

of the input data serves two purposes. First, a complex Hilbert space allows de-

tection both of standing oscillations and traveling waves (Horel, 1984). This is

important for identifying the quasi-periodic nature of seismicity. Second, the con-

struction allows for interference between the real and imaginary parts of the phase

4

function. This interference helps correlate geographic locations which are spatially

separated.

To create our phase function, the geographic area of interest is partitioned into N

square bins centered on a point xi and with an edge length δx determined by the

nature of the physical system. For our analysis we chose δx = 0.1◦ ≈ 11km,

corresponding to the linear size of a magnitude M ∼ 6 earthquake. Within each

box, a time series ψobs(xi, t) is deﬁned by counting how many earthquakes with

magnitude greater than Mmin occurred during the time period t to t + δt. These

time series are interpreted as the real-valued portion of an analytic signal, and thus

the entire signal is recreated by combining ψobs with its Hilbert transform:

ψobs(xi, t) → Ψ(xi, t) ≡ ψobs + ˜ψobs,

where ˜ψobs(xi, t) = 1
π

P

∞
−∞

ψ(xi,τ )dτ
t−τ

and Cauchy principal value integration is

speciﬁed (Bracewell, 1999). Next, the activity rate function S(xi, tb, T ) is deﬁned

R

as the average rate of occurrence of earthquakes in box i over the period tb to T :

S(xi, tb, T ) =

T

t=tb Ψ(xi, t)
T − tb

.

P

If tb is held to be a ﬁxed time, S(xi, tb, T ) can be interpreted as the ith com-

ponent of a general, time-dependent vector evolving in an N-dimensional space

(Tiampo et al., 2002b). Furthermore, it can be shown that this N-dimensional cor-

relation space is deﬁned by the eigenvectors of an N×N correlation matrix (Rundle et al.,

2000a,b). In order to remove the ﬁnal free parameter in the system–the choice of

base year–changes in the activity rate function are then averaged over all possible

(1)

(2)

(3)

base-time periods:

S(xi, t0, T ) =

T

tb=t0 S(xi, tb, T )
T − t0

.

P

5

The base averaged activity rate function is then normalized by subtracting the spa-

tial mean over all boxes and scaling to give a unit-norm:

ˆS(xi, t0, T ) =

S(xi, t0, T ) − 1
N
j=1[S(xj, t0, T ) − 1
N
P
N

N

j=1 S(xj, t0, T )

N

k=1 S(xk, t0, T )]2

.

(4)

qP

P

The requirement that the rate functions have a constant norm helps remove random

ﬂuctuations from the system. Following the assumption of pure phase dynamics

(Rundle et al., 2000a,b), the important changes in seismicity will be given by the

change in the normalized base averaged activity rate function from the time period

t1 to t2:

∆ˆS(xi, t0, t1, t2) = ˆS(xi, t0, t2) − ˆS(xi, t0, t1).

(5)

This is simply a pure rotation of the N-dimensional unit vector ˆS(xi, t0, T ) through

time. Finally, the probability of change of activity in a given box is deduced from

the square of its base averaged, mean normalized change in activity rate:

P (xi, t0, t1, t2) = [∆ˆS(xi, t0, t1, t2)]⋆ × [∆ˆS(xi, t0, t1, t2)],

(6)

where multiplication and complex conjugation are indicated. In phase dynamical

systems, probabilities are always related to the square of the associated vector phase

function (Mori and Kuramoto, 1998; Rundle et al., 2000b). This probability func-

tion is often given relative to the background by subtracting off its spatial mean:

P ′(xi, t0, t1, t2) ⇒ P (xi, t0, t1, t2) − µ,

(7)

Where µ = 1
N

N

j=1 P (xj, t0, t1, t2) and P ′ indicates the probability of change in

activity is measured relative to the background.

P

6

37˚

36˚

35˚

34˚

33˚

32˚

37˚

36˚

35˚

34˚

33˚

32˚

(A)

(B)

(C)

-122˚

-121˚

-120˚

-119˚

-118˚

-117˚

-116˚

-115˚

-122˚

-121˚

-120˚

-119˚

-118˚

-117˚

-116˚

-115˚

-122˚

-121˚

-120˚

-119˚

-118˚

-117˚

-116˚

-115˚

Fig. 1. Logarithmic seismic hot-spot map for large earthquake events with M ≥ 5 for the

forecasted time period 1 August 2004 to 31 July 2009 using (A) complex eigenvectors and

(B) real-valued eigenvectors. Data from the SCEDC catalog was used below 35◦ North

latitude while data from the NCEDC catalog was used above 35◦ North latitude. Figure (C)

is a difference map plotted with a linear scale.

3 Application Of The Method

As an application of the modiﬁed PI method, we created a short-term forecast seis-

mic hot-spot map for Southern California over the time period 1 August 2004 to

31 July 2009. The result is shown in Figure 1A. Also presented in Figure 1 is the

same forecast map created with real-valued eigenvectors (1B) and a difference map

between the two methods (1C).

Two data sets were employed in this analysis, the ﬁrst being the entire historic seis-

mic catalog from 1 January 1932 through 31 July 2004, obtained from the Southern

California Earthquake Data Center (SCEDC) on-line searchable database 1 , with

all non-local and blast events speciﬁcally removed. The relevant data consists of

location, in East longitude and North latitude, and the date the event occurred. Seis-

mic events between −122◦ and −115◦ longitude and between 32◦ and 35◦ latitude

(any depth and quality) and with magnitude greater than or equal to Mmin = 3.0

were selected. Data from the time period 1977-1980 is currently missing from

1 http://www.data.scec.org/catalog search/index.html

7

the database but can be found at the older Southern California Seismic Network

(SCSN) archives 2 .

The second source of data employed in this analysis was acquired from the North-

ern California Earthquake Data Center (NCEDC) on-line searchable database 3 ,

with all non-local and blast events again speciﬁcally removed. When incorporating

this catalog, seismic events between −122◦ and −115◦ longitude and between 35◦

and 37◦ latitude (any depth and quality) and with magnitude greater than or equal to

Mmin = 3.0 were selected. The necessity for utilizing this additional catalog in our

analysis arises from various earthquake events in the vicinity of 35◦ North latitude

missing from the SCEDC/SCSN catalog but present in the NCEDC collection.

The necessity of combining catalogs arises from the fact that the SCEDC catalog is

not complete in its network coverage above the joining mark. Most notably, it does

not contain earthquakes from the San Simeon region (location of the M = 6.5,

2003 event).

As can be seen in Figure 1, the map created using complex eigenvectors is similar

to the map created using real-valued eigenvectors. Important differences, however,

are present. Most prominent are the increased emphasis of forecasted activity sur-

rounding 36◦ North latitude, −117.9◦ East longitude and the decreased emphasis of

forecasted activity southwest of the 1999 Hector Mine events. While future moni-

toring of these areas will be necessary to help determine the accuracy and reliability

of complex PI analysis, certain measurements can be performed to estimate the in-

formation gain.

2 http://www.data.scec.org/ftp/catalogs/SCSN/
3 http://quake.geo.berkeley.edu/ncedc/catalog-search.html

8

3.1 Entropy

Using methods from information theory (Cover and Thomas, 1991), we can calcu-

late the entropy, H, of our two hot-spot maps. Entropy can be considered a measure

of disorder (e.g. randomness) or “surprise”, hence maps with lower entropy contain

more useful information than maps with higher entropy. We deﬁne entropy as

H(z) = −

p(xi; z) log p(xi; z),

N

i=1
X

where

p(xi; z) =

P (xi, t0, t1, t2)
0

(

P (xi, t0, t1, t2) ≥ z
P (xi, t0, t1, t2) < z

,

(8)

(9)

and the probabilities are scaled such that

N

i=1 p(xi) = 1. This deﬁnitions allows a

measurement of entropy as a function of some lower threshold.

P

Performing this calculation on the two maps indicates that the complex PI anal-

ysis does indeed yield more useful information (lower H-value) than the original

analysis, but only when the lower threshold is non-zero. With complex PCA cal-

culations, sudden transitions and noisy spikes are emphasized (Horel, 1984). Since

seismic time series data can be approximated by chains of delta functions, we ex-

pect that calculations in the complex domain would contain more low-level noise.

A small, non-zero threshold allows us to measure the entropy above and relative to

this noise.

9

3.2 ROC Analysis

A second measure for the accuracy of the hot-spot maps can be inferred from rela-

tive operating characteristic (ROC) diagrams. ROC curves are essentially signal de-

tection curves for binary forecasts obtained by plotting the hit rate (y-axis) against

the false alarm rate (x-axis) over a range of different thresholds (Joliffee and Stephenson,

2003). Originally established for verifying tornado forecasts (Murphy and Winkler,

1987), ROC frameworks have recently become popular in the seismic community

as well (Molchan, 1997).

While only one year has passed since the onset of the hot-spot forecasts given in

Figure 1, we can create ROC diagrams for the two maps by considering a “hit”

to be any box i with P (xi, t0, t1, t2) ≥ z, for some threshold z, that contains a

future large earthquake. Similarly we consider a “false alarm” to be any box j

with P (xj, t0, t1, t2) ≥ z, for some threshold z, that does not contain a future large

earthquake. Since a successful forecast will maximize the hit rate while minimizing

the false alarm rate, a measure of the forecast accuracy is given by the area, AROC

under the ROC curve. It can be shown that AROC → 1 for a perfect forecast and

AROC → 0.5 for a forecast consisting of randomly distributed alarms.

Performing this calculation on the two maps again indicates that the complex PI

analysis is better correlated with future large events (higher AROC-value) than the

original analysis. It is important to consider, however, that this analysis is only

using one year of observed future seismicity. A full analysis should be performed

at the end of the forecast interval.

10

4 Conclusion

Complex PCA is a useful tool and is ideally suited for many applications. There

are, however, situations where the results of complex PCA are difﬁcult to interpret

such as when both amplitude and phase relationships must be considered. For these

types of systems, the existence of phase information by itself suggests the need for

an analysis in the full complex domain.

The theoretical evidence that earthquake stress ﬁelds are wave-like in nature indi-

cates that seismicity is better studied using complex time series. Due to its ability to

create seismic hot-spot forecast maps using relatively short time series data and its

handling of impulsive data sets, the PI method is naturally extended to this complex

domain.

In our ﬁve year seismic hot-spot forecast for southern California, the map created

using complex eigenvectors has subtle differences with the the map created using

real-valued eigenvectors. These differences result in more useful information (i.e.

a reduction in the map entropy) and in better apparent correlation with future large

earthquakes. Future monitoring and testing, however, will be necessary to conclu-

sively determine the accuracy and reliability of complex PI analysis.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by a grant from US Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of

Basic Energy Sciences to the University of California, Davis DE-FG03-95ER14499

(JRH and JBR) and through additional funding from the National Aeronautics and

Space Administration under grants through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the

11

University of California, Davis.

References

tion. Academic Press.

New York.

6 (10), 1972–86.

Interscience, New York.

Arfken, G. B., Weber, H. J., 2001. Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 5th Edi-

Bracewell, R. N., 1999. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications. McGraw-Hill,

Burger, G., Oct. 1993. Complex principal oscillation pattern analysis. J. Climate

Cover, T. M., Thomas, J. A., 1991. Elements of Information Theory. Wiley-

Egger, J., July 1999. POPs and MOPs principal and main oscillation patterns. Cli-

mate Dynamics 15 (7), 561–8.

Holliday, J. R., Rundle, J. B., Tiampo, K. F., Klein, W., Donnellan, A., 2005. Sys-

tematic procedural and sensitivity analysis of the pattern informatics method for

forecasting large (m ≥ 5) earthquake events in southern California, in print.

Horel, J. D., 1984. Complex principal component analysis: Theory and examples.

J. Appl. Meteor. 23, 1660–1673.

Joliffee, I. T., Stephenson, D. B., 2003. Forecast Veriﬁcation. John Wiley.

Kim, K., North, G. R., July 1999. EOF-based linear prediction algorithm: examples.

J. Climate 12 (7), 2076–92.

Klein, W., 2004. Stress ﬁeld evolution near the spinodal, unpublished.

Molchan, G. M., 1997. Earthquake predictions as a decision-making problem. Pure

Mori, H., Kuramoto, Y., 1998. Dissipative Structures and Chaos. Springer-Verlag,

Appl. Geophys. 149, 233–247.

Berlin.

12

Murphy, A. H., Winkler, R. L., 1987. A general framework for forecast veriﬁcation.

Mon. Weather Rev. 115, 1330–1338.

Penland, C., 1989. Random forcing and forecasting using principal oscillation pat-

tern analysis. Monthly Weather Rev. 117, 2165–2185.

Rundle, J. B., Klein, W., Gross, S. J., Tiampo, K. F., 2000a. Dynamics of seismicity

patterns in systems of earthquake faults. In: Rundle, J. B., Turcotte, D. L., Klein,

W. (Eds.), Geocomplexity and the Physics of Earthquakes. Vol. 120 of Geophys.

Monogr. Ser. AGU, Washington, D. C., pp. 127–146.

Rundle, J. B., Klein, W., Tiampo, K. F., Gross, S. J., 2000b. Linear pattern dynamics

in nonlinear threshold systems. Phys. Rev. E. 61, 2418–2432.

Savage, J. C., 1988. Principal component analysis of geodetically measured defor-

mation in long valley caldera, eastern California, 19831987. J. Geophys. Res. 93,

13297–13305.

Scholz, C. H., 1990. Geophysics–earthquakes as chaos. Nature 348, 197–198.

Tiampo, K. F., Rundle, J. B., McGinnis, S., Gross, S. J., Klein, W., 2002a. Eigen-

patterns in southern California seismicity. J. Geophys. Res. 107 (B12), 2354.

Tiampo, K. F., Rundle, J. B., McGinnis, S., Klein, W., 2002b. Pattern dynamics and

forecast methods in seismically active regions. Pure App. Geophys 159, 2429–

2467.

Wu, D. H., Anderson, D. L. T., Davey, M. K., 1994. ENSO prediction experiments

using a simple ocean-atmosphere model. Tellus Ser. A–Dynamic Meteorology

and Oceanography 46, 465–480.

Zhang, Y., Dymnikov, V., Wallace, J. M., July 1997. Sensitiviy test of POP system

matrices–an application of spectral portrait of a nonsymmetric matrix. J. Climate

10 (7), 1753–8.

13

