5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A RELM earthquake forecast based on pattern informatics

James R. Holliday1,2, Chien-chih Chen3,2, Kristy F. Tiampo4,
John B. Rundle2,1, Donald L. Turcotte5, and Andrea Donnelan6

1 Department of Physics - University of California, Davis, USA
2 Computational Science and Engineering Center - University of California, Davis, USA
3 National Central University - Taiwan
Department of Earth Sciences - University of Western Ontario, Canada
5 Geology Department - University of California, Davis, USA
6 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA

4

Abstract

We present a RELM forecast of future earthquakes in California that is
primarily based on the pattern informatics (PI) method. This method
identiﬁes regions that have systematic ﬂuctuations in seismicity, and it
has been demonstrated to be successful. A PI forecast map originally
published on 19 February 2002 for southern California successfully fore-
cast the locations of sixteen of eighteen M>5 earthquakes during the
past three years. The method has also been successfully applied to Japan
and on a worldwide basis. An alternative approach to earthquake fore-
casting is the relative intensity (RI) method. The RI forecast map is
based on recent levels of seismic activity of small earthquakes. Recent
advances in the PI method show considerable improvement, particularly
when compared with the RI method using relative operating character-
istic (ROC) diagrams for binary forecasts. The RELM application re-
quires a probability for each location for a number of magnitude bins
over a ﬁve year period. We have therefore constructed a hybrid fore-
cast in which we combine the PI method with the RI method to com-
pute a map of probabilities for events occurring at any location, rather
than just the most probable locations. These probabilities are further
converted, using Gutenberg-Richter scaling laws, to anticipated rates of
future earthquakes that can be evaluated using the RELM test.

1 Introduction

There have been a wide variety of approaches applied to the forecast-
ing of earthquakes (Turcotte, 1991; Kanamori, 2003). These approaches
can be divided into two general classes; the ﬁrst is based on empirical
observations of precursory changes. Examples include precursory seis-
mic activity, precursory ground motions, and many others. The second
approach is based on statistical patterns of seismicity. Neither approach
has been able to provide reliable short-term forecasts (days to months)
on a consistent basis.

Although short-term predictions are not available, long-term seismic-
hazard assessments can be made. A large fraction of all earthquakes oc-
cur in the vicinity of plate boundaries, although some do occur in plate
interiors. It is also possible to assess the long-term probability of having
an earthquake of a speciﬁed magnitude in a speciﬁed region. These as-
sessments are primarily based on the hypothesis that future earthquakes
will occur in regions where past, typically large, earthquakes have oc-
curred (Kossobokov et al., 2000). As we will discuss, a more promising
approach is to begin with the hypothesis that the rate of occurrence of
small earthquakes in a region can be analyzed to assess the probability
of occurrence of much larger earthquakes.

The RELM forecast described in this paper is primarily based on
the pattern informatics (PI) method (Rundle et al., 2002; Tiampo et al.,
2002c,a; Rundle et al., 2003). This method identiﬁes regions of strongly
correlated ﬂuctuations in seismic activity. These regions are the loca-
tions where subsequent large earthquakes have been shown to occur,

therefore indicating a strong association with the high stress preced-
ing the main shock. The ﬂuctuations in seismicity rate revealed in a
PI map have been found to be related to the preparation process for large
earthquakes. Seismic quiescence and seismic activation (Bowman et al.,
1998; Wyss and Habermann, 1988), which are revealed by the PI map,
are examples of such preparation processes. The PI method identiﬁes
the existence of correlated regions of seismicity in observational data
that precede the main shock by months and years. The fact that this cor-
related region locates the aftershocks as well as main shocks leads us
to identify this region of correlated seismicity with the region of corre-
lated high stress (Tiampo et al., 2002b,c,a). Finally, our results with the
PI map indicate that the occurrences of future signiﬁcant earthquakes
are better forecasted by a change (correlated ﬂuctuation) in the average
seismicity rate rather than with the high seismicity rate itself.

The PI method does not predict earthquakes, rather it forecasts the
regions (hotspots) where earthquakes are most likely to occur in the rel-
atively near future (typically ﬁve to ten years). The objective is to re-
duce the areas of earthquake risk relative to those given by long-term
hazard assessments. The result is a map of areas in a seismogenic re-
gion (hotspots) where earthquakes are likely to occur during a speciﬁed
period in the future. In this paper a PI map is combined with historic
seismicity data to produce a map of probabilities for future large events.
These probabilities can be further converted, using Gutenberg-Richter
scaling laws, to forecast rates of occurrence of future earthquakes in spe-
ciﬁc magnitude ranges. This forecast can be evaluated using the RELM
model. In the following we present details of the PI method and the pro-
cedure for producing a composite forecast map. A discussion on binary
forecasts and forecast veriﬁcation techniques is given in the appendix.

2 The PI method

Our approach divides the seismogenic region to be studied into a grid
of square boxes, or “pixels”, whose size is related to the magnitude
of the earthquakes to be forecast. The rates of seismicity in each box
are studied to quantify anomalous behavior. The basic idea is that any
seismicity precursors represent changes, either a local increase or de-
crease of seismic activity, so our method identiﬁes the locations in which
these changes are most signiﬁcant during a predeﬁned change interval.
The subsequent forecast interval is the ﬁve year time window during
which the forecast is valid. The box size is selected to be consistent
with the correlation length associated with accelerated seismic activity
(Bowman et al., 1998), and the minimum earthquake magnitude consid-
ered is the lower limit of sensitivity and completeness of the network in
the region under consideration. The PI method as applied to California
in this paper is composed of the following steps:

1. The seismically active region is binned into boxes of size 0.1◦ x
0.1◦ and all events having M ≥ 3.0 are used. These boxes are la-
beled xi. This is also the box size speciﬁed for the RELM forecast.

1

2. The seismicity obtained from the ANSS catalog for each day in
each box is uniformly spread over that box and the eight imme-
diately adjacent boxes (the Moore neighborhood (Moore, 1962)).
The resulting smoothed intensities for each box is a time series.

3. Only the top 10% most active boxes are considered. These are the
boxes with the most Mc ≥ 3.0 earthquakes during the period t0 =
1 January 1950 to t2 = 1 August 2005. Mc is the cutoff magnitude
for the analysis.

4. Each time series is normalized in time by subtracting the temporal

mean and dividing by the temporal standard deviation.

5. Each time series is then normalized in space for each value of time
by subtracting the spatial mean and dividing by the spatial standard
deviation.

6. Two intensity maps I1(xi, tb, t1), I2(xi, tb, t2) are computed by
averaging all the time series from an initial time, tb to t1 where
t0 < tb < t1, and then from tb to t2. Here t0 = 1 January 1950,
t1 = 1 January 1985, and t2 = 1 August 2005.

7. The intensity change ∆I(xi, tb, t1, t2) = I2(xi, tb, t2) −
I1(xi, tb, t1) is computed at each location and absolute value is
taken |∆I(xi, tb, t1, t2)|.

8. The average of |∆I(xi, tb, t1, t2)| over all values of t0 < tb <

tmax is then computed.

9. Finally, the mean squared change < |∆I(xi, tb, t1, t2)| >2 is

computed.

Note that steps (2), (3), (7), and (8) have been modiﬁed from the orig-
inal, published algorithm (Rundle et al., 2002; Tiampo et al., 2002c,a;
Rundle et al., 2003).

Hotspot pixels are deﬁned to be the regions where ∆Pi(t0, t1, t2)
is larger than some threshold value in the interval [0, 1]. In these re-
gions, Pi(t0, t1, t2) is larger than the average value for all boxes (the
background level). Note that since the intensities are squared in deﬁn-
ing probabilities the hotspots may be due to either increases of seismic
activity during the change time interval (activation) or due to decreases
(quiescence). We hypothesize that earthquakes with magnitudes larger
than Mc+2 will occur preferentially in hotspots during the forecast time
interval t2 to t3. Note that this is a binary forecast: either an earthquake
is forecast to occur or it is forecast not to occur.

3 Relative intensity

An alternative approach to earthquake forecasting is to use the rate of
occurrence of small earthquakes in the past. We refer to this type of
forecast as a relative intensity (RI) forecast. In such a forecast, the study
region is again tiled with boxes of size 0.1◦ × 0.1◦. The number of
earthquakes with magnitude M ≥ 3.0 in each box is determined over
the time period from t0 to t2. The RI score for each box is then com-
puted as the total number of earthquakes in the box in the time period
divided by the value for the box having the largest value. In order to cre-
ate a binary forecast, a threshold value in the interval [0, 1] is selected.
Large earthquakes having M ≥ 5 are then considered possible only in
boxes having an RI value larger than the threshold. The physical justi-
ﬁcation for this type of forecast is that large earthquakes are considered
most likely to occur at sites of high seismic activity. In this paper we
combine our binary PI forecast with a continuum RI forecast in order to
create our continuum RELM forecast.

4 Binary versus continuum forecasts

The earthquake forecast make by the PI method is a binary forecast.
An earthquake is forecast to occur in the hotspot regions and not to
occur in the other regions, analogous to the issuance of tornado warn-
ings. An extensive methodology has been developed in the atmo-
spheric sciences for forecast veriﬁcation. A standard approach uses
contingency tables and relative operating characteristic (ROC) diagrams
(Jolliffe and Stephenson, 2003). An example of binary forecast con-
struction and veriﬁcation is presented in the appendix.

The alternative to binary forecasts is a continuum forecast. The like-
lihood of an earthquake throughout the entire region is speciﬁed, anal-
ogous to temperature forecasts in the atmospheric sciences. A common
approach to testing the validity of these forecasts is the maximum like-
lihood test. Kagan and Jackson (2000) were the ﬁrst to apply this test
to earthquake forecasts. The maximum likelihood test is not appropriate
for the veriﬁcation of binary forecasts because they are overly sensitive
to the least probable events. For example, consider two forecasts. The
ﬁrst perfectly forecasts 99 out of 100 events but assigns zero probability
to the last event. The second assigns zero probability to all 100 events.
Under a likelihood test, both forecasts will have the same skill score of
−∞. Furthermore, a naive forecast that assigns uniform probability to
all possible sites will always score higher than a forecast that misses only
a single event but is otherwise superior.

5 Creating the forecast map

The PI method ﬁnds regions where earthquakes are most likely to occur
during a future time window. In order to create a forecast map suitable
for RELM testing, we combined the PI map with the RI map to create a
probability map. This map is then renormalized to unit probability and
scaled by the total number of M ≥ 5 earthquakes expected over the
future ﬁve year period. The details of this procedure are as follows:

1. We ﬁrst create a relative intensity map for the entire region to be
considered. Data was taken from the ANSS on-line catalog for the
years 1950 to 2005. This data was then truncated such that relative
values greater than 10−1 were set to 10−1 and non-zero values
less than 10−4 were set to 10−4. Finally, since the RELM calcu-
lations cannot handle zero-rate values, every box with zero historic
seismicity was given a value of 10−5. The RI map is shown in
Figure 1A.

2. We next perform a pattern informatics calculation over the top 10%
of most active sites in California using the ANSS catalog as input.
For this calculation, we used t0 = 1 January 1950, t1 = 1 January
1985, and t2 = 1 August 2005. Since the hotspots are where we ex-
pect future earthquakes to occur, they are given a probability value
of unity. The PI map is shown in Figure 1B.

3. We then create a composite probability map by superimposing the
PI map and its Moore neighborhood (the pixel plus its eight adja-
cent neighbors) on top of the RI map. All the hotspot pixels have
a probability of 1, and all other pixels have probabilities that range
from 10−5 to 10−1. The composite map is shown in Figure 2.

4. To convert our pixel probabilities to earthquake occurrence proba-
bilities, we ﬁrst add up the probabilities in all pixels in the region
and call this sum N . We then normalize this total to the expected
number of M ≥ 5.0 earthquakes during the forecast period. We
estimate four to eight such events per year and assume 30 such
events during a ﬁve year period. In order to do this, we multiply
each pixel probability by 30/N to give our RELM forecast. We
then use Gutenberg-Richter scaling to interpolate these rates into
the appropriate magnitude bins speciﬁed by the RELM test.

2

42˚

40˚

38˚

36˚

34˚

32˚

(A)

-124˚

-122˚

-120˚

-118˚

-116˚

-114˚

-124˚

-122˚

-120˚

-118˚

-116˚

-114˚

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

(B)

Figure 1: (A) Relative intensity (RI) map for all of California and the surrounding region. Data from the ANSS on-line catalog for the years 1950
to 2005 were used. (B) Pattern informatics (PI) map for the same region and time frame as above.

6 Discussion

Ultimately there exists the fundamental question of whether forecasts of
the time and location of future earthquakes can be accurately made. It
is accepted that long term hazard maps of the expected rate of occur-
rence of earthquakes are reasonably accurate. But is it possible to do
better? Are there precursory phenomena that will allow earthquakes to
be forecast?

It is actually quite surprising that immediate local precursory phenom-
ena are not seen. Prior to a volcanic eruption, increases in regional seis-
micity and surface movements are generally observed. For a fault sys-
tem, the stress gradually increases until it reaches the frictional strength
of the fault and a rupture is initiated. It is certainly reasonable to hy-
pothesize that the stress increase would cause increases in background
seismicity and aseismic slip. In order to test this hypothesis the Park-
ﬁeld Earthquake Prediction Experiment was initiated in 1985. The ex-
pected Parkﬁeld earthquake occurred beneath the heavily instrumented
region on 28 September 2004. No local precursory changes were ob-
served (Lindh, 2005).

In the absence of local precursory signals, the next question is whether
broader anomalies develop, and in particular whether there is anomalous
seismic activity. It is this question that is addressed in this paper. Using
a technique that has been successfully applied to the forecasting of El
Ni˜no we have developed a systematic pattern informatics (PI) approach
to the identiﬁcation of regions of anomalous seismic activity. Applica-
tions of this technique to California, Japan, and on a world-wide basis
have successfully forecast the location of future earthquakes. We em-
phasize that this is not an earthquake prediction. It is a forecast of where
future earthquakes are expected to occur during a future time window of

ﬁve to ten years. The objective is to reduce the possible future sites of
earthquakes relative to a long term hazard assessment map.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by NASA Headquarters under the Earth
System Science Fellowship Grant NGT5 (JRH), by research support
from the National Science Council and the Department of Earth Sciences
(CCC), by an HSERC Discovery grant (KFT), by a grant from the US
Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences to the University
of California, Davis DE-FG03-95ER14499 (JRH and JBR), and through
additional funding from NSF grant ATM-0327558 (DLT) and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration under grants through the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (AD) to the University of California, Davis.

Appendix A - Forecast veriﬁcation

Along with the RELM model, previous published tests of earthquake
forecasts have emphasized the likelihood test (Kagan and Jackson, 2000;
Rundle et al., 2002; Tiampo et al., 2002c; Holliday et al., 2005). As dis-
cussed above, these tests have the signiﬁcant disadvantage that they are
overly sensitive to the least probable events. For this reason, likelihood
tests are subject to unconscious bias.

An extensive review on forecast veriﬁcation in the atmospheric sci-
ences has been given by Jolliffe and Stephenson (2003). The wide va-
riety of approaches that they consider are directly applicable to earth-
quake forecasts as well. We believe that many of these approaches are
better suited to the evaluation of earthquake forecasts. The earthquake

42˚

40˚

38˚

36˚

34˚

32˚

3

42˚

40˚

38˚

36˚

34˚

32˚

-124˚

-122˚

-120˚

-118˚

-116˚

-114˚

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

Figure 2: Composite forecast map. The scaled PI and RI maps have been combined, and boxes outside the testing region have been discarded.

forecasts considered in this paper can be viewed as binary forecasts by
considering the events (earthquakes) as being forecast either to occur or
not to occur in a given box. We consider that there are four possible
outcomes for each box, thus two ways to classify each hotspot, box, and
two ways to classify each non-hotspot, box:

1. An event occurs in a hotspot box or within the Moore neighbor-
hood of the box (the Moore neighborhood is comprised of the eight
boxes surrounding the forecast box). This is a success.

2. No event occurs in a white non-hotspot box. This is also a success.

3. No event occurs in a hotspot box or within the Moore neighborhood

of the hotspot box. This is a false alarm.

4. An event occurs in a white, non-hotspot box. This is a failure to

forecast.

We note that these rules tend to give credit, as successful forecasts,
for events that occur very near hotspot boxes. We have adopted these
rules in part because the grid of boxes is positioned arbitrarily on the
seismically active region, thus we allow a margin of error of ±1 box
dimension. In addition, the events we are forecasting are large enough
so that their source dimension approaches, and can even exceed, the
box dimension meaning that an event might have its epicenter outside a
hotspot box, but the rupture might then propagate into the box. Other
similar rules are possible but we have found that all such rules basically
lead to similar results.

The standard approach to the evaluation of a binary forecast is the
use of a relative operating characteristic (ROC) diagram (Swets, 1973;
Mason, 2003). Standard ROC diagrams consider the fraction of failures-
to-predict and the fraction of false alarms. This method evaluates the
performance of the forecast method relative to random chance by con-

4

structing a plot of the fraction of failures to predict against the fraction
of false alarms for an ensemble of forecasts. Molchan (Molchan, 1997)
has used a modiﬁcation of this method to evaluate the success of inter-
mediate term earthquake forecasts.

The binary approach has a long history, over 100 years, in the veriﬁca-
tion of tornado forecasts (Mason, 2003). These forecasts take the form of
a tornado forecast for a speciﬁc location and time interval, each forecast
having a binary set of possible outcomes. For example, during a given
time window of several hours duration, a forecast is issued in which a
list of counties is given with a statement that one or more tornadoes will
or will not occur. A 2 × 2 contingency table is then constructed, the
top row contains the counties in which tornadoes are forecast to occur
and the bottom row contains counties in which tornadoes are forecast to
not occur. Similarly, the left column represents counties in which torna-
does were actually observed, and the right column represents counties in
which no tornadoes were observed.

With respect to earthquakes, our forecasts take exactly this form. A
time window is proposed during which the forecast of large earthquakes
having a magnitude above some minimum threshold is considered valid.
An example might be a forecast of earthquakes larger than M = 5
during a period of ﬁve or ten years duration. A map of the seismi-
cally active region is then completely covered (“tiled”) with boxes of
two types: boxes in which the epicenters of at least one large earth-
quake are forecast to occur and boxes in which large earthquakes are
forecast to not occur. In other types of forecasts, large earthquakes are
given some continuous probability of occurrence from 0% to 100% in
each box (Kagan and Jackson, 2000). These forecasts can be converted
to the binary type by the application of a threshold value. Boxes having
a probability below the threshold are assigned a forecast rating of non-
occurrence during the time window, while boxes having a probability
above the threshold are assigned a forecast rating of occurrence. A high
threshold value may lead to many failures to predict (events that occur
where no event is forecast), but few false alarms (an event is forecast at
a location but no event occurs). The level at which the threshold is set
is then a matter of public policy speciﬁed by emergency planners, repre-
senting a balance between the prevalence of failures to predict and false
alarms.

Appendix B - Binary earthquake forecast veriﬁ-
cation

To illustrate this approach to earthquake forecast veriﬁcation, we have
constructed two types of retrospective binary forecasts for California.
The ﬁrst type of forecast utilizes the PI results published by Rundle et
al. and Tiampo et al.
(Rundle et al., 2002; Tiampo et al., 2002c) for
southern California and adjacent regions (32◦ to 38.3◦ N lat, 238◦ to
245◦ E long). This forecast was constructed for the time period 1 Jan-
uary 2000 to 31 December 2009, but we performed an interim analysis
using data up to the present. The second type of forecast utilizes the RI
results with the same parameter thresholds.

The ﬁrst step in our generation of ROC diagrams is the construction
of the 2 × 2 contingency table for the PI and RI forecast maps. The
hotspot boxes in each map represent the forecast locations. A hotspot
box upon which at least one large future earthquake during the forecast
period occurs is counted as a successful forecast. A hotspot box upon
which no large future earthquake occurs during the forecast period is
counted as an unsuccessful forecast, or alternately, a false alarm. A
white box upon which at least one large future earthquake during the
forecast period occurs is counted as a failure to forecast. A white box
upon which no large future earthquake occurs during the forecast period
is counted as a unsuccessful forecast of non-occurrence.

Veriﬁcation of the PI and RI forecasts proceeds in exactly the same
was as for tornado forecasts. For a given number of hotspot boxes, which
is controlled by the value of the probability threshold in each map, the

Table 1: Contingency tables as a function of false alarm rate. In Ta-
ble 1A, a threshold value was chosen such that F ≈ 0.005. In Table 1B,
a threshold value was chosen such that F ≈ 0.021.
(A)

Pattern informatics (PI) forecast

Relative intensity (RI) forecast

Forecast

Forecast

Yes
No
Total

Yes
No
Total

Forecast

Forecast

Yes
No
Total

Yes
No
Total

Observed
No
(b) 25
(d) 4998
5023

Observed
No
(b) 27
(d) 4997
5024

Observed
No
(b) 104
(d) 4904
5008

Observed
No
(b) 107
(d) 4903
5010

Yes
(a) 4
(c) 13
17

Yes
(a) 2
(c) 14
16

Yes
(a) 23
(c) 9
32

Yes
(a) 20
(c) 10
30

Relative intensity (RI) forecast

Total
29
5011
5040

Total
29
5011
5040

Total
127
4913
5040

Total
127
4913
5040

(B)

Pattern informatics (PI) forecast

contingency table (see Table 1) is constructed for both the PI and RI
maps. Values for the table elements a (Forecast=yes, Observed=yes),
b (Forecast=yes, Observed=no), c (Forecast=no, Observed=yes), and d
(Forecast=no, Observed=no) are obtained for each map. The fraction of
colored boxes, also called the probability of forecast of occurrence, is
r = (a + b)/N , where the total number of boxes is N = a + b + c + d.
The hit rate is H = a/(a + c) and is the fraction of large earthquakes
that occur on a hotspot. The false alarm rate is F = b/(b + d) and is
the fraction of non-observed earthquakes that are incorrectly forecast.

To analyze the information in the PI and RI maps, the standard pro-
cedure is to consider all possible forecasts together. These are obtained
by increasing F from 0 (corresponding to no hotspots on the map) to 1
(all active boxes on the map are identiﬁed as hotspots). The plot of H
versus F is the relative operating characteristic (ROC) diagram. Vary-
ing the threshold value for both the PI and RI forecasts, we have ob-
tained the values of H and F given in Figure 3. The results correspond-
ing to the contingency tables given in Table 1 are given by the ﬁlled
symbols. The forecast with 29 hotspot boxes has FP I = 0.00498,
HP I = 0.235 and FRI = 0.00537, HRI = 0.125. The fore-
cast with 127 hotspot boxes has FP I = 0.0207, HP I = 0.719 and
FRI = 0.0213, HRI = 0.666. Also shown in Figure 3 is a gain curve
deﬁned by the ratio of HP I (F ) to HRI (F ). Gain values greater than
unity indicate better performance using the PI map than using the RI
map. The horizontal dashed line corresponds to zero gain. From Fig-
ure 3 it can be seen that the PI approach outperforms (is above) the RI
under many circumstances and both outperform a random map, where
H = F , by a large margin. For reference, ROC diagrams using the
modiﬁed method discussed in the main text for the same forecast period

5

)
F
(
H

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

RI
PI
Gain

RI
PI

 3

 2.5

 2

 1

 0.5

 1.5

)
F
(
G

)
F
(
H

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0.005

 0.01

 0.02

 0.025

 0.005

 0.01

 0.02

 0.025

 0.03

 0
 0.03

 0

 0

 0.015
F

 0.015
F

Figure 4: Relative operating characteristic (ROC) diagram. Plot of hit
rates, H, versus false alarm rates, F , for the RI forecast and PI forecast
using the modiﬁed method. Note that the PI approach outperforms the
RI under all circumstances.

Moore, E. F. (1962). Machine models of self reproduction.

In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourteenth Symposius on Applied Mathematics, pages
17–33. American Mathematical Society.

Rundle, J. B., Tiampo, K. F., Klein, W., and Martins, J. S. S. (2002).
Self-organization in leaky threshold systems: The inﬂuence of near-
mean ﬁeld dynamics and its implications for earthquakes, neurobiol-
ogy, and forecasting. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 99:2514–2521:
Suppl. 1.

Rundle, J. B., Turcotte, D. L., Shcherbakov, R., Klein, W., and Sam-
mis, C. (2003). Statistical physics approach to understanding the
multiscale dynamics of earthquake fault systems. Rev. Geophys.,
41(4):1019.

Swets, J. A. (1973). The relative operating characteristic in psychology.

Science, 182:990–1000.

Tiampo, K. F., Rundle, J. B., McGinnis, S., Gross, S. J., and Klein, W.
(2002a). Eigenpatterns in southern California seismicity. J. Geophys.
Res., 107(B12):2354.

Tiampo, K. F., Rundle, J. B., McGinnis, S., Gross, S. J., and Klein, W.
(2002b). Mean ﬁeld threshold systems and earthquakes: An applica-
tion to earthquake fault systems. Europhys. Lett., 60(3):481–487.

Tiampo, K. F., Rundle, J. B., McGinnis, S., and Klein, W. (2002c).
Pattern dynamics and forecast methods in seismically active regions.
Pure App. Geophys, 159:2429–2467.

Turcotte, D. L. (1991). Earthquake prediction. An. Rev. Earth Planet.

Sci., 19:263–281.

Wyss, M. and Habermann, R. E. (1988). Precursory seismic quiescence.

Pure Appl. Geophys., 126:319–332.

Figure 3: Relative operating characteristic (ROC) diagram. Plot of hit
rates, H, versus false alarm rates, F , for the PI forecast and RI forecast.
Also shown is the gain ratio deﬁned as HP I (F )/HRI (F ). The ﬁlled
symbols correspond to the threshold values used in Table 1, solid cir-
cles for 29 hotspot boxes and solid squares for 127 hotspot boxes. The
horizontal dashed line corresponds to zero gain.

are given in Figure 4. Note that a different input catalog was used for
this analysis. Also note that in this case, the PI approach outperforms
the RI under all circumstances.

References

Bowman, D. D., Ouillon, G., Sammis, C. G., Sornette, A., and Sornette,
D. (1998). An observational test of the critical earthquake concept. J.
Geophys. Res., 103:24359–24372.

Holliday, J. R., Rundle, J. B., Tiampo, K. F., Klein, W., and Donnellan,
A. (2005). Modiﬁcation of the pattern informatics method for fore-
casting large earthquake events using complex eigenvectors. Tectono-
physics, in press.

Jolliffe, I. T. and Stephenson, D. B. (2003). Forecast Veriﬁcation. John

Wiley, Chichester.

Kagan, Y. Y. and Jackson, D. D. (2000). Probabilistic forecasting of

earthquakes. Geophys. J. Int., 143:438–453.

Kanamori, H. (2003). Earthquake prediction: An overview.

In Lee,
W. H. K., Kanamori, H., Jennings, P. C., and Kisslinger, C., editors,
International Handbook of Earthquake & Engineering Seismology,
pages 1205–1216, Amsterdam. Academic Press.

Kossobokov, V. G., Keilis-Borok, V. I., Turcotte, D. L., and Mala-
mud, B. D. (2000). Implications of a statistical physics approach for
earthquake hazard assessment and forecasting. Pure Appl. Geophys.,
157:2323–2349.

Lindh, A. G. (2005). Success and failure at Parkﬁeld. Seis. Res. Let.,

76:3–6.

Mason, I. B. (2003). Binary events.

In Joliffe, I. T. and Stephenson,
D. B., editors, Forecast Veriﬁcation, pages 37–76, Chichester. John
Wiley.

Molchan, G. M. (1997). Earthquake predictions as a decision-making

problem. Pure Appl. Geophys., 149:233–247.

6

