6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Controlled Irradiative Formation of Penitentes

Vance Bergeron,1 Charles Berger,2 and M. D. Betterton3
1Ecole Normale Sup´ereiure, Laboratoire de Physique,
UMR 5672, 46 all´ee d’Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France
2Ecole Normale Sup´ereiure, Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, 24 rue Lhomond,75231 Paris Cedex 07, France
3Department of Physics, 390 UCB, University of Colorado, Boulder CO 80309, USA

Spike-shaped structures are produced by light-driven ablation in very diﬀerent contexts. Peni-
tentes 1-4 m high are common on Andean glaciers, where their formation changes glacier dynamics
and hydrology. Laser ablation can produce cones 10-100 µm high with a variety of proposed ap-
plications in materials science. We report the ﬁrst laboratory generation of centimeter-scale snow
and ice penitentes. Systematically varying conditions allows identiﬁcation of the essential parame-
ters controlling the formation of ablation structures. We demonstrate that penitente initiation and
coarsening requires cold temperatures, so that ablation leads to sublimation rather than melting.
Once penitentes have formed, further growth of height can occur by melting. The penitentes intially
appear as small structures (3 mm high) and grow by coarsening to 1-5 cm high. Our results are an
important step towards understanding and controlling ablation morphologies.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Kd,81.16.Rf,92.40.Rm,92.40.Sn,92.40.-t

Penitentes 1-4 m high are found on glaciers in high mountain regions; laser ablation of materials can produce similar
structures 10-100 µm high (Fig. 1). These structures are initiated by the same underlying physics: ablation caused by
direct and reﬂected radiation. When radiation illuminates a surface, small surface depressions receive more reﬂected
light than high points, leading to greater ablation in troughs and surface instability[1, 2, 3]. Penitente formation
alters glacial energy balances and therefore aﬀects local water runoﬀ and ﬂooding, feedback in climate dynamics,
and paleo-climatic reconstruction[4, 5]. In materials science, surface micropatterning via laser ablation can produce
problematic surface roughness[6, 7], but also has several proposed applications, including improved solar cells and
electron-ﬁeld emitters[8, 9].

Here we report the ﬁrst laboratory generation of snow penitentes 1-5 cm high (Fig. 1). We characterize lab penitente
formation and measure penitente coarsening. The lab setting allows controlled environmental conditions, and we can
measure the evolution of lab penitentes visually in real time. Our experiments provide a model system for studying
ablation morphologies.

Penitentes occur on high-altitude snowﬁelds exposed to intense sunlight, particularly in South America[10]. Expe-
ditions studying penitentes have invoked the importance of sunlight[4, 5, 10, 11] and cold, dry conditions (dew point
below 0oC), where melting is disfavored and ablation proceeds by sublimation[5, 10]. Concentrated reﬂections and
protection from wind increase penitente growth; higher temperature and humidity in the troughs of penitentes allows
melting in the troughs[10]. This eﬀect accelerates penitente growth, because sublimation of ice at 0oC requires 7.8
times more energy than melting an equivalent volume, while the sublimating surface is evaporatively cooled, further
lowering the surface temperature. Thus initiation of penitente growth requires a low dew point, but melting can occur
during later height growth.

Centimeter-scale penitentes similar in appearance to those we describe have been observed in ﬁeld work, where
they are called micropenitentes and are believed to be precursors to large Andean penitentes[5, 10, 12]. Thus our
experiments may mimic the initial stages of penitente development on high-altitude glaciers, and allow further un-
derstanding of the conditions necessary for penitente development. Our observation contrasts with reports on the
formation of suncups, an ablation morphology found on lower-altitude glaciers and snowﬁelds with a typical initial
wavelength of 5-10 cm[1, 2]. Suncups typically form in melting snow, where the uniform temperature of melting means
that no temperature gradients along the surface are present. This eﬀect may be responsible for the large diﬀerence in
initial feature size between micropenitentes and suncups.

Once penitentes are formed, feedback by multiple reﬂections and evaporative cooling preserve their shape[5]. Here
we study the initial stages of the instability when penitentes are most vulnerable to disruption. Simulations of an
Andean glacier basin suggest that penitentes lower the net ablation rate, preserving glacier mass. Global warming
is expected to increase the minimum elevation of penitente formation, accelerating the disappearance of Andean
glaciers and depleting water resources[5]. Particulate pollution could futher accelerate Andean glacier disappearance,
because snow optical properties are signiﬁcantly altered by surface debris[13, 14, 15]. Small dirt particles adhere to
the ablating surface and migrate toward its peaks[1]. A thin debris layer suppresses reﬂections and disrupts penitente
formation, while a thicker layer forms an insulating sheath and promotes formation of diﬀerent structures[1, 2].

2

FIG. 1:
laser ablation[8]. (c) Laboratory penitentes approximately 5 cm high.

Images of ablation spikes. (a) Penitentes in the Andes, approximately 2 m high[5]. (b) Silicon spikes created through

Laser ablation of surfaces can produce a variety of surface patterns[6], including arrays of conical spikes that bear
a striking resemblance to penitentes. The enhanced light capture due to multiple reﬂections on such micropatterned
silicon surfaces has led to the suggestion that they could form improved solar cells[8]. Conical spikes have been
demonstrated in metals and semiconductors[8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20], polymers[21, 22, 23, 24, 25], composites[26] and
ceramics[6, 27, 28]. The formation mechanism of ablation spikes shares common features with penitente formation.
The spikes tilt toward the illumination direction[8, 16, 22] and multiple reﬂections are believed to be important for
their growth[3, 16, 18]. Other variables are also important in the formation of microstructures by high-intensity laser
pulses, including light interference, hydrodynamics of melted surface material, re-freezing of material at cone tips,
surface impurities, and chemical interactions with ambient gas.

Our apparatus allows controlled air temperature down to -50oC with a relative humidity < 5% (Fig. 2). Illumination
is provided by a ﬂood lamp. We produce artiﬁcial snow with controlled particle radius by freezing water droplets[29].
In our experiments, penitente-like structures 1-5 cm high were produced after a few hours of illumination. The
direction of penitente growth is always aligned with the incident angle of our radiation source as observed in laser
ablation and on glaciers. Furthermore, at normal incidence we were able etch the conical irradiation proﬁle of the
lamp into the snow as shown in Figs. 2 and 4.

Filtering the light or creating wind eliminates penitente formation in our experiments. The absorption of light
by snow is much higher for near-infrared and infrared wavelengths than for other spectral regions[13]; therefore,
the intensity of these wavelengths controls the ablation rate. Selectively ﬁltering out infrared wavelengths inhibits
penitente formation in our setup. Similarly, using a fan to provide a steady breeze of 2.5 m s−1 over the snow surface
eliminates penitente production. The wind may prevent temperature gradients along the surface needed for penitente
formation through a reduction in the thickness of the water vapor boundary layer.

The optical extinction length determines the initial size structures that form, except in the case of particle sizes
comparable to the extinction length. We created artiﬁcial snow particles with radii between 25 µm and 2.5 mm. In

FIG. 2: Experimental apparatus. A horizontal freezer with Plexiglas cover serves as the environmental chamber. Temperature
control is achieved by passing dried compressed air through liquid nitrogen and into the chamber. Humidity control is achieved
by introducing water vapor. For further details, see [29].

3

FIG. 3: Coarsening data. Top, measurements of penitente height (circles) and peak separation (diamonds) versus time.
Bottom, penitente aspect ratio (height/peak separation) versus time. After an initial coarsening phase ∼300 minutes in length,
In
the dynamics transition from sublimation throughout the structures to melting at the troughs and coarsening ceases.
−2
this experiment the initial particle radius was approximately 50 µm, infrared radiation intensity approximately 300 W m
,
o
temperature -15

C and relative humidity 10%.

the ﬁeld, snow ﬂakes age to become quasi-spherical with age-dependent particle radii of 20 µm–1.5 mm, and snow
optical properties change with age[13, 14]. The size of the smallest ablation structures is limited by the optical
extinction length: points on the snow within one extinction length experience the same light intensity and therefore
ablate at the same rate[2]. The optical extinction length is proportional to r/v, the particle radius divided by the ice
volume fraction in the snow[13]. For our dry, ﬁne-grained snow, we estimate that the extinction length is 0.5–1 mm
for particle radii 25–500 µm. The snow density increases with particle size. Therefore as the particle radius increases
the volume fraction also increases and the extinction length is approximately constant. An extinction length of 1 mm
is consistent with our observation of an initial feature wavelength of approximately 3 mm, which we observe for all
but very large (r=2.5 mm) particles. For 2.5-mm radius particles, the formation of initial structures requires a much
longer time, and structures initially appear on the scale of the particle size (5-mm wavelength).

Formation of penitentes does not require granular snow; we also studied structure formation using a solid ice block.
Similar penitentes formed, but the initial development of structure required approximately two times longer than for
experiments with snow particles (at the same temperature and relative humidity). An opaque, frosty layer formed
on the ice surface before the formation of ablation spikes. This layer may form when surface ice sublimates and the
resulting evaporative cooling of the surface causes a portion of the water vapor to recondense. The surface roughness
produced by the recondensation may be important for the initial development of ice surface structure.

After the initial instability forms surface structure, penitente growth enters a nonlinear regime. The penitentes
increase in size by coarsening (Fig. 3), as predicted in a previous model of penitente growth[2]. In our experiments,
penitente height and peak separation increase linearly, while maintaining an approximately constant aspect ratio of
2. This value is comparable to aspect ratios of 1.5-1.7 measured for Andean penitentes 1.35 m high[30].

In many experiments, we observe that coarsening stops after a certain time. This dynamical transition occurs near
t=300 minutes for the experiment shown in Fig. 3. After the transition, penitente height continues to increase while
the peak separation remains constant. In addition, we observe a rounded shape at penitente tips after the transition
(Fig. 4). We hypothesized that the end of coarsening behavior is associated with a transition to melting in penitente
troughs. Because larger penitentes capture a greater fraction of the illuminating radiation, the reﬂected intensity
in penitente troughs increases with time during coarsening. This hypothesis was conﬁrmed by experiments with a
temperature-sensitive dye added to the snow[29]. In these experiments, the surface layer was blue, corresponding to a
warmer temperature than the pink snow below the penitentes. The transition to height increase without coarsening
was accompanied by a transition to melting: we observed both downward seepage of warmer (blue) material and the
elimination of observable temperature gradients along the surface. This behavior is expected for uniformly melting
snow. The transition to melting did not occur for experiments at colder temperatures.

Humidity changes have little eﬀect on structure formation in our experiments, while changes in temperature signiﬁ-
cantly alter the growth of penitentes. For the conditions of Fig. 3, addition of water vapor to the chamber to increase
the relative humidity up to 70% does not signiﬁcantly change penitente growth. However, temperature changes sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀect the process. Under melting conditions (above -4oC), the snow ablates and meltwater accumulates
beneath the snow without structure formation. Between -10 and -20oC penitentes appear within two hours of irradia-
tion and coarsen as in Fig. 3. Below -35oC we could not produce penitentes after ten hours of irradiation. The strong
temperature dependence suggests that glacial penitentes are sensitive to temperature increases induced by climate

4

FIG. 4:
Images of penitentes. Left, a snow block showing larger penitentes in the center where the light illumination is most
intense. The curved shape of the surface is caused by the conical irradiation proﬁle of the ﬂood lamp. The snow block is 80 by
50 cm and the largest, central penitentes are 6 cm high. Right, ﬁeld of penitentes after the transition to melting in the troughs
has occurred. The penitente aspect ratio increases and the tips become more rounded. The largest penitentes are 3 cm high.

change: as global temperatures increase, regions where penitentes currently form may become too warm for their
growth.

The large change in vapor pressure with temperature is likely responsible for the variations we observe. The
sublimation rate is proportional to the diﬀerence between the saturated vapor pressure near the surface and the
ambient partial pressure far from the surface. The vapor pressure of water decreases approximately exponentially
between 0 and -35oC, with a decay constant ∼10.5o[31]. Presumably, at -35oC the low saturated vapor pressure (20
Pa) impedes sublimation because the air near the ice surface is saturated with water vapor. The thickness of the
boundary layer of water vapor near the ice surface also aﬀects the ablation rate.

To investigate the eﬀects of surface debris on penitente formation, we spread carbon black powder over half the
surface of the snow block. The powder layer thickness was comparable to the snow particle size, the limit of the
In the debris-covered region, we observed earlier formation of penitentes with larger
thin-dirt regime of ref. [2].
peak separations than in the clean-snow region. In addition the particulate material accumulated at the tips of the
penitentes. It is known that small dirt particles typically adhere to an ablating surface and migrate toward its peaks[1].
These observations are consistent with a model of how dirt inﬂuences ablation-structure formation[2].

The result of our dirty-snow experiment has surprising implications for the eﬀects of particulate pollution on
penitente formation. On a relatively ﬂat glacier surface, a thin debris layer accelerates glacier ablation[15]. However,
simulated glaciers covered with penitentes ablate more slowly than ﬂat ones, because of shadowing and increased
cooling by wind[5]. Large fractions of a penitente-covered glacier are in shadow as the sun moves throughout the
day and the solar zenith angle changes from day to day. Although penitentes absorb a slightly larger fraction of the
incident radiation than does a ﬂat surface, the shadowing eﬀect dominates the increased absorption. In addition,
a penitente-covered glacier has larger surface area and is more eﬀectively cooled by a light wind blowing over the
surface. Thus, by accelerating penitente formation and producing larger penitentes, small amounts of particulate
matter could help preserve Andean glaciers.

We thank M. Ben Amar and J. Corripio for useful discussions. MDB acknowledges funding from the Alfred P.

Sloan foundation.

[1] J. J. Rhodes, R. L. Armstrong, and S. G. Warren, J Glaciol 33, 135 (1987).
[2] M. D. Betterton, Phys Rev E 63, 056129 (2001).
[3] A. Usoskin, H. C. Freyhardt, and H. U. Krebs, Appl Phys A 69, S823 (1999).
[4] V. M. Kotlyakov and I. M. Lebedeva, Z Gletscher und Glazial Bd X, 111 (1974).
[5] J. G. Corripio, Ph.d., University of Edinburgh (2002).
[6] S. G. Foltyn, in Pulsed Laser Deposition of Thin Films, edited by D. B. Chrisey and G. K. Hubler (John Wiley and Sons,

[7] J. C. Miller and R. F. Haglund, eds., Laser ablation and desorption, vol. 30 of Experimental methods in the physical sciences

New York, 1994), pp. 89–114.

(Academic Press, San Diego, 1998).

[8] T. H. Her et al, Appl Phys Lett 73, 1673 (1998).
[9] H. C. Lo et al, Appl Phys Lett 83, 1420 (2003).

5

[10] L. Lliboutry, J Glaciol 2, 331 (1954).
[11] C. Troll, B¨usserschnee in den Hochgebirgen der Erde, Patermanns Geographische Mitteilungen Ergdnzungsheft Nr. 240

(1942).

[12] L. Lliboutry, Trait´e de Glaciologie (Masson, Paris, 1965).
[13] W. J. Wiscombe and S. G. Warren, J Atmos Sci 37, 2712 (1980).
[14] S. G. Warren and W. J. Wiscombe, J Atmos Sci 37, 2734 (1980).
[15] S. G. Warren, Ann Glaciol 5, 177 (1984).
[16] S. I. Dolgaev et al, Appl Phys A 73, 177 (2001).
[17] Y. Kawakami and E. Ozawa, Appl Phys A 74, 59 (2002).
[18] A. J. Pedraza, J. D. Fowlkes, and Y. F. Guan, Appl Phys A 77, 277 (2003).
[19] F. Sanchez, J. L. Morenza, and V. Trtik, Appl Phys Lett 75, 3303 (1999).
[20] E. Gyorgy et al, J Mat Res 18, 2228 (2003).
[21] Y. Novis et al, J Appl Phys 64, 365 (1988).
[22] D. J. Krajnovich and J. E. Vazquez, J Appl Phys 73, 3001 (1993).
[23] B. Hopp et al, Appl Surf Sci 110, 232 (1997).
[24] X. Y. Zeng et al, Appl Surf Sci 140, 90 (1999).
[25] Z. B. Wang et al, J Appl Phys 93, 6375 (2003).
[26] S. Ono et al, Appl Surf Sci 129, 821 (1998).
[27] Y. S. Jeong et al, Appl Surf Sci 110, 424 (1997).
[28] J. Heitz et al, Appl Phys A 65, 259 (1997).
[29] See EPAPS Document for methods and additional images. This document can be reached via a direct link in the online

article’s HTML reference section or via the EPAPS homepage (http://www.aip.org/pubservs/epaps.html).

[30] J. G. Corripio, B.sc., University of Edinburgh (1999).
[31] D. R. Lide, ed., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2005), Internet Version 2005,

http://www.hbcpnetbase.com

