6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Electrostatic Gravimeter:
An Alternate Way of Measuring
Gravitational Acceleration

David O. Kashinski
Department of Physical Sciences, Kutztown University, Kutztown, Pennsylvania
19530

Paul V. Quinn Sr.
Department of Physical Sciences, Kutztown University, Kutztown, Pennsylvania
19530

Abstract

In the past, the gravitational acceleration on the surface of the Earth, g
has been measured in many ways. Various methods include the use of a
pendulum as well as models involving the use of a mass on a spring. We
have designed a new method incorporating the mass-spring model with
a capacitor, and a capacitance meter. This capacitor model still uses a
hanging mass on a spring, but alters the method of determining the change
in position of the mass attached to the spring caused by the gravitational
acceleration. We relate the change in position of mass to the capacitance
across the two parallel plates. By relating this capacitance directly to the
gravitational acceleration, a new method of measuring g is obtained.

PACS numbers: 91.10 Pp; 01.50.Pa; 07.10-h
Keywords: gravitational acceleration, gravimeter, geophysics

1 Introduction

Gravity is deﬁned as the force of attraction exerted between masses. [1] Here on Earth,
it is commonly described as the force causing objects to fall toward the center of the
Earth. In mechanics, it is a common practice for students to calculate the value of
the acceleration due to the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld acting on other masses. In the
classroom, this gravitational acceleration is commonly referred to as the constant g,
with an accepted value of 9.81m/s2. In reality, the value of g is not constant, but
rather, changes over the surface of the Earth. The variations in the Earth’s radius
are responsible for the variation of g. Using Newton’s theory of gravity, we derive an
exact expression for the gravitational acceleration,

g =

GME
r2

,

(1)

where ME is the mass of the Earth, G is the gravitational constant, and r is the
distance to the center of the earth.[1] Depending on where you are on the surface of
the Earth, the value of g will ﬂuctuate. The value for g = 9.81m/s2 used in most
introductory physics courses is actually the value of g at sea level.

1

In the ﬁeld of geology, the value of g can be used to determine many character-
istics of the Earth such as rock density, porosity, layer composition, and locations of
underground aquafers, caverns, or air pockets. By monitoring the slight changes of the
value of g, geologists can extrapolate information about the structure of the Earth’s
crust below the surface. All methods of extrapolating data from the measurements of
g can be derived from Newton’s law of gravity[3],

Fg =

GMEm
r2

.

Specialized methods of measurement using various types of measuring devices called
gravimeters have been designed by geophysicists to easily obtain the value or the
changes in the value of g at various positions on the Earth’s surface[2].

2 Current Techniques of Measuring Gravity

One method used for obtaining a value for g is the free fall method. This involves
dropping an object of mass m from a distance y above the Earth’s surface. We can
then measure the time t in which it takes the mass to traverse the distance. Using the
following projectile motion equation,

(2)

(3)

∆y =

gt2,

1
2

we can use the time t it takes to fall and the distance y that it falls to calculate the
value of the gravitational acceleration g.[3] This method is frequently used in most high
school and introductory college physics courses. However, the value obtained with this
simple calculation is not precise enough to signiﬁcantly change when being measured
from various locations on the surface of the Earth. To obtain the information needed
by geologists, a much more accurate method has to be used.

A second more accurate method procedure for obtaining the value g requires the
use of a simple pendulum. In an introductory physics or mechanics class, students
learn that the period of a pendulum can be expressed as

,

L
g

T =

1
2π r
where T is the period of the pendulum and L is the length of the pendulum.[4] The
pendulum can be used to determine a much more precise value for the gravitational
acceleration. There are some geophysicists that may use a duoble pendulum gravimeter
to conduct preliminary measurements of g. However, the changes that occur as you
move across the surface of the Earth are still not accurate enough to obtain some of
the more detailed information about the Earth’s crust. Plus, the pendulum apparatus
is cumbersome to move around, and the measurement process itself is fairly time
consuming.[5]

(4)

The method used most commonly by geophysicists interested in obtaining an ac-
curate measurement of the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld, requires the analysis of a mass-
spring system. A mass hanging from a stationary spring is under the inﬂuence of the
following two forces: the force of gravity pulling it down and the force of the spring
pulling it up. These two forces are equal and opposite, causing the block to be motion-
less while in a state of static equilibrium. One can obtain the value of the gravitational

2

acceleration by setting the two forces equal to one another and solving for g as shown
below,

mg = ky

g =

k
m

y,

where k is the spring constant and y is the distance the string has stretched from
its equilibrium position without the mass as shown in Fig. 1. If the mass and the
spring constant are known, you can calculate the gravitational constant by measuring
the distance the spring is stretched from its initial equilibrium position. This is the
device that is commonly used by many geophysicists to obtain measurements of the
gravitational acceleration.[6] However, such a device, called a gravimeter, can cost
anywhere from $15,000 to $50,000 or more. The most diﬃcult aspect in the design
of the gravimeter is determining the changes in the stretch of the spring with slight
changes in g as you survey diﬀerent locations on the surface of the Earth. Changes in
y are to small to detect with the human eye. These small minute changes are detected
via a complicated processe using a LASER within the apparatus itself. The bulk of the
cost of a gravimeter comes from the various apparati designed to measure the slight
changes in y.[7,8]

The purpose of this paper is to propose an easier method of measuring the slight
changes in the y used in the mass-spring gravimeter while providing close to the same
accuracy when determining g. This new gravimeter also has educational value in
both physics and geology. We will show that with a simple application of elemen-
tary electrostatics, the same measurements are possible with a lower cost and a less
complicated apparatus. For geologists, this may provide an easy-to-build, inexpensive
gravimeter yielding fairly accurate measurements of g. For for college faculty, it will
provide an excellent way to demonstrate changes in g using simple concepts of physics.
Our design is called the electrostatic gravimeter, and it uses a capacitor as the primary
component in the device for measuring changes in y.

3 The Capacitor

Before we discuss the detailed design of the electrostatic gravimeter, we will ﬁrst review
some of the electrostatic theory used to describe capacitors. There are many types of
capacitors used in physics, speciﬁcally in the ﬁeld of electronics. In the electrostatic
gravimeter, a parallel plate capacitor is used in the design. A parallel plate capacitor
is two identical metallic plates with surface area A, separated by some distance d.
A parallel plate capacitor connected to a DC power supply as depicted in the in the
schematic of Fig. 2, has many useful properties, making it a key component in many
electronic devices.[9]

Capacitance is deﬁned as the ratio of the magnitude of the total charge on one of

the metal plates to the potential diﬀerence between them [9],

Using our knowledge of electrostatics, we can use Gauss’s Law,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

C =

qtot
V

.

E · da =

qenc
ǫo

,

I

3

to derive an expression for the electric ﬁeld E, between the two plates, where qenc is
just qtot on one plate. Solving for qtot, we obtain the following expression:

qtot = ǫoEA,

(9)

where E is the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld, qtot is the total charge on one of the
plates, and ǫo is the permittivity of free space. Solving this expression for the ﬁeld,
we get

qtot
ǫoA
To obtain an expression for the capacitance, the potential diﬀerence is calculated

E =

(10)

.

using

+
We assume the ﬁeld is uniform and that the plates are large enough and close enough
together such that no fringing of the electric ﬁeld occurs at the ends of the plates. In
Eq.(11) we are integrating from the positively charged plate to the negatively charged
plate. Changing the limits of integration and evaluating the scalar product, the integral
becomes

Using the uniformity of the ﬁeld, we integate Eq.(12) and get

We now obtain the expression for the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor in free
space[10],

.

C =

ǫoA
d
The capacitance derived in Eq.(14) is for two metallic plates separated by a vac-
uum. However, in most situations, capacitors are not used in a vacuum. There is
usually a material called a dielectric in between the plates of the capacitor. As the
electric ﬁeld interacts with the molecules of the dielectric, they line up with the ﬁeld,
producing their own electric ﬁeld opposite the direction of the original. This causes
a lower value of the total electric ﬁeld between the plates. Since the value of the ca-
pacitance is inversely proportional to E, the value of C will increase when a material
is added between the plates of the capacitor. The capacitance with the dielectric,
denoted as C

, is proportional to the capacitance in a vacuum as shown below:

(14)

′

where κ is the dielectric constant of proportionality. Since C
is always bigger than
C, we can deduce that κ > 1. The value of κ will depend on the material used as the
dielectric. Combining Eq.(14) and (15), we obtain an expression for the capacitance
of a parallel plate capacitor with a dielectric material between the plates [10],

′

−

E · ds.

V =

Z

V =

Eds.

d

Z
0

V = Ed.

′

C

= κC,

′

C

= κ

ǫoA
d

.

4

(11)

(12)

(13)

(15)

(16)

Often, the constants κ and ǫo are combined into one constant called the permittivity
constant, ǫ = ǫoκ. Using the pemittivity constant, we can rewrite the parallel plate
capacitance with a dielectric as

′

C

= ǫ

A
d

.

(17)

4 The Electrostatic Gravimeter

Air as a dielectric allows us to obtain an expression for g, the acceleration do to
gravity, in terms of the capacitance between two plates used in our new gravimeter.
Starting with the mass-spring system, we know that y, the distance the spring is
pulled from its equilibrium position by the mass, is determined by the gravitational
acceleration g. By measuring y, one can essentially calculate the value of g at a
particular location on earth. We can use a capacitor to accurately determine the
distance y and how it changes with your location on the Earth’s surface. A sketch
of the proposed apparatus is shown in Fig.3. In the diagram, we have a mass-spring
system made of a metallic conductor. The mass-spring system is contained inside an
insulated cylinder, surrounded by air at atmospheric pressure. The spring is attached
to the top of the cylinder. A cylindrical mass, made of the same material as the
spring, is permanently attached to the other end of the spring. The mass is freely
hanging, but is just slightly smaller in diameter, than the cylinder that contains it.
At the bottom of the cylinder is a second metal plate also made of the same material
as the spring. Both metallic plates will be connected to a capacitance meter, which
has a small internal power supply used to apply voltage across the plates to assist in
measuring the capacitance. The plates themselves will be the capacitor in the system
with air acting as the dielectric between them. The the capacitance meter should be
very precise in its output, to allow us to calculate g as accurately as possible. Because
the distance between the two plates will change due to changes in the graviational
acceleration gravity over various locations on the Earth’s surface, the capacitance
will change as measured by the meter attached to the two plates. Therefore, by
measuring the changes in the capacitance between the two plates, we can directly
calculate variations in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld.

To derive an expression for g, we will the diagram presented in Fig.3. Our ﬁrst
step was to obtain an expression for d, the distance between the plates, in terms of
the variables shown in Fig.3. From the diagram, we ﬁnd that

where a is the thickness of the cylindrical mass, c is the length of the spring in its
stretched position, and h is the height inside the cylinder. As illustrated in Fig.1, the
variable c can be deﬁned as

where yo is the length of the spring with no mass attached, and y is the additional
stretched length that occurs when the mass is added. If g = 0, then y = 0 and the
value of c would simply by the length of the spring. Using Eq.(6), (18) and (19), we
obtain the following expression for d:

d = h − a − c,

c = y + yo,

d = h − a − yo − mg
k

.

5

(18)

(19)

(20)

Using Eq.(14) and (20) we found that,

C =

=

ǫA
d

ǫA
h − a − yo − mg/k

,

(21)

where ǫ would account for any dielectric material, in this case air, placed between
the two cylindrical plates. Since we are working with a cylinder, the area of both
plates will be circular in nature, making A = πr2. The shape of your plates could
be square or rectangular, but for convenience, we chose to derive the result using a
circular system. Plugging in the value of A and solving for g, we get

(h − a − yo − ǫπr2
C
This gives us an expression for g in terms of the capacitance C between the cylin-

k
m

(22)

g =

).

drical plates as well as the physical dimensions and properties of the system.

5 Range of Gravimeter Measurements

The electrostatic gravimeter gives us a new method of determining gravitational ac-
celeration, simply by measuring the capacitance across the two parallel plates inside
the apparatus. The process for obtaining C is simply a matter of reading a value given
by a very precise meter. You can then determine g by plugging the appropriate values
inot Eq.(22). By looking at some realistic values, we can show that small changes
in the gravitational acceleration produce changes in the capacitance that are easily
measureable with a precise meter. On the surface of the earth, gravitational accelera-
tion ranges from approximately 9.78306m/s2 to 9.83208m/s2.[11] This is a total range
of ∆g ≈ 0.04902m/s2. To obtain a range for the change in capacitance, we chose
the following reasonable values for the dimensions of the apparatus and the ratio of
the mass and the spring constant h = .3m, a = .0051m, yo = .285m, r = 0.15m,
−12 . The value of ǫ used here is the perme-
m/k = .001kgN/m, and ǫ = 8.8552215 × 10
ability constant of air.[12] These values are all reasonable for the apparatus proposed
in this paper. The values may seem very exact, but an apparatus with these exact
values can be easily manufactured by a skilled machinist. Using these values, we ﬁnd
−9 F . To measure changes
the range of C to be approximately 5.353 × 10
in gravitational acceleration on Earth, we need to detect changes in capacitance of at
−9F . In the ﬁeld of electronics, there are meters that can easily
most ∆C ≈ 3.863 × 10
detect changes in capacitance on the order of 1.00 × 10−14.

−9 - 9.216 × 10

Using Eq.(1), it can easily be shown that a change in height of approximately 10m
−5m/s. This
results in a change in the gravitational acceleration of ∆g ≈ 3.00 × 10
corresponds to a change in capacitance of ∆C ≈ 4.475 × 10−12F . From this result,
we can infer that one should easily be able to detect the change in g that occurs
when moving between two ﬂoors of a building. This would be an excellent educational
demonstration when discussing gravity in an introductory level physics class. When a
gravimeter is used to take measurements by geophysicists, changes in g usually range
−6m/s2. According to Eq.(21), this reqires
from approximately 1.00 × 10
looking at changes in capacitance as small as ∆C ≈ 1.00 × 10−14F . Once again, this
is in range of what is detectable using modern electronics.

−5 to 1 × 10

6

6 Conclusion

Gravitational acceleration g, is a numerical constant used in all levels of physics,
from high school to graduate research in physics. The value of g is also used by
geophysicists to determine various properties of the Earth’s crust. For geophysicists,
this value becomes extremely important for mining or oil exploration. Currently,
methods to obtain these value require very expensive equipment combined with very
tedious and complicated measurements.[6,11] For a thorough and detailed geological
survey covering large areas of land, the more complicated apparatus is probably more
appropriate. However, for geological surverys conducted by faculty with or without
students, for small research projects, our new electrostatic gravimeter would be more
than suitable. This electrostatic gravimeter would be ideal for small surveys about
the size of a football ﬁeld. It could be used to conduct less complicated studies such
as the location of small faults or crust composition on a small scale. Projects such
as this couls be completed without spending tens of thousands of dollars on the more
complex apparatus. The cost of manufacturing our gravimeter, would clearly be much
less, the majority of the cost being the meter used to measure the capacitance.

The electrostatic gravimeter could also be used as a wonderful educational tool
in the classroom. First of all, it is an excellent demonstration of how the simple
concepts learned in an introductory physics class can be utilized to create a device
used for important research. Many times in an introductory class, students ﬁnd a
lot of the concepts they learn to be abstract and not practical. The electrostatic
gravimeter provides an example of the practical use of these concepts. One could
actually demonstrate to students how the gravitational acceleration changes as you
change the height of the apparatus. This gives students a real picture of how gravity
works here on Earth. A geology professor might also be able to use the device in a
classroom or laboratory setting to demonstrate changes in g over various locations on
the surface of the Earth. Because the design of this gravimeter is fairly straightforward,
It
its construction could make a wonderful project for an undergraduate student.
would be a great experience for a physics major with machining skills and an interest
in experimental physics. The electrostatic gravimeter has the potential to be a useful
educational tool for both geologists and physicists.

7

References

[1] Raymond A. Serway and John W. Jewett, Jr., Physics for Scientists and
Engineers 6th Ed., Thomson Learning Inc., pp. 389441(2004).

[2] Jon P. Davidson, Walter E. Reed, and Paul M. Davis, Exploring Earth 2nd
Ed., Prentice Hall, pp.135-142(2002).

[3] David Halliday, Robert Resnick, and Jearl Walker, Fundamentals of Physics
7th Ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 24-27(2005).

[4] Grant R. Fowles and George L. Cassiday, Analytical Mechanics 6th Ed.,
Thomson Learning Inc., pp.79-80(1999).

[5] William Frederick Hoﬀmann, ”A Pendulum Gravimeter for Measurement
of Periodic Annual Variations in the Gravitational Constant”,Thesis (Ph.D.),
Princeton University, Dissertation Abstracts International, Vol. 23-03, (1962).

[6] Allen E. Mussett and M. Aftab Khan, Looking Into The Earth, Cambridge
University Press, pp.107-123 (2000).

[7] Thomas M. Boyd, Mass and Spring Measurements, http://www.mines.edu/
fs home/tboyd/GP311/MODULES/GRAV/NOTES/
spring.html(2002).

[8] Micro-g Solutions, FG-5 Absolute Gravimeter, http://www.microgsolutions.com/
fg5.htm, Micro-g Solutions Inc.(2002)

[9] Paul A. Tippler and Gene Mosca, Physics for Scientists and Engineers 5th
Ed., W.H. Freeman and Company, pp.752-775 (2004).

[10] David J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Electrodynamics 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall,
pp.103-106,179-196(1999)

[11] Robert J. Lillie, Whole Earth Geophysics, Prentice Hall, pp.223-275(1999).

[12] David R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics 83rd Ed., CRC
Press LLC, (20020

8

Figure Captions

Figure 1: A diagram of the mass-spring system used to determine the gravi-
tational acceleration g. This ﬁgure illustrates the distance the spring stretches
due to the mass attached at one end.

Figure 2: A schematic o the parallel plate capacitor with a voltage source, which
will be used by our electrostatic gravimeter.

Figure 3: A diagram of our proposed electrostatic gravimeter. The cylinder bot-
tom, the spring, and the hanging mass would all be constructed out of the same
metallic material. The rest of the cylinder would be an insulating material. The
capacitance meter would be attached to the top of the spring, and thebottom
of the cylinder. A cylindrical geometry was chosen out of convenience, but a
rectangular system would work just as well.

9

c

y o

y

m

10

+

-

11

h

a

Capacitance
Meter

c

r

d

12

