6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Arctic East Siberia had a lower latitude in the Pleistocene

W. Woelﬂi∗ and W. Baltensperger†

March 30, 2006

In Arctic East Siberia many remains of mammoths
have been found. In this region there is not suﬃ-
cient sunlight over the year to allow for the growth
of the plants on which these animals feed. Con-
sequently the latitude of these regions must have
been lower before the end of the Pleistocene than at
present. It is a challenge to reconstruct this geogra-
phic shift of the poles in a manner compatible with
known facts. A possible sequence of events is de-
scribed here. It assumes an additional planet, which
must since have disappeared. This is possible, if it
moved in an extremely eccentric orbit and was hot
as a result of tidal work and solar radiation. Dur-
ing a few million years evaporation of this planet
led to a disk-shaped cloud of ions moving around
the Sun. This cloud partially shielded the Earth
from the solar radiation, producing the alteration
of cold and warm periods characterizing the Plei-
stocene. The degree of shielding is sensitive to the
inclination of Earth’s orbit, which has a period of
100 000 years. Two cloud structures are discussed.
The ﬁrst is small and steady. The other builds up
to a point where inelastic collisions between parti-
cles induce its collapse The resulting near-periodic
time dependence of the shielding resembles that of
Dansgaard-Oeschger events. The Pleistocene came
to an end when the additional planet had a close en-
counter with the Earth, whereby the Earth suﬀered a
one permil extensional deformation. While this de-
formation relaxed to an equilibrium shape in a time
of one to several years, the globe turned relative
to the rotation axis: The North Pole moved from
Greenland to the Arctic Sea. The additional planet
split into fragments, which subsequently evaporated.
Simple estimates are used here for the characteriza-
tion of the complex processes; more elaborate studies
may lead to diﬀerent scenarios for the indispensable
pole shift.

∗Institute for Particle Physics, ETHZ H¨onggerberg,
e-mail:

CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland (Prof.
woelﬂi@phys.ethz.ch .

emerit.);

†Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas F´ısicas, Rua Dr. Xavier
e-mail:

Sigaud,150, 222 90 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
baltens@cbpf.br

1 Reveiling evidence

The remains of mammoths in East Siberia in re-
gions with high latitude have been found in ecologi-
cal surroundings, where at present these herbivores
could not exist.
In East Siberia heards of mam-
moths grazed within the arctic circle, even on is-
lands in the Arctic Sea which during the glacial pe-
riods were connected with the mainland. The yearly
insolation diminishes with increasing latitude, and
the distribution of the ﬂora on the globe suggests
that in arctic regions the yearly insolation is insuf-
ﬁcient for the steppe plants that feed mammoths.
A limiting situation exists in the Wrangle Islands,
where in some favourable habitats certain depau-
perated relicts of the Pleistocene grassland sup-
ported the persistence of dwarf mammoths into the
Holocene [1]. Floral reconstructions for the Late
Pleistocene have also been made on the basis of
fossil beetles in arctic East Beringa [2]. This pa-
per is written with the assumption that beyond a
limit given essentially by the arctic circle the insuf-
ﬁcient yearly insolation inhibits the growth of the
steppe plants indispensable for mammoths. Why
then could mammoths exist in arctic areas? Since
this depends on the yearly insolation, there is just
one answer: these regions had a lower latitude in
the Pleistocene.

Let us suppose that the North pole was at the
center of the known ice cover of the Last Glaciation.
This is situated in Greenland, about 18◦ apart from
the present North pole. Its longitude is less certain,
since it depends on the thermal inﬂuence attributed
to the Atlantic ocean. A model study of the Pleisto-
cene climate with geographically shifted poles could
be revealing. The geographic consequences of a po-
lar shift are best visualized using a globe. The an-
gular distance from the old or new pole amounts to
(90◦ - latitude) in each case. Since the North pole
moved from Greenland into the Arctic Sea while
the South Pole was displaced within Antarctica, the
climate changes were larger on the Northern hemi-
sphere. Some places on the great circle through the
old and the new positions of the poles suﬀered the

1

full 18◦ shift. The Lena River in Siberia moved 18◦
north, while the latitudes in Australia decreased ap-
proximately by this amount. Bolivia moved away
from the equator (tropical → arid), while the North-
ern Amazon region shifted to the equator (arid →
tropical). The latitudes on the US-East coast and
in West Europe were higher in the Pleistocene, and
those of Alasca slightly lower.

The evidence of mammoths in arctic east Siberia
is not just one more in a multitude of unexplained
facts, since it contains an aspect that we under-
stand. These regions necessarily received more sun-
light in the Pleistocene than at present. Thus, the
latitude of arctic East Siberia was lower than it is
now. The globe has been turned with respect to its
rotation axis.

If the idea of the geographic shift of the poles ap-
pears exceptional, then so are the empirical facts.
(They are of a kind similar to the data about pho-
toemission as known at the beginning of the last
century. The Maxwell equations then continued to
be valid, however, something additional [i.e. quan-
tization] was necessary for the explanation.) At
present, the Milankovitch theory continues to be
valid, but without a lower latitude of East Siberia
during the Pleistocene the known facts cannot be
understood. The evidence imposes a conclusion
which adds a basic assumption i.e. a shift of lat-
itude of Arctic East Siberia. Since this geographic
pole shift actually took place there must be at least
one possible scenario to produce it. In the follow-
ing paragraphs we attempt to ﬁnd such a course
of events. This involves quite complex processes
for which we can only provide simple estimates. If
more elaborate future studies will show that our es-
timates are wrong, this means that the real scenario
must have been diﬀerent, but not that the shift of
the poles did not occur.

The problem discussed here has a long history. At
the end of the 19th century, several geographers pos-
tulated a polar shift on the basis of the asymmetry
of the observed Pleistocene maximum glaciation.
Careful studies by G. H. Darwin, J.C. Maxwell,
G.V. Schiaparelli as well as by W. Thomson led to
the conclusion that the required rapid polar shift
was impossible. The verdict of these eminent sci-
entists was considered deﬁnite. At that time, con-
densed matter was considered to be either solid or
liquid. During the last century the concept of plas-
tic behaviour appeared which opened a new range
of possible relaxation times of deformation. It may
have remained unnoticed that this is of decisive im-
portance for the problem of a rapid geographic po-
lar shift. Without the polar shift, the problem of

mammoths in polar regions remains unsolvable.

2 Geographic polar shift

A rapid geographical shift of the poles is physically
possible [3]. At present, the Earth is in hydrostatic
equilibrium. Since it rotates, its radius is larger at
the equator (by 21 km) than at the poles. The rota-
tional motion of an object is governed by its inertial
tensor. In a coordinate system ﬁxed to the object
and with the origin at the center of mass, this ten-
sor is obtained by an integration over the density
times a bilinear expression of the cartesian compo-
nents. At present, due to the equatorial bulge, one
of the main axes of Earth’s inertial tensor is longer
than the other two, and its direction coincides with
that of the rotation axis. This is a stable situa-
tion. For a polar shift, a further deformation of the
Earth is required. During the shift, the direction
of the angular momentum vector remains strictly
ﬁxed relative to the stars, as required by conserva-
tion laws. What turns is the globe relative to the
rotation axis. The shift leads to new geographic
positions of the North and South Poles.

Suppose the Earth gets deformed: some of its
mass is displaced to an oblique direction. This pro-
duces an inertial tensor with a new main axis, which
deviates from the rotation axis. Then, as seen from
the globe (i.e. geographically), the rotation axis
will move around (”precess” around) this main axis.
Actually, on a minute scale such a precession is ob-
served on the present Earth (Chandler precession).
A full turn of the precession takes about 400 days.
This period is determined by the equatorial bulge.
Its order of magnitude will be of prime importance
in the discussion of polar shifts. The shape of a
deformed Earth relaxes to a new hydrostatic equi-
librium, which brings the precession to an end. In
the ﬁnal situation there again is an equatorial bulge
around the new geographic position of the rotation
axis. The poles have shifted geographically, how-
ever, what turned in space is the globe.

If global deformations relax in a time short com-
pared to about 200 days (half a precession cycle),
the movement stops quickly and the pole shift re-
mains insigniﬁcant. This would happen in the case
of an elastic deformation of a solid Earth, since the
changes of the deformation occur with the speed
of sound. Similarly, for a model of a liquid Earth,
the backﬂow of matter (over distances of 10 km)
is expected to occur within days at most. Histor-
ically, at the end of the 19th century, these were
the only known states of condensed matter. Thus,

2

In the
a polar shift seemed to be impossible [4].
last century, plastic materials with wide ranges of
relaxation times were investigated. The idea that
a global deformation of the Earth relaxes in several
years appears plausible. A simple calculation of a
geographic polar shift with just one assumed relax-
ation time of 1000 days is given in the Appendix
of ref.[5]. The result is a decreasing precession of
the rotation axis around the main axis, which it-
self moves on a small spiral. Of course, a study of
the motion with a more detailed model of the Earth
would be very signiﬁcant.

3 Cause of the deformation

The polar shift requires a displacement of mass on
Earth at the end of the Pleistocene. What mech-
anism could produce this? Hapgood [4] proposed
that the ice on Antarctica could become unstable
and drift away from the South Pole due to the
centrifugal force. For an appreciable shift, the ice
would have to move several tens of degrees latitude
and add to the mass of a continent rather than ﬂoat.
Even then, this displacement of mass could actu-
ally not produce the required shift. A related idea
might consider a displacement of the Earth’s nu-
cleus from the centre by centrifugal forces. Again,
this displacement would have to be large, and it is
incompatible with the present centred position of
the nucleus.

A very eﬃcient deformation is a stretching of the
globe in a direction oblique to the poles. A vol-
ume ﬂow over distances of the order of the strech-
ing amplitude suﬃces to create a mass diﬀerence
at the surface far from the rotation axis. For the
pole shift considered, the required stretching ampli-
tude is 6.5 km on each side [5]. How could this one
per mil stretching in a direction 30◦ from the poles
occur? If a massive object passed near the Earth,
it would create a tidal force. Since (for large dis-
tances) tidal forces vary with the third reciprocal
power of the distance to Earth, the Moon brought
20 times closer would produce a large but still in-
suﬃcient tidal eﬀect. A close passage of a mass
about ten times larger is required (approximately
the mass of Mars) [6]. It is reasonable to assume
a planetary speed for this object, say a relative ve-
locity to the Earth of about 40 km/s. The close
distance then lasts about 10 minutes only. The
process of deformation is therefore highly dynamic.
Only an elaborate study of this process could give
reliable numbers. The required one per mil value is

the deformation with a prolonged relaxation of at
least a hundred days. Any deformation that decays
rapidly would be additional. This global deforma-
tion is catastrophic, although compatible with the
continuation of life on Earth. Nevertheless, many
large vertebrate species are known to have become
extinguished at the end of the Pleistocene [7].

4 Planet Z

What was this massive object, that passed near the
Earth? Certainly not one of the present planets,
since these have orbits that do not pass through
Earth’s distance from the Sun. The object involved
in the near collision must afterwards have been in an
orbit, which crosses that of Earth, and the Holocene
was much too short a time for a major readjustment
due to couplings with Jupiter and other planets.
One might think of a massive object which hap-
pend to travel through the planetary system. This
might occur as a rare event. However, it is improb-
able that at this occasion the object comes close
to Earth. For this reason the object has to be an
additional planet in an orbit that crosses Earth’s
distance from the Sun. The chance that a passage
through the surface of the sphere at Earth’s dis-
tance, RE = 150 Mio km, happens within a range of
E) = 4 · 10−9. Thus
r = 20 000 km is only πr2/(4πR2
it is even unlikely that within the time in which an
object may remain in an exotic orbit, i.e. a few mil-
lion years, a narrow encounter occurs. Therefore we
assume that the orbital plane of this planet, hence-
forth called Z, is restricted to a small angle (say
1◦) with the invariant plane (perpendicular to the
total angular momentum of the planetary system).
For example Z might have been a moon of Jupiter
which got loose.

The larger the distance of an approach between
Z and Earth, the more frequent it is. A passage
of Z nearer than about the distance Earth-Moon
creates dramatic earthquakes. These may well be
the trigger of Heinrich events [8].

The orbital parameters of Z are not known, but
restricted by three conditions. The perihel distance
leads to a hot planet. The aphel lies beyond Earths
orbit. Its value together with the variable inclina-
tion of Z to the ecliptic allow a close approach to
Earth within some million years. In numerical esti-
mates we often used 4·109 m for the perihel distance
and 1.5 ·1011 m for the semi-axis of the ellipse. This
corresponds to an eccentricity ǫ = 0.973.

3

5 Disappearance of Z

Evidently, at present Z does not exist. How could it
disappear within the Holocene? Only the Sun could
accomplish this. Z had to be in a special situation
before the pole shift, i.e. during the Pleistocene.
Necessarily, Z had to move in an extremely eccen-
tric orbit, with a perihel distance barely compatibel
with its existence. Each time Z passed through the
perihel, it was heated inside by tidal deformation
and on the surface by solar radiation. Z was liquid
and had a shining surface.

Since Z must disappear during the Holocene, it is
almost indispensible that Z broke into pieces dur-
ing the narrow passage. For this Z must be much
smaller than Earth, so that the tidal forces pro-
duced by Earth on Z are larger than those by Z on
Earth. The pressure release in the hot interior may
have further promoted the preakup. The condition
that Z had at least 1/10 of the mass of Earth, so
that it could deform the Earth as required by the
polar shift, together with the condition that it was
much lighter than Earth, imposed by the breakup,
determine the size of Z surprisingly well. Z was
about Mars-sized. Again, these considerations de-
serve detailed studies.

For an evaporation from Z, the particles have to
surmount their escape energy. The escape speed of
Mars is 5.02 km/s. As an example, the kinetic en-
ergy of an Oxygen atom (as the most frequent atom
on a dense planet) with that speed is 2.1 eV and
that of an O2 molecule 4.2 eV. If half the molecular
binding energy of an O2 molecule is included as the
cost to produce an evaporated O-atom, it turns out
that it takes less energy (4.2 eV for O2 versus 4.7
eV for O) to evaporate the molecule than the single
atom. However, note that this holds, since O2 is a
fairly light molecule. In most cases, atomic evap-
In a theory of evaporation, the
oration prevails.
Boltzmann factor exp[−E/(kBT )] plays a dominant
role, where E is the energy necessary to liberate a
particle, T the temperature and kB the Boltzmann
constant. Let us assume T = 1500 K on the surface
of Z near the perihel. For E we use the escape en-
ergy for an Oxygen molecule from Z, i.e. E1 = 4.2
eV. If Z breaks into n equal parts Zn, each has 1/n
the mass of Z, while its radius is reduced by (1/n)1/3
at most. Therefore the escape energy from a frag-
ment satisﬁes En ≤ E1/n2/3, and the ratio between
the Boltzmann factors for Zn and Z becomes

E1−En
kB T ≥

e

2 · 105
2 · 107

(cid:26)

for n = 2
for n = 3

(1)

Thus the splitting of Z into two or more parts re-

sults in an enormous increase of the Boltzmann fac-
tor. Mostly for this reason, we expect a dramatic
increase of the evaporation rate after the polar shift.
From the fractions Zn, molecules and clusters evap-
orate. Furthermore, since the near-collision be-
tween Z and Earth dissipates energy, it is likely that
the perihel distances of the parts Zn are reduced.
If their masses diminish sizeably in the following
1000 years, then the complete evaporation within
the Holocene results. Obviously, these considera-
tions are preliminary. They indicate the possibility
that Z can disappear within the Holocene, provided
that it was already evaporating during the Pleisto-
cene.

In principle, Z could vanish in a diﬀerent way.
Since it was in an extremely eccentric orbit, there
is a certain probability that during the narrow en-
counter it lost its small angular momentum and af-
terwards dropped into the Sun. However, as Bill
Napier pointed out in a private communication, as a
result of the attraction to the Sun, a Mars-sized ob-
ject would introduce a kinetic energy equivalent to
the solar radiation of three years, and furthermore,
the shock might perturb the delicate equilibrium in
the Sun’s innermost parts and activate an increase
of the nuclear reaction. For these reasons, we favour
processes which gradually add the material of Z to
the Sun over many years.

This assumed scenario for the Pleistocene could
not have occured several times during the existence
of the planetary system without a collision of Z with
one of the inner planets. The Pleistocene ice age era
was a rare, if not unique, period in Earth’s history.
Other types of ice ages may have occured as a re-
sult of the slow movements of the continents. When
these were joined to one block, Earth’s rotation is
stable when this supercontinent is centered around
a pole. Plausibly, in this situation the whole conti-
nent is covered by ice.

6 The steady gas cloud

The continuous evaporation from Z produced a gas
cloud. Since the velocity of Z at the perihel is much
larger than thermal particle velocities, the initial
conditions of the particle motions equal those of Z.
However, each type of particle is subject to its spe-
ciﬁc light force. If the ﬁrst excitation energy of the
particle is larger than about 10 eV, the repulsive
light force is expected to be weaker than the grav-
itational attraction to the Sun. In this case bound
orbits exist. In general, an evaporated particle may
start on a hyperbolic or an elliptical path.

4

The properties of the cloud determine the most
important consequences of this model, since the
cloud can partially shield the solar radiation from
Earth. This becomes the prime reason for the
glaciations during the Pleistocene. The cloud is
very complex.
It involves particles, each with its
light force, plasma properties and possibly mag-
netic and electric ﬁelds. The cloud receives particles
that evaporated from Z, which itself is in a time-
dependent orbit. Both, the orbital and the spin
periods of Z appear in the evaporation. Further-
more, the dynamics of the cloud itself may produce
time dependencies. The authors have repeatedly
changed their views regarding the spacial extent of
the cloud and the amount of material lost to outer
space.

In the ice cores of Greenland [9] and of Antarctica
[10] the impurity concentration is sharply peaked
during cold periods. Given the uncertainty about
the size of the cloud, this dust might have contained
extraterrestrial contributions, since during cold pe-
riods the Earth might have been in the cloud. How-
ever, the detailed analysis [11, 12] unambiguously
lead to the terrestrial origin of the dust. Hence,
the cloud does not reach Earth′s distance from the
Sun. It has been a main motivation of this paper to
examine whether the present model is compatible
with this empirical fact.

Since the light force is directed outwards, an in-
dividual particle orbit can only extend further out
than the orbit of Z. If, empirically, particles do not
reach Earths distance from the Sun, then they must
have lost energy in the ﬁrst part of their orbit. This
could be due to inelastic collisions between parti-
cles. Photon emission reduces the relative kinetic
energy of two colliding particles. After the collision,
the diﬀerence of their velocities is smaller, and their
new orbits diﬀer less. However, the sums of the two
momenta and also of the two angular momenta re-
main practically unchanged. When electrons are
emitted during the collision, this also holds to a
good approximation. The angular momentum of
the evaporated particles will deﬁne a size of a cloud,
which cannot be further reduced by inelastic colli-
sions.

The solar radiation acts on a particle by a repul-
sive radial force Frad, which varies with the inverse
square of the distance to the Sun, just as the gravi-
tational attraction to the Sun, FG = mMS G
, where
MS is the mass of the Sun, m the mass of the par-
ticle and G the gravitational constant. Let, for a
given particle,

r2

f =

Frad
FG (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

5

be the ratio between these forces. Then G(1−f ) is a
coupling constant, which describes the diminished
attraction to the Sun. The energy E of a bound
particle depends only on the semiaxis a of its orbit

E = −

G(1 − f )mMS
2a

.

(3)

The angular momentum L depends also on the ec-
centricity ǫ:

L = m

MSG(1 − f )(1 − ǫ2)a.

(4)

p

When the energy E decreases, a decreases, but
since L remains constant on the average, so does
(1 − ǫ2)a. Therefore the eccentricity diminishes
from its initial value ǫ. This may go on until the
p
eccentricity vanishes and a reaches the value af inal
af inal = (1 − ǫ2)a.

(5)

For 1 − ǫ ≪ 1, this is twice the initial perihel dis-
tance (1 − ǫ)a. Therefore, as a result of assumed
collisions in a region quite close to the Sun, parti-
cles can end up in circular orbits that diﬀer strongly
from the initial orbits of the evaporated particles.
With an assumed perihel distance for Z of 4 Mio. km
and a radius of the Sun of 0.7 Mio. km, af inal is
only 11 solar radii and 1/11 of the perihel distance
of Mercury. If it turns out that the mean free path
for collisions is small compared to the size of this
cloud, then the assumption that collisions inhibit
the escape of particles to Earth’s distance becomes
self-consistent.

The kinetic energy of a particle of mass m and

evaporated with the speed of Z at perihel is

Ekinetic =

mMSG
2a

·

1 + ǫ
1 − ǫ

,

(6)

where a and ǫ refer to Z. The ﬁrst factor, assum-
ing a = 1.5 · 1011 m, i.e. Earth’s orbital radius,
corresponds to a velocity of 3.2 · 104 m/s and to a
kinetic energy for an Oxygen atom of 85 eV. With
ǫ = 0.97, the second factor multiplies this energy
by 66. Therefore, evaporated particles and also
particles in the cloud have enough energy to split
molecules and ionize atoms in inelastic collisions.
For the resulting ions, the ﬁrst excitation energy is
usually suﬃciently large, so that the light force is
small compared to the gravitational attraction to
the Sun. Collisions can produce ions in circular or-
bits bound to the Sun.

7 Lifetime of the particles

(2)

The subsequent lifetime of these particles is deter-
mined by Poynting-Robertson drag [13]. A particle

(12)

(13)

(14)

moving in a circular orbit with velocity v is acted
upon not only by the radial lightforce Frad but, due
to the aberration, also by a drag force v
c Frad (in
linear approximation in v
c ). The energy loss per
unit time of the particle becomes dE
c Frad.
Then, using the radius r as time dependent param-
eter given by E = − mMS G(1−f )

dt = − v

,

2

2r

dr
dt

=

dr
dE

dE
dt

= −

= −

mMSG(1 − f )
2E2
2f
1 − f

v2
c

.

·

v2
c

mMSG
r2

f

With v2 = MSG(1 − f )/r,

dt = −

crdr
2f MSG

,

f . Therefore, the amount of light scattered by a
particle during its lifetime is independent of f . The
more it scatters, the shorter it lives. This allows
to give an estimate of the number of particles that
have to enter the cloud per unit time to produce a
certain amount of shielding.

The fact that in equation [11] the radii are
squared in the numerator shows that the particles
spiralling in the plane of the orbit spend equal time
per equal surface. According to equation [11] this
time per unit surface is

β =

c
4πMSGf

.

Numerically, β = 1
f

· 1.8 · 10−13 s m−2.

The Sun produces S = 3.8·1026 Watt of radiation
output. The momentum ﬂow (i.e. the pressure) at
distance r is S/(4πr2c). The value f corresponds to
a scattering cross section σ (assumed as isotropic).

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

which integrates to the lifetime t0 for the change of
r from r1 to r2

t0 =

c(r2
1 − r2
2)
4MSGf

.

(11)

Thus

σ

S
4πr2c

= f ·

mMSG
r2

.

σ = f ·

4πmcMSG
S

.

Here, r2 = 0.7 Mio km, the radius of the Sun,
is numerically almost insigniﬁcant. With r1 =
1 AU = 1.5 · 1011 m , equation [11] would give
t0 = 406
f yr, while the distance after the collisions,
r1 = af inal = 8 Mio km, results in t0 = 1.1
f yr .
For ions often 1
≫ 1. For a given ionic state, the
f
value of f is not readily available. Furthermore, it
may be diﬃcult to predict the distribution of ionic
states that result from the collisions and from the
surrounding illuminated plasma.

The lifetime t0 corresponds to an idealized model,
in which the evaporated particles ﬁrst rapidly loose
energy by collisions until they reach circular or-
bits. Their relative velocity is then assumed to be
small, so that inelastic collisions become rare and
Poynting-Robertson drag determines the lifetime.
In reality, inelastic collisions still occur with newly
evaporated particles and possibly also between par-
ticles in circular orbits with diﬀerent values of f .
Therefore, t0 is an upper limit only.

8 Shielding of the solar radia-

tion

The amount of solar radiation scattered per unit
time by a particle is proportional to the value f
of this particle. On the other hand, its Poynting-
Robertson lifetime t0 is inversely proportional to

For an Oxygen atom (or ion) with mass m = 2.7 ·
10−26 kg this amounts to σ = f · 3.5 · 10−23 m2.

A particle spends a time β2πrdr between the dis-
tances r + dr and r. During this time an individual
particle scatters the fraction σ/(4πr2) of the outgo-
ing solar radiation. The actual amount of shielding
depends on the shape of the cloud. An isotropic
cloud around the Sun cannot screen any radiation
from an object outside.
If immersed into such a
cloud, an object would even be exposed to addi-
tional radiation from backscattering.

It is therefore essential to investigate the shape
of the cloud, which depends on the supply of parti-
cles, the distribution of f values, the temperature,
the presence of magnetic and electric ﬁelds, and the
inﬂuence of the planets. This is a very complex
problem. An inelastic collision reduces the relative
velocity between the two colliding particles, so that
their orbits become more alike. We assume that the
cloud is a disk with the Sun at its center, extending
to an outer radius R. Outwards its width increases
conically, being limited by a small angle α on both
sides of its central plane. The orientation of this
plane may be determined by the orbit of Z or vary
under the inﬂuence of the planets. Possibly it coin-
cides with the invariant plane [14, 15] of the plan-
etary system, since in this case the climate varies
with the inclination of Earth’s orbital plane, which

6

(15)

(16)

has a period of approximately 100 kyr. Even for
the simple assumed shape of the cloud, the shield-
ing of an extended Sun presents complications. In
the face of all the uncertainties, we shall simply as-
sume an angle-independent shielding for directions
within the cloud and no shielding outside.

Let ν be the rate by which particles are intro-
duced into the cloud. A particle at distance r from
the Sun scatters the fraction σ/[4πr2 sin(α)] of the
light passing through the cloud. In the Pleistocene
the temperature diﬀered a few percent between sta-
dials and interstadials, so let us assume a small
shielding s, say s = 3 %. Any overlap of crossec-
tions can then be neglected. The shielding s is an
integral over the contributions of the scatterers at
all distances and is assumed independent of direc-
tion within the cloud:

r1

s =

Z

r2

νβ2πrdrσ
4πr2 sin(α)

=

νβσ
2 sin(α)

ln

r1
r2 (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

thus

ν =

2 sin(α)
ln (r1/r2)

·

sS
mc2 .

(νmc2 is the energy of matter introduced into the
cloud per unit time and sin(α)sS the total scattered
radiation energy per unit time. Equation [16] states
that these quantities diﬀer only by a factor of order
1, when the lifetime of the particles is determined by
Poynting-Robertson drag.) As a numerical exam-
ple, let’s put α = 1◦ = π
180 rad , r1 = af inal = 8·109
m , r2 = 7 · 108 m the radius of the Sun, further
s = 0.03, and ﬁnally m = 2.7 · 10−26 kg, the mass of
an Oxygen ion. We then obtain ν = 7 · 1031 parti-
cles/s = 1 · 108 mol/s. For Oxygen this corresponds
to a time averaged mass evaporation rate of 2 · 106
If Z has a radius of 3.4 · 106 m and a sur-
kg/s.
face density of 3000 kg/m2, then a surface layer of
In 3 Mio years this
0.1 mm per year evaporates.
amounts to 400 m. With this estimate, the size of
Z is hardly aﬀected by the evaporation required to
diminish the solar radiation within the solid angle
of the cloud by 3 %.

There are several corrections to this evaporation
rate. Due to the ﬁnite size of the Sun, the rays
that move towards the shielded Earth mostly enter
the cloud at a distance larger than the Sun’s radius.
Thus the 3 % shielding requires a denser cloud and
a correspondingly higher evaporation rate. Further-
more, it was assumed that the lifetimes of the ions
in circular orbits are limited by Poynting-Robertson
drag only.
In reality, since the eﬀective gravita-
tional constant G(1 − f ) depends on the particular
ionic state, diﬀerent ions on a circular orbit with

given radius can collide inelastically. This reduces
the lifetimes and further increases the evaporation
rate. Necessarily, the particles of the gas also col-
lide inelastically with the fast particles after their
evaporation. Since this may increase the energy of
particles of the cloud, the sign of this inﬂuence on
the expected evaporation rate is not trivial. Note
that νm is a time average of a mass evaporation
rate, which is strongly peaked near the perihel of Z.

9 Mean free path of the evap-

orated particles

In order to explain that the evaporated particles
do not reach the distance of Earth’s orbit, we sup-
posed that the particles ﬁrst rapidly loose their
energy by inelastic collisions and then slowly by
Poynting–Robertson drag. From this a minimum
evaporation rate follows. These assumptions be-
come self-consistent, provided the mean free path
for collisions within the cloud is small compared
to its radius af inal. The radial size of an atom
is about Bohr’s radius rB = 0.53 · 10−10 m, so
the scattering crossection for two atoms becomes
Σ = π · (2rB)2 = 3.5 · 10−20 m2. We shall use
this number for inelastic scattering, although the
scattering of ions is more involved. Between the
distances r + dr and r the number of particles is
νβ2πrdr, and the volume 4πr2dr sin(α), so that the
particle density D at distance r becomes

D =

νβ
2r sin(α)

.

(17)

Numerically, for r = af inal = 8 · 109 m, i.e. at the
· 4.5 · 1010 m−3,
outer edge of the cloud, D = 1
f
which depends on the (average) reciprocal value of
f . The mean free path for collisions for an evapo-
rated particle is of the order of

λ =

= f · 6 · 108 m,

(18)

1
ΣD

where f belongs to particles of the cloud. Since for
bound particles f < 1 and for ions f ≪ 1, we have
λ ≪ af inal. This garantees the self-consistency of
the assumed rapid energy loss by collisions.

It may be a more delicate question, whether some
ions will not capture electrons and become atoms of
a species withf > 1 or small molecules, for which
always f > 1, so that these can escape. It cannot
be stressed enough that the dynamics of the gas
cloud may turn out to be a very complex theoret-
ical problem. It is the basis for understanding the
temperature changes of the ice age era.

7

10 The time dependent cloud

The small cloud around the Sun, in which the emit-
ted particles rapidly loose their initial high energy
by collisions, was found to be self-consistent. The
question remains, whether this is what establishes
itself. Starting without a cloud, the evaporated par-
ticles are not stopped by collisions. If they are ions,
any electric or magnetic ﬁeld could deviate them
from their path, which is f -dependent. The cloud
may be spread over rather vast space so that for
a time the particles do not collide. However, since
the inﬂux of particles continues, their density in-
creases. At a certain point, energy loss by inelastic
collisions becomes appreciable. Therefore, the vol-
ume of the cloud shrinks and the collisions become
more frequent. A transition from individual motion
to collision-dominated energy loss must necessarily
occur in a time that is shorter than the Poynting-
Robertson lifetime. As indicated by Eq. [11] (valid
for circular motion) this lifetime increases with the
square of the size of the orbit. For an estimate,
using the mass of an O-atom, and a = 1.5 · 1011
m (Earth’s distance from the Sun), we get t = 400
f
years, where we expect f ≪ 1 for ions.

As the particles move closer to the Sun, the
amount of light scattered per particle increases. In-
elastic scattering favours the formation of a disk.
If Earth’s orbit is near the midplane of the cloud,
which is presumably close to the invariant plane of
the planetary system, the insolation is diminished
[14, 15]. In the endphase of the cloud, the particles
have aligned motions in small orbits, and they spiral
into the Sun due to Poynting-Robertson drag. Thus
the initial dilute cloud gradually becomes denser
until collisions induce a collaps. The slowly grow-
ing shielding is followed by a rather sudden return
to the full solar insolation. This, of course, will
be followed by another buildup of a cloud. Such a
time dependence of the shielding reproduces char-
acteristic features of the Dansgaard-Oeschger tem-
perature peaks. 21 such events were counted be-
tween 90 and 11.5 kyr BP [17, 18], which corre-
sponds to 4000 yr as the average spacing between
two events. More detailed data reveal a period of
1470 yr [19]. The interval is with both values too
short to be connected with Milankovitch modiﬁca-
tions of orbits. On the other hand, if the particles
of the time dependent cloud are ions, then their val-
ues f are expected to be suﬃciently small, so that
the Poynting-Robertson lifetime, equation [11], is
longer than this period. Therefore, the period may
be determined by the dynamics of the cloud. Tenta-
tively, we explain the Dansgaard-Oeschger temper-

ature variations with sequences of formations and
collapses of the screening cloud.

Extensive studies will be necessery to establish
the conditions under which either the small cloud
or the time dependent cloud is real. We are aware
that we left aside plasma properties, electric and
magnetic ﬁelds and the question, whether energy
loss via gas discharges might play a role. The size of
the small cloud was determined by the high excen-
tricity of the initial orbits of evaporated particles.
The smallest semiaxis compatible with the angu-
lar momentum deﬁnes the size of the small cloud.
We are not aware of a further physical lenght that
could prevent the time dependent cloud from reach-
ing the Earth. Although the cloud is dilute initially,
a particle ﬂux into Earth’s atmosphere seems un-
avoidable. It would be important to establish up-
per bounds for extraterrestrial components in ice
cores. The evaporation from Z is limited by the
escape velocity and it acts as a mass-sensitive frac-
tional distillation. Therefore, a measurement of the
isotopic ratio of a stable impurity element in an ice
core could deﬁne such a bound.

11 Unavoidable ice age era

In this model, Z is necessary for the polar shift, but
Z does not exist any more. This is indeed a strongly
limiting condition for the scenario. Clearly, Z had to
be hot and emitting material already before the po-
lar shift. This period lasted a few million cycles, the
estimated number of trials for a narrow approach to
Earth to occur. During this time Earth’s climate
was inﬂuenced by the screening of the solar radia-
tion by the gas cloud. The existence of a polar shift
at the end of the Pleistocene, connected with the
condition, that the culprit has disappeared, leads
to the prediction of a variable cold period lasting a
few million years. The Milanchovitch theory with-
out polar shift does not predict this. It rather pre-
dicts variations in insolation during an unlimited
time forward and backward. It cannot cope with
the observed fact that before about 3 million years
BP the climate was warm and had only small ﬂuc-
tuations [16]. The global temperature was similar
to that of the Holocene.

12 Cloud after the pole shift

Since the evaporation rate increased enormously af-
ter the narrow encounter, what happened with the
cloud? The pole shift occured towards the end
of the Pleistocene, probably before the Younger

8

Dryas, which was a cold period, but not distinctly
colder than previous periods. Now, the high veloci-
ties of Earth and Z were determined by their motion
in the Sun’s large gravitational ﬁeld. If the relative
velocity was of the order of 40 km/s, then the mo-
mentum transfer during the narrow encounter pro-
duced a modest scattering of Z by an angle of a few
degrees. Before, the orbital planes of Earth and Z
probably almost coincided. After the scattering, the
orbital plane of Z likely was rotated by a few degrees
around an axis that passed through the location of
the close encounter and the Sun. This tilt saved the
Earth from an extreme shielding of the solar radia-
tion. The evaporated material (mostly in molecular
form) moved outside the existing disk of ionic parti-
cles. Thus it was blown out of the planetary system
by radiation pressure. Even if a new ionic cloud
established itself in the tilted plane, this shielding
aﬀected the Earth only twice a year, i.e. when the
Earth crossed the plane of the cloud. Again, more
detailed modelling might establish probabilities of
various occurences. It seems likely that the scatter-
ing of the fractions of Z during the narrow encounter
saved the Earth from dramatic shielding and inﬂux
of material.

13 Conclusions

Remains of mammoths in arctic Siberia, where
there is not enough sunlight per year to grow the
plants that feed these animals, prove, that the lat-
itude of this region was lower in the Pleistocene.
Therefore a scenario must exist, which leads to this
geographic polar shift. The paper describes a pro-
posal which inolves an additional planet. In a close
encounter between this planet and the Earth the
tidal force created a 1 permil extensional deforma-
tion on the Earth. While this deformation relaxed
to a new equilibrium shape in a time of at least
200 days, the precessional motion of the globe re-
sulted in the geographic polar shift. Since the ad-
ditional planet does not exist any more, it must
have moved in an extremely eccentric orbit, so that
it was hot and evaporating.
It produced a disk-
shaped gas cloud around the Sun which partially
shielded the solar radiation. The resulting glacia-
tion on Earth depended on the inclination of Earth’s
orbit relative to the invariant plane, which has a
period of about 100 kyr. We describe two cloud
structures, namely a time independent cloud and a
cloud, whose density increases until inelastic colli-
sions induce its collaps. Tentatively we assume that
the resulting time dependence of the screening pro-

duced the Dansgaard-Oeschger temperature peaks.
The Heinrich events might result from earthquakes
accompaniing passages between Earth and planet
up to about Moon’s distance. During the polar shift
event the Earth must have torn the other planet to
peaces which subsequently evaporated completely.
Such a close encounter is expected to occur only
once in several millions of orbital motions of the
planet. Therefore the model correctly predicts a
duration for the era of glaciations of the order of
the length of the Pleistocene. We conclude that it
is possible to construct a scenario which leads to
the required geographic polar shift. The resulting
model has the potential to describe the dominant
observed features of the Pleistocene glaciations. It
involves complex problems which here are treated
only rudimentarily. More elaborate studies would
be very valuable. In the case that these contradict
the given estimates, they could only question this
particular scenario, but not the conclusion that a
pole shift has occured.

Acknowledgement

We wish to express our gratitude to Hans-Ude Nis-
sen, who has been a critical and knowledgeable dis-
cussion partner throuout this research.

References

[1] S.L. Vartanian, V.E. Garutt and A.V. Sher,
Holocene dwarf mammoths from Wrangle Is-
land in the Siberian Arctic, Nature 362, 337–
340 (1993).

[2] A.V. Alﬁmov and D.I. Berman, Beringian
climate during the Late Pleistocene and the
Holocene, Quaternary Science Review 20, 127–
134 (2001).

[3] T. Gold, Instability of the Earth’s axis of rota-

tion, Nature 175, 526 (1955).

[4] Ch. H. Hapgood, Earth’s shifting crust, ed.

Pantheon Books, New York, 1958.

[5] W. Woelﬂi and W. Baltensperger, An addi-
tional planet as a model for the Pleistocene Ice
Age, (2002), CBPF, Notas de F´ısica 007/02 or
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0204004 .

[6] W. Woelﬂi and W. Baltensperger, A possible
changes
(1999),

explanation for Earth’s
in the past

climate
few million years,

9

[18] North Greenland Ice Core Project Members,
High resolution record of Northern Hemisphere
climate extending into the last interglacial pe-
riod, Nature 431, 147–151 (2004).

[19] S. Rahmstorf, Timing of abrupt climate
change: A precise clock, Geophys. Res. Lett.
30, 1510, doi:10.1029/2003GL017115 (2003).

de

F´ısica CBPF-NF-031/99
Notas
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9907033
.

or

[7] P. S. Martin, Late Quaternary Extinctions:The
Promise of TAMS 14C Dating, Nuclear Instru-
ments and Methods in Physics Research B29,
179-186 (1987).

[8] H. Heinrich, Origin and consequences of cyclic
ice rafting in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean dur-
ing the past 13 000 years, Quaternary research
29, 142-152 (1988).

[9] Paul A. Mayewski et al., Major features and
forcing of high-latitude northern hemisphere
atmospheric circulation using a 110 000–year–
long glaciochemical series, Jour. Geophys. Res.
102, 26 345–26 366 (1997).

[10] EPICA community members, Eight glacial cy-
cles from an Antartic ice core, Nature 429,
623–628 (2004).

[11] P.E. Biscaye et al., Asian provenance of glacial
dust (stage 2) in the Greenland ice sheet project
2 ice core, Summit, Greenland, Jour. Geophys.
Res. 102, 26 765–26 781 (1997).

[12] B. Delmonte et al., Comparing the Epica and
Vostok dust records during the last 220 000
stratigraphical correlation and prove-
years:
nance in glacial periods, Earth Science Reviews
6, 63–87 (2004).

[13] B.˚A.S. Gustafson, Physics of zodiacal dust,
Annual Rev. Earth and Planet. Science 22,
552–554 (1994).

[14] R.A. Muller and G.J. MacDonald, Glacial cy-
cles and orbital inclination, Nature 377, 107–
108 (1995).

[15] R.A. Muller and G.J. MacDonald, Glacial cy-
cles and astronomical forcing, Science 277,
215–218 (1997).

[16] R. Tiedemann, M. Sarntheim and N.J. Shak-
leton, Astronomic time scale for the Pliocene
Atlantic δ18O and dust ﬂux records of Ocean
Drilling Site 659, Paleocanography 9, 619–638
(1994).

[17] Greenland Ice-core Project Members, Climate
instability during the last interglacial period
recorded in the GRIP ice core, Nature 364,
203–207 (1993).

10

