Self-aﬃne time series: applications and models

Jon D. Pelletier and Donald L. Turcotte

Department of Geological Sciences, Snee Hall, Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Table of Contents

1. Introduction

2. Natural variability of climate

2.1. Temperature spectra

2.2. River discharge and tree ring spectra

2.3. Stochastic diﬀusion model

2.4. Variations in solar luminosity

2.5. Drough hazard assessment

3. Variations in sedimentation

3.1. Introduction

3.2. Surface growth model

3.3. Observations

3.4. Completeness of the sedimentary record

3.5. Bed thicknesses

4. Variability of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld

4.1. Variations of the dipole moment

4.2. Reversal record

4.3. Inclination and declination data

4.4. Model for geomagnetic variations

5. Other applications

1

I. INTRODUCTION

In the previous paper [Malamud and Turcotte, 1997, hereafter referred to as MT] the

authors considered various theoretical aspects of self-aﬃne time series. Several techniques

for generating synthetic, self-aﬃne time series were discussed and alternative methods for

analyzing time series were presented. A primary means of identifying a self-aﬃne time series

is in terms of its Fourier spectrum. For self-aﬃnity the power spectrum or power-spectral

density, S, must have a power-law dependence on frequency, f : S ∝ f −β (MT equation 2.4).

When considering self-similar processes in nature there are generally upper and lower

limits to the validity of power-law statistics. An example is a power-law distribution for

the frequency-size distribution of fragments. There will always be a largest and a smallest

fragment.

In many cases power-law statistics will be applicable over a limited range of

sizes. In other cases two power-law regimes are found with diﬀerent slopes. There are also

upper and lower limits to the self-aﬃne behavior of naturally occuring time series. In some

cases two or more power-law regimes are found with diﬀerent values of β. In this paper we

consider several applications of self-aﬃne time series in geophysics. The coverage of topics

is not meant to be complete. Instead, we consider three examples in some detail and present

applicable models.

The ﬁrst application we consider is time-series data for local atmospheric temperature.

The spectral behavior for time scales between 200 kyr and 500 yr is obtained from Deuterium

concentrations in the Vostok ice core. Historical temperature records are analyzed to give the

spectral behavior between time scales of 100 yr and 1 day. The obvious daily and annual

periodicities are removed and we focus on the stochastic content of the time series. We

ﬁnd that self-aﬃne behavior is applicable over well-deﬁned frequency bands. The self-aﬃne

behavior is associated with interactions between the atmosphere, the space above (through

the radiation of heat), and the oceans and continents below. Solutions to a stochastic

diﬀusion equation for a layer with a substrate reproduce the observed statistics. The results

are virtually identical to those for heat diﬀusion through a metallic ﬁlm over a substrate and

2

to variations of solar luminosity. We have also carried out power-spectral analyses of mean

river discharges and tree ring thicknesses. Both exhibit self-aﬃne behavior with β ≈ 0.5.

This corresponds to a Hurst exponent Hu ≈ 0.7, consistent with the previous results as

discussed by MT (Section 5.2). The implications of a self-aﬃne river discharge time series

for drought assessment is also considered.

In our second application we consider porosity variations in sedimentary basins. A model

developed for the growth of atomic surface layers is modiﬁed so that it is applicable to the

spatial and temporal variations in deposition and erosion. Self-aﬃne variability is found with

β = 2 in space and β = 1.5 in time. The spatial variability is a Brownian walk. This has

been widely observed as the spectral behavior of topography. We show that this variability is

also consistent with the spatial distribution of oil pools in sedimentary basins. The temporal

variability of sedimentation is associated with the vertical variability of porosity. Self-aﬃne

spectra with β ≈ 1.5 are good approximations to observed data. The vertical variability of

sedimentation and erosion can also be used to model the completeness of the sedimentary

record. It has been observed that the rate of sedimentation, R, has a power-law dependence

on the time period of sedimentation, T , with R ∝ T −0.76. A self-aﬃne spectrum with β = 1.5

gives R ∝ T −0.75.

Our third application considers the variability of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. We argue

that intensity variations and reversals of the magnetic ﬁeld are a natural consequence of the

inherent variability generated by dynamo action and magnetic diﬀusion in the core. The

ﬁeld exhibits a binormal behavior and when a ﬂuctuation crosses the zero intensity value

a reversal occurs. The spectral behavior of the ﬁeld on time scales of 100 yr to 4 Myr

has been obtained from paleomagnetic data Over this range it is well approximated by a

1/f (β = 1) self-aﬃne time series. Synthetic 1/f time series have been used to generate

reversal statistics and these are found to be in good agreement with observations. The

reversal statistics are sensitive to the values of β and we conclude that the agreement is

strong support for 1/f behavior over the entire record of reversals. A model that generates

the observed 1/f behavior is a two-dimensional stochastic diﬀusion equation.

3

II. NATURAL VARIABILITY OF CLIMATE

A. Temperature spectra

Understanding the natural variability of climate is one of the most important tasks fac-

ing climatologists. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [1995] concluded that

the “balance of evidence suggests a discernible human impact on the climate system.” This

conclusion is based, however, on comparisons with the variability exhibited by general cir-

culation models (GCM). Model runs often exhibit signiﬁcantly lower variability, by a factor

of two to ﬁve, and a diﬀerent frequency dependence on time than paleoclimatic data [Inter-

governmental Panel on Climate Change, 1995]. Other model results give natural variability

comparable in magnitude to that observed in the last 100 years [Barnett, et al. 1992].

In this section we consider the power spectrum of temporal variations in atmospheric

temperature on time scales of 200 kyr to 1 day. We will show that at frequencies smaller

than f ≈ 1/(40 kyr) the power spectrum is ﬂat (white noise). At frequencies between f ≈

1/(40 kyr) and f ≈ 1/(2 kyr) the power spectrum is proportional to f −2 (a Brownian walk).

At frequencies greater than f ≈ 1/(2 kyr) the power spectrum is proportional to f − 1

2 . At

very high frequencies (above f ≈ 1/(1 month)) the spectrum varies as f − 3

2 for continental

stations and remains proportional to f − 1

2 for maritime stations. Thus we ﬁnd a sequence of

self-aﬃne spectra, each with a characteristic values of β, over diﬀerent frequency bands.

We will further show that the observed power spectrum of atmospheric temperature

is identical to the power spectrum of variations due to the stochastic diﬀusion of heat in

a metallic ﬁlm that is in thermal equilibrium with a substrate [Van Vliet et al., 1980].

Temperature variations in the ﬁlm and substrate occur as a result of ﬂuctuations in the

heat transport by electrons undergoing Brownian motion. The top of the ﬁlm absorbs and

emits blackbody radiation. In our analogy we associate the atmosphere with the metallic

ﬁlm and the oceans with the substrate. Turbulent eddies in the atmosphere and oceans are

analagous to the electrons undergoing Brownian motion in a metallic ﬁlm in contact with a

4

substrate.

We ﬁrst consider the spectral behavior of the Deuterium concentrations in the Vostok

(East Antarctica) ice core. A 220 kyr record of temperature ﬂuctuations is obtained using

the conversion 5.6 δD(%)=1oK [Jouzel et al., 1987]. The plot of variations in temperature

versus age is given in Figure 2.1. Jouzel and Merlinvat [1983] have concluded that the

Vostok Deuterium record is a proxy for local atmospheric temperature. Because the data

are unevenly sampled we utilized the Lomb Periodogram [Press et al., 1992] to estimate the

power spectrum. The results are given in Figure 2.2. We associate the power spectrum with

three regions of diﬀerent self-aﬃne behavior. The ﬁrst region, at frequencies less than f ≈

1/(40 kyr), is a white noise (β ≈ 0). The second region, between f ≈ 1/(40 kyr) and f ≈

1/(2 kyr) is a Brownian walk (β ≈ 2). In the third region, with frequencies greater than

f ≈ 1/(2 kyr), there is a change to a lower value of β. This change is associated with rapid

variations in the Vostok core. This is also observed in ice cores from Greenland [Yiou et al.,

1995]. Details of this analysis have been given by Pelletier [1997a].

In order to extend our analyses to higher frequencies we have carried out power-spectral

analyses on data for atmospheric temperature variations from weather stations. One of the

longest available records is for the average monthly temperature in Central England, 1659-

1973. The data is tabulated in Manley [1974]. The yearly periodicity was removed from

this data by subtracting from each value the average temperature of that month for the

entire record. The resulting time series is given in Figure 2.3. The time series exhibits rapid

ﬂuctuations from year to year superimposed on more gradual, lower frequency variations.

The power spectrum estimated as the square of the coeﬃcients of the Fast Fourier Transform

(FFT) is presented in Figure 2.4 along with a least-square power-law ﬁt to the data with β =

-0.47. We have also determined the average power spectrum of the time series of monthly

mean temperatures from 94 stations worldwide with the yearly trend removed. We obtained

the power spectra S(f ) of all complete temperature series of length greater than or equal to

1024 months from the climatological database compiled by Vose et al. [1992]. The yearly

trend was removed by subtracting from each monthly data point the average temperature

5

for that month in the 86 year record for each station. All of the power spectra were then

averaged at equal frequency values. The results are given in Figure 2.5. The data yield a

straight-line on a log-log plot with slope close to -0.5 indicating that S(f ) ∝ f − 1

2 in this

frequency range.

Finally we consider the average power spectrum of time series of daily mean temperature

(estimated by taking the average of the maximum and minimum temperature of each day)

from 50 continental and 50 maritime stations over 4096 days. Maritime stations are sites on

small islands far from any large land masses. Continental stations are well inland on large

continents, far from any large bodies of water. We chose 50 stations at random from the

complete records (those with greater than 4096 nearly consecutive days of data) provided

by the Global Daily Summary database compiled by the National Climatic Data Center

[1994]. Once again the yearly periodicities were removed. The results are given in Figure

2.6 and 2.7. Continental stations (Figure 2.6) correlate with a f − 3

2 high-frequency region.

Maritime stations (Figure 2.7) correlate with a f − 1

2 scaling up to the highest frequency.

The crossover frequency for the continental spectra is f ≈ 1/(1 month). The diﬀerence

between continental and maritime stations results from the air mass above maritime stations

exchanging heat with both the atmosphere above and the oceans below while the air mass

above continental stations exhanges heat only with the atmosphere above it. The three

spectra have been combined in Figure 2.8 to give a continuous spectral behavior of local

atmospheric temperature from frequencies of 10−6-102 yr−1.

B. River discharge and tree ring spectra

Before presenting a theoretical basis for the temperature time series spectra given above

we will consider two related time series. We ﬁrst give power-spectral analyses of hydrological

time series. Figure 2.9 presents the results of power-spectral analyses of monthly mean river

discharge data in the United States from the Hydro-Climatic Data Network compiled by

Slack and Landwehr [1994]. The annual variabilites were removed and the power spectra

6

were computed in the same manner as for the temperature data. For the streamﬂow data

we chose all complete records with a duration greater than or equal to 512 months and

included 636 records in our analysis. Since river discharges can vary by orders of magnitude

between river basins we normalized the variance of each series before averaging the spectra.

A least-square ﬁt to the data a β value of -0.50, consistent with the value observed for

the temperature data in the same frequency range. We have taken advantage of the large

number of available stations to investigate the possible regional variability of the power

spectra. We have averaged the power spectra for each of the 18 hydrologic regions of the

U.S. deﬁned by the United States Geological Survey and given in Wallis et al. [1991]. All

of the regions exhibit the same spectral dependence with an average β value of −0.52 and

a standard deviation of 0.03, indicating little variation.

The second related time series we consider is the sequence of annual tree ring widths.

We have performed spectral analyses of tree ring width chronologies in the western United

States obtained from the International Tree Ring Database. Tree rings in the western U.S.

are strongly correlated with precipitation [Landwehr and Matalas, 1986]. The chronologies

are time series in which the nonstationarities in growth rates have been removed and spatial

averaging has been performed in an attempt to isolate climatic eﬀects. Tree ring series

have the advantage of being much longer than most historical records. We obtained 43

chronologies in the western U.S. greater than 1024 years in length. The average normalized

power spectrum of those records is presented in Figure 2.10. The least-square ﬁt indicates

that for tree ring time series, S(f ) is nearly proportional to f − 1
2 .

In the frequency range f ≈ 1/(2 kyr) to 1/(1 month) the three data sets atmospheric

temperature, river discharge, and tree ring widths all yield spectra with a slope β ≈ 1/2.

In Section 5.2 of MT the application of the rescaled-range technique was discussed.

It

was pointed out that Hurst et al. [1965] applied the rescaled-range method to time-series

data for atmospheric temperature, river discharge, precipitation, tree ring widths, and other

climatological time series. Good correlations were obtained with the Hurst relation (MT

equation 5.5) taking Hu=0.73 on average. From the correlation between Hu and β given for

7

fractional Gaussian noises in MT Figure 5.3 we see that Hu=0.73 is entirely consistent with

the observed value β ≈ 1/2.

C. Stochastic diﬀusion model

To see how time series with power-law power spectra arise, we present the results from

the simulation of a discrete, one-dimensional stochastic diﬀusion process. A discrete version

of the diﬀusion equation for the density of particles on a one-dimensional grid of points is

ni(tj+1) − ni(tj) ∝ ni+1(tj) − 2ni(tj) + ni−1(tj)

(1)

We establish a one-dimensional lattice of 32 sites with periodic boundary conditions at the

ends of the lattice. At the beginning, we place 10 particles on each site of the lattice. At

each timestep, a particle is chosen at random and moved to the left with probability 1

2 and

to the right if it does not move to the left. In this way, the average rate at which particles

leave a site is proportional to the number of particles in the site. The average rate at which

particles enter a site i is proportional to the number of particles on each side multiplied by

one-half since the particles to the left and right of site i move into site i only half of the time.

This is a stochastic model satisfying equation 2.1. The probabilistic nature of this model

causes ﬂuctuations to occur in the local density of random walkers. These ﬂuctuations do

not occur in a deterministic model of diﬀusion.

In Figure 2.7 we present the average of 50 power spectra, each spectrum from a time

series of the number of particles in the central site of the 32-site lattice. The ﬁgure shows a

power spectrum of the form S(f ) ∝ f − 1

2 . In Figure 2.8 we plot the cumulative probability

distribution of the time series produced by the stochastic diﬀusion model. The solid circles

represent data. The curve represents the cumulative log-normal distribution ﬁt to the data.

A good ﬁt is obtained.

Since the distribution of values in a hydrological time series is often log-normal, we have

shown that a simple model of stochastic diﬀusion gives rise to both the power spectrum and

the distribution observed for hydrological time series.

8

A stochastic diﬀusion process can be studied analytically by adding a noise term to the

ﬂux of a deterministic diﬀusion equation [Van Kampen, 1981]:

ρc

∂∆T
∂t

= −

∂J
∂x

J = −σ

+ η(x, t)

∂∆T
∂x

where J is the heat ﬂux, ∆T is the ﬂuctuation in temperature from equilibrium, ρ is the

density, c is the heat capacity per unit mass, σ is the conductivity, and η is Gaussian random

noise in space and time.

Equation 2.2 is conservation of energy. Equation 2.3 is Fourier’s law of heat transport

with random advection of heat superimposed. The random advection term models the eﬀects

of local convective instabilities which randomly advect heat vertically in the atmosphere.

Novikov [1963] has proposed this method for studying turbulent ﬂuctuations.

We now determine the behavior of the stochastic diﬀusion model in terms of the power

spectrum of temperature ﬂuctuations in a layer of width 2l of an inﬁnite, one-dimensional,

homogeneous space. The presentation we give is similar to that of Voss and Clarke [1976].

The variations in total heat energy in the layer of width 2l is determined by the heat ﬂow

across the boundaries. Figure 2.9a illustrates the geometry of the layer exchanging thermal

energy with diﬀusing regions above and below it. A diﬀusion process has a frequency-

dependent correlation length λ = (2D/f )

2 [Voss and Clarke, 1976]. Two diﬀerent situations

1

arise as a consequence of the length scale, 2l, of the geometry. For high frequencies λ <<

2l and the ﬂuctuations in heat ﬂow across the two boundaries are independent. For low

frequencies λ >> 2l and the ﬂuctuations in heat across the two boundaries are in phase.

First we consider high frequencies. Since the boundaries ﬂuctuate independently, we can

consider the ﬂow across one boundary only. The ﬂux of heat energy is given by equation

2.2. Its Fourier transform is given by

J(k, ω) =

iωη(k, ω)
αk2 + iω

9

(2)

(3)

(4)

where α = σ/(ρc) is the diﬀusivity. The ﬂux of heat energy out of the layer at the boundary

at x = l (the other boundary is located at x = −l) is the rate of change of the total energy

in the layer E(t): dE(t)

dt = J(l, t). The Fourier transform of this equation is
∞

E(ω) = −

i

(2π)

1

2 ω Z

−∞

dk eiklJ(k, ω)

Therefore, the power spectrum of variations in E(t), SE(ω) =< |E(ω)|2 >, is

SE(ω) ∝

∞

Z

−∞

dk

α2k4 + ω2 ∝ ω− 3

2

In the above expression, the noise term η does not appear because, since it is white noise in

space and time, it’s average amplitude is independent of ω and k, i.e. it is just a constant.

Since ∆T ∝ ∆E the power spectrum of temperature has the same form as SE and ST (ω) ∝
ω− 3
2 .

If we include the heat ﬂux out of both boundaries, the rate of change of energy in the

layer will be given by the diﬀerence in heat ﬂux:

dE(t)
dt = J(l, t) − J(−l, t). The Fourier

transform of E(t) is now

Then,

E(ω) =

dk sin(kl)J(k, ω)

1

∞

(2π)

1

2 ω Z

−∞

ST (ω) ∝ SE(ω) ∝

∞

dk sin2(kl)
α2k4 + ω2
2 (1 − e−θ(sin θ + cos θ))

−∞

Z

∝ ω− 3

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1

2 and ωo = α/2l2 is the frequency where the correlation length is equal to

where θ = (ω/ωo)
the width of the layer. When λ << 2l, the above expression reduces to ST (f ) ∝ f − 3
λ >> 2l, ST (f ) ∝ f − 1

2 [Voss and Clarke, 1976]. In this limit the boundaries ﬂuctuate in

2 . When

phase and heat that enters into the region from one boundary can diﬀuse out of the other

boundary. The result is a sequence of ﬂuctuations which are less persistent (β is smaller)

than the single boundary f − 3

2 case.

In Section 2.1 we presented evidence that continental stations exhibit a f − 3

2 high-

frequency region and maritime stations exhibit f − 1

2 scaling up to the highest frequency

10

considered. This observation can be interpreted in terms of the diﬀusion model presented

above. The power spectrum of temperature variations in an air mass exchanging heat by

one-dimensional stochastic diﬀusion is proportional to f − 1

2 if the air mass is bounded by

two diﬀusing regions and is propotional to f − 3

2 if it interacts with only one. The boundary

conditions appropriate to maritime and continental stations are presented in Figure 2.13b

and 2.13c, respectively. The maritime stations have a f − 1

2 power spectrum up to the high-

est frequency because the air mass above a maritime station exchanges heat with both the

atmosphere above and the oceans below. In maritime stations, ﬂuctuations in heat energy

are readily absorbed by both the oceans below and the atmosphere above which can radi-

ate heat into space. The ﬂuctuation calculation appropriate for maritime stations is one in

which the coherent ﬂuctuations from two boundaries are considered as in the calculation

of the f − 1

2 spectrum. The air mass above continental stations exchanges heat energy only

with the atmosphere above it. The calculation appropriate for continental stations is the

one-boundary model which predicts the observed f − 3

2 spectrum. At low frequencies, hor-

izontal heat exchange between continental and maritime air masses limits the variance of

the continental stations. This crossover should occur at the time scale when the air masses

above continents and oceans become mixed. The time scale for one complete Hadley or

Walker circulation which mixes the air masses is approximately 1 month, the same time

scale as the observed crossover [Pelletier, 1997a].

Next we consider the stochastic diﬀusion model in a geometry appropriate for a coupled

atmosphere-ocean model with an atmosphere of uniform density (equal to the density at sea

level) in thermal contact with oceans of uniform density. The height of our model atmosphere

is the scale height of the atmosphere (height at which the pressure falls by a factor of e from

its value at sea level). Figure 2.14 illustrates the geometry and constants chosen with σ the

vertical heat conductivity, ρ the density, c the speciﬁc heat per unit mass, α the vertical

thermal diﬀusivity, and g the thermal conductance of heat out of the Earth by emission of

radiation. Primed constants denote values for the oceans. The physical constants which

enter the model are the density, speciﬁc heat, vertical thermal diﬀusivity, depths of the

11

oceans and atmosphere, and the thermal conductance by emission of radiation. The density

and speciﬁc heat of air and water are well-known constants. We chose an ocean depth of 4

km and an atmospheric height equal to the scale height of 8 km as used by Hoﬀert et al.

[1980] in their climate modeling studies. The eddy diﬀusivity we employ for the oceans is

6x10−5 m2/s. This value has been obtained from Tritium dispersion studies [Garrett, 1984].

The vertical eddy diﬀusivity for the atmosphere we use is 1 m2/s, as quoted by Pleune [1990]

and Seinfeld [1986] for stable air conditions. This eddy diﬀusivity implies an equilibration

time of the tropospheric air column to be 2 years. This value is roughly consistent with the

one year decay time of the Pinatubo and El Chichon aerosols [Hofmann and Rosen, 1987;

Rosen et al., 1994].

Since the time scales of horizontal diﬀusion in the atmosphere and oceans are so much

smaller than the time scales of vertical diﬀusion, the rate-limiting step for thermal equi-

libration is vertical transport. For this reason, we consider only the variations in local

temperature resulting from heat exchange vertically in the atmosphere and oceans.

The equation for temperature ﬂuctuations in space and time in the model from equations

2.2 to 2.5 is

The mean value of η is zero and the ﬂux of heat of proportional to the temperature:

∂∆T (x, t)
∂t

− α(x)

∂2∆T (x, t)
∂x2

= −

∂η(x, t)
∂x

hη(x, t)i = 0

hη(x, t)η(x′, t′)i ∝ σ(x)hT (x)i2δ(x − x′)δ(t − t′)

(9)

(10)

(11)

The delta functions indicate that the white noise term η is uncorrelated in space and time.

North and Cahalan [1981] analyzed a similar model of climate change with respect to

predictability. They studied the diﬀusion equation in two dimensions as a model for heat

transport horizontally in the atmosphere. They included a white noise term on the right side

of the diﬀusion equation (they used η(x, t) where we use ∂η(x,t)

∂x ) to represent variations in

12

heat transport by turbulent eddies. However, a noise term in the ﬂux of temperature rather

than in the temperature itself is more appropriate as a model for variations in turbulent

heat transfer.

The boundary conditions are that no heat ﬂows out of the bottoms of the oceans and

continuity of temperature and heat ﬂux at the atmosphere-ocean boundary:

σ′ ∂T
∂x

|x=w2 = 0

∆T (x = w+

1 ) = ∆T (x = w−
1 )

σ

∂∆T
∂x

|x=w

−
1

= σ′ ∂∆T
∂x

|x=w+

1

(12)

(13)

(14)

At the top of the atmosphere we impose a blackbody radiation boundary condition.

Most (65%) of the energy incident on the Earth is reradiated as long-wavelength blackbody

radiation from the H2O and CO2 in the atmosphere [Peixoto and Oort, 1992]. This radiated

energy depends on the temperature of the atmosphere at the point of emission according

to the Stefan-Boltzmann law. It is common practice to assume that temperature variations

about equilibrium are small. This is a good approximation since the global mean tempera-

ture has ﬂuctuated by only about ten degrees Kelvin during the last glaciation as illustrated

in Figure 2.1. With a linear approximation, the radiated energy will be proportional to the

temperature diﬀerence from equilibrium [Ghil, 1983]. The boundary condition at the scale

height of the atmosphere (which we take to be representative of the average elevation where

radiation is emitted from the atmosphere) is then

σ

∂∆T
∂x

|x=0 = g∆T (x = 0)

(15)

We will use the value g = 1.7 W/m2K as used by Ghil [1983] and Harvey and Schneider

[1985]. It is often assumed that a feedback exists between atmospheric or sea-surface tem-

perature and cloud cover. If such a feedback existed, it might be necessary to parameterize

radiated energy in terms of cloud cover or atmospheric water vapor. However, no evidence

for such a feedback has been found [Arking and Ziskin, 1994].

13

The existence of two layers of diﬀerent diﬀusivity makes the study of the two-layer

model much more complex than for the one-layer models applied to the atmosphere above

the continents and the oceans. Van Vliet et al.

[1980] used Green’s functions to solve

this two-layer model. The Green’s function of the Laplace-transformed diﬀusion equation is

deﬁned by

and Gb:

iωG(x, x′, iω) − α(x)

∂2G(x, x′, iω)
∂x2

= δ(x − x′)

where G is governed by the same boundary conditions as ∆T . This equation can be solved

by separating G into two parts: Ga and Gb with x < x′ and x > x′, respectively. Ga and

Gb satisfy the homogeneous (unforced) diﬀusion equation with a jump condition relating Ga

∂Ga
∂x

|x=x′ −

|x=x′ =

∂Gb
∂x

1
α(x′)

The power spectrum of the average temperature in the atmosphere in terms of G is given

by Van Vliet et al. [1980] as:

w1

w1

S∆T (f ) ∝ Re(Z

0

Z
0

G1(x, x′, iω)dxdx′)

∝ Re(

w1

x

Z
0
w1

Z
0
w1

+

Z
0

Z
x

G1b(x, x′, iω)dxdx′

G1a(x, x′, iω)dxdx′)

where G1 stands for the solution to the diﬀerential equation for G where the source point

is located in the atmosphere and Re denotes the real part of the complex expression. Two

forms of G1a and G1b are necessary for x located above and below x′, respectively, due to

the discontinuity in the derivative of G1 created by the delta function. The solution of G1

which satisﬁes the above diﬀerential equation and boundary conditions is

G1a =

+ cosh(

) cosh(

w1 − x′
L

L
αK

(

σ′L
σL′ sinh(
x
w2
L′ ))(sinh(
L

w1 − x′
L

) sinh(

) +

cosh(

σ
Lg

w2
L′ )
x
))
L

14

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

and L = (α/iω)

1

2 and L′ = (α′/iω)

1

2 . Performing the integration van Vliet et al.

[1981]

and

where

obtained

G1b = G1a +

sinh(

L
α

x′ − x
L

)

K = (sinh(

) +

cosh(

w1
L

σ
Lg

+(cosh(

) +

sinh(

w1
L

σ
Lg

w1
L

))

σ′L
σL′ sinh(
w1
)) cosh(
L

w2
L′ )
w2
L′ )

S∆T (f ) ∝ Re(L2(

2gL
σ

)((

σ′L
σL′ tanh(

w2
L

gw1
σ
cosh(w1/L) − 1
cosh(w1/L)
w1
L

))((tanh(

w1
L

) +

+

tanh(

w2
L′ ) + (1 +

σ
Lg

tanh(

w1
L

− 1)

)

w2
L
σL
g
)))−1

)

tanh(

) −

w1
L
gL
σ

−

w1
L
σ′L
σL′ tanh(

+(

gw1
σ

+ (

For very low frequencies several approximations can be made:

tanh(

) ≈

, tanh(

w1
L

w1
L

w2
L′ ) ≈

w2
L′

cosh(w1/L) − 1
cosh(w1/L)

) ≈

1
2

w2
1
L2

S∆T (f ) ∝

1
1 + ω2/ω2
0

∝

1
f 2 + f 2
0

Reducing equation 2-26,

This is the low-frequency Lorentzian spectrum observed in the Vostok data. The crossover

frequency as a function of the constants chosen for the model is

f0 =

g
w1cρ + w2c′ρ′(1 + gw1/σ)

At higher frequencies the following approximations hold

15

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

tanh(

) ≈

, tanh(

w1
L

w1
L

w2
L′ ) ≈ 1

cosh(w1/L) − 1
cosh(w1/L)

≈

1
2

w2
1
L2

then

STav(f ) ∝

1
2

(

2gw1
σ

1

)

2 (

cρσ
c′ρ′σ′ )

1

2 (

g
w1ρcf

1

2 ∝ f − 1

2

)

This is the broad f − 1

2 region observed in the power spectrum of the temperature data and

predicted based on the simpler one-layer model exchanging heat with regions above and

below. The high- and low-frequency spectra meet at

f1 =

g
w1ρc

(

σ
2gw1

1

)

3 (

c′ρ′σ′
cρσ

1

1

)

3 4

3 (

cρw1
c′ρ′w2

4
3

)

≈ 1/(10kyr)

This value agrees within an order of magnitude to that observed in the Vostok data (f ≈

1/(2 kyr)).

At time scales less than 2 kyr, ﬂuctuations in heat energy input into air masses from the

oceans or variations in emitted radiation can be absorbed by the other reservoir. At lower

frequencies, the atmosphere and oceans are in thermal equilibrium. The oceans can no longer

absorb thermal ﬂuctuations input into the atmosphere from ﬂuctuations in radiative emission

at this time scale and vice versa. The variance in temperature of the atmosphere and oceans

is then determined solely by the radiation boundary condition. The ﬂuctuating temperature

at the top of the atmosphere will result in a white noise ﬂux out of the atmosphere-ocean

system. The average temperature of the atmosphere and oceans will be given by the sum

of a white noise, a Brownian walk. This is observed in the Vostok data. The Brownian

walk behavior of the climate system ﬂattens out at low frequencies as a result of a negative

feedback mechanism: as the coupled atmosphere and oceans warm up (or cool down) due to

nonstationary ﬂuctuations of the random heat exchange from radiative emission, the system

16

will radiate, on average, more (less) radiation, limiting the variance at low frequencies.

This interpretation depends on the conductivity being low compared to the time scale for

radiative damping, τ = c′ρ′w2/g.

If so, the rate-limiting step of radiative equilibrium is

the conduction of heat from the oceans through the atmosphere. The time constant of

this thermal discharge (analagous to the electrical discharge of an RC circuit) is then τ =

σ/w1w2c′ρ′. However, if the conductivity is high, the time scale of radiative equilibrium
is determined by the time scale for radiative damping, τ = c′ρ′w2/g. Using the estimates

for the thermal diﬀusion properties of the atmosphere and the oceans listed in Figure 2.14,

the conductivity is large and the low-frequency portion of the spectrum is governed by

the radiative damping constant. This is problematic, however, because the time scale of

radiative equilibrium is then τ = c′ρ′w2/g = 600 yr. Such a short time scale implies that
no f −2 spectral region should exist at all. An atmospheric vertical diﬀusivity of 0.1 m2/s is

required in order for the model spectrum to be consistent with the spectrum of the Vostok

data with the f ≈ 1/(40 kyr) crossover frequency. This is an order of magnitude smaller

than the values quoted by Pleune [1990] and Seinfeld [1986].

Besides the frequency dependence of the power spectrum, the model we have presented

predicts that the distribution of temperature variations from equilibrium obeys a Gaussian

distribution. This is because the stochastic term obeys a Gaussian distribution function and

the temperature ﬂuctuations are related to the stochastic term through a linear transforma-

tion. By deﬁnition, the probability density function is only deﬁned for time scales in which

the temperature ﬂuctuation time series are stationary. Gaussian time series with power-law

power spectra of the form S(f ) ∝ f −β are stationary if β < 1 and non-stationary if β ≥ 1

(MT section 5). Thus, a unique probability density function only exists for very long time

scales (greater than 100 kyr) where the power spectrum is constant (β = 0) and for the range

of time scales in which the power spectrum obeys S(f ) ∝ f −β with β = 1

2. Matteucci [1990]

has computed the probability distribution function for climatic variations at very long time

scales with the SPECMAP stack. He obtained a Gaussian distribution. Similarly, Janosi

and Vattay [1992] have obtained a Gaussian distribution with monthly temperature datasets

17

of several decades length with the annual variability removed.

Manabe and Stouﬀer [1996] have completed power-spectral analyses of variations in local

atmospheric temperature in control runs of a coupled atmosphere-ocean-land surface model.

They computed the power spectrum of temperature time series of each surface grid point

and then averaged the power spectra at equal frequency values, as in our observational

power-spectral analyses. Their results are presented in Figure 2.15. They found diﬀerent

spectra for continental and maritime gridpoints. Maritime gridpoints exhibited power-law

power spectra from time scales of one month to several hundred years with an exponent of

close to −0.25. Continental gridpoints, however, showed ﬂat spectra up to time scales of

about 100 yr, in contrast to observations. Exploring the similarities and diﬀerences between

the approach in this paper, GCM results such as those of Manabe and Stouﬀer [1996],

and observations should enable us to learn more about this fundamental problem in Earth

science.

Time-series analysis of paleoclimatic data often exhibit a dominant peak near 100 kyr.

Although variations in the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit occur with this frequency, this

variation is not expected to produce a linear inﬂuence on climate change since this orbital

variation results in only a fraction of a percent change in the amount of radiation incident

on the Earth [Hays et al., 1976]. Although there are nonlinear models that predict a 100

kyr periodicity, it is generally agreed that the underlying mechanism for this peak is not

well understood [Kerr, 1978]. The model presented in this section leaves the question open

as it does not predict any periodicity. The only component of the system thought to have a

characteristic time scale of 100 kyr is the cryosphere [Mitchell, 1976]. Perhaps the cryosphere

can produce a 100 kyr peak in the power spectrum when forced by the background spectrum

predicted by the model of this paper. Studies incorporating the cryosphere into our model

are an important extension of our work that may lead to new insights into the nature of the

100 kyr periodicity.

18

D. Variations in solar luminosity

We have applied the same model presented in this Section 4.4 to variations in the solar

luminosity from time scales of minutes to months [Pelletier, 1996]. In Figure 2.16 we present

the power spectra estimated with the Lomb periodogram of ACRIM solar irradiance data

sampled during 1987 and 1985 plotted as a function of the frequency in hours−1. The same

sequence of power-law behavior is observed in these data as are observed in the Vostok data.

Large peaks appear at the orbital frequency of the satellite and its harmonics. These peaks

are an artifact of the spectral estimation. A stochastic diﬀusion model of the turbulent

heat transfer between the granulation layer of the sun, modeled as a homogeneous thin

layer with a radiative boundary condition, and the rest of the convection zone, modeled as

a homogeneous thick layer with thermal and diﬀusion constants appropriate to the lower

convection zone, predicts the same spectral form observed in solar irradiance data. The time

scales of thermal and radiative equilibrium of the solar convection zone based upon thermal

and diﬀusion constants estimated from mixing-length theory match those observed in the

ACRIM data. Further details are discussed in Pelletier [1996].

E. Drought hazard assessment

One of the principle applications of time-series analysis is to drought hazard assess-

ment. A major question is whether “short-memory” models are adequate or whether “long-

memory” models such as self-aﬃne noises and walks are required [Bras and Rodriguez-Iturbe,

1985].

Since hydrologic droughts are phenomena requiring multiple years of low ﬂow, the fre-

quency of occurence will be aﬀected by correlations in the time series of discharge. We now

illustrate how fractional noises can be used to estimate drought frequencies. The use of

fractional noises that exhibit the Hurst phenomenon has been proposed by Booy and Lye

[1989] for use in ﬂood-frequency analysis. The goal of stochastic hydrology is to generate

19

synthetic time series of river discharge that accurately reproduce hydrological time series.

Based on evidence for the applicability of a fractional noise with β ≈ 1/2, we generated syn-

thetic time series with two-parameter log-normal distributions that ﬁt the historical records

of river discharge. We ﬁrst discuss the techniques and results of drought frequency analyses

for series with diﬀerent log-normal distributions. Then we discuss the results of a compar-

ison between drought frequencies for the Colorado river based upon a fractional noise with

exponent of −1/2 and a short-memory AR(1) model.

Techniques for generating synthetic log-normal fractional noises have been discussed by

MT, Section 4.2. We utilize synthetic noises with β = 1/2 and cv = 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6. There

is no unique deﬁnition of a drought; several alternatives were discussed in a recent drought

assessment of the southwestern U.S. by Tarboton [1994]. Perhaps the most straightforward

deﬁnition is that proposed by Yevjevich [1967] and Dracup et al.

[1980]. They deﬁned a

drought as any year or consecutive number of years during which average annual streamﬂow

is continuously below the long-term mean annual runoﬀ. The magnitude is the average

deﬁcit during the drought. The principal drawback to this deﬁnition is that two 5-year

droughts separated by one wet year will only be recognized as 5-year droughts even though

the succession of droughts results in ten or eleven years of critically low supply. In Figure 2.17

we present the results of drought frequency analyses based on this deﬁnition of a drought.

Each part is a two-dimensional contour plot of the logarithm (base 10) of the recurrence

interval of a drought of a given duration and magnitude, with the magnitude normalized to

the mean ﬂow. Figure 2.17 a, b, and c represent coeﬃcients of variation 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6,

respectively. To construct each ﬁgure we generated synthetic records of one million years in

length and searched them for drought occurences.

In order to assess the importance of long-range persistence on the likelihood of severe

drought, we have completed a drought frequency analysis using an AR(1) model for the

Colorado river at Lees Ferry [Kendall and Dracup, 1991] with a fractional noise model for

the same location. The synthetic time series were one million years in length. We found

that for droughts of ten years duration and small magnitude, 100-year events according to

20

the fractional noise model, the diﬀerence in recurrence interval for the two models is a factor

of ﬁve. We conclude that the presence of long-range persistence has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on

the likelihood of severe drought. The presence of long-range persistence does not, however,

appear to improve the ability to predict future climatological and hydrological time series

to any signiﬁcant degree [Noakes et al., 1988].

III. VARIATIONS IN SEDIMENTATION

A. Introduction

We now turn to porosity variations in sedimentary basins. We show that these variations

are self-aﬃne walks in both the horizontal and vertical directions. We show that the observed

distributions can be reproduced using a standard model for surface growth. We will further

show that this model is consistent with the observed variations and episodicity in sediment

deposition.

In the past decade many studies have documented the scale-invariance of porosity and

density variations in sedimentary basins. Power-law power spectra of vertical density and

porosity well logs have been reported by Hewett [1986], Walden and Hosken [1985], Pilkington

and Todoeschuck [1990], Todoeschuck et al.

[1990], Holliger [1996], Shiomi et al.

[1996],

Dolan et al.

[1996], and Pelletier and Turcotte [1996]. Tubman and Crane [1995] and

Deshpande et al.

[1996] have presented evidence for scale-invariant horizontal variations

in density and porosity from well logs and seismic data. In addition, Dunne et al. [1995]

presented evidence that the topography of alluvial plains along the channel strike is also

scale-invariant. They performed spectral analyses on ﬂuvial microtopographic transects of

an alluvial plain in Kenya. They obtained power spectra with S(k) ∝ k−β where k is

the wave number and β ranges from 1.5 to 2. Based on his original observation, Hewett

[1986] developed a fractal-based interpolation scheme for determining the three-dimensional

porosity variations in sedimentary basins using available well logs. The validity of the

21

interpolated structure was subsequently veriﬁed in a variety of ways. This approach was

applied to modeling ground water migration by Molz and Boman [1993].

B. Surface growth model

Before considering the observed spectra further, we present a model for surface growth

which will be predictive of both vertical and horizontal porosity variations in sedimentary

basins. At each time step, a site on a one-dimensional lattice is chosen at random. During

that time step, a unit of sediment is deposited on that site or on one of its nearest neighbors,

depending on which site has the lowest elevation. This is the simplest model combining

randomness and the tendency for sediment to be deposited in low-lying areas of an alluvial

plain. The model is illustrated in Figure 3.1. The cross-hatched block shows the unit of

sediment being added to the surface. In each case, an arrow points towards the site upon

which the unit of sediment will be deposited. In Figure 3.1a the chosen site has a lower

elevation than either of its nearest neighbors, so the sediment is deposited at the chosen

site.

In Figure 3.1b one of the nearest neighboring sites has a lower elevation and the

sediment is deposited at that lower site. In the case of a tie for the lowest elevation between

two or three sites, the site on which the sediment is deposited is chosen randomly between

the sites of the same elevation, as in Figure 3.1c. The local elevation is the total number of

units of sediment that have been deposited at the site.

This model of surface growth was ﬁrst analyzed by Family [1986] with applications to

the growth of atomic surface layers. He reported the results of computer simulations which

showed that the model produces scale-invariant variations of the surface in space and time.

He found that the standard deviation, σ, of the surface follows the relation

σ(L, T ) ∝ L

2 T

1

1
4

(1)

where L is a length scale and T is a time scale. Surfaces with scale-invariant standard

deviations σ(L, T ) ∝ LHaxT Hat have a power-law dependence of the power-spectral density,

22

S(k), on wave number k of the form S(k) ∝ k−2Hax−1 (i.e. ∝ k−2 for Hax = 1/2) and a
power-law dependence on frequency of the form S(f ) ∝ f −2Hat−1 (i.e. ∝ f − 3

2 for Hat = 1/4).

An example of the surface elevation produced by the model with 1024 grid points is given

in Figure 3.2. The average dependence of the power-spectral density on wave number from

ﬁfty independent simulations is given in Figure 3.3. The power spectrum is proportional to

k−2 indicating that the surface is a Brownian walk. Other lattice sizes yield similar results.

The synthetic topography given in Figure 3.2 is very similar to the one-dimensional transect

of Kenyan topography obtained by Dunne et al.

[1995] and plotted in Figure 3.4. Hooke

and Rohrer [1979] have mapped the topographic proﬁles of alluvial fans perpendicular to the

ﬂow direction. The synthetic proﬁle is also strikingly similar to their alluvial fan proﬁles.

In Figure 3.5 we plot the variations in surface elevation (subtracted from the mean height

of the landscape) at the central site of our simulation after the simulation has reached a

dynamic steady state. In Figure 3.6 we present the average power spectrum of the diﬀerence

from the mean height of the central site produced in ﬁfty simulations. The power spectrum is

proportional to f − 3

2 . If deposition and erosion took place independently, the variation of the

local elevation relative to the mean with time would be a random walk with power spectrum

S(f ) ∝ f −2. The random-walk model has been analyzed as a model for sedimentary bed

formation. The eﬀect of the diﬀusion term is to preferentially ﬁll low-lying areas of the

alluvial plain. This results in an anticorrelated sequence of deposition and erosion: after an

area has aggraded it has a higher elevation and a lower rate of future aggradation. Without

the presence of the diﬀusion term, the surface would be white noise. The random-walk

model, therefore, results in a very unrealistic alluvial plain topography.

We can also include the eﬀects of erosion in our model. Although deposition generally

occurs in topographic depressions, tending to smooth out the ﬂoodplain, erosion is less con-

sistent. Erosion can downcut in a channel or, during a large ﬂood, can lower alluvial ridges.

We have modiﬁed our simulation to include the eﬀects of erosion by choosing randomly at

each timestep whether to deposit or erode sediment during that timestep. The probability

of deposition must be greater than 0.5 in order to accumulate a sedimentary basin over time.

23

We have studied the above model assuming that erosion occurs preferentially on channel

ﬂoors, randomly on the landscape, or preferentially on alluvial ridges. In the simulations in

which we assumed erosion to occur preferentially on the channel ﬂoors, we have included an

erosion rule that takes away rather than deposits a unit of sediment at a randomly chosen

site or one of its nearest neighbors, depending on which has the lowest elevation. We have

also investigated rules that remove a unit of sediment only from the chosen site (to simulate

random erosion on the ﬂoodplain) and a rule that removes sediment from the chosen site or

one of its nearest neighbors, depending on which site is highest, to simulate the preferential

erosion of alluvial ridges. The exponents of the power-law power spectra obtained in the

model without erosion are unchanged for any of these erosion models.

In the simplest version of the model which includes only deposition the probability that

a particle is added to the site is proportional to two if both of a site’s neighbors have a

higher elevation, proportional to one if only one of the neighbors is higher, and zero if

both neighbors are lower. The model may be described mathematically with a stochastic

diﬀerence equation of the form

hi,t+1 − hi,t ∝ Θ(hi+1,t, hi,t) + Θ(hi−1,t, hi,t)

(2)

where hi,t+1 − hi,t represents the most probable growth rate of the surface and Θ is the

Heavyside function deﬁned by Θ(x, xo) = 1 if x > xo or 0 if x < xo. Averaging this equation

over a time long compared to the time required to grow a single layer of unit height of

sediment, the equation for the average surface growth rate is

hhi,t+1 − hi,ti ∝ hhi+1,t − hi,ti + hhi−1,t − hi,ti

∝ hhi+1,ti − 2hhi,ti + hhi−1,ti

(3)

(4)

This is a discrete version of the diﬀusion equation. Directing sediment to lower elevations

smooths out the surface and is equivalent to a diﬀusion process. As recognized by Family

[1986], a continuous version of the discrete model is provided by a one-dimensional diﬀusion

equation with a Gaussian white noise term:

24

∂h(x, t)
∂t

∂2h(x, t)

= D

∂x2 + η(x, t)

(5)

The term η(x, t) represents actual deposition and erosion. The assumed Gaussian white

noise is characterized by a mean, η, and a standard deviation σ. If η = 0 there is no net

deposition and sedimentation balances erosion. For η > 0 there is net deposition and for

η < 0 there is net erosion. The ratio σ/η is a measure of the amplitude of ﬂuctuations in

the sedimentation process. The diﬀusion term in equation 3.5 introduces both spatial and

temporal correlations in the sedimentation process not present in the random-walk model.

C. Observations

We will next consider some observed spectra of the vertical variations of porosity in

sedimentary basins and compare them with the results we have obtained. Porosity as a

function of depth is routinely measured at equal intervals in formation well logs [Hewett,

1986]. As a speciﬁc example we have considered porosity logs from 15 wells in the Gulf of

Mexico. One of the logs is plotted in Figure 3.7. The wells are drilled in a deltaic sedimentary

environment with a few large, nearly vertical faults [Alexander, 1995]. The power spectra

for these wells are given in Figure 3.8. as a function of the wavenumber k in m−1. At spatial

scales larger than ≈ 3 m the power spectra are well approximated by a power law. Below

this scale the power-spectral density decreases sharply in most of the wells. This decrease

may be the result of a transition from second-order heterogeneities (dominated by variations

in porosity within the larger genetic units) to third order heterogeneities which result from

the geometrical arrangements of individual depositional units. The transition from second

to third-order heterogeneities occurs at the scale of meters [Allen and Allen, 1990] and is

consistent with the 3 m scale of the break observed in the power spectra. We estimate β

from the slope of the least-square linear ﬁts to the log-log plots at scales greater than 3 m.

The values of β obtained exhibit considerable variability from well to well. However, the

average β = 1.4 is close to the value 1.5 predicted by the model. The standard deviation is

0.2.

25

Dolan et al. [1996] reported ranges of values of β from time-series analyses of vertical

density and porosity variations in well logs. They obtained average power spectral exponents

β = -1.50, -1.62, and -1.46 using three diﬀerent numerical procedures for a cluster of ten

wells in a ﬂuvial sedimentary environment. These values are in excellent agreement with

the ones we obtained and with our model. Holliger [1996] has reported values of β from 1.2

to 1.4, somewhat smaller, but roughly consistent with the values reported here.

We will next consider several observational studies relevant to the horizontal variations

of porosity in sedimentary basins. Direct measurements of topography on relevant scales

have been carried out by Dunne et al. [1995]. These authors have performed power spec-

tral analyses of ﬂuvial microtopographic transects perpendicular to the fall line from two

hillslopes obtained with laser altimetry from scales of 0.1 to 100 m. Their work provides

us with a direct test of our model for the topographic variations of an alluvial plain. They

obtained power spectra with a power-law dependence on wave number as predicted. The

exponents of the power spectra had an average of β = 1.6 with a standard deviation of 0.2,

somewhat smaller than our model prediction of β = 2.

In addition to the power-spectral behavior of the surface in space and time discussed

above, the stochastic diﬀusion model also predicts a Gaussian distribution of the surface

elevation. This is true of any linear stochastic diﬀerential equation with Gaussian noise. The

microtopographic transects obtained by Dunne et al. [1995] enable us to test this prediction.

In Figure 3.9 we present the distribution of elevations from the 15 proﬁles published by the

authors. The proﬁles were digitally scanned for the analysis. Also plotted in Figure 3.9 is

the non-linear least-square ﬁt to a Gaussian distribution. A good ﬁt is obtained.

We will next show that the distribution of producing oil and gas wells is consistent with

β=2 horizontal porosity variations. Barton and Scholz [1995] have presented the spatial

distribution of drilled wells and wells showing hydrocarbons in the Denver and Powder River

basins. These basins evolved from sediment deposition in a meandering alluvial environment

[Berg, 1968]. Using the box counting technique, Barton and Scholz [1995] found that the

fractal dimensions for the drilled wells in the two basins were 1.80 and 1.86 and that the

26

fractal dimensions of wells showing hydrocarbons were 1.43 and 1.49, respectively. After

petroleum is generated and migrates from source rocks, it will move from sites of high

potential energy to sites of low potential energy. Hydrocarbons are found in traps that are

the crests of low-porosity caprock that have obstructed its upward migration [Allen and

Allen, 1990]. The caprock will mimic the ﬂoodplain relief at the time of its deposition.

This is consistent with the observation that hydrocarbons are often found in geometries

which mimic the topography of the alluvial plain at the time of deposition in a variety

of ﬂuvial depositional environments such as meandering [Curry and Curry, 1972], deltaic

[Coleman and Prior, 1982], and submarine fans [Garcia, 1981; Wilde et al., 1978]. A simple

model for the horizontal spatial distribution of hydrocarbons in a reservoir is one in which

hydrocarbons are assumed to be accumulated in all of the crests of the caprock above a

certain elevation.

The spatial distribution of wells showing hydrocarbons in the Powder River and Denver

basins are given in Figure 3.10. We have set the width of each basin to be 128 units so

as to facilitate comparisons with a synthetic reservoir constructed on a 128 x 128 grid.

We analyzed the data with the pair-correlation function which we believe to be a better

estimator of correlations for point processes than box counting.

The two-dimensional pair-correlation function C(r) is deﬁned as the number of pairs

of wells whose separation is between r and r + ∆r, per unit area [Vicsek, 1992]. The

pairs are binned in logarithmically spaced intervals ∆r. For a data set with scale invariant

clustering, C(r) ∝ r−α where α is related to the fractal dimension through D = 2 − α

in two dimensions [Vicsek, 1992]. The pair-correlation function is commonly employed in

the analysis of diﬀusion-limited-aggregation. However, studies incorporating it in the earth

sciences are rare. Kagan and Knopoﬀ [1980] have applied it to the spatial clustering of

earthquakes. Figure 3.11 shows the pair-correlation function of the Denver and Powder

River basin wells on a log-log plot. The least-square ﬁts to the correlation function yield

exponents of α = −0.59 for Powder River and α = −0.50 for the Denver basin, implying

D = 1.41 and D = 1.5, respectively. The results obtained by the pair-correlation method

27

are in close agreement with the results obtained by Barton and Scholz [1995] using box

counting.

To show that these correlation functions are consistent with a caprock with Brownian

walk topography, we have constructed synthetic reservoirs where hydrocarbon traps are

regions where the caprock elevation is larger than a threshold value. In order to do this

we synthesized two-dimensional fractional Brownian walks on a 128 x 128 lattice with the

Fourier-ﬁltering technique discussed in MT Section 3.1. The threshold value for showing

hydrocarbons was chosen such that the resulting synthetic reservoir had the same percentage

of showing wells as the Denver and Powder River basins (about 5%). Figure 3.12 shows a

synthetic reservoir produced with β = 2.0 (a Brownian walk). The synthetic reservoir

shows a degree of clustering similar to the Denver and Powder River basins. In Figure 3.9

we have plotted the pair-correlation functions for the showing wells in synthetic reservoirs

constructed with β = 2.5, 2.0, 1.5, and 1.0. The pair-correlation functions show a gradual

decrease with decreasing β. The synthetic reservoirs whose scaling exponents α most closely

match those of the Denver and Powder River basins are β = 2.0 and β = 1.5. Although we

cannot precisely determine the scaling exponent of the porosity variations with this method,

we conclude that β is close to 2, consistent with our model.

Besides the pair-correlation function, two other fractal relations allow us to infer Brown-

ian walk paleotopography from horizonal variations in sedimentary basins. Agterberg [1982]

has computed the fractal dimension of the perimeter of sand isopach contours from the

Lloydminster oil ﬁeld to be 1.3, close to the value of 1.25 measured for coastlines and topo-

graphic contours [Turcotte, 1992]. Barton and Scholz [1995] have presented frequency-size

distributions of oil pools. They found that the cumulative number of oil ﬁelds has a power-

law dependence on the volume of the ﬁelds with exponent close to -1: N(> V ) ∝ V −1.

Kondev and Henley [1995] have related the length distribution of contour lengths of Gaus-

sian surfaces to the Hausdorﬀ measure Ha. Pelletier [1997b] has shown that their results

imply that the cumulative frequency-area distribution of areas enclosed by contours of a

Brownian walk surface is N(> A) ∝ A−3/4. Since oil ﬁelds have a much larger horizontal

28

extent than vertical extent, it is reasonable to assume that area and volume are propor-

tional. Our model of the migration of hydrocarbon into regions with caprock topography

above a threshold elevation then predicts N(> V ) ∝ V −3/4 in reasonable agreement with the

cumulative frequency-size distributions of Barton and Scholz [1995]. Pelletier [1997b] has

employed the same techniques to infer the self-aﬃnity of the top of the convective boundary

layer from the size-distribution of cumulus cloud ﬁelds.

D. Completeness of the sedimentary record

A related problem to topography and porosity variations in sedimentary basins is the

statistics of preserved sections. Stratigraphic sections are formed by alternating periods of

deposition and erosion or non-deposition. The resulting stratigraphic section contains the

deposited sediments that were not subsequently eroded. Various stochastic models have

been proposed to explain aspects of sedimentary bed formation, including the frequency

distribution of bed thicknesses. Beginning with Kolmogorov’s work [Kolmogorov, 1951],

many studies have investigated random-walk models of sedimentation. Random-walk models

assume that the magnitude of alternating depositional and erosional events are independent.

These models are applied by letting the typical episodes of deposition and erosion deﬁne

minimal units of a discrete time scale. The lengthy periods of non-deposition, as well as any

long intervals of deposition and erosion, are treated as multiples of these units. There have

been a number of variants of Kolomogorov’s work: Schwarzacher [1975] described a process

of bed formation that results in a random walk on the integers, Vistelius and Feigel’son

[1965] allowed diﬀerent types of sediment to be deposited, Dacey [1979] considered both

exponential and geometrical probability distributions for the amount of sediment deposited

and eroded, and Strauss and Sadler [1989] have considered a continuous version of the

random-walk model. These models are generally considered to be successful at predicting

observed bed thickness distributions [Strauss and Sadler, 1989].

29

Tipper [1983] was the ﬁrst to apply the random-walk model to the problem of strati-

graphic completeness: given that deposited sediment is often later eroded, how much of the

depositional history is preserved in a given stratigraphic section? Sadler [1981] obtained a

solution to this problem by investigating the dependence of sedimentation rate on the time

span over which the sedimentation rate was measured. If the dependence of the sedimenta-

tion rate on time span can be assessed, then for a single stratigraphic section, the ratio of

the overall accumulation rate to the average rate at time span T is the completeness [Sadler

and Strauss, 1990]. Sadler quantiﬁed the sedimentation rate, R, as a power-law function of

time span, T , with exponent -0.65: R ∝ T −0.65. McShea and Raup [1986] have critically

reviewed Sadler’s approach, indicating possible biases in the data he compiled. Sadler in-

terpreted the decreasing sedimentation rate with time as the result of including longer and

longer hiatuses of erosion or non-deposition in the average at longer time intervals. Plotnick

[1986] introduced a fractal model for the length distribution of stratigraphic hiatuses that

is consistent with this interpretation and predicts a power-law dependence of sedimentation

rate on time span. Tipper [1983], Strauss and Sadler [1989], and Sadler and Strauss [1990]

have addressed the issue of stratigraphic completeness with the random-walk model of sedi-

mentation. The random-walk model predicts a power-law dependence of sedimentation rate

on time with exponent − 1

2 : R ∝ T − 1

2 , giving quite good agreement with Sadler’s data.

The time history of sedimentation at a point based on our model is given in Figure 3.14

and 3.15. Figure 3.14 is the complete history of deposition and erosion at a point in the

basin. The time series of deposition and erosion is represented by a fractional Brownian walk

with power spectrum S(f ) ∝ f − 3

2 . This fractional Brownian walk represents the elevation of

total height of sediment deposited locally in a ﬂuvial sedimentary basin, superimposed on a

constant rate of subsidence. The time series is scale-invariant in terms of the nondimensional

sedimentary thickness, hσ/D, and time, tσ2/D; it is characterized by the single parameter

σ/η.

If σ/η is small the ﬂuctuations in sedimentation rate are small compared to the

subsidence rate; if σ/η is large the ﬂuctuations are large. For the example given in Figure

3.14, σ/η = 0.1. Figure 3.15 is produced from Figure 3.14 by removing any deposited

30

sediment that is subsequently eroded.

In the “staircase” plot of Figure 3.15, beds are

deﬁned as a time interval of continuous deposition, i.e. a series of consecutive timesteps with

increasing elevations. Hiatuses are deﬁned as periods in which no sediment is preserved, i.e.

a series of consecutive timesteps with the same elevation.

We will next discuss the relationship between sedimentation rate and time span with the

stratigraphic model of Plotnick (1986) based on a deterministic fractal distribution of hiatus

lengths. The age of sediments in this model is given as a function of depth in Figure 3.16a.

As illustrated, the vertical segments (beds) are of equal thickness. The positions of the

transitions from beds to hiatuses are given by a second-order Cantor set. Eight kilometers

of sediments have been deposited in this model sedimentary basin in a period of 9 Myr

so that the mean rate of deposition is R (9 Myr) = 8 km / 9 Myr = 0.89 mm/yr over

this period. However, there is a major unconformity at a depth of 4 km. The sediments

immediately above this unconformity have an age of 3 Ma and the sediments immediately

below it have an age of 6 Ma. There are no sediments in the sedimentary pile with ages

between 3 and 6 Ma. In terms of the the Cantor set this is illustrated in Figure 3.16b. The

line of unit length is divided into three parts and the middle third, representing the period

without deposition, is removed. The two remaining parts are placed on top of each other as

shown.

3.16c.

During the ﬁrst three million years of deposition (the lower half of the sedimentary

section) the mean rates of deposition are R (3 Myr)= 4 km / 3 Myr = 1.33 mm/yr. Thus

the rate of deposition increases as the period considered decreases. This is shown in Figure

There is also an unconformity at a depth of two kilometers. The sediments immediately

above this unconformity have an age of 1 Ma and sediments below have an age of 2 Ma.

Similarly there is an unconformity at a depth of 6 km, the sediments above this unconformity

have an age of 7 Ma and sediments below an age of 8 Ma. There are no sediments in the

pile with ages between 8 and 7 Ma or between 2 and 1 Ma. This is clearly illustrated in

Figure 3.16a. In terms of the Cantor set, Figure 3.16b, the two remaining line segments of

31

length 1/3 are each divided into three parts and the middle thirds are removed. The four

remaining segments of length 1/9 are placed on top of each other as shown. During the

periods 9 to 8, 7 to 6, 3 to 2, and 1 to 0 Myr the rates of deposition are R (1 Myr) = 2 km

/ 1 Myr = 2 mm/yr. This rate is also included in Figure 3.16c.

The rate of deposition clearly has a power-law dependence with respect to the length of

the time interval considered. The results illustrated in Figure 3.16 are based on a second-

order Cantor set but the construction can be extended to any order desired and the power-law

results given in Figure 3.11c would be extended to shorter and shorter time intervals.

The sedimentation rate has been calculated in this way based on the sedimentation

sedimentation rate has a power-law dependence on time span with exponent − 3

history of Figure 3.15. The results are plotted in Figure 3.17 on a logarithmic scale. The
4 : R ∝ T − 3
4 .
Sadler and Strauss [1990] have shown that the random-walk model results in a power-law

relationship with exponent − 1

2. Our result is a better ﬁt to the data of Sadler (1981) who

has compiled measurements of ﬂuvial sedimentation rates from the geological literature for

time scales of minutes to 100 million years. His data are plotted in Figure 3.18 where they

are averaged in bin sizes with an equal spacing on a logarithmic scale.

In this plot we

have not included the data on time scales from 105 to 108 years since these time scales

include unconformities resulting from regressive and transgressive events on active margins.

Variations in sea level are beyond the scope of the model and it would be inappropriate to

compare the model to sedimentation rates on those time scales. A least-square linear ﬁt to

the log-log plot yields a slope of −0.76. This result is consistent with the model result given

in Figure 3.17.

These results can also be obtained from theoretical fractal relations. Fractional Brownian

walks have the property that the standard deviation of the time series has a power-law

dependence on time with a fractional exponent Ha, the Hausdorﬀ measure: σ ∝ T Ha as

given by MT equation 3.2. The rate of change of the time series for a given time interval, T ,

is then the sedimentation rate R = σ/T ∝ T Ha−1. The power-spectral exponent of a time

series and its Hausdorﬀ measure are related by β = 2Ha + 1 (MT equation 5.10). For the

32

random-walk model, β = 2, Ha = 1/2, and the sedimentation rate is then R ∝ T − 1

2 . For

the stochastic diﬀusion model, β = 3/2, Ha = 1/4, and R ∝ T − 3

4 , in agreement with the

numerical results.

The dependence of sedimentation rate on time span continues up to time scales of the

Wilson cycle. On time scales of 105-108 years, transgressive and regressive events give rise to

alternating periods of deposition and erosion as mentioned previously. Korvin [1992] found,

using the SEDPAK simulation package, that alternating periods of deposition and erosion

resulting from sea level change, combined with the diﬀusive parameterization of sediment

transport of SEDPAK, resulted in a decreasing sedimentation rate with increasing time span

in the same way that channel avulsion and diﬀusive sediment transport results in episodic

sedimentation rates on smaller time scales.

E. Bed thicknesses

Working from our preserved thickness history of Figure 3.10b, we will deﬁne a bed as

any consecutive sequence of time units with diﬀerent thickness. Conversely, a hiatus is any

consecutive sequence of time units with the same thickness. In this section we will present

bed thickness and hiatus length distributions and compare them with observations and with

other models.

Plotnick [1986] presented the model for discontinuous sedimentation based on a fractal

distribution of hiatus lengths from in Figure 3.15. The cumulative distribution of hiatus

lengths, the number of hiatuses greater than or equal to a length of time, T , produced by

our model is plotted in Figure 3.19. In order to obtain an accurate curve, we generated 100

synthetic preserved thickness histories and accumulated the hiatus distributions to obtain

Figure 3.19. The distribution is not fractal. This was at ﬁrst surprising since a fractal

distribution of hiatuses was used to illustrate how a power-law dependence of sedimentation

rate on time span can occur. However, in the model of Figure 3.16 each bed had the same

thickness.

In contrast, as we will show, the stochastic diﬀusion model of sedimentation

33

results in bed thicknesses with an exponential distribution. Therefore, our observation

of a scale-invariant sedimentation rate without a scale-invariant distribution of hiatuses is

not inconsistent with the model of Figure 3.16 since they result in diﬀerent bed thickness

distributions.

The cumulative distribution of bed thicknesses generated by our model is plotted in

Figure 3.20 for the four diﬀerent values of σ/η indicated next to each distribution. For

synthetic depositional histories with a relatively large σ/η, such as 0.1, no deposition occurs

during most of the history. The result is a small number of beds with a very skewed

distribution. For smaller ratios, more thick beds appear in the record. The straight line

trends of the distributions on a log-linear axis indicate that the cumulative bed thickness

distributions are exponential. The non-cumulative distribution is also exponential since the

cumulative distribution is the integral of the non-cumulative distribution. Exponential bed

thickness distributions are common in stochastic models of sedimentation [Dacey, 1979].

Despite reported conclusions that stochastic models of sedimentation, including those that

generate exponential bed thickness distributions, accurately predict observed bed-thickness

distributions [Mizutani and Hattori, 1972], we are not aware of any model which predicts

the commonly observed log-normal distribution. This may be a fundamental weakness of

the bed formation models that have been proposed to date. Another possibility has been

suggested by Drummond and Wilkinson [1996]. They have argued that the observation

of log-normal distributions is an artifact resulting from unrecognized or unrecorded small

strata. They propose that exponential distributions are consistent with the data if the

data for the frequencies of the smallest strata are considered incomplete and not considered

in the distribution ﬁtting. This is consistent with the conclusion of Muto [1995] who has

presented the cumulative frequency-thickness distribution of four large turbidite datasets

from Japan. He found that an exponential distribution best ﬁt the data. However, power-

law distributions have also been persuasively argued for the distribution of turbidite beds

[Rothman et al., 1993].

In Figure 3.20, synthetic sedimentation histories with larger values of sedimentation

34

rate, σ/η, have a more skewed distribution or a steeper slope on a log-linear scale. This is

consistent with the dependence of skew on sedimentation rate observed in deep-sea sequences

in Italy by Claps and Masetti [1994]. These authors published bed-thickness data from three

formations in Italy: Ra Stua, Castagne, and Cismon Valley. The sedimentation rates for

a 1 Ma time scale have been estimated to be 2.5, 1.7, and 0.6 cm/kyr, respectively, for

these sections. In Figure 3.20 we found that basins which ﬁlled slowly had bed-thickness

distributions that were more skewed than those in basins which ﬁlled more quickly. The

cumulative bed-thickness distributions for these sections based on data that were digitally

scanned from Claps and Masetti [1994] are presented in Figure 3.21. The model prediction

that the skew of the bed thickness distributions increases from the (a) Ra Stua section to

the (b) Castagne and (c) Cismon Valley sections is consistent with the data.

IV. VARIABILITY OF THE EARTH’S MAGNETIC FIELD

A. Variations of the dipole moment

As our third and ﬁnal example we consider the time series of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.

Paleomagnetic studies show clearly that the polarity of the magnetic ﬁeld has been subject

to reversals. Kono [1971] has compiled paleointensity measurements of the magnetic ﬁeld

from volcanic lavas for 0-10 Ma. He concluded that the distribution of paleointensity is well

approximated by a symmetric binormal distribution with mean 8.9x1022Am2 and standard

deviation 3.4x1022Am2. A normal distribution is applicable to the ﬁeld when it is in its

normal polarity and the other when it is in its reversed polarity.

We have utilized three data sets for computing the power spectrum of the dipole mo-

ment of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. They are archeomagnetic data from time scales of 100

yr to 8 kyr from Kovacheva [1980], marine sediment data from the Somali basin from time

scales of 1 kyr to 140 kyr from Meynadier et al. [1992], and marine sediment data from the

Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans from 20 kyr to 4 Myr from Meynadier et al. [1994]. The data

35

were published in table form in Kovacheva [1980] and obtained from L. Meynadier (personal

communication, 1995) for the marine sediment data in Meynadier et al.

[1992] and Mey-

nadier et al. [1994]. Marine sediment data are accurate measures of relative paleointensity

but give no information on absolute intensity. In order to calibrate marine sediment data,

the data must be compared to absolute paleointensity measurements from volcanic lavas

sampled from the same time period as the sediment record. Meynadier et al.

[1994] has

done this for the composite Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean data set. They have calibrated the

mean paleointensity in terms of the virtual axial dipole moment for 0-4 Ma as 9x1022Am2

[Valet and Meynadier, 1993]. This value is consistent with that obtained by Kono [1971] for

the longer time interval up to 10 Ma. Using this calibration, we calibrated the Somali data

with the time interval 0-140 ka from the composite Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean dataset. The

data from Meynadier et al. [1994] are plotted in Figure 4.1 as a function of age in Ma. The

last reversal at approximately 730 ka is clearly shown. We computed the power spectrum

of each of the time series with the Lomb periodogram [Press et al., 1992]. The compiled

spectra are given in Figure 4.2. The composite sediment record from the Paciﬁc and Indian

Oceans are plotted up to the frequency 1/(25 kyr). Above this time scale good synchroneity

is observed in the Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean data sets [Meynadier et al., 1994]. This suggests

that non-geomagnetic eﬀects such as variable sedimentation rate are not signiﬁcant in these

cores above this time scale. From frequencies of 1/(25 kyr) to 1/(1.6 kyr) we plot the power

spectrum of the Somali data. From time scales of 1.6 kyr to the highest frequency we plot

the power spectrum of the data of Kovacheva [1980]. A least-squares linear regression to

the data yields a slope of −1.09 over 4.5 orders of magnitude. This indicates that the power

spectrum is well approximated as 1/f on these time scales.

The power spectrum of secular geomagnetic intensity variations has been determined to

have a 1/f 2 power spectrum between time scales of one and 100 years [Currie, 1968; Barton,

1982; Courtillot and Le Mouel, 1988]. This is consistent with the analysis of McLeod [1992]

who found that the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the annual means of geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity is a

white noise since the ﬁrst diﬀerences of a random process with power spectrum 1/f 2 is a white

36

noise. Our observation of 1/f power-spectral behavior above time scales of approximately

100 yr together with the results of Currie [1968] and Barton [1982] suggests that there is a

crossover from 1/f to 1/f 2 spectral behavior at a time scale of approximately one hundred

years.

B. Reversal record

We will now show that the statistics of the reversal record are consistent those with of a

binormal 1/f noise paleointensity record which reverses each time the intensity crosses the

zero value. We will compare the polarity length distribution and the clustering of reversals

between synthetic reversals produced with 1/f noise intensity variations and the reversal

history according to Harland et al. [1990] and Cande and Kent [1992a,1995].

First we consider the polarity length distribution of the real reversal history. The polarity

length distribution calculated from the chronology of Harland et al. [1990] is given as the

solid line in Figure 4.3. The polarity length distribution is the number of interval lengths

longer than the length plotted on the horizontal axis. A reassessment of the magnetic

anomaly data has been performed by Cande and Kent [1992a,1995] to obtain an alternative

magnetic time scale. The polarity length distribution of their time scale normalized to the

same length as the Harland et al. [1990] time scale, is presented as the dashed curve. The two

distributions are nearly identical. These plots suggest that the polarity length distribution

is better ﬁt by a power law for large polarity lengths than by an exponential distribution, as

ﬁrst suggested by Cox [1968]. The same conclusion has been reached by Gaﬃn [1989] and

Seki and Ito [1993].

The third curve, plotted with a dashed-dotted line, represents the polarity length distri-

bution estimated from the magnetic time scale between C1 and C13 with “cryptochrons”

included and scaled to the length of the Harland et al. [1990] time scale. Cryptochrons are

small variations recorded in the magnetic anomaly data that may either represent variations

in paleomagnetic intensity or short reversals [Blakely, 1974; Cande and Kent, 1992b]. Cryp-

37

tochons occur with a time scale at the limit of temporal resolution of the reversal record from

magnetic anomalies of the sea ﬂoor. The form of the polarity length distribution estimated

from the record between C1 and C13 including cryptochrons is not representative of the

entire reversal history because of the variable reversal rate which concentrates many short

polarity intervals in this time period. However, this distribution enables us to estimate the

temporal resolution of the reversal record history. The distribution estimated from C1 to

C13 has many more short polarity intervals than those of the full reversal history starting

at a reversal length of 0.3 Myr. Above a time scale of 0.3 Myr the magnetic time scale is

nearly complete. Below it many short polarity intervals may be unrecorded.

To show that this distribution is consistent with binormal 1/f noise intensity variations,

we have generated synthetic Gaussian noises with a power spectrum porportional to 1/f , a

mean value of 8.9x1022Am2 and a standard deviation of 3.4x1022Am2 as obtained by Kono

[1971], representative of the ﬁeld intensity in one polarity state. The synthetic noises were

generated using the Fourier-domain ﬁltering technique discussed in MT section 2.1. An

example is shown as Figure 4.4. In order to construct a binormal intensity distribution from

the synthetic normal distribution, we inverted every other polarity interval to the opposite

polarity starting from its minimum value below the zero intensity axis and extending to its

next minimum below the zero. The result of this procedure on the Gaussian, 1/f noise of

Figure 4.4 is presented in Figure 4.5. Its irregular polarity lengths are similar to that in the

marine sediment data of Figure 4.1.

The operation of reversing the paleomagnetic intensity when it crosses the zero intensity

value is consistent with models of the geodynamo as a system with two symmetric attracting

states of positive and negative polarity such as the Rikitake disk dynamo. Between reversals,

the geomagnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuates until a ﬂuctuation large enough occurs to cross the energy

barrier into the other basin of attraction. Kono [1987] has explored the statistical similarity

between the Rikitake disk dynamo and the distribution of paleointensity. Our construction

of the binormal 1/f noise is consistent with this model.

We have computed the distributions of lengths between successive reversals for twenty

38

synthetic noises scaled to length 169 Ma, the length of the reversal chronology, and averaged

the results in terms of the number of reversals. The results are plotted as the solid curve

along with the Harland et al. [1990] time scale (dashed curve) in Figure 4.6. The dots in

Figure 4.6 are the maximum and minimum values obtained in the twenty synthetic reversal

chronologies for each reversal rank, thus representing 95% conﬁdence intervals. The shape

of the synthetic polarity length distribution is very similar to the Harland et al. [1990] time

scale. The synthetic polarity length distribution matches the Harland et al.

[1990] time

scale within the 95% conﬁdence interval over all time scales plotted except for the Cretaceous

superchron, which lies slighly outside of the 95% conﬁdence interval, and reversals separated

by less than about 0.3 Myr. The overprediction of very short reversals could be a limitation of

the model or a result of the incompleteness of the reversal record for short polarity intervals.

As mentioned, the temporal resolution of the magnetic time scale inferred from magnetic

anomalies is approximately 0.3 Myr. We conclude that the polarity length distribution

produced from binormal 1/f intensity variations are consistent with the observed polarity

length distribution for all time scales for which the reversal record is complete.

We next consider whether the agreement illustrated in Figure 4.6 is unique to 1/f noise.

We have computed polarity length distributions using binormal intensity variations with

power spectra f −0.8 and f −1.2. These results along with the 1/f result from Figure 4.6 are

given in Figure 4.7. The shape of the polarity length distribution is very sensitive to the

exponent of the power spectrum. A slight increase in the magnitude of the exponent results

in many more long polarity intervals than with 1/f noise. We conclude that the agreement

in Figure 4.6 between the synthetic reversal distribution and the true reversal history is

unique to 1/f noise and provides strong evidence that the dipole moment has 1/f behavior

up to time scales of 170 Myr.

A binormal, 1/f noise geomagnetic ﬁeld variation is consistent with the qualitative results

of Pal and Roberts [1988] who found an anticorrelation between reversal frequency and

paleointensity. This anticorrelation is evident in the synthetic 1/f noise of Figure 4.5.

During the time intervals of greatest average paleointensity the reversal rate is lowest.

39

In addition to the broad distribution of polarity lengths, the reversal history is also

characterized by a clustering of reversals. This behavior has been quantiﬁed with the reversal

rate. The reversal rate has been relatively high from 0-20 Ma and has decreased gradually

going back in history to the Cretaceous superchron. An alternative approach to quantifying

the clustering of reversals is with the pair-correlation function. The pair-correlation function

C(t) is the number of pairs of reversals whose separation is between t and t + ∆t, per unit

time [Vicsek, 1992]. The pair-correlation function for a set of points can be compared to

that for a Poisson process to detect non-random clustering. The pair-correlation function

analysis is more appropriate for comparison of the reversal history to the synthetic reversal

history generated by a stochastic model since a stochastic model cannot predict behavior

in time, such as when the reversal rate is large or small. However, a stochastic model may

accurately reﬂect the extent to which small polarity intervals are followed by small polarity

intervals and long intervals by long intervals as quantiﬁed with the pair-correlation function.

The pair-correlation function of reversals according to the Harland et al.

[1990] and

Cande and Kent [1992a,1995] reversal history are shown in Figure 4.8 as ﬁlled and unﬁlled

circles, respectively. Also presented in Figure 4.8 is the pair-correlation function for a syn-

thetic reversal data set based on binormal 1/f noise dipole moment variations (boxes) and

for a Poisson process (triangles). The functions are oﬀset so that they may be placed on

the same graph. The Poisson process was constructed with 293 points, the same number

of reversals as the Harland et al.

[1990] time scale, positioned with uniform probability

on the interval between 0 and 170 Ma. The Poisson process yields a correlation function

independent of t. The real and synthetic reversal histories variations exhibit signiﬁcant clus-

tering with more pairs of points at small separation and fewer at large separations than for

a Poisson process. Straight-line ﬁts of the form C(t) ∝ t−α were obtained. The purpose of

this was to show that similar clustering is observed in the real and synthetic reversals. The

exponents of the Harland et al. [1990], Cande and Kent [1992a,1995], and synthetic reversals

are -0.39, -0.31, and -0.42, respectively, indicating close agreement between the model and

real reversals.

40

C. Inclination and declination data

Power spectral analyses of inclination and declination data have also been carried out.

We obtained time series data for inclination and declination from lake sediment cores in the

Global Paleomagnetic Database [Lock and McElhinney, 1992]. The core with the greatest

number of data points was from Lac du Bouchet [Thouveny et al., 1990]. The inclination

data from this data set is plotted in Figure 4.9. The power spectrum of the inclination

and declination at Lac du Bouchet estimated with the Lomb Periodogram is presented in

Figure 4.10. We associate the spectra with a ﬂat spectrum below a frequency of f ≈ 1/(3

kyr) and a constant spectrum above a frequency of f ≈ 1/(500 yr). From frequencies of

f ≈ 1/(3 kyr) to f ≈ 1/(500 yr) the inclination and declination are Brownian walks with

S(f ) ∝ f −2. Spectral analyses of inclination data from ﬁve other sediment cores were

calculated. These spectra are presented in Figure 4.11. The spectra correspond, from top to

bottom, to cores from Anderson Pond [Lund and Banerjee, 1985], Bessette Creek [Turner et

al., 1982], Fish Lake [Verosub et al., 1986], Lake Bullenmerri [Turner and Thompson, 1981],

and Lake Keilambete [Barton and McElhinny, 1985]. Since the data sets have fewer points

there is more uncertainty in the spectra and they are characterized by greater variability

between adjacent frequencies. The spectra have the same form, within the uncertainty of

the spectra, as that associated with the spectra from Lac du Bouchet. These results suggest

that 3 kyr and 500 yr are characteristic time scales of geodynamo behavior. Variations in

inclination and declination are associated with changes in the non-dipole components of

the ﬁeld. Therefore, the autocorrelation or decay time of the quadrupole moment is the

maximum time scale for correlated ﬂuctuations of inclination and declination to occur. The

autocorrelation time of the quadrupole moment has been estimated by McLeod [1996] to be

1.6 kyr. This is within a factor of two of the 3 kyr time scale above which variations in

inclination and declination are observed to be uncorrelated in the spectra of Figures 4.10

and 4.11.

Many analyses of variations in paleointensity of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld concentrate on

41

identifying characteristic time scales of variation. Many such characteristic time scales have

been identiﬁed. Valet and Meynadier [1993] suggested, based on the same sediment core data

analyzed in this paper, that the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld regenerates following a reversal on a

time scale of a few thousand years and then decays slowly on a time scale of 0.5 Myr before

the next reversal. They termed this an “asymmetric saw-tooth” pattern. More recent data

have shown that the “asymmetric saw-tooth” is not a robust pattern. Longer cores show

a slow decay preceding a reversal to be rare [Tauxe and Hartl, 1997]. Moreover, Laj et al.

[1996] has shown that the magnetic ﬁeld does not always regenerate quickly after a reversal.

Thibal et al. [1995] have quantiﬁed the rate of decrease in ﬁeld intensity preceeding a reversal

and found it to be inversely proportional to the length of the polarity interval. The authors

concluded from this that the length of the reversal was predetermined. Such behavior is not

indicative of a predetermined polarity length. This can be concluded by considering the null

hypothesis that variations in the ﬁeld are characterized by any stationary random process.

By deﬁnition, a stationary time series has a variance which is independent of the length of

the series. The average rate of change of the time series over a time interval will then be a

constant value divided by the interval of time, i.e.

inversely proportional to time interval.

Therefore, any stationary random function satisﬁes the relationship that Thibal et al. [1995]

observed.

In the power-spectral analyses of geomagnetic variations inferred from sediment cores

performed by Lund et al.

[1988], Meynadier et al.

[1992], Lehman et al.

[1996], and

Tauxe and Hartl [1997] dominant periodicities in the record were identiﬁed and proposed

as characteristic time scales of geodynamo behavior. However, it must be emphasized that

any ﬁnite length record will exhibit peaks in its power spectrum even if the underlying

process is random such as a 1/f noise. Periodicity tests such as those developed by Lees

and Park [1995] need to be applied to data in order to assess the probability that a peak

in a spectrum is statistically signiﬁcant. The periodicity tests developed by Lees and Park

[1995] are especially valuable because they do not depend on a particular model of the

stochastic portion of the spectrum. Some of the periodicity tests that have been used in the

42

geomagnetism literature assume forms for the stochastic portion of the spectrum that are

not compatible with the 1/f process we have identiﬁed. See Mann and Lees [1996] for an

application of these techniques to climatic time series.

It is generally believed that secular geomagnetic variations are the result of internal

dynamics while longer time scale phenomena such as variations in the reversal rate are con-

trolled by variations in boundary conditions at the core-mantle boundary (CMB) [McFadden

and Merrill, 1995]. However, our observation of continuous 1/f spectral behavior from time

scales of 100 yr to 170 Myr suggests that a single process controls variations in geomagnetic

intensity over this range of time scales. In Section 4.4 we consider a model for geodynamo

behavior which reproduces the 1/f dipole moment variations over a wide range of time scales

and exhibits many of the other features of geomagnetic variability we have identiﬁed.

D. Model for geomagnetic variations

There has been great interest in 1/f noise processes in the physics literature for many

years [Weissman, 1988]. One model of 1/f noise is a stochastic process comprised of a

superposition of modes with exponential decay characterized by diﬀerent time constants.

The time constant for a stochastic process is deﬁned through its autocorrelation function

a(τ ). For a stochastic process with a single time constant τo the autocorrelation function is

given by a(τ ) = e

τo . The power spectrum of such a process is, by the Weiner-Khinchine

− τ

theorem, the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function:

S(f ) ∝

τo
1 + (2πf )2

(1)

This is a Lorentzian spectrum with Brownian walk behavior (S(f ) ∝ f −2) for time scales

small compared to τo and white noise behavior (S(f ) = constant) above the characteristic

time constant. If the stochastic process is composed of a superposition of modes with time

constants following a distribution D(τo) ∝ τ −1

o

, where the D(τo)∆τo is the net variance

contributed by modes between τo and τo + ∆τo, then a 1/f spectrum results over a range of

43

frequencies [van der Ziel, 1950; Weissman, 1988]. Such a distribution of exponential time

constants has been documented for the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld by McLeod [1996].

McLeod [1996] calculated the autocorrelation of each degree of the geomagnetic ﬁeld dur-

ing the last eighty years. The autocorrelation functions that he computed had an exponential

dependence on time with degree-dependent time constants τo ∝ n−2. This behavior is con-

sistent with a diﬀusion process. McLeod [1996] attributed this autocorrelation structure to

a simple model of the geomagnetic ﬁeld in which the ﬁeld was stochastically generated with

a balance between ﬁeld regeneration and diﬀusive decay across a magnetic boundary layer.

One way to model such a stochastic diﬀusion process is with a two-dimensional diﬀusion

equation driven by random noise:

∂Bz
∂t

= D∇2Bz + η(x, y, t)

(2)

(3)

where Bz is the axial component of the magnetic ﬁeld at a point inside the core and η(x, y, t)

is a Gaussian white noise representing random ampliﬁcation and destruction of the ﬁeld

locally by dynamo action. To this equation we add a term equal to c(p − Bz,tot):

∂Bz
∂t

= D∇2Bz + η(x, y, t) + c(p − Bz,tot)

where c is a constant, Bz,tot is the dipole moment integrated over all space, and p is +1 if the

dipole moment of the ﬁeld outside the core-mantle boundary is positive and -1 if the dipole

moment outside the core-mantle boundary is negative. The eﬀect of this term is to create

two basins of attraction (polarity states) within which the dipole ﬁeld ﬂuctuates around an

intensity of +1 or -1 until a ﬂuctuation large enough occurs to cross the barrier to the other

basin of attraction. This term could be the result of a conservation of magnetic energy

for the combination of the poloidal and toroidal ﬁelds such that when the poloidal dipole

ﬁeld intensity is low the toroidal ﬁeld intensity, which is unobservable outside the core and

not explicitly modeled in equation 3, is high and dynamo action is intensiﬁed, repelling the

poloidal ﬁeld away from a state of low dipole intensity.

In our model the core is modeled as a two-dimensional circular region of uniform diﬀu-

sivity (the ﬂuid outer core) surrounded by an inﬁnite region with small but ﬁnite diﬀusivity

44

and the boundary condition that Bz approach zero as r approaches zero where r is the

radial distance from the center of the earth. The diameter of the inner circular region is the

diameter of the core-mantle boundary.

This model has been simulated by computer using ﬁnite diﬀerencing of the model equa-

tion on a two-dimensional lattice. It has been studied in terms of the distribution of values

and power spectrum of the dipole moment and the power spectrum of the angular deviation

from the dipole ﬁeld. The dipole ﬁeld from the simulation is plotted in Figure 4.12. The

ﬁeld clearly undergoes reversals with a broad distribution of polarity interval lengths. Figure

4.13 represents the dipole distribution of 10 simulations (solid curve) along with the ﬁt to

a binormal distribution (dashed curve). A binormal distribution ﬁts the data well. The

slight asymmetry is the result of this particular model run spending slightly more time in

the negative polarity state than in the positive polarity state. Model outputs were generated

which showed asymmetry in the other direction.

The average power spectrum of time series of the dipole ﬁeld from 25 simulations is

presented in Figure 4.14. The spectrum has a low-frequency spectrum S(f ) ∝ f −1 and a

high-frequency spectrum S(f ) ∝ f −2. This is identical to the spectrum observed in sediment

cores and historical data discussed earlier in the chapter. The crossover time scale is the

diﬀusion time across the diameter of the core, estimated to be between 103 yr [Harrison and

Huang, 1990] and 104 yr [McLeod, 1996]. These values are somewhat higher than the time

scale of 102 yr identiﬁed as the crossover in the sediment core and historical data.

Figure 4.15 shows the average power spectrum of the angular displacement from the

dipole from 25 simulations. The spectrum has a high-frequency region S(f ) ∝ f −2 which

slowly ﬂattens out to a ﬂat spectrum at low frequencies. This is nearly consistent with the

spectra of inclination and declination from lake sediment time series shown in Figures 4.10

and 4.11. The measured value of the crossover from white noise to Brownian walk behavior

in the lake sediment power spectra is 3 kyr. This value is consistent with estimates of 103 to

104 years for the diﬀusion time across the core from Harrison and Huang [1990] and McLeod

[1996]. A major discrepancy between the model and the observed spectrum is the absence

45

of a ﬂattening out of the spectrum of angular displacement at high frequencies in the model

calculation.

V. OTHER APPLICATIONS

Self-aﬃne time series occur in many other areas of Earth science. For example, topo-

graphic proﬁles are Brownian walks [Turcotte, 1987]. Pelletier [1997c] has shown that a

model of topography governed by the diﬀusion equation with the diﬀusivity a function of

discharge predicts both the Brownian walk variations and the log-normal distribution of to-

pography. Branching river networks with statistics identical to those of real river networks

were also obtained. Gravity ﬁelds also exhibit power-law power spectra [Turcotte, 1987;

Passier and Sneider, 1995]. These power spectra have been interpreted as resulting from

random density anomalies in the mantle [Lambeck, 1976]. A related problem to the frac-

tal structure of topography which may also exhibit self-aﬃnity is sediment loads in rivers.

Plotnick and Prestegaard [1993] have obtained time series data for sediment loads in rivers

on time scales of minutes to days. They applied both the rescaled-range technique and

power-spectral analysis to show that the time series are approximately self-aﬃne.

Tjemkes and Visser [1987] have performed power-spectral analyses on the horizontal

variability of temperature, humidity, and cloud water in the atmosphere. They found that

diﬀerent power-law behaviors were applicable over well-deﬁned wave number ranges. These

results are important for understanding the variability of the atmosphere and for improved

characterization of these ﬁelds for inputs into large scale models of the climate system [IPCC,

1995]. The TOPEX/POSEIDON project has provided data on sea surface height with global

coverage with a 10-day sampling interval. Wunsch and Stammer [1995] have shown that sea

surface height has self-aﬃne behavior in both space and time with three diﬀerent values of

β characterizing the variability over diﬀerent wave number ranges. Variability in sea surface

height has been modeled using the potential vorticity equation with stochastic forcing to

represent variable wind conditions [Muller, 1996]. These techniques are very similar to the

46

stochastic partial diﬀerential equations discussed in Sections 2-4. Hsui et al.

[1993] have

shown that sea level variations are a self-aﬃne time series on time scales of 104 to 108 yr.

Since sea level variations determine the major unconformities of the stratigraphic record,

the record of the earth’s history is determined by self-aﬃne behavior.

Self-aﬃne time series have applications in other ﬁelds.

It has long been recognized

that spatial variations in plankton abundance in the oceans are self-aﬃne. This has been

determined by performing power-spectral analysis on remotely-sensed data for plankton

along one-dimensional transects [Platt and Denman, 1975]. Plankton variability has been

modeled using stochastic diﬀusion equations similar to those presented in this paper [Fasham,

1978]. Diﬀusion is used to model ocean mixing and stochastic terms are introduced to

model the eﬀects of local environmental variations that aﬀect the population growth rate

such as variations in light intensity and nutrient concentration. Power spectral analyses

have also been performed on vegetation densities [Palmer, 1988]. The time series were

observed to have power-law power spectra. Sugihara and May [1990] and McKinney and

Frederick [1992] have applied the self-aﬃnity of population abundance in time to assessing

the probability of extinction. They argued that populations with stronger correlations in

variability, characterized by larger values of β or Hu, have greater ﬂuctuations in population

size and have a higher probability of extinction.

Self-aﬃne time series with β ≈ 1 are also observed in traﬃc ﬂows [Musha and Higuchi,

1976]. This behavior is reproduced in lattice gas models which move cars around on a lattice

according to simple interaction rules that prevent cars from occupying the same space and

that are driven by a random input of cars into the lattice [Takayasu and Takayasu, 1993].

1/f noise has also been observed in the the density of internet traﬃc. This observation may

have important implications for the design and testing of network software and services.

47

Alexander, L.L., Geologic evolution and stratigraphic controls on ﬂuid ﬂow of the Eugene

Island Block 330 Mini Basin, oﬀshore Louisiana, Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell Univ., Ithaca,

N. Y., 1995.

Cambridge, Mass., 1990.

Allen, P.A., and J.R. Allen, Basin Analysis: Principles and Applications, Blackwell Sci.,

Arking, A., and D. Ziskin, Relationship between clouds and sea surface temperatures in

the western tropical Paciﬁc, J. Clim., 7, 988, 1994.

Barnett, T.P., A.D. Del Genio, and R.A. Ruedy, Unforced decadal ﬂuctuations in a

coupled model of the atmosphere and ocean mixed layer, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 7341-7354,

1992.

Barton, C.C., and C.H. Scholz, The fractal size and spatial distribution of hydrocarbon

accumulations: implications for resource assessment and exploration strategy, edited by C.C.

Barton and P.R. LaPointe, Fractals in Petroleum Geology and Earth Sciences, pp. 13-34,

Plenum, New York, 1995.

Barton, C.E., Spectral analysis of palaeomagnetic time series and the geomagnetic spec-

trum, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A, 306, 203-209, 1982.

Berg, R.R., Point bar origin of Fall River sandstone reservoirs, northeast Wyoming, Am.

Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull., 52, 2116-2122, 1968.

Blakely, R.J., Geomagnetic reversals and crustal spreading rates during the Miocene, J.

Geophys. Res., 79, 2979-2985, 1974.

Booy, C., and L.M. Lye, A new look at ﬂood risk determination, Water Resour. Bull.,

25, 933-943, 1989.

Reading, Ma., 1985.

Bras, R.L., and I. Rodriguez-Iturbe, Random Functions and Hydrology, Addison-Wesley,

Cande, S.C., and D.V. Kent, A new geomagnetic polarity time scale for the Late Creta-

ceous and Cenozoic, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 13,917-13,951, 1992a.

Cande, S.C., and D.V. Kent, Ultrahigh resolution marine magnetic anomaly proﬁles : a

record of continuous paleointensity variations?, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15075-15083, 1992b.

48

Cande, S.C., and D.V. Kent, Revised calibration of the geomagnetic polarity timescale

for the Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 6093-6095, 1995.

Claps, M., and D. Masetti, Milankovitch periodicities recorded in Cretaceous sequences

from the Southern Alps (Northern Italy), in Orbital Forcing and Cyclic Sequences, edited

by P.L. DeBoer and D.L. Smith, pp. 99-107, Blackwell Sci., Cambridge, Mass., 1994.

Coleman, J.M., and D.B. Prior, Deltaic environments of deposition, in Sandstone Depo-

sitional Environments, edited by P.A. Scholle and D. Spearing, AAPG Mem., 31, 139-178,

1982.

1968.

Courtillot, V., and J.L. Le Mouel, Time variations of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld: From

daily to secular, Ann. Rev. Earth Plan. Sci., 16, 389-476, 1988.

Cox, A., Lengths of geomagnetic polarity intervals, J. Geophys. Res., 73, 3247-3260,

Currie, R.G., Geomagnetic spectrum of internal origin and lower mantle conductivity, J.

Geophys. Res., 73, 2779-2768, 1968.

Curry, W.H., and W.H. Curry III, South Glennock oil ﬁeld, Wyoming: A pre-discovery

thinking and post-discovery description, in Stratigraphic Oil and Gas Fields, edited by R.E.

King, Mem. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol., 15, 415-427, 1972.

Dacey, M.F., Models of bed formation, Math. Geol., 11, 655-668, 1979.

Deshpande, A., P.B. Flemings, and J. Huang, Quantifying lateral heterogeneities in

ﬂuvio-deltaic sediments using 3-D reﬂection seismic data: Oﬀshore Gulf of Mexico, J. Geo-

phys. Res., in press, 1997.

Dolan, S.S., C.J. Bean, and B. Riollet, The broad-band fractal nature of heterogeneity

in the upper crust from petrophysical logs, submitted, 1996.

Drummond, C.N., and B.H. Wilkinson, Stratal thickness frequencies and the prevalence

of orderedness in stratigraphic sequences, J. Geol., 104, 1-18, 1996.

Dunne, T., K.X. Whipple, and B.F. Aubry, Microtopography of hillslopes and initiation

of channels by Horton overland ﬂow, in Natural and AnthropogenicInﬂuences in Fluvial

Geomorphology: The Wolman Volume, Geophys. Monogr. Ser., vol. 89, edited by J.E.

49

Costa et al., pp. 27-44, AGU, Washington, D. C., 1995.

Family, F., Scaling of rough surfaces: Eﬀects of surface diﬀusion, J. Phys. A Math.

Gen., 19, L441-L446, 1986.

Fasham, M. J. R., The statistical and mathematical analysis of plankton patchiness,

Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Ann. Rev., 16, 43-79, 1978.

Gaﬃn, S., 1989. Analysis of scaling in the geomagnetic polarity reversal record, Phys.

Earth Plan. Inter., 57, 284-290.

Garcia, R., Depositional systems and their relation to gas accumulation in Sacremento

Valley, California, AAPG Bull., 65, 653-674, 1981.

Garrett, A.E., Vertical eddy diﬀusivity in the ocean interior, J. Mar. Res., 42, 359-393,

Ghil, M., Theoretical climate dynamics: An introduction, in Turbulence and Predicability

in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and Climate Dynamics, edited by M. Ghil, North Holland,

Gomes da Silva, L.M., and D.L. Turcotte, A comparison between Hurst and Hausdorﬀ

measures derived from fractional time series, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 4, 2181-2192,

1984.

1994.

Amsterdam, 1983.

Harland, W.B., Cox, A., Llewellyn, P.G., Pickton, C.A.G., Smith, A.G. & Walters, R.,

A Geologic Time Scale 1989, Cambridge University Press, London, 1990.

Harrison, C.G.A., and Q. Huang, Q., Rates of change of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld

measured by recent analyses, J. Geomag. Geoelectr., 42, 897-928, 1990.

Harvey, L.D.D., and S.H. Schneider, Transient climate response to external forcing on

100-104 year time scales Part I: Experiments with globally averaged, coupled, atmosphere

and ocean energy balance models, J. Geophys. Res., 90, 2191-2205, 1985.

Hays, J.D., J. Imbrie, and N.J. Shackleton, Variations in the earth’s orbit: Pacemaker

of the ice ages, Science, 194, 1121-1132, 1976.

Hewett, T.A., Fractal distribution of reservoir heterogeneity and their inﬂuence of ﬂuid

transport, SPE Prof. Pap. 15386, Soc. of Pet. Eng., Richardson, Tex., 1986.

50

Hoﬀert, M.I., A.J. Callegari, and C.-T. Hsieh, The role of deep sea heat storage in the

secular response to climatic forcing, J. Geophys. Res., 85, 6667-6679, 1980.

Hofmann, D.J., and J.M. Rosen, On the prolonged lifetime of the El Chichon sulfuric

acid aerosol cloud, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 9825-9830, 1987.

Holliger, K., Upper-crustal seismic velocity heterogeneity as derived from a variety of

P-wave sonic logs, Geophys. J. Int., 125, 813-829, 1996.

Hsui, A.T., K.A. Rust, and G.D. Klein, A fractal analysis of Quaternary, Cenozoic-

Mesozoic, and late Pennsylvanian sea-level changes, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 21963-21967,

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change, The IPCC Scientiﬁc As-

sessment, edited by J.T. Houghton and B.A. Callendar, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York,

1993.

1995.

Janosi, I.M., and G. Vattay, Soft turbulent state of the atmospheric boundary layer,

Phys. Rev. A, 46, 6386-6389, 1992.

Jouzel, J., C. Lorius, J.R. Petit, C. Genthon, N.I. Barkov, V.M. Kotlyakov, Vostok ice-

core: A continuous isotope temperature record over the last climatic cycle (160,000 years),

Nature, 329, 403-407, 1987.

Jouzel, J., and D. Merlivat, Deuterium and oxygen 18 in precipiation: Modeling of the

isotopic eﬀects during snow formation, J. Geophys. Res., 89, 11,749-11,757, 1984.

Kagan, Y.Y., and L. Knopoﬀ, Spatial distribution of earthquakes: The two-point corre-

lation function, Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc., 62, 303-320, 1980.

Kendall, D.R., and J.A. Dracup, A comparison of index-sequential and AR(1) generated

hydrologic sequences, J. Hyd., 122, 335-352, 1991.

Kerr, R.A., Climate control: How large a role for orbital variations?, Science, 201, 144-

146, 1978.

Kolmogorov, A.N., Solution of a problem in probability theory connected with the prob-

lem of the mechanism of stratiﬁcation, Trans. Am. Math. Soc., 53, 171-177, 1951.

Kondev, J., and C.L. Henley, Geometrical exponents of contour loops on random gaussian

51

surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 74, 4580-4583, 1995.

Kono, M., Intensity of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld during the Pliocene and Pleistocene

in relation to the amplitude of mid-ocean ridge magnetic anomalies, Earth and Plan. Sci.

Kono, M., Rikitake two-disk dynamo and paleomagnetism, Geophys. Res. Lett., 14,

Korvin, G., Fractal Models in the Earth Sciences, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1992.

Kovacheva, M., Summarized results of the archeomagnetic investigation of the geomag-

netic ﬁeld variation for the last 8000 yr in south-eastern Europe, Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc.,

Laj, C., C. Kissel, and I. Lefevre, Relative geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity and reversals from

Upper Miocene sections in Crete, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 141. 67-78, 1996.

Lambeck, K., Lateral density anomalies in the upper mantle, J. Geophys. Res., 81,

Lett., 11, 10-17, 1971.

21-24, 1987.

61, 57-64, 1980.

6333-6340, 1976.

Landwehr, J.M., and N.C. Matalas, On the nature of persistence in dendrochronologic

records with implications for hydrology, J. Hyd., 86, 239-277, 1986.

Lees, J.M., and J. Park, Multiple-taper spectral analysis: A stand-alone C-subroutine,

Computers & Geology, 21, 199-236, 1995.

Lehman, B., C. Laj, C. Kissel, A. Mazaud, M. Paterne, and L. Labeyrie, Relative changes

of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity during the last 280 kyear from piston cores in the Acores

area, Phys. Earth Plan. Int., 93, 269-284, 1996.

Lock, J., and M.W. McElhinney, The Global Paleomagnetic Database: design, installa-

tion, and use with ORACLE, Surveys in Geophysics, 12, 317-506, 1992.

Lund, S.P., and S.K. Banerjee, The paleomagnetic record of Late Quaternary secular

variation from Anderson Pond, Tennessee, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 72, 219-237, 1985.

Lund, S.P., J.C. Liddicoat, K.R. Lajoie, T.L. Henyey, and S.W. Robinson, Paleomagnetic

evidence for long-term (104 year) memory and periodic behavior in the earth’s core dynamo

process, Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 1101-1104, 1988.

52

Manabe, S., and R.J. Stouﬀer, Low-frequency variability of surface air temperature in

a 1000-year integration of a coupled atmosphere-ocean-land surface model, J. Climate, 9,

376-393, 1996.

Met. Soc., 100, 389-405, 1974.

Manley, G., Central England temperatures: monthly means 1659-1973, Quat. J. Roy.

Mann, M.E., and J.M. Lees, Robust estimation of background noise and signal detection

in climatic time series, Climatic Change, 33, 409-445, 1996.

Matteucci, G., Analysis of the probability distribution of the late Pleistocene climatic

record: Implications for model validation, Clim. Dyn., 5, 35-52, 1990.

McFadden, P.L., and R.T. Merrill, History of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and possible

connections to core-mantle boundary processes, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 307-316, 1995.

McKinney, M.L., and D. Frederick, Extinction and population dynamics: New methods

and evidence from Paleogene foraminifera, Geology, 20, 343-346, 1992.

McLeod, M.G., Signals and noise in magnetic observatory annual means: Mantle con-

ductivity and jerks, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 17,261-17,290, 1992.

McLeod, M.G., Spatial and temporal power spectra of the geomagnetic ﬁeld, J. Geophys.

Res., 101, 2745-2763, 1996.

Meynadier, L., J.-P. Valet, F.C. Bassonot, N.J. Shackleton, and Y. Guyodo, Asymmet-

rical saw-tooth pattern of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity from equatorial sediments in the

Paciﬁc and Indian oceans, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 126, 109-127, 1994.

Meynadier, L., J.-P. Valet, R. Weeks, N.J. Shackleton, and V.L. Hagee, Relative geo-

magnetic intensity of the ﬁeld during the last 140 ka, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 114, 39-57,

1992.

Res., 6, 481-493, 1976.

Mitchell Jr., J.M., An overview of climatic variability and its causal mechanisms, Quat.

Mizutani, S., and I. Hattori, Stochastic analysis of bed-thickness distribution of sedi-

ments, Math. Geol., 4, 123-146, 1972.

Molz, F.J., and G.K. Boman, A fractal-based stochastic interpolation scheme in subsur-

53

face hydrology, Water Resour. Res., 29, 3769-3774, 1993.

Muller, P., Stochastic forcing of quasi-geostrophic eddies, in Stochastic Modelling in

Physical Oceanography, edited by R. J. Adler, P. Muller, and B. Rozovskii, pp. 381-395,

Birkhauser, Boston, 1996.

Jap. J. Appl. Phys., 15, 1271-1275, 1976.

Musha, T., and H. Higuchi, The 1/f ﬂuctuation of a traﬃc current of an expressway,

Muto, T., The Kolmogorov model of bed thickness distribution: An assessment based

on numerical simulation and ﬁeld-data analysis, Terra Nova, 7, 408-416, 1995.

National Geophysical Data Center, Global Paleomagnetic Database, version 3.1, National

Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, 1995.

Noakes, D.J., K.W. Hipel, A.I. McLeod, C. Jimenez, and S. Yakowitz, Forecasting annual

geophysical time series, Int. J. Forecasting, 4, 103-115, 1988.

North, G.R., and R.F. Cahalan, Predicability in a solvable stochastic climate model, J.

Atm. Sci., 38, 504-513, 1981.

1449-1454, 1963.

dipole, Nature, 331, 702-705, 1988.

nities, Vegetatio 75, 91-102, 1988.

Novikov, E.A., Random force method in turbulence theory, Soviet Phys., J.E.T.P., 17,

Pal, P.C., and P.H. Roberts, Long-term polarity stability and strength of the geomagnetic

Palmer, M.W., Fractal geometry: A tool for describing spatial patterns of plant commu-

Passier, M.L., and R.K. Snieder, On the presence of intermediate-scale heterogeneity in

the upper mantle, Geophys. J. Int., 123, 817-837, 1995.

Peixoto, J.P., and A.H. Oort, Physics of Climate, Am. Inst. Phys., New York, 1992.

Pelletier, J.D., Variations in solar luminosity from time scales of minutes to months,

Astrophys. J., 463, L41-L45, 1996.

10, 1331-1342, 1997a.

Pelletier, J.D., Analysis and modeling of the natural variability of climate, J. Climate,

Pelletier, J.D., Kardar-Parisi-Zhang scaling of the convective boundary layer and the

54

189-210, 1975.

1990.

94, 885-890, 1986.

Cliﬀs, Cal., 1993.

fractal structure of cumulus cloud ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78, 2672-2675, 1997b.

Pelletier, J.D., Why is topography fractal?, J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 1997c.

Pelletier, J.D., and D.L. Turcotte, Scale-invariant topography and porosity variations in

sedimentary basins, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 28,165-28,175, 1996.

Pilkington, M., and J.P. Todoeschuck, Stochastic inversion for scaling geology, Geophys.

J. Int., 102, 205-217, 1990.

Platt, T., and K.L. Denman, Spectral analysis in ecology, Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 6,

Pleune, R., Vertical diﬀusion in the stable atmosphere, Atm. Env. A, 24, 2547-2555,

Plotnick, R.E., A fractal model for the distribution of stratigraphic hiatuses, J. Geol.,

Plotnick, R.E., and K. Prestegaard, Fractal analysis of geologic time series, in Fractals

in Geography, edited by L. De Cola and S. Lam, pp. 193-210, Prentice-Hall, Englewood

Press, W.H., S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, and B.P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes in

C: The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing, 2nd ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1992.

Rosen, J.M., N.T. Kjome, R.T. McKenzie, and J.B. Liley, Decay of Mount Pinatubo

aerosols at midlatitudes in the northern and southern hemispheres, J. Geophys. Res., 99,

25,733-25,739, 1994.

Petrol. A, 64, 59-67, 1993.

J. Geol., 89, 569-584, 1981.

Rothman, D.H., J. Grotzinger, and P. Flemings, Scaling in turbidite deposition, J. Sed.

Sadler, P.M., Sediment accumulation rates and the completeness of stratigraphic sections,

Sadler, P.M., and D.J. Strauss, Estimation of completeness of stratigraphical sections

using empirical data and theoretical methods, J. Geol. Soc. London,147, 471-485, 1990.

Schwarzacher, W., Sedimentation Models and Quantitative Stratigraphy, Elsevier, Ams-

terdam, 1975.

55

Seinfeld, J.H., Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics of Air Pollution, Wiley, New York,

1986.

Geomag. Geoelectr., 45, 79-88, 1993.

Seki, M. and K. Ito, A phase-transition model for geomagnetic polarity reversals, J.

Shiomi, K., H. Sato, and M. Ohtake, Broad-band power-law spectra of well-log data in

Japan and the eﬀects on seismic wave propagation, Geophys. J. Int., in press, 1997.

Slack, J.R., J.M. Landwehr, Hydro-climatic data network: A U.S. Geological Survey

streamﬂow data set for the United States for the study of climatic variations: 1874-1988,

U.S. Geol. Surv. Open-File Rep. 92-129, 1992.

Stevenson, D.J., Planetary magnetic ﬁelds, Rep. Prog. Phys., 46, 555-620, 1983.

Strauss, D.J., and P.M. Sadler, Stochastic models for the completeness of stratigraphic

sections, Math. Geol., 21, 37-59, 1989.

5, 79-86, 1990.

Sugihara, G., and R.M. May, Applications of fractals in ecology, Trends in Ecol. Evol.

Takayasu, M., and H. Takayasu, 1/f noise in a traﬃc model, Fractals, 1, 860-866, 1993.

Tarboton, D.G., The source hydrology of severe sustained drought in the Southwestern

United States, J. Hyd., 161, 31-69, 1994.

phys. J. Int., 128, 217-229, 1997.

Tauxe, L., and P. Hartl, 11 million years of Oligocene geomagnetic ﬁeld behavior, Geo-

Thibal, J., J.-P. Pozzi, V. Barthes, and G. Dubuisson, Continuous record of geomagnetic

ﬁeld intensity between 4.7 and 2.7 Ma from downhole measurements, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett.,

136, 541-550, 1995.

298, 1983.

Thouveny, N., K.M. Creer, and I. Blunk, Extension of the Lac du Bouchet palaeomag-

netic record over the last 120,000 years, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 97, 140-161, 1990.

Tipper, J.C., Rates of sedimentation, and stratigraphical completeness, Nature, 21, 296-

Tjemkes, S.A., and M. Visser, Horizontal variability of temperature, speciﬁc humidity,

and cloud liquid water as derived from spaceborne observations, J. Geophys. Res., 99,

56

23,089-23,105, 1994.

Todoeschuck, J.P., O.G. Jensen, and S. Labonte, Gaussian scaling noise model of seismic

reﬂection sequences: evidence from well logs, Geophysics, 55, 480-484, 1990.

Tubman, K.M., and S.D. Crane, Vertical versus horizontal well log variability and appli-

cation to fractal reservoir modeling, in Fractals in Petroleum Geology and Earth Sciences,

edited by C.C. Barton and P.R. LaPointe, pp. 279-294, Plenum, New York, 1995.

Turcotte, D.L., A fractal interpretation of topography and geoid spectra on the Earth,

Moon, Venus, and Mars, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 597-601, 1987.

Turcotte, D.L., Fractals and Chaos in Geology and Geophysics, Cambridge Univ. Press,

New York, 1992.

Turner, G.M., and R. Thompson, Lake sediment record of the geomagnetic secular vari-

ation in Britain during Holocene times, Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc., 65, 703-725, 1981.

Valet, J.-P., L. Meynadier, Geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity and reversals during the past four

million years, Nature, 366, 234-238, 1993.

van der Ziel, A., On the noise spectra of semiconductor noise and of ﬂicker eﬀect, Physica,

Van Kampen, N.G., Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry, North-Holland, Am-

16, 359-375, 1950.

sterdam, 1981.

Van Vliet, K.M., A. van der Ziel, and R.R. Schmidt, Temperature-ﬂuctuation noise of

thin ﬁlms supported by a substrate, J. Appl. Phys., 51, 2947-2956, 1980.

Verosub, K.L., P.J. Mehringer, and P. Waterstraat, Holocene secular variation in western

North America: paleomagnetic record from Fish Lake, Harney County, Oregon, J. Geophys.

Res., 91, 3609-3623, 1986.

SSSR, 164, 158-160, 1965.

Vicsek, T., Fractal Growth Phenomena, World Sci., River Edge, N. J., 1992.

Vistelius, A.B., and T.S. Feigel’son, On the theory of bed formation, Dokl. Akad. Nauk.

Voorhies, C.V., and J. Conrad, Accurate predictions of mean geomagnetic dipole ex-

cursion and reversal frequencies, mean paleomagnetic ﬁeld intensity, and the radius of the

57

Earth’s core using McLeod’s rule, NASA Technical Memorandum 104634, 1996.

Vose, R.S., R.L. Schmoyer, P.M. Stewer, T.C. Peterson, R. Heim, T.R. Karl, and J.K.

Eischeid, The global historical climatology network: Long-term monthly temperature, pre-

cipitation, sea-level pressure, and station pressure data, Envir. Sci. Div. Pub. No. 392,

Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1992.

Voss, R.F., and J. Clarke, Flicker (1/f ) noise: Equilibrium temperature and resistance

ﬂuctuations, Phys. Rev. B, 13, 556-573, 1976.

Walden, A.T., and J.W.J. Hosken, An investigation of the spectral properties of primary

reﬂection coeﬃcients, Geophys. Prospect., 33, 400-435, 1985.

Wallis, J.R., D.P. Lettenmaier, and E.F. Wood, A daily hydroclimatological data set for

the continental U.S., Water Resour. Res., 27, 1657-1663, 1991.

Weissman, M.B., 1/f noise and other slow, nonexponential kinetics in condensed matter,

Rev. Mod. Phys., 60, 537-571, 1988.

Wilde, P., W.R. Normark, and T.E. Chase, Channel sands and petroleum potential of

Monterey deep-sea fan, California, AAPG Bull., 62, 967-983, 1978.

Wunsch, C., and D. Stammer, The global frequency-wavenumber spectrum of oceanic

variability estimated from TOPEX/POSEIDON altimetric measurements, J. Geophys. Res.,

100, 24,895-24,910, 1995.

Yiou, P., J. Jouzel, S. Johnsen, and O.E. Rognvaldsson, Rapid oscillations in Vostok and

GRIP ice cores, Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 2179-2182, 1995.

58

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 2.1: Atmospheric temperatures at Vostok, Antarctica inferred from Deuterium

concentrations in the Vostok ice core [Jouzel et al., 1987].

Figure 2.2: Power-spectral density estimated with the Lomb periodogram of the temper-

ature inferred from the Deuterium concentrations in the Vostok (East Antarctica) ice core.

The power-spectral density S is given as a function of frequency for time scales of 500 yr to

Figure 2.3: Average monthly atmopsheric temperature for Central England [Manley

[1974] with the yearly periodicity removed.

Figure 2.4: Power-spectral density of the time series of Central England temperatures in

Figure 2.5: Average power-spectral density of 94 complete monthly temperature time

series from the dataset of the Vose et al. [1992] plotted as a function of frequency in yr−1.

The power-spectral density S is given as a function of frequency for time scales of 2 months

Figure 2.6: Average power-spectral density of 50 continental daily temperature time

series from the data set of the National Climatic Data Center [1994] as a function of frequency

in yr−1. The power-spectral density S is given as a function of frequency for time scales of

Figure 2.7: Average power-spectral density of 50 maritime daily temperature time series

from the data set of the National Climatic Data Center [1994] as a function of frequency in

yr−1. The power-spectral density S is given as a function of frequency for time scales of 2

Figure 2.8: Power-spectral density of local atmospheric temperature from instrumental

data and inferred from ice cores from time scales of 200 kyr to 2 days. The high frequency

data are for continental stations. Piecewise power-law trends are indicated.

Figure 2.9: Average normalized power-spectral density of 636 monthly river discharge

200 kyr.

Figure 2.3.

to 100 yr.

2 days to 10 yr.

days to 10 yr.

59

series as a function of frequency in yr−1.

Figure 2.10: Average normalized power-spectral density of 43 tree ring chronologies in

the western U.S. as a function of frequency in yr−1.

Figure 2.11: Average power-spectral density of the number of random walkers in the

central site of a lattice. The average of 50 simulations is presented.

Figure 2.12: Cumulative distribution function of the time series produced by the stochas-

tic diﬀusion model (solid circles). The curve represents the cumulative log-normal distribu-

tion function ﬁt to the data.

Figure 2.13: (a) Geometry of the one-dimensional diﬀusion calculation detailed in the

text. (b) Boundary conditions appropriate to the air masses above the ocean (maritime

stations), where the ocean acts as a thermal conductor. (c) Boundary conditions appropriate

to the air masses above the continents (continental stations), where the continents act as a

thermal insulator.

Figure 2.14: Geometry of the coupled atmosphere-ocean model and the constants chosen.

Figure 2.15: Average power-spectral density of atmospheric temperature above conti-

nents and oceans for each grid point in the general circulation model calculations of Manabe

and Stouﬀer [1996]. The straight-line corresponding to f − 1

2 is included for comparison.

Figure 2.16: Power spectral density of variations in the solar irradiance in 1987 and 1985

from the ACRIM project as a function of frequency in hour−1.

Figure 2.17: Logarithm (base 10) of the recurrence interval as a function of drought

duration and magnitude (normalized to the mean annual ﬂow) for a log-normal distribution

with coeﬃcient of variation (a) 0.2, (b) 0.4, and (c) 0.6.

Figure 3.1: Illustration of the sediment deposition model. In each case a site is chosen

randomly (the center of the three sites in each of the above pictures). The dashed block

is the unit of sediment being added to the surface. The arrows point toward the site upon

which the unit of sediment will be deposited. (a) The chosen site has a lower elevation than

either of its nearest neighbors, so the sediment is deposited at the chosen site. (b) One of

the nearest neighboring sites has a lower elevation and the sediment is deposited at that

60

lower site. (c) In the case of a tie for the lowest elevation between two or three sites, the

site on which the sediment is deposited is chosen randomly between the sites of the same

elevation.

Brownian walks.

Figure 3.2: A typical surface produced by the deposition model with 1024 grid points.

Figure 3.3: Average power spectrum of the surfaces constructed from ﬁfty independent

simulations on 1024 grid points as a function of the wave number k. The model surfaces are

Figure 3.4: One-dimensional transect of hillslope topography perpendicular to the chan-

nel dip. Obtained with the use of laser altimetry [Dunne, Whipple, and Aubry, 1995].

Figure 3.5: Diﬀerence from the mean height of the central site of the lattice as a function

of time.

is proportional to f − 3
2 .

Figure 3.6: Average power spectrum of the diﬀerence from the mean height of the central

site for ﬁfty independent simulations as as a function of frequency f . The power spectrum

Figure 3.7: Vertical porosity well log from the Gulf of Mexico.

Figure 3.8: Power spectral density of porosity as a function of wave number in units of

m−1 in ﬁfteen wells from the Gulf of Mexico. The spectra are oﬀset so that they may be

placed on the same graph.

[Dunne et al., 1995].

Figure 3.9: Probability density function for elevation of topographic transects from

Figure 3.10: Wells producing hydrocarbons in the (a) Powder River and (b) Denver

basins [Barton and Scholz, 1995]. Distance units are scaled such that the basin is 128 x 128.

Figure 3.11: Pair-correlation function of the Powder River and Denver basins as a func-

tion of the pair separation.

Figure 3.12: Synthetic reservoir constructed from a source and cap rock with a two-

dimensional Brownian walk topography constructed on a 128 x 128 grid where all the sites

with porosity greater than a ﬁxed level are showing.

Figure 3.13: Pair-correlation functions for synthetic reservoirs with caprocks constructed

61

with diﬀerent values of β. The plots are oﬀset so that they may be placed on the same graph.

Figure 3.14: The nondimensional thickness of sediments hσ/D in a sedimentary basin is

given as a function of nondimensional time tσ2/D for a sequence in which the ratio of the

standard deviation to the mean of sedimentation, σ/η is 0.1.

Figure 3.15: For the model given in Figure 3.14 the age of the sediments is given as a

function of depth. Only those sediments which are not later eroded are preserved.

Figure 3.16: Illustration of a model for sediment deposition based on a Devil’s staircase

associated with a second-order Cantor set. (a) Age of sediments T as a function of depth y.

(b) Illustration of how the Cantor set is used to construct the sedimentary pile. (c) Average

rate of deposition R as a function of the period T considered.

Figure 3.17: Average rate of sedimentation, R/η, as as function of time span, T σ2/D,

for the sediment column of Figure 3.10(b).

Figure 3.18: Observed sedimentation rates as a function of time span from the data of

Sadler [1995]. The data have been binned in equally-spaced bins in log space. A least-square

linear ﬁt to the logarithms of the data yields a slope of − 3

4 indicating that R ∝ T − 3
4 .

Figure 3.19: Cumulative frequency-length distribution of hiatuses, the number of hiatuses

longer than nondimensional hiatus length thσ2/D, for synthetic sequences produced with the

Figure 3.20: Cumulative frequency-thickness distribution of nondimensional bed thick-

nesses for synthetic sediment columns with σ/η = 0.1, 0.01, 0.001 and 0.0003. The distribu-

stochastic diﬀusion model.

tions are exponential.

Figure 3.21: Cumulative frequency-thickness distribution of bed thicknesses of deep-sea

sequences from (a) Ra Stua, (b) Castagne, and (c) Cismon Valley, Italy published in Claps

and Masetti [1994]. The coeﬃcients in the exponential distributions determined by a least-

squares ﬁt of the logarithm of the bed number to the bed thickness for the largest forty

beds were -0.052, -0.166, and -0.252, showing an increasing trend with sedimentation rate

consistent with the model behavior.

Figure 4.1: Paleointensity of the virtual axial dipole moment (VADM) of the earth’s

62

magnetic ﬁeld (with reversed polarity data given by negative values) inferred from sediment

cores for the past 4 Ma from Meynadier [1994].

Figure 4.2: Power spectral density of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity variations estimated

from the Lomb periodogram of sediment cores from Meynadier [1992] and Meynadier [1994]

and archeomagnetic data from Kovacheva [1980]. The power-spectral density S is given as

a function of frequency f for time scales of 100 yr to 4 Myr.

Figure 4.3: Cumulative frequency-length distribution of the lengths of polarity intervals

from the time scale of Harland et al.

[1990] (solid curve), Cande and Kent [1992a,1995]

(dashed curve), and the Cande and Kent [1992a,1995] time scale from C1 to C13 with

cryptochrons included (dashed-dotted line).

Figure 4.4: A 1/f noise with a normal distribution with mean of 8.9 and standard

deviation of 3.4x1022Am2 representing the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity in one polarity state.

Figure 4.5: Binormal 1/f noise constructed from the normal 1/f noise of Figure 4.4 as

described in the text.

Figure 4.6: Cumulative frequency-length polarity interval distributions from the Harland

et al. [1990] time scale and that of the binormal 1/f noise model of intensity variations. The

distribution from the Harland et al. [1990] time scale is the dashed curve. The solid line is

the average cumulative distribution from the 1/f noise model. The dotted lines represent the

minimum and maximum reversal length distributions for 20 numerical experiments, thereby

representing 95% conﬁdence intervals.

Figure 4.7: Cumulative frequency-length polarity interval distributions for the 1/f noise

model of intensity variations (shown in the middle, the same as that in Figure 4.6) and for

intensity variations with power spectra proportional to f −0.8 and f −1.2. This plot illustrates

that the polarity length distribution is very sensitive to the form of the power spectrum,

allowing us to conclude that the agreement between the model and the observed distribution

in Figure 4.5 is unique to 1/f noise intensity variations.

Figure 4.8: Pair-correlation function of the reversal history according to the Harland

et al.

(1990) time scale (ﬁlled circles), Cande and Kent (1992a,1995) (unﬁlled circles),

63

synthetic reversals produced from 1/f noise model of intensity variations (boxes), and a

Poisson process (triangles). The real and synthetic reversals exhibit similar non-random

clustering.

[Thouveny et al., 1990].

Figure 4.9: Magnetic ﬁeld inclination inferred from the Lac du Bouchet sediment core

Figure 4.10: Power spectra of inclination and declination from the Lac du Bouchet

sediment core. The declination spectrum is oﬀset from the inclination spectrum so that

they may be placed on the same graph.

Figure 4.11: Power spectra of inclination from the following locations, top to bottom:

1) Anderson Pond, 2) Bessette Creek, 3) Fish Lake, 4) Lake Bullenmerri, and 5) Lake

Keilambete. The spectra are oﬀset to place them on the same graph.

Figure 4.12: Dipole moment produced by the model for geomagnetic variations normal-

ized to the average dipole moment, set to be one. The ﬁeld exhibits reversals with a broad

distribution of polarity interval lengths and a variable reversal rate decreasing at later times

in the simulation.

bution ﬁts the data well.

Figure 4.13: Distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld according to ten simulations of the model

(solid curve) and a binormal distribution ﬁt to the data (dashed line). The binormal distri-

Figure 4.14: Average power spectrum of the mean value of the magnetic ﬁeld (dipole

ﬁeld) from 25 simulations. The spectrum has a low-frequency spectrum with S(f ) ∝ f −1

and a high frequency region S(f ) ∝ f −2. The same spectrum is observed in geomagnetic

intensity from sediment cores and historical data.

Figure 4.15: Average power spectrum of the angular deviation from a dipole ﬁeld from

25 simulations. The spectrum is S(f ) ∝ f −2 for high frequencies and gradually ﬂattens out

to a constant spectrum at low frequencies.

64

a)

2l

E(t)

b)

atmosphere

maritime
stations

ocean

c)

atmosphere

continent

continental
stations

constant solar input

heat flux a DT

x=0

=100 m2/s
a
=105 W/moK
s
=1 kg/m3
r
c=1000 J/kgoK
w1=8000 m

atmosphere

ocean

'=6x10-5 m2/s
a
'=1000 kg/m3
r
'=250 W/moK
s

x=w1

c'=4200 J/kgoK
w2=4000 m

x=w1+w2

a)

b)

c)

or

9

Age T, Ma
3

6

0

0

2

4

6

8

Depth y, km

D=0.6309

T, Myr

10

(a)
2

1.5

R
(mm/yr)

1.0

0.8
1

(b)

(c)

