Statistical analysis and modeling of variations of the earth’s

magnetic ﬁeld

Jon D. Pelletier

Ithaca, NY 14853

Department of Geological Sciences, Snee Hall, Cornell University

Power spectral analyses of the dipole moment of the earth’s magnetic

ﬁeld inferred from ocean sediment cores and archeomagnetic data from time

scales of 100 yr to 4 Myr have been carried out. The power spectrum is

proportional to 1/f where f is the frequency. These analyses compliment

previous work which has established a 1/f 2 spectrum for variations at time

scales less than 100 yr. Power spectral analyses of inclination and declination

inferred from lake sediments from time scales of 10 yr to 30 kyr have also been

performed. The spectra are constant above time scales of 3 kyr, proportional

to 1/f 2 from time scales of 500 yr to 3 kyr, and constant again below time

scales of 500 yr. The 3 kyr time scale is associated with the decay time of the

quadrupole moment. We test the hypothesis that reversals are the result of

variations in dipole intensity with a 1/f spectrum which occasionally are large

enough to cross the zero intensity value. Synthetic binormal time series with

a 1/f power spectrum representing variations in the earth’s dipole moment

are constructed. Synthetic reversals from these time series exhibit statistics

in good agreement with the reversal record. 1/f noise behavior is reproduced

with a model of magnetic diﬀusion in the earth’s core driven by dynamo action

modeled as a random ampliﬁcation or destruction of the local magnetic ﬁeld.

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The earth’s magnetic ﬁeld has exhibited signiﬁcant variability over a wide range of time

scales. On time scales less than a couple of hundred years historical data are available for

variations in the intensity and orientation of the geomagnetic ﬁeld. Archeomagnetic data

can be used to infer the intensity of the ﬁeld from time scales of centuries to millenia.

Sediment cores provide the widest range of time scales of variations in the geomagnetic

ﬁeld with internal origin: 1 kyr to several Myr. Techniques of time series analysis can be

used to characterize this variability. The power spectrum is the square of the coeﬃcients of

the Fourier transform of the time series. It quantiﬁes the average variability of the series

at diﬀerent time scales. Barton (1982) has performed spectral analysis of paleointensity

using historical observations and sediment cores. He identiﬁed a broad, continuous power

spectrum with a steep dependence on time scale for time scales less than a century and a

ﬂatter spectrum at longer time scales.

The geomagnetic ﬁeld also exhibits reversals with a complex history including variations

over a wide range of time scales. The reversal history can be characterized by the polarity

interval distribution and the reversal rate. Polarity intervals vary from those short enough

to be barely resolved in the magnetic anomalies of the seaﬂoor to the 35 Myr Cretaceous

superchron. Reversals are also clustered in time such that short polarity intervals tend to

be followed by short polarity intervals and long intervals by long intervals. This clustering

has been quantiﬁed with the reversal rate which gradually decreases going back to 100 Ma

and then increases going back further in time before the Cretaceous superchron.

Due to the availability of many new time series data sets for paleointensity and inclination

and declination of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld since the work of Barton (1982), it would

be useful to perform power spectral analyses of some of these recent data sets to further

characterize the temporal variability of the geomagnetic ﬁeld.

In this paper we perform

power spectral analyses of time series data for the dipole moment and the inclination and

declination of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld inferred from sediment core and archeomagnetic

2

data. We ﬁnd that the power spectrum of the virtual axial dipole moment (VADM) from

time scales of 100 yr to 4 Myr is well approximated by a 1/f dependence, where f is

the frequency. The power spectrum of inclination and declination are constant above time

scales of 3 kyr, proportional to 1/f 2 from time scales of 500 yr to 3 kyr, and constant

again below time scales of 500 yr. Variations in the intensity of the geomagnetic ﬁeld in

one polarity exhibits a normal distribution. When a ﬂuctuation crosses the zero intensity

value a reversal occurs. We test the hypothesis that reversals are the result of intensity

variations with a 1/f power spectrum which occasionally are large enough to cross the zero

intensity value, driving the geodynamo into the opposite polarity state. Synthetic time

series with a 1/f power spectrum and a binormal distribution are used to generate reversal

statistics. These are found to be in good agreement with those of the real reversal history.

The reversal statistics are sensitive to the form of the power spectrum of intensity variations.

We conclude that the agreement between the synthetic reversal record produced with 1/f

noise variations in the earth’s dipole moment is strong support for 1/f behavior over the

length of the reversal record. This suggests that processes internal to the core may determine

geomagnetic variability up to very long time scales. This contrasts with the hypothesis that

internal core processes dominate secular variations while changes in conditions at the core-

mantle boundary determine variations at larger time scales (McFadden and Merrill, 1995).

A model of geomagnetic variability based on internal processes of magnetic diﬀusion and

dynamo action modeled as a stochastic process generates the observed 1/f behavior. This

model is analyzed in detail and compared to the behavior of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.

II. POWER SPECTRAL ANALYSES OF THE VIRTUAL AXIAL DIPOLE

Paleomagnetic studies clearly show that the polarity of the magnetic ﬁeld has been

subject to reversals. Kono (1971) has compiled paleointensity measurements of the magnetic

ﬁeld from volcanic lavas for 0-10 Ma. He concluded that the distribution of paleointensity

MOMENT

3

is well approximated by a symmetric binormal distribution with mean 8.9x1022Am2 and

standard deviation 3.4x1022Am2. One normal distribution is applicable to the ﬁeld when it

is in its normal polarity and the other when it is in its reversed polarity.

We have utilized three datasets for computing the power spectrum of the dipole moment

of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. They are archeomagnetic data from time scales of 100 yr to 8

kyr from Kovacheva (1980), marine sediment data from the Somali basin from time scales of

1 kyr to 140 kyr from Meynadier et al. (1992), and marine sediment data from the Paciﬁc and

Indian Oceans from 20 kyr to 4 Myr from Meynadier et al. (1994). The data were published

in table form in Kovacheva (1980) and obtained from L. Meynadier (Meynadier, 1995) for

the marine sediment data in Meynadier et al. (1992) and Meynadier et al. (1994). Marine

sediment data are accurate measures of relative paleointensity but give no information on

absolute intensity. In order to calibrate marine sediment data, the data must be compared

to absolute paleointensity measurements from volcanic lavas sampled from the same time

period as the sediment record. Meynadier et al. (1994) has done this for the composite

Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean dataset. They have calibrated the mean paleointensity in terms

of the virtual axial dipole moment for 0-4 Ma as 9x1022Am2 (Valet and Meynadier, 1993).

This value is consistent with that obtained by Kono (1971) for the longer time interval up

to 10 Ma. Using this calibration, we calibrated the Somali data with the time interval 0-140

ka from the composite Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean dataset. The data from Meynadier et al.

(1994) are plotted in Figure 1 as a function of age in Ma. The last reversal at approximately

730 ka is clearly shown. We computed the power spectrum of each of the time series with

the Lomb periodogram (Press et al., 1992). The compiled spectra are given in Figure 2.

The composite sediment record from the Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans are plotted up to a

frequency corresponding to a period of 25 kyr. Above this time scale good synchroneity is

observed in the Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean datasets (Meynadier et al., 1994). This suggests

that non-geomagnetic eﬀects such as variable sedimentation rate are not signiﬁcant in these

cores above this time scale. From frequencies corresponding to time scales of 25 kyr down

to 1.6 kyr we plot the power spectrum of the Somali data. From time scales of 1.6 kyr to

4

the highest frequency we plot the power spectrum of the data of Kovacheva (1980). A least-

squares linear regression to the data yields a slope of −1.09 over 4.5 orders of magnitude.

This indicates that the power spectrum is well approximated as 1/f on these time scales.

The power spectrum of secular geomagnetic intensity variations has been determined to

have a 1/f 2 power spectrum between time scales of one and one hundred years (Currie,

1968; Barton, 1982; Courtillot and Le Mouel, 1988). This is consistent with the analysis

of McLeod (1992) who found that the ﬁrst diﬀerence of annual means of geomagnetic ﬁeld

intensity is a white noise since the ﬁrst diﬀerences of a random process with power spectrum

1/f 2 is a white noise. Our observation of 1/f power spectral behavior above time scales of

approximately 100 yr together with the results of Currie (1968) and Barton (1982) suggests

that there is a crossover from 1/f to 1/f 2 spectral behavior at a time scale of approximately

one hundred years.

III. ANALYSIS OF THE REVERSAL HISTORY

In this section we will test the hypothesis that reversals are the result of intensity varia-

tions in one polarity state becoming large enough to cross the zero intensity value into the

opposite polarity state. We will show that the statistics of the reversal record are consis-

tent those of a binormal, 1/f noise paleointensity record which reverses when the intensity

crosses the zero value. We will compare the polarity length distribution and the clustering

of reversals between synthetic reversals produced with 1/f noise intensity variations and the

reversal history according to Harland et al. (1990) and Cande and Kent (1992a,1995).

First we consider the polarity length distribution of the real reversal history. The polarity

length distribution calculated from the chronology of Harland et al. (1990) is given as the

solid line in Figure 3. The polarity length distribution is the number of interval lengths

longer than the length plotted on the horizontal axis. A reassessment of the magnetic

anomaly data has been performed by Cande and Kent (1992a,1995) to obtain an alternative

magnetic time scale. Their chronology, normalized to the same length as the Harland et

5

al. (1990) time scale, is presented as the dashed curve. The two distributions are nearly

identical. These plots suggest that the polarity length distribution is better ﬁt by a power

law for large polarity lengths than by an exponential distribution, as ﬁrst suggested by Cox

(1968). The same conclusion has been reached by Gaﬃn (1989) and Seki and Ito (1993).

It should be emphasized, however, that the polarity length distribution is a very diﬀerent

analysis than that of the spectral analysis of Section 2. There is no simple relationship

between the power spectrum of intensity variations and the polarity length distribution of

reversals. The observation of a power-law power spectrum in Section 2 does not necessarily

imply a power-law polarity length distribution.

The third curve, plotted with a dashed and dotted line, represents the polarity length dis-

tribution estimated from the magnetic time scale between C1 and C13 with “cryptochrons”

included and scaled to the length of the Harland et al. (1990) time scale. Cryptochrons are

small variations recorded in the magnetic anomaly data that may either represent variations

in paleomagnetic intensity or short reversals (Blakely, 1974; Cande and Kent, 1992b). Cryp-

tochons occur with a time scale at the limit of temporal resolution of the reversal record from

magnetic anomalies of the sea ﬂoor. The form of the polarity length distribution estimated

from the record between C1 and C13 including cryptochrons is not representative of the

entire reversal history because of the variable reversal rate which concentrates many short

polarity intervals in this time period. However, this distribution enables us to estimate the

temporal resolution of the reversal record history. The distribution estimated from C1 to

C13 has many more short polarity intervals than those of the full reversal history starting

at a reversal length of 0.3 Myr. Above a time scale of 0.3 Myr the magnetic time scale is

nearly complete. Below it many short polarity intervals may be unrecorded.

To show that the polarity length distribution of the real reversal record is consistent

with that produced by binormal, 1/f noise variations in the earth’s dipole moment, we have

generated synthetic Gaussian noises with a power spectrum porportional to 1/f , a mean

value of 8.9x1022Am2 and a standard deviation of 3.4x1022Am2. These synthetic noises

represent the ﬁeld intensity in one polarity state. The synthetic noises were generated using

6

the Fourier-domain ﬁltering technique described in Turcotte (1992). An example is shown in

Figure 4a. In order to construct a binormal intensity distribution from the synthetic normal

distribution, we inverted every other polarity interval to the opposite polarity starting from

its minimum value below the zero intensity axis and extending to its next minimum below

the zero. The result of this procedure on the Gaussian, 1/f noise of Figure 4a is presented

in Figure 4b. Its irregular polarity lengths are similar to those in the marine sediment data

of Figure 1.

The operation of reversing the paleomagnetic intensity when it crosses the zero intensity

value is consistent with models of the geodynamo as a system with two symmetric attracting

states of positive and negative polarity such as the Rikitake disk dynamo (Rikitake, 1958).

Between reversals, the geomagnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuates until a ﬂuctuation large enough occurs

to cross the energy barrier into the other basin of attraction. Kono (1987) has explored the

statistical similarity between the Rikitake disk dynamo and the distribution of paleointensity.

Our construction of the binormal 1/f noise is consistent with this model.

We have computed the distribution of lengths between successive reversals for twenty

synthetic noises scaled to 170 Ma, the length of the reversal chronology, and averaged the

results in terms of the number of reversals. The results are given in Figure 5. The dots are the

maximum and minimum values obtained in the twenty synthetic reversal chronologies, thus

representing 95% conﬁdence intervals. The polarity interval distribution from the Harland et

al. (1990) time scale indicated by the dashed curve falls within the 95% conﬁdence intervals

of our synthetic data over all time scales plotted except for the Cretaceous superchron,

which lies slighly outside of the 95% conﬁdence interval and reversals separated by less

than about 0.3 Myr. The overprediction of very short reversals could be a limitation of the

model or a result of the incompleteness of the reversal record for short polarity intervals.

As mentioned, the temporal resolution of the magnetic time scale inferred from magnetic

anomalies is approximately 0.3 Myr. We conclude that the polarity length distribution

produced from binormal 1/f intensity variations are consistent with the observed polarity

length distribution for all time scales at which the reversal record is complete.

7

We next consider whether the agreement illustrated in Figure 5 is unique to 1/f noise.

We have computed polarity length distributions using the binormal intensity variations with

power spectra f −0.8 and f −1.2. These results along with the 1/f result from Figure 5 are

given in Figure 6. The shape of the polarity length distribution is very sensitive to the

exponent of the power spectrum. A slight increase in the magnitude of the exponent results

in many more long polarity intervals than with 1/f noise. We conclude that the agreement

in Figure 5 between the synthetic reversal distribution and the true reversal history is unique

to 1/f noise and provides strong evidence that the dipole moment has 1/f behavior up to

170 Ma.

A binormal, 1/f noise geomagnetic ﬁeld variation is consistent with the qualitative results

of Pal and Roberts (1988) who found an anticorrelation between reversal frequency and

paleointensity. This anticorrelation is evident in the synthetic 1/f noise of Figure 4b. During

the time intervals of greatest average paleointensity the reversal rate is lowest.

In addition to the broad distribution of polarity lengths, the reversal history is also

characterized by a clustering of reversals. This behavior has been quantiﬁed with the reversal

rate. The reversal rate has been relatively high from 0-20 Ma and has decreased gradually

going back in history to the Cretaceous superchron. An alternative approach to quantifying

the clustering of reversals is with the pair correlation function. The pair correlation function

c(t) is the number of pairs of reversals whose separation is between t and t + ∆t, per unit

time (Vicsek, 1992). The pair correlation function for a set of points can be compared to

that for a Poisson process to detect non-random clustering. The pair-correlation function

analysis is more appropriate for comparison of the reversal history to the synthetic reversal

history generated by a stochastic model such as model based on turbulent processes in the

core. This is because stochastic models cannot predict behavior in time, such as when the

reversal rate is large or small. However, a stochastic model may accurately reﬂect the extent

to which small polarity intervals are followed by small polarity intervals and long intervals

by long intervals as quantiﬁed with the pair correlation function.

The pair correlation function of reversals according to the Harland et al. (1990) and

8

Cande and Kent (1992a,1995) reversal history are shown in Figure 7 as ﬁlled and unﬁlled

circles, respectively. Also presented in Figure 7 is the pair correlation function for a synthetic

reversal data set based on binormal 1/f noise dipole moment variations (boxes) and the pair

correlation function for a Poisson process (triangles). The functions are oﬀset so that they

may be placed on the same graph. The Poisson process was constructed with 293 points,

the same number of reversals as the Harland et al.

(1990) time scale, positioned with

uniform probability on the interval between 0 and 170 Ma. The Poisson process yields a

correlation function independent of separation. The real and synthetic reversal histories

variations exhibit signiﬁcant clustering with more pairs of points at small separation and

fewer at large separations than for a Poisson process. Straight-line ﬁts of the form c(t) ∝ tα

were obtained. The purpose of this was to show that similar clustering is observed in the

real and synthetic reversals. The exponents α of the Harland et al. (1990), Cande and

Kent (1992a,1995), and synthetic reversals are -0.39, -0.31, and -0.42, respectively. Similar

non-random clustering is observed in the real and synthetic reversals. We conclude from the

consistency between the polarity interval distribution and pair correlation function of real

reversals and those generated by ﬂuctuations of a bionormal 1/f noise process that there is

strong evidence for 1/f intensity variations for time scales up to the length of the reversal

record.

IV. POWER SPECTRAL ANALYSES OF INCLINATION AND DECLINATION

Power spectral analyses of inclination and declination data have also been carried out.

We obtained time series data of inclination and declination from lake sediment cores in the

Global Paleomagnetic Database (Lock and McElhinney, 1992). The core with the greatest

number of data points was from Lac du Bouchet (Thouveny et al., 1990). The power

spectrum of the inclination and declination at Lac du Bouchet estimated with the Lomb

Periodogram is presented in Figure 8. We associate the spectra with a constant spectrum

below a frequency of f ≈ 1/(3 kyr) and a constant spectrum above a frequency of f ≈

9

1/(500 yr). From frequencies of f ≈ 1/(3 kyr) to f ≈ 1/(500 yr) the inclination and

declination are Brownian walks with S(f ) ∝ f −2. Spectral analyses of inclination data

from ﬁve other sediment cores were calculated. These spectra are presented in Figure 9.

The spectra correspond, from top to bottom, to cores from Anderson Pond (Lund and

Banerjee, 1985), Bessette Creek (Turner et al., 1982), Fish Lake (Verosub et al., 1986), Lake

Bullenmerri (Turner and Thompson, 1981), and Lake Keilambete (Barton and McElhinny,

1985). Since the data sets have fewer points there is more uncertainty in the spectra and

they are characterized by greater variability between adjacent frequencies. The spectra have

the same form, within the uncertainty of the spectra, as that associated with the spectra

from Lac du Bouchet. These results suggest that 3 kyr and 500 yr are characteristic time

scales of geodynamo behavior. Variations in inclination and declination are associated with

changes in the non-dipole components of the ﬁeld. Therefore, the autocorrelation or decay

time of the quadrupole moment is the maximum time scale for correlated ﬂuctuations of

inclination and declination to occur. The autocorrelation time of the quadrupole moment

has been estimated by McLeod (1996) to be 1.6 kyr. This is within a factor of two of the

3 kyr time scale above which variations in inclination and declination are observed to be

uncorrelated in the spectra of Figures 8 and 9.

Many analyses of variations in paleointensity of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld concentrate

on identifying characteristic time scales of variation. Many such characteristic time scales

have been identiﬁed. Valet and Meynadier (1993) suggested, based on the same sediment

core data analyzed in this paper, that the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld regenerates following a

reversal on a time scale of a few thousand years and then decays slowly on a time scale

of 0.5 Ma before the next reversal. They termed this an “asymmetric saw-tooth” pattern.

More recent data have shown that the “asymmetric saw-tooth” is not a robust pattern.

Longer cores show a slow decay preceding a reversal to be rare (Tauxe and Hartl, 1997).

Moreover, Laj et al. (1996) has shown that the magnetic ﬁeld does not always regenerate

quickly after a reversal. Thibal et al. (1995) have quantiﬁed the rate of decrease in ﬁeld

intensity preceeding a reversal and found it to be inversely proportional to the length of

10

the polarity interval. The authors concluded from this that the length of the reversal was

predetermined. Such behavior is not indicative of a predetermined polarity length. This can

be concluded by considering the null hypothesis that variations in the ﬁeld are characterized

by any stationary random process. By deﬁnition, a stationary time series has a variance

which is independent of the length of the series. The average rate of change of the time

series over a time interval will then be a constant value divided by the interval of time, i.e.

inversely proportional to time interval. Therefore, any stationary random function satisﬁes

the relationship that Thibal et al. (1995) observed.

In the power spectral analyses of geomagnetic variations inferred from sediment cores by

Lund et al. (1988), Meynadier et al. (1992), Lehman et al. (1996), and Tauxe and Hartl

(1997) dominant periodicities in the record were identiﬁed and proposed as characteristic

time scales of geodynamo behavior. However, it must be emphasized that any ﬁnite length

record will exhibit peaks in its power spectrum, even if the underlying process is random,

such as a 1/f noise. Periodicity tests such as those developed by Lees and Park (1995) need to

be applied to data in order to assess the probability that a peak in a spectrum is statistically

signiﬁcant. The periodicity tests developed by Lees and Park (1995) are especially valuable

because they do not depend on a particular model of the stochastic portion of the spectrum.

Some of the periodicity tests that have been used in the geomagnetism literature assume

forms for the stochastic portion of the spectrum that are not compatible with the 1/f

process we have identiﬁed. See Mann and Lees (1996) for an application of these techniques

to climatic time series.

It is generally believed that secular geomagnetic variations are the result of internal

dynamics while longer time scale phenomena such as variations in the reversal rate are

controlled by variations in boundary conditions at the core-mantle boundary (CMB) (Mc-

Fadden and Merrill, 1995). However, our observation of continuous 1/f spectral behavior

from time scales of 100 yr to 170 Myr suggests that a single process controls variations in

geomagnetic intensity over this range of time scales. In Section 6 we consider a model for

geodynamo behavior which reproduces the 1/f dipole moment variations over a wide range

11

of time scales and exhibits many of the other features of geomagnetic variability we have

identiﬁed.

V. MULTIPOLE EXPANSION OF THE PRESENT DAY GEOMAGNETIC FIELD

In addition to temporal variations of the ﬁeld, detailed information on the spatial struc-

ture of the present-day magnetic ﬁeld from spherical harmonic degree n = 1 to n = 13 is

available. Above n = 13 the magnetic ﬁeld at the earth’s surface is dominated by crustal

magnetic ﬁelds. Stevenson (1983) and Voorhies and Conrad (1996) have presented the results

of a spherical harmonic expansion of the geomagnetic ﬁeld extrapolated to the core-mantle

boundary. The results indicate that a broad spectrum of multipoles is represented with an

intensity decreasing with increasing order in the spherical harmonic expansion. The spec-

trum is consistent with a power-law function of wave number at the core-mantle boundary

with exponent −1: Rn ∝ n−1. The form of the spectrum is not well constrained since an

exponential ﬁt, ﬁrst proposed by Langel and Estes (1982), and a power-law ﬁt both match

the observed spectrum equally well from n = 1 to n = 13. This is illustrated in Figure 1

of McLeod (1996) where the two ﬁts are compared. Although the data does not allow an

unambiguous determination of the functional form of the spectrum, Stevenson (1983) has

shown that a spectrum Rn ∝ n−1 is consistent with a multipole expansion expected based

upon other considerations. Stevenson argues that an exponent close to −1 is the only one

consistent with energy conservation given the typical convective velocities and the magnetic

Reynolds number expected in terrestrial dynamos. Voorhies and Conrad (1996) have argued

that a Rn ∝ n−1 amplitude spectrum at the core-mantle boundary does a superior job at

predicting the location of the core-mantle boundary and provides a better extrapolation to

the observed dipole ﬁeld. In the next section we discuss a model of the earth’s magnetic

ﬁeld which generates a ﬁeld with a power spectrum Rn ∝ n−1.

12

VI. MODELING OF VARIATIONS IN THE EARTH’S MAGNETIC FIELD BY

DYNAMO PROCESSES

There has been great interest in 1/f noise processes in the physics literature for many

years (Weissman, 1988). One model of 1/f noise is a stochastic process comprised of a

superposition of modes with exponential decay characterized by diﬀerent time constants.

The time constant for a stochastic process is deﬁned through its autocorrelation function

a(τ ). For a stochastic process with a single time constant τo the autocorrelation function is

given by a(τ ) = e

τo . The power spectrum of such a process is, by the Weiner-Khinchine

− τ

theorem, the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function:

S(f ) ∝

τo
1 + (2πf )2

(1)

This is a Lorentzian spectrum with Brownian walk behavior (S(f ) ∝ f −2) for time scales

small compared to τo and white noise behavior (S(f ) = constant) above the characteristic

time constant. If the stochastic process is composed of a superposition of modes with time

constants following a distribution D(τo) ∝ τ −1

o

, where the D(τo)∆τo is the net variance

contributed by modes between τo and τo + ∆τo, then a 1/f spectrum results over a range of

frequencies (van der Ziel, 1950; Weissman, 1988). Such a distribution of exponential time

constants has been documented for the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld by McLeod (1996).

McLeod (1996) calculated the autocorrelation of each degree of the geomagnetic ﬁeld

during the last eighty years. The autocorrelation functions that he computed had an ex-

ponential dependence on time with degree-dependent time constants τo ∝ n−2. This be-

havior is consistent with a diﬀusion process. McLeod (1996) attributed this autocorrelation

structure to a simple model of the geomagnetic ﬁeld in which the ﬁeld was stochastically

generated with a balance between ﬁeld regeneration and diﬀusive decay by decay across a

magnetic boundary layer. One way to model such a stochastic diﬀusion process is with a

two-dimensional diﬀusion equation driven by random noise:

∂Bz
∂t

= D∇2Bz + η(x, y, t)

13

(2)

where Bz is the axial component of the magnetic ﬁeld at a point inside the core, η(x, y, t) is a

Gaussian white noise representing random ampliﬁcation and destruction of the ﬁeld locally

by dynamo action. To this equation we add a term equal to p − Bz,tot:

∂Bz
∂t

= D∇2Bz + η(x, y, t) + c(p − Bz,tot)

(3)

where c is a constant, Bz,tot is the dipole moment integrated over all space, and p is +1 if the

dipole moment of the ﬁeld outside the core-mantle boundary is positive and -1 if the dipole

moment outside the core-mantle boundary is negative. The eﬀect of this term is to create

two basins of attraction (polarity states) within which the dipole ﬁeld ﬂuctuates around an

intensity of +1 or -1 until a ﬂuctuation large enough occurs to cross the barrier to the other

basin of attraction. This term could be the result of a conservation of magnetic energy

for the combination of the poloidal and toroidal ﬁelds such that when the poloidal dipole

ﬁeld intensity is low the toroidal ﬁeld intensity, which is unobservable outside the core and

not explicitly modeled in equation 3, is high and dynamo action is intensiﬁed, repelling the

poloidal ﬁeld away from a state of low dipole intensity.

In our model the core is modeled as a two-dimensional circular region of uniform diﬀu-

sivity (the ﬂuid outer core) surrounded by an inﬁnite region with small but ﬁnite diﬀusivity

and the boundary condition that Bz approach zero as r, the radial distance from the center

of the earth, approaches inﬁnity. The diameter of the inner circular region is the diameter

of the core-mantle boundary.

This model has been studied in terms of the distribution of values and power spectrum

of the dipole moment and the power spectrum of the angular deviation from the dipole ﬁeld.

The dipole ﬁeld from the simulation is plotted in Figure 10. The ﬁeld clearly undergoes re-

versals with a broad distribution of polarity interval lengths. Figure 11 presents the dipole

distribution of 10 simulations (solid curve) along with the ﬁt to a binormal distribution

(dashed curve). A binormal distribution ﬁts the distribution well. The slight asymmetry

is the result of this particular model run spending slightly more time in the negative po-

larity state than the positive polarity state. Model outputs were generated which showed

14

asymmetry in the other direction.

The average power spectrum of time series of the dipole ﬁeld from 25 simulations is

presented in Figure 12. The spectrum has a low-frequency spectrum S(f ) ∝ f −1 and a

high-frequency spectrum S(f ) ∝ f −2. This is identical to the spectrum observed in sediment

cores and historical data discussed in Section 2. The crossover time scale is the diﬀusion time

across the diameter of the core, estimated to be between 103 (Harrison and Huang, 1990)

and 104 yr (McLeod, 1996). These values are somewhat higher than the order of magnitude

time scale of 102 yr identiﬁed as the crossover in the sediment core and historical data. The

average power spectrum of the angular deviation from the dipole from 25 simulations is

shown in Figure 13. The spectrum has a high-frequency region S(f ) ∝ f −2 which slowly

ﬂattens out to a constant spectrum at low frequencies. This is nearly consistent with the

spectra of inclination and declination from lake sediment time series shown in Figures 8 and

9. The S(f ) ∝ f −2 begins to ﬂattens out at a time scale roughly equivalent to the time

scale of the intensity spectrum to cross over from 1/f to 1/f 2 behavior. The measured value

of this crossover in the lake sediment power spectra is 3 kyr. This value is consistent with

estimates of 103 to 104 years for the diﬀusion time across the core from Harrison and Huang

(1990) and McLeod (1996). A major discrepancy between the model and the observed

spectra is the absence of a ﬂattening out of the spectrum at high frequencies in the model

calculation.

The average spatial power spectrum of transects of Bz for 25 simulations is given in

Figure 14. The spectrum is S(k) ∝ k−1. This is consistent with the Rn ∝ n−1 power

spectrum from a spherical harmonic expansion as observed for the spatial power spectrum

of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. The power spectrum of one-dimensional transects is directly

comparable to the power spectrum from a spherical harmonic expansion. For example, the

power spectrum of the earth’s topography and bathymetry has been estimated from Fourier

analysis of one-dimensional transects and from a spherical harmonic expansion. The spectral

exponents obtained are identical in the two analyses (Turcotte, 1992).

Although this model reproduces many of the observed features of the variability of the

15

earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, the physical origin of the terms in the model equation have not been

speciﬁed. Gaussian white noise ampliﬁcation and decay of the magnetic ﬁeld by dynamo

action is a simple stochastic model for dynamo action but there is no physical justiﬁcation for

it. Moreover, we have presented no clear physical justiﬁcation for the term p − Bz,tot which

generates ﬁeld reversals and a binormal distribution of dipole intensity. These terms were

included in the model in order to construct a minimal model consistent with the complex

behavior of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented the results of power spectral analyses of variations in the dipole mo-

ment of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld which show the spectrum to be proportional to 1/f from

time scales of 100 yr to 4 Myr. We have also performed spectral analyses of variations in in-

clination and declination. These spectra are constant above time scales of 3 kyr, proportional

to 1/f 2 from time scales of 500 yr to 3 kyr, and constant again below time scales of 500 yr.

The 3 kyr time scale is associated with the decay time of the quadrupole moment. We have

shown that reversals generated by binormal, 1/f noise geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity variations

are consistent with the distribution of polarity lengths and clustering of real reversals. We

have shown how a model of magnetic diﬀusion driven by dynamo action parameterized as

a stochastic process reproduces many of the observed features of the spatial and temporal

variability of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank Donald L. Turcotte for helpful conversations and Laure Meynadier for

access to the marine sediment data and helpful conversations regarding its interpretation.

16

Barton, C.E., Spectral analysis of palaeomagnetic time series and the geomagnetic spec-

trum, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A, 306, 203-209, 1982.

Blakely, R.J., Geomagnetic reversals and crustal spreading rates during the Miocene, J.

Geophys. Res., 79, 2979-2985, 1974.

Cande, S.C. and Kent, D.V., A new geomagnetic polarity time scale for the Late Creta-

ceous and Cenozoic, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 13,917-13,951, 1992a.

Cande, S.C. and Kent, D.V., Ultrahigh resolution marine magnetic anomaly proﬁles : a

record of continuous paleointensity variations?, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15075-15083, 1992b.

Cande, S.C. and Kent, D.V., Revised calibration of the geomagnetic polarity timescale

for the Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 6093-6095, 1995.

Courtillot, V. and Le Mouel, J.L., Time variations of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld: From

daily to secular, Ann. Rev. Earth Plan. Sci., 16, 389-476, 1988.

Cox, A., Lengths of geomagnetic polarity intervals, J. Geophys. Res., 73, 3247-3260,

1968.

Geophys. Res., 73, 2779-2768, 1968.

Plan. Inter., 57, 284-290, 1989.

Currie, R.G., Geomagnetic spectrum of internal origin and lower mantle conductivity, J.

Gaﬃn, S., Analysis of scaling in the geomagnetic polarity reversal record, Phys. Earth

Harland, W.B., Cox, A., Llewellyn, P.G., Pickton, C.A.G., Smith, A.G., and Walters,

R., 1990. A Geologic Time Scale 1989, Cambridge University Press, London, 1989.

Harrison, C.G.A. and Huang, Q., Rates of change of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld measured

by recent analyses, J. Geomag. Geoelectr., 42, 897-928, 1990.

Kono, M., Intensity of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld during the Pliocene and Pleistocene

in relation to the amplitude of mid-ocean ridge magnetic anomalies, Earth and Plan. Sci.

Lett., 11, 10-17, 1971.

21-24, 1987.

Kono, M., Rikitake two-disk dynamo and paleomagnetism, Geophys. Res. Lett., 14,

Kovacheva, M., Summarized results of the archeomagnetic investigation of the geomag-

17

netic ﬁeld variation for the last 8000 yr in south-eastern Europe, Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc.,

61, 57-64, 1980.

250-253, 1982.

Laj, C., Kissel, C., Lefevre, I., Relative geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity and reversals from

Upper Miocene sections in Crete, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 141. 67-78, 1996.

Langel, R.A. and Estes, R.H., A geomagnetic ﬁeld spectrum, Geophys. Res. Lett., 9,

Lehman, B., Laj, C., Kissel, C., Mazaud, A., Paterne, M., and Labeyrie, L., Relative

changes of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity during the last 280 kyear from piston cores in the

Acores area, Phys. Earth Plan. Int., bf 93, 269-284, 1996.

Lock, J. and M.W. McElhinney, The Global Paleomagnetic Database: design, installa-

tion, and use with ORACLE, Surveys in Geophysics, 12, 317-506, 1991.

Lund, S.P. and Banerjee, S.K., The paleomagnetic record of Late Quaternary secular

variation from Anderson Pond, Tennessee, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 72, 219-237, 1985.

Lund, S.P., Liddicoat, J.C., Lajoie, K.R., Henyey, T.L., and Robinson, S.W., Paleomag-

netic evidence for long-term (104 year) memory and periodic behavior in the earth’s core

dynamo process, Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 1101-1104, 1988.

McFadden, P.L. and Merrill, R.T., History of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and possible

connections to core-mantle boundary processes, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 307-316, 1995.

McLeod, M.G., Signals and noise in magnetic observatory annual means: Mantle con-

ductivity and jerks, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 17,261-17,290, 1992.

McLeod, M.G., Spatial and temporal power spectra of the geomagnetic ﬁeld, J. Geophys.

Res., 101, 2745-2763, 1996.

Meynadier, L., Valet, J.-P., Bassonot, F.C., Shackleton, N.J. and Guyodo, Y., Asym-

metrical saw-tooth pattern of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity from equatorial sediments in

the Paciﬁc and Indian oceans, Earth Plan. Sci Lett., 126, 109-127, 1994.

Meynadier, L., Valet, J.-P., Weeks, R., Shackleton, N.J. and Hagee, V.L., Relative geo-

magnetic intensity of the ﬁeld during the last 140 ka, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 114, 39-57,

1992.

18

Pal, P.C. and Roberts, P.H., Long-term polarity stability and strength of the geomagnetic

dipole, Nature, 331, 702-705, 1988.

Pelletier, J.D. and Turcotte, D.L., Scale-invariant topography and porosity variations in

sedimentary basins, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 28,165-28,175, 1996.

Press, W.H., Teukolsky, S.A., Vetterling, W.T. and Flannery B.P., Numerical Recipes in

C: The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing, second ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

1992.

Geomag. Geoelectr., 45, 79-88, 1993.

Seki, M. and Ito, K., A phase-transition model for geomagnetic polarity reversals, J.

Stevenson, D.J., Planetary magnetic ﬁelds, Rep. Prog. Phys., 46, 555-620, 1983.

Tauxe, L. and Hartl, P., 11 million years of Oligocene geomagnetic ﬁeld behavior, Geo-

phys. J. Int., 128, 217-229, 1997.

Thibal, J., Pozzi, J.-P., Barthes, V., and Dubuisson, G., Continuous record of geomag-

netic ﬁeld intensity between 4.7 and 2.7 Ma from downhole measurements, Earth Plan. Sci.

Lett., 136, 541-550, 1995.

Thouveny, N., Creer, K.M., and Blunk, I., Extension of the Lac du Bouchet palaeomag-

netic record over the last 120,000 years, Earth Plan. Sci. Lett., 97, 140-161, 1990.

Turcotte, D.L., Fractals and Chaos in Geology and Geophysics, Cambridge Univ. Press,

Cambridge, 1992.

Turner, G.M. and Thompson, R., Lake sediment record of the geomagnetic secular vari-

ation in Britain during Holocene times, Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc., 65, 703-725, 1981.

Valet, J.-P. and Meynadier, L., Geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity and reversals during the past

four million years, Nature, 366, 234-238, 1993.

van der Ziel, A., On the noise spectra of semiconductor noise and of ﬂicker eﬀect, Physica,

16, 359-375, 1950.

Verosub, K.L., Mehringer, P.J., and Waterstraat, P., Holocene secular variation in west-

ern North America: paleomagnetic record from Fish Lake, Harney County, Oregon, J. Geo-

phys. Res., 91, 3609-3623, 1986.

19

Vicsek, T., Fractal Growth Phenomena, World Sci., River Edge, N. J., 1992.

Voorhies, C.V. and Conrad, J., Accurate predictions of mean geomagnetic dipole ex-

cursion and reversal frequencies, mean paleomagnetic ﬁeld intensity, and the radius of the

Earth’s core using McLeod’s rule, NASA Technical Memorandum 104634, 1996.

Weissman, M.B., 1/f noise and other slow, nonexponential kinetics in condensed matter,

Rev. Mod. Phys., 60, 537-571, 1988.

20

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1: Paleointensity of the virtual axial dipole moment (VADM) of the earth’s

magnetic ﬁeld (with reversed polarity data given by negative values) inferred from sediment

cores for the past 4 Ma from Meynadier (1994).

Figure 2: Power spectrum of the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity variations estimated with

the use of the Lomb periodogram from sediment cores of Meynadier (1992) and Meynadier

(1994) and archeomagnetic data from Kovacheva (1980). The power spectrum S is given as

a function of frequency f for time scales of 100 a to 4 Ma.

Figure 3: Cumulative frequency-length distribution of the lengths of polarity intervals

during the last 170 Ma from the time scale of Harland et al. (1990) (solid curve), Cande and

Kent (1992a,1995) (dashed curve), and the Cande and Kent (1992a,1995) time scale from

C1 to C13 with cryptochrons included (dashed and dotted line).

Figure 4: (a) A 1/f noise with a normal distribution with mean of 8.9x1022Am2 and

standard deviation of 3.4x1022Am2 representing the geomagnetic ﬁeld intensity (VADM) in

one polarity state. (b) Binormal 1/f noise constructed from the normal 1/f noise of (a) as

described in the text.

Figure 5: Cumulative frequency-length polarity interval distributions from the Harland

et al. (1990) time scale and that of the binormal, 1/f noise model of intensity variations.

The distribution from the Harland et al. (1990) time scale (dashed curve) was also given in

Figure 4. The solid line represents the average cumulative distribution from the 1/f noise

model. The dotted lines represent the minimum and maximum reversal length distributions

for 20 numerical experiments, thereby representing 95% conﬁdence intervals.

Figure 6: Cumulative frequency-length polarity interval distributions for the 1/f noise

model of intensity variations (shown in the middle, also given in Figure 5) and for intensity

variations with power spectra proportional to f −0.8 and f −1.2. This plot illustrates that the

polarity length distribution is very sensitive to the form of the power spectrum, allowing us

to conclude that the agreement between the model and the observed distribution in Figure

21

5 is unique to 1/f noise intensity variations.

Figure 7: Pair correlation function of the reversal history according to the Harland et al.

(1990) time scale (ﬁlled circles), Cande and Kent (1992a,1995) (unﬁlled circles), synthetic

reversals produced from 1/f noise model of intensity variations (boxes), and a Poisson

process (triangles). The real and synthetic reversals exhibit similar non-random clustering.

Figure 8: Power spectra of inclination and declination from the Lac du Bouchet sediment

core. The declination spectrum is oﬀset from the inclination spectrum so that they may be

placed on the same graph.

Figure 9: Power spectra of inclination from the following locations, top to bottom:

1) Anderson Pond, 2) Bessette Creek, 3) Fish Lake, 4) Lake Bullenmerri, and 5) Lake

Keilambete. The spectra are oﬀset to place them on the same graph.

Figure 10: Dipole moment produced by the model normalized to the average dipole

moment, set to be one. The ﬁeld exhibits reversals with a broad distribution of polarity

interval lengths and a variable reversal rate decreasing at later times in the simulation.

Figure 11: Distribution of magnetic ﬁeld according to the ten simulations of the model

(solid curve) and a binormal distribution ﬁt to the data (dashed line). The binormal distri-

bution ﬁts the data well.

Figure 12: Average power spectrum of the mean value of the magnetic ﬁeld (dipole ﬁeld)

from 25 simulations. The spectrum has a low-frequency spectrum with S(f ) ∝ f −1 and a

high frequency region S(f ) ∝ f −2. The same spectrum is observed in geomagnetic intensity

from sediment cores and historical data.

Figure 13: Average power spectrum of the angular deviation from a dipole ﬁeld from 25

simulations. The spectrum is S(f ) ∝ f −2 for high frequencies and gradually ﬂattens out to

a constant spectrum at low frequencies.

Figure 14: Average spatial power spectrum of transects of the magnetic ﬁeld Bz. The

power spectrum is S(k) ∝ k−1. This is precisely analagous to the power-law spectrum

Rn ∝ n−1.

22

