Scale-invariance of soil moisture variability and its implications

for the frequency-size distribution of landslides

Jon D. Pelletier, Bruce D. Malamud, Troy Blodgett, and Donald L. Turcotte

Department of Geological Sciences, Snee Hall, Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Power spectral analyses of soil moisture variability are carried out from

scales of 100 m to 10 km on the microwave remotely-sensed data from the

Washita experimental watershed during 1992. The power spectrum S(k) has

an approximately power-law dependence on wave number k with exponent

−1.8. This behavior is consistent with the behavior of a stochastic diﬀer-

ential equation for soil moisture at a point. This behavior has important

consequences for the frequency-size distribution of landslides. We present the

cumulative frequency-size distributions of landslides induced by precipitation

in Japan and Bolivia as well as landslides triggered by the 1994 Northridge,

California earthquake. Large landslides in these regions, despite being trig-

gered by diﬀerent mechanisms, have a cumulative frequency-size distribution

with a power-law dependence on area with an exponent ranging from −1.5

to −2. We use a soil moisture ﬁeld with the above statistics in conjunc-

tion with a slope stability analysis to model the frequency-size distribution

of landslides.

In our model landslides occur when a threshold shear stress

dependent on cohesion, pore pressure, internal friction and slope angle is ex-

ceeded. This implies a threshold dependence on soil moisture and slope angle

since cohesion, pore pressure, and internal friction are primarily dependent

on soil moisture. The cumulative frequency-size distribution of domains of

shear stress greater than a threshold value with soil moisture modeled as

above and topography modeled as a Brownian walk is a power-law function

of area with an exponent of −1.8 for large landslide areas. This distribution

is similar to that observed for landslides. The eﬀect of strong ground motion

from earthquakes lowers the shear stress necessary for failure but does not

change the frequency-size distribution of failed areas. This is consistent with

observations. This work suggests that remote sensing of soil moisture can be

of great importance in monitoring landslide hazards and proposes a speciﬁc

2

quantitative model for landslide hazard assessment.

I. INTRODUCTION

Landslides can be triggered by intense rainfall, rapid snowmelt, a change in water level,

and ground motion from earthquakes and volcanic eruptions (Wieczoreck, 1996). The ﬁrst

three mechanisms act to increase soil moisture. The coincidences of increased groundwater

levels and pore pressures with landslides have been investigated by many authors (Fukuoka,

1980). Studies suggest that a threshold dependence on soil moisture is appropriate for slope

instablity since landslides often occur when the product of rainfall duration and intensity

exceeds a threshold value (Caine, 1980; Wieczoreck, 1987).

In situ monitoring of pore

pressure has shown that increases in pore pressure resulting from heavy precipitation is

coincident with landslides (Johnson and Sitar, 1990). Several authors have shown that

variations in the frequency of occurrence of landslides respond to climatic changes with

higher rates of landslides associated with wetter climates (Grove, 1972; Innes, 1983; Pitts,

1983; Brooks and Richards, 1994). Further evidence for correlations between landslides and

soil moisture is the observation that soil drainage is the most successful method of landslide

prevention in the United States (Committe in Ground Failure Hazards, 1985).

Seismic triggering of landslides has also been studied by many authors (Keefer, 1984;

Jibson, 1996). Correlations between landslides and earthquakes can be inferred in a number

of ways. Many earthquakes have been known to trigger large numbers of landslides and

landslide densities have a strong correlation with active seismic belts (Jibson and Keefer,

1988; Tibaldi et al., 1995). In some cases landslides have been associated with both high

soil moisture and earthquakes (Seed, 1968).

Landslides are a serious natural hazard and also play an important role in the long-

term shaping of landforms (Beck, 1968; Keefer, 1994; Densmore et al., 1997).

In this

paper we investigate the frequency-size distribution of landslides in areas where diﬀerent

triggering mechanisms dominate. We argue that fractal models are useful for modeling the

3

soil moisture and topographic variations that are associated with the landslide instability. A

number of authors have examined the frequency-size distribution of landslides (Whitehouse

and Griﬃths, 1983; Ohmori and Hirano, 1988; Sugai, 1990; Sasaki, 1991; Hovius et al.,

1997). These authors have consistently noted that the distribution is power-law or fractal.

This is precisely analagous to the Gutenberg-Richter law for earthquakes which states that

the cumulative frequency of events with a seismic moment greater than Mo is a power-

law function of Mo.

In this paper we present cumulative frequency-size distributions for

three new data sets. One of these data sets include landslides triggered exclusively by

hydrologic mechanisms, one represents landslides triggered by a single large earthquake, and

one includes landslides triggered by both hydrologic and seismic mechanisms. Surprisingly,

despite diﬀerent triggering mechanisms, the frequency-size distributions are very similar,

with a power-law distribution for large areas and a ﬂattening out of the distribution for

small areas.

There is also observational evidence that soil moisture exhibits scale-invariant behavior.

Rodriguez-Iturbe et al.

(1995) have analyzed the frequency-size distribution of patches

of soil moisture greater than a threshold value and have shown them to have a power-

law cumulative frequency-size distribution. This is analagous to that for landslides. This

suggests that soil moisture patches may be related to landslide failure areas.

In Section 2 of this paper we perform spectral analyses of soil moisture to show that soil

moisture is a scale-invariant function. We show that the classic equation for soil moisture

with evapotranspiration proportional to soil moisture and diﬀusive dispersion predicts the

observed scale-invariance. In Section 3 we present frequency-size distributions of landslides

and argue that a universal distribution exists, independent of triggering mechanism. Section

4 attempts to explain the observed frequency-size distribution of landslides with a slope

stability analysis with soil moisture and topography modeled as scale-invariant functions.

4

II. POWER SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF SOIL MOISTURE DATA

We have obtained microwave remotely-sensed soil moisture data collected from June 10

to June 18, 1992 at the Washita experimental watershed (Jackson, 1993). The watershed

received heavy rainfall preceeding the experiment but did not receive rainfall during the

experiment. The data are gridded estimates of soil moisture in the top ﬁve centimeters of

soil calculated using the algorthm of Jackson and Le Vine (1996). Each pixel respresents an

area of 200 m x 200 m and the total area considered is 45.6 km by 18.6 km. The soil moisture

values do not correlate with relief in the watershed, which is very small. We have computed

the one-dimensional power spectrum of each row of pixels for each image and averaged the

power spectrum for each row at equal frequency values. The power spectrum S is the square

of the Fourier coeﬃcients at each wave number of a Fourier series representation of the data.

The power spectrum was estimated with the routine “spctrm” of Press et al. (1992). The

spectra for June 10, 14, and 18 are presented from top to bottom in Figure 1. Although the

soil moisture decreased signiﬁcantly during the course of the experiment, the spectrum has

a nearly constant form. The spectrum is given approximately by a power law S(k) ∝ k−1.8,

also plotted in Figure 1. The power-law form with exponent −1.8 is chosen to compare

with the model presented below. A power-law dependence of the power spectral density

S on wave number k, S(k) ∝ k−2, directly implies scale-invariant behavior. If β = 2 the

behavior is a Brownian walk, with β = 1.8 it is a fractional Brownian walk. In both cases

the behavior is that of a self-aﬃne fractal (Turcotte, 1992). Although the spectrum appears

to ﬂatten out at high wave numbers, soil moisture variability at the Washita watershed with

ﬁner spatial resolution has been quantiﬁed by Rodriguez-Iturbe et al. (1995) using similar

techniques. They ﬁnd that the soil moisture variability continues to be scale invariant down

to the 30 m scale for the more ﬁnely sampled data.

In the top image of Figure 2 we present a color image of the soil moisture at Washita on

June 17, 1992. White spaces indicate areas where the watershed is interrupted by roads or

lakes. Below it is a synthetic two-dimensional image constructed using the Fourier-ﬁltering

5

method of Turcotte (1992). The mean and variance of the synthetic moisture ﬁeld have

been chosen to match that of the observed image and we have taken β = 1.8. The synthetic

image reproduces the correlated structure of the real soil moisture image.

Entekhabi and Rodriguez-Iturbe (1994) have proposed a partial diﬀerential equation for

the dynamics of the soil moisture ﬁeld s(~x, t):

∂s(~x, t)
∂t

= D∇2s(~x, t) − ηs(~x, t) + ξ(~x, t)

(1)

In this equation, the evapotranspiration rate η is assumed to be constant in space and time.

Soil moisture disperses in the soil according to a diﬀusion equation, and rainfall input ξ(~x, t)

is modeled as a random function in space and time. Variations in rainfall from place to

place cause spatial variations in soil moisture that are damped by the eﬀects of diﬀusion

and evapotranspiration. Without spatial variations in rainfall input, there are no variations

in soil moisture according to this model. As pointed out by Rodriguez-Iturbe et al. (1995),

the variability at the small scale of the Washita watershed is not likely to be the result of

spatial variations in rainfall.

An alternative approach to this problem which will generate spatial variations in soil

moisture at these small scales assumes that the evapotranspiration rate is a random func-

tion in space and time. This models spatial and temporal variations in evapotranspiration

resulting from variable atmospheric conditions and heterogeneity in soil, topography, and

vegetation characteristics. The resulting equation is

∂s(~x, t)
∂t

= D∇2s(~x, t) − η(~x, t)s(~x, t)

(2)

This equation is a variant of the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation (Kardar et al., 1986) which

has has received a great deal of attention in the physics literature. This equation is nonlinear

and can only be solved numerically. Amar and Family (1989) have solved this equation and

have found that the solutions are scale-invariant and fractal with a Hausdorﬀ measure of

approximately 0.4, independent of the relative strength of the diﬀusion and noise terms.

This implies that the one-dimensional power spectrum has a power-law dependence on wave

6

number with exponent β = 1.8. The similarity between the ﬁeld generated by equation (2)

and the soil moisture observed in the Washita images suggests that equation (2) may be

capturing much of the essential dynamics of soil moisture at these scales.

Rodriguez-Iturbe et al. (1995) quantiﬁed the scale-invariance of soil moisture variations

by computing the cumulative frequency-size distribution of patches of soil with moisture

levels higher than a prescribed value. They found that the cumulative frequency-size distri-

bution had a power-law function on area with exponent of approximately −0.8. The number

of soil patches N depended on the area according to

N(> A) ∝ A−0.8

(3)

This is a fractal relation. We have determined the equivalent distribution for the synthetic

soil moisture ﬁeld illustrated in Figure 2. The result is plotted in Figure 3. The same

distribution that was observed in real soil moisture ﬁelds is obtained. The same distribution

has also been observed for cumulus cloud ﬁelds (Pelletier, 1997).

III. OBSERVED FREQUENCY-SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF LANDSLIDES

Fuyii (1969), Whitehouse and Griﬃths (1983), Ohmori and Hirano (1988), Sugai (1990),

Sasaki (1991), and Hovius et al. (1997) have all presented evidence that landslide frequency-

size distributions are power-law functions of area. Some have presented cumulative distribu-

tions while others have presented noncumulative distributions. Care should be taken when

comparing distributions to ensure that the same type of distribution is being used. In this

section we present cumulative frequency-size distributions of landslide area from three ar-

eas. The results suggest that cumulative frequency-size distributions are remarkably similar

despite diﬀerent triggering mechanisms.

7

A. Landslides in Japan

A data set of 3,424 landslides with areas larger than 104 m2 in the Akaishi Ranges, central

Japan, have been compiled by Ohmori and Sugai (1995). Landslide masses were selected

for measurement from 1:20,000 scale aerial photographs and by ﬁeld survey. On 1:25,000

scale topographic maps the length and area of each landslide was measured with a digitizer.

In this region landslides occur as a result of both heavy rainfall and strong seismicity. The

distribution of landslides is not uniform over the study area but correlates well with bedrock

lithology. For this reason, the authors have divided their data set into 13 subsets each

with a similar lithology. We have computed the cumulative frequency-size distribution of

landslides in each of the lithologic units that contained at least 100 landslides. The data

set is believed to be complete for landslides with areas greater than 10−2 km2. In Figure 4

cumulative frequency-size distributions, the number of landslides with an area greater than

A, are plotted as a function of A for seven lithologic units. Areas for these landslides include

the runout zone. The distributions plotted in Figure 4 are remarkably similar between the

diﬀerent lithologic units. For large landslides, the distribution is well characterized by a

power law with an exponent of approximately −2, that is

N(> A) ∝ A−2

(4)

This power-law trend for large landslides was chosen based on visual correlation with the

landslide data. Thus, the exponent −2 is only approximate. The observed frequency-area

distribution ﬂattens out for areas less than about 10−1 km2, thus few landslides occur with

small areas. Note that this change in the distribution occurs at an area that is an order of

magnitude larger than the resolution of the catalog. Therefore, it does not appear to be an

artifact of completeness of the data set.

It can be argued that a better estimate of the initial failure area is provided by the

square of the width of the landslide since the length of the landslide includes the runout

distance. The data set from Japan includes both estimates of total area as well as the

8

approximate length and width of each landslide. This allows us the opportunity to compare

the distribution of total landslide area to the distribution of the square of the width. In

Figure 5 the cumulative distributions of the total area and the width squared are plotted for

one of the lithologic units of the Japan data set. The upper line is the cumulative statistics

for total area and the lower line is the cumulative statistics for width squared. This ﬁgure

suggests that the total landslide area scales in approximately the same way as the initial

failure area. The two distributions were compared for the other lithologic units of the Japan

data set and results similar to those of Figure 5 were obtained.

B. Landslides in Bolivia

Two sets of landslide areas were mapped in adjacent watersheds in the Yungas region

of the Eastern Cordillera, Bolivia between Lake Titicaca and the city of Guanay. The main

river channels ﬂowing through each of the watersheds are the Challana and an unnamed trib-

utary of the Challana. Because very few people inhabit this region, most of the landslides

(more than 95%) were not anthropogenically inﬂuenced. The watersheds are located in a rel-

atively aseismic region of the Andes; therefore, all of the landslides are thought to have been

hydrologically triggered during the wet season which extends from November through April.

Based on multitemporal aerial photographic coverage and limited dendrochronology ﬁeld

studies, the landslide data sets represent an interval of time of about 20-35 years. Scanned

aerial photographs at approximately 1:50,000 scale were used for mapping. Each photo-

graphic image was georegistered to a Thematic Mapper image using a Universal Transverse

Mercator projection. Landslide mapping was only undertaken in suitable portions of the

watershed below treeline. This excluded cloud covered, shadowed, and agricultural areas.

The full extent of each landslide was mapped including the runout zone. Since individual

trees can be discerned in the mapped areas, the resolution of the photographs is about 3 to

10 meters.

The cumulative frequency-size distributions of landslides in these data sets are presented

9

in Figure 6. Distributions similar to those obtained with the data from Japan were observed.

Large landslides in the two areas match power-law distributions from equation (4) with

exponents −1.6 and −2, determined by visual correlation. A ﬂattening of the distribution

at small areas was also observed. As with the Japan data set, this rolloﬀ is at a scale much

larger than the resolution of the data set.

C. Landslides triggered by the 1994 Northridge, California earthquake

The January 17, 1994 Northridge, California earthquake triggered more than 11,000

landslides over an area of 10,000 km2. Harp and Jibson (1995) mapped landslides triggered

by the earthquake. They used 1:60,000-scale aerial photography taken the morning of the

earthquake by the U.S. Air Force. The subsequently digitized photos were supplemented by

ﬁeld work. It was esimated that the inventory is nearly complete down to landslides of about

5 m on a side below which a signiﬁcant number may have been missed. The distribution is

plotted in Figure 7. Large landslides have a power-law dependence on area with an exponent

of approximately −1.6. Again, there is a rolloﬀ for small areas. As with the Bolivian and

Japanese data sets, this rolloﬀ is at a scale much larger than the resolution scale of the data

set and is not an artifact of an incomplete catalog.

IV. MODELING OF LANDSLIDE FAILURE WITH REALISTIC TOPOGRAPHY

AND SOIL MOISTURE

Landslides occur when the shear stress exceeds a threshold value given approximately

by the Coulomb failure criterion (Terzaghi, 1962)

τf = τ0 + (σ − u) tan φ

(5)

where τ0 is the cohesive strength of the soil, σ is the normal stress on the slip plane, u

is the pore pressure, and φ is the angle of internal friction. Landslides are initiated in

places where τf is greater than a threshold value. The movement of the soil at the point of

10

instability increases the shear stress in adjacent points on the hillslope causing failure of a

connected domain with shear stress larger than the threshold value. To model the landslide

instability and, in particular, the frequency-size distribution of landslides, it is therefore

necessary to model the spatial variations of τ0, σ, u, and φ. The variables τ0 and u are

primarily dependent on soil moisture for a homogeneous lithology and a slip plane of constant

depth. The dependence of each of these variables on soil moisture has been approximated

using power-law functions (Johnson, 1984). The shear stress and normal stress are linearly

proportional to soil moisture through the weight of water in the soil. The shear stress and

normal stress are also trigonometric functions of the local slope. Based on the results given

in Section 2 the soil moisture will be modeled as a two-dimensional fractional Brownian walk

with β = 1.8. Topography will be modeled as a Brownian walk. Power spectral analyses

of one-dimensional transects of topography have shown topography to be a scale-invariant

function analagous to soil moisture. The power spectrum has a power-law dependence with

an exponent β = 2 in a variety of tectonic and erosional environments (Mandelbrot, 1975;

Sayles and Thomas, 1978; Turcotte, 1987; Huang and Turcotte, 1989). Thus it is a Brownian

walk. This scale-invariant behavior is applicable only over a certain range of scales. At scales

smaller than the support area of a drainage network, for instance, the surface is not dissected

by channels and the hillslope is smooth. To model the small-scale smoothness of topography

as well as the scale-invariant behavior at larger scales, we have constructed a two-dimensional

surface with one-dimensional power spectrum S(k) ∝ k−2 with the Fourier-ﬁltering method

of Turcotte (1992). At small scales, the synthetic topography has been planarly interpolated.

A shaded-relief example of the model topography is illustrated in Figure 8 along with its

contour plot. The plot has 128 x 128 grid points with interpolation below a scale of 8

pixels. The result of the interpolation is clearly identiﬁed as piecewise linear segments in

the transects along the boundaries of the plot. The slope corresponding to this model of

topography is illustrated in Figure 9. Below a scale of 8 pixels, the slopes are constant.

Above this scale, the slopes are a two-dimensional Gaussian white noise. This follows from

the fact that our model for topography at large scales, a Brownian walk with S(k) ∝ k−2,

11

can be deﬁned as the summation of a Gaussian white noise time series. White noise means

that adjacent values are totally uncorrelated. The contour map of the slope function shows

that there are no contours smaller than 8 x 8 pixels.

The shear stress necessary for failure is a complex function of soil moisture and slope.

However, to show how landslide areas may be associated with areas of simultaneously high

levels of soil moisture and steep slopes, we will assume a threshold shear stress criterion

proportional to the product of the soil moisture and the slope. In addition, we will assume

that slope and soil moisture are uncorrelated. A grid of synthetic soil moisture and topogra-

phy of 512 x 512 grid points was constructed according to the models described above. The

domains where the product of the soil moisture and the topography were above a threshold

value are shown in Figure 10. The threshold value was chosen such that only a small frac-

tion of the region was above the threshold. Figure 11 shows the cumulative frequency-size

distribution of the regions above threshold, our model landslides.

It can be seen that at

large areas a power-law distribution with an exponent of −1.6, similar to that observed for

landslides, is observed. Distributions obtained with diﬀerent realizations of the synthetic

random ﬁelds had exponents of 1.6 ± 0.1 ﬁt to the landslides above A = 10. For values of

the threshold that resulted in only a small fraction of the lattice being above threshold, the

form of the distribution was independent of the value of the threshold. The exponent of this

distribution is more negative than that of the soil moisture patches of Figure 3. This results

from the less correlated slope ﬁeld “breaking up” some of the large soil moisture patches so

that there are fewer large landslides relative to small ones than there are large soil moisture

patches relative to small ones. The eﬀect of the smooth topography at small scales acts

to ﬂatten the frequency-size distribution below the power-law trend. This means that the

slope function is completely correlated at these scales. The slope tends to fail as a unit more

often than it would if the slope was not constant on these scales. This results in fewer small

avalanches and a ﬂattening out of the distribution for small areas. The ﬂattening out of

the observed landslide distributions at small areas can also be associated with a minimum

thickness necessary for failure at depth.

12

The eﬀect of strong ground motion from earthquakes is to to lower the shear stress

necessary for failure (Newmark, 1965). This does not alter the frequency-size distribution

of landslides according to our model since the form of the distribution is independent of

the value of the threshold. This is consistent with the observation of Section 3 that the

cumulative frequency-size distribution is independent of triggering mechanism.

V. DISCUSSION

There has been a great deal of interest in the physics community in systems exhibiting

“avalanches.” Much of this interest stems from the theory of self-organized criticality re-

cently introduced by Bak et al. (1988). These authors proposed the idea that many systems

are driven to a state in which energy is dissipated in events which have a power-law distri-

bution of sizes. The type example of such a system is a growing sandpile. Sand grains are

dropped on a pile continuously and are lost from the edge of the pile in discrete sand slides.

A few sand slides are large and many are small. Experimental studies of real sand piles

suggest that the frequency-size distribution of these slides may in fact be power-law (Held

et al., 1990; Bretz et al., 1992; Rosendahl et al., 1994; Densmore et al., 1997). Rothman et

al. (1993) has presented evidence for power-law statistics in the cumulative frequency-size

distribution of thicknesses of turbidites. It should also be noted that they observed a ﬂatten-

ing of the distribution at small thicknesses similar to that which we have observed for small

areas in the frequency-size distribution of landslides. The results of Rothman et al. (1993)

have been interpreted in terms of the theory of self-organized criticality. Self-organized criti-

cality has also been proposed as model for earthquakes (Bak and Tang, 1989) and landslides

(Noever, 1993). The model we have presented appears to be an alternative hypothesis for

the dynamics of landslides. The behavior of our model is a result of soil moisture dynamics

that are independent of topography. In the sandpile model self-organization of the sandpile

into a critical state results from the continuous input of energy into the system and the

action of large and small sand slides. In that model there is no additional ﬁeld that aﬀects

13

the system behavior. In contrast, in our model soil moisture acts as a additional ﬁeld that

aﬀects the system dynamics.

Since soil moisture is known to be an important factor in the landslide instability and

large landslides obey power-law statistics, it is likely that patches of soil moisture above

a threshold value, which also obey power-law statistics, can be associated with landslides

through the model we have discussed. This observation suggests that continuous remote-

sensing of soil moisture, together with a digital elevation model, are necessary for successful

landslide hazard assessment. A continuous monitoring program of landslide-prone areas

could also provide valuable data for the better understanding of landslide failure. For exam-

ple, in the model we presented, landslide failure was chosen to be the product of slope and

soil moisture. As noted, the correct failure criterion is likely to be a complex function of the

slope and the soil moisture. This function could be determined empirically using historical

records of landslides if high resolution soil moisture data and topography are available for

the time immediately preceding each landslide.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank Peggy O’Neil for providing us with the soil moisture data and Toshihiko

Sugai for providing us with the landslide data from Japan.

Amar, J.G., and Family, F., 1989. Numerical solution of a continuum equation for

interface growth in 2+1 dimensions. Phys. Rev. A, 41: 3399-3402.

Bak, P., Tang, C., and Wiesenfeld, K., 1988. Self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. A,

38: 364-374.

Geophys. Res., 94: 15,635-15,637.

Geol. Geophys., 11: 191-199.

Bak, P., and Tang, C., 1989. Earthquakes as a self-organized critical phenomenon. J.

Beck, A.C., 1968. Gravity faulting as a mechanism of topographic adjustment. NZ J.

Bretz, M., Cunningham, J., Kurczynski, P., and Nori, F., 1992. Imaging of avalanches

14

in granular materials. Phys. Rev. Lett., 69: 2431-2434.

Brooks, S.M., and Richards, K.S., 1994. The signiﬁcance of rainstorm variations to

shallow translational hillslope failure. Earth Surf. Proc. Landforms, 19: 85-94.

Caine, N., 1980. The rainfall-intensity-duration control of shallow landslides and debris

ﬂows. Geograﬁska Annaler, 62: 23-27.

Committee in Ground Failure Hazards, 1985. Reducing Losses from Landsliding in

the United States. Commission on Engineering and Technical Systems, National Research

Council, Washington, D.C., 41 pp.

Densmore, A.L., Anderson, R.S., McAdoo, B.G., and Ellis, M.A., 1997. Hillslope evolu-

tion by bedrock landslides. Science, 275: 369-372.

Entekhabi, D., and Rodriguez-Iturbe, I., 1994. Analytical framework for the characteri-

zation of the space-time variability of soil moisture. Adv. Water Resour., 17: 35-46.

Fukuoka, M., 1980. Landslides associated with rainfall. Geotechnical Engineering, 11:

1-29.

Fuyii, Y., 1969. Frequency distribution of the magnitude of landslides caused by heavy

rainfall. J. Seismol. Soc. Japan, 22: 244-247.

Grove, J.M., 1972. The incidence of landslides, avalanches, and ﬂoods in eastern Norway

during the little ice age. Artic and Alpine Res., 4: 131-138.

Harp, E.L., and Jibson, R.L., 1995.

Inventory of landslides triggered by the 1994

Northridge, California earthquake, US Geol. Surv. Open File Report 95-213.

Held, G.A., Solina II, D.H., Keane, D.T., Haag, W.J., Horn, P.M., and Grinstein, G.,

1990. Experimental study of critical mass ﬂuctuations in an evolving sandpile. Phys. Rev.

Lett., 65: 1120-1123.

derived by landslide mapping. Geology

Hovius, N., Stark, C.P., and Allen, P.A., 1997. Sediment ﬂux from a mountain belt

Huang, J., and Turcotte, D.L., 1989. Fractal mapping of digitized images: Applications

to the topography of Arizona and comparisons with synthetic images. J. Geophys. Res., 94:

7491-7495.

15

Innes, J.L., 1983. Lichenometric dating of debris-ﬂow deposits in the Scottish highlands,

Earth Surf. Processes, 8: 579-588.

Jackson, T.J., 1993. Washita ’92 Data Sets, high density diskette, version 12/20.

Jackson, T.J., and Le Vine, D., 1996. Mapping surface soil moisture using an aircraft-

based passive microwave instrument: algorithm and example. J. Hydrol., 184: 85-99.

Jibson, R.W., 1996. Use of landslides for paleoseismic analysis. Engineering Geology,

43: 291-323.

Jibson, R.W., and Keefer, D.K., 1988. Landslides triggered by earthquakes in the central

Mississippi Valley, Tennessee, and Kentucky. US Geol. Surv. Professional Paper 1336-C.

Johnson, A.M., 1984. Debris Flow, In: D. Brunsden and D.B. Prior (Editors), Slope

Instability. Wiley, New York, pp. 257-361.

tion. Can. Geotech. J., 27: 789-801.

Johnson, K.A., and Sitar, N., 1990. Hydrologic conditions leading to debris-ﬂow initia-

Kardar, M., Parisi, G., and Zhang, Y.-C., 1986. Dynamic scaling of growing interfaces.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 56: 889-892.

406-421.

Keefer, D.K., 1984. Landslides caused by earthquakes. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 95:

Keefer, D.K., 1994. The importance of earthquake-induced landslides to long-term slope

erosion and slope-failure hazards in seismically active regions. Geomorphology, 10: 265-284.

Mandelbrot, B., 1975. Stochastic models for the earth’s relief, the shape and the fractal

dimension of coastlines, and the number-area rule for islands. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,

Newmark, N.M., 1965. Eﬀects of earthquakes on dams and embankments. Geotechnique,

Noever, D.A., 1993. Himalayan sandpiles. Phys. Rev. E, 47: 724-725.

Ohmori, H., and Hirano, M., 1988. Magnitude, frequency, and geomorphological signiﬁ-

cance of rocky mud ﬂows, landcreep, and the collapse of steep slopes. Z. Geomorph. N.F.,

72: 3825-3828.

15: 139-160.

67: 55-65.

16

Ohmori, H., and Sugai, T., 1995. Toward geomorphometric models for estimating land-

slide dynamics and forecasting landslide occurrence in Japanese mountains. Z. Geomorph.

N.F., 101: 149-164.

Pelletier, J.D., 1997. Kardar-Parisi-Zhang scaling of the height of the convective bound-

ary layer and the fractal structure of cumulus cloud ﬁelds. Phys. Rev. Lett., 78:2672-2675.

Pitts, J., 1983. The temporal and spatial development of landslides in the Axmouth-

Lyme Regis Undercliﬀs National Nature Reserve, Devon. Earth Surf. Processes, 8: 589-603.

Press, W.H., Teukolsky, S.A., Vetterling, W.T., and Flannery, B.P., 1992. Numerical

Recipes in C: The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing (2nd edn.). New York, Cambridge Univ.

Press, 994 pp.

Rodriguez-Iturbe, I., Vogel, G.K., Rigon, R., Entekhabi, D., and Rinaldo, A., 1995. On

the spatial organization of soil moisture ﬁelds. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22: 2757-2760.

Rosendahl, J., Vekic, M., and Kelley, J., 1994. Persistent self-organization of sandpiles.

Phys. Rev. E, 47: 1401-1404.

J. Sed. Petrol. A, 64: 59-67.

Engineering Geol., 32: 1-11.

process, Nature, 271: 431-434.

Rothman, D.H., Grotzinger, J., and Flemings, P., 1993. Scaling in turbidite deposition,

Sasaki, Y., 1991. Fractals of slope failure number-size distribution. J. Japan. Soc.

Sayles, R.S., and Thomas, T.R., 1978. Surface topography as a non-stationary random

Seed, H.B., 1968. Landslides during earthquakes due to soil liquefaction. Am. Soc. Civil

Engineers. J. Soil Mech. Found. Div. 94: 1055-1122.

Sugai, T., Ohmori, H., and Hirano, M., 1994. Rock control on magnitude-frequency

distributions of landslides. Trans. Japan. Geomorph. Union, 15: 233-251.

Terzaghi, K., 1962. Stability of steep slopes on hard unweathered rock. Geotechnique,

12: 251-270.

Tibaldi, A., Ferrari, L., and Pasquare, G., 1995. Landslides triggered by earthquakes

and their relations with faults and mountain slope geometry: an example from Ecuador.

17

Geomorphology, 11: 215-226.

Turcotte, D.L., 1987. A fractal interpretation of topography and geoid spectra on the

Earth, Moon, Venus, and Mars. J. Geophys. Res., 92: 597-601.

Turcotte, D.L., 1992. Fractals and chaos in geology and geophysics. New York, Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, 221 pp.

Whitehouse, I.E., and Griﬃths, G.A., 1983. Frequency and hazard of large rock

avalanches in the central Southern Alps, New Zealand, Geology, 11: 331-334.

Wieczoreck, G.F., 1987. Eﬀect of rainfall intensity and duration on debris ﬂows in central

Santa Cruz Mountains, California. In: J.E. Costa and G.F. Wieczorek (Editors), Debris

Flows/Avalanches: Process, Recognition, and Mitigation, Geological Society of America.

Rev. Eng. Geol., 7: 93-104.

Wieczoreck, G.F., 1996. Landslide triggering mechanisms, In: A.K. Turner and R.L.

Schuster (Editors), Landslides:

Investigation and Mitigation. Transportation Research

Board, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., Special Report 247, pp. 76-90.

18

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1: Average one-dimensional power spectrum of soil moisture on (top) June 10,

(middle) June 14, and (bottom) June 18, 1992 in the Washita experimental watershed. The

spectra are oﬀset so that they can be plotted on the same graph.

Figure 2: (a) Color map of microwave remotely-sensed estimates of soil moisture on

June 17, 1992 at the Washita experimental watershed. (b) Color map of a synthetic soil

moisture ﬁeld with the power spectrum S(k) ∝ k−1.8 with the same mean and variance as

the remotely-sensed data.

Figure 3: Cumulative frequency-size distribution of patches of soil moisture larger than

a threshold value for the synthetic soil moisture ﬁeld with power spectrum S(k) ∝ k−1.8.

Figure 4: Cumulative frequency-size distribution of landslides in 6 lithologic zones in

Japan. The distributions are well characterized by N(> A) ∝ A−2 above aproximately 0.1

km2.

Figure 5: The upper curve is the cumulative frequency-size distribution for one of the

lithologic zones in Japan as illustrated in Figure 4. The lower curve is the data for the same

set of landslides with the area deﬁned to be the width of the landslide squared.

Figure 6: Cumulative frequency-size distribution of landslides in two areas in Bolivia.

Figure 7: Cumulative frequency-size distribution of landslides triggered by the 1994

Northridge, California earthquake.

Figure 8: Synthetic model of topography used in the model of Section 4. The topography

is a scale-invariant function with S(k) ∝ k−2 above a scale of eight lattice sites and is planarly

interpolated below that scale.

Figure 9: Slope model corresponding to the topographic model of Figure 8. The slopes

are white noise above a scale of 8 lattice points and constant below that scale.

Figure 10: Contour map of the product of the synthetic soil moisture ﬁeld with the

synthetic slope function. Areas inside the contour loops respresent model landslides.

Figure 11: Cumulative frequency-size distribution of model landslides. The distribution

19

compares favorably to the distributions of real landslides.

20

