8
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
9
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Oxygen in the Earth’s core: a ﬁrst principles study

Dario Alf`e and G. David Price
Geological Sciences Dept., University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, U.K.

Michael J. Gillan
Physics Department, Keele University, Keele, Staﬀordshire ST5 5BG, U.K.

February 2, 2008

Abstract

First principles electronic structure calculations based on density functional theory
have been used to study the thermodynamic, structural and transport properties of
solid solutions and liquid alloys of iron and oxygen at Earth’s core conditions. Aims of
the work are to determine the oxygen concentration needed to account for the inferred
density in the outer core, to probe the stability of the liquid against phase separation,
to interpret the bonding in the liquid, and to ﬁnd out whether the viscosity diﬀers
signiﬁcantly from that of pure liquid iron at the same conditions. It is shown that the
required concentration of oxygen is in the region 25 − 30 mol percent, and evidence is
presented for phase stability at these conditions. The Fe-O bonding is partly ionic, but
with a strong covalent component. The viscosity is lower than that of pure liquid iron at
Earth’s core conditions. It is shown that earlier ﬁrst-principles calculations indicating
very large enthalpies of formation of solid solutions may need reinterpretation, since
the assumed crystal structures are not the most stable at the oxygen concentration of
interest.

1 Introduction

The Earth’s liquid outer core consists mainly of iron, but its density is about 10% too low
to be pure iron (Birch, 1952), so that it must contain some light element. The nature of
this element is still uncertain, and during the last 45 years the main candidates have been
carbon (Birch, 1952; Clark, 1963; Urey, 1960; Wood, 1993), silicon (Birch, 1952; MacDonald
and Knopoﬀ, 1958; Ringwood, 1959, 1961, 1966), magnesium (Alder, 1966), sulphur (Clark,
1963; Urey, 1960; Birch, 1964; Mason, 1966; Murthy and Hall, 1970; Lewis, 1973), oxygen
(Dubrovskiy and Pan’kov, 1972; Bullen, 1973; Ringwood, 1977), and hydrogen (Birch, 1952;
Fukai and Akimoto, 1983; Suzuki et al., 1989). For a given light element, it is also uncertain
what concentration is needed to explain the inferred density in the core. The arguments for
and against each of the candidate light elements have been reviewed by Poirier (1994).

The aim of this paper is to use ﬁrst-principles calculations to investigate the possibility
that oxygen is the light element. First-principles calculations are well established as a reli-
able way of predicting the thermodynamic, structural and dynamical properties of solid and
liquid materials, including liquid metals (ˇStich et al., 1989; Kresse and Furthm¨uller, 1993).
We have recently reported calculations of this kind on pure liquid iron under core conditions

(Voˇcadlo et al., 1997; de Wijs et al., 1998), which show that it is a simple close-packed
liquid with a viscosity not much greater than that of many liquid metals at ambient pres-
sure, contrary to some earlier suggestions (Secco, 1995). We have also used ﬁrst-principles
simulations to investigate a liquid iron-sulphur alloy under the same conditions (Alf`e and
Gillan, 1998a). We showed that the properties of the liquid are scarcely aﬀected by the small
sulphur concentration needed to explain the observed density.

The proposal that oxygen is the light element has a long and controversial history. Among
the earliest proponents were Dubrovskiy and Pan’kov (1972) and Bullen (1973), the latter of
whom suggested an outer core composition in the region of Fe2O (equivalent to 12.5 wt%).
Ringwood (1977) argued that oxygen should be seriously considered, and used seismic data
to estimate the oxygen content as 28 mol percent (10 wt%). However, it is not completely
certain whether the Fe/O liquid is thermodynamically stable against phase separation under
Earth’s core conditions at the composition that would be necessary to explain the density. It
is known that the solubility of FeO in liquid Fe is very low (≈ 1 mol percent) near the melting
temperature of pure iron (1811 K) at atmospheric pressure (Distin et al., 1971). However,
the solubility increases rapidly with temperature, becoming 6.5% at 2350 K (Fischer and
Schumacher, 1978) and rising to the region of ≈ 35 mol % at 2770 K (Ohtani and Ringwood,
1984). According to Ohtani and Ringwood (1984), an extrapolation of the available phase
measurements would suggest that the region of immiscibility disappears entirely above ≈
3080 K at atmospheric pressure. It is also well established that the solubility of FeO in Fe
increases with increasing pressure, and that the partial molar volume of FeO in liquid Fe
is lower than that of pure liquid FeO itself. Ohtani et al. (1984) used their high pressure
measurements on the solubility of FeO to suggest that the Fe/O system may show simple
eutectic behaviour above a pressure of ≈ 20 GPa, with no region of liquid immiscibility at any
temperature. Subsequently, Ringwood and Hibberson (1990) showed by direct measurements
that at 16 GPa addition of FeO to pure iron causes a depression of melting point, leading
to a eutectic point at oxygen mole fraction of 28 % and a temperature of ca. 1940 K.
Boehler’s (1992) measurements on the melting of Fe/O mixtures are consistent with these
ideas. Experiments of Knittle and Jeanloz (1991) and Goarant et al. (1992) on the reaction
between lower mantle material and molten iron at pressures above 70 GPa revealed that
the liquid dissolves signiﬁcantly amount of FeO. However, Sherman (1995) has recently used
ﬁrst-principles calculations on crystalline Fe/O phases to argue strongly against signiﬁcant
amounts of oxygen in the core. His calculations gave values for the enthalpy of formation
of crystals of composition Fe3O and Fe4O starting from Fe in the hexagonal close packed
structure and FeO in the NiAs structure. The Fe3O and Fe4O compositions were used
to model substitutional and interstitial oxygen respectively. The enthalpies of formation
were found to be so large that phase separation into FeO and Fe appears to be inevitable.
However, it is not clear that Sherman’s results have any relevance to the outer core, since
in the liquid phase oxygen does not have to be either substitutional or interstitial. Even
for the solid phase it is not obvious that Sherman’s argument is robust, since Fe/O crystal
structures other than those he studied might well give much lower enthalpies of formation.
We are mainly concerned in this paper with the Fe/O system in the liquid state. Our ﬁrst-
principles calculations, based on density functional theory and the pseudopotential method,
will be used to address three questions: (a) Is the Fe/O liquid stable against phase separation
under Earth’s core conditions? (b) If it is, what oxygen concentration is needed to reproduce
the observed density? (c) At this concentration, do the structural and dynamical properties
of the liquid diﬀer appreciably from those of pure liquid iron at the same pressure and tem-
perature? Our ﬁrst-principles simulations of the liquid will provide strong evidence that it is
thermodynamically stable, and that the observed density requires an oxygen concentration

of 25 − 30 mol-percent. In studying the properties of the liquid, we shall be particularly
concerned with the viscosity, since this is one of the most poorly determined properties of
the outer core, with estimates from diﬀerent experimental and theoretical methods spanning
many orders of magnitude (Secco, 1995). We shall also investigate a number of other prop-
erties, including the nature of the short-range order, the atomic diﬀusion coeﬃcients, and
the electronic structure.

Although we are mainly interested in the liquid, we shall also present some results for
the energetics of various crystalline forms of the Fe/O system. These crystal calculations
serve two purposes: ﬁrst, they demonstrate that our techniques are in complete agreement
with those used by Sherman in predicting large enthalpies of formation for Fe3O and Fe4O
in the structures he assumes; second, they demonstrate that there are crystal structures that
give much lower formation enthalpies – an important fact in understanding how the Fe/O
liquid can be stable against phase separation. It is not our intention to come to deﬁnite
conclusions about the possible phase stability of the Fe/O solid solutions themselves, but
our calculations suggest that their stability cannot be ruled out.

The paper is organised as follows. In section 2, we summarise the ﬁrst-principles tech-
niques on which the work is based. Section 3 presents our calculations on the energetics of
Fe/O crystals. In section 4 we report our results on liquid Fe/O, including its structural
properties, the evidence for its stability against phase separation, and its dynamical and
electronic properties. The ﬁnal sections present discussion and conclusions.

2 Methods

In ﬁrst principles calculations, the solid or liquid is represented as a collection of ions and
electrons, and for any given set of ionic positions the aim is to determine the total energy and
the force on every ion by solving the Schr¨odinger equation. This is a formidable task if the
number of atoms is large, but it was made feasible by the introduction of density functional
theory (DFT) many years ago (Hohenberg and Kohn, 1964; Kohn and Sham, 1965; Jones
and Gunnarsson, 1989; Parr and Yang, 1989). DFT treats electronic exchange and corre-
lation in a way that allows the electrons to be described by single-particle wavefunctions,
with the interaction between them accounted for by an eﬀective potential. DFT can be
applied in two ways: all-electron calculations, or pseudopotential calculations. The ﬁrst ap-
proach includes such standard techniques as full-potential linearised augmented plane waves
(FLAPW) and linearized muﬃn-tin orbitals (LMTO). In the pseudopotential approach, only
valence electrons are explicitly treated, the eﬀect of the core electrons being included by an
eﬀective interaction between the valence electrons and the cores. In both approaches, the
accuracy with which the real material is described is governed by the approximation used for
the electronic exchange-correlation energy. Until recently, the local density approximation
(LDA) was the standard method. But in order to achieve the highest accuracy for transition
metals it is essential to use an improved method known as the generalized gradient approxi-
mation (GGA) (Wang and Perdew, 1991). The present work is based on the pseudopotential
approach and the GGA. A non-technical review of ﬁrst-principles calculations based on the
pseudopotential approach has been given recently by one of the authors (Gillan 1997).

There have already been extensive ﬁrst-principles calculations on crystalline iron both
at ambient pressure and at pressures going up to Earth’s core values (Stixrude et al., 1994;
S¨oderlind et al., 1996). The calculations have been performed using diﬀerent all-electron
techniques and the pseudopotential technique, and a variety of properties have been studied,
including the equilibrium volume, the elastic constants, the magnetic moment, the volume as

a function of pressure and lattice vibration frequencies. The agreement between results ob-
tained with diﬀerent techniques is generally very close, and the agreement with experimental
data is also good. Particularly relevant here is the recent comparison of the pseudopotential
results for the pressure-dependent volume of hexagonal-close-packed iron up to core pres-
sures with earlier all-electron results and with experimental measurements (Voˇcadlo et al.,
1997).

Static ﬁrst-principles calculations on crystals have been in routine use for many years. But
to study liquids we need to do dynamical ﬁrst-principles simulations, in which the calculated
forces on the atoms are used to generate time evolution of the system, with every atom
moving according to Newton’s equation of motion. This kind of ﬁrst-principles molecular
dynamics (FPMD) pioneered by Car and Parrinello (1985) has been extensively used to
study liquid metals (ˇStich et al., 1989; Kresse and Furthm¨uller, 1993; Holender and Gillan,
1996; Kirchhoﬀ et al. 1996a, 1996b), and it is known to give an accurate description of both
structure and dynamics.

The present work was performed mainly with the VASP code (Vienna Ab initio Simu-
lation Package) (Kresse and Furthm¨uller, 1996a, 1996b). As usual in pseudopotential work,
the electron orbitals are represented using a plane-wave basis set, which includes all plane
waves up to a speciﬁc energy cut-oﬀ. The electron-ion interaction is described by ultra-
soft Vanderbilt pseudopotentials (Vanderbilt, 1990), which allow one to use a much smaller
plane-wave cut-oﬀ while maintaining high accuracy. When we perform FPMD with VASP,
the integration of the classical equation of motion is done using the Verlet algorithm (1967),
and the ground-state search is performed at each time-step using an eﬃcient iterative ma-
trix diagonalisation scheme and a Pulay mixer (1980). This method diﬀers from the original
Car-Parrinello technique, which treated the electronic degrees of freedom as ﬁctitious dy-
namical variables. In order to improve the eﬃciency of the dynamical simulation, the initial
electronic charge density at each time step is extrapolated from the density at previous steps
as described in our previous work (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998a). In FPMD on metals, the dis-
continuity of occupation numbers at the Fermi level can cause technical diﬃculties. Since
we are interested in high temperatures in our liquid simulations, the electronic levels are
occupied according to Fermi statistics corresponding to the temperature of the simulation.
This prescription also avoids problems with level crossing during the ground state search.
The FPMD simulations are performed at constant temperature (rather than at constant
energy), using the Nos´e technique (1984).

The iron pseudopotential we use is the same as that used in our earlier work (Voˇcadlo et
al., 1997; de Wijs et al., 1998; Alf`e and Gillan, 1998a,b), and was constructed using an Ar core
and a 4s13d7 atomic reference conﬁguration. The oxygen pseudopotential was constructed
using a He core and the 2s22p4 reference conﬁguration. At Earth’s core pressures the distance
between the atoms becomes so small that the Fe(3p) orbitals respond signiﬁcantly. The net
eﬀect is a small repulsion, which we determined from calculations on the h.c.p. crystal
using a Ne core for the iron pseudopotential instead of Ar. We represent this repulsion by
Fe-Fe and Fe-O pair potentials, as in our earlier work (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997; de Wijs et al.,
1998). The resulting corrections to energy and forces are generally small. Non-linear core
corrections (Louie et al., 1982) are included throughout the work.

For all the calculations to be reported, we use a plane-wave cut-oﬀ of 400 eV, which
gives total energies converged within ≈ 10 − 20 meV/atom. In the calculations on crystals
Brillouin-zone sampling is an important issue, and the sampling density we use is described
in the next section. But for the liquid we use Γ point sampling, which experience suggests
should be satisfactory. (We have done separate tests on pure liquid iron using 4 k-points, and
we have found no detectable structural eﬀects, while the average total energy diﬀerence with

respect to the Γ point only calculations is of the order of 10 meV/atom, which is completely
negligible for the purposes of the present work). The time step used in the dynamical
simulations was 1 fs and we generally used a self-consistency threshold of 1.5×10−7 eV/atom.
With these prescriptions the drift of the Nos´e constant of motion was less than ≈ 60 K per
ps.

3 Fe/O solid solutions

We have used the techniques described in the previous section to calculate the equilibrium
properties and the enthalpy of formation ∆H of various members of the Fe/O system,
including those studied by Sherman (1995). Although Sherman’s calculations and ours are
both based on DFT, the technical methods are completely diﬀerent, since Sherman used the
FLAPW method, whereas ours are based on the pseudopotential approach. One of our main
aims is therefore to make detailed comparisons with his results in order to ensure that the
two methods agree about the energetics of the systems. We shall also point out that there
are Fe3O structures with enthalpies of formation much lower than those reported previously.
We begin by presenting our results for the equilibrium density ρ0 (i.e. the density for
which the pressure is zero), the bulk modulus K at this density, and the pressure derivative
K ′ ≡ dK/dP for crystals of Fe, FeO, Fe3O and Fe4O. Pure Fe is in the ǫ structure (hexagonal
close packed); FeO is in the B8 structure (the NiAs structure); Fe3O is in the structure
obtained from face-centred cubic Fe by replacing the atoms at the corners of the conventional
cube by O atoms; and Fe4O is in the structure obtained from f.c.c. Fe by inserting an O
atom at the centre of the conventional cube (see Fig. 1). We have done the calculations both
spin restricted (the occupation numbers of every electronic orbital are equal for up and down
spins, so that there are no magnetic moments) and spin unrestricted (the occupation numbers
for up and down spins are allowed to vary independently). To sample the Brillouin zone (BZ)
we have used Monkhorst and Pack grids (1976) using the sampling level that corresponds to
20 and 36 k-points in the irreducible wedge of the BZ respectively for the cubic (Fe3O and
Fe4O) and the hexagonal (Fe(ǫ) and FeO(B8)) crystals. Using these values, the total energies
are converged within 5 meV/atom for the Fe3O, Fe4O and FeO(B8) structures, and within
10 − 15 meV/atom for the Fe(ǫ) structure. We ﬁnd that, except for Fe, all the structures
are magnetic at low pressures, so that the system is stabilised if spin restriction is removed.
This disagrees with the results of Sherman (1995), where a signiﬁcant magnetic moment was
found only for the FeO(B8) structure (a weak moment was found for Fe3O).

Since we regarded the disagreement concerning magnetic properties as disturbing, we re-
peated our calculations of the equilibrium magnetic moment of Fe3O and Fe4O using a com-
pletely independent electronic structure technique, namely the LMTO method (linearised
muﬃn-tin orbitals), using the LMTO-46 code due to Krier et al. (1994). These calculations
completely conﬁrm the magnetic ordering in Fe3O and Fe4O and give numerical values for
the magnetic moments that agree well with those given by our pseudopotential calculations.
This suggests that the minimisation of the total energy with respect to magnetic moments
may not have been fully under control in Sherman’s work.

For each system we have calculated the static internal energy E for a series of volumes,

and ﬁtted the results to the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state:

4/3

V0
V (cid:19)

(cid:18)

−

2

ξ
2 (cid:18)

V0
V (cid:19)

2
3

−

(1 + ξ)

2/3

V0
V (cid:19)

(cid:18)

+

ξ +

1
2 (cid:18)

3
2 (cid:19)#

(1)

E = E0 +

(1 + 2ξ)

3
4

"

V0K

3
2
(4 − K ′),

ξ =

3
4

where K is the zero pressure bulk modulus, K ′ = (dK/dP )P =0, E0 is the equilibrium energy
and V0 the equilibrium volume. Our calculated values of ρ0, K and K ′ are compared with
Sherman’s results in Table 1, which also reports our calculated magnetic moments. The
overall conclusion from the comparison is that the results agree well in the cases where
magnetism is absent: pure Fe and spin-restricted Fe3O and Fe4O (Sherman’s calculations are
eﬀectively spin-restricted for Fe3O and Fe4O, since he found no moments). The equilibrium
density agrees in those cases to better than 2%, and the values of K and K ′ to about 10%.
However, our results show that magnetism has a strong eﬀect on the equilibrium properties,
so that it is important to treat it correctly. The case of FeO(B8) is problematic. Our spin-
unrestricted calculations give a ρ0 value in respectable agreement with that of Sherman,
but the agreement is poor for K and K ′.
It is clear that the accurate treatment of the
volume dependence of magnetic moment is important in obtaining reliable values for these
parameters, and our suspicion is that problems with moments may have aﬀected Sherman’s
values. However, we shall stress below that magnetic eﬀects become unimportant at core
pressures, so the most important feature of Table 1 is the good agreement between the two
sets of calculations for the non-magnetic cases.

We turn now to the enthalpies of formation ∆H of Fe3O and Fe4O, deﬁned by:

∆H(Fe3O) = H(Fe3O) − H(FeO(B8)) − 2H(Fe(ǫ)),
∆H(Fe4O) = H(Fe4O) − H(FeO(B8)) − 3H(Fe(ǫ)),

(2)

where H ≡ E + P V is the enthalpy per formula unit of each material. The total energy is
taken directly from our Birch-Murnaghan ﬁt, and the pressure P = −dE/dV is calculated
from the derivative of the ﬁtted form. We have done these calculations both spin restricted
and spin-unrestricted, and our results are reported in the two panels of Fig. 2. In the spin-
restricted panel we also show Sherman’s enthalpy results. The most important conclusion is
that ∆H for both Fe3O and Fe4O becomes very large at core pressures. In the range from
135 GPa (core-mantle boundary) to 330 GPa (inner-core boundary) ∆H is at least 3 eV,
which corresponds roughly to a temperature of 3.5 × 104 K, so that it is exceedingly unlikely
that Fe3O and Fe4O could be thermodynamically stable in the assumed structures.

Our spin unrestricted results indicate that the true values of ∆H are considerably lower
than Sherman’s results at low pressure, but at high pressure the diﬀerences between the
magnetic and non-magnetic values of ∆H become very small, so the conclusion is unaﬀected.
The detailed agreement with Sherman’s values of ∆H is only moderately good, but again
this does not aﬀect the conclusions about the very large size of ∆H.

We now want to ask whether the assumed crystal structures for Fe3O and Fe4O are
actually the most stable. A glance at Wyckoﬀ’s book Crystal Structures (1964) shows that
compounds having the composition A3B crystallise in a bewildering variety of structures.
We have picked some likely candidates and calculated their formation enthalpy. Most turn
out to be unfavourable, with ∆H values at least as great as those already reported in Fig. 2.
However, we have discovered one that has a much lower value. This is the BiI3 structure,
which has a rhombohedral unit cell containing two formula units. Putting Fe3O into this
structure and relaxing both the atomic positions and the shape of the cell, we end up with
the triclinic structure shown in Fig. 1. To characterise the structure brieﬂy, we note that
at 300 GPa each oxygen is surrounded by 11 Fe neighbours at distances of between 1.76
and 2.57 ˚A, and two O atoms at distances of 2.02 and 2.34 ˚A (by contrast, in the cubic
Fe3O structure at the same pressure, each oxygen has 12 Fe neighbours at 2.05 ˚A, and the
nearest oxygen neighbours are at 2.9 ˚A). We have calculated the fully relaxed total energy
of this structure at several volumes, and the resulting structural parameters are reported in

Table 2. Spin unrestricted calculations show that the structure is weakly magnetic, but the
moment and the energy stabilisation are so small that the eﬀects can be ignored.

Fitting of the energies to the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state yields the enthalpy of
formation shown in Fig. 2. Remarkably, ∆H is very much lower than for the previous
structures, and it decreases with increasing pressure. At the pressure of the inner core
boundary it is only just over 1 eV. Since we arrived at this distorted BiI3 structure in
a rather haphazard way, it is quite likely that there are other Fe3O structures with even
lower enthalpies. We cannot say at present whether there are Fe3O structures that are
stable against phase separation under Earth’s core conditions, but it certainly does not look
impossible. The low ∆H for the BiI3 structure will be highly relevant to our study of phase
stability in the liquid Fe/O system.

4 The liquid

4.1 Thermodynamics

Our aim in choosing the thermodynamic parameters for our liquid simulations was to model
liquid Fe/O near the thermodynamic state it would need to have to reproduce the known
outer-core density at the inner core boundary (ICB). The temperature at this point is very
uncertain, with estimates ranging from 4000 to 8000 K (Poirier, 1991). We took the value
of 6000 K, which is intended to be a reasonable compromise. However, the density and the
pressure are quite accurately known to be ≈ 12000 kg m−3 and ≈ 330 GPa. This density
is about 10% lower than it would be if the core consisted of pure iron (Birch, 1952). The
main problem in choosing thermodynamic parameters is that we do not know in advance
the required oxygen concentration, so that a certain amount of trial and error is needed.

We started from our previous 64-atom simulation for pure liquid iron (Voˇcadlo et al.,
1997), which had a mass density of 13300 kg m−3 and a calculated pressure of 358 ± 6 GPa.
Our ﬁrst move was to hold the volume of the system ﬁxed and to transmute the appropriate
number of iron atoms into oxygen atoms to produce the density of 12000 kg m−3. This
resulted in a large reduction of the pressure, and we therefore reduced the cell volume to
restore the original pressure. Naturally, this increased the density, and we therefore converted
more iron atoms into oxygen to regain the density of 12000 kg m−3. By repeating this cycle
many times, one could in principle achieve the required density and pressure. But the
calculations are very demanding, since at each state point one has to equilibrate the system
and run it for long enough to obtain adequate statistics for the pressure, so that in practice
a compromise between accuracy and computational eﬀort is needed. After several iterations,
we ended up with a simulation box containing 43 iron atoms and 21 oxygen atoms, i.e. mole
fractions of xFe ≈ 0.67 and xO ≈ 0.33. The resulting mass density of 11600 kg m−3 and
pressure of 342 ± 4 GPa are close to the known values at the ICB.

Since the mass density of 11600 kg m−3 is slightly below the known value at the ICB, it
is likely that the concentration of xO ≈ 0.33 is an overestimate. We have therefore taken a
second thermodynamic state with a lower concentration. In order to facilitate comparisons
with our calculations on crystalline Fe3O, we chose the value xO = 0.25. This second
simulation was performed on a system of 48 iron atoms and 16 oxygen atoms at the mass
density of 12200 kg m−3, and the resulting pressure was 366 ± 8 GPa. We shall refer to the
two simulations in the following as the ‘33% simulation’ and the ‘25% simulation’.

From the thermodynamic results just mentioned, we can estimate the oxygen concentra-
tion that would be needed to reproduce the known density and pressure at the ICB. Interpo-

lating between the calculated density values and applying a small correction for the slightly
diﬀerent pressures in the two simulations, we estimate that the mole fraction xO = 0.28
would reproduce the density 12000 kg m−3 at the ICB pressure.

In the next sections we describe the structural, dynamical and electronic-structure prop-

erties of the Fe/O liquid alloys.

4.2 Structure

We have simulated the 33% system for 4.2 ps after 2 ps of equilibration. The structural
properties of the system have been inspected by looking at the partial radial distribution
functions (rdf), gFeFe(r), gFeO(r), and gOO(r). The partial rdf’s are deﬁned so that, sitting on
an atom of the species α, the probability of ﬁnding an atom of the species β in the spherical
shell (r, r + dr) is 4πr2nβgαβ(r)dr, where nβ is the number density of the species β (the mole
fraction of species β times the total number of atoms per unit volume).

We have calculated averages of the rdf’s over diﬀerent small time windows of the sim-
ulation and we ﬁnd no meaningful diﬀerences between the windows. This conﬁrms that
the system is well equilibrated. In Fig. 3 we display the rdf’s calculated from the whole
simulation. These show that the distance between neighbouring iron and oxygen atoms is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the iron-iron distance, the maximum of gFeO(r) being at ≈ 1.7 ˚A,
while the maximum of gFeFe(r) is at ≈ 2.1 ˚A. It is interesting to notice that gOO(r) has a
ﬁrst maximum at ≈ 2.1 ˚A, which is much greater than the chemical bond length expected
for O-O single or double bonds (1.47 ˚A and 1.21 ˚A respectively). This is clear evidence
that there is no covalent bonding between oxygen atoms. The presence of the O-O peak at
≈ 2.1 ˚A indicates that oxygen atoms repel each other with an eﬀective atomic diameter of
≈ 2.1 ˚A. This fact shows that oxygen has two eﬀective sizes in the liquid: a small one when
it interacts with iron and a large one when it interacts with itself.

It is interesting to compare the structural properties of the alloy with those of pure liquid
iron. In Fig. 4 we display the rdf calculated earlier for pure liquid iron at ICB conditions
(Voˇcadlo et al., 1997) and the gFeFe calculated here. The two are not very diﬀerent, the only
apparent eﬀect being the broadening of the peak in the liquid alloy, which is probably due
to the greater disorder in the alloy.

The integration of the ﬁrst peak of the rdf’s provides a deﬁnition of the coordination
αβ (the average number of neighbours of species β surrounding an atom of species

number N c
α):

N c

αβ = 4πnβ

r2gαβ(r)dr,

rc
αβ

0
Z

(3)

FeO = 4.5, N c

FeFe = 11.0, N c

OFe = 9.2, and N c

where rc
αβ is the position of the minimum after the ﬁrst peak of gαβ. We ﬁnd the values
N c
OO = 4.5. For comparison, the average
coordination number found in our earlier simulation of pure liquid iron at ICB conditions was
N c
FeFe = 13.8 (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997). In interpreting these numbers, it is helpful to consider
the coordination numbers that would be found if iron and oxygen atoms had exactly the
same size and if atoms were packed in the same way as in pure liquid iron. In that case, the
total number of neighbours of each iron atom, N c
FeO, would be the same as in pure
iron, whereas in fact it is 15.5. This increase of coordination number is clearly due to the
smaller size of oxygen, which allows more atoms to be ﬁtted into the ﬁrst shell of neighbours.
On the other hand, the total number of neighbours of each oxygen atom, N c
OO is
13.7, which is almost the same as the coordination number in pure iron. We interpret this
as the result of two competing eﬀects. The smaller size of oxygen would lead to a smaller
coordination number if all atoms in its shell of neighbours were iron. But since on average

FeFe + N c

OFe + N c

4.5 of the neighbours are oxygen, which have a smaller size when interacting with iron atoms
in the shell, the coordination number is increased again.

We note that the structure of the liquid is very diﬀerent from that of the cubic Fe3O and
Fe4O crystals discussed in section 3. Oxygen atoms in these crystals have respectively 12 and
6 iron neighbours. The coordination number of 9.2 in the liquid is roughly half way between
the two. In the liquid, the radii from oxygen to iron and oxygen neighbours are equal to
≈ 1.7 and ≈ 2.1 ˚A respectively, whereas in the cubic Fe3O crystal at a similar pressure,
the distances are 2.05 and 2.9 ˚A. On the other hand, in the BiI3-structure Fe3O, the O-Fe
neighbour separation is spread over the range 1.76 − 2.57 ˚A, and the O-O separation is in
the range 2.02 − 2.34 ˚A.

We now want to ask whether our simulated system is really in a single phase and whether
we can detect any sign of phase separation. In studying this it is very helpful to calculate
the static structure factors Sαβ(k) deﬁned by:

Sαβ(k) = hρ∗

α(k)ρβ(k)i,

where h·i denotes the thermal average (in practice evaluated as a time average). Here, ρα(k)
is the Fourier component of the number density of species α at wavevector k, given by:

ρα(k) = N −1/2

α

exp(ik · rαi),

Nα

Xi=1
where Nα is the number of atoms of species α and rαi is the position of the ith atom of this
species. Phase separation is associated with ﬂuctuations of the concentrations of the two
species, and the structure factors give us quantitative information about the intensities of
these ﬂuctuations.

The connection between phase separation and structure factors can be made more precise.
In the limit of zero wavevector, the structure factors of a liquid alloy can be rigorously
expressed in terms of thermodynamic derivatives (Bhatia and Thornton, 1970):

lim
k→0

Sαβ(k) =

kBT
(NαNβ)1/2

∂Nα
∂µβ !V,T,µ′

β

.

 

where µα are the chemical potentials, and the notation indicates that the derivative is to
be taken with the volume V , the temperature T and all chemical potential except µβ held
ﬁxed. But the condition for thermodynamic stability with respect to phase separation is

(∂µα/∂xβ)P,T > 0.

β

At the consolute point (the point in the phase diagram at which phases start to sepa-
rate) the derivatives (∂µα/∂xβ)P,T become zero. This implies that the matrix of derivatives
has vanishing eigenvalues, corresponding to variations of the numbers Nα
(∂µα/∂Nβ)V,T,N ′
that maintain the pressure constant at ﬁxed volume. But the matrix (∂Nα/∂µβ)V,T,µ′
is the
inverse of the matrix (∂µα/∂Nβ)V,T,N ′
, so that when the latter becomes singular the former
must acquire inﬁnite eigenvalues. The consequence is that the values of the structure factors
in the zero-wavevector limit must diverge if the system is unstable with respect to phase
separation. This is also intuitively clear: as one passes from the miscible to the immiscible
region, concentration ﬂuctuations become ever larger, becoming of macroscopic size when
the phases separate, and the increase in the ﬂuctuations is reﬂected in the divergence of the
quantities Sαβ(k → 0).

β

β

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Our calculated structure factors for the 33% simulation are reported in Fig. 5. They have
the form usually found in liquid alloys, with prominent peaks in SFeFe(k) and SOO(k) in the
region k ≈ 4 ˚A−1 signalling the approximate spatial periodicity associated with the packing
of the atoms. The signiﬁcant feature for present purposes is the lack of any anomalous
behaviour at small wavevectors. We recognize, of course, that because of the limited size of
the repeating simulation cell, there is a lower limit to the wavevector that we can examine,
which in the present case is 0.86 ˚A−1. But at least in the accessible region of wavevectors
there is no indication of any tendency towards phase separation.

Before leaving the description of structure, we outline another method we have used to
search for signs of phase separation. To explain this, let us imagine for a moment that the
system had separated into phases of pure Fe and pure FeO. Then the Fe atoms in the Fe phase
would have no oxygen neighbours, whereas the Fe atoms in the FeO phase might be expected
to have 6 oxygen neighbours (we assume the FeO liquid to have a structure resembling that
of crystalline FeO in the NiAs structure). On the other hand, in the unseparated Fe/O
phase, the number of oxygen neighbours surrounding each Fe atom ﬂuctuates around the
value 4 − 5 (see above). We can therefore distinguish between the two situations by studying
the probability distribution for the number of oxygen neighbours surrounding Fe atoms. To
do this, we use the cut-oﬀ distance rc
αβ deﬁned above to decide when an atom of species β
counts as a neighbour of an atom of species α, and we deﬁne the function Pαβ(n, rc
αβ) as the
probability that an atom of species α has n neighbours of species β. If there is a complete
phase separation, we expect PFeO to have peaks in the region of n = 0 and n = 8, but if
there is no separation we expect a single peak in the region of n = 4 − 5. Note that the
rdfs contain less information than the Pαβ functions, and cannot by themselves deliver the
discrimination we need.

We present in Fig. 6 the function PFeO(n, rc

FeO) calculated from our 33% simulation with
FeO = 2.5 ˚A. This shows a single peak at n = 4, and no sign of any structure at
the cut-oﬀ rc
lower or higher values of n. This means that there is no indication whatever of any tendency
towards phase separation.

4.3 Conﬁrmation of phase stability

Our failure to ﬁnd any evidence of phase separation strongly suggests that the Fe/O liquid
is in fact stable. But it might be objected that a simulation lasting only 4 − 6 ps does not
give enough time for separation to occur, and that it would occur if the simulation were
longer. To eliminate this possibility we have devised a method in which phase separation
is artiﬁcially induced by an external force. We shall show that when the force is removed
the phases spontaneously re-mix very rapidly. We performed this procedure on the 25%
simulation (it is not signiﬁcant that the 25% case was chosen for this, and we believe that
the 33% system would have behaved in the same way).

In our procedure, we notionally divide our cubic cell into two parts, consisting of the left
region 0 < x < 0.4 and the right region 0.4 < x < 1.0 (x is the coordinate along one of the
edge directions in units of the cell length). The ﬁrst step is to sweep all the oxygen atoms
into the left region with an external force, so that this region contains something resembling
FeO, while the right region contains pure Fe. To achieve this, we apply a constant force
along the x-axis to all oxygen atoms lying in the right region. This force is in the positive
x direction for 0.7 < x < 1.0 and in the negative direction for 0.4 < x < 0.7. No force is
applied to the iron atoms, and these are left free to redistribute themselves. Initially, the
magnitude of the force was taken to be 1 eV/˚A, but since this proved to be too weak it
was increased to 3 eV/˚A. After ≈ 1 ps a complete phase separation was achieved, with all

oxygen atoms in the left region, and we let the system equilibrate with the external force
still present for a further 1 ps. We show in Fig. 7 a snapshot of one conﬁguration taken
from this period, which clearly shows the complete separation of phases. The external force
was then switched oﬀ and the system was allowed to evolve for a further 2 ps. Remarkably,
we found that after only 1 ps had elapsed the oxygen atoms became completely randomized
throughout the cell, as can be seen in the snapshot shown in in the lower part of Fig. 7.
To characterise these events quantitatively, we use the probability function PFeO(n, rc
FeO)
described in section 4.2. Fig. 8 shows this function calculated by averaging over three short
windows of 0.1 ps each, starting 0 ps , 0.5 ps and 1.0 ps after the external force was switched
oﬀ. The ﬁrst window shows a clear bimodal form, as would be expected for a two phase
system. (We note that because our system is rather small, many atoms are near the boundary
between the phases, so that the peaks in PFeO are not as sharp as they would probably be
in a larger system.) After 0.5 ps, the distribution has already become unimodal, and after
1 ps it is very similar to what we showed in Fig. 6 for the equilibrium 33% simulation. The
conclusion is clear: the system is not stable in the separated state and returns very quickly
to the homogeneous state.

In section 3 we have used the calculations on Fe/O crystals to show that phase stability in
high-temperature Fe/O systems might well be expected. In particular, we gave an example
of an Fe3O solid structure whose enthalpy of formation is only ≈ 1 eV. We have used our 25%
simulation to create another such structure. This was done simply by quenching the liquid
at the rate of 3000 K ps−1 until the atoms came to mechanical equilibrium in an amorphous
structure (this is clearly a local minimum of the total energy function). We can regard this
as a crystal with the Fe3O composition having an unusually large supercell. The calculated
enthalpy of formation of this solid at the pressure of 290 GPa is reported in the left panel of
Fig. 2, and we see that its stability is even greater that that of the BiI3 structure proposed
for Fe3O in section 3. This conﬁrms the idea that even more stable structures may yet be
found.

4.4 Dynamics

In studying the dynamical properties of the Fe/O liquid, our main concern is with the
viscosity. However, we ﬁrst give results for the atomic diﬀusion coeﬃcients Dα, which give a
simple way of characterising the motion of the atoms. These are straightforwardly calculated
from the mean square displacement of the atoms through the Einstein relation (Allen and
Tildesley, 1987):

1
Nα

h

Nα

Xi=1

|rαi(t0 + t) − rαi(t0)|2i → 6Dαt, as t → ∞,

(8)

where riα(t) is the position of the ith atom of species α at time t, Nα has its usual meaning,
and h·i is the thermal average, in practice evaluated by averaging over time origins t0. In
studying the long time behaviour of the mean square displacement, it is convenient to deﬁne
a time dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dα(t):

Dα(t) =

|rαi(t0 + t) − rαi(t0)|2i,

1
6tNα

h

Nα

Xi=1

which has the property that

t→∞ Dα(t) = Dα.
lim

(9)

(10)

In Fig. 9 we display the iron and the oxygen diﬀusion coeﬃcients calculated using Eq. (9).
From this data we estimate DFe ≈ 0.8 × 10−8 m2 s−1 and DO ≈ 1.0 × 10−8 m2 s−1. These
values should be compared with those obtained for pure liquid iron, DFe ≈ 0.4 − 0.5 × 10−8
m2 s−1 (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997; de Wijs, 1998), and those obtained for Fe and S in our Fe/S
simulation DFe ≈ 0.4 − 0.6 × 10−8 m2 s−1, and DS ≈ 0.4 − 0.6 × 10−8 m2 s−1 (Alf`e and Gillan,
1998a). This means that the two species of atoms in liquid Fe/O diﬀuse somewhat more
rapidly than the atoms in both liquid iron and the liquid Fe/S alloy at the same pressure
and temperature.

In the past, atomic diﬀusion coeﬃcients have often been used to estimate the viscosity
of liquids via the Stokes-Einstein relation, and this was the procedure used in our previ-
ous work on liquid Fe and Fe/S. Since the diﬀusion coeﬃcients are larger in the present
case, this procedure would lead us to expect a lower viscosity for liquid Fe/O. We have
recently demonstrated (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998b) that the viscosity can be more directly (and
more rigorously) calculated in ﬁrst-principles simulations using the Green-Kubo relations,
i.e. the relations between transport coeﬃcients and correlation functions involving ﬂuxes of
conserved quantities (Allen and Tildesley, 1987). The shear viscosity η is given by:

η =

∞

V
kBT Z

0

dthPxy(t0 + t)Pxy(t0)i,

(11)

where V is the volume of the system and Pxy is the oﬀ-diagonal component of the stress tensor
Pαβ (α and β are Cartesian components). The stress tensor is straightforwardly calculated,
so that the stress autocorrelation function (SACF) hPxy(t0 + t)Pxy(t0)i can also be obtained,
but at ﬁrst sight it might appear that very long simulations would be needed to gather
adequate statistical sampling. However, we have recently shown that perfectly adequate η
values can be obtained with surprisingly short runs, and we have reported results for liquid
aluminium and liquid Fe/S (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998b).

In the left panel of Fig. 10 we display the the average of the ﬁve independent components
of the traceless SACF divided by its value at t = 0 which we denote by φ(t). Since the
traceless part of the stress tensor has zero average, φ(t) goes to zero as t → ∞. The
statistical error on φ(t) for all values of t is ≈ 5% of the value at t = 0, and after 0.2 − 0.3
ps the magnitude of φ(t) falls below that error. In the right panel of Fig. 10 we display
0 dt′φ(t′) of φ(t) as a function of time. The limiting value of the integral for
t
the integral
t → ∞ is the shear viscosity. The error that one makes in evaluating that integral grows
R
with time, since one integrates the noise together with φ(t). We estimated the error in the
integral as a function of time using the scatter of the SACF’s. Combining this estimate
with an analytic expression for the error, we obtain the error estimate displayed in Fig. 10.
From the point where φ(t) falls below the noise one integrates only the latter, so one gains
nothing by evaluating the integral beyond that point. If we assume that φ(t) is zero above
t ≈ 0.3 ps, we obtain the value η = 4.5 ± 1.0 mPa s. This value is roughly half the value
reported earlier for liquid Fe (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997) and Fe/S (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998a) at ICB
conditions, and is not very much greater than the viscosity of typical liquid metals under
ambient conditions; for example, the viscosity of liquid aluminium at atmospheric pressure
100 K above its melting point is 1.25 mPa s (Shimoji and Itami, 1986).

This result conﬁrms our earlier conclusion (de Wijs et al., 1998) that the viscosity of the
outer core is towards the lower end of the wide range of theoretical and experimental values
reported in the literature.

4.5 Electronic structure

We have studied the electronic structure of our simulated Fe/O liquid in order to shed light
on the nature of the bonding between the atoms and to help to interpret the structure
discussed in section 4.2. The main tools used in this analysis are the electronic density of
states (DOS) and the local density of states (LDOS). The DOS represents the number of
electronic states per unit energy as a function of energy, while the LDOS is a projection of
the DOS onto states of chosen angular momentum on atoms of chosen species. In performing
this projection we took spherical regions of radius R on the atoms, and in practice we chose
R = 0.6 ˚A for both iron and oxygen. This R value is considerably smaller than half the
interatomic distance in the liquid (see Fig. 3), so we expect to distinguish clearly between
the electronic structures on diﬀerent atoms. The results are not averaged over time but are
calculated from the electronic energies and wavefunctions for selected time steps taken from
the 25% simulation.

The calculated DOS is shown in the upper panel of Fig. 11, and consists of four main
features (energies are referred to the Fermi energy): two fairly narrow peaks at −24 and
−11 eV; a large dominant peak spanning the range −9 eV to 3 eV; and a broad feature
extending well above the Fermi energy. The LDOS shown in the lower panel of the Figure
allows us to interpret these features. The peak at −24 eV consists entirely of O(2s) states.
The peak at −11 eV is mainly O(2p), but with an appreciable contribution of Fe(3d). The
dominant peak from −9 eV to 3 eV consists mainly of Fe(3d) states, but there is a signiﬁcant
peak associated with O(2p) states just above the Fermi energy. The broad feature above the
Fermi energy comes from both Fe(3d) and O(2p) states.

To see the implications of this structure for the interatomic bonding, we note that if
the O(2p) states were much lower in energy than the Fe(3d) states, there would be very
little hybridisation between the two kind of states, the O(2p) levels would be completely
ﬁlled, and the oxygen atoms would carry a net charge of −2|e|. The Fe-O bonding would
be ionic. On the other hand, if the O(2p) states were at the same energy as Fe(3d), we
should expect strong hybridisation and little charge transfer, so that the bonding would be
covalent. It is clear from Fig. 11 that the Fe-O bonding is intermediate between ionic and
covalent. The O(2p) states are below Fe(3d), but not low enough to suppress hybridisation.
There is a clear splitting of the O(2p) levels into bonding and anti-bonding orbitals, though
the bonding orbital clearly has much larger weight (in pure covalent bonding we should
expect the weights to be equal). The peak in Fe(3d) at −11 eV is also clear evidence for
hybridisation between O(2p) and Fe(3d). The implication is that there is a partial charge
transfer from Fe to O, but not enough to give oxygen a charge of −2|e|.

The bonding between Fe atoms is metallic. The partial ﬁlling of the Fe(3d) levels gives
the well known bonding mechanism emphasised by Friedel’s (1969) analysis of the cohesive
and elastic properties of transition metal crystals.

Since the oxygen atoms carry partial charges and their 2p orbitals are almost full, no
covalent bond is expected between them, and this is also clear from Fig. 3. To investigate
the electronic state of oxygen in more detail, we have calculated the LDOS for oxygen atoms
in diﬀerent environments. We show in Fig. 12 the LDOS for two oxygen atoms denoted Oa
and Ob, which have been chosen from the 25% simulation so that Oa has 10 Fe neighbours
and one O neighbour while Ob has seven Fe and four O neighbours.
If there were any
covalent bonding between O atoms, we should expect a larger bonding-antibonding splitting
of the 2p states for the Ob atoms than for Oa, and we might expect a similar splitting (or
at least a broadening) of the O(2s) states for Ob. The LDOS curves show neither of these
eﬀects. Instead, the main diﬀerence is the upward shift of the peaks for Ob compared with

Oa. We believe this is direct evidence for the partial charge transfer: the valence electrons
of Ob feel a repulsive electrostatic potential due to the partial negative charges on the four
oxygen neighbours, which raises their energy.

The main bonding mechanisms in the liquid are therefore the ionic-covalent Fe-O bond
and the metallic Fe-Fe bond. Since the O(2p) atomic orbitals are more compact than Fe(3d)
orbitals we expect the Fe-O distance to be shorter than the Fe-Fe distance, and this eﬀect is
clear from the rdf’s shown in Fig. 3. The partial charge transfer presumably also contributes
to the shortening of this distance.

5 Discussion

Two of our main aims in this paper have been to probe the phase stability of liquid Fe/O
under Earth’s core conditions, and to determine the oxygen concentration that would be
needed to reproduce the known core density.
In practice, these aims must be taken to-
gether: we want to know whether the alloy is thermodynamically stable at the appropriate
concentration.

The results we have presented leave little doubt that if the liquid is stable then the
mole fraction of oxygen must be in the region 25 − 30% (our best estimate is 28%), because
anything much less than this would give a pressure that is too low at the known density.
This is essentially the same as the value proposed many years ago by Ringwood (1977).
In judging the robustness of this conclusion we recall some important facts: First, DFT
electronic-structure methods of the type used here generally predict the density of materials
at a given pressure to within a few percent. Particularly relevant here are recent DFT
calculations (Stixrude et al., 1994; S¨oderlind et al., 1996; Voˇcadlo et al., 1997) on h.c.p. iron
over the pressure range 0 − 350 GPa which are in excellent agreement with each other and
with the experimental results. Similar comparisons for FeSi (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997) are also
relevant. DFT calculations on oxides (including transition-metal oxides) generally predict
the density with similar accuracy. A second important fact is that our earlier ﬁrst principles
simulations of pure liquid iron, based on exactly the same techniques, gave a prediction of
the density at the pressure of the inner core boundary which is correct to ≈ 2%. (In fact
the comparison was done the other way round: at the density of 13300 kg m−3 and the
temperature of 6000 K, our simulations gave a pressure of 358 GPa, compared with the
value of 330 GPa estimated from experimental data.) Third, our estimate of the oxygen
concentration is based on changes of pressure and density compared with our simulated pure
iron. The calculations should be even more reliable for these diﬀerences then they are for the
absolute values. We therefore believe that our value for the oxygen concentration required
should be subject to an error of no more that ≈ 5%.

It is interesting to compare the liquid composition with that for the case of Fe/S. In
our recent simulations (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998a), we showed that liquid Fe/S is not far from
reproducing the known pressure and density at the inner core boundary with a sulphur mole
fraction of 18%. At this composition, the mass density of 12330 kg m−3 gave a calculated
pressure of 349 ± 6 GPa. If we make a correction to bring the density to 12000 kg m−3, we
ﬁnd a sulphur mole fraction of 23%. This means that to achieve the required reduction in
density we actually need a higher mole fraction of oxygen than of sulphur, even though the
atomic mass of oxygen is only half that of sulphur. The reason is that the oxygen atom is
smaller, a point to which we return below.

The question of phase stability is more complex. What seems certain is that earlier
arguments against phase stability based on ab initio calculations of the energetics of Fe3O

and Fe4O crystals (Sherman, 1995) do not really deliver the intended conclusion. This is not
because the calculations were wrong. On the contrary, our calculations fully support their
correctness. It is simply that the crystal structures assumed were not the most stable. We
have presented an alternative structure for Fe3O which gives a formation enthalpy that is
low enough (≈ 1 eV) to make phase stability under core conditions quite plausible.

We have used our simulations to probe the phase stability of the Fe/O liquid in the appro-
priate region of concentration, and all the indications are that it is stable. We therefore fully
support the conclusion that has been drawn from high pressure experimental measurements
(Ohtani et al., 1984; Ringwood and Hibberson, 1990) that liquid Fe and FeO are miscible
under core conditions in the concentration region of interest. However, a word of caution is
in order. The fact is that our simulated systems are rather small, and it is quite conceiv-
able that a system that would be unstable in the thermodynamic limit could be stabilised
by the artiﬁcial periodic boundary conditions in small simulation cells. Nevertheless, our
calculations certainly provide strong support for the thermodynamic stability of liquid Fe/O
under core conditions at the relevant concentration. In the end, we believe that the deﬁnitive
theoretical approach to this question will be ﬁrst principles free energy calculations on the
appropriate solid and liquid phases. These would be computationally very demanding, but
should certainly be feasible in the near future. (First principles free energy calculations have
recently been used with success to calculate the melting properties of silicon and aluminium
(Sugino and Car, 1995; de Wijs et al., 1998).)

The small size of oxygen is clear from our analysis of the liquid structure: the Fe-O
nearest neighbour distance (the position of the ﬁrst peak in the rdf) is only at ≈ 1.7 ˚A,
compared with ≈ 2.1 ˚A for the Fe-Fe distance. We recall that in the Fe/S liquid, the Fe-S
distance was ≈ 1.95 ˚A (Alf`e and Gillan, 1998a). An important feature of the liquid is that
each oxygen has on average only 9 iron neighbours, whereas it has between 4 and 5 oxygen
neighbours. This atomic environment of oxygen is very diﬀerent from that produced by
the cubic structure of Fe3O. By contrast in the BiI3 structure of Fe3O oxygen has 11 iron
neighbours and 2 oxygen neighbours. The dilemma in making crystal structures for Fe/O
solid solutions at core pressures is that we want to achieve close packing because of the high
pressure, but the atoms that are being packed have diﬀerent sizes. It seems that the cubic
structure of Fe3O is not a good solution. The BiI3 structure is better, even though it means
putting oxygen atoms next each other. There may be yet better ways.

Our analysis of the electronic structure of the liquid gives further insight. Here, the
important feature is that Fe-O bonding is only partially ionic, with a substantial covalent
contribution. The implication that there is partial electron transfer from Fe to O is relevant,
because presumably if O carried a full ionic charge of −2|e| oxygen atoms would be more
reluctant to become neighbours of each other. The electronic structure shows that there is
no detectable covalent interaction between oxygens, so the fact that they become neighbours
cannot be attributed to covalency.

Finally, we have studied the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of iron and oxygen atoms and the viscos-
ity of the liquid at 33% composition. The ﬁnding is that both species diﬀuse more rapidly
than in either pure liquid iron or the liquid Fe/S alloy: the diﬀusion coeﬃcients have roughly
twice the value that they have in pure Fe and Fe/S at the same pressure and temperature.
We also ﬁnd that the viscosity of the Fe/O liquid is about half what it is in those other
systems. This means that if the major light element in the outer core was oxygen, our
earlier conclusion (de Wijs et al., 1998) about the low viscosity of the outer core would be
conﬁrmed, and indeed strengthened.

6 Conclusions

We are led to the following conclusions:
if the light impurity in the outer core is mainly
oxygen, then its molar concentration would have to be ≈ 28%; in this region of concentration,
we have strong evidence that the liquid is stable against phase separation; the proposed
miscibility is not in conﬂict with the large formation enthalpies predicted by earlier ab initio
calculations, because those calculations were based on assumed structures that are not the
most stable; the proposed Fe/O liquid alloy has an even lower viscosity than that of pure Fe
and the relevant Fe/S alloy under the same conditions.

Acknowledgments

The work of DA is supported by NERC grant GST/O2/1454 to G. D. Price and M. J. Gillan.
We thank the High Performance Computing Initiative for allocations of time on the Cray T3D
and T3E at Edinburgh Parallel Computer Centre, these allocations being provided through
the Minerals Physics Consortium (GST/02/1002) and the U.K. Car-Parrinello Consortium.
We thank Dr. G. Kresse and Dr. G. de Wijs for valuable technical assistance, and Dr. L.
Voˇcadlo and Dr. D. Sherman for useful discussions. We thank Dr. W. Temmerman for useful
advice about the LMTO-46 code, and the Psi-k Network for making the code available.

References

Alder, B. J., 1966. Is the mantle soluble in the core? J. Geophys. Res., 71: 4973-4979.

Alf`e, D., and Gillan, M. J., 1998a. First principles simulations of liquid Fe-S under Earth’s core
conditions. Phys. Rev. B, in press.

Alf`e, D., and Gillan, M. J., 1998b. The ﬁrst principles calculation of transport coeﬃcient. Phys.
Rev. Lett., submitted.

Allen, M. P., Tildesley, D. J., 1987. Computer Simulation of Liquids. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.

Bhatia, A. B., Thornton, D. E., 1970. Structural aspects of the electrical resistivity of binary alloys.
Phys. Rev. B, 2: 3004-3012.

Birch, F., 1952. Elasticity and composition of the Earth’s interior. J. Geophys. Res., 57: 227-286.

Birch, F., 1964. Density and composition of mantle and core. J. Geophys. Res., 69: 4377-4388.

Boehler, R., 1993. Temperature in the Earth’s core from melting-point measurements of iron at
high static pressures. Nature. 363: 534-536.

Bullen, K. E., 1973. Cores of terrestrial planets. Nature, 243: 68-70.

Car, R., and Parrinello, M., 1985. Uniﬁed approach for molecular-dynamics and density-functional
theory. Phys. Rev. Lett., 55: 2471-2474.

Clark, S. P., 1963. Variation of density in the Earth and the melting curve in the mantle. In: The
Earth Sciences, edited by T. W. Donnelly, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Distin, P. A., Whiteway S., and Masson, C., 1971. Solubility of oxygen in liquid iron from 1785o
to 1960o. A new technique for the study of slag-metal equilibria. Canad. Metallurg. Quart., 10:
13-18.

Dubrovskiy, V. A. and Pan’kov, V. L., 1972. On the composition of the Earth’s core. Acad. Sci.
USSR Phys. Solid Earth, 7: 452-455.

Fischer, W. A., and Schumacher, J. F., 1978. Die S¨attigungsl¨oslichkeit von Reineisen an Saurstoﬀ
vom Schmelzpunkt bis 2046o C, ermittelt mit dem Schwebeschmelzverfahren. Arch. Eisenh¨uttenwes.,
49: 431-435.

Friedel, J., 1969. Fundamental aspects in the bonding of transition metals. In: The Physics of
Metals, ed. J. Ziman, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 494 pp.

Fukai, Y., and Akimoto, S., 1983. Hydrogen in the Earth’s core. Proc. Jpn. Acad., Ser. B, 59:
158-162.

Gillan, M. J., 1997. The virtual matter laboratory. Contemp. Phys., 38: 115-130.

Goarant, F., Guyot, F., Peyronneau, J., and Poirier, J.-P., 1992. High-pressure and high-temperature
reactions between silicates and liquid iron alloys in the diamond anvil cell, studied by analytical
electron microscopy. J. Geophys. Res., 97: 4477-4487.

Hohenberg, P., and Kohn, W., 1964. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev. 136: B864-B871.

Holender, J. M., and Gillan, M. J., 1996. Composition dependence of the structure and electronic
properties of liquid Ga-Se alloys studied by ab initio molecular dynamics simulation. Phys. Rev.
B, 53: 4399.

Jones, R. O., and Gunnarsson, O., 1989. The density functional formalism, its applications and
prospects. Rev. Mod. Phys., 61: 689-746.

Kirchhoﬀ, F., Holender, J. M., and Gillan, M. J., 1996a. The structure, dynamics and electronic
structure of liquid Ag-Se alloys investigated by ab initio simulation. Phys. Rev. B, 54: 190-202.

Kirchhoﬀ, F., Gillan, M. J., Holender, J. M., Kresse, G., and Hafner, J., 1996b. Structure and
bonding in liquid Se. J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 8: 9353-9357.

Knittle, E., Jealnoz, R., 1991. Earth’s core-mantle boundary: results of experiments at high
pressures and temperatures. Science, 251: 1438-1443.

Kohn, W., and Sham, L., 1965. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation eﬀects.
Phys. Rev. 140: A1133-A1138.

Kresse, G., and Hafner, J., 1993. Ab-initio molecular-dynamics for open-shell transition-metals.
Phys. Rev. B, 48: 13115-13118.

Kresse, G., and Furthm¨uller, J., 1996a. Eﬃciency of ab-initio total-energy calculations for metals
and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis-set. Comput. Mater. Sci., 6: 15-50.

Kresse, G., and Furthm¨uller, J., 1996b. Eﬃcient iterative schemes for ab-initio total-energy calcu-
lations using a plane-wave basis-set. Phys. Rev. B, 54: 11169-11186.

Krier, G., Jepsen, O., Burkhardt, A., and Andersen, O. K., 1994. LMTO-46 code, Max-Planck-
Institut f¨ur Festk¨orperforschung, Stuttgart.

Lewis, J. S., 1973. Chemistry of the planets. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 24: 339-351.

Louie, S. G., Froyen, S., and Cohen, M. L., 1982. Non-linear ionic pseudopotentials in spin-density-
functional calculations. Phys. Rev. B, 26: 1738-1742.

MacDonald, G. J. F., and Knopoﬀ, L., 1958. The chemical composition of the outer core. J.
Geophys., 1: 1751-1756.

Mao, H. K., Wu, Y., Chen, L. C., Shu, J. F., and Jephcoat, A. P., 1990. Static compression of iron
to 300 GPa and Fe0.8Ni0.2 alloy to 260 GPa: implications for composition of the core. J. Geophys.
Res., 95: 21737-21742.

Mason, B., 1966. Composition of the Earth. Nature, 211: 616-618.

Monkhorst, H. J., and Pack, J. D., 1976. Special points for Brillouin-zone integrations. Phys. Rev.
B, 13: 5188-5192.

Murthy, V., and Hall, H. T., 1970. On the possible presence of sulfur in the Earth’s core. Phys.
Earth Planet. Inter., 2: 276-282.

Nos´e, S., 1984. A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemble. Molec.
Phys., 52: 255-268.

Ohtani, E., and Ringwood, A. E., 1984 Composition of the core, I. Solubility of oxygen in molten
iron at high temperatures. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 71: 85-93.

Ohtani, E., Ringwood, A. E. and Hibberson, W., 1984. Composition of the core, II. Eﬀect of high
pressure on solubility of FeO in molten iron. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 71: 94-103.

Parr, R. G., and Yang, W., 1989. Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Poirier, J.-P., 1991.
Press, Cambridge.

Introduction to the Physics of the Earth’s Interior. Cambridge University

Poirier, J.-P., 1994. Light elements in the Earth’s outer core: A critical review. Phys. Earth
Planet. Interiors. 85: 319-337.

Pulay, P., 1980. Convergence acceleration of iterative sequences. The case of SCF iteration. Chem.
Phys. Lett., 73: 393.

Ringwood, A. E., 1959. On the chemical evolution and densities of the planets. Geochem. J., 15:
257-283.

Ringwood, A. E., 1961. Silicon in the metal phase of enstatite chondrites and some geochemical
implications. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 25: 1-13.

Ringwood, A. E., 1966. Chemical evolution of the terrestrial planets. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta,
30: 41-104.

Ringwood, A. E., 1977. On the composition of the core and implications for the origin of the Earth.
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 11: 111-135.

Ringwood, A. E., and Hibberson, W., 1990. The system Fe-FeO revisited. Phys. Chem. Minerals,
17: 313-319.

Secco, R. A. 1995. Viscosity of the Outer Core.
Handbook of Physical Constants, ed. T. J. Ahrens, Americal Geophysical Union, 218 pp.

In: Mineral Physics and Crystallography: A

Sherman, D. M., 1995. Stability of possible Fe-FeS and Fe-FeO alloy phases at high pressure and
the composition of the Earth’s core. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 132: 87-98.

Shimoji, M., and Itami, T., 1986. Atomic Transport in Liquid Metals, Trans Tech Publications,
Aedermannsdorf, p. 191.

S¨oderlind, P., Moriarty, J. A., and Wills, J. M., 1996. First principles theory of iron up to the
Earth’s core pressures: Structural, vibrational, and elastic properties. Phys. Rev. B, 53: 14063-
14072.
ˇStich, I., Car, R., and Parrinello, M., 1989. Bonding and disorder in liquid silicon. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 63: 2240-2243.

Stixrude, L., Cohen, R. E., and Singh, D. J., 1994. Iron at high pressure: Linearized-augmented-
plane-wave computation in the generalized-gradient approximation. Phys. Rev. B, 50: 6442-6445.

Sugino, O., and Car, R., 1995. Ab-initio molecular-dynamics study of ﬁrst-order phase-transitions.
Melting of silicon. Phys. Rev. Lett., 74: 1823-1826.

Suzuki, T., Akimoto S., and Yagi, T., 1989. Metal-silicate-water reaction under high pressure, I,
Formation of metal hydride and implications for composition of the core and mantle. Phys. Earth
Planet. Inter., 56: 377-388.

Urey, H. C., 1960. On the chemical evolution and densities of the planets. Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta, 18: 151-153.

Vanderbilt, D., 1990. Soft self-consistent pseudopotentials in a generalized eigenvalue formalism.
Phys. Rev. B, 41: 7892-7895.

Verlet, L., 1967. Computer ‘experiments’ on classical ﬂuids. I. Thermodynamical properties of
Lennard-Jones molecules. Phys. Rev., 159: 98-103.

Voˇcadlo, L., de Wijs, G. A., Kresse, G., Gillan, M. J., and Price, G. D., 1997. First principles
calculations on crystalline and liquid iron at earth’s core conditions. Faraday Discuss., 106: 205-217.

Wang, Y., and Perdew, J., 1991. Correlation hole of the spin-polarized electron gas, with exact
small-wave-vector and high-density scaling. Phys. Rev. B, 44: 13298-13307.

de Wijs, G. A., Kresse, G., and Gillan, M. J., 1998. First order phase transitions by ﬁrst-principles
free energy calculations: The melting of Al. Phys. Rev. B, 57: 8223-8234.

de Wijs, G. A., Kresse, G., Voˇcadlo, L., Dobson, D., Alf`e, D., Gillan, M. J., Price, G. D., 1998.
The viscosity of liquid iron at the physical conditions of the Earth’s core. Nature, 392: 805-807.

Wood, B. J. 1993. Carbon in the core. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 117: 593-607.

Wyckoﬀ, R. W. G., 1964. Crystal Structures, 2nd edition, Vol. 2, Interscience, New York.

PP(spin-unrestricted) PP(spin-restricted)

8910
283
4.39

5650
92
4.96
2.0

6500
123
4.23
2.34

6880
135
4.82
2.0

Fe(ǫ)

FeO(B8)

Fe3O(cubic)

Fe4O

Fe3O(BiI3)

ρ0
K
K ′

ρ0
K
K ′
µ

ρ0
K
K ′
µ

ρ0
K
K ′
µ

ρ0
K
K ′

FLAPW
8780
260
4.53

5810
173
2.93
not reported

7420
223
4.02
small

7830
310
4.17

8910
283
4.39

6980
258
4.4

7550
226
4.04

7840
273
4.26

7930
248
4.29

Table 1: Calculated equilibrium properties of crystals in the Fe/O system: equilibrium
mass density ρ0 (kg m−3), bulk modulus K (GPa), the pressure derivative K ′ = dK/dP ,
and magnetic moment per atom µ (units of Bohr magneton). Results are given for the
present spin unrestricted and restricted pseudopotential (PP) calculations and the FLAPW
calculations of Sherman (1995). The structures of the cubic Fe3O, Fe4O and BiI3-structure
Fe3O are shown in Fig. 1.

Volume (˚A3) Pressure (GPa)

22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36

467
325
226
156
105
67
40
19

b/a
1.01016
1.00988
1.01010
1.00772
1.00574
0.99711
0.99452
0.99193

c/a
0.95443
0.95322
0.95164
0.94984
0.94874
0.94465
0.94303
0.94258

α
123.76
123.82
123.85
123.89
123.85
123.82
123.76
123.57

β
90.70
90.88
91.03
91.26
91.39
91.79
91.97
91.98

γ
79.04
78.79
78.55
78.28
78.07
77.69
77.37
76.95

Table 2: Cell parameters and pressure P of Fe3O in the BiI3 structure (see Fig. 1) calculated
at a series of volumes (per Fe3O unit). The quantities a, b, c are the magnitudes of the
primitive translation vectors, and α, β, γ are the angles between the pairs (a, b), (a, c) and
(b, c) respectively.

Figure captions

Fig. 1: The crystal structures of cubic Fe3O (left), cubic Fe4O (centre) and the BiI3 form of
Fe3O (right) used to calculate the formation enthalpies of Fe/O solid solutions. Large and
small spheres represent iron and oxygen respectively.

Fig. 2: Calculated enthalpies of formation (per formula unit) of solid solutions having com-
positions Fe3O and Fe4O. Left panel shows spin-restricted results from present work com-
pared with FLAPW results of Sherman (1995); right panel shows present spin-unrestricted
,
results. Key to style of curves: present cubic Fe3O
present cubic Fe4O
, present Fe3O in the BiI3
structure
. The isolated point shows formation enthalpy of the amorphous structure
obtained by quenching the liquid (see Sec. 4).

, cubic Fe4O of Sherman (1995)

, cubic Fe3O of Sherman (1995)

Fig. 3: Radial distribution functions gαβ(r) obtained from simulation of liquid Fe/O at
oxygen molar concentration of 33%.

Fig. 4: The iron-iron radial distribution function gFeFe(r) from the present simulation of
liquid Fe/O (oxygen molar concentration of 33%) compared with gFeFe(r) from simulation of
pure liquid iron at similar pressure and temperature (Voˇcadlo et al., 1997).

Fig. 5: Partial structure factors Sαβ(k) calculated from simulation of liquid Fe/O at oxygen
molar concentration of 33%.

Fig. 6: Probability distribution PFeO(n, rc
atom calculated from simulation of liquid Fe/O at oxygen molar concentration of 33%.

FeO) for number n of oxygen neighbours of an iron

Fig. 7: Snapshots of the simulated liquid Fe/O system along three principal Cartesian axes.
Top three panels show a conﬁguration from the period when phase separation was artiﬁcially
induced by application of an external force. Bottom three panels show a conﬁguration from
the later period after removal of the external force. Large and small spheres represent iron
and oxygen respectively.

Fig. 8: Probability distribution PFeO(n, rc
FeO) for number n of oxygen neighbours of an
iron atom calculated from simulation of liquid Fe/O at oxygen molar concentration of 25%.
Results are average values for three windows of length 0.1 ps at times of 0 ps, 0.5 ps and 1
ps after removal of the external force used to induce phase separation.

Fig. 9: Time dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcients Dα(t) for iron and oxygen calculated from the
simulation of liquid Fe/O at oxygen molar concentration of 33%.

Fig. 10: Average over the ﬁve independent components of the autocorrelation function
of the traceless stress tensor φ(t) (left panel) and viscosity integral (solid curve) with its
statistical error (dashed curve) (right panel).

Fig. 11: Electronic density of states (upper panel) and local densities of states (lower panel)
calculated for liquid Fe/O at oxygen molar concentration of 25%. Energy is referred to the
Fermi energy Ef .

Fig. 12: Local densities of states for two selected oxygen atoms taken from the simulation
of liquid Fe/O at oxygen molar concentration of 25%. Atom Oa has 1 oxygen neighbour
and 10 iron neighbours; atom Ob has 4 oxygen neighbours and 7 iron neighbours. Energy is
referred to the Fermi energy Ef .

FIGURE 1

)

V
e
(
 
y
p
a
h
t
n
E

l

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

FIGURE 2

)

V
e
(
 
y
p
a
h
t
n
E

l

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350

0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350

Pressure (GPa)

Pressure (GPa)

)
r
(
g

3

2

1

0

0

FIGURE 3

Fe-Fe
Fe-O 
O -O 

1

2

o

r(A

)

3

FIGURE 4

Fe/O alloy
pure Fe 

1

2

o

r(A

)

3

)
r
(
g

3

2

1

0

0

FIGURE 5

Fe-Fe
O -O 
Fe-O 

r
o
t
c
a
f
 
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t

S

1.5

0.5

2

1

0

-0.5

-1

0

2

4

6

8

10

k(A-1)

FIGURE 6

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
n

FIGURE 7

FIGURE 8

0.0 ps
0.5 ps
1.0 ps

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
n

FIGURE 9

Fe
O 

)

1
-
s
2

m

i

8
-
0
1
(
 
s
t
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
o
c
 
n
o
s
u
f
f
i

i

D

1.5

0.5

1

0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
time(ps)

0.8

l

n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
r
o
c
o
t
u
a
 
s
s
e
r
t

S

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

FIGURE 10

)
s
 
a
P
m

(
 
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
V

i

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Time (ps)

Time (ps)

FIGURE 11

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)

V
e
/
s
e
t
a
t
s
(
 

S
O
D

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 

S
O
D
L

0
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

E - Ef (eV)

O 2s
O 2p
Fe 3d

0
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

E - Ef (eV)

FIGURE 12

Oa

Ob

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 

S
O
D
L

0
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

E - Ef (eV)

