9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Some Wave–related, Heavy Mineral Placer Deposits

S. J. Childs
Department of Pure and Applied Mathematics, Rhodes University, Grahamstown,

F.A. Shillington
Department of Physical Oceanography, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch,

6140, South Africa

7701, South Africa

Abstract

Examples of heavy mineral placer deposits are presented in which wave reﬂection,
refraction, diﬀraction and resonance would appear to have played a major con-
centrating role. Their geometry is compared with the computer generated patterns
predicted for the reﬂection, refraction and diﬀraction of surface waves moving over
fairly simple, idealised bathymetries. Much of this work is founded on the idea that
similar sediments document equivalent (or once equivalent) ﬂow–tractional envi-
ronments.

Most of the examples could be satisfactorily explained in this fashion. It may there-
fore be possible to ignore the exact physics of the boundary layer, longshore and
tidal return currents etc. at the scale on which these examples occur, leaving the
way open for the qualitative use of results obtained using the likes of the mild slope
wave equation. A “Monte Carlo” approach based on wave induced tractions should
therefore succeed in elucidating presently known heavy mineral placer deposits and,
consequently, in predicting other deposits which remain as yet undiscovered.

Keywords: placer deposits; heavy minerals; waves; refraction; diﬀraction; reﬂection; in-
terference; standing waves; resonance

1 Introduction

Examples of heavy mineral placer deposits in which wave reﬂection, refraction, diﬀraction
and resonance would appear to have played a major concentrating role, and in which it
is believed a “Monte Carlo” approach based on wave induced tractions would work,
are presented in this paper. Some general factors thought to be instrumental in the
formation of heavy mineral placer deposits are listed, and a brief description is given

1

2

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

of the oceanographical context in which examples occur oﬀ the west coast of Southern
Africa.

The description of each example includes sonographs, a contour map, and some possi-
ble formational mechanisms. Relevant diagrams, detail or geological interpretation is
also sometimes given. Much of this work is founded on the idea that similar sediments
document equivalent (or once equivalent) ﬂow–tractional environments.

Sorted sediments often form distinctive patterns on the sea bed. These sometimes take
the form of radiating gravel lenses around islands or other positive topographic features.
Other patterns are sometimes associated with the leeward side of these positive topo-
graphic features. Successive gravel lenses in parallel formation may occur at the base of
submarine cliﬀs. Many variations and combinations of these themes do, however, also
occur. Sonographs of examples, in which a diﬀerence in sediment type is visible, ap-
pear in Section 4. These features are discernible due to a pronounced diﬀerence in the
acoustic properties of the sediments. A signiﬁcantly larger number of intricate sediment
distribution patterns are not visible.

Heavy mineral placers are well documented (eg. Hallam (1989), and Murray et al.
(1970)) examples and of particular economic interest. Phosphatic gravels, metamorphic
garnet, diamond, kimberlitic garnet and sometimes even ilmenite, all rocks and minerals
of similar hydrodynamic character1 but from a diverse range of source environments are
consistently associated. A microcosm of hydrodynamic zonation can sometimes even be
recognised within these sediments. For example ﬂatter, higher surface area macles gener-
ally experience greater tractions and are consequently often more amenable to longshore
transport. (This oversimpliﬁcation is, of course, not always applicable as mobilisation is
also dependent on the reactive angle, bed roughness etc.)

The degree of hydrodynamic sorting, sometimes enrichment, and yet the diverse environ-
ments of origin represented in these sediments, undoubtedly suggest they were concen-
trated by physical processes. An apparent correlation between these accumulations and
regions where one could expect to ﬁnd energetically similar wave conditions, appears to
exist. For instance, the radiating gravel lenses coincide with a given wave refraction pat-
tern in the vicinity of islands. The successive parallel lenses are often an integer multiple
of an expected wavelength apart, suggesting reﬂection and resonance oﬀ submarine cliﬀs.
The heavy mineral placers are often associated with caustics of a certain energy.

Such interference probably occurs everywhere but is only apparent in sonographs where
there is an accoustic diﬀerence in sediment type. In rather special instances, where the
traction in caustics etc. exceeds the threshold required to mobilise the overlying, ﬁne
sediment sheet, yet is not suﬃcient to strip coarser, underlying sediments and thereby
expose the bedrock, these phenomena become visible to the naked eye in sonographs. The
accretion of bands of coarse terrigenous sediment at a spacing one half the wavelength of
the prevailing wave climate is yet another phenomenon frequently observed.

The quality of the descriptive material unfortunately varies and some of the formational

1the total hydrodynamic eﬀect of the sediment grain’s combined density, volume, shape/surface area

etc.

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

3

mechanisms proposed are somewhat speculative, consequently requiring a certain amount
of patience and vision from the reader.

2 Factors Possibly Contributing to the Formation of

Heavy Mineral Placer Deposits

Many of the phenomena presently listed can be explained in terms of a modiﬁcation to
the onshore–oﬀshore traction proﬁle (two such proﬁles are depicted in Fig. 1 on page 16).
All established wave theories predict an inverse correlation between traction on the sea
bed and depth up until the point of breaking. This, somewhat simplistic, deduction is
based on the components of the stress tensor, calculated for each theory according to the
constitutive relation for a Newtonian ﬂuid. It is on this basis that the “cartoon” traction
proﬁle (featured twice in Fig. 1) is proposed. The proﬁle suggests the possibility of
twin concentrations, one onshore and more deposition related, the other lagging oﬀshore,
more extraction related. The onshore grouping together of higher surface area macles
which are more amenable to transport2, separate from oﬀshore, highly concentrated gem
deposits would be an example of such twin deposits.

2.1 The Signiﬁcance of Marine Transgression

The wave induced, shoreward motion of sediment (remembering that orbitals are not
perfectly closed in reality) is in the same direction as the migration of the shoreline
during transgressive periods. Marine transgressions can therefore be expected to collect
and sort sediment from a considerable area before ﬁnally concentrating it. By a converse
argument regressive marine sequences might be expected to have a relatively distributive
eﬀect on shelf sediments.

Marine transgressions are characterised by thin, discontinuous stratigraphic units and
erosional surfaces. It is signiﬁcant that sorted sediment concentrations, especially heavy
mineral placers, arise as a result of the selective removal of particles of a certain hydro-
dynamic character as well as the selective deposition of others.

2.2 Gently Sloping Bathymetry

A gently oﬀshore–sloping bathymetry makes a far greater area susceptible to an erosional
range of tractions, hence a greater source area is susceptible to extraction.

2Traction is measured in units of force per unit area.

4

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

2.3 Wave Converging Bathymetry

Wave convergent bathymetry focuses and conﬁnes material extracted from a larger than
usual source area. Refraction also results in a far greater range and zonation of wave
energy thereby concentrating a greater range of sediments in speciﬁc hydrodynamic zones.

2.4

Interference Phenomena in General

Refraction, diﬀraction, reﬂection, caustic interference, resonance and the interaction with
longshore and rip currents are all potential mechanisms which favour the concentration
of heavy minerals. They also result in a far greater range and zonation of wave energy,
concentrating a greater range of sediments in speciﬁc hydrodynamic zones. Refraction is
possibly most signiﬁcant as a sediment concentrating process.

2.5 A “Half Wavelength” Eﬀect

Bands of coarse terrigenous sediment regularly accrete at a spacing half the wavelength
of the prevailing wave climate. Bands of the type described can be seen in Fig. 10 in
the caustic zone associated with the submerged canyon head (on the north–western side
of it) as well as in the vicinity of the other fragmented canyon head (just south–west of
Deposit 2). This phenomenon is easily understood if one considers that the horizontal
orbital velocity vanishes twice within one wavelength. The particle path and streamline
diagrams for a sinusoidal progressive wave in Fig. 2 (after Kinsman (1965)) illustrate well
what is described. Only the sweeps and outward interactions are thought to be signiﬁcant
in the bedload transport of coarse terrigenous material (see the accoustic measurements
of Williams et al. (1989)) and so–called “half wavelength” phenomena are thought
to form consequently.

Naturally, one would anticipate the proposed phenomenon to occur in the context of
standing waves, resonance etc. only. Statistical properties of the near–bottom velocity
ﬁeld would otherwise not vary in the along–propagation direction. The “half wavelength”
phenomena are indeed usually associated with bathymmetries suggestive of standing
waves and resonance. An alternative formational mechanism is a change in the harmonic
induced by the propagation of waves over an abrupt, downward step. The orientation of
the bands relative to the prevailing swell direction suggests, however, that this is not the
case. Some kind of Bragg eﬀect can also not be totally ruled out.

This process may well have been operative in other of the examples in Section 4 (in which
case they will have been mistakenly attributed to waves of a far shorter wavelength than
those supposed in terms of this “half wavelength” eﬀect).

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

5

2.6 Bed Roughness

Potholes, gulleys, benches etc. can be signiﬁcant in trapping heavy minerals in a dynamic,
high energy state equilibrium. The recognition of bed roughness as an independent
factor is in some ways a scale distinction, although turbulence and other boundary layer
processes are almost certainly more signiﬁcant in such instances. The ﬁnite element
simulation of the motion of a rigid body in a ﬂuid with free surface described (Childs
and Reddy (1998)) is better suited to dealing with such complications, although the
ﬂuid model still needs to be adapted for turbulence.

3 Sedimentation on the West Coast of Southern Africa

Sea levels on the west coast of Southern Africa have ﬂuctuated over a vertical range in
excess of one kilometre in recent geological times (Kennett (1982)). Fairly long periods
in which the sea level remained constant are documented by submarine cliﬀs, drowned
beaches, ancient wave cut platforms and various other relict features (eg. the cliﬀs which
occur around sixty metres below the present sea level, but many other examples exist,
both above and below present sea level). Lesser stillstands are documented by less signif-
icant “notches”. The cliﬀs are occasionally interrupted by canyons which mark the path
of ancient watercourses.
It is these ancient watercourses which introduced the heavy
minerals to then low–lying areas, in what is now the sea. The ancient watercourses and
canyons therefore demarcate the original source areas where terrigenous sediment was
introduced to the sea. They also give rise to unusual topographic features which are
conducive of wave refraction, diﬀraction, reﬂection and resonance.

The ancient river terraces were subsequently reworked by the sea so that the terrigenous
sediments have come to lie on the last surface of unconformity in their present state.
These sediments are often presently found trapped against submarine cliﬀs (or lesser
notches) and have been re–concentrated by wave related phenomena (eg.
refraction,
reﬂection, diﬀraction and resonance) associated with the submarine canyons and other
topographic features in the nearby vicinity. Modern day beaches and other sediment
formations indicate a predominantly south westerly incident swell direction (although
de Decker (1988), suggests a more southerly direction – probably the case in deeper
water before refraction begins) and the coarse terrigenous sediments are normally found
concentrated on the north eastern to northern side of positive topographic features.

The sediments on the west coast of Southern Africa form a typically ﬁning–upward trans-
gressive sequence (Birch et al. (1991)). Present–day shelf sediments may be divided
into two main facies for the purposes of interpreting the side scan sonographs on pages
to follow.

Facies 1: Fine, marine fallout consisting mainly of pelagic ooze, shells, marine detritus
etc. Due to its absorbent nature and ooze–like consistency this mud is not a good reﬂector
of sound and consequently appears white in sonographs. This facies forms a highly mobile
blanket overlying much of the bottom and is mobilised during storm periods (this fact is

6

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

evident from side–scan sonographs of the same area taken before and after storms).

Facies 2: Coarse megarippled sediments (frequently hidden by facies 1) are better reﬂec-
tors of sound due to the larger, more deﬁnite and harder surfaces of constituent grains.
They are characterised by megaripples which are usually of the order of one to two metres
apart and have heights in the region of one metre. They frequently lend a ﬁnger–print
like appearance to the coarse terrigenous sediment features in sonographs eg. Figs. 7
and 6.

Facies 3: Underlying bedrock is the most reﬂective and casts jagged, white shadows.
This normally lends an enhanced three–dimensional eﬀect to bedrock in sonographs.

Frequent scours through ﬁne, overlying, marine detrital sediments demarcate zones of
higher traction on the sea bed, exposing underlying, coarse, terrigenous sediments, alter-
natively bedrock. The characteristic shapes of these scours suggest many were formed in
caustic zones. One might imagine that such interference occurs far more frequently than
the instances discernable in sonographs, the instances in which there is a diﬀerence in
the accoustic properties of the sediments.

4 Examples of Wave–related Placer Deposits

Sonographs of four areas in which sediments have formed distinctive patterns on the sea
bed follow. Relevant topography and a proposed mechanism of formation is included in
the discussion of these areas. Special detail and geological interpretation is provided in
some cases.

Interpreting Sonographs

Sonographs are “pictures” based on the intensity of echos, or reﬂected sound. Highly
reﬂective surfaces appear dark and absorbant material or “shadows” appear white. In
particular, sidescan sonographs are derived from a repetitive series of scans, taken along
narrow beams perpendicular to the path of a combined source/receiver, as it is towed
above the area of interest. The sonographs presented here are collages of those sidescan
tracks.

The ﬁrst rule to interpreting what results might therefore be to regard the sonograph
as the negative of a ﬂoodlit terrain illuminated by rows of ﬂoodlights. In practice the
tow ﬁsh is never successfully towed at a constant height above the sea bed, or along
a perfectly straight line. The magniﬁcation, overlap and intensity of individual tracks
within the sidescan sonar collages consequently varies and the tracks often required to
severe buckling and smoothing over when being glued down. The technology required to
edit and arrange sonographs, maps and diagrams was, unfortunately, also far from ideal
at the time of collection.

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

7

4.1 Deposit 1 (Figs. 3, 5, 6 and 7)

The sonograph in Fig. 3 shows ﬁne, marine fallout sediments to have been removed by
waves, alternatively, deposition has been prevented, concentrating the coarser, terrige-
nous gravel in parallel zones of high traction near the base of a submarine cliﬀ. The
associated bathymetry appears in Fig. 5. These particular zones of high traction are
believed to be the result of reﬂection and refraction, oﬀ and around submarine cliﬀs. A
schematic overlay outlining the processes presently proposed is given in Fig. 4.

Reﬂection: Inferred wave reﬂection oﬀ the three steepest regions of the cliﬀ (clearly
visible in Fig. 5) is particularly strong, giving rise to the crescentic gravel patches visible
in Fig. 3. Reﬂection oﬀ the remainder of the north west facing slope is not as pronounced
and gives rise only to long, thin, parallel streamers. Careful examination of the sonograph
Figure 3 reveals a total of four parallel gravel lenses orientated perpendicular to the north
west, although one is not as pronounced as the others. The distance between the parallel
lenses averages approximately one hundred and twenty three metres.
If it is assumed
that the bottom features are caused by reﬂected surface waves which have the same
wavelength as the spacing between the gravel features, the dispersion relation for small
amplitude Airy waves in water of intermediate depth1,

can be used to determine the period, where λ is the wavelength, T the period, d the
depth and g the gravitational constant.

λ =

tanh

gT 2
2π

2πd
λ !

,

 

λ ≈ 123m ⇒ T ≈ 2
v
u
u
t

= 8.93 seconds.

2π × 123
9.81 × tanh( 2π50
123 )

It is signiﬁcant that typical average wave periods for this area are quoted as being a
similar value (de Decker (1988)).
It is therefore reasonable to expect that parts of
the gravel outline could visibly be seen to have been modiﬁed where successive scans
overlap given that the rough scale analysis is correct. One such deﬁnite alteration to the
sediment was discernible in successive overlapping tracks, suggesting that sedimentation
was active at the time the sonographs were taken.

Refraction: The entire set of parallel lenses is thought to be contained within a zone of
high wave energy, or modulated envelope, attributed to the refraction of surface waves
about topography lying to the south of that depicted (c.f. the shaded regions in Figure
14). The bottom traction due to incoming waves interfering with reﬂected waves would
be enhanced as it entered the high energy zone attributed to refraction. The entire modu-
lated envelope containing the reﬂected gravel feature (or at very least, that part occurring
in deeper water) is considered a typical refraction feature associated with submarine cliﬀs
to the south of the area depicted. Kinks and necking in some parts of the gravel feature
bear a resemblance to those in the shaded regions in the refraction feature in Fig. 14.

1Intermediate depth is deﬁned as a depth deeper than one twentieth, but shallower than half a

wavelength – Le M´ehaut´e (1976)

8

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

Mega-ripples: Striations visible within the coarse terrigenous material (see Figs. 6
and 7) are megaripples with an amplitude of approximately one metre and a wavelength
of between one and two metres apart. They are a characteristic feature of the coarse
terrigenous sediments and form perpendicular to the prevailing wave direction.

The orientation of the megaripples within the gravels, the orientation of the entire
reﬂection–related feature (both long streamers and crecentic patches) and the orienta-
tion of the proposed, refraction–related, modulated envelope relative to the cliﬀs, are all
consistent with a prevailing south westerly swell direction.

Alternative Formational Processes: Current schools of thought pertaining to the
orientation of megaripples oppose the idea that the feature is the result of resonance
and caustics formed by waves propagating over the cliﬀs from the south (assuming the
megaripples were not superimposed by a diﬀerent wave condition). A formational mech-
anism whereby waves are reﬂected simplistically into shallower water would entail an
incident wave angle which is improbable and there would also then be no obvious expla-
nation why the feature does not repeat itself closer to the base of the submarine cliﬀ.

4.2 Deposits 2 and 3 (Figs. 8, 9 and 10)

In Figs. 8 and 9 ﬁne, marine fallout sediments and silt would once again appear to
have been removed, alternatively, deposition prevented, in wave–induced zones of high
traction, leaving a “window” into coarser, terrigenous material. A “cartoon” of the
associated bathymetry and geological interpretation for both can be found in Fig. 10
(the gravel features are the two darkly shaded, inset patches).

Refraction: The zones of higher traction are attributed to refracted waves which origi-
nate from the south. These waves are refracted about the canyon heads clearly evident
in Fig. 10. Reﬂection and resonance oﬀ the submarine cliﬀs and canyons are processes,
almost certainly, also operative. The three, uniform, gravel lenses constitute a further
feature to the left of the outcrop in the upper part of the sonograph Fig. 9. They
are considered a typical refraction feature when associated with the outcrop of bedrock
to their right (compare with the refraction around a circular pile depicted in Fig. 14).
Such refraction related phenomena about positive topographic features are typical and
numerous examples exist.

Reﬂection and Resonance: The distance between the bands averages roughly sixty
metres 1 in Fig. 8 and 30 metres in Fig. 9. Assuming some kind of resonance or reﬂection
2 oﬀ the adjacent cliﬀs and canyons in the vicinity, one might guess λ = 2 × 60m in
Fig. 8 (supposing the “half wavelength” eﬀect) and λ = 4 × 30m in Fig. 9 (the integer
multiple, 4, is chosen for agreement alone and can only be explained in a heuristic sense).

1By far the most common spacing between such gravel features.
2Unlikely to be a straightforward reﬂection for both features since their environments are in every

other way alike, highlighting the need for the algorithms to be proposed in Section 5.

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

9

Using this rough scale analysis in the deep3 water, Airy formula,

which implies

λ =

g
2π

T 2,

T = 2
s

2π × 60 × 2
9.81
≈ 8.8 seconds

and

T = 2
s

2π × 30 × 4
9.81
≈ 8.8 seconds

for the surface wave period expected to generate the bottom features in Figs. 8 and 9. A
period of 6.2 seconds (which would correspond to λ = 60m) would, however, still lie just
within the limits of acceptability. The high traction zones, arising from the refraction of
such waves, would probably only be capable of mobilising the ﬁne, overlying sediment
sheet.

“Half Wavelength” Eﬀect: In Fig. 10, in the caustic zone associated with the sub-
merged canyon head (on the north–western side), as well as in the vicinity of the other
fragmented canyon head (just south–west of Deposit 2), ﬁelds of coarse terrigenous sedi-
ment, which have accreted at a spacing half the wavelength of the prevailing wave climate,
occur. In the latter instance this may be a bunching up of traction zones, much the same
as that evident for the island and circular pile in Fig. 14, or a superposition of phenomena
arising from more than one, alternatively a more complex, topographic feature. In the
former instance, however, resonance of the type described on page 4 would appear to be
the only likelihood.

Detailed maps giving exact geological information based on samples and seismic pro-
ﬁles could unfortunately not be printed due to the economically sensitive nature of the
deposits.

4.3 Deposit 4 (Figs. 11, 12, 13 and 15)

The radiating geometry of the sediment within and about the submerged archipelagos
highlighted in Figs. 12 and 11 is remarkably reminiscent of the surface wave refraction
patterns in Fig. 14. Presently in deep water of the order of one hundred metres on the
shelf, the relative bathymetry of underlying and surrounding bedrock is given in Figs. 13
and 15 (the x + · quantities denote relative depth).

The recent sediments are visible in the side–scan sonograph and overlay, Figs. 11 and 12.
Zones of higher traction are believed to arise due to the combined eﬀects of refraction and
diﬀraction of waves originating from the south (see Fig. 14 – all wave theories predict a
relationship between traction on the sea bed and absolute wave height).

The distance between the terrigenous bands varies from anything between three hundred
to four hundred and ﬁfty metres. Using the dispersion relation for small amplitude Airy

3Deep water is deﬁned as water of a depth exceeding half a wavelength – Le M´ehaut´e (1976)

10

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

waves in water of intermediate depth

λ =

tanh

gT 2
2π

2πd
λ !

 

⇒ T ≈ 13 to 16 seconds.

This observation that sediments in Deposit 4 are only sorted by the eﬀects of abnormally
large waves is consistent with the depths at which the sediments occur.

The accompanying geological sample maps of this area are extremely interesting although
they could unfortunately not be included. Highly sorted sediments can be found concen-
trated in island–induced caustics which would correspond to a relict sealevel.

It is possible that refractive processes operative on a far greater scale than those to which
the deposits have presently been attributed, were responsible for the formation of some
of these examples, highlighting the need for the algorithms proposed in Section 5. What
does appear to be apparent, however, is that the physical complexity of viscous eﬀects
etc.
in the boundary layer may be qualitatively ignored at the scales on which these
features occur.

5 A “Monte Carlo” Approach to Sorted Sedimenta-

tion in a Wave Environment

Finite element algorithms based on an inputed incident wave height, angle and wavelength
are able to predict relevant ﬁelds, such as velocity and wave height, or related quantities
which are dependent on wave reﬂection, refraction and diﬀraction over large areas when
run on computers which could be said to have fairly average capabilities by today’s
standards. Algorithms which calculate the traction (surface force) on the sea bed can, in
turn, be written based on these ﬁelds.

The algorithms are written on the premise of laminar ﬂow and other gross simpliﬁcations
which circumvent the usual problems associated with modelling the exact physics of the
problem, as might well have been expected. The relevant, outputed ﬁelds may there-
fore not suﬃce where the more intricate mechanics of the boundary layer are concerned
and the ﬁelds may require modiﬁcation according to “velocity defect” and other laws
(Tennekes and Lumley (1972)). The obvious geometry of the examples discussed in
the previous section and the scale on which these deposits occur suggest, however, that
the need for modiﬁcation is unlikely in calculations of the qualitative type about to be
proposed.

Although obvious uses for algorithms which calculate tractions on the sea bed exist for
known wave climates and sea levels, it is often aperiodic, catastrophic events which are of
relevance in sedimentology. In some cases such events may not even occur as often as once
in a lifetime. The known wave climate is therefore not necessarily the applicable one and

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

11

it is therefore also likely that many ﬁeld studies observing wave–sediment associations
are meaningless.

This section proposes a way in which to elucidate the problem of sorted sediments and
their environments of formation, keeping the afore–mentioned facts in mind and with
an awareness that a whole range of conditions may contribute to the formation of some
It is proposed that the distinctive patterns
intricate distribution of sorted sediment.
described in this paper may be likened to unique signatures which could be deciphered
with the use of a little lateral thinking. If one could establish the exact characteristics of
the wave environment operative at the time of formation, regions where similar tractions,
and hopefully the same sediments, arise could be located elsewhere. A method to do just
that is what this section concerns itself with.

Much of what is about to be proposed is founded on the idea that the hydrodynamic prop-
erties of individual sediment particles document the conditions under which the sediment
formed. Sediments said to share the same hydrodynamic character are those supposed to
have been concentrated under similar ﬂow–tractional conditions. “Sorted”, as used here,
refers to sediments in which a common hydrodynamic character is obviously apparent.
Sorted sediment concentrations arise as a result of the operation of two simultaneous
processes viz. the selective deposition of particles of a certain hydrodynamic character
and the selective removal (erosion) of those of a diﬀerent hydrodynamic character. Using
tractions, this section attempts to understand sorted sediments from a more empirical
point of view. Much of this work is founded on the idea that similar sediments document
equivalent, or once equivalent, ﬂow tractional environments.

5.1 The Underlying Logic to a “Monte Carlo” Approach

Supposing the hydrodynamic character of sediments to document the conditions under
which they formed, it is proposed that the correct sediment–concentrating wave condi-
tion/s may be deduced by employing the logic

an incorrect wave condition ⇒ no necessary correlation in bed

ﬂow-tractional environments,

therefore,

a necessary correlation in bed
ﬂow-tractional environments ⇒ the correct wave condition.

This is, of course, assuming that an equal or greater number of sorted sediment concen-
trations (distinctive “pattern features”) arise than the number of parameters required to
specify a prevailing wave climate or condition; furthermore, that the traction acting on
these sediments always varies with deep water wave speciﬁcation. By “wave conditions”
is also meant sea level, parameters of bed roughness and any other, suspected controlling
variables in addition to the more obvious incident wave angle, wave height and wave pe-
riod. A correlation in tractions at positions where similar sediment concentrations occur
would be looked for using diﬀerent wave conditions.

12

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

5.2 Using the Algorithms as a Qualitative as Opposed to a

Quantitative Tool.

A number of reasons exist for using algorithms as a qualitative rather than quantitative
tool. The mild slope wave equation is one obvious candidate on which to base such
large scale calculations which forgo the exact physics of the boundary layer. The fact
that qualitative capabilities of the mild slope wave equation are in question where slopes
greater than 1 : 3 (Booij (1983)) are involved, boundary eﬀects, bed roughness (the mild
slope wave equation assumes the sea bed to be locally ﬂat), particle–particle interactions
and the unknown ﬁnal static or dynamic equilibrium state of deposits are all factors
which may contribute to making exact quantitative calculations meaningless.

The comparison of relative traction values would obviously have to be kept within reason.
For example, a condition which results in a wave base far above the sea bed would produce
a perfect correlation in tractions (zero traction) on the sea bed.

6 Conclusions and Further Research

Side–scan sonar measurements show interesting, dune–like terrigenous sediment features
on the sea ﬂoor. Agreement between these features and zones of high traction predicted
by crude refraction, reﬂection and diﬀraction studies would appear to exist. These studies
suggest that the physical complexity of viscous eﬀects etc. in the boundary layer may be
ignored at the scales on which these features occur. Very crude scale analyses show that
the “wavelength” of these features corresponds to surface waves with realistic periods.

It would appear that a sediment’s hydrodynamic character and its geographical distri-
bution may be likened to a ﬁnger–print. In cases this “ﬁnger–print” may indicate the
prevailing wave climate. This idea that heavy minerals lie locked beneath the waves by
a oceanographical “combination lock” (whose code is incident wave angle, wave height,
wave period and sea level) may seem slightly fanciful, however, such concentrations do
seem to exist. It is conceivable that adjustments to the coastline in presently active wave
environments could be made to concentrate heavy minerals.

The author is presently in the process of completing a ﬁnite element algorithm which
calculates tractions on the sea bed, based on a ﬁnite element solution of the mild slope
wave equation, and which uses a biquadratic least squares ﬁt to model the sea bed locally
in the vicinity of a node. This will be used in an attempt to determine the conditions
under which the sediments depicted in the sonographs were concentrated.

7 Acknowledgements

Benco and De Beers Marine are thanked for the sonographs and associated bathymetries.
Jacobus Williams, Timothy Gregory and Shaun Courtney are thanked for assistance in

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

13

photographing, scanning, editing and arranging the material in a presentable format.
The use of George Ellis’ computer is gratefully acknowledged, and Kevin Collville is also
thanked in this regard.

References

Berkhoﬀ, J. C. W. (1976). Mathematical models for simple harmonic linear water waves

wave diﬀraction and refraction. Technical report, Delft hydraulics laboratory.

Bettess, P. and Zienkiewicz, O. C. (1977). Diﬀraction and refraction of surface waves
International Journal For Numerical Methods In

using ﬁnite and inﬁnite elements.
Engineering, 11, 1271–1290.

Birch, G. F., Day, R. W., and Plesis, A. D. (1991). Nearshore quaternary sediments on the
west coast of southern africa. Technical report, Republic of South Africa Department
of Mineral and Energy Aﬀairs.

Booij, N. (1983). A note on the accuracy of the mild–slope wave equation. Coastal

Engineering, 7, 191–203.

Childs, S. J. and Reddy, B. D. (1998). Finite element simulation of the motion of a rigid
body in a ﬂuid with free surface. accepted, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering.

de Decker, R. H. (1988). The wave regime on the inner shelf south of the orange river
and its implications for sediment transport. South African Journal of Geology, 91(3).

Dias, F. and Iooss, G. (1993). Capillary–gravity solitary waves with damped oscillations.

Physica D, 65, 399–423.

Gonsalves, J. W. (1985). Estuary mouth stability project progress report no. 2 modiﬁca-
tions to the ﬁnite element programme ‘Wave’. Technical Report T/SEA 8515, Council
for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research.

Hallam, C. D. (1989). The Geology of Coastal Deposits of Southern Africa., volume 2 of

Ore Deposits of South Africa.

Hockney, A. P. (1985). Suggested pleistocene climatic changes and their possible eﬀects
on the raised and submerged beaches of the West Coast of Southern Africa. Technical
report, De Beers Marine.

Kennett, J. P. (1982). Marine Geology. Prentice–Hall.

Kinsman, B. (1965). Wind Waves, their Generation and Propagation on the Ocean

Surface. Applied Mathematical Sciences. Prentice–Hall.

Longuet-Higgins, M. S. and Stewart, R. W. (1964). Radiation stresses in water waves; a

physical discussion, with applications. Deep–Sea Research, 11, 529–562.

14

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

M´ehaut´e, B. L. (1976). An Introduction to Hydrodynamics and Water Waves. Springer–

Verlag, New York.

Murray, L. G., Joynt, R. H., O’Shea, D. C., Foster, R. W., and Kleinjan, L. (1970). The
geological environment of some deposits oﬀ the coast of South West Africa. Institute
of Geological Sciences Report, 70(15), 119–141.

Pos, J. D., Kilner, F. A., and Fischer, P. G. (1987). Combined refraction–diﬀraction
International Journal of Engineering Science, 25(5),

of water waves by an island.
577–590.

Rosenthal, G. N. (19). Lift Forces on Spherical Particles Near a Horizontal Bed in

Oscillatory Flow. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cape Town.

Shillington, F. A. and Britten-Jones, A. (1979). Features of surface waves oﬀ the Southern
Cape coast and their associated meteorological conditions during a sever storm between
30 August and 3 September 1978. South African Journal of Science, 75.

Tennekes, H. and Lumley, J. L. (1972). A First Course in Turbulence. MIT press.

Williams, A. T. and Caldwell, N. E. (1988). Particle size and shape in pebble beach

sedimentation. Marine Geology, 82, 199–215.

Williams, J. J., Thorne, P. D., and Heathershaw, A. D. (1989a). In situ acoustic mea-
surements of marine gravel threshold and transport. Sedimentology, 36(1), 61–74.

Williams, J. J., Thorne, P. D., and Heathershaw, A. D. (1989b). Measurements of
turbulence in the benthic boundary layer over a gravel bed. Sedimentology, 36(6),
959–971.

Zienkiewicz, O. C. and Heinrich, J. C. (1979). A uniﬁed treatment of steady–state shallow
water and two–dimensional Navier–Stokes equations – ﬁnite element penalty function
approach. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 17/18, 673–698.

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

15

8 Captions

Fig. 1: A “Cartoon” Proﬁle of Tractions on the Sea Bed Before and After a Marine
Transgression Illustrating the Sediment Collecting Eﬀect

Fig. 2: Particle Path and Streamline Diagrams for a Sinusoidal Progressive Wave (after
Kinsman (1965))

Fig. 3: Side–scan Sonograph of Deposit 1

Fig. 4: Overlay Schematic Diagram of the Proposed Wave Processes which Gave Rise to
the Gravel Formations in Deposit 1

Fig. 5: The bathymetry in and around Deposit 1 (See Figure 3). An outline of the
feature is lightly sketched. The contour interval is 1m and the grid interval 1km.

Fig. 6: An Enlargement of Part of Deposit 1 (the Feature Depicted in Fig. 3)

Fig. 7: An Enlargement of Part of Deposit 1 (the Feature Depicted in Fig. 3)

Fig. 8: Side–scan Sonograph of Deposit 2

Fig. 9: Side–scan Sonograph of Deposit 3

Fig. 11: Side–scan Sonograph of Deposit 4

Fig. 12: Overlay to Fig. 11

Fig. 10: The Bathymetry and Geological Interpretation of Deposits 2 and 3 (grid interval
= 1km)

Fig. 13: The Relative Bathymetry in Deposit 4 (contour interval = 1m).

Fig. 14: Relative, absolute wave heights associated with a single island (after Pos
et al. (1987)) and relative, absolute wave heights associated with a circular pile (after
Berkhoff (1976)). Note that these are not wave fronts but instead “modular envelopes”.
All wave theories predict a relationship between traction on the sea bed and absolute wave
height.

Fig. 15: The Relative Bathymetry In and Around Deposit 4 (Fig. 13 bathymetry inset).
contour interval = 1m

16

S.J. Childs, F.A. Shillington

Figure 1:

Some Wave–related, . . . Placer Deposits

17

Figure 2:

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig12.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig13.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig14.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

This figure "fig15.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909023v1

