0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

7
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Temperature, Pressure & Solvent Dependence of Positronium Acceptor Reactions

Debarshi Gangopadhyay∗, Bichitra Ganguly∗ & Binayak Dutta-Roy†

∗ Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, I/AF Bidhannagar, Calcutta 700 064, India

† S.N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, III/JD Bidhannagar, Calcutta 700 098

PACS No.: 82.55.+e,71.60.+z, 78.70.Bj

Abstract

Positronium (Ps) reaction rates (κ) with weak Acceptors (Ac) leading to the formation
of Ps-Ac Complexes show several intriguing features: non-monotonic temperature depen-
dence of κ (departing from the usual Arrhenius paradigm), considerable variability of κ
with respect to diﬀerent solvents, and anomalies in response to external pressure at ambi-
ent temperature (large changes of κ in some media and hardly any in others). We explain
all these phenomena, introducing the novel concept of a critical surface tension, which
uniﬁes observations in diverse non-polar solvents at diﬀerent temperatures and pressures.

The Positronium (Ps) atom, as the ‘lightest isotope of hydrogen’, enters into various chemical
reactions, amongst which we shall concentrate here on those with diamagnetic organic com-
pounds (equipped with a suitable low-lying molecular orbital) such that a Positronium-Acceptor
(Ps-Ac) Complex can form in the presence of some solvent (S).

The observed rate constant (κ) for a given Acceptor depends on the solvent and for a given

solvent varies in a rather remarkable manner with temperature (T ), namely:
• κ increases with T at low temperatures,
• κ reaches a maximum at T = T0 (the turnover temperature),
• κ decreases with increasing T above T0.
This is shown in Fig.1 for the case of the weak Acceptor nitrobenzene in diﬀerent solvents.

1011

1010

)
1
-
s
1
-

M

(
 

109

108

107

2.0

 in toluene
 in water

 in heptane
 theoretical (for heptane)

expt. error

2.5

3.0

3.5
1000/T

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

Fig.1 Observed temperature dependence of rate constants for Ps reaction with nitrobenzene in
diﬀerent solvents. (Taken from W.D.Madia et.al., J.Am.Chem.Soc. 97(1975)5041). The lines
correspond to slopes in the enthalpy dominated and diﬀusion controlled regimes as predicted by
our model(with appropriate over-all normalization for heptane).

This unusual phenomenon [1], ﬁrst observed by Goldanskii and his group [2] at Moscow,
and subsequently by Hall, Madia and Ache [3], is in sharp contrast with the normal trend in

k
k
activated chemical processes where ln κ versus 1/T (the inverse temperature) yields a straight
line with negative slope, as the rate is proportional to the Maxwell-Boltzmann probability
factor exp(−E∗/kBT ) where kB is the Boltzmann constant and E∗ is the activation energy or
barrier height to be overcome by thermal agitation. Possible prefactors are generally taken to
be mildly dependent on temperature.

Another dramatic observation [4,5] pertains to the variation of the rate constant for Ps-Ac
Complex formation with external pressure at ambient temperature, which shows surprisingly
strong solvent dependence. Thus, for instance, with nitrobenzene as the Acceptor and hexane
as the solvent the rate constant κ was found to be enhanced by a factor of almost thirty as
the pressure was increased to ∼ 1000 kg/cm2, while with benzene as the solvent the same rate
manifested only small variation over the same pressure range. This feature is depicted in Fig.2.
Kobayashi [4,5] conjectured that this could indicate a diﬀerence in reaction mechanism in cases
which do and those which do not show marked pressure dependence, and that a correlation
could be sought with the corresponding solvent dependence of the turnover temperature.

102

)
1
-
s
n
1
-

 

101

M

(
 

 in benzene
 in hexane
 theoretical curve for hexane

100

-

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Pressure (kg/cm2)

Fig.2 Observed dependence on external pressure for Ps reaction with nitrobenzene in hexane
and in benzene. The predicted dependence in the case of hexane is shown by the solid line
(appropriate normalization has been done).

The objective of this letter is to put forward a heuristic model which captures the essence
of all these puzzling aspects of Positronium reactions outlined above, through a remarkably
simple and reasonably accurate semi-quantitative description. As we shall see, the widely used
bubble model for Ps-annihilation in liquids provides a suitable setting for the purpose at hand.
This was proposed by Ferrel [6] to account for the observed largeness of the ortho-Positronium
(o-Ps) pick-oﬀ lifetime, whereby the positron in o-Ps seeks out an electron in the surrounding
medium with opposite spin (not its partner in o-Ps which is in a spin triplet state) to decay into
two gammas. He suggested that due to the repulsive interaction between o-Ps and the atoms
of the surrounding liquid, the Positronium pushes away the molecules of the liquid and gets
self-trapped in a cavity or bubble. The decreased probability for the positron to ﬁnd an electron
(of the surrounding medium) in its immediate vicinity leads to the lengthening of the pick-oﬀ
lifetime. For simplicity he took the trapping potential to be an inﬁnitely repulsive spherical
well of radius R. The resulting quantal zero-point energy of Ps with mass 2m ( m being the
electron mass) is E0 = π2¯h2
∂R to be balanced by the
contractile forces of compression due to the surface tension (σ) of the ﬂuid, thereby minimizing
the total energy Etot = E0 +4πR2σ viz. ∂Etot
4mR3 +8πσ = 0 resulting in a bubble of radius
R0 = ( π¯h2
16mσ )1/4 = (12.445)/σ1/4˚A , where σ is measured in dynes/cm ( .624× 10 −4 eV/˚A2).

4mR2 . This exerts an outward ‘pressure’ viz. − ∂E0

∂R = − 2π2¯h2

k
k
This model was further developed by Tao [7] and by Eldrup et al.
[8] employing again the
inﬁnite spherical well but describing the picked-oﬀ electrons as forming a thin layer uniformly
coating the inner surface of the bubble. Though such a description has been criticised on
account of the inﬁnite repulsion [9,10] or the unrealistic nature of the sharpness of the bubble
edge [11,12], nevertheless as a ﬁrst approximation the model does rather well in explaining the
observables in the case of pure solvents (lifetime and angular correlation of decay gammas).

In this framework the formation of the Ps-Ac Complex within the cavity results, through
the restriction on the motion of the Positronium due to its binding to the Acceptor, in a release
of the outward ‘uncertainty pressure’ and accordingly the bubble begins to shrink under the
inﬂuence of the surface tension. As the bubble wall approaches the Positronium (bound to the
Acceptor with some energy E = −B where B is the binding energy), the increasing proximity
of the solvent molecules leads (because of the augmented repulsive energy) to a reduction of
the binding, until at some radius Rb of the bubble the Ps-Ac bond is broken viz. B = 0. To
raise the status of this contention [13] to at least a semi-quantitative level let us consider the
Positronium to be subjected to an attractive potential V (r) due to the Acceptor, while it also
feels the inﬁnite repulsion due to the solvent located at the bubble wall at a distance R. Taking
the potential V (r) to be a spherical well [14] of depth V0 and range a viz. −V0Θ(a − R) where
Θ is the step function, the relevant Schr¨odinger equation for the centre-of-mass motion of Ps is

¯h2
4m

h−
h−

d2

dr2 − V0iu = −Bu for
dr2iu = −Bu for

d2

¯h2
4m

r < a

r > a

(1a)

(1b)

(4)

(5)

with ψ = u/r. The appropriate boundary conditions are u(r = 0) = 0 and u(r = R) = 0, while
u and its derivative must be continuous at r = a, yielding the eigenvalue condition

where k = q 4mB

k = 0, is thus given by

¯h2 and κ = √˜g2 − k2 with 4mV0
Rb = ah1 −

k tan κa = −κ tanh k(R − a)

(2)

¯h2 = ˜g2. The bond breaking radius Rb, viz. where

tan ˜ga

˜ga i.

(3)

Since in the leading approximation (adopted by us) the eﬀect of the solvent is represented by
an inﬁnite repulsion (tantamount to a boundary condition forcing ψ to vanish at R), the radius
Rb depends only on the characteristics of the Acceptor vis a vis its aﬃnity for the Positronium,
and is, to that extent, same for all solvents. However, we must also consider the fact that
the Ps-Ac-bubble system would equilibrate at some radius Rmin at which the total energy is a
minimum, namely,

∂
∂R

[−B + 4πR2σ] = 0.

This leads to

Rmin = (

1

8πσ

)(

¯h2
4m

)(

1
a4 )

6ζ 4

(ζ − tan ζ)(3ζ − 3 tan ζ + 3ζ tan2 ζ − 2 tan3 ζ)

where ζ ≡ ˜ga. Whether the Ps-Ac-bubble system will be stable or not will depend on whether
Rmin is greater than or lesser than the bond-breaking radius Rb.
A big step forward is made possible by our recognition that in leading approximation Rb
is essentially solvent independent, while solvent dependence enters through Rmin and that
too only through σ. As the surface tension of the solvent is a function of temperature, the
equilibrium radius of the bubble (with Ps-Ac inside) depends on temperature only through σ
viz. Rmin(T ) = Rmin[σ(T )]. As T is decreased, σ increases and by virtue of eq.(4) and more

explicitly eq.(5), Rmin decreases. When Rmin becomes less than Rb the Ps-Ac-bubble system
is no longer stable. Clearly there is a critical value of σ, say σcr, at which Rmin[σcr] = Rb,
marking the watershed beyond which the Ps-Ac-bubble system destabilises. The value of T at
which σ attains the value σcr depends on the particular solvent, but σcr does not, but is, in
the leading order, a property of the Acceptor under consideration. We argue that the turnover
temperature T0 is the temperature at which, for the solvent at hand, σ(T0) = σcr. Indeed at
suﬃciently high temperature where σ(T ) < σcr, a large negative change in enthalpy occurs
as the reactants [Ps in a bubble of radius R0 = ( π¯h2
16mσ )1/4 and the Acceptor] react to form
the product [Ps-Ac Complex in bubble] with the radius having shrunk to Rmin. This makes
it a down-hill reaction, since for weak Acceptors the activation energy is expected to play a
sub-dominant role and also the eﬀect of solvent viscosity is negligible (because the complex is
protected by the bubble from the buﬀetting by the solvent molecules). It is thus basically the
negative activation volume that is responsible for the anti-Arrhenius behaviour for T > T0. On
the other hand for T < T0 when σ(T ) > σcr the Ps-Ac-bubble system is unstable, the Ac is
squeezed out of the bubble and the formation of the Complex must of necessity take place in the
milieu of the solvent accompanied by the continual impact of the solvent molecules. As such,
following Kramers [15] the role of the medium would be said to belong to the Smolochowski
regime, with the dependence of the rate constant on the viscosity (η) varying as 1
η ∼ D (where
D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the liquid, the last step being a consequence of the Einstein-
Stokes relation). In view of the smallness of the activation energy for weak Acceptors, we would
therefore expect that κ ∼ exp[−Eη/kBT ], where Eη is the activation energy associated with
the process of diﬀusion. The reaction in this region would be diﬀusion controlled and would
exhibit a normal Arrhenius behaviour. This enables us to make the important prediction that
σ(T0) = σcr and that it is approximately solvent independent. In order to confront this with
experiment, we have plotted in Fig.3, σ(T ) against T − T0 for various solvents (for which data
is available with nitrobenzene as the Acceptor).

 hexane
 heptane
 toluene
benzene 
 octanol

16

20

 in dynes/cm

24
 

28

32

120

100

K
n

 

i
 

0
T
-
T

 

80

60

40

20

0

-20

-40

-60

Fig.3 Surface tension σ(T ) for diﬀerent solvents as a function of T − T0 exposing the concept
of the critical surface tension (σcr)

It is indeed highly gratifying to note that while T0 diﬀers widely from solvent to solvent,
and also the values of the surface tension σ at a given temperature for diﬀerent solvents have a
substantial spread, nevertheless σ(T0) = σcr for the solvents under consideration lie in a rather
narrow range, namely, σcr = 26 ± 2 dynes/cm.
Armed with this value of σcr we are now in a position to access the Ps-Ac interaction
parameters which, as we shall discuss below, are unfortunately not available from any other

s
s
source. Being led by the estimates of other authors [16] let us ﬁx the range of the interaction
to be a = 1.5 ˚A , and determine ˜g by putting, in accordance to our discussions above, σ = σcr
and Rmin = Rb [refer eq.(3)]. This immediately yields the value ˜g =1.25 ˚A−1 which corresponds
to the Ps-Ac binding energy (the Acceptor being nitrobenzene) B0 = 0.18eV . Note that B0
signiﬁes the basic binding in the absence of the solvent, namely, B0 = LimR→∞B, which implies
vide eq.(2), the well-known result: −κ cot κa = k the eigenvalue condition for a spherical well.
Unfortunately there is no direct measurement of this binding energy B0, and the approaches
based on ﬁrst principles [17] are beset with huge theoretical uncertainties. However, using our
methodology we have now completely tied down the model and shall proceed to show how this
explains all the main observed features,

In order to ﬁnd the slope of the ln κ versus 1/T plot in the higher temperature anti-
Arrhenius region we recognise that this is nothing but the activation free energy, the major
contribution to which come from the change in Enthalpy arising from the shrinkage of the
bubble from its value given by R0 to the size determined by Rmin, viz. 4πR2
minσ − 4πR2
0σ
where, of course the radii are functions of temperature through the surface tension. To this
must be added the change in the Ps-Ac binding due to the approach of the bubble wall from R0
to Rmin. The resulting behaviour (appropriately normalized) is depicted in Fig.1 for the case of
Ps nitrobenzene reaction in heptane, for instance, as a solvent. The slope obtained through our
model corresponds to ≈ 0.15 eV which agrees very well with the experimental value. The part
of the plot in the Arrhenius regime is also shown by using the value of the activation energy
for diﬀusion (Eη). Fig.1 demonstrates that the main aspect of the temperature dependence of
the rate has been captured in a satisfactory manner.

Apart from providing an interpretation of the temperature dependence of the reaction as set
forth above, this simple model is also able to furnish an explanation of the observed variation
with the external pressure (P). In view of the small compressibility of liquids one would hardly
expect any appreciable activation volume when T < T0 as the reaction occurs in the solvent
itself. However, for T > T0 due to the involvement of the bubble a large ∆V ∗ (activation
volume) becomes possible and hence a signiﬁcant pressure dependence can occur, in view of
the basic Polyani relationship:

 ∂lnκ
∂P !T

∆V ∗
kBT

= −

(6)

between the eﬀect of external pressure on the rate of a chemical reaction and the activation
volume of the reaction (namely, the diﬀerence between the volume of the activated complex
and the volume of the reactants). To obtain quantitative estimates it is to be noted that the
initial volume viz. Ps in the bubble without the Ac must be found now by minimizing the total
energy, namely Etot = ¯h2
3 R3P with respect to R and thereby obtain R0(P ).
Here P is measured in kgwt/cm2 (=.613 × 10−6 eV/˚A3). Similarly the equation determining
the equilibrium radius [Rmin(P )] with Ps-Ac inside the bubble must be appropriately modiﬁed,
so that in place of eq.(4), we now have

4mR2 + 4πR2σ + 4π

∂

∂R(cid:16)−B + 4πR2σ +

4π
3

R3P(cid:17) = 0

(7)

Equipped with R0(P ), Rmin(P ) and B[R(P )] the variation of the rate constant with pressure
can be readily calculated.

Consider the two typical cases depicted in Fig.2 out of the many taken from the experimental
studies of Kobayashi [4,5]. All these experiments were performed at ambient temperature
(Texpt = 19± 1oC). With nitrobenzene as the Acceptor and benzene as the solvent we note that
there is no signiﬁcant eﬀect of pressure on the reaction rate. This is quite consistent with the
model in view of the fact that the turnover temperature in this case [18] is considerably above
Texpt and hence one is working in the Arrhenius region where the pressure eﬀect is expected
to be small. On the other hand when the solvent is hexane, the experiment was performed

in the regime where the Ps-Ac-bubble system is stable (as the turnover temperature here is
-53oC), and accordingly the reaction rate responds appreciably to external pressure. Indeed
the enhancement of the rate by a factor of about thirty in our model is even in quantitative
agreement with the experimental results of Kobayashi. Using the experimental value of the
surface tension of hexane at Texpt (σ ≈ 19 dynes/cm), the model indicates the behaviour shown
in Fig.2 with appropriate over-all normalization.
Above a critical pressure the Ps-Ac-bubble system destabilizes and the rate versus pres-
sure curve levels oﬀ. Except for the fact that there is a somewhat precocious onset of the
Arrhenius regime the general experimental trend is captured very well indeed considering the
approximations involved.

We may thus conclude that the simple model we have proposed eﬀectively accounts for
the temperature, pressure and solvent dependence of Ps-Ac Complex formation reactions. Of
cardinal importance for our discussion has been the introduction of the notion of the critical
surface tension (σcr) which enables us to semiquantitatively account for most observations and
also to make the important qualitative remark: that for any solvent at a temperature such that
its surface tension is smaller than σcr the reaction rate decreases with increasing temperature
and is also signiﬁcantly aﬀected by external pressure, while otherwise it is the other way around.

[1] O.E. Mogensen, Positronium Annihilation in Chemistry (Springer- Verlag, 1995).
[2] V.I. Goldanskii et al., Dokl. Acad. Nauk. 203 (1972) 870.
[3] E. Hall, W.J. Madia & H.J. Ache, Radiochem. Radioanal. Lett. 23 (1975) 283.
[4] Y. Kobayashi, Chem. Phys. Lett. 172 (1990) 307.
[5] Y. Kobayashi, Chem. Phys. 150 (1991) 453.
[6] R.A. Ferrel, Phys. Rev. 16 (1957) 108.
[7] S.J. Tao, J. Chem. Phys. 56 (1972) 5499.
[8] M. Eldrup, D. Lightbody & J.N. Sherwood, Chem. Phys. 63 (1981) 51.
[9] L.O. Roellig, Positron Annihilation, ed. A.T. Stewart & L.O. Roellig (Academic Press,
N.Y.) p 127.
[10] T.B. Daniel & R. Stump, Phys. Rev. 115 (1959) 1599.
[11] T. Mukherjee, B. Ganguly & B. Dutta-Roy, J. Chem. Phys. 107 (1997) 7467.
[12] D. Gangopadhyay et al., J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 11 (1999) 1463.
[13] A similar two potential model was suggested in A.P. Buchikin, V.I. Goldanskii & V.P.
Shantarovich, Dokl. Acad. Nauk. 212 (1973) 1356 and in A.I. Ryzhkov & V.P. Shantarovich,
Mat. Sci. Forum 105-108 (1992) 1699. However, with both potentials having ﬁnite depths
there were too many parameters to give the model predictive power or provide a deeper insight.
[14] The detailed form of the binding potential hardly matters. We have checked that with a
It must however be
Dirac delta potential V (r) = −gδ(r − a), the results are very similar.
mentioned that even though the general trends in each of these models essentially remain the
same detailed values are often very sensitively dependent on the numerical values of parameters.
[15] H.A. Kramers, Physica 7 (1940) 284.
[16] V.I. Goldanskii & V.P. Shantarovich, Appl. Phys. 3 (1974) 335. The range 1.5 ˚A
represents the distance between the active centres i.e. electron of Ps and that of C+ ion.
[17] D.M. Schrader & C.M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. 80 (1976) 2507.
[18] Indications are already there in reference 2 but very careful measurements recently made
in our laboratory place the turnover temperature for Ps-nitrobenzene reaction with benzene as
a solvent at 33 ± 3oC.

