0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
0
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comments on “Eﬀective Core Potentials” [ M. Dolg, Modern

Methods and Algorithms of Quantum Chemistry (Ed. by J.Grotendorst,
John von Neumann Institute for Computing, J¨ulich, NIC Series, Vol.1,

ISBN 3-00-005618-1, pp.479-508, 2000) ].

A. V. Titov∗ and N. S. Mosyagin
Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute,

Gatchina, Petersburg district 188350, Russia

(September 2, 2013)

Abstract

The recent paper of M. Dolg is discussed and his critical remarks with respect
to the Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective Core Potential (GRECP) method
are shown to be incorrect. Some main features of GRECP are discussed as
compared with the “energy-consistent/adjusted” pseudopotential and with
the conventional shape-consistent RECP.

I. INTRODUCTION

The discussed paper of M. Dolg deals with the relativistic eﬀective core potential (RECP)
methods including the model potential and pseudopotential (PP) techniques. The shape-
consistent RECP method as a PP version is compared with the “energy-adjusted” PP
(EAPP) and the “energy-consistent” PP (ECPP) developed by Stuttgart’s group (e.g., see
[1,2] and references in the discussed paper by M. Dolg).
In their semiempirical version,
EAPP, partial potentials are ﬁtted to reproduce the experimental atomic spectrum. In the
ab initio approximation, ECPP (earlier also called energy-adjusted PP), “valence energies”
(i.e. sums of ionization potentials and excitation energies) for a group of low-lying states
are ﬁtted to the corresponding energies of the same states in all-electron approximations
like Hartree-Fock, Wood-Boring or Dirac-Fock in a least-squares sense with the help of the
ECPP parameters. It means that only some special combinations of the matrix elements
of a (non-,quasi-)relativistic Hamiltonian are ﬁtted by the ECPP and EAPP Hamiltonians
with the help of the one-electron radially local PP operator. When considering below both
ECPP and EAPP versions we will write ECAPPs or Stuttgart PPs.

The radially local operator is also used in the shape-consistent RECPs and some new
non-local RECP terms are added in our Generalized RECP (GRECP) version [3–16], which
we consider as a development of the shape-consistent RECP method. The underlying idea
traced in our papers concerning the GRECP approximation is in simulating the one- and
two-electron parts of an original Dirac-Coulomb (in prospect, Dirac-Coulomb-Breit) Hamil-
tonian with the accuracy which is needed and suﬃcient for calculation of physical and chem-
ical properties (and processes) in heavy-atom molecules with a given accuracy. A paramount

1

requirement is that such a simulation should provide maximum possible savings for conse-
quent molecular calculations with GRECPs.

As is conﬁrmed in all our test calculations and not only in our theoretical analysis,
the GRECP Hamiltonian in the form used in papers by Mosyagin et al. (1997) [7] and
(2000) [11] (which are criticized by M. Dolg) more accurately reproduces the Dirac-Coulomb
Hamiltonian in the valence (V) region as compared with other tested RECP and Stuttgart
PP versions employing the radially local operator. Phrase “in the valence region” means that
the occupation numbers of the outer core (OC) shells, nocc
OC, are not considerably changed
in studied states as compared with the OC occupation numbers of the conﬁgurations used
in the GRECP generation (i.e. ∆nocc
≪1). Thus, only relaxation and dynamic correlation
OC
eﬀects are suggested to take place in the OC shells.

We have emphasized this property of the GRECP Hamiltonian already in the introduc-
tion of paper [7]. It is noted in the abstract of our theoretical paper (1999) [10] where a very
detailed analysis of features of the shape-consistent RECP method including the GRECP
approximation is given. We consider the GRECP version for Hg used in [7,11] as reliable for
atomic and molecular calculations of the states in which the OC shells of Hg are completely
occupied in the leading conﬁgurations if accuracy of a few hundreds wave numbers for tran-
sition, dissociation etc. energies is required. In papers [5,10], some other improvements of
the RECP method are suggested in order to provide minimal computational eﬀorts in ac-
curate RECP calculation of wide range of excitations and properties in systems containing
arbitrary heavy atoms including transition metals, lanthanides and actinides. We, obviously,
will not repeat here the theoretical analysis of the shape-consistent RECP method and will
give only some necessary details which have direct attitude to the criticized points.

The goal of this paper is mainly to compare features of the GRECP and other RECP
versions including Stuttgart PPs rather than to reply on Dolg’s claims. These comments
can be also useful for reading them before paper [10].

II. GENERAL COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT RECP VERSIONS

The discussed GRECP version is assumed to be eﬃciently used when excitations and
chemical bonding take place in the V region whereas only dynamic correlation and relaxation
(polarization) are considered in the OC region. Therefore, interactions between/with valence
and outer core electrons are simulated on the basis of the following principles:

First, for selected subspaces of the OC and V shells, the matching radii Rc for the regions
of the spinor’s smoothing are chosen to be as small as possible in order to reduce the errors
of reproducing the original two-electron integrals (in further reducing the matching radii,
partial potentials become too singular to be approximated by gaussians and used in RECP
calculations, for details see [10]). When using the GRECP operator in calculations of the
same states as with the Dirac-Coulomb Hamiltonian, the OC, V and virtual pseudospinors
(PSs) coincide with the large components of the original Dirac spinors after the matching
radii with very good accuracy [6,10] in contrast to the cases of using the conventional RECP
operator. In this connection (it is very important), the radius of the “unphysical” GRECP
terms (which, obviously, do not include the Coulomb interaction with the inner core (IC)
electrons) only slightly larger than the outermost matching radius Rmax
for PSs. This is

c

2

direct consequence of generating diﬀerent partial potentials, Vnlj(r), for the corresponding
OC and V (and virtual) pseudospinors with the same (lj). It is shown in [16] that diﬀerence
between the OC and V potentials with the same (lj) can not be eliminated with the help
of any special kind of smoothing the corresponding OC and V spinors without substantial
decrease (up to an order of magnitude for transition energies) in accuracy. Thus, when
reducing the matching radii which are usually close to each other, we reduce the radius
of unphysical terms in the corresponding atomic eﬀective Hamiltonian. The independent
smoothing the OC and V (and, in principle, some virtual) spinors with polinomials give us
suﬃcient ﬂexibility to generate smooth enough OC and V pseudospinors as well as their
partial potentials.

The GRECP is a “matching radii-speciﬁed” (or “space-driven”) method of approximation
(see [10]) contrary to the energy-adjusted/consistent PPs which are “selected valence energy-
based” (or “energy-driven”).

Second, the non-local terms with projectors on the outer core PSs in the GRECP opera-
tor give us an important possibility to reproduce the original OC and V orbital energies and
properly construct the most important nondiagonal one-electron terms [16], which together
with the Hartree-Fock (Coulomb and exchange) electronic terms derived on pseudospinor
densities constitute the one-electron part of the eﬀective (model) Hamiltonian. Therefore,
the one-electron part of the Hamiltonian in the V region can be reproduced very accurately
(see section “Theory” in [10] for more details). The orbital energies are used in denominators
of the M¨oller-Plessett perturbation theory (PT) accounting for correlation etc. Otherwise,
instead of the orbital energies and nondiagonal Lagrange multipliers, some other combina-
tions of matrix elements of an original Hamiltonian can be reproduced in the model one. (In
particular, those one-electron energies can be exactly simulated which are more appropriate,
e.g., for the Epstein-Nesbet PT. However, the partial potentials have additional “tails” in
such cases because of the use the inverted Hartree-Fock equations for their generation and
the radius of the unphysical RECP terms is thus enlarged. One should remember that the
tail behaviour of orbitals is described by their orbital energies. The diﬀerence in using dif-
ferent one-electron energies is not very essential if the corresponding original Coulomb and
exchange two-electron integrals are accurately reproduced by those with pseudospinors as is
for small matching radii [10].)

Obviously, it is possible to ﬁt transition or valence energies for a group of states with the
help of the energy-consistent/adjusted PPs having appropriate number of ﬁtting parameters.
Certainly, it is not equivalent to the simulation of all the important Hamiltonian matrix el-
ements on a needed level of accuracy in order to describe a possible variety of perturbations
in the valence region (including excitations and chemical bonding with arbitrary atoms and
geometries) in correlation structure calculations with a given accuracy. All the one- and
two-electron matrix elements of the original valence Hamiltonian should be appropriately
reproduced to be used for accurate calculations of a wide range of applications. Besides,
ﬁtting the valence energies prior to the orbital energies, give no any advantages in reproduc-
ing, in particular, the variety of physical and chemical properties which cannot be calculated
from potential curves or surfaces. The steady simulation of the valence Hamiltonian can be
done on the basis of the “space-driven” shape-consistent RECP generation scheme.

The conventional RECP operator with the shape-consistent spinor smoothing suggested

3

by K.Pitzer’s group (1979,1977) [19,20] gives no ﬂexibility in ﬁtting shapes and orbital
energies simultaneously for the OC and V spinors with the same (lj).
In general, when
the OC spinors are used in their RECP generation scheme for a given (lj), the “eﬀective
matching radii” for other (V and virtual) pseudospinors with the same (lj) are, in fact, larger
than those for the OC pseudospinors and so on. Therefore, in general (see [10] for more
theoretical details), the two-electron matrix elements are not so accurately reproduced as in
the case of GRECP. By other words, the radius of “unphysical” terms of the conventional
RECPs is substantially larger than the matching radii.

In turn, the ECAPP generation schemes take no care about smooth pseudoorbitals (pseu-
dospinors) and matching radii when putting simulation of some valence energies and gen-
eration of smooth partial potentials on the ﬁrst place. (A small number of gaussians in
the ECAPP expansion is, in fact, equivalent to smooth partial potentials). The result is
similar to the case of the conventional shape-consistent RECP. Additional disadvantages
of ECAPPs are a poor theoretical justiﬁcation and technical complexity in ﬁtting a large
number of valence energies. When taking account of correlations in ECPP calculations,
the valence energies for the correlated states should be ﬁtted as well if a high computa-
tional accuracy is required. It should be done as a pay for the absence of matching radii
for the ECPP pseudospinors. Moreover, being one-electron potentials of a special (radially
local) type, ECAPPs cannot provide arbitrarily high accuracy even for reproducing the one-
electron part of the valence Hamiltonian [16] let alone the two-electron part (if, obviously,
the number of explicitly treated electrons is ﬁxed). Besides, how many transition/valence
energies between/for correlated states should be ﬁtted for reliable reproducing a required
(large) number of two-electron integrals with some needed accuracy? Hundreds? Or maybe
thousands? Can it be eﬃciently applied in practice? Will it provide a proportional (even)
level of errors for the one- and two-electron integrals as is in the case of GRECPs? Should
not forget that the ECAPPs are employing the conventional RECP operator that is not so
ﬂexible as the GRECP one [10,16]. We can also remind here about those properties which
cannot be calculated from potential curves or surfaces. Whether will these properties be
well reproduced with the help of ECAPPs?

In the optimization of the parameters of partial potentials Vnlj(r) one can produce com-
pact gaussian expansions for the ECAPPs when ﬁtting directly some selected valence ener-
gies. Is this a real advantage? The compactness in the gaussian expansions of the partial
potentials does not ensures the smoothness of pseudoorbitals (pseudospinors). Moreover, as
is mentioned above, the radius of unphysical terms in such a PP is invitably larger than in the
RECPs in which a large set of gaussians is employed to ﬁt quite singular behaviour of numer-
ical potentials close to the matching points thus reducing the eﬀective Vnlj(r) − Ncore/r radii
(see Figure 2 in [10]). It is very widely known that the eﬀort in the calculation (∼ N 4) and
transformation (∼ N 5) of two-electron integrals (where N is the number of basis functions)
is always substantially higher than in calculation of the RECP integrals (∼ N 2 · NRECP ,
where NRECP is the number of terms in the used RECP expansions) for all known RECP
versions including GRECPs when appropriately large basis sets are employed for precise
calculations. Again we should emphasize that in spite of the rather complicated form of
the GRECP operator, the main computational eﬀort in calculating matrix elements with
GRECPs is caused by the standard radially local operator which is also the main part of the

4

shape-consistent RECP and ECAPP operators, and not by the non-local GRECP terms.
Thus, the additional eﬀorts in calculations with GRECPs are negligible as compared with
the cases of using the conventional RECPs and PPs if comparable gaussian expansions are
used for the partial potentials.

Summarizing, what is the computational utility in generation of compact RECPs and
PPs? Maybe much more important is that their accuracy should be in agreement with
the number of explicitly treated electrons? Obviously, the smooth shapes of pseudospinors
in the atomic core are more important than smooth partial potentials. The smooth PSs
can be accurately approximated with a relatively small number of gaussian functions. It
is substantially more ﬂexible if the OC and V spinors can be smoothed individually. A
possibility to generate the partial potentials after constructing PSs (and not simultaneously)
when inverting the Hartree-Fock equations following Goddard III (1968) [17] is important
from the computational viewpoint.

Due to these features, the RECP generation scheme by K.Pitzer’s group is very eﬀective
in practice in addition to its theoretical advantages. It is always better to have a possibility
to split solution of a computationally consuming problem on a few consequent steps. That is
why we prefer the scheme of K.Pitzer’s group and not that proposed by Durand & Barthelat
(1975) in their classical paper [18], where the idea of the shape-consistent ECP method
was ﬁrst suggested. The ECAPP generation scheme is in many aspects close to the ECP
generation scheme by Durand & Barthelat.

Our ﬁrst comparisons of RECPs in [7] were done in the one-conﬁgurational approxi-
mation because only recently we have obtained an opportunity of employing very eﬃcient
atomic Relativistic Coupled Cluster (RCC) [28] code for reliable correlation structure cal-
culations with both Dirac-Coulomb and RECP Hamiltonians [11]. The advantage of the
former is in the use of the ﬁnite-diﬀerence method (i.e. spinors/orbitals are varied in the nu-
merical form) and therefore, the DF/HF calculations are independent of the ﬁnite basis sets
errors. In the latter case, one has a possibility to use very large basis sets thus minimizing
dependence of the ﬁnal results on a special choice of a basis set. Besides, there are almost no
subjective dependences in RCC calculations from a special selection of conﬁgurations (ref-
erence spaces, truncation thresholds, etc.) that is very important for correct comparison of
diﬀerent eﬀective Hamiltonians with original. Our statements in [7] concerning the accuracy
of the GRECP Hamiltonian were done on the bases of one-conﬁgurational calculations in the
jj-coupling scheme and of the theoretical analysis presented in [10]. They are completely
conﬁrmed in ﬁrst correlation GRECP calculations of Hg, Pb and TlH [11,13,14]. Besides,
the examined energy-adjusted PPs were found in our tests to be less accurate in general
than the shape-consistent RECP versions generated by other groups.

III. REPLY ON REMARKS OF M. DOLG

Below Dolg’s remarks from the discussed paper and our answers are given. All Dolg’s
quotations are taken from section 5.3 “Limitations of accuracy” in the same order as in the
discussed paper unless the opposite is explicitly stated. The references within the quotations
are given with respect to the list of references in the end of the present comments. To avoid

5

possible problems when extracting quotations from a context, the whole text of section 5.3
is presented in Appendix A.

1. See Table 1 in the Dolg’s paper.

* Our remarks:

The frozen core approximation (FCA) is underlying for all the known ECP methods,
both nonrelativistic and relativistic. Therefore, the accuracy of the ECPs can not be
considered as higher than that of the FCA unless the special corrections like the Core
Polarization Potential (CPP) or our Self-Consistent (SfC) terms are used. Moreover,
the smoothing of the orbitals (spinors), incorporating the relativistic eﬀects, etc. will
further increase the ECP errors. In Table I, we have compiled the errors of the new
ECPPs (with 26 and 54 adjustable parameters) from Table 1 in the Dolg’s paper
together with the FCA errors calculated by us. The HFD code [22] is used in the
corresponding Dirac-Fock all-electron and FCA calculations with the point nuclear
model for the states averaged over the nonrelativistic conﬁgurations. Obviously, having
54 adjustable parameters in the ECPP, one can use them to ﬁt exactly 54 valence
energies. However, the accuracy of the generated PP should not be estimated by the
errors in reproducing the ﬁtted energies. The errors in the valence energies which
were not used in the ﬁtting procedure or other properties must be used. Although,
the number of chemical interesting states in the case of atom is not too large to allow
one to ﬁt almost all of them, this number is dramatically increased in the case of the
“pseudo-atom”-in-molecules.

Therefore, the accuracy of the new ECPPs can not be derived from Tables 1 and 2 in
the Dolg’s paper and additional independent testing is necessary. Unfortunately, we
can not do this because we do not have the parameters of his new ECPPs (see [23]).

2. Dolg:

Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate that for very special cases like Hg, with a closed 5d10-shell
in all electronic states considered, a small-core energy-consistent pseudopotential us-
ing a semilocal ansatz reaches an accuracy of 10 cm−1, which is well below the eﬀects
of the nuclear model, the Breit interaction or higher-order quantum electrodynamical
contributions. We also note that diﬀerences between results obtained with a frequency-
dependent Breit term and the corresponding low-frequency limit amount to up to 10
cm−1. Moreover, the quantum electrodynamic corrections listed in tables 1 and 2 might
change by up to 20 cm−1 when more recent methods of their estimation are applied
[24,25] 1

1Papers are cited according the list of references in the present comments and the numbers of
tables are original.

6

* Answer:

The basic requirement of any fruitful simulation is a transferability of a model Hamil-
tonian to the cases which were not used when constructing this Hamiltonian. We are
“ﬁtting” the Hamiltonian matrix elements in the valence region ﬁrst of all and not
some their combinations of a special kind likewise the valence energies. It is suﬃcient
to use a very small number of DF conﬁgurations for the GRECP generation, with the
basic requirements: a) they should have the same conﬁgurational structure in the core
region as the states of the atom (in a molecule) in the GRECP calculations; b) they
should contain all the spinors required for the generation of the corresponding partial
potentials.

Some special remarks can be done with respect to the Breit eﬀect. The replacement
of the Coulomb-Breit two-electron interaction by the Coulomb interaction (1/r12) in
the PP Hamiltonian is not well justiﬁed by M. Dolg. The contributions from the
(frequency-dependent) Breit interaction were evaluated in the ﬁrst-order perturbation
theory (PT1). However, the Breit interaction is very strong close to a heavy nucleus.
Therefore, the wave function in its neighborhood is seriously perturbed by the Breit
interaction and the higher PT orders are required to consider the core relaxation
for appropriate accounting for the Breit correction [26].
In particular, the random
phase approximation can be used keeping the ﬁrst-order perturbation on the Breit
interaction. As is shown in [26,27], in some cases the core relaxation can reduce the
ﬁnal Breit correction by an order of magnitude. Did Prof. Dolg perform similar analysis
when generating the ECPPs for Hg? After that, what is the need to take account of
the QED eﬀects having an order of magnitude smaller contribution than other inherent
PP errors? What is the proﬁt (advantage) in such an accounting for Breit and QED
eﬀects?

Those modiﬁcations are done by Prof. Dolg which can be done easily, and not those
which should be done ﬁrst of all (i.e. those which give the largest errors). In our work
upon GRECPs, we are eliminating at ﬁrst largest errors, then errors of the next level
of magnitude and so on, step-by-step. The theoretical analysis of the GRECP errors
is always done, thus justifying the approximations made by us.

At last, it would be excellent to perform molecular calculations on a level of accuracy
of 100 cm−1 for transition, dissociation, etc. energies systematically but the modern
correlation methods, codes and computers do not allow one to do this because of the
high computational cost. Our goal on the nearest future is to generate the GRECPs
with “inherent” errors close to (or below than) 100 cm−1 for the valence energies when
treating minimal number of electrons explicitly. In molecular GRECP calculations, it
allows one to attain accuracy within a few hundred wave numbers for the energies of
interest reliably and with minimal eﬀorts.

3. Dolg:

“Therefore, it is important to state exactly which relativistic all-electron model the ef-
fective core potential simulates and, when comparing eﬀective core potentials of diﬀer-
ent origins, to separate diﬀerences in the underlying all-electron approach from errors
in the potential itself, e.g., due to the size of the core, the method of adjustment or the

7

form of the valence model Hamiltonian.”

* Answer:

It is true. As one can see from our papers, we are carefully analyzing the sources
of errors in our GRECP versions. We “state exactly which relativistic all-electron
model the eﬀective core potential simulates”, etc. Moreover, we consider as our duty
to present all the necessary details concerning all the GRECPs which were used in our
papers. Being requested, the GRECP parameters can be received, in particular, by
email.

However, it is not in our responsibility “to separate diﬀerences in the underlying all-
electron approach from errors in the potential itself ” for PPs and RECPs generated
by other groups. How can we separate errors of the Wood-Boring approximation from
the the EACPP ﬁtting errors without knowledge of all the details of ﬁtting, without
having the required codes, and without doing some test calculations with these codes?
Besides, why must we do this? The responsibility for such an analysis is on those who
have generated these PPs and RECPs.

We have written in [11]:
“It should be noted that the energy-adjusted pseudopotential (PP) tested in the
present paper was generated by H¨aussermann et al. [2] using the results of the quasirel-
ativistic Wood-Boring [29] SCF all-electron calculations as the reference data for ﬁtting
the spin-orbit averaged PP parameters. A new 20e-PP for Hg was generated recently
by ﬁtting to the Dirac-Fock-Breit reference data [30], but we do not have the param-
eters of this PP2.

The energies of transitions between the 6s2 and 6s16p1(3P0,3 P1,3 P2) states in the
20e-PP/MRCI calculations employing the CIPSO method [31] are within 100 cm−1
of experiment (see Table 6 in [2] or Table 2 in the present paper). However, the
energy-adjusted PP does not account for the contributions from correlations with the
4f shell, and the basis set used does not contain h-type functions. One can see from
Tables 1 and 2 that the contributions of the two eﬀects to these transition energies are
up to 284 cm−1 and 247 cm−1, respectively. The good 20e-PP/MRCI/CIPSO results
are probably due to fortuitous cancellation of several contributions: the inherent PP
errors (e.g., the 6s1
3/2(J = 2) splitting is overestimated by 1014
cm−1 because of the features of the spin-orbit simulation within the LS-based version
of the energy-adjusted scheme, see Table 4 in paper [7]), the neglect of correlations
with the 4f shell, the basis set incompleteness, etc. A similar situation holds for
transitions between the 6s1 and 6p1(2P1/2,2P3/2) states of Hg+, but errors of the 20e-
PP/MRCI/CIPSO calculations relative to experimental data reach a level of 1000 cm−1
in this case.”

1/2(J = 0) – 6s1

1/26p1

1/26p1

Is it not correct? Similar analysis can be found in our previous paper [7] criticized by
M. Dolg. Moreover, it is strange that such simple one-conﬁgurational tests as in [7]

2See Ref. [23] for more details.

8

were not performed in [2] for their 20e-PP. M. Dolg many times claimed that our test
results with their 20e-PP in [2] are wrong. Where can we ﬁnd his publication with the
conﬁrmation of these claims?

However, let us get back to the paper of M. Dolg. Why is the information about the
states used in the valence energy ﬁtting in the ECPP generation not even presented
there? Where are the ECPP parameters? Because of [23], we cannot check the real
quality of these new ECPPs.

4. Dolg:

“In this context we want to point out that the seemingly large errors for energy-adjusted
pseudopotentials reported by Mosyagin et al. [7,11] are mainly due to the invalid com-
parison of Wood-Boring-energy-adjusted and Dirac-Fock-orbital-adjusted pseudopoten-
tials to all-electron Dirac-Fock data, i.e., diﬀerences in the all-electron model are con-
sidered to be pseudopotential errors.”

* Answer:

Although “the correct relativistic all-electron Hamiltonian for a many-electron system
is not known”, the Dirac-Coulomb Hamiltonian is preferred over the Wood-Boring one.
Moreover, for an “RECP user” the level of the PP errors with respect to the most ac-
curate relativistic Hamiltonian (among the known ones) is much more meaningful than
the question whether the PP errors are due to the unsatisfactorily ﬁtting procedure
of the EACPPs (the small number of parameters, incompleteness of the PP opera-
tor, etc.) or the poor all-electron reference data used for this ﬁtting. Therefore, the
comparison of the all-electron Dirac-Coulomb data with the Wood-Boring-ﬁtted PP
results is correct in papers [7,11], whereas the comparison by Dolg of the all-electron
Wood-Boring data with the Dirac-Fock-based GRECP results in Table XVII from [7]
is not valid and is given in [7] only in order to show “the range of the dispersion of
the data”. Besides the absence of equivalence in the used basis sets, the Wood-Boring
approximation is an additional source for the distinctions between the all-electron and
GRECP molecular data in this table (see also the last item in this section for Dolg’s
remark). The question is also arise how M. Dolg and co-authours can obtain “excel-
lent agreement” (see abstract of [2]) with the experimental data in their previous works
with the help of the Wood-Boring ﬁtted PPs.

5. Dolg:

“It is also obvious from the compiled data that the accuracy of the valence model
Hamiltonian is also a question of the number of adjustable parameters.”

* Answer:

We are very satisﬁed that Prof. Dolg at last recognized the fact of importance of the
number of the adjustable parameters because probably all the EACPPs generated be-
fore had small number of the parameters. The problem is only that the EACPP is a
one-electron operator and the original Hamiltonian contains the two-electron interac-
tions as well. How is Prof. Dolg planning to reproduce the two-electron part with the
EACPP’s ﬁtting parameters?

9

6. Dolg:

“ Claims that such very high accuracy as demonstrated here can only be achieved by
adding nonlocal terms for outer core orbitals to the usual semilocal terms [7,11] appear
to be invalid, at least for energy-consistent pseudopotentials.”

* Answer:

We have revised again our papers but could not ﬁnd the text which could be interpreted
by such a manner as it is done in the Dolg’s paper. Can Prof. Dolg show the places
in our papers where we have written so? The most “hard” (debatable) phrase in our
papers (written in our joint paper [11] with the Tel Aviv group, p. 674, but its RECP
part is on our responsibility) is “...The larger errors for RECPs [21,2] are mainly due
to the neglect of the diﬀerence between the outer core and valence potentials in these
RECP versions (see [10,6] for details).” But “larger errors” means here “larger level
of errors” (it is clear from the context below this phrase where we clarify the origin of
the errors for our concrete calculations and for the used 20e-PP for Hg). Nevertheless,
we are ready to recognize that in the case of the 20e-PP for Hg [2] the (very) large
errors in the transition energies compiled in Table 3 of [11] are due to a bad quality of
the used ﬁtting principles and/or incompetent their application in [2] rather than due
to the neglect of the diﬀerence between the outer core and valence potentials in this
PP (if such a reformulation is more acceptable for authors of [2]).

Obviously, some errors in transition energies can be smaller for an EACPP, especially, if
those energies are ﬁtted when generating this EACPP. The EACPPs should be checked
for those transitions or properties, which were not ﬁtted during the EACPP generation.
Test calculations should be performed with diﬀerent numbers of correlated electrons
and with a good quality of accounting for correlation. A “minimal” completeness of
the basis sets is also required.

As to the importance of the nonlocal terms and to the phrase “This error could be
reduced further upon using a smaller core, but the eﬃciency of the approach would be
sacriﬁced.” written by Prof. Dolg a few lines above, we should remind the following.
Already in paper [6] we have pointed out that when freezing the OC pseudospinors,
the corresponding nonlocal GRECP projectors are not involved in calculations. How-
ever, the accuracy can be very high if partial potentials are generated for nodal V
pseudospinors and not for OC ones thus taking into account the diﬀerence between the
V and OC potentials contrary to the standard RECP. Therefore we considered this
case as a special GRECP version. We have pointed out later (e.g., see [10]) about sim-
ilar alternatives with respect to other our additions (“self-consistent” and “spin-orbit”
terms) to the conventional radially local operator. Obviously, the same (freezing) pro-
cedure can be applied for a larger space of explicitly treated electrons when freezing
the innermost core shells because the diﬀerences between the partial potentials for the
innermost nodeless PSs and the next having one node PSs with the same (lj) are the
most essential. However these cases are not computationally interesting because such
RECP accuracy is of interest for the modern level of correlation structure calculations
which can be achieved treating as small number of electrons explicitly as possible. The
latter is our main purpose. That is why we prefer to change the functional form of the

10

RECP operator, to insert core correlations to GRECPs etc. The only problem is to
do this properly, by a “theoretically-consistent” way, involving appropriate functional
forms. And this should be done eliminating ﬁrst the largest errors. What is the need
to take account of the Breit and other QED eﬀects within PPs if their contribution
are about an order of magnitude smaller than other inherent PP errors?

7. Dolg:

“Moreover, additional nonlocal terms obviously do not improve the performance for
atomic states with a 5d9 occupation”

* Answer:

It is not true. M. Dolg did not present any his results of calculations with GRECPs
or any theoretical analysis. As we know from our correspondence with him, similar
work have not been performed by him at all, therefore, his conclusions are made only
on the basis of our results given in [7]. However, our results and conclusions in [7] are
opposite. In this connection, the adverb “obviously” is very funny.

8. Dolg:

“or in molecular calculations (cf., e.g., tables III and XVII in Mosyagin et al. [7]).”

* Answer:

Concerning the molecular GRECP calculations, the ﬁrst GRECP/MRD-CI results
for spectroscopic constants in TlH [13] lead to opposite conclusions. Some other
GRECP/MRD-CI and GRECP/RCC-SD calculations on HgH, TlH and PbH are in
progress now. As to the spin-orbit-averaged RECP/SCF calculations on HgH pre-
sented in table XVII of [7], they are performed to study “the range of dispersion of
the data” because for the one-electron RECP and GRECP operators it “is impor-
tant information to estimate the accuracy of the RECP approximation both for one-
conﬁgurational and for highly correlated calculations of HgH and HgH+ molecules”
(see p. 1121 in [7]). The above mentioned Dolg’s excerption is certainly the top ana-
lytical result in the commented paper dealing with the pseudopotentials. Following its
logic pattern, we can call this by a pseudoresult.

In fact, almost all that we have written in these comments was written in our papers
earlier and we only have concentrated here on some underlying principles of our approach
as compared to other RECP methods. We regret that our papers have occured to be so
diﬃcult for reading that Prof. Dolg could not clarify the principles and features of the
GRECP method.

We should add that some more remarks could be given concerning the application by
Stuttgart group of the core polarization potential together with EACPPs, their “idea to
ﬁt exclusively to quantum mechanical observables like total valence energies” (see the dis-
cussed paper), the features of the EACPP operator, actions to avoid admixture of the inner
core states which are occupied by the electrons eliminated from calculations etc. Are the
valence energies obtained from the Dirac-Fock-Breit equations observable? Without a good
theoretical justiﬁcation of the transferability and proper application of these very progres-
sive ideas to other ﬁeld, the result can be unsatisfactory. This we have seen on example of

11

application of the Wood-Boring aproximation to the EACPP generation. Moreover, when
developing a new method, one should at least to take into account the basic achievements
in this ﬁeld made earlier. Besides, the accuracy and reliability of a newly developed method
should not be lower than that of already existing methods if their application require the
same computational eﬀorts.

At last, we should say that we did not ﬁnd any serious scientiﬁc analysis of our conclusions
and results in the Dolg’s paper but only some “political declarations” are there. Therefore,
we are not going to answer in future on claims of similar quality as in the commented
paper only because do not want to lose time on such a level of discussion as is proposed by
Prof. Dolg. Any well-justiﬁed critical remarks concerning our GRECPs (or the text in our
papers) are welcomed. We will answer with pleasure on questions dealing with RECPs. We
are ready to (and welcome) any public discussion on the RECP methods (e.g., within the
REHE newsletters) if they will be of common interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to M. Dolg for sending us the discussed paper that have stimulated us

for writing these comments.

The work on development of the GRECP method was supported by the DFG/RFBR
grant N 96–03–00069, the INTAS grant No 96–1266 and by the RFBR grant N 99–03–33249.

12

REFERENCES

∗

E-mail: titov@hep486.pnpi.spb.ru ; http://www.qchem.pnpi.spb.ru .

[1] W. K¨uchle, M. Dolg, H. Stoll, and H. Preuss, Mol. Phys. 74, 1245 (1991).
[2] U. H¨aussermann, M. Dolg, H. Stoll, H. Preuss, P. Schwerdtfeger, and R. M. Pitzer, Mol.

Phys. 78, 1211 (1993).

[3] A. V. Titov, A. O. Mitrushenkov, and I. I. Tupitsyn, “Eﬀective core potential for pseudo-

orbitrals with nodes”, Chem. Phys. Lett. 185, 330-334 (1991).

[4] N. S. Mosyagin, A. V. Titov, and A. V. Tulub, “Generalized-eﬀective-core-potential
method: Potentials for the atoms Xe, Pd and Ag”, Phys. Rev. A 50, 2239-2248 (1994).
[5] A. V. Titov and N. S. Mosyagin, “Self-Consistent Relativistic Eﬀective Core Potential

for Transition Metal Atoms: Cu, Ag and Au”, Struct. Chem. 6, 317-321 (1995).

[6] I. I. Tupitsyn, N. S. Mosyagin, and A. V. Titov, “Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective
Core Potential. I. Numerical calculations for atoms Hg through Bi”, J. Chem. Phys.
103, 6548-6555 (1995).

[7] N. S. Mosyagin, A. V. Titov, and Z. Latajka, “Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective Core
Potential: Gaussian expansions of potentials and pseudospinors for atoms Hg through
Rn”, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 63, 1107-1122 (1997).

[8] N. S. Mosyagin and A. V. Titov, “Comment on “Accurate relativistic eﬀective core
potentials for the sixth-row main group elements” [J.Chem.Phys. 107, 9975 (1997)],
E-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9808006.

[9] N. S. Mosyagin, M. G. Kozlov, and A. V. Titov, “All-electron Dirac-Coulomb and RECP
calculations of excitation energies for mercury with combined CI/MBPT2 method”, E-
print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9804013 .

[10] A. V. Titov and N. S. Mosyagin, “Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective Core Potential
Method: Theoretical grounds”, Preprint PNPI No 2182 (Petersburg Nuclear Physics
Institute, St.-Petersburg, 1997), 81 pp.; Int. J. Quant. Chem. 71, 359-401 (1999).

[11] N. S. Mosyagin, E. Eliav, A. V. Titov, and U. Kaldor, “Comparison of relativistic ef-
fective core potential and all-electron Dirac-Coulomb calculations of mercury transition
energies by the relativistic coupled cluster method”, J. Phys. B 33, 667 (2000).

[12] A. V. Titov and N. S. Mosyagin, “Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective Core Potential
Method: Theory and calculations”, Report on the European Research Conference Rel-
ativistic Quantum Chemistry - Progress and Prospects (Acquafredda di Maratea, Italy,
10-15 April 1999); Russian J.Phys.Chem. (In Russian: Zh.Fiz.Khimii), accepted; E-
print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0008160 .

[13] A.V.Titov, N.S.Mosyagin, A.B.Alekseyev, and R.J.Buenker, “GRECP/MRD-CI calcu-
lations of the spin-orbit splitting in the ground state of Tl and of the spectroscopic
properties of TlH”, to be published; E-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0008155
.

[14] T.A.Isaev, N.S.Mosyagin, M.G.Kozlov, A.V.Titov, E.Eliav and U.Kaldor, “Compari-
son of accuracy for the RCC-SD and CI/MBPT2 methods in RECP and all-electron
calculations on Pb”, to be published.

[15] N.S.Mosyagin, A.V.Titov, E.Eliav, and U.Kaldor, “GRECP/RCC-SD calculation of the

spectroscopic constants for the HgH molecule and its ions”, to be published.

13

[16] A.V.Titov and N.S.Mosyagin, “About incompleteness of the conventional radially-local

RECP operator”, to be published.

[17] W. A. Goddard III, Phys. Rev. 174, 659 (1968).
[18] P. Durand and J. C. Barthelat, Theor. Chim. Acta. 38, 283 (1975).
[19] P. A. Christiansen, Y. S. Lee, and K. S. Pitzer, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 4445 (1979).
[20] Y. S. Lee, W. C. Ermler, and K. S. Pitzer, J. Chem. Phys. 67, 5861 (1977); 73, 360

(1980).

[21] R. B. Ross, J. M. Powers, T. Atashroo, W. C. Ermler, L. A. Lajohn, and P. A. Chris-

tiansen, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 6654 (1990).

[22] V. F. Bratzev, G. B. Deyneka, and I. I. Tupitsyn, Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR 41, 173 (1977).
[23] Prof. Dolg twice refused to send us the parameters of his new ECPPs for Hg, at ﬁrst,
when we were preparing paper [11] (and therefore we were forced to use their previous
PP version for Hg in our RECP comparison in [11]) and then, after publishing the
results with the new ECPPs in the commented paper.

[24] P. Pyykk¨o, M. Tokman, and L.N. Labzowski, Phys. Rev. A 57, R689 (1998).
[25] L. Labzowski, I. Goidenko, M. Tokman, and P. Pyykk¨o, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2707 (1999).
[26] E. Lindroth, A.-M. M˚artensson-Pendrill, A. Ynnerman, and P. ¨Oster, J. Phys. B 22,

2447 (1989).

[27] M.

G.

Kozlov,

S.

G.

Porsev,

and

I.

I.

Tupitsyn,

E-print:

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0004076.

[28] U. Kaldor and E. Eliav, Adv. Quantum Chem. 31, 313 (1998)
[29] J. H. Wood and A. M. Boring, Phys. Rev. B 18, 2701 (1978).
[30] M. Dolg, 1999, private communication.
[31] C. H. Teichteil, M. Pelissier, and F. Spiegelmann, Chem. Phys. 81 274 (1983); C. H. Te-

ichteil and F. Spiegelmann, Chem. Phys. 81 283 (1983).

14

TABLES

TABLE I. The FCA errors calculated by us with the help of the HFD [22] code at the
all-electron Dirac-Fock level within the point nuclear model for the states averaged upon the
nonrelativistic conﬁgurations. The errors of the new ECPPs from Table 1 in the Dolg’s paper. All
values are in cm−1.

conﬁguration

6s2
6s16p1
6s1
7s1
8s1
9s1
6p1
7p1
8p1
9p1

Hg

Hg+

Hg++

ECPPa
0.0
1.3
-0.1
-0.4
1.1
1.6
0.6
-3.3
-0.8
0.6
2.6

error
ECPPb
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

FCAc
0.0
0.6
1.0
4.0
4.3
4.4
3.3
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.5

a energy-consistent pseudopotential with 26 adjustable parameters.
b energy-consistent pseudopotential with 54 adjustable parameters.
c frozen core approximation with the 1s, . . . , 4f frozen shells taken from the 6s2 Hg state.

15

APPENDIX A:

Because the reader can be not familiar with the criticized paper of Prof. Dolg, below we

present its section 5.3, which is discussed in our comments, without any changes.

M. Dolg, Section 5.3 “Limitations of accuracy”

Eﬀective core potentials are usually derived for atomic systems at the ﬁnite diﬀerence
level and used in subsequent molecular calculations using ﬁnite basis sets. They are desig-
nated to model the more accurate all-electron calculations at low cost, but without signiﬁcant
loss of accuracy. Unfortunately the correct relativistic all-electron Hamiltonian for a many-
electron system is not known and the various pseudopotentials merely model the existing
approximate formulations. For most cases of chemical interest, e.g., geometries and binding
energies, it usually does not matter which particular Hamiltonian model is used, i.e., typ-
ically errors due to the ﬁnite basis set expansion or the limited correlation treatment are
much larger than the small diﬀerences between the various all-electron models.

Table 1. Relative average energy of a conﬁguration of Hg from all-electron (AE) multi- con-
ﬁguration Dirac-Hartree-Fock (DHF) average level calculations using the Dirac-Coulomb
(DC) Hamiltonian with a ﬁnite nucleus with Fermi charge distribution (fn) or a point nu-
cleus (pn). Contributions from the frequency-dependent Breit (B) interaction (frequency of
the exchanged photon 103 cm−1) and estimated contributions from quantum electrodynamics
(QED, i.e., self-interaction and vacuum polarization) were evaluated in ﬁrst-order perturba-
tion theory. Errors of energy-consistent pseudopotentials (PP) with 20 valence electrons and
diﬀerent numbers of adjustable parameters with respect to the AE DHF(DC,pn)+B+QED
data. All values in cm−1.

conﬁguration

AE, DHF

(DC)+B+QED

contribution

error

B
0.0
-52.5
-98.6
-220.6
-238.4
-244.1
-154.2
-224.1
-238.5
-244.0
-249.8

QED
0.0
-18.7
-11.6
-42.4
-41.7
-40.6
-41.8
-40.3
-40.0
-39.6
-39.5

PPa
0.0
1.3
-0.1
-0.4
1.1
1.6
0.6
-3.3
-0.8
0.6
2.6

PPb
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Hg++
a energy-consistent pseudopotential with 26 adjustable parameters.
b energy-consistent pseudopotential with 54 adjustable parameters.

Hg

Hg+

6s2
6s16p1
6s1
7s1
8s1
9s1
6p1
7p1
8p1
9p1

fn
0
35632.3
68842.1
154127.4
178127.5
188751.0
122036.8
167514.3
183808.0
191697.2
206962.2

pn
0
35674.4
68885.1
154206.2
178215.5
188843.2
122128.9
167609.2
183903.6
191793.1
207058.4

16

For very accurate calculations of excitation energies, ionization potentials and electron
aﬃnities, or for a detailed investigation of errors inherent in the eﬀective core potential
approach, however, such diﬀerences might become important. Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate
that for very special cases like Hg, with a closed 5d10-shell in all electronic states considered,
a small-core energy-consistent pseudopotential using a semilocal ansatz reaches an accuracy
of 10 cm−1, which is well below the eﬀects of the nuclear model, the Breit interaction or
higher-order quantum electrodynamical contributions. We also note that diﬀerences between
results obtained with a frequency-dependent Breit term and the corresponding low-frequency
limit amount to up to 10 cm−1. Moreover, the quantum electrodynamic corrections listed in
tables 1 and 2 might change by up to 20 cm−1 when more recent methods of their estimation
are applied 98,99. Therefore, it is important to state exactly which relativistic all-electron
model the eﬀective core potential simulates and, when comparing eﬀective core potentials of
diﬀerent origins, to separate diﬀerences in the underlying all-electron approach from errors in
the potential itself, e.g., due to the size of the core, the method of adjustment or the form of
the valence model Hamiltonian. In this context we want to point out that the seemingly large
errors for energy-adjusted pseudopotentials reported by Mosyagin et al.100,101 are mainly due
to the invalid comparison of Wood-Boring-energy-adjusted and Dirac-Fock-orbital-adjusted
pseudopotentials to all-electron Dirac-Fock data, i.e., diﬀerences in the all-electron model
are considered to be pseudopotential errors.

Note that in the above example of Hg the average energy of a conﬁguration (table 1)
and the ﬁne-structure (table 2) of one-valence electron states is more accurately represented
than the ﬁne-structure of the 6s16p1 conﬁguration. The small errors in the latter case
are a consequence of the pseudoorbital transformation and the overestimation of the 6s-
6p exchange integral with pseudo-valence spinors. This error could be reduced further
upon using a smaller core, but the eﬃciency of the approach would be sacriﬁced.
It is
also obvious from the compiled data that the accuracy of the valence model Hamiltonian
is also a question of the number of adjustable parameters. Claims that such very high
accuracy as demonstrated here can only be achieved by adding nonlocal terms for outer
core orbitals to the usual semilocal terms100,101 appear to be invalid, at least for energy-
consistent pseudopotentials. Moreover, additional nonlocal terms obviously do not improve

98P. Pyykk¨o, M. Tokman, and L.N. Labzowski, Estimated valence-level Lamb shifts for group 1
and group 11 metal atoms, Phys. Rev. A 57, R689 (1998).

99L. Labzowski, I. Goidenko, M. Tokman, and P. Pyykk¨o, Calculated self-energy contributions
for an ns valence electron using the multiple-commutator method, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2707 (1999).

100N.S. Mosyagin, A.V. Titov, and Z. Latajka, Generalized Relativistic Eﬀective Core Potential:
Gaussian expansions of potentials and pseudospinors for atoms Hg through Rn, Int. J. Quant.
Chem. 63, 1107 (1997).

101N.S. Mosyagin, E. Eliav, A.V. Titov, and U. Kaldor, Comparison of relativistic eﬀective core
potential and all-electron Dirac-Coulomb calculations of mercury transition energies by the rela-
tivistic coupled-cluster method, J. Phys. B 33, 667 (2000).

17

the performance for atomic states with a 5d9 occupation or in molecular calculations (cf.,
e.g., tables III and XVII in Mosyagin et al.100).

Table 2. As table 1, but for ﬁne-structure splittings. All values in cm−1.

conﬁguration

splitting

Hg

6s16p1

Hg+

6p1
7p1
8p1
9p1

3 P0
3 P0
3 P0

3P1 −
3P3 −
1P1 −
2 P1/2
2P3/2 −
2P3/2 −2 P1/2
2 P1/2
2P3/2 −
2P3/2 −
2 P1/2

AE,DHF

(DC)+B+QED

contribution

error

fn
1987.7
6082.6
22994.4
7765.3
2136.8
939.4
498.7

pn
1988.6
6084.8
22982.3
7768.8
2137.9
939.9
498.9

B
-25.5
-96.8
-72.4
-132.8
-29.0
-12.1
-6.2

QED
0.9
2.9
2.2
4.8
1.1
0.4
0.2

PPa
-14.7
-28.3
-12.4
-14.8
-1.7
-4.6
-3.5

PPb
3.0
-3.5
-9.4
-0.1
0.2
-0.3
0.0

a energy-consistent pseudopotential with 26 adjustable parameters.
b energy-consistent pseudopotential with 54 adjustable parameters.

18

