0
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analytical Cell Potentials for Clathrate-Hydrates from Inversion of Langmuir
Constant Versus Temperature Curves

Martin Z. Bazant
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139

Bernhardt L. Trout
Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
(November 20, 2000)

Experimental Langmuir constants for clathrate-hydrates, which are inferred from phase
equilibrium data using an equation of state and the statistical thermodynamical model of
van der Waals and Platteeuw (vdWP), contain a wealth of information about intermolecular
In the simplest (Lennard-Jones and Devonshire) approximation of a spherical cell,
forces.
the Langmuir constant is related to a conﬁgurational integral involving a spherically averaged
cell potential. All previous attempts to interpret experimental data based on this formalism
have involved numerical ﬁtting with ad hoc functional forms, such as the popular Kihara
potential. In addition to lacking analytical insight, however, such empirical ﬁts often produce
parameters contradicting those obtained by other means. As a more appealing alternative, the
spherical-cell vdWP formula for the Langmuir constant versus temperature can be viewed as
a nonlinear integral equation for the cell potential. In this article, a variety of exact analytical
solutions are derived, and the mathematical theory is used to interpret experimental data for
ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates.

I. INTRODUCTION

Clathrate-hydrates exist throughout nature and are potentially very useful technological materials [1]. For
example, existing methane hydrates are believed to hold much more energy than any fossil fuel in use today.
Carbon dioxide hydrates are being considered as eﬀective materials for the sequestration and/or storage of
CO2.

In spite of their great importance, however, the theory of clathrate-hydrate phase behavior is not very
well developed, still relying for the most part on the ad hoc empirical ﬁtting of experimental data. Since
being introduced in 1959, the statistical thermodynamical model of van der Waals and Platteeuw (vdWP)
has been used almost exclusively to model the phase behavior of clathrate-hydrates, usually together with a
spherical cell (SC) model for the interaction potential between the enclathrated or “guest” molecule and the
cage of the clathrate-hydrate. The SC model was also introduced by vdWP and was inspired by an analogous
approximation made by Lennard-Jones and Devonshire in the case of liquids [2,3].

In the general formulation of vdWP [2], the chemical potential diﬀerence between an empty, unstable hydrate
structure with no guest molecules, labeled MT, and the stable hydrate, labeled H, is related to the so-called
Langmuir hydrate constant CJi and the fugacity of the guest molecule ˆfJ

∆µMT −H = kT

νi ln(1 +

CJi ˆfJ )

i
X

XJ

where i designates the type of cage, νi the number of cages of type i per water molecule and J the type of
guest molecule. In practice, experimental phase equilibria data is used to determine ∆µMT −H .

The connection with intermolecular forces within vdWP theory is made by expressing the Langmuir hydrate
constant as the conﬁgurational integral ZJi divided by kT , which is written explicitly as an integral over the
volume V

CJi(T ) =

e−Φ(r,θ,φ,α,ξ,γ)/kT r2sinθsinξdrdθdφdαdξdγ

1
8π2kT

ZV

where Φ(r, θ, φ, α, ξ, γ) is the general six dimensional form of the interaction potential between the guest
molecule at spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ) oriented with Euler angles (α, ξ, γ) with respect to all of the water
molecules in the clathrate-hydrate. In the SC approximation, which is made without any careful mathematical

(1)

(2)

1

(3)

(4)

(5)

justiﬁcation, the intermolecular potential Φ is replaced by a spherically averaged “cell potential” w(r), which
reduces the Langmuir constant formula (2) to a single, radial integration

CJi(T ) =

e−w(r)/kT r2dr

4π
kT

R

0
Z

where the cutoﬀ distance R is normally and arbitrarily taken as the radius of the cage, although its exact value
does not usually matter because typical temperatures are so low that the high energy portion of the cage r ≈ R
makes a negligible contribution. Although the SC approximation may appear to be a drastic simpliﬁcation, it
is very useful for theoretical studies of intermolecular forces based on Langmuir constant measurements.

Before this work, the functional form of the cell potential w(r) has always been obtained by ﬁrst choosing
a model interaction potential between the guest molecule in a cage and each nearest neighbor water molecule
essentially ad hoc, and then performing the spherical average from (2) to (3) analytically. The most common
potential form in use today is the Kihara potential, which is simply a shifted Lennard-Jones potential with
a hard-core. Using the Kihara potential and spherically averaging the interaction energy, typically over the
ﬁrst-shell only, yields the following functional form for w(r):

where

w(r) = 2zǫ[

(δ10 +

δ11) −

(δ4 +

δ5)]

a
R

σ6
R5r

a
R

σ12
R11r

δN =

[(1 −

−

)−N − (1 +

−

)−N ]

1
N

r
R

a
R

r
R

a
R

and z is the coordination number, R is the radius of the cage, and σ, ǫ, and a are the Kihara parameters.
As a result of the averaging process leading from (2) to (3), the functional form of w(r) is fairly complicated,
and the parameters ǫ and σ are generally determined by ﬁtting monovarient equilibrium temperature-pressure
data numerically [1,4].

There are several serious drawbacks to this ubiquitous numerical ﬁtting procedure, which suggest that
the Kihara parameters lack any physical signiﬁcance: (i) The Kihara parameters are not unique, and many
diﬀerent sets can ﬁt the experimental data well; (ii) the Kihara parameters found by ﬁtting Langmuir curves
do not match those of found by ﬁtting other experimental data, such as the second virial coeﬃcient or the gas
viscosity [1]; and (iii) comparisons of Langmuir constants found via the SC approximation (3) and via explicit
multi-dimensional quadrature (2) show that the two can diﬀer by over 12 orders of magnitude [5,6] (which
results from the exponentially strong sensitivity of the Langmuir constant to changes in the cell potential).
These problems call into question the validity of using the Kihara potential as the basis for the empirical
ﬁtting, and even the use of the SC approximation itself.

It would clearly be preferable to extract more reliable information about the interatomic forces in clathrate-
hydrates directly from experimental data without any ad hoc assumptions about their functional form. Such
an approach may be possible in the case of clathrate-hydrates which contain a single type of guest molecule
occupying only one type of cage. In this case, each of the sums in Eq. (1) contains only one term, and by
using an equation of state to compute the fugacity ˆfJ , the Langmuir constant CJi can be determined directly
from experimental phase equilibria data. Typical data sets obtained in this manner are shown in Fig. 1 for
Structure I ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates [7].

Because the full potential Φ in (2) is multi-dimensional (while the Langmuir constant only depends on
a single parameter T ), the general vdWP theory is too complex to pose a well-deﬁned inverse problem for
the interatomic forces. The SC approximation, on the other hand, introduces a very convenient theoretical
construct, the spherically averaged potential w(r), which has the same dimensionality as the Langmuir curve
CJi(T ) of a single type of guest molecule occupying a single type of cage. (Since we consider only this case,
we drop the subscripts Ji hereafter.) Although one can question the accuracy of the SC approximation, its
simplicity at least allows precise connections to be made between the Langmuir curve and the cell potential.
Such analytical insights, which are necessary for an evaluation of the SC approximation on physical and
mathematical grounds, cannot be obtained from ad hoc numerical ﬁtting schemes.

As an appealing alternative to empirical ﬁtting, therefore, in this article we view Eq. (3) as an integral
equation to be solved analytically for w(r), given a particular Langmuir curve C(T ). Letting β = 1/kT , we
rewrite (3) as

C(β) = 4πβ

e−βw(r)r2dr,

(6)

∞

0
Z

2

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

where we have also set the upper limit of integration to R = ∞, which introduces negligible errors due to the
very low temperatures (large β) accessible in experiments. (This will be justiﬁed a posteriori below with a
precise deﬁnition of “low” temperatures.)

In our analytical approach, some straight-forward ﬁtting of the raw experimental data is needed to construct
the function C(β), but after that, the “inversion” process leading to w(r) is exact. For example, typical sets
of experimental data are well described by a van’t Hoﬀ temperature dependence

as shown in Fig. 2 for ethane and cyclopropane clathrate hydrates [7], and the constant m is generally positive.
(Note that the exponential dependence which we call ”van’t Hoﬀ dependence” in this paper can be expected
based on quite general thermodynamic considerations [8].)

Aided by the analysis, the quality and functional form of these ﬁts are discussed below in section VI. In
order to allow for deviations from the dominant van’t Hoﬀ behavior, however, in this article we consider the
more general form

C(β) = Coemβ

C(β) = βF (β)emβ

m = lim
β→∞

log C(β)/β

where m is a constant deﬁned by

whenever this limit exists and is ﬁnite, i.e. when the prefactor F (β) in Eq. (8) is dominated by the exponential
term at low temperatures. We exclude the possibility of hyperexponential behavior at low temperatures,
log C/β → ∞, which is not physically meaningful, as explained below. The set of possible prefactors includes
power-laws, F (β) = β−µ, as well as various rational functions.

Although we are not aware of any previous attempts to derive interatomic potentials for chemical systems
by solving an inverse problem, the basic idea of “exact inversion” has recently been pursued in solid state
physics, albeit based on a very diﬀerent mathematical formalism. This approach was pioneered by Carlsson,
Gelatt and Ehrenreich in 1980 for the case of interatomic pair potentials for crystalline metals [9,10]. These
authors had the following insight: Assuming that the total cohesive energy E(x) of a crystal with nearest
neighbor distance x can be expressed as a lattice sum over all pairs of atoms (i, j)

E(x) =

φ(xsij )

ij
X

where sij are normalized atomic separation distances, then a unique pair potential φ(r) can be derived which
exactly reproduces the cohesive energy curve E(x).
(Lattice sums also appear in some clathrate-hydrates
models [18], but to our knowledge they have never been used as the basis for an inversion procedure.) The
mathematical theory for the inversion of cohesive energy curves has been developed considerably in recent
years and applied to wide variety of solids [11–15]. For example, the successful extension of the inversion
formalism to semiconductors has required solving a nonlinear generalization of Eq. (10) representing many-
body angle-dependent interactions [14,15]. These theoretical advances have recently led to improvements in
the modeling of silicon, beyond what had previously been obtained by empirical ﬁtting alone [16,17]. Inspired
by such developments in solid state physics, in this work we seek analogous insights into clathrate-hydrate
interatomic forces from the exact inversion of Langmuir constant versus temperature curves.

The article is organized as follows. In section II we discuss various necessary and suﬃcient conditions for
the existence of physically reasonable solutions, and we also derive the asymptotics of the Langmuir curve
at low temperature from the behavior of the cell potential at near its minimum. In section III, we perform
the analysis in the general case, and in section IV, we discuss the speciﬁc case of van’t Hoﬀ dependence (7),
which leads to a cubic solution as well as various unphysical solutions involving cusps. In section V, we derive
analytical solutions for several diﬀerent temperature dependences, which reveal the signiﬁcance of possible
deviations from van’t Hoﬀ behavior for the form of the potential w(r). The theoretical curves are compared
with the experimental data in section VI, and the physical conclusions of the analysis are summarized in
section VII. Relevant mathematical theorems are proved in the Appendix.

II. GENERAL ANALYSIS OF THE INVERSE PROBLEM

3

A. Necessary Conditions for the Existence of Solutions

On physical grounds, it expected that the cell potential w(r) is continuous (at least piecewise) and has
a ﬁnite minimum at ro ≥ 0 somewhere inside the clathrate cage, w(r) ≥ w(ro) = wo. We also allow the
possibility that w(r) is inﬁnite for certain values of r (e.g. outside a “hard-wall radius”) by simply omitted
such values from the integration in Eq. (6). As proved in the Appendix, these simple physical requirements
suﬃce to imply the asymptotic relation (9), where m = −wo. They also place important constraints on the
prefactor F (β) deﬁned in (8), which must be

(i) analytic in the half plane Reβ > c and

(ii) real, positive and non-increasing for β > c on the real axis

where c ≥ 0 is a real number. (Note that we view the inverse temperature β as a complex variable, for reasons
soon to become clear.) Moreover, if the set

S = {r ≥ 0|wo < w(r) < ∞}

has nonzero measure, then F (β) is strictly decreasing on the positive real axis.
It is straightforward to
generalize these rigorous results to the multi-dimensional integral of vdWP theory, Eq. (2), without making
the spherical cell approximation, as described in the Appendix, but hereafter we discuss only the spherically
averaged integral equation, Eq. (6), because it makes possible an exact inversion.

In this section, we give simple arguments to explain the results proved in Theorem 1 of the Appendix. First,

we consider the illustrative example of a constant cell potential with a hard wall at r = rhw > 0,

w(r) =

(cid:26)

if 0 ≤ r < rhw

wo
∞ if r > rhw

C(β) =

πr3

hwβe−woβ

4
3

which satisﬁes the assumptions stated above. The integral (6) is easily performed in this case to yield

which implies m = −wo, the well depth, and F (β) = 4
hw, the volume of negative energy. Consistent with
the general results above, F (β) is constant in this case since S = ∅. For continuous potentials w(r), however,
the prefactor F (β) must be strictly decreasing because S 6= ∅.

3 πr3

The integral equation (6) can be simpliﬁed by a change of variables from radius to volume. In terms of a

shifted cell potential versus volume

u(x) = w(r) − wo where x =

4π
3

r3

the integral equation is reduced to the form

where

Since u(x) ≥ 0 by construction, the function F (β) is clearly non-increasing. In the Appendix, it is proved
that if the potential varies continuously near its minimum (in a very general sense), then F (β) does not decay
exponentially. Since F (β) also positive and bounded above, we conclude

which implies m = −wo. Therefore, the slope of the Langmuir curve on a “van’t Hoﬀ plot” (log C versus
β = 1/kT ) in the low temperature limit is equal to (minus) the minimum energy of the cell potential. Since it
is generally observed that m is positive, as in the case of ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates shown in

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

C(β) = βF (β)e−w(ro)β

F (β) =

e−βu(x)dx.

∞

0

Z

lim
β→∞

log C(β)/β = −wo

4

Figs. 1–2, the cell potential must be attractive, wo = −m < 0, which simply indicates that the total internal
energy is lowered by the introduction of guest molecules into clathrate-hydrates.

The fact that F (β) must be nondecreasing has important consequences for the existence of solutions which
are piecewise continuous and bounded below. For example, consider the class of Langmuir curves of the form

C(β) = βνemβ

(18)

which is useful in ﬁtting experimental data (see below). We have already addressed the borderline case, ν = 0,
in which a discontinuous hard-wall solution is possible. Although it is not obvious a priori, there are no
solutions to the inverse problem if ν > 0, since in that case F (β) = βν−1 is increasing. On the other hand, if
ν > 0, then well behaved continuous solutions are possible, because F (β) is strictly decreasing.

B. Low Temperature Asymptotics of the Langmuir Curve

From Eq. (17), we see that the minimum energy wo = w(ro) determines the leading order asymptotics
of C(β) in the low temperature limit. More generally, one would expect that C(β) at low temperatures is
completely determined by shape of the cell potential at low energies, close to its minimum. Using standard
methods for the asymptotic expansion of Laplace integrals [19], it is straightforward to provide a mathematical
basis for this intuition. For simplicity, here we consider the usual case of a parabolic minimum

w(r) = wo +

k(r − ro)2 + O((r − ro)3)

1
2

for some constants k > 0 and ro ≥ 0, although below we will derive many exact solutions with non-parabolic
minima.

Due to the factor of r2 appearing in the integrand in Eq. (6), the two cases of a non-central or central
minimum, ro > 0 and ro = 0, respectively, must be treated separately. Physically, this qualitative diﬀerence
between central and non-central-wells is due to the spherical averaging process going from Eq. (2) to Eq. (6):
A central well in w(r) corresponds to a unique local minimum of the multidimensional potential Φ, but a
non-central-well in w(r) corresponds to a nonlocal minimum of Φ which is smeared across a sphere of radius
ro.

Beginning with non-central-well case, r > 0, we have the following asymptotics as Reβ → ∞:

C(β) ∼ 4πr2

oβ

ro+ǫ

e−β(wo+ 1

2 k(r−ro)2)dr

ro−ǫ

Z
2β
k

(cid:18)

(cid:19)
2πβ
k

1/2

e−βwo

1/2

Z
e−βwo

∼ 4πr2
o

= 4πr2
o

∞

−∞

e−t2

dt

C(β) ∼ Coemββ1/2 as β → ∞.

(cid:19)
which is the usual leading order term in the expansion of a Laplace integral [19]. Therefore, the experimental
signature of a non-central-well is a Langmuir constant which behaves at low temperatures like

(cid:18)

Comparing (20) and (21), we can identify the well depth wo = −m, consistent with the general arguments
above, but it is impossible to determine independently the location of ro and the curvature k of the minimum.
Instead, any ro and k satisfying 4πr2
2π/k = Co would exactly reproduce the same large-β asymptotics
o
of the Langmuir curve (as would a completely diﬀerent central-well solution described in section V). This
degeneracy of non-central-well solutions revealed in the low temperature asymptotics is actually characteristic
of all non-central-well solutions, as explained below.

p

In the central-well case, ro = 0, the asymptotics must be carried out more carefully because the leading

term derived in (20) vanishes:

(19)

(20)

(21)

C(β) ∼ 4πβ

e−β(wo+ 1

2 kr2)r2dr

ǫ

0
Z

5

The experimental signature of a parabolic central well in the Langmuir curve,

1/2

∞

e−βwo

t1/2e−tdt

0
Z

∼ 4π

2
k3β

(cid:18)
2π
k

(cid:19)
3/2 e−βwo
β1/2 .

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

=

C(β) ∼ Coemββ−1/2 as β → ∞,

is qualitatively diﬀerent from (21), which provides an unambiguous way to separate the two cases using
low temperature measurements. Moreover, unlike the non-central-well case, the curvature k = 2πC−2/3
of
a parabolic central minimum is uniquely determined by the low temperature asymptotics of the Langmuir
curve. Consistent with asymptotic results, we shall see in section III that central-well solutions to the inverse
problem are unique, while non-central-well solutions are not.

o

C. Suﬃcient Conditions for the Existence of Solutions

The primary diﬃculty in solving Eq. (6) lies in its being a nonlinear integral equation of the “ﬁrst kind” for
which no general theory of the existence and uniqueness of solutions exists [20,21]. In the linear case, however,
there is a special class of ﬁrst-kind equations which can be solved using Laplace, Fourier or Mellin transforms,
namely integral equations of the additive or multiplicative convolution type [22,23]

Ψ(x) =

K(x − y)ψ(y)dy

or Ψ(x) =

K(xy)ψ(y)dy,

Q(β) =

e−βEn(E)dE,

∞

Z

−∞
∞

0
Z

∞

0
Z

respectively, where ψ(x) is the unknown function and Ψ(x) is given. Integral equations of the form (25) often
arise in statistical mechanics [24]. For example, the partition function Q(β) for the canonical ensemble is
simply the Laplace transform of the energy density of states n(E)

which means that the n(E) is the inverse Laplace transform of Q(β). In this way, the density of states in the
canonical ensemble can also be obtained from derivatives of the partition function such as the speciﬁc heat.
The formalism based on inverse Laplace transforms can also been extended in various ways to solve related
multiplicative convolution equations arising in Bose-Einstein [11,25–27] and Fermi-Dirac statistics [28].

Although our nonlinear, ﬁrst-kind equation (6) is not of the convolution type because the unknown function
w(r) appears in the exponent, it does somewhat resemble a Laplace transform. This connection is more obvious
in the alternative formulation (16) relating F (β) and u(x), which is equivalent to the original equation (6)
according to the analysis above. In the next section, it is shown that physically reasonable solutions exist
if F (β) has an inverse Laplace transform f (y) which is positive, nondecreasing and non-constant for y > 0.
In light of the necessary condition that F (β) be analytic the right half plane Reβ > c, the deﬁning contour
integral for f (y)

f (y) =

1
2πi

′

c

+i∞

c′−i∞

Z

eβyF (β)dβ

must converge for any c′ > c. By closing the contour in the left half plane, it can be shown that a suﬃcient
(but not necessary) condition to ensure the assumed properties of f (y) is that F (β) decay in the left half plane
(limρ→∞ |F (ρeiθ)| = 0 for π/2 ≤ θ ≤ 3π/2) and have isolated singularities only on the negative real axis or at
the origin with positive real residues. The particular examples of F (β) considered in section V satisfy these
conditions, but the weaker assumptions above regarding f (y) suﬃce for the following general derivation.

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

6

III. ANALYTICAL SOLUTIONS FOR ARBITRARY LANGMUIR CURVES

A. The Unique Central-Well Solution

It is tempting to change variables y = u(x) in the integral (16) to reduce it to a Laplace transform, but care
must be taken since u−1(y) may not be single-valued. This leads us to treat solutions which are monotonic
separately from those from those which are not, an important distinction foreshadowed by the asymptotic
analysis above. As a natural ﬁrst case, we seek diﬀerentiable solutions u(x) which are strictly increasing
without bound (u(∞) = ∞) from a central minimum (u(0) = 0). Such “central-well solutions” correspond to
cell potentials w(r) which are strictly increasing from a ﬁnite minimum w(0) = wo at the center of the cage. We
proceed by considering the inverse cell potential v(y) = u−1(y) with units of volume as a function of energy,
which is single-valued and strictly increasing with v(0) = 0, as shown in Fig. 3(a). With the substitution
y = u(x), Eq. (16) is reduced to Laplace’s integral equation [23] for the unknown function v′(y)

F (β) =

∞

e−βydy
u′(u−1(y))

=

∞

0
Z

0

Z

e−βyv′(y)dy.

Upon taking inverse Laplace transforms, we arrive at a diﬀerential equation for v(y)

whose unique solution is

using the boundary condition v(0) = 0. According to (29), the continuity of f (y) for y > 0 (which is not
assumed) would the guarantee diﬀerentiability of v(y) for y > 0, and hence of u(x) for x > 0.

Equivalently, we can also simplify (28) with an integration by parts

Therefore, the inverse cell potential is given by

where g(y) is the inverse Laplace transform of the function

The cell potential u(x) is determined implicitly by the algebraic equation

Returning to the original variables, we have a general expression for w(r) in the central-well case

This equation uniquely determines the central-well potential that exactly reproduces any admissible Langmuir
curve.

v′(y) = f (y)

v(y) =

f (y)dy

y

0
Z

F (β) = β

e−βyv(y)dy.

∞

0
Z

v(y) = g(y)

G(β) =

F (β)
β

=

C(β)eβwo
β2

.

g(u) = x.

w(r) = wo + g−1

πr3

.

4
3

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

7

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

B. Non-Central-Well Solutions

The simplest kind of non-central-well solution is the central-well (35) shifted by a “hard-core” radius rhc > 0

w(r) =

∞
wo + g−1

(cid:26)

4

3 π(r3 − r3

hc)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

if 0 ≤ r < rhc
if r ≥ rhc

which exempliﬁes a peculiar general property of our integral equation: An arbitrary hard core can be added
to any solution. Note that, if u(x) is any solution of the rescaled equation (16), then so is

for any hard-core volume xhc ≥ 0. The proof is simple:

˜u(x) =

∞
u(x − xhc)

if 0 ≤ x < xhc
if x ≥ xhc

(cid:26)

∞

xhc

Z

∞

0
Z

e−β ˜u(x)dx =

e−βu(x−xhc)dx =

e−βu(x)dx = F (β).

∞

0
Z

Physically, a hard core for the cell potential could represent the presence of a second guest molecule (in a
spherically symmetric model) in the same clathrate-hydrate cage. Alternatively, a hard-core could represent
a water molecule (again in a spherically symmetric model) at the node of several adjacent clathrate cages, in
which case the cell potential actually describes the “super-cage” surrounding the central water molecule.

The arbitrary hard-core just described only hints at the vast multiplicity of non-monotonic solutions to the
integral equation (16), which is a common characteristic of ﬁrst-kind equations [21]. Next, we consider the
general case of a non-central-well, shown in Fig. 3(b), which includes (36) as a special case. To be precise,
we seek continuous solutions u(x) on an interval x1 < x < x2 composed of a non-increasing function u−(x)
and a nondecreasing function u−(x) which are piecewise diﬀerentiable and non-negative. We also allow for a
possible hard-core in the central region x < x1 as well as a “hard wall” beyond the clathrate cage boundary
x > x2. The general form of such a non-central-well solution is

where u−(xo) = u+(xo). We do not assume u′
+(xo) = u′
−(xo), which would imply diﬀerentiability at the
minimum u′(xo) = 0, although we do not rule out this case either. Instead, we allow for the mathematical
possibility of a discontinuous ﬁrst derivative at xo, i.e. a “cusp” at the well position, at least for the moment.
As before, it is convenient to express the solution (39) in terms of two diﬀerentiable functions v−(y) = u−1
− (y)
+ (y) which describe the multi-valued inverse cell potential. Note that v−(∞) = x1, v+(∞) = x2

and v+(y) = u−1
and v−(0) = v+(0) = xo. In terms of the inverse cell potentials, the integral equation (16) takes the form

∞
u−(x)
u+(x)
∞

if 0 < x < x1
if x1 < x ≤ xo
if xo ≤ x < x2
if x < x2

u(x) = 




F (β) =

e−βu(x)dx

∞

0
Z

xo

x1

Z

∞

0
Z

=

=

e−βu−(x)dx +

e−βu+(x)dx

x2

xo

Z
+(y) − v′
v′

−(y)

dy

e−βy

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

+(y) − v′
v′

−(y) = f (y).

v+(y) − v−(y) = g(y)

8

which implies

In this case, the continuity of f (y) would only guarantee the diﬀerentiability of the diﬀerence v+(y) − v−(y),
but not of the individual functions v+(y) and v−(y).
Integrating (40) by parts before taking the inverse
transform yields a general expression for the solution

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

where again g(y) is the inverse Laplace transform of F (β)/β. Unfortunately, we have two unknown functions
and only one equation, so the set of non-central-well solutions is inﬁnite.

The scaled Langmuir curve F (β) uniquely determines only v+(y)−v−(y), the volume diﬀerence as a function
of energy between the two branches of the scaled cell potential u(x), but not the branches v+(y) and v−(y)
themselves. An inﬁnite variety of non-central-well solutions, which exactly reproduce the same Langmuir curve
as the central well solution, can be easily generated by choosing any non-increasing, non-negative, piecewise
diﬀerentiable function v−(y) such that the function v+(y) deﬁned by (42) is nondecreasing. Even the position
of the well v−(0) = xo can be chosen arbitrarily.

For example, one such family of solutions with a central “soft-core” (x1 = 0) is given by

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

where

and

u(x) =

(cid:26)

u−(x)
u+(x)

if 0 ≤ x ≤ xo
if x ≥ xo

v−(y) = u−1

− (y) =

xo − ayb
0

if 0 ≤ y ≤ yc
if y ≥ yc

(cid:26)

v+(y) = u−1

+ (y) = v−(y) + g(y),

for any a, b > 0 and xo ≥ 0. (In the limit a → 0, we recover the unique central-well solution.) Note that
yc = u(0) = (xo/a)1/b is the height of the central maximum of the potential. These solutions, all derived from
a single Langmuir curve, exist whenever g(y) increases quickly enough that v+(y) is nondecreasing, which is
guaranteed if g′(y) ≥ abyb−1 for 0 < y < yc.

Another family of non-central-well solutions with a soft-core can be constructed with the choice

for any 0 < λ < 1 and xo ≥ 0, where yc = g−1(xo/λ). In this case, the cell potential is easily expressed in
terms of g−1(x) as

v−(y) =

(cid:26)

xo − λg(y)
0

if 0 ≤ y ≤ yc
if y ≥ yc

g−1
g−1
(cid:0)
g−1(x)
(cid:16)

xo−x
λ
xo−x
(cid:1)
1−λ
(cid:17)

if 0 ≤ x ≤ xo
if xo ≤ x ≤ xc
if x ≥ xc

u(x) = 




where xc = v+(yc) = xo/λ. This class of solutions exists whenever g(y) is nondecreasing (or f (y) ≥ 0). If
yc = ∞, then there is a hard core u(0) = ∞. Otherwise, if there is a soft core u(0) = yc < ∞, then there is
typically a cusp (discontinuous derivative) at xc, as explained below.

As demonstrated by the preceding examples, it is simple to generate an enormous variety of non-central-well
solutions, with an arbitrarily shaped soft or hard core, and an arbitrary position of the minimum. In spite of
the multiplicity of non-central-well solutions, however, our analysis of the inverse problem at least determines
v+(y) − v−(y) uniquely from any experimental Langmuir curve. This important analytical constraint is not
satisﬁed by empirical ﬁtting procedures.

C. Soft Cores and Outer Cusps

Non-central-well solutions with a soft-core satisfy v−(y) = 0 for y ≥ yc > 0, as in the examples above. In
such cases, v+(y) = g(y) for y ≥ yc regardless of whether or not there is an outer hard wall, which implies
that u(x) = g−1(x) for x ≥ xc, where xc = g−1(yc). If f (y) is continuous for y > 0, then, unless u−(x) has
−(0+) = −∞), any non-central-well solution u(x) with a
an “inverted cusp” at the origin (v′
soft-core must have a cusp at x = xc, as in the examples above. This “outer cusp” in u(x) could only be
avoided if f (y) itself has a cusp at yc which would allow v+(y) to be continuous. However, an inverted cusp in
u(x) at the origin does not necessarily imply an cusp in w(r) at the origin due the transformation x = 4
3 πr3.
For example, if v−(y) ∼ (yc − y)3/2 as y → yc, or u(x) ∼ yc − x2/3 as x → 0, then w(r) would have a physically

−(yc) = 0 and u′

9

reasonable, parabolic soft core w(r) ∼ wo + yc − (4π/3)2/3r2 as r → 0. Nevertheless, even in such cases, if f (y)
were continuous for all y > 0, then both u(x) and w(r) would have unphysical second-derivative discontinuities
at x = xc related to the soft core. In general, a continuously diﬀerentiable, non-central-well solution with
a central soft core could only arise if f (y) were discontinuous at some yc > 0, and such discontinuities are
generally not present.

D. Cusps at a Non-Central Minimum

As mentioned above, the behavior of the cell potential near its minimum (whether central or not) is deter-
mined by the behavior of the Langmuir curve at low temperature, or equivalently, at large inverse temperature,
β = 1/T . The Laplace transform formalism makes this connection transparent and mathematically rigorous.
The asymptotic behavior of G(β) as Reβ → ∞ is related to the asymptotics of the inverse transform g(y) as
y → 0, which in turn governs the local shape of the energy minimum through Eq. (32) for a central well or
Eq. (42) for a non-central well. The leading order asymptotics has already been computed above for parabolic
minima, but the general solutions above show how various non-local properties of the potential are related to
ﬁnite temperature features of the Langmuir curve. Here, we comment on a subtle diﬀerence in diﬀerentiability
between central and non-central-wells, related to the small-y behavior of f (y).

For typical sets of experimental data, including the van’t Hoﬀ form (7), the prefactor F (β) has a bounded

inverse Laplace transform in the neighborhood of the origin

lim
y→0

f (y) = f (0) < ∞.

This generally implies the existence of a cusp at a non-central minimum of u(x), which is signiﬁed by a nonzero
right and/or left derivative. When u(x) is diﬀerentiable at its minimum, it satisﬁes u′
o ) = 0. In
the central-well case xo = 0, the existence of a cusp in u(x) follows from (29)

o ) = u′

−(x−

+(x+

u′(0+) = 1/v′(0+) = 1/f (0) > 0,

but this does not imply a cusp in the unscaled potential w(r) as long as f (0) > 0 because in that case

w(r) − wo = u(4πr3/3) ∼ (4π/3f (0))r3 as r → 0+.

+(0) − v′

−(0) = f (0) < ∞ from (42) along with v′

In the non-central-well case, however, the bounded inverse transform (48) implies a cusp at the minimum
because, v′
+(0) < ∞
and/or v′
+(0) > 0 and/or u′
−(0) < 0. Unlike the central-well case, however,
a cusp in u(x) at the non-central minimum xo > 0 implies a cusp at the corresponding non-central minimum
of w(r). Therefore, we conclude that whenever (48) holds, the only physically reasonable solution is the
central-well solution (35).

−(0) > −∞ which in turn implies u′

−(0) ≤ 0 implies that v′

+(0) ≥ 0 and v′

E. Asymptotics at High Energy and Temperature

The high energy behavior of the cell potential is related to (but not completely determined by) the high
temperature asymptotics of the Langmuir hydrate constant, through the function g(y). For example, the cell
potential would have a hard wall at x2 < ∞, if and only if g(y) were unbounded

Since the empirical modeling of Langmuir curves using Kihara potentials assumes an outer hard-core, Eq. (51)
could be used to test the suitability of using the Kihara potential form, although experimental data is often
not available at suﬃciently high temperatures to make a fully adequate comparison (see below). Whenever
(51) holds, the non-central-well solutions u(x) are also universally asymptotic to the central-well solution

at large volumes x → ∞. This follows from (42) and the fact that v−(y) is bounded, which implies v+(y) ∼
g(y). The exact inversions performed in section V provide further insight into the relationship between small
β asymptotics of the Langmuir constant and high energy behavior of the cell potential.

lim
y→∞

g(y) = ∞.

u(x) ∼ g−1(x)

10

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

IV. LANGMUIR CURVES WITH VAN’T HOFF TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE

Experimental Langmuir hydrate-constant curves C(β) are well ﬁt by an ideal van’t Hoﬀ temperature de-

pendence (7), demonstrated by straight lines on Arrhenius log-linear plots

log C = mβ + log Co

as shown in Figs. 1 and 2 for ethane (Co = 4.733 × 10−7 atm−1, m = 9.4236 kcal/mol) and cyclopropane
(Co = 1.9041 × 10−7 atm−1, m = 10.5939 kcal/mol) clathrate-hydrates [7]. This data is analyzed carefully in
section VI, where alternative functional forms are considered. In the ideal van’t Hoﬀ case, we have F (β) =
Co/β and G(β) = Co/β2. The inverse Laplace transforms of these functions are simply f (y) = CoH(y) and
g(y) = CoyH(y), respectively, where H(y) is the Heaviside step function.

We begin by discussing the unique central-well solution, which is illustrated by the solid line in Fig. 4 for
the case of ethane. The central-well solution is linear in volume u(x) = g(x) = CoyH(y), and cubic in radius

A curious feature of this exact solution is that it has a vanishing “elastic constant”, w′′(0) = 0, a somewhat
unphysical property which we address again in section VI.

The simple form of (54) makes it very appealing as a means of interpreting experimental data with van’t
Hoﬀ temperature dependence. We have already noted that the slope of a van’t Hoﬀ (Fig. 2) plot of the
Langmuir constant is equal to the well depth m = −wo, but now we see that the y-intercept log Co is related
to the well-size, e.g. measured by the volume of negative energy mCo. This volume corresponds to a spherical
radius of

w(r) =

− m.

4πr3
3Co

rs =

1/3

3mCo
4π

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

which is 0.4180 ˚A for ethane and 0.3208 ˚A for cyclopropane.

There are inﬁnitely many non-central-well solutions reproducing van’t Hoﬀ temperature dependence, but
each of them has unphysical cusps (discontinuous derivatives). There will always be a cusp at the minimum
of the potential, since f (y) satisﬁes the general condition (48). For example, the central-well solution can be
shifted by an arbitrary hard-core radius ro ≥ 0

In the case of a soft core, there must be a second cusp in the outer branch of the potential at the same
energy as the inner core due to the continuity of f (y), as explained above. This is illustrated by the following
piecewise cubic family of soft-core solutions of the general form (47):

w(r) =

∞
4π(r3−r3
o)
3Co

(

if 0 ≤ r < ro

− m if r ≥ ro

w(r) =

8π|r3

o−r3|
3Co

(

4πr3
3Co

− m

− m if 0 ≤ r ≤ 21/3ro

if ro ≥ 21/3ro

which are shown in Fig. 4 in the case of ethane guest molecules. An inﬁnite variety of other piecewise
diﬀerentiable solutions exactly reproducing van’t Hoﬀ dependence of the Langmuir curve could easily be
generated, as described above, but each would have unphysical cusps.

Previous studies involving ad hoc ﬁtting of Kihara potentials have reported non-central-wells [1], but these
empirical ﬁts may be only approximating various exact, cusp-like, non-central-well solutions, such as those
described above. Moreover, given that the central-well solution (54) can perfectly reproduce the experimental
data, it is clear that the results obtained by ﬁtting Kihara potentials to Langmuir curves are simply artifacts
of the ad hoc functional form, without any physical signiﬁcance. Kihara ﬁts also assume a hard wall at the
boundary of the clathrate cage (by construction), whereas all of the exact analytical solutions (both central
and non-central-wells) have the asymptotic dependence

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

w(r) ∼

4πr3
3Co

11

as r → ∞ according to (52). Any deviation from the cubic shape at large radii, such as a hard wall, would
be indicated by a deviation from van’t Hoﬀ behavior at high temperatures, but such data would be diﬃcult
to attain in experiments (see below).

The preceding analysis shows that the only physical information contained in a Langmuir curve with van’t
Hoﬀ temperature dependence is the depth wo and the eﬀective radius rs of the spherically averaged cell
potential, which takes the unique form (54) in the central-well case. In hindsight, the simple two-parameter
form of the potential is not surprising since a van’t Hoﬀ dependence is described by only two parameters, m
and Co. It is clearly inappropriate to ﬁt more complicated ad hoc functional forms, such as Eq. (4) derived
from the Kihara potential, since they contain extraneous ﬁtting parameters and do not reproduce the precise
shape of any exact solution.

V. ANALYSIS OF POSSIBLE DEVIATIONS FROM VAN’T HOFF BEHAVIOR

A. Dimensionless Formulation

The general analysis above makes it possible to predict analytically the signiﬁcance of possible deviations
from van’t Hoﬀ temperature dependence, which could be present in the experimental data (see below). We
have already discussed the experimental signatures of various low and high energy features of the cell potential
in the asymptotics of the Langmuir curve. In this section, we derive exact solutions for Langmuir curves of
the form (8) where F (β) is a rational function. Such cases correspond to logarithmic corrections of linear
behavior on a van’t Hoﬀ plot of the Langmuir curve, which are small enough over the accessible temperature
range to be of experimental relevance, in spite of the dominant van’t Hoﬀ behavior seen in the data.

Fitting to the dominant van’t Hoﬀ behavior (53) introduces natural scales for energy, m, and pressure, C−1
o ,

so it is convenient and enlightening to introduce dimensionless variables. With the deﬁnitions

˜β = mβ,

˜C( ˜β) = C( ˜β/m)/Co, and ˜F ( ˜β) = F ( ˜β/m)/mCo,

the Langmuir curve can be expressed in the dimensionless form

˜C( ˜β) = ˜β ˜F ( ˜β)e

˜β.

For consistency with these deﬁnitions, the other energy-related functions in the analysis are nondimensionalized
as follows

˜G( ˜β) = G( ˜β/m)/m2Co, ˜y = y/m,

˜f (˜y) = f (m˜y)/Co, ˜g(˜y) = g(m˜y)/mCo,

where ˜f (˜y) and ˜g(˜y) are the inverse Laplace transforms of ˜F ( ˜β) and ˜G( ˜β), respectively. The natural scales for
energy and pressure also imply natural scales for volume, mCo, and distance, rs, as described in the previous
section, which motivates the following deﬁnitions of the dimensionless cell potential versus volume

Note that ˜x = ˜r3. With these deﬁnitions, the central-well solution takes the simple form,

and radius

in terms of the dimensionless volume, or

˜x = x/mCo, ˜u(˜x) = u(mCo ˜x)/m

˜r = r/rs,

˜w(˜r) = w(rs ˜r)/m.

˜u(˜x) = ˜g−1(˜x)

˜w(˜r) = −1 + ˜g−1(˜r3)

12

in terms of the dimensionless radius. We now consider various prefactors ˜F ( ˜β) which encode valuable infor-
mation about the energy landscape in various regions of the clathrate cage.

(59)

(60)

(61)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)

B. The Interior of the Clathrate Cage

1. Power-Law Prefactors

The simplest possible correction to van’t Hoﬀ behavior involves a power-law prefactor
˜F ( ˜β) = ˜β−µ

for any µ > 0,

which corresponds to a logarithmic correction on a van’t Hoﬀ plot of the Langmuir constant

log ˜C = ˜β + (1 − µ) log( ˜β)

as shown in Fig. 5(a). In this case, we have

˜f (˜y) = ˜yµ−1H(˜y)/Γ(µ) and ˜g(˜y) = ˜yµH(˜y)/Γ(µ + 1),

where Γ(z) is the gamma function. In general, power-law prefactors at low temperatures signify an energy
minimum with a simple polynomial shape.

The unique central-well solution is also a simple power law

or equivalently

2. The Central-Well Solution

˜u(˜x) = [Γ(µ + 1)˜x]1/µ

˜w(˜r) = −1 + Γ(µ + 1)1/µ˜r3/µ.

The cubic van’t Hoﬀ behavior is recovered in the case µ = 1, as is the (asymptotic) parabolic behavior from
(19) and (23) in the case µ = 3/2. Because ˜w(˜r) + 1 ∝ ˜r3/µ, a power-law correction to van’t Hoﬀ behavior with
a positive exponent (µ < 1) corresponds one which is “wider” than a cubic, while a negative exponent (µ > 1)
corresponds to a potential which is “more narrow” than a cubic, as shown in Fig. 5(b). On physical grounds,
the smooth polynomial behavior described by (70) is always to be expected near the minimum energy of the
cell potential. Therefore, the power-law correction to van’t Hoﬀ behavior (67) has greatest relevance for low
temperature measurements in the range ˜β ≫ 1, from which it determines interatomic forces in the interior of
the clathrate cage at low energies | ˜w(˜r)| ≪ 1.

3. Non-Central-Well Solutions

As described above, there are inﬁnitely many non-central-well solutions. One family of solutions of the form

(47) with λ = 1/2 is given by

1/µ

2Γ(µ + 1)|˜r3 − ˜r3
o|
Γ(µ + 1)˜r3

1/µ

(cid:3)

if 0 ≤ ˜r ≤ 21/3˜ro
if ˜r ≥ 21/3˜ro

˜w(˜r) + 1 =

( (cid:2)
(cid:2)

where ˜ro = ro/rs is arbitrary, as shown in Fig. 5(c) for the case ˜ro = 0.65. These solutions are unphysical
since they all have cusps at ˜r = 21/3˜ro near the outer wall of the cage. However, they can still have reasonable
behavior near the minimum at ˜ro for certain values of µ, which could have experimental relevance for low
temperature measurements. Near the minimum, the exact solutions (71) have the asymptotic form

(cid:3)

˜w(˜r) ∼ −1 +

6Γ(µ + 1)˜r2

o|˜r − ˜ro|

1/µ

as ˜r → ˜ro,

(cid:2)

which is cusp-like for µ > 1/2, but diﬀerentiable for 0 < µ ≤ 1/2. For example, the non-central-well has a
parabolic shape in the case µ = 1/2, which agrees with the asymptotic analysis in Eqs. (19)–(21) when the units
are restored, and it has a cubic shape when µ = 1/3. On the other hand, in the central-well case µ = 3/2 and
µ = 1 correspond to parabolic and cubic minima, respectively. Therefore, this example nicely illustrates the
diﬀerence between the low-energy asymptotics of central and non-central-wells described above in section II,
which would be useful in interpreting any experimental Langmuir constant data showing deviations from van’t
Hoﬀ behavior.

(cid:3)

13

(66)

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

C. The Outer Wall of the Clathrate Cage

1. Rational Function Prefactors

The behavior of the Langmuir curve in the high temperature region ˜β = O(1) is directly linked to properties
of the outer wall of the clathrate cage, described by the cell potential at high energies ˜w(˜r) + 1 = O(1).
Although this region of the Langmuir curve does not appear to be accessible in experiments (see below), in
this section we derive exact solutions possessing diﬀerent kinds of outer walls, whose faint signature might
someday be observed in experiments at moderate temperatures.
In order to isolate possible eﬀects of the
outer wall, we consider Langmuir curves which are exactly asymptotic to the usual van’t Hoﬀ behavior at
low temperatures with small logarithmic corrections (on a van’t Hoﬀ plot) at moderate temperatures. These
constraints suggest choosing rational functions for ˜F ( ˜β) such that ˜F ( ˜β) ∼ 1/ ˜β as β → ∞.

(73)

(74)

(75)

(76)

2. Central Wells with Hard Walls

We begin by considering a “shifted power-law” prefactor

˜F ( ˜β) = 1/( ˜β + α),

for any α > 0

which corresponds to a shifted logarithmic deviation from van’t Hoﬀ behavior,

log ˜C = ˜β − log(1 + α/ ˜β).

As shown in Fig. 6(a), this suppresses the Langmuir constant at high temperatures, which intuitively should
be connected with an enhancement of the strength of the outer wall compared to the cubic van’t Hoﬀ solution.
Taking inverse Laplace transforms we have

˜f (˜y) = e−α˜yH(˜y) and ˜g(˜y) = (1 − e−α˜y)H(˜y)/α,

and indeed, since ˜g(˜y) is bounded, all solutions must have a hard wall regardless of whether or not the well is
central, as described above. For example, the unique central-well solution is

˜w(˜r) = −1 − log(1 − α˜r3)/α for 0 ≤ ˜r < α−1/3

which has an outer hard wall at ˜r = α−1/3, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The solution is also asymptotic to the
cubic van’t Hoﬀ solution at small radii ˜r ≪ α−1/3. Therefore, in the limit α → 0, the radius of the outer hard
wall diverges, and the solution reduces to the cubic shape as the deviation from van’t Hoﬀ behavior is moved
to increasingly large temperatures. Since empirical ﬁtting with Kihara potential forms arbitrarily assumes an
outer hard wall, this example provides analytical insight into the nature of the approximation at moderate to
high temperatures, where the Langmuir constant should be suppressed according to (74).

3. Central Wells with Soft Walls

Next we consider the opposite case of a Langmuir constant which is enhanced at high temperatures compared
to van’t Hoﬀ behavior, which intuitively should indicate the presence of a “soft wall”, rising much less steeply
than a cubic function. An convenient choice is

˜F ( ˜β) = ˜β/( ˜β2 − γ2),

for any γ > 0.

(77)

which is analytic except for poles at β = ±γ on the real axis. Although this function diverges at β = γ due
to the overly soft outer wall, the corresponding Langmuir curve

1 − (γ/ ˜β)2
h
shown in Fig. 6(a) could have experimental relevance at moderate temperatures ˜β ≫ γ, if γ were suﬃciently
small. In this case, we have

log ˜C = ˜β − log

(78)

i

14

˜f (˜y) = cosh(γ ˜y)H(˜y) and ˜g(˜y) = sinh(γ ˜y)H(˜y)/γ

which yields the central-well solution

˜w(˜r) = −1 + sinh−1(γ˜r3)/γ.

(79)

(80)

As shown in Fig. 6(b), this function follows the van’t Hoﬀ cubic at small radii ˜r ≪ γ−1/3 but “softens” to a
logarithmic dependence for large radii ˜r ≫ γ−1/3.

VI. INTERPRETATION OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA

We begin by ﬁtting Langmuir constant curves, computed from experimental phase equilibria data, an
equation of state, and a heat capacity model [7] for ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates to the van’t
Hoﬀ equation

log C = mβ + b

(81)

using least-squares linear regression. This leads to rather accurate results, as indicated by the small uncer-
tainties in the parameters displayed in Table I (63% conﬁdence intervals corresponding to much less than one
percent error). The high quality of the regression of log C on β is further indicated by correlation coeﬃcients
very close to unity, 0.99650 and 0.99998 for the ethane and cyclopropane data, respectively. Using the ﬁtted
values for m and Co = eb, the data for the two clathrate-hydrates can be combined into a single plot in terms
of the dimensionless variables ˜C and ˜β, as shown in in Fig. 7, which further demonstrates the common linear
dependence.

Converting the experimental data to dimensionless variables also reveals that the measurements correspond
to extremely “low temperatures”. This is indicated by large values of ˜β = m/kT in the range of 16 to 24, which
imply that kT is less than 6% of the well depth m. As such, physical intuition tells us that the experiments can
probe the cell potential only very close to its minimum. This intuition is ﬁrmly supported by the asymptotic
analysis above, which (converted to dimensionless variables) links the asymptotics of the Langmuir constant
for ˜β ≫ 1 to that of the cell potential for |˜r − ˜ro| ≪ 1. In this light, it is clear that any features of the cell
potential other than the local shape of its minimum, which are determined by empirical ﬁtting, e.g. using
Eq. (4) based on the Kihara potential, are simply artifacts of an ad hoc functional form, devoid of any physical
signiﬁcance.

Since the shape of the potential very close to its minimum should always be well approximated by a
polynomial (the leading term in its Taylor expansion), the analysis above implies that only simple power-law
prefactors to van’t Hoﬀ behavior should be considered in ﬁtting low temperature data. Therefore, we reﬁt the
experimental data, allowing for a logarithmic correction,

log C = mβ + b + ν log(β)

(82)

as in Eq. (67). The results are shown in Table I, and the best-ﬁt functions are displayed in dimensionless form
in Fig. 7. In the case of ethane, the best-ﬁt value of µ = 1 − ν corresponds to a roughly linear central-well
solution ˜w ∝ ˜r0.9 or a cusp-like non-central-well solution ˜w ∝ |˜t − ˜ro|0.3. Although these solutions are not
physically reasonable, perhaps the qualitative increase in µ compared with ideal van’t Hoﬀ behavior (µ = 1)
is indicative of a parabolic central well (µ = 3/2). In the case of cyclopropane, we have µ = −1.4 ± 0.9, which
violates the general condition µ ≥ 0 needed for the existence of solutions to the inverse problem. If this ﬁt
were deemed reliable, the the basic postulate of vdWP theory, Eq. (2), would be directly contradicted, with
or without the spherical cell approximation (see the Appendix). It is perhaps more likely that the trend of
decreasing µ < 1 could indicate a non-central parabolic minimum in the spherically averaged cell potential
(µ = 1/2).

Although it appears there may be systematic deviations from ideal van’t Hoﬀ behavior in the experimental
data for ethane and cyclopropane, ν 6= 0 or µ 6= 1, the results are statistically ambiguous. For both types of
guest molecules, adding the third degree of freedom ν substantially degrades the accuracy of the two linear
parameters m and b, with errors increased by several hundred percent. Moreover, the uncertainty in ν is
comparable to its best-ﬁt value. Therefore, it seems that we cannot trust the results with ν 6= 0, and, by the
principle of Occam’s razor, we are left with the more parsimonious two-parameter ﬁt to van’t Hoﬀ behavior,
which after all is quite good, and its associated simple cubic, central-well solution.

15

On the other hand, there are diﬀerent two-parameter ﬁts, motivated by the inversion theory, which can
describe the experimental data equally well, but which are somewhat more appealing than the cubic solution
in that they possess a non-vanishing elastic constant (second spatial derivative of the energy). For example,
the ﬁts can be done using (82) with the parameter ν ﬁxed at either 1/2 or −1/2, corresponding to either
a non-central or central, parabolic minimum, respectively. The results shown in Table I reveal that these
physically signiﬁcant changes in the functional form have little eﬀect on the van’t Hoﬀ parameters m and
b = log Co.

The diﬃculty with the experimental data as a starting point for inversion is its limited range in ˜β of roughly
one decade, which makes it nearly impossible to detect corrections proportional to log β related to diﬀerent
polynomial shapes of the minimum. It would be very useful to extend the range of the data, using the analytical
predictions to interpret the results. In general, it is notoriously diﬃcult to determine power-law prefactors
multiplying a dominant exponential dependence, but at least the present analysis provides important guidance
regarding the appropriate ﬁtting functions, which could not be obtained by ad hoc numerical ﬁtting. Moreover,
the clear physical meaning of the dominant van’t Hoﬀ parameters elucidated by the analysis also makes them
much more suitable to describe experimental data than the artiﬁcial Kihara potential parameters.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this article, we have shown that pairwise intermolecular potentials (within the spherical shell approxi-
mation Lennard-Jones and Devonshire) can be determined analytically from Langmuir constant versus tem-
perature curves for clathrate-hydrates which contain only a single type of guest molecule occupying a single
type of cage, e.g. ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates. The availability of this analytical approach
obviates the need for empirical ﬁtting procedures for such hydrates [1,4]. Moreover, this approach also allows
a systematic analysis of the functional forms which are typically assumed ad hoc. For example, the ubiqui-
tous ﬁtting procedure involving Kihara potentials actually approximates unphysical exact solutions possessing
cusps. Therefore, such empirical approaches cannot be expected to have predictive power beyond the data
sets used in parameter ﬁtting. Further conclusions of our analysis are listed below:

• The experimental Langmuir constant data for ethane and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates is very well
ﬁt by an ideal van’t Hoﬀ dependence, which corresponds to a cubic central well. However, the data is
also equally consistent with both central and non-central (spherically averaged) parabolic wells because
the range of temperatures is insuﬃcient to distinguish between these cases.

• Experimental data tends to be taken at very “low” temperatures, kT ≪ m, which means that only
the region of the potential very close to the minimum |r − ro| ≪ rs is probed. Therefore, only simple
polynomial functions are to be expected, and ﬁtting to more complicated functional forms, such as the
Kihara potential, has little physical signiﬁcance.

• Physically reasonable solutions to the inverse problem, which are piecewise continuous and bounded
below, exist only if the Langmuir curve has a low-temperature van’t Hoﬀ dependence, limβ→∞ log C/β =
m, with a prefactor function F (β) = C(β)e−mβ /β which is (i) analytic in some half plane Reβ > c and
(ii) positive, real and non-increasing on the real axis. In general, the minimum of the potential is given
by wo = −m.

• For any admissible Langmuir curve, the unique central-well potential is given by Eq. (54).

• The central-well solution for ideal van’t Hoﬀ temperature dependence C(β) = Coemβ is a simple cubic
given by Eq. (54). The attractive region of the potential has depth m, volume mCo, and radius rs =
(3mCo/4π)1/3. Each non-central-well solution for van’t Hoﬀ dependence has two unphysical cusps, one
at the minimum.

• There also exist inﬁnitely many non-central-well solutions of the general form (39), constrained only to
satisfy Eq. (42). Several classes of such solutions with a central “soft core” (a ﬁnite maximum at the
center of the cage) are described explicitly in Eqs. (43)–(47).

• Each one of the multitude of non-central-well solutions with a soft-core typically possesses unphysical
cusps (slope discontinuities), while the unique central-well solution is a well-behaved analytic function.

16

• The experimental signature of a parabolic, non-central-well is a Langmuir curve that behaves like
C(β) ∼ Coemββ1/2 at low temperatures (β → ∞), while a parabolic central well corresponds to
C(β) ∼ Coemββ−1/2.

• If there is a pure power-law prefactor multiplying van’t Hoﬀ behavior C(β) = Co(mβ)1−µemβ with
µ > 0, the central-well solution is also a power-law (70). For certain values of the prefactor exponent
0 < µ ≤ 1/2, there are also non-central-well solutions with diﬀerentiable minima such as (71), although
such solutions still possess cusps at higher energies.

• Rational function prefactors multiplying van’t Hoﬀ behavior, such as (74) or (78), are associated with
non-cubic behavior at the outer wall of the cage, such as a “hard wall” (76) or a “soft wall” (80),
respectively.

These analytical results shed much more light on the physical meaning of experimental Langmuir hydrate
constant data than does the standard approach of numerical ﬁtting. The method of “exact inversion” developed
here may also be useful in analyzing other statistical thermodynamical problems. In practical applications to
clathrate-hydrates, the full power of our analysis could be exploited by measuring Langmuir hydrate constants
over a broader range of temperatures than has previously been done.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Z. Cao for help with the experimental ﬁgures, J. W. Tester for comments on the
manuscript, and H. Cheng for useful discussions. This work was supported in part by the Idaho National
Engineering and Environmental Laboratory.

APPENDIX: MATHEMATICAL THEOREMS

The ﬁrst theorem provides necessary conditions on the Langmuir C(β) so that the cell potential w(r) is
bounded below and continuous. It also interprets the slope of a van’t Hoﬀ plot of the Langmuir curve in the
low temperature limit as the well depth, under very general conditions. As pointed out in the main text, it is
convenient to view the inverse temperature β as a complex variable.

Theorem 1 Let w(r) be real and continuous (except at possibly a ﬁnite number of discontinuities) for r ≥ 0
with a ﬁnite minimum, w(r) ≥ wo = w(ro) > −∞ for some ro ≥ 0, and suppose that the integral

converges for some β = c on the real axis. Then

C(β) = 4πβ

e−βw(r)r2dr

∞

0
Z

C(β) = βF (β)e−woβ

where the complex function F (β) is

(i) real, positive and non-increasing on the real axis for β > c and

(ii) analytic in the half plane Reβ > c.

If, in addition, the set Sǫ = {r ≥ 0|wo < w(r) < wo + ǫ} has nonzero measure for some ǫ = ǫo > 0, then
F (β) is strictly decreasing on the positive real axis (for β > c). Moreover, if Sǫ has ﬁnite, nonzero measure
for every 0 < ǫ < ǫo, then

where the limit is taken on the real axis.

lim
β→∞

log C(β)/β = −wo

(83)

(84)

(85)

17

Proof: Deﬁne a shifted cell potential versus volume, u
reduces Eq. (83) to Eq. (84), where

4π

3 r3

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

= w(r) − wo. Substituting u(x) for w(r)

F (β) =

e−βu(x)dx.

∞

0

Z

Since u(x) ≥ 0 is real, the function F (β) is real and positive for all real β for which the integral converges.
Moreover, for any complex β and β′ with Reβ > Reβ′ > c, we have the bound

|F (β)| ≤

e−Reβ·u(x)dx ≤

′

e−Reβ

·u(x)dx ≤ F (c) < ∞

∞

0
Z

∞

0
Z

which establishes that the deﬁning integral (86) converges in the right half plane Reβ ≥ c and is non-increasing
on the real axis, thus completing the proof of (i).

Next let w(r) be larger than its minimum value (but ﬁnite), w(ro) < w(r) < ∞, on a set S∞ of nonzero
measure, so that 0 < u(x) < ∞ for the corresponding set of volumes. Then for every β > β′ > c on the real
axis we have

On the complement Sc

∞ = (0, ∞) \ S∞, either u(x) = 0 or u(x) = ∞, which implies

e−βu(x)dx <

e−β

u(x)dx.

ZS∞

ZSc

∞

′

′

ZS∞

ZSc

∞

e−βu(x)dx =

e−β

u(x)dx.

From Eqs. (88)–(89) we conclude that F (β) is strictly decreasing on the real axis.

Next we establish the low-temperature limit (85). Given 0 < ǫ < ǫo, we have the following lower bound for

any β > c on the real axis:

eǫβF (β) =

e−β[u(x)−ǫ]dx ≥ eǫβ/2

dx +

e−β[u(x)−ǫ]dx ≥ eǫβ/2

dx.

(90)

ZSǫ/2

ZSc

ǫ/2

ZSǫ/2

∞

0
Z

Combining this with the upper bound, F (β) ≤ F (c) < ∞, we obtain

e−ǫ/2Mǫ ≤ F (β) ≤ F (c)

where Mǫ =
Substituting Eq. (84) in Eq. (91), we arrive at

Sǫ/2

R

dx is a ﬁnite, nonzero constant (because Sǫ/2 is assumed to have ﬁnite, nonzero measure).

log β + log Mǫ − ǫβ/2 − βwo ≤ log C(β) ≤ log β + log F (c) − βwo

which yields

− wo − ǫ/2 ≤ lim
β→0

log C(β)/β ≤ −wo.

The desired result is obtained in the limit ǫ → 0.

Finally, we establish the analyticity of F (β) in the open half plane Reβ > c by showing that its derivative

exists and is given explicitly by

This requires justifying the passing a derivative inside the integral (16), which we have just shown to converge
for Reβ ≥ c. Using a classical theorem of analysis [20], it suﬃces to show that the integral in (94) converges
uniformly for Reβ > c + ǫ for every ǫ > 0 because the integrand is a continuous function of β and x. (The
possibility of a ﬁnite number of discontinuities in u(x) is easily handled by expressing (94) as ﬁnite sum of
integrals with continuous integrands.) It is a simple calculus exercise to show that te−t < 1/e, and hence

(86)

(87)

(88)

(89)

(91)

(92)

(93)

(94)

(95)

F ′(β) = −

e−βu(x)u(x)dx.

∞

0
Z

te−(c+ǫ)t ≤

e−ct
eǫ

18

for all real t ≥ 0. This allows us to derive a bound on the “tail” of the integral (94):

∞

|

X

Z

∞

X

Z

∞

X

Z

e−βu(x)u(x)dx| ≤

e−Reβ·u(x)u(x)dx ≤

e−(c+ǫ)u(x)u(x)dx <

e−cu(x)dx

(96)

∞

1
eǫ

X

Z

which is independent of β. This uniform bound vanishes in the limit X → ∞ because it is proportional to the
tail of the convergent integral deﬁning F (β), which completes the proof. ✷

The proof of Theorem 1 does not depend in any way on the dimensionality of the integral and thus can be
trivially extended to the general multi-dimensional case of vdWP theory without the spherical cell approxi-
mation.

Theorem 2 Let Φ(r, θ, φ, α, ξ, γ) ≥ Φ(ro, θo, φo, αo, ξo, γo) = wo be real and continuous, and suppose that the
integral

C(β) =

e−βΦ(r,θ,φ,α,ξ,γ)r2sinθsinξdrdθdφdαdξdγ

(97)

β
8π2

ZV
converges for some β = c (real). Then all the conclusions of Theorem 1 hold.

The six-dimensional integral (97) of Theorem 2 does not present a well-posed inverse problem for the
intermolecular potential Φ. However, the spherically averaged integral equation (83) of Theorem 1 can be
solved for the cell potential w(r) for a broad class of Langmuir curves C(β) speciﬁed in the following theorem.
The proof is spread throughout section III of the main text.

Theorem 3 If the inverse Laplace transform f (y) of F (β) exists and is nondecreasing and non-constant for
y > 0, then there exist a unique central-well solution (ro = 0) and inﬁnitely many non-central-well solutions
(0 < ro < ∞) to the inverse problem (6). If f (y) is also continuous, then the central-well solution is the only
continuously diﬀerentiable solution.

[1] E. D. Sloan, Jr., Clathrate Hydrates of Natural Gases, 2nd ed., (Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 1998).
[2] J. H. van der Waals and J. C. Platteeuw, Adv. Chem. Phys., 2, 1 (1959).
[3] J. E. Lennard-Jones and A. F. Devonshire, Proc. Roy. Soc., 165, 1 (1938).
[4] W. R. Parrish and J. M. Prausnitz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Develop., 11, 26 (1972).
[5] V. T. John and G. D. Holder, J. Phys. Chem., 89, 3279 (1985).
[6] K. A. Sparks. J. W. Tester, Z. Cao, and B. L. Trout, J. Phys. Chem. B, 103, 6300 (1999).
[7] K. A. Sparks, Conﬁgurational Properties of Water Clathrates Through Molecular Simulation (Ph.D. Thesis in

Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1991).

[8] J. W. Tester and M. Modell, Thermodynamics and Its Applications, 3rd ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,

NJ, 1997).

[9] A. E. Carlsson, C. Gelatt, and H. Ehrenreich, Phil. Mag. A 41 (1980).
[10] A. E. Carlsson, in Solid State Physics: Advances in Research and Applications, edited by H. Ehrenreich and D.

Turnbull (Academic, New York, 1990), 43, pp. 1-91.

[11] N.-X. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1193 (1990); errata, 64, 3203 (1990).
[12] N.-X. Chen and G.-B. Ren, Phys. Rev. B 45, 8177 (1992).
[13] N.-X. Chen, Z.-D. Chen, Y.-N. Shen, S.-J. Liu and M. Li, Phys. Lett. A 184, 347 (1994).
[14] M. Z. Bazant and E. Kaxiras, in Materials Theory, Simulations and Parallel Algorithms, ed. by E. Kaxiras,
J. Joannopoulos, P. Vashista, and R. Kalia, Materials Research Society Symposia Proceedings 408 (M. R. S.,
Pittsburgh, 1996), 79.

[15] M. Z. Bazant and E. Kaxiras, Phys. Rev. Lett., 77, 4370 (1996).
[16] M. Z. Bazant, E. Kaxiras and J. F. Justo, Phys. Rev. B 56, 8542 (1997).
[17] J. F. Justo, M. Z. Bazant, E. Kaxiras, V. V. Bulatov and S. Yip, Phys. Rev. B 58, 2539 (1998).
[18] K. A. Sparks and J. W. Tester, J. Phys. Chem. 96, 11022 (1992).

19

[19] C. M. Bender and S. A. Orszag, Advanced Mathematical Methods for Scientists and Engineers (MgGraw-Hill, New

[20] E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, A Course in Modern Analysis, Fourth Edition (Cambridge University Press,

York, 1978).

1927).

[21] F. G. Tricomi, Integral Equations (Dover, New York, 1985, ﬁrst ed. 1957).
[22] G. F. Carrier, M. Krook and C. E. Pearson, Functions of a Complex Variable (Hod Books, Ithaca, NY, 1983).
[23] E. Titchmarsh, Introduction to the Theory of Fourier Integrals (Clarendon Press, Oxford, second edition, 1948).
[24] R. K. Pathria, Statistical Mechanics (Pergamon, New York, 1972).
[25] N.-X. Chen, Y. Chen and G.-Y. Li, Phys. Lett. A 149, 357 (1990).
[26] B. D. Hughes, N. E. Frankel and B. W. Ninham, Phys. Rev. A 42, 3643 (1990).
[27] B. W. Ninham, B. D. Hughes, N. E. Frankel and M. L. Glasser, Physica A 186, 441 (1992).
[28] N.-X. Chen and G.-B. Ren, Phys. Lett. A 160, 319 (1991).

TABLE I. Linear regressions of the experimental Langmuir constant data [7] for ethane
and cyclopropane clathrate-hydrates on the form log C = mβ + b + ν log(β). Errors reﬂect
63% conﬁdence intervals. The rows where ν = 0, 1/2, or −1/2 correspond to two-parameter
ﬁts with ν held constant.

Guest Molecule

m

b

Ethane

Cyclopropane

9.422 ± 0.043
9.180 ± 0.044
9.664 ± 0.043

10.52 ± 0.85

10.594 ± 0.012
10.335 ± 0.011
10.853 ± 0.012

9.36 ± 0.47

-14.561 ± 0.081
-14.419 ± 0.082
-14.703 ± 0.080

-15.2 ± 0.50

-15.474 ± 0.022
-15.302 ± 0.021
-15.646 ± 0.024

-14.66 ± 0.31

ν

0
1/2
-1/2

0
1/2
-1/2

-2.3 ± 1.8

2.37 ± 0.90

20

 (a)

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

)

1
−
m
t
a
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
i
u
m
g
n
a
L

2000

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

)

1
−
m
t
a
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
i
u
m
g
n
a
L

1800

 (c)

10000

9000

 (b)

)

1
−
m
t
a
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
i
u
m
g
n
a
L

8000

7000

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

1/T(1/K)

3.9
−3

x 10

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

4

4.1

4.2

3.8
3.9
1/T(1/K)

−3

x 10

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

4.4

4.6

4.8

4.2
1/T(1/K)

5
−3

x 10

FIG. 1. Exponential ﬁts of Langmuir constants over the measured temperature range
plotted with linear axes for (a)-(b) cyclopropane and (c) ethane clathrate hydrates. An en-
largement of the high temperature data for cyclopropane is shown in (a). The experimental
data is taken from Ref. [7].

21

(a) 

0
10

3.5

(b) 

3
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

)

1
−
m
t
a
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
i
u
m
g
n
a
L

)

1
−
m
t
a
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
i
u
m
g
n
a
L

2
10

4

4.5

1/T(1/K)

5
−3

x 10

1
10

3.4

3.6

3.8
1/T(1/K)

4

4.2

−3

x 10

FIG. 2. Exponential dependence with inverse temperature of experimental Langmuir
curves from Fig. 1 plotted with log-linear axes for (a) ethane and (b) cyclopropane clathrate
hydrates. Straight lines indicate pure van’t Hoﬀ behavior.

22

y

0

0

y

v
(
y
)

x

(a)

g
(
y
)

u(x)

(b)

g
(
y
)

+

v
 
(
y
)

y

c

-

v
 
(
y
)

u (x)
-

u (x)+

0

0

x
1

xo

xc

x

2

x

FIG. 3. (a) Sketch of a central-well solution, where x is the scaled volume of interaction
and u(x) is the spherically averaged cell potential with inverse v(y) = u−1(y). (b) Sketch
of a non-central-well solution composed of a non-increasing function u−(x) and a nonde-
creasing function u+(x) joined at a minimum of zero at xo, along with a possible hard core
at x1 and hard wall at x2. The two branches v−(y) and v+(y) of the multi-valued inverse
cell potential v(y) are also shown, along with other variables deﬁned in the text.

23

)
l
o
m

/
l
a
c
k
(

 

w

10

5

0

-5

-10

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

r

o
(A)

FIG. 4. Analytical cell potentials for the ethane clathrate-hydrate which exactly repro-
duce the experimental data in Fig. 2(a). The unique central-well solution (54) is indicated
by a solid line, while a family of non-central-well solutions with soft cores (57) is also shown
as dashed lines with cusp-like minima at ro = 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 ˚A. Each of these solutions also
has a cusp at r = 21/3ro, where the energy is the same as the central maximum, and
beyond this distance joins the central-well solution.

24

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

f

  H o f

t

v a n ’

µ
µ
µ

= 1/2
 = 1
 = 3/2

van’t Hoff

µ
µ
µ

= 1/2
 = 1
 = 3/2

(a)

10

∼
C

1

1.5

1

0

0.5

~
w

-0.5

-1

1.5

1

0

0.5

~
w

-0.5

-1

(b)

(c)

∼
β

~
r

~
r

25

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

van’t Hoff

µ
µ
µ

= 1/2
 = 1
 = 3/2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

FIG. 5. Exact inversion of Langmuir curves with power-law corrections to van’t Hoﬀ
behavior in terms of dimensionless variables, as in Eq. (67). (a) Plots of ˜C = C/Co versus
˜β = m/kT for the cases µ = 1/2, 1, 3/2. (b) The corresponding (unique) central-well
potentials plotted as ˜w = w/m versus ˜r = r/(3mCo/4π)1/3. (c) Examples of soft-core
non-central-well solutions of the form (71) with an arbitrarily chosen minimum at ˜r = 0.65,
which all have cusps at ˜r = 21/3(0.65) ≈ 0.819.

0.5

1

1.5

2.5

3

3.5

4

100

(a)

f

f

t   H o

’

n

a

v

α = 2, γ = 0
α = 1, γ = 0
α = γ = 0
α = 0, γ = 1
α = 0, γ = 2

∼
C

10

1

0.1

0

1.5

1

0

-0.5

-1

0.5

∼
w

α = 2, γ = 0
α = 1, γ = 0
α = γ = 0
α = 0, γ = 1
α = 0, γ = 2

van’t Hoff

(b)

2
∼
β

∼
r

26

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

FIG. 6. Exact inversion of Langmuir curves of the form ˜C = e

˜β/(1 + α/ ˜β − (γ/ ˜β)2) in
terms of the dimensionless variables deﬁned in Fig. 5. (a) Langmuir curves in this class of
functions have anomalous high temperature (small ˜β) behavior but are asymptotic to the
van’t Hoﬀ curve (α = γ = 0). (b) The corresponding central-well solutions depart from
the cubic van’t Hoﬀ curve at large radius and energy, indicating diﬀerent properties at the
boundary of the clathrate cage: “hard walls”, if α > 0 and γ = 0, or “soft walls”, if α = 0
and γ > 0.

∼

C

21

g
o
l

20

24

23

22

19

18

17

16

16

van’t Hoff

ethane data

ethane fit

cyclopropane data

cyclopropane fit

17

18

19

21

22

23

24

20
∼
β

FIG. 7. Experimental Langmuir hydrate constant data for ethane and cyclopropane
from Fig. 2 plotted in terms of the dimensionless variables ˜C = C/Co versus ˜β = m/kT ,
where Co and m are obtained by each data set ﬁtting to log C = m/kT +log Co. Ideal van’t
Hoﬀ behavior ˜C = exp( ˜β) is shown as a solid line. Fits including power law corrections of
the form log C = m/kT + log Co + ν log(m/kT ) are also shown as the dotted and dashed
lines (which are very close to the van’t Hoﬀ line).

27

