1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the proximity relation between two
surface-melted clusters involved in inter-cluster
mass-transfer

F. Despa and R.S. Berry
Department of Chemistry,
The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637

October 27, 2000

Abstract

We explore the way free particles produced by dissociating “particle-
hole pairs” on a surface-melted cluster can be transferred to a second,
nearby surface-melted cluster. This mass transport is based on an
inter-cluster direct transfer mechanism of the particles. We found
that in this particular case one cluster may grow at the expense of
another, obeying a temporal power law with the exponent 1/2 for the
average radius (R ∼ t1/2). The change from the expected universal
power law (R ∼ t1/3) is a consequence of the proximity relation be-
tween these two clusters which lead to enhance the eﬀective transport
rates.

It is widely agreed that, under certain conditions, clusters may exhibit
more than two phaselike forms coexisting in dynamic equilibrium.[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
For example, Ar55 is expected to show, depending on the temperature range,
coexistence of solidlike, homogeneously melted forms and surface-melted
either in an ensemble at any instant or in the time history of a single
cluster.[4, 5] It is also equally possible, e.g., for the solid form to be in equi-
librium with only the surface-melted form and for the surface-melted form

1

to coexist at higher temperatures with the liquid. There may or may not
be a temperature range in which the surface-melted form is the only stable
species.

The surface-melting phenomenon is usually exhibited in bulk matter and
in large clusters (with about 50 or more particles, usually) at temperatures
or energies a little below the temperatures or energies of homogeneous melt-
ing. This process involves local minima on the potential energy surface of
the system corresponding to one or a few of the particles from the surface
layer moving into local sites above the surface. The promoted particles are
rather free and ﬂoat on the cluster surface while all the other particles in the
surface layer undergo large-amplitude, anharmonic oscillations. The numer-
ical experiments indicate that the surface is liquidlike and all the particles
of the surface, including the ﬂoaters, do permute among themselves without
involving inner layers of the cluster.

The statistical mechanical underpinning of these ﬁndings allow for one
other kind of behavior yet to be observed. This would be a dynamical process
within which free particles produced by dissociating “particle-hole pairs” on a
surface-melted cluster are allowed to recombine with available vacancies on a
second, nearby surface-melted cluster. The inter-cluster direct mass transfer
arisen in this way involves pairs of surface-melted clusters in a dense cluster
ensemble. The occurrence of this process is limited by the energetic need to
drive the particle ﬂow and by an obvious requirement on the nearest-neighbor
distance. We assume the surface-melted clusters are close to each other such
that the direct transfer of the particles makes sense. The escape energy for the
itinerant particle is achieved by thermal excitation and possible interaction
with the surface vacancies on the neighbor cluster. The probability of transfer
is high if the solid angle in the direction of jump is large. Therefore, the
net ﬂow of particles proceeds from the small cluster, with large curvature,
to the large cluster in the pair, which has smaller curvature. Note that,
an increase of the nearest-neighbor distance between surface-melted clusters
over a critical value may lead to change the transport mechanism and sets
in crossover phenomena.

The investigation of the direct mass transfer between neighboring surface-
melted clusters is of both theoretical and experimental interest. First of
all, this is a useful way to increase our understanding of phase separation,
coarsening[6] and crossover phenomena.[7, 8, 9, 10] The process can also
have some relevance in describing kinetic transformations of the cluster-

2

assembled materials. Second, the direct transfer mechanism of particles
between surface-melted clusters oﬀers the prototype of grain growth which
deviates from the expected universal power law (S ∼ t2/3) of the classical
Ostwald ripening theory.[6] Generalization for solid clusters is straightfor-
ward.

Making reference only to the cluster-pair problem appears as a strong
limitation in the broad context as declared above. Usually, more than two
individuals in the entire cluster ensemble may act in this process. We be-
lieve that, for a dense cluster distribution, the chief particle transfer occurs,
anyway, between nearest neighboring clusters, along the shortest separation
distance where the particle concentration gradient is greatest possible.

It is the purpose of this work to explore the dynamics of such a process.
The modelling starts by assuming that the separation distance between the
surface-melted clusters involved in this process, say ξ, is of order of mag-
nitude of the characteristic diﬀusion length l (ξ ≃ l).
In this context, the
particles released from one cluster may reach the second, nearby cluster by
performing an inter-cluster direct jump. Next, we assume that the surface-
melting process produces an amount of “particle-hole pairs”at the surface of
each cluster. The number M of “particle-hole pairs” is in direct proportion
with the number of atoms on the cluster surface of area S and depends on
the temperature T

M ≃ Sσ exp

−Ep−h
(cid:18)

kBT (cid:19)

,

where σ stands for the surface particle density, Ep−h is the energy to excite
a particle above the melted surface (the ”particle-hole pair” creation energy)
and kB has the usual meaning. The ﬂoating particles perform continuous
permutations (atomic scale jumps) among energetically equivalent sites (va-
cancies) on the cluster surface with the frequency

(1)

(2)

υ0 = υp−h exp

− E0
(cid:18)

kBT (cid:19)

,

where υp−h is the vibration frequency of the ”particle-hole pair” and E0 is
the energy cost of the ”on-site” jump. The equivalent sites on the surface of
this cluster are labelled by i, i = 1, M.

According to numerical experiments,[4, 5] the ﬂoating particles are rather
free and get easily dissociate from the cluster surface. We suppose these par-
ticles can jump to the nearest neighbor cluster, over the separation distance

3

ξ, where may recombine with vacancies of the host melted surface. The
equivalent sites on the surface of the second, nearby, cluster (of surface area
S∗) are labelled by k, k = 1, M ∗ with M ∗ given by

The ”inter-site” transfer frequency is denoted by

M ∗ ≃ S∗σ exp

−Ep−h
(cid:18)

kBT (cid:19)

.

υ ≃ υp−h exp

− Ed
(cid:18)

kBT (cid:19)

,

(3)

(4)

where Ed stands for the energy cost to dissociate the ”particle-hole pair”.

We place now one cluster at x and the other at x + ξ and apply to this
mass-transfer process a kinetic approach based on a system of master equa-
tions which describe both permutations and escapes of itinerant particles.[11]
Accordingly, the rate of change of the particle number at every site ”i” on
the melted surface of the cluster placed at x may be written as

ni(x, t) = υ0

nj(x, t) − υ0

ni(x, t) +

(5)

M

Xi6=j=1
M ∗′

Xk=1

υ

nk(x + ξ, t) − υ

ni(x, t)

.

After some simpliﬁcations, this becomes

ni(x, t) = υ0

[nj(x, t) − ni(x, t)] +

(6)

υ

nk(x + ξ, t) − υM ∗′ni(x, t) .

∂
∂t

∂
∂t

The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of the equation accounts for the move-
ment of the particles on the surface of the cluster (the number of ﬂoaters
is conserved by this movement) while, the second term includes all trans-
fer possibilities of the particles to the second, nearby cluster (naturally, this
transfer changes the particle number at each site i). Obviously, those sites on
cluster surfaces which do not face each other are excepted from the calculus.
Therefore, M ∗′ counts the eﬀective available sites on the surface of the cluster

M

Xi6=j=1
M ∗′

Xk=1

M

Xi6=j=1
M ∗′

Xk=1

4

placed at x + ξ which can be reached by a direct jump, M ∗′ = f M ∗ where
f is the weight of the geometrical obstruction (roughly, f ≃ 1
2). Itinerant
particles, subject of ”inter-site” jumps, distribute themselves, quickly, over
the whole surface area by ”on-site” jumps (with the frequency υ0, υ0 ≫ υ).
In this way, all the ”particle-hole pairs” get involved in the transport process.
By summing up over all sites ”i” in (6) we obtain

∂n
∂t

= υbn∗ − υf n ,

which is the transport equation for the particle number n(x, t) =
with n∗(x + ξ, t) =
backward eﬀective transition rates

M ′
i=1 ni(x, t)
M ∗′
k=1 nk(x + ξ, t). υf and υb stand for the forward and

P

P

(7)

(8)

υf ≃ 1
2
υb ≃ 1
2

M ∗υ =

Mυ =

S∗σ
2
Sσ
2

kB T

υp−he− E
υp−he− E

kB T

,

where E = Ed +Ep−h. The same set of equations (5 − 7) apply for the cluster
placed at x + ξ and one get straightforwardly the transport equation for the
particle number n∗(x + ξ, t) =
∂n∗
∂t

M ∗′
k=1 nk(x + ξ, t) as

= υf n − υbn∗

(9)

P

.

By looking at equations (7 − 9) we may infer that the net ﬂow of itinerant
particles occurs in the direction of the large cluster where the solid angle of
the particle jump is large. For example, we may consider that at the initial
moment of time t = 0, the cluster placed at x + ξ is larger by comparing
with the other, S∗ > S, which means that υf > υb. Consequently, the
cluster placed at x + ξ starts growing on the expense of the other which
shrinks in time. The corresponding variation in time of the cluster surfaces
S∗ and S have to be in direct proportion with the instant numbers of particle
concentrations n and n∗ given by kinetic equations (7 − 9) and should depend
on the rate of spreading over the cluster surface (this is given by the transfer
frequency υ0, subject of eq. 2). The fact can be expressed by the following
set of coupled diﬀerential equations
1
A

= n∗ (t) ;

= −n (t)

(10)

1
A
1
B

dS∗
dt
∂n∗
∂t

dS
dt
= nS∗ − n∗S;

= n∗S − nS∗

,

1
B

∂n
∂t

5

where the forward and backward transition rates υf,b in above were replaced
by (8) and use has been made of eq. (2) which render for the constants A
and B

A =

υp−h
σ

e−

E0

kB T ; B ≃ συp−h

e−

E
kB T

.

2

(11)

The evolution in time of cluster sizes depends on the degree of melting
of their surfaces by the corresponding energy cost E = Ep−h + Ed and by
the characteristic (anharmonic) oscillation frequency υp−h.
In Fig. 1, we
displayed the evolution in time of the surface area for the growing cluster,
S∗ (t), following from the inter-cluster direct transfer mechanism of particles
(10) (the curve a). We may roughly
with the growth law given by eqs.
approximate the growth law goes linearly (S∗ ∼ t), which means the increase
of the average radius of the cluster obeys a power law with the exponent
equal to 1/2 .[12]

We may observe that, actually, the set of eqs. (10) are general equations
and can be used to describe the eﬀective mass-transfer in any situation in-
volving pairs of clusters which are not necessarily surface-melted but satisfy
the appropriate proximity requirement (ξ ≃ l).
In the general case, E is
simply the dissociation energy for an atom at the cluster surface and υp−h
becomes the surface vibration frequency (υ).

The result obtained above refers to the mechanism of direct transfer of
particles between neighboring clusters. In principle, the process can switch
to an asymptotic transport regime by increasing the separation distance be-
tween the two clusters. For widely separated clusters, the latter case resumes
to an ideal one, where there is only one cluster growing directly from solution.
The cluster growth obeys, in this case, the well-known power law

R ∼ t1/3 ,

(12)

for the average radius and is known as the Ostwald ripening process.[6] The
growth of surface area goes as ∼ t2/3, in this case. For comparison, we
displayed in Fig. 1 the growth law obeying the 2/3 power law (see the curve
b).

The asymptotic regime occurs naturally in our model by letting the sep-
aration distance ξ between clusters go to inﬁnity (ξ ≫ l) which allows the
itinerant particles to proceed by a random walk. By looking above we can
see that this crossover between the direct particle transfer regime and the
asymptotic one can be set up by transforming the kinetic equation (7) into

6

a diﬀusion-like type of equation. This transformation requires υf = υb ≡ υ
and a Taylor expansion up to second order of the concentration functions.
The procedure allows to obtain the diﬀusion coeﬃcient (D ∼ υl2) which is
the constant associated with the diﬀusion through the background matrix at
large distances from the shrinking cluster. The rate of growth is then given
by (12). Of course, the transition to the asymptotic regime proceeds grad-
ually, being characterized by various transient values of the time exponents
in the range 1/2 through 1/3. Finally, we can note that the main factor of
delaying the setting up of the asymptotic regime is the proximity relation
between the two clusters involved in the mass-transfer.

R ∼ t1/2
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

As one can see, the limiting regime

identiﬁed here in the clus-
ter growth process, namely the inter-cluster direct transfer of particles, has
no relevant statistical aspects: this is a particle transfer process between
two neighboring surface-melted clusters (therefore, essentially a cluster-pair
problem). The statistical size distribution of clusters may change only irrel-
evantly at its two ends, where the small and the large clusters are placed.
The statistical aspects are signiﬁcant, in the sense that the distribution is
much and fastly aﬀected, in the transient regimes intervening between the
two limiting ones (R ∼ t1/2, R ∼ t1/3) described above.

References

[1] V.V. Nauchitel and A.J. Pertsin, Mol. Phys. 40 1341 (1980)

[2] H.-P. Cheng and R.S. Berry, in Proceedings of the Symposium on Clus-
ters and Cluster-Assembled Materials, 1991, R. Averbach, Ed. (Materi-
als Research Society, Pittsburgh, 1991), p. 241

[3] H.-P. Cheng and R.S. Berry, Phys. Rev. A 45 7969 (1992)

[4] R.E. Kunz and R.S. Berry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 3987 (1993)

[5] R.E. Kunz and R.S. Berry, Phys. Rev. E 49 1985 (1994)

[6] See, for example, S. W. Koch, Dynamics of First-Order Phase Tran-
sitions in Equilibrium and Non-Equilibrium Systems, in Lecture Notes
in Physics, 207, Springer, Berlin (1984); P.W. Voorhees, Annu. Rev.

7

Matter Sci. 22, 197 (1992) and A.J. Bray, Adv. Phys. 43 357 (1994)
for review of the traditional Lifshitz-Slyozov-wagner theory. Other new
approaches employing the renormalization - group method are studied
in P.C. Hohenberg, and B.I. Halperin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49 435 (1977);
G. F. Mazenko, O. T. Valls, and F. C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B31 4453
(1985); 32 5807 (1985) and A.J. Bray, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 2841 (1989).

[7] J. L. Lebowitz, J. Marro and M. H. Kalos, Acta Metall. 30 297 (1982)

[8] A. Cumming, P. Wiltzius and F. S. Bates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 863
(1990); A. Cumming, P. Wiltzius, F. S. Bates and J. H. Rosendale,
Phys. Rev. A 45 885 (1992)

[9] M. Tokuyama and Y. Enomoto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 312 (1992); Phys.

Rev. E 47 1156 (1993)

[10] G. Coulon, B. Collin, D. Chatenay and Y. Gallot, J. Phys. II 3 697

(1993)

[11] F. Despa and M. Apostol, Solid State Commun. 94 153 (1995); J.
Phys.&Chem. Solids 57 1231 (1996); F. Despa and V. Topa, Z. Phys. D
38 65 (1996); F. Despa, phys. stat. sol.(b), 191 31 (1995)

[12] this result is obtained also for an interface kinetic limited growth, see

J.A. Marqusee and J. Ross, J. Chem. Phys. 79 373 (1983)

Figure caption
Fig. 1 - The growth of the surface area of a surface-melted cluster by the
inter-cluster direct transfer mechanism (a) in comparison with the asymptotic
regime of the Ostwald ripening process (b). The parameters employed in the
present computation are: υp−h = 2 103 s−1, E0 = 0.6 eV , E = 0.82 eV ,
kT = 0.05 eV and σ = 1/4 ˚A−2.

8

This figure "chicc4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105073v1

