1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Relaxation dynamics in the presence of
unequally spaced attractors along the reaction
coordinate

F. Despa and R.S. Berry
Department of Chemistry,
The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637

December 1, 2000

Abstract

We show how reaction coordinate path lengths aﬀect the relax-
ation eﬃciency of a complex system. To this purpose, we consider the
metric contributions to the transition rates. These metric contribu-
tions preserve informations about the geometry change of the system
at the barrier crossing and, therefore, are directly related to the path
lengths. The output of the present work can lead to identify a way
to enrich our knowledge about the ability of the complex systems to
relax only to preferential structures.

The diﬀerent aspects of the topographies and topologies of multidimen-
sional potential surfaces of polyatomic molecules, clusters, and nanoscale
particles and the way they govern the dynamics and phaselike behavior of
these systems are currently receiving a great interest; for reviews, see [1, 2, 3]
and the references therein. As a result, a new picture of their energy land-
scape is emerging which greatly enhances our understanding in this pressing
issue. Despite the enormous power to do computations and many methods
for extracting useful information, the problem of relating potential surfaces
of complex systems to their relaxatio is far from a complete solution.

1

For complex systems, development of better potential functions still re-
mains clearly a priority. We can say that, at least, starting from available ex-
pressions for the interaction between and among the system constituents, ac-
curate potential energy surfaces (PES) may be constructed for many systems.
Finding minima and saddles on potential surfaces has become a straightfor-
ward matter by employing some of the most widely used algorithms or com-
binations thereof.[4, 5, 6, 7] As it evidenced the problem shifted from how
to ﬁnd minima eﬃciently to what method should be employed to provide a
better connection between the topography and the dynamics on the surface.
Statistical methods,[8, 9, 10] especially that based on the topography diagno-
sis procedure,[8] achieved considerable success, caying the study of complex
systems to the point where one can begin to infer dynamics of ﬂow on the
surface from the general characteristics of the topography. A serious short-
coming of the existing dynamical studies, however, has to be pointed out:
virtually, all of them describe the thermally activated barrier crossing by the
traditional transition state theory (TST) rate model which deals only with
the height of the barrier and the densities of initial and saddle states.[11] No
information about the geometrical structures of the initial and saddle sites
in this approach. From this point of view, there is a limit to the precision
with which we can characterize the capability of complex systems to relax
preferentially to one of only a limited number of geometrical structures from
the vastly larger variety that the system might exhibit. However, there are
other ways to compensate for this lack of information.
It was shown, for
example, that the topographical properties of the potential energy surface
(PES) determine the extent to which the system is either glass-forming or
focusing on regular structures.[2, 8, 12] In addition, qualitative interpreta-
tions of the interplay between structure and dynamics have been made of
the path length distributions between connected minima along the reaction
coordinate.[12, 13]

For a better understanding of dynamics, it is now useful to investigate
the relation between the variety of path lengths between neighboring minima
along the reaction coordinate of a speciﬁc PES and the ﬂow of probability
between those minima. We attempt in the following to get more insight into
this particular aspect by invoking a generalization of transition-state theory
(TST) to express the transition rates on the PES.[14] To this purpose, we
include the metric contributions to the transition rates and speculate on their
relation to the reaction coordinate paths brought about in this way. We work

2

out a simple three-level system with a model surface based on a ”nearest-
neighbor” connection pattern and focus on the ability of the system to ﬁnd
the global minimum under the assumption of unequal path lengths between
connected minima.

Let x denote the reaction coordinate of a complex system with N degrees
of freedom whose dynamics is governed by an appropriate potential surface.
The reaction coordinate x is a function of all the degrees of freedom x =
(q1, ...qN ; p1, ...pN ), where qi stands for the ith conﬁguration coordinate and
pi for its momentum. In the following, we restrict our considerations to a
small region of the PES containing two states of local stability Θ1 and Θ2,
for which the reaction coordinate takes the particular values x1 and x2 with
the corresponding energy levels E1 and E2, respectively.
In general, these
two domains of attraction might be separated by barriers containing one
or possibly more saddle points, possible unstable limit cycles, or even more
complex unstable attractors, including combinations thereof. For most of
the following we shall restrict our discussion of the theory to the situation in
which two adjacent attracting basins are separated by a single saddle point.
In the present case, we assume that between the local minima Θ1 and Θ2
xa.
there is a transition state at x(1−2) ≡

Generally, the forward TST rate w1−2 is given by[15]

δ (x

w1−2 = h

−
h
where δ and θ are the usual delta- and step-functions. Here, the average
...
i
denotes an equilibrium average over the canonical probability density. The
integration over the momenta is straightforward and leads to

(1)

h

,

.x (a) θ [
x)

xa)
θ (xa −

i

.x (a)]
i

w1−2 = (2πβ)

−1/2 [δ (x

xa)
−
[θ (xa −

]

|∇Q (x)
x)]

|

,

(2)

2

i

i

(cid:16)

P

∂x
∂Qi

2 =
and Qi are the mass-weighted coordinates
|∇Q (x)
where
|
Qi = qim1/2
[...] indicates an average over the coordinates only. Fur-
.
ther simpliﬁcations in (2) can be achieved by integrating over the coordi-
(cid:16)
nates of the center-of-mass position R and all orientations Ω relative to a
reference conﬁguration of the system. This follows the coordinate transform-
(R, Ω; f1...fm), where f are the internal coordinates (in
ing (Q1, ..., QN )

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

→

3

number, m = N
6). The internal coordinates allow us to describe forces
acting in the system in terms of the potential function U (f). For example,
x)] can be written after suitable
the number of particle in the well [θ (xa −
integrations as

−

[θ (xa −

x)] =

Z

df1...dfmJ (f) θ (x (f)) exp

U (f)
kBT !

.

 −

(3)

J (f) is the integrated Jacobian of the coordinate transformation and com-
prises the determinant of the metric tensor times the volume of the system
and factors resulting from integrations over the orientational degrees of free-
dom.

In the low temperature limit (βU (f )

kB T ), eq. (2) can
be evaluated by a Gaussian steepest-descent approximation. The procedure
needs to expand the eﬀective potential Uef f (f) = U (f)
kBT ln J (f) to
second order at the saddle point (a) and at the local minimum (Θ1) . After
some simple algebra, the ﬁnal formula for the TST forward rate can be given
in the form

1, with β = 1

≫

−

M−1/2

i

i

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

m

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:18)

−

2π

(4)

exp (

i=1 λ(1)
m−1
i=1 λ(a)

βE1−a) .

w1−2 ≃ (cid:12)

Ja
J1 (cid:19) Q
Q
Note that in the case of multiple transitions states we have to count each
contribution separately and write the rate as a sum over pathways.[8] The
≃
sign is used instead of the equality sign because of terms of order O
com-
pared to unity have been neglected in above. M is the mass matrix and the
indices (a) and (1) indicate that the corresponding quantities are evaluated
at the saddle point and the local minimum 1, respectively. E1−a measures
the barrier height for the forward transition. λi are the eigen values of the
force constant matrix, that is the covariant second derivative of the energy.
The Jacobians J1,a in eq. (4) contain information about the volume, bond
lengths and orientations of the system at the local minima Θ1 and the sad-
dle point, respectively. Equivalently said, the metric contributions J1,a are
directly related to the values of the reaction coordinate at these particular
sites the system is visiting in the evolution through the conﬁguration space.
Under these circumstances, the above contributions modify the rate constant
by a multiplicative factor. This factor is the ratio between the two Jacobians

1
βf

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

4

corresponding to the atomic arrangements at the saddle point and at the po-
sition of the initial well, respectively, all taken in the same reference frame.
Within the Gaussian steepest-descent approximation for integrations in the
phase space, this Jacobian ratio can be taken constant. for any set of coordi-
nates employed. The backward rate w2−1 may be obtained straightforwardly
by replacing J2 and E2−a for J1 and E1−a, respectively.

In the following we shall apply the TST rate formula to a simple landscape
case in which the two states of local stability Θ1 and Θ2 are connected to the
global minimum, Θ3. The global minimum has the energy E3 (E3 < E1,2) and
is placed at x3 along the reaction coordinate. A barrier placed at x(2−3) ≡
xb separates the global minimum from the nearest-neighbor attractor Θ2.
All the considerations in above apply equally to the forward (w2−3) and
backward (w3−2) transitions between the attractors Θ2 and Θ3. These can
be constructed in a similar manner by using the parameters Jb, J2,3, λ(b,2,3)
and E2−b,3−b.

i

The general procedure describing the dynamics on the PES relies in prac-
tice on the explicit knowledge of a master equation governing the time de-
pendence for the single-event probability Pi (xi, t) of the reaction coordinate.
For the PES described above, the system of master equations has the form

∂P1
∂t
∂P2
∂t
∂P3
∂t

= w2−1P2 (x2)

w1−2P1 (x1)

−

−

=

(w2−1 + w2−3) P2 (x2) + w1−2P1 (x1) + w3−2P3 (x3)

(5)

−

= w2−3P2 (x2)

w3−2P3 (x3)

.

The practical problem is to determine the extent to which the dynamics of
the system is aﬀected by the metric contributions J to the corresponding
TST rates wi−j
. To do so , we have to solve the above system
of kinetic equations under certain initial conditions. For simplicity, let us
assume that at the initial moment (t = 0) the system is in the domain of
attraction Θ1 with the probability P1 (t = 0) = 1. Here, the evolution of the
reaction coordinate through the conﬁguration space starts with the highest
probability from x = x1.

i, j = 1, 3
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

For the present case, analytic solutions of eqs. (5) are available:

P1 (t) = α

1 +

"

g1S6
2S5S2

φ

 

2 + χ
χ

ϕ
φ

e−ω1t

2 + ψ
ψ

−

e−ω2t

,

!#

5

P2 (t) = αg1

1 +

P3 (t) = αg1g3

1 +

2 + χ
χ

e−ω1t

−
(2 + χ) e−ω1t

S6
2S2  
1
2S2 h

−

"

(cid:20)

2 + ψ
ψ

e−ω2t

!#

,

(6)

(2 + ψ) e−ω2t

,

i(cid:21)

h(cid:16)
3 −

S6 +
2 −

S2) with S1 = 1 + g1 + g2 + g3, S2 =

which were obtained in terms of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the charac-
teristic system of equations. The (nontrivial) eigenvalues are given by ω1,2 =
g3)2 + 4g3,
w2−1
(S1 ±
(1 + g1 −
2
g1 = w1−2
w2−1 , g2 = w3−2
w2−1 . All the other constants entering eq.
S3, ψ = S4 + S2 and
(7) are given by χ = S4 −
g1 + S3−S2
α = S5
g2 + g3,
g1 ±
S6
2 and S6 = S2
S2
S5 = S2

S2, φ = S2 + S3, ϕ = S2 −

w2−1 and g3 = w2−3

g1 −
S2
4.
(cid:16)

with S3,4 = 1

S3−S2
S4−S2

g2 −

S4−S3

∓

−1

(cid:17)i

q

(cid:17)

2

The energy levels corresponding to the minima Θ1, Θ2 and Θ3 of the stan-
dard potential energy surface employed in the present study are disposed as
in a steeper funnel obeying the following sequence E1 > E2 > E3. Each
transition state connecting two adjacent minima lies an energy li above the
nearest uphill minimum. Therefore, one sets E2−a −
E1−a = l1 > 0 and
E2−a = l2 > 0, respectively. In addition, we assume in this model
E3−b −
that the potential energy barrier opposing the escape from the global mini-
mum is higher than that opposing the escape from the minimum Θ2 towards
the minimum Θ1, (E3−b > E2−a). It is also assumed that the relaxation rate
from Θ2 towards the global minimum is energetically greater than the up-
E2−b = l3 > 0). In our computation λ(1−3) denote
hill escape E2−a, (E2−a −
the vibrational frequencies of the reaction coordinate in the corresponding
minima and we shall keep them at constant values. As for the mean vibra-
tional frequency of the transition state, we make the usual assumption,[?]
that is the geometric mean of the vibrational frequencies of the two minima
it connects, λ(a) = √λ(1)λ(2) and λ(b) = √λ(2)λ(3), respectively.

By using probability distributions Pi (i = 1, 2, 3) as derived above, we
have investigated the tendency of relaxation of the complex system under
various circumstances for reaction coordinate paths. In simulating the dis-
tribution of path lengths we speculate on the direct relation between the
Jacobian J (f) and the reaction coordinate, as can be seen below. The re-
sults are displayed in Fig.1.

Going back to the purpose of the present paper, we focus on the role the
metric contribution plays in the relaxation behavior of the system and assign

6

J2 ≡

J3 ≡

AJa ≡

1 : 2 : 3, Ja : Jb ≡

to the Jacobians J1, J2, J3, Ja and Jb the following sequence of numbers
J1 : J2 : J3 ≡
4 : 5. Roughly, these numbers should cor-
respond to a distribution of path lengths along the reaction coordinate with
increasing step sizes towards the global minimum. The pictorial correspon-
dence in nuclear conﬁguration space is therefore characterized by sizeable
rearrangements of the system components on their way to relax towards the
ground state. We are interested in monitoring the relaxation dynamics of
the system on the particular energy landscape as described in above. The
values of the parameters l1−3 have been tuned to achieve a rapid satura-
tion eﬀect on a scale of 100. The time evolution of the probability P3 for
which the system relaxes to the global minimum is displayed in Fig. 1 (see
the curve labeled (1)). One can observe that the increase in the popula-
tion of the ground state is sharp and the probability reaches a plateau. We
now modify the metric contributions to the relaxation rates by considering
BJb = 1 which corresponds to an equally spaced dis-
J1 ≡
tribution of minima along the reaction coordinate. All the other parameters
in above remain at constant values. Looking at Fig. 1 (see the curve 2), we
observe that the accumulation in the global minimum is much slower in this
case. The time evolution of the probability P3 does not reach saturation on
the same time scale. This indicates that the backward rates of escape from
attraction domains are higher for the present case in comparison with the
former and, the system spends considerably more time now moving uphill
on the PES. The geometrical structures corresponding to minima Θ1 and Θ2
attract the system at rates comparable to that of the ground state structure
even if the latter is energetically more favorable. Note that, the balance may
decisively be turned around if, by chance, the numbers of pathways towards
Θ1 and Θ2, respectively, are large enough to compensate the energy gaps
by entropic contributions.[8] The eﬃciency of relaxation towards the global
minimum can be reduced dramatically by inverting the numbers in the se-
quence J1 : J2 : J3 from those assumed in the ﬁrst example. This becomes
J1 : J2 : J3 ≡
3 : 2 : 1, and the pictorial correspondence of the PES may be
that of a steeper funnel with a wide step at the top, between the minima Θ1
and Θ2 and a narrow one at the bottom, between the minima Θ2 and Θ3.
1, for the present case). As can be seen in Fig.1 (see
(We assume Ja : Jb ≡
the curve 3), the probability P3 of accumulation in the global minimum is
even worse than that of the previous case. In turn, a narrow barrier between
the global minimum Θ3 and adjacent local minimum Θ2 combined with a

7

broader one between Θ2 and Θ3 should result in a longer survival of the
system in the well around energy level E2. This is demonstrated by curve
3′ in Fig.1 which shows that the accumulation in the domain of attraction
Θ2 is still rising over the entire time scale for the above values of the metric
contributions. This behavior contrasts with the two previous situations (see
curves 1′ and 2′ in Fig.1) where, after an initial increase in population, the
attractor Θ2 starts, more or less suddenly, to depopulate.

In conclusion, we can say that the eﬃciency of relaxation towards the
global minimum can be much aﬀected by the metric contributions to the
transition rates. The metric contributions are directly related to the dis-
tribution of the path lengths by the integrated Jacobians. Therefore, these
play, in concert with the barrier heights, an implicit role in classifying the
archetypal energy landscapes.[2, 3, 8, 12] In addition, we can say that in-
corporating the metric contribution to the TST rate is the appropriate way
to combine the height of the barrier and the densities of initial and saddle
states with the diﬀerential path length corresponding to the transition of
the system between these speciﬁc stationary points. The present approach
allows the TST rate to be implicitly related to the geometrical structures in-
volved in the min-saddle-min transition of the system. We intend to use the
information so obtained to identify a way to enrich the precision with which
we can characterize the ability of complex systems to relax, preferentially, to
only a limited number of geometrical structures from the vastly larger variety
that the system might exhibit.

References

[1] R.S. Berry, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 58 657 (1996)

[2] K.D. Ball, R.S. Berry, R.E. Kunz, F.-Y. Li, A. Proykova, and D.J.

Walles, Science 271 963 (1996)

[3] D.J. Wales, M.A. Miller and T. Walsh, Nature 394 758 (1998)

[4] W.H. Press, B.P. Flannery, S.A. Teukolsky, and W.T. Vetterling, Nu-

merical Recipes (Cambridge, Cambridge, 1986)

[5] D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 86 3505 (1990)

8

[6] H.L. Davis, D.J. Wales, and R.S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 92 4473 (1990)

[7] R.J. Hinde and R.S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 99 2942 (1993)

[8] R.E. Kunz and R.S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 103 1904 (1995); 108 2576

(1998)

1973)

[9] J.P.K. Doye and D.J. Wales, Phys. Rev Lett. 80 1357 (1998)

[10] R.P. White and H.R. Mayne, J. Chem. Phys. 112 7964 (2000)

[11] W. Forst, Theory of Unimolecular Reactions (Academic, New York,

[12] M.A. Miller, J.P.K. Doye and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 110 328 (1999)

[13] D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 101 3750 (1994)

[14] P. H¨anggi, P. Talkner, M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 251 (1990)

[15] D.J. Chandler, J. Chem. Phys. 68 2959 (1978)

Figure captions
Fig. 1 - Time evolution of the probability P3 (curves 1, 2 and 3) and
P2 (curves 1′, 2′ and 3′) for three diﬀerent sequences of path lengths be-
tween connected minima. The initial population in the highest minimum
was assumed equal to unity, P1 (t = 0) = 1. For explanation, see the text.

9

This figure "atl.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0105061v1

