Magic number behavior for heat capacities of medium sized classical Lennard-Jones
clusters

D. D. Frantz
Department of Chemistry, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
(February 9, 2008)

Monte Carlo methods were used to calculate heat capacities as functions of temperature for
classical atomic clusters of aggregate sizes 25 ≤ N ≤ 60 that were bound by pairwise Lennard-Jones
potentials. The parallel tempering method was used to overcome convergence diﬃculties due to
quasiergodicity in the solid-liquid phase-change regions. All of the clusters studied had pronounced
peaks in their heat capacity curves, most of which corresponded to their solid-liquid phase-change
regions. The heat capacity peak height and location exhibited two general trends as functions of
cluster size: for N = 25 to 36, the peak temperature slowly increased, while the peak height slowly
decreased, disappearing by N = 37; for N = 30, a very small secondary peak at very low temperature
emerged and quickly increased in size and temperature as N increased, becoming the dominant peak
by N = 36. Superimposed on these general trends were smaller ﬂuctuations in the peak heights that
corresponded to “magic number” behavior, with local maxima found at N = 36, 39, 43, 46 and 49,
and the largest peak found at N = 55. These magic numbers were a subset of the magic numbers
found for other cluster properties, and can be largely understood in terms of the clusters’ underlying
geometries. Further insights into the melting behavior of these clusters were obtained from quench
studies and by examining rms bond length ﬂuctuations.

1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

remains an active area of

The investigation of small atomic and molecular
clusters
research, both
theoretically1–13 and experimentally.14–17 Computer
simulations of clusters have revealed a wide diversity of
fundamental behavior that is highly sensitive to many
factors, such as the cluster aggregate size N , the poten-
tial used to model the intermolecular interactions, and
even the simulation method itself. The Lennard-Jones
(LJ) potential is the most commonly used model po-
tential for computer simulations of cluster properties,
and it is especially useful for modeling rare gas clusters.
A key aspect of this model when applied to small and
medium sized atomic clusters is that the resulting poten-
tial surfaces have global minima that are dominated by
icosahedral-like structures, with ﬁvefold symmetries that
are markedly diﬀerent than the closest-packed structure
found in corresponding bulk systems.

A major motivation for studying clusters is the in-
sight that can be obtained in understanding the tran-
sition from ﬁnite to bulk behavior. Because of their
high proportion of surface atoms, many clusters have
physical properties that typically exhibit a very irreg-
ular dependence on their aggregate size, with certain
sizes standing out in particular. For example, the mass
spectra of clusters typically exhibit especially abundant
sizes that often reﬂect particularly stable structures, spe-
cially reactive clusters, or closed electronic shells,12–14,17
These “magic number” sizes have been of great theoreti-
cal interest,11–13 and much work has been done in relat-
ing magic number sequences to cluster structure in terms
of “soft” sphere packings, since many magic number sizes
in LJ clusters such as N = 13, 19, 55, and 147 correspond
to compact structures that are especially stable.1,7 Many
cluster properties obtained from simulation studies such
as binding energies, root mean square (rms) bond length
ﬂuctuations and heat capacities also show very irregu-
lar dependencies on the cluster size that mostly corre-
spond to their usual magic number sequences. For exam-
3,21
ple, the heat capacity peak values per atom for LJ13
25,35–37 are especially large, which can be at-
and LJ55
tributed to the exceptional thermodynamic stability of
their lowest-energy isomers relative to their next higher
energy conﬁgurations. To more easily compare various
cluster property size dependencies in this report, I have
generalized the concept of magic numbers for arbitrary
cluster properties to refer to those cluster sizes having
particularly enhanced values relative to their immediate
neighbors.
In a previous study, I examined these gen-
eralized magic number eﬀects in LJ clusters ranging in
size from 4 to 24 atoms.11 In this study, I extend the
sequence to 60 atoms, which completes the ﬁlling of the
second Mackay icosahedral shell (to N = 55) and just
begins the ﬁlling of the third shell (to N = 147).

The issue of cluster phase transitions is fundamentally
important, and so has been of great interest. Because

of their small size, clusters do not have the sharp ﬁrst
order transition characteristic of bulk melting, but in-
stead show changes occurring over a range of tempera-
tures, typically a few degrees K.2 Although the phase-
change range generally decreases as the cluster size in-
creases, coalescing to the bulk transition temperature
as N approaches inﬁnity, both the range and the lo-
cation show much variation as a function of N . Clus-
ter solid-liquid phase-change regions can be determined
from computer simulations typically by identifying char-
acteristic changes in certain cluster properties. For ex-
ample, cluster potential energies often change markedly
as functions of temperature in the phase-change regions,
resulting in distinct peaks in the corresponding heat ca-
pacity curves; rms bond length ﬂuctuations often rise
abruptly with increasing temperature at the beginning of
the phase-change regions, and the fractions of quenched
cluster conﬁgurations corresponding to the lowest-energy
isomers often decrease sharply with increasing tempera-
ture in these regions. Deﬁning the phase-change region
on the basis of such behavior is somewhat ambiguous,
though, since the temperature ranges associated with
these diﬀerent properties do not always coincide, and oc-
casionally do not even overlap. For a given property,
the phase-change region temperature range can also de-
pend on the simulation method; for example, for Ar13,
the rise in the rms bond length ﬂuctuations as calculated
from canonical Monte Carlo simulations occurred about
7 K lower than that calculated from molecular dynamics
simulations.3 Because of these diﬃculties, it is convenient
to loosely deﬁne the solid-liquid phase-change region as
the temperature region between the lower-temperature,
solid-like region (where the clusters are mostly conﬁned
to their lower energy conﬁgurations, undergoing isomer-
izations only rarely at the higher-temperature end of
the region) and the higher-temperature, liquid-like re-
gion (where the clusters exhibit easy isomerization and
diﬀusion). Cluster behavior in the solid-liquid phase-
change regions is particularly complicated, with some
cluster sizes showing coexistence behavior, where “solid-
like” and “liquid-like” isomers dynamically coexist,2–4
while other cluster sizes show a relatively smooth progres-
sion of isomerizations between locally similar but globally
distinct conﬁgurations occurring throughout this region.5
Although clusters having magic number sizes such as 13
and 55 have pronounced heat capacity peaks that cor-
respond closely to the solid-liquid phase-change region
determined from other cluster properties, other cluster
sizes such as N = 15, 16 and 17 do not have heat ca-
pacity peaks in their phase-change regions.11 Since heat
capcity peaks have often been used to identify phase-
change regions,20,25,32,33,35,39 characterizing their tem-
perature dependencies for sequences of LJ clusters can
help elucidate the underlying reasons for such varied be-
havior.

The accurate determination of cluster properties such
as the heat capacity is hampered by the poor convergence
of standard simulation methods in the phase-change re-

2

gions. This poor convergence is a consequence of quasier-
godicity, or the incomplete sampling of conﬁguration
space.18 Various methods have been developed in re-
cent years to reduce the systematic errors resulting from
quasiergodicity, including histogram methods,20 jump-
walking methods (J-walking),21–28 smart walking meth-
ods (S-walking),29 and parallel tempering methods.30–32
Many of these methods are based on the coupling of
conﬁgurations obtained from ergodic higher-temperature
simulations to the quasiergodic lower-temperature simu-
lations. In my previous study of magic number eﬀects in
cluster heat capacities, I used J-walking to successfully
overcome quasiergodicity. Monte Carlo J-walking meth-
ods couple the usual small-scale Metropolis moves made
by a lower-temperature random walker, with occasional
large-scale jumps that move the random walker out of the
conﬁned regions of conﬁguration space that it could not
otherwise easily escape within the duration of the sim-
ulation. There are two complimentary implementations
of J-walking. In tandem J-walking, higher-temperature
walkers and lower-temperature walkers are run in tan-
dem, with the higher-temperature walkers occasionally
feeding conﬁgurations to the lower-temperature walkers.
Because J-walking obeys detailed balance only approxi-
mately, the walkers become correlated whenever a lower-
temperature walker accepts a jump, and so it is necessary
to run several extra Metropolis passes after a jump is ac-
cepted to break these correlations, thereby decreasing the
overall eﬃciency. The second method breaks the correla-
tions by running the higher-temperature walkers before-
hand, and storing representative samples of the conﬁg-
urations in external ﬁles, which the lower-temperature
walkers sample periodically in a random fashion. Thus,
sampling from an external distribution is more eﬃcient,
provided that the required distributions are not too large,
and this was the implementation I used in the previous
study.
It was also successful for the ﬁrst few clusters
considered in this study, but for clusters ranging in size
from N = 31 to 37, which had two heat capacity peaks,
the heat capacity curves obtained with diﬀerent J-walker
distributions showed poor reproducibility for the lower-
temperature peaks. Since the distribution ﬁle sizes al-
ready totalled more than 2 Gb, it seemed prudent to
abandon that implementation and switch to the tandem
J-walker implementation. However, a recent study by
Neirotti, et al.32 of LJ38, which is notoriously diﬃcult to
simulate accurately, showed that the parallel tempering
method was remarkably successful in overcoming quasier-
godicity and calculating an accurate heat capacity curve.
Parallel tempering is nearly identical to a parallel version
of tandem J-walking, except that instead of copying the
higher-temperature J-walker’s conﬁguration to the lower-
temperature walker’s conﬁguration whenever a jump is
accepted, the two conﬁgurations are exchanged. This has
the advantage of maintaining detailed balance, thereby
eliminating the need to run extra Metropolis passes after
accepting an exchange, which makes the method more
eﬃcient than tandem J-walking. Thus, I decided to use

parallel tempering for all of the cluster sizes examined in
this study.

I begin in Section II with a brief description of the com-
putational methods used in this work and a summary of
the calculations undertaken. Section III describes the
results obtained for the cluster potential energies, heat
capacities, rms bond length ﬂuctuations and quenched
conﬁguration distributions, as functions of temperature
and cluster size. In Section IV, I summarize the impor-
tant conclusions concerning magic number behavior in
LJ clusters for N ≤ 60.

II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

The clusters studied were modeled by the pairwise ad-

ditive Lennard-Jones potential,

V =

VLJ (rij ),

i<j
X

12

6

.

#

(cid:18)

−

(1)

"(cid:18)

σ
rij (cid:19)

VLJ (rij ) = 4ǫ

σ
rij (cid:19)
Because small clusters can dissociate at higher temper-
atures and make the cluster deﬁnition ambiguous, it is
customary to conﬁne the clusters by a constraining po-
tential. For classical Monte Carlo simulations, a perfectly
reﬂecting spherical constraining potential of radius Rc,
centered on the cluster’s center of mass, is most conve-
nient, and was used in this work.

The classical internal energy and heat capacity were
calculated by the usual expressions for an N -atom cluster
(in reduced units),

hU ∗i =

+ hV ∗i ,

3N T ∗
2
3N
2

+

hC∗

V i =

(V ∗)2

− hV ∗i2

,

(cid:10)

(T ∗)2
(cid:11)
where U ∗ = U/ǫ, V ∗ = V /ǫ, C∗
V = CV /kB, and T ∗ =
kBT /ǫ. Since so many rare gas cluster simulations have
been done for Ar, I found it convenient to generate the
temperature-dependent curves using Ar parameters, with
σ = 3.405 ˚A and ǫ = 119.4 K.

Relative rms bond length ﬂuctuations have been cal-
culated in many previous cluster simulations.2–4,11,38,39
These were calculated as

δ =

2
N (N − 1)

hr2

ij i − hrij i2
hrij i

1/2

,

(cid:1)

i<j (cid:0)
X

where the summations are taken over the entire walk. Be-
cause of the summations being taken over the entire walk,
rms bond length ﬂuctuations cannot be determined for
the J-walking and parallel tempering simulations, whose
conﬁguration jumps and exchanges eﬀectively reduce the

(2)

(3)

(4)

3

long Metropolis walks to a collection of very many short
excursions about the last accepted jump or exchange
conﬁguration. Thus, quasi-ergodicity remains a problem
for rms bond length calculations. Caution must also be
exercised when interpreting δ(T ) curves, since they are
dependent on simulation parameters such as the walk
length, as well as the ensemble that is used.3,11,39

ﬁndings imply that J-walking was successful in access-
ing all of the important regions of conﬁguration space
for these clusters, even though it was unable to do so in
the statistically representative manner needed to accu-
rately reproduce the heat capacities at very low temper-
atures. Thus, higher temperature J-walker distributions
were also generated for cluster sizes 39 to 60 to obtain sets
of the important low-energy quenched conﬁgurations.

A. J-walking

J-walking runs were done for cluster sizes 25 ≤ N ≤ 38,
using sampling from externally stored distributions as de-
scribed in the preceding study.11 Distributions for each
temperature consisted of several ﬁles, totaling 2.5 × 106
conﬁgurations, sampled every 100, 50, 25, or 10 passes,
depending on the temperature (100 passes for higher
temperatures having broad distributions, 10 passes for
very low temperatures having very narrow distributions).
The distributions were generated in stages from higher
temperatures to lower, beginning with temperatures well
within the cluster liquid region (50 to 60 K). Data accu-
mulation was done with walks consisting of 2 × 106 total
passes, with jumps attempted randomly with a frequency
of 10%. Since any systematic errors in the higher tem-
perature J-walker distributions can feed into the lower
temperature distributions and corrupt them, heat capac-
ity peaks occurring at very low temperatures can be very
In previous studies of
diﬃcult to calculate accurately.
13-atom binary clusters,24 very low temperature heat ca-
pacity peaks corresponding to mixing anomalies could
be obtained accurately by repeating the full J-walking
temperature scan several times, each time with newly
generated distributions, and averaging the independent
curves. This procedure was followed in this work as well,
and at least ﬁve J-walking runs were done for cluster
sizes 25 to 30, with the heat capacity curves showing very
good reproducibility in each case. For cluster sizes 31 to
38 though, the curves showed very poor reproducibility
for the lower-temperature peaks, and so the method was
abandoned.

Despite the J-walking method’s inability to reproduce
the lower-temperature heat capacity peaks accurately,
the method was still useful for obtaining a listing of the
important lowest-energy conﬁgurations for each cluster
size. In each case, representative subsets of the distribu-
tion ﬁles were quenched using steepest descent methods19
and all of the unique isomers found were extracted. While
this crude method cannot identify all of the conﬁgura-
tions for clusters of these sizes, it is well suited for iden-
tifying most of the lower energy isomers that dominate
the low temperature behavior of clusters. For example,
the quenched J-walker distributions for LJ38 contained
all of the lowest-energy conﬁgurations found by Doye et
al.,34 including the global minimum face-centered-cubic
(fcc) truncated octahedron, which is notoriously diﬃcult
to obtain from randomly initialized simulations. These

B. Metropolis Monte Carlo

Metropolis simulations were also run for each cluster.
These provided a check of the J-walking and parallel
tempering results for those temperature regions where
quasiergodicity in the Metropolis runs was not a problem,
as well as revealing trends in the systematic errors arising
from quasiergodicity in the Metropolis runs themselves.
Temperature scans were also generated using Ar param-
eters, with the temperature mesh size set to ∆T = 1 K,
and sometimes to 0.5 K in the phase-change regions. For
each temperature, simulations consisted of 105 warmup
passes, followed by 107 passes with data accumulation.
The scans in each case were started at the lowest temper-
ature from the global minimum conﬁguration obtained
from the corresponding J-walker simulations, and were
continued well past the cluster solid-liquid phase-change
region, with the ﬁnal conﬁguration for each temperature
used as the initial conﬁguration for the subsequent tem-
perature. To gain a better appreciation of the extent of
quasiergodicity in the solid-liquid phase-change region,
additional Metropolis simulations consisting of 108 to-
tal passes per temperature point were run for each clus-
ter over a narrower temperature range encompassing the
phase-change region.

C. Parallel Tempering

Parallel tempering30–32 is very closely related to
the tandem and parallel walker implementations of J-
walking,21,26 with the essential diﬀerence being that
instead of the higher-temperature conﬁguration being
copied over the lower-temperature conﬁguration when-
ever a jump is accepted, the two conﬁgurations are ex-
changed. This close similarity between parallel temper-
ing and tandem J-walking makes it very easy to con-
vert a tandem J-walking simulation program to a paral-
lel tempering one. The parallel tempering method’s con-
ﬁguration exchange ensures that it obeys detailed bal-
ance (provided that the simulation has been warmed
up enough to be in the asymptotic region), so there
is no need to run the extra Metropolis passes to break
correlations between the higher-temperature and lower-
temperature walkers whenever an exchange move is ac-
cepted, which is required for tandem J-walking. In ad-
dition to oﬀering greater eﬃciency, the obeying of de-

4

tailed balance allows parallel tempering simulations to
vary the exchange-attempt frequency in temperature re-
gions where the exchange-acceptance rate is too low. In
J-walking simulations, the jump-attempt frequency was
typically kept at 10%, since larger values required even
more extra Metropolis passes to be run whenever a jump
was accepted to break the correlations, thereby oﬀsetting
the eﬃciency gains made by increasing the jump-attempt
frequency in the ﬁrst place.

As with J-walking, the number of temperatures used
in a parallel tempering simulation and their spacing can-
not be chosen arbitrarily, but must be selected to en-
sure that the exchanges are accepted suﬃciently often.
Generally, more temperature walkers and smaller spac-
ing are required for the solid-liquid phase-change region,
and for very low temperatures. Since the heat capacity
curves as a functions of temperature typically had peaks
in the solid-liquid phase-change regions whose location
and height I wanted to determine accurately, the num-
ber of temperatures and their spacing was also aﬀected by
the need to properly represent the heat capacity curves
with a suﬃcient density of points to allow for good inter-
polation. This latter requirement resulted in my choos-
ing temperature spacings in the phase-change region that
were small enough that the exchange acceptance ratios
were typically quite high. For very low temperatures, the
classical heat capacity curve is nearly linear, thus requir-
ing fewer points to represent. However, the exchange ac-
ceptance ratio decreases rapidly at lower temperatures,
requiring more temperature walkers. Since the overall
computation time is nearly proportional to the number
of walkers, I was able to reduce the number of lower-
temperature walkers needed by increasing the exchange-
attempt frequency PX at lower temperatures, according
to the relation

PX (T ) =

PX (TH)
PX (TL)−PX (TH )
PX (TL)

1 −

(cid:16)

TH −T
TH −TL

(cid:17) (cid:16)

(cid:17)

,

(5)

where PX (TL) = (1 + 3PX (TH ))/4. This expression
increases the lowest-temperature exchange-attempt fre-
quency PX (TL) by a quarter of the range above the base-
line highest-temperature exchange-attempt frequency,
PX (TH ), which was set to 10%.

The parallel tempering simulations done in this study
were similar to those done by Neirotti et al. for LJ38.32
For each cluster simulation, a number of random walkers
at various temperatures were run in parallel, with each
temperature walker occasionally attempting an exchange
move with the next higher temperature walker, except
for the highest temperature walker, which attempted no
exchanges directly (but did exchange conﬁgurations ac-
cording to attempts made by the next-highest tempera-
ture walker). Since I had the lowest-energy isomers for
each cluster from the J-walking distribution quenches,
for most of the clusters I initialized the temperature
walkers by using the lowest-energy isomer for the lowest-
temperature initial conﬁguration, the next lowest-energy

isomer for the next lowest-temperature initial conﬁgura-
tion, and so on. For the other clusters, I just used the
lowest-energy isomer to initialize all of the initial conﬁg-
urations. It did not seem to matter which initialization
scheme was used, and of course, random conﬁgurations
could have been used, but at the cost of longer warmup
periods. Because I initialized the simulations from the
lowest-energy isomers, I could quickly run preliminary
simulations that gave qualitatively good results, which I
could use to ﬁne-tune the number of parallel tempering
temperature walkers and their spacing. These prelimi-
nary parallel tempering runs consisted of 105 Metropolis
warmup passes for each temperature walker, followed by
105 parallel tempering warmup passes and then by 10
parallel tempering walks with preliminary data accumu-
lation, with each walk being 105 passes in length. The
conﬁgurations for each temperature walker were saved at
the end of the warmup period, and at the end of each
walk. The heat capacity curves for each walk were ex-
amined for consistency, and if signiﬁcant variations were
found, the parallel tempering run was repeated (without
the Metropolis warmup passes) from the last saved con-
ﬁgurations, so that in eﬀect, all of the preceding parallel
tempering runs served as warmup runs for the ﬁnal run.
For some of the clusters, only parallel tempering warmup
passes were run, indicating that the preceding Metropolis
warmup passes were likely not necessary (although their
computational expense was minor). After the prelimi-
nary runs appeared to be suﬃciently warmed up, a longer
parallel tempering run of 105 warmup passes followed by
107 total passes of data accumulation per temperature
point was run (10 walks of 106 passes each). Again, the
heat capacity curves for each walk were checked for con-
sistency; for a few clusters, the variations in the curves
were still too large, and so the run was repeated from
the last saved conﬁgurations. For LJ38, an especially
long warmup was required, consistent with the ﬁndings
of Neirotti et al.32

One important diﬀerence between my implementation
of parallel tempering and that of Neirotti et al concerns
the choice of the constraining radius Rc.
Ideally, the
value of the constraining radius should be large enough
that the cluster properties being simulated are not ad-
versely aﬀected by the constraining potential, but not so
large that cluster dissociations lead to overly long conver-
gence times. In my previous study of clusters of size 4 to
24, I used Rc = 4.0 σ, a value large enough not to aﬀect
the heat capacity curves, except at higher temperatures,
well past the solid-liquid phase-change regions. Thus,
for this study, I also set Rc = 4.0 σ for the Metropolis
and J-walker simulations. Neirotti et al used a value of
Rc = 2.25 σ for their simulation of LJ38, since they had
diﬃculties attaining ergodicity with larger constraining
radii. For LJ38, such a small constraining radius was not
a problem since the heat capacity peak occurred at a rela-
tively low temperature. However, for most of the cluster
sizes included in this study, such a small value would
aﬀect the heat capacity peak height and location. After

5

some preliminary investigations, I chose to set Rc = 3.5 σ
for parallel tempering simulations of cluster sizes 25 to 48,
and to Rc = 4.0 σ for the larger cluster sizes. Figure 1 il-
lustrates the eﬀects of the constraining radius on clusters
Ar30 and Ar32. The heat capacity peak for Rc = 3.0 σ
is slightly truncated, but the peak for Rc = 3.5 σ is in
good agreement with the Rc = 4.0 σ peak, even though
the high-temperature side of the peak is substantially
aﬀected. These two examples also show how well paral-
lel tempering was able to overcome the quasiergodicity
evident in the Metropolis curves. The two parallel tem-
pering curves for Ar32 show very good agreement for the
smaller peak, which is completely absent in the Metropo-
lis simulations.

The converged heat capacity curve I obtained for Ar38
was mostly similar to the curve obtained by Neirotti et al.
in their parallel tempering study of LJ38,32 with a small
shoulder in the low-temperature side of the peak. The
reduced peak temperature 0.1653 was also in good agree-
ment with that found by Neirotti et al. (0.166), although
my peak value was slightly higher (hCV i/N kB = 5.858
compared to 5.62) and the higher-temperature part of
my curve rose substantially higher; these discrepancies
are mostly due to Neirotti et al. having used the smaller
constraining radius. As pointed out by Neirotti et al.,
the shoulder in the heat capacity curve is in contrast to
the small lower-temperature peak found by Doyle, Wales
33 (their larger peak lo-
and Miller in their study of LJ38
cation and height were similar to the parallel tempering
results, though, at 0.17 and 5.68, respectively).

Finally, follow-up parallel tempering simulations of 106
passes per temperature were run for each cluster with pe-
riodic quenching of the conﬁgurations to determine the
population distributions of the lower-energy isomers as
functions of temperature. These were initialized using
the ﬁnal conﬁgurations from their corresponding preced-
ing parallel tempering runs. Since I was primarily inter-
ested in using the quench results to provide qualitative
insight into the heat capacity results, rather than deter-
mining the quench curves themselves with high accuracy,
these shorter walk lengths were suﬃcient.

The lowest-energy conﬁgurations for each of the clusters
I examined in this study were obtained from quenches of
J-walker distributions. These were consistent with the
lowest-energy conﬁgurations found in other studies.7,33
From N = 25 to 30, the global minima all consisted of
a N = 19 double icosahedral core with atoms added to
tetrahedrally bonded face sites (anti-Mackay overlayers),
while for N = 31 to 54 (except for N = 38), the added
atoms occupied sites corresponding to the outer shell of
the N = 55 Mackay icosahedron (Mackay overlayers);7,9
N = 38 did not ﬁt the pattern, it being a truncated octa-
hedron instead.32,33 Clusters for N = 56 to 60 had added
atoms that contributed to the anti-Mackay overlayer of
the 55-atom core, beginning the building up of the next
Mackay icosahedron (N = 147).

Although the lowest-energy isomers play a signiﬁcant
role in cluster thermodynamics, other low-energy iso-
mers also play important roles, and the size of the gap
between the lowest-energy isomer and the next lowest-
energy isomer is an especially important predictor of
magic number behavior.2,6,9 Figure 2 shows the energy
levels of the lower-energy conﬁgurations for each clus-
ter size, relative to their global minimum. Sizes N =
26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43, 46, 49, 55 and 58 have relatively large
gaps between their global minimum and next higher min-
imum, compared to their immediate neighbors, and so
can be considered a magic number sequence; the gaps
between the lowest-energy and next lowest-energy iso-
mers are also plotted in Figure 3 as functions of N . The
Mackay icosahedron N = 55 has an especially large gap.
There is also much variation in the densities of the low-
lying isomers evident in Figure 2, with densities being
substantially greater for sizes N = 28 to 37 than for the
other sizes, while sizes N = 52 to 56 have particularly
low densities.

The binding energy diﬀerences for the clusters are also
displayed in Figure 3. Except for N = 38, the max-
ima in the binding energy diﬀerences are the same as
the maxima in the energy diﬀerences between the two
lowest-energy isomers. Also shown in Figure 3 is a plot
of another indicator of structural magic number behav-
ior, the second ﬁnite diﬀerence of the energy,

III. RESULTS

∆2E(N ) = Vmin(N + 1) + Vmin(N − 1) − 2Vmin(N ). (7)

A. Structural properties

Much of the magic number behavior of cluster heat ca-
pacities can be understood in terms of the magic number
behavior of the underlying potential surfaces. For exam-
ple, for the small clusters I studied earlier,11 the largest
heat capacity peaks were observed for sizes N = 13, 19
and 23, corresponding to single, double and triple icosa-
hedra, respectively. The same magic numbers were found
in some corresponding structural properties as well, such
as the binding energy diﬀerences,

∆Eb(N ) = −[Vmin(N ) − Vmin(N − 1)].

(6)

These magic numbers are also in agreement with the
magic numbers obtained for the binding energy diﬀer-
ences, again, except for N = 38. The discrepancy in the
magic number sequence for N = 38 is due to that clus-
ter being unique in this range by having an fcc structure
as its global minimum, so that those measures that are
relative to the cluster’s immediate neighbors are consid-
erably diﬀerent than those of the other clusters, whose
immediate neighbors are structurally similar.
Figure 4 shows a generalization of

zero-
temperature ∆2E(N ) curve shown in Figure 3, with
the curves extended to non-zero temperatures to form
a ∆2E(N, T ) surface. The curves were obtained from

the

6

parallel tempering simulations; the temperature scale is
for Ar. The surface can be seen to encompass two general
regions: a ﬂat region at higher temperatures, correspond-
ing to the clusters’ liquid-like regions, and a corrugated
region at lower temperatures, corresponding to the clus-
ters’ solid-like regions. The plot shows that many of the
clusters are locked in their lowest-energy isomers for ex-
tended temperature ranges, especially the magic number
sizes N = 26, 29, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55 — the ∆2E peak
values diﬀer very little from their zero-temperature values
well into the phase-change region, until their abatement
over a relatively narrow temperature range. The plot also
shows that the phase-change temperature regions have a
strong dependence on the cluster size, with the melting
temperature generally decreasing from about 30 K for
N = 26 to about 20 K for N = 36, and then generally
increasing to a maximum of about 40 K for N = 55.

B. Thermodynamic properties

Figure 5 plots the reduced potential energy per particle
for each cluster size over a temperature range spanning
the solid-like and liquid-like regions. Magic number be-
havior can be seen for sizes N = 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43,
46, 49 and 55 by the relatively large diﬀerences at lower
temperatures between their potential energies and those
of their preceding cluster size. The Mackay icosahedron
N = 55 is so stable relative to its neighbors that its
curve actually crosses several of the other curves. The
phase regions are apparent in Figure 5 by the transition
from the irregular spacing between the curves seen for
the lower temperature, solid-like regions, to the regular
spacing seen for the higher temperature, liquid-like re-
gions. As was seen in the ∆2E(N, T ) surface in Figure 4,
the melting temperature generally decreases as the clus-
ter size increases from N = 25, reaching a minimum of
about 20 K for N about 36, and then increases to a max-
imum for N = 55.

Curves of the reduced heat capacity per particle for
each cluster size are shown in Figures 6, 7 and 8, while
Figure 9 shows the corresponding peak height and tem-
perature as functions of the cluster size; the peak pa-
rameters are also listed in Table I. The peak parameters
were obtained by smoothing and interpolating the com-
bined parallel tempering data (10 walks of 106 passes
per temperature point each). The associated parame-
ter uncertainties were estimated by determining the peak
height and location for each of the 10 walks separately,
and calculating the standard error of the set of these val-
ues. As a check, additional runs of 107 total passes per
temperature were done for a few of the clusters, and the
standard deviations of the resulting set of peak param-
eters were compared to the corresponding uncertainty
estimates. These were found to be in good agreement.
The extra check runs also showed the parallel tempering
heat capacity results to be very reproducible, unlike the

corresponding J-walking results.

Each of the clusters had at least one peak in its heat
capacity curve, and overall, while their was much varia-
tion in the curves, systematic trends are evident. Clus-
ter sizes N = 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55 had peak heights
that were substantially greater than those of their imme-
diate neighbors, and thus represent the magic numbers
for the heat capacity sequence. These cluster sizes were
also magic numbers for the ∆2E(N ) sequence and the
lowest-energy isomer gaps shown in Figure 3, but the
other structural magic numbers (N = 26, 29 and 32) did
not show magic number behavior in their heat capacity
curves. Instead, for cluster sizes 25 to 36, both the heat
capacity peak height and the peak temperature showed
remarkably smooth variation, with the peak temperature
slowly increasing, while the peak height slowly decreased
in a nearly linear fashion, until the peak disappeared at
N = 37. As can be seen in Figure 6, this behavior was
somewhat aﬀected by the choice of the constraining ra-
dius. For the Metropolis simulations run at Rc = 4.0 σ,
the heat capacity curves had greater slopes at higher tem-
peratures, resulting in the peak disappearing by N = 34.
More interesting was the emergence and evolution of
a second heat capacity peak, as the ﬁrst peak gradually
disappeared. Beginning with N = 30, a small, lower-
temperature peak can be seen in Figure 6 to develop
and gradually increase in both height and temperature,
until it becomes the dominant peak at N = 36. This
trend can be seen to continue in Figures 7 and 8, until
the peak reaches its greatest height and highest temper-
ature for the magic number size N = 55. This behavior
suggests partitioning the heat capacity peaks into two se-
quences, with the ﬁrst sequence containing the small-N
peaks that evolve into the large, broad high-temperature
peaks as the second Mackay shell initially builds up,
while the second sequence originates from the smaller,
narrower, lower-temperature peaks that evolve into the
dominant peaks as the second Mackay shell is completed.
The possible beginning of a third sequence correspond-
ing to the initial building up of the third Mackay shell
can be inferred from the curves in Figure 8, where Ar58
has a small, lower-temperature peak, and Ar59 and Ar60
have discernable shoulders in the low-temperature sides
of their peaks.

The emergence of the smaller peak nearly coincides
with the transition at N = 31 from the anti-Mackay over-
layer in the lowest-energy conﬁguration to the Mackay
overlayer, and the cluster sizes where two prominent heat
capacity peaks are evident correspond to those sizes hav-
ing the greatest density of low-lying isomers (Figure 2).
Doye et al. found that for clusters in this size range, the
high density of isomers was due to the small diﬀerences
in energy between the various conﬁguration types, anti-
Mackay, Mackay, decahedral, fcc, etc;10 similar ﬁndings
were obtained for clusters bound by a Morse potential
whose range parameter is similar to the Lennard-Jones
potential.9

The two heat capacity sequences make the determi-

7

nation of the cluster melting temperature from heat ca-
pacity peak temperatures ambiguous for sizes N = 31
to 36. Peaks in heat capacity curves have typically
been associated with cluster phase changes, particularly
solid-liquid changes.20,25,32,33,35,39 However, peaks can
arise from other circumstances as well, such as mixing
anomalies23,24 and premelting eﬀects, which can make
the assignment of the cluster melting temperatures diﬃ-
cult. Calvo and Spiegelmann deﬁned the melting temper-
atures of the sodium clusters they studied whose heat ca-
pacity curves had multiple peaks, as the temperature as-
sociated with the highest peak.39 Applying such a deﬁni-
tion to the clusters shown in Figure 6 that have two heat
capacity peaks would imply that the reduced melting
temperature would jump from T ∗ = 0.3784 for N = 35
to 0.1427 for N = 36. Given the structural similari-
ties of these two clusters, such a large diﬀerence in the
melting temperature would be surprising, and as will be
seen later when other cluster properties are examined,
the two clusters do in fact have similar melting temper-
atures. Also, the potential energy curves shown in Fig-
ure 5 and the ∆2E(N, T ) surface shown in Figure 4 both
suggest that the melting temperature for these clusters is
about T ∗ = 0.17, and thus intermediate to the two heat
capacity peak temperatures.

There is much evidence of systematic error due to
quasiergodicity in the Metropolis results, especially for
sizes N = 31 to 38, where the Metropolis heat capac-
ity curves had lower-temperature peaks that were either
missing (N = 31 to 34) or poorly formed (N = 35 to
38). For the other cluster sizes, the Metropolis heat
capacity curves showed very good agreement with the
parallel tempering results, except for temperatures near
the heat capacity peak, where the Metropolis results for
107 total passes per temperature point were substan-
tially lower than the parallel tempering results, and even
the Metropolis results for 108 total passes were typically
slightly lower. The fact that parallel tempering sim-
ulations of 107 passes could provide signiﬁcantly bet-
ter results than similar Metropolis simulations of 108
passes, for not much more computational overhead than
Metropolis simulations of 107 passes, clearly shows the
superiority of parallel tempering over the Metropolis
method.

There have been several previous studies of 55-atom
cluster heat capacities done.20,25,33,35–37 The study most
directly comparable to the parallel tempering results I
obtained for N = 55 is a J-walking study of Ar55 done by
L´opez.25 He obtained peak parameters of hCV i/N kB =
19.5 and T ∗ = 0.29, compared to my parallel tempering
results of 17.45 and 0.294, respectively. L´opez used the
same constraining volume radius as I did for N = 55,
Rc = 4.0 σ, but his J-walker distributions consisted of
only 4 × 104 conﬁgurations, which are considerably fewer
than the 2.5 × 106 conﬁgurations I used for my J-walking
studies of cluster sizes N = 25 to 38. Given the poor re-
sults I obtained with J-walking using larger distributions
for smaller cluster sizes, I suspect that the discrepancy

in the heat capacity peak parameters is due to L´opez
having used insuﬃciently representative J-walker distri-
butions in his study. The heat capacity curve obtained
from a Metropolis simulation of 108 total passes per tem-
perature that is shown in Figure 8 had peak parameters
of 17.00 and 0.294, respectively, which are close to the
parallel tempering results. The small discrepancy be-
tween these Metropolis results and the parallel temper-
ing results is similar to the discrepancies obtained for the
other clusters of similar size. Labastie and Whetten ob-
tained peak parameters of 15.4 and 0.3 for Ar55 using
histogram methods, but their smaller peak height was
most likely due to their constraining radius being consid-
erably smaller at Rc = 2.6 σ. Doye and Wales obtained
peak parameters of 17.4 and 0.298 for Ar55 using the su-
perposition method,33,35 which is in very good agreement
with my results.

C. Bond length ﬂuctuations

The rms bond length ﬂuctuation δ is another measure
that has been used often in cluster simulations to esti-
mate the melting temperature.2–4,11,38,39 According to
the Lindemann criterion, melting occurs in bulk matter
when δ is about 10% or greater. However, much care
must be exercised in interpreting rms bond length ﬂuctu-
ations obtained from cluster simulations. First, as Calvo
and Spiegelmann have pointed out, the Lindemann cri-
terion was originally proposed for bulk systems, imply-
ing that it does not necessarily extend to ﬁnite clusters,
and the choice of 10% for the critical value is somewhat
arbitrary.39 Second, δ(T ) is dependent on the simulation
walk length, with the sharp rise in the curve generally
occurring at lower temperatures as the walk length is
increased.11 For cluster simulations of very long length,
a value of δ ≈ 0.1 can be obtained at temperatures where
the cluster spends most of its time in some solid-like form,
with only occasional isomerizations to other solid-like
forms, rather than undergoing the ready diﬀusion typical
of liquid-like behavior. Because δ is obtained from aver-
ages over entire Metropolis walks or molecular dynam-
ics trajectories, it cannot be estimated from simulations
where conﬁguration scrambling occurs, such as J-walking
and parallel tempering, and so quasiergodicity issues fur-
ther complicate matters. Using very long walk-lengths to
reduce systematic errors arising from quasiergodicity can
result in δ(T ) curves whose transitions occur well before
the melting phase-change.

Despite these caveats, rms bond length ﬂuctuation
curves have qualitative validity and can provide useful in-
sights, especially in conjunction with other cluster prop-
erties. Curves of δ(T ) for each cluster size are shown in
Figures 10, 11 and 12 for averaged walk-lengths of 106
and 107 passes per temperature, while Figure 13 shows
the N -dependence of the temperatures corresponding to
the Lindemann-like threshold δ = 0.2. The threshold

8

temperatures were estimated by smoothing and interpo-
lating the δ(T ) curves, and then searching for the inter-
polated temperature corresponding to δ = 0.2. I chose
to set the threshold slightly higher than the usual Linde-
mann criterion of δ = 0.1, since some of the δ(T ) curves
had too much noise near δ = 0.1 to obtain a reliable esti-
mate of the temperature corresponding to that threshold,
and because the threshold is somewhat arbitrary anyway;
the value δ = 0.2 was also typically near the inﬂection
point of the smoothed curves’ transition regions.

The δ(T ) curves shown in Figures 10 to 12 are mostly
similar, but there are some interesting diﬀerences. Gen-
erally, the steepness of the rise in δ in the transition
region increases with cluster size, with the magic num-
ber sizes N = 43, 46 and 55 having especially sharp
rises. Evidence of quasiergodicity can be clearly seen
in some curves: the δ(T ) curves for N = 31 each have a
noisy shoulder just before the transition region, while the
curves for N = 32 each have a small peak; the curves for
N = 38 show the cluster to be locked in its global mini-
mum for all of the lower-temperature Metropolis simula-
tions of length 107 passes or fewer, until ﬁnally escaping
at T = 19 K. Evidence of pre-melting in the anti-Mackay
overlayer of the third Mackay shell can be seen in sizes
N = 56 to 60 by the emergence and evolution of a shoul-
der in the lower-temperature part of the δ(T ) curves.

Also indicated on the temperature axes in Figures 10
to 12 are the corresponding heat capacity peak temper-
atures obtained from the parallel tempering simulations
(likewise, Figures 6 to 8 have the corresponding temper-
atures associated with the Lindemann-like threshold of
δ = 0.2 indicated on their axes). These clearly show that
the heat capacity peaks do not necessarily correspond
to a cluster phase change. For cluster sizes N = 25 to
29, the heat capacity peak temperatures are well within
the liquid-like region, according to the δ(T ) curves, while
for cluster sizes N = 30 to 36, where two heat capacity
peaks are evident, the higher-temperature heat capacity
peak is also clearly in the liquid-like region. Moreover,
these temperatures are high enough that quasiergodicity
in these regions of the δ(T ) curves is not an issue. Like-
wise, most of the lower-temperature heat capacity peaks
are found to be in the solid-like region of the δ(T ) curves,
well before the transition region (although ergodicity is-
sues regarding the δ(T ) curves in these regions could be
involved). Only for sizes N = 35 and N = 36, are the
lower-temperature heat capacity peak temperatures simi-
lar to the δ(T ) transition regions. For the remaining clus-
ter sizes shown in Figures 11 and 12, however, the heat
capacity peak temperatures correspond quite closely to
the end of the δ(T ) transition regions, where the curves
quickly change slope to mark the start of the liquid-like
region.

Magic number behavior in the rms bond length ﬂuctua-
tions is evident in Figure 13, especially for the threshold
temperature values obtained from the longer Metropo-
lis simulations of 107 passes. The threshold tempera-
tures are signiﬁcantly higher for the magic number sizes

N = 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55, relative to their
immediate neighbors. These are the same magic numbers
seen in Figure 3 for ∆2E(N ) and for the energy gaps be-
tween the lowest-energy and next lowest-energy isomers,
except for N = 58. The δ data also account for the ab-
sence of magic number behavior in the heat capacities for
sizes N = 26, 29 and 32. Since the large, broad, higher-
temperature heat capacity peaks seen slowly diminish-
ing in Figures 3 and 6 are located well past the cluster
solid-liquid phase-change regions, whatever magic num-
ber eﬀects might exist for N = 26, 29 and 32 are masked
by the systematic evolution of the heat capacity peak it-
self with increasing cluster size. Classical cluster heat
capacities are inherently a measure of the width of the
potential energy distributions. Typically, for tempera-
tures near the cluster melting temperature, the distribu-
tions are much wider than those at lower temperatures
(which span mostly lower-energy, solid-like forms) and
those at higher temperatures (which span mostly higher-
energy, liquid-like forms), since these distributions span
both types of forms. However, the distribution width
in the liquid region also typically increases with tem-
perature, since the number of accessible conﬁgurations
also increases. Thus, depending on the energy distribu-
tion of the higher-energy isomer potential minima, the
inverse dependence of the heat capacity on temperature
in Eq. (3) could result in a peak occurring in the liquid-
like region of the curve that would have little relation to
the cluster’s solid-liquid phase change.

The threshold temperatures corresponding to δ = 0.2
in Figure 13 also imply that the cluster melting tem-
perature generally decreases as the cluster size increases
from N = 25, reaching a minimum near N = 37, then
generally increases with cluster size, reaching a maxi-
mum for N = 55, and decreases thereafter; magic num-
ber eﬀects superimposed on these general trends account
for the local variations. These general trends are con-
sistent with those inferred from the ∆2E(N, T ) surface
in Figure 4 and the potential energy curves in Figure 5.
Casero and Soler calculated melting temperatures for LJ
clusters of size N = 4 to 34 in the microcannonical en-
semble, deﬁning the melting temperature to be the tem-
perature where the free energies of the solid and liquid
clusters become equal.12 Their results indicate a gener-
ally increasing trend with cluster size, with reduced melt-
ing temperatures for sizes N = 25 to 34 all above 0.3.
These results are very similar to the temperatures seen
for higher-temperature heat capacity peak temperatures
in Figure 9, and thus are contrary to the melting temper-
atures implied by the rms bond length ﬂuctuation data
shown in Figure 13. Since the melting temperatures de-
duced from the δ data are in good agreement with the
melting temperatures obtained from the heat capacity
peak temperatures for cluster sizes greater than about
N = 35, and these temperatures are well below 0.3 for
N < 40, it is likely that the reduced melting tempera-
tures for sizes N = 25 to 34 are also well below 0.3.

9

D. Quench results

The temperature dependence on the distribution of
quenched isomers is shown in Figure 14 for those Ar clus-
ters whose heat capacities showed magic number behav-
ior, and in Figures 15 to 17 for some selected non-magic
number Ar clusters. Each plot shows the percentage of
quenches to each of the three lowest-energy isomers, as
well as the total percentage of quenches to the remaining
higher-energy isomers; the data for all of these plots were
all obtained from parallel tempering simulations. Much
of the behavior exhibited by these curves can be ratio-
nalized in terms of the energy spacings and densities of
the lower-energy isomers shown in Figure 2.

The plots for the magic number sizes are all very sim-
ilar in form, with quenches in the lower-temperature,
solid-like region represented solely by the lowest-energy
isomer, and quenches to the other isomers only appear-
ing at temperatures near the phase-change region, and
higher. This is a consequence of the large gap between
the lowest-energy and next lowest-energy isomers that is
typical of magic number clusters. The only signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between the diﬀerent cluster sizes is the tem-
perature where the fraction of quenches to the lowest-
energy isomer drops oﬀ substantially, which increases
with cluster size, and can be seen to be very similar to
the heat capacity peak temperature.

The plots for some non-magic cluster sizes shown in
Figure 15 for N < 35 are considerably diﬀerent. The
curves for N = 25 have a similar form to the magic
number curves in Figure 14, but both the decrease in
the fraction of quenches to the lowest-energy isomer and
the increase in the fraction of quenches to the higher-
energy isomers are much more gradual. This gradual
transition is consistent with the more gradual transition
for the δ(T ) curve, seen in Figure 10. Also, the tran-
sition region occurs well below the heat capacity peak
temperature (but near the transition region indicated by
δ(T )). Ar27 has two very closely spaced lowest-energy
isomers that are well below its next-higher energy iso-
mers, and most of the lower-temperature quenches are to
the second lowest-energy isomer. The temperature where
the fraction of quenches to the second lowest-energy iso-
mer exceeds the fraction to the lowest-energy isomer is
similar to the peak temperature of the very small lower-
temperature heat capacity peak. Again, the tempera-
ture region where the fraction of quenches to the higher-
energy isomers increases substantially corresponds well
to the transition region in the δ(T ) curves, and is well
below the higher-temperature heat capacity peak tem-
perature. The quench curves for N = 31 and 32 are sim-
ilar to the N = 27 curve, with the fraction of quenches
to the lowest-energy isomer dropping rapidly at very low
temperatures corresponding closely to the small heat ca-
pacity peak temperatures, and the fraction of quenches
to higher-energy isomers gradually increasing at temper-
atures well below the peak temperature of the larger,

higher-temperature heat capacity peaks. For Ar31, the
density of lower-energy isomers is so great that quenches
to higher-energy isomers dominate at temperatures even
below the transition region for the δ(T ) curves shown in
Figure 10. The lower-temperature shoulders appearing
in the N = 31 δ(T ) curves and the behavior of the corre-
sponding quench curves are indicative of pre-melting and
an extended phase-change region. Ar32 is a magic num-
ber according to such structural properties as ∆Eb(N )
and ∆2E(N ), but not according to its heat capacity peak
parameters. Its quench curves are also diﬀerent than the
typical magic-number quench curves seen in Figure 14.
The N = 32 δ(T ) curves show unusual peaks in the solid
region, just before their sharp rise. This region just fol-
lows the lower-temperature heat capacity peak, and ac-
cording to the quench results, almost all of the quenches
are to the second lowest-energy isomer. This indicates
that the peaks in the δ(T ) curves are a result of quasier-
godicity (the Metropolis heat capacity curves in Figure 6
also show small, spurious peaks in this region). The
quench curves for N = 33 and 34 indicate easy access
to the other low-lying isomers at low temperatures near
the small heat capacity peak temperatures.

Figure 16 shows quench results for some non-magic
number clusters for N = 37 to 48. Ar37, like Ar31 and
Ar34, has an especially high density of low-lying isomers,
and its quench curves also show a substantial fraction of
quenches to these isomers at temperatures corresponding
to the heat capacity peak temperature. For N = 38,
the temperature region where the fraction of quenches to
the lowest-energy fcc isomer drops oﬀ and the fraction
of quenches to the lowest-energy icosahedral-like isomer
(the second lowest-energy isomer) increases corresponds
to the region just before the heat-capacity peak where a
shoulder can be seen in Figure 7, which is consistent with
other studies of this cluster.32 The quench curves for N =
41, 45 and 48 are similar to those for N = 37, since these
clusters all have accessible lower-energy isomers that are
only slightly higher than the lowest-energy isomer, but
the curves for N = 42 are similar to the curves for the
magic number clusters in Figure 14, indicating that its
low-lying isomers are not very accessible.

The isomer energy levels for N = 50 are similar to
those for N = 45 and 48, and the corresponding quench
curves shown in Figure 17 are likewise similar to those for
N = 45 and 48. Ar52 and Ar53 have some isomers hav-
ing closely spaced potential energies only slightly above
the lowest-energy isomer, and then very few isomers un-
til ∆Vmin ≈ 2.5. This type of isomer energy distribu-
tion is similar to the distributions seen for binary Ar-Kr
clusters, where many mixed isomer conﬁgurations had
energies similar to the lowest-energy isomer,24 and the
quench results are similar too, with the low-lying iso-
mer quench curves showing plateaus throughout much of
the solid-like temperature region. However, neither Ar52
nor Ar53 exhibited the small, very low temperature heat
capacity peaks that were evident in the binary cluster
curves. Ar56 has two low-energy isomers corresponding

10

to the two unique ways a lone atom can be positioned
on a 55-atom Mackay icosahedral core, separated by a
large energy gap from the other isomers corresponding
to rearrangements of the 55-atom core. The N = 56
quench curves show substantial fractions of quenches to
both isomers throughout much of the solid-like region
until the phase-change region, when the higher-energy
isomers become accessible. For N = 57, there are several
lower-energy isomers below ∆Vmin ≈ 1.0 that were rep-
resented in the quench distributions, but as with N = 52
and 53, there was no corresponding lower-temperature
heat capacity peak. Both the N = 57 and 59 quench
curves show evidence of premelting, consistent with their
corresponding δ(T ) curves in Figure 12.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Compared to the irregularity with respect to cluster
size N that characterized the properties of the small clus-
ters of size N ≤ 24 that I studied previously,11 the prop-
erties for the clusters sized 25 ≤ N ≤ 60 showed more
regularity and consistency. The lowest-energy isomers
for these sizes were all dominated by icosahedral based
geometries, except for N = 38, whose lowest-energy iso-
mer had fcc geometry (the lowest-energy icosahedral-like
isomer for N = 38 was only slightly less stable). For
the icosahedral-like clusters, conﬁgurations having anti-
Mackay overlayers were the lowest-energy isomers for
N < 31, while conﬁgurations having Mackay overlayers
were the lowest-energy isomers for the remaining sizes up
to N = 55, after which the ﬁlling of the third shell began
again with anti-Mackay overlayers. Correspondingly, the
heat capacity peak parameters formed two overlapping
sequences as functions of cluster size, with those clus-
ters having anti-Mackay overlayer lowest-energy isomers
showing a gradual evolution in their heat capacity peaks
to higher temperature and smaller size, while those clus-
ters having Mackay overlayer lowest-energy isomers had
small, lower-temperature peaks that generally shifted to
higher temperature and grew in size as N increased.

For cluster sizes 25 ≤ N ≤ 35, the heat capacity
peak temperatures did not correspond well to the clus-
ter melting temperature ranges inferred from the tem-
perature dependence of other cluster properties, such as
the rms bond length ﬂuctuations and the distributions
of quenched isomers. For each of the cluster sizes from
N = 36 to 60, though, the melting temperature ranges
obtained from the three measures were in qualitatively
good agreement. The general trend in the cluster melt-
ing temperatures as a function of the cluster size over the
range studied was an initial decrease, reaching a mini-
mum near N = 36, then an increase until a maximum at
N = 55, where the second Mackay shell was completed,
followed by another decrease as atoms were added to the
third Mackay shell. Superimposed on this general trend
were local maxima corresponding to the magic numbers

N = 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55. The heat ca-
pacity peak heights had a magic number series that was
a subset of this sequence, with local maxima occuring at
N = 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55; for the other magic number
sizes where the heat capacity peaks did not show magic
number behavior (N = 26, 29, and 32), the heat capac-
ity peaks were located well away from the solid-liquid
phase-change regions.

The magic number sequence for the cluster melting
temperatures coincided very well with the magic num-
ber sequences obtained for structural properties such as
the binding energy diﬀerence ∆Eb(N ), the second ﬁnite
diﬀerence of the energy ∆2E(N ), and the gap between
the lowest-energy and next lowest-energy isomers. The
only diﬀerences were N = 38 being a magic number for
the ∆Eb(N ) sequence instead of N = 39, and N = 58,
which was a magic number for all three structural prop-
erties, but was not for either the heat capacity or the rms
bond length ﬂuctuation sequences. This similarity in the
magic number sequences is consistent with the widely
held view that the thermodynamic behavior of clusters
in the phase-change region is dominated by their poten-
tial energy surfaces.

The parallel tempering method was found to be es-
pecially useful for overcoming quasiergodicity and accu-
rately calculating the heat capacities of these clusters,
particularly for the range N = 30 to 38, where the
Metropolis method was hard pressed to provide even
qualitatively correct results. Even the J-walking method,
which had worked very well for smaller cluster sizes, was
unable to determine heat capacities reproducibly for clus-
ters in this range. Given also the relatively small compu-
tational overhead for the method compared to Metropolis
Monte Carlo, parallel tempering currently stands as the
method of choice for cluster Monte Carlo simulations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for part of this
I thank Northern
research is gratefully acknowledged.
Digital, Inc. for generously providing me the use of their
workstations for some of the calculations reported, and
the University of Waterloo for the use of their facilities.
I also thank David L. Freeman for helpful discussions.

1 M. R. Hoare and P. Pal, Adv. Phys. 20, 161 (1971).
2 R. S. Berry, T. L. Beck, H. L. Davis and J. Jellinek, in
Advances in Chemical Physics, edited by I. Prigogine and
S. A. Rice (Wiley, New York, 1988), Vol. 70B, p. 75.

3 H. L. Davis, J. Jellinek, and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys.

86, 6456 (1987).

11

4 T. L. Beck, J. Jellinek, and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys.

35 J. P. K. Doye and D. J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 9659

5 J. E. Adams and R. M. Stratt, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 1332

36 H. Cheng, X. Li, R. L. Whetten, and S. Berry, Phys. Rev.

6 J. D. Honeycutt and H. C. Andersen, J. Phys. Chem. 91,

37 V. V. Nauchitel and A. J. Pertsin, Mol. Phys. 40, 1341

87, 545 (1987).

(1990).

4950, (1987).

38 C. Seko, and K. Takatsuka, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 8613

39 F. Calvo, and F. Spiegelmann, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 2888

A 46, 791 (1992).

(1995).

(1980).

(1996).

(2000).

7 J. A. Northby, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 6166 (1987).
8 D. G. Vlachos, L. D. Schmidt, and R. Aris, J. Chem. Phys.

96, 6880 (1992); 96, 6891 (1992).

9 J .P. K. Doye, D. J. Wales, and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys.

103, 4234 (1995).

10 J. P. K. Doye, M. A. Miller, and D. J. Wales, J. Chem.

Phys. 111, 8417 (1999).

11 D. D. Frantz, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 3747 (1995).
12 R. Casero and J. M. Soler, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 2927 (1991).
13 T. Ikeshoji, B. Hafskjold, Y. Hashi, and Y. Kawazoe, J.

Chem. Phys. 105, 5126 (1996).

14 O. Echt, K. Sattler, and R. Recknagel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

47, 1121 (1981).

15 E. K. Parks, B. J. Winter, T. D. Klots, and S. J. Riley, J.
Chem. Phys. 94, 1882 (1991); E. K. Parks, K. P. Kearns,
and S. .J Riley, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 10207 (1998).

16 D. Prekas, C. L¨uder, and M. Velegrakis, J. Chem. Phys.

108, 4450 (1998).

17 M. Sakurai, K. Watanabe, K. Sumiyama, and K. Suzuki,

J. Chem. Phys. 111, 235 (1999).

18 J. P. Valleau and S. G. Whittington, in Statistical Mechan-
ics, edited by B. J. Berne (Plenum, New York, 1977), Ch. 4,
p. 145.

19 F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, Phys. Rev. A 25, 978

20 P. Labastie and R. L. Whetten, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1567

21 D. D. Frantz, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem.

22 D. D. Frantz, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem.

Phys. 93, 2769 (1990).

Phys. 97, 5713 (1992).

23 G. E. Lopez and D. L. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1428

(1982).

(1990).

(1993).

24 D. D. Frantz, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 10030 (1996); J. Chem.

Phys. 107, 1992 (1997).

25 G. E. L´opez, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 6650 (1996).
26 A. Matro and D. L. Freeman, and R. Q. Topper, J. Chem.

Phys. 104, 8690 (1996).

27 E. Curotto, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys.

109, 1643 (1998).

28 H. Xu and B. J. Berne, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 10299 (1999).
29 R. Zhou and B. J. Berne, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 9185 (1997).
30 C. J. Geyer and E. A. Thompson, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90,

31 M. R. Ghayal and E. Curotto, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4298

909 (1995).

(2000).

32 J. P. Neirotti, F. Calvo, D. L. Freeman and J. D. Doll, J.
Chem. Phys. 112, 10340 (2000); F. Calvo, J. P. Neirotti,
D. L. Freeman and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 10350
(2000).

33 J. P. K. Doye, D. J. Wales and M. A. Miller, J. Chem.

Phys. 109, 8143 (1998).

34 J .P. K. Doye, M. A. Miller and D. J. Wales, J. Chem.

Phys. 110, 6896 (1999).

12

TABLE I. Cluster heat capacity peak parameters for 25 ≤ N ≤ 60. These values were obtained by smoothing and inter-
polating the parallel tempering data shown in Figs. 6, 7 and 8, which were based on the combined results of 10 walks, each
consisting of 106 passes of data accumulation per temperature. The uncertainties were estimated as the standard errors of the
set of peak parameters that were obtained from the interpolated heat capacity curves for each of the 10 walks.

Lower temperature peak
∗
V i/N

hC

T

∗

Lower temperature peak
∗
V i/N

hC

T

∗

Higher temperature peak
∗
V i/N

hC

∗

N
25
26
27 0.0183±0.0004
28
29
30 0.0554±0.0010
31 0.0279±0.0019
32 0.0603±0.0008
33 0.0757±0.0015
34 0.0612±0.0011
35 0.1070±0.0014
36 0.1415±0.0015
37
38
39
40
41
42

2.965±0.001

3.059±0.002
3.443±0.079
4.115±0.035
4.336±0.063
4.202±0.024
4.759±0.031
5.715±0.067

∗

hC

Higher temperature peak
∗
V i/N
6.425±0.011
6.380±0.012
6.313±0.011
6.210±0.013
6.092±0.011
5.995±0.014
5.888±0.013
5.814±0.009
5.737±0.010
5.656±0.005
5.600±0.010
5.600±0.006
5.027±0.023
5.858±0.030
7.554±0.029
7.250±0.021
6.602±0.015
6.828±0.025

T
0.3134±0.0016
0.3116±0.0015
0.3157±0.0015
0.3242±0.0016
0.3299±0.0025
0.3337±0.0020
0.3396±0.0018
0.3484±0.0023
0.3511±0.0033
0.3641±0.0021
0.3771±0.0064
0.4097±0.0074
0.1398±0.0017
0.1653±0.0005
0.1948±0.0009
0.1938±0.0004
0.1875±0.0011
0.1884±0.0006

N
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58 0.1844±0.0022
59
60

3.721±0.005

T
0.1970±0.0009
0.1986±0.0009
0.2051±0.0009
0.2210±0.0006
0.2204±0.0005
0.2289±0.0010
0.2374±0.0006
0.2472±0.0006
0.2615±0.0003
0.2743±0.0004
0.2828±0.0005
0.2897±0.0004
0.2940±0.0005
0.2929±0.0007
0.2917±0.0005
0.2871±0.0010
0.2824±0.0006
0.2786±0.0007

7.815±0.032
7.012±0.027
7.682±0.029
9.781±0.040
8.681±0.033
9.067±0.041
10.257±0.089
9.702±0.047
11.531±0.045
13.460±0.061
15.197±0.064
16.766±0.104
17.450±0.098
15.280±0.131
13.645±0.081
11.702±0.033
10.934±0.053
10.340±0.073

13

FIG. 1. Eﬀects of the constraining radius Rc on cluster reduced heat capacities per particle for simulations of Ar30 (at left)
and Ar32 (at right). The ﬁlled circles represent parallel tempering results for Rc = 3.0 σ, while the squares represent parallel
tempering results for Rc = 3.5 σ; these were obtained from walks of 107 total passes per temperature point. The error bars
are two standard deviations on each side. The dotted line and the diamonds represent Metropolis results for Rc = 4.0 σ,
which were obtained from walks of 107 and 108 total passes per temperature point, respectively. The curves with diﬀerent
constraining radii are in very good agreement on the low-temperature side of the peak, but show substantial deviations on the
high-temperature side of the peak, eﬀecting the peak height and location slightly. The diﬀerences between the Rc = 3.5 σ and
Rc = 4.0 σ peak height and location were minor in these two cases, and insigniﬁcant for most of the other cluster sizes whose
parallel tempering results were obtained using Rc = 3.5 σ. The smaller lower-temperature peaks seen in the parallel tempering
curves are absent in the Metropolis curves, indicating the Metropolis simulations were subject to substantial quasiergodicity.

FIG. 2. Cluster local potential energy minima relative to the global minimum, in reduced units. Magic number behavior can
be seen for N = 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55, which have large gaps between their global minimum energy and their next
higher energy conﬁgurations, compared to their immediate neighbors. The potential energies were obtained from J-walking
and parallel tempering quench studies.

FIG. 3. The binding energy diﬀerence as a function of cluster aggregate size (top plot), the second ﬁnite diﬀerence of
the energy as a function of cluster size (middle plot), and the energy gap between the lowest-energy isomer and the next
lowest-energy isomer, as a function of cluster size (bottom plot), all in reduced units. Except for N = 38 and 39, the three
measures show the same peak values. The binding energy diﬀerences and the second ﬁnite diﬀerences for 5 ≤ N ≤ 24 have
been included for comparison, using data from Ref. 11.

FIG. 4. The second ﬁnite diﬀerence of the energy ∆2E as a function of temperature T and size N , for Ar clusters. The
structure of the zero temperature curve ∆2E(N ) (also shown in Fig. 3) can be seen to extend well into the higher-temperature
regions for the magic number sizes (seen as ridges in the surface), which indicates the persistence of their solid-like lowest-energy
isomers over relatively large temperature ranges. The ﬂat regions of the surface at higher temperature correspond to the cluster
liquid-like regions, and so the phase-change regions correspond to the temperatures where the ridges abate.

FIG. 5. Cluster potential energies per particle as functions of temperature, obtained from parallel tempering simulations for
clusters ranging from N = 25 (top curve) to N = 60 (bottom curve). Reduced units have been used; the absolute temperature
scale at the top is for Ar. Magic number sizes for N = 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 43, 46, 49 and 55 are indicated by the dotted
curves, and correspond to those clusters having relatively large energy diﬀerences from their preceding cluster sizes at low
temperatures. A rough indication of the phase-change region from solid-like to liquid-like can be ascertained by the change
from the irregular spacing between the curves seen at lower temperatures to the regular spacing seen at higher temperatures.

FIG. 6. Reduced heat capacities per particle as functions of temperature for Ar clusters of size N = 25 to 36. The open
circles and thicker solid line represent the results obtained from parallel tempering runs of 107 passes per temperature point.
The dotted line represents the results obtained from Metropolis runs of 107 passes per temperature point, while the thin solid
line represents the results obtained from similar Metropolis runs of 108 passes per temperature point. Beginning with Ar30,
a smaller, lower-temperature peak can be seen evolving in the parallel tempering curves and moving to higher temperatures,
while the higher-temperature peak gradually disappears. Quasiergodicity is evident in the Metropolis results of these cluster
sizes by the absent and malformed lower temperature peaks. As in Fig. 1, the discrepancies between the parallel tempering
and Metropolis curves for higher temperatures are due to the parallel tempering simulations having been run with a smaller
constraining radius of 3.5 σ, instead of the value of Rc = 4.0 σ used in the Metropolis simulations. The large ticks on the
temperature axes indicate the temperatures where the Metropolis rms bond length ﬂuctuations rose sharply for walks of 107
passes per temperature (higher temperature) and 108 passes.

FIG. 7. Same as Fig. 6, but for clusters ranging in size from N = 37 to 48. Note the diﬀerent heat capacity scale.

FIG. 8. Same as Fig. 6, but for clusters ranging in size from N = 49 to 60. For these sizes, the constraining radius was set

to 4.0 σ for both the parallel tempering and Metropolis simulations. Again, note the diﬀerent heat capacity scale.

14

FIG. 9. Magic number behavior in cluster heat capacities. The upper plot shows the reduced heat capacity peak values as
a function of the cluster size, while the lower plot shows the corresponding peak reduced temperatures as a function of the
cluster size; the right-hand axis is representative of Ar. The peak parameters were obtained from interpolations of the parallel
tempering data; parameter values for N < 25 have been included from Ref. 11 for added context. Two general sequences have
been identiﬁed as a consequence of the clusters in the range 30 ≤ N ≤ 37 having two prominent peaks. The circles indicate
the heat capacity parameters for the broader, higher temperature peaks, which have evolved from the solid-liquid phase-change
region peaks of the smaller cluster sizes, while the squares represent the narrower, lower temperature peaks, which evolve into
the solid-liquid phase-change region peaks of the larger cluster sizes. The triangles represent the parameters for the very small,
broad peaks seen for sizes N = 27 and 58. The magic number labels indicate the cluster sizes whose peaks are higher than
those of their immediate neighbors.

FIG. 10. Root mean square bond length ﬂuctuations as functions of the temperature for Ar clusters of size N = 25 to 36.
The solid circles represent data obtained from 10 Metropolis walks, each consisting of 106 passes per temperature point, while
the open circles represent data obtained from 10 similar Metropolis walks of 107 passes in length. The error bars are single
standard deviations for the 10 walks. The large ticks on the temperature axes indicate the corresponding cluster heat capacity
peak temperatures.

FIG. 11. Same as Fig. 10, but for clusters ranging in size from N = 37 to 48.

FIG. 12. Same as Fig. 10, but for clusters ranging in size from N = 49 to 60.

FIG. 13. Magic number behavior in cluster rms bond length ﬂuctuations. The curves plot the reduced temperatures associ-
ated with the Lindemann-like threshold δ = 0.2, as a function of cluster size. The squares represent the values corresponding
to δ(T ) curves whose data were obtained from Metropolis walks of 106 passes per temperature point, while the circles represent
values obtained from similar Metropolis simulations of 107 passes. The right-hand axis is representative of Ar. The magic
numbers are a subset of those obtained in Figure 3 for the second ﬁnite diﬀerences in the energy.

FIG. 14. Quenched isomer distribution curves for Ar clusters as functions of temperature for the magic number sizes
N = 36, 39, 43, 46, 49, and 55. The data were obtained from parallel tempering simulations of 106 total passes per tem-
perature. The ﬁlled circles represent the fraction of isomers that quenched to the lowest-energy isomer, the open circles the
second lowest-energy isomer, and the squares the third lowest-energy isomer, while the line represents the sum of the remaining
isomers. The dotted vertical lines in each plot indicate the corresponding heat capacity peak temperatures.

FIG. 15. Same as Figure 14, but for the non-magic number sizes N = 25, 27 and 31 to 34.

FIG. 16. Same as Figure 14, but for the non-magic number sizes N = 37, 38, 41, 42, 45 and 48.

FIG. 17. Same as Figure 14, but for the non-magic number sizes N = 50, 52, 53, 56, 57 and 59.

15

This figure "figure1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure4.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure5.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure6.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure7.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure8.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure9.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure10.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure11.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure12.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure13.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure14.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure15.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure16.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

This figure "figure17.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0107013v1

