1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Helium nanodroplet isolation ro-vibrational spectroscopy: methods and recent results

Carlo Callegari, Kevin K. Lehmann,∗ Roman Schmied, and Giacinto Scoles†
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

In this article, recent developments in HElium NanoDroplet Isolation (HENDI) spectroscopy are
reviewed, with an emphasis on the infrared region of the spectrum. We discuss how molecular beam
spectroscopy and matrix isolation spectroscopy can be usefully combined into a method that provides
a unique tool to tackle physical and chemical problems which had been outside our experimental
possibilities. Next, in reviewing the experimental methodology, we present design criteria for droplet
beam formation and its seeding with the chromophore(s) of interest, followed by a discussion of the
merits and shortcomings of radiation sources currently used in this type of spectroscopy. In a second,
more conceptual part of the review, we discuss several HENDI issues which are understood by the
community to a varied level of depth and precision. In this context, we show ﬁrst how a superﬂuid
helium cluster adopts the symmetry of the molecule or complex seeded in it and discuss the nature
of the potential well (and its isotropy) that acts on a solute inside a droplet, and of the energy
levels that arise because of this conﬁnement. Second, we treat the question of the homogeneous
versus inhomogeneous broadening of the spectral proﬁles, moving after this to a discussion of the
rotational dynamics of the molecules and of the surrounding superﬂuid medium. The change in
rotational constants from their gas phase values, and their dependence on the angular velocity and
vibrational quantum number are discussed. Finally, the spectral shifts generated by this very gentle
matrix are analyzed and shown to be small because of a cancellation between the opposing action of
the attractive and repulsive parts of the potential of interaction between molecules and their solvent.
The review concludes with a discussion of three recent applications to (a) the synthesis of far-from-
equilibrium molecular aggregates that could hardly be prepared in any other way, (b) the study of
the inﬂuence of a simple and rather homogeneous solvent on large amplitude molecular motions, and
(c) the study of mixed 3He/4He and other highly quantum clusters (e.g., H2 clusters) prepared inside
helium droplets and interrogated by measuring the IR spectra of molecules embedded in them. In
spite of the many open questions, we hope to convince the reader that HENDI has a great potential
for the solution of several problems in modern chemistry and condensed matter physics, and that,
even more interestingly, this unusual environment has the potential to generate new sets of issues
which were not in our minds before its introduction.

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Scope of the review

frared spectroscopy has led seamlessly to this apparently
esoteric, but in reality simple, extension, which, as we
hope to show here, is likely to spawn a large number of
scientiﬁc and technical applications.

In this article we review the motivations and the exper-
imental methodology of HElium NanoDroplet Isolation
(HENDI) spectroscopy, with an emphasis on the infrared
region of the spectrum. After reviewing spectrometer de-
sign criteria and experimental know-how, we summarize
our present understanding of line spacings, line shapes
and spectral shifts, and discuss some of the recent re-
sults in as far as they illustrate general principles and
possible future applications. Our aim is centered on dis-
cussing the current understanding of the ﬁeld, on identi-
fying unsolved problems and open questions, and not on
providing a complete summary of the work published so
far, because the last three years have seen a really explo-
sive growth in this area. For earlier reviews of this ﬁeld,
see Refs. 1, 2. Before describing the motivations and gen-
eral goals of this kind of research, we shall ﬁrst show how
the natural evolution of supersonic molecular beam in-

∗Electronic address: lehmann@princeton.edu
†Electronic address: gscoles@princeton.edu

B. The marriage between molecular beams and
matrix spectroscopy

Because of the long ﬂuorescence lifetimes of vibra-
tionally excited molecules, it is impractical, with few ex-
ceptions [3, 4], to obtain infrared spectra in free jets using
ﬂuorescence detection. At the same time, when the use of
well collimated beams is called for, direct measurement
of the attenuation of the exciting radiation is also out of
the question [5].

This leaves bolometric detection of the energy de-
posited in the beam by a resonant, tunable laser as the
method of choice for this type of spectroscopy [6]. As-
suming unity partition function and full saturation of the
IR transition, it can be shown that with a seeded beam
of “standard” intensity and the typical sensitivity of a
doped Si (or Ge) bolometer operating at 1.5 K (noise
equivalent power on the order of 100 fW/√Hz), signal-
to-noise (S/N) ratios of up to 105 can be obtained [5].

The method is equally applicable to van der Waals

complexes which, again with very few exceptions [7], dis-
sociate upon vibrational excitation. What is detected in
this case is a decrease of the total kinetic energy car-
ried by the beam, because the dissociation fragments are
deﬂected from the beam axis, resulting in a decreased
particle ﬂux to the detector.

If the complex consists of a large number of monomer
units, it is not a priori obvious that absorption of energy
must lead to evaporation, as the amount of excess energy
per degree of freedom can conceivably be too small. One
must consider, however, that the temperature of large
van der Waals clusters is determined by evaporative cool-
ing [8] which is a self-limiting process. It is then easy to
appreciate that the absorption of an IR photon by a large
van der Waals cluster will in general put the cluster above
the threshold for evaporation to resume.

Using this detection technique and concepts, IR spec-
tra of hundreds of van der Waals complexes (mostly be-
low 4 monomer units) have been obtained during the last
20 years, contributing a great deal to our knowledge of
intermolecular forces [7, 9]. For larger sizes, many exper-
iments investigate a single chromophore molecule com-
plexed to a cluster of rare gas atoms, in order to keep the
interactions as simple as possible. This class of experi-
ments has, however, about an order of magnitude lower
S/N ratios than the experiments carried out on a seeded
beam of stable molecules.

In spite of the added diﬃculties, the possibility of load-
ing a large rare-gas host cluster with almost any chro-
mophore by pickup of the latter in a “scattering” cell
located on the path of the host cluster beam [10] has gen-
erated a whole new class of experiments. As the exact
number of atoms in the cluster starts becoming incon-
sequential, this approach can be seen as the gas-phase
analog of Matrix Isolation (MI) spectroscopy [11]. As in
bulk MI spectroscopy, several classes of experiments can
be carried out that involve both the unperturbed chro-
mophore and its photodissociation/reaction products.

In comparison with bulk MI spectroscopy, its Cluster
Isolation (CI) analogue has two main advantages and two
major disadvantages. The ﬁrst advantage is due to the
ﬁnite size of the cluster matrix, which allows control over
the degree of chromophore complexation. Uncontrolled
aggregation upon annealing plagues MI spectroscopy and
sets one of the inevitable limits of this powerful tech-
nique. The second advantage is the fact that preparing
the chromophore in a surface location is much easier in a
cluster than in a matrix. The two disadvantages are (1)
the usual transient character of every molecular beam,
which makes it necessary to use powerful laser sources to
both pump and probe the cluster beam, while the bulk
matrix can be both manipulated and probed with rela-
tively low power, broadband light sources, and (2) the
fact that the temperature of a cluster is “internally set”
by evaporative cooling and cannot easily be changed.

Another problem connected with MI spectroscopy is
the presence of matrix-induced perturbations, which can
be minimized by the use of bulk solid or liquid helium as

2

a medium. This, however, comes with a heavy price: in-
jection of the sample into helium without causing aggre-
gation or condensation onto the walls of the container is
extremely diﬃcult because of low solubility, and has been
achieved almost exclusively for atoms [12]. It should be
noted, however, that high purity parahydrogen has been
shown to form stable matrices for molecular dopants with
perturbations, as measured by widths of rovibrational
transitions, that are comparable to those observed in he-
lium [13].

The extension of CI spectroscopy to helium clusters,
pioneered at Princeton about a decade ago [14], solves
the problem of sample injection. It has grown tremen-
dously in importance since the group of J. P. Toennies in
G¨ottingen has shown that a guest in a host helium nano-
droplet can yield a spectrum indicative of free molecular
rotation. Almost all the spectra measured to date are
consistent with the spectral structure predicted by the
symmetry of the isolated molecule (see Section III A). In
contrast, in a solid matrix (or even in a conventional liq-
uid, if an instantaneous conﬁguration is considered), the
total symmetry of the system is the combined symme-
try of the molecule and that of the trapping site, usu-
ally lower than that of the molecule alone. Further-
more, the matrix-induced spectral shifts in helium are
also much smaller than in any other medium, and of-
ten much smaller than complexation-induced shifts (see
Section III E). For the purpose of comparison with ab
initio calculations, complexes formed in He droplets can
then be treated as isolated (gas phase), and the observed
shifts provide direct information to decide which isomers
are actually formed. There are two important implica-
tions: (1) the structural information contained in the
spectral symmetry is undiluted, and (2) if a complex is
formed in helium, the interactions of its parts with the
surrounding medium are too weak to signiﬁcantly aﬀect
its equilibrium structure (zero-point motions and, more
dramatically, kinetics, are sometimes aﬀected).

Finally, the possibility of obtaining high resolution
spectra in helium droplets at 0.38 K and, using 3He,
0.15 K, allows for the study of superﬂuidity in nanoscale
systems, a frontier subject in condensed matter physics
that has the potential to give a substantial contribution
to our understanding of highly degenerate many-body
systems [15, 16].

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

The history of liquid helium cluster/nanodroplet pro-
duction and the principal methods used for their study
have been reviewed in the preceding article by Jan
Northby [17]. Here we will instead discuss the design cri-
teria of a typical droplet source for HENDI spectroscopy,
with particular focus on those used in our laboratory.
The schematic of a typical experimental apparatus is
shown in Figure 1.

chopper

l
a
s
e
r

M
W

 
 
 
 
c
a
b
l
e

b
o
l
o
m
e
t
e
r

waveguide-multipass

cooler

nozzle

pick-up

cell

g
a
s
 
i
n
l
e
t

t
o
 
D
P
 
2

to Diff. Pump 1

cold shield

to Diffusion Pump 3

FIG. 1: Schematic of a typical experimental apparatus. From
Ref. 68.

A. Nanodroplet beam production

0

Due to the weak binding energy of small helium clus-
ters, large densities and low temperatures are called for in
the expansion, both resulting in a large gas ﬂux. There-
fore, liquid helium droplet sources require large pumps
and/or very small nozzles. The ﬂux is proportional
to P0d2T −1/2
, where typical nozzle diameters (d) range
from 5 to 20 µm, pressures (P0) from 1 to 100 bar, and
temperatures (T0) from 10 to 30 K. Within the ideal
gas approximation, a 10 µm nozzle with T0 = 20 K
and P0 = 15 bar will discharge into the source cham-
ber approximately the same gas load as a room temper-
4 standard cm3/s
ature 50 µm nozzle at 2 bar, i.e.,
(= 0.16 mmol/s). This is the maximum gas load that can
be applied to a typical diﬀusion pump with an eﬀective
pumping speed of 4000 L/s (referred to N2, i.e., 10000 L/s
10−4 torr).
for He) at the limit operating pressure (
Typically, droplets with an atom count N of a few thou-
sand are formed. The large mass of these droplets means
that the beam intensity is not much aﬀected by scattering
from the background gas.

≈

≈

×

3

If a source is fed at the “standard” load mentioned
above, it is possible to operate a droplet source with a
small two-stage closed-cycle refrigerator (the warm stage
typically operates at 80 K, the cold stage at 12 K) de-
livering 1 W of cooling power at the cold stage (0.12 W
of power are needed to cool the gas from 80 K down to
20 K). However, due to background radiation and back-
ground gas thermal loads, the use of a 5 W refrigerator
is recommended. This will allow experiments to span a
larger temperature and gas load range, and therefore to
cover a larger range of average cluster sizes. For sources
which operate below 10 K, which are used for the pro-
> 105), either refrig-
duction of very large clusters (
N
h
erators with lower minimum operating temperatures or
direct liquid He cooling are required. Closed-cycle re-

i

3

frigerators with a zero-load temperature of 3 K are com-
mercially available [18], of course at substantially higher
cost. Cost is also the limiting factor for direct liquid He
cooling, which is the cooling method that allows the max-
imum ﬂexibility in terms of droplet size range and total
ﬂux that can be attained [19].

i

i

In a subcritical expansion, 4He droplets exhibit a log-
normal size distribution, with a full width at half max-
[20, 21]. While the existence of
imum of 0.55–0.75
N
h
scaling laws for the determination of
from expan-
N
h
sion parameters is generally recognized, diﬀerent formu-
las have been proposed for it [22]. The most popular one
states that
is a function (not necessarily linear [23])
N
i
h
of P0d1.5T −2.4
. The estimates that we will give here for
use a formula by Knuth et al. [24]; this formula is
N
h
in fair agreement with the measurements of Ref. 25, al-
though the latter seem to scale diﬀerently with T0. The
case of supercritical expansion, which produces a bimodal
distribution of much larger droplets, has been analyzed
IR absorption has been used as a
in Refs. 19, 26, 27.
calibrated source of He evaporation to measure average
cluster sizes as a function of source conditions [28].

i

0

The exact shape (density distribution) of a He droplet
has been computed using both density functional [20, 21]
and Monte Carlo [29] methods. A good approxima-
tion for “back of the envelope” calculations is that of
a sphere having the same density as bulk liquid helium
(ρ0 = 0.0218 ˚A−3, for 4He [30]). According to this liquid
drop model, a droplet containing N 4He atoms has a ra-
dius R = 2.22N 1/3 ˚A. A more realistic description uses
the analytic function [20, 31]:

ρ(r) =

ρ0
2 (cid:20)

1

−

tanh

r

R
−
g (cid:19)(cid:21)

,

2
(cid:18)

≈

which accounts for the diﬀuseness of the surface via a
thickness parameter g; the 10–90% thickness (
1.1g) is
≈
6 ˚A for 4He [20]
estimated by various methods to be
and

8 ˚A for 3He [21].

≈

The equilibrium temperature of a droplet is dictated
by evaporative cooling [32, 33], and can be extracted
from the ﬁt of the ro-vibrational spectrum of a probe
molecule (Sec. II D 1). The measured values, 0.38 K for
4He (Ref. 34, and most entries in Tab. I) and 0.15 K for
3He [34], are in good agreement with theoretical predic-
tions [32, 33].

About 1 cm downstream from the nozzle, the droplet
beam is collimated by a skimmer. As shock waves may
play a role in attenuating the beam, it is important that
the shape of the skimmer is optimized, and that its edges
are as sharp as possible. Typically, commercial electro-
formed conical skimmers, about 500 µm in diameter, are
used [35].

To give an idea of what intensity can be expected for a
droplet beam, consider a detector located 500 mm away
from the source, with a 1 mm2 detection area, and an
average cluster size of
4000. Assuming that 10%
i ≈
of the ﬂux is in the droplets and that the droplet ﬂux is
spread uniformly over 1/10 of a steradian in the forward

N
h

direction (a conservative estimate), one gets a ﬂux of on
the order of 1011 droplets per second at the detector [36].
Notorious diﬃculties in calibrating the absolute values of
molecular beam detectors (be it bolometers or mass spec-
trometers) make this number hard to calculate precisely.
For larger clusters, a ﬁrst approximation of the observ-
able mass ﬂux can be obtained by scaling the number of
clusters inversely with the number of atoms per cluster.
Whereas pure and doped 4He droplets have been ex-
tensively studied far fewer experiments with pure 3He
or mixed 3He/4He droplets have been done [15, 21,
34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41] chieﬂy due to the high cost of
the isotope [42]. Budget dictates that 3He be continu-
ously recycled, requiring specialized equipment: sealed
pumps and a puriﬁcation system. The gas is collected
from the exhaust of the source chamber pumping sys-
tem, cleaned on liquid-nitrogen-cooled zeolite traps, pres-
surized by a membrane compressor to 20–80 bar and
fed back to the nozzle. The recycling system used in
L gas to
Refs. 21, 34, 39, 40, 41 needed about 20 bar
·
be ﬁlled. The loss rate under normal operation was < 2
bar
L per week [41]. Thus although a considerable initial
·
investment is required the operating costs are comparable
to the other running costs of these experiments.

There is an important diﬀerence between 4HeN and
3HeN clusters: whereas the former are bound for any
N [43], calculations predict that small 3He droplets of
less than about 30 atoms are unstable [44, 45] because of
the larger zero point energy associated with the lighter
isotopic mass. Experimentally, a strikingly diﬀerent be-
havior of average droplet size as a function of nozzle
temperature is observed for the two isotopes. Whereas
the size of 4He droplets increases gradually with de-
creasing temperature[20], the formation of 3He droplets
sets in sharply, and at a considerably lower temperature
(T0 = 11.5 K for P0 = 20 bar and d = 5µm, giving
droplets of about 4500 atoms [21, 41]). In the expansion
of an isotopic mixture, formation of 4He-enriched mixed
droplets is observed [34, 41]. The 4He concentration in
the droplets is several times higher than that of the ex-
panding mixture (< 4%) and depends on the expansion
conditions [41]. Because 4He will selectively solvate most
dopants, the production of pure 3He droplets requires gas
of high isotopic purity (4He < 10−6), which is commer-
cially available [42].

B. Nanodroplet beam doping

After collimation, the droplets are seeded with the
molecule of interest by passing them through a small gas
pickup cell where the pressure is tailored to obtain the
desired mean number of dopants per droplet. The in-
ternal and kinetic energy of the dopant, as well as the
energy of solvation, are dissipated into the droplet and
result in evaporation of He atoms (200–250 atoms, each
taking oﬀ 5.5–7 K of energy [46], are estimated for the
pickup of a small molecule such as HCN), leading to a

4

≈

1 + (vm/vd)2, where vd

microcanonical system cooled to 0.38 K (we assume pure
4He droplets here). On average, the impact parameter of
the molecule is signiﬁcant (2/3 of the droplet radius), re-
45N 1/3¯h per
sulting in a mean angular momentum of
collision with HCN. Likewise, He evaporating at 0.38 K
will carry away 10–15¯h of angular momentum per atom.
At present, it is not clear how much angular momentum
remains in the cluster after evaporative cooling, nor in
which form it is stored if it exceeds the thermal values.
A quick estimate of the optimum pickup conditions
can be made by assuming unity sticking coeﬃcient and
a droplet cross section of 15.5N 2/3 ˚A2 (see Section II A);
further, the droplet’s size reduction upon pickup and the
nonzero velocity of the gas molecules are neglected (if
the latter is accounted for, the collision rate will increase
by a factor of
400 m/s
is the droplet velocity and vm is the rms velocity of the
molecules in the pickup cell). With these approximations
(further corrections are discussed in Ref. 47), the pickup
process results in a Poisson distribution of the number
of dopant molecules per droplet, and a column density
corresponding to
cm is required to maxi-
·
mize the probability of single pickup. Under typical con-
ditions, the vapor pressure needed for eﬃcient doping of
helium droplets is on the order of 10−2 Pa, some four
orders of magnitude lower than what is typically used
in supersonic jet coexpansions. This implies that many
species can be doped into helium that are not practical
to study by jet spectroscopy because of the high tem-
peratures involved, which are either diﬃcult to reach or
cause thermal decomposition of the species. The large
cross sections for the droplets imply that the vacuum re-
quirements in the instruments are more stringent than
for beam experiments on monomers or small clusters.

2.5N −2/3 Pa

p

≈

≈

≈

∼

Molecules captured by the same droplet are expected
to ﬁnd each other and form van der Waals complexes, but
once past the pickup region, each droplet becomes an iso-
lated system and no further aggregation occurs. At the
temperature of the droplet, 0.38 K, the ro-vibrational
1 cm−1, which
spectrum of a typical molecule spans
is generally smaller than the shifts induced by complex-
ation. Hence, spectra of diﬀerent small oligomers will
not overlap, and pickup of more than one molecule per
droplet will only decrease the intensity of the single-
molecule spectrum, without aﬀecting its shape. For this
reason, at least when one is concerned with monomers
and dimers only, high purity of the dopant gas is de-
sirable but not essential. An extreme case is the spec-
trum of H12C13CH, which has been observed [48] at
its naturally occurring abundance (2.2%) interleaved to
that of H12C12CH. The situation is diﬀerent for higher
oligomers, because complexation shifts tend towards an
asymptotic limit [49, 50], and the spectra tend to merge.
Nevertheless,
in a favorable case complexes of OCS
with up to 17 hydrogen molecules have been made and
spectroscopically resolved [51], though this was done in
mixed 3He/4He droplets which cool to 0.15 K. Pendu-
lar spectroscopy (see Section II D 4 and Ref. 49) allows

even the modest width of the rotational contours to be
collapsed, which is particularly favorable in separating
closely spaced oligomer or isomer bands.

C. Radiation sources

Since spectroscopy of doped helium droplets is still a
relatively new ﬁeld, it is often the availability of a suitable
radiation source that dictates the choice of the system to
In the early days [14, 52], SF6 (ν3 mode)
be studied.
was chosen as a dopant molecule because of its large ab-
sorption cross section in a spectral region where watts of
radiation (from line-tunable CO2 lasers) were available.
To achieve rotational resolution, this transition was
later studied with a continuously tunable semiconductor
(lead salt) laser [53]. The same type of laser was also em-
ployed for the beautiful studies of OCS in mixed 3He/4He
carried out in G¨ottingen [15, 51, 54, 55].

Pulsed lasers have also been used in early experiments
on HF-, H2O- or NH3-doped helium droplets [56, 57, 58].
They oﬀer the advantage of high power and wide-range
tunability; those come at the price of usually broadband
emission, so that it becomes diﬃcult to establish whether
the width of the observed spectral lines is determined
by the surrounding helium environment or rather by the
laser itself (via instrumental linewidth or power broad-
ening).

High power line-tunable gas lasers, cw or pulsed, are
still being used up to the present time [59, 60, 61, 62]. Be-
cause of the sparse set of available lasing frequencies, they
are most suited to the investigation of small molecules,
with small moments of inertia and therefore well spaced
lines. Thanks to their large output power, they have
been successfully used to perform saturation measure-
ments [62].

Most of the experimental spectra to date have been
acquired with color center lasers,
in the 3 µm re-
gion [49, 50, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68], and, to a lesser extent,
in the 1.5 µm region [69]. These lasers oﬀer broader tun-
ability range, comparatively large output power (30 and
250 mW, respectively) and high resolution, as they can
be stabilized to better than 1 MHz without too much
diﬃculty. Since the 1.5 µm region is used in telecommu-
nications, commercial optical components (e.g., ﬁbers,
connectors, and high ﬁnesse cavities) are available for
this type of measurements.

At these power levels it is possible to bring near sat-
uration a 10 MHz homogeneously broad, strong funda-
If the lines are broader
mental transition near 3 µm.
or the transition weaker (as in the case of overtones at
1.5 µm), laser ﬁeld enhancement devices can be usefully
employed (see Section II D). Looking at the future, since
HENDI spectral lines are rarely narrower than 0.01 cm−1
(see Section III C) and since pulsed lasers with similar
bandwidth are available, it would probably be useful to
explore the possibility of developing pulsed helium nano-
droplet sources. Pulsed devices that produce small He

5

clusters are already available at present [70].

For cw beam sources, narrow bandwidth high repe-
tition rate pulsed lasers have recently become available
at power levels that allow frequency multiplication and
mixing. As the use of regenerative ampliﬁers has allowed
repetition rates up to 10 kHz, the problem of the low duty
cycle characteristic of traditional pulsed laser sources can
be overcome. For strictly cw laser sources, recent devel-
opments that will likely ﬁnd HENDI applications are cw
OPOs [71] and quantum cascade lasers [72]. Quantum
cascade lasers oﬀer the advantage of being available to
24 µm [73], which is going to be
wavelengths as high as
particularly useful for the study of large molecules where,
at higher frequencies, Intramolecular Vibrational Redis-
tribution (IVR) is an unavoidable source of line broad-
ening and of loss of information.

≈

D. Excitation schemes

1.

Infrared

R

Q

-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
transiton number

P

]
z
H
G

[
 

h
t
d
i
w
k
a
e
p

 

2

1

0

l
a
n
g
i
s
 
r
e
t
e
m
o
l
o
b

6567.5

6568.0

wavenumber [cm

-1

]

6568.5

FIG. 2: Spectrum of the 2ν1 transition of propyne, and ﬁt to
a symmetric top. The inset shows the linewidth for each tran-
sition. Note that at the temperature of the droplet (0.38 K)
the Q-branch would be absent if nuclear spin relaxation had
taken place. From Ref. 69.

Infrared (IR) spectroscopy in He droplets derives its
uniqueness from the fact that the medium still allows ro-
tational resolution (a representative spectrum is shown
in Figure 2), even for relatively large molecules and com-
plexes. This is to be compared to “classical” solvents,
for which rotational resolution is, at best, only possible
for molecules of the smallest moments of inertia. Rota-
tional resolution allows the measurement of the cluster

temperature, a very sought after quantity as the follow-
ing statement (made in 1994) proves:

But so far no “thermometer” to measure a
cluster’s temperature is available. Worse,
there does not even exist a suggestion how
to construct one.
[Ref. 74, Chapter 1.5: Experiments not possi-
ble today]

Ironically, in the same book, the ﬁrst results on infrared
spectroscopy in He clusters were summarized, and the
following prediction was made:

In future the technique may be combined
with continuously tunable narrow band lasers
of higher power as these become available.
[ibid., Chapter 3.7: Infrared spectroscopy]

Continuously tunable, narrow-band lasers were indeed
the key that, one year after, allowed for rotational reso-
lution to be achieved and thus temperature to be mea-
sured [34, 53, 75]. The technical solution that was used
to overcome the power requirement consists of a diﬀer-
ent arrangement of how the laser beam interacts with
the beam of doped droplets. In contrast to the opaque
bolometer detectors of the early experiments, the use of
a “transparent” mass spectrometer detector allowed for
a setup where the laser and cluster beam counterpropa-
gated, resulting in interaction region of tens of centime-
ters. With this arrangement, low power diode lasers can
be proﬁtably employed [53]. Additional beneﬁts of using
this setup for pulsed lasers is that their duty cycle (de-
ﬁned as the fraction of the beam that is in the laser ﬁeld)
is increased from 10−5 to 10−3 and the detector output
can be time gated to match the depletion transient.

When bolometers are used as detectors, multipass
cells [49] and power build-up cavities [69] have been suc-
cessfully employed. While a well aligned multipass cell
can give a 30- to 50-fold increase in signal relative to
the single-crossing case, a resonant cavity can further en-
hance the radiation intensity seen by the droplets by one
order of magnitude. Naturally, this comes at a price,
since, as the laser is scanned, the cavity has to be kept in
resonance by suitable feedback electronics. Moreover, as
currently implemented, the interior of the cavity is a vol-
ume bound by metallic surfaces; as such it is eﬀectively
shielded from electromagnetic ﬁelds. Hence, double res-
onance and Stark spectroscopy experiments are not pos-
sible. Nevertheless, the large amount of available power
(currently only matched by line-tunable gas lasers [62])
makes this approach very desirable to reach saturation
conditions, and to study forbidden transitions [69].

HENDI spectra have been measured by beam deple-
tion using both bolometers and mass spectrometers to
detect the on axis beam ﬂux. Even with helium evapora-
tion occurring at 0.38 K, the mean lab frame scattering
angle of the evaporated helium is still
10 degrees, and
so the evaporated helium largely miss the detector. The
relative sensitivity of the two detection methods is hard

≈

6

to determine unambiguously from the literature spectra,
as they involve widely diﬀerent source powers, transition
moments, and detection geometries. Our attempt to cor-
rect for these factors suggests that detection of depletion
with a bolometer is about a factor of ten more sensitive
than with a mass spectrometer. This assumes use of a
continuous wave laser and of a multipass cell. The lat-
ter partially oﬀsets the shorter excitation length (relative
to the more eﬃcient counter propagation scheme possi-
ble with the mass spectrometer) so that ultimately only
modest reduction results. The mass spectrometer will
likely give superior sensitivity in the case when one is us-
ing a low repetition rate pulsed laser for excitation, due
to the possibility of using gated detection.

2. Microwaves

Investigation of purely rotational transitions in doped
helium clusters shifts the frequency spectrum to the mi-
crowave (MW) region. Radiation is conﬁned inside a
section of waveguide (part of which is collinear with the
cluster beam) properly terminated at the ends. Conﬁne-
ment is necessary not only to concentrate the available
microwave power, but also to minimize its absorption or
rectiﬁcation by the bolometric detector, which can easily
obscure the true signal.

Pure rotational spectroscopy in He droplets diﬀers
from vibrational and electronic spectroscopies in that it
is inherently multiphoton. One can see from Table I that
in a He droplet the energies associated with a pure ro-
tational transition (0.5–70 GHz) are insuﬃcient to evap-
orate even a single He atom. Microwave spectroscopy
in a He droplet relies on the occurrence of rotational re-
laxation in an isolated droplet, which allows a dopant
molecule to repeatedly absorb photons and release their
energy into the droplet. The fact that the observed sig-
nals are of the same magnitude as for infrared transitions
has been used to estimate the number of relaxation cy-
cles that each molecule must undergo in the
100 µs
it spends in the MW ﬁeld, and thus to place the ro-
tational relaxation time (see Section III C) on the sub-
microsecond time scale for HCCCN [76].

≈

The large amount of available microwave power (tens
of watts), along with the large transition dipoles in this
spectral region has made saturation measurements pos-
sible [68, 76, 77], which have been used to establish and
quantify the dominance of inhomogeneous broadening in
HENDI spectroscopy.

3. Double resonance

The term double resonance (DR) refers to the cou-
pling of two transitions by a common level, which al-
lows driving one transition (the “pump”) to change the
strength of the other (the “probe”). In the gas phase,
DR is routinely used (1) to simplify the assignment of

complex spectra, (2) to reach states inaccessible by one-
photon selection rules, and (3) to measure homogeneous
lines within an inhomogeneous proﬁle. To date, with one
exception, only type (3) experiments have been done in
helium droplets, and only in the simplest “steady state”
versions, i.e., without explicit time resolution of the time
delay between pump and probe ﬁelds. The exception is
the recent hole burning study of the electronic spectrum
of tetracene [78] which shows a helium induced splitting
of the electronic band origin. The complexity of the dy-
namics in helium droplets has unfortunately made the
interpretation of these experiments much more diﬃcult
than that of their gas phase analogues.

The ﬁrst double resonance study in helium were the
MW-MW experiments performed on the R(3) and R(4)
transitions of HCCCN [76]. Saturation measurements on
these rotational lines had shown the typical pattern of a
line to be dominated by inhomogeneous broadening. It
was expected that DR spectra would directly reveal the
homogeneous component of the line, as in a classical hole-
burning experiment (Ref. 79, page 438). The observation
of lines much broader than expected was interpreted as
a sign of spectral diﬀusion (see Section III C 2).

In an attempt to gain further insight, MW-IR exper-
iments on HCCCN [68] have been performed. Indepen-
dent of this work, MW-IR double resonance experiments
where performed on OCS [80]. Because rotational relax-
ation times in He clusters lie in the nanosecond range
(during which a cluster only travels a few µm), double
resonance experiments require spatial overlap of the two
radiation ﬁelds. While in MW-MW experiments this is
readily achieved, in MW-IR experiments spatial overlap
has been achieved by either propagating the laser along
the axis of the waveguide [80], or by using the walls of
the waveguide as a substrate for thin mirrors in a mul-
tipass arrangement [68] (see Figure 1). The long wave-
length of microwaves, compared to the transverse dimen-
sions of the cluster beam, makes it possible to have holes
drilled into the waveguide as ports for the cluster and
laser beam, without introducing signiﬁcant microwave
losses.

While a MW-IR scheme introduces the additional
complication of vibrational excitation (which fans out
the “probe” transition frequencies associated to a given
“pump” frequency), it has the advantage that the probe
laser can cover the entire manifold of rotational levels,
thus probing rotational states that are not directly con-
nected via the pump ﬁeld. With some diﬀerences, prob-
ably due to the use of diﬀerent molecules, both exper-
iments ﬁnd that the population of all levels is to some
extent aﬀected by the pump beam, which indicates fast
rotational diﬀusion.

4. Stark spectroscopy

Stark spectroscopy has been shown to be a potentially
valuable tool to learn more about the interactions of the

7

dopant molecule with the helium environment and possi-
ble distortions of the molecule (particularly of complexes)
by gentle helium solvation [49, 63]. In a simple linear di-
electric approach, one would expect the molecular dipole
moments to be reduced in helium by its dielectric con-
stant, 1.055 [81]. However, this is only valid for a dipole
in a continuous medium. If the dipole is located in the
center of a spherical cavity, the induced dipoles in the
solvent cancel out and give no net change in dipole mo-
ment. As the solvation around molecules is in general
highly anisotropic, the net induced moment provides a
potentially interesting measure of the anisotropy. Re-
cently such calculations have been performed for Mg (3P)
solvated in He, with the anisotropic density obtained by
a Density Functional method, and a 6.2% reduction of
3S) transition
the optical transition dipole of Mg (3P
has been calculated [82]. Such a reduction, along with
the solvent-induced red shift, has been found to quantita-
tively account for the experimentally measured increased
lifetime of the transition. The solvent-induced stabiliza-
tion of dipolar structures was listed as one of the possible
causes of the decreased tunneling splitting observed for
the HF dimer in He droplets (see Section IV B).

→

Nauta and Miller [63] have studied the Stark pattern
of the R(0) line of HCN in the IR. They ﬁnd the split-
ting and intensity pattern expected from the isolated
molecule, but with the observation that what appears to
be the a splitting of the
= 0, 1 components persists
|
even at zero ﬁeld, as a poorly resolved doublet structure
of the R(0) line (see Figure 5). A careful study of the
dipole moment in this and other systems would likely be
quite valuable for testing theoretical predictions of the
helium solvation structure.

M
|

Another relevant manifestation of Stark eﬀects is the
mixing of rotational states (Ref. 83, Section 10.6).
In
He droplets, it has been exploited to induce a (normally
forbidden) Q-branch in those linear molecules, such as
HCN and HF, whose zero-ﬁeld rotational constants are
large enough that their spectrum consists of the R(0) line
only. By this method, the band origin and the rotational
constant of the molecule can be directly measured [63].
In this application the ﬁeld is kept as weak as possible,
compatibly with the need of inducing a measurable sig-
nal, and indeed an accurate value for the band center is
obtained by measuring the position of the Q-branch at
increasingly weak ﬁelds and extrapolating to zero ﬁeld.

The electric ﬁeld can be used to “tune” the frequency
of a given transition. This has been exploited to quench
tunneling in (HF)2 [65], and to perform time-resolved
relaxation measurements in the ms range (by mapping
diﬀerent excitation times onto an electric ﬁeld gradi-
ent) [84].

Once the information contained in the ro-vibrational
Hamiltonian has been extracted, rotational resolution ac-
tually becomes a nuisance: ﬁrst, the band strength is
fractionated, resulting in smaller signals; second, a typi-
cal spectrum spans a range comparable to kBT (0.38 K
or 0.26 cm−1), which results in a corresponding loss of

resolution when trying to identify closely spaced bands (a
common occurrence when many diﬀerent van der Waals
complexes of the same molecules are present). For gas
phase polar molecules, an elegant solution is Pendular
State spectroscopy [85, 86], which is the application of a
static electric ﬁeld suﬃciently strong to convert the rota-
tion of a molecule into oscillations of the dipole moment
around the external ﬁeld. In the strong static ﬁeld limit
(and with the permanent and transition moments par-
allel to each other), the entire rotational contour of the
spectrum collapses into a single line at the wavenumber
of the purely vibrational excitation, with an integrated
intensity 3 times that of the entire band at zero ﬁeld
(the traditional spectroscopic “conservation of intensity”
holds, it is just the orientation of the molecules is now
ﬁxed, and absorption, no longer averaged, will be maxi-
mum when the transition dipole and the laser polariza-
tion are parallel). It is indeed possible to use the signal
strength as a function of relative polarization of the op-
tical and Stark ﬁelds to determine the angle between the
static and transition dipoles.

This technique has been ported to He droplets by
Nauta and Miller [49, 87].
It is particularly attractive
in this environment because both the low temperature
and the increased moments of inertia make it easier to
reach the required “high ﬁeld” limit. By this technique,
the spectra of linear chains of up to 8 HCN units [49],
and up to 12 HCCCN units [50] have been resolved (see
Section IV A and Figure 3).

FIG. 3: Stark spectrum of linear chains of cyanoacetylene
(labeled by the number of monomer units), showing the high
resolution achievable with pendular state spectroscopy. The
series is taken at progressively smaller droplet sizes, showing
that the size of the droplet limits the length of the chains that
can be formed. From Ref. 50.

Suppression of rotation can also be achieved by re-
placing 4He with 3He [15, 54]. The technique has been
used to collapse the absorption bands of OCS–(H2)n com-
plexes so that n could be assigned via the measured band
shift [51, 55]. This method is applicable even to nonpolar
cases, but lines will typically not be as narrow as for 4He

spectra.

8

III. CURRENT UNDERSTANDING AND OPEN
QUESTIONS

A. Molecular symmetries in the nanodroplet
environment

The most remarkable feature of the vibration-rotation
spectra of molecules in liquid 4He nanodroplets is the
presence of rotational ﬁne structure, either quantum
state resolved or observed as rotational contours. This
was ﬁrst seen in the seminal work of Hartmann et al. [53]
on the spectrum of SF6, but has now been observed a
wide range of other molecular solutes. Table I contains
a list of molecules studied to date with rotational resolu-
tion in the IR, at least as known to us. In almost every
case, the nature of the spectroscopic ro-vibrational struc-
ture is exactly what one expects from the gas phase, i.e.,
the standard spectroscopic signatures of a linear, sym-
metric, or spherical top are preserved, along with the ro-
tational selection rules based upon the symmetry of the
gas phase transition dipole moment, though often with
dramatically changed spectroscopic constants (see Sec-
tion III D and Figure 2). High temperature spin statis-
tical weights have been observed, indicative of negligible
relaxation between nuclear spin isomers on the time scale
100µs), as ﬁrst noted by Harms et
of the experiment (
al. [34] (see also Figure 2).

∼

Viewed in terms of a classical picture of the instan-
taneous conﬁgurations of the helium atoms, the above
preservation of symmetry is unexpected in that these
instantaneous conﬁgurations do not retain the molec-
ular symmetry.
In view of the large delocalization of
the He atoms, we must rather consider the symmetry
of their ground state many-body wavefunction, which is
the same as the molecular symmetry when the helium
is in its ground state. Bulk excitations of the helium
droplet would lower this symmetry, but at the temper-
ature of the droplets, liquid-drop-model calculations in-
dicate that there are no thermally excited phonons [33].
Thermal excitations are present in the surface modes of
the droplet, but these appear to couple weakly to the
solvated molecules, though they must ultimately be re-
sponsible for the relaxation of the latter into thermal
equilibrium with the droplet. Thus, we are lead to view
the helium not as a classical ﬂuid of rapidly moving par-
ticles, but as a quantum probability density associated
with a bosonic N -body wavefunction, which is a smooth
and continuous function of coordinates and reﬂects the
symmetry of the potential that the molecule creates for
the helium.

One potential counterargument of the above model is
that linear molecules will create a cylindrically symmet-
ric ring of helium density around them, implying that
the entire system should act as a symmetric top, which
has an additional rotational degree of freedom. However,

it is easily shown that the Bose symmetry of the helium

TABLE I: Rotational constants derived from rotationally re-
solved IR or MW spectra. Blank entries in the “Mode” col-
umn indicate purely rotational spectra. The modes in paren-
thesis indicate that more than one band has been seen but the
measured rotational constants do not diﬀer enough to grant
separate entries.

Molecule

DCN
HCN
HCN
(HCN)2
(HCN)3
HCCCN
HCCCN
(HCCCN)2 (A)
(HCCCN)2 (B)
HCCCCH
H12C12CH
H13C13CH
CH3CCH
CH3CCH
CF3CCH
CF3CCH
HCN–N2
HF
(HF)2
CO–HF
N2–HF
OC32S
OC34S
pH2–OC34S (A)
pH2–OC34S (B)
pH2–OC34S (C)
SF6
HCOOH (A)
HCOOH (B)
HCOOH (C)
DCOOH (A)
DCOOH (B)
DCOOH (C)
CO2
NH3
oH2–HF
pD2–HF
oD2–HF
CH4
N2O
(CH3)3SiCCH (A)
(CH3)3SiCCH (B)
Ar–HF
Cyclopropane (A + B)
Cyclopropane (C)
oH2–HCN
pD2–HCN
Mg–HCN
Mg3–HCN (A)
Mg3–HCN (B)

Ref.

ν1
ν1

ν1
ν1
ν3
ν3
ν3
ν3
ν3
ν3

”
ν3
ν3
ν3
ν1
2ν1

–
–
ν1
ν1
ν1
ν1
2ν1

Mode Bgas BHe
cm−1
cm−1
[77]
1.208 0.999
[77]
1.478 1.204
1.478 1.175
[63]
0.0582 0.0193 [128]
0.0156 0.0073 [146]
0.1517 0.0525 [68]
0.0518 [69]
”
0.0168 [50]
ν1 (ν2) –
0.0113 0.0050 [50]
0.1464 0.047 [146]
1.1766 1.0422 [48]
1.1195 0.987
[48]
0.2851 0.0741 [87]
0.0717 [69]
”
2ν1 (A) 0.1908 0.1004 [69]
2ν1 (B) 0.0960 0.0355 [69]
0.0525 0.019 [146]
[66]
19.787 19.47
ν1 (ν2) 0.2167 0.0986 [65]
0.524 0.1022 [146]
0.1066 0.045 [146]
0.2029 0.0732 [88]
0.1979 0.0706 [88]
0.0847 [54]
0.0544 [54]
0.0422 [54]
[53]
0.0911 0.034
ν2 (ν1) 2.5758 1.3811 [147]
0.4020 0.2970 [147]
0.3470 0.1996 [147]
[147]
1.16
–
0.24
–
[147]
[147]
0.21
–
0.154 [148]
0.39
9.96
[60]
7.5
0.8325 0.182 [146]
0.492 0.164 [146]
0.487 0.159 [146]
5.2406 5.013 [146]
ν1+ν3 0.419 0.0717 [148]
0.1056 0.0275 [69]
0.0654 0.0144 [69]
0.102 0.04
[146]
0.6702 0.1631 [146]
0.4188 0.2416 [146]
0.4303 0.0897 [146]
0.2663 0.0785 [146]
0.0285 [67]
–
0.035
–
[67]
0.0167 [67]
–

”
”
ν1
”
”
ν3
ν2
ν1
ν1
ν1
ν3

ν1
ν1
ν1
ν1
ν1

2ν1
2ν1
ν1

9

eliminates the low lying K excited states [88]: states with
angular momentum along the symmetry axis cannot be
thermally populated, and the K = 0 spectrum of a sym-
metric top is indistinguishable from that of a Σ state
of a linear molecule (see also Section IV D). This argu-
ment alone does not exclude the possibility of creating
3.2 K has been es-
K > 0 states with modest energy (
timated for OCS in He [88]). However, in order to create
such a “vortex” excitation localized in the ﬁrst solvation
shell, it is necessary to have a nodal surface separating
it from the vortex-free remainder of the helium droplet
[149]; such a nodal surface may come at a steep energy
cost, making the creation of high-K modes even more
diﬃcult. It would be interesting to have an estimate for
the excitation energy of such states calculated with the
ﬁxed node diﬀusion Monte-Carlo (DMC) method.

∼

Roger Miller’s group has observed two examples of
spectra of highly polar linear molecules (cyanoacetylene
dimer and HCN trimer [50]) which appear to have Q-
branches, and thus suggest a breakdown of this “rule”
of preservation of molecular symmetry. The origin of the
Q-branches in these cases has not yet been explained con-
clusively. It has been proposed that they arise not from
population of higher K states of the helium, but are due
to some mechanism that would create an anisotropic po-
tential for rotation of the molecules. One candidate is the
anisotropy due to the ﬁnite size of the droplet and the
delocalization of the molecule in the droplet [50] (see Sec-
tion III B). This model predicted the wrong droplet size
dependence of the Q-branch intensity unless an ad hoc
energy term was added to favor location of the molecule
slightly below the helium surface. Another proposal [89]
is the presence of a vortex in a minority of droplets, which
is expected to strongly align molecules along it [90]. This
would also appear to favor Q-branch intensity in smaller
droplets since a larger fraction of pickup collisions in
such droplets would be expected to impart enough an-
gular momentum to create a vortex (on the order of one
¯h per helium atom). We would like to add to the list
the anisotropy that arises from the hydrodynamic cou-
pling of rotation and translation [91] (see Section III B),
which is expected to be most important for precisely the
extremely prolate molecules for which this interesting ef-
fect has been observed. Furthermore, this eﬀect should
be most important for large droplets, where the motional
averaging of the linear momentum (to which the angular
momentum is coupled) is slowest. Clearly, these “odd”
spectra should be subjected to further experimental and
theoretical work since some important new dynamical ef-
fect may be revealing itself by these phenomena.

It is worth noting that none of the ro-vibrational spec-
tra observed in helium have shown evidence of “phonon
wings”. Such features, which appear to the blue of the
molecular excitation and involve creation of one or more
helium phonons upon solute excitation, are observed
and often predominate in electronic spectra [92, 93].
The strength of the pure molecular excitation, the zero
phonon line (ZPL), is expected to decrease exponentially

with the degree of solvent reorganization upon molecu-
lar excitation, and thus the complete dominance of the
ZPL in the case of vibrational excitation implies that the
reorganization of the solvation density must be negligi-
ble relative to the zero point ﬂuctuations of the helium
ground state density. Perhaps the study of ﬂoppy, large
amplitude vibrational modes (see Section IV B) will show
evidence of the phonon wings, which could provide valu-
able data on solvent reorganization in a quantum liquid.

B. Translational motion of molecules: Where are
the molecules?

The gas-phase-like symmetry of ro-vibrational spectra
of molecules attached to helium droplets strongly sug-
gests that these molecules are located in a nearly isotropic
environment. This rules out surface sites since their re-
duced symmetry would lead to a characteristic splitting
of the M degeneracy, as has been seen for the electronic
spectrum of He∗
2 which resides above the surface of the
helium [94]. Once a molecule penetrates the helium sur-
face by more than the ﬁrst or perhaps second solvation
layer, a relatively ﬂat potential is expected. Vilesov and
Toennies [95] proposed treating the motion of the sol-
vated molecule as that of a free particle in a spherical
box. However, one can explicitly calculate the eﬀective
potential that pulls the molecule toward the center of the
droplet by summing up the missing long range interac-
tions outside of the droplet (i.e., taking the molecule in
bulk helium as the reference state). The resulting po-
tential turns out to localize molecules well within the
droplets (see Figure 4), keeping them away from the sur-
face region where the approximations used to derive the
potential are expected to break down [91]. The spectrum
of thermally populated energy levels of a particle in this
potential resembles more closely that of a 3-dimensional
harmonic oscillator than that of a particle in a box; the
heat capacity arising from this motion is nearly 3kB and
is similar to that of an entire, pure helium nanodroplet of
3 nm radius. The eﬀective frequency for vibrational mo-
0.5–1 GHz in typical cases. The
tion in this potential is
potential is proportional to the molecule-helium C6 coef-
ﬁcient minus the helium-helium C6 coeﬃcient times the
net number of helium atoms displaced by the molecule,
i.e., there is a buoyancy correction due to the change
in the net helium-helium interaction as the molecule is
displaced [96].

≈

For a non-spherically-symmetric molecule, displace-
ment from the center of the droplet leads to a reduction in
site symmetry and a weak coupling between translational
and rotational motion. The leading coupling term has a
P2(cos θ) dependence on the angle θ between the axis of
a linear rotor molecule and the displacement vector from
the center of the droplet (Pn are the Legendre polyno-
mials). If the displacements from the center are assumed
to be static and their distribution given by Boltzmann
weights, this P2 asymmetric ﬁeld results in the same type

10

of characteristic splitting of M components of a tran-
sition as discussed above for a surface location, and is
easily calculated analytically. However, calculations in-
dicate that the expected splittings are on the order of,
or less than, the vibrational frequency in the 3-D poten-
tial, and thus the splittings are predicted to be at least
partially motionally averaged. Lehmann [91] has given
explicit matrix elements for calculations in a coupled ba-
sis of translational and rotational angular momenta of
the molecule, and presented some sample calculations.

Another important coupling of translational motion
and molecular rotation is expected to arise from a hydro-
dynamic eﬀects (see Section III D 1). The translational
motion of an ellipsoid in helium leads to a hydrodynamic
contribution to the eﬀective mass, which depends upon
the orientation of the ellipsoid relative to the linear mo-
mentum. Lehmann [91] has derived the quantum Hamil-
tonian including this coupling term, and the resulting
matrix elements between the translational and rotational
angular momenta. Model calculations on simple systems,
such as HCN and OCS, suggest that the hydrodynamic
coupling is more important than the potential terms men-
tioned in the previous paragraph. It is interesting to note
that the hydrodynamic term leads again to the expected
P2(cos θ) induced splittings in the limit of bulk helium,
where the potential asymmetry goes to zero.

The relatively dense manifold of center-of-mass states,
coupled to the rotation of the molecule which changes
upon ro-vibrational excitation, creates a source of inho-
mogeneous broadening in the spectrum that was origi-
nally not recognized: quantization of the translational
motion should lead to a potentially resolvable ﬁne struc-
ture of the spectral features. However, it is likely that
the broad droplet size distribution present in all ro-
vibrational spectra observed to date will wash out any

Potential  for  HCN  in  R  =  3  nm  He  Cluster

P ( r )

V

0 F

2

2

(a/R)

V

0 F

4

4

(a/R)

1
-

m
c
 
/

 
r
e
b
m
u
n
e
v
a
W

1.000

0.8000

0.6000

0.4000

0.2000

0.000

0

0.5

1

2

2.5

3

1.5

a / R

FIG. 4: Isotropic (V2) and anisotropic (V4) parts of the con-
ﬁning potential for a dopant molecule (HCN) in He droplets,
arising from the dopant-He long-range interaction. P (r) is
the radial probability density function for the position of the
dopant. From Ref. 91.

11

details of this ﬁne structure, which is then only observ-
able as a source of inhomogeneous broadening in the spec-
trum.

These couplings of the center of mass and rotational
motion of the molecules are believed to make important
contributions to the inhomogeneous lineshapes often ob-
served in rovibrational spectra. However, calculations
done to date have neglected the vibrational dependence
of the interaction of the helium with the molecules. Any
such model predicts that the lineshape will be indepen-
dent of vibrational transition, and that the R(J) and
1) transitions should be mirror images, which is
P(J
not what is generally observed. Once vibrationally av-
eraged potentials for diﬀerent vibrational states become
available, it will be possible to more critically test the
lineshapes predicted by this model. At present, it must
be admitted we do not have a quantitatively successful
theory.

−

in cases where there is a resonance, or near-resonance,
of vibrational levels in a molecule and the optical ex-
citation accesses an upper component of the resonance
polyad. This can be compared to the behavior in the
gas phase, where it is well established that anharmonic
resonances allow for rapid (i.e, approaching the speed
expected for rotational relaxation) V-V collisional relax-
ation inside the set of coupled levels.

A related phenomenon is the case of molecules which
in the gas phase have a density of states slightly below
that required for IVR via high-order relaxation, such as
propyne in the 2ν1 mode. In helium, the eﬀective density
of states is raised, as the helium can be excited with one
or more low energy quanta, thus accommodating small
energy mismatches. Molecules with a suﬃciently high
density of states to undergo statistical IVR in the gas
phase, such as (CH3)3SiCCH [69], are at most weakly

C. Line shapes of rotationally resolved lines

→

Direct evidence of inhomogeneous broadening is only
available for a few molecules; nevertheless, there are rea-
sons to believe that it is common to all molecules. One
reason is that the ro-vibrational lines rarely ﬁt to the
Lorentzian shapes predicted by simple lifetime broaden-
ing models. This is particularly evident for HCN, for
1) transition has been studied
which the R(0) (J = 0
in several vibrational states, as well as in the deuterated
molecule (see Figure 5). For OCS, the lines in the P and
R branch have tails that point towards the band origin
and widths that grow with J. Possible explanations have
been discussed by Grebenev et al. [88] Available evidence
suggests that one can expect inhomogeneous broaden-
ing to contribute a few hundred MHz or more to the
linewidth, equivalent to a lifetime of a few ns. Often,
rotational and vibrational relaxation is slower than that,
yet (with the notable exception of vibrationally excited
HF [66]) still much faster than the 0.1–1 ms time scale
of the experiment.

This slow relaxation derives from the large mismatch
between the frequencies of the modes of the molecule and
those of the helium bath (the helium cannot respond on
the time scale of the vibrational motion of the molecule).
The maximum energy of an elementary excitation in bulk
4He is about 20 K [97]. As a result, V-T (vibration to
translation) and even most V-V (vibration to vibration)
relaxations require simultaneous creation of many (10–
100) phonons/rotons in the helium. One expects the rate
of such processes to be slow, decreasing exponentially
with the number of phonons involved.

1. Homogeneously broadened proﬁles

Exceptions to the above argument are expected in
cases of very low frequency, large amplitude modes, and

HCN, v=2

HCN, v=1

HCN, v=0

DCN, v=0

-1500

-1000

-500

0
Relative frequency [MHz]

500

1000

1500

FIG. 5: R(0) line for DCN (ν1 = 0) and HCN (ν1 = 0, 1, 2),
evidencing the importance of
inhomogeneous broadening.
These data show that vibrational excitation is not very im-
portant in determining the broadening pattern, whereas the
mass of the dopant is, suggesting a nontrivial dynamics inside
the droplet. The data are adapted from Refs. 77, 77, 63, 69,
respectively. The zero of the frequency was selected to best
overlap the transitions.

aﬀected by the helium.

2.

Indirect measurements: Saturation, double resonance

An interesting case occurs when, in the gas phase, ex-
citation would cause the molecule to dissociate. While
the helium forms a “cage” which may prevents dissocia-
tion, it would still accommodate some of the excitation
energy. As in the case above, one might still be left with
an excited species, but as for determining the lifetime,
the initially excited state would appear to have relaxed.
So far this scenario has only been observed for van der
Waals complexes, and the lifetimes are only moderately
decreased relative to their gas phase value. All the values
measured to date are reported in Table II.

All the experimental evidence currently available indi-
cates that the line proﬁles are determined by rotational
relaxation only when the energy of one rotational quan-
tum is suﬃcient to excite bulk modes of the droplet [150].
As the energy must then be near or above the roton min-
imum of 8.58 K [98], only small molecules, with large ro-
tational constants, display this kind of behavior. The ob-
served lines are Lorentzian, with widths around 1 cm−1,
reﬂecting relaxation times in the 1–10 ps range (see Ta-
ble III).

TABLE II: Vibrational lifetimes calculated from apparent ho-
mogeneous linewidths in He nanodroplets (except Ar–HF,
measured directly). The entry under the header “Note” refers
to the cause of vibrational relaxation; “tentative” indicates
that vibrational relaxation is assumed as the dominant cause
of broadening.

Molecule Mode Lifetime/ns
HCOOH ν1 (a)
ν1 (b)
ν1 (c)
ν1
ν3
ν3
ν1
ν2
ν2
ν2+ν5
ν1+ν4
ν1
ν
ν1

”
”
d1-HCOOH
H12C12CH
H13C13CH
(HCN)2
(HCN)2
(HF)2
(HF)2
(HF)2
Ar–HF
SF6
CH3CCH

> 0.64
0.15
> 0.53
7 × 10−3
3 × 10−3
1.5 × 106
0.56
0.16–1.5

Ref.
Note
0.12 Fermi resonance [147]
[147]
”
0.09
0.05
[147]
”
0.15 Fermi resonance [147]
[48]
0.12 Fermi resonance
≈ 1 Fermi resonance
[48]
[65]
[65]
[65]
[65]
[65]
[84]
[28]
[69]

dissociation
dissociation
tentative
tentative

tentative
tentative

TABLE III: Rotational
lifetimes measured in He nan-
odroplets. The entry in the column “Note” refers to the
droplet modes responsible for rotational relaxation.

Ref.

Molecule

Levels Lifetime Note
or band (ns)
HCN/DCN J = 0 ∼ 10
J = 3, 4 2–20
HCCCN
J = 2, 4 10–100
”
ν1
HF
ν1
(HF)2

12 × 10−3 bulk
2.7 × 10−3 ”

surface? [77]
[76]
”
[68]
”
[66]
[65]

12

For large molecules, the dissipation channel into bulk
helium modes is closed for thermally populated rota-
tional states, and relaxation must occur either by R-T
(rotation-translation) transfer (for which Franck-Condon
factors are unfavorable [16]) or by coupling to the softer
surface modes of the droplet. Because long-range forces
conﬁne the molecule to spend most of its time away from
the surface, the latter coupling is weak, and relaxation
times are correspondingly extended into the nanosecond
range (see Table III). In fact, the coupling to the surface
modes has been estimated to be so weak [91] that it is
an outstanding question how the molecules can come to
equilibrium with such a grainy heat bath. Lines are then
inhomogeneously broadened, but homogeneous widths
can still be estimated from saturation and double res-
onance measurements.

The ﬁrst such measurement, the MW-MW experiment
on HCCCN [76], faced a set of apparently contradictory
ﬁndings: the single resonance saturation data demon-
strated that the strength of rotational lines was propor-
tional to the square root of the applied power over a wide
range, the classic signature of saturation of a line dom-
inated by inhomogeneous broadening [79]. As the only
previously considered source of inhomogeneous broaden-
ing was the spread of droplet sizes, a standard analysis
based on the assumption of “static” broadening predicted
that double resonance measurements would directly re-
veal the homogeneous component of the line via hole-
burning with the the pump ﬁeld, i.e., a Bennet hole and
hill in the absorption of the probe [79], with a width of
no more than 150 MHz. It was instead found that the
linewidths of the transitions aﬀected by the pump beam
were comparable to those measured in single resonance
(1 GHz). The contradiction was solved by ascribing in-
homogeneous broadening to the spectral diﬀusion of the
dopant over a set of quantum states (most likely diﬀerent
translational states within the droplet; see Section III B).
Initially it was assumed that such diﬀusion occurred on
a time scale faster than rotational population relaxation.
Upon further analysis, it was realized that this would
have corresponded to a much higher saturation power
than was actually observed, and it was proposed that
the two phenomena are occurring on the same time scale
(tens of ns) [68]. Despite the use of a simpliﬁed model,
and the tentative value of the parameters obtained from
it, the conclusion that spectral diﬀusion and rotational
relaxation both occur because of the motion of the dopant
inside the droplet appears to be reasonable; indeed the
time scale for these is in the ns range.

MW-IR experiments performed on HCCCN [68] and
OCS [80] conﬁrmed the above picture: double resonance
lines span the whole inhomogeneous width. A repro-
ducible substructure of 5 peaks, about 50 MHz wide is
observed for the J = 2
3 rotational transition of OCS,
suggestive of a 2J + 1 splitting, but no pattern is re-
solved for other lines, thus making a deﬁnite assignment

→

not possible. The main ﬁnding, common to both experi-
ments, and therefore probably of general nature, is that
the populations of all the rotational levels are altered by
the MW “pump” (Figure 6).

In gas phase DR experiments, such as the classic
IR-MW studies by Oka [99], one can often observe
collisionally-induced four level DR signals, but they are
typically considerably weaker than the collisionless fea-
tures.
In helium, the relaxation induced signals have
been found to be even stronger than the “direct” sig-
nals in some cases. There also was a strong dependence
of the DR signals on the source conditions, which sug-
gests that the relaxation dynamics are strongly depen-
dent upon droplet size, which aﬀects the density of states
of the thermal bath that the molecule is coupled to. For
HCCCN, the DR spectra dramatically simplify for the
largest droplets, which has suggested rotational relax-
ation is in the “strong collision” limit for these droplets,
i.e., that the relative populations produced by relaxation
are independent of the initially populated state.

A curious feature observed for both HCCCN and OCS
is that there appears to be a lack of conservation of pop-
ulation in the DR experiment. For DR signals that arise
from population transfer, the integral of the DR signal
over the rotation structure of the IR band should be zero

FIG. 6: Double resonance spectra of OCS in He droplets.
The levels coupled by the MW “pump” and the frequency of
the transition are indicated in the upper left corner of each
panel. In contrast to what is commonly observed in gas phase
experiments, note how all the levels are aﬀected by the MW
“pump”, and how the total signal does not sum to zero. From
Ref. 80.

13

since the integral cross section for IR absorption is inde-
pendent of the lower state. This apparent lack of pop-
ulation conservation must reﬂect some “artifact” in the
experiments, but the ones considered do not appear con-
sistent with the observations; in particular, the sign of
the total signal is opposite for the two molecules. This
eﬀect is currently unexplained and may ultimately reveal
some interesting novel dynamics for these systems.

D. Molecular rotations

1. Changes in rotational constants: How is the helium
moving?

An important aspect of the rotational structure of sol-
vated molecules is that in most cases the eﬀective rota-
tional constants are substantially reduced from their gas
phase values. For molecules with rotational constants
much larger than 1 cm−1, the change on going into he-
lium is small, while for heavier molecules, the rotational
constant is typically reduced by a factor of 3–4 upon he-
lium solvation. Clearly, when the molecules rotate in he-
lium, at least some of the helium must also move, creating
kinetic energy and contributing to the eﬀective moment
of inertia of the molecular rotation. Several models have
been put forward to describe the nature of the helium
motion.

The ﬁrst model that was proposed [53, 88] assumed
that a speciﬁc number of helium atoms were rotating
rigidly with the molecule, directly contributing their mo-
ment of inertia to that of the molecule. This model ap-
peared to work for both SF6 and OCS, in that chemically
reasonable positions and numbers of rigidly attached he-
lium atoms were consistent with the experimentally ob-
served changes in moment of inertia (∆I). For OCS, the
authors called this the “donut model” since it assumes
that a ring of 6 He atoms is localized in the potential
minimum locus around the OCS molecule. This very
simple model has two problems. First, when one tries
to extend it to lighter molecules such as NH3 or HCN,
even a single rigidly attached He atom would increase the
moment of inertia by nearly an order of magnitude more
than what is observed experimentally. Second, more re-
cent results for the OCS–H2 complex [54] in helium are
clearly inconsistent with the “donut model” for OCS. In
this work, it was found by isotopic substitution that a
single H2, HD, or D2 molecule will replace one of the he-
lium atoms in the “donut”. Yet, extrapolation to zero
mass of the isotopomer gives a moment of inertia of the
“donut with a bit taken out” considerably larger than for
the OCS in a pure Helium droplet, i.e. with a complete
“donut”.

A more sophisticated “two ﬂuid” model for the motion
of the helium was introduced by Grebenev et al. [15].
They proposed that the density of helium around the
molecule be partitioned into spatially dependent normal
and superﬂuid fractions, with the normal fraction having

large values only in the ﬁrst solvation layer. In analogy
with the classical Andronikashvili experiment (where the
normal ﬂuid fraction of bulk helium follows the rotation
of a stack of plates, contributing to their eﬀective mo-
ment of inertia [100]), these authors propose that the
normal ﬂuid fraction rotates rigidly with the molecule,
contributing the classical moment of inertia of the normal
ﬂuid mass density. This model was incomplete, however,
in that the authors provided no deﬁnition of the spatially
dependent normal ﬂuid density that appears in the ex-
pression for the increase in moment of inertia.

Kwon and Whaley proposed an ansatz for a local su-
perﬂuid density [101], based upon an extension of Ceper-
ley’s global estimator for the bulk superﬂuid density
from path integral Monte Carlo (PIMC) calculations [29].
They took the diﬀerence in total density and superﬂuid
density to be a nonsuperﬂuid density that rotates rigidly
with the molecule, assuming the molecule-He interaction
is suﬃciently anisotropic. The term “nonsuperﬂuid den-
sity” is used instead of “normal ﬂuid density” because
this density is not related to the normal ﬂuid density
produced by a “gas” of elementary excitations, as in bulk
helium experiments such as the Andronikashvili experi-
ment. The inertial response of the helium to rotation is
a second rank tensor, involving both the axis of rotation
and the direction of the response, which is measured in
PIMC by a projected area of closed Feynman paths [29].
The Kwon-Whaley estimator produces a scalar superﬂuid
density, and thus has the wrong symmetry to describe
the helium inertial response [102, 103]. This two ﬂuid
model has, however, made predictions in excellent agree-
ment with experiment for the cases of SF6 and OCS in
helium. Draeger and Ceperley have proposed a new local
superﬂuid density estimator that has the correct tensor
properties and gives, when spatially averaged, the correct
value for the global superﬂuid fraction [103].

An alternative, quantum hydrodynamic model has also
been developed for the helium contribution to the mo-
ment of inertia of molecules in helium. It is well known
that linear motion of a rigid body through an ideal (avis-
cous and irrotational ﬂow) ﬂuid generates motion in the
ﬂuid that contributes to the eﬀective mass for transla-
tion. For example, for a sphere, the eﬀective mass in-
crease is exactly one half of the mass of the displaced
liquid [104]. Similarly, rotation of an ellipsoid generates
helium kinetic energy proportional to the square of the
angular velocity, thus contributing to the eﬀective mo-
ment of inertia. The possible inclusion of such a “su-
perﬂuid hydrodynamic” term was already recognized by
Grebenev et al. [15]. However, attempts to estimate this
term, using classical expressions for the moment of in-
ertia of an ellipsoid in a uniform ﬂuid of the density of
bulk helium, gave results which were only a small frac-
tion of the experimental values [15, 91]. On the other
hand, as the density around a molecule is highly nonuni-
form, Callegari et al. [105] have developed a quantum hy-
drodynamic model that properly takes into account the
anisotropy of the density, and have obtained moments of

10

1

1
-

m
c
/

t
e
l
p
o
r
d
B

0.1

0.01

14

inertia in good agreement with experiments for a number
of molecules.

If one adiabatically separates the helium motion from
the rotation of the molecule, then one expects the helium
density in the rotating frame of the molecule to be con-
stant and equal to that around a static molecule [105,
106]. This is called the adiabatic following approxima-
tion and, on physical grounds, should be accurate when
the minimum rotational spacing, 2B, is well below the
energy of the roton, which characterizes the helium den-
sity excitation energy on the atomic level (in the two ﬂuid
model, Kwon et al. have introduced a distinct deﬁnition
of adiabatic following [101, 107]). If one further assumes
that the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld generated by this time de-
pendent helium density in the laboratory frame is irrota-
tional (which Kelvin proved to be the lowest kinetic en-
ergy solution [108]), then one obtains from the equation
of continuity a second order diﬀerential equation for the
velocity potential (the instantaneous laboratory frame
velocity is the negative gradient of this velocity poten-
tial). The helium contribution to the moment of inertia
is then calculated directly as an integral over the velocity
potential. In applying this method to molecules of cylin-
drical symmetry, the helium density was calculated us-
ing a density functional (DF) approach [109, 110] which,
instead of searching for the ground state of the helium
many-body problem, ﬁnds the solution of a one-particle
problem with a nonlocal self interaction, whose density
distribution, if the correct functional was used, would ex-
actly match the density of the many-body wavefunction.

0.01

0.1

10

1

-1

Bgas/cm

FIG. 7: Plot of the rotational constants (gas phase versus
helium droplet) reported in Table I. The two lines are the
functions y = x and y = x/3 respectively. Note the diﬀer-
ent trend above and below Bgas = 1 cm−1, indicative of a
threshold for adiabatic following.

It takes orders of magnitude less computational eﬀort
to solve for the helium density by DF methods than by
Monte Carlo methods, and the results have been found
to be in good agreement for cases where the molecule-
helium interaction potentials are not too deep [111].

An alternative derivation [112] of the quantum hy-
drodynamic approach is to write the many-body helium
wavefunction in a rotating “external” molecular potential
as that of the instantaneous static ground state wave-
function times a single particle phase function. Varia-
tional optimization of the energy with respect to this
phase function gives the same hydrodynamic equation as
for an ideal classical ﬂuid with the adiabatic following ap-
proximation. Within a Hartree approximation for the he-
lium wavefunction (which DF theory implicitly invokes),
the hydrodynamic treatment gives the exact wavefunc-
tion correction to ﬁrst order in angular velocity and thus
the energy to second order. Time reversal symmetry im-
plies that changes in the helium density can only depend
on even powers of the angular velocity, and will therefore
contribute only to the centrifugal distortion constant, not
to the rotational constant. It has been known since the
dawn of quantum mechanics [113, 114] that quantum
mechanics can be formulated exactly as a hydrodynamic
problem in conﬁguration space. The one body approxi-
mate hydrodynamic approach used for these calculations
is equivalent to many calculations that have been done
in bulk helium, including the structure of the core of a
vortex [115], which has a helium density structure on a
length scale smaller than that induced by the solvation
of most molecules.

The quantum hydrodynamic model has been applied to
a number molecules, including HCN, HCCH, HCCCH3,
OCS, HCCCN, and HCN dimer [105]. For the last four,
for which the adiabatic following approximation is ex-
pected to hold, the predicted increase in moment of in-
ertia was between 103-130 % of the observed values, as
good as could be expected given the uncertainties in the
helium solvation densities. For HCN and HCCH, which
have small moments inertia, the hydrodynamic calcu-
lations signiﬁcantly overestimate the observed increase
which is taken as evidence of the breakdown of the adi-
abatic following (see below). Kwon et al. [107] have re-
ported that the hydrodynamic model predicts for SF6 an
increase in the moment of inertia of only 6(9)% of the ex-
perimentally observed value when their calculated super-
ﬂuid (total) helium solvation density was used. Similar
hydrodynamic calculations have been done by Lehmann
and Callegari [116] using the lowest four tensor compo-
nents in the expansion of the helium density in octahedral
harmonics. These authors ﬁnd that when the total he-
lium density is used, the hydrodynamic contribution to
the moment of inertia was 55% of the observed value,
and this value is likely to increase if the full anisotropy
of the helium density is included. The reason for the
discrepancy in the two reported values [107, 116] for the
hydrodynamic prediction for SF6 has not yet been re-
solved.

15

Despite their apparent diﬀerences, the “two ﬂuid” and
the hydrodynamic approaches to the superﬂuid helium
rotation problem are related. They are both based on
a linear response of the helium, and thus not appli-
cable when the adiabatic separation of molecular rota-
tion and helium motion breaks down. Furthermore, the
“nonsuperﬂuid” helium accounts for much of the angu-
lar anisotropy of the helium density, which is the source
term in the quantum hydrodynamic treatment.

Clearly, it would be desirable to develop a theoreti-
cal method to directly calculate the rotational constant
of molecules in superﬂuid helium without making the dy-
namical approximations of either the “two ﬂuid” or quan-
tum hydrodynamic approaches. It would also be desir-
able to directly calculate relaxation rates for excited rota-
tional states as well as their energies. Unfortunately, this
is still largely an unsolved problem. Blume et al. [117]
have used an excitation energy estimator based upon
the rate of decay of an approximate excited state wave-
function under imaginary time propagation (POITSE
method). Unfortunately, only studies of very small clus-
ters have been published to date with this method, and
thus its relevance to rotational dynamics in helium nan-
odroplets is not established. Further, the initial state had
the same rotor based nodal surfaces and thus the accu-
racy of this method may also depend upon an approxi-
mate adiabatic separation of the rotational motion from
that of the helium. If this approximation breaks down,
the initial state will contain sizable contributions from
several excited states and the imaginary time propaga-
tion will contain sizable contributions from many expo-
nential decays. Lee et al. [106] have calculated the rota-
tional constant of SF6–HeN (N = 1–20) by a ﬁxed-node
diﬀusion Monte Carlo method. In these calculations, the
helium and the molecule moved in the same coordinate
system, a condition that is particularly easy for a spher-
ical top molecule, but harder in general. Calculations
for the rotational spacings of SF6 were in quantitative
agreement with experiment for N
8, as in the simple
model proposed earlier by Hartmann et al. [53] The ﬁxed
node approximation used, based upon the nodes of the
rotational wavefunction of the isolated molecule, was jus-
tiﬁed by precisely the same type of adiabatic separation
of time scales that is used for adiabatic following in the
quantum hydrodynamic approach [106]. Recent work on
a model system [118] has found that the hydrodynamic
and this molecular rotor based ﬁxed node approximation
are closely related, and break down at about the same
point when the rotational constant of the molecule is in-
creased. To date, the diﬀusion Monte Carlo calculations
have been published only for SF6, so the accuracy of the
method in general is hard to judge, though it is likely the
most accurate of the presently available methods.

≥

2. Breakdown of helium adiabatic following

As it was mentioned in the beginning of Section III D 1,
“light” molecules with large gas phase B values appear to
have little helium contributions to their moments of iner-
tia. It is certainly the case that these molecules, by their
nature, have relatively weakly anisotropic interaction po-
tentials with the helium, and thus a small increased mo-
ment of inertia is expected. However, because they also
have very small molecular moments of inertia, even a
small helium contribution would be expected to lead to
a substantial fractional change in the value of B. This
suggests that something else is going on. The models dis-
cussed above invoke “adiabatic following” of the helium
with the molecular rotation, though the precise meaning
of that phrase is diﬀerent for the quantum hydrodynamic
and the “two ﬂuid” models. It is expected that this adi-
abatic separation of the time scales of molecular rotation
and helium motion will break down when the rotational
spacing becomes comparable to the energy required to
create a helium excitation with a wavelength on the order
of the solvation structure around the molecule, and this
will be similar to the energy of the helium roton, 8.58 K
4.3 K as the
[98]. This suggests a rotational constant of
point where substantial breakdown of the adiabatic fol-
lowing would be expected (see Figure 7). Lee et al. [106]
studied adiabatic following breakdown theoretically by
changing the rotational constant of SF6 in their ﬁxed
node DMC calculations of small SF6-HeN clusters. They
found that the angular anisotropy of the helium in the
molecular frame and the helium contribution to the ef-
fective moment of inertia both decreased substantially
when the SF6 rotational constant used in the calcula-
1cm−1.
tion was increased by a factor of ten, from 0.1
HCN (B = 2.13 K [119]) is one of the few molecules
that have been studied which is near this threshold. The
breakdown of adiabatic following for HCN has been es-
tablished experimentally, by observation of the change in
the helium contribution to the eﬀective moment of iner-
tia by isotopic substitution of HCN to DCN. Compared
to DCN, it was found that the somewhat lighter and thus
23% faster HCN produced a 9% decrease in the helium
contribution to the moment of inertia [77]. It would be
highly desirable to study other molecular systems in this
important intermediate region.

→

≈

Density-functional computations can reproduce the
breakdown of adiabatic following to some degree by ex-
plicitly moving the density computation from the inertial
lab frame to the frame rotating with the dopant molecule.
In terms of the helium and total angular momentum op-
erators ~L and ~J, respectively, the rotating-frame rota-
tional energy of the dopant molecule is B( ~J
~L)2 =
~L [120]. In the rotational ground state,
BJ 2+BL2
J 2
= 0 because of time reversal symme-
h
try. Therefore, the only change in going to the rotating
frame is the appearance of a term BL2 in the helium den-
sity functional. For large values of B, this term increases

2B ~J
~L
h

= 0, and

·
i

−

−

i

16

the angular smoothness of the ground state helium den-
sity, which decreases the helium moment of inertia in the
hydrodynamic theory; this provides a scale to gauge the
breakdown of adiabatic following. Work is in progress in
our group to quantitatively assess this approach.

3. Giant centrifugal distortion constants

∼

Another interesting generic feature that has been ob-
served in rotational spectra in helium droplets is a dra-
matic increase in the centrifugal distortion constants re-
10−4 have
quired to ﬁt the spectra. Values of D/B
been observed for heavy molecules, three to four orders
of magnitude larger than for the same molecules in the
gas phase. It has been suggested that these large distor-
tion constants reﬂect weakly bound helium atoms that
are easily displaced by the centrifugal potential, but a
careful attempt to estimate this eﬀect, for OCS, gave
a predicted D value 50 times smaller than is observed
experimentally [88].
If one uses the standard scaling
4B3/ω2, one must invoke an eﬀective vibrational
D
wavenumber on the order of 1 cm−1 in order to repro-
duce the observed D values, much smaller than what is
physically reasonable considering the force constants of
the helium-molecule potentials. Given the above discus-
sion of the breakdown of adiabatic following with increas-
ing rotation rate, one can argue that the eﬀective D value
should be negative, the opposite sign from what has been
observed! This is because we would expect the eﬀective
B value to increase, going towards the gas phase value,
as the rotational velocity increases, making it harder for
the helium to follow.

∼

At present, there is only one calculation that has re-
produced the correct size of the distortion constant: a
toy model [118] of a rigid, planar ring of N He atoms in-
teracting with a rotating molecule. What this calculation
clearly demonstrated is that opposite behaviors are found
depending on how the rotational velocity is increased: by
decreasing the moment of inertia of the molecular rotor
or by spinning up a ﬁxed rotor to higher J values. In
the former case, the helium follows more poorly, consis-
tent with the above discussion.
In the latter case, the
He anisotropy and following increase until a resonance
between the molecular and helium ring rotations occurs.
These results are consistent with general conclusions pre-
viously drawn by Leggett in his analysis of the “rotating
bucket” experiment for bulk liquid helium [121].

4. Vibrational dependence of rotational constants

As in the gas phase, the eﬀective rotational constants
change upon vibrational excitation. The size of the ob-
served vibration-rotation coupling is much larger in he-
lium than that expected based upon the gas phase change
in B. For example, for HCCCN the total increase in mo-
ment of inertia upon vibrational excitation changes from

0.35 u˚A2 in the gas phase to 9.2 u˚A2 in helium, and for
CH3CCH it changes from 0.32 u˚A2 to 8.5 u˚A2 [69]. This
suggests that most of the eﬀect is due to a change in the
helium contribution to the eﬀective moment of inertia.
As expected, the excited vibrational states have increased
helium contributions, which suggests increased density
and/or anisotropy around the vibrationally excited state.
As pointed out above, the absence of phonon wings to the
spectra indicate that these changes must be small. There
has yet to be published a quantitative attempt to cal-
culate this change in solvation structure, which requires
knowledge of the vibrational dependence of the molecule-
He interaction potential, which are not yet generally
available. Recently, there has been important progress
made in the calculation of the intermolecular-mode de-
pendence of the interaction potentials [122], which would
allow such an estimate to be made.

E. Shift in band origins

An extremely attractive feature of ro-vibrational spec-
troscopy in helium is that solvent shifts of the vibrational
origins are generally quite small, typically less than 0.1%.
This can be contrasted with spectroscopy in the tradi-
tional matrix environments of Ne or Ar, for which the
shifts are usually much larger. As an example, for HF
the matrix shifts are 0.067%, 0.24% and 1.1%, respec-
tively [123]. The small shifts in helium are due in large
part to its low density and polarizability (even when com-
pared to other rare gases). However, existing evidence
suggests that there is often a fortuitous cancellation of
eﬀects leading to smaller shifts than one could otherwise
expect.

In considering the shift in band origin, one must dis-
tinguish between the vertical and adiabatic excitation en-
ergies. The former refers to a transition within a frozen
helium solvation density, while the latter considers the
optimized helium solvation density in each vibrational
state. As discussed above, the observed vibrational de-
pendence of the eﬀective rotational constants is largely
a result of such a change in helium solvation. The peak
of the zero phonon line should provide an experimen-
tal estimate for the adiabatic excitation energy while the
vertical excitation will be at the ‘center of gravity’ of the
entire transition, including the phonon wing. The diﬀer-
ence between vertical and adiabatic excitation energies
reﬂects the helium reorganizational energy during vibra-
tional excitation. Given the lack of observed “phonon
side bands” in vibrational spectra, one can anticipate
that this reorganizational energy is small, but not nec-
essarily small compared to the typically observed helium
10 cm−1 wide
induced vibrational frequency shift. If a
phonon wing contains 50% of the integrated intensity of
5 cm−1 shift between
a transition, it would cause a
the adiabatic and vertical excitation wavenumber, but
this phonon wing would have a peak absorption strength
less than 1% of that of the zero phonon line (assuming

≈

≈

17

a linewidth of 1-3 GHz), and thus could be easily lost in
any low frequency noise in the spectrum. The vertical
excitation energy, in contrast, is much easier to estimate
theoretically, since it does not require computation of the
change in helium-helium interactions. As an example,
Blume et al. [56] have calculated the vertical excitation
wavenumber of HF in helium by averaging the potential
diﬀerence for He interacting with v=0 and 1 states of HF
over the ground state wavefunction of the system.

The change in the helium-molecule interaction poten-
tial upon vibrational excitation reﬂects several diﬀer-
ent physical components. Based upon the natural sep-
aration in time scales between intramolecular and he-
lium solvation motions, an adiabatic separation is ap-
propriate and one can consider a vibrationally aver-
aged molecule-helium interaction potential for each vi-
brational state [122]. If we consider excitation of a nor-
mal mode k in a molecule with dimensionless normal
coordinates qi, then in the harmonic approximation the
He-molecule potential in the excited state of the normal
vibration νk can be written as

Veﬀ = Vg +

∂V
∂qs (cid:19) h

qsi

+

1
2 (cid:18)

∂2V
∂q2

q2
,
ki

k (cid:19) h

(cid:18)

Xs

where V is the full interaction potential, including in-
tramolecular coordinates, and the derivatives are evalu-
ated at the equilibrium structure of the isolated molecule.
The sum is restricted to totally symmetric vibrational
is proportional to the cubic anhar-
modes, and
monic coupling φskk between the excited mode k and
the symmetric mode s. Given the small changes in vi-
brational wavenumber upon solvation by helium, the har-
monic approximation is expected to be adequate for rigid
molecules.

qsi
h

The long range interaction between He and the
molecular dopant is dominated by the isotropic and
P2(cos θ) R−6 terms. One term contributing to the vi-
brational dependence of this term is the polarization sta-
bilization of the dipole induced by vibrational motion,
even in nonpolar molecules such as SF6 [124]. This term
leads to a shift proportional to the IR strength of the
vibrational mode. Integrating this term over an estimate
for the helium solvation density gave a shift for SF6 [125]
1.6 cm−1 [14, 53]
of about one half the observed value of
(such an estimate is for the vertical, not adiabatic shift).
A sizable fraction of the shift comes from the ﬁrst sol-
vation shell, for which the use of the long range R−6
terms is not expected to be complete, though there may
be a signiﬁcant cancellation of errors between the ne-
glect of higher order terms and damping of the dispersion
series [126]. For molecules with a permanent dipole mo-
ment, one also needs to consider the changes in the vibra-
tionally averaged dipole moment. While these changes
are usually smaller than the transition moments, at least
for reasonably strong IR transitions, one gets an “inter-
ference” with the permanent dipole moment (since the in-
µ2
duction energy depends on
), which can magnify the
i
h
eﬀects of a small absolute change in the dipole moment

−

upon vibrational excitation. For excitation of the over-
tone of the C-H stretching mode in HCN [69], the tran-
sition dipole and change in vibrationally averaged dipole
moment lead to estimated shifts of 0.14 and 1.67 cm−1,
respectively. The long range interaction between He and
molecular dopants is typically dominated by dispersion
interactions, not the induction terms. One can estimate
the change in the induction terms from changes in the po-
larizability of the molecule upon vibrational excitation.
For HCN, this gives an estimate of 4.98 cm−1 for the
shift, substantially larger than the observed value.

All of the terms discussed above are long range and
lead to red shifts. They certainly are expected to dom-
inate the droplet size dependence of the shift. Putting
the solute in the center of the droplet and integrating
the missing (compared to the bulk) interaction, one ﬁnds
that the shift from bulk or inﬁnite droplet size limit
will be dominated by the R−6 terms and will scale as
N −1, where N is the number of helium atoms in the
droplet [31]. Thus, a red shift towards the limiting
bulk value is expected for large droplets, independent
of whether the overall shift is red or blue.
If one as-
sumes that the droplet size distribution follows the log-
normal distribution, then the inhomogeneous distribu-
tion of droplet sizes will also contribute a log-normal dis-
tribution of shifts away from the bulk value. This al-
lows the N dependence of the width and shift for smaller
droplets (where the inhomogeneous cluster size distribu-
tion contributes most to the spectral shape) to be used to
estimate the inhomogeneous size dispersion contribution
to the lineshape of larger droplets.

Counteracting the above discussed increases in long
range He attraction upon vibrational excitation (and
higher order multipole contributions that have not yet
been estimated) is an expected blue shift from the
“crowding” interaction. Such an eﬀect is due to the fact
that the potential for a molecular oscillator will be in part
stiﬀened due to the interaction with the ﬁrst solvent shell,
where repulsive forces are important. In a highly simpli-
ﬁed harmonic picture of a linear X-H–He unit, the X-H
stretch normal mode force constant will be increased by
the H-He force constant. This leads to a blue shift of
the vibrational frequencies that should be most impor-
tant for vibrational motion dominated by exposed atoms
and/or involving low frequency, large amplitude motions.
Examples of the later include the torsional mode of gly-
oxal [127] and the butterﬂy mode of pentacene [78], both
in the ﬁrst excited electronic states. At ﬁxed helium sol-
vation structure, one would expect that the blue shift of
a chemically unique vibrational motion, such as the C-H
stretching mode of terminal acetylene compounds, would
be approximately conserved. However, helium density
functional theory calculations made by our group have
shown that helium solvation density around this terminal
C-H bond is a strong function of the rest of the molecule,
which thus far has prevented the development of a quan-
titatively predictive theory of the expected blue shift.

The spectrum of HCN dimer provides some evidence

18

for the importance of the blue shift induced by the local
structure. For the hydrogen bound C-H stretch, Nauta
and Miller [128] have observed a larger gas-to-helium-
droplet redshift compared to the same quantity for the
HCN monomer. They interpreted this as arising from an
increasingly linear and thus strengthened hydrogen bond
when HCN dimer is solvated in helium. However, this ef-
fect can be also interpreted as arising from a substantial
reduction of the helium induced blue shift upon inter-
molecular complex formation since the hydrogen bonded
H atom no longer pushes directly on the helium solvent.
At present, we lack an eﬀective theory to use the ob-
served solvent induced shifts to learn about the solvation
structure around the chromophore molecule or to reliably
predict the observed shifts, even their sign, relative to the
gas phase. However, since the observed shifts appear to
be small, we can safely neglect this complication in most
cases, in particular when using the predictions of quan-
tum chemistry to help assign novel spectra observed in
liquid helium.

IV. SPECIAL TOPICS

A. Synthesis of nonequilibrium structures

A very promising application of HENDI spectroscopy
which has been recently and dramatically demonstrated
by Nauta and Miller [49, 50, 64] relates to the possibil-
ity of using the very cold droplet environment to syn-
thesize highly non-equilibrium species that could not be
prepared in any other known way.
In analogy to the
preparation of van der Waals clusters of spin polarized
alkali atoms demonstrated in Princeton in 1996 (see the
following review by Stienkemeier and Vilesov [129] and
Refs. 130, 131, 132), the essential ingredient in these
syntheses is, in addition to the low temperature of the
droplets, the rapid cooling action that the superﬂuid he-
lium exerts on the molecular partners at the time of
cluster formation. Consider the example of the prepa-
ration of linear chains of HCN [49]: such chains with
more than three monomer units have not been observed
even in the cold environment of a supersonic jet expan-
sion, where cyclic or other nonpolar structures are in-
stead prepared. When an HCN molecule collides with a
cluster that already hosts another molecule in its interior,
the long range dipole-dipole forces align the two dipoles
at distances where no other force is acting between the
two molecules. The rapid rotational relaxation necessary
for such an alignment is probably provided during mul-
tiple collisions with the droplet surface, where coupling
to ripplons is enhanced. After the two dipoles have been
aligned, the molecules are drawn together by their mu-
tual attraction; in contrast to a gas phase coagulation,
however, their potential energy is not completely trans-
formed into kinetic energy because of the steady cooling
action of the “solvent”. Consider that a potential energy
10−21 J) would accelerate a molecule
of 200 K (i.e., 2.8

×

of mass 27 u to a velocity of 350 m/s, which is well above
the critical velocity of 60 m/s [133] above which a for-
eign body will rapidly dissipate energy in superﬂuid he-
lium. This dissipative cooling during complexation en-
sures that, at the contrary of what happens in the gas
phase, the freshly formed complex is born cold, without
the energy needed to surmount any barrier to isomeriza-
tion toward the global energy minimum. It is remarkable
that this process is repeated until the linear chain spans
the whole cluster diameter, as the data of Nauta and
Miller show. Observed spectra for CH3OH and CH3CN
clusters [59], for H2O clusters [64] and for Arn+HF clus-
ters (described in their article in this issue [134]) have
been interpreted as arising from the isomers which are
formed with the smallest amount of nuclear rearrange-
ment.

So far this self-assembling technique has been applied
using stable molecules. Eﬀorts are in progress in our
laboratory to use CN radicals for preparing isocyanogen-
like chains or, if the presence of a recombination barrier
is detected, at least van der Waals clusters of CN radi-
cals. The potential applications of this technique for the
synthesis of exotic or high energy density materials are
quite evident.

A diﬀerent, but equally useful, non-equilibrium syn-
thesis has been demonstrated by Nauta and Miller in an
experiment [67] in which a cluster of reactive metal atoms
(Mg) has been attached to an IR active molecule (HCN),
and the rotational spectrum of the resulting complex has
been resolved (Figure 8). While clusters of metal atoms
are bound by van der Waals or metallic forces accord-
ing to their size [135, 136, 137, 138], they are in both
cases very diﬃcult to study because their UV spectra are
made of broad lines and their IR spectra, when present,
appear at rather low frequencies, where lasers are not
yet available. Probing the IR spectrum of a molecule at-
tached to the atomic cluster yields valuable information
on the latter via an analysis of the rotationally resolved
spectrum or via the spectral shifts of the molecule’s vi-
brations. While the information contained in rotationally
resolved spectra is at present clouded by our imperfect
knowledge of the helium contributions (see Section III D),
the type of spectrum (i.e., the symmetries of complexes)
and shifts are already now sources of reliable information.
We anticipate that this type of experiments will provide
a wealth of information on metal-ligand interactions and
on the nature of bonding in chemisorbed systems.

Most large organic molecule, including those of bio-
logical relevance, have a number of isomers populated
at room temperature, particularly arising from rotation
about single bonds (conformers). When these molecules
are cooled to low temperature, either in MI or super-
sonic jet spectroscopies, isomers separated by high barri-
ers do not interconvert, while those separated from lower-
lying minima by low barriers will cool out. Multiple
isomers have been observed by HENDI spectroscopy as
well. As an example, see the study of glycine by Huisken
et al. [58], where the same three conformers were ob-

19

served in He nanodroplets and in Ne and Ar matrices.
In general, however, the diﬀerent cooling rates should re-
sult in diﬀerent distributions of conformers in the diﬀer-
ent spectroscopies. Spectra of tryptophan and tyrosine
in helium have been interpreted in terms of suppression
of certain conformers in helium compared to those ob-
served in seeded beam expansions [139]. The more rapid
quenching, lower ﬁnal temperatures, and shorter inter-
action times of HENDI suggest that the conformer dis-
tribution observed by this method should more closely
resemble that of the initial ensemble. The much smaller
spectral shifts in helium should make conformer assign-
ments based upon quantum chemistry calculations sig-
niﬁcantly more reliable than for MI. The use of pendular
spectroscopy in helium, which allows measurement of the
permanent dipole moments and the angle between that
and the vibrational transition moment, should further
greatly enhance reliability of assignments.

B. Large-amplitude molecular motions in liquid
helium

One of the great diﬀerences between electronic and
ro-vibrational spectroscopy in He droplets is the ex-
tent to which helium is displaced upon excitation of the
molecule. Helium displacement arises from the repul-
sive interaction (which can be viewed in terms of the
Pauli exclusion principle) between the electron clouds of
He atoms and that of the molecule. Electronic excita-
tion results in general in an expansion of the electron
cloud, with an energetic cost that is responsible for the
experimentally observed blue shifts of electronic spectra
of atomic and molecular species immersed in liquid He.

FIG. 8: Rotationally resolved spectrum of the van der Waals
complex Mg3–HCN. The structural information extracted
from this spectrum allows one to deduce a contraction of the
HCN–metal-cluster bond, when going from Mg2 to Mg3. This
in turn indicates the presence of strong nonadditivity eﬀects.
From Ref. 67.

Conversely, the volume and shape of the electron cloud
are not signiﬁcantly changed upon ro-vibrational excita-
tion. The observed band shifts are small, mostly towards
the red, and are determined by a delicate balance be-
tween the attractive and repulsive forces in the ground
and excited state [69] (see Section III E). As a ﬁrst ap-
proximation, one can say that molecular stretch vibra-
tions, with few exceptions the only modes studied so far,
are too stiﬀ to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the presence
of the helium.

This statement does not hold true for large-amplitude
modes which are, somewhat by deﬁnition, softer (the
FWHM of the 1-D harmonic oscillator is proportional
to (mω)−1/2 or (km)−1/4). They are particularly rele-
vant not only because they displace more helium (sup-
posedly coupling better to He bulk modes), but also be-
cause they are usually bending modes. Tunneling barri-
ers commonly occur for such modes, and are expected to
be increased by the presence of the helium. For the above
reasons, these mode are a useful probe of the molecule-
helium interaction.

∼

The prototypical transition is the ν2 umbrella mo-
tion of NH3 [60]: the hindrance induced by the helium
causes a blue shift of 17.4 cm−1, an order of magni-
tude larger than what is commonly observed. Within
the limits imposed by the coarse resolution of the spec-
1 cm−1), the excited-state inversion splitting is
trum (
found to be decreased by 31%. At the time, only specu-
lations could be made as for the cause: it was suggested
that helium might increase either the tunneling barrier
and/or the eﬀective mass of the oscillator, or even change
the symmetry of the inversion potential, thus suppressing
tunneling overall. With the knowledge we have gained in
the meantime from the study of molecular rotation, we
can reasonably say that the ﬁrst two are going to be
important while the third is probably not. Similar ob-
servations have been made for the ν1 and ν2 modes of
the ammonia dimer [59].
In this system the inversion
tunneling is already suppressed by the partner molecule,
and the presence of the helium has, if any, a smaller ef-
fect. For the same reason, the large blue shift observed
for the monomer is not present here. Interchange tunnel-
ing is instead aﬀected by the presence of the helium: the
splitting is reduced from 5–10 cm−1 to 2 cm−1.

A capital step forward is the study of the HF dimer
by Nauta and Miller [65]: the use of a low power contin-
uously tunable laser and the added diagnostics provided
by Stark ﬁelds allowed a truly quantitative study of tun-
neling motions. The interchange tunneling splitting, like
in the ammonia dimer, is observed to be decreased, by an
amount that is accurately quantiﬁed (-41%). Nauta and
Miller propose that this is due to an increased barrier; the
barrier increase is explained with the observation that the
transition state is nonpolar, hence has less energy gain
from polarization of the helium than the polar equilib-
rium states. While it is diﬃcult to rule out additional
contributions, such as those proposed for ammonia, this
one must deﬁnitely be present, since the simple model

20

used in Ref. 63 shows quantitative agreement with the
experiment. Nauta and Miller observe that this interpre-
tation also explains a rather unusual observation. The A
rotational constant is increased (from 31.96 to 33.3 cm−1)
upon solvation in helium, a fact which is indicative of a
more linear structure. Such a structure exhibits a larger
dipole moment, and is therefore consistent with a polar-
ization energy gain.

The experiment also measured the ν2+ν5 and ν1+ν4
bands, from which the frequencies of the soft modes
involving the van der Waals bond (ν4,
intermolecular
stretch, and ν5, intermolecular bend) are reconstructed.
Both are found to be increased, relative to the gas phase,
185 cm−1
133 cm−1 up from 127.57, and
by
up from 178.67, respectively), which is a huge value com-
pared to any other mode observed so far. This obser-
vation is in line with the general expectation that soft
modes will be more strongly aﬀected by the hindering
presence of the helium.

4% (

∼

∼

≈

C.

3He and mixed 4He/3He droplets

At present, rotationally resolved infrared spectra in
pure or mixed 3He droplets have been only obtained for
of SF6 [34, 41] and OCS [15, 88].
In mixed droplets
the slightly lower zero point energy of 4He atoms favors
their localization around the dopant molecule[140]. Thus
a small doped 4He cluster within the large 3He droplet
is formed; clusters with a small number of 4He atoms
(N4 = 20–30) produce considerably broadened spectra
(ascribed to inhomogeneous broadening induced by the
spread of N4). Otherwise the resulting spectra are, to
ﬁrst approximation, the same as in pure 4He, except the
temperature is lower (0.15 K), being dictated by evapora-
tion of 3He. As the concentration of 4He in the expanding
gas mixture is increased from 0.1 to 4% the temperature
rises gradually to the limit value of pure 4He droplets,
0.38 K [41].

Because of the lower number density of 3He, the ma-
trix shift of the band origin (Sec. III E) is also aﬀected.
The band origin shift of SF6 has been used to esti-
mate the number of 4He atoms in the inner cluster[41];
small shifts within the R branch suggest that the rota-
tional constant of SF6 in mixed droplets with a large
number of 4He atoms (200–500) is
3% larger then in
pure 4He droplets. The eﬀect is more evident for OCS,
where the rotational constant drops by up to 10%, at
N4 = 60.[141, 142]

≈

Studies of isotopically pure 3He droplets were limited
to OCS which has a simpler Hamiltonian and a bet-
ter resolved spectrum[15, 88]. Whereas in pure 4He the
spectrum shows the well resolved rotational structure ex-
pected for a linear molecule, in pure 3He droplets the
spectrum collapses into a broad single band, very similar
to what is expected in a classical ﬂuid. Since the binary
interaction potentials of OCS with 3He and 4He atoms
are virtually identical, the diﬀerence must be due to the

diﬀerent states of the droplet: superﬂuid for 4He and nor-
mal ﬂuid for 3He. Molecules in non-superﬂuid 3He are
rapidly exchanging their energy and angular momentum
with the medium as compared to superﬂuid 4He[143].
Thus the ability of the dopant molecule to rotate coher-
ently over many periods is a microscopic manifestation
of superﬂuidity. Recently, the spectrum in pure 3He has
also been ﬁtted to an unresolved rotational structure;
this gives a rotational constant 1.6 times smaller than in
4He.[142]

The onset of superﬂuidity in small 4He clusters has
been investigated by intentionally doping isotopically
pure 3He droplet containing one OCS molecule with a
controlled number (up to 100) of 4He atoms.[15] The
gradual appearance of a sharp rotational structure in-
dicates that the onset of superﬂuidity is a smooth pro-
cess, and is almost complete in cluster of just 604He
atoms, corresponding to approximately two solvation lay-
ers. While it is understood that preservation of rotational
coherence depends on lack of accessible excitation of the
helium, in turn linked to the Bose permutation symme-
try of the ﬁrst solvation shell(s) [118, 143], the detailed
mechanism of this eﬀect is still to be understood.

Further addition of the 4He atoms do not lead to quali-
tative change of the spectrum. The appearance of partic-
ularly sharp lines in the P branch (< 100 MHz) has been
attributed to cancellation of rotational and vibrational
contributions to inhomogeneous broadening.[141]

D. Molecule/hydrogen clusters in helium droplets

The HENDI study of van der Waals clusters contain-
ing various isotopomers of molecular hydrogen deserves
special attention because of the highly quantum nature
of the latter molecule. Just like the magnesium clusters
discussed in Section IV A [67], the arrangement and prop-
erties of hydrogen molecules are studied through their ef-
fect on the infrared spectrum of a larger molecule such
as OCS [51, 54, 55].

The ﬁrst study of an OCS–H2 (–HD, –D2) van der
Waals complex [54] has indicated that the hydrogen
molecule lies in the ring-shaped locus of the potential
minimum around OCS, with a rather large delocaliza-
tion out of the average OCS–hydrogen plane. It is not
clear, however, to what degree the use of Kraitchman’s
equations (which are used to derive the position of an iso-
topically substituted atom from the resulting change in
the moments of inertia, assuming a rigid structure [144])
is justiﬁed given the large amplitude of the hydrogen vi-
bration. However, the resulting OCS–H2 structure was
found to be in reasonable agreement with the predictions
of recent ab initio calculations [145].

The same authors have found [55] that upon addition
of more para-hydrogen molecules to the OCS–(pH2)n
van der Waals complex in pure 4He (0.38 K) and mixed
4He/3He (0.15 K) droplets, the ro-vibrational spectrum
rapidly approaches that of a symmetric top, until, for

21

n = 5 and 6, the Q-branch disappears and the symmetry
of the spectrum is that of a linear molecule again, just
as for a pure OCS molecule in a helium droplet. This is
most probably due to the fact that the bosonic (I = 0)
pH2 molecules form a complete ring of Cnv (n = 5–6)
symmetry around OCS. As discussed for helium excita-
tions in Section III, azimuthal excitations of such a ring
are forbidden if K is not an integer multiple of n. In the
cold environment of the helium droplets, such high-K
levels are not populated, and there can be no Q-branch.

In the same article, a very interesting comparison
has been made with the same complex but using or-
tho-deuterium (oD2) instead of pH2. One would expect
that the 6-fold nuclear spin degeneracy of oD2 makes the
probability for building a ring of indistinguishable oD2
molecules equal to 61−n, which amounts to 0.8% for n = 5
and 0.1% for n = 6. The resulting decreases in intensity
of the Q-branches of OCS–(oD2)n complexes are there-
fore negligible.
Indeed, the spectra of all OCS–(oD2)n
clusters up to n = 8 feature a Q-branch.

Most surprisingly, the same authors have found [51]
that the Q-branch disappears again for OCS–(pH2)n
clusters with n = 14–16 at 0.15 K, but not at 0.38 K.
For these values of n, the pH2 molecules probably form
several rings around OCS, with diﬀerent numbers ni of
molecules per ring. One could imagine a situation where
two rings are formed, with n1 = 6 and n2 = 8 pH2
molecules, with a C2v structure. Based upon the re-
sults for the OCS–H2 monomer, a moment of inertia of
370 u ˚A2 can be estimated for this structure. This
Ia ≈
would imply that the lowest accessible state with rota-
tional angular moment along the OCS axis (K = 2) will
have an excitation energy of 0.26 K, allowing signiﬁcant
population at 0.38 K but not at 0.15 K. The next two
pH2 molecules could then be added at both ends of the
OCS on the molecular axis, preserving the C2v structure,
and ﬁnally resulting in a ﬁlled shell of 16 pH2 molecules
around the OCS (compare to a ﬁlled 4He shell that con-
sists of 17 molecules [107]). This picture neglects any
additional reduction of the rotational constant by the
helium, which is expected to be small because such a
highly symmetric structure may not induce much angu-
lar anisotropy in the helium. The authors of Ref. 51
propose the radically diﬀerent explanation that at the
lower temperature (0.15 K), large delocalization of the
pH2 molecules leads to bosonic exchange and thus to a
“superﬂuid” state of the hydrogen rings, which eﬀectively
makes the symmetry group C∞v and forbids any states
with K
= 0. At higher temperature (0.38 K), however,
> 0
delocalization is less, and thermal population of
states yields a Q-branch. The ﬁeld of (pH2)n clusters will
need further study in order to corroborate this claim of
superﬂuidity.

K
|

|

6
V. CONCLUSION

HENDI spectroscopy has evolved from earlier molec-
ular beam techniques for isolated and complexed atoms
and molecules and has, in a rather short time, reached
the point where it can be applied to the study of a wide
variety of problems. Ro-vibrational spectroscopy in this
novel extremely cold and ﬁnite environment reveals rich
spectra, often with much more detail than in other con-
densed phases. The ﬁeld has made signiﬁcant progress in
developing the experimental and theoretical tools needed
to extract relevant information from these spectra. How-
ever, a number of fundamental questions remain which
principally relate to the nature of the interactions of the
molecular motions with the highly quantum many-body
dynamics of the helium. We still do not understand the
mechanism by which molecules come into equilibrium
with the droplets, nor do we know precisely the time
scales for many of the relaxation processes that occur.

Despite the fact that much work remains to be done
on these basic issues, the ﬁeld is also rapidly making the

22

transition from using molecules to study the physics of
the droplets to using droplets to create and study novel
chemical species. Vibrational spectroscopy has produced
the bulk of the results in this direction, due to the high
resolution available and the nearly additive eﬀects from
multiple perturbers. New tools, especially continuously
tunable IR lasers at longer wavelengths than 3.5 µm and
the development of sources of radicals for pickup by the
droplets, promise to greatly expand the range of Chemi-
cal Physics that can be done with the smallest and coldest
chemical vials yet devised.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Udo Buch, David Far-
relly, Martina Havenith, and Andrej Vilesov for carefully
reading and commenting on this manuscript. This work
was supported by grants from the National Science Foun-
dation and the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research.

[1] J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Annu. Rev. Phys.

Chem. 49, 1 (1998).

[2] K. B. Whaley,

in Advances in Molecular Vibrations
and Collision Dynamics, edited by J. M. Bowman and
Z. Bacic (JAI Press, Inc., Greenwich, Conn., 1998),
Vol. III, p. 397.

[3] G. M. Stewart and J. D. McDonald, J. Chem. Phys. 78,

[4] H.-C. Chang and W. Klemperer, J. Chem. Phys. 98,

3907 (1983).

2497 (1993).

[5] R. E. Miller, in Atomic and molecular beam methods,
edited by G. Scoles (Oxford University Press, New York,
1992), Vol. 2, Chap. 6, p. 192.

[6] T. E. Gough, R. E. Miller, and G. Scoles, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 30, 338 (1977).

[7] D. J. Nesbitt, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45, 367 (1994).
[8] C. E. Klots, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 5854 (1985).
[9] J. M. Hutson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 41, 123 (1990).
[10] T. E. Gough, M. Mengel, P. A. Rowntree, and G. Scoles,

J. Chem. Phys. 83, 4958 (1985).

and C. Winkler, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 6875 (1990).
[20] J. Harms, J. Toennies, and F. Dalfovo, Phys. Rev. B

[21] J. Harms, J. Toennies, M. Barranco, and M. Pi, Phys.

58, 3341 (1998).

Rev. B 63, 4513 (2001).

[22] H. Haberland,

in Clusters of atoms and molecules:
Theory, experiment, and cluster of atoms, Vol. 52 of
Springer Series in Chemical Physics, edited by H.
Haberland (Springer Verlag, New York, 1994), Chap. 3.
[23] R. A. Smith, T. Ditmire, and J. W. G. Tisch, Rev. Sci.

Instr. 69, 3798 (1998).

[24] E. L. Knuth, B. Schilling, and J. P. Toennies, in Inter-
national Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics (19th
: 1994 University of Oxford) (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1995), Vol. 19, p. 270, hNi was calculated ac-
cording to the scaling law given in this reference; since
no explicit dependence of hNi on the scaling parame-
ter Γ is given, the data in ﬁg. 1 were ﬁtted to a line
obtaining: ln(hNi) = 2.44 + 2.25 ln(Γ).

[25] J. Harms and J. P. Toennies, J. Low Temp. Phys. 113,

[11] T. E. Gough, D. G. Knight, and G. Scoles, Chem. Phys.

501 (1998).

Lett. 97, 155 (1983).

[26] J. Harms, J. P. Toennies, and E. L. Knuth, J. Chem.

[12] B. Tabbert, H. G¨unther, and G. zu Putlitz, J. Low

Phys. 106, 3348 (1997).

Temp. Phys. 109, 653 (1997).

[27] E. L. Knuth and U. Henne, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 2664

[13] S. Tam, M. Fajardo, H. Katsuki, H. Hoshina, T. Wak-
abayashi, and T. Momose, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 4191
(1999).

[14] S. Goyal, D. L. Schutt, and G. Scoles, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[15] S. Grebenev, J. Toennies, and A. Vilesov, Science 279,

69, 933 (1992).

2083 (1998).

[16] K. K. Lehmann and G. Scoles, Science 279, 2065 (1998).
[17] J. Northby, J. Chem. Phys. xx, xxxx (2001).
[18] e.g., Advanced Research Systems; Sumitomo Heavy In-

dustries Ltd.; Helix Technology, 2001.

[28] M. Hartmann, N. Portner, B. Sartakov, J. P. Toennies,
and A. F. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 5109 (1999).

[29] D. M. Ceperley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 279 (1995).
[30] B. M. Abraham, Y. Eckstein, J. B. Ketterson, M. Kuch-
nir, and P. R. Roach, Phys. Rev. A 1, 250 (1970).
[31] J. Jortner, Z. Phys. D–Atoms Mol. Clusters 24, 247

(1999).

(1992).

[32] J. Gspann, in Physics of electronic and atomic colli-
sions, edited by S. Datz (North Holland, Amsterdam,
1982), p. 79.

[19] H. Buchenau, E. L. Knuth, J. Northby, J. P. Toennies,

[33] D. Brink and S. Stringari, Z. Phys. D–Atoms Mol. Clus-

23

ters 15, 257 (1990).

[34] J. Harms, M. Hartmann, J. Toennies, A. Vilesov, and

B. Sartakov, J. Mol. Spectr. 185, 204 (1997).

[35] Beam Dynamics, Inc., Eden Prairie, MN, 2001.
[36] D. L. Miller, in Atomic and molecular beam methods,
edited by G. Scoles (Oxford University Press, New York,
1988), Vol. 1, Chap. 2, p. 17.

[37] P. Stephens and J. King, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1538

[38] J. Gspann, Z. Phys. B 98, 405 (1995).
[39] M. Farnik, U. Henne, B. Samelin, and J. Toennies, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81, 3892 (1998).

[40] J. Harms and J. Toennies, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 344

(1983).

(1999).

(1999).

(2000).

(2000).

[64] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science 287, 293 (2000).
[65] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 10158

[66] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9466

[67] K. Nauta, D. T. Moore, P. L. Stiles, and R. E. Miller,

Science 292, 481 (2001).

[68] C. Callegari, I. Reinhard, K. K. Lehmann, G. Scoles,
K. Nauta, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4636
(2000).

[69] C. Callegari, A. Conjusteau,

I. Reinhard, K. K.
Lehmann, and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 10535
(2000).

[41] J. Harms, M. Hartmann, B. Sartakov, J. Toennies, and

[70] U. Even, J. Jortner, D. Noy, N. Lavie, and C. Cossart-

A. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 5124 (1999).

Magos, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 8068 (2000).

[42] Isotec, Inc. $175/L for 99.95% and $280/L for Grade 6,

[71] P. E. Powers, T. J. Kulp, and S. E. Bisson, Opt. Lett.

[43] W. Sch¨ollkopf and J. Toennies, Science 266, 1345

[72] F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho,

both at STP.

(1994).

(2000).

78, 4729 (1997).

[44] R. Guardiola and J. Navarro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1144

[45] M. Barranco, J. Navarro, and A. Poves, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[46] S. A. Chin and E. Krotscheck, Phys. Rev. B 52, 10405
(1995), the binding energy per atom (E, in K), as a
function of droplet size N , is given by: E = −7.21 +
17.71N −1/3 − 5.95N −2/3.

23, 159 (1998).

Phys. World 12, 27 (1999).

[73] R. Colombelli, F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, A. L. Hutchin-
son, D. L. Sivco, A. Tredicucci, M. C. Wanke, A. M.
Sergent, and A. Y. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 2620
(2001).

[74] H. Haberland, Clusters of atoms and molecules: Theory,
experiment, and cluster of atoms, Vol. 52 of Springer
Series in Chemical Physics (Springer Verlag, New York,
1994).

[47] M. Lewerenz, B. Schilling, and J. P. Toennies, J. Chem.

[75] R. Fr¨ochtenicht, J. P. Tonnies, and A. F. Vilesov, Chem.

Phys. 102, 8191 (1995).

Phys. Lett. 229, 1 (1994).

[51] S. Grebenev, B. Sartakov, J. Toennies, and A. Vilesov,

[78] M. Hartmann, A. Lindinger, J. P. Toennies, and A. F.

[52] S. Goyal, D. L. Schutt, and G. Scoles, J. Phys. Chem.

[79] W. Demtr¨oder, Laser Spectroscopy, 2nd ed. (Springer-

cuss. 113, 261 (1999).

Science 289, 1532 (2000).

97, 2236 (1993).

[48] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, The vibrational and rota-
tional dynamics of acetylene solvated in superﬂuid he-
lium nanodroplets, preprint, 2001.

[49] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science 283, 1895 (1999).
[50] K. Nauta, D. T. Moore, and R. E. Miller, Faraday Dis-

[53] M. Hartmann, R. E. Miller, J. P. Toennies, and A.

Vilesov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1566 (1995).

[54] S. Grebenev, B. Sartakov, J. Toennies, and A. Vilesov,

J. Chem. Phys. 114, 617 (2001).

[55] S. Grebenev, E. Lugovoi, B. G. Sartakov, J. P. Toennies,
and A. F. Vilesov, Faraday Discuss. 118, 19 (2001).
[56] D. Blume, M. Lewerenz, F. Huisken, and M. Kaloudis,

J. Chem. Phys. 105, 8666 (1996).

[57] R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Kaloudis, M. Koch, and F. Huisken,

J. Chem. Phys. 105, 6128 (1996).

[58] F. Huisken, O. Werhahn, A. Y. Ivanov, and S. A. Kras-

nokutski, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 2978 (1999).

[59] M. Behrens, U. Buck, R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Hartmann,
and M. Havenith, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 7179 (1997).
[60] M. Behrens, U. Buck, R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Hartmann, F.
Huisken, and F. Rohmund, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 5914
(1998).

[61] M. Behrens, R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Hartmann, J. G.
Siebers, U. Buck, and F. C. Hagemeister, J. Chem.
Phys. 111, 2436 (1999).

[62] M. Kunze, J. Reuss, J. Oomens, F. Harren, and D. H.
Parker, Z. Phys. Chemie–Int. J. Res. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 214, 1209 (2000).

[76] I. Reinhard, C. Callegari, A. Conjusteau, K. K.
Lehmann, and G. Scoles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5036
(1999).

[77] A. Conjusteau, C. Callegari,

I. Reinhard, K. K.
Lehmann, and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4840
(2000).

Vilesov, J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 6369 (2001).

Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1996).

[80] S. Grebenev, M. Havenith, F. Madeja, J. P. Toennies,
and A. F. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9060 (2000).
[81] CRC handbook of chemistry and physics, 70th ed., edited
by R. C. Weast (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1990).

[82] J. Reho, U. Merker, M. R. Radcliﬀ, K. K. Lehmann,
and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 8409 (2000).
[83] C. H. Townes and A. L. Schawlow, Microwave Spec-
troscopy (Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1975).
[84] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Vibrational relaxation of
Ne, Ar, Kr-HF (v = 1) binary complexes in helium nan-
odroplets, preprint, 2001.

[85] H. J. Loesch and A. Remscheid, J. Chem. Phys. 93,

4779 (1990).

[86] B. Friedrich, D. P. Pullman, and D. R. Herschbach,

J. Phys. Chem. 95, 8118 (1991).

[87] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, in Atomic and molecular
beams: The state of the art 2000, edited by R. Campar-
gue (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2001), part VI.3, p. 775.

[88] S. Grebenev, M. Hartmann, M. Havenith, B. Sartakov,
J. P. Toennies, and A. F. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. 112,
4485 (2000).

[89] R. E. Miller, IV Workshop on quantum ﬂuid clusters,

Ringberg Schloss, 2000.

[63] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4480

[90] F. Dalfovo, R. Mayol, M. Pi, and M. Barranco, Phys.

24

Rev. Lett. 85, 1028 (1999).

2898 (1988).

[91] K. K. Lehmann, Mol. Phys. 97, 645 (1999).
[92] F. Stienkemeier, J. Higgins, W. E. Ernst, and G. Scoles,

[125] Y. Kwon, D. M. Ceperley, and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem.

Phys. 104, 2341 (1996).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3592 (1995).

[126] C. Douketis, G. Scoles, S. Marchetti, M. Zen, and A. J.

[95] J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Chem. Phys. Lett.

(1999).

[93] M. Hartmann, F. Mielke, J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov,
and G. Benedek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4560 (1996).
[94] C. C. Hu, R. Petluri, and J. A. Northby, Physica B 284,

107 (2000), part 1.

235, 596 (1995).

33, 150 (1986).

[96] K. K. Lehmann, Mol. Phys. 98, 1991 (2000).
[97] E. Manousakis and V. R. Pandharipande, Phys. Rev. B

[98] K. H. Andersen, J. Bossy, J. C. Cook, O. G. Randl, and
J.-L. Ragazzoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4043 (1996).

[99] T. Oka, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 9, 127 (1973).

[100] E. L. Andronikashvili, J. Phys. USSR 10, 201 (1946).
[101] Y. Kwon and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4108

(1999).

[102] D. M. Ceperley, paper presented at the IV Workshop
on quantum ﬂuid clusters, Ringberg Schloss, 2000.
[103] E. W. Draeger, Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, 2001, http://archive.ncsa.
uiuc.edu/Apps/CMP/draeger/draeger_thesis.ps.gz.
[104] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics, 4 ed. (Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, 1916).
[105] C. Callegari, A. Conjusteau,

I. Reinhard, K. K.
Lehmann, G. Scoles, and F. Dalfovo, Phys. Rev. Lett.
83, 5058 (1999).

[106] E. Lee, D. Farrelly, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett.

83, 3812 (1999).

Thakkar, J. Chem. Phys. 76, 3057 (1982).

[127] M. Hartmann, F. Mielke, J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov,
and G. Benedek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4560 (1996).
[128] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 3426

[129] F. Stienkemeier and A. F. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. xx,

[130] J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov, and K. B. Whaley, Phys.

xxxx (2001).

Today 54, 31 (2001).

[131] J. Higgins, C. Callegari, J. Reho, F. Stienkemeier, W. E.
Ernst, K. K. Lehmann, M. Gutowski, and G. Scoles,
Science 273, 629 (1996).

[132] J. Higgins, T. Hollebeek, J. Reho, T.-S. Ho, K. K.
Lehmann, H. Rabitz, and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys.
112, 1 (2000).

[133] J. Wilks and D. S. Betts, An introduction to liquid he-
lium, 2 ed. (Oxford University press, New York, 1987).
[134] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. xx, xxxx

[135] R. Busani, M. Folkers, and O. Cheshnovsky, Phys. Rev.

[136] K. Bowen, unpublished results on Mg−

n photoelectron

(2001).

Lett. 81, 3836 (1998).

spectroscopy, 2001.

[137] T. Diederich, T. D¨oppner, J. Braune, J. Tiggesb¨aumer,
and K.-H. Meiwes-Broer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4807
(2001).

[138] A. Kohn, F. Weigend, and R. Ahlrichs, Phys. Chem.

[107] Y. Kwon, P. Huang, M. V. Patel, D. Blume, and K. B.

Chem. Phys. 3, 711 (2001).

Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 6469 (2000).

[139] A. Lindinger, J. P. Toennies, and A. F. Vilesov,

[108] L. M. Milne-Thompson, Theoretical hydrodynamics, 5

J. Chem. Phys. 110, 1429 (1999).

ed. (Dover, New York, 1996).

[140] M. Pi, R. Mayol, and M. Barranco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,

[109] J. Dupont-Roc, M. Himbert, N. Pavloﬀ, and J. Treiner,

3093 (1999).

J. Low Temp. Phys. 81, 31 (1990).

[141] S. Grebenev, Ph.D. thesis, Universit¨at G¨ottingen,

[110] F. Dalfovo, A. Lastri, L. Pricaupenko, S. Stringari, and

G¨ottingen, Germany, 2000.

J. Treiner, Phys. Rev. B 52, 1193 (1995).

[111] F. Dalfovo, Z. Phys. D–Atoms Mol. Clusters 29, 61

[112] K. K. Lehmann, unpublished results, 2000.
[113] E. Madelung, Z. Phys. 40, 332 (1926).
[114] L. de Broglie, Compt. Rend. 183, 447 (1926).
[115] G. Ortiz and D. M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4642

(1994).

(1995).

[116] K. K. Lehmann and C. Callegari, Quantum Hydro-
dynamic Model
for the enhanced moments of Iner-
tia of molecules in Helium Nanodroplets: Applica-
tion to SF6, preprint, 2001, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/
physics/0109009.

[117] D. Blume, M. Mladenovi´c, M. Lewerenz, and K. B.

Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 5789 (1999).
[118] K. Lehmann, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 4643 (2001).
[119] A. G. Maki, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 3, 221 (1974).
[120] J. M. Hutson, in Advances in molecular vibrations and
collision dynamics, edited by J. M. Bowman (JAI Press,
Inc., ”Greenwich, Conn.”, 1991), Vol. 1A, p. 1.

[121] A. J. Leggett, Physica Fennica 8, 125 (1973).
[122] K. Szalewicz, Faraday Discuss. 118, 121 (2001).
[123] F. Huisken, M. Kaloudis, and A. A. Vigasin, Chem.

Phys. Lett. 269, 235 (1997).

[124] D. Eichenauer and R. J. LeRoy, J. Chem. Phys. 88,

[142] S. Grebenev, M. Hartmann, A. Lindinger, N. P¨ortner,
B. Sartakov, J. Toennies, and A. Vilesov, Physica B
280, 65 (2000).

[143] V. S. Babichenko and Y. Kagan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,

3458 (1999).

[144] W. Gordy and R. L. Cook, Microwave molecular spectra

(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984).

[145] K. Higgins, as reported in Ref. 54, 1999.
[146] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, personal communication,

2001.

[147] F. Madeja, P. Marcwick, M. Havenith, K. Nauta, and
R. E. Miller, Rotationally resolved infrared spectroscopy
of h2- and d1-formic acid monomer in liquid He-droplets,
preprint, 2001.

[148] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Rotational and vibrational
dynamics of CO2 and N2O in helium nanodroplets,
preprint, 2001.

[149] Nodal surfaces are necessary to separate regions of dif-
ferent angular momentum in the helium droplet, in or-
der to preserve continuity of the wavefunction.

[150] Particularly compelling is the remarkable sharpness of
the sub-bands that by selection rules do not rotationally
relax, observed for HF, (HF)2, and HCCH.

