1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

1

Molecular Theory of Hydrophobic Eﬀects:

“She is too mean to have her name
repeated.”∗

Lawrence R. Pratt

Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA, phone:
505-667-8624, fax: 505-665-3909, email: lrp@lanl.gov

KEYWORDS: aqueous solutions, biomolecular structure, statistical thermodynamics, quasi-

chemical theory, pressure denaturation

ABSTRACT: This paper reviews the molecular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects relevant to
biomolecular structure and assembly in aqueous solution. Recent progress has resulted in simple,
validated molecular statistical thermodynamic theories and clariﬁcation of confusing theories of
decades ago. Current work is resolving eﬀects of wider variations of thermodynamic state, e.g.
pressure denaturation of soluble proteins, and more exotic questions such as eﬀects of surface
chemistry in treating stability of macromolecular structures in aqueous solution

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WHAT CHANGED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The ‘small size’ hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Transient cavities probing packing and ﬂuctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Modeling occupancy probabilities
Non-equivalence with Pratt-Chandler theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
‘Good theories are either Gaussian or everything’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

TECHNICAL OBSERVATIONS AND EXTENSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Default models
Quasi-chemical theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Importance sampling to correct occupancy probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
van der Waals picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION AND TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCES . . . .
Solubilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Model explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
∗W. Shakespeare: All’s well that ends well

2

4
4
5
6
6
7

7
7
8
10
11

12
12
13

Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2002 52

RECENT EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF HYDRATION STRUCTURE . . . . .
Pressure dependence of hydrophobic hydration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
‘Clathrate’ is in the eye of the beholder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

POTENTIALS OF THE MEAN FORCES AMONG PRIMITIVE HYDROPHOBIC
SPECIES IN WATER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contact hydrophobic interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Non-contact hydrophobic interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simulation results
Polarizability? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Alkane conformational equilibrium in water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

PRESSURE DEPENDENCE OF HYDROPHOBIC INTERACTIONS . . . . . . .

18

SIZE DEPENDENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contact densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PMF for stacked plates in water
Benzene-benzene PMF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Theory of interface formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

CONCLUDING DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

14
15
15

15
16
16
16
17
17

19
19
20
20
21

INTRODUCTION

In the past several years there has been a breakthrough, associated with the
eﬀorts of a theoretical collaboration at Los Alamos(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11) but
with important antecedents(12, 13, 14, 15, 16), on the problem of the molecular
theory of hydrophobic eﬀects. That breakthrough is the justiﬁcation for this
review.

One unanticipated consequence of that work has been the clariﬁcation of the
‘Pratt-Chandler theory’(17). Judged empirically, that theory was not less suc-
cessful than is typical of molecular theories of liquids. But the supporting theoret-
ical arguments had never been compelling and engendered signiﬁcant confusion.
That confusion was signaled already in 1979 by the view(18): “The reason for
the success of their theory may well be profound, but could be accidental. We
cannot be sure which.” Today the correct answer is ‘both,’ though acciden-
tal ﬁrst.
In reviewing these
developments, a signiﬁcant volume of intervening theoretical work must even-
tually be viewed again in this new light.
In addition, the work that clariﬁed
the Pratt-Chandler theory suggested several improvements and extensions, and
was deepened by the parallel development of the molecular quasi-chemical the-
ory of solutions(19, 20, 21, 22, 11, 23). On this basis, I predict an extended period
of consolidation of the theory of these systems and inclusion of more realistic,

In an amended form, it is a compelling theory.

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

interesting, and exotic instances.

3

An attitude of this review is to respect a scholarly patience in addressing the
foundations without prejudging the speculations ellicited by the fascinating bio-
physical motivations. Thus, physical chemists working at strengthening those
foundations are the audience for this review.

Nevertheless, clarity of the biophysical goals is important. Thus, an unclut-
tered expression of the motivation and the basic problem is essential. The molec-
ular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects is an unsolved facet of a molecular problem
foundational to biophysics and biochemistry: the quantitative molecular scale
understanding of the forces responsible for structure, stability, and function of
biomolecules and biomolecular aggregates. I estimate that the term ‘hydropho-
bic’ appears in every biophysics and biochemistry textbook. An intuitive def-
inition of hydrophobic eﬀects is typically assumed at the outset. Hydrophobic
eﬀects are associated with demixing under standard conditions of oil-like mate-
rials from aqueous solutions. A more reﬁned appreciation of hydrophobic eﬀects
acknowledges that they are a part of a subtle mixture of interactions that sta-
bilize biomolecular structures in aqueous solution over a signiﬁcant temperature
range while permitting suﬃcient ﬂexibility for the biological function of those
structures.

Preeminent characteristics of these hydrophobic interactions are temperature
dependences, and concurrent entropies, that can be exempliﬁed by cold denat-
uration of soluble proteins(24).
If hydrophobic eﬀects stabilize folded protein
structures, then folding upon heating suggests that hydrophobic interactions be-
come stronger with increasing temperature through this low temperature regime.
This is a counter-intuitive observation.

A primitive correct step in relieving this contrary intuition is the recognition
that water molecules of the solution participate in this folding process(25). Spe-
ciﬁc participation by small numbers of water molecules is not unexpected but
also isn’t the mark of hydrophobic eﬀects. For hydrophobic eﬀects, on the con-
trary, a large collection of water molecules are involved nonspeciﬁcally. It is the
statistics of the conﬁgurations of these water molecules at the speciﬁed temper-
ature that lead to the fascinating entropy issues. Because of the signiﬁcance of
these entropies, hydrophobic eﬀects are naturally a topic for molecular statistical
thermodynamics.

Given the acknowledged signiﬁcance of this topic, it is understandable that
the literature that appeals to them is vast. Many researchers from a wide range
of backgrounds and with a wide variety of goals have worked on these problems.
Thus, the ‘unsolved’ assertion will challenge those researchers. But the ‘unsolved’
assertion also reﬂects a lack of integration of principles, tools, and results to form
a generally accepted mechanism of hydrophobic eﬀects. For example, it is widely,
but not universally, agreed that the hydrogen bonding interactions between water

4

Lawrence R. Pratt

molecules are a key to understanding hydrophobic eﬀects. Conventional molecu-
lar simulation calculations with widely accepted molecular interaction models for
small hydrophobic species in water broadly agree with experimental results on
such systems(26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71,
72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,
98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134).
In this sense, everything is known. Nevertheless, this complete knowledge hasn’t
achieved a consensus for a primitive mechanism of hydrophobic eﬀects. By ‘mech-
anism’ we mean here a simpler, physical description that ties together otherwise
disparate observations. Though this concept of mechanism is less than the com-
plete knowledge of simulation calculations, it is not the extreme ‘poetic “expla-
nation”’ famously noted by Stillinger(135). The elementary simpliﬁcations that
lead to a mechanism must be more than rationalizations; they must be veriﬁable
and consistent at a more basic level of theory, calculation, and observation.

The ‘breakthrough’ mentioned in the ﬁrst paragraph is particularly exciting
because it hints at such a mechanism for the most primitive hydrophobic ef-
fects. A great deal more reseach is called for, certainly. But discussion of that
development is a principal feature of this review.

WHAT CHANGED

The breakthrough required a couple steps. The ﬁrst step was the realization
that feasible statistical investigations of spontaneous formation of atomic sized
cavities in liquid solvents should shed light on operating theories of hydrophobic
hydration(12, 13, 136, 14, 15). Those studies could be based upon the formal
truth(3, 10)

∆µA = −RT ln p0

(1)

where ∆µA is the interaction contribution to the chemical potential of a hard core
hydrophobic solute of type A, and p0 the probability that an observation volume
deﬁned by the excluded volume interactions of A with water molecules would
have zero (0) occupants. These cavity formation studies were not an attempt
to calculate hydration free energies for realistic hydrophobic solutes. The goal
was just to examine simple theories and to learn how diﬀerent solvents might be
distinguished on this basis.

The ‘small size’ hypothesis

There was also a signiﬁcant physical idea alive at the time those studies were
undertaken(12): “The low solubility of nonpolar solutes in water arises not from

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

5

the fact that water molecules can form hydrogen bonds, but rather from the fact
that they are small in size.” As a simple clear hypothesis, this view contributed
to the breakthrough although the hypothesis was eventually disputed(13, 137).

Packing and molecular sizes are important concerns for liquids because they
are dense. The idea was that since water molecules are smaller than, say, CCl4
molecules, the ‘interstitial’ spaces available in liquid water would be smaller than
those in liquid CCl4. The ﬁrst disputed point was that this hypothesis was
suggested by the approximate scaled particle model(138, 139) and that model
was known to have ﬂaws(140, 135) as applied to hydrophobic hydration. The
second disputed point was that treatment of the coexisting organic phase, liquid
CCl4 in this discussion, was less convincing than the treatment of liquid water:
the modeling of a CCl4 molecule as a simple ball is an oft-convenient canard
but shouldn’t be taken too literally. Another signiﬁcant consideration is that
liquid water is less dense on a packing fraction basis than most coexisting organic
solvents.

Eventually(13, 136, 14, 15), the direct investigations at the low pressures of
ﬁrst interest indicated that the probable spontaneously occurring cavities might
be smaller in typical organic solvents than in water, though the diﬀerences are
small. What was decidedly diﬀerent between water and organic solvents was the
ﬂexibility of the medium to open cavities larger than the most probable size.
Water is less ﬂexible in this regard, stiﬀer on a molecular scale, than typical or-
ganic liquids. Fig. 1 gives a macroscopic experimental perspective on this relative
stiﬀness. Furthermore, the results for the organic phase were not at all similar to
what scaled particle models suggested(14, 15). So as an explanation of the dis-
tinction between water and common organic solvents, the ‘small size’ mechanism
must be discounted(141,91,142,143). Nevertheless, we can anticipate subsequent
discussion by noting that the equation of state of the solvent is important in
establishing thermodynamic signatures of hydrophobic hydration.

Transient cavities probing packing and ﬂuctuations

As an analysis tool for assessment of packing in disordered phases, studies of
cavity statistics should be more widely helpful(145, 39, 46, 146, 147, 78, 148, 86,
149, 99, 150, 151, 112, 105, 152, 88, 153, 154, 133, 23, 155). The interesting work of
Kocher, et al., (148) is notable. Those calculations studied the cavity forma-
tion work in protein interiors and that cavity formation work was seen to be
larger than for comparable organic solvents. In that respect, the packing of those
protein interiors was tighter, less ﬂexible, than a simple oil droplet. This conclu-
sion seems signiﬁcant for our pictures of protein structures and deserves further
investigation. Structural and compositional heterogeneity are undoubtedly also
important features of the cores of globular proteins. These observations should be
helpful in distinguishing the interiors of micelles from the cores of folded globular

6

proteins(156).

Modeling occupancy probabilities

Lawrence R. Pratt

The decisive second step in achieving the present breakthrough was the modeling
of the distribution pn of which p0 is the n=0 member(1). Several speciﬁc distribu-
tions pn had been tried in analyzing the results of Pratt and Pohorille(14). But it
was eventually recognized that a less speciﬁc approach, utilizing a maximum en-
tropy procedure to incorporate successively more empirical moment information,
was prudent and eﬀective. Surprisingly, direct determination of the distribution
pn showed that a two moment model

− ln pn ≈ ζ0 + ζ1n + ζ2n2

(2)

was accurately born-out in circumstances of computer simulation of liquid wa-
ter(1). The parameters ζj are evaluated by ﬁtting of the predicted moments hnji,
j = 0, 1, . . . to moment data. A practical virtue of this two moment model is
that the required moment data can be obtained from long-available experimental
results. A further surprise was that it had previously been shown, in diﬀerent con-
texts and with additional assumptions(16, 157), that theories of a Percus-Yevick
analog type had a structure derivable from a Gaussian or harmonic density ﬁeld
theory. The Pratt-Chandler theory was of this Percus-Yevick analog type. To
the extent that the empirical observation Eq. 2 suggests a normal distribution,
the Pratt-Chandler theory is given a better foundation than was available at its
genesis(10).

Non-equivalence with Pratt-Chandler theory

In fact, the two moment model Eq. 2 is not precisely the same as the Pratt-
Chandler theory. There are several related direct observations that can make that
point clear. For example, the probability model Eq. 2 assigns probability weight
only to non-negative integer occupancies. That is not the case for the harmonic
density ﬁeld theory. The restriction that such density ﬁeld theories should not
permit the negative occupancy of any subvolume is an obvious but interesting
requirement. Additionally, the Percus-Yevick theory for hard sphere mixtures
can predict negative probabilities(158). These are technical issues, however, and
the performance of the two moment model Eq. 2 gives strong and unexpected
support for the Pratt-Chandler theory.

There is a diﬀerent respect in which the correspondence of the two moment
model Eq. 2 with the Pratt-Chandler theory is imprecise. The kinship indicated
above is based upon calculation of hydration free energies when the solvent can
be idealized as a harmonic density ﬁeld. That can be straightforwardly carried
over to consideration of nonspherical solutes. For example, classic potentials of

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

7

mean force might be addressed by consideration of a diatomic solute of vary-
ing bond length. The Pratt-Chandler theory does not do that directly but uti-
lizes the structure of the Ornstein-Zernike equations together with yet another
Percus-Yevick style closure approximation. Those distinctions have not yet been
discussed fully.

‘Good theories are either Gaussian or everything’

A curious feature of the ln pn moment modeling is that convergence of predic-
tions for ∆µA = −RT ln p0 with increasing numbers of utilized moments is non-
monotonic(10, 6, 8). The predicted thermodynamic results are surprisingly accu-
rate when two moments are used but become worse with three moments before
eventually returning to an accurate prediction with many more moments avail-
able. The two moment model, and also the Pratt-Chandler theory, is fortuitous
in this sense. But this does conform to the adage that ‘good theories are either
Gaussian or everything.’

TECHNICAL OBSERVATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

The theory above has always been understood at a more basic level than the de-
scription above(10). The most important observation is that the Mayer-Montroll
series(159, 10) can be made signiﬁcantly constructive with the help of simulation
data(13, 136, 10) and those approaches can be more physical than stock inte-
gral equation approximations. Simulation data can provide successive terms in a
Mayer-Montroll series. In that case the binomial moments h
i0 are the stylis-
tically preferred data(10). Then the maximum entropy modeling is a device for
a resummation based upon a ﬁnite number of initial terms of that series(10).
Several additional technical points are helpful at this level.

n
j

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

Default Models

The adage that ‘good theories are either Gaussian or everything’ is serious but
doesn’t address the physical reasons why these distributions are the way they are.
In fact, painstaking addition of successive moments is not only painful but often
unsatisfying. And the two moment model Eq. 2 has been less satisfactory for every
additional case examined carefully beyond the initial one that was connected with
this breakthrough(1); recent examples can be seen in Ref. (23, 133). It is better
to consider simple physical models for the distribution pn and approximations

− ln

pn
ˆpn (cid:21)

(cid:20)

≈ ζ0 + ζ1n + ζ2n2 + . . .

(3)

where ˆpn is a model distribution chosen on the basis of extraneous considerations.
Since pn = ˆpn in the absence of further information, ˆpn is called the default model.

8

Lawrence R. Pratt

Utilization of a default model in this way compromises the goal of predicting the
distribution and instead relies on the moments to adapt the default model to the
conditions of interest. The default model of ﬁrst interest(1) is ˆpn ∝ 1/n! This
default model produces the uncorrelated result (the Poisson distribution) when
the only moment used is hni. Another way to identify default models is to use
probabilities obtained for some other system having something in common with
the aqueous solution of interest(8).

An important practical point is that this approach works better when the
default model is not too speciﬁc(22). This can be understood as follows: The
moment information used to adapt the default model to the case of interest is
not particularly speciﬁc.
If the default model makes speciﬁc errors, a limited
amount of that nonspeciﬁc data will not correct those errors adequately. This
argument gives a partial rationalization for the accurate performance of the ﬂat
default model that leads to Eq. 2.

In Eq. 2 ζ0 = ∆µA/RT but it is helpful to notice that this thermodynamic

quantity can be alternatively expressed as(10)

∆µA = RT ln

1 +




Xn=1 (cid:18)

ˆpn
ˆp0 (cid:19)

exp

−

kmax

Xk=1

ζk

 

n
k!









(4)





where binomial moments through order kmax are assumed and the default model
is included. ζ0 does not appear on the right since that normalization factor is
being expressed through the thermodynamic property. The point is that this is
a conventional form of a partition function sum. The interactions are n-function
interactions, in contrast to density or ρ-functional theories, but with strength
parameters adjusted to conform to the data available. The fact that ∆µA is
extracted from a fully considered probability distribution, and this consequent
structure, is the substance behind our use of the adjective ‘physical’ for these the-
ories. These theories are still approximate, of course, and they will not have the
internal consistency of statistical mechanical theories obtained by exact analysis
of a mechanical Hamiltonian system.

Quasi-chemical theory

The quasi-chemical theory(19,11) adapted to treat hard core solutes(23) gives an
explicit structure for the ∆µA formula as in Eq. 4. That result can be regarded
as a formal theorem

∆µA = RT ln

1 +

KmρW

m

.





Xm≥1





The Km are equilibrium ratios

Kn =

ρ ¯AWn
ρ ¯AWn=0ρW

n

(5)

(6)

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

for binding of solvent molecules to a cavity stencil associated with the AW ex-
cluded volume, understood according to the chemical view

¯AWn=0 + nW ⇀↽ ¯AWn .

¯A is a precisely deﬁned cavity species(23) corresponding to the AW excluded
volume. Eq. 4 should be compared to Eq. 5; because of the structural similarity, it
is most appropriate to consider Eq. 4 as a quasi-chemical approximation. The Km
are well-deﬁned theoretically(23) and observable from simulations. So again this
approach can be signiﬁcantly constructive when combined with simulations(19,
20, 11). But the ﬁrst utility is that the low density limiting values of Km, call
them Km

(0), are computable few body quantities(23). The approximation

∆µA ≈ RT ln

1 +

Km

(0)ρW

me−mζ1

(8)





Xm≥1





is then a simple physical theory, the primitive quasi-chemical approximation(23).
The Lagrange multiplier ζ1 serves as a ‘mean ﬁeld’ that adjusts the mean oc-
cupancy to the thermodynamic state of interest. For a hard sphere solute A
in a hard sphere solvent, this theory produces sensible results though it does
not achieve high accuracy in the dense ﬂuid regime ρd3 > 0.7(23) where d is
the diameter of the solvent hard spheres.
[The foremost questions for aqueous
solutions are at the lower boundary of this conventional demarcation of dense
ﬂuids.] When the accuracy of this theory for hard sphere systems degenerates, it
is because the distribution

9

(7)

(9)

ˆpn =

1 +

ne−nζ1

Kn

(0)ρW
Km

(0)ρW

me−mζ1

m≥1
P

is too broad in the low n extreme(23); see Fig. 2. Because this theory thus directly
treats short range molecular structure but somewhat too broadly, it is a natural
suggestion for generating default models. No direct experience along those lines
is presently available.

The investigation of how such a simple theory breaks Eq. 9 down is a yet
more interesting aspect of the development of the quasi-chemical theories for
these problems(11,23). For the hard sphere ﬂuid at higher densities the primitive
quasi-chemical theory Eq. 9 remains a faithful descriptor of the n≥1 features of
the distribution. But the actual p0 (see Fig. 2) becomes depressed relative to the
model; p0 breaks away from the rest of the primitive quasi-chemical distribution.
In fact, the suggested correlation correction can be eﬀectively empiricised and
provides an accurate description of these distributions for hard sphere ﬂuids.
These exotic complexities with p0 are not reﬂected in Eq. 2. Tiny features like
that were noticed, however, in the initial simulation studies of these probability
models(1). Additionally, we anticipate discussion below by noting that proximity

10

Lawrence R. Pratt

to a low pressure liquid-vapor transition point, associated with solvent-solvent
attractive interactions and potential dewetting of hard surfaces, is expected to
increase p0(1, 11).

Importance sampling to correct occupancy probabilities

A more workman-like investigation of these theories can be based upon the po-
tential distribution theorem(160, 3, 23)

e−∆µA/RT =

e−∆U/RT

.

DD

0

EE

The brackets hh. . .ii0 indicate the average of the thermal motion of a distinguished
A solute and the solvent under the condition of no interactions between these
subsystems; the latter restriction is conveyed by the subscript ‘0.’ Distributions
ˆpn should be helpful as importance functions. It would be natural to use this
estimate to revise the calculation of all the probabilities pn. But we have seen a
case, Fig. 2, where the distinction between n=0 and n≥1 is most interesting. In
addition, this quantity averaged here Eq. 10 takes the values zero (0) if n≥1 and
one (1) for n=0. Thus we consider the importance function

(cid:26)
The standard importance sampling ideas(161, 162) then produce

W =

ˆp0, n = 0 ,
1 − ˆp0, n > 0. (cid:27)

e−∆µA/RT = DD

W e−∆U/RT

hhW ii1/W

EE

1/W

.

The sampling distribution is the Boltzmann weight in Eq. 10 multiplicatively aug-
mented by the conﬁgurational function 1/W and corresponds to a ﬁnite prob-
ability step p0
1−p0 as the ﬁrst solvent molecule enters the observation volume.
Typically, this will lead to a diminished occupancy of the observation volume.
After some rearrangement, Eq. 12 is

p0 − ˆp0
ˆp0

=

(2π0 − 1)
1−2ˆp0
1−ˆp0

1 − π0

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

π0 =

e−∆U/RT

DD

.

1/W

EE

Here π0 is the probability of the observation volume being empty with the
reweighted sampling

These formulae could be used directly with simulation calculations. The best
available approximate p0(135, 164) could be used as ˆp0 in order to achieve higher
accuracy; that would be interesting but not easy because achieving n≫ 0 →
n=0 transitions requires rare collective processes. On the other hand, n=0→n≥1
transitions will have a low acceptance probability. But our argument here is

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

11

directed toward understanding physical features left out of simple models such as
the quasi-chemical model of Eq. 4. The choice here of W in Eq. 11 is transparently
directed towards discussion of a ‘two-state’ picture of the hydration.

With that goal, the conceptual perspective is the more interesting one. This
is a discrete example of a procedure common in density functional arguments.
Local particle occupancies are altered by a reweighting. Just as with p0, π0 can be
studied with a Mayer-Montroll series and moment modeling(10). The moments
involved now would be obtained from study of the designed non-uniform system.
The average on the right-side of Eq. 14 is a functional of the density induced by
the reweighting.

For example, if the reweighting can serve to nucleate a bubble because of prox-
imity of the thermodynamic state to a liquid-vapor transition, then, physically
viewed, π0 is expected to be composed of two important cases: (a) ‘vapor’ with
a depletion region surrounding the observation volume; this gives contribution
one (1) to π0 for these cases and (b) ‘liquid;’ typically these cases will contribute
zero (0) to π0. But occasional conﬁgurations, roughly with frequency ˆp0, will give
e−∆U/RT = 1. Thus as a rough estimate, we expect

π0 ≈

e−∆F/RT ( 1−ˆp0
e−∆F/RT ( 1−ˆp0

ˆp0 ) + ˆp0
ˆp0 ) + 1

(15)

where ∆F is the free energy for formation of a bubble from the liquid corre-
sponding to boundary conditions n=0 on the observation volume. That free
energy might be approximated by a combination of van der Waals theories and
molecular theories appropriate for the vapor phase(163). Let’s consider a one
phase, dense liquid thermodynamic state, not far from coexistance with a vapor
phase so that 1> e−∆F/RT > ˆp0. With these estimates, Eqs. 13 and 15 evaluate
to

p0 ≈ e−∆F/RT > ˆp0

(16)

The insertion probability is the probability of bubble formation, surely the only
simple guess, and this estimated change raises the value ˆp0.

van der Waals picture

On the basis of the observations above, we can construct the following picture(23)
by considering how these theories would work for an atomic size hard sphere
solute in a simple van der Waals ﬂuid system. Consider packing eﬀects ﬁrst,
then subsequently the eﬀects of attractive interactions. For dense liquid cases
with full-blown packing diﬃculties, models such as Eq. 2 or 9 overestimate p0
because those models aren’t accurate for packing problems in the dense ﬂuid
regime. Next, consider attractive interactions and the possibility of dewetting.
Those eﬀects raise p0. Models such as Eq. 2 do not reﬂect these phenomena. But

12

Lawrence R. Pratt

these two errors can compensate, so Eq. 2 can be empirically accurate for atomic
solutes despite the naivit´e. This is another rationalization of the astonishing,
fortuitous accuracy of the two moment model and of the Pratt-Chandler theory.
While absorbing this argument, there are two additional points that may be
noted. The ﬁrst point is that in discussing errors in treating packing eﬀects,
we have been concerned about errors of the same type as those in the Percus-
Yevick theory for the hard sphere ﬂuid. But the Percus-Yevick theory of the hard
sphere ﬂuid might be considered the most successful theory of a liquid, “gloriously
accurate, considering its simplicity”(166). So this discussion is bringing a high-
sensitivity view to this problem. This is necessary because of the importance
and high interest in these problems. The second point for note is that ‘attractive
interactions’ in this argument involve solvent-solvent interactions, not solute-
solvent attractive interactions. Part of the subtlety of these discussions is that
the approach that oﬀers models such as Eq. 2 is suﬃciently empirical that a
unique identiﬁcation of the source of a particular inaccuracy is nontrivial.

HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION AND TEMPERATURE DEPEN-
DENCES

The most astonishing result of the new theory Eq. 2 is its explanation of the
hydrophobic temperature dependence known as ‘entropy convergence’ (2, 10, 9,
11, 133) and those temperature dependences are discussed here.

Solubilities

The solubilities of simple gases in water have some interesting complexities(167).
Many simple gases have a solubility minimum in water at moderate temperatures
and pressures. Since the solubility is governed by ∆µA/RT , the temperature
variation of the solubility at a ﬁxed pressure requests information on

∂∆µA/RT
∂T

(cid:18)

(cid:19)p

= −

1
T (cid:18)

∆hA
RT (cid:19)

with ∆hA the partial molar enthalpy change upon dissolution of species A and we
considering the low concentration limit here. Thus, a solubility minimum leads
us to anticipate a temperature of zero enthalpy change for the dissolution where
∆µA/RT plotted as a function of T has a maximum.

At a higher temperature the dissolution of many simple gases shows approxi-

mately zero partial molar entropy change:

(17)

(18)

∂∆µA
∂T

(cid:18)

(cid:19)p

= −∆sA .

∆µA plotted as a function of T has a maximum. More puzzling is the fact that
this temperature of zero entropy change is common to a number of diﬀerent gases.

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

13

This phenomenon is referred to as ‘entropy convergence’ because the entropies
of hydration of diﬀerent solutes converge to approximately zero at a common
temperature(168, 169).

Model explanation

The puzzle “why?” was ﬁrst answered on a molecular level in Ref. (2) on the basis
of the model Eq 2; see also(10, 9, 11, 133). Establishing these two temperature
behaviors should go a long way toward establishing the temperature variations
of hydrophobic eﬀects throughout an extended range relevant to biomolecular
structure.

If we agree to be guided by an estimate of pn based upon a continuous normal
distribution(2, 10, 9, 11) then evaluation of the Lagrange multipliers of Eq. 2 is
not a problem and

∆µA/RT ≈

+ ln[2πhδn2i0]

1
2 (
1
2 (

2

hni0
hδn2i0
(ρv)2
hδn2i0

=

+ ln[2πhδn2i0]

)

)

(19)

(20)

with v the volume of the AW excluded volume, expected to be weakly temperature
dependent. The surprise is that hδn2i0 varies only slightly with temperature over
the interesting temperature range. This is suggestive of the data shown in Fig. 1.
Furthermore the second term of Eq. 20 is smaller than the ﬁrst. Therefore the
plot of ∆µA as a function of T experiences a maximum because the combination
T ρ2 has a maximum as ρ = ρsat(T ) decreases with increasing temperature along
the coexistence curve. To the extent that the rightmost term of Eq. 20 can be
neglected and v2/hδn2i0 is independent of temperature, then entropy convergence
will occur and the temperature at entropy convergence will be the same for all
hydrophobic solutes.

This development applies to model hard core solutes and the convergence tem-
perature does appear to shift slowly but systematically to lower temperatures
as the volume of the solute increases. But it was disturbingly noted nearly
forty years ago that the success of the scaled particle model in evaluating hydra-
tion entropies “. . . suggests an almost thermodynamic independence of molecular
structure”(140). In the entropy convergence phenomena, we see that this almost
thermodynamic independence of molecular structure is a feature of the data(169)
and that the current theory gives a simple molecular explanation that resolves
that puzzle.

The lower temperature iso-enthalpy solubility minimum is expected to be tied
to a diﬀerent aspect of the solution-water interactions, the van der Waals attrac-
tive interactions. Following a WCA view, these eﬀects should be reasonably de-

14

Lawrence R. Pratt

scribed by ﬁrst order perturbation theory so as a qualitative model we have(9,11)

∆µA ≈ −Aρ + BT ρ2 + CT

(21)

with ﬁtting parameters A, B, and C. This equation does indeed have the cor-
rect qualitative behaviors(9, 11).
If this Eq. 21 is used as a ﬁtting model and
the parameters are unrestricted, it is essentially perfect. If the parameters are
constrained by physical expectations for the temperature independent ﬁtted pa-
rameters are v, hδn2i0, and A, then this model is only qualitatively and crudely
successful in describing experimental solubilities.

Several of these considerations have been reexamined recently with results con-
sistent with this picture(170, 171). Although these temperature behaviors were
not always so clearly recognized as this, there remains speciﬁc solubility issues
that aren’t resolved including at the simulation level. An interesting case was
provided by the important simulation calculations of Swope and Andersen(38)
on solubility of inert gas atoms in water. With regard to the Lennard-Jones so-
lute water (oxygen) interaction models, they concluded: “For the potentials used
in the present simulations, it is not possible to ﬁt the value, slope, and curvature
for helium and neon without choosing what we believe to be unreasonably large
values of σ. We can, however, obtain ﬁts to the data for argon and krypton with
reasonable values of the diameters.” Simulation calculations for such cases have
been pursued several times since then; those activities up to 1998 are summa-
rized by Arthur and Haymet(106) and the latter eﬀort also concludes with some
ambiguity about the case of the He solute.

It is also important to emphasize that this model is used here only over a
limited temperature range and at low pressure. Lin and Wood(95) used molecular
dynamics to model the thermodynamic properties of small hydrocarbons in water
over a wide range of temperature and pressure and Errington, et al.(109) studied
the phase equilibria of water-methane and water-ethane systems of over wide
ranges of temperature and pressure using Monte Carlo techniques.

RECENT EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF HYDRATION STRUC-
TURE

In recent years, eﬀorts to measure directly the structure of water surrounding
simple hydrophobic solutes have produced results that should be of quantitative
relevance to the theories discussed here(100,172,173,174,175,176). A more quan-
titative consideration is warranted but the initial impression is that these results
are in good agreement with the calculations that have been done. These data
give the weight of evidence to important basic conclusions also.

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

15

Pressure Dependence of Hydrophobic Hydration

One such conclusion is that this structuring of water appears to be independent
of variations of the pressure to 700 bar (70 MPa)(175). This may be important
to the current issue of pressure denaturation of soluble proteins as is discussed
below. But investigation in a higher pressure range would be necessary for that
purpose(119, 177).

‘Clathrate’ is in the eye of the beholder

Another important conclusion follows from the direct comparison of the radial
distribution of oxygen atoms surrounding Kr in liquid aqueous solution and in a
solid clathrate phase. Those radial distributions are qualitatively diﬀerent in the
two diﬀerent phases. This is important because a ‘clathrate’ picture of hydration
structure of nonpolar solutes in liquid water is a common view of hydrophobic
hydration that has not been of quantitative relevance; it has been a ‘pictorial the-
ory’(178). In contrast, several theoretical calculations that have had quantitative
value assume roughly the antithesis of ‘clathrate,’ that the conditional density of
water surrounding of a non-spherical nonpolar solute can be built-up by super-
position of proximal radial information(179, 180, 94, 181, 84, 85). The ‘clathrate’
language is widely used, hardly explicitly justiﬁed, and leads to misunderstand-
ings. A number of studies have explicitly considered the issue of how valid is the
‘clathrate’ description(82, 116, 53, 55, 182, 183, 108). The conclusion seems to be
that if you look for clathrate-style hydration structures you probably see them
but if you ask whether they are necessary for a correct quantitative understand-
ing, the answer is ‘no.’
‘Clathrate’ is in the eye of the beholde. A reasonable
recommendation is that when ‘clathrate’ is used as a descriptor in these liquid
solutions, it should be explicitly deﬁned and justiﬁed. Attempts to formulate
quantitative theories on the basis of chemical models of these hydration shells
are known but ill-developed(11).

POTENTIALS OF THE MEAN FORCES AMONG PRIMITIVE
HYDROPHOBIC SPECIES IN WATER

The theories discussed above are straight-forwardly applicable to non-spherical
solutes. For a solute composed of two atoms with varying interatomic separation,
the comparison

∆µAA′(r) − ∆µA − ∆µA′ ≡ wAA′(r)

(22)

leads to the classic issue of the ‘potential of mean force’ (pmf), an issue of long-
standing interest(26,184,185,186,187,188,189,190,191,192,193,194,195,196,198,
200,199,51,201,68,65,202,203,204,205,206,207,208,209,210,212,213,214,215,177,
216). The model Eq. 2 for a simple case was tested against simulation results(1)

16

Lawrence R. Pratt

and the comparison was close. That theory, including Eq. 20, sheds new light on
these properties.

Contact Hydrophobic Interactions

Consider wAA(r) for atomic solutes in contact. When the solute atoms are in
van der Waals contact, we still anticipate that hδn2i0 will be only weakly tem-
perature dependent. Further, the volume excluded to the solvent by the pair
is less than twice the volume of an atom alone because of the overlap of their
excluded regions. Thus the dominant contribution to Eq. 22 is negative, stabi-
lizing the contact pair, and that stabilization increases with temperature below
the entropy convergence temperature.

[Note that the subtraction Eq. 22 requires some additional thought when the
If the subtraction were naively
logarithmic term of Eq. 20 is addressed(6).
carried-out, that r-independent nonzero diﬀerence might imply pathologically
long-ranged interactions. A more careful consideration of the statistical ap-
proaches satisfactorily resolves that pathology(6). This detail shows again that
these theories are not naively equivalent to the Pratt-Chandler theory.]

Non-contact Hydrophobic Interactions

On the other hand, when the atomic solutes are separated enough that a water
molecule may ﬁt between them, the volume excluded to the solvent by the pair
is more nearly twice the excluded volume of the separated atoms. The theories
following Eq. 2 then are more sensitive to water molecule correlations of longer
range because the information hδn2i0 depends on those correlations. These theo-
ries then produce more subtle eﬀects. Non-contact hydrophobic interactions may
be, nevertheless, signiﬁcant because of the larger conﬁgurational volume corre-
sponding to those solvent-separated conﬁgurations. In addition, as discussed by
Pratt and Chandler(217, 218), free energies of these solvent-separated conﬁgura-
tions may be more sensitive to details of van der Waals attractive interactions
than are contact conﬁgurations.

Simulation results

These views seem to be born out by the available simulation results, although(205)
“the conclusions drawn from previous simulation calculations have been very con-
tradictory.” Substantial stability for contact hydrophobic pairs is probably the
least contradictory of the possible conclusions. The recent preponderance of
simulation results indicate that these contact pairs are stabilized by favorable
hydration entropies(201, 202, 68, 203, 205, 206, 209, 219, 216). This would agree
with the view established from the simple model Eq. 20 but those model tem-
perature variations have been checked mostly along the liquid-vapor coexistence

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

17

curve. The interesting results of Ref. (205, 206) ﬁnd substantial temperature
variations at ﬁxed water density. It was noted(203) that the conditions of tem-
perature increase at ﬁxed density strengthen the apparent entropic stabilization
of the contact pair. That is also how Eq. 20 works; the density decrease serves
to moderate the temperature increase and eventually, at the entropy conver-
gence temperature, to dominate it. But the large eﬀects seen by the Vienna
group(205,206) make it unclear that the simple model Eq. 20 will be accurate for
those phenomena.

Simulation results for the solvent-separated conﬁgurations are less clear also.
There are entropic and enthalpic temperature eﬀects in opposite directions with
small net results(202, 206, 209). Because of the larger conﬁgurational volume for
the solute pair in this conﬁguration, these smaller hydration free energies are not
negligible and(206) “the puzzling ﬁnding that the marked hydrophobic behavior
of methane-like solutes concluded from the free energy data is not reﬂected in a
similarly clear manner by the second osmotic virial coeﬃcients requires a closer
inspection of the underlying phenomena.” See also (197). There is precedent,
depending on a variety of additional details, for simulation results to exhibit
either hydrophobic clustering or not, i.e., “hydrophobic repulsion.”(193).

Polarizability?

The complications suggested for these solvent-separated conﬁgurations seem to
have lead to other contradictory results.
It was suggested long ago(190) that
solute polarizability might change the character of hydrophobic interactions pre-
dicted by simple theories. A later simulation calculation that included explicit
polarizability(65) in the water-water interactions also suggested that these more
complicated descriptions might qualitatively change the hydration of non-contact
atom pairs. Further calculations again suggested that polarizability could lead
to substantial changes but in a diﬀerent direction from those seen earlier(204);
treatment of long-ranged interactions was noted as a signiﬁcant issue in these cal-
culations. More recent studies of interaction models that include polarizability,
however, have restored an original ‘small change’ view for the moment(209).

Alkane conformational equilibrium in water

The potentials of mean force just discussed are relevant to consideration of the
conformational equilibrium of small ﬂexible hydrophobic molecules in water. The
ﬁrst test case for theories has always been the trans-gauche isomerization of n-
butane(220, 221, 222, 223, 179, 224, 91, 225, 84, 226, 181). For the case of n-butane,
solvent separated possibilities are not available, so the contact hydrophobic inter-
actions are relevant. The population of the more compact gauche conﬁguration
is enhanced by an entropic hydration eﬀect. Hummer, et al.,(1) applied to the

18

Lawrence R. Pratt

model of Eq. 2 to the case of conformational equilibrium of n-butane in water and
found close agreement with the latest simulation results. Hummer has eﬀectively
adapted the model of Eq. 2 so that it can be simply applied to other alkanes(227).
Much longer chain molecules that are strictly hydrophobic as less well studied
primarily because they would be so unusual as isolated components of aqueous
solutions. Hydrophilic groups are necessary to solubilize large molecules. Perhaps
the simplest such soluble molecules would be polyethylene oxide chains which are
a speciﬁc interest(228). But Gallicchio, et al., (129) has recently studied the
hydration of slightly larger alkanes in additional detail.

PRESSURE DEPENDENCE OF HYDROPHOBIC INTERAC-
TIONS

The intense current interest in pressure studies of protein structure is due to the
alternative light that this research can shed on protein conformational dynamics.
A recent example can be found in (229) but we are unable to review adequately
that body of interesting work here.

The complications of the non-contact hydrophobic interactions mentioned above
appear to be involved in understanding pressure denaturation of proteins, how-
ever. We identify some of that work because views of hydrophobic eﬀects had
been paradoxical for these issues(230) and because it gives additional perspective
into the theories discussed here. Wallqvist reported initial studies of pressure de-
pendence of hydrophobic interactions(182,231). Remarkably, atomic hydrophobic
solutes in water clustered at low pressure but dispersed at a substantially higher
pressure that wasn’t further quantiﬁed in that study. Later the Rutgers group
took an important step(207) in Monte Carlo calculations of the eﬀects of pressure
on the pmf between Lennard-Jones model hydrophobic atomic solutes in water.
Hummer, et al.(4) then developed the theory Eq. 2 for these pmfs as a function
of pressure. That theory suggested that non-contact conﬁgurations of hydropho-
bic pairs become progressively more stable relative to contact pairs and that
this might be a feature of pressure denaturation that was known to produce less
disrupted structures than does heat denaturation. Subsequent molecular dynam-
ics calculations(177) conﬁrmed this picture of dispersal at higher pressures and
the pressure variations of the pmfs: as pressure is increased, these pmfs become
more structured, the contact minimum deepens, the desolvation barrier becomes
higher, the solvent-separated well becomes better deﬁned, deeper, and it appears
to deepen faster than the contact well. This work also observed clustering of hy-
drophobic atomic solutes at low pressure (1 atm) but dispersal at high pressure
(8000 atm, 810.6 MPa). This work also saw changes in the solute-water(oxygen)
radial distribution that should be observable in experimental studies such as those
of Ref. (175). But the simulation results are for considerably higher pressures
than the experimental work reported. These calculations also considered spheri-

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

19

cal hydrophobic solutes of a larger size, more comparable with valine, leucine, or
iso-leucine side chains. The responses to substantial pressure increases were simi-
lar but perhaps slightly more pronounced. A physical view is that as the pressure
is increased, water molecules can be jammed between contact hydrophobic pairs;
this evidently results in a more eﬃcient, lower-volume packing, and consequently
a negative hydration free energy change with increasing pressure for non-contact
conﬁgurations.

SIZE DEPENDENCE OF HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION FOR
HARD SPHERE SOLUTES

For a hard sphere solute, the rate of increase of the hydration free energy Eq 1
with the distance of closest AO approach, denoted by λ, produces a particularly
interesting quantity

ρW G(λ) =

1
4πλ2

∂∆µA/RT
∂λ

.

(23)

(cid:18)
This ρW G(λ) is the conditional density of the solvent water (oxygen) at contact
with the spherical solute. Because of the involvement of ∂∆µA/∂λ this relation
describes the compressive force exerted by the solvent on the solute.

(cid:19)

Contact densities

Direct studies of these quantities have shown(14, 15) that in the range 2.0 ˚A<
λ <3.0 ˚A G(λ) for liquid water is approximately two-times larger than for n-
hexane. Water exerts a higher compressive force on the surface of an inert solute
than do typical organic liquids so that water squeezes-out hydrophobic solutes
(232). More pertinent for the present discussion is that the Pratt-Chandler theory
overestimates this compressive force and the original scaled particle model under-
estimates it(14, 15). The revised scaled particle model(135) lands in the middle
and does a better job at describing this compressive force. Recent work(164) has
studied these quantities over a much larger range of λ and conﬁrmed the accuracy
of the revised scaled particle model.

The reason for the diﬀerences between the scaled particle models and the Pratt-
Chandler theory is associated with the known behavior ρW G(λ) ∼ p/RT for large
λ. For the cases of ﬁrst interest, p/ρW RT ≪1. Since G(λ) is initially one (1) and
typically increases initially, G(λ) decreases for large λ to achieve the small value
p/ρW RT . In fact, this decreasing behavior obtains for λ >3 ˚A, approximately.
Thus, for hard sphere solutes with λ ≫3 ˚A the contact density can be small.
This low pressure for a dense liquid is due to attractive forces between the sol-
vent molecules. If the conditions are adjusted for liquid-vapor coexistence, then p
is also the pressure of the coexisting vapor and p/RT would be the density of the

20

Lawrence R. Pratt

vapor under the assumption that it can be treated as ideal. Under these condi-
tions we can, therefore, say that a suﬃciently large hard sphere solute nucleates
a bubble of the vapor. These behaviors are built into the approximate scaled
particle models but not into the Pratt-Chandler theory. These issues had been
directly investigated for spherical model solutes moderately larger than canoni-
cal for methane(5); weak eﬀects and were found for those cases and convincing
models were developed(5).

PMF for stacked plates in water

This issue has been of particular interest recently because a previous calcula-
tion(233) studied the pmf between modeled stacked plates with exclusively re-
pulsive interactions with water molecules. That work suggested that contact
hydrophobic interactions in that case could be dominated by a dewetting event:
the last two layers of water molecules intervening between parallel plates evacu-
ated together.

Benzene-Benzene PMF

The comparable results for more realistically modeled benzene, or toluene, or
other small aromatic solute molecule pairs are also interesting but more com-
plicated(197, 198, 200, 51, 199, 211, 212, 215). These molecules are slightly smaller
than the stacked plates that were studied. In the ﬁrst place, ‘T’-shaped contact
pairs are more probable for benzene than a stacked arrangement is. The opposite
is true for toluene(212). This is also true for the gas-phase potential energy sur-
face though the hydration seems to enhance this distinction(212) slightly. In the
second place, variations in these pmfs(197,200,51,199,212,215) are much smaller
than for the modeled stacked plates(233). A dewetting transition is not obvious
for the calculations with higher molecular realism. It may be the signiﬁcance of
any dewetting would be more obvious near transitional conﬁgurations such as the
desolvation barrier region that separates contact from solvent-separated conﬁgu-
rations. Though the hydration of neither of the high probability conﬁgurations
discussed here seemed(200,51,199,212,215) remarkable in this way, the variation
of the free energy in the desolvation barrier region might be unusual; this deserves
further checking. How these complications are aﬀected by the more complicated
environment of an amino acid side chain, e.g., phenyl alanine, in a hydrated pro-
tein is not known; the peptide backbone is, of course, highly polar. The hydrogen
bonding possibilities of tyrosine or tryptophan side chains complicate things yet
again. An interesting study of pairing of tryptophan-histidene side chains (215)
suggested that hydration of these side chains results in stacked pairing near pro-
tein surfaces but ‘T’-contacts in protein interiors. [Continuum dielectric models
did not provide a rationalization of that observed tendency(215).] The variety of

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

21

the results obtained suggested(215) “. . . the importance of the atomic details of
the solvent in determining the free energy for the solute-solute interactions.”

Theory of interface formation(163)

The development of the theory corresponding to the stacked plates data was ini-
tiated by Lum, Chandler, and Weeks; see Fig. 1 there(234). Subsequently(235,
236, 237, 238), a focus has been the study of how the entropy dominated hydra-
tion free energies discussed above for inert gas solubilities change to the surface
tension dominated behavior expected for ideal mesoscopic hydrophobic species;
see also(128). That behavior was explicitly built into the revised scaled parti-
cle model for hard sphere solutes decades ago(135); that model is known to be
accurate for water(164) and for a simple liquid(235, 237). A fundamental niche
for that theoretical work(163) is the development of a molecular description of
the interface formation mechanism built into the revised scaled particle model at
large sizes(163).

How these theoretical developments will accommodate heterogeneity of chem-
istry and structure that is typical of biomaterials, in contrast to the model stacked
plates, is not yet established. A nice example of the issue of heterogeneity, ab-
sorption of water on activated carbon, was discussed recently by M¨uller and
Gubbins(240).
It is unreasonable to imagine that the biophysical applications
will be simpler than this. It might be more appropriate at this stage of develop-
ment to regard that Berkeley project as ambitiously directed toward an implicit
hydration model(20) rather than an assertion of speciﬁc physical relevance of
‘drying’ to biomolecular structure(239). These problems require consideration
of several distinct issues together. One such issue is the direct contributions
of solute-solvent attractive interactions to hydration free energies for a speciﬁc
structure(241). A second issue is the indirect eﬀects of solute-solvent interac-
tions in establishing structures and switching between structures as was initially
anticipated(234). That switching can be sensitive to details of van der Waals
attractive interactions(242, 243, 244, 164, 245).

It is worthwhile attempting to articulate a down-to-earth view of the claims
of Ref. (234) speciﬁcally. For biomolecules, there likely are uncommon transi-
tional structures and conditions for which localized water occupancies can change
abruptly. As these transitional structures become indentiﬁed, they will be in-
teresting. Considering water-hydrocarbon liquid interfaces, not compromised
by hydrophilic contacts, it is likely that these interfacial regions will be looser
than adjoining bulk phases and more accomodating to imposition of hydropho-
bic species(146). Surfactants probably change that conclusion qualitatively(146).
This is likely to be relevant to protein hydration and function. Most solute
conﬁgurations, except for a few transitional structures, won’t require speciﬁc ac-
knowledgement of ‘drying.’ The claims to Ref. (234) don’t seem to require mod-

22

Lawrence R. Pratt

iﬁcation of the discussion above on POTENTIALS OF THE MEAN FORCES
AMONG PRIMITIVE HYDROPHOBIC SPECIES IN WATER that separated
contact from non-contact conﬁgurations and entropy eﬀects from the rest, and
then suggested that the more poorly understood non-contact questions are likely
to show the most variability. The speciﬁc claims of Ref. (234) and the general
issues remain questions for research.

CONCLUDING DISCUSSION

This review has adopted a narrow theoretical focus and a direct style with the
goal of identifying primitive conclusions that might assist in the next stage of
molecular research on these problems. These theory and modeling topics haven’t
been reviewed with this goal recently and a review of the bigger topic of hy-
drophobic eﬀects would not be feasible in this setting. More comprehensive and
formal reviews of these topics are in progress and that must be my excuse for
considering such a small subset of the work in this area. Nevertheless, some
historical perspective is necessary in identifying valuable primitive conclusions.

One such conclusion is the rectiﬁcation of the antique ‘Pratt-Chandler the-
ory’(12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11). This was an unexpected develop-
ment because the advances reviewed above had bypassed stock integral equation
theories.
It may have been the stock aspect of the earlier approach (17) that
caused the greatest confusion on this topic. There is no obvious point to doing
that type of integral equation approximation again for the more complex solutes
to which the theoretical interest has progressed. For the problems addressed,
however, this amended Pratt-Chandler theory is now seen to be a compelling,
approximate theory with empirical ingredients. The research noted above on
Theory of interface formation and Importance sampling to correct quasi-chemical
models emphasize that the treatment of those attractive force eﬀects on the hy-
dration problem by the Pratt-Chandler theory was less satisfactory than that of
the scaled particle models.

Another primitive conclusion is that the scaled particle models(138, 135) have
been the most valuable theories for primitive hydrophobic eﬀects. This is due to
the quantitative focus of those models. The quantitative focus of the scaled parti-
cle models permitted more incisive analyses(140,135,139,12,13,14,15), in contrast
to ‘pictorial theories,’ and those analyses have lead to signiﬁcant advances in un-
derstanding of these problems. The connection from scaled particle models, to
Mayer-Montroll series(159, 10), the potential distribution theorem(160, 3), and
the quasi-chemical approach(19, 20, 21, 22, 11, 23) identiﬁes a promising line for
further molecular theoretical progress on these problems. Comparing Eqs. 4 and
5, the amended Pratt-Chandler theory is most appropriately viewed as a quasi-
chemical theory. The anticipated theoretical progress will treat more thoroughly
the eﬀects of changes in temperature, pressure, and composition of the solution,

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

23

including salt eﬀects, and will treat neglected ‘context’ hydrophobicity(197) in
detail. That work will study cold denaturation and chemical denaturation in
molecular detail. That work will begin to discriminate hydrophobic eﬀects in the
cores of soluble proteins from hydrophobic eﬀects in membranes and micelles.
That work will begin to consider hydrophobic eﬀects in nanotechnology with
molecular speciﬁcity.

A natural explanation of thermodynamic signatures of hydrophobic hydration,
particularly entropy convergence, emerges from these theoretical advances. How
those temperature behaviors are involved in cold denaturation or the stability of
thermophilic proteins will be a topic for future research.

Much has been made of the ‘Gaussian’ character of results such as Fig. 2.
The observation(1) best supporting this view can be explained as a cancellation
of approximation errors(23); slight inaccuracies of a Percus-Yevick (‘Gaussian’)
approximation are balanced by neglect of incipient interface formation for atomic
sized solutes.
In a number of other cases where these distributions have been
investigated carefully simple parabolic models of results such as Fig. 2 are less
accurate for thermodynamic properties and not only because of the inﬂuence of
a second thermodynamic phase nearby. Nevertheless, quadratic models provide
convenient, reasonable starting points for these analyses.

A ﬁnal conclusion regards the better discrimination of contact and non-contact
hydrophobic interactions. The contact hydrophobic interactions seem to express
the classic picture of entropy dominance at lower temperatures. The non-contact
interactions have more variability and are likely to be involved in more unusual
eﬀects such as pressure denaturation where a historical picture of hydrophobicity
had been paradoxical.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The ‘theoretical collaboration at Los Alamos’ mentioned in the INTRODUC-
TION has included G. Hummer (NIH), A. E. Garc´ia (LANL), S. Garde (Rens-
selaer Polytechnic Institute), M. A. Gomez (Vassar College), R. A. LaViolette
(INEEL), M. E. Paulaitis (Johns Hopkins University), and A. Pohorille (NASA
Ames Research Center). I thank those collaborators for their numerous essential
contributions that I have discussed in a personal way here. I thank H. S. Ash-
baugh and M. E. Paulaitis for helpful discussions of this review. This work was
supported by the US Department of Energy under contract W-7405-ENG-36 and
the LDRD program at Los Alamos. LA-UR-01-4900.

Literature Cited

93:8951

1. Hummer G, Garde S, Garc´ıa AE, Pohorille A, Pratt LR. 1996. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

2. Garde S, Hummer G, Garc´ıa AE, Paulaitis ME, Pratt LR. 1996. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77:4966

Lawrence R. Pratt

24

95:1552

3. Pratt LR. 1998. Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry:“Hydrophobic eﬀects” John Wi-

ley & Sons, Chichester 1286–1294.

4. Hummer G, Garde S, Garc´ıa AE, Paulaitis ME, Pratt LR. 1998. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

5. Hummer G, Garde S. 1998. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80:4193
6. Hummer G, Garde S, Garc´ia AE, Paulaitis ME, Pratt LR. 1998. J. Phys. Chem. B 102:10469
7. Pohorille A. 1998. Pol. J. Chem. 72:1680
8. Gomez MA, Pratt LR, Hummer G, Garde S. 1999. J. Phys. Chem. B 103: 3520
9. Garde S, Garc´ia AE, Pratt LR, Hummer G. 1999. Biophys. Chem. 78:21
10. Pratt LR, Hummer G, Garde S. 1999. in New Approaches to Problems in Liquid State

Theory, edited by C. Caccamo, J.-P. Hansen, G. Stell, Kluwer, Netherlands, 529:407–420

11. Hummer G, Garde S, Garc´ia A. 2000. Pratt LR, Chem. Phys. 258:349
12. Lee B. 1985. Biopolymers 24:813
13. Pohorille A, Pratt LR. 1990. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112:5066
14. Pratt LR, Pohorille A. 1992. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:2995
15. Pratt LR, Pohorille, A. 1993. in Proceedings of the EBSA International Workshop on Water-
Biomolecule Interactions, edited by MU. Palma, MB. Palma-Vittorelli, F. Parak Societ´a
Italiana de Fisica, Bologna, 261–268
16. Chandler D. 1993. Phys. Rev. E 48:2898
17. Pratt LR, Chandler D. 1977. J. Chem. Phys. 67:3683
18. Chan DYC, Mitchell DJ, Ninham BW, Pailthorpe BA. 1979. in Water: A Comprehensive
Treatise, edited by F. Franks New York: Plenum, vol 6, Recent Advances, pp. 239–278.

19. Pratt L, LaViolette RA. 1998. Mol. Phys. 94:909
20. Pratt LR, Rempe SB. 1999. in Simulation and Theory of Electrostatic Interactions in So-
lution. Computational Chemistry, Biophysics, and Aqueous Solutions, edited by LR. Pratt
G. Hummer American Institute of Physics, Melville, NY AIP Conference Proceedings, 492:
172–201.

21. Rempe SB, Pratt LR, Hummer G, Kress JD, Martin RL, Redondo A. 2000. J. Am. Chem.

22. Rempe SB, Pratt LR. 2001. Fluid Phase Equilibria 183-184: 121
23. Pratt LR, LaViolette RA, Gomez MA, Gentile ME. 2001 (in press). J. Phys. Chem. B

Soc. 122:966 2000.

xxx:yyy

24. Privalov PL. 1990. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 25:281
25. Parsegian V, Rand R, Rau D. 2000. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 97:3987
26. Dashevsky V, Sarkisov G. 1974. Mol. Phys. 27:1271
27. Owicki J, Scheraga HA. 1977. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 99:7413
28. Swaminathan S, Harrison SW, Beveridge DL. 1978. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 100: 5705
29. Geiger A, Rahman A, Stillinger, FH. 1979. J. Chem. Phys. 70:263
30. Pangali C, Rao M, Berne BJ. 1979. J. Chem. Phys. 71:2982
31. Bigot B, Jorgensen WL. 1981. J. Chem. Phys. 75:1944
32. Postma J, Berendsen H, Haak J. 1982. Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc. p55
33. Okazaki S, Touhara H, Nakanishi K, Watanabe N. 1982. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap. 55:2827
34. Kincaid R, Scheraga HA. 1982. J. Comp. Chem. 3:525
35. Rossky P, Zichi DA. 1982. Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc. p69
36. Rapaport DC, Scheraga HA. 1982. J. Phys. Chem. 86:873
37. Tani A, 1983. Mol. Phys. 48: 1229
38. Swope W, Andersen HC. 1984. J. Phys. Chem. 88:6548
39. Remerie K, van Gunsteren WF, Postma JPM, Berendsen HJC, Engberts JBFN. 1984. Mol.

Phys. 53: 1517

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

25

40. Linse P, Karlstrom G, Jonsson B. 1984. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106:4096
41. Jorgensen WL, Gao J, Ravimohan C. 1985. J. Phys. Chem. 89:3470
42. Straatsma TP, Berendsen HJC, Postma, JPM. 1986. J. Chem. Phys. 85: 6720
43. Zichi DA, Rossky P. 1986. J. Chem. Phys. 84:2814
44. Zichi DA, Rossky P. 1986. J. Chem. Phys. 84:1712
45. Fois E, Gamba A, Morosi G, Demontis P, Suﬀritti G. 1986. Mol. Phys. 58:65
46. Tanaka H. 1987. J. Chem. Phys. 86: 1512
47. Fleischman SH, Brooks CL. 1987. J. Chem. Phys. 87: 3029
48. Koop O, Perelygin 1988. I, Z. Fiz. Khim. (English Tranlation) 62: 1070
49. Jorgensen WL, Blake JF, Buckner JK. 1989. Chem. Phys. 129:193
50. Rao BG, Singh UC. 1989. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111:3125
51. Linse P. 1990. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112: 1744
52. Guillot B, Guissani Y, Bratos S. 1991. J. Chem. Phys. 95:3643
53. Laaksonen A, Stilbs P. 1991. Mol. Phys. 74:747
54. Cummings PT, Cochran HD, Simonson JM, Mesmer RE, Karaborni S. 1991. J. Chem.

Phys. 94:5606

55. Tanaka H, Nakanishi K. 1991. J. Chem. Phys. 95:3719
56. Andaloro G, Sperandeo-Mineo RM. 1991. Eur. J. Phys. 11:275
57. Fleischman SH, Zichi DA, 1991. J. Chim. Phys. Phys.-Chim. Bio. 88: 2617
58. Lazaridis T, Paulaitis ME. 1992. J. Phys. Chem. 96:3847
59. Wallqvist A. 1992. J. Chem. Phys. 96:1655
60. Sun Y, Spellmeyer D, Pearlman D, Kollman P. 1992. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114:6798
61. Lazaridis T, Paulaitis ME.1992. J. Phys. Chem. 96:3847
62. Guillot B, Guissani Y. 1993. J. Chem. Phys. 99:8075
63. Guillot B, Guissanni Y, Bratos S. 1993. Z. Fiz. Khim. (English Tranlation) 67: 25
64. Smith D, Haymet A. 1993. J. Chem. Phys. 98:6445
65. van Belle D, Wodak SJ. 1993. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115:647
66. Guillot B, Guissani Y. 1993. Mol. Phys. 79:53
67. Zeng J, Hush NS, Reimers JR. 1993. Chem. Phys. Letts. 206:318
68. Skipper NT. 1993. Chem. Phys. Letts. 207:424
69. Beglov D, Roux B. 1994. J. Chem. Phys. 100: 9050
70. Forsman J, Jonsson B. 1994. J. Chem. Phys. 101:5116
71. Madan B, Lee B. 1994. Biophys. Chem. 51:279
72. Matubayasi N. 1994. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116:1450
73. Matubayasi N, Reed L, Levy RM. 1994. J. Phys. Chem. 98:10640
74. Bushuev Y. 1994. Zhurnal Obshchei Khimii 64:1931
75. Lazaridis T, Paulaitis ME. 1994. J. Phys. Chem. 98:635
76. Kaminski G, Duﬀy EM, Matsui T, Jorgensen WL. 1994. J. Phys. Chem. 98:13077
77. Head-Gordon T. 1994. Chem. Phys. Letts. 227:215
78. Beutler TC, Beguelin DR, van Gunsteren WF. 1995. J. Chem. Phys. 102: 3787
79. Head-Gordon T. 1995. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117:501
80. Sun YX, Kollman PA. 1995. J. Comp. Chem. 16:1164
81. Wallqvist A, Berne BJ. 1995. J. Phys. Chem. 99:2885
82. Head-Gordon T. 1995. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:8308
83. Mancera RL, Buckingham AD. 1995. J. Phys. Chem. 99:14632
84. Ashbaugh HS, Paulaitis ME. 1996. J. Phys. Chem. 100:1900
85. Garde S, Hummer G, Garc´ıa AE, Pratt LR, Paulaitis ME. 1996. Phys. Rev. E 53:R4310
86. Prevost M, Oliveira IT, Kocher JP, Wodak SJ. 1996. J. Phys. Chem. 100:2738
87. Chau P, Forester T, Smith W. 1996. Mol. Phys. 89:1033

26

Lawrence R. Pratt

88. Re M, Laria D, Fern´andez-Prini R. 1996. Chem. Phys. Letts. 250:25
89. Matubayasi N, Levy RM. 1996. J. Phys. Chem. 100:2681
90. Durell SR, Wallqvist A. 1996. Biophys. J. 71:1695
91. Wallqvist A, Covell DG. 1996. Biophys. J. 71:600
92. Skipper NT, Bridgeman CH, Buckingham AD, Mancera RL. 1996. Faraday Disc. 103:

93. Haymet A, Silverstein K, Dill K. 1996. Faraday Disc. 103: 117
94. Garde S, Hummer G, Paulaitis ME. 1996. Faraday Disc. 103:125
95. Lin CL, Wood RH. 1996. J. Phys. Chem. 100:16399
96. Mancera RL. 1996. J. Chem. Soc. - Faraday Trans. 92: 2547
97. Meng EC, Kollman PA.1996. J. Phys. Chem. 100:11460
98. Lynden-Bell R, Rasaiah J. 1997. J. Chem. Phys. 107:1981
99. Floris F, Selmi M, Tani A, Tomasi J. 1997. J. Chem. Phys. 107:6353
100. DeJong PHK, Wilson JE, Neilson GW, Buckingham AD. 1997. Mol. Phys. 91: 99
101. Radmer RJ, Kollman PA. 1997. J. Comp. Chem. 18:902
102. Mancera RL, Buckingham AD, Skipper NT. 1997. J. Chem. Soc. - Faraday Trans. 93:

141–150

2263

103. Silverstein KAT, Dill KA, Haymet ADJ. 1998. Fluid Phase Equilibria 151:83
104. Silverstein K, Haymet A, Dill K. 1998. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120: 3166
105. Ikeguchi M, Shimizu S, Nakamura S, Shimizu K. 1998. J. Phys. Chem. B 102:5891
106. Arthur J, Haymet A. 1998. J. Chem. Phys. 109:7991
107. Panhuis M, Patterson C, Lynden-Bell R. 1998. Mol. Phys. 94:963
108. Mountain RD, Thirumalai D. 1998. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 95:8436
109. Errington, JR, Boulougouris GC, Economou IG, Panagiotopoulos AZ, Theodorou, DN.

1998. J. Phys. Chem. B 102: 8865

110. Mancera RL. 1998. J. Chem. Soc. - Faraday Trans. 94: 3549
111. Silverstein KAT, Haymet ADJ, Dill KA. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 111:8000
112. Tomas-Oliveira I, Wodak SJ. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 111:8576
113. Arthur JW, Haymet ADJ. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 110:5873
114. Pomes R, Eisenmesser E, Post C, Roux B. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 111: 3387
115. Urahata S, Canuto S. 1999. Chem. Phys. Letts. 313:235
116. Fois E, Gamba A, Redaelli C. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 110:1025
117. Slusher J. 1999. J. Phys. Chem. B 103: 6075
118. Somasundaram T, Lynden-Bell R, Patterson C. 1999. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1:143
119. Chau P, Mancera RL. 1999. Mol. Phys. 96:109
120. Smith P. 1999. J. Phys. Chem. B 103: 525
121. Madan B, Sharp K. 1999. Biophys. Chem. 78:33
122. Guisoni N, Henriques V. 2000. Braz. J. Phys. 30:736
123. Svishchev I, Zassetsky A, Kusalik P. 2000. Chem. Phys. 258:181
124. Rasaiah J, Noworyta J, Koneshan S. 2000. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122:11182
125. Urbic T, Vlachy V, Kalyuzhnyi Y, Southall N, Dill K. 2000. J. Chem. Phys. 112: 2843

2000.

126. Noworyta J, Koneshan S, Rasaiah J. 2000. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122:11194
127. Schurhammer R, Wipﬀ G. 2000. J. Phys. Chem. A 104: 11159
128. Southall N, Dill K. 2000. J. Phys. Chem. B 104: 1326 2000.
129. Gallicchio E, Kubo MM, Levy RM. 2000. J. Phys. Chem. B 104:6271
130. Cobos J, Mackie A, Vega L. 2001. J. Chem. Phys. 114: 7527
131. Bergman D, Bell R. 2001. Mol. Phys. 99:1011
132. Raschke T, Tsai J, Levitt M. 2001. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 98:5965

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

27

133. Garde S, Ashbaugh HS. 2001. J. Chem. Phys. 115:977
134. Kaira A, Tugcu N, Cramer SM. 2001. S. Garde, J. Phys. Chem. B 105:6380
135. Stillinger FH. 1973. J. Sol. Chem. 2:141
136. Pratt LR. 1991. in CLS Division 1991 Annual Review National Technical Information
Service U. S. Department of Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Rd., Springﬁeld, VA 22161, LA-
UR-91-1783.

137. Tang K, Bloomﬁeld V. 2000. Biophys. J. 79:2222
138. Pierotti RA. 1976. Chem. Rev. 76:717
139. Lucas M. 1976. J. Phys. Chem. 80: 359
140. Ben-Naim A, Friedman HL. 1967. J. Phys. Chem. 71:448
141. Madan B, Lee B. 1994. Biophys. Chem. 51:279
142. Silverstein TP. 1998. J. Chem. Ed. 75:116
143. Lazaridis T. 2001. Solvent size vs cohesive energy as the origin of hydrophobicity, private

communication

144. Rowlinson JS, Swinton, FL. 1982. Liquids and Liquid Mixtures, Butterworths, London
145. Postma JPM, Berendsen HJC, Haak JR. 1982. Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc. 55
146. Pohorille A, Wilson M. 1993. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 103:271
147. Wolfenden R, Radzicka A. 1994. Science 265:936
148. Kocher JP, Prevost M, Wodak SJ, Lee B. 1996. Structure 4:1517
149. Crooks GE, Chandler D. 1997. Phys. Rev. E 56:4217
150. Stamatopoulou A, Ben-Amotz D. 1998. J. Chem. Phys. 108:7294
151. Tanaka H. 1998. Chem. Phys. Letts. 282:133
152. Mountain R. 1999. J. Chem. Phys. 110:2109
153. Garde S, Khare R, Hummer G. 2000. J. Chem. Phys. 112:1574
154.
155. Kussell E, Shimada J, Shakhnovich E. 2001. J. Mol. Bio. 311:183
156. Lesemann M, Thirumoorthy K, Kim YJ, Jonas J, Paulaitis ME. 1998. Langmuir 14: 5339–

in’tVeld PJ, Stone M, Truskett T, Sanchez I. 2000. J. Phys. Chem. B 104:12028

5341

157. Percus JK. 1993. J. Physique IV 3:49
158. Mitchell D, Ninham B, Pailthorpe B. 1977. Chem. Phys. Letts. 51:257
159. Stell G. 1985. in The Wonderful World of Stochastics. A Tribute to Elliot W. Montroll,
edited by MF Schlesinger and GH Weiss Elsevier, NY, XII: 127, Studies in Statistical
Mechanics.

160. Widom B. 1963. J. Chem. Phys. 39: 2808 1963.
161. Torrie GM. Valleau JP. 1977. J. Comp. Phys. 23:187
162. Valleau JP. Torrie GM. 1977. in Statistical Mechanics, Part A: Equilibrium Techniques,

edited by BJ. Berne, Plenum, New York, 5: 169.
163. Weeks JD. 2002. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem 52:xxx
164. Ashbuagh HS, Paulaitis ME. in press 2001. J. Am. Chem. Soc. xxx:yyy
165. Chandler D, Weeks JD, Andersen HC. 1983. Science 220:787
166. Stell G. 1977. in Statistical Mechanics, Part A: Equilibrium Techniques, edited by BJ.

Berne, Plenum, NY, 5: 47, Modern Theoretical Chemistry.

167. Pollack G. 1991. Science 251:1323
168. Baldwin RL. 1986. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 83: 8069
169. Lee B. 1991. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 88: 5154
170. Boulougouris GC, Voutsas EC, Economou IG, Theodorou DN, Tassios DP. 2001 J. Phys.

Chem. B 105: 7792–7798

171. Ashbaugh HS, Truskett TM, Debenedetti PG. 2001. A simple molecular thermodynamic

theory of hydrophobic hydration, private communication

28

Lawrence R. Pratt

172. Filipponi A, Bowron DT, Lobban C, Finney JL. 1997. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79:1293
173. Bowron D, Filipponi A, Lobban C, Finney J. 1998. Chem. Phys. Letts. 293:33
174. Bowron D, Filipponi A, Roberts M, Finney J. 1998. Phys. Rev. Letts. 81:4164
175. Bowron D, Weigel R, Filipponi A, Roberts M, Finney J. 2001. Mol. Phys. 99:761
176. Sullivan D, Neilson G, Fischer H. 2001. J. Chem. Phys. 115:339
177. Ghosh T, Garde S, Garc´ia AE. in press 2001. J. Am. Chem. Soc. xxx:yyy
178. Frank HS, Evans MW. 1945. J. Chem. Phys. 13:507
179. Pellegrini M, Doniach S. 1995. J. Chem. Phys. 103:2696
180. Pellegrini M, Gronbechjensen N, Doniach S. 1996. J. Chem. Phys. 104:8639
181. Ashbaugh HS, Garde S, Hummer G, Kaler EW, Paulaitis ME. 1999. Biophys. J. 77:645

1999.

182. Wallqvist A. 1991. J. Phys. Chem. 95:8921
183. Cheng Y, Rossky P. 1998. Nature 392:696
184. Pangali C, Rao M, Berne B. 1978. ACS Symposium Series 1978:32
185. Pangali C, Rao M, Berne BJ. 1979. J. Chem. Phys. 71:2975
186. Swaminathan S, Beveridge DL. 1979. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 101:5832
187. Ravishanker G, Mezei M, Beveridge DL. 1982. Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc. 79
188. Beveridge DL, Mezei M, Ravishanker G. 1985. Jayaram B, J. Biosci. 8:167
189. Ravishanker G, Beveridge DL. 1985. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107:2565
190. Backx P, Goldman S. 1985. Chem. Phys. Letts. 113:578
191. Backx P, Goldman S. 1985. Chem. Phys. Letts. 119:144 1985.
192. Watanabe K, Andersen HC. 1986. J. Phys. Chem. 90:795
193. Watanabe K, Andersen HC. 1986.

in Molecular-Dynamics Simulation of Statistical-
Mechanical Systems, edited by G. Ciccotti WG. Hoover ASI-NATO International School
of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, XCVII: 418.

194. Wallqvist A, Berne B. 1988. Chem. Phys. Letts. 145:26
195. Jorgensen WL, Buckner JK, Boudon S, Tiradorives J. 1988. J. Chem. Phys. 89:3742
196. Berne B, Wallqvist A. 1989. Chem. Scr. 29A:85
197. Rossky PJ, Friedman HL. 1980. J. Phys. Chem. 84:587
198. Jorgensen WL, Severance DL. 1990. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112:4786
199. Linse P. 1992. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114: 4366
200. Linse P. 1993. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115: 8793
201. Smith DE, Zhang L, Haymet ADJ. 1992. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114:5875
202. Smith DE, Haymet ADJ. 1993. J. Chem. Phys. 98:6445
203. Dang LX. 1994. J. Chem. Phys. 100: 9032
204. New MH, Berne BJ. 1995. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117:7172
205. L¨udemann S, Schreiber H, Abseher R, Steinhauser O. 1996. J. Chem. Phys. 104:286
206. L¨udemann S, Abseher R, Schreiber H, Steinhauser O. 1997. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119:4206
207. Payne VA, Matubayasi N, Murphy LR, Levy RM. 1997. J. Phys. Chem. B 101:2054
208. Young WS, Brooks CL. 1997. J. Chem. Phys. 106:9265
209. Rick SW, Rick BJ. 1997. J. Phys. Chem. B 101:10488
210. Rank JA. Baker D. 1998. Biophys. Chem. 71:199
211. Gao JL. 1993. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115:6893–6895,
212. Chipot C, Jaﬀe R, Maigret B, Pearlman D, Kollman P. 1996. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118:11217.
213. Rick SW, 2000. J. Phys. Chem. B 104: 6884
214. Shimizu S, Chan H. 2000. J. Chem. Phys. 113: 4683
215. Gervazi FL, Chelli R, Marchi M, Procacci P, Scettino V 2001. J. Phys. Chem. B 105:7835.
216. Ghosh T, Garde S, Garc´ia AE. 2001 (in press). J. Chem. Phys. xxx:yyy
217. Pratt LR, Chandler D. 1980. J. Chem. Phys. 73:3434

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

29

218. Pratt LR. 1985. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 36:433
219. Hummer G. 2001. J. Chem. Phys. 114: 7330
220. Jorgensen WL. 1982. J. Chem. Phys. 77:5757
221. Rosenberg RO, Mikkilineni R, Berne BJ. 1982. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104:7647
222. Jorgensen WL, Buckner 1987. JK, J. Phys. Chem. 91: 6083
223. Tobias DJ, Brooks CL. 1990. J. Chem. Phys. 92:2582
224. Wallqvist A, Covell DG. 1995. J. Phys. Chem. 99:13118
225. Garde S, Hummer G, Paulaitis ME. 1996. Faraday Disc. 103:125
226. Ashbaugh HS, Kaler EW, Paulaitis ME. 1998. Biophys. J. 75:755
227. Hummer G. 1999. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121:6299–6305
228. Borodin O, Bedrov D, Smith GD. 2001. Macromol. 34:5687–5693
229. Akasaka K, Li H. 2001. Biochem. 40:8665
230. Kauzmann W. 1987. Nature 325:763–764
231. Wallqvist A. 1992. J. Chem. Phys. 96:1655
232. Richards FM. 1991. Sci. Am. 264:54
233. Wallqvist A, Berne BJ. 1995. J. Phys. Chem. 99:2893
234. Lum K, Chandler D, Weeks JD. 1999. J. Phys. Chem. B 103:4570
235. Huang DM, Geissler P, Chandler D. 2001. J. Phys. Chem. B 105:6704
236. Huang DM, Chandler D. 2000. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 97:8324
237. Huang DM, Chandler D. 2000. Phys. Rev. E 61:1501
238. Sun SX. 2001. Phys. Rev. E 64:1512
239. Rein ten Wolde P, Sun SX, Chandler D. 2001. Model of a ﬂuid at small and large length

scales and the hydrophobic eﬀect, private communication

240. M¨uller E, Gubbins K. 1998. Carbon 36:1433
241. Huang DM, Chandler D. 2001. The hydrophobic eﬀect and the inﬂuence of solute-solvent

attractions, private communication

242. Brovchenko I, Paschek, D, Geiger A, J. Chem. Phys. 113:5026 2000.
243. Wallqvist A, Gallicchio E, Levy RM. 2001. J. Phys. Chem. B 105:6745
244. Brovchenko I, Geiger A, Oleinikova A. 2001. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 3:1567
245. Hummer G, Rasaiah JC, Noworyta J. 2001. Water conduction through a hydrophobic chan-

nel of a carbon nanotube, private communication

30

FIGURE LEGENDS

Lawrence R. Pratt

1
ρ

∂ρ
∂p

Figure 1 The isothermal compressibilities βT ≡ −

along the liquid-
vapor coexistence curve of several organic solvents compared to water(144)
in common units. From top to bottom are n-heptane, carbon tetrachloride,
benzene, and water. The compressibility is smaller for water than for these
organic solvents, is less strongly temperature dependent, and has a mini-
mum near 46◦ C. The critical temperatures of these organic solvents are all
substantially less than the critical temperature of liquid water.

(cid:17) (cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

T

Figure 2 Distribution ˆpn for a isodiameter hard sphere solute in a hard sphere
ﬂuid at density ρd3=0.8 and various models. The dots are simulation re-
sults(23) and the spread indicates a 67% conﬁdence interval. The upper
dashed curve is the Poisson distribution with the required mean hni0 =
4πρd3/3. The long-dashed curve next down is the primitive quasi-chemical
model, Eq. 9(23). The solid line is an ‘iterated’ quasi-chemical theory that
incorporates an empirical correlation correction(23) and provides a simple
accurate description of these quantities for the hard sphere ﬂuid. Note that
the primitive quasi-chemical approximation is a good description of this
distribution for n≥1 but signiﬁcantly overestimates p0 at these densities.

Hydrophobic Eﬀects

31

b 

T (bar-1)

0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140

T ( C)

0.0005

0.0003

0.0002

0.0001

ln

^p
n

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Figure 1:

Figure 2:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

n

