Simulations of binary hard-sphere crystal-melt interfaces: interface

between a one-component fcc crystal and a binary ﬂuid mixture

Rachel Sibug-Aga and Brian B. Laird1

Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA

(Dated: November 13, 2013)

Abstract

The crystal-melt interfaces of a binary hard-sphere ﬂuid mixture in coexistence with a single-component

hard-sphere crystal is investigated using molecular-dynamics simulation. In the system under study, the

ﬂuid phase consists of a two-component mixture of hard spheres of diﬀering size, with a size ratio α = 0.414.

At low pressures this ﬂuid coexists with a pure fcc crystal of the larger particles in which the small particles

are immiscible. For two interfacial orientations, [100] and [111], the structure and dynamics within the

interfacial region is studied and compared with previous simulations on single component hard-sphere

interfaces. Among a variety of novel properties, it is observed that as the interface is traversed from ﬂuid

to crystal the diﬀusion constant of the larger particle vanishes before that of the small particle deﬁning a

region of the interface where the large particles are frozen in their crystal lattice, but the small particles

exhibit signiﬁcant mobility. This behavior was not seen in previous binary hard-sphere interface simulations

with less asymmetric diameters.

2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

A fundamental understanding of the nucleation, growth kinetics and morphology of crystals

grown from the melt requires a detailed microscopic description of the crystal-melt interface2,3,4,5.

However, such interfaces are very diﬃcult to probe experimentally and reliable experimental data,

especially for structure and transport properties, is rare. It is then not surprising that computer

simulations have, in recent years, played a leading role in the determination of the microscopic

structure, dynamics and thermodynamics of such systems6.

To date, the vast majority of simulation studies have focused on single component interfacial

systems. Such studies range from simple model systems such as hard spheres6,7,8,9 or Lennard-

Jones10,11 to more “realistic” systems, such as water12,13,14, silicon15,16 or simple metals17,18.

In

contrast, there have been but few studies on multicomponent systems19,20, in spite of the fact that

most materials of technological interest are mixtures (for example, doped semiconductors, alloys

and intermetallic compounds).

In such systems, the crystal and coexisting ﬂuid have diﬀering

composition, in general, and the change in concentration as one traverses the interface from one

bulk phase into the other becomes an object of study.

Of particular interest to materials scientists is the degree of interfacial segregation - the prefer-

ential adsorption of one component (usually the “solute”) at the interface. In addition, the phase

diagrams for multi-component systems are signiﬁcantly more varied and complex than single com-

ponent systems due to the additional dimension of concentration. For a binary system several types

of solid-liquid equilibria are possible. If the two types of particles are similar, then one typically has

coexistence between a binary ﬂuid and a substitutionaly disordered solid of similar structure to that

of the pure components. However, if the two types of particles are substantially diﬀerent in nature,

then generally the binary ﬂuid will either be immiscible in the pure coexisting solid, or will coexist

with one or more ordered crystal mixtures (e.g.

intermetallic compounds). Previous simulation

studies on binary crystal-melt interfaces have exclusively focused on the former case, namely the

equilibrium between the ﬂuid and a disordered crystal. Davidchack and Laird19 recently reported

results for a binary hard sphere system in which a substitutionally disordered face-centered-cubic

2

(fcc) crystal coexists with a binary ﬂuid mixture. In a related study, Hoyt et al. examined the

crystal-melt interface of a Cu/Ni mixture18. In both studies the degree of solute segregation was

found to be negligible.

In the two studies above, the disordered fcc crystal was stabilized by the fact that the two

components were quite similar in size -for example, in the hard-sphere system studied by Davidchack

and Laird, the diameters of the two types of spheres making up the system diﬀered only by 10%. In

this work, we extend the previous studies to hard-sphere mixtures with signiﬁcant size asymmetry.

For such systems, in which the diameters diﬀer by more than about 85%, the disordered fcc phase

is no longer stable and only coexistence of the ﬂuid with ordered crystal structures is possible. In

this work we examine the interface between a binary hard-sphere ﬂuid mixture and a coexisting fcc

crystal in which the small particle is immiscible.

Our system of choice is a binary hard-sphere mixture in which the ratio of the smaller particle

diameter to that of the larger particle is 0.414. Hard spheres are an important reference system

for the crystal-melt interfaces of simple systems since the structure, dynamics and phase behavior

of dense atomic systems are dominated by packing considerations with only minor inﬂuence from

the attractive parts of the interactions. For example, it has been recently demonstrated21 that the

interfacial free energy of close-packed metals can be quantitatively described using a purely hard

sphere model. The speciﬁc diameter ratio of 0.414 was chosen because, to perform an interface

simulation, accurate phase coexistence parameters are required a priori, and the phase diagram for

this binary system has been worked out via simulation in some detail22. This phase diagram shows

that at low pressures the ﬂuid mixture coexists with a pure fcc crystal of the larger particles, but

that at higher pressures the crystal structure in equilibrium with the ﬂuid is a 1:1 (or AB) “inter-

metallic” compound with an “NaCl” structure (the small and large particles form interpenetrating

fcc lattices).

(The existence of the “NaCl” structure at this diameter ratio had been predicted

earlier, using cell theory23. The diameter ratio, α = 0.414 is necessary for an “NaCl” structure to

attain its maximum packing fraction of 0.793.) Thus, this system allows us to study the interfaces

between binary ﬂuids and two types of ordered crystal phases: single component and “NaCl”. In

3

this work we present results for the former, but simulations on the ﬂuid/“NaCl” are under way and

will be reported later.

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM

We consider a two-component system consisting of hard spheres of diﬀering diameters, given by

σA and σB. Without loss of generality, it is assumed that σA ≥ σB. The interaction between two

particles of type i and j, (i, j ∈ {A, B}), respectively, is then given by

φij(r) = 


∞ ,

r ≤ σij

0

,

r > σij

,

where r is the distance between the centers of the two interacting spheres, and σij is the distance of



closest possible approach. In addition, we deﬁne the spheres to be additive, that is, σij = (σi+σj)/2.

The state of the system is then completely described by specifying the total density, ρ = ρA + ρB =

N/V , the mole fraction, xA, of the larger species, and the diameter ratio α = σB/σA. Note that so

deﬁned one has α ∈ (0, 1). In a single component system composed of hard spheres of diameter σ

the packing fraction, η (the fraction of the total volume occupied by the spheres) is given by,

where ρ is bulk density. For the binary hard sphere system described above the packing fraction is

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

As mentioned in the introduction we are interested in the present study in the interface between

an fcc crystal consisting of pure large (type A) spheres and its coexisting binary ﬂuid at a diameter

ratio, α = 0.414. The pressure-composition phase diagram for a binary hard sphere system with

this diameter ratio has been previously determined by Trizac and coworkers22 and is shown in Fig. 1.

η =

ρσ3,

π
6

=

η = ηA + ηB
π
xAσ3
6
h
πσ3
A
6

=

ρ

A + xBσ3
B

i

ρ[xA + (1 − xA)α3] .

4

For this study we have chosen the point in the phase diagram where a ﬂuid mixture with a

1:1 composition (that is, xA = 0.50) coexists with a crystal phase that is an fcc composed of only

large particles. We independently calculated the coexistence conditions for this point in the phase

diagram and we determine the coexisting pressure to be P = 20.1σ3

A/kT , with packing fractions for

the crystal and ﬂuid calculated to be ηc = 0.61 and ηf = 0.51, respectively.

III. CALCULATION OF INTERFACIAL PROFILES

To monitor changes in the structural or dynamical properties across the interface, the system is

divided into bins along the z-axis, deﬁned as that perpendicular to the interfacial plane. Quantities

of interest are then calculated for each bin generating a z-dependent interfacial proﬁle for the

speciﬁc property (density, concentration, diﬀusion, etc.) being measured. The techniques of proﬁle

generation and analysis are similar to those used earlier in the works of Davidchack and Laird on

the single24 and binary hard-sphere systems (with α = 0.9)19. In this section these techniques are

summarized, with particular attention to the present calculation. The reader is urged to consult

the earlier papers if more detail is required.

In our analysis of the simulations, we employ bins of two diﬀerent resolutions: a coarse scale

and a ﬁne scale. Coarse scale bins have a width equal to the layer spacing of the bulk crystal. This

spacing is 0.753σA for [100] and 0.870σA for [111]. The ﬁne scale is 1/25 of the coarse scale. Fine

scale bins reveal in greater detail parameter variations across the interface, but the coarse scale is

more useful for observing overall trends in the interfacial proﬁles. Also for some parameters, such

as the diﬀusion constant, only the coarse scale can be used if one is to achieve meaningful statistical

accuracy. For interfacial proﬁles that exhibit oscillations on the order of the lattice spacing, such

as density, the conversion between the ﬁne-scale proﬁles and coarse-scale proﬁles to illustrate bulk

trends is problematic, since the distance between the peaks of such proﬁles is not necessarily constant

through the interface. The mismatch between the coarse-scale bins and the peak spacing can lead

to spurious results24 if one simply averages over the ﬁne scaled bins to create the coarse scaled

proﬁle. For such proﬁles we employ a Finite Impulse Response ﬁltering procedure25 to average out

5

the oscillations and reveal coarse-grained trends. Details of the speciﬁc ﬁltering procedure we use

can be found in Ref. 24.

Below is a description on how the various interfacial properties were determined. In the def-

initions, the size of the bin is denoted by ∆z and Lx, Ly and Lz are the the dimensions of the

simulation box in the x, y and z directions, respectively.

• Pressure: The total pressure proﬁle is deﬁned as

wherePkk is calculated from

P (z) =

{Pxx(z) + Pyy(z) + Pzz(z)} ,

1
3

Pkk
kBT

= ρ(z) +

3m
2LxLy∆z∆t< Ek >

k ∆v(c)
r(c)
k ,

Nc

Xc=1

(6)

(7)

where c indexes the collisions, m is the mass of each sphere,< Ek >is the average kinetic

energy per sphere, Nc is the number of collisions that occurred over the time interval ∆t in

the region between z − ∆z and z + ∆z, r(c)
k
between the two colliding spheres and ∆v(c)
k

is the kth component of the relative distance

is the kth component of the change in velocity

for collision c. The ﬁrst term in Eq. 7 represents the ideal gas pressure and the second term

is the excess part due to sphere interactions.

• Excess Stress Proﬁles: The local excess stress is calculated from the pressure tensor compo-

nents.

S(z) = Pzz(z) −

{Pxx(z) + Pyy(z)}

(8)

1
2

In a simulation of an equilibrium interfacial system this quantity should be zero, except in

a small region at the interface.

Improper preparation or equilibration of the system often

manifests itself in the excess of this quantity in the bulk crystal away from the interface. As

such this quantity is carefully monitored as a measure of the quality of the simulation. To

smooth out the large oscillations in this quantity through the interface, the proﬁle is ﬁltered

to easily reveal overall trends.

(The local excess stress can be integrated with respect to

z to give the surface excess stress. For a liquid-vapor interface the surface excess stress is

6

identical to the interfacial free energy, but since the relaxation time for stress in a crystal is

generally much longer than a typical simulation time, the surface excess stress and γsl can be

signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for crystal-melt interfaces3.)

• Density Proﬁles and Contour Plots: The ﬁne-scale density proﬁle for a sphere of type i is

determined from the number density of that type particle in each ﬁne-scale bin.

ρi(z) =

<Ni(z)>
LxLy∆z

(9)

where <Ni(z)> is the average number of spheres of type i in the region between z − ∆z/2

and z + ∆z/2. To observe overall trends in bulk density (or concentration) changes we also

produce ﬁltered density proﬁles using our FIR ﬁltering procedure discussed above.

In addition to the z dependent density proﬁles, it is also useful to examine the density varia-

tions within the x-y planes parallel to the interfacial plane. To do this we divide the system

into orthorhombic subcells with a width in the z direction equal to the coarse bin spacing

and x and y dimensions of 0.15σA. By counting the average number of particles of each type

in each subcell and dividing by the subcell volume we can produce 2d contour plots of the

cross-sectional density variation within each interfacial plane.

• Interface location: We determined the location of the interface from the orientational order

parameter proﬁle.

where n is an integer, i, j and k are nearest neighbor atoms, θxy(i, j, k) is the bond angle

qn(z) =

cos {nθxy(i, j, k)}

+

1
Nz

*

Xi,j,k

(10)

formed by i, j and k projected on the x, y plane, and Nz is the total number of atoms that

form bond angles. The average is taken over the number of angles found between z − ∆z/2

and z + ∆z/2. The interface in the [100] orientation is the point along the z-axis where q4(q6

for the [111]) is the arithmetic mean of the bulk crystal and liquid values. For comparison, the

position of the Gibbs dividing surface3 is also calculated. We determine the Gibbs dividing

surface as the plane along the z-axis such that for the ’solute’ i, Γi = 0 in the equation

N i/A = ρi

Sz + ρi

L(Lz − z) + Γi

(11)

7

where N i the total number of spheres of type i, A is the area of the interface, ρi

S and ρi

L are

the bulk densities, z is the location of the interface assuming the length of the simulation box

runs from 0 to Lz and Γi is the excess particle per unit area of the interface.

• Diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁle: To study the dynamics across the interface, the diﬀusion

coeﬃcient proﬁle is calculated. For a particle of type i, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is deﬁned as

follows

Di(z) =

1
6Ni(z)

d
dt

Ni(z)

Xj=1 D

rj(t) − rj(t0)2

E

(12)

The term in the summation is the mean squared displacement over a time interval t − t0 of a

total of Ni type i spheres located between z − ∆z/2 and z + ∆z/2 at time t0.

IV. CONSTRUCTION AND EQUILIBRATION OF INTERFACE

Initially, blocks of crystal and ﬂuid spheres at the calculated coexistence packing fractions and

concentrations were prepared separately. As a reference, the z-axis is taken to be perpendicular

to the interface. The x-y planes for both blocks had the same dimensions so that they would ﬁt

perfectly when put together to construct the interface. The plane perpendicular to the interface

is made as close to square as possible given the geometric constraints of the speciﬁc interfacial

orientation under study. This is trivial to achieve with the [100] orientation but for [111], the x

and y lengths can only be made approximately equal. The lengths along z were made longer than

both those in x and y so that bulk properties will be observed between the two interfaces formed.

Periodic boundary conditions are applied in all directions, which results in the two independent

crystal-melt interfaces formed along z. The similarity of the two interfaces is an important monitor

on the quality of the simulation. Obviously, if statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in structure or

dynamics exist between the two interfaces, then the system has not been properly equilibrated.

The crystal block with [100] orientation was set up with 7776 large spheres. It consisted of 48

crystal layers, each layer having 162 spheres. Using the coexistence packing fraction ηc = 0.61,

the following dimensions for the [100] crystal block were used: Lx = 13.56σA, Ly = 13.56σA and

8

Lz = 36.15σA. Its coexisting ﬂuid had 7776 large spheres and 7776 small spheres (15552 spheres

total). The block length is Lz = 43.78σA. For reasons that will be explained later, this Lz gives a

packing fraction that is slightly higher than that obtained from the calculated coexistence conditions.

For the simulation of the [111] interface, the crystal block used contained 8190 large spheres, with 45

layers in the z direction giving 182 spheres per layer. The crystal block dimensions are Lx = 13.85σA,

Ly = 12.91σA and Lz = 39.13σA. The total number of ﬂuid spheres used was also 15552 as in that

for the [100] simulation with Lz = 45.09σA, again, giving a packing fraction slightly higher than

that predicted for coexistence. Thus the total number of particles in the interface simulations are

23328 and 23742 for the [100] and [111] interfacial orientations, respectively.

Both crystal and ﬂuid blocks are equilibrated separately. The two blocks are then put together

but a gap equal to σA is left between each of the two crystal-melt interfaces formed to ensure that

no initial overlap will occur at the interfaces. The molecular dynamics simulation is then started

with only the ﬂuid spheres allowed to move (the crystal spheres remain ﬁxed). The ﬂuid then ﬁlls

the gaps. To compensate for the decrease in the overall bulk density of the ﬂuid phase during this

step, the ﬂuid blocks are prepared at a packing fraction that is slightly higher than the predicted

coexistence values (as mentioned earlier). In the next step, the crystal is equilibrated with the ﬂuid

spheres held ﬁxed. At this point the interface setup is complete and an equilibration run is started

with all spheres moving and with initial velocities assigned according to a Maxwell distribution. In

order to eﬃciently carry out the molecular dynamics simulation of such a large system we use the

cell method of Rappaport26.

The stability of a crystal-melt interface in a simulation is extremely sensitive to the assumed

coexistence conditions. In our previous work19,24, it was found that the predetermined coexistence

conditions generally had to be modiﬁed slightly in order to create a stationary interface with a zero

excess stress in the bulk crystal region. This is necessary because a) the coexistence conditions are

often not known a priori to the accuracy required for interface stability and b) the presence of the

interface in a ﬁnite simulation can shift the coexistence equilibrium slightly. During our preliminary

runs for the current system, using the coexistence conditions as calculated by thermodynamic

9

integration of the free energies of separate bulk phases, we found that the resulting interface was

stable, but yielded a bulk crystal with negative excess stress. Through experimentation, we found

that an equilibrium interface with zero crystal excess stress was possible if the initial ﬂuid packing

fraction was increased to ηf = 0.52. This had the eﬀect of changing the concentration equilibrium

slightly away from a 1:1 mixture in the ﬂuid, as discussed below. Now it is in principle possible

to vary both the initial ﬂuid concentration and packing fraction so that the ﬁnal equilibrium gives

precisely a 1:1 ﬂuid mixture, however this procedure is quite tedious and since our choice of the

1:1 ﬂuid at coexistence was arbitrary, the fact that the actual system deviates slightly from this

concentration is not important for the purposes of the current study.

To ensure that the system is indeed in equilibrium and that the bulk crystal is free of excess

stress, we monitor a variety of properties such as total pressure, bulk crystal stress, ﬂuid bulk

densities and interfacial location. The results for the [100] interface are shown in Fig. 2, which

shows that prior to equilibration at about t∗ ≡ t(kT /mσ2

A)1/2 = 10000 the crystal grows by about

3 crystal lattice planes (see Fig. 2d), accompanied by a pressure drop from 20.6 to its equilibrium

value of 20.1 σ3

A/kBT (Fig. 2a). In addition, the average excess stress in the bulk crystal, initially

positive, goes to zero (within ﬂucuations) when equilibrium is reached (Fig. 2b). (This average

excess stress was calculated by averaging S as deﬁned above over the middle 28 layers of the bulk

crystal.)

Initially, the bulk densities of both particle types in the ﬂuid are equal, but as the system

equilibrates, the bulk density of the small particles increases. This increase is due to the growth of

the crystal (see Fig. 2d). Large ﬂuid particles near the crystal freeze, expelling the small particles,

which are immiscible in the crystal at this pressure, into the bulk ﬂuid region. Although the bulk

ﬂuid initially has a large sphere mole fraction of XA = 0.50, the value at equilibrium is somewhat

lower (0.46 and 0.47 for the [100]and [111] interfaces, respectively). The equilibrium packing fraction

of the bulk ﬂuid slightly reduced from its initial value of ηf = 0.52 to 0.51. Once the system is

in equilibrium, the interfacial positions are stable and the ﬂuctuation in position is less within one

layer spacing.

10

In the preparation of the [100] interface some small particles became trapped within some of

the interior crystal layers as the crystal grew during equilibration. Since these were in regions

where the diﬀusion constant for the small (and large) particles was found to be zero, it cannot be

determined whether these particles would actually be present in a true equilibrium interface. In

order to determine the importance of these interstitial small particles in stabilizing the interface,

we removed the particles (about 77 total) from the inner 3 crystal layers where they were found.

The removal was done at t∗ = 8000 in the equilibration run. Initially the crystal stress became

negative, but quickly returned to zero (within ﬂuctuations) as small particles from the bulk diﬀused

in to reoccupy the removed layer closest to the interface (this layer corresponds to layer B in

Fig. 5, discussed in the next section). The inner two layers did not ﬁll in. The interfacial position

remained stable during this process. The question of true chemical equilibrium is always a tricky

one in these types of interface simulations19 due to the extremely slow relaxation of concentration

in the deeper crystal layers. However, in this region the concentration of small particles is in any

event probably quite small and should not aﬀect our results signiﬁcantly (except for perhaps the

interfacial segregation). As a possible check to this procedure, one could use the Widom insertion

method27 to determine the excess chemical potential, and thus the solubility, of the small particles

in the various inner crystal layers, but this was not done here.

The total length of the averaging run after equilibration was t∗ = 4000, which was divided into

40 separate blocks of length t∗ = 100 (corresponds to about 1800 collisions per particle(cpp)),over

which the interfacial proﬁles were averaged. Since the system contains two interfaces, each block

average yields two independent proﬁles (when properly folded about the center of the crystal) Thus,

each of the proﬁles reported here represents an average of 80 block averages.

It is important to compare the two independent interfaces produced in a single interface simula-

tion to ensure that they are statistically identical. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the two interfaces

are indications of problems with the equilibration procedure. As a diagnostic we determine the

excess stress proﬁle (calculated on the ﬁne scale and ﬁltered using the FIR ﬁlter described above

and in Ref. 24). These ﬁltered stress proﬁles are shown in Fig. 3 for both the [100] and [111] orien-

11

tations - note that, the crystal is in the middle of the simulation box. The proﬁles are remarkably

symmetric and also show that the excess stress is zero within ﬂuctuations in the bulk crystal region.

It should be noted that in contrast to the case for a liquid-vapor interface, the interfacial free energy

of a crystal melt interface cannot be determined from the integral of the excess stress proﬁle, as the

relaxation time for stress in the crystal is signiﬁcantly longer than possible simulation times3, and

must be determined by other means, such as the recently developed cleaving wall method9. The

excess stress proﬁles shown in Fig. 3 show a signiﬁcant negative stress region on the crystal side

of the interface, indicating that in this region the transverse pressure components are greater than

the pressure component normal to the interfacial plane. The precise origin of this unrelaxed crystal

stress at the interface is as yet unknown.

As mentioned above, the position of the interface is determined as the value of z at which the

orientational order parameter for the large spheres is the arithmetic mean of that quantity in the two

bulk phases. This quantity is a useful measure of interfacial location as it is monotonic as a function

of z (so that using the arithmetic mean makes sense) and can be calculated as smooth function

without large ﬂuctuations using relatively short simulation runs. Orientational order parameters q4

and q6, as deﬁned by Eqn. 10, were determined for each particle type. These are shown in Fig. 4.

Since the crystal phase is made up of pure large spheres and we want to see how the ordering of

particles is changed from bulk crystal to bulk liquid, we determined the interface location from the

parameters calculated for large spheres. We also show q4 and q6 for the small particles and we see

that at the interfacial region, the small spheres start developing some order that is similar to the

large spheres.

A. Structure

V. RESULTS FOR THE [100] AND [111] INTERFACES

The ﬁne scale density proﬁles for the [100] and [111] interfaces are shown in the upper panels

of Figures 5 and 6, respectively. Shown in the lower panels are the corresponding ﬁltered proﬁles

12

(including the total density proﬁle). The distance along the z-axis (in units of the large particle

diameter, σA) is measured relative to the interface center, deﬁned as discussed above by the orien-

tational order proﬁles. The vertical dotted lines are equally spaced and constructed to correspond

with the density minima in between the bulk crystal layers.

In both ﬁgures, speciﬁc interfacial

layers are labeled alphabetically for later reference - layers A and G correspond to bulk crystal and

liquid, respectively, and layers B-F lie within the interfacial region.

The density proﬁles for the large particles resemble strongly those for the single component hard

sphere interface24 with the periodic oscillations of the bulk crystal transforming to the uniform

density of the ﬂuid over about 7-9 lattice layers as the interface is traversed along the z-axis. The

new feature seen in the present simulation is the decay of the small particle density over a similar

distance into the bulk crystal, in which the small particle are immiscible. As the small particle

density decreases into the crystal, it develops oscillations with a wavelength closely matching that

of the crystal lattice spacing. For the [100] interface, the oscillations in the small particle density,

ρB(z) line up in phase with those of the large particle density,ρA(z); whereas, in the [111] interface

the oscillations are out of phase - the peaks of ρB(z) correspond to minima of ρA(z). Analysis of

the atomic positions indicate that this diﬀerence is due to the fact that in the interfacial region

the small particles occupy interstitial sites of the large particle fcc lattice - corresponding to the

positions that would be occupied in an NaCl structure. These preferred positions lie in the [100]

plane, but lie between the [111] planes of the bulk fcc lattice. Recall that the NaCl structure is

the stable structure for this system at high pressure, so this eﬀect is reminiscent of premelting

transitions at solid/vapor interfaces below the bulk melting point, in that the presence of a nearby

triple point (in this case the fcc/NaCl/ﬂuid triple point) manifests itself in the presence of the

metastable phase (NaCl) at the interface between the two coexisting phases (fcc and ﬂuid).

As in the single component hard-sphere system24, the spacings between the density peaks exhibit

some variation across the interface - especially for the [100] orientation. For each interface, the peak

spacing was measured by determining the distance between density peaks in the ﬁne scale proﬁles.

The resulting peak spacings as functions of z are shown in Fig. 7. For the large particles the

13

dependence of the spacing on interfacial orientation and z is identical to that seen in the single

component simulations24. The spacing for the [100] lattice increases by nearly 20% from the bulk

crystal value of 0.76σA to the limiting value of about 0.9σA as the bulk ﬂuid is approached. The

spacing for the large particles in the [111] interface has the same bulk liquid limiting value, but

since the bulk crystal spacing is very close to this limiting value, the variation in spacing across the

interface is quite small. The changes in peak spacing for the small particles are quite diﬀerent for

the diﬀerent orientations and loosely follow those of the large particle - in [100] the small and large

particle curves have very similar shape, but are shifted by about σA.

It is useful to compare these results directly with the single component case24. In Fig. 8 we plot

(upper panel) the ﬁne scale density proﬁles for the [100] orientation of both the single component

and binary interfaces. The single component data was shifted slightly along z to make the liquid

peaks commensurate. From this plot one sees that the presence of the small particles has negligble

eﬀect on the coexisting liquid density and structure; however, the higher pressure for the binary

coexistence does give a crystal phase with a higher density (the peaks are more closely spaced and

more localized). The close similarity to the single component system indicates that the structure

for the large particles is changed very little due to the presence of the smaller ones - except for the

higher density of the crystal. In the lower panel of Fig. 8 is shown the peak spacing for the [100]

single component and binary interfaces - scaled and shifted so that the curves go from zero in the

crystal to unity in the ﬂuid. The curves for the large particles are qualitatively similar, but the

change in the single component case is less abrupt than that of the binary system.

A convenient measure of the width of the interfacial region is the so-called 10-90 width deﬁned

as the distance over which an interfacial proﬁle changes from 10% to 90% of the higher of the two

coexisting bulk values relative to the lower bulk value. Such a deﬁnition is only useful for those

interfacial proﬁles which are monotonic across the interface, such as a coarse-grained (ﬁltered)

density or diﬀusion constants. For the ﬁltered large particle densities the 10-90 widths are 2.6σA

for the [100] and 2.4σA for the [111] - these are lower by about 0.8σA than those found for the

single component system24 which were about 3.3σ for the two interfaces. From the small particle

14

densities, the widths are larger at 3.4σA and 3.2σA for the [100] and [111] orientations, respectively,

The 10-90 region deﬁned by the large particles is within that deﬁned by the small particles. The

larger 10-90 width of the small particle ﬁltered density is due to the ability of the small particles

to penetrate into the ﬁrst few crystal lattice layers.

To get a more detailed picture of the transition from crystal-like to ﬂuid-like structure as the

interface is traversed it is useful to examine the density distributions within x-y cross-sectional

planes parallel to the interface.

(The reported distributions are averages taken over 1800 cpp -

details of their calculation can be found in the previous section.) Figures 9 and 10 respectively

show the x-y large and small particle density distributions for the [100] interface orientation as

greyscale contour plots. The layer labels A-G correspond to those shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 9 shows

that this transition from crystal to ﬂuid occurs over about three layers (C,D and E) for the [100]

interface and that these transition layers are not uniform, but consist of coexisting solid- and liquid-

like regions, as was seen in the single-component simulations24. Layer B, although fully crystalline,

does possess two vacancy defects at points (−3.3, −3.0) and (−1.0, 5.3). The [100] contour plots

for the small particle density are quite interesting. There is considerable density in layer B where

the small particles are present in two types of positions - in the ’NaCl’ interstitial positions and

in the positions corresponding to the vacancies of the large particle crystal lattice found in layer

B. The interstitial positions are occupied by single small particles, but each vacancy is ﬁlled with

several small particles. In the single component simulations24 vacancy nucleation at the interface

was also seen, in that case the vacancies once formed were highly mobile, migrating into the bulk

via a hopping mechanism. In the present simulations, however, once the vacancies are formed in

the large particle lattice, they are quickly ﬁlled with some number of small particles, which appears

to immobilize the defect by suppressing the hopping mechanism - however the evidence for this is

anecdotal, as the number of such vacancies is too small to gather meaningful statistics.

To estimate the degree of interfacial segregation, the Gibbs dividing surface for both interfacial

orientations was determined according to Eq. 11 and found it to be close to the interface location

determined from the orientational order parameters. The surface is at z = −0.5σA for [100] and

15

at z = −0.9σA for [111]. At these dividing surfaces, the excess density of solute (here deﬁned as

component B) was found to be negligible - indicating minimal interfacial segregation. Of course, for

such interfacial simulations, the question of complete chemical equilibrium is generally problematic,

as discussed in the previous section; however, we are conﬁdent that the concentrations of each

particle type from interfacial layer B out to the bulk ﬂuid are in chemical equilibrium (since diﬀusion

is non-negligible there) and that the equilibrium concentrations of small particles in layers deeper

into the crystal are probably quite small and will not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results presented here.

B. Dynamics

12(a), respectively.

We study the dynamics across the interface by measuring diﬀusion coeﬃcients in the coarse-

scaled bins. The diﬀusion proﬁles for the [100] and [111] interfaces are shown in Figures 11(a) and

The limiting bulk diﬀusion coeﬃcient is 0.012(kBT σ2

A/m)1/2

for the large spheres and

0.050(kBT σ2

A/m)1/2 for the small particles, independent of the crystal orientation, as expected.

When the three Cartesian components of the total diﬀusion coeﬃcient are separately determined,

it is found that diﬀusion is isotropic throughout the interfacial region.

The larger value of the small particle diﬀusion constant makes it diﬃcult to compare the diﬀusion

constants of the two components so we also plot for each, the ratio diﬀusion constant to the average

ﬂuid bulk value in Figures 11(b) and 12(b). Here we ﬁnd the interesting result that the two curves

(for both crystal orientations) are similar in shape, but shifted relative to one another by more

than 1σA. As the interface is traversed from ﬂuid to crystal, the diﬀusion constant for the large

particle goes eﬀectively to zero near z = 0, but the small particles still have signiﬁcant mobility. In

this region, the large particles have become “locked in” to their crystal lattice sites, but the small

particles can still move about - primarily by hopping between interstitial sites.

The 10-90 widths from the diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁles for both orientation and particle types

are about 3σA. But because the diﬀusion proﬁles are shifted, the 10-90 widths do not deﬁne the

same region. If contributions from both particle types are considered, the widths are 4.5σA for the

16

[100] and 3.9σA for the [111] interface. The center of these interfacial regions are shifted by about

1σA to the ﬂuid side compared to the interfacial regions deﬁned by the density proﬁles. To illustrate

this more clearly, we show in Fig. 13 all of the order parameter proﬁles (orientation, diﬀusion and

density) for the [100] interface, scaled in such a way that they go from unity in the crystal phase

to zero in the liquid (for example for the diﬀusion constants we plot 1 − D(z)/Df ).

The 10-90 regions for the diﬀusion constants are oﬀset (toward the liquid side) from those for

the ﬁltered density proﬁles so the interfacial region is wider than any single structural or dynamical

quantity would indicate. If one considers the interfacial region as the union of the 10-90 regions for

the separate proﬁles, then the width of the interfacial region is 4.8σA, greater than that calculated

from densities or diﬀusion coeﬃcients alone.

VI. SUMMARY

We have performed a series of molecular-dynamics simulations to study the crystal-melt inter-

face of a binary hard-sphere system with diameter ratio 0.414. Previous simulation studies on

two-component crystal-melt interfaces have focused on equilibrium between a ﬂuid mixture and a

substitutionally disordered crystal19,20, but here we have examined the interface between a ﬂuid

mixture (approximately equimolar in concentration) and a coexisting single-component fcc crystal

comprised of large particles - in which the small particles are immiscible. Such a coexistence occurs

at relatively low pressures in the phase diagram for this diameter ratio - at higher pressures the

ﬂuid coexists with a 1:1 ordered crystal with an ‘NaCl’ structure. At a pressure of P = 20.1σ3

A/kT

the two phases coexist at the following packing fractions: ηc = 0.61 and ηf = 0.51.

Some of the principal results of this study are as follows:

• The interfacial density proﬁles of the large particles is very similar to that of the single-

component hard-sphere system previously studied24, indicating that the presence of the small

particle has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the interfacial structure of the large particle, except for

a compression of the crystal lattice due to the higher pressure. In particular the variation of

the spacing between the large particle density peaks is very similar to that found in the single

17

component studies.

• Within the regions of the interface in which the large particles are largely conﬁned to fcc lattice

sites, the small particles occupy either vacancy sites in the fcc lattice or ‘NaCl’ interstitial

sites. The interstitial sites are single occupied whereas the vacancy sites are found to be

occupied by several small particles. The presence of the small particles greatly suppresses

the mobility of the fcc vacancies relative to those previously noted in single-component hard-

sphere simulations24.

• There does not appear to be signiﬁcant solute (small particle) segregation at the interface.

• The diﬀusion proﬁles of the small and large particles are similar in width (about 3 σA), but

are shifted relative to one another by about 1 σA along the interface normal (z axis). As one

traverses the interface from bulk ﬂuid to bulk crystal, the diﬀusion constant goes to zero for

the large particles in a region in which there is still signiﬁcant small particle mobility. The

picture in this region is of large particles localized at fcc lattice sites, with the small particles

still diﬀusing between interstitial site within the lattice of large particles.

• As was found in previous hard-sphere interface studies19,24 the total width of the interfacial

region is greater than the width determined by any single interfacial proﬁle (such as diﬀusion

or density) as the proﬁles for the individual quantities can be signiﬁcantly shifted from one

another. Speciﬁcally we see that as one moves from the crystal into the ﬂuid the bulk density

relaxes ﬁrst to liquid-like values before signiﬁcant mobility (diﬀusion) is observed. Considering

both structural and dynamic properties, the interfacial (10-90) width is 4.8σA.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We gratefully acknowledge R.L. Davidchack for helpful conversations, as well as the Kansas

Center for Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing for the use of their computer facilities. We also would

like to thank the National Science Foundation for generous support under grant CHE-9500211.

18

REFERENCES

1 Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

2 D. Woodruﬀ, The Solid-Liquid Interface (Cambridge University Press, London, 1973).

3 W. Tiller, The Science of Crystallization: Microscopic Interfacial Phenomena (Cambridge University

Press, New York, 1991).

4 J. Howe, Interfaces in Materials (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997).

5 A. Adamson and A. Gast, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces (Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1997).

6 B. Laird, in Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry, edited by P. Schleyer, N. Allinger, T. Clark,

16 U. Landman, W. Luedtke, R. Barnett, C. Cleveland, M. Ribarsky, E. Arnold, S. Ramesh, H. Baumgart,

P. Kollman, and H. Schaefer (J. Wiley and Sons, New York, 1998).

7 A. Kyrlidis and R. Brown, Phys. Rev. E 51, 5832 (1995).

8 A. Mori, R. Manabe, and K. Nishioka, Phys. Rev. E 51, R3831 (1995).

9 R. Davidchack and B. Laird, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4751 (2000).

10 J. Broughton and G. Gilmer, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 5759 (1986).

11 R. Galejs, H. Raveche, and G. Lie, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2574 (1989).

12 O. Karim and A. Haymet, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 6889 (1988).

13 O. Karim, P. Kay, and A. Haymet, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 4634 (1990).

14 J. Hayward and A. Haymet, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 3713 (2001).

15 F. Abraham and J. Broughton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 734 (1986).

A. Martinez, and B. Khan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 155 (1986).

17 B. Jesson and P. Madden, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 5935 (2001).

18 J. Hoyt, M. Asta, and A. Karma, Phys. Rev. Lett 86, 5530 (2001).

19 R. Davidchack and B. Laird, Mol. Phys. 97, 833 (1999).

20 R. Davidchack and B. Laird, Phys. Rev. E 54, R5905 (1996).

21 B. Laird, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 2889 (2001).

22 E. Trizac, M. D. Eldridge, and P. A. Madden, Mol. Phys. 90, 675 (1997).

23 X. Cottin and P. A. Monson, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 3354 (1995).

24 R. Davidchack and B. Laird, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 9452 (1998).

19

25 W. Press, S. Teukolsky, W. Vetterling, and B. Flannery, Numerical Recipies in Fortran (Cambridge

26 D. C. Rappaport, The Art of Molecular Dynamics Simulation (Cambridge University Press, New York,

University Press, New York, 1992).

1995).

27 D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation (Academic Press, New York, 1996).

20

FIG. 1: Pressure-concentration phase diagram of a binary hard-sphere system with α = 0.414. [Reprinted

from Ref. 22, by permission of the publisher, Taylor and Francis Ltd. (www.tandf.co.uk/journals).] Note

that to make the phase coexistence lines easier to distinguish, the pressure is plotted against x1/3

A and not

xA as in the usual case.

per particle (cpp).

FIG. 2: Time evolution of (a) total pressure of the system, (b) stress in bulk crystal, (c) ﬂuid densities

and (d) location of the interfaces, z0. The time unit (mσ2

A/kBT )1/2 corresponds roughly to 18 collisions

FIG. 3: Filtered excess stress proﬁles for the [100] and [111] interface orientations.

FIG. 4: Orientational order parameters q4 and q6 for the two sphere types and for both interfaces studied.

FIG. 5: Fine-scale (upper panel) and ﬁltered (lower panel) density proﬁles for the [100] orientation. The

solid line and dashed lines are for the larger (A) and smaller (B) particles, respectively. In the lower panel

the dotted line shows the ﬁltered total density.

FIG. 6: Fine-scale (upper panel) and ﬁltered (lower panel) density proﬁles for the [111] orientation. The

solid line and dashed lines are for the larger (A) and smaller (B) particles, respectively. In the lower panel

the dotted line shows the ﬁltered total density.

FIG. 7: Peak spacing as determined from maxima of ﬁne-scale density proﬁles for both interfaces studied.

FIG. 8: Comparison of the binary interface with the previously studied hard-sphere single component

simulation24. The upper panel shows the [100] ﬁne scale density for both interfaces. The single component

data was shifted along the z-axis slightly to maximize the peak overlap in the ﬂuid phase. The lower panel

shows a comparison with the lattice spacing of the [100] interface - for comparison purposes, the data is

scaled and shifted (vertically) so that all curves go from zero in the crystal to unity in the ﬂuid.)

FIG. 9: Cross-sectional (x-y) density distributions of the large spheres for diﬀerent layers of the [100]

interface.

21

FIG. 10: Cross-sectional (x-y) density distributions of the small spheres for diﬀerent layers of the [100]

interface.

FIG. 11: (a) Diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁle for the [100] interface. (b) Scaled diﬀusion coeﬃcients.

FIG. 12: (a) Diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁle for the [111] interface. (b) Scaled diﬀusion coeﬃcients.

FIG. 13: Diﬀusion, orientation and ﬁltered density order parameter proﬁles for the [100] interface - all

scaled such that they go from unity in the crystal to zero in the ﬂuid phase.

22

This figure "figure1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure12.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

This figure "figure13.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0201007v1

