1

2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NUCLEAR SPIN CONVERSION IN

POLYATOMIC MOLECULES

Institute of Automation and Electrometry, Russian Academy of Sciences,

P.L. Chapovsky

630090 Novosibirsk, Russia;

E-mail: chapovsky@iae.nsk.su

L.J.F. Hermans

Huygens Laboratory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands;

E-mail: hermans@molphys.leidenuniv.nl

KEYWORDS:

spin-isomer enrichment, ortho-para conversion, hyperﬁne interactions,

level-

crossing, Zeno eﬀect

ABSTRACT: Except for ortho- and para-H2, very little is known about nuclear spin isomers

(or spin modiﬁcations) of molecules. The main reason is the lack of practical enrichment tech-

niques. Recently a few enrichment methods were developed, which opened up new possibilities

in the ﬁeld. These methods are brieﬂy reviewed. Substantial progress in the ﬁeld has been made

by the introduction of Light-Induced Drift as a gas-phase separation tool. This is illustrated

by extensive data on CH3F, which reveal that the gas-phase ortho-para conversion is governed

by intramolecular mixing of the nuclear spin states. The role of “direct” ortho-para transitions

is shown to be small. Various aspects of the conversion were investigated in detail: pressure

and collision partner dependence, isotope eﬀect, temperature dependence. The most decisive

information on the spin conversion mechanism is derived from the observation of level-crossing

resonances in an electric ﬁeld and the Quantum Zeno eﬀect induced by collisions.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hydrogen spin isomers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

2

Other molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

THEORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Quantum relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ortho-para state mixing in CH3F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

CH3F level structure and theoretical conversion rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

EXPERIMENTAL METHOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spin isomer separation by LID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Relaxation time measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dependence on pressure and collision partner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Isotope eﬀect

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Temperature dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Level-crossing resonances

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Quantum Zeno eﬀect induced by collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

DIRECT ORTHO-PARA TRANSITIONS IN CH3F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Direct conversion on surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Direct conversion by collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

6

6

10

12

14

14

16

17

18

19

19

20

21

23

23

24

CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

1 INTRODUCTION

1.1 Hydrogen spin isomers

At the beginning of the century physicists were puzzled by two seemingly unre-

lated phenomena: the anomalous speciﬁc heat of hydrogen discovered by Eucken

in 1912 [1] and the line intensity alternation in molecular spectra discovered by

Mecke in 1925 [2]. The solution of these two problems was a landmark in the

foundation of quantum mechanics. As was pointed out by Farkas, “it was a real

triumph for theory when in 1929 Bonhoeﬀer and Harteck [3] succeeded in bringing

forward experimental evidence for the existence of the two diﬀerent modiﬁcations

of hydrogen” [4].

Three quarters of a century later, the explanation of these problems looks

2

Nuclear Spin Conversion

3

almost trivial. There are two nuclear spin isomers of H2 which diﬀer by total

spin (I) of the two hydrogen nuclei: I = 1 for ortho hydrogen and I = 0 for para

hydrogen. The symmetry of the molecular wave function upon interchange of

the two protons allows only odd values of rotational angular momentum (J) for

ortho and only even values of J for para. The spin isomers of H2 are extremely

stable, having a conversion time on the order of 1 year at room temperature and

1 atm for pure hydrogen [4].

It is useful to recall the principle of the hydrogen spin isomer separation. A

unique property of hydrogen molecules is their anomalously big rotational level

spacing. The energy gap between the J=0 and J=1 states (ﬁrst para and ortho

states of hydrogen, respectively) is ≃ 170 K. This energy gap is much larger than

the boiling point of liquid hydrogen (20.4 K). The standard method of hydrogen

isomer separation consists of cooling down the gas to 20.4 K in the presence of a

catalyst (like activated charcoal or Fe(OH)3) which speeds up the equilibration.

After equilibrium is reached, 99.8% of the hydrogen molecules are in the lowest

rotational state J=0 which is the para state. After warming up the gas, one has

pure para hydrogen at ambient temperatures because of extremely slow ortho-

para conversion.

The discovery of hydrogen spin isomers triggered extensive investigations into

their physical, chemical and even biological properties. Contrary to the intuitive

feeling that nuclear spins are “deeply hidden” inside the molecule and cannot

be important in practice, they play a decisive role in some practical problems.

The most famous example is the storage of liquid hydrogen, e.g., as a rocket

fuel, where considerable boil-oﬀ is caused by the energy released from ortho-para

conversion. Research on hydrogen spin isomers, over nearly 70 years, has been

reviewed in a few monographs [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and is not considered in this paper.

1.2 Other molecules

The study of molecular spin isomers gave the ﬁrst experimental background for

the concept of nuclear spin (see, e.g., [9]), ﬁnally establishing the general rela-

tion between spin and statistics of identical particles. For molecular physics this

theorem has as a consequence that molecules having identical nuclei in symmet-

rical positions (e.g., H2, NH3, CH4, N2, etc.) occur in nature only in the form

4

Chapovsky & Hermans

of nuclear spin isomers for which selection rules prescribe particular rotational

quantum numbers to particular spin states.

Nuclear spin isomers of molecules other than hydrogen formed a long standing

puzzle. Even 50 years after the discovery of hydrogen spin isomers one could safely

state that “no one has ever produced gaseous samples of any molecules other than

H2 or D2 in which the ratio of the concentrations of the diﬀerent nuclear spin

symmetry species is diﬀerent from the high temperature equilibrium value” [10].

Thus, on one hand, quantum mechanics predicted the existence of stable spin

isomers (see, for example, [11], p. 426), and on the other hand, almost nothing was

known about their stability and their properties, for lack of practical separation

methods. The simple technique of hydrogen isomer separation obviously fails in

the case of heavy molecules, which have much smaller rotational level splitting

and a much higher boiling point. Consequently, at temperatures suﬃciently

low for isomer enrichment the gas becomes solid. Thus the separation of spin

isomers of heavy molecules requires a special technique. This is a non-trivial

problem because spin isomers have identical masses and quite similar physical and

chemical properties. Nevertheless, separation methods are under development

now. In this Section we brieﬂy review these methods.

• Low-temperature solids. Small molecules embedded in special matrices par-

tially retain their spin isomer features. This allows one to produce in solids at

low temperature signiﬁcant enrichment of spin isomers in comparison with their

abundance at room temperature. One may hope that the enrichment will be re-

tained after fast evaporation of these molecules into the gas phase. In paper [12]

an attempt was made to separate spin isomers of methane using rapid heating of

a solid held at low temperature. In a subsequent paper [13] (see also [14]), these

authors attributed the negative result of [12] to fast conversion due to the degen-

eracy of methane states having diﬀerent spin symmetry. Yet this issue deserves

further investigation because fast (although in a diﬀerent time range) cooling of

methane in a molecular jet is not accompanied by spin conversion [15, 16, 17].

• Selective photolysis. Due to the diﬀerence in allowed rotational quantum

numbers, diﬀerent spin isomers are spectroscopically distinguishable. (In fact,

this is the essence of the famous line intensity alternation eﬀect). In the enrich-

ment method proposed in [13] narrow band laser radiation destroys one of the

Nuclear Spin Conversion

5

spin isomers from an equilibrium mixture by photolysis. This method was ﬁrst

applied to the enrichment of I2 spin isomers [18]. It is not certain yet if I2 can be

enriched by selective photolysis because the results [18] could not be reproduced

Selective photolysis was used for enrichment of spin isomers of formaldehyde

(CH2O) molecules in [20]. The authors obtained enriched hydrogen (one of the

photolysis products), but enrichment of CH2O was not achieved. The conclusion

was that the spin conversion is too fast in comparison with the duration of the

photolysis [20]. Later, with an improved setup, enrichment of CH2O spin isomers

by selective photolysis was nevertheless demonstrated [21]. Those authors mea-

sured the life time of the formaldehyde spin isomers to be 200 sec. As a possible

mechanism of conversion the authors [21] proposed the mixing of states model

in [19].

[13].

• Exchange reactions. Another approach to the separation of spin isomers of

heavy molecules is based on the use of chemical exchange reactions with spin-

polarized atoms. This technique proved feasible for the enrichment of nuclear

spin isomers of diatomic molecules in [22, 23] where enrichment of Na2 and Li2

was obtained.

• Selective adsorption/condensation. The diﬀerence in rotational quantum num-

bers for diﬀerent spin isomers can cause a diﬀerence in their physical properties,

e.g., in adsorption on surfaces. This can be used for separation. Thus spin iso-

mers of water molecules were separated by selective condensation [24] and by

selective adsorption on Al2O3 surface [25]. This group measured the life time of

water spin isomers to be 4.4 ± 0.2 days. Presumably, the isomers convert on the

container surface [25]. No model was proposed so far for the conversion of water.

• Chemical reactions. The dependence of chemical reactions on the nuclear spin

state of the reacting molecules was predicted in [26]. This selectivity was em-
ployed in experiment [27] to obtain enriched samples of H+

3 molecules by chemical

reactions involving enriched H2.

• Light-induced drift. A breakthrough in the separation of spin isomers was

achieved in Ref. [28] by using Light-Induced Drift (LID) [29]. CH3F isomer sepa-

ration was analogous to the previously performed enrichment of the CH3F isotope

species (see [30] and references therein). The LID eﬀect proved to be a convenient

6

Chapovsky & Hermans

tool since it enables one to separate spin isomers in the gas phase at well-deﬁned

gas composition, temperature and pressure. Although this technique can be ap-

plied to any molecular species in principle, the ﬁrst experiments were performed

on CH3F for the following reasons. The two nuclear spin species, characterized

by their total proton spin I=3/2 or 1/2, have well-distinguishable rovibrational

absorption lines which are easily accessible by a CO2 laser. In addition, CH3F is

chemically inactive and has low adsorption onto the cell walls. These fortunate

circumstances have promoted substantial progress in the ﬁeld. The ﬁrst mea-

surement of the life time of nuclear spin isomers of polyatomic molecules was
performed for 12CH3F and gave 2 hours [31]. In subsequent measurements [32]

nearly two orders of magnitude diﬀerence in the conversion rates of spin isomers
of 13CH3F and 12CH3F molecules was observed.

At the time of these experiments the nuclear spin conversion of CH3F molecules

was considered to be a heterogeneous process. The situation changed when it was

proven [33] that the CH3F conversion is a gaseous process having an anomalously
large isotope dependence (14 ± 1) × 10−3 s−1/torr for the 13CH3F isomers and
(0.31 ± 0.03) × 10−3 s−1/torr for the 12CH3F isomers. Although these rates

are extremely fast if compared to the H2 case, they are astonishingly slow if

considered from a gas-kinetic point of view: the molecules retain their spin state

even after suﬀering some 109 collisions which totally scramble the rotational state.

The ﬁrst feeling of a researcher in this situation is that the phenomenon is too

complicated to expect a simple description based on ﬁrst principles. Nevertheless,

there is such simple model as will be shown below.

2 THEORY

2.1 Quantum relaxation

An explanation of the CH3F spin conversion was suggested [33] in the frame-

work of a model based on intramolecular mixing of ortho and para states of the

molecule. This model was proposed in a theoretical paper by Curl et al [13] as

a tentative mechanism of spin conversion in H2O, CH2O and CH4. The model

[13] formed the basis of a new approach to the spin conversion in polyatomic

molecules.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

7

The essence of spin conversion induced by intramolecular mixing consists of

the following. Let us divide the quantum states of a molecule into two subspaces,

ortho and para, each having their own rotational energy levels. This is symbol-

ized in Figure 1. Let us assume for simplicity that only one pair of ortho and

para states (m-n) is mixed by an intramolecular perturbation. Suppose that at

the beginning of the conversion process a test molecule is placed in the ortho

subspace. Collisions of the test molecule with the surrounding particles cause

fast migration inside the ortho subspace but cannot, by assumption, change its

spin state directly. This running up and down along the ladder of ortho states

continues until the molecule arrives in the state m which is mixed with the en-

ergetically close para state n. During the free ﬂight after this collision, the para

state n will be admixed by the internal perturbation to the ortho state m, which

creates a coherent mixture of the m and n states. The next collision can destroy

this coherent mixture of states by transferring the molecule to other para states.

This will localize the molecule inside the para subspace, and conversion has taken

place.

To summarize, the mechanism of spin conversion is based on intramolecular

mixing of ortho and para states and collisional destruction of the coherence be-

tween the states. This type of relaxation deserves a special name and can be

called “quantum relaxation” [35]. Processes of similar origin are well known in

various parts of physics. First of all we can mention the relaxation of magnetic

polarization in NMR [36]. Another example is the vibrational energy transfer

enhanced by Coriolis perturbation (see [37] and references therein). The same

mechanism is responsible for the singlet-triplet relaxation in spin-radical pairs

[38]. Analogous mechanisms can be found also in elementary particle physics,

e.g., neutral kaon decay [39].

Below we give a rigorous model of isomer conversion by quantum relaxation

[33], hoping that the reader will enjoy seeing how a few steps of simple mathe-

matics bring us to a general solution of a complicated problem. Suppose, that

the molecular Hamiltonian is the sum of the two parts

ˆH = ˆH0 + ¯h ˆV ,

(1)

where ˆH0 is the main part of the Hamiltonian which has pure ortho and para
states as the eigen states; ˆV is a small intramolecular perturbation which mixes

8

the ortho and para states.

Chapovsky & Hermans

The Liouville equation for the density matrix ρ of the molecule in the repre-

sentation of the eigen states of the operator ˆH0 reads

(∂/∂t)ραα1 = Sαα1 − i [ ˆV , ρ ]αα1 ,

(2)

where Sαα1 is the collision integral and α and α1 represent the complete sets of

quantum states.

Using Eq.(2) one can obtain an equation which governs the change of molecular

concentration in one particular nuclear spin state. This can be done by calculating

the trace of Eq.(2) over all states of one spin isomer. For example, for the

concentration of ortho molecules (ρo) one has

(∂/∂t)ρo = 2Re

iραα′ Vα′α;

ρo ≡

ραα,

(3)

Xα∈o,α′∈p

Xα∈o

where α runs over all ortho (o) states and α′ runs over all para (p) states. Hence-

forth, unprimed quantum numbers will refer to the ortho states, and the primed

ones to the para states.

When deriving Eq.(3) we have assumed that collisions conserve the number of

molecules in each spin state (no “direct” conversion). This can be expressed as

Sαα =

Sα′α′ = 0 .

Xα∈o

Xα′∈p

(4)

This property means that the collisional cross-section of ortho-para transfer is

equal to zero: σ(p|o)=0. The justiﬁcation of the relations (4) for CH3F molecules,

both experimental and theoretical, can be found in [40, 41, 42].

To ﬁnd the time dependence of ρo from Eq.(3) we need to know the oﬀ-diagonal

matrix elements of ρ, which are a measure of the coherence between ortho and

para states. From Eq.(2) we have

(∂/∂t)ραα′ = Sαα′ − i [ ˆV , ρ ]αα′ .

(5)

In ﬁrst order perturbation theory, on the right hand side of Eq.(5) one has to

keep only the unperturbed values of the density matrix. Those are the diagonal

matrix elements of ρ. This leads to the equation

(∂/∂t)ραα′ = Sαα′ − iVαα′(ρα′α′ − ραα) .

(6)

Nuclear Spin Conversion

9

Here we have assumed that perturbation ˆV has no diagonal matrix elements.
Such deﬁnition of ˆV is always possible by proper separation (1) of the molecular

Hamiltonian.

Further, we will model the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the collision integral solely

by a decay process: Sαα′ = −Γαα′ραα′. The decoherence rate Γαα′ is approxi-
mately equal to the average of the population decay rates in the states α and α′.

Note that Γαα′ is proportional to the gas pressure. Moreover, we assume all Γαα′

to be equal: Γαα′ ≡ Γ. Thus the oﬀ-diagonal terms of the collision integral will

be modeled by the Anzatz

Sαα′ = −Γραα′ .

(7)

The validity of this model will be tested below by comparison with experiment.
The intramolecular perturbation ˆV is time independent. Consequently, the

time dependence of Vαα′ is given by exp(iωαα′ t) where ¯hωαα′ is the energy gap
between the states α and α′. Using the assumptions made above, the steady-state

solution of Eq.(6) reads

Combining (3) and (8) one has

ραα′ =

−iVαα′
Γ + iωαα′

(ρα′α′ − ραα) .

∂ρo
∂t

=

Xα∈o, α′∈p

2Γ | Vαα′ |2
Γ2 + ω2
αα′

(ρα′α′ − ραα) .

(8)

(9)

The diagonal elements of the density matrix (which are populations of states)

are determined by the Boltzmann distribution, Wα, for ortho and para isomers

independently:

ραα = ρoWα;

ρα′α′ = ρpWα′,

(10)

because the rotational relaxation inside the ortho and para subspaces is many

orders of magnitude faster than the ortho-para conversion.

In Eq.(10) ρo and

ρp are the total concentrations of ortho and para molecules, respectively. The

Boltzmann factors are determined in the standard way by the expression

Wα = Z −1

ortho exp(−Eα/kT ),

(11)

for the ortho molecules and similarly for para. In (11), Eα is the energy of state

α; Zortho and Zpara are the partition functions for ortho and para molecules,

respectively.

10

Chapovsky & Hermans

Let us represent ρo as the sum of a steady-state and a time-dependent part:

ρo = ρo + δρo(t). By taking into account that the total molecular concentration

N = ρo + ρp is conserved, one ﬁnds from (9) and (10) an exponential decay:

(12)

(13)

(14)

δρo(t) = δρo(0)e−γt ,

with the conversion rate

γ =

Xα∈o,α′∈p

2Γ | Vαα′ |2
Γ2 + ω2
αα′

(Wα′ + Wα) .

This expression gives the solution to the problem in ﬁrst order perturbation

theory. It is valid for not too strong mixing, such that

| V |2≪

max{Γ2, ω2},

νrot
4Γ

where νrot is the rotational relaxation rate. Conversion in the more general case

is considered in [35].

2.2 Ortho-para state mixing in CH3F

The model of spin conversion described above is simple and clear, but is there

something inside a symmetrical molecule which mixes the ortho and para states?

We know now that such mixing can be produced by hyperﬁne interactions. These

interactions are very weak and usually show up as small eﬀects on a much larger

background. Quantum relaxation of spin isomers provides an example of a phe-

nomenon for which hyperﬁne interactions are the leading force.

Hyperﬁne interactions in molecules are important for various physical prob-

lems, ﬁrst of all for hyperﬁne spectroscopy. We note that for the nuclear spin

conversion one needs a speciﬁc part of hyperﬁne interaction which mixes the

ortho and para states. This part of hyperﬁne interaction is unimportant for

standard hyperﬁne spectroscopy but is important for level crossing/anticrossing

spectroscopy (see Ref. [43] and references therein).

Let us recall the classiﬁcation of CH3F quantum states. As a consequence

of the CH3F symmetry the molecules exist in form of two nuclear spin isomers:

ortho and para which have a total spin of three hydrogen nuclei I = 3/2 and

I = 1/2, respectively (see, for example [44]). The ortho molecules have K-values

(K refers to the angular momentum projection on the molecular symmetry axis)

Nuclear Spin Conversion

11

divisible by 3: K = 0, 3, 6 . . .. For para isomers only K = 1, 2, 4, 5 . . . are allowed.

Consequently, the quantum states of CH3F are divided into two subspaces, ortho
and para, which are shown in Figure 1 for the particular case of 13CH3F molecules.

An analysis of ortho-para mixing in CH3F in relation with the spin conversion

problem was performed in a few papers. Two sources of mixing in CH3F have been

considered so far: spin-spin interactions between the molecular nuclei [45, 46, 47]

and spin-rotation interactions [46, 47, 48, 49, 50].

Spin-spin interactions. The ortho and para states in CH3F are mixed by spin-
spin interaction between the three hydrogen nuclei ( ˆVHH ), the ﬂuorine–hydrogen
nuclei ( ˆVF H) and the carbon–hydrogen nuclei ( ˆVCH ) in the case of 13CH3F (see

Figure 2). These interactions can be written as

ˆVHH = PHH

ˆI(m)ˆI(n) •

• T(m,n);

ˆVF H = PF H

ˆI(m)ˆIF •

• TmF ;

ˆVCH = PCH

ˆI(m)ˆIC •

• TmC ,

Xm<n

Xm

Xm

(15)

with m, n = 1, 2, 3 denoting the protons. In (15) P are scale factors having the
order of magnitude 104 Hz. Their numerical values are given in [45]; ˆI are the
spin operators of the corresponding nuclei; T are the second rank tensors for the

magnetic dipole–dipole interaction having the form, e.g.,

ij = δij − 3nmF
T mF

i nmF
j

,

(16)

where nmF is the unit vector directed from the H(m) to the F nucleus.

The spin conversion rate in 13CH3F molecules induced by the spin–spin inter-
actions ˆV SS = ˆVHH + ˆVF H + ˆVCH, is given by the expression (13) having a mixing
eﬃciency for the ortho-para level pair (J ′,K ′)-(J,K) [45]

X

| V SS

αα′ |2 ≡ FSS(J ′, K ′|J, K) = (2J ′ + 1)(2J + 1) 

|2 +2 | PCHT 1C
2q

|2 +2 | PF HT 1F
2q

−K ′

3 | PHH T (1,2)
(cid:16)

2q

q K

|2

.

(cid:17)

J ′ 2

J

2

×





(17)

Here T are the spherical components of the corresponding T-tensors calculated

in the molecular frame (for their numerical values see [45]); (: : :) stands for the

3-j symbol. In the left-hand side of (17) summation is performed over degenerate
quantum numbers of the states α and α′ which are the projections on the labo-
ratory quantization axis of molecular angular momentum M , spins σ, σF , σC of

the three protons, ﬂuorine and carbon nucleus, respectively.

12

Chapovsky & Hermans

The selection rule for the spin-spin mixing follows from Eq.(17):

| ∆J | ≤ 2 ;

J ′ + J ≥ 2 ;

| ∆K | ≤ 2 .

(18)

Note that mixing of states having | ∆K |= 0 does not contribute to the spin

conversion. By contrast, the level shift in hyperﬁne spectroscopy is dominated
by the diagonal matrix elements of ˆV having | ∆K |= 0.

The spin-spin interaction in CH3F can be determined with rather high accu-

racy, limited presently to a few percent by the uncertainty in the molecular spatial

structure. The most accurate data for the CH3F structure are given in Ref. [51].

Spin-rotation interaction. Another source of ortho-para mixing in CH3F is the

spin-rotation coupling which results from the interaction of the nuclear spins

with the magnetic ﬁeld induced by molecular rotation [46, 47, 48, 49, 50]. The

spin-rotation perturbation relevant for the ortho-para mixing can be written as

[50]

ˆVSR =

1
2 Xn h

ˆJ • C(n) • ˆI(n) + H.C.
i

,

(19)

where C(n) is the spin-rotation tensor for the n-th hydrogen nucleus. The ex-

pression for the ortho-para mixing eﬃciency due to the spin-rotation interaction

can be found in the original papers [46, 47, 48, 49, 50].

The selection rules for the spin-rotation interaction read

| ∆J | ≤ 1 ;

| ∆K | ≤ 2 .

(20)

As can be seen from the selection rules (18) and (20), there are ortho-para level

pairs which are mixed exclusively by spin-spin but not by spin-rotation interac-

tion, viz., | ∆J |= 2. This can be used to disentangle the contribution to the spin

conversion from these two mechanisms of state mixing [49].

In contrast to spin-spin interaction, the spin-rotation interaction in CH3F is

known presently only approximately.

It was proposed [46, 49] to use nuclear

spin conversion itself as a source of information on spin-rotation perturbation in

molecules. Such information would be complementary to the information pro-

vided by standard hyperﬁne spectroscopy.

2.3 CH3F level structure and theoretical conversion rates

Spin conversion by quantum relaxation is dependent on the position of ortho

and para states, notably the ortho-para level gaps. They are not accessible di-

Nuclear Spin Conversion

13

rectly by standard spectroscopical methods. Nevertheless, if a complete set of

molecular parameters is available one can calculate the positions of all states and

thus the ortho-para level gaps. The accuracy of the molecular parameters should

be rather high to guarantee the determination of the level position within 1 − 10

MHz because only close ortho-para level pairs contribute substantially to the con-

version. For CH3F such accurate parameters are available from high-resolution

spectroscopy [52, 53, 54, 55, 34].

A search for close ortho-para level pairs in CH3F was performed in [45]. At

the time, a complete set of ground state molecular parameters was available for
12CH3F only [52]. For 13CH3F the molecular parameters A0 and DK

0 were miss-

ing. Nevertheless, a search for close ortho-para level pairs was performed for both
molecules using the estimation of A0=5.18240(6) cm−1 made by T Egawa and
K Kuchitsu (unpublished data) and assuming DK

0 equal for both isotopes. This

search revealed that only two ortho-para level pairs are important for the spin
conversion in 13CH3F. For 12CH3F four important ortho-para level pairs were

found. This choice of level pairs was conﬁrmed and their energy gaps determined

more precisely in [56] on the basis of new accurate molecular parameters deter-

mined in [54, 55]. The best presently available values for the CH3F ortho-para

level gaps are given in Table 1.

In addition to the ortho-para level spacing, ωαα′, and the eﬃciency of the

ortho-para mixing, Vαα′, the decoherence rate, Γ, should be determined in order

to calculate the conversion rates. This is a rather complicated problem that has

not yet been resolved. Approximately, the rate Γ can be taken equal to the level

population decay rate. Even so, the uncertainty remains because the population

decay rates of the states important for the conversion (see Table 1) have not

been measured. There is a measurement of the population decay rate in the state
(J=4, K=3) of 13CH3F [57] which was determined to be 1·108 s−1/torr.

Since the decoherence rate Γ is close to but nevertheless diﬀerent from the level

population decay rate, it is more consistent to determine Γ from the nuclear spin

conversion itself by ﬁtting the measured conversion rate. Such an approach [58,
59] yields Γ ≃ 1.8·108 s−1/torr which is indeed close to the level population decay
rate 1·108 s−1/torr [57]. The various mixing processes in CH3F are illustrated

in Table 1 where the contributions to the conversion are calculated assuming the

decoherence decay rate Γ = 1.8·108 s−1/torr for all pairs of ortho-para states in

Chapovsky & Hermans

14

both molecules.

From the data in Table 1 one can see that the conversion in 12CH3F by spin-spin
interaction is much slower than in 13CH3F. On the other hand, in 12CH3F the

spin-rotation interaction was predicted to be the leading mechanism [60, 50]. The

key point is the right choice of the decoherence rate Γ for the most important level
pair in 12CH3F: (28,5)-(27,6). It was proposed in [50] to use Γ ≃ 2 · 107 s−1/torr

for this pair in order to ﬁt the experimental value for the rate.

3 EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

3.1 Spin isomer separation by LID

It is the introduction of the Light-Induced Drift (LID) [29] as a separation tool

that has brought substantial progress in the ﬁeld of nuclear spin isomers over the

last decade. The essence of LID is explained in Figure 3. Let us consider a gas of

two-level particles interacting with a traveling monochromatic wave. Due to the

Doppler eﬀect, the radiation will excite particles selectively with respect to their
velocity component along the radiation k-vector.

Suppose that the absorbing particles are diluted in a buﬀer gas and that the

laser frequency is chosen such that the radiation excites only molecules moving

away from the laser. Because the excited molecules have in general a diﬀerent

(usually bigger) kinetic cross section than the unexcited particles, the mean free

path for molecules moving away from the laser will be diﬀerent (usually smaller)

than for molecules moving towards the laser. This diﬀerence in mean free path

will create a drift of absorbing particles towards the laser. The buﬀer gas will ﬂow

in the opposite direction as required by momentum conservation. The direction of

the ﬂuxes depends on the sign of the laser frequency detuning from the absorption
line center and the direction of the wave vector k. In a closed tube the LID eﬀect

results in a spatial separation of the two gas components, which can be quite

substantial even if the ﬂuxes themselves are relatively small.

A quantitative description of the LID eﬀect in molecules is a complicated prob-

lem because LID depends on small diﬀerence in transport properties between ex-

cited and ground state molecules, which is rather diﬃcult to calculate. A crucial

Nuclear Spin Conversion

15

parameter is the relative change in cross section, or – more precisely – in collision

rate, ∆ν/ν, upon excitation. In general, ∆ν/ν depends on velocity, and thus on

the detuning. In some cases ∆ν/ν can even change sign as a function of detuning,

giving rise to so called “anomalous LID” (see, e.g., Refs. [62]). Here we will limit

ourselves to the simpliﬁed case that ∆ν/ν can be considered constant. In this

case the description of LID is relatively simple [63] and yields for the diﬀerence

in absorbing particle density between the ends of the tube

∆n = −

∆ν
ν

2∆S
¯hωv0

ϕ(Ω),

(21)

p

where ∆S is the absorbed laser intensity; ¯hω is the photon energy; v0 =

2kT /m

is the thermal speed; ϕ(Ω) describes the behavior as a function of detuning,

Ω = ω − ω0, of the laser frequency, ω, from the absorption line center frequency,

ω0. The spectral function ϕ(Ω) can be readily calculated if the homogeneous line

width of the absorbing transition is known. For small frequency detuning and

low pressure, the function ϕ(Ω) ≃ vL/v0, where vL = Ω/k is the resonant velocity
component of the absorbing particle along the k-vector. Examples of ϕ(Ω) for

various homogeneous line widths, as well as corrections to (21) due to the ﬁnite

gas dilution are given in [64].

It was shown in Ref. [65] that the LID eﬀect in the CH3F isotope mixture,

which should behave similar to the mixture of spin isomers, is consistent with the

model of constant ∆ν/ν. The change in collision rate, ∆ν/ν, upon rovibrational

excitation was found to be ≃1%. For more details on the LID eﬀect see Ref. [66]

and Refs.[65, 67] which review the LID eﬀect in molecular gases.

A prerequisite of the LID separation of gas components is their spectral dis-

tinguishability. This is perfectly satisﬁed for CH3F for which ortho and para

isomers are diﬀerent by K and thus have diﬀerent absorption spectra. There
are two convenient coincidences between absorption lines of 13CH3F and 12CH3F

molecules in the ν3 fundamental band (C–F stretch) and CO2-laser lines [68],

which were used for spin isomer separation. The absorption spectra of ortho and
para 13CH3F near the P(32) line of the 9.6 µ band of a CO2-laser are shown in

Figure 4. As can be seen from these spectra, the CO2-laser frequency tuned to
the center of the 9P(32) laser line excites ortho 13CH3F molecules in the blue

wing of the R(4,3). This results in LID of ortho isomers towards the laser. In
the case of 12CH3F, excitation of the molecular absorption line Q(12, 2) by the

16

Chapovsky & Hermans

9P(20) laser line induces a drift of para molecules away from the laser.

In a

typical experiment on CH3F spin isomer an enrichment of 10% was produced,

suﬃcient to have good signal-to-noise ratio.

3.2 Relaxation time measurement

The experiments on CH3F were performed in Novosibirsk and Leiden using sim-

ilar approaches. Separation of spin isomers was achieved in a long and thin glass

tube using LID as outlined in Section 3.1. One end of the separation tube was

connected with a test cell to collect an enriched gas sample. The other end of

the separation tube was connected with a ballast volume, thus providing an equi-

librium reference sample (see Figures 5 and 6). The degree of enrichment (or

depletion, depending on the particular arrangement) was monitored by absorp-

tion, using a probe laser beam resonant with either the ortho, or the para isomer.

To increase the sensitivity and stability of the detection system the absorption

in the test cell was compared diﬀerentially with the absorption in a reference cell

having equilibrium composition.

A schematic of the setup used in Ref. [33] is presented in Figure 5. The isomer

separation was performed in a tube having length 1.5 m and inner diameter

1.3 mm by CO2-laser radiation (power ≃ 10 W ). The radiation frequency was

stabilized to the CO2 line center. For the enrichment detection, a small portion

of the laser beam was directed through the test and reference cells which were

placed on the same optical axis. The absorption in these cells was modulated in

antiphase by external Stark electrodes. This modulation produced a component

in the probe beam proportional to the absorption diﬀerence between the two cells.

This diﬀerential signal was normalized by the signal proportional to probe beam

intensity. The latter signal was created by additional Stark electrodes which

modulated the absorption in the reference cell alone. The detection method used

in [33] has a rather high sensitivity but has the drawback that it can be applied

to molecules having permanent electric dipole moment only.

The setup used in Ref. [40] is presented in Figure 6. It has a separation tube
of 30 cm length and 3 mm inner diameter for the study of 13CH3F. For 12CH3F a

tube of 1 m length and 1.1 mm diameter was used to make up for the much smaller

absorption of the Q(12, 2) transition used. In both cases the separation laser (a

Nuclear Spin Conversion

17

CO2 laser from Edinburgh Instrument, Model PL5) was frequency stabilized to

the CO2-line center.

For the detection, a weak probe beam from an additional (waveguide) laser

was used. Intensity and direction of the beam were stabilized using an Acousto

Optic Modulator with a feed back loop and a set of diaphragms. The frequency

was locked to the CH3F absorption line center using an additional absorption cell

with CH3F gas at low pressure.

It is essential to be sure that the powerful CO2 laser radiation indeed produces

separation of CH3F spin isomers and that spurious eﬀects like gas heating, laser

induced thermal diﬀusion, etc., do not contribute substantially to the signal. This

important issue was addressed already in the ﬁrst experiment, where the spin

isomer separation was conﬁrmed by comparing the optical signal with additional

monitoring of the gas composition by a mass-spectrometer. A more decisive test

was performed in [69] where it was demonstrated, by probing various ortho and

para absorption lines, that the LID enrichment of ortho is accompanied by a

corresponding depletion of para species. We stress that the conversion of spin

isomers takes place in a part of the setup which is unaﬀected by the strong laser

beam used for the isomer separation.

Depending on the problem at hand, the test cell could be connected to a

Stark cell, or to a cell at elevated temperature, or to a cell containing diﬀerent

test surfaces. This allowed to study the inﬂuence of various physical factors on

nuclear spin conversion.

The measurement procedure was generally as follows. First, the setup was

ﬁlled with equilibrium gas and the detection system was set to zero absorption

diﬀerence. Next, the enrichment was started by switching on the separation laser

(ﬁrst part of the curve in Figure 7). After a suﬃcient enrichment was achieved, the

two probe cells were isolated by closing the appropriate valves and the conversion

process began (the decay part in Figure 7). The measured decay curve was ﬁtted

by a function exp(−γt) + κt, where γ is the conversion rate, while the second

term accounts for a (small) drift of the detection signal.

4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

18

Chapovsky & Hermans

4.1 Dependence on pressure and collision partner

In the following Sections we review the experiments which test the mechanism

responsible for spin conversion in CH3F. Let us ﬁrst consider the pressure depen-
dence. The data for 13CH3F conversion in two buﬀer gases, 12CH3F and 13CH3F

itself are shown in Figure 8. The rates have linear pressure dependence and are

seen to be rather close. As the reference value we give the conversion in pure
13CH3F [41]

γ13/P = (12.2 ± 0.6) · 10−3 s−1/torr,

(22)

where the subscript 13 refers to the isotopic species.

The linear pressure dependence of γ13 is consistent with conversion by quantum

relaxation. Indeed, at P ≃1 torr the decoherence rate Γ/2π ≃ 30 MHz, which
is much smaller than the frequency gaps between the mixed states in 13CH3F
(see Table 1). In this pressure limit, where Γ ≪ ω, one can neglect Γ2 in the

denominator of Eq.(13) and the conversion rate becomes proportional to Γ, thus

proportional to pressure.

Note that the linear pressure dependence of γ13 at low pressures in itself does

not allow to distinguish between conversion by quantum relaxation and by or-

dinary gaseous relaxation. The latter would produce conversion with a rate

2nσ(p|o)v which is also linear in pressure (see Section 5.2). The important point

is that quantum relaxation is able to reproduce the right order of magnitude for
the conversion rate in 13CH3F [45]. If one takes as an estimation for the deco-
herence rate Γ = 1·108 s−1/torr, as follows from measurement [57], the spin-spin
mixing of states in 13CH3F gives the conversion rate γ13/P ≃ 7 · 10−3 s−1/torr

which is half the measured value.

Measurements of the 13CH3F spin conversion in various buﬀer gases are pre-

sented in Figure 9 [40, 41]. The conversion rates are rather close in buﬀer gas

CH3Cl and in pure CH3F but are much smaller in buﬀer gases N2 and O2. As

was concluded in [40, 41], the buﬀer gas dependence of the conversion rate is in

qualitative agreement with the buﬀer gas variation of the decoherence rate, Γ,

which was estimated in [40, 41] on the basis of pressure broadening data. An

important result of the data in Figure 9 is that the large magnetic moment of O2
(≃ 2 µB) seems to be unimportant the 13CH3F spin conversion. For more details

on this point see Section 5.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

4.2 Isotope eﬀect

19

The measurements show a large isotope eﬀect in CH3F conversion [33, 59]. In
Figure 10 the 12CH3F conversion rate as a function of pressure is presented and
seen to be much smaller than for 13CH3F (Figure 8). The ratio of the conversion
rates in 13CH3F and 12CH3F measured in Leiden [59] was found to be

γ13/γ12 = 55 ± 4,

(23)

which is close to the value 46±5 measured in [33]. The slow conversion rate in
12CH3F makes the measurements rather diﬃcult to perform because of severe

restrictions to the long term stability of the detection system.

The much smaller rate in 12CH3F results from the bigger gaps between the
ortho and para states in this molecule in comparison with 13CH3F. There is one

close pair of ortho-para states, viz., (51,4)-(50,6), but these states are situated at
high energies and therefore hardly populated. The 13CH3F conversion is domi-
nated by spin-spin mixing of the ortho and para states. In 12CH3F the spin-spin

interaction gives only a small part of the observed rate [56]. As was discussed
in Section 2.3 and concluded in the papers [60, 50] the conversion in 12CH3F is

dominated by spin-rotation interaction.

4.3 Temperature dependence

The levels important for spin conversion in 13CH3F and 12CH3F are situated at

widely diﬀerent energies. Consequently, one would expect quite diﬀerent tem-

perature dependences of the rates in the two cases as the level populations will

be aﬀected diﬀerently by temperature. For example, the population of the states
(11,1) and (9,3), which are dominant for 13CH3F conversion, will decrease at
elevated temperature, in contrast with, e.g., states (51,4) and (50,6) of 12CH3F

whose population will increase.

The temperature dependence of the conversion rate in the two molecules was

reported in Ref. [59]. The results of the measurements are presented in Figure 11.
Indeed, the conversion rate in 12CH3F grows rapidly with increasing temperature.
By contrast, the rate in 13CH3F decreases in the temperature range 300 - 600 K.

Presently we can propose only a rough model of the temperature dependence.

The conversion rates is aﬀected primarily through the Boltzmann occupation of

20

Chapovsky & Hermans

rotational states. An additional temperature dependence may appear due to the

temperature dependence of the decoherence rate Γ. It proved suﬃcient to apply

only a 25% temperature variation in Γ by the expression:

Γ(T ) =

1.8 − (T − Troom) · 1.5 · 10−3K −1
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

· 108 s−1/torr,

(24)

to ﬁt the experimental points for the 13CH3F conversion in the range from room

temperature Troom=297 K up to 600 K, as shown by the thick line in Figure 11.

Thus these data are qualitatively consistent with spin conversion by quantum

relaxation (for T ≥ 600 K see below).

The same temperature dependence of the decoherence rate Γ(T ) was used to
model the conversion in 12CH3F. Again, only spin-spin mixing of states was taken
into account. The calculated rate in 12CH3F (thin line) reproduces the overall

behavior but fails to reproduce the magnitude of the rate. This may not be
surprising, since an additional contribution to the conversion rate in 12CH3F

should result from spin-rotation interaction, as was pointed out in [60, 50].

Above 600 K the conversion rate in 13CH3F increases again, which suggests an

additional conversion mechanism at high temperatures. This mechanism seems

to have no isotope selectivity, as one may conclude from Figure 11.

4.4 Level-crossing resonances

Eq.(13) predicts a strong dependence of the conversion rate on ortho-para level

spacing at low pressures where Γ ≪ ω. To detect this eﬀect, it was proposed [61]
to split and cross the ortho and para levels of 13CH3F by a homogeneous electric

ﬁeld. This experiment was performed in [58] with the setup in Figure 6 equipped

with an additional Stark cell.

Results of the measurement of the conversion rate in 13CH3F as a function of

electric ﬁeld are shown in Figure 12. As seen from these data the conversion rate

is hardly aﬀected by the ﬁeld below 500 V/cm, but rises sharply above 600 V/cm.

A theoretical description of the level-crossing resonances presented in Figure 12

was developed in [61, 58]. A homogeneous electric ﬁeld splits each state of CH3F

into 2J + 1 magnetic sublevels due to the ﬁrst order Stark eﬀect. The energy
gaps between the M -sublevels of the two states | J ′, K ′, M ′ > and | J, K, M >

21

(25)

Nuclear Spin Conversion

are given by the formula [44]

¯hωM ′M (E) = ¯hω0 − Ed

M ′K ′
J ′(J ′ + 1)

(cid:18)

−

M K
J(J + 1) (cid:19)

,

where ¯hω0 is the energy gap between the states | J ′, K ′ > and | J, K > at zero

electric ﬁeld; E is the electric ﬁeld strength, d is the molecular electric dipole
moment. For 13CH3F, d was taken to be 1.858 D (or 6.198 × 10−30 C·m) [68].

In the model of level-crossing spectra [61, 58] only spin-spin interaction was

taken into account.

In this case each ortho-para level pair gives the following

“spectrum” of γ as a function of ﬁeld strength:

γ(E) =

XM ∈o,M ′∈p

2ΓFSS(J ′, K ′|J, K)

Γ2 + ω2

M ′M (E)

J ′

J

2

−M ′ M M ′ − M





2





(Wα′ + Wα) ,

(26)
where FSS(J ′, K ′|J, K) is the mixing eﬃciency from (17). The selection rule

| ∆M |≤ 2 follows directly from (26). The only unknown parameter in expression

(26) is the decoherence rate Γ. This parameter was determined in [58] by ﬁtting
the experimental value of γ in 13CH3F at zero electric ﬁeld which gave Γ ≃
1.8 · 108 s−1/torr.

Once Γ is determined, there are no free parameters in the model and the level-

crossing spectra can be calculated. The result is presented in Figure 12. As can

be seen from these data, the model reproduces the main features of the measured

spectrum very well: positions of the peaks within a few MHz as well as their

amplitude within 10%.

The spectrum in Figure 12 results from crossing of sublevels of the ortho state

(9,3) and the para state (11,1). The level pair (21,1)-(20,3) gives a constant

contribution to γ(E) in the electric ﬁeld range of Figure 12 because of the much

larger gap for this level pair: 350 MHz. The states (11,1) and (9,3) have ∆J = 2

and consequently are mixed by spin-spin interactions but not by spin-rotation

interaction. This justiﬁes taking only spin-spin interaction into account in the

modeling of the level-crossing resonances [61, 58].

4.5 Quantum Zeno eﬀect induced by collisions

In the high pressure limit, where Γ ≫ ω, one can neglect ω in the denominator of

(13) and the conversion rate is seen to be inversely proportional to pressure (“1/P

22

Chapovsky & Hermans

dependence”). Consequently, at high pressures one has a very interesting regime

of spin conversion in which rapid collisions prevent the molecule from changing

its spin state: collisional inhibition of spin conversion. This slowing down of
the conversion should start in the case of 13CH3F at pressures well above 10 torr.

Unfortunately it was not possible to perform measurements at such high pressures

because of a few experimental problems. First, the LID eﬀect is reduced at high

pressures due to loss of velocity selectivity by pressure broadening. Second, the

attained level of enrichment at high pressures becomes smaller also because the

diﬀusion-limited separation time increases whereas the spin relaxation time is

rather short at 10 torr, making back-conversion during the enrichment stage

more severe. Third, the sensitivity of the detection system decreases because

of overlapping ortho and para absorption lines. Another approach to observe

the slowing down of the conversion would be to enrich at low pressures and

to increase the pressure afterwards. Such an attempt was unsuccessful mainly

because of spurious eﬀects accompanying the compression [69].

To overcome these problems one could, as an alternative, narrow the gap be-

tween the ortho and para levels by an external electric ﬁeld. This would shift the

slowing down of the conversion rate to lower pressures. The idea was realized in

[70] by choosing the ﬁeld strength at which the strongest peak in the spectrum
of Figure 12 occurs. This peak is due to the crossing of sublevels M ′=11 and

M =9 at electric ﬁeld 652.8 V/cm. If this resonant condition is chosen and the

spin conversion is dominated by mixing of the resonant level pair, the description

of the conversion is given by just one term from Eq.(26) which has ω = 0 in the

denominator and gives a 1/P dependence.

The result of the measurements is shown in Figure 13. Indeed, there is a rapid

slowing down of the conversion rate when the pressure increases from 0.05 torr
to 0.5 torr. The plateau above 0.5 torr is the result of the neighboring M ′ − M

level pairs which do not have zero gaps at the chosen electric ﬁeld and, conse-

quently, give a contribution which is still increasing with pressure. At still higher

pressures, the conversion rate would go down again.

The experimental results in the high pressure range are in good agreement with

the theory (solid line in Figure 13). The calculation of the pressure dependence
was performed on the basis of Eq.(26) by taking into account all pairs (J ′=11,

Nuclear Spin Conversion

23

K ′=1, M ′)-(J=9, K=3, M ); | M ′ − M |≤ 2. The decoherence rate was taken to
be Γ=1.75x108 s−1/torr for all level pairs. Only the spin-spin mixing of states

was taken into account because this pair of states has |∆J|=2 and, consequently,

is not mixed by the spin-rotation interaction, see (20).

At low pressure the theoretical conversion rates are systematically larger than

the measured one. This can be attributed to the saturation eﬀect which should

occur at low pressure in case of degenerate ortho and para states when the ﬁrst

order perturbation theory breaks down [35, 71]

The inhibition of the conversion rate at increasing collision rate can be con-

sidered as an example of the Quantum Zeno eﬀect [72]. In the original version

of this eﬀect [72] the inhibition of the quantum system decay is due to frequent

measurements which destroy quantum coherence by projecting the system to a

particular quantum state. In our case the decoherence is produced by molecular

collisions which destroy the coherence between the ortho and para states in the

molecule.

5 DIRECT ORTHO-PARA TRANSITIONS IN CH3F

The investigation of nuclear spin conversion in CH3F would not be complete

without studying direct ortho-para transitions in this molecule, i.e., transitions

caused by the magnetic-ﬁeld gradient from a collision partner or a surface. There

is room for the conversion by quantum relaxation only if direct transitions are

unimportant. Below we describe the two “direct” contributions to the conversion

which are produced by surface or bulk collisions.

5.1 Direct conversion on surfaces

For the case of ortho and para H2, conversion on catalytic surfaces is by far the

most eﬃcient mechanism (see e.g. [8, 73, 74, 75]). This may not be surprising in

view of the extremely slow gas-phase conversion. But also for CH3F, conversion

on surfaces plays a role. As was demonstrated in Refs.[31, 69], CH3F nuclear

spin conversion can be quite diﬀerent for diﬀerent wall materials. The most rapid

conversion (in fact instantaneous on the experimental time scale) was observed

on Fe(OH)3 powder [31]. The rate of conversion on this catalyst was limited,

most likely, by diﬀusion.

24

Chapovsky & Hermans

Glass surfaces appeared to be rather inert for the CH3F conversion. The surface

contribution to the conversion is given by a cutoﬀ of the linear ﬁt of the conversion

rate vs. pressure. The data in Figure 8 determines the surface contribution on
the order of 10−4 s−1. This yields a probability per collision for the molecule to
convert ≃10−9 [31, 69]. There are other surfaces which do not seem to produce

rapid conversion, e.g., aluminum and gold. On the other hand, conversion on the

surface of magnetic tape was found to be rather fast [69].

5.2 Direct conversion by collisions

Another possible mechanism of direct ortho-para transitions is due to collisions

in the bulk. In the case of hydrogen, it is known [4] that oxygen molecules speed

up hydrogen conversion dramatically, although in a time domain diﬀerent from

the CH3F conversion. This phenomenon is well understood [76]. The conversion

is due to the steep magnetic ﬁeld gradient produced by the collision partner.

Conservation of the nuclear spin symmetry of symmetric tops in molecular

collisions was conﬁrmed in a number of studies using various experimental ap-

proaches [77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82]. This is not surprising, because we know now

that spin isomers are very stable species.

Nevertheless, it would be useful to know the conversion rate in direct collisions.

First of all we would like to stress that conservation of nuclear spin symmetry in

molecular collisions is an approximate selection rule, although a very precise one.

Like in the case of hydrogen, it can be violated if an inhomogeneous magnetic

ﬁeld is produced by a colliding molecule. From the measurements of the CH3F

conversion rate one can estimate an upper bound for the cross section of direct

spin-changing collisions σ(p|o). Using the formula for the gas-kinetic relaxation
rate γcoll = 2N σ(p|o)v and the experimental value for the conversion rate 0.01 s−1

[33, 41] one obtains the estimation

σ(p | o) ≤ 2.5 · 10−24 cm2.

(27)

Cross sections of this order are hardly accessible by conventional collision exper-

iments, like molecular beams, or double resonance techniques.

In order to reveal the role of the magnetic moment of the collision partner,
the 13CH3F spin conversion was studied in two buﬀer gases: N2 and O2 which

Nuclear Spin Conversion

25

have quite similar pressure broadening coeﬃcients and, consequently, should have

similar contributions to the conversion due to quantum relaxation [41]. On the

other hand, the magnetic moments of N2 and O2 are diﬀerent by three order of

magnitude, which can result in extra contribution to the conversion in the case of
oxygen. From the data for 13CH3F presented in Figure 9, one can conclude that

the role of the oxygen magnetic moment is too small to be visible on the much

larger background which is due to conversion by quantum relaxation. Thus in or-

der to observe direct ortho-para transitions one has to suppress the contribution

by quantum relaxation. It was proposed in [83] to search for spin-violating colli-
sions by studying spin conversion in 12CH3F, in which the conversion by quantum
relaxation is slower by almost two orders of magnitude than in 13CH3F.

The results of the measurements are presented in Figure 14. One can see that
the 12CH3F conversion is considerably faster in collisions with O2 than with N2.

The diﬀerence in rates can be attributed [83] to direct ortho-para transitions.

The estimation for the cross section from the data in Figure 14 reads

σ(p|o) = (6 ± 0.8) · 10−26 cm2.

(28)

We see from this result that even if CH3F is diluted in paramagnetic oxygen,

the direct ortho-para transitions are very improbable if compared with ordinary

kinetic cross sections. To understand to what extend the direct transition can

inﬂuence the conversion in a “nonmagnetic” environment (like pure CH3F), one

needs to scale the cross section σ(p|o) for the various magnetic moments. Similar

to the case of hydrogen [76], the cross section of direct transitions for CH3F
scales with µ2 where µ is the magnetic moment of the collision partner [42].

Consequently, direct transitions can be neglected for CH3F spin conversion in a

nonmagnetic environment.

6 CONCLUSION

It is well established by now that the nuclear spin isomers of molecules can be sep-

arated in the gas phase by using the Light-Induced Drift technique. The enriched

gas samples can be stored in a separate test volume for further investigations of

their properties.

In the present review we have used CH3F to investigate the mechanism behind

26

Chapovsky & Hermans

nuclear-spin conversion. This molecule was found to have conversion rates in a

convenient time domain, and turned out to be very versatile for investigating

various aspects of the conversion process. The conversion was studied at vari-

ous pressures, temperatures and gas compositions and for two isotopic species.

The experimental results obtained for the CH3F spin isomers revealed that the

conversion in the bulk is governed by a speciﬁc process which can be called

quantum relaxation. This mechanism is based on the intramolecular mixing of

molecular quantum states and collisional destruction of the quantum coherence

between the mixed states.

Various key points in the CH3F conversion by quantum relaxation were clari-

ﬁed. It includes, ﬁrst of all, the knowledge of the most important levels in CH3F

which contribute substantially to the conversion through mixing by intramolecu-
lar perturbations. Second, the mixing mechanism in 13CH3F is shown to be the
spin-spin interaction between the molecular nuclei. For 12CH3F, on the other

hand, there is evidence that the spin-rotation perturbation is the most important

while spin-spin interactions play a minor role. Third, the decay rate of the co-

herence between ortho and para states by collisions in the bulk was determined

experimentally. All these data gave an internally consistent picture of the spin

conversion in CH3F.

The mechanism responsible for nuclear spin conversion in CH3F was tested

experimentally in a few ways. The most decisive experiments are the observation

of level-crossing resonances in the conversion rate and the observation of the

slowing down of the conversion with increasing gas pressure (“Quantum Zeno

Eﬀect”).

Prospects for further development in the ﬁeld of spin isomers look optimistic.

Even if one restrict oneself to the spin isomers separation method based on LID,

there is a large variety of investigations possible. The LID eﬀect already proved

to be an eﬃcient separation tool for a number of molecules like NH3, C2H4, H2O

which all have nuclear spin isomers. There is no doubt that investigations of

molecular spin isomers similar to that for CH3F can be performed with various

other molecules.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

7 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

27

The results presented in this review were obtained in a long term project. We are

indebted to many colleagues for fruitful and pleasant cooperation. More speciﬁ-

cally, we would like to name the following colleagues (in the order in which they

joined the project) V.N. Panﬁlov, V.P. Strunin, L.N. Krasnoperov, A.E. Bakarev,

D. Papouˇsek, J Demaison, B. Nagels, M. Schuurman, D.A. Roozemond, N. Calas,

P. Bakker, E. Ilisca, M. Irac-Astaud, K. Bahloul.

This project was made possible by ﬁnancial support from the Netherlands

Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO), the Russian Academy of Sciences

and the RFBR grant 98-03-33124a.

28

Literature Cited

Chapovsky & Hermans

1. Eucken A. 1912. Sitzber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. 1912:41

2. Mecke R. 1925. Z. f. Physik. 31:709-712

3. Bonhoeﬀer KF, Harteck P. 1929. Naturwiss. 17:182

4. Farkas A. 1935. Orthohydrogen, Parahydrogen and Heavy Hydrogen. London: Cambridge

University Press. 215 pp.

5. Cremer E. 1943. in Handbuch der Katalyse 3, Schwab GM, ed., Springer, Wien. p. 1

6. Trapnell BMW. 1955. in Catalysis 3, Emett PH, ed., Reihold, New York, p. 1

7. Schmauch GE and Singleton AH. 1964. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 56:20

8. Ilisca E. 1992. Progress in Surface Science. 41:217

9. Heitler W, Herzberg G. 1929. Naturwiss. 17:673-674

10. Bloom M. 1972. Nuclear spin relaxation in gases. In MTP International Review of Sci-

ence, Physical Chemistry Series, Magnetic Resonance, ed. CA McDowell, 4:1-42. Lon-

don/Baltimore: Butterworth/University Park Press. 365 pp.

11. Landau LD, Lifshitz EM. 1977. Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed. Pergamon Press, Oxford.

673 pp.

12. Curl RF, Jr, Kasper JVV, Pitzer KS, Sathianandan K. 1966. J. Chem. Phys. 44:4636-4637

13. Curl RF, Jr, Kasper JVV, Pitzer KS. 1967. J. Chem. Phys. 46:3220-3228

14. Ozier I, Yi P-n. 1967. J. Chem. Phys. 47:5458-5459

15. Amrein A, Quack M, Schmitt U. 1988. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 92:5455-5466

16. Hepp M, Winnewisser G, Yamada KMT. 1994. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 164:311-314

17. Georges R, Herman M, Hilico JC, Roberto O. 1998. J Mol. Spectrosc. 187:13-20

18. Balykin VI, Letokhov VS, Mishin VI, Semchishen VA. 1976. Chem. Phys. 17:111-121

19. Booth JL, Dalby FW, Parmar S, Vanderlinder J. 1989. Chem. Phys. 132:209-217

20. Schramm B, Bamford DJ, Moor CB. 1983. Chem. Phys. Lett. 98:305-309

21. Kern J, Schwahn H, Schramm B. 1989. Chem. Phys. Lett. 154:292-298

22. Weber HG, Stock M. 1974. Physics Letters, A50:343-343

23. Bernheim RA, He Chun. 1990. J. Chem. Phys. 92:5959-5962
24. Konyukhov VK, Prokhorov AM, Tikhonov VI, Faˇizulaev VN. 1986. Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor.

Fiz. 43:65-67 [JETP Lett. 43:85-89]

25. Konyukhov VK, Tikhonov VI, Tikhonova TL. 1988. Proceedings of Physical Institute of

The USSR Academy of Sciences, (Kratkie Soobshcheniya po Fizike). 9:12-14 p.12

26. Quack M. 1977. Mol. Phys. 34:477-504

27. Uy D, Cordonnier M, Oka T. 1997. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78:3844-3847

28. Krasnoperov LN, Panﬁlov VN, Strunin VP, Chapovsky PL. 1984. Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor.

29. Gel’mukhanov FKh, Shalagin AM. 1979. Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 29:773-776 [JETP

Fiz. 39:122-144 [JETP Lett. 39:143-146]

Lett. 29:711-713]

30. Panﬁlov VN, Strunin VP, Chapovsky PL. 1983 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 85:881-892 [Sov. Phys.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

JETP 58:510-516]

29

31. Chapovsky PL, Krasnoperov LN, Panﬁlov VN, Strunin VP. 1985. Chem. Phys. 97:449-455

32. Bakarev AE, Chapovsky PL. 1986. Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 44:5-6 [JETP Lett. 44:4-6]

33. Chapovsky PL. 1990. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 97:1585-1596 [Sov. Phys. JETP. 70:895-901]

34. Papouˇsek D, Demaison J, Wlodarczak G, Pracna P, Klee S, Winnewisser M. 1994. J. Mol.

Spectr. 164:351-367

35. Chapovsky PL. 1996. Physica A (Amsterdam) 233:441-448

36. Bloembergen N. 1961. Nuclear Magnetic Relaxation, W.A.Benjamin, Inc., New York. 178 pp.

37. Orr BJ. 1995. Chem. Phys. 190:261-278

38. Salikhov KM, Molin YuN, Sagdeev RZ, Buchachenko AL. 1984. Spin Polarization and Mag-

netic Eﬀects in Radical Reactions, Elsevier, Amsterdam. 419 pp

39. Feynman RP, Leighton RB, Sands M. 1963. The Feynman Lectures in Physics, Addison–

Wesley Pub. Com. Ltd.

40. Nagels B, Schuurman M, Chapovsky PL, Hermans LJF. 1995. J. Chem. Phys. 103:5161-5163

41. Nagels B, Schuurman M, Chapovsky PL, Hermans LJF. 1996. Phys. Rev. A54:2050-2055

44. Townes CH, Shawlow AL. 1955. Microwave Spectroscopy, McGraw-Hill Publ. Comp., New

42. Chapovsky PL. 1996. Chem. Phys. Lett. 254:1-5

43. Ozier I, Meerts WL. 1981. Can. J. Phys. 59:150-171

York.698 pp.

45. Chapovsky PL. 1991. Phys. Rev. A43:3624-3630

Chapovsky PL. 1991. ”Light induced drift: application to nuclear spin modiﬁcation prob-

lem,” Atomic Physics 12, edited by J.C.Zorn and R.R.Lewis, AIP Conference Proceedings,

AIP, New York. 233:504–518

46. Gus’kov KI. 1995. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 107:704-731 [JETP. 80:400-414]

47. Bahloul K. 1998. Des Interactions Hyperﬁnes et de la Conversion des Isom`eres de Spin

Nucl´eaire de CH3F, Ph.D.Thesis. Univ. Paris-7, Denis Diderot. 249 pp.

48. Chapovsky PL. 1997. ”Nuclear spin conversion in molecules induced by hyperﬁne inter-

actions,” in 12th Symposium and School on High–Resolution Molecular Spectroscopy,

Sinitsa LN, Ponomarev YuN, Perevalov VI, Editors, Proc. SPIE 3090:2-12

49. Bahloul K, Irac-Astaud M, Ilisca E, Chapovsky PL. 1998. J. Phys. B.: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

31:73-85

50. Ilisca E, Bahloul K. 1998. Phys. Rev. A57:4296-4300

51. Egawa T, Yamamoto S, Naketa M, Kuchitsu K. 1987. J. Mol. Structure. 156:213-228

52. Graner G. 1976. Mol. Phys. 31:1833-1843

53. Lee SK, Schwendeman RH, Crownover RL, Skatrud DD, and Delucia FC. 1987. J. Mol.

54. Papouˇsek D, Hsu Yen-Chu, Chen Hann-Sen, Pracna P, Klee S, Winnewisser M. 1993. J.

Spectrosc. 123:145-160

Mol. Spectr. 159:33-41

55. Papouˇsek D, Papouˇskova D, Hsu Yen-Chu, Pracna P, Klee S, Winnewisser M, Demaison J.

30

Chapovsky & Hermans

1993. J. Mol. Spectr. 159:62-68

56. Chapovsky PL, Papouˇsek D, Demaison J. 1993. Chem. Phys. Lett. 209:305-308

57. Jetter H, Pearson EF, Norris CL, McGurk JC, Flygare WH. 1973. J. Chem. Phys. 59:1796-

58. Nagels B, Calas N, Roozemond DA, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996.

59. Nagels B, Bakker P, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. 1998. Phys. Rev. A57:4322-4326

60. Gus’kov KI. 1996. unpublished.

61. Nagels B, Schuurman M, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. 1995. Chem. Phys. Lett. 242:48-53

62. van der Meer GJ, Smeets J, Pod’yachev SP, Hermans LJF. 1992. Phys. Rev. A45:1303–1306;

Chapovsky PL, van der Meer GJ, Smeets J, Hermans LJF. 1992. Phys. Rev. A45:8011–8018;

Nagels B, Chapovsky PL, Hermans LJF, van der Meer GJ, Shalagin AM. 1996. Phys. Rev.

63. Mironenko VR, Shalagin AM. 1981. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR, Seriya Fiz. 45:995-1006

[Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR, Phys. Ser. 45:87]

64. van der Meer GJ, Hoogeveen RWM, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. 1989. Phys. Rev.

1804

77:4732–4735

A53:4305–4310;

A39:5237-5242

65. Chapovsky PL. 1989. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR, Seriya Fiz. 53:1069-1075 [Bull. Acad.

Sci. USSR, Phys. Ser. 53:43-49]

66. Rautian SG, Shalagin AM. 1991. Kinetic Problems of Nonlinear Spectroscopy, Elsevier Sci.

Publ., Amsterdam. 439 pp.

67. Hermans LJF. 1992. Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 11:289-315

68. Freund SM, Duxbury G, Romheld M, Tiedje JT, Oka T. 1974. J. Mol. Spectr. 52:38-57

69. Nagels B. 1998. New Light on Nuclear Spin Conversion in Molecules, Ph.D.Thesis, Leiden

University, 107 pp.

70. Nagels B, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. 1997. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79:3097-3100

71. Chapovsky PL. 1997. The 11th International Vavilov Conference on Nonlinear Optics, June

24-27, Novosibirsk, Russia (unpublished).

72. Misra B, Sudarshan ECG. 1977. J. Math. Phys. 18:756–783

73. Ilisca E. 1970. Phys. Rev. Lett. 24:797-801

74. Ilisca E, Sugano E. 1986. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57:2790-94

75. Ilisca E. 1991. Phys. Rev. Lett. 66:667-71

76. Wigner E. 1933. Z. f. Physikal Chemie. B23:28-32

77. Oka T. 1973. Adv. Atom. Mol. Phys. 9:127

78. Chesnokov EN, Panﬁlov VN. 1977. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 73:2122-2130 [Sov. Phys. JETP.

46:1112-1116]

79. Harradine D, Foy B, Laux L, Dubs M, Steinfeld JI. 1984. J. Chem. Phys. 81:4267-

80. Everett HO, De Lucia FC. 1989. J. Chem. Phys. 90:3520-3527

81. Matsuo Y, Lee SK, Schwendeman RH. 1989. J. Chem. Phys. 91:3948-3965

Nuclear Spin Conversion

31

82. Shin U, Schwendeman RH. 1991. J. Chem. Phys. 94:7560-7561

83. Nagels B, Bakker P, Hermans LJF, Chapovsky PL. 1998. Chem. Phys. Lett. 294:387-390

32

Chapovsky & Hermans

TABLE 1. Close ortho-para level pairs in CH3F and calculated conversion

rates (γ) induced by spin-spin (SS) and spin rotation (SR) interactions.

level pair
J ′, K ′-J, K

ωα′α/2π(1)

(MHz)

γSS/P
(10−3 s−1/torr)

γSR/P
(10−3 s−1/torr)

11,1-9,3

130.99±0.15

7.7

Molecule

13CH3F

21,1-20,3

-351.01±0.16

12CH3F

9,2-10,0

8591.7±0.3

15,7-17,6

1745.7±2.3

28,5-27,6

1189.2±1.5

51,4-50,6

-41.3±2.5

4.4
9.3·10−3
6.8·10−3
16·10−3
28·10−3

1.7(2)
1.3·10−3

–

–

≃ 0.3(3)

0.1

(1)Molecular parameters for 13CH3F from [34] and for 12CH3F from [54].
(2)Calculated assuming spin-rotational tensor component C22=1 kHz [46].
(3)Calculated assuming spin-rotational tensor component C21=3.6 kHz and a

value for Γ = 2 · 107 s−1/torr [50].

Nuclear Spin Conversion

33

m

V

mn

n

200

150

100

50

0

)
1
-

m
c
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
e
v
e
L

ortho

para

Figure 1: The rotational states of 13CH3F below 200 cm−1 in the ground vi-
brational state calculated using the molecular parameters from [34]. The level
pair (J ′=11,K ′=1)–(J=9,K=3) is shown to be mixed by intramolecular pertur-
bation ˆV . The bent lines indicate collisional transitions inside the ortho and para

subspaces.

34

Chapovsky & Hermans

x
y

C

F
z

2

1

3

Figure 2: Numbering of the hydrogen nuclei in CH3F and deﬁnition of the

molecular coordinate system.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

35

LASER

Figure 3: The principle of Light-Induced Drift (LID) [29]. Due to velocity-

selective excitation combined with a state-dependent kinetic cross section, the

light-absorbing species (black circles) exhibits anisotropic diﬀusion through the

optically inert species (gray circles). Here we have assumed laser detuning in

the blue wing (Ω > 0) and increased transport collision rate upon excitation,

resulting in Light-Induced Drift of the absorbing species towards the laser.

36

Chapovsky & Hermans

9P(32) of CO2

0.2

K =  0 1

2

3

4

)

1
−

m
c
(
 
.
f
f

e
o
c
 

n
o

i
t

p
r
o
s
b
A

0.1

0.0

−400

−200

0

200

Frequency (MHz)

Figure 4: The R(4, K) absorption lines of ortho (–) and para (- -) 13CH3F in the

vicinity of the P(32) line of a CO2 laser in the 9.6 µm band. The spectrum was
calculated for pressure P =0.5 torr of 13CH3F using the molecular parameters

from [34, 68].

Nuclear Spin Conversion

37

separation
beam

separation tube

Valve

1

1

2

probe beam

test cell

Stark
electrodes

reference
cell

to ballast 
volume

to ballast 
volume

detector

Figure 5: Schematic of the Novosibirsk setup [33]. Separation is achieved in the

long upper tube. For increased sensitivity and long-term stability in detection,

this diﬀerential method makes use of two detection cells with phase-shifted Stark

modulation by electrodes 1 and an additional Stark modulation by electrodes 2

(see text).

38

Chapovsky & Hermans

separation
beam

separation tube

detector

valve

test cell

reference 

reservoir

(equilibrium

composition)

probe beam

valve

Figure 6:

Schematic of the Leiden setup [41]. After separation by LID, an

enriched and a reference sample are isolated by closing two valves, and the con-

version process is probed by absorption. For conversion measurements at elevated

temperatures a two-compartment oven was connected to the test and reference

cells [59]. For conversion measurements in an electric ﬁeld a Stark cell was added

to the test cell [58].

Nuclear Spin Conversion

39

Close valves

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

]

%

[
 
t

n
e
m
e
h
c
i
r
n
E

n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

-1.0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

t [s]

Figure 7: Typical enrichment decay curve as measured by absorption, for the
13CH3F spin conversion at pressure 0.6 torr. The smooth curve is an exponential

ﬁt to the data [41].

40

Chapovsky & Hermans

30

20

10

1
−

3
−

)

s

0
1
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

13CH3F/12CH3F
13CH3F/13CH3F

0
0.0

0.5

1.0
Pressure(torr)

1.5

2.0

Figure 8: The pressure dependence of the 13CH3F conversion rate as a function
of pressure. (•) – 13CH3F in 12CH3F as a buﬀer gas [33]; (◦) – pure 13CH3F [41].

The solid lines give a linear ﬁt for the two data sets.

Nuclear Spin Conversion

41

15

10

5

1
−

3
−

)

s

0
1
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

13CH3F/CH3Cl
13CH3F/O2
13CH3F/N2

0
0.0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Mole fraction, x

0.8

1.0

Figure 9: The 13CH3F conversion rate in binary mixtures as a function of mole

fraction of CH3Cl, O2, or N2. The total pressure P =1 torr, T = 297 K. Extrap-

olation to x = 1 yields the conversion rate in collisions with the corresponding

buﬀer gas [41].

42

Chapovsky & Hermans

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1
−

3
−

)

s

0
1
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Pressure (torr)

Figure 10: The pressure dependence of the conversion rate in 12CH3F. Data

marked by open squares are from [59]; ﬁlled squares are from [33].

Nuclear Spin Conversion

43

10.0

1.0

0.1

)
r
r
o

t
/

1
−

s

3
−
0
1
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

13CH3F
12CH3F

250

450

650

850

Temperature (K)

Figure 11: The conversion rates in CH3F at various temperatures [59] (revised).
The solid lines represent the calculated conversion rates in 13CH3F and 12CH3F

assuming the same Γ(T ) for both molecules (see Eq. (24)) and mixing of ortho

and para states only by spin-spin interaction.

44

Chapovsky & Hermans

(11,1)

(9,3)

 
 
)
z
H
G

(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

3411.40

3411.35

3411.30

3411.25

3411.20

3411.15

3411.10

1
-

0.04

0.06

0.05

0.03

0.02

0.01

)
 

s
 
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

Exp.
Theory

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

0.00

0

200

400

600
Electric field (V/cm)

800

1000

1200

Figure 12: Upper panel: Splitting of the (11,1) and (9,3) levels by an electric

ﬁeld. Crossings which should contribute to the conversion through mixing by

spin-spin interaction (|∆M | ≤ 2) are marked. Lower panel: Experimental and
theoretical spin conversion rates γ(E) in 13CH3F as a function of the electric

ﬁeld strength. Gas pressure is 0.20 torr (26.6 Pa). The experimental points are

connected to guide the eye [58].

Nuclear Spin Conversion

45

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

)

1
−

s
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

Valves closed

Electric field on

t
n
e
m
h
c
i
r
n
E

0

500
Time (s)

1000

0.00

0.0

0.2

0.4
Pressure (torr)

0.6

0.8

Figure 13: The ortho–para conversion rate in 13CH3F as a function of pressure

in a static electric ﬁeld of 652.8 V/cm : experiment (•) and theory (–). The ﬁeld
is chosen such that the M ′=11 and M =9 magnetic sublevels of the levels (J ′=11,
K ′=1) and (J=9, K=3) become degenerate (see Figure 12). The inset shows a

typical decay curve [70].

46

Chapovsky & Hermans

0.4

0.2

1
−

3
−

)
r
r
o
t
/

s

0
1
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

i

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Mole fraction, x

0.8

1.0

Figure 14: The experimental data for the nuclear spin conversion in 12CH3F

molecules as a function of mole fraction of nitrogen (∗), and oxygen (•) [83]. The

total pressure is 1 torr. Note that the conversion rate increases with increasing
O2 mole fraction, in contrast to the behavior of 13CH3F displayed in Figure 9.

