2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shannon information increase and rescue in friction

Lajos Di´osi
Research Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics
H-1525 Budapest 114, POB 49, Hungary

February 2, 2008

Abstract

On the standard microscopic model of friction we conﬁrm the com-
mon belief that the irreversible entropy production originates from the
increase of Shannon information. We reveal that the reversible micro-
scopic dynamics would continuously violate the Gibbsian interchange-
ability of molecules. The spontaneous restoration of interchangeability
constitutes the mechanism of irreversibility. This is the main sugges-
tion of the Letter. We also point out that the irreversible entropy can
partially be rescued if the size of the medium is ﬁnite. The rescue-
able entropy is found to be proportional to the square of the Fisher
statistical (also called thermodynamic) distance.

Introduction. It is commonly trusted that the thermodynamic entropy
produced in irreversible processes is identical to the increase of the Shan-
non information in the underlying microdynamic process. A direct proof
is yet missing. The microscopic dynamics is reversible, it preserves the
Shannon information. We need a transparent model to resolve this funda-
mental paradox. In this Letter I discuss the mechanical friction of a thin
‘disc’ perpendicularly driven through a medium with small velocity V . The
phenomenological model is a prototype for the whole theory of irreversible
processes [1]. Accordingly, the disc moves against the frictional force −ηV
where η is the friction constant. If the medium (reservoir) is in thermal equi-
librium at inverse temperature β then the rate of thermodynamic entropy
production can be written in this form:

˙S = ηβV 2 .

(1)

An elementary microscopic model will be considered where the medium is
ideal gas of light molecules scattering elastically on both ﬂat surfaces of

1

the disc. This is the Brownian motion microscopic model well-known from
textbooks [2], applied this time to a disc instead of a ‘ball’ [3]. The model
enables us to calculate the exact reversible evolution of the microscopic sys-
I will conﬁrm that the thermodynamic entropy production rate (1)
tem.
can indeed be identiﬁed as the rate ˙I of Shannon information increase in an
inﬁnite medium:

˙I = ˙S ,

if the molecular interchangeability, which is being violated by each reversible
collision on the disc, is being re-imposed (`a la Gibbs). This appears to be a
generic mechanism of irreversibility in the otherwise reversible dynamics.

The molecular interchangeability is less relevant if the medium is ﬁnite.
Then, as we shall prove, the increase of Shannon information becomes less
than the standard irreversible entropy production (1):

In the given microscopic model, the rate of the rescued information (and
entropy) will take the following form:

˙I = ˙S − ˙Sresc .

˙Sresc ≡ ˙Iresc = χ ˙S ,

where ˙S is the standard irreversible entropy production rate (1) and the
rescue factor χ is the ratio of the already interacted molecules within the
whole reservoir.

Shannon information. Let the medium be ideal gas of N identical
molecules of mass m. The initial distribution of the momenta p1, . . . , pN
is the thermal equilibrium distribution at inverse temperature β:

ρ0(p1, . . . , pN ) = exp

β
2m

−

"

N

Xr=1

p2
r

#

.

The molecules collide on the disc elastically (reversibly). The mean inter-
collision time τ is assumed to be independent of V which is a good approx-
imation for small velocities V . In a single collision, the momentum change
of the given molecule is approximately the following:

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

provided the molecules are much lighter than the disc. In a short yet macro-
scopic interval ∆t ≫ τ , the average momentum transfer to the medium is

pr → 2mV − 2pr ,

2

2mV ∆t/τ . Therefore the average frictional force is −2mV /τ while the fric-
tion constant takes this simple form:

η =

2m
τ

.

(7)

(For simplicity, we request that no molecules will scatter twice or more. It
also means that the mass of the medium is being consumed by the collisions
at rate η/2. Then, in a ﬁnite reservoir of mass MR = N m, the friction
process would be cut at time 2MR/η.)

After time ∆t, the equilibrium distribution is shifted:

ρ∆t(p1, . . . , pN ) = ρ0(p1 − ¯p1, . . . , pN − ¯pN ) ,

(8)

where ¯pr is the mean momentum transfer caused by collision to the r’th
molecule. Obviously, the Shannon information has been preserved by the
collisions. On the other hand, we know from the thermodynamics of friction
that there is a deﬁnite entropy production (1). We suspect that an ultimate
information increase comes from the undistinguishability of the molecules.
We assume that knowledge is leaking out, regarding which molecule scattered
on the disc and which did not. Accordingly, the true distribution ρ∆t of
the medium must be the re-symmetrized projection of the post-collision
distribution (8) over all permutations π of the N molecules:

ρ∆t(p1, . . . , pN ) =

ρ0(pπ(1) − ¯p1, . . . , pπ(N ) − ¯pN ) .

(9)

1
N !

π
X

We deﬁne the increment of the Shannon information (counted in ln2 bit
units) during the interval ∆t:

∆I = −

[ρ∆tlnρ∆t − ρ0lnρ0]

Z

dN p
(2πmβ)N/2 .

Using the Eqs.(5,9), I have derived the Taylor-expansion upto the lowest
non-vanishing order of the momentum transfers:

∆I =

β
2m "

N

Xr=1

¯p2
r −

1
N

N

(
Xr=1

¯pr)2

.

#

The two terms on the R.H.S. correspond to macroscopic quantities. There
are two relationships, respectively. The ﬁrst is the balance between the

(10)

(11)

3

average energy increase of the medium and the energy dissipated by the
friction force:

Similarly, there is an average momentum balance as well:

1
2m

N

Xr=1

N

Xr=1

¯p2
r = ηV × V ∆t .

¯pr = ηV × ∆t .

(12)

(13)

Let us insert the above two relationships into (11), yielding the following
rate of information increase:

1 −

∆I
∆t

= ηβV 2

η∆t
2MR (cid:19)
It conﬁrms the equality (2) of
This is the central result of the Letter.
irreversible information (14) and entropy (1) productions in inﬁnite mass
reservoirs (MR = N m = ∞).
Information rescue.

In a ﬁnite reservoir, the Eq.(14) contains a non-

(14)

(cid:18)

.

stationary correction, we call it the rescued information. Its rate reads:

∆Iresc
∆t

= ηβV 2 η∆t
2MR

.

(15)

This equation is equivalent with the Eq.(4) if we set χ = η∆t
2MR which is
indeed the ratio of the consumed mass of molecules to the total mass of
the reservoir. In conventional system–reservoir setups the mass MR of the
reservoir is kept constant. Yet we can consider non-static setups where
the reservoir mass is allocated dynamically, i.e., varying with time. We shall
therefore introduce a monotone function MR(t) with ﬁxed initial MR(0) = 0
and ﬁnal values MR(ttot) = MRtot, where ttot is the total considered time
˙MR should never fall below the con-
of the process. (The allocation rate
sumption rate ˙MR ≥ η/2. In the rest of the Letter we shall understood this
condition, without mentioning it again.) The function MR(t) will govern
the gradual allocation of the medium to the friction process. A discretized
interpretation is the following. We divide the total time and reservoir into
small yet macroscopic parts.
In each short interval [t, t + ∆t] in turn, a
small part ∆MR(t) = MR(t + ∆t) − MR(t) of the total mass MRtot is used
as medium: the small medium is brought into contact with the disc at the
beginning of the small period and removed at the end of it, to be replaced
by the forthcoming small medium e.t.c., until the whole period [0, ttot] and

4

the total reservoir mass MRtot are both exhausted. To the ﬁrst short period
[0, ∆t], in particular, we allocate a small mass MR(∆t) ≈ ˙MR(0)∆t. Substi-
tuting MR by ˙MR(0)∆t, the rate (15) of the rescued information becomes
stationary on the macroscopic time scale:

˙Iresc = ηβV 2 η
2 ˙MR

.

We can extend this diﬀerential relationship for all later time. Invoking the
Eq.(4), we can read out the rescue factor for the case of time-dependent
reservoir allocation:

η
2 ˙MR
This is the ratio of the reservoir’s consumption rate η/2 with respect to its
allocation rate ˙MR.

(17)

χ =

.

An optimization of the rescued information (entropy) is straightforward.

We are going to maximize the total rescued information:

Iresc ≡ Sresc = ηβ

ttot

V 2 η
2 ˙MR

dt ,

0
Z

by varying MR(t) at ﬁxed total reservoir mass MRtot. The Euler-Lagrange
˙MR = const × V . The optimum reservoir allocation MR(t)
equation yields
t
0 V dt of the disc trajectory. We should
is thus proportional to the length
allocate equal reservoir masses over equal lengths of the driven trajectory of
R
the disc. For the special case of stationary driving V = const, the optimum
˙MR ≡ MRtot/ttot. The optimum ratio (17) of
allocation is also stationary:
the rescued/standard information (entropy) takes this form:

Reservoir-driven process. We apply our results to the case when we do
not directly drive the disc. Rather we change slowly the velocity VR(t) of
the medium and only the frictional force −η(V − VR) will drive the disc. All
previous equations remain valid if V is substituted by V − VR which can be
further expressed from the Newton equation M ˙V = −η(V − VR) where M
˙V . The
is the disc mass. The resulting substitution has thus to be V → − M
η
thermodynamic entropy production rate (1) takes this form:

(16)

(18)

(19)

(20)

χ =

ηttot
2MRtot

.

˙S = β

˙V 2 ,

M 2
η

5

and for the rescued information (entropy) rate (16) we obtain:

˙Iresc = βM 2 ˙V 2 1
2 ˙MR

.

It is remarkable that the friction constant η canceled! The rescued informa-
tion in the reservoir-driven process is universally independent of the tempo-
ral scales. (The rescue factor χ will, however, keep its η-dependence (17).)
The optimization of the rescued information (entropy) is again straightfor-
ward. We minimize the total rescued information:

Iresc ≡ Sresc = βM 2

ttot

˙V 2 1
2 ˙MR

dt

0
Z

at ﬁxed total reservoir mass MRtot. The variation of the allocation func-
tion MR(t) yields the condition ˙MR = const × ˙V . The optimum reservoir
allocation MR(t) is proportional to the velocity change V (t) − V (0) of the
disc. For the special case of constant acceleration ˙V = const, the optimum
˙MR ≡ MRtot/ttot. The optimum rescue factor is
allocation is stationary:
the same (19) as for the externally driven disc.

Finally we give an explicit interpretation for the ‘timelessness’ of the
rescued information (21). We note that the velocity V of the reservoir–
driven disc is an equilibrium thermodynamic variable itself. It is tending to
equilibrate with the medium’s velocity VR. In equilibrium it has a deﬁnite
ﬂuctuation σV which is also a thermodynamic quantity: σ2
V = 1/βM . This
gives rise to the notion of statistical length ℓ [4], also called thermodynamic
length [5]:

dℓ =

dV
σV

,

rescaling the parameter length dV in absolute units of equilibrium thermo-
dynamics. Let us express the evolution in function of the statistical length
ℓ instead of the time t. Replacing (21), we obtain the following result for
the rescued entropy rate:

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

′
resc ≡ S
I

′
resc =

M
2M ′
R

,

where the apostrophes stand for ℓ-derivatives. The maximum of the rescued
entropy is obtained by variation of the reservoir allocation function MR(ℓ)
between the ﬁxed endpoints. The resulting optimum is MR(ℓ) = const × ℓ.
In the thermodynamic length, the optimum rescued entropy rate (24) is

6

constant and the total rescued entropy becomes a simple quadratic function
of the total statistical length:

Iresc ≡ Sresc =

M
2MRtot

ℓ2
tot .

(25)

It depends exclusively on the equilibrium thermodynamics of the disc–reservoir
frictional interaction.

Discussion. On the common microscopic model of friction we have
pointed out that the standard thermodynamic entropy production derives
exactly from the increase of Shannon information. The well-known discrep-
ancy with the microscopic reversibility has been resolved in a natural way.
The resolution comes from a related discrepancy, revealed by the Letter:
The microscopic model is inevitably violating the Gibbsian interchangeabil-
ity of molecules. The recovery, i.e., the re-symmetrization of the phase-
space density is obviously irreversible. This is the mechanism of Shannon
information increase and of macroscopic entropy production. (The role of
interchangeability in the irreversibility of system-reservoir interactions has
independently been noticed for a quantum informatic model of non-thermal
equilibration by Ziman et al.
[6].) The ﬁrst proof of perfect coincidence
between the Shannon information and the phenomenological entropy pro-
duction in a common irreversible process has been achieved by the present
Letter. The phenomenology of friction is structurally identical to the model
of general irreversible processes [1]. We therefore incline to think that our
results reﬂects general features of irreversible processes.

We have also shown that the information increase falls with the size of
the medium. A certain portion of the standard entropy production can thus
be rescued in ﬁnite reservoirs. The Gibbsian molecular interchangeability,
having been violated locally, will be recovered by a process propagating in
space. The identity of the distinguished molecules (i.e. of those which ‘took
part’ in friction) will be smashed gradually over bigger and bigger parts of
the surroundings. It is clear that this propagation is cut by the walls of the
reservoir though temporal aspects (if any) of the propagation have not been
discussed at all.

Entropy rescue might remain pure speculation for static reservoirs. The
Letter has discussed time-dependent reservoir allocations. An externally
driven ‘object’ in a medium at rest as well as an object driven merely by the
frictional force in a moving medium have been considered. The optimum
reservoir allocation is proportional to the real length of the object trajectory
in the ﬁrst case, and to the statistical (thermodynamical) length in the
second case. The second result gives an exact microscopic interpretation

7

for the role of thermodynamic length in irreversible process optimization.
This may be a crucial step in the longstanding complex research [4, 5, 7]
to illuminate the signiﬁcance of Fisher’s statistical distance in statistics,
control, thermodynamics, and quantum information.

This work was supported by the Hungarian OTKA Grant 32640.

References

1982).

1971).

[1] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics (Clarendon, Oxford,

[2] A. Isihara, Statistical Physics (Academic Press, New York–London,

[3] Our present results can be generalized for the ‘ball’ at the additional
cost (spared by the Letter) of using the joint phase-space distribution
of the molecular momenta and the coordinates since the reversible de-
scription of the collisions needs the coordinates, too.

[4] R.A. Fisher, Proc. R. Soc. Edinburgh 42, 321 (1922). W.K.Wootters,
Phys. Rev. D23, 357(1981); S.L. Braunstein and C.M. Caves, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 72, 3439 (1994).

[5] F.Weinhold, Phys. Today 29, 23 (1976); G.Ruppeiner, Phys.Rev. A20,
1608 (1979); L.Di´osi, G.Forg´acs, B.Luk´acs, and H.L.Frisch, Phys.Rev.
A29, 3343 (1984).

[6] M.Ziman et al., Phys. Rev. A65 402105 (2002).

[7] P. Salamon and R.S. Berry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 1127; B. An-
dresen and J.M. Gordon, Phys. Rev. E50, 4346 (1994); P.Salamon and
J.D.Nulton, Europhys. Lett. 42 571 (1998); L.Di´osi and P.Salamon,
p286 in: Thermodynamics of Energy Conversion and Transport, eds.:
S.Sieniutycz and A.deVos (Springer, Berlin, 2000).

8

