2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rapid Determination of Multiple Reaction
Pathways in Molecular Systems:
The Soft-Ratcheting Algorithm

Daniel M. Zuckerman∗† and Thomas B. Woolf†‡
†Department of Physiology and ‡Department of Biophysics,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205

January 28, 2014

Abstract

We discuss the “soft-ratcheting” algorithm which generates tar-
geted stochastic trajectories in molecular systems with scores corre-
sponding to their probabilities. The procedure, which requires no ini-
tial pathway guess, is capable of rapidly determining multiple path-
ways between known states. Monotonic progress toward the target
state is not required. The soft-ratcheting algorithm is applied to
an all-atom model of alanine dipeptide, whose unbiased trajectories
are assumed to follow overdamped Langevin dynamics. All possi-
ble pathways on the two-dimensional dihedral surface are determined.
The associated probability scores, though not optimally distributed at
present, may provide a mechanism for estimating reaction rates.

∗Current address: Center for Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, University of

Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, dzuckerman@ceoh.pitt.edu

1

1 Introduction

Reaction paths in large molecular systems, such as biomolecules, provide crit-
ical information regarding structural intermediates (transitions states) and
barrier heights. The search for these paths has a long history in the applied
math research commnity (e.g., [1]), as well as in the ﬁeld of biomolecular
computation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Many
approaches must start from an initial guess for the reaction path (such as
a straight line between two states), eﬀectively limiting the search to a sin-
gle pathway. On the other hand, “targeted” and “steered” MD approaches
[8, 9, 10] are capable of ﬁnding multiple pathways by repeated simulation
(from diﬀering initial conditions) forced to reach the desired end state.

The recently-introduced soft-ratcheting approach [18] is also capable of
“blindly” determining multiple reaction pathways.
It diﬀers from the tar-
geted and steered approaches in the following ways: (i) monotonic progress
toward the target state is not enforced, permitting a wider range of reaction
pathways; (ii) soft-ratcheting is applied in the context of stochastic dynam-
ics, although this does not prevent the inclusion of explicit solvent molecules;
and (iii) a probability weight (“score”) is associated with each trajectory gen-
erated, which in principle also permits estmates of the reaction rates within
the dynamic importance sampling (DIMS) formulation discussed by Woolf
[19] and by Zuckerman and Woolf [20, 21]. We note that reaction-rate esti-
mates have not yet been produced by the soft-ratcheting algorithm, because
such estimates require trajectories sampled with a near-optimal distribution
(i.e., as would occur in unbiased dynamics; see below).

The soft-ratcheting procedure is simple and is motivated by the Metropo-
lis algorithm [22] and the “exponential transformation” used in nuclear im-
[23]). Related methods include the “weighted-
portance sampling (e.g.,
ensemble Brownian dynamics” approach of Huber and Kim [24] and the
“CONTRA MD” scheme of Harvey and Gabb [7]. The process is: (a) gen-
erate an unbiased step; (b) if the step moves toward the target state, accept
it; (c) if it moves away, accept it with a probability (i.e., “softly”) that in-
creases in the forward direction; (d) repeat, while estimating the probability
score for all accepted steps. We emphasize that the non-monotonicity em-
bodied in (b) and (c), and the existence of the score in (d) distinguish this
method from previous multiple-pathway methods. The guiding concept be-
hind soft-ratcheting is not to force the system (which necessarily perturbs
the dynamics) but to try to allow the system to proceed in a possible, if

2

unlikely, way. Of course, rare stochastic events are just what we seek!

Note too that, unlike the trajectory sampling methods introduced by
Pratt [11] and pursued by Chandler and coworkers [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] as
well as those of Eastman, Grønbech-Jensen and Doniach [17], the overall
eﬀect of the soft-ratcheting algorithm is non-Metropolis in nature (despite
the motivation): trajectories do not evolve from one another and are statis-
tically independent. The Metropolis idea is only used to ensure that a given
trajectory successfully reaches the target state. In this important sense, the
soft-ratcheting algorithm comes under the independent-trajectory rubric of
the DIMS method [19, 20, 21].

2 Theory

2.1 Generating Paths

In essence there is no more theoretical underpinning to producing soft-ratcheted
trajectories than that already sketched in the Introduction: using a physically-
but-arbitrarily chosen acceptance probability function for step increments, one
accepts all forward steps, and backward steps are accepted with a probability
which decreases the more “negative” the increment. See Fig. 1. Here, the
forward direction is simply some vector in conﬁguration space that points
from the initial to the target state — perhaps a dihedral angle in a dihedral
transition. The algorithm is suﬃciently robust (see Results section) that ad-
vance knowledge of the reaction path and the true reaction coordinate is not
necessary.

When generating a series of soft-ratcheted crossing events in a single long
trajectory, it is convenient to use a simple threshold device [21]. This means
only that trajectories are permitted to perform unbiased dynamics in small
regions near the “centers” of the beginning and end states, and biased (i.e.,
soft-ratcheted) dynamics begin only when the threshold is reached. The idea
is to allow the trajectory to explore diﬀerent parts of the stable states, with
an eye toward ﬁnding exit points to diﬀerent pathways. Such exploration,
of course, must take place within the limits of available computer time! As
noted below, our use of the threshold requires further investigation and op-
timization, though it appears to perform the task of permitting exploration
of alternative exit points from a stable state.

3

2.2 Scoring Paths

It is only when one wishes to associate a score with a trajectory that some
analysis must be undertaken. The dynamic importance sampling (DIMS)
approach requires the probability score for use in rate estimates, moreover.
Speciﬁcally, the probability score used in DIMS calculations is the ratio of
two quantities [19, 20, 21]: (i) the probability that the given trajectory would
occur in an unbiased simulation — a known quantity; and (ii) the probabilty
that the given trajectory was produced in the biased (e.g., soft-ratcheting)
simulation. Further details of the full DIMS formulation may be found in
Refs. [19, 20, 21] and are beyond the scope of the present report. Here we
focus solely on computing the probability that the soft-ratcheting algorithm
produced a given trajectory (ii), which unfortunately does not follow directly
from the simple acceptance probability used to generate the trajectory.

This section gives full details of generating the probability score (i.e.,
ratio) required by DIMS. Brieﬂy, however, assume progress towards the tar-
get is measured in terms of a scalar “distance,” ϕ, which is larger at the
target state than the initial: each step corresponds to an increment ∆ϕ,
with positive increments moving toward the target. From any starting con-
ﬁguration xn−1, one can deﬁne the unbiased distribution of ∆ϕ increments
p∆ϕ(∆ϕ; xn|xn−1), which is simply the projection of the more fundamental
distribution of conﬁgurations, xn, onto the ∆ϕ coordinate. The distribution
of ∆ϕ increments typically is nearly Gaussian with a mean which may be ei-
ther positive or negative. However, once certain backward steps are rejected
due to the acceptance function in the soft-ratcheting procedure (speciﬁed
below), the ∆ϕ distribution is shifted forward in a non-trivial way to become
the biased distribution, b∆ϕ(∆ϕ; xn|xn−1). Estimating the ratio of values of
these two distributions for every accepted step (though not the entire distri-
butions) is the task at hand.

The multi-dimensional case reduces to a simple scalar description in terms
of ∆ϕ increments, but we include it for completeness. We assume (although it
is not necessary for the formalism) that the initial and ﬁnal states of interest
in our molecule do not require the full all-atom conﬁguration x, but rather a
subset of coordinates, say, {φ1, φ2, . . .}. If the target point is the “center” of
state B, say, {φB
i }, then one can always measure the distance to that point,

dB({φi}) =

φi − φB
i

(1)

1/2

2

,

#

(cid:17)

"
Xi (cid:16)

4

where it may be necessary to consider the closest distance if the φi coordinates
represent true angles. For a step from xn−1 to xn, one can then deﬁne a one-
dimensional change in distance by

∆ϕ(n−1 → n) = dB({φ(n)

i }) − dB({φ(n−1)

i

}) .

(2)

In essence, since distance from the target is always a scalar quantity, one need
only consider a one-dimensional description to estimate probability scores.

T
P
E
C
C
A

1.5

0.5

1

0

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

0
∆ϕ

Figure 1: An example acceptance function for use in the soft-ratcheting
algorithm. The acceptance probability pacc for a given step is plotted against
the “distance” toward the target in angle space, ∆ϕ. Steps toward the target
(∆ϕ > 0) are always accepted, while steps away from the target (∆ϕ < 0)
are accepted with probability less than one. Thus, trajectories are not forced
toward the target, but “softly” ratcheted.

The acceptance function for ∆ϕ increments is very simple and is speciﬁed
by the simulator. The function used in the present work is illustrated in Fig.
1 and is written

pacc(∆ϕ) =

1
exp [−|∆ϕ/∆ϕ0|2]

if ∆ϕ > 0
if ∆ϕ < 0 ,

(

(3)

5

where ∆ϕ0 is a parameter which controls the width of the (backwards) decay
depicted in Fig. 1. The gradual decay to zero is the “softness” of soft-
ratcheting: many backwards steps will be accepted.

With pacc speciﬁed, the ﬁnal task toward generating the required probabil-
ity score is to consider the relation between the unbiased and soft-ratcheted
(biased) distribution. The probability (density) that the soft-ratcheting algo-
rithm will generate a given ϕ increment, b∆ϕ, is proportional to the product
of the unbiased probability of generating the increment, p∆ϕ, and the accep-
tance probability, pacc:

b∆ϕ(∆ϕ) = N −1p∆ϕ(∆ϕ) pacc(∆ϕ) ,

(4)

where N < 1 is the required normalization factor, given by the fraction
of steps initiated at xn−1 which would be accepted by the soft-ratcheting
procedure. As noted, the biased distribution, b∆ϕ, has been shifted forward
in the ϕ direction because the acceptance function pacc partially suppresses
backward steps.

The desired probability score for a single step is then the ratio deriving

from (4), namely,

single-step ratio =

p∆ϕ(∆ϕ)
b∆ϕ(∆ϕ)

=

N
pacc(∆ϕ)

.

(5)

To truly calculate the normalization factor N , one would have to initiate
a large number of steps from the point xn−1 and compute the fraction ac-
cepted by the soft-ratcheting acceptance function. As that procedure would
be very computationally expensive, we instead use the sequence of nearby at-
tempted steps, both accepted and rejected, to estimate the probability that
soft-ratcheted steps were accepted in a given local region of conﬁguration
space. The ﬁnal score is simply the product of the single-step scores (5).

3 Results

The results of this preliminary report may be summarized in three points:
(i) the soft-ratcheting algorithm is capable of generating reaction pathways
rapidly — in a fraction of the time which would be required by unbiased
simulation: see Fig. 2; (ii) the scores associated with each crossing trajectory
permit the generation of a most-important ensemble of events as in Fig.

6

3, which can give more detailed information about the full “valley” of the
pathway; and (iii) the associated scores, in principle, permit rate estimates
within the dynamic importance sampling formulation [19, 20, 21].

ALANINE PATHS -- EPSILON = 80

700 NSEC UNBIASED
10 NSEC DIMS

180

90

0

-90

I
S
P

c7eq

alphaR

alpha
  L

c7ax

-180

-180

-90

0

PHI

90

180

Figure 2: Rapid generation of crossing trajectories with the soft-ratcheting
algorithm. The ﬁgure shows both crossing trajectories generated by unbiased
simulation (dark lines) and those generated by the soft-ratcheting algorithm
in a fraction of the uniased simulation time (dashed lines, “DIMS”). The
potential is AMBER94 [25] as encoded in the Molecular Modelling Tool Kit
[26] for an all-atom representation of alanine dipeptide, and the unbiased
trajectories were generated using overdamped Langevin dynamics.

In Figure 2, one sees the rapidity with which the soft-ratcheting algorithm
generates crossing trajectories. The same three pathways are found in 1/70th
of the simulation time. In absolute terms, the 10 nsec. of simulation time used
in generating the soft-ratcheting trajectories appears quite long; however, this
time may be signiﬁcantly reduced by adjusting the threshold level (see Sec.
2) from the preliminary value used to generate the depicted results.

Figure 3 illustrates the capacity of the soft-ratcheting algorithm to gener-

7

ALANINE PATHS -- EPSILON = 80

700 NSEC UNBIASED
700 NSEC DIMS (TOP)

180

90

0

-90

I
S
P

c7eq

alphaR

alpha
  L

c7ax

-180

-180

-90

0

PHI

90

180

Figure 3: Accuracy of top-scoring crossing trajectories generated with the
soft-ratcheting algorithm. The ﬁgure shows both crossing trajectories gen-
erated by unbiased simulation (dark lines) and the top-scoring trajectories
generated by the soft-ratcheting (dashed lines, “DIMS”). Note that the large
ensemble of soft-ratcheted trajectories appear to better explore the full path-
way “valleys.” Data are from simulations of equal length, with the same
potential and dynamics as in Fig. 2.

ate an “important” (highly weighted) ensemble of crossing events. The large
set of trajectories shown in the ﬁgure clearly gives a better description of the
pathway valleys than the sparse events generated by unbiased simulation.

Figure 3 also demonstrates the agreement between the weight estimate
discussed previously (used to select the depicted trajectories) and the un-
biased results. The higher-weighted trajectories coincide strongly with the
unbiased events. The large cluster of soft-ratcheted trajectories in the region
110 < φ < 180 deserves comment. Because there is only a single unbiased
event in that region, it is not obvious whether the relatively widely dispersed
soft-ratcheted trajectories are “correct” — i.e., whether such an ensemble of

8

trajectories would be found in a long unbiased simulation, with many events
in the region. Examination of the adiabatic energy surface (not shown) does
indicate that the channel in question is indeed signiﬁcantly wider than the
two pathways crossing φ = 0, though perhaps not quite to the extent sug-
gested by the soft-ratcheting trajectories of Fig. 3.

4 Future Research

Several means of improving the soft-ratcheting procedure are possible, of
which we mention two. First, to increase the speed with which transition
trajectories are generated — really, to decrease the waiting interval between
crossing events — one can reduce the size of the threshold region (Sec. 2)
in which purely unbiased dynamics are performed. The threshold region
was intended to permit trajectories to explore a multiplicity of potential
“exit points” from the stable state. However, the “softness” of the soft-
ratcheting algorithm should, by itself, permit a substantial degree of this
kind of exploration, and it may be possible to use a very small threshold
region.

Second, a more optimal (i.e., higher-scoring) ensemble of trajectories pre-
sumably can be obtained by systematic estimation of parameter ∆ϕ0.
In
fact, the promising preliminary results presented in Sec. 3 were based on an
ad-hoc choice. It is a simple matter to study in more detail an unbiased dis-
tribution of ∆ϕ increments, and then use this data to systematically inform
the choice of ∆ϕ0. Moreover, one can imagine attempting to bias trajecto-
ries forward in a focussed conical region of dihedral angles [23], rather than
simply according to (hyper)planes of constant ∆ϕ.

Ultimately, it will also be important to compare the soft-ratcheted paths
(which presumably represent the stochastic dynamics in a faithul way) with
those generated by explicitly-solvated molecular dyanmics simulation. That
is, how does the addition of explicit solvent alter the paths? Of course,
this comparison will only be possible in small molecules like the alanine
dipeptide and other small peptides, but it will provide a crucial validation of
the technique.

9

5 Summary and Discussion

We have given motivation and details for the “soft-ratcheting” algorithm
[18] for determining reaction pathways in molecular systems governed by
stochastic dynamics. The method generates independent transition trajec-
tories which will not be trapped in a single channel (pathway), and hence
is capable of ﬁnding multiple channels. Although a ﬁnal state is always tar-
geted on average, the algorithm permits “backward” steps with a suppressed
probability. The trajectories are thus ratcheted forward, but only softly: see
Fig. 1. The capacities of the approach were demonstrated in Figs. 2 and 3
for an all-atom model of the alanine dipeptide molecule evolving according
to overdamped Langevin dynamics with the AMBER potential [25].

Beyond rapidly generating multiple pathways, as other existing approaches
are presently able to do [8, 9, 10], the soft-ratcheting algorithm has the poten-
tial also to estimate reaction rates and free energy diﬀerences via the dynamic
importance sampling (DIMS) framework [19, 20, 21]. The soft-ratcheting al-
gorithm associates a score (see Sec. 2) with each transition trajectory it
generates. The scores, in turn, may be used in principle to estimate kinet-
ics and free energy diﬀerences. At present, however, we note that initial
results showed that further parameterization and/or reﬁnement of the algo-
rithm are necessary before eﬃciency can be obtained in rate and free energy
calculations.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge funding provided by the NIH (under grant GM54782),
the AHA (grant-in-aid), the Bard Foundation, and the Department of Phys-
iology. Jonathan Sachs oﬀered many helpful comments on the manuscript.

References

[1] K. M¨uller and L. D. Brown. Location of saddle points and minimum
energy paths by a constrained simplex optimization procedure. Theoret.
Chim. Acta (Berlin), 53:75–93, 1979.

10

[2] R. Czerminski and R. Elber. Reaction-path study of conformational
transitions in ﬂexible systems - applications to peptides. J. Chem. Phys.,
92:5580–5601, 1990.

[3] C. Choi and R. Elber. Reaction path study of helix formation in
tetrapeptides: Eﬀect of side chains. J. Chem. Phys., 94:751–760, 1991.

[4] S. Fischer and M. Karplus. Conjugate peak reﬁnement: an algorithm
for ﬁnding reaction paths and accurate transition states in systems with
many degrees of freedom. Chem. Phys. Lett., 194:252–261, 1992.

[5] E. M. Sevick, A. T. Bell, and D. N. Theodorou. A chain of states method
for investigating infrequent event processes occurring in multistate, mul-
tidimensional systems. J. Chem. Phys., 98:3196–3212, 1993.

[6] R. Olender and R. Elber. Yet another look at the steepest path. J.

Molec. Struc. (Theochem), 398-399:63–71, 1997.

[7] S. C. Harvey and H. A. Gabb. Conformational transitions using molecu-
lar dynamics with minimum biasing. Biopolymers, 33:1167–1172, 1993.

[8] J. Schlitter, M. Engels, P. Kruger, E. Jacoby, and A. Wollmer. Targeted
molecular-dynamics simulation of conformational change – Application
to the T ↔ R transition in insulin. Molec. Sim., 10:291–309, 1993.

[9] J. F. D´iaz, B. Wroblowski, J. Schlitter, and Y. Engelborghs. Calcu-
lation of pathways for the conformational transition between the GTP-
and GDP-bound states of the Ha-ras-p21 protein: Calculations with ex-
plicit solvent simulations and comparison with calculations in vacuum.
Proteins, 28:434–451, 1997.

[10] S. Izrailev, S. Stepaniants, M. Balsera, Y. Oono, and K. Schulten. Molec-
ular dynamics study of unbinding of the Avidin-Biotin complex. Bio-
phys. J., 72:1568–1581, 1997.

[11] L. R. Pratt. A statistical method for identifying transition states in high

dimensional problems. J. Chem. Phys., 85:5045–5048, 1986.

[12] C. Dellago, P. G. Bolhuis, F. S. Csajka, and D. Chandler. Transition
path sampling and the calculation of rate constants. J. Chem. Phys.,
108:1964–1977, 1998.

11

[13] C. Dellago, P. G. Bolhuis, and D. Chandler. Eﬃcient transition path
sampling: Application to Lennard-Jones cluster rearrangements. J.
Chem. Phys., 108:9236–9245, 1998.

[14] F. S. Csajka and D. Chandler. Transition pathways in a many-body
system: Application to hydrogen-bond breaking in water. J. Chem.
Phys., 109:1125–1133, 1998.

[15] P. G. Bolhuis, C. Dellago, and D. Chandler. Sampling ensembles of
deterministic transition pathways. Faraday Discuss., 110:421–436, 1998.

[16] C. Dellago, P. G. Bolhuis, and D. Chandler. On the calculation of
reaction rate constants in the transition path ensemble. J. Chem. Phys.,
110:6617–6625, 1998.

[17] P. Eastman, N. Grønbech-Jensen, and S. Doniach. Simulation of protein

folding by reaction path annealing. (unpublished), 2000.

[18] D. M. Zuckerman and T. B. Woolf. Accelerated estimation of reaction
rates, average paths, and relative free energies in all-atom molecular
model. Biophys. J., 78:2364, 2000.

[19] T. B. Woolf. Path corrected functionals of stochastic trajectories: to-
wards relative free energy and reaction coordinate calculations. Chem.
Phys. Lett., 289:433–441, 1998.

[20] D. M. Zuckerman and T. B. Woolf. Dynamic reaction paths and rates
J. Chem. Phys.,

through importance-sampled stochastic dynamics.
111:9475–9484, 1999.

[21] D. M. Zuckerman and T. B. Woolf. Eﬃcient dynamic importance sam-

pling of rare events in one dimension. Phys. Rev. E, 63:016702, 2001.

[22] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and
E. Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. J.
Chem. Phys., 21:1087–1092, 1953.

[23] T. E. Booth. A sample problem for variance reduction in MNCP.
Technical Report LA-10363-MS, Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1985.
http://lib-www.lanl.gov/la-pubs/00326096.pdf, 00326096.pdf.

12

[24] G. A. Huber and S. Kim. Weighted-ensemble Brownian dynamics sim-
ulations for protein association reactions. Biophys. J., 70:97–110, 1996.

[25] W. D. Cornell, P. Cieplak, C. I. Bayly, I. R. Gould, K. M. Merz, D. M.
Ferguson, D. C. Spellmeyer, T. Fox, J. W. Caldwell, and P. A. Kollman.
A 2nd generation force-ﬁeld for the simulation of proteins, nucleic-acids,
and organic-molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 117:5179–5197, 1995.

[26] K. Hinsen. The molecular modeling toolkit: A new approach to molec-

ular simulations. J. Comp. Chem., 21:79–85, 2000.

13

