2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The electrostatic potential proﬁle along a biased molecular wire: A model quantum
mechanical calculation

St´ephane Pleutin,1 Hermann Grabert,1 Gert-Ludwig Ingold,2 and Abraham Nitzan3
1Physikalisches Institut, Albert-Ludwigs-Universit¨at,
Hermann-Herder-Straße 3, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany
2Institut f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Augsburg, Universit¨atsstraße 1, D-86135 Augsburg, Germany
3School of Chemistry, The Sackler Faculty of Science, Tel Aviv University, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel
(Dated: August 1, 2013)

We study the electrostatic potential of a molecular wire bridging two metallic electrodes in the
limit of weak contacts. With the use of a tight-binding model including a fully three-dimensional
treatment of the electrostatics of the molecular junction, the potential is shown to be poorly screened,
dropping mostly along the entire molecule. In addition, we observe pronounced Friedel oscillations
that can be related to the breaking of electron-hole symmetry. Our results are in semi-quantitative
agreement with recent state-of-the-art ab initio calculations and point to the need of a three-
dimensional treatment to properly capture the behavior of the electrostatic potential. Based on
these results, current-voltage curves are calculated within the Landauer formalism. It is shown that
Coulomb interaction partially compensates the localization of the charges induced by the electric
ﬁeld and consequently tends to suppress zones of negative diﬀerential resistance.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Due to important technical progress, the ﬁeld of molec-
ular electronics, born in the mid 70s with the proposal
of Aviram and Ratner to use single organic molecules
as rectiﬁers,1 receives rapidly growing interest.2,3,4 In-
deed, new fabrication methods and probes now enable
individual molecules or small numbers of them to be
connected to macroscopic electrodes.2,5,6,7,8 Among these
methods, one may cite, for instance, the break-junction
technique5,6,8 and the use of a conducting Atomic-Force-
Microscope (AFM) to contact molecules absorbed on a
metallic surface.7

On the theoretical side, the problem posed by these
experimental works is highly challenging. We are facing
a non-equilibrium many-body problem where, moreover,
the coupling to a phonon bath may also be of impor-
tance. Up to now, most of the studies have focussed
on the coherent regime and the Landauer approach has
been employed to obtain the conductance from ab initio
or semi-empirical models.3 Important inelastic processes
were included only within simple models9,10,11,12,13 and
much further progress is needed before one may hope to
reach a satisfactory understanding of the problem.

The exact number of molecules contacted by the leads
remains for a large part uncontrolled in the experimental
set-ups cited above.2,8 In theoretical modelling it is con-
venient to assume that a single organic molecule bridges
two semi-inﬁnite metallic electrodes (cf. Fig. 1). Another
important experimental aspect is the fact that current-
voltage characteristics are measured with applied volt-
ages up to a few volts, values which bring us well away
from the linear regime.

In this context, a central question concerns the electro-
static potential proﬁle of a biased molecular wire. The
importance of this issue was ﬁrst demonstrated by Datta
and coworkers.14,15 Using semi-empirical models, they

have shown that diﬀerent choices of the electrostatic pro-
ﬁle have a profound eﬀect on the current-voltage char-
acteristics of a molecular junction. For instance, the
transport properties are strongly modiﬁed depending on
whether the potential drop occurs at the interface be-
tween molecule and electrode or along the molecular wire.
In fact, it is natural to assume that even the details of the
potential shape have a considerable eﬀect on molecular
conductance.

Recently, a few works along that line have been
reported.16,17,18 They give us a rather ambiguous view
of this fundamental problem. Model calculations involv-
ing self-consistent solutions of the coupled Poisson and
Schr¨odinger equations suggest that the potential drop
occurs mainly at the interface between the molecule and
the electrodes.16 Within the molecule, the electrostatic
potential is then found to be essentially ﬂat. Screen-
ing appears to be very eﬃcient within this approach and
the ﬁnal conclusions are in agreement with some pre-
vious investigations.14,15 However, these model calcula-
tions involve a drastic approximation: instead of solving
the full Poisson equation, the authors of Ref. 16 have used
a one-dimensional version of it. Implicitly, it is then as-
sumed that the lateral dimensions of the molecule are
much larger than the screening length. For quasi-one
dimensional systems with lateral dimensions of the or-
der of a few angstr¨oms, such as the organic molecules
used in recent experimental work, this approximation is
clearly questionable.19 Indeed, recent state-of-the-art ab
initio calculations on carbon and gold chains show a quite
diﬀerent picture.17,18 In these works, the potential drop
occurs not only at the interface but rather along the en-
tire molecule. Moreover, the local potential is found to
display pronounced Friedel oscillations. Contrary to pre-
vious results, screening appears to be rather ineﬃcient,
even for metallic wires.

We are then left with two diﬀerent pictures and it be-
comes clear that a full understanding of the electrostatic

potential proﬁle in biased molecular wires or metallic con-
strictions is still lacking. In this work, we re-address the
problem following the approach by Mujica et al.16 We
perform model calculations and solve the coupled set of
two equations: the Poisson equation for the electrostatics
and the Schr¨odinger equation for the electronic structure.
In this respect, our work is similar to that of Mujica et
al.16 However, the calculation is modiﬁed in ways that
we believe to be essential.
In particular, we treat the
real three-dimensional Poisson equation. As recently dis-
cussed by us,19 we expect that this proper handling of the
electrostatic problem changes the qualitative behavior:
The potential is poorly screened and falls oﬀ substan-
tially along the molecule. Indeed, the electrostatic po-
tential proﬁle of the model calculations presented here is
in semi-quantitative agreement with the ab initio results
reported in Refs. 17 and 18. However, while ab initio
calculations are involved and intricate enough to leave
the underlying physics essentially obscure, our model in-
cludes only the ingredients necessary to capture the cor-
rect screening eﬀects, and consequently our calculations
are rather economic in time. We thus believe that our ap-
proach may help to gain further insight into the diﬃcult
problem of understanding transport through molecules,
i.e. at a scale where quantum eﬀects are prominent. A
forthcoming work by Ghosh et al.20 reaches conclusions
similar to those presented here.

In section II, our model Hamiltonian is introduced.
The electronic density in the absence of a bias potential
is then studied in section III, using exact diagonalization
and Hartree-Fock calculations that are shown to agree
reasonably well which each other. The electrostatic pro-
ﬁle is then calculated in section IV at the Hartree-Fock
level. Finally, the current-voltage characteristics are dis-
cussed in section V.

II. MODEL HAMILTONIAN

A. Coulomb interaction including image charges

The physical problem posed by a molecular wire be-
tween two inﬁnite metallic reservoirs is far too compli-
cated to be solved exactly and, to proceed, several ap-
proximations are necessary. First, we assume that the
surfaces of the two electrodes are inﬁnite planes (cf.
Fig. 1). Second, the molecule is assumed to be weakly
connected to the metallic electrodes so that their chemi-
cal constitution is unimportant. This is certainly not ful-
ﬁlled for some of the wires examined experimentally, with
covalent bonds between molecule and electrode. Finally,
we assume the characteristic time scale for electronic pro-
cesses in the electrodes to be much shorter than the tran-
sit time of electrons in the wire. The electrodes can then
be treated as equipotential surfaces, and the Schr¨odinger
equation is solved under these potential boundary con-
ditions. We are then within the same framework used
in Ref. 16, but proceed diﬀerently. We ﬁrst determine

metallic
electrode

molecular wire

1

n

N

d

a

µl

L

0

2

metallic
electrode

µr

L

z

FIG. 1: Idealized molecular junction. A molecular wire, mod-
elled by a ﬁnite one-dimensional lattice, bridges two metallic
electrodes with surfaces assumed to be inﬁnite planes. The
tunnelling contacts, eﬀective only at the two molecular end
sites indicated by 1 and N , are assumed to be weak. The
chemical potentials in the left and right electrode are denoted
by µl and µr, respectively.

the Coulomb interaction potential which includes the im-
age charges due to the metallic leads, keeping its three-
dimensional character. Then, we solve the electronic wire
problem.

The Coulomb interaction energy reads

W =

d3r

d3r′ρ(r)ρ(r′)ϕ(r, r′)

(1)

1
2 Z

Z

where ρ(r) is the charge density in the wire and ϕ(r, r′)
is the potential at point r = (x, y, z) produced by the
charge located at point r′ = (x′, y′, z′). The Coulomb
potential is the solution of the Poisson equation

∆rϕ(r, r′) = −4πU δ(r − r′)

(2)

where for convenience we have introduced a factor U
measuring the strength of the electron-electron interac-
tion. In the absence of the metallic electrodes the solu-
tion of (2) is given by the standard Coulomb potential

ϕ0(r, r′) =

U
|r − r′|

.

(3)

In the setup depicted in Fig. 1, we require the potential
in the absence of an external bias to vanish on the sur-
faces of the metallic electrodes, i.e. at z = 0 and z = L.
A solution of the Poisson equation with these particular
boundary conditions is found using the standard method
of image charges

+∞

Xp=−∞

ϕ(r, r′) =

[ϕ0(r + 2pLˆz, r′) − ϕ0(2pLˆz − r, r′)]

(4)
where L is the distance between the two electrodes (cf.
Fig. 1) and ˆz the unit vector along the molecular axis.

ϕ(r, r′) is a genuine three-dimensional Coulomb poten-
tial including the eﬀects of the two semi-inﬁnite metallic
electrodes. The electrostatics of the molecular junction

is then governed by this potential.
It remains to con-
struct and solve the Schr¨odinger equation for the molec-
ular wire.

B. Tight-binding model including image charges

In the following, we will mainly be concerned with
conjugated molecules and, in particular, with their low-
energy properties. An appropriate description can then
be given by an eﬀective tight-binding Hamiltonian for
the π electrons only.21,22 In addition, since there exist ab
initio results for short chains of gold atoms,18 it is also
of interest to study systems with electrons in s-orbitals.
We therefore attach Gaussian type orbitals of the form

φn(r) = Asxs exp

− α[x2 + y2 + (z − zn)2]
(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(5)

to each atomic site n. This allows us to model both
s-orbitals with s = 0 and p-orbitals with s = 1. The
center of the orbital, zn = d + (n − 1)a, depends on the
distance d between each electrode and the molecule as
well as the lattice constant a in the molecule (cf. Fig. 1).
The parameter α determines the spread of the state and
gives an estimate of the electronic density. Finally, the
normalization constants for s- and p-orbitals are given by
A0 = (2α/π)3/4 and A1 = 2(2/π)3/4α5/4, respectively.

The explicit form (5) of the orbitals allows us to deter-
mine the eﬀective parameters entering the tight-binding
model. In the following, we adopt the ‘Zero Diﬀerential
Overlap’ (ZDO) approximation21,22,23

n(r)φm(r) = |φn(r)|2δn,m
φ⋆

(6)

which remains valid as long as the orbitals φn are strongly
localized on the atomic sites n. It implies orthogonality
between the Gaussian orbitals on diﬀerent sites and, most
importantly, leads to a drastic reduction of non-vanishing
matrix elements of the Coulomb operator since only the
two center integrals are retained in the ﬁnal model. In
particular, no exchange integrals will appear. These inte-
grals, involving a diﬀerential overlap, are usually negligi-
bly small compared to the Coulomb integrals. Moreover,
we approximate the positive cores by point charges lo-
calized at the atomic sites m with coordinates (0, 0, zm).
Then, the energy of an electron localized at site n due to
all positive core charges and their images becomes

3

It is worthwhile to notice that the interaction terms (7)
and (8) depend on the position n along the chain due to
the image charges but also because of the ﬁnite size of
the molecular wire.

Within the ZDO approximation kinetic energy contri-
butions vanish as a consequence of (6). To lowest order,
the overlap leads to a constant shift of the on-site en-
ergy ǫn that may be disregarded and to nearest neigh-
bor hopping. The hopping matrix element t cannot be
evaluated directly within the ZDO and, therefore, has
to be treated as a parameter of the model.21,22,23 How-
ever, it is possible to relax the approximation23 and es-
timate the hopping matrix elements from (5). Doing so,
we have found that their dependences on n are not pro-
nounced, and, moreover, this kind of more sophisticated
treatment would not change qualitatively our ﬁnal con-
clusions. Therefore, we assume the hopping matrix el-
ements, t, to be constant along the chain, and use the
ratio U/t as a parameter to examine the importance of
electron-electron interaction.

With the parameters just discussed, we obtain a
description of the electrons in terms of an eﬀective
tight-binding model which includes long range Coulomb
interaction21,22

H =

(ǫn + vn)c†

n,σcn,σ +

t(c†

n+1,σcn,σ + h.c.)

Xn,σ

Un,n′c†

n,σc†

n′,σ′cn′,σ′ cn,σ .

(9)

Xn,σ
1
2 Xn,n′,σ,σ′

+

c†
n,σ (cn,σ) are the usual creation (annihilation) opera-
tors for an electron with spin σ in the local state φn.
In the ﬁrst term, we have accounted for an additional
shift of the local potential due to an external bias. With
the chemical potentials µl and µr in the left and right
electrode, respectively, the shift at site n is given by

vn = µl +

µr − µl
L

zn .

(10)

The resulting tight-binding model (9) is mostly de-
ﬁned by the geometry of the molecular junction. The
only other parameters are the energies t and U , which
determine the strength of the kinetic and Coulomb en-
ergies, respectively.
It is usually believed that con-
jugated molecules lie in an intermediate regime where
U/t = 1 . . . 4.21,22

ǫn = −U

d3r|φn(r)|2ϕ(r, zmˆz) .

(7)

III. ELECTRON DENSITY WITHOUT BIAS
POTENTIAL

N

Xm=1 Z

Within the ZDO approximation the only ﬁnite Coulomb
matrix elements are related to the interaction energy be-
tween electrons localized at sites n and n′

Un,n′ = U

d3r

d3r′|φn(r)|2ϕ(r, r′)|φn′ (r′)|2 .

(8)

Z

Z

Consider ﬁrst the situation without bias potential,
µl = µr or vn = 0. We analyse for this case the elec-
tron density at equilibrium in the absence of electron
transfer between the molecule and the leads. In all the
calculations presented here, we assume the chains to be
electrically neutral with on average one electron per site.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

n

• α → ∞, corresponding to interactions between

point charges.

(cid:11)
σ
,
n
c
σ
,
†n
c

σ

P

(cid:10)

1.02

1.0

0.98

0.96

FIG. 2: Electronic density without bias potential for a molec-
ular wire of carbon (s = 1) with N = 12 sites. The param-
eters are α = 4.5/a2 and U = t. The full curve is the exact
result for a molecule-electrode distance of d = 2a. The dotted
curve is for the same geometry but at Hartree-Fock level. The
dashed curve is the exact result for the case without metallic
electrodes, d → ∞.

Because of the electron spin, this corresponds to the half-
ﬁlled case. Furthermore, we restrict ourselves to the
ground state of the system.

We have done exact diagonalization studies for chains
of up to 12 sites. Results for the charge density of a
chain with 12 sites shown in Fig. 2 are typical for other
cases studied. Two main features can easily be seen.
(i) The electron density is non-uniform: the electrons
have a tendency to shift towards the middle of the chain.
(ii) Because of this non-uniformity, substantial Friedel
oscillations occur across the wire. These features can
be explained by invoking electron-hole symmetry as it is
shown below.

For the case of a half-ﬁlled band it has long been known
that the electron density is uniform, i.e. does not depend
on the site index n, for models deﬁned on bipartite lat-
tices in such a way that electron-hole symmetry is ful-
ﬁlled. This theorem was ﬁrst discovered for the ground
state of the free-electron (H¨uckel) model24 and later ex-
tended to some interacting systems.25 More recently, a
generalization to canonical and grand canonical ensem-
bles was proven for a large class of models.26 Mathe-
matically, the theorem applies to models invariant with
respect to the transformation c†

n,σ → (−1)ncn,σ.

Applying this transformation, we ﬁnd that the Hamil-
tonian of the molecular wire (9) is invariant only if the
equality

ǫn = −

1
2

N

Xm=1

Un,m (cid:18)

1 −

δn,m

2 (cid:19)

+ K

(11)

is fulﬁlled where K is a constant. This implies that
the electron-ion interaction is essentially compensated,
up to a constant term, by the repulsive electron-electron
interaction. Notice that allowing for hopping matrix
elements that depend on the position in the chain

4

n,σ tn,n+1(c†

n+1,σcn,σ + c†

would not change this equality.

Indeed, a term like
n,σcn+1,σ) remains unchanged
when the electron-hole transformation is applied. From
P
this point of view, it is not necessary to go beyond the
ZDO approximation.

The equality (11) can be satisﬁed only in very partic-
ular cases where at least one of the following conditions
is satisﬁed:

• the chain is inﬁnite;

• there is no interaction, U = 0;

None of these criteria are fulﬁlled in realistic cases of
interest. With the exception of carbon nanotubes, ex-
perimental molecular junctions involve relatively short
(< 10 nm) molecular chains.2 The Coulomb interaction
is of the same order of magnitude as the kinetic terms21,22
and certainly not negligible. Even then, the electron den-
sity would still be uniform if the electron-orbitals are re-
duced to points (α → ∞) irrespective of the presence
of image charges. Therefore, one may say that the non-
uniformity of the density comes from the lateral extension
of the electronic clouds, the p- or s-states. This shows,
once again, the need of a three-dimensional treatment of
the electronic structure.

The exact shape of the electron density is determined
by (i) the strength of the Coulomb interaction, U/t, (ii)
the spread of the electronic orbitals, α, and (iii) the geom-
etry of the system, expressed in our model by the length
(n − 1)a of the molecule and by the distance d between
the electrodes and the molecule.

All these factors contribute to yield, instead of the uni-

form density condition (11), the relation

ǫn = −

1
2

N

Xm=1

Un,m (cid:18)

1 −

δn,m

2 (cid:19)

+ fL(n)

(12)

where fL(n) is a function of the position in the chain; its
dependence on n is responsible for the non-homogeneity
of the electronic density. It is of interest to understand
the eﬀects of each of these parameters separately.

Coulomb interaction.

Starting from the non-
interacting case where the electronic density is uniform,
increasing U results in an increase of the Friedel oscil-
lations until the electrons start to localize. In the limit
U → ∞, half ﬁlling leads to a Mott insulator and one
recovers a constant electron density.

Spread of the electronic orbitals. When the orbitals
are reduced to points (point charge limit), α → ∞, the
electronic density is uniform. Indeed, in this particular
limit the electron-ion and electron-electron interactions
have the same form restoring the electron-hole symmetry
of the molecular Hamiltonian. Accounting for a spread of
the orbitals increases slowly the amplitude of the Friedel
oscillations.

Geometry of the molecular junction. Two eﬀects need
to be distinguished: (i) the ﬁnite size eﬀects and (ii) the
image-charge eﬀects. In Fig. 2, the dashed curve shows
the density for the very same system used to obtain the
other two curves except that now no metallic electrodes
are present. Therefore, the dashed curve contains only
the ﬁnite size eﬀects. From this particular example, one
sees that both eﬀects contribute to the Friedel oscillations
and that, in order to get the correct density, image inter-
actions should be included unless the electrode-molecule
distances is large. In fact, in the example of Fig. 2, the
contribution to the oscillations due to the image charges
is the larger one. The Coulomb interaction with the elec-
trodes described by the image charges is therefore crucial
to estimate transport properties of molecular wires or
metallic constrictions. We have observed, as expected,
that ﬁnite size eﬀects alone tend to disappear when the
chain size is increased. In contrast, the eﬀect of image
charges tends to become more important: the amplitude
of the Friedel oscillations increases with the system size
due to the presence of the two metallic electrodes. This
tendency should continue until for long wires, that we do
not consider here, the oscillations occur predominantly
near the edges.

Finally, the dotted curve of Fig. 2 shows the electron
density with metallic electrodes calculated within the
Hartree-Fock approximation; it is in very good agreement
with the exact result. We have performed calculations for
diﬀerent values of U up to U = 4t and observed that, as
far as the electron density is concerned, the Hartree-Fock
approximation gives reasonable results. This allow us to
use this mean-ﬁeld approach for the study of the electro-
static proﬁle in biased molecular wires (section IV) and
their transport properties (section V).

IV. ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL IN BIASED
MOLECULAR WIRES

The application of the screened on-site electrostatic po-
tential to calculations of conductance properties is useful
only within a single electron theory, e.g. in the mean-ﬁeld
description of the process. This is how this concept was
applied in the calculation of Mujica et al.16 and in the
density functional theory.17,18 Here, our calculations are
done using the Hartree-Fock approximation applied to
the molecular Hamiltonian (9). In the previous section,
by comparing the mean-ﬁeld electron density with the
exact one, we have already shown, that the approximate
result is reasonable in the range of parameters proper to
conjugated molecules. More precisely, the Hartree-Fock
density is in very good agreement with the exact results
for values of U up to, approximately, 2t (cf. Fig. 2) and
remains of reasonable accuracy up to values of about 4t.
In the following we present only results for U = t, but
the same qualitative picture arises also for larger values
of U .

Starting from the initial tight-binding model (9), we

5

(13)

build an eﬀective Hamiltonian by solving self-consistently
the usual Hartree-Fock equations21 leading to

Heﬀ =

ǫn(V )c†

n,σcn,σ

Xn,σ

+

Xn,n′,σ

tn,n′(V )(c†

n′,σcn,σ + h.c.)

where V = µl − µr. The chemical potentials will al-
ways be chosen such that µl = −µr. ǫn(V ) is the eﬀec-
tive on-site potential which includes the ionic attraction
and the electron-electron repulsion incorporated within
a mean ﬁeld picture as well as the on-site potential (10).
tn,n′(V ) is the eﬀective hopping matrix element which in-
cludes the exchange terms. Note that a vanishing of ex-
change integrals in the ZDO approximation is not equiv-
alent to an Hartree approximation. Indeed, a mean ﬁeld
approximation of (9) still contains exchange terms of
the form − 1
n′,σcn,σ which, due
2
to the long range part of the Coulomb potential (4), in-
clude long range hopping.

n6=n′ Un,n′hc†

n,σcn′,σic†

P

Without Coulomb interactions, the electrostatic po-
tential is given by the ramp deﬁned in (10), i.e. by the
potential in the absence of a molecule. This linear pro-
ﬁle has been used sometimes in the literature to study
non-linear current-voltage characteristics.27,28

In the presence of Coulomb interaction, the linear pro-
ﬁle is changed and the screened electrostatic potential,
En(V ), is given by the diﬀerence between the on-site term
with and without bias voltage.

En(V ) = ǫn(V ) − ǫn(0)

(14)

A typical example is shown in Fig. 3 for a chain with
20 sites. We see two main features: (i) screening is not
very eﬃcient and, consequently, there is only a small po-
tential drop at the interfaces but a ﬁnite slope of the
potential along the entire molecule; (ii) there are sub-
stantial Friedel oscillations along the proﬁle.

Our results diﬀer from those of Mujica et al.16 despite
the fact that the two models are closely related. These
diﬀerences mostly come from the fact that we solve the
Poisson equation without resorting to a one-dimensional
approximation. As recently shown by us within a classi-
cal model,19 a three-dimensional treatment of the electro-
statics is necessary, and in fact leads to the identiﬁcation
of the lateral thickness of the molecule as a new generic
attribute that determines the potential proﬁle. In Fig. 4,
we show a comparison between our results and the cal-
culations of Damle et al.18 for a chain of six gold atoms.
It is important to stress that we did not try to ﬁt the ab
initio curve but, instead, we simply chose a reasonable
set of parameters. Note, however, that we include the
response of inﬁnite leads while the ab initio calculations
take only small metal clusters into account. Furthermore,
the asymmetry in the latter case indicates that the ab ini-
tio calculations result in a charged molecule while in our
case the molecular wire always remains neutral. Other

6

0.5

V
/
n
E

0.0

0.5

V
/
n
E

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

1

10
n

20

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

z/L

FIG. 3: Electrostatic potential proﬁle for a carbon wire (s = 1
in Eq. 5) with N = 20 sites. The parameters are α = 4.5/a2,
U = t, V = µl − µr = t and d = 2a. The dashed curve is
the unscreened potential without molecule (ramp potential).
The full curve is the screened potential in the presence of the
molecular wire. It shows a small decrease in slope along the
entire molecule with substantial Friedel oscillations.

ab initio calculations17,29,30 on similar models are also in
agreement with our observations.

To conclude this section, we summarize our main re-
sults: in the relevant range of parameters, screening is not
very eﬃcient in the wire and the drop of the potential oc-
curs along the entire molecule. Additionally, substantial
Friedel oscillations are present in the electrostatic proﬁle.
Our results are in good agreement with recent ab initio
results.17,18 When compared with the results of Ref. 16,
our treatment stresses the need to study the full three-
dimensional problem, as far as the electrostatics of the
molecular junction is concerned.

In the next section, we discuss consequences of the
screening eﬀects for the current-voltage characteristics of
molecular wires studied within the Landauer formalism.

V. CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS
OF A MOLECULAR WIRE IN THE WEAK
TUNNELLING CONTACT LIMIT

In a model where only the ﬁrst and the last atom of a
molecular chain couple to the corresponding metal leads
and at T = 0, the Landauer conduction formula yields3,31

I =

µl

2e
π¯h Z

µr

dE|G1N (E, V )|2∆l(E, V )∆r(E, V )

(15)

where V = µl − µr and ∆l/r are the spectral functions
for the left and right reservoirs. The molecule-lead cou-
pling only occurs at sites 1 and N and G1N is the ma-
trix element of the exact Green function of the molecular
junction between these sites (cf. Fig. 1).

This equation can be understood as a special case of
the Landauer formula32 adapted to the case of bad con-

FIG. 4: The electrostatic potential proﬁle for a gold wire
(s = 0 in Eq. 5) with N = 6 sites obtained from Hartree-Fock
calculations is shown by the ﬁlled circles. The parameters
used are d = 0.9a, α = 4.5/a2, and U = t. For comparison
the full curve shows the ab initio results taken from Ref. 18.

tacts, where it is possible to use second order perturba-
tion theory in the tunnelling matrix element.31 In the
limit of ‘extremely’ bad contacts of interest here, the
Green function of the system in formula (15) may be
replaced by the Green function of the isolated molecu-
lar wire, G0
1N .33 Moreover, assuming that the product of
spectral densities does not signiﬁcantly depend on energy
in the range between µl and µr, one gets

I =

µl

2e
π¯h

∆2

0 Z

µr

dE|G0

1N (E, V )|2

(16)

where ∆0 is the spectral density at zero bias.

From this simpliﬁed equation, we can calculate the
current-voltage characteristics of the molecular junction,
using only the Green function of the isolated molecular
wire, evaluated in the presence of the electrostatic po-
tential created by the metallic electrodes. Examples are
given in Fig. 5 for increasing Coulomb strength U starting
from the non-interacting case where the on-site potential
is given by the ramp (10).

In all cases, the I-V curves have a staircase struc-
ture which is a common feature in the weak tunnelling
limit18,27,34 and simply reﬂects the discreteness of the
molecular electronic spectrum.
Indeed, an increase of
the bias potential corresponds to an increase of the win-
dow of integration in formula (16). Therefore, a jump in
the I-V curves means that one more discrete molecular
level enters this window of integration.

It is interesting to note that Fig. 5 shows also wide
regions of negative diﬀerential resistance, in particular in
the non-interacting case. Within our simple formulation,
they can be explained by the localization of charges in-
duced by a strong enough electric ﬁeld: at suﬃciently
high bias voltage, charge carriers are localized at one end
of the chain resulting in a decrease of the current. This
could be an artifact of our weak molecule-electrode cou-
pling model, however negative diﬀerential resistance has

I

0.2

0.4

0.3

0.1

0.0

0

1

4

5

2
3
(µl − µr)/t

FIG. 5: Current-voltage characteristics for a carbon molecule
(s = 1) with N = 12, d = 2a, α = 4.5/a2, and for diﬀerent
Coulomb interaction strengths U/t = 0, 0.1, 1 are depicted by
the dotted, dashed, and full line, respectively. The current is
given in units of (2e/π¯h)∆2

0/t.

been found in recent experiments,35 and electric ﬁeld in-
duced localization could be a way to understand these
experimental ﬁndings.

The Coulomb interaction has two main eﬀects on the
I-V characteristics. First, the positions of the current-
voltage steps are shifted to higher voltages reﬂecting the
displacement of the molecular levels to higher energy
with increasing Coulomb interaction. Second, the lo-
calization of the charges due to a strong electric ﬁeld is
partially compensated by the electron-electron repulsion.
These screening eﬀects attenuate the negative diﬀerential
resistance eﬀects (cf. Fig. 5). These observations are sim-
ilar to those made by Mujica et al.,27 where a Hubbard
model was studied at the Hartree level.

VI. CONCLUSION

We have addressed the problem of calculating trans-
port properties of a molecular wire bridging two semi-
inﬁnite metallic electrodes. A ﬁrst important part of
this task is to determine the electrostatic potential proﬁle
through the biased wire.14,15,16,17,18 Indeed, it is of im-
portance to know how screening eﬀects modify the ramp
potential (Eq. 10) existing in the absence of the organic
molecule.

This work and our earlier paper19 resolve discrepan-
cies between answers available in the literature. On
the one hand, a tight-binding model combined with a
one-dimensional Poisson equation gives a strong screen-
ing version of the problem: the drop of the potential
occurs at the interfaces and the potential is therefore
almost ﬂat within the molecule.16 On the other hand,
recent ab initio results give a weak screening version:
no substantial drop at the interfaces but rather a de-
crease along the entire molecule together with substantial

7

Friedel oscillations.17,18

In this paper, we have proposed a modiﬁed tight-
It is based
binding model to address this question.
on three main ingredients.
(i) We introduce a three-
dimensional Coulomb potential (Eq. 4) which includes
the image interaction with the two metallic electrodes
assumed to have planar surfaces. (ii) The electrons lo-
calized at atomic sites are modelled by Gaussian type
orbitals of ﬁnite lateral extent (Eq. 5). (iii) The positive
background is assumed to be a set of point charges local-
ized on the atomic sites. With these three ingredients,
it is possible to evaluate the various terms of our model
Hamiltonian: the on-site energy (Eq. 7) and the electron-
electron interaction (Eq. 8). They are all functions of the
position on the chain due to the ﬁnite size of the system
and the image charges induced by the electrodes. All
our calculations are done in the weak tunnelling limit,
assuming bad contacts.

This model yields an electronic density that is non-
uniform already in the absence of a bias potential — the
electrons prefer to be in the center of the wire — and
displays pronounced Friedel oscillations (Fig. 2). These
characteristics are due to the fact that our model does
not fulﬁll, in general, the electron-hole symmetry.24,25,26
In the presence of an applied voltage the electrostatic
potential proﬁle does not drop appreciably at the inter-
faces but rather, in accordance with the ab initio results
of Refs. 17 and 18, it decreases along the molecule with
substantial Friedel oscillations appearing along the entire
proﬁle (Figs. 3 and 4). Our results are diﬀerent from the
ones of Ref. 16 where a one-dimensional Poisson equa-
tion was used. This disagreement stresses the need to
perform a three-dimensional calculation, as done here,
to properly describe the electrostatic properties of the
molecular junction. Finally, the current-voltage charac-
teristics shows a staircase structure (Fig. 5) as is common
in the weak tunnelling limit.18,27 Zones of negative dif-
ferential resistance are found due to charge localization
induced by the electric ﬁeld. The main eﬀects of the
Coulomb interaction, within our approximations, are, on
the one hand, a shift to higher energies of the position
of the current-voltage steps and, on the other hand, a
partial compensation of the localization of the electrons
diminishing the negative diﬀerential resistance eﬀects in
agreement with a previous study.27

In closing, it is important to stress some limitations of
our model. On the one hand, we consider coherent trans-
port, assuming that the electrons are transferred from
one lead to the other in a single quantum mechanical
process. This is a good approximation if the tunnelling
time is much less than the inelastic scattering time. For
organic molecules, this transit time could be of the same
order of magnitude as the intramolecular vibronic re-
laxation time, especially in the weak contact limit em-
ployed here.3 In this case, part of the current could be
due to sequential tunnelling, where the molecular wire
would be successively charged and discharged. This im-
portant issue remains to be studied further. We have

neglected charging eﬀects assuming the molecule to re-
main neutral. At high voltage, this approximation could
fail.27 The average charge number of the molecule could
increase in analogy with Coulomb blockade phenomena
observed in mesoscopic metallic double tunnel junctions
and quantum dots,36 and, more recently, in multiwall
carbon nanotubes.37

A proper handling of the full problem requires to treat
the wire as an open system dynamically coupled to the
electrodes and to the vibronic degrees of freedom. This
program is far beyond the scope of the present work.

Acknowledgments

The authors have beneﬁtted from useful discussions
with P. H¨anggi, S. Kohler, J. Lehmann, and S. Yali-

1 A. Aviram and M. A. Ratner, Chem. Phys. Lett. 29, 277

2 C. Joachim, J. K. Gimzewski, and A. Aviram, Nature 408,

(1974).

541 (2000).

3 A. Nitzan, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 681 (2001).
4 Special issue on Processes in Molecular Wires, ed. by P.
H¨anggi, M. Ratner, and S. Yaliraki, Chem. Phys. 281, pp.
111–487 (2002).

5 M. A. Reed, C. Zhou, C. J. Muller, T. P. Burgin, and J.

M. Tour, Science 278, 252 (1997).

6 C. Kergueris, J.-P. Bourgoin, S. Palacin, D. Esteve, C.
Urbina, M. Magoga, and C. Joachim, Phys. Rev. B 59,
12505 (1999).

7 X. D. Cui, A. Primak, X. Zarate, J. Tomfohr, O. F. Sankey,
A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, D. Gust, G. Harris, and S. M.
Lindsay, Science 294, 571 (2001).

8 J. Reichert, R. Ochs, D. Beckmann, H. B. Weber, M.
Mayor, and H. v. L¨ohneysen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 176804
(2002).

9 E. G. Petrov and P. H¨anggi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2862
(2001); E. G. Petrov, V. May, and P. H¨anggi, Chem. Phys.
281, 211 (2002).

10 J. Lehmann, G.-L. Ingold, and P. H¨anggi, Chem. Phys.

281, 199 (2002).

11 D. Segal and A. Nitzan, Chem. Phys. 281, 235 (2002).
12 H. M. Pastawski, L. E. F. Foa Torres, and E. Medina,

Chem. Phys. 281, 257 (2002).

13 H. Ness and A. J. Fisher, Chem. Phys. 281, 279 (2002).
14 S. Datta, W. Tian, S. Hong, R. Reifenberger, J. I. Hender-
son, and C. P. Kubiak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2530 (1997).
15 W. Tian, S. Datta, S. Hong, R. Reifenberger, J. I. Hender-
son, and C. P. Kubiak, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 2874 (1998).
16 V. Mujica, A. E. Roitberg, and M. A. Ratner, J. Chem.

Phys. 112, 6834 (2000).

17 N. D. Lang and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 358

(2000).

18 P. S. Damle, A. W. Ghosh, and S. Datta, Phys. Rev. B

64, 201403 (2001).

19 A. Nitzan, M. Galperin, G.-L. Ingold, and H. Grabert,

8

raki. Three of us (HG, GLI and AN) would like to thank
the Institute for Theoretical Physics at UCSB for hospi-
tality during the workshop on “Nanoscience” where this
work was started. This research was supported in part
by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
PHY99-07949, by the Volkswagen-Stiftung under grant
No. I/77 217, by the Israel Science Foundation and by
the Israel Ministry of Science.

arXiv:physics/0207124, to appear in J. Chem. Phys.

20 A. W. Ghosh, private communication (2002).
21 L. Salem, Molecular Orbital Theory of Conjugated Systems

(Benjamin, London 1966).

22 D. Baeriswyl, D. K. Campbell and S. Mazumdar, in Conju-
gated Conducting Polymers, edited by H. Kiess (Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, 1992), pp. 7-133.

23 P. Fulde, Electron Correlations in Molecules and Solids
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1995).
24 C. A. Coulson and G. S. Rushbrooke, Proc. Camb. Phil.

Soc. 36, 193 (1940).

25 A. D. MacLachlan, Mol. Phys. 2, 271 (1959); Mol. Phys.

26 E. H. Lieb, M. Loss, and R. J. McCann, J. Math. Phys.

4, 49 (1961).

34, 891 (1993).

27 V. Mujica, M. Kemp, A. Roitberg, and M. Ratner, J.

Chem. Phys. 104, 7296 (1996).

28 S. Dallakyan and S. Mazumdar, arXiv:cond-mat/0209143.
29 H. B. Weber, J. Reichert, F. Weigend, R. Ochs, D. Beck-
mann, M. Mayor, R. Ahlrichs, and H. v. L¨ohneysen, Chem.
Phys. 281, 113 (2002).

30 P. Damle, A. W. Ghosh, and S. Datta, Chem. Phys. 281,

171 (2002).

31 J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6, 57 (1961).
32 R. Landauer, IBM J. Res. Develop. 1, 223 (1957); S. Datta,
Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England, 1995).

33 A. Onipko, Y. Klymenko, L. Malysheva, and S. Stafstr¨om,

Solid State Commun. 108, 555 (1998).

34 A ﬁnite molecule-lead coupling matrix element would

smoothen the sharp steps in Fig. 5.

35 J. Chen, M. A. Reed, A. M. Rawlett, and J. M. Tour,

Science 286, 1550 (1999).

36 Single Charge Tunneling. Coulomb Blockade Phenomena
in Nanostructures, ed. by H. Grabert and M. H. Devoret
(Plenum, New York, 1992).

37 M. R. Buitelaar, A. Bachtold, T. Nussbaumer, M. Iqbal,
and C. Sch¨onenberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 156801 (2002).

