2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Application of time-dependent density-functional theory

to electron-ion coupling in ethylene

G.F. Bertsch(a), J. Giansiracusa(a) and K. Yabana(b)

(a)Department of Physics and Institute for Nuclear Theory,

Box 351560, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98915

(b)Institute of Physics, University of Tsukuba,

Tsukuba 305-8571, Japan

Abstract

To examine the applicability of the time-dependent density-functional the-

ory (TDDFT) for treating the electron-nucleus coupling in excited states,

we calculate the strength distribution associated with the π-π∗ transition in

ethylene. The observed optical transition strength at 7-8.5 eV region shows a

complex structure arising from coupling to C-C stretch motion, to torsional

motion, and to Rydberg excitations. The mean energy of the observed peak

is reproduced to about 0.2 eV accuracy by the TDDFT in the local density

approximation (LDA). The reﬂection approximation is used to calculate the

peak broadening. Roughly half of the broadening can be attributed to the

ﬂuctuation in the C-C coordinate. The asymmetry in the line shape is also

qualitatively reproduced by the C-C coordinate ﬂuctuation. We ﬁnd, in agree-

ment with other theoretical studies, that the torsional motion is responsible

for the progression of weak transition strength extending from the peak down

to about 6 eV. The LDA reproduces the strength in this region to about factor

of 3. We conclude that the TDDFT is rather promising for calculating the

electron nucleus coupling at short times.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) oﬀers a compromise between

economy and accuracy for the calculation of electronic excitations in atoms, molecules and

condensed matter. The electronic excitation energies are typically reproduced by a few

tenths of an eV for states with large oscillator strengths, and their strengths are typically

reproduced within 25% accuracy [1,2]. We are now interested in seeing how much further

the theory can be applied at this level of accuracy and, in particular, how well it works in

describing the coupling of electronic excitations to the nuclear degrees of freedom.

In a previous publication, we examined this question taking the benzene molecule for

a case study [3]. There we found that the TDDFT worked rather well at describing the

nominally forbidden transitions, reproducing oscillator strength over 3 orders of magnitude

with errors at the 30% level. Besides giving transition strength to the symmetry-forbidden

transitions, the electron-nucleus coupling induces a vibrational splitting of each electronic

line. While the detailed description requires the Franck-Condon factors of the individual

vibrational states, the overall widths can be calculated with much simpler theory. For

benzene, we found that the overall widths associated with the vibrational splittings were

reproduced within 25% accuracy.

The ethylene is an even simpler molecule whose absorption spectrum has been subject

to much theoretical study by the methods of quantum chemistry. The observed photoab-

sorption spectrum in ethylene shows a strong, structured peak in the region of 7-8.5 eV

excitation that may be largely attributed to the π-π∗ transition. The studies of ref. [4] and

[5] present detailed calculations of the vibronic couplings, but they do not make a direct

comparison to experiment. We also note the calculations by Ben-Nun and Martinez [6]

in which the subsequent nuclear motion is treated quantum mechanically. The goal of the

present article is less ambitious: we aim to see how well the density functional theory (DFT)

works for electron-nucleus coupling at short times, before the system responds dynamically.

We will focus on the π-π∗ transition, which is of general interest for the optical properties

2

of conjugated carbon systems.

The basic properties of the transition, besides its mean energy, are its width (about 1

eV FWHM) and its oscillator strength, measured to be f = 0.42 [7]. A feature of particular

interest is the long progression of strength on the low-energy side of the peak, extending

down to about 6 eV. We shall also apply the TDDFT to this feature and directly compare

the theoretical and the experimental strength in the region of 6-7 eV.

II. CALCULATIONAL METHOD

We use the DFT to calculate the ground potential energy surface (PES) as well as the

excited PES. In the present work, we use a simple density functional based on the local

density approximation (LDA) [8].

Denoting the nuclear coordinates by Q, the ground PES Egs(Q) is obtained in the static

theory by minimizing the energy functional of the orbital variables. The optimized φi satisfy

the Kohn-Sham equations

−

∇2
2m

δE
δn

φi +

φi = ǫiφi.

(1)

Here E is the energy functional including Coulomb interactions but not including the elec-

trons’ orbital kinetic energy.

The excited states are calculated by solving the linearized equations of the TDDFT.

These equations are very close to the RPA equations, diﬀering only by the presence of an

exchange-correlation term in the interaction. For each ground state orbital φi, there are two

excited wave function, φ+

i andφ−

i . The equations they satisfy are

−

∇2
2m

φ±
i +

i − ǫiφ±
φ±

i +

δE
δn

δ2E
δn2 δnφi = (ǫi ± ω)φ±
i ,
i |φ−

with the normalization condition, hφ+

i |φ+

i i − hφ−

i i = 1. The physical quantities extracted

from the solutions are the eigenvalues ω, representing vertical excitation energies, and the

transition densities δn =

i φi(φ+

i + φ−

i ) which represent the matrix elements of the density

P

3

operator between the ground and the excited states. The excited PES is given by the sum

of the ground PES and the excitation energy ω,

Eex(Q) = Egs(Q) + ω(Q).

(2)

To describe the oscillator strength distribution, we treat nuclear motion classically except

for the zero-point motion on the ground PES. This is called the reﬂection approximation

[9,10]. Also, we neglect couplings between diﬀerent vibrational degrees of freedom and treat

the ﬂuctuations in various coordinates Q independently. The reﬂection formula for the

strength function is

df
dE

= f (Q)

−1

dEex
dQ !

 

|Ψ(Q)|2,

where the coordinate Q in this expression is obtained by inverting the equation E = Eex(Q).

In the formula, Ψ(Q) denotes the vibrational nuclear wave function in the ground PES,

normalized as

|Ψ|2dQ = 1. Also f (Q) denotes the oscillator strength at a ﬁxed Q between

the ground and the excited state. In ref. [3], we used an even simpler approximation, namely

R

taking the vibrations to be harmaonic and treating other factors in eq. (3) as constant. Then

the width is Gaussian with an energy variance σE given by

(3)

(4)

σE =

σQ,

dEex
dQ (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

0

where σQ is the variance of Q in the ground state vibrational wave function. For a Gaussian

proﬁle, the variance is related to the width Γ by Γ = 2.3σE.

Our computational method is quite diﬀerent from usual quantum chemistry methods

in that we employ a three-dimensional Cartesian grid representation for the orbital wave

functions. Only valence electrons are explicitly included in the functional. More tightly

bound electrons are taken into account by pseudopotentials constructed with a commonly

used prescription [11,12]. Further details on the computation may be found in our previous

publications, e.g. [1]. The important numerical parameters in the computations are the

mesh spacing ∆x and the shape and size of the volume on which the grid is deﬁned. In our

4

previous work on conjugated carbon systems, we used a grid spacing of ∆x = 0.3 ˚A. With

that mesh, orbital energies are converged to better than 0.1 eV. One can use the same coarse

mesh to compute the coupling to the vibrational degrees of freedom, provided the ground

PES is independently known.

In ref. [3] we only considered small amplitudes of nuclear

motion, obtaining the necessary information from empirical data on the vibrations. Here we

want to consider larger amplitudes of motion, beyond the harmonic regime. This requires a

more accurate calculation of the ground PES, obtainable with a ﬁner mesh.

III. RESULTS

A. Ground PES

We ﬁrst consider the ground PES. To obtain converged results for equilibrium nuclear

positions and vibrational frequencies, we found it necessary to use mesh spacing of ∆x = 0.2

˚A. The orbital wave functions are deﬁned on the grid points that lie within a sphere. We

found that a sphere of radius R = 5 ˚A is adequate to obtain converged ground orbital ener-

gies. Some properties related to the ground PES are shown in Table I. The C-C equilibrium

distance is reproduced to 1% accuracy. The curvature of the potential energy surface for the

two important modes, the C-C stretch and the torsion, control the respective vibrational

frequencies. As may be seen from the Table, the empirical vibrational frequencies [13] are

reproduced to about 5% accuracy. We also quote the results of the ab initio calculations of

ref. [14] and [5], which show more or less the same accuracy. We conclude that the quality

of the DFT results are encouraging to proceed with the calculation of anharmonic and large

amplitude ﬂuctuation eﬀects.

Next we turn to the TDDFT excitation energies at the equilibrium geometry (call the

Franck-Condon point, FCP). The TDDFT predictions with the LDA energy functional are

B. Vertical Excitations

5

shown in Table II. The π-π∗ transition appears at 7.5 eV excitation energy with an oscillator

strength of f = 0.30. This energy is about 0.2 eV lower that the center of gravity of the

observed peak. Also, comparing to the measured strength of 0.42 in this region, we infer

that additional electronic transitions are likely to be present. Indeed, the TDDFT produces

other states The three additional states have a Rydberg character with diﬀuse orbitals. Only

the lowest of these, which is s-like and has no angular nodes at large distance, is optically

active. It has a transition strength of f = 0.08. Adding this to the π-π∗ strength, the total

strength is only 0.04 units abelow the observed value. We note that our oscillator strength

are quite close to those obtained by quantum chemistry methods, eg. ref. [5]. However, the

position of the s-Rydberg excitation is too low by about 0.3 eV. The diﬃculty to reproduce

energies of Rydberg states is a well-known shortcoming of the LDA. Since the long range

Coulomb potential is responsible for the Rydberg state, a more sophisticated functional or

an exact treatment of the electron exchange interaction is required. The generalized gradient

approximation (GGA) was developed to deal with this problem, and indeed we can obtain

better Rydberg energies without adversely aﬀecting the π-π∗ energy. The oscillator strength

distribution with the GGA correction of ref. [15] was presented in ref. [16]. For the present

study, however, we will use the LDA and conﬁne our attention to the π-π∗ transition.

C. Coupling to the nuclear coordinates

The nuclear coordinates that have the largest eﬀect on the π-π∗ transition are the C-C

stretch coordinate and the torsion angle coordinate. We shall consider both of these in

the sections below. The CH2 wagging coordinates also play a role, ﬁrst in mixing the π-

π∗ excitation with Rydberg excitations [17,4], and then at large torsion angles providing

a direct path from the excited PES to the ground PES [6]. Since we ignore the Rydberg

states and do not treat the the multidimensional character of the nuclear coordinate space

at all, we shall neglect the wagging and other modes that couple indirectly.

6

1. C-C stretch motion

Historically, the ﬁrst candidate for the source of the width of the π-π∗

transition was

the coupling to the C-C stretch coordinate. Calculating the excited PES along the stretch

coordinate according to eq. (2). we ﬁnd the results shown in Fig. 1. The excited PES has

a minimum at RCC = 1.5 ˚A with an energy 7.0 eV. The slope of the PES at the FCP is

given by dEex/dQ = 8 eV/˚A. This is all we need to estimate the width using eq. (4). Taking

σQ = 0.04 ˚A from empirical vibrational frequency, we ﬁnd a variance of σE ≈ 0.3 eV for

the absorption peak. The corresponding width is Γ = 0.7 eV, roughly 2/3 of the observed

peak width. We expect that the widths from ﬂuctuation of diﬀerent coordinates add in

quadrature. Thus, the width due to ﬂuctuation in the C-C distance must be augmented by

a similar width from other coordinates.

The observed peak has an apparent asymmetry, falling oﬀ more steeply on the low-energy

side. In principle the asymmetry can be calculated using the full expression eq. (3). We

ﬁrst solve the Schroedinger equation on the ground PES to get the wave function Ψ(Q), and

then apply eq. (3) directly. The result is shown in Fig. 2. Indeed, a signiﬁcant asymmetry is

predicted, reﬂecting the anharmonicity in the ground PES and the curvature of the excited

PES. However the width is still too small. We mention that the calculation of ref. [14] also

predict an asymmetric peak. Their width includes all the vibrational modes, and comes out

somewhat larger than the observed width.

2. Coupling to torsional motion

Experimentally, the strong absorption peak at 7-8 eV has a progression of strength

at low energies, seen down to nearly 6 eV [19]. The C-C stretch PES doesn’t drop to

that low an energy, leaving the torsional mode as the most likely source of the strength.

Combining the inertia Iθ (with ¯h2/Iθ ≈ 0.0048 eV/r2) of the torsional motion with empirical

vibrational frequency ωtorsion, the zero-point ﬂuctuation variance in the torsional angle is

7

given by hθ2i1/2 =

¯h/2Iθωtorsion ≈ 8◦. This is rather soft, and suggests that coupling
to this coordinate could be signiﬁcant. Unfortunately, the π-π∗ excitation mixes with the

q

Rydberg states at ﬁnite torsional angles [4,17], splitting the original π-π∗

transition into

several components. Since the Rydberg excitation energies are not accurate in the LDA,

we choose to ignore the splitting of the π-π∗ state, taking the diabatic state at the mean

excitation energy associated with an excitation along the x coordinate. The diabatic excited

PES is shown in Fig. 3. Using it in eq. (3), we obtain the strength distribution shown in

Fig. 4. Qualitatively the measured fall-oﬀ is reproduced, but in detail the predictions are not

as accurate as we had found for the forbidden transitions in benzene. In the region of 6.5-7.0

eV, the theoretical strength is too high, by about a factor of three. The agreement is much

better at lower energies, down to 6.1 eV, the lowest energy measured in ref. [19]. However,

the theory should be more reliable the closer to the FCP, so the low energy agreement is

probably a fortuitous cancellation of opposite-sign errors.

A likely cause of the discrepancy just below 7 eV is the error in the TDDFT excitation

energy. In Fig. 2, we saw that the strength around the main peak in the LDA calculation

is somewhat lower than the observed one. This is within a typical error of the TDDFT

for excitation energy. A overall shift of 0.2 eV in the excited state PES would improve the

description of strength function both in the peak region and in the region as far down as 6.5

eV. Shifting the excited state PES in that way, on the other hand, would destroy the present

agreement below 6.5 eV. However, this large-angle region of PES is only accessible by a deep

tunneling of the nuclear motion. It might be that the naive reﬂection treatment becomes

inaccurate. For example, it might be that the tunneling in the excited state vibrational

wave function becomes important. It may also be that thermally promoted tunneling on

the ground PES becomes signiﬁcant in the deep tunneling region, even though the thermal

excitation probabilities are small. However, we leave it for future work to investigate these

possibilities.

8

IV. DYNAMICS ON THE EXCITED PES

We now discuss brieﬂy about nuclear dynamics on our excited PES. An interesting

measurement of a dynamic time scale on the excited PES was reported in ref. [20], made by

a two-photon pump-probe technique. In the experiment the two photon energies were 6.2

eV and 4.64 eV, and the average time delay between them could be varied. The ionization

rate was measured as a function of the delay time. The observed ionization yield peaked

when the pulse associated with the lower energy photon was delayed by about 50 fs from the

pulse of the more energetic photon. Clearly, the ethylene must ﬁrst be excited by the 6.2

eV photon before it can absorb the lower energy photon. The experiment was interpreted

in terms of lifetime of the state excited by the 6.2 eV photon, with an extracted value of

30 ± 15 fs. The ionization threshold of ethylene is 10.5 eV, so the total energy available is

only 0.3 eV above the threshold.

While the complete dynamics on the excited state PES are beyond the TDDFT, the

PES we have already constructed can be used to estimate the accelerations in the short-

time domain after excitation. According to the calculation in the previous section, the

absorption strength at 6.2 eV comes from the torsional zero-point ﬂuctuation the hydrogens

rotated to a angle of about 35◦. Let us assume that the ionization potential of the molecule

is independent of the angle. Then, as long as the excitation energy is kept in the electronic

degrees of freedom, the ionization can take place. However, the gradient in the PES will

cause an acceleration in that coordinate, converting energy from potential to kinetic. The

kinetic energy associated with nuclear motion cannot be used in the ionization process,

so these accelerations give the ﬁrst quenching of the ionization rate. To make a concrete

estimate, we use the slope of the TDDFT PES to determine the acceleration. At 35◦, the

PES is still rapidly falling, with a slope given by dEex/dθ ≈ 2 eV/rad2. Taking this as the

force in Newton’s equation, the system acquires a angular velocity given by

dθ
dt

=

1
Iθ

dEex
dθ

t

9

with a corresponding kinetic energy

K =

Iθ

1
2

2

.

dθ
dt !

 

Evaluating these expression numerically, we ﬁnd that it only takes 5 fs for the kinetic energy

to grow to 0.5 eV. This would put the potential energy below the ionization threshold, and

indicates that the quenching should happen very rapidly.

However, the fact that vibronic structure is seen in the strength function tells one that

the motion along the torsional coordinate is not very dissipative. The system can accelerate

to very large angle, bounce, and return to a state with no kinetic energy in the nuclear

motion. Since one cannot say what the true irreversible rates are, the considerations here

can only give a lower bound on the eﬀects of a time delay.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we aimed to elucidate how well the TDDFT works in describing electron-

nucleus coupling. For this purpose, we analyzed the π-π∗

transition of ethylene molecule

in the 6-8 eV region. The DFT and TDDFT were employed to construct the ground and

excited PES in the LDA. A simpliﬁed treatment in the reﬂection approximation is made

for the Frank-Condon factor. The TDDFT describes reasonably well the vertical excitation

energy and the magnitude of oscillator strength. The roles of the C-C stretch motion and

the torsional motion on the spectral line-shape were investigated. We found that the C-C

stretch coordinate contributes substantially to the width of the transition, but the torsional

coordinate is responsible for the low energy tail. There the transition strength is reproduced

by about a factor of three over 4 orders of magnitude. We thus conclude that the TDDFT

survives the ﬁrst tests as a useful approximation to treat electron-nucleus couplings in excited

states. As next steps, a more sophisticated treatment of the quantum nuclear motion would

be required, as well as an improved treatment of the exchange-correlation potential beyond

the LDA.

10

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank T.J. Martinez for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Depart-

ment of Energy under Grant DE-FG03-00-ER41132, and facilitated by the Computational

Materials Science Network.

11

REFERENCES

[1] K. Yabana and G.F. Bertsch, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 75, 55 (1999).

[2] M.E. Casida, C. Jamorski, K.C. Casida, and D.R. Salahub, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 4439

(1998).

[3] G.F. Bertsch, A. Schnell, and K. Yabana, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 4051 (2001).

[4] C. Petrongolo, R. Buenker, S. Peyerimhoﬀ, J. Chem. Phys. 76, 3655 (1982).

[5] A.M. Mebel, Y.T. Chen and S.H.Lin, Chem. Phys. Lett. 258 53 (1996).

[6] M. Ben-Nun, J. Quenneville, and T.J. Martinez, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 5161 (2000).

[7] G. Cooper, T.N. Olney and C.E. Brion, Chem. Phys. 194, 175 (1995).

[8] J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).

[9] E.J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 68 2066 (1978).

[10] C. Boisseau, E. Audouard, J. Vigue, and P.S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 62, 052705 (2000).

[11] N. Troullier and J. Martins, Phys. Rev. B43, 1993 (1991).

[12] L. Kleinman and D. Bylander Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).

[13] R.J. Sension and B.S. Hudson, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1377 (1989).

[14] M. Ben-Nun and T.J. Martinez, J. Phys. Chem. 103, 10517 (1999).

[15] R. van Leeuwen and E. J. Baerends, Phys. Rev. A 49, 2421 (1994).

[16] T. Nakatsukasa and K. Yabana, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 2550 (2001).

[17] J. Ryu and B.S. Hudson, Chem. Phys. Lett. 245, 448 (1995).

[18] A.M. Mebel, Y.T. Chen and S.H. Lin, J. Chem. Phys. 105 9007 (1996).

[19] P.G. Wilkinson and R.S. Mulliken, J. Chem. Phys. 23, 1895 (1955).

12

[20] P.Farmanara, V. Stert, and W. Radloﬀ, Chem. Phys. Lett. 288, 518 (1998).

13

TABLES

TABLE I. Ground state properties of ethylene.

Experimental

Ref. [6,14]

Ref. [5]

RCC (˚A)

ωCC (eV)

ωtorsion (eV)

s-Rydberg

px-Rydberg

py-Rydberg

π∗

1.339

0.201

0.127

6.8

7.3

7.4

7.5 eV

TABLE II. Calculated electronic excitations in ethylene at the FCP. The lowest 4 excitations

are mainly conﬁgurations made by exciting a π electron to the π∗ or to a Rydberg orbital. We

follow the convention used by ref. [13] for the x, y, z axes.

Excited orbital

ω (LDA)

f (LDA)

Ref. [6]

1.347

0.21

0.134

Ref. [5]

7.3,0.08

8.1,0.36

0.22

0.135

6.8

7.5

7.5

7.8

DFT

1.335

0.19

0.12

0.08

0

0

0.30

14

10

9

8

7

6

 
)

V
e
(
 
 

x
e
E

 

FIGURES

15

5
1.2 1.25 1.3 1.35 1.4 1.45 1.5 1.55 1.6
RCC  (A)

FIG. 1. Excited PES along the C-C stretch coordinate. Solid: TDDFT; dashed: ref. [6].

E
d
/
f
d

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

7

7.2

7.4

7.6

7.8

8

8.2

8.4

Energy (eV)

FIG. 2. Line broadening of the π-π∗ excitation due to the zero-point motion in the C-C bond

coordinate. Solid: TDDFT theory; dashed: experimental [13].

16

 
)

V
e
(
 
 

E

 

7.5

8

7

6

5

6.5

5.5

17

0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

 θ (degrees)

FIG. 3. Excited PES along the torsional coordinate. The solid line is the TDDFT result with

other coordinates ﬁxed at the FCP. The dashed line is from ref. [18].

)

1
-
V
e
(
 
 

E
d
/
f
d

 

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

0.0001

1e-05

1e-06

18

6

6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8
 E (eV)

7

7.2 7.4

FIG. 4. Low energy absorption strength associated with the zero-point motion in the torsional

coordinate. Solid: present theory; dashed: experiment [19].

