2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Theoretical study of the ﬁnite temperature spectroscopy in van der Waals clusters.
III Solvated Chromophore as an eﬀective diatomics

F. Calvo, F. Spiegelman
Laboratoire de Physique Quantique, IRSAMC, Universit´e Paul Sabatier,
118 Route de Narbonne, F31062 Toulouse Cedex, France

J.-M. Mestdagh
CEA/DRECAM, CE Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

The absorption spectroscopy of calcium-doped argon clusters is described in terms of an eﬀective
diatomics molecule Ca–(Arn), in the framework of semiclassical vertical transitions. We show how,
upon choosing a suitable reaction coordinate, the eﬀective ﬁnite-temperature equilibrium properties
can be obtained for the ground- and excited-surfaces from the potential of mean force (PMF). An
extension of the recent multiple range random-walk method is used to calculate the PMF over
continuous intervals of distances. The absorption spectra calculated using this single-coordinate
description are found to be in good agreement with the spectra obtained from high-statistics Monte
Carlo data, in various situations. For CaAr13, we compare the performances of two diﬀerent choices
of the reaction coordinate. For CaAr37, the method is seen to be accurate enough to distinguish
between diﬀerent low-energy structures. Finally, the idea of casting the initial many-body problem
into a single degree of freedom problem is tested on the spectroscopy of calcium in bulk solid argon.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Polyatomic molecules can be electronically excited in
a global or local way, depending on the chemical nature
of the system, and on details of the excitation mecha-
nisms, such as the characteristics or of the laser pulse.
In many systems, the chemical bonds at various places
of the same molecule favor local excitations. This sit-
uation typically occurs in chromophore-doped rare-gas
clusters, where photons in the visible range may excite
the chromophore but not the rare-gas atoms. This fea-
ture is especially useful because it allows a precise anal-
ysis by comparison with the isolated chromophore spec-
troscopy. Actually, even though the chromophore is lo-
cally excited, the geometric distortions and the vibra-
tions of the solvent atoms act as a perturbation on its
spectroscopic properties. From a theoretical point of
view, these many-body eﬀects are usually treated either
with simple approximations,1,2 or conveniently by simu-
lation. In the previous papers of this series,3,4 we have
presented an alternative approach to simulation, where
the Gaussian theory of absorption by Wadi and Pollak2
was combined with the superposition approximation5 in
the quantum regime at ﬁnite temperature. This method
was applied to CaArn clusters of various sizes n in the
range 2 ≤ n ≤ 146.

In these molecular systems, the calcium atom is en-
ergetically more stable when located on the surface of
the argon cluster, rather than in a fully solvated site.
At moderate temperatures, below the cluster melting
point, the calcium atom gets the ability to glide over
the argon cluster.3 The heterogeneous cluster CaArn can
then be thought as an eﬀective diatomic molecule, where
the argon cluster would be replaced by a large pseudo-
atom. Similar ideas have been previously used in chemi-
cal physics or condensed matter physics, as in the eﬀec-

tive interactions between colloids or between polymers,
or in the Girifalco6 or Gspann-Vollmar7 interaction po-
tentials between clusters of carbon or rare-gas atoms, re-
spectively.

In this work, we investigate the possibility of treat-
ing the photoabsorption spectroscopy of CaArn clusters
in this eﬀective diatomics picture. For this purpose, we
need to characterize the interaction on the ground- and
excited-state potential energy surfaces in terms of a sin-
gle reaction coordinate separating the calcium atom from
the argon cluster. The eﬀective absorption spectrum can
then be constructed from the eﬀective potential curves.
The ﬁnite-temperature properties of a many-body sys-
tem are conveniently expressed as ensemble averages in
the canonical ensembles. It is possible to treat the reac-
tion coordinate separately, and to perform some averages
on the remaining degrees of freedom. The next stage
consists of averaging over the reaction coordinate itself
using its suitable statistical weight. In this context, the
statistical average on the many-body system is reduced
into a potential of mean force (PMF) calculation that
will appear as a Helmholtz free energy. Several methods
are available to get the computational solution to this
problem,8,9 including umbrella sampling10 or constraint
dynamics,11 or more recently the multiple-range random
walk algorithm,12,13 which we have used in the present
work.

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
we describe the general method, and the algorithms used
to calculate the eﬀective properties of the Ca–(Arn) clus-
ter as a function of an internal reaction coordinate. We
then apply in Sec. III the method to various cluster sizes,
at several temperatures. In particular, the choice of the
reaction coordinate may not be systematically obvious,
and we show how more information can be obtained from
a carefully chosen coordinate. For a suitable choice, ab-

sorption spectroscopy of calcium in bulk argon can also
be studied, and some results will be presented in section
III. We ﬁnally summarize and conclude in Sec. IV.

II. FREE-ENERGY PROFILES FOR GROUND-
AND EXCITED-STATES

Our system is a CaArn cluster, described using the
Cartesian atomic coordinates R = {xi, yi, zi}, where
subscript 0 will be used for the calcium atom. We
ﬁrst present the main ideas and approximations of the
method.

The photoabsorption spectrum of the cluster is calcu-
lated in a semiclassical way by assuming vertical transi-
tions (Condon approximation) between the ground state
surface V0(R) and several excited-state surfaces Vk(R).
At each conﬁguration R, the absorption cross section
σk(R) is proportional by the square of the transition
dipole moment at this point, scaled by the transition
energy. Excitation from the ground state surface ther-
malized at temperature T leads to the unnormalized ab-
sorption intensity I(ω) given by the sum over excited
k Ik(ω). The intensity of absorption
states, I(ω) =
from the ground state 0 to state k is
P

Ik(ω) =

δ {¯hω − [Vk(R) − V0(R)]} σk(R)e−V0(R)/kB T dR,

1
Z Z

(1)
where the partition function Z(T ) is calculated on the
ground state surface. For each excited surface k, and up
to a constant factor, Ik(ω) can be written as a canonical
average on V0:

Ik(ω) = hAk(ω, R)i,

(2)

with the notations

and

Ak(ω, R) = σk(R)δ{¯hω − [Vk(R) − V0(R)]};

(3)

hOi =

O(R)e−V0(R)/kB T dR,

(4)

1
Z Z

for any observable O(R). In the following, and for clar-
ity reasons, we shall drop the subscript k indicating the
excited state. The single excited surface will be denoted
V ∗.

Let now assume that a reaction coordinate or an order
parameter ξ(R) can be deﬁned, which characterizes the
overall location of ground state calcium with respect to
the argon atoms. Possible expressions for ξ(R) will be
discussed at the end of the present section. At a given
temperature T , calcium has a probability p(ξ0) of resid-
ing at coordinate ξ0 given by the canonical average

2

(7)

This deﬁnes a potential of mean force (PMF) W (ξ0) ac-
cording to:

W (ξ0) = −kBT ln p(ξ0).

(6)

The absolute value of the PMF is meaningful only if the
probability distribution p is normalized. It can be arbi-
trarily shifted by any additive term W0, provided that a
factor eW0/kB T is incorporated in the calculated observ-
ables.

Building upon these deﬁnitions, we can introduce the
partial average ¯O(ξ0) of observable O by restriction on
the coordinate ξ:

¯O(ξ0) = R

O(R)δ[ξ(R) − ξ0] exp[−V0(R)/kBT ]dR
δ[ξ(R) − ξ0] exp[−V0(R)/kBT ]dR .

¯O can also be written

R

¯O(ξ0) = R

O(R)δ[ξ(R) − ξ0] exp[−V0(R)/kBT ]dR
Zp(ξ0)

,

(8)
where Zp(ξ0) plays the role of a restricted partition func-
tion. By deﬁnitions of p and W , Eqn. (5) and (6), the
global thermal average hA(ω, R)i over the whole conﬁgu-
ration space is given by the one-dimensional average over
the coordinate ξ:

hA(ω, R)i =

¯A(ξ)e−W (ξ)/kB T dξ.

(9)

Z

Importantly, Eq. (6) indicates that the PMF W (ξ) plays
the role of a Helmholtz free energy term corresponding to
the deformation of the system along the single coordinate
ξ. We have thus mapped the initial many-body problem
into a simpler one-dimensional problem, where the initial
ground-state potential has been replaced by the PMF,
and the instantaneous observable by its partial overage
over all other, unrestricted degrees of freedom.

In the present context, further assumptions are needed
in order to get the full picture of an eﬀective diatomics
to describe the CaArn cluster. ¿From expressions similar
to Eq. (8) eﬀective surfaces ¯V0(ξ) and ¯V ∗(ξ), as well as
eﬀective cross sections ¯σ(ξ), can be constructed. The
absorption intensity is then approximated as
I(ω) ≈ ¯I(ω)

=

Z

δ{¯hω − [ ¯V ∗(ξ) − ¯V0(ξ)]}¯σ(ξ)e−W (ξ)/kB T dξ.(10)

A further approximation can be done, which will be
checked later. We replace the function exp(−W/kBT )
by a Boltzmann weight over the eﬀective ground-state
surface ¯V0. Hence

Z

I(ω) = C

δ{¯hω − [ ¯V ∗(ξ) − ¯V0(ξ)]}¯σ(ξ)e− ¯V0(ξ)/kB T dξ,
(11)
where the proportionality constant C accounts for the
normalization of ¯V0:

p(ξ0) = hδ[ξ(R) − ξ0]i.

(5)

C−1 =

e−β ¯V0(ξ)/kB T dξ.

Z

(12)

In the following, we will only consider normalized absorp-
tion spectra, and C will be dropped.

Using this extra approximation, Eq. (11) thus obtained
is the complete analogue of Eq. (1) for a single-coordinate
system.
In order to use it in a practical situation, we
need to calculate all eﬀective quantities over a continu-
ous range of the reaction coordinate ξ, starting with the
free-energy proﬁles ¯V0(ξ) and ¯V ∗(ξ). For this purpose
we use the multiple range random walk method of Wang
and Landau12 recently extended to the calculation of po-
tentials of mean force and free-energies.13

Brieﬂy, we introduce a function g(ξ) initially set to 1
in the range of accessible values of ξ, and we set s(ξ) =
ln g(ξ). A Monte Carlo simulation is carried out using
the following Metropolis acceptance rule between the old
Rold and new Rnew conﬁgurations:12,13

acc(Rold → Rnew) = min[1, exp(−∆F/kBT )],

(13)
with ∆F = F (Rnew) − F (Rold) and the (Landau) free
energy F (R) = V0(R) − kBT s[ξ(R)]. After the new con-
ﬁguration Rnew is visited, s is updated: s[ξ(Rnew)] →
s[ξ(Rnew)] + ln f , or equivalently, g is multiplied by f .
Here f is a ﬁxed quantity, initially set to 2–2.5. After
a large number of MC steps, a new iteration m starts
where α = ln f is reduced by taking αm+1 = αm/2. In
this algorithm, the function Γ(ξ) = −kBT s(ξ) smoothly
converges to the potential of mean force W (ξ), up to an
additive factor.

Once it has been calculated, the PMF gives also access
to the restricted averages ¯A over a much wider range of
ξ than normally accessible. For this purpose each con-
ﬁguration in the Monte Carlo simulation is reweighted
by the factor exp{−W [ξ(R)]}. One should then get a
uniform probability distribution for ξ. The ﬂatness of
this distribution can be used as a check of the PMF com-
puted using the Wang-Landau method.12 The eﬀective
averaged observables ¯A are then obtained with the usual
reweighting formulas.8

We now turn to the choice of the reaction coordinate
ξ(R) in concern with absorption spectroscopy. A suitable
coordinate should have a clear geometrical meaning. A
straightforward deﬁnition is the “local” distance d(R)
between calcium and the closest argon atom:
d(R) = min
i≥1

k~ri − ~r0k,

(14)

where ~ri denotes the position vector of atom i. This def-
inition has the advantage that it reduces to the usual in-
teratomic distance for the true diatomic molecule CaAr.
Furthermore, this choice does not suﬀer any problem in
a MC framework, in spite of the discontinuities that def-
inition (14) introduces in the Jacobian. In contrast, this
would not be the case in a molecular dynamics simulation
and an alternative better choice would be the distance
between the chromophore and the center of mass (com)
of the argon cluster:

dcom(R) = (cid:13)
~r0 −
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

1
n

n

Xi=1

.

~ri(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(15)

3

Let us notice that the latter reaction coordinate is not
practical in several cases, such as calcium in bulk argon.
However, it can sometimes bring extra information with
respect to the choice of d above, Eq. (14), as will appear
in the next section.

III. APPLICATIONS TO Ca@Ar

We have applied the ideas developed in the previ-
ous section to two CaArn clusters, namely CaAr13 and
CaAr37. The 4s2 ground state potential is modelled by
simple pairwise terms, and the 4s4p excited states are
modelled using a Diatomic-In-Molecules (DIM) Hamilto-
nian. All details about the potentials and the parame-
terization are given in Ref. 14.

For all systems investigated here, the reference absorp-
tion spectra were obtained from classical parallel temper-
ing Monte Carlo, using 106 cycles after 2 × 105 initial cy-
cles discarded for equilibration. For CaAr37, we did not
use parallel tempering because only the local properties
of the isomers were needed. The potential of mean force
was computed from the multiple range random walk al-
gorithm using 20 iterations of each 106 cycles following
2 × 105 thermalization cycles. The parameter f was ini-
tially taken as 2.5, and the number of bins in the his-
tograms of the reaction coordinate was set to 1000.

CaAr13 is an obvious choice for testing the above meth-
ods, because the Ar13 is icosahedral, hence nearly spher-
ical, and because in this system calcium occupies a cap-
ping site of the icosahedral cluster. This is a virtual sup-
port to the eﬀective diatomic picture. As seen in our
previous papers,3,4 the calcium atom can jump into the
icosahedral shell at moderate temperatures T ∼ 30 K,
but the spectroscopic signature of these isomerizations is
rather weak.

In Fig. 1 we have represented the eﬀective potential
energy curves (ground and excited states) of CaAr13 at
T = 30 K, computed using the local distance d between
calcium and argon deﬁned by Eq. (14). We have superim-
posed the (shifted) potential of mean force on the ground
state eﬀective surface. The two curves are rather close
to each other, suggesting that approximating Eq. (10) by
Eq. (11) is correct. All curves have similar variations as
in the Ca–Ar diatomics,14 except a global shift to lower
energies due to the additional argon-argon interaction
energies. The excited state surfaces show a regular be-
havior, but we also note the presence of a crossing near
d ∼ 10 a0 which is also present in the Ca–Ar pair. The
corresponding eﬀective absorption cross sections ¯σ(d) are
displayed in Fig. 2. Except at small distances d < 6 a0,
they remain very close to their asymptotic atomic value.
Hence the approximation (AB) ≈ ¯A × ¯B in Eq. (10)
should be satisﬁed.

The photoabsorption spectrum calculated using the di-
atomics picture and the eﬀective potential surfaces is
represented as a normalized histogram in Fig. 3, along
with the result of classical Monte Carlo simulations.

3.00

2.80

2.60

2.40

2.20
-0.40

-0.45

0

-0.50

)
V
e
(

V

)
V
e
(

V

(cid:3)

(cid:22)

(cid:22)

0.24

0.22

0.20

0.18

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

CaAr13
local coordinate

4

niﬁcant signature of the isomers with calcium inside the
icosahedral shell, the extra peak found in Ref. 3 being re-
placed with a shoulder in the blue wing of the red peak.
This prevents a clear identiﬁcation of the possible isomers
in the eﬀective diatomics calculation.

ground state
PMF

Monte Carlo
diatomics

-0.55

5

10
d (bohr)

15

FIG. 1: Eﬀective potential surfaces of CaAr13 at T = 30 K,
as function of the local distance coordinate d. V0 and V ∗
are the ground- and excited-states surfaces, respectively. On
the lower panel, the potential of mean force (PMF) is also
represented, after shifting its asymptotic value to the ground-
state potential.

0.16

5

10
d (bohr)

15

FIG. 2: Eﬀective absorption intensities of CaAr13 at T = 30 K
as function of the local coordinate d.

The agreement is remarkable, as far as the positions
and widths of the peaks are concerned. The diatomics
method introduces some additional noise due the unac-
curacy in the calculated eﬀective potential curves. This
noise could be partly reduced by taking a smaller num-
ber of bins in the interval of distances d. However, this
would also require one to reduce the number of bins in
the histogram of the absorption spectrum.

As compared to our previous study using the super-
position approximation,3 the absorption spectrum calcu-
lated using classical Monte Carlo does not show a sig-

23000

24000
Wavenumber (cm-1)
FIG. 3: Normalized simulated (solid line) and eﬀective,
diatomics-like (histogram) absorption spectra of CaAr13 at
T = 30 K, using the local coordinate d.

25000

The CaAr37 cluster has a large number of stable low-
energy minima,3 characterized by very diﬀerent geome-
Its global minimum is decahedral, and the next
tries.
most stable isomer is a Mackay-type icosahedron. Due
to their diﬀerent spectroscopic signatures at low tempera-
ture, these two isomers provide a way of confronting the
diatomics method to more detailed spectroscopic data.
In Fig. 4 we have represented the eﬀective ground state
potential curves as a function of the local coordinate
d, for the two decahedral and icosahedral isomers, at
T = 5 K. At such low temperature, and using simple
Monte Carlo, the cluster is expected to be trapped in its
initial basin.4 As can be seen from Fig. 4, the icosahe-
dral structure remains more stable than the decahedral
minimum. The equilibrium distance is slightly shifted be-
tween the two isomers, which results from the diﬀerent
local arrangements of argon atoms near the calcium site.
Neither the eﬀective excited state potential curves nor
the eﬀective absorption cross sections are shown in this
ﬁgure, as they display the same variations as in CaAr13
with the same reaction coordinate. The normalized ab-
sorption spectra calculated with the eﬀective diatomics
approach are compared in Fig. 5 to the reference Monte
Carlo data. Besides the presence of residual noise, we
ﬁnd again a good agreement in the positions and widths
of the absorption peaks for the two isomers. At temper-
atures higher than 5 K, multiple isomers become popu-
lated at thermal equilibrium,3 but they are separated by
large energy barriers, making the sampling diﬃcult even
within the Wang-Landau approach.
In an experiment,
such a situation would correspond to the presence of sev-
eral stable isomers in the cluster beam. Turning back

-2.05

-2.10

-2.15

)
V
e
(

V

0

(cid:22)

decahedral
icosahedral

-2.20

6

8

10
d (bohr)

12

14

FIG. 4: Eﬀective ground state potentials of CaAr37 at T =
5 K as function of the local coordinate d, for the decahedral
global minimum (solid line) and the lowest Mackay icosahe-
dral minimum (dashed line).

5

the choice of d(R), which is very much guided by the
kind of process we want to focus on. In CaAr13, the dis-
tance dcom(R) between the calcium atom and the center
of mass of the argon atoms has essentially two values
depending on the calcium atom being in a capping loca-
tion over the argon icosahedron or inside the icosahedral
shell. In the latter case, dcom can actually take 4 diﬀer-
ent values, one for each icosahedral site, but the 4 values
are close to each other (around 10 a0), and relatively far
from the 13.5 a0 value in the global minimum.

The eﬀective potential curves for CaAr13 at T = 30 K
using the dcom coordinate are represented in Fig. 6. We
could not extend the sampling of this coordinate below
8 a0 or beyond 18 a0 because of extensive noise. The ef-
fective ground state potential clearly shows the presence

CaAr13
center of mass coordinate

2.50

2.45

2.40

2.35

-0.48

-0.50

)
V
e
(

V

)
V
e
(

V

(cid:3)

(cid:22)

(cid:22)

dec

icos

Monte Carlo
diatomics

23000

23500

24000
Wavenumber (cm-1)

24500

25000

FIG. 5: Normalized simulated (solid line) and eﬀective,
diatomics-like (histogram) absorption spectra of CaAr37 at
T = 5 K, using the local coordinate d. Upper panel: decahe-
dral minimum; lower panel: icosahedral minimum.

to calculations, rather than trying algorithmic alteration
to treat all the isomers in one calculation, it seems more
appropriate to perform calculations for each isomer and
then average calculations with proper weights, in a spirit
similar to the superposition approximation.3

When the barrier between isomers is not as high as in
these pathological systems, isomerization is in principle
included in the calculated eﬀective properties. However,
the choice of the local coordinate d(R) may not be ap-
propriate to reveal features associated with the presence
of several isomers. A more suitable reaction coordinate
would show distinct values depending on the isomers we
want to separate. There is indeed some arbitrariness in

0

-0.52

B

-0.54

8

10

A

16

18

12
14
dcdm (bohr)

FIG. 6: Eﬀective potential surfaces of CaAr13 at T = 30 K, as
function of the center-of-mass coordinate dcom. V0 and V ∗ are
the ground- and excited-states surfaces, respectively. On the
lower panel, the vertical dashed line deﬁnes the two diﬀerent
structures of the cluster, where the capping site is occupied
either by calcium (A) or by argon (B).

of two sets of minima, which can be attributed to the
calcium (A) or argon (B) capping atom sketched in the
lower panel of Fig. 6, depending on the outcome of a
quenching procedure. Regions (A) and (B) are deﬁned
by the distance dcom being larger or smaller than 12.01a0,
respectively. The eﬀective excited states potential curves
are also strongly inﬂuenced by this change in coordinate,
and their variations reﬂect the two stable minima near
10a0 and 13.5a0, respectively. Therefore the dcom re-
action coordinate provides a structural order parameter
that can distinguish between the diﬀerent parts of the
conﬁguration space we are interested in. Being able to
diﬀerentiate isomers (A) and (B) allows one to calculate
the separate contributions of each region to the global
absorption spectrum. We have reported in Fig. 7 the

diatomics (A)
diatomics (B)

Monte Carlo
diatomics

6

context, the Ba(6s2 1S0 → 6s6p 1P1) excitation on large
argon clusters.15

We just have seen that the spectroscopic properties
of the chromophore are substantially aﬀected by partial
solvation in the argon cluster, that they appear as sensi-
tive probe of the local environment of calcium and that
they are satisfactorily described by the present eﬀective
diatomic picture. Going further in that direction, we
consider a fully solvated Ca atom in an argon matrix
as examined in the Monte Carlo simulations of Ref. 14.
The present system is now a calcium atom surrounded by
107 argon atoms in a face-centered cubic lattice, at con-
stant density ρ = 1.562 × 103 kg.m−3 and temperature
T = 20 K. Bulk argon solvent is simulated using periodic
boundaries conditions in the minimum image convention.
The reaction coordinate is again the local distance from
calcium to all other argon atoms, and the simulations
were carried out with the same statistics as for clusters.
The eﬀective ground- and excited-states potential curves
are displayed in Fig. 8. Since calcium remains fully sol-
vated in an equilibrium position, the ground-state sur-

Ca@solid Ar

-6.20

-6.25

-6.30

-6.35

-6.40

-6.45
-9.55

-9.56

-9.57

0

-9.58

)
V
e
(

V

)
V
e
(

V

(cid:3)

(cid:22)

(cid:22)

23000

23500

24000
Wavenumber (cm-1)

24500

25000

FIG. 7: Normalized simulated (solid line) and eﬀective,
diatomics-like (histogram) absorption spectra of CaAr13 at
T = 30 K, using the center-of-mass coordinate dcom. On the
upper panel, the normalized spectra obtained by considering
only regions A or B of the potential curves are represented
(see Fig. 6).

total absorption spectrum and its individual contribu-
tions from (A) or (B). The overall agreement between the
global spectrum and the Monte Carlo data is again good,
and we notice that the blue shoulder near 23900 cm−1 is
larger than when using the local coordinate. This shows
that the sampling of isomers (B) is more eﬃcient, maybe
even slightly too eﬃcient with respect to the actual er-
godic result. Longer simulations and a better sampling
of region (A) would be needed to reduce this error.

By carrying the integral (11) over each region (A) or
(B) separetely allows for a spectroscopic distinction be-
tween the isomers.
It can be seen that region (B) is
responsible for the blue wing at 23900 cm−1. The global
spectrum is the weighted sum of the two separate con-
tributions from (A) or (B), and the statistical weight of
(B) was found to be around 25%, in agreement with the
study in Ref. 3. It is interesting to discuss further the
shape of the spectrum for each isomer. We discussed in
Ref. 14 that the blue and red bands of spectra, similar
to that shown in Fig. 7 for isomer A, are associated to
exciting the 4p orbital perpendicular or parallel to the
cluster surface, respectively. In the case of isomer A, be-
cause of the outer location of calcium the two possible
parallel alignments of the 4p orbital are almost degen-
erated in average and lead to two merging bands.
In
contrast, calcium is closer to argon atoms in isomer B.
As seen in Fig. 6 this corresponds to a larger the split-
ting between the two lower ( ˆV ∗) potentials curves in the
region that is accessible from the ground state isomer B.
As a result, the red band in Fig. 7 is splitted into two
components for isomer B. A splitted red band has actu-
ally been observed experimentally in a slightly diﬀerent

-9.59

7.0

7.5

8.0
d (bohr)

8.5

9.0

FIG. 8: Eﬀective potential surfaces of Ca in solid argon at
−3 and temperature T = 20 K,
density ρ = 1.562 × 103 kg.m
as function of the local distance coordinate d. V0 and V ∗
are
the ground- and excited-states surfaces, respectively.

face roughly has a distorted parabola shape, and cannot
tend to zero at large distances d. As we expect, the
excited-states surfaces are fully degenerated, giving rise
to a dynamical Jahn-Teller eﬀect in absorption.14 The
photoabsorption spectrum calculated from the eﬀective
diatomics approach is compared to Monte Carlo results
in Fig. 9. The three excited potential surfaces lead to
three absorption peaks, but they are quite broad, and
the precise identiﬁcation is less easy than with the MC
data. Still we observe a surprisingly good agreement for
the locations and overall widths of the peaks, suggest-
ing that the eﬀective diatomics method is adequate for

treating chromophore-doped inert systems with general
shapes.

Monte Carlo
diatomics

23500

24000

24500
Wavenumber (cm-1)

25000

25500

FIG. 9: Normalized simulated (solid line) and eﬀective,
diatomics-like (histogram) absorption spectra of Ca in solid
−3 and temperature
argon at density ρ = 1.562 × 103 kg.m
T = 20 K, using the local coordinate d.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Spectroscopy of polyatomic molecules with many de-
grees of freedom is a diﬃcult theoretical problem. Be-
yond simple harmonic approximations,1,2 the most con-
venient way to describe correctly the absorption inten-
sity relies on numerical simulations based on relevant
Hamiltonians for the potential energy surfaces. However
the complex, multidimensional character of the PES is a
burden for simple physical interpretations of the results
obtained by conventional methods.
In this paper, we
have presented a simple alternative approach based on
the separate treatment of a single reaction coordinate,
the many-body nature of the problem being thermally
averaged into eﬀective (free-)energy potential curves. By
reducing the many-body problem into a single coordinate
problem, the system is considered as a pseudo diatomics
molecule, where the interactions implicitely depend on
the thermodynamical conditions (temperature, but also
pressure, and possibly chemical potential) and include
the ﬂuctuations within the averaged pseudo-atom. This
point of view is best suited to the case of CaArn clusters,
where the visible photoexcitation is localized on the sin-
gle calcium atom. In heterogeneous clusters, extra reac-
tion coordinates could naturally appear. For instance, in
CaKrArn, the two distances between calcium and kryp-
ton, and between calcium and the argon cluster could
be treated on a same footing. In such cases, the present
investigation could be easily generalized to provide eﬀec-
tive hypersurfaces depending on several coordinates. In

7

this picture the example chosen above would be consid-
ered as a pseudo triatomics Ca–Kr–Arn. Similar ideas
could be applied to atom-diatom reactions solvated by
an inert cluster.

Computationally speaking, the present method in-
volves the preliminary calculation of the potential of
mean force, which incorporates the statistical averages
over all but one coordinates. The PMF is then used in
a reweighting simulation to obtain the eﬀective interac-
tions and absorption cross section in a broad range of
distances. The overall numerical cost is therefore heav-
ier than in a conventional simulation, by one order of
magnitude at the very least. However, the calculation of
the PMF can be achieved conveniently, independently of
the reaction coordinate chosen, using the multiple range
random walk algorithm of Wang and Landau,12 recently
adapted to the problem of free-energy proﬁles.13 There-
fore the interest of the present approach mainly resides
in the extra interpretations it provides. For instance,
it could be used to assess or quantify the local charac-
ter of the excitation. It also lays some ground for further
spectroscopic investigations. In particular, more detailed
studies of the excited states eﬀective surfaces could be un-
dertaken. The inﬂuence of temperature or the number of
inert atoms on these curves, the related possible conical
intersections oﬀer examples of future research directions.
On a practical point, we have largely used a local dis-
tance coordinate d, namely the geometric distance (i.e.
the lowest distance) between calcium and argon atoms.
This order parameter is relevant to describe the CaArn
cluster as a pseudo Ca–(Arn) diatomics, for which most
of the methodology developed here was meant. How-
ever, the separate eﬀects of diﬀerent isomers are essen-
tially smoothed out and averaged, and it may be much
more proﬁtable to use other system-dependent coordi-
nates to get a richer information about structure. In the
case of CaAr13, we have shown that the distance between
calcium and the argon cluster center of mass was more
appropriate in this purpose. In other, more complex clus-
ters, one should take proﬁt of the known structural in-
formation to design suitable reaction coordinates. For
instance the bond order parameters Q4, Q6, W4, or W6,
introduced by Steinhardt and coworkers,16 could be used
to distinguish between icosahedral, octahedral, or deca-
hedral isomers.17,18,19 One could then extend the present
work to metallic clusters, where the energy levels can
change upon global shape deformation,20 and for which
appropriate reaction coordinates could be the eccentrici-
ties or the Hill-Wheeler parameters.

Quantum vibrational eﬀects are not accounted for in
the present description, essentially because the corre-
sponding treatment within path-integral ﬁnite temper-
ature Monte Carlo is numerically demanding, and be-
cause reference calculations are not available. However,
at moderate temperatures, the present approach could
be straightforwardly applied to quantum-corrected po-
tential energy surfaces using the Feynman-Hibbs eﬀective
potentials.21

At a more general level, the present approach gives the
framework both to describe a reactive system in terms of
deformations along a reaction coordinate and to calcu-
late the corresponding energy variation. In that sense,
the present calculation allows one to deal with the de-
scription of a chemical reaction in terms of the transition
state theory in situations where part of the reactive sys-
tem itself acts as a thermal bath. In the present case the
reactive system is a calcium atom plus an argon cluster.

The latter plays the role of the thermal bath. The reac-
tion is the simplest that might be considered: solvation
of Ca by the argon cluster. The choice of reaction coor-
dinate is not unique and a possible choice is the distance
between Ca and the closest argon atom. Finally the rele-
vant energy term when the system is free to evolve along
the reaction coordinate is the potential of mean force that
was deﬁne in the present work as a Helmoltz free energy
term.

8

this series.

of this series.

114, 7312 (2001).

1 Y. J. Yan and S. Mukamel, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 5908 (1986).
2 H. Wadi and E. Pollak, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 11890 (1999).
3 F. Calvo, F. Spiegelman, and M.-C. Heitz, ﬁrst article of

4 F. Calvo, F. Spiegelman, and D. J. Wales, second article

5 F. Calvo, J. P. K. Doye, and D. J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys.

6 L. A. Girifalco, J. Phys. Chem. 96, 858 (1992).
7 J. Gspann and H. Vollmar, in Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics, 8th
Symposium, edited by K. Karamcheti (Academic Press,
New York, 1974), p. 261; in Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics, 11th
Symposium, edited by R. Campargue (CEA, Paris, 1979),
Vol. II, p. 1193.

8 M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulations of

Liquids (Oxford, 1987).

(2001).

13 F. Calvo, Mol. Phys. 100, 3421 (2002).
14 M. A. Gaveau, M. Briant, P. R. Fournier, J. M. Mestdagh,
J. P. Visticot, F. Calvo, S. Baudrand, and F. Spiegelman,
Euro. Phys. J. D 21, 153 (2002).

15 J. P. Visticot, P. de Pujo, J. M. Mestdagh, A. Lallement, J.
Berlande, O. Sublimontier, P. Meynadier, and J. Cuvelier,
J. Chem. Phys. 100, 158 (1994).

16 P. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson, and M. Ronchetti, Phys.

17 J. P. K. Doye, M. A. Miller, and D. J. Wales, J. Chem.

Rev. B 28, 784 (1983).

Phys. 110, 6896 (1999).

18 J. P. Neirotti, F. Calvo, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J.
Chem. Phys. 112, 10340 (2000); F. Calvo, J. P. Neirotti,
D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, ibid. 112, 10350 (2000).
19 J. P. K. Doye, M. A. Miller, and D. J. Wales, J. Chem.

9 D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simula-

Phys. 111, 8417 (1999).

tion (Academic Press, NY, 1996).

10 G. M. Torrie and J.-P. Valleau, Chem. Phys. Lett. 28 578

(1995).

20 C. Yannouleas and U. Landman, Phys. Rev. B 51, 1902

21 R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, Quantum mechanics and

path integrals (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965).

(1974).

11 E. A. Carter, G. Ciccotti, J. T. Hynes, and R. Kapral,

Chem. Phys. Lett. 156, 472 (1989).

12 F. Wang and D. P. Landau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2050

