3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Alignment-to-orientation conversion and nuclear quadrupole resonance

D. Budker,1, 2, ∗ D. F. Kimball,1, † S. M. Rochester,1, ‡ and J. T. Urban3, §
1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-7300
2Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720
3Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and Department of Chemistry,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-1460
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

The role of alignment-to-orientation conversion (AOC) in nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR)
is discussed. AOC is shown to be the mechanism responsible for the appearance of macroscopic
orientation in a sample originally lacking any global polarization. Parallels are drawn between NQR
and AOC in atomic physics.

PACS numbers: 76.60.Gv, 32.80.Bx

Polarization is a generic term describing the anisotropy
of the state of a quantum system (atom, nucleus, etc.).
Various types of polarization are characterized by polar-
ization moments associated with corresponding spherical
tensor ranks, of which the lowest are population (rank
zero), orientation (rank one), alignment (rank two), the
octupole moment (rank three), and the hexadecapole mo-
ment (rank four). For a system with angular momentum
F , there may exist polarization moments with rank rang-
ing from zero to 2F . A polarization moment of rank κ
has 2κ + 1 components labelled q = −κ, . . . , κ. Under
rotations, components of the polarization moments of a
given rank transform into each other, but diﬀerent ranks
remain uncoupled.

In atomic physics, the role of polarization in phenom-
ena such as atomic collisions [1] and optical pumping [2]
has been studied in great detail. In the context of the lat-
ter it is seen that when external ﬁelds that produce evo-
lution other than rotation are applied to a polarized sys-
tem, the polarization moments transform into moments
of other ranks. The most prominent example of this
is alignment-to-orientation conversion (AOC) discussed,
for example, in Refs. [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and references
therein.
In a simple example of atomic AOC, optical
pumping by linearly polarized light produces alignment
in the initially unpolarized atomic ground state. Then, a
static electric ﬁeld, applied along a direction other than
the atomic alignment axis, induces “quantum beats” that
result in an oriented state. Here, we will describe how
AOC is also the mechanism for nuclear quadrupole res-
onance (NQR) [9, 10, 11], which ﬁnds applications, for
example, in biochemistry [12], and in explosives, land
mine, and narcotics detection [13, 14, 15].

In pulsed NQR experiments, a radio-frequency (rf)
magnetic-ﬁeld excitation pulse is applied to a crystalline
solid, resulting in ac magnetization of the nuclei in the

∗Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
†Electronic address: dfk@uclink4.berkeley.edu
‡Electronic address: simonkeys@yahoo.com
§Electronic address: jurban@OCF.Berkeley.EDU

sample that is detected by a pick-up coil after the com-
pletion of the rf pulse. For this to occur, there must be
nuclear polarization present in the sample prior to the
rf pulse, since the pulse does not generate polarization
In addi-
but simply rotates the polarization direction.
tion, there must be a ﬁeld (external or internal) present
after the pulse that induces quantum beats that can be
detected with the pick-up coil. In contrast to the related
technique of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which
provides for these conditions with an external magnetic
ﬁeld, NQR takes advantage of electric ﬁeld gradients
(EFG) produced by the crystalline lattice of the sample
itself that interact with the nuclear quadrupole moment.
In both NMR and NQR, the function of the rf pulse is to
rotate the polarization axis of symmetry away from the
static ﬁeld symmetry axis, so that quantum beats will
occur.

Consider a nucleus with a nonzero quadrupole moment
(i.e., possessing angular momentum I ≥ 1). While the
average electric ﬁeld “seen” by the nucleus is zero, there
are nonzero electric ﬁeld gradients that interact with the
quadrupole moment according to the Hamiltonian (ex-
pressed in the Cartesian basis x1, x2, x3)

HE2 = −

1
6 X

i,j

Qij

∂Ej
∂xi

.

(1)

Here Qij is the quadrupole moment tensor and E is the
local electric ﬁeld in the vicinity of the nucleus. As a
simple example of NQR, we consider an I = 1 nucleus
(such as the 14N and 2H nuclei important in many ap-
plications) and assume that the local ﬁeld gradients at
each nucleus have cylindrical symmetry. In this case, the
quadrupole interaction Hamiltonian written in the I, M
basis reduces to (see, for example, [9, 11, 16]):

HE2 ∝ 3M 2 − I(I + 1) = 3M 2 − 2.

(2)

Note that the energy splitting caused by the quadrupole
interaction is similar to the quadratic (second order)
Stark splitting of F = 1 atomic energy levels relevant
to atomic AOC (Fig. 1).

The interaction (1) lifts the degeneracy between sub-
levels corresponding to diﬀerent magnetic quantum num-

2

FIG. 1: An energy splitting between levels with diﬀerent ab-
solute values of the magnetic quantum number M can arise
due to the interaction of atomic system with a uniform elec-
tric ﬁeld (the Stark eﬀect) or due to the interaction of a
quadrupole moment with electric ﬁeld gradients.
In both
the F = 1 atomic system and the I = 1 nuclei with axi-
ally symmetric electric ﬁeld gradients, the splitting between
the M = 0 and M = ±1 levels can result in quantum beats
that convert alignment to orientation.

bers |M | of the nucleus. Typical values of the sublevel
frequency splittings are between 100 kHz and 10 MHz.
In a sample at thermal equilibrium, the energy splitting
gives rise to nuclear polarization because, according to
the Boltzmann law, there is a higher probability of ﬁnd-
ing a nucleus in a lower energy state. At room tempera-
ture, a representative value of the relative population dif-
ference is ∼10−7. Although each nucleus is in an aligned
state, with a preferred axis (although no preferred direc-
tion), in a disordered medium, such as a powder, there
is no macroscopic polarization of the sample because the
crystallites are randomly oriented with respect to each
other. However, remarkably, NQR signals can still be
observed in such media, as discussed below.

Figure 2 illustrates the diﬀerent ways in which initial
alignment is achieved in the case of optical pumping and
in NQR. Note that in the former case, initial alignment
is determined by the polarization of the pumping light,
and not by static ﬁelds or gradients.

The initial nuclear alignment of several crystallites
with diﬀerent orientations of the local ﬁeld gradients is
illustrated in the ﬁrst column of Fig. 3 using angular mo-
mentum probability surfaces as discussed in Ref. [17] (see
also Ref. [5]). The distance to such a surface from the
origin in a given direction is proportional to the probabil-
ity of ﬁnding the projection M = I along this direction.
For clarity, we assume complete polarization, i.e., that
all the nuclei are in the lowest energy state; we can see
that the aligned states have a preferred axis (the EFG
axis of symmetry) but no preferred direction.

The excitation pulse consists of a resonant rf magnetic-
ﬁeld pulse, given by B(t) = B1 cos(ωt + φ), applied for a
time τ . Here B1 is the magnetic-ﬁeld amplitude (at an-
gle β to the EFG axis of symmetry), ω is the frequency
(equal to the quadrupolar splitting frequency), and φ is
the phase. Assuming that γB1 ≪ ω, where γ is the gyro-
magnetic ratio, and decomposing this ﬁeld into compo-
nents along and perpendicular to the EFG axis of symme-

FIG. 2: A diﬀerence in the population of magnetic sublevels
with diﬀerent absolute values of the magnetic quantum num-
ber M can be created via optical pumping of an atomic sys-
tem by linearly polarized light, or, when the energy levels
are split by an electric ﬁeld gradient, as a result of thermal
distribution, as in nuclear systems. The presence of such
a population diﬀerence gives rise to a quadrupole moment
(alignment) along the quantization axis. Optical excitation
by linearly polarized light transfers atoms from a particular
(aligned) ground state to the upper state, while spontaneous
decay repopulates all the ground states equally, since sponta-
neous emission can occur with any polarization. More atoms
are left in the aligned state, determined by the light polar-
ization, that does not interact with light. In the ﬁgure, solid
lines represent the excitation light, and the wavy lines repre-
sent spontaneous decay. In the case of quadrupole splitting
and thermal population, the alignment axis is determined by
the direction of the electric ﬁeld gradients in the crystal.

try, we see that the longitudinal component causes fast-
oscillating level shifts that have no eﬀect on atomic po-
larization, whereas the transverse component consists of
two circular components, each of which is resonant with
one transition from M = 0 to M ′ = ±1. We can neglect
the nonresonant component for each transition; the reso-
nant components, of amplitude B1 sin(β)/2, causes rota-
tion of the nuclear polarization by an angle γB1τ sin(β)/2
around the direction of the transverse component of the
magnetic ﬁeld. Since in a typical NQR experiment the
pulse length is much longer than the quantum-beat pe-
riod T = 2π/ω, quantum beats begin to occur during
the rf pulse. However, at the end of the pulse, the net re-
sult, shown in the second column of Fig. 3, corresponds
to simple rotation. (We plot only the eﬀect of the ro-
tation, and not of the fast quantum-beat oscillation, by
assuming that the pulse length τ is an integer number
of quantum-beat periods, but this assumption is not im-
portant for any of the mechanisms described here.) We
have chosen the parameters of the excitation pulse such
that the rotation is by π/4 for β = π/2 [25].

After the excitation pulse is over, nuclear polarization
undergoes evolution in the presence of the quadrupolar
interaction. Because the excitation pulse has rotated the
polarization of the nuclei, these nuclei are now in coher-
ent superpositions of eigenstates of diﬀerent energies—
the condition for quantum beats. These quantum beats
correspond to a cycle of alignment-to-orientation conver-
sion, as shown in the last four columns of Fig. 3.
In
one period of the cycle, alignment is converted into ori-
entation (angular momentum biased in one direction),

RF pulse

Quantum beats

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

Α=0
Π
€€€€€€
2

Β=

Α=0
Π
€€€€€€
3

Β=

Α=

Β=

Π
€€€€€€
4
Π
€€€€€€
4

Α=

Β=

Π
€€€€€€
2
Π
€€€€€€€€€
16

Powder
average

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

t

0

Τ

Τ+T(cid:144)4

Τ+T(cid:144)2

Τ+3T(cid:144)4

FIG. 3: Probability surfaces [17] corresponding to the evo-
lution of the nuclear polarization in several crystallites with
diﬀerent orientations of the (axially symmetric) local ﬁeld gra-
dients (given by the Euler angles α and β of the symmetry
axes of the local electric ﬁeld gradients with respect to the
ﬁxed lab frame). Surfaces corresponding to a given crystal-
lite are shown in a row. The last row is an average over
crystallites with all possible orientations. The columns cor-
respond to diﬀerent times. The ﬁrst column represents the
local nuclear polarizations prior to the excitation pulse, while
the second column shows these polarizations at the end of the
resonant RF excitation pulse (with magnetic ﬁeld along B1).
The excitation is simply a rotation of the polarization by a
certain angle. For these plots, the parameters of the excita-
tion pulse were chosen so the rotation is by π/4 for β = π/2; it
is also assumed that the pulse length τ is an integer multiple
of the quantum-beat period T , so that the phase of the quan-
tum beats is zero (full alignment) at time τ . The last three
columns show the probability surfaces at times T /4, T /2, and
3T /4 after the end of the pulse. As is shown in the bottom
row, macroscopic oscillating orientation appears along the di-
rection of B1. These plots are produced by performing an
averaged-Hamiltonian calculation in the quadrupolar interac-
tion frame (assuming γB1 ≪ ω) as described in, for example,
Ref. [16] to ﬁnd the density matrix as a function of time, and
then plotting the polarization as described in Ref. [17]. The
powder average is found by integrating analytically over the
Euler angles.

then into alignment at an angle of π/2 with respect to
the original alignment, followed by conversion to the op-
posite orientation, and back to the original state. This
illustrates that the evolution of the nuclear system in the
presence of an axially symmetric EFG is the same as the
evolution of an aligned atomic system in the presence of
an electric ﬁeld not directed along the axis of alignment
(see, for example, Ref. [17]).

Since, as illustrated by Fig. 3, the orientation produced

3

in each crystallite is perpendicular to both the EFG axis
and the axis of the alignment prepared by the excitation
pulse, all crystallites contribute coherently to the orien-
tation along B1, which leads to a net orientation of the
entire sample (Fig. 3, bottom row). Such AOC-induced
orientation corresponds to a net sample ac magnetization
that is the source of the NQR signal detected by Faraday
induction in the pick-up coil.

It must be mentioned that aspects of the AOC pro-
cess for quadrupolar nuclei have been long understood in
the ﬁeld of nuclear magnetic resonance in the context of
multiple-quantum coherences. The NMR situation dif-
fers from that of NQR in several respects. At the high
magnetic ﬁeld strengths common in NMR experiments,
the interaction of the nuclear spin system with this ﬁeld is
dominant. Within the rotating frame approximation, the
quadrupolar interaction for any crystallite appears to be
cylindrically symmetric about the external magnetic ﬁeld
axis, and the applied resonant radio-frequency ﬁelds are
transverse and appear to be static in the rotating frame.
Additionally, the nuclear spin system is initially magne-
tized (oriented) along the dominant magnetic ﬁeld direc-
tion.
In the case of radio-frequency irradiation that is
weak compared to the quadrupolar interaction, the con-
version of orientation to alignment has been recognized as
the means by which multiple-quantum coherence can be
created from nuclear spin magnetization during a single
pulse [18, 19]. In the case of strong, short radio-frequency
pulses, during which quadrupolar evolution is negligi-
ble, the multipolar (polarization moment) formalism has
been used to show how multiple-quantum coherence can
be created after a two-pulse sequence via orientation-to-
alignment conversion due to quadrupolar evolution be-
tween the pulses [20, 21]. Furthermore, methods have
been introduced to visualize the polarization moments of
the nuclear spin system in terms of graphical representa-
tions of the corresponding spherical harmonics [22].

Finally, we mention that various techniques for con-
verting nuclear alignment into orientation have been de-
veloped for the studies of nuclear moments of short-lived
nuclides [23, 24].

In conclusion, we have shown that alignment-to-
orientation conversion plays a prominent role in the phe-
nomenon of nuclear quadrupole resonance, converting lo-
cal nuclear alignment into global orientation, causing the
appearance of a macroscopic oscillating magnetic mo-
ment. This has been illustrated using the method of
angular momentum probability surfaces, and the rela-
tionship of this mechanism to that of AOC in atomic
physics has been discussed. In future work, it will be in-
teresting to extend the present analysis to NQR in nuclei
with I > 1 in which polarization moments higher than
alignment are possible and more complicated transfor-
mations of these moments occur during quantum beats,
rather than just alignment-to-orientation conversion [17].
The authors are grateful to A. Trabesinger for the sug-
gestion to explore the connection between atomic physics
and NQR, and to him and S. J. Freedman, J. Granwehr,

A. Pines, V. V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev for useful
discussions. This work has been supported by the Oﬃce
of Naval Research (grant N00014-97-1-0214), by NSF,
and by the Director, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of Basic
Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Nuclear Science

Divisions, of the U.S. Department of Energy under con-
tract DE-AC03-76SF00098. D.B. also acknowledges the
support of the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Sci-
ence.

4

[1] N. Andersen and K. Bartschat, Polarization, align-
(AIP

and orientation in atomic

collisions

ment,
Press/Springer, New York, 2001).

[2] W. Happer, T. Walker, and K. Bonin, Optical Pumping.

Principles and Applications (Wiley, 2003).

[3] M. Lombardi, J. Phys. (Paris) 30(8-9), 631 (1969).
[4] R. Hilborn, L. Hunter, K. Johnson, S. Peck, A. Spencer,

and J. Watson, Phys. Rev. 50(3), 2467 (1994).
[5] M. Auzinsh, Can. J. Phys. 75(12), 853 (1997).
[6] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(10), 2088 (2000).

[7] J. Alnis and M. Auzinsh, Phys. Rev. A 63(2), 023407/1

(2001).

[8] M. C. Kuntz, R. Hilborn, and A. M. Spencer, Phys. Rev.

A. 65(2), 023411 (2002).

[9] T. P. Das and E. L. Hahn, Nuclear quadrupole resonance
spectroscopy, Solid state physics. Supplement ; 1 (Aca-
demic Press, New York, 1958).

[10] H. Kopfermann, Nuclear moments (Academic Press, New

York, 1958).

[11] A. Abragam, The principles of nuclear magnetism, Inter-
national series of monographs on physics (Oxford, Ox-
fordshire) (Claredon Press, Oxford, 1962).

[12] D. T. Edmonds and C. P. Summers, J. Mag. Reson.

12(2), 134 (1973).

[13] J. P. Yesinowski, M. L. Buess, A. N. Garroway,
M. Ziegeweid, and A. Pines, Anal. Chem. 67(13), 2256
(1995).

[14] M. D. Rowe and J. A. S. Smith, in EUREL International
Conference. The Detection of Abandoned Land Mines:
A Humanitarian Imperative Seeking a Technical Solution
(IEE, Conf. Publ.No.431, London, UK, 1996), p. 62.
[15] A. N. Garroway, M. L. Buess, J. B. Miller, B. H. Suits,
A. D. Hibbs, G. A. Barrall, R. Matthews, and L. J.
Burnett, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 39(6), 1108 (2001).

[16] Y. K. Lee, Concepts in Magnetic Resonance 14(3), 155

[17] S. M. Rochester and D. Budker, Am. J. Phys. 69(4), 450

[18] S. Vega, T. W. Shattuck, and A. Pines, Phys. Rev. Lett.

37(1), 43 (1976).

[19] S. Vega and A. Pines, J. Chem. Phys. 66(12), 5624

(2002).

(2001).

(1977).

[20] B. C. Sanctuary, T. K. Halstead, and P. A. Osment, Mol.

[21] G. J. Bowden and W. D. Hutchison, J. Mag. Reson.

Phys. 49(4), 753 (1983).

67(3), 403 (1986).

[22] T. K. Halstead, P. A. Osment, and B. C. Sanctuary, J.

Mag. Reson. 60(3), 382 (1984).

[23] K. Matsuta, T. Minamisono, Y. Nojiri, M. Fukuda,
T. Onishi, and K. Minamisono, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
A 402, 229 (1998).

[24] N. Coulier, G. Neyens, S. Teughels, D. L. Balabanski,
R. Coussement, G. Georgiev, S. Ternier, K. Vyvey, and
W. F. Rogers, Phys. Rev. C 59(4), 1935 (1999).

[25] According to the common NMR/NQR terminology, the
pulse that accomplishes such a rotation is called a π/2
pulse. The terminology stems from the two-level spin-
1/2 system, where if one starts, for example, with “spin-
down” and applies a pulse creating a coherent superpo-
sition of “spin-down” and “spin-up” (with equal ampli-
tudes of the two components) this corresponds to rotat-
ing the orientation direction by π/2. Similarly, a π pulse
transfers all atoms from “spin-down” to “spin-up,” and
rotates the orientation by π. In the present case of a spin-
one system, if the excitation pulse transfers the initial
M = 0 population into a superposition of the M = ±1
sublevels, this actually corresponds to a physical rotation
of the alignment by π/2 (not by π!). Unfortunately, there
appears to be some confusion in the literature about this
point.

