3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Impact of Interatomic Electronic Decay Processes on the Width of the Xe 4d Lines in
the Auger Decay of the Xenon Fluorides

Christian Buth,∗ Robin Santra,† and Lorenz S. Cederbaum
Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls-Universit¨at Heidelberg,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 229, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
(Dated: March 19, 2003)

For a long time, the Auger eﬀect in molecules has been thought of to be an intra-atomic process,
involving mainly the molecular orbitals with a high probability amplitude on the atom which carries
the initial vacancy. Newer investigations suggest that this picture fails for certain molecules. We
investigate the Auger decay of Xe 4d-ionized xenon ﬂuorides (XeFn, n = 2, 4, 6) with respect to
the recently discovered interatomic electronic decay processes interatomic Coulombic decay (ICD)
and electron transfer mediated decay (ETMD). It is shown that the broadening of the Xe 4d line
width in XeFn with increasing n can be attributed to them. The phenomenon of foreign imaging is
explained in terms of ICD and ETMD.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Auger eﬀect1–5 has provided a magniﬁcent means
to study atoms, molecules and surfaces. It is caused by a
special type of electronic resonance, i.e. the decay by elec-
tron emission of core-ionized atoms or molecules and it
has received much attention since its discovery because
it is a fundamental process which yields deep insights
into complex many-body eﬀects in atoms and molecules.
The Auger eﬀect has proven to be useful in many exper-
imental situations2–6 and can be used as an analytical
tool. Therefore an in depth understanding of the Auger
eﬀect is important both for fundamental and for practi-
cal reasons. Over the years there were many attempts to
calculate Auger decay rates and as soon as Auger tran-
sitions involving valence orbitals in molecules came into
the focus of interest the question of the importance of
interatomic transitions arose6 and is still by far not com-
pletely elucidated. Matthew and Komninos were the ﬁrst
to examine interatomic Auger transition rates7. Using
too strong approximations6 they falsely concluded that
these transitions have a small impact on the Auger rate,
except in low energy Auger processes. Recent theoretical
and experimental investigations show that the eﬀect of
the chemical bond can be dramatic8–12.

Clusters13 of atoms or molecules have been receiving
much attention because they can be seen as a bridge be-
tween the individual monomer and the condensed phase
formed by many monomers. They also provide ideal ex-
amples to investigate the role of interatomic (intermolec-
ular) decay processes. In clusters new interatomic and
intermolecular electronic decay processes were discovered
recently that basically involve neighboring atoms14–19
and that do not take place in the individual monomer.
Since the understanding of these processes is essential for
this work, these processes will be brieﬂy described in the
following section II. Evidence for the new interatomic
decay processes predicted theoretically has been found
recently20 in neon clusters with the help of photoelec-
tron spectroscopy. In this work we investigate the role
of these processes in the Auger decay in molecules. Gen-

eral aspects are discussed and exempliﬁed for XeFn, n =
0, 2, 4, 6. The XeFn constitute an ideal example because
of the weak bonding between the central noble gas atom
and the ﬂuorine atoms allowing us to identify various
interatomic processes and to discern them from intra-
atomic ones. Here, we would like to draw the reader’s at-
tention to the recent interesting experimental study and
its analysis on SiF4

12.

Photoelectron spectroscopy was used to examine the
Xe 4d lines in the xenon atom and in the xenon ﬂuorides
(XeFn, n = 2, 4, 6)21. In ﬁgure 1 the line width of the
Xe 4d lines is plotted for all these systems21,22. The graph
suggests that the line width of the compounds increases
with an increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms. Several ex-
perimental line widths are measured for each compound
which originate from the decay of the initial ionization of
the non-equivalent Xe 4d orbitals.

The observed increase in line width raises the ques-
tion whether the increase may be caused by an increased
electronic decay rate, or whether it is caused by, e.g., un-
resolved vibrational broadening21. Cutler et al. reason
that vibrational broadening does not lead to a signiﬁ-
cant eﬀect because in other compounds, e.g. Ge 3d, this
was not important for d-level electrons21. Therefore, the
electronic decay rate of Xe 4d-ionized XeFn is examined
in this work to elucidate which types of electronic decay
processes are responsible for the increased line width in
XeFn.

To this end, section III introduces a many-body
Green’s function method, the algebraic diagrammatic
construction scheme, to calculate ionization spectra of
molecules. A two-hole population analysis8,23 serves as
an important tool for the analysis of the localization of ﬁ-
nal states which is used together with Wigner-Weisskopf
theory24,25 to elucidate the dependence between decay
width and ﬁnal state population numbers. Section IV
describes all details involved in the calculation of the ion-
ization spectra of XeFn. The single and double ionization
spectra are analyzed in section V and the relevance of in-
teratomic decay processes for the decay of Xe 4d vacan-
cies is discussed. Consequences and perspectives of our
work for the understanding of molecular Auger decay are

2

]

V
e
[
 
h
t
d
W
 
e
n
L

i

i

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

e

Auger

ov

iv

c

A+

++

A

FIG. 2: Principle of Auger decay. The initial core hole is
ﬁlled by a valence electron. The excess energy is released
by emitting a second valence electron. A: atom, ov: outer
valence orbital, iv: inner valence orbital, c: core orbital.

0

2

4

6

Number of Fluorine Atoms n in XeFn

FIG. 1: Experimental widths of the Xe 4d lines in Xe, XeF2,
XeF4 and XeF6. The ﬁgure22 suggests an average increase of
the line width with an increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms.

B.

Interatomic and Intermolecular Coulombic

Decay

illuminated in section VI.

II. ELECTRONIC DECAY PROCESSES

In this section we present the knowledge obtained in
the study of the decay of inner valence ionized clus-
ters of atoms and clusters of molecules clearly and self-
contained. We elucidate parallels and draw conclusions
for molecular Auger decay. All decays presented here are
electronic decays, i.e. an electron is emitted after the ini-
tial ionization. For sure, there is always the possibility
of a decay by photon emission or dissociation, but life-
time calculations show that the electronic decay is very
fast and consequently is the dominant process17,19,26–28
for inner valence ionized clusters. This fact is also well
known in the case of core hole decay2–5. We mention
that the decay processes, discussed below for singly ion-
ized systems, can be generalized to describe the decay of
inner valence vacancies of multiply ionized clusters16.

A.

Intra-atomic Electronic Decay

Intra-atomic electronic decay is usually the most
prominent electronic decay process of core-ionized
molecules or clusters of atoms or molecules and is closely
related to the Auger decay1 in an isolated atom. In atoms
this mechanism is well understood1–5: the initial core
hole is ﬁlled by a (valence) electron and the excess en-
ergy is transferred to a second (valence) electron which is
emitted subsequently (ﬁgure 2). In molecules or clusters
of atoms or molecules intra-atomic decay is not the only
decay process because other processes can occur which
involve neighbor atoms or neighbor molecules.

If one removes an inner valence electron from an iso-
lated atom or molecule, in general, it cannot decay by
electron emission because it is below the double ioniza-
tion threshold. The situation changes if the monomer
is part of a cluster: the initial inner valence vacancy is
ﬁlled by a valence electron of the same monomer and the
excess energy is transferred to a second valence electron
of a neighboring monomer which is emitted subsequently.
See ﬁgure 3 for a schematic representation.

The repulsion between two holes localized on two dif-
ferent monomers, the so-called two-site states, is reduced
due to the larger spatial separation of the two ﬁnal state
holes, in comparison to the repulsion between two holes
localized on one monomer, the so-called one-site states.
This increased spatial separation of the ﬁnal state holes
leads to a reduction in energy for two-site states which
lowers the double ionization threshold and a decay by
electron emission becomes energetically possible.

The decay process is termed interatomic or intermolec-
ular Coulombic decay (ICD) for clusters of atoms or
clusters of molecules, respectively.
It was identiﬁed in
(HF)n clusters14,16,18,
several weakly bound clusters:
the HF(H2O)2 cluster29, (H2O)n clusters14, (Ne)n clus-
ters15,19,30,31, the NeAr dimer17 and found to be a very
eﬃcient decay. Further we would like to point out Ref. 32
for a study of electronic decay after inner-valence ioniza-
tion of ﬂuorinated carbanions and their acids.

The ICD decay width in (Ne)n clusters was found to
increase strongly with n where the central neon atom car-
ried the initial inner valence vacancy and the surrounding
atoms converged with n to the shape of the ﬁrst coordi-
nation shell in solid neon19.

C. Electron Transfer Mediated Decay

The ionization spectra of neon and argon are very dif-
ferent (Ref. 17 and references therein), neon has higher

e

e

+
’
A −− A

+

’
A −− A

+

FIG. 3: Principle of interatomic or intermolecular Coulom-
bic decay. The initial inner valence vacancy is ﬁlled by a
valence electron of the same monomer. The excess energy
is released by emitting a second valence electron of a neigh-
boring monomer. A, A′: atoms, ov: outer valence orbital,
iv: inner valence orbital, c: core orbital.

ov

iv

c

ov

iv

c

ICD

ETMD

+
’
A −− A

’
A −− A

++

FIG. 4: Principle of two-monomer electron transfer mediated
decay. A valence electron of A′ drops into the hole on A and
the excess energy is transferred to another valence electron of
A′ which is emitted subsequently. A, A′: atoms, ov: outer
valence orbitals, iv:
inner valence orbital, c: core orbital.
The inner valence IP of A is higher than the double ionization
threshold of A′.

lying single ionization potentials (IP) and double ioniza-
tion potentials (DIP) compared to argon.
In fact, the
inner valence Ne 2s IP is larger than the Ne−1Ar−1 DIP
in the NeAr dimer17. [The superscript numbers −1, −2
denote the number of electrons missing on the atom writ-
ten to its left (compared to the isolated, neutral atom).
This idealized picture assumes a strong localization of
the electron vacancies on the atoms.] Therefore, an ini-
tial Ne 2s vacancy can lead to ICD.

The Ne 2s vacancy can decay in another way, too, be-
cause the Ne 2s IP is also larger than the NeAr−2 DIP.
In this case, a valence electron from argon drops into the
Ne 2s hole and the excess energy is transferred to another
valence electron of argon which is emitted subsequently,
leaving the dimer in a NeAr−2 state. This process is
called electron transfer mediated decay (ETMD)17. A
schematic representation of the ETMD process is shown
in ﬁgure 4.

In Ref. 17 it is shown that the contribution of ETMD
to the total electronic decay width of an initial Ne 2s va-

3

cancy is appreciably smaller compared to the contribu-
tion of ICD in NeAr. In the light of the vastly increas-
ing ICD decay width in neon clusters19 we expect this
to hold for ETMD, too. In the ETMD described, only
two atoms are involved and, therefore, it is called two-
monomer ETMD.

In Ref. 17 a three-monomer ETMD is suggested to oc-
cur for an initial Ne 2s vacancy in NeAr2. A schematic
representation of this (proposed) process is given in ﬁg-
ure 5. A valence electron of the ﬁrst argon atom drops
into the initial Ne 2s hole. The excess energy is trans-
ferred to a valence electron of the second argon atom
which is emitted subsequently, leaving the trimer in a
NeAr−1Ar−1 state.

D. Self Imaging and Foreign Imaging

This subsection is a ﬁrst example how the knowledge
obtained in the study of the electronic decay of inner
valence ionized clusters yields valuable insight into the
physics of molecular Auger decay. Auger decay in atoms
produces double vacancies in the atomic valence shells.
Likewise Auger decay in molecules produces double va-
cancies in the valence molecular orbitals. The following
discussion uses 2p ionized silicon atoms and 2p ionized
SiF4 as an example to discuss the general concepts. The
Auger spectrum of 2p ionized silicon atoms exhibits a
three-region structure. Each region is characterized by
the dicationic ﬁnal states p−2, p−1s−1 and s−2 in the
atomic valence shell.

Core holes in singly ionized molecules or solids are
highly localized. Therefore it is frequently assumed that
the Auger decay rate matrix elements are dominated by
intra-atomic terms. For this reason it has been thought
that the contribution of the molecular orbitals to the
molecular Auger decay may be approximated by that of
the atomic orbitals of the atom carrying the initial va-
cancy. In this picture, the chemical bond is seen as small
modulation. This is called the self-imaging picture of
molecular Auger decay9 (and references therein) and the
Auger spectrum of a molecule exhibits the structure of
atomic Auger decay, described above. A prominent ex-
ample is the 1s Auger spectrum of ﬂuorine which exhibits
similar appearance in diﬀerent materials. This picture of
Auger decay in molecules is only valid if the molecular
orbitals are very similar to the atomic orbitals of the ini-
tially ionized atom.

If this condition is not fulﬁlled, the situation changes
dramatically9–12. A good example for this situation is sil-
icon tetraﬂuoride. The bonds in SiF4 are highly polarized
towards the ﬂuorine atoms, causing a signiﬁcant deple-
tion of valence electrons on the silicon atom. The Auger
spectrum of Si 2p ionized SiF4 exhibits eight, instead of
three, distinct regions because of the eight possibilities
to produce two holes in the valence molecular orbitals:
1. F1 p−1 F2 p−1, 2. F p−2 (triplet), 3. F p−2 (singlet),
4. F1 p−1 F2 s−1, 5. F p−1s−1 (triplet), 6. F p−1s−1 (sin-

4

e

ov

iv

c

ETMD

+

A  −− A −− A

1

2

A  −− A −− A

+
1

+
2

FIG. 5: Principle of three-monomer electron transfer mediated decay. A valence electron of A1 drops into the hole on A and
the excess energy is transferred to a valence electron of A2. A, A1, A2: atoms, ov: outer valence orbital, iv: inner valence
orbital, c: core orbital. The inner valence IP of A is higher than the double ionization threshold for ionization from A1 and A2.

glet), 7. F1 s−1 F2 s−1, 8. F s−2 in increasing energetical
order. Orbitals associated with the silicon atom play
practically no role. Here, F1 and F2 refer to diﬀerent
ﬂuorine atoms. As can be seen, the Auger decay of the
Si 2p core hole populates only states with two valence
holes essentially on the ﬂuorine atoms. This phenomenon
is termed the foreign-imaging picture of molecular Auger
decay9,10.

The mechanism responsible for this drastic redistribu-
tion of charge has been an open question. The argu-
ments to be used in the case of foreign imaging parallel
those given in subsection V E for the xenon ﬂuorides.
Therefore we give here only an abbreviated analysis. In
the light of the preceding subsections, the foreign imag-
ing phenomenon can be explained by resorting to inter-
atomic electronic decay processes. The fact that the ini-
tial core hole is a Si 2p hole and that the vast majority of
ﬁnal state holes are situated on one or two neighboring
ﬂuorine atoms10 suggests that ETMD is the dominant
decay process because ETMD is the only process that
produces ﬁnal state holes on neighboring atoms exclu-
sively. As no partial decay widths have been computed
for ETMD in SiF4 the impact of the transition matrix
elements in (16) are unknown.

A reason for the intra-atomic rate to drop below the
ICD, two- and three-atomic ETMD rates is the ionic
bonding in SiF4 because the outer valence electron den-
sity is considerably reduced on the central silicon atom.
This extreme depletion of valence electron density on sil-
icon causes the dominance of ETMD. To prove this one
has to calculate the partial decay widths of the various
decay processes in SiF4 which has not been done yet.

We would like to study a new example for the surpris-
ing impact of the ideas presented so far. To this end, we
examine the decay of Xe 4d vacancies in XeFn where in-
teratomic processes lead to an increase in line width. To
pursue this issue we need to introduce a couple of com-
putational techniques in the ensuing sections III and IV.
Readers not interested in much details should proceed
with section V.

III. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

A. Algebraic Diagrammatic Construction

Greens function methods are well-suited to calculate
various properties of molecules. The pole positions of
the particle propagator and the pole positions of the
two-particle propagator yield the vertical IPs and DIPs
of a molecule, respectively33–36. The residuum or pole
strength of the poles of the propagators is a measure
of the one-particle or two-particle character of a speciﬁc
singly or doubly ionized state, respectively, i.e. it is a
measure how well the physical state is described by the
1h- or 2h-conﬁgurations that derive from the Hartree-
Fock ground state.

Algebraic diagrammatic construction (ADC) is an ap-
proximation scheme for the particle and two-particle
propagator using Feynman diagrams37–40. The n-th or-
der ADC scheme, ADC(n) for short, contains inﬁnite
summations of those classes of diagrams which derive
from the ﬁrst n orders of the Feynman-Dyson pertur-
bation series. The problem of ﬁnding their pole positions
and pole strengths is formulated in terms of the solution
of a Hermitian matrix eigenvalue problem. The eigen-
value problem is solved by a block-variant of the Lanczos
algorithm which selectively computes the eigenvalues of
a matrix41–43. The Lanczos algorithm converges rapidly
for the lowest and the highest eigenvalues. Unfortunately,
the lowest IPs correspond to eigenvalues amidst the spec-
trum because the electron aﬃnities of the molecule which
are also given by poles of the one-particle Green’s func-
tion are lower in energy.

The one-particle ADC scheme used to calculate the
IPs in this work employs the Dyson equation which sums
many diagram classes in addition to the summation car-
ried out by the ADC scheme. Using the Dyson equation
implies the combined calculation of the IPs and the elec-
tron aﬃnities. The latter are also given by pole positions
of the particle propagator. This enlarges the aforemen-
tioned eigenvalue problem extremely. Therefore an ap-
proximation to the aﬃnity block in the Dyson equation

is made by replacing it with the much smaller result of a
few block Lanczos iterations performed on this block43.
Ionization from the Xe 4d orbitals of the xenon ﬂu-
orides is a core-level ionization, with IPs widely above
the double ionization threshold. Therefore, not only
2h1p-conﬁgurations but also 3h2p-conﬁgurations are ex-
pected to have a considerable impact for the descrip-
tion of these IPs44,45. The ADC(3) scheme does not
contain 3h2p-conﬁgurations explicitly, but the next or-
der scheme, ADC(4), does. Hence one expects that the
ADC(4) scheme gives an appreciable improvement of the
core-level IPs of xenon and its ﬂuorides.

The inclusion of 3h2p-conﬁgurations enlarges the con-
ﬁguration space considerably. The available computer
resources are not suﬃcient to calculate a molecule
like XeF6 in an acceptable time. Therefore, the exist-
ing ADC(4) programs44–46 contain the core-valence sep-
aration approximation for core-level ionization which re-
duces the size of the conﬁguration space and consequently
does not calculate the ionization potentials of the valence
regime. In particular, they do not include those 2h1p-
conﬁgurations that are needed to describe core-hole de-
cay. For these reasons, the ADC(4) programs are useless
for the calculations needed here. Hence all ionization
spectra were calculated using the ADC(3) scheme.

There is no Dyson equation for the two-particle Greens
function47–49. Therefore the two-particle ADC evaluates
the two-particle propagator directly. The program46 used
to calculate double ionization potentials implements the
two-particle ADC(2) scheme39.

B. Two-Hole Population Analysis

The two-hole population analysis is a means to reveal
the localization of the two holes which result from double
ionization8,23. It is used together with the ADC(2) pro-
gram and is carried out by taking the contribution of
the 2h-conﬁgurations to the total 2h-pole strength. To
this end, a dicationic ﬁnal state in the ADC(2) scheme is
expanded in terms of 2h-conﬁgurations

| ΨN −2
n

i =

( ~Xn)ij ˆciˆcj | Φ0 i

+ . . . ,

(1)

X
ij

2h−conﬁg
|
}
{z

where ~Xn is the 2h-part of the ADC eigenvector of the
n-th dicationic state. ij denotes a single 2h-conﬁguration
and ˆci, ˆcj are annihilation operators acting on the
Hartree-Fock ground state | Φ0 i. The correlated ground
state of the system is approximated by the Hartree-Fock
ground state50–52. The two-hole population analysis8,23
examines only the 2h-components because in most cases
the two-particle ADC(2) matrices cannot be diagonal-
ized fully. The 3h1p-components of the eigenvectors are
therefore typically not available.

The two-hole conﬁgurations can be either singlet or
triplet states. There is no coupling between the two sets

5

of conﬁgurations with diﬀerent spin. A spin adapted 2h-
conﬁguration in molecular orbital basis | ij(s,t) i can be
expanded8,23 in 2h-conﬁgurations | pq(s,t) i deriving from
the atomic orbital basis

| ij(s,t) i =

U (s,t)
pq,ij | pq(s,t) i .

(2)

X
pq

The superscripts s and t denote singlet or triplet spin
multiplicity, respectively, and ij and pq are hole indices
in the molecular and atomic basis.
For a speciﬁc state | ΨN −2

i the spin multiplicity is
ﬁxed. As the equations in this section possess an in-
variant form with respect to spin, the spin indices can be
dropped. With the equations (1) and (2) one can express
the n-th dicationic state in terms of the 2h-functions in
atomic orbital basis

n

| ΨN −2
n

i =

( ~Xn)ij | ij i + . . .

Pij

=

Ppq Pij

Upq,ij ( ~Xn)ij | pq i + . . . .

(3)

This gives new expansion coeﬃcients ~Yn := U ~Xn. Us-
ing this new vector to transform the total 2h-weight
(ADC pole strength) gives8,23

~X †
n

~Xn = ~Y †
n

O ~Yn =

hYpq,n X

rs

X
pq

Opq,rsYrs,n

i

(4)

|

Qpq,n
{z

}

where Opq,rs = h pq | rsi denotes the overlap matrix of the
2h-conﬁgurations in atomic orbital basis. The orthonor-
mality condition for the molecular orbitals thus reads
U †OU = 1. The Qpq,n form the 2h-population ma-
trix. Choosing suitable sets of atomic basis functions A,
B, one obtains population numbers8,23

QAB,n =

Qpq,n .

(5)

X
p∈A
q∈B

Frequently, as is done in this work, A and B represent
the atomic basis functions of individual atoms within a
molecule. This provides a clear picture of the localization
properties of the two holes.

As the contribution to the 2h-pole strength is used
in this population analysis, the sum of the contribu-
tions
Ppq Qpq,n to the n-th dicationic state yields the
2h-pole strength of this state. In this work, all popula-
tion numbers of the n-th state are normalized, so sum-
ming them yields 1. Then, the numbers QAB,n represent
the fraction of the two holes to be located on the atoms A
and B.

C. Wigner-Weisskopf Theory

Wigner-Weisskopf theory24,25 applies time-dependent
perturbation theory to describe the decay of a resonance.

6

The theory yields an approximation to the decay width
and was applied in Refs. 17,19 to inner-valence-ionized
clusters to study their electronic decay. There, single
Hartree-Fock determinants were employed to describe
initial and ﬁnal states which is not suitable here.

Let the initial state | ΨI i be a singly ionized resonance
state and the ﬁnal states | ΨF i are the n-th doubly ion-
ized state together with the free electron of momentum ~k
resulting from the decay. The decay width is given by24,25

Γ = 2π

| h ΨF | ˆH | ΨI i |2 δ(EF − EI) .

(6)

X
F 6=I

three types of matrix el-
This equation contains
h ΨF | ˆH | ΨI i
transition matrix element,
ements:
:= h ΨI | ˆH | ΨI i initial state energy and EF :=
EI
h ΨF | ˆH | ΨF i ﬁnal state energy. The δ-function in equa-
tion (6) assures that the contribution to the total decay
width of only those accessible ﬁnal states is summed that
conserve energy in the decay.

The partial decay widths of the various electronic de-
cay processes, intra-atomic electronic decay, ICD, two-
and three-monomer ETMD which are reviewed in sec-
tion II can be described by expressions of the type (6) in
Wigner-Weisskopf theory24,25. All four decay processes
have in common that they produce two ﬁnal state holes.
One sums over all energetically accessible dicationic ﬁnal
states which are denoted below with the single index n,
to obtain the total decay width

Γch =

Γn = ΓOne−site + ΓTwo−site .

(7)

X
n

of the initial core hole “ch”. There are two sorts of over-
all partial decay widths. The electronic decays which
produce two holes localized on one atom, the one-site
states, and those which produce two holes localized on
two atoms, the so-called two-site states. The one-site ﬁ-
nal states arise from intra-atomic electronic decay and
two-monomer ETMD, as shown in ﬁgures 2, 4

ΓOne−site = ΓIntra−atomic + ΓETMD,2 .

(8)

of stationary states28.
In addition, the decay electron,
i.e. the electron emitted as the result of the decay of the
core hole levels, is inappropriately represented in Gaus-
sian basis sets typically used in quantum chemistry cal-
culations28. Nevertheless, Wigner-Weisskopf theory24,25
and the population numbers discussed above can be used
to analyze the decay at least qualitatively.

To this end, we return to the decay width in (6) and
observe that a ﬁnal state of the decay can be written
~k
n i where n speciﬁes the dicationic state and ~k the
as | Ψ
momentum of the emitted electron. For simplicity we
employ the sudden approximation (Ref. 53 and references
therein) and express | Ψ~k
n i by the antisymmetrized prod-
uct ˆc†
| Ψn i. We now expand the dicationic state in terms
~k
of dicationic electronic conﬁgurations using, for instance,
the expansion (1) and obtain

~k
n | ˆH | ΨI i =
h Ψ

( ~X †

~k
ij | ˆH | ΨI i + . . .
n)ij h Φ

(10)

X
ij

ij i = ˆc†
~k

for the transition matrix elements in (6). Here, the ﬁnal
state conﬁgurations are given by | Φ~k
ˆciˆcj | Φ0 i. If
we further assume that the initial state can be approx-
imated by a single determinant | ΨI i = ˆcl | Φ0 i where l
indicates a core orbital index, and that core orbitals do
not contribute to the ( ~X †
n)ij of the ﬁnal state which is a
good approximation, then the terms indicated in (10) as
“. . . ” vanish exactly due to the Slater-Condon rules33.

To proceed we make use of (2) which enables us to ex-
press the dicationic electronic conﬁgurations in terms of
atomic 2h-indices pq. The conﬁgurations | Φ~k
ij i appear-
ing in (10) form an orthonormalized set of functions and
by using the relation

~k
| Φ
ij i =

(O 1

~k
2 )pq,rs Urs,ij | Φ
pq i

(11)

X
pq,rs

we have introduced an orthonormalized set of conﬁgura-
tions | Φ~k
pq i in terms of atomic orbitals in (2). Notice that
the atomic conﬁgurations in (2) are not orthonormalized.
Inserting (11) into (10) leads to

ICD and three-monomer ETMD produce two-site ﬁnal
states, as shown in ﬁgures 3, 5

~k
n | ˆH | ΨI i =
h Ψ

~k
pq | ˆH | ΨI i
Y ′
pq,n h Φ

(12)

X
pq

ΓTwo−site = ΓICD + ΓETMD,3 .

(9)

Of course, each of the above partial widths can be viewed
as a sum over the accessible ﬁnal states. For instance,
ΓICD =

Γn, ICD.

Pn

D. On the Lifetimes of Decaying States

The calculation of lifetimes τ = 1/Γ of decaying elec-
tronic states with a decay width Γ is, in general, much
more complicated than the calculation of the energy

n := O 1

where ~Y ′
2 U ~Xn. This equation relates the tran-
sition matrix element to a superposition of atomic-like
quantities.

We now insert the transition matrix element (12) into
the basic equation (6) for the decay width, integrate over
the momentum ~k of the emitted electron and neglect in-
terference terms (cross terms). The result reads

Γ =

Γn

Pn

Ppq

Γn =

|Tpq|2 |Y ′

pq,n|2

.

(13)

The width associated with the ﬁnal dicationic state | Ψn i
speciﬁed by n is expressed as a sum over 2h-atomic in-
dices. Each contributing term consists of a state speciﬁc
factor |Y ′
pq,n|2 which we have calculated above. The other
factor

reads

|Tpq|2 = 2π

~k
pq | ˆH | ΨI i |2 δ(EF − EI)
| h Φ

(14)

X
~k

depends on the dicationic state | Ψn i only via the δ(EF −
EI) function. Since we consider the decay of a core level
implying that the energy of the emitted electron is high,
this dependence is weak and can be neglected to a good
approximation.

The state speciﬁc quantities |Y ′

pq,n|2 are closely re-
lated to the occupation numbers discussed above in sec-
tion III B.
In principle, they could be used as an al-
ternative deﬁnition of occupation numbers (in spirit of
L¨owdin’s population analysis33).
In particular, if the
atomic basis functions are well localized, each on its
atom, we may put |Y ′

pq,n|2 = Qpq,n and obtain

Γn =

|Tpq|2 Qpq,n .

(15)

X
pq

For a given molecule the quantities |Tpq|2 are universal
and the only information which is state speciﬁc is in the
occupation numbers Qpq,n. We are able to compute the
occupation numbers of the molecules studied in this work
and hence (15) is already a useful tool of analysis.

The number of distinct atomic pairs (pq) is, unfortu-
nately, rather large. We notice, however, that many ele-
ments |Tpq|2 are of similar magnitude, e.g., if p denotes a
p-type atomic orbital on atom A and q a p-type atomic
orbital on atom B, and group together in (15) the cor-
responding contributions: Γn = |TAB|2
Qpq,n + . . .

Pp∈A
q∈B

Since |Tpq|2 grouped together are not identical, the aver-
age quantity |TAB|2 will slightly depend on the dicationic
state index n. Computing Γ =
Γn amounts to aver-

Pn

aging over the slightly varying |TAB|2 and thus leads to
a more stable result. We may now classify the atomic
pairs (pq) by their localization characteristics. Let us
denote with A the atom on which the initial core hole
is localized. Then, if p and q denote atomic orbitals
on A, obviously |Tpq|2 corresponds to intra-atomic elec-
tronic decay. Analogously, if p belongs to atom A and
q to atom B, we are dealing with ICD, and if neither p
nor q belong to A, |Tpq|2 describes two- or three-monomer
ETMD depending on whether p and q belong to the same
atom B or not. Thus, the minimal dissection of Γ into its
various contributions in the spirit of the above discussion

7

.

(16)

Γ = |Tintra−atomic|2

Qpq,n

+ |TICD|2

Pn Pp,q∈A

Qpq,n

Pn Pp∈A
q∈B

+ |TETMD,2|2

Qpq,n

Pn Pp,q∈B

+ |TETMD,3|2

Qpq,n

Pn Pp∈B
q∈C

If necessary, further dissections of Γ into more detailed
contributions are readily done. For instance, grouping
together separately the contributions of p and q both
being atomic orbitals of s-type, both of p-type, or one
of s- and one of p-type, etc. A distinction between the
decay into singlet and triplet ﬁnal dicationic states is
also possible. Finally, we mention that the individual
transition strengths |TICD|2, etc., may be similar in a
series of related molecules.

IV. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

The ground state geometries of F2, XeF2, XeF4 and
XeF6 are taken from literature. The distance of the
ﬂuorine atoms in the ﬂuorine molecule is r(F–F) =
1.42 ˚A 54. Xenon(II)-ﬂuoride also is a linear molecule
of D∞h symmetry with a Xe–F distance of 1.977 ˚A 54.
Xenon(IV)-ﬂuoride is square-planar (D4h), the Xe–F dis-
tance is 1.94 ˚A. See chapter 12 in Ref. 54 for further
chemical and physical properties of the xenon ﬂuorides.
The atomic distances are given for all molecules in the
gas phase.

The ground state geometry of xenon(VI)-ﬂuoride in
gas phase is a distorted octahedron21,55, it can be de-
scribed in C3v symmetry. Nevertheless, some of our
computations were performed in Oh symmetry due to
computer hardware limitations. The notation of ﬁg-
ure 1a in Ref. 55 is used here. Our calculations on XeF6
in C3v symmetry use the bond lengths r(Xe–F1) =
1.856 ˚A and r(Xe–F4) = 1.972 ˚A and bond angles α =
80.8◦ and β = 112.8◦ taken from tables 2,3 of Ref. 55.
These values have been determined using MP2 and an
all-electron basis with f -functions. Our computations
on XeF6 in Oh symmetry were performed at the bond
length r(Xe–F) = 1.952 ˚A which is taken from table 1 of
Ref. 55.

The ADC programs, used for the calculation of sin-
gle and double ionization potentials, introduced in sec-
tion III A rely on the molecular orbitals of a Hartree-Fock
calculation which are obtained using the Gamess-UK56
program package. The employed software uses no sym-
metry for the xenon atom. D2h symmetry is used for F2,
XeF2 and XeF4. The calculation of the single ioniza-
tion potentials of XeF6 in the ground state geometry of
C3v symmetry is performed in Cs symmetry.

The double ionization spectrum of XeF6 is calculated
using a ground state geometry of Oh symmetry, instead

8

of C3v symmetry, to make the calculation feasible with
the available computer resources. The employed software
uses D2h symmetry to calculate the DIPs of XeF6 in the
ground state geometry of Oh symmetry. To investigate
the eﬀect of the diﬀerent symmetries of the ground state
of XeF6, the orbital energies are compared. The overall
positions of the xenon-like orbitals are in good agree-
ment in both symmetries but the split of the ﬂuorine-like
orbitals is enlarged due to the increased interaction in
C3v symmetry.

The xenon and the ﬂuorine atoms are represented by
the DZVP (DFT orbital)57,58 basis set. The quality of
the basis sets can be estimated from table I by comparing
the Hartree-Fock orbital energies of xenon, obtained by
solving the Hartree-Fock equations numerically, i.e. with-
out the help of an initially given ﬁxed basis set59, with
those obtained using the DZVP (DFT orbital)57,58 ba-
sis set. The shift of the orbitals, due to the approxi-
mation introduced by the ﬁnite basis set, are ∆εBS :=
εHF, numeric − εHF, DZVP. The shift is ≈ 0.1334 eV for
the Xe 4d orbitals and even less for the valence orbitals
because basis sets are usually optimized with respect to
the latter orbitals. This shift is neglected in the following
because other errors are larger.

There are three main relativistic eﬀects one has to
take into account when examining heavy atoms like
xenon60,61:

1. the relativistic radial contraction and energetic sta-

bilization of the s and p shells,

2. the spin-orbit splitting,

3. the relativistic radial expansion and the energetic

destabilization of the (outer) d and f shells.

Eﬀects (1) and (3) are termed scalar relativistic eﬀects55.
As the theory of subsection III A for the calculation of
IPs is strictly non-relativistic, one has to take into ac-
count relativistic eﬀects by a “rule of thumb”. This is
done by performing Hartree-Fock and Dirac-Fock calcu-
lations, the relativistic counterpart to Hartree-Fock60,61,
for the xenon atom. Due to the spherical symmetry of
atoms, the equations can be solved numerically59,62,63,
i.e. without ﬁxed basis sets, to arbitrary precision. This
gives exact sets of relativistic and non-relativistic orbitals
in the mean ﬁeld approximation.

In table I, the orbitals determined in this way are listed
together with Hartree-Fock orbitals obtained by a calcu-
lation employing the DZVP (DFT Orbital)57,58 basis set.
By comparing the orbital energies of the two numerical
solutions of the Hartree-Fock and Dirac-Fock equations,
one can determine the size of relativistic eﬀects and cor-
rect for them in non-relativistic computations of the IPs
of the xenon ﬂuorides.

To carry out this comparison, one has to note that
the total angular momentum j is the combination of the
orbital angular momentum l and the electron spin: j =
l ± 1
2 . A Dirac-Fock calculation yields two orbitals60, one

2 and one for j− = l − 1

for j+ = l + 1
2 , for one Hartree-
Fock orbital with l ≥ 1. The j− orbital has a lower orbital
energy than the j+ orbital.

To compare Dirac-Fock with Hartree-Fock orbital en-
ergies one has to calculate a weighted mean of the two
Dirac-Fock orbital energies60, which eﬀectively removes
spin-orbit splitting. This weighted mean reads

¯εDF =

(2j+ + 1) εDF,+ + (2j− + 1) εDF,−
2j+ + 1 + 2j− + 1

.

(17)

The scalar relativistic shift of the non-relativistic orbitals
is ∆ε := ¯εDF −εHF. The shifts are 3.077 eV for the Xe 4d,
−1.789 eV for the Xe 5s and −0.00283 eV for the Xe 5p
orbitals. The sign of the shift is predicted by the rules (1)
and (3) given above because the energetic stabilization
of s and p orbitals leads to a lowering of the Xe 5s and
Xe 5p orbital energies and thus ∆ε < 0. Similarly, ∆ε >
0 holds for the shift of the Xe 4d orbital energies due to
the energetic destabilization of the (outer) d orbitals.

Koopmans’ theorem33,64 states that the IPs of an atom
or a molecule are approximately given by the negative
of the orbital energies IP ≈ −εHF. As the relativis-
tic shift ∆ε represents a relativistic correction to the
Hartree-Fock orbital energies εHF,corr = εHF + ∆ε, the
IPs are corrected as follows IPcorr = IPHF − ∆ε.

The above shifts of the orbital energies of the xenon
atom are used to correct the Xe 4d orbitals for the scalar
relativistic eﬀect by adding −∆ε to the Xe 4d IP of the
non-relativistic calculations. This procedure is justiﬁed
by the observation that the Xe 4d orbitals are highly lo-
calized and are very similar to atomic Xe 4d orbitals.
The Xe 4d IPs calculated employing the ADC(3) scheme
take electron correlation into account. Therefore con-
tributions of all orbitals mix into the description of the
Xe 4d ionized states. As the Xe 4d ionized states are pre-
dominantly described by the Xe 4d orbitals the relativis-
tic correction is applicable in this case as well.

The spin-orbit split in the xenon atom amounts
to 2.111 eV for the 4d orbitals and 1.436 eV for 5p or-
bitals (table I). The spin-orbit split in the xenon atom is
possibly only a good approximation21 for the Xe 4d or-
bitals in the xenon ﬂuorides because the Xe 5p orbitals
suﬀer from a signiﬁcant modiﬁcation by the molecular
bond to the ﬂuorine atoms. The experimental value for
the spin-orbit split of the 4d orbitals in the xenon atom
is 1.984 ± 0.014 eV (table III). The theoretically and ex-
perimentally determined values are in satisfactory agree-
ment. A good agreement is not expected because the
Dirac-Fock equations are a mean ﬁeld approximation60
and do not take electron correlation into account. Spin-
orbit splitting is not accounted for in the non-relativistic
theory used throughout and is not considered any further
in the ensuing sections.

The double ionization spectra cannot be corrected for
the relativistic eﬀects as easily as the single ionization
spectra because usually two orbitals with diﬀerent orbital
angular momenta are involved. Our computed double
ionization spectra are only accurate up to the Xe 4d ion-

HF orbital εHF, DZVP εHF, numeric DF orbital

εDF

¯εDF

4d

5s

5p

-2.78280

-2.77788

-0.457894 -0.457290

4d 3/2
4d 5/2
5s
5p 1/2
5p 3/2

-2.71133
-2.63376

-2.66479

-0.492572
-0.439805

-0.457394

-0.946253 -0.944414

-1.01014 -1.01014

9

TABLE I: Hartree-Fock (HF) and Dirac-Fock (DF) orbital energies of xenon. Hartree-Fock orbitals are given for the DZVP
(DFT orbital)57,58 basis set and for the numeric solution. The Dirac-Fock orbitals were obtained numerically. All data are
given in Hartree.

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

h
t
g
n
e
r
t

S
 
e
o
P

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XeF4

XeF6

5p

5s

Xe
F2

XeF2

5s

2p

2s

2s

4d

4d

Xenon
Flourine

5s

5s

2s

2s

2s

4d

4d

0

20

40

60

80

100

Ionization Potential [eV]

FIG. 6: (Color) Single ionization spectra of Xe, F2, XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6 calculated on Hartree-Fock level (Koopmans’
theorem). The assignment of the lines to atomic orbitals of xenon or ﬂuorine origin in XeFn is not strict in the valence region
due to the molecular bond.

ization energy where only the Xe 5p and Xe 5s orbitals
are involved and the main relativistic error of the DIPs
is caused by the neglect of the relativistic shift of the
Xe 5s orbitals. The amount of spin-orbit coupling can-
not be estimated satisfactorily for the double ionization
spectra.

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Single Ionization Spectra

1. Mean-Field Model

Single ionization spectra of the xenon ﬂuorides can be
obtained with the help of Koopmans’ theorem33,64 in the

10

Compound Atoms Nuclear Mulliken

L¨owdin

Charge Population Population

XeF2

XeF4

XeF6

Xe
2 F
Xe
4 F
Xe
3 F
3 F

54
9
54
9
54
9
9

52.92
9.54
52.13
9.47
51.71
9.49
9.27

52.95
9.53
52.12
9.47
51.51
9.51
9.33

TABLE II: Mulliken and L¨owdin population analyses of XeF2,
XeF4 and XeF6.

In this mean ﬁeld model
Hartree-Fock approximation.
the correlation between the electrons is neglected result-
ing in very simple spectra (ﬁgure 6) which can give a
hint for the interpretation of the more complex spectra
that include electron correlation (ﬁgure 7). The assign-
ment of the lines in ﬁgure 6 to atomic orbitals of xenon
or ﬂuorine is not strict in the valence region due to the
molecular bond.
In the lower lying molecular orbitals,
this assignment is well-deﬁned. As spin-orbit coupling
is neglected, artiﬁcial degeneracies are introduced in the
spectra of ﬁgure 6. The eﬀect of the ligand ﬁeld caused
by the ﬂuorine atoms is of course included.

The eﬀect of adding ﬂuorine atoms to xenon is stud-
ied by Mulliken and L¨owdin population analyses33,65
in table II. We remind that such population analysis
may exhibit some basis set dependence33 but the consis-
tency between the two sets of results indicates reliability.
One sees immediately that charge is withdrawn from the
xenon atom to the ﬂuorine atoms: XeF2: 1.1, XeF4: 1.9,
XeF6: 2.3 electron charges. Due to the C3v symmetry of
the ground state geometry of XeF6, there are two kinds
of ﬂuorine atoms with diﬀerent distances to the central
xenon atom. These geometric diﬀerences are reﬂected in
table II in that these ﬂuorine atoms in XeF6 which are
further away from the xenon atom acquire less charge.

At ﬁrst sight one may assume that the computed
change in charge density involves only the valence elec-
trons and has little eﬀect on the inner molecular orbitals
of the xenon ﬂuorides. In the hydrogen atom, the wave
functions of the higher lying shells, which are unoccu-
pied in the ground state, have a considerable amplitude
in the spatial regions of the lower lying shells of the same
angular momentum24. As this argument also holds in
the case of the xenon ﬂuorides, a reduction of valence
electron density on the xenon atom leads to a less eﬃ-
cient screening of its nuclear charge and consequently to
a lowering in energy of the energetically low lying molec-
ular orbitals with a dominant contribution on the xenon
atom.

tribution on ﬂuorine atoms. The charge withdrawn from
the xenon atom is shared among several ﬂuorine atoms.
The net increase of charge density on each ﬂuorine atom
is ≈ 0.5 electron charges. This value is, of course, much
smaller than the loss of charge density on the xenon atom
and hence the impact on the inner molecular orbitals of
ﬂuorine character is expected to be much smaller than
for xenon. It is most dramatic in XeF2 where each ﬂu-
orine atom acquires the largest fraction of charge. The
screening of the nuclear charge is largest in XeF2 and
decreases in XeF4 and XeF6.

The eﬀects of this model can be seen in ﬁgure 6. The
positions of the Xe 5s and Xe 4d lines shift to higher
binding energies with an increasing number of ﬂuorine
atoms. The energy diﬀerences between the correspond-
ing lines of XeF2, XeF4 and of XeF4, XeF6 are nearly
equally large. The F 2p and F 2s lines also shift slightly
to higher binding energies with increasing number of ﬂu-
orine atoms. This explanation for the shift of the ﬂuorine
lines is supported by a comparison with F2. The mean of
the F 2p lines in F2 and the mean of the F 2s lines in F2
are higher in energy than the mean values of the corre-
sponding lines in XeF2. The ﬁrst IP is nearly constant
for all xenon ﬂuorides studied. Its value is ≈ 12.5 eV.

In the ﬂuorine molecule, the two F 2s lines are split
considerably due to the molecular bond. The split of the
two F 2s lines in XeF2 is tiny due to the large separation
of the ﬂuorine atoms. In XeF4 and XeF6, the ﬂuorine
atoms are closer and interact. This results in a larger
split of the F 2s lines in comparison to the split in XeF2.
The Xe 4d lines are quintuply degenerate in the sin-
gle ionization spectrum of the xenon atom in ﬁgure 6.
In XeF2, the degeneracy is lifted by the ligand ﬁeld of
the ﬂuorine atoms and three distinct lines become visi-
ble. The three lines reﬂect the spatial orientation of the
4d orbitals. There is a ligand ﬁeld along the molecu-
lar axis. Perpendicular to the molecular axis there is no
In XeF4 there
shift resulting in a total of three lines.
is only one dimension left that is unaﬀected by the lig-
and ﬁeld: the axis perpendicular to the molecular plane.
The spectrum, ﬁgure 6, shows that there are four distinct
Xe 4d lines in this case.

In XeF6 the situation changes because the ﬂuorine
atoms are grouped around the xenon in such a way
that XeF6 is close to octahedral symmetry. This high
symmetry leads to a split of the two 4d orbitals of XeF6 in
Oh symmetry of only 0.1568 eV compared to the much
larger splits in XeF2 and XeF4. Lowering the symmetry
to C3v leads in XeF6 to three distinct 4d orbital energies
with a total split of 0.3682 eV.

2. Correlation Eﬀects

Conversely, the increase of valence electron density on
the ﬂuorine atoms leads to a more eﬃcient screening of
their nuclear charge and consequently raises the energy of
the lower lying molecular orbitals with a dominant con-

Going beyond the Hartree-Fock description of the
molecules by using ADC(3) leads to the IPs plotted in
ﬁgure 7. Figure 6 helps to identify the one-particle origin
of the states in ﬁgure 7. The Xe 4d lines are energetically

11

Xenon
Fluorine

Xe
F2

XeF2

XeF4

XeF6

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

h
t
g
n
e
r
t

S
 
e
o
P

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0

20

40

60

80

100

Ionization Potential [eV]

FIG. 7: (Color) Single ionization spectra of Xe, F2, XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6 calculated with the one-particle ADC(3) program
(see text). The assignment of lines to atomic orbitals of xenon or ﬂuorine origin is not done for the XeFn molecules.

clearly separated from the outer and inner valence lines
in all spectra. They are located between 72 eV and 82 eV.
The F 2s derived lines show up between 35 eV and 45 eV.
Correlation eﬀects do not change the fact that the ﬁrst
IPs are approximately equal in all compounds.

in energy to a one-particle state and contribute consid-
erably to the description of the state66. The coupling
of these conﬁgurations to one-particle states leads to a
broad shape of lines which has been observed in the in-
ner valence region of many molecules66.

There is an overall dramatic change of the spectra due
to the inclusion of many-body eﬀects which grows with
increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms. This is reﬂected in
energy shifts and reduction of intensity in the outer va-
lence part of the spectra, in the appearance of numerous
satellite lines in the vicinity of 20 eV and above, and in
particular in the eye catching breakdown of the molecular
orbital picture of ionization seen in the inner valence re-
gion. The latter phenomenon is common in molecules66;
the intensity originally conﬁned to a single orbital in ﬁg-
ure 6 is spread over many cationic states (ﬁgure 7). The
breakdown of the molecular orbital picture of ionization
is caused by compact 2h1p-conﬁgurations which are close

Due to the many-body description of a molecule by
the ADC scheme, decay processes of electronic states of
the ion which turn into resonances also become describ-
able16.
In particular, the ﬁnal state of the electronic
decay of a singly ionized molecule can be approximated
in terms of 2h1p-conﬁgurations describing the emitted
electron (1p) and the residual dication (2h)(see subsec-
tion III D). The shape of each decaying state can be iden-
tiﬁed as a thin bundle of lines which mimic a discretized
Lorentzian curve16.

To unambiguously identify a decaying state the break-
down of the molecular orbital picture of ionization has to
be separated clearly from the decaying states in a small

12

energy range where each decaying state mimics a dis-
cretized Lorentzian curve. Furthermore, there can be a
mixing of both phenomena for a certain state, but it is
hard to identify a decay curve for one-particle states that
suﬀer from the breakdown phenomenon.

The inner valence region of the xenon ﬂuorides com-
prises the Xe 5s and F 2s states. The F 2s states are sub-
ject to the breakdown phenomenon and may also decay
by emitting an electron. The Xe 5s one-particle state suf-
fers solely from breakdown. No decay is possible because
its IP is below the double ionization threshold (see next
subsection). Many 2h1p-conﬁgurations contribute to the
Xe 5s one-particle state (see ﬁgure 7). As the Xe 5s line
is close to the double ionization threshold, many 2h1p-
conﬁgurations are close in energy to this state because
the excited states are generally very dense in this ener-
getic region.

The spectra exhibit a considerable increase of break-
down of the molecular orbital picture for the inner va-
lence with an increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms. Ob-
viously, the number of possible conﬁgurations rises due
to the addition of ﬂuorine atoms. As xenon ﬂuorides
are very symmetric, these ﬂuorine atoms are all equiv-
alent (except for XeF6 in C3v symmetry) and the num-
ber of equivalent 2h1p-conﬁgurations with one hole on
the xenon atom and one hole on a ﬂuorine atom dou-
bles between XeF2 and XeF4.
In XeF6 there are even
more such conﬁgurations than there are in XeF4 but they
are no longer equivalent due to the C3v symmetry of the
XeF6 ground state.

Another contribution to the increase of one-particle
states involved in the breakdown phenomenon can be at-
tributed to the decrease in symmetry: spherical symme-
try (Xe), D∞h (XeF2), D4h (XeF4), C3v (XeF6). This
decrease in symmetry leads to an increase in electronic
conﬁgurations that can couple to the respective states.

The one-particle picture is a relatively good descrip-
tion for the Xe 4d lines.
2h1p-conﬁgurations close
to the energy of the core 1h-conﬁgurations are spa-
tially diﬀuse and thus couple only weakly to the core
1h-conﬁgurations.
the mixing of 2h1p-
conﬁgurations with 1h-conﬁgurations is weak. The splits
of the Xe 4d lines in the xenon ﬂuorides are of compara-
ble size to those in ﬁgure 6 and the individual lines can
be identiﬁed easily in all molecules but XeF6.

Therefore,

As in all xenon ﬂuorides, the Xe 4d lines are above
the double ionization threshold and the electronic de-
cay of the Xe 4d-ionized xenon ﬂuorides is possible (see
next subsection). The Xe 4d lines in ﬁgure 7 show signs
of decay by exhibiting signs of discretized Lorentzian
curves. The shape of the discretization of the Lorentzian
curve representing a decaying state in the spectra de-
pends highly on the number of 2h1p-conﬁgurations in
the energy range of the decay electron.

The decay electrons which result from the decay of
a Xe 4d vacancy are highly energetic (up to ≈ 60 eV).
Hence a satisfactory description in terms of Gaussian
basis sets is not feasible. Therefore the Xe 4d IPs in

ﬁgure 7 correspond in our description essentially to one-
particle states (a pole strength close to unity). Never-
theless, the number of states which originate from 2h1p-
conﬁgurations around the Xe 4d IPs grows with the num-
ber of ﬂuorine atoms. In XeF6 one observes very densely
lying states around 83 eV with a high contribution of
2h1p-conﬁgurations. The extreme change in the impor-
tance of 2h1p-conﬁgurations in XeF6 compared to XeF4,
XeF2 was investigated by us.

The six ﬂuorine atoms in XeF6 form a distorted oc-
tahedron around the xenon atom. Hence the basis of
the ﬂuorine atoms may help to improve the description
of the decay electrons from Xe 4d-ionized XeF6 consid-
erably. To test this assumptions, the ionization spec-
trum of XeF2 was calculated with the DZVP (DFT or-
bital)57,58 basis set augmented by a few diﬀuse functions.
The resulting spectrum did not change much compared
to that of ﬁgure 7.

To test the eﬀect of the basis functions on the ﬂuo-
rine atoms, we performed another calculation of the ion-
ization spectrum of XeF2 with ﬂuorine basis functions
attached to ghost centers arranged to yield an octahe-
dron of ﬂuorine basis functions surrounding the central
xenon atom. The extra basis functions had a minor ef-
fect on the spectrum and did not account for the drastic
eﬀect observed in ﬁgure 7 for XeF6. These investiga-
tions convinced us of the suitability of the DZVP (DFT
orbital)57,58 basis set for our concerns but did not eluci-
date the reasons for the drastic change in ﬁgure 7. To
this end, we calculated the ionization spectrum of XeF6
using Oh symmetry. The resulting spectra showed a sim-
ilar shape of the Xe 4d lines as that of Xe 4d lines in XeF4
revealing the great importance of the decreased symme-
try for the description of XeF6 in our computations. The
reduction in symmetry from Oh to C3v enables a vastly
enlarged amount of 2h1p-conﬁgurations to couple to the
Xe 4d 1h-conﬁguration. To some extent this is similar
to an increased basis set, as a multitude of conﬁgura-
tions are provided additionally for the description of the
ionized states. For sure this improves the description of
decay electrons with a low kinetic energy.

The charge transfer from the xenon atom to the ﬂu-
orine atoms, discussed in subsubsection V A 1, leaves a
positively charged central xenon atom. Therefore, it is
not surprising that XeF4 and XeF6 possess positive elec-
tron aﬃnities, i.e. (XeF4)− and (XeF6)− are stable an-
ions. We have computed the respective electron aﬃni-
ties by ADC(3). The values obtained for XeF4 (a dou-
bly degenerate state) is 0.66 eV and there are electron
aﬃnities of XeF6 at 1.30 eV, 1.31 eV, 1.81 eV. The ﬁg-
ures are not very accurate because the basis set is not
very well suited to describe the diﬀuse states of anions.
In XeF6 the ﬂuorine atoms form a cloud of nearly octa-
hedral symmetry of negative charge around the central
positively charged xenon atom. This potential well is
similar to potential well used in the model problem dis-
cussed in28,67,68. There scattering a particle oﬀ a poten-
tial well is investigated.

Cmpd. Line

IPexp

IPADC IPrel

Γexp

Compound 1st Experimental IP 1st ADC IP

Xe

XeF2

XeF4

XeF6

1
2

1
2
3
4
5

1
2
3
4
5

1
2
3
4
5

69.525 (10) 72.90
67.541 (9)

69.82 0.207 (4)
0.202 (4)

72.568 (6) 76.52
72.248 (6) 76.14
70.601 (13) 75.63
70.421 (9)
70.179 (6)

75.098 (6) 79.76
74.729 (7) 79.60
73.140 (10) 79.01
72.816 (10) 78.89
72.661 (5)

77.462 (13) 80.86
77.321 (11) 80.59
75.53
75.38
75.25

73.44 0.248 (8)
73.06 0.223 (10)
72.55 0.264 (26)
0.256 (27)
0.214 (19)

76.68 0.319 (8)
76.52 0.255 (8)
75.93 0.392 (10)
75.81 0.210 (27)
0.225 (26)

77.78 0.32 (4)
77.51 0.25 (3)

0.33
0.25
0.25

TABLE III: Peak positions and widths of the Xe 4d lines
in Xe, XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6. Abbreviation of labels – Cmpd.:
compound, IPexp: experimental peak position, IPADC: calcu-
lated peak position, IPrel: calculated peak position with rela-
tivistic correction, Γexp: experimental peak width. IPexp and
Γexp are photoelectron experimental data, reproduced from
table 1 in Ref. 21. For XeF6 the data with an experimen-
tal resolution of 0.11 eV are taken. The values in brackets
are the standard deviations of the peak positions and peak
widths21. IPADC and IPrel are sorted descending in energy
for each compound. The value of IPexp does not necessarily
correspond to the values of IPADC and IPrel in the same row
as spin-orbit splitting is neglected to obtain the latter ones.
The IPADC of XeF6 are the two main peaks in ﬁgure 7. All
data are given in electronvolt.

The Xe 4d and F 2s lines in ﬁgure 7 are shifted to higher
IPs with an increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms (subsec-
tion V A 1). This general trend, seen in the mean ﬁeld
approximation of ﬁgure 6, can still be identiﬁed if electron
correlation is taken into account. Nevertheless, the dif-
ference between the shifts of the Xe 4d lines of XeF2 and
XeF4 is larger than that between the Xe 4d lines of XeF4
and XeF6. Electron correlation reduces the eﬀect caused
by charge depletion on the xenon atom.

The calculated non-relativistic IPs are listed in ta-
ble III together with the values obtained by applying
the relativistic corrections of section IV. The number
of distinct Xe 4d lines is smaller in the non-relativistic
spectra due to a higher degeneracy caused by neglecting
the spin-orbit coupling. The Xe 4d lines of XeF6 cannot
be identiﬁed clearly in ﬁgure 7. One expects from sub-
subsection V A 1 two lines for a ground state geometry of
Oh symmetry and three lines for a ground state geometry
of C3v symmetry. The two IPs, in the energy range of
the Xe 4d lines of XeF6 (80–83 eV), with maximum pole

13

Xe

XeF2

XeF4

XeF6

12.129

12.35

13.1

12.35

12.16

12.76

13.07

12.56

TABLE IV: Comparison of the calculated lowest (ﬁrst) IPs
of Xe, XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6 with experimental results. The
ﬁrst IP of xenon is taken from Ref. 54. The other ﬁrst IPs
are taken from Ref. 69. All data are given in electronvolt.

strength are listed in table III.

Adding the relativistic shift −∆ε discussed in sec-
tion IV to the Xe 4d IPs obtained with the help of the
ADC(3) programs, the resulting Xe 4d IPs diﬀer from the
experimentally obtained data in table III only by 1.5–
2 eV (≈ 3%) which is a good agreement in view of the
complexity of the problem and the necessity to describe
the decay simultaneously. The reason for the deviation
is twofold. Firstly, the spin-orbit splitting is neglected
which amounts to 2.111 eV for the 4d lines of the xenon
atom, according to section IV. Secondly, since the calcu-
lations use ADC(3) for the xenon ﬂuorides, the 3h2p-
conﬁgurations are neglected (ADC(4) calculations are
currently beyond reach). The inclusion of these addi-
tional conﬁgurations would shift the IPs of the Xe 4d lines
further to lower energy, due to improved hole relax-
ation44, which would cause a considerable improvement.
The ﬁrst IPs of xenon and its ﬂuorides are compared
to the experimental results in table IV. The agreement
of experimental IPs and calculated IPs is good.

B. Double Ionization Spectra

The computed double ionization spectra for the xenon
atom, the ﬂuorine molecule and the series XeFn are
shown in ﬁgure 8. The ADC 2h-pole strength plotted in
this ﬁgure has a similar meaning as the 1h-pole strength
it characterizes how well the dicationic states
for IPs:
are described by 2h conﬁgurations (subsection III A).
The deviation of the 2h-pole strength from unity yields
the total contribution of 3h1p-conﬁgurations to the state
In analogy to the single ionization spec-
in question.
tra, electronically decaying states may also appear in
the double ionization spectra14,16. Owing to the dis-
crete basis set used their appearance mimics a discretized
Lorentzian curve16. Such curves may indeed be identiﬁed
above 50 eV in ﬁgure 8 for XeFn. The triple ionization
threshold of the xenon atom70 is 66.2 eV. Short lived
states of the cations decay to dications by emitting an
electron and similarly such states of the dications decay
to trications. The decaying states of the dications must,
of course, lie above the triple ionization threshold. Inter-
estingly, the Xe 4d lines in the single ionization spectra of
the xenon ﬂuorides shown in ﬁgure 7 are thus likely to be

14

FIG. 8: (Color) Double ionization spectra of Xe, F2, XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6. The two-particle ADC(2) 2h-pole strength is
plotted on the ordinate to characterize how well the dicationic ﬁnal states are described by 2h-conﬁgurations.

above the triple ionization threshold. This indicates that
there is some probability for the Xe 4d holes to decay by
emitting two electrons.

The double ionization spectra in ﬁgure 8 comprise ion-
ization out of the outer and the inner valence of Xe,
F2 and XeFn because below 80 eV double ionization in-
volving the Xe 4d orbitals is energetically impossible.
Double ionization from the outer valence of the xenon
atom takes place between 30 eV and 40 eV and three dis-
tinct DIPs are found in ﬁgure 8. The spectra of XeFn
show in this region increasingly dense lying DIPs which
is attributed to a (with the number of ﬂuorine atoms)
growing number of outer valence states due to a higher
delocalization of the two ﬁnal state holes. The double
ionization spectrum of F2 in ﬁgure 8 shows outer valence
ionization of F2 in the range 40 eV and 55 eV. The gen-
eral trend in the spectra is a decrease of the validity of
the two-hole description of dicationic states of XeFn with
DIPs above 40 eV with increasing n. As all ﬂuorine atoms

in XeFn are equivalent (the double ionization spectrum
of XeF6 is obtained in Oh symmetry) dicationic states of
the type a hole on xenon and a hole on a ﬂuorine atom
are in fact a linear combination of the conﬁgurations in-
volving a hole on xenon and a hole on the n-th ﬂuorine
atom. The coeﬃcients of the linear combinations are de-
termined by the strength of the interaction between the
ﬂuorine atoms in XeFn being the weakest in XeF2.

The analysis of the DIPs is more involved than the
analysis of the IPs because one has to keep in mind that
there are essentially four contributions to a dicationic
state which determine its character. The two holes in
the dicationic state can be localized on one atom, Xe
or F, or on two diﬀerent atoms, Xe and F or two diﬀer-
ent F atoms. The one-site states have a large dicationic
population number on either xenon Xe−2 or on a single
ﬂuorine F−2 and the two-site states are of either Xe−1F−1
or of F1−1F2−1 character. For each dicationic state ap-
pearing in the spectra of the xenon ﬂuorides, the data of

the population analysis for equivalent ﬂuorine atoms are
summed up to yield the population numbers. For exam-
ple, the Xe−1F1−1, Xe−1F2−1 population numbers are
added in XeF2 to give a single Xe−1F−1 contribution for
each dicationic state of the spectrum of XeF2. The popu-
lation numbers are normalized, i.e. the sum of the contri-
butions of Xe−2, F−2, Xe−1F−1 and F1−1F2−1 character
yields one for each state.

C. One-site Population Numbers

The one-site population numbers are plotted in ﬁg-
ure 9 for the xenon ﬂuorides. The spectra are compared
to study the eﬀect of the increasing number of ﬂuorine
atoms. The ﬁrst states in the double ionization spec-
tra possess DIPs of ≈ 30 eV. The major contribution of
the one-site population Xe−2 is at the lower energy part
of the spectrum. Obviously, the density of states with a
considerable F−2 population increases due to the increas-
ing number of ﬂuorine atoms. The overall distribution of
these states does not change much in the diﬀerent com-
pounds, certain regions are visible where the states have
a high F−2 population. These regions shift slightly to
higher DIPs due to the reduced excess charge that the
individual ﬂuorine atoms have acquired from the central
xenon atom in the ground state of the molecule (see ta-
ble II).

Conversely, the importance of Xe−2 contributions to
the dicationic states is extremely reduced due to the
reduction of the valence electron density on the xenon
atom. In XeF6 the contributions of Xe−2 character have
nearly vanished.

D. Two-site Population Numbers

The two-site population numbers for the xenon ﬂuo-
rides are plotted in ﬁgure 10. The impact of the increas-
ing number of ﬂuorine atoms is seen here as well. The
states with a large F1−1F2−1 population in the spec-
trum of XeF2 are clearly separated into distinct groups of
lines originating from F1 2p−1 F2 2p−1, F1 2p−1 F2 2s−1
and F1 2s−1 F2 2s−1 populations. This can be con-
cluded from a simple energy consideration. The IPs
in ﬁgure 6 for ionization from molecular orbitals with
F 2p character are located at ≈ 20 eV, those for ion-
ization from molecular orbitals with F 2s character are
located at ≈ 40 eV.
In the spectrum of XeF2 in ﬁg-
ure 10, the groups are approximately at 40, 60 and 80 eV.
Since XeF2 is a linear molecule, the two ﬂuorine atoms
are separated by the central xenon atom. Such states
with a large F1−1F2−1 population are termed opposite
F1−1F2−1 states.

The situation changes in XeF4 and XeF6. There are
adjacent and opposite F1−1F2−1 states and the clear sep-
aration between the groups seen in the spectrum of XeF2
is lost. One reason for this eﬀect is the interaction be-

15

tween adjacent ﬂuorine atoms which is stronger than the
interaction between opposite ones. This leads to a split-
ting of the ﬂuorine lines which is also observed in the
single ionization spectra (subsection V A).

The F1–F2 distance in adjacent F1−1 F2−1 states is
considerably reduced in comparison to the F1–F2 dis-
tance in opposite states and the hole-hole repulsion en-
ergy varies accordingly. Of course, one has to com-
pare states which have a large F1−1F2−1 population
that arises from the same types of orbitals. Therefore,
such F1−1F2−1 states are distributed to a small IP-range
in the double ionization spectrum. Corresponding lines
in XeF2 mark the lower ends of such IP-ranges due to
the maximum distance between the vacancies therein, in
contrast to XeF4 and XeF6.

States with a large Xe−1F−1 population do not group
like those of F1−1F2−1 character. The density of these
Xe−1F−1 states also increases with an increasing number
of ﬂuorine atoms but they are distributed more uniformly
over the whole spectral range. In XeF2 and XeF6 these
states are dominant with respect to population number
and in XeF4 they are comparable to the F1−1F2−1 states.
The DIPs, of the Xe−1 F−1 states are not subject to a
change of the hole-hole repulsion energy in contrast to
those of the F1−1F2−1 states because the Xe–F distance
does not change within a molecule (remember that the
double ionization spectrum of XeF6 was calculated using
octahedral symmetry).

E. Xe 4d Line Width

The increase of the decay width in ﬁgure 1 is not very
large. If interatomic decay processes become dominant
in XeFn one might expect naively that this leads to a
pronounced rise in the decay width with growing n be-
cause a multitude of additional decay channels is opened.
If this was the case, interatomic electronic decay would
have been discovered long ago. Hence there is another
discriminating factor for the total Auger decay rate: the
transition matrix element in (15). This matrix element
depends strongly on the overlap of the initial and ﬁnal
state wave functions. As atomic wave functions decay ex-
ponentially with respect to the distance to their center,
it is not surprising that the intra-atomic matrix elements
are considerably larger than interatomic ones6. For an
Auger decay that involves the decay of a core hole into
two highly localized (core, inner valence) ﬁnal state holes
on the atom that carries the initial vacancy within the
molecule, the interatomic matrix elements are exceed-
ingly small. The chemical environment, too, has only a
minimal eﬀect.

The electronic decay processes presented in section II
are characterized according to their ﬁnal state population
in subsection III C. Using relation (15), the analysis of
the ﬁnal state population numbers in ﬁgures 9, 10 shows
which of the processes described in section II are impor-
tant for the electronic decay of Xe 4d holes in the xenon

16

FIG. 9: (Color) One-site population numbers of the double ionization spectra of XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6. Each line shown is
related to a dicationic state in the double ionization spectra in ﬁgure 8. The height of the line gives the one-site population
number. Note that the contributions on xenon decrease as the number of ﬂuorine atoms increases.

ﬂuorides.

isolated atom.

The

intra-atomic

electronic decay of an initial
Xe 4d hole produces ﬁnal states of Xe−2 type. The one-
site population numbers plotted in ﬁgure 9 show that the
Xe−2 population is extremely low in the xenon ﬂuorides.
According to relation (15) the partial decay rate of each
cationic state which decays into a given dicationic state
can be viewed as a product of an averaged Coulomb ma-
trix element and a two-hole population8,23 factor related
to the latter state. Hence, as far as population numbers
are concerned intra-atomic decay is suppressed and in-
teratomic decay processes dominate the electronic decay
of Xe 4d holes.

Final states with large F−2, F1−1F2−1 population
numbers are attributed to two- and three-monomer
ETMD processes, respectively. As no partial decay
widths for the individual processes are calculated and
three-monomer ETMD has not been studied so far, one
cannot answer the question which of these two processes
is more important. ICD produces Xe−1 F−1 ﬁnal states.
Figure 10 shows that the two-site ﬁnal state population
of ICD is comparable to that of three-monomer ETMD.
This fact is somewhat surprising because the valence elec-
tron density on the xenon atom in the ground state of the
molecule is considerably reduced compared to that in the

The intra-atomic decay matrix elements are much
larger than the interatomic ones, due to the larger over-
lap of the involved wave functions of the initial and ﬁnal
states. Therefore, the suppression of intra-atomic decay
by the Xe−2 population numbers of the accessible ﬁnal
states may not be large enough to make interatomic de-
cay processes comparable or even dominant. This rele-
vant issue deserves further studies.

As the intra-atomic decay is increasingly suppressed
with an increasing number of ﬂuorine atoms this de-
crease in decay width must be compensated by the in-
crease in interatomic decay width. We are here in a sit-
uation where two competing eﬀects are present which
tend to cancel. This is a reason why the signiﬁcance
of interatomic Auger processes is hard to discover. As
intra-atomic decay is energetically not possible in inner
valence ionized clusters, such clusters are well-suited to
study interatomic electronic decay processes. The anal-
ogy of Auger decay to the decay of inner valence ionized
clusters can then be exploited, as pursued in this article,
to identify the impact of interatomic decay processes.

Our analysis suggests that the experimentally observed
increase in line width is caused by an increase of the elec-
tronic decay width. The conclusion is in contrast to con-

17

FIG. 10: (Color) Two-site population of the double ionization spectra of XeF2, XeF4 and XeF6.

ventional wisdom that the Auger decay rate in molecules
is low for a low valence electron density on the atom
that carries the initial vacancy6. The interatomic decay
processes ICD and ETMD are of central relevance in ex-
plaining the decay of Xe 4d holes in XeFn.

VI. CONCLUSION

The Auger eﬀect1–5 in molecules has been thought of
to be an intra-atomic process. This means that only the
molecular orbitals with a high probability amplitude on
the atom which carries the initial vacancy are involved.
The ﬁrst study of interatomic Auger decays7 was discour-
aging as the relevance of interatomic decay processes was
underestimated6. Wormeester et al. corrected this view
on interatomic Auger decay by showing the relevance of
interatomic matrix elements in their calculations6. Yet
they investigated the impact of interatomic matrix el-
ements on an overall scale without dissection into the
physical processes introduced in Ref. 7. Newer investiga-
tions suggest that the intra-atomic picture of molecular
Auger decay fails severely for certain molecules9,10,12.

Molecular Auger decay and electronic decay of clusters
after inner valence ionization diﬀer by the energetic scale
of the decay electrons and the energy of the electronic
states involved in the decay. Furthermore the binding

energy of molecules is much higher than the binding en-
ergy of weakly bound clusters which implies a signiﬁcant
modiﬁcation of the atomic valence orbitals of atoms con-
tained in a molecule which is not the case for the clusters.
The energetic scale is given by the initial ionization of the
molecular system which is a core ionization in the case of
Auger decay and an inner valence ionization in the case
of weakly bound clusters. The electronic decay in weakly
bound clusters has been studied extensively to elucidate
the role of interatomic electronic decay processes. It was
discovered that interatomic Coulombic decay (ICD)14–19
and electron transfer mediated decay (ETMD)17 are eﬃ-
cient interatomic electronic decay processes. The study
of weakly bound clusters is simpliﬁed by the fact that no
intra-atomic electronic decay is possible because the iso-
lated singly ionized monomer is below the double ioniza-
tion threshold. In molecular Auger decay this is not the
case and the identiﬁcation and the study of interatomic
electronic decay processes is by far more complicated.

The analogy to the electronic decay of inner valence
ionized weakly bound clusters is therefore employed
throughout this article. In ﬁrst place we discuss the for-
eign imaging phenomenon9–12 discovered in the molec-
ular Auger decay of 2p-ionized SiF4 in terms of ICD
and ETMD. This discussion delivers a lucid explana-
tion of this phenomenon. The formally proposed three-
monomer ETMD17 process turns out to be crucial in our

18

explanation.

To identify the impact of interatomic Auger processes
on a thorough basis it is necessary to obtain an esti-
mate of their contribution to the lifetimes of the decay-
ing states at least qualitatively. To this end, Wigner-
Weisskopf theory24,25 for ionized molecules17,19 is ex-
tended to include the many-body Green’s function de-
scription38–40 of dicationic states in the ADC scheme37.
With the help of this, a relation between the population
numbers of dicationic ﬁnal states8,23 and the electronic
decay width could be derived.

Xenon ﬂuorides (XeFn, n = 2, 4, 6) are studied as an
example for molecular Auger decay. This family of com-
pounds is chosen due to the experimental observation
that the Xe 4d line width increases with increasing num-
ber of ﬂuorine atoms21,22. We investigate whether this
eﬀect arises due to an increase in electronic decay width.
The impact on the decay width of interatomic decay pro-
cesses, which are essential in the decay of weakly bound
clusters14–19, is estimated in the xenon ﬂuorides, because
their partial decay width increases with an increasing
number of ﬂuorine atoms. Xenon is a fairly heavy atom,
so relativistic eﬀects60,61 have a considerable impact on
the ionization potentials of the xenon ﬂuorides. As the
theory employed here is strictly non-relativistic, a rule
of thumb is devised to correct for the scalar relativistic
eﬀects, i.e. the modiﬁcation of the orbital energies, by
performing numeric Hartree-Fock59 and Dirac-Fock62,63
calculations for the xenon atom. The diﬀerence of the or-
bital energies is used to correct for these eﬀects in XeFn.
Mulliken and L¨owdin population analyses33,65 are car-
ried out for XeFn which show that a considerable amount
of charge is withdrawn from the central xenon atom to
the ﬂuorine atoms. The eﬀect increases with an increas-
ing number of ﬂuorine atoms. This reduction of charge
on the xenon atom leads to a shift of the IPs of xenon in
the xenon ﬂuorides to higher energies because the nuclear
charge is less eﬀectively screened by the valence electrons.
The ionization spectra are examined on the Hartree-
Fock level (Koopmans’ theorem33,64) ﬁrst because the
mean ﬁeld approximation yields clear and easy-to-
understand spectra. The ionization spectra change re-
markably when electron correlation is taken into ac-
count38–40. The spectra show breakdown of the molec-
ular orbital picture of ionization66 in the inner valence
of the xenon ﬂuorides and Lorentzian decay curves of
singly ionized states above the double ionization thresh-
old are clearly identiﬁed especially for the Xe 4d-lines.
Electron correlation reduces the eﬀect of the withdrawal
of charge on the xenon atom considerably and the ioniza-
tion potentials are lower in energy with respect to their
Hartree-Fock values.

To investigate singly ionized electronically decaying
states, the double ionization spectra are discussed in
terms of the one-site population numbers Xe−2, F−2 and
two-site population numbers Xe−1 F−1, F1−1 F2−1 of the
dicationic states. Separating these two classes of con-
tributions gives considerable insights if these states are

interpreted as dicationic ﬁnal states of the electronic de-
cay of a single Xe 4d vacancy. The one-site population
numbers describe decay by intra-atomic electronic de-
cay and three-monomer ETMD and the two-site popula-
tion numbers describe decay by ICD and two-monomer
ETMD. The analysis of the one- and two-site popula-
tion numbers further reveals that ICD, two- and three-
monomer ETMD are likely the relevant interatomic de-
cay processes because intra-atomic Xe−2 states acquire
only a minimal population in contrast to the population
numbers obtained for ICD and ETMD.

The results of the analysis of the population numbers
of the double ionization spectra of the xenon ﬂuorides
have considerable impact on the understanding of molec-
ular Auger decay. Up to now, only the phenomenon of
foreign imaging9–12 and the signiﬁcance of interatomic
matrix elements6,7 have been known. With this work
a clear identiﬁcation of the physical decay processes is
given and the importance of ICD and ETMD is eluci-
dated. It is argued that there is no simple relation be-
tween the decay width in molecular Auger decay and the
electron density on the atom that carries the initial va-
cancy.
Instead molecular Auger decay is governed by
complex many-body eﬀects that tend to compensate the
loss in intra-atomic electronic decay width by an increase
in the decay width of interatomic electronic decay pro-
cesses. The experimentally observed Xe 4d decay width
increases only slightly with an increasing number of ﬂu-
orine atoms. This can be explained by the vast rise19
with n of the number of accessible interatomic dicationic
ﬁnal states for Xe 4d-ionized XeFn which prevails in the
end over the reduction in intra-atomic electronic decay.
This conclusion is in contrast to conventional wisdom
that the Auger decay rate in molecules is low for a low
valence electron density on the atom that carries the ini-
tial vacancy6.

Two objections can be made to the arguments pre-
sented before: ﬁrstly, ﬁnal state holes in outer valence
molecular orbitals are not highly localized, in contrast to
holes in inner valence and core orbitals. Hence the picture
of one-site and two-site ﬁnal state holes is only a crude
approximation. The Mulliken style population analysis
employed sums the contribution of the basis functions of
a speciﬁc atom in a molecule. So it yields a large popu-
lation number on a speciﬁc atom if a hole in a molecular
orbital has a high probability amplitude near the speciﬁc
atom.
If the basis set is reasonable then the Mulliken
population analysis yields some sort of dissection of the
electron density into point charges. Therefore the picture
of one- and two-site holes is replaced by the weaker point
charge argument which does not contradict our conclu-
sion that interatomic decay processes are important for
the electronic decay of the Xe 4d holes. Secondly, the
overlap between initial and ﬁnal state wave functions is
large if the ﬁnal state holes are not very localized. This
suggests that quite delocalized ﬁnal state holes may cause
the interatomic matrix elements to become relevant.

Several questions are left open and should be investi-

gated in subsequent work. The three-monomer electron
transfer mediated decay is suggested to be an important
process to explain the foreign imaging9–12 phenomenon
(subsection II D) observed in SiF4 and is addressed in
the context of the xenon ﬂuorides. Therefore, it is highly
desirable to study this process in a cluster like NeAr2 as
proposed in Ref. 17. Particularly the decay width of this
process in relation to interatomic Coulombic decay and
two-monomer ETMD is relevant and can have consider-
able impact on the understanding of interatomic decay
processes and their eﬀects.

The F 2s states in ﬁgure 7 were not examined in this
work but are for themselves interesting as they are above
the double ionization threshold and consequently can de-
cay. Therefore a detailed study should investigate the ef-
fect of interatomic Auger transitions for F 2s states in the
xenon ﬂuorides. The advantage of studying F 2s states
are the much slower decay electrons which may enable
the precise theoretical determination of their lifetimes.

The accurate determination of lifetimes of electronic
resonances is still a problem with ab initio calculations28.
Standard Gaussian basis sets are optimized to represent
compact ground state wave functions of molecules. Hence
they are less suited to represent decay electrons further
away from the molecule. The situation can be remedied
somewhat by augmenting the basis set with a few diﬀuse
functions28, i.e. Gaussians with a small exponent. This

19

cannot be done excessively because (near) linear depen-
dencies and consequently numerical instabilities arise28.
Furthermore basis sets become too large for the expen-
sive calculations. Therefore, new types of basis functions
are needed that are capable of representing decay elec-
trons, not only in the vicinity of a molecule. A practical
requirement is that it should be possible to evaluate the
integrals eﬃciently which are needed in the Hartree-Fock
calculations28. Then it would be possible to determine
the lifetimes of the Xe 4d vacancies in the xenon ﬂuorides
by purely theoretical means.

Acknowledgments

The authors are highly indebted to T. Darrah Thomas
for pointing out Ref. 21 to them and supporting it fur-
ther with valuable private communications (ﬁgure 1).
Markus Pernpointner helped to estimate the impact of
the relativistic eﬀects in the xenon atom. This work
would not have been possible without the ADC programs
and support by Francesco Tarantelli.
Imke B. M¨uller,
Sven Feuerbacher and Thomas Sommerfeld accompanied
our work with helpful comments and fruitful discussions.
R. S. and L. S. C. gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial sup-
port by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

∗ Corresponding

author:

Christian.Buth@ePost.de;
Present address: Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik kom-
plexer Systeme, N¨othnitzer Straße 38, 01187 Dresden,
Germany

† Present address: Joint Institute for Laboratory Astro-
physics (JILA), University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
80309-0440

1 P. Auger, Compt. Rend. (Paris) 177, 169 (1923).
2 E. H. Burhop, ed., The Auger Eﬀect and Other Radi-
ationless Transition, Cambridge Monographs on Physics
(Krieger Publishing Company, Melbourne, 1980), ISBN 0-
88275-966-3, reprint.

3 M. Thompson, M. D. Baker, J. F. Tyson, and A. Christie,
Auger Electron Spectroscopy, Chemical Analysis Mono-
graphs (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1985), ISBN 0-
471-04377-X.

4 W. Bambynek, B. Crasemann, R. W. Fink, H. U. Freund,
H. Mark, C. D. Swift, R. E. Price, and P. V. Rao, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 44, 716 (1972).

5 W. Bambynek, B. Crasemann, R. W. Fink, H. U. Freund,
H. Mark, C. D. Swift, R. E. Price, and P. V. Rao, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 46, 853 (1974).

6 H. Wormeester, H. J. Borg, and A. v. Silfhout, Surf. Sci.

258, 197 (1991).

(1975).

7 J. A. D. Matthew and Y. Komninos, Surf. Sci. 53, 716

8 F. Tarantelli, A. Sgamellotti, and L. S. Cederbaum, J.

Chem. Phys. 94, 523 (1991).

9 F. Tarantelli and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,

649 (1993).

10 F. O. Gottfried, L. S. Cederbaum, and F. Tarantelli, Phys.

Rev. A 53, 2118 (1996).

11 T. X. Carroll, K. J. Børve, L. J. Sæthre, J. D. Bozek,
E. Kukk, J. A. Hahne, and T. D. Thomas, J. Chem. Phys.
116, 10221 (2002).

12 T. D. Thomas, C. Miron, K. Wiesner, P. Morin, T. X.
Carroll, and L. J. Sæthre, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 223001
(2002).

13 Science 271, 920 (1996), special issue on clusters.
14 L. S. Cederbaum, J. Zobeley, and F. Tarantelli, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 79, 4778 (1997).

15 R. Santra, J. Zobeley, L. S. Cederbaum, and N. Moiseyev,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4490 (2000).

16 J. Zobeley, L. S. Cederbaum, and F. Tarantelli, J. Chem.

17 J. Zobeley, R. Santra, and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem.

Phys. 108, 9737 (1998).

Phys. 115, 5076 (2001).

18 R. Santra, J. Zobeley, L. S. Cederbaum, and F. Tarantelli,
J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 114-116, 41 (2001).
19 R. Santra, J. Zobeley, and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. B

20 S. Marburger, O. Kugeler, U. Hergenhahn, and T. M¨oller,

64, 245104 (2001).

submitted.

21 J. N. Cutler, G. N. Bancroft, J. D. Bozek, K. H. Tan, and
G. J. Schrobilgen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 9125 (1991).
22 T. D. Thomas (2002), private communication, based on the
data taken from Ref. 21 which is reproduced in table III.
23 F. Tarantelli, A. Sgamellotti, and L. S. Cederbaum, in Ap-
plied Many-Body Methods in Spectroscopy and Electronic
Structure, edited by D. Mukherjee (Plenum Press, New

20

York, 1992), pp. 57–104, ISBN 0-306-44193-4.

24 J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics (Addison-
Wesley, Reading (Massachusetts), 1994), 2nd ed., ISBN
0-201-53929-2.

25 V. F. Weisskopf and E. P. Wigner, Z. Phys. 63, 54 (1930).
26 R. Santra and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 6853

(2001).

27 R. Santra, L. S. Cederbaum, and H.-D. Meyer, Chem.

Phys. Lett. 303, 413 (1999).

28 R. Santra and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rep. 368, 1 (2002).
29 J. Zobeley, L. S. Cederbaum, and F. Tarantelli, J. Phys.

Chem. A 103, 11145 (1999).

30 S. Scheit, L. S. Cederbaum, and H.-D. Meyer, J. Chem.

Phys. 118, 2092 (2003).

31 R. Santra and L. S. Cederbaum, submitted.
32 I. B. M¨uller, J. Zobeley, and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem.

Phys. 117, 1085 (2002).

33 A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chem-
istry: Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure The-
ory (Macmillan, New York, 1982), ISBN 0-02-949710-8.
34 R. D. Mattuck, A Guide to Feynman Diagrams in the
Many-Body Problem (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976), 2nd
ed., ISBN 0-07-040954-4.

35 E. K. U. Gross, E. Runge, and O. Heinonen, Many-Particle
Theory (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1991), ISBN 0-7503-0155-4.
36 A. L. Fetter and J. D. Walecka, Quantum Theory of Many-
Particle Systems, International Series in Pure and Applied
Physics, edited by Leonard I. Schiﬀ (McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1971).

37 J. Schirmer, Phys. Rev. A 26, 2395 (1982).
38 J. Schirmer, L. S. Cederbaum, and O. Walter, Phys. Rev.

A 28, 1237 (1983).

39 J. Schirmer and A. Barth, Z. Phys. A 317, 267 (1984).
40 J. Schirmer and G. Angonoa, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1754

(1989).

41 G. H. Golub and C. F. van Loan, Matrix Computations
(John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1989), 2nd ed.,
ISBN 0-8018-3772-3.

42 C. Lanczos, J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand. 45, 255 (1950).
43 H.-G. Weikert, H.-D. Meyer, L. S. Cederbaum, and

F. Tarantelli, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 7122 (1996).

44 G. Angonoa, O. Walter, and J. Schirmer, J. Chem. Phys.

45 J. Schirmer and A. Thiel, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10621

46 F. Tarantelli, private communication.
47 J. Brand and L. S. Cederbaum, Ann. Phys. (New York)

48 J. Brand and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A 57, 4311

49 J. Brand and L. S. Cederbaum, Adv. Quantum Chem. 38,

87, 6789 (1987).

(2001).

252, 276 (1996).

(1998).

65 (2001).

nom. 124, 289 (2002).

54 A. E. Holleman, E. Wiberg, and N. Wiberg, Inorganic
Chemistry (Academic Press, New York, 2001), ISBN 0-
123-52651-5.

55 M. Kaupp, C. van W¨ullen, R. Franke, F. Schmitz, and
W. Kutzelnigg, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 11939 (1996).
56 Guest, M. F., Gamess-UK is a package of ab initio pro-
grams written by M. F. Guest, J. H. van Lenthe, J.
Kendrick, K. Schoﬀel, and P. Sherwood, with contribu-
tions from R. D. Amos, R. J. Buenker, H. J. J. van Dam,
M. Dupuis, N. C. Handy, I. H. Hillier, P. J. Knowles, V.
Bonacic-Koutecky, W. von Niessen, R. J. Harrison, A. P.
Rendell, V. R. Saunders, A. J. Stone, D. J. Tozer, and
A. H. de Vries. The package is derived from the origi-
nal GAMESS code due to M. Dupuis, D. Spangler and
J. Wendoloski, NRCC Software Catalog, Vol. 1, Program
No. QG01 (GAMESS), 1980.

57 N. Godbout, D. R. Salahub, J. Andzelm, and E. Wimmer,

Can. J. Chem. 70, 560 (1992).

58 Feller, David and Schuchardt, Karen, basis sets were ob-
tained from the Extensible Computational Chemistry En-
vironment Basis Set Database, Version 5/22/02, as devel-
oped and distributed by the Molecular Science Comput-
ing Facility, Environmental and Molecular Sciences Lab-
oratory which is part of the Paciﬁc Northwest Labora-
tory, P.O. Box 999, Richland, Washington 99352, USA,
and funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. The Paciﬁc
Northwest Laboratory is a multi-program laboratory op-
erated by Battelle Memorial Institute for the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy under contract DE-AC06-76RLO 1830.
Contact David Feller or Karen Schuchardt for further in-
formation.

59 C. Froese-Fischer, Comp. Phys. Commun. 14, 145 (1978).
60 K. Balasubramanian, Relativistic Eﬀects in Chemistry:
Theory and Techniques (John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1997), ISBN 0-471-30400-X.

61 P. Pyykk¨o, Chem. Rev. 88, 563 (1988).
62 K. G. Dyall, I. P. Grant, T. Johnson, C., F. A. Parpia, and
E. P. Plummer, Comp. Phys. Commun. 55, 425 (1989).
63 F. A. Parpia, C. Froese-Fischer, and I. P. Grant, Comp.

Phys. Commun. 94, 249 (1996).
64 T. Koopmans, Physica 1, 104 (1933).
65 R. S. Mulliken, J. Chem. Phys. 23, 1833 (1955).
66 L. S. Cederbaum, W. Domcke, J. Schirmer, and W. von
Niessen (Wiley, 1986), vol. 65 of Adv. Chem. Phys., pp.
115–159.

67 C. Buth, Diplomarbeit, Ruprecht-Karls Universit¨at Hei-
delberg, Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch-Chemisches
Institut, Im Neuenheimer Feld 229, 69120 Heidelberg, Ger-
many (2002), www.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/archiv/3004.
68 C. Buth, R. Santra, and L. S. Cederbaum, to be published.
69 U. Nielsen and W. H. E. Schwarz, Chem. Phys. 13, 195

70 D. Mathur and C. Badrinathan, Phys. Rev. A 37, 1033

50 J. Schirmer, Phys. Rev. A 43, 4647 (1991).
51 F. Mertins and J. Schirmer, Phys. Rev. A 53, 2140 (1996).
52 F. Mertins, J. Schirmer, and A. Tarantelli, Phys. Rev. A

(1976).

(1987).

53, 2153 (1996).

53 L. Hedin and J. D. Lee, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phe-

