From ab initio quantum chemistry to molecular dynamics:

The delicate case of hydrogen bonding in ammonia

A. Daniel Boese,1 Amalendu Chandra∗,2 Jan M. L. Martin,1 and Dominik Marx2

1Department of Organic Chemistry,

Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Reh. ovot, Israel
2Lehrstuhl f¨ur Theoretische Chemie,

Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany

(Dated: 305335JCP: Received May 15, 2003; Accepted June 18, 2003)

3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

The ammonia dimer (NH3)2 has been investigated using high–level ab initio quantum chemistry

methods and density functional theory (DFT). The structure and energetics of important isomers

is obtained to unprecedented accuracy without resorting to experiment. The global minimum of

eclipsed Cs symmetry is characterized by a signiﬁcantly bent hydrogen bond which deviates from
linearity by as much as ≈ 20◦.

In addition, the so–called cyclic C2h structure, resulting from

further bending which leads to two equivalent “hydrogen bonding contacts”, is extremely close in

energy on an overall ﬂat potential energy surface. It is demonstrated that none of the currently

available (GGA, meta–GGA, and hybrid) density functionals satisfactorily describe the structure

and relative energies of this nonlinear hydrogen bond. We present a novel density functional,

HCTH/407+, which is designed to describe this sort of hydrogen bond quantitatively on the level

of the dimer, contrary to e.g. the widely used BLYP functional. This improved generalised gradient

approximation (GGA) functional is employed in Car–Parrinello ab initio molecular dynamics

simulations of liquid ammonia to judge its performance in describing the associated liquid. Both

the HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals describe the properties of the liquid well as judged by

analysis of radial distribution functions, hydrogen bonding structure and dynamics, translational

diﬀusion, and orientational relaxation processes. It is demonstrated that the solvation shell of the

ammonia molecule in the liquid phase is dominated by steric packing eﬀects and not so much by

directional hydrogen bonding interactions. In addition, the propensity of ammonia molecules to

form bifurcated and multifurcated hydrogen bonds in the liquid phase is found to be negligibly

small.

∗ On sabbatical leave from: Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur,

—————————–

India 208016.

2

I.

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Wavefunction–based quantum chemistry methods as well as density functional theory

(DFT) are now well established electronic structure techniques within Theoretical

Chemistry [1]. The former is traditionally used to investigate small ﬁnite systems,

i.e.

“gas phase problems”, whereas the latter had its ﬁrst successes in solid state physics,

i.e., in the framework of “periodic lattice problems”. There is also ample evidence that

wavefunction–based quantum chemistry methods are able to predict properties of molecular

systems up to virtually any desired accuracy as a result of systematically improving

the correlation treatment together with the wavefunction representation. However, the

numerical complexity, as e.g. measured by the computer time needed for such studies,

explodes easily in praxi either before reaching a suﬃcient level of accuracy or before treating

systems that are suﬃciently large. DFT methods, on the other hand, are known to lead to

astonishingly good predictions for a wide variety of systems at moderate cost – of course

dramatic failures are also well documented in the literature. When describing molecular

solids, associated liquids, or large biosystems, noncovalent interactions such as hydrogen

bonds and van der Waals interactions might play an important role. The ideal approach

would be to use post Hartree-Fock methods converged to the basis set limit, which turns

out to be computationally prohibitive, especially when used in conjunction with molecular

dynamics. While simple DFT methods are unable to correctly describe van der Waals

interactions [2, 3, 4], hydrogen bonds are known to be well within the capabilities of DFT

approaches once suitable gradient–corrected functionals are devised. A pioneering step in

the early nineties was the investigation of hydrogen bonds in the water dimer [5, 6, 7] and

in small water clusters [8] based on such functionals, which are of the generalised gradient

approximation (GGA) type. Soon thereafter it was demonstrated that also the structure and

dynamics of liquid bulk water can be described faithfully [7]. Now there is ample evidence

that various properties of water can be computed quite reliably using GGA–type functionals,

see e.g. Refs. [7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] and Refs. [21, 22, 23, 24] for

dimer calculations. But how about other hydrogen bonded systems?

Among hydrogen–bonded dimers the ammonia dimer is peculiar since it features a rather

unusual hydrogen bond, see Refs. [25, 26] for an early and a very recent overview. Instead of
an essentially linear hydrogen bond, similar to the one of the water dimer having a H–O· · ·O

3

angle of only 5.5◦ [27], the hydrogen bond in the ammonia dimer is signiﬁcantly bent as

depicted in Fig. 1c or d. Furthermore, close in energy is the so–called cyclic structure where

an even more pronounced bending of the hydrogen bond produces two equivalent “hydrogen

bonding contacts” according to Fig. 1e. As an interlude we stress that such strongly bent

hydrogen bonds play an important role in many biological systems, in particular if the

bending allows for more than one interaction of a donor with acceptor molecules which

leads to so–called bifurcated or multifurcated hydrogen bonds [28, 29]. In carbohydrates

over 25% of the hydrogen bonds turn out to be multifurcated [28] and in proteins [30] about

40 and 90% of the hydrogen bonds in β–sheet and α–helix structures, respectively, are of

this type. In this context the ammonia dimer could serve as a prototype system in order to

investigate nonlinear hydrogen bonding on the level of a minimal model, i.e. a free dimer in

the gas phase.

Guided by analogy or chemical intuition, one might guess that the ammonia dimer

possesses a “classical” quasi–linear hydrogen bond similar to other dimers such as those

of water or hydrogen ﬂuoride. Early calculations, see e.g. Refs. [31, 32, 33] and references

cited therein, actually assumed from the outset a perfectly linear bond similar to the one

shown in Figs. 1a or b or predicted a quasi–linear hydrogen bond as depicted in Figs. 1c or

d, while others [34, 35, 36] favoured strongly bent up to cyclic dimers similar to Figs. 1c–

e. This controversy got fueled by microwave measurements [37] providing evidence for a

quasi–rigid cyclic structure such as the one in Fig. 1e. The issue of a quasi–linear hydrogen

bond vs. a cyclic structure remained controversial (see e.g. Refs. [38, 39]) up to early

nineties where both experiment and theory started to converge. Thanks to sophisticated

experiments [40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47] and extensive computations [48, 49] there

is now consensus [26] that the ammonia dimer is a ﬂuxional molecular complex with an

equilibrium structure that is characterized by a bent hydrogen bond such as the one shown

in Fig. 1c. Combining far–infrared spectra with static and dynamic calculations [48, 49, 50],
the H–N· · ·N hydrogen bond angle (between the N–H bond of the proton donor and the
N· · ·N axis) was determined to be 26◦ in the equilibrium structure with a N· · ·N distance
of ≈ 3.354 ˚A. Note, however, that this “experimental” structure of the ammonia dimer

was deduced within the rigid monomer approximation [48, 50], which might introduce a

systematic bias. In fact, a recent study [51] of the water dimer has shown that monomer

ﬂexibility is indeed important in determining its vibration–rotation–tunneling spectrum and

4

thus “experimental” structures derived from it. It is expected that such monomer ﬂexibility

would also be important for the ammonia dimer. Furthermore, the global potential energy

surface is found to be very ﬂat [48, 49], e.g. the cyclic C2h structure was estimated to be
about only 7 cm−1 higher in energy, which is qualitatively consistent with the observation

that the dimer is a very ﬂuxional complex. Most interestingly, there is now experimental

support [52] advocating a more cyclic equilibrium structure for (NH3)2 in superﬂuid Helium

droplets at 0.4 K.

More recent wavefunction–based quantum chemical calculations [53, 54] on the structure

and energetics of the ammonia dimer support in some aspects the earlier conclusions [26,

48, 49]. Second–order Møller–Plesset perturbation calculations (MP2) with medium–sized

basis sets (for geometry optimization followed by MP4 single–point energy calculations)[53]
resulted however in a signiﬁcantly smaller H–N· · ·N hydrogen bond angle of 12◦ together
with a reasonable low barrier of 7.6 cm−1. Most recently, another (valence–only) MP2

study [54], this time near the one–particle basis set limit, was reported. At the MP2 limit,
the hydrogen bond angle of 23◦ was closer to the recommended value [48, 49], but the barrier
of 24 cm−1 seems too high and the dissociation energy De (into separated and optimized
monomer fragments) was estimated to be 13.5 ± 0..3 kJ/mol. This clearly hints to the

importance of higher–order correlation eﬀects and core–valence corrections, in particular

since they account for 0.4 kJ/mol in the case of the water dimer [55] (which already exceeds

the error bar given in Ref. [54]). DFT calculations of the ammonia dimer are both rather

scarce [56, 57, 58, 59] and somewhat inconclusive as to what level of accuracy DFT methods

describe this intermolecular interaction. In the following we will clearly demonstrate that

none of the 14 widely used GGA, meta–GGA, and hybrid functionals checked by us lead to

a satisfactory description of both the structure and relative energies of the ammonia dimer

(despite large basis sets being used and basis set superposition error being corrected for).

Thus, even at the level of the ammonia dimer there is still room for improvement based on

purely theoretical grounds !

Thus far we considered the behavior of ammonia in the limit of forming a dimer, e.g. in

the very dilute gas phase. The question arises, if or how its peculiar behavior concerning

hydrogen–bonding in the dimer is present in its condensed phases? Indeed, based on the

apparent stability and rigidity of the cyclic dimer in the gas phase [37] it was concluded

in quite general terms some time ago that NH3 might well be best described as a powerful

5

hydrogen–bond acceptor with little propensity to donate hydrogen bonds [25]; note that now

it is however recognized that the ammonia dimer is non–rigid and non–cyclic [26]. The x–ray

structure of crystalline ammonia at low temperatures [60, 61] features a staggered, directed

hydrogen bonded network, with the monomers being arranged like the dimer in Fig. 1d.

Furthermore, based on neutron powder diﬀraction experiments, it was proposed that solid

ammonia has an “unusual shared–hydrogen bond geometry” [62] and, in particular, the

high–pressure phase ND3–IV contains bifurcated hydrogen bonds with bending angles as
large as about 30◦. A most recent theoretical study [63], however, did not support the

presence of bifurcated hydrogen bonds in phase IV of solid ammonia. In this latter study, it

was concluded through calculations of electron density between intermolecular nitrogen and

hydrogen atoms that the apparent bifurcated hydrogen bond geometry in solid ammonia

IV is actually a single hydrogen bond perturbed by a neighboring interacting atom. The

structure of liquid ammonia has been studied by x–ray [64] and neutron [65] diﬀraction for a

long time. Only the total structure factor and the total radial distribution function could be

extracted in these early experiments and the presence of hydrogen bonds in liquid ammonia

was inferred from a comparison of the experimental structure factor with the known structure

of the solid. More recently, a set of neutron diﬀraction experiments was performed [66] on

liquid NH3, ND3, and an isomolar NH3/ND3 mixture. The powerful isotopic substitution

technique, in conjunction with sophisticated data analysis, allowed extraction of all partial

radial distribution functions at 213 and 273 K. Contrary to earlier conceptions (as presented

in many standard textbooks on that subject) the spatial arrangement of nitrogen atoms

showed that no extended hydrogen bonded network exists in liquid ammonia. Nevertheless,

some degree of hydrogen bonding was inferred from the temperature dependence of the N-H

and H-H radial distribution functions. However, the hydrogen bond interaction in liquid

ammonia proved to be much weaker than that in water and no clear hydrogen bond peak

was observed in either N-H or H-H correlations, unlike the case of water.

Due to the importance of liquid ammonia and in particular its metallic solutions, also

many theoretical attempts have been made in past two decades to understand its liquid

phase. Most of these studies are based on classical Monte Carlo (MC) or molecular dynamics

(MD) simulations using empirical site–site [67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73] or ab initio pair

potentials [74] which all lead to essentially linear hydrogen bonds in the limit of treating the

ammonia dimer. A recent pioneering study [59] investigated the structure of liquid ammonia

6

through Car–Parrinello ab initio molecular dynamics [75, 76], i.e. without resorting to any

pre–determined (pairwise) potentials but using the full many–body interactions as obtained

by “on the ﬂy” DFT (BLYP) instead. It was found that the results of the N-N, N-H and H-H

radial distribution functions are in better agreement with experimental results than previous

ones relying on model potentials. Some important diﬀerences, however, still remained. For

example, the results of this study were found to overestimate the hydrogen bonded structure

as revealed by the N-H correlations and predict a narrower ﬁrst peak of the N-N distribution

when compared with the corresponding experimental results. Also, a later such study [77]

of liquid ammonia containing an ammonium or an amide solute reported somewhat diﬀerent

results for the N-N and N-H correlations between the bulk ammonia molecules compared to

those of Ref. [59]. Besides, the nature of the hydrogen bonds in the liquid phase is not fully

understood yet, in particular in view of the experimental situation. As discussed before,

unlike water, the ammonia dimer has a bent hydrogen bond in its equilibrium geometry. If

this bent character of the dimer hydrogen bond has the same signiﬁcant eﬀects on the liquid

as in solid phases [62] is still an unresolved issue, in particular since all pair potentials by

construction yield a quasi–linear hydrogen bond as do existing density functionals.

The outline of this paper is as follows.

In Section II, we describe the details of the

computational methodologies that we employ for the calculations of the dimer and the liquid

phase. In Section III, we present results for important dimer structures and their energies

based on highly accurate ab initio methods and compare these data to those obtained from a

wide variety of currently available density functional families. Section IV focuses in detail on

the development of the novel HCTH/407+ functional, on its performance in various systems,

and on the improvement achieved on the dimer level. In Section V, we compare the results

of ab initio MD simulations of liquid ammonia using HCTH/407+ to those obtained from

the widely used BLYP functional for reference purposes, and to experimental data wherever

available. We summarise and conclude in Section VI.

7

II. METHODS AND TECHNICAL DETAILS

A. The HCTH Density Functional Family

In this contribution, we develop a new generalised gradient approximation (GGA)

functional – which will be termed HCTH/407+ – that only involves the density ρ(r) and its
gradient ∇ρ(r). The latter has been shown to be a necessary ingredient for the description

of hydrogen bonds within DFT, see for instance Refs. [5, 6, 7, 8, 22, 24, 78]. To the

contrary of with the so–called hybrid functionals that involve “Hartree–Fock exchange”

(such as e.g. B3LYP[79]), this advantage is not impaired by a prohibitive computational

overhead relative to the local (spin) density approximation if used in the framework of

plane wave pseudopotential calculations, see e.g. the arguments presented in Sect. 3.3 of

Ref. [76]. Thus, we opted for reparametrising the Hamprecht-Cohen-Tozer-Handy (HCTH)

form, which has been described in detail elsewhere [80] and was originally used by Becke

for a hybrid functional [81]. In general, HCTH is a post-local spin density approximation

(post- LSDA) functional, meaning that it factorises the LSDA functional forms (FLSDA)

Exc =

Eγ =

cq,γ

FLSDA,γ(ρα, ρβ)uq

γ(x2

α, x2

β)dr ,

(1)

m

γ=x,cσσ,cαβ
X

γ
X

Xq=0

Z

here, uq

γ denotes the perturbation from the uniform electron gas if c0,γ is unity. The sum

over the integers q going from zero to m implies the power series deﬁned through uγ, with

θγσ and ηγσ as ﬁxed coeﬃcients:

The variable xσ is closely related to the reduced density gradient

γ(x2
uq

α, x2

β) =

q

θγσx2
σ
1 + ηγσx2

 

σ !

x2
σ =

(∇ρσ)2
ρ8/3
σ

.

(2)

(3)

This functional form was previously employed for reparametrisations [17, 82] resulting in

a highly accurate GGA functional, HCTH/407[82]. Although the above form obeys none

of the exact conditions for slowly varying densities [83], and violates part of the scaling

relations [84], it does obey the most crucial scaling relations and the Lieb-Oxford bound

[85, 86] within the physically important region [87].

When employing the form in Eqn. 1 up to fourth order in m, we obtain 15 linear

coeﬃcients (because of having exchange, spin-like and spin-unlike correlation), which are

8

easily parametrised by minimising an error function Ω, which is constructed out of the sum

of three components

Ω =

wm(Eexact

m

− EK−S

m )2 +

wl,G

nG

Xl,X

2

∂EK−S
l
∂X !

 

wj,v

(vZM P

j,σ + kj,σ − vK−S

j,σ

)2ρ2/3

j,σ dr .

Z

nE

m
X

nv

+

Xj,σ

(4)

The three sums represent the mean-square deviations from our reference data of energies,

gradients and exchange-correlation potentials for each molecule, respectively, of the result

of a Kohn–Sham density functional calculation (denoted by the superscript “K-S”). In the

case of the total energies reference data are high–level quantum chemistry results that are

denoted by “exact”.

In the second sum the exact gradients (at equilibrium geometry)

are zero by deﬁnition and thus do not appear in the formula.

In the ﬁnal term, we ﬁt

to the exchange-correlation potentials as determined by the Zhao-Morrison Parr(ZMP)-

method [88], which are shifted by a constant k because of the eﬀects of the quantum-

mechanical integer discontinuity. The ZMP method has been proven to be an important

aspect of the ﬁt [89]. All these contributions need to be balanced using weights w, which

have been determined and reported previously [82]. The weights w consist of a product of

multiple partial weights making contributions for each molecule in order to ensure a balanced

functional.

Sect. IV.

We also have to consider the molecular set for which the new functional was determined.

In general, the new HCTH/407+ functional was determined by ﬁtting it to the “407 set”

of molecules as used for HCTH/407 [90]. This set is similar to the G3 set of molecules [91],

with added inorganic molecules, but a smaller proportion of large organic species which we

considered to be over–represented. This original training set was supplemented with data

from the ammonia dimer, including non-equilibrium structures, as described in detail in

B. Quantum Chemical Calculations

For the accurate determination of some points of the potential energy surface (PES)

of the ammonia dimer, we used the W2 method [92]. This is basically an extrapolation

towards the full CCSD(T) basis set limit including relativistic (but not Born-Oppenheimer)

9

corrections. W2 energies are calculated at the CCSD(T)/A′PVQZ geometry, this notation

meaning an aug-cc-pVQZ basis set for nitrogen and a cc-pVQZ basis set for hydrogen [93].

The MOLP RO package [94] was used for these calculations. This method is one of the

most accurate standard ab initio methods currently available, with an average error of less

than 0.5 kcal/mol for the G2-1 set[95] of molecules [96]. In particular, it is more reliable and

accurate than the G1, G2 and G3 methods (although computationally much more expensive)

Two types of higher-order contributions were considered. Firstly, higher-order T3 eﬀects

were assessed by means of full CCSDT[98] calculations using the AcesII program system

[99]. Secondly, the importance of connected quadruple excitations was probed by means of

CCSD(TQ) [100] and BD(TQ) [101, 102] calculations using AcesII and Gaussian98 [103],

[96, 97].

respectively.

For the DFT calculations, we employed the Cadpac suite of programs [104], and assessed a

variety of GGA and meta–GGA functionals (namely BLYP[105], PBE[106], HCTH/120[17],

HCTH/407[82], τ -HCTH[24], and BP86[107]; we also tested but do not report results from

PW91[108] and HCTH/93[80]) and hybrids (B3LYP[79], B97-1[80], and τ -HCTH hybrid[24];

not reported are the results obtained from B97-2[109] and PBE0[110]). In case of the density
functional calculations we used an A′PVTZ basis set, which is reasonably close to the DFT

basis set limit.

For the DFT values, which were obtained from using ﬁnite basis sets without

extrapolation as done in the W1/W2 methods, we employed the counterpoise (CP)

correction [111] to account for the basis set superposition error (BSSE). In the ﬁtting
procedure, the TZ2P basis set[112] was utilised in addition to the A′PVTZ basis set.

C. Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics Simulations

The ab initio molecular dynamics simulations were performed by means of the Car-
Parrinello method [75, 76] and the CPMD code [76, 113]. A simple cubic box of 32 ammonia
molecules with a box length of 11.229 ˚A was periodically replicated in three dimensions

and the electronic structure of the extended system was represented by the Kohn-Sham

formulation [114] of DFT within a plane wave basis. The core electrons were treated via the

atomic pseudopotentials of Goedecker et al. [115] and the plane wave expansion of the KS

10

orbitals was truncated at a kinetic energy of 70 Ry. A ﬁctitious mass of µ=875 a.u. was

assigned to the electronic degrees of freedom and the coupled equations of motion describing

the system dynamics was integrated by using a time step of 5 a.u. As usually done, see e.g.

Refs. [7, 9, 10], the hydrogen atoms were given the mass of deuterium in order to allow for

a larger molecular dynamics timestep which also reduces the inﬂuence of (the neglected)

quantum eﬀects on the dynamical properties.

The ab initio MD simulations have been performed using the HCTH/407+ and

BLYP [105] functionals. We used the BLYP functional in addition to the new functional

because the former has been shown to provide a good description of hydrogen bonded liquids

such as water [7, 10, 11], methanol [116] and also ammonia [59, 77]. Thus, it is worthwhile to

compare the results of the two functionals for various structural and dynamical properties of

liquid ammonia. The initial conﬁguration of ammonia molecules was generated by carrying

out a classical molecular dynamics simulation using the empirical multi-site interaction

potential of Ref. [71]. Then, for simulation with the HCTH/407+ (BLYP) functional, we

equilibrated the system for 8.75 (10.1) ps at 273 K in NVT ensemble using Nose-Hoover

chain method and, thereafter, we continued the run in NVE ensemble for another 9.30

(9.34) ps for calculation of the various structural and dynamical quantities; the average

temperatures of these microcanonical runs were about 275 (252) K. We note that the size of

the simulation box used in the present simulations corresponds to the experimental density
of liquid ammonia at 273 K which is 2.26 × 10−2 molecules/ ˚A3 [66].

III. THE AMMONIA DIMER: STRUCTURE AND ENERGETICS

In order to brieﬂy validate the W2 method for some representative hydrogen bonded

systems, (HF)2 and (H2O)2, we compared the W2 results to MP2 basis set limit corrections

applied to coupled cluster calculations[55, 117], whereas the reference data was additionally

empirically reﬁned by scaling the calculations to certain quantum energy levels. Moreover,

to get an estimate of the accuracy of the basis set extrapolation, we compared with the more

cost-eﬀective alternative of W2, which is W1 [92]. When calculated at the same geometry

as W2, it usually yields a fair estimate as to how well the basis set limit is obtained in the

extrapolation. In Table I, the dissociation energies for the HF and H2O dimers are compared

to best values from the literature, and displayed along with the results for the (NH3)(H2O)

11

complex. All the W1 and W2 results are within the stated error margins of the reference

data. While the dissociation energy of the hydrogen ﬂuoride dimer is exactly the same, that

of water dimer is slightly lower than predicted in reference [55]. In the latter case, relativistic

corrections were not included in their best estimate. This will reduce the energy somewhat;

however we would expect a geometry relaxation to lower the energy. The authors of Ref.[55]

used a CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pVTZ geometry and estimated the geometry relaxation, whereas

the W2 calculation is carried out at an CCSD(T)/A’PVQZ geometry. Nevertheless, the

results show only 0.03 kJ/mol diﬀerence between the W1 and W2 method for the HF dimer

and 0.09 kJ/mol for the water dimer, indicating the high accuracy of these methods for such

interactions. Finally, the (H2O)(NH3) dissociation energy is predicted to be 26.8 kJ/mol by

W2, compared to 27.4 kJ/mol determined by experiment [118]; unfortunately no high-level

ab initio data were found in the literature for this mixed dimer.

Let us now focus on the ammonia dimer. Five diﬀerent structures on the dimer PES can
be considered important. The global minimum found on the CCSD(T)/A′PVQZ surface, as
shown in Figure 1c, has an HNN angle of 19.9◦ with eclipsed hydrogens and Cs symmetry.
Its staggered counterpart, displayed in Figure 1d, has an HNN angle of 13.1◦. The two
completely linear structures with the HNN angle being 0◦ (Figures 1a and 1b) are salient

points and the C2h structure (Figure 1e) is a transition state. In Table II, W1 and W2 results

for the ﬁve structures are summarised, with column two and four (with BSSE) corresponding

to the regular W2 method without the cp-correction. Because of the low barrier between the

Cs minimum and the C2h structure, we additionally calculated a counterpoise-corrected W2

barrier. As to the accuracy of the electron correlation methods underlying the W2 method,

we can make the following observations:

• quasiperturbative connected triple excitations, i.e., the CCSD(T) – CCSD diﬀerence,
only contribute 0.5 cm−1 to the C2h barrier with CP correction and 0.7 cm−1 without;

• this has also been veriﬁed by CCSD(TQ) [BD(TQ)] calculations, where the
contribution of the perturbative connected quadruples lowers the barrier by 0.2 cm−1
[0.3 cm−1] with the A′PVDZ basis set;

• higher-order connected triples (i.e., CCSDT-CCSD(T)) additionally lower the barrier
by 0.2 cm −1 when using A′PVDZ. This leads to the conclusion that not only has

12

basis set convergence been achieved, but also that higher-order excitations beyond
CCSD(T) will contribute less than 1 cm−1;

• further optimisation of the Cs geometry at the MP2/A’PV5Z level lowers the binding
energy by only 0..3 cm−1 (0.004 kJ/mol) relative to MP2/A′PV5Z//MP2/A′PVQZ;

• we do not expect relaxation of the geometry at the core-valence level to make a

signiﬁcant contribution, since even for the monomer the core-valence correction to

the geometry is very small [119].

Still, the diﬀerence between the BSSE-corrected and uncorrected results is rather large.
Based on these results, we suggest that the Cs to C2h energy diﬀerence is 3.5 ± 3 cm−1,

and we would expect the barriers between the linear and minimum geometries to be

equally well described by W2. For the slightly improved CCSD(T) geometry, by correcting
CCSD(T)/A′PVQZ - MP2/A′PVQZ + MP2/A′PV5Z, we predict the HNN angle to be 20.7

degrees. As for the C2h barrier, the interaction energy is raised by 0.002 kJ/mol when

going from CCSD(T) to CCSDT, showing that the quasiperturbative triples treatment (and
the quadruples estimation as well) is quite accurate. Using an A′PVDZ basis set, the quasi-

perturbative quadruples treatment lowers the binding energy by 0.092 kJ/mol for the coupled

cluster and 0.087 kJ/mol when using the Brueckner-Doubles method. With the geometry

relaxation contributing less than 0.005 kJ/mol at MP2 level and the estimate of the higher
order excitations, we predict the dissociation energy to be 13.1 ± 0.2 kJ/mol, since the main

error is likely to come from the quadruple excitations.

The results obtained using a selection of currently published functionals are shown in

Table III. For comparison, the CCSD(T), CCSD, MP2 and HF values are given. It should

be noted, however, that BSSE for the coupled-cluster values is more than twice as high as

for DFT (0.9 compared to 0.4 kJ/mol), and therefore we would expect the DFT calculations

to be closer to their respective basis set limits than the ab initio methods. Nevertheless,

their BSSE is still larger than that at the HF level. As expected, the CCSD(T) and W2

numbers are reasonably close to each other. Most density functional methods reproduce the

dissociation energy as listed in the ﬁrst column, reasonably well. In general, the GGA and

meta-GGA functionals tested give a good description of this interaction underestimate and

PW91 overestimating the dissociation energy. The tested hybrid functionals are even more

accurate, yet all of them underestimating the dissociation energy.

13

However,

if we consider the energy diﬀerence between the staggered and eclipsed

conformation of the NH3-dimer (see the data in the second column of Table III), it becomes

obvious that available functionals are incapable of reproducing the eﬀect of a bent hydrogen

bond. It is found that density functionals typically underestimate the diﬀerence between

the local and global minima by at least a factor of two. We note here that functionals

other than those listed in our tables (such as e.g. PW91, B97-2, PBE0) yield similar results

which are therefore not displayed. On the other hand, all other wavefunction-based ab initio

methods considered are able to reproduce this eﬀect. This becomes even more apparent

when considering the C2h transition state. Here, the coupled-cluster diﬀerences are close to
3 cm−1, whereas HF renders 24 cm−1 and the DFT values are between 60 and 95 cm−1 with
the exception of HCTH/407 (27 cm−1) and the τ -HCTH functionals (100 and 140 cm−1). In

turn, the other barrier is underestimated by 30-60% and both linear structures are stabilised

relative to the global minimum. The same trends are seen in Table IV, where the HNN angles

of the two minimum structures are shown. Here, available density functionals underestimate

the bending of the hydrogen bond by almost a factor of two for the global minimum and by

about 30% for the local (staggered) minimum, although the hydrogen bond distance itself

is reasonably well reproduced. Both τ -HCTH functionals, while they perform well with

their large ’training’ ﬁt set, are the worst performers here. On the other hand, HCTH/407

is the only functional which is somewhat capable of reproducing the eﬀect, outperforming

Hartree-Fock.

In summary, although standard density functionals do yield a correct dissociation energy

and a slightly nonlinear hydrogen bond, they completely overestimate the barrier towards

the symmetrical C2h structure, thereby preferring a much more linear hydrogen-bonding

conﬁguration than our accurate reference methods. Although the energy diﬀerences might

be viewed as intrinsically too small to be accurately rendered by DFT, the fact that even HF

gives better results is somewhat disturbing. Nevertheless, the observation that Hartree-Fock

and HCTH/407 are somewhat capable of properly predicting the structure and energetics

of the ammonia dimer system suggests that the problem at hand is not beyond the grasp of

density functional methods as such.

14

IV. THE HCTH/407+ FUNCTIONAL: CONSTRUCTION AND PERFOR-

MANCE

Considering that standard density functionals were shown to be unable to describe the

energy diﬀerence between linear and bent hydrogen bonds and do not capture the large

bending angle of the hydrogen bond, the most obvious remedy would be to change the

functional form itself. However, if all tested functionals give such a bad description, this

is unlikely to solve the problem. The culprit in this case, therefore, has to be the set of

molecules which the HCTH functionals are ﬁt to, insofar as only linearly hydrogen-bonded

systems have been included. Nevertheless, including the minimum structure and energetics

of the ammonia dimer determined in the previous section into the set probably only partly

solves this problem. The main problem, as established before, is the energy diﬀerence

between the linear and bent hydrogen bonds. In addition, the TZ2P basis set commonly
used in the ﬁt set might not be appropriate. Even when employing the A′PVTZ basis

set mentioned above, the basis set superposition error for the dimerisation energy is 29
cm−1, contributing 8 cm−1 to the energy diﬀerence between the minimum and symmetric

structure when using the B97-1 functional. In comparison, using the TZ2P basis set, the
BSSE is 92 cm−1, contributing 33 cm−1 to the energy diﬀerence. Clearly, the TZ2P basis set

is inappropriate for this problem. The above numbers indicate that a counterpoise procedure

has to be employed within the ﬁt in order to get a good estimate. Note that even when

using an extrapolation to the full basis set limit (in the case of W2), the diﬀerence between
the counterpoise corrected and uncorrected values is already 3 cm−1.

All of the above issues were considered in the ﬁt.. Thus, we ﬁt to all points shown in
Figure 1 employing an A′PVTZ basis set with counterpoise correction in the ﬁt. This is

the ﬁrst time we are ﬁtting to non-equilibrium structures, and we only ﬁt to their energy

diﬀerences and exchange-correlation potentials of these. Due to the energy diﬀerence of only

a couple of wavenumbers, an additional weight has to be employed for any change in the ﬁt

to be noticeable. Thus, equation (3) now reads

Ω =

wm(Eexact

m

− EK−S
m

− EBSSE
m

)2 +

wl,G

nE

m
X

+

nv

Xj,σ

wj,v

(vZM P

j,σ + kj,σ − vK−S

j,σ

Z

15

2

∂EK−S
l
∂X !

 

nG

Xl,X
)2ρ2/3
j,σ dr

(5)

with

EBSSE
m

m

= Eghost,donor

+ Eghost,acceptor

− Emonomer,donor

− Emonomer,acceptor

.

m

m

m

(6)

Since we do not want to ﬁt to a given value of basis set superposition error, it is included in
EK−S

m . The weights wm,l,j now also include the additional weights for the potential energy

surface with the other weights deﬁned as before [82]. Thus, wm is composed of

wm,P ES = 750 × weightconf idence

× weightatom

× weightdimer

× weightP ES .

(7)

When determining the weights for the new members of the ﬁt set, we need to consider
both their A′PVTZ optimised energies as well as their A′PVTZ single-point energies at
the CCSD(T)/A′PVQZ optimised geometries. The latter is necessary since we can only ﬁt

to single points. As a result of the small energy diﬀerences, the frozen-geometry single-

point energies and optimised energies diﬀer by a signiﬁcant amount. The development

procedure is similar to the one employed for the HCTH/407 functional, and the set includes

numerous atomisation energies, proton aﬃnities, ionisation potentials, electron aﬃnities,

and dissociation energies of hydrogen-bonded dimers and transition metal complexes [82].

First, we ﬁt to a subset of the 407 molecules in order to get close to the global minimum, then

we ﬁt to the full set. The latter subset (small set) is the G2-1 set plus two hydrogen-bonded

systems (H2O)2 and (HF)2, and the additional structures on the potential energy surface,

making 153 systems in all (the 147 of the HCTH/147 functional plus the ﬁve PES points, in

addition to the NH3 dissociation energy at the TZ2P basis). For each point on the PES, the

counterpoise correction was employed. The results using the newly determined functionals

as a function of the weights have been determined in both the ﬁrst ﬁt (to 153 systems) and

the second ﬁt (to 413 systems). Thus, we obtained new functionals with weights ranging

from 0/0 (which corresponds to the HCTH/407 functional) to 200/200. The ﬁrst weight is

the one used in the subset, while the second corresponds to the large ﬁt. The importance

of the weights in the ﬁrst ﬁt can be seen from the diﬀerences by using weight pairs of

30/80 and 80/80 - they diﬀer by about a factor of two in the energy diﬀerence between

the staggered and eclipsed geometry. Hence, the minimum obtained by the second ﬁt will

of necessity be close to the global minimum obtained by the ﬁrst one. When increasing

these weights, we approach the reference values as expected, with the 200/200 functional

rendering the closest values to the reference method. While not explicitly included in the ﬁt,

16

the BSSE also increased from 0.444 kJ/mol to 0.866 kJ/mol. This resembles the tendency

of the functional to have a larger intermolecular distance than the reference methods when

increasing the weights, hence entering a regime where the BSSE increases more rapidly than

for the optimised structures. In comparison, the largest BSSE observed by the functionals

tested in Table III is 0.48 kJ/mol. However, for all the calculations in the ﬁt we have

performed only DFT single-point energy calculations at the CCSD(T) optimised geometries.

Another, more appropriate, point of comparison consists of the optimised structures of

all the newly obtained functionals, as done in Table III for the contemporary functionals.

Since the energy diﬀerences in general are very small, these results diﬀer signiﬁcantly from

the ones obtained by the single-point energies calculated at the coupled-cluster geometries.

In addition, the C2h structure becomes the global minimum for the functionals with a weight

of 80 or larger in the ﬁrst ﬁt. Based on these results, the 30/80 functional appears to be

the most reliable for this interaction, and hence will be denoted as the new HCTH/407+

functional. This new functional (compare to Table III) now renders a dissociation energy

of 13.18 kJ/mol for the ammonia dimer, in much closer agreement to the reference values

than any other method employed. The diﬀerence between the Cs minimum and the C2h
structure is 4.0 cm−1 for HCTH/407+, compared to our best estimate of 3.5 cm−1 in Table
II. The staggered Cs structure lies 18 cm−1 above its eclipsed counterpart, which is about

ﬁve wavenumbers higher than our best estimate but still within its error bars. The diﬀerence

to the linear eclipsed and linear staggered structures are slightly underestimated at 51.5 and
53.5 cm−1 respectively, but this is still a vast improvement over the other functionals. In

Figure 2, we compare the energies of the new HCTH/407+ functional to W2 and one of the

most commonly used GGA functionals (BLYP). The BSSE for the relaxed Cs structures does

not increase as rapidly as for their CCSD(T) optimised counterparts. It increases from 0.43

(HCTH/407) to 0.45 (HCTH/407+) to 0.61 kJ/mol (weight of 200), and does not yield as

unreasonably large values as the single-point calculations at the CCSD(T) geometries. The

hydrogen bond lengths of the Cs and C2h structures increase with larger weights, emphasising

the importance of this analysis. Generally, all HCTH functionals are found to slightly

overestimate this hydrogen bond length. The HNN angle of the HCTH/407+ functional is
17 ◦ for the minimum geometry. This is within the accuracy that can be expected from
contemporary density functionals (± 2◦), showing a signiﬁcant improvement over all other

density functionals in Table IV. The results for all functionals obtained with diﬀerent weights

17

(from which we determined the HCTH/407+ functional) are given in the supplementary

material. [120]

The parameters which deﬁne the HCTH/407+ functional, compared to HCTH/407, are

given in Table V. As might be expected, they diﬀer only slightly from those for the standard

HCTH/407 functional; only the correlation and higher-order coeﬃcients have signiﬁcantly

been aﬀected by the change.. Nevertheless, the new functional should now be able to describe

non-directed hydrogen bonds better than HCTH/407. On the level of the ammonia dimer,

the improvement with respect to other density functionals becomes clearly visible in Fig. 2;

see Table III for the corresponding numbers.

It is seen that HCTH/407+ describes the

relative stability of all isomers much better with respect to the W2 reference data than BLYP,

which was selected as a prominent representative of the GGA family. Most importantly, the

dramatic failure of BLYP to capture the stability of the cyclic C2h isomer relative to all

other isomers is cured. According to HCTH/407+, the two Cs structures as well as the

C2h structure are essentially degenerate, which is in accord with the reference data.. Apart

from the energetics, also the structure of the ground state of the ammonia dimer, i.e. the

eclipsed Cs structure, is dramatically improved, see Table IV for details. In particular the

hydrogen bond angle HNN is now much larger and thus closer to the reference value than

any other density functional method; note that also the functionals PW91, B97-2, and PBE0

were considered. The same is true for the HNN angle in the staggered variant of the Cs
symmetric structure. However, it is also clear from this table that the N· · ·H distance is
clearly overestimated: HCTH/407+ yields a distance of about 2.5 ˚A instead of around
2.3 ˚A as required. This seems to be typical for the HCTH family as both HCTH/120 and
HCTH/407 yield similarly large values exceeding 2.4 ˚A (and HCTH/93 leads to 2.614 ˚A).

In addition, the same trend of producing too long hydrogen bonds is found for the C2h

structure. This deﬁciency is corrected by both τ -HCTH and τ -HCTH hybrid functionals.

Here it should be noted that both BLYP and PBE describe the hydrogen bond length quite

well, however at the expense of making it much too linear and grossly disfavoring the cyclic

structure energetically.

Furthermore, this signiﬁcant improvement in describing non-directed hydrogen bonds,

however, comes at the expense of a slightly increased error for the other molecules in the

ﬁt set. Table VI shows the errors of the HCTH/407 and HCTH/407+ functionals to the

ﬁt set, summarising these as RMS energy and geometry errors, together with the errors for

18

the energies, geometry shifts and frequency shifts of nine hydrogen-bonded systems. The

values for B3LYP, BLYP and BP86 are included for comparison. The hydrogen-bonded

systems are the (HF)2, (HCl)2, (H2O)2, (CO)(HF), (OC)(HF), (FH)(NH3), (ClH)(NH3),
(H2O)(NH3) and (H3O+)(H2O) complexes, but not the NH3 dimer itself. The performance

of other functionals over all the sets has been discussed elsewhere [22, 24, 82]. Overall,

errors for the HCTH/407+ functional are quite similar to HCTH/407, which in turn means

that they are still excellent compared to ﬁrst-generation hybrid functionals like B3LYP

and especially GGA functionals like BLYP or BP86. Although we expect the geometries

to be still slightly worse than B3LYP (although the gradient error is comparable), the

energetic properties are better described, as are the hydrogen bonds. Whereas the errors

of the HCTH/407+ functional for the ﬁt set have barely changed compared to HCTH/407,

the accuracy of the dissociation energies of the nine directed hydrogen bonds has actually

decreased by about 20%. Nonetheless, the accuracy of the frequency shifts of the H-X bond

stretches has increased, indicating that we seem to have improved the description of the

potential energy surface of these complexes.

V. LIQUID AMMONIA: STRUCTURE, DYNAMICS, AND HYDROGEN BOND-

ING

A. Radial Distribution Functions

We have calculated the nitrogen-nitrogen, hydrogen-hydrogen and nitrogen-hydrogen

radial distribution functions (RDF) from the atomic trajectories generated by ab initio

molecular dynamics simulations; note again that we used the mass of the deuteron instead

of that of the proton but we still use the symbol H for convenience. The results for both

HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals are shown in Fig. 3.

In this Figure, we have also

included the experimental results [66, 121] of the RDFs of liquid ammonia at 273 K; note

that the underlying experimental technique is based on the assumption that the structure

of all isotopically substituted systems is identical. For the nitrogen-nitrogen RDF, it is seen

that at the short distances the BLYP gN N (r) is in better agreement with experimental
results. The HCTH/407+ peak is located at a distance of about 0.15 ˚A larger than

the experimental peak position whereas the BLYP peak appears at a somewhat shorter

19

distance. We note in this context that the HCTH/407+ functional gives an overestimated

equilibrium N-N distance for the isolated dimer compared to the reference CCSD(T) result

as can be inferred from Table IV. The larger N-N distance seems to be translated to the

liquid phase conﬁgurations and we observe a somewhat larger most probable N-N distance

for the HCTH/407+ functional than what is found in the experiments. Still, the overall

shape of the ﬁrst peak is represented reasonably well by both the functionals. When

the RDFs are integrated up to their ﬁrst minimum to obtain the coordination number

in the ﬁrst solvation shell, we obtained the values of 13.2 and 12.1 for HCTH/407+ and

BLYP functionals compared to an experimental value of 12.75. Clearly, the agreement with

experimental results is found to be rather good.

Considering the results of the H-H and N-H RDFs, the positions of the calculated

intramolecular H-H and N-H peaks for both the functionals agree rather well with

experimental results as expected. For example, the liquid phase N-H bond length and
intramolecular H-H distance for the HCTH/407+ (BLYP) functionals are 1.03 (1.03) ˚A and
1.63 (1.65) ˚A which can be compared with the experimental values of 1.04 ˚A and 1.60 ˚A,

respectively. Also, these intramolecular distances in the liquid phase are very close to their

gas phase values. This was also noted earlier for the BLYP functional [59]. Because of the

quantum disperson eﬀects which are present in real liquid but not in the current simulated

systems, the experimental intramolecular peaks are found to be broader than the theoretical

peaks. The somewhat higher value of the experimental H-H correlation at the ﬁrst minimum
at around 2 ˚A can also be attributed to such quantum dispersion eﬀects.

The intermolecular H-H peaks are found to be well represented by both functionals. The

intermolecular part of the N-H RDF shows the presence of both H-bonded and non H-bonded
H atoms in the ﬁrst solvation shell. The shoulder up to about 2.7 ˚A can be attributed to

hydrogen bonded H atoms, while the more pronounced peak at the larger distance at around
3.75 ˚A corresponds to the hydrogen atoms in the solvation shell which are not hydrogen

bonded. Again, both functionals are found to describe well the non-hydrogen bonded ﬁrst

solvation shell peak when compared with the corresponding experimental result. For the

hydrogen bonded part, however, the HCTH/407+ result is found to exhibit a less pronounced

shoulder than what is found in the experiments and for the BLYP functional. This is

probably a result of the slight overestimation of the hydrogen bond length by HCTH/407+

already on the level of the dimer, see Table IV. Considering both hydrogen bonded and

20

non-hydrogen bonded H atoms, a sphere of radius 5.3 (5..2) ˚A around a central N atom is

found to contain 34.1 (34) intermolecular H atoms for the HCTH/407+ (BLYP) functional.
The radius of the sphere is set to 5.3 (5.2) ˚A because the ﬁrst minimum of the intermolecular

N-H RDF is located at this distance. The corresponding radius for the experimental N-H
RDF is 5.0 ˚A, yielding the experimental value of 34.8 for the above coordination number.

A more detailed analysis of the distribution of hydrogen bonds in liquid ammonia is given

in the following subsection, and the dynamical aspects of hydrogen bonds are considered in

Sect. V D.

B. Distribution of Hydrogen Bonds

The analysis of the hydrogen bond (HB) distribution among ammonia molecules is based

on a calculation of the fractions Pn of ammonia molecules that engage in n hydrogen

bonds and the average number of hydrogen bonds that an ammonia molecule donates and

accepts [29]. Following previous work on liquid ammonia, water and other hydrogen bonding

liquids [59, 71, 72, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128], we have adopted a geometric deﬁnition

of the hydrogen bonds where two ammonia molecules are assumed to be hydrogen bonded

if they satisfy the following conﬁgurational criteria with respect to N-N and N-H distances

R(N N ) < R(N N )

,

R(N H) < R(N H)

c

c

(8)

and the values of these distance cut-oﬀs are usually determined from the positions of

procedure where the N-N RDF gives a value of RN N

the ﬁrst minimum of the corresponding (intermolecular) RDFs. We have used a similar
c =5.25 (5.1) ˚A for the N-N cut-
oﬀ for HCTH/407+ (BLYP) functionals. However, the procedure can not be applied

unambiguously to determine the N-H cut-oﬀ because no clear minimum that separates the

hydrogen bonded and nonbonded H atoms is found in the N-H RDF. In the latter case,

the shoulder which is assigned to hydrogen bonded H atoms merges into the broad and

more intense peak corresponding to the H atoms of the ﬁrst solvation shell which are not

hydrogen bonded. Since this shoulder – which corresponds to the hydrogen bonded H atoms
– extends up to about 2.7 ˚A in the experimental and BLYP RDFs we have taken this
distance of 2.7 ˚A as the cutoﬀ N-H distance. For HCTH/407+ also, we have used the same

21

cut-oﬀ of the N-H distance although the hydrogen bonded shoulder is less pronounced for this

functional. Still, variation of RN H

c within reasonable bounds does not change qualitatively

the result of this analysis.

In Fig. 4, we have shown the distribution of donor and acceptor hydrogen bonds for both

HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals. In this ﬁgure, panels (a) and (b) show the fraction

of ammonia molecules that accept or donate n hydrogen bonds and panel (c) shows the

fraction of hydrogen atoms that donate n hydrogen bonds. The majority of the ammonia

molecules is found to accept one hydrogen bond and to donate one. Also, the fraction of

hydrogen atoms donating two or more hydrogen bonds is found to be negligibly small, which

means that the bifurcated or multifurcated hydrogen bonds are practically absent in liquid

ammonia. The average number of donor hydrogen bonds per ammonia molecule, which is

also equal to the average number of acceptor hydrogen bonds per molecule, is found to be

0.93 (1.34) for the HCTH/407+ (BLYP) functional. Given that there are as many as about

13 ammonia molecules in the ﬁrst solvation shell, we conclude that non–hydrogen–bonded

interactions, i.e. packing or steric eﬀects, are crucial in determining the solvation behavior

of ammonia in the liquid state. This is in sharp contrast to the case of liquid water where

the solvation structure of a water molecule is determined primarily by hydrogen bonding

interactions [129].

The ammonia dimer has a strongly bent hydrogen bond in its equilibrium geometry and

it would be interesting to investigate whether the hydrogen bonds remain bent in the liquid

phase. We have carried out such an analysis by calculating the distribution function of the
cosine of the hydrogen bond angle θ, which is deﬁned as the N· · · N–H angle of a hydrogen

bonded pair and the results are shown in Fig.. 5a for both the functionals. It is seen that, for

both the functionals, the probability distribution P (cos θ) is peaked at cos θ = 1 indicating

that the preferred hydrogen bond geometry is linear in the liquid phase, see Ref. [130]. The

peak is somewhat more sharp and narrower for the BLYP functional, which means a stronger

preference for the linear hydrogen bonds for this functional as compared to that for the

HCTH/407+ functional. This preferential presence of linear hydrogen bonds in the liquid

phase is indeed an interesting result given that the dimer has a bent hydrogen bond in the
gas phase. We have also investigated the distribution of N· · · N–H angle for H atoms that
belong to nearest neighbours but are not hydrogen bonded, i.e. the N· · ·H distance is greater
than 2.7 ˚A. The results of these angular distributions are shown in Fig. 5b for 2.7 ˚A < R(N H)

22

< 3.7 ˚A and in Fig. 5c for 3.7 ˚A < R(N H) < 4.7 ˚A. A wide range of values are found for the
N· · · N–H angle with very little or no preference for a particular orientation. These ﬁndings

are indeed consistent with the above analysis that the ﬁrst solvation shell in liquid ammonia

is dominated by simple packing rather than by directional hydrogen bonding.

C. Self Diﬀusion and Orientational Relaxation

The translational self diﬀusion coeﬃcient of an ammonia molecule in the liquid state is

calculated from the long-time limit of the mean-square displacement (MSD)

D = lim
t→∞

< [r(t) − r(0)]2 >
6t

,

(9)

where r(t) is the position of the center of mass of a molecule at time t and the average

is carried out over the time origin for autocorrelation and over all the molecules as usual.

The results of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients, which are obtained from a least square linear ﬁt

of the simulation data excluding the initial ballistic regime up to 0.5 ps, are included in

Table (VII). This Table also contains the experimental values of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of

deuterated liquid ammonia ND3 at 275 and 252 K that are found from Eq.(2) of Ref.[131],

which was shown to ﬁt the experimental data over a rather wide temperature range very

well. The agreement of the calculated diﬀusion coeﬃcients with the experimental result is

found to be reasonably good for both functionals. In particular it is gratifying to see that

the experimental value is underestimated because quantum eﬀects on nuclear motion, which

are neglected in the present study, tend to increase the diﬀusion in a liquid.

The self-orientational motion of ammonia molecules is analyzed by calculating the

orientational time correlation function [132], C α

l (t), deﬁned by

C α

l (t) =

< Pl(eα(t) · eα(0)) >
< Pl(eα(0) · eα(0)) >

,

(10)

where Pl is the Legendre polynomial of order l and eα is the unit vector which points along
the α-axis in the molecular frame. Here, we have studied the time dependence of C α

l (t)
for l = 1, 2 and for three diﬀerent eα, the unit vectors along the molecular dipole axis,

an N-H bond and an intramolecular H-H axis. The geometric dipole vector of an ammonia

molecule is calculated by assigning partial charges to N and H atoms as given by the classical

model of Ref.[71]. For the orientational relaxation of unit vectors along the N-H and H-H

23

axes, the results are averaged over three such intramolecular axes of each type. After an

initial transient non-exponential decay, the relaxation becomes diﬀusional and C α

l (t) decays

exponentially. The orientational correlation time, τ α

l , is deﬁned as the time integral of the

orientational correlation function

τ α
l =

dt C α

l (t) .

∞

0
Z

(11)

We note that the orientational relaxation of molecular vectors containing H atoms are usually

measured by NMR relaxation experiments, which yield the Fourier transform of a correlation

function for l = 2 such that the integrated correlation time τ α

2 is measured.

In Fig. 6, we depict the results of the orientational correlation function C α

l (t) for l = 1, 2
and α=dipole, N-H and H-H. The corresponding results of the orientational correlation times

are included in Table (VII). We have also included the experimental result of τ2 of deuterated

ammonia ND3 as given by the ﬁtted Arrhenius law of Ref. [133]. Since this experimental

relaxation time was obtained by NMR relaxation experiments, it is likely to correspond to

the relaxation of N-H/H-H vectors rather than the dipole vector. The BLYP functional is

found to predict a relatively slower orientational relaxation. Considering the quite small

system size and short simulation trajectories, both functionals are found to describe the

single-particle rotational dynamics of liquid ammonia reasonably well.

D. Dynamics of Hydrogen Bonds

The key dynamical quantity in the context of hydrogen bond dynamics is the mean

hydrogen bond life time, τHB. The fast librational motion of ammonia molecules makes

apparent breaking and reformation of a hydrogen bond a very fast process and, depending

on how these fast transient events are taken into account, one can obtain diﬀerent values

for the hydrogen bond (HB) lifetime. The rotational motion of ammonia molecules is also a

rather fast process and can also contribute to the short–time dynamics of hydrogen bonds.

For a particular chosen deﬁnition of a breaking event, one can adopt a direct counting

method [128, 134, 135] or a time correlation function method [123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 136]

to calculate the lifetime. In the present work, we have adopted the time correlation function

approach which allows us to calculate the hydrogen bond lifetime in both cases: (a) The

breaking of hydrogen bond occurs due to fast librational motion even though it may be a

24

transient event and not a ‘true’ breaking event and (b) these fast librational breaking events

are ignored and only rotational and translational diﬀusional breaking on a longer time scale

is considered as the ‘true’ breaking of a hydrogen bond. Also, in the present context, it is

implied that ‘fast librational breaking’ also includes the eﬀects of fast rotational motion that

might contribute to the short time dynamics of the hydrogen bonds.

In order to obtain the hydrogen bond lifetime for the two scenarios mentioned above, we

calculate three time correlation functions: one continuous and two intermittent hydrogen

bond correlation functions [123, 124, 136]. Before we deﬁne these time correlations, we ﬁrst

deﬁne two hydrogen bond population variables h(t) and H(t): h(t) is unity when a particular

tagged pair of ammonia molecules is hydrogen bonded at time t, according to the adopted

deﬁnition from Sect. V B and zero otherwise. The function H(t) is unity if the tagged pair

of ammonia molecules remains continuously hydrogen bonded from t = 0 to time t given

that the bond was formed for the last time at t = 0, and it is zero otherwise. We deﬁne the

continuous hydrogen bond time correlation function SHB(t) as

SHB(t) =< h(0)H(t) > / < h > ,

(12)

where < · · · > denotes an average over all hydrogen bonds that are created at t = 0. Clearly,

SHB(t) describes the probability that a hydrogen bonded ammonia pair, which was created

at t = 0, remains continuously bonded upto time t. It diﬀers from the continuous hydrogen

bond correlation function of Rapaport [136] in that we apply the condition of bond formation

at time t = 0. The mean hydrogen bond lifetime τHB can then be calculated from the time

integral

τHB =

SHB(t) dt .

∞

0
Z

(13)

In Fig. 7a, we have shown the decay of SHB(t) for both functionals and the corresponding

results of τHB are included in Table VII. The hydrogen bond lifetime is found to be about

0.1 ps for both functionals. We note that both fast librational and slower diﬀusional motion

can contribute to the decay of SHB(t). Since the librational motion occurs on a faster

time scale and since the correlation function SHB(t) does not allow any reformation event,

the dynamics of SHB(t) primarily reveal the dynamics of hydrogen bond breaking due to

fast librational motion and hence the lifetime that is obtained from Eq.(12) corresponds to

the average time over which a hydrogen bond survives before it ‘breaks’ due to librations.

Again, this short time breaking may also include contributions from fast rotational motion

25

of ammonia molecules which also occurs at subpicosecond time scale.

A diﬀerent way to analyze the hydrogen bond dynamics is to calculate the intermittent

hydrogen bond correlation function [123, 136]

CHB(t) =< h(0)h(t) > / < h > ,

(14)

where the average is now over all hydrogen bonds that were present at t = 0. Note that the

correlation function CHB(t) does not depend on the continuous presence of a hydrogen bond.

It describes the probability that a hydrogen bond is intact at time t, given it was intact at

time zero, independent of possible breaking in the interim time. Clearly, bonds which were

brieﬂy ‘broken’ by fast librational motions would continue to contribute to the correlation

function at later times and this leads to a much slower decay of CHB(t) at longer times. The

results of CHB(t) are shown in Fig. 7b which clearly shows a two-phase relaxation of this

correlation function. The initial fast relaxation corresponds to rapid breaking of hydrogen

bonds due to librational motion and the slower relaxation after this initial transient decay

corresponds to the breaking and reformation of hydrogen bonds due to both rotational and

translational diﬀusion of ammonia molecules.

After a hydrogen bond is broken, the two ammonia molecules can remain in the vicinity

of each other for some time before either the bond is reformed or the molecules diﬀuse away

from each other. We deﬁne NHB(t) as the time dependent probability that a hydrogen bond

is broken at time zero but the two molecules remain in the vicinity of each other i.e. as

nearest neighbors but not hydrogen bonded at time t.. Following previous work[123], we can
then write a simple rate equation for the ‘reactive ﬂux’ −dCHB/dt in terms of CHB(t) and

NHB(t)

− dCHB(t)
dt

= k CHB(t) − k′ NHB(t) ,

(15)

where k and k′ are the forward and backward rate constants for hydrogen bond breaking.

The inverse of k can be interpreted as the average lifetime of a hydrogen bond.

The derivative of the intermittent hydrogen bond correlation or the ‘reactive ﬂux’ of

Eq.(14) is computed from the simulation results of CHB(t) that are presented in Fig. 7b.

The probability function NHB(t) is also calculated from the simulation trajectories through

the following correlation function approach [124]

NHB(t) =< h(0)[1 − h(t)]h′(t) > / < h > ,

(16)

26

where h′(t) is unity if the N–N distance of the pair of ammonia molecules is less than R(N N )

c

at time t and it is zero otherwise. The results of NHB(t) are shown in Fig.. 7c. We used a

least-squares ﬁt of Eq.(14) to the simulation results of the reactive ﬂux, CHB(t) and NHB(t)

to produce the forward and backward rate constants. We performed the ﬁtting in the short

time region 0 < t < 0.15 ps to obtain the rate constants and the corresponding average

hydrogen bond lifetime for the librational relaxation and we also carried out the ﬁtting on

the longer time region 0.25 ps < t < 3 ps to calculate these quantities for slower rotational

and translational diﬀusional relaxation. The inverses of the corresponding forward rate

constants, which correspond to the average hydrogen bond lifetimes and which we denote

as 1/kshort and 1/klong, are included in Table VII. We note that the value of 1/kshort is very

close to average hydrogen bond lifetime τHB obtained from the continuous hydrogen bond

correlation function SHB(t) which is not unexpected because both SHB(t) and the short-

time part of the ‘reactive ﬂux’ captures the hydrogen bond ‘breaking’ dynamics due to fast

librational motion. The hydrogen bond lifetime as given by 1/klong is signiﬁcantly longer

because it excludes the fast librational relaxation.

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have investigated the properties of ammonia from the gas phase dimer to the liquid

state by means of wavefunction based quantum chemistry techniques, density functional

theory, and ab initio molecular dynamics. The ammonia dimer is a particularly interesting

hydrogen–bonded system, as it is known to feature a strongly bent hydrogen bond. In order

to investigate possible consequences of this nonlinear hydrogen bond, important points on

the potential energy surface were ﬁrst investigated by means of ab initio methods up to W2–

extrapolated CCSD(T) theory, see Fig. 1 for the corresponding structures. The structure

and energetics of important isomers are obtained up to unprecedented accuracy without

resorting to experiment; see Fig. 1 and Table IV for structures, and Fig. 2 and Table III

for energies. It is conﬁrmed that the structure of the global minimum (having eclipsed Cs
symmetry) possesses a substantially nonlinear hydrogen bond with an H–N· · ·N angle that
is predicted to be 20.7◦; note that the corresponding angle is predicted to be 5.5◦ in the

water dimer. The energy diﬀerence between the global minimum and the C2h transition
state (which is the famous “cyclic structure”) is about 3.5 cm−1, and the energy penalty to

27

make the hydrogen bond artiﬁcially linear amounts to only 70 cm−1, i.e. 0.2 kcal/mol or

0.009 eV. This implies that the potential energy surface is very ﬂat.

However, when investigating the ammonia dimer using a wide variety of available

density functionals (including important representatives of the GGA, meta–GGA and hybrid

functional families) it was found that none of the functionals checked by us describes the bent

hydrogen bond in (NH3)2 satisfactorily. Typically, the hydrogen bond angle is too small by a

factor of two and the energy of the cyclic C2h structure w.r.t. the eclipsed Cs global minimum

is overestimated by a factor of 10 to 30. Since ammonia is an important hydrogen bonded

liquid, a density functional was developed for studying this subtle system, with particular

focus on its applicability for condensed phase simulations in the framework of Car–Parrinello

molecular dynamics. To this end, a novel GGA–type density functional, HCTH/407+, was

developed, with special emphasis on the nonlinear hydrogen bond and potential energy

surface of (NH3)2. This functional yields the bent hydrogen–bonded equilibrium structure

of the ammonia dimer, as well as the correct energetics of the low–lying isomers including

the energy barrier to a linear hydrogen–bond.

The performance of the new functional

in describing the structural and dynamical

properties of liquid ammonia was investigated by carrying out Car–Parrinello molecular

dynamics simulations of the liquid phase. In addition, simulations were carried out using

a GGA–type functional that is widely used for describing associated liquids, BLYP, and

the results of the two functionals are compared with experiments wherever available.

In

particular, we focused on the atom-atom radial distribution functions, on structure and

dynamics of hydrogen bonds, and on diﬀusion as well as orientational relaxation processes.

Overall, both functionals are found to describe the structural and dynamical properties of the

liquid phase reasonably well. Importantly, it is shown that the propensity to form a strongly

bent hydrogen bond – which is characteristic for the equilibrium structure of the gas–phase

ammonia dimer – is overwhelmed by steric packing eﬀects that clearly dominate the solvation

shell structure in the liquid state. Similarly, the propensity of ammonia molecules to form

bifurcated and multifurcated hydrogen bonds in the liquid phase is found to be negligibly

small. Thus, even functionals that lead to unreasonably linear hydrogen bonds in the

limiting case of the in vacuo ammonia dimer, such as BLYP, yield a good description of

liquid ammonia – albeit for the wrong reason!

28

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Professor Martina Havenith for pointing out the pecularities of the

ammonia dimer and for stimulating discussions. The authors would also like to acknowledge

Professor Nicholas Handy for enlightening discussions, his critical comments on an early

draft of the manuscript, and his help in the very beginning of the project. A. D. Boese is

grateful for ﬁnancial support by the EPSRC, the Gottlieb Daimler- und Karl Benz-Stiftung,

and the Feinberg Graduate School. A. Chandra wishes to thank Alexander von Humboldt –

Foundation for a Research Fellowship. The simulations were carried out at Rechnerverbund–
NRW and at Bovilab@RUB (Bochum). This research was also supported by the Lise

Meitner Center for Computational Chemistry, the Helen and Martin A. Kimmel Center for

Molecular Design, DFG, and FCI.

29

References

[1] W. Kohn, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1253 (1999); J.. A. Pople, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 38, 1894

(1999); Angew. Chem. 111, 2014 (1999).

[2] A. K. Rapp´e and E. R. Bernstein, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 6117 (2000).

[3] T. van Mourik, R. J. Gdanitz, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 9620 (2002).

[4] M. Kamiya, T. Tsuneda, and K. Hirao, J.. Chem. Phys. 117, 6010 (2002).

[5] K. Laasonen, F. Csajka, and M. Parrinello, Chem. Phys. Lett. 194, 172 (1992).

[6] F. Sim, A.. St.–Amant, I. Papai, and D. R. Salahub, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114, 4391 (1992).

[7] K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, M. Parrinello, and R. Car, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 9080 (1993).

[8] K. Laasonen, M. Parrinello, R. Car, C. Lee, and D. Vanderbilt, Chem. Phys. Lett. 207, 208

[9] M.E. Tuckerman, K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, and M. Parrinello, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 5749 (1995);

J. Chem. Phys. 103, 150 (1995).

[10] M. Sprik, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 1142 (1995).

[11] P. L. Silvestrelli and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3308 (1999); J. Chem. Phys. 111,

(1993).

3572 (1999).

[12] P. L. Silvestrelli, M. Bernasconi, and M. Parrinello, Chem. Phys. Lett. 277, 478 (1997).

[13] D. Marx, M.E. Tuckerman, J. Hutter and M. Parrinello, Nature 397, 601 (1999).

[14] M. Boero, K. Terakura, T. Ikeshoji, C. C. Liew, and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3245

(2000); J. Chem. Phys 115, 2219 (2001).

[15] E. Schwegler, G. Galli, and F. Gygi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2429 (2000).

[16] E. Schwegler, G. Galli, F. Gygi, and R. Q.. Hood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 265501 (2001).

[17] A. D. Boese, N. L. Doltsinis, N. C. Handy, and M. Sprik, J. Chem. Phys. 112 1670 (2000).

[18] M. E. Tuckerman, D. Marx, and M. Parrinello, Nature 417, 925 (2002).

[19] M. Krack, A. Gambirasio, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem.. Phys. 117, 9409 (2002).

[20] S. Izvekov and G. A. Voth, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 10372 (2002).

[21] B. Paizs and S. Suhai, J.. Comp. Chem 19, 575 (1998).

[22] C. Tuma, A. D. Boese, and N. C. Handy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1, 3939 (1999); note

30

that the HCTH/120 functional is denoted HCTH-38 in this paper.

[23] K. N. Rankin and R.J. Boyd, J. Comp. Chem. 22, 1590 (2001).

[24] A. D. Boese and N.C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 9559 (2002).

[25] D. D. Nelson, Jr., G. T. Fraser, and W. Klemperer, Science 238, 1670 (1987).

[26] M. Havenith, Infrared Spectroscopy of Molecular Clusters (see in particular Chap. 9) Springer

Verlag, Berlin 2002.

[27] W. Klopper, J. G. C. M.. van Duijneveldt–van de Rijdt, and F. B. van Duijneveldt, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2, 2227 (2000); see in particular last line of Table 1.

[28] T. Steiner, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 41, 48 (2002); Angew. Chem. 114, 50 (2002).

[29] Note that we adopt here Steiner’s terminology [28]: (i) in a hydrogen bond D–H· · ·A the

group D–H is called the (proton) donor and A is called the (proton) acceptor; (ii) the
interaction of one donor with two or more acceptors A′, A′′, . . .

leads to so–called bifurcated

D H

. . .A′
. . .A′′ or multifurcated hydrogen bonds. Note that sometime the cyclic C2h structure

of (NH3)2 according to Fig. 1e is also termed “bifurcated”, which we do not do here.

[30] R. Preißner, U. Egner, and W. Saenger, FEBS Lett. 288, 192 (1991).

[31] Z. Latajka and S. Scheiner, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 407 (1984).

[32] M. J. Frisch, J. E. Del Bene, J. S. Binkley, and H. F. Schaefer III, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 2279

(1986).

[33] S. Liu, C. E. Dykstra, K. Kolenbrander, and J. M. Lisy, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 2077 (1986).

[34] K. Hirao, T. Fujikawa, H. Konishi, and S. Yamabe, Chem. Phys. Lett. 104, 184 (1984).

[35] K. P. Sagarik, R. Ahlrichs, and S. Brode, Mol.. Phys. 57, 1247 (1986).

[36] Z. Latajka and S. Scheiner, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 341 (1986).

[37] D. D. Nelson, Jr., G. T. Fraser, and W. Klemperer, J. Chem. Phys. 83 6201 (1985).

[38] F.- M. Tao and W. Klemperer, J.. Chem. Phys. 99, 5976 (1993).

[39] D. M. Hassett, C.. J. Marsden, and B. J. Smith, Chem. Phys. Lett. 183, 449 (1991).

[40] M. Havenith, R. C. Cohen, K. L. Busarow, D. H. Gwo, Y. T. Lee, and R. J. Saykally, J.

[41] M. Havenith, H.. Linnartz, E. Zwart, A. Kips, J. J. ter Meulen, and W. L. Meerts, Chem.

Chem. Phys. 94, 4776 (1991).

Phys. Lett. 193, 261 (1992).

[42] J. G. Loeser, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. C. Cohen, M. J. Elrod, D. W. Steyert, R.. J. Saykally,

31

R. E. Bumgarner, and G. A. Blake, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 4727 (1992).

[43] R. J. Saykally and G. A. Blake, Science 259, 1570 (1993).

[44] H. Linnartz, A. Kips, W. L. Meerts, and M. Havenith, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 2449 (1993).

[45] N. Heineking, W. Stahl, E. H. T. Olthof, P. E. S. Wormer, and M. Havenith, J. Chem. Phys.

[46] H. Linnartz, W. L. Meerts, and M. Havenith, Chem. Phys. 193, 327 (1995).

[47] G. Cotti, H. Linnartz, W. L. Meerts, A. van der Avoird, and E. H. T. Olthof, J. Chem. Phys.

102, 8693 (1995).

104, 3898 (1996).

[48] E. H. T. Olthof, A. van der Avoird, and P. E. S. Wormer, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 8430 (1994).

[49] E. H. T. Olthof, A. van der Avoird, P. E. S. Wormer, J. G. Loeser, and R. J. Saykally, J.

Chem. Phys. 101, 8443 (1994).

[50] Note that the results for the 18–dimensional equilibrium structure of the ammonia dimer

reported in Ref. [48] were obtained by (i) keeping the structure of the NH3 monomers rigid,

(ii) solving the remaining six–dimensional vibration–rotation–tunneling problem on a global

potential energy surface, and (iii) adjusting some parameters of this ab initio–based potential

in order to match the observed far–infrared spectrum [42]. Note that recent work on the water

dimer [51] showed that monomer ﬂexibility does play a signiﬁcant role in determining the

vibration–rotation–tunneling spectrum of this dimer. The intramolecular degrees of freedom

of the monomers are also expected to play a role in determining the “experimental” structure

of the ammonia dimer.

[51] C. Leforestier, F. Gatti, R. S. Fellers, and R. J. Saykally, J.. Chem. Phys. 117, 8710 (2002).

[52] M. Behrens, U. Buck, R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Hartmann, and M. Havenith, J. Chem. Phys. 107,

[53] J. S. Lee and S. Y. Park, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 230 (2000).

[54] J. Stalring, M. Sch¨utz, R. Lindh, G. Karlstr¨om, and P.-O. Widmark, Mol. Phys. 100, 3389

7179 (1997).

(2002)

[55] W. Klopper and H. P. L¨uthi, Mol. Phys. 96, 559 (1999).

[56] T. H. Zhu and W. T. Yang, Int. J. Quant. Chem 49, 613 (1994).

[57] M. Kieninger and S. Suhai, J. Comp. Chem. 17, 1508 (1996).

[58] B. S. Jursic, J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 434, 29 (1998).

[59] M. Diraison, G.J. Martyna and M.E. Tuckerman, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1096 (1999).

32

[60] I. Olovsson and D. H. Templeton, Acta Crystallogr. 12, 832 (1959).

[61] R. Boese, N. Niederpr¨um, D. Bl¨aser, A. Maulitz, M. Y. Antipin, and P. R. Mallinson, J.

[62] J. S. Loveday, R. J. Nelmes, W. G. Marshall, J. M. Besson, S. Klotz, and G. Hamel, Phys.

Phys. Chem. B, 101, 5794 (1997).

Rev. Lett. 76, 74 (1996).

[63] A.D. Fortes, J.P. Brodholt, I.G. Wood, and L. Vocadlo, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 5987 (2003).

[64] A. H. Narten, J. Chem.. Phys. 49, 1692 (1968); 66, 3117 (1977).

[65] P. Chieux and H. Bertagnolli, J. Phys. Chem. 88, 3726 (1984).

[66] M. A. Ricci, M. Nardone, F. P. Ricci, C. Andreani and A.. K. Soper, J. Chem. Phys. 102,

7650 (1995).

[67] W. L. Jorgensen and M. Ibrahim, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 102, 3309 (1979).

[68] R. H. Kincald and H. A. Scheraga, J. Phys. Chem. 86, 833 (1982).

[69] R. W. Impey and M. L. Klein, Chem. Phys. Lett. 104, 579 (1984).

[70] S. V. Hannongbua, T. Ishida, E. Spohr, and K. Heinzinger, Z. Naturforsch.. A 43, 572 (1988).

[71] J. Gao, X. Xia and T. F. George, J. Phys. Chem. 97, 9241 (1993).

[72] M. Kiselev, T. Kerdcharoen, S. Hannongbua and K. Heinzinger, Chem. Phys. Lett. 327, 425

(2000).

(2001).

[73] T. A. Beu and U. Buck, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 7848 (2001); see also J. Chem. Phys. 114, 7853

[74] S. Hannongbua, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4707 (2000).

[75] R.. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 (1985).

[76] D. Marx and J. Hutter, Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics: Theory and Implementation in

Modern Methods and Algorithms of Quantum Chemistry, Ed. J. Grotendorst (NIC, FZ J¨ulich,

2000); for downloads see <www.theochem.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/go/cprev.html>.

[77] Y. Liu and M. E. Tuckerman, J. Phys.. Chem. B 105, 6598 (2001).

[78] R. N. Barnett and U. Landman, Phys. Rev. B 48, 2081 (1993).

[79] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98 5648 (1993).

[80] F. A. Hamprecht, A. J. Cohen, D. J. Tozer and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 6264

(1998).

[81] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 8554 (1997).

[82] A. D. Boese and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 114 5497 (2001).

33

[83] D. C. Langreth and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 21, 5469 (1980).

[84] M. Levy and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. A 32, 2010 (1985).

[85] E. H. Lieb and S. Oxford, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 19, 427 (1981).

[86] G. K-L. Chan and N. C. Handy., Phys. Rev. A59, 3075 (1999).

[87] J. P. Perdew and K. Burke, Int. J.. Quantum Chem. 57 309 (1996).

[88] Q. Zhao, R. C. Morrison, and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev.. A 50, 2138 (1994).

[89] G. Menconi, P. J. Wilson, and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 3958 (2001).

[90] http://www-theor.ch.cam.ac.uk/people/nch/ﬁt/; see also supplementary material to [82],

EPAPS Document No. E-JCPSA6-301111.

[91] L. A. Curtiss, K. Raghavachari, P. C. Redfern, and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 7374

[92] J. M. L. Martin and G. De Oliveira, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1843 (1999).

[93] R. A. Kendall, T. H. Dunning, and R. J. Harrison, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 6796 (1992).

[94] MOLPRO is a package of ab initio programs written by H.-J. Werner and P. J. Knowles,

with contributions from J. Alml¨of, R. D. Amos, A. Berning, M. J. O. Deegan, F. Eckert, S.

T. Elbert, C. Hampel, R. Lindh, W. Meyer, A. Nicklass, K. Peterson, R. Pitzer, A. J. Stone,

P. R. Taylor, M. E. Mura, P. Pulay, M. Sch¨utz, H. Stoll, T. Thorsteinsson, and D. L. Cooper.

[95] L. A. Curtiss, K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 7221

[96] S. Parthiban and J. M. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 6014 (2001).

[97] M. B. Sullivan, M. A. Iron, P. C. Redfern, J. M. L. Martin, L. A. Curtiss, and L. Radom, J.

Phys. Chem. A, accepted for publication.

[98] J. Noga and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 7041 (1987), errat. 89, 3401 (1988)

[99] J. F. Stanton, J.. Gauss, J. D. Watts, W. Lauderdale, and R. J. Bartlett (1996) ACES II,

an ab initio program system, incorporating the MOLECULE vectorized molecular integral

program by J. Alml¨of and P. R. Taylor, and a modiﬁed version of the ABACUS integral

derivative package by T. Helgaker, H. J. Aa. Jensen, P. Jørgensen, J. Olsen, and P. R.

(2000).

(1991).

Taylor.

[100] S. A. Kucharski and R. J. Bartlett, Chem. Phys. Lett. 158, 550 (1989); K. Raghavachari, J.

A. Pople, E. S. Replogle, and M. Head-Gordon, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 5579 (1990)

[101] R.. A. Chiles and C. E. Dykstra, J. Chem. Phys. 74, 4544 (1981)

34

[102] N. C. Handy, J. A. Pople, M. Head-Gordon, K. Raghavachari, and G. W. Trucks, Chem.

Phys. Lett. 164, 185 (1989)

[103] M. J. Frisch, et. al. Gaussian 98, Revision A.11 (Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, 1998).

[104] The Cambridge Analytic Derivatives Package (Cadpac),

Issue 6.5, Cambridge, 1998

Developed by R. D. Amos with contributions from I. L. Alberts, J. S. Andrews, S. M.

Colwell, N. C. Handy, D. Jayatikala, P.J. Knowles, R. Kobayashi,K. E. Laidig, G. Laming,

A. M. Lee, P. E. Maslen, C.. W. Murray, P. Palmieri, J. E. Rice, E. D. Simandiras, A. J.

Stone, M..-D. Su, and D. J. Tozer.

[105] A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38 3098 (1988), C. Lee, W. Yang, R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B 37

[106] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[107] J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B. 33 8822 (1986).

[108] J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B. 45 13244 (1992), J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S.

H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson, M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh, C. Fiolhais, Phys. Rev. B. 46 6671

[109] P. J. Wilson, T. J. Bradley, and D.. J. Tozer, J.. Chem. Phys. 115, 9233 (2001).

[110] C. Adamo and V. Barone, Chem. Phys. Lett. 298, 113 (1998).

[111] S. F. Boys and F. Bernardi, Mol. Phys., 19, 553 (1970).

[112] T. H. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 716 (1971).

[113] CPMD Program, J. Hutter, A. Alavi, T. Deutsch, M. Bernasconi, St. Goedecker, D. Marx,

M. Tuckerman, and M. Parrinello, MPI f¨ur Festk¨orperforschung and IBM Zurich Research

[114] W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, Phys. Rev. A 140, 1133 (1965).

[115] S. Goedecker, M. Teter and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev. B 54, 1703 (1996).

[116] E. Tsuchida, Y. Kanada, and M. Tsukada, Chem. Phys. Lett. 311, 236 (1999).

[117] W. Klopper. M. Quack, and A. Suhm, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 10096 (1998).

[118] C. J. Wormald and B. Wurzberger, J. Chem. Thermodyn. 33, 1193 (2001).

[119] J. M. L. Martin, Chem. Phys. Lett. 242, 343 (1995).

[120] See EPAPS Document No. for Tables I-III for diﬀerent weights in order to determine the

HCTH/407+ functional to give the correct description of bonding in the ammonia dimer.

[121] The experimental RDFs that are plotted in Fig. 3 were derived from the diﬀraction data of

785 (1988).

(1992).

Laboratory.

35

Ref. [66] but using a more sophisticated procedure; private communiation of A..K. Soper.

[122] A. Geiger, F. H. Stillinger, and A. Rahman J. Chem. Phys. 70, 4185 (1979).

[123] A. Luzar and D. Chandler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 928 (1996); Nature (London) 379, 53 (1996);

[124] H. Xu and B. J. Berne, J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 11929 (2001); H. Xu, H. A. Stern and B.

A. Luzar, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 10663 (2000).

Berne, J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 2054 (2002).

[125] F. W. Starr, J. K. Nielsen and H. E. Stanley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2294 (1999); Phys. Rev.

E 62, 579 (2000).

[126] A. Chandra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 768 (2000).

[127] S. Balasubramanian, S. Pal, and B. Bagchi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002).

[128] M. Ferrario, M. Haughney,I. R. McDonald, and M. L. Klein, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 5156 (1990).

[129] F. H. Stillinger, Adv. Chem. Phys. 31, 1 (1975); Science 209, 451 (1980).

[130] J. Kroon and J. A. Kanters, Nature 248, 667 (1974).

[131] D. E.. O’Reilly, E. M. Peterson and C. E. Scheie, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 4072 (1973).

[132] R. W. Impey, P. A. Madden, and I. R. McDonald, Mol. Phys. 46, 513–539 (1982); see in

[133] E. H. Hardy, A. Zygar, M. D. Zeidler, M. Holz, and F. D. Sacher, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 3174

particular Sect. 5.

(2001).

[134] M. Haughney, M. Ferrario and I. R. McDonald, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 4934 (1987).

[135] R. D. Mountain, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 3084 (1995).

[136] D. C. Rapaport, Mol. Phys. 50, 1151 (1983).

36

TABLE I: Dissociation energies De (in kJ/mol) according to Wn theories for several hydrogen

bonded dimers compared to the best available estimates from Refs. [55, 117, 118].

Molecule W1 W2

reference

(HF)2

(H2O)2

19.13 19.10 19.10 ± 0.2 [117]

20.93 20.84 21.1 ± 0.3 [55]

(H2O)(NH3) 26..94 26.82 27.4 ± 3 [118]

37

TABLE II: Relative energies (in cm−1) according to Wn theories for the ammonia dimer at the
respective CCSD(T)/A′PVQZ optimised structures compared to the global minimum; for the latter

the dissociation energies De (in kJ/mol) into isolated optimized monomers is reported in the last

line. In column 2, and column 4, standard W1 and W2 results are reported, while in column 3, a

counterpoise-correction is employed on each step in the W2 calculation.

Points on PES W1 (w BSSE) W2(w/o BSSE) W2(w BSSE) best estimate

Cs (staggered)

23.4

C2h

0.7

5.9

linear (eclipsed)

69.6

linear (staggered) 71.8

Global Minimum

23.5

2.8

67.5

69.9

23 ± 5

3.5 ± 3

67 ± 5

70 ± 5

Cs (eclipsed)

13.21

13.15

13.13

13.1 ± 0.2

38

TABLE III: Various ﬁrst principles results for the dissociation energies De (in kJ/mol) of the
eclipsed Cs global minimum and relative energies (in cm−1) of several structures of the ammonia
dimer w.r..t. the global minimum. All data, except that for W2, were obtained using an A′PVTZ

basis set at fully optimised geometries including the counterpoise correction. W1 and our best

estimates for these values are reported in Table II.

Geometry

Cs (ecl.) Cs (sta.) C2h

lin (ecl.)

lin (sta.)

Type

De

diﬀerence diﬀerence diﬀerence diﬀerence

Method

in kJ/mol in cm−1

in cm−1

in cm−1

in cm−1

W2

13.13

CCSD(T)

12.22

CCSD

MP2

HF

BLYP

PBE

τ -HCTH

B3LYP

B97-1

11.31

12.27

7.58

9.11

13.05

10.96

10.18

12.73

τ -HCTH hyb. 11.27

HCTH/407+ 13.18

23.5

18.2

18.4

20.3

12.6

5.7

9.2

6.2

5.2

3.3

11.2

9.4

18.0

HCTH/120

9.48

HCTH/407

11.23

11.0

2.8

2.8

3.3

2.9

23.6

97.8

91..5

75.1

27.0

141.8

76.6

61.1

99.9

4.0

67.5

62.8

60.7

71.8

32.3

36.5

42.1

31.1

39.0

29.9

40.2

41.5

37.7

51.5

69.9

63.8

59.4

72.7

34.4

36.4

41.4

32.4

41.1

29.6

40.1

41.6

37.2

53.6

39

TABLE IV: Various ﬁrst principles results for representative structural parameters of the ammonia
dimer, see Fig. 1, using the A′PVTZ basis set.

Geometry

Cs (ecl.)

C2h

Cs (ecl.)

Cs (sta.)

Type

N· · ·H Distance N· · ·H Distance HNN Angle HNN Angle

best estimate 2.31

CCSD(T)1

2.302

CCSD(T)

2.294

CCSD

MP2

HF

BLYP

PBE

τ -HCTH

B3LYP

B97-1

2.331

2.286

2.541

2.341

2.249

2.311

2.322

2.298

HCTH/120

2.427

HCTH/407

2.493

τ -HCTH hyb. 2.269

HCTH/407+ 2.493

1 A′PVQZ basis set

20.7

19.86

16.40

16.76

17.32

13.41

9.73

9.90

10.27

13.71

8.40

10.50

10.90

9.57

16.95

13.2

13.09

12.43

12.39

13.28

9.69

8.55

8.47

8.65

7.45

8.89

9.00

8.24

10.25

11.33

2.52

2.522

2.527

2.562

2..520

2..772

2.610

2.512

2.736

2.773

2.645

2.573

2.555

2.549

2.754

40

TABLE V: Expansion coeﬃcients of the HCTH/407+ functional compared to the coeﬃcients of

the HCTH/407 functional.

Functional HCTH/407+ HCTH/407

c1 = cXσ,0

1.08018

1.08184

c2 = cCσσ,0 0.80302

1..18777

c3 = cCαβ,0 0.73604

0.58908

c4 = cXσ,1

-0.4117

-0..5183

c5 = cCσσ,1

-1.0479

-2.4029

c6 = cCαβ,1 3.0270

c7 = cXσ,2

2.4368

c8 = cCσσ,2 4.9807

c9 = cCαβ,2

-10.075

c10 = cXσ,3 1.3890

c11 = cCσσ,3 -12.890

c12 = cCαβ,3 20.611

c13 = cXσ,4

-1.3529

c14 = cCσσ,4 9.6446

4.4237

3.4256

5.6174

-19.222

-2.6290

-9.1792

42.572

2.2886

6.2480

c15 = cCαβ,4 -29.418

-42.005

41

TABLE VI: Comparison of the errors of the 407+ ﬁt set for the HCTH/407+ and previous published functionals. Also included are the

errors for properties of nine hydrogen-bonded systems (see text)..

407+ Set of molecules

Hydrogen-Bonded Systems

Property

RMS Energy

Gradient RMS Dissociation Energy RMS H-Bond Shift RMS Frequency Shift

4
2

Unit

[kcal/mol]

P
[a.u.]

HCTH/120

9.1

HCTH/407

7.8

HCTH/407+ 8.0

B3LYP

BLYP

BP86

9.4

9.7

16.4

11.51

11.91

11.96

12.00

19.30

17.05

[%]

8.5

7.5

10.3

11.0

16.4

22.3

[%]

26.0

16.7

16.8

30.2

42.1

81.9

[%]

29.1

14.8

12.8

35.0

42.9

68.3

TABLE VII: Dynamical properties of liquid ammonia. The diﬀusion coeﬃcient, relaxation times
and the inverse rate constants are expressed in units of 10−5 cm2sec−1, ps and ps, respectively.

Note that all numbers given refer to the fully deuterated species ND3.

Quantity HCTH/407+ BLYP Experiment

8.75a, 5.95b

D

τ dipole
1

τ N H
1

τ HH
1
τ dipole
2

τ N H
2

τ HH
2
τ exp
2

τHB

5.23

0.52

0.37

0.34

0.18

0.15

0.15

0.07

1/kshort

0.10

1/klong

0.62

5.44

0.85

0.58

0.54

0.27

0.22

0.22

0.10

0.16

0.60

a at 275 K,

b at 252 K

0.26a, 0.35b

43

Fig. 1. The ﬁve relevant optimized structures of the ammonia dimer; dotted lines are only

guides to the eye..

Fig.

2. The potential energy proﬁle obtained from W2 Theory (accurate reference

calculations) in comparison to that obtained from HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals at

the ﬁve optimized structures, see insets, from Fig. 1. Note that the proﬁles obtained from

other GGA functionals such as PBE are qualitatively similar to that of BLYP.

Fig.3. The atom-atom radial distribution functions. The solid, dashed and the dotted curves

show the HCTH/407+, BLYP, and the experimental [66, 121] results, respectively.

Fig.4. The fraction P (n) of molecules having a certain number of accepted nacceptor and

donated ndonor hydrogen bonds, see panels (a) and (b), respectively. Panel (c) shows

the fraction of hydrogen atoms that donates a certain number of hydrogen bonds. The

squares and the triangles represent the results for the HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals,

respectively, and the dashed lines are drawn to guide the eye.

Fig.5. The distribution of the cosine of the N· · ·N–H angle for H atoms that belong to the

nearest neighbours. Panel (a) shows the distribution for hydrogen bonded H atoms (i.e..
R(N H) < 2.7 ˚A) and panels (b) and (c) show, respectively, the results for non–hydrogen–
bonded H atoms that appear in the region 2.7 ˚A < R(N H) < 3.7 ˚A and 3.7 ˚A < R(N H)
< 4.7 ˚A. The solid and the dashed curves show the results for the HCTH/407+ and BLYP

functionals, respectively.

Fig.6. The time dependence various orientational correlation functions, see text for

deﬁnitions and further details. The solid and the dashed curves show the results for the

HCTH/407+ and BLYP functionals, respectively.

Fig.7. The time dependence of various hydrogen bond correlation functions, see text for

deﬁnitions and further details. The diﬀerent curves are labelled as in Fig.6.

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

linear eclipsed

linear staggered

Fig. 1a

Fig. 1b

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

Cs eclipsed

Fig. 1c

Cs staggered

Fig. 1d

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

   2.522

   2.522

C2h

Fig. 1e

FIG. 1: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

   2.522

   2.522

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

W2 (ref.)
HCTH/407+
BLYP

]
1
-
m
c
[
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

100

80

60

40

20

0

linear eclipsed Cs eclipsed

Cs staggered linear staggered

C2h
Geometry

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N
M O L D E N

defaults used                           

                                        

point  0                                

                                        

                                        

                                        

FIG. 2: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

(a)

(b)

(c)

3

2

1

0

2

1

0

2

1

)
r
(

N
N

g

)
r
(

H
H

g

1.5

0.5

)
r
(

H
N

g

1.5

0.5

0

0

2

4

6

r (Å)

FIG. 3: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

)

r
o
t
p
e
c
c
a

n
(
P

)

r
o
n
o
d

n
(
P

)

r
o
n
o
d
-
H

n
(
P

(a)

(b)

(c)

0

0

1

2

3

4

n

FIG. 4: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

16

12

8

4

0

4

3

2

1

0

4

3

2

1

 

)
θ
s
o
c
(
P

 

)
θ
s
o
c
(
P

 

)
θ
s
o
c
(
P

(a)

(b)

(c)

0
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

cos θ

FIG. 5: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

l=1

l=1

l=1

)
t
(

e
l
o
p
i
d

l

C
 
n
l

)
t
(

H
N

-

l

 

C
n
l

)
t
(

H
H

-

l

C
 
n
l

0

-1

-2

-3

0

-1

-2

-3

0

-1

-2

-3

0

(a)

(c)

(e)

l=2

l=2

l=2

(b)

(d)

(f)

0.2

0.4

0.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

t (ps)

t (ps)

FIG. 6: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

)
t
(

B
H

 

S
n
l

)
t
(

B
H

 

C
n
l

)
t
(

B
H
N

0

-2

-4

0

0

-1

-2

-3

0

0.9

0.6

0.3

0

0

(a)

(b)

(c)

3

3

0.1

0.2

0.3

1

1

2

2

t (ps)

FIG. 7: Boese et al, Journal of Chemical Physics

