3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The unreasonable accuracy of the Jastrow approach in many-body physics

Niels R. Walet∗ and R. F. Bishop†
Department of Physics, UMIST, P.O. Box 88, Manchester M60 1QD, UK
(Dated: 25th July 2013)

We investigate in a simple model whether a Jastrow-based approach for a many-body system
containing two-body interactions can be exact. By comparison with recent assertions to the contrary,
we ﬁnd that in general the exact wave function is not purely two-body correlated. Nonetheless, we
show that the energy estimate obtained from the calculations is as accurate as it can possibly be,
suggesting why Jastrow wave functions are such a good choice.

PACS numbers: 31.15.Pf,71.10.-w,31.10.+Z,31.25.Eb

A long-standing and ongoing fundamental problem in
quantum physics is the search for general methods to pro-
vide accurate descriptions of strongly interacting systems
with many degrees of freedom, starting from a micro-
scopic Hamiltonian. One of the ﬁrst such broadly based
techniques, which is still in widespread use, was intro-
duced by Feenberg [1]. He generalized a similar varia-
tional approach of Jastrow [2], the basic idea of which is
that in a strongly correlated N -body system the wave
function may be approximated as the product of two
parts. The ﬁrst is a simple “uncorrelated” part which
incorporates the correct quantum statistics (e.g., a Slater
determinant for fermions). The second describes the cor-
relations and is a product of pairwise Jastrow factors,
which depends only on the interparticle separations.

Many, if not most, of the key methods in modern quan-
tum many-body theory are based on similar ideas, but
often with simple but subtle diﬀerences which have deep
implications, as we elaborate below. For example, the
variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method often employs
a parametrized Jastrow-correlated wave function which
is optimized using a statistical approach. Although the
VMC method is not intrinsically tied to Jastrow wave
functions, their usefulness has been proven empirically by
the high level of accuracy that can be reached with such
a simple form of trial wave function in many applications
in nuclear physics and elsewhere [3]. Many authors in
many diﬀerent ﬁelds have attempted to understand the
surprisingly accurate results obtained by Jastrow trial
wave functions. For example, Gaudoin et al. [4] have
shown how by generalizing the random phase approxi-
mation of the electron gas to the inhomogeneous case, a
Slater-Jastrow trial wave function arises rather naturally.
They also showed how the uncorrelated Slater determi-
nant contains optimal orbitals which are close both to
standard Hartree-Fock orbitals and to orbitals obtained
from density-functional theory within the local density
approximation, even though neither of these latter ap-
proaches includes Jastrow factors a priori.

Although the use of such simple Jastrow-correlated
many-body wave functions has been seen to give a large
part of the correlation energy in many diverse applica-
tions, one would also like to improve the method. Sev-

eral such reﬁnements have been widely used. Firstly,
one may extend the two-body correlations to depend
also on internal quantum numbers such as spin. This
is particularly important in cases where the interactions
are state-dependent, such as in nuclear physics. State-
dependence in the two-body correlators turns them ef-
fectively into operators. The fact that the parameters
of a given particle occur in many of the Jastrow factors
then leads to them not commuting between themselves,
and hence the product of N (N − 1)/2 correlation oper-
ators needs to be symmetrized. This considerably com-
plicates the formalism, and the Fermi hypernetted chain
(FHNC) method [5] is one approach that deals with it.
It is based on a cluster expansion of the Jastrow cor-
relations, and the method has proven to be quite accu-
rate. An alternative to the FHNC method for Hamil-
tonians which include tensor and other spin-dependent
interactions has been developed by Schmidt and Fantoni
[6], using a purely numerical approach. A second exten-
sion of the simplest Jastrow scheme is the inclusion of
the product of all 3-body scalar cluster correlation func-
i<j<k f (rij , rjk, rki), and similar products of n-
tions,
body cluster correlation functions with n > 3, as well as
the Jastrow product of all 2-body correlation functions,
i<j f (rij ). Thirdly, the more general method of cor-
related basis functions (CBF) [1, 5, 7], which employs a
Q
correlated basis rather than a single trial wave function as
above, is one of the two most successful universal many-
body methods available today. The correlation operator
in CBF calculations is commonly taken as a product of a
state-dependent part and a scalar Jastrow-Feenberg part.

Q

The main competitor to the many-body techniques
outlined above is the coupled cluster method (CCM)
[8].
It is based on describing the correlations in terms
of exponentiated independent excitations, which are
parametrized as multiconﬁgurational creation operators
with respect to some suitable reference state. The CCM
thereby completely avoids the complications arising from
the overlapping products of correlation functions inher-
ent in the Jastrow method. A huge advantage is that
it is now much easier to deal with state dependence,
since the issue of non-commutativity of the correlation
operators never arises. A corresponding disadvantage is

that it is much more diﬃcult to deal with such extreme
correlations as arise in hard-core systems in the second-
quantized representation that provides the natural frame-
work for the CCM than it is in the ﬁrst-quantized rep-
resentation in which the Jastrow and CBF methods are
most naturally expressed.

Both the CBF method and the CCM have been widely
applied in many diﬀerent areas of quantum many-body
physics outside the ﬁeld of nuclear physics to which both
can trace their origins. For example, the CCM has found
many applications in quantum chemistry, where it is the
method of ﬁrst choice for very accurate descriptions of
highly correlated atoms and molecules (see, e.g., Ref.
[9]). Recently, in this context, an attempt was made
[10] to extend the CCM to include more general excita-
tions than those generated by exponentiated independent
two-particle/two-hole excitations.

This extension is tantamount to the use of state-
dependent Jastrow wave functions, although the equa-
tions to be solved diﬀer slightly from the usual varia-
tional ones, as discussed more fully below. There are
now claims in the literature that this method can give
the exact ground state wave function for systems inter-
acting via pairwise forces [10, 11]. We shall argue here
that although the method can certainly be extremely ac-
curate, it is not in general exact.

Our fundamental concern is thus twofold: why is the
Jastrow method so accurate, and what limits its accu-
racy? One obvious such limit is clearly any constraint on
the parametrisation of the correlation functions. How-
ever, the key issue is that even if we use the most general
parametrisation possible, can the Jastrow method be ex-
act? In view of our earlier discussion, it would clearly be
surprising if it were always exact, but in recent papers
Nooijen [10] and Piecuch and his collaborators [11] have
claimed that this is the case. Their basic idea is to work
in a ﬁnite part of occupation-number space, and obtain
equations for the coeﬃcients in a second-quantized two-
body operator that speciﬁes the correlations. Although
there are an equal number of unknowns and equations, in
practice there seems to be a large degeneracy to the solu-
tions. Nevertheless, by tackling semi-realistic problems
they ﬁnd such a high accuracy that the method seems
exact.
In this letter we analyse their method, and we
argue that such high accuracy is intrinsic to the Jastrow
approach underlying their calculations. In particular, we
analyse a simple model with the aim of shedding some
light on the issues raised above.

In the original Jastrow approach a correlated N -

particle wave function is decomposed as

Ψα(r1, . . . , rN ) =

f (rij )

Φα(r1, . . . , rN )

,

(1)

i<j
(cid:0)Y

(cid:1)

where f (rij ) incorporates the eﬀects of short-range cor-
relations between the particles, and Φ is a “simple” wave
function, typically Hartree or Hartree-Fock, which also

2

incorporates internal quantum numbers such as spin,
etc., which we collectively denote by the label “α”.

We now rewrite the product of correlation functions in
terms of a sum, by means of an exponential representa-
tion,

f (rij) = exp

u(rij )

(2)

.
(cid:19)

i<j
Y

i<j

(cid:18)X

The sum in the exponent can be recognized as a special
case of a general two-body operator. If we look at state-
dependent correlations which involve internal degrees of
freedom as well as relative coordinates, the correlated
wave function is characterized by a Jastrow operator,

|Ψi = exp

ˆT2

|Φi ,

(3)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)
where the correlator ˆT2 is a general two-body operator.
In the work of Nooijen [10] it has been argued that
Eq. (3) represents the exact ground state for any two-
body Hamiltonian. Although the examples studied re-
cently [11, 12] provide numerical support for this method,
they are neither rigorous nor transparent. This is par-
tially because they involve realistic or semi-realistic ap-
plications, where the limitations and successes of the ap-
proach are less evident, and partially because, as in most
quantum-chemistry problems, the results are largely per-
turbative, and thus do not provide a rigorous test of the
general method.

We can easily derive the form of Jastrow’s method
introduced by Nooijen for use in a ﬁnite conﬁguration
space. This starts from a general Jastrow operator in
i ti ˆOi, where ˆOi is a complete set of two-
the form ˆT =
body operators (we shall also include one-body operators
in our analysis, but the principle remains the same). We
label a complete normalised basis in the space by |ni,
with |0i = |Φi. The ground-state wave function is as-
sumed to take the form

P

|Ψi = e

ˆT |Φi ,

ˆH |Ψi = E |Ψi

,

(4)

where |Φi is a simple reference state. One then evaluates
the energy using a technique similar to that used in the
coupled cluster method,

E = hΦ| e− ˆT ˆHe

ˆT |Φi

.

(5)

We now use the fact that if e ˆT |0i is an eigenstate of the
Hamiltonian, it must satisfy the equations [13]

0 = hΦ| e

ˆT † ˆOi ˆHe

ˆT |Φi − E hΦ| e

ˆT † ˆOie

ˆT |Φi

.

(6)

Actually, very similar equations follow from the varia-
tional approach to the Jastrow problems. By minimising
the energy

E =

hΦ| e ˆT † ˆHe ˆT |Φi
hΦ| e ˆT † e ˆT |Φi

,

(7)

and using hermiticity, we get Eq. (6), apart from the
fact we must use Eq. (7) for E rather than the similarity
transformed expression in Eq. (5).

Finally, one can use the energy relation (5) combined
with completeness to write the basic equations (6) in the
form derived in Nooijen’s original work

hΦ| e

ˆT † ˆOie

ˆT |ni hn| e− ˆT ˆHe

ˆT |Φi = 0

.

(8)

Xn6=0

Since the number of equations in Eqs. (6,8) equals the
number of unknowns in the operator ˆT , one might expect
that these equations have a solution. Since the equations
are highly non-linear, there is no general proof of this
assertion, and its validity must depend on the nature of
the Hamiltonian. One may argue that if |Φi is close to
an eigenfunction of ˆH, a perturbative argument will show
that there may well be a solution to the problem.

One of the reasons to believe that the Jastrow method
may be exact is based on the technique of Euclidean ﬁl-
tering, as disccused in Refs. [10, 11]. This starts from the
fact that the wave function

|ψ(t)i = e− ˆHt |Φi/ hΦ| e−2 ˆHt |Φi1/2

(9)

approaches the exact one as t → ∞, and that it is obvi-
ously a two-body correlated wave function for all ﬁnite t.
If, in the limit t → ∞, the wave function |ψ(t)i remains a
two-body wave function, it must be a solution to Eqs. (6).
For this argument to be correct, it is a necessary and suf-
ﬁcient condition that the set of two-body-correlated wave
functions is complete. The non-trivial nature of such a
statement can be seen from the fact that we try to ﬁnd
a set of ﬁnite parameters in the operator ˆT that can de-
scribe the same physics as obtained by the limit t → ∞
in Eq. (9). Actually, what we shall do below is provide an
indirect proof that the exact solution for a simple prob-
lem, which by the ﬁltering argument must also be the
limit of |ψ(t)i, is not two-body correlated.

A standard test-bed for many-body calculations is the
Lipkin model. This is a two-level model, where fermions
can occupy either of two levels.
±,i
the creation operator of a fermion in state i in either
the upper (+) or lower level (−), the Hamiltonian of this
model can be written in the form

If we denote by a†

ˆH = J0 + λ

+ + J 2
J 2
−

,

(10)

where

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

J0 =

Ω

1
2

J+ =

i=1
X

+,ia+,i − a†
a†

−,ia−,i

,

i=1
X
(cid:0)
Ω
a†
+,ia−,i,

(cid:1)

J− = J †

+ .

(11)

The fact that only SU (2) generators appear means that
we can diagonalise states within diﬀerent irreps of this

3

algebra; here we shall concentrate on the one with J =
Ω/2. Hence we shall only be considering the states

|M = −J + ni =

(J+)n

a†
−,i |0i

. (12)

(2J − n)!
n!(2J)!

s

2J

i=1
Y

There are only a small number of two-body operators
in the relevant space, and most of these do not respect
the SU (2) dynamical symmetry of the Hamiltonian. This
leads to the only allowed two-body operators being J 2
+,
−, J+J−, J−J+, and J 2
J 2
0 . The last three operators are
overcomplete. Thus, when acting in the basis of Eq. (12,)
all three of them correspond to a quadratic function in n.
From the combination we can then construct a constant,
linear and quadratic piece. The constant part is irrele-
vant for time-independent problems, and we only need
the linear and quadratic parts. These can be reached
with the operators J 2
0 and J0 as well, which are what we
shall use. The single-particle operator J0 does not seem
to play a key role. We see no a priori reason why this op-
erator is irrelevant in the current calculation, apart from
the fact that in the Jastrow method one-body operators
correspond to a general modiﬁcation of the single particle
wave functions.

We now attempt to investigate perturbatively whether
the result from Nooijen’s method agrees with the exact
result. We write

ti =

t(n)
i λn

,

(13)

∞

n=1
X

and use as our reference state |Φi = |M = −Ji, the ex-
act eigenstate for λ = 0. There are three ways to solve
the problem. Firstly, we can solve Eqs. (5) and (8) order
by order in λ, which we shall refer to as “the solution to
Nooijen’s equations”. Alternatively, we can either com-
bine Eq. (8) with Eq. (7) to “solve the variational prob-
lem”, or we can write down the exact wave function in
Rayleigh-Schr¨odinger perturbation theory, including all
the arbitrary constants related to its normalisation, and
require that eT |0i is equal to this wave function order
by order in λ (equality of wave functions). All three ap-
proaches only involve matrix algebra, which can easily
be done with a computer-algebra package. The result in
each case is very instructive.

We look at these solutions as we vary J from 1 to 8,
i.e., we look at even particle numbers only. The num-
ber of wave functions mixing in the ground state is easily
seen to be J +1, so the number of parameters in the wave
function changes from larger than the number of compo-
nents, to much less than the number of components. Let
us ﬁrst study the equality of the wave functions.

For J = 1, 2, 3 we have no problems, and all indica-
tions are that the wave function is exact. For all the
other cases investigated we can only have equality of the
If we insert this
wave functions up to 7th order in λ.

wave function in the energy expressions of Eqs. (5,7) we
ﬁnd that the energy for the similarity transformed result
is accurate to the same order, whereas the variational
estimate using the wave function is actually accurate to
14th order [14].

The solution to Nooijen’s equations is equally illumi-
nating. First of all there appears to be an enormous
degeneracy to these equations. An obvious source for
such degeneracy is in the choice of normalisation of the
wave function. Indeed, using intermediate normalisation
drastically reduces the number of independent variables,
but it doesn’t fully lift the degeneracy. We seem to be
able to choose the coeﬃcient of J0 to equal zero, without
any loss of generality. We can also impose the require-
ments that the coeﬃcients of J 2
+ and J 2
− are odd in λ,
and those of J 2
0 even. [The problems cited above are to-
tally independent of this choice, as has been checked for
a few representative cases.] An interesting observation is
that the these equations have two solutions at order λ8,
one of which leads to an inconsistent set of equations at
the next order; the other continues. In the cases J ≤ 3 it
continues forever, as far as we can see, and when J > 3
the solutions terminate at order λ13 where we again get
an inconsistent set of equations. Surprisingly, this leads
to a more accurate energy than above, up to order λ12
(which is almost, but not quite, as accurate as the Jas-
trow method). Note, however, that the lack of a solution
to Nooijen’s equations gives rise to some problems. The
deviations from zero may actually be hard to see if λ is
small enough, which may be an indication that for almost
perturbative problems this is not such a bad approach af-
ter all.

Finally we can also solve the variational equations. It
comes as no surprise that, whatever the number of par-
ticles, we can solve this problem. When J > 3 the vari-
ational energy starts deviating from the exact result at
order λ16, as expected.

From the simple model discussed here we can draw
some conclusions on the use of a Jastrow-like method in
conﬁguration space. We have disproven the idea that
it can be generally exact, but to our surprise it seems
to be exact when the number of parameters in the cor-
relation operator is larger than the number of parame-
ters in a general wave function. Due to the non-linearity
of the method, this is already a highly nontrivial state-
ment. When the method breaks down the wave function
is still correct to seventh order in perturbation theory,
which leads to a fourteenth-order accuracy for the Jas-
If we input this wave function into an
trow method.
estimate of the energy based on a similarity transform
of the Hamiltonian, we get a result that is only correct
to the same order as the wave function is correct.
If
we determine the coeﬃcients by what we called “Nooi-
jen’s equations” the accuracy of the energy can be im-
proved to twelfth order - only a little less accurate than

4

the benchmark variational estimate! Nonetheless, if one
deals carefully with the enormous degeneracy, numerical
solution of the equations can be a valid approximation
to a many-body system. The problem is that there is
only an approximate solution to the equations, and so
the method only works if the residual interaction is small
in one sense or another, as is often the case in quantum-
chemical calculations.

In conclusion, on the one hand we have the disappoint-
ing result that the Jastrow wave function is not in general
exact for many-body systems interacting via two-body
forces, in contrast to recent claims to the contrary. How-
ever, the Jastrow wave functions proposed in the new
method may well be so accurate that in numerical ap-
proximations they are suﬃcient to obtain energies of the
accuracy required, for example, in quantum chemistry
calculations. It is surprising that the energy estinate of
Eq. (5) is almost as accurate as the optimal variational
estimate of Eq. (7). We see no intrinsic reason for this.
Nevertheless, even when the parameters are derived from
a solution to Nooijen’s equations, its is more acuurate to
use the variational estimate Eq. (7).

∗ Electronic address: Niels.Walet@umist.ac.uk
† Electronic address: R.F.Bishop@umist.ac.uk

[1] J. W. Clark and E. Feenberg, Phys. Rev. 113, 388 (1959);
E. Feenberg, Theory of Quantum Fluids (Academic press,
New York, 1969).

[2] R. Jastrow, Phys. Rev. 98, 1479 (1955).
[3] D. M. Ceperley and M. H. Kalos, in Monte Carlo Meth-
ods in Statistical Physics, ed. K. Binder (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1979).

[4] R. Gaudoin et al., Phys. Rev. B 63, 115115 (2001).
[5] J. W. Clark, in Progress in Particle and Nuclear Physics
2, ed. D. H. Wilkinson (Pergamon, Oxford, 1979).
[6] K. E. Schmidt and S. Fantoni, Phys. Lett. B 446, 99

[7] S. Fantoni and V. R. Pandharipande, Phys. Rev. C 37,

(1999).

1697 (1988).

[8] R. F. Bishop, Theor. Chim. Acta 80, 95 (1991); in: “Mi-
croscopic Quantum Many-Body Theories and Their Ap-
plication,” J. Navarro and A. Polls (eds.), Lecture Notes
in Physics 510, (Springer, Berlin, 1998), p. 1.
[9] R. J. Bartlett, J. Phys. Chem. 93, 1697 (1989).
[10] M. Nooijen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2108 (2000).
[11] P. Piecuch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 113001 (2003).
[12] T. Van Voorhis and M. Head-Gordon, J. Chem. Phys.
115, 5033 (2001); M. Nooijen and V. Lotrich, J. Chem.
Phys. 113, 4549 (2000)

[13] H. Nakatsuji, Phys. Rev. A 14, 41 (1976); J. Chem. Phys.
115, 2465 (2001); J. Chem. Phys. 116, 1811 (2002).
[14] It is quite straightforward to understand this using a
standard perturbative argument which can be used to
show that the deviation of the energy is quadratic in any
small ﬂuctuation around the exact solution.

