3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exploring the Harmony between
Theory and Computation
- Toward a uniﬁed electronic
structure theory

Liqiang Wei and Alexander Dalgarno
Institute for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

February 20, 2014

Abstract

The physical aspect of a general perturbation theory is explored.
Its role as a physical principle for understanding the interaction among
the matters with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy is appreciated.
It is
shown that the general perturbation theory can not only be used for
understanding the various electronic phenomena including the nature
of chemical bonds but also serve as a uniﬁed theme for constructing
general electronic structure theories and calculation schemes.

Perturbation theory is regarded as one of the two major approaches for

approximately solving quantum many-body problems. However, its deeper

physical aspect is far more than it is currently being used just as a math-

ematical tool for solving the complicated issues. All the fundamental laws

in physics are variational in nature, including the Schr¨odinger equation in

1

quantum mechanics. Nevertheless, the perturbation theory provides a prin-

ciple that governs how the matters with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy interact.

In fact, a general perturbation theory itself contains two ingredients. On one

hand, the degenerate or near-degenerate situation is not a perturbation at

all but actually constitutes a strong physical interaction. On the other hand,

the non-degenerate case is a real perturbation in the common sense. We

believe that, it is this equal or near energy physical mixing that governs the

interaction among the matters with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy. Of course, it

is also the physical principle based on which a uniﬁed chemical bond theory

can be built.

Electrons are quantum mechanical particles which possess wave-particle

duality. The binding process of the electrons associated with some atoms,

or equivalently, the interaction of atomic orbitals for the formation of a

molecule, can be regarded as a wave interference phenomenon. The inter-

action of intra-atomic orbitals with the same energy or near energies is the

Pauling’s hybridization process, which determines the direction of chemical

bonds, while the interaction of inter -atomic orbitals with the same energy or

near energies determines the actual formation of chemical bonds. These are

the nature of chemical bonds [1,2]. The immediate beneﬁt for recognizing

this near energy principle in determining the formation of chemical bonds

is that it gives a better understanding of many previously developed very

important structure concepts such as multi-center chemical bonds, multiple

chemical bonds, resonance structure, Walsh diagrams, and avoided crossing,

and therefore incorporate them into one qualiatative theoretical framework

[1,3-5].

2

More important in realizing this fundamental physics for understanding

how the matters interact is that it also provides a physical foundation for

quantitatively investigating the electronic structure of molecules, including

large systems such as molecular materials and biomolecules. We are going to

have a harmony between theory and computation.

Energy scale principle in Rayleigh − Ritz variatioanl approach

Rayleigh-Ritz variational method is most commonly used for solving

eigenvalue problem in quantum mechanics. Its relation to the general per-

turbation theory, including the degenerate situation, has also been worked

out mathematically during the 1960’s [6]. However, the physical implication

of this relation, especially its role as a guidance in constructing the elec-

tronic structure calculation schemes has not been explored and appreciated

yet. First of all, as long as the reference Hamiltonian which produces the

basis functions is made as close as possible to the full Hamiltonian, then the

dimension for the Rayleigh-Ritz variational expansion will be made as small

as possible. Secondly, if the basis functions have the closest energies of the

reference Hamiltonian, then they will have the strongest mixing and make

the greatest contribution to the combined state, while the others with larger

energy diﬀerences will have smaller or even negligible contributions. These

are the situations we qualitatively discussed above for the general pertur-

bation theory. We term this as the energy scale principle in Rayleigh-Ritz

variational approach.

(a) Molecular fragmentation and basis set construction

The basis set approach is a most popular and natural way for solving the

single particle equation such as Hartree-Fock equation. Physically, it reﬂects

3

a composite relation between the molecule and its constituent atoms. To

have an overall accurate electronic structure calculation, the ﬁrst necessary

step is to get the reliable and converged molecular orbitals [7].

However, since the current basis functions like most commonly used con-

tracted Gaussians are primarily a reﬂection of electrons in single atoms in

the molecule, it leaves the perturbed part of the molecular Fock operator

very large. That is why the polarization functions, including some expanded

ones such as the correlation consistent basis sets, have to be introduced to
get good computation results [8]. Nevertheless, the O(N 4) scaling, where N

is the number of basis functions, has become a major bottleneck in quantum

chemistry calculation, especially for the large systems.

To overcome this diﬃculty, the energy-scale principle described above can

come for a help. If we construct the basis functions which are the reﬂection

of molecular fragments so that the corresponding reference Hamiltonian is

as close as possible to the whole molecular Fock operator, then the dimen-

sion of basis set expansion can be made as small as possible. This is going

to be a challenge work but will be mathematical in nature. The basis set

superposition eﬀects (BSSE) is an example [9].

Similar situation occurs in the quantum molecular scattering calculation,

where the channels are used as the basis functions for solving the Schr¨odinger

equation, or its integral form, Lippmann-Schwinger equation with proper

boundary conditions. Since there are often very large diﬀerences between

the channels and the scattering waves for the whole reactive system in the

interaction regions, the dimension for their expansion is particularly large,

which causes the quantum scattering calculation prohibitively expansive for

4

all but the smallest systems. The ideas suggested here can obviously be

utilized for remedying this deﬁciency.

(b)General multi − reference electronic structure theory

To get ﬁnal accurate solution to the Schr¨odinger equation for the many-

electron systems with a non-separable two-body Coulomb interaction, it is

most likely that we have to go beyond the single particle description [10-

13]. Mathematically, the full conﬁguration interaction (FCI) gives exact

answers [14]. However, it is computationally prohibitive and possibly will

never been strictly realized. The energy scale principle described above can

also be applied in this conﬁguration level. A general electronic structure

theory should be multi-conﬁguration or multi-reference in nature [15-20].

First, there exists a strong conﬁguration mixing, for example, at transition

states, for excited states, and for multiple chemical bonds. The concept of

exciton introduced in solid state physics also belongs to this case [21]. Second,

the degenerate conﬁgurations are often the case for the stable open-shell

systems. Third, if we want to treat the ground state and the excited states

simultaneously, we have to include the corresponding reference states in the

same model space. Finally, the separation of correlation into the static and

dynamic parts, which corresponds to the near degenerate and the perturbed

situations, really has chemical structure signature. Therefore, among all the

correlation approaches developed so far for electronic structure, the MCSCF

type with perturbation or coupled-cluster expansion correction should be the

most appropriate and general one and works in the right direction. To solve

the remaining issues such as proper selection of conﬁgurations for the model

space, the eﬃcient treatment of dynamic correlation, and the avoidance of

5

intruder states, we not only need a mastery of current quantum many-body

theory but also might need its further development.

The importance and necessity of separation of correlation into a static

part and a dynamic part is also indicated in the DFT calculation for the

highly charged ions [22] and in its treatment of transition states of reactions

[23]. This calls for an extension of current DFT to incorporate the diﬀerenti-

ation of static and dynamic correlation eﬀects into its theoretical framework

[24,25].

(c)General pseudopotential theory

The concepts of pseudopotentials, eﬀective core potentials (ECP), or

model potentials (MP) are those of the most signiﬁcant developments in

the ﬁelds of electronic structure for molecular and solid state systems.

It

treats valence electrons only, leaving the core electrons and nucleus as a

whole charge entity and therefore reducing the number of electrons as well as

the corresponding overall size of the basis set being used for the computation.

It is important when we study the electronic structure for large molecules

or inorganic molecules containing heavy elements [26]. A most commonly

used pseudopotential for solid state calculation is the so-called norm con-

serving pseudopotential [27]. In addition to having the same valence state

energies, its pseudo valence state wavefunctions are also equivalent to the

valence state wavefunctions obtained from the full electron calculations out-

side a cutoﬀ radius. The pseudopotentials constructed in this manner share

the same scattering properties as those of the full potentials over the energy

range of the valence states. The practical implementation of various pseu-

dopotentials has also demonstrated the importance of choosing a correct size

6

of the core or range of the valence electrons for the accurate pseudopotential

computation in order that the core-valence correlations or core polarization

can be neglected. Obviously, the physics behind this valence and core state

separation is the energy scale principle we described above applied in the level

of atomic orbitals. After realizing this principle, however, we might estab-

lish a more general pseudopotential theory. We are planning to reformulate

the pseudopotential approach in the framework of perturbation theory so

that most ﬂexible and accurate ECPs can be developed. They can be used

in diﬀerent chemical environments and work for both ground and excited

state problems. The ﬁnal goal is to make the eﬀective core potentials to be

a routine rather than an approximation for calculating electronic structure

for large molecules, inorganic molecules containing heavy elements, and solid

state systems.

(d)Molecular fragmentation and combined QM /MM approach for

electronic structure of large molecules

Combined QM/MM approach has become very popular in recent years

in the study of, for example, the chemical reactions in solutions and in en-

zymes [28,29]. The basic consideration is that treating a full collection of

electrons for the whole system explicitly is not only unrealistic but also un-

necessary.

In the ﬁrst place, the electronic charge redistribution induced

by a chemical reaction is very often limited to a small region due to the

length scale issues such as ﬁnite range of interaction or natural charge dis-

tribution. Second, the quantum exchange eﬀect for the electrons is ﬁnite

range, and there is no exchange interaction among the electrons with long

distance. This permits a partition of the whole system into an active part

7

and an inactive part without any charge redistribution. The former has to

be described quantum mechanically since it possibly involves bond breaking

and making, while the latter can be described by molecular mechanics be-

cause it merely serves as a classical electrostatic environment for the active

site. This combined QM/MM description has shown remarkable successes in

studying the electronic structure and reactivity of large molecules in recent

years. However, challenges remain. One of the major obstacles for the appli-

cations is in the proper treatment of boundary region where the cut has to

be for a covalent bond. Currently, there are two approaches to this problem.

The one introducing link atoms along the boundary is severely limited and

cannot be applied to treat a large variety of diﬀerent chemical systems. In

addition, it artiﬁcially brings additional forces into the system and therefore

complicates the problem. The other kind like local self-consistent ﬁeld meth-

ods seems reasonable but it is still more empirical. In order to utilize this

kind of combined QM/MM methods for investigating the electronic structure

and molecular dynamics in a larger domain of ﬁelds, we need to develop a

more generic ab initio approach. We believe that the energy scale principle

discussed above can play a key role here.

It is not only the principle ac-

cording to which the atomic orbitals including valence ones interact along

the boundary but also the principle based on which a systematic approach

for constructing the correct charge distribution or the force ﬁelds along the

boundary can be established. This is also the key for a more sophisticated

or ﬁner treatment of quantum region including its electron correlation.

In summary, the energy scale principle for the hierarchy of interacting

matters is identiﬁed. It not only can be utilized as a general principle for

8

understanding how the matters interact at diﬀerent levels but also can serve

as the foundation based on which the accurate electronic structure calculation

schemes for even large molecular systems can be constructed.

It can also

be employed to build a general theory for the intermolecular forces so that

the important issues such as the interplay between chemical bondings and

intermolecular forces can be investigated [30].

References

[1] L. Pauling: The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of

Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Modern Structure Chem-

istry (Cornell University Press, Third Edition, 1960).

[2] K. Ruederberg: ”The Physical Nature of the Chemical Bond. An In-

terpretation of Cohesion in Polyatomic Many-Electron Systems”, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 34, 326 (1962).

[3] W. N. Lipscomb: Boron Hydrides (W. A. Benjaming, 1963).

[4] R. Hoﬀmann: ”A Chemical and Theoretical Way to Look at Bonding

on Surfaces”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 601 (1988).

[5] F. A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C. A. Murillo, and M. Bochmann: Ad-

vanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th ed (John Wilet & Sons, 1999).

[6] J. C. Slater: Quantum Theory of Atomic Structure, Vol. 1 (McGraw-Hill

Book Company, Inc, 1960).

9

[7] V. A. Rassolov, M. A. Ratner, J. A. Pople, et al: ”6-31G* basis set for

third-row atoms”, J. Comput. Chem. 22, 976 (2001).

[8] T. H. Dunning, Jr., K. A. Peterson, and D. E. Woon: ”Basis Sets: Cor-

relation Consistent Sets”, in Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry,

ed. P. v. R. Schleyer (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998), pp. 88-115.

[9] N. R. Kestner and J. E. Combariza: ”Basis Set Superposition Erros:

Theory and Practice”, Rev. Comput. Chem. 13, 99 (1999).

[10] J. A. Pople, R. Krishnan, H. B. Schlegel, and J. S. Binkley: ”Elec-

tron Correlation Theories and Their Application to the Study of Simple

Reaction Potential Surfaces”, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 14, 545

(1978).

[11] P. J. Rossky and M. Karplus: ”Generalized Perturbed Hartree-Fock

Theory”, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 6085 (1980).

[12] T. D. Crawford, S. S. Wesolowski, E. F. Valeev, R. A. King, M. L.

Leininger, and H. F. Schaefer: ”The Past, Present, and Future of Quan-

tum Chemistry”, in Chemistry for the 21st Century, ed. E. Keinan and

I. Schechter (John & Wiley-VCH, 2001), pp. 219-246.

[13] R. J. Bartlett: ”Quantum Theory Project”, ibid, pp. 271-286.

[14] I. Shavitt: ”The Method of Conﬁguration Interaction”, in Method of

Electronic Structure Theory, ed. H. F. Schaefer (Plenum Press, 1979),

pp. 189-275.

10

[15] W. A. Goddard, T. H. Dunning, Jr., W. J. Hunt, and P. J. Hay: ”Gen-

eralized Valence Bond Description of Bonding in Low-Lying States of

Molecules”, Acc. Chem. Res. 6, 368 (1973).

[16] K. Rudenberg and K. Sundberg: ”MCSCF Studies of Chemical Reac-

tions I. Natural Raction Orbitals and Localized Raction Orbitals”, in

Quantum Science, ed. J. L. Calais, O. Goscinski, J. Lindberg, and Y.

Ohrn (Plenum, New York, 1976), pp. 505-515.

[17] R. J. Robert and S. D. Peyerimhoﬀ: ”An Initio Calculations Close to

the Full CI Level of Accuracy and Their Use for the Interpretation of

Molecular Spectra”, in New Horizons of Quantum Chemistry, ed. P.-

O. L¨owdin and B. Pullman (D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1983), pp.

183-219.

[18] X. C. Wang and K. F. Freed: ” Comparison of Complete Model Space

Quasidegenerate Many-Body Perturbation Theory for LiH with Mul-

tireference Coupled Cluster Method” J. Chem. Phys. 91, 3002 (1989).

[19] E. R. Davidson and A. A. Jarzecki: ”Multi-Reference Perturbation

Theory”, in Recent Advances in Multireference Methods, ed. H. Kirao

(World Scientiﬁc, 1990), pp. 31-63.

[20] B. O. Roos: ”Theoretical Studies of Electronically Excited States of

Molecular Systems Using Multiconﬁgurational Perturbation Theory”,

Acc. Chem. Res. 32, 137 (1999).

11

[21] J. Jortner, S. A. Rice, and R. Silbey: ”Excitons and Energy Transfer in

Molecular Crystals”, in Modern Quantum Chemistry, vol 3 (Academic

Press, Inc., N.Y., 1965).

Chem. 69, 241 (1998).

[22] E. R. Davidson: ”How Robust is Present-Day DFT?”, Int. J. Quantum

[23] B. S. Jursic: ”Computing Transition State Structure with Density Func-

tional Theory Methods”, in Recent Developments and Applications of

Modern Density Functional Theory, ed. J. M. Seminario (Elsevier, Am-

sterdam, 1996).

A1133 (1965).

[24] (a) P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn: ”Inhomogeneous Electron gas”, Phys.

Rev. 136, B864 (1964); (b) W. Kohn and L. J. Sham: ”Self-Consistent

Equations Including Exchange and Correlation Eﬀects”, Phys. Rev. 140,

[25] R. Parr and W. Yang: Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and

Molecules (Oxford University Press, 1989).

[26] C. F. Melius and G. A. Goddard:”Ab Initio Eﬀective Potentials for Uses

in Molecular Calculations”, Phys. Rev. A 10, 1528 (1974).

[27] (a) D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang: ”Norm-Conserving

Pseudopotentials”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494 (1979); (b) G. B. Bachelet,

D. R. Hamman, and M. Schluter: ”Pseudopotential that work: From H

to Pu”, Phys. Rev. B 26, 4199 (1982).

12

[28] A. Warshel and M. Levitt: ”Theoretical Studies of Enzymatic Reactions:

Dielectric Electrostatic and Steric Stabilization of the Carbonium Ion

in the Reaction of Lysozyme”, J. Mol. Biol. 103, 227 (1976).

[29] N. Reuter, A. Dejaegere, B. Maigret, and M. Karplus: ”Frontier Bonds

in QM/MM Methods: A Comparison of Diﬀerent Approaches”, J. Phys.

Chem. A 104, 1720 (2000).

7 (1982).

[30] J. A. Pople: ”Intermolecular Binding”, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc. 73,

13

