3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution in DCO (

X 2A′): Classical-Quantum

correspondence, dynamical assignments of highly excited states, and phase space
transport

e

Aravindan Semparithi and Srihari Keshavamurthy
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India 208 016
(Dated: January 14, 2014)

e
−1 and 7000 cm

Intramolecular dynamics of highly excited DCO (

X 2A′) is studied from a classical-quantum cor-
respondence perspective using the eﬀective spectroscopic Hamiltonian proposed recently by Tr¨ollsch
and Temps (Z. Phys. Chem. 215, 207 (2001)). This work focuses on the polyads P = 3 and P = 4
−1 respectively. The majority
corresponding to excitation energies Ev ≈ 5100 cm
of states belonging to these polyads are dynamically assigned, despite extensive stochasticity in the
classical phase space, using the recently proposed technique of level velocities. A wavelet based
time-frequency analysis is used to reveal the nature of phase space transport and the relevant dy-
namical bottlenecks. The local frequency analysis clearly illustrates the existence of mode-speciﬁc
IVR dynamics i.e., diﬀering nature of the IVR dynamics ensuing from CO stretch and the DCO
bend bright states. In addition the role of the weak Fermi resonance involving the CO stretch and
DCO bend modes is investigated. A key feature of the present work is that the techniques utilized
for the analysis i.e., parametric variations and local frequency analysis are not limited by the di-
mensionality of the system. This study, thus, explores the potential for understanding IVR in larger
molecules from both time domain and frequency domain perspectives.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Substantial progress has been made over the past few
decades in understanding the nature of energy ﬂow in
highly excited molecules1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8. At higher levels of
excitation the usual rigid rotor-normal mode descrip-
tion breaks down and the modes get strongly coupled.
The resulting spectral complexity in terms of the split-
tings and intensities encode the ﬂow of energy through
the molecule. This phenomenon of intramolecular vibra-
tional energy redistribution (IVR) can lead to subtle but
important deviations from the predictions of statistical
theories like RRKM10 and thus profound consequences
for the rates of chemical reactions9. The mode mix-
ings in general have classical as well as quantum origins.
Much of the classical eﬀects arise from vibrational an-
harmonicities, coriolis and centrifugal distortion eﬀects.
Possible quantum contributions11,12,13,14,15,16 manifest as
indirect state-to-state explorations involving a sequence
of intermediate, oﬀ-resonance virtual states (“vibrational
superexchange”). In molecules with symmetry the phe-
nomenon of dynamical tunneling provides a quantum
route to mode mixing14,15,16. Theoretically it is cru-
cial to establish and understand IVR pathways from
time dependent as well as time independent perspectives.
RRKM theory has been quite successful10 but evidence is
mounting for a number of reactions where the intramolec-
ular dynamics is inherently nonstatistical9,10. Account-
ing for such nonstatistical dynamics is theoretically chal-
lenging and crucial for control of reactions.

In this work our aim is to understand IVR in the
deuterated formyl radical DCO. Our choice of the system
is primarily due to the considerable experimental17 and
theoretical18,19,20,21 work on IVR and mode speciﬁcity
of the unimolecular decay of highly vibrationally excited

DCO. In contrast to HCO the deuterated analog involves
a strong accidental 1 : 1 : 2 resonance between the vi-
brational frequencies. The experiments and analysis of
Renth et al using a eﬀective Hamiltonian clearly shows
that the unimolecular decay in DCO is IVR limited20.
Although DCO has three vibrational modes, m (DC
stretch), n (CO stretch), b (bend), the coupling structure
of the eﬀective Hamiltonian22 yields a conserved quantity
called as the polyad number P = m + n + b/2. Ex-
perimentally the existence of P is revealed by bunching
of vibrational levels as evident in the SEP spectrum of
DCO17.

As a small molecule exhibiting nonstatistical
in-
tramolecular dynamics DCO provides an ideal system
to test the various theoretical approaches for study-
ing highly excited molecules. Impressive advances have
been made towards fully quantum investigation of the
IVR dynamics in large systems7,9,23,24,25. There is little
doubt that DCO can be subjected to such exact treat-
ments which are important in their own right. How-
ever there are strong reasons26 to believe that pow-
erful
insights into IVR can be gained by approaches
based on classical-quantum correspondence. For exam-
ple, Jung et al have provided dynamical assignments
of the highly excited states of DCO based on certain
key periodic orbits in phase space21. A key to the
success of the many classical-quantum correspondence
studies26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36 is that the understand-
ing of IVR is ﬁrmly rooted in the invariant structures
inhabiting the underlying phase space. This provides a
very clear dynamical picture of IVR in molecules and can
serve as a baseline for estimating the important quantum
routes to mode mixings.

Currently one of the main obstacles in extending such
useful classical-quantum correspondence studies is the is-
sue of dimesionality. Despite the existence of potentially

−

3N
6 coupled vibrational modes it is now well under-
stood that not all of the modes are coupled strongly7,9.
Although such hierarchicality of the couplings leads to
much smaller dimensionalities of the ‘IVR space’ it is pos-
sible that for large enough molecules or smaller molecules
at higher levels of excitation the eﬀective dimesional-
In such
ity of the system can be larger than three.
instances the dimensionality of the system poses both
technical as well as conceptual problems in the context
of classical-quantum correspondence studies. The tech-
nical problems are well known and have to do with the
inability to visualize Poincar´e surface of sections or the
quantum states and, computation of the periodic orbits
or higher dimensional tori. Thus the knowledge of the
global phase space structure along with its inﬂuence on
the quantum states is at present diﬃcult to obtain for sys-
tems with three or more degrees of freedom. For more
detailed discussions on the dimensionality issues, tech-
nical and conceptual, we refer the reader to the earlier
works29,37,38,39,40.

One of the central goals of our research is to come
up with techniques that would allow a detailed classical-
quantum correspondence study of IVR in molecules with
three or greater degrees of freedom and in this context
two approaches will be of particular interest. The ﬁrst
one is the promising technique of local frequency analysis
(LFA) put forward nearly two decades ago by Martens,
Davis and Ezra41. In their pioneering work41,42,43,44 on
energy ﬂow in the OCS molecule it was shown that LFA
was capable of highlighting the role of various phase space
structures including partial barriers and resonance zones.
The important point is that although motion may be ir-
regular when viewed over long time scales (several pi-
coseconds), quantities such as frequencies can be con-
stant over times corresponding to many vibrational peri-
ods. This gives rise to long time correlations and the no-
tion of dynamically signiﬁcant phase space regions41,42.
Since then very little work has been done in utilizing this
technique for studying energy transport in multimode
molecules.
Interestingly much more eﬀorts have been
made in celestial mechanics45 with fewer applications
in atomic physics46 and molecular systems48. Recently
Arevalo and Wiggins47,49 have proposed a technique for
performing time-frequency analysis (LFA) which include
strongly chaotic trajectories as well by using wavelet
analysis. Applications to various systems demonstrated
the advantages of a wavelet based LFA in understanding
phase space transport49.

A second technique50 for analyzing the quantum
states, based on parametric variations, was recently pro-
posed by us and applied to a 2-mode model Hamiltonian.
It was shown that variations of the eigenvalues with ap-
propriate parameters i.e., level velocities were strongly
correlated to the important classical phase space struc-
tures organizing the quantum states. In the case of mixed
and near-integrable systems the magnitudes and relative
signs of the level velocties clearly indicated50 the dynam-
ical region of phase space associated with a given eigen-

2

state thereby providing a dynamical assignment of the
states. The technique based on parametric variations is
dimensionality independent, like the local frequency anal-
ysis mentioned before, and more importantly basis in-
variance is guaranteed. Moreover parametric variations
can be used to identify localization, resulting in devi-
ations from random matrix theory (RMT) predictions,
even in strongly chaotic systems51. The full utility of
parametric techniques is yet to be explored, particularly
in the context of IVR52, and there do exist detailed semi-
classical theories in the (near)integrable53 and chaotic
situations51.

Our system of choice DCO is eﬀectively two dimen-
sional due to the existence of the polyad P . Thus the
intramolecular dynamics can be investigated in great de-
tail using the existing methods. However DCO provides
a stringent test for the dimensionality independent tech-
niques mentioned above since there is signiﬁcant chaos in
the classical phase space for the lowest energies in P = 3
and 4. This paper is organized as follows: In section
II the main features of the eﬀective Hamiltonian and its
classical limit are presented. This is followed, in section
III, by a dynamical assignment of states in P = 3, 4 us-
ing the level velocities. It will be shown that a dynamical
assignment based on level velocities, in conjunction with
the inverse participation ratios54 (IPR), can be given de-
spite the presence of signiﬁcant chaos. In section IV the
time dependent dynamics of DCO are analyzed using lo-
cal frequency analysis. This reveals the global picture of
phase space transport and highlights chaotic trajectories
undergoing rapid frequency jumps mainly between the
stretch-stretch 1 : 1 resonance and the DC stretch-bend
2 : 1 Fermi resonance. Moreover it is seen that chaotic
trajectories can be trapped in resonances for many vi-
brational periods. This is related55 to the ’stickiness’ of
the chaotic trajectories and is of importance to the IVR
dynamics in the molecule. The local frequency analysis
also highlights the nature of the CO stretch-bend 2 : 1
Fermi resonance which is seen to play a role in the IVR
for short times. Section V concludes.

II. EFFECTIVE HAMILTONIAN FOR DCO

The spectroscopic Hamiltonian, proposed recently by
Tr¨ollsch and Temps22, was obtained through a ﬁt to the
experimental DF and SEP spectra. The relevant matrix

3

elements are

Hmnb;mnb =

j +

ωj (cid:18)

1
2 (cid:19)

+

xjk (cid:18)

j +

1
2 (cid:19) (cid:18)

k +

1
2 (cid:19)

Xj

Xjk
λ1
2

−

λ2
2
kmbb

1
2

1
2

2 (cid:20)

knbb

2 (cid:20)

Hmnb;m−1,n+1,b =

(m(n + 1))1/2

1 + λ′

1m + λ′′

1 (n + 1) + λ′′′

b +

1 (cid:18)

× (cid:20)

Hmnb;m−2,n+2,b =

[m(m

1)(n + 1)(n + 2)]1/2

(1c)

Hmnb;m−1,n,b+2 =

m(b + 1)(b + 2)

Hmnb;m,n−1,b+2 =

n(b + 1)(b + 2)

1/2

(cid:21)
1/2

(cid:21)

(1a)

(1b)

1
2 (cid:19)(cid:21)

(1d)

(1e)

with j = m, n, b denoting the zeroth order DC stretch,
the CO stretch, and the bend modes respectively. The
coupling terms λ1 and λ2 represent a 1 : 1 and a Darling-
Dennison 2 : 2 resonance between the stretch modes re-
spectively. The Fermi resonant couplings km(n)bb corre-
spond to a 1 : 2 resonance between the DC (CO) stretch
and the bend modes. The eﬀective Hamiltonian
H com-
mutes with the polyad PQ = m+ n+ b/2 and hence block
diagonal in PQ. A given PQ block has (PQ +1)(PQ +2)/2
states for integer polyads and the states are labelled as
PQj in order of decreasing energy. Note that the above
Hamiltonian is able to approximately reproduce the ex-
perimental DF spectra for polyad values upto PQ = 5
since PQ = 6 was the highest polyad considered in the
ﬁtting procedure. Consequently the current work focuses
on the polyads PQ = 3, 4 as examples. The techniques
used for the analysis in this work are, however, applicable
to higher polyads as well. In what follows we will adopt
a shorthand notation for the two main resonances, 1 : 1
DC stretch-CO stretch and 1 : 2 DC stretch-DCO bend,
denoting them as mn and mbb respectively.

b

The classical limit Hamiltonian can be obtained using

the Heisenberg correspondence

I 1/2
j

aj ↔
b
between creation-annhilation operators and the action-
angle variables. The resulting classical Hamiltonian is

(2)

a†
j ↔
b

e−iφj

I 1/2
j

eiφj

H =

ωjIj +

xjkIj Ik

Xj

Xjk

(3)

+ Λ1(ImIn)1/2 cos(φm −
[kmbbI 1/2
m cos(φm −
+

Ib
√2

φn) + λ2ImIn cos(2φm −
2φb) + knbbI 1/2
cos(φn −

n

2φn)

2φb)]

λ1[1 + λ′

1 Ib]. As expected the
with Λ1 ≡
zeroth order Hamiltonian H0 is a function of the actions
alone and the various couplings manifest themselves as

1 In + λ′′′

1Im + λ′′

anharmonic resonances. The quantum zero point energy
E0 has been subtracted from the classical Hamiltonian
for consistency. The classical system is eﬀectively a two
degree of freedom system due to the existence of the con-
served quantity Pc = 2(Im + In) + Ib which is the analog
of the quantum polyad. As a result the classical dynam-
ics can be studied in a four dimensional reduced phase
space. The reduction can be obtained by performing a
canonical transformation via the generating function:

(4)

2φb)Jn + φbPc

F = (φm −

2φb)Jm + (φn −
The new action-angle variables are related to the old
ones, Jm = Im, Jn = In, Pc = 2(Im + In) + Ib, and
2φb, θ = φb. The result-
ψm = φm −
ing Hamiltonian21 is independent of the angle variable θ
which is conjugate to Pc and hence an eﬀectively two-
dimensional system.

2φb, ψn = φn −

It is possible to perform a Chirikov56 analysis of the
classical Hamiltonian and obtain a resonance template in
the state space29. However it is seen that in this case the
Chirikov analysis, which is based on the zeroth order H0,
is not very suitable. This is mainly due to the reduced
bend anharmonicity of DCO. Despite this limitation use-
ful qualitative information can be obtained regarding the
approximate location of the resonance zones and over-
laps. For instance, such an analysis predicts that the CO
stretch-bend Fermi resonance (knbb) does not show up in
the state space for most of the polyads. Thus one an-
ticipates the IVR dynamics in DCO to be dominated by
the stretch-stretch 1 : 1 and DC stretch-bend 2 : 1 Fermi
resonances. This observation is in agreement with earlier
works20,21. In what follows we will show the resonance
template as a guideline and the local frequency analy-
sis of the dynamics establishes the signiﬁcant deviations
from the zeroth order picture due to strong couplings.

III. DYNAMICAL ASSIGNMENTS OF STATES
IN P = 3 AND P = 4

Considerable work has been done in the last few
years to understand and possibly assign highly excited
states by invoking the classical-quantum correspondence
principle26. Every single method, without exception, is
based on identifying a dominant classical phase space
structure that organizes the eigenstates in a given energy
range. Indeed as DCO is eﬀectively two dimensional due
to the existence of the polyad it is possible to use any
one of the several techniques proposed in the literature.
However our objective in this work is to use techniques
that do not explicitly rely on determining the exact peri-
odic orbits and/or visualizations of the phase space and
wavefunctions. This is especially important for analyzing
systems with more than two degrees of freedom.

One such method was recently proposed by us50 and it
is based on the method of parametric variations. In this
approach the “level velocities” ˙xα(τ ) associated with an
are determined and analyzed. Thus if
eigenstate

α(τ )
i
|

the eﬀective, spectroscopic, Hamiltonian has the general
j τj Vj with Vj and τj denoting the vari-
form H = H0 +
ous resonances and the corresponding coupling strengths,
then the level velocity of a speciﬁc eigenstate associated
with a coupling Vj is obtained as:

P

˙xα(τj)

=

∂Eα(τ )
∂τj
c∗
αncαn′ Vj;nn′ = 2

α
Vj |
α
i
|
h

≡

=

Xn,n′

XPj

(5)

˙xα(τj ; Pj)

(6)

α
i
|

In the above equation n is the zeroth-order basis and
n
cαn =
with re-
. The level velocity of a state
α
i
|
h
spect to Vj can be written as a sum over the polyads
Pj, corresponding to the resonant perturbation Vj , of
the partial level velocities ˙xα(τj ; Pj). In the integrable
limit i.e., with only Vj present it is easy to see that
˙xα(τj) = ˙xα(τj; Pj).
In the presence of other pertur-
bations Vi6=j the level velocity ˙xα(τj ) can have contribu-
tions from many diﬀerent Pj indicating extensive mixing.
Thus the level velocity essentially measures the response
of the quantum eigenvalue to a speciﬁc perturbation.

It was established50 in the earlier work that ˙xα(τj ) is
correlated to the phase space nature of the eigenstate.
For integrable, single resonance cases the various proper-
ties of the level velocities are well known57. In the case
of mixed phase space systems it is still possible50 to dy-
namically assign states based on the level velocities since
the regular regions strongly inﬂuence the eigenstates. In
case of near integrable systems and, to some extent, for
mixed systems the correlation of the level velocities with
the phase space can be understood semiclassically since
it is possible to write50
˙xα(τj) = Tr[ ˆVj |
α
1
(2π¯h)N Z

]
α
|
dIdθV W

(I, θ)Wα(I, θ)

(7)

(8)

≈

ih

j

j

is the Weyl symbol of the operator ˆVj and
where V W
Wα is the Wigner function associated with the eigenstate
. For near integrable systems the Wigner function
α
i
|
condenses on to the invariant torus58 thus explaining the
observed correlation.

However for systems with considerable chaos it is not
a priori clear wether the correlation continues to hold.
The P = 3, 4 cases for DCO considered herein show ex-
tensive chaos at low energies and hence provide a critical
test for the level velocity approach. In the extreme limit
of an ergodic system the Berry-Voros hypothesis states
that58,59,60

Wα(I, θ) = Cδ[Eα −

H(I, θ)]

(9)

In this limit it is easy to see that ˙xα is essentially the
parametric derivative of the smooth part of the spectral
staircase function60. This term is independent of the na-
ture of the dynamics and in particular refers to contribu-
tions from short time orbits. Nevertheless it is well known

4

that even in strongly chaotic systems the periodic orbits
(unstable) play a crucial role61. Thus it is expected that
in such systems the level velocities are inﬂuenced by the
periodic orbits. A more general expectation is that, inde-
pendent of the nature of the dynamics, closed orbits will
inﬂuence the level velocities. As the purpose of the cur-
rent work is not to provide a semiclassical expression for
computing the level velocities, we will brieﬂy outline the
reasons for such an expectation. The arguments provided
are not new and appear in an early work by Eckhardt et
al. where semiclassical matrix elements were determined
from periodic orbits62. To begin with deﬁne a quantity

gVj (E) = Tr ˆG ˆVj

(10)

with ˆG being the energy Green’s function and ˆVj is the
perturbation of interest. Using the formal deﬁnition of
ˆG it is straightforward to show that

1
π

≡ −

ρVj (E)

ImgVj (E) =

˙xα(τj )δ(E

Eα)

(11)

Xα

−

Thus ρVj (E) has poles at the eigenvalues Eα and the
residues are precisely the level velocities ˙xα(τj ). The
quantity gVj (E) can be written in the semiclassical limit
as:

gVj (E) =

dIdθV W

j

(I, θ)GW (I, θ; E)

(12)

Z

with GW being the Wigner transform of the Green’s
function. The above integral can be evaluated via
stationary phase approximation and, apart from the
smooth short time contribution, gives rise to an oscillat-
ing term. The oscillating part can be evaluated for inte-
grable (Berry-Tabor)63, near-integrable (Almeida-Ullmo-
Grinberg-Tomsovic)64, and chaotic (Gutzwiller)65 cases.
In every case the oscillating part depends on the stabil-
ities of the closed orbits and involves the classical time
average of Vj over the period of the closed orbits66. Since
the level velocities are extracted as residues of the oscil-
lating part it is reasonable to expect a strong inﬂuence of
the closed orbits and their stabilities. Note that extract-
ing the velocities from this approach is rather involved.
Since it is diﬃcult to obtain bounds on the velocities
using semiclassical techniques in the mixed phase space
case and the eﬀect of various bifurcations on the level ve-
locities is not known as of yet we will explore the utility
of the technique in dynamical assignments from a quali-
tative perspective. The basis for the assignments will be
explicitly discussed for the case P = 3 since the argu-
ments are fairly general.

In table I we show the states in polyad P = 3, the
level velocities with respect to the mn and the mbb res-
onances and the IPR in three diﬀerent basis. We start
by noting that the maximum integrable limit velocities
expected (appendix of Ref. 50) are 1.5 and 2.8 for the
˙xα,mn and ˙xα,mbb respectively. Moreover since the cou-
pling constants λ1, kmbb > 0 it is also anticipated, based

5

FIG. 1: State space representation (left panels), Husimi distributions superposed on the surface of section (middle panel), and
partial level velocities (right panels) are shown for selected states in P = 3. The resonance zones computed using Chirikov
approximation are also shown in the state space. The mn zone is shown as solid lines and the mbb zone is shown as the dashed
lines. Three contours of the Husimis are shown for clarity. The states shown are 31 (top row), 34 (middle row), and 38 (bottom
row). Note that the Husimis of states 31 and 34 are localized around the stable and unstable regions of the classical phase
space. The Husimi of state 38 is delocalized over the surface of section and the partial velocity data indicates strong mixing.
The maximum contour value for 38 is one third of the maximum value for state 31.

on the earlier work50, that large positive velocities cor-
respond to stable (elliptic) regions of the phase space
and large negative velocities correspond to unstable (hy-
perbolic) regions of the phase space. Consequently the
highest energy state 31 is clearly a mn state with the cor-
responding Husimi localized around a stable region of the
phase space. The high IPR in the mn basis and the small
level velocity with respect to the mbb resonance clearly
support such an assignment. Thus we expect state 31 to
be localized in the state space as well and associate an
approximate integrable limit polyad Pmn with the state.
Our expectations are conﬁrmed and Fig.1 shows the state
space representation of 31 and the corresponding Husimi
superposed on the surface of section. The approximate
polyad Pmn can be extracted by looking at the partial
level velocities, shown in Fig.1, and one obtains Pmn = 3.
The state 32 has comparable positive velocities both with

≈

respect to mn and mbb i.e., ˙xmn(32)
˙xmbb(32). This
suggests that the state is inﬂuenced by both the reso-
nances and conﬁrmed by inspecting the state space rep-
resentation of the state as well as the partial velocities.
However since the IPR Lmn(32) > Lmbb(32) and the in-
tegrable limit mn velocity is expected to be small for this
state, 32 is assigned as a mn state with Pmn = 3. The
next state 33 can be clearly assigned based on the (par-
tial) level velocities as well as the IPRs as a mn state
localized about a stable periodic orbit with Pmn = 2.
State 34 has a negative mn velocity with large IPR in
the mn basis and hence it is expected to be located in
the unstable region of the phase space. The Husimi of the
state shows a typical seperatrix-like structure (cf. Fig.1)
and hence agrees with the velocity analysis. Based on
the partial velocity data it is straightforward to assign
an approximate Pmn = 3 for 34. Analogous to the state

6

TABLE I: Dynamical assignments for states in P = 3

TABLE II: Dynamical assignments for states in P = 4

State E (cm−1)
310
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31

4885
4935
5032
5138
5177
5289
5354
5415
5469
5644

Pmbb, u
dl
mbb
∗, Pmbb
b

˙xmn ˙xmbb L0 Lmn Lmbb Assignmenta
-0.09 -1.81 0.55 0.56 0.91
-0.55 -0.40 0.65 0.80 0.78
-0.37 -0.09 0.24 0.33 0.70
-0.11 0.45 0.51 0.29 0.46
-0.02 1.09 0.34 0.33 0.41
-0.31 0.09 0.33 0.60 0.39
-0.62 0.23 0.25 0.69 0.22
0.60 0.13 0.41 0.71 0.34
0.22 0.23 0.46 0.81 0.49
1.26 0.07 0.54 0.99 0.53

,s
∗, Pmbb
Pmn − 1
Pmn, u
Pmn − 1, s
Pmn,nom

Pmn

,s

c

as, u and dl stand for stable, unstable and distorted local respec-
tively. The approximate polyads Pmn = m+ n and Pmbb = 2m+ b.
States involved in avoided crossings are denoted by ∗.
bThe value of Pmbb = 6 is deduced from the partial velocity data.
cThe value of Pmn = 3 is deduced from the partial velocity data.
See Fig. 1

32 it is possible to nominally assign the state 35 as a
mn state with Pmn = 2. State 310 has a large negative
˙xmbb and can be clearly associated with the unstable re-
gion in phase space with Pmbb = 6. Again, inspection of
the Husimi and the partial velocities supports the assign-
ment.

We now discuss states that are either diﬃcult to assign
or unassignable. The particularly strong mixings in these
states can arise due to avoided crossings and/or strong
overlap of the various resonances zones. The notoriety of
multistate avoided crossings in the process of assignments
are well known and one expects them in suﬃciently non-
integrable systems. State 36 has a large positive mbb ve-
locity and is expected to be an mbb state localized about
a stable periodic orbit. However the velocity is about half
of the maximum expected in the integrable limit and the
IPRs are about the same in all three basis. The partial
velocities clearly show that 36 can be assigned as a mbb
state with Pmbb = 6. The state 37 is an interesting state
since the IPR in the zeroth order basis is larger than the
IPRs in either the mn or the mbb basis. Indeed the state
space picture and the Husimis of the state 37 rule out
a clear mn or mbb assignment. A closer inspection re-
veals that the states 36 and 37 are involved in an avoided
crossing with respect to both λ1 and kmbb. This explains
the observed lower than maximum velocity of the state
36. This quantum mixing, seen in earlier studies21,30, is
clearly 2-state and it is possible to demix the states yield-
ing states
and analyze the velocities.
37i
On demixing it is found that ˙xmbb(α) = 2.2 which is
closer to the maximum value expected for an mbb state
in polyad P = 3. The other velocities indicate dominance
0.65 thus leading
of the mbb coupling and ˙xmbb(β) =
to an assignment of the state 37 as mbb with Pmbb = 4.
State 38 is a typical example of a diﬃcult state to as-
In Fig.1 the state space representation, Husimi,

36i ± |
|

α(β)
i
|

sign.

=

−

State E (cm−1)
415
414
413
412
411
410
49
48
47
46
45
44
43
42
41

6167
6392
6448
6593
6715
6773
6809
6875
6965
7017
7101
7168
7241
7287
7470

dl
Pmbb, u
Pmbb
Pmbb

˙xmn ˙xmbb L0 Lmn Lmbb Assignmenta
-0.67 -0.31 0.80 0.95 0.84
-0.30 -3.38 0.22 0.25 0.76
-0.30 -0.98 0.36 0.40 0.76
-0.30 0.83 0.22 0.27 0.81
0.07 -1.35 0.54 0.50 0.68 Pmbb − 2, u
-0.28 3.35 0.32 0.32 0.72
-0.59 -0.47 0.38 0.70 0.47
-0.37 0.13 0.13 0.29 0.34
0.15 0.09 0.47 0.30 0.35
-0.08 1.18 0.30 0.27 0.27 ∗, Pmbb − 2, s
-0.01 0.32 0.36 0.57 0.40
-0.81 0.19 0.27 0.78 0.26
1.03 -0.06 0.33 0.61 0.41
0.64 0.41 0.23 0.65 0.29
1.81 0.07 0.49 0.99 0.47

mixed
Pmn, u
Pmn − 1, s
Pmn
Pmn, s

Pmbb, s
dl
mixed
∗, Pmn − 2

aThe notations are same as in table I. The values Pmn =
4, Pmbb = 8 are deduced from the partial velocity data. See Fig. 2.

and the partial velocity data is shown for 38. The veloc-
ity data indicates this to be a mn state whereas the IPR
data supports a mbb assignment. Note that this state
has the lowest IPR in the zeroth order basis amongst the
set of states in P = 3. The particularly high value of the
IPR in the mbb basis suggests that it is quite possible
for this state to have a small velocity even in the single,
mbb only integrable case. Indeed on computing the in-
0.13. Thus it is
tegrable limit one obtains ˙xmbb(38)
possible to assign the state 38 as a mbb state. Note that
the partial velocity data suggests Pmn = 4 but the state
space representation exhibits Pmbb = 6. The diﬃculty,
in part, arises from the fact that it is quite possible for a
state to have a velocity close to zero and yet be strongly
inﬂuenced by that resonance57. A similar situation arises
for the state 39 in that the level velocities are very simi-
lar. In this case, however, the IPRs are very similar and
high in all three basis. This is a typical signature of a
distorted local mode state. In this instance the state is
inﬂuenced slightly by both the resonances leading to the
similar velocities and IPRs.

≈ −

The states for P = 4 can be assigned in a similar fash-
ion and the assignments are shown in table II. In par-
ticular, all the states except 48 and 45 can be assigned
in analogy with the states in P = 3. Thus the states 48
and 45 are classiﬁed as mixed. In Fig.2 states with large
positive (410) and large negative (414) mbb velocities are
shown. Note the localization of the Husimis in the stable
and unstable regions of the phase space. The state space,
Husimi and partial velocity data for the mixed state 48
are shown in Fig.2 as an example. Extensive delocaliza-
tion is seen for this state in both the state space and the
phase space. The state 48 also happens to have the low-
est IPR among the states in P = 4. We note that for

7

FIG. 2: Same as in Fig. (1) for three states in P = 4. The states shown are 410 (top row), 414 (middle row), and 48 (bottom
row). Note that the Husimis of states 410 and 414 are localized around the stable and unstable regions of the classical phase
space. The Husimi of state 48 is delocalized over the surface of section and the partial velocity data indicates strong mixing.

P = 4 the maximum expected velocities for the mn and
the mbb are 2.0 and 4.4 respectively.

A general observation regarding the assignments is
that the lower energy states of the polyads are domi-
nated by mbb whereas the higher end states are inﬂu-
enced more by the mn resonance. States in the middle
of the energy regions exhibit transitional character. Simi-
lar observations were made in the dynamical assignments
of the states in P = 8 by Jung et al21. Note that the
assignments made in this work are essentially based on
the level velocities and the IPRs. Thus our assignment
does not invoke any explicit quantum numbers based on
periodic orbits. However it is clear that attaching an
approximate polyad and noting the signs on the level ve-
locities is providing dynamical information. For instance
state 41 having a large ˙xmn > 0 implies that the state
is inﬂuenced by a stable periodic orbit of the mn type.
In particular this state would be considered as a C class
state with the assignment (l = 4, t = 0) in the notation
of the previous work21. The approximate polyad Pmn
can be identiﬁed with the longitudinal quantum number

l. A crucial point regarding the assignments using level
velocities is worth reiterating at this juncture. The ad-
vantage of using the level velocities is based on strong
correlation of the velocities with the phase space nature
of the eigenstates. Such dynamical informations cannot
be obtained by using the IPRs alone or the various rep-
resentations of the eigenstates. For example, in P = 3
the IPRs Lmn(33)
Lmn(34) and one would correctly
infer that both states are of mn type. However with
˙xmn(34)
˙xmn(33) it is possible to provide a ﬁner dis-
tinction between the two states ; 33 is associated with a
stable region of the phase space whereas 34 is located in
the unstable region of the phase space.

≈ −

≈

IV. LOCAL FREQUENCY ANALYSIS: PHASE
SPACE DIFFUSION AND TRANSPORT

As mentioned before the Chirikov analysis of DCO res-
onances based on the zeroth order classical H0(I) is not
very accurate due to strong resonant couplings of the

8

i

i

and

040
|

030
|

earlier works on OCS, there have not been many eﬀorts
to identify partial barriers for transport in the context
of IVR in molecules. The importance of such an un-
dertaking lies in the fact that it might prove crucial in
controlling IVR as well. In DCO it has been established
that the unimolecular decay is IVR limited17,20. More-
over, previous studies18,20,21 on DCO suggest that the
Fermi resonance between the CO stretch and DCO bend
is unimportant. The approximate Chirikov analysis also
indicates the muted role of the nbb Fermi resonance. In
Fig.3 the survival probabilities for the zeroth order bright
in the absence of the nbb Fermi res-
states
onance are shown and compared to the full system. It is
clear from the ﬁgure that although the initial decay from
the bright states is controlled by the 1 : 1 (for about 100
fs) the nbb Fermi resonance starts to play a role around
200 fs. Is it the case that the nbb resonance does play
a role, albeit in a secondary fashion, in the short time
tier structure? Why is the initial decay from
ap-
parently complete by about 150 fs as opposed to those
? In other words what makes the 1 : 1
of
050
i
|
so eﬀective for the bright state
? The answers to
i
these questions are not straightforward and in this work
we will try to provide some approximate answers. We
believe that the LFA technique is capable of addressing
some of these crucial issues. Ahead a brief introduction
is given to the technique of LFA and we refer the reader
to the work by Martens et al41 and Arevalo et al47,49 for
more details.

040
|

040
|

030
|

and

i

i

→

P

The classical

limit of the spectroscopic Hamiltoni-
ans are nonlinear, multiresonant Hamiltonians which are
functions of the zeroth order actions I and the angles
φ. The classical limit Hamiltonians have a typical form
H(I, φ) = H0(I) +
j Vj (I, φ) where the various reso-
nant perturbations are denoted by Vj . In the absence of
the perturbations the system is described by H0 which
is classically integrable. In such cases the various nonlin-
ear frequencies Ω(I) = ∂H0/∂I are time-independent and
one can deﬁne a frequency map I
Ω(I) which, if invert-
ible, can be used to characterize the phase space. The fre-
quency map can be used to characterize the phase space,
thanks to the KAM theorem, for near-integrable systems
as well. For a system like DCO there are three frequen-
cies Ω
(Ωm, Ωn, Ωb) and it is useful to visualize the
dynamics in the frequency ratio space. However for non-
quasiperiodic trajectories, associated with the full nonin-
tegrable Hamiltonian, the various frequencies Ω(I) vary
with time since increasing perturbation strengths lead to
the breakdown of KAM tori and widespread chaos. De-
spite the time dependence of the frequencies it has been
observed in many systems that the frequencies can re-
main approximately constant over times corresponding to
many vibrational periods. Thus even non-quasiperiodic
trajectories can spend an appreciable amount of time in
one part of the phase space before passing on to another
region of the phase space. This in turn implies existence
of long time correlations and gives rise to the concept
of dynamically signiﬁcant regions of phase space. The

≡

FIG. 3: Survival probabilities for the ZOBS (a) |030i and (b)
|040i. Solid line is the exact Hamiltonian and dashed lines
are with knbb = 0.

various modes. The surface of sections indicate that for
polyads P = 3, 4 there is considerable stochasticity even
at the lowest energy. This implies that the various reso-
nances overlap strongly for these polyads and most tra-
jectories are chaotic. Despite the signiﬁcant amount of
chaos in the phase space the Husimis of many eigenstates
were seen to be rather localized. Such observations have
been made earlier in other studies and it is well known
that a largely chaotic phase space can still contain struc-
tures that act as partial barriers to phase space transport.
The partial barriers can arise due to cantori as well as
broken seperatrices and existence of such structures can
lead to eigenstate localization. Moreover even in the case
of strongly chaotic systems eigenstates can get scarred by
periodic orbits leading to localization. In recent years it
has been understood that such partial barriers and peri-
odic orbit scarring lead to statistically signiﬁcant devia-
tions from the predictions of RMT. Infact the level veloc-
ities, studied in the previous section, already encode such
localization information. From the IVR perspective, sev-
eral studies7,9 have now established that the energy ﬂow
process is hierarchical and that a hierarchical local ran-
dom matrix (HLRM) approach is more appropriate to
understand IVR. The important factor is the local den-
sity of coupled states and not the total density of states
at a given energy which leads, amongst other observa-
tions, to a power law decay of the survival probability on
intermediate timescales67.

Based on the detailed work on classical phase space
transport68 it is tempting to conjecture that the hier-
archical nature of IVR is intimately connected to the
various partial barriers in the phase space. The im-
portant work41,42 by Davis and Martens et al on OCS
seems to support the conjecture. However, except for

concept of local frequencies i.e., time-varying frequen-
cies allows one to identify such dynamically signiﬁcant
regions of phase space.

Two main approaches are available to extract the lo-
cal frequencies from a classical trajectory. The ﬁrst
one proposed by Martens et al41, and a similar one by
Laskar45, uses Fourier transforms of short time segments
of long trajectories. We are interested in the more recent
work47,49 by Arevalo and Wiggins wherein the local fre-
quencies are obtained by a continuous wavelet transform
of the trajectories. In this approach a general time de-
pendent function f (t) is expressed in terms of the basis
functions constructed as translations and dilations of a
mother wavelet69

ψa,b(t) = a−1/2ψ

t

b
−
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(13)

The coeﬃcients of this expansion are given by the wavelet
transform of f (t), deﬁned as

Lψf (a, b) = a−1/2

f (t)ψ∗

∞

Z

−∞

t

b
−
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

dt

(14)

for a > 0 and b real. The wavelet transform gives the lo-
cal frequency of f (t) over a small interval of time around
t = b and inverse of the scale factor a is proportional to
the frequency. A distinct advantage of the wavelet ap-
proach is that the time window automatically narrows for
high frequency and widens for low frequency. The value
of the local frequency at a given time t = b is extracted47
by determining the scale a which maximizes the modu-
lus of the wavelet transform. Throughout this work, as in
Arevalo and Wiggins, we will use the Morlet-Grossman
mother wavelet

ψ(t) =

1
σ√2π

e2πiλte−t

2

2

/2σ

(15)

with λ = 1 and σ = 2. The parameters λ, σ can be tuned
to improve the resolution. Within the wavelet approach
the local frequencies can be obtained even for chaotic
trajectories. For a strongly chaotic trajectory the fre-
quencies will vary considerably and one can measure the
“diﬀusion” of the kth frequency by evaluating

dk(T ) =

T

1
T Z
0

dt

Ωk(t)
|

−

¯Ω

|

(16)

where ¯Ω is the mean frequency and T is the total time to
which the trajectory is propagated. This measure of dif-
fusion characterizes the unstable regions of phase space
and thus low diﬀusion implies either quasiperiodic motion
or extensive trapping near resonance zones (see below).
For our application to DCO we choose initial conditions
for the trajectories in the following fashion. A uniform
grid is chosen in the state (zeroth order action) space
(Im, In) with Ib being ﬁxed by the polyad conservation.
A particular choice of the angles (φm, φn, φb) then pro-
vides initial conditions corresponding to a speciﬁc slice

9

FIG. 4: The three frequency ratios for DCO for various tra-
jectories at energy E = 5145 cm−1. Total time of propagation
T = 10 ps. Ωm/Ωn is shown in blue, Ωm/Ωb is shown in red
and Ωn/Ωb is in green. See text for details on each trajectory.

p

of the phase space. The numerically integrated trajec-
tories over certain time interval [0, T ] are expressed as
2Ik(t)eiφk(t) for k = m, n, b. The three local
zk(t) =
frequencies Ωk(t) are extracted by computing the max-
ima of the modulus of the wavelet transforms of zk(t) i.e.,
maxa|
. Note that the maxima are obtained
Lψzk(a, b)
|
with a fractional precision of 10−8. Details regarding the
numerical procedure to extract the maxima can be found
in the work of Arevalo et al47.

A large number of trajectories for both P = 3 and
P = 4 at various energies were analysed and many dis-
tinct dynamical behaviours were repeatedly seen.
In
Fig.4 we show, as examples of such dynamical patterns,
six trajectories whose frequency ratios were computed to
about T = 10 ps. Note that 10 ps is a fairly long time
and corresponds to about 500 CO vibrational periods.
All of the six trajectories are at an energy E = 5145
cm−1 which is energetically close to the middle of the
polyad P = 3. The phase space structure is shown in
Fig.5 for reference and one can clearly see large regions
of stochasticity. Figure (a) shows a typical quasiperiodic,
nonresonant trajectory which in this case represents a
distorted local mode. The corresponding trajectory is
shown in the surface of section (circles in Fig.5) as well.
In Fig.4b a 1 : 1 resonant regular trajectory correspond-
ing to the small island on the surface of section is shown.
Notice the locking of the relevant frequency ratio i.e.,
1 for the entire duration. In Fig.4c a trajec-
Ωm/Ωn ≈
tory with initial conditions very close to a periodic orbit
of the full system is shown. All the frequency ratios are
locked perfectly for about 7 ps and later show large diﬀu-
sion. Interestingly in this case the nbb locking Ωn/Ωb = 2

10

FIG. 5: Classical Poincar´e surface of section at E = 5145
cm−1. The variables are Jm = Im and ψm = φm − 2φb.
Selected trajectories (cf. Fig.4) are highlighted with ﬁlled
circles (a), triangles (d), and squares (e). The highlighted
trajectories are plotted for about 5 ps.

FIG. 6: A trajectory for P = 4 exhibiting rapid frequency
jumps. For clarity the ratios Ωm/Ωb (solid line with points)
and Ωn/Ωb (dashed) are shown. Note that the jumps (in-
dicated by arrows) take the trajectory from being near mbb
resonance to being near the mn resonance. Only a 2.5 ps por-
tion of the 15 ps trajectory is shown. The jumps occur over
the entire time span.

is clearly seen and thus any other initial condition close
to this would certainly involve the nbb resonance to some
extent. In Fig.4d we show an example of a trajectory ex-
hibiting resonance trapping. This particular trajectory
is trapped in the 1 : 1 resonance for nearly 5 ps and then
drifts away. The corresponding trajectory is plotted in
the surface of section (triangles in Fig.5) and it is seen
that this trapping is due to the stickiness of the small 1 : 1
island. The trajectory is chaotic for longer times but the
observed stickiness suggests that even tiny regions of reg-
ularity in the phase space can suﬃciently inﬂuence the
dynamics. Another example of a trapped trajectory is
shown in Fig.4e with the corresponding behaviour on the
surface of section shown in Fig.5 (squares). In this case
the trajectory starts out with frequency locked in the
1 : 1 but drifts away quickly and gets trapped into the
2 ratio for almost 6 ps. Finally in Fig.4f we
Ωm/Ωb ≈
show a typical chaotic trajectory with large diﬀusion and
no apparent long time trapping in any of the fundamental
resonances. Two points are worth reiterating in the con-
text of the examples shown in Fig.4 and Fig.5. The ﬁrst
is that all these various, and other, dynamical behaviors
are found at the same energy indicating the rich struc-
ture inherent to the classical phase space. This energy
is by no means special and indeed similar observations
hold for other energies in the polyad P = 3 as well as dif-
ferent polyads. Secondly, the overall phase space might
look chaotic on long time scales but the regular regions,
even those with phase space area < ¯h, lead to signiﬁcant
stickiness49,55 and hence long time trappings in one or
the other signiﬁcant resonance zone. This observation,
we emphasize again, is not new and is well known in the

nonlinear dynamics community. However in this work we
are demonstrating this eﬀect for a realistic spectroscopic
Hamiltonian with important consequences for IVR in the
molecule.

A further dynamical eﬀect that occurs in DCO has to
do with rapid jumps in the frequency ratio space. An
example for P = 4 is shown in the Fig.6 where the ra-
tio Ωm/Ωb is undergoing rapid jumps between otherwise
smooth variations. Note that the ratio Ωn/Ωb is fairly
smooth and does not exhibit the rapid jumps. The jumps
in the frequency ratio happen from the trajectory being
near the mbb resonance to the trajectory being near the
mn resonance. Such rapid jumps have been observed by
Arevalo in OCS as well as the planar 3-body problem49.
In this instance the jumps seem to correspond to hete-
roclinic orbits that connect the mbb and the mn reso-
nance zones. However conﬁrming this involves comput-
ing invariant manifolds and their intersections which is
far from easy. Nevertheless, such rapid resonance tran-
sitions could have important implications for the nature
of IVR in DCO.

To indicate the strongly coupled nature of the DCO
dynamics we show the total diﬀusion for P = 4 over the
state space in Fig.7. In Fig.7a the diﬀusion is shown for
the phase space slice φm = φn = φb = 0. For refer-
ence Figs.7c,d show the diﬀusion data for integrable mn
and mbb subsystems. It is easy to see the mn and mbb
resonance zones in the integrable single resonance cases.
Comparing to Fig.7a it is clear that the resonances have
overlapped strongly. Further in Fig.7b we show the diﬀu-

11

FIG. 7: Total diﬀusion (ps−1) in the state space for P = 4 computed for T = 10 ps. In (a) and (b) the phase space slices are
(0, 0, 0) and (0, π, 0) respectively. The integrable subsystems are shown for reference in (c) mn and (d) mbb respectively. In
(c) and (d) the resonance zones can be seen clearly. In (a) and (d) there are no isolated resonances and the system is strongly
coupled.

sion for the phase space slice φm = 0 = φb, φn = π. Note
that the diﬀusions for the two slices of phase space are
dramatically diﬀerent. This implies that it is not possi-
ble to understand the intramolecular dynamics of DCO
based on H0 alone. A key observation here is that the
diﬀusions in state space show signiﬁcant heterogeneity.
For instance in Fig.7a,b we have regions of similar dif-
fusion strengths seperated by a region of larger diﬀusion
strengths. Thus if one imagines going along a speciﬁc mn
or mbb polyad in state space then alternating diﬀusion
strengths are encountered. Similarly along a speciﬁc en-
ergy contour the diﬀusion values can vary considerably.
This leads to trappings of the classical trajectory and
hence bottlenecks to energy ﬂow. For instance in Fig.7b
the region of low diﬀusion around (Im, In)
(1.0, 0.5) is
due to the existence of a periodic orbit of the full system.
In the semiclassical limit the heterogeneous nature of the
state space diﬀusion can have interesting consequences
for eigenstate localizations.

≈

Temps et al. discuss20 the diﬀerences between choos-

ing a CO-stretch bright state (experimental) versus the
DCO bend bright states.
It was shown that the DCO
bend states undergo much faster unimolecular decay. In
order to gain dynamical insights into their ﬁndings the
various bright states were analyzed from the LFA per-
spective. Several initial conditions corresponding to the
bright states i.e., E = EZOBS were generated with the
actions (Im, In, Ib) corresponding to the bright state of
interest and randomly choosing the angle (φm, φn, φb)
variables. The various dynamical quantities of interest
are then averaged over the angles. This is done for two
main reasons. First, although the correspondence be-
tween actions and quantum numbers is well known a sim-
ilar correspondence for angles is not very clear. In the
deep semiclassical limit one expects a correspondence but
the problem at hand is far from such a limit. Second ob-
servation is that the quantum dynamics associated with
a particular ZOBS, semiclassically speaking, would nat-
urally involve a family of classical trajectories which are
modeled here with the random angle distributions. The

1
-

s
p

 
,

T

 
/
 

>
c
<

s
p

 
,

>
τ
<

6

4

2

0

6

4

2

0

A B C D E F

a

c

1

0.5

0

5

4

3

2

b

d

s
p

 
,

 

>
m

 

τ
<

1
-

s
p

 
,

>
d
<

FIG. 8: Average crossings per unit time (a), average longest
locking time (b), total time near a speciﬁc resonance (c) and
diﬀusion of the frequencies (d) are shown in this ﬁgure for
six ZOBS. A, B, C, D, E, F correspond to the bright states
|030i, |040i, |050i, |006i, |008i, and |0010i respectively. Aver-
aging is done over 1000 trajectories and T = 10 ps. In (a),
(b), and (c) the ﬁlled circles and triangles correspond to the
mn and mbb resonances respectively while the open symbols
are for the case with knbb = 0. See text for details.

fact that the diﬀusion of the frequency ratios are strongly
dependent on the choice of the phase space slice further
support the procedure of angle averaging. The quan-
tities of interest are number of crossings per unit time
/T ), to-
of the two main resonances (denoted
cmn, cmbbi
h
),
tal time spent near the resonances (denoted
τmn, τmbbi
h
),
τmi
longest locking time in a given resonance (denoted
h
and the diﬀusions d(T ). In this study we have averaged
over 1000 trajectories with the angles chosen such that
1.0 cm−1 and each trajectory was propa-
E = EZOBS ±
gated to T = 10 ps.

In Fig.8 we show the various dynamical quantities of
interest for three of the experimental CO stretch bright
states and three of the bend only bright states corre-
sponding to the polyads P = 3, 4, 5. In Fig.8a the num-
ber of resonance crossings per unit time are shown. It is
immediately clear that the mn resonance plays a domi-
nant role for the CO stretch bright states and that the
mbb resonance is key for the bend bright states. Notice
bright states the ’ﬂux’
0010
that for the
|
across mn is almost zero. On the other hand despite
the dominance of mn ﬂux for the CO stetch ZOBS, the
mbb ﬂux is not negligible. This already provides a hint
to the drastically diﬀerent IVR dynamics from the two
being an exception. Fig.8b
classes of ZOBS with
i
shows the longest locking time, on average, for the dif-
ferent bright states. Interestingly even though the mn
ﬂux is larger than the mbb ﬂux for the CO stretch states

and the

003
|

008
|

i

i

12

the τm’s show the opposite trend. The total time spent
near a particular resonance as shown in Fig.8c also in-
dicates that the IVR from CO stretch states is strongly
eﬀected by the mbb resonance. The diﬀusions in Fig.8d
show marginal diﬀerences. A clear picture emerges for
the IVR dynamics associated with the CO stretch bright
states. Initially the mn resonance transfers energy to the
DC stretch (dissociation mode) but prior to a substantial
buildup of excitation in the DC stretch the energy is “si-
phoned oﬀ” into the bend mode via the mbb resonance.
This process happens for a fairly long time leading to
a highly nonstatistical nature of the dynamics and uni-
molecular decay of DCO. On the other hand for the bend
bright states corresponding to P = 4, 5 the initial IVR
dynamics is dominated by the mbb resonance. However
the mn resonance is unable to compete and this results
in unhindered transfer of energy to the dissociative mode
via the mbb coupling. Exception to the nature of bend
ZOBS is clearly seen in the case of
wherein the mn
resonance does compete and leads to transfer of energy
from the dissociative mode to the CO stretch mode. An
important observation is that the diﬀusion of frequencies
computed here is the lowest for the ZOBS
which
undergoes the fastest unimolecular decay. This is not a
contradiction since large difusion corresponds to many
hops and consequent locking leading to incomplete ﬂow
of energy into the dissociative mode. For example the
largest diﬀusion is predicted for the ZOBS
which
is consistent with the fact that the times spent near the
two main resonances are similar as compared to the other
states. Thus
should decay the slowest which is con-
ﬁrmed by computing the associated survival probability
(cf. ﬁgure 3(b) in Ref. 20). It is interesting to observe
that the diﬀusions for the CO stretch bright states are
not very diﬀerent whereas in the case of the bend bright
states there is a large variation. This demonstrates the
mode-speciﬁcity of the intramolecular dynamics of DCO.

0010
|

006
|

006
|

006
|

i

i

i

i

i

and

040
|

030
|

In Fig.8 the eﬀect of setting knbb = 0 is shown. It is
clear that the largest eﬀect of the nbb Fermi resonance
is for the CO stretch bright states
. In
i
the absence of nbb the mn ﬂux is decreased and the mbb
ﬂux is increased with larger time being spent, on the
average, near the mbb Fermi resonance. This indicates
that the CO stretch bright states would lead to smaller
rates of unimolecular decay in the absence of the nbb
resonance. This is true for the bend bright states as well
although the eﬀect is very small. Thus the role of nbb
Fermi resonance is not negligible for the lower polyads.
As a ﬁnal observation we point out that amongst the CO
stretch bright states there is a sharp increase, on going
, in the average residence time and
from
i
the average longest locking time for the mn resonance.
This perhaps explains the eﬃciency of the mn resonance
in P = 4 but at this stage it is conjectural.

030
|

040
|

to the

i

V. CONCLUSIONS

A long term goal of our research is to come up with
techniques that would allow fairly detailed classical-
quantum correspondence studies of highly excited states
in systems with three degrees of freedom or more. To this
end two dimensionality independent techiniques, para-
metric variations and local frequency analysis, have been
employed in this study. We have demonstrated the utility
of both the techniques for understanding the intramolec-
ular dynamics of DCO. The successes of both the tech-
niques, in dynamical assignments of states and establish-
ing the nonstatistical nature of the dynamics, given the
strongly coupled nature of the system (coupling strengths
comparable to the mean level spacing) is quite encourag-
ing. We conclude with brief comments on the techniques
and future outlook.

The level velocity approach, used to dynamically as-
sign the eigenstates, is certainly capable of identifying
strongly localized states. The close connections between
the level velocity of an eigenstate and its corresponding
phase space nature makes this approach attractive. Pre-
vious application50 to a mixed 2-mode system demon-
strated the utility of the level velocities for dynamical
assignments of the highly excited states.
In this work
we have shown that the method is useful even in the
presence of signiﬁcant chaos. Although avoided crossings
lead to diﬃculties, and this is not surprising, it is debat-
able wether the resulting mixed states can be or should
be assigned. Demixing the states invovled in avoided
crossings and then analyzing them can be done within
this approach as in any other approach. However the
procedure of demixing, especially in multistate or broad
avoided crossings, should not be considered as an assign-
ment. This work shows that analyzing the level veloc-
ities in conjunction with measures like IPRs can be a
fairly useful way of dynamically assigning highly excited
states. At this stage the eﬀects of various bifurcations on
the level velocity spectrum is not known. Interestingly in
the case of DCO, despite substantial change in the phase
space structure with changing energies, the level velocity
corresponding to a state localized about stable regions
is very close to the classical estimate. This has been
observed before50 in the case of HCP as well. This sug-
gests a very detailed classical-quantum correspondence
and needs to be studied further. In order to make this ap-
proach more useful it is important to obtain some bounds
on the level velocities in the mixed and strongly chaotic
situations. Thus a semiclassical theory for the velocities
in the chaotic regimes needs to be developed and work is
in progress in our group along these lines. Note that the
distribution of the velocities has been found to be gaus-
sian in the strong chaos limit70. The general technique
of parametric variations has a wide range of applications
and level curvatures have also been studied70. It remains
to be seen if the level curvatures have any utility in un-
derstanding highly excited states and IVR. For example
conductance of disordered systems have been related to

13

level curvatures54,70,71 and given the tantalizing similar-
ities between the example mentioned and IVR it seems
worthwhile to investigate the utility of level curvatures
in molecular systems.

The LFA technique is able to provide detailed phase
space information in a strongly coupled system like DCO.
In particular the time-frequency analysis revealed the ex-
istence of trajectories trapped near important resonance
zones. In an eﬀective spectroscopic Hamiltonian the key
resonances are easy to expect since the ﬁt already builds
in the main resonant perturbations but LFA is able to
provide information on the competing roles of these var-
ious resonances. An example is the clear diﬀerences be-
tween the CO-stretch bright state and DCO bend bright
state dynamics for DCO. LFA is also able to highlight
the role of weak resonances like the nbb Fermi resonance.
As shown in this work and in the previous works the
wavelet based approach to LFA is useful in analyzing
eﬀective Hamiltonians and various dynamical quantities
can be determined to understand IVR. LFA clearly shows
that despite signiﬁcant chaos the DCO phase space is far
from the RMT regime. In this paper it is shown that even
for a strongly coupled system like DCO the state space
diﬀusion has a lot of structure with regions of high and
low diﬀusions interspersed thorughout. The diﬀusion of
frequencies provides clear insights into the dynamics at
a particular polyad and/or a speciﬁc energy. This infor-
mation can then be used to determine the nature of the
’random walk’ in action space for strongly coupled sys-
tems and thus provide more insights into certain recent
conjectures67 regarding the intermediate time behavior of
survival probabilities. Although not shown here most of
the trajectories exhibit across-resonance diﬀusion which
is quite fast and implicates higher order secondary res-
onances as well45,72. The rapid frequency jumps which
perhaps correspond to heteroclinic orbits joining unsta-
ble periodic orbits have not been investigated in detail.
Surely the rapid jumps from one resonance to another
have important consequences for IVR and needs further
study. We also note that there is not much of an Arnol’d
web for DCO for P = 3, 4 in contrast47 to H2O. DCO
being eﬀectively two dimensional implies that there is
no transport along resonance lines and thus many of
the interesting conjectures put forward41,42 by Martens,
Davis, and Ezra remain to be tested. Currently work is
in progress for true three degree of freedom systems.

As a ﬁnal note we mention that both techniques used
in the current study probe localiztion characteristics.
The parametric response is probing eigenstate localiza-
tion and the LFA is probing localization of phase space
transport due to partial barriers and broken seperatri-
ces. Localization explicitly implies nonstatistical behav-
ior and thus deviations from RMT and incomplete IVR in
the system. Evidence exists73,74 that the quantized ver-
sions of the partial barriers can be more restrictive than
the classical analogs. A interesting link between these
two approaches is provided by the recently proposed
intensity-velocity correlator51,52,53. Detailed studies of

true three degrees of freedom system via the intensity-
velocity correlator can lead to a better understanding of
the IVR dynamics.

to time-frequency analysis. We are also grateful to Prof.
Greg Ezra for sending us a copy of the unpublished work
Ref.42. This work is supported by funds from the De-
partment of Science and Technology, India.

14

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It is a pleasure to acknowledge useful discussions with
Dr. L. V. Arevalo regarding the wavelet based approach

6 M. Gruebele and R. Bigwood, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 17,

Chem. Phys. 81, 1115 (1984).

1 M. Bixon and J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys. 48, 715 (1968).
2 S. A. Rice, Adv. Chem. Phys. 47, 117 (1981).
3 T. Uzer, Phys. Rep. 199, 73 (1991).
4 K. K. Lehmann, G. Scoles, and B. H. Pate, Annu. Rev.

Phys. Chem. 45, 241 (1994).

5 D. J. Nesbitt and R. W. Field, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 12735

(1996).

91 (1998).

323 (2000).

7 M. Gruebele, Adv. Chem. Phys. 114, 193 (2000).
8 J. C. Keske and B. H. Pate, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 51,

9 M. Gruebele, Theor. Chem. Acc. 109, 53 (2003).
10 T. Baer and W. L. Hase, Unimolecular Reaction Dynamics:
Theory and Experiments, Oxford University press, Oxford,
1996.

11 J. S. Hutchinson, E. L. Sibert III, and J. T. Hynes, J.

Chem. Phys. 81, 1314 (1984).

12 A. A. Stuchebrukhov and R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys.

98, 8443 (1993).

13 R. T. Lawton and M. S. Child, Mol. Phys. 37, 1799 (1979).
14 M. J. Davis and E. J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 75, 246

(1981).

15 E. J. Heller, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 2625 (1995).
16 S. Keshavamurthy, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 161 (2003).
17 See C. St¨ock, X. Li, H. -M. Keller, R. Schinke, and F.
Temps, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 5333 (1997) and references
therein.

18 H. -M. Keller, M. Stumf, T. Schr¨oder, C. St¨ock, F. Temps,
R. Schinke, H. -J. Werner, C. Bauer, and P. Rosmus, J.
Chem. Phys. 106, 5359 (1997).

19 S. Stamatiadis, S. C. Farantos, H. -M. Keller, and R.

Schinke, Chem. Phys. Lett. 344, 565 (2001).

20 F. Renth, F. Temps, and A. Tr¨ollsch, J. Chem. Phys. 118,

21 C. Jung, H. S. Taylor, and E. Atilgan, J. Phys. Chem. A

22 A. Tr¨ollsch and F. Temps, Z. Phys. Chem. (Munich) 215,

659 (2003).

106, 3092 (2002).

207 (2001).

23 See R. E. Wyatt and C. Iung in Dynamics of Molecules
and Chemical Reactions Eds. R. E. Wyatt and J. Z. H.
Zhang, pp 59, Marcel Dekker, NY, 1996.

24 A. A. Stuchebrukhov, A. Mehta, and R. A. Marcus, J.

Phys. Chem. 97, 12491 (1993).

B. I. Zhilinskii, Phys. Rep. 341, 85 (2001); M. S. Child,
J. Molec. Spec. 210, 157 (2001); M. J. Davis, Int. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 14, 15 (1995); M. P. Jacobson and R. W.
Field, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 3073 (2000); M. Joyeux, S.
C. Farantos, and R. Schinke, J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 5407
(2002).

27 E. L. Sibert III, W. P. Reinhardt, and J. T. Hynes, J.

28 Z. Lu and M. E. Kellman, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 1 (1997).
29 S. Keshavamurthy and G. S. Ezra, J. Chem. Phys. 107,

30 S. Keshavamurthy and G. S. Ezra. Chem. Phys. Lett. 259,

156 (1997).

81 (1996).

31 M. P. Jacobson, C. Jung, H. S. Taylor, and R. W. Field,

J. Chem. Phys. 111, 600 (1999).

32 H. Ishikawa, R. W. Field, S. C. Farantos, M. Joyeux, J.
Koput, C. Beck, and R. Schinke, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
50, 443 (1999).

33 C. Jung, E. Ziemniak, and H. S. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys.

34 C. C. Martens and W. P. Reinhardt, J. Chem. Phys. 93,

115, 2499 (2001).

5621 (1990).

35 C. C. Martens, J. Stat. Phys. 68, 207 (1992).
36 K. M. Atkins and D. E. Logan, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 2438

(1992).

37 See P. Lochak in Hamiltonian Systems with Three or More
Degrees of Freedom, Ed. C. Sim´o, pp 168, NATO ASI Se-
ries, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1999 and references therein.
38 G. Contopoulos, S. C. Farantos, H. Papadaki, C. Polymilis,

Phys. Rev. E 50, 4399 (1994).

39 R. E. Gillilan and G. S. Ezra, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 2648

(1991).

40 D. Begie, J. Nonlinear Sci. 5, 57 (1995).
41 C. C. Martens, M. J. Davis, and G. S. Ezra, Chem. Phys.

Lett. 142, 519 (1987).

42 C. C. Martens, M. J. Davis, and G. S. Ezra, unpublished.
43 D. Carter and P. Brumer, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 4208 (1982).
44 M. J. Davis, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 1016 (1985).
45 J. Laskar, Physica D 67, 257 (1993); See J. Laskar in
Hamiltonian Systems with Three or More degrees of Free-
dom, pp 134, NATO-ASI, Kluwer Dordrect, 1999.

46 J. von Milczewski, D. Farrelly, and T. Uzer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 78, 1436 (1997).

47 L. V. Vela-Arevalo and S. Wiggins, Int. J. Bifurcations and

25 D. V. Shalashilin and M. S. Child, J. Chem. Phys. 119,

Chaos 11, 1359 (2001).

1961 (2003).

26 M. E. Kellman, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 46, 395 (1995);
G. S. Ezra, Adv. Class. Traj. Meth. 1, 1 (1992); M. J.
Davis, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 14, 15 (1995); G. S. Ezra,
Adv. Class. Traj. Meth. 3, 35 (1998) and references therein;

48 J. C. Losada, J. M. Estebaranz, and R. M. Benito, J.

Chem. Phys. 108, 63 (1998).

49 L. V. Vela-Arevalo, Time-Frequency analysis based on
wavelets for Hamiltonian systems, Ph.D. Thesis, Caltech,
2002.

15

50 A. Semparithi, V. Charulatha, and S. Keshavamurthy, J.

Chem. Phys. 118, 1146 (2003).

51 S. Tomsovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4158 (1996); N. R. Cer-
ruti, A. Lakshminarayan, J. H. Lefebvre, and S. Tomsovic,
Phys. Rev. E 63, 016208 (2001); A. Lakshminarayan, N. R.
Cerruti, and S. Tomsovic, Phys. Rev. E 63, 016209 (2001).
52 S. Keshavamurthy, N. R. Cerruti, and S. Tomsovic, J.

Chem. Phys. 117, 4168 (2002).

53 N. R. Cerruti, S. Keshavamurthy, and S. Tomsovic, Phys.

Rev. E (2003), submitted.

54 D. J. Thouless, Phys. Rep. 13C, 93 (1974).
55 See for example, K. Tsiganis, A. Anastasiadis, and H. Var-
voglis, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 11, 2281 (2000) and
references therein; A. Iomin and G. M. Zaslavsky, Chem.
Phys. 284, 3 (2002); B. J. West, Chem. Phys. 284, 45
(2002).

56 B. V. Chirikov, Phys. Rep. 52, 263 (1979).
57 S. Keshavamurthy, J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 2668 (2001).
58 M. V. Berry, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 287, 237

(1977); M. V. Berry, J. Phys. A 10, 2083 (1977).

59 A. Voros in Stochastic behaviour in Classical and Quantum
Hamiltonian Systems (Lecture Notes in Physics 93), pp 326
Ed. G. Casati and J. Ford, Springer, NY 1979.

60 A. M. Ozorio de Almeida, Hamiltonian Systems: Chaos
and Quantization (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1988).

61 L. Kaplan and E. J. Heller, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 264, 171

(1998).

62 B. Eckhardt, S. Fishman, K. M¨uller, and D. Wintgen,

64 A. M. Ozorio de Almeida in Quantum Chaos and Statisti-
cal Nuclear Physics, Ed. T. H. Seligman and H. Nishioka,
Lecture Notes in Physics 263 (Springer, Berlin, 1986); D.
Ullmo, M. Grinberg, and S. Tomsovic, Phys. Rev. E 54,
136 (1996).

65 M. C. Gutzwiller, J. Math. Phys. 12, 343 (1971).
66 This is a generalization of the familiar semiclassical ma-
trix elements in one dimension wherein the quantum mean
value of an observable is expressed as a classical time av-
erage of the observable over the period of a mean orbit.
See M. S. Child, Semiclassical Mechanics with Molecular
Applications, section 5.2, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991.
67 S. A. Schoﬁeld, R. E. Wyatt, and P. G. Wolynes, J. Chem.
Phys. 105, 940 (1996); V. Wong and M. Gruebele, J. Phys.
Chem. A 103, 10083 (1999); S. Keshavamurthy, Chem.
Phys. Lett. 300, 281 (1999).

68 J. D. Meiss, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 795 (1992) and refer-
ences therein; R. S. Mackay and J. D. Meiss, Hamiltonian
Dynamical Systems, see part 6, Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1987.
69 Y. Meyer, Wavelets: Algorithms and Applications, SIAM,

Philadelphia, 1993.

70 See F. Haake, Quantum Signatures of Chaos, chapter 6,

2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 2000).

71 D. Braun, E. Hofstetter, A. MacKinnon, and G. Montam-
baux, Phys. Rev. B 55, 7557 (1997); D. Braun and G.
Montambaux, Phys. Rev. B 50, 7776 (1994); Y. V. Fyo-
dorov and H. -J. Sommers, Phys. Rev. E 51, R2719 (1995).

72 G. Haller, Phys. Lett. A 200, 34 (1995).
73 G. Radons, T. Geisel, and J. Rubner, Adv. Chem. Phys.

Phys. Rev. A 45, 3531 (1992).

LXXIII, 891 (1989).

63 M. V. Berry and M. Tabor, Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. A

74 R. C. Brown and R. E. Wyatt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1

349, 101 (1976).

(1986).

