3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Two-dimensional trapping of dipolar molecules in time-varying electric ﬁelds

T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse, and G. Rempe
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Hans-Kopfermann-Str. 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany
(Dated: February 21, 2014, PREPRINT)

Simultaneous two-dimensional trapping of neutral dipolar molecules in low- and high-ﬁeld seeking
states is analyzed. A trapping potential of the order of 10 mK can be produced for molecules like
ND3 with time-dependent electric ﬁelds. The analysis is in agreement with our experiment where
slow molecules with longitudinal velocities of the order of 10 m/s are guided between four 50 cm long
rods driven by an alternating electric potential at a variable frequency of a few kHz.

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps, 33.55.Be, 39.10.+j

Cold molecules oﬀer new perspectives, e.g.

for high
precision measurements [1] and collisional physics stud-
ies [2]. Pioneering work on cold molecules has been done
using cryogenic buﬀer gas cooling [3]. Another promising
technique for the production of cold molecules is based on
the interaction of dipolar molecules with inhomogeneous
electric ﬁelds. For example, low-ﬁeld seeking molecules
(LFS) have been slowed down in suitably tailored time-
varying electric ﬁelds [4] and have been trapped in in-
homogeneous electrostatic ﬁelds
[5, 6]. Furthermore,
eﬃcient ﬁltering [7] of slow LFS from an eﬀusive thermal
source using a bent electrostatic quadrupole guide has
been demonstrated [8].

Compared to LFS, the manipulation of high-ﬁeld seek-
ing molecules (HFS) is much more diﬃcult. This is
mainly due to the fact that electrostatic maxima are not
allowed in free space, and hence, HFS are quickly lost
on the electrodes. Nevertheless, guiding of HFS in Kep-
pler orbits
[9] and deceleration as well as acceleration
of HFS [10] is possible. Despite this progress in manip-
ulating dipolar molecules, all techniques realized so far
are well suited only for either LFS or HFS, not both si-
multaneously. But in future experiments with trapped
samples of cold molecules, collisions or the interaction
with light ﬁelds are likely to change HFS into LFS and
vice versa. Therefore, a technique to trap both species
simultaneously is vital.

In this Letter we report on the ﬁrst experimental
demonstration of two-dimensional trapping of slow ND3
molecules from an eﬀusive source in a bent four-wire
guide driven by an alternating electric ﬁeld. The tech-
nique, applicable to both HFS and LFS, is analyzed in
detail and the motion of both species in the guide is dis-
cussed.

Trapping of neutral particles in oscillating electric
ﬁelds [11] has many analogies to trapping of ions in Paul
traps. Our realization for molecules is sketched in Fig. 1.
We have four long wire electrodes [12], which are longitu-
dinally invariant so that in the following we can focus on
the electric ﬁeld in the transverse xy-plane. The oscillat-
ing electric ﬁeld is obtained by rapidly switching between
the two dipole conﬁgurations with angular frequency ω.
Taking only the leading terms, the ﬁeld can be expanded
harmonically around the center,

a

b

y

x

electrode
pair
2

1

time

on
off

on
off

E[kV/cm]
50.0

0

config. 1)

config. 2)

±

FIG. 1: Schematic of the four-wire setup for typical oper-
5 kV. The voltages on a pair of opposite
ating voltages of
electrodes are switched as shown in (a) in order to produce
a time-varying ﬁeld that alternates between conﬁgurations 1)
and 2) shown in (b) with a repetition rate in the kHz range.
The exit threshold used in simulations is indicated by the
dashed circles with radius rmax.

E = E0 + H(t)β(x2

y2),

−

(1)

−

2 )T and H(t) =

where E0 is the ﬁeld in the center and β is (half) the
curvature of the ﬁeld. The step function H(t) = 1 if
nT < t < (n + 1
1 otherwise, with
T = 2π/ω the period of the driving ﬁeld and n an in-
teger. The force acting upon a polar molecule is given
by ~F =
W (E), with W (E) the Stark energy of the
molecule. Non-polar molecules and atoms usually expe-
1
2 αE2, with the
rience a quadratic Stark eﬀect W =
polarizability α. Polar molecules like ND3 and H2CO
experience a linear Stark shift W = sE, where s is the
slope of the Stark shift.

~
∇

−

−

Independent of the exact shape and the sign of the
Stark shift, the saddle-like dipole potential derived from
Eq.
(1) conﬁnes the particle in one direction and re-
pels it in the perpendicular direction, depending on time.
Therefore, the time average of the force is small at every

position, and identical to zero for a linear Stark shift.
However, similar to the motion of an ion in a Paul trap,
the particle performs a micromotion which is locked to
the external driving ﬁeld in such a way that the time-
averaged force does not cancel and the particle expe-
riences a net attractive force towards the center. This
conclusion is independent from the exact form of H(t).
Therefore, a sinusoidal change between two conﬁgura-
tions would also work. However, instantaneous switch-
ing is more convenient to realize in the laboratory. As
the x and y degrees of freedom separate, the equation of
motion is reduced to one dimension. It reads

¨x =

H(t)Ω2x,

−

(2)

where we have introduced the squared frequency Ω2 =
2sβ/m for a linear Stark shift and Ω2 = 2αE0β/m
for a quadratic Stark shift of a particle with mass m.
Following [13], we search for periodic solutions of the
form (x(t), ˙x(t)) = U (t)(x(t0), ˙x(t0)) with U (nT + t) =
U (t)[U (T )]n. The solution of these coupled linear diﬀer-
ential equations yields U (T ) = U2(T )U1(T ), where U1
and U2 are the evolution operators for each half cycle
given by:

U1 =

U2 =

1
Ω sinh(T Ω/2)

cosh(T Ω/2)
Ω sinh(T Ω/2) cosh(T Ω/2)) (cid:19)
1
Ω sin(T Ω/2)

cos(T Ω/2)
Ω sin(T Ω/2) cos(T Ω/2)) (cid:19)

.

,

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

−

(3)

(4)

≤

The trajectories are stable if the magnitude of none of
the both eigenvalues of U (T ) exceeds one. From this,
the main stable region can be found for ΩT
3.75. Sim-
ilar to the case of Paul traps, narrow higher-order stable
regions also exist. Concentrating on the main stability
region, there exists a sharp drive-frequency threshold for
every Stark shift, above which trapping is possible, irre-
spective of the sign of the Stark shift and independent
of the initial conditions. Assuming a ﬁnite extension of
our alternating saddle trap up to
xmax, the trap
| ≤
depth is also ﬁnite.
It can be estimated by averaging
over the micromotion, which is assumed to be smaller
and faster than the macromotion. This results in a trap
depth U = mπ2x2

maxΩ4/(24ω2) [14].

x
|

The trap depth is an important number for any exper-
imental realization of the system. For a more realistic
In par-
estimate, a detailed analysis should be made.
ticular, for drive frequencies close to the stability edge,
the micromotion cannot be considered small compared to
the macromotion and we expect the trap depth to devi-
ate from the ω−2 law. Also, as is obvious from Fig. 1, the
harmonic approximation is only valid in a small region
around the center of the guide. This region is a small frac-
tion of the total area accessible to the molecules. More-
over, away from the center, the time-average of the con-
ﬁgurations 1) and 2) is not zero, and there are regions
with a net attractive or repulsive time-average force. Dif-
ferent from the situation in a Paul trap where ~
~F = 0,
the molecule-ﬁeld interaction in the Stark guide allows

∇ ·

2

= 0 away from the center. This can lead to diﬀer-

~F

~
∇ ·
ent behavior for HFS and LFS.

To take all these eﬀects into account, we have per-
formed a two-dimensional Monte Carlo simulation.
In
the simulation, point-like particles are injected on-axis
in a random phase of the driving ﬁeld. The input veloc-
ities vx and vy are varied. The particles are propagated
under the inﬂuence of the periodically poled Stark force
for 10 ms, a typical time in the experiment. They are
considered lost if they leave a radius rmax = 1.25 mm.
The amount of trapped trajectories can be expressed as
an area A in the two-dimensional vxvy-velocity space. A
is a good measure for the trap depth. Results for four dif-
ferent molecular states exhibiting linear Stark shifts with
a slope of
cm )
±
are plotted in Fig. 2. For a molecular state with a Stark
shift of 1.2 cm−1/(100 kV
cm ) the trap depth is of the order
of 10 mK for our experimental parameters.

1.2 cm−1/(100 kV

0.6 cm−1/(100 kV

cm ) and

±

FIG. 2: Area of guided molecules in transverse-velocity space
obtained from a two-dimensional Monte-Carlo simulation.
Curves for low-ﬁeld seeking (H, H) and high-ﬁeld seeking
(N, N) ND3 molecules with the given Stark shifts are dis-
played. The substructure visible for low-ﬁeld seekers is an
eﬀect of the anharmonicity of the trap.

As expected, there is a sharp turn-on frequency above
which guiding is possible both for LFS and HFS. For
increasing frequencies, the area A reaches a maximum
before decreasing again for higher frequencies. Note that
the maximum of A is approximately four times larger for
LFS than for HFS, indicating that LFS can be guided
more eﬃciently. This is due to the anharmonicity of the
trapping potential away from the center, where stable
trajectories exist for LFS with comparatively high initial
velocities. This eﬀect also causes the substructure in the
LFS curves in Fig. 2. For HFS the stability of a trajectory
is more critical and stable regions are much smaller than
for LFS.

Another consequence of the anharmonicity is that the
boundary between trapped and non-trapped trajectories
now depends on the propagation time. Clearly, the mo-

6
tion in the full anharmonic potential can be very com-
plicated. In fact, we have found numerical evidence for
chaotic motion for some initial conditions. But despite
of the complicated dynamics, LFS and HFS are simul-
taneously trapped and there is a broad overlap between
the trapping regions for diﬀerent Stark shifts at the same
frequencies, as evident from Fig. 2.

detector

diff. pumping

quadrupole

gas inlet

nozzle

FIG. 3: Schematic of the experimental setup. ND3 Molecules
emerging from the nozzle are injected into the guide. The
slowest molecules are kept within the guide and after passing
two diﬀerential pumping stages they enter a UHV chamber
where they are detected with a mass spectrometer. The fast
molecules are pumped away.

Our experimental demonstration of AC guiding uses
an eﬀusive source of thermal polar ND3 molecules, see
the setup shown in Fig. 3 [8]. The double-bent guide
consists of four wires which pass through two vacuum
chambers with two diﬀerential pumping sections before
ending in an UHV detection chamber. The guide has a
length of 500 mm and is made of 2 mm diameter stain-
less steel rods, with a 1 mm gap between neighboring
rods. The radii of curvature of the two bends are
25 mm and the rods are built around the 0.8 mm in-
ner diameter ceramic nozzle, constituting the eﬀusive
source. Typical operation pressures in the nozzle are
around 0.05 mbar in order to maintain molecular-ﬂow
conditions. Most of the molecules are not guided and
escape into the ﬁrst vacuum chamber, where an opera-
tional pressure of a few times 10−7 mbar is maintained.
In the detection chamber, where a pressure below 10−10
mbar is achieved, the guided molecules are detected by a
quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS)[Hiden Analytical,
HAL 301/3F] with a pulse-counting channeltron. The
ionization volume of the QMS begins 22 mm behind the
guide. To protect the QMS from the high electric ﬁelds,
a metal shield with a 5 mm diameter hole is placed 1 cm
behind the exit of the guide. The time-varying electric
ﬁelds are generated by switching high voltages with fast
push-pull switches. Switching frequencies are typically in
the range of a few kHz. In each phase of the alternating
7 kV, which
ﬁeld, opposite rods carry voltages of up to

±

3

give rise to an electric ﬁeld of 40 kV/cm in the center of
the guide. The ﬁeld distribution is shown in Fig. 1. Due
to the inversion splitting of the vibrational ground state,
ND3 shows in good approximation a linear Stark shift in
the relevant electric ﬁeld range (0-100) kV/cm [15].

FIG. 4: (a) Molecular ﬂux as a function of the applied fre-
quency for rod voltages of
5 kV. The graph in the inset
±
shows the frequency of maximum ﬂux, ω0, as a function of
√V
the applied voltage. The dashed line indicates the ω0
dependence. (b) Flux as a function of the applied voltage.
For each voltage, the frequency is adjusted for maximum ﬂux
according to (a). The line is a quadratic ﬁt.

∝

For detecting ND3 molecules the quadrupole mass ﬁl-
ter is set to mass 20. The inﬂuence of other gases at
this mass is negligible. The experiment does not provide
state-selective detection, which is very diﬃcult to achieve
if one considers the variety of molecular states involved
in a thermal (room-temperature) ensemble. Our simula-
tion, however, shows that the detection of HFS is sup-
pressed, because under the inﬂuence of the high electric
ﬁelds the HFS turn around at the exit of the guide, mov-
ing backwards on its outside, or they are reﬂected back
into the guide. The detection eﬃciency of the QMS is
10−4 counts/molecule. The pulses from
of the order of
the channeltron are processed in a multi-channel scaler.
In our experiment, the alternating electric ﬁeld is pe-
riodically applied for 200 ms followed by a 200 ms break
where no ﬁeld is applied. This on-oﬀ sequence is repeated
about 40000 times to obtain a good signal-to-noise ratio.
From the instant when the alternating ﬁeld is switched

≈

on, the molecules can propagate along the guide. The
fastest molecules reach the detector after about 10 ms.
50 ms later the slowest molecules with velocities around
10 m/s contribute to the ﬂux. When the alternating ﬁeld
is switched oﬀ the ﬂux instantaneously falls oﬀ. The
same measurement without injecting gas yields no signal,
which therefore must be caused by the guided molecules
and not by electric disturbances of the QMS. The ﬂux of
guided molecules is determined by subtracting the back-
ground count rate from the count rate during the last
50 ms of the 200 ms-long interval where the ﬁeld is ap-
plied.

±

≈

We now investigate the frequency dependence of the
system. For electrode voltages of
5 kV, the switching
frequency is varied between (4-15) kHz, and the ﬂux of
guided molecules is recorded in frequency steps of 500 Hz.
The experimental data in Fig. 4a show that the signal
amplitude reaches a pronounced maximum at a frequency
of
8 kHz, as expected from Fig. 2. No discernible sig-
nal is observed for frequencies below 4 kHz. This behav-
ior can be understood from the simple analytic theory
above, acknowledging the thermal ensemble of molecular
states. For every molecular state there exists a cut-oﬀ fre-
quency corresponding to the associated Stark shift below
which no guiding is possible. This frequency increases
with the Stark shift. For example, the cut-oﬀ frequencies
for molecules with Stark shifts of 0.6 cm−1 and 1.2 cm−1
at an electric ﬁeld strength of 100 kV/cm in our guide
are 3.3 kHz and 4.7 kHz, respectively. For small frequen-
cies stable trajectories exist only for molecules with small
Stark shifts. These molecules are unlikely to be guided
as the potential depth is too small compared to their ki-
netic energy. Higher frequencies allow stable trajectories
for molecules with higher Stark shifts and so the num-
ber of guidable states increases. Furthermore the guiding
eﬃciency for molecules with higher Stark shifts is much
higher. Both eﬀects cause the rise in the count rate for
frequencies below 8 kHz. For higher frequencies the count

4

rate decreases because the guided ﬂux for every molec-
ular state depends on the depth of the potential which
drops oﬀ with ω−2.

∝

∝

≤

3.75 with Ω

Our conclusions are supported by two additional mea-
surements. First, the dependence between the applied
voltage and the frequency ω0 for which optimum guid-
ing exists is analyzed. The stable region is given by
√β. As the curvature β scales
ΩT
√V .
linearly with the applied voltage V , we obtain ω0
Experimental data are shown together with the expected
square root dependence in the inset of Fig. 4a. Unfortu-
nately, the measurements cover only a small voltage in-
terval, because for small voltages no guiding signal could
be obtained, whereas sparks occurred for higher voltages.
Nevertheless, the measured data agree with the calcu-
lated scaling. This allows one to choose the optimum
switching frequency for a given voltage. In a second mea-
surement, the ﬂux is measured as a function of the ap-
plied voltage, using the optimum frequency for each volt-
age. The experimental data in Fig. 4b show a quadratic
rise in ﬂux with increasing voltage. This is expected for a
molecule like ND3, where most states have a linear Stark
shift [8].

To summarize, the experiment presented here shows
that two-dimensional trapping of neutral molecules from
a thermal reservoir at room temperature is possible with
alternating electric ﬁelds. Our simulation shows that
both HFS and LFS are guided, whereas the low-ﬁeld seek-
ers are guided and detected with a higher eﬃciency. The
guiding eﬃciency for both species will further increase if
the injected molecules are precooled with cryogenic meth-
ods. An important aspect of our guide is that it is suited
to trap laser-cooled atoms as well [11]. Two-dimensional
trapping of both atoms and molecules should therefore be
possible. This opens up new possibilities to investigate
atom-molecule collisions for cooling molecules. Finally,
an extension of our technique to trap suﬃciently slow
molecules in three dimensions [11] should be feasible.

[1] J.J. Hudson, B.E. Sauer, M.R. Tarbutt, and E.A. Hinds,

[8] S.A. Rangwala, T. Junglen, T. Rieger, P.W.H. Pinkse,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. A 67, 043406 (2003).

[2] N. Balakrishnan, A. Dalgarno, Chem. Phys. Lett. 341,

[9] H.J. Loesch and B. Scheel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2709-

652-656 (2001).

[3] J.D. Weinstein et al., Nature (London) 395, 148 (1998).
[4] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

2712, (2000).

[10] H.L. Bethlem, A.J.A. van Roij, R.T. Jongma, and G.

Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 133003 (2002).

[11] F. Shimizu and M. Morinaga, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 31,

[5] F.M.H. Crompvoets, H.L. Bethlem, R.T. Jongma, and

L1721 (1992).

G. Meijer, Nature 411, 174 (2001).

[6] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T.
Jongma, A.J.A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Nature 406,
491 (2000).

[7] P.W.H. Pinkse, T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala,
and G. Rempe, Interactions in Ultracold Gases, edited
by M. Weidem¨uller and C. Zimmermann, (Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, 2003).

[12] D. Auerbach, E.E.A. Bromberg, and L. Wharton, J.

Chem. Phys. 45, 2160 (1966).

[13] M. Morinaga and F. Shimizu, Laser Physics 4, No. 2, 412

(1994).

[14] P.K. Ghosh, Ion Traps, (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995).
[15] C.H. Townes and A.L. Schawlow, Microwave Spec-
troscopy, (Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1975).

