4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photoluminescence studies study of a phenyl-substituted PPV

Vladimir A. Sautenkov†⋄, Steven A. van den Berg†, Gert W. ’t Hooft†‡, and Eric R. Eliel† ∗
† Huygens Laboratory, Leiden University, P.O.Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

‡ Philips Research Laboratories, Prof. Holstlaan 4, 5656 AA Eindhoven, The Netherlands
⋄ Lebedev Institute, Leninsky Prospect 53, Moscow 119991, Russia

Abstract

We report on the photophysics of a phenyl-substituted
PPV both in solution and as a ﬁlm. For both systems
we have studied the decay of the photoluminescence
and of the emission anisotropy for a large set of wave-
lengths spanning the entire photoluminescence spec-
trum. At long wavelengths the decay behavior is that
of an interchain species. At the shortest wavelengths
the decay of the photoluminescence from the ﬁlm is
observed to have a long-lived component, in addition
to the rapidly decaying component usually associated
with energy transfer. We attribute this slow compo-
nent to emission by isolated intrachain excitons with
reduced nonradiative relaxation.

1

Introduction

The ﬁrst operation of a light-emitting diode based on
electroluminescence from poly(p-phenylene-vinylene),
PPV [1], has been followed by a worldwide eﬀort to
discover new and eﬃcient organic electroluminescent
materials, to develop practical devices, and to under-
stand their conducting and luminescent properties.

Notwithstanding an intense eﬀort, the photophysics
of these materials is not yet completely understood.
This is well exempliﬁed by the recent work on, presum-
ably, simple systems, i.e., low-concentration solutions
of MEH-PPV [2, 3, 4]. These studies brought to light
that the solvent quality has a major inﬂuence on the
spectrum, decay and quantum eﬃciency of the photo-
luminescence. The eﬀects are believed to be induced
by solvent-induced conformational changes of the poly-
mer, leading to aggregate formation in poor solvents.
In high-quality solvents, at low concentration the
photoluminescence (PL) is primarily due to the decay
of the primary exciton [2], the spectrum showing a 0-
0 band and well-resolved vibronic sidemodes. The PL
quantum yield is high (> 50%) and the decay time of

∗fax:

+31-71-5275819,

electronic

address:

eliel@molphys.leidenuniv.nl

the photoluminescence is of order 0.3-1.2 ns. The opti-
cal gain can easily be made suﬃciently large to gener-
ate mirrorless lasing [5]. It decays at the same rate as
the photoluminescence when the pumping strength is
such that depletion of the excited state by stimulated
emission can be neglected [6].

In the technologically relevant case that the poly-
mer forms a thin ﬁlm the photophysics continues to be
a subject of debate. For instance, the exciton bind-
ing energy is advocated to be of order 0.1 eV [7], 0.5
eV [8, 9], or 1 eV [10]. This variability makes it virtu-
ally impossible to estimate the probability of exciton
dissociation at any temperature. There is universal un-
derstanding, however, that interchain species play an
important role in the emission process of conjugated
polymer ﬁlms, whether these interchain species emit
themselves or not. It has also become clear that the
luminescent properties of conjugated polymer ﬁlms can
be heavily inﬂuenced by the ﬁlm-processing pocedure,
and, again, the quality of the solvent when the ﬁlm is
cast [11].

In comparison to high-quality solutions, ﬁlms of, for
instance, MEH-PPV ( an alkoxy-substituted PPV) ex-
hibit considerably reduced PL eﬃciency, a PL decay
which is slower and nonexponential, and very rapid
optical gain dynamics. Although these characteris-
tics are found for many PPV-derivatives, they are
not universal. For instance, in DP6-PPV, the gain
dynamics of the ﬁlm is as slow as that of the so-
lution [12], making this material well-suited as gain
material in a conjugated-polymer-ﬁlm laser. Also, a
substantial number of PPV-derivatives, notably the
phenyl-substituted varieties, have roughly equal, high,
PL quantum-eﬃciencies in the ﬁlm and in solution.
These phenyl-substituted PPVs deserve particular at-
tention, being the ﬁrst to be used in a commercial prod-
uct that is on the market at the present time.

Notwithstanding their market introduction, the pho-
tophysics of such phenyl-substituted PPVs, developed
to have a high electroluminescent eﬃciency in the con-
densed phase [13], has hardly been studied. To address
that issue we report here results on PL spectra, spec-

1.0

0.5

0.0

1.00

0.10

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
L
P

(c)

(a)

(b)

2

400

500
Wavelength (nm)

600

Figure 1: Absorption and photoluminescence spectra
of the phenyl-substituted PPV polymer under study.
The dashed lines show the spectra for the polymer dis-
solved in chlorobenzene while the solid lines display
the absorption and emission spectrum of a spin-coated
polymer ﬁlm.

trally resolved PL decay, and the time and spectrally
resolved PL anisotropy for both a neat ﬁlm and a so-
lution of the polymer.

2 Experiment

The conjugated polymer under study is the phenyl-
poly[2-phenyl-(2’-decyloxy)-1,4-
substituted PPV,
phenylene-vinylene].
It exhibits good solubility in
standard organic solvents and has a high electrolu-
minescent eﬃciency when made into a thin ﬁlm [13].
Our base material
is a solution of the polymer in
chlorobenzene at a concentration of 1 g/l. We ﬁll a
small cuvette with the solution to measure the PL
spectrum and PL decay of the solution. Additionally,
we form thin ﬁlms by spin coating the solution on a
BK7 substrate in a dry nitrogen atmosphere. The
samples are kept and studied permanently under
such atmosphere to avoid degradation due to the
presence of oxygen and/or water. The optical density
of the ﬁlms is measured to be approximately 2 at a
wavelength of 400 nm.

We excite the polymer, in solution or as a thin ﬁlm,
with the frequency-doubled output (λ = 400 nm) of
an ultrafast (60 fs pulse duration) Ti:sapphire laser
(Kapteyn-Murnane Laboratories) operating at a rep-
etition rate of 82 MHz. The excitation pulses from
the laser are heavily attenuated in order to remain in
the linear-response regime and to avoid degradation of
the sample. The laser beam is vertically polarized and
is focussed to a spot of 1 mm diameter at the sam-

0.01

0

1
Time (ns)

Figure 2: Decay of the photoluminescence of the poly-
mer as excited by an ultrashort pulse at λ = 400 nm.
Curve (a) shows the emission at λ = 472 nm by the
dissolved polymer while curves (b) and (c) give the re-
sults for the polymer ﬁlm at a wavelength of λ = 472
nm and λ = 600 nm, respectively.

ple. The photoluminescence emitted by the polymer
is collected with a lens and imaged on the input aper-
ture of our detection equipment. Steady-state PL spec-
tra are recorded with a simple ﬁber-optic spectrome-
ter (Ocean Optics S2000), while we use time-correlated
single-photon counting to measure PL in the time do-
main. With a multichannel-plate based photomulti-
plier (Hamamatsu model R3809U-52) our setup has a
temporal resolution of ≈ 40 ps.
In the time-domain
measurements we use spectral ﬁlters (bandwidth 10
nm, 10−7 out-of-band transmission) to select speciﬁc
wavelength bands in the range 472-600 nm. We in-
clude a polarizer in our setup to separately record the
polarized and sensitized luminescence.

Figure 1 shows the steady-state absorption spectrum
together with the time-integrated PL spectrum of the
polymer, both in solution (dashed curves) and as a
thin ﬁlm (solid lines). For the solution the absorp-
tion spectrum peaks at λ = 430 nm, whereas the PL
spectrum has its maximum at λ = 490 nm. The ab-
sorption spectrum of the ﬁlm is similar to that of the
solution, peaking at λ = 428 nm. As compared to
that of the solution, the PL spectrum of the ﬁlm is red
shifted, relatively broad and structureless, with a peak
at λ = 538 nm. When excited with more powerful
pump pulses, generated by an ampliﬁed laser system,
we observe ampliﬁed stimulated emission from our ﬁlm,
centered around λ = 545 nm.

3 Photoluminescence decay

For the polymer in solution the temporal evolution of
the PL is almost wavelength independent and is well
described by a single exponential:

S = S0 exp(−γt),

(1)

where γ represents the PL decay rate. The decay takes
place due to a combination of radiative (spontaneous
emission) and nonradiative processes, which have, for
the polymer at hand, roughly equal rates. Curve (a)
in Fig. 2 shows the decay of the PL of the dissolved
polymer as measured in a narrow interval around λ =
472 nm, i.e., in the blue wing of the pure singlet-exciton
transition (see Fig. 1).

The PL decay of the thin ﬁlm shows a strong wave-
length dependence, and can not be described by a sin-
gle exponential. Rather, the PL decay shows both a
fast and slow component, the latter becoming slower
with increasing wavelength. Additionally,
for the
longer emission wavelength, one observes that the PL
rise time is no longer instrumentally limited as is the
case for shorter emission wavelengths. To illustrate
the wavelength dependence of the PL decay we in-
clude in Fig. 2 decay curves for the thin ﬁlm (solid
lines), as recorded in wavelength bands around λ = 472
(curve(b))and λ = 600 nm (curve(c)). To simplify the
comparison of the various decay curves in Fig. 2, they
have all been normalized to unity at their respective
maxima.

In the standard description of light emission by con-
jugated polymers intrachain energy migration and re-
laxation play an important role [14]. The singlet ex-
citon, generated through the photo-excitation process,
is thought to migrate from regions of short conjuga-
tion length to regions of longer conjugation length,
thereby reducing its energy. This process takes place
on a time scale of order 100 ps [15]. Additionally, there
can be interchain energy transfer due to dipole-dipole
coupling, for instance through the F¨orster process [16].
This model is generally believed to be incomplete. Ex-
perimental evidence abounds that one has to assume
the presence of at least two types of excitation: intra-
chain excitons and long-lived, red-emitting interchain
species, such as excimers. These excitations are cou-
pled through a one-way transfer from exciton to ex-
cimer. This transfer takes place in a time comparable
to the response time of our setup (≈ 40 ps). Note that
not all primary excitons need to follow this path. The
presence of a long-lived component in the ﬁlm PL at
λ = 472 nm suggests that at least some of the primary
excitons survive.

We parametrize the PL by a biexponential:

S(t, λ) = S

λ
fast exp(−γ

λ
fastt) + S

λ
slow exp(−γ

λ
slowt),

(2)

fast and Sλ

where Sλ
slow are proportional to the popula-
tion of the fast-decaying and the slow-decaying species
that emit at wavelength λ, respectively. These species
decay at rates γλ
slow respectively. Figure 2
shows that the slowly decaying component can indeed
be described by an exponential. Our parametric de-
scription of the luminescence ﬁts our experimental data
quite well, particularly at longer wavelengths.

fast and γλ

For λ > 515 nm we associate the slowly decaying
component of the PL with the excimer, and the com-
ponent with fast decay with the exciton, each emitting
at that speciﬁc wavelength. In the extreme blue wing
of the PL spectrum we make a diﬀerent connection;
there we associate the fast decaying component of the
PL with the (nonradiative) relaxation of the bulk of
the exciton population, while the slow decay represents
the evolution of a class of high-energy excitons that
have strongly reduced nonradiative decay; henceforth
we will refer to these excited states as “isolated exci-
tons”. The rapid decay of the bulk of the population
of high-energy excitons is due to nonradiative processes
such as intrachain and interchain energy transfer and
coupling to excimer states.
In that light it does not
come as a surprise that Eq. (2) does not ﬁt our data so
well at short wavelengths. One can hardly expect the
complicated energy transfer process to be described by
a bi-exponential.

1.0

0.8

)
s
n
(
 
e
m

i
t
 
y
a
c
e
d
 
L
P

(b)

0.6

(a)

450

500
Wavelength (nm)

550

600

Figure 3: Upper frame: PL spectra measured for a
solution (dashed line) and for a ﬁlm (solid line). The
triangles indicate the midband positions of the narrow-
bandwidth (10 nm) ﬁlters to selectively measure the
wavelength dependent PL decay. Lower frame: The
dashed curve shows the wavelength dependence of the
decay time of the PL from a solution; the solid curve
displays the behavior of the decay constant associated
with the long tail of the PL emitted by a ﬁlm.

fast (≤ 5 × 109 s−1) and γλ

From the ﬁts one can extract values for the two de-
cay rates γλ
slow. In Fig. 3 we
show the values of τslow(λ) = (γλ
slow)−1 as a function of
emission wavelength. For reference purposes we have
included the decay time for the polymer in solution
as obtained from a ﬁt of the appropriate data with a
curve described by Eq. (1). Figure 3 also shows that
the ﬁlm PL (at least its slow component) decays at a
rate that is appreciably slower than that of the solu-
tion. This observation supports our assumption that
an interchain species is involved in the slow decay of
the ﬁlm PL.

4 Photoluminescence

anisotropy

Additional information about interchain interactions
can be obtained from a time-domain study of the pho-
toluminescence anisotropy [17, 18], given by:

r(t, λ) =

Sk(t, λ) − S⊥(t, λ)
Sk(t, λ) + 2S⊥(t, λ)

.

(3)

Here Sk(t, λ) and S⊥(t, λ) represent the strength of the
polarized and sensitized PL signals at wavelength λ as
a function of time.

of the polymer chains [19]. In the ﬁlm, the decay of
r(t, λ) is due to intrachain and interchain excitation
transfer, or creation of interchain states.

In our experiments we ﬁnd that r(t, λ) never exceeds
the value 0.3, even for the solution at t = 0. This im-
plies either misalignment of the absorbing and emitting
dipoles, or very fast depolarization during the energy
relaxation process from the photo-excited to the lumi-
nescent level of the singlet manifold.

Because of the importance of the instrumental re-
sponse during the rising part of the PL signal, one
can not arrive at a reliable value of r(t, λ) while ei-
ther Sk(t, λ) or S⊥(t, λ) increase rapidly. We therefore
calculate r(t, λ) only during the decay of the PL sig-
nals, with t = 0 being deﬁned as the time at which the
PL signals reach their maximum. Figure 4 shows our
results for the time-dependent anisotropy for the same
set of wavelengths as in Fig. 2. In all measurements
the PLA decays as a function of time, not reaching a
steady-state value within our time window (1 ns). Ad-
ditionally, the PLA of the solution is, at all times, sub-
stantially larger than that of the ﬁlm. For t ≥ 0.2 ns
the PLA is well described by an exponential time de-
pendence; this applies to all wavelengths both in solu-
tion and in the ﬁlm By ﬁtting our data for t ≥ 0.2 ns
with an exponential we obtain the associated decay
times, of order 1 − 3 ns.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

0.10

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
y
p
o
r
t
o
s
n
a
 
L
P

i

0.01

0.0

(a)

(b)

0.20

0.10

y
p
o
r
t
o
s
n
a

i

 

L
P

0.5
Time (ns)

1.0

0.00

450

500
Wavelength (nm)

550

600

Figure 4: Time-dependent anisotropy of the emission
from a solution (curve (a) for λ = 472 nm and curve
(b) for λ = 580 nm), and from a ﬁlm (curve (c) for
λ = 472 nm and curve (d) for λ = 600 nm).

Wavelength dependence of

Figure 5:
the PL
anisotropy at t = 0 for the polymer solution (dashed
curve), and for a polymer ﬁlm (solid curve).

Modeling the conjugated polymer, both in solution
and in the ﬁlm, as an ensemble of randomly oriented
dipoles one ﬁnds r(0) = 0.4 (that is Sk(0)/S⊥(0) = 3),
if the absorbing and emitting dipoles are parallel. Be-
yond t = 0, the photoluminescence anisotropy (PLA)
decays due to orientational relaxation. In a polymer
solution this happens through orientational diﬀusion

Figure 5 shows the values of r(0), i.e., the maxi-
mum value of the photoluminescence anisotropy. For
the solution we ﬁnd a, basically, wavelength indepen-
dent value of r(0), except at the shortest wavelengths.
Curve (a) of Fig. 4 shows that the increased value of
r(0) at λ = 472 nm is due to an enhanced contribution
of the fast-decaying component of r(t). The value of
r(0) for the ﬁlm is strongly wavelength dependent.

5 Discussion

Reviewing all our experimental results for the solution
we note that the photophysics in that system is es-
sentially wavelength independent except at the short-
est wavelengths. This is summarized succinctly by the
relevant curves of Figs. 3 and 5. The photolumines-
cence decay can be described by a single exponential,
yielding a PL decay time of ≈ 0.65 ns. The photolumi-
nescence anisotropy is substantial and has a long-lived
component that is well described by an exponential
time dependence, with a time constant of a few ns.
This component of the PLA decay can be attributed to
orientational diﬀusion of the polymer in its solvent [19].
The weak, fast decaying component of the anisotropy is
associated with dipole-dipole-coupling-induced loss of
orientation during (intrachain) energy migration along
the polymer backbone [2, 18, 20]. This is supported by
our data that show that this fast-decaying component
is quite a bit larger at the shortest wavelength than
at longer wavelengths (see Fig. 4). The photolumines-
cence at short wavelengths is entirely due to excitons
that have not migrated, whereas at longer wavelengths
the emission is due to excitons that have been popu-
lated directly or through an intrachain energy transfer
Interchain energy transfer can be excluded
process.
because of the low probability of interchain overlap in
solution.

The results for the ﬁlm are in sharp contrast with
those of the solution. Here we observe a strong wave-
length dependence (see Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 5) and decay
curves that can not be described by a single exponen-
tial. As discussed earlier this behavior is due to inter-
chain processes, all-important in the ﬁlm, and virtually
absent in the solution.

Combining the results of Fig. 5 with those of Fig. 1,
one notices that the anisotropy is very weak (r(0) <
0.06, Sk/S⊥ < 1.2) and essentially featureless over the
main body of the emission spectrum of the ﬁlm. This
small value of the anisotropy supports the earlier made
assumption that, in this wavelength interval, the emis-
sion originates predominantly in species that have not
been populated directly in the photo-excitation pro-
cess.
In the extreme red wing, where the photolu-
minescence decays slowest (see Fig. 3), these have in-
terchain character and are collectively called excimers.
These interchain species are generally believed to have
reduced oscillator strengths, hence the slow decay of
the photoluminescence (see Fig. 3). Less far in the red
wing the emission may well be due to both excitons and
excimers, the excitonic emitting states (partly) having
been populated through an intrachain energy transfer
process.

In the extreme blue wing of the emission spectrum

the PLA is strongly wavelength dependent, as shown
by Fig. 5. Here the value of r(0) is comparable to
that in solution (see Fig. 4). This suggests that, at
these wavelengths, the same species (a singlet exciton)
is responsible for the emission by both the ﬁlm and
the solution. Nonradiative processes such as intrachain
transfer rapidly deplete this exciton population, induc-
ing the fast initial decay of the PL. The dipole-dipole
coupling that is believed to be responsible for (part
of) these transfer process causes the observed rapid
loss of anisotropy at these wavelengths. The slowly
decaying tail of the luminescence attests to the pres-
ence of excited species that emit at these wavelengths
at much later times. We believe that these are not ex-
cimers or other low-energy interchain species. Rather,
we attribute this emission to the isolated excitons, in-
troduced earlier. These communicate only weakly with
their environment, as shown by their slow nonradiative
decay and slow depolarization.

It is interesting to make a connection to measure-
ments of the transient gain in thin ﬁlms of this and
similar PPVs. Initially, the transient gain can be quite
considerable but is, almost universally, seen to decay
very rapidly, on a time scale of tens of picoseconds. It
is tempting to connect the fast decay of the gain in
polymer ﬁlms with the rapid decay of the initially ex-
cited species [11]. Hence, we postulate that the gain
is exclusively related to the exciton population, while
a considerable part of the photoluminescence is re-
lated to the population of excimers. The mere fact
that the photoluminescence quantum eﬃciency of a
conjugated polymer is particularly high thus does not
guarantee that it is especially suitable as a gain ma-
terial in a laser. Rather, in order to make a good
optically pumped polymer laser, one has to reduce
the interchain coupling in the ﬁlm. This discussion
puts into context the recent extensive eﬀorts to con-
trol and reduce interchain eﬀects in conjugated poly-
mers [21, 22, 15, 23, 24, 25, 26]. Note, however, that
interchain coupling is essential for any kind of charge
transport, i.e., for the development of injection-type
polymer lasers.

It is clear that a description of the lasing process in
thin ﬁlms of conjugated polymers in terms of a stan-
dard four-level system is, from this perspective, not to
the point. An interesting issue to pursue is the ques-
tion why the excimers in conjugated polymers do not
give rise to lasing. A curious aspect of excimer las-
ing in conjugated polymers is that the energy transfer
process that populates the excimer states enhances the
Stokes shift. In standard laser physics, a large Stokes
shift is considered to be advantageous. The reduced
oscillator strength of the excimers should not pose a
problem in view of the many laser systems that are

based on very low oscillator-strengths optical transi-
tions. Obviously, the crucial question concerns whether
the excimer emission is self-absorbed by the material,
i.e., whether (photo-induced) absorption by excimers
or other interchain species will overwhelm the gain.

References

6 Conclusions

We have studied the photophysics of a phenyl-
substituted PPV, dissolved in a common organic sol-
vent, and as a thin ﬁlm by performing time-domain
measurements of the spectrally resolved photolumines-
cence and its anisotropy across the full emission spec-
trum of the material. As for many conjugated poly-
mers, the emission by the ﬁlm is red-shifted as com-
pared to that of the solution. The overall picture is
that the measured properties for the dissolved poly-
mer are wavelength independent, while the lumines-
cent properties of the ﬁlm vary considerably with wave-
length. These observations thereby conﬁrm the results
obtained by others in that the photoluminescence in
the ﬁlm has, for the most part, a diﬀerent origin as
that in solution. While in solution the emission is dom-
inated by the radiative decay of singlet excitons, in
the ﬁlm the main contribution comes from interchain
species such as excimers.

We have paid particular attention to the blue wing of
the photoluminescence spectrum where the diﬀerences
between ﬁlm and solution are smallest. In that spectral
region the ﬁlm photoluminescence (and its anisotropy)
is dominated by a quickly decaying component, the
decay being caused by intrachain relaxation. Once this
component has decayed away, we measure an emission
that slowly gets weaker. We attribute this emission to
isolated excitons that only weakly interact with their
surroundings.

Finally, we speculate on the connection between pho-
toluminescence and gain in ﬁlms of conjugated poly-
mers. We discuss whether the long-living emitter in
the ﬁlm can be exploited for lasing.

[1] J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown,
R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L.
Burns, and A. B. Holmes. Light-emitting diodes
based on conjugated polymers. Nature, 347:539,
1990.

[2] T.-Q. Nguyen, V. Doan, and B. J. Schwartz. J.

Chem. Phys., 110:4068, 1999.

[3] R. Chang, J. H. Hsu, W. S. Fann, J. Yu, S. H.
Lin, Y. Z. Lee, and S. A. Chen. Aggregated states
of luminescent conjugated polymers in solutions.
Chem. Phys. Lett., 317:153, 2000.

[4] C. J. Collison, L. J. Rothberg, V. Treemaneekarn,
and Y. Li. Conformational eﬀects on the pho-
tophysics of conjugated polymers: A two-species
model for meh-ppv spectroscopy and dynamics.
Macromolecules., 34:2346, 2001.

[5] S. A. van den Berg, R. H. van Schoonderwoerd den
Bezemer, H. F. M. Schoo, G. W. ’t Hooft, and
E. R. Eliel. From ampliﬁed spontaneous emis-
sion to laser oscillation: dynamics in a short-cavity
polymer laser. Opt. Lett., 24:1847, 1999.

[6] S. A. van den Berg, G. W. ’t Hooft, and E. R.
Eliel. Pulse-train formation in a gain-switched
polymer laser resulting from spatial gain inhomo-
geneity. Phys. Rev. A, 63:063809, 2001.

[7] D. Moses, A. Dogariu, and A. J. Heeger. Chem.

Phys. Lett., 316:356, 2000.

[8] S. F. Alvarado, P. F. Seidler, D. G. Lidzey, and
D. D. C. Bradley. Direct determination of the ex-
citon binding energy of conjugated polymers using
a scanning tunneling microscope. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
81:1082, 1998.

[9] J.-W. van der Horst, P. A. Bobbert, M. A. J.
Michels, and H. B¨assler. Calculation of exci-
tonic properties of conjugated polymers using
J. Chem. Phys.,
the bethe-salpeter equation.
114:6950, 2001.

7 Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. H.F.M. Schoo for supplying the poly-
mer material. This work is part of the research pro-
gramme of the Stichting voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek
der Materie (FOM, ﬁnancially supported by the Ned-
erlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek
(NWO))and Philips Research.

[10] J. M. Leng, S. Jeglinski, X. Wei, R. E. Brenner,
Z. V. Vardeny, F. Guo, and s. Mazumdar. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 72:156, 1994.

[11] C. J. Collison, V. Treemaneekarn, W. J. Oldham
Jr., J. H. Hsu, and L. J. Rothberg. Aggregation
eﬀects on the structure and optical properties of a
model ppv oligomer. Synth. Met., 119:515, 2001.

[25] R. G. Sun, Y. Z. Wang, D. K. Wang, Q. B. Zheng,
E. M. Kyllo, T. L. Gustafson, and A. J. Epstein.
High luminescent eﬃciency in light-emitting poly-
mers due to eﬀective exciton conﬁnement. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 76:634, 2000.

[26] R. Jakubiak, Z. Bao, and L. J. Rothberg. Pho-
toluminescence decay dynamics of dendritically
substituted conjugated polymers. Synth. Met.,
116:41, 2001.

[12] A. Dogariu, A. J. Heeger, and H. Wang. Photo-
physics of poly(2,3-diphenyl-5-hexyl-p phenylene-
vinylene. Phys. Rev. B, 61:16183, 2000.

[13] H. Spreitzer, H. Becker, E. Kluge, W. Kreuder,
H. Schenk, R. Demandt, and H. F. M. Schoo.
Soluble phenyl-substituted ppvs- new materials
for highly eﬃcient polymer leds. Adv. Mater.,
10:1340, 1998.

[14] R. Kersting, U. Lemmer, R. F. Mahrt, K. Leo,
H. Kurz, H. B¨assler, and E. O. G¨obel. Femtosec-
ond energy relaxation in π-conjugated polymers.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 70:3820, 1993.

[15] B. J. Schwartz, T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Wu, and S. H.

Tolbert. Synth. Met., 116:35, 2001.

[16] Th. F¨orster. Ann. Physik, 2:55, 1948.

[17] L. M. Herz, C. Silva, R. H. Friend, R. T. Phillips,
S. Setayesh, S. Becker, D. Marisky, and K. M¨ullen.
Phys. Rev. B, 64:195203, 2001.

[18] A. Watanabe, T. Kodaira, and O. Ito. Chem.

Phys. Lett., 273:227, 1997.

[19] S. A. van den Berg, G. W. ’t Hooft, and E. R. Eliel.
Orientational relaxation in polymer and dye solu-
tions and its consequence for the laser threshold.
Chem. Phys. Lett., 347:167, 2001.

[20] G. R. Hayes, I. D. W. Samuel, and R. T. Phillips.

Phys. Rev. B, 56:3838, 1997.

[21] T.-Q. Nguyen, I. B. Martini, J. Liu, and B. J.
Schwartz. Controlling interchain interactions in
conjugated polymers: The eﬀects of chain mor-
phology on exciton-exciton annihilation and ag-
gregation in meh-ppv ﬁlms. J. Phys. Chem. B,
104:237, 2000.

[22] S. A. Whitelegg, A. Buckley, M. D. Rahn, A. M.
Fox, D. D. C. Bradley, L. O. P˚alsson, I. D. W.
Samuel, G. R. Webster, and P. L. Burn. Synth.
Met., 119:575, 2001.

[23] L. Chiavarone, M. Di Terlizzi, G. Scamarcio,
F. Babudri, G. M. Farinola, and F. Naso. Strong
interchain interaction by bridged
reduction of
chain substitution in luminescent phenyleneviny-
lene thin ﬁlms. Appl. Phys. Lett., 75:2053, 1999.

[24] R. G. Sun, Y. Z. Wang, D. K. Wang, Q. B.
Zheng, E. M. Kyllo, T. L. Gustafson, F. Wang,
and A. J. Epstein. High pl quantum eﬃciency of
poly(phenylene vinylene) systems through exciton
conﬁnement. Synth. Met., 111:595, 2000.

