4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analysis of an algebraic model for the chromophore
vibrations of CF3CHFI

C. Jung a, C. Mejia-Monasterioa

∗, and H. S. Taylorb

a Centro de Ciencias Fisicas, UNAM
Av. Universidad, 62251 Cuernavaca, Mexico
b Department of Chemistry
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California 90089

May 9, 2013

Abstract

We extract the dynamics implicit in an algebraic ﬁtted model Hamiltonian for the hydrogen
chromophore’s vibrational motion in the molecule CF3CHF I. The original model has 4 degrees
of freedom, three positions and one representing interbond couplings. A conserved polyad al-
lows the reduction to 3 degrees of freedom. For most quantum states we can identify the
underlying motion that when quantized gives the said state. Most of the classiﬁcations, identi-
ﬁcations and assignments are done by visual inspection of the already available wave function
semiclassically transformed from the number representation to a representation on the reduced
dimension toroidal conﬁguration space corresponding to the classical action and angle variables.
The concentration of the wave function density to lower dimensional subsets centered on ideal-
ized simple lower dimensional organizing structures and the behavior of the phase along such
organizing centers already reveals the atomic motion. Extremely little computational work is
needed.

∗present address: Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems, Universita dell’ Insubria, Via Vallegio 11,

22100 Como, Italy

1

1 Introduction

In recent years we have developed methods to investigate algebraic models ( spectroscopic
Hamiltonians ) for the vibrations of molecules [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The Hamiltonians reproduce and
encode by their construction the experimental data [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In the mentioned
examples the system is reducible to two degrees of freedom. Therefore it is interesting to
investigate systems where after all possible reductions 3 degrees of freedom remain in order to
demonstrate that our methods also work well for higher dimensional systems. In this paper we
[13] an algebraic
use as example of demonstration the molecule CF3CHFI for which in Ref.
model has been presented for the motion of the H atom ( chromophore ). This model has 4
degrees of freedom and it has one conserved polyad which can be used to reduce it to 3 degrees
of freedom.
For the already known wave function ( they are needed to construct the Hamiltonian ) trans-
formed from the number representation so as to be able to be plotted in the toroidal conﬁgu-
ration space of action/angle variables [14] we show that we can visually sort most of the states
into ladders of states with similar topology. Each ladder has a relatively simple spectrum.
Complexity arises from their interleaving. We also can recognize underlying classical lower
dimensional organizing structures by the fact that for these inherently complex functions the
density ( magnitude squared ) is concentrated around them and the phase has simple behavior
near them. The position of these structures in angle space reveals the nature of the resonance
interaction causing the topology.
It also allows the reconstruction, often by analytic use of
the transformation back to generalized coordinates, which are near displacement coordinates,
of the motion of the atoms which underlie this particular quantum state. By counting nodes
in plots of the wave function density and phase advances in corresponding plots of the phase
quantum excitation numbers can be obtained. In many cases, along with the polyad quantum
number itself, we thereby obtain a complete set of quantum numbers for a state even though
the corresponding classical motion is nonintegrable. These classiﬁcation numbers can be inter-
preted as quasi conserved quantities for this particular state or for the ladder of states based
on the same dynamic organizational element. Note there are usually several diﬀerent types of
organizing structures and hence ladders in the same energy region.
Why are the wave functions that are so visually complex as to be unsortable in displacement
coordinate space simple enough to be sorted in our semiclassical representation ? The answer is
ﬁvefold. First, when a spectroscopic Hamiltonian is used and as energy changes frequencies can
move into resonance, that is rational ratio, a constant of the motion called the polyad number
comes into existence ( see section 2 ). It can be used to reduce the dimension of the conﬁguration
space when the action angle variables are used, which come out in taking the semiclassical limit
of the spectroscopic Hamiltonian. Dimension reduction is always a great simpliﬁcation. Second,
the resonant form of the ﬁtted spectroscopic Hamiltonian can be justiﬁed formally by using
Van Vleck or canonical perturbation theory starting with a given potential surface [13, 15, 16]

2

in a way that takes in only the dominant dynamics. The terms that are left out for the most
part are multiple small perturbations that in turn cause multiple small distortions to the wave
function. This makes them harder to recognize but not fundamentally diﬀerent. An excellent
example of this is seen in [9], section 3 and quite pictorially in [17] where ﬁgures 4 and 9
show the wave functions for the same states but computed from the full and the spectroscopic
Hamiltonian respectively. The simplicity of the latter is enough to illustrate our point. The
third reason for the relative wave function simplicity is that as the bound wave functions lie on
a toroidal conﬁguration space their parts must interfere constructively as any angle is advanced
by 2π. This coherence results in simpler but not always simple wave functions. The fourth
reason is in the freedom to choose a particular type of reduced dimension canonical variables.
These variables are designed with guidance from the polyad and the angle dependence of the
resonance to have zero velocity when the phase locking caused by the resonance sets in. The
wave function in reduced conﬁguration space will then in turn further collapse onto the environs
of ( in the sense of small oscillations about ) even lower dimensional surfaces or lines. We defer
explaining and exhibiting this point till section 5 which introduces needed notation. The ﬁfth
reason for simplicity is that, as alluded to above, the wave function is complex and can then be
plotted separately in density and phase. Each part helps in visually sorting of wave function
topologies and therefore dynamics and each yields the values of diﬀerent quantum numbers.
As organizational elements we do not necessarily use actual classical periodic orbits. In many
cases it is simpler to study the general ( average ) classical ﬂow and to relate to it some idealized
guiding center and to use this idealized motion as the skeletal element on which the quantum
density is concentrated. We can imagine that this idealized structure contains the essence
of a large number of periodic orbits performing on average a similar motion. The quantum
dynamics is not able to resolve all the ﬁne details of the classical motion, nor the inﬁnity of
long periodic orbits, nor their enormous number of bifurcations.
Its limited resolution only
recognizes the average of the classical dynamics over cells of the size of its resolution. Therefore
we interpret the quantum state as based on the motion of the atoms which corresponds to the
idealized structural element. In many cases one state of the group of similarly organized states
can be interpreted as the quantum ground state on this element and the other ones are various
longitudinal and transverse excitations of the basic structure, hence the ladders. In some cases
only sections of a ladder are found.
Further in this paper, we see how the higher number and smaller spacing between observed
states of a system with more degrees of freedom makes the whole investigation more complicated
and in particular how the higher density causes more mixing of structures. This increase of
structural mixing might be interpreted as one way in which eﬀects of classical chaos enter the
quantum behavior and results in a group of states being unassignable even in the semiclassical
angle representation that brought simplicity in appearance to the density and phases of the
assignable states.
In section 2 we discuss the spectroscopic Hamiltonian, section 3 presents the semiclassical

3

representation of the wave functions on the toroidal conﬁguration space and section 4 contains
the dimensional reduction. Section 5 explains the basic ideas how to extract the assignment of
a wave function from its plot on the reduced conﬁguration torus. Section 6 explains how from
information about the dynamics in the reduced system we go back to reconstruct information
about the original system. Section 7 contains the classiﬁcation of states and section 8 gives
ﬁnal remarks.

2 The model

For the description of the chromophore dynamics of the molecule CF3CHFI we use the model
set up in [13]. It is based on 4 degrees of freedom as required by the nature of the observed
overtone spectroscopy. Roughly they describe the three degrees of freedom of the H atom. The
index s stands for the stretch, the index a labels the bend in the HCCF(4) plane and the index
b labels the bend perpendicular to this plane, the index f stands for the transpositioned C-F
stretch. For the exact atomic motion belonging to these 4 degrees of freedom see Fig.2 in [13].
The algebraic Hamiltonian ﬁtted to experiment and to calculations on a ﬁtted potential surface
has a natural decomposition

into a diagonal part

Hq = H0 + W

H0 =

ωja†

jaj +

xj,ma†

jaja†

mam

Xj

Xj≤m

(here the indices j, m run over the 4 degrees of freedom a, b, f, s) and an interaction part

W =

ks,j,m[asa†

ja†

m + a†

sajam]/(2√2) +

Xj,m

ba†
γ[aaaaa†
aa†
b + a†
aabab]/2 +
f a†
δ[aaaaa†
aa†
f + a†
aaf af ]/2 +
ba†
f + a†
f a†
ǫ[ababa†

baf af ]/2

where aj and a†
j are the usual harmonic destruction and creation operators of degree of freedom
j. In Eq.3 the indices j and m run over the 3 degrees of freedom a, b, f. For the coeﬃcients we use
2ωf
the ones given in column 6 in Table I in [13] where we see that roughly ωs ≈
giving rise to the Fermi resonances anticipated by the terms of Eq.3 and the Darling-Dennison
resonances anticipated by the terms of Eqs.4-6. Eq.2 has ﬁrst a “harmonic oscillator” term and
a second “anharmonic” Dunham term.
The implied unperturbed basis of the space upon which Hq operates is the number basis

2ωa ≈

2ωb ≈

=

~n
i
|

|

ns, nf , na, nbi
4

=

nsi|

nf i|

nai|

nbi

|

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

nj are the quantum numbers or degree of excitation of the harmonic mode j and are eigenvalues
of the number operator ˆnj = a†
is its pure oscillator mode eigenfunction. H0 is diagonal
nji
j njωj.
on this basis. The unperturbed ( ﬁrst term of H0 ) energy of a basis function
~n
i
|
2ωf a polyad naturally arises with
When frequencies are near resonant as ωs ≈
many consequences. First we can write E0

~n = 2Pωb with the polyad P deﬁned as

2ωa ≈

2ωb ≈

is E0

~n =

jaj.

P

|

P = ns + (nf + na + nb)/2

(8)

with the corresponding operator given as ˆP by replacing nj →
ˆnj in Eq.8. Clearly all basis
functions with nj giving the same value of P are degenerate. If basis functions are sorted by
polyad, the Hamiltonian matrix which can be evaluated algebraically, is expected by pertur-
bation theory ( degenerate basis functions interact most strongly ) to be nearly block diagonal
suggesting that P is a near constant of motion. In fact, it is totally block diagonal as P is here
an exact constant of the motion since ˆP commutes with Hq by construction [13], albeit not with
the true Hamiltonian to which Hq is, as said, to a high order of perturbation an approximation.
When each block is diagonalized, each eigenfunction
cj
~n
~n|
i

X~n∈P
in block P has a good conserved quantum number P which roughly measures via the equation
for E0
~n the degree of excitation of the state in units of the lowest frequency. One can now study
each polyad separately ( second consequence of P ). Here we will concentrate on the one 161
state polyad P = 5 which is the most complex one in the range of measured energy.

ΨP
j i

(9)

=

|

3 Semiclassical representation

cj
~n}

{

Having the
now allows us to immediately obtain, without any extra work, semiclassical
eigenfunctions in action/angle variables ( good to the lowest two orders in ¯h ). We do this
because as we will see such eigenfunctions can be viewed due to the existence of the polyad as
eﬀectively having one less dimension. Hence the problem must now be transformed from the
number representation to a semiclassical action/angle representation. The drop in dimension is
characteristic of classical mechanics where a constant of the motion, here the classical analogue
of P , can by canonical transformation allow one to reduce the dimension of the phase space.
Here the reduction is from a four degree of freedom system with action/angle coordinates ~I, ~φ
to a reduced system with speciﬁc value of P and three degrees of freedom with action/angle
coordinates ~J, ~ψ. This of course will accomplish the ﬁrst promised simpliﬁcation, that is
dimension reduction.
To make a transition to the corresponding classical Hamiltonian we bring the operators in Hq
ﬁrst into symmetrical order, and then apply the semiclassical substitution rules

aj →

I 1/2
j

exp(

iφj), a†

I 1/2
j

exp(iφj)

−

j →

(10)

5

where Ij and φj are the classical action and angle variables. The resulting classical Hamiltonian
is using Eqs.2-6

H0 =

(Ij −

Xj

1/2)ωj +

Xj≤m

xj,m(Ij −

1/2)(Im −

1/2)

W =

ks,j,mI 1/2

s I 1/2

j

Xj,m

I 1/2
m cos(φs −

φj −

φm)/√2 +

It has the conserved quantity

γIaIb cos(2φa −
δIaIf cos(2φa −
ǫIbIf cos(2φb −

2φb) +

2φf ) +

2φf )

K = Is + [Ia + Ib + If ]/2

Because of the symmetric ordering required for the transition to classical dynamics the zero
point between the eigenvalues of P and the corresponding value of K is shifted by 5/4.
The reader, as an aside, might wish to contemplate how easily this transition was taken. For
the more familiar H = T + V Hamiltonian form one must solve the Hamilton-Jacobi equation
to get such variables; indeed a diﬃcult process even if the system is completely integrable. The
simplicity is due to the fact that, as said, this should be rigorously done starting with a potential
surface and using perturbation theory. A price is paid for circumventing perturbation theory
and using a ﬁtted spectroscopic Hamiltonian. This price is that the relation of the a†
j and aj
to the generalized momentum and position variables pj and qj is rigorously unknown. We will
return to this issue later when going back from reduced space to displacement coordinates; our
so called lift process.
If one now quantizes any single harmonic oscillator term in Eqs.11-15 using Schroedinger cor-
φj it is clear that, since the angles deﬁne a now toroidal
respondence Ij → −
conﬁguration space,

i∂/∂φj , φj →
nji →
i →
1/2. From Eq.9 we get

exp(injφj),

~n
|

exp(i~n

~φ)

·

|
with nj corresponding to Ij −

ΨP

j →

ΨP

j (~φ) =

cj
~n exp(i~n

~φ)

·

X~n∈P

That is, the semiclassical wave functions are already known and given by Eq.18.

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

6

4 Dimension reduction

Dimension reduction can now be carried out by noting that, using the polyad of Eq.8 to
eliminate the fast degree of freedom s, the j-th eigenstate can be written

ΨP

j (~φ) = exp(iP φs)

cj
P,na,nb,nf Yk=a,b,f

Xna,nb,nf

exp(ink(φk −

φs/2))

= exp(iP φs)

exp(inkψk)

Xna,nb,nf
= exp(iP φs)χP

cj
P,na,nb,nf Yk=a,b,f
j (ψa, ψb, ψf )

This shows that the eigenfunctions in a given polyad P have a common phase factor dependence
on φs and really only depend on χP

j which is a function of the three angles

ψj = φj −

φs/2

k is situated.

for j = a, b, f . These three angle make up a three dimensional toroidal conﬁguration space
T 3 upon which χP
k is just the Fourier decomposition of the reduced
dimension wave function on the conﬁguration torus. More rigorously the wave function χP
j
deﬁned by Eqs.19- 21 actually is the semiclassical wave function after the classical constant
of motion K is used to reduce dimension by a canonical transformation. Using the angle
transformation of Eq.22 suggested above by the existence of P plus the trivial transformation

In fact χP

θ = φs

Jj = Ij

the canonical transformation permits that the new actions are K, given by Eq.16 and

again for j = a, b, f . θ is the cyclic angle. Starting with equations 11 to 15 and using equations
16, 22-24 a new Hamiltonian in the six canonical variables ~J, ~ψ albeit parametric in P or K
can now be written so directly that to save space we omit it. The torus T 3 is the conﬁguration
is
space. Using the Schroedinger quantization for the new variables is only semiclassical, i.e.
correct in the two lowest orders in ¯h. Its use gives the semiclassical expression

χP

j (ψa, ψb, ψf ) =

cj
P,nf ,na,nb exp(i(naψa + nbψb + nf ψf ))

(25)

Xna,nb,nf

for the eigenfunctions on the reduced conﬁguration space.
In the new coordinates the basis function with polyad number P and three indices na, nb, nf
corresponds to the product of three plane waves or rotors as

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(26)

exp(inkψk)

Yk=a,b,f

7

(27)

(28)

(29)

Each single plane wave factor loops the T 3 in the positive direction. The rotor is that into
which the single mode harmonic oscillator has been transformed. Since Eq. 25 is a manifestly
complex function it can be written as

where the phase function ΦP

j ( ~ψ) is given as

j ( ~ψ) =
χP

j ( ~ψ)
χP

eiΦP

j ( ~ψ)

|

|

ΦP

j = arctan(ImχP

j /ReχP
j )

For the basis function of Eq.26 it is well to note for future reference that the density is constant
and the phase is

Φ~n = nf ψf + naψa + nbψb

Symmetry properties of the system in the toroidal conﬁguration space will be used in the
following. The Hamiltonian is invariant under a simultaneous shift of all angles ψj by π.
Therefore the reduced conﬁguration torus T 3 covers the original conﬁguration space twice and
all structures show up in double, even though they really exist only once.
In addition the
system is invariant under a shift of any angle ψj by 2π and it is invariant under a reﬂection
where all angles go over into their negatives.

5 Methods to evaluate wave function plots

It is seen that the simple basis functions have constant density and any eigenstate dominated
by a single basis function has a density without sharp localization. Resonances as for example
ωs will be seen to cause localization about a line ψa = constant. This follows as
2ωa ≈
φs/2 = constant when diﬀerentiated with respect to time gives the frequency
ψa = φa −
relation. Hence it is seen that resonances are associated with localization and the fact that
dψj/dt = 0.
It can be claimed that by using angle coordinates that slow to zero velocity
at resonance we here assure that the wave function will “collapse” onto and about a lower
dimensional subspace called the organization center. This in reverse gives a way to recognize
the inﬂuence of resonances, namely localization of the wave function on the conﬁguration torus.
Each linearly independent locking of angles therefore reduces by 1 the dimension of the subset
of conﬁguration space around which the wave function is concentrated.
The fact that the wave function is on T 3, a three dimensional torus, presents graphical and visual
challenges when attempting to sort wave functions by inspection. To meet these challenges we
employ the fact that T 3 is 1:1 with a cube with sides of angle range 2π and identiﬁed opposite
boundary points. That is a point on one surface of the cube is the same as a point on the direct
opposite side of the cube. The density and phase are plotted in such cubes. The density plots
now over the interior of the cube are organized over the whole cube or about interior planes or

8

lines or points if zero, one, two or three independent resonant couplings respectively are active.
Over (or “along” in the case of a line) the organizing structure a smooth density with no sharp
localization should appear.
Nodal structures will be visible and countable in directions perpendicular to the organization
element and clearly will be associated with a localized direction. The count of such transversal
nodes supplies for each direction of localization a transverse quantum number t, that replaces
an original mode quantum number n which has been destroyed by the resonant interaction.
The wave function in all the localized directions can be considered as qualitatively similar
( a continuous deformation ) of an oscillator state of the corresponding dimension. By the
superposition of the running wave basis functions with appropriate weights and signs locally
around the organization center the nodal pattern of an oscillator is reproduced. The transverse
quantum numbers tk are the corresponding oscillator excitation numbers.
The phase functions Φ according to Eq.28 are smooth and close to a plane wave in the neigh-
borhood of the organization center. They tend to have jumps by π and singularities away from
the center. Therefore phase advances along fundamental cycles ( loops on the torus or lines
that connect opposite boundary points on the cube ) of the organization center are well deﬁned
and are necessarily integer multiples of 2π. They provide longitudinal quantum numbers lk
which also replace the interacting mode quantum numbers.
Some states present what at ﬁrst look appears to be a familiar but unexpected phase pattern
in that the phase picture is too simple. Cases will appear when the density is localized but
the phase picture has the globally striped ﬂag appearance of the nearly noninteracting mode
case. The strangeness disappears if ideas from nonlinear dynamics are employed. Nonlinear
dynamics tells us that at low P most of the motion takes place on what is called the primary
zone of phase space. And the now interacting states are quantization of tori in this region.
This zone has no central organizing structure other than the whole conﬁguration space itself.
It does contain quasiperiodic orbits corresponding to the uncoupled modes.
As P changes coupling of a subset or even all modes can occur by at least two mechanisms.
First is one where the existing periodic orbits bifurcate and create new secondary zones based
on newly created organizing structures ( periodic orbits, 2 tori, 3 tori e.t.c.
). Also new
secondary zones may be created seemingly spontaneously due to what are called saddle-center
bifurcations. In these secondary cases the motions will have changed and states based on tori or
near tori ( think about the resolution of ¯h ) will have density and phase diagrams as described
above with (P, tk, lk) quantum numbers.
The second mechanism of coupling which will manifest itself in density localization is by con-
tinuous deformation; a process visualized by mentally drawing the primary conﬁguration on
rubber sheets and stretching and pulling the sheets in various directions till the localized form
is achieved. Under such continuous deformation the phase function Φ of the continuous, single-
valued complex wave function Ψ( ~ψ) always must change by an integer multiple of 2π as its
argument ~ψ goes around any closed loop γ in conﬁguration space. In our case prior to defor-

9

mation Φ = ~n
ψj →
relation

ψj + 2π, Φ

·

→

~ψ and that integer is nj if the loop is in ψj ( this loop will be called γj ) i.e. as
Φ + nj2π. More generally for any Φ this can be stated as the loop integral

mj(λ) =

1
2π Zγj

dΦ( ~ψ; λ)

(30)

where mj is an integer and λ is the deformation parameter. Now under a continuous deformation
it is clear that mj or in our case nj must remain constant as a continuous integer valued function.
In our case this nj can be read oﬀ from the phase diagram as equal to the number of revolutions
ψj + 2π. For the noninteracting modes the
of the phase along the loop γj achieved as ψj →
afore mentioned quantum number l is just the n.
From the point of view of basis state mixing even though the phase is behaving as if a single
basis function is totally dominant, signiﬁcant state mixing can occur. This can and will occur
in proportion to the amount of localization of the density. Weak localization tends to occur
when one basis function is dominant, the one with the same ~n.
The ~n assignment holds till a small change in λ causes an abrupt change in Φ, that is when
singularities occur. At this point continuous deformation will stop. Now since the wave function
must be continuous, singularities in phase can only occur where the density and hence the wave
function is zero. For us this occurs at the nodes and perhaps the outer edges of the localized
oscillator. In short when nodes occur one can no longer use this simple full set of ~n quantum
numbers. One can still count phase revolutions along loops inside an organized region ( parallel
to the organizing center ) to get the l quantum numbers. Great care should be exercised in
deciding if for a localized density the phase is a continuation of a plane wave or not. To do this
Φ( ~ψ) must be a smooth function in the neighborhood of the loop along which one is counting
the phase revolutions.

6 Ladders and motions in displacement coordinates

Once the wave functions in their semiclassical reduced dimension representation are diagram-
matically presented and quantum numbers assigned as described in the previous section, as will
be seen in the next section, most often states can be visually sorted and ordered into ladders
of states with a given topology. Each ladder tends to lie in the Husimi sense in one of the
phase space resonance zones discussed previously. The simplicity of sorting is due to the fact
that as said an idealized classical organizing element underlies each ladder. This structure can
easily be written as a conﬁguration space relation between the ~ψ variables. The structure will
allow us to immediately determine what type of resonance interaction is creating this structure.
An approximate procedure that transforms the variables ~ψ back to displacement space reveals
the atomic motion ( modes of motion ) whose quantization yields the ladders of states. This
process we call “lifting” and refer to it as the “lift”. We now describe the lift in a way that

10

≈

≈

ωs/2

˙φs/2

ωa −

starts with the least approximate and most diﬃcult to implement algorithm and proceeds to
simpler to implement ones that still retain the qualitative spirit of the motions.
To determine the key interactions we only illustrate the procedure with a simple example.
Assume that the organization structure is a line ( or ﬁber ) along ψa = 0. Since ψa = φa −
φs/2
then ˙φa −
0 and the 2ωa = ωs phase locking relation speaks to us of
a 2:1 Fermi resonance between the bending mode a and the stretch mode s. Other cases are
similarly treated.
Now for interpretation of the motion a trajectory in the ( ~J, ~ψ) phase space need be found which
when projected into conﬁguration space should represent the organizing element. In reverse
the knowledge of the organizing element is helpful in ﬁnding an appropriate trajectory. To
start this search estimates of the actions will be useful. For uncoupled modes the assigned nj
quantum numbers using Ij = nj + 1/2 suﬃces. To obtain estimates of the initial actions the
quantum mechanical average of the Jj can be used and trivially computed from the known
wave functions as

∂
∂ψj |
The ladder state that is most localized should be used for this and to check an estimate the
and a value of ψj on the
variance can be used. With this we now have initial conditions (
organizing structure) with which to use Hamilton’s equations to get ψj(t), Jj(t). Then ﬁrst we
reconstruct the cyclic angle θ by integrating

Jji

Jji

c~n|

(31)

X |

2nj

| −

=

Ψ

Ψ

=

h

i

h

h

i

θ(t) = θ(0) +

(ψj(s), Jj(s))

t

ds

∂H
∂K

Z
0

(32)

Next we undo the canonical transformation to get the corresponding φj(t) and Ij(t). Then we
assume some idealized harmonic model for the elementary degrees of freedom and form the
displacement qj(t) and its conjugate momentum pj(t) as

qj(t) =

2Ij(t) cos(φj(t)), pj(t) =

2Ij(t) sin(φj(t))

(33)

q

q

The functions qj(t) will be interpreted as representatives of the atomic motion.
Diagrams in which the qj are taken as coordinates with t as parameter give the more conven-
tional picture of the atomic motions. In the simpliﬁed methods the average values of Ij which
giving the scale of the qj motion will replace I(t) in Eq.33. These methods are simple because
again Eq.33 is used but the time dependence and therefore the computation is suppressed and
the relations gotten between the qj from the organizing structure equation that relates φj along
with the use of Eqs.23, 24.
In preparation for section 7 let us discuss a few very simple cases. First there is the possibility
that the density is distributed rather homogeneously over the whole T 3 and the phase function
comes close to a global plane wave with 3 component wave vector (na, nb, nf ). This means no

11

−

locking at all, all modes run freely with their individual frequency and the excitation numbers of
the various modes are nj read oﬀ from the wave vector for j = a, b, f (i.e. count the revolutions
as one traverses the phase diagram in the j’th direction) and ns = P
[na + nb + nf ]/2. If
the density is concentrated in a plane, e.g. the plane ψa = constant then the angle ψa does
not move in the long run. It only may oscillate around the value of the constant. From the
φs/2 = constant for the angles
canonical transformation of Eq.22 we see that this means φa −
of the original degrees of freedom. Therefore we have frequency and phase locking between the
modes a and s. The other modes b and f run freely and their excitation is according to the wave
vector of the phase function in the plane of high density. Analogous considerations hold for
other planes of concentration of the density. If the density is concentrated along a line, e.g. the
line ψa = constant and ψb = constant ( this is a ﬁber running in f direction ) then we see from
φs/2 are kept close to constant values and this means locking
Eq.22 that φa −
between a and s and simultaneously locking between b and s. Of course, then also a and b are
locked relatively to each other. The mode f runs freely in this case and its excitation number
follows from the wave number of the phase function along the ﬁber of high density. Analogous
considerations will be applied for a concentration of the density along other 1 dimensional lines
in reduced conﬁguration space.

φs/2 and φb −

7 The motion behind individual quantum states

For polyad 5 with 161 states, the given transformations and equations lead to a three dimen-
sional toroidal conﬁguration space which here is a cube with coordinates ψa, ψb and ψf . Three
dimensional ( perspective ) plots of the semiclassical state functions look too often like large
globes of ink and were not informative. Here we will resort to cuts of the cube ( e.g. cut
ψa = ψb) and plot density and phase in such cuts.
The question is now where to cut. Clearly a knowledge of the classical ﬂow was most helpful
here. An analysis as follows is also useful. The cuts should contain organizing elements about
which the density is localized. The phase should be simple over the regions of the plane having
high density. Note the idea of an organizing structure is that one has found the conﬁguration
part of the quasiregular resonant zone of the coupled modes. The phase simplicity can be used
as a tool for ﬁnding organizing structures if they exist as simple phase patterns are immediately
apparent to the eye. Here we have used both trial and error as well as dynamics guidance to
ﬁnd the cuts.
Dynamics guidance means for example that in CF3CHFI a resonance with a rather close fre-
ωb and its associated kb,f in the Hamiltonian is largest. This suggests that
quency is ωf ≈
f = ωef f
modes b and f should be coupled in the plane ψf = ψb + constant which assures ωef f
.
b
Note the constant will vary as explained below in a dynamically meaningful way, i.e.
it will
be used for state classiﬁcation on a ladder of states and allow the ladder to be subdivided into

12

similar sub ladders.
The Fermi choice ωs = 2ωa along with ωs = 2ωb would then give by similar reasoning the
organizing line ψa = c1, ψb = c2. For some states several organizing structures could be used
and the same dynamics revealed. Our experience is to choose those corresponding resonances
which seem more important in H and which give longer ladders of states.

7.1 Scheme for a large number of states throughout the polyad

Starting at the bottom of the polyad we ﬁnd 64 states that deﬁnitely lie in the Darling-Dennison
ωf = ωb resonance class in that they have densities localized about planes all denotable as
ψf = ψb + constant. They also have simple phase plots in these planes. At the lower end a few
of them could also be organized by the ωs = 2ωf , ωs = 2ωb Fermi resonances, i.e. about a line
in the “a” direction; but they occur when the stretch excitation is zero and this classiﬁcation
is not very physical.
Some of the lowest states could also be assigned for all modes by quantum numbers nj and
correspond to continuous deformations of basis functions. Although these nj are useful in the
lift for obtaining actions these assignment misses the phase and frequency locking and the
localization of the density. In addition we looked very carefully for primary tori in the classical
phase space at the corresponding energy and did not ﬁnd any. Therefore EBK quantization
cannot be applied. Hence classical dynamics shows that the assignment by nj for j = a, b, f is
unphysical.
In what follows we shall ﬁrst discuss motion in the planes ψf = ψb + const. This leads us
to conclude that modes “a” and “s” are uncoupled and that the Darling-Dennison resonance
couples “f” and “b” such that mode “b”, a true mode of the Hydrogen atom motion, is driven
by the generic source mode f which represents the eﬀect on the Hydrogens motion of the motion
of the rest of the molecule. At this point in our analysis the quantum numbers ns, na and lf +b
lf +b represents the
will ﬁrst be assigned to each state as explained by the examples below.
number of quanta in the DD coupling. Clearly one more quantum number is needed for a full
assignment and this would be the transverse one representing the degree of excitation for the
localized motion transverse to the plane ψf = ψb + const. In most prior papers in this series this
quantum number, t, could be counted as the number of nodes perpendicular to the organizing
structure.
In our analysis of the CDBrClF [18] spectra we were unable to consistently see
these nodes clearly but could assign t as a numerical excitation index based on the distance
of density maxima from the ψf = ψb + const organizing plane. Here the situation was not as
opaque as nodes could be seen. What at ﬁrst was confusing was that they appeared very often
to be organized about one of two parallel planes and at higher energy about third and fourth
planes. At low energy this observation and the fact that pairs of states with identical (ns, na,
lf +b, t) assignments appeared, led to the discovery of a dynamic nearly symmetric double well
or double “valley”. Two organizing planes at ψf = ψb and ψf = ψb + π, each run along and

13

±

−

−

ψf + π invariance be only approximate.

bisected the transverse width of one of the valleys. The ψa = ψb was slightly deeper making
the ψf →
For some of the lower states, the energy in the “mode f - mode b” lock is low enough that
these states are primarily localized in the ψf = ψb or the ψf = ψb + π well. As energy increases
the states are roughly speaking “above the barrier” of the “double well” with density on both
) pairs (with the same ns, na,
sides and they fall into near symmetric (+) and antisymmetric (
ψb + π. Each member of these pairs has a
la+b, t) reﬂecting the approximate invariance ψb →
slight density preference for one of the wells. The ladders with an even la start with a + state
state. The lowest state in any ladder of constant la
and ladders with an odd la start with a
always has most of its density near the plane ψf = ψb.
Clearly it can be said that roughly two ladders exist. Each represents states in b-f lock but with
motions that are π out of phase with each other. In Table I this classiﬁcation (
) label appears.
It is necessary for classiﬁcation as the other four quantum numbers label only pairs of states. It
is also necessary to overcome the confusion that arose in trying to count the transverse modes.
This count now makes sense once the organizing plane is speciﬁed and it is noted that within a
pair the t value in column 6 is common. For higher states it is sometimes becomes diﬃcult to
count t. The reason for this can be traced to the fact that a slice transverse to the organizing
plane should ideally reveal wave functions that represent oscillators. The density would then
be the highest in the two planes running parallel and on opposite sides of the organizing plane.
Now consider that for higher states the density is localized about both planes (albeit with
a preference for one plane). As excitation increases then the outer lobes of the transverse
oscillator will move toward the planes in between (recall all features appear by symmetry in
doubles) the two original planes i.e. the planes ψf = ψb ±
π/2 on which the highest density will
now accumulate. Hence it now make sense to count transverse nodes between these now bigger
intensities. We label these as t′. Sometimes both t and t′ assignments are possible. Figure 2c
and 2d show the t′ assignment. To see it a ψf = ψa + π plane that cuts the ψf = ψb + π/8
plane is chosen.
As always the transverse quantum number indicates to which extent the coupled motion goes
out of exact phase lock. It is a measure of the width of the phase distribution.
A feature that further complicates and hides the true interpretation of the states is mixing
due to the accidental degeneracies of two or three states. The mixed ﬁnal eigenstates that
result are spotted by noting their near degenerate energies and their lack of almost all of the
above discussed features. Trial and error demixing using various weights yields states with the
above features. The notation s/s′ or s/s′′/s′′ indicates in Table I that this particular state is a
demixing of s + s′ etc.
The main method used for assignment, at least initially, is simply to inspect various 2D cuts of
wave functions that hopefully exhibit recognizable localizations, nodes and plane wave struc-
tures. This “informed” inspection and slicing of the conﬁguration cube is aided by ﬁrst inspect-
ing the lower levels on the ladders which exhibit simpler behavior. Further insight is gained

14

ωb ≈

by running many long classical trajectories that show here that the motion, that is the ﬂow
of the trajectories, is mainly parallel to the ψf = ψb plane and in addition is mainly in the
direction of the space diagonal i.e. guided by the condition ψf = ψb = ψa. This is not totally
ωf . This eﬀect is reﬂected in the observation that in the organizing
unexpected as ωa ≈
planes ψf = ψb and ψf = ψb + π the wave function tend to have ﬁbers of density running along
the diagonal. In fact a diagonal classiﬁcation could have served many states as the organizing
structure and assignment might have been made relative to it. We chose the parallel planes as
the organizing structures as breaks in this diagonal ﬁbration often made assignment less than
clear.
The “double well” observation was ﬁrst made by constructing an “accessibility diagram”. This
is a plot of regions of conﬁguration space, i.e. the values of ψa, ψb and ψf that satisfy E =
H(Ja, Jb, Jf , ψa, ψb, ψf ; P ), at each E, for given P and any compatible actions. Around 11100
cm−1 (well below the lowest quantum state of Polyad 5 and near to the classical lower end of
Polyad 5) it was noted that only two slabs of conﬁguration space were accessible; these are our
wells. At the energy of the lowest quantum state all conﬁguration space is accessible but the
wells act as two attractive wells that cause quantum localization above them.
To illustrate our ideas let us consider two states, state s = 7 and s = 43 at the bottom and
the middle of the ladder respectively. Both states are organized about ψf = ψb giving a DD
ωf = ωb expectation. State 7 is a low state with its density running up the valley in the middle
of the well as seen in Figures 1c and 1a. Recall again that due to the symmetry property
discussed at the end of the section 4 all features come in double. Figure 1a looks down on
the organizing plane and ﬁgure 1c looks sideways. In Figure 2 the highly exited case discussed
above is exhibited. The reader here can without seeing it be assured that the highest density
is in the plane ψf = ψb + π/8. Figures 2a and 2b look down on this plane of high density and
ﬁgures 2c and 2d show a view from the side that shows transverse excitation.
With this we proceed to extract the quantum numbers ns, na and lb+f for the two example
cases of states 7 and 43. Figures 1 and 2 show that if one stays on the high density plane and
heads say in the a direction the torus is looped during a 2π change of ψa. This means that
ψa + 2π the
the ψa motion is free and that on the phase plot following any path with ψa →
free exp(inaψa) factor in the wave function should go to exp(ina(ψa + 2π)). In Fig.1b or Fig.2b
ψa + 2π and if we follow a line in the “a” direction one sees a phase
respectively, as ψa →
advance of 4π and 2π respectively. We conclude that na = 2 for state 7 ( Fig.1b) and na = 1
for state 43 ( Fig.2b). Sometimes here na will be usefully called la to emphasize that it is a
longitudinal quantum number obtained by following the path of highest density around the “a”
loop.
The phase change accompanying a loop of the b direction in ﬁgures 1b and 2b by the nature
of the cut causes a looping on the ψf = ψb + constant plane in the complete conﬁguration
space. This looping advances both ψf and ψb by 2π and on this plane the wave function must
c exp(i(~n ~ψ + 2π(nf + nb)) The choice of the ψf = ψb + constant
change as

c exp(i~n

~ψ)

P

·

→ P

15

−

plane required that we see a simple plane wave factor exp(i(nf ψf + nbψb)) which means that
all the important basis states with large mixing coeﬃcients must have this factor. Hence the
wave function phase must advance as we sweep ψb in this organizing plane by 2π(nf + nb). We
denote this by lb+f , l for longitudinal, i.e. motion along the organizing center as opposed to
transverse to it. This longitudinal quantum number clearly tells us the total number of quanta
in the Darling Dennison lock.
For state 7 in ﬁgure 1b lb+f = 8 and for state 43 in ﬁgure 2b lb+f = 7. Using the polyad
expression for the stretch mode we get ns = P
(na + lb+f )/2 = 0 for state 7 and ns = 1
for state 43. Now a partial ( three out of four needed quantum numbers ) assignment can be
made as (P, la = na, ns) or equivalently (lb+f , la = na, ns). State 7 is now (5, 2, 0) or (8, 2, 0)
respectively and state 43 is (5, 1, 1) or (7, 1, 1) respectively as recorded in table I. In principle
nf and nb no longer exist as good quantum numbers except when as explained these numbers
represent conserved integer loop integrals as in the continuous deformation case for state 7
where both phase diagrams ( Figs 1b and 1d ) look as they represent 2D plane waves. Figure
1d then tells us that nb = 8 and nf = 0. This is useful only for obtaining Ib = nb + 1/2 = 17/2
and If = nf + 1/2 = 1/2 which will in turn be useful in the lift process.
For state 43 phase simplicity only happens in the organizing plane. Fig. 2d shows no useful
phase information. The plot shows jumps along lines and ramp singularities where the phase
value depends on the direction of approach.
At this point and in a similar way a full 64 states for P = 5 can be assigned by ns and na.
Actually an additional 38 states seem to resemble this picture. The resemblance is only seen
as trends from the systematic following of the 64 other ones. For these, increasing but still
smaller eﬀects of many other resonances are taking their toll and they signiﬁcantly degrade the
assignable states into unassignable more heavily mixed quantum analogues of classical chaos.
The table I indicates which states have less certain assignments.
Subladders of common values of na and ns (or equivalently la and lf +b) can now be made. To
complete this part of the table demixing must be used and the table indicates states which
result from the process. Each subladder now needs classiﬁcation according to (+) and (
) and
assignment of t and/or t′.
By looking at the wave function amplitudes above the ψf = ψb (plane 1) and ψf = ψb + π
(plane 2) wells for each pair of states with the same (ns, nb) the (+) and (
) assignment can
be made. It is seen that state 1 is concentrated above plane 1 and state 2 about plane 2; the
latter is a little higher in energy. State 3 is about plane 1. The nearly degenerate states 4 and
5 need demixing. Then (4-5) is concentrated about plane 2, and (4+5) is about both planes.
As described above higher excitation leads to states over both wells but with a slight favoring
of one well.
To see the transverse structure of the states we need plots of the density in some appropriate
plane transverse to the plane of high density. In ﬁgure 1c we see that state 7 has t = 0 and
in Fig.2c we see that state 43 has t = 1. The number t′ does not make sense for state 7 and

−

−

16

the number t′ = 2 for state 43 is rather unclear from Fig.2c. However the phase plot in Fig.2d
π/2 and these lines of phase jumps
shows two lines of phase jumps near the lines ψa = ψb ±
indicate nodal lines of the density. Since this is a somewhat indirect indication of the value
t′ = 2, in table I the number t′ = 2 for state 43 is set in brackets.
Even at this stage where other ladders discussed below are omitted spectral complexity arises
from the interlacing of energy levels of diﬀerent subladders. The roughly 100 states on the
ladder which only demands the DD-f/b lock for its construction gives a complex spectrum
and nontransparent energy spacings.
In addition the individual ladders appear irregular by
the mixing of states. A sequence of states which are pure excitations of a single organization
element would form a regular ladder of energy levels looking like the spectrum of one anharmonic
oscillator. However by the mixing the eigenstates are mixtures of various pure excitations and
thereby their energies are shifted and thereby the ladders appear more irregular.
The reader will note that some ladder states in table I are missing. These states could not
be found but their disappearance is conﬁrmed using the anharmonic models expected energy
spacing. Formally these states lie among the highly mixed ( chaotic ? ) states we discuss
below. They are mixings of more than two dynamically identiﬁable states and do not show the
near degeneracy that our demixing process identiﬁes. Parenthetically we note that the ultimate
demixing to dynamically recognizable states is the known inverse transform of the eigenstates
back to the dynamically uncoupled basis functions. The magnitude of the eigenvector trans-
formation elements would then have to be used for state classiﬁcation and as said at the very
beginning, this is impossible to do for the great majority of states.
The actions Ij can be gotten for the modes s and a using Ij = nj + 1/2, in addition we have
If + Ib = lb+f + 1. Then Ib = Jb and If = Jf is gotten from the state functions using Eq.31. To
observe approximate averages of the motion of the hydrogen atom the Ij can be used in Eq.32
for θ to enable us to get I(t) and φ(t) and then using Eq. 33 to draw qualitatively pictures
for the various pairs (qj, pj). Actually a great deal can be said without the integration for θ.
In (qs, qa/b/f ) planes a roughly rectangular region is seen whose sides are proportional to √2Is
2Ia/b/f . The hydrogen trajectories motion interior to the rectangle will be quasiperiodic
and
motion. The exact trajectory depends on the initial choices of φs and φa/b/f and is really not
important. In the (qa, qb) plane organization structure leads to ellipses whose relative ranges (
excursion from zero displacement ) in the (qa, qb) variables is
Ia/Ib. The ellipses eccentricity
depends on the organizing structures phase shift, viz. ψa = ψb + δ
φa = φb + δ. δ = 0
and π give zero angular momentum and something approaching a straight line motion while
δ =
π/2 gives maximal angular momentum and elliptical motion which becomes circular if
Ia = Ib. The t value is the out of phase motion and causes the trajectory to change slowly its
eccentricity.

→

±

q

q

17

7.2 Scheme for the upper end of the polyad

At the upper end of the polyad we take to start states 160 and 161. A cut in ψb = 0 ( or
any other value of ψb ) reveals as we see in Fig.3 for state 160 what looks like two columns of
density localized around ψa = π and ψf = π. In comparison state 161 ( not shown ) only has
one column. A cut in the plane ψb = constant is called to see that the columns really exist.
Figure 3 shows that they do for state 160 and it also holds for state 161. Clearly for both these
states the line ψa = π, ψf = π is the organizing structure. Since it loops in ψb, mode b is
decoupled and the phase picture for both states shows ( ﬁgure 3 for state 160, state 161 not
ψb + 2π along the organizing line no wave fronts are crossed and hence
shown ) that as ψb →
there is no phase advance. Hence lb = nb = 0. For the upper end of the polyad also classical
dynamics shows a ﬂow in b direction. As always the ﬁgures show all structures in two copies
which in reality are only one structure.
Now the ψa = ψf = π organizing structure implies that the phase locks are φa = φs/2 and
φf = φs/2. Time diﬀerentiation of these relations show that the frequency locks are of 2:1
Fermi type with the stretch mode locking with the bend mode a and the mode f. Clearly for
the organizing structure ψa = ψf then φa = φf is a valid phase lock and ωa = ωf is a DD 1:1
frequency lock. Since all three types of terms appear in the Hamiltonian we can be assured that
all three frequencies are in lock and that the quantum numbers na, nf and ns no longer exist.
They must be replaced by three quantum numbers of the lock one of which can be P and the
other two can be taken as the number of nodes seen in the ψb = 0 cut along the antidiagonal
as t1 = 1 and along the diagonal as t2 = 0. For state 161 since one column exists t1 = t2 = 0.
If energy decreases from the top, then the classical ﬂow turns into the space diagonal direction
rather soon and accordingly only the 4 highest quantum states show ( partly after demixing ) a
clean ﬁber structure in b direction. The ﬁber is always sharp in the a direction but broad in the
f direction. This demonstrates again an emerging b-f mixing in the system. The next 7 states
still show some tendency towards ﬁbers in b direction ( they are no longer really clean ), but
at the same time also show the beginning of ﬁbers in the diagonal direction. Their assignment
as states organized along b ﬁbers is less clear but still they continue the trends seen in the
4 highest states ( partly after demixing ). The corresponding assignments for the 11 highest
states are compiled in table II.
An idea of the internal motion of the deuterium and the CF stretch can be obtained from the
actions, phase relations and the t1 and t2 values. In all (qi, qj) planes the actions again deﬁne
2Ij of each qj from its equilibrium. Clearly this range is meant
the maximal displacement
in the sense that an average is made over the values of the two variables not represented in
the plane. The plane (qb, qj), j = a, f, s will show rectangularly bound quasiperiodic motion.
In the (qs, qa/f ) plane a U shaped region is swept out. Here qa/f reaches its extreme values
as qs reaches its maximum displacement and qs sweeps its range twice for each sweep of qa/f .
Increasing t1 and/or t2 causes the lifted trajectory to oscillate in a tube about this basic U lift.

q

18

Of course qf and qa reach their maxima ( minima) in phase as the three modes s, a and f are
phase locked.

7.3 Patterns in the dense region of the polyad

∗

π/2 and at the same time around ψa = ψb ±
±

In the middle of the polyad there are approximately 35 states with very complicated wave
functions which we could not classify in any scheme.
It is possible that further and closer
analysis could reveal some systematics. These states are dispersed among the states mentioned
in subsection 7.1. But interestingly a few simple states which do not fall into any scheme
discussed so far are dispersed in this region. In this subsection we present a few such states.
Figure 4 shows the structure of state 82, parts a and b give density and phase respectively in the
plane ψf = 0 and parts c ans d show the plane ψb = ψa + 0.29
2π. Part a demonstrates some
π/2 with a transverse
concentration around ψa =
excitation t = 1. Plots of the phases in various planes show that planes ψb = ψa + constant are
the only planes with a simple phase structure. Figure 4d shows it in the plane of highest density.
The phase function comes very close to a plane wave with la+b = 8 and lf = 2. Together with
the above mentioned transverse quantum number t = 1 this gives the complete assignment
of the state. In Fig.4 notice that also the interaction between the degrees of freedom f and s
has an eﬀect, it concentrates the density mainly around ψf = 0 and ψf = π. There are a few
other examples ( states 93, 111, 114, 122 and 136 ) which show such a clean phase function in
π/2 but do not show a clean phase function in any other plane. There are
planes ψb = ψa ±
approximately 5 other states where the phase function is not as clean as in ﬁgure 4d but comes
close to a continuous deformation of a plane wave only in a plane of this type. The motion of
all these states is a circular motion of the H atom, two orthogonal bends with relative phase
shift locked at
Numerical results for state 80 are shown in ﬁgure 5, part a and b show density and phase
respectively in the plane ψb = ψa + ψf + π/2 which is the plane of high density and thereby
the organizing structure. Part c and d show density and phase respectively in the transverse
plane ψf = 0. In the plane of high density the phase function comes close to a plane wave
with la+b = 6 and lf +b = 5. This is the only plane where the phase function is a continuous
deformation of a plane wave. This case is something new in so far as there is a plane with a
simple phase function and at the same time not a single nj has a deﬁnite value. There is a
locking involving all modes without implying a locking in any pair of modes. A few other states
( 75, 83, 87, 118 ) fall into the same scheme, i.e. they have simple phase functions only in a
plane of the form ψb = ψa + ψf + constant. The implications for the motion of the atoms are
as follows. In the nonreduced variables the locking condition is φb + φs/2
π/2.
This can be interpreted as a locking of the beat frequency between a pair of degrees of freedom
to the beat frequency of the remaining pair of degrees of freedom. We have several possibilities
to group the 4 modes into two pairs.

φa −

φf =

π/2.

±

−

±

19

8 Conclusions

We have shown how our previously developed methods can also be applied to systems with 3
degrees of freedom after reduction. For 75 percent of the states the strategy works successfully.
We investigate the wave functions constructed on a toroidal conﬁguration space. We investigate
on which subsets the density is concentrated and evaluate the phase function on this subset of
high density. This allows us to obtain a set of excitation numbers for the states; in the best
cases we obtain a complete set of excitation numbers which provide a complete assignment of
the state. The excitation numbers can be interpreted as quasi conserved quantities for this
particular state.
The success of the method is based on 3 properties of our strategy which more traditional
approaches starting from potential surfaces do not have. First, we start from an algebraic
Hamiltonian which naturally decomposes into an unperturbed H0 and a perturbation W . Per-
turbation theory assures us that W contains only the dominant interactions, leaving out those
that do not aﬀect the qualitative organization of the states. In addition having the ideal H0 re-
sults in the classical Hamiltonian being formulated from the start in action and angle variables
belonging to H0. For a potential surface it is very complicated to construct an appropriate H0
and the corresponding action/angle variables. Our knowledge of the correct H0 allows the con-
tinuous deformation connection of some eigenstates of H with the corresponding eigenstates
of H0 which was useful for many states. Second in the algebraic Hamiltonian the polyad (
which for the real molecule is only an approximate conserved quantity ) is an exactly conserved
quantity and allows the reduction of the number of degrees of freedom. We always deal with
one degree of freedom less than the number of degrees of freedom on the potential surface.
Third, our strategy depends to a large extent on having a compact conﬁguration space with
nontrivial homology where the phase of the wave function is important and where the phase
advances divided by 2π along the fundamental cycles of the conﬁguration space provide a large
part of the excitation numbers. In part also feature 1 is responsible for the importance of the
phases. This is an essential diﬀerence to working in usual position space.
In total we have
found a semiclassical representation of the states which is actually much simpler to view than
the usual position space one.
The classical dynamics of the system shows rather little regular motion and is strongly unstable.
Then the question arises in which way the quantum states reﬂect anything from the classical
chaos. We propose the following answer:
In the middle of the polyad a large number of
states do not show any simple organization pattern. For some of those states it might be that
we simply have not found the right representation in which to see the organizational center.
However we doubt that this is the case for many states. For many of the complicated states
the wave function is really without a simple structure, it seems to be a complicated interference
between several organizational structures. Then immediately comes the idea to mix these states
with their neighboring states to extract simple structures in the way as we did it for example

20

for states 22 and 24. For most of the complicated states this method does not lead to any
success. This indicates that underlying simple patterns are distributed over many states so
that demixing becomes rather hopeless and maybe also meaningless. In the spirit of reference
[19] this indicates that the density of states is already so high that many states fall into the
energy interval over which states are considered almost degenerate and mix strongly. This is
a strong diﬀerence to the systems we have investigated before which could be reduced to 2
degrees of freedom. There the density of states was much lower such that mixing only occurred
occasionally between 2 neighboring states. This stronger mixing gives some clue as to how the
quantum wave functions become complicated for classically chaotic systems and for suﬃciently
high quantum excitation.
Finally there may come up the question why we do not use some of the common statistical
procedures ( like e.g. random matrix theory ) to treat our system when eﬀects of classical chaos
become evident in a quantum system. The answer is: We are not satisﬁed with only generic
(universal) properties of the system or with the investigation to which extent such universal
properties are realized by our system. We aim to investigate each individual quantum state one
after the other and to work out its individual properties in order to arrive in the best case at a
complete set of quantum numbers and in addition at a detailed description of the atomic motion
underlying the individual state. Previous examples have shown that our procedure provides a
complete classiﬁcation for simpler systems which can be reduced to 2 degrees of freedom. As
the example presented in this paper shows, this program is doable with good success for a large
number of states even in a system with originally 4 degrees of freedom, reducible only to 3
degrees of freedom and with a complicated classical dynamics.

Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. E. Atilgan for helpful discussions. CJ thanks CONACyT for support under
grant number 33773-E and DGAPA for support under grant number IN-109201. HST thanks
the US Department of Energy, Chemical Science Division for support under grant number
DE-FG03-01IR15147.

21

References

[1] C. Jung, H. S. Taylor, and E. Atilgan, J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106 3092.

[2] H. Waalkens, C. Jung, and H. S. Taylor, J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106 911.

[3] C. Jung, E. Ziemniak, and H. S. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115 2499.

[4] C. Jung, H. S. Taylor, and M. P. Jacobson, J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105 681.

[5] M. P. Jacobson, C. Jung, H. S. Taylor, and R. W. Field, J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 111 600.

[6] A. Troellsch, and F. Temps, Z. Phys. Chem. 2001, 215 207.

[7] J. L. Teﬀo, V. I. Perevalov, and O. M. Lyulin, J. Mol. Spec. 1994 168 390.

[8] A. Beil, D. Luckhaus, and M. Quack, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100 1853.

[9] A. Beil, D. Luckhaus, M. Quack, and J. Stohner, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 1997, 101

[10] A. Beil, D. Luckhaus, R. Marquardt, and M. Quack, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Discuss. 1994,

[11] M. Abbouti Temsamani, M. Herman, S. A. B. Solina, J. P. O’Brien, R. W. Field, J. Chem

Phys. 1996, 105 11357.

[12] M. P. Jacobson, J. P. O’Brien, R. J. Sibley, and R. W. Field, J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 109

311.

99 49.

121.

[13] J. Pochert, M. Quack, J. Stohner and M. Willeke, J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113 2719.

[14] E. L. Siebert III, and A. B. McCoy, J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 105 469.

[15] M. Joyeux, J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 109 2111.

[16] L. E. Fried, and G. S. Ezra, J. Chem Phys. 1987, 86 6270.

[17] M. Joyeux, S. C. Farantos and R. Schinke, J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 5407.

[18] C. Jung, C. Mejia-Monasterio and H. S. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 2004 120, in print.

[19] L. Benet, T. H. Seligman and H. A. Weidenm¨uller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993 71, 529.

22

Table 1: This table gives the classiﬁcation and assignment of all states organized around planes
ψf = ψb +constant. The ﬁrst column gives the number of the state ordered according to energy.
If the structure only becomes clear after demixing, then it contains in addition the number(s)
of the state(s) with which it is demixed. The second column gives the energy in units of cm−1.
The third and fourth columns give the two longitudinal quantum numbers la and lb+f . The ﬁfth
column gives the approximate symmetry of the state. The sixth column gives the transverse
quantum number t relative to the planes ψf = ψb and ψf = ψb + π. The seventh column
gives the transverse quantum number t′ relative to the planes ψf = ψb ±
π/2. If the transverse
structure is washed out in the ﬁgures then the corresponding transverse quantum numbers are
put in parenthesis. For such states where the individual quantum numbers nb and nf exist,
If these phase functions show some ﬁrst indications of
these are given in columns 8 and 9.
developing singularities, these quantum numbers are put in brackets. States where the pattern
is not so clear in total but where the general trends suggest the assignment have a
in the last
column.

∗

Number(s) Energy la
0
0
1
1
0
0
2
1
2
1
0
2
3
3

11564
11609
11724
11764
11775
11901
11917
11922
11964
12028
12060
12097
12123
12161

1
2
3
4/5
5/4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

sym t
+ 0
0
-
0
-
+ 0
+ 1
-
1
+ 0
1
-
-
0
+ 1
+ 2
+ 1
-
0
+ 0

t′

(3)

nb
10
9
9
8
8
7
8
7
7
(6)
6
(6)
(7)

nf
0
1
0
1
2
3
0
2
1
(3)
4
(2)
(0)

lb+f
10
10
9
9
10
10
8
9
8
9
10
8
7
7

23

Number(s) Energy la
1
2
2
0
0
1
3
4
0
0
4
3
1
4
0
1
1
1
5
2
5
2
0
0
3
2
3
0
1
4
4
2
5
5
1
6
0
6
2
3
0
6
3
1

15/16
16/15/18
17
18/15/16
19
20
21
22/24
23
24/22
25
26
27
28/29
29/28
30
31/34
32
33
34/31
35
36
37
38/39
39/38
40
41/42
42/41
43
44
45
46
47
48/49/51
49/48/51
50
51/48/49
52
53
54/55
55/54
56
57
58

12195
12225
12235
12240
12254
12283
12302
12318
12327
12358
12380
12385
12422
12466
12472
12495
12521
12527
12539
12544
12549
12561
12575
12587
12590
12615
12622
12622
12634
12635
12647
12689
12716
12739
12743
12745
12762
12793
12807
12816
12822
12849
12874
12906

lb+f
9
8
8
10
8
9
7
6
8
10
6
7
7
6
8
7
9
9
5
8
5
8
10
10
7
6
7
8
7
6
6
6
5
5
7
4
8
4
6
5
6
4
5
7

24

0
(2)
0

sym t
-
(2)
-
1
+
2
-
2
0
+
+ (2)
1
-
0
+
-
0
+ (3)
0
-
1
+
0
-
1
+
1
+
+
0
-
+
-
-
+
+
-
+
-
+
+
1
-
1
-
-
1
+ (2)
0
-
1
-
1
+
1
+
0
+
2
+
0
-
1
+
0
-
0
+
1
+
0
+
(2)
-

0

2

2

2

1
1

1

1
1
1
1

1

1
1

2

2

1

1

(2)
1
1

t′
(2)
2
2
2

2
(2)

nb
(5)

nf
(4)

(5)
8

(5)
(6)
7

(5)
0

(2)
(0)
1

7

6
6

0

2
1

6

0

(5)

(3)

5

1

(4)

(3)

(4)

(4)

5
(6)

0
(0)

*

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*

*

*

sym t

nb

nf

(5)

(1)

Number(s)
59/61
60/63
61/59
62/64
63/60
64/62
65/66
67
68/69
69/68
70
73
74/78/81
76/77
78/74
79
81/74/78
84/85
85/84/86
86/84/85
88
89
90
91
95/96
97/99
100
101
102
103
104/105
105/104
107/108/109
108/109
109/107/108
115/113
116/117
121
123
125/126/127
126/125/127
127/126
128
139

Energy la
2
12911
0
12912
7
12916
3
12921
0
12929
2
12933
3
12938
1
12943
7
12947
1
12951
2
12955
4
12966
4
12993
0
13003
0
13006
5
13011
2
13031
0
13066
3
13075
6
13077
1
13102
7
13125
7
13132
4
13152
0
13206
5
13219
1
13241
1
13244
2
13248
2
13252
0
13275
0
13277
3
13286
3
13292
2
13298
1
13333
4
13359
0
13418
3
13457
1
13494
0
13497
1
13501
0
13505
3
13620

lb+f
8
6
3
7
8
8
7
9
3
9
6
6
4
10
10
5
6
6
5
4
5
3
3
4
6
3
7
7
6
6
8
8
5
5
4
5
4
4
3
3
25
6
5
6
3

2

0

0

0
0

(1)

-
-
+
-
-
+
+
+
-
-
-
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
1
1
+
+ (2)
0
+
1
-
1
+
1
+
1
-
0
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
-
+
-
-
-
+
+

0
0
0

0
1

t′
0

(1)
0
1
0
0
0

0
(1)
(0)

0
0
0
1

1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

(1)
0

0
0
0
(1)

(3)

(0)

(4)

(0)

(4)

(2)

4
(1)
(2)

1
(2)
(1)

3

3

(0)
0
1
1

(3)

(1)

(3)

(0)

*

*

*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

*

Table 2: This table gives the classiﬁcation and assignment of all states organized around ﬁbers
in b direction. The ﬁrst column gives the number of the state ordered according to energy. If
the structure only becomes clear after demixing, then it contains in addition the number(s) of
the state(s) with which it is demixed. The second column gives the energy in units of cm−1.
The third column gives the longitudinal quantum number lb. The fourth and ﬁfth column give
the transverse quantum numbers t1 and t2.

Number(s) Energy lb
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1

161
160
159/158
158/159
157
156/155
155/156
154
153/152
152/153
151

14172
14074
13983
13980
13929
13893
13887
13853
13814
13805
13782

t1
0
1
0
2
0
1
3
1
2
2
0

t2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1

26

Fig. 1 Plots of density ( part a ) and phase ( part b ) respectively in the plane ψf = ψb
and of density ( part c ) and phase ( part d ) respectively in the plane ψa = π for
the state 7. In parts a and c darker grey means higher density. In parts b and d
points with positive real part of the wave function are marked by a dot and points
with a positive imaginary part of the wave function are marked by an open circle.
All frame boundaries run from 0 to 2π.

Fig. 2 Plots for state 43 in the plane ψf = ψb + π/8 ( parts a and b ) and in plane

ψf = ψa + π ( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

Fig. 3 Plots for state 160 in the plane ψb = 0 ( parts a and b ) and in plane ψf =

ψa (

parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

Fig. 4 Plots for state 82 in the plane ψf = 0 ( parts a and b ) and in plane ψb = ψa+0.29

2π

( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

Fig. 5 Plots for state 80 in the plane ψb = ψa + ψf + π/2 ( parts a and b ) and in plane
ψf = 0 ( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

−

∗

27

psi_b

psi_b

c

d

i

f
_
s
p

i

f
_
s
p

a

a
_
s
p

i

b

0.5

a
_
s
p

i

2.5

1.5

2

1

0

−0.5

psi_b

psi_b

Figure 1: Plots of density ( part a ) and phase ( part b ) respectively in the plane ψf = ψb
and of density ( part c ) and phase ( part d ) respectively in the plane ψa = π for the state 7.
In parts a and c darker grey means higher density. In parts b and d points with positive real
part of the wave function are marked by a dot and points with a positive imaginary part of the
wave function are marked by an open circle. All frame boundaries run from 0 to 2π.

28

a

b
_
s
p

i

c

b
_
s
p

i

psi_a

psi_a

b

d

0.5

b
_
s
p

i

b
_
s
p

i

psi_a

psi_a

2.5

1.5

2

1

0

−0.5

Figure 2: Plots for state 43 in the plane ψf = ψb+π/8 ( parts a and b ) and in plane ψf = ψa+π
( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

29

2.5

1.5

2

1

0

i

f
_
s
p

0.5

f

i

_
s
p

a

c

psi_a

psi_a

b

d

b
_
s
p

i

b
_
s
p

i

30

psi_a

psi_a

−0.5
Figure 3: Fig.3: Plots for state 160 in the plane ψb = 0 ( parts a and b ) and in plane ψf =
( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

ψa

−

2.5

a

b
_
s
p

i

b

0.5

b
_
s
p

i

1.5

2

1

0

−0.5

psi_a

psi_a

c

i

f
_
s
p

d

i

f
_
s
p

31

psi_a

psi_a

Figure 4: Plots for state 82 in the plane ψf = 0 ( parts a and b ) and in plane ψb = ψa +0.29
( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

∗

2π

a

i

f
_
s
p

c

psi_a

psi_a

b

d

b
_
s
p

i

b
_
s
p

i

psi_a

psi_a

2.5

1.5

2

1

0

−0.5

0.5

i

f
_
s
p

Figure 5: Fig.5: Plots for state 80 in the plane ψb = ψa + ψf + π/2 ( parts a and b ) and in
plane ψf = 0 ( parts c and d ). Otherwise this plot is done in analogy to Fig.1.

32

