4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy studies of graphite edges

Y. Niimi, T. Matsui, H. Kambara, K. Tagami, M. Tsukada, and Hiroshi Fukuyama∗
Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

×

◦
√3)R30

We studied experimentally and theoretically the electronic local density of states (LDOS) near
single step edges at the surface of exfoliated graphite. In scanning tunneling microscopy measure-
ments, we observed the (√3
4
nm either from the zigzag or armchair edge. Calculations based on a density-functional derived non-
orthogonal tight-binding model show that these superstructures can coexist if the two types of edge
admix each other in real graphite step edges. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements near
the zigzag edge reveal a clear peak in the LDOS at an energy below the Fermi energy by 20 meV.
No such a peak was observed near the armchair edge. We concluded that this peak corresponds to
the “edge state” theoretically predicted for graphene ribbons, since a similar prominent LDOS peak
due to the edge state is obtained by the ﬁrst principles calculations.

and honeycomb superstructures both extending over 3

−

PACS numbers: 61.16.Ch, 61.72.Ff, 73.20.At

I.

INTRODUCTION

(cid:11)D(cid:12)(cid:3)]LJ]DJ(cid:3)HGJH

(cid:11)E(cid:12)(cid:3)DUPFKDLU(cid:3)HGJH

Graphite is one of the most extensively studied ma-
terials both experimentally and theoretically. Recently,
electronic properties of graphite nanostructures such as
graphite edges have been attracting much attention in
view not only of basic research but also of applications.
For example, porous carbons, which consist of an assem-
bly of minute graphite fragments and naturally of a large
amount of graphite edges, have extremely high speciﬁc
surface area [1, 2].

Topologically, there are two types of edge in single-
layer graphite sheet (graphene), i.e., zigzag and armchair
edges (see Fig. 1). Fujita et al. [3] were the ﬁrst to pre-
dict the existence of the speciﬁc electronic states localized
only at the zigzag edge from the tight binding band calcu-
lations for graphene ribbons. On the other hand, it does
not appear at the armchair edge. The ﬂat band nature
of this “edge state” results in a peak in the local den-
sity of states (LDOS) at the Fermi energy (EF ). When
the ribbon width is large enough, the contribution of the
edge state to the total density of states should be neg-
ligibly small. However, this could be measurably large
if we survey the LDOS, for example, with the scanning
tunneling spectroscopy (STS) technique in the vicinity
of zigzag edge. It is also predicted that a similar edge
state appears at zigzag edges of multi-layer αβ stacking
ribbons [4]. This suggests that the edge state should be
potentially observed at step edges on bulk graphite sur-
faces.

In the previous STS measurements [5, 6], a broad max-
imum near EF in the tunnel spectrum was reported to
appear near circular edges of graphite nanopits, which
might be attributable to the edge state. However, at a
circular edge around the nanopit, both the zigzag and
armchair edges inevitably coexist with comparable prob-

∗Electronic address: hiroshi@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

FIG. 1: Two graphite edges represented by the bold lines:
zigzag edge (a) and armchair edge(b). The open circles are
B-site carbon atoms.

abilities which makes it diﬃcult to extract an electronic
property either of the edges. In another scanning tunnel-
√3)R30◦
ing microscopy (STM) measurement [7], a (√3
superstructure was observed near an armchair edge at a
surface of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). So
far, it is not clear whether similar superstructures appear
near the zigzag edge or not [8].

×

In this report, we present results of STM and STS mea-
surements for single step edges of both the zigzag and
armchair types on a surface of exfoliated graphite which
contains much higher edge densities than non-exfoliated
HOPG. With STS, we observed a peak in tunnel spec-
trum at an energy just below EF on the upper terrace
only of the zigzag edge not of the armchair one. This is
the ﬁrst clear spectroscopic observation of the theoreti-
cally predicted graphite edge state [3, 4]. We also found
√3)R30◦ and
two types of superstructure, i.e., the (√3
honeycomb ones, coexisting on the upper terrace either of
zigzag or armchair edge. Our calculations based on the
density-functional derived non-orthogonal tight-binding
model show that this coexistence is due to admixing of
the two types of edge in real step edges on the exfoliated
graphite surface.

×

II. EXPERIMENTAL

All the measurements shown here were made on ZYX
exfoliated graphite (hereafter ZYX) [9]. ZYX is prepared
by graphite intercalation of HOPG with HNO3 and sub-
sequent evacuation of the intercalant at high tempera-
ture. And then, it was evaculated at 1500 ◦C for 3 hrs. to
remove the remnant intercalant. It has an order of mag-
nitude smaller single crystallite (100
200 nm [10, 11])
than HOPG, which makes it much easier to ﬁnd step
edges on the surface with STM. All the graphite edges
studied are single step edges with an almost linear shape
at least in the length scale of 100 nm or longer. We be-
lieve that they are hydrogen terminated since we did not
try to remove the hydrogen in ultra high vacuum (UHV)
at elevated temperatures. Other details on the charac-
terization of ZYX have been published elsewhere [9].

−

The STM images were obtained at room temperature
in air with mechanically sharpened Pt0.8Ir0.2 wire tips.
The data were acquired in the constant current mode
with a tunnel current (I) of 1.0 nA and a bias voltage (V )
of +0.1 V applied to the sample with respective to the
tip. The STS data were obtained at T = 77 K in UHV
10−7 Pa with our newly constructed STM
of P
which works in multi-extreme conditions [12]. The tunnel
spectrum was obtained by averaging a set of dI/dV vs.
V curves measured at 100 to 120 grid points over 5
5
10 nm2 area by the lock-in technique (f = 71.73
to 10
Hz, Vmod = 6 mV).

×

≤

×

×

2

III. THEORETICAL MODELS

In the calculations we assumed the two layers of
graphene for both types of edge structure. The bottom
layer is composed of a graphene extended inﬁnitely over
the two dimensional plane, and is assumed to have no de-
fects. The top layer with edge structures is prepared by
removing a few tens to hundreds atoms from a similarly
inﬁnite graphene. The lateral dimensions of the periodic
supercells in the top layer are 12.8
×
25.6 nm2 for the zigzag and armchair edges, respectively.
The electronic states of these graphite layers are cal-
culated by the density-functional derived non-orthogonal
tight-binding model [13]. We assumed that carbon atoms
at the edges are completely hydrogen terminated, and
took into account only the π-orbital at each carbon
atomic site. These are relevant to the electronic states
around EF . LDOS at every atomic site is achieved by
diagonalizing the Hamiltonian and overlap matrices gen-
erated from these π-orbitals at the Γ point.

14.8 nm2 and 7.4

×

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

An STM image taken near a zigzag step edge on the
ZYX surface is shown in Fig. 2. Although an atomic res-
olution is not obtained right on the edge, we can identify

2

FIG. 2: STM image near a zigzag step edge (the dashed line)
8 nm,
on the surface of ZYX exfoliated graphite (8 nm
T = 300 K, in air). The long dashed line show the atomic
row of B-site atoms. The diamond and hexagon represent
the (√3
superstructure and the honeycomb one,
respectively.

◦
√3)R30

×

×

FIG. 3: STM image near an armchair edge (the dashed line)
on ZYX (8 nm
8 nm, T = 300 K, in air). The long dashed
line show the atomic row of B-site atoms. The diamond and
hexagon represent the same meanings as in Fig. 2.

×

it as the zigzag type by noting that the atomic row of
B-site carbon atoms (the long dashed line) visible at the
upper terrace (the lower part of the image) is oriented
at 60◦ to the edge direction (the dashed line; see also
Fig. 1(a)). The step height estimated from the line pro-
ﬁle (not shown here) is 0.35 nm, which is close to the
graphite layer spacing (= 0.335 nm). As seen in the ﬁg-
ure, the edge is probably not a perfect straight line but a
line with a slight irregularity. In other words, it would be
a predominantly zigzag edge contaminated with a small
amount of armchair edges. Two types of superstructure
are seen only on the upper terrace of the edge depending
√3)R30◦ super-
on the lateral position. One is the (√3
structure and the other is the honeycomb superstructure
which consists of six B-site atoms. Typical spatial exten-

×

3

1.5

]LJ]DJ(cid:3)HGJH

 - 1.0 nm

 + 0.5 nm
 + 1.5 nm
 + 2.5 nm
 + 3.5 nm

)

/

V
A
n
(
 

V
d

/
I

d

0.5

1

0

)

/

V
A
n
(
 

V
d

/
I

d

0.5

1

0

-0.2 -0.1

0
bias voltage (V)

0.1 0.2

FIG. 5: dI/dV vs. V curves measured near a zigzag edge
(T = 77 K, in UHV). The numbers denoted are distances
from the edge (d = 0).

1.5

DUPFKDLU(cid:3)HGJH

 - 1.0 nm

 + 0.5 nm
 + 1.5 nm
 + 2.5 nm
 + 3.5 nm

-0.2 -0.1

0
bias voltage (V)

0.1 0.2

FIG. 6: dI/dV vs. V curves measured near an armchair edge
(T = 77 K, in UHV). The numbers denoted are distances
from the edge (d = 0).

results for the perfect edges.

Hence, we have calculated the LDOS near zigzag (arm-
chair) edges which are mingled with small amounts of
armchair (zigzag) edges. Two examples of such edge pat-
terns are shown in Fig. 4(a)(b), where integrals (Ical) of
the calculated LDOS in an energy range between EF and
+100 meV are represented by radii of the circles plotted
on the B-sites. Note that Ical should be proportional to
the local tunnel currents at V = +100 mV. As is seen in
√3)R30◦ and honeycomb su-
Fig. 4(a), both the (√3
perstructures appear for the zigzag edge even if it is only
slightly mingled with the armchair edges. The super-
structures have decay lengths of about 4
5 nm from the
edge and rather complicated distributions in the parallel
direction to the edge being consistent with the observa-
tion. Although the atomic arrangement of the zigzag
edge in the experiment is not resolved clearly, the ap-
pearance of the two superstructures is strongly indicative

×

−

FIG. 4: Two examples of edge pattern used in the LDOS cal-
culations: (a) a zigzag edge with a small amount of armchair
edges and (b) an armchair edge with a small amount of zigzag
edges. The radii of the circles plotted on the B-sites represent
integrals of the calculated LDOS in an energy range between
EF and +100 meV. The diamond and hexagon have the same
meanings as in Fig. 2.

4 nm from the edge.
sions of the superstructures are 3
The superstructure pattern did not depend on the bias
voltage in a range between +0.05 and +1.0 V. This is
probably the ﬁrst STM image showing unambiguously
the superstructures near the zigzag edge.

−

Figure 3 is an STM image obtained near an arm-
chair step edge. The edge type is identiﬁed from an
angle (= 90◦) between the edge (the dashed line) and
the atomic row of B-site atoms (the long dashed line).
As was already reported by other workers [7], both the
√3)R30◦ and the honeycomb superstructures are
(√3
seen extending over 3
4 nm from the armchair edge.
Therefore, the STM images near the two types of edge
resemble each other at least in terms of the superstruc-
ture.

−

×

We now compare the experimental STM images with
those simulated by calculations based on the density-
functional derived non-orthogonal tight-binding model
[13]. In the case of perfect zigzag edge, the calculations
indicate that the electronic states are localized in the
vicinity of the edge (decay length
0.5 nm) and no su-
perstructures appear anywhere. On the other hand, in
the case of perfect armchair edge, they predict no local-
ized states at the edge but the honeycomb superstructure
persisting far beyond 5 nm from the edge. Thus the ob-
servations are clearly inconsistent with these calculated

≈

that the edge in Fig. 2 is admixed with a small amount
of armchair edges.

The same is true for the other way around, i.e., ad-
mixing of a small amount of zigzag edges to an armchair
edge can explain the experimental coexistence of the two
superstructures. However, such admixing does not seem
to explain the short decay lengths of the observed super-
structures. The absence of the predicted long persistence
of the honeycomb superstructure near the armchair edges
in Fig. 3 is probably due to the three dimensional char-
acter of the experimental system which is not fully taken
into account in the present calculations. In any case, it
is highly desirable to identify detailed edge shapes with
atomic resolutions in future probably with much sharper
STM tips.

Next, we show STS data near single step edges on ZYX
obtained at 77 K in UHV. We chose the scan directions
parallel to the edges, and averaged dI/dV curves taken at
ﬁxed distances (d) from the edges to increase the signal
to noise ratio. Fig. 5 shows tunnel spectra at diﬀerent
distances from a zigzag edge. A clear peak appears to
grow at V =
20 mV as we approach the edge on the
upper terrace (d > 0). Note that the peak suddenly dis-
appears when we move across the edge (d =
1.0 nm). A
decay length of this structure estimated by subtracting a
smoothed base line from the spectra is 1.6
0.4 nm which
is in agreement with that (1.2 nm) for Ical in Fig. 4(a).
Since the tunnel current was unstable at
< 0.5 nm by
some reason, we could not obtain reliable spectra right

d
|
|

±

−

−

4

on the edge. It should be also noted that the deﬁnition
of d = 0 is somewhat arbitrary (
0.5 nm) because of the
absence of the atomic resolution in that region.

±

In contrast to the zigzag edge, we obtained qualita-
tively diﬀerent spectra near an armchair edge as is shown
in Fig. 6 where neither position dependence of the spectra
nor a LDOS peak is seen within the experimental scat-
ters. Thus we conclude that the LDOS peak observed
just below EF in Fig. 5 corresponds to the edge state
that has been theoretically predicted to exist only for the
zigzag edge [3, 4]. A recent ﬁrst-principles calculation for
a graphite ribbon with zigzag edges of 3 nm wide on an
inﬁnite graphene sheet [14] indicates that the LDOS peak
due to the edge state is located below EF by a few tens
mV. This is in reasonable agreement with the peak in the
tunnel spectra obtained in the present experiment.

Acknowledgments

One of us (H.F.) thanks the late Mitsutaka Fujita for
stimulating his interest in the graphite edge state. The
authors are grateful to H. Akisato for useful comments on
this manuscript. This work was ﬁnancially supported by
Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research from from MEXT,
Japan and ERATO Project of JST. One of us (T.M.)
acknowledges JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Sci-
entists.

[1] K.Tai and N. Shindo, Polym. Process. 35, 384 (1986).
[2] K. Kaneko, C. Ishii, M. Ruike, and H. Kuwabara, Carbon

B 66, 024429 (2002).

30, 1075 (1991).

[3] M. Fujita, K. Wakabayashi, K. Nakada, and K. Kusak-
abe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65, 1920 (1996); K. Nakada, M.
Fujita, G. Dresselhaus, and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev.
B 54, 17954 (1996); M. Fujita, M. Igami, and K. Nakada,
J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66, 1864 (1997).

[4] Y. Miyamoto, K. Nakada, and M. Fujita, Phys. Rev. B

59, 9858 (1999).

[5] Z. Klusek, Z. Waqar, E. A. Denisov, T. N. Kompaniets,
I. V. Makarenko, A. N. Titkov, and A. S. Bhatti, Appl.
Surf. Sci. 161, 508 (2000).

[6] Z. Klusek, Vacuum 63, 139 (2001).
[7] P. L. Giunta and S. P. Kelty, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 1807

(2001).

[8] P. Esquinazi, A. Setzer, R. H¨ohne, C. Semmelhack, Y.
Kopelevich, B. Kohlstrunk, and M. L¨osche, Phys. Rev.

[9] Y. Niimi, S. Murakawa, Y. Matsumoto, H. Kambara, and

H. Fukuyama, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74, 4448 (2003).
[10] R. J. Birgeneau, P. A. Heiney, and J. P. Pelz, Physica B

109&110, 1785 (1982), and references therein.

[11] Y. Niimi, T. Matsui, H. Kambara, K. Tagami, M.

Tsukada, and H. Fukuyama, to be published.

[12] T. Matsui, H. Kambara, and H. Fukuyama, J. Low Temp.
Phys. 121, 803 (2000); T. Matsui, H. Kambara, I. Ueda,
T. Shishido, Y. Miyatake, and H. Fukuyama, Physica
B 329, 1653 (2003); H. Kambara, T. Matsui, and H.
Fukuyama, to be published.

[13] M. Elstner, D. Porezag, G. Jungnickel, J. Elsner, M.
Haugk, T. Frauenheim, S. Suhai, and G. Seifert, Phys.
Rev. B 58, 7260 (1998).

[14] K. Tagami and M. Tsukada, to be published.

