4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Time-dependent electron localization function

Tobias Burnus,1 Miguel A. L. Marques,1 and Eberhard K. U. Gross1, ∗
1Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Arnimallee 14, 14195 Berlin, Germany
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

In this article we present a generalization of the electron localization function (ELF) that can
be used to analyze time-dependent processes. The time-dependent ELF allows the time-resolved
observation of the formation, the modulation, and the breaking of chemical bonds, and can thus
provide a visual understanding of complex reactions involving the dynamics of excited electrons. We
illustrate the usefulness of the time-dependent ELF by two examples: the π − π∗ transition induced
by a laser ﬁeld, and the destruction of bonds and formation of lone-pairs in a scattering process.

PACS numbers: 31.70.Hq,82.20.Wt,31.15.Ew

The advent of ultra-short laser sources with pulse
durations on the order of 10–100 femtoseconds[1] has
paved the way to the analysis and control of chemical
reactions[2]: By means of pump-probe spectroscopies
with femtosecond laser pulses[3] one can follow, in the
time-domain, the nuclear motion which typically evolves
on the picosecond time scale. One of the most impor-
tant recent achievements has been the experimental re-
alization of attosecond pulses[4]. These are produced
by coherently superimposing high harmonics generated
by a strong infrared laser pulse interacting with atoms.
With this new light source available, pump-probe spec-
troscopies using attosecond pulses allow, for the ﬁrst
time, the temporal resolution of the electronic motion
which is governed by the femtosecond timescale. Ques-
tions like “How does an electron travel from the HOMO
to the LUMO when excited by a laser?” may soon
become experimentally accessible. This establishes the
need for theoretical tools to analyze and interpret such
data. Theoretical tools of this type will be developed in
this article. We are mainly concerned with bonds, and
how they break, form, or change during a time-dependent
process.

The intuitive concept of a chemical bond is very sim-
ple and elegant: an electron pair shared between neigh-
boring atoms that provides the necessary attraction to
bind the molecule. However, it turns out to be very dif-
ﬁcult to deﬁne exactly what a bond is, or even to visu-
alize it. The one-electron molecular orbitals that stem
from density functional theory or Hartree-Fock usually
have contributions from several atoms and do not repre-
sent a unique bond. The electronic density, on the other
hand, does not easily reveal important features like lone
pairs. The electron localization function (ELF) is a func-
tion crafted to bring into evidence the subtle bonding
properties of an electronic system. It was originally ap-
plied to ground-state systems, in the study of atomic
shells and covalent bonds[5]. Soon after, it was real-
ized that the ELF could be also used to analyze lone
ionic and metallic bonds[7],
pairs, hydrogen bonds[6],

etc. The systems studied include atoms[5], molecules[7],
surfaces[7] and solids[7, 8, 9].
It is also possible to es-
tablish a rigorous topological classiﬁcation of chemical
bonds using the ELF[10]. Furthermore, the ELF has the
advantage of being fairly insensitive to the method used
to calculate the wave functions of the system. In fact,
Hartree-Fock, density functional theory, or even simple
approaches such as extended H¨uckel methods yield qual-
itatively similar ELFs[7]. Approximate electron localiza-
tion functions have also be obtained from experimental
electron densities measured with X-rays[9].

Up to now the ELF could only be used to study systems
in their ground state. Clearly, an extension of the ELF to
time-dependent processes appears quite desirable. Such
extension would allow the time-resolved observation of
the formation, the modulation, and the breaking of chem-
ical bonds, and thus provide a visual understanding of
complex reactions involving the dynamics of excited elec-
trons. Exactly that is the goal of this communication.

The derivation of a time-dependent ELF follows closely
the derivation of Becke and Edgecombe of the ground-
state ELF[5]. Our objective is to ﬁnd a function,
Dσ(r, t), that measures the probability of ﬁnding one
electron in the near vicinity of a reference like-spin elec-
tron at position r and time t. If this probability is high
then the reference electron must be delocalized. On the
other hand, a covalent bond consists of a localized elec-
tron pair (of opposite spins) between two neighboring
atoms. The probability of ﬁnding a like-spin electron
close to a reference electron in this region must then be
very low. The function Dσ(r, t) is approximately given
by

Dσ(r, t) = τσ(r, t) −

2

1
4

(cid:2)∇nσ(r, t)(cid:3)
nσ(r, t)

−

σ(r, t)
j2
nσ(r, t)

,

(1)

where σ denotes the spin, nσ the spin density, jσ the
norm of the current density, and

τσ(r, t) =

|∇ϕiσ(r, t)|2 .

(2)

Nσ

X
i=1

∗Electronic address: hardy@physik.fu-berlin.de

This last expression represents the kinetic energy density
of a system of Nσ electrons, described by the one-particle

orbitals ϕiσ. These orbitals can be obtained, e.g., from
time-dependent density functional theory or from a time-
dependent Hartree-Fock calculation.

Equation (1) is similar to the expression for the
ground-state Dσ(r)[5]. The main diﬀerence is the ad-
ditional term proportional to j2
σ. The appearance of this
term is easily understood: For a system with only one
electron (or two electrons of opposite spin) the function
Dσ(r, t) has to vanish identically by deﬁnition. By eval-
uating the two ﬁrst terms of Eq. (1) for this simple case
we immediately infer the need for the third term. We
note that the term involving the current density should
also appear in the static case if current-carrying states in
open-shell systems are investigated[11].

The function Dσ(r, t) is always ≥ 0, but it is not
bounded from above. As usual, we deﬁne as an alter-
native measure of localization

ELF(r, t) =

1

2 ,

σ(r, t)(cid:3)

1 + (cid:2)Dσ(r, t)/D0
σ(r, t) = τ HEG

σ

(cid:0)nσ(r, t)(cid:1), where

with the deﬁnition D0

τ HEG
σ

(nσ) =

(6π2)2/3n5/3

σ

3
5

(3)

(4)

is the kinetic energy density of a homogeneous electron
gas of density nσ. Using this deﬁnition, the ELF is di-
mensionless and lies between zero and one. A value of
one corresponds to high localization, while a completely
delocalized electron gas has an ELF equal to 1/2.

We shall illustrate the usefulness of the time-dependent
ELF by two examples: (i) the excitation of acetylene by
a strong laser pulse Fig. 1, and (ii) the scattering of a
high-energy proton from the ethene molecule Fig. 2. The
ﬁgures depict a slab of the ELF passing through the plane
of the molecules, to which we superimposed an isosurface
Fig. 1 or contour lines Fig. 2 at ELF = 0.8. Movies of
the time-dependent ELF and of the corresponding time-
dependent density can be found in our web site[12]. All
calculations were performed in the framework of time-
dependent density functional theory[13, 14], using a real-
space, real-time code[15].

In the beginning of the simulation (i), the acetylene
molecule is in its ground-state (Fig. 1a). At this mo-
ment, the ELF exhibits three major features: a torus
between the carbon atoms – typical of triple bonds – and
the two characteristic blobs around the hydrogens. As
the intensity of the laser increases the system starts to
oscillate, and then to ionize (Fig. 1b,c). Note that the
ionized charge leaves the system in fairly localized pack-
ets (the blob on the left in panel b, and on the right in
panel c), that then spread with time. The central torus
then starts to widen until the moment it breaks into two
separate tori, each around one carbon atom (Fig. 1e). We
interpret this ﬁnding as a transition from the π bonding
state into the π∗ non-bonding state. The system then
remains in this excited state for some time.

2

In our second example we send a fast, but still non-
relativistic, proton against one of the carbons of ethene
(Fig. 2). The initial conﬁguration is shown in panel a.
While approaching the carbon atom the proton accumu-
lates some charge around it (Fig. 2b). It then scatters
and leaves the system picking up part of the electronic
charge. The electron-nuclei system is thus excited (in to-
tal the electronic system absorbs around 20 eV). In pan-
els d,e the leftmost carbon has already broken the two
bonds with the hydrogens (that will later form an H2
molecule). Clearly visible is also the polarization of the
carbon-carbon double bond, and the starting of the for-
mation of a lone pair above the leftmost carbon. We em-
phasize once again that the formation of lone pairs can-
not be visualized in movies of the time-dependent density.
Only the TDELF allows one to observe this feature. At
the end of the simulation (panel f ) we can observe an
H2 molecule (left), and two CH molecules (middle and
right). The rightmost CH molecule is again breaking to
yield a carbon and a hydrogen atom. Note again the lone
pairs characteristic of the CH molecule localized around
the carbon atoms.

These two examples illustrate the amount of informa-
tion that can immediately be grasped just by looking
at the time-dependent ELF, from π–π∗ transitions, to
the creation of lone pairs. One can infer the time-scale
and the temporal order of the various processes occur-
ring, e.g., in a molecular collision: One can tell which
bond breaks ﬁrst and which breaks second and how many
atto/femtoseconds it takes to form new bonds and new
lone pairs. We emphasize once more that with the advent
of attosecond pulses this information will soon become
experimentally available. We expect the time-dependent
ELF to be a valuable tool in the analysis of many physi-
cal processes. One example is the creation and decay of
collective excitations or the scattering of electrons from
atoms and molecules. Another example is the process of
vision:
light promotes the electrons of retinal into the
ﬁrst excited state, which by its turn induces the isomer-
ization of the chromophore and eventually leads to the
ﬁring of a neuron. The key feature of the time-dependent
ELF, in all cases, is the time-resolved observation of the
formation, the modulation, or the breaking of chemical
bonds, thus providing a visual understanding of the dy-
namics of excited electrons.

Acknowledgements

supported

This work was

by
the
part
NANOQUANTA Network of Excellence,
by the
EXC!TiNG Research and Training Network and by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeischaft within the Sonder-
forschungsbereich SFP450.

in

FIG. 1: Snapshots of the time-dependent ELF for the excitation of acetylene by a 17.5 eV laser pulse. The pulse had a total
length of 7 fs, an intensity of 1.2 × 10
, and was polarized along the molecular axis. Ionization and the transition
W cm
from the bonding π state to the anti-bonding π∗
state are clearly visible.

−2

14

FIG. 2: Snapshots of the time-dependent ELF for the scattering of a fast, non-relativistic proton (Ekin ≈ 2 keV) by ethene.
The molecule breaks into several pieces. During this fragmentation process, the breaking of bonds and the subsequent creation
of several lone pairs become clearly visible in the time-dependent ELF. The legend is the same as in Fig. 1.

3

[1] T. Brabec and F. Krausz, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 545

102, 6366 (1998).

[2] A. H. Zewail, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 39, 2586

(2002).

(2000).

(2000)

[3] N. F. Scherer, J. L. Knee, D. D. Smith, and A. H. Zewail,

J. Phys. Chem. 89 5141 (1985).

[4] P. M. Paul, E. S. Toma, P. Breger, G. Mullot, F. Aug´e,
Ph. Balcou, H. G. Muller, and P. Agostini, Science 292,
1689 (2001).

[5] A. D. Becke and K. E. Edgecombe, J. Chem. Phys. 92,

5397 (1990).

[6] D. B. Chesnut, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 11644 (2000).
[7] A. Savin, R. Nesper, S. Wengert, and T. F. F¨assler, Ange-

[9] V. Tsirelson and A. Stash, Chem. Phys. Lett. 351, 142

[10] B. Silvi and A. Savin, Nature 371, 683 (1994).
[11] J. F. Dobson, J. Chem. Phys, 98, 8870 (1993).
[12] http://www.physik.fu-berlin.de/~ag-gross/tdelf/
[13] E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 997

(1984).

[14] M. A. L. Marques and E. K. U. Gross,

in A Primer in
Density Functional Theory, Vol. 620 of Lecture Notes in
Physics, edited by C. Fiolhais, F. Nogueira, and M. A. L.
Marques (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003), p. 144.

[15] M. A. L. Marques, A. Castro, G. F. Bertsch, and A. Ru-

wandte Chemie Int. Ed. Engl. 36, 1808 (1997).

bio, Comput. Phys. Commun. 151, 60 (2003).

[8] J. K. Burdett and T. A. McCormick, J. Phys. Chem. A

