4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photo-Chemical Applications of Phase-Modulus
Interdependencies

Robert Englmana,b and Asher Yahalomb
a Department of Physics an Applied Mathematics,
Soreq NRC,Yavne 81810,Israel
b College of Judea and Samaria, Ariel 44284, Israel
e-mail: englman@vms.huji.ac.il; asya@ycariel.yosh.ac.il;

February 2, 2008

Abstract

After an accolade to Joshua Jortner, we trace the inﬂuences of his
Chemistry background in his Physics writings. On the way, we note
the richness of Physics in principles (or large-scale laws) and the fact-
orientedness of Chemistry.

Next we turn to a recent laser-induced electron-detachment exper-
iment and utilize analytic properties of the developing wave-packet in
the (complex) time domain, studied by us previously, to relate the
phase of the optimized laser ﬁeld to its intensity. It is suggested that
these results can be used to reduce the labor of pulse optimization in
phase-intensity controlled reaction dynamics. Phase-intensity interde-
pendencies are also established in simulated results (obtained with the
END-algorithm) for photo-excited hydrogen-molecules.

Short title: Phase-Modulus Interdependencies
Keywords: Scientiﬁc Laws, Reaction control, Pulse-shaping, Electron

detachment, Optimized laser ﬁeld

1 Joshua Jortner in Physics. An Appreciation

Few readers will begrudge our saying some nice things about Joshua Jortner,
especially from an angle not frequently projected. Praise has been deservedly
accorded to him for the quality and importance of his scientiﬁc works, for
his leadership and for his inspiration to his colleagues. One of us (R.E. or,

1

in this section, ”I” for short) was some time ago (probably in the seventies)
a participant and lecturer in one of the Erice NATO workshops. Joshua
gave a course there and so did a number of other distinguished scientists,
some of whom have achieved leading prominence on the scientiﬁc world
stage. I conducted a survey among the attendees at the Workshop, mostly
postgraduate Physics students, asking them whose course impressed them
best, from whom did they learn the most. The list of persons chosen by
these young people started with one name and ended with the same. When
I pressed them for their reason, they replied that Joshua Jortner talked with
a grand sweep, a breadth that opened for them a window to Science, rather
than just to the particular subject on which he was lecturing.

In continuation, I wish to delve on a ”problematic” aspect of Joshua’s
works. A considerable part of these are what most of us would term ”Physics
subjects”. A look at Joshua’s publication’s list reveals that these works ap-
peared variedly in Physics journals, in Chemistry periodicals and in general
science forums, which do not qualify as either. The place of the publica-
tion does not really matter, what is clear is that many of his topics are
comfortably at home in any Physics department.

I would like to discuss this phenomenon (admittedly not unique to Joshua),

namely that of someone with a Chemistry background and working in a
chemist environment digging into a physics soil to bring up veritable trea-
sures. Or, to use a diﬀerent metaphor, plucking the fruits of a tree that used
to be out-of-bounds, not to say forbidden, to a Chemist. Of course, it is not
the ethics of this that I wish to discuss, but whether one can discern in these
Physics papers (in their style, in the methodology, etc.) the upbringing of
a Chemist.

To make progress, I shall try to draw some distinctions between ap-
proaches that are indigenous to chemists and to physicists. Are there such
distinctions? On the face of it, there need not be. After all, good science in
both disciplines is expected to be honest, open, impersonal, self-critical and
objective (all these things being what one likes to subsume under ”the scien-
tiﬁc method”). Still, there appear to be (somewhat unforeseen) diﬀerences,
which will be seen relevant to our inquiry.

According to von Neumann, 1 scientiﬁc laws are of two kinds. The ﬁrst
kind, called type (A), relate to properties of the constituents of the system
under study. Thus they describe or predict properties (such as positions or
velocities) of the ”bodies” of which the system is composed (e.g., atoms or
elementary articles). The second kind of laws, those of type (B), characterize
the system as a whole, and do not focus on its parts. A-type laws tend to

2

be speciﬁc in scope, are formal, mathematical. They are empirically based,
but are extrapolative and ﬂexible. They tell us that ”one may conclude
the following as well”.
In contrast, B-rules tend to be more verbal and
less formal and are restrictive in their application. They say: ”Only these
are acceptable”. (One ought to add that in the present understanding one
excludes from ”scientiﬁc laws” axioms, theorems and theories, the latter two
being of too limited scope to qualify as laws. One might have called the laws
”principles”, it being understood that the laws are not only of broad scope,
but are also widely accepted.)

It turns out that Physics is very rich in both A- and B-rules. A-rules
comprise Laws of Motion of bodies, the Schrodinger equation, the Einstein
equation, the Maxwell equations, quarks. B-laws are causality, c-causality or
subluminality, positivity of energy, minimal action, the exclusion principle
(which perhaps belongs better to A), single-valuedness of wave-function, the
correspondence principle, four laws of thermodynamics, Mach’s principle,
the principle of frame-independence, the insistence on the simplicity and
beauty of theories and possibly others, e.g., Ref. 2. Of course, Chemistry has
adopted many of these laws, but without claims of paternity. It has its own
rules, too. These are, of the A-types , the laws of multiple proportions, the
Lewis laws of structural chemistry, H¨uckel’s rule, the Woodward-Hoﬀman
rules. Belonging to the B-category one has the atomic ”hypothesis” (that
matter is composed of molecules and of atoms) and Le Chatelier’s principle.
There might be only a few more than these.

One sees from this, as well from the perusal of the scientiﬁc literature,
that when one is interested in a broad-brushed description, the picture is
that Physics (at least as a theoretical pursuit) is primarily principle-laden,
whereas Chemistry is more fact-oriented. The former derives its results
from a uniﬁed description,3 the latter thrives on diversity. More deductive
is the former ,4 matched by more induction in the latter. (It has been said,
though vigorously disputed by others such as Harry Lipkin, that the major
advances in Physics are essentially theoretical, with experiments playing a
conﬁrmatory role.)

In a recent article on the distinguished contributions to Physics by some
former chemists and entitled ”From chemistry to physics”, L. Tisza writes
”all three [E.P. Wigner, John v. Neumann and Edward Teller] moved from
chemistry that seemed to them an empirical craft, toward a physics based on
mechanics that was already penetrated by subtle mathematics” .5 [Tisza ei-
ther disregards the ”principle-richness” of Physics or perhaps insinuates that
the three (Jewish-descent-) Hungarians were those who were instrumental

3

in consolidating it.]

The above distinctions allow us to seek traces of a Chemistry background
in Joshua’s approach to physical phenomena and in his distinctive style. But
before doing this, let us cite a historical precedent, in which Chemistry and
Physics styles of writing are contrasted. The famous chemist, Justus von
Liebig, vaunts Michael Faraday’s papers, as follows: ”I have heard mathe-
matical physicists deplore that the way Faraday recorded his [results] were
diﬃcult to read and understood that they often resembled rather abstracts
from a diary. But the fault was theirs, not Faraday’s. To physicists who
have approached physics by a road of chemistry, Faraday’s memoirs sound
like admirably beautiful music ”.6

In a less serious vein, we might contemplate the secondary meanings fre-
quently attached to ”Physics” and ”Chemistry”. The former word has the
connotation of being deep and fundamental, in the form of, e.g., ”the phys-
ical reason of this is...”. Recently, we have heard a metallurgist saying:”the
physics in this is ...” when he clearly meant to say that ”the truth in this is
....”. In opposition, ”Chemistry” has a more vital secondary usage: between
two persons it can lead to a happy life ever after, or alternatively, can bring
peace and understanding between warring nations.

The ”distinctive style” in Joshua’s papers is unmistakable, especially in
the Introductions and Conclusions, and it is the same style that impresses
one in his lectures. Almost immediately and without warning he immerses
the reader in a sea of facts, or in his own words, ”in the rich and fascinating
world of phenomena”.7 The kaleidoscope of phenomena usually includes as
enumeration of instances, of eﬀects, being part of a broader phenomenon,
of properties, of applications, of varieties of experimental methods and of a
list of tasks that await to be done. And it is not just bare facts that are
enumerated, but the characterization of each system within a wider context,
the ordering of subjects by placing subject x smugly between subjects y and
z. The categories are frequently labelled (A), (B), (C), etc. or by equivalent
symbols.

Is it unity that the author is taking his aim at? Methinks, it is rather
the manifestation of diversiﬁcation that is guiding him. He is less after
establishing a common parentage than the discovering of kinships, seeking
to introduce us to a big and independently functioning family and letting us
see the role of each individual member in the group. If the above is correct
(and the hypothetical factor cannot be suﬃciently emphasized), it should
leave its imprint on methodology, too. The deductive (and in my view, more
Physics-based) approach normally starts with the posing and the solution

4

of a general problem and takes particular sub-cases in its stride; a more
inductive approach places the maximal eﬀort on a speciﬁc instance (probably
that for which data are awaiting an explanation) and having solved that,
reminds us of further instances that have elements in common with the
studied one.

It is in this form that the imprints of a chemistry heritage and environ-
ment are legible in Joshua’s marvellous works in Physics. How this comes
about, has been a concern in the sociology of sciences. It has been proposed,
that the norms of the reference group are accepted by the individuals form-
ing part of it. In the phrasing of an eminent sociologist of science, J. Ben
David, ”[subject to some reservations] the expectations [in the individual]
directed toward a role ... are determined by the institutional deﬁnition of
the role”.8

On more than one occasion we have heard Joshua proclaim the pleasure
he takes at theorizing in Physics. ”The physical chemist dines and wines
well at the table of Theoretical Physics.” Few have repaid their meal at that
table more fully than Joshua Jortner.

2 Background to Reaction Control

The enhancement of a desired end-product in a chemical (or photo- chemi-
cal) process through controlled electromagnetic (laser) excitation has been
the aim of numerous studies. At least two volumes comprehensively doc-
umenting the state of the art have recently appeared, with some articles
in them that are of particular interest to the present paper.9−10 It emerges
that by the shaping of femtosecond laser pulses it is possible to achieve se-
lective molecular excitation leading to a preferred exit channel. (A caveat
on impossible pathways has also been sounded .11)

A seminal idea in the subject has been that the quantum system under
investigation could itself guide (through some automated algorithmic loop)
the search for the optimal electric ﬁeld .12 In other eﬀorts the relationship
between the quantum state and the optimal electric ﬁeld was brought out
in a diﬀerent form, namely, by explicit formulae giving the latter in terms
of (overlaps of) time-dependent wave-functions describing the evolution of
the system .13,14 It therefore appears from these results that some analytical
properties of the molecular wave-function as a function of time (t) are carried
over onto the optimized electric ﬁeld.

On the other hand, some time ago we have investigated the analytic

5

properties possessed by some molecular wave-functions,
in particular of
wave-packets formed by vertical excitations between two potential energy
surfaces, as functions of the time variable .15−16 The root-cause of these
analytic properties is the lower-boundedness of the energies entering the
wave-packet :17−18 this property induces reciprocal relations similar to those
in the Kramers-Kronig relations (which are based on causality), but in the
present case in the time domain. (The relations are shown below in equation
(1) and equation (2) ).

These results are applied in the present paper to two recent works involv-
ing photo-excitational processes, the ﬁrst being experimental, 19−20 while the
second is computational, based on the electron nuclear dynamics (END) al-
gorithm .21−22 However, before turning to these applications we ﬁrst describe
the mathematical background of our algorithm as applied to an optimized
laser ﬁeld.

3 Reciprocity Relations for an Optimal Field

Let a component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld vector be written as the com-
plex quantity E(R, t), with R representing position vectors
inside the molecule. (The ﬁeld in the present formulation is complex: its real
and imaginary parts are associated with the two independent polarizations
of the laser light perpendicular to the direction of its propagation .9) For all
values of the position coordinates R, let E(R, t) satisfy as function of the
complex variable t, the conditions that it is (a) regular and (b) without zeros
in the lower half of the complex t-plane and that (c) it tends to a constant
(t-independent) ﬁnite value for large |t|. (The meaning of these restrictions
will be presently discussed.) Then one has the following integral relations:

and

1
π

1
π

P

P

∞

Z

−∞

dt′ ln |E(R, t′)|
t − t′

= − arg E(R, t)

∞

Z

−∞

dt′ arg E(R, t′)
t − t′

= + ln |E(R, t)|

(1)

(2)

making the logarithm of the ﬁeld intensity and the phase Hilbert transforms
of each other. In the above equations P designates the principal part of the
integral. (For an electric ﬁeld whose analyticity domain is the upper half
of the complex t-plane, the right hand sides of the above equations change
sign.)

6

To discuss experiments in which the (real) electric ﬁeld is of the form
Er(R, t) = F (R, t)cos(Ωt + φ(R, t))
(3)
, where the ﬁeld strength F (R, t) is positive and φ(R, t) is the chirped part
(in our terminology, the analytic part) of the phase, one writes

Er(R, t) = Re F (R, t)ei(Ωt+φ(R,t))
= Re eiΩtE(R, t)

(4)
If the complex ﬁeld E(R, t) thus deﬁned
where Re means the real part.
satisﬁes the conditions (a)-(c) above, then F (R, t) and φ(R, t)) are Hilbert
transforms, that is to say are connected by equation (1) and equation (2) .
(The alternative deﬁnition of Er(R, t), in terms of an imaginary exponent
which is the negative of that in the above equations, leads to the same result,
owing to the remark in the parentheses at the end of the last paragraph.)

The conditions (a)-(c) are satisﬁed for a wave packet. 16 (To be accurate,
one needs to exclude from the overall phase the non-chirped part of the
wave packet, since for this the integral in equation (2)
is divergent and
the formula meaningless; thus, this part of the phase must be taken oﬀ the
physical phase, before applying the reciprocal equations and then reinserted
in the physical quantity). Therefore, if the optimal electromagnetic ﬁeld
mimics the behavior of such wave function, it will also satisfy the reciprocal
relations. Our preliminary examination of a ﬁeld that gives the most eﬃcient
transition to an excited state wave packet indicates that this ﬁeld should
indeed have both the same modulus and the same phase as the wave-packet.
(There is an analogous result in signal theory: the optimum ﬁlter function
is proportional to the complex conjugate of the input signal spectrum .23)
Condition (b) is included mainly for simplicity. When it does not hold, it
can be corrected for. Furthermore when the zeros in the lower half-plane lie
far from the real t-axis, their presence is not felt in a limited and frequently
physical part of the real time region.

Condition (c) might seem at a ﬁrst sight to be un-physical, since it re-
quires the ﬁeld amplitude to be constant (and non-zero) long before and long
after the experiment. A natural meaning of this constant is the (tempera-
ture dependent) vacuum ﬁeld intensity. Its value nay not be readily available
in many cases. This, however, aﬀects the results, as e.g. in the right hand
side of equation (1) only by the logarithm of the error committed. (For
another, somewhat similarly unexpected, appearance of quantum electrody-
namics that is needed to establish consistency, one can call attention to the
last paragraph in a landmark paper .24)

7

Figure 1: Potential surfaces (in eV) against M n − CO distance (in a.u.)
(Schematic). Potential surfaces belong, for increasing energy heights at the
left hand extremity of the ﬁgure, to states A, B and C, respectively. The
pump excitation (in the region of 3 eV) from the ground state (A) level
populates levels in both excited states B and C. In a controlled experiment
the laser ﬁeld is so adjusted, as to preferentially populate C.

4 Electron Detachment in CpMn(Co)3

A variant of control in photo-chemical processes was proposed in Ref. 25,
such that both the intensity and the phase of the optimized laser ﬁeld were
adjusted. Carrying forward this idea, optimization of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld was applied to the carbonyl CpM n(Co)3 (Cp = η5−C5H5), with a view
of obtaining an enhancement of the molecular ion product CpM n(Co)+
3 , in
2 .19−20 The latter
preference to another fragmentation product CpM n(Co)+
works gave accounts of a pump-probe experiment in which the exciting ﬁeld
was optimized, so as to achieve an improved ionic yield.

The experimental arrangement in the quoted works, described there in
detail, used a laser that sent, in the pump stage, pulses operating at 402.5nm
(24844.7cm−1) and of about 45 fs duration. The probe pulse consisted of
three photons of 805nm (12422.4 cm−1) each; these arrived with a variable
delay. The optimization was eﬀected by a pulse shaper (operating with
256 pixels), which was capable of simultaneous modulation of the phase
(chirping) and the intensity.

Several potential energy surfaces for the carbonyl molecule were shown
in Fig. 3 of Ref. 19 as functions of a single nuclear coordinate (the Mn-CO
distance). In an adjacent ﬁgure (Fig.1), we have drawn schematically only
those three potential energy curves that are essential for the understanding
of the process. These are the ground state a1A′, named A and the two

8

states in the excited state manifold, at about 3eV higher, namely b1A”
(B), and c1A” (C). It is the enhanced population of C that favors upon a
further excitation (the probe) the desired end product (the molecular ion),
while population of B will promote upon further excitation of about the
same wave-length the competing process: the dissociation of the molecule.
Intensities and phases of the optimized electromagnetic ﬁelds are shown in
the published curves of the above works, in particular in Fig. 1 of Ref. 19.
In addition, data values were kindly made available to us through private
communication. These data have enabled us to test some analytic properties
of the optimal laser ﬁeld (as function of time), in the manner explained
below.

The ﬁnal conclusion from this test is that in the optimal electromag-
netic ﬁeld there is a signiﬁcant (though not full) correlation between the
phase and the intensity. Theoretically, such correlation would indicate (es-
pecially, if conﬁrmed by more extensive tests) that the analytic properties
of the evolving molecular wave functions are imprinted on the optimized
femtosecond pulse. In this context it should be mentioned that, though the
enhancement of unimolecular reactions by an optimal electromagnetic ﬁeld
has been clearly demonstrated by now, details of its dynamics have been
in need of better understanding.19 On a practical level, the eventual phase-
intensity correlation would mean that the optimization of one of these does
automatically lead to the optimization of the other. Thus a considerable
part of the optimization eﬀort can be spared.

4.1 Optimal pump ﬁeld

The intensity and phase for the pump pulse which took place in the interval
between -100fs and about 50fs, are seen in the ﬁrst half of Fig. 1 in Ref. 19 .
However, insomuch that the probe peak follows the pump peak with a delay
of about 85 fs and the width of each excitation is also of about this value,
the pump intensity curve overlaps the probe curve. This makes the pump
part of the experimental curve diﬃcult to consider separately. To make an
analysis of the pump curve only, we have taken from the published ﬁgure
the values of the phase between -100fs and 50fs and then smoothly extrapo-
lated the value of the phase outside this interval to zero. This extrapolated
pump-phase curve is shown in the accompanying Figure 2 by a broken line.
In the same ﬁgure is drawn (by a full curve) the intensity of the pump-pulse,
as calculated from the second of the reciprocal relations, equation (2) . The
curve that this algorithm produces bears a clear similarity to the experimen-

9

-200

-100

100

200

time

INTENSITY,PHASE

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

-0.25

-0.5

-0.75

-1

Figure 2: Time (in quarter-fs units) - dependence of the pump-excitation
ﬁeld. Broken line: Phase (in quarter-radians) taken from a section of Fig. 1
(in Ref. 19, but adjusted at both extremities to a zero value. Full line: In-
tensity (in arbitrary electric ﬁeld strength units), calculated from the phase
through the integral relation in equation (2)

10

Figure 3: Full-scale optimal phase of the excitation ﬁeld vs time (in fs). The
thin line shows the phase as calculated from the supplied intensity and the
formula in equation (1) . The thick line gives the phase, optimized in the
experiment of Ref. 19.

tal curve and indicates the ipso facto applicability of the reciprocal-relation
method. More than this cannot be said about the method, in view of both
the theoretical and the experimental uncertainties. The main discrepancy
is in the values of the ﬁeld strength in the wings: in the experiments these
tend to zero, whereas the computed strength remains ﬁnite (representing
the background). The relatively large value is due to the rather ﬂat phase
curve.
It should be added, however, that when we attempt to apply the
same procedure [namely, calculating the intensity from the phase (or vice
versa) by the integral relations above] to a diﬀerent experiment 25, in which
the pulse was optimized for a second harmonic generation (SHG) this leads
to a complete failure, in the sense that it comes nowhere near the optimized
curves shown in Figure 5 of the cited work .25 That the method works with
photo-fragmentation and not with SHG reinforces our supposition that it
is the relatedness of the optimized pulse-shape to the developing molecular
wave-function that makes the method work.

4.2 Phase-optimized pump and probe pulses

The data values supplied to us spanned the broad range of between -3000
and 3000 femto seconds and thus covered the full duration of pumping and
”probing”, as well as far beyond. The raw log-intensity data values were
inserted in the left hand side of the ﬁrst of the reciprocal relations, equation

11

(1) , and the phase calculated by integration. The original and calculated
curves are shown in Figure 3. Again a signiﬁcant agreement, though far
from perfect in detail, is brought into evidence.

The proposed interpretation of this (admittedly, partial) agreement is as
follows: In any actual molecular wave function which arises as the solution of
the Schr¨odinger, the phase and intensity do not vary freely, independently
In particular, this is true of those wave functions which
of each other.
favor electron detachment, or the CpM n(Co)+
3 exit channel. On the other
hand, the generation of any such wave-function by a external pulse of some
duration, necessitates some relation between the pulse shape and the wave-
function. The hypothesis that is being tested in this work (and to some
extent found justiﬁed), is that it is the same integral reciprocal relations
that hold between phase and intensity of the wave-function, which is also
valid for the optimal ﬁeld.

5 Excitations in Molecular Hydrogen

The formalism named END (Electron Nuclear Dynamics) was designed to
give a full description of dynamics of the electron-nuclear system dynamics
in molecules, going beyond the Born-Oppenheimer or the adiabatic approxi-
mation. A review is in Ref. 26. Of late, the method was applied to study the
behavior of H3 (as well as the heavier triatomic Li3), when photon-energy
in the range of several electron volts is pumped into the molecule.27 De-
scriptions were given of the evolution of nuclear motions, which take place
far from the equilateral triangle, equilibrium conﬁguration, of the spin oc-
cupancy on each atom and of the amplitudes of excited electronic states
(essentially of the HOM O− > LU M O excitation amplitudes), all these
as functions of time. The time range that was investigated was typically
4 atomic units, or about 10−16 seconds. An interesting set of computa-
tional results were the probabilities |cα(t)|2 and the associated phase shifts
arg cα(t) (Fig. 9 in Ref. 26). The two quantities showed fast oscillations in
time. What appears remarkable is that the oscillations between the quan-
tities appear to be correlated, in a manner similar to that predicted by the
reciprocal relations. However, in view of the complexity of the curves, as
well as of the intricacy of the dynamic situation under study, it was thought
inadvisable to try to obtain one conjugate quantity from the other using
these curves.

A simpler system is a rotating H2 molecule, whose rotation speed can

12

Figure 4: Modulus |cα| and phase of the HOM O− > LU M O transition
amplitude against time for H2 upon excitation with energy of 4.28 eV. Com-
puted with END. Source: Ref. 27.

be regulated by varying the excitation energy of the molecule. Here again
results were obtained by END simulations 27 for the phase-shifts between
spin-up and spin-down amplitudes, and also of the spin-state probabilities,
when the diatomic was excited in the 3-4 eV range to induce a HOM O− >
LU M O promotion. The time dependency of the curve was again oscillatory,
with the maxima of magnitudes coinciding with the moments at which the
bond was stretched .26−27 Moreover, these results were also indicative of
temporal correlations between phase and moduli of the type proposed by
us. Still, the data were too complicated and minuscule to be useful to us.

A more transparent result was obtained when the phase of the

HOM O− > LU M O excitation amplitude was plotted and this was com-
pared with the modulus. Figure 4 shows the curves (for an excitation energy
of 4.28 eV), as given by the output. It is seen, that the extrema of the moduli
coincide with (numerical) maxima of the phase-slope, as well as vice versa.
This is a distinctive hallmark of the reciprocal-relations. (Cf. sin(t) and
− cos(t) are Hilbert transforms of each other). According to F. Hagelberg,
the correlation can also be detected in dynamic regions where the phase
exhibits a far less regular time dependence than in the time interval shown
in the ﬁgure .27

The next ﬁgure (Figure 5) illustrates the application of the reciprocal
relation equation (1) to this system. The ”symmetric” curve is essentially
the numerical output supplied to us for the excitation modulus, but which
has been adjusted in the wings to terminate (at both t = ±∞) in a very

13

Figure 5: Synthesized phase for the case of Figure 4. The phase was calcu-
lated from the intensity using the integral relation in equation (1) and the
modulus values. The modiﬁed intensity (the input in the integral relation)
also appears in this ﬁgure. This is the same as the |cα| curve shown in the
previous ﬁgure, but was adjusted and extended at the wings to a small ﬁnite
value. (Discussed in the text.)

small but ﬁnite value. This adjustment is necessary for the convergence of
the integrals. The results are only weakly dependent on the value of this limit
(to be precise, in a logarithmic fashion). A physical interpretation of the
limiting value is the equilibrium value of the excited state population, which
is temperature dependent and might be extremely small, but is nevertheless
ﬁnite. The justiﬁcation for this is similar to that given at the end of section
3 for the (non-zero) asymptotic value of the electric ﬁeld intensity.

The computed output is the phase, diﬀerentiated from the modulus by
it being ”anti-symmetric”. This is rather similar to the directly computed
phase, which was shown in the previous ﬁgure.

However, discrepancies are evident in the wings and in the slight, rising
slope in the phase. These are connected to the wing-adjustment in the mod-
ulus values. A ﬁnal discrepancy is that the positions of the phase-minima
and maxima are interchanged between the directly computed (shown here in
the Figure 4) and those that are obtained from the reciprocal relation (Fig-
ure 5). The order of the extrema in the latter with reference to the rise or the
fall of the modulus is a direct consequence of the lower-boundedness of the
energy. On the other hand, a systematic reversal would require a ”principle
of upper-boundedness”, which is diﬃcult to justify. A possible sign mistake
in the END data was investigated by their author (Frank Hagelberg) and
was found not to be the case. There remains, thus, the need for further
clariﬁcation.

14

6 Conclusion

It is very likely that in many instances in the photo-chemistry literature
interdependent behavior exists between the phase and the modulus of some
quantity. Such behavior may have been noticed in the past, or may not.
This paper examines two areas (out of possibly many others), one in the
subject of reaction-control and the other in the dynamics of molecules, where
the correlated behavior is fairly evident (though not precise in details). We
provide a physical rationale for this correlation and give an algorithm (based
on the theory of Hilbert transforms) for its prediction. The algorithm can
have a practical use of reducing the labor in the optimization of photo-
fragmentation protocols.

7 Acknowledgements

Our thanks go to Frank Hagelberg, Cosmin Lupulescu and Ludger Woeste
for making their results available to us and for their comments, to Mark
Perel’man for discussions and to Hava Nowerstern of the Edelstein Collection
for help with the literature.

References

[1] von Neumann, J. The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics

(Dover, New York, 1959) section III.5.

[2] Rozental’, I.L. Sov. Phys. Usp. 1980 23, 296 . This paper advances a
”principle of eﬀectiveness”, related to the anthropic principle, in the form
that our basic physical laws, together with the numerical values of the
fundamental constants are not only suﬃcient, but also necessary for the
existence of ground states.

[3] Weisskopf, V.F. Science 1979203, 241 . This paper names the follow-
ing milestones in the deepening of unity in Physics throughout modern
times: unity of natural laws upon earth and in the heaven, unity of
heat and mechanics, unity of electricity, magnetism and optics, unity of
space, time, matter and gravity, unity of physics, chemistry and material
sciences, unity of atomic, nuclear and subnuclear phenomena. [To these
one can add unity involving also gravitation (in preparation).]

15

[4] Polikarev, A. Methodological Problems of Science; Bulgarian Academy

of Science, Soﬁa, 1983.

[5] Tisza, L. Europhysics News 2003, March/April, 58

[6] Agassi, J. Faraday as a natural Philosopher; University Press: Chicago,

1971, p. 125.

[7] Jortner, J. Faraday Discussions 1997, 108 1.

[8] Ben David, J. Scientiﬁc Growth. Essays on the social organization and
ethos of Science; G. Freudenthal, Ed.; Univ. California Press: Berkeley,
1991, p.91

[9] Tannor, D.J.; Kosloﬀ, R. ; Bartana, A. Faraday Discussions 1999 113

365, as well as other discussion papers in that volume.

[10] Abrashkovich, A.; Shapiro M.; Brumer, P. Chem. Phys. 2001, 267, 81,

together with other papers in the volume.

[11] Brumer, P.; Shapiro,M. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1989, 139, 221.

[12] Judson, R.S.; Rabitz, H. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 68, 1500.

[13] Kosloﬀ, R.; Rice, S.A. ; Gaspard, P.; Tersigni, S.; Tannor, D.J. Chem.

Phys., 1989, 139, 201.

95, 8019.

[14] Amstrup, B.; Carlson, R.J.; Matro, A.; Rice, S.A. J. Phys. Chem. 1991,

[15] Englman, R.; Yahalom A.; Baer, M. Europ. Phys. J. D, 2000, 8, 1.

[16] Englman, R.; Yahalom, A. Adv. Chem. Phys. 2002, 124, 197.

[17] Khalﬁn, L.A. Soviet Phys. JETP 1958, 8, 1053.

[18] Perel’man, M.E.; Englman, R. Modern Phys. Lett. B 2001, 14, 907.

[19] Daniel, C.; Full, J.; Gonzalez, L. ; Lupulescu, C. ; Manz, J. ; Merli,A.;

Vajda S.; Woeste, L. Science 2003, 299, 536.

[20] Daniel, C.; Full, J.; Gonzalez, L. ; Kaposta, C.; Krenz, M.; Lupulescu,
C.; Manz, J. ; Minemoto, S.; Oppel, M. ; Rosendo-Francisco, P.; Vajda,
S.; Woeste, L. Chem. Phys. 2001, 267, 247.

16

[21] Deumens, E. ; Diz, A.; Taylor, H. ; ¨Ohrn, Y. J. Chem. Phys. 1992,

96, 6820.

[22] Hagelberg, F. ; Deumens, E. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 65, 052505.

[23] Peebles, P. Z. Probability, Random Variables and Random Signal Prin-

ciples; McGraw-Hill: New York, 1995, section 9.1-13

[24] Callen, H. B. ; Welton, T. A. ; Phys. Rev. A 1951, 83, 34.

[25] Brixner, T. ; Strehle, M.; Gerber, G. ; Appl. Phys. B 1999, 68, 281.

[26] Deumens, E.; Diz, A. ; Longo, R. ; ¨Ohrn, Y. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1994, 66

917.

[27] Hagelberg, F. Private communications, 2002-3.

17

