4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Complex States of Simple Molecular Systems

R. Englmana,b and A. Yahalomb
a Department of Physics and Applied Mathematics,
Soreq NRC,Yavne 81810,Israel
b College of Judea and Samaria, Ariel 44284, Israel
e-mail: englman@vms.huji.ac.il; asya@ycariel.yosh.ac.il;

December 20, 2013

Abstract

A review is given of phase properties in molecular wave functions, composed of a number
of (and, at least, two) electronic states that become degenerate at some nearby values
of the nuclear conﬁguration. Apart from discussing phases and interference in classical
(non-quantal) systems, including light-waves, the review looks at the constructability of
complex wave functions from observable quantities (”the phase problem”), at the con-
troversy regarding quantum mechanical phase-operators, at the modes of observability
of phase and at the role of phases in some non-demolition measurements. Advances
in experimental and (especially) theoretical aspects of Aharonov-Bohm and topological
(Berry) phases are described, including those involving two-electron and relativistic sys-
tems. Several works in the phase control and revivals of molecular wave-packets are cited
as developments and applications of complex-function theory. Further topics that this
review touches on are: coherent states, semiclassical approximations and the Maslov in-
dex. The interrelation between time and the complex state is noted in the contexts of
time delays in scattering, of time-reversal invariance and of the existence of a molecular
time-arrow.

When the stationary Born-Oppenheimer description for nearly degenerate state is
regarded as ”embedded” in a broader dynamic formulation, namely through solution of
the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation, the wave function becomes necessarily com-
plex. The analytic behavior of this function in the complex time-plane can be exploited
to gain information about the connection between phases and moduli of the component-
amplitudes. One form of this connection are a pair of reciprocal (Kramers-Kronig type)
relations in the complex time-domain. These show that certain phase changes in a com-
ponent amplitude (such as, e.g., lead to a non-zero Berry-phase) require changes in the
amplitude-moduli, too, and imply degeneracies of the electronic state.

The subject of conical degeneracy, or intersection, of adjacent potential surface is ex-
tended to nonlinear nuclear-electronic coupling, which can then result in multiple conical
degeneracies on a nuclear coordinate plane. We treat cases of double and fourfold in-
tersections, the latter under trigonal symmetry, and employ an analytic-graphical phase
tracing method to obtain the resulting Berry phases as the system circles around some
or all of the degeneracy points. These phases can take up values that are all integral
multiples of π, with integers that vary with the physical situation (or with the model
postulated for it).

A further type of invariance, with respect to gauge transformation, is also tied to
the complex form of the wave function. For a many-component state this leads to a
consideration of tensorial (Yang-Mills type) ﬁelds F for molecular systems. It is shown
that it is the truncation of the Born-Oppenheimer electron-nuclear superposition that
generates the molecular Yang-Mills ﬁelds.

L

, representing a non-Abelian situation. In

The equations of motion for the nuclear degrees of freedom are derived from a La-
grangean density
the non-adiabatic cou-
pling terms (NACTs), that express the electronic background on the nuclear states, enter
as vector potentials (or gauge ﬁelds). We demonstrate a deep lying interrelation between
two apparently distinct theoretical developments: that which led to the discovery of
the Yang-Mills ﬁelds from considerations of local gauge-invariance, and the use of an
adiabatic-diabatic transformation matrix for the molecular case due to Baer. A general-
ized form of the NACTs is found, such that it makes the ﬁeld F vanish for a complete
electronic set.

L

Lastly, the use of phases and moduli as variables was found to be very convenient to
obtain variationally the equation of continuity and the Hamilton-Jacobi equations from
the Lagrangian of an electron following either the Schr¨odinger or the Dirac equation. In
the latter case, to a good approximation (in the nearly non-relativistic limit) the phases
in the diﬀerent spinor components are not scrambled together and their Berry phases are
unaﬀected.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Bz, 03.65.Ca, 03.65.Ge, 31.15.-p, 31.30.-i, 31.30.Gs, 31.70.-f

keywords: phases, Born-Oppenheimer states, nonadiabatic coupling

1

Contents

1 Complex States of Simple Molecular Systems

4
4
10

Introduction and Preview of the Chapter

1.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Aspects of Phase in Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Analytic Theory of Complex Component-

Simpliﬁed Cases

17
Amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.1 Modulus and Phase
17
1.3.2 Origin of Reciprocal Relations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.3.3 Other Phase-Modulus Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.3.4 The Cauchy-Integral Method for the Amplitudes . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.3.5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.3.6 Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.4 Non-Linearities That Lead to Multiple Degeneracies . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
1.4.1 Conical Intersection Pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1.4.2 Continuous Tracing of the Component Phase . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
1.4.3 The Adiabatic to Diabatic Transformation (ADT)
. . . . . . . . .
1.4.4 Direct Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
1.4.5 Higher Order Coupling in some Jahn-Teller and Renner-Teller Eﬀects 39
43
1.4.6 Experimental Phase Probing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
1.5 Molecular Yang-Mills Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
1.5.1 A Nuclear Lagrangean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1.5.2 Pure versus Tensorial Gauge Fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
1.5.3 The ”Curl Condition” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
1.5.4 The Untruncated Hilbert Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
1.5.5 An Alternative Derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5.6 General Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
1.5.7 An Extended (Suﬃciency) Criterion for the Vanishing of the Ten-
sorial Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5.8 Observability of Molecular States in a Hamiltonian Formalism . .
1.5.9 An Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6 Lagrangeans in Phase-Modulus Formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6.1 Background to the Non-Relativistic and Relativistic Cases . . . . .
1.6.2 Non-Relativistic Electron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Similarities Between Potential Fluid Dynamics and Quantum Me-
1.6.3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
chanics
1.6.4 Electrons in the Dirac Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6.5 The Nearly Non-Relativistic Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6.6 The Lagrangean-Density Correction Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6.7 Topological Phase for Dirac Electrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51
53
54
56
56
56

57
58
60
61
61

2

1.6.8 What Have We Learned about Spinor Phases? . . . . . . . . . . .
1.7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63
63

3

Chapter 1

Complex States of Simple
Molecular Systems

1.1

Introduction and Preview of the Chapter

In quantum theory physical systems move in vector spaces that are, unlike those in
classical physics, essentially complex. This diﬀerence has had considerable impact on the
status, interpretation and mathematics of the theory. These aspects will be discussed in
this Chapter within the general context of simple molecular systems, while concentrating,
at the same time, on instances in which the electronic states of the molecule are exactly
or nearly degenerate. It is hoped that as the Chapter progresses, the reader will obtain
a clearer view of the relevance of the complex description of the state to the presence of
a degeneracy.

The diﬃculties that arose from the complex nature of the wave function during the
development of quantum theory are recorded by historians of science ([1] - [3]). For
some time during the early stages of the new quantum theory the existence of a complex
state deﬁed acceptance ([1], p.266). Thus, both de Broglie and Schr¨odinger believed that
material waves (or ”matter” or ”de Broglie” waves, as they were also called) are real (i.e.,
not complex) quantities, just as electromagnetic waves are [3]. The decisive step for the
acceptance of the complex wave came with the probabilistic interpretation of the theory,
also known as Born’s probability postulate. This placed the modulus of the wave function
in the position of a (and, possibly, unique) connection between theory and experience.
This development took place in the year 1926 and it is remarkable that already in the
same year Dirac embraced the modulus based interpretation wholeheartedly [4]. [Oddly,
it was Schr¨odinger who appears to have, in 1927, demurred at accepting the probabilistic
interpretation ([2], p. 561, footnote 350)]. Thus, the complex wave function was at last
legitimated, but the modulus was and has remained for a considerable time the focal
point of the formalism.

A somewhat diﬀerent viewpoint motivates this article, which stresses the added mean-
ing that the complex nature of the wave function lends to our understanding. Though
it is only recently that this aspect has come to the forefront, the essential point was
aﬃrmed already in 1972 by Wigner [5] in his famous essay on the role of mathematics in
physics. We quote from this here at some length:

”The enormous usefulness of mathematics in the natural sciences is something border-
ing on the mysterious and there is no rational explanation for ... this uncanny usefulness
of mathematical concepts...

4

The complex numbers provide a particularly striking example of the foregoing. Cer-
tainly, nothing in our experience suggests the introducing of these quantities... Let us not
forget that the Hilbert space of quantum mechanics is the complex Hilbert space with a
Hermitian scalar product. Surely to the unpreoccupied mind, complex numbers ... can-
not be suggested by physical observations. Furthermore, the use of complex numbers is
not a calculational trick of applied mathematics, but comes close to being a necessity in
the formulation of the laws of quantum mechanics. Finally, it now [1972] begins to appear
that not only complex numbers but analytic functions are destined to play a decisive role
in the formulation of quantum theory. I am referring to the rapidly developing theory
of dispersion relations. It is diﬃcult to avoid the impression that a miracle confronts us
here [i.e., in the agreement between the properties of the hypernumber
1) and those
of the natural world].”

−

(

A shorter and more recent formulation is: ”The concept of analyticity turns out to

p

be astonishingly applicable”([6], p.37)

What is addressed by these sources is the ontology of quantal description. Wave
functions (and other related quantities, like Green functions or density matrices), far
from being mere compendia or short-hand listings of observational data, obtained in the
domain of real numbers, possess an actuality of their own. From a knowledge of the wave
functions for real values of the variables and by relying on their analytical behavior for
complex values, new properties come to the open, in a way that one can perhaps view,
echoing the quotations above, as ”miraculous”.

A term that is nearly synonymous with complex numbers or functions is their ”phase”.
The rising preoccupation with the wave function phase in the last few decades is beyond
doubt, to the extent that the importance of phases has of late become comparable to that
of the moduli. (We use Dirac’s terminology [7], that writes a wave function by a set of co-
eﬃcients, the “amplitudes”, each expressible in terms of its absolute value, its “modulus”,
and its ”phase”). There is a related growth of literature on interference eﬀects, associ-
ated with Aharonov-Bohm and Berry phases ([8] - [14]). In parallel, one has witnessed in
recent years a trend to construct selectively and to manipulate wave functions.The nec-
essary techniques to achieve these are also anchored in the phases of the wave function
components. This trend is manifest in such diverse areas as coherent or squeezed states
[15, 16], electron transport in mesoscopic systems [17], sculpting of Rydberg-atom wave-
packets [18, 19], repeated and non-demolition quantum measurements [20], wave-packet
collapse [21] and quantum computations [22, 23]. Experimentally, the determination of
phases frequently utilize measurement of Ramsey fringes [24] or similar methods [25].

The status of the phase in quantum mechanics has been the subject of debate. In-
somuch as classical mechanics has successfully formulated and solved problems using
action-angle variables [26], one would have expected to see in the phase of the wave-
function a fully ”observable” quantity, equivalent to and and having a status similar to
the modulus, or to the equivalent concept of the ”number variable”. This is not the case
and, in fact, no exact, well behaved Hermitean phase operator conjugate to the number is
known to exist. [An article by Nieto [27] describes the early history of the phase operator
question, and gives a feeling of the problematics of the ﬁeld. An alternative discussion,
primarily related to phases in the electromagnetic ﬁeld, is available in [28]]. In section 2 a
brief review is provided of the various ways that phase is linked to molecular properties.
Section 3 presents results that the analytic properties of the wave function as a func-
tion of time t imply and summarizes previous publications of the authors and of their
collaborators ([29] -[38]). While the earlier quote from Wigner has prepared us to expect
from the analytic behavior of the wave function some general insight, the equations in
this section yield the speciﬁc result that, due to the analytic properties of the logarithm

5

of wave function amplitudes, certain forms of phase changes lead immediately to the
logical necessity of enlarging the electronic set or, in other words, to the presence of an
(otherwise) unsuspected state.

In the same section we also see that the source of the appropriate analytic behavior
of the wave function is outside its deﬁning equation, (the Schr¨odinger equation), and is
in general the consequence of either some very basic consideration or of the way that
experiments are conducted. The analytic behavior in question can be in the frequency
or in the time domain and leads in either case to a Kramers-Kronig type of reciprocal
relations. We propose that behind these relations there may be an ”equation of restric-
tion”, but while in the former case (where the variable is the frequency) the equation of
restriction expresses causality (”no eﬀect before cause”), for the latter case (when the
variable is the time), the restriction is in several instances the basic requirement of lower
boundedness of energies in (no-relativistic) spectra ([39, 40]). In a previous work it has
been shown that analyticity plays further roles in these reciprocal relations, in that it
ensures that time-causality is not violated in the conjugate relations and that (ordinary)
gauge invariance is observed [40].

As already remarked, the results in section 3 are based on dispersions relations in
the complex time domain. A complex time is not a new concept. It features in wave
optics [28] for ”complex analytic signals” (which is an electromagnetic ﬁeld with only
positive frequencies) and in non-demolition measurements performed on photons [41].
For transitions between adiabatic states (which is also discussed in this review), it was
previously introduced in several works ([42] - [45]).

Interestingly, the need for a multiple electronic set, which we connect with the re-
ciprocal relations, was also a keynote of a recent review ([46] and previous publications
cited there and in [47]). Though the considerations relevant to this eﬀect are not linked
to complex nature of the states (but rather to the stability of the adiabatic states in the
real domain), we have included in section 3 a mention of, and some elaboration on, this
topic.

In further detail, section 3 stakes out the following claims: For time dependent wave
functions rigorous conjugate relations are derived between analytic decompositions (in
the complex t-plane) of phases and of log moduli. This entails a reciprocity, taking the
form of Kramers-Kronig integral relations (but in the time domain), holding between
observable phases and moduli in several physically important cases. These cases include
the nearly adiabatic (slowly varying) case, a class of cyclic wave-functions, wave packets
and non-cyclic states in an ”expanding potential”. The results deﬁne a unique phase
through its analyticity properties and exhibit the interdependence of geometric-phases
and related decay probabilities. It turns out that the reciprocity property obtained in this
section holds for several textbook quantum mechanical applications (like the minimum
width wave packet).

The multiple nature of electronic set becomes especially important when the potential
energy surfaces of two (or more) electronic states come close, namely, near a ”conical
intersection” (ci). This is also the point in the space of nuclear conﬁgurations at which
the phase of wave function components becomes anomalous. The basics of this situation
have been extensively studied and have been reviewed in various sources ([49]- [51]).
Recent works ([52] - [58]) have focused attention on a new contingency: when there may
be several ci’s between two adiabatic surfaces, their combined presence needs to be taken
into account for calculations of the non-adiabatic corrections of the states and can have
tangible consequences in chemical reactions. Section 4 presents an analytic modeling of
the multiple ci model, based on the superlinear terms in the coupling between electronic
and nuclear motion. The section describes in detail a tracing method that keeps track

6

In these the phases are either zero or π.

of the phases, even when these possess singular behavior (namely, at points where the
moduli vanish or become singular). The continuous tracing method is applicable to real
states (including stationary ones).
[At this
point, it might be objected that in so far that numerous properties of molecular systems
(e.g., those relating to questions of stability and, in general, to static situations and not
involving a magnetic ﬁeld) are well described in terms of real wave functions, the complex
form of the wave function need, after all, not be regarded as a fundamental property.
However, it will be shown in Section 4 that wave functions that are real but are subject
to a sign change, can be best treated as limiting cases in complex variable theory. In fact,
the ”phase tracing” method is logically connected to the time dependent wave-functions
(and represents a case of mathematical ”embedding”)].

A speciﬁc result in Section 4 is the construction of highly non-linear vibronic couplings
near a ci. The construction shows, inter alia, that the connection between the Berry (or
”topological”, or ”geometrical”) phase, acquired during cycling in a parameter space,
and the number of ci’s circled depends on the details of the case that is studied and
can vary from one situation to another. Though the subject of Berry phase is reviewed
in a companion chapter in this volume [59], we note here some recent extensions in the
subject ([60] - [62]). In these works, the phase changes were calculated for two-electron
wave functions, such that are subject to inter-electronic forces . An added complication
was also considered, for the case in which the two electrons are acted upon by diﬀerent
ﬁelds. This can occur when the two electrons are placed in diﬀerent environments, as in
asymmetric dimers. By and large, intuitively understandable results are found for the
combined phase factor but, under conditions of accidental degeneracies, surprising jumps
( named ”switching”) are noted. Some applications to quantum computations seem to
be possible [62].

The theory of Born-Oppenheimer (abbreviated to BO) [63, 64] has been hailed (in
an authoritative but unfortunately unidentiﬁed source) as one of the greatest advances
in theoretical physics. Its power is in disentangling the problem of two kinds of interact-
ing particles into two separate problems, ordered according to some property of the two
kinds. In its most frequently encountered form, it is the nuclei and electrons that inter-
act (in a molecule or in a solid) and the ordering of the treatment is based on the large
diﬀerence between their masses. However, other particle pairs can be similarly handled,
like hadronic mesons and baryons, except that a relativistic or ﬁeld theoretical version
of the Born-Oppenheimer theory is not known. The price that is paid for the strength of
the method is that the remaining coupling between the two kinds of particles is dynamic.
This coupling is expressed by the so called Non-Adiabatic Coupling Terms (abbreviated
as NACTs), which involve derivatives of (the electronic) states rather than the states
themselves. ”Correction terms” of this form are diﬃcult to handle by conventional per-
turbation theory. For atomic collisions the method of ” Perturbed Stationary States” was
designed to overcome this diﬃculty [65, 66], but this is accurate only under restrictive
conditions. On the other hand, the circumstance that this coupling is independent of the
potential, indicates that a general procedure can be used to take care of the NACTs [68].
Such general procedure was developed by Yang and Mills in 1954 [68] and has led to far
reaching consequences in the theory of weak and strong interactions between elementary
particles.

The interesting history of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld belongs essentially to particle physics
([69] - [72]). The reason for mentioning it here in a chemical physics setting, is to note that
an apparently entirely diﬀerent procedure was proposed for the equivalent problem arising
in the molecular context, namely, for the elimination of the derivative terms (the NACTs)
from the nuclear part of the BO Schr¨odinger equation through an Adiabatic-Diabatic

7

Transformation (ADT) matrix [67, 48].
It turns out that the quantity known as the
tensorial ﬁeld (or covariant, or Yang-Mills, or YM ﬁeld, with some further names also in
use) enters also into the ADT description, though from a completely diﬀerent viewpoint,
namely through ensuring the validity of the ADT matrix method by satisfaction of what
is known as the ”curl cndition”. Formally, when the ”curl condition” holds, the (classical)
Yang-Mills ﬁeld is zero and this is also the requirement for the strict validity of the ADT
method. [A review of the ADT and alternative methods is available in, e.g., [49, 50], the
latter of which discusses also the Yang-Mills ﬁeld in the context of the BO treatment.]
However, it has recently been shown by a formal proof, that an approximate construction
of the ADT matrix (using only a ﬁnite, and in practice small, number of BO, adiabatic
states) is possible even though the ”curl condition” may be formally invalid [36]. An
example for such an approximate construction in a systematic way was provided in a
model that uses Mathieu functions for the BO electronic states [73].

As has been noted some time ago, the non-adiabatic coupling terms (NACTs, men-
tioned above) can be incorporated in the nuclear part of the Schr¨odinger equation as a
vector potential [74, 75]. The question of a possible magnetic ﬁeld, associated with this
vector potential has also been considered ([76] - [83]). For an electron occupying an ad-
mixture of two or more states (a case that is commonly designated as non-commutative,
”non-Abelian”), the ﬁelds of physical interest are not only the magnetic ﬁeld, being the
curl of the ”vector potential”, but also tensorial (Yang-Mills) ﬁelds. The latter is the
sum of the curl ﬁeld and of a vector-product term of the NACTs. Physically these ﬁeld
represent the reaction of the electron on the nuclear motion via the NACTs.

In a situation characteristic of molecular systems, a conical intersection ci arises
from the degeneracy point of adiabatic potential energy surfaces in a plane of nuclear
displacement coordinates. There are also a number of orthogonal directions, representing
a so-called ”seam” direction.
In this setting, it emerges that both kinds of ﬁelds are
aligned with the seam direction of the ci and are zero everywhere outside the seam, but
they diﬀer as regards the ﬂux that they produce. Already in a two-state situation, the
ﬁelds are representation dependent and the values of the ﬂuxes depend on the states the
electron occupies. (This evidently diﬀers from conventional electro-magnetism, in which
the magnetic ﬁeld and the ﬂux are unchanged under a gauge transformation.)

Another subject in which there are implications of phase is the time evolution of
atomic or molecular wave-packets.
In some recently studied cases these might be a
superposition of a good ten or so energy eigen-states. Thanks to the availability of
short, femtosecond laser pulses both the control of reactions by coherent light ([16],
[84]- [94]) and the probing of phases in a wave packet are now experimental possibilities
([19], [95] - [97]). With short duration excitations the initial form of the wave packet is
a real ”doorway state” ([98]- [100]) and this develops phases for each of its component
amplitudes as the wave-packet evolves. It has recently been shown that the phases of these
components are signposts of a time arrow ([101]-[102]) and of the irreversibility; both of
these are inherent in the quantum mechanical process of preparation and evolution [34].
It was further shown in [34] (for systems that are invariant under time-reversal, e.g. in
the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld) that the preparation of an initially complex wave-packet
requires ﬁnite times for its construction (and cannot be achieved instantaneously).

The quantum phase factor is the exponential of an imaginary quantity (i times the
phase) which multiplies into a wave function. Historically, a natural extension of this
was proposed in the form of a gauge transformation, which both multiplies into and
admixes diﬀerent components of a multi-component wave function [103]. The resulting
”gauge theories” have become an essential tool of quantum ﬁeld theories and provide (as
already noted in the discussion of the YM ﬁeld, above) the modern rationale of basic

8

forces between elementary particles ([69] -[72]). It has already been noted in an earlier
paragraph, that gauge theories have also made notable impact on molecular properties,
especially under conditions that the electronic state basis in the molecule consists of more
than one component. This situation also characterizes the conical intersections between
potential surfaces, as already mentioned. In section 5 we show how an important theorem,
originally due to Baer [48], and subsequently used in several equivalent forms, gives some
new insight to the nature and source of these YM ﬁelds in a molecular (and perhaps also
in a particle-ﬁeld) context. What the above theorem shows is that it is the truncation
of the BO set that leads to the YM ﬁelds, whereas for a complete BO set the ﬁeld is
inoperative for molecular vector potentials.

Section 6 shows the power of the modulus-phase formalism and is included in this
review partly for methodological purposes. In this formalism the equations of continuity
and the Hamilton-Jacobi equations can be naturally derived in both the non-relativistic
and the relativistic (Dirac) theories of the electron. It is shown that in the four-component
(spinor) theory of electrons, the two extra components in the spinor wave-function will
have only a minor eﬀect on the topological phase, provided certain conditions are met
(nearly non-relativistic velocities and external ﬁelds that are not excessively large).

So as to make the individual sections self-contained, we have found it advisable to

give some deﬁnitions and statements more than once.

9

1.2 Aspects of Phase in Molecules

This section attempts a brief review of several areas of research on the signiﬁcance of
phases, mainly for quantum phenomena in molecular systems. Evidently, due to limita-
tion of space, one cannot do justice to the breadth of the subject and numerous important
works will go unmentioned. It is hoped that the several cited papers (some of which have
been chosen from quite recent publications) will lead the reader to other, related and
earlier, publications. It is essential to state at the outset that the overall phase of the
wave-function is arbitrary and only the relative phases of its components are observ-
able in any meaningful sense. Throughout, we concentrate on the relative phases of the
components. (In a coordinate representation of the state function, the ”phases of the
components” are none other than the coordinate-dependent parts of the phase, so it is
also true that this part is susceptible to measurement. Similar statements can be made
in momentum, energy, etc. representations.)

A further preliminary statement to this section would be that, somewhat analogously
to classical physics or mechanics where positions and momenta (or velocities) are the two
conjugate variables that determine the motion, moduli and phases play similar roles. But
the analogy is not perfect. Indeed, early on it was questioned, apparently ﬁrst by Pauli
[104], whether a wave function can be constructed from the knowledge of a set of moduli
alone. It was then argued by Lamb [105] that from a set of values of wave function moduli
and of their rates of change, the wave function, including its phase, is uniquely found.
Counter-examples were then given [106, 107] and it now appears that the knowledge of
the moduli and some information on the analytic properties of the wave function are
both required for the construction of a state. (The following section contains a formal
treatment, based partly on [30] - [32] and [108]- [109].) In a recent research eﬀort, states
with deﬁnite phases were generated for either stationary or traveling type of ﬁelds [110].
Recalling for a start phases in classical waves, these have already been the subject
of consideration by Lord Rayleigh [111], who noted that through interference between
the probed and a probing wave the magnitude and phase of acoustic waves can be sepa-
rately determined, e.g., by ﬁnding surfaces of minimum and of zero magnitudes. A recent
review on classical waves is given by Klyshko [112]. The work of Pancharatnam on po-
larized light beams ([113, 114]) is regarded as the precursor of later studies of topological
phases in quantum systems [9]. This work contained a formal expression for the relative
phase between beams in diﬀerent elliptic polarizations of light, as well as a construction
(employing the so-named ”Poincare sphere”) that related the phase diﬀerence to a ge-
ometrical, area concept. (For experimental realizations with polarized light beams we
quote [115, 116]; the issue of any arbitrariness in experimentally pinning down the topo-
logical part of the phase was raised in [118].) Regarding the interesting question of any
common ground between classical and quantal phases, the relation between the adiabatic
(Hannay’s) angle in mechanics and the phase in wave functions was the subject of [117].
The diﬀerence in two-particle interference patterns of electromagnetic and matter waves
was noted, rather more recently, in [119]. The two phases, belonging to light and to
the particle wave-function, are expected to enter on an equal footing when the material
system is in strong interaction with an electromagnetic ﬁeld (as in the Jaynes-Cummings
model). An example of this case was provided in a study of a two level atom, which
was placed in a cavity containing an electromagnetic ﬁeld. Using one or two photon
excitations, it was found possible to obtain from the Pancharatnam phase an indication
of the statistics of the quantized ﬁeld [120].

Several essential basic properties of phases in optics are contained in [28, 41, 121]. It
was noted in [28], with reference to the ”complex analytic signal” (an electromagnetic ﬁeld

10

with positive frequency components), that the position of zeros (from which the phase can
be determined) and the intensity represent two sets of information which are intetwined
by the analytic property of the wave.
In the next section we shall again encounter
this ﬁnding, in the context of complex matter (Schr¨odinger) waves. Experimentally,
observations in wave guide structures of the positions of amplitude zeros (which are just
the ”phase singularities”) were made in [122]. An alternative way for the determination
of phase is from location of maxima in interference fringes ([28], section 7.3.2).

Interference in optical waves is clearly a phase phenomenon; in classical systems it
arises from the signed superposition of positive and negative real wave amplitudes. To
single out some special results in the extremely broad ﬁeld of interference, we point to
recent observations using two-photon pulse transition [94] in which a diﬀerentiation was
achieved between interferences due to temporal overlap (with ﬁnite pulse-width) and
quantum interference caused by delay. The (component-speciﬁc) topological phase in
wave functions has been measured, following the proposal of Berry in [9], by neutron
interferometry in a number of works, e.g., [123, 124] with continual improvements in the
technique. The diﬃculties in the use of coherent neutron beams and the possibility of
using conventional neutron sources for phase-sensitive neutron radiography have been
noted in a recent review [125].

Phase interference in optical or material systems can be utilized to achieve a type of
quantum measurement, known as non-demolition measurements ([41], Chapter 19). The
general objective is to make a measurement that does not change some property of the
system at the expense of some other other property(s) that is (are) changed. In optics it
is the phase that may act as a probe for determining the intensity (or photon number).
The phase can change in the course of the measurement, while the photon number does
not [126].

In an intriguing and potentially important proposal (apparently not further followed
up), a ﬁltering method was suggested for image reconstruction (including phases) from
the modulus of the correlation function [127].
[In mathematical terms this amounts
to deriving the behavior of a function in the full complex (frequency) plane from the
knowledge of the absolute value of the function on the real axis, utilizing some physically
realizable kernel function.] A diﬀerent spectral ﬁltering method was discussed in [128].

Before concluding this sketch of optical phases and passing on to our next topic,
the status of the ”phase” in the representation of observables as quantum mechanical
operators, we wish to call attention to the theoretical demonstration, provided in [129],
that any (discrete, ﬁnite dimensional) operator can be constructed through use of optical
devices only.

The appropriate quantum mechanical operator form of the phase has been the subject
of numerous eﬀorts. At present, one can only speak of the best approximate operator,
and this also is the subject of debate. A personal-historical account by Nieto of various
operator deﬁnitions for the phase (and of its probability distribution) is in [27] and in
companion articles, e.g.
[130] - [132] and others, that have appeared in volume 48 of
Physica Scripta T (1993) devoted to this subject. (For an introduction to the unitarity
requirements placed on a phase operator, one can refer to [133]). In 1927 Dirac proposed
a quantum mechanical operator ˆφ, deﬁned in terms of the creation and destruction op-
erators [134], but London [135] showed that this is not Hermitean. (A further source is
[136].) Another candidate, ei ˆφ is not unitary, as was demonstrated, e.g., in [28], section
10.7. Following that, Susskind and Glogower proposed a pair of operators ˆcos and ˆsin
[137], but it emerged these do not commute with the number operator ˆn. In 1988 Pegg
and Barnett introduced a Hermitean phase operator through a limiting procedure based
on the state with a deﬁnite phase in a truncated Hilbert space [138]. Some time ago a

11

comparison was made between diﬀerent phase operators when used on squeezed states
[139]. Unfortunately, there is as yet non consensus on the status of the Pegg-Barnett
operators ([121], [140] - [142]). It may be that, at least, part of the diﬃculties are rooted
in problems that arise from the coupling between the quantum system and the measur-
ing device. However, this diﬃculty is a moot point in quantum mechanical measurement
theory, in general.

(For the special case of a two-state systems, a hermitean phase operator was proposed,

[143]. This was said to provide a quantitative measure for ”phase information”.)

A related issue is the experimental accessibility of phases: It is now widely accepted
that there are essentially two experimental ways to observe phases [9, 161, 124]: (1)
through a two-Hamiltonian, one state method, interferometrically (namely, by sending
two identically prepared rays across two regions having diﬀerent ﬁelds), (2) a one Hamil-
tonian, two-state method (meaning, a diﬀerence in the preparation of the rays), e.g.,
[89, 92]. (One recalls that already several years ago it was noted that there are the two
ways for measuring the phase of a four-component state, a spinor [144].) One can also
note a further distinction proposed more recently, namely, that between ”observabilities”
of bosonic and fermionic phases [145]: Boson phases are observable both locally (at one
point) and nonlocally (at extended distances, which the wave reaches as it progresses).
The former can lead to phase values that are incompatible with the Bell inequalities,
while fermion phases are only nonlocally observable (i.e., by interference) and do not
violate Bell’s inequalities. The diﬀerence resides in that only the former type of particles
gives rise to a coherent state with arbitrarily large occupation number n, whereas for the
latter the exclusion principle allows only n = 0 or 1.

The question of determination of the phase of a ﬁeld (classical or quantal, as of a
wave-function) from the modulus (absolute value) of the ﬁeld along a real parameter (for
which alone experimental determination is possible) is known as ”the phase problem”
[28]. (So, also in crystallography.) The reciprocal relations derived in the next section
represent a formal scheme for the determination of phase given the modulus, and vice
versa. The physical basis of these singular integral relations was described in [146] and in
several companion articles in that volume; a more recent account can be found in [147].
Thus, the reciprocal relations in the time domain provide, under certain conditions of
analyticity, solutions to the phase problem. For electromagnetic ﬁelds, these were derived
in [148, 149, 121] and reviewed in [28, 147]. Matter or Schr¨odinger waves were considered
in a general manner in [39]. The more complete treatment, presented in the next section
applies the results to several situations in molecular and solid state physics. It is likely
that the full scope and meaning of the modulus-phase relationship await further and
deeper-going analyses.

In 1984 Berry made his striking discovery of time-scale-independent phase changes
in many-component states [9] (now variously known as Berry or topological or geometric
phase) . This followed a line of important developments regarding the role of phases
and phase factors in quantum mechanics. The starting point of these may be taken with
Aharonov and Bohm’s discovery of the topologically acquired phase [8], named after them.
(As a curiosity, it is recorded that David Bohm himself referred to the ”ESAB eﬀect”
[150, 151].) The achievement, stressed by the authors of [8], was to have been able to
show that when an electron traverses a closed path along which the magnetic ﬁeld is zero,
it acquires an observable phase change, which is proportional to the ”vector potential”.
The ”topological” aspect, namely that the path is inside a multiply connected portion of
space (or that, in physical terms, the closed path cannot be shrunk without encountering
an inﬁnite barrier), has subsequently turned out to be also of considerable importance
[152, 153], especially through later extensions and applications of the Aharonov-Bohm

12

phase-change [154]. (Cf. the paper by Wu and Yang [155] that showed the importance of
the phase factor in quantum mechanics, which has, in turn, led to several developments
in many domains of physics.)

In molecular physics, the ”topological” aspect has met its analogue in the Jahn-Teller
eﬀect [47, 156] and, indeed, in any situation where a degeneracy of electronic states is
encountered. The phase-change was change was discussedfrom various viewpoints in [157]
- [162] and [318].

For the Berry-phase we shall quote a deﬁnition given in [163]: ”The phase that can be
acquired by a state moving adiabatically (slowly) around a closed path in the parameter
space of the system.” There is a further, somewhat more general phase, that appears in
any cyclic motion, not necessarily slow) in the Hilbert space, which is the Aharonov-
Anandan phase [10]. Other developments and applications are abundant. An interim
summary was published in 1989 in [78]. A further, more up-to-date summary, especially
on progress in experimental developments, is much needed. (In section 4 of the present
review we list some publications that report on the experimental determinations of the
Berry phase.) Regarding theoretical advances, we note (in a somewhat subjective and
selective mode) some clariﬁcations regarding parallel transport, e.g., [164]. This paper
discusses the ”projective Hilbert space” and its metric (the Fubini-Study metric). The
projective Hilbert space arises from the Hilbert space of the electronic manifold by the re-
moval of the overall phase and is therefore a central geometrical concept in any treatment
of the component phases, such as the present review.

The term ”Open-path phase” was coined for a non-fully-cyclic evolution [11, 14]. This,
unlike the Berry-phase proper, is not gauge-invariant, but is, nevertheless (partially)
accessible by experiments ([30] - [32]). The Berry phase for non-stationary states was
given in [13], the interchange between dynamic and geometric phases is treated in [118].
A geometrical interpretation is provided in [165] and a simple proof for Berry’s area
formula in [166]. The phases in oﬀ-diagonal terms form the basis of generalizations
of the Berry-phase in [167, 168]; an experimental detection by neutron interferometry
was recently accomplished [169]. The treatment by Garrison and Wright of complex
topological phases for non-Hermitean Hamiltonians [170] was extended in [171] - [173].
Further advances on Berry-phases are corrections due to non-adiabatic eﬀects (resulting,
mainly, in a decrease from the value of the phase in the adiabatic, inﬁnitely slow limit)
[30, 174, 175]. In [176] the complementarity between local and nonlocal eﬀects is studied
by means of some examples. For more general time dependent Hamiltonians than the
cyclic one, the method of the Lewis and Riesenfeld invariant spectral operator is in use.
This is discussed in [177].

As already noted, the Berry-phase and the open path phase designate changes in the
phases of the state-components, rather than the total phase change of the wave function,
which belongs to the so-called ”Dynamic phase” [9, 10]. The existence of more than
one component in the state function is a topological eﬀect. This assertion is based on
a theorem by Longuet-Higgins ([157], ”Topological test for intersections”), which states
that, if the wave function of a given electronic state state changes sign when transported
around a loop in nuclear conﬁguration space, then the state must become degenerate
with another at some point within the loop.

¿From this theorem it follows that, close to the point of intersection and slightly away
from it, the corresponding adiabatic or BO electronic wave functions will be given (to a
good approximation) by a superposition of the two degenerate states, with coeﬃcients
that are functions of the nuclear coordinates.
(For a formal proof of this statement,
one has to assume, as is done in [157], that the state is continuous function of the
nuclear coordinates.) Moreover, the coeﬃcients of the two states have to diﬀer from each

13

other, otherwise they can be made to disappear from the normalized electronic state.
Necessarily, there is also a second ”superposition state”, with coeﬃcients such that it is
orthogonal to the ﬁrst at all points in the conﬁguration space. (If more than two states
happen to be codegenerate at a point, then the adiabatic states are mutually orthogonal
superpositions of all these states, again with coeﬃcients that are functions of the nuclear
coordinates.)

If now the nuclear coordinates are regarded as dynamical variables, rather than pa-
rameters, then in the vicinity of the intersection point, the energy eigenfunction, which is
a combined electronic-nuclear wave function, will contain a superposition of the two adi-
abatic, superposition-states, with nuclear wave functions as cofactors. We thus see that
the topological phase change leads, ﬁrst, to the adiabatic electronic state being a multi-
component superposition (of diabatic states) and, secondly, to the full solution being a
multi-component superposition (of adiabatic states), in each case with nuclear-coordinate
dependent coeﬃcients.

The design and control of molecular processes has of late become possible thanks to
advances in laser technology, at ﬁrst through the appearance of femtosecond laser pulses
and of pump-probe techniques [178] and, more recently, through the realization of more
advanced ideas, including feedback and automated control ([179] - [182]). In a typical
procedure, the pump pulse prepares a coherent superposition of energy eigenstates, and
a second delayed pulse probes the the time-dependent transition between an excited and
a lower potential energy surface. When the desired outcome is a particular reaction
product, this can be promoted by the control of the relative phases of two fast pulses
emanating from the same coherent laser source. One of the earliest works to achieve this
is [183]. A recent study focuses on several basic questions, e.g., those regarding pulsed
preparation of an excited state [92]. In between the two, numerous works have seen light
in this fast-expanding and technologically interesting ﬁeld. The purpose of mentioning
them here is to single out this ﬁeld as an application of phases in atomic ([25], [95] - [96])
and molecular ([84]- [90]) spectroscopies. In spite of the achievements in photochemistry,
summarized e.g., in [184], one hardly expects phases to play a role in ordinary (that is,
not state-selective or photon-induced) chemical reactions. Still, interference (of the kind
seen in double-slit experiments) has been observed between diﬀerent pathways during the
dissociation of water [185, 186]. Moreover, several theoretical ideas have also been put
forward to produce favored reaction products through the involvement of phase eﬀects
([187] -[193]). Calculations for the scattering cross sections in the four-atom reaction
OH + H2 →
Wave-packet reconstruction, or imaging from observed data, requires the derivation of
a complex function from a set of real quantities. Again, this is essentially the ”phase prob-
lem”, well known also from crystallography and noted above in a diﬀerent context than
the present one [28]. An experimental study yielded the Wigner position-momemtum
distribution function [88]. This approach was named a ”tomographic” method, since a
single beam scans the whole phase-space and is distinct from another approach, in which
two diﬀerent laser pulses create two wave-packets: an object and a reference. When the
two states are superimposed, as in a conventional holographic arrangement, the cross
term in the modulus squared retains the phase information ([195, 90, 16]). Computer
simulations have shown the theoretical proposal to be feasible. In a diﬀerent work, the
preparation of a long lived atomic electron wave packet in a Rydberg state, with principal
quantum numbers around n = 30, was achieved [196].

H2O + H showed a few percent change due to the eﬀect of phase [194].

Rydberg states, as well as others, can provide an illustration for another, spectacular
phenomenon: wave-packet revivals [15].
In this, a superposition of about ten energy-
states ﬁrst spreads out in phase-space (due to phase decoherence), only to return to its

14

original shape after a time which is of the order of the deviation of the spacing of the
energy levels from a uniform one [197, 198]. Not only is the theory ﬁrmly based, and
simulations convincing, but even an application, based on this phenomenon and aimed at
separation of isotopes, has been proposed [199]. Elsewhere, it was shown that the eﬀect
of slow cycling on the evolving wave-packet is to leave the revival period unchanged, but
to cause a shift in the position of the revived wave packet [200].

Coherent states and diverse semiclassical approximations to molecular wave-packets
are essentially dependent on the relative phases between the wave-components. Due to
the need to keep this review to a reasonable size, we can mention here only a sample
of original works, (e.g., [201] - [204]) and some summaries ([205] - [207]). In these the
reader will come across the Maslov index [208], which we pause to mention here, since it
links up in a natural way to the modulus-phase relations described in the next section
and with the phase tracing method in section 4. The Maslov index relates to the phase
acquired when the semi-classical wave function traverses a zero (or a singularity, if there
be one) and it (and, particularly, its sign) is the consequence of the analytic behavior of
the wave function in the complex time-plane.

The subject of time connects with the complex nature of the wave function in a
straight forward way, through the deﬁnition in quantum mechanics of the Wigner time-
reversal operator [209, 210]. In a rough way, the deﬁnition implies that the conjugate
of the complex wave function describes (in several instances) the behavior of the system
with the time running backwards. Given, on one hand, ”the time-reversal invariant”
structure of accepted physical theories and, on the other hand, the experience of passing
time and the successes of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and thermodynamics,
the question that is being asked is: when and where does a physical theory pick out a
preferred direction of time (or a ”time arrow”)? From the numerous sources that discuss
this subject, we call attention to some early controversies ([212] -[214]) and to more recent
accounts ([101], [215] -[217]), as well as to a volume with philosophical orientation [102].
Several attempts have been made recently to change the original formalism of quantum
mechanics by adding non-Hermitean terms ([218] - [220]), or by extending (”rigging”)
the Hilbert space of admissible wave-functions [221, 222]. The last two papers emphasize
the preparation process as part of the wave-evolution. By an extension of this idea, it has
recently been shown that the relative phases in a wave-packet, brought to life by fast laser
pulses, constitute a uni-directional clock for the passage of time (at least for the initial
stages of the wave-packet) [34]. Thus, developing phases in real life are hallmarks of both
a time-arrow and of irreversibility. It also emerged that, in a setting that is invariant
under time reversal, the preparation of an ”initially” complex wave-packet needs ﬁnite
times to accomplish, i.e. it is not instanteneous [92, 34].

Time shifts or delays in scattering processes are present in areas as diverse as particle,
molecular and solid state phenomena, all of which are due to the complex nature of the
wave function. For a considerable time it was thought that the instance of formation of a
particle or of an excited state is restricted only by the time-energy uncertainty relation.
The time delay τ was ﬁrst recognized by David Bohm [223] and by Eisenbud and Wigner
[224], and was then given by F. Smith [67] a unifying expression in terms of the frequency
(ω)-derivative of the scattering- (or S-) matrix, as

τ = Re

∂lnS
i∂ω

(1.1)

The Re pre-symbol signiﬁes that essentially it is the phase part of the scattering matrix
that is involved. A conjugate quantity, in which the imaginary part is taken, was later
identifed as the particle formation time ([225] - [228]). Real and imaginary parts of

15

derivatives were associated with the delay time in tunnelling processes across a potential
barrier in the Buttiker-Landauer approach.
(A review is in [229].) Experimentally,
an example of time delay in reﬂection was found recently [230]. The question of time
reversal invariance, or of its default, is naturally a matter of great and continued interest
for theories of interaction between the fundamental constituents of matter. A summary
that provides an updating, good to its time of printing, is found in [231].

Another type of invariance, namely with respect to unitary or gauge transformation
of the wave-functions (without change of norm) is a corner-stone of modern physical
theories [68]. Such transformations can be global (i.e., coordinate independent) or local
(coordinate dependent). Some of the observational aspects arising from gauge transfor-
mation have caused some controversy; e.g., what is the eﬀect of a gauge transformation
on an observable [232, 233]. The justiﬁcation for gauge-invariance goes back to an ar-
gument due to Dirac [134], reformulated more recently in [234]. This is based on the
observability of the moduli of overlaps between diﬀerent wave-function, which then leads
to a deﬁnite phase diﬀerence between any two coordinate values, the same for all wave
functions. From this Dirac goes on to deduce the invariance of Abelian systems under
an arbitrary local phase change, but the same argument holds true also for the local
gauge-invariance of non-Abelian, multi-component cases [72].

We end this section of phase eﬀects in complex states by reﬂecting on how, in the
ﬁrst place, we have arrived at a complex description of phenomena that take place in a
real world. There are actually two ways to come by this:

First, the time-dependent wave function is necessarily complex and this is due to the
form of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation for real times, which contains i. This
equation will be the starting point of the next section, where we derive some consequence
arising from the analytic properties of the complex wave function. But, secondly, there
are also deﬁning equations that do not contain i (like the time-independent Schr¨odinger
equation). Here also the wave-function can be made complex through making some or
other of the variables take complex values. The advantage lies frequently in removing
possible ambiguities that arise in the solution at a singular point (which may be an inﬁn-
ity). Complex times have been considered in several theoretical works, e.g., [42, 43]). It
is possible to associate a purely imaginary time with temperature. Then, recognizing that
negative temperatures are unphysical in an unrestricted Hilbert space, we immediately
see that the upper and lower halves of the complex t-plane are non-equivalent. Speciﬁ-
cally, regions of non-analytic behavior are expected to be found in the upper half, which is
the one that corresponds to negative temperatures, and analytic behavior is expected in
the lower half plane, that corresponds to positive temperatures. The formal extension of
the nuclear coordinate space onto a complex plane, as is done in [44, 45], is an essentially
equivalent procedure, since in the semi-classical formalism of these works the particle
coordinates depend parametrically on time. Complex topological phases are considered
in, e.g., [170, 171], which can arise from a non-Hermitean Hamiltonian. The so-called
Regge-poles are located in the complex region of momentum space. (A brief review well
suited for molecular physicists is in [235]). The plane of complex-valued interactions is
the subject of [236].

In addition, it can occasionally be useful to regard some physical parameter appearing
in the theory as a complex quantity and the wave function to possess analytic properties
with regard to them. This formal procedure might even include fundamental constants
like e, h, etc.

16

1.3 Analytic Theory of Complex Component-

Amplitudes

1.3.1 Modulus and Phase

With the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation written as

i

∂Ψ(x, t)
∂t

= H(x, t)Ψ(x, t)

(1.2)

(in which t is time, x denotes all particle coordinates, H(x, t) is a real Hamiltonian and
¯h = 1), the presence of i in the equation causes the solution Ψ(x, t) to be complex-valued.
Writing Ψ(x, t) in a logarithmic form and separating as

) + iarg(Ψ(x, t))
Ψ(x, t)
lnΨ(x, t) = ln(
|
|
we have in the ﬁrst term the modulus
and in the second term arg, the ”phase” .
Ψ(x, t)
|
|
It is the latter that expresses the signed or complex valued nature of the wave-function.
In this section we shall investigate what, if any, interrelations exist between moduli and
phases? Are they independent quantities or, more likely since they derive from a single
equation (1.2) , are they interconnected? The result will be of the form of ”reciprocal”
relations, shown in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) below. Some approximate and
heuristic connections between phases and moduli have been known before ([2] Vol.5, Part
2, Sec.IV.5); [237] - [241]; we shall return to these in subsection 1.3.3.

(1.3)

1.3.2 Origin of Reciprocal Relations

Contrary to what appears at a ﬁrst sight, the integral relations in equation (1.9) and
equation (1.10) are not based on causality. However, they can be related to another
principle [39]. This approach of expressing a general principle by mathematical formulae
can be traced to von Neumann [242] and leads in the present instance to an ”equation
of restriction”, to be derived below. According to von Neumann complete description of
physical systems must contain:

1. A set of quantitative characterizations (energy, positions, velocities, charges, etc.).

2. A set of ”properties of states” (causality, restrictions on the spectra of self energies,

existence or absence of certain isolated energy bands, etc.).

As has been shown previously [243], both sets can be described by eigenvalue equations,
but for the set (2) it is more direct to work with projectors P r taking the values 1 or
0. Let us consider a class of functions f (x), describing the state of the system or a
process, such that (for reasons rooted in physics) f (x) should vanish for x
D (i.e., for
supp f (x) = D, where D can be an arbitrary domain and x represents a set of variables).
If P rD(x) is the projector onto the domain D, which equals 1 for x
D,
6∈
then all functions having this state-property obey an ”equation of restriction” [244]:

D and 0 for x

∈

6∈

f (x) = P rD(x)f (x)

(1.4)

The ”equation of restriction” can embody causality, lower-boundedness of energies in
the spectrum, positive wave-number in the outgoing wave (all these in non-relativistic
physics) and interactions inside the light cone only, conditions of mass spectrality, etc. in
relativistic physics. In the case of interest in this Chapter, the ”equation of restriction”

17

arises from the lower-boundedness of energies (E), or the requirement that (in non-
relativistic physics) one must have E > 0 (where we have arbitrarily chosen the energy
lower bound as equal to zero).

Applying to equation (1.4) an integral transform (usually, a Fourier transform) Fk ,

one derives by (integral) convolution, symbolized by

k, the expression

f (k) = Fk[P rD(x)]

N
f (k)

k
O

−

Z

=

Fk

k′ [P rD(x)]f (k′)dk′

(1.5)

For functions of a single variable (e.g., energy, momentum or time) the projector
P rD(x) is simply Θ(x), the Heaviside step-function, or a combination thereof. When
also replacing x, k by the variables E, t, the Fourier transform in equation (1.5) is given
by

Ft[Θ(E)] = δ+(t)

[δ(t)

P (

)]

1
2

i
π

1
t

≡
where P designates the principal part of an integral. Upon substituting into equation
(1.5) (with k replaced by t) one obtains after a slight simpliﬁcation

−

f (t) =

P

f (t′)dt′

i
π

∞

1
t′ −

t

Z

−∞
Real and imaginary parts of this yield the basic equations for the functions appearing
in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) , below. (The choice of the upper sign in these
equations will be justiﬁed in a later subsection for the ground state component in several
physical situations. In some other circumstances, such as for excited states in certain
systems, the lower sign can be appropriate.)

A general wave packet

We can state the form of the conjugate relationship in a setting more general than Ψ(x, t),
which is just a particular, the coordinate representation of the evolving state. For this
purpose, we write the state function in a more general way, through

Ψ(t) >=
|

n >
φn(t)
|

n
X

where
n > represent some time-independent orthonormal set and φn(t) are the cor-
|
responding amplitudes. We shall write generically φ(t) for any of the ”component-
amplitudes” φn(t) and derive from it, in equation (1.15) below, a new function χ
(t)
that retains all the ﬁne-structured time variation in lnΨ(t) and is free of the large scale
variation in the latter. We then derive in several physically important cases, but not in
all, reciprocal relations between the modulus and phase of χ(t) taking the form

±

and

1
π

1
π

P

P

Z

−∞

∞

∞

Z

−∞

dt′[ln

]/(t
χ(t′)
|
|

−

t′) =

argχ(t)

±

dt′[argχ(t′)]/(t

t′) =

−

ln

χ(t)
|
|

∓

The sign alternatives depend on the location of the zeros (or singularities) of χ(t). The
above conjugate, or reciprocal, relations are the main results in this section. When

(1.6)

(1.7)

(1.8)

(1.9)

(1.10)

18

equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) hold, ln
[245, 246].

χ(t)
|
|

and argχ(t) are ”Hilbert transforms”

Later in this section, we shall specify the analytic properties of the functions involved
and obtain exact formulae similar to equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) , but less simple
and harder to apply to observational data of, say, moduli.

In subsection 1.3.5 we give conditions under which equation (1.9) and equation (1.10)
are exactly or approximately valid. Noteworthy among these is the nearly adiabatic
(slowly evolving) case, which relates to the Berry phase [9].

1.3.3 Other Phase-Modulus Relations

As a prelude to the derivation of our results, we note here some of the relations between
phases and moduli that have been known previously. The following is a list (presumably
not exhaustive) of these relations. Some of them are standard text-book material.

(a) The equation of continuity

This was ﬁrst found by Schr¨odinger in 1926 starting with equation (1.2) , which he
called the ”eigentliche Wellengleichung”. [Paradoxically, this got translated to ”real wave
equation” [2].] In the form

∂ ln

2m

Ψ(x, t)
|
|
∂t

+ 2~
∇

ln

.~
Ψ(x, t)
∇
|
|

arg[Ψ(x, t)] + ~

~
∇

∇ ·

arg[Ψ(x, t)] = 0

(1.11)

(where m is the particle mass), it is clearly a (diﬀerential) relation between the modulus
and the phase. As such, it does not show up any discontinuity in the phase [125],
whereas equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) do that. We further note, that the above
form depends on the Hamiltonian and looks completely diﬀerent for, e.g, a Dirac electron.

(b) The WKB formula

In the classical region of space, where the potential is less than the energy, the standard
formula leads to an approximate relation between phase and modulus in the form of the
following path integral ([237], Section 28)

arg Ψ(x) =

C

±

Ψ(x)
−
|
|

2dx

x(t)

(1.12)

0
Z
where C is a normalization constant. This and the following example do not arise from
the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation; nevertheless, time enters naturally in a semi-
classical interpretation [204].

(c) Extended systems

Extending some previous heuristic proposal [238, 239] the phase in the polarized state of
a one-dimensional solid of macroscopic length L was expressed in [240] as:

arg Ψ(x) = Im ln

L

2πix
L

e

2dx
Ψ(x)
|
|

(1.13)

0
Z
It has been noted [240], that the phase in equation (1.13) is gauge-independent. Based
on the above mentioned heuristic conjecture (but fully justiﬁed, to our mind, in the
light of our rigorous results), Resta noted that ”Within a ﬁnite system two alternative
descriptions [in terms of the squared modulus of the wave function, or in terms of its
phase] are equivalent” [247].

19

(d) Loss of phase in a quantum measurement

In a self-consistent analysis of the interaction between an observed system and the ap-
paratus (or environment), Stern et al [241] proposed both a phase-modulus relationship
[[241], equation (3.10)] and a deep lying interpretation. According to the latter, the
decay of correlation between states in a superposition can be seen, equivalently, as the
eﬀect of either the environment upon the system or the back reaction of the system on
its environment. The reciprocal relations refer to the wave-function of the (microscopic)
system and not to its surroundings, thus there is only a change of correlation not a decay.
Still it seems legitimate to speculate that the dual representation of the change that we
have found (namely, through the phase or through the modulus) might be an expression
of the reciprocal eﬀect of the coupling between the system (represented by its states) and
its environment (acting through the potential).

1.3.4 The Cauchy-Integral Method for the Amplitudes

Since the amplitude φ(t) arises from integration of equation (1.2) , it can be assumed to
be uniquely given. We can further assume that φ(t) has no zeros on the real t-axis, except
at those special points, where this is demanded by symmetry. The reason for this is that,
in general, φ(t) = 0 requires the solution of two equations, for the real and the imaginary
parts of φ(t) and this cannot be achieved with a single variable: a real t. (Arguing from a
more physical angle, if there is a zero somewhere on a the real t axis, then a small change
in some parameter in the Hamiltonian, will shift this zero to a complex t. However, this
small change cannot change the physical content of the problem and thus we can just as
well start with the case where the zeros are away from the real axis.) We can therefore
perform the decomposition of ln φ(t), following [248, 249]:

ln φ(t) = ln φ+(t) + ln φ

(t)

−

(1.14)

where ln φ+(t) is analytic in a portion of the complex t-plane that includes the real axis
(or, as stipulated in [248], ”including a strip of ﬁnite width about the real axis” ) and a
(t) is analytic in the corresponding portion
large semicircular region above it and ln φ
below and including the real axis. By deﬁning new functions χ
(t) we separate oﬀ those
parts of ln φ

(t) that do not vanish on the respective semicircles, in the form:

±

−

±

ln φ

(t) = P

(t) + ln χ

(t)

±

±

±

(1.15)

−

(t) are not unique, and only the end result for ln φ

where ln χ+(t) and ln χ
complex t-plane and vanish in their respective half planes for large
suitable P
we apply to the functions ln χ
inﬁnite semicircle in the upper (+), or lower (
clockwise (+) or anti-clockwise (
−
which the point t′ = t is avoided with a small semicircle. We obtain:

(t) are respectively analytic in the upper and lower half of the
. The choices for
|
(t) is. In the interim stage
(t) Cauchy’s theorem with a contour C that consists of an
) half of the complex t′-plane traversed
in

) and a line along the real t′ axis from

to +

−∞

t
|

∞

−

±

±

±

±

ln χ
(t′ −

(t′)
t)

IC

dt′ =

2πi ln χ

(t)

or zero

±

±

depending on whether the small semicircle is outside or inside the half-plane of analyticity
and the sign
is taken to be consistently throughout. Further, writing the logarithms
as:

±

(1.16)

(1.17)

ln χ

(t) = ln

±

χ
|

±

(t)
|

+ iarg χ

(t)

±

20

and separating real and imaginary parts of the functions in equation (1.16) we derive
the following relations between the amplitude moduli and phases in the wave-function:

and

(

1
π

)P

(

1
π

)P

∞

[log

χ
|

−

(t′)
| −
(t′ −

log
t)

]
χ+(t′)
|
|

Z

−∞

∞

[arg χ+(t′)

(t′)]

arg χ
t)

−

−
(t′ −

Z

−∞

1.3.5 Simpliﬁed Cases

dt′ = arg χ+(t) + arg χ

(t) = arg χ(t)

(1.18)

−

dt′ = log

χ
|

−

(t)
|

+ log

χ+(t)
|
|

= log

χ(t)
|
|

(1.19)

We shall now concentrate on several cases where relations equation (1.18) and equation
(1.19) simplify. The most favorable case is where ln φ(t) is analytic in one half-plane,
(say) in the lower half, so that ln φ+(t) = 0. Then one obtains reciprocal relations between
observable amplitude moduli and phases as in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) , with
the upper sign holding. Solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation are expected to be regular
in the lower half of the complex t-plane (which corresponds to positive temperatures),
but singularities of ln φ(t) can still arise from zeros of φ(t). We turn now to the location
of these zeros.

A. The near-adiabatic limit

We wish to prove that as the adiabatic limit is approached the zeros of the component
amplitude for the ”time dependent ground state ” (TDGS, to be presently explained)
Im tr > 0 and for a fewer
are such that for an overwhelming number of zeros tr,
2π
ω , where (∆E is the characteristic spacing
number of other zeros
of the eigen-energies of the Hamiltonian , and 2π
ω is the time scale (e.g., period) for
the temporal variation of the Hamiltonian. TDGS is that solution of the Schr¨odinger
equation (1.2) that is initially in the ground state of H(x, 0), the Hamiltonian at t = 0.
It is known that in the extreme adiabatic (inﬁnitesimally slow) limit a system not crossing
degeneracies stays in the ground state (”the adiabatic principle”). We shall work in the
nearly adiabatic limit, where the principle is approximately, but not precisely true.

1
∆E ≪

Im ts
|

| ≪

Expanding Ψ(x, t) in the eigenstates

n > of H(x, 0), we have
|

Ψ(x, t) =

n >
Cn(t) < x
|

n
X

and we assume (for simplicity’s sake) that the expansion can be halted after a ﬁnite
number (say, N + 1) of terms, or that the coeﬃcients decrease in a suﬃciently fast
manner (which will not be discussed here). Expressing the matrix of the Hamiltonian H
as Ghnm(t) where hnm(t) is of the order of unity and G positive, we obtain (with the dot
denoting time-diﬀerentiation)

(1.20)

(1.21)

˙Cn(t) =

iG

−

hnm(t)Cm(t)

m
X

The adiabatic limit is characterized by:

˙hnm(t)
|
We shall ﬁnd that in the TDGS [i.e. Ψg(x, t)], the coeﬃcient Cg(t) of < x
g > has the
|
form:

(1.22)

| ≪ |

G
|

Cg(t) = Bgg(t)e−

iGϕg +

Bgm(t)e−

iGϕm

(1.23)

m
X

21

Here ϕm = ϕm(t) are time-integrals of the eigenvalues em(t) of the matrix hnm(t):

ϕm(t) =

em(t′)dt′

(1.24)

t

0
Z

In the sum the value m = g is excluded and (as will soon be apparent) Bgm
Bgg
the order of

˙hnm(t)
|
|
G
To ﬁnd the roots of Cg(t) = 0 we divide equation (1.23) by the ﬁrst term shown and
transfer the unity to the left hand side to obtain an equation of the form:

(1.25)

is small of

1 = c1(t)e−

iGδe1t + c2(t)e−

iGδe2t + . . .

to N terms

(1.26)

−

represent the diﬀerences ϕm

where δe1t, etc.
ϕg and are necessarily positive and
increasing with t, for non-crossing eigenvalues of hnm(t). (They are written in the form
shown to make clear their monotonically increasing character and are exact, by the mean
value theorem, with δe1, etc. being some positive function of t.) c1(t), etc. are small near
the adiabatic limit, where G is large. It is clear that equation (1.26) has solutions only
at points where Imt > 0. That the number of (complex) roots of equation (1.26) is very
large in the adiabatic limit, even if equation (1.26) has only a few number of terms, can
be seen upon writing eit
| = z and regarding equation (1.26) as a polynomial equation
|
1. Then the number of solutions increases with G. Moreover, these solutions can
in z−
be expected to recur periodically provided the δe’s approach to being commensurate.
It remains to investigate the zeros of Cg(t) arising from having divided out by

hnm

iGϕg . The position and number of these zeros depend only weakly on G, but
Bgg(t)e−
depends markedly on the form that the time dependent Hamiltonian H(x, t) has. It can
be shown that (again due to the smallness of c1, c2, . . .) these zeros are near the real axis.
If the Hamiltonian can be represented by a small number of sinusoidal terms, then the
number of fundamental roots will be small. However, in the t-plane these will recur with
a period characteristic of the periodicity of the Hamiltonian. These are relatively long
periods compared to the recurrence period of the roots of the previous kind, which is
characteristically shorter by a factor of

This establishes our assertion that the former roots are overwhelmingly more numerous
than those of the latter kind. Before embarking on a formal proof, let us illustrate the
theorem with respect to a representative, though speciﬁc example. We consider the time
development of a doublet subject to a Schr¨odinger equation whose Hamiltonian in a
doublet representation is [13, 29]

H(t) = G/2

(cid:18)

cos(ωt)
−
sin(ωt)

sin(ωt)
cos(ωt)

(cid:19)

Here ω is the angular frequency of an external disturbance. The eigenvalues of equation
(1.28) are G
g > (=the
|
vector

G
2 . If G > 0, then in the ground state the amplitude of

2 and
in equation (1.28) ) is

−

1
0

Cg = cos(Kt) cos(ωt/2) + (ω/2K) sin(Kt) sin(ωt/2) + i(G/2K) sin(Kt) cos(ωt/2) (1.29)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(1.27)

(1.28)

˙hnm(t)
|
|
G

22

with

K = 0.5

G2 + ω2

G/2,

since

≈

G/ω

1

≫

(1.30)

Thus the amplitude in equation (1.29) becomes:

p

Cg(t)

≈
≈

exp(iKt) cos(ωt/2) + (ω/2K) sin(Kt) sin(ωt/2)
exp(iGt/2)[cos(ωt/2)

i(ω/2G) sin(ωt/2)] + i exp(

−

iGt/2)(ω/2G) sin(ωt/2)

−

(1.31)

This is precisely of the form equation (1.23) , with the second term being smaller than
the ﬁrst by the small factor shown in equation (1.25) . Equating (1.31) to zero and
dividing by the ﬁrst term, we recover the form in equation (1.26) , whose right hand side
consists now of just one term. For an integer value of G/ω = M (say) which is large
and exp(
> 1 (or,
iωt) = Z, the resulting equation in Z has about M roots with
what is the same, Im t > 0). As noted above, further roots of Cg(t) will arise from the
neighborhood of cos(ωt/2) = 0, or Z =
1. [The upper state of the doublet states has
the opposite properties, namely about M roots with Im t < 0. We have treated this case
(in collaboration with M. Baer) in a previous work [29].]

Z
|

−

−

|

A formal derivation of the location of the zeros of Cg(t) for a general adiabatic Hamil-
tonian can be given, following proofs of the adiabatic principle (e.g., [250]-[252]). The
last source, [252] derives an evolution operator U , which is written there , with some
slight notational change, in the form

U (t) = A(t)Φ(t)W (t)

(1.32)

[equation XVII.86 in the reference source]. Here A(t) is a unitary transformation [equa-
tion XVII.70] that ”takes any set of basis vectors of H(x, 0) into a set of basis vectors
of H(x, t) in a continuous manner” and is independent of G.
In the previous worked
example its components are of the form cos(ωt/2) and sin(ωt/2) [252]. The next factor
in equation (1.32) is diagonal [XVII.68] and consists of terms of the form:

−
Finally, the unitary transformation W(t) was shown to have a near-diagonal form ([252],
Eq. XVII.97)

Φ(t) = exp(

iGϕm)δnm

(1.33)

W (t) = δnm + ( |

)δWnm

(1.34)

˙h(t)
|
G

The gg-component of the evolution matrix U is just Cg and is, upon collecting the
foregoing,

Cg(t) =

Agm(t) exp(

iGϕm)[δmg + ( |

)δWmg]

(1.35)

˙h(t)
|
G

This can be rewritten as

m
X

˙h(t)
|
G

−

−

Cg(t) = Agg(t)[1 + ( |

)δWgg] exp(

iGϕg) + ( |

′Agm(t) exp(

iGϕm)δWmg

(1.36)
with the summation excluding g. This is again of the form of equation (1.23) , establishing
the generality of the location of the eigenvalues for the nearly adiabatic case.

˙h(t)
|
G

)

m
X

−

23

B. Cyclic wave-functions

This is a particularly interesting case, for two reasons. First, time-periodic potentials such
that arise from external periodic forces, frequently give rise to cyclically varying states.
(According to the authors of [253]: ”The universal existence of the cyclic evolution is
guaranteed for any quantum system”.) The second reason is that the Fourier expansion
of the cyclic state spares us the consideration of the convergence of the inﬁnite-range inte-
grals in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) ; instead, we need to consider the convergence
of the (discrete) coeﬃcients of the expansion. In this section we show that in a broad class
of cyclic functions one half of the complex t-plane is either free of amplitude-zeros, or
has zeros whose contributions can be approximately neglected. As already noted above,
in such cases, the reciprocal relations connect observable phases and moduli (exactly or
approximately). The essential step is that a function φ(t) cyclic in time with period 2π
can be written as a sine-cosine series. We assume that the series terminates at the N ’th
trigonometric function, with N ﬁnite. We can write the series as a polynomial in z, where
z = exp(it), in the form:

(1.37)

(1.38)

(1.39)

(1.40)

(1.41)

2N

φ(t) =

cmzm

−

N

m=0
X
= z−

N c0χ(t)
2N

= z−

N c0

cm
c0

zm

m=0
X

χ(t) =

(1

z/zk)

−

2N

k=1
Y

If φ(t) is a wave function amplitude arising from a Hamiltonian that is time-inversion-
invariant then we can choose φ(
t) = φ∗(t) for real t, where the star denotes the complex
conjugate. Then the coeﬃcients cm are all real. Next, factorize in products as:

−

where zk are the (complex) zeros of χ(t) or φ(t), 2N in number. Then the decomposition
shown in equation (1.15) , namely ln χ(t) = ln χ+(t) + ln χ

(t), will be achieved with:

−

ln χ+(t) =

ln(1

z/zk+),

−

zk+| ≥
|

1,

ln χ

(t) =

−

ln(1

z/zk

),

−

−

zk
|

−|

< 1,

R

k=1
X
2N

k=R+1
X

R
provided that R of the roots are on or outside the unit circle in the z-plane and 2N
roots are inside the unit circle. The results in equation (1.18) and equation (1.19) for
the phases and amplitudes can now be applied directly. But it is more enlightening to
obtain the coeﬃcients in the complex Fourier-series for the phases and amplitudes. This
is easily done for equation (1.40) , since for each term in the sum:

−

z/zk+|
|

=

exp(it)/zk+|

|

< 1,

(1.42)

and the series expansion of each logarithm converges. (When, in equation (1.42) equality
reigns, which is the case when the roots are upon the unit circle, the convergence is ”in

24

the mean” [254].) Then the n’th Fourier coeﬃcient is simply the coeﬃcients of the term
(1/n)(1/zk+)n.
exp(int) in the expansion, namely,

The corresponding series-expansion of ln χ

(t) in equation (1.41) is not legitimate,

−

since now in every term:

−

z/zk
|

−|

|

=

exp(it)/zk

> 1,

−|

(1.43)

Therefore we rewrite:

ln χ

(t) =

−

−

ln(

zk

) + (2N

R)it +

−

−

−

ln(1

zk

/z).

−

−

(1.44)

2N

k=R+1
X

2N

k=R+1
X

Each logarithm in the last term can now be expanded and the (
n)’th Fourier coeﬃcient
)n. To this must be added the n = 0 Fourier
arising from each logarithm is
coeﬃcient coming from the ﬁrst, t-independent term and that arising from the expansion
of second term as a periodic function, namely

(1/n)(zk

−

−

−

it =

2i

−

(
−

n
X

1)n sin(nt)/n

(1.45)

For the Fourier coeﬃcients of the modulus and the phase we note that, because of the
time-inversion invariance of the amplitude, the former is even in t and the latter is odd.
Therefore the former is representable as a cosine series and the latter as a sine series.
Formally:

ln(χ) = ln

+ iarg(χ) =

An cos(nt) + i

Bn sin(nt)

(1.46)

n
X
When expressed in terms of the zeros of χ, the sine-cos coeﬃcients of the log modulus
and of the phase are respectively:

n
X

(χ)
|
|

A0 =

−

ln

zk
|

−|

2N

k=R+1
X

(1.47)

(1.48)

(1.49)

[This is written in terms of
, since the roots are either
real or come in mutually complex conjugate pairs. In any case, this constant term can
be absorbed in the polynomial P (t) in equation (1.15) .]

, the moduli of the roots zk

zk
|

−|

−

An =

1/(zk+)n +

R

"

k=1
X

2N

k=R+1
X

(zk

)n

−

/n

#

R

2N

Bn =

"

1/(zk+)n

−

[(zk

)n

−

2(

1)n]
#

−

−

/n

k=1
X

k=R+1
X
Equations (1.47)-(1.49) are the central results of this subsection. Though somewhat
complicated, they are easy to interpret, especially in the limiting cases (a) -(d), to follow.
In the general case, the equations show that the Fourier coeﬃcients are given in terms
of the amplitude zeros. (a) When there are no amplitude zeros in one of the half planes,
then only one of the sums in equation (1.48) or equation (1.49) is non-zero (R is either
0 or 2N ). Consequently, the Fourier coeﬃcients of the log modulus and of the phase are
the same (up to a sign) and the two quantities are logically interconnected as functions
of time. The connection is identical with that exhibited in equations (1.9) and (1.10).

25

Figure 1.1: Numerical test of the reciprocal relations in equation (1.9) and equation
(1.10) for Cg shown in equation (1.29) . The values computed directly from equation
(1.29) are plotted upwards and the values from the integral downwards (by broken lines)
for K/ω = 16. The two curves are clearly identical. (a) ln
against (t /period).
The modulus is an even function of t. (b) arg Cg(t) against (t/period). The phase is odd
in t.

Cg(t)
|
|

−

In the two-state problem formulated by equation (1.28) , the solution (1.29) is cyclic
provided K/ω is an integer. A ”Mathematica” output of the zeros of equation (1.29)
for K/ω = 8 gives the following results: None of the zeros is located in the lower half
plane, 7 pairs and an odd one is in the upper half plane proper, a pair of zeros is on the
real t-axis. The reciprocal integral relations in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) are
veriﬁed numerically, as seen in ﬁgure 1.1. (The equality between the Fourier coeﬃcients
An and Bn was veriﬁed independently.) (b) It is a characteristic of the above two state
problem (with general values of K/ω), and of other problems of similar type that there
is one or more roots at or near zk+ =
π; the generality of the occurrence of
1 (t =
these roots goes back to a classic paper on conical intersection [255].) By inspection of
the second sum in equation (1.49) we ﬁnd that, if all the roots located in the upper half
plane are of this type, then An = Bn up to small quantities of the order of (zk+ + 1).
Then again equations (1.9) and (1.10) can be employed. (c) As a corollary to the previous
observation (and an important one in view of the stipulation in subsection 1.3.4, that
the wave function has no real zeros) a small shift in the location of a zero originally at
t =
π into the complex plane either just above or just below this location, will only
have a small consequence on the Fourier coeﬃcients. Therefore, zeros of this type do
not violate the assumptions of the theory. (d) If either
1, it is
1 or
that the contribution of such roots is
clear from equation (1.48) and equation (1.49)
small. This circumstance is important for the following reason: Suppose that the model
is changed slightly by adding to the potential a small term, e.g., adding ǫ cos 2ωt to a
diagonal matrix element in equation (1.28) , where ǫ is small. (In [256] terms of this type
were used to describe the nonlinear part of a Jahn-Teller eﬀect.) Necessarily, this term

zk+| ≫
|

−| ≪

zk
|

±

±

26

will introduce new zeros in the amplitude. It can be shown that this addition will add
new roots of the order
ǫ. The eﬀects of these are asymptotically
negligible.
In other words, the formulae (1.48) and (1.49) are stable with respect to
small variations in the model. [A similar result is known as Rouche’s theorem about the
stability of the number of zeros in a ﬁnite domain ([265] Section 3.42).]

zk+| ≈
|

1/ǫ or

−| ≈

zk
|

C. Wave packets

A time varying wave function is also obtained with a time-independent Hamiltonian by
placing the system initially into a superposition of energy eigenstates (
n >), or forming a
|
wave-packet. Frequently, a coordinate representation is used for the wave function which
then may be written as

Ψ(x, t) =

am(t) exp(

m >
iEmt) < x
|

−

(1.50)

m
X

where < x
m > are solutions of the time independent Schr¨odinger equation, with eigen-
|
energies Em that are taken as non-degenerate and increasing with m. In this coordinate-
representation, the ”component-amplitudes” in the Introduction are just fancy words
for Ψ(x, t) at ﬁxed x (so that the discrete state label n that we have used in equation
(1.8) is equivalent to the continuous variable x) and (φn(t) is simply < x(t)
Ψ(x, t) >.
|
The results in the earlier section are applicable to the present situation. Thus, to test
equation (1.9) or equation (1.10) , one would look for any ﬁxed position x in space at the
moduli (or state populations) as a function of time, as with repeated state-probing set
ups. In turn, by some repeated interference experiments at the same point x, one would
establish the phase and then compare the results with those predicted by the equations.
(Of course, the same equations can also be used to predict one quantity, provided the
time history of the second is known.)

As in previous sections, the zeros of Ψ(x, t) in the complex t-plane at ﬁxed x are of
interest. This appears a hopeless task, but the situation is not that bleak. Thus, let us
consider a wave packet initially localized in the ground state in the sense that in equation
(1.50) , for some given x,

m >
am < x
|
|

2 <
|

0 >
a0 < x
|
|

2.
|

m>0
X

(1.51)

Then we expect that for such value(s) of the coordinate, the t- zeros of the wave-packet
will be located in upper t-half plane only. The reason for this is similar to the reasoning
that led to the theorem about the location of zeros in the near-adiabatic case. (Paragraph
A, above.) Actually, empirical investigation of wave-packets appearing in the literature
indicates that the expectation holds in a broader range of cases, even when the condition
(1.51) is not satisﬁed.
It should be mentioned that much of the wave packet work is
numerical and it is not easy to theorize about it. (A review describing certain aspects of
wave-packets is found in [257].)

We now present some examples of studied wave-packets for which the reciprocal re-

lations hold (exactly or approximately), but have not been noted.

(a) Free-particle in one dimension.
The Hamiltonian consists only of the kinetic energy of the particle having mass m
([258], [237] Section 28). The (unnormalized) energy eigenstates labeled by the momen-
tum index k are:

ψk(x) = exp(ikx)

(1.52)

27

with corresponding energies Ek = k2/2m. Initially the wave packet is centered on x = 0
and has mean momentum K. As shown in [258], the coeﬃcients ak appearing in equation
(1.50) are

ak = exp[

(k

K)2∆2]

−

−

(1.53)

where ∆(> 0) is the root mean square width in the initial wave packet. The expanding
wave packet can be written as:

ln Ψ(x, t) =

1/2 ln[∆ + (it/2m∆)]

−

[x2

−

4i∆2K(x
[4∆2 + 2it/m]

−

−

Kt/2m)]

+ constant

(1.54)

which is clearly analytic in the lower half t-plane. (The singularity arises because free
electron wave functions are not normalizable.) We can therefore identify this function
(t) in equation (1.14) , and put ln φ+(t) = 0. As a numerical test
with ln φ(t) = ln φ
we have inserted equation (1.54)
in equation (1.9) and equation (1.10) , integrated
numerically and found (for K = 0) precise agreement.

−

(b) ”Frozen Gaussian Approximation”.
Semi-analytical and semi-classical wave packets suitable for calculating evolution on
an excited state multi-dimensional potential energy surface were proposed in pioneering
studies by Heller [259]. In this method (called the Frozen Gaussian Approximation) the
last two factors in the summand of equation (1.50) were replaced by time dependent
gaussians. The time dependence arose through having time varying average energies,
momenta and positions. Speciﬁcally, each coeﬃcient am in equation (1.50) was followed
by a function g(x, t) of the form:

ln g(x, t) =

< x >t)2/2 + i < p >t (x

< x >t)

−

(< p >2

t /m

< g

H
|

g >t)dt
|

−

(1.55)

mω(x
t

−

−
+ i

0
Z

where ω is an energy characteristic of the upper potential surface, the angular brackets
are the average position and momenta of the classical trajectory and the Dirac bracket
of the Hamiltonian H is to be evaluated for each component g separately.

For a set of gaussians it is rather diﬃcult to establish the analytic behavior of equation
(1.55) , or of equation (1.50) , in the t-plane. However, with a single gaussian (in one
spatial dimension) and a harmonic potential surface one has classically:

< p >t= (m)

=

(ωx0m) sin ωt,

−

< x >t= x0 cos ωt,

d < x >t
dt
H
|

< g

g >t= ω/2
|

(1.56)

(1.57)

(1.58)

Substituting these expressions into equation (1.55) one can see after some algebra that
ln g(x, t) can be identiﬁed with ln χ
(t) + P (t) shown in subsection 1.3.4. Moreover,
ln χ+(t) = 0. It can be veriﬁed, numerically or algebraically, that the log-modulus and
phase of ln χ
(t) obey the reciprocal relations (1.9) and (1.10). In more realistic cases
(i.e., with several gaussians) equations (1.56)- (1.58) do not hold. It still may be true
that the analytical properties of the wave packet remain valid and so do relations (1.9)
and (1.10). If so, then these can be thought of as providing numerical checks on the
accuracy of approximate wave-packets.

−

−

(c) Expanding waves.

28

As a further application we turn to the expanding potential problem ([260]-[262]),
where we shall work from the amplitude-modulus to the phase. The time dependent
potential is of the form:

V (x, t) = ζ−

2(t)V (x/ζ(t))

(1.59)

Here ζ2(t) = c + t2, which diﬀers from the more general case considered in [260]-[262], by
putting their time scale factor a = 1 and making the potential real and regular for real
t, as well as time-inversion invariant. Then c is positive and, in [260, 261] b = 0. The
i√c, away from the real axis. As ﬁrst shown in [260], the
Hamiltonian is singular at t =
generic form of the solution of the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation is the same for
a wide range of potentials. We shall consider the ground state for a harmonic potential
V (x) = 1/2mω2
ox2. The log (amplitude-modulus) of the ground state wave function (in
the coordinate representation) is according to [260] for real t

±

ln

φ(x, t)
|
|

=

−

−

(1/4) ln(c + t2)

1/2[mωx2/(c + t2)],

(1.60)

where ω2 = ω2
o + c. Processing the expression in equation (1.60) as in equation (1.14) ,
we can arbitrarily decompose φ(x, t) into factors that are analytic above and below the
real t-axis. Thus, let us suppose that in equation (1.60) a fraction f1 of the ﬁrst term
and a fraction f2 of the second term is analytic in the upper half and, correspondingly,
fractions (1

f2) are analytic in the lower half. Explicitly, for complex t

f1) and (1

−
ln

φ(x, t)
|
|

−
= Re

{−

1/2[f1 ln(√c
1/2(mωx2/√c)[f2/(√c
f2)/(√c + it)]
}

−

−

.

−
+ (1

it) + (1
it)

−

−

f1) log(√c + it)]

(1.61)

Next, for the log term (which normalizes the wave function), we have to choose, as in
equation (1.15) , suitable functions P
(t) that will ”correct” the behavior of that term
along the large semi-circles. Among the multiplicity of choices the following are the most
rewarding (since they completely cancel the log term):

±

P+(t) =
=

f1(1/2) ln(√c
−
(f1/4)[ln(t2 + c)

it)

−

−

−

2i arctan(t/√c)],

P

(t) =

−

=

(1

−
(1/4)(1

−

−

−

f1)(1/2) log(√c + it)

f1)[ln(t2 + c) + 2i arctan(t/√c)].

The right hand side of equation (1.18) comes from the second term of equation (1.60)
alone and is

arg χ(x, t) = (1

2f2)[mωx2/(t2 + c)](t/4√c).

(1.62)

−

To complete the phase of the wave function, arg φ(x, t), we have to reinstate the terms
P

(t) that were removed in equation (1.15) so as to get χ

(x, t). The result is:

±

arg φ(x, t) =

(1

2f1)(1/2) arctan(t/√c) + (1

2f2)[mωx2/(t2 + c)](t/4√c)

(1.63)

±

−

−

−

This establishes the functional form of the phase for real (physical) times. The phase
of the solution given in [260, 261] has indeed this functional form. The fractions f1 and
f2 cannot be determined from our equations (1.17) and (1.18). However, by comparing
with the wave functions in [260, 261], we get for them the following values.

2f1 = ω/√c,

1

−

1

−

2f2 = 4√c/ω

(1.64)

29

In the excited states for the same potential, the log modulus contains higher order terms
in x (x3, x4, etc.) with coeﬃcients that depend on time. Each term can again be
decomposed (arbitrarily) into parts analytic in the t-half-planes, but from elementary
inspection of the solutions in [260, 261] it turns out that every term except the lowest
(shown in equation (1.59) ) splits up equally (i.e. the f ’s are just 1/2) and there is no
contribution to the phases from these terms. Potentials other than the harmonic can be
treated in essentially identical ways.

1.3.6 Consequences

The following theoretical consequences of the reciprocal relations can be noted:

(i) They unfold a connection between parts of time-dependent wave functions that
arises from the structure of the deﬁning equation (1.2) and some simple properties of
the Hamiltonian.

(ii) The connection holds separately for the coeﬃcient of each state component in the
wave function and is not a property of the total wave function (as is, e.g., the ”dynamical”
phase [9]).

(iii) The relations pertain to the ﬁne, small-scale time-variations in the phase and the

log modulus, not to their large scale changes.

(iv) One can deﬁne a phase that is given as an integral over the log of the amplitude
modulus and is therefore an observable and is gauge-invariant. This phase (which is
unique, at least in the cases for which equation (1.9) holds) diﬀers from other phases,
those that are, e.g. a constant, the dynamic phase or a gauge-transformation induced
phase, by its satisfying the analyticity requirements laid out in subsection 1.3.3.

(v) Experimentally, phases can be obtained by measurements of occupation proba-
bilities of states using equation (1.9) . (We have calculationally veriﬁed this for the case
treated in [263].)

(vi) Conversely, the implication of equation (1.10)

is that a geometrical phase ap-
pearing on the left-hand-side entails a corresponding geometric probability change, as
shown on the right-hand-side. Geometrical decay probabilities have been predicted in
[161] and experimentally tested in [264].

(vii) An important ingredient in the analysis has been the positions of zeros of Ψ(x, t)
in the complex t-plane for a ﬁxed x. Within quantum mechanics the zeros have not been
given much attention, but they have been studied in a mathematical context [265] and
in some classical wave-phenomena ([266] and references cited therein). Their relevance
to our study is evident since at its zeros the phase of Ψ(x, t) lacks deﬁnition. Future
theoretical work shall focus on a systematic description of the location of zeros. Fur-
ther, practically oriented work will seek out computed or experimentally acquired time
dependent wave functions for tests or application of the present results.

(viii) Finally, and probably most importantly, the relations show that changes (of a
nontrivial type) in the phase imply necessarily a change in the occupation number of the
state components and vice versa. This means that for time-reversal-invariant situations,
there is (at least) one partner state with which the phase-varying state communicates.

30

1.4 Non-Linearities That Lead to Multiple Degen-

eracies

In previous sections of this review we have treated molecules and other localized systems
in which a linear electron-nuclear coupling resulted in a single degeneracy, or conical
intersection (ci) of the electronic potential energy surfaces. A notable, symmetry-caused
example of this is the linear E
ǫ Jahn-Teller eﬀect (a pair of degenerate electronic states,
that can happen under trigonal or higher symmetry, which is coupled to two energetically
degenerate displacement modes) [267, 156, 47]. Still, some time ago nonlinear coupling
was also considered within the E
ǫ case in [268, 269] and subsequently in [256]. Such
coupling can result in a more complex situation, in which there is a quadruplet of ci’s, such
that one ci is situated at the origin of the mode coordinates (as before) and three further
ci’s are located farther outside in the plane, at points that possess trigonal symmetry.

⊗

⊗

As of late, non-linear coupling has become of increased interest, partly through evi-
dence for a weak linear coupling in the metallic cluster N a3 [53, 270] (computations of
vibrational levels in a related molecule Li3 were performed in [271, 272]), and partly by
attempts to computationally locate ci’s in the potential energy landscape with a view to
estimate their eﬀect on inter-surface, non-adiabatic transitions [273]. The method used
in the last reference was based on the acquisition of the geometric phase by the total
function as a ci is circled [274, 157, 158, 9]. Independently, the authors of [55] found the-
oretically a causal connection between the number of ci eﬀectively circled (one or four)
and the important question of the nature of the ground state. They showed that, con-
trary to what had been widely thought before, the ground state may be either a vibronic
doublet or a singlet, depending on the distance (which is a function of the parameters
in the vibronic Hamiltonian) of these trigonal ci’s from the centre. (A similar instance
of ”quantum phase transition” was noted for a threefold degenerate system in [275] and,
earlier, for an icosahedral system, in [276]).

In a diﬀerent ﬁeld, location and characteristics of ci’s on diabatic potential surfaces
have been recognized as essential for the evaluation of dynamic parameters, like non-
adiabatic coupling terms, needed for the dynamic and static properties of some molecules
([277] -[280], [192]). More recently, pairs of ci’s have been studied [281, 282] in greater
detail. These studies arose originally in connection with a ci between the 12A′ and 22A′
states found earlier in computed potential energy surfaces for C2H in Cs symmetry [278].
Similar ci’s appear between the potential surfaces of the two lowest excited states 1A2
and 1B2 in H2S or of 2B2 and 2A1 in Al
H2 within C2v symmetry [283]. A further,
−
closely spaced pair of ci’s has also been found between the 32A′ and 42A′ states of the
C
molecule C2H. Here the separation between the twins varies with the assumed C
separation, and they can be brought into coincidence at some separation [282].

−

In this section we investigate the phase changes that characterize the double and
trigonal (or cubic) ci’s. We shall ﬁnd that the Berry phases upon circling around the
ci’s can take the values of 0 or 2N π (where N is an integer). It can be shown that the
diﬀerent values of N can be made experimentally observable (through probing the state
populations after inducing changes in the amplitudes of the components), in a way that
is not marred by the fast oscillating dynamic phase. Apart from the results regarding the
integer N in the Berry phase, the diﬀerence between our approach to the phase changes
and those in some previous works, especially in [283, 273], needs to be noted. While these
consider the topological phase belonging to the total wave packet, we continue in the spirit
of the previous section 3 and treat the open phase belonging to a single component of the
wave packet. (For the topological, full-cycle phase the two are equivalent, but not for the
open phase, that is present at interim stages.) Explicitly, we write the (in general) time

31

(t)-dependent molecular wave function Ψ(t) as a superposition of (diabatic) electronic
states χk as

Ψ(t) =

ak(t)χk

(1.65)

).
|

k
X
where the amplitudes ak are functions of the nuclear coordinates. In the previous section
we have developed and used the reciprocal relations between the phases (arg ak) and the
ak
(”observable”) moduli (
|

We also describe a ”tracing” method to obtain the phases after a full cycling. We
shall further consider wave-functions whose phases at the completion of cycling diﬀer
by integer multiples of 2π (a situation that will be written, for brevity, as ”2N π ”).
Some time ago, these wave functions have been shown to be completely equivalent, since
only the phase factor (viz., eiP hase ) is observable [155]; however, this is true only for a
set of measurements that are all made at instances where the phase diﬀerence is 2N π.
We point out simple, necessary connections between having a certain 2N π situation and
observations made prior to the achievement of that situation. The phase that is of interest
in this review is the Berry phase of the wave-function [9], not its total phase, though this
distinction will not be re-stated.

1.4.1 Conical Intersection Pairs

We treat this case ﬁrst, since it is simpler than the trigonal case. The molecular dis-
placements are denoted by x and y (with suitable choice of their origins and of scaling).
Then, without loss of generality we can denote the positions of the ci pairs in Cartesian
coordinates by

or, in polar coordinates, where x = q cos φ, y = q sin φ, by

x =

1,

±

y = 0

q = 1,

φ = 0, π

(1.66)

(1.67)

To obtain potential surfaces for two electronic states which will be degenerate at these
points, we write a Hamiltonian as a 2x2 matrix in a diabatic representation in the fol-
lowing form:

H(x, y) = K

−

1)

(x2
−
yf (x)
(q2 cos2 φ

yf (x)
(x2

1)

−

(cid:19)

= K

1)
−
q sin φf (q cos φ)

−

q sin φf (q cos φ)
(q2 cos2 φ
1)

−

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

= H(q, φ)

(1.68)

whose two eigenvalues are

E

(x, y) =

±

(x2

1)2 + [yf (x)]2

±

K

K

=
±
= E

p
(q, φ)
p

±

−
(q2 cos2 φ

−

1)2 + [q sin φf (q cos φ)]2

(1.69)

For K a (positive) constant and f (x) a function which is non zero at x =
1, the
Hamiltonian in equation (1.68) can be taken as a model that yields the postulated ci
pairs, since the two eigenvalues coincide just at the points given by equation (1.66) or
equation (1.67) . There may be more general models that give the same two ci’s. (Note,
1, the degeneracy of energies would not be
however, that if f (x) had a zero at x =

±

±

32

conical.) We now make the above model more specialized and show that diﬀerent values
of the Berry phase can be obtained for diﬀerent choices of f (x). For deﬁniteness we
consider speciﬁc molecular situations, but these are just instances of wider categories.
(The notation of Herzberg [284] is used.)

1A1 and 2A2 states in C2v symmetry (Exempliﬁed by 1A(1)
HCH.)

1 and 1A(2)

1

in bent

If the x coordinate represents a mode displacement that transforms as B1 (e.g., an asym-
metric stretch of CH) and y transforms as A1 (a ﬂapping motion of the H2, this co-
ordinate being the same as y in ﬁgure 169 of [284]), then f (x) in equation (1.68) can
be taken as a constant. Without loss of generality we put for this case f (x) = 1 and
1, 0) induces
ﬁnd that cycling adiabatically counterclockwise around the ci that is at (
(in the component that is unity at φ = 0) a topological phase of π, and that around
(1, 0) yields
π. Cycling either fully inside or outside q = 1 (the latter case encircling
both ci’s), gives zero phase. We now describe a ”continuous (phase-) tracing method”
that obtains in an unambiguous way the phase of a real wave function. The alternative,
”adiabatic cycling” method of the previous section gave the same phase change in terms
of the evolution of the complex solution of the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation in
the extremely slow (adiabatic) limit. Other methods will be brieﬂy referred to.

−

−

1.4.2 Continuous Tracing of the Component Phase

×

In this method one notes that real-valued solutions of the time independent Hamiltonian
2 matrix form can be written in terms of an θ(φ, q), which is twice the ”mixing
of a 2
angle”, such that the electronic component which is ”initially” 1 is cos[θ(φ, q)/2], while
that which is initially 0 is sin[θ(φ, q)/2]. For the second matrix form in equation (1.68)
(in which, for simplicity f (x) = 1), we get

θ(φ, q) = arctan

q sin φ
q2 cos2 φ

1

(1.70)

−
One can trace the continuous evolution of θ (or of θ
2 ) as φ describes the circle q =
constant. This will yield the topological phase (as well as intermediate, open-path phase
during the circling). We illustrate this in the next two ﬁgures for the case q > 1 (encircling
the ci ’s).

In the sub-ﬁgure (1.2.a) several important stages in the circling are labeled with
In the adjacent sub-ﬁgure (1.2.b) the values of θ(φ, q) are plotted
Arabic numerals.
as φ increases continuously. The labeled points in the two sub-ﬁgures correspond to
each other. (The notation is that points which represent zeros of tan θ are marked with
numbers surrounded by small circles, those which represent poles are marked by numbers
placed inside squares, other points of interests that are neither zero nor poles are labeled
by free numbers.) The zero value of the topological phase ( θ
2 ) arises from the fact that
at the point 2 (at which φ = π

2 ), θ retraces its values, rather than goes on to decrease.

A1 and B2 states in C2v symmetry (Exempliﬁed by 2A1 and 2B2 in AlH2 [285])

Symmetry considerations forbid any non-zero oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements in equation
(1.68) when f (x) is even in x, but they can be non-zero if f (x) is odd, e.g., f (x) = x.
(We note that x itself transforms as B2 [284].) Figure 1.3 shows the outcome for the
phase by the continuous phase tracing method for cycling outside the ci’s (q > 1). The

33

Figure 1.2: Phase-tracing for the case of 1A1 and 2A2 states in C2v symmetry: (a) The
left-hand side shows the labels for the signiﬁcant stages during the circling in the (q, φ)-
plane. In this and the following ﬁgures, numbers in circles represent the positions of zeros
in the argument of the arctan in the expression of the angle, (equation (1.70) ), numbers
in squares are poles and free numbers are other signiﬁcant stages in the circling. (b) The
angle θ in equation (1.70) as function of the circling angle. The numbers correspond to
those on the adjacent part (a) of the ﬁgure. (Note: The angle θ is deﬁned as twice the
transformation or mixing angle.) The circling is with q > 1, namely outside the ci pair.

diﬀerence between the present case and the previous one (in which f (x) was an even
function of x) is that now, in the second half of circling in the q, φ - plane, the wave-
function component angle θ does not retrace its path, but goes on decreasing. (It is
interesting to remark here on an analogy between the present results and the well known
1 over
results of contour integration in the complex z - plane. An integration of (z2
a path that encircles the two poles of the function gives zero result, but the same path
integration of z(z2
1, gives 2πi. However, the analogy does not work fully. Thus, a
simple multiplication of the integrand by a positive constant alters the residues, but not
the phase.)

1)−

1)−

−

−

≈

−

However, the resulting Berry phase of

2π depends on (i) having reached the adiabatic
limit and (ii) circling well away from the ci’s; i.e., it is necessary that the circling shall
be done with a value of q that is either much smaller or much larger than 1. A contrary
case not satisfying these conditions, e.g., when either q < 3 or K < 60 , would give
a Berry phase of about 4π, 6π, . . ., or a number N
2, 3, . . . rather than 1, as might
have been expected. What is perhaps remarkable is that even in the not quite adiabatic
or not very large q cases, N (though plainly diﬀerent from 1) is still close to being an
integer. More study may be needed on this result, especially in view of the possibility
of observable consequences of the value of N . The cases of ”1A1 and 2A2 states in C2v
symmetry” and of ”A1 and B2 states in C2v symmetry” are, of course, inequivalent, since
they arise from diﬀerent Hamiltonians. Their non equivalence results not only in diﬀerent
topological phases (zero and 2π), but in diﬀerent state occupation probabilities. These
are deﬁned as the probabilities of the systems being in one of the states χk, of which the
superposition in equation (1.65) is made up. In Figure 1.4 we show these probabilities
as functions of time for systems that diﬀer by their having diﬀerent functions f (x) in
the oﬀ-diagonal positions of the Hamiltonian. The diﬀerences in the probabilities are
apparent.

34

Figure 1.3: Phase-tracing for circling outside the ci pair (for the model in A1 and B2
states in C2v symmetry. The Berry phase (half the angle shown at the extremity of the
ﬁgure) is here

2π.

−

35

Probability

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

2

3

4

5

6

time

Figure 1.4: Probabilities in diﬀerent models during adiabatic circling around ci’s. The
square moduli of component amplitudes as function of time are seen to be diﬀerent for
diﬀerent models. Long-dashed lines: the model in 1A1 and 2A2 states in C2v symmetry
for circling inside the ci’s. Full lines: the model in 1A1 and 2A2 states in C2v symmetry
for circling outside the ci’s. Broken lines: the model in A1 and B2 states in C2v symmetry
(with the ”xy” oﬀ-diagonal matrix element) for circling outside the ci’s. In the latter
model, circling inside the ci’s gives probabilities that would be indistinguishable from
unity on the ﬁgure (and are not shown).

Trigonal Degeneracies

⊗

The simplest way to write down the 2-by-2 Hamiltonian for two states such that its
eigenvalues coincide at trigonally symmetric points in (x, y)- or (q, φ) -plane is to consider
the matrices of vibrational-electronic coupling of the E
ǫ Jahn-Teller problem in a
diabatic electronic state representation. These have been constructed by B. Halperin,
and listed in Appendix IV of [156], up to the third order in q. The ﬁrst order or linear
coupling in the displacement coordinates is of the well known form (shown by the ﬁrst
term in the Hamiltonian presented below) and yields the familiar ci at the origin, q = 0.
When one adds to this the quadratic coupling, designated I(E) in section IV.3 (A) of
the above reference and quoted below, one obtains three further, trigonally situated ci,
4π
namely at either φ = 0,
3 , depending on whether the signs of the linear
and quadratic couplings are the same or opposite. The distance of the trigonal ci’s from
the origin varies with the relative magnitudes of the couplings: the higher the strength
of the quadratic term, the nearer the trigonal ci are to the center. This was, of course,
the physical basis of [55], in which a ground vibronic singlet state for strong quadratic
coupling was found. The resulting Hamiltonian is of the form (to be compared with the
two matrices in equation (1.68) above):

2π
3 , or φ = π,

±

±

H(x, y) = K

(x

−

2κ(x2
−
−
y + 4κxy

y2))

(x
2κq2 cos 2φ)

−

−

(q cos φ
q sin φ + 2κq2 sin 2φ

−

y + 4κxy
2κ(x2
y2))
q sin φ + 2κq2 sin 2φ
2κq2 cos 2φ)
(q cos φ

−

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

= K

= H(q, φ)

(cid:19)

(1.71)

36

Figure 1.5: Phase-tracing for the case of trigonal degeneracies when the circle encom-
passes all four ci’s and the Berry phase is 2π.

where κ represents the ratio of the strength of the quadratic coupling to the linear one.
1, with angular positions as described
The trigonal ci ’s are at a distance q = (2κ)−
above. Employing now the continuous phase tracing method introduced in subsection
1.4.1, one again obtains the graphs for the mixing angle. There are now three cases to
1) the resulting
consider, namely (i) for cycling that encloses all four ci’s , (q > (2κ)−
phase acquired being now 2π (shown in Fig. 1.5) This is an even multiple of π, as
expected for four ci’s [274], but diﬀers from 4π (or from zero). Then (ii) for intermediate
1) (which is shown in Fig. 1.6) that terminates with
radius cycling ((2κ)−
1). The last case
a Berry phase of
π, and lastly (iii) for small radius cycling (q < (2κ)−
has also the Berry phase of π , but diﬀers from the intermediate case (ii), in that the
initial increase is absent.

1 > q > (4κ)−

−

It might be asked what happens when one adds further couplings beyond the quadratic

one? In the next higher order one ﬁnds a scalar cubic term of the form:

q3cos3πI

(1.72)

where I is the unit matrix. This gives rise to three trigonally aligned degeneracies ([156],
Appendix IV). However, these are parabolic (touching) degeneracies, not conical inter-
sections, and do not cause changes of sign in the wave function upon circling round them.
Higher order terms (not listed in that Appendix) can give rise to additional ci ’s of trig-
onal symmetry, but the strength of these terms is expected to be less and therefore the
resulting ci’s will be farther outside, where are without importance for low lying states.
Still, their presence is of interest for revealing the connection between the Berry angle

37

Figure 1.6: Phase-tracing for the trigonal degeneracies. The drawings (which are ex-
plained in the caption to ﬁgure 1.3) are for intermediate-radius (q) circling.

and the number of ci’s circled and we shall presently obtain nonlinear coupling terms to
an arbitrarily high power of q.

1.4.3 The Adiabatic to Diabatic Transformation (ADT)

Several years ago Baer proposed the use of a matrix A, that transforms the adiabatic
electronic set to a diabatic one [48]. (For a special two-fold set this was discussed in
[286, 287].) Computations performed with the diabatic set are much simpler than those
with the adiabatic set. Subject to certain conditions, A is the solution of a set of ﬁrst
order partial diﬀerential equations. A is unitary and has the form of a ”path-ordered”
phase factor, in which the phase can be formally written as

(1.73)

(1.74)

R

R0

Z

IJ

f

(R)

dR

·

IJ

f

~
(R) =< I
∇|
|

J >

Here the integrand is the oﬀ-diagonal gradient matrix element between adiabatic elec-
tronic states,

(~
is the derivative with respect to R.) We stress that in this formalism, I and J denote
∇
the complete adiabatic electronic state, and not a component thereof.
J >
|
contain the nuclear coordinates, designated by R, as parameters. The above line integral
was used and elaborated in calculations of nuclear dynamics on potential surfaces by
several authors ([273, 283], ([288] -[301]). (For an extended discussion of this and related
matters the reviews of Sidis [49] and Pacher et al. [50] are especially informative.)

I > and
|

The possibility of a non-gradient component in the integrand introduces some diﬃ-
culty and an alternative formulation has been proposed [283, 273]. (At positions that
are close to a ci, the alternative approximates well to the angle shown above in equation
(1.73) .)

The ADT, computed for ci pairs in [57] and denoted (in their ﬁgures 1-3) by γ(φ
q), is
|
related to the ”open path phase” deﬁned below in equation (1.75) , but is identical with

38

it (and with Berry’s angle) only at φ = 2π. At this value the computed results of [57]
are in agreement with those that were derived with the model Hamiltonian in equation
(1.68) . However, in some of the cases, when the coupling terms became zero, the sign
q) acquires might become ambiguous (e.g., whether it is even or odd
that the phase γ(φ
|
under reﬂection about the line φ = π). In the above analytic models the signs are given
unambiguously.

Since up to date summaries about the practical implementation of the line integral
have been given recently (in [282, 108]; as also in the chapter by Baer in the present
volume), and the method was applied also to a pair of ci’s [282], we do not elaborate
here on the form of the phase associated with one or more ci’s, as obtained through this
method .

1.4.4 Direct Integration

The open path phase [14, 11] associated with a component- amplitude can be obtained
as the imaginary part of an integral:

γk(t) = Im

/ak(t′)

(1.75)

t

dt′

∂ak(t′)
∂t′

0
Z

where, as before at several places in this chapter, ak(t) is the amplitude of the k-
component in the solution of the time - dependent Schr¨odinger equation in the near-
adiabatic limit. The (complex) amplitude in the integrand is (in general) non-vanishing
(unlike the real wave-function amplitude in the strictly adiabatic solution) and thus the
integral is non-divergent. However, in practice, even fairly close to the adiabatic limit,
the convergence is very slow, due to oscillations in the amplitude, noted in the previ-
ous section and in [29]-[32]. For this reason, the formula in equation (1.75)
is not a
convenient one to use. Still, using the formula for increasing values of the adiabaticity
to K > 102), we have evaluated the
parameter (i.e.
topological phase for the case with trigonal symmetry and have found it to converge
close to the value 2N π, with N=1 (and not 0). Because of the diﬃulties in its practical
implementation, we shall not further consider the direct integration method.

increasing K in equation (1.68)

1.4.5 Higher Order Coupling in some Jahn-Teller and Renner-

Teller Eﬀects

A systematic derivation of forms of coupling that is super-linear in the nuclear motion
amplitude was given, partly based on Racah coeﬃcients, in [156], Appendix IV, but
these went up only as far as the third order in the amplitudes q. As will shortly be made
apparent, there is some theoretical need to obtain higher order terms. For the E
ǫ
Jahn-Teller case, the form of coupling to arbitrary powers was given in [302]. Here we
give a diﬀerent and arguably simpler derivation using the vector-coupling formalism of
Appendix IV in [156], the complex representation form given in [303], and a mathematical
induction type of argument.

⊗

Complex Representation

The mode coordinates, transforming respectively as the
(doubly degenerate) modes, have the form:

−

1 and 1 components of the E

(g

1, g1) =

−

−

(i/√2)(gθ, gǫ)

= (i/√2)(qe−

iφ,

qeiφ)

(1.76)

−

1 1
−
i
i

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

39

A: B:
E
E
b:
a:

1
1
-1
-1

1
-1
1
-1

C:
–
c:
–

U:

A1
–
a1
–
0
1/√2
1/√2
0

A2
–
a2
–
0
i/√2
−
i/√2
0

E
–
1
–
-i
0
0
0

–
1
–
0
0
0
1

Table 1.1: The coupling- coeﬃcients U (ABC
abc) for the complex form of a doubly
|
degenerate representation, following G.F. Koster et al ”Properties of the thirty-two point
groups” (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1963), pp. 8, 52.

where the extreme right-hand member recalls the ”modulus” q and the ”phase” φ used
in the real representation. The vector coupling -coeﬃcients for e.g. octahedral symme-
try, can be obtained from Table A.20 in the Appendix 2 of [304], upon performing the
transformation shown (1.76) on the real representation. In the following Table we show
the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients deﬁned in equation (1.79) below.

To obtain non-linear coupling terms, we consider two linearly independent, not iden-

tical E-modes, namely

(g

−
(G

1, g1)
1, G1)

−

(1.77)

(1.78)

(1.79)

and construct bilinear expressions from these. The combination that transforms as com-
ponents of an E-mode is given by

χ(E

x) =
|

U (EEE

abx)gaGb
|

a,b
X

|

−

−

×

−

−

−

1G

1, b =

1 and 1: χ(E

The above Table for U immediately shows that there are only two bilinear combinations
of g and G, namely those a = 1, b = 1 and a =
1. These lead to the quadratic
terms belonging to the components

1) = g1G1 and χ(E
| −
d >< e
Eq. A IV.4 of [156] tells us which ket-bra operator
|

1) = g
1
|
is multiplied by the above
combinations or, equivalently, where in the 2
2 electronic- nuclear coupling matrix each
of these terms sit. Here again we adopt for the electronic kets a complex representation,
analogous to that shown in equation (1.76) . To use the vector coupling coeﬃcients
for these, we recall that in the complex representation the bra’s transform as the corre-
sponding ”minus-label ket”’s (cf. Eq. (2.34) in [303]). Using again the vector coupling
coeﬃcients, we see that χ(E
1) is
1 ><
|
|
). In the usual matrix notation [in which rows and
the factor that multiplies
|
1, 1)] this means that in the upper right corner one has
columns are taken in the order (
1, and (for quadratic coupling), g1G1, and similarly in
(for linear coupling ) g
1 and G
the lower left corner g1, G1 , as well as g
1. Both linear and quadratic terms will
1G
be multiplied by diﬀerent constants, whose values depend on the physical situation and
cannot be given by symmetry considerations, except that the electronic- nuclear interac-
tion must be Hermitean and invariant under the symmetry operations of the group. The
same construction can be employed to derive bilinear terms on the diagonal part of the
coupling matrix. Using again the U -coeﬃcients in the Table, one obtains the forms (not
normalized)

1) is the factor that multiplies

| −
1 >< 1

(and χ(E

−
−

| −

−

1

−

−

−

|

(g1G

1 + g

−

1 >< 1
1G1)(
|

|

−

+

| −

1 ><

1

)
|

−

(1.80)

40

where each factor belongs to the A1 representation and

(g1G

1 −

−

g

1 >< 1
1G1)(
|

−

| − | −

1 ><

1

)
|

−

(1.81)

where each factor belongs to the A2 representation.

Squaring of Oﬀ-diagonal Elements

The method shown aﬀords easy generalization to higher order coupling in the important
iφ. Then the two
case where a single mode is engaged, i.e., G
oﬀ-diagonal terms derived above are, after physics based constant coeﬃcients have been
aﬃxed, in the upper right corner

1 = g

1
i√2

1 =

qe±

±

±

±

iφ

(qe−

2κq2e2iφ)
1 ><
|

1

−

|

−

(1.82)

with another, Hermitean conjugate expression on the other (lower left) oﬀ-diagonal po-
sition. These were previously given in a similar form in, e.g., [256, 156]. The A1 term
in equation (1.80) only renormalizes the vibrational frequency. The A2 term vanishes
(for terms up to second order in q2). Proceeding in the same way to get further terms
by cross multiplying the second order expression in equation (1.82) , and continuing the
procedure, we obtain in the upper right corner the following terms correct up to the
fourth order in q:

q3e−

iφ, q4e2iφ, q4e−

4iφ

(1.83)

The ﬁrst and second terms contain phase factors identical to those previously met with
4iφ (Though the power
in equation (1.82) . The last term has the ”new” phase factor e−
of q in the second term is diﬀerent from that in equation (1.82) , this term enters with a
physics-based coeﬃcient that is independent of κ in equation (1.82) , and can be taken for
the present illustration as zero. The full expression is shown below in equation (1.86) and
the implications of higher powers of q are discussed thereafter.) Then a new oﬀ-diagonal
matrix element enlarged with the third term only, multiplied by a (new) coeﬃcient λ, is

iφ

(qe−

2κq2e2iφ + λq4e−

4iφ) = qe−

iφ(1

2κqe3iφ + λq3e−

3iφ)

(1.84)

−

−

There is going to be an A1 (scalar) term of the form, well known in the literature (e.g.,
[156]), q3 cos 3φ, and an A2 (pseudo- scalar) term of the form q3 sin 3φ. We may once
again suppose that the coeﬃcients of all these terms are independent (i.e., their physical
origins are diﬀerent) and that we may discuss terms in diagonal and oﬀ-diagonal positions
separately. Let us consider the oﬀ-diagonal term, as given on the right hand member of
equation (1.84) . The vanishing of the ﬁrst factor gives the traditional conical intersection
(ci) at the origin. The zeros of the second factor give additional ci’s. These are all
3iφ, which induce trigonal symmetry.
trigonally positioned, due to the phase factors e±
The maximum number of trigonal ci’s (to this, fourth order approximation in q) is clearly
3 = 9. Thus, to give a numerical example in which κ = 0.15, λ = 0.003, we obtain
3
the following nine trigonal roots of equation (1.84)

×

q = 3.95,

φ = 0,

q = 7.42,

φ = 0,

q = 11.37, φ = π,

2π
3
2π
3
π
3

,

,

,

4π
3
4π
3
5π
3

41

(1.85)

(Clearly the pseudo-scalar term vanishes at these points; so the ci character at the roots
is maintained, no matter whether there are or are not A2 terms. Also the vanishing of
A2 terms will not lead to new ci’s.) On the other hand, by circling over a large radius
, so that all ci’s are enclosed, the dominant term in equation (1.84) is the
path q
last one and the acquired Berry- phase is

4(2π)/2 =

→ ∞

4π.

To see that this phase has no relation to the number of ci’s encircled (if this statement
is not already obvious), we note that this last result is true no matter what are the values
In contrast,
of the coeﬃcients κ , λ, etc., provided only that the latter is non-zero.
the number of ci’s depends on their values; e.g. for some values of the parameters the
vanishing of the oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements occurs for complex values of q, and these
do not represent physical ci’s. The model used in [270] represents a special case, in which
it was possible to derive a relation between the number of ci’s and the Berry- phase
acquired upon circling about them. We are concerned with more general situations. For
these it is not warranted, for example, to count up the total number of ci’s by circling
with a large radius.

−

−

General Oﬀ-diagonal Coupling

The construction given above to obtain oﬀ-diagonal non-linear couplings up to order q4
can be generalized to arbitrary order. Only the ﬁnal result is given. This gives for the
oﬀ diagonal term in the upper right corner:

Kqe−

iφ[1 + q−

2

q3mQm+e3miφ +

q3mQm

e−

3miφ]

−

(1.86)

−

m=1,...
X

m=1,...
X
are polynomials in q2 with coeﬃcients that depend on the physical
where Qm+ and Qm
system and whose leading terms will be q0 . When transformed back to the real repre-
sentation, by applying the inverse of the transformation in equation (1.76) , one regains
the expressions of [302]. Normally, for stable physical systems, it is expected that, with
increasing m , Qm+ and Qm
will numerically decrease and so will, in each polynomial,
the coeﬃcients of successively higher powers q2. If we assume only a ﬁnite number of
summands in the above sums and that the highest power of q in equation (1.86) has the
phase factor e3Miφ (where M is a positive or negative integer), then the path along a very
large circle will add a topological phase of (3M
is diﬀerent (either
smaller or larger) than the number of ci’s enclosed by the large contour, though it equals
the number of ci’s for the case M = +1 treated in [270]. When there are two or more
diﬀerent phase factors with the same highest power of q, then the amount of topological
phase is not simply given, but can be determined, using the continuous phase-tracing
method described above in subsection 1.4.2.

1)π. In general, 3

M
|

−

−

|

Nonlinear Diagonal Elements

Their forms are:

q3mD1,m(q) cos 3mφ

q3mD2,m(q) sin 3mφ

A1 :

A2 :

m=0,...
X

m=0,...
X

(1.87)

(1.88)

where D1,m and D2,m are polynomials in q2 with coeﬃcients that again depend on the
physical system and whose leading terms is q0. The scalar term evidently does not
produce a ci. The zeros of the A2 term (which is applicable for systems not invariant
under time reversal) by themselves do not add to or subtract from the ci’s.

42

Generalized Renner-Teller Coupling

The foregoing formulae in equations (1.86, 1.88) can be immediately applied to two
physically interesting situations (not treated in [302], but very recently considered for a
special model in [305]). The ﬁrst is the vibronic interaction in a system having inversion
symmetry between a doubly degenerate electronic state and an odd vibrational mode. The
second situation is the more common one of Renner-Teller coupling (e.g., a linear molecule
whose doubly degenerate orbital is coupled to a bending-type distortion) [47], formally
identical to the previous. To write out the coupling to any order, one simply removes
in the previous formulae all terms having odd powers of q. In the real representation,
the coupling matrix correct to the fourth harmonics in the angular coordinate has the
following form:

R1q2 cos 2φ + R2q4 cos 4φ + . . .
R2q4 sin 4φ + . . .
R1q2 sin 2φ

R1q2 sin 2φ
(R1q2 cos 2φ + R2q4 cos 4φ + . . .)

R2q4 sin 4φ + . . .

−

(cid:18)

−

−

(cid:19)

(1.89)

where, as in the instances of equations (1.86,1.88) above, R1 and R2 are polynomials in
q2 with coeﬃcients that again depend on the physical system and whose leading terms
are of order q0.

Interpretation

The key of constructing vibronic coupling terms for doubly degenerate states and modes
to an arbitrary order is the use of a complex representation. The formal essence of the
method is that in the complex representation V (EEE
xyz) is nonzero only for a single
|
z. (In Table 1.1 there is only one entry in a row. Figuratively speaking: All coupled
”coaches” travel to a unique ”train station” and all trains in that station consist of coupled
coaches. Moreover, this goes also for the coupling of coupled train, and so on.) From our
result we conclude that the Berry phase around more than one conical intersection is not
uniquely given by the number of conical intersections enclosed, but is model dependent.
This has consequences for experimental tracing of the phase, as well as for computations
of line integrals with the purpose of obtaining non-adiabatic surface jumping in chemical
rearrangement processes (e.g., in [185] -[194], [300, 301]) and as discussed in section 1.2.

1.4.6 Experimental Phase Probing

Experimental observation of topological phases is diﬃcult, for one reason (among others)
that the dynamic-phase part (which we have subtracted oﬀ in our formalism, but is
present in any real situation) oscillates in general much faster than the topological phase
and tends to dominate the amplitude behavior ([306]- [312]). Several researches have
addressed this diﬃculty, in particular, by neutron-interferometric methods, which also
can yield the open-path phase [123], though only under restricted conditions [313].

The continuous tracing method and other methods for cycling reviewed in this section
can be used in several very diﬀerent areas. An example is a mesoscopic system composed
of quantum dots that is connected to several capacitors. For this a network of singularities
was described in the parameter space of the gate voltages [314]. It has been suggested
that the outcome of circling around these singularities, through a phased alteration of
the charges on the capacitors, is formally similar to that of circling around ci’s [210].
Although the physical eﬀects are diﬀerent (i.e., the acquisition of a π- phase by the
wave function has the eﬀect of transferring a single electronic charge), the results of
circling obtained in this section can be associated with quantized charges passing between
quantum dots. Some related topics, for which the results of this section can be used or

43

extended are: Phase behavior in a diﬀerent type of multiple ci’s, located in a single point
but common to several states. This was studied in [168] and for an electronic quartet
state in [60, 36, 62]. A further future extension of the theory is to try to correlate the
topological phase with a general (representation-independent) property of the system (or
of the Hamiltonian).

The phases studied in the present work are those of material, Schr¨odinger waves,
rather than of electromagnetic, light waves. Recently, it has been shown that it is possible
to freeze coherent information (=phases) from light into material degrees of freedom and
vice versa [315, 316]. This development extends the relevance of this section to light, too.
Among ﬁelds of application not directly addressed in their recent work, let us quote from
the authors of [315] quantum information transfer [317] and Bose-Einstein condensates.

44

1.5 Molecular Yang-Mills Fields

1.5.1 A Nuclear Lagrangean

One starts with the Hamiltonian for a molecule H(r, R) written out in terms of the elec-
tronic coordinates (r) and the nuclear displacement coordinates (R, this being a vector
whose dimensionality is 3 times the number of nuclei) and containing the interaction
potential V (r, R). Then, following the Born-Oppenheimer scheme one can write the
combined wave-function Ψ(r, R) as a sum of an inﬁnite number of terms

Ψ(r, R) =

ζk(r, R)χk(R)

(1.90)

k
X

Here the ﬁrst factor, ζk(r, R) in the sum is one of the solutions of the electronic Born-
Oppenheimer equation and its partner in the sum, χk(R) is the solution of the following
equation for the nuclear motion, with total eigenvalue Ek :

1
2M

{−

∂b∂bδk

m + V k

m(R)

bm(R)∂b +
τ k

1
M

−

1
2M

bn(R)τ b n
τ k

m (R)
}

χm(R) = Ekχk(R) (1.91)

The symbol M represents the masses of the nuclei in the molecule, which for simplicity
are taken to be equal. δk
m is the Kronecker delta. The tensor notation is used in this
section and the summation convention is assumed for all repeated indices not placed in
parentheses. In equation (1.91) appears the ”non-adiabatic coupling term” (NACT) τ k
bm
(this being a matrix in the electronic Hilbert space, whose components are denoted by
labels k, m, and a ”vector” with respect to the b-component of the nuclear coordinate
R). It is given by an integral over the electron coordinates:

τ k
bm(R) =

drζk(r, R)∂bζm(r, R) :=< k

∂b
|

m >=
|

−

< m

∂b
|

k >
|

(1.92)

Z

The eﬀective potential matrix for nuclear motion, which is a diagonal matrix for the
adiabatic electronic set, is given by:

m >
V (r, R)
|
|
In the algebraic, group theoretical treatments of non-Abelian systems ([68], [69] - [72],
[77]-[80]) the NACT is usually written in a decomposed form as

(1.93)

V k
m(R) =< k

τ k
bm(R) = d(b)(R)(tb)k
m

(1.94)

where tb is one of the set of constant (non-commuting) matrices (the ”generators”) that
deﬁne the Lie-group of the system. So far, with the summation in equation (1.90) over
k running over the full electronic Hilbert space spanned by ζk(r, R), the Hamiltonian
treatment is exact. We shall shortly see that the truncation of the summation in equation
(which in practice is almost inevitable) has far-reaching eﬀects in the Yang-
(1.90)
Mills theory. Before that, we turn to an equivalent description, standardly used in ﬁeld
theories but which has not been in use for the Born-Oppenheimer treatment of molecules,
namely to write down a ”nuclear” Lagrangean density
for the vector ψ(R) whose
(transposed) row vector form is

LM

ψT = (χ1, χ2, χ3, . . . , χN )
∗

(1.95)

(The mixed, ψ - χ notation here has historic causes.) The Schr¨odinger equation is
obtained from the nuclear Lagrangean by functionally deriving the latter with respect

45

to ψ. To get the exact form of the Schr¨odinger equation, we must let N in the previous
equation to be equal to the dimension of the electronic Hilbert space (namely, inﬁnite),
but we shall soon come to study approximations in which N is ﬁnite and even small, e.g.,
2 or 3. The appropriate nuclear Lagrangean density is for an arbitrary electronic states:

L

M (ψ, ∂aψ) = (2M )−
(2M )−

1(∂aψ)k(∂aψ)k
1(ψ)kτ m
kb τ bn

m (ψ)n

−

M −

1ψkτ m
ka (∂aψ)m
ψkV m
k ψm

−

−

(1.96)

The non-Abelian nature of the formalism is apparent from the presence of non-diagonal
matrices τ and V . V can be diagonalized, leading to adiabatic energy surfaces and states,
but not simultaneously with the (τ ∂) term. Requiring now only global gauge invariance
of the Lagrangean, we obtain the usual phase-gauge theories [76, 318], incorporating a
vector potential. However, requiring invariance under a local gauge transformation we
obtain the extension of the vector potential to a Yang-Mills ﬁeld [68, 69]. [Actually, the
local gauge invariance is not a ”luxury” because, if the Lagrangean is invariant under
global (constant) transformation, then it is also invariant under a gauge transformation
with general position dependent parameters ([72], section 15.2). A remark on nomencla-
ture:”ﬁeld” and ”ﬁelds” are used interchangeably.] Before obtaining the equation for the
ﬁeld, we return for a moment to the (simpler) Abelian case.

1.5.2 Pure versus Tensorial Gauge Fields

To start, it is useful to put the previous result in a more elementary setting, familiar in
the context of electromagnetic force between charged particles, say electrons. Thus, we
recapitulate as follows:

In an Abelian theory (for which Ψ(r, R) in equation (1.90) is a scalar rather than a
vector function, N = 1), the introduction of a gauge ﬁeld g(R) means pre-multiplication
of the wave function χ(R) by exp(igR), where g(R) is a scalar. This allows the deﬁnition
of a ”gauge”-vector potential, in natural units:

and if we deﬁne a ﬁeld intensity tensor, as in electromagnetism, by:

Aa = ∂ag

Fbc = ∂bAc

∂cAb

−

we ﬁnd that Fbc is zero, excluding singularities of Aa. Therefore a vector potential arising
from a gauge transformation g does not give a true ﬁeld (since it can be transformed away
g). Conversely, a vector potential Aa for which Fbc in equation (1.98)
by another gauge
is not zero, gives a true ﬁeld and cannot be transformed away by a choice of gauge.

−

In a non-Abelian theory (where the Hamiltonian contains non-commuting matrices
and the solutions are vector or spinor functions , with N in equation (1.90) greater than
1 ) we also start with a vector potential Ab. ( In the manner of equation (1.94) this can
b , in which he superscript a labels the matrices in the
be decomposed into components Aa
theory). We next deﬁne the ﬁeld intensity tensor through a ”covariant curl” by

bc = ∂bAa
F a

∂cAa

b + Ca

deAd

b Ae
c

c −

Here Ca
bc are the structure constants for the Lie-group deﬁned by the set of the non-
commuting matrices ta appearing in equation (1.94) and which also appear both in the
Lagrangean and in the Schr¨odinger equation. We further deﬁne the ”covariant derivative”
by

(1.97)

(1.98)

(1.99)

(1.100)

(Daψ)k = (∂aψ)k

iAb

a(tb)m

k ψm

−

46

and write the ﬁeld equations for A and F as

∂aF ac

b = F cf

d Cd

beAe

f + i

δ

L

M (ψ, Dψ)
δDcψk

(tb)m

n ψk

(1.101)

If the vector potential components Aa
b have the property that the derived ﬁeld intensity,
the Yang-Mills ﬁeld in equation (1.99) , is non zero, then the vector potential cannot be
transformed away by a gauge phase g(R) through pre-multiplication of the wavefunction
χm(R) by the (unitary) factor exp(ig(R)). There is no g(R) that will do this. Conversely,
if there is a g(R), one obtains a vector potential-matrix Aa whose km components satisfy

Ak

am = (exp(g(R))−

1)k

n∂a[exp(ig(R))]n
m

(1.102)

Thus, the existence of a (matrix-type) phase g represents the ”pure-gauge case” and the
non-existence of g the non-pure, Yang-Mills ﬁeld case, which cannot be transformed away
by a gauge.

1.5.3 The ”Curl Condition”

We now return to the nuclear Born-Oppenheimer equation (1.91) in the molecular con-
text. Consider the derivative coupling term in it, having the form:

M −

1τ k

bm(R)∂bχm(R)

Suppose that we want this to be transformed away by a pure gauge factor having the
form

[exp(ig(R))]k

m = [G(R)]k
m

where g and G are matrices. That is, we require:

for all b, or

τ k

bm(R) = [G(R)−

1]k

s ∂b[G(R)]s
m

[G(R)]s

kτ k

bm(R) = ∂b[G(R)]s
m

The consistency condition for this set of equations to possess a (unique) solution is that
the ﬁeld intensity tensor deﬁned in equation (1.99) is zero [48]. This is also known as
the ”curl condition” and is written in an abbreviated form as

curl τ =

τ

τ

−

×

Under circumstances that this condition holds, an Adiabatic Diabatic Transformation
(ADT) matrix A exists, such that the adiabatic electronic set can be transformed to
a diabatic one. Working with this diabatic set, at least in some part of the nuclear
coordinate space, was the objective aimed at in [48].

Starting from a completely diﬀerent angle, namely the nuclear Lagrangean and the
requirement of local gauge invariance, we have shown in the previous subsection that if
the very same curl condition is satisﬁed, there is a pure gauge ﬁeld. If it is not satisﬁed,
then the ﬁeld is not a gauge ﬁeld, but something more complicated, namely the Yang-
Mills ﬁeld. The set of equations that give the pure gauge g is identical to that which
yields the ADT matrix A which was introduced in [48]. The equivalence between a
(pure) gauge phase factor and the ADT matrix does not seem to have been made in the
literature before, though the conditionality of a pure gauge on the satisfaction of the
”curl-relation” was common knowledge. (Indeed, they are regarded as tautologously the

(1.103)

(1.104)

(1.105)

(1.106)

(1.107)

47

same.) The reason for the omission may have been that, possibly, the ADT matrix was
not thought to have the respectability of the pure gauge. (From a naive, superﬁcial angle
it is not evident, why one and the same condition should guarantee the elimination of
the cross term in the molecular Schr¨odinger equation, which is a non-relativistic, second
order diﬀerential equation, and the possibility of a pure gauge for a hadron ﬁeld, which
obeys entirely diﬀerent equations: e.g., relativistic, ﬁrst order ones.)

1.5.4 The Untruncated Hilbert Space

We now recall the remarkable result of [48] that if the adiabatic electronic set in equation
(1.90) is complete (N =
), then the curl condition is satisﬁed and the Yang-Mills ﬁeld
is zero, except at points of singularity of the vector potential. (An algebraic proof can
be found in [48], Appendix 1. An alternative derivation, as well as an extension, is given
below.) Suppose now that we have a (pure) gauge g(R), that satisﬁes the following two
conditions:

∞

(1) the electronic set (represented in the following by Greek indexes) is complete, and
(2) the vector potential-matrix A present in the Hamiltonian (or in the Lagrangean)

arises from a dynamic coupling: meaning, that it has the form

A α

aβ ∝

∂a
< α
|

β >
|

(1.108)

Then, two things (that are actually interdependent) happen: (I) The ﬁeld intensity F = 0
(II) There exists a unique gauge g(R) and, since F = 0, any apparent ﬁeld in the
Hamiltonian can be transformed away by introducing a new gauge.
If, however, the
above condition (1) does not hold, i.e., the electronic Hilbert space is truncated, then F
is in general not zero within the truncated set, In this event, the ﬁelds A and F cannot
be nulliﬁed by a new gauge and the resulting Yang-Mills ﬁeld is true and irremovable.

[Attention is directed to a previous discussion of what happens when the electronic
basis is extended to the complete Hilbert space, [79] p. 60; especially eqs. (2.17)-(2.18). It
is shown there that in that event the full symmetry of the invariance group is regained (in
eﬀect, through the cancellation of the transformation matrix operating on the electronic
and on the nuclear functions spaces). From this result it is only a short step to conclude
that the Yang-Mills ﬁeld coming from electron-nuclear coupling must be zero for a full
set. However, this conclusion is not drawn in the article, nor is the vanishing of the
Yang-Mills ﬁeld shown explicitly.]

→

As was already noted in [9], the primary eﬀect of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld is to induce
transitions (ζm
ζk) between the nuclear states (and, perhaps, to cause ﬁnite life-times).
As already remarked, it is not easy to calculate the probabilities of transitions due to
the derivative coupling between the zero order nuclear states (if for no other reason,
then because these are not all mutually orthogonal). Eﬀorts made in this direction are
successful only under special circumstances, e.g. the Perturbed Stationary State method
[65, 66] for slow atomic collisions. This diﬃculty is avoided when one follows Yang
and Mills to derive a mediating tensorial force that provide an alternative form of the
interaction between the zero order states and, also, if one introduces the ADT matrix to
eliminate the derivative couplings.

1.5.5 An Alternative Derivation

The vanishing of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld intensity tensor can be shown to follow from the
gauge transformation properties of the potential and the ﬁeld. It is well known (e.g., [69]

48

section II) that under a unitary transformation described by the matrix

(which induces a rotation in the nuclear function space) the vector potential transforms
as:

whereas the ﬁeld intensity transforms covariantly, homogeneously as:

Aa = Aa(R)

U −

1AaU + U −

1∂aU

→

If now there exists a representation in which Aa is zero, then in this representation Fab
is also zero (by equation (1.99) ). Now, in a U -transformed representation (which can be
chosen to be completely general), one ﬁnds that

U = U (R)

Fab

→

U −

1FabU

Aa

→

U −

1∂aU

(1.109)

(1.110)

(1.111)

(1.112)

is zero, but not the second. Thus Aa is not
since the ﬁrst term in equation (1.110)
zero. However, the transformed Fab has no such inhomogeneous term (see equation
(1.111) ) and therefore, in the transformed representation Fab = 0 and this is true
in all representations, i.e., generally true. The crucial assumption was that there is a
representation in which Aa are all zero, and this holds in any diabatic representation
(where the electronic functions ζk(r, R) are independent of R). Then also derivative
matrices, deﬁned in equation (1.92) , are zero and so are the potentials Aa depending
linearly on the derivative matrices. On the other hand, the possibility of a diabatic set
is rigorously true only for a full electronic set. The existence of such a set is thus a
(suﬃcient) condition for the vanishing of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld intensity tensor Fab.

1.5.6 General Implications

The foregoing indicate that there are three alternative ways to represent the combined
ﬁeld in the degrees of freedom written as r, R.

1. By starting with a Lagrangean having the full symmetry, including that under
local gauge transformations, and solving for Ψ(r, R) (this being a solution of the
corresponding Schr¨odinger equation in the variables r, R). The solutions can then
be expanded as in equation (1.90) , utilizing the full electronic set (the ﬁrst factor
on the sum equation (1.90) ), or, for that matter, employing any other full electronic
set.

2. Projecting the nuclear solutions χk(R) on the Hilbert space of the electronic states
ζk(r, R) and working in the projected Hilbert space of the nuclear coordinates R.
The equation of motion (the nuclear Schr¨odinger equation) is shown in equation
(1.91) and the Lagrangean in equation (1.96) . In either expression, the terms with
τ k
bm represent couplings between the nuclear wave functions χk(R) and χm(R), i.e.
(virtual) transitions (or admixtures) between the nuclear states. (These may rep-
resent transitions also for the electronic states, which would get expressed in ﬁnite
electronic lifetimes.) The expression for the transition matrix is not elementary,
since the coupling terms are of a derivative type.

Now the Lagrangean associated with the nuclear motion is not invariant under
a local gauge transformation. For this to be the case the Lagrangean needs to
include also an ”interaction ﬁeld”. This ﬁeld can be represented either as a vector

49

ﬁeld (actually a four-vector, familiar from electromagnetism), or as a tensorial,
Yang-Mills type ﬁeld. Whatever the form of the ﬁeld, there are always two parts
to it. First, the ﬁeld induced by the nuclear motion itself, secondly an ”externally
induced ﬁeld”, actually produced by some other particles r′, R′ , which are not part
of the original formalism. (At our convenience, we could include these and then
these would be part of the extended coordinates r, R. The procedure would then
result in the appearance of a potential interaction, but not having the ”ﬁeld”.) At
a ﬁrst glance, the ﬁeld (whether induced internally or externally) is expected be a
Yang-Mills type tensorial ﬁeld since the system is non-Abelian, but here we meet
a surprise. When the couplings τ k
bm are of the derivative form shown in equation
(1.92) and when a complete set is taken for the electronic states ζk(r, R), then
the Yang-Mills ﬁeld intensity tensor F bc
induced by the r, R system vanishes and
the induced ﬁeld is a ”pure gauge ﬁeld”. Just as the induced 4-vector potential in
the Abelian case can be transformed away by a choice of gauge, so also can the
τ k
bm interaction terms. (See our previous proof. This shows that the vanishing of
the Yang-Mills tensor is the condition for the possibility to transform away the
interaction term.) This serves as a reminder that with choice of a full electronic
set, the solutions Ψ(r, R) are exact and there is no residual interaction between
diﬀerent Ψ(r, R)’s. Such interaction can, of course, be externally induced by an
”external” Yang-Mills ﬁeld intensity tensorF bc
. This is rooted, as before, in r′, R′,
and it could be got rid oﬀ by including these in the Hamiltonian.

a

a

3. There is ﬁnally the case that the electronic set ζk(r, R) is not a complete set.
Then, neither Ψ(r, R) in equation (1.90) , nor the nuclear equation (1.91) is exact.
Moreover, the truncated Lagrangean in equation (1.96) is not exact either and this
shows up by its not possessing a full symmetry (namely, lacking invariance under
local gauge transformation). We can (and should) remedy this by introducing
a Yang-Mills ﬁeld, which is not now a pure gauge ﬁeld. This means that the
internally induced Yang-Mills ﬁeld cannot be transformed away by a (local) gauge
transformation and that it brings in (through the back door, so to speak) the eﬀect
of the excluded electronic states on the nuclear states, these being now dynamically
coupled between themselves.

At this stage, it would be too ambitious to extrapolate the implications of the above
molecular theory for to elementary particles and forces but, by analogy with the fully
worked out molecular model and disregarding any complications due to the fully rel-
ativistic covariance, one might argue that particle states are also eigenstates of some
operators (”hamiltonians”) and constitute full sets. Interactions between diﬀerent parti-
cles (leptons, muons, etc.) exist and when these interactions (in their minimal form) are
incorporated in the formalism, one gets exact eigenstates (and at this stage, as yet, no
interaction ﬁelds ). It is only when one truncates the particle state-manifolds to ﬁnite
subsets, which may have some internal symmetry (as the SU (2) multiplets: ”neutron,
proton”, or ”electron, neutrino”), that one ﬁnds that one has to pay some price for the
approximation involved in this truncation. Namely, the Lagrangean loses its original
gauge-invariance, which is the formal reﬂection of the fact that the original interaction
ﬁeld is not fully accounted for in the truncated representation. To remedy both the for-
mal deﬁciency and the neglect of part of the interaction, one has to introduce some new
forces (electromagnetic, or Yang-Mills types and possibly others). These do both jobs.

Moreover, if the molecular analogy is further extended, these residual forces play a
further role, in addition to the two already mentioned (namely, restoring formal invari-
ance and reinstating the missed interaction). They bring in extra degrees of freedoms

50

(e.g., photons), which act on the particles (but, supposedly, not between themselves).
(In a vernacular locution, the tail that was wagged by the dog, can also wag the dog.)
In the consistent scheme that we describe here, these extra degrees of freedom are illu-
sory in that the residual forces are only convenient expressions of the presence of some
other particles, and would be eliminated by including these other particles in a broader
scheme. Evidently, the above description steers clear of ﬁeld theory and is not relativistic
(covariant). These, as well as other shortcomings that need to be supplied, require us to
stop our speculations at this stage.

1.5.7 An Extended (Suﬃciency) Criterion for the Vanishing of

the Tensorial Field

We deﬁne the ﬁeld intensity tensor Fbc as a function of a so far undetermined vector
operator X = Xb and of the partial derivatives ∂b:

Fbc mn(X) = ∂bXc mn

∂cXb mn

[Xb mkXc kn

Xc mkXb kn]

−
(The summation convention for double indices, e.g. k in the above, is assumed, as before.
However, we no longer make distinction between covariant and contravariant sets.) We
set ourselves the task to ﬁnd anti-hermitean operators Xb such that

−

−

(1.113)

Fbc mn(X) = 0

(1.114)

The matrix elements are given by:

Xb km :=< m

Xb
|

n >:=
|

drζm(r, R)Xbζn(r, R)

(1.115)

Z
i.e., the brackets represent integration over the electron coordinate r. The ζm(r, R) are
a real orthonormal set for any ﬁxed R. By anti-hermiticity of the derivative operator ∂b,
we have already noted that

−
Now (with ∂b designating a diﬀerential that operates to the right until it encounters a
closing bracket symbol) one ﬁnds that

< m

∂b
|

n >=
|

< n

∂b
|

m >
|

(1.116)

∂b < m

Xc
|

Xc
n >=< (∂bm)
|
|

n > + < m
|

∂b(Xc
|

n) >
|

(1.117)

and, further, that

∂bXc mn
−
= < (∂bm)
Xc
|
+ Commut.

∂cXb mn
n >
|

−

where we designate:

Xb
< (∂cm)
|

n > + < m
|

Xc(∂bn) >
|

−

< n

Xb(∂cm) >
|

(1.118)

[∂bXc
|
Subtracting in the ﬁrst four terms from the X’s the derivatives and adding to compensate,
we have for equation (1.118)

n >
∂cXb]
|

Commut.

(1.119)

< m

≡

−

= < (∂bm)
(Xc
|
(Xb
< n
|

−
−
+ Commut.

∂c)
(Xb
< (∂cm)
n >
|
−
−
|
(∂cn) >
(∂cm) > + < (∂bm)
∂b)
|
|

(Xc
n > + < m
∂b)
|
−
|
(∂bn) >
< (∂cm)
|

−

−

(∂bn) >=
∂c)
|

(1.120)

51

We have ignored a term < m
n >, which is zero by the commutativity
∂b∂c)
|
of derivatives. The crucial step is now, as in [48] and in other later derivations, the
evaluation of the ﬁfth and sixth terms by insertion of
(which is the unity
operator, when k is summed over a complete set)

k >< k
|

(∂c∂b
|

−

|

(∂cn) >
< (∂bm)
|
= < (∂bm)
k >< k
|
∂b
=
|

< (∂cm)
(∂bn) >
|
n >
|
∂c
|
where equation (1.116) has been used. We replace any derivative ∂ by ∂
compensate, so as to get for equation (1.121) the expression

n >
∂b
k >< k
< (∂cm)
|
|
|
n >
∂b
k >< k
∂c
|
|
|
|

−
∂c
|
k >< k
|

n > + < m
|

< m

−

−

(1.121)

X and

−

= < m

+ < m
+ < m

+ < m

n >
|

∂b
|
Xb
|
∂b
|
Xb
|

k >< k
Xc
∂c
−
|
|
Xc
k >< k
∂c
−
|
|
k >< k
Xc
Xb
|
−
|
n >
Xc
k >< k
|
|
|

Xb
−
n >
|
n >
|

−
−
< m

−

−

< m
Xc
|
∂c
|
k >< k
|

∂c
|
k >< k
|
Xc
−

k >< k
Xc
|
Xb
∂b
−
|
Xb
k >< k
|
|
Xb
|

n >
|

−
< m
< m
Xc
|

∂b
|
n >
|
n >
|

Xb

n >
|

−

We now put

Xb = ∂b + fb(R)

where the function fb(R) is a c-number (not an operator) and can be taken outside
brackets (where the integration variable is r). Then we ﬁnd that ﬁrst three lines in
equation (1.122) cancel and so do the four matrix elements in equation (1.120) (involving
∂c
Xb). The surviving contributions to the right hand side of equation (1.118) are, ﬁrst,
the last line of equation (1.122) , which is nothing else than the square brackets in the
expression equation (1.113) for the ﬁeld intensity tensor and, secondly, the ”Commut.”
term in equation (1.118) , deﬁned in the line following equation (1.118) . For this term
to vanish for all values of n, m , we require that:

−

∂bXc

∂cXb = 0

−

fb(R) = ∂bG(R)

or, in view of equation (1.123) , that the function fb(R) be the gradient of a scalar G(R)

In conclusion, we have shown that the non-Abelian gauge-ﬁeld intensity tensor Fbc(X)

shown in equation (1.113) vanishes when:

1. the electronic set is complete, and

2. the X operator has the form Xb = ∂b + ∂bG(R)

It will be recognized that this generalizes the result proved by Baer in [48]. Though
that work did establish the validity of the curl-condition for the derivative operator as
long as some 25 years ago and the validity is nearly trivial for the second term taken
separately, the same result is not self-evident for the combination of the two terms, due
to the non-linearity of F (X). An important special case is when G(R) = R2/2. Then

Xb = ∂b + Rb

(1.126)

and the last expression is recognized as a multiple of the creation operator a+
b . This
result paves the way for second-quantized or ﬁeld theoretic treatments. An additional
extension is to the time derivative operator, appropriate when the electronic states are

52

(1.122)

(1.123)

(1.124)

(1.125)

time dependent. This extension is elementary (though this has not been noted before),
since the key relation that leads to the vanishing of the ﬁeld intensity, Fbc = 0, is equation
(1.116) , and this also holds when the subscript b stands for the time variable. What
makes this result of special interest is the way that it provides an extension of the results
to relativistic theories, in particular to a combination of Hamiltonians that (for the
electron) is the Dirac Hamiltonian and (for the nuclear coordinates) is the Schr¨odinger
Hamiltonian.

1.5.8 Observability of Molecular States in a Hamiltonian Formal-

ism

We now describe the relation between a purely formal calculational device, like a gauge
transformation that merely admixes the basis states, and observable eﬀects.

Let us start, for simplicity, with a Hamiltonian H(r, R) for two types of particles.
The particles can have similar or very diﬀerent masses, but for clarity of exposition we
continue to refer to the two types of particle as electrons (r) and nuclei (R). As before, we
posit solutions of the time independent Schr¨odinger equation that have the form shown
in equation (1.90) but, for completeness, we attach an energy label e to each solution:

Ψe(r, R) =

ζk(r, R)χe

k(R)

(e = 0, 1 . . .)

(1.127)

k
X

The electronic factor in the sum ζk(r, R) arises from the familiar Born-Openheimer elec-
tronic Hamiltonian deﬁned for a ﬁxed R. Since this Hamiltonian is independent of the
nuclear set χe
k(R), it does not carry the e-label. As is well known, with each k there is
associated a potential surface Vk(R) (the eigen-energies of the electronic Hamiltonian).
Therefore by holding the nuclear positions ﬁxed for a suﬃciently long time and choosing
an excitation wave-length appropriate to Vk(R), it is possible to excite into any of the
mutually orthogonal electronic states, ζk(r, R). The dependence of these functions on
both of their variables can therefore be experimentally obtained. Turning now to the
nuclear equation, equation (1.91) above, when the derivative terms are excluded, this
equation yields the nuclear set χe
k for any
given diagonal Vk. The set χe
k(R) is orthogonal for diﬀerent e’s and the same k, but not
orthogonal for diﬀerent k’s and the same e (say, the lowest energy e = 0) or diﬀerent e’s.
Returning to equation (1.127) , it is clear that we can select any stationary eigen-state
Ψe(r, R) of the combined system by exciting with the proper wavelength for a suﬃciently
long time (in this case, of course, without constraint on R). Thus, the dependence of any
of these superpositions on the two variables r, R can also be ascertained and Ψe(r, R)
thereby operationally obtained. By computing the projections

k(R) with a set of (constant) eigen-energies Ee

Ψe(r, R) >
< ζk(r, R)
|
(in which both factors have been experimentally determined) we obtain the nuclear co-
factors χe
[See again equation (1.127) .] Actually, one could have written, in-
stead of equation (1.127) , a diﬀerent superposition, sometimes called the ”crude Born-
Oppenheimer” wave-function:

(1.128)

k(R).

Ψe(r, R) =

ζk(r, R0)χe

k(R

R0)
|

k
X

(e = 0, 1 . . .)

(1.129)

in which the electronic state refers to a ﬁxed nuclear position R0 rather than to all val-
ues of the nuclear coordinate. This electronic state can be operationally obtained in a

53

k(R

manner similar to, but actually more simple, than that which has already been proposed
to obtain ζk(r, R) in equation (1.127) , namely, by exciting at a wavelength correspond-
ing to Vk(R0) and probing the r-dependence of ζk(r, R0). Determining Ψe(r, R) as
Ψe(r, R) > we again obtain (gedanken-
before and forming the projection < ζk(r, R0)
|
experimentally) the nuclear factors χe
R0). While this procedure is legitimate (and
|
even simpler than the previous), it suﬀers from the more problematic convergence of the
superposition (1.129) in comparison to (1.127). One could next try equation (1.127) with
a truncated superposition, say involving only N summand terms (in practice N = 2 or 3
are common), rather than an inﬁnite number of terms. The electronic functions ζk(r, R)
(k = 1, . . . , N ) can be determined as before, and so can be the associated nuclear factors
χe
k(R), but here one risks to come upon inconsistencies, when from the observationally
obtained full wave function Ψe(r, R) one computes the overlaps < ζk(r, R)
Ψe(r, R) >
|
for any k above N . Then the truncated sum on the right hand side vanishes, while the
computed overlap on the left hand side will in general be non-zero. In a sense it may
be said that it is this inconsistency that the introduction of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld tries to
resolve. The resulting eigen state Ψe(r, R) is an ”entangled state”, in the terminology of
measurement theory [242]. While there appears to be no problem in principle to extract
by experiment any ζk(r, R) (as already indicated), the question arises whether one can
put the nuclear part into any particular k-state χe
k(R). This does not appear possible for
the form in equation (1.127) and the source of the diﬃculty may again be the presence
of derivatives in the nuclear equation. Can one select some observable nuclear set? It
turns out that the set φe

h(R) in the transformed eigen state

Ψe(r, R) =

ζk(r, R)[G(R)−

1]khφe

h(R)

(e = 0, 1 . . .)

(1.130)

kh
X

is observable. The matrix G(R) is the gauge factor introduced in equation (1.104) . The
1 is independent of R.
product ζk(r, R)G(R)−
[Recall that G(R) is identical with the
ADT matrix A]. Then φe
h(R) can be selected by exciting an e-state such as in equation
(1.128) and then selecting one of the r states. The coeﬃcient of the selection will be
(apart from a phase factor) the nuclear state φe

h(R).

However, this procedure depends on the existence of the matrix G(R), (or of any
pure gauge), which predicates the expansion in equation (1.90) for a full electronic set.
Operationally, this means the pre-selection of a full electronic set in equation (1.129) .
When the pre-selection is only to a partial, truncated electronic set, then the relaxation
to the truncated nuclear set in equation (1.128) will not be complete. Instead, the now
truncated set nuclear in equation (1.128) will be subject to a Yang-Mills force F . It is not
our concern to fully describe the dynamics of the truncated set under a Yang-Mills ﬁeld,
except to say (as we have already done above) that it is the expression of the residual
interaction of the electronic system on the nuclear motion.

1.5.9 An Interpretation

As shown in equation (1.92) , the gauge ﬁeld Ab
c is simply related to the non-adiabatic
coupling elements τ k
in
equation (1.90) ), Fbc = 0. This important results seems to have been ﬁrst established
[In the original formulation of [48] only the
by [48] and was later rederived by others.
contracted form of the ﬁeld Ab

bm. For an inﬁnite set of electronic adiabatic states (N =

∞

c (appearing in the deﬁnition of F )
c(tb)k
m

cm = Ab

Ak

enters. This has the form

(1.131)

(1.132)

Ak

cm = τ k

cm(R)

54

If the intermediate summations are over a complete set, then

(Fbc)k

m = F a

bc(ta)k

m = 0]

(1.133)

This result extends the original theorem [48] and is true due to the linear independence
of the t-matrices [69].] The meaning of the vanishing of F is that, if χk(R) is the partner
of the electronic states spanning the whole Hilbert space, there is no indirect coupling
(via a gauge-ﬁeld) between the nuclear states; the only physical coupling being that
between the electronic and nuclear coordinates, which is given by the potential energy
part of H(r, R). When the electronic N -set is only part of the Hilbert space (e.g., N
is ﬁnite), then the underlying electron-nuclei coupling gets expressed by an additional,
residual coupling between the nuclear states. Then F a
= 0 and the Lagrangean has to
be enlarged to incorporate these new forces.

bc 6

[We further make the following tentative conjecture (probably valid only under re-
stricted circumstances, e.g., minimal coupling between degrees of freedom): In Quantum
Field Theories, too, the Yang Mills residual ﬁelds, A and F , arise because the particle
states are truncated (e.g., the proton-neutron multiplet is an isotopic doublet, without
consideration of excited states). Then, it is within the truncated set that the residual
ﬁelds reinstate the neglected part of the interaction. If all states were considered, then
eigenstates of the form shown in equation (1.90) would be exact and there would be no
need for the residual interaction negotiated by A and F .]

55

1.6 Lagrangeans in Phase-Modulus Formalism

1.6.1 Background to the Non-Relativistic and Relativistic Cases

The aim of this section is to show how the modulus-phase formulation, which is the
keytone of our Chapter, leads very directly to the equation of continuity and to the
Hamilton-Jacobi equation. These equations have formed the basic building blocks in
Bohm’s formulation of non-relativistic Quantum Mechanics [320]. We begin with the non-
relativistic case, for which the simplicity of the derivation has mainly pedagogical merits,
but then we go over to the relativistic case that involves new results, especially regarding
the topological phase. Our conclusions (presented in the penultimate subsection) are
that, for a broad range of commonly encountered situations, the relativistic treatment
will not aﬀect the presence or absence of the Berry-phase that arises from the Schr¨odinger
equation.

The earliest appearance of the non-relativistic continuity equation is due to Schr¨odin-
ger himself [321, 2], obtained from his time-dependent wave-equation. A relativistic
continuity equation (appropriate to a scalar ﬁeld and formulated in terms of the ﬁeld
amplitudes) was found by Gordon [322]. The continuity equation for an electron in the
relativistic Dirac theory [134, 323] has the well known form [324]:

where the four-current J ν is given by

∂νJ ν = 0

J ν = ¯ψγνψ

(The symbols in this equation are deﬁned below). It was shown by Gordon [325], and
further discussed by Pauli [104] that, by a handsome trick on the four-current, this can be
broken up into two parts J ν = J ν
(1) (each divergence-free), representing respectively
a conductivity current (“Leitungsstrom”):

(0) +J ν

J ν
(0) =

i
2mc {

−

[(¯h∂ν

i

e
c

−

Aν ) ¯ψ]ψ

¯ψ[(¯h∂ν + i

−

e
c

Aν)ψ]
}

and a polarization current [325]:

J ν
(1) =

i¯h
2mc

−

∂µ( ¯ψγµγνψ),

ν

= µ

Again, the summation convention is used, unless we state otherwise. As will appear
below, the same strategy can be used upon the Dirac Lagrangean density to obtain the
continuity equation and Hamilton-Jacobi equation in the modulus-phase representation.
Throughout, the space coordinates and other vectorial quantities are written either
in vector form ~x, or with Latin indices xk (k = 1, 2, 3), the time (t) coordinate is x0 = ct.
A four vector will have Greek-lettered indices, such as xν (ν = 0, 1, 2, 3) or the partial
derivatives ∂ν. m is the electronic mass, e the charge.

1.6.2 Non-Relativistic Electron

The phase-modulus formalism for non-relativistic electrons was discussed at length by
Holland [326], as follows:

The Lagrangean density

for the non-relativistic electron is written as

L

=

L

−

¯h2
2m

~
∇

ψ∗

ψ

~
∇

·

−

eV ψ∗ψ

ie¯h
2cm

−

~A

(ψ∗ ~
∇

ψ

·

~
∇

−

ψ∗ψ) +

i¯h(ψ∗ ˙ψ

˙ψ∗ψ)

(1.138)

−

1
2

56

(1.134)

(1.135)

(1.136)

(1.137)

6
Here dots over symbols designate time derivatives. If now the modulus a and phase φ
are introduced through

the Lagrangean density takes the form

ψ = aeiφ

=

L

−

¯h2
2m

[(~
∇

a)2 + a2(~
∇

φ)2]

−

ea2V +

e¯h
cm

a2 ~
∇

φ

·

~A

−

¯ha2 ∂φ
∂t

The variational derivative of this with respect to φ yields the continuity equation

(1.139)

(1.140)

(1.141)

δ
L
δφ

= 0

→

∂ρ
∂t

+ ~

∇ ·

(ρ~v) = 0

in which the charge density is deﬁned as: ρ = ea2 and the velocity is ~v = 1

−
Variationally deriving with respect to a leads to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation

m (¯h~
∇

φ

~A).

e
c

δ
L
δa

= 0

→

∂S
∂t

+

1
2m

S

(~
∇

−

e
c

~A)2 + eV =

¯h2
2a
∇
2ma

+

e2 ~A2
2mc2

(1.142)

in which the action is deﬁned as: S = ¯hφ. The right hand side of the above equation
contains the ”quantum correction” and the electromagnetic correction. These results are
elementary, but their derivation illustrates the advantages of using the two variables,
phase and modulus, to obtain equations of motion that are substantially diﬀerent from
the familiar Schr¨odinger equation and have straightforward physical interpretations [320].
The interpretation is, of course, connected to the modulus being a physical observable (by
Born’s interpretational postulate) and to the phase having a similar though somewhat
more problematic status. (The ”observability” of the phase has been discussed in the
literature by various sources, e.g. in [28] and, in connection with a recent development,
in [31, 33]. Some of its aspects have been reviewed in section 2 of this Chapter.)

Another possibility to represent the quantum mechanical Lagrangian density is using
a = eλ. In that particular representation the

the logarithm of the amplitude λ = ln a,
Lagrangean density takes the following symmetrical form:

= e2λ

L

¯h2
2m

{−

[(~
∇

λ)2 + (~
∇

φ)2]

−

¯h

∂φ
∂t −

eV +

e¯h
cm

φ

~
∇

·

~A
}

(1.143)

1.6.3 Similarities Between Potential Fluid Dynamics and Quan-

tum Mechanics

In writing the Lagrangean density of quantum mechanics in the modulus-phase repre-
sentation, equation (1.140) , one notices a striking similarity between this Lagrangean
density and that of potential ﬂuid dynamics (ﬂuid dynamics without vorticity) as repre-
sented in the work of Seliger and Whitham [327]. We recall brieﬂy some parts of their
work which are relevant and then discuss the connections with quantum mechanics. The
connection between ﬂuid dynamics and quantum mechanics of an electron was already
discussed by Madelung [328] and in Holland’s book [326]. However, the discussion by
Madelung refers to the equations only and does not address the variational formalism
which we discuss here.

If a ﬂow satisﬁes the condition of zero vorticity, i.e. the velocity ﬁeld ~v is such that
~v = 0, then there exists a function ν such that ~v = ~
ν. In that case one can describe
∇

~
∇ ×
the ﬂuid mechanical system with the following Lagrangean density:

= [

∂ν
∂t −

1
2

(~
∇

−

ν)2

−

L

ε(ρ)

Φ]ρ

−

(1.144)

57

in which ρ is the mass density, ε is the speciﬁc internal energy and Φ is some arbitrary
function representing the potential of an external force acting on the ﬂuid. Taking the
variational derivative with respect to ν and ρ, one obtains the following equations:

∂ρ
∂t
∂ν
∂t

+ ~

ν) = 0

(ρ~
∇
ν)2

(~
∇

∇ ·
1
2

−

=

h

Φ.

−

−

(1.145)

(1.146)

in which h = ∂(ρε)
∂ρ
equation, while the second is Bernoulli’s equation.

is the speciﬁc enthalpy. The ﬁrst of those equations is the continuity

Going back to the quantum mechanical system described by equation (1.140) , we
ˆρ = ma2. In terms of these new variables the

introduce the following variables ˆν = ¯hφ
m ,
Lagrangean density in equation (1.140) will take the form:

= [

∂ ˆν
∂t −

1
2

(~
∇

−

ˆν)2

−

L

¯h2
2m2

(~
∇

√ˆρ)2
ˆρ

e
m

−

V ]ˆρ

(1.147)

in which we assumed that no magnetic ﬁelds are present and thus ~A = 0. When compared
with equation (1.144) the following correspondence is noted:

ˆν

ν,

⇔

ρ,

ˆρ

⇔

¯h2
2m2

(~
∇

√ˆρ)2
ˆρ ⇔

ε,

e
m

V

Φ.

⇔

(1.148)

2
2m2

2

( ~
∇

√ ˆρ)
ˆρ

The quantum ”internal energy” ¯h
depends also on the derivative of the density,
unlike the ﬂuid case, in which internal energy is a function of the mass density only.
However, in both cases the internal energy is a positive quantity.

Unlike classical systems in which the Lagrangean is quadratic in the time derivatives
of the degrees of freedom, the Lagrangeans of both quantum and ﬂuid dynamics are linear
in the time derivatives of the degrees of freedom.

1.6.4 Electrons in the Dirac Theory

(Henceforth, for simplicity, the units c = 1, ¯h = 1 will be used, except at the end, when
the results are discussed.) The Lagrangean density for the particle is in the presence of
external forces

i
2

=

L

[ ¯ψγµ(∂µ + ieAµ)ψ

(∂µ

−

−

ieAµ) ¯ψγµψ]

m ¯ψψ

−

Here ψ is a four-component spinor, Aµ is a four-potential and the 4
given by

×

γ0 =

I
0

0
I

−

(cid:19)

γk =

0
σk

σk
0

(cid:18)

−

(cid:19)

where we have the 2

2 matrices

(cid:18)

×

(1.149)

4 matrices γµ are

(k = 1, 2, 3)

(1.150)

I =

σ2 =

1 0
0 1

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

0
i

(cid:19)
i
−
0

(cid:19)

σ1 =

(cid:18)
σ3 =

0
1

1
0

1
0

(cid:19)
0
1

(cid:18)

−

(cid:19)

(1.151)

58

Following [325] we substitute in the Lagrangean density, equation (1.149), from the Dirac
equations [324], namely, from

ψ =

γν(∂ν + ieAν)ψ

i
m

¯ψ =

i
m

−

(∂ν

−

ieAν) ¯ψγν

(1.152)

and obtain

=

(∂ν

1
m

L

−

ieAν) ¯ψγνγµ(∂µ + ieAµ)ψ

m ¯ψψ

(1.153)

−

We thus obtain a Lagrangean density, which is equivalent to equation (1.149)
for all
solutions of the Dirac equation, and has the structure of the non - relativistic Lagrangian
density, equation (1.140). Its variational derivations with respect to ψ and ¯ψ lead to the
solutions shown in equation (1.152), as well as to other solutions.
The Lagrangean density can be separated into two terms

=

0 +

1
L

L
according to whether the summation symbols ν and µ in (1.149) are equal or diﬀerent.
The form of

0 is

L

L

0 =

L

1
m

−

(∂µ

ieAµ) ¯ψ(∂µ + ieAµ)ψ + m ¯ψψ

(1.155)

Contravariant V µ and covariant Vν four-vectors are connected through the metric gµν =
diag (1,

1) by

1,

1,

−

−

−

V µ = gµνVν

(1.156)

(1.154)

The second term in equation (1.154) ,

1 will be shown to be smaller than the ﬁrst

in the near non-relativistic limit.

L

Introducing the moduli ai and phases φi for the four spinor components ψi (i =

1, 2, 3, 4), we note the following relations (in which no summations over i are implied):

ψi = aieiφi
¯ψi = γ0
¯ψiψi = a2

iiaie−
i γ0
ii

iφi

The Lagrangean density equation (1.153) rewritten in terms of the phases and moduli
takes a form that is much simpler (and shorter), than that which one would obtain by
substituting from equation (1.139) into equation (1.149) . It is given by

0 =

L

1
m

i
X

ii[∂νai∂νai + a2
γ0

i ((∂ν φi + eAν )(∂νφi + eAν)

m2)]

(1.158)

−

When one takes its variational derivative with respect to the phases φi, one obtains the
continuity equation in the form

(1.157)

(1.159)

The right hand side will be treated in a following subsection, where we shall see that
it is small in the nearly non-relativistic limit and that it vanishes in the absence of an
electromagnetic ﬁeld. The left hand side can be evaluated to give

0
δ
L
δφi

=

2
m

−

∂ν[a2

i (∂ν φi + eAν)]

2∂νJ ν
i

≡

(no summation over i)

(1.160)

0
δ
L
δφi

=

1
δ
L
δφi

−

59

The above deﬁned currents are related to the conductivity current by the relation:

J ν
(0) =

iiJ ν
γ0
i

i
X

(1.161)

Although the conservation of J ν
in [104], one should bear in mind that the present result is only approximate.

i separately is a stronger result than the result obtained

The variational derivatives of

0 with respect to the moduli ai give the following

equations:

0
δ
L
δai

=

2
m

−

[∂ν∂νai

ai((∂ν φi + eAν)(∂ν φi + eAν)

m2)]

(1.162)

−

The result of interest in the expressions shown in equation (1.160) and equation (1.162)
is that, although one has obtained expressions that include corrections to the non-
relativistic case, given in equation (1.141) and equation (1.142) , still both the continuity
equations and the Hamilton-Jacobi equations involve each spinor component separately.
To the present approximation there is no mixing between the components.

L

−

1.6.5 The Nearly Non-Relativistic Limit

In order to write the previously obtained equations in the nearly non-relativistic limit,
we introduce phase diﬀerences si that remain ﬁnite in the limit c

. Then

φi = γ0
ii(

mx0 + si),

∂0φi = γ0
ii(

m + ∂0si),

−

−
We reinstate the velocity of light c in this and in the next subsection, in order to appreciate
1 are neglected,
the order of magnitude of the various terms. When contributions from
the expression in equation (1.162) equated to zero gives the following equations, in which
the large (i = 1, 2) and small (i = 3, 4) components are separated.

L

(1.163)

→ ∞
~
φi = γ0
ii
∇

~
∇

si.

In the same manner we obtain the following equations from equation (1.160)

∂tsi +

1
2m

+

1
2mc2 [
−
(i = 1, 2)
1
2m

∂tsi +

+

1
2mc2 [
−
(i = 3, 4).

si

(~
∇
∂2
t ai
ai

si

(~
∇
∂2
t ai
ai

e
c

−

~A)2 + eA0 = ∇

2ai
2mai

+

e2
2mc2

~A2

+ (∂tsi)2 + 2eA0∂tsi + e2A2

e2 ~A2]

0 −

e)
(
−
c

−

~A)2 + (

e)A0 = ∇

+

2ai
2mai

e2
2mc2

~A2

+ (∂tsi)2 + 2(

e)A0∂tsi + e2A2

e2 ~A2]

0 −

−

−

∂tρi + ~
∇ ·
1
c2 ∂t[ρi(

(ρi~vi) =
∂tsi + eA0
m

)]

(i = 1, 2),

∂tρi + ~
∇ ·
1
c2 ∂t[ρi(

(ρi~vi) =

∂tsi + (
m

−

e)A0

)]

(i = 3, 4),

ρi = ma2
i ,

60

ρi = ma2
i ,

~vi =

~A

e
c

si

~
∇

−
m

si

~
∇

~vi =

(

e)
−
c

~A

−
m

(1.164)

(1.165)

(1.166)

(1.167)

The ﬁrst lines give the non-relativistic part of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation and the
continuity equation shown in equation (1.142) and equation (1.141) , while the second
0 are of the non-mixing type
lines contribute relativistic corrections. All terms from
between components. There are further relativistic terms, to which we now turn.

L

1.6.6 The Lagrangean-Density Correction Term

L

1 in equation (1.154) arises from terms in which µ

As noted above,
= ν. The cor-
responding contribution to the four-current was evaluated in [325, 104] and was shown
to yield the polarization current. Our result is written in terms of the magnetic ﬁeld ~H
and the electric ﬁeld ~E, as well as the spinor four-vector ψ and the vectorial 2
2 sigma
matrices given above in equation (1.151) .

×

1 =

L

e
mc

−

¯ψ( ~H

~σ)

·

I
0

0
I

ψ +

ie
mc

¯ψ( ~E

~σ)

·

0
I

I
0

ψ

(1.168)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)
These terms are analogous to those on p. 265 of [7]. It will be noted that the symbol c has
been reinstated as in the previous subsection, so as to facilitate the order of magnitude
estimation in the nearly non-relativistic limit. We now proceed based on equation (1.168)
as it stands, since the transformation of equation (1.168) to modulus and phase variables
and functional derivation gives rather involved expressions and will not be set out here.
0 we rewrite the latter in terms of the phase variables introduced

1 with

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

To compare
in equation (1.163) :

L

L

0 = 2

L

γ0
ii{−

1
2m

[(~
∇

ai)2 + a2

si)2]

i (~
∇

−

(γ0

iie)a2

i A0

a2
i

∂si
∂t }

−

+

i
X
2e
mc

i
X

a2
i

~
∇

si

·

~A + O(

1
c2 )

(1.169)

which contains terms independent of c as well as terms of the order O( 1

c ) and O( 1

c2 ).

In equation (1.168) , the ﬁrst, magnetic-ﬁeld term admixes diﬀerent components of the
spinors both in the continuity equation and in the Hamilton-Jacobi equation . However,
with the z-axis chosen as the direction of ~H, the magnetic-ﬁeld term does not contain
phases and does not mix component amplitudes. Therefore, there is no contribution
from this term in the continuity equations and no amplitude mixing in the Hamilton-
Jacobi equations . The second, electric-ﬁeld term is non-diagonal between the large and
small spinor components, which fact reduces its magnitude by a further small factor of
O(particle velocity/c). This term is therefore of the same small order O( 1
c2 ), as those
terms in the second line in equation (1.164) and in equation (1.166) that refer to the
upper components.

We conclude that in the presence of electromagnetic ﬁelds the components remain

unmixed, correct to the order O( 1

c ).

1.6.7 Topological Phase for Dirac Electrons

The topological (or Berry) phase [9, 78, 11]) has been discussed in previous sections of this
Chapter. The physical picture for it is that when a periodic force, slowly (adiabatically)
varying in time, is applied to the system then, upon a full periodic evolution, the phase
of the wave function may have a part that is independent of the amplitude of the force.
This part exists in addition to that part of the phase which depends on the amplitude
of the force and which contributes to the the usual, ”dynamic” phase. We shall now

61

6
discuss whether a relativistic electron can have a Berry phase when this is absent in
the framework of the Schr¨odinger equation, and vice versa.
(We restrict the present
discussion to the nearly non-relativistic limit, when particle velocities are much smaller
than c.)

The following lemma is needed for our result. Consider a matrix Hamiltonian h

coupling two states, whose energy diﬀerence is 2m:

h =

(cid:18)

m + E1cos(ωt + α)
E2sin(ωt)

E2sin(ωt)
E1cos(ωt + α)

m

−

−

(cid:19)

(1.170)

The Hamiltonian contains two ﬁelds, periodically varying in time, whose intensities E1
and E2 are non-zero. ω is their angular frequency, and is (in appropriate energy units)
assumed to be much smaller than the ﬁeld strengths. This ensures the validity of the
adiabatic approximation [33]. α is an arbitrary angle. It is assumed that initially, at
t = 0, only the component with the positive eigen-energy is present. Then after a full
revolution the initially excited component acquires or does not acquire a Berry phase
(i.e., returns to its initial value with a changed or unchanged sign) depending on whether
E1|
|
Proof: When the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation is solved under adiabatic condi-
tions, the upper, positive energy component has the coeﬃcient: the dynamic phase factor

is greater or less than m (=half the energy diﬀerence).

C, where

×

C = cos[

arctan(

1
2

E2 sin(ωt)
m + E1 cos(ωt + α)

)]

(1.171)

Tracing the arctan over a full revolution by the method described in section 4 of this
2 in equation (1.171) establishes our result. (The case
= m needs more careful consideration, since it leads to a breakdown of the

Chapter and noting the factor 1
that
adiabatic theorem. However, this case will be of no consequence for the results.)

E1|
|

L

[The ”two states” in equation (1.28)

We can now return to the Dirac equations, in which the time varying forces enter
through the four-potentials (A0, ~A).
refer now
to a large and to a small (positive- and negative-energy) component in the solution of
In the expressions (1.164-1.165)
the Dirac equation in the near nonrelativistic limit.]
0, there is no coupling
obtained for the phases si and arising from the Lagrangean
between diﬀerent components and therefore the small relativistic correction terms will
clearly not introduce or eliminate a Berry phase. However, terms in this section supply
the diagonal matrix elements in equation (1.28) . Turning now to the two terms in
equation (1.168) , the ﬁrst, magnetic ﬁeld term again does not admix the large and small
components, with the result that for either of these components previous treatments
based on the Schr¨odinger or the Pauli equations [323, 326] should suﬃce. Indeed, this
term was already discussed by Berry [9]. We thus need to consider only the second,
electric-ﬁeld term which admixes the two types of components. These are the source
of the oﬀ-diagonal matrix-elements in equation (1.28) . However, we have just shown
that in order to introduce a new topological phase, one needs ﬁeld strengths matching
the electronic rest energies, namely electric ﬁelds of the order of 1014V olt/cm.
(For
comparison we note that the electric ﬁeld that binds an electron in a hydrogen atom is
four orders of magnitudes smaller than this. Higher ﬁelds can also be produced in the
laboratory, but, in general, are not of the type that can be used to guide the motion of
a charged particle during a revolution.) As long as we exclude from our considerations
such enormous ﬁelds, we need not contemplate relativistically induced topological phases.
Possibly, there may be cases (e.g. many electron systems or magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects) that
are not fully covered by the model represented in equation (1.28) . Still, the latter model
should serve as an indicator for relativistic eﬀects on the topological phase.

62

1.6.8 What Have We Learned about Spinor Phases?

This part of our Chapter has shown that the use of the two variables, moduli and phases,
leads in a direct way to the derivation of the continuity and Hamilton-Jacobi equations
for both scalar and spinor wave functions. For the latter case we show that the dif-
ferential equations for each spinor component are (in the nearly non-relativistic limit)
approximately decoupled. Because of this decoupling (mutual independence) it appears
that the reciprocal relations between phases and moduli derived in section 3 hold to
a good approximation for each spinor component separately, too. For velocities and
electro-magnetic ﬁeld strengths that are normally below the relativistic scale, the Berry
phase obtained from the Schr¨odinger equation (for scalar ﬁelds) will not be altered by
consideration of the Dirac equation.

1.7 Conclusion

This Chapter has treated a number of properties that arise from the presence of degener-
acy in the electronic part of the molecular wave fuction. The existence of more than one
electronic state in the superposition that describes the molecular state demands attention
to the phase relations between the diﬀerent electronic component-amplitudes. Looked
at from a diﬀerent angle, the phase relations are the consequence of the complex form
of the molecular wave functions, which is grounded in the time dependent Schr¨odinger
equation. Beside reviewing numerous theoretical and experimental works relating to the
phase-properties of complex wave functions, the following general points have received
emphasis in this Chapter: (1) Relative phases of components that make up, by the su-
perposition principle, the wave function are observable. (2) The analytic behavior of
the wave function in a complex parameter-plane is in several instances traceable to a
physics-based ”equation of restriction”. (3) Phases and moduli in the superposition are
connected through reciprocal integral relations. (4) Systematic treatment of zeros and
singularities of component amplitudes are feasible by a phase tracing method. (5) The
molecular Yang-Mills ﬁeld is conditioned by the ﬁniteness of the basic Born-Oppenheimer
set. Detailed topics are noted in the Abstract.

Acknowledgments

The authors are indebted to Prof. Michael Baer for many years of exciting collab-
oration, to Dr. B. Halperin for advice, to Prof. Mark Pere’lman for discussion and
permission to quote from his preprint (”Temporal Magnitudes and Functions of Scatter-
ing Theory”), to Prof. Shmuel Elitzur for suggesting the approach leading to ”Alternative
Derivation” in section 5 and to Prof. Igal Talmi for an inspiration [329].

63

Bibliography

[1] M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill,

New York, 1966)

[2] J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg, The Historical Development of Quantum Theory

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987) Vol. 5, Part 2

[3] T.Y. Cao, Conceptual Development of 20th Century Field Theory (University Press,

Cambridge, 1997)

[4] P.A.M. Dirac, Proc Roy. Soc. (London) A 112 661 (1926)

[5] E.P. Wigner, The Place of Consciousness in Modern Physics in C. Muses and A.M.
Young (editors), Consciousness and Reality (Outerbridge and Lazzard, New York,
1972); reprinted in E.P.Wigner, Philosophical Reﬂections and Syntheses (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1997)

[6] M. Steiner, The Applicability of Mathematics as a Philosophical Problem (Harvard

University Press, Cambridge Mass.,1998)

[7] P.A.M. Dirac The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Clarendon Press, Oxford,

1958)

[8] Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 115 485 (1959)

[9] M.V. Berry, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 392 45 (1984)

[10] Y. Aharonov and J. Anandan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 1593 1987

[11] S.R. Jain and A.K. Pati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 650 (1980)

[12] C.M. Cheng and P.C.W. Fung, J. Phys.A 22 3493 (1989)

[13] D.J. Moore and G.E. Stedman, J.Phys. A 23 2049 (1990)

[14] A.K. Pati, Phys. Rev. A 52 2576 (1995)

[15] I.Sh. Averbukh and N.F. Perel’man, Soviet Phys. Uspekhi 34 572 (1991)

[16] I. Sh. Averbukh, M. Shapiro, C. Leichtle and W.P. Schleich, Phys. Rev. A 59 2163

[17] R. Schuster, E. Buks, M. Heiblum, D. Mahalu, V. Umansky and H. Shtrikman,

Nature 385 417 (1997)

[18] C. Leichtle, W.P. Schleich, I. Averbukh and M. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 1418

(1999)

(1998)

64

[19] T.C. Weinacht, J. Ahn and P.H. Buchsbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 5508 (1998)

[20] G. Nogues, A. Rauschenbeutel, S. Osnaghi, M. Brune, J.M. Raimond and S. Haroche,

Nature 400 239 (1999)

[21] G.C.Ghirardi, A.Rimini and T.Weber, Phys. Rev. D34 470(1986)

[22] D.V. Averin, Nature 398 748 (1999)

[23] L. Grover, The Sciences 39 27 (1999, No.2)

[24] N.F. Ramsey, Molecular Beams (Oxford University Press, New York, 1985)

[25] M.W Noel and C.R. Stroud, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 751252 (1995)

[26] H.Goldstein, Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading Mass. 1959)

[27] M.M. Nieto, Physica Scripta T 48 5 (1993)

[28] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (University Press,

Cambridge, 1995) section 3.1

[29] R. Englman, A.Yahalom and M. Baer, J. Chem. Phys.109 6550 (1998) (1999)

[30] R. Englman, A. Yahalom and M. Baer, Phys. Lett. A 251 223 (1999)

[31] R. Englman and A. Yahalom, Phys. Rev. A 60 1802 (1999)

[32] R. Englman, A.Yahalom and M. Baer, Eur. Phys. J. D 8 1 (2000)

[33] R. Englman and A.Yahalom, Phys. Rev. B 61 2716 (2000)

[34] R. Englman and A.Yahalom, Found. Phys. Lett. 13 329 (2000)

[35] R. Englman and A.Yahalom, The Jahn Teller Eﬀect: A Permanent Presence in the
Frontiers of Science in M.D. Kaplan and G. Zimmerman (editors), Proceedings of
the NATO Advanced Research Workshop, Boston, Sep. 2000 (Kluwer, Dordrecht,
2001)

[36] M. Baer and R. Englman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 335 85 (2001)

[37] A. Mebel, M. Baer, R. Englman and A. Yahalom, J.Chem. Phys. 115 3673 (2001)

[38] R. Englman, A.Yahalom and M. Baer, Int. J. Quant. Chem. (In press)

[39] L.A. Khalﬁn, Soviet Phys. JETP 8 1053 (1958) [J. Exp.Teor. Fyz. (USSR) 33 1371

(1957)]

[40] M.E. Perel’man and R. Englman, Modern Phys. Lett. B 14 907 (2000)

[41] M.N. Scully and M.S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics (University Press, Cambridge, 1997)

[42] W.H. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 55 3146 (1971)

[43] J.-T. Hwang and P. Pechukas, J. Chem. Phys. 67 4640 (1977)

[44] E.E. Nikitin, J. Chem. Phys. 102 6768 (1997)

[45] C. Zhou, E.E. Nikitin and H. Nakamura, J. Chem. Phys. 104 7059 (1998)

65

[47] I.B. Bersuker and V.Z. Polinger, Vibronic Interactions in Molecules and Crystals

[46] I.B. Bersuker, Chem. Rev. 101 1067 (2001)

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989)

[48] M. Baer, Chem. Phys. Lett. 35 112 (1975)

[49] V. Sidis in M. Baer and C.Y. Ng (editors), State Selected and State-to-State Ion-
Molecule Reaction Dynamics, Part 2, Theory (Wiley, New York, 1992); Adv. Chem.
Phys. 82 73 (2000)

[50] T. Pacher, L.S. Cederbaum and H. Koppel, Adv. Chem. Phys. 84, 293 (1993)

[51] D.R. Yarkony, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 985 (1996); Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 31, 511 (1998)

[52] H. Thummel, M. Peric, S.D. Peyerimhoﬀ amd R.J. Buenker, Z. Phys. D 13 307

(1989)

[53] H. Koppel and R. Meiswinkel, Z. Phys. D 32 153 (1994)

[54] D.R. Yarkony, Acc. Chem. Res. 31 511 (1998)

[55] H. Koizumi and I.B. Bersuker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 3009 (1999)

[56] A. M. Mebel, M. Baer and S.H. Lin, J. Chem. Phys. 112 10703 (2000)

[57] A. M. Mebel, M. Baer and S.H. Lin, J. Chem. Phys. 114 5109 (2001)

[58] J. Avery, M. Baer and G.D. Billing (2001, to be published)

[59] M.S. Child, Adv. Chem. Phys. (This volume)

[60] M. Baer, R. Englman and A.J.C. Varandas, Mol. Phys. 97 1185 (1999)

[61] M. Baer, A.J.C. Varandas and R. Englman, J. Chem. Phys. 111 9493 (1999)

[62] A.Yahalom and R. Englman, Phys. Lett. A 272 166 (2000)

[63] M. Born and R.J. Oppenheimer, Ann. Physik (Leipzig) 89 457 (1927)

[64] M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices (Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1951) Appendix VII

[65] D.R. Bates and R. McCarroll , Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 245 175 (1958)

[66] N.F. Mott and H.S.W. Massey, The Theory of Atomic Collisions (Oxford University

Press, London, 1965)

[67] F.T. Smith, Phys. Rev. 115 349 (1960); ibid 179 111 (1969)

[68] C.N. Yang and R. Mills, Phys. Rev. 96 191 (1954)

[69] R. Jackiw, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52 661 (1980)

[70] C. Itzykson and J.-B. Zuber, Quantum Field Theories (McGraw Hill, New York,

1980)

[71] M.E. Peskin and D.V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (Perseus

Books, Reading Mass., 1995) Chapter 14

66

[72] S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields (University Press, Cambridge, 1996)

Vol. 2 Chapter 15

[73] R. Englman, A. Yahalom and M. Baer, Intern. J. Quantum Chem.

[74] C.A. Mead, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 161 (1987)

[75] B. Zygelman, Phys. Lett. A 125 476 (1987)

[76] C.A. Mead and D.G. Truhlar, J.Chem. Phys. 70 2284 (1979)

[77] J. Moody, A. Shapere and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 893 (1986)

[78] A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (editors), Geometrical Phases in Physics (World Scien-

tiﬁc, Singapore, 1990)

[79] J. Moody, A. Shapere and F. Wilczek in A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (editors), Geo-

metrical Phases in Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1990)

[80] B. Zygelman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 256 (1990)

[81] Y. Aharonov, E. Ben-Reuven, S. Popescu and D. Rohrlich, Nucl. Phys. B 350 818

(1991)

[82] M.V. Berry in A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (editors), Geometrical Phases in Physics

(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1990) p.7

[83] M. Baer, Chem. Phys. Lett. (to appear)

[84] P. Brumer and M. Shapiro, Chem. Phys. Lett. 12 541 (1986)

[85] M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, Faraday Disc. Chem. Soc. 82 177 (1987)

[86] M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, J. Chem. Phys. 90 6179 (1989)

[87] M. Shapiro, J. Phys. Chem. 97 7396 (1993)

[88] T.J. Dunn, I.A. Walmsley and S. Mukamel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 884 (1995)

[89] R. Uberna, M. Khalil, R.M. Williams, J.M. Papanikolas and S. George, J. Chem.

Phys. 108 9259 (1998)

1418 (1998)

[90] C. Leichtle, W.P. Schleich, I.Sh. Averbukh and M. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80

[91] M. Shapiro, J. Phys. Chem. 102 9570 (1998)

[92] A. Zucchetti, W. Vogel, D.-G. Welsch and I.A. Walmsley, Phys. Rev. A 60 2716

[93] M. Shapiro, E. Frishman and P. Brumer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 1669 (2000)

[94] V. Blanchet, C. Nicole, M.-A. Bouchene and B. Girard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 2716

(1999)

(1997)

[95] T.C. Weinacht, J. Ahn and P.H. Buchsbaum, Nature 397 233 (1999)

[96] L.E.E. de Araujo, I.A. Walmsley and C.R. Stroud, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 955 (1998)

67

1992)

1980)

260 (2000)

282

[97] W.P. Schleich, Nature 397 207 (1999)

[98] H. Feshbach, K. Kerman and R.H. Lemmer, Ann. Phys. (NY) 41 230 (1967)

[99] J. Jortner and S. Mukamel in A.D. Buckingham and C.A. Coulson (editors), Intern.
Rev. Sci. Theoret. Chem., Phys. Chem. Ser. 2, Vol.1 (Butterworth, London, 1975)
p. 327

[100] R. Englman, Non-Radiative Decay of Ions and Molecules in Solids (North- Holland,

Amsterdam, 1979) p. 155

[101] H.D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

[102] S.F. Savitt (editor), Time’s Arrow Today, Recent Physical and Philosophical Work

on the Direction of Time (University Press, Cambridge, 1995)

[103] H. Weyl, Space, Time, Matter (Dover Books, New York, 1950); The Theory of

Groups and Quantum Mechanics (Dover Books, New York, 1950)

[104] W. Pauli, General Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

[105] W.E. Lamb, Physics Today 22 23 (April 1969)

[106] W. Gale , E. Guth and G.T. Trammel, Phys. Rev. 165 1434 (1968)

[107] A. Royer, Found. Physics 19 3 (1989) 3

[108] M. Baer and R. Englman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 265 105 (1997)

[109] R. Englman and M. Baer, J. Phys.:Condensed Matter 11 1059 (1999)

[110] Y. Guimare, B. Baseia, C.J. Villas-Boas and M.H.Y. Moussa, Phys. Lett. A 268

[111] J.W.S. Rayleigh The Theory of Sound Volume II (Dover, New York, 1945) section

[112] D.N. Klyshko, Physics - Uspekhi 36 1005-19 (1993)

[113] S. Pancharatnam, Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. A 44 247 (1956)

[114] G.N. Ramachandran and S. Ramaseshan in S. Flugge (editor), Handbuch de Physik

Vol. XXV.1 (Springer, Berlin, 1961) p.1

[115] H. Schmitzer, S. Klein and W. Dultz, Physica B 175 148 (1991)

[116] H. Schmitzer, S. Klein and W. Dultz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1530 (1993)

[117] M.V. Berry, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 18 15 (1985)

[118] G. Giavarini, E. Gozzi, D. Rohrlich and W.D. Thacker, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 22

3513 (1989)

[119] C. Brukner and A. Zeilinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 2599 (1997)

[120] Q.V. Lawande, S.V. Lawande and A. Joshi, Phys. Lett. A 251 164 (1999)

68

[121] J.H. Shapiro and S.R. Shepard, Phys. Rev. A 43 3795 (1991)

[122] M.L.M. Balisteri, J.P. Korterik, L. Kuipers and N.F. van Hulst, Phys. Rev. Lett.

85 294 (2000)

(1998)

[123] A. G. Wagh, V.C. Rakhecha, P. Fischer and A. Ioﬀe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 1992

[124] A. G. Wagh, G. Badurek, V.C. Rakhecha, R.J. Buchelt and A. Schricker, Phys.

Lett. A 268 209 (2000)

[125] K.A. Nugent, A. Paganin and T.E. Gureyev, Physics Today 54 No. 8, 27 (2001)

[126] P. Grangier, J.A. Levenson and J-P. Poizat, Nature 396 537 (1998)

[127] D. Kohler and L. Mandel in L. Mandel and E. Wolf (editors), Coherence and

Quantum Optics (Plenum, New York, 1973) p.387

[128] A. Vijay, R.E. Wyatt and G.D. Billing, J. Chem. Phys. 111 10 794 (1999)

[129] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H.J. Bernstein and P. Bertani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 58 (1994)

[130] J.W. Noh, A. Fougeres and L. Mandel, Physica Scripta T 48 29 (1993)

[131] S. Stenholm, Physica Scripta T 48 77 (1993)

[132] A Vourdas, Physica Scripta T 48 84 (1993)

[133] R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1983) p.140

[134] P.A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 114 243 (1927)

[135] F. London, Z. Physik, 37 915 (1926); 40 193 (1927)

[136] W.H. Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation (Wiley, London, 1973)

[137] L. Susskind and J. Glogower, Physics 1 49 (1964)

[138] D.T. Pegg and S.M. Barnett, Europhys. Lett. 8 463 (1988)

[139] N. Gronbech-Jensen, P.L. Christiansen and P.S. Ramanujam, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 6

2423 (1989)

[140] Yu. I . Vorontsov and Yu. A. Rembovsky, Phys. Lett. A 254 7 (1999)

[141] J.A. Vaccaro, D.T. Pegg and S.M. Barnett, Phys. Lett. A 262 483 (2000)

[142] Yu. I . Vorontsov and Yu. A. Rembovsky, Phys. Lett. A 262 486 (2000)

[143] A. Muller, Phys. Rev. A 57 731 (1998)

[144] Y. Aharonov and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. 158 1237 (1967)

[145] Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Phys. Rev. A 61 052108 (2000)

[146] M. Floissart in E.P. Wigner (editor) Dispersion Relations and their Connection

with Causality (Academic Press, New York, 1964) p. 1.

[147] K.E. Peiponen, E.M. Vertiainen and T. Asakura Dispersion, Complex Analysis and

Optical Spectroscopy. (Classical theory) (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999)

69

[148] J.S. Toll, Phys Rev. 104 1760 (1956)

[149] R.E. Burge, M.A. Fiddy, A.H. Greenaway and G. Ross, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London)

A 350 191 (1976)

Reading Mass., 1997) p. 192

[150] F.D. Peat, Inﬁnite Potential, The Life and Times of David Bohm (Addison- Wesley,

[151] W. Ehrenburg and R.E. Siday, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B 62 8 (1949)

[152] M. Peshkin, I. Talmi and L.J. Tassie, Ann. Phys. (NY) 12 426 (1960)

[153] B. Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 2167 (1983)

[154] M. Peshkin and A. Tonomura, The Aharonov Bohm Eﬀect (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

[155] T.T. Wu and C.N. Yang, Phys. Rev. D 12 3845 (1975)

[156] R. Englman, The Jahn-Teller Eﬀect in Molecules and Crystals (Wiley, Chichester,

1989)

1972)

[157] H.C. Longuet-Higgins, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 344 147 (1975)

[158] A.J. Stone, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 351 141 (1976)

[159] C.A. Mead and D.G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys. 70 2284 (1979)

[160] C.A. Mead, Chem. Phys. 49 23, 33 (1980)

[161] M.V. Berry, Physics Today 43 34 (1990)

[162] F.S. Ham, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 725 (1987)

[163] C.C. Chancey and M.C.M. O’Brien, The Jahn-Teller Eﬀect in C60 and other Icosa-

hedral Complexes (University Press, Princeton, 1997)

[164] J. Anandan, Phys. Lett. A 147 3 (1990)

[165] B. Kohler, Phys. Lett. A 237 195 (1998)

[166] L. Yang and F. Yan, Phys. Lett. A 265 326 (2000)

[167] N. Manini and F. Pistolesi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3067 (2000)

[168] D. E. Manolopoulos and M.S. Child, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 2223 (1999)

[169] Y. Hasegawa, R. Loidl, M. Baron, G. Badurek and M. Rauch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87

070401 (2001)

[170] J.C. Garrison and E.M. Wright, Phys. Lett. A 128 17781 (1988)

[171] Ch. Miniatura, C. Sire, J. Baudon and J. Belissard, Europhysics Lett. 13 199 (1990)

[172] Y.C. Ge and M.S. Child, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 2507 (1997)

[173] Y.C. Ge and M.S. Child, Phys. Rev. A 58 872 (1998)

[174] Z.-M. Bai, G.-Z. Chen and M.-L. Ge, Phys. Lett. A 262 137 (1999)

70

[175] R. S. Whitney and Y. Gefen, (Preprint, 2001)

[176] Y. Aharonov and B. Reznik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 490 (2000)

[177] J. M. Cervero, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 2095 (1999)

[178] P.M. Felker and A.H. Zewail, Adv. Chem. Phys. 70 265 (1988)

[179] P. Gaspard and I. Burghardt (editors) Chemical Reactions and their Control on
the Femtosecond Time Scale in Adv. Chem. Phys. 101 (Wiley, New York, 1997)

[180] D. Meshulach and Y. Silberberg, Nature 396 239 (1998); Phys. Rev. A 60 1287

[181] H. Rabitz, R. de Vivie-Riedle, M. Motzkus and K.-L.Kompa, Science 259 1581

[182] D. Zeidler, S. Frey, K.-L.Kompa and M. Motzkus, Phys. Rev. A 64 023420 (2001)

[183] F. Scherer, A.J. Ruggiero, M. Du, G.R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys. 93 856 (1990)

[184] D. J. Tannor, Design of Femtosecond Optical Pulse Sequences to Control Photo-
chemical Products in A.D. Bandrark (editor), Molecules in Laser Fields (Dekker,
New York, 1994)

[185] R.N. Dixon, D.W. Hwang, X.F. Yang, S. Harich, J.J. Lin and X. Yang, Science

285 1249 (1999)

[186] D. C. Clary, Science 285 1218 (199)

[187] J.E. Avron and J. Berger, Chem. Phys. Lett. 294 13 (1998)

[188] S. Adhikari and G. Billing, J. Chem. Phys. 107 6213 (1997)

[189] S. Adhikari and G. Billing, Chem. Phys. Lett. 284 31 (1998)

[190] S. Adhikari and G. Billing, J. Chem. Phys. 111 40 (1999)

[191] S. Zilberg and Y. Haas, J. Phys. Chem. A 103 2364 (1999).

[192] M. Baer, S.-H. Lin, A. Alijah, S. Adhikari and G.D. Billing, Phys. Rev. A 62 032506

[193] S. Adhikari, G.D. Billing, A. Alijah, S.-H. Lin and M. Baer, Phys. Rev. A 62 032507

[194] G.D. Billing and A. Kuppermann, Chem. Phys. Lett. 294 26 (1998)

[195] M. Shapiro, J. Chem. Phys. 103 1748 (1995); J. Phys. Chem. 100 7859 (1996)

[196] J. Bromage and C.R. Stroud, Jr., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 4963 (1999)

[197] J.H. Eberly, J.J. Sanchez-Mondragon and N.B. Narozhny, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44 1323

[198] I. Sh. Averbukh and N.F. Perel’man, Phys. Lett. A 139 449 (1989)

[199] I. Sh. Averbukh, M.J.J. Vrakking, D.M. Villeneuve and A. Stolow, Phys. Rev. Lett.

77 3518 (1996)

71

(1999)

(1993)

(2000)

(2000)

(1980)

[200] J. Jarzynski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 1264 (1995)

[201] E.J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 62 1544 (1975)

[202] M.F. Herman and E. Kluk, Chem. Phys. 91 27 (1984)

[203] D. Huber and E.J. Heller , J. Chem. Phys. 87 5302 (1987)

[204] K.G. Kay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 5190 (1999)

[205] I. C. Percival, Semiclassical Theory of Bound States in Adv. Chem. Phys. 36 1

(1977)

Oxford, 1991)

[206] W.M. Zhang, D.H. Feng and R. Gilmore, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 867-927 (1990)

[207] M.S. Child, Semiclassical Mechanics with Molecular Applications (Clarendon Press,

[208] V.P. Maslov and M.V. Fedoriuk, Semi-classical Approximations in Quantum Me-

chanics (Reidel, Boston, 1981)

[209] A.S. Davydov, Quantum Mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford 1965) Section 108

[210] R.D. Levine Quantum Mechanics of Molecular Rate Processes (Clarendon Press.

Oxford, 1969) section 2.8.1

[211] T.Y. Wu, Am. J. Phys., 26 568 (1958)

[212] K.R. Popper, Nature bf 177 538 (1956) ; ibid 178 382 (1956); ibid 179 1293 (1957)

[213] E.L. Hill and A. Grunbaum, Nature 179 1292 (1957)

[214] O. Costa de Beauregard, La Second Principe de la Science du Temps (De Seuil,

Paris, 1963)

[215] J.L. Lebowitz, Physics Today Sep. 1993 32 (1993) [Various responses in Physics

Today Nov. 1994 11 (1994)]

[216] J.J. Halliwell, J. Perez-Mercader and W.H. Zurek (editors), Physical Origin of Time

Asymmetry (University Press, Cambridge, 1994)

[217] L.S. Schulman, Time Arrows and Quantum Measurement (University Press, Cam-

[218] T. Banks, L. Susskind and M.E. Peskin, Nucl. Phys. B 244 125 (1984)

[219] G.P. Beretta, E.P. Gyftopoulos, J.L. Park and G.N. Hatsopoulos. Nuovo. Cim. 82B

bridge, 1997)

169 (1984)

[220] S. Gheorghiu- Svirshevski, Phys. Rev. A 63 022105 (2001); 63 054102 (2001)

[221] A. Bohm, I. Antoniou and P. Kielanowski, Phys. Letters, A 189 442 (1994)

[222] A. Bohm, Phys. Rev. A60 861 (1999)

[223] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice Hall, New York, 1952)

[224] E.P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 98 145 (1955)

72

[225] E. Pollak and W.H. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 115 (1984)

[226] E. Pollak. J. Chem. Phys. 83 1111 (1985)

[227] M.E. Perel’man, Kinetical Quantum Theory of Optical Dispersion (Mezniereba,

Tblisi, 1989) (In Russian)

[228] M.E. Perel’man, Soviet Phys. JETP 23 407 (1966); [J. Eksp. Teoret. Fyz. 50 613
(1966)]; Soviet Physics Doklady 14 772 (1970) [DAN SSSR 187 781-3 (1969)]

[229] R. Landauer and Th. Martin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66 217 (1994)

[230] D. Chauvat, O. Emile, F. Bretenaker and A. Le Floch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 71

[231] P. Debu , Europhysics News 31 5 (May/June 2000)

[232] Y. Aharonov and C.K. Au, Phys. Lett. A 86 269 (1981)

[233] T.E. Feuchtwang, E. Kazes, H. Grotch and P.H. Cutler, Physics Letters A 93 4

[234] F.A. Kaempﬀer, Concepts in Quantum Mechanics (Academic, New York 1965) p.

[235] P.A. Ozimba and A.S. Msezane, Chem. Phys. 246 87 (1999)

[236] W.D. Heuss, Eur. Phys. J. D 7 1 (1999)

[237] L.I. Schiﬀ, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955) Section 12

[238] A. Selloni, P. Carnevali, R. Car and M. Parinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 823 (1987)

[239] F. Ancilotti and F. Toigo, Phys. Rev. A 45 4015 (1992)

[240] R. Resta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 1800 (1998)

[241] A. Stern, Y. Aharonov and Y. Imry, Phys Rev. A 41 3436 (1990)

[242] J. von Neumann, The Mathematical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics (Dover,

New York, 1959)

[243] M.E. Perel’man, Soviet Phys. Doklady 14 772 (1969)[DAN SSR 187 781 (1969)]

[244] M.E. Perel’man, Soviet Phys. JETP 23 407 (1966) [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 50 613

[245] E.C. Titchmarsh, Introduction to the Theory of Fourier Integrals (Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1948) Chapter V

[246] C. Caratheodory, Theory of Functions (Chelsea, New York, 1958) Vol. I, Chapter

[247] R. Resta, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66 899 (1994)

[248] R.A.E.C. Paley and N. Wiener, Fourier Transforms in the Complex Domain (Amer-

ican Physical Soc., New York, 1934)

(1999)

(1982)

169

(1966)]

3.

73

[249] B. Davison, Neutron Transport Theory (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1957) Chapter

VI , Section 1

ter XVII

[250] M. Born and V. Fock, Zeitschrifte fur Physik 51 165 (1928)

[251] T. Kato, Progr. Theor. Phys. 5 435 (1950)

[252] A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics Vol. II (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1961) Chap-

[253] J. Liu, B. Hu and B. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 1749 (1998)

[254] A. Zigmund, Trigonometrical Series (Dover, New York, 1955) Chapter III.

[255] J. von Neumann and E.P. Wigner, Physik. Zeits. 30 467 (1929)

[256] J.W. Zwanziger and E.R. Grant, J. Chem. Phys. 87 2954 (1987)

[257] R. Kosloﬀ, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45 145 (1994)

[258] S.-I. Tomonaga, Quantum Mechanics, Vol II (North Holland, Amsterdam 1966),

Sections 41, 61

[259] E.J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 75 2923 (1981)

[260] M.V. Berry and J. Klein, J. Phys. A: Math. and General 17 1805 (1984)

[261] V.V. Dodonov, V. I. Manko and D.E. Nikonov, Phys. Lett. A 162 359 (1992)

[262] C. Grosche, Phys. Lett. A 182 28 (1993)

[263] Y. Aharonov, T. Kaufherr, S. Popescu and B. Reznik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 2023

(1998)

[264] J.W. Zwanziger, S.P. Rucker and G.C. Chingas, Phys. Rev. A 43 3232 (1991)

[265] E.C. Titchmarsh, The Theory of Functions (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1932) sec-

tions 3.42, 3.45, 7.8, 8.1.

[266] N. Shvartsman and I. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 1008 (1994)

[267] A.H. Jahn, and E. Teller, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 161 220 (1937)

[268] M.C.M. O’Brien, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 281 323 (1964)

[269] F.S. Ham, Jahn-Teller Eﬀects in Electron Paramagnetic Spectra ( Plenum Press

New York, 1971)

[270] D. Yarkony, J. Chem. Phys. 111 4906 (1999)

[271] D.J.A. Varandas, H.G. Yu and Z.R. Xu, Mol. Phys. 96 1193 (1999)

[272] D.J.A. Varandas and Z.R. Xu, Int. J. Quant. Chem.75 89 (1999)

[273] D. Yarkony, J. Chem. Phys. 110 701 (1999)

[274] G. Herzberg and H.C. Longuet-Higgins, Discuss. Faraday Soc. 35 77 (1963)

[275] H. Koizumi, I.B. Bersuker, J. Boggs and V.Z. Polinger, J. Chem. Phys. 112 8470

(2000)

74

[276] M.C.P. Moate, M.C.O. O’Brien, J.I. Dunn, C.A. Bates, Y.M. Liu and V.Z. Polinger,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 4362 (1996)

[277] P. Saxe, B.H. Lengsﬁeld and D.H. Yarkony, Chem. Phys. Lett. 113 19 (1985)

[278] H. Thummel, M. Peric, S.D. Peyerimhoﬀ and R.J. Buenker, Z. Phys. D 13 307

(1989)

(1992) 217

[279] I.N. Radazos, M.A. Robb, M. A. Bernardi and M. Olivucci, Chem. Phys. Lett. 192

[280] G.C.G. Waschewsky, P. W. Kash, T.L. Myers, D.C. Kitchen and L.J. Butler, J.

Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 90 1581 (1994)

[281] A.M. Mebel, M Baer and S.H. Lin, J. Chem. Phys. 112 10 (2000) 10 703

[282] A.M. Mebel, M Baer and S.H. Lin, Mol. Phys. (in press)

[283] D. Yarkony, Acc. Chem. Res. 31 511 (1998)

[284] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure (Van Nostrand: Princeton,

1966) Vol.3

[285] G. Chaban, M.S. Gordon and D. Yarkony, J. Phys. Chem. 43 7953 (1997)

[286] W.D. Hobey and A.D. McLachlan, J. Chem. Phys. 33 1695 (1961)

[287] A.D. McLachlan, Mol. Phys. 4 417 (1961)

[288] B. Lepetit and A. Kuppermann, Chem. Phys. Lett. 166 581 (1990)

[289] Y.-S. M. Wu and A. Kuppermann, Chem. Phys. Lett. 201 178 (1993); ibid 235

105 (1995)

[290] M. Baer, Chem. Phys. 15 49 (1976)

[291] M. Baer, Mol. Phys. 40 1011 (1980)

[292] M. Baer, in M. Baer (editor) Theory of Chemical Reaction Dynamics Vol. II (CRC

Press, Boca Raton, 1985) Chapter 4

[293] M. Baer, J. Chem. Phys. 107 2694, 10662 (1997)

[294] X. Chapuisat, A. Nauts and D. Hehaureg-Dao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 95 139 (1983)

[295] D. Hehaureg, X. Chapuisat, J.C. Lorquet, G. Galloy and G. Raseev, J. Chem.

Phys. 78 1246 (1983)

(1981)

[296] L.S. Cederbaum, H. Koppel and W. Domcke, Int. J. Quant. Chem. Symp. 15 251

[297] T. Pacher, L.S. Cederbaum and H. Koppel, J.Chem. Phys. 84 293 (1993)

[298] M. Baer and A. Alijah, Chem. Phys. Lett. 319 489 (2000)

[299] M. Baer, J. Phys. Chem. A104 3181 (2000)

[300] R. Baer, D. Charutz, R. Kosloﬀ and M. Baer, J. Chem. Phys. 105 9141 (1996)

75

[301] D. Charutz, R. Baer and M. Baer, Chem. Phys. Lett. 265 629 (1997)

[302] T.C. Thompson and C.A. Mead, J. Chem. Phys. 82 2408 (1985)

[303] J.S. Griﬃth, The Irreducible Tensor Method for Molecular Symmetry Groups (Pren-

tice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1962) p. 20

[304] J.S. Griﬃth, The Theory of Transition Metal Ions (University Press, Cambridge,

1964)

[305] G. Bevilacqua, L. Martinelli and G.P. Parravicini, (Preprint 2001)

[306] T. Bitter and D. Dubbens, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 251 (1988)

[307] D. Suter, K.T. Mueller and A. Pines, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 1218 (1988)

[308] R. Simon, H.J. Kimble and E.C.G. Sudarshan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 19 (1988)

[309] A.F. Morpurgo, J.P. Heida, T.M. Klapwijk, B.J. Van Wees and G. Borghs, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 80 1050 (1998)

[310] H. Von Busch, V. Dev, H.-E. Eckel, S. Kasahara, J. Wang, W. Demtroder, P.

Sebald and W. Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 4584 (1998)

[311] D. Loss, H. Schoeller and P.M. Goldbart, Phys. Rev. B 59 13 328 (1999)

[312] I. Fuentes-Guri, S. Bose and V. Vedral, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 5018 (2000)

[313] E. Sj¨oquist, Phys. Lett. A 286 4 (2001)

[314] H. Pothier, P. Lafarge, C. Urbina, D. Esteve and M.H. Devoret, Europhys. Lett.

17 1183 (1992)

[315] C. Liu, Z. Dutton, C. Behroozi and L.V. Hau, Nature 409 490 (2001)

[316] D.F. Phillips, A. Fleischhauer, A. Mair, R.L. Walsworth and M.D. Lukin, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 86 783 (2001)

[317] D. DiVicenzo and B. Terhal, Physics World, March 1998 53 (1998)

[318] C.A. Mead, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64 51 (1992)

[319] A. Thiel and H. Koppel, J. Chem. Phys. 110 9371 (1999)

[320] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice Hall, New York, 1966) section 12.6

[321] E. Schr¨odinger, Ann. d. Phys. 81 109 (1926). English translation appears in E.
Schr¨odinger, Collected Papers in Wave Mechanics (Blackie and Sons, London, 1928)
p. 102

[322] W. Gordon, Z. Physik 41 117 (1926).

[323] W. Greiner, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics: Wave Equations (Springer-Verlag,

Berlin, 1997)

[324] N.N. Bogoliubov and D.V. Shirkov, Introduction to the Theory of Quantized Fields

(Interscience, New York, 1959).

[325] W. Gordon, Z. Physik 50 630 (1928).

76

[326] P.R. Holland The Quantum Theory of Motion (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, 1993)

[327] R. L. Seliger and G. B. Whitham, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A A 305 1 (1968)

[328] E. Madelung, Z. Phys., 40 322 (1926)

[329] I. Talmi, Simple Models of Complex Nuclei (Harcourt Academic, Chur, 1993)

77

