A joint theoretical and experimental study of phenylene-acetylene

Submitted to Chemical Physics Letters

molecular wires

R. J. Magyar and S. Tretiak∗

Theoretical Division and Center for Nonlinear Studies,

Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545

Y. Gao, H.-L. Wang and A. P. Shreve

Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

The excited state electronic structure of π conjugated phenylene-acetylene oligomers is calcu-

lated using time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) approaches. The theoretical ﬂu-

orescence spectra are analyzed in terms of Frank-Condon active nuclear normal modes and shown

to compare well with experiment. Theoretical and experimental results for the optical absorption

and emission spectra of these molecules indicate that the conjugation length can be signiﬁcantly

reduced by conformational rotations about the triple-bonded carbon links. This has serious im-

plications on the electronic functionalities of polyphenylene-acetylene based molecular wires and

their possible use as charge/energy conduits in nano-assemblies.

PACS numbers: 82.35.Cd, 71.20.Rv, 42.70.Jk

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: serg@cnls.lanl.gov

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

In nature, complex nano-assemblies of functional units combine to perform required com-

plicated tasks. One example is the assembly for harvesting light in photosynthesis [1, 2].

There is considerable practical interest in imitating and manipulating this sort of function-

ality on a nano-scale. In order to do so, theoretical and experimental understanding of the

constituents is required. In this paper, we consider a functional component of a possible

light harvesting assembly. One functional unit of a light harvesting assembly might be a

self-assembled multilayer with the speciﬁc function of transferring holes away from light

receptors. Conjugated polymers may be good candidates for this purpose because of their

semiconductor-like properties, plasticity, and potential low cost of fabrication [3]. These

materials have already found uses in a wide range of applications such as light-emitting

diodes, lasers, sensors and molecular switches [4, 5, 6, 7].

To perform such functions, the molecule should be rigid in one dimension to provide

required spatial conduits. Moreover, the hole-electron separation and charge conduction

processes require long conjugation lengths and ﬂexible excited state structure to provide

suﬃcient freedom to tune energetics synthetically. We consider oligomers of phenylene-

acetylene , shown on the top panel of Fig. 1, which retain one-dimensional rigidity like

molecular wires. However, this polymer can be easily twisted between benzene rings about

the triple-bonded carbon links. This geometry change is expected to reduce the conjugation

length and may adversely aﬀect applications which rely on the de-localization of the charge

carriers. In this article we examine phenylene-acetylene oligomers from both theoretical and

experimental standpoints in order to analyze their excited state electronic structure and the

eﬀects of conformational rotations on eﬀective conjugation and electronic de-localization

lengths of these materials. In particular, we utilized the natural transition orbital decom-

position [8] to infer the extent of the underlying electronic localization.

To calculate electronic structure we use a blend of quantum chemical methods including

semi-empirical (Austin Model 1 (AM1)) approaches [9] for ground and excited state [10]

geometry optimizations, and time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) [11, 12]

and ZINDO [13] methods for excited state computations. There have been many theo-

retical calculations on conjugated polymers using various semi-empirical and ﬁrst principle

approaches. It is well understood that, in general, both semi-empirical (such as AM1) and

2

DFT methods provide reasonable geometries and ZINDO can deliver good UV-visible spec-

tra for such molecular systems [14, 15]. Even more accurate TD-DFT approaches are able to

tackle complicated electronic features such as exciton binding energy [16, 17, 18] and double

excitations [19]. Furthermore, based on the results of the calculations, absorption an emis-

sion spectra can be modeled, for example, for polyenes, oligoarylenes, phenylenevinylenes,

and polyﬂuorenes [10, 20, 21]. Existing theoretical studies of phenylene-acetylene include

TD-DFT investigation of the excited states of the monomer [22, 23] and several studies of

dendrimer with phenylene-acetylene being the basic unit [24, 25]. Additionally, experimental

absorption and ﬂuorescence spectra have been reported for phenylene-acetylene monomers,

dimers, and trimers linked to Pt centers [26].

Details of our computational approach are presented in Section II.

In Section III we

analyze computational results and compare them to experiment. Finally, we discuss the

trends that emerge and summarize our ﬁndings in Section IV.

II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY

We focus on oligomers of two to ten phenylene-acetylene repeat-units (top panel of Fig. 1).

The two unit case is the small molecule limit and may be compared to more expensive

ab initio calculations which are only possible for small systems.

In such small molecules

photo-excitations are conﬁned by molecular ends and study of increasingly longer chains is

necessary to understand the onset of de-localized excitations that polymers exhibit. The

ten unit chain is a suﬃciently long oligomer to reasonably approximate the inﬁnite polymer

limit [14, 15].

Ground state optimal geometries of phenylene-acetylene oligomers have been obtained

using the Gaussian 98 [27] software package. The molecular geometries in the gas phase

are fully optimized using the semi-empirical AM1 method. The AM1 model has been

parametrized to give accurate geometries for organic molecules and is expected to provide

reliable geometries [9]. To model the ﬂuorescence spectra, the excited state geometries are

needed. We used the excited-state molecular dynamics (ESMD) computational package [10]

to optimize molecular geometries for the lowest excited state at time-dependent Hartree-Fock

(TD-HF) level and AM1 model. This approach allows treatment of large molecular systems

at modest numerical cost and previously resulted in reasonable ﬂuorescence line-shapes of

3

several conjugated molecular systems [10, 21]. In principle, it is also possible to use DFT or

Hartree-Fock ab initio approaches for ground state optimization purposes. However, such

approaches may be problematic for the excited state optimization due to high numerical

cost. Instead, we treat molecular geometries within the same approach: HF/AM1 and TD-

HF/AM1 levels for the ground and excited states, respectively. Additionally, by using the

AM1, we eliminate any errors in the geometry that might come from using approximate

functionals and limited basis sets in density functional theory. For example, it was found for

polyacetylene that a fraction of exact-exchange must be mixed with a semi-local exchange-

correlation functional for the theory to reproduce the bond-length alternation accurately

[28].

For obtained geometries, we next calculate the excited-state triplet and singlet manifolds

using TD-DFT approach which is known to be a reliable but computationally aﬀordable

ab initio tool for excited state treatment. We perform all our calculations in the gas phase

for simplicity, but we expect that the results will not change much when these oligomers

are placed in non-polar solvents. We use the B3LYP functional combined with the 6-31G

basis set as implemented in the Gaussian 98 package [27]. The 6-31G basis set is known to

be an eﬃcient blend of accuracy and manageable size for large conjugated molecules [29].

We do not include diﬀuse functions as we expect the relevant excited states have support

only along the backbone of the polymer for long chains. For ground-state properties, DFT

provides a formally exact scheme for solving the many-body problem [30], but, in practice,

the functionals used are approximated in a manner convenient for calculations. The B3LYP

functional [31] combines semi-local exchange-correlation with non-local exact-exchange. By

construction, this functional handles a fraction of long-range exchange exactly but fails

to capture long-range correlation eﬀects. Time-dependent density functional theory is an

extension of density functional theory in which many-body excitations are associated with

the poles of the exact density response [11, 12]. TD-DFT using B3LYP inputs has been

shown to be accurate for many molecular systems and is computationally aﬀordable.

In

particular, Ref. [32] suggests that B3LYP is the optimal functional to use for excited-state

calculations on PPV-type polymers.

In order to characterize calculated excited states and to address the electronic local-

ization, we performed a transition orbital analysis [8] based on the computed transition

densities from the TD-DFT calculations. This analysis oﬀers the most compact representa-

4

tion of a given transition density in terms of its expansion in single-particle transitions. The

transition orbital picture provides an important information on the multi-conﬁgurational

nature of a given excited state, and gives a real-space orbital representation as to where the

photo-excited hole and electron reside, which is useful to illustrate the excitonic localization

phenomena.

Finally, we calculate the line-shapes of ﬂuorescence spectra using the ground and excited

state optimal geometries and vibrational normal modes of the ground state. This can be

readily done within the Condon approximation for displaced multidimensional harmonic

oscillators [20, 33]. The vibrational overlap integrals |h0|νni|2 =

, Franck-Condon

e−Sn Sν
n
ν!

factors, govern the probability of emission from transition between the vibrational level 0

in the lowest excited state and a vibrational level n in the ground state. These quantities,

in turn, depend on the dimensionless displacements ∆n of each normal mode with Huang-

Rhys factors, Sn = ∆2

n/2. The ﬂuorescence band shape as a function of the frequency ω is

determined by the imaginary part of the polarizability [20, 33]

α(ω) = Im 


µ2

· · ·

Xν1

Xν3N−6

Ω(0) −



Π3N −6
n=1 h0|νni2
3N −6
n=1 νnωn − ω − iΓ

P




,



(1)

where µ is the electronic transition dipole moment between the excited and the ground-

state, Ω(0) is the associated 0 − 0 transition energy, the ωn’s are the vibrational frequencies,

the νn’s are the quanta of the participating normal modes, and Γ is an empirical parameter

setting the spectral line-widths. We choose the line-width to be either 0.2 eV or 0.02 eV.

The former produces plots which agree well with the experimentally observed line widths,

whereas the latter allows greater resolution and the analysis in terms of the contributing

vibrational states.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

The chemical structure of phenylene-acetylene is shown on Fig. (1). Our specimen is

terminated at one end by a methyl group (CH3) and at the other end by an amine group

(NH2) which may either be used for binding the molecule to to a substrate or for self-

assembly into structures of interest at the air-water interface (Langmuir-Blodgett method).

Oligomers with N=2,3, and 4 repeat units have been synthesized and spectroscopically

characterized. The phenylene-acetylene oligomers were synthesized by cross-coupling of the

5

appropriate phenylacetylene compounds with 4-amino-1-iodobenzene using P d(P P h3)4/CuI

as catalyst. The molecular building block (Phenylene-acetylene ) is prepared by coupling 4-

dodecane-ethynylbenzene with 4-(trimethylsilylethynyl) iodobenzene. The solution UV-vis

and ﬂuorescence spectra were measured using methylene chloride as the solvent.

We calculate the threshold for rotation about the triple bond is ∼ 0.05 eV per triple

bond, and we expect that at room temperature where kBT ≈ 0.025 eV, an ensemble of

geometries will be allowed given the uncertainty of solvent eﬀects and molecular packing.

In order to estimate how these geometry changes will aﬀect the spectrum, we sample two

extreme geometries (Fig. 1), the completely planar conﬁguration where all benzene rings

lie in the same plane, and an alternating conﬁguration where adjacent benzene rings are at

right angles to each other. Both geometries are local minima within the AM1 approach,

the planar case being the global minimum. Even though in total ground-state energies the

two conﬁgurations do not diﬀer drastically, their excited-states properties do. Torsional

potentials for another type of conjugated polymer have been calculated in detail [34]. Here

we choose only to calculate the extreme limits and some intermediates arguing that the

general behavior and trends will be thereby evident and the details of the torsional potential

are not critical to the current study.

In Fig 1, we plot the dependence of the energy of the uv-visible active singlet state as a

function of chain length for absorption and ﬂuorescence. Absorption results are presented for

a planar, a completely alternating, and an intermediate geometry where every other benzene

is rotated about the triple bond by 45 degrees. The experimental results are the absorption

and ﬂuorescence maxima in a non-polar solvent, methylene chloride. Except for in the

alternating geometry, the lowest S1 state has the largest oscillator strength. We see that the

experiment lies between the intermediate and completely alternating results. The long chain

limit is reached by approximately four to six repeat units for planar chain, which implies

the extent of the conjugation length and the size of the photo-generated exciton. This value

is a strong function of the exact orbital-dependent exchange (Fock-like exchange) present

in the functional [35]. For example, the ZINDO (100% of exact-exchange) curve saturates

faster to the constant long-chain-limit than B3LYP (20% of exact-exchange) results. Since

the alternating geometry breaks some of the conjugation, we observe several low-lying dark

singlets energetically below the optically active band-gap state. In this case, the energy of

the band-gap state has little size-dependence and is signiﬁcantly blue-shifted compared to

6

that for planar geometry. As expected, the intermediate geometry values lie between these

two extremes and are accidentally very close to the ZINDO results. In order to estimate the

eﬀective bond angle (within TD-B3LYP/6-31G approach), we gradually rotated the benzene

rings about the triple bonds and calculated the singlet excited states for N=2, 3, and 4 unit

oligomers. For most angles, the lowest singlet state can be directly associated with the

lowest singlet state for the planar geometry. At some critical angle, this breaks down and

the lowest singlet is no longer optically active. For 2-units, the singlet and experiment do

not overlap for any angle. For 3-units, the overlap is at 43 degrees. The eﬀective rotation

angle for 4-unit chains is over 63 degrees. In the long chain limit, we expect the eﬀective

angle to increase but saturate.

Geometric eﬀects are important for ﬂuorescence as well. Here the excited state geometries

remain close to planar with a steep torsional potential as has been reported for other poly-

mers [10, 21]. The bond-length alternation parameter reduces in the middle of the molecule

which indicates an excitonic self-trapping process. Because of the tendency of the excited

state to planarize the molecule, the alternating geometry is unlikely, so we simulate what

one might expect to become of the alternating geometry by taking the relaxed excited state

geometry and rotating each benzene by 45 degrees about the triple bond while leaving two

to three benzene rings in the center of the chain coplanar. We see that the ﬂuorescence from

the simulated alternating geometry diﬀers only slightly from the planar geometry (pointing

to the short extent of the self-trapped exciton). The curve for the simulated case is not

smooth because of the scheme we use to simulate the geometry. For even numbered chains

we have two coplanar benzenes in the center of the chain, but for odd numbered chains, we

have three coplanar benzenes and a slightly greater de-localization. Therefore, the results

for the ﬁrst excited singlets of odd chain lengths are systematically slightly lower.

Using Eq. (1) it is possible to compare the experimental and theoretical ﬂuorescence

spectra directly (see Fig. 2). The top panel shows the experimental absorption spectra for 2-4

unit chains. The next panel is the experimental emission spectra. As expected, experimental

absorption-ﬂuorescence spectra are nearly mirror-image proﬁles; this indicates the same

nature of the absorbing and emitting electronic state. The last two panels are theoretical

results calculated with broadening parameters of 0.2 eV and 0.02 eV, respectively. The

larger broadening is able to model experimentally measured line shapes. Indeed we observe

good overall comparison between theory and experiment. In particular, the shoulder on the

7

red-side of all spectra are well reproduced. The Γ = 0.02 eV broadening gives spectra which

show more detail than experiment and oﬀer the possibility of identiﬁcation and analysis

of the dominant vibrational modes.

In the theoretical absorption plots, three peaks can

easily be resolved. They correspond, from left to right, to a 0-0 transition, a benzene bond

alternating mode, and a fast triple bond length oscillation. In the ten unit chain, we can

also resolve a peak from an alternate benzene bond mode. Figure 3 shows schematically

the dominant normal modes of phenylene-acetylene . The top shows the low-frequency

stretching mode I of the entire molecule, which contribute for the most part to the width of

vibronic peaks. Its frequency and displacement ∆ depends on the molecular mass. These

quantities decrease and increase for large oligomers, respectively. The other three nuclear

modes (II-IV) coupled to the electronic system are high-energy vibrations whose frequencies

weakly depend on the chain length. The ﬁrst two (II and III) are bond alternating modes

within the benzene rings that only become resolved for the longer chain lengths. The last

mode IV is the stretching of the triple-bond. Relative displacements are shown for the

individual modes. The left value is for the shortest chain and the right is for the ten unit

chain. We see that the higher energy modes become less dominant as the polymer’s length is

increased. The strength of the low energy stretching mode nearly doubles in the long chain

limit relative to the short chain limit, and the sub-dominant alternating modes such as the

second benzene alternating mode become resolved in the longer chain length limit.

Figure 4 shows the size-scaling of calculated low-lying excited states as a function of

reciprocal conjugation length. The top panel displays a typical structure of singlet and

triplet manifolds in conjugated polymers where the ladder of well-deﬁned states is optically

coupled. Nearly linear scaling for all states allows extrapolation to the saturated values in

the inﬁnite chain limit. As expected, the singlet-excitation energies (S1) become lower with

increasing polymer length. The long-chain limit is achieved approximately (within 0.2 eV)

by six units. The optically inactive ﬁrst triplet excited state (T1) has been calculated using

two levels of theory: the TD-DFT approach for the lowest triplet excitation and change in

the self-consistent ﬁeld (∆SCF) method. The latter is the energy diﬀerence between the

self-consistent ground states calculated with enforced singlet and triplet spin multiplicities.

We observe negligible spin contamination in the unrestricted approach used to calculate the

triplet ground state. In general, ∆SCF is considered to be a stable and reliable approach

for evaluating the ﬁrst triplet state energy. In contrast, TD-DFT energies of triplet states

8

strongly depend on the amount of the HF exchange present in the functional. Even negative

energies of triplet states may be observed in the TD-HF limit (so-called triplet instability).

In our case (B3LYP functional) we found 2 and 2.4 eV saturation limits for the energy of

the T1 state of phenylene-acetylene in TD-DFT and ∆SCF approaches, respectively. Higher

lying Tn and Sn states correspond to de-localized excitations where the electron become well

separated from the hole upon absorption of a quantum of light [14]. Even though the spin

state matters for small molecules, Tn and Sn correctly become degenerate in the long chain

limit, saturating to 2.8 eV limit. In the alternating geometry case, the electron is expected

to remain localized. All excitations for the alternating geometry are about 0.5 eV greater

than for the planar geometry because of the more local nature of the excitation.

In order to characterize the typical low-lying (T1 and S1) excitations we further performed

a transition orbital analysis [8]. The top of Fig. 5 shows the transition orbitals for 2, 4,

and 10 unit chains of planar phenylene-acetylene . As expected, all these states represent
de-localized transitions which are mostly π − π∗ nature. Note that for the longest (ten

unit) chains, the triplets are more localized than the singlets. For the singlet state, one

pair of orbitals dominates. Both the hole and particle are de-localized along the backbone

of the polymer; however, the hole is more de-localized. Triplet states adopt more of a

multi-conﬁgurational character with increasing chain length, which reﬂects their smaller

exciton size compared to that of singlet states. The bottom of Fig. 5 displays the transition

orbitals for the alternating geometry. These plots clearly show the breakage of conjugation

due to torsion. All excitations have multi-conﬁgurational character as a superposition of

orbitals with an electron-hole pair residing on short chain segments (e.g., see T1 for N=10).

Ultimately such excitations in long chains can be well treated in the Frenkel exciton limit.

IV. CONCLUSION

The extent of electronic de-localization and the existence of appropriate excited state

energetics have serious implications for using conjugated polymers as a constituent in artiﬁ-

cial functional nano-assemblies. Our study conﬁrms that torsional disorder of the molecular

geometry caused by dielectric environment or thermal ﬂuctuation is an important factor

aﬀecting the excited state structure of phenylene-acetylene . We ﬁnd that DFT can give

quantitatively accurate results when compared to experiment. Subsequently, the nature

9

of calculated electronic states can be analyzed in the real-space using a transition orbital

decomposition. The good agreement between the experimental and theoretical ﬂuorescence

spectral line-shapes indicate that we can use theory to understand the underlying molecular

morphology and to identify and analyze Franck-Condon active vibrational modes. By com-

paring our theoretical calculations to the experimental results, we ﬁnd an eﬀective average

geometry and argue that the conjugation length is drastically reduced by rotations about

the triple-bonds.

Section III contains only a fraction of the results we obtained using combination of diﬀer-

ent methods. Overall, we observe two fundamental trends: I) The bond-length alternation

parameter reduces with decreasing a fraction of exact Fock-like exchange in the DFT func-

tional in the course of the ground state geometry optimization. This results in the overall

red-shift of the excitation energies. II) An increase of a fraction of exact exchange in the

functional when computing TD-DFT excited states results in the blue (red) shift of singlet

(triplet) state energies. Consequently, any combination of physically justiﬁed methods and

appropriate model chemistries will result in the same trends and conclusions with some

variation of calculated spectroscopic variables.

Acknowledgments

The research at LANL is supported by Center for Nonlinear Studies (CNLS), the LANL

LDRD program, and the oﬃce of Science of the US Department of Energy. This support is

gratefully acknowledged.

[1] T. Pullerits and V. Sundstr¨om, Acc. Chem. Res. 29, 381 (1996).

[2] V. Sundstr¨om, T. Pullerits, and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 2327 (1999).

[3] R. H. Friend et al., Nature 397, 121 (1999).

[4] C. Schmitz, P. Posch, M. Thelakkat, H. W. Schmidt, A. Montali, K. Feldman, P. Smith, and

C. Weder, Advv Func. Mat. 11, 41 (2001).

[5] F. Hide, M. A. Diaz-Garcia, B. J. Schwartz, M. R. Andersson, Q. B. Pei, and A. J. Heeger,

Science 273, 1833 (1996).

[6] J. S. Yang and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 5321 (1998).

10

[7] A. R. Brown, A. Pomp, C. M. Hart, and D. M. Deleeuw, Science 270, 972 (1995).

[8] R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 4775 (2003).

[9] M. J. S. Dewar, E. G. Zoebisch, E. F. Healy, and J. J. P. Stewart, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107,

3902 (1985).

[10] S. Tretiak, A. Saxena, R. L. Martin, and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 097402 (2002).

[11] E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 997 (1984).

[12] M. E. Casida, in Recent Advances in Density-Functional Methods, Vol. 3 of Part I, edited by

D. A. Chong (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995).

[13] J. Ridley and M. C. Zerner, Theor. Chim. Acta 32, 111 (1973).

[14] J. L. Br´edas, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne, D. A. dos Santos, and Z. Shuai, Acc. Chem. Res. 32, 267

[15] S. Tretiak and S. Mukamel, Chem. Rev. 102, 3171 (2002).

[16] A. Ruini, M. J. Caldas, G. Bussi, and E. Molinari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 206403 (2002).

[17] J. W. van der Horst, P. A. Bobbert, M. A. J. Michels, G. Brocks, and P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 4413 (1999).

[18] M. Rohlﬁng and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1959 (1999).

[19] N. T. Maitra, K. Burke, and C. Woodward, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023002 (2002).

[20] S. Karabunarliev, M. Baumgarten, E. Bittner, and K. Mullen, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 11372

[21] I. Franco and S. Tretiak, Chem. Phys. Lett. 372, 403 (2003).

[22] L. Serrano-Andres, M. Merchan, and M. Jablonski, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 4294 (2003).

[23] Y. Amatatsu and Y. Hasebe, J. Phys. Chem. A 107, 11169 (2003).

[24] A. L. Thompson, K. M. Gaab, J. J. Xu, C. J. Bardeen, and T. J. Martinez, J. Phys. Chem.

A 108, 671 (2004).

[25] S. Tretiak, V. Chernyak, and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 3310 (1998).

[26] D. G. McLean, J. E. Rogers, and T. M. Cooper, Proc. SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 4462, 11

(1999).

(2000).

(2002).

[27] M. J. Frisch et al., Gaussian 98 (Revision A.11) (Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh PA, 2002).

[28] C. H. Choi, M. Kertesz, and A. Karpfen, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 6712 (1997).

[29] A. M. Masunov and S. Tretiak, J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 899 (2004).

[30] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, 864 (1964).

11

[31] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1372 (1993).

[32] J. S. K. Yu, W. C. Chen, and C. H. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. A 107, 4268 (2003).

[33] A. B. Myers, R. A. Mathies, D. J. Tannor, and E. J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 3857 (1982).

[34] A. Karpfen, C. H. Choi, and M. Kertesz, J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 7426 (1997).

[35] S. Tretiak, K. Igumenshchev, and V. Chernyak, Exciton sizes of conducting polymers predicted

by a time-dependent density functional theory, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, (in press).

12

FIG. 1: Top: molecular structure of phenylene-acetylene and schematic structures of the planar and

alternating geometries respectively. Middle: scaling of the energy of the singlet excited state which

dominates uv-visible absorption as a function of the number of polymer repeat units. Theoretical

values correspond to the vertical excitation and emission, and experimental values are taken for

the absorption and emission maxima. Bottom: Same as above but for ﬂuorescence.

13

Absorption (Experiment)

 

 

 Dimer (N=2)
 Trimer (N=3)
 Tetramer (N=4)
 Decamer (N=10)

Fluorescence (Experiment)

s
t
i
n
U
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
A

 

 

 

Fluorescence (Theory) 
  G =0.2 eV

Fluorescence (Theory) 
 G =0.02 eV

III

IV

II

 

 

250

300

350

400

450

500

550

600

 Wavelength (nm)

FIG. 2: Absorption and ﬂuorescence line shapes for various length phenylene-acetylene oligomers;

experiment versus theory. The top two panels are the experimental absorption and ﬂuorescence.

The bottom two panels are the theoretical emission proﬁles calculated with broad (0.2 eV) and

narrow (0.02 eV) spectral line width. Frank-Condon active vibrational normal modes (II-IV) are

shown in Fig. 3.

 

 

 

14

I

D ~0.45-0.70
w ~250-54 cm-1

II

D ~0.32-0.48
w ~1780 cm-1

III

D ~0.65-0.29
w ~1790 cm-1

IV

D ~0.66-0.34
w ~2490 cm-1

FIG. 3: The dominant normal modes contributing to the vibrational structure of the ﬂuorescence

spectrum for phenylene-acetylene . The top diagram is a low energy stretching mode contributing

to the spectral broadening. The next two diagrams show vibrations contributing to the II-III peak,

which becomes resolved as the polymer length increases; these are oscillations in the length of the

bonds within the benzene rings. The ﬁnal mode is a high energy oscillation in the length of the

triple bond, which contributes to the IV peak.

15

Singlets Triplets

n3Bu

Tn (m3Ag)

T1 (13Bu)
 

 T1 (D SCF)
 T1    
 S1
 Tn    
 Sn

Theory B3LYP/6-31G
AM1 planar geometry

 

n1Bu
Sn (m1Ag)

S1 (11Bu)

S0 (11Ag)

)

V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
c
x
E

 

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05
 1/Length (A)

0.06

0.07

0.08

FIG. 4: Top: Typical electronic structure of optically active states in singlet and triplet manifolds

for conjugated polymers. Bottom: Size-scaling of excitation energies as a function of the reciprocal

conjugation length for phenylene-acetylene oligomers.

16

FIG. 5: Selected transition orbitals for 2, 4, and 10-unit phenylene-acetylene chains in the planar

and alternating ground-state geometries. These are calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G level. The

NH2 end is to the right.

17

