4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Accurate electronic excitations for two
alkali-halide systems obtained by
density-functional theory and veriﬁed by
multi-conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld
calculations
A. Hellman23 and M. Slabanja
Department of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of
Technology and G¨oteborg University, SE-412 96
G¨oteborg, Sweden.

Abstract
Use of density-functional theory in a ∆self-consistent
ﬁeld framework result in both the ground- and two low-
est electronicly excited states of the NaCl and LiCl.
The accuracy of this method is conﬁrmed using a multi-
conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld method to obtain the
same states. The overall good agreement between the
calculated ground and excited potential-energy surfaces
speaks promising for the computationally simple ∆self-
consistent ﬁeld method.

Keywords: multi-conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld
calculations, ∆self-

density-functional

calculations,
consistent ﬁeld, electronic excitation

I.

INTRODUCTION

The development of powerful computers has allowed
available ab initio methods to calculate electronic ex-
citations within considerably larger systems than ever
before1. However, the need to calculate electronically ex-
cited states within systems of such a size, that the above
methods are just not practical, is ever present.

The less computational expansive density-functional
theory2 (DFT) as proved its value as a theoretical
method over the years. Typically this method address
only ground-state properties. However, over the years
there has been a number of studies extending DFT into
the realm of electronic excitations. Time-dependent
DFT3, GW4, perturbation-DFT5 and embedded DFT6
methods, all show an impressive and promissing progress
in this ﬁeld.

In this paper, DFT within a ∆self-consistent ﬁeld
(SCF) framework is used to calculate the ground and
two lowest electronically excited states of NaCl and LiCl.
The DFT-based ∆SCF method, which recently has re-
ceived some justiﬁcation7 is an extraordinary simple
method to calculate electronic excited states. Here, state-
of-the-art multi-conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld (MC-
SCF) method8 is used to conﬁrm the accuracy of the
above method by calculating the same electronic excita-
tions. The calculated PES’s obtained by both methods
are compared both with other theoretical results9 and
experimental10 ones. The overall agreement between the
MCSCF method and the DFT-based ∆SCF method is
promising for use of the ∆SCF method on systems of
such size that are beyond the present realm of the MC-
SCF method.11

1

As an extantion, the quantum dynamics of a simu-
lated photodissociation process is resolved using timede-
pendent wavepacket propagation, on the obtained PES’s.
The wavepacket is simultaneously propagated on the cou-
pled diabatic PES’s and the distribution of the ampli-
tudes are monitored at each timestep so that the disso-
ciation fraction can be determined and also the interme-
diate dynamics of the photoreaction.

The organization of the paper is as follows. In section
II the model and the computational methods used in this
paper are described. Results from the calculation are
presented in section III. Conclusions are given in section
IV. Finally, the appendix state the results of a simulated
photodissociation of the two alkali-halide systems

II. THEORY AND COMPUTATIONAL
METHOD

The main advantage with an ab initio calculation, such
as the MCSCF method, is the predictive power in esti-
mating the fundamental forces that act on the involved
nuclei, both in the ground state and in an excited state.
Unfortunately, the highly accurate ab initio method is
hard to apply to larger systems, due to the high compu-
tational cost. On the other hand, ﬁrst-principle DFT
has proven to be an essential tool in describing large
systems, whereas it has been restricted to ground-state
properties so far. However, recently ordinary DFT has
been extended to include electronically excited states in
a ∆SCF-fashion,7 with a working accuracy.11

The optimized geometry was obtained by a restricted
Hartree-Fock (RHF) calculation using GAMESS.12 Here
the basis set uses Slater-type orbitals (STO) together
with 6 Gaussians, hence STO-6G. Both dimers have a
C2v point group symmetry, in which the Hamiltonian
matrix is constructed in a basis that transforms accord-
ing to the A1(Σ+, ∆), B1(Π), and A2(Σ−, ∆) irreducible
representations. Here only the Σ+ symmetry is consid-
ered since one of the aims is to simulate a photodissocia-
tion event. In addition, the use of symmetry reduces the
complexity of the calculation substantially. The wave-
function obtained from the RHF calculation is used as an
input to the MCSCF calculation, where 10 electrons are
distributed in 14 active orbitals. This generate approx-
imately one million sets of conﬁguration determinants
for the A1 symmetry group. The MCSCF determines
the PES’s for the ground 1Σ+ and the excited 3Σ+,1 Σ+
states with high accuracy.

In analogy with the ∆SCF13 method to calculate elec-
tronically excited states within the Hartree-Fock (HF)
approximation, the DFT-based ∆SCF method uses dif-
ferent electronic conﬁguration in the Kohn-Sham (KS)
model system to represent these electronically excited
states. Such an application of the KS formalism has for
long been without any formal justiﬁcation, but in a re-
cent article by A. G¨orling7 this method retrieves some
justiﬁcation and indeed can be viewed as an approxima-

2

III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION

Here the results for total energies and aspects of the
electronic structure, such as the charge density, are pre-
sented. The electronic ground states for the NaCl and

Cl

Na

1 Å

(a)

(b)

tive method to calculate electronic excitations within the
considered system.

The methodology of the used DFT-based ∆SCF
method is presented in length elsewhere11 and here only a
short description is given. The basic ingredients are three
concepts: (i) interpretation of the KS-orbitals in a molec-
ular orbital (MO) scheme, (ii) discretization of these or-
bitals and their energy levels, using supercell calculations
with periodic boundary conditions, and (iii) introduction
of electron-hole (e-h) pairs in the system, which is equiv-
alent to an internal charge transfer in the supercell. First
an ordinary DFT calculation is performed to obtain the
ground state PES of the system and the KS orbitals with
discrete energy levels. Then the relevant KS orbitals for
the desired internal charge transfer process are identiﬁed
as the ones that should be occupied in the ground state
but unoccupied in the excited electronic conﬁguration.
Next a hole is introduced in one of these identiﬁed oc-
cupied KS orbitals together with an extra electron onto
another one that is introduced into the excited conﬁg-
uration. In this way a KS determinant for the desired
excitation is constructed. Finally, this KS determinant
is optimized in a self-consistent-ﬁeld calculation, and its
energy is evaluated as in a normal DFT calculation. The
total energy diﬀerence between the excited- and ground-
state electronic conﬁgurations is identiﬁed as the excita-
tion energy.

This method is straightforward, when calculating the
covalent triplet 3Σ state of the NaCl and LiCl dimers,
since it can be constructed using only one KS deter-
minant. However, in the photodissociation process the
transitions from the ionic ground-state 1Σ to the excited
state 3Σ is forbidden. Therefore we apply the so called
“sum-method”14 to calculate the singlet 1Σ state of the
NaCl and LiCl dimers. Simply, it means that a weighted
sum of determinants is constructed, including both the
3Σ and 1Σ state, and its energy is found by means of
ordinary minimization procedure. After that, the energy
for the singlet state can be extracted since the sole energy
for the triplet state can be found by similar means.

The ﬁrst principle calculations presented in this paper
are performed by means of the plane wave pseudopoten-
tial code DACAPO15. The generalized-gradient (GGA) ap-
proximation16,17,18 is used for the exchange-correlation
energy-density functional. The wave functions are ex-
panded in a plane-wave basis set, and the electron-ion
interactions are described by ultrasoft pseudopotentials.
The electronic density between iterations is updated by
means of a Pulay-mixing algorithm. The occupation
numbers are updated using a developed technique based
on minimization of the free energy functional. All calcu-
lations are performed allowing for spin polarization. The
dimer cases LiCl and NaCl, are calculated using a super-
cell of a volume of 20×20×20 ˚A3. The reason for using
such a big supercell is to minimize any artiﬁcial eﬀect
from the periodicity.

FIG. 1: The diﬀerent valence electron density proﬁles of the
NaCl molecule through a cut along the molecular axis. (a)
The ground state with its ionic character, (b) The covalent
3Σ state between Na and Cl.

LiCl dimers at their equilibrium distances are ionic, with
the Na(Li) and Cl atoms being positively and negatively
charged, respectively. However, at inﬁnite separation the
ground state is a neutral “covalent” conﬁguration, where
the ionic conﬁguration lies about 1.4(1.7) eV above the
covalent PES. This value comes from the diﬀerence in
the ionization energy for the Na(Li) atom and the aﬃn-
ity energy of the Cl atom. As the Na(Li) and Cl atom
move toward each other, there occurs at some intermedi-
ate separation (∼ 10 ˚A)9 approximative the PES’s for the
covalent and ionic states have comparable energies, which
makes an internal charge transfer of the unpaired 3(2)s
electron on the Na(Li) to the electronegative Cl atom

and the electrostatic force aﬀect the ionic fragment more
strongly than in the original weak covalent bond. The
ionic character of the ground state can be seen in Fig. 1a
where the cut through the dimer axis clearly shows how
the charge is focused around the chloride atom.

Analyzing the DOS for the system shows that the elec-
tron transfer moves the 3s-electron from the sodium atom
to the empty 3p6 orbital on the chloride atom, as ex-
pected. So in order to obtain the excited triplet 3Σ co-
valent state, the hole is introduce in the now ﬁlled 3p6
orbital and the electron in the parallel spin-channel of
the 3s orbital of the Na atom. Figure 1b shows the co-
valent character of the excited 3Σ state with a charge
density located around the sodium atom, representing
the 3s electron, and more importantly, a concentration of
charge between the atoms. Since we are interested in the
excited singlet 1Σ state, we construct a combination of
the triplet state and the singlet state by calculating the
energy for the KS-determinant constructed by instead
placing the electron in the anti-parallel spin-channel of
the 3s orbital of the Na atom. The energy separation of
the triplet-singlet state is then extracted from this calcu-
lation.

In Fig. 2 the PES’s for the ionic 1Σ ground state and
both covalent 3Σ,1 Σ excited states of the NaCl dimer
are shown, calculated with the MCSCF method and
DFT-based ∆SCF method. In Table 1 the bondlength,

1
Σ
3
Σ
1
Σ

1
Σ
3
Σ
1
Σ

)

V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

8

6

4

2

0

3

TABLE I: The calculated bondlength for the ionic 1Σ state
and vertical excitation energies to both 3Σ,1 Σ states, for the
NaCl and LiCl dimers. Here results from (a) the MCSCF
method, (b) the ∆SCF method, are compared with those for
(c) the valence-bond (VB) method, and experiment. The unit
is eV.

NaCl
Bondlength 2.35
1Σ →3 Σ
5.27
1Σ →1 Σ
5.49

MCSCF ∆SCF VB Exp.
2.34 2.36
-
-
5.74 5.26

2.32
4.92
5.17

LiCl
Bondlength 2.02
1Σ →3 Σ
5.96
1Σ →1 Σ
6.08

2.06
5.64
5.75

2.07 2.02
-
-
7.28 -

present methods are compared with values from other
calculations9 and experiment,10 for both the NaCl and
LiCl dimers. The overall agreement between the point
from the MCSCF and ∆SCF methods is promising. For
instance, the discrepancy in the (i) vertical excitation for
a 1Σ →1 Σ transition for both the NaCl and LiCl dimers
is around 0.3 eV, (ii) singlet-triplet splitting is around
0.05 eV, and (iii) bondlength is around 0.03 ˚A .

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The ground and two lowest excited states of NaCl and
LiCl dimers are calculated. In the paper there are two
main theoretical methods used; (i) the ab initio MCSCF
method with high accuracy and (ii) a ﬁrst-principle DFT-
based ∆SCF method with a working accuracy to calcu-
late both the ionic 1Σ ground state and the two 3Σ,1 Σ
covalent states of the systems.

The overall agreement between results of the MC-
SCF and DFT-based ∆SCF methods is very promising.
For instance, the discrepancy in vertical excitation for a
1Σ →1 Σ transition for both the NaCl and LiCl dimer is
around 5% and in bondlength around 2% compared to
each other.

2.0 2.2 2.4

2.0 2.2 2.4

2.6

2.6
Distance (Å)

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

FIG. 2: The calculated potential energy curves for the NaCl
system with the MCSCF (left) and ∆SCF methods (right).
The ionic 1Σ ground state is displayed in a solid line while
the excited 3Σ,1 Σ covalent states uses a dashed line.

and vertical excitation energies calculated with the

The work is supported by the Swedish Scientiﬁc
Council and the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Re-
search (SSF) via Materials Consortia No. 9 and ATOM-
ICS, which is gratefully acknowledged. We thank
B. I. Lundqvist for comments on the manuscript.

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
p
o
r
P

)
s
t
i

n
u
 
.

b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
p
o
r
P

VI. APPENDIX

Knowing the PES’s for the system enables the use of
wavepacket propagation to resolve the quantum dynam-
ics of the nuclei. However, the quantum dynamics of
the photodissociation process on its multitude of diabatic
potentials is a complex problem. As the system makes
a sudden transition from its ground state to its excited
state there will be a new set of forces that work on the
dimer. The potential energy will be released into the
intermolecular coordinate which might result in a disso-
ciation of its fragments. The timeevolution of the system
is determined by the Schr¨odinger equation

where the Hamiltonian matrix for the NaCl dimer looks
like

i¯h

∂Ψ
∂t

= ˆHΨ,

ˆH =

ˆHcov
ˆV21

"

ˆV12
ˆHion

.
#

(6.1)

(6.2)

Here the diagonal elements ˆHcov and ˆHion represent well-
deﬁned electronic conﬁgurations of the NaCl and LiCl
dimers, i.e. the ionic ground state and the covalent ex-
cited state. The oﬀ-diagonal element ˆV21 is the non-
adiabatic coupling between the diabatic states, which en-
ables the wavepacket to bifurcate among the states. It
has been found19 that the strength of the non-adiabatic
coupling term ˆV21 depends exponentially on the position
of the curve-crossing point Rcross as

ˆV21 = V12 exp[γRcross],

(6.3)

where for the halide Cl atom the parameters are V12 = 20
eV, γ = 1.1638 ˚A−1.

The solution to the Sch¨odinger equation is calculated
with a timedependent wavepacket method that is based
on discrete variables and a ﬁnite basis representation
(DVR-FBR).20 The DVR has the advantage that the am-
plitude of the wavepacket is well deﬁned, and it leads it-
self to the simultaneous propagation of the wavepacket
on diﬀerent diabatic potentials. The propagation of
the wavepacket is done with the standard split operator
technique21 where the potential operator together with
the eﬀect of the non-adiabatic coupling are evaluated in
the DVR, while the kinetic operator is calculated in the
FBR.

As a consequence of the overall good agreement be-
tween the PES’s obtained by the MCSCF and DFT-
based ∆SCF methods, the results from the quantum dy-
namics turns out to be the same within the simulations
accuracy. Here the quantum dynamics performed by
the NaCl dimer during photodissociation is found to be
highly non-adiabatic, with a negligible population of the
quasi-bound state, whereas the LiCl dimer has a small
population of the quasi-bound state. It is concluded that
the population of the quasi-bound state strongly depends

4

t=60 fs

t=320 fs

t=600 fs

t=60 fs

t=200 fs

t=400 fs

5

10

15

20

25

Intramolecular distance (Å)

FIG. 3: The timeevulotion of |hΨ(t)|Ψ(t)i|2, representing the
probability distribution for the NaCl dimer, at three diﬀerent
times. Here the dashed-dotted curve shows the probability
distribution on the covalent state, whereas the solid curve is
the probability distribution of the ionic state.

5

10

15

20

25

Intramolecular distance (Å)

FIG. 4: The timeevulotion of |hΨ(t)|Ψ(t)i|2, representing the
probability distribution for the LiCl dimer, at three diﬀerent
times. Here the dashed-dotted curve shows the probability
distribution on the covalent state, whereas the solid curve is
the probability distribution of the ionic state.

on the diﬀerence between the ionization potential and the
aﬃnity for the two atoms involved in the dimer. Hence,
if one moves up the rows of the alkali-atoms or down the
rows of the halogen-atoms the population of the quasi-
bound state is expected to increase substantially. The
observation of oscillations in pump-probe experiments on
NaI dimers22 should be consistent with this conclusion.

5

1 J. Pople, Quantum Chemical Models, Noble

lec-

ture,www.nobel.se, (1998).

2 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136 (1964) B864;
W. Kohn, and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140 (1965) A1133.
3 E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 997

(1984).

4 L. Hedin, Phys. Rev. 139, A796 (1965).
5 A. G¨orling and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. B 47, 13105 (1993).
6 T. Kl¨uner, N. Govind, Y. A. Wang, and E. A. Carter, J.

Chem. Phys. 116 (2002) 42.

13 J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev. 32 (1928) 339.
14 T. Ziegler, A. Rauk, and E. J. Baerends, Theor. Chim.

Acta 43 (1977) 877.

15 B. Hammer, “computer code DACAPO-1.30”, Denmark

Technical University, Lyngby, Denmark (1999).
16 J. P. Perdew et al., Phys. rev. B 46 (1992) 6671.
17 J. P. Perdew, edited by P. Ziesche and H. Eschrig

(Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1991), Vol. 11.

18 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett.

77 (1996) 3865.

7 A. G¨orling, Phys. Rev. A 59 (1999) 3359.
8 R. Shepard,in Ab Initio Methods in Quantum Chemistry,
Part II, edited by K. P. Lawley John Wiley & Sons, New
York 1987.

9 Y. Zeiri and G. G. Balint-Kurti J. Mol. Spectrosc. 99

19 R. Grice, and D. R. Herschbach, Mol. Phys. 27 (1974) 159.
20 R. Kosloﬀ, in Time-Dependent Quantum Molecular Dy-
namics, edited by J. Broeckhove and L. Lathouwers
Plenum Press, New York 1992.

21 M. D. Feit, J. A. Fleck, and A. Steigler, J. Comp. Phys.

(1983) 1.

J. Chem. Phys. 84 (1986) 4378.

10 J. A. Silver, D. R. Worsnop, A. Freedman, and C. E. Kolb,

22 T. S. Rose, M. J. Rosker, and A. H. Zewail, J. Chem. Phys.

11 A. Hellman, B. Razaznejad, and B.

I. Lundqvist,

23 Corresponding author: Tel. +46 31 772 3377; Fax: +46 31

772 8426; E-mail: ahell@fy.chalmers.se

J. Chem. Phys. 120 (2004) 4593.

12 M. W. Schmidt, K. K. Baldridge, J. A. Boatz, et al., J.

Comput. Chem. 14 (1993) 1347.

47 (1982) 412.

91 (1989) 7415.

