4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energy lowering of current-carrying single-particle states in

open-shell atoms due to an exchange-correlation vector potential

E. Orestes and A. B. F. da Silva

Instituto de Qu´ımica de S˜ao Carlos

Universidade de S˜ao Paulo

Caixa Postal 780

13560-970 S˜ao Carlos SP, Brazil

K. Capelle

Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos

Universidade de S˜ao Paulo

Caixa Postal 369

13560-970 S˜ao Carlos SP, Brazil

(Dated: January 9, 2014)

Abstract

Current-density-functional theory is used to perturbatively calculate single-particle energies of

open-shell atoms prepared in a current-carrying state. We focus on the highest occupied such en-

ergy, because its negative is, in principle, the exact ionization energy. A variety of diﬀerent density

functionals and calculational schemes are compared with each other and experiment. When the

atom is prepared in a current-carrying state, a current-dependent exchange-correlation functional

is found to slightly lower the single-particle energy of the current-carrying orbital, as compared to

a calculation using standard (current independent) density functionals for the same system. The

current-dependent terms in the exchange-correlation functional thus provide additional stabiliza-

tion of the current-carrying state.

Keywords: density-functional theory, atomic energy levels, current density, magnetism, ionization energies

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Density-functional theory (DFT) [1, 2, 3, 4] is widely recognized as a powerful refor-

mulation of the many-electron problem in terms of the charge-density distribution n(r). In

practise the most common version of DFT is spin-DFT (SDFT), which employs spin-resolved

charge densities n↑(r) and n↓(r). While SDFT satisfactorily accounts for magnetic eﬀects

associated with the electron spin, it does not explicitly deal with magnetic eﬀects associated

with the current density. In the presence of symmetry-broken states with orbital currents (or

in strong external ﬁelds), a useful alternative to SDFT is provided by current-DFT (CDFT)

[5, 6, 7], which allows explicit calculation of the orbital currents and their eﬀect on, e.g., total

and single-particle energies. In CDFT the exchange-correlation (xc) energy Exc depends on

n(r) and the current density

jp(r) =

1
2i Xk

[ψ∗

k(r)

ψk(r)

∇

(

−

∇

ψ∗

k(r))ψk(r)]

(atomic units are used in all equations). The derivative of the functional Exc[n, jp],

(1)

(2)

Axc(r) =

1
c

δExc[n, jp]
δjp(r)

,

gives rise to an xc vector potential Axc in the Kohn-Sham equations, in addition to the usual
scalar xc potential vxc(r) = δExc/δn(r) [5, 6, 7]. Within (S)DFT Axc ≡
a nonzero Axc are little explored in quantum chemistry.

0. Consequences of

Both SDFT and CDFT share the fundamental property that the negative of the highest

occupied single-particle eigenvalue equals the exact ﬁrst ionization energy I [8]. It is well

known that in actual (approximate) SDFT calculations the highest occupied eigenvalue pro-

vides only an unsatisfactory approximation to I if the local-density approximation (LDA) or

any of the common generalized-gradient approximations (GGA’s) are used. The main rea-

son for this failure is incomplete self-interaction correction (SIC). We have recently explored

numerically the question if the application of CDFT corrections on top of a converged SDFT

LDA calculation can mitigate this problem, or reduce the remaining diﬀerence to experiment

after a SIC has been applied [9].

This investigation was partially motivated by the observation that in order to prepare

a current-carrying single-particle state in an atom one must selectively occupy certain m-

substates, and leave others unoccupied. In the absence of orbital currents and external ﬁelds

2

all single-particle states diﬀering only in the occupation of m-substates are degenerate, but in

the presence of currents this degeneracy is broken, and it becomes a legitimate question to ask

if one of the resulting single-particle energies is a better approximation to the experimental

I than the one obtained by spherical averaging (i.e., restoring the original degeneracy).

−
This becomes an interesting question in particular for open-shell systems, where orbital

currents can ﬂow. The numerical results obtained in Ref. [9] did not allow to give a conclusive

answer since, although the proposed calculation turned out to be numerically feasible, no

systematic improvement of ionization energies with respect to SDFT was achieved. While

this was discussed in some detail in Ref. [9], another interesting aspect of those data was

mentioned there only in passing, namely that the current-dependent correction tends to

lower the single-particle energy, as compared to an (S)DFT calculation for the same state.

This lowering suggests that inclusion of the current-dependent part of the full exchange-

correlation functional — and hence of Axc — provides extra stabilization of the current-

carrying state, relative to a current-independent calculation for the same state. In the present

paper we continue this investigation of current-carrying single-particle states, and show that

the lowering of the single-particle energy of the current-carrying orbital due to xc eﬀects is

robust against a variety of technical and conceptual changes in the calculational procedure.

II. METHODS

In general, the ionization energy of a many-body system is deﬁned as I = E(N

−
E(N), where E(M) is the many-body ground-state energy of the M-electron system. Simi-

1)

−

larly, the current ﬂowing in a many-body system in the absence of externally applied mag-

netic ﬁelds is the expectation value of

ˆjp(r) =

N

1
2i

Xi ∇iδ(r

−

ri) + δ(r

ri)

∇i,

−

(3)

taken with the many-body wave function. Within DFT, SDFT and CDFT the ioniza-

tion energy can also be calculated from the negative of the highest occupied single-particle

eigenvalue [8], and within CDFT (but not DFT or SDFT) the current can also be calculated
from Eq. (1), which is obtained by taking the expectation value of ˆjp(r) with the Kohn-Sham

Slater determinant [5, 6, 7]. Note that these are exact properties, which hold regardless of

the fact that the quantum numbers (l, m) used to label the noninteracting atomic states are

3

not the same used for the interacting states, 2S+1LJ .

Consequently, it is not necessary to construct current-carrying many-body states to cal-

culate the ionization energy of the current-carrying system. The (at least m-fold degenerate)

highest eigenvalue of the unperturbed noninteracting Kohn-Sham system already yields the

ionization energy in the absence of currents. A current-carrying state is then described by

selectively occupying single-body substates with deﬁnite value of m, obtained by multiplying

a numerical radial function with the appropriate spherical harmonic Y l

m(θ, Φ). Within SDFT
these current-carrying states are still degenerate, but CDFT is capable of picking up the

energetic contribution of the current to the highest occupied single-particle state, and will

thus in general make a diﬀerent prediction for the ionization energy. The original motivation

for this work was to see if the resulting ionization energies of current-carrying single-particle

states were better approximations to the experimental ones, in particular for atoms whose

many-body conﬁguration has L

= 0 or J

= 0. This expectation was not bourne out by the

numbers in Ref. [9]. The present paper is concerned with the question whether this is due

to computational approximations made in that work, or a real physical phenomenon.

The computational approach of Ref. [9] was to apply CDFT not self-consistently, but per-

turbatively, following a converged (S)DFT calculation. This strategy, denoted perturbative

CDFT (pCDFT) was proposed by one of us in Ref. [10], and leads to a major simpliﬁcation

of the CDFT equations. While similar in spirit to post-LDA applications of GGA [11], or

post-GGA applications of Meta-GGA [12, 13], pCDFT is not simply obtained by substitut-

ing SDFT orbitals in CDFT expressions (as in ‘post’ methods), but amounts to low-order

perturbation theory with respect to Axc, taking as unperturbed system the Kohn-Sham

equations of (S)DFT. In this sense there is some conceptual similarity between pCDFT and

Møller-Plesset perturbation theory, and also between pCDFT and the SDFT derivation of

the Stoner approximation to the theory of itinerant ferromagnetism [14]. Since the basic

equations of CDFT and pCDFT have been described in detail in Refs. [5, 6, 7] and [9, 10],

respectively, we refer the interested reader to these papers, and here focus directly on nu-

merical results and their interpretation. For later reference we record, however, the explicit

expression for the perturbative shift of the k’th single-particle eigenvalue due to the presence

of the current in the orbital ψk(r) [10],

δǫk =

d3r jp,k(r)

Axc[n, jp](r),

1
c Z

(4)

·

4

6
6
where

jp,k(r) =

1
2i

[ψ∗

k(r)

ψk(r)

∇

(

−

∇

ψ∗

k(r))ψk(r)] .

(5)

Our previous results for the pCDFT corrections to the highest occupied DFT-LDA eigen-

value for open-shell atoms prepared in a current-carrying state indicate that, without apply-

ing a SIC, CDFT eigenvalues are about as far from the experimental ﬁrst ionization energies

as SDFT ones, whereas after applying a SIC the remaining diﬀerence between experiment

and LDA-SIC is comparable to (but still larger than) the pCDFT corrections [9]. We found

the pCDFT corrections to be mostly negative, i.e., to stabilize the current-carrying state as

compared to a (current-insensitive) SDFT calculation for the same current-carrying conﬁg-

uration. Since LDA+SIC sometimes underestimates and sometimes overestimates the true

ionization energy, a negative correction cannot consistently improve agreement with exper-

iment. However, the fact that the single-particle energy is lowered upon including Axc is

interesting in its own right, even if the deviation of LDA-SIC from experimental ionization

energies is not dominated by current-related eﬀects, and it is important to check whether it

is robust against changes in the approximations and computational procedures.

To further investigate these issues we consider, in the present paper, three methodological

changes with respect to the calculations of Ref. [9]. First, we obtain the orbitals and energies

of the unperturbed system (i.e., the DFT Kohn-Sham equations) not with LDA but from two

common GGAs: B88-LYP [11, 16] and PW91 [17]. Either choice should yield an improved

description of the input orbitals needed for perturbatively calculating the eﬀect of Axc. In

a ﬁrst step we made only this change, to single out the consequences of passing from LDA

to GGA without changing anything else.

In a second step, we analyse the role played by the orbital susceptibility χ in the CDFT

LDA, ELDA

xc

[n, jp] (cf. Eqs. (8,9) of Ref. [9] or Eq. (17) of Ref.[5] for the explicit form

of this functional). In the spirit of the ordinary LDA, this functional is derived from the

interacting uniform electron gas [5, 6, 7]. Current-related many-body eﬀects enter via the

orbital (Landau) susceptibility χ, which has been calculated numerically for the electron gas

by Vignale, Rasolt and Geldart [18] and parametrized by Lee, Colwell and Handy (LCH)

[19, 20, 21] and in Ref. [9]. We observe that of these two parametrizations the ﬁve-term

interpolation [9]

s5(rs) = 1.1038

0.4990r1/3

s + 0.4423√rs −

−

0.06696rs + 0.0008432r2
s,

(6)

5

provides a better ﬁt of the 10 data points of Ref. [18], while the LCH expression [19, 20, 21]

sLCH(rs) = (1.0 + 0.028rs) exp (

0.042rs)

(7)

−

has the correct limiting behaviour as rs →
addition to calculations employing consistently the LCH or the ﬁve-term interpolations, we

, and a smoother derivative. In

0 and rs → ∞

thus tentatively also implemented a hybrid calculation that employs (6) for s(r), but (7) for

its gradient

∇
In these expressions rs is related to the density via n = 3/4πr3

dn ∇

s(r) =

drs(n)

ds(rs)
drs

n(r).

the (known) orbital susceptibility of the noninteracting electron gas.

s, and s = χ/χ0, where χ0 is

Third, we observed that either expression for the orbital susceptibility is derived from the

Vignale-Rasolt-Geldart data for the electron gas [18], which clearly has a susceptibility that

is very diﬀerent from that of an open-shell atom. We thus also considered a semi-empirical

expression of the LCH form,

sse(rs) = (1.0 + b rc

s) exp (

0.042rs),

−

whose parameters b and c were ﬁtted to reproduce the experimental value of

I for the

−

Carbon atom and then employed unchanged for the other atoms. This semi-empirical cal-

culation can provide a valuable additional piece of information: If it turned out that with a

semi-empirical susceptibility, ﬁtted to one atom only, good ionization energies were obtained

also for the other atoms this would suggest that the form of the employed functional for

Axc is in principle correct, but handicaped by the input data from the electron gas. If, on

the other hand, replacing the electron-gas susceptibility by a semi-empirical one did not

improve the ionization energies for the other atoms considered, this would suggest that the

functional itself may not be adequate for this type of calculation, independently of the origin

(8)

(9)

of the susceptibility used in it.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Our results are summarized in Table I, which for each atom and current-carrying (cc)

single-particle (sp) state considered lists the diﬀerence ∆I between the LDA+SIC data of

Ref. [15] and the experimental data [22]. The other columns contain data for the negative

6

of the pCDFT shift of the highest occupied eigenvalue,

δǫ, obtained from Eq. (4) with the

−

various calculational schemes described above. In every case the unperturbed DFT orbitals

and energies were obtained using the fully numerical (basis-set free) Kohn-Sham code opmks

[23].

In Table I the current-carrying single-particle states are characterized succinctly by the

values of m of the single-particle orbitals occupied in the open shell. As an example of our

notation, for the Carbon atom the numbers

1, 0

in the second column mean that of the

{
two electrons in the open p-shell one is in a state with m = 1, the other in a state with

}

m = 0. Note that states with m = 0 do not make a contribution to either jp or Axc. States

with m = 1 and with m =

1 make a contribution of same magnitude but opposite sign to

−

each jp and Axc. Hence both lead to the same value for the resulting energy shift, which is
determined by the product jp ·
for each open shell. Ref. [9] contains data for other choices of occupation.

Axc. Here we consider only one single-particle conﬁguration

We now systematically discuss each of the calculational schemes described above, and

the resulting conclusions. Altough we do not ﬁnd that ionization energies are systematically

improved by pCDFT, we still present, in Sec. III A, a rather detailed discussion of the corre-

sponding numbers, since they justify our conclusion that the diﬀerence between experiment

and LDA+SIC is most likely not due to current-related eﬀects. In Sec. III B we then turn to

the possible self-induced stabilization of current-carrying states via formation of a nonzero

xc vector potential Axc.

A.

Ionization energies

In column three of Table I we reproduce the results obtained with LDA for vxc and the

LCH expression (7) for s = χ/χ0. These are the same data listed in Table I of Ref. [9]

and are repeated here for comparison purposes [24]. As pointed out in Ref. [9], there is no

overall systematic trend as to when the pCDFT correction improves the LDA+SIC value

and by what margin, although we note that for the ﬁrst-row elements there is a systematic

correlation between the atomic number Z and the size of ∆I, while for ﬁrst and second-row

elements there is a correlation between δǫ and the size of the current. The deviation between

the LDA+SIC+pCDFT values and experiment is, however, in most cases larger than the

pCDFT correction itself, which leads us to believe that other eﬀects, not related to orbital

7

currents, must play a more important role in explaining the remaining diﬀerences. Some

possible sources for these are explored in the following.

The next two columns list data obtained using the B88-LYP and PW91 GGAs for vxc.

As anticipated in Ref. [9], the resulting changes are very small. This shows that for the

remaining calculations we can use either functional, without signiﬁcant changes in the ﬁnal

numbers. It also implies that an improved treatment of the unperturbed system does not

improve agreement with experiment, suggesting, as expected, that the critical ingredient in

the calculation is the current-dependent part of the full xc functional, not the charge-density

dependent one.

The following column contains results obtained with the ﬁve-term expression (6) for

the susceptibility ratio s = χ/χ0 in the current-dependent part of the functional. These

values replace the ones listed in Table I of Ref. [9], which suﬀered from a numerical error.

This correction does lead to somewhat diﬀerent numbers, but does not aﬀect any of the

conclusions drawn in Ref. [9]. In particular, it remains still true that the numbers are more

strongly dependent on the choice made for the orbital susceptibility than on the one for

the charge-dependent part of the functional (LDA/GGA). The next column contains data

from the hybrid implementation using the LCH expression (7) for determining

s(r) and

∇

the ﬁve-term expression (6) for s(r). The results are on average closer to those obtained

with only the LHC expression than to those obtained with only the ﬁve-term interpolation.

Finally, we list data obtained with the semi-empirical expression (9). In this case the value

for the m1 = 1 and m2 = 0 single-particle (Kohn-Sham) conﬁguration of the Carbon atom

was used to determine the parameters b and c, while the other values were obtained holding

these parameters ﬁxed. The optimal values b = 0.161 and c = 0.689 exactly reproduce

the ﬁrst ionization energy of Carbon. This procedure allows us to disentangle the form of

the functional from the electron-gas origin of the original expression for the susceptibility.

Clearly, some improvement for the other atoms is obtained in this way, in particular as

regards the sign of the corrections, but the improvement is still not fully satisfactory or

consistently obtained for all considered systems. This observation suggests that future work

should go into deducing CDFT functionals adequate for ﬁnite systems, instead of improving

on the electron-gas data.

Our conclusion from all these calculations is that currents in open shells do not make a

decisive contribution to atomic ionization energies.

8

B. Possible self-stabilization of current-carrying states

We now focus on the CDFT shifts δǫ themselves, independently of the question how

they change ionization energies. For this purpose we have to disregard the second-to-last

(semi-empirical) column of Table I, because the values of δǫ listed there were forced to have

the sign and size required to obtain perfect agreement with experimental ionization energies

for the Carbon atom, and can thus not be used to discuss sign and size of the calculated

correction.

A notable feature of the non-empirical data collected in Table I is that, with exception of

a few cases using the ﬁve-term interpolation for the derivative of χ, the pCDFT correction

δǫ is negative throughout. (Data obtained with the ﬁve-term interpolation for the derivative
0 and rs → ∞
of the orbital susceptibility may be less reliable because of the wrong rs →
limits and the polynomial ﬁt involved.) To appreciate that this lowering of the single-

particle eigenvalue of the current-carrying state is not entirely trivial, consider the following

two observations: (i) Both jp(r) and Axc(r) individually have positive and negative values

for some r, it is only the integral over their product, Eq. (4), which is negative. (ii) Axc itself

is nonzero only due to the presence of the current, so that the energy lowering is not simply

due to the accomodation of a current in the system in response to some external ﬁeld.

On the single-particle level, inclusion of the xc vector potential thus provides additional

stabilization of the current-carrying state, as compared to ordinary DFT or SDFT calcu-

lations, which are insensitive to the current. While this stabilization is apparently not a

decisive factor in determining ionization energies, it may have signiﬁcant consequences in

other situations, since it implies that a proper assessment of the energetics of processes

involving electron ﬂow should consider the xc eﬀects associated with charge currents, and

not only those associated with the charge density. In the present case the pCDFT shifts

are relatively small, but within the accuracy of modern density functionals. A systematic

exploration of current-related many-body eﬀects could hold some surprises, in particular for

nearly degenerate or symmetry-broken states, or in the presence of strong external ﬁelds.

We stress that this energy lowering is obtained for a ﬁxed current-carrying state, com-

paring a calculation that is insensitive to the current (the LDA of SDFT) with a calculation

that explicitly accounts for current-dependent correlations (the LDA of CDFT, implemented

within pCDFT). A related result was recently reported in Ref. [12] — employing another

9

current-dependent density functional, not constructed within the framework of CDFT —

where the total energies of some current-dependent states were found to be lower in a

current-dependent calculation than in a current-independent one.

In this context it is also interesting to recall the suggestion by Rasolt and Perrot [25]

that the ground state of a strongly inhomogeneous many-body system can develop spon-

taneous self-induced currents. This result was obtained using the same formal framework

as here (CDFT), but with a quite diﬀerent choice of the density functional (optimized for

two-dimensional systems), and by performing a direct minimization of the total energy

(thus avoiding any self-consistent calculations). Clearly a spontaneously current-carrying

ground state is an extreme example of self-stabilization, in which the energy lowering due to

current-dependent correlations does not only reduce the energy below the one of a current-

independent calculation for the same current-carrying state, but even below the one of the

not current-carrying state. It remains to be explored whether our above result, obtained for

single-particle energies, can be related to this type of novel many-body ground state.

IV.

SUMMARY

Concerning the calculation of ionization energies, we ﬁnd that neither the description of

the charge-dependent part of the functional (LDA or GGA) nor the quality of the interpo-

lation used for the electron-gas susceptibility (LCH or ﬁve-term interpolations) decisively

inﬂuence the quality of the ﬁnal results, whereas a semi-empirical expression for the sus-

ceptibility yields better results than expressions based on the electron gas. Although it

is thus possible that current-dependent functionals designed speciﬁcally for ﬁnite systems

will further improve results, as compared to electron-gas based functionals, the remaining

diﬀerences to experiment are suﬃciently large to suggest that they are not due to orbital

currents.

While ionization energies thus do not seem to be systematically aﬀected by current-

dependent corrections, the single-particle energy of the current-carrying states is. The

self-stabilization of these states by means of the exchange-correlation vector potential,

Axc[n, jp], is found to be robust against a variety of numerical and conceptual changes

in the computational procedure. This self-stabilization is completely missed in current-

independent calculations, but may be relevant for studies of the energetics of processes

10

involving electron ﬂow and states with orbital currents in general.

Acknowledgments We thank E. Engel for providing us with the Kohn-Sham code

opmks, which was used for obtaining the (S)DFT orbitals and energies within the LDA,

B88-LYP and PW91 approximations. We also thank T. Marcasso for collaboration at an

earlier stage of this project, and L. N. Oliveira for useful discussions. Financial support by

FAPESP and CNPq is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] Kohn, W., Rev Mod Phys. 1999, 71, 1253.

[2] Dreizler, R.M.; Gross, E.K.U. Density Functional Theory; Springer: Berlin, 1990.

[3] Parr, R.G.; Yang, W. Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules; Oxford University

Press: Oxford, 1989.

[4] Kohn, W.; Becke, A.; Parr, R.G. J Phys Chem 1996, 100, 12974.

[5] Vignale, G.; Rasolt, M. Phys Rev Lett 1987, 59, 2360.

[6] Vignale, G.; Rasolt, M. Phys Rev B 1988, 37, 10685.

[7] Vignale, G.; Rasolt, M.; Geldart, D.J.W Adv Quantum Chem 1990, 21, 235.

[8] Note that this statement is diﬀerent from Koopman’s theorem in Hartree-Fock theory:

it

includes correlation, but holds only for the highest occupied eigenvalue.

[9] Orestes, E.; Marcasso, T.; Capelle, K. Phys Rev A 2003, 68, 022105.

[10] Capelle, K. Phys Rev A 1999, 60, 733.

[11] Becke, A.D. Phys Rev A 1988, 38, 3098.

[12] Becke, A.D. J Chem Phys. 2002, 117, 6935.

[13] Perdew, J.P.; Kurth, S.; Zupan, A.; Blaha, P. Phys Rev Lett 1999, 82, 2544.

[14] Gunnarsson, O. J Phys F 1976 6, 587.

[15] Chen, J.; Krieger, J.B.; Li, Y.; Iafrate, G.J. Phys Rev A 1996, 54, 3939.

[16] Lee, C.; Yang, W.; Parr, R.G. Phys Rev B 1988, 37, 785.

[17] Perdew, J.P.; Burke K.; Wang, Y. Phys Rev B 1996, 54, 16533.

[18] Vignale, G.; Rasolt, M.; Geldart, D.J.W. Phys Rev B 1988, 37, 2502.

[19] Colwell, S.M.; Handy, N.C. Chem Phys Lett 1994, 217, 271.

[20] Lee, A.M.; Colwell, S.M.; Handy, N.C. Chem Phys Lett 1994, 229, 225.

11

[21] Lee, A.M.; Colwell, S.M.; Handy, N.C. J Chem Phys 1995, 103, 10095.

[22] From the NIST standard reference data base (http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/).

[23] opmks: atomic DFT program written by E. Engel, University of Frankfurt, Germany.

[24] The value for Al, δǫ =

0.043 eV , corrects a typo in Ref. [9], where it was given as δǫ =

0.049 eV .

−

−

[25] Rasolt, M.; Perrot, F. Phys Rev Lett 1992, 69, 2563.

12

TABLE I: Current-induced changes in the ionization energies of atoms with open p (B to Cl) and d

(Sc, Y ) shells. Column one: atom. Column two: selected current-carrying (cc) single-particle (sp)

state, characterized by the occupied m-substates in the open shell. As in Ref. [9] we have normally

considered several current-carrying conﬁgurations for each atom, but here we list only one for each,

since the numbers for the others do not aﬀect any of the conclusions. Column three: Negative of

the pCDFT correction obtained with LDA, using the LCH expression (7) for the susceptibility

χ. Column four: Negative of the pCDFT correction obtained with B88-LYP GGA, using the

LCH χ. Column ﬁve: Negative of the pCDFT correction obtained with PW91 GGA, using the

LCH χ. Column six: Negative of the pCDFT correction obtained with LDA using the ﬁve-term

(5t) Eq. (6) for χ. Column seven: Negative of the pCDFT correction obtained with LDA, using

Eq. (6) for χ itself, but the LCH expression (7) for its gradient. Column eight: Negative of the

pCDFT correction obtained with LDA, using the semi-empirical (se) expression (9) for χ. Column

nine: deviation of zero-current ionization energy calculated within LDA-SIC [15] from experimental

ionization energies [22]. All values are in eV .

LDA

B88LYP

PW91

LDA

LDA

cc sp

state

1

1,0

1,1,0

1,1,0,0

1,1,0,0,-1

1

1,0

1,1,0

1,1,0,0

1

1

B

C

N

O

F

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Sc

Y

δǫ

−
LCH

0.072

0.045

0.14

0.11

0.023

0.043

0.022

0.059

0.044

0.036

0.035

δǫ

−
LCH

0.070

0.044

0.14

0.11

0.023

0.043

0.021

0.059

0.044

0.036

0.034

−

δǫ

5t

LDA

0.016

-0.012

-0.085

-0.10

-0.032

0.025

0.0061

0.0082

δǫ

−
5t/LCH

−

δǫ

se

-0.32

-0.018

∆I

-0.34

-0.42

-0.71

-1.2

-0.42

0.35

0.42

-

-

0.034

0.023

0.086

0.39

0.17

0.046

0.082

0.043

0.035

-0.34

-1.3

-1.2

-0.27

-0.34

-0.26

-0.19

0.027

-0.092

0.016

-0.093

0.036

0.034

0.012

0.015

δǫ

−
LCH

0.071

0.044

0.14

0.11

0.023

0.044

0.021

0.059

13

1,1,0,0,-1

0.0091

0.0091

0.0091

-0.0017

0.020

-0.073

-0.11

0.044

-0.0054

-0.32

-0.050

