Extracting Work From A Single Heat Bath

Department of Electronics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan

Arbab A. Khan

M.S. Ansari

Department of Chemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan

We present here a machine that is capable of extracting work from a single heat

bath. Although no signiﬁcant temperature gradient is involved in the operation of

the machine, yet the Carnot eﬃciency as high as one is achievable. Working of the

machine is explained on the basis of a demon suggested by Maxwell. Utilizing the

kinetic energy spectrum of the molecules in solution, the demon can send ”hotter”

molecules to a higher gravitational potential at the expense of their own energies.

Diﬀerence in chemical potentials due to concentration gradients and use of semi-

permeable membranes ensure the continuing cyclic process.

4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

0

Keywords: perpetual motion machine, osmosis, chemical potential

Perpetual Motion Machine (P MM)1,2, although hardly allowed by the laws of thermo-

dynamics, has been a subject of great interest since long. P MM of ﬁrst kind, in contrast

to the law of conservation of energy, is supposed to create energy, thus violating the ﬁrst

law of thermodynamics. On the other hand P MM of second kind should be capable to

convert total heat into useful work showing 100% eﬃciency of the heat engine, which is

rather contrary to the second law of thermodynamics.

Another manifestation that forbids P MM of second kind is that no work can be extracted

from a single heat bath. This is because according to Carnot, greater eﬃciency of a heat

engine is only possible if temperature of the energy source, Th is higher and the entropy sink

is maintained at a lower temperature Tc

2–4 whereby the Carnot eﬃciency, is given as

η = 1 − Tc/Th.

(1)

It is to note further that input of heat energy from a bath is essential for all heat engines

but for a P MM of second kind it can take place without requiring any temperature diﬀerence

and entropy sink.

An additional requirement that prohibits the existence of P MM is pertaining to en-

tropy, which for a spontaneous process must not decrease. Since P MM of second kind is

capable of increasing order by separating high and low energy particles without any en-

ergy involvement, its existence is not allowed according to the entropy considerations as

well. Maxwell’s demon5,6, a hypothetical “creature”, can sort hot and cold types of particles

without any eﬀort in measurement and consumption of energy, therefore it may also be

considered equivalent to a P MM of second kind.

Discovery of quantum non-demolition measurements and computing7–12 have given an

incentive and led to a reﬁned review of thermodynamics demanding a more careful search

for the existence of P MM.

Recently in their excellent paper Scully et al.13 working on a new kind of quantum heat
engine using “phaseonium”14 as fuel and utilizing lasing without inversion15–17, showed that

1

work can be extracted from a single heat bath but they had to consider vanishing quantum

coherence to save laws of thermodynamics.

In a recent communication Scully18 used a

Stern-Gerlach apparatus to sort hot and cold spin atoms thus acting as Maxwell’s demon.

To achieve a cyclic operation, the atomic center of mass was prepared in a well-deﬁned

quantum state, showing that the “cost” of preparing the center of mass wave packet was

enough to preserve the second law of thermodynamics.

Distribution of kinetic energy between the particles in a sample of gas or liquid at a

given temperature is Gaussian19,20. In an isolated system, one possible way of sorting high

and low energy particles can be moving up high-energy particles to a higher gravitational

potential at the expense of their own heat energies. The above scheme may be employed

for a cyclic process of mass-transfer to achieve useful work without involvement of an initial

temperature gradient.

At this point a system of two containers at diﬀerent gravitational potentials may be

considered as shown in Fig. 1. The container L at lower potential is ﬁlled with neat water,

while the container H at higher potential is initially empty. The system is in thermal

equilibrium at an absolute temperature T . The demon allows transfer of higher kinetic

energy particles from L to H utilizing their own energies. Consequently, mass m of water

may reach to H after gaining the gravitational potential energy mgh, where g is the (average)

gravitational constant and h is the height to which water is raised from the surface of water

in L. This will result in an overall decrease in temperature of the thermodynamically isolated

system. This temperature decrease may be related with potential energy as

∆T = mgh/Mσ,

(2)

where M and σ are the mass and speciﬁc heat capacity of the whole system. The temperature

of the system may again be raised back to T if water from H is allowed to drain into container

L. If the setup is connected to a heat reservoir that can maintain temperature T , this demon

will continue to pour more and more water into H by increasing the potential energy of water

at the expense of heat taken from the bath.

2

Fig. 1. Maxwell’s demon capable of separating higher energy water molecules to a container

at higher potential.

Kinetic energy spectrum of molecules in a solution requires the lighter solvent molecules

to be more agile and hence an eﬀective means of energy transfer. A semi-permeable mem-

brane (SP M) allows only solvent molecules to pass through it but solute molecules, espe-

cially of larger size, are not allowed to cross. Statistically the solvent molecules may move

across both sides of SP M. However, a net ﬂux of solvent across the SP M may take place

under the inﬂuence of gravitational and/or osmotic pressure.

Consider the setup for osmosis as shown in Fig. 2. (A). A tube whose lower end is

attached to an SP M contains sugar solution in it. If the SP M is immersed in neat water

and the system is left alone to equilibrate, the level of the solution rises in the tube due to

osmosis till a height h is ﬁnally attained at which the column level in the tube is maintained

by a counterbalance of water-ﬂow across the SP M. Under this condition the chemical

potential of water on the two sides of the SP M becomes equal21. The column pressure,

ρgh (ρ being the solution density in appropriate units) makes water to ﬂow out of the tube

through SP M while the osmotic pressure tends to maintain the level by an inwards ﬂow.

As a result, a state of dynamic equilibrium is reached. The osmotic pressure, Π may be

related to the mole fraction of water, XA as

Π = −(RT /Vm)lnXA,

(3)

where R is the gas constant, T is absolute temperature and Vm is the molar volume of

water. For dilute solutions, eq. (3) simpliﬁes to well-known van’t Hoﬀ’s expression that

directly relates osmotic pressure with the solute concentration21,?,?. It is evident that the

column pressure, ρgh alone is responsible for the outwards ﬂow of water through SP M.

Hence in the event where the SP M is not immersed, water will come out of it under the

inﬂuence of the column pressure. This is depicted in Fig. 2 (B), where shape of the SP M

is slightly modiﬁed as per requirement of the experiment to be discussed later.

3

Fig. 2.

(A) Setup for osmosis showing a rise of the solution level due to inwards ﬂow of water

through the SPM. (B) Setup for the outwards ﬂow of water under the inﬂuence of column pressure,

ρgl.

Now we join together the above two setups so that the sugar solution becomes enclosed

in a tube whose both ends are attached to SP M as shown in Fig. 3. Since the lower SP M

remains immersed in water in L, osmosis continues and tends to maintain the column height

h. The inward pressure at the lower SP M is still governed by eq. (3). On the other hand,

the upper SP M has been kept hanging at an average height k above the water level in L.

An outwards pressure on the upper SP M is an essential requirement for the outﬂow of water

through it; keeping k < h ensures this working condition. A suitable arrangement for the

escape of dissolved air or the air that enters into the tube through SP M may be made by

providing an “air escape valve” above height h as shown in Fig. 3. Water uptake through the

lower SP M and release through the upper SP M makes reaching a dynamic equilibrium at

which a steady ﬂow of water from L to H is maintained. The neat water collected in H may

be made to drain back into L thus completing the ﬂow cycle and providing an opportunity

to extract useful work from the system. We have successfully achieved the working of the

setup shown in Fig. 3 at ambient temperature and also repeated the experiment. For this

purpose, about 30 % by weight sugar solution was used and a natural SP M was employed.

Fig. 3.

Setup showing a PMM of second kind, regarded as a Maxwell’s demon, which can

totally convert absorbed heat into useful work without any involvement of temperature diﬀerence.

Functioning of the above P MM depends upon various factors related to its design and

the working conditions. A steady ﬂow rate, besides other factors, depends upon quality

& size of the SP M, concentration of the sugar solution and temperature of the system. A

number of factors tend to hinder the performance of the P MM. One important factor is the

accumulation of water droplets at the outer surface of the upper SP M. This problem may be

minimized by properly designing the shape of the SP M. Another factor is the concentration

gradient developed within the solution due to induction of neat water. Diﬀusion of sugar

4

molecules and a slow rate of ﬂow tend to nullify this gradient. The net eﬀect of both the

above factors is a reduction of the ﬂow rate than expected.

We conclude that the setup shown in Fig. 3 behaves as a Maxwell’s demon without itself

consuming any energy or involving any change of state, but converts heat into potential

energy. It is notable that the whole system is at a single temperature, T maintained by the

heat bath of the surrounding. Further the system is non-temporal, i.e., all the parameters

like concentration and pressure etc. are time independent.

1. S.W. Angrist, Scientiﬁc American 218 (1) (1986) 114.

2. W. Kauzmann, Thermodynamics and Statistics (W.A. Benjamin, Inc., NY, 1967) pp. 123-8.

3. P.W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry 4th ed. (W.H. Freeman and Company, NY, 1990) pp. 96-8.

4. K. Annamalai and I. Puri, Advanced Thermodynamic Engineering (CRC Press, Boca Raton,

Fl, 2001).

5. H.S. Leﬀ, A.F. Rex, Eds., Maxwell’s Demon (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1990).

6. H.C. von Baeyer, Warmth Disperses and Time Passes (Random House, New York, 1999).

7. M. Brune, S. Haroche, V. Lefevre, J.M. Raimond, N. Zagury, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990) 976.

8. M. Brune, S. Haroche, J.M. Raimond, L. Davidovich, N. Zagury, Phys. Rev. A 45 (1992) 5193.

9. Arbab A. Khan, M.S. Zubairy, Phys. Lett. A 254 (1999) 301.

10. N. Imoto, H.A. Haus, Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. A 32 (1985) 2287.

11. J.-F. Roch, K. Vigneron, Ph. Grelu, J.-Ph. Poizat, Ph. Grangier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997)

634.

12. Arbab A. Khan, M.S. Zubairy, Fortschr. Phys. 46 (1998) 417.

5

13. M.O. Scully, M.S. Zubairy, G.S. Agarwal, H. Walther, Science 299 (2003) 862.

14. M.O. Scully, M.S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics (Cambridge Press. London, 1997).

15. O. Kocharovskaya, Phys. Rep. 219 (1992) 175.

16. E. Arimondo, Prog. Opt. 35 (1996) 257.

17. S. Harris, Phys. Today 50 (1995) 36.

18. M. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 220601.

19. F. Reif, Statistical Physics (McGraw-Hill, Inc., NY, 1967) pp. 350-4.

20. U. Lachish, J. Chem. Educ. 55 (1978) 369.

21. D. Tabor, Gases, liquids and solids and other states of matter, 3rd ed. (Cambridge University

Press, 1993) pp. 276-80.

22. P.W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry 4th ed. (W.H. Freeman and Company, NY, 1990) pp. 171-2.

23. J.H. van’t Hoﬀ, Zeitsdhrift fur physikalische Chemie 1 (1887) 481.

Figure Caption

Fig. 1 Maxwell’s demon capable of separating higher energy water molecules to a con-

tainer at higher potential.

Fig. 2 (A) Setup for osmosis showing a rise of the solution level due to inwards ﬂow of

water through the SPM. (B) Setup for the outwards ﬂow of water under the inﬂuence of

column pressure, ρgl.

diﬀerence.

Fig. 3 Setup showing a PMM of second kind, regarded as a Maxwell’s demon, which

can totally convert absorbed heat into useful work without any involvement of temperature

6

Container H

h

Container L

h

Sugar
solution

Sugar
solution

l

SPM

Water
coming out

Neat
water

k

Container H

SPM

Container L

(A)

(B)

Air escape valve

SPM

Neat water

h

k

Container H
Sugar solution

SPM

Neat water

Container L

