5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Smooth/rough layering in
liquid-crystalline/gel state of dry phospholipid
ﬁlm, in relation to its ability to generate giant
vesicles

Mafumi Hishida, Hideki Seto, Kenichi Yoshikawa

∗

Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan

Abstract

Morphological changes in a dry phospholipid ﬁlm on a solid substrate were stud-
ied below and above the main transition temperature, between the gel and liquid-
crystalline phases by phase-contrast microscopy and AFM. A Phospholipid ﬁlm
in the liquid-crystalline phase exhibits ﬂat, smooth layering, whereas that in the
gel phase shows rough, random layering. These ﬁlm morphologies are discussed in
relation to the ability to form giant vesicles through the natural swelling method.

1 Introduction

All living cells on the earth maintain their lives by using a closed thin mem-
brane with a size of 1-100 µm, the main constituent of which is phospholipid
molecules. Currently, closed vesicular membranes made of phospholipids have
been actively studied, and these have ranged in size from on the order of 10
nm to 10 µm. Among these vesicular membranes, giant vesicles, GV, which
are larger than 1 µm, are thought to be suitable for use as a model system of
living cells. [1,2,3,27,28].

Various methods have been developed to prepare GVs such as the electro-
formation or the solvent-spherule evaporation method [4,5,6,7,25,26]. However,
the use of such physical and chemical treatments inevitably has harmful eﬀects
∗

Corresponding author. FAX: +81 75 753 3779
Email address: yoshikaw@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp (Kenichi Yoshikawa).

Preprint submitted to Chemical Physics Letters

24 December 2013

on the model cell system, such as denaturation of proteins and the destruction
of unstable biochemical species. On the other hand, under suitable conditions
GVs are formed with mild treatment under natural swelling [4]. Although this
method has been frequently used, the mechanism of GV formation is not yet
fully understood and the preparation method is still dependent on technical
skill without a solid physico-chemical background [6].

To investigate of the mechanism of GV formation by the natural swelling
method, some studies with phase-contrast optical microscopy have shown that
the myelin ﬁgures grew in the form of tubular ﬁbrils when non-charged phos-
pholipid dry ﬁlms were hydrated [4,8,9,10]. Reeves et al. considered the process
of “budding-oﬀ” of the myelin ﬁgures as an intermediate state in GV forma-
tion [4]. However, their experimental conditions were markedly diﬀerent from
the usual procedure of the natural swelling method, i.e., the phospholipid dry
ﬁlms were prepared ﬁlling the space between two parallel glass plates, and
the amount of water was very small, while in the natural swelling a spot of
phospholipid dry ﬁlm is covered by excess water in a test tube. In addition,
the “budding-oﬀ” process is not well veriﬁed by experiments and has not been
understood theoretically.

To solve the problems concerning the budding-oﬀ model, Lasic investigated the
size distribution of vesicles hydrated from dry ﬁlms on substrates with various
topologies [5]. They found that bilayered phospholipid ﬂakes (BPF) peeled
oﬀ from the support and their sizes depended on the topology of the sub-
strate. However, this could not explain the mechanism of the natural swelling
method. Since dry ﬁlm has been thought to be aligned with slight defects on
a smooth substrate, many defects should be formed in hydration process to
make BPFs, where more energy is required to make defects compared with
thermal ﬂuctuation. In addition, the structures of phospholipid dry ﬁlm com-
posed of multi-stacked layers on a smooth substrate has not been directly
observed, which might aﬀect the formation of BPFs.

Recently, through the use of atomic force microscopy (AFM), the nm-scale
structures of phospholipid ﬁlms have been investigated [11,12,13,14,20,21].
While these studies revealed the lateral structures of these ﬁlms (e.g., do-
main formation, ripple structure), most observed only one or a few layers of
membranes. Simonsen et al. showed the structure of spin-coated POPC dry
ﬁlm and hydrated dry ﬁlm [21]. In their study, the number of stacked layers
was only 1-3 and they did not refer to the relation with the mechanism of
GV formation. Leonenko et al. also performed AFM observation for only one
layer of phospholipid on mica prepared by vesicle adsorption, and noted the
temperature-dependence of the morphology [24]. On the other hand, studies
by X-ray scattering or neutron scattering on stacks of hundreds of layers on
a solid substrate clariﬁed only the average inter-layer structure, and did not
aim at clarifying the mechanism of GV formation; the condition was far from

2

that in the natural swelling method [15,16,17].

In this study, the micrometer-scale morphologies of phospholipid dry ﬁlms
composed of multi-layers on smooth substrate were observed as the initial
state of GV formation by phase-contrast microscopy and AFM. All of the
observations were carried out under the conditions that are commonly used
to prepare GV with the natural swelling method. We also paid attention to
the diﬀerence between the structures of the dry ﬁlms in diﬀerent phases; a
′
disordered phase (liquid-crystalline Lα phase) and an ordered phase (gel Lβ
phase), above and below a main transition temperature Tm. To discuss the
relation between the morphology of dry ﬁlm and the eﬃciency of GV forma-
tion, hydrated products as the ﬁnal state were observed by phase-contrast
microscopy. The results revealed new aspects of GV formation.

2 Materials and Method

2.1 Chemicals

1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) was obtained in powder form
from SIGMA ALDRICH, 1,2-Dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC)
was also obtained in powder form from Wako Pure Chemical Industries. The
lipids were used without further puriﬁcation. As a mother solution, these
lipids were dissolved in an organic solvent composed of dehydrated chloro-
form and dehydrated methanol (2:1 v/v) (both of which were from NACALAI
TESQUE). For complete dehydration, molecular sieves (NACALAI TESQUE)
were mixed in the solution. The mother solution (10 mM) was stored at -30◦C
and used for all of the experiments after being allowed to stand at room tem-
perature for ﬁve minutes.

2.2 Natural swelling method

Glass plates (30×40 mm thickness 0.12-0.17 mm from MATSUNAMI GLASS)
and test tubes (9×30 mm from Maruemu Corporation) were treated with ace-
tone. The mother solution (10 mM, 10 µl) was dropped onto the glass plate or
into the glass test tube, and the solvent was evaporated calmly in air (40-50%
humidity) at room temperature for over 15 minutes. To remove the solvent
completely, the samples were placed under vacuum overnight. After this pro-
cedure, a 5-7mm-diameter spot of the phospholipid dry ﬁlm remained on the
glass plate or in the test tube. Under these conditions, over a hundred bilayers
were stacked. The samples on glass plates were used for the observation of dry

3

ﬁlms and the samples in the test tubes were used to prepare GVs. When dry
ﬁlms in the test tube were hydrated with pure water (MilliQ, 100 µl) at room
temperature or at a temperature above the main transition point (from the
gel phase to the liquid-crystalline phase) of phospholipid without agitation,
GVs with diameters of 1-100 µm swelled spontaneously (the suspension was
at most 1 mM).

2.3 Phase-contrast microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM)

The suspensions prepared by hydrating the phospholipid dry ﬁlm or the phos-
pholipid dry ﬁlms on substrates were observed by phase-contrast microscopy
(E600, Nikon) under green light. The images were captured with a CCD cam-
era and recorded and analyzed with an image processor. To increase contrast
in the images, 50 consecutive images were stacked and averaged. The phos-
pholipid dry ﬁlms on glass plates were also investigated by AFM (NVB-100,
Olympus) with tapping mode. The images were analyzed and captured with
a Nanoscope IIIa system (Digital Instruments). For modiﬁcation, the images
were ﬂattened and plane-ﬁtted to remove inclination of the glass plates. All
experiments were carried out at room temperature

3 Results

Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show the phase-contrast microscopic images of DOPC
and DPPC dry ﬁlms , both of which were prepared at room temperature
(22◦C±2◦C). The surface of the DOPC ﬁlm is smooth and ﬂat, and exhibits
a multi-layered terrace-like morphology. The size of each layer measured was
1-100 µm, which was comparable to the size of GVs obtained through natural
swelling [4]. In contrast, the surface of the DPPC ﬁlm is rather rough. Figure
2 shows AFM images of DOPC and DPPC ﬁlms. DOPC ﬁlm were composed
of several ﬂat layers and the step height was about 4.5 nm, corresponding to
the thickness of the DOPC bilayer in the liquid-crystalline Lα phase [19]. In
contrast, the DPPC dry ﬁlm show a very rough surface.

Figure 1(c) shows a phase-contrast microscopic image of a DPPC dry ﬁlm
observed at room temperature after being annealed at 80◦C for over 12 hours.
A ﬂat multi-layered structure is observed, similar to the case of a DOPC dry
ﬁlm (Fig. 1(a)).

After 12 hours of hydration of these dry ﬁlms with pure water at room temper-
ature, the bulk aqueous solution was monitored by phase-contrast microscopy.
Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the typical products of DOPC and DPPC, respec-

4

Fig. 1. Phase-contrast microscopic images of phospholipid dry ﬁlms in air at room
temperature. (a) DOPC dry ﬁlm prepared in air at room temperature. The surface
is ﬂat and a stepped terrace-like morphology is observed. The size of the terrace
is comparable to the size of GVs. (b) DPPC dry ﬁlm prepared in air at room
temperature. The surface seems to be rough, and no steps are observed. (c) DPPC
dry ﬁlm. The sample is prepared in air at room temperature and annealed to be in
the liquid-crystalline phase (>80◦C, >12 h). After this procedure, the sample was
observed at room temperature (in the gel phase). A step morphology is observed.

tively, swollen from dry ﬁlms prepared at room temperature (corresponding to
(a) and (b) in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively). Diﬀerences were noted with regard
to the eﬃciency of GV formation and the morphology of the suspension. Many
GVs were obtained by hydrating the DOPC dry ﬁlm, and the cross-section
proﬁle of DOPC has two small narrow peaks, which means that these products
are vesicles made by thin-layered membranes (GV). The GVs ranged in the
size from 1 to 100 µm and were polydisperse. In contrast, no GVs, but a few
aggregates of phospholipid (<1 µm), were obtained by hydrating the DPPC
dry ﬁlm. The cross-section proﬁle of DPPC has a single large peak, which
means that phospholipid molecules did not organize into giant vesicles but
rather into random aggregates of phospholipid molecules. Notably, the DPPC
ﬁlm remained on the surface of the test tube after 12 hours of hydration.

Figure 3(c) shows the results of GV formation by hydrating DPPC dry ﬁlm at
50◦C, i.e., which is above the main transition temperature. GVs were obtained
eﬀectively and the ﬁlm did not remain on the surface of the test tube when
the phospholipid was in the liquid crystalline phase. On the other hand, the
DPPC dry ﬁlm that was annealed at 80◦C (Fig. 1(c)) did not give either GVs or
aggregations of phospholipid molecules when hydrated at room temperature.

4 Discussion

The present results show that liquid-crystalline and gel ﬁlms of phospholipid
exhibit smooth and rough layering. It is well known that DOPC is in the dis-
ordered, liquid-crystalline phase, and DPPC is in the ordered, gel phase, at
room temperature under both dry and wet condition (in excess pure excess

5

(a)

100 nm

(b) 100 nm

1 µm

1 µm

1 µm

1 µm

Fig. 2. 3-D images of phospholipid dry ﬁlms observed by AFM. (a) DOPC dry
ﬁlm showing a ﬂat multilayered structure. The step height is about 4.5 nm, which
corresponds to the thickness of a DOPC bilayer. (b) DPPC dry ﬁlm exhibiting a
random, rough surface.

Fig. 3. (Upper) Phase-contrast microscopic images of objects obtained by the nat-
ural swelling method (Lower) Cross-section proﬁles along the latitudinal lines. (a)
Hydrated products of DOPC at room temperature. GVs are obtained eﬀectively. (b)
Phase-contrast images of DPPC. No GVs are generated. A few aggregates of phos-
pholipid molecules are observed. (c) Phase-contrast image of DPPC hydrated at
50◦C. GVs are eﬀectively obtained by hydrating DPPC ﬁlm in the liquid-crystalline
phase.

water, the main transition temperature Tm of DOPC is about -20◦C and that
of DPPC is about 42◦C. In dry ﬁlm, the Tm of DOPC increases to 0◦C and
that of DPPC increases to 80◦C, respectively) [18]. Phospholipid in the liquid-
crystalline phase on a smooth substrate forms smooth, ﬂat layers (Figs. 1(a),
2(a)). The ﬂat layers of annealed DPPC indicates that this saturated phospho-
lipid can form ﬂat layers above the main transition temperature (Fig. 1(c)). A
disordered phospholipid ﬁlm with a nm-scale length exhibits smooth, ordered
layering on the scale of µm. In contrast, the morphology of a dry ﬁlm in the gel
phase depends on the process used for preparation. When organic solvents are
evaporated below the Tm, the dry ﬁlm exhibits rough layering (Fig. 2(b)), while
the well-aligned step morphology (Fig. 1(c)) is formed when the dry ﬁlm is
prepared by cooling across the main transition temperature. In a related study,
Perino-Gallice et al. indicated that wetting induces micrometer-scale changes
in morphology [20]. However, in the present study, similar morphologies were
observed even in dry ﬁlms and the diﬀerence in morphologies originates from
the phases of phospholipid molecules.

6

The hydration of phospholipid dry ﬁlms gave simple results; in the liquid-
crystalline phase, GVs were obtained eﬀectively (Figs. 3(a) and 3(c)), while
in the gel phase, GVs were not obtained at all (Fig. 3(b)). Our results with
DOPC showed that GVs could be formed eﬀectively from the regular stacking
of phospholipid layers on a smooth substrate, and suggested that the size of
GVs was deﬁned by the size of the phospholipid layers forming the terrace
morphology. This tendency is consistent with the result reported by Lasic; the
lipid layers of each terrace acts as a BPF. The highly aligned step morphology
of a phospholipid dry ﬁlm as an initial state is essential for the formation
of GVs. Taking the result reported by Perino-Gallice et al. into account, the
morphology of the phospholipid ﬁlm was reconstructed and showed a well-
aligned step morphology upon crossing the main transition temperature from
the gel phase to the liquid-crystalline phase under wet conditions. GVs were
formed eﬀectively even when the morphology of the dry ﬁlm was rough. Thus,
GVs were eﬀectively formed from the DPPC ﬁlm at 50◦C.

The result that GVs were not formed eﬀectively from the annealed DPPC dry
ﬁlm with the step morphology indicated that the large undulation motion of
the membrane is also important for BPFs to peel oﬀ, since only steric force
can act as a repulsive force for the non-charged phospholipid [22]. This notion
is closely related to the fact that the unbinding transition is induced only in
the liquid-crystalline phase [23].

The mechanism of GV formation is depicted in the scheme in Fig. 4. The
phospholipid dry ﬁlm in the disordered liquid-crystalline phase forms a regu-
larly stacked step morphology like micrometer-scale terraces. When this ﬁlm
is hydrated, water penetrates between the layers and phospholipid membranes
separate almost inﬁnitely under thermal ﬂuctuation. The steps in the multi-
layer serve to introduce aqueous solution into the interlayer region, and also
promote sequential peeling oﬀ of the layers. The edge of a separated bilayer
membrane adheres to form a vesicle. In contrast, when a ﬁlm in the ordered gel
phase is hydrated, phospholipid membranes cannot be unbound due to small
undulation and most of the layers remain on the substrate without forming
vesicles.

5 Conclusion

In this study, we clariﬁed that the morphologies of phospholipid dry ﬁlms de-
pend on the phase of the phospholipid, which is closely related to the eﬃciency
of the formation of giant vesicles. Our results suggest that two conditions may
be necessary for the eﬀective formation of GVs. (i) the phospholipid ﬁlm is
well aligned and has many steps that form micrometer-scale terraces, and (ii)
the membrane show adequate ﬂuctuation in water.

7

(a)

(b)

(b-1)

(b-2)

in water

in water

in air

in air

in water

in air

in water

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the swelling of a phospholipid ﬁlm. (Left) The
structures of phospholipid dry ﬁlms. (Right) Hydration process of the ﬁlms. (a)
Phospholipid in the disordered liquid-crystalline phase. The dry ﬁlm is composed
of regularly stacked layers with many steps. When the ﬁlm is hydrated, membranes
ﬂuctuate greatly and are unbound from each other by steric repulsion. Finally,
membranes peel oﬀ from the edges sequentially and their edges close to form vesicles.
(b) Phospholipid in the ordered gel phase. The dry ﬁlm is bumpy (b-1) or well
aligned with steps (b-2). When the ﬁlm is hydrated, it is diﬃcult for membranes
to separate and peel oﬀ because there are no edges and the membranes have less
ﬂuctuation.

Acknowledgements

We are thankful to Dr. S-i. M. Nomura (Tokyo Medical and Dental Univer-
sity, Japan), N. L. Yamada (High Energy Accelerator Research Organization,
Japan), and Mr. T. Hamada (Kyoto University, Japan) for their helpful ad-
vice. This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for the 21st century
COE (Center for Diversity and Universality in Physics) from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan.

References

[1] S-i.M. Nomura, K. Tsumoto, T. Hamada, K. Akiyoshi, Y. Nakatani, K.

Yoshikawa, ChemBioChem 4 (2003) 1172

[2] P.-A. Monnard, J. Membr. Biol. 191 (2003) 87

[3] T. Baumgart, S.T. Hess, W.W. Webb, NATURE 425 (2003) 821

8

[4] J.P. Reeves, R.M. Dowben, J. Cell. Physiol 73 (1969) 49

[5] D.D. Lasic, J. Colloid Interfac. Sci. 124 (1988) 428

[6] D.D. Lasic, Biochem. J. 256 (1988) 1

[7] R.M. Watwe, J.R. Bellare, Current Science 68 (1995) 715

[8] D.M. Small, M.C. Bourg`es, D.G. Dervichian, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 125 (1966)

563

[9] A. Saupe, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 58 (1977) 549

[10] W. Harbich, W. Helfrich, Chem. Phys. Lipids 36 (1984) 39

[11] J. Mou, J. Yang, C. Huang, Z. Shao, Biochemistry 33 (1994) 9981

[12] H.A. Rinia, B. Kruijiﬀ, FEBS Lett. 504 (2001) 194

[13] A.F. Xie, R. Yamada, A.A. Gewirth, S. Granick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002)

24610

J. 83 (2002) 2625

(1999) 486

1932

J. E 8 (2002) 275

[14] C. Leidy, T. Kaasgaard, J.H. Crowe, O.G. Mouritsen, K. Jørgensen, Biophys.

[15] C. M¨unster, T. Salditt, M. Vogel, R. Siebrecht, J. Peisl, Europhys. Lett. 46

[16] M. Vogel, C. M¨unster, W. Fenzl, T. Salditt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 390

[17] G. Pabst, J. Katsaras, V.A. Raghunathan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 128101

[18] K.L. Koster, Y.P. Lei, M. Anderson, S. Martin, G. Bryant, Biophys. J. 78 (2000)

[19] J.F. Nagle, S. Tristram-Nagle, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1469 (2000) 159

[20] L. Perino-Gallice, G. Fragneto, U. Mennicke, T. Salditt, F. Rieutord, Eur. Phys.

[21] A.C. Simonsen, A. Bagatolli, Langmuir 20 (2004) 9720

[22] W. Helfrich, Z. Naturforsch. 33a (1978) 305

[23] B. Pozo-Navas, V.A. Raghunathan, J. Katsaras, M. Rappolt, K. Lohner, G.

Pabst, Phys. Rev. Lett 91 (2003) 028101

[24] Z.V. Leonenko, E. Finot, H. Ma, T.E.S. Dahms, T. Cramb, Biophys. J. 86

(2004) 3783

[25] M.I. Angelova, D.S. Dimitrov, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 152 (1987) 89

[26] S. Kim, R. E. Jacobs, S.H. White, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 812 (1985) 793

[27] H. Hotani, F. Nomura, Y. Suzuki, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface 4 (1999) 358

[28] S.L. Veatch, S.L. Keller, Biophys. J. 85 (2003) 3074

9

