5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Thermodynamic theory of kinetic overshoots

Alexander N. Gorban∗
Centre for Mathematical Modelling, University of Leicester, UK,
and Institute of Computational Modeling RAS
Krasnoyarsk Russia
Gregory S. Yablonsky†
Department of Chemical Engineering, Washington University
St. Louis, USA

Abstract

Everything that is not prohibited is permissible. So, what is prohibited in the course of chemical
reactions, heat transfer and other dissipative processes? Is it possible to “overshoot” the equilibrium,
and if yes, then how far? Thermodynamically allowed and prohibited trajectories of processes are
discussed by the example of eﬀects of equilibrium encircling. The complete theory of thermodynami-
cally accessible states is presented. The space of all thermodynamically admissible paths is presented
by projection on the “thermodynamic tree”, that is the tree of the related thermodynamic potential
(entropy, free energy, free enthalpy) in the balance polyhedron. The stationary states and limit points
for open systems are localized too.

1

Introduction

In the beginning was A, the chemical reagent A, 100% of A in a closed vessel. Then A began to transform
in B. The substance B transforms in A, as well as A transforms in B. The conditions are stationary; the
reactions rates are proportional to concentrations. The system goes to equilibrium. Let the concentration
of A and B be equal at this equilibrium (simply for deﬁniteness). One could ask a question: Is it possible
that the amount of B exceed 50% during the way to equilibrium? The answer is obvious: it is impossible.
When concentration of B reaches 50%, the motion stops, because it is equilibrium state. The system
is one-dimensional, and one coordinate (for example, the concentration of A) describes the state of the
system in full (for ﬁxed external conditions, for example for ﬁxed volume and temperature). On the line
it is impossible to walk round the equilibrium.

The answer changes, if in the system a third reagent C is present: The equilibrium encircling is
possible if the dimension is more than 1. The second question arises immediately: how far is it possible
to walk around the equilibrium? Is it possible to reach 100% or 90% of B? How far the system can go
along the thermodynamically admissible paths, that are the continuous curves, which satisfy the balances
(conservation lows) and the second law (the entropy of isolated system should grow monotonically, i.e. the
related thermodynamic potential of our system should change monotonically, in proper direction). Let
the equilibrium concentrations of A, B, and C be equal, all these reagents can transform to each other,
and the system is thermodynamically perfect. In this case, on thermodynamically admissible paths the
concentration of B cannot exceed the upper boundary bmax ≈ 77.3% on the way from the state A = 100%
to equilibrium [1]. This global thermodynamic estimation follows from the local condition (the balances
and the second law) and from the continuity of thermodynamically admissible paths.

The questions about global thermodynamical restrictions for kinetic behavior arose several times
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. The interest to this problem revives again and again (see, for example, [7, 8]) because
thermodynamic data are much more reliable than kinetic constants, ant it is important to extract all the
possible information about dynamic behavior from thermodynamics, both from the practical (industrial)
and the scientiﬁc points of view.

∗ag153@le.ac.uk
†gy@che.wustl.edu

1

The goal of our talk is to analyze the main theoretical construction that allow to solve the problem
of global thermodynamical restrictions on the system dynamics in an explicit form. It is the problem
of integration of special diﬀerential inclusions: the time derivatives comply with the thermodynamic
inequalities and balance equalities at each state, and the whole motion satisfy some global restrictions.
It appears that the thermodynamic conditions allow the explicit integration.

2 Thermodynamic tree

Let us consider the chemical system dynamics in the composition space. Coordinates in this space are
amounts of reagents. For systems with constant volume we can use the concentration space. The linear
conservation laws together with the positivity conditions deﬁne a convex polyhedron D in the composition
space. For chemical reaction under given condition there exists a thermodynamic Lyapunov function.
It is the appropriate thermodynamic potential. For example, for V, T = const it is the Helmholtz free
energy F , and for P, T = const it is the Gibbs free energy (the free enthalpy) G. We use the notation
G for any thermodynamic Lyapunov function. The function G is assumed to be continuous and strictly
convex in B. This assumption is crucial, because for non-convex function G computation diﬃculties of
thermodynamic analysis increase drastically. The global minimum of G in D belongs to interior G. It is
the equilibrium point.

Thermodynamically admissible path is such a continuous function ϕ : [0, 1] → D that the function
G(ϕ(x)) monotonically decrease (non-increase) on [0, 1]. The state y ∈ D is thermodynamically accessible
from the state x ∈ D (x ≻ y), if there exists such a thermodynamically admissible path ϕ that ϕ(0) = x
and ϕ(1) = y. The states x, y ∈ D are thermodynamically equivalent (x ∼ y), if x ≻ y and y ≻ x. In
order to study the structure the thermodynamic accessibility let us glue the thermodynamically equivalent
states: Thermodynamic tree is the factor-space D/ ∼. This space is a one-dimensional continuum
with ﬁnite number of branching points, that is the tree. The function G is constant on the classes of
thermodynamic equivalence, hence, we can deﬁne G on D/ ∼. Similarly, the thermodynamic order ≻
can be deﬁned on D/ ∼, and y is thermodynamically accessible from x if and only if for their images on
the thermodynamic tree (x/ ∼) ≻ (y/ ∼). The set of all states thermodynamically accessible from the
given x ∈ D is the preimage in D of the monotone path going on the thermodynamic tree from the point
x/ ∼ to the equilibrium.

3 How to construct the thermodynamic tree?

In this section we consider three main computational problems:

1. How to construct the thermodynamic tree for given D and G.

2. How to ﬁnd the image of the given state x ∈ D on the thermodynamic tree.

3. How to ﬁnd maximum of linear function on a class of thermodynamically equivalent states, that
is, on the preimage in D of the point from the thermodynamic tree, and on the preimage of a
monotone path.

The solution of the third problem gives us the thermodynamically admissible extremal values of
various characteristics on the way to equilibrium. After solution of the ﬁrst two problems this problem
turns to the standard problem of optimization: to ﬁnd a maximum of a linear function on a convex set.
Let D1 be the one-skeleton of D, that is the union of all edges of D (including the vertexes). For each a
(minx∈D G(x) < a < maxx∈D G(x)) there is one-to-one correspondence between connected components of
sets {x ∈ D1|G(x) > a} and {z ∈ D/ ∼ |G(z) > a}. A connected component of {x ∈ D1|G(x) > a} maps
by the natural projection D → D/ ∼ onto correspondent connected component of {z ∈ D/ ∼ |G(z) > a}.
Hence, for convex functions G the solution of the ﬁrst problem depends only on two sets of numbers: the
values of G in vertexes, and minimal values of G on edges of D.

For solution of the second problem, it is suﬃcient to ﬁnd such a vertex v that v ≻ x. In this case
the correspondent thermodynamically admissible path can be chosen as a segment of a straight line. For
each vertex v and the number a (minx∈D G(x) < a < G(v)) the following two conditions, v ≻ x and
G(x) = a, deﬁne the point on the thermodynamic tree uniquely.

2

4 Localization of stationary states

Thermodynamics allows us to localize the domain in the concentration space where the stationary states
for open system can appear. This estimation is rather simple:
in this region the external ﬂow should
produce G, whereas the intrinsic dynamics decrease G. Let the kinetic equation have the form

where N is composition vector, c is vector of concentrations, V is the system volume, w describes all the
intrinsic processes, vin and vout are input and output velocities, and cin is input vector of concentrations.
The point c might be a stationary point of the open system only in the case when the following inequality
is true:

˙N = V w(c) + vincin − voutc,

vin
vout

(cid:18)

cin − c, ∇G(c)

≥ 0,

(cid:19)

where ( , ) is the standard scalar product.

Is it possible to localize the possible general limit points too [1]. The available information about

stoichiometric reaction mechanism can be used for reﬁnement of these estimations.

5 Discussion

As it is well known, the traditional thermodynamic analysis gives many possibilities to analyze the
complex chemical process without knowing a kinetic model:

• to ﬁnd the allowed direction of the chemical process;

• to calculate the equilibrium composition of the complex reaction mixture;

• to apply relationships between parameters of the complex chemical reaction.

The strong advantage of the traditional approach is its simplicity and reliability of data, which it is based
on. At the same time, it has the obvious limitation. Using this approach it is impossible to estimate the
dynamic of the complex chemical process “beyond the equilibrium”.

In diﬀerence from the traditional approach, the advanced thermodynamical analysis of kinetics (let
us call it “TAK”) allows to make the further signiﬁcant step in analysis with no kinetic model. Using
TAK, it became possible to estimate an eﬃciency (selectivity, yield) for the complex chemical reaction
“far from equilibrium”, i.e. under non-steady-state conditions in the closed system or under steady-state
conditions (or in more complicated attractor regime) in the open system.

Many toy and not only toy example are presented now in [1, 2, 6, 8]. Using TAK, the following

problems can be solved:

1. Knowing the initial composition of the complex mixture, to estimate the characteristics of the
process “far from equilibrium” and answer the question, is it possible to achieve the desired values
of process characteristics.

2. Assuming the desired characteristics of the process, to estimate the corresponding domain of the

initial composition.

References

[1] Gorban A.N., Equilibrium Encircling. Equations of Chemical Kinetics and their Thermodynamic

Analysis, Novosibirsk, Nauka Publ., 1984, 256 pages.

[2] Gorban A.N., Methods for qualitative study of chemical kinetics equations, Chislennye Metody
Mekhaniki Sploshnoi Sredy (Numerical Methods for Continuous Media Mechanics), V. 10, No. 4
(1979), 42–59 (Institute for Pure and Applied Mechanics, USSR Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk).

[3] Gorban A.N., Bykov V.I., Yablonsky G.S. Method of successive analysis of dynamics of catalytic re-
action, In: Heterogeneous Catalysis, Proc. IV International Symposium on Heterogeneous Catalysis,
Oct. 2-5, 1979. V. 2, Varna, 1980, 157–162.

3

[4] Gorban A.N., Yablonsky G.S., Bykov V.I., The path to equilibrium, Int. Chem. Eng., V. 22, No. 2

(1982), 368-375.

[5] Shinnar R., Feng C., Structure of complex chemmical reactions. Thermodynamic constrains in kinetic

modeling and catalyst evaluation, Ind. and Eng. Chem. Fund., V. 24, No. 2, 153–170.

[6] Shinnar R., Thermodynamic analysis in chemical process and reactor design, Chem. Eng. Sci., 43,

Iss. 8 (1988), 2303–2318.

[7] Vuddagiri S.R., Hall K.R., Eubank Ph.T., Dynamic modeling of reaction pathways on the Gibbs

energy surface. Ind. and Eng. Chem. Fund., V. 39 (2000), 508–517.

[8] Gorban A.N., Kaganovich B.M., Fillipov S.P., Thermodynamic equilibria and extremes: Analysis of
thermodynamic accessible regions and partial equilibria in physical, chemical, and technical systems.
Novosibirsk, Nauka Publ., 2001, 296 pages.

4

