5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mesoscopic Multi-Particle Collision Dynamics of Reaction-Diﬀusion Fronts

Kay Tucci1, ∗ and Raymond Kapral2, †
1SUMA-CeSiMo, Universidad de Los Andes, M´erida 5101, Venezuela
2Chemical Physics Theory Group, Department of Chemistry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H6, Canada
(Dated: 18th January 2014)

A mesoscopic multi-particle collision model for ﬂuid dynamics is generalized to incorporate the
chemical reactions among species that may diﬀuse at diﬀerent rates. This generalization provides
a means to simulate reaction-diﬀusion dynamics of complex reactive systems. The method is illus-
trated by a study of cubic autocatalytic fronts. The mesoscopic scheme is able to reproduce the
results of reaction-diﬀusion descriptions under conditions where the mean ﬁeld equations are valid.
The model is also able to incorporate the eﬀects of molecular ﬂuctuations on the reactive dynamics.

PACS numbers: 02.70.Ns, 05.10.Gg, 05.20.Dd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Mesoscopic models provide coarse-grained descriptions
of the dynamics of systems that neglect certain details
at microscopic scales while retaining essential dynamical
features at mesoscopic and macroscopic scales. Conse-
quently, a convenient way to study of the dynamics of
complex systems over a large range of interesting space
and time scales is through the use of such models.
In
physical and biological systems we often encounter situ-
ations where mean ﬁeld descriptions of reactions break
down and molecular ﬂuctuations play an important role
in determining the character of the system’s dynamics.
Such eﬀects are especially relevant for reactions taking
place in nano-scale domains or biochemical reactions at
the cellular level. Fluctuations also play a role in far-
from-equilibrium systems near bifurcation points or when
the system behaves chaotically since the system is es-
pecially susceptible to perturbations in such regimes.1
Mesoscopic models are able to capture the inﬂuence of
such molecular ﬂuctuations on the dynamics. Meso-
scopic models are also useful for simulating the dynamics
of macroscopic systems because they often provide sta-
ble particle-based simulation schemes and can be imple-
mented in complex geometries.

In this article we consider a generalization of a meso-
scopic multi-particle collision (MPC) (or stochastic rota-
tion) model2,3,4 to a pattern-forming chemically reacting
system. We show how the multi-particle collision rule
can be generalized to a multi-component system to yield
diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcients for the chemical species.
Diﬀerences in diﬀusion coeﬃcients can give rise to chem-
ical instabilities which cannot occur if the diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients of all species are equal. Reactions are incorporated,
also at a mesoscopic level, by combining a birth-death de-
scription of reactive events with multi-particle collisions.
The mesoscopic dynamics preserves all the basic conser-
vation laws of the system and leads to the macroscopic
evolution laws on long distance and time scales.

To illustrate the scheme, the reactive MPC dynamics
is used to investigate the evolution and structure of a cu-

bic autocatalytic front. The cubic autoatalytic reaction
is A + 2B → 3B, where the autocatalyst B consumes the
fuel A.
If one considers a two-dimensional rectangular
domain (or a thin rectangular slab in three dimensions)
with B in left portion and A in the right portion, a re-
action front will propagate from left to right. While the
simulations presented in this paper are for cubic auto-
catalytic fronts, the manner in which the diﬀusion pro-
cess is modelled to yield diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcients for
diﬀerent chemical species and the way reactions are in-
corporated in the model presage extensions of the theory
and applications to more complex far-from-equilibrium
reactive systems.

The paper is organized as follows:

In Sec. II we
sketch the basic elements of the multi-particle collision
model and present its generalization to reactive systems
where the chemical species can have diﬀerent diﬀusion
coeﬃcients. Section III describes the simulation of cu-
bic autocatalytic fronts and compares the results of the
mesoscopic simulations with the predictions of reaction-
diﬀusion equations. The conclusions of the paper are
given in Sec. IV.

II. MESOSCOPIC MODEL

In multi-particle collision dynamics a system contain-
ing N particles with continuous positions ri and velocities
vi evolves through a sequence of free streaming and colli-
sion steps3. The collisions among the particles take place
in the following way: the system is divided into cells and
at time intervals τ each cell labelled by ξ is assigned at
random a rotation operator ˆωξ from some suitable set of
rotation operators. The center of mass velocity Vξ of
the particles in cell ξ is computed and the post-collision
velocity v′
i of particle i in the cell is determined by rotat-
ing its velocity, relative to the cell center of mass velocity,
and adding the center of mass velocity to the result of this
rotation:

i = Vξ + ˆωξ(vi − Vξ) .
v′

(1)

2

The velocity of every particle in cell ξ is rotated by
the same rotation operator but the rotation operator
varies from cell to cell. The dynamics then consists
free streaming interspersed by these multi-particle col-
lision events. It has been shown that this dynamics con-
serves mass, momentum and energy and thus leads to
the full set of Navier-Stokes equations on long distance
and time scales3,4,5. The method has been applied to the
study of a variety of systems5 including hydrodynamic
ﬂows6, colloids7, polymers8, Brownian motion9 and sim-
ple diﬀusion-inﬂuenced reaction dynamics10.

We present a generalization of this model that allows
the dynamics of reaction-diﬀusion systems to be investi-
gated. This generalization entails several extensions of
the MPC model. In particular, a multi-component ver-
sion of the MPC model10,11 must be constructed that
accounts for reactions among the chemical species and
allows for the possibility that the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of
the species diﬀer.

DA

5

4

3

2

1

0

Diﬀusion

A multi-component MPC dynamics that provides a
simple way to control the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of diﬀerent
chemical species can be constructed as follows. Suppose
we have s species labelled by an index α. Instead of ap-
plying the MPC operator to all particles in a cell, we as-
sume that multi-particle collision operators act to change
the velocities of a fraction of the particles of species α in
a cell for α = 1, . . . , s. More speciﬁcally, in each cell ξ
each particle of species α is chosen with probability γα.
If vα
is the velocity of a chosen particle i of species α
i
and Vc
ξ is the center of mass velocity of all chosen par-
ticles, the post-collision velocities of those particles that
undergo collision are given by

vα′
i = Vc

ξ + ˆωξ(vα

i − Vc

ξ) .

(2)

The post-collision velocities of the particles that do not
take part in the multi-particle collision do not change.
The diﬀusion coeﬃcients Dα are functions of {γα′|α′ =
1, . . . , s}, which can be tuned to change the values of the
diﬀusion coeﬃcients.

In order to investigate the range over which the diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcients can vary, we consider the self diﬀusion
coeﬃcient of a single species A and change both the mean
particle density ¯nA and the fraction γA of particles that
participate in the multi-particle collisions. Figure 1 plots
DA(γA), determined from the slope of the mean square
displacement versus time, as a function density ¯nA for
diﬀerent values of γA. ¿From these results one sees that
the self diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be varied by about a fac-
tor of ﬁve by changing the values of γA at a ﬁxed density.
The self diﬀusion coeﬃcient for γA 6= 1 can be esti-
mated in the Boltzmann approximation where correla-
tions are neglected. The discrete-time Green-Kubo ex-

2

4

8

10

6
¯nA

Figure 1: Diﬀusion coeﬃcient DA(γA) as a function of the
density ¯nA for various values of γA. Squares, γA = 1.00.
Circles, γA = 0.75. Triangles, γA = 0.50. Diamonds γA =
0.25. Solid lines plot the theoretical value (Eq. (5)) of the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient.

pression for the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is4,10

DA(γA) =

hv2

xi +

hvx(n)vxi ,

(3)

1
2

∞

Xn=1

where, without loss of generality, we have set τ = 1. Tak-
ing into account the collision rule where, on average, a
fraction γA of the particles undergo multi-particle colli-
sions and fraction 1 − γA do not, we have

DA(γA) =

hv2

xi + (1 − γA)hv2

xi + γAhv(1)

x vxi + . . . , (4)

1
2

where v(1)
is the post-collision value of the velocity at
x
time τ = 1. Assuming that higher order collision terms
can be expressed in terms of the ﬁrst collision so the series
is geometric, we obtain

DA(γA) = −

1 + (1 − γA) + γArD + . . .

hv2

1
2
1
2
hv2
xi
2 (cid:20)

hv2

≈ −

=

xi + hv2
xi

xi +

(cid:16)
hv2
xi
γA(1 − rD)
2 − γA(1 − rD)

γA(1 − rD) (cid:21)

,

where

rD =

hv(1)
x vxi
hv2
xi

=

2(1 − e−¯nA) + ¯nA
3¯nA

,

was computed in Ref.10. The comparison in Fig. 1 shows
that this analytical expression (solid lines) accurately de-
scribes the simulation data.

(cid:17)

(5)

(6)

Reaction

III. SIMULATION OF CHEMICAL FRONTS

3

The mesoscopic dynamics must also be generalized to
allow for chemical reactions among the species. Our
earlier study of diﬀusion-inﬂuenced reactions10 was re-
stricted to a simple A + C ⇋ B + C reaction that occurs
when the A or B particles collide with catalytic spheres
C. Since we are now interested in reactions that occur
among the mesoscopic particles, we instead use a birth-
death stochastic law to describe the reactive events1,12.
Here we restrict our considerations to the cubic auto-
catalytic reaction A + 2B → 3B. Independently in each
cell we assume the reaction takes place with probabil-
ity pR = knAnB(nB − 1), where nα is the number of
molecules of species α in a cell. The reactive dynamics
in a cell is described by the Markov chain,13

P (n, t + 1) =

W (n|n′)P (n′, t) ,

(7)

Xn′

where n = (nA, nB), P (n, t) is the probability that there
are n particles in the cell at time t and the transition
matrix W is given by

W (n|n′) = kn′
+(1 − kn′

An′
An′

B(n′
B(n′

B − 1)δnA,n′
B − 1))δnA,n′

A−1δnB ,n′
B .
AδnB ,n′

B +1

(8)

The (discrete time) rate of change of the mean density of
n nαP (n, t), is
species α, ¯nα(t) =

P
¯nα(t + 1) − ¯nα(t) =

nα

W (n|n′) − δn,n′
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Xn,n′

P (n, t).(9)

We assume that the MPC non-reactive collisions are suf-
ﬁciently eﬀective to maintain a local equilibrium Poisso-
nian distribution in the cells so that

P (n, t) ≈ Pℓ(nA; ¯nA(t))Pℓ(nB; ¯nB(t)) ,

(10)

where the local Poisson distribution is Pℓ(n; ¯n(t)) =
e−¯n(t)¯n(t)n/n!. If we insert the local Poissonian approx-
imation for P (n, t) in the right hand side of Eq. (9) for
α = A we obtain the discrete-time mean-ﬁeld rate law,

¯nA(t + 1) − ¯nA(t) = −k¯nA(t)¯n2

B(t) .

(11)

A similar equation can be derived for species B. Thus,
the mass action rate law will describe the dynamics pro-
vided diﬀusion is suﬃciently rapid compared to reac-
tion so that a local Poissonian distribution of particles
is maintained during the evolution of the reactive sys-
tem. In this limit the discrete-time rate law will closely
approximate the continuous-time mass action rate law.

After the reaction step, the particles free stream us-
ing the post-collision values of the velocities, taking into
account the boundary conditions of the system. Once
all the particles have been moved, the time advances one
unit and the multi-particle collision and reaction steps
are applied again. This mesoscopic dynamics conserves
the total mass, momentum and energy of the system.

In this section we show that the mesoscopic MPC
model can be used simulate the dynamics of cubic auto-
catalytic fronts on macroscopic scales where comparisons
with the predictions of reaction-diﬀusion equations can
be made. Cubic autocatalytic fronts have been studied
often in the context of a coupled pair of reaction-diﬀusion
equations for the A and B species.14,15,16,17,18,19,20 The
particular focus of many of these studies was on the trans-
verse front instability that occurs when the diﬀusion co-
eﬃcient of the fuel is suﬃciently larger than that of the
autocatalyst: at a critical value of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
ratio an instability will develop and the planar front will
become nonplanar and exhibit complex dynamics.

Our investigations will be conﬁned to a simpler case
of a binary mixture undergoing the cubic autocatalytic
reaction. For such a reacting mixture the relevant macro-
scopic ﬁeld variables are the total mass density ρ(r, t) =
ρA + ρB, the local concentration c(r, t) = ρA/ρ, the cen-
ter of mass velocity v(r, t) and the energy density e(r, t).
For the isothermal cubic autocatalytic reaction with no
net ﬂuid ﬂow so that v(r, t) = 0, and taking equal masses
for the A and B species, the macroscopic equation for the
number density of A is21,

∂
∂t

¯nA(r, t) = −k¯nA¯n2

B + D∇2¯nA ,

(12)

where D is the mutual diﬀusion coeﬃcient. The equation
for ¯nB(r, t) is not independent and follows from number
conservation, ¯nA + ¯nB = ¯n0.

Front proﬁle

The simulations of the reaction front using the MPC
model were carried out in a rectangular prism with length
l = 200 along x, width w = 200 along y and height h = 5
units along z. The system was open along its length
x, periodic boundary conditions were imposed in the
y-direction, and bounce-back reﬂection boundary condi-
tions were imposed on the top and bottom of the prism
along z. In order to initiate a chemical front, A particles
were distributed uniformly in the right side of the prism,
(¯nA(x ≥ 100) = 10, ¯nB(x ≥ 100) = 0), while B parti-
cles were uniformly distributed in left side of the prism
(¯nA(x < 100) = 0, ¯nB(x < 100) = 10). The velocities
were chosen from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution with
reduced temperature kBT = β−1 = 1/3.

Starting from this initial condition a reaction front will
develop as the autocatalyst B consumes the fuel A in
the reaction. The front will move with velocity c and
it is convenient to study the front dynamics in a frame
moving with velocity c. Propagating fronts are depicted
in Fig. 2, which shows the concentration ﬁeld at a given
time instant. The upper two panels plot the front for two
values of the reaction rate constant k and γA = γB = 1.
We see that for k = 0.0005 the front proﬁle is much

4

(13)

front velocity, the reaction-diﬀusion equation (12) is,

D

d2
dξ2 ¯nA(ξ) + c

d
dξ

¯nA(ξ) − k¯nA(ξ)(¯n0 − ¯nA(ξ))2 = 0 .

The front proﬁle can be found analytically from the so-
lution of this equation and is given by20

¯nA(ξ) = ¯n0

1 + e−cξ/D

−1

,

(14)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
where the front speed is c = (Dk¯n2
0/2)1/2. The proﬁle
for species B can be found from the conservation con-
dition ¯nA + ¯nB = ¯n0. Figure 3 compares this analyt-
ical prediction with the simulation results of the MPC
reaction-diﬀusion dynamics. For γA = γB = 1 the mu-
tual diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is given by Eq. (5). There is
good agreement between the simulation and analytical
values for small k where the conditions for the validity
of the mean ﬁeld approximation are satisﬁed. For larger
k values, such as k = 0.001 in the right panel of the ﬁg-
ure we see that there are deviations from the mean ﬁeld
result. For this value of k, the reaction is fast and there
is a breakdown of the local Poissonian equilibrium and a
reaction-diﬀusion description is not applicable. A similar
breakdown is observed for very small k, for example for
k = 0.0002, due to the fact that very few reactive events
occur in the reaction zone of the front and ﬂuctuations
are important.

The front velocity was determined from the simulation
data as a function of k. In Fig. 4 we plot the front velocity
c versus k and compare the simulation results with the
0/2)1/2. The front velocity agrees
prediction c = (Dk¯n2

Figure 2: Concentration ﬁeld at a given time instant for
k = 0.0005 (top left panel) and k = 0.001 (top right panel).
The system size is 200 × 200 × 5. Lower panels show the con-
centration ﬁeld for k = 0.0005 and γA = 0.25, γB = 1 (left),
and k = 0.0005, γA = 1, γB = 0.25 (right). The structure of
the reaction zone can be seen in these ﬁgures.

thicker than that for k = 0.001. This dependence is
in accord with predictions based on a reaction-diﬀusion
description of the front as can be seen from the analysis
given below.

The structure of these planar fronts can investigated
quantitatively by studying the front dynamics in a frame
moving with the front velocity, ξ = x − ct, and averaging
the concentration proﬁle over the width (along y) of the
front, ¯nA(ξ) =
dy nA(ξ, y). Figure 3 plots ¯nA(ξ) for the
two values of k used in Fig. 2. ¿From this ﬁgure we see

R

10

8

6

4

2

¯nA

10

8

6

4

2

0
−20

−10

10

20

0
−20

−10

0
ξ

10

20

0
ξ

Figure 3: Plot of the front proﬁle ¯nA(ξ) versus ξ for diﬀerent
values of k: left panel, k = 0.0005; right panel, k = 0.001. The
system size is 200 × 200 × 5. The continuous line represents
the theoretical value obtained from Eq. (14).

c

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.001

0.002

0.003

0.004

0.005

k

that a well-deﬁned propagating reaction front is obtained
and the width of the front decreases as the reaction rate
increases relative to the diﬀusion rate.

Figure 4:
(solid line) Front velocity from Eq. (14).

(ﬁlled circles) Front velocity c as a function of k.

The front shape and velocity can be determined from
the reaction-diﬀusion equation. For a planar front prop-
agating along the x-direction, in a frame moving with the

with the simulation results for k ≤ 0.003, although the
front proﬁle deviates slightly from the predicted value for
somewhat smaller values of k (k ≤ 0.001).

5

More microscopic aspects of the front structure and
dynamics that are captured by the MPC model are il-
lustrated in the lower two panels of Fig. 2. These ﬁgures
plot snapshots of the front for k = 0.0005, the same value
of k as in the top left panel of the ﬁgure, but for two
diﬀerent pairs of γα values, (γA = 0.25, γB = 1.0) and
(γA = 1.0, γB = 0.25). Comparison of the lower panels
of the ﬁgures, and also with the upper left panel, shows
that the structures of the interfacial zones are diﬀerent.
In the MPC dynamics employed here, the diﬀusion of the
species depends on their density and γα. Since the den-
sity of the species changes signiﬁcantly in the interfacial
zone, it is likely that a concentration-dependent mutual
diﬀusion coeﬃcient is required to describe this structure.

IV. CONCLUSION

The generalizations of the multi-particle collision
model described here, and its extensions, allow one to
study a variety of phenomena at the mesoscopic level. In
particular, the ability to simulate the dynamics of multi-
component systems whose diﬀusion coeﬃcients can be
diﬀerent means that diﬀusion-driven instabilities, such as
the transverse cubic autocatalytic front instability con-
sidered in this paper, can be investigated. Since the
mesoscopic MPC model preserves the basic conservation

laws in the system, to study such instabilities requires
the presence of a third solvent species so that there are
two independent diﬀusion coeﬃcients in the system. The
method could also be used to study reactive and non-
reactive binary ﬂuid ﬂows which also show interesting
instabilities where ﬂuctuations play a role near the onset
of instabilities.

The cubic autocatalytic reaction is simply one exam-
ple of a much broader class of reaction-diﬀusion systems
that can be studied using reactive versions of the meso-
scopic multi-particle collision dynamics.
In particular,
more general reaction-diﬀusion dynamics in speciﬁc ge-
ometries relevant for the materials science and biological
applications may be carried out. The presence of ﬂows
can also be treated easily in this context.

While we have focused primarily on parameter do-
mains where mean ﬁeld approximations are largely ap-
plicable, one of the most interesting applications of the
methodology introduced in this paper is to systems on
mesoscales where particle numbers are small so that ﬂuc-
tuations play a crucial role in the dynamics and system
geometry is important.

Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part
by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada and in part by the grant
C-1279-0402-B from Consejo de Desarrollo Cientﬁco Hu-
manstico y Tecnolgico of Universidad de Los Andes.

∗ kay@ula.ve
† rkapral@chem.utoronto.ca
1 G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-Organization in Non-

Equilibrium Systems, (Wiley, New York, 1977).

2 A. Malevanets, R. Kapral, Europhys. Lett., 44(5), 552

3 A. Malevanets and R. Kapral, J. Chem. Phys., 110, 8605

4 A. Malevanets and R. Kapral, J. Chem. Phys., 112, 7260

(1995).

5 A. Malevanets and R. Kapral, Lect. Notes Phys. 640, 113

Ser. A 334, 1 (1991).

6 T. Ihle, D. M. Kroll, Phys. Rev. E 63, 020201 (2001);
A. Lamura, G. Gompper, T. Ihle, D. M. Kroll, Europhys.
Lett., 56, 768 (2001); A. Lamura, G. Gompper, T. Ihle, D.
M. Kroll: Europhys. Lett., 56, 319 (2001).

7 Y. Hashimoto, Y. Chen, H. Ohashi, Comp. Phys. Comm.,
129, 56 (2000); Y. Inoue, Y. Chen, H. Ohashi, Colloids
and Surfaces A, 201, 297 (2002); T. Sakai, Y. Chen, H.
Ohashi, Phys. Rev. E, 65, 031503 (2002).

8 A. Malevanets, J. M. Yeomans, Europhys. Lett., 52, 231

10 K. Tucci and R. Kapral, J. Chem. Phys., 120, 8262 (2004).
11 A. Malevanets and J. M. Yeomans, Comp. Phys. Com-

mun., 129, 282 (2000).

12 C. W. Gardiner, Handbok of Stochastic Processes,

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985).

13 R. Kapral, in Stochastic Dynamics, eds., L. Shimansky-
Geier and T. P´oschel, (Springer, Berlin, 1997), p. 294.
14 D. Horv´ath and K. Showalter, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 2471

15 J. Billingham and D. J. Needham, Phil. Trans. R. Soc.,

16 S. K. Scott and K. Showalter, J. Phys. Chem. 96, 8702

17 D. Horv´ath, V. Petrov, S. K. Scott and K. Showalter, J.

Chem. Phys. 98, 6332 (1993).

18 Z. Zhang and S. A. E. G. Falle, Proc.R. Soc., Ser. A 446,

19 R. A. Milton and S. K. Scott, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 5271

(1992).

1 (1994).

(1995).

20 A. Malevanets, A. Careta and R. Kapral, Phys. Rev. E,

52, 4724 (1995).

21 S. R. de Groot and P. Mazur, Nonequilibrium Thermody-

9 S. H. Lee and R. Kapral, J. Chem. Phys., 121, 11163

namcis, (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1962).

(1998).

(1999).

(2000).

(2004).

(2000).

(2004).

