5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Water vapor at one kelvin

T. Rieger, T. Junglen, S.A. Rangwala,∗ G. Rempe, and P.W.H. Pinkse
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Hans-Kopfermann-Str. 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany

J. Bulthuis
Department of Physical Chemistry and Laser Centre, Vrije Universiteit,
De Boelelaan 1083, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(Dated: February 20, 2014, PREPRINT)

We report the creation of a conﬁned slow beam of heavy-water (D2O) molecules with a trans-
lational temperature around 1 kelvin. This is achieved by ﬁltering slow D2O with inhomogeneous
static electric ﬁelds exploiting the quadratic Stark shift of D2O. All previous demonstrations of
electric ﬁeld manipulation of cold dipolar molecules rely on a predominantly linear Stark shift of
the molecular states being acted upon. Further, on the basis of elementary molecular properties
and our ﬁltering technique we predict that the resulting slow molecular beam of D2O signiﬁcantly
populates only a few molecular ro-vibrational states.

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps, 33.55.Be, 39.10.+j
Keywords:

Cold dilute molecular systems are rapidly emerging as
a frontline area at the interface of quantum optics and
condensed matter physics [1]. An increasing subset of
this activity centers around recent advances with the cre-
ation of cold dilute gas of molecules possessing electric
dipole moments. These in particular, owing to their long
range anisotropic interaction hold the promise of novel
physical systems, where two and many body quantum
properties can be systematically studied. Cold dilute
gases of dipolar molecules can be produced by forging
a tight bond between two chemically distinct species of
laser-cooled atoms, e.g. RbCs [2]. Alternatively, cold
dilute gas ensembles can be created by buﬀer gas load-
ing [3] or electric ﬁeld manipulation of naturally occur-
ring molecules like ND3 [4, 5], H2CO [6], metastables
like CO [7] or radicals like YbF [8], OH [9], NH [10].
However, so far all the cold molecules produced in this
manner have a Stark eﬀect which is predominantly lin-
ear in the experimentally relevant electric-ﬁeld range of
0-150 kV/cm.

Here we report the creation of a slow beam of heavy-
water (D2O) molecules with a translational temperature
around 1 kelvin. For D2O, the Stark shifts are quadratic
functions of the electric ﬁeld in the range relevant for
experiments. It follows that forces exerted by inhomo-
geneous electric ﬁelds are relatively small for D2O, thus
making the Stark manipulation of water very challenging.
The result demonstrates the versatility of the velocity-
ﬁltering method employed in our experiment [6]. This
Letter is structured as follows. First we discuss certain
general features of Stark shifts of molecular states with
particular references to D2O. We then present our exper-
imental work with D2O. This is followed by arguing from
ﬁrst principles that we are likely to have a highly state
selected beam of D2O, despite starting with a thermal
source of molecules.

It is hardly necessary to motivate the interest in water.
In all of its phases, water exhibits a complex behavior
which is still not completely understood. Water is abun-
dant on earth and in interstellar space at low densities
and temperatures from a few kelvin upward, playing an
important role in the chemistry of molecular clouds [11].
The conditions in these clouds are remarkably close to
the conditions achieved in recent cold-molecule experi-
ments with molecules having a linear Stark shift. An ex-
tension of these experimental techniques to quadratically
shifted molecules like D2O opens up prospects for a va-
riety of studies. One such example could be very precise
spectroscopic measurements, as such molecules would be
insensitive to stray electric ﬁelds, to the ﬁrst order.

Several techniques have recently been developed to ma-
nipulate molecules [1] and even atoms [12] with electric
ﬁelds. All of these exploit the Stark eﬀect to exert a
force on the molecules. In contrast to atoms, molecules
can have a permanent electric dipole moment. Such
molecules have much larger Stark shifts than non-polar
molecules. However, as described below, a large dipole
moment alone is not enough to have a strong Stark eﬀect.
The direction and magnitude of the force exerted on the
molecule in an inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld depends on
the details of the molecular rotational state. Assuming
the Stark shift to be a monotonic function of the elec-
tric ﬁeld, the molecule can be either in low-ﬁeld-seeking
(LFS) or high-ﬁeld-seeking (HFS) states, depending on
the sign of the Stark shift.

The Stark interaction between a molecule with an elec-
tric dipole moment and the externally applied ﬁeld may
be described in the weak, intermediate and strong-ﬁeld
regimes. The weak-ﬁeld (WF) regime is applicable when
the ﬁrst non-vanishing term of the perturbation expan-
sion provides an accurate description of the Stark shift
for a particular molecular state. The intermediate ﬁeld

(IF) requires the inclusion of higher-order eﬀects or an
exact calculation, as the case may be. In the strong-ﬁeld
(SF) regime, the molecule becomes an angular oscillator
about the direction of the local electric ﬁeld and in this
case all states become HFS states [13]. Which regime is
applicable for a given value of an electric ﬁeld depends
on the speciﬁcs of the molecular state. Note that our
deﬁnition of the regimes is slightly diﬀerent than the one
in literature.

The condition for having a linear Stark eﬀect is that
the component of the dipole moment ~d along a space-
ﬁxed direction, we can choose ~z, is non-vanishing (i.e.
h~d · ~zi 6= 0). Strictly speaking this requires a ﬁnite elec-
tric ﬁeld, but it can be arbitrarily low. Since the energy
of a molecular state cannot depend on the sense of rota-
tion, this condition implies K-degeneracy for symmetric
top molecules, where K is the projection of the total
angular momentum ~J on the molecular symmetry axis.
Conversely, K-degeneracy implies a linear Stark eﬀect.
The same holds for polar linear molecules with a non-
zero angular momentum Ω along the molecular axis, such
as NO and OH. In the presence of an electric ﬁeld, each
degenerate state will be split into two states, one with
equal, and one with opposite signs of K (Ω) and M , the
projection of ~J on the space ﬁxed z-axis. Of course, there
is no ﬁrst-order Stark splitting if either M or K(Ω) – or
both – are zero. If the degeneracy in zero ﬁeld is lifted,
e.g. by ﬁne-structure splitting, nuclear quadrupole inter-
action in a symmetric-top molecule, or Λ-doubling in lin-
ear molecules, the Stark splitting will no longer be linear
in the WF limit. However, often those non-Stark inter-
actions are small enough as to lead to a (nearly) linear
Stark splitting in the IF regime.

The linear Stark eﬀect condition, h~d · ~zi 6= 0, is not ful-
ﬁlled in asymmetric top molecules. Under certain con-
ditions, however, polar asymmetric molecules can also
exhibit (nearly) linear Stark shifts. If the asymmetry is
weak, the states that correspond to K 6= 0 in the prolate
or oblate top limit, will always be close to being degener-
ate. Those states show nearly linear Stark shifts if they
are connected by the Stark interaction. This is the case
if the dipole is along the a-axis in the prolate limit, or
along the c-axis in the oblate limit, where we follow the
convention to label the axis with the smallest moment
of inertia and hence the largest rotational constant with
a, the intermediate axis b and the axis with the largest
moment of inertia c. An example is the nearly symmetric
(prolate) top molecule H2CO.

True asymmetric top molecules

in general have
quadratic Stark shifts. Exceptions can occur for some
states, if the dipole is oriented along the axis of largest
or smallest moment of inertia. For molecules with their
dipole oriented along the b-axis, we found no exceptions:
all rotational states have a non-linear Stark shift. Wa-
ter, both H2O and D2O, presents such a case. It also has

2

large rotational constants [14], for D2O A = 15.394 cm−1,
B = 7.2630 cm−1, C = 4.8520 cm−1, so the spacing be-
tween adjacent molecular rotational levels is large. Thus
second-order perturbation theory is found to be a rea-
sonable approximation for the Stark shift computation
of H2O and D2O. Moreover, since the contribution to
the perturbation from each connected pair of states is in-
versely proportional to the energy gap between the pair,
the shift will be proportional to the density of (rotational)
states, and therefore very small for the sparse rotational
spectrum of D2O and H2O. Our choice of working with
D2O as opposed to H2O has partly to do with the larger
Stark shifts of D2O because of its smaller rotational con-
stants.

The treatment of the general case of an asymmetric
molecule, where the dipole is not necessarily along one of
the principal axes, is, of course, more involved.

FIG. 1: Schematic of the experiment. Depicted on the left is
the eﬀusive source, which injects thermal D2O molecules into
the 4-wire guide. Neighboring electrodes carry voltages of
opposite polarity, creating a quadrupolar electric ﬁeld in the
space between. Molecules that are slow enough are guided
through the ﬁrst and second (not shown) 90o bends and are
ﬁnally detected by a mass spectrometer.

Our apparatus, which is detailed in Ref. [4], is depicted
in Fig. 1. It consists of a room-temperature eﬀusive ther-
mal source, which injects D2O molecules directly between
four 50 cm long electrodes set up in a quadrupole ar-
rangement, with neighboring electrodes having opposite
polarities. The guide has two 90o bends with a radius of
curvature of 25 mm. The quadrupolar electric ﬁeld de-
ﬁnes a two-dimensional potential well. This well has a
depth that depends on the internal molecular state, e.g.
for the |Jτ M i = |111i state (where τ is a pseudo quan-
tum number labelling the state) with a positive Stark
shift of 0.20 cm−1 at 100 kV/cm, the depth amounts to
0.29 K. Molecules with transverse kinetic energy exceed-
ing the potential depth escape the quadrupole guide.
The bends let the longitudinally fast molecules escape
the quadrupole but keep the slow ones due to the action
of the centripetal force. These are guided through two
diﬀerential pumping regions into an ultrahigh vacuum
chamber for mass-spectrometric detection at the end of
the electrodes. Heavy water is convenient for this pur-
pose, as the background at its mass is virtually zero.
The longitudinal velocity distribution of the guided D2O

beam was determined by a time-of-ﬂight method [6] at an
escape ﬁeld, E, of 115 kV/cm. We found a most-probable
velocity of 24 m/s in the laboratory frame, corresponding
to a longitudinal temperature of ≈ 1.4 K. The transverse
temperature is expected to be on the order of 0.1 K, as the
guide presents a smaller transverse velocity cutoﬀ value
than the corresponding longitudinal velocity cutoﬀ.

The ﬂux dependence on the escape ﬁeld, E, and hence
on the applied electrode voltage V , is characteristic of the
nature of the guided molecule Stark shift. This can be
seen as follows: Let x, y be directions orthogonal to and
z be parallel to the quadrupolar axis. Let fvx,y,z be func-
tions proportional to the ﬂux crossing the planes of unit
area perpendicular to the x, y, z axes respectively [15].
x,y/α2) is bi-directional and fvz ∝
Then fvx,y ∝ exp(−v2
vz exp(−v2
z/α2) is uni-directional along the positive z
axis. Here, α = p2kBT /m, kB the Boltzmann constant,
T the temperature of the reservoir where the beam origi-
nates and m the molecular mass. Hence the total guided
vy,max
vx,max
dvzfvxfvy fvz ,
ﬂux Φ ∝ R
dvx R
0
0
where vx,y,z,max are the maximal guided velocities in each
direction. As α ≫ vx,y,z,max, Φ ∝ vx,max vy,max v2
z,max.
The maximum kinetic energy, Uk,max is given by the es-
cape energy of the guide, i.e., the Stark shift in E, which
is proportional to the applied electrode voltage, V . Hence
k ∝ V 2.
for molecules with a linear Stark shift, Φ ∝ U 2
For molecules with a quadratic Stark shift, Uk ∝ V 2 and
hence, Φ ∝ U 2

vz,max
dvy R
0

k ∝ V 4.

Our detector, a quadrupole mass spectrometer, con-
verts molecules to ions by electron-impact ionization
which are then mass-selected. Measurement on various
molecules with a linear Stark shift indicate that the sig-
nal is to a good approximation proportional to the guided
ﬂux [4, 6]. Scaling (for detector counting eﬃciencies,
angular divergence of the beam) and some corrections
(velocity dependent detection, branching ratios of ion-
ization) are needed to convert our measured count rates
(plotted in Fig. 2) to the absolute ﬂux ≈ 7 × 107 s−1 at
V = 7 kV, corresponding to an electric ﬁeld depth of the
guide of E = 134 kV/cm, with an error margin of the or-
der of a factor 2. The quartic dependence on E is clearly
visible in Fig. 2 and a proof for the quadratic Stark shift
of the guided molecules. Indeed, with the same apparatus
it has been observed [4, 6] that for H2CO and ND3(linear
Stark molecules), the ﬂux depends quadratically on V .

As our slow beam originates from a room-temperature
source, more than one rotational state is populated. This
is illustrated in Fig. 3, where the Stark shifts of D2O in
a ﬁeld of 100 kV/cm have been plotted as a function of
the zero-ﬁeld rotational energy. The Stark shifts are ob-
tained by numerically diagonalizing the Stark Hamilto-
nian for a rigid asymmetric rotor, following the procedure
of Ref. [16]. It is known that the rigid-rotor assumption
is only a coarse approximation when estimating the abso-
lute energies of D2O states. In the present case however,
the approximation is expected to be good if one is only

3

100

z
H

 
/
 
e
t
a
r
 
t
n
u
o
C

80

60

40

20

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

electrode voltage / kV

FIG. 2: Guided molecule signal versus the electrode voltage
V . The data follow a quartic law in V , as illustrated by the
V 4 ﬁt (solid line). The dotted line shows an attempt to ﬁt
the data points by a quadratic ﬁt.

interested in the Stark shifts of those states, because the
Stark shifts are caused by the coupling of adjacent states
that do not diﬀer much in their sets of rotational quan-
tum numbers, leading to relatively small sensitivity to the
centrifugal distortion. We have also neglected hyperﬁne
couplings, which is completely justiﬁed in the range of
ﬁeld strengths used in our experiments. As input for the
Stark shift calculations we took the rotational constants
and the dipole moment µ = 1.87 Debye, which is directed
along the b-axis [14]. Note that as a general trend, the
Stark shifts decrease with rotational energy.

|1,1,1〉
|3,-2,0〉
|3,-2,1〉
|2,0,2〉
|3,-2,2〉

1

0.5

0

0

400
E / cmRot

-1

800

0.20

1
-

m
c
/
)

m
c
/
V
k
0
0
1
(
k
r
a
t
S

W

0.15

0.10

0.05

0

0

200

600

800

400
E / cm

Rot

-1

FIG. 3: Stark shifts, WStark, in an electric ﬁeld of 100 kV/cm
of rotational states of D2O in its vibrational and electronic
ground state, as a function of the zero-ﬁeld rotational energy,
Erot. The Boltzmann factor is indicated in the inset. The ﬁve
most abundant states in the guided ﬂux are labelled |Jτ M i.
Note that the spin statistical weighting is not shown.

As discussed earlier the room temperature rotational
spectrum of D2O is very sparse. The populations in the
thermal gas in the eﬀusive source can be estimated by
weighting all thermally populated states with the Boltz-
mann factor and the spin-statistical weight [17]. Fur-
ther, only very few of these levels have large enough
Stark shifts to be guided. This selection is much more

State Contribution [ % ] Erot [cm
74.53
15
|3 −2 0i
74.53
12
|3 −2 1i
22.66
9
|1 1 1i
49.30
9
|2 0 2i
74.53
5
|3 −2 2i

−1] ∆WS [cm
0.18
0.16
0.20
0.13
0.10

−1]

TABLE I: The most dominant rotational states of D2O with
their partial contribution to the ﬂux, their zero-ﬁeld energy
and the Stark shift ∆WS at E = 100 kV/cm.

pronounced for molecules with a quadratic Stark shift
than for molecules with a linear Stark shift. The intu-
itive reason is that for molecules with a quadratic Stark
shift, the electric ﬁeld should ﬁrst orient the dipole in
space, which is harder the faster the molecule rotates.
Indeed, for these molecules an approximate expression
for the Stark shift [14] is ∝ 1/2(J + 1). Hence, the (max-
imum) Stark shifts decreases with J, as can be seen for
D2O in Fig. 3. This should be compared with the de-
pendence of the Stark shift on J of molecules with a
linear Stark shift. For the generic example of a symmet-
ric top, this shift is ∝ |~d|KM E/(J(J + 1)), as can be
found in e.g. Ref. [14]. As (K, M ) ∈ {−J, . . . , 0, . . . , J},
the Stark shift of the maximum (K, M ) for molecules
with a linear Stark shift will not decrease with J.
In
fact, assuming the ﬂux of molecules in a certain internal
state is proportional to the square of the Stark shift, 50%
of the guided ﬂux populates the 5 ro-vibrational states
|Jτ M i = |3 −2 0i , |3 −2 1i , |1 1 1i , |2 0 2i and |3 −2 2i.
Their partial contributions, zero-ﬁeld energy and Stark
shifts are summarized in table I. One should note that
the beam purity is independent of voltage changes as all
the states are quadratic in nature in laboratory-range
ﬁelds.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the eﬀective
Stark manipulation of a polar molecule with quadratic
Stark shifts over the range of applied ﬁelds of 0-
135 kV/cm. This experimentally demonstrates the feasi-
bility of the velocity-ﬁltering method for the large class of
quadratically Stark-shifted molecular states. Using this
method we have created water vapor (D2O) at a temper-
ature of ≈ 1 kelvin. Further trapping of these molecules is
technically possible [18]. In addition, the fact that such a
beam would be signiﬁcantly state selected, opens up the
possibility for using ﬁltering techniques in the study of

4

molecular interactions of cold identical particles, some-
thing usually thought of as unlikely.

We acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the Deutsche

Forschungsgemeinschaft (SPP 1116).

∗ Raman Research Institute, C. V. Raman Avenue,

Sadashivanagar, Bangalore 560080, India

[1] See, e.g., the special issue on ultracold polar molecules

[Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 149 (2004)].

[2] A.J. Kerman, J.M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and D.

DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 153001 (2004).

[3] J.D. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, T. Guillet, B. Friedrich,
and J.M. Doyle, Nature (London) 395, 148 (1998).
[4] T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse,

and G. Rempe, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 365 (2004).

[5] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T.
Jongma, A.J.A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Nature (Lon-
don) 406, 491 (2000).

[6] S.A. Rangwala, T. Junglen, T. Rieger, P.W.H. Pinkse,

and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. A 67, 043406 (2003).

[7] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

[8] M.R. Tarbutt, H.L. Bethlem, J.J. Hudson, V.L. Ryabov,
V.A. Ryzhov, B.E. Sauer, G. Meijer, and E.A. Hinds,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173002 (2004).

[9] J.R. Bochinski, E.R. Hudson, H.J. Lewandowski, G Mei-
jer, and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 243001 (2003).
[10] S.Y.T. van de Meerakker, R.T. Jongma, H.L. Bethlem,
and G. Meijer, Phys. rev. A 64, 041401(R) (2001)
[11] M. Spaans and E. van Dishoeck, Astrophys J. 548, L217

[12] H. Katori and T. Akatsuka, Jap. J. Appl. Phys. 43, 358

[13] B.G. West and M. Mizushima, J. Chem. Phys. 38, 251

(2001).

(2004).

(1963).

[14] C.H. Townes and A.L. Schawlow, Microwave Spec-
troscopy, (Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1975).
[15] P.W.H. Pinkse, T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala,
and G. Rempe, in Interactions in Ultracold Gases, M.
Weidem¨uller, C. Zimmermann (Eds). Wiley-VCH, Wein-
heim, 2003.

[16] T.D. Hain, R.M. Moision, and T.J. Curtiss, J. Chem.

Phys. 111, 6797 (1999).

[17] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and molecular Structure,
I. and III. (Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York 1966).
[18] T. Rieger, T. Junglen, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse,

G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 173002 (2005).

