6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

P-Violation Manifested at the Molecular Level - A Simple Means for an Absolute
Deﬁnition of “Left” vs. “Right”

APS/123-QED

Avshalom C. Elitzur
Unit of Interdisciplinary Studies, Bar-Ilan University, 52900 Ramat-Gan, Israel

Meir Shinitzky
Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

P-violation of the nuclear weak force was hitherto believed to manifest itself only in asymmetric
β-emission due to neutron decay. Molecules with space asymmetry (like L and D amino acids) are
aﬀected by this parity violation, yielding a parity violation energy diﬀerence (PVED) between chiral
−16 ev. In speciﬁc cases, where an autocatalytic process is combined with
isomers in the order of 10
interaction with a selective spin isomer of H2O, this tiny PVED can be ampliﬁed to a macroscopic
detectable level. We describe such a system through which one can transmit a universal deﬁnition
of “left” and “right.” The procedure is straightforward, yielding an absolute rather than a statistical
deﬁnition. The argument is illustrated by paraphrasing Feynman’s celebrated thought-experiment
of communicating spatial directions to an alien.

PACS numbers: 01.55+b,11.30.Er,12.15.-y,31.,33.15.Bh

In memory of Prof. Ofer Lider,
A rare talent in science and arts.

P-violation, demonstrated ﬁrst in 1957 [1], provided for
the ﬁrst time an absolute deﬁnition of spatial coordi-
nates. It is believed, however, to be conﬁned to the sub-
nuclear domain, leaving the higher levels (atomic, molec-
ular, etc.) unaﬀected. In this letter we show that, under
speciﬁc conditions, P-violation can be detected in the
molecular level. We ﬁrst describe the signiﬁcance of P-
violation with the aid of a gedankenexperiment due to
Feynman. We then propose our simpliﬁcation of the ex-
periment, based on P-violation at the molecular regime.
We conclude with some reﬂections on the experiment’s
wider implications.

molecules, they might as well assume the reverse picture.
Against this challenge, Feynman proposed utilizing the
parity violation involved in electro-weak nuclear interac-
tions: “take a radioactive stuﬀ, a neutron, and look at
the electron which comes from such a beta-decay. If the
electron is going up as it comes out, the direction of its
spin is into the body from the back on the left side” ([2],
p. 103). Obviously, the experimental demands for such
a test are extraordinary [1], while the ﬁnal deﬁnition of
“right” vs. “left” is given by a quantitative recording.

Based on recent ﬁndings, we are now at a stage where
we can propose a straightforward and much simpler
method of conveying spatial directions, also based, in-
directly, on the parity violation induced by the nuclear
weak force.

I.

INVARIANCE AND INCOMMUNICABILITY

II. A CHEMICAL MANIFESTATION OF P
VIOLATION

Feynman [2] rephrased P invariance in the form of a
communication problem. Suppose you have established
communication with extraterrestrial aliens somewhere in
the universe and want to describe to them the proper-
ties of your world. Conceptually, it is possible to send
a series of signals conveying some basic arithmetical el-
ements, such as prime numbers. Next, some physical
measures can be communicated, such as the periodic ta-
ble and some constants of nature. Then, based on these
measures, you can convey all the properties of your sur-
roundings: sizes, colors, chemical properties, etc.

One physical property, however, proves elusive,
namely, the spatial directions “left” and “right.” One
can, for example, describe the English script to the aliens,
but one cannot tell them what left-to-right means. Simi-
larly, when communicating to them some important facts
about human biology, such as the heart’s position in the
human chest, or the right- or left-handedness of chiral

The neutral current interaction between the nuclear
weak force and the electron cloud of atoms and molecules
is extremely weak and undetectable. However, in the
special case of chiral molecules, the interaction of the
asymmetric electron cloud with the asymmetric nuclear
weak force will in principle be diﬀerent for the two enan-
tiomers. One enantiomer will gain ǫpv while the other
will lose the same amount of energy i.e., −ǫpv. The par-
ity violation energy diﬀerence (PVED) will therefore be
PVED=2ǫpv.

Hegstrom et al. [3], as well as Mason and Tranter [4],
have calculated PVED for chiral carbon molecules, like
amino acids, and found that for such molecules, at around
room temperature, PVED is in the order of 10−17kT
or 10−17RT per mole. More recent elaborate calcula-
tions [5, 6, 7] suggested that PVED in such molecules
is actually greater by about one order of magnitude, i.e,

PVED=10−16kT .
In other words, one enantiomer will
be of a lower energy state of 10−17 − 10−16kT . Trans-
lated to probabilities, in a simple racemic synthesis, the
more stable isomer will amount to an excess of 104 to 105
molecules per mole (i. e., 6 × 1023). For the speciﬁc case
of amino acids, the natural L enantiomers are the more
stable ones [4].

One might argue that PVED implies that any racemic
mixture, i.e., of precisely 50% of each chiral isomer, gen-
erally obtained in direct chemical synthesis, may pos-
sess optical activity in solution. For example, a solu-
tion of DL amino-acids, might be applied for determina-
tion of right vs.
left. However, due to the tiny mag-
nitude of PVED, the excess it confers on one of the
enantiomers corresponds, even under the most extreme
conditions, to optical rotation of less than a few picode-
grees. This is much below the maximal hypothetical res-
olution that any putative polarimeter can achieve. Op-
tical rotations below microdegrees lie within the thermal
ﬂuctuations (i.e., “noise”) and are consequently unde-
tectable [8]. Similar considerations apply also for the
unique group of ambi-chiral molecules, like asymmetrical
secondary amines, e.g., ethylmethylamine. They possess
a non-zero optical rotation [9], yet of a similar magnitude
to those of ordinary racemic mixtures.

In principle, chiral assemblies associated with inter-
action with water can adopt an autocatalytic process
[10, 11], which will extend the diﬀerence between the
two enantiomers [12]. Systems of “chiral enhancement”
of this type have been recently described [13, 14]. We
selected one of them [14] to be used in our set-up for dis-
tinction of right vs. left, described below. It is based on
the formation of micellar aggregates in water, a typical
autocatalytic process, of lipophilic derivatives of the L
and D enantiomers of the amino acid serine. The spe-
ciﬁc optical rotations of these micelles are strong and in
opposite directions. However, the absolute magnitudes
of their optical rotations are unexpectedly diﬀerent by
up to 50% [14].
It should be noted that it is assumed
that the ambience is such that molecules preserve their
3-dimensional structure for a suﬃciently long time. This
is especially pertinent to a temperature which should be
below 200◦ − 300◦, where processes of racemization or
enantiomerization [15] are insigniﬁcant. Furthermore, in
our selected system such processes, even though negli-
gible, would not alter the ﬁnal deﬁnition of “right” vs.
“left.”

2

solve each of them in water to exactly the same
concentration.

2. Establish the following set of Cartesian coordi-
nates, where the Z is along your gravitational vec-
tor such that “down” is towards the ground. The
Y-axis is parallel to the ground and is along your
detection system (e.g. eyes) and the experiment
set-up, such that “forward” is the direction away
from you.
It is the X-axis, normal to the ZOY
plane, the “right” and “left” directions of which we
wish to deﬁne.

3. Construct the following set-up: An elongated cylin-
drical tube aligned at the Y axis, divided by a
transparent partition, e.g. quartz, sealed by two
transparent windows. On each side place a polar-
izer. One, termed “the analyzer,” is aligned at the
Z axis and can be rotated. The other, aligned at
the X axis, is ﬁxed. Place a UV light source in front
of the X polarizer. On the other side place a light
detector behind the analyzer.

4. Place water in both compartments of the tube and
adjust the analyzer till no light from the source
reaches the detector. Polarizers are thus precisely
crossed, i.e., at 90◦.

5. Empty the compartments, dry them and then add
to each compartment one or another of the two
aqueous solutions of N-stearoyl serine.

6. Now rotate the analyzer slightly (≤ 1◦ ).

If the
light signal is consequently increased, the direction
of rotation is “left” while if it is decreased, the di-
rection is “right.”

Dual-chamber tandem polarimeter

z

x(right)

fixed horizontal
polarizer (along X)

light

1
1
1
1

y

analyzer (along Z)

2
2
2
2

detector

Reference set

III. SIMPLIFYING FEYNMANS SOLUTION

IV. BROADER IMPLICATIONS

Back to Feynman’s scenario, then, trying to convey
the notions of “right” and “left” to the aliens, we would
instruct them to do the following (see ﬁgure):

1. Synthesize the amino acid serine. Separate its two
enantiomers (obviously, you don’t know which of
them is “L” and which is “D” by Earth conven-
tions). Synthesize their N-stearoyl derivatives. Dis-

Molecular P-violation came as a surprise [16], a remi-
niscent of the surprise evoked earlier by P-violation itself.
Its importance obviously extends beyond ordinary chem-
istry, bearing on key issues in theoretical physics. Thus
Quack [17], in his extensive review (p. 4627), states:
“the role of molecular parity violation for fundamental
physics leads us to further motivation for a sustained ex-
perimental and theoretical research eﬀorts in this ﬁeld...

A combination of accurate experiments with accurate cal-
culations of the expected eﬀects can be used as a testing
ground for the ‘standard model’.”

Finally, it is tempting to speculate that the absolute
preference for one enantiomer over the other will turn
out to be already inherent to the aliens’ own chemical
constituents. In other words, biological chemistry based

on L amino-acids and D saccharides, etc., might reﬂect
a universal rule rather than an evolutionary coincidence
on Earth alone [17].

Acknowledgments It is a pleasure to thank Dr.
Yosef Scolnik and Prof. David Avnir for inspiring dis-
cussions.

3

[1] C. S. Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Hayward, D. D. Hoppes,

and R. P. Hudson. Phys. Rev. 105, 1413 (1957).

[2] Feynmann, R. P. The Character of Physical Law. (Pen-

[3] R.A. Hegstrom, D. Rein and P.G.H. Sandars. J. Chem.

[4] S.F. Mason and G.E. Tranter, Mol. Phys. 53, 1091

in Biological Chirality, edited by G. Playi, C. Zucchi, and
L. Caglioti. (New York: Elsevier, 2004), pp. 329-337.
[11] Scolnik, Y., I. Portnaya, U. Cogan, S. Tal, R. Haimovitz,
M. Fridkin, A. C. Elitzur, D. W. Deamer and M.
Shinitzky, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., in press. (2006).
[12] W.A. Bonner, Orig. Life Evol. Biosphere, 21, 59 (1991).
[13] D.K. Kondepudi, R.J. Kaufman, and N. Singhi., Science,

[5] A. Bakasov, T.-K. Ha and M. Quack. J. Chem. Phys.

[14] M. Shinitzky and R. Haimovitz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 115,

[6] R. Zanasi and P. Lazzeretti. Chem. Phys. Lett. 286, 240

[15] Y. Pinto, Y. Salomon and D. Avnir, J. Math. Chem., 23,

guin, New York, 1965).

Phys. 73, 2329 (1980).

109, 7263 (1998).

(1984).

(1998).

250, 975 (1990).

12545 (1993).

13 (1998).

(2002).

[16] A. M. Schwartz, Orig. Life Evol. Biosphere, 32, 283

[17] M. Quack, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 41, 4618 (2002).

[7] A.J. MacDermott. Enantiomer 5, 153 (2000).
[8] A. C. Elitzur, J. Theor. Biol. 168, 429 (1994).
[9] A. J. MacDermott and R. A. Hegstrom, Chem. Phys.

305 55 (2004).

[10] M. Shinitzky, A.C. Elitzur and D.W. Deamer, in Progress

