6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exploring the Harmony between
Theory and Computation
- Toward a uniﬁed electronic
structure theory

Liqiang Wei
Chemical Physics Research Institute ∗
Abington, MA 02351

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The physical aspect of a general perturbation theory is explored.
Its role as a physical principle for understanding the interaction among
matter with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy is appreciated. It is shown
that the generic perturbation theory can not only be used for under-
standing various electronic phenomena including the nature of chem-
ical bonds but also serve as a uniﬁed theme for developing general
electronic structure theories and calculation schemes. In particular,
a standard electron correlation approach is suggested and established
according to this law.

Keywords: uniﬁcation; harmony; hierarchy; quantum mechanics; quan-

tum many-body theory; interaction; perturbation theory; variational method;
∗The original version of this paper was ﬁnished in the early of 2002 and can be found

in arXiv: physics/0307156.

1

energy-scale principle; quantum chemistry; electronic structure; molecular

orbital; electron correlation; multireferences; single-particle Green function;

Dyson equation; correlated molecular orbital; density-functional theory; Kohn-

Sham equation; time-dependent density-functional theory; basis set; pseu-

dopotential; QM/MM; intermolecular forces

Perturbation theory is regarded as one of two major approaches for ap-

proximately solving quantum many-body problems. However,

its deeper

physical aspect is far more than it is at present being used just as a math-

ematical apparatus for solving the complicated issues. All the fundamental

laws in physics are variational in nature, including the Schr¨odinger equa-

tion in quantum mechanics. Nevertheless, the perturbation theory provides

a basic principle that governs how matter with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy

interacts. In fact, a general perturbation method itself contains two ingre-

dients. On one hand, the degenerate or near-degenerate situation is not a

perturbation at all but actually constitutes a strong physical interaction. On

the other hand, the non-degenerate case is a real perturbation in the common

sense. We believe that, it is this physical mixing with equal or near energies

that governs the interaction among matter with diﬀerent levels of hierarchy.

Of course, it is also an elementary physical law based on which a uniﬁed

chemical bond theory can be built.

Electrons are quantum mechanical entities which possess wave-particle

duality. The binding process of the electrons associated with some atoms,

or equivalently, the interaction of atomic orbitals for the formation of a

2

molecule, can be regarded as a wave interference phenomenon. The interac-

tion of intra-atomic orbitals with the same or near energies is the Pauling’s

hybridization process, which determines the spatial orientation of chemical

bonds, while the interaction of inter -atomic orbitals with the same energy or

near energies decides the actual formation of chemical bonds. These are the

nature of chemical bonds [1, 2]. The immediate beneﬁt for recognizing this

near energy principle in the determination of the chemical bonds is that it

gives a better understanding of many very important structural concepts such

as multi-center chemical bonds, multiple chemical bonds, resonance struc-

ture, Walsh diagrams, and avoided crossing. It can incorporate these diﬀer-

ent concepts into single qualitative theoretical framework [1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].

Furthermore, in addition to serving as a fundamental physical law for

understanding how matter interacts, the generic perturbation approach can

provide a unique and most powerful mathematical device for quantitatively

investigating the electronic structure of molecules including molecular mate-

rials and biomolecules [6]. We are going to have a harmony between theory

and computation.

Energy scale principle in the Rayleigh − Ritz variational approach

The Rayleigh-Ritz variational method is most commonly used for solving

eigenvalue problem in quantum mechanics. Its relation to the general pertur-

bation theory has been the subject of analysis for many decades, which in-

cludes the study of the complicated issues concerning the perturbation theory

for the linear operators [9, 10, 11]. However, the utilization of this relation,

or its role as a guidance, in establishing the electronic structure calculation

schemes has not been fully explored or completed yet. A related universal

3

formalism for the quantum many-body systems is still lacking, which is of

paramount importance for our investigation [12]. At a ﬁrst glance, as long as

the reference Hamiltonian which produces the basis functions is made as close

as possible to the full Hamiltonian, then the dimension for the Rayleigh-Ritz

variational expansion will be made as small as possible. In addition, if the

basis functions have the closest energies of the reference Hamiltonian, then

they will have the strongest mixing and make the greatest contribution to

the combined states; while the others with larger energy diﬀerences will have

smaller or even negligible contributions. These are the situations we qualita-

tively discussed above for the elementary perturbation theory. We term this

as the energy scale principle in the Rayleigh-Ritz variational approach.

(a) Molecular fragmentation and basis set construction

The basis set approach is a most popular and natural way for solving the

single particle equations such as the Hartree-Fock equation for a molecular

system. Physically, it reﬂects a composite relation between the molecule and

its constituent atoms. To have an overall accurate electronic structure calcu-

lation, the ﬁrst necessary step is to get the reliable and converged molecular

orbitals [13].

However, since the current basis functions like contracted Gaussians which

are most commonly used are primarily a reﬂection of electrons in single atoms

in the molecule, it leaves the perturbed part of the molecular Fock operator

very large. That is why the polarization functions, including some expanded

ones such as the correlation consistent basis sets, have to be introduced to get
good computation results [14, 15]. Nevertheless, the O(N 4) scaling, where N

is the number of basis functions, has become a major bottleneck in quantum

4

chemistry calculation, especially for the large systems.

To overcome this diﬃculty, the energy-scale principle described above

can be helpful. If we construct the basis functions which are the reﬂection

of molecular fragments so that the corresponding reference Hamiltonian is

as close as possible to the whole molecular Fock operator, then the dimen-

sion of basis set expansion can be made as small as possible. This is going

to be a challenge work but will be mathematical in nature. The basis set

superposition eﬀects (BSSE) is an example [16].

A similar situation occurs in the quantum molecular scattering calcu-

lation, where the channels are used as the basis functions for solving the

Schr¨odinger equation, or its integral form, Lippmann-Schwinger equation

with proper boundary conditions. Since there are often very large diﬀerences

between the channels and the scattering waves for the whole reactive system

in the interaction regions, the dimension for their expansion is particularly

large. This causes the quantum scattering calculation to be prohibitively

expensive for all but the smallest systems. The ideas from the perturbation

theory can obviously be utilized for remedying this deﬁciency [17].

(b)General multireference electronic structure theory

To get a ﬁnal accurate solution to the Schr¨odinger equation for the many-

electron system with a non-separable two-body Coulomb potential, it is most

likely that we have to go beyond the single particle description [18, 19, 20,

21]. Mathematically, the full conﬁguration interaction (FCI) gives exact

answers [22]. However, it is computationally prohibitive and possibly will

never be strictly realized. The energy scale principle described above can

also be applied in this conﬁguration level. A general electronic structure

5

theory must be multiconﬁgurational or multireferential in nature [23, 24, 25,

26, 27, 28, 29, 30]. First, there exists a strong conﬁguration mixing, for

example, at transition states, for excited states, and for multiple chemical

bonds. The concept of exciton introduced in solid state physics also belongs

to this case [6, 31, 32]. Second, the degenerate conﬁgurations are often the

case for the stable open-shell systems. Third, if we want to treat the ground

state and the excited states simultaneously, we have to include the corre-

sponding reference states in the same model space. Finally, the separation

of correlation into the static and dynamic parts, which corresponds to the

near degenerate and the perturbed situations, really has chemical structure

signature. Therefore, among all the correlation approaches developed so far

for the electronic structure, the type of multiconﬁgurational self-consistent

ﬁelds (MCSCF) with perturbation or coupled-cluster expansion corrections

should be the most appropriate one and works in the right direction. To solve

the issues such as proper selection of the conﬁgurations for the model space,

the eﬃcient treatment of the dynamic correlation, and the avoidance of the

intruder states, we need not only a mastery of current quantum many-body

theories but also their further development [33, 34].

The density functional theory (DF T ) is one of the most powerful compu-

tational schemes in the study of the electronic structures for the molecules

and solids [35, 36]. However, the importance and necessity of the separation

of the correlation into a static part and a dynamic one is also indicated in its

calculation of the highly charged ions and in its treatment of the transition

states for reactions [37, 38]. Even though the time-dependent DFT has been

developed to address the excited state issues, it seems that the overall den-

6

sity functional theories are still within the framework of quantum mechanics

based on the state vectors and operators [39]. The density is one of the most

fundamental physical quantities which is used for specifying a system.

One most generic quantum many-body approach has been suggested and

established within the perturbation theory [13]. Since the molecular orbitals

deﬁne a reference Hamiltonian for the interacting many-electron system [40],

it is crucial to choose the appropriate ones to make the reference Hamilto-

nian as close as possible to the whole Hamiltonian. In this way, the compu-

tational burden relevant to the correlations will be alleviated. Nevertheless,

the correlated molecular orbitals, determined from the Dyson equation, pro-

vide this candidacy. It is a most general energy eignequation for generating

the molecular orbitals, covering the Hartree-Fock and Kohn-Sham equations

as special cases. In practice, it gives the best single-particle properties such

as electron aﬃnities and electron ionization potentials. Meanwhile, the one-

particle Green function method can go beyond the single-determinant level

and study the N -body properties such as the transition states and total ener-

gies including excitation energies related to the conﬁguration mixing. Since

the self-energy operator can be approached in a systematic way, the multiref-

erence perturbation theory, combined with the single-particle Green function

formalism, will henceforth furnish a most powerful approach for studying the

static and nonstatic correlations of the interacting electrons [13].

(c)General pseudopotential theory

The concepts of eﬀective core potentials (ECP), pseudopotentials, or

model potentials (MP) are those of the most signiﬁcant developments in the

ﬁelds of the electronic structure for molecular and solid state systems [41,

7

42, 43]. They treat valence electrons only, leaving the core electrons and the

nucleus as a whole charge entity and therefore reducing the number of elec-

trons as well as the corresponding overall size of the basis sets employed for

the computation. It is important when we study the electronic structure for

the large molecules or the inorganic molecules containing heavy elements. A

type of pseudopotentials most commonly used for the solid state calculations

is the so-called norm conserving pseudopotentials [42]. In addition to having

the same energies for the valence states, their pseudo valence wavefunctions

are equivalent to the wavefunctions for the valence states obtained from the

full electron calculations outside a cutoﬀ radius. The pseudopotentials con-

structed in this manner share the same scattering properties as those of the

full potentials over the energy range of the valence states. The practical

implementation of the various pseudopotentials has also demonstrated the

importance of choosing a correct size of the core or the range of the va-

lence electrons for the accurate pseudopotential computation in order that

the core-valence correlation or core polarization can be neglected. Obviously,

the physics behind this separation of the valence and core states is the energy

scale principle we described above applied in the level of atomic orbitals.

After realizing this principle, however, we might establish a more general

pseudopotential theory. We are planning to do so within the framework of a

perturbation theory so that the most ﬂexible and accurate pseudopotentials

or eﬀective core potentials can be obtained. They can be used in diﬀerent

chemical environments and work for both ground and excited state problems.

The ﬁnal goal is to make the eﬀective core potentials to be a routine for the

calculation of the electronic structures for the large molecules, the inorganic

8

molecules containing heavy elements, and the solid state systems.

(d)Molecular fragmentation and combined quantum mechanical and

molecular mechanical (QM /MM ) approach for electronic structure of

large molecules

A combined QM/MM approach has become very popular in recent years

in the investigation of, for example, the chemical reactions in solutions and

in enzymes [44]. The basic consideration is that treating a full collection of

electrons for the whole system explicitly is not only unrealistic but also un-

necessary. In the ﬁrst place, the electronic charge redistribution induced by

a chemical reaction is very often limited to a small region due to the length

scale issues such as a ﬁnite range of interaction or natural charge distribu-

tion. Second, the quantum exchange eﬀect for the electrons is ﬁnite range,

and there is no exchange interaction among the electrons with a long dis-

tance [45, 46, 47, 48, 49]. This permits a partition of the whole system into

an active part and an inactive one without any charge redistribution. The

former has to be described quantum mechanically since it possibly involves

bond breaking and making, while the latter can be described by molecular

mechanics because it merely serves as a classical electrostatic environment

for the active site [50]. This combined QM/MM description has shown re-

markable successes in studying the electronic structure and reactivity of large

molecules. However, challenges remain. One of the major obstacles for the

applications is in the proper treatment of the boundary region where the

cut has to be for a covalent bond. Currently, there are two approaches to

this problem. The one introducing link atoms along the boundary is severely

limited and cannot be applied to treat a large variety of diﬀerent chemical sys-

9

tems. In addition, it artiﬁcially brings additional forces into the system and

therefore complicates the problem. The other kind like local self-consistent

ﬁeld methods seems reasonable but it is still more empirical. In order to uti-

lize this kind of combined QM/MM methods for investigating the electronic

structure and molecular dynamics in a larger domain of ﬁelds, we need to

develop a more generic ab initio approach. We believe that the energy scale

principle discussed above can play a key role here. It is not only the prin-

ciple according to which the atomic orbitals including valence ones interact

along the boundary but also the law based on which a systematic approach

for constructing the correct charge distribution or the force ﬁelds along the

boundary can be established. This is also the key for a more sophisticated

or ﬁner treatment of the quantum region including its electron correlation.

In summary, the energy scale principle for the hierarchy of interacting

matter is identiﬁed. Not only can it be utilized as a universal law for under-

standing how matter interacts at diﬀerent levels but also the relevant pertur-

bation formalisms, including the ones pertaining to the Rayleigh-Ritz varia-

tional expansion, can serve as the foundation for building various and most

powerful electronic structure calculation schemes even for the large molecu-

lar systems [6]. In particular, a standard electron correlation approach or a

quantum many-particle theory in general have thereby been established [13].

Obviously, they can also be employed to develop a generic theory for the

intermolecular forces so that the important issues such as the interplay be-

tween chemical bondings and intermolecular forces can be investigated [51,

52].

10

References

[1] L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of

Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Modern Structure Chem-

istry, 3rd ed (Cornell University Press, 1960).

[2] K. Ruedenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 34, 326 (1962).

[3] W. N. Lipscomb, Boron Hydrides (W. A. Benjamin, 1963).

[4] D. A. Harris and M. D. Bertolucci, Symmetry and Spectroscopy: An

Introduction to Vibrational and Electronic Spectroscopy (Oxford Uni-

versity Press; 1978).

[5] R. Hoﬀmann, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 601 (1988).

[6] (a) L. Wei, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

(UMI Publication, 1998); (b) private communication (1998).

[7] W. Kauzmann, Quantum Chemistry: An Introduction (Academic Press

Inc., 1957).

[8] F. A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C. A. Murillo and M. Bochmann, Advanced

Inorganic Chemistry, 6th ed (John Wiley & Sons, 1999).

[9] J. C. Slater, Quantum Theory of Atomic Structure, Vol. 1 (McGraw-Hill

Book Company, Inc, 1960).

[10] T. Kato, Perturbation Theory for Linear Operators (Springer: New

York; 1980).

11

[11] R. A. Marcus, J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 2612 (2001).

[12] H. Kirao, Recent Advances in Multireference Methods (World Scientiﬁc,

1999).

[13] L. Wei, arXiv: physics/0412174 (2004).

[14] (a) W. J. Hehre, L. Radom, P. v. R. Schleyer, and J. A. Pople, Ab Initio

Molecular Orbital Theory (Wiley, New York, 1986); (b) V. A. Rassolov,

M. A. Ratner, J. A. Pople, P. C. Redfern, and L. A. Curtiss, J. Comput.

Chem. 22, 976 (2001).

[15] T. H. Dunning, Jr., K. A. Peterson, and D. E. Woon, in Encyclopedia

of Computational Chemistry, ed. P. v. R. Schleyer (John Wiley & Sons:

New York, 1998); pp. 88-115.

[16] N. R. Kestner and J. E. Combariza, Rev. Comput. Chem. 13, 99 (1999).

[17] L. Wei, A. W. Jasper, and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A 107,7236

(2003).

[18] J. A. Pople, R. Krishnan, H. B. Schlegel, and J. S. Binkley, Int. J.

Quantum Chem. 14, 545 (1978).

[19] P. J. Rossky and M. Karplus, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 6085 (1980).

[20] (a) R. J. Bartlett, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 32, 359 (1981); (b) R.

J. Bartlett, in Chemistry for the 21st Century, ed. E. Keinan and I.

Schechter (John & Wiley-VCH, 2001); pp. 271-286.

12

[21] T. D. Crawford, S. S. Wesolowski, E. F. Valeev, R. A. King, M. L.

Leininger, and H. F. Schaefer, in Chemistry for the 21st Century, ed. E.

Keinan and I. Schechter (John & Wiley-VCH, 2001); pp. 219-246.

[22] I. Shavitt, in Method of Electronic Structure Theory, ed. H. F. Schaefer

(Plenum Press, 1979); pp. 189-275.

[23] W. A. Goddard, T. H. Dunning, Jr., W. J. Hunt, and P. J. Hay, Acc.

Chem. Res. 6, 368 (1973).

[24] K. Rudenberg and K. Sundberg in Quantum Science, ed. J. L. Calais,
O. Goscinski, J. Lindberg, and Y. ¨Ohrn (Plenum: New York, 1976); pp.

505-515.

[25] R. J. Buenker and S. D. Peyerimhoﬀ, in New Horizons of Quantum

Chemistry, ed. P.-O. L¨owdin and B. Pullman (D. Reidel Publishing

Company, 1983);, pp. 183-219.

[26] (a) B. O. Roos, in Advances in Chemical Physics: Ab Initio Methods

in Quantum Chemistry - II ed. Lawley, K. P. (John Wiley & Sons Ltd.:

Chichester, England, 1987); pp. 399-434; (b) B. O. Roos, Acc. Chem.

Res. 32, 137 (1999).

[27] X. C. Wang and K. F. Freed, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 3002 (1989).

[28] H.-J. Werner, Mol. Phys. 89, 645 (1996).

[29] M. W. Schmidt and M. S. Gordon, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 49, 233

(1998).

13

[30] E. R. Davidson and A. A. Jarzecki, in Recent Advances in Multireference

Methods, ed. H. Kirao (World Scientiﬁc, 1999); pp. 31-63.

[31] L. Wei, G. Li, and Y.-C. Chang, Surf. Sci. 439, 14 (1999).

[32] J. Jortner, S. A. Rice, and R. Silbey, in Modern Quantum Chemistry,

Vol 3 (Academic Press, Inc.: New York, 1965); pp. 139-160.

[33] Alexander L. Fetter and John Dirk Walecka, Quantum Theory of Many-

Particle Systems (McGraw-Hill, 1971).

[34] I. Lindgren and J. Morrison, Atomic Many-Body Theory (Springer-

Verlag, 1982).

[35] (a) P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964); (b) W.

Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).

[36] R. Parr and W. Yang, Density-Functional Theory for Atoms and

Molecules (Oxford University Press, 1989).

[37] B. S. Jursic, in Recent Developments and Applications of Modern Den-

sity Functional Theory, ed. J. M. Seminario (Elsevier: Amsterdam,

1996).

[38] E. R. Davidson, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 69, 241 (1998).

[39] K. Burke and E. K. U. Gross, in Density Functionals: Theory and Ap-

plications, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 500, ed. D. Joubert (Springer:

Heidelberg, 1998).

14

[40] A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduc-

tion to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory (McGraw-Hill, New York,

1989).

[41] C. F. Melius and G. A. Goddard, Phys. Rev. A 10, 1528 (1974).

[42] (a) D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43,

1494 (1979); (b) G. B. Bachelet, D. R. Hamann, and M. Schluter, Phys.

Rev. B 26, 4199 (1982).

Phys. 86, 2132 (1987).

[43] S. Huzinaga, L. Seijo, Z. Barandiaran, and M. Klobukowski, J. Chem.

[44] A. Warshel and M. Levitt, J. Mol. Biol. 103, 227 (1976).

[45] (a) M. J. Field, P. A. Bash, and M. Karplus, J. Comput. Chem. 11, 700

(1990); (b) N. Reuter, A. Dejaegere, B. Maigret, and M. Karplus, J.

Phys. Chem. A 104, 1720 (2000).

[46] R. D. J. Froese and K. Morokuma, in Encyclopedia of Computational

Chemistry, ed. P. v. R. Schleyer, N. L. Allinger, T. Clark, J. Gasteiger,

P. A. Kollman, H. F. Schaefer III, P. R. Schreiner (John Wiley: Chich-

ester,1998); pp. 1245-1257.

[47] J. Gao, P. Amara, C. Alhambra, and M. J. Field, J. Phys. Chem. A 102,

[48] R. B. Murphy, D. M. Philipp, and R. A. Friesner, J. Comp. Chem. 21,

4714 (1998).

1442 (2000).

15

[49] W. L. Jorgensen, in Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry, ed. P.

v. R. Schleyer (John Wiley & Sons: New York, 1998); pp. 1986-1989.

[50] U. Burkert and N. L. Allinger, Molecular Mechanics, ACS Monograph

177, 1982.

[51] A. Dalgarno, Rev. Mod. Phys. 35, 611 (1963).

[52] J. A. Pople, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc. 73, 7 (1982).

16

