J. Phys. Chem. A 110 (2006)

Theory and Application of Dissociative Electron Capture in

Molecular Identiﬁcation

Crystal D. Havey†, Mark Eberhart†, Travis Jones†, Kent J. Voorhees†,

James A. Laram´ee∗, Robert B. Cody‡, Dennis P. Clougherty∗∗

† Department of Chemistry & Geochemistry,

Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401

∗ EAI Corporation, 1308 Continental Drive, Abingdon, MD 21009

‡ JEOL-USA, Inc., 11 Dearborn Road, Peabody, MA 01960 and

∗∗ Department of Physics, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405-0125

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

The coupling of an electron monochromator (EM) to a mass spectrometer (MS) has created a

new analytical technique, EM-MS, for the investigation of electrophilic compounds. This method

provides a powerful tool for molecular identiﬁcation of compounds contained in complex matrices,

such as environmental samples. In particular, EM-MS has been applied to the detection of nitrated

aromatic compounds, many of which are potent mutagens and/or carcinogens and are considered

environmental hazards. EM-MS expands the application and selectivity of traditional MS through

the inclusion of a new dimension in the space of molecular characteristicsthe electron resonance

energy spectrum. EM-MS also enhances detection sensitivity as well because the entire electron

ﬂux of the proper energy can be delivered into the negative ion resonance that is analytically most

useful to solving the problem at hand. However, before this tool can realize its full potential, it

will be necessary to create a library of resonance energy scans from standards of the molecules for

which EM-MS oﬀers a practical means of detection. Unfortunately, the number of such standards

is very large and not all of the compounds are commercially available, making this library diﬃcult

to construct. Here, an approach supplementing direct measurement with chemical inference and

quantum scattering theory is presented to demonstrate the feasibility of directly calculating reso-

nance energy spectra. This approach makes use of the symmetry of the transition-matrix element

of the captured electron to discriminate between the spectra of isomers. As a way of validating this

approach, the resonance values for twenty-ﬁve nitrated aromatic compounds were measured along

with their relative abundance. Subsequently, the spectra for the isomers of nitrotoluene were shown

to be consistent with the symmetry-based model. The initial success of this treatment suggests

that it might be possible to predict negative ion resonances and thus create a library of EM-MS

standards.

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

Developing analytical instrumentation with high detection sensitivity and selectivity

is crucial to our abilities to solve meaningful analytical problems that challenge the na-

tion. Among the more sensitive analytical techniques are those employing gas chromatogra-

phy/mass spectrometric analysis (GC/MS), where GC-retention time, mass, and intensity

are molecule selective, and therefore useful for molecular identiﬁcation. For a number of

years, researchers have sought to expand on MS detection methods by using a monochro-

matic electron beam of varying energy to scan an unknown analyte.

In a process called

dissociative electron capture, electrons of speciﬁc energies are captured to produce ions

of characteristic masses that can be detected as a fragment ion with MS. In eﬀect, the

resonance energy spectrumion yield as a function of electron energycreates an additional

molecular characteristic to supplement those produced with traditional GC/MS.

The trochoidal electron monochromator (EM), which uses an axial magnetic ﬁeld to

prevent spreading of the electron beam, was ﬁrst introduced by Stamatovic and Schultz

[1, 2]. Illenberger et al. then modiﬁed and interfaced the EM to a mass spectrometer and

demonstrated the ability to produce negative ions and ion fragments along with ion yield

curves as a function of electron energy using EM-MS [3, 4]. More recently, Laram´ee et al.

used Illenbergers design to further improve the use of the EM in MS applications [5, 6]. This

device was reported to allow the ionization energy to be precisely controlled to

0.3 eV

±

with ion currents only slightly below those observed for electron ionization.

JEOL USA, Inc. (Peabody, MA) has designed and interfaced an EM similar to that of

Laram´ee et al.

for use in a commercially available mass spectrometer. This instrument

produces spectra of negative ion current as a function of electron energy (Figure 1). For

example, the three isomers of mono-nitrotoluene show two negative ion resonances at distinct

electron energies, viz, 0.5 and 3 eV. The relative abundance of the lower energy peak is

distinct for the 2-nitrotoluene isomer. These spectra suggest that a new analytical approach

could be applied for analysis of complex mixtures that are capable of ionization by electron

capture and have led analytic chemists to explore the technique more fully [7, 8]. However, a

number of theoretical and technical issues must be addressed before the technique can begin

to ﬁll its full potential. Key among these are: (1) a demonstration that diﬀerent molecules

give rise to diﬀerent electron resonance spectra (ERS), and (2) that once a spectrum is

3

obtained, it can be associated with the molecule, or class of molecules, from which it arose.

First steps in addressing issue (1) above have been taken by Laram´ee et al. [6] who have

used EM-MS to study a limited number of pesticides, explosives, organoﬂuoro compounds,

polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic aromatic compounds,

and nitrated aromatic compounds. Here, we expand on this work by determining the ERS

of twenty-ﬁve nitrated aromatic compounds some of which are representative of those found

in explosives, diesel soot, and tobacco smoke. Generally the electron resonance of these
compounds is linked to the detachment of a nitro group, NO−

2 , which can be identiﬁed by

scanning the electron energies associated with the m/z 46 peaks [6, 9, 10, 11].

Addressing issue (2) above is more diﬃcult. One approach is simply to create a library of

ERS for all molecules of potential interest. Another approach would be the direct calculation

of electron resonance spectra that could further serve to supplement experimentally obtained

standards. Such an approach is presented and used to distinguish the isomers of nitrotoluene.

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A. Chemicals.

Hexaﬂuorobenzene and all nitroaromatic compounds were purchased from either Sigma-

Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Accustandard, Inc. (New Haven, CT) and were used without

further puriﬁcation. The standards were diluted or dissolved into toluene (ChromAR grade,

Mallinckrodt Chemicals, Phillipsburg, NJ) at a concentration of 100 ng/µL.

B.

Instrumentation.

A JEOL trochoidal EM has been interfaced to a JEOL MStation JMS 700-T four sector

mass spectrometer. The ﬁlament potential, with respect to its center, was scanned from

-3 to 12 eV with an electron current of 20 µA, The energy resolution was

0.4 eV. A

±

6.0 kV accelerating voltage was used, the resolution was set to 1000, and the EM source

temperature was 280 C. The electron energy scale was calibrated using nitrobenzene and

hexaﬂuorobenzene standards introduced to the ionization source via a heated reservoir. The

molecular ion of nitrobenzene (m/z 123) was assigned a resonance energy value of 0.06 eV,

4

while the ﬁrst and second NO−

2 (m/z 46) resonance peaks were assigned values of 1.2 eV

and 3.5 eV, respectively [5].

For hexaﬂuorobenzene, the molecular ion (m/z 186) was assigned a value of 0.03 eV,

while the ﬁrst and second m/z 167 peaks from the C6H−

5 fragment were assigned 4.5 eV

and 8.3 eV, respectively [12] One microliter of each sample solution was injected onto an

HP 6890 Series GC equipped with an on-column injector port to avoid degradation of the

compounds at the inlet. A 30-m ZB-5 column set to 280 C was used for resonance energy

measurements except for 1,3-dinitropyrene, in which the column temperature was set to 300

The electron energy scans were carried out using a JEOL electron monochromator power

supply modiﬁed with an energy sweep board. A Tektronix (Beaverton, OR) TDS2022 two-

channel oscilloscope interfaced to the JEOL NIR Energy Sweep Utility program was used

C.

for data acquisition.

C. Calculations.

All ﬁrst principle calculations were done using the Amsterdam Density Functional code

[13] The correction to the exchange and correlation speciﬁed by Perdew-Wang [14] were used

for all calculations. Triple zeta and double zeta basis sets including polarization terms were

used. The symmetry arguments presented here were not altered by the choice of basis set.

D. Experimental Results.

Table 1 summarizes the major parameters which we believe distinguish one ERS from

another: namely, the energies and relative intensities of both the electron-capture resonances

typical of nitrated aromatic groups. The variation in these parameters, particularly the

vanishing of the lower energy resonance for some compounds, e.g. 2-nitrophenol, suggests

that these parameters will potentially be useful in molecular identiﬁcation.

Unfortunately, as noted before, the extent to which this potential is realized will depend

sensitively on the ability to assign a molecule to its spectrum. In the absence of any clear

rules that associate molecular structure with spectra, the enormous task of creating an ERS

library must be confronted. Rather than taking on this task in full, an initial attempt has

5

been made here to create a model of dissociative electron capture, from which rules linking

structure to ERS might be inferred. Thus, providing the motivation for future work to

directly calculate these spectra.

III. A MODEL FOR DISSOCIATIVE ELECTRON CAPTURE

Begin by considering the reaction

e− + AB

A− + B

→

where AB is an isomer of nitrotoluene and B is the negatively charged nitro fragment and

A, a toluene radical. The radical toluene fragment is much more massive than either the

electron or the nitro fragment. Ignore the kinetic energy of the toluene fragment and take

as the Hamiltonian

H = Te + TB + Ve−A + VAB + Ve−B

where Te and TB are the kinetic energies of the electron and the nitro fragment, respectively;

Ve−A and Ve−B are the interactions of the electron with the toluene and the nitro fragments,

respectively; and VAB is the interaction of the nitro group and the toluene fragment.

Following the work of Day et al. [15], we identify the toluene fragment to be a massive

“core.” It is known [15] that the interactions with the core fragment can be eliminated from

the T-matrix element. In the ﬁrst order Born approximation, the T-matrix element is given

by

~k
|

i

A−, B

T

e−, AB

h

|

|

=

φ, ~K

Ve−B

i

h

|

~k, Φb
|

i

where

is the unperturbed plane wave state of the incident electron,

φ

is the molecular

orbital of the core that captures the electron,

Φb

|

i

to the core, and

is the plane wave state of the detached nitro fragment.

~K

|

i

With the nitro fragment so deeply bound to the toluene core initially, we make the further

|
is the bound state of the nitro fragment

i

approximation that

~R

Φb

h

|

i ≈

δ( ~R), giving

A−, B

T

e−, AB

h

|

|

i ≈

1
√Ωh

φ

Ve−B

|

~k
|

i

where Ω is the volume of the box used to normalize the continuum eigenstates.

Lastly, it is recognized, on the basis of ab-initio density functional calculations on nitro-

toluene, that the incoming electron is attracted to the phenyl moiety and repelled by the

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6

nitro group because a permanent dipole is present in this class of chemical compounds. Such

an interaction is long-range, and over the extent of the short-range bound state in which

the electron is captured, the electron-nitro interaction can be approximated as a repulsive
constant, VeB ≈

V0.

A−, B

T

e−, AB

h

|

|

i ≈

V0
Ω

d3~r ei~k·~rφ∗(~r)
Ω φ∗(~k)
V0

R
≡

(5)

(6)

By Fermi’s Golden Rule, the reaction rate averaged over all molecular orientations–a

quantity closely related to the electron capture resonance spectra– is given by

Γ =

V 2
0
2~Ω Z

d3 ~KdΩk
(2π)3

|

φ(~k)

2δ(ǫk + ǫφ

|

EK

∆)

−

−

where ǫk is the incident electron kinetic energy, EK is the ﬁnal fragment kinetic energy, ǫφ

is the electron binding energy for the capturing orbital, and ∆ is the binding energy of the

nitro fragment to the toluene core. Thus, the essential component needed for the calculation

of the resonance spectra from ﬁrst principles is nothing more than the Fourier transform of

the capturing orbital.

The diﬃculty in evaluating this matrix element is ascertaining into which of the many

molecular orbitals the incident electron is initially captured. However, inspection of Table 1

suggests that in the case of nitrated aromatic compounds, attention may be restricted to the

unoccupied π-orbitals. The rationale behind this conclusion derives from the observation

that the resonance energies do not vary substantially among compounds characterized by

strikingly diﬀerent functionalities, e.g. nitrophenol and nitrotoluene, both of which show pri-

mary resonances close to 3.6 eV. Accordingly, the wavefunctions of the capturing molecular

orbital are also unlikely to show appreciable variation.

The only wavefunctions that could satisfy this constraint are those of the molecular π-

orbitals, which will be characterized by contributions from the pz orbitals of the nitro group

and ring carbons (we take z to be normal to the aromatic ring). Ring functionalities without

π-electrons, e.g. methyl or hydroxyl groups, will contribute only modestly to these molecular

π-orbitals.

In the case of substituted phenyl compounds, like the isomers of nitrotoluene, there

are three unoccupied π-orbitals that should be considered, the structure of which can be

7

predicted from simple nodal arguments, Figure 2. The lowest lying of the three will be the

molecular LUMO and possesses two nodal planes, neither of which contains the nucleus of

a ring carbon atom. This forces the nitro-to-ring interaction to be π-bonding. The other

π-orbital with two nodal planes is generally the LUMO + 1. One of its nodal planes contains

the ring carbon bound to the nitrogen atom, producing a non-bonding interaction between

the nitro group and the ring. At still higher energies is the fully anti-bonding π-orbital

characterized by three nodal planes.

By virtue of the placement of its nodal planes, the nitro-to-ring nonbonding orbital will

be composed almost entirely of the pz atomic orbitals on the carbon atoms at the 2, 3, 5,

and 6 positions relative to the nitro group. As such, we expect this orbital will be nearly

identical in the isomers of nitrotoluene and nitrophenol and thus is likely to be the orbital

into which the 3.6 eV electron is captured.

As a partial conﬁrmation of this conjecture, in Figure 3 isosurfaces are shown for the

LUMOs + 1 of 2-, 3-, and 4-nitrotoluene as computed from ﬁrst principles using the Ams-

terdam Density Functional code [13]. As expected, these orbitals are similar and localized

on the ring, with very little amplitude on the nitro or methyl functionalities.

With a candidate capturing wavefunction, the energy of an incident electron that will

maximize the matrix element

must be determined. Here,

is the state corre-

ψ2

|

i

sponding to the LUMO + 1. This observation invites the evaluation of the matrix element

ψ2

~k
h

|

i

through a plane wave expansion of the capturing orbital and a direct determination of its

overlap with an incident electron.

However, as a ﬁrst step, and as a means of testing our previous assumptions and building

intuition, we begin with a semiquantitative analysis, noting that electron capture will be

governed by a “local symmetry” that may be higher than that of the full molecule. This

local symmetry is that of the potential only on those sites where the wavefunction of the

capturing molecular orbital has signiﬁcant amplitude. Thus, from Figure 3 it is shown

that the symmetry governing the capture of an electron into the LUMO + 1 of 2-, 3-, or

4-nitrotoluene will be that of the potential about the carbon atoms at the 2, 3, 5, and

6 ring positions relative to the nitro group, for it is on these atoms that the LUMO is

localized. Over this region, the symmetry is nearly D2h, and it will be this symmetry that

governs electron capture into the LUMOs + 1 of the isomers of nitrotoluene. Under this

local symmetry, if the capturing matrix element is to be nonzero, the capturing LUMO must

8

share the same irreducible representation as the wavefunction of the incident electron.

The LUMOs + 1 of the isomers of nitrotoluene, all transform as the Au irreducible

representation of the D2h point group. And it is a straightforward exercise to project out

that component of a general plane wave with this symmetry. This exercise reveals the

wavefunction of the incident electron to be, i sin(kxx) sin(kyy) sin(kzz), where kx, ky, and

kz are the Cartesian components of the electrons wavevector. Note that the wavefunction

vanishes, if any of these components is zero.

The Fourier transform of the LUMO + 1 has a substantial magnitude for wavevectors

corresponding to a phase shift of π along a displacement vector connecting orbital lobes

of opposite phase, as depicted in Figure 4A and B. The magnitude of this wavevector can

be estimated by placing the endpoints of the displacement vector in the regions of highest

amplitude for the orbital lobes. This displacement must be a half-wavelength to correspond

to having the electron wavefunction undergo a phase change of π.

It is now possible to estimate the wavelength of the incident captured electron and hence

its energy. The x-component of the displacement vectors shown in Figure 4A corresponds
to the distance between neighboring ring carbon atoms, 1.4 ˚A. The y-component is the
distance between carbon atoms meta to each other, 2.42 ˚A. The z-component varies from
an upper limit of 2 ˚A to a lower limit given by the distance between the LUMO extrema,
or approximately 1 ˚A. These values yield electron wavelengths between 6.9 and 5.9 ˚A,
corresponding to wavevectors between, 0.9 and 1.1 ˚A−1, and electron energies between 3.2

and 4.3 eV respectively. Using these values for kx, ky, and kz, a double isosurface for the

corresponding wavefunction is shown as Figure 4C, which, overlaps constructively over all

space with the molecular wavefunction, accounting for the large amplitude of the resonance

at 3.6 eV.

Given the approximations involved, these are remarkable results. The experimental scans

show a broad electron resonance at 3.6 eV, but with a half width of nearly 1.5 eV. The

semiquantitative estimate is well within this margin of error, and correctly predicts the

peak resonance energy. Further, the model attributes the observed width of the spectrum

to the broadness of the Fourier transform of the LUMO + 1 around this optimum k-value,

which is due, in part, to the slow decay of the pz atomic-wavefunctions normal to the ring.

While the model presented thus far provides conﬁdence that it is possible to identify

the structures responsible for electron capture, the real challenge is to apply the insight

9

gained to discriminate between isomers. Toward this end, the isomer-dependent amplitude

variations of a secondary electron resonance at about 1.0 eV are studied. The energy of this

resonance also varies little between isomers, again suggesting that the capturing orbital is π

in character. For the isomers of nitrotoluene, we believe, electron capture into the LUMO

is responsible for this resonance.

Shown in Figure 5 are the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals, calculated using the

ADF package, of 2-, 3-, and 4-nitrotoluene. There are signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The local

symmetry of 3-nitrotoluene and 4-nitrotoluene are approximately C2v by virtue of a near

reﬂection symmetry in the plane normal to the ring containing the carbon to nitrogen bond.

However, 2-nitrotoluene has an asymmetric LUMO because of signiﬁcant wave amplitude

on the methyl group, reducing the local symmetry to Ch. We believe this diﬀerence leads to

the larger secondary resonance intensity of 2-nitrotoluene compared to the other two isomers

Under the local C2v symmetry, the LUMOs of 3- and 4-nitrotoluene reduce as B1. Pro-

jecting this component from a general plane wave gives the wavefunction of the incident

(see Figure 1).

electron to be,

φ(kx, ky, kz) = i cos(kyy) sin(kzz)(cos(kxx) + i sin(kxx))

(7)

As is evident, the reﬂection symmetry in the xz and yz-planes requires the center of a

captured electrons wavefunction to sit on the x-axis. There is only one set of wavevectors that

simultaneously satisfy this constraint and connect regions of opposite phase. The projection

of these vectors in two planes is shown in Figure 6 along with the real component of the

wavefunction of equation (8). Though these displacement vectors are of a length expected
for half the wavelength of 1.0 eV electron ( 12 ˚A), the intervening region of opposite phase

leads to signiﬁcant cancellations between the wavefunctions of the incoming electron and

the LUMO. Thus, one can expect a weak resonance at about 1.0 eV, as is observed.

The symmetry reduction seen in the LUMO of the 2-nitrotoluene removes one of the

constraints on the incident electron wavevector, conﬁning its center only to the xy-plane.
No longer tethered to the x-axis, a new family of wavevectors (also 12 ˚Ain length) contributes

to the reaction rate. The projection of these wavevectors in the xy-plane is shown in Figure 7.

Because the center of these vectors has been displaced to a region of low LUMO amplitude,

the cancellation will be reduced over those of 3- and 4-nitrotoluene, leading to a more

10

pronounced 1.0 eV resonance, again, consistent with experimental observation.

While the model has shown itself to be consistent only with the ERS for the isomers of

nitroroluene, we are conﬁdent that it is general, at least as far as the isomers of nitrated

aromatics are concerned. This optimism is based, in part, on the extensive molecular orbital

calculations conducted on this series of compounds, most of which have not been reviewed

here. Still, the results are so promising that we believe a quantitative implementation of the

model is in order. Accordingly, we have begun the coding of equation (6) with the intent

of predicting ERS for a great number of compounds. The results will be discussed in a

subsequent paper.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have shown that the utility of EM-MS as a tool for molecular identiﬁcation can be

enhanced through a two-step process. In the ﬁrst, chemical inference is employed to identify

the molecular orbitals into which the monochromatic incident electrons are captured. In the

second step, the principles of quantum scattering theory can be employed to calculate the

fragmentation rate, and thus the ion yield as a function of electron energies. Though for

simple molecules, such as those studied here, such calculations are not necessary to explain

spectral diﬀerences associated with diﬀerent isomers. For more complex molecules, the direct

calculation of ion yield will be necessary. The tools necessary to perform these calculations

are presently under development. We anticipate that these revelations will serve not only

to accelerate the use of EM-MS for molecular identiﬁcation, but also further stimulate a

broader interest in the use of ﬁrst principle methods with analytical chemistry.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

The authors thank Philip Morris USA and the Colorado Tobacco Research Program for

support of this work. The authors also extend thanks to John Dane and Giuseppe Petrucci

for helpful discussions.

11

[1] Stamatovic, A.; Schultz, G. J. Rev. Sci. Instr. 1968, 39, 1752-1753.

[2] Stamatovic, A; Schultz, G. J. Phys. Rev. 1969, 188, 213-216.

[3] Illenberger, E.; Scheunemann, H.-U.; Baumg¨artel, H. Chem. Phys. 1979, 37, 21-31.

[4] Fenzlaﬀ, H.-P.; Illenberger, E. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Proc. 1984, 59, 185-202.

[5] Laram´ee, J. A.; Kocher, C. A.; Dienzer, M. L. Anal. Chem. 1992, 64, 2316-2322.

[6] Laram´ee, J. A.; Mazurkiewicz, P.; Berkout, V.; Deinzer, M. L. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 1996, 15,

[7] LaFranchi, B.W.; Zahardis. J; Petrucci, G.A., Rapid Comm. Mass. Spectrom. 2004, 18, 2517-

15-42.

2521.

[8] LaFranchi, B.W.; Petrucci, G.A., J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2004, 15, 424-430.

[9] Laram´ee, J. A.; Deinzer, M. L. Proc. 5th International Symposium on Analysis and Detection

of Explosives, Washington, DC, December 4-8, 1995.

[10] Voorhees, K. J.; Cody, R. B.; Eberhart, M. E.; McCormick, R. Proc. 49th ASMS Conference

on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, Chicago, IL, May 27-31, 2001.

[11] Havey, C. D.; Hayes, R. R.; McCormick, R. L.; Voorhees, K. J. Proc. 229th ACS National

Meeting, San Diego, CA, March 13-17, 2005.

[12] Laram´ee, J. A.; Deinzer, M. L. Anal. Chem. 1994, 66, 719-724.

[13] Fonseca Guerra, C.; Snijders, J. G.; te Velde, G.; Baerends, E. J. Theor. Chem. Acc. 1998,

99, 391-403.

[14] Perdew, J.P., et al., Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 46, 6671.

[15] Day, T. B.; Rodberg, L. S.; Snow, G. A.; Sucher, J. Phys. Rev. 1961, 123, 1051-1053.

12

FIG. 1:

Ion yield curves for m/z 46 as a function of electron energy for the three isomers of

mono-nitrotoluene obtained by electron monochromator-mass spectrometry.

13

FIG. 2: The unoccupied π-orbitals of a nitro aromatic compound, the orbital “C” is usually the

LUMO while the “B” is typically the LUMO + 1.

FIG. 3: The LUMO + 1s of 2- (A), 3-(B), and 4-(C) nitrotoluene. Note the similarity between

these orbitals, all showing little amplitude on the nitro or methyl groups. Thus the underlying

symmetry can be taken as approximately D2h.

14

FIG. 4: (A) half-wavevectors that are “in phase” with the LUMO + 1 of 2-, 3-, and 4-nitrotoluene

projected onto the plane normal to the ring and containing ring carbons 1 and 4 relative to the

methyl group. In (B) another projection of this wavevector onto the xy-plane of 4-nitrotoluene is

shown for clarity. The wavefunction corresponding to this wavevector is shown in (C). Note the

constructive overlap between the wavefunction and the LUMO.

15

FIG. 5: The LUMOs of 2-(A), 3-(B), and 4-(C) nitrotoluene. Note the similarity between these

orbitals B and C, which are of nearly C2v symmetry. However, the signiﬁcant amplitude on the

methyl group of (A) 2-nitro toluene reduces its symmetry to Ch.

16

FIG. 6: (A) Half-wavevectors that are “in phase” with the LUMOs of 2-, 3-, and 4-nitrotoluene

projected onto the plane normal to the ring and containing a nitro oxygen and the carbon at

position 2 relative to the nitro group. In (B) another projection of this wavevector onto the xy-

plane of 4-nitrotoluene is shown for clarity. The wavefunction corresponding to this wavevector is

shown in (C). Note that this wavefunction must be centered on the molecular x-axis for 3 and 4

nitrotoluene and so will experience both positive and negative overlap with the LUMO.

FIG. 7: The local symmetry of 2-nitrotoluene is Ch and the incident electron wavefunction must

only be centered on the xy-plane. At the position indicated, the negative overlap will be reduced,

leading to a greater resonance signal.

17

TABLE I: Resonance Energies for m/z 46 anions of nitro aromatic compounds (bond type: C-

Compound

Resonance Energy (eV)

Normalized Relative Intensities (%)

NO2).

2-nitrotoluene

3-nitrotoluene

4-nitrotoluene

2,6-dinitrotoluene

2-nitro-m-xylene

4-nitro-m-xylene

5-nitro-m-xylene

2-nitrophenol

4-nitrophenol

1-nitronaphthalene

2-nitronaphthalene

1,3-dinitronaphthalene

1,8-dinitronaphthalene

2-nitrobiphenyl

3-nitrobiphenyl

2,2-dinitrobiphenyl

3,4-dinitrobiphenyl

6-nitroquinoline

2-nitroanthracene

9-nitroanthracene

9,10-dinitroanthracene

1-nitropyrene

1,3-dinitropyrene

4-nitrophenanthrene

0.7, 3.9

3-nitroﬂuoranthene

2.8, 4.7

0.8, 3.6

1.0, 3.5

1.0, 3.6

0.6, 3.4

1.0, 4.1

1.0, 4.0

1.1, 3.9

3.5

1.3, 3.9

0.8, 3.1

1.0, 3.2

3.4

0.7, 3.7

1.0, 4.0

1.1, 3.9

0.6, 4.0

1.0, 3.9

1.2, 3.3

1.4, 4.0

2.7

4.7

3.6

4.0

18

60, 100

26, 100

21, 100

21, 100

100, 77

39, 100

14, 100

100

14, 100

39, 100

16, 100

100

40, 100

100, 89

23, 100

64, 100

31, 100

24, 100

100, 96

100

100

100

100

57, 100

100, 77

