When hot water freezes before cold

Department of Physics and McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences

Washington University, St. Louis, Mo. 63130

J. I. Katz∗

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

I suggest that the origin of the Mpemba eﬀect (the freezing of hot water before cold) is freezing-

point depression by solutes, either gaseous or solid, whose solubility decreases with increasing

temperature so that they are removed when water is heated. They are concentrated ahead of the

freezing front by zone reﬁning in water that has not been heated, reduce the temperature of the

freezing front, and thereby reduce the temperature gradient and heat ﬂux, slowing the progress of

the freezing front. I present a simple calculation of this eﬀect, and suggest experiments to test this

hypothesis.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

In a sub-freezing environment initially hot water often freezes before initially cold water.

This observation is counter-intuitive because one na¨ıvely expects the hot water ﬁrst to cool

to the temperature of the initially cold water, and then to follow the cooling history of the

initially cold water. However, the eﬀect has been observed many times and is folk-wisdom in

many cultures; the earliest known reference is by Aristotle. It was brought to the attention

of modern science by the Tanzanian high school student for whom it is now named; with

admirable persistence in the face of disbelief on the part of his teachers, he insisted on the

primacy of empirical evidence over theory. The history and literature are summarized by

Auerbach [1].

No generally accepted explanation of the Mpemba eﬀect exists. Apparently, pre-heating

water aﬀects its properties in a manner that accelerates its freezing. A number of mechanisms

have been considered, including loss of mass by evaporation [2], the loss of dissolved gases

(whose solubility in hot water is much less than in cold water) and supercooling [1].

Wojciechowski, et al.

[3] report what appear to be the only systematic quantitative

measurements of the Mpemba eﬀect. Following a suggestion of Freeman [4], they also

measured the freezing of water saturated with CO2. Unfortunately, they did not describe

the ionic content of their water, which is likely to be essential.

Auerbach [1] found substantial (several degrees) but non-reproducible supercooling in

both preheated and non-preheated samples. As a result, some of his data showed an Mpemba

eﬀect while some did not. His experiments were performed on distilled and de-gassed water,

and may therefore not be applicable to observations of the Mpemba eﬀect in tap water or

environmental water (Mpemba’s observations were on sugared milk he was freezing to make

ice cream!).

The observations clearly point to some change in water when heated. As has been re-

marked before, heating water removes dissolved air (chieﬂy nitrogen) because its solubility

decreases rapidly with increasing temperature. The problem is to ﬁnd a mechanism by which

the removal of a small quantity of dissolved material (the solubility of nitrogen in water at

room temperature is only about 0.7 mmolar/bar) can produce a Mpemba eﬀect.

Gases are not the only substances whose solubility in water decreases with increasing

temperature. Most natural waters are “hard”, containing a variety of dissolved mineral

salts, most importantly calcium bicarbonate Ca(HCO3)2. This is introduced into ground

water that has been acidiﬁed by atmospheric carbon dioxide by the reaction in limestone

2

pure water

freezing point depressed
  
(hard water)

Ice

Liquid

T
m
/Tm

T

T
0

FIG. 1: Temperature proﬁles, neglecting speciﬁc heat in comparison to latent heat. Tm is the
freezing point of pure water, T ′
m

< Tm that of hard water, lowered by freezing point depression. Its

temperature gradient and heat ﬂux are reduced, so the freezing front advances more slowly than

in water puriﬁed by heating.

rock [5]

CaCO3 + CO2 + H2O

Ca(HCO3)2.

(1)

↔

Because the solubility of gases in liquids decreases rapidly with increasing temperature,

heating shifts the equilibrium to the left, resulting in the precipitation of limestone deposits

known as “boiler scale” or “kettle fur”. For this reason, hardness resulting from bicarbonates

is known as “temporary hardness” [5]. Hard water that has been heated loses much of its
dissolved calcium. Hence the freezing point T ′

m of never-heated hard water is lower, because

of the depression of freezing points by solutes [6], than the freezing point Tm of hard water

that has been heated. For the same thickness of the ice layer, the temperature gradient

and heat ﬂux are less in the never-heated water, so it takes longer to lose the latent heat of

freezing and freezes more slowly. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.

The concentration of dissolved calcium in moderately hard tap water is about 100 ppm, or
2.5 mmolar, but values several times greater or less are found. Each Ca++ ion corresponds to

a total of three dissolved ions, so such a solution has a total ion concentration of 7.5 mmolar.

x

3

The freezing point depression of ideal dilute aqueous solutions [6] is ∆Tm = RT 2
m/Hm =
1.86◦ C/molar, where R is the gas constant and Hm the enthalpy of melting. The eﬀect

of hardness is typically ten times greater than that of dissolved air, but still rather small

without further concentration.

The equilibrium ratio of the concentration of a solute in a solid to that in its melt is the

Nernst equilibrium distribution coeﬃcient k0 [6]. For most solutes in water and ice k0

1;

≪

they are almost completely excluded from the solid. As a freezing front advances into water

the solutes are pushed ahead of it, and their concentration close to the front is enhanced

over its initial value in the liquid, a process known as zone reﬁning [7].

The conventional theory of zone reﬁning [8] assumes a stationaryi state with a boundary

condition that the concentration of solute equals its initial concentration in the liquid at

a ﬁnite distance from the freezing front. This latter condition is appropriate when there

is driven ﬂuid circulation outside a viscous boundary layer of thickness δ. In the present

problem there is no circulation and δ

. Worse, in the limits k0

0 and δ

this

→ ∞

→

→ ∞

solution becomes singular because in steady state the solute from an inﬁnite volume of ﬂuid

must accumulate in a ﬁnite region of enhanced concentration.

Our problem corresponds to the low concentration limit of the theory of the freezing

of binary melts [9], in which the progress of the freezing front is controlled by diﬀusion of

heat. Mathematically, it is a “Stefan problem” in which the boundary condition is moving.

We neglect the speciﬁc heats of the liquid and solid in comparison to the latent heat of

the phase transition. Then the liquid is isothermal and there is no thermal diﬀusion of the

solute within it.

The freezing front advances at a nonsteady speed vf (t) = q(Tm −

T0)κ/(2Hmρit) [10],

where Tm is the melting temperature, T0 < Tm is the subfreezing boundary temperature, κ

is the thermal conductivity and ρi the density of ice, and t is the time elapsed since freezing

began. The equation for the conservation of solute concentration C(x, t) in the liquid, in a

frame moving with the freezing front, is

∂C(x, t)
∂t

+ v(t)

∂C(x, t)

∂x −

D

∂2C(x, t)
∂x2

= 0,

(2)

where v(t) =

vf (t)ρi/ρl is the velocity at which liquid ﬂows to the freezing front and D is

−

the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of solute in the liquid.

Both the diﬀusion length √Dt and the frozen layer thickness

vf (t) dt are proportional

R

4

to t1/2. Hence the solution is stationary in suitable variables. Deﬁning ζ

x/√Dt [11], we

≡

obtain the separable equation

t

∂C(ζ, t)
∂t

−

(KM +

ζ
2

)

∂C(ζ, t)
∂ζ

−

∂2C(ζ, t)
∂ζ 2

= 0,

where the dimensionless parameter KM ≡ q(Tm −
l D). The value of D
for Ca(HCO3)2 in water is not readily available, so we take the values [12, 13] for
CaCl2 as estimates and extrapolate to 0◦ C, giving D
10−5 cm2/sec. Then
KM ≈

7q(Tm −

T0)/10◦ C.

0.6

≈

×

T0)κρi/(2Hmρ2

Writing C(ζ, t) = Cζ(ζ)Ct(t), we ﬁnd ordinary diﬀerential equations for Cζ(ζ) and Ct(t)

with a separation constant A:

d2Cζ(ζ)

dζ 2 + (KM +

ζ
2

)

dCζ(ζ)

dζ −

d ln Ct(t)
d ln t

= A

ACζ(ζ) = 0.

(1) we can neglect the ζ/2 term and the solution is elementary. From

0) we ﬁnd A = 0. The equation for Cζ(ζ) has solutions

→
KM . The root γ = 0 gives the uniform solute density far

1 and ζ =

For KM ≫
the conservation of solute (and k0

O

Cζ(ζ)

exp (γζ) with γ = 0,

∝

−

close to the front:

from the freezing front, while the root γ =

KM gives the enhanced concentration of solute

Cζ(ζ) = C0[1 + 2K 2
M

exp (

KM ζ)].

−

−

ρl
ρi
(K −2
M ).

O

This justiﬁes the neglect of the ζ/2 term to

The concentration at the freezing front is enhanced by a factor

100(Tm −

≈

T0)/10◦ C.

The fractional freezing point depression

∆T
Tm −

=

T0

RT 2
mκ
H 2
mρlD

C0,

where C0 is the concentration in moles/cm3, independent of time and of T0. For Ca(HCO3)2

in water the coeﬃcient of C0 is 20/molar so an ion concentration of 5 mmolar (67 ppm

calcium) produces a 10% reduction in freezing rates compared to pure (once heated) water.

Wojciechowski, et al. [3] reported an apparent increase of Hm of CO2-saturated water of

10

4 cal/gm. This is not likely to be an actual change in Hm, but may reﬂect a reduction
4 ◦C, requiring the removal of additional

of the freezing point at the freezing front of 10

±

internal energy before freezing begins. Application of the theory presented here predicts

±

5

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

that for water saturated with respect to CO2 at 1 bar pressure at room temperature (33
T0 = 23 ◦C [3] the freezing point depression at the front is 10 ◦C,
mmolar CO2) and Tm −
consistent with the apparent increase in Hm. These authors found an Mpemba eﬀect only

in water that had not been degassed by boiling, which is consistent with the removal of

temporary hardness, even though dissolved air itself is predicted to produce only a small

Mpemba eﬀect.

Our model makes readily testable predictions for the dependence of a Mpemba eﬀect

on the concentration of solutes whose solubility decreases with increasing temperature. It

also predicts no Mpemba eﬀect, but a dependence of freezing time on concentration, for

solutes whose solubility does not decrease with increasing temperature. It predicts that the

magnitude of freezing point depression and of the eﬀect (having subtracted the time required

for the solutions to cool to the freezing point) should be independent of the thickness of ice

formed. In this model an Mpemba eﬀect occurs in the time required for formation of an ice

layer of any thickness, and hence is found for the onset of freezing as well as for complete

solidiﬁcation. Fully quantitative predictions require modeling of heat transfer through the

air boundary layer.

∗ Electronic address: katz@wuphys.wustl.edu

[1] D. Auerbach, “Supercooling and the Mpemba eﬀect: When hot water freezes quicker than

cold,” Am. J. Phys. 63, 882–885 (1995).

[2] G. S. Kell, “The freezing of hot and cold water,” Am. J. Phys. 37, 564 (1969).

[3] B. Wojciechowski, I. Owczarek and G. Bednarz, “Freezing of aqueous solutions containing

gases,” Crystal Res. Tech. 23, 843–848 (1988).

[4] M. Freeman, “Cooler still—an answer?” Phys. Educ. 14, 417–421 (1979).

[5] L. Pauling College Chemistry 2nd ed., (W. H. Freeman, San Francisco 1955).

[6] E. A. Guggenheim Thermodynamics 5th ed., (North Holland, Amsterdam 1967).

[7] W. G. Pfann Zone Melting 2nd ed., (Wiley, New York 1966).

[8] J. A. Burton, R. C. Prim and W. P. Slichter, “The Distribution of Solute in Crystals Grown

from the Melt. Part I. Theoretical,” J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1987–1991 (1953).

[9] H. E. Huppert and M. G. Worster, “Dynamic solidiﬁcation of a binary melt,” Nature 314,

6

703–707 (1985).

[10] J. Stefan, “ ¨Uber die Theorie der Eisbildung, insbesondere ¨uber die Eisbildung im Polarmeere,”

Annalen der Physik und Chemie 42, 269–286 (1891).

[11] G. Lam´e and B. P. Clapeyron, “M´emoire sur la solidiﬁcation par refoidissement d’un globe

solide,” Ann. Chem. Phys. 47, 250–256 (1831).

[12] L. G. Longsworth,

in American Institute of Physics Handbook 3rd ed., ed. D. E. Gray

(McGraw-Hill, New York, 1972) p. 2-222.

[13] A. V. Eletskii, in Handbook of Physical Quantities eds. I. S. Grigoriev and E. Z. Meilikhov

(CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla., 1997) p. 473.

I thank Nadya MacAloon, a student in my “How Things Work” class, for asking if the

Mpemba eﬀect is real, and L. M. Canel for ﬁnding and correcting an error.

7

