6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

To be published in International Reviews in Physical

Chemistry, Vol. 25, issue 4 (Oct-Dec 2006)

Molecule formation in ultracold atomic gases

Jeremy M. Hutson
Department of Chemistry, University of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, England

Pavel Sold´an
Doppler Institute,Department of Physics, Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering,
Czech Technical University, Bˇrehov´a 7, 115 19 Praha 1, Czech Republic
(Dated: 21 July 2006)

This review describes recent experimental and theoretical advances in forming molecules in ul-
tracold gases of trapped alkali metal atoms, both by magnetic tuning through Feshbach resonances
and by photoassociation. Molecular Bose-Einstein condensation of long-range states of both boson
dimers and fermion dimers was achieved in 2002-3. Condensates of boson dimers were found to
be short-lived, but long-lived condensates of fermion dimers have been produced. Signatures of
triatomic and tetraatomic molecules have recently been observed. Both homonuclear and heteronu-
clear molecules have been formed by photoassociation, mostly in very high vibrational levels. Recent
attempts to produce ultracold molecules in short-range states (low vibrational levels) are described.
Experimental and theoretical work on collisions of ultracold molecules is discussed.

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps,34.20.Mq,34.50.Lf,34.50.-s,03.75.Nt,03.75.Ss

Contents

INTRODUCTION

Introduction

Basic properties of ultracold atomic gases
Bosons and fermions
Hyperﬁne structure
Trapping and cooling
Bose-Einstein condensation and Fermi degeneracy
Scattering lengths
Feshbach resonances

Molecules formed by Feshbach resonance tuning5

Dimers of bosonic atoms
Dimers of fermionic atoms
Heteronuclear Feshbach resonances
Triatomic and larger molecules

Molecules formed by photoassociation
Photoassociation in Bose-Einstein Condensates
Coherent control
Molecules in low vibrational states

Molecules in optical lattices

Collisions of ultracold molecules

Conclusions

Acknowledgments

References

1

2
2
2
2
3
3
4

6
7
9
9

9
10
11
11

12

13

14

14

14

The achievement of Bose-Einstein condensation in
1995 in dilute gases of 87Rb [1], 7Li [2] and 23Na [3] revo-
lutionised atomic physics. Since that time, Bose-Einstein
condensation has been achieved for several other alkali
metal species (85Rb [4], 41K [5] and 133Cs [6]) and a few
other systems (1H [7], metastable He [8, 9], 174Yb [10]
and 52Cr [11]).
Intense eﬀort has been devoted to the
study of the new properties of Bose-Einstein condensates
[12, 13, 14, 15]. The ﬁeld was further broadened by the
achievement of quantum degeneracy in Fermi gases of
40K [16] and 6Li [17], and ultracold fermionic quantum
matter has proved to exhibit a new range of novel prop-
erties.

Bose-Einstein condensation and Fermi degeneracy in
dilute gases typically require temperatures between 1
nK and 1 µK. However, new quantum properties start
to appear at temperatures around 1 mK, where de
Broglie wavelengths become large compared to atomic
and molecular dimensions. Under these circumstances,
collisions are fully quantum-mechanical and are primar-
ily sensitive to long-range interactions. The region below
1 mK is generally referred to as the ultracold regime.

Over the last few years, the focus of research in quan-
tum matter has shifted to the control of ultracold quan-
tum systems. A particularly important development has
been the ability to form and manipulate molecules in
ultracold atomic gases. Molecules have a much richer
energy level structure than atoms, and oﬀer many new
possibilities for quantum control. Perhaps most impor-
tantly, dipolar molecules interact with one another much
more strongly and at longer range than atoms. Dipolar
quantum gases are predicted to exhibit more new features

[18] and have possible applications in quantum comput-
ing [19]. Cold molecules also have applications in high-
precision measurement, and high-resolution spectroscopy
on cold molecules may allow the measurement of funda-
mental physical properties such as the electric dipole mo-
ment of the electron [20], the energy diﬀerences between
enantiomers (which result from parity violation) [21, 22]
and the time-dependence of the ﬁne-structure constant
[23].

There are two approaches to producing molecular
quantum gases: direct approaches, in which pre-existing
molecules are cooled from room temperature, and indi-
rect approaches, in which molecules are formed from pre-
cooled atoms. The direct approaches have been reviewed
previously [24] and there are also several reviews that fo-
cus on the applications of scattering theory to directly
cooled molecules [25, 26, 27]. The purpose of this arti-
cle is to review molecule formation in ultracold quantum
gases by indirect methods.

BASIC PROPERTIES OF ULTRACOLD ATOMIC
GASES

The physics of cooling and trapping atoms [28, 29,
30, 31] and of the production and properties of Bose-
Einstein condensates [12, 13, 14, 15] has been reviewed
many times. We will restrict ourselves here to a brief
discussion, focussing on aspects of the subject that are
essential to understanding the present review but may
be unfamiliar to readers with a background in physical
chemistry rather than atomic physics.

Bosons and fermions

All

fundamental particles are

either bosons or
fermions. Bosons have integer spin quantum numbers,
while fermions have odd half-integer spin quantum num-
bers. The fundamental diﬀerence is encompassed by the
Pauli Principle, which states that the total wavefunc-
tion for a system must be symmetric with respect to ex-
change of any pair of identical bosons, but antisymmetric
with respect to exchange of a pair of identical fermions.
The most important consequence of the Pauli Principle
is the Pauli Exclusion Principle, which states that no
two fermions in the same spin state can occupy the same
spatial state.

Under circumstances where individual electrons cannot
be exchanged, atoms and molecules are composite bosons
or fermions. Any atom or molecule with an even number
of nucleons and electrons is a composite boson and any
with an odd number is a composite fermion. For the
alkali metals, with an odd number of electrons, isotopes
with bosonic nuclei (6Li, 40K) are composite fermions

and isotopes with fermionic nuclei (7Li, 23Na, 41K, etc.)
are composite bosons.

2

Hyperﬁne structure

An alkali metal atom with nuclear spin i in its ground
electronic state (2S1/2) can have total angular momen-
tum f = i ± 1
In a magnetic ﬁeld, the energy levels
2 .
split into components labelled by the projection quantum
number mf , as shown for 85Rb in Fig. 1 (the Breit-Rabi
diagram). An atom for which the ground state has the
lowest value of f is said to have regular hyperﬁne struc-
ture, and one in which the order is reversed is said to
have inverted hyperﬁne structure. The only alkali metal
atom important to the present review that has inverted
hyperﬁne structure is 40K.

The projection quantum number mf is a good quan-
tum number at any ﬁeld, but f is conserved only at zero
ﬁeld. At ﬁelds above the avoided crossings in Fig. 1, f
no longer describes the character of the states. In this
region the nearly conserved quantities are the individual
projections ms and mi. This occurs at quite high ﬁeld for
85Rb but at much smaller ﬁelds for atoms with smaller
hyperﬁne splittings such as 6Li. Nevertheless, (f, mf )
always provides a unique label for a hyperﬁne state by
following the curve back to low ﬁeld.

Molecules may have more than one nucleus with non-
zero spin, and have mechanical as well as electronic an-
gular momentum. Their energy level structure is thus
considerably more complex than for atoms. Neverthe-
less, it remains true that the zero-ﬁeld levels are char-
acterised by a total angular momentum f , and that in
a ﬁeld these are split into components with projection
quantum number mf .

Trapping and cooling

Ultracold atoms and molecules would condense if they
came into contact with the walls of a vessel. It is therefore
necessary to trap them without physical walls. In most
experiments, an atomic beam is ﬁrst decelerated using
light pressure in a Zeeman slower [33], which maintains
the atoms in resonance as they slow down. The slow
atoms are then conﬁned in a magnetic [34] or magneto-
optical [35] trap.

Levels whose energy increases in a magnetic ﬁeld (see
Fig. 1) are known as low-ﬁeld-seeking, and those whose
energy decreases in a ﬁeld are known as high-ﬁeld-seeking.
A magnetic trap [34] operates by creating a local mini-
mum in the magnetic ﬁeld strength B, so that atoms
in low-ﬁeld-seeking states are trapped. Since it is not
possible to create a local maximum in B in free space,
high-ﬁeld-seeking states cannot be trapped magnetically.

85

Rb

)
z
H
G

(
 
h
/
E

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

F=3

F=2

l
jk
i
h
g

f

e
d
c
ab

mF=3
12
0
-1
-2

-3

-2

-1
0
2

1

0

1000

3000

4000

2000
B (Gauss)

FIG. 1: Zeeman splitting of the hyperﬁne levels of 85Rb in a
magnetic ﬁeld. 85Rb has i = 5/2 and f = 2 and 3. Figure
from Tiesinga [32].

For alkali metal atoms, a magnetic trap has a typical
depth of around 1 mK.

A magneto-optical trap (MOT) [35] uses a combina-
tion of magnetic ﬁelds and Doppler cooling [36] to trap
atoms at considerably higher densities than is possible
with magnetic ﬁelds alone. A MOT can also cool atoms
below the theoretical limit of Doppler cooling by a mech-
anism known as Sisyphus cooling [37]. For example, in
early work on 23Na, Lett et al. [38] observed a tempera-
ture of 40 µK, compared to the 240 µK expected. Even
this is not by itself suﬃcient to achieve Bose-Einstein
condensation, and a ﬁnal stage of cooling, often by evap-
orative cooling [39], is needed to achieve sub-µK temper-
atures.

Ultracold atoms can also be conﬁned in an optical
dipole trap [40]. Optical dipole traps have the advan-
tage that all magnetic sublevels can be trapped simulta-
neously. They rely on the fact that the energy of an
atom in an electric ﬁeld oscillating at frequency ω is
E = − 1
2 α(ω)F , where F is the electric ﬁeld strength.
The frequency-dependent polarizability α(ω) is positive
at low frequencies but is enhanced (and changes sign)
near absorption frequencies. An optical dipole trap op-

3

erates by creating an electric ﬁeld maximum in a region of
strong laser radiation, and can be either near-resonant,
taking advantage of the enhancement in α(ω) near an ab-
sorption, or far oﬀ-resonance. A far oﬀ-resonance trap
(FORT) [41] causes less heating but is much shallower
than a near-resonant trap (sometimes as little as 10 µK).
An optical dipole trap in which the laser frequency is so
low that the polarizability is close to its static value is
referred to as a quasi-electrostatic trap (QUEST) [42].

An optical dipole trap can conﬁne molecules as well as
atoms [43]. In addition, molecules with magnetic dipole
moments can be trapped magnetically [44, 45]. Molecules
with electric dipole moments can be trapped by an anal-
ogous electrostatic approach [46].

Bose-Einstein condensation and Fermi degeneracy

Most traps produce a trapping potential that is nearly
harmonic near the minimum. Because of this, the “trans-
lational” energy spectrum of trapped atoms is not actu-
ally continuous, as is the case for free particles. Instead,
it is discretised by the conﬁnement in the trap: the en-
ergy level spacings ¯hω are typically 10 to 1000 Hz, cor-
responding to 0.5 to 50 nK.

Bosons and fermions follow quite diﬀerent quantum
statistics: Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics re-
spectively. In a Bose-Einstein condensate, nearly all the
atoms are in the lowest level in the trap (though there
are always uncondensed atoms coexisting with the con-
densate). In a harmonic trap, condensation occurs at a
critical temperature Tc given approximately by kBTc =
0.94¯hωN 1/3, where N is the number of atoms [14]. In
a Fermi-degenerate gas, by contrast, each level can ac-
commodate only one atom in each spin state (f, mf ), so
that the system is characterised by full occupation of trap
levels up to the Fermi level, forming a “Fermi sea”. The
Fermi temperature TF is again proportional to the level
spacing, kBTF = ¯hω(6N )1/3 [14]. Both Bose-Einstein
condensation and Fermi degeneracy typically occur at
temperatures below 1 µK.

Scattering lengths

The scattering wavefunction for collision of a pair
of structureless atoms is conveniently written ψ(r) =
r−1χ(r). The radial wavefunction χ(r) obeys the 1-
dimensional Schr¨odinger equation,

¯h2
2µ

d2
dr2 + V (r) − E

(cid:21)

−

(cid:20)

χ(r) = 0,

(1)

where E is the total energy, V (r) is the eﬀective poten-
tial energy and µ is the reduced mass. For two atoms
colliding with zero kinetic energy, V (r) → E as R → ∞,

so χ(r) has zero curvature in that region and becomes
linear in the interatomic distance r,

χ(r) ∼ r − a as

r → ∞.

(2)

The atom-atom interaction is characterised at the sim-
plest level by the scattering length, a, which is the
distance at which the continuation of the asymptotic
straight line (2) crosses zero.

Many of the properties of a Bose-Einstein condensate
depend only on the scattering length and are unaﬀected
by short-range properties of the wavefunction such as the
number of nodes. The chemical potential µBose of a uni-
form Bose gas is proportional to a, µBose = nU0, where
n is the number density, U0 = 4π¯h2a/m and m is the
atomic mass [14]. A positive scattering length thus cor-
responds to an interaction that is overall repulsive, while
a negative scattering length corresponds to an interaction
that is overall attractive. A large Bose-Einstein conden-
sate can usually exist only for positive scattering lengths;
for negative scattering lengths there is a limit to the size
of condensate that can be formed [47, 48].

The scattering length is closely related to the energy
of the highest bound state of the atom-atom pair, Etop.
If Etop is small and negative (a bound state just below
threshold), the scattering length is large and positive and
is related to the bound-state energy approximately by

Etop =

−¯h2
2µa2 .

(3)

The scattering length increases to inﬁnity as Etop ap-
proaches zero and reappears at large negative values
when Etop > 0.

The scattering length depends on the interaction po-
tential and on the reduced mass. It is thus diﬀerent for
pairs of atoms interacting on singlet and triplet curves,
and indeed for diﬀerent hyperﬁne states. It is also diﬀer-
ent for diﬀerent isotopic species.

Feshbach resonances

A very important discovery was that the interactions
between ultracold atoms can be tuned using magnetic
ﬁelds [49]. As described above, an atom with nuclear
spin i in a 2S1/2 state can have total angular momen-
tum f = i ± 1
2 . When two such atoms interact, there
are 3 closely-spaced thresholds corresponding to diﬀer-
ent combinations of hyperﬁne states as shown in Fig. 2,
and there are sets of vibrational levels correlating with
each threshold. Some of the high-lying vibrational levels
of the upper curves can lie above the lower thresholds.
Vibrational levels embedded in a continuum are quasi-
bound and produce Feshbach resonances [50].
In zero
ﬁeld, such resonances are characterised by their energy
Eres and width Γ (in energy space).

4

FIG. 2: Potential energy curves for 85Rb2 (with nuclear spin
i = 5/2) showing the 3 hyperﬁne thresholds. Also shown
is a zero-energy scattering wavefunction on the lowest curve
(f1, mf 1; f2, mf 2) = (2, −2; 2, −2) and a bound-state wave-
function on the (3, −2; 3, −2) curve that is above the lowest
threshold and produces a Feshbach resonance. Reprinted with
permission from Courteille et al. [51]. Copyright 1998 by the
American Physical Society.

Each combination of atomic quantum numbers pro-
duces a channel, and in general there are several chan-
nels correlating with each threshold (corresponding to
diﬀerent values of projection quantum numbers mf and
values of the quantum numbers l and ml that describe
mechanical rotation of the atoms about one another).
Each channel has its own potential energy curve, though
for simplicity only one curve is shown for each threshold
in Fig. 2. At energy E, each channel is described as either
open or closed (energetically accessible or inaccessible at
R = ∞). For example, at the energy of the state shown
in Fig. 2, channels corresponding to the lowest threshold
are open and the rest are closed.

In a magnetic ﬁeld, both the atomic levels (thresholds)
and the molecular levels split and shift as shown for 87Rb
in Fig. 3. A high-lying vibrational level correlating with
one hyperﬁne state can often be tuned across a lower
threshold with an applied magnetic ﬁeld.
In work on
ultracold gases, where the collision energy is typically
ﬁxed at very near zero and a magnetic ﬁeld can be varied,

6

4

2

0

2

0

)

1
-
s
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
s
s
o

l

0

)

a
 
0
0
0
1
(
 
a

 

-2

0

 

50

100
magnetic field (G)
 

5

 

150

FIG. 3: Tuning of molecular levels (solid lines) and atomic
thresholds (dotted lines) for 87Rb2 as a function of mag-
netic ﬁeld. Feshbach resonances occur at the points marked
with ﬁlled circles, where a molecular state crosses a threshold.
87Rb has i = 3/2, so there are higher thresholds corresponding
to (f1, f2) = (1, 2) and (2,2). Reprinted with permission from
Marte et al. [52]. Copyright 2002 by the American Physical
Society.

the term “Feshbach resonance” has come to be applied
to the behaviour of scattering properties as a function of
applied ﬁeld as a state crosses threshold.

Eq. 3 applies even in the multichannel case, not just
when the scattering is governed by a single potential
curve. The scattering length thus has a pole whenever
there is a bound state at zero kinetic energy, as shown
for 133Cs2 in the lower panel of Fig. 4. As a function of
magnetic ﬁeld B, the scattering length in the vicinity of
a Feshbach resonance has the form [53]

a(B) = abg

1 −

(cid:18)

∆B
B − B0 (cid:19)

,

(4)

where abg is the background scattering length, B0 is the
resonance position (deﬁned as the ﬁeld at which a is in-
ﬁnite, which is not quite the same as the ﬁeld at which
the bound state is at zero kinetic energy) and ∆B is re-
lated to the width of the resonance Γ. In practice, it is
of course possible for resonances to overlap or for a sharp
resonance to occur in the wings of a broad one. For exam-
ple, the strong ﬁeld-dependence of the scattering length
for 133Cs2 at low magnetic ﬁeld shown in Fig. 4 can be
interpreted in terms of a broad Feshbach resonance at
B0 = −8 G [54].

The elastic cross section σ(k) for identical bosons at
kinetic energy Ekin = ¯h2k2/2µ is approximately given by
[58]

Feshbach resonances

in 133Cs collisions with
FIG. 4:
(f, mf ) = (3, 3)+(3, 3) as a function of magnetic ﬁeld . Lower
panel: scattering length based on theoretical parameters in
loss rate for radiative collisions [56].
ref. 55. Upper panel:
Note that some of the sharpest resonances are too narrow to
see in the scattering length but are still observed in the loss
rates. Figure from Chin [57].

so that σ(k) passes through a peak of height 8π/k2 (cor-
responding to a = ∞) at a resonance. Other collisional
properties also show sharp features. For example, for
133Cs the radiative loss rate (which is due to atom pairs
temporarily excited to the excited electronic state) ex-
hibits sharp peaks as shown in the upper panel of Fig. 4
[55, 56].

Magnetic tuning of Feshbach resonances was ﬁrst ob-
served by Inouye et al. [59] and Stenger et al. [60], who
detected enhanced loss rates from a Bose-Einstein con-
densate of 23Na as a function of magnetic ﬁeld, and by
Courteille et al. [51], who observed enhanced photoas-
sociation rates in the vicinity of a Feshbach resonance
in 85Rb. The loss rates were attributed either to ex-
citation of atoms to higher trap states during the ﬁeld
ramp [61, 62] or to inelastic collisions involving the tran-
siently formed molecular state [63].
In experiments on
85Rb, Roberts et al. [64] and Donley et al. [65] demon-
strated that tuning the scattering length suddenly from
positive to negative could cause controlled collapse of a
Bose-Einstein condensate. The collapse produces an ex-
plosion of atoms from the condensate and has come to
be known as a Bosenova by analogy with astrophysical
supernovae.

MOLECULES FORMED BY FESHBACH
RESONANCE TUNING

8πa2

σ(k) =

1 + (ka)2 + . . . ,

(5)

The possibility of using Feshbach resonances to cre-
ate ultracold molecules was ﬁrst predicted in 1999 [61,

62, 66]. As described above, a Feshbach resonance oc-
curs when a molecular level crosses an atomic threshold
as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld B. In reality, since
the atomic and molecular states are coupled, there is an
avoided crossing. Thus if the magnetic ﬁeld is tuned
across the resonance, slowly enough to follow the avoided
crossing adiabatically, pairs of trapped atoms can be con-
verted into trapped molecules as shown in Fig. 5. Since
no kinetic energy is created in the process, the molecules
are created with essentially the same energy as the atoms.

y
g
r
e
n
E

Scattering state

)
r
(
U

r

2

Molecular state

1

Feshbach
resonance

Magnetic field

FIG. 5: The crossing of atomic (scattering) and molecular
states as a function of magnetic ﬁeld, showing the avoided
crossing and the use of a ﬁeld ramp to convert pairs of atoms
into molecules. Note that in this case the atomic and molec-
ular states are both high-ﬁeld-seeking, so cannot be trapped
magnetically. Reprinted with permission from Herbig et al.
[67]. Copyright 2003 by Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

The actual arrangement of states in a Feshbach res-
onance is sometimes the mirror image of that shown in
Fig. 5. In the following discussion, the side of the res-
onance where molecules are lower in energy than atoms
will be referred to as the molecular side of the resonance.

Dimers of bosonic atoms

The ﬁrst signatures of trapped molecules produced by
Feshbach resonance tuning were observed by Donley et
al. [68] in 2002. They worked with magnetically trapped
85Rb, so were restricted to low-ﬁeld-seeking states. 85Rb
has nuclear spin i = 5/2, and Donley et al. worked with
trapped atoms in the (f, mf ) = (2, −2) state, which is not
the lowest state in a magnetic ﬁeld (see Fig. 1). In this
case the energy levels are the mirror image of those shown
in Fig. 5, with the molecular state below the atomic state
on the high-ﬁeld side of the resonance.

6

The experiment of Donley et al. was a little more com-
plicated than a simple ramp over the resonance as shown
in Fig. 5. Since the background scattering length for
this system is negative, a(B) is negative on the atomic
side even far from the resonance. For this reason it was
not possible to approach the resonance from the atomic
side, because the condensate collapsed [64, 65]. Don-
ley et al. therefore used a magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle that ap-
proached the Feshbach resonance from the molecular side
but did not actually cross it. The fast ﬁeld ramp mixed
the atomic and molecular states, and Donley et al. ob-
served quantum beats (Ramsey fringes) between trapped
atoms and molecules.

133Cs2 [67], 87Rb2 [69] and 23Na2 [70].

Over the following two years, the technique was devel-
oped by several groups and extended to other bosonic
systems:
In
all these experiments atoms were prepared in the low-
est hyperﬁne state in a magnetic ﬁeld, with f = i − 1/2
and mf = f . Such states cannot be trapped magneti-
cally (because they are high-ﬁeld-seeking), so the atoms
were conﬁned in optical traps. Molecules were created by
sweeping the magnetic ﬁeld across a resonance as shown
in Fig. 5. The molecules were separated from the remain-
ing atoms either magnetically [67, 69] or by using a laser
resonant with the atoms but not the molecules to push
the atoms out of the trap [70]. The molecules were then
detected and imaged by converting them back to atoms
with a reverse ﬁeld sweep. Fig. 6 shows images of the
Cs2 molecular cloud created by Herbig et al. [67].

FIG. 6: Formation of a quantum gas of 133Cs2 molecules.
A: magnetically levitated atomic BEC; B: levitated atomic
BEC with falling molecular cloud below; C: levitated molecu-
lar cloud with rising atomic BEC above. Reprinted with per-
mission from Herbig et al. [67]. Copyright 2003 by Macmillan
Publishers Ltd.

In all these experiments involving bosonic atoms it was
found that the molecules were lost from the trap within
a few milliseconds. The fast trap loss was attributed to

7

closed channel
{-2,-2} open channel
separable potential

Bevolve=16.0 mT

0.06

0.04

)
r
(

b

φ
r

0.02

2
/
1

)
π
4
(

0

-0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

)
r
(

b

φ
r

2
/
1

)
π
4
(

0

-0.005

atom-diatom collisions. The molecules are formed in a
very highly excited state, often the highest vibrational
state that exists in the potential well. There are always
many lower-lying states, and even near dissociation the
vibrational spacing is large compared to the depth of the
trap. Thus inelastic atom-molecule collisions,

M2(v) + M −→ M2(v

< v) + M,

′

(6)

or molecule-molecule collisions,

M2(v) + M2(v) −→ M2(v

< v) + M2(v

′

′′ ≤ v),

(7)

always release enough kinetic energy to eject both colli-
sion partners from the trap. It should be noted that the
molecules are not destroyed in such collisions, but they
are lost from the trap and are no longer ultracold.

As remarked above, the molecules produced by Donley
et al. [68] are formed from 85Rb atoms in the (f, mf ) =
(2, −2) state, which is not the lowest state in a magnetic
ﬁeld. They are thus not strictly bound, and can disso-
ciate spontaneously without collisions to form atoms in
lower-lying hyperﬁne states. This has been studied ex-
perimentally by Thompson et al. [71] and theoretically
by K¨ohler et al. [72]. Thompson et al. [71] adapted the
experiment of Donley et al. [68] to create 85Rb2 molecules
using a magnetic ﬁeld sweep through the Feshbach res-
onance without holding the atomic condensate at a < 0
for long enough for it to collapse. As in the earlier ex-
periments, the molecules were formed in states above the
lowest hyperﬁne threshold. Even at densities where col-
lisional loss was very slow, Thompson et al. found that
the molecules decayed within 1 ms at magnetic ﬁelds far
from resonance. However, close to resonance, they were
able to achieve lifetimes of tens of milliseconds. It should
be noted that this decay mechanism is not applicable to
the experiments on 133Cs2, 87Rb2 and 23Na2 [67, 69, 70],
where the molecules are formed in states that lie below
the lowest atomic threshold.

Molecules formed by Feshbach resonance tuning are
very large. Even the closed-channel part of the wave-
function corresponds to a molecule in a very high vibra-
tional state, as shown in Fig. 2; the wavefunction peaks
near the outer turning point, which can be at distances
approaching R = 100 a0. However, even this underesti-
mates the size of Feshbach molecules. K¨ohler et al. [73]
have investigated a model of the Feshbach resonance used
to produce 85Rb2 by Donley et al. [68], and have shown
that for magnetic ﬁelds near the resonance the molecular
wavefunction is dominated by the open (atomic) channel
and has a wavefunction that dies oﬀ as exp(−r/a) at long
range; the mean internuclear distance is on the order of
a/2, which near a resonance can be several thousand a0.
An example of this is shown in Fig. 7.

2

10

Bmin=15.55 mT

3
10
r [aBohr]

4

10

FIG. 7: Bound-state wavefunctions for a model of 85Rb2 close
to a Feshbach resonance (B = 15.55 mT, a = 7800 a0) and
slightly further away (B = 16.0 mT, a = 521 a0). Reprinted
with permission from K¨ohler et al. [73]. Copyright 2003 by
the American Physical Society.

Dimers of fermionic atoms

In parallel to the work on boson dimers, molecules
were created from pairs of fermionic atoms by tuning
through Feshbach resonances. Collision rates for two
identical fermions are suppressed because s-wave scat-
tering (partial wave l = 0) is forbidden. Accordingly,
the fermion work focussed on pairs of atoms in diﬀerent
spin states, again in optical traps. Molecule formation
was ﬁrst achieved for 40K2 by Regal et al. [74]. 40K has
nuclear spin i = 4 and an inverted hyperﬁne structure,
so that the atomic ground state in a magnetic ﬁeld has
(f, mf ) = (9/2, −9/2). Regal et al. used a mixture of
(9/2, −9/2) and (9/2, −5/2) atoms and formed molecules
by magnetic tuning through a Feshbach resonance. Once
again the molecules were found to be short-lived (τ ≈ 1
ms). The lifetime was attributed to vibrationally in-
elastic collisions [74], though spontaneous dissociation by
spin relaxation is also possible in this case.

A major experimental breakthrough came in mid-2003,
when four groups [75, 76, 77, 78] independently reported

within a period of 6 weeks that fermion dimers can be
remarkably stable to collisions when the atom-atom scat-
tering length is tuned to a large positive value. 6Li has
nuclear spin i = 1, and Strecker et al. [75] and Cubizolles
et al. [76] prepared 6Li2 molecules by Feshbach resonance
tuning in mixtures of the lowest two spin states, corre-
lating with (f, mf ) = (1/2, 1/2) and (1/2, −1/2) at low
ﬁeld. Both groups showed that the molecules remained
trapped for 1 s or more before being dissociated by a re-
verse magnetic ﬁeld sweep. Jochim et al. [77] prepared
6Li2 molecules by a diﬀerent method, taking advantage
of the dramatically enhanced 3-body recombination rate
near a Feshbach resonance, and observed comparable
lifetimes. Cubizolles et al. [76] and Jochim et al. [77]
showed that the lifetime was particularly large close to
the resonance, where the scattering length is large and
positive. Regal et al. [78] carried out analogous experi-
ments on 40K2, both for the spin states involved in their
earlier experiments [74] and for molecules formed from
(f, mf ) = (9/2, −9/2) and (9/2, −7/2). They conﬁrmed
the fast decay far from resonance, but showed that for
large positive scattering lengths the lifetime was dramat-
ically enhanced.

By the end of 2003, three diﬀerent groups had suc-
ceeded in creating long-lived molecular Bose-Einstein
condensates of fermion dimers. Jochim et al. [79] and
Zwierlein et al. [80] achieved this by evaporative cool-
ing combined with 3-body recombination in a mixed
gas of 6Li in its (f, mf ) = (1/2, 1/2) and (1/2, −1/2)
states, held at large positive scattering length close to a
Feshbach resonance. Under these circumstances 3-body
recombination to form molecules is thermodynamically
favourable and the molecules are long-lived. Greiner et
al. [81] formed 40K2 from a very cold Fermi gas of 40K2
atoms in their (f, mf ) = (9/2, −9/2) and (9/2, −7/2)
states, using a Feshbach ramp so slow that thermal equi-
librium was maintained during the ﬁeld sweep. All three
groups observed the sudden appearance of a sharp spa-
tial peak in the density with decreasing temperature, as
shown in Fig. 8 for 40K2. This is widely regarded as the
“smoking gun” of Bose-Einstein condensation [1, 3].

Petrov et al. [82, 83] analysed the stability of fermion
dimers in terms of the long-range form of the wavefunc-
tion. In the case where the atom-atom scattering length
a is much larger than the range of the atom-atom po-
tential re, they showed that both the atom-molecule and
molecule-molecule inelastic collision rates are suppressed
by Fermi statistics. However, their derivation applies
only to molecules that are in long-range states, with
a wavefunction that depends on the scattering length,
χ(r) ∼ exp(−r/a). As will be discussed in more detail
below, Cvitaˇs et al. [84] have shown computationally that
there is no systematic suppression of the atom-molecule
inelastic rate for fermion dimers in low-lying vibrational
levels, even when a is large and positive.

A major reason for interest in fermion dimers is that

8

FIG. 8: Images of a molecular cloud of 40K2 after 20 ms of free
expansion, above and below the critical temperature for Bose-
Einstein condensation. The condensed cloud (right) shows the
tight spatial peak characteristic of a condensate. Reprinted
with permission from Greiner et al. [81]. Copyright 2003 by
[check organisation]

they provide tunable models for studying problems in
condensed matter physics such as the origin of super-
ﬂuidity and superconductivity. According to the widely
accepted theory of Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieﬀer (BCS)
[85], superconductivity occurs because pairs of electrons
are composite bosons and can therefore condense. How-
ever, the pairs of electrons involved in superconductivity
(Cooper pairs) are much larger than the mean separa-
tion between electrons. This is diﬀerent from the usual
regime of molecular Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC),
because far from a resonance a fermion dimer is relatively
strongly bound and is small compared to the typical sep-
aration between unbound atoms. However, close to res-
onance the “size” of the molecules increases and can be-
come comparable to the atom-atom spacing. Under these
circumstances the “molecules” are interpenetrating and
lose their identity in very much the same way as Cooper
pairs of electrons. The beauty of the fermionic atom sys-
tems is that this transition can be followed as a function
of magnetic ﬁeld.

The BEC-BCS crossover between a molecular Bose-
Einstein condensate and a condensate of atomic Cooper
pairs has been studied extensively. The BCS regime is
an intrinsically many-body regime in which 2-body the-
ories cannot be expected to work. At the centre of a
resonance the 2-body scattering length is inﬁnite but the
pair size in a many-body system is limited to the atom-
atom spacing. Beyond the resonance, where the scat-
tering length is negative, the binding forces are much
smaller and the pair size becomes much larger then the
interparticle spacing. Bartenstein et al. [86] showed that

the transition between the two regimes can be achieved
smoothly and reversibly. Regal et al. [87, 88] and Zwier-
lein et al. [89] demonstrated Bose-Einstein condensation
of Cooper pairs in the BCS regime and measured the
atomic momentum distribution in the BCS region. Chin
et al. [90] and Greiner et al. [91] observed a pairing gap
characteristic of superﬂuidity. Partridge et al. [92] have
measured the closed-channel component of the pair wave-
function on both sides of a resonance and shown that,
though small, it persists on the BCS side of the reso-
nance, contrary to the predictions of 2-body theory.

Other studies have focussed on signatures of superﬂu-
idity rather than Cooper pairing. Kinast et al. [93] and
Bartenstein et al. [94] observed collective oscillations in
a strongly interacting Fermi gas that suggest superﬂuid
behaviour in the BCS regime, while Kinast et al. [95]
measured the heat capacity of such a gas. Most recently,
Zwierlein et al. [96] provided conclusive evidence of su-
perﬂuidity by observing arrays of vortices on both the
BEC and BCS sides of a resonance in 6Li2.

Heteronuclear Feshbach resonances

It is possible to trap two diﬀerent alkali metal species
simultaneously, and magnetic Feshbach resonances have
been observed in RbK [97, 98] and LiNa [99]. There
is little doubt that tuning through such resonances will
soon be used to form heteronuclear molecules. However,
it should be noted that neutral heteronuclear molecules in
long-range states do not have signiﬁcant dipole moments:
typical values are less than 0.3 D at R = 15 a0 [100] and
decay as D7R−7 at long range [101].

Triatomic and larger molecules

It is in principle possible to form molecules larger than
diatomic, either by direct association from atoms or by
association of smaller molecules. Chin et al. [102] have
formed Cs2 molecules by Feshbach resonance tuning and
then separated out the remaining atoms magnetically.
They observed ﬁeld-dependent resonances in the inelastic
loss rates that they attributed to Cs4 bound states near
the molecular scattering threshold.

For three atoms there is the intriguing prospect of
forming Eﬁmov states [104], which are long-range trimer
states that exist even when the corresponding dimers are
unbound. Indeed, Eﬁmov showed that, if the pair poten-
tial has exactly one bound state at zero energy (corre-
sponding to an inﬁnite scattering length), there are an
inﬁnite number of such trimer states. The helium trimer
is predicted to have one Eﬁmov state [105, 106], but it
has not yet proved possible to observe this experimen-
tally. However, alkali metal atoms with tunable interac-
tions oﬀer new possibilities for a slightly diﬀerent type

9

FIG. 9: Appearance of Eﬁmov trimer states, showing how
they intersect the threshold for 3 separated atoms as a func-
tion of scattering length. The shaded area shows the scatter-
ing continuum for 3 atoms (a < 0) and for atom + diatom
(a > 0). The characteristic factor of 22.7 in a has been re-
duced to 2 for the purpose of illustration. Reproduced from
Kraemer et al. [103].

of Eﬁmov state, which occurs whenever the scattering
length is large but is complicated by the existence of a
large number of deeply bound states. Braaten and Ham-
mer [107] and Nielsen et al. [108] have shown that Eﬁmov
states will cause resonant enhancements in 3-body recom-
bination rates at characteristic values of the scattering
length that diﬀer by successive factors of 22.7. The char-
acteristic dependence of energies on scattering length is
shown in Fig. 9. Very recently, Kraemer et al. [103] have
measured trap loss in an ultracold gas of Cs atoms as a
function of scattering length, and observed a peak that
they attribute to resonance between an Eﬁmov state of
the trimer and the threshold for 3 separated atoms.

MOLECULES FORMED BY
PHOTOASSOCIATION

Dimers can also be formed in cold atomic gases by pho-
toassociation, as predicted by Thorsheim et al. in 1987
[109]. Developments up to 1999 were reviewed by Stwal-
ley and Wang [110] and more recent work by Jones et al.
[111]. The early work focussed on 1-photon photoasso-
ciation spectroscopy, forming molecules in electronically
excited states. More recently, however, it has become
possible to form ultracold molecules in their electronic
ground states by 2-photon processes as shown in Fig. 10.
This was ﬁrst achieved by Fioretti et al. [112], who pho-
toassociated Cs2 to an excited 0−
g electronic state with a
double minimum [113] and observed ultracold molecules

formed by spontaneous emission to the lowest triplet
state. Nikolov et al. [114] carried out a similar experi-
ment to form the 1Σ+
g ground state of K2 and used res-
onant two-colour ionization to show that the vibrational
distribution peaked at v = 36, just over half way up
the ground state potential well. They subsequently [115]
developed a 2-photon excitation scheme via an excited
1Πu state that produced molecules even further down
the ground-state well. Optical trapping of ground-state
Cs2 molecules was achieved by Takekoshi et al. [43] and
magnetic trapping by Vanhaecke et al. [45].

FIG. 10: Potential energy curves and (squares of) vibrational
wavefunctions for photoassociation of Rb2. Reprinted with
permission from Boesten et al. [116]. Copyright 1999 by In-
stitute of Physics.

Photoassociation in Bose-Einstein Condensates

An additional degree of control can be introduced by
using stimulated Raman adiabatic passage (STIRAP)
[117], in which a second laser detuned from the excita-
tion laser brings the molecules down to bound levels of
the ground electronic state [118]. This was ﬁrst achieved
by Wynar et al. [119], who worked in a Bose-Einstein con-
densate of 87Rb and produced ultracold 87Rb2 molecules
in a speciﬁc vibration-rotation (and hyperﬁne) state by
STIRAP via the 0−
g state. In their experiment the dump
laser was detuned by only 636 MHz from the pump laser,
and the molecules were formed in the second-to-last vi-
brationally excited state. Producing molecules in this

10

way has the major advantage that coherence can be main-
tained [120, 121]; this is not the case if spontaneous
emission is involved. Winkler et al. [122] have used 2-
colour photoassociation to produce a coherent superposi-
tion of atomic 87Rb and molecular 87Rb2 Bose-Einstein
condensates.
In a conceptually related but experimen-
tally quite diﬀerent approach, Thompson et al. [123] have
used an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld to stimulate deexcita-
tion of atom pairs from free atom states to molecular
states of 85Rb2.

1-photon and coherent 2-photon photoassociation can
be viewed as manifestations of optical Feshbach reso-
nances, in which laser frequencies or intensities are used
to tune collision properties. In a “dressed state” picture,
the photons of a laser ﬁeld bring atomic or molecular
states at diﬀerent energies into resonance with one an-
other. Such resonances were ﬁrst investigated theoreti-
cally by Fedichev et al. [124], who showed that moder-
ate laser intensities near resonance could induce suﬃcient
excited-state character to change scattering lengths and
even reverse their sign. Bohn and Julienne [125] extended
this work and introduced the concept of 2-photon (or 2-
colour) optical Feshbach resonances, in which the state
responsible for the resonance is a vibrational level of the
ground electronic state, connected to the atomic state by
a 2-photon (stimulated Raman) transition.

Optical Feshbach resonances were ﬁrst demonstrated
experimentally by Fatemi et al.
[126], who observed
changes in Na-Na scattering properties due to a one-
photon resonance as a function of laser detuning and
intensity. Theis et al. [127] observed the variation of
scattering length directly, by using Bragg spectroscopy
to determine the mean ﬁeld energy of an 87Rb conden-
sate, and Thalhammer et al. [128] have carried out similar
measurements for a stimulated Raman resonance.

An optical Feshbach resonance can in principle be used
to create molecules in a very similar way to a mag-
netic Feshbach resonance. Javanainen and Mackie [129]
proposed a photoassociation scheme in which molecules
are produced coherently by chirping (ramping) the laser
frequency adiabatically across an optical Feshbach reso-
nance. Koch et al. [130] have investigated the formation
of electronic ground-state 87Rb2 molecules in a similar
way, and considered ramping the laser intensity as well
as the frequency.

Tuning through optical Feshbach resonances is poten-
tially more general than magnetic tuning. Laser ﬁelds
can be switched on and oﬀ much faster than magnetic
ﬁelds, and optical tuning could be applied to atoms with-
out nuclear spin, such as the predominant isotopes of sev-
eral of the alkaline earths (24Mg, 40Ca, 88Sr, 138Ba). In
addition, levels can be tuned into resonance from much
further away using 2-photon resonances than is possible
magnetically. However, a limitation arises because the
extent to which the crossing is avoided depends on the
laser-induced coupling between the two states, and thus

on transition moments and Franck-Condon factors.
If
the Raman transition is very weak, it will be impossible
to tune across the resonance slowly enough to achieve
adiabatic passage.

Coherent control

Most photoassociation experiments have so far used
ﬁxed-frequency lasers. However, an alternative is to use
laser pulses with tailored frequency and intensity proﬁles,
as has become common in quantum control experiments
on molecules at higher temperature [131]. A broadband
laser can create a non-stationary state (wavepacket) that
is made up of a linear combination of several diﬀerent
rovibrational levels of the excited electronic state. The
wavepacket then evolves in time, and if carefully chosen
may develop favourable Franck-Condon overlap with low-
lying vibrational levels of the electronic ground state.

Vala et al. [132] have simulated the use of chirped pi-
cosecond laser pulses to form Cs2 molecules in the double-
minimum 0−
state, and Luc-Koenig et al. [133, 134]
g
have investigated optimization of the pulse characteris-
tics. Koch et al. [135] have simulated two-photon pho-
toassociation using the scheme shown in Fig. 11 and op-
timized the parameters of the dump pulse to maximize
the formation of molecules in deeply bound vibrational
states. Salzmann et al. [136] have carried out initial
experimental work in which evolutionary strategies are
used to optimize pulse parameters to maximise formation
of ultracold 85Rb2, while Brown et al. [137] have found
that chirped femtosecond pulses produce fewer ultracold
85Rb2 and 87Rb2 molecules than comparable unchirped
pulses.

Molecules in low vibrational states

Both photoassociation and magnetic resonance tuning
produce molecules in very high vibrational states. How-
ever, molecules in excited vibrational states can always
undergo inelastic collisions that lead to trap loss. There
is thus great interest in ﬁnding ways either to drive the
formation of molecules in the vibrational ground state,
v = 0, or to transfer molecules initially formed in high-
lying states to v = 0.

Direct photoassociation to form low-lying vibrational
states is not usually feasible for homonuclear molecules,
because the low-energy scattering wavefunction for a pair
of atoms has very little amplitude at short range. There
is therefore very little Franck-Condon overlap with the
wavefunctions for low-lying vibrational states, which are
entirely at short range. Various schemes have been pro-
posed to overcome this [19, 138, 139], but for homonu-
clear molecules the combination of parity restrictions and
Franck-Condon factors present formidable obstacles. For

11

tP + 40 ps

tP + 250 ps

tP + 135 ps

t = 0

tP + 40 ps

1
-

]
 

m
c
 
[
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

11900

11800

11700

100

0

-100

-200

20

40

60

80

100

120

internuclear distance [ units of Bohr radius a0 ]

FIG. 11: Formation of Cs2 using chirped pump and dump
pulses, showing the evolution of the wavepacket on the upper
−
electronic state (0
g ). Reprinted with permission from Koch
et al. [135]. Copyright 2006 by the American Physical Society.

example, Jaksch et al. [140] proposed a 6-photon scheme
to form 87Rb2 in its ground vibronic state. For het-
eronuclear species, on the other hand, the parity restric-
tions are lifted and the Franck-Condon factors are more
favourable [141], so that stimulated Raman photoassoci-
ation to form v = 0 molecules may be feasible [19, 139].

(2)

y
g
r
e
n
E

(2)

(1)

Na-Na distance

FIG. 12: The use of tailored laser pulses to stabilise long-
range Na2 molecules by transferring them to the ground vi-
bronic state. Reprinted with permission from Koch et al.
[142]. Copyright 2004 by the American Physical Society.

An alternative approach that may be advantageous is
to form long-range molecules ﬁrst, by either Feshbach

resonance tuning or photoassociation, and then transfer
the molecular population to a short-range state. Koch
et al. [142] have used optimal control theory to design
tailored laser pulses that would achieve this for Na2 as
shown in Fig. 12, while Stwalley [143] has suggested that
for heteronuclear alkali metal dimers it could be eﬃ-
ciently achieved by stimulated Raman adiabatic passage
via mixed levels of the b3Π and A1Σ+ states.

12

The SEP process has an eﬃciency of only 6%, but this
could in principle be dramatically improved by using STI-
RAP instead.

Other heteronuclear molecules such as KRb [148, 149,
150] and NaCs [151] have also been produced in the elec-
tronic ground state [148, 149, 151] and state-selectively
detected [150], but not yet transferred to low-lying vi-
brational states. LiCs and NaCs have been formed in
the lowest vibrational level of the lowest triplet state on
the surface of helium droplets [152], but the tempera-
ture is that of the droplet (0.38 K) and cannot easily be
lowered further.

MOLECULES IN OPTICAL LATTICES

An optical lattice is formed by standing waves between
two or more laser beams. Since atoms and molecules
are polarisable, they experience a periodic potential with
minima at the points where the electric ﬁelds due to
the laser are greatest. The separation between succes-
sive minima is half the laser wavelength, and the heights
of the barriers between minima can be adjusted by vary-
ing the laser intensity. Conﬁnement of atoms in optical
lattice cells was ﬁrst observed by Westbrook et al. [153].
One particularly interesting state that can be created is
a Mott insulator phase [154, 155], in which the lattice
sites are occupied in a regular pattern and which can
be “melted” to form a superﬂuid by lowering the barri-
ers. The dynamics of Bose-Einstein condensates in opti-
cal lattices have been recently reviewed by Morsch and
Oberthaler [156].

∆

jPR + 1i

jPR (cid:0) 1i

ω
2

jPRi

(cid:1)

FIG. 13: The scheme used to produce and detect RbCs
molecules in their ground vibronic state. Reprinted with per-
mission from Sage et al. [144]. Copyright 2005 by the Ameri-
can Physical Society.

E

0

ω
4

ω
1

ω
3

|b〉

!

!

2

1

jbi

j0i

|0〉

In the culmination of a series of papers [145, 146, 147],
Sage et al. [144] have succeeded in creating ultracold
RbCs molecules (T ≈ 100 µK) in their vibronic ground
state using the 2-step (4-photon) process shown in Fig.
13: ﬁrst, molecules are produced in the weakly bound
v = 37 level of the a3Σ+ state by 1-photon photoas-
sociation (a) followed by spontaneous emission (b), and
then they are transferred to the v = 0 or 1 level of the
X1Σ+ state by an incoherent 2-photon pump/dump pro-
cess (stimulated emission pumping, SEP, (c) and (d) in
Fig. 13) via a mixed level of the c and B excited states.

R

FIG. 14: Scheme for creating molecules at doubly occupied
lattice sites in a Mott insulator. Note the quadratic trapping
potential at long range that serves to conﬁne the initial state.
Reprinted with permission from Jaksch et al. [140]. Copyright
2002 by the American Physical Society.

The production of molecules in optical

lattices of-
fers intriguing possibilities. The barriers between lat-

tice sites enhance stability by preventing collisions be-
tween molecules at diﬀerent sites. Jaksch et al. [140]
proposed creating a molecular Bose-Einstein condensate
by Raman photoassociation in a Mott insulator with 2
atoms in each lattice site as shown in Fig. 14. The trap-
ping potential discretizes the molecular continuum and
converts the free-bound photoassociation process into a
bound-bound transition. Damski et al. [157] extended
this idea to the creation of a dipolar superﬂuid by pho-
toassociation in a lattice containing one atom of each of
two diﬀerent species in each site. Rom et al. [158] have
created 87Rb2 molecules in an optical lattice by essen-
tially the technique of ref. 140. Ryu et al. [159] have
carried out similar experiments and observed coherent
oscillations (Rabi cycling) between atomic and molecu-
lar gases. They also observed distinct Raman spectra for
photoassociation occurring in doubly and triply occupied
sites. Thalhammer et al. [160] have also created 87Rb2 on
an optical lattice, but by magnetic tuning through a Fes-
hbach resonance. They were able to purify the resulting
molecular lattice by driving out the remaining atoms with
a laser, and showed that the molecules remained trapped
much longer (700 ms) after the atoms had been removed
than while they were still present. They attribute the
loss rate to inelastic atom-molecule collisions that occur
when atoms tunnel through lattice barriers into sites oc-
cupied by molecules; once the atoms are removed, the
corresponding loss due to molecule-molecule collisions is
much slower simply because of the larger mass and re-
duced tunnelling rate of the molecules. Very recently,
Winkler et al. [161] have created long-lived bound atom
pairs with a repulsive atom-atom interaction. The pairs
cannot decay into separated atoms because the energies
of the atoms that would be produced are not allowed
by the lattice band structure. Remarkably, the pairs do
decay if the repulsive interaction between the atoms is
switched oﬀ by tuning the scattering length to zero. Volz
et al. [162] have created a Mott state of 87Rb2 molecules
and demonstrated that phase coherence is restored when
the lattice depth is reduced.

Initial experiments have also been carried out on
fermion dimers in optical lattices. Moritz et al. [163]
reported the creation of a 1-dimensional gas of 40K2
molecules in a 2-d optical lattice by Feshbach resonance
tuning, and St¨oferle et al. [164] have carried out simi-
lar experiments in a 3-d lattice. However, the tunnelling
rates for the lattices used were too fast for lifetimes to be
increased beyond those normal for fermion dimers.

Optical lattices provide a very promising environment
for bringing together more than two atoms at a time and
studying many-body processes under controlled condi-
tions. Stoll and K¨ohler [165] have suggested a scheme
that could be used to produce Eﬁmov states of alkali
metal trimers directly from 3 atoms by magnetic Fesh-
bach resonance tuning in an optical lattice.

13

COLLISIONS OF ULTRACOLD MOLECULES

Collision processes involving ultracold molecules are
of prime importance to trapping and controlling them.
As described above, inelastic collisions usually release
enough kinetic energy that both collision partners are lost
from the trap. The initial experiments on boson dimers
formed by Feshbach resonance tuning [67, 68, 69, 70] gave
lifetimes that suggested vibrational relaxation rates for
atom-molecule collisions around 10−10 cm3 s−1. Quanti-
tative estimations were not usually attempted, but this
was consistent with the rate of 1.6 × 10−10 cm3 s−1, esti-
mated by Yurovsky et al. [166] on the basis of early Fesh-
bach resonance experiments [59, 60]. It also agreed with
quantum dynamics calculations by Soldan et al. [167] on
vibrational relaxation in Na + Na2 collisions. More re-
cently, Mukaiyama et al. [168] have measured the trap
loss rate for 23Na2 molecules formed by Feshbach reso-
nance tuning and obtained an atom-molecule rate coef-
ﬁcient kloss = 5.1 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 for molecules in the
highest vibrational state.

Relaxation processes involving molecules formed by
photoassociation have also been studied. Wynar et al.
[119] obtained an upper bound of kloss = 8 × 10−11
cm3 s−1 for 87Rb2 molecules in the second-to-last vibra-
tionally excited state. Staanum et al. [169] have inves-
tigated inelastic collisions of rovibrationally excited Cs2
(3Σ+
u ) in collisions with Cs atoms in two diﬀerent ranges
of the vibrational quantum number v by monitoring trap
loss of Cs2. They obtained atom-molecule rate coeﬃ-
cients close to 1.0 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 for both v = 4 to 6
and v = 32 to 47. Zahzam et al. [170] have carried out
similar work for diﬀerent rovibrational states of 3Σ+
u , but
also considered molecules in the 1Σ+
g state and molecule-
molecule collisions. They obtained rate coeﬃcients of
2.6 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 and 1.0 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 in the
atom-atom and atom-molecule cases respectively, both
with quite large error bounds.

Sold´an et al. [167], Qu´em´ener et al. [171, 172], and
Cvitaˇs et al. [84, 173, 174] have carried out quantum dy-
namics calculations on atom-molecule collisions between
alkali-metal atoms and dimers. This work will be de-
scribed in greater detail in a forthcoming review [175].
The calculations used a reactive scattering approach de-
veloped by Launay and LeDourneuf [176], which has
been applied extensively to chemical reactions such as
N(2D)+H2 [177] and O(1D)+H2 [178] at higher ener-
gies. Sold´an et al. [167] showed that barrierless atom
exchange reactions can occur in Na + Na2, and that even
at very low energy such collisions cause very fast vibra-
tional relaxation (kinel on the order of 10−10 cm3 s−1)
for collisions of molecules in low vibrational states. The
cross sections were shown to depend strongly on the de-
tails of the potential energy surfaces, and to change by
a factor of 10 when non-additive forces were included,

10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
Collision energy (K)
Collision energy (K)

(a)
(a)

(b)
(b)

14

CONCLUSIONS

There have been enormous advances in the produc-
tion and manipulation of molecules in laser-cooled atomic
gases. Molecules have been produced both by photoasso-
ciation and by magnetic tuning through Feshbach reso-
nances. Molecular Bose-Einstein condensates have been
produced for molecules in long-range states, and the ﬁrst
signatures of triatomic and tetraatomic molecules have
been seen. Most of the experimental advances were
guided by theoretical predictions, and the experiments
have in turn stimulated a large number of theoretical
studies.

Prospects for the future include the use of cold
molecules for high-precision measurement and the pro-
duction of quantum-degenerate gases of ground-state
molecules, which will be stable to collisions and oﬀer
a wealth of new possibilities for quantum control. Het-
eronuclear molecules are particularly interesting, because
they can have substantial dipole moments in long-range
states. Dipolar quantum gases oﬀer a new range of novel
properties, and ultracold polar molecules also have po-
tential applications in quantum computing and in study-
ing fundamental physical properties such as parity viola-
tion and the electron dipole moment.

)
)

2
2
m
m
c
c
(
(
 
 
s
s
n
n
o
o
i
i
t
t
c
c
e
e
s
s
 
 
s
s
s
s
o
o
r
r
C
C

)
)

2
2
m
m
c
c
(
(
 
 
s
s
n
n
o
o
i
i
t
t
c
c
e
e
s
s
 
 
s
s
s
s
o
o
r
r
C
C

10-8
10-8
10-9
10-9
10-10
10-10
10-11
10-11
10-12
10-12
10-13
10-13
10-14
10-14
10-15
10-15
10-16
10-16
10-17
10-17
10-18
10-18
10-19
10-19
10-20
10-20

10-8
10-8
10-9
10-9
10-10
10-10
10-11
10-11
10-12
10-12
10-13
10-13
10-14
10-14
10-15
10-15
10-16
10-16
10-17
10-17
10-18
10-18
10-19
10-19
10-20
10-20

10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
Collision energy (K)
Collision energy (K)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

FIG. 15: Cross sections from s-wave quantum reactive scat-
tering calculations for Na + Na2(v = 1, j = 0) Elastic and
quenching results are shown as solid and dotted lines. The
cross sections on the additive potential (a) are a factor of 10
smaller than those on the non-additive potential (b). Repro-
duced from Sold´an et al. [167]

The authors are grateful to Simon Cornish and Charles
Adams for valuable discussions and to Eite Tiesinga and
Cheng Chin for providing Figures based on unpublished
work. PS acknowledges support from the Ministry of
Education of the Czech Republic (grant no. LC06002).

as shown in Fig. 15. In subsequent work, Sold´an et al.
[179] showed that non-additive forces are important for
all the alkali metal trimer systems, and aﬀect the well
depth for spin-polarized Li + Li2 collisions by a factor
of 4. The quantum dynamics calculations were subse-
quently extended to Li + Li2 collisions, both isotopically
homonuclear [84, 173] and heteronuclear [174], and to K
+ K2 [172]. For the homonuclear Li systems, Cvitaˇs et
al. [84] demonstrated that there is no systematic sup-
pression of the inelastic collision rates for fermion dimers
in low vibrational states, in contrast to the situation for
molecules in long-range states [75, 76, 77, 78, 82, 83].
This is very important for attempts to transfer molecules
formed by Feshbach resonance tuning to the vibrational
ground state, because it means that the transfer must be
accomplished without spending signiﬁcant time in inter-
mediate vibrational states.

[1] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E.
Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995).
[2] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett, and R. G.

Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995).

[3] K. B. Davis, M. O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. Van-
Druten, D. S. Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995).

[4] S. L. Cornish, N. R. Claussen, J. L. Roberts, E. A.
Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1795
(2000).

[5] G. Modugno, G. Ferrari, G. Roati, R. J. Brecha, A. Si-
moni, and M. Inguscio, Science 294, 1320 (2001).
[6] T. Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H. C. N¨agerl, and

R. Grimm, Science 299, 232 (2003).

[7] D. G. Fried, T. C. Killian, L. Willmann, D. Landhuis,
S. C. Moss, D. Kleppner, and T. J. Greytak, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, 3811 (1998).

[8] A. Robert, O. Sirjean, A. Browaeys, J. Poupard,
S. Nowak, D. Boiron, C. I. Westbrook, and A. Aspect,
Science 292, 461 (2001).

feger, Org. Biomol. Chem. 3, 2218 (2005).

R. Grimm, Science 299, 232 (2003).

[9] F. P. Dos Santos, J. Leonard, J. M. Wang, C. J.
Barrelet, F. Perales, E. Rasel, C. S. Unnikrishnan,
M. Leduc, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 3459 (2001).

[10] Y. Takasu, K. Maki, K. Komori, T. Takano, K. Honda,
M. Kumakura, T. Yabuzaki, and Y. Takahashi, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 040404 (2003).

[11] A. Griesmaier, J. Werner, S. Hensler, J. Stuhler, and

T. Pfau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 160401 (2005).

[12] E. A. Cornell and C. E. Wieman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74,

875 (2002).

[13] W. Ketterle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1131 (2002).
[14] C. J. Pethick and H. Smith, Bose-Einstein Conden-
sation in Dilute Gases (Cambridge University Press,
2002).

[15] S. L. Cornish and D. Cassettari, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. Ser. A-Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 361, 2699 (2003).
[16] B. DeMarco and D. S. Jin, Science 285, 1703 (1999).
[17] A. G. Truscott, K. E. Strecker, W. I. McAlexander,
G. B. Partridge, and R. G. Hulet, Science 291, 2570
(2001).
[18] M. Baranov,

 L. Dobrek, K. G´oral, L. Santos, and

M. Lewenstein, Phys. Scr. T102, 74 (2002).
[19] D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 067901 (2002).
[20] J. J. Hudson, B. E. Sauer, M. R. Tarbutt, and E. A.

Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

[21] M. Quack and J. Stohner, Chimia 59, 530 (2005).
[22] J. Crassous, C. Chardonnet, T. Saue, and P. Schwerdt-

[23] E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, B. C. Sawyer, and

J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 143004 (2006).

[24] H. L. Bethlem and G. Meijer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

[25] R. V. Krems, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 24, 99 (2005).
[26] E. Bodo and F. A. Gianturco, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

22, 73 (2003).

25, 313 (2006).

25, 283 (2006).

1 (1997).

[28] C. S. Adams and E. Riis, Prog. Quantum Electron. 21,

[29] S. Chu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998).
[30] W. D. Phillips, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 721 (1998).
[31] C. N. Cohen-Tannoudji, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 707

(1998).

(1982).

[32] E. Tiesinga (2006), private communication.
[33] W. D. Phillips and H. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 596

[34] A. L. Migdall, J. V. Prodan, W. D. Phillips, T. H.
Bergeman, and H. J. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2596
(1985).

[35] E. L. Raab, M. Prentiss, A. Cable, S. Chu, and D. E.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).

[36] S. Chu, L. Hollberg, J. E. Bjorkholm, A. Cable, and

A. Ashkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 48 (1985).

[37] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

B-Opt. Phys. 6, 2023 (1989).

[38] P. D. Lett, R. N. Watts, C. I. Westbrook, W. D. Phillips,
P. L. Gould, and H. J. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 169
(1988).

[39] N. Masuhara, J. M. Doyle, J. C. Sandberg, D. Kleppner,
T. J. Greytak, H. F. Hess, and G. P. Kochanski, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 61, 935 (1988).

15

[41] J. D. Miller, R. A. Cline, and D. J. Heinzen, Phys. Rev.

A 47, R4567 (1993).

[42] T. Takekoshi and R. J. Knize, Opt. Lett. 21, 77 (1996).
[43] T. Takekoshi, B. M. Patterson, and R. J. Knize, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81, 5105 (1998).

[44] J. D. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, T. Guillet, B. Friedrich,

and J. M. Doyle, Nature 395, 148 (1998).

[45] N. Vanhaecke, W. D. Melo, B. L. Tolra, D. Comparat,
and P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 063001 (2002).
[46] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F. M. H. Crompvoets, R. T.
Jongma, A. J. A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Nature 406,
491 (2000).

[47] Y. Kagan, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and J. T. M. Walraven,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2670 (1996).

[48] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, Phys.

[49] E. Tiesinga, B. J. Verhaar, and H. T. C. Stoof, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 78, 985 (1997).

Rev. A 47, 4114 (1993).

[50] H. Feshbach, Ann. Phys. 5, 357 (1958).
[51] P. Courteille, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Heinzen, F. A. van
Abeelen, and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 69
(1998).

[52] A. Marte, T. Volz, J. Schuster, S. Durr, G. Rempe,
E. G. M. van Kempen, and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 283202 (2002).

[53] A. J. Moerdijk, B. J. Verhaar, and A. Axelsson, Phys.

Rev. A 51, 4852 (1995).

[54] T. Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H. C. N¨agerl, and

[55] C. Chin, V. Vuleti´c, A. J. Kerman, S. Chu, E. Tiesinga,
P. J. Leo, and C. J. Williams, Phys. Rev. A 70, 032701
(2004).

[56] C. Chin, A. J. Kerman, V. Vuleti´c, and S. Chu, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 90, 033201 (2003).

[57] C. Chin (2006), private communication.
[58] C. J. Joachain, Quantum Collision Theory (North-

[59] S. Inouye, M. R. Andrews, J. Stenger, H. J. Miesner,
D. M. Stamper-Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Nature 392,
151 (1998).

[60] J. Stenger, S. Inouye, M. R. Andrews, H. J. Miesner,
D. M. Stamper-Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, 2422 (1999).

[61] F. A. van Abeelen and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[62] F. H. Mies, E. Tiesinga, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev.

83, 1550 (1999).

A 61, 022721 (2000).

[63] V. A. Yurovsky, A. Ben-Reuven, P. S. Julienne, and

C. J. Williams, Phys. Rev. A 60, R765 (1999).

[64] J. L. Roberts, N. R. Claussen, S. L. Cornish, E. A. Don-
ley, E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 4211 (2001).

[65] E. A. Donley, N. R. Claussen, S. L. Cornish, J. L.
Roberts, E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, Nature 412,
295 (2001).

[66] E. Timmermans, P. Tommasini, M. Hussein, and
A. Kerman, Phys. Rep.-Rev. Sec. Phys. Lett. 315, 199
(1999).

[67] J. Herbig, T. Kraemer, M. Mark, T. Weber, C. Chin,
H. C. N¨agerl, and R. Grimm, Science 301, 1510 (2003).
[68] E. A. Donley, N. R. Claussen, S. T. Thompson, and

C. E. Wieman, Nature 417, 529 (2002).

[27] P. F. Weck and N. Balakrishnan, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

Holland, Amsterdam, 1975).

[40] S. Chu, J. E. Bjorkholm, A. Ashkin, and A. Cable, Phys.

[69] S. D¨urr, T. Volz, A. Marte, and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev.

Rev. Lett. 57, 314 (1986).

Lett. 92, 020406 (2004).

[70] K. Xu, T. Mukaiyama, J. R. Abo-Shaeer, J. K. Chin,
D. E. Miller, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
210402 (2003).

[71] S. T. Thompson, E. Hodby, and C. E. Wieman, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 94, 020401 (2005).

[72] T. K¨ohler, E. Tiesinga, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 94, 020402 (2005).

[73] T. K¨ohler, T. Gasenzer, P. S. Julienne, and K. Burnett,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 230401 (2003).

[74] C. A. Regal, C. Ticknor, J. L. Bohn, and D. S. Jin,

[75] K. E. Strecker, G. B. Partridge, and R. G. Hulet, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 91, 080406 (2003).

[76] J. Cubizolles, T. Bourdel, S. J. J. M. F. Kokkelmans,
G. V. Shlyapnikov, and C. Salomon, Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 240401 (2003).

[77] S. Jochim, M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl,
C. Chin, J. H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 240402 (2003).

[78] C. A. Regal, M. Greiner, and D. S. Jin, Phys. Rev. Lett.

16

[97] S. Inouye, J. Goldwin, M. L. Olsen, C. Ticknor, J. L.
Bohn, and D. S. Jin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 183201 (2004).
[98] F. Ferlaino, C. D’Errico, G. Roati, M. Zaccanti, M. In-
guscio, G. Modugno, and A. Simoni, Phys. Rev. A 73,
040702 (2006).

[99] C. A. Stan, M. W. Zwierlein, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F.
Raupach, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 143001
(2004).

[100] M. Aymar and O. Dulieu, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 204302

(2005).

(1973).

[102] C. Chin, T. Kraemer, M. Mark, J. Herbig, P. Wald-
burger, H. C. N¨agerl, and R. Grimm, Phys. Rev. Lett.
94, 123201 (2005).

[103] T. Kraemer, M. Mark, P. Waldburger, J. G. Danzl,
C. Chin, B. Engeser, A. D. Lange, K. Pilch, A. Jaakkola,
H. C. N¨agerl, et al., Nature 440, 315 (2006).

[104] V. Eﬁmov, Phys. Lett. B 33, 563 (1970).
[105] T. K. Lim, K. Duﬀy, and W. C. Damert, Phys. Rev.

Nature 424, 47 (2003).

[101] W. B. Brown and D. M. Whisnant, Mol. Phys. 25, 1385

92, 083201 (2004).

Lett. 38, 341 (1977).

[79] S. Jochim, M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl,
S. Riedl, C. Chin, J. H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Sci-
ence 302, 2101 (2003).

[80] M. W. Zwierlein, C. A. Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F.
Raupach, S. Gupta, Z. Hadzibabic, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 250401 (2003).

[106] B. D. Esry, C. D. Lin, and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. A

[107] E. Braaten and H. W. Hammer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 8716,

[108] E. Nielsen, H. Suno, and B. D. Esry, Phys. Rev. A 66,

54, 394 (1996).

160407 (2001).

012705 (2002).

[81] M. Greiner, C. A. Regal, and D. S. Jin, Nature 426,

[109] H. R. Thorsheim, J. Weiner, and P. S. Julienne, Phys.

537 (2003).

Rev. Lett. 58, 2420 (1987).

[82] D. S. Petrov, C. Salomon, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys.

[110] W. C. Stwalley and H. Wang, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 195,

Rev. Lett. 93, 090404 (2004).

194 (1999).

[83] D. S. Petrov, C. Salomon, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys.

[111] K. M. Jones, E. Tiesinga, P. D. Lett, and P. S. Julienne,

Rev. A 71, 012708 (2005).

[84] M. T. Cvitaˇs, P. Sold´an, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault, and
J. M. Launay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 033201 (2005).
[85] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieﬀer, 108,

1175 (1957).

[86] M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, S. Riedl, S. Jochim,
C. Chin, J. H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 120401 (2004).

[87] C. A. Regal, M. Greiner, and D. S. Jin, Phys. Rev. Lett.

92, 040403 (2004).

[88] C. A. Regal, M. Greiner, S. Giorgini, M. Holland, and

D. S. Jin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 250404 (2005).

[89] M. W. Zwierlein, C. A. Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F.
Raupach, A. J. Kerman, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 120403 (2004).

[90] C. Chin, M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, S. Riedl,
S. Jochim, J. H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Science 305,
1128 (2004).

[91] M. Greiner, C. A. Regal, and D. S. Jin, Phys. Rev. Lett.

94, 070403 (2005).

[92] G. B. Partridge, K. E. Strecker, R. I. Kamar, M. W.
Jack, and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 020404
(2005).

[93] J. Kinast, S. L. Hemmer, M. E. Gehm, A. Turlapov,
and J. E. Thomas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 150402 (2004).
[94] M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, S. Riedl, S. Jochim,
C. Chin, J. H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 203201 (2004).

[95] J. Kinast, A. Turlapov, J. E. Thomas, Q. J. Chen,
J. Stajic, and K. Levin, Science 307, 1296 (2005).
[96] M. W. Zwierlein, J. R. Abo-Shaeer, A. Schirotzek, C. H.
Schunck, and W. Ketterle, Nature 435, 1047 (2005).

Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 483 (2006).

[112] A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, A. Crubellier, O. Dulieu,
F. Masnou-Seeuws, and P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,
4402 (1998).

[113] A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, C. Drag, C. Amiot, O. Dulieu,
F. Masnou-Seeuws, and P. Pillet, Eur. Phys. J. D 5, 389
(1999).

[114] A. N. Nikolov, E. E. Eyler, X. T. Wang, J. Li, H. Wang,
W. C. Stwalley, and P. L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
703 (1999).

[115] A. N. Nikolov, J. R. Ensher, E. E. Eyler, H. Wang,
W. C. Stwalley, and P. L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,
246 (2000).

[116] H. M. J. M. Boesten, C. C. Tsai, D. J. Heinzen, A. J.
Moonen, and B. J. Verhaar, J. Phys. B-At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 32, 287 (1999).

[117] U. Gaubatz, P. Rudecki,

S. Schiemann,

and

K. Bergmann, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 5363 (1990).
[118] P. S. Julienne, K. Burnett, Y. B. Band, and W. C.

Stwalley, Phys. Rev. A 58, R797 (1998).

[119] R. Wynar, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Han, C. Ryu, and D. J.

Heinzen, Science 287, 1016 (2000).

[120] D. J. Heinzen, R. Wynar, P. D. Drummond, and K. V.
Kheruntsyan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5029 (2000).
[121] P. D. Drummond, K. V. Kheruntsyan, D. J. Heinzen,
and R. H. Wynar, Phys. Rev. A 65, 063619 (2002).
[122] K. Winkler, G. Thalhammer, M. Theis, H. Ritsch,
R. Grimm, and J. H. Denschlag, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
063202 (2005).

[123] S. T. Thompson, E. Hodby, and C. E. Wieman, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 95, 190404 (2005).

[124] P. O. Fedichev, Y. Kagan, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and

J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2913 (1996).

and M. Weidem¨uller, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 291 (2004).

[125] J. L. Bohn and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 56, 1486

[126] F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, and P. D. Lett, Phys. Rev.

(1997).

Lett. 85, 4462 (2000).

[127] M. Theis, G. Thalhammer, K. Winkler, M. Hellwig,
G. Ruﬀ, R. Grimm, and J. H. Denschlag, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 123001 (2004).

[128] G. Thalhammer, M. Theis, K. Winkler, R. Grimm, and
J. H. Denschlag, Phys. Rev. A 71, 033403 (2005).
[129] J. Javanainen and M. Mackie, Phys. Rev. A 59, R3186

[130] C. P. Koch, F. Masnou-Seeuws, and R. Kosloﬀ, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 94, 193001 (2005).

[131] M. Dantus and V. V. Lozovoy, Chem. Rev. 104, 1813

(1999).

(2004).

[132] J. Vala, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, P. Pillet, and

R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 63, 013412 (2001).

[133] E. Luc-Koenig, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws, and
M. Vatasescu, Phys. Rev. A 70, 033414 (2004).
[134] E. Luc-Koenig, M. Vatasescu, and F. Masnou-Seeuws,

Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 239 (2004).

[135] C. P. Koch, E. Luc-Koenig, and F. Masnou-Seeuws,

Phys. Rev. A 73, 033408 (2006).

[136] W. Salzmann, U. Poschinger, R. Wester, M. Wei-
dem¨uller, A. Merli, S. M. Weber, F. Sauer, M. Plewicki,
F. Weise, A. M. Esparza, et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 023414
(2006).

[137] B. L. Brown, A. J. Dicks, and I. A. Walmsley, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 96, 173002 (2006).

[138] Y. B. Band and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 51, R4317

(1995).

(1998).

[139] S. Kotochigova, E. Tiesinga, and P. S. Julienne, Eur.

Phys. J. D 31, 189 (2004).

[140] D. Jaksch, V. Venturi, J. I. Cirac, C. J. Williams, and

P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 040402 (2002).

[141] H. Wang and W. C. Stwalley, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 5767

[142] C. P. Koch, J. P. Palao, R. Kosloﬀ, and F. Masnou-

Seeuws, Phys. Rev. A 70, 013402 (2004).
[143] W. C. Stwalley, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 221 (2004).
[144] J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and D. DeMille,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 203001 (2005).

[145] A. J. Kerman, J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and
D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 033004 (2004).
[146] A. J. Kerman, J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and
D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 153001 (2004).
[147] T. Bergeman, A. J. Kerman, J. Sage, S. Sainis, and

D. DeMille, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 179 (2004).

[148] M. W. Mancini, G. D. Telles, A. R. L. Caires, V. S. Bag-
nato, and L. G. Marcassa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133203
(2004).

[149] D. Wang, J. Qi, M. F. Stone, O. Nikolayeva, B. Hatt-
away, S. D. Gensemer, H. Wang, W. T. Zemke, P. L.
Gould, E. E. Eyler, et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 165
(2004).

[150] D. Wang, E. E. Eyler, P. L. Gould, and W. C. Stwalley,

Phys. Rev. A 72, 032502 (2005).

17

[153] C. I. Westbrook, R. N. Watts, C. E. Tanner, S. L. Rol-
ston, W. D. Phillips, P. D. Lett, and P. L. Gould, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 65, 33 (1990).

[154] M. P. A. Fisher, P. B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, and

D. S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989).

[155] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. W. H¨ansch,

and I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002).

[156] O. Morsch and M. Oberthaler, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 179

(2006).

[157] B. Damski, L. Santos, E. Tiemann, M. Lewenstein,
S. Kotochigova, P. Julienne, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 90, 110401 (2003).

[158] T. Rom, T. Best, O. Mandel, A. Widera, M. Greiner,
T. W. H¨ansch, and I. Bloch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 073002
(2004).

[159] C. Ryu, X. Du, E. Yesilada, A. M. Dudarev, S. Wan,
Q. Niu, and D. J. Heinzen, arXiv pp. cond–mat/0508201
(2006).

[160] G. Thalhammer, K. Winkler, F. Lang, S. Schmid,
R. Grimm, and J. H. Denschlag, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
050402 (2006).

[161] K. Winkler, G. Thalhammer, F. Lang, R. Grimm, J. H.
Denschlag, A. J. Daley, A. Kantian, H. P. B¨uchler, and
P. Zoller, Nature 441, 853 (2006).

[162] T. Volz, N. Syassen, D. M. Bauer, E. Hansis, S. D¨urr,

and G. Rempe, arXiv pp. cond–mat/0605184 (2006).

[163] H. Moritz, T. St¨oferle, K. G¨unter, M. K¨ohl, and
T. Esslinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 210401 (2005).
[164] T. St¨oferle, H. Moritz, K. G¨unter, M. K¨ohl, and
T. Esslinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 030401 (2006).
[165] M. Stoll and T. K¨ohler, Phys. Rev. A 72, 022714 (2005).
[166] V. A. Yurovsky, A. Ben-Reuven, P. S. Julienne, and
C. J. Williams, Phys. Rev. A 6204, 043605 (2000).
[167] P. Sold´an, M. T. Cvitaˇs, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault, and
J. M. Launay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 153201 (2002).
[168] T. Mukaiyama, J. R. Abo-Shaeer, K. Xu, J. K. Chin,

and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 180402 (2004).

[169] P. Staanum, S. D. Kraft, J. Lange, R. Wester, and

M. Weidem¨uller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 023201 (2006).

[170] N. Zahzam, T. Vogt, M. Mudrich, D. Comparat, and

P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 023202 (2006).

[171] G. Qu´em´ener, P. Honvault, and J. M. Launay, Eur.

Phys. J. D 30, 201 (2004).

[172] G. Qu´em´ener, P. Honvault, J. M. Launay, P. Sold´an,
D. E. Potter, and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Rev. A 71,
032722 (2005).

[173] M. T. Cvitaˇs, P. Sold´an, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault, and

J. M. Launay, in preparation (2006).

[174] M. T. Cvitaˇs, P. Sold´an, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault, and
J. M. Launay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 200402 (2005).
[175] P. Sold´an and J. M. Hutson, in preparation (2007).
[176] J. M. Launay and M. LeDourneuf, Chem. Phys. Lett.

[177] P. Honvault and J. M. Launay, J. Chem. Phys. 111,

[178] P. Honvault and J. M. Launay, J. Chem. Phys. 114,

163, 178 (1989).

6665 (1999).

1057 (2001).

[151] C. Haimberger, J. Kleinert, M. Bhattacharya, and N. P.

[179] P. Sold´an, M. T. Cvitaˇs, and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Rev.

Bigelow, Phys. Rev. A 70, 021402 (2004).

[152] N. Mudrich, O. Bunermann, F. Stienkemeier, O. Dulieu,

A 67, 054702 (2003).

