W4 theory for computational thermochemistry: in pursuit of

conﬁdent sub-kJ/mol predictions

Amir Karton, Elena Rabinovich, and Jan M. L. Martin*

Department of Organic Chemistry, Weizmann

Institute of Science, IL-76100 Reh. ovot, Israel∗

Branko Ruscic

Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA

(Dated: Journal of Chemical Physics MS# A6.07.059; Received July 7, 2006; Accepted August 10, 2006)

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

In an attempt to improve on our earlier W3 theory [J. Chem. Phys. 120, 4129 (2004)] we

consider such reﬁnements as more accurate estimates for the contribution of connected quadruple

excitations ( ˆT4), inclusion of connected quintuple excitations ( ˆT5), diagonal Born-Oppenheimer

corrections (DBOC), and improved basis set extrapolation procedures. Revised experimental data

for validation purposes were obtained from the latest version of the ATcT (Active Thermochemical

Tables) Thermochemical Network. The recent CCSDT(Q) method oﬀers a cost-eﬀective way of

estimating ˆT4, but is insuﬃcient by itself if the molecule exhibits some nondynamical correlation.
The latter considerably slows down basis set convergence for ˆT4, and anomalous basis set

convergence in highly polar systems makes two-point extrapolation procedures unusable. However,

we found that the CCSDTQ

CCSDT(Q) diﬀerence converges quite rapidly with the basis set, and

−

that the formula 1.10[CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ+CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ

CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVDZ] oﬀers a

−

very reliable as well as fairly cost-eﬀective estimate of the basis set limit ˆT4 contribution. The
ˆT5 contribution converges very rapidly with the basis set, and even a simple double-zeta basis
set appears to be adequate. The largest ˆT5 contribution found in the present work is on the

order of 0.5 kcal/mol (for ozone). DBOC corrections are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 kcal/mol level

in hydride systems. Post-CCSD(T) contributions to the core-valence correlation energy are only

signiﬁcant at that level in systems with severe nondynamical correlation eﬀects. Based on the

accumulated experience, a new computational thermochemistry protocol for ﬁrst-and second-

row main-group systems, to be known as W4 theory,

is proposed.

Its computational cost is

not insurmountably higher than that of the earlier W3 theory, while performance is markedly

superior. Our W4 atomization energies for a number of key species are in excellent agreement

(better than 0.1 kcal/mol on average, 95% conﬁdence intervals narrower than 1 kJ/mol) with the

latest experimental data obtained from Active Thermochemical Tables. Lower-cost variants are

proposed: the sequence W1

W2.2

W3.2

W4lite

W4 is proposed as a converging hierarchy of

→

→

→

→

computational thermochemistry methods. A simple a priori estimate for the importance of post-

CCSD(T) correlation contributions (and hence a pessimistic estimate for the error in a W2-type

calculation) is proposed.

∗Electronic address: comartin@wicc.weizmann.ac.il

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the past ﬁfteen years, computational thermochemistry has matured to the point where

its accuracy is often competitive with all but the most accurate experimental techniques.

A compact overview of computational thermochemistry methods in all their variety has

very recently been published by one of us[1], while a book with more detailed reviews of the

various techniques was published in 2001[2]. In terms of ‘ready-made’ nonempirical small-

molecule methods of sub-kcal/mol accuracy, there have been two major developments in the

last few years. One is the Wn family of computational thermochemistry protocols (to be

discussed below)[3, 4, 5], the other has been the HEAT (Highly accurate Extrapolated Ab

initio Thermochemistry) project by a multinational group of researchers[6]. In this context,

mention should be made of the related ‘focal point approach’ pioneered by Allen[7] — which

is however more a general strategy than a precisely deﬁned computational protocol — as well

as of the conﬁguration interaction extrapolation based work of Bytautas and Ruedenberg[8].

The ‘Wn theory’ naming scheme was introduced by analogy to the ‘Gn theory’ family

of methods of the late lamented Pople and coworkers[9]. The basic philosophy of the Wn

family of methods can be outlined as follows:

All terms in the Hamiltonian that can reasonably contribute at the kJ/mol level to

the atomization energy should be retained;

Basis set convergence is established for each contribution individually, and the smallest

basis sets are used for each that still lead to acceptable basis set incompleteness errors

for the relevant contribution;

required accuracy;

As a result, computational eﬀort is kept down to the minimum consistent with the

No parameters derived from experiment are employed: where possible, physically or

empirically rational basis set extrapolations are employed.

W1 theory[3, 4] uses basis sets of no larger than spdf g quality, and no electron correlation

methods more elaborate than CCSD(T). It represents an approximation to the relativistic,

clamped-nuclei, basis set limit CCSD(T) energy.

(Scalar relativistic corrections were

obtained as one-electron Darwin and mass-velocity terms from averaged coupled pair

wavefunctions, although the implementation in Gaussian 03[10] employs Douglas-Kroll scalar

•

•

•

•

3

relativistics[11, 12] at the CCSD(T) level.) W2 theory[3, 4] aims at the same target as

W1 theory but uses more elaborate spdf gh basis set and is in general more accurate. For

systems dominated by a single reference determinant, W2 theory can usually achieve kJ/mol

accuracy.

For systems with signiﬁcant nondynamical correlation, the CCSD(T) limit diﬀers

signiﬁcantly from the FCI (full conﬁguration interaction) limit. Even for systems like the

diatomics N2, O2, and F2, W2 will be in error by 0.5–0.7 kcal/mol, and for ozone an error of

3 kcal/mol is seen[5]. Two main improvements were introduced in W3 theory. The ﬁrst was

a more robust scalar relativistic correction based on DKH-CCSD(T) calculations (Douglas-

Kroll-Hess[11, 12]), with an eye to future extension of applicability to elements heavier than
Ar. The second, which proved crucial, was an account for higher-order ˆT3 eﬀects — i.e., the

CCSDT
CCSD(T) diﬀerence — on the one hand, and for connected quadruple excitations
ˆT4 on the other hand. W3 proved much more robust to nondynamical correlation eﬀects than

−

its predecessors[5]: for systems dominated by a single reference determinant, it is comparable

in accuracy to W2 theory.

Attempts to surpass W3-level accuracy (RMSD of about 1.2 kJ/mol, 95% conﬁdence

interval of about 2.5 kJ/mol) were impeded by a number of problems, of which we shall cite

only the two most important ones. On the one hand, it would deﬁnitely be necessary to

consider connected quadruple excitation eﬀects with basis sets larger than spd quality, but

this was precluded by the limiting n4N 6 computational cost scaling (where n and N are the

numbers of electrons and basis functions, respectively) of CCSDTQ calculations. On the

other hand, we were working in an accuracy regime comparable to that of all but the very

best experimental thermochemical data, and meaningful comparisons with experiment were

just not possible beyond the kJ/mol range, except for a few select molecules.

The recent development of the CCSDT(Q) method[13] and of a code for arbitrary

quasiperturbative techniques[14] opened a potential avenue for more cost-eﬀective
treatments of ˆT4 on the theoretical front. In terms of availability of accurate and reliable

thermochemical benchmarks, the advent of Active Thermochemical Tables aﬀorded relief.

Active Thermochemical Tables (ATcT) are a new paradigm of how to obtain accurate,

reliable, and internally consistent thermochemical values by using all available knowledge[15,

16, 17, 18], and overcome the limitations that are deeply engrained in the traditional

approach to thermochemistry,

such as that used in all traditional thermochemical

4

compilations. As opposed to the traditional sequential approach, ATcT derives its results

from a Thermochemical Network (TN). Where available, the thermochemical values used

in the present work for the purpose of benchmarking the W4 method have been obtained

from the latest version of the Core (Argonne) Thermochemical Network, C(A)TN, that is

currently under development and encompasses

700 chemical species containing H, O, C, N,

∼

and halogens, which are interlinked by >7000 thermochemically-relevant determinations[19].

In addition, the benchmark ATcT values for three sulfur-containing species have been

obtained from a separate adjunct ATcT TN. The adjunct TN is currently under intense

development and scrutiny as part of a joint Argonne-NIST project[20], which is attempting

to address and resolve some of the inherent inconsistencies surrounding the accepted

experimental thermochemical values for several key sulfur-containing species. Consequently,

within the context of the present work, we have limited ourselves to using as benchmarks

only three sulfur-containing species from ATcT (H2S, SO and SO2), whose values happen

to be invariant (within 0.05 kcal/mol or better) to the ﬁner details of the adjunct sulfur-

containing ATcT TN. For the species of interest here, the current version of C(A)TN includes

all available experimental results and also considers a selection of prior highly accurate

theoretical results (with weights proportional to the expected uncertainties), but, in order

to keep the ATcT benchmarks used here independent of the current computational results,

does not include W4. These will be added to the Thermochemical Network in a subsequent

revision of C(A)TN. Full details of how the ATcT values were developed and what data are

they based on will be published separately in a forthcoming series of papers[21].

In the present work, we will:

greater detail;

explore basis set convergence of connected quadruple and quintuple excitations in

consider the eﬀect of diagonal Born-Oppenheimer corrections;

present a computational protocol called W4 theory which yields

signiﬁcant

improvements over W3 theory, for a tractable additional computational cost;

validate it against the best available benchmark values from ATcT;

present a simple energy-based diagnostic for the reliability of thermochemical

approaches that neglect post-CCSD(T) correlation.

•

•

•

•

•

5

II. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

All quantum mechanical calculations were carried out on the Linux cluster of the Martin

group at the Weizmann Institute. In practice, most results were obtained from four dual-

processor 32-bit (Intel Xeon 2.8 and 3.06 GHz) and a single four-processor 64-bit (AMD

Opteron 846) machine, all custom-built by Access Technologies of Reh. ovot, Israel. These
machines are equipped with 4-way and 8-way striped disk arrays, respectively, made up of 72

GB Ultra320 SCSI disks. The high sustained I/O throughputs of these machines[23] proved

essential to handle the daunting I/O requirements for many of the calculations reported.

All CCSD and CCSD(T) calculations were carried out using MOLPRO 2002.6[24].

Conventional, rather than direct, algorithms were used throughout as this proved more

eﬃcient with the special I/O hardware available.

The DBOC calculations, and some full CCSDT calculations, were carried out using the

Austin-Mainz-Budapest version of ACES II[25]. The remaining post-CCSD(T) calculations

— CCSDT(Q), CCSDTQ, CCSDTQ(5), CCSDTQ5, CCSDTQ5(6), CCSDTQ56, and full

CI — were carried out by means of the general coupled cluster code MRCC of K´allay and

coworkers[26]. The required integrals and SCF orbitals for the latter were obtained using

ACES II.

The basis sets used are all of the correlation consistent family of Dunning and

coworkers[27]. For the large-scale CCSD(T) calculation, we combined regular cc-pVnZ

basis sets (n=D,T,Q,5,6) on hydrogen with aug-cc-pVnZ ([diﬀuse-function] augmented

polarization consistent) basis sets[28] on boron through ﬂuorine, and Wilson’s aug-cc-

pV(n+d)Z basis sets[29] on phosphorus through chlorine. The latter contain high-exponent d

functions to cope with ‘inner polarization’ eﬀects[30]: these occur in second-row elements in

high oxidation states as a result of back-bonding into their low-lying d orbitals[31]. For

post-CCSD(T) calculations, regular cc-pVnZ basis sets were employed unless indicated

otherwise.

In core-valence correlation calculations, we employed Peterson’s core-valence

weighted correlation consistent basis sets[32], aug-cc-pwCVnZ. Finally, the scalar relativistic

calculations were carried out using both the unpublished Douglas-Kroll optimized correlation

consistent basis sets by Oren and Martin[33] and the PNNL (Paciﬁc Northwest National

Laboratory) relativistically contracted correlation consistent basis sets[34].

(We veriﬁed

that fundamentally the same results were obtained.)

6

All reference geometries are obtained at the CCSD(T)/cc-pV(Q+d)Z level. Complete

sets of geometries and total energies are available as supporting information to the present

paper[35].

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Basis set convergence of post-CCSDT correlation contributions

In order to get a clearer picture of basis set convergence behavior in post-CCSDT

contributions, we considered in detail a set of 22 mostly diatomic molecules, namely, HF,

H2O, NH3, PH3, H2S, HCl, CO, CS, Cl2, ClF, N2, B2, CH, CN, NO, SO, O2, F2, C2, BN,

BeO, and MgO. They were chosen in such a way as to span the gamut from dominated by

a single reference conﬁguration to pathological nondynamical correlation. Because of their

small size, consideration of fairly large basis sets is possible. Results can be found in Table I.

Let us ﬁrst consider quasiperturbative connected quadruples, which we were able to

obtain with cc-pVQZ basis sets for all systems. Considerable basis set sensitivity was seen,

especially for systems with signiﬁcant nondynamical correlation. The data give us reason to

believe cc-pVQZ is close to basis set convergence, but this is clearly not a practically feasible

basis set for larger systems.

Generally the (Q) contributions increase monotonically with the basis set. However,

in very polar systems (H2O and HF, with MgO being an extreme case) anomalous

nonmonotonic convergence is observed. The problem appears to largely go away if aug-

cc-pVnZ basis sets are used on O and F. However, this may not be something one can do

As we noted before[5] for ˆT4 overall, extrapolation from cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ basis

sets works well in some cases, but does more harm than good in cases like H2O, HF, and

on a routine basis.

especially MgO.

Scaling the cc-pVDZ result — analogous to the scaled CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ

CCSDT/cc-

−

pVDZ diﬀerence in W3 theory — does less harm but is clearly a rather crude approximation.

However, there is a very high statistical correlation (R2 = 0.9945) between the cc-pVTZ

values and the numbers extrapolated from cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets.

As expected, the CCSDTQ

CCSDT(Q) diﬀerence is quite small in systems dominated

−

7

by a single reference conﬁguration (like HF and H2O). However, it becomes rather signiﬁcant

in systems with moderate to strong nondynamical correlation. This casts some doubt on

the general applicability of CCSDT(Q) on its own as a post-CCSDT correction.

Fortunately, basis set convergence of the CCSDTQ

CCSDT(Q) diﬀerence is much more

−

rapid than for the (Q) contribution, and even cc-pVDZ generally appears to be suﬃcient.

This naturally suggests a simple additivity approximation:

∆E( ˆT4)

≈

c1(E[CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ]

+E[CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ]

−

E[CCSDT/cc-pVTZ] +

−
E[CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVDZ])

(1)

We found that this approximation works very well when ﬁtted against the extrapolated basis

set limit data. Eliminating the anomalous cases of BeO and MgO, we ﬁnd c1 = 1.10 to be

optimal with R2 = 0.997. We also found that, in practice, all the steps in this additivity

approximation are computationally feasible if CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ is feasible — that is, any

system tractable at the W3 level will be amenable to this improved connected quadruples

term.

What about connected quintuple excitations? Results can be found in Table II. We ﬁnd

that the CCSDTQ5

CCSDTQ diﬀerence converges quite rapidly with the basis set, and

−

that even a simple double-zeta basis set comes quite close to the presumed basis set limit.

In our experience, a CCSDTQ5/DZ calculation is feasible for any system that we were able

to do CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ for.

How useful are quasiperturbative techniques here? We ﬁnd the CCSDTQ5

CCSDTQ(5)

−

diﬀerence to be essentially negligible in systems dominated by a single reference

conﬁguration. Even with fairly mild nondynamical correlation, however, this diﬀerence

behaves somewhat erratically. If moderate to strong static correlation is present, however,

CCSDTQ(5) being large in the
we see exaggerated (5) contributions, with CCSDTQ5
opposite direction and ˆT5 overall thus rather modest (albeit signiﬁcant enough for inclusion

−

in anything purporting to improve on W3 theory).

Finally, the largest ˆT6 contribution (Table II) is seen for singlet C2 (about 0.06 kcal/mol).

In less pathologically multireference systems, it can be neglected for all but the most accurate

work (which would also require much greater accuracy in all other contributions). For

systems with no or only mild static correlation, the quasiperturbative CCSDTQ5(6) method

reproduces essentially the entire eﬀect:

in cases with severe nondynamical correlation, we

8

note again that (6) tends to exaggerate the eﬀect.

B. Connected quadruple excitations for the W3 set

We now turn to the W3 set of molecules. Connected quadruple excitation contributions

to the total atomization energy can once again be found in Table I. The largest contribution

is found for ozone (3.81 kcal/mol) but it exceeds 2 kcal/mol for several other molecules, and 1

kcal/mol for surprisingly many. It was conjectured by Bak et al.[36] and conﬁrmed repeatedly

before (e.g.[5, 37, 38, 39]) that the main reason for the good performance of CCSD(T)
for many systems is error compensation between neglect of higher-order ˆT3 eﬀects (which
generally decrease the atomization energy) and complete neglect of ˆT4 (which systematically

increases atomization energies). This is once more conﬁrmed here.

Diﬀerences

between

the W3

estimate

for

eﬀects — that

is,

ˆT4

1.25(E[CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ]

E[CCSDT/cc-pVDZ]) — and Eq.(1) may reach 0.5

−

kcal/mol and are somewhat erratic in character. The W3 estimate was a stop-gap measure

at the time for want of a better yet suﬃciently cost-eﬀective alternative. Eq.1 appears to

have made it obsolete.

C. Connected quintuple and higher excitations

Connected quintuple excitation contributions to the total atomization energy for the W3

set of molecules can be found in Table II. The largest contribution found is for ozone, 0.41
kcal/mol. With one exception (OCS, decrease by 0.01 kcal/mol), ˆT5 systematically increases

the binding energy.

We were unable to obtain iterative ˆT6 corrections for many of the systems. In light of
what was noted for the diatomics above, and in light of the quasiperturbative ˆT6 corrections
which we were able to obtain for most systems, ˆT6 contributions are expected to be negligible

compared to other intrinsic errors in our calculations.

9

D. Diagonal Born-Oppenheimer corrections

Valeev and Sherrill[40] studied correlation eﬀects on diagonal Born-Oppenheimer

corrections in some detail, and concluded that they should be very small for relative energies,

and that the DBOCs should be adequately reproduced at the Hartree-Fock level with a basis

set of at least AVTZ quality. This is the level of theory considered by us. Contributions can

be found in Table IV. (ROHF/AVDZ values are also given there, in order to show that the

ROHF/AVTZ values are converged with respect to the basis set.)

As expected, they are most important for the hydrides, and can reach or exceed 0.1

kcal/mol if multiple hydrogens are present. For the benzene molecule (not listed in Table

IV), we computed a contribution of 0.24 kcal/mol. For semirigid closed-shell molecules,

DBOC appears to systematically increase the binding energy, but decreases are seen for

some open-shell and less rigid molecules.

E. Larger basis sets for valence higher-order T3 contributions

In W3 theory, the CCSDT-CCSD(T) diﬀerence was extrapolated from cc-pVDZ and

cc-pVTZ basis sets.

In this work, we considered whether it would be worthwhile to

extrapolate this contribution from larger cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets (at the expense

of approximately a factor 32 in computational eﬀort). As can be seen in Table III, the eﬀect

is in the 0.01 kcal/mol range in most cases, with B2 (

0.11 kcal/mol), PH3 (0.08 kcal/mol),

−

and O2 (0.07 kcal/mol) being the exceptions that prove the rule. We have therefore elected

to retain cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ basis sets for this contribution.

F. Post-CCSD(T) contributions to the core-valence contribution

It was shown in the original W1 paper[3] that connected triple excitations are quite

important for the core-valence contribution, accounting for as much as half the total. It can

then not a priori be ruled out that post-CCSD(T) contributions to the inner-shell correlation

energy would be non-negligible. Limited anecdoctal evidence gathered in the W3 paper[5]

suggests possible contributions on the order of 0.05–0.10 kcal/mol, which might well be

relevant for our purposes. Clearly, this point bears further scrutiny.

In addition, CCSDT-CCSD(T) diﬀerential core-valence contributions may resolve an

10

ambiguity resulting from diﬀerent CCSD(T) deﬁnitions.

(See Appendix 1 for a more

detailed discussion.) Brieﬂy, closed-shell CCSD(T) and CCSDT are uniquely deﬁned, as

are UCCSD(T) and UCCSDT, regardless of whether electrons are frozen. By contrast,

ROCCSD(T) is only uniquely deﬁned if all electrons are correlated.

If some are

‘frozen’, two ambiguities arise: (1) whether standard or semicanonical orbitals are used;

(2) if the latter, whether the ‘frozen core’ orbitals are included or excluded from the

semicanonicalization. In practice, performing ROCCSD(T) in a basis of standard orbitals

requires an additional O(N 7) step, so therefore the two main practical implementations

(Watts-Gauss-Bartlett[46], a.k.a.

ACES II, and Werner-Hampel-Knowles[57], a.k.a.

MOLPRO) use semicanonicalization. Their mutual nonequivalency arises on point (2), in

that ACES II includes the frozen core orbitals in the semicanonicalization, while MOLPRO

excludes them.

ROCCSDT with all electrons correlated would be devoid of such ambiguities. However,

basis set limit calculations at this level are manifestly not a practical approach. Rather, we

shall apply the following additivity approximation:

E[CCSDT]limit

all ≈

E[CCSD(T)limit1

val

] + E[CCSDT

CCSD(T)]limit2

val

−
CCSD(T)val]limit3
CCSD(T)all −
The ﬁrst term is the sum of our SCF, CCSD, and (T) limits. The second term is

+ E[CCSD(T)all −
+ E[CCSDTall −

CCSDTval + CCSD(T)val]limit4

(2)

(T) correction. The third term is our calculated core-valence correction,

our valence T3−
while the fourth and ﬁnal term is the diﬀerential T3−
correction. The diﬀerent ‘limit’ labels reﬂect the fact that each component is obtained at a

(T) contribution to the core-valence

diﬀerent approximate basis set limit — if the true basis set limit were available in each case

the ‘is approximately equal to’ sign would change to an equality.

The all-electron CCSDT calculations involved in the ﬁnal term strain our computational

resources to the limit even for the heavier 1st-row systems: they will be eﬀectively impossible

for most 2nd-row systems.

In Table III, we have gathered values for this ﬁnal term using ACES II and MOLPRO

deﬁnitions. It can be seen there that the corrections are generally negative for ACES and

positive for MOLPRO, and that their absolute values are quite small even for signiﬁcantly

11

multireference systems. Only for pathologically multireference molecules like C2 and BN do

they even exceed 0.1 kcal/mol.

follows:

The same Table also contains quasiperturbative T4 diﬀerential contributions deﬁned as

∆Q

E[UCCSDT(Q)

≈
∆∆Q = X
atoms

∆Qatom −

UCCSDT]all −

−
∆Qmolecule

E[UCCSDT(Q)

UCCSDT]val

−

(3)

Diﬀerential T4 contributions become somewhat signiﬁcant for pathologically multirefer-

ence molecules but are insigniﬁcant for our purposes otherwise.

In summary, the post-CCSD(T) contribution to the core-valence correlation energy —

at least for ﬁrst-row systems — appears to be negligibly small in most cases. Its neglect

will slightly bias TAEs upward if the ACES deﬁnition of valence CCSD(T) is used, and

slightly downward if the MOLPRO deﬁnition is used instead. We have therefore elected to

take an average. Speciﬁcally, we shall be using the MOLPRO deﬁnition throughout, except

for adding in one-half the ACES

MOLPRO diﬀerence extrapolated from cc-pVDZ and cc-

−

pVTZ basis sets. As can be seen in Table III, this diﬀerence converges extremely rapidly

with the basis set, and values extrapolated from cc-pV
{

D,T
}

Z and cc-pV
{

}

T,Q

Z basis sets

are basically indistinguishable.

G. Deﬁnitions of W4 theory and variants

For consistency, as long as we are investing the quite formidable computational eﬀort

required for the improved post-CCSDT corrections, we might want to improve the SCF,

CCSD(T), and core correlation contributions relative to those used in W2 and W3 theory.

The use of larger basis sets for the SCF and valence CCSD(T) correlation was already

considered in some detail in the W3 paper[5]. With the hardware detailed in the Methods

section, we found that we could carry out CCSD/AV6Z and CCSD(T)/AV5Z calculations

using conventional algorithms for all the systems considered in the present paper.

We thus propose the following protocol for W4 theory:

the ROHF-SCF contribution is extrapolated from AV5Z and AV6Z basis sets

•

using the recently proposed Martin-Karton modiﬁcation[41] of Jensen’s extrapolation

12

formula[42]:

EHF,L = EHF,∞ + A(L + 1) exp(

9√L)

−

(4)

•

•

•

•

the RCCSD valence correlation energy is calculated using AV5Z and AV6Z basis set,

using the Watts-Gauss-Bartlett deﬁnition[46] for open-shell systems. Following the

suggestion of Klopper[43], it is partitioned in singlet-coupled pair energies, triplet-
coupled pair energies, and ˆT1 terms. (The term linear in the single excitations ˆT1 in

the CCSD equations is nonzero for open-shell CCSD calculations using semicanonical
orbitals, see, e.g., Ref.[44].) The ˆT1 term (which exhibits very weak basis set

dependence) is simply set equal to that in the largest basis set, while the singlet-

coupled and triplet-coupled pair energies are extrapolated by the expression

E∞ = E(L) +

E(L)
(L/L

E(L
1)α

−
−

−
−

1)
1

(5)

with αS=3 and αT =5, and L set equal to the maximum angular momentum present

in each basis set (i.e., 5 for AV5Z and 6 for AV6Z). These expressions are physically

motivated by the partial-wave expansion of pair correlation energies in helium-like

atoms[47, 48, 49] as well as by empirical observation[3, 50].

the (T) valence correlation energy was extrapolated using the same expression with

α=3, from AVQZ and AV5Z calculations. Note that only a CCSD calculation is

required in the largest (AV6Z) basis set. For open-shell systems, the Werner-Knowles-

Hampel (a.k.a. MOLPRO) deﬁnition[57] of the restricted open-shell CCSD(T) energy

is employed throughout, rather than the original Watts-Gauss-Bartlett[46] (a.k.a.

ACES II) deﬁnition, unless indicated otherwise;

the CCSDT

CCSD(T)

diﬀerence

is

extrapolated

using

Eq.(5)

from

CCSDT

CCSD(T) diﬀerences with PVDZ and PVTZ basis sets

−

−

the ˆT4 diﬀerence was estimated from eq.(1). For this contribution, UHF reference

determinants are used for want of an restricted open-shell CCSDT(Q) code. In any

case, RCCSDT and UCCSDT energies are very close for all the systems considered

here, and we have no reason to believe that there is any signiﬁcant error introduced in

this term by spin contamination. One might argue about the use of RCCSDTQ/cc-

pVDZ versus UCCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ in Eq.(1). We have considered both options. For

the closed-shell molecules, the results are equivalent to within less than 0.01 kcal/mol,

13

but one can see larger diﬀerences for radicals with signiﬁcant spin contamination. For

radicals like O2 and NO2, the ROCCSDTQ based estimate yields results substantially

closer to the very precisely known experimental values, and we have therefore retained

this choice.

ﬁnal result.

the ˆT5 contribution was estimated from CCSDTQ5/DZ calculations

the diﬀerence between ACES II and MOLPRO deﬁnitions of the valence ROCCSD(T)

deﬁnition is computed at the CCSD(T)/cc-pVTZ and CCSD(T)/cc-pVQZ levels and

extrapolated using Eq.(5) (with α=3). One-half of this contribution is added to the

the inner-shell correlation contribution was extrapolated using Eq.(5) (with α=3) from

CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pwCVTZ and CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pwCVQZ calculations

the scalar relativistic contribution is obtained from the diﬀerence between nonrela-

tivistic CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pV(Q+d)Z and second-order Douglas-Kroll CCSD(T)/DK-

aug-cc-pV(Q+d)Z calculations. We found that there is essentially no diﬀerence

between such contributions obtained using the unpublished Martin-Oren Douglas-

Kroll optimized basis sets[33] and the publicly available PNNL Douglas-Kroll

contracted correlation consistent basis sets[34], and have chosen the latter as the

nonrelativistic result can be recycled from the (T) step.

atomic spin-orbit coupling terms are taken from the experimental ﬁne structure. The

spin-orbit splitting constant for NO — the only molecule considered here with ﬁrst-

order spin-orbit coupling — was taken from Ref.[51]. It was previously shown[3] that

both atomic and molecular spin-orbit coupling constants can be computed as well

without signiﬁcant loss of accuracy.

Finally, diagonal Born-Oppenheimer corrections are obtained from ROHF/AVTZ

calculations.

•

•

•

•

•

•

In the HEAT paper (and ‘superHEATed’ methods discussed there[6]), unrestricted

reference wave functions are used throughout and inner-shell electrons are only frozen in

the post-CCSD(T) correlation treatments. Only ﬁrst-row molecules were considered there.

Finally, we note that for electron aﬃnities — as well as for systems like MgO that are

both very polar and pathologically multireference in character — the use of augmented basis

14

sets in the T3 −
for Na, Mg, and especially K and Ca systems that the inner-valence shell of these metals

(T ) and T4 steps is very strongly recommended. It was previously shown

should be added to the valence shell[52, 53].

H. Validation against Active Thermochemical Tables data

Individual components of the ﬁnal W4 results can be found in Table V. A comparison

between the ﬁnal W4 values and the Active Thermochemical Tables data (with associated

95% conﬁdence intervals) is given in Table VI.[54]

A remark is due on the anharmonic zero-point vibrational energies used. As the

uncertainty in some of the ZPVEs employed in the W1/W2/W3 series of papers is on the

order of 0.1 kcal/mol, we have re-examined the data available: source details are given in

the footnotes to Table VI. For two species, CH3 and CH4, the best available data represent

revisions in excess of 0.1 kcal/mol.

For the ﬁrst-row systems, agreement between W4 and ATcT data can only be described

as excellent, with an RMSD (root mean square deviation) of 0.083 kcal/mol and a mean

absolute deviation (MAD) of 0.065 kcal/mol. (This implies a 95% conﬁdence interval of

about 0.16 kcal/mol.) The mean signed deviation (MSD) is essentially zero, at

0.011

−

kcal/mol, suggesting that the method is free of systematic bias.

If we add in the 2nd-row species, RMSD and MAD go up to 0.15 and 0.09 kcal/mol,

respectively. However, basically all the extra error is caused by a single molecule, ClCN, for

which the ATcT value is mostly based on prior theoretical calculations. If we remove this

data point, RMSD and MAD drop to values equivalent to those for the ﬁrst row alone.[55]

Including the remaining W3 species, and using the earlier experimental data compiled in

Ref.[3] for species lacking an ATcT value, we ﬁnd both RMSD and MAD to be 0.15 kcal/mol

with ClCN included, both dropping to 0.10 kcal/mol with ClCN excluded.

Overall, excepting ClCN, the discrepancy between W4 and experiment reaches or exceeds

1 kJ/mol for only 2 species: PH3 (+0.31 kcal/mol) and O3 (-0.24 kcal/mol). For PH3, the

calculated result is still within the experimental error bar (

0.41 kcal/mol).

±

For

the ﬁrst-row and part of

the

second-row species, we

can add in the

CCSDT/cc-pCVTZ

CCSD(T)/cc-pCVTZ diﬀerential core-valence contribution to the total

−

atomization energy, thus obtaining what we term W4.2 theory. (For second-row elements,

15

the cc-pwCVTZ basis set was used.) Here, diﬀerences between ACES and MOLPRO

deﬁnitions of CCSD(T) are on the order of 0.01 kcal/mol or less, as they ought to be. For the

ATcT 1st-row systems, W4.2 theory represents a slight improvement over W4 theory: the

W4.2 error statistics are RMSD=0.067, MSD=+0.003, MAD=0.056 kcal/mol. (This implies

a 95% conﬁdence interval of about 0.13 kcal/mol.) As expected, the largest improvement

is seen for ozone (from 0.24 to 0.14 kcal/mol): we expect that this error would be reduced
further if a diﬀerential ˆT4 contribution to the core correlation could be included and/or a
valence ˆT6 contribution could be added. The former requires about 92 billion determinants

in the cc-pCVTZ basis set, which is sadly beyond our available computational resources.

(An at best semiquantitative estimate can be obtained at the CCSDT(Q)/cc-pCVDZ level:

this suggests a narrowing of the gap by 0.04 kcal/mol, to a rather pleasing 0.1 kcal/mol.) As
for the latter, a crude estimate of the ˆT6 contribution can be obtained as one-fourth the ˆT5

contribution (see Section III J below), i.e., a further increase by 0.1 kcal/mol which would

bridge the gap essentially completely.

At the W4.2 level, our biggest remaining error is for Cl2 (-0.17 kcal/mol). Using larger

basis set CCSDT

CCSD(T) and T4 corrections reduces the discrepancy to -0.12 kcal/mol,

−

which is further reduced to -0.10 kcal/mol when a larger basis set is used for T5 as well.

Based on this observation, we are quoting an additional set of results, labeled ‘W4.3’

in the Table. These represent the results of more rigorous accounting for valence post-

CCSD(T) eﬀects — all other contributions are the same as for W4.2. Speciﬁcally, we are
(a) using our ‘best estimate’ valence ˆT4 contributions; (b) CCSDT-CCSD(T) is extrapolated
Z basis sets; (c) the ˆT5 contribution is obtained with the cc-pVDZ basis
from cc-pV
{
set; (d) an approximate ˆT6 contribution was obtained at the CCSDTQ5(6)/cc-pVDZ level.

T,Q

}

Relative to W4.2, the performance of W4.3 is somewhat mixed. For some systems —

notably O2, Cl2, ClF, and to a lesser extent, CO — agreement with experiment is markedly

improved, for others (notably N2) it deteriorates. For the remainder of the systems, the

W4.2–W4.3 diﬀerence is either too small to aﬀect anything, or the two values err on

opposite sides of experiment.

In all probability, for a W4.3 type method to yield any

further improvement, the valence CCSD extrapolations would need to be rendered still more

rigorous, as we believe the W4.2–W4.3 diﬀerences are on the order of the valence CCSD

uncertainty in a number of our systems.

Finally, for some systems we are actually able to add the (Q)/cc-pCVTZ contribution

16

to the core-valence correlation term. We have not tabulated these results, as they do not

appreciably aﬀect the systems given in the Table for which we could obtain them. Their

inclusion might be worthwhile in systems like C2 or BN, or — as noted above, and if the

daunting computational requirements could be met — ozone.

I. An improved and more cost-eﬀective W3 theory

Stanton and coworkers have argued[13] that CCSDT(Q) might be closer to FCI than

CCSDTQ, for similar reasons as in the case of CCSD(T) vs. CCSDT[56]. This begs the

question if one could not derive a lower-cost variant of W3 theory involving CCSDT(Q)/cc-

pVDZ.

Eliminating

the

anomalous

cases

of BeO and MgO, we

ﬁnd

that

1.025(E[CCSDT(T)/cc

pVDZ]

E[CCSDT/cc

pVDZ]) reproduces the W4 estimate

−

−

−

of post-CCSDT correlation eﬀects with R2 = 0.974, the largest deviations being seen for

the B2 and CS molecules. When these latter two systems are eliminated, the coeﬃcient

changes to 1.012 (only semantically diﬀerent from unity for our purposes), with R2 = 0.991.

Carrying out regression instead to our ‘best estimate’ post-CCSDT contributions, we ﬁnd

three clear outliers (B2, CS, and Cl2): upon eliminating them, we ﬁnd a coeﬃcient of 1.000

with R2=0.990. We thus essentially recover the HEAT[6] post-CCSDT contribution.

The component breakdown for W3.2 theory is given in the Supporting Information:

the ﬁnal W3.2 results can be found in Table VI, compared with W4 and experiment.

Occasionally a substantial deviation from W4 theory is seen (notably for B2, somewhat

less so for CS) but by and large, W3.2 theory appears to be closer to W4 theory than the

original W3 theory.

contributions.

We might then deﬁne W2.2 theory as W3.2 theory without the post-CCSD(T)

For the ATcT species minus ClCN, W3.2 theory obtains an RMSD=0.16 kcal/mol and

MAD=0.12 kcal/mol. This is competitive with W3 theory itself, at considerably reduced

computational cost. Neglecting post-CCSD(T) correlation eﬀects altogether, we obtain W2.2

theory. The latter does very well, as expected, for species dominated by a single reference

determinant, but yields unacceptable errors for species like N2O, NO2, and especially ozone.

Finally,

let us consider W4 theory in which just the post-CCSDT contribution is

17

approximated as unscaled (Q)/cc-pVDZ; “W4lite”, as it were.

Its performance is

intermediate between W3.2 and full W4: for the ATcT species less ClCN, MAD=0.09 and

RMSD=0.12 kcal/mol. The performance diﬀerential with W3 is primarily due to the larger

basis sets employed in the various CCSD(T) level contributions. “W4lite” may be applicable

to some systems where CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ and/or CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ are prohibitive in

computational cost.

W2.2

W3.2

W4lite

W4.

→

→

→

A proposed convergent hierarchy of methods (at increasing cost) might thus be W1

→

J. A simple energy-based diagnostic for nondynamical correlation eﬀects

A number of diagnostics have been proposed for nondynamical correlation character of
D2 diagnostics of
T1 diagnostic of Lee and Taylor[59] and the
Nielsen and Janssen[60]. Other researchers (particularly those involved with multireference

a system, such as the

D1 and

methods) consider such indicators as the largest T2 amplitudes or the HOMO and LUMO

natural orbital occupations. Such diagnostics are gathered in Table IX, together with

some energy-based quantities — speciﬁcally, the percentages of the total atomization energy
accounted for by SCF, (T) triples, and ˆT4 + ˆT5.

The latter is probably the best yardstick for imperfections in CCSD(T) for our purposes,

but of course it is an a posteriori criterion. An a priori indicator for whether the formidable

computational eﬀort entailed by post-CCSD(T) methods is necessary would be highly

desirable.

Of the various diagnostics displayed in Table IX, the %TAE[(T)] criterion appears to be

the best predictor for %TAE[T4 + T5], with a squared correlation coeﬃcient R2 = 0.791.

If the somewhat anomalous systems BeO and MgO are deleted, we ﬁnd a linear regression

%TAE[T4 + T5]

0.126%TAE[(T)], with the squared correlation coeﬃcient increasing to a

≈

respectable R2=0.941. (The regression slope including BeO and MgO is 0.11.)

The second-best predictor appears to be %TAE[SCF]. With BeO and MgO eliminated,

we ﬁnd a linear regression %TAE[T4 +T5]

0.0199%TAE[SCF] + 1.5997, with R2 = 0.810.

The following approximate predictors for speciﬁc higher-order excitations can be obtained

in the same manner: %TAE[T5]
R2=0.922) and %TAE[T6]

0.095 %TAE[T4] (eliminating just OCS as an outlier,
0.24 %TAE[T5] (no outliers, R2=0.917). While these are

≈

≈

≈ −

18

obviously no replacement for explicit calculations, they are quite useful in establishing

whether a post-CCSD(T) approach such as W3 or W4 theory is required in the ﬁrst place.

Note also that, as an error estimate for W2 theory, 0.126%TAE[(T)] is rather pessimistic,

as %TAE[T4 + T5] will be compensated to greater or lesser extent by higher-order connected

triple excitations.

instance, the deceptively low

Turning now to the other diagnostics, we note clear failures for all of them. We note, for
T1 diagnostic of F2, or the fact that the largest T2 amplitude
for H2CO is larger than that for O2, despite the latter having almost an order of magnitude

greater %TAE[T4 + T5]. The LUMO natural orbital occupation appears to track %TAE[T4 +

T5] somewhat more consistently, although it requires the CCSD response to calculate (which

is not available in the two most commonly used quantum chemical codes, Gaussian 03 and

MOLPRO).

We conclude that the simple energy-based diagnostics %TAE[(T)] and %TAE[SCF] —

which require no additional software or computational eﬀort to calculate — are the most

useful, at least for thermochemical applications.

For general ‘user convenience’, let us address how to interpret the numerical values of

%TAE[SCF] and %TAE[(T)] in a qualitative sense. The data in Table IX suggest that:

%TAE[(T)] below 2% indicate systems dominated by dynamical correlation

%TAE[(T)] between 2% and about 4–5% indicate mild nondynamical correlation

%TAE[(T)] between 4–5% and about 10% indicate moderate,

and values in excess of 10% severe, nondynamical correlation

•

•

•

•

The %TAE[SCF] data oﬀer less detail, but as a rule of thumb, %TAE[SCF] above

66.7% (two-thirds) suggest systems largely or wholly dominated by dynamical correlation,

and %TAE[SCF] below 20% (one-ﬁfth) — particularly negative values — indicate severe

nondynamical correlation.

Finally, in light of the fairly good correlation (without outliers) between ˆT6 and ˆT5 and the
small numbers involved, we could consider adding 0.24∆TAE( ˆT5) as an empirical correction

for connected sextuple excitations. Doing so somewhat violates the general spirit of the ‘Wn

theory’ family (as we are estimating a contribution to the Hamiltonian rather than explicitly

calculating it), and we shall not report any such values (the interested reader can easily

19

obtain them using a pocket calculator and Tables II and VI). For such a putative ‘W4as

theory’ (‘as’ for ‘approximate sextuples’), error statistics for the 1st-row ATcT systems

would indeed be improved somewhat compared to regular W4: MSD=-0.008, MAD=0.059,

RMSD=0.069 kcal/mol. (Also including the 2nd-row ATcT species, we have MSD=-0.005,

MAD=0.059, RMSD=0.071 kcal/mol.) For a putative ‘W4.2as theory’, the corresponding

1st-row error statistics are MSD=-0.016, MAD=0.049, RMSD=0.060 kcal/mol. As noted

above, the single most notable improvement would be for ozone.

K. Prospects for application to heavier-element systems

Moving beyond Ar (or perhaps Ca) in the Periodic Table without sacriﬁcing accuracy

will entail some additional considerations.

One of them is second-order spin-orbit coupling. It has been neglected for the systems

considered here:

for HF, HCl, F2, and Cl2, however, we can compare the sum of scalar

relativistic corrections and atomic spin-orbit coupling to relativistic corrections obtained by

Visscher et al.[62, 63] from full four-component relativistic coupled cluster calculations. In

all cases, diﬀerences are well below 0.1 kcal/mol. However, previous work at PNNL[64] on

bromine and iodine compounds suggested approximate second-order spin-orbit contributions

for Br2 and I2 of 0.4 and 2.0 kcal/mol, respectively, which clearly cannot be neglected with

Secondly,

for such heavy elements, basis set superposition error may need to be

accounted for in extrapolations, although small-core ECP-based basis sets may oﬀer a better

impunity.

alternative.

Thirdly, more sophisticated basis set extrapolation schemes may be called for, especially

in transition metal systems. Research on this issue is currently under way in our laboratory.

Fourthly, for more heavily multireference transition metal systems, CCSD(T) may no

longer be adequate for geometry optimizations.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed a new computational thermochemistry protocol, named W4 theory,

for ﬁrst- and second-row main group elements and validated it against benchmark values

20

obtained from the latest version of the ATcT (Active Thermochemical Tables) network.

For key species with well-established atomization energies, W4 theory reaches an average

accuracy better than 0.1 kcal/mol, including for such diﬃcult species as ozone. Most systems

for which the earlier W3 theory is feasible are amenable to W4 calculations.

The recent CCSDT(Q) method oﬀers a cost-eﬀective way of estimating ˆT4, but is

insuﬃcient by itself if the molecule exhibits some nondynamical correlation. The latter
considerably slows down basis set convergence for ˆT4, and anomalous basis set convergence

in highly polar systems makes two-point extrapolation procedures unusable. However, we

found that the CCSDTQ

CCSDT(Q) diﬀerence converges quite rapidly with the basis

−

set, and that the formula 1.10[CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ+CCSDTQ/cc-pVDZ-CCSDT(Q)/cc-
pVDZ] oﬀers a very reliable as well as fairly cost-eﬀective estimate of the basis set limit ˆT4

contribution.

The ˆT5 contribution converges very rapidly with the basis set, and even a simple double-
zeta basis set appears to be adequate. The largest ˆT5 contribution found in the present

work is on the order of 0.5 kcal/mol (for ozone). DBOC corrections are signiﬁcant at the

0.1 kcal/mol level in hydride systems.

with severe nondynamical correlation.

Post-CCSD(T) contributions to inner-shell correlation are quite small, except in systems

We further propose low-cost versions, which we denote W4lite, W3.2, and W2.2 theory.

W3.2 theory is found to be about as reliable as the original W3 theory (at much reduced

cost), and supersedes the latter. W2.2 theory is essentially W2w theory[5] with a diagonal

Born-Oppenheimer correction added. W4lite is intermediate in accuracy between W3.2

and full W4, and may be applicable to some systems beyond the reach of full W4. The

sequence W1

W2.2

W3.2

W4lite

W4 forms a convergent hierarchy of computational

→

→

→

→

thermochemistry methods, where all steps required in W2.2 theory can be recycled for W3.2

theory, and all steps required in the latter can be recycled for W4 theory.

Finally, we have considered various diagnostics for the importance of post-CCSD(T)

correlation eﬀects, and ﬁnd the simple energy based criteria %TAE[(T)] and %TAE[SCF]

to be the most useful for our purposes.

21

Acknowledgments

Research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant 709/05), the Minerva

Foundation (Munich, Germany), and the Helen and Martin Kimmel Center for Molecular

Design. JMLM is the incumbent of the Baroness Thatcher Professorial Chair of Chemistry

and a member ad personam of the Lise Meitner-Minerva Center for Computational

Quantum Chemistry. The work at Argonne National Laboratory, together with the

underlying fundamental thermochemical development of the ATcT approach, was supported

by the U.S. Department of Energy, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and

Biosciences of the Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-

38. Development of inherent computer-science aspects of ATcT and the underpinning data

management technologies were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Division of

Mathematical, Information, and Computational Science of the Oﬃce of Advanced Scientiﬁc

Computing Research, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38 (Argonne) as part of the multi-

institutional Collaboratory for Multi-Scale Chemical Science (CMCS), which is a project

within the National Collaboratories Program of the U.S. Department of Energy.

The authors would like to thank Prof. John F. Stanton (U. of Texas, Austin), Prof.

Peter R. Taylor (Warwick U.), Prof. Donald G. Truhlar (U. of Minnesota), and Prof. Hans-

Joachim Werner (U. of Stuttgart) for helpful discussions and Dr. Mih´aly Kallay (Budapest)

for early access to a new version of MRCC and kind assistance with the code. The general

ATcT development has beneﬁted from the support and eﬀort of numerous past and present

CMCS Team members.

The research presented in this paper is part of ongoing work in the framework of a Task

Group of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry on ’Selected free radicals

and critical intermediates: thermodynamic properties from theory and experiment’ (2000-

013-2-100, renewal 2003-024-1-100). See Ref.[61] for further details.

Appendix I: Eﬀect of diﬀerent reference wave functions on energies obtained from

high-order coupled cluster methods

For open-shell species, diﬀerences between results obtained with diﬀerent reference wave

functions are liable to cause some confusion, which we would like to address here. Some

22

illustrative data can be found in Table VIII.

At the full CI level with all electrons correlated, restricted and unrestricted wave functions

should give the same answers, since the ROHF and UHF orbitals are related by a unitary

transformation, under which FCI is invariant.

This will no longer be the case when core orbitals are frozen: even at the FCI level there

will be small but ﬁnite diﬀerences between the total energies. For the ﬁrst-row atoms B–F,

we found these to be in the 20–50 microhartree range. Small as these numbers may seem,

for a polyatomic they may add up to a nontrivial discrepancy between ROFCI and UFCI

atomization energies.

Likewise, when core orbitals are frozen, results — even at the FCI level — become slightly

dependent on whether one uses standard or semicanonical orbitals.

For fully iterative coupled cluster methods such as CCSD, CCSDT, CCSDTQ,. . . , there

will be nonzero diﬀerences between restricted open-shell and unrestricted energies due to

spin contamination, even when all electrons are correlated. The diﬀerence tapers oﬀ to zero

as the FCI limit is approached: for the ﬁrst-row atoms B–F, the ROCCSDT

UCCSDT

−

diﬀerences with all electrons correlated are already down to the 100 nanohartree range.

For CCSDT, CCSDTQ,

. . . calculations with frozen cores, the diﬀerence between

restricted open-shell and unrestricted data will normally be dominated by the intrinsic

ROFCI - UFCI diﬀerence, which even for CCSDT (a fortiori for CCSDTQ and CCSDTQ5)

is several orders of magnitude larger than the spin contamination discrepancy.

Quasiperturbative methods entail an additional complication. For instance,

in the

CCSD(T) method, the underlying CCSD is invariant to unitary rotations within the orbital

space for both restricted open-shell and unrestricted reference orbitals, but the (T) term

is not invariant in the case of a restricted open-shell reference. Both of the leading

implementations of ROCCSD(T) — Watts et al.[46] as implemented in Aces II and other

codes, and Hampel et al.[57] as implemented in MOLPRO — involve transformation from

standard to semicanonical orbitals. The ROCCSD(T) energies of these two implementations

are equivalent when all electrons are correlated. However, in the case of frozen core orbitals,

the deﬁnitions are nonequivalent: while Aces II carries all orbitals in the semicanonicalization

and then freezes out the semicanonical core orbitals in the integral transformation and

coupled cluster steps, MOLPRO skips the core orbitals even at the semicanonicalization

stage[58]. The resulting CCSD(T) atomization energies are slightly diﬀerent (Table VIII),

23

up to about 0.1 kcal/mol. (The ROCCSD(T) and UCCSD(T) data are rather more diﬀerent,

as expected.)

contribution.)

What are the consequences of all this for a computational thermochemistry protocol

like W4? First of all, the discrepancy between approximate ROFCI and UFCI limits in

the valence-only steps will be oﬀset by an (almost) identical but opposite discrepancy in the

core-valence correction. (In practice, in a putative UW4 method a small fraction of the total

atomization energy would move from the valence correlation to the inner-shell correlation

Secondly, the inequivalence between the (T) implementations will introduce inequiv-

alences at three stages: two nearly equal but opposite changes in the valence (T) and

core-valence correlation steps, respectively, and another in the valence CCSDT

CCSD(T)

diﬀerence.

If we were including a core-valence CCSDT

CCSD(T) diﬀerence as well, we

−

would once again have approximate cancellation of the inequivalences (as we do ﬁnd in this

work for W4.2 theory). In W4 theory, we are neglecting the latter term, so a slightly diﬀerent

result would be obtained depending on whether one used, in the CCSDT

CCSD(T) step,

CCSD(T) energies from ACES II or MOLPRO, or an average of the two (as in the present

−

−

work).

24

[1] J. M. L. Martin, Annual Reports in Computational Chemistry 1, 31-43 (2005).

[2] “Quantum Mechanical Prediction of Thermochemical Data”, ed. J. Cioslowski (Kluwer,

Dordrecht, 2001), ISBN 0-7923-7077-5.

[3] J. M. L. Martin and G. de Oliveira, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1843 (1999); S. Parthiban, G. de

Oliveira, and J. M. L. Martin, in Ref.[2].

[4] S. Parthiban and J. M. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 6014 (2001).

[5] A. D. Boese, M. Oren, O. Atasoylu, J. M. L. Martin, M. K´allay and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Phys.

120, 4129 (2004).

[6] A. Tajti, P. G. Szalay, A. G. Cs´asz´ar, M. K´allay, J. Gauss, E. F. Valeev, B. A. Flowers, J.

V´azquez, and J. F. Stanton, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 11599 (2004).

[7] A. G. Cs´asz´ar, W. D. Allen, and H. F. Schaefer III, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 9751 (1998).

[8] L. Bytautas and K. Ruedenberg, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 10905 (2004); ibid. 121, 10915 (2004);

[9] L. A. Curtiss, P. C. Redfern, K. Raghavachari, and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 108

(2001) and references therein; K. Raghavachari and L. A. Curtiss, in Ref.[2].

[10] Gaussian 03, Revision C.02, M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M.

A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., T. Vreven, K. N. Kudin, J. C. Burant,

J. M. Millam, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, M. Cossi, G. Scalmani, N.

Rega, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa,

M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, M. Klene, X. Li, J. E. Knox, H. P.

Hratchian, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann,

O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, P. Y. Ayala, K. Morokuma,

G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, V. G. Zakrzewski, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, M.

C. Strain, O. Farkas, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari, J. B. Foresman, J. V.

Ortiz, Q. Cui, A. G. Baboul, S. Cliﬀord, J. Cioslowski, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko,

P. Piskorz, I. Komaromi, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng,

A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, C.

Gonzalez, and J. A. Pople, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT, 2004.

[11] M. Douglas and N. M. Kroll, Ann. Phys. (NY) 82, 89 (1974).

[12] B. A. Hess, Phys. Rev. A 33, 3742 (1986).

25

[13] Y. J. Bomble, J. F. Stanton, M. K´allay, and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 054101 (2005).

Approximate CCSDT(Q) methods relying on approximate factorization were earlier proposed

by Bartlett and coworkers: S. A. Kucharski and R. J. Bartlett, Chem. Phys. Lett. 158, 550

(1989); R. J. Bartlett, J. D. Watts, S. A. Kucharski, and J. Noga, Chem. Phys. Lett. 165,

513 (1990); S. A. Kucharski and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 9221 (1998); S. Hirata,

M. Nooijen, I. Grabowski, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 3919 (2001); S. Hirata, P.

D. Fan, A. A. Auer, M. Nooijen, and P. Piecuch, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 12197 (2004); S. A.

Kucharski, M. Kolaski, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 692 (2001).

[14] M. K´allay and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 214105 (2005).

[15] B. Ruscic, R. E. Pinzon, M. L. Morton, G. von Laszewski, S. Bittner, S. G. Nijsure, K. A.

Amin, M. Minkoﬀ, and A. F. Wagner, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 9979-9997 (2004)

[16] B. Ruscic, Active Thermochemical Tables, in: 2005 Yearbook of Science and Technology

(annual update to McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology), McGraw-Hill, New

York (2004), pp 3-7

[17] B. Ruscic, R. E. Pinzon, G. von Laszewski, D. Kodeboyina, A. Burcat, D. Leahy, D. Montoya,

and A. F. Wagner, Active Thermochemical Tables: Thermochemistry for the 21st Century, J.

Phys. Conf. Ser. 16, 561-570 (2005)

[18] B. Ruscic, R. E. Pinzon, M. L. Morton, N. K. Srinivasan, M.-C. Su, J. W. Sutherland,

and J. V. Michael, Active Thermochemical Tables: Accurate Enthalpy of Formation

of Hydroperoxyl Radical, HO2, J. Phys. Chem. 110, 6592 - 6601 (2006) in press;

http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp056311j.

[19] B. Ruscic, unpublished results obtained from Active Thermochemical Tables (ATcT) ver. 1.25

using the Core (Argonne) Thermochemical Network ver. 1.056 (2006)

[20] B. Ruscic, A. Fernandez, J. M. L. Martin, R. E. Pinzon, D. Kodeboyina, G. von Laszewski,

D. G. Archer, R. D. Chirico, M. Frenkel, and J. W. Magee, unpublished results obtained from

Active Thermochemical Tables (ATcT) ver. 1.25 using the adjunct Thermochemical Network

describing key sulfur-containing species ver. 1.056a (2006)

[21] B. Ruscic et al., to be published.

[22] the enthalpy of formation of C atom is currently under intense development; B. Ruscic, J. F.

Stanton, A. G. Cs´asz´ar, et al., to be published

[23] For example, the 4-CPU Opteron machine, for ﬁles at least twice as large as physical RAM,

26

reaches sustained streaming read and write throughputs over 300 MB/s, according to the

IOZONE benchmark, http://www.iozone.org.

[24] MOLPRO is a package of ab initio programs written by H.-J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, M. Schtz,

R. Lindh, P. Celani, T. Korona, G. Rauhut, F. R. Manby, R. D. Amos, A. Bernhardsson, A.

Berning, D. L. Cooper, M. J. O. Deegan, A. J. Dobbyn, F. Eckert, C. Hampel, G. Hetzer,

A. W. Lloyd, S. J. McNicholas, W. Meyer, M. E. Mura, A. Nickla, P. Palmieri, R. Pitzer, U.

Schumann, H. Stoll, A. J. Stone R. Tarroni, and T. Thorsteinsson.

[25] ACES II (Austin-Mainz-Budapest version) is an electronic structure program system written

by J.F. Stanton, J. Gauss, J.D. Watts, P.G. Szalay, and R.J. Bartlett, with contributions from

A.A. Auer, D.B. Bernholdt, O. Christiansen, M.E. Harding, M. Heckert, O. Heun, C. Huber,

D. Jonsson, J. Jus´elius, W.J. Lauderdale, T. Metzroth, and K. Ruud.

[26] MRCC, a string-based general coupled cluster program suite written by M. K´allay. See also M.

K´allay and P. R. Surj´an, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 2945 (2001) as well as: http://www.mrcc.hu.

[27] T. H. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1007 (1989)

[28] R. A. Kendall, T. H. Dunning, and R. J. Harrison,J. Chem. Phys. 96, 6796 (1992).

[29] T. H. Dunning, Jr., K. A. Peterson, and A. K. Wilson, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 9244 (2001)

[30] J. M. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 2791 (1998)

[31] J. M. L. Martin, J. Mol. Struct. (THEOCHEM), in press (WATOC′05 special issue). Preprint

at http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0508076.

[32] K. A. Peterson and T. H. Dunning, Jr. J. Chem. Phys. 117, 10548 (2002)

[33] M. Oren and J. M. L. Martin, to be published.

[34] W. A. de Jong, R. J. Harrison, and D. A. Dixon, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 48 (2001). These

basis sets were obtained from the Extensible Computational Chemistry Environment Basis

Set Database (http://www.emsl.pnl.gov/forms/basisform.html), Version 02/25/04, as

developed and distributed by the Molecular Science Computing Facility, Environmental and

Molecular Sciences Laboratory which is part of the Paciﬁc Northwest Laboratory, P.O. Box

999, Richland, Washington 99352, USA, and funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. The

Paciﬁc Northwest Laboratory is a multi-program laboratory operated by Battelle Memorial

Institute for the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC06-76RLO 1830. Contact

Karen Schuchardt for further information.

[35] Supporting information for the present paper, including absolute energies at the relevant levels

27

of theory for all species, is available on the World Wide Web at the Uniform Resource Locator

http://theochem.weizmann.ac.il/web/papers/w4.html.

[36] K. L. Bak, P. Jørgensen, J. Olsen, T. Helgaker, and J. Gauss, Chem. Phys. Lett. 317, 116

(2000)

[37] T. A. Ruden, T. Helgaker, P. Jørgensen, and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 371, 62 (2003)

[38] T. A. Ruden, T. Helgaker, P. Jørgensen, and J. Olsen, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 5874 (2004)

[39] D. Feller, K. A. Peterson, and T. D. Crawford, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 054107 (2006)

[40] E. F. Valeev and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 3921 (2003).

[41] A. Karton and J. M. L. Martin, Theor. Chem. Acc. 115, 330 (2006).

[42] F. Jensen, Theor. Chem. Acc. 113, 267 (2005)

[43] W. Klopper, Mol. Phys. 99, 481 (2001)

[44] See, e.g., eq. (26) in R. J. Bartlett, in Modern Electronic Structure Theory (ed. D. R. Yarkony),

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995, vol. 2, p. 1047.

[45] K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople, and M. Head-Gordon, Chem. Phys. Lett. 157,

479 (1989)

York, 1963

[46] J. D. Watts, J. Gauss, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 8718 (1993).

[47] C. Schwartz, in Methods in Computational Physics 2 (B. J. Alder, Ed.), Academic Press, New

[48] R. N. Hill J. Chem. Phys. 83, 1173 (1985)

[49] W. Kutzelnigg and J. D. Morgan III, 96, 4484 (1992); erratum 97, 8821 (1992)

[50] A. Halkier, T. Helgaker, P. Jørgensen, W. Klopper, H. Koch, J. Olsen, and A. K. Wilson,

Chem. Phys. Lett 286, 243 (1998).

[51] K. P. Huber and G. Herzberg, Constants of Diatomic Molecules (Van Nostrand Reinhold,

[52] A. Schulz, B. J. Smith, and L. Radom, J. Phys. Chem. A 103, 7522 (1999); M. B. Sullivan,

Mark A. Iron, P. C. Redfern, J. M. L. Martin, L. A. Curtiss, and L.Radom, J. Phys. Chem.

New York, 1979)

A 107, 5617 (2003)

[53] M. A. Iron, M. Oren and J. M. L. Martin, Mol. Phys. 101, 1345 (2003)

[54] As the H2 molecule trivially has no post-CCSD(T) — or for that matter post-CCSD

— correlation contributions we have not included it in our statistics. For the sake of

completeness, and in order to assist people wishing to obtain isodesmic or isogyric reaction

28

energies involving H2, we are providing the data here: D0[W2.2]=D0[W3.2]=103.28,

D0[W4lite]=D0[W4]=103.29 kcal/mol,

compared to expt. value of 103.27 kcal/mol.

W4 component breakdown: TAE[SCF]=83.85, ∆TAE[CCSD]=25.63, ∆TAE[REL]=0.00,

∆TAE[DBOC]=0.05, De=109.53 kcal/mol. Note that here the highest angular momentum
actually present in the molecule was used for L in the extrapolations: the other choice (cardinal

number N of the AVN Z basis sets, which is nonequivalent for H2) would lead to diﬀerent values

of W2.2=W3.2=103.34 and W4lite=W4=103.32 kcal/mol, with the W4 SCF and valence

correlation components being 83.85 and 25.65 kcal/mol, respectively. The zero-point energy,

6.23 kcal/mol, was taken from spectroscopic constants in Huber and Herzberg[51], with Y00

being included. (Failure to do so causes an underestimate of 0.025 kcal/mol.) For H2, there

is[40] a nontrivial correlation correction to the DBOC of -0.04 kcal/mol: applying it would

bring the W4 value to 103.25 kcal/mol with the former, and 103.28 kcal/mol with the latter,

choice of L in the extrapolations.

[55] As SO2 has a central 2nd-row atom in a high oxidation state, it becomes quite vulnerable

to ‘inner polarization’ eﬀects — speciﬁcally, as discussed in Ref.[31] for the extreme cases

of HClO4 and Cl2O7, the (3d) orbitals drop low enough that they can accept some back-
donation from lone pairs of highly electronegative elements. While the aug-cc-pV(n+d)Z basis

set sequence is intended to cope with this, one may wonder if full saturation of the SCF

component has in fact been achieved for SO2. Using the AVnZ+2d1f sequence recommended

in Ref.[30] — speciﬁcally the AV5Z+2d1f and AV6Z+2d1f basis sets — we obtain an SCF

limit 0.05 kcal/mol higher for SO2, and 0.02 kcal/mol higher for SO. In fact, in both cases

this brings the W4 values closer to ATcT, although this may well be fortuitous.

[56] J. F. Stanton, Chem. Phys. Lett. 281, 130 (1997).

[57] P. J. Knowles, C. Hampel, and H.-J. Werner, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 5219 (1993); erratum 112,

3106 (2000).

[58] H.-J. Werner, personal communication.

[59] T.J. Lee and P.R. Taylor, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 23, 199 (1989).

[60] M.L. Leininger, I.M.B. Nielsen, T.D. Crawford, and C.L. Janssen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 328, 431

(2000); C.L. Janssen and I.M.B. Nielsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 290, 423 (1998); I.M.B. Nielsen

and C.L. Janssen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 310, 568 (1999)

[61] B. Ruscic, J. E. Boggs, A. Burcat, A. G. Csaszar, J. Demaison, R. Janoschek, J. M. L.

29

Martin, M. L. Morton, M. J. Rossi, J. F. Stanton, P. G. Szalay, P. R. Westmoreland,

F. Zabel, and T. Berces, “IUPAC Critical Evaluation of Thermochemical Properties

of Selected Radicals. Part I”, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 34, 573-656 (2005); see also

http://www.iupac.org/projects/2003/2003-024-1-100.html.

[62] L. Visscher and K. G. Dyall, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 9040 (1996).

[63] L. Visscher, J. Styszynski, and W. C. Nieuwpoort, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 1987 (1996).

[64] D. Feller, K. A. Peterson, W. A. de Jong, and D. A. Dixon, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 3510 (2003)

30

TABLE I: Basis

set

convergence

of CCSDTQ

CCSDT, CCSDT(Q)

CCSDT and

−

−

CCSDTQ

CCSDT(Q) (∆TAE, in kcal/mol)

−

CCSDTQ − CCSDT

CCSDT(Q) − CCSDT

CCSDTQ − CCSDT(Q) Best ˆT4 estimate

Basis set DZ PVDZ PVTZ PVDZ DZ PVDZ PVTZ PVQZ DZ PVDZ

PVTZ

(a)

Eq.(1)

Reference UHF UHF UHF ROHF UHF UHF UHF UHF UHF UHF

C2H2

0.64

0.54

0.54

0.68

0.62

H2O

B2

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

C2

BN

BeO

CN

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

ClCN

C2H4

0.17

1.19

0.65

0.05

0.07

0.03

0.56

0.80

0.09

0.94

0.16

0.75

0.96

2.12

1.87

1.74

0.67

1.00

0.41

0.42

0.87

0.14

0.09

0.09

0.75

0.28

0.24

1.08

0.99

0.07

0.06

0.08

0.07

0.04

0.03

1.11

0.99

0.50

0.53

1.00

0.82

0.16

0.17

1.25

0.87

0.22

0.17

2.16

1.75

0.86

0.72

1.16

1.00

3.38

3.21

0.95

1.59

0.72

1.38

0.53

0.69

1.22

0.86

1.79

1.66

0.11

0.24

0.35

0.39

0.13

0.50

0.03

0.08

0.02

0.07

0.03

0.05

0.90

0.68

1.68

1.44

0.85

0.98

1.09

0.94

0.27

0.33

0.24

0.29

0.26

0.21

-0.01 -0.02

0.99

0.88

0.91

1.22

0.20

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.08

-0.05 -0.08

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.99

1.27

1.21

-0.16 -0.22

0.53

0.55

0.63

0.70

-0.04 -0.10

0.82

1.06

0.93

0.98

-0.06 -0.11

0.17

0.17

0.19

0.12

0.00

-0.02

0.87

1.44

1.03

1.16

-0.19 -0.16

0.17

0.23

0.19

0.19

-0.01 -0.02

1.75

2.62

2.20

-0.46 -0.46

0.75

0.97

0.88

0.98

-0.11 -0.15

1.08

1.26

1.12

1.16

-0.10 -0.13

3.21

4.26

4.13

-0.88 -0.92

1.59

2.29

2.66

3.35

-1.34 -1.07

1.38

1.53

2.46

3.17

-0.81 -1.09

0.69

1.11

1.38

1.13

-0.59 -0.69

0.84

1.24

1.24

1.52

-0.03 -0.38

1.72

2.14

2.05

-0.35 -0.39

0.19

1.16

0.71

0.05

0.07

0.03

1.17

0.65

0.91

0.11

1.09

0.16

2.26

0.91

1.09

4.38

3.22

3.03

2.85

1.16

1.44

2.12

0.43

0.47

0.98

0.13

0.09

0.59

0.09

0.88

1.79

1.39

1.33

0.42

0.59

1.03

31

MgO

1.31

1.57

1.57

2.45

2.85

2.76

-1.14 -1.28

0.24

0.10

0.26

0.49

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

0.51

0.39

0.37

0.44

0.51

-0.02 -0.05

0.50

0.09

0.59

1.08

0.04

-0.09

-0.10

1.05

0.08

0.03

0.08

0.15

0.00

0.00

0.06

0.02

0.07

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.05

0.02

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.73

0.95

0.80

0.94

-0.05 -0.12

0.86

HOCl

0.49

0.48

0.48

0.52

0.54

-0.03 -0.06

1.44

2.15

1.81

0.98

0.95

1.16

0.94

1.26

1.14

0.33

0.29

0.37

-0.47 -0.37

-0.10 -0.18

-0.17 -0.20

-0.02 -0.04

-0.06 -0.09

H2CO

0.56

0.50

0.50

0.62

0.60

HNO

0.99

0.86

0.85

0.62

0.99

1.10

-0.10 -0.14

(a) Extrapolated from CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ and CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVQZ basis sets, plus CCSDTQ/cc-pVTZ −

CCSDT(Q)/cc-pVTZ diﬀerence

0.21

1.29

0.04

0.64

0.92

0.11

1.06

0.19

0.87

1.08

2.35

2.13

1.58

0.61

1.13

UHF

-0.02

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.09

-0.11

-0.02

-0.15

-0.01

-0.16

-0.13

-1.10

-1.16

-1.11

-0.49

-0.44

0.00

0.00

0.18

1.37

0.70

0.05

0.08

0.03

1.04

0.61

0.89

0.10

1.03

0.16

1.98

0.84

1.06

3.81

2.37

2.13

1.72

0.52

1.16

1.90

0.44

0.46

0.98

0.15

0.10

0.58

0.09

0.84

1.56

1.32

1.24

0.43

0.54

0.99

TABLE II: Contribution of connected quintuple ( ˆT5) and sextuple ( ˆT6) excitations to the total

atomization energies (in kcal/mol)

CCSDTQ5 −

CCSDTQ(5) −

CCSDTQ5 − CCSDTQ56 − CCSDTQ5(6) −

CCSDTQ

CCSDTQ

CCSDTQ(5)

CCSDTQ5

CCSDTQ5

Basis set

DZ

PVDZ

DZ PVDZ PVDZNOD DZ

PVDZ

DZ PVDZ DZ

PVDZ

Reference UHF

UHF

UHF UHF

UHF

UHF

UHF

UHF UHF UHF

UHF

-0.01

-0.01

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.02

-0.03

0.00

0.07

0.04

0.06

0.02

H2O

B2

C2H2

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

C2

BN

MgO

BeO

CN

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

HOCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

ClCN

C2H4

H2CO

HNO

0.01

0.08

0.08

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.03

0.04

0.00

0.11

0.01

0.08

0.10

0.32

0.16

0.02

0.02

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.06

0.01

0.01

0.07

0.05

0.06

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.04

0.01

0.00

0.12

0.12

0.01

0.01

0.04

0.06

0.11

0.10

0.11

0.11

0.51

0.47

0.47

0.47

0.11

-0.11

0.20

0.11

0.00

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.05

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.06

0.14

-0.01 -0.04

0.11

0.12

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.03

0.01

0.08

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.03

0.01

0.11

0.01

0.19

0.09

0.10

0.41

0.27

0.18

0.13

0.19

0.00

0.02

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.05

0.11

0.03

0.03

0.07

-0.08

-0.13

-0.04

-0.97 -1.05

-0.11

-0.72 -0.72

-0.08

-0.13

0.12

0.16

0.14

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.15

0.27

1.00

0.62

-0.03

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.08

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.03

0.01

0.11

0.01

0.19

0.09

0.10

0.41

0.27

0.18

0.13

0.19

0.00

0.02

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.05

0.14

0.05

0.11

0.03

0.03

0.07

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

-0.01

-0.01

0.00

0.00

0.14

-0.02

0.00

-0.09

-0.20

0.07

0.88

0.59

-0.03

-0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

32

0.08

0.08

0.09

-0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.06

0.01

-0.30

-0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.07

0.07

-0.28

-0.15

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.01

TABLE III: Basis set convergence of CCSDT

CCSD(T); post-CCSD(T) core correlation

−

contributions calculated with the cc-pCVTZ basis set (∆TAE,

in kcal/mol) and basis set

convergence of CCSD(T) MOLPRO

ACESII diﬀerences in the TAE (kcal/mol)

−
Post-CCSD(T) core corr.

CCSDT−CCSD(T) (a)

CCSD(T) MOLPRO−ACESII diﬀ.

{PVDZ, {PVTZ, diﬀ.

ACES

MOLPRO

PVDZ PVTZ PVQZ {PVDZ, {PVTZ,

PVTZ} PVQZ}

∆∆[ ˆT3-(T)] ∆∆[ ˆT3-(T)] ∆∆(Q)

PVTZ} PVQZ}

H2O

-0.18

-0.20

-0.03

B2

0.18

0.07

-0.11

C2H2

-0.68

-0.68

0.00

-0.03

-0.01

-0.07

-0.01

0.12

0.00

-0.99

-0.03

-0.51

0.00

-0.29

0.05

-0.15

-0.02

-0.66

0.02

-0.47

0.02

-0.64

0.07

-2.19

-0.05

-2.58

0.01

-0.27

0.01

-0.37

-0.02

-0.27

0.01

-0.57

0.01

-0.07

0.01

-0.11

-0.01

0.07

0.08

-0.74

0.02

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

C2

BN

CN

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

-0.01

-0.06

0.12

-0.96

-0.51

-0.34

-0.13

-0.69

-0.09

-1.38

-0.49

-0.71

-1.27

-2.15

-2.59

-0.28

-0.98

-0.35

-0.28

-0.58

-0.08

-0.10

-0.02

-0.76

-1.22

-1.04

HOCl

-0.44

-0.02

0.04

-0.01

-0.01

-0.01

-0.01

-0.03

-0.02

0.02

-0.01

-0.05

-0.03

-0.05

-0.03

0.00

0.06

0.15

0.07

-0.03

-0.02

-0.02

0.01

-0.05

0.00

-0.01

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.07

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.02

0.01

0.08

0.12

0.03

0.02

0.00

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.05

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.07

0.03

0.08

0.05

0.02

0.05

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.04

0.04

0.05

0.03

0.03

0.05

0.02

0.00

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.06

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.09

0.05

0.11

0.06

0.03

0.06

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.09

0.02

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.02

0.05

0.05

0.07

0.04

0.04

0.07

0.02

0.00

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.07

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.10

0.05

0.12

0.07

0.03

0.07

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.09

0.02

0.02

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.03

0.06

0.06

0.08

0.04

0.04

0.07

0.02

0.00

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.07

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.10

0.05

0.12

0.07

0.03

0.07

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.10

0.02

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.03

0.06

0.06

0.08

0.04

0.04

0.07

0.02

0.00

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.07

0.05

0.01

0.01

0.10

0.05

0.13

0.07

0.03

0.07

0.04

0.06

0.07

0.10

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.03

0.06

0.06

0.08

0.04

0.05

0.08

0.01

0.04

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.04

0.02

0.03

0.00

0.04

0.01

0.07

0.03

0.03

0.13

0.19

0.12

0.03

0.07

-0.01

0.03

-0.02

0.01

0.00

0.03

0.04

33

ClCN

-1.07

C2H4

-0.42

-0.43

-0.01

H2CO -0.48

-0.49

-0.01

HNO

-0.52

-0.48

0.04

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

0.03

0.02

0.04

0.00

0.01

0.01

(a) All values were calculated using ACESII

TABLE IV: Basis set convergence of diagonal Born-Oppenheimer corrections at the Hartree-Fock

level and of scalar relativistic corrections (TAE, in kcal/mol)

DBOC

Scalar relativistic

Oren

PNNL

PNNL

AVDZ AVTZ AVQZ AV(T+d)Z AV(Q+d)Z

H2O

B2

0.12

0.01

0.13

-0.26

0.01

-0.06

C2H2

0.12

0.12

-0.28

0.05

0.11

0.05

-0.17

0.10

-0.19

-0.08

-0.08

-0.04

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

C2

BN

CN

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

-0.03

-0.03

-0.24

0.05

0.01

0.00

0.08

0.02

0.14

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.06

0.05

0.16

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.05

-0.47

0.02

-0.16

0.00

-0.02

0.08

-0.19

0.02

-0.13

0.14

-0.25

0.04

-0.45

0.01

-0.18

0.01

-0.18

0.03

-0.17

0.01

-0.17

0.02

-0.15

0.00

-0.42

0.00

-0.21

0.00

-0.18

0.01

-0.16

0.05

-0.39

0.04

-0.25

0.15

-0.45

0.01

-0.34

0.02

-0.81

0.03

-0.53

HOCl

0.07

0.07

-0.32

ClCN 0.04

0.04

-0.44

C2H4

0.12

0.12

-0.33

H2CO 0.03

0.03

-0.33

HNO -0.05

-0.05

-0.27

-0.27

-0.06

-0.28

-0.17

-0.19

-0.04

-0.48

-0.16

-0.03

-0.20

-0.14

-0.26

-0.46

-0.19

-0.18

-0.25

-0.17

-0.17

-0.16

-0.43

-0.19

-0.17

-0.16

-0.39

-0.25

-0.32

-0.45

-0.33

-0.82

-0.54

-0.44

-0.33

-0.34

-0.27

-0.27

-0.06

-0.28

-0.17

-0.19

-0.04

-0.48

-0.16

-0.03

-0.20

-0.14

-0.25

-0.46

-0.19

-0.18

-0.25

-0.17

-0.17

-0.16

-0.43

-0.20

-0.18

-0.16

-0.40

-0.25

-0.33

-0.46

-0.34

-0.83

-0.54

-0.45

-0.33

-0.34

-0.27

34

TABLE V: Component breakdown of the ﬁnal W4 total atomization energies at the bottom of the

well (in kcal/mol)

SCF valence valence ˆT3−(T)

ˆT4

ˆT5

inner relativ. spin-orbit DBOC (a) TAEe

-0.35

0.89 0.03 -0.10

-0.03

0.00

0.01 38.14

CH

57.22

25.83

0.10

0.03 0.00 0.14

-0.04

-0.08 0.02 84.06

3.53

8.35

1.90

2.89

0.89

8.02

7.63

2.15

9.49

3.89

9.48

9.28

4.59

5.25

9.68

2.24

1.48

6.77

2.01

8.46

CCSD (T)

shell

H2O 160.02 69.08

-0.20

0.18 0.01 0.38

-0.27

C2H2 299.87 94.73

-0.72

0.70 0.07 2.49

-0.28

CH3

243.40 61.47

-0.03

0.05 0.00 1.09

-0.17

CH4

331.55 84.72

-0.08

0.08 0.00 1.27

-0.19

CO2

258.08 116.34

13.86

-1.03

1.04 0.05 1.77

-0.48

CO

F2

HF

N2

181.58 69.08

-31.08 61.91

100.05 39.31

119.69 98.11

-0.55

0.61 0.05 0.96

-0.16

-0.13

0.10 0.01 0.18

-0.20

-0.79

1.03 0.11 0.79

-0.14

NH3

203.28 90.17

-0.14

0.16 0.01 0.65

-0.25

N2O 95.13 155.03

18.81

-1.51

1.98 0.19 1.15

-0.46

NO

54.92

87.51

-0.56

0.84 0.09 0.41

-0.19

26.78

83.95

-0.74

1.07 0.10 0.23

-0.18

26.82

28.08

15.41

41.85

104.16 57.06

133.63 47.66

80.85

24.99

-0.37

0.44 0.00 0.14

-0.20

-0.30

0.46 0.02 0.04

-0.18

-0.62

0.98 0.06 0.84

-0.16

-0.10

0.15 0.00 0.33

-0.40

-0.11

0.10 0.00 0.19

-0.25

HOCl 86.70

72.35

-0.47

0.58 0.02 0.26

-0.33

PH3

173.22 66.54

-0.03

0.09 0.00 0.34

-0.46

SO

53.14

64.15

-0.79

0.84 0.05 0.49

-0.34

SO2

121.91 121.45

15.83

-1.28

1.56 0.14 0.97

-0.83

OCS

218.25 101.32

14.47

-1.09

1.33 0.05 1.41

-0.54

ClCN 169.49 101.51

12.44

-1.15

1.24 0.11 1.78

-0.45

C2H4 434.97 119.32

7.40

-0.46

0.43 0.03 2.38

-0.33

H2CO 264.83 100.53

7.92

-0.53

0.54 0.03 1.31

-0.34

O2

O3

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

0.13

0.02 232.65

0.12

0.04 405.18

0.05

0.02 307.69

0.10

0.02 420.26

0.05

0.07 389.18

0.02

0.04 259.30

0.08

0.01 141.18

0.02

0.10 228.37

0.14

0.05 297.93

0.04

0.12 270.20

0.01

0.07 152.52

0.01

0.03 120.15

0.00

0.02 57.83

0.00

0.01 61.35

0.01

0.03 171.38

0.05

0.01 183.00

0.04

0.01 106.47

0.07

0.03 164.90

0.15

0.01 241.88

0.01

0.03 125.30

0.02

0.06 258.80

0.03

0.06 334.37

0.04

0.08 284.12

0.12

0.04 563.71

0.03

0.04 374.04

-0.22

-0.17

-0.08

-0.08

-0.04

-0.53

-0.31

-0.77

-0.39

0.00

0.00

-0.22

-0.05

-0.45

-0.67

-0.45

-1.68

-1.23

-0.64

-0.56

-0.84

-1.06

0.00

-0.78

-1.01

-0.87

-0.93

-0.17

-0.31

-0.22

-45.09 163.94

25.62

-1.34

3.81 0.41 -0.05

-0.25

-0.03 0.07 146.39

NO2

59.55 147.16

19.36

-1.08

1.91 0.19 0.67

-0.43

0.00

0.10 226.99

HNO 85.45 109.46

10.08

-0.60

0.99 0.07 0.40

-0.27

-0.05 0.07 205.34

(a) diﬀerence between the ACES II and MOLPRO deﬁnitions of the valence ROCCSD(T)

35

TABLE VI: Comparison between W4 total atomization energies at 0 K, Active Thermochemical

Tables benchmarks, and earlier reference data (kcal/mol)

ZPVE(a) W2.2 W3.2 W4lite W4 W4.2 W4.3 ATcT(b) uncert. Earlier ref. (c) uncert.

H2O

13.29

219.39 219.47 219.43 219.36 219.35 219.35

219.36

C2H2

16.46

388.61 388.54 388.57 388.72 388.72

18.55

289.12 289.15 289.14 289.14 289.14

27.74

392.52 392.52 392.52 392.52 392.52

388.62

289.11

392.50

79.89 80.01

80.01

80.02

80.02 80.02

79.98

381.70 381.94 382.06 381.94 381.94

382.01

256.01 256.12 256.17 256.19 256.18 256.21

256.25

36.15 36.78

36.85

36.84

36.87 36.97

36.91

135.32 135.39 135.40 135.33 135.32 135.30

135.27

224.62 224.92 224.90 225.01 225.00 225.07

224.94

21.33

276.62 276.68 276.62 276.60 276.59 276.61

276.59

262.44 263.24 263.42 263.39 263.40

263.38

149.30 149.66 149.74 149.81 149.81 149.86

149.82

117.25 117.69 117.77 117.90 117.91 118.00

117.99

139.06 142.06 142.15 142.24 142.34

220.24 221.31 221.49 221.59 221.61

142.48

221.67

57.12 57.03

56.85

57.03

57.01 57.08

57.18

60.00 60.17

60.19

60.23

60.24 60.29

169.24 169.24 169.10 169.55 169.51 169.59

173.59 173.58 173.54 173.60 173.60 173.64

173.55

102.32 102.28 102.20 102.23 102.22 102.23

102.21

156.61 156.71 156.67 156.72

156.64

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

HOCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

ClCN

4.04

7.24

3.11

1.30

5.85

3.36

6.81

2.71

2.25

4.15

5.40

0.80

1.12

1.83

9.40

4.24

8.18

1.64

4.38

5.72

5.33

14.44

227.36 227.39 227.40 227.44 227.47 227.57

123.47 123.53 123.52 123.66 123.69 123.76

123.72

253.75 254.37 254.53 254.42

328.40 328.52 328.45 328.65

278.73 278.77 278.58 278.79

C2H4

31.60

532.06 531.99 532.02 532.11 532.11

H2CO 16.53

357.38 357.48 357.53 357.51 357.51

HNO

8.56

196.27 196.71 196.71 196.78 196.78

254.46

279.42

532.00

357.43

196.86

0.01

0.07

0.03

0.03

0.05

0.03

0.03

0.07

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.02

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.43

0.02

0.02

0.26

0.06

0.06

0.03

219.35

388.90

289.00

392.51

79.90

381.91

256.16

36.94

135.33

225.06

276.73

263.79

149.82

117.97

142.51

221.70

57.18

60.36

169.41

173.15

102.24

156.61

227.13

123.58

253.92

328.53

279.20

531.91

357.25

196.85

0.12

0.24

0.10

0.14

0.23

0.06

0.12

0.10

0.17

0.04

0.13

0.03

0.04

0.00

0.01

0.23

0.12

0.02

0.12

0.41

0.04

0.08

0.48

0.48

0.17

0.12

0.06

(a) Zero-point vibrational energies taken from the compilation in Ref.[3], except for the following:
CH3: D. W. Schwenke, Spectrochimica Acta A 55, 731 (1999), adjusted for expt.–calc. diﬀerences in the fundamental
frequencies; CH4: D. W. Schwenke, Spectrochimica Acta A 58, 849 (2002), same adjustment made; H2O:

CCSD(T)/cc-pVQZ quartic force ﬁeld, fundamentals obtained by second-order rovibrational perturbation theory and
adjusted for expt.-calc. diﬀerences in fundamentals; HOCl: K. A. Peterson, S. Skokov, and J. M. Bowman, J. Chem. Phys.
111, 7446 (1999); N2O: as for H2O; O3: Obtained from experimentally derived harmonic frequencies and anharmonicity
constants in A. Barbe, A. Chichery, T. Cours, V. G. Tyuterev, and J. J. Plateaux, J. Mol. Struct. 616, 55 (2002); NO2:
from R. Georges, A. Delon, and R. Jost, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 1732 (1995); number not explicitly given there, quoted
(presumably derived from their potential) by A. J. C. Varandas, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 2596 (2003).

(b) Ref.[19], except for H2S, SO, and SO2, which are from Ref.[20]; the adjunct uncertainties correspond to 95% conﬁdence

intervals, as customary in experimental thermochemistry, which were obtained by utilizing the full covariance matrix

computed by ATcT; see see also Refs.[15, 16, 17, 18].

(c) Ref.[5] and references therein.

36

TABLE VII: Components of W1w, W2w, W3, W2.2, W3.2, W4lite, W4, W4.2 and W4.3

Component

W1w

W2w

W3

W2.2 W3.2 W4lite W4 W4.2

W4.3

Reference geometry

B3LYP/

CCSD(T)/cc-pV(Q+d)Z

cc-pV(T+d)Z

SCF

AV{T,Q}+dZ

AV{Q,5}+dZ

AV{5,6}+dZ

SCF extrap.

(a)

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

Valence CCSD

AV{T,Q}+dZ

AV{Q,5}+dZ

AV{5,6}+dZ

Val. CCSD extrap.

(d)

(d)

(e)

(e)

(e)

(e)

(e)

(e)

Valence (T)

AV{D,T}+dZ

AV{T,Q}+dZ

AV{Q,5}+dZ

Val. (T) extrap.

Valence T3-(T)

Valence (Q)

Valence T4-(Q)

Valence T5

(d)

(d)

(d)

(d)

(d)

(d)

(d)

(d)

— V{D,T}Z (f) —

V{D,T}Z (f)

V{T,Q}Z (f)

— 1.25 PVDZ — PVDZ PVDZ

1.10 PVTZ

— 1.25 PVDZ —

—

1.10 PVDZ

PVQZ

PVTZ

—

—

—

— DZ (f) DZ (f)

PVDZ

CCSD(T) inner shell

MTsmall

ACV{T,Q}Z

T3-(T) inner shell

—

—

—

— CVTZ

CVTZ

Scalar relativistics

MTsmall

AVQ+dZ

ZPVE

0.985 B3LYP/ (h)

(h)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

—

—

—

—

cc-pV(T+d)Z

DBOC

—

—

—

HF/AVTZ

(c)

(c)

—

—

—

—

—

The notation {D,T} refers to extrapolation from, in this case, cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ basis sets.
(a) A + B/L5

(b) Martin-Karton formula[41].
(c) A + B/L3.22 on valence correlation energies.
(d) A + B/L3 on valence correlation energies.
(e) Separate L−3 and L−5 extrapolations on singlet and triplet coupled pairs, respectively.

(f) CCSDT calculated with ACES II, CCSD(T) calculated with MOLPRO.

(g) For second row systems a cc-pVDZ basis without the d functions was used.

(h) From CCSD(T)/cc-pV(Q+d)Z quartic force ﬁeld.

(i) Best available, usually obtained from expt. fundamentals and high-level ab initio anharmonic force ﬁeld (whence

anharmonic corrections). See Table VI for further details.

37

TABLE VIII: Valence-only and all-electrons-correlated total atomization energies (kcal/mol) at

the CCSDT level with diﬀerent reference orbital choices, as well as using diﬀerent deﬁnitions of

CCSD(T). The cc-pCVTZ basis set was used throughout.

CCSD(T) CCSD(T) CCSD(T) CCSDT CCSDT CCSDT CCSD(T) CCSD(T) CCSD(T) CCSDT CCSDT CCSDT

UHF

ROHF

ROHF

ROHF

UHF ROHF

UHF

ROHF

ROHF

ROHF

UHF ROHF

Aces MOLPRO

Aces MOLPRO

semican.

std.

std.

semican.

std.

std.

All electrons correlated

Only valence electrons correlated

63.38

98.56

63.44

98.57

63.44

98.57

63.76

96.18

63.75

63.76

96.18

96.18

62.85

97.72

62.93

97.82

62.93

97.87

63.21

95.31

63.19

63.21

95.22

95.37

140.37

140.37

140.37

138.62

138.61

138.62

139.51

139.60

139.64

137.66

137.56

137.69

217.93

217.94

217.94

217.37

217.36

217.37

217.00

217.17

217.27

216.56

216.39

216.65

253.03

253.03

253.03

252.64

252.64

252.64

252.11

252.23

252.27

251.82

251.70

251.86

377.86

377.86

377.86

377.08

377.08

377.08

376.18

376.36

376.43

375.55

375.36

375.61

255.66

255.67

255.67

254.49

254.49

254.49

254.23

254.47

254.59

253.23

252.99

253.34

114.35

114.38

114.38

113.85

113.98

113.85

113.97

114.08

114.12

113.52

113.57

113.55

133.25

133.25

133.25

132.36

132.36

132.36

132.86

133.06

133.13

132.05

131.84

132.12

35.05

35.05

35.05

34.85

34.85

34.85

35.01

35.09

35.10

34.86

34.77

34.87

137.43

137.43

137.43

137.33

137.33

137.33

137.21

137.25

137.25

137.15

137.11

137.16

171.22

172.39

172.39

172.25

172.26

172.25

170.20

171.46

171.53

171.29

171.17

171.36

144.19

144.35

144.35

143.99

144.02

143.99

143.59

143.88

143.95

143.48

143.39

143.55

213.37

213.50

213.50

212.77

212.83

212.77

212.36

212.70

212.79

211.90

211.75

211.99

81.94

81.94

81.94

82.05

82.05

82.05

81.77

81.80

81.81

81.90

81.88

81.92

303.51

303.52

303.52

303.51

303.51

303.51

302.63

302.66

302.68

302.65

302.63

302.67

C2H2

396.08

396.08

396.08

395.53

395.53

395.53

394.09

394.18

394.22

393.61

393.52

393.65

C2H4

554.36

554.36

554.36

554.04

554.04

554.04

552.36

552.45

552.49

552.12

552.02

552.15

415.31

415.31

415.31

415.27

415.27

415.27

414.23

414.28

414.30

414.23

414.18

414.25

289.79

289.79

289.79

289.72

289.72

289.72

289.07

289.16

289.21

289.08

289.00

289.13

226.13

226.13

226.13

225.99

225.99

225.99

225.68

225.75

225.77

225.60

225.53

225.63

H2CO 365.67

365.67

365.67

365.29

365.29

365.29

364.43

364.54

364.59

364.15

364.04

364.20

HNO

195.73

195.73

195.73

195.34

195.34

195.34

195.08

195.24

195.31

194.81

194.65

194.88

53.93

56.51

53.91

56.50

53.91

56.50

53.62

56.32

53.61

53.62

56.31

56.32

53.60

56.31

53.67

56.38

53.69

56.40

54.19

56.57

53.29

53.41

56.08

56.19

164.90

164.89

164.89

164.45

164.43

164.45

164.06

164.17

164.21

164.23

164.61

163.77

179.69

179.69

179.69

179.64

179.63

179.64

179.30

179.37

179.38

179.80

179.24

179.33

105.14

105.13

105.13

105.04

105.03

105.04

104.91

104.94

104.95

105.26

104.81

104.87

236.74

236.74

236.74

236.81

236.81

236.81

236.35

236.45

236.46

236.97

236.38

236.49

118.40

118.63

118.63

118.07

N/A

118.07

117.84

118.18

118.20

118.06

117.53

117.60

Ref.

Def.

Orbs.

B2

BN

C2

N2

CO

CO2

N2O

O2

O3

F2

HF

CN

NO

NO2

CH

CH3

CH4

NH3

H2O

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

PH3

SO

38

TABLE IX: Diagnostics for importance of nondynamical correlation

%TAE[SCF] T1 D1

Largest T2

%TAE[(T)]

%TAE

%TAE[T4 + T5]

NO occupations

diagnostic

amplitudes

[post-CCSD(T)]

HDOMO LUMO

— CCSD(T)/cc-pVTZ —

0.007 0.011

0.039 0.071

0.048

0.286

0.013 0.028

0.084 (x2)

0.005 0.009

0.036, 0.034(×2)

0.007 0.011

0.035 (×2)

0.008 0.017

0.09112 (×2)

0.018 0.047

0.063 (x2)

0.019 0.039

0.067 (x2)

-81.5

0.011 0.029

0.007 0.012

0.169

0.040

0.013 0.026

0.095 (x2)

0.006 0.010

0.036

0.020 0.048

0.086 (x2)

0.021 0.051

0.007 0.013

0.027 0.077

0.038 0.086

0.073 0.199

0.051 0.106

0.113

0.094

0.192

0.293

0.224

0.213

0.043 0.104

0.041 (x2)

0.053 0.152

0.092 (x2),

0.025 0.065

0.008 0.021

0.011 0.031

0.077 (x2)

0.093

0.091

0.091

0.025 0.049

0.092 (×2)

0.009 0.016

0.046, 0.045,

0.044, 0.043

0.006 0.011 0.043, 0.040 (×4)

0.010 0.024

0.061

0.013 0.021

0.044 (×2),

0.038 (×1 + 2),

0.019 0.049

0.067 (×2)

0.014 0.028

0.074 (×2)

0.023 0.052

0.021 0.056

0.011 0.032

0.016 0.045

0.015 0.043

0.037

0.074

0.091

0.119

0.119

0.110

H2O

B2

C2H2

CH3

CH4

CH

CO2

CO

F2

HF

N2

NH3

N2O

NO

O2

O3

C2

BN

MgO

BeO

CN

NO2

Cl2

ClF

CS

H2S

HCl

HOCl

PH3

SO

SO2

OCS

ClCN

C2H4

H2CO

HNO

68.8

30.3

74.0

79.1

78.9

68.1

66.3

70.0

70.9

52.4

68.2

35.2

36.0

22.3

-30.8

12.5

-10.8

-62.0

51.1

46.9

26.2

46.4

25.1

60.8

73.0

75.9

52.6

71.6

42.4

47.1

65.3

59.7

77.2

70.8

41.6

1.52

14.98

19.84

2.07

0.62

0.69

1.05

3.57

3.10

1.52

4.18

1.31

6.99

6.24

7.73

17.74

13.33

18.75

21.96

8.11

5.85

8.56

7.72

8.40

5.67

1.22

1.38

4.08

0.83

6.73

6.11

4.33

4.39

1.32

2.12

4.92

39

-0.005

2.445

0.012

0.008

-0.001

0.160

0.015

0.038

1.461

-0.013

0.152

0.011

0.245

0.240

0.357

1.954

0.311

-0.316

1.118

0.168

0.519

0.447

0.132

0.298

0.245

0.027

-0.009

0.077

0.028

0.082

0.163

0.065

0.069

-0.001

0.013

0.241

(a)

1.962

1.830

0.026

0.111

1.924 (x2) 0.057 (x2)

1.959

0.022

1.958 (x3) 0.022 (x3)

1.940

0.020

1.948 (x2) 0.054 (x2)

1.945 (x3) 0.053 (x3)

1.904

1.967

0.097

0.025

1.931 (x2) 0.063 (x2)

1.959

0.025

1.928 (x2) 0.074 (x2)

1.944

1.950

1.876

1.629

1.833

1.843

0.060

0.042

0.014

0.362

0.157

0.147

1.943 (x2) 0.044 (x2)

1.926

0.063

1.943

1.930

1.937

0.077

0.065

0.066

1.920 (x2) 0.069 (x2)

1.943

0.039

1.951

1.932

0.035

0.064

1.933

0.037 (x2)

1.942

1.929

0.043

0.084

1.932 (x2) 0.062 (x2)

1.927 (x2) 0.063 (x2)

1.916

1.927

1.912

0.064

0.063

0.086

0.082

2.178

0.190

0.018

0.019

0.040

0.281

0.252

2.354

0.080

0.498

0.057

0.804

0.609

0.971

2.866

1.813

2.226

2.636

0.368

0.716

0.923

0.749

0.769

0.604

0.080

0.093

0.361

0.039

0.708

0.655

0.392

0.476

0.081

0.154

0.515

Percentages of the total atomization energy relate to nonrelativistic, clamped-nuclei values with inner shell electrons

constrained to be doubly occupied.

D1 diagnostics were obtained using MOLPRO 2006.1[24].

(a) Highest doubly occupied molecular orbital.

