6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of multiple ionization pathways for OCS in an intense laser ﬁeld resolved
by three dimensional covariance mapping and visualized by hierarchical ionization
topology.

W. A. Bryan∗ and W. R. Newell
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK

J. H. Sanderson
Department of Physics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1

A. J. Langley
Central Laser Facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The two- and three-body Coulomb explosion of carbonyl sulﬁde (OCS) by 790 nm, 50 fs laser
−2 has been investigated by three-dimensional covariance mapping
pulses focussed to ≈ 1016 Wcm
technique. For the ﬁrst time in a triatomic molecule, a single charge state, in this case the trication,
has been observed to dissociate into two distinct energy channels. With the aid of a three dimensional
visualization technique to reveal the ionization hierarchy, evidence is presented for the existence of
two sets of ionization pathways resulting from these two initial states. While one group of ions can
be modeled using a Classical enhanced ionization model, the second group, consisting of mainly
asymmetric channels, can not. The results provide clear evidence that an enhanced ionization
approach must also be accompanied by an appreciation of the eﬀects of excited ionic states and
multi-electronic processes.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Hz, 33.80.Gj, 33.80.Wz

I.

INTRODUCTION

Advances in tabletop femtosecond laser generation and
ampliﬁcation techniques has lead to the routine availabil-
ity of light pulses which may be focussed to intensities
comparable to the binding between the proton and elec-
tron in atomic hydrogen [1]. When a triatomic molecule
is exposed to such a light pulse, the dynamics of electron
removal and subsequent Coulomb explosion is rich in its
complexity and not yet fully understood. Typically, the
variation of the focussed laser intensity throughout the
confocal volume [2, 3] exposes the molecule to ≃ 1016
Wcm−2 at focus, decreasing to such an extent that in
the low intensity lobes before and after the focus that
the eﬀects are purely perturbative. Depending on the lo-
cation and orientation of the molecule, the laser pulse can
initiate a number of complex processes, including laser-
induced reorientation [4], low energy dissociation with
the removal of 0, 1 or 2 electrons [4, 5] and two- or three-
body Coulomb explosion (2BCE and 3BCE respectively)
[4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] with the removal of
at least 3 electrons. Additional complexity is introduced
through the observation that the laser pulse may mod-
ify the geometry of triatomics undergoing 3BCE (H2O
[6], OCS [7], CO2 [4, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16], SO2 [10], NO2
[11]). The recent development of complete momentum
measuring coincidence techniques, [17] and the advent
of sub 10 femtosecond laser pulses has allowed the ob-

∗Electronic address: w.bryan@ucl.ac.uk

Theoretical

servation of the near equilibrium geometry of triatomic
molecules through Coulomb imaging [18].
In addiction
both concerted and sequential dissociation channels have
been mapped in time for SO2+
2 [19].Concerted and se-
quential channels in the triply charged ions of N2O and
CS2 [20, 21, 22] have also been identiﬁed. 3BCE is fur-
ther complicated in many-electron triatomics by the large
number of possible ionization channels, here labelled ac-
cording to the convention OCS(m+n+p)+ → Om+ + Cn+
+ Sp+ and referred to as the (m, n, p) channel.
treatments of

two- and three-body
Coulomb explosion have been proposed and may be sep-
arated into quantum mechanical [23, 24] and classical
[25] interpretations, broadly termed enhanced ionization
(EI). However recent experimental and theoretical works
present possible shortcomings. A number of theoretical
considerations indicate that molecular ionization cannot
be treated as the action of a single electron. Speciﬁcally,
ab initio calculations of the distortion of carbon dioxide
during multiple ionization by a static electric ﬁeld [26]
indicate the presence of a charge-exchange mechanism
leading to experimentally observed geometries [4, 9] and
ionization proceeding through the most negative atomic
site. The ongoing theoretical investigation into the appli-
cability of Thomas-Fermi theory to ultrafast ionization in
molecules [27] has lead to a recent publication concerning
the ionization of CO2 and N2O[28]. This hydrodynamic
treatment of a group of active electrons has resulted in
an impressive agreement between experiment and calcu-
lation, however the extent to which the predicted dynam-
ics are physical is open to doubt. This is particularly
clear in the case of CI2 [27] where the model generates

a CI-CI bond much stiﬀer than is natural which subse-
quently plays an important part in keeping the molecule
at low bond length as ionization proceeds.

An important consideration in molecular ionization is
the sequence of events within the laser pulse temporal
envelope. A strong coupling exists between electron re-
moval and the expansion of the molecular bonds. Thus,
as the molecule is ionized - either sequentially or non-
sequentially, the rate of expansion of the molecular bonds
can vary, strongly inﬂuencing further ionization. As pro-
posed in enhanced ionization [25], a classical treatment of
molecular ionization by Posthumus and coworkers, mul-
tiple ionization is governed by dissociation, which gives
rise to sequential ionization every time a classical ion-
ization threshold is crossed. The ’critical separation’ in
the bond length, where the ﬁnal ionization takes place, is
simply the consequence of the strong dip in the threshold
intensity dependence on bond length. Typically, these
critical separations are two or three times the ground-
state equilibrium bond length depending on the molec-
ular type. The threshold dip is the consequence of the
combined eﬀect of electron localization and Stark shift-
ing. We have previously shown that the adaptation of
this method to triatomics such as OCS can give quanti-
tative agreement with experiment. A criticism of both
the classical enhanced ionization treatment and hydro-
dynamic models is that neither makes any account the
nonadiabatic response of a group of electrons to a laser
pulse of a speciﬁc frequency and intensity, which has
been shown to be inﬂuential [29]. Exact numerical so-
lutions of the hydrogen molecular ion by Bandrauk and
co-workers [23] have independently predicted a maxi-
mum in the ionization rate through a diﬀerent mecha-
nism. The electric ﬁeld generated by the laser pulse pro-
duces a Stark-shift of the lowest-unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO). For particular internuclear separations,
this Stark-shifting lifts the LUMO above the Coulomb
barrier. However, for ionization to proceed, the LUMO
must be populated: as the molecule expands during the
laser pulse, the exchange of population between the high-
est occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the LUMO
becomes nonadiabatic, producing a net population in the
LUMO. Furthermore, Kawata, Kono and Bandrauk have
predicted similar maxima in the ionization rate in the
case of linear H+
3 in an intense laser ﬁeld [30]. As in
the case of H+
2 [23], the response of the molecule to the
laser ﬁeld can be classiﬁed as either adiabatic or nonadi-
abatic. In the adiabatic system, electron transfer along
the molecule is possible, whereas in the nonadiabatic case
electron migration is suppressed due to laser induced lo-
calization. The ionization dynamics of this two-electron
system depend heavily on both the electron distribution
along the molecule and the nonadiabatic transitions be-
tween the lowest three electronic states.

These processes although not explicitly predicted for
multi-electron systems have been the subject of some de-
tailed experimental work [31, 32]. By making a careful
examination of the bond lengths at which channels of

2

FIG. 1: Schematic of the carbonyl sulﬁde molecule currently
under investigation.

the exploding N2 and I2 molecules appear to occur, it
was deduced that certain channels could not be precur-
sors of others and that because of this it was not possible
that the symmetric enhanced ionization channel (1,2)-
(2,2) could exist.
It was therefore necessary to invoke
multi-electronic processes causing asymmetric ionization
pathways ie (1,2)-(1,3). The authors postulate that this
process still involves the strong coupling of g − u sym-
metry states (analogous to HOMO, LUMO in the en-
hanced ionization symmetric ionization process) but that
the strong coupling of the outer electron to the ﬁeld gives
rise to the ionization of an inner electron (internal re-
scattering). Such multi-electronic processes would leave
the molecular ion in excited states and direct evidence of
this has been found in ﬂuorescence studies of N2 [33, 34]
and various other molecules [35]. One innovative fea-
tures of [32] was to introduce a visualize method able to
show the progression of ionization through many avail-
able pathways.

In the case of a near-linear [7] triatomic such as OCS,
the molecular geometry is deﬁned by the bond lengths
(r OC and r CS) and the bend angle (θ) between the
bonds, as deﬁned in ﬁgure 1, these are the controlling
factors in EI. The current work continues our investiga-
tion of the behaviour of triatomics in a laser ﬁeld; in the
current work, we return to the carbonyl sulﬁde (OCS)
molecule to resolve the ionization sequence. Our pre-

vious work [7] used momentum mapping and classical
enhanced ionization to resolve the bond lengths at ion-
ization for the 334 channel. We were able to show that
the diﬀerence between the bond length calculated using a
simplistic Coulomb assumption (the molecule is station-
ary before explosion) is within ten percent of the correct
bond length calculated using an iterative technique. Al-
though ionization channels have been identiﬁed in CO2
[4, 12, 13, 15], and the possibility of non-sequential ion-
ization taking place in order to reach the (111) channel
has been discussed [36] the transitions between the higher
channels have not been probed. By choosing the highly
asymmetric OCS molecule instead of CO2 we might ex-
pect to be able to ﬁnd the limits of applicability of the
classical ionization approach. Where possible our aim is
to clarify the role of transitions between channels through
the visualization of a hierarchical ionization topology.

The covariance mapping (CM) technique was used to
investigate laser-molecule interactions as early as 1989
[37], but it was 1994 before exhaustive investigations into
ionization in CO2 were published. Frasinski et al [12] em-
ployed the technique to identify ionization channels; the
observed channels were conﬁrmed by Cornaggia et al [13]
using a variant of the technique. Cornaggia performed
further experiments on polyatomic molecules using CM,
reporting a straightening of carbon dioxide in 130 fs laser
pulses [14]. Without implying any compromise in the
conclusions published by Cornaggia and co-workers, it
has since become apparent that the CM technique is not
ideally suited to investigating the geometry of explod-
ing triatomics, which requires unit collection eﬃciency
for all ions, irrespective of momentum. This situation
was addressed initially by Hishikawa and co-workers who
proposed the mass-resolved momentum imaging (MRMI)
technique [9, 10, 11]. An analogue to this technique, ion-
momentum imaging (IMI), was developed by the authors
and co-workers, and applied to the 3BCE of H2O [6], CO2
[4] and OCS [7] where laser-induced geometry modiﬁca-
tions were reported and compared to Monte Carlo sim-
ulations.
Importantly, the IMI technique also includes
an instrumental correction process [4, 6], that removes
the instrumental bias by quantifying the variation of de-
tector eﬃciency with ion species and momentum. W T
Hill and co-workers examined molecular distortion by iso-
lating 3BCE products from a speciﬁc channel and bend
angle, then making comparisons between the EI and the
Thomas-Fermi models [16]. This novel approach indi-
cates the Thomas-Fermi and EI schemes may be linked
via an eﬀective charge defect.

In this paper, dissociation and 2BCE are investigated
using two-dimensional covariance mapping (2DCM).
Measurements of the kinetic energy of the product ions is
reported. The 2DCM technique has previously been used
to investigate 3BCE of CO2 [4] and OCS [7], however,
given that OCS is comprised of three diﬀerent atomic
species, and that the charge-to-mass ratio of oxygen
and sulphur atoms is degenerate under certain ionization
states, three-dimensional covariance mapping (3DCM) of

3

the Coulomb explosion of OCS is necessarily employed
in the presented work. This allows unambiguous iden-
tiﬁcation of the ionisation channels and measurement of
their relative strengths. The kinetic energy release asso-
ciated with each of these channels is also reported, allow-
ing the OC and CS bonds to be measured. This paper
is organised as follows: the experimental conﬁguration
will be discussed in the following section, with details
of the data collection and processing. Results of 2DCM
experiments will then be presented, and details of the
observed OCS 2BCE channels introduced. The 3DCM
of OCS will then be presented, with particular discus-
sion concerning the application of modern visualisation
techniques, allowing new insights into the behaviour of
a triatomic during Coulomb explosion. Measurements of
the rOC and rCS bond lengths will then be presented for
each channel, along with an estimate of the relative chan-
nel strengths. At this point, the scheme of hierarchical
ionization topology will be introduced, and the 3DCM
results reinterpreted using a 3D diagrammatic technique
adapted from [32].

II. EXPERIMENTAL CONFIGURATION AND
DATA PROCESSING

As in previous experimental studies, the RAL (UK)
ASTRA laser facility generated the femtosecond laser
pulses, as detailed in previous publications [4, 6, 7, 8].
Ti: Sapphire seed pulses at 790 nm were ampliﬁed by
CPA [38] to a pulse energy of 1 mJ in 50 fs at a repeti-
tion rate of 10 Hz. An f/5 focus was then generated in the
source region of a Wiley-McLaren [39] time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometer (TOFMS), interacting the laser pulses with
the gas target. The background pressure in the TOFMS
system is ≃ 8 × 10−10 mbar. Product ions generated by
the interaction of the focused laser pulse with the target
gas were extracted from the source region, and detected
using a pair of micro-channel plates after 11 cm of ﬁeld-
free drift. Throughout the present work, the laser polar-
ization direction is parallel to the axis of the TOFMS.
Unlike previous IMI experiments, the detector is now ex-
posed to the full confocal volume and operated in high
eﬃciency mode, with an extraction ﬁeld of 600 Vcm−1.
The output of the TOFMS is monitored on a Tektronix
TDS-744A digital storage oscilloscope (DSO). Time-of-
ﬂight spectra were recorded on the DSO, and stored on a
laboratory PC for oﬀ-line analysis. The two- and three-
dimensional covariance coeﬃcients (C2(x , y) and C3(x ,
y, z ) respectively) were then evaluated for all n points for
each of the N TOF spectra. For deﬁnitions of C2(x , y)
and C3(x , y, z ), the reader is referred to reference [40],
which provide full discussions of the application of co-
variance mapping to molecular ionization. Depending on
the process under investigation, either C2(x , y) (2BCE)
or C3(x , y, z ) (3BCE) was evaluated for all n points on
the TOF spectrum, resulting in an n 2 matrix in the case
of C2(x , y), referred to as the two-dimensional covariance

TABLE I: Peak assignments for the average time- of-ﬂight
spectra presented in the present work

4

B / S5+

F

Ion Species
C3+
O3+
F
C2+ / O3+
S5+
B
F / S4+
B / S4+
S3+
F
S3+
B
C+
F / S2+
B / S2+

O2+
O2+

O+
O+
CO+

B

B

F

F

F /M/B
OCS2+
S+
F /B

Peak
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

FIG. 2: Two-dimensional covariance map of carbonyl sulﬁde
recorded with 790 nm 50 fs Ti: Sapphire laser pulses focused
−2. The regions of positive
to an intensity of ≃ 1016 Wcm
covariance are identiﬁed by the labelled average time-of-ﬂight
spectra, the peaks are identiﬁed in table 1. The features iden-
tiﬁed a - d are discussed in the text.

map (2DCM) and an n 3 matrix in the case of C3(x , y, z ),
similarly referred to as the three-dimensional covariance
map (3DCM). Throughout this paper, the axes x , y are
deﬁned as the time-of-ﬂight axes in the 2DCM, and x , y
and z are deﬁned as the time-of-ﬂight axes in the 3DCM.
To test the performance of the experimental appara-
tus with respect to false correlations [40], a series of two-
dimensional maps were recorded for the order of 3000
laser shots as a function of target gas pressure. At a
target gas pressure of 3 × 10−9 mbar, the contribution
of false correlations to the covariance map became neg-
ligible. Of the order of 105 individual TOF spectra were
recorded directly to hard disk.

III. RESULTS - 2BCE OF OCS

Figure 2 is a surface representation of the 2DCM of
OCS after 104 laser shots, under the optical conditions
discussed in the previous section. Correlations on the
map are identiﬁed by labeled average time-of-ﬂight spec-
tra to the left and below the map, where the peaks in the
ionization signal are identiﬁed in table I. As is apparent
from table I, peaks 3, 5, 6, 10 and 11 are the result of the
detection of two or more ions, either through charge de-
generacy (peaks 5, 6, 10 and 11) or temporal overlap. As
a consequence, the average time-of-ﬂight spectrum gives
a limited amount of information about the explosion of
the molecule. Note that both TOF axes are truncated

between peaks 11 and 12, as no ions are detected be-
tween t = 650 and 850 ns. The major features of ﬁgure 2
are as follows. The strong diagonal signal is the autocor-
relation line, a consequence of an event at x = y always
being self-correlated and therefore gives no information
about the processes under investigation. True correla-
tions lie above and below this line, false correlations as-
sociated with peak 13 (OCS2+) are unavoidable. The
double ionization of the molecular ion requires a lower
intensity as compared to the multiple ionization leading
to Coulomb explosion, hence the volume of the focus gen-
erating OCS2+ is approximately an order of magnitude
greater than that generating the Coulomb explosion sig-
nal [2].

Important features of ﬁgure 2 are highlighted a - d,
and are identiﬁed thus: (a) CO+ + S+, (b) CO+ + S2+,
(c) S3+ + O+ and (d) S3+ + O2+. Correlations (a) and
(b) identify the 2BCE channels (1, 1) and (1, 2) respec-
tively. The kinetic energy release (KER) associated with
these 2BCE processes, channels a and b, may be calcu-
lated from the temporal width in x and y of the cor-
relations, and are presented in table II. These channels,
(1,1) and (1,2) are expected in the 2DCM, as the OC
bond is considerably stronger than the CS bond, as ob-
served in recent dissociative photoionization experiments
performed by Eland and co-workers [41] and Brion and
co-workers [42], implying that early ionization and dis-
sociation favour energetically eﬃcient routes. Wang and
Vidal [43] have published cross sections for the electron
impact dissociative ionization of OCS, and reported the
CO+ + S+ channel has a cross section at least ﬁve times
that of any channel involving CS+. In the present work,
only a trace of CS+ is detected at a longer ﬂight time
than that presented in ﬁgure 2, however it is uncorre-
lated on an equivalent 2DCM, implying O+ + CS+ is
negligible, and the CS+ signal probably originates from
the very weak O + CS+ dissociative process.

Because of the charge degeneracy and temporal overlap

5

FIG. 3: Geometry of the autocorrelation planes present in a
three-dimensional covariance map

B / S2+

B ) and 10 (O+

present in much of the average time-of-ﬂight spectrum,
the dense area of the 2DCM containing the atomic prod-
uct ions where t ≤ 0.65 µs is diﬃcult to interpret. How-
ever, relying on the fact that peaks 7 and 8 are purely
due to S3+, correlations (c) and (d) can be employed to
make limited inferences about the molecular behaviour.
Correlations (c), peaks 7 (S3+
F ) and 11 (O+
B ) peaks
F / S2+
8 (S3+
F ) are forwards - backwards
pairs, formed by the ions being produced parallel to the
laser polarization direction. Similarly in correlation (d)
peaks 7 (S3+
B /S4+
B ) and 5
(O2+
F /S4+
F ) are forward backward pairs. As observed in
[7] the molecule favours exploding with the O - S axis
aligned to the laser ﬁeld, i.e. ϕ =0 in ﬁgure 1. All tri-
atomic molecules exposed to similar laser conditions have
been found to exhibit this forward-backward behaviour.
However other correlations are overlapping such as those
associated with peak 3 which represents C2+ as well as
O3+
b

B ) and peak 8 (S3+

F ) and 6 (O2+

and S5+
f .

IV. RESULTS - 3BCE OF OCS

To establish the 3BCE channels, we turn to the 3DCM
results. Due to the extra dimension introduced into the
calculations, the correlation islands on the 2DCM, ﬁgure
2, become correlation volumes in the 3DCM. True 3BCE
correlations appear as small volumes of positive covari-
ance within the map volume. Identifying the locations of
these correlations is complicated by the presence of three
autocorrelation (AC) planes, which traverse the map at
x = y, x = z and y = z . As with the AC line in a 2DCM,
volumes of the 3DCM located on the AC planes have a
stronger covariance than 3BCE correlations but are es-
sentially meaningless. The geometry of the AC planes is
illustrated in ﬁgure 3, and will be present in any 3DCM.
Research Systems IDL (Interactive Data Language)
5.5 was used to examine the OCS 3DCM, allowing us
to present, for the ﬁrst time, visualizations through the
body of the 3DCM. Previous studies [12, 13, 15, 40]
present two-dimensional slices through the body of the
3DCM, where a slice or plane parallel to the x -axis shows
all correlations in y and z . While being a reasonable man-

FIG. 4: Projection visualization of the OCS three-dimensional
covariance map. The range in (x , y, z ) corresponds to the re-
gion within the dashed box in ﬁgure 2. The peaks are identi-
ﬁed by comparison with table I. Three semitransparent planes
illustrate the location of the (2, 3, 4) channel.

ner in which to view a complex dataset, when viewed in
three-dimensions, the location of local maxima may be
identiﬁed more easily and accurately. A voxel (volume
element) projection of the 3DCM between 0 ≤ (x , y, z )
≤ 300 ns is presented in ﬁgure 4, corresponding to the
region in ﬁgure 2 between the origin and the dashed lines.
The full 3DCM was calculated up to t = 1 ms, but for
the purposes of presentation, only a limited subset of this
volume presented in ﬁgure 4.

The visualization presented in ﬁgure 4 is generated in
two steps. Firstly a transparency threshold, T is de-
ﬁned such that if C3(x , y, z ) ≤ T , the point (x , y, z )
is treated as transparent. If C3(x , y, z ) > T , the point
(x , y, z ) is assigned a variable opacity, where the opac-
ity depends logarithmically on C3(x , y, z ). Secondly a
three-dimensional transform is applied allowing arbitrary
rotation, translation and oblique display of the 3DCM
onto an image plane, in this case deﬁned as the plane
of the ﬁgure. Visualization in this manner is similar to
taking an x-ray of the dataset, with the covariance coef-
ﬁcient equivalent to density, thus dark regions of ﬁgure 3
correspond to volumes of high covariance. The position
of the AC planes in ﬁgure 4 may be identiﬁed through
a comparison with ﬁgure 3. The dark volumes between
the AC planes are true correlations, generated only by
3BCE channels, identiﬁed in part by average TOF spec-
tra displayed parallel to the x , y, z axes. The labels on

6

TABLE II: Kinetic energy release (KER) associated with all
2BCE and 3BCE channels as identiﬁed from the 2DCM and
3DCM. The rOC and rCS bond lengths are modeled using a
Monte Carlo method, and the channel strength is estimated
by integrating the covariance volumes.

Channel KER (eV)

rCS (˚A) Strength (arb.)

(1,1)
(1,2)
(1,1,1)a
(1,1,1)b
(1,1,2)
(1,2,2)
(1,2,3)
(2,2,2)
(1,2,4)
(2,2,3)
(2.3.2)
(1,3,4)
(2,2,4)
(2,3,3)
(2,3,4)
(3,2,4)
(3,3,4)
(3,3,5)

4.1
7.6
12.3
14.9
17.9
34
38.9
46.3
48.3
55.8
59.6
66
63
73
81
78
96
105

rOC (˚A)
-
-
2.5
2.0
2.6
2.3
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.6
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

2.9
3.2
3.5
3.0
3.7
3.5
3.9
3.8
4.1
4.0
4.2
4.2
4.3
4.1
4.5
4.4
4.9
5.2

0.5
0.2
0.7
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.0
1.5
1.0
3.0
2.5
1.0
4.0
4.0
5.0
2.0
4.0
2.0

corresponding to 3BCE channels. The primary beneﬁt
of 3D visualization is that by moving the viewpoint from
parallel to the x , y or z axes, an analogue to taking a
slice, to a point on the line x = y = z simpliﬁes the sys-
tem considerably. Furthermore, by examining volumes of
the map rather than slices, a more accurate identiﬁcation
may be carried out, eﬀectively removing the AC planes
from the dataset and thus making the volumes of interest
immediately accessible.

The KER associated with each of the correlations iden-
tiﬁed is calculated from the time diﬀerence between the
centre of the correlation volume and the zero kinetic en-
ergy point for each ion charge-to-mass ratio parallel to
the x , y, z axes. The total KER associated with each
correlation volume is presented in table II, along with
an estimate of the relative strength of the channel in the
range 0 to 5. The detected channel strength is gauged by
integrating the correlation volumes. Returning to iden-
tifying the correlations highlighted in ﬁgures 4 and 5, by
converting the KER (eV) to momentum, p (amu ms−1)
for all combinations of ion identities possible from table
I, a straightforward application of the conservation-of-
momentum parallel to the detector axis allows the cor-
rect bond length assignment to be made. An incorrect
assignment of the 3DCM correlation volume results in a
net momentum imbalance, whereas a correct assignment
leads to zero net momentum. This process is repeated
for each correlation volume in ﬁgures 4 and 5, and for all
possible ion assignments for a particular group of three
peaks, thus the 3BCE channels are unambiguously iden-
tiﬁed. The ﬁnal assignments are presented in table II.

In the case of a diatomic molecule Coulomb exploding,

Iso-surface visualization of

FIG. 5:
the OCS three-
dimensional covariance map, where the complication of the
dataset by the presence of the three autocorrelation planes
has been almost negated by viewing the map along the direc-
tion x = y = z . Again, the peaks are identiﬁed by comparison
with table I. The circled region corresponds to the three-body
correlation forming the (2, 3, 4) channel.

the average TOF spectra adhere to the peak assignments
in table I.

B / S4+

F / S4+

An example of a 3BCE correlation between peaks 1
(C3+), 5 (O2+
F ) and 6 (O2+
B ) is identiﬁed
in ﬁgure 4 by the intersection of three semi-transparent
planes superimposed in the 3DCM. This correlation
therefore represents the (2, 3, 4) channel, where the ion
order has been changed to agree with the (m, n, p)
convention discussed earlier. However, the KER asso-
ciated with this channel cannot be measured, as there
is uncertainty due to the charge-to-mass degeneracy as
to whether axes y and z represent O2+
F respec-
tively or vice versa: the solution of this problem will be
presented later in this section.

F and S4+

Figure 5 is an iso-surface representation of the 3DCM,
an iso-surface being the 3D equivalent of a contour in
2D. The image plane in ﬁgure 5 is deﬁned normal to the
line x = y = z , dramatically reducing the impact of the
AC planes, as each of the AC planes x = y, x = z and
y = z are normal to the image plane. A series of iso-
surfaces is used to examine the 3DCM, thus identifying
the 3BCE channels, where true correlations are identi-
ﬁed in the regions between the AC planes by adjusting
the iso-surface threshold. The C3(x , y, z ) volume is in-
vestigated by varying the surface threshold and noting
local maxima in the regions bounded by the AC planes,

it is trivial to estimate the bond length at the point of
explosion [25]. However, in the case of 3BCE of OCS,
which, as apparent from table II, is heavily predisposed
to charge-asymmetric Coulomb explosion, such a calcula-
tion is not straightforward. To address this, the following
technique was applied. The bend angle (θ) distribution
between rOC and rCS (see ﬁgure 1) for identical laser con-
ditions is known [7], and using the Monte-Carlo software
developed as part of our IMI technique [4, 6, 7], the 3BCE
of OCS is simulated in momentum space for a range of
geometries. The bond lengths reported in table II are
those in strongest agreement with the 3DCM presented
in ﬁgures 4 and 5, with rOC, rCS and θ bound by con-
servation of momentum. As discussed earlier these bond
lengths assume a coulomb explosion from a stationary
molecule. Although this is clearly not the case, previ-
ous work [7] suggests that even for the highest channels
the discrepancy is around 10% between this approxima-
tion and the correct bond length, and so rather than
embark on the iterative process set out previously [7]
we will begin our analysis with these approximate val-
ues. A number of general trends are observed in table
II: there is an overall increase in the KER with increas-
ing channel order, an observation common to Coulomb
explosion studies [4, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15], caused by the
higher Coulomb repulsion between the ionic constituents.
Furthermore, the rOC and rCS bonds are generally asym-
metric throughout, and tend to increase with channel
ionization, q = (m + n + p).
Importantly, two (1, 1,
1) channels are observed in the 3DCM, labeled (a) and
(b) in table II in order of increasing KER. There should
clearly be a dynamic coupling between the 3BCE chan-
nels presented in table II, however the tabulation of the
results is somewhat ambiguous.

V. DISCUSSION

To comprehend the possible pathways which the OCS
molecule can take during ionization we ﬁrst make the as-
sumption that the ionization channels which we observe
are the steps on an ionization ladder which ﬁnishes at
(335). To visualize this we have adapted the method of
[32] into a 3D hierarchical ionization topology. The gen-
eral hierarchical ionization (GHI) diagram for laser-OCS
interaction is presented in ﬁgure 6, where the ionization
channels presented in table II, identiﬁed from the 3DCM
presented in ﬁgures 4 and 5 are indicated as nodes on a
pyramidal framework. The least-charged (lowest order)
channel (1, 1, 1) is the node at the apex of the pyramid,
corresponding to a total charge, q = 3. Progression down
the pyramid from the apex between the subsequent tri-
angular grids indicates ionization through the loss of one
or more electrons. Each intersection on a particular tri-
angular grid uniquely represents a channel. Three classes
of node are introduced in ﬁgure 6: (1) each intersection
represents a numerically possible channel, (2) the open
circles represent an experimentally possible channel, and

7

FIG. 6: General hierarchical ionization (GHI) diagram for the
3BCE channels observed in the 3DCM as presented in table
II. Open circles represent numerically possible channels, solid
circles represent true 3BCE channels.

(3) the ﬁlled circles represent observed 3BCE channels.
The reﬁnement to these three classes of node makes the
distinction between whether an ion may be generated, is
observed in the average time-of-ﬂight spectrum or is ob-
served as a true 3BCE channel, following the application
of conservation of momentum as discussed earlier. The
key to the right of ﬁgure 6 indicates experimentally possi-
ble channels (regular type) and observed 3BCE channels
(bold underlined). For example, on the q = 9 level, 28
channels are numerically possible, illustrated by the large
basic grid. However, the necessary component ions are
only observed for six channels (indicated in the key), and
of these six, only two triply-correlated channels are ob-

8

The second observation is that both bond lengths in-
crease with charge state but in an oscillating fashion (see
shaded area ﬁgure) [7]. This increasing trend is similar
to that observed previously for CO2 [9]. In addition the
oscillation is accompanied by a set of channels somewhat
oﬀset from the others. Speciﬁcally, the group of 12 3BCE
channels, starting with (1, 1, 1)a and ﬁnishing at (3, 3,
5) contains the majority of channels, which are generated
at larger rOC and rCS locations. The channels (1, 1, 1)b
to (1, 3, 4), are generated at smaller rOC and rCS as com-
pared to the main group. The dashed diagonal line run-
ning from bottom left to top right serves as a visual guide,
separating the two regions of (rOC, rCS). For illustrative
purposes three solid lines link the ionization channels. At
this point we must be very careful about the conclusions
we draw. It is tempting to see the bond information, in
table II and in ﬁgure 7, as being indicative of those bond
lengths occupied during the steps in the ionization ladder
illustrated in ﬁgure 6, and this is exactly the procedure
carried out by [27, 31, 32], although the bond lengths are
calculation diﬀerently to here in [31, 32]. But it is im-
portant to realize that however accurate the bond length
measurement are, for a particular ionization channel say
(223), it does not mean that this ionization state uniquely
occurs at the measured bond lengths. A higher ionization
state, say (233), formed in a region of the focus of higher
peak laser intensity, might display the same bond lengths
because of enhanced ionization. In this case the molecule
could still have passed through the (223) state, but at
shorter bond lengths. This is best illustrated for OCS
by ﬁgure 8 in [7] which shows that although each chan-
nel may ionize last at the critical distance the precursors
to any given channel will ionize at shorter bond lengths.
These shorter bond lengths are not measurable with a
long laser pulse. This phenomenon is consistent with the
recent work using short (sub 7fs) laser pulses [18, 19]
which clearly shows ionization at bond lengths less than
the critical distance, if ionization is switched oﬀ rapidly
before the critical distance is reached. For pulses of 50fs
or longer, it is even possible that bond lengths measured
for say the (233) channel could be shorter than those
measured for the (223) channel but that the (223) state
is a precursor of the (233) channel. Two 2BCE channels
are also included in ﬁgure 7. It is assumed that the OC
bond has not expanded during 2BCE, thus 2BCE can be
thought of as starting from the equilibrium geometry (◦,
ﬁgure 7), then the CS bond expands while the OC bond
is constant, undergoing ionization to the (1, 1) or (1,2)
channels (△, ﬁgure 7). Furthermore the dissociation of
OCS into both (1,1) and (1,2) will be quite nonCoulom-
bic and so the approximate bond lengths given in ﬁgure
7 are expected to be an overestimate. It is even likely
that these channels dissociate from equilibrium.

Figure 7 makes a distinction between two regions in
(rOC, rCS) space.
In the case of the four channels to
the left of the dashed diagonal line, multiple ionization
only occurs from the carbon or sulphur sites. The charge
on the oxygen site remains 1, even though the carbon is

FIG. 7: The 3BCE channels identiﬁed from the 3DCM pre-
sented in (rOC, rCS) space, forming the second stage in hierar-
chical ionization topology. The two groups of 3BCE channels
observed are separated by a dashed line for clarity.

served in the 3DCM for this level. The vertical arrows in
ﬁgure 6 indicate the transfer between q-levels, the heads
of which reach the vertices of three-sided secondary pyra-
mids on the next q-level. At this point the overall charge
of the molecule is known, but the speciﬁc ionization chan-
nel is not. The ionization routes emanate from the vertex
of the secondary pyramid. In choosing one of the three
sides of this pyramid, the ionization channel is speciﬁed.
At this point, molecular ionization is treated as a single-
site sequential process. GHI is well illustrated by the
transition between the (2, 2, 3) channel on the q = 7
level and the (2, 2, 4) and (2, 3, 3) channels on the q =
8 level.

The most striking feature of ﬁgure 6 is the apparent
profusion of ionization routes through the GHI diagram.
We now turn to the second stage of hierarchical ionization
topology, and consider the inﬂuence of the geometry of
the exploding molecule as it develops through the GHI di-
agram. Figure 7 shows the result of plotting in (rOC, rCS)
space all of the ionization channels uniquely identiﬁed us-
ing 3DCM. The ﬁrst observation which is clear from ﬁg-
ure 7 is that the approximate bond lengths are not partic-
ularly constant as would be expected from an enhanced
ionization explanation, although on further inspection
they do form a group centered around extended bond
lengths of rCS=3.7au and rOC=2.7au which would cor-
respond 2.5 and 2.25 times the equilibrium bond lengths
which is similar to the factor of 2, observed for CO2 [4].

9

FIG. 9: Simulation of ionization to the right of dashed the
line in ﬁgure 7, using the modiﬁed enhanced ionization (EI)
model, described in the text. An analogous simulation of
channels to the left of the line was unsuccessful.

however, the processes implied are signiﬁcant. The three
3BCE asymmetric channels which are observed after the
(111)b channel are generated through two stages of dou-
ble ionization. Dashed lines in ﬁgure 8 indicate a double
ionization step. A pair of double ionization steps also
occur after the (111)a channel on route to (1,2,3) and
(2,2,2) from (1,1,2).

We now attempt to reproduce the results to the right
of the dashed line in ﬁgure 7 using the results of a series
of EI calculations. Unlike the previous calculations pre-
sented in [7], the current calculations allow both bonds
to expand independently, thus for each (m, n, p) channel
an appearance intensity surface is created in (rOC, rCS)
space. This large calculation is possible by only calculat-
ing the eﬀective Coulomb potential (Coulombic and laser
ﬁeld) along rOC and rCS, as it has been found that this
potential is minimized along these axes, hence EI will de-
pend only on these conditions. This simpliﬁcation only
applies for near linear molecules (in this case θ = 170
degrees) parallel to the laser polarization direction, rea-
sonable in this case given the observations of Sanderson
et al [7]. To best replicate the laser conditions responsible
for the observations of ﬁgure 7, a wide range of laser in-
tensities are modeled, as the laser intensity deﬁnes which
ionization channel occurs. Each channel occupies a re-
gion of (rOC, rCS) space, indicated by the shaded areas
in ﬁgure 9. As is apparent from comparison between ﬁg-
ures 7 and 9, there is reasonable agreement between the

FIG. 8: Reﬁned hierarchical ionization (RHI) diagram for the
3BCE channels observed in the 3DCM after simpliﬁcation
as described in the text. The solid arrows indicate single
ionization, the dashed arrows indicate double ionization.

observed to loose up to 2 more electrons and the sulphur
up to 3 more.
In contrast, the channels to the right
of the dashed line in ﬁgure 7 are observed to Coulomb
explode with levels of ionization loosely bound by the
ionization potentials of the constituent atoms. At this
point we tentatively proposed that the (111)b channel
and the asymmetric channels are associated and form a
diﬀerent ionization ladder to the channels to the right of
the line.

Figure 8 illustrates the reﬁned hierarchical ionization
(RHI) diagram for the laser-OCS interaction. Visually,
ﬁgure 8 appears simpler and better deﬁned in comparison
to ﬁgure 6 as there are fewer connections between nodes;

measured and predicted distribution in (rOC, rCS), espe-
cially given the number of ionization channels involved.
As a development of the original treatment of the
Coulomb explosion of diatomic molecules [25], the rea-
sonable agreement between the ﬁgures 7 and 9 is only
possible following two major modiﬁcations to the model.
Firstly, using the accepted ionization potentials of the
constituent atoms, the appearance intensity minimum in
(rOC, rCS) space (the critical geometry) is considerably
larger than equilibrium for low q channels, and moves
to lower rOC, rCS with increasing total charge q. So,
even before taking into account the laser pulse trajec-
tory [25], the trend observed in ﬁgure 7 cannot be repli-
cated within the unmodiﬁed EI model. By decreasing
the atomic ionization potentials with increasing charge,
the appearance intensity minimum is varied to give a
far better agreement with the present observations. The
best-ﬁt ionization potential I ′
p = k Ip where Ip is the
accepted ionization potential and k is the scaling param-
eter given by k = - 0.1(m, n) + 1 or k = - 0.05p + 0.95
depending on the channel (m, n, p). Secondly, calculat-
ing the laser trajectory as the molecule expands reveals
a dramatic underestimate of the bond extension for all
channels, for example, the unmodiﬁed model predicts the
(3,3,5) channel Coulomb explodes from rOC = 2.5 ˚A, rCS
= 3.0 ˚A. Careful investigation of the intersections be-
tween the appearance surfaces and the laser trajectories
over a wide intensity reveals the low q channels ionizing
with near equilibrium bonds, thus limiting the expansion
possible in the higher q channels. The behaviour of the
low q channels indicates that molecular expansion is not
purely Coulombic, a simple solution to the overestimate
of the interaction is to reduce the charge of the ions by
assigning fractional charges, adjusted to give a best ﬁt to
ﬁgure 7. It was found that the low q channels, i.e. (111),
required charge suppression ≈ 0.7, whereas the high q
channels, i.e. (335) needed no charge suppression, inter-
mediate channels exhibit a linear relationship between
these limits.

The modiﬁcations made to the enhanced ionization
model do have valid physical basis. Firstly the modiﬁca-
tions to q eﬀectively introduce a bonding aspect to the
low charge states and make them less Coulombic. This
deviation from pure Coulomb interaction for low charge
states is well known in such molecules as Cl2 [44] and
decreases with charge state. The small modiﬁcation to
the atomic IP’s can be related to the ionization potential
of the molecule, or the gap between the molecular inter-
action potentials. For low charge states the gap is larger
than it would be for purely Coulombic interactions be-
cause the bonding character of the potential, represented
by a dip below the Coulombic curve, reduces in magni-
tude as charge state increases. With these modiﬁcations
it is possible to represent the general features of the ma-
jority of the ionization channels, in a way which is self
consistent throughout and this is a signiﬁcant indication
of the overall validity of the enhanced ionization model.
However it is equally signiﬁcant that we can not repre-

10

sent all ﬁnal ionization channels with this approach. The
(111)b channel and the other channels to the left of the
dashed line in ﬁgure 7 can not be accommodated by this
treatment.

In an eﬀort to account for the remaining channels we
should begin by explaining the two distinct energy groups
for the (111) channel. Firstly it is sensible to consider
enhanced ionization as it has been reasonably successful
thus far. In the enhanced ionization picture bond expan-
sion towards the critical distance is require before CE
is complete. This would seem to imply the existence of
two critical distances for the (111) channel. Although a
secondary minimum was found in the ionization thresh-
old curve calculated for the (334) channel previously [7]
none was found for the (111) channel. Even if a double
structure does exist for an ionization threshold curve it
does not easily give rise to double valued bond lengths,
because if an ionization trajectory crosses the threshold
curve once, the molecule will ionize and there is no ad-
vantage to crossing more than once. A second possibil-
ity is the presence of two distinct energetic channels in
the break up of OCS3+, this might be more likely as we
observe stable OCS3+ in the time of light spectrum of
this molecule, a quite unusual observation for triatomic
molecules; it is not seen for CO2 or N2O for instance. It is
possible that a long lived metastable trication may com-
pletely dissociate after the laser pulse from equilibrium
geometry. The (111)b channel appears to have stretched
from equilibrium but this could be deceptive just as rCS
appears to have stretched in the (11) and (12) channel
this may just be the eﬀect of a non Coulombic dissocia-
tion channel. One problem with this possibility is that
(111)b appears to be precursor of the other channels such
a s (122) and this could not take place after the laser
pulse. A third possibility is that two distinctive dissoci-
ation channels in the OCS2+ molecule exist, which give
rise to diﬀerent degrees of atomic excitation. The more
highly excited molecule would ionize to the (111) channel
at a lower laser intensity, this phenomenon has been ob-
served for metastable argon ions [45]. A consequence of
this would be to shift the critical distance to lower bond
length, in fact two curves would exist for the two diﬀer-
ent molecular states with the same charge. It should be
notes that two distinct kinetic energy groups have been
observed for the S fragment in the CO+S dissociation
of OCS after 233nm absorption [46]. This phenomenon
could not be predicted from the simple classical mode,
as it would require two distinct sets of atomic ionization
potentials to exist. Excited molecules formed in high in-
tensity regions would reach the (111) channel earlier in
the laser pulse and this may be why asymmetric double
ionization is possible after the (111)b channel is formed,
as multi electronic asymmetric processes occur at bond
lengths closer to equilibrium than the critical distance
[32]. If asymmetric ionization is preferred at shorter bond
lengths then only the state which gives rise to the (111)b
channel can make the triply ionized molecule at suﬃ-
ciently small bond length to allow further asymmetric

11

multi-electronic processes to occur. The state which give
rise to the (111)a channel does not do so until after the
molecule has passed through this bond length range.

VI. CONCLUSION

The kinetic energy release during two- and three-body
Coulomb explosion of carbonyl sulﬁde has been mea-
sured using three-dimensional covariance mapping. For
the ﬁrst time in a triatomic molecule two distinct en-
ergy groups have been identiﬁed for the same dissociation
channel. A 3D hierarchical ionization topology has been
introduced to help visualize the multitude of possible ion-
ization pathways and a Classical trajectory simulation
using a simple over the barrier enhanced ionization model
has been used in an attempt to reproduce the observed
bond lengths. The distribution of most bond lengths are
reasonably predicted when small modiﬁcation to the en-
hanced ionization model are introduced. The presence of
the two (111) channels and highly asymmetric channels

however can not be modeled using the simple approach.
In conclusion, OCS has proven to be a useful subject
of study in the quest to understand the ionization mech-
anisms of small molecules in an intense laser pulse. The
results indicate the need to develop an enhanced ioniza-
tion model which incorporates molecular excitation and
the possibility of multi-electronic processes in order to
be able to fully predict the ionization process. In addi-
tion the need for further experimental study is indicated,
in order to better understand the interplay between the
ionization routes indicated by the current work, utiliza-
tion of sub 10 femtosecond pulses would enable prob-
ing within the critical distance and full coincidence tech-
niques would establish the link between geometry and
ionization pathway.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Engineering and Phys-

ical Sciences Research Council, and NSERC.

[1] S. Backus, C. G. D. III, M. M. Murnane, and H. C.

[16] K. Zhao, G. Zhang, and W. T. H. III, Phys. Rev. A 68,

Kapteyn, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 1207 (1998).

063408 (2003).

Phys. Lett. 61, 245 (2002).

[21] A. Hishikawa, H. Hasegawa, and K. Yamanouchi, Chem.

[2] A. El-Zein, P. McKenna, W. A. Bryan, I. M. G. Johnston,
T. R. J. Goodworth, J. H. Sanderson, I. D. Williams,
W. R. Newell, P. F. Taday, E. J. Divall, et al., Physica
Scripta T92, 119 (2001).

[3] M. A. Walker, P. Hansch, and L. D. V. Woerkom, Phys.

Rev. A 57, R701 (1998).

[4] W. A. Bryan, J. H. Sanderson, A. El-Zein, W. R. Newell,
P. F. Taday, and A. J. Langley, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 33, 745 (2000).

[5] A. Hishikawa, A. Hasegawa, and K. Yamanouchi, Chem.

[6] J. H. Sanderson, A. El-Zein, W. A. Bryan, W. R. Newell,
A. J. Langley, and P. F. Taday, Phys. Rev. A 59, R2567
(1999).

[7] J. H. Sanderson, T. R. J. Goodworth, A. El-Zein, W. A.
Bryan, W. R. Newell, A. J. Langley, and P. F. Taday,
Phys. Rev. A 65, 043403 (2002).

[8] J. H. Sanderson, R. V. Thomas, W. A. Bryan, W. R.
Newell, A. J. Langley, and P. F. Taday, J. Phys. B: At.
Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, L599 (1998).

[9] A. Hishikawa, A. Iwamae, and K. Yamanouchi, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 1127 (1999).

[10] A. Hishikawa, A. Iwamae, K. Hoshina, M. Kono, and
K. Yamanouchi, Chem. Phys. Lett. 282, 283 (1998).
[11] A. Hishikawa, A. Iwamae, and K. Yamanouchi, J. Chem.

[12] L. J. Frasinski, P. A. Hatherly, K. Codling, M. Larsson,
A. Persson, and C. G. Wahlstrom, J. Phys. B: At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 27, L109 (1994).

[17] H. Hasegawa, A. Hishikawa, and K. Yamanouchi, Chem.

Phys. Lett. 349, 57 (2001).

[18] F. L´egar´e, I. V. Litvinyuk, P. W. Dooley, F. Qu´er´e, A. D.
Bandrauk, D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91 (2003).

[19] F. L´egar´e, K. Lee, I. V. Litvinyuk, P. W. Dooley, A. D.
Bandrauk, D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 72, 052717 (2005).

[20] A. Hishikawa, M. Ueyama, and K. Yamanouchi, J. Chem.

Phys. 122, 151104 (2005).

Phys. Lett. 361, 245 (2002).

[22] M. Ueyama, H. Hasegawa, A. Hishikawa, and K. Ya-

manouchi, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 154305 (2005).

[23] T. Zuo and A. D. Bandrauk, Phys. Rev. A 52, 2511

(1995).

[24] T. Seideman, M. Y. Ivanov, and P. B. Corkum, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 75, 2819 (1995).

[25] J. H. Posthumus, A. J. Giles, M. R. Thompson, and
K. Codling, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 29, 5811
(1996).

[26] H. Kono, S. Koseki, M. Shiota, and Y. Fujimura, J. Phys.

[27] M. Brewczyk, K. Rzazewski, and C. W. Clark, Phys. Rev.

Chem. 105, 5627 (2001).

Lett. 78, 191 (1997).

Lett. 85, 2288 (2000).

[29] M. Lezius, V. Blanchet, M. Y. Ivanov, and A. Stolow, J.

Chem. Phys. 117, 1575 (2002).

Phys. 111, 8871 (1999).

[28] P. Hering, M. Brewczyk, and C. Cornaggia, Phys. Rev.

[13] C. Cornaggia, M. Schmidt, and D. Normand, J. Phys. B:

[30] I. Kawata, H. Kono, and A. D. Bandrauk, Phys. Rev. A

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 27, L123 (1994).

64, 043411 (2001).

[14] C. Cornaggia, Phys. Rev. A 54, R2555 (1996).
[15] P. Hering and C. Cornaggia, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2836

(1999).

[31] J. P. Nibarger, S. V. Menon, and G. N. Gibson, Phys.

Rev. A. 63, 053406 (2001).

[32] S. V. Menon, J. P. Nibarger, and G. N. Gibson, J. Phys.

Rev. A. 35, 2961 (2002).

[33] R. N. Coﬀee and G. N. Gibson, Phys. Rev. A. 72, 011401

[34] R. N. Coﬀee and G. N. Gibson, Phys. Rev. A. 69, 053407

Phys. 255, 353 (2000).

[35] L. Quaglia and C. Cornaggia, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4565

(2003).

(2005).

(2004).

(2000).

(2000).

246, 973 (1989).

(1985).

1150 (1955).

[36] C. Cornaggia and P. Hering, Phys. Rev. A. 62, 023403

[37] L. J. Frasinski, K. Codling, and P. A. Hatherly, Science

[38] D. Strickland and G. Mourou, Opt. Commun. 56, 219

[40] L. J. Frasinski, P. A. Hatherly, and K. Codling, Phys.

Lett. A 156, 227 (1991).

12

[41] S. Morse, M. Takahashi,

J. H. D. Eland,

and

L. Karlssong, Int. J. Mass. Spectrom. 184, 67 (1999).
[42] R. Feng, G. Cooper, Y. Sakai, and C. E. Brion, Chem.

[43] P. Wang and C. R. Vidal, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 5383

[44] J. S. Wright, G. A. DiLabio, D. R. Matusek, P. B.
Corkum, M. Y. Ivanov, C. Ellert, R. J. Buenker, A. B.
Alekseyev, and G. Hirsch, Phys. Rev. A. 59, 4512 (1991).
[45] J. B. Greenwood, I. M. G. Johnstone, P. McKenna, I. D.
Williams, T. R. J. Goodworth, J. H. Snaderson, W. A.
Bryan, A. E.-Z. adn W. R. Newell, A. J. Langley, and
E. J. Divall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 233001 (2002).

Chem. Phys. 109, 5778 (1998).

[39] W. C. Wiley and I. H. McLaren, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 26,

[46] T. Suzuki, H. Katayanagi, S. Nanbu, and M. Aoyagi, J.

