On search for nuclear Schiﬀ moment in liquid xenon

T.A. Isaev,∗ A.N. Petrov, and N.S. Mosyagin

Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, 188300, Russia

Chemistry Department, St.-Petersburg State University,

St.-Petersburg, 198504, Russia and

Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, 188300, Russia

A.V. Titov†

Abstract

A parameter of the P,T-odd Hamiltonian characterizing interaction of the nuclear Schiﬀ moment

with the gradient of electronic density on the Xe nucleus is calculated for an isolated Xe atom and

for liquid xenon. We use more realistic model of liquid medium than the spherical cell model

used in [B.Ravaine and A.Derevianko Phys. Rev. A 69, 050101(R)(2004)]. Qualitatively diﬀerent

results for enhancement of the P,T-odd eﬀect in liquid xenon are obtained when polarization of the

medium is taken into account. Thus, proper choice of the liquid phase model is crucially important

even for calculation of the properties dependent mostly on the electronic density near a nucleus.

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION.

Schiﬀ moment is a space parity (P) and time invariance (T) violating (P,T-odd) nuclear

moment that is expected to exist because of P,T-odd interactions between nucleons and/or

existence of uncompensated contribution from the permanent electric dipole moment (EDM)

of the unpaired nucleon, enhanced (or, in principle, suppressed) by nucleus core polarization

[1]. The conventional choice for experiments on search for the Schiﬀ moment up to the

present time has been heavy atoms or polar diatomic molecules containing a heavy atom

because of great enhancement of the P,T-odd eﬀects in such systems. Recently some new

approaches to search for the Schiﬀ moment were suggested. Their principal feature is using

more complex systems, particularly, solid state [2] and liquid xenon (LXe) [3, 4] have been

considered for the corresponding experiments. Though solids and liquids have a number of

advantages ﬁrst of all because of the higher statistical factor in comparison with that for the

atomic/molecular beam/cell experiments, reliable calculations of their electronic structure

(always required in the experiments for the interpretation of the data in terms of constants

of the P,T-violating weak interaction) are, certainly, substantially more complicated than for

the diatomic molecules. Even in a closed-shell Van der Waals system such as liquid xenon

the choice of the appropriate model for the medium is not trivial for the purpose of reliable

theoretical study. For example, in [5] the cell model of liquid xenon was used. In that model

the single Xe atom is conﬁned in the spherically symmetric cavity and a density-dependence

factor is introduced through variation of the cavity radius. Using the cell model could be

justiﬁed by the fact that LXe is non-polar liquid with the dielectric constant close to unity.

In [5] authors found that the eﬀect of P,T-violation is suppressed in their model for liquid

xenon on about 40% in comparison with an isolated (free) atom. However, the inﬂuence of

polarization of the medium on the P,T-odd property was not studied. The purpose of the

current work is calculation of the P,T-odd eﬀect caused by the Schiﬀ moment of the 129Xe

nucleus using more realistic models of LXe than the cell model and studying the contribution

from polarization of the medium on the P,T-odd property in liquid xenon.

2

METHODS AND APPROACHES.

Electronic structure calculations of the isolated Xe atom and liquid medium are carried

out using two-step method (see [6] and references therein), the most principal features of

which are:

1. A two-component electronic (pseudo)wave function is ﬁrst obtained in calculation with

the generalized relativistic eﬀective core potential (GRECP) for Xe with either 8 or

26 explicitly treated electrons, providing proper electronic density in the valence and

outer core regions.

2. The proper shape of the four-component molecular spinors in the inner core region

of the Xe atom is restored using the non-variational one-center restoration (NOCR)

scheme [7, 8, 9] followed by calculations of P,T-odd parameters essentially depending

on electronic density near the heavy nucleus.

In the present work, the ﬁnite ﬁeld method [10] is used for the required property calcu-

lations in the framework of the relativistic coupled cluster method with single and double

cluster amplitudes (RCC-SD) [11, 12]. The latter was chosen because it is known to work

well for the closed shell systems.

Generalized correlation-consistent (GC) spin-orbital atomic basis sets [13, 14] are used

in xenon electronic structure calculations. GC basis sets were specially optimized for cal-

culation of the “core-type” properties and, besides, were augmented with the polarization

d-function optimized with respect to the value of atomic polarizability αp. As a result, basis

set [4s,6p,4d,2f] was constructed for calculations with 8-electron GRECP and [5s,6p,4d,2f] for

26-electron GRECP. All molecular spinors are then restored as one-center expansions on the

129Xe nucleus. The nucleus is modelled as a uniform charge distribution within a sphere with

the radius rnucl = 6.2 fm ≡ 1.17 × 10−4 a.u. The gaussian expansion of basis sets and results

of atomic calculations can be found elsewhere (see http://qchem.pnpi.spb.ru/Basis/Xe).

To calculate the atomic polarizability and parameter of the P,T-odd Hamiltonian, X (see

Eq. (1)), we have applied electric ﬁeld created by four point electric charges located on z

axis. In order to reach suﬃcient homogeneity of electric ﬁeld at the xenon cluster the charges

{-80, 5, -5, 80} a.u. were located in points {-100, -50, 50, 100} (a.u., on z axis), thus electric

ﬁeld 0.012 a.u. was created at the coordinate source. Below we will use the atomic units

3

unless other is stated explicitly. Such electric ﬁeld is weak enough to neglect higher-order

terms in calculations of αp and parameter X, but suﬃciently strong to avoid problems with

numerical accuracy. The ﬁeld homogeneity and strength were checked in the atomic SCF

and RCC-SD calculations of αp with homogenous ﬁeld and X taking the ﬁeld 0.0012 (ten

times weaker than the originally used one).

The parameter X of the P,T-odd Hamiltonian [9] was calculated for the Xe atom in the

presence of electric ﬁeld:

X =

2π
3 (cid:20)

∂
∂z

ρψ(~r)

,

(cid:21)x,y,z=0

(1)

where ρψ(~r) is the electronic density calculated from the wave function ψ. Such form of

X is derived from contact form of the P,T-odd interaction of the Schiﬀ moment with the

electronic density.

In [1] more sophisticated form of P,T-odd interaction was suggested,

where the “ﬁnite-volume” Schiﬀ moment potential is used. In the atomic Xe calculations

it was found that the “ﬁnite-volume” form of Schiﬀ interaction does not lead to noticeable

changes in the results of the P,T-odd properties calculation in comparison with the contact

one [15]. Connection of the parameter X with the parameters typically evaluated in atomic

calculations of the EDM induced by the Schiﬀ moment can be derived following [16]:

X =

S · n
De · E ,

1
6

where S is the Schiﬀ moment of 129Xe nucleus, n is a unit vector along the molecular axis
(which in our case coincides with the direction of external electric ﬁeld), De is the atomic
EDM induced by the nucleus Schiﬀ moment, E is an external electric ﬁeld applied to the

Xe atom.

Atomic calculation. To analyze the diﬀerent correlation contribution we have performed

calculations of X and αp for an isolated Xe atom with the diﬀerent numbers of correlated

electrons and the level of correlation treatment. The results are summarized in Table I. Spin-

averaged GRECP (AGREP) was used in SCF calculations, while the spin-orbit GRECP

component was also included in RCC-S and RCC-SD calculations. The diﬀerence between

26-electron GRECP/RCC-S (which is roughly analogous to SCF calculation accounting for

the spin-orbit (SO) interaction in the closed-shell case) and all-electron DHF results is

within 10%, which can be connected with the incompleteness of basis sets and polarization

contributions from inner shells. As the main purpose of the current work is not calculating

the P,T-odd eﬀects with very high precision but rather investigating the inﬂuence of the

4

TABLE I: Calculated parameter X and scalar polarizability αp for the 129Xe single atom, compared

with values from [16]. Relativistic coupled cluster methods with single (RCC-S) and single and

double cluster amplitudes (RCC-SD) are used with 8- and 26-electron Xe GRECPs. All values are

in a.u.

8 electrons

26 electrons

All-electrona

AGREP/SCF GRECP/RCC-SD AGREP/SCF GRECP/RCC-S GRECP/RCC-SD DHF TDHF Experimental

X

αp

238

26.7

213

186

26.6

176

26.6

173

27.2

165

213

26.9

27.0

27.16b 27.815c

a Four component atomic calculations by Dirac-Hartree-Fock method (DHF) and time-dependent DHF (TDHF).
b Reference [17].
c Reference [18].

liquid medium on the P,T-odd eﬀect(s) we use 8-electron GRECP in subsequent calculations

to reduce computational expenses. It is seen from Table I that contribution to the X value

from the SO eﬀects is only about 5%, thus we are not calculating further RCC-S values

separately and rather going from AGREP/SCF right to GRECP/RCC-SD values accounting

for both correlation and SO-eﬀects. Note, however, that contribution of the SO interaction

taken into account at the GRECP/RCC-SD or GRECP/RCC-S calculation (for the “outer

parts” of explicitly treated shells) is diﬀerent from the SO contributions taken into account

at the AGREP/SCF stage (for the inner shells excluded from the GRECP calculations since

they were treated as SO-split atomic spinors at the GRECP generation) and at the NOCR

stage (for the “inner parts” of the shells explicitly treated within GRECP calculations).

Liquid xenon model.

In liquid xenon calculations we used the simple cubic crystalline

lattice (see Fig. 1). It is known (e.g., see [19]), that the decrease of the density in liquid

xenon as compared to the solid state phase is mainly due to decreasing the average number

of the neighboring atoms (i.e. introducing vacancies) according to the ratio ρliq/ρsol, where

ρliq (ρsol) is the density of liquid (solid) xenon. On the other hand, at atmospheric pressure

ρliq/ρsol≈0.83, thus, the lattice model can be used for the liquid phase description without

introducing principal error. Though in solid xenon the crystalline lattice is the face-centered

cubic one (FCC), there are some reasons to use simple cubic (SC) lattice model. In such

lattice the number of neighboring atoms is reduced twice in comparison with the FCC lattice,

nevertheless, the minimal number of the atoms which required for adequate analysis of the

5

eﬀects of the liquid medium is kept. As it will be seen from the further discussion, the atoms

which are in the plane perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld and going through the central Xe

atom practically do not inﬂuence the value of X. Thus, on the one hand, high-symmetry

SC lattice allows us to analyze the eﬀect of the liquid medium with minimal computational

eﬀorts — the only six neigbours reproduce the volume eﬀect reasonably well whereas the

number of explicitly treated electrons is reduced almost twice, and, on the other hand, it

reﬂects the most principal features of the liquid medium. Besides, high symmetry of the

SC lattice simpliﬁes the analysis of diﬀerent density- and polarization-dependence eﬀects

keeping reasonable computational expenses within the C2v symmetry implemented in the

code used by us. Electric ﬁeld modelled by four point charges described in section “Methods

and approaches” was applied to the cluster of seven xenon atoms. We used two geometries of

relative arrangement of the Xe atoms and electric ﬁeld, both geometries are shown on Fig. 1.

The other geometries were not considered because they have the symmetry which is not

implemented in our codes or require to use lower symmetry that leads to high computational

expenses. Blue color means that all explicitly taken eight electrons of the given Xe atom were

frozen by the level-shift technique [20] after the atomic spin-free AGREP/SCF calculations,

while red color means involving all eight electrons to SCF and RCC procedure. Two series
of calculations were performed denoted below as I and II. In series I all electrons of all

atoms but the central Xe atom were frozen after the atomic AGREP/SCF calculations (Fig.
1) In series II electrons in the 1st geometry were frozen only for atoms which are not on

axis z (Fig. 2). The interatomic distance Rl in the lattice cell (lattice constant) was changed

from 6.0 a.u. to 20 a.u. The value of Rl = 6.6 corresponds to the elementary lattice cell of

the same volume that was taken in [5] for the spherical cell. The more realistic value for

the equilibrium lattice constant Rl is connected with the parameters of the FCC lattice for

the solid xenon density (in this case the distance between the closest neighbors in the FCC

lattice is Rl−F CC = 8.6). As explaned above, we, however, use the model of simple cubic
lattice with Rl = n−1/3 = 8.0, where n is the density of liquid xenon (for the solid xenon

density the corresponding constant would be Rl = 7.5). In any case, as we will see further,

the reasonable choice of such or another Rl is not principal for our conclusions.

6

FIG. 1: Series I lattice cell geometry and electric ﬁeld. In the 1st geometry electric ﬁeld E0 is

directed along z axis. In the 2nd geometry electric ﬁled E45 is directed under 45o to z axis.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Series I: The results of AGREP/SCF and GRECP/RCC-SD calculations are presented

on Fig. 3. Qualitative agreement with the results of [5] is seen from that picture, though the

suppression of P,T-odd eﬀect in liquid phase is only about 20%, in contrast to 40% obtained

in [5]. An interesting peculiarity which is seen on Fig. 3 is the increase of the X value when

Rl ≤ 7.5. The natural reason for such behavior can be the increase of the amplitude of the

wavefunction on the Xe nucleus due to compression of the tail of the electronic density in

the valence region. For Rl > 7.5 the wavefunction amplitude increasing on the nucleus is

less important than eﬀect of suppression of the polarizability of the Xe atom in the “frozen”

medium. Actually, the same is observed in the spherical cavity model (where polarizability

of the valence shells is suppressed even stronger) that results in decreasing the value of the

P,T-odd eﬀect. We have seen very weak dependance (within 1 %) of X value from either 1st

or 2nd geometry used. In further calculations we used only the 1st geometry, such choice
for series II is explained below.

Series II: The results of AGREP/SCF and GRECP/RCC-SD calculations are pre-

sented on Fig. 4. The test calculations were performed ﬁrst with Rl = 7.5 to estimate in-

7

FIG. 2: Series II lattice cell geometry and electric ﬁeld.

ﬂuence of the neighboring atoms. It turned out that accounting for polarization/correlation

eﬀects for the atoms which are not on z axis (that is directed along the electric ﬁeld) prac-

tically does not change the value of X, that looks rather natural. Thus, in subsequent

calculations we accounted only for polarization/correlation of the electrons belonging to the

atoms on z axis. Reduced GC basis sets described in section “Methods and approaches”

were used — on the central Xe atom GC basis was [4s,6p,4d] and on two neighbor atoms ba-

sis sets were reduced to [4s,6p]. Though, formally, {s, p} basis set is not good for description

of polarizaton/correlation eﬀects on the atom, functions from the other atom are partially

capable to account for those eﬀects.

One can see that accounting for polarization of the neighboring atoms leads to crucial

change in the enhancement of the Schiﬀ moment in liquid xenon. The P,T-odd eﬀect is

practically not suppressed but rather enhanced in liquid xenon.

The physical reason for such behavior is interference of the polarization of the liquid

medium and the density-dependence eﬀects (compression of the electronic density in the

valence region). The following basic interpretations are the most reasonable to consider for

the polarization contribution:

1. the tails of electronic density from neighboring atoms penetrate to the inner core of the

8

FIG. 3: Series I X value as a function of the lattice cell size. XSCF curve corresponds to

AGREP/SCF result, XRCC−SD stands for GRECP/RCC-SD results. Vertical lines are the func-

tions Rl = 7.5 and Rl = 8.0, see section “Methods and approaches”.

central Xe atom. Due to polarization eﬀects the contributions to the gradient of the

electronic density on the central Xe nucleus (which X is proportional to, see Eq. (1))

from neighbors do not compensate each other;

2. own electronic shells of the central Xe atom interact with the outermost electronic

shells of neighboring atoms, thus aﬀecting the X value. As outer shells of neighboring

atoms are polarized in the electric ﬁeld, their polarization inﬂuences the polarization

of the outer shells of the central Xe atom. Also, the amplitude of the electronic wave-

function could be increasing at the 129Xe nucleus due to compression of the electron

wavefunction tails in the valence region whereas the polarization of the isolated atom

and the atom in liquid medium could be comparable. Such an eﬀect of the “volume

compression” would manifest itself in 1/R3

l – like dependance of the X value from Rl
(with Rl for which outermost shells of the neibour Xe atoms start to overlap) on

9

FIG. 4: Series I and II AGREP/SCF X values as a function of the cell size. Vertical lines are

the functions Rl = 7.5 and Rl = 8.0, see section “Methods and approaches”.

10

Fig. 4, but, as our analysis show, the dependance X(Rl), (9.0 < Rl < 10), is linear.

Nevertheless, some combination of the above eﬀects is rather taking place.

Though the above discussed eﬀects are undistinguishable physically (at least for the case of

the xenon cluster), from computational point of view they are treated as diﬀerent ones. The

spherical cell model in [5] does not account for the above eﬀects properly.

To clarify the situation we carried out two series of calculations.

In the ﬁrst one we

placed three Xe atoms on z axis and the distance between the Xe nuclei was chosen to be

7.5. The electrons of the central atom were frozen, while the electrons of its two neighbors

were allowed to relax (polarize) in the external electric ﬁeld, which strength was 0.012. Thus,

the only contribution to X came from the electronic density from the neighboring atoms,

as frozen atomic shells of the central atom had deﬁnite parity. We obtained X = 1.4. On

the other hand, the contribution from every neighbor was about Xs ≈ ±24) (sign depends

on relative position with respect to the central atom), thus the great compensation of the

contributions from the neighboring atoms takes place. In the second series we performed
calculation of X value almost in the same geometry as in series I. Electrons of neighboring

atoms were frozen, while in the central atom eight electrons were correlated. Then the

central atom was shifted with respect to the coordinate source on the value ∆z, see Fig. 5
(picture S).

As one can see from Fig. 5 such geometry simulates polarization of the shells of the

neighbor atoms with electric ﬁeld. The obtained dependance of the X value from ∆Z is
given on Fig. 6. To get X as large as in series II one has to take ∆Z ≈ −0.15. Taking

into account atomic Xe polarizability αp (see Table I) one can estimate that ∆Z ≈ −0.15

is compatible with possible value for the shift of the center of charge density of outer p-

electrons in the ﬁeld 0.012. Thus dramatic change of the X value in the lattice model in

comparison with the cell model can be rather attributed to the eﬀect of rearrangement of

electronic density of the liquid medium.

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the RFBR grant 06–03–33060. T.I. and

A.P. are grateful for the grant of Russian Science Support Foundation. A.P. is also supported

by grant of Gubernator of Leningrad district.

11

FIG. 5: Simulation of the inﬂuence of electric ﬁled through lattice geometry. Only atoms on z axis

are plotted. Red color designates the nuclei of the central Xe atom (its shells explicitly treated

in the calculations are not shown here), outer shells of the neighboring atoms are half-transparent

blue, inner shells and nuclei are blue. On picture A atoms are without electric ﬁeld, when center of

charge of the outer electronic density coincides with that of the inner shells and nuclei. On picture

B in the electric ﬁeld (designated E) the centers of charge of the outer shells are shifted in respect

to inner part. On picture C outer shells electronic density of the neighboring atoms is shifted so

as to superpose their charge center to those of neighboring atoms but keep the relative position to

the central Xe atom the same as in case R.

∗ Electronic address: timisaev@pnpi.spb.ru

† Electronic address: titov@AT1770.spb.edu

[1] J. S. M. Ginges and V. V. Flambaum, Phys. Rep. 397, 63 (2004).

[2] T. N. Mukhamedjanov and O. P. Sushkov, A suggested search for 207Pb nuclear Schiﬀ moment

in PbTiO3 ferroelectric (2004), arXiv:physics/0411226.

[3] M. V. Romalis and M. P. Ledbetter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 067601 (2001).

[4] I. I. Sobel’man and V. N. Sorokin, Physics – Uspekhi 48(9), 939 (2005).

12

260

250

240

230

220

210

200

190

180

170

.
u
.
a

,

X

160

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

-0.05
∆Z, a.u.

FIG. 6: AGREP/SCF X value as a function of the shift of the central atom.

[5] B. Ravaine and A. Derevianko, Phys. Rev. A 69, 050101(R) (2004).

[6] A. V. Titov, N. S. Mosyagin, A. N. Petrov, T. A. Isaev, and D. P. DeMille, Progr. Theor.

Chem. Phys. B 15, 253 (2006).

[7] A. V. Titov, PhD Thesis, (St.-Petersburg State University, Russia, 1985).

[8] A. V. Titov, N. S. Mosyagin, and V. F. Ezhov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77(27), 5346 (1996).

[9] A. N. Petrov, N. S. Mosyagin, T. A. Isaev, A. V. Titov, V. F. Ezhov, E. Eliav, and U. Kaldor,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(7), 073001 (2002).

[10] D. Kunik and U. Kaldor, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 4127 (1971).

[11] E. Eliav and U. Kaldor, Chem. Phys. Lett. 248, 405 (1996).

[12] U. Kaldor, E. Eliav, and A. Landau, in Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory. Part 2.

13

Applications, edited by P. Schwerdtfeger (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2004), p. 81.

[13] N. S. Mosyagin, E. Eliav, A. V. Titov, and U. Kaldor, J. Phys. B 33(4), 667 (2000).

[14] T. A. Isaev, N. S. Mosyagin, M. G. Kozlov, A. V. Titov, E. Eliav, and U. Kaldor, J. Phys. B

33(22), 5139 (2000).

[15] V. Dzuba (2006), private communication.

[16] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, J. S. M. Ginges, and M. G. Kozlov, Phys. Rev. A 66, 012111

(2002).

[17] A. Kumar and W. J. Meath, Can. J. Chem. 63, 1616 (1985).

[18] U. Hohm and K. Kerl, Mol. Phys. 69, 803 (1990).

[19] P. Stampﬂi and K. H. Bennemann, Phys. Rev. A 44(12), 8210 (1991).

[20] V. Bonifacic and S. Huzinaga, J. Chem. Phys. 60(7), 2779 (1974).

14

