7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Microstructure of neat alcohols

1

Aur´elien Perera1 , Franjo Sokoli´c2 and Larisa Zorani´c1
Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique de la Matire Condens´ee (UMR CNRS 1600),
Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, 4 Place Jussieu, F75252, Paris cedex 05, France.
Laboratoire de Spectrochimie Infrarouge et Raman (UMR CNRS 8516),
Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches Lasers et Applications,
Universit´edes Sciences et Technologies de Lille, F59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex, France.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

2

Formation of microstructure in homogeneous associated liquids is analysed through the density-
density pair correlation functions, both in direct and reciprocal space, as well as an eﬀective local
one-body density function. This is illustrated through a molecular dynamics study of two neat
alcohols, namely methanol and tert-butanol, which have a rich microstructure: chain-like molecular
association for the former and micelle-like for the latter. The relation to hydrogen bonding inter-
action is demonstrated. The apparent failure to ﬁnd microstructure in water -a stronger hydrogen
bonding liquid- with the same tools, is discussed.

Liquids are generally thought as macroscopically ho-
mogeneous when they are considered far from phase
transitions and interfacial regions. From a statistical
mechanical point of view, homogeneity is expressed by
the fact that the order parameter, in this case the one
body density, which formally depends on both the po-
sition and orientation of a single particle 1 (as in a
crystal or a liquid crystal, for example), is a constant
throughout the sample: ρ(1)(1) = ρ = N/V , where N
is the number of particles per volume V. As a conse-
quence, the microscopic description of the structure of
a neat liquid starts from the two-body density function
ρ(2)(1, 2) = ρ(1)(1)ρ(1)(2)g(1, 2) that expresses the den-
sity correlations between particles 1 and 2, and reduces
in this case to ρ2g(1, 2) , where g(1, 2) is the pair distri-
bution function. Associated liquids, such as water and
alcohols, for example, belong to a special class because
of the particularity of the hydrogen bonding (HB) that
is highly directional, and tend to enhance the structure
the liquid locally. One particularly interesting example
of this phenomena is the microheterogeneous nature of
aqueous mixtures, which has attracted a recent upsurge
of interest [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Perhaps the most remarkable reported fact is that water-
methanol mixtures show local immiscibility at micro-
scopic level, while being miscible at macroscopic level[1,
2]. In order to appreciate this result it is interesting to
compare it to microemulsions where bicontinuous phases
are usually observed, and micro-immiscibility operates
with domain sizes ranging from 100 nanometers to few
micrometers, while those mentioned here are around few
In
nanometers-that is about few molecular diameters.
addition, it is important to note that bicontinuous phases
in microemulsions arise after a phase transition has oc-
curred from disordered to ordered phase; while in the for-
mer case, we are still in a genuinely homogeneous and dis-
ordered liquid phase. From these facts, microheterogene-
ity in aqueous mixtures can be considered as both obvious
and mysterious, obvious because the mechanism behind

it is the strong directionality of the hydrogen bonding,
and mysterious because of the existence of stable micro-
immiscibility of water and solute in a macroscopically
homogeneous sample.
In contrast to the situation for
mixtures, neat water do not seem to exhibit any micro
phase separation between 2 types of water -tetrahedraly
ordered and disordered local regions [8] Such a liquid-
liquid phase coexistence is recurrent theme in the study
of water [9, 10], despite the fact that neither experimen-
tal results nor computer simulations have conﬁrmed the
validity of this idea. Neat water seems to behave more
like a random network [11], with no apparent particular-
ity in its local distribution, in average.
In this report, we show by simulations that weak hydro-
gen bonding liquids, such as alcohols, have a rich mi-
crostructure, that the stronger hydrogen bonding water
do not seem to possess. It is found herein that neat alco-
hols are microheterogeneous, since they tend to develop
distinct local microstructures, which depend on the ge-
ometry of the constitutive molecule. Namely, chains-like
structures for methanol(CH3OH) (MetOH) and micelle-
like structure for tert butanol((CH3)3COH) (TBA). The
ﬁrst type of structure has been studied previously by
It
many authors and by various techniques[4, 12, 13].
is often a matter of debate as to know in which exact
form these chain-like structures appear, such as rings,
lassos and so on. In this work, we would like to point out
that the exact topology of the forms is not so much rele-
vant, since their enumeration is biased by the theoretical
description that is needed to spot them out. Rather, the
characterisation of the microstructure by experimentally
measurable quantities is the most relevant feature. Our
observables are the two major static quantities related
to the structure mentioned above, namely an eﬀective
one body function, as a local order parameter, and the
angle averaged pair correlation function g(r), or equiva-
lently the structure factor S(k) which is the Fourier trans-
form of g(r). The latter two functions are unambiguous
statistical quantities since they are directly measured by

n

neutron or X-ray scattering experiments, or like in here
calculated by Molecular Dynamics simulations. Since
the one body function is just the number density of the
system, a constant, we will here use a cluster counting
method in order to describe the degree of local hetero-
geneity in a statistically meaningful way. For a given
instantaneous conﬁguration c, the cluster of size n is de-
ﬁned by counting all particles that are paired within a
given distance lc. This is the deﬁnition of the Stillinger
cluster [14]. In this way, we have an instantaneous pic-
ture of the spatial distribution of the one body density.
By averaging over several such conﬁgurations the number
s(n, c) of clusters of size n, we acquire a statistical pic-
ture through the probability of having a cluster of size n:
pn = Pc s(c, n)/ Pn Pc s(c, n). One can compute sim-
ilarly a more precise quantity which is the probability
p(XY )
of having a clustering of some speciﬁc sites X and
n
Y on a molecule, and this is the quantity that we will con-
sider here as our local order parameter. By contrast to
g(r) or S(k), pn and p(XY )
have some degree of arbitrari-
ness through the choice of lc. Despite this shortcoming,
it turns out that both type of quantities coherently point
to the same microstructure of neat alcohol.
Two models of MetOH are studied, the OPLS model [15]
and the more recent WS model [6], and for TBA the
OPLS model [15]. Both MetOH models have 3 sites,
one for O, H, and one for the methyl group M = CH3.
Each site has a diameter and a partial charge, and the in-
teraction between 2 molecules is described as the sum of
the Lennard-Jones and Coulomb interactions between all
pairs of sites. Similarly, the TBA model is a six site model
(O, H, C, M1−3). All the force ﬁelds used herein are clas-
sical atom-atom force ﬁelds, and thus the hydrogen bond-
ing (HB) is essentially electrostatic in nature. All sim-
ulations were performed in the constant NPT ensemble,
with the Berendsen thermostat and barostat to ensure
a temperature of 300K and a pressure of 1 atm, with a
number of particles of N=2048. Rather than the radial
distribution function (RDF) between the center of masses
of the molecules, we prefer to use the site-site correlation
functions ga1b2 (r) between the sites a on molecule 1 and
site b on molecule 2 which account better for the angular
dependence of the correlations, as well as the associated
structure factors Sa1b2 (k) = 1+ρ R d~r exp(−i~k.~r)ga1b2 (r).
Fig.1a shows some site-site RDFs for both MetOH mod-
els. The methyl-methyl correlations has the oscillatory
structure typical of a Lennard-Jones (LJ) type liquid. In
contrast, the correlations involving the hydrogen bond-
ing sites O and H display a striking lack of structure at
long range, after the ﬁrst peak that is associated with
the HB tendency. We note that both models seem very
close in describing structural features. Fig.1b shows the
site-site structure factors corresponding to the functions
in Fig.1a. Again, SMM (k) look typical of a LJ dense
liquid, with a main peak around km = 2π/σm, where

2

FIG. 1: (color online) Density correlations for neat methanol
(a) site-site g(r); full (OPLS), dashed (WS) (b) corresponding
site-site structure factors (pre-peaks shown by arrow)

σm is the eﬀective diameter of the methanol molecule,
about σm ≈ 4.2˚A for both models. The most important
feature in the structure factors involving the hydrogen
bonding atoms, is the presence of a pre-peak at k-vector
kp ≈ 1˚A−1 smaller than km, which corresponds to a dis-
tance about rp ≈ 6˚A. This inner-peak is found in many
reported experimental structure factors [12, 13]. It is an
unmistakable trace of the microstructure of the neat liq-
uid due to hydrogen bonding.
Indeed, while hydrogen
bonding corresponds to a distance in the site-site RDF
smaller than σm-i.e.- the position of the ﬁrst peak in
gHH (r) or gOO(r), and therefore should correspond to a
larger k-vector value, the smaller kp value corresponds
to a larger structure: the clusters formed by methanol
molecules through the HB interactions. Can we recoup
this interpretation with the information from the order
parameter, -i.e.- the cluster probability? Fig.2a shows
p(XX)
, the probability of clustering between similar sites
n
X, as a function of the cluster size, for the OPLS MetOH
model. The inset shows the typical behaviour of p(MM)
: there is a larger probability of ﬁnding smaller clus-
ters, starting from monomers, which decreases rapidly
since larger clusters are less probable. This situation is
the same both for the methyl groups and the hydrogen
bonding sites. All of this is in accordance with the intu-
itive idea of clustering in a liquid. A notable feature is
the robustness of the general shape of p(XX)
as a func-
tion of the distance lc that spans the well of the ﬁrst
minimum of gXX (r). Such plots have been shown in
previous studies by other authors. However, the main
plot shows something that has apparently not been no-
ticed before: the small oxygen-oxygen cluster size dis-
tribution p(OO)
shows a small bump around n ≈ 5 that
n
is not seen in p(MM)
. It indicates that about 5 oxygen
atoms cluster preferentially, through the HB mechanism,

n

n

n

3

2

1

0

0

2

4

6

FIG. 2: (color online) Cluster size probabilities for diﬀerent
sites (Oxygen and Methyl-group(insets)) and diﬀerent cutoﬀ
values l indicated in the plots; (a) Methanol (OPLS) ; (b)
tertbutanol

FIG. 3:
for neat
(color online) Density correlations
tertbutanol (a) site-site g(r) (b) corresponding site-site struc-
ture factors. The inset shows the same data for uncharged
sites

thus interlinking the MetOH molecules, and in accord
with the experimentally well known fact that methanol
molecules tend to form chains with rich topology (open
chains, rings, lassos)[3, 4]. The absence of any bump in
p(MM)
is an indication of the topology of MetOH asso-
n
ciation: the connected oxygen and hydrogen atoms form
the backbone of the chain, while the methyl groups are
randomly distributed around it. The fact that monomer
probability is higher than that for clusters corresponding
to the bump indicates that the chain formation in liq-
uid methanol is a weak feature. Returning to the RDFs
in Fig.1a, we now understand why methyl groups look
packed as in a monoatomic liquid, while the absence of
correlation at the large distance between hydrogen bond-
ing sites is reminiscent of RDF between monomers in
polymeric ﬂuids [16], and thus indicates chain formation
between H-bonding sites.

Turning to tert butanol, Fig.3a shows the RDFs be-
tween some particular sites. All RDFs have a strong
ﬁrst peak due to the hydrogen bonding, but the oscilla-
tory structure behind is diﬀerent between H-bonding and
non-H-bonding sites: the latter have a period about the
average size of the molecule (≈ 5.6˚A) while the former
have a larger period of about 7.5˚A. This second period
expresses the modulation over the sphere-like suprastruc-
ture formed by the micelle-type clustering of the TBA
molecules. Fig.3b shows the corresponding S(k). Again,
it is clear that while the non-hydrogen bonding sites have
an S(k) typical of an atomic liquid with σm ≈ 5.7˚A, the
other RDF show a pronounced pre-peak at kp ≈ 0.8˚A−1
that corresponds to a lengthscale of rp ≈ 7.5˚A. In order
to conﬁrm that this pre-peak is entirely due to the lo-
cal organisation coming from the hydrogen bonding ten-
dencies between molecules, we have simulated the TBA

molecules without the partial charges, under the same
pressure and temperature. The corresponding S(k) are
shown in the inset: the pre-peak have disappeared, and
the whole atomic distribution is as random as for the
non-hydrogen bonding sites. The clusters distribution is
shown in Fig.2b. The methyl groups display the random
cluster distribution (inset) of ordinary liquids. It is strik-
ing that the O-O cluster have a pronounced peak around
size n ≈ 4, while the probability of ﬁnding monomers is
now smaller than unity, indicating that liquid TBA is
more strongly microstructured than methanol. This fact
is also transparent from the height of the pre-peaks in
Fig.3b, as compared to Fig.1b. Inner peak and chain/ring
type clustering in TBA have been reported from various
experiments [17, 18]. A look at our simulations snapshots
(Fig.5) indicates that TBA molecules order by grouping
all their hydrogen-bonding sites together and letting the
methyl tripods outside: thus forming small micelles of
about 4-6 molecules.
It is interesting to note that the electrostatic energy
of methanol, which accounts for the HB interaction, is
−29.60kJ/mol for the OPLS model and −35.4kJ/mol
for the WS model, whereas it is −24.73kJ/mol for the
OPLS model of TBA. The corresponding Van de Waals
energies are respectively, −5.8kJ/mol, −6.1kJ/mol and
−21.kJ/mol. Since the Coulomb energies are quite sim-
ilar, the diﬀerence in patterns is governed essentially
by the topology of the molecule, in other words by the
symmetry of the interaction. The corresponding exper-
imental data are not available for the comparison, how-
ever the experimental value for the enthalpy of lique-
faction compares qualitatively with the calculated ones:
for methanol ∆H = −37.3kJ/mol (expt), −35.44kJ/mol
(OPLS) , while for TBA ∆H = −46.74kJ/mol(expt) and

4

reminiscent of that taking place in microemulsion af-
ter the disorder to order phase transition, while present
features are within the disordered phase. This associ-
ation is visible in the pair correlations, particularly in
the structure factors, but also in the one-body distribu-
tions modiﬁed to account for local structures. As said in
the beginning, while we understand that these features
are related to the strong directionality of the hydrogen
bonding tendency in these liquids, we cannot help being
surprised that this interaction creates equilibrium hetero-
geneity in a globally homogeneous disordered liquid. The
view point introduced herein is that associated liquids
can be dually viewed as constituted of molecules inter-
acting through strong directional forces and at the same
time as mixtures of microclustered molecular domains.
The implications in the physical chemistry of such liquids
and their mixture with water remains an open problem.

[1] S. Dixit, J. Crain, W.C.K. Poon, J. L. Finney and A.K.

Soper, Nature 416, 6883 (2002)

[2] L. Dougan, S. P. Bates, R. Hargreaves, J. Fox, J. Crain,
J. L. Finney, V. Reat and A. K. Soper, J. Chem. Phys.
121, 6456 (2004)

[3] S. K. Allison, J. P. Fox, R. Hargreaves and S. P. Bates,

Phys. Rev. E71, 24201 (2005)

[4] J.-H. Guo, Y. Luo, A. Augustsson, S. Kashtanov, J.-E.
Rubensson, D. K. Shuh, H. ˚Agren and J. Nordgren, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 157401-1(2003)

[5] A. Perera, F. Sokoli´c, L. Alm´asy and Y. Koga, J. Chem.

Phys. 124, 124515 (2006)

[6] S. Weerasinghe and P. E. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. B109,

[7] M. E. Lee and N. F. A. van der Vegt, J. Chem. Phys.

[8] H. S. Frank and A. S. Quist, J. Chem. Phys. 34, 604

15080 (2005)

122, 114509 (2005)

(1960)

[9] H. E. Stanley et al. J. Phys. Cond. Mat. 12, A403 (2000)
[10] J. R. Errington, P. G. Debenedetti and S. Torquato,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 215503-1 (2002)

[11] H. E. Stanley, J. Teixeira, A. Geiger and R. L. Blumberg,

Physica A106, 260 (1981)

[12] A. H. Narten and A. Habenschuss, J. Chem. Phys. 80,

[13] S. Sarkar and R. N. Joarder, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 2032

[14] L. A. Pugnaloni and F. Vericat, J. Chem. Phys. 116,

3387 (1984)

(1993)

1097 (2002)

[15] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Phys. Chem. 90, 1276 (1986)
[16] J. G. Curro and K. S. Schweizer, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 1842

[17] A. H. Narten and S. I. Sandler, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 2069

[18] D. Zimmerman, TH. H¨aber, H. Schaal and M. A. Suhm,

Mol. Phys. 99, 413 (2001)

[19] A. H. Narten and H. A. Levy, J. Chem .Phys. 55, 2263

(1987)

(1979)

(1971)

(color online) Typical

FIG. 4:
local clusters of methanol
molecules. Methyl in blue, oxygen in red and hydrogen in
white

FIG. 5:
molecules

(color online) Typical local cluster of tertbutanol

−45.74kJ/mol(OPLS).

In view of the features reported for alcohols, one may
then ask what this type of analysis would give for water-a
stronger hydrogen bonding liquid. The structure factor
of water has been reported about three decades ago [19]
and constantly improved since then. It shows no sign of
distinct pre-peak, except perhaps for a weak shoulder at
k ≈ 2.0˚A−1. The cluster calculation indicates no sign
of bump or peaks in the small size region. These ﬁnd-
ings indicate that water molecules do not form appar-
ent clusters. One way to conciliate these inconsistencies
with the present approach is to conjecture that water
molecules form branched-polymer like clusters, due to
the strong tetrahedrality of their hydrogen bonds. Then,
multiple conﬁgurations, due to the inherent ﬂexibility of
such clusters, may not be detected by the cluster distri-
bution and the pair correlations. This conjecture remains
to be tested.
The striking feature reported here is the dual appearance
of homogeneity and microheterogeneity in neat associ-
ated alcohols. They show structural features strongly

