6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LU TP 96-28
February 2, 2008

Local Interactions and Protein Folding:
A 3D Oﬀ-Lattice Approach

Anders Irb¨ack1, Carsten Peterson2, Frank Potthast3 and Ola Sommelius4

Complex Systems Group, Department of Theoretical Physics
University of Lund, S¨olvegatan 14A, S-223 62 Lund, Sweden

Submitted to Journal of Chemical Physics

Abstract:

The thermodynamic behavior of a three-dimensional oﬀ-lattice model for protein folding is probed.
The model has only two types of residues, hydrophobic and hydrophilic. In absence of local inter-
actions, native structure formation does not occur for the temperatures considered. By including
sequence independent local interactions, which qualitatively reproduce local properties of functional
proteins, the dominance of a native state for many sequences is observed. As in lattice model ap-
proaches, folding takes place by gradual compactiﬁcation, followed by a sequence dependent folding
transition. Our results diﬀer from lattice approaches in that bimodal energy distributions are not
observed and that high folding temperatures are accompanied by relatively low temperatures for the
peak of the speciﬁc heat. Also, in contrast to earlier studies using lattice models, our results con-
vincingly demonstrate that one does not need more than two types of residues to generate sequences
with good thermodynamic folding properties in three dimensions.

1irback@thep.lu.se
2carsten@thep.lu.se
3frank@thep.lu.se
4ola@thep.lu.se

1

Introduction

In the process of unveiling central issues in the thermodynamics and kinetics of protein folding,
simpliﬁed models where the amino acid residues constitute the basic entities seem to exhibit many
non-trivial and interesting properties [1]. In particular lattice model approaches with contact inter-
actions only have become increasingly popular. The lattice and contact term approximations may
seem drastic. Nevertheless, it turns out that such simple models are able to catch non-trivial aspects
of the folding problem. This is interesting and encouraging. However, it does not imply that the
approximations involved are understood. It is therefore crucial to pursue the study of alternative
models, e.g. exploring oﬀ-lattice models with Lennard-Jones interactions.

The major advantage of lattice models is computational eﬃciency, at least for small chain sizes.
With improved algorithms and faster computers this advantage is losing in importance.
In this
paper we propose and study an extension to three dimensions (3D) of a two-dimensional (2D)
oﬀ-lattice model [2] that was successfully studied in Refs. [3, 4]. This model contains only two
types of amino acids, hydrophobic and hydrophilic, and the key part of the energy function is
a species-dependent term that favors the formation of a hydrophobic core. However, as will be
demonstrated below, this term alone is not suﬃcient in order to have thermodynamically dominant
native states. This observation is reminiscent of existing lattice model results [5, 6], and could be
taken as an indication that it is essential to have more than two diﬀerent types of amino acids. In
this paper we explore another possibility; do the folding properties depend on species-independent
local interactions sticking to two amino acid types only? It should be noted that both lattice and
2D oﬀ-lattice models implicitly contain local interactions. In the lattice case the mere presence of a
discretized space “stiﬀens” the dynamics locally, and in two dimensions the continuum movements
are hampered by compressing one dimension.

The purpose of this work is to construct and numerically study a 3D generalization of the 2D model
of Refs. [3, 4]. As design criteria for such a model we have:

• The model should give rise to thermodynamically dominant states – i.e. be biologically plau-

sible from a stability point of view.

• The local interactions should be chosen to at least qualitatively reproduce bond and torsional

angle distributions and local correlations found in functional proteins.

We propose a simple form for the local interactions, which are found to play an important role.
Without any local interaction in the model, the local structure of the chains is much more irregular
than for proteins. It turns out that one can obtain a local structure qualitatively similar to that of
proteins, by adjusting the strength of the local interactions. Having chosen the local interactions in
this way, we reexamine the overall thermodynamic behavior. We ﬁnd that not only have the local
properties improved, but the native states have also become more stable.

Furthermore, we examine the structure formation and the properties of the folding transition by
studying the temperature dependence of various thermodynamic and structural variables, and the
distributions of these quantities at the folding temperature. These results can be understood in terms
of a gradual collapse to compact structures where the (sequence dependent) folding transition occurs.
The qualitative aspects of this picture conﬁrm what has been found in lattice model calculations

1

[1, 8]. However, it turns out that our results diﬀer from lattice approaches in that bimodal energy
distributions are not observed and that high folding temperatures are accompanied by relatively
low temperatures for the peak of the speciﬁc heat.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 the 3D model is deﬁned and in Sec. 3 we extract local
properties and correlations for functional proteins from the PDB data base [9]. Monte Carlo (MC)
methods and measurements are described in Sec. 4. The results and the summary are found in
Sec. 5 and 6 respectively.

2 The Model

We start by deﬁning the simpliﬁed geometry of the model. Each residue is represented by a single
site located at the Cα position. These sites are linked by rigid bonds of unit length, ˆbi, to form
linear chains living in three dimensions. The shape of an N -mer is either speciﬁed by the N − 1
bond vectors ˆbi or by N − 2 bond angles τi and N − 3 torsional angles αi (see Fig. 1).

Figure 1: Deﬁnition of ˆbi, τi and αi.

The model contains two kinds of residues, A and B, which behave as hydrophobic (σi=+1) and
hydrophilic (σi = −1) residues respectively. The energy function is given by

E(ˆb; σ) = −κ1

ˆbi · ˆbi+1 − κ2

ˆbi · ˆbi+2 +

ELJ(rij ; σi, σj )

(1)

N −2

Xi=1

N −3

Xi=1

N −2

N

Xi=1

Xj=i+2

where rij = rij (τi+1, . . . , τj−1; αi+1, . . . , αj−2) denotes the distance between residues i and j, and
σ1, . . . , σN is a binary string that speciﬁes the primary sequence. The species-dependent global
interactions are given by the Lennard-Jones potential,

ELJ(rij ; σi, σj) = 4ǫ(σi, σj)

1
r12
ij

(cid:16)

−

1
r6
ij (cid:17)

.

(2)

2

The depth of the minimum of this potential, ǫ(σi, σj ), is chosen to favor the formation of a core of
A residues

ǫ(σi, σj) = 


1 AA

1
2 BB, AB

The two parameters of the energy function, κ1 and κ2, determine the strength of species-independent
local interactions. The model will be explored for diﬀerent values of these two parameters, and our
ﬁnal choice will be κ1 = −1 and κ2 = 0.5.



The behavior of the model at ﬁnite temperature T is given by the partition function

(3)

(4)

Z(T ; σ) =

exp(−E(ˆb; σ)/T ) .

N −1

dˆbi(cid:21)

Z (cid:20)

Yi=1

Let us stress that the interactions in Eq. 1 are not chosen so as to stabilize the native state of some
particular sequence. Rather, our goal is to study general sequences for a given energy function. We
have attempted to choose this energy function as simple as possible. Anticipating some of results
to be presented in Sec. 5, let us here brieﬂy discuss the relevance of the diﬀerent interaction terms.

Species-dependent interactions. It is obvious that the global interactions play a key role in the
model; these interactions are responsible for the compactiﬁcation of the chain, and for the formation
of a hydrophobic core. For functional proteins, we ﬁnd that probability distributions of bond and
torsional angles depend only weakly on the hydrophobicity pattern for the residues involved. In our
model, the form of these distributions is very sensitive to the choice of global interactions, and it
can be strongly sequence dependent. In order to avoid this, we have chosen the potentials for the
three diﬀerent types of residue pairs to be fairly similar; they are all attractive at large separations,
and the location of the minimum is the same.

Species-independent interactions.
It is less clear how important the local interactions are.
When studying the behavior of several diﬀerent sequences in the absence of the local interactions
(κ1 = κ2 = 0), the stability of the native state tends to be very low. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that local
correlations along such chains are weak, which is in line with the ﬁndings of Ref. [10]. For functional
proteins the corresponding correlations are fairly strong, which is a manifestation of the presence
of secondary structure. For these reasons we decided to incorporate the local interactions in the
model. In this way one gets stiﬀer chains, which implies stronger local correlations. In addition,
the stability of the native states tends to improve, as we will see below.

We have studied the model for many diﬀerent choices of κ1 and κ2. The general behavior of the
system is fairly insensitive to small changes of these parameters. Below we will focus on the results
obtained for the three choices (κ1, κ2)=(0,0),(-1,0) and (-1,0.5).

3 Local Structures in Functional Proteins

In a 3D oﬀ-lattice model, it is possible to check the local properties against those for functional
proteins in a direct way. We have probed the local structure in two diﬀerent ways. First we consider
the distributions of bond and torsional angles. Second we study local correlations along the chain.

3

Figure 2: Bond (τi) and torsional (αi) angle distributions for functional proteins.

In this section we describe the results one ﬁnds for functional proteins. These results will be used
in Sec. 5 to compare with the qualitative local behavior of our model.

Distributions of bond and torsional angles. These distributions for functional proteins are
well-known [11, 12] and are included here for completeness. We consider the structure deﬁned by
the backbone of Cα atoms. The results were obtained using a set of 505 selected sequences [13]5
from the Protein Data Bank [9]. This set was obtained by allowing for a maximum of 25% sequence
similarity for aligned subsequences of more than 80 residues [14]. Within this set of 505 minimally
redundant sequences, 491 contained complete backbone information; the others were excluded from
our analysis.

In Fig. 2 the distributions of bond and torsional angles are shown together with a scatter plot for
these two quantities. Note that the calculation of the torsional angle αi requires four consecutive
Cα atoms, while the bond angle τi requires only three. The additional fourth Cα atom needed for
αi is taken in the N-terminus direction.

From Fig. 2 it is evident that there are strong regularities in the local structure. The τi and
αi distributions both exhibit a clear two-peak structure, which can be associated with two well-
populated regions in the (τi, αi)-plane. One of these regions, τi ∈ [85◦,100◦] and αi ∈ [35◦,70◦],
corresponds to right-handed α-helix and the other, τi ∈ [105◦,145◦] and αi ∈ [170◦,250◦], corresponds
to β-sheet.

5The May 1996 edition was used.

4

Local correlations. We study local correlations using the function

Cb(d) =

1
N − d − 1

N −d−1

Xi=1

ˆbi · ˆbi+d

(5)

where ˆbi are normalized (virtual) bond vectors. Local correlations along protein chains have been
studied by Ref. [10], using a correlation function slightly diﬀerent from that in Eq. 5. In Fig. 3a
we show the correlation function Cb(d) for functional proteins. As can be seen from this ﬁgure,
there are signiﬁcant correlations at least out to separations of about eight residues. The oscillations
present can be related to the presence of α-helix structure, which has a period of 3.6.

Figure 3: The correlation function Cb(d) for functional proteins (see Eq. 5).

4 Methods

4.1 Monte Carlo Method

Numerical simulations have been performed for a variety of diﬀerent choices of (κ1, κ2) and diﬀerent
sequences and temperatures. At low temperatures conventional Monte Carlo methods tend to
become extremely time-consuming, due to the presence of high free-energy barriers. As in Refs. [3, 4]
we have therefore chosen to employ the dynamical-parameter method, which means that some
parameter of the model is taken as a dynamical variable which takes values ranging over a deﬁnite
set. In this way it is possible to greatly improve the frequency of transitions between the diﬀerent
free-energy valleys; for the 2D model studied in Ref. [3] speedup factors of 103–104 were observed.

In the present work the temperature is treated as a dynamical variable (“simulated tempering”
[15]). More precisely, the joint probability distribution

P (ˆb, k) ∝ exp(−gk − E(ˆb, σ)/Tk)

(6)

5

Figure 4: Evolution of the quenched (diamonds) and unquenched (line) energies in the simulation
of sequence 1 (see Table 1). Measurements were taken every 10 iterations. Shown are the data
corresponding to the lowest allowed temperature. The thermalization phase of 50000 sweeps is not
shown.

is simulated, where Tk, k = 1, . . . , K, are the allowed values of the temperature. The gk’s are tunable
parameters which must be chosen carefully for each sequence. We refer the reader to Refs. [3, 4] for
details on how to determine these parameters. The joint distribution P (ˆb, k) is simulated by using
separate Metropolis steps [16] in k and ˆb. For ˆb we use two types of elementary moves: rotations of
single bonds and moves of pivot type [17].

In our simulations we used a set of K = 25 allowed temperatures, which are equidistant in 1/T and
ranging from 0.15 to 3.0.

In order to study the energy level spectrum we use a quenching procedure; in the course of the
simulations the system is quenched to zero temperature at regular intervals. For this purpose we
employ a conjugate gradient method. We found this method more eﬃcient than using a Monte Carlo
algorithm with T = 0. Also, we tested two diﬀerent conjugate gradient algorithms. In the conjugate
gradient method successive minimizations are carried out along diﬀerent lines. Information about
the gradient is needed to deﬁne the lines, and may or may not be utilized for the minimizations.
For the present problem we found that minimization without gradient calculation is faster. The
quenching procedure only accounts for a small portion of the total computing time.

In Fig. 4 we show the evolution of the quenched and unquenched energies in a typical simulation of
a N = 20 chain.

4.2 Measurements

In Sec. 3 we discussed measurements of local properties of the chains. In order to study the sta-
bility of the full native structure, further information is needed. To this end we have studied the
distribution of the mean-square distance between conﬁgurations, δ2
ab. For two conﬁgurations a and

6

b, δ2

ab is deﬁned as

δ2
ab = min

|¯x(a)

i − ¯x(b)

i

|2

1
N

N

Xi=1

i − ¯x(b)

where |¯x(a)
, and where the minimum is
taken over translations, rotations and reﬂections. The corresponding distribution, P (δ2), for ﬁxed
temperature and sequence, reads

| denotes the distance between the sites ¯x(a)

and ¯x(b)

i

i

i

P (δ2) =

1
Z(T ; σ)2 Z

dˆb(a)dˆb(b)δ(δ2 − δ2

ab)e

−E(ˆb(a);σ)/T )e

−E(ˆb(b);σ)/T )

where δ(·) denotes the Dirac delta function. For convenience, we often use the mean

rather than the full distribution P (δ2).

hδ2i =

′2P (δ

′2)δ

′2

dδ

Z

We have also measured the speciﬁc heat CV and gyration radius rgyr, deﬁned by

CV =

r2
gyr =

1
T 2

1
N

hE2i − hEi2
(cid:0)
N

(cid:1)

h¯x2

i i − h¯xii2

Xi=1 (cid:0)

(cid:1)

The speciﬁc heat has a maximum in the vicinity of the folding transition. To accurately determine
the height and location of this maximum we use the multihistogram method [18, 19].

In addition to these measurements, we employ the quenching procedure described above. Removing
the thermal noise in this way is of great help in monitoring the evolution of the system, but requires
a substantial amount of computer time. Therefore, we have performed these calculations at larger
intervals than other measurements, and only at the lowest of the temperatures studied.

The quenching procedure provides us with a set of low-lying local energy minima. For some of the
studied chains we believe that the lowest minimum obtained in our simulation is the global minimum
of the energy function, as will be discussed below. The mean-square distance to the global minimum
will be denoted by δ2
0), we deﬁne a probability
p0 of ﬁnding the system within a small neighborhood of the global minimum. We take

0 (cf Eq. 7). Using the corresponding distribution, P (δ2

with the parameter ∆ = 0.04; this choice of ∆ is motivated by the δ2
and b). Let us stress that the distribution P (δ2
earlier; P (δ2) measures general ﬂuctuations rather than deviations from a given state.

0 distributions (cf Figs. 11 a
0) is diﬀerent from the distribution P (δ2) introduced

The degree of folding may be deﬁned in terms of the quantity p0. Alternatively, it may be deﬁned
as

∆

P (δ2

0)dδ2
0

p0 =

Z
0

Q =

no
n

7

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

no.
1
2
3
4
5
6

sequence

Ts

BAAA AAAB AAAA BAAB AABB 0.361
BAAB AAAA BABA ABAA AAAB 0.319
AAAA BBAA AABA ABAA ABBA 0.298
AAAA BAAB ABAA BBAA ABAA 0.273
BAAB BAAA BBBA BABA ABAB 0.327
AAAB BABB ABAB BABA BABA 0.257

Tf

Cmax
V
51.4 < 0.15
55.9 < 0.15
65.8
61.5
49.8 < 0.15
62.6

0.23
0.22

0.15

Table 1: The six sequences studied. The errors in Ts and Cmax
tively. The errors in Tf are approximately 0.02.

V

are less than 0.005 and 0.3 respec-

where no is the number of occupied native contacts, and n is the total number of native contacts.
Two monomers i and j are taken to be in contact if r2
ij < 1.75; this cutoﬀ is motivated by the
distribution P (r2
ij ) (not displayed in this paper). We have Q = 1 for the native structure. Also,
it is useful to divide the set of native contacts into local and global contacts. A contact between
monomers i and j will be called local if 2 ≤ |i − j| ≤ 4 and global if |i − j| > 4. We set Ql = no
l /nl,
where no
l is the number of occupied local native contacts and nl is the total number of local native
contacts. Similarly, we deﬁne Qg as the fraction of occupied global native contacts.

5 Results

The model is deﬁned by two parameters, κ1 and κ2, which set the strengths of the local interactions.
In order to investigate the importance of these interactions, we ﬁrst performed preliminary runs for
a number of diﬀerent (κ1, κ2) values. In particular, these explorations aimed at establishing the
balance between the local and global interactions — the overall scale of (κ1, κ2). More extensive
simulations were then carried out for three diﬀerent choices

(κ1, κ2) =

(-1,0)

(14)

using sequences of length N = 20.
It turns out that shorter chains exhibit less interesting and
discriminative behavior. The sequences, which were deliberately chosen to represent a variety of
behavior, are listed in Table 1.

In this section we ﬁrst compare the behavior of the model at the three values of (κ1, κ2) with respect
to the local interactions and low T properties in order to single out one set of (κ1, κ2) values. We
then examine the folding properties and thermodynamic behavior for (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0.5) in some
detail.

(0,0)

(-1,0.5)






8

Figure 5: Bond (τi) and torsional (αi) angle distributions at T = 0.15 for the six simulated sequences,
(a) pure Lennard-Jones potential (κ1, κ2) = (0, 0) and (b) (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0.5). The potential
corresponding to (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0) yields a similar distribution as in (b).

5.1 The Local Interactions

Prior to investigating folding properties for diﬀerent choices of (κ1, κ2), we compare the bond and
torsional angle distributions and the local correlations of the chains with those of functional proteins.
In Figs. 5 and 6 the model counterparts of Figs. 2 and 3 are shown. The data in Fig. 5 were obtained
at a ﬁxed temperature, T = 0.15, while those in Fig. 6 were obtained using quenched low energy
structures. In both cases we expect the data to reﬂect the behavior for a wide range of not too high
temperatures.

The results strongly indicate the need for local interactions when it comes to mimicking functional
proteins; the strong regularities in the local structure observed for proteins are to a large extent
missing for a pure Lennard-Jones potential. This can be seen from the torsional angle distribution
and the correlation function Cb(d). The torsional angle αi varies over the whole range of 360◦,
without any strongly suppressed regions, and the correlation Cb(d) is very weak for all d > 0. The
conclusion that local correlations are weak for a pure Lennard-Jones potential is in good agreement
with the ﬁndings of Ref. [10].

From the Figs. 5 and 6 it is also clear that changing κ1 from 0 to -1 leads to a signiﬁcant improvement;
the torsional angle distribution becomes concentrated to a few relatively small regions, and local
correlations become stronger. The range of the correlation Cb(d) is for κ1 = −1 comparable to what
it is for proteins. Needless to say, the model is not intended to reproduce the precise form of the
correlations. However, it is encouraging that the qualitative behavior of this very simple model is
consistent with the one from functional proteins.

The remaining question is whether a non-zero κ2 is called for. No conclusive evidence can be drawn
from Figs. 5 and 6 alone in this respect, although one may argue that the range of the correlation
Cb(d) is still somewhat short for (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0).

9

Figure 6: The correlation function Cb(d) (Eq. 5) for 3D model chains; (κ1, κ2)=(0,0) (⋄), (-1,0) (2)
and (-1,0.5) (×).

Next we investigate how the choice of parameters aﬀects the key folding property identiﬁed in
Ref. [4] — the δ2 distribution should be peaked for low δ2. In Fig. 7, P (δ2) is shown for sequence 4
in Table 1. In contrast to the local properties discussed above, P (δ2) is strongly sequence dependent.
Nevertheless, Fig. 7 illustrates some general trends seen in the data. First, the pure Lennard-Jones
interaction yields a very broad distribution of δ2, implying that folding properties are poor. This
is true for all the six sequences studied. Second, although the behavior is diﬀerent for one of the
six sequences, the κ2 6= 0 choice appears to have a distinct edge over the one ignoring the torsional
angle interaction.

In summary, our results show that local interactions are essential in order to get a regular local
structure and structural stability. When comparing the results for (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0) and (-1,0.5),
we ﬁnd that the structural stability tends to be highest for (κ1, κ2) = (−1, 0.5). In what follows we
will focus on this choice of parameters for the six sequences in Table 1.

5.2 2D Revisited

In Refs. [3, 4], a similar model [2] was studied in 2D using somewhat diﬀerent Lennard-Jones
parameters and local interactions corresponding to (κ1, κ2)=( 1
4 , 0) (cf Eq. 1). Here, we brieﬂy
discuss the importance of local interactions for this 2D model.

For this purpose, we leave out the local interaction term, i.e. we set (κ1, κ2)=(0, 0). Using this
pure Lennard-Jones potential, we redo the simulations for 15 sequences. At T = 0.15, we ﬁnd a
strong correlation between the hδ2i’s for the two types of potentials; thus hδ2i varies widely with
sequence even for the (κ1, κ2)=(0, 0) potential. This is in contrast to our ﬁndings in 3D, where all
the sequences studied have a large hδ2i for (κ1, κ2)=(0, 0).

10

Figure 7: P (δ2) at T = 0.15 for sequence 4 (cf Table 1); (κ1,κ2)=(0,0) (dots), (-1,0) (dashes), and
(-1,0.5) (solid). The low-δ2 peak for (κ1,κ2)=(-1,0.5) extends to 37.

5.3 Folding Properties

When investigating the folding properties of the chains we focus on the thermodynamics. This is
in part inspired by the results from Ref. [4], where the thermodynamic properties exhibited strong
sequence dependence. Initially we examine the various thermodynamic quantities deﬁned in Sec. 4.2
over the entire probed T range. Then we proceed with the “magnifying glass” to the 0.15< T <0.50
region, where the diﬀerent chains exhibit strongest diﬀerence in behavior and the folding properties
can be studied in some detail.

5.3.1 Thermodynamic Behavior

In Fig. 8 the behavior of the diﬀerent thermodynamic quantities are shown over the entire T range.
The overall size of the molecule, as measured by r2
gyr, decreases substantially when T decreases from
3 to 0.15, as can be seen from Fig. 8. This decrease is gradual. The data points essentially fall
onto two diﬀerent curves. The upper curve corresponds to the sequences 5 and 6 with composition
10A+10B, and the lower curve to the sequences 1–4 with composition 14A+6B.

Next we turn to hδ2i, which measures the size of the ﬂuctuations. In Fig. 8 we show the relative
magnitude hδ2i/r2
gyr. This ratio exhibits a peak slightly above T = 1, and is approximately sequence
independent down to T ≈ 0.4; above this temperature hδ2i shows a sequence (composition) depen-
dence similar to that of r2
gyr. Below T ≈ 0.4 the situation is diﬀerent. Here hδ2i is strongly sequence
dependent, in contrast to r2

gyr. In Fig. 9 the results are shown for hδ2i in the low-T region.

11

Figure 8: Thermodynamic properties for the six chains in Table 1 using (κ1, κ2)=(-1,0.5).

12

Figure 9: hδ2i as a function of T for the sequences of Table 1: (a) 4 (2), 2 (×) and 3 (⋄). (b) 6
(2), 1 (×) and 5 (⋄).

Figure 10: Enlargements of (a) p0 and (b) CV in Fig. 8. The bands in (b) correspond to CV ± σ,
where σ is the standard deviation.

In order to understand the low-T behavior it is useful to consider p0, which measures the relative
population of the lowest energy state (Eq. 12). A comparison of the data for hδ2i and p0 shows
that small hδ2i values are associated with large p0 values. Therefore, it is reasonable to deﬁne the
folding temperature Tf as the temperature where p0 = 1/2. Estimates of Tf are given in Table 1.
For three of the six sequences Tf is smaller than 0.15, as can be seen from Fig. 10a. It should be
stressed that the shape of the molecule is very compact already above Tf . This will be discussed in
more detail below for one of the sequences.

From Figs. 8 and 10b it can be seen that the speciﬁc heat exhibits a peak in the low-T region,

13

V

V

slightly above Tf . The height, Cmax
, and location, Ts, of the peak are given in Table 1. We ﬁnd
that Cmax
is large for the sequences with high Tf , which is in accordance with the results from the
lattice model study of Ref. [8]. However, our results for Ts are somewhat diﬀerent from those of
Ref. [8]. In our model Ts is relatively low for sequences with high Tf , while the results reported
by Ref. [8] show the opposite behavior. Thus, the separation Ts − Tf exhibits a stronger sequence
dependence in our model.

Also shown in Fig. 8 is the T dependence for the occupancy of local and global native contacts.
In the vicinity of Tf , Ql is large and varies slowly, whereas Qg changes rapidly. In particular, this
demonstrates that the formation of local native structure, like the compactiﬁcation, is a gradual
process that to a large extent takes place above Tf .

5.3.2 The Folding Transition Region

In this subsection we study the behavior at the folding temperature Tf , where p0 = 1/2, in some
more detail. Two diﬀerent sequences are considered, 4 and 6. Sequence 4 has a fairly high Tf value,
whereas sequence 6 represents a more typical Tf .

In Figs. 11 a and b we show histograms of δ2
0, the mean-square distance to the lowest energy state,
near T = Tf . Both histograms exhibit a multi-peak structure, with a narrow peak at low δ2
0 that
corresponds to the native state. The thermodynamic weight of the native state is, by deﬁnition,
approximately 50% in both cases. However, the distributions diﬀer in shape, which is important
from the viewpoint of kinetics. From Figs. 11 a and b one concludes that the δ2
0 distribution is much
more rugged for sequence 6 than for sequence 4. This suggests that, at T = Tf , folding is fastest
for sequence 4, the sequence with highest Tf . We also explored using Q rather than δ2
0 as reaction
coordinate, with similar results.

The Q distribution at Tf has been studied previously by Ref. [7], using a lattice model. Here the
distributions for a folding and a non-folding sequence were compared, and these were found to be
almost identical. This may seem to contradict our ﬁndings, and suggest that there is a diﬀerence
between the two models. However, it should be remembered that Ref. [7] did not study the full Q
distribution, but rather the Q distribution corresponding to maximally compact structures only.

In Figs. 11 c and d we show the probability distributions of E and r2
gyr at T ≈ Tf for sequence 4. Also
0 < 0.04 and δ2
shown are the contributions to these distributions from conformations with δ2
0 > 0.04,
respectively. This corresponds to a simpliﬁed two-state picture where each conformation is classiﬁed
as either native-like or not. The shape of the δ2
0 distribution shows that such a classiﬁcation is feasible
in an essentially unambiguous way.

As one might have expected from the sharpness of the peak in the speciﬁc heat, Fig. 11 c shows
that these two “states” diﬀer signiﬁcantly in energy, although the total E distribution is unimodal.
However, the average size of the molecule is very similar for the two states. This fact clearly
demonstrates that the compactiﬁcation occurs prior to the dominance of the native state setting in.

These results may be compared with those of Ref. [8], where a detailed study of the behavior at Tf
was carried out for a lattice model. Here the total number of contacts, C, rather than r2
gyr was used
as a measure of compactness. In contrast to the results shown in Figs. 11 c and d, the probability

14

Figure 11: Histograms at T ≈ Tf for sequence 4 (T = 0.22) and 6 (T = 0.15). (a) δ2
(b) δ2
0 for seq. 6. (c) E for seq. 4. (d) r2
represent the contributions corresponding to δ2

0 for seq. 4.
gyr for seq. 4. The dashed and dotted lines in (c) and (d)

0 > 0.04, respectively.

0 < 0.04 and δ2

distributions of both E and C were found to be bimodal for a sequence with high Tf . This may
reﬂect a genuine diﬀerence between lattice and oﬀ-lattice models.

6 Summary

We have extended the oﬀ-lattice protein model of Ref. [4] to three dimensions. In doing so, one
key issue has been the choice of species-independent local interactions that balance the species-
dependent non-bonded Lennard-Jones interactions. The local bond and torsional angle interactions
were chosen to satisfy two criteria:

15

• The resulting low temperature conﬁgurations should at least qualitatively reproduce the local

angle distributions and correlations of functional proteins.

• It should be possible to produce good folders; i.e. there should be sequences with thermody-

namically stable structures at not too low temperatures.

It turns out that the presence of local interactions is necessary for satisfying these criteria. Among
the two local interactions, the bond angle one is the most crucial one in this respect.

After having speciﬁed the interaction to meet these requirements we study the thermodynamic
behavior for six diﬀerent sequences. The following generic behavior emerges:

• As the temperature is decreased, a gradual compactiﬁcation takes place.

• In the compact state a sequence dependent folding transition occurs, where the good folding
sequences are characterized by a higher folding temperature. In terms of the speciﬁc heat,
these good folders also have more pronounced peaks.

• In the state from which the transition to the native state occurs, a large fraction of the native
contacts are already formed. The contacts missing are mainly those corresponding to large
topological distance along the chain.

This picture is consistent with what is observed for lattice models [1, 8]. A few minor, but signiﬁcant,
diﬀerences should be mentioned though.

• We do not observe bimodal distributions of energy or compactness as in Ref. [8]. In a sim-
pliﬁed two-state picture, the two coexisting states at the folding temperature do correspond
to diﬀerent energy distributions, but the overlap between the two is large enough to blur this
eﬀect.

• For the sequences studied, high folding temperature is accompanied by a relatively low tem-
perature for the peak of the speciﬁc heat. This is in contrast to what was reported in Ref. [8].

In
Finally, we stress the fact that we have studied sequences with only two types of residues.
Refs. [5, 6] a number of binary (two-letter code) sequences were studied in a 3D lattice model. The
two-letter code was found to be insuﬃcient in the sense that these sequences did not have unique
native structures. In our model, many binary sequences do have unique native structures.

Our ability to map out the thermodynamics of the 3D oﬀ-lattice model, relies heavily upon the
eﬃciency of the dynamical-parameter algorithm of Refs. [3, 4]. As it stands, the results for each
N = 20 chain require 70 CPU hours on an Alpha DecStation 200. We feel conﬁdent that additional
algorithmic eﬃciency improvements can be made, which will enable us to probe longer and more
3D chains than reported in this work.

16

References

[1] For a review, see M. Karplus and A. ˘Sali, “Theoretical Studies of Protein Folding and Unfold-

ing”, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5, 58 (1995).

[2] F.H. Stillinger, T. Head-Gordon and C.L. Hirshfeld, “Toy Model for Protein Folding”, Phys.

Rev. E 48, 1469 (1993).

[3] A. Irb¨ack and F. Potthast, “Studies of an Oﬀ-Lattice Model for Protein Folding: Sequence De-
pendence and Improved Sampling at Finite Temperature”, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 10298 (1995).

[4] A. Irb¨ack, C. Peterson and F. Potthast, “Identiﬁcation of Amino Acid Sequences with Good

Folding Properties”, LU TP 96-12, chem-ph/9605002 (1996).

[5] E.I. Shakhnovich, “Proteins with Selected Sequences Fold into Unique Native Conformation”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3907 (1994).

[6] K. Yue, K.M. Fiebig, P.D. Thomas, H.S. Chan, E.I. Shakhnovich and K.A. Dill, “A Test of

Lattice Protein Folding Algorithms”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 325 (1995).

[7] A. ˘Sali, E. Shakhnovich and M. Karplus, “Kinetics of Protein Folding. A Lattice Model Study

of the Requirements for Folding to the Native State”, J. Mol. Biol. 235, 1614 (1994).

[8] N.D. Socci and J.N. Onuchic, “Kinetic and Thermodynamic Analysis of Proteinlike Heteropoly-

mers: Monte Carlo Histogram Technique”, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 4732 (1995).

[9] F.C. Bernstein, T.F. Koetzle, G.J.B. Williams, E.F. Meyer, M.D. Brice, J.R. Rodgers, O.
Kennard, T. Shimanouchi and M. Tasumi, “The Protein Data Bank: A Computer Based
Archival File for Macromolecular Structures”, J. Mol. Biol. 112, 535 (1977).

[10] N.D. Socci, W.S. Bialek and J.N. Onuchic, “Properties and Origins of Protein Secondary Struc-

ture”, Phys. Rev. E 49, 3440 (1994).

[11] M. Levitt, “A Simpliﬁed Representation of Protein Conformations for Rapid Simulation of

Protein Folding”, J. Mol. Biol. 104, 59 (1976).

[12] A. Godzik, A. Kolinski and J. Skolnick, “Lattice Representations of Globular Proteins: How

Good are They?”, J. Comp. Chem. 14, 1194 (1993).

[13] U. Hobohm and C. Sander, “Enlarged Representative Set of Protein Structures”, Protein Sci.

3, 522 (1994).

[14] U. Hobohm, M. Scharf, R. Schneider and C. Sander, “Selection of a Representative Set of

Structures from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank”, Protein Sci. 1, 409 (1992).

[15] E. Marinari and G. Parisi. “Simulated Tempering: A New Monte Carlo Scheme”, Europhys.

Lett. 19, 451 (1992).

[16] N.A. Metropolis, A.W. Rosenbluth, M.N. Rosenbluth, A. Teller and E. Teller, “Equation of

State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines”, J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1087 (1953).

[17] M. Lal, “Monte Carlo Computer Simulations of Chain Molecules”, Molec. Phys. 17, 57 (1969).

[18] A.M. Ferrenberg and R.H. Swendsen, “New Monte Carlo Technique for Studying Phase Tran-
sitions”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2635 (1988); 63, 1658 (1989) (Erratum), and references given in
the erratum.

17

[19] A.M. Ferrenberg and R.H. Swendsen, “Optimized Monte Carlo Data Analysis”, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 63, 1195 (1989).

18

