Theory for Diﬀusion-Limited Oscillating Chemical Reactions

Harmen J. Bussemaker
Institute for Physical Science and Technology
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland 20742

Ricardo Brito
Facultad de Ciencias F´ısicas
Universidad Complutense
28040 Madrid, Spain

Abstract

A kinetic description of lattice-gas automaton models for reaction-diﬀusion
systems is presented. It provides corrections to the mean ﬁeld rate equations
in the diﬀusion-limited regime. When applied to the two-species Maginu
model, the theory gives an excellent quantitative prediction of the eﬀect of
slow diﬀusion on the periodic oscillations of the average concentrations in a
spatially homogeneous state.

Keywords: Reaction-diﬀusion, lattice-gas automata, non-detailed balance,
Hopf bifurcation.

6
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
2
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

In this paper we describe how a relatively simple theory quantitatively explains the
deviations from mean ﬁeld behavior that occur in diﬀusion-limited chemical reactions. The
modeling of chemical reactions in spatially extended systems is an interesting application
of a class of microscopic models called “lattice-gas automata” [1]. Space, velocity, and time
are all discrete in such models, which simpliﬁes implementation on computers as well as
theoretical analysis. Lattice-gas automata (LGA) provide a ﬂexible tool for studying the
various phenomena resulting from the interplay between reaction and diﬀusion [2].

Here we will not be concerned with chemical pattern formation, but instead we will
consider a spatially extended two-species model exhibiting coupled periodic oscillations of
the concentrations of both species in a spatially homogeneous state.
If the reactions are
slow compared to the diﬀusion, then mean ﬁeld or Boltzmann theory equations give an
excellent description of the reaction kinetics. This is the so-called reaction-limited regime.
In the opposite diﬀusion-limited case however, when the diﬀusion is slow compared to the
reactions, there is no time to equilibrate after a reaction before another reaction occurs.
Consequently, equal-time correlations will be present that invalidate the Stosszahlansatz
or molecular chaos assumption used to derive the Boltzmann equation. Therefore in the
diﬀusion-limited regime the behavior of the system is seriously modiﬁed.

A condition that guarantees the absence of correlations in the equilibrium state of lattice-
gas automata is the so-called detailed balance (DB) condition. Reactive LGA’s in the
diﬀusion-limited regime violate DB. A systematic theory for LGA’s violating DB has recently
been developed by Ernst and coworkers [3,4]. In the present paper we apply this theory to
calculate corrections to the Boltzmann equation. A similar method has been developed by
Boghosian and Taylor [5,6].

The organization of this paper is as follows. In section II we deﬁne the model used. We
present the ring kinetic theory in section III, and compare it with computer simulations in
section IV. We end with a discussion in section V.

II. THE MODEL

A. Reactive Lattice-Gas Automaton

In a lattice gas automaton particles live on a regular lattice, L, so that their positions can
only take a a limited set of values corresponding to the nodes of the lattice. The velocities
are also restricted, and must be equal to unit vectors oriented along the the links connecting
the neighboring nodes. We denote this set by {ci; 1 ≤ i ≤ b} where b is the coordination
number of the lattice. The square lattice, with b = 4, will be used in this paper as it has
suﬃcient symmetry to properly describe the diﬀusive problem that we are considering. We
further impose an exclusion principle requiring that no more that one particle can be at
the same node with the same velocity. As a consequence there can be at most b particles
per node, i.e., one per link. The state of the LGA is fully described by a set of boolean
occupation numbers {si(r); 1 ≤ i ≤ b, r ∈ L}, where si(r) equals 1 if there is a particle at
node r with velocity ci and 0 otherwise.

2

For multi-species models with m types of reactants, such as the Maginu model, where
m = 2, we have to introduce diﬀerent types of particles. The exclusion principle has to
be modiﬁed in order to allow for the coexistence of several species. We adopt the coupled-
lattice model described in [7]. In this approach particles of diﬀerent types live on separate
lattices, and only interact when a chemical reaction occurs. The exclusion principle is applied
independently to each lattice. However, for the sake of compactness in the mathematical
derivations, we can extend the former set of occupation numbers si(r) to a new set {si(r); 1 ≤
i ≤ mb, r ∈ L}, in such a way that channels 1 ≤ i ≤ b are reserved for particles of species
1, channels b + 1 ≤ i ≤ 2b for species 2, etc. The number of particles of type p is given by

αp(r) =

si(r).

pb

Xi=1+(p−1)b

A time evolution step is the composition of two substeps, deﬁned as follows. First, at
each node independently a reactive collision takes place, during which a pre-reaction state
s(r) ≡ {si(r), 1 ≤ i ≤ mb} is replaced by a post-reaction state σ(r) in a stochastic process
governed by a set of transition probabilities Asσ. The reactive collision is followed by a
propagation step, during which all particles are moved to neighboring nodes r + ci in the
direction of their velocities.

Let us describe the reactive collision step in detail. The chemical reaction we want to

simulate is described by

α1X1 + α2X2 + . . . + αmXm −→ β1X1 + β2X2 + . . . + βmXm

(2)

and occurs at a rate P (α, β), where α = (α1, α2, . . .) and β = (β1, β2, . . .) specify the
number of particles before and after reaction, and Xp represents species p. The outcome of
the chemical reaction only depends on the number of particles of each species, {αp(s); 1 ≤
p ≤ m}, present at the node before the reaction, not on the velocity distribution. After
the reaction, the βp particles of each species are randomly redistributed over the b available
velocity directions (this random redistribution models the diﬀusion process), which can be
done in b!/(βp)!(b−βp)! ways for species p. Thus, the transition probability from precollision
state s to postcollision state σ is given by

Note that the normalization

m

Asσ =

(βp(σ))!(b − βp(σ))!
b!

P (α, β).

p=1
Y
σ Asσ = 1 follows from the normalization

P

B. Maginu Model

β P (α, β) = 1.

P

The Maginu model [8] is a two species model that exhibits a variety of behavior. It is

described by the following equations for the concentrations x and y of the two species [2]:

(1)

(3)

(4)

∂x
∂t
∂y
∂t

= x − x3/3 − y + Dx∇2x

= (x − ky)/c + Dy∇2y

3

with c > 0 and 0 < k < 1. The constants Dx and Dy are the diﬀusion coeﬃcients for
the two species respectively. Depending on the parameters, the model can exhibit Turing
structures (when Dx is very diﬀerent from Dy) as well as periodic behavior. Here we will
solely be interested in the case Dx = Dy, where the system develops a stable limit cycle in
a homogeneous state. This limit cycle shrinks as the chemical reaction rate increases.

The Maginu model as deﬁned by Eq. (4) is not directly useful since the concentrations
can become negative, and therefore cannot be directly simulated with an LGA [7]. This
problem is however easily solved by using the linear transformation

x = 1

y = 1

2 + x/
q
2 + yk/

12(1 + k)/k,

12(1 + k)/k

q

where x and y are the concentrations of the two species X and Y that we will study.

Next we have to determine a set of reaction rates P (α, β) for the LGA that gives rise
to the macroscopic behavior deﬁned by Eqs. (4) and (5). The matrix P (α, β) is needed in
numerical simulations as well as in the theory presented in the next section. In Ref. [2] a
method for constructing P (α, β) has been extensively discussed, and we will not give the
details here. We will however, adopt the rules of Ref. [7], where the number of particles is
only allowed to change by ±1 during the reaction. The matrix P (α, β) is then uniquely
speciﬁed.

An important point in the deﬁnition of the collision rules is the introduction of a time
scaling parameter, s, which allows us to control whether the system is in the reaction-
limited or in the diﬀusion-limited regime (see Ref. [7] for details). For large values of s we
have P (α, β) ≃ δ(α, β) (where δ is the Kronecker delta): chemical reactions occur at a
very slow rate. This is the diﬀusion-limited regime, where diﬀusion is able to maintain the
homogeneity in the system, and where Eqs. (4) and (5) are meaningful, as the conditions
for their derivation are fulﬁlled. On the other hand, for small values of s chemical reactions
occur at a much faster rate, and diﬀusion is no longer able to maintain spatial homogeneity.
This is the reaction-limited regime. In the next section we present a theory that explains
the behavior of the system throughout both regimes.

III. RING KINETIC THEORY

In mean ﬁeld or Boltzmann approximation all correlations between occupation numbers
are neglected, and the state of the system is completely speciﬁed by the average occupation
numbers,

fi(r, t) = hsi(r, t)i.

The time evolution of fi(r, t) is given by the nonlinear Boltzmann equation,

fi(r, t + 1) = fi(r, t) + Ii[f (r, t)].

The nonlinear collision operator is deﬁned as

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Ii[f ] =

(σi − si)AsσF (s) ≡ hσi − siiF .

s,σ
X

4

We have introduced h· · ·iF as an average that assumes that the precollision state is factorized
over all channels, so that the probability to ﬁnd a state s is given by

F (s) =

i (1 − fi)1−si.
f si

Yi

In this approximation, where F (s) is given by Eq. (9), and the transition rates Asσ are those
of the Maginu model, the nonlinear Boltzmann equation (7) is equivalent to the mean ﬁeld
rate equations (4) and (5).

To go beyond the mean ﬁeld approximation we consider the pair correlation function,

Cij(r − r′, t) = hδsi(r, t)δsj(r′, t)i.

Here we have assumed that the system is translational invariant. The ﬂuctuations are deﬁned
as δsi = si−fi. A special role is played by the on-node correlations Cij(0, t); by deﬁnition the
diagonal elements vanish: Cii(0, t) ≡ 0. We neglect all triplet and higher order correlations.
In a spatially homogeneous system, where fi(r, t) = fi(t), the time evolution of fi(t) is then
described by the generalized Boltzmann equation,

fi(t + 1) − fi(t) = Ii[f (t)] +

I ′
i,kl[f (t)]Ckl(t).

Xk<l

Here the operator I ′ describes corrections to the Boltzmann collision term I. It is deﬁned
by

I ′
i,kl[f ] =

∂2Ii[f ]
∂fk∂fl

=

(σi − si)

*

δskδsl
gkgl +F

,

where gi = h(δsi)2i = fi(1 − fi) is the single channel ﬂuctuation.

In order to have a complete theory we must provide a time evolution equation for Cij(r, t).
To derive this equation we will make the important assumption that the average occupations
change slowly in time. In fact, as far as the evolution of Cij(r, t) is concerned, we will assume
that no chemical reactions occur at all, so that the model is purely diﬀusive. Under this
assumption, the average occupations in equilibrium are given by

f eq
i = x
f eq
i = y

(i = 1, 2, 3, 4)
(i = 5, 6, 7, 8),

where x and y are the average concentrations of species X and Y , respectively. When fi(r, t)
is close to equilibrium, the approach to equilibrium is given by the linearized Boltzmann
equation (δfi = fi − f eq

i ),

δfi(r + ci, t + 1) =

(11 + Ω)ijδfj(r, t),

where 11ij = δij and the linearized Boltzmann operator is deﬁned by

Ωij =

∂Ii[f ]
∂fj

=

(σi − si)

*

δsj
gj +F

.

j
X

5

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Under the assumption of slow reactions we have

(11 + Ω) =

(16)

1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1

.


















1
4


















It is natural to assume that ﬂuctuations δsi(r, t) will decay to equilibrium in a manner
similar to δfi(r, t), i.e.,

δsi(r + ci, t + 1) =

(11 + Ω)ijδsj(r, t).

(17)

Xj
However, two ﬂuctuations at the same node will be correlated after collision, even if before
collision the distribution is completely factorized. This is a consequence of the violation of
detailed balance [3]. The generation of on-node postcollision correlations is quantiﬁed by

Ω2,0

ij [f (t)] = hδσi(r, t)δσj(r, t)iF .

This expression vanishes in the non-reactive limit s → ∞. The presence of on-node correla-
tions Cij(0, t) before collision gives rise to corrections to Ω2,0
ij [f (t)], and the full postcollision
source term is given by (see Ref. [3])

Bij(t) = Ω2,0

ij [f (t)] + Cij(0, t) +

Ω2,2

ij,kl[f (t)]Ckl(0, t),

Xk,l

where Ω2,2
Cij(r, t) in Eq. (10) we obtain the ring kinetic equation

ij,kl[f (t)] = ∂2Ω2,0

ij /∂fk∂fl. Combining Eqs. (17) and (19) with the deﬁnition of

Cij(r + ci − cj, t + 1) = (1 − δr,0)

(11 + Ω)ik(11 + Ω)jlCkl(r, t) + δr,0Bij[f (t)].

(20)

Xk,l

This equation has been derived in a more systematic fashion in Ref. [3].

The physical interpretation of Eq. (20) is as follows. Two ﬂuctuations on the same node
r that are correlated after collision at time t0, will be propagated to neighboring nodes r + ci
and r + cj. Due to the collision with other particles at these nodes the correlation will be
scattered to all directions as described by (11 + Ω). Thus both ﬂuctuations branch into many
diﬀerent paths. At time t0 + τ the weight of each path is given by the same factor (1/4)τ .
If two correlated paths end at the same node — a so-called “ring”-collision — they give
rise to on-node precollision correlations, C(0, t0 + τ ) ∼ (1/4)2τ B(t0), that change the time
evolution of the average occupations according to Eq. (11). The actual value of Cij(r, t) is
a superposition of “ring” contributions from source terms at all earlier times, although the
dominant contribution comes from the last few time steps.
The fact that Eq. (20) is linear in C allows us to write

(18)

(19)

6

Cij(0, t) =

Kij,kl(t − t′)Bkl(t′).

(21)

t−1

Xt′=0 Xk,l

Here Kij,kl(t − t′) is a memory kernel which does not depend on any of the model parameters
— although it does depend on the system size L — and thus can be constructed once and
for all using Eq. (20). This can be done in an eﬃcient manner by exploiting the rotation
and reﬂection symmetry of Kij,kl(t − t′).

After an initial fast decay, the memory function decays algebraically for large t, as
Kij,kl(t) ∝ t−α with α ≃ 1.2 for L = 256. When the ring kinetic theory is evaluated
numerically, on time scales on the order of 103 time steps this slow decay leads to the build-
up of pair correlations that are much larger that what is observed in simulations. This excess
of correlations would be corrected if we include higher order correlations that are not taken
into account by the the present form of the ring kinetic theory. Therefore it is desirable to
cut oﬀ the memory kernel for large times, i.e., to set Kij,kl(t) ≡ 0 for t > tcutoﬀ . It is natural
to choose the cut-oﬀ equal to the time it takes to travel across the the system: tcutoﬀ = L.
By rewriting Eq. (20) in Fourier representation, it can be interpreted in terms of modes at
diﬀerent wavevectors q (see Ref. [3]). When no reactions occur, the diﬀusive modes around
q = 0 and the (spurious) staggered modes around q = (π, π) play a special role, since they
correspond to conserved densities. However, in the presence of reactive collisions there are
no conserved densities, and all modes are in principle equally important in determining the
size of the correlations.

In the next section we will compare theoretical predictions with the results of computer
simulations. Numerically, the theory of this section is evaluated as follows. At time t = 0 we
set fi(0) = x0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ 4, fi(0) = y0 for 5 ≤ i ≤ 8, and Cij(r, 0) = 0. To perform a time
evolution step from time t to time t+1, we ﬁrst use f (t) to calculate the nonlinear Boltzmann
operator Ii[f (t)] and the correction term I ′
i,kl[f (t)]. Together with the on-node correlations
Cij(0, t) we then use these operators to calculate fi(t + 1) with the help of Eq. (11). To
calculate the evolution of the pair correlation function we use fi(t) and Cij(0, t) to evaluate
the source term Bij(t) in Eq. (19) and then obtain Cij(r, t + 1) with the help of Eq. (20).
Iteration of the above procedure yields the set {[x(t), y(t)]; t ≥ 0} deﬁning a trajectory in
the x-y concentration plane. For large times, either a ﬁxed point or a limit cycle is reached.

IV. COMPARISON WITH SIMULATIONS

Our simulations were carried out on a 256 × 256 square lattice. The parameters used in
the simulations were k = 0.9 and c = 2, i.e., identical to those used in Ref. [7]. At t = 0
the system was prepared in an uncorrelated homogeneous state, with average concentrations
x0 = y0 = 0.6. Then we performed the time evolution of the LGA, according to section II.
The initial time steps were discarded, as the system needs some time to build up the corre-
lations that will eventually produce the shrinking of the limit cycle. Once the correlations
have been created we record the spatially averaged concentration of both species. The scale
parameter s was varied between s = 2 and s = 20.

In Fig. 1 the dashed line denotes the limit cycle as it is obtained from the mean ﬁeld
theory deﬁned by Eqs. (4) and (5), assuming that the concentration of both species are
homogeneous and the term ∇2 can be neglected. For relatively large values of the time

7

scaling parameter s we expect mean ﬁeld theory to be accurate. This is conﬁrmed by the
simulation data for s = 20, shown as a gray band in Fig. 1, which are reasonably close to
the mean ﬁeld prediction. The width of the gray band corresponds to the ﬂuctuations in
the spatially averaged concentrations that occur due to the ﬁnite system size.

When s is decreased correlations become important (measurements show that correla-
tions are typically 10 times larger for s = 4 than for s = 20) and the diﬀusion process is
not able to keep the system homogeneous. As a consequence, diﬀerent regions in the system
become desynchronized to a certain degree, and the contribution to the average concentra-
tion of one region is partially canceled out by out-of-phase contributions from other regions.
This produces a shrinking of the limit cycle in Fig. 1, as is shown by the simulation data for
s = 6 and s = 4 in Fig. 1. The eﬀect is stronger for smaller s.

It is clear from Fig. 1 that mean ﬁeld theory completely fails for the smaller values of s.
The solid black lines in Fig. 1 represent the limit cycle as it is predicted by the ring kinetic
theory of section III. For the values s = 20 and s = 6 shown in Fig. 1 our theory gives
an excellent quantitative prediction of the shrinking of the limit cycle. For s = 4 there are
deviations due to higher order eﬀects that are not taken into account.

Analysis of the ring kinetic theory shows that as s is further decreased, the limit cycle
shrinks continually, until at s ≃ 3 there is an inverse Hopf bifurcation from a limit cycle
to a ﬁxed point. This bifurcation corresponds to a desynchronization transition, where the
coherence between diﬀerent regions is lost completely. It should be noted that this transition
is of a diﬀerent character than the Hopf bifurcation that occurs at the mean ﬁeld level as a
function of the model parameters k and c.

Let us consider the case s = 2 in some detail. Here s is close to the smallest possible
value (see Ref. [7]) and the ﬂuctuations caused by the chemical reactions are strongest here.
Diﬀusion is not fast enough to keep the system homogeneous except at very small scales.
The ring kinetic theory for s = 2 predicts a ﬁxed point located at x = y = 1/2. Simulations
for a system of linear size L = 256 reveal that the average concentrations ﬂuctuate around
the point x = y = 1/2 in a irregular fashion, and in a range between 0.47 and 0.53. In order
to assess whether the result of the simulations for s = 2 corresponds to a ﬁxed point or to
a limit cycle, we compared numerical simulations for three diﬀerent system sizes: L = 32,
L = 256, and L = 1024. The concentration of species X versus time is plotted in Fig. 2.
The vertical scale in all three plots is the same. Clearly, the amplitude of the oscillation
decreases with the system size. In the L = 32 system the concentration x oscillates with an
amplitude δx ≃ 0.10; in the L = 256 system we have δx ≃ 0.02, and in the L = 1024 system
the ﬂuctuations are very small, δx ≃ 0.004. It is reasonable to conclude that for s = 2 the
correct solution is a stable ﬁxed point, in perfect agreement with our theory.

In close connection with this last point, we have veriﬁed that for s ≥ 4 the limit cycle
obtained in the simulations is ﬁnite and stable, and independently of the size of the system
up to size L = 1024. For s = 3 our ring kinetic theory predicts a ﬁxed point x = y = 1/2.
However, simulations are here not conclusive, as systems of intermediate size L = 256 show a
limit cycle, but large systems do not reach any stationary behavior within available computer
time. We conclude that the (inverse) Hopf bifurcation from a limit cycle to a ﬁxed point
at the level of the spatially averaged concentrations in a large enough system must occur
between s = 2 and s = 4.

The comparison between ring kinetic theory and simulations has so far been restricted to

8

the shape of the limit cycle. Figure 1 however does not give any information about the actual
time evolution of the concentrations, or the period of oscillation around the limit cycle. In
order to obtain this information, we have plotted in Fig. 3 the average concentration of
the two species versus time, for both theory and simulations. Figure 3A and B show the
concentration of particles of type X and Y , respectively, for s = 10. Simulation results are
indicated by a solid line, while the ring kinetic theory is denoted by a dashed line. The
amplitudes of the oscillation agree quite well, as we already knew from Fig. 1. There is
however some deviation between theoretical and simulated periods, that causes the curves
to become slightly out of phase. The diﬀerence between both oscillation periods is about
3%. Figures 3C and D show similar curves for s = 4. Here the agreement is worse, and the
diﬀerence in periods is about 11%.

Figure 4 shows how the oscillation period — normalized by dividing by s — depends on s.
We have plotted the mean ﬁeld value of the period as a dashed line; the ring theory is denoted
by circles, and simulation results by triangles. It was shown in Fig. 1 that ring kinetic theory
predicts the shape of the limit cycle quite well down to s ≃ 6. It is therefore somewhat
surprising that the mean ﬁeld prediction for the oscillation period, which is s-independent, is
better than ring kinetic theory for all values of s. To resolve this issue it would be necessary
to include higher order correlation functions in the theoretical description. This is clearly
beyond the scope of the present paper. Furthermore, it can be seen that the approach to
the mean ﬁeld period for large s is slow, and even for s = 20 there is a clear deviation of
about 1%. This eﬀect is probably due to the particular choice of the transition rates, that
are not able to maintain the local diﬀusive equilibrium even for high s [2].

V. DISCUSSION

In this paper we have shown how a theory that takes into account equal-time pair cor-
relations, provides an excellent explanation of the large deviations from mean ﬁeld theory
observed in diﬀusion-limited chemical reactions, as modeled by lattice-gas automata (LGA).
Our theory is a straightforward application of the general framework established in the pa-
pers of Ernst and coworkers [3,4]. It is not restricted to the Maginu model, but is applicable
to any chemical reaction that can be modeled with an LGA.

It is in principle possible to include triplet and higher order correlations as well. How-
ever, the good agreement between theory and simulations indicates that the ring theory of
section III captures the essential physics in a quantitative way. Although the comparison
between theory and simulations reported here is restricted to the domain of LGA’s, we
expect that mutatis mutandi the general concepts apply equally well to continuous systems.
We have focused on a particular two-species model exhibiting periodic oscillations of the
average concentrations. Wu and Kapral [9] have studied a model with more complicated
temporal behavior — period doubling bifurcations and a transition to a strange attractor, as
model parameters are changed. They investigated the consequences of spatial ﬂuctuations
by means of computer simulations. It is an interesting question whether some of the features
observed in that work can be explained using the theory presented in this paper. As a ﬁnal
remark we mention that our theory provides a more microscopic analogue of the Langevin
equation method used in Ref. [10] to predict the magnitude of spatial density correlations.

9

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It is a great pleasure to dedicate this paper to Matthieu Ernst on the occasion of his
sixtieth birthday. Over the last decade, Matthieu has played an important role in developing
a broad theoretical understanding of the behavior of lattice gas automata. Both authors
have greatly enjoyed working with him, and appreciate his exceptional sense of responsibility,
in particular when it comes to training young scientists.

We thank D. Dab and J. P. Boon for providing us with the table with the transition

rates. R.B. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from D.G.I.C.yT. (Spain), project PB94-0265.

10

REFERENCES

[1] U. Frisch, D. d’Humi`eres, B. Hasslacher, P. Lallemand, Y. Pomeau, and J.-P. Rivet,
Complex Systems 1, 31 (1987) [reprinted in G. Doolen, ed., Lattice-Gas Methods for
Partial Diﬀerential Equations (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1990)].

[2] J. P. Boon, D. Dab, R. Kapral, and A. Lawniczak, Phys. Rep. 273, 55 (1996).
[3] H.J. Bussemaker, M.H. Ernst, and J.W. Dufty, J. Stat. Phys. 78, 1521 (1995).
[4] M. H. Ernst and H. J. Bussemaker, J. Stat. Phys. 81, 515 (1995); R. Brito, H. J. Busse-
maker, M. H. Ernst, and J. Matsui, Phys. Rev. E 52, 2657 (1995); H. J. Bussemaker,
Phys. Rev. E 53, 1644 (1996); H. J. Bussemaker and M. H. Ernst, Phys. Rev. E 53,
5837 (1996).

[5] B. M. Boghosian and W. Taylor, Phys. Rev. E 52, 510 (1995).
[6] B. M. Boghosian and Taylor, J. Stat. Phys. 81, 295 (1995).
[7] D. Dab and J. P. Boon, and Y.-X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1940 (1993).
[8] K. Maginu, Math. Biosci, 27, 17 (1975); J.Diﬀ. Eqs., 31, 130 (1978).
[9] X.-G. Wu and R. Kapral, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1940 (1993).
[10] J. R. Weimar, D. Dab, J. P. Boon, and S. Succi, Europhys. Lett. 20, 627 (1992).

11

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Average concentrations x and y in the Maginu model for several values of the time
scaling parameter: s = 4, 6, and 20. The outer dashed line corresponds to mean ﬁeld theory, given
by Eqs. (4) and (5). Solid lines correspond to the ring kinetic theory of section III. The gray
bands denote the result of computer simulations performed on square lattices of size 256 × 256;
their width corresponds to the size of the ﬂuctuations from cycle to cycle.

FIG. 2. Average concentration x of species X versus time t for the Maginu model at s = 2, and
system size 32 × 32, 256 × 256, and 1024 × 1024, respectively. The bigger the system, the smaller
the ﬂuctuations.

FIG. 3. Concentration of species X and Y versus time t for s = 10 (ﬁgures A and B), and for
s = 4 (ﬁgures C and D). Solid lines are the results of the computer simulations (in systems of size
256 × 256), while the dashed lines correspond to ring kinetic theory.

FIG. 4. Oscillation period as a function of s. The mean ﬁeld value is indicated by a dashed
line. Circles denote the ring kinetic theory prediction of section III. Triangles are the simulation
values. Mean ﬁeld theory is here in better agreement with simulations than ring kinetic theory.

12

FIGURE 1

0.7

0.6

y

0.5

0.4

s=6
s=20

s=4

x

0.3

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Title: Theory for Diffusion-Limited Oscillating Chemical Reactions

Authors: H.J. Bussemaker and R. Brito 

13

FIGURE 2

L=32

L=256

x

0.5

x

0.5

0.7

0.3

0.7

0.3

0.7

x

0.5

0.3

0

500

1500

2000

L=1024

1000
t

Title: Theory for Diffusion-Limited Oscillating Chemical Reactions

Authors: H.J. Bussemaker and R. Brito 

14

FIGURE 3

x

y

x

y

0.80

0.50

0.20

0.80

0.50

0.20

0.70

0.50

0.30

0.70

0.50

0.30

A

B

C

D

0

500

1000

1500

2000

0

500

1500

2000

1000
t

Title: Theory for Diffusion-Limited Oscillating Chemical Reactions

Authors: H.J. Bussemaker and R. Brito 

15

FIGURE 4

s
/
d
o
i
r
e
P

52

50

48

46

44

42

Mean field
Ring theory
Simulation

0

5

15

20

10
s

Title: Theory for Diffusion-Limited Oscillating Chemical Reactions

Authors: H.J. Bussemaker and R. Brito 

16

