7
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
1
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

He Scattering from Random Adsorbates, Disordered Compact

Islands and Fractal Submonolayers: Intensity Manifestations of

Surface Disorder

A.T. Yinnon,a D.A. Lidar (Hamburger),a,b I. Farbman,a R.B. Gerber,a,c P. Zeppenfeld,d

M.A. Krzyzowski,d and G. Comsad

aDepartment of Physical Chemistry and The Fritz Haber Center for Molecular Dynamics, The

Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel

bDepartment of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel

cDepartment of Chemistry, University of California - Irvine, Irvine, CA 92717, USA

dInstitut f¨ur Grenzﬂ¨achenforschung und Vakuumphysik, Forschunszentrum J¨ulich, Postfach 1913,

D-52425 J¨ulich, Germany

Abstract

A theoretical study is made on He scattering from three basic classes of dis-

ordered adlayers: (a) Translationally random adsorbates, (b) disordered com-

pact islands and (c) fractal submonolayers. The implications of the results to

experimental studies of He scattering from disordered surfaces are discussed,

and a combined experimental-theoretical study is made for Ag submonolay-

ers on Pt(111). Some of the main theoretical ﬁndings are: (1) The scattering

intensities from the three disorder classes diﬀer signiﬁcantly, and can be used

to distinguish between them. (2) Structural aspects of the calculated intensi-

ties from translationally random clusters were found to be strongly correlated

with those of individual clusters. (3) For fractal islands, just as for all surfaces

considered here, the oﬀ-specular intensity depends on the parameters of the

1

He/Ag interaction, and does not follow a universal power law as previously

proposed in the literature.

In the experimental-theoretical study of Ag on Pt(111), we use experi-

mental He scattering data from low-coverage (single adsorbate) systems to

determine an empirical He/Ag-Pt potential of good quality. Then, we carry

out He scattering calculations for high coverage and compare with exper-

iments for these systems. The conclusion is that the actual experimental

phase corresponds to small compact Ag clusters of narrow size distribution,

with partial translational disorder.

2

I. INTRODUCTION

The properties of thin metal or semiconductor ﬁlms on solid substrates are of major

theoretical, experimental and technological interest. The structure of these ﬁlms inﬂuences

their physical and chemical properties, and these may be of central importance, for exam-

ple, in the fabrication of electronic devices. The shape of adlayers generally depends on the

growth kinetics and the microscopic characteristics of the substrate. Thin ﬁlms are typically

produced by epitaxial growth processes, wherein vapor atoms or clusters are deposited on a

substrate.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 Once adsorbed, the adatoms diﬀuse on the substrate surface, and when

reaching short mutual distance they can form stable nuclei, which subsequently grow to

clusters or islands by attachment of further adatoms. Nucleation and growth are competing

processes, which depend on diﬀusion of adatoms, stability of the adsorbed clusters, and

surface diﬀusion of these clusters. Therefore, thin ﬁlm structures contain a wealth of in-

formation about microscopic growth processes, and adatom/substrate and adatom/adatom

interactions.

Experimental studies have shown that in addition to ordered adlayers, various disordered

structures may form. For example on adsorption of Ag on Pt(111) surfaces, at low substrate

temperatures and low deposition rates, isolated small clusters may form.2,3,4,5 Elevation of

the surface temperature or lowering of the deposition rate can lead to the growth of fractal

islands.2,3 At even higher temperatures randomly distributed compact islands may form.2,3,4,5

Therefore, thin ﬁlms oﬀer an exceptional opportunity for studying two dimensional disor-

dered systems. By investigating the relation between the structure of thin ﬁlms and their

growth processes, valuable information can be obtained about the processes leading to the

emergence of diﬀerent kinds of disorder. This, however, requires techniques for determining

the disordered adlayer structure.

Surface morphologies can be probed by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) or diﬀrac-

tion techniques, such as thermal energy atom scattering (TEAS), low-energy or reﬂective

high energy electron diﬀraction (LEED or RHEED). Diﬀraction methods have the property

3

that in addition to being sensitive to local surface features, they resolve the global sur-

face structure. Accordingly, they provide a better average of the over-all topography than

direct imaging techniques, such as STM. Moreover, diﬀraction readily allows for monitor-

ing adlayer growth in situ and at various temperatures and therefore can easily follow its

temporal evolution. For studying surface structure, a technique of great power is Helium

atom scattering. It is non-destructive, and He only probes the outer layer. Also, thermal

He atom scattering is dominantly elastic. Moreover, since its wavelength is of the order

of surface unit cells, it is very sensitive to the local adlayer structure. He atom scattering

has successfully been employed in the study of ordered surfaces and surfaces with isolated

defects. However, relatively little is known as yet on the manifestations of diﬀerent kinds of

disorder in He scattering patterns. Two of the few experimentally and theoretically stud-

ied disordered surfaces are those of substitutionally disordered mixed Xe+Kr monolayers

on Pt(111),9 and translationally disordered small Pt-clusters on Pt(111).10 It was found

that attenuation of the specular peak in He scattering from the surface due to the presence

of adsorbates or other defects contains a wealth of information about adatom/adatom in-

teractions, the clustering of adatoms, and 2D vs. 3D epitaxial growth.10 Also, non-Bragg

maxima, e.g., Fraunhofer or rainbow maxima, appear for such systems. These maxima con-

tain information on the microstructure of islands and are sensitive to percolation transitions.

Non-specular Bragg peaks appear as well, which contain information on the corrugation of

the He/adlayer interaction.9 The study of randomly adsorbed rare-gas overlayers has the

advantage that the interactions between the rare gas atoms and He are well known.

In

contrast little is known about the interactions in a He/(metal adsorbate)/(metal substrate)

system. So far, this has complicated the interpretation of features in the angular scattering

patterns, and has made identifying diﬀerent kinds of disorder diﬃcult.

In this paper, for the ﬁrst time a comparative He scattering study is undertaken among

three major classes of disorder: Translationally random adatoms, translationally random

compact islands, and fractal/dendritic submonolayers. These classes are representative

of a large proportion of the experimentally reported adlayer structures at submonolayer

4

coverage.11 It is thus of fundamental interest to understand the diﬀerences in their respec-

tive He scattering intensity distributions, and to investigate whether the type of disorder

can be identiﬁed by a He scattering experiment. In order to carry out this program reliably,

we determined the interaction potential between He and a Pt(111) surface with an adsorbed

Ag atom. From this we have constructed what we hope is a realistic potential function

for He interaction with a disordered metal submonolayer. The choice of the Ag/Pt(111)

system was motivated by the fact that the He/Pt(111) potential is rather smooth parallel

to the surface. Therefore the structures in the scattering patterns are mainly due to the Ag

adsorbates. Moreover, the He/Pt(111) belongs to one of the few atom/surface systems for

which a fairly reliable empirical potential is available.

The outline of the paper is as follows: Section II describes the experimental and theo-

retical methods employed, and states the assumptions made in the theoretical part of this

work. Section III discusses the scattering from the diﬀerent disorder classes. In section III C

we analyze the experimental scattering data and suggest a morphological identiﬁcation of

the disordered phase present on the surface. Concluding remarks are presented in section

IV.

II. SYSTEMS AND METHODS

The adlayer structures studied here theoretically are:

1. Full Ag monolayer.

2. Single adsorbed Ag atom.

3. Isolated small compact cluster (henceforth SCC).

4. Ag adatoms randomly adsorbed on a lattice.

5. SCCs of Ag randomly adsorbed on a lattice.

6. Ag adatoms completely randomly and continuously distributed (Ag adatoms can

be arbitrarily close).

5

7. Large compact Ag islands.

8. Fractal islands of Ag atoms.

(1) and (2) are important as a reference, and for developing potentials. All other cases

were chosen as representing important types of disorder. In all cases, the adsorbates are

on a Pt(111) surface. In the case of randomly adsorbed Ag adatoms one would expect to

observe system (4) and not the idealized system (6). However, calculations for the latter

structure leads to additional insight into angular scattering patterns.

A. Experimental Methods

The experiments were performed in a high resolution UHV helium scattering apparatus

with a nominal base pressure < 10−

10 mbar. The system is equipped with a commercial

Knudsen cell by means of which high purity (99.999%) silver can be evaporated onto the

Pt(111) sample at a rate between 10−

1 and 10−

4 monolayers per second. The Pt(111) sample

was cleaned by repeated cycles of heating in an oxygen atmosphere (10−

6 mbar) at 750K,

sputtering with 1 keV Ar-ions followed by short annealing at 1250K. The sample is mounted

on a manipulator which allows the crystal to be rotated around its three principal axes. In

addition, the total angle χ = θi + θf of the incident and outgoing He-beam can be varied

between 60◦ and 120◦ by rotating the detector. By means of a liquid helium cryostat the

sample can be cooled to 20K and by concomitant heating by electron bombardment the

surface temperature can be set and held constant at any value between 20K and 1250K.

The experiments reported here (e.g., Fig.1) involve two diﬀerent modes of operation of the

He-scattering apparatus. In the ﬁrst mode, the specularly scattered He-intensity is recorded

during the deposition of silver at a constant rate. From the initial slope (extrapolated

towards silver coverage Θ

0) the scattering cross-section of the Ag-nuclei initially formed

→

on the surface are obtained. From a detailed analysis of the shape of the deposition curves,

we can infer that at the temperature of 38K at which the data in Fig.1 were taken these

6

initial Ag nuclei are individual Ag atoms randomly distributed on the Pt(111) surface. The

initial slope of the He-intensity curve, therefore, directly yields the He cross section Σ(kz)

(as deﬁned by Eq.(6) below), where kz = k cos(θi) is determined by the wavevector k of the

incident He beam, related to its energy by E = ¯h2k2/(2m). θi = θf (specular scattering)

denotes the incident and outgoing angle of the He beam measured against the surface normal.

To measure the dependence of the cross section Σ on kz, either the total scattering angle

χ = θi + θf or the energy of the incident He beam has to be varied. We have chosen the

second option which, in practice, we achieve by varying the nozzle temperature from liquid

nitrogen temperature to above room temperature at constant total scattering angle χ = 90◦.

This temperature variation corresponds to a change of the energy E from 18 to 90 meV,

i.e., from kz = 4.15˚A−

1 to 9.28˚A−

1.

The second type of experiment is the analysis of diﬀraction proﬁles as shown, e.g., in

Fig.8. Here, the He-intensity is recorded as a function of the parallel wavevector transfer

∆ ~K.

In the present case, the incident and outgoing beams lie in the same plane as the

surface normal (in plane scattering) and ∆K = k(sin θf −
of the scattering plane relative to the surface crystallographic directions can be varied by

sin θi). The azimuthal orientation

rotating the crystal around its surface normal. In Fig.8 the surface was oriented along the

[11¯2]-direction (i.e., the direction along which the ﬁrst order Bragg peaks of the hexagonal

substrate lattice are expected).

Our scattering apparatus is equipped with a time-of-ﬂight (TOF) spectrometer allowing

to separate the elastic from the inelastically scattered He intensity by counting only those

He-atoms within a narrow energy window of about 0.5meV centered around the incident

beam energy. In this way, even the very small elastic signals away from the Bragg peaks can

be discriminated. As shown in the next sections, these elastic features provide important

information on the surface morphology.

All the experiments reported here were conducted at low temperatures, T = 38K. As

already mentioned, this ensures that small silver clusters are formed as a consequence of the

limited mobility of the Ag adatoms on the Pt(111) surface. Although similar in size and

7

distribution, these low-temperature structures should not be confused with those obtained

after depositing or annealing Ag at high surface temperature, T

620K.2,3,4 At these elevated

≥

temperatures, the Ag atoms are embedded into the topmost Pt(111) layer forming small,

stable clusters as a consequence of the surface strain.4,12.

Instead, the low temperature

structures presented here are diﬀusion limited aggregates composed of Ag atoms adsorbed

on top of the Pt(111) surface. A detailed account on the diﬀerence of these two conﬁgurations

will be given in a forthcoming paper.13

B. Theoretical Methods

In modeling the substrate, we assumed a ﬂat supporting surface. Indeed, the He/Pt(111)

equipotential surface is rather smooth, leading to very little oﬀ-specular scattered He.14 How-

ever, due to the lattice misﬁt of about 4% between Ag and Pt,13,15 the assumption of a ﬂat

Pt(111) surface is only a reasonable ﬁrst approximation. In addition, in all of our calcula-

tions we assume the Ag/Pt(111) system to be rigid. Note that experimentally the inelastic

contribution can be separated by a TOF spectrometer. As for elastic scattering, results of

calculations using a rigid, non-vibrating surface system should be useful at least for studying

the main qualitative features. Moreover, for diﬀraction scattering from crystalline surfaces,

the eﬀect of surface vibrations on the scattering intensities can be represented approxi-

mately by a simple Debye-Waller factor.16,17,18 A similar description should be successful for

the angular intensity distributions obtained in scattering from an adlayer.

1. Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations of Diﬀusion Limited Aggregates

We outline here the methods used to simulate the compact and fractal Ag islands (sys-

tems (7,8); Figs.6,7). There is an extensive literature on the modeling of adsorption, diﬀusion

and aggregation processes on homogeneous surfaces.19 To produce realistic arrangements of

adatoms on the surface we adopted the Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) method.20 The Pt(111)

surface was simulated as a hexagonal lattice of 100

100 unit cells with periodic boundary

×

8

conditions. As for the lateral interaction between adsorbed particles, the assumptions made

are critical for the shape and size of the ﬁnal clusters formed. We assumed that the interac-

tions between two adsorbates depend on the number of their nearest neighbors, nN N . Thus

the energy of a particle in a given conﬁguration is:

E(n) = E0 + nN N ǫ

(1)

where E0 = 5.2kcal/mole is the activation energy for diﬀusion at zero coverage, and ǫ =

5.0kcal/mole is the nearest neighbor interaction energy. No values were available for the ǫ

parameters for Ag on Pt(111). Therefore, we adopted the values given by Rosenfeld et al.5

for Pt adsorbed on Pt(111). These values, while not more than semiquantitatively valid,

should at least allow for the formation of plausible aggregates.

The diﬀusion of adatoms was modeled by random walks over nearest neighbor sites. The

hopping rate, i.e., the transition probability per unit time, of a particle from site i, where it

has ni nearest neighbors, to a neighboring site with nf nearest neighbors, is taken as

ωi

f = ν e−

E(ni)/(k T ) = ω0 e−

ni ǫ/(k T )

→

(2)

where ω0 = ν exp[

E0/(k T )] is the hopping frequency of an “isolated” particle; τ0 = 1/ω0

−

is the average time interval between successive moves on the bare (zero coverage) surface.

Since there is an uncertainty in our data regarding the values of the activation energy E0

and the interaction energy ǫ, it must be commented that there is a resulting uncertainty

in the temperature scale: Changing T at constant E(n) is equivalent to changing E(n) at

constant T . Note further that according to Eq.(2), the transition rate depends only on

the initial state. A possible dynamical interpretation of this model, originally suggested by

Uebing and Gomer,21 is that the rate of the transition from state i to state f , is governed

by the energy diﬀerence between the initial state and the transition state. The same is of

course true also for the reverse process (with the ﬁnal state replacing the initial state), so

that detailed balance is obeyed. We note that a situation where a rate depends on the gap

between any given initial state and the transition state holds widely for many activated

9

rate processes. Hopping diﬀusion involves overcoming a barrier between the initial and ﬁnal

conﬁgurations and therefore the model seems most reasonable here. The KMC simulations

were performed using the time-dependent Monte-Carlo scheme.20 In this scheme, instead

of randomly choosing particles and accepting or rejecting moves according to the given

transition probabilities (as in the “traditional” MC simulations), one performs a move in

any attempt, and propagates the time accordingly. More explicitly, we ﬁrst calculate the

average transition rate

i
h
move with probability ωi

r

= 1/

ωi

out of state i, then randomly sample a given i

f i
→
f and, ﬁnally, perform this move and record the time

→

f

h
ωi

elapsed as ∆t = 1/

r

. Further details about this procedure can be found elsewhere.19,20

f /

→

→

P

h

i

The simulation starts with two particles diﬀusing on the surface until a third particle

adsorbs. This period is typically 0.05 sec (for simulating an adsorption rate of 1ML/500sec),

corresponding to about 106 MC steps at room temperature. Then the three particles diﬀuse,

a fourth one adsorbs, and so on until the desired coverage is obtained. The conﬁgurations

attained are not at equilibrium, but reach a steady state after some time duration, when

the adsorption is terminated. The true equilibrium state corresponds most probably to a

segregated phase, with one large compact island formed by all the adsorbates. Both the

compact and the fractal clusters of Figs.6,7 were generated according to this procedure,

diﬀering only in the respective temperatures of 500K and 200K.

2. He Scattering Calculations

The

scattering

intensities were

calculated using

the Sudden Approximation

(SA),18,22,23,24,25 which has proved very useful in studies of atom scattering from defects26

and from substitutionally disordered rare-gas monolayers.9 On the basis of the experience

gained with the SA, including tests against numerically exact calculations for several model

systems,27 we estimate that at least the main predictions of the SA calculations should be

reliable for the systems studied here.

The SA takes the following form for the systems studied below. Consider a particular

10

(static) conﬁguration ~r =

of a disordered adlayer system consisting of N atoms

~r1, ..., ~rN }
{

with ~ri denoting the position of atom i. The angular intensity distribution for He scattered

from this adlayer involves an average over all conﬁgurations pertinent to the disorder:23,24

I(∆ ~K) =

1
A2

ei∆ ~K

~Re2i η~r( ~R)d ~R

·

2

.

Z Z

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
~K is the wavevector transfer of the He parallel to the surface,

(cid:28)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:29)

(3)

In this expression ∆ ~K = ~K ′

−

where ( ~K, kz) is the incident wavevector, and ( ~K ′,

kz) the ﬁnal wavevector of the scattered

−

He atom; ~R = (x, y) denotes the coordinates of the He atom in the surface plane; A is

the area of the surface over which the integration in Eq.(3) is performed;

denotes the

...
i

h

average over all conﬁgurations of the quantity in parenthesis; η~r( ~R) denotes the phase shift

for He scattering for an adlayer having a conﬁguration ~r. The phase shift is given in the

WKB approximation by22

η~r( ~R) =

∞
ξ( ~R)

dz

Z

k2
z −

(cid:18)h

2m V~r( ~R, z)/¯h2

1/2

i

kz

−

(cid:19) −

kz ξ( ~R),

where m is the mass of the He atom and z denotes the distance of the He atom from the

surface plane; V~r( ~R, z) is the interaction potential between the He atom at position ( ~R, z).

ξ( ~R) in Eq.(4) is the classical turning point for the He atom when colliding with the surface

at the lateral position ~R, i.e., ξ( ~R) is the z value for which

(4)

(5)

(¯hkz)2

2m V~r( ~R, z) = 0

−

3. The Interaction Potential

To determine the interaction of He atoms with the Pt(111) surface with a single adsorbed

Ag atom, we calculated the attenuation of the specular peak with incident He energy. This

attenuation is closely related to the cross-section of the adatom. The relation between the

cross-section Σ and the specular intensity I for scattering from random isolated adatoms

is:26,28

11

Σ =

1
I0

lim
0
Θ
→

dI
dΘ

,

(6)

(7)

(8)

where I0 represents the specular scattering intensity from the clean Pt(111) surface, n is the

number of sites per unit cell, and Θ the adatom coverage. The parameter Σ in Eq.(6) can

be interpreted as the cross-section of a single adatom. Indeed, Eq.(6) is only valid when the

cross-section of diﬀerent atoms can be viewed as non-overlapping. Σ is very sensitive to the

interaction potential. Therefore, we tried to ﬁnd a potential that is capable of reproducing

the experimentally observed changes in the specular scattering. We assumed the following

general form for the interaction potential between He and the Pt(111) surface with an

adsorbed Ag atom:

Morse potential,

VHe/Ag/Pt(111) = VHe/Pt(111) + VHe/Ag,

where VHe/Pt(111) is the interaction potential of He with the clean Pt(111) surface. A He-Pt

V (z) = De

e−

2α (z

zm)

−

2e−

α (z

zm)

−

−

(cid:16)
for this interaction29 is available in the literature, with De = 7.86meV= 2.89

(cid:17)

10−

4a.u. and

×

α = 0.98˚A−

1 = 0.52a.u.30 VHe/Ag is the interaction between He and an isolated adsorbed

Ag atom. We modeled this interaction with a Lennard-Jones potential, and changed its

parameters until the potential could reproduce the dependence of the experimental cross-

section on the incidence energy of the He atom. This procedure also yielded the value of

zm = 11.46a.u.

in the Morse potential. The high sensitivity of this ﬁt to the parameter

values is the source of our conﬁdence in the semiquantitative reliability of the potential.

For the interaction between He and multiple adsorbed Ag atoms, we assumed pairwise

interactions for the He atom with the adsorbed Ag atoms, i.e., VHe/Ag in Eq.(7) is replaced by

ΣiVHe/Ag(ri) where ri is the distance of the He from the ith Ag atom. The pairwise additive

potential for the interaction with a collection of Ag atoms is expected in general to be no

better than a ﬁrst approximation. We estimate, however, that it is suﬃcient in accuracy for

our purpose here.

12

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. He Interaction Potential with Pt(111) and adsorbed Ag

Specular scattering intensities were measured as a function of He incidence wavenumber

for a single adsorbed Ag atom. Using these values in Eq.(6) provided us with the exper-

imentally determined cross-sections, shown in Fig.1. Experimental constraints detailed in

Sec.II A limited the range of incident He wavenumber values. Subsequently, we attempted

to ﬁt the experimental cross-section data by ﬁnding an optimal set of C12 and C6 values for

the He/(adsorbed Ag atom) Lennard-Jones 6-12 potential

VHe/Ag =

C12
r12 −

C6
r6 ,

(9)

with which the specular intensities were calculated from Eq.(6). By adopting this trial

and error approach, we found that the experimental values are best reproduced with the

following Lennard-Jones parameters: C12 = 6.33

106a.u. and C6 = 29.0a.u. This leads to

req = (2C12/C6)1/6 = 4.6˚A and V (req)

0.9meV. A comparison between the experimental

×

≈

and theoretical values is presented in Fig.1. We found the ﬁt to be very sensitive to these

parameters, suggesting that our empirically determined potential models the long range

attractive and the short range repulsive interactions well, and its accuracy is mainly limited

by the experimental uncertainty.

B. Angular Scattering Patterns from Disordered Overlayers

The results will be outlined by examining the angular distributions of each of the disorder

classes, and comparing among them. In each case where random ensembles are discussed,

we averaged over 30 conﬁgurations.

13

1. Scattering from a Full Monolayer (system (1))

To evaluate the inﬂuence of surface disorder on He scattering, we ﬁrst calculated for

reference the angular intensity pattern for He scattered from a completely ordered monolayer

of Ag on Pt(111), i.e., for a silver coverage Θ = 1.

(The issue of incommensurability

does not arise here because we take the Pt(111) surface to be ﬂat – Eq.(8)). The incident

perpendicular He momentum is 3bohr−

1 = 5.67˚A−

1 (For the other calculations presented

below, we assumed the same incident momentum.) The result, presented in Fig.2, strong

ﬁrst order Bragg peaks along with the specular peak. The very weak background intensity is

due to ﬁnite grid eﬀects. Note that our calculations, based on a pairwise additive potential,

probably give the eﬀect of a too corrugated surface (hence diﬀraction stronger than the real

one) since the smoothing role of the conduction electrons is not included in the interaction.

2. Scattering from Single Clusters: Adatom and Small Compact Cluster (systems (2),(3))

The simplest deviation from perfect order is the introduction of a single defect. Such

defects, namely a single Ag adatom and SCC are the subject of this section. In subsequent

sections gradually more disordered systems will be considered.

The dashed lines in Figs.3,4 present the scattering results from a single adatom and

an SCC (heptamer) respectively. Despite their quantitatively diﬀerent appearance, the

scattering patterns share some important qualitative features:

a. Specular Peak: The sharp specular peak is due to He scattered from uncovered

Pt(111) surface areas, where the He/Pt(111) potential is not inﬂuenced by the defect. The

ﬂatness of this potential across the unperturbed surface results in almost perfect mirror

scattering.

b. Broadening of the Specular Peak:

Immediately below the specular “spike” a shoulder

appears, which is clearly wider in the single adatom case. In other words, the broadening of

the specular peak is inversely related to the cluster size.

14

c. Oﬀ-Specular Peaks: A series of rather broad, oﬀ-specular diﬀraction features follows

the specular broadening. The interesting feature is their spacing, which is larger for the

single adatom. Again, this spacing in reciprocal space is inversely related to the cluster size.

For a detailed quantitative analysis of this issue see Ref.[10]. Here it will suﬃce to mention

that the peak structure, as well as the specular broadening, can be satisfactorily explained in

terms of scattering from a hard hemispherical object of radius d. The resulting Fraunhofer

diﬀraction intensities are given by:31

I(φ)

(1 + cos φ) J1(k d sin φ)
sin φ

∝ (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

,

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(10)

where φ is the scattering angle, J1 denotes the Bessel function of ﬁrst order, and k is the

incident wavenumber. The parameter d can be interpreted as the radius of the scattering

cross-section. Indeed, we found using Eq.(10), that for scattering from an isolated heptamer

(Fig.4), the Fraunhofer interferences are those characteristic for an average island scattering

cross-section of three nearest-neighbor Ag atoms.

Another mechanism at work in the scattering from defects is rainbow scattering, in

which the positions of the peaks are determined by the inﬂexion points of the equipotential

surface.25,18 For an extensive treatment of this issue in the heptamer case, see Ref.[10].

3. Scattering from Adatoms and SCCs Randomly Adsorbed on a Lattice (systems (4),(5))

A natural transition to more complex disorder is obtained by considering a collection of

clusters, randomly adsorbed on the hexagonal lattice. A system like this can be formed in

realistic conditions when gas phase Ag atoms are deposited on a cold Pt(111) surface, such

that the Ag mobility is very small.2,3,4,5 Scattering from such translationally random systems

is the subject of the present section.

The results for a system of single adatoms and SCCs at 15% coverage are presented as

the solid lines in Figs.3,4. Let us enumerate the central features:

a. Specular and Bragg Peaks: The sharp specular peak is as usual an indication that

signiﬁcant portions of the Pt(111) surface remain ﬂat.

In addition one observes strong

15

ﬁrst and second order Bragg peaks at multiples of 2π/a (a = 2.77˚A is the Pt(111) lattice

constant). What is their origin? It is not the underlying ﬂat Pt(111) surface, as proved

by the absence of Bragg peaks in the case of the individual defect systems of Figs.3,4.

Nor is it the small (111) plateau on top of the SCCs (see inset of Fig.4), since the Bragg

peaks are observed also for the adatom system, which has no such structure. Thus these

peaks can only be the result of the strong corrugation induced by the presence of the Ag

adatoms and clusters on the lattice. This must be so in spite of their random positions on

this lattice. Since the Bragg peaks are robust and their intensities are comparatively high

(

10−

3 relative to specular), they are easily measurable. In addition, they yield to a simple

∼
theoretical description, and thus are attractive candidates for the calibration of a simple

model potential from experimental data.

b. Similarity to Single Cluster and Eﬀect of Disorder: Perhaps the most striking result

from the present calculations is the close (qualitative) resemblance between the intensity

distributions from the single clusters and their random counterparts. This can be seen

very clearly in Figs.3,4, where the distributions are slightly oﬀset for clarity. As is especially

conspicuous in the SCC case (Fig.4), there is a one-to-one correspondence between essentially

every (broad) oﬀ-specular peak in the single and random case, respectively. The eﬀect of the

randomness seems to be limited to a modiﬁcation of the single-cluster intensity distribution

by the addition of noise. In the previous section we identiﬁed the principal cause for the

peak structure in the scattering from a single cluster to be Fraunhofer scattering. This,

then, must also be the dominant mechanism in the scattering from the random systems.

The Fraunhofer mechanism is sensitive to local surface details, through the cross-section of

the individual cluster [Eq.(10)]. Since this is a feature of the adlayer which is not expected

to change signiﬁcantly in the transition to an ensemble, the similarity agrees with intuition.

But why does the randomness have such little eﬀect? This can be understood qualitatively

as follows: For a regular super-lattice of islands, one would expect a set of Bragg peaks at

multiples of the inverse super-lattice constant. For a random set of islands, as in the present

16

case, such long-range translational order is not present, and the only order that remains in

the system is the structure of the individual islands and the discreteness of the underlying

lattice giving rise to the Bragg peaks at the Pt positions. Hence this is the only coherent

contribution (though the Fraunhofer or rainbow mechanisms) to the intensity spectrum.

The eﬀect of the disorder is then reduced to the addition of noise. In the next section we

investigate what happens when even the pinning due to the underlying substrate lattice is

lost.

case.

4. Scattering from a Fully Random Adatom System (system (6))

In the previous section we considered a random adatom system on a lattice. Here we

consider the same system of randomly located adatoms, with the lattice constraint removed.

Thus, each Ag adatom is located completely randomly, as if the Pt(111) surface were per-

fectly smooth. Although this system is rather artiﬁcial, it removes the distance length scale

between the atoms, which the lattice implies. Consequently in this model, adatoms can be

“merged” into each other into statistically allowed structures. This non-lattice system is

amenable to analytical modeling, as discussed below.

The scattering results from this system are presented in Fig.5, for a system of 15%

coverage Ag on Pt(111). The scattering intensity is very similar to that obtained for the

lattice system of Fig.3. The broadening of the specular peak is essentially identical, and the

decay of the intensity beyond the broadening is the same apart from the oscillations absent

in Fig.5. These oscillations, then, can most likely be identiﬁed as the result of Fraunhofer

interference, whose eﬀect is suppressed due to the loss of adatom identity in the present

Another sharp feature evidenced in Fig.5 is the presence of two distinctly diﬀerent slopes

dominating the intensity distribution. The slope discontinuity occurs at about ∆K ∗ = 3˚A−

1,

and is an indication that there exist two important structural regimes on the surface: The

individual cluster, and the long-range translational randomness. Why 3˚A−

1? The answer

17

can be found in the single adatom scattering intensity of Fig.3: 3˚A−

1 is exactly the point

where the specular broadening reaches a minimum, and the Fraunhofer interference pattern

takes over (the actual value of course depends on the cluster radius). One would expect that

the small ∆K (< ∆K ∗) regime corresponds to the long range surface-structure, and vice

versa. To check this, we repeated the calculation with a “harder” He/Ag potential (C12 =

3.0

107a.u., C6 = 7.0a.u.), which enhances the eﬀect due to the individual cluster structure.

×

The result is presented in the right inset in Fig.5. The slope discontinuity at ∆K ∗ is even

more pronounced here, and oscillations reminiscent of the on-lattice system are observed as

well for ∆K > ∆K ∗. The reason is that this harder potential eﬀectively increases the local

surface corrugation; consequently the surface is rougher and leads to increased high-angle

scattering. Thus changes in the He/Ag potential strongly aﬀect the intensity distribution

for large ∆K values, which therefore contain important information on the He/adsorbate

potential. Furthermore, by studying the large ∆K regime, a He scattering experiment can be

used as a tool to measure adatom electron densities, which are related to the He/adsorbate

potential.32 It is clear from the above analysis that the short-range structure, manifested by

the local corrugation (and controlled by the hardness of the potential), appears in the large

∆K regime. However, the small ∆K behavior is identical even for the hard-potential case.

This proves that this regime is determined exclusively by the long-range structural features

of the surface, as indeed expected.

The question arises whether we can isolate the long-range eﬀect of the surface disorder

(∆K < ∆K ∗) from that of the interaction with a single defect. In order to completely isolate

the eﬀect of the translational randomness of the clusters, we introduce a highly simpliﬁed

two-state model (TSM), in which every adatom is represented by a cylinder of height h

and a diameter d, and the adatoms are completely randomly located. Here h is the height

of an adatom above the Pt(111) surface and d is the diameter of the adatom scattering

cross-section. The adatoms are assumed to be fully mutually penetrable. The resulting

system may be considered as a two-phase random medium, in the sense that the underlying

18

surface and the incomplete layer of tops of islands are two separate phases from the point

of view of the incident He beam. This approximation is reasonable for systems of metal

atoms adsorbed on metal surfaces, because the corrugation of metal islands is extremely

weak. By representing the adatoms as structureless cylinders, we capture only the global

features of the system, neglecting its local structure, and can thus hope to reproduce only

those features of the spectrum which result from the underlying random scattering system.

An outline of the solution of this TSM for the intensities is given next; for additional

details see the appendix. For scattering from a hard island on a hard surface, the general

expression for the scattering intensity [Eq.(3)] becomes:

I(∆ ~K) =

d ~R1

d ~R2 ei∆ ~K

·

( ~R1

~R2)

−

e2ikz Z( ~R1, ~R2)

h

,

i

1
A2

Z

Z

where

Z( ~R1, ~R2) = ξ( ~R2)

ξ( ~R1)

−

and ξ( ~R) is the classical turning point at ~R for a hard surface, and

e2ikz Z( ~R1, ~R2)

=

dz e2ikz zfZ(z; ~R1, ~R2).

h

i

Z

Here fZ(z; ~R1, ~R2) is the probability density of observing a height diﬀerence z between two

points located at ~R1 and ~R2 on the surface. The problem of obtaining I( ~Q) therefore reduces

to the evaluation of fZ(z; ~R1, ~R2). In the case of realistic shape functions for the island, the

evaluation of fZ is a very hard problem, because it requires to take into account the 3D shapes

of all possible cluster types. The TSM renders the problem of ﬁnding fZ tractable, at the

expense of loosing certain details in the long-range part of the real intensity distribution.

Rewriting Eq.(13) for the case of a stepped surface, we obtain:

ei kzZ( ~R1, ~R2)

=

e2ikz zj Pr(zj; ~R1, ~R2)

h

i

Xj

where the sum is over all possible height diﬀerences, and Pr(zj; ~R1, ~R2) is the probability

to observe a given height diﬀerence between the points ~R1 and ~R2.

In the present case

19

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

zj = 0,

h. The problem now reduces to evaluating Pr(zj; ~R1, ~R2). Our evaluation for

±

randomly adsorbed islands is presented in the appendix, and shows that for this case the

scattering intensity Eq.(11) becomes:

I(∆ ~K) = c1(ρ d2, 2kz h, A)δ(∆ ~K) + c2(ρ d2, 2kz h, d2/A)

g(∆Kd, ρd2) +
"

g(α, β) =

J0(αS)e

1

2 β(cos−1 S

S√1

−

(15)

1

0
Z

J1(∆Kd)

∆Kd #
S2)S dS,

−

where J1 is the modiﬁed Bessel function of order 1, and ρ is the adsorbate density. The

factors c1, c2 are independent of ∆ ~K. The important point to notice about Eq.(15) is that

apart from a specular term, it is composed of a term due to a single cylindrical adatom (the

J1 term – compare to Eq.(10)), and a new term (g), which incorporates the eﬀect of the

surface disorder. As can be seen in the left inset in Fig.5, the eﬀect of the disorder term

is very signiﬁcant: It completely dominates the small ∆K regime compared to the single

adsorbate term. In particular the slope in this ∆K range is controlled almost exclusively by

the disorder term (in contrast to the width, which was previously shown to be determined

by the radius of the islands). This explains the universality of this slope in all the random

models considered above.

Next, Eq.(15) was applied to study the quantitative aspects of the small ∆K region.

The height h has mainly the eﬀect of an overall intensity factor. Since one cannot expect

the crude TSM to correctly predict the intensities, we shifted the intensity curves in the

(∆K, log(I)) plane, and focused on the eﬀect of changing the cylinder diameter d. At

the incidence wavenumber of kz = 3.0bohr−

1 = 5.7˚A−

1, Fig.1 predicts a cross-section of

140˚A2, i.e., a diameter of

∼
The eﬀect of increasing the diameter is to ﬂatten the intensity. The d = 5a case clearly

∼

5a. In Fig.5 we show the TSM prediction for d = 5a, 10a.

underestimates the intensity, whereas for d = 10a there is good quantitative agreement in the

small ∆K (< ∆K ∗) regime. Thus, not surprisingly, the TSM does not oﬀer good quantitative

agreement for realistic parameter values. However, the agreement improves when the TSM

is compared to the “hard-potential” case (see inset in Fig.5), which is consistent with its

formulation as a hard-wall model.

20

In conclusion, the relative success of the TSM in representing the small ∆K regime

(as well as its failure to agree with the large ∆K region!), demonstrates convincingly that

the properties of the long-range structure of the disordered surface can be found from the

quantitative analysis of this regime.

5. Scattering from Large Compact Islands (system (7))

In this and the next section we discuss the scattering from yet more complex, stochastic

systems: those created by the Kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm described in Sec.II B 1. A

typical conﬁguration of the large, quasi-compact islands formed at 500K is shown in the

inset in Fig.6. Note that periodic boundary conditions are employed. It is not our purpose

here to obtain a quantitative description of the structure of these islands from the scattering

intensities.

Instead, we will limit ourselves to a discussion of some of the main features

of the intensity distribution, and contrasting them with those characteristic of the systems

studied above.

a. Broadening of the Specular Peak: Among all the systems discussed so far, the spec-

ular broadening observed in Fig.6 is the smallest. This corresponds, as expected, to the

large area of the individual islands. The observed width is

0.3˚A−

1, in agreement with

∼

an average island diameter of 13-17a obtained in our KMC simulations. Thus, as indeed

obvious, the specular broadening can be used experimentally to ﬁnd the average diameter

of randomly adsorbed islands.

b. Broadening of the Bragg Peaks:

In contrast to the case of translationally random

adatoms or SCCs, there is little oﬀ-specular structure in Fig.6. The exception are the

Bragg peaks, whose existence in the present case is not surprising, considering the large

island surface area, which has the underlying Pt(111) lattice corrugation. However, the

new feature is the broadening of the Bragg peaks. The broadening is roughly half that

of the specular peak. This phenomenon is reminiscent of Fraunhofer interference of light

transmitted through a grating. Indeed, roughly speaking, the uncovered surface area between

21

the islands can be thought of as a slit pattern. The kinetics governing the formation of the

islands leads to depletion zones, or an eﬀective repulsion between them (since they cannot

overlap), thus inducing a degree of regularity in this pattern, which can yield the Fraunhofer

broadening. Note that this is diﬀerent from the Fraunhofer scattering by a hemispherical

object described by Eq.(10), which is responsible for the specular peak broadening and the

“humps” at ∆K =

1.5, 3.0˚A−

1. The irregularity in “slit” sizes and orientations, as well

±

as to a lesser extent their positions, both due to the inhomogeneity of island sizes and

separation, is responsible for the added noise.

6. Scattering from Fractal Islands (system (8))

In this section we discuss the scattering results from the last model system considered

in this work: the dendritic/fractal structures formed by the KMC simulations at 200K. The

interest in such structures hardly needs recapitulation. The averaged scattering intensities,

as well as a typical conﬁguration, are shown in Fig.7. This conﬁguration is rather reminiscent

of STM results on Pt/Pt(111)11,33 and Ag/Pt(111)34 obtained under similar conditions. The

fact that these systems are indeed fractal over a number of orders of magnitude of resolution-

observation, is discussed in detail elsewhere.35

Interestingly, in spite of the non-negligible surface area of the clusters, there is apart from

weak ﬁrst order Bragg peaks almost no trace of interference in Fig.7. This is in agreement

with the characterization of a fractal as an object with no typical length scale between

physical lower and upper cutoﬀs. Indeed, our “fractals” are composed of a large variety of

clusters of diﬀerent sizes (dimers, trimers and larger clusters), which generally are somehow

connected. Each of these clusters contributes Fraunhofer peaks at its typical length scale.

The net eﬀect is to smear out these peaks into a relatively smooth decline of the intensity.

However, since the fractal clusters are all ﬁnite in size, their average radius is reﬂected in

the scattering distribution, as the by now familiar specular broadening. Apart from this, the

absence of a typical length scale (above the lower cutoﬀ a) results in that there is essentially

22

no structure left in the intensity distribution.

As for the intensities at ∆K beyond the broadening, we observe that the decline of the

angular intensity with ∆K for fractal islands is very similar to that for randomly adsorbed

adatoms (Fig.3), and quite similar to the average decline for SCCs and large compact is-

lands (Figs.4,6). Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, this dependence is determined by the

He/Ag/Pt(111) interaction potential. Nevertheless, we attempted to ﬁt the intensities both

before and beyond the broadening (
|

|

∆K

> 2˚A−

1) by a potential-independent power-law,

following Ref.[36]:

I(∆K)

∆K D

4.

−

∝

(16)

Here D is the fractal dimension. The right inset of Fig.7 shows the result of this ﬁt for both

positive and negative ∆K (the latter were reﬂected), after elimination of the specular and

Bragg peaks. The result is a slope of

1.84

0.03 for

∆K

−

±

|

|

< 2˚A−

1, and

1.62

0.06 for

−

±

> 2˚A−

∆K

1 over a total range of slightly less than one decade, with respective regression

|
coeﬃcients of -0.99 and -0.90. If these slopes were used in accordance with Eq.(16), the

|

fractal dimension would be D > 2. Clearly, this cannot be for our planar sets, so that we

conclude that the procedure suggested by Eq.(16) is not generally valid for the determination

of fractal dimensions from He scattering data. A further reason is that the intensities

beyond the specular broadening depend strongly on the hardness of the potential. For

example, on changing the He/Ag/Pt(111) potential, a very diﬀerent dependence, similar

to that in the inset in Fig.5, is obtained (not shown here). Consequently, one would be

forced to conclude that the fractal dimension changes when the interaction potential is

varied. Within a simplistic interpretation, in which D is the mass fractal dimension, this

is physically unacceptable. If, however, He measures the fractal dimension of the electron

density contours – see Ref.[35] – a dependence on the potential is in fact expected. For

mass fractals, analytical results have been obtained showing that the scattering intensities

are self-aﬃne functions, whose scaling exponent is simply related to the dimension of the

scattering fractal sets.37

23

C. Comparison of Experiments on Ag/Pt(111) with Scattering From Theoretical

Disorder Models

In this ﬁnal section we apply the understanding developed from the analysis of the vari-

ous disorder models, to interpret He scattering data obtained in the experiments described

in Sec.II A. To recapture the main details, the system studied in these experiments was a

submonolayer of Ag at 50% coverage deposited on a Pt(111) surface at 38K. He scattering

proﬁles were taken along the [11¯2]-direction with incident wavenumber of 6.43˚A−

1. The

experimental data are the circles in Figs.8a-c (the same data is shown in all ﬁgures). Our

purpose in performing the analysis to be described next was threefold: To qualitatively inter-

pret the available experimental data and thus gain some understanding of the morphology

of this low-temperature Ag/Pt(111) phase, to test the insight developed from the analysis

of the disorder models, and to self-consistently test our empirically extracted potential.

If one focuses attention on the experimental data in, say, Fig.8b, several features (some

of which observed in the previous sections) stand out:

1. Sharp specular and Bragg peaks, the latter having “shoulders”.

2. Oﬀ-specular structure manifested in oscillations of the intensity.

3. The absence (or at least masking) of specular peak broadening; instead clear

maxima at

0.28, 0.37˚A−

1 are present.

−

4. An asymmetry between positive and negative ∆K.

The last point is an immediate consequence of the experimental scattering geometry,

which breaks the left-right symmetry (see Sec.II A). This feature cannot be reproduced in

the Sudden approximation calculations, in which the He always strikes the surface along its

normal. The other observations can be used to reach several conclusions on the underlying

surface structure:

(1) The large compact clusters model [system (7)] cannot be ruled out since the broadening

of the Bragg peaks is one of its main features.

24

(2) The presence of a series of peaks does not agree well with a fractal structure, which

should exhibit a rather smooth decay of the intensity. Instead, one observes in Fig.8b that

the scattering pattern from a 50% coverage fractal does contain peaks, for ∆K < 3˚A−

1.

The reason is that at such high coverage part of the fractal character is lost: adatoms ﬁll

in the gaps typical of the low coverage fractals of Fig.7, and the resulting surface structure

is at ﬁrst sight not very diﬀerent from the random one of Fig.8a. However, the scattering

intensities are markedly diﬀerent in Figs.8a and b: the intensity decay in the fractal case is

far smoother that in the random one, in agreement with the absence of a typical length scale

(> a) in the fractal. Point 2. then, can be used to eliminate both the fractal and randomly

adsorbed adatom models: the former due to a lack of peak structure for ∆K > 3˚A−

1, in the

latter due to a complete disagreement in peak positions.

(3) The maxima adjacent to the specular are a feature which was absent in the disorder

models we studied. They are most likely a result of constructive interference due to a length

scale of

(2π/0.33), i.e. about 4 lattice constants (19/(2.77√3)) along the [11¯2] direction.

∼

At present we do not yet have a satisfactory model which contains such a length scale and

is also in agreement with the other features of the intensity distribution.

Having essentially ruled out the fractal and random adatoms models, what then is an

appropriate model which can at least qualitatively explain the features observed in the ex-

perimental intensities?38 The central clue in answering this question is the oﬀ-specular peak

structure. In the absence of agreement with the above models, we attempted a ﬁt with a

hybrid of the large compact islands and SCC model, namely a narrow distribution of trans-

lationally random small compact clusters. The advantage of this model is that it turns out

that the positions and intensities of the oﬀ-specular peaks are extremely sensitive to the rel-

ative numbers and absolute diameters of these clusters. Thus a possible, although deﬁnitely

not ﬁnal morphological identiﬁcation, is given in Fig.8c. The distribution shown is a set of

hexagonal islands, 7 or 9 Ag atoms in diameter, mixed in a 1:4 ratio at 50% coverage. Upon

a careful examination it will be noticed that apart from the quantitative location of the

peaks near the specular discussed above, and the elevated intensity around the ﬁrst order

25

Bragg, the positions of all other peaks are correctly reproduced (some of these peaks are mere

shoulders in the experimental data; e.g. at 3.0 and 4.6˚A−

1). This agreement is not present

in either the random adatom or fractal cases. On the other hand, the two missing features in

the intensity pattern of Fig.8c seem likely to be explained by the introduction of some degree

of positional order in the locations of the SCCs: A separation of about 20-30˚A between the

centers of every pair of adjacent clusters would result in the observed peaks, while at the

same time create a shoulder underneath the Bragg peaks due to a slit-Fraunhofer eﬀect [as

for system (7)]. Such an ordered separation is in agreement with the fact that due to the

size-mismatch between Pt and Ag, a strain is induced by the formation of an Ag island,

resulting in an eﬀective repulsion between neighboring islands. We observe evidence for this

in the location of the experimental ﬁrst order Bragg peak, which is located slightly below the

position of the corresponding pure Pt(111) peak, suggesting some degree of lattice ordering

due to Ag (which has a lattice constant of 2.89˚A). In addition there are some purely kinetic

eﬀects determining the size and distribution of islands, namely nucleation and an average

diﬀusion length. The generation of a size-dispersed SCCs distribution satisfying the separa-

tion requirement turns out, however, to be a non-trivial task, and for the present qualitative

purposes, we limit ourselves to the translationally random model. Beyond the introduction

of positional order, one should probably also relax the assumption of perfect hexagons: At

the low surface temperature considered, the mobility of Ag adatoms is extremely small, and

consequently a more realistic model is probably one in which the hexagons are imperfect at

least along their perimeter. Since the hexagons are perfect in our model, one observes an

oscillation in the calculated intensity of Fig.8c, with a period of

0.25˚A−

1; this is likely due

∼

to interference between adatoms separated by 4-5 lattice constants along the chains making

up the edges of the hexagons. At any rate, while clearly not being fully quantitative, the ﬁt

with the narrowly size-distributed SCCs is very promising and bound to be non-accidental.

26

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The motivation for the study presented in this paper is the rapidly growing interest in

structures formed on surfaces during epitaxial growth. We demonstrated that various types

of disordered structures thus formed can be studied quantitatively by He scattering, and that

a distinction between them can be made on the basis of the diﬀerent scattering features that

arise respectively in these cases. This is due to the high sensitivity of the He angular intensity

spectrum to the surface morphology and electron distribution. In particular, we inverted a

He/Ag/Pt(111) potential from experimental cross section measurements, and subsequently

used this potential to predict from the analysis of experimental angular intensity data the

presence of a phase of small and compact, narrowly size-dispersed clusters with some degree

of positional order. The sensitivity to changes in both potential and morphology parameters

of our ﬁt to the experimental data, as well as support from a more general He-scattering

study39 and independent STM data,40 provides strong evidence for the existence of this

phase. Furthermore, it illustrates what we believe to be an important principle in surface

science: The combination of the mutually complementary experimental (He scattering and

STM) and theoretical techniques provides an extremely powerful tool for the quantitative

analysis of complex surface structures.

Our theoretical ﬁndings shed light on several other points:

1. There are clear and speciﬁc diﬀerences between the intensity distributions re-

sulting from the scattering from diﬀerent classes of disordered structures. Care-

ful analysis of the relevant features, such as broadening of the specular peak,

the slope (d log I/d∆K), oﬀ-specular Fraunhofer maxima, position and width of

Bragg peaks and more, can lead a long way to the identiﬁcation of the type of

disordered phase present on the surface.

2. The structure of the complex intensity spectrum obtained by scattering from

translationally disordered, small compact clusters, can be understood as a sum of

27

the contributions due the scattering spectrum of a single such cluster, and due to

the disorder. The former is mainly responsible for characteristic Fraunhofer and

rainbow peaks in the large ∆K regime, whereas the latter aﬀects the slope of the

intensity function for small ∆K values and is responsible for the introduction of

noise and peak “smearing”. Conversely, this information can be used to extract

useful information about the individual cluster size and the cluster ensemble

statistics.

3. The claim that for fractals the angular intensity dependence on parallel momen-

tum transfer follows a universal power law, is not supported by our calculations.

Instead there is a strong dependence on the parameters of the He/adsorbate po-

tential. Thus it does not appear to be possible to calculate the fractal dimension

from a simple scaling analysis of the intensity distribution.

Recent experimental studies have addressed the diﬀerent kinds of disordered structures

formed during 3D epitaxial growth. Speciﬁcally, the attenuation of the He scattering spec-

ular peak during growth was measured, allowing for the distinction between 2D vs. 3D

growth mechanisms. The results presented here indicate that much more information on

the structure of disordered multiple ad-layers can be obtained by He scattering, and we are

currently pursuing such work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by Grant No. I-215-006.5/91 from the German-Israel Founda-

tion for Scientiﬁc Research (G.I.F.) to R.B.G. and G.C. The Fritz Haber Research Center

at the Hebrew University is supported by the Minerva Gesellschaft f¨ur die Forschung mbH,

M¨unchen, Germany. The research was supported in part by the Institute of Surface and

Interface Science at U.C. Irvine.

28

APPENDIX

We derive Eq.(15). This requires ﬁrst the evaluation of Eq.(14). The task at hand is the

calculation of the probabilities Pr(zj; ~R1, ~R2), to observe a given height diﬀerence between

points located at ~R1 and ~R2 on the surface. Denoting the underlying surface as 0 and the

0 with Z( ~R1, ~R2) = 0;

1 with Z( ~R1, ~R2) = h;

0, ~R2 ∈
1, ~R2 ∈

atom tops as 1, there exist four possibilities:
(1) ~R1, ~R2 ∈
(2) ~R1 ∈
(3) ~R1 ∈
(4) ~R1, ~R2 ∈
= 0, 1 according as to whether ~Ri ∈
Denote Sǫ ~R1 ǫ ~R2
of observing the point ~R1 in phase ǫ ~R1 and the point ~R2 in phase ǫ ~R2. Then clearly:

1 with Z( ~R1, ~R2) = 0.

0 with Z( ~R1, ~R2) =

0 or ~Ri ∈

(with ǫ ~Ri

h and

−

1), as the probability

Pr(0; ~R1, ~R2) = S00 + S11

Pr(h; ~R1, ~R2) = S01

Pr(

h; ~R1, ~R2) = S10

(17)

−

A general formalism for the evaluation of quantities of the type Sǫ ~R1 ǫ ~R2 ···
Torquato and Stell (TS).41 Their result for the case of interest to us is:

ǫ ~Rn

is given by

Sn( ~R1, .., ~Rn) = 1 +

(

ρ)k
−
k!

N

Xk=1

Z · · · Z

k

gk

~xk
(cid:16)

Yj=1  "

(cid:17)

1

−

n

Yi=1

(1

m(

~Ri −

|

))

~xj|

−

#!

d~xj

(18)

S11( ~R1, ~R2) = 1

(S1( ~R1) + S1( ~R2)) + S00( ~R1, ~R2)

−

where Sn is shorthand for n points in phase 0 (so e.g. S1 above means one point in phase

0), ρ = N/A is the adsorbate density, ~xk

(~x1, ..., ~xk), and gk is the reduced distribution

function of k particles, deﬁned as:

S01( ~R1, ~R2) = S1( ~R1)

S00( ~R1, ~R2)

S10( ~R1, ~R2) = S1( ~R2)

S00( ~R1, ~R2)

−

−

≡

=

ρk

~xk
(cid:17)ρk
(cid:16)

gk

~xk
(cid:16)

(cid:17)
N!

Pk

ρk

~xk
(cid:16)

=

(cid:17)

k)!

(N
P (~x1, ..., ~xN ) d~xk+1 · · ·

−

~xk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
d~xN .

29

Pk

=

~xk
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Z · · · Z

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

In the case of an isotropic system g2 (~x1, ~x2) = g(r) (where r =

radial distribution function. The function m(

~x2|
) is the “particle indicator function”,

) is the well-known

~x1 −
|

~Ri −

|

~xj|

deﬁned as:

m(

) = 


Collecting Eqs.(11),(14),(17), we obtain:

~xj|

−

|

~R

1 if

0 if

~R

~R

|

|

~xj|
~xj|

−

−

< d/2

> d/2.

(S00( ~R1, ~R2) + S11( ~R1, ~R2)) + e2i h kz S01( ~R1, ~R2) + e−
h

I(∆ ~K) =

1
A2

Z

d ~R1 d ~R2 ei∆ ~K

·

( ~R1

~R2)

−

×
2i h kz S10( ~R1, ~R2)

.

i

The last equation, together with Eqs.(18)-(24), establish a formal connection between the

reduced distribution functions of interest in characterization of surface statistics and the

measurable scattering intensity.

Eq.(26) can next be applied to the scattering from translationally random adatoms. It

is shown by TS that in this case, since gk ≡

1 for all k, one obtains:

Sn( ~R1, .., ~Rn) = e−

ρ Vn( ~Rn;d),

where Vn is the union area of n circles with diameter d, with centers at

~R1, .., ~Rn}

{

. For

n = 1, 2 there exist explicit formulae:

V1 =

π d2

1
4
1
2

V2(R/d) =

π d2

1
2

d2

−

1 R

cos−

R
1
d s

−

d −

H(1

R/d)

−

R2
d2 






Here R =

~R1 −

|

~R2|

and H(x) is the Heavyside step function. Note that in the scattering

context, d = d(kz), d being the diameter of the cross-section, which depends on the incident

He wavenumber kz. Using this in Eqs.(27),(19)-(21), and recalling that the present system

is translationally invariant, we obtain:

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

S00(R/d) = e−

ρ V2(R/d)

(30)

30

S11(R/d) = 1

2e−

1
4 ρ π d2

+ e−

ρ V2(R/d)

−

S01(R/d) = S10(R/d) = e−

1

4 π ρ d2

ρ V2(R/d)

e−

−

What remains is to insert the last expressions into the general formula for the scattering

intensity, Eq.(26), and go through some algebra and integrations. Deﬁning:

and:

we obtain:

c1(β, γ, A) =

1

1 + 2e−

4 π β(cos(γ)

(2π)2
A

(cid:16)

1)

−

(cid:17)

c2(β, γ, ǫ) = 4πǫ(1

cos(γ)) e−

1
2 π β

−

I(∆ ~K) =

d ~R ei∆ ~K

~R +

·

d ~R ei∆ ~K

~R e−

·

ρ V2(R/d)

(36)

1
(2π)2 c1

Z

1
2 π β

e
2π d2 c2

Z

The ﬁrst integral evaluates to a delta-function, whereas the second simpliﬁes to:

1
2 π β

2πe−

d



0
Z



Let us now deﬁne:

1
2 β

cos−1 R

R
d

d −

R2
d2

1

−

J0(R ∆K)e

(cid:18)

q

(cid:19) R dR +

J0(R ∆K) R dR

∞

d
Z




g(α, β) =

J0(αS)e

1

2 β(cos−1 S

S√1

S2)S dS,

−

−

1

0
Z

then ﬁnally the scattering intensity becomes:

I(∆ ~K) = δ(∆ ~K)c1(β, γ, A) + c2(β, γ, ǫ)

g(∆K d, β) +
"

J

−

1(∆K d)
∆K d

.

#

β = ρ d2

γ = 2kz h
d2
A

ǫ =

31

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(37)

(38)

REFERENCES

1 S.C. Wang, G. Ehrlich, Surf. Sci. 239, 301 (1990).

2 H. Brune, H. R¨oder, C. Boragno and K. Kern, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1955 (1994).

3 H. R¨oder, H. Brune, J.-P. Bucher and K. Kern, Surf. Sci. 298, 121 (1993).

4 P. Zeppenfeld, M. Krzyzowski, Ch. Romainczyk, G. Comsa and M.G. Lagally, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 72, 2737 (1994).

917 (1992).

5 G. Rosenfeld, A.F. Becker, B. Poelsema, L.K. Verheij and G. Comsa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,

6 R. Stumpf and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 254 (1994).

7 P.Blandin, C. Massobrio and P. Ballone, Phys. Rev. B 49, 48 (1994).

8 S. Esch, M. Hohage, T. Michely and G. Comsa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 518 (1994).

9 M. Yanuka, A.T. Yinnon, R.B. Gerber, P. Zeppenfeld, K. Kern, U. Becher and G. Comsa,

J. Chem. Phys. 99, 8280 (1993).

327, 165 (1995).

10 D.A. Hamburger, A.T. Yinnon, I. Farbman, A. Ben Shaul and R.B. Gerber, Surf. Sci.

11 M. Bott, T. Michely and G. Comsa, Surf. Sci. 272, 161 (1992).

12 P. Zeppenfeld, M. Krzyzowski, Ch. Romainczyk, R. David, G. Comsa, H. R¨oder, K.

Bromann, H. Brune and K. Kern, Surf. Sci. Lett. 342, L1131 (1995).

13 M. Krzyzowski, Ch. Romainczyk, P. Zeppenfeld, R. David and G. Comsa, to be published.

14 A.T. Yinnon, R. Kosloﬀ, R.B. Gerber, B. Poelsema and G. Comsa, J. Chem. Phys. 88,

3722 (1988).

15 A.F. Becker, G. Rosenfeld, B. Poelsema and G. Comsa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 477 (1993).

32

16 R. Schinke and R.B. Gerber, J. Chem. Phys. 82, 1567 (1985).

17 R.B. Gerber, A.T. Yinnon, M. Yanuka, D. Chase, Surf. Sci., 272, 81 (1992)

18 R. B. Gerber, Chem. Rev. 87, 29 (1987).

19 H. C. Kang and W. H. Weinberg, Surf. Sci. 299/300, 755 (1994).

20 H. C. Kang and W. H. Weinberg, Acc. Chem. Res. 25, 253 (1992).

21 C. Uebing and R. Gomer, J. Chem. Phys., 95, 7626 (1991).

22 R.B. Gerber, A.T. Yinnon and J.N. Murrell, J. Chem. Phys., 31, 1 (1978).

23 A.T. Yinnon, R.B. Gerber, D.K. Dacol and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 5955 (1986).

24 D.K. Dacol, H. Rabitz and R.B. Gerber, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 1616 (1987).

25 R.B. Gerber, Delgado-Bario, editor, in Dynamics of Molecular Processes, p.299, (IOP,

Bristol, 1993).

26 B. Poelsema and G. Comsa, in Scattering of Thermal Energy Atoms from Disordered

Surfaces, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, Vol. 115 (Springer, Berlin, 1989).

27 A.T. Yinnon, R. Kosloﬀ and R.B. Gerber, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 7209 (1988).

28 D.A. Hamburger and R.B. Gerber, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 6919 (1995).

29 In fact the potential was obtained for He/Pt(110), but should likewise be applicable to

the Pt(111) face since the potential is a laterally averaged one.

30 M.A. Krzyzowski, P. Zeppenfeld and G. Comsa, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8705 (1995).

31 A.M. Lahee, J.P. Manson, J.P. Toennies and C. W¨oll, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 7194 (1987).

32 N. Esbjerg and J.K. Norskov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 807 (1980); N.D. Lang and J.K.

Norskov, Phys. Rev. B 27, 4612 (1983); J.K. Norskov, K.W. Norskov, P. Stoltze and L.B.

Hansen, Surf. Sci. 283, 277 (1993).

33

33 M. Bott, M. Hohage, M. Morgenstern, T. Michely and George Comsa, Phys. Rev. Lett.

76, 1304 (1996)

34 H. Brune, C. Romainczyk, H. R¨oder, and K. Kern, Nature 369, 469 (1994).

35 D.A. Hamburger, A.T. Yinnon and R.B. Gerber, Chem. Phys. Lett. 253, 223 (1996)

36 P.Pfeifer and M.W. Cole, New J. of Chem. 14, 221 (1990).

37 D.A. Hamburger-Lidar, Phys. Rev. E., 54, 354 (1996).

38 It may be appropriate at this point to explain why we did not use the KMC method

to generate conﬁgurations at 38K to guide us in the search for a model for the surface

morphology. The reason is that, as explained in Sec.II B 1, we do not have an absolute

temperature scale available in the KMC simulations.

39 M.A. Krzyzowski, P. Zeppenfeld and G. Comsa, to be published.

40 H. R¨oder, thesis Nr. 1288, EPF Lausanne (1994).

41 S. Torquato and G. Stell, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 2071 (1982); 78, 3262 (1983); 79, 1505

(1983).

34

FIGURES

FIG. 1. A comparison between experimental and theoretical cross-sections for He scattered from

an isolated Ag atom adsorbed on a Pt(111) surface. The experimental values were determined from

adsorption curves I(Θ) (Eq.(6)) recorded at 38K and extrapolated to Θ

0. A ﬁt (solid line) of

→

the theoretical cross-sections was used to derive the potential used in this work.

FIG. 2. Calculated angular intensity distribution along the ΓK direction for He scattered from

an ordered monolayer of Ag on the Pt(111) surface, with the Ag/Pt(111) lattice mismatch ignored.

The orientation of the scattering plane is along the close packed [1¯10] direction in real space.

The reciprocal space lattice is rotated by 30◦ so that the Bragg peaks appear at non-close packed

multiples of 4π/a, a = 2.77˚A being the Pt(111) lattice constant. For the indexing of the Bragg

peaks, we chose real space unit vectors ~a1 = (a/2, √3a/2), ~a2 = (

a/2, √3a/2), corresponding to

reciprocal space unit vectors ~b1 = (2π/a)(1, 1/√3), ~b2 = (2π/a)(1,

1/√3).

−

−

FIG. 3. Dashed line: Calculated angular intensity distribution along the ΓK direction of He

scattered from a single Ag adatom. Solid line: Same for He scattered from 15% coverage transla-

tionally random Ag atoms on a Pt(111) lattice.

FIG. 4. Dashed line: Calculated angular intensity distribution along the ΓK direction of He

scattered from a single Ag heptamer. Solid line: Same for He scattered from randomly distributed

Ag heptamers on Pt(111). Inset: Top view of a small compact cluster (heptamer).

FIG. 5. Calculated angular intensity distribution of He scattered from a Pt(111) surface with

15% adsorbed Ag atoms with oﬀ-lattice translational randomness. Thin line: Sudden approxima-

tion results. Thick lines: calculation using Eq.(15). Right Inset: Same, using a harder He/Ag

potential. Left inset: The disorder term g compared to the single adatom term, from Eq.(15)

(linear scale).

35

FIG. 6. Calculated angular intensity distribution of He scattered along the ΓK direction from

randomly distributed large compact Ag islands on Pt(111). Inset: Compact Ag islands produced

by a KMC simulation, at 15% coverage on a surface of 100

100 unit cells and T=500K. The surface

×

is a parallelogram with an angle of 60◦. Periodic boundary conditions are employed, so straight

edges usually imply that the cluster is continued at the opposite boundary.

FIG. 7. Calculated angular intensity distribution of He scattered along the ΓK direction from a

Pt(111) surface with 15% adsorbed Ag atoms, forming fractal islands. Left inset: KMC simulations

as in Fig.6, but for fractal islands (T=200K). Right Inset: Power-law regression of the intensity

(see text for details).

FIG. 8. A comparison between experimental and theoretical angular intensities for He scattered

from a Pt(111) surface with 50% adsorbed Ag atoms in diﬀerent disorder classes: (a) Translation-

ally random adatoms, (b) Fractal islands, (c) Size-dispersed compact islands.

Insets: Typical

conﬁgurations in each of the disorder classes. The orientation of the scattering plane is along

the non-close packed [11¯2] direction in real space, corresponding to the close packed ΓM direc-

tion in reciprocal space. Thus Bragg peaks appear at multiples of 4π/(√3a) where a = 2.77˚A is

the Pt(111) lattice constant. Experimental surface temperature: 38K, He beam energy: 21.6meV

(kz = 6.43˚A−

1). Solid lines: theoretical intensities. Circles: experimental data. Note that only the

elastically scattered intensity is shown. The inelastic part was separated in the experiment using

time-of-ﬂight spectroscopy.

36

Fig. 1

experimental
fitted

200

175

150

125

]
2
Ao

[
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
s
−
s
s
o
r
c

100

4

5

6
o
−1]
kz [A

7

8

Fig. 2

0.0

(0,0)

(1,1)

(−1,−1)

−2.0

−4.0

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
(

0
1
g
o

l

−6.0

−8.0

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.0
o
∆K [A
−1]

Fig. 3

single adatom
random adsorbates

−1.0

−3.0

−5.0

−7.0

−9.0

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
(

0
1
g
o

l

−11.0

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.0
o
∆K [A
−1]

Fig. 4

single heptamer
random system

−1

−3

−5

−7

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
(

0
1
g
o

l

−9

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.0
o
∆K [A
−1]

J1(∆Kd)/(∆Kd)
g(∆Kd,ρd2)

hard potential

Fig. 5

−3.0

−5.0

0.0

−2.0

1.4

0.9

0.4

−0.1

0.0

−4.0

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
(

0
1
g
o

l

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.0
o
∆K [A

−1]

Sudden approximation
TSM: d=5a
d=10a

−6.0

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.0
o
∆K [A
−1]

 

Fig. 6

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
(

0
1
g
o

l

−2

−4

−6

−8

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

∆K [A

o
−1]

Fig. 7

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

intensity
regression

0

∆K [A

o

1
−1]

10

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

∆K [A

o
−1]

−1.0

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
(

0
1
g
o

l

−3.0

−5.0

−7.0

Fig. 8a

random adsorbates (simulation)
experiment

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5

−6

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
(

0
1
g
o
L

−7

−10.0

−8.0

−6.0

−4.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

−2.0
o
−1]

∆Kx [A

Fig. 8b

fractals (simulation)
experiment

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
(

0
1
g
o
L

−1.0

−3.0

−5.0

−7.0

−10.0

−8.0

−6.0

−4.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

−2.0
o
−1]

∆Kx [A

Fig. 8c

compact clusters (simulation)
experiment

)
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
(

0
1
g
o
L

−0.5

−2.5

−4.5

−6.5

−10.0

−8.0

−6.0

−4.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

−2.0
o
−1]

∆Kx [A

