7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A computational study of 13-atom Ne-Ar cluster

Department of Chemistry, University of Waterloo,

Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada

heat capacities

D. D. Frantz

(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Heat capacity curves as functions of temperature were calculated using Monte

Carlo methods for the series of Ne13−nArn clusters (0 ≤ n ≤ 13). The clusters

were modeled classically using pairwise additive Lennard-Jones potentials.

The J-walking (or jump-walking) method was used to overcome systematic

errors due to quasiergodicity. Substantial discrepancies between the J-walking

results and those obtained using standard Metropolis methods were found.

Results obtained using the atom-exchange method, another Monte Carlo vari-

ant for multi-component systems, also did not compare well with the J-walker

results. Quench studies were done to investigate the clusters’ potential energy

surfaces. Only those Ne-Ar clusters consisting predominately of either one or

the other component had lowest energy isomers having the icosahedral-like

symmetry typical of homogeneous 13-atom rare gas clusters; non-icosahedral

structures dominated the lowest-energy isomers for the other clusters. This

resulted in heat capacity curves that were very much diﬀerent than that of

their homogeneous counterpart. Evidence for coexistence behavior diﬀerent

than that seen in homogenous clusters is also presented.

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The investigations discussed in this report are the second part of a comprehensive study

of 13-atom binary rare gas clusters; the ﬁrst part examined the series of clusters Ar13−nKrn
for 0 ≤ n ≤ 13.1 Thirteen-atom homogeneous2–10 and heterogeneous11–20 clusters have been

the subject of many studies. The homogeneous rare gas clusters exhibit “magic number”
eﬀects2,20–25 for many of their properties that are due in large part to their compact icosa-

hedral ground state conﬁguration. Because Ar and Kr have similar sizes (the Ar radius is

about 11% smaller than the Kr radius), all the 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters also had icosahedral-

like lowest-energy conﬁgurations that played dominant roles in their behavior. This size

similarity resulted in two diﬀerent categories of Ar-Kr isomers: topological isomers based

on geometric structures that were similar to those of their homogeneous counterparts, and

permutational isomers, which were based on the various rearrangements of the diﬀerent

component atoms within a topological form. Ne and Ar have quite diﬀerent sizes (the Ne

radius is about 19% smaller than the Ar radius). This results in many additional non-

icosahedral isomers with energies similar to the icosahedral-like isomers, which dramatically

alters the Ne-Ar cluster behavior compared to that of their Ar-Kr counterparts. The other

major diﬀerence between Ne-Ar and Ar-Kr clusters is in their intermolecular potentials,

where the Ne and Ar values are far more dissimilar compared to the Ar and Kr values

(ǫNe-Ne/ǫAr-Ar = 0.2982, ǫAr-Ar/ǫKr-Kr = 0.7280).

Heat capacities have been useful for elucidating the nature of cluster solid-liquid “phase”
transitions.2,4–8,17,26–28 Heat capacity curves as functions of temperature for homogeneous 13-

atom clusters are characterized by a very large peak in the solid-liquid transition region that

is primarily a consequence of the large energy gap between the ground state icosahedral iso-
mer and the higher energy non-icosahedral isomers.2,4–8 Thirteen-atom Ar-Kr clusters have

heat capacity curves that are mostly similar to the homogeneous cluster curve, but there are

interesting diﬀerences arising from the eﬀects of the permutational isomers, made manifest

as an additional, very small, heat capacity peak occurring at very low temperatures.1,17 This

2

feature, arising from the low-energy icosahedral-like permutational isomers, is reminiscent

of order-disorder transitions known to occur in some bulk alloy materials.17 For 13-atom

Ne-Ar clusters, though, the large disparity in the Ne and Ar potential parameters results in

qualitatively diﬀerent heat capacity curves.

Cluster heat capacities are notoriously diﬃcult to calculate accurately using simulation

methods because of poor convergence due to the incomplete sampling of conﬁguration space.

This is especially so for heterogeneous clusters, where the inadequate mixing of the diﬀerent

component atoms can become problematic at lower temperatures, leading to large system-

atic errors. As with my previous Ar-Kr heat capacity studies, I used the J-walking (or

jump-walking) method6 to obtain the heat capacities to good accuracy. J-walking has been

shown to greatly increase Monte Carlo convergence rates and overcome systematic errors
due to incomplete sampling in several studies.1,2,5,17,26–29 Despite the poor performance of

the standard Metropolis method in calculating heat capacities, the results obtained from the

method can still provide additional insights when compared with the J-walking results, and

so I also calculated heat capacity curves for each Ne-Ar cluster using the standard Metropo-

lis method, as well as with a modiﬁed version that augments binary cluster simulations by

using atom-exchange methods to enhance the mixing of the components.16

I begin in Section II with a brief overview of the various computational methods I used.

Section III ﬁrst examines the structural properties of 13-atom Ne-Ar clusters, discusses the

results obtained for their heat capacities and potential energies as functions of temperature,

and then examines the results obtained from the quench studies. The results are also

compared to their corresponding Ar-Kr results. Finally, in Section IV, I summarize my

ﬁndings and discuss some of the insights provided by the Ne-Ar cluster results.

II. COMPUTATIONAL METHOD

The computational methods used in this work were mostly similar to the methods I used

in my previous study of Ar-Kr clusters.1 The following brieﬂy summarizes the important

3

points; the reader is referred to the previous work for a more detailed description.

Monte Carlo simulations were run for all clusters in the series Ne13−nArn with 0 ≤ n ≤ 13.

The clusters were modeled by the usual pairwise additive Lennard-Jones potential. Table I

lists the Lennard-Jones parameters.30 The Ne-Ar interaction parameters were determined

from the usual Lorentz-Berthelot mixing rules.31. I have followed Lee, Barker and Abraham32

and have conﬁned the clusters by a perfectly reﬂecting constraining potential of radius Rc

centered on the cluster’s center of mass. To maintain a common set of boundary conditions

throughout the survey, the constraining radius was identical for all the clusters studied,

with Rc = 3σAr-Ar. Analogous to the Ar-Kr study, the energies and heat capacities are
expressed in reduced units in terms of the smaller atom interaction, with V ∗ = V /ǫNe-Ne and

C ∗

V = CV /kB.

Standard Monte Carlo simulations of clusters based on the sampling algorithm proposed

by Metropolis et al.33 are known to suﬀer from systematic errors due to quasiergodicity,34 the

non-ergodic sampling that typically arises with conﬁguration spaces that are comprised of

several regions separated by large barriers. For certain temperature domains, this can lead

to bottlenecks that eﬀectively conﬁne the sampling to only some of the regions, resulting

in large errors.31 J-walking addresses the problem of quasiergodicity by coupling the usual

small-scale Metropolis moves to occasional large-scale jumps that move the random walker

to the diﬀerent regions of conﬁguration space in a representative manner.6 The large-scale

jumps are governed by Boltzmann distributions generated at higher temperatures where

the sampling is ergodic. As in my previous study of Ar-Kr clusters, the more common

external ﬁle implementation of J-walking was used, with the J-walker distributions generated

beforehand and stored in an external array for subsequent jump attempts.35

I also found it necessary to again run several shorter, independent J-walker trials, instead

of the single longer run that is usually done for homogeneous clusters. The heat capacity

results were very sensitive to small errors in the J-walker distributions, especially at the

lower temperatures. These errors were a consequence of the large increase in the number

of isomers arising from the extra permutational isomers in the binary cluster case, which

4

made obtaining representative samples that much more diﬃcult. Therefore, I ran at least

ﬁve separate J-walking trials, with each trial sampling from its own unique set of J-walker

distributions, to ensure there were no signiﬁcant systematic errors in the binary cluster

heat capacity curves. For those clusters showing especially large deviations in their heat

capacity curves at low temperatures, I ran ten trials to reduce the uncertainties in the peak

locations and heights. The results for the separate trials were then combined and averaged,

with the standard deviations taken as estimates of the uncertainty. As was done with the

Ar-Kr calculations, the total walk length for each temperature was set at 106 passes of data

accumulation. Fig. 1 shows the results for Ne11Ar2. As can be seen in the plot, the noise

level in each curve is about the same magnitude as the diﬀerences between the curves over

most of the temperature range, indicating that these walk lengths were suﬃciently long

for the desired level of accuracy. However, for the smaller heat capacity peak occurring

at 0.4 K, the curves show a much greater variation, comparable to the peak height itself.

The results for this cluster were the worst of the series, and while none of the other Ne-Ar

clusters showed such large deviations, the deviations were mostly larger than those obtained

for their Ar-Kr counterparts.

I again ran standard Metropolis simulations for each cluster. The Metropolis results

provided a check of the J-walking results for those temperature regions where quasiergodicity

was not a problem, and they provided additional insights into the underlying behavior for

those regions where quasiergodicity was evident. Simulations for each temperature consisted

of 105 warmup passes, followed by 107 passes with data accumulation. The temperature scans

were started at the lowest temperature from the global minimum conﬁguration, with the

ﬁnal conﬁguration for each temperature then used as the initial conﬁguration for the next

temperature. The scans were continued well past the cluster melting region. Figure 1 also

shows the Metropolis results for Ne11Ar2. As can be seen, substantial discrepancies due to

quasiergodicity are evident in the low temperature region. The Metropolis curve was too low

until about 6 K, after which it rose sharply to approach the J-walker curves. As a check, I

repeated some of the points using walk lengths of 108 passes of data accumulation per point.

5

Even with these long walks, the Metropolis method was unable to give accurate results below

6 K, although the results for T > 6 K were in good agreement with the J-walker results (the

results obtained for 107 passes remained slightly too low until about 9 K).

The inadequacy of the standard Metropolis algorithm for simulating heterogeneous clus-

ters at very low temperatures has been noted previously. Tsai, Abraham, and Pound16

developed a simple but eﬀective strategy to help overcome these limitations by incorpo-

rating an atom exchange scheme in their Metropolis algorithm. The method enhances the

mixing of clusters by occasionally attempting an exchange move where one of the atoms of

one component is swapped with one of the atoms of another component. The atom-exchange

method showed considerable improvement over the standard Metropolis method for Ar-Kr

clusters in the very low temperature region.

It was even able to partially reproduce the

mixing-anomaly peaks that were completely absent in the Metropolis results, although the

agreement with the J-walking results was only qualitative in these regions. I also ran atom-

exchange simulations for all the Ne-Ar clusters. These were done in a manner similar to

the standard Metropolis runs described previously, with an atom-exchange move between

randomly selected Ne and Ar atoms attempted once after every pass of standard Metropolis

moves. The results for Ne11Ar2 can also be seen in Fig. 1. In this case, the atom-exchange

method did not provide any improvement over the standard Metropolis method.

At the lower temperatures associated with the cluster solid-liquid transition regions,

the competition between the intermolecular forces and atomic sizes eﬀects which isomeric

structures play dominant roles in the cluster’s behavior. Thus, information concerning the

relative populations of the lower energy isomers encountered during a simulation at a given

temperature can oﬀer much insight into the nature of cluster dynamics.36,37 The relative fre-

quencies of occurrence for each isomer can be obtained from quench studies done during the

simulation, where the assumption is that the distribution of minima found in the quenches

indicates the likelihood of the system being associated with a particular isomer. That is, the

quench distributions are a reﬂection of the relative phase volume of each catchment basin.38

To obtain further insight into the role cluster structure plays, I also performed quench studies

6

on each of the clusters simulated. Steepest-descent quenches36 were performed periodically

on each cluster during one of its ﬁve J-walker trials to monitor the relative frequency of

occurrence for the lower energy isomers as functions of temperature. For each temperature,

quenches were undertaken every 1000 passes, providing 1000 quenched conﬁgurations for

subsequent analysis. In each instance, quench trajectories were run until the relative energy

diﬀerence converged to within 10−7.

Having a complete listing of all the stable low-energy isomers for a given cluster would also

be valuable. Although the local minima comprising a typical cluster potential hypersurface

are far too numerous to be completely catalogued in any practical manner, a reasonably

complete listing of the important lower energy isomers can be obtained easily from the

J-walker distributions. Since the distributions generated at a given temperature contain

representative samples of a cluster’s conﬁguration space, a crude, but nonetheless eﬀective,

way to identify cluster isomers is to simply quench a suﬃcient number of the conﬁgurations

stored in the distributions, saving them in an external ﬁle indexed by their energy, and

then removing the duplicate conﬁgurations. This was done for all the clusters examined

in this study. Again, each conﬁguration was quenched until the relative energy diﬀerence

converged to within 10−7; the ﬁnal composite ﬁle of unique isomers was then further reﬁned

by running another set trajectories until the relative energy diﬀerence converged to within

10−12. For 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters, the low energy isomers in the quenched distributions

were dominated by icosahedral-like structures having the smaller Ar atom in the center.

This was not the case for the Ne-Ar clusters, though. Ne12Ar and Ne11Ar2 both had Ne-core

icosahedral-like structures as their lowest-energy isomers, but for most of the other clusters,

almost all of the expected Ne-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers were absent from

the quenched distributions. This implies that these isomers played only minor roles in the

Ne-Ar cluster behavior, which was surprising considering the dominant role played by the

Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers in the Ar-Kr clusters’ behavior. So, for sake of comparison, I

determined the icosahedral-like isomers for each Ne-Ar cluster by generating all the possible

permutations from an icosahedral structure, and then minimized each one using the quench

7

routines, as described above.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The structural and thermodynamics results obtained for 13-atom Ne-Ar clusters were

very much diﬀerent than those obtained for their Ar-Kr counterparts.1 The small diﬀerence

between the Ar and Kr atom sizes led to the Ar-Kr clusters essentially having topological

conﬁgurations that were very similar to their homogeneous counterparts, but with many

additional permutational isomers arising from the diﬀerent arrangements of the Ar and Kr

atoms within each type of topological form. As a consequence, the behavior of 13-atom Ar-

Kr clusters was mostly similar to that of their homogeneous counterpart, and each cluster

in the series still retained the characteristic magic number behavior. Like the Ar13 heat

capacity curve, the Ar-Kr heat capacity curves were dominated by a huge peak in the

solid-liquid transition region. Variations within the series arose primarily because of the

energy diﬀerences between the permutational icosahedral-like isomers having an Ar atom

core and the icosahedral-like isomers having a Kr core. For each cluster, the lowest energy

isomer corresponded to a segregated Ar-core icosahedral-like isomer, with the other more

mixed Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers having only slightly higher energies.

These closely spaced isomers gave rise to a very small, low-temperature peak in the heat

capacity for those clusters having more than one such isomer. The Kr-core icosahedral-like

permutational isomers’ energies likewise formed a narrow group. The energy gap between

the two sets of permutational isomers was very large for Ar12Kr, but decreased markedly

across the series as the number of Kr atoms increased. This resulted in initially small changes

in the low-temperature side of the solid-liquid transition region heat capacity peak that grew

to eventually form an additional, smaller heat capacity peak for ArKr12. For 13-atom Ne-Ar

clusters though, the large size diﬀerence between the Ne and Ar atoms (σAr-Ar/σNe-Ne = 1.239

compared to σKr-Kr/σAr-Ar = 1.062) resulted in many new non-icosahedral topological forms

having no homogeneous counterparts. These dominated the solid-liquid transition region

8

for many of the clusters, especially those consisting mostly of Ne atoms, drastically eﬀecting

their resultant heat capacity behavior.

A. Structural properties

It is those few isomers having the lowest energies that often dominate the solid-liquid

transition region in small clusters. For example, quench studies of Ar13 have shown that

at the solid-liquid transition region heat capacity peak temperature, the lowest 4 isomers

accounted for about 80% of the quenched conﬁgurations.1 Thus much insight can be obtained

by examining a cluster’s low-lying isomers and their energy distribution. Figure 2 shows

the 13 lowest energy isomers found for each of the Ne-Ar clusters; their energies are listed

in Table II. Unlike the low-lying isomers for Ar-Kr, which were all readily recognizable

as variations of the 4 most stable 13-atom homogeneous cluster conﬁgurations, the low-

lying Ne-Ar isomers are mostly non-icosahedral. The isomers depicted were all obtained

from quenches of J-walker distribution conﬁgurations, except for the Ne-core icosahedral-

like isomers for Ne9Ar4 (ﬁfth lowest), Ne7Ar6 (second lowest), Ne4Ar9 (eighth lowest), and

NeAr12 (second lowest), which were not found in the quenched distributions and so were

obtained instead by quenching the permutations derived from icosahedral structures. In fact,

very few of the Ne-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers predicted by the icosahedral

atom-counting rules15 were found in the quenched J-walker distributions, unlike the case

for 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters, where all of the expected permutational icosahedral-like isomers

were found.

The lowest energy isomer found for Ne12Ar was icosahedral-like, consisting of a 12-atom

Ne sub-cluster stacked on the Ar atom; the remaining isomers consisted of the small Ne

atoms wrapped around the larger Ar core in various monolayer forms. Although the large

diﬀerence between the Ne-Ar and the Ne-Ne potentials favors monolayer structures, the

most eﬃcient Ne packing is in the stacked structure, and in this case, the packing eﬃ-

ciency overshadowed the diﬀerential strengths of the potentials by a fairly large margin,

9

with the diﬀerence between the stacked conﬁguration and the lowest monolayer conﬁgura-

tion being 1.31042ǫNe-Ne. The stacked and monolayer forms are reminiscent of the wetting

and nonwetting structures observed by Chartrand, Shelley and Le Roy20 in their study of

SF6–(rare gas)n clusters. They observed both stacked (or nonwetted) and monolayer (wet-

ted) structures for all the clusters n ≥ 4 for SF6-Arn and n ≥ 5 for SF6-Krn, with wetted

isomers having the lowest energy for some n, and nonwetted isomers for the others. For

n = 12, the ground state conﬁguration for both Ar and Kr had the larger SF6 located on the

exterior of a stacked 12-atom sub-cluster, while in the second-lowest energy conﬁguration,

the SF6 core was surrounded by a monolayer of rare gas atoms. For SF6-Ar12, the energy

diﬀerence was 1.544ǫAr-Ar, which is similar to the Ne12Ar energy diﬀerence in the analogous

reduced units. Note also, that the size diﬀerence between the Ne and Ar atoms is similar

to the size diﬀerence between Ar and SF6. For the SF6-Rgn clusters, pentagonal and fused

pentagonal caps were especially stable conﬁgurations that appeared often in the isomers for

n ≥ 6, and these are likewise evident in many of the Ne12Ar isomers shown in Fig. 2.

For Ne11Ar2, there are 3 Ne-core icosahedral-like structures possible. The lowest energy

isomer found consisted of an icosahedral-like structure with the 2 Ne atoms occupying ad-

jacent sites, analogous to the Ar11Kr2 lowest energy isomer. But unlike Ar11Kr2, there were

also two non-icosahedral isomers having energies lower than the other two icosahedral-like

permutational isomers. These non-icosahedral isomers are characterized by a 6-atom ring

wrapped around the axis formed by the 2 Ar atoms. The other 5 Ne atoms occupied the

various interstices formed by this Ne6Ar2 sub-cluster. The lowest energy non-icosahedral

conﬁguration had the 5 Ne atoms forming a partial second ring just beneath the 6-atom

ring. This arrangement can also be seen to form two fused pentagonal caps, each consisting

of one of the Ar atoms and 4 Ne atoms capped by a ﬁfth Ne atom. This is a relatively stable

conﬁguration, so unlike the Ne12Ar case, the energy diﬀerence between the lowest energy

stacked and monolayer conﬁgurations was very small (0.0537ǫNe-Ne).

The increase in the Ne-core icosahedral-like isomer energies relative to the non-

icosahedral isomers continued for Ne10Ar3, which has 5 such isomers. The lowest energy

10

icosahedral-like isomer (analogous to the ground state Ar10Kr3 isomer) was not the ground

state isomer, but ranked third lowest; the second-lowest Ne-core isomer ranked eleventh.

Unlike the Ar-Kr clusters, the 5 Ne-core icosahedral-like isomers were not closely spaced in

energy. Their energy range was 1.74461ǫNe-Ne, compared to 0.12115ǫAr-Ar for the 5 analogous

Ar10Kr3 Ar-core isomers. The non-icosahedral conﬁgurations shown in Fig. 2 each consist

of the 3 Ar atoms arranged in a trigonal plane having 3 of the Ne atoms stacked on them

in an opposing trigonal plane, and the remaining Ne atoms occupying various sites around

them. The lowest energy conﬁguration has C3v symmetry.

The lowest energy isomer for Ne9Ar4 also consisted of the Ar atoms arranged in the

lowest energy homogeneous sub-cluster conﬁguration (the tetrahedron in this case), with

the Ne atoms occupying the exterior sites.

Its structure was very similar to the second

lowest energy Ne10Ar3 isomer, with the main diﬀerence being the replacement of the Ne

atom directly behind the 3 Ar atoms by another Ar atom. Similarly, the second lowest

energy Ne9Ar4 isomer had a structure akin to the ground state structure of Ne10Ar3, with

the main diﬀerence again being the replacement of the Ne atom directly behind the 3 Ar

atoms by another Ar atom, so that the structure also has C3v symmetry. The other Ne9Ar4

isomers can also be obtained formally from similar Ne10Ar3 structures by replacing a Ne atom

with an Ar atom. Ne9Ar4 also has 10 Ne-core icosahedral-like isomers. The lowest energy

one (analogous to the ground state Ar9Kr4 isomer) ranked ﬁfth lowest. The second and

fourth lowest energy Ne9Ar4 icosahedral-like isomers were found in the quench distribution,

but none of the other 7 were. The reason for the absence of the Ne9Ar4 icosahedral-like

isomers in the quenched distributions was evident in the quench trajectories obtained from

one of the J-walking walks: almost all of the very few lowest energy Ne-core icosahedral-like

isomers encountered during the walk quenched down to the global minimum, implying that

the barriers to rearrangement between the two isomers are low. Thus, while the quenched

J-walker distributions did not contain all of the low-lying isomers, the manner in which

they were obtained suggests that they did contain the most important stable isomers, and

that the shortfall consisted primarily of those isomers having low likelihood and being easily

11

rearranged. Again, the energy spread between the Ne9Ar4 Ne-core icosahedral-like isomers

was very large (2.34926ǫNe-Ne compared to 0.16439ǫAr-Ar for Ar9Kr4).

The lowest energy conﬁguration for a 5-atom Lennard-Jones cluster is the trigonal

bipyramid,39 and so it not surprising that the lowest energy isomer for Ne8Ar5 consisted

of the 5 Ar atoms arranged in a trigonal bipyramid conﬁguration, with the 8 Ne atoms at-

tached to the exterior sites, resulting in C2v symmetry. The other low-lying non-icosahedral

isomers had a similar form, with some of the Ne atoms occupying other exterior locations.

The lowest energy conﬁguration for a 6-atom Lennard-Jones cluster is the octahedron, but

the tripyramid is only a little higher in energy (−12.30293ǫ compared to −12.71206ǫ) and

the two are connected by low saddle points.39 As can be seen in Fig. 2, the lowest energy

non-icosahedral isomers found for Ne7Ar6 all have their 6 Ar atoms arranged in the tripyra-

mid form, and not the lower energy octahedron. The lowest energy octahedral isomer, which

has each Ne atom located on one of the octahedral faces, was the 36th lowest energy isomer

found, with an energy of 1.63820ǫNe-Ne above the global minimum. Although the Ar-Ar

interactions are maximized slightly in the octahedral arrangement, the Ne-Ne interactions

are reduced substantially, making such conﬁgurations unfavorable. Ne7Ar6 has 18 Ne-core

icosahedral-like isomers, and the lowest energy one ranked second; it was not found in the

quenched distributions, and only two of the other 17 isomers were found. According to the

icosahedral atom-counting rules,15 Ne7Ar6 is also expected to have 12 Ar-core icosahedral-

like isomers, but because the Ne atoms are too small to remain ﬁxed in the icosahedral sites

around the much larger Ar core atom, many additional isomers resembling highly distorted

icosahedral-like forms are possible. Most of these were found in the quenched distributions.

Their energies were generally higher than the Ne-core icosahedral-like isomer energies, but

because of the large energy spread in both sets of isomers, there was substantial overlap.

The lowest-energy Ar-core icosahedral-like isomer had an energy of 1.99495ǫNe-Ne relative to

the global minimum.

The 7-atom Lennard-Jones cluster is one of the magic number sizes, having a pentagonal

bipyramidal structure for its lowest energy isomer. Most of the Ne6Ar7 low energy isomers

12

shown in Fig. 2 consist of the 6 Ne atoms located on the trigonal faces of an Ar-atom

pentagonal bipyramidal sub-cluster. The lowest energy isomer has 2 pairs of Ne atoms

located on the upper trigonal faces, and the other pair located on the lower face below.

The pentagonal sites formed by the Ar-atom ring are separated by distances much larger

than the Ne-Ne equilibrium distance, and so the distances between the Ne atoms in each

pair are compressed substantially. The second lowest energy isomer for Ne6Ar7 is readily

recognizable as a truncated Ar-core icosahedral-like structure, with one of the Ne atoms

located on one of the Ar icosahedral faces.

If the Ne atom were moved to the top to

cap the 5-atom Ne ring, the resulting conﬁguration would be the lowest energy Ar-core

icosahedral-like isomer. This isomer ranked 24th lowest, with an energy of 1.11047ǫNe-Ne

above the ground state. The energy gained by increasing the number of Ne-Ar interactions

in the truncated icosahedral-like form is much greater than the energy lost by breaking the

compact icosahedral structure. The third lowest energy isomer did not have its Ar atoms

arranged as a trigonal bipyramid, but as an incomplete stellated tetrahedron, the second

lowest 7-atom Lennard-Jones isomer.39

Ne5Ar8 represents an interesting cross-over point in the 13-atom Ne-Ar series. It is the

last in the series having a non-icosahedral structure as its lowest energy isomer — Ne4Ar9

to NeAr12 all have Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers as their ground state isomers. Thus,

it is also the last in the series to have its lowest energy Ne-core icosahedral-like isomer

being more stable than its lowest energy Ar-core icosahedral-like isomer. The lowest energy

isomer consists of the 8 Ar atoms arranged as a fully stellated tetrahedron, with the 5

Ne atoms located on the tetrahedral faces. The stellated tetrahedron is the second lowest

energy isomer for 8-atom homogeneous Lennard-Jones clusters (the pentagonal bipyramid

with an added atom is the lowest energy isomer).39 The energy diﬀerence between the two

is not small (−19.82149ǫ compared to −18.97606ǫ), but the larger number of Ne-Ar nearest

neighbor interactions in this conformation is suﬃcient to overcome the deﬁcit. Except for

the third lowest energy isomer, which is a Ne-core icosahedral-like structure, all the other

Ne5Ar8 isomers depicted in Fig. 2 consist of the Ar atoms arranged in the lowest energy

13

8-atom homogeneous sub-cluster. The second lowest energy isomer is a truncated Ar-core

icosahedral-like structure, having one of the Ne atoms occupying one of the icosahedral faces

formed by 3 Ar atoms. This structure is only slightly more stable than the lowest energy

Ar-core icosahedral-like isomer, which ranked tenth lowest, but only 0.12235ǫNe-Ne higher in

energy.

For Ne4Ar9, the two lowest energy isomers were Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational

isomers, and so this cluster was the ﬁrst in the series to have Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers

that were lower in energy than their corresponding truncated icosahedral-like isomers. The

energy ranges of the icosahedral-like and truncated icosahedral-like permutational isomers

were both larger than the energy diﬀerence between the two sets, and so the isomers were

mostly interspersed. As the number of Ar atoms increased, so too did the energy diﬀerence

between the two sets, and they became increasingly segregated. For Ne3Ar10, the 4 lowest

energy isomers were Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers, and the ﬁfth one ranked

twelfth lowest overall. For Ne2Ar11, all 3 Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers

lay well below the truncated icosahedral-like permutational isomers, and the lone Ne-core

icosahedral-like isomer was fourth lowest. For NeAr12, the Ar-core icosahedral-like isomer

lay well below its Ne-core counterpart. This energy was similar to the energies of the next

three truncated icosahedral-like isomers, all of which have the Ne atom occupying one of the

exterior sites. The subsequent isomers were also separated from these isomers by nearly as

large an energy gap.

The trends in the lowest energy icosahedral-like and non-icosahedral isomers as functions

of the cluster composition can be seen in Fig. 3. The reduced energies show a nearly linear

dependence on composition that is due to the large diﬀerence between the Ne and Ar inter-

molecular forces. As the fraction of Ar atoms increased, so too did the fraction of stronger

Ar-Ne and Ar-Ar interactions. This eﬀect overshadowed the smaller, more subtle trends,

which can be made manifest by scaling out the gross linear dependence on composition by

using energies scaled by the composition weighted average ǫAvg = XNeǫNe-Ne + XArǫAr-Ar,

where XNe = nNe/(nNe + nAr) and XAr = 1 − XNe. The icosahedral-like isomers’ scaled en-

14

ergies increased as their mole fraction decreased from unity. For the Ne-core isomers, they

rose rapidly from Ne13 until they leveled oﬀ at Ne9Ar4, and then decreased slightly again

after Ne6Ar7. The Ar-core scaled energies likewise increased from the Ar13 value as the

number of Ne atoms increased. However, they did not level oﬀ, but kept rising in a roughly

linear manner. The two Ne-Ar icosahedral-like curves crossed at Ne5Ar8. These trends are

strongly dependent on the atomic sizes, though. Had the Ne and Ar atoms been the same

size, then the Ar-core isomers would have been more stable than the Ne-core isomers for

all compositions, since the central Ar atom would have maximized the Ne-Ar interactions

relative to the weaker Ne-Ne interactions. For 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters, the size diﬀerence

between the Ar and Kr atoms was suﬃciently large that the trends reversed and the Kr-core

isomers were higher in energy than the Ar-core isomers for all compositions. The Ne-Ar

curves demonstrate that there exists another critical size ratio for those icosahedral-like iso-

mers consisting mostly of the larger-atom component, where having the larger atom at the

center becomes more stable again than having the smaller atom at the center. The scaled

energies for the non-icosahedral isomers were roughly constant across the series. The similar-

ity of the scaled energies for these isomers indicates that these clusters had non-icosahedral

ground state structures not because the isomers themselves became intrinsically more stable

as the composition became more mixed, but because the icosahedral-like isomers became so

much less stable.

The eﬀects of cluster composition on the isomer energy distributions are shown in Fig. 4,

which depicts the energy spectrum for each cluster’s local minima relative to its global

minimum. The plots have been arranged so that complementary clusters (Ne13−nArn and

NenAr13−n) appear in the same column. As was the case with 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters, the

densities of the energetically distinct local minima increased as the number of possible per-

mutations increased, quickly becoming so great that most of the individual levels cannot be

distinguished in the plots. Otherwise, though, the plots diﬀer greatly from the Ar-Kr plots.

In those plots, the clusters having a greater fraction of Ar atoms had an energy spectrum

similar to that of Ar13, which is dominated by its very large energy gap between the icosa-

15

hedral ground state and the non-icosahedral isomers. As the fraction of Kr atoms in the

clusters increased from Ar12Kr to Ar7Kr6, the number of Ar-core icosahedral-like permuta-

tional isomers increased, forming a small group of closely spaced low-lying energies, but the

energy gap between these isomers and the band formed by the higher energy truncated icosa-

hedral and non-icosahedral isomers remained nearly constant. The Kr-core icosahedral-like

isomers were also closely spaced, but the gap between them and the Ar-core isomers de-

creased steadily as the Kr mole fraction increased. The Ne-Ar energy spectra do not exhibit

such patterns, showing instead, a wide variety of behavior. Except for NeAr12, none of the

binary cluster spectra has the large gap between the global minimum and the higher energy

isomers that characterize the homogeneous cluster spectra. The number of low lying isomers

(∆E <

∼ 2) is greater for those clusters having similar numbers of Ne and Ar atoms, being

greatest for Ne5Ar8. For these clusters, the low-lying icosahedral-like and non-icosahedral

isomers have similar energies so that the two sets are substantially interlaced.

B. Thermodynamic properties

The wide variety that characterizes the structural properties of 13-atom Ne-Ar clusters

carries over to their thermodynamic properties as well. Figure 5 shows the heat capacity (in

reduced units) for each cluster as a function of temperature. The heat capacity peak heights

and temperatures are listed in Table III, and the values for the major peaks are plotted in

Fig. 6. The J-walking curves shown in each plot in Fig. 5 represent the averages obtained

from combining the results of the individual J-walking runs, as described in Section II.

Representative standard deviations have not been included to prevent excessive cluttering,

but they were consistent with the noise levels evident in the curves. The peak values were

obtained in each case from the averaged J-walker curves. These curves were smoothed and

then interpolated in the peak vicinities to obtain ﬁner mesh sizes, and the peak parameters

were then found simply by searching the interpolated data.40 The uncertainties in the peak

heights were estimated from the average standard deviations of the points in the vicinity of

16

each peak.

The plots of the Ne-Ar heat capacity peak temperature and height as functions of compo-

sition shown in Fig. 6 do not exhibit the smooth variations that were seen in the correspond-

ing plots of their Ar-Kr counterparts. The Ne-Ar peak temperatures can be grouped into

three regions: Ne13 to Ne10Ar3, which have similar, but much lower peak temperatures than

the others; Ne9Ar4 to Ne4Ar9, whose peak temperatures are roughly constant; and Ne3Ar10

to Ar13, whose peak temperatures rise nearly linearly as a function of the composition. The

linear rise in the peak temperature is similar to the trends observed for the Ar-Kr clusters,

which showed a gradual linear rise from Ar13 to Ar7Kr6, followed by a steeper linear rise

from Ar6Kr7 to Kr13. The changes in the Ar-Kr peak heights were relatively minor, with

the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum being only about 12% of the Ar13 peak

height. The changes in the Ne-Ar peak heights were much more drastic. Again, it was those

Ne-Ar clusters having a large Ar mole fraction whose behavior most resembled that of their

Ar-Kr counterparts. Also shown in Fig. 6 is a plot of the peak heights as a function of

the peak temperature. Unlike the corresponding plot for the Ar-Kr clusters, though, which

consisted of a regular progression on a smoothly varying curve, the Ne-Ar plot consists of

an irregular scatter of points with some grouping evident.

Except for the NeAr12 heat capacity curve, none of the curves shown in Fig. 5 resembles

the Ar13 curve obtained previously,2,6 unlike the Ar-Kr curves, which were mostly very

similar to the Ar13 curve in the solid-liquid transition region. The similarity in the Ar-

Kr curves was a consequence of the Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational isomer energies

being closely spaced and well separated from the Kr-core icosahedral-like energies, and from

the non-icosahedral energies, so that the important diﬀerences occurred only in the low

temperature regions. Except for NeAr12, the Ne-core icosahedral-like, Ar-core icosahedral-

like, and the non-icosahedral isomer energies were not well separated, but were mostly

intermixed, so that there were few large gaps in the energy spectra. This resulted in the

much diminished heat capacity peaks evident in Fig. 5.

The standard Metropolis heat capacity curves for each cluster have also been included

17

in Fig. 5. These were in good agreement with the J-walking curves over most of the tem-

perature domain for only a few of the clusters, but were in mostly good agreement with all

of them at the higher temperatures. The poor results obtained from the standard Metropo-

lis method in the low temperature regions was not surprising since this was evident in

the 13-atom Ar-Kr Metropolis results as well, where the low temperature mixing-anomaly

peaks were not reproduced at all. What was surprising is how little improvement was ob-

tained using the atom-exchange method. For the Ar-Kr clusters, the atom-exchange results

were substantially better than the standard Metropolis results, and were in good agreement

with the J-walker results for all the clusters over most of their temperature domains. The

atom-exchange results even showed the mixing-anomaly peaks, although they were only in

qualitative agreement with the J-walker results. As is evident in Fig. 5, the atom-exchange

results were mostly similar to the standard Metropolis results for most of the Ne-Ar clusters.

The poor performance of the atom-exchange method in application to Ne-Ar clusters is also

due to the large size diﬀerence between the Ne and Ar atoms. In the low temperature regions

where most of the Metropolis conﬁgurations have energies only slightly above their nearest

local minimum, the trial conﬁgurations most often obtained by swapping one of the large

Ar atoms with a small Ne atom were strained conﬁgurations having energies too high to

be accepted with suﬃcient frequency. Comparison of the exchange-move acceptance ratios

for the Ne-Ar clusters with the ratios for their corresponding Ar-Kr counterparts showed

that indeed far fewer exchange moves had been accepted for the Ne-Ar clusters. It appears

then, that the atom-exchange method is useful for reducing quasiergodicity in binary cluster

simulations only when the atomic sizes of the two components are similar enough.

Much of the low temperature Ne-Ar heat capacity behavior seen in Fig. 5 can still

be rationalized mainly in terms of the potential minima energy spectra shown in Fig. 4,

although there are other important factors involved as well. The curves for the predominately

Ne clusters Ne12Ar, Ne11Ar2 and Ne10Ar3 diﬀered from the others by their much lower

peak temperatures, and by their much smaller peak sizes. The peak temperatures were all

substantially below the Ne13 peak temperature of 10.15 K. Ne12Ar had a single moderately

18

high peak occurring at 5.20 K that was evident only in the J-walking calculations; the

Metropolis and atom-exchange results showed an abrupt rise in the heat capacity at 6 K,

but no peak. The peak is due to the moderately large energy gap between the stacked

ground state icosahedral-like isomer and the Ar-core monolayer isomers. The rest of the

curve rising sharply after the peak is the low temperature side of a larger peak associated

with the cluster’s dissociation.41 It is tempting to extend the correspondence between the

Ne13 heat capacity peak and its solid-liquid transition region to Ne12Ar and to think of its

peak then as characterizing a solid-liquid transition between the “solid” stacked conﬁguration

and the “liquid” monolayer conﬁgurations, but this is not the case. The absence of a peak in

the Metropolis results implies that this peak is not due to any dynamic transition between

the stacked and monolayer isomers, and so cannot represent a coexistence region like the one

in Ne13. Instead, once the Metropolis simulations reached 6 K, the Ne12Ar clusters began

achieving energies high enough to overcome the potential barriers separating the stacked

conﬁgurations from the other low-lying isomers, whereupon they escaped their conﬁnement,

transformed into one of the monolayer conﬁgurations and were seldom encountered again.

As will be discussed later, the quench studies revealed that as the temperature continued

increasing, it was the monolayer isomers that dominated the solid-liquid transition region,

which occurred at higher temperatures.

For Ne11Ar2, the Ne-core icosahedral-like ground state and the lowest energy non-

icosahedral isomer have very similar energies, which resulted in the very small heat capacity

peak occurring at 0.37 K. As with Ne12Ar, there was a very large discrepancy between the

J-walking and Metropolis results over much of the low temperature region. The Metropo-

lis curve rose slowly and nearly linearly until about 6 K, after which it rose abruptly to

approach the J-walking curve. The curves form a larger peak at 8.92 K that can be iden-

tiﬁed, in conjunction with the quench studies discussed later, as the solid-liquid transition

region. Ne10Ar3 had a peak that was more pronounced than the peak for Ne11Ar2, and it

was located at a slightly lower temperature of 6.76 K. The Metropolis and atom-exchange

curves for Ne10Ar3 were in much better agreement with the J-walking curve than was the

19

case for the other two clusters. Although the Metropolis peak was much diminished and the

curve on the low temperature side of the peak was much lower than the J-walking curve,

the results were at least in qualitative agreement.

The predominately Ar clusters Ne3Ar10 to NeAr12 were distinguished by a single large

peak corresponding to the solid-liquid transition region. The peaks became smaller and

shifted to lower temperatures as the number of Ar atoms decreased. Their larger size is

due to the very large gaps between the lowest energy isomers and the band of higher energy

isomers that are accessible only at the higher temperatures associated with the liquid region.

As the gap decreased from Ar13 to Ne3Ar10, so too did the peak height. These clusters also

have suﬃciently large energy gaps between the ground state isomer and the next lowest

energy isomer that none exhibited the small, very low temperature heat capacity peaks seen

in some of the other clusters. While the heat capacity curve for NeAr12 most resembled the

Ar13 curve, it diﬀered much from its ArKr12 counterpart. The ArKr12 curve had a smaller,

well separated second peak occurring just before the solid-liquid transition peak that was

due to the interaction between the Ar-core and Kr-core icosahedral-like isomers. The isomer

energy spectra for NeAr12 and ArKr12 are mostly similar. For ArKr12, the Kr-core isomer

having the larger Kr atom at the center was 3.15883ǫNe-Ne higher in energy than the Ar-

core isomer. For NeAr12, the energy gap between the Ne-core and Ar-core icosahedral-like

isomers was only slightly larger (3.99438ǫNe-Ne), but in this case, it was the Ar-core isomer

with its larger Ar atom at the center that had the lower energy. NeAr12 also diﬀers from

ArKr12 in that its 3 truncated icosahedral-like isomers with the Ne atom located on one

of the icosahedral faces had energies only slightly higher than the Ne-core icosahedral-like

isomer; in ArKr12, the corresponding truncated icosahedral-like isomers had much higher

energies, with the gap being similar to the one in Kr13. Otherwise though, the two energy

spectra diﬀered little. This major diﬀerence between the NeAr12 and ArKr12 heat capacity

curves despite their similar energy spectra clearly indicates that much more than just the

isomer energy distributions are involved in the clusters’ thermodynamic behavior. Both

NeAr12 and Ne2Ar11 showed mostly good agreement between the J-walking and Metropolis

20

curves, while Ne3Ar10 showed signiﬁcant deviations on the low temperature side of the peak.

For Ne3Ar10, the atom-exchange results were markedly better than the Metropolis results,

though.

The heat capacities for the intermediate clusters Ne9Ar4 to Ne4Ar9 are characterized by

very broad, low peaks extending over much of the temperature domain. While the curve

proﬁles transformed smoothly in going from Ne4Ar9 to Ne3Ar10, there was an abrupt change

in going from Ne10Ar3 to Ne9Ar4. The peaks for Ne9Ar4 to Ne4Ar9 occurred at much higher

temperatures than did the peaks for Ne12Ar to Ne10Ar3, but their temperatures were similar

to the solid-liquid transition peak temperatures obtained for Ne3Ar10 to NeAr12. While

the similar peak temperatures might suggest that these peaks also corresponded to solid-

liquid transitions, the peaks’ broad proﬁles, extending over such large temperature ranges,

together with the abrupt changes in the peak height and location between Ne10Ar3 and

Ne9Ar4, indicates a more complicated scenario, one which will await the discussion of the

quench results. Except for Ne4Ar9, the peak temperatures for this group were remarkably

similar. The peak heights mostly decreased over this range as the Ar mole fraction increased,

reaching a minimum at Ne5Ar8. Those clusters having isomers with energies slightly above

their global minimum energy (Ne9Ar4, Ne8Ar5, Ne6Ar7, and Ne5Ar8) also had an additional

small peak occurring at very low temperatures. In the Ar-Kr clusters, these smaller peaks’

sizes were primarily determined by the number of Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers, since

these isomers were grouped closely together in energy. For the Ne-Ar clusters though, the

large spread of the various permutational isomer energy ranges implies that there is no such

simple connection between the low-lying isomers and the size of the low temperature peaks:

Ne9Ar4 had the largest such peak, which is due to the transactions between its lowest 3 non-

icosahedral permutational isomers, while Ne8Ar5, with 5 low-lying non-icosahedral isomers,

had a much smaller peak.

The potential energy curves for the clusters as functions of temperature are shown in

Fig. 7. The large diﬀerence between the Ne and Ar intermolecular potentials results in the

binary cluster curves having widely varying energies and temperature ranges, which makes

21

it diﬃcult to compare them directly. It is clear, though, that they diﬀer qualitatively from

the homogeneous cluster curves; except for the Ne12Ar and NeAr12 curves, the curves for the

binary clusters show very gradual rises occurring over more extended temperature ranges.

The Ne12Ar curve has a noticeable inﬂection, but it occurs at a reduced temperature well

below that of the Ne13 inﬂection.

C. Quench results

Further insights into the temperature dependence of binary cluster isomerizations can

be obtained from the quench studies. Figures 8 to 10 show the quench results obtained

using J-walking for the six lowest-energy isomers for each Ne-Ar cluster. Not surprising, the

quench curves also show much variation, and are generally dissimilar from the corresponding

homogenous cluster quench curves. This again is very much diﬀerent than what occurred

for the 13-atom Ar-Kr clusters, whose quench curves showed large diﬀerences due to the

low-lying Ar-core icosahedral-like permutational isomers; if those curves were combined into

single curves representative of their common icosahedral-like topological forms, then the

resulting quench proﬁles were in fact very similar to their homogeneous counterparts.

For Ne12Ar, the fraction of quenches to the ground state Ne-core icosahedral-like isomer

dropped oﬀ rapidly after 4 K as the Ar-core monolayer isomers began to contribute, so that

by 8 K, there were very few quenches to this isomer. The two lowest-energy monolayer

isomers dominated the quenches over much of the rest of the temperature domain depicted,

contributing about 75% of the quenches at 7 K (which the Metropolis heat capacity results

indicate as being in the solid-liquid transition region), and about 40% of the quenches at

13 K, where the large fraction of quenches to the other higher energy isomers is indica-

tive of liquid-like behavior. The curve for the remaining higher energy isomers rose much

more slowly than was the case for the other predominately Ne clusters, implying that the

solid-liquid transition region for Ne12Ar seems to extend over a much larger temperature

range. Note too, that this curve becomes dominant well beyond the heat capacity peak,

22

again consistent with the Metropolis heat capacity behavior indicating that the solid-liquid

transition region occurred at higher temperatures.

To gain more insight into the melting behavior of this cluster, I ran additional quench

studies using similar Metropolis temperature scans in the direction of decreasing tempera-

tures, starting at 10 K. Figure 11 compares the quench proﬁles obtained for the three lowest

energy isomers from these simulations with those obtained from the Metropolis simulations

in the direction of increasing temperatures, which were begun from the ground state isomer.

The curves show clear hysteresis. The quench curves in the increasing temperature direction

reveal that the clusters were locked into their lowest energy conﬁguration until 6.3 K, after

which the monolayer isomers began being accessed (this temperature also corresponds to

the point where the Metropolis heat capacity curve rose abruptly in Fig. 5). Reversing the

temperature direction at 10 K resulted in curves that were in agreement only for tempera-

tures higher than 6.3 K, below which, none of the quenches were to the ground state isomer,

but were distributed among the low lying monolayer isomers. This behavior implies that

the barriers to isomerization between the monolayer conﬁgurations are very low, while the

barriers between the stacked and the monolayer conﬁgurations are very large.

The spikes seen in the Metropolis quench curves near 7 K imply that this is a narrow

coexistence region where the cluster spent long periods of time in either the stacked or

monolayer conﬁgurations, switching between the two only occasionally. But this coexistence

is quite diﬀerent than the one occurring in Ne13. For Ne13, the coexistence region primarily

involved isomerizations between the ground state icosahedron and the three higher energy

truncated icosahedral structures having one of the atoms located on one of the icosahedral

faces (at the heat capacity peak temperature, about 80% of the quenches were to these four

isomers). It is the very large energy gap between the Ne13 ground state and the truncated

icosahedral isomers, as well as the substantial gap between those isomers and the succeeding

non-icosahedral isomers, that is responsible for the pronounced coexistence range in Ne13.

The gap between the Ne12Ar ground state and the corresponding truncated icosahedral-like

isomers having a lone Ne atom on one of the icosahedral faces is slightly smaller than the

23

one in Ne13, but as can be seen in Fig. 4, Ne12Ar has a large number of monolayer isomers

with energies well below the truncated icosahedral-like isomers. Thus once a stacked Ne12Ar

isomer at about 6.3 K gained suﬃcient energy to move a Ne atom from an icosahedral

vertex onto an icosahedral face, it reached a plateau region where the lone Ne atom could

return again to its icosahedral site, or the cluster could continue isomerizing into one of the

monolayer isomers. But once it started down the monolayer path, it could easily continue

isomerizing into several of the various monolayer isomers, since the barriers separating them

are so low. Such a trajectory would cover a much larger distance in conﬁguration space,

greatly reducing the likelihood of its return to the original stacked conﬁguration. For Ne13,

the four lowest energy isomers are close together in conﬁguration space so that the isomeriza-

tions between them are largely reversible, and the typical recurrence times between isomers

returning to icosahedral conﬁgurations are short on the time scale of the walk length. For

Ne12Ar, the recurrence times were so much longer that the transformations from stacked

to monolayer conﬁgurations were largely irreversible, except for a very narrow temperature

range, where the probability of crossing the barriers was so low that such an occasional

transformation would leave the cluster trapped in the stacked conﬁguration subspace for a

long period of time before accessing enough energy to take it out again.

The icosahedral-like conﬁguration subspace being so much smaller than the non-

icosahedral conﬁguration subspace, and it being isolated by large barriers, were also factors

in the quench distributions for the other Ne-Ar clusters, where the quenches to Ne-core

icosahedral-like isomers were also very low; it also accounts for the absence of many of these

permutational isomers in the J-walker distributions noted earlier. Similar behavior was en-

countered by Matro, Freeman and Topper in their study of ammonium chloride clusters.26

The second and third lowest energy isomers for (NH4Cl)3 were only slightly higher in energy

than the lowest energy isomer (∆E01 = 235 K, ∆E02 = 635 K) and separated from it by

large barriers of nearly equal size (∆E01 = 2118 K, ∆E02 = 2021 K). During the simulations

at 50 K, all the conﬁgurations were found to be in the potential energy wells belonging to

the ﬁrst and third isomers, but none were found in the well belonging to the second isomer,

24

which the authors attributed to the much smaller fraction of conﬁguration space associated

with the second isomer.

Visually examining samples of the Ne12Ar conﬁgurations generated during Metropolis

walks at various temperatures provided further support for the above arguments. Walks

begun from an initial ground state conﬁguration at 8 K quickly resulted in conﬁgurations

that were distended, but quite recognizable as stacked Ne-core icosahedral-like structures.

After a several thousand passes, the cluster isomerized into one of the truncated icosahedral-

like forms, where the lone exterior Ne atom slowly migrated over the surface, moving from

site to site, sometimes returning to its original site. Eventually, after many additional steps,

the exterior Ar atom and the core Ne atom would make a concerted movement that brought

the Ar atom into the central location and moved the central Ne atom to the exterior,

transforming the cluster into an Ar-core precursor that quickly collapsed into a monolayer

structure, after which the exterior Ne atoms rapidly rearranged themselves into various

other monolayer conﬁgurations. The migration of exterior Ne atoms from one side of the Ar

atom to another was still sluggish, though, because the Ne atoms enveloped the Ar atom

closely enough to hinder gross movements. Repeating the walks at higher temperatures led to

similar behavior, but on an accelerated time scale such that the transformation from stacked

to monolayer conﬁguration occurred much more quickly. The monolayer conﬁgurations also

underwent isomerizations more rapidly as the exterior Ne atoms moved freely about the

Ar core, showing large-scale movements akin to liquid-like behavior. The intermediate,

partially stacked conﬁgurations were also seen more frequently. At the higher temperatures,

the clusters often had enough energy to overcome the barriers between the monolayer and

stacked conﬁguration spaces, but because the stacked conﬁguration subspace is so much

smaller than the monolayer conﬁguration subspace, only a small fraction of the walk was

spent in the stacked subspace, resulting in few stacked conﬁguration quenches. But for

temperatures near 7 K though, the movement between the regions slowed down enough

that the occasional forays into the stacked conﬁguration subspace resulted in the Metropolis

walker being trapped for long periods before escaping. Coexistence was not seen at lower

25

temperatures since the movements into the stacked subspace became so infrequent that the

walker remained essentially trapped in the monolayer subspace.

This type of coexistence behavior between the stacked and monolayer conﬁgurations

is also similar to the behavior reported by Shelley, Le Roy and Amar in their molecular

dynamics study of SF6-Ar9 clusters.19 The authors observed that the cluster underwent two

diﬀerent “melting” transitions, the ﬁrst at T ≈ 15 K marking the onset of Ar atom mobility

within the unimolecular layer surrounding the SF6 core, and the second at T ≈ 35 K

marking the onset of facile Ar atom motion out of and back into this layer. Over a narrow

intermediate temperature range, the authors noted the coexistence between the “liquid-like”

monolayer rearrangments and the solid-like large-amplitude motion of the stacked two-layer

conﬁgurations. One of the fundamental diﬀerences between this coexistence and that seen

for homogeneous Ar clusters was that the transition from the liquid-like monolayer isomers

to the solid-like stacked isomers required an increase in energy; that is, the “solid” was

obtained after heating the “liquid.” This spontaneous reversing isomerization is analogous

to the Ne12Ar behavior, since the large spikes in the Metropolis stacked isomer quench

curves, as well as the small, but nonzero, values afterward, occurred at higher temperatures

(T >

∼ 7 K) than the temperature where the cluster ﬁrst isomerized to the monolayer form

(T = 6.4 K), and had no quenches to the stacked conﬁguration at all.

The quench proﬁles for Ne9Ar4 and Ne10Ar3 show that much care must be exercised

in interpreting quench results. Both clusters have similar proﬁles, diﬀering mostly in the

Ne9Ar4 curves showing abrupt changes about 2 K sooner, but whereas the Ne10Ar3 quench

proﬁle was consistent with the J-walking and Metropolis heat capacity results, the Ne9Ar4

proﬁle was not. Ne9Ar4 has a much larger number of low-lying non-icosahedral isomers lying

within 1ǫNe-Ne of the lowest energy isomer than does Ne10Ar3, but the high density of isomers

above 1ǫNe-Ne from the global minimum is similar in both clusters. The curve representing

the sum of the quenches to the higher energy isomers rises even more quickly in Ne9Ar4

because of the contributions from the many isomers lying within 1ǫNe-Ne of the ground state,

suggesting that the temperature region near 4 K be interpreted as a solid-liquid transition

26

region as well. The heat capacity results, though, were more akin to those obtained for

Ne12Ar than to those obtained for Ne10Ar3 — the Ne9Ar4 heat capacity peak was also seen

only in the J-walking results. The Metropolis results showed a small rise in this region,

but no discernible peak, again implying that these higher energy isomers were not accessed

dynamically at these low temperatures, and so this region is not the solid-liquid transition

region. The Ne9Ar4 heat capacity curve has another peak at 24.27 K having no counterpart

in Ne10Ar3 that could be identiﬁed as the solid-liquid transition peak, but it seems surprising

that replacing a single Ne atom with an Ar atom in Ne10Ar3 to form Ne9Ar4 could shift the

transition temperature from 7 K to 24 K. Moreover, the peak is so broad that it is hard to

imagine that it could represent a solid-liquid transition spanning a range from 5 to 30 K.

Visually examining samples of the Ne9Ar4 conﬁgurations generated during some of the

Metropolis walks revealed that peak encompassed more than just a solid-liquid transition.

At 5 K, the cluster showed only solid-like behavior for tens of thousands of passes, but

at temperatures near 7 K, the Ar atoms remained ﬁxed as a solid-like tetrahedral sub-

cluster undergoing small amplitude oscillations, while a Ne atom occasionally moved from

one site to another. Although there are many low-lying non-icosahedral isomers having

similar energies, the barriers were too high for the Metropolis walks to overcome at such low

temperatures; the ergodic J-walking could cover such large regions of conﬁguration space,

though, resulting in quenches to a wide distribution of isomers, but with relatively few to any

one. Thus the quench proﬁle appears similar to that of a cluster in the liquid region, even

though none of the atoms were undergoing the rapid large scale movements characteristic

of liquid-like behavior. As the Metropolis walk temperature was increased, the Ne atoms

underwent increasingly large amplitude motions, eventually moving freely about the still

solid-like Ar core. Much higher temperatures were required before the Ar atoms also started

undergoing large amplitude motions and rearrangements from their tetrahedral sites. This

implies that Ne9Ar4 underwent diﬀerentiated melting, with the outer Ne atoms “melting”

well before the Ar core. At temperatures near the heat capacity peak, the Ne9Ar4 clusters

showed full liquid-like behavior, but the Ne atoms would sometimes move quite far apart

27

from one another, and from the Ar atoms, which still tended to remain together, leading

to dissociated conﬁgurations that would collapse again into condensed conﬁgurations after

a short while.

The similar broad shapes of the heat capacity peaks for the other clusters up to Ne3Ar10,

as well as their similar peak temperatures, indicate behavior similar to that of Ne9Ar4, with

the peaks encompassing “pre-melting” isomerizations at low temperatures (evident where

the J-walking and Metropolis curves showed larger discrepancies), “melting” of the outer

Ne atoms (that is, free movement of the Ne atoms around an intact Ar sub-cluster core),

melting of the Ar-core to give a fully liquid-like cluster (although with the Ne and Ar atoms

more segregated than not), and dissociation of the Ne atoms (which remained about the

undissociated Ar atoms because of the conﬁning potential); full dissociation of the cluster

was evident in other peaks occurring at slightly higher temperatures than shown in Fig. 5.

None of these “stages” had sharply deﬁned temperature ranges, but formed a continuum

of behavior. As the number of Ar atoms increased, though, these stages shifted to higher

temperatures and became increasingly diﬀerentiated, so that by Ne4Ar9, liquid-like behavior

dominated the heat capacity peak region.

The lowest energy isomers for the predominately Ar clusters Ne4Ar9 to NeAr12 were all

Ar-core icosahedral-like structures having increasingly larger gaps between them and their

next highest energy isomers. This is reﬂected in their quench proﬁles, shown in Fig. 10.

The temperature at which the fraction of quenches to the ground state isomers began to

drop increased as the number of Ar atoms increased. Ne2Ar11 has its two other Ar-core

icosahedral-like permutational isomers having similar energies at about 1ǫNe-Ne from the

ground state. Their quench curves show that they too began being accessed by about 5 K,

but while the second lowest energy isomer went on to contribute a maximum of 20% of the

quenches at 18 K, the third isomer had very few quenches throughout. This behavior is

similar to that observed for Ar-Kr clusters, where the diﬀerent quench levels for icosahedral-

like permutational isomers was due primarily to simple combinatorics. As can be seen in

Fig. 2, the third lowest-energy isomer has its two Ne atoms occupying the axial positions of

28

the icosahedron. The number of ways that the two Ne and 11 Ar atoms can be combined to

form this arrangement is much smaller than the number of ways the other two permutational

isomers can be formed. The fourth lowest energy Ne2Ar11 isomer is a Ne-core icosahedral-

like isomer, and like most of the other Ne-core icosahedral-like isomers for the other Ne-Ar

clusters, it had very few quenches.

The quench proﬁle for NeAr12 is similar to that of Ar13. NeAr12 has a Ne-core icosahedral-

like isomer, as well as three truncated Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers having the lone Ne

atom located on one of the icosahedral faces. The Ne-core icosahedral-like isomer again had

very few quenches, but the other three isomers began being accessed at about 20 K, reaching

a maximum at the heat capacity peak temperature. These three isomers and the ground

state isomer accounted for 75% of the quenches at the heat capacity peak temperature, which

was similar to Ar13, whose four lowest isomers accounted for 80% of the quenches at the heat

capacity peak temperature. The quench proﬁle for NeAr12 is very much diﬀerent than that of

its ArKr12 counterpart, though. Its analogous Kr-core icosahedral-like isomer also dominated

the quenches near the heat capacity peak temperatures, but since this isomer was the higher

energy one, it started with no quenches at the very low temperatures where the ground state

Ar-core isomer was dominant. ArKr12 had a moderately sized heat capacity peak occurring

below the solid-liquid transition peak that corresponded to the transformation from the Ar-

core to the Kr-core isomer. Because the analogous Ne-core isomer was not the ground state

isomer for NeAr12, there was no analogous transformation from it to the Ar-core isomer, and

so there was no smaller heat capacity peak for NeAr12 corresponding to the one for ArKr12.

The results obtained for 13-atom Ne-Ar clusters were very much diﬀerent than those

obtained for their Ar-Kr counterparts. Where the Ar-Kr cluster properties were mostly

alike and similar to those of their homogeneous counterpart, the Ne-Ar cluster properties

exhibited a wide range of diverse and unique behavior that showed little semblance to their

IV. CONCLUSION

29

corresponding homogeneous cluster properties. For example, Ne12Ar and Ne11Ar2 clusters

underwent transitions from stacked Ne-core icosahedral-like conﬁgurations to Ar-core mono-

layer conﬁgurations that none of the other clusters did. Ne4Ar9 and Ne3Ar10 were much alike,

but their complements Ne9Ar4 and Ne10Ar3 were very diﬀerent from one another. All the

Ar-Kr clusters showed the magic-number behavior characteristic of Ar13, but except for

NeAr12, none of the Ne-Ar clusters did. Analogous to Ar13, whose icosahedral and much

higher energy truncated icosahedral isomers dominated the solid-liquid transition region,

the Ar-Kr clusters’ solid-liquid transition regions were dominated by closely spaced Ar-core

icosahedral-like permutational isomers and higher energy truncated icosahedral-like permu-

tational isomers. For the Ne-Ar clusters, though, the corresponding Ne-core icosahedral-like

and truncated icosahedral-like permutational isomers played important roles only for Ne12Ar

and Ne11Ar2, and were conspicuously absent for the others. Instead, the low-lying Ne-Ar

isomers were dominated by diﬀerent types of non-icosahedral isomers, many of which had no

homogeneous counterparts. The permutational isomers derived from the low-energy Ne-Ar

topological forms did not have energies lying in closely spaced groups that were separated

from one another by large gaps, as was the case for the Ar-Kr clusters. Instead, the Ne-Ar

permutational isomer energies for the various topological forms were typically spread out

over ranges that were comparable or larger than the diﬀerences between the diﬀerent sets,

leading to very interspersed isomer energy spectra; most of the Ne-Ar clusters were devoid

of any large gaps in their minima energy spectra.

These large diﬀerences in behavior between the 13-atom Ne-Ar and Ar-Kr clusters result

primarily from the disparateness between the Ne and Ar atomic sizes compared to the much

more similar Ar and Kr sizes, and to a lesser extent, from the large diﬀerence between the

Ne and Ar intermolecular forces compared to the Ar and Kr forces. The former primarily ef-

fected the cluster packing eﬃciency, decreasing the extraordinary stability of the icosahedral

structure to such an extent that the icosahedral-like isomers energies became comparable

to the non-icosahedral isomer energies for most of the Ne-Ar clusters; this mostly eﬀected

the clusters’ low-temperature behavior. The latter was predominant at higher temperatures

30

and resulted in extended solid-liquid transition regions. Ar-Kr clusters, like their homoge-

neous counterpart, underwent solid-liquid transitions over temperature ranges that, while

not sharply delimited, could be nonetheless diﬀerentiated by the abrupt changes in many of

their properties. The Ar and Kr atoms were similar enough that the modiﬁcations in the

clusters’ transition behavior were largely minor. For many of the Ne-Ar clusters, though, as

the temperature increased from the solid region, the clusters underwent a pre-melting stage

where the Ar atoms remained ﬁxed as a solid sub-cluster core undergoing low amplitude

motions, while the Ne atoms wrapped around the Ar core, slowly moving from site to site.

Increasing the temperature led to liquid-like motion of the Ne atoms as they moved with

little hindrance around the still solid-like Ar sub-cluster core. For those clusters having more

than 4 Ar atoms, much higher temperatures were required before the Ar core also showed

liquid-like behavior. At these temperatures, the atoms moved freely about one another,

although the Ne and Ar atoms still tended to segregate, with the Ar atoms mostly in the

center. Similarly, as the temperature increased from the liquid region, the Ne atoms disso-

ciated ﬁrst, resulting in a liquid-like Ar-atom sub-cluster surrounded by freely moving Ne

atoms, conﬁned within the constraining volume. These transitions each had extended tem-

perature regions of several degrees that mostly overlapped, so that the overall solid-liquid

transitions occurred over a much wider temperature range, resulting in very broad heat

capacity peaks with peak heights that were mostly much lower than those obtained for the

Ar-Kr clusters. As the number of Ne atoms diminished, the melting behavior transformed

into the more usual diﬀerentiated behavior, so that by NeAr12, the melting behavior was

quite similar to that of Ar13.

The results obtained for the Ne-Ar clusters again demonstrated the need to consider

several cluster properties together, in context to one another, when attempting to interpret

their underlying behavior. While the J-walking simulations were able to provide accurate

heat capacities and quench proﬁles, these were insuﬃcient in themselves to interpret the

solid-liquid transition behavior. The J-walking results for Ne12Ar showed a pronounced

heat capacity peak that seemed indicative of a solid-liquid transition, and the quench pro-

31

ﬁles were consistent with such an interpretation. However the Metropolis heat capacity and

quench results, as well as visual inspections of the conﬁgurations obtained during Metropolis

walks, indicated that the solid-liquid transition region occurred at higher temperatures. The

Ne12Ar J-walking heat capacity peak was due to the increased ﬂuctuations in the cluster’s

energies arising from the ergodic sampling of the stacked isomer’s and monolayer isomers’

conﬁguration subspaces — the peak occurred at too low a temperature for dynamic mo-

tions to overcome the barriers between these regions, and so it was more akin to the low

temperature mixing anomaly peaks observed in the Ar-Kr clusters than to their solid-liquid

transition peaks. Similarly, the J-walker quench proﬁles for Ne10Ar3 and Ne9Ar4 were alike,

while their heat capacity curves and underlying solid-liquid transition behavior were quite

diﬀerent. Since I performed no molecular dynamics simulations on these clusters, I have

no direct dynamical evidence of the coexistence behavior that is an essential characteristic

of homogeneous 13-atom rare gas clusters, but the J-walking and Metropolis results can

be used to infer changes in the coexistence behavior for the diﬀerent cluster compositions.

NeAr12 and possibly Ne12Ar had suﬃcient implicit evidence to infer they underwent coex-

istence, although the coexistence behavior in Ne12Ar was diﬀerent from that of Ne13. For

the other clusters, though, the solid-liquid transitions were best described as a progressive

evolution of isomerizations between predominately topologically distinct isomers. This pro-

gression became less continuous as the proportion of Ar atoms increased and the diﬀerent

sets of permutational isomers became increasingly segregated, eventually transforming into

the coexistence behavior of NeAr12 and Ar13. It is interesting to note that the broadening

and lowering of the heat capacity peaks as the cluster composition varied from NeAr12 to

Ne5Ar8, followed by the narrowing and increased peak heights from Ne6Ar7 to Ne9Ar4, were

very similar to the changes in the homogeneous cluster heat capacities as the aggregate size

N changed from 13 to 19.2 The large N = 13 peak decreased and broadened as N increased

to 16, and then narrowed and increased to the N = 19 peak. The magic number endpoints

N = 13 and 19 had pronounced solid-liquid coexistence ranges, while the clusters N = 15, 16

and 17, which had low, broad peaks, underwent solid-liquid transitions comprised of smooth

32

progressions of isomerizations.

As was the case with the Ar-Kr clusters, the calculations presented here have demon-

strated that the standard Metropolis algorithm is inadequate for dealing with the low-

temperature behavior of heterogeneous clusters. Unlike the Ar-Kr case, though, augmenting

the Metropolis method with the atom-exchange method did not improve its accuracy much

for the Ne-Ar clusters. Again, the J-walking calculations for these binary clusters were more

complicated than those done on similar homogeneous clusters because of the greater possi-

bility for systematic errors corrupting the J-walker distributions. Using multiple trials from

independently generated distributions helped ensure that such errors were not present. The

computational overhead was mitigated by the shorter walk lengths required for J-walking

to achieve the desired level of accuracy compared to the Metropolis method; for example,

for the Ne11Ar2 heat capacity curve over the range 6 ≤ T ≤ 8 K, the J-walker runs of 106

passes each had a level of accuracy that required runs totaling 108 passes for the Metropolis

method to match, and even at 108 total passes, the Metropolis method had large systematic

errors below 6 K.

Finally, it should be noted that the Ne-Ar results reported here are deﬁcient in that

they were obtained from classical simulations. Previous quantum studies of Ne clusters have

shown that quantum eﬀects play a large role in their behavior,28 and so quantum simulations

would likely be needed for a realistic treatment of Ne-Ar clusters as well, especially for the

predominately Ne ones. Since my primary motivation with this study was to elucidate the

eﬀects of largely diﬀerent atomic sizes and intermolecular forces on binary cluster behavior,

as well as the dependence on cluster composition, the Ne-Ar clusters served primarily as a

model system, and so the classical simulations were quite adequate. Quantum eﬀects are

most pronounced at lower temperatures, and for the predominately Ne clusters, much of the

interesting behavior occurred at the low temperatures where quantum eﬀects are expected to

have a major impact. For example, barriers between low-lying isomers are eﬀectively reduced

in quantum simulations, and so transitions from stacked isomers to monolayer isomers in

Ne12Ar could become dynamically accessible in quantum simulations, and the heat capacity

33

peak behavior thus much modiﬁed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada

(NSERC) for this research is gratefully acknowledged. I thank the University of Lethbridge

Computing Services for generously providing me the use of their workstations for some of

the calculations reported, and the University of Waterloo for the use of their facilities. I

also thank David L. Freeman for his helpful discussions.

34

REFERENCES

1 D. D. Frantz, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 10030 (1996).

2 D. D. Frantz, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 3747 (1995).

3 J. Jellinek, T. L. Beck, and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 2783 (1986).

4 H. L. Davis, J. Jellinek, and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 6456 (1987).

5 C. J. Tsai and K. D. Jordan, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 6957 (1993); 95, 3850 (1991).

6 D. D. Frantz, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 2769 (1990).

7 V. V. Nauchitel and A. J. Pertsin, Mol. Phys. 40, 1341 (1980).

8 N. Quirke and P. Sheng, Chem. Phys. Lett. 110, 63 (1984).

9 R. D. Etters and J. Kaelberer, J. Chem. Phys. 66, 5112 (1977); J. B. Kaelberer and R.

D. Etters, J. Chem. Phys. 66, 3233 (1977).

10 C. L. Briant and J. J. Burton, J. Chem. Phys. 63, 2045 (1975).

11 M. J. L´opez, P. A. Marcos and J. A. Alonso, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 1056 (1996).

12 G. S. Fanourgakis and S. C. Farantos, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 3900 (1996).

13 A. Goursot, L. Pedocchi, and B. Coq, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 12718 (1995).

14 A. Goldberg, A. Heidenreich, and J. Jortner, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 2662 (1995).

15 B. K. Teo, H. Zhang, Y. Kean, H. Dang, and X. Shi, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 2929 (1993).

16 N. Tsai, F. F. Abraham, and G. M. Pound, Surf. Sci. 77, 465 (1978).

17 G. E. Lopez and D. L. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1428 (1993).

18 D. J. Chartrand and R. J. Le Roy, A. Kumar and W. J. Meath, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5668

(1993);

35

19 J. C. Shelly, R. J. Le Roy and F. G. Amar, Chem. Phys. Lett. 152, 14 (1988).

20 D. J. Chartrand, J. C. Shelley and R. J. Le Roy, J. Phys. Chem. 95, 8310 (1991).

21 T. L. Beck and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 3910 (1988); T. L. Beck, J. Jellinek, and

R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 545 (1987).

22 J. D. Honeycutt and H. C. Andersen, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 4950, (1987).

23 J. A. Northby, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 6166 (1987).

24 D. L. Freeman and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 82, 462 (1985).

25 O. Echt, K. Sattler, and R. Recknagel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1121 (1981).

26 A. Matro and D. L. Freeman, and R. Q. Topper, J. Chem. Phys. , 104, 8690 (1996).

27 G. E. L´opez, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 6650 (1996); Y. Rivera, D. C. Weber, and G. E. L´opez,

J. Chem. Phys. 103, 10627 (1995).

28 D. D. Frantz, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 5713 (1992).

29 M. A. Strozak, G.E. Lopez and D.L. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 4445 (1992).

30 D. M. Leitner, J. D. Doll and R. M. Whitnell, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 6644 (1991).

31 M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids (Clarendon Press, Oxford,

1987).

21, 1087 (1953).

32 J. K. Lee, J. A. Barker, and F. F. Abraham, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 3166 (1973).

33 N. Metropolis, A. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. Teller and E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys.

34 J. P. Valleau and S. G. Whittington, in Statistical Mechanics, edited by B. J. Berne

(Plenum, New York, 1977), Ch. 4, p. 145.

35 All calculations were performed on either a DEC Alpha 3000/300 AXP Unix workstation

36

equipped with 64 Mb of RAM, a DEC Alpha 3000/300L AXP equipped with 32 Mb of

RAM, a DEC Alpha 3000/400 AXP, equipped with 64 Mb of RAM, or a Zeos Pantera 90

DOS PC, equipped with 32 Mb of RAM.

36 F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, Phys. Rev. A 25, 978 (1982).

37 F. G. Amar and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 5943 (1986).

38 D. J. Wales and R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 4283 (1990).

39 M. R. Hoare and P. Pal, Adv. Phys. 20, 161 (1971).

40 The Savitsky-Golay algorithm was used for the data smoothing, and 2D cubic splines were

used for the interpolation. These routines are implemented in the MS Windows graphics

software package Axum, version 4.0.

41 The Metropolis simulations were extended to much higher temperatures than the J-

walking simulations. Although not shown in the plots in Fig. 5, the Metropolis curves

for each cluster had a higher temperature peak asscociated with the cluster’s dissocia-

tion region. These peaks’ locations and heights depended very much on the boundary

conditions imposed by the constraining spheres.

37

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Heat capacity curves for Ne11Ar2 clusters. The solid curves were obtained from separate

J-walking runs, each using a diﬀerent set of J-walker distributions; the data for each temperature

were obtained from 106 total passes. Over most of the temperature domain, the diﬀerences be-

tween the curves are comparable to the noise levels inherent in each, indicating that the systematic

errors associated with each J-walker distribution were suﬃciently small in these regions. The larger

diﬀerences between the curves at the low-temperature peak illustrate how sensitive the peak is to

small systematic errors in the low-temperature J-walker distributions. Also included is the dashed

curve obtained from standard Metropolis runs having 107 total passes of data accumulation at each

temperature. The curve was begun at the lowest temperature using the lowest energy isomer as

the initial conﬁguration, with the ﬁnal conﬁguration at each temperature then used as the initial

conﬁguration for the next temperature. Substantial discrepancies due to quasiergodicity are evi-

dent for temperatures below 6 K, with the low-temperature peak completely absent. Augmenting

standard Metropolis with the atom-exchange algorithm did not improve its low temperature per-

formance in this case, as can be seen by the ﬁlled circles, which lie mostly on the Metropolis curve.

The open circles represent results obtained from standard Metropolis runs having 108 total passes

of data accumulation at each temperature. These are in better agreement with the J-walker results

down to 6 K, but still show the same sharp drop at this temperature that the shorter Metropolis

runs did. The heat capacities are in reduced units.

FIG. 2. The 13 lowest energy isomers found for Ne13−nArn clusters (1 ≤ n ≤ 12), in order of

increasing energy; their energies are listed in Table II. The isomers were obtained from quenches of

the conﬁgurations stored in J-walker distribution ﬁles. For the predominately-Ne clusters Ne12Ar

and Ne11Ar2, the global minimum corresponds to an icosahedral-like conﬁguration having a Ne

atom as the central atom, but for the predominately-Ar clusters Ne4Ar9 to NeAr12, the global

minimum in each case corresponds to an icosahedral-like conﬁguration having an Ar atom as

the central atom. The global minimum for each of the intermediate cases Ne10Ar3 to Ne5Ar8 is

non-icosahedral.

38

FIG. 3. Potential energies as functions of composition for the lowest energy non-icosahedral

isomers (circles) and icosahedral-like isomers (squares for Ne-core, and diamonds for Ar-core iso-

mers). The energies in the upper plot are in reduced units of ǫNe-Ne, while the energies in the

lower plot have been scaled by the composition weighted average ǫAvg = XNeǫNe-Ne + XArǫAr-Ar,

where XNe = nNe/(nNe + nAr) and XAr = 1 − XNe. The Ne-core icosahedral-like isomers were the

global minimum conﬁgurations up to Ne11Ar2, after which the non-icosahedral isomers became the

ground state. The Ar-core icosahedral-like conﬁgurations became the ground state at Ne4Ar9; for

clusters having fewer than 7 Ar atoms, the Ar-core icosahedral-like isomers were highly distorted,

and those having fewer than 4 Ar atoms were unstable.

FIG. 4. Local potential energy minima (in reduced units) for Ne13−nArn clusters (0 ≤ n ≤ 13).

In each case, the zero energy level corresponds to the global minimum energy. The energies were

obtained from quenches of the conﬁgurations stored in J-walker distribution ﬁles.

FIG. 5. Heat capacities for the binary clusters Ne13−nArn (1 ≤ n ≤ 12). In each case, the thick

curve represents the J-walking results and the thin curve the standard Metropolis results; the dots

represent the results obtained using Metropolis Monte Carlo augmented with the atom-exchange

algorithm. Large discrepancies between the Metropolis and J-walking results can be seen to occur

at lower temperatures for all the clusters except for NeAr12. The atom-exchange method showed

some improvement over the standard Metropolis method, but still had large deviations from the

J-walking results. For the predominately Ar clusters Ne3Ar10 to NeAr12, the large high-temperature

peaks correspond to solid-liquid transitions, but for the other clusters, the peaks are so broad that

they encompass not only the solid-liquid transition, but also the dissociation of the Ne component

at the higher temperatures. The Ne12Ar peak and the very small low-temperature peaks seen in

Ne11Ar2, Ne9Ar4, Ne8Ar5, Ne6Ar7 and Ne5Ar8 are due to low-lying isomers whose energies are

close to the global minimum energies. Only NeAr12 has a heat capacity curve similar to that of its

homogeneous counterpart.

39

FIG. 6. Trends in the higher temperature heat capacity peak parameters. The top plot shows

the peak temperatures as a function of cluster composition, while the middle plot shows the peak

heights as a function of composition. The bottom plot depicts the peak heights as a function of the

peak temperature. The uncertainties in the peak heights and temperatures are smaller than the

symbol size. The predominately Ne clusters (nNe > 9) and the predominately Ar clusters (nAr > 9)

have parameter trends much diﬀerent than that of the other clusters. The peak temperature and

height for each cluster also are listed in Table III.

FIG. 7. Potential energy curves as functions of

temperature for Ne13−nArn clusters

(0 ≤ n ≤ 13). The curves were obtained from the J-walking simulations.

FIG. 8. Quench results for the predominately Ne clusters. These were obtained by periodically

quenching cluster conﬁgurations by steepest descent every 1000 passes during one of the J-walker

runs, giving 1000 quenched conﬁgurations for each temperature. In each case, results for the six

lowest energy isomers shown in Fig. 2 are plotted, and the solid curve represents the sum of all the

other isomers. The dashed vertical lines in each plot indicate the heat capacity peak temperatures.

FIG. 9. J-walker quench results for the clusters Ne8Ar5 to Ne5Ar8.

FIG. 10. J-walker quench results for the predominately Ar clusters. The NeAr12 curves are

similar to those of Ar13.

40

FIG. 11. Metropolis quench results for Ne12Ar clusters. The solid symbols represent the results

obtained from Metropolis simulations that were started from the global minimum conﬁguration at

0.1 K, with the temperature increased in increments of 0.1 K, while the open symbols represent the

results obtained from similar runs started at 10 K, with the temperature decreased in increments

of 0.1 K. The sets of curves agree with each other, and agree with the J-walking curves for Ne12Ar

shown in Fig. 8 only for temperatures greater than 6.2 K. The Metropolis simulations run in the

direction of decreasing temperature did not reach the lowest energy isomer as the temperature

approached zero.

41

TABLES

TABLE I. Lennard-Jones parameters used in the calculations. The Ne-Ne and Ar-Ar pa-

rameters were obtained from Ref. 30. The Ne-Ar parameters were obtained from the usual

Lorentz-Berthelot mixing rules, with ǫNe-Ar = (ǫNe-Ne ǫAr-Ar)1/2 and σNe-Ar = 1

2 (σNe-Ne + σAr-Ar).

Parameter

ǫ/K

σ/˚A

Ne-Ne

35.60

2.749

Ne-Ar

65.20

3.077

Ar-Ar

119.4

3.405

42

TABLE II. Potential energies for the thirteen lowest-energy equilibrium conﬁgurations shown

in Fig. 2. These values were obtained from quench studies of the conﬁgurations stored in the

J-walker distribution ﬁles or by minimizing the various permutations of icosahedral conﬁgurations.

The energies are expressed in reduced units of −ǫNe-Ne.

Isomer

Ne13

Ne12Ar

Ne11Ar2

Ne10Ar3

Ne9Ar4

Ne8Ar5

Ne7Ar6

44.32680

50.14737

56.57433

64.24192

71.38399

78.86406

86.39936

41.47198

48.83695

56.52063

63.72413

71.08382

78.66373

85.83742

41.44460

48.76841

56.06123

63.71574

70.94101

78.52868

85.81146

41.39440

48.76223

56.03686

63.66647

70.93143

78.51267

85.76317

40.75851

48.71912

55.93749

63.59504

70.85554

78.46705

85.63794

40.72846

48.65682

55.81092

63.59501

70.77891

78.04509

85.62603

40.71041

48.38159

55.79632

63.19284

70.75207

78.02281

85.56162

40.67380

48.32417

55.70070

63.10945

70.74139

77.99609

85.55390

40.67017

48.31641

55.69579

63.05431

70.72857

77.93368

85.50783

40.61547

48.24531

55.64982

63.04676

70.72729

77.88402

85.49314

40.60458

48.18147

55.61569

63.01544

70.68951

77.88031

85.41050

40.54129

48.11949

55.61427

62.96995

70.67538

77.84458

85.39834

40.43333

48.11635

55.60919

62.95865

70.65142

77.73255

85.36450

Isomer

Ar13

NeAr12

Ne2Ar11

Ne3Ar10

Ne4Ar9

Ne5Ar8

Ne6Ar7

148.66910

137.68293

127.58029

118.43464

109.36661

100.77911

93.73315

139.09422

133.68855

126.78465

117.49640

108.72718

100.67782

93.61382

139.00238

133.57037

126.72343

116.79154

108.59267

100.67727

93.53146

138.83402

133.53295

124.53811

116.72628

108.52706

100.65515

93.47289

136.70131

133.46282

124.44729

116.54890

108.46116

100.63225

93.41254

136.60051

130.36349

124.43270

116.51740

108.45875

100.62103

93.41221

136.53996

129.95629

124.41134

116.50550

108.44127

100.56415

93.38494

136.41718

129.92105

124.38340

116.46722

108.41135

100.56237

93.33902

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

10

11

12

43

8

9

10

11

12

136.40501

129.86693

124.34131

116.44073

108.40618

100.56091

93.10541

136.22154

129.80847

124.34068

116.42079

108.35227

100.55547

93.07193

136.18504

129.70576

124.32050

116.20818

108.25224

100.51264

92.99134

135.97277

129.70212

123.66593

115.98123

107.99351

100.50910

92.94263

135.61066

129.69684

123.65838

115.74204

107.90823

100.47166

92.87926

44

TABLE III. Heat capacity peak parameters for 13-atom Ne-Ar clusters. These values were

obtained by smoothing and interpolating the J-walking data shown in Fig. 5. The Ne13 and Ar13

values were obtained by scaling the values in reported Ref. 1. The heat capacity uncertainty

estimates are averages of single standard deviations of the points near the peaks.

Lower temperature peak

Higher temperature peak

Tpeak (K)

hC ∗

V ipeak

Tpeak (K)

hC ∗

V ipeak

10.15 ±0.02

118.5 ±0.6

Ne11Ar2

0.37 ±0.03

41.1 ±0.7

Ne9Ar4

3.40 ±0.02

Ne8Ar5

2.02 ±0.02

Ne7Ar6

Ne6Ar7

1.69 ±0.06

Ne5Ar8

1.63 ±0.10

47.4 ±0.7

40.6 ±0.3

38.9 ±0.3

39.8 ±0.4

Ne13

Ne12Ar

Ne10Ar3

Ne4Ar9

Ne3Ar10

Ne2Ar11

NeAr12

Ar13

5.20 ±0.03

8.92 ±0.14

6.76 ±0.03

24.27 ±0.34

24.46 ±0.17

25.62 ±0.20

24.83 ±0.35

25.40 ±0.33

22.42 ±0.05

22.01 ±0.31

25.49 ±0.14

29.68 ±0.11

67.1 ±0.9

59.2 ±0.3

58.5 ±0.5

79.6 ±0.3

75.4 ±0.4

71.7 ±0.4

69.3 ±0.4

67.3 ±0.3

68.2 ±0.5

73.9 ±0.4

84.2 ±0.7

95.2 ±0.5

34.05 ±0.07

118.0 ±0.6

45

This figure "dfrantz01.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz02.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz03.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz04.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz05.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz06.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz07.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz08.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz09.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz10.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

This figure "dfrantz11.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705002v1

