7
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
8
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Decoherent Histories and Non-adiabatic Quantum Molecular

Dynamics Simulations.

Eric R. Bittner

Department of Chemistry, University of Houston,

Houston TX 77204

Peter J. Rossky

Austin, TX 78712

(February 2, 2008)

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Austin,

The role of quantum coherence loss in mixed quantum-classical dynami-

cal systems is explored in the context of the theory of quantum decoherence

introduced recently by Bittner and Rossky.

(J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8130

(1995)). This theory, which is based upon the consistent histories interpreta-

tion of quantum mechanics, introduces decoherence in the quantum subsys-

tem by carefully considering the relevant time and length scales over which

one must consider the eﬀects of phase interference between alternative his-

tories of the classical subsystem. Such alternative histories are an integral

part of any quantum-classical computational scheme which employ transi-

tions between discrete quantum states; consequently, the coherences between

alternative histories have a profound eﬀect on the transition probability be-

tween quantum states. In this paper, we review the Bittner-Rossky theory

and detail a computational algorithm suitable for large-scale quantum molec-

ular dynamics simulations which implements this theory. Application of the

algorithm towards the relaxation of a photoexcited aqueous electron compare

well to previous estimates of the excited state survival time as well as to the

experimental measurements.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

A key issue which has emerged in describing electronic transitions in the condensed phase

is the proper treatment of the short-lived phase coherence of the electronic and nuclear (bath)

wavefunction. The essence of the eﬀect becomes clear if one considers the behavior of an

electronic quantum system in a classical bath. In such a mixed quantum-classical system,

the classical dynamics of the bath nuclei follow along a given adiabatic potential surface

associated with one of the eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian. Thus the potential

felt by the nuclear degrees of freedom will depend strongly upon the quantum state of the

electronic degrees of freedom. The fundamental distinction between quantum mechanics and

classical mechanics is that a quantum system can evolve into a coherent linear superposition

of states. This leads to a rather profound ambiguity in describing the forces between the

quantum and classical subsystems. Furthermore, quantum mechanics forces us to consider

the eﬀect of all alternative histories or pathways,

including those of the classical bath,

when computing quantum transition probabilities. Thus, as the electronic wavefunction

evolves from an initially pure eigenstate to a coherent superposition of eigenstates, various

alternative pathways for the bath particles begin to emerge, each associated with dynamics

starting from an initial nuclear conﬁguration and electronic state and ending in a diﬀerent

ﬁnal nuclear conﬁguration and ﬁnal electronic eigenstate. As the nuclear dynamics for

the diﬀerent quantum (electronic) states diverge, phase coherence between the alternative

histories is lost due to the increasing diﬀerences between the classical actions associated with

each alternative nuclear path. This eﬀect is known as quantum decoherence.1

Because quantum decoherence acts to suppress the formation of superposition states,

it diminishes profoundly the transition probability between quantum states coupled by the

nuclear dynamics. When the loss of quantum phase coherence between the electronic states

is neglected and no longer enters directly into the computation of making an electronic

transition, which is a typical approximation made in mixed quantum-classical treatments,

one can show that the result will be an incorrect estimation of the transition probabilities

2

and other associated physical observables.2 Because of the tremendous utility of mixed-

quantum classical treatments in simulating condensed phase phenomena, it is of tantamount

importance to be able to properly incorporate the eﬀects of quantum decoherence into these

simulations.

Recently, we have presented a theory of quantum decoherence which is suitable for con-

densed phase quantum molecular dynamics simulations.2 This approach is based upon a

interpretation of quantum mechanics introduced by Griﬃths3, Omn`es4,5, and Gell-Mann
and Hartle6–8 over roughly the past 10 years. This interpretation of quantum mechanics,

termed “consistent” or “decoherent” histories, has generated a great deal of attention in
the ﬁeld of quantum cosmology.9–11 We have also applied and extended the formalism to

study coherence eﬀects in physically realistic condensed phase problems 12,13. This work has

lead to a number of advances in designing computational algorithms which incorporate a

consistent description of quantum decoherence and to a deeper understanding of the role

that quantum decoherence plays in condensed phase chemical processes and molecular level
descriptions of the decoherence process.2,12–14 These theoretical advances have also oﬀered

a tangible solution to a speciﬁc long standing puzzle regarding the solvent isotope eﬀect

on the non-radiative lifetime of an excess electron in H2O and D2O and oﬀer a plausible
explanation of the lack of an observed solvent isotope eﬀect.15–18

In this paper, we give the details of our computational algorithm based upon consistent

quantum histories and its application in a full scale quantum molecular dynamics simula-

tion of the relaxation of an excited excess electron in H2O. The simulations presented in

this paper represent the ﬁrst application of the Bittner-Rossky decoherence theory in a full

scale simulation of a condensed phase system. The aqueous electron provides perhaps the

simplest example of electronic dynamics in the condensed phase. At the same time, aqueous

electrons are of particular importance since they play a prominent role in the broad area

of radiation chemistry of water.

In spite of intensive experimental and theoretical study

since identiﬁcation of the hydrated electron over 30 years ago, many dynamical features of

electron solvation have remained incompletely understood, largely due to the extremely fast

3

time scales on which electronic relaxation occurs.15 Newly developed femtosecond spectro-

scopic techniques are now providing glimpses of the details of condensed phase electronic

dynamics. From a theoretical standpoint, the aqueous electron is an ideal test case for new

condensed phase theories. Recent theoretical advances in treating condensed phase elec-
tronic dynamics19–23 has led to an exceptional interplay between theory and experiment,

helping to unravel many subtle dynamical aspects of this system.

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows:

In the next section we review the

consistent histories methodology as it applies toward developing a computational algorithm

for condensed phase simulations. We then give the results of quantum MD simulations of

the non-adiabatic relaxation dynamics of an excited excess aqueous electron which employ

the consistent histories algorithm and compare the present results to previous estimates

of the non-adiabatic electronic transition rate by Schwartz, Bittner, Prezhdo, and Rossky

(SBPR)12, to earlier results presented by Schwartz and Rossky which employed a constant
1 fs coherence time scale throughout,22–24 as well as to the experimental data of Kimura et
al..16–18 Finally, we comment upon the utility of the present algorithm and discuss its limi-

tations as well as future extensions and improvements.

II. THEORETICAL METHODS

A. Coherence Between Switching Paths

Let us consider the evolution of an initial quantum state |i(R◦)i, taken as an adiabatic

eigenstate of the quantum mechanical Hamiltonian for initial bath (or classical) conﬁgura-

tion R◦, along a switching path, Rα(t) which begins at R◦. Along the course of this path, we

determine at various time intervals whether or not a quantum transition has occurred ac-

cording to a stochastic switching criteria and modifying the classical dynamics accordingly.

The fundimental notion of having classical particles switch between discrete quantum states

was originally pioneered by Tully26 in the early 1970’s. Subsequently, various computa-

4

tional schemes have been developed which incorporate quantum switching into the classical

dynamics and improve upon Tully’s original idea. Most notably are the stationary phase

surface hopping algorithms developed by Webster, Friesner, and Rossky20,21 and further by

Coker and co-workers25,31,33,34, as well as the Molecular Dynamics with Quantum Transitions

algorithm of Tully and co-workers28,30. The classical switching path contains a record of the

outcome of each switching attempt and can thus be written as a time ordered sequence of

events,

Rα(t) = {Rα◦

◦ , · · · , Rαj

j

· · · , Rαn

n }.

(1)

The superscript αj denotes the switching outcome at time-step j and α◦ = i corresponding

to our choice of the initial quantum state. Two such paths are shown schematically in Fig. 1

where we plot the eigenenergy of the occupied state along the path as a function of time.

Changes in the quantum state imply that there is a corresponding sudden change in the

forces exerted on the classical particles over the course of its evolution. The result is that

diﬀerent sequences of switching events will lead to rapidly diverging paths.

Along a given switching path, Rα(t), the partial transition amplitude between an initial

and ﬁnal quantum state, |i(R◦)i and |f (Rf )i respectively, is given by

Tif [Rα(t)] = hf (Rα

f )|e−i

tf

t◦ dsHQ[Rα(s)]|i(R◦)ie+iS[Rα(t)]
R

= Uif [Rα(t)]e+iS[Rα(t)],

where Uif [Rα(t)] is the transition amplitude for the quantum subsystem (with Hamiltonian

HQ) and S[Rα(t)] is the classical action computed along the switching path Rα(t), i.e.

S[R(t)] =

tf

dt

m
2

(cid:26)

t◦

Z

˙R(t)2 − VC(R(t))

.

(cid:27)

Here, VC is the interaction potential coupling the classical particles. The probability of

starting in some initial state |i(t◦)i ending up in a given ﬁnal quantum state, |f (tf )i, at

some time tf is computed by summing over all possible switching paths which connect the

initial and ﬁnal quantum states. Averaging over initial conﬁgurations, the reduced transition

(2)

(3)

probability for a mixed quantum-classical system is

5

Pif (tf ) =

Tif [Rα(t)]T †

if [Rβ(t)]ρi(R◦)

,

+

◦

*

*

=

X{Rα(t),Rβ (t)}

X{Rα(t),Rβ (t)}

Uif [Rα(t)]ρi(R◦))U †

if [Rβ(t)]ei(S[Rα]−S[Rβ])

,

+

◦

where ρi(R◦) is the probability density of being in the initial state, the average, h· · ·i◦, is

taken over initial conﬁgurations, and the sum is over pairs of switching paths

{Rα(t), Rβ(t)|Rα(0) = R◦, Rβ(0) = R◦}

(4)

(5)

which start at the initial conﬁguration, R◦, with the quantum state in the initial state and

end at any ﬁnal conﬁguration with the quantum state in state |f i at tf .

According to this last equation, the transition probability for the quantum subsystem is

dependent upon interferences between the various alternative pairs of switching pathways.

Thus, in order to correctly compute the populations of the electronic states at some later

time, one must perform a sum over all alternative paths that the bath can take.

In a

practical sense, this amounts to launching a swarm of trajectories from each initial starting

point and computing the switching probabilities (i.e. branching ratios for the swarm) using

Eq. 4. However, this approach has the distinct disadvantage that one must initialize a large

enough swarm of trajectories in order to eﬀectively sample the distribution of switching

paths originating from each initial conﬁguration. So, while formally correct and tractable in

small dimensional systems, the tremendous computational overhead required to implement

Eq. 4 directly for a large number of classical variables is prohibitive.

Next, we present an alternative derivation of the quantum survival and transition prob-

abilities which uses only a single switching path explicitly. The formalism is motivated by

the observation that at short times, there will be a signiﬁcant contribution from the phase

interferences between two alternative paths with similar histories, necessitating a coherent

sum over paths, while at longer times the action diﬀerence between two paths will become

very large and phase interference eﬀects from alternative paths will become negligible. The

time scale separating these two regimes is the quantum coherence time scale.

6

B. Consistent Histories

Let us deﬁne the space of paths, Z, as consisting of all continuous paths connecting some

initial system/bath state Rα

◦ to the ﬁnal state Rβ

f labeled by a set of quantum numbers, {αj}

and a classical bath variable, R. Deﬁne also a set of subspaces of Z labeled by ∆(Rα) which

are the spaces of paths taken by the quantum subsystem which are parameterized by the

paths taken by the bath. The full space of paths is the continuous union of all the various

subspaces.

Eq. 2,

Z =

∆(Rα)

α
]

These paths are completely ﬁne grained histories since the values of the each paths can be

speciﬁed at all times and one can compute the partial amplitude along any one of the paths

in Z. Furthermore, by integrating over the individual “quantum” subspaces one obtains

Tαβ[Rα] =

Dx exp (i(SQ[x, Rα] + S[Rα])

Z∆(Rα)

= Uif [Rα(t)]e+iS[Rα(t)].

(6)

(7)

A fundamental property of quantum mechanics is that ﬁne grained histories can not

be assigned probabilities, only amplitudes.

In order to make predictions based upon the

theory of probabilities, coarse graining of histories must be introduced. Coarse graining is

accomplished when a “reduced” history is constructed by summing over sets of ﬁne grained

histories at a particular time. Coarse grained histories can be assigned probabilities, that

is, integrating over coarse grained histories is equivalent to integrating over probabilities.

Coarse graining of histories arises naturally whenever we try to mix quantum with clas-

sical dynamics. As diﬀerent classical switching paths emerge from a common origin, the

space of quantum paths parameterized by one switching path will diverge from the space

of quantum paths parameterized by another. As the “overlap” between subspaces decays

(corresponding to diﬀerent classical dynamics), the originally ﬁne grained space of paths, Z,

7

becomes coarse grained into separate subspaces, {∆(Rα)} as time goes on. Consequently,

transition probabilities are computed by ﬁrst integrating coherently over the ﬁne grained

sets of paths to get the transition amplitude say along one classical switching path, then

summing incoherently (i.e. adding as ordinary probabilities) over coarse grained sets.

Quantum decoherence eﬀects can be consistently incorporated into mixed quantum-

classical systems by recognizing that restricting the quantum evolution to given classical

pathways is equivalent to making a series of quantum measurements on the total system.

Furthermore, the quantum coherence time is the time scale which characterizes how often

such “measurements” occur2. The classical path sequence shown in Fig. 1 is an example of

a quantum mechanical history. Along this history, the time evolution operator for the quan-

tum system can be written equivalently as a time ordered sequence of alternating quantum

projection operators and unitary evolution operators

ˆC[Rα(t)] = ˆUn ˆP αn−1 · · · ˆU1P α1 ˆU◦

where the projections at each time interval are members of complete sets representing the

total set of possible outcomes,

ˆP αi = 1,

αi
X

tn
tn−1

dsH[Rα(s)]

−i

ˆUn = e

R

and

switching path.

is the unitary evolution operator for the quantum wavefunction along a segment of the

The decoherence time scale sets a characteristic time interval between subsequent appli-

cations of the projection operators. This time scale is roughly the time scale for alternative

stationary trajectories of the nuclear bath to diverge suﬃciently such that the diﬀerence in

action between the two paths in Eq. 4 is large. In Ref.12 we suggested that coherence time

scale is related to the time scale for the decay of the overlap integral between nuclear wave-

functions evolving on diﬀerent adiabatic potential energy surfaces. During the coherence

8

(8)

(9)

(10)

interval, transition amplitudes are added coherently according to the rules of quantum me-

chanics. Application of the projection operators destroys the coherences and one is left with

transition probabilities which are then added according to the rules of standard probability

theory. Within this approach, Eq. 4 is equivalent to

Pi→f (t) =

hfn| ˆC[Rα(t)]ρi(R◦) ˆC †[Rα(t)]|fni

+

◦

*

X{Rα(t)}

=

*

X{Rα(t)}

hfn| ˆUn ˆP αn−1 · · · ˆP α1 ˆU1ρ◦
i

ˆU †
1

ˆP α1 · · · ˆP αn−1 ˆU †

n|fni

(11)

,

+
◦

where |fni = |f (Rαn)i is the ﬁnal quantum state at the end of path Rα(t).

When the time intervals δtn = tn − tn−1 are members of a Poisson distribution, the

probability of maintaining coherence over a given interval, t, follows from the exponential

deviate

π(t) =

t

ds

e−s/τ
τ

0
Z

= 1 − e−t/τ ,

and τ is the characteristic decoherence timescale. Thus, over a short time interval, δt, where

the probability of collapsing the wavefunction is

π(t) = δt/τ + O(δt2),

the reduced density matrix of the quantum system evolves as

ρ(t + δt) = (1 − δt/τ )(ρ(t) + iδt[H, ρ]) + δt/τ R[ρ].

(12)

(13)

(14)

where R[ρ] is a “reduction mapping” of the density matrix ρ which projects out the diagonal

elements of the quantum density matrix (the populations) killing oﬀ the coherences between

the quantum states.

Taking the limit of δt → 0 in Eq. 14 and identifying τ as the decoherence timscale τD

we arrive at the master equation for the quantum density matrix.

˙ρ(R) = i[H(R), ρ(R)] −

(ρ − R[ρ(R)]),

= L(R)ρ −

(ρ(R) − R[ρ(R)]).

(15)

1
τD

1
τD

9

The ﬁrst term in this equation contains the Liouvillian of the quantum system, L(R) =

i[H(R), ]. Evolution of the quantum system under this term alone is unitary and non-

dissipative. The second term introduces quantum decoherence into the dynamics of the

quantum subsystem. The coherences originally in the quantum subsystem decay due to the

series of measurements imposed by the environment. Although energy exchange does not

appear explicitly in Eq. 15, energy exchange between the system and the bath is explicitly

included through dynamics of the bath variable R(t) treated separately.

In other theories of quantum relaxation, such as the spin-boson model 35,36, the Redﬁeld
equations 37–41, or Liouville space methods42, both decoherence and dissipation are treated

implicitly through eﬀective equations of motion for the bath, thus losing the molecular level

information about the underlying dynamics of the bath. In our treatment, dissipation is in-

cluded explicitly through the classical molecular dynamics of the condensed phase medium,

thus we are able to retain a molecular level description of the bath while quantum deco-

herence is treated implicitly in order to avoid summing over alternative pairs of classical

paths.

It is important to note that the form of the projections and the coherence time scale

(and the resulting master equation) are directly related to the forces coupling the quantum

system to the bath and hence are very dependent upon the choice of basis used to represent

the quantum subsystem.

In the present application of our theory, we assume that the

projections periodically resolve the quantum subsystem into the adiabatic states with a

time scale determined by the average decay time of the Franck-Condon overlap between

nuclear wavefunctions initialized on the diﬀerent adiabatic surfaces at the instantaneous

nuclear coordinates.12 A more detailed analysis of this assumption is forthcoming.14

Perhaps the most important physical consequence of decoherence for chemical physical

applications is the overall reduction of the transition probabilities between diﬀerent quantum

states. In order for a quantum system to make a transition from one state to another, the

system must form a coherent superposition between the states. The ease with which these

coherences form reﬂects the strength of the coupling between the two states. Decoherence,

10

on the other hand, reﬂects the strength of the system-bath coupling. When a quantum

system evolves into a superposition state, the destructive interferences between divergent

alternative switching paths leading to the ﬁnal state destroys the coherence in the quantum

subsystem, hence, reducing the likelihood of making a transition into the ﬁnal state.2

III. SIMULATIONS

The simulation techniques employed here are nearly identical to those used in earlier

work by Murphrey and Rossky studying both the relaxation of electrons photo-injected into

neat water20,29 as well as the present case of photoexcitation of equilibrium hydrated elec-

trons by Schwartz and Rossky. The exceptions regard the treatment of the quantum coher-

ences detailed below.23,24,43 Brieﬂy, the model consists of 200 classical SPC water molecules

with the addition of internal ﬂexibility44 and one quantum electron in a cubic cell of side

18.17 ˚A (corresponding to a solvent density of 0.997 g/ml) with standard periodic bound-

ary conditions at room temperature. The electron-water interactions were described with a

pseudo-potential,45 and the equations of motion integrated using the Verlet algorithm with

a dynamical time step of 1 fs in the microcanonical ensemble.46 The adiabatic eigenstates at

each time step were computed via an eﬃcient iterative and block Lanczos scheme utilizing

a 163 plane wave basis20 The lowest 6 eigenstates were used as a basis for propagating the

quantum wavefunction and to compute the stationary phase paths for the nuclear dynamics.

Explicit details of these methods are discussed elsewhere.20

A. Consistent Histories Algorithm

Quantum decoherence was incorporated into the simulation through the Consistent His-

tories theory discussed above. The computational algorithm given below follows directly

from Eq. 11 and the coherence time intervals were chosen from a Poisson distribution with

characteristic time scale τD = 3.1 fs which was derived from our previous estimates of the

coherence time scale for an electron in H2O when the excited state is nearly solvated. As

11

discussed in a previous paper, this time scale was estimated by computing the average de-

cay time of the overlap of frozen Gaussian vibrational wavefunctions evolving on diﬀerent

adiabatic potential energy surfaces by sampling a large number of nearly equivalent excited

state conﬁgurations. This is in marked contrast to previous simulations on this system in

which coherences between electronic states were not maintained beyond 1 fs. The consistent

histories algorithm proceeds as follows:

1. Determine new coherence interval from Poisson distribution of possible intervals with

characteristic time scale τD.

2. Propagate the quantum wavefunction over this time scale while self consistently evolv-

ing the classical degrees of freedom. At the end of each dynamical time step h ≤ τD,

determine the switching path followed by the classical variables using the stationary

phase algorithm developed by Webster, et al.20,21 modiﬁed such that coherence in the

quantum wavefunction is maintained over the entire coherence interval. We also note

that the stationary phase switching path is determined in a piece-wise continuous

fashion by selecting intermediate quantum states every dynamical time step. This is

to avoid the computational overhead of computing variationally the stationary phase

trajectory over relatively long time intervals. So long as τD is no longer than a few

dynamical time steps, this approximation should not be too extreme; however, certain

pathological cases can be invented in which this approximation does break down.

3. If either a switch occurs in the time interval or we reach the end of the interval, the

quantum wavefunction is collapsed using the projection operators discussed above.

4. Repeat.

In Fig. 2 we plot the switching times from the excited state to the ground state for

a total of 23 simulation runs. The starting conﬁgurations were generated by performing

B. Results

12

a 35 ps simulation in which the electron was prepared in the ground state and 16 initial

conﬁgurations were chosen whenever the energy diﬀerence between the ground state and
one of the p-like excited states become resonant with the excitation laser (1.7 eV). 16–18

These starting conﬁgurations were identical to conﬁgurations used previously by Schwartz

and Rossky in their work on this system. 23,24,43 Following the initial excitation, the system

was allowed to evolve. During this time, the energy gap between the p-states and the

s-state narrowed to ≈ 0.5eV as the excited state was solvated by the surrounding water

molecules. The simulation continued until a switch from the excited state to the ground

state was recorded.

Immediately after the switch, the energy gap between the occupied

ground state and the ﬁrst excited state widened dramatically as the solvent responded to

the new electronic state. The average and median switching times from these simulations

are compiled in Table 1.

In order to test the sensitivity of the switching times to the choice of sequence of coherence

intervals, ﬁve conﬁgurations were “recycled” by using diﬀerent random number sequences

for the coherence time intervals to generate diﬀerent switching paths starting from the same

initial conﬁguration. For each such pairs of paths, the classical dynamics were identical

up until the earlier switching time when one of the paths switched from the excited state

to the ground state. However, since the coherences between the diﬀerent quantum states

were killed oﬀ at randomly diﬀerent times for each path, each path sampled a diﬀerent

probability distribution function for making a switch at each MD time step. Hence any

correlations between switching times resulting using the same initial conﬁguration reﬂect

correlations in the distribution of coherence time intervals. Given that there is typically a

100 fs time diﬀerence between pairs of data (in one case a 530 fs diﬀerence) which is roughly

1/3 of the average survival time scale of the excited state, we ﬁnd very little correlation

between the switching times originating from the same initial conﬁguration.

The excited state survival probability reﬂects not only the probability of making a tran-

sition from the excited state to the ground state, it also reﬂects the solvation dynamics of

the non-equilibrium excited state following its preparation. Initially, the energy gap between

13

the excited and ground state is very wide and a non-adiabatic transition between the states

is highly unlikely. However at later times, after the excited state has begun to be solvated

by the surrounding water molecules, the energy gap closes considerably and nonadiabatic

transitions become more likely. The solvation dynamics of this system have been extensively

studied previously by Schwartz and Rossky.23,24,43 Their results for the solvation response,

deﬁned as the normalized autocorrelation of the energy gap between the ground and excited

states, indicates a rapid 24 fs initial Gaussian component which makes up roughly 40% of

the response followed by a longer time 240 fs exponential decay which makes up most of the

remainder.

As the excited state is solvated by the surrounding water molecules, the energy gap

between the excited state and the ground state narrows to its equilibrium value. Further-

more, from ﬁrst order perturbation theory, we expect that the electronic transition rate to

be inversely proportional to the magnitude of the energy diﬀerence between initial and ﬁnal

states. Thus, a simple model for the excited state survival probability can be written

∂P (t)
∂t

= −

P (t)

keq
˜ω(t)

subject to the initial condition P (0) = 1. Here, keq is the non-adiabatic transition rate

for the solvated excited state and ˜ω(t) is the average energy gap normalized to the average

energy gap of the solvated excited state. ˜U (t) is also related to the solvation response S(t)

by

The solvation response can be modeled as short time Gaussian decay followed by a longer
time exponential relaxation,22–24,47

˜ω(t) =

hω◦iS(t) + hωeqi(1 − S(t))
hωeqi

.

S(t) = Ae−1/2(t/tG )2

+ (1 − A)e−t/tE .

In Fig. 3, we plot ˜ω(t) using a parameteric ﬁt to the solvation response function obtained

from our simulations: A = 0.38, tG = 0.38 fs, tE = 240fs. These parameters agree exactly

14

(16)

(17)

(18)

with those obtained by Schwartz and Rossky22–24 for this system. This comes as no surprise

since our inclusion of quantum coherence eﬀects does not eﬀect the computation of the

interaction forces between the excited electron and the water molecules. At short times,

when ˜U (t) > 1, the nonadiabatic transition rate will be small since the energy gap is large.

At long times ˜ω(t) → 1 as the energy gap relaxes to its equilibrium value. Thus, keq is the

exponential decay constant of the excited state population once the excited state is fully

solvated.

The solution of Eq. 16 is the one parameter family of curves given by

0
Z
Using a non-linear ﬁtting procedure, we ﬁt our data to this model to obtain an estimate

 

P (t) = exp

−keq

t

ds
˜ω(s) !

P (0).

(19)

of the equilibrium nonadiabatic lifetime of 241 fs with a χ2 = 1.707. A plot of our data

superimposed on this ﬁt is given in Fig. 2. Interestingly enough, our data does not ﬁt this
simple model as nicely as the data given by Schwartz and Rossky.22–24,47 This suggests that

the longer coherence times used in this study imparts a non-trivial memory dependency into

the survival probability which is inadequately captured in Eq. 16.

As expected, the lifetimes reported here (Table 1) are consistently shorter than the life-
times reported by Schwartz and Rossky22–24,47 in which a constant 1 fs coherence time scale

throughout their simulations, thus emphasizing the profound sensitivity of these simulations

to the coherence time scale. Furthermore, our results are consistent with the estimated

lifetimes reported in SBPR12 where the eﬀective equilibrium lifetime was estimated as a

function of coherence time by reanalyzing the transition amplitudes computed in the origi-

nal Schwartz and Rossky simulations with the coherence time scale estimated from a frozen

Gaussian approximation to the nuclear wavefunction.

In this paper we have brieﬂy described the results of our work towards a molecular level

description of quantum relaxation phenomena. Here we have focused exclusively upon the

IV. DISCUSSION

15

role that transient quantum mechanical coherences between the solvent and the solute play in

the electronic relaxation of an excited solute species. In mixed quantum-classical computer

simulations, fundamental assumptions about the decay of these coherences produce direct

manifestations on the computed quantum mechanical transition rates and must be included

consistently in order to make realistic predictions and comparisons.2,12

The computational algorithm, based upon the so-called consistent histories interpreta-

tion of quantum mechanics, provides both the molecular level underpinnings of quantum

decoherence and the computational means for properly including decoherence eﬀects in

non-adiabatic quantum-molecular dynamics simulations. According to the rules of ordinary

quantum mechanics, a quantum system will evolve into a coherent superposition of alter-

native states. In our decoherence theory, this coherence is dissipated due to the diﬀerences

in the forces exerted on the bath by alternative states involved in the superposition. Thus,

on short scales, a quantum system in a bath will obey the rules of ordinary quantum me-

chanics and evolve into a coherent superposition of states, whereas on longer time scales,

the coherences between states are diminished and the quantum system must be described as

statistical (i.e. incoherent) mixture of states. As the quantum system interacts continuously

with the bath, coherences between states are continuously created by non-adiabatic coupling

and damped by the divergence in the bath dynamics induced by the system-bath coupling.

This subtle interplay between coupling and decoherence and the subsequent dependency

of transition rates on the decoherence time scale has profound implications for a variety of

condensed phase chemical dynamics including: internal conversion and internal vibrational

energy redistribution (in which the bath is comprised of all the modes of the molecules except

for the one mode of interest), electronic energy transfer between molecules or diﬀerent parts

of the same molecule, and charge transfer reactions including proton and electron transfer.

In these latter examples, both the condensed phase environment and the internal motions

of the molecules act as a bath which couples the quantum states together. The decay

of quantum coherence, which depends upon the frequencies and populations of the bath

modes coupled to the quantum system will determine the extent to which the non-adiabatic

16

coupling can act to allow the chemical reaction to proceed. Changes in the spectral density

due to isotopic changes in the bath can have a substantial impact on non-adiabatic chemical

dynamics.12 Furthermore, the decay of quantum coherence can determine the adiabaticity

for a chemical reaction.

Perhaps the two major lacunae in our present theory is the explicit dependency upon

an a priori estimate of the coherence time scale and the fact that this time scale remains

ﬁxed throughout the calculation. As mentioned above, we estimated this time scale by

computing the average decay time of the overlap of a product of Gaussian coherent states

evolving on diﬀerent adiabatic potential energy surfaces. In this estimate, the individual

widths of the coherent state wavefunctions centered about the initial phase space points of

the classical nuclei are set to be proportional to the thermal DeBroglie wavelength of each

nuclei. Although physically realistic for a variety of situations, this does leave the coherence

length scale (i.e. the widths) as an adjustable parameter. While the eﬀects of changing the

coherence length scale over a broad range have not been systematically studied, results from

our previous work demonstrate that the non-adiabatic transition is quite sensitive to changes

in the coherence time scale and hence will be sensitive to changes in the coherence length

scales. Furthermore, as the bath explores various regions of the quantum potential energy

surface, the force diﬀerences which give rise to the decay of the quantum coherences12 should

vary from one conﬁguration to the next. Current progress is underway towards obtaining

both the coherence length and time scale during the course of the non-adiabatic simulation

ab initio by examining the quantum mechanical ﬂuctuations of the bath particles about their

stationary phase paths.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (CHE-9504666) as well as

the San Diego Supercomputing Center for computing resources. We also thank Professor

Benjamin J. Schwartz and Oleg V. Prezhdo for many fruitful discussions over the course

17

of this work. ERB also wishes to thank Professor Hans C. Andersen for his hospitality at

Stanford University where this paper was completed.

1 Many of the underlying concepts and “philosophical” underpinnings of the “Consistant Histories”

interpretation of quantum mechanics are presented at an approachable level by R. Omn`es, in

The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. (Princeton Univ., 1994).

2 E. R. Bittner and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8130 (1995).

3 R. B. Griﬃths, J. Stat. Phys. 36, 219 (1984).

4 R. Omn`es, J. Stat. Phys. 53, 893 (1988).

5 R. Omn`es, Ann. Phys. 201, 354 (1989).

6 M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle, Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quantum Cosmology, in

Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, edited by W. H. Zurek, Addison-Wesley,

Redwood City, CA, 1990.

7 M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle, Phys. Rev. D 47, 3345 (1993).

8 M. Gell-Mann and J. Hartle, Equivalent Sets of Histories and Multiple Quasiclassical Domains,

LANL preprint: gr-qc:940413, 1994.

9 S. Schreckenberg, J. Math. Phys. 36, 4735 (1996).

10 F. Dowker and A. Kent, On the Consistent Histories Approach to Quantum Mechanics, LANL

preprint: gr-qc/9412067, 1994.

11 L. Do´osi, N. Gisin, J. Halliwell, and I. C. Percival, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 203 (1995).

12 B. J. Schwartz, E. R. Bittner, O. V. Prezhdo, and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 5942 (1994).

13 E. R. Bittner, B. J. Schwartz, and P. J. Rossky, J. Mol. Struct.:THEOCHEM (1996), in press.

18

14 O. V. Prezhdo and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. (1996), in preparation.

15 A. Migus, Y. Gauduel, J. L. Martin, and A. Antonetti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1559 (1987).

16 J. C. Alfano, P. K. Walhout, Y. Kimura, and P. F. Barbara, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5996 (1993).

17 Y. Kimura, J. C. Alfano, P. K. Walhout, and P. F. Barbara, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 3450 (1994).

18 J. C. Alfano, P. K. Walhout, Y. Kimura, and P. F. Barbara, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5996 (1993).

19 P. J. Rossky, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7, 1727 (1990).

20 F. Webster, P. J. Rossky, and R. A. Friesner, Comput. Phys. Commun. 63, 494 (1991).

21 F. Webster, J. Schnitker, M. S. Friedrichs, R. Friesner, and P. Rossky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3172

(1991).

22 P. J. Rossky, B. J. Schwartz, and W. S. Sheu, Electronic Relaxation Dynamics in Solution, in

Ultrafast Phenomena IX, edited by P. F. Barbara, W. H. Knox, G. A. Mourou, and A. H. Zewail,

volume 60 of Springer Series in Chemical Physics, page 53 (Spinger-Verlag, Berlin, 1994).

23 B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 6902 (1994).

24 B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 6917 (1994).

25 D. Coker, Computer Simulation of Nonadiabatic Dynamics in Condensed Systems, in Computer

Simulation in Chemical Physics, edited by M. Allen and D. Tildesley, pages 315–377, Kluwer

Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993.

26 J. Tully and R. Preston, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 562 (1971).

27 J. Tully, Nonadiabatic Processes in Molecular Collisions, in Dynamics on Molecular Collisions,

Part B, edited by W. Miller, page 217, Plenum, New York, 1976.

28 J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 1061 (1990).

29 T. H. Murphrey and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 515 (1993).

19

30 S. Hammes-Schiﬀer and J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 4657 (1994).

31 L. Xiao and D. Coker, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 8646 (1994).

32 L. Xiao and D. F. Coker, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 496 (1995).

33 B. Space and D. Coker, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 1976 (1991).

34 B. Space and D. Coker, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 652 (1992).

35 A. O. Calderia and A. J. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 211 (1981).

36 A. J. Leggett, S. Chakravarty, A. T. Dorsey, M. P. A. Fisher, A. Garg, and W. Zwerger, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 59, 1 (1987).

37 A. G. Redﬁeld, Adv. Mag. Reson. 1, 1 (1965).

38 A. Abragam, The Principles of Nuclear Magnitism (Oxford University Press, London, 1961).

39 J. M. Jean, R. A. Friesner, and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 5827 (1992).

42 S. Mukamel, Principles of Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopy (Oxford University Press, New York,

40 J. M. Jean, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 10464 (1994).

41 J. M. Jean, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 2092 (1995).

43 B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky, J. Mol. Liquids 65/66, 23 (1995).

44 K. Toukan and A. Rahman, Phys. Rev. B 31, 2643 (1985).

45 P. J. Rossky and J. Schnitker, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 3462 (1987).

1995).

York, 1987).

47 B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 6997 (1996),

20

46 M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids (Oxford University Press, New

Tables

TABLE I. Excited state lifetimes for the aqueous electron. (SR= Schwartz and Rossky, J. Chem.

Phys. 101 6902 (1994). SBPR = Schwartz, Bittner, Prezhdo, and Rossky, J. Chem. Phys. 104

4942 (1996)). The coherence times used in each study are listed in parentheses.

Present (3.1 fs )

SR (1 fs)

SBPR (2.8-3.1 fs)(a)

Median

Average

Equilibrium

338 fs

384

234

630

730

450

—

—

310-270

(a.) Only Equilibrium lifetimes considered.

21

Figure Captions

FIG. 1. Energy eigenvalues and quantum populations along diﬀerent switching paths for the

electron in water. Shown in the upper graph are the energy eigenvales of the occupied electronic

state for two possible switching paths with the occupations shown in the lower plot. Following

promotion to the excited state, the electron makes a series of stochastic hopping attempts between

the initial and ﬁnal states with two possible outcomes shown.

FIG. 2. Excited state cumulative survival probability as a function of time following initial

excitation. Superimposed points (A) are the switching times from the simulations. Curve B is the

ﬁt of the data to the energy gap relaxation model given by Eq. 22 and curve C is a ﬁt of the data

to a Gaussian. See text for details.

following initial excitation.

FIG. 3. Plot of the normalized energy gap, ω, between the ground and occupied excited state

22

y
g
r
e
n
E
 
e
t
a
t
S
 
d
e
i
p
u
c
c
O

0.5

1

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.5

-3

e
t
a
t
S
 
d
e
i
p
u
c
c
O

2

1

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time (fs)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
P(t)

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

A
B
C

100

200

300

500

600

700

800

400
time (fs)

t

<ω( )>/ω    
           eq
ω    
  eq

ω( )t

4.5

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

4

3

2

1

0

0

200

400

600

time (fs)

800

1000

