7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The hydrogen molecule in magnetic ﬁelds: The ground states of the Σ manifold of the
parallel conﬁguration

T.Detmer, P. Schmelcher, F. K. Diakonos and L. S. Cederbaum
Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch–Chemisches Institut,
Universit¨at Heidelberg, INF 253, D–69120 Heidelberg,
Federal Republic of Germany

The electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule is investigated for the parallel conﬁguration.
The ground states of the Σ manifold are studied for ungerade and gerade parity as well as singlet and
triplet states covering a broad regime of ﬁeld strengths from B = 0 up to B = 100 a.u.. A variety
of interesting phenomena can be observed. For the 1Σg state we found a monotonous decrease
of the equilibrium distance and a simultaneously increase of the dissociation energy with growing
magnetic-ﬁeld strength. The 3Σg state is shown to develop an additional minimum which has no
counterpart in ﬁeld-free space. The 1Σu state shows a monotonous increase in the dissociation
energy with ﬁrst increasing and than decreasing internuclear distance of the minimum. For this
state the dissociation channel is H2 → H −
+ H + for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths B >∼ 20 a.u. due to the
existence of strongly bound H −
states in strong magnetic ﬁelds. The repulsive 3Σu state possesses
a very shallow van der Waals minimum for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths smaller than 1.0 a.u. within
the numerical accuracy of our calculations. The 1Σg and 3Σu states cross as a function of B and
the 3Σu state, which is an unbound state, becomes the ground state of the hydrogen molecule in
magnetic ﬁelds B >∼ 0.2 a.u.. This is of particular interest for the existence of molecular hydrogen in
the vicinity of white dwarfs. In superstrong ﬁelds the ground state is again a strongly bound state,
the 3Πu state.

I. INTRODUCTION

During the past years the behavior and properties of particle systems in strong magnetic ﬁelds became a subject of
increasing interest in diﬀerent areas of physics like astrophysics or solid-state physics. In astrophysics the discovery
B <
of strong magnetic ﬁelds in the vicinity of white dwarfs
[1–3] gave rise to
many investigations. On the other hand, for highly excited atomic states the Coulomb forces and magnetic forces are
(cid:0)
of comparable orders of magnitude even for laboratory ﬁeld strengths. In solid-state physics, excitons show strong
ﬁeld eﬀects due to their small eﬀective masses and large dielectricity constants [4].

and neutron stars

B <
(cid:0)

∼ 105T

∼ 108T

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

A number of investigations were performed to reveal the structure and properties of small atoms and one-dimensional
chains in such strong ﬁelds. They include variational methods [5–7], Thomas-Fermi-type models [8–11], density-
functional calculations [12,13] and Hartree-Fock calculations [14–18]. For a summary of energies, wave functions, and
electromagnetic transitions concerning the hydrogen atom in strong magnetic ﬁelds, we refer the reader to Ref. [19].
In contrast to the large number of studies on in particular the hydrogen atom in a strong magnetic ﬁelds there exist
only a few investigations on molecular systems. Most of them deal with the H +
2 ion (see Refs. [20–26] and references
In strong magnetic ﬁelds we encounter a variety
therein) and little is known about the H2 molecule [18, 27–31].
of interesting new molecular phenomena. For the ground state of the H +
2 ion an increase of the electron density
between the nuclear charges leads to a contraction of the bond length. At the same time we observe an increase in
the dissociation energy with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. Moreover for the H +
2 ion a class of states with purely
repulsive potential energy curves (PECs) in ﬁeld-free space was shown to exhibit well-pronounced potential-energy
minima in a suﬃciently strong magnetic ﬁeld [21, 23]. Furthermore the topology of the electronic potential surfaces
changes strongly with varying ﬁeld strength. For intermediate ﬁeld strengths it was shown, that the lowest-lying
electronic states possess their global equilibrium conﬁgurations at positions corresponding to high symmetry, i.e.,
θ = 0 o or θ = 90 o. However, for some excited states a global symmetry lowering occurs leading to global equilibrium
conﬁgurations at 0 o < θ < 90 o [24–26].

Only little is known concerning the electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule in a strong magnetic ﬁeld. Most of
the investigations deal with the hydrogen molecule in superstrong ﬁelds
. For intermediate ﬁeld strengths
there exist only two studies of qualitative character which investigate the PEC of the lowest 1Σg state [27, 28]. A
detailed knowledge of the electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule is of particular relevance in astrophysics since
it might lead to a better understanding of the spectra of white dwarfs and neutron stars. Hereby the ground state
of the hydrogen molecule is of particular interest. Recently a controversial discussion arose concerning the electronic

B ≥ 1011G
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

1

structure of a hydrogen molecule in a superstrong magnetic ﬁeld [30, 32–37]. It was conjectured that in superstrong
magnetic ﬁelds the 3Σu state would be the ground state of H2 [32]. This state possesses a very shallow van der Waals
minimum in ﬁeld-free space at R ∼ 8a.u.. Due to the spin-Zeeman shift the 3Σu state monotonously decreases in
energy with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. Therefore a crossing exists between the 1Σg and the 3Σu state at some
magnetic-ﬁeld strength Bc. For that reason the authors expected the weakly bound 3Σu state to be the ground state
of the hydrogen molecule in superstrong ﬁelds. For such magnetic-ﬁeld strengths, hydrogen might then be able to form
a Bose-Einstein condensate and become superﬂuid. However it has been proved that the 3Πu state is the true ground
state for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths B >
∼ 3 × 103 a.u. [30]. For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths smaller than B = 3 × 103 a.u.
the ground state of the hydrogen molecule is not known.

From the above it is evident that accurate investigations of the electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule are very
desirable. In the present investigation we perform a ﬁrst step to elucidate the electronic properties of the hydrogen
molecule in a strong magnetic-ﬁeld. Particular emphasis is placed on the intermediate regime which is of relevance
to the physics of white dwarfs. We investigate the electronic structure of the lowest states of the Σ manifold, i.e.,
the lowest singlet and triplet states with gerade and ungerade parity for a magnetic quantum number equal to zero.
We hereby focus on the case of the parallel internuclear and magnetic-ﬁeld axes. This conﬁguration is distinct by its
higher symmetry compared to the case of an arbitrary angle θ between the internuclear and magnetic-ﬁeld axis. It
has been shown [38] that the diabatic energy curves exhibit extrema at θ = 0o, and it can therefore be expected that
the parallel conﬁguration plays an important role.

Our calculations will provide detailed data of equilibrium distances, total energies, and dissociation energies for the
corresponding electronic states. Due to the eﬃciency of our method we are able to investigate the electronic structure
in the complete range of ﬁeld strengths, from B = 0 up to B = 100 a.u..

In detail the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we develop the theoretical framework as well as technical
background for our calculations. Section III. is the central part of the paper. It contains the detailed discussion of the
electronic PECs for the lowest 1Σg, 1Σu, 3Σg and 3Σu states for magnetic ﬁelds B = 0 − 100 a.u.. The summary and
conclusions are given in Sec. IV. We use a basis set of nonspherical atomic orbitals for our conﬁguration-interaction
calculations [39]. Some details of this basis set are given in Appendix A. Furthermore, in Appendix A we describe
the construction of the molecular wave function for the hydrogen molecule . Appendix B contains a more detailed
description of the computational techniques. The evaluation of the matrix elements and some special features of the
implementation of our source code are discussed to some extent.

II. THEORETICAL ASPECTS

We start with the total nonrelativistic molecular Hamiltonian in Cartesian coordinates. It is well known that the
total pseudomomentum is a constant of motion [40,41]. For a neutral system like the hydrogen molecule , the compo-
nents of the pseudomomentum additionally commute with each other. Therefore, the Hamiltonian can be simpliﬁed
by performing a so-called pseudoseparation of the center-of-mass motion [40, 42, 43]. Due to this pseudoseparation
the center-of-mass coordinate and the conserved pseudomomentum are introduced as a pair of canonical conjugated
variables. As a result, the center-of-mass coordinate does not appear in the transformed Hamiltonian . After applying
this transformation, the exact Hamiltonian can be further simpliﬁed by a series of unitary transformations. For details
of these transformations, we refer the reader to the literature [42, 43].

In order to separate the electronic and nuclear motion an adiabatic approximation has to be performed, which
means that we have to apply the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. The validity
of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld has been studied in detail by Schmelcher
and coworkers [42–44], including all corrections due to ﬁnite nuclear mass. In a ﬁrst order approximation we choose
the electronic Hamiltonian as the ﬁxed nuclei Hamiltonian , i.e., we assume inﬁnitely heavy masses for the nuclei.
The origin of our coordinate system coincides with the midpoint of the internuclear axis of the hydrogen molecule
and the protons are located on the z axis. The magnetic ﬁeld is chosen parallel to the z axis of our coordinate system
and we use the symmetric gauge for the vector potential. Finally our electronic Hamiltonian takes on the following
appearance:

H =

2

Xi=1 (cid:26)

1
2

p2
i +

1
8

2
(B × ri)

+

Li · B −

1
2

1
|ri − R/2|

−

1
|ri + R/2| (cid:27)

+

1
|r1 − r2|

1
R

+

+ S · B

(1)

We hereby neclect relativistic eﬀects such as, e.g., the spin-orbit coupling , and the gyromagnetic factor of the electron
was chosen to be 2. The symbols ri, pi, and Li denote the position vectors, the canonical conjugated momenta and
the angular momenta of the two electrons, respectively. B and R are the vectors of the magnetic ﬁeld and internuclear

2

distance, respectively and R denotes the magnitude of R. With S we denote the vector of the total electronic spin.

Since we deal with Σ states, the sum

Li · B equals to zero. Throughout the paper we will use atomic units.

The Hamiltonian (1) commutes with the following operators:
a) The parity operator P due to the charge symmetry of the molecule . The corresponding eigenfunctions are

marked with the subscript g for gerade or u for ungerade parity.

b) The projection Lz of the electronic angular momentum on the internuclear axis.
c) The square S2 of the total electronic spin. The electronic functions are labeled with a left superscript describing

2

Pi=1

the multiplicity 2S + 1 of the state.

d) The projection Sz of the total electronic spin on the internuclear axis. For singlet states the only possibility is

Ms = 0. For triplet states we are only interested in the lowest state, which means Ms = −1.

In the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld we encounter an additional symmetry namely the reﬂections with respect to
the electronic coordinates at the xz (σv) plane. The eigenfunctions possess the corresponding eigenvalues ±1. This
symmetry does not hold in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Therefore, the resulting symmetry groups for the hydrogen
molecule are D∞h in the case of ﬁeld-free space, and C∞h in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld [38].

In order to solve the ﬁxed-nuclei electronic Schr¨odinger equation belonging to the Hamiltonian (1), we expand the
electronic eigenfunctions in terms of molecular conﬁgurations. First of all we note that the total electronic wave
function Ψges can be written as a product of its spatial part Ψ and its spin part χ, i.e., we have Ψges = Ψχ. For the
spatial part Ψ of the wave function we use the linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital ansatz (LCAO-
MO), i.e., we decompose Ψ with respect to molecular orbital conﬁgurations ψ of H2 which respect the corresponding
symmetries (see above) and the Pauli principle, i.e

Ψ =

cij [ψij (r1, r2) ± ψij (r2, r1)]

=

cij [Φi (r1) Φj (r2) ± Φi (r2) Φj (r1)]

Xi,j

Xi,j

The molecular-orbital conﬁgurations ψij of H2 are products of the corresponding one-electron H +
2 molecular orbitals
Φi and Φj. The H +
2 molecular orbitals are built from atomic orbitals centered at each nucleus. A key ingredient
of this procedure is a basis set of nonorthogonal optimized nonspherical Gaussian atomic orbitals which has been
established previously [22, 39]. A more detailed description of the construction of the molecular electronic wave
function is presented in Appendix A. In order to determine the molecular electronic wave function of H2 we use

the variation principle. This means we minimize the variational integral

by varying the coeﬃcients ci. The

resulting generalized eigenvalue problem reads as follows:

Ψ∗

HΨ
Ψ∗Ψ

R
R

(H − ǫS) c = 0

(2)

In the present investigation for parallel internuclear axis and magnetic-ﬁeld axis, the Hamiltonian matrix H is real
and symmetric and the overlap matrix is real, symmetric and positiv deﬁnite. The vector c contains the expansion
coeﬃcients. The matrix elements of the Hamiltonian matrix and the overlap matrix are certain linear combinations of
matrix elements with respect to the optimized nonspherical Gaussian atomic orbitals. The latter matrix elements were
already calculated in Ref. [39]. However, the formulas for the electron-nucleus and in particular the electron-electron
matrix elements given in Ref. [39] turned out to be not suﬃciently eﬃcient for numerical calculations with large basis
sets. Both, the numerical stability and the eﬃcient and fast computation of the matrix elements required a diﬀerent
approach to the integral evaluation within our basis set of atomic orbitals. In our computational scheme the matrix
elements are evaluated by a combination of a special quadrature method and a subsequent numerical integration. We
herefore wrote a numerical integration routine which is very carefully adjusted to the special problem of the hydrogen
molecule parallel to a magnetic ﬁeld. We were able to reduce the mean time of one integral calculation by a factor
of 1000. Appendix B deals with the most important aspects of the corresponding computational method. For the
construction of the Hamilton matrix within each subspace we used a direct method which means that each integral
is evaluated only once. This procedure is very useful since the same atomic orbitals contribute to diﬀerent molecular
orbitals. In addition, all four matrices belonging to diﬀerent subspaces (parity, spin multiplicity) of the Σ states are
simultaneously constructed since they depend on the same matrix elements of the corresponding atomic orbitals.

For each PEC about 300 points were calculated on an average. In the present calculations, the typical dimension
of the Hamiltonian matrix for each subspace varies between approximately 800 and 3000 depending on the magnetic-
ﬁeld strength. Depending on the dimension of the Hamiltonian matrix, it takes between 30 and 250 minutes for
simultaneously calculating one point of a PEC of each Σ− subspace on a AIX 590 computer. Therefore, the total

3

amount of CPU time for our calculations amounts to approximately seven months on the above computer. Previous
to the calculation of the PECs we performed detailed test on the accuracy and convergence of the calculations. For
each magnetic-ﬁeld strength we developed a basis set of atomic orbitals particularly adapted for minimizing the total
energy. The overall accuracy of our results is estimated to be better than 10−3. For the numerical solution of the
eigenvalue problem (2) we used the standard NAG library.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. The 1Σg state

Let us begin our investigation by considering the lowest 1Σg state of the hydrogen molecule , which is the ground
state in ﬁeld-free space. This state has been extensively studied in ﬁeld-free space in the adiabatic approximation, both
theoretically and experimentally. For the literature on theoretical investigations up to 1960 we refer the reader to the
bibliography in Ref. [45]. In particular we mention the pioneering work of James and Coolidge [46]. They represent
the wave function in elliptic coordinates and demonstrated the usefulnes of explicitely including the interelectronic
distance in the wave function. A well-known drawback of the expansion in elliptical coordinates is that it converges
more and more slowly with increasing values of the internuclear distance. In addition, the results of earlier work do
not possess the accuracy needed for comparison with experimental data. Recently, several theoretical investigations
were performed to improve the overall energy values for the 1Σ+
g state. Kolos [47] as well as Wolniewicz [48] improved
the electronic energy calculated in the Born-Oppenheimer approximation several times. As a reference in the case of
ﬁeld-free space, we use the energy values obtained by Wolniewicz in 1995 [48].

In ﬁeld-free space the energy curve of the 1Σ+

g state shows only one minimum at the equilibrium distance of 1.4 a.u.
with a total energy of −1.1744757 a.u.. In the dissociation limit we have two H atoms in their ground states, i.e.,
H2 → H (1s)+H (1s). Therefore, in the separated atom limit the total energy approaches −1.0 a.u. which corresponds
to the energy of two H atoms in the ground state. In the united atom limit we have a helium atom in the 1S 1s2 state.
For that reason the total energy without the nucleus-nucleus repulsion 1
R approaches an energy value of 2.90372 a.u.
with decreasing internuclear distance which is the ground state energy of the helium atom.

For the total energy at the equilibrium distance in ﬁeld-free space we obtained a total energy of −1.173892 a.u.
which yields a dissociation energy of 0.173892 a.u.. This corresponds to a relative accuracy in the total energy of
about 6 × 10−4 compared to the bench mark result in Ref. [48]. This accuracy in the total energy even increases
with increasing internuclear distance. For R = 3 a.u. and R = 4 a.u. we yield an error of 3 × 10−4 and 2 × 10−4,
respectively.

Let us explain how we obtained such an accuracy for a conﬁguration-interaction (CI) calculation with a nonspherical
Gaussian basis set. In order to compare the eﬃciency of our basis set with the best data available in the literature [48],
we performed a calculation at the equilibrium distance for the ground state of H2. In this calculation we include 42
atomic basis functions constituting the H +
2 orbitals with a magnetic quantum number equal to zero, 21 with gerade
and 21 with ungerade parity, respectively. Hereby 24 atomic basis functions were optimized in order to describe the
ground state of the hydrogen atom.
In order to describe the in-out correlation correctly, 18 further atomic basis
functions were optimized for excited states of the hydrogen atom. The in-out correlation takes into account the
fact that if one electron is located near the internuclear axis, the second electron is preferably located far from the
internuclear axis. The angular correlation describing the fact that the angle between the two electrons preferably
diﬀers by 180 degrees has been taken into account by using the following atomic basis functions: 32 functions for each
of the magnetic quantum numbers m = +1 and m = −1; 18 functions for m = +2 and m = −2; and analogously
12 functions with m = +3 and m = −3. In order to understand the origin of the small diﬀerence of our dissociation
energy compared to the dissociation energy given in Ref. [48] we performed an additional calculation and included
only the 42 functions described above with magnetic quantum number equal to zero. This yields the so-called σ
limit [49] of 1.1615 a.u. which is the lowest energy achievable by molecular conﬁgurations including only functions
with a magnetic quantum number equal to zero. Our calculation yields 1.16144 a.u. for the σ limit. Therefore the
main diﬀerence between the benchmark energy for the ground state of the H2 molecule and our energy is due to some
missing in-out correlation and angular correlation.

For the calculation of the entire PEC we used a second slightly smaller basis set than the one given above. The
evaluation of the matrix elements takes increasingly more CPU time if higher angular momenta are involved. For the
calculation of the PEC we therefore reduced the number of basis functions involving higher angular momenta in the
following way: nine functions for each of the magnetic quantum numbers m = +1 and m = −1, and six functions
for m = +2 and m = −2 were used. This reduction of our basis leads to only minor changes in the total energy but
saves about 30 % of the CPU time needed for the evaluation of the matrix elements. In Table I both results for the

4

ground state energy of the hydrogen molecule are included. The calculations with respect to other electronic states
of the hydrogen molecule in ﬁeld-free space were performed by using the second basis set described above. Details of
the basis set can be obtained from the authors upon request.

In contrast to the numerous investigations concerning the behavior and structure of the hydrogen molecule in ﬁeld-
free space only a few studies deal with the hydrogen molecule in strong magnetic ﬁelds [18, 27–32, 50]. Most of these
deal with the hydrogen molecule in superstrong magnetic ﬁelds as large 1011 or even 1012 G (in atomic units this
corresponds to B = 42.54414 a.u. and B = 425.4414 a.u., respectively).

First of all we mention that our computational method is by no means restricted to a special range of the magnetic-
ﬁeld strength. We were therefore able to study the development of the total energy with respect to the ﬁeld strength
ranging from ﬁeld-free space up to a very strong ﬁeld. Before entering into a discussion of our results let us introduce
our notation for the united and separated atom limit in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Throughout this paper we
will denote the atomic hydrogen states in the dissociation limit with H (mπa
a ), where ma denotes the atomic magnetic
quantum number and πa the atomic z parity, respectively. The united atom limit is described by 2S+1Lπz
z . Here
2S + 1 is the spin multiplicity, Lz is the projection of the electronic angular momentum onto the axis of the magnetic
ﬁeld and πz is the z parity. Now we are in the position to discuss the structure of the electronic PEC for the 1Σg
state in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.

Figure 1 shows the energy curves of the 1Σg state of the hydrogen molecule for diﬀerent ﬁeld strengths. In order to
display electronic energies for varying magnetic-ﬁeld strengths in the same viewgraph the energy in the dissociation
limit is substracted from the total energy, i.e., we show the quantity E (R) = Et (R) − lim
Et (R). The total as
R→∞
well as the dissociation energies at the equilibrium distance of the 1Σg state are given in Table I together with the
corresponding equilibrium internuclear distance for ﬁeld strengths in the range B = 0 − 100 a.u.. Furthermore,
Et (R). For the 1Σg state the dissociation channel is
we show the total energy in the dissociation limit, i.e.,
lim
R→∞
H2 → H (0+) + H (0+) which means that the energy in the dissociation limit corresponds to the energy of two
hydrogen atoms in the lowest electronic state with positive z parity. The appropriate electronic state in the united
atom limit is the 10+ helium state for any ﬁeld strengths up to B = 100a.u..

In the following we discuss the changes in the dissociation energy and equilibrium distance with increasing strength
of the magnetic ﬁeld. The overall behavior we observe in Table I is a monotonously increasing total energy as well as
dissociation energy and a monotonously decreasing equilibrium internuclear distance. The decrease in the equilibrium
internuclear distance originates from the simultaneous decrease of the electron clouds perpendicular and parallel
to the magnetic ﬁeld. Figure 1 illustrates the drastic growth in the dissociation energy for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths
B <
∼ 1 a.u.. At the same time the potential well becomes more and more pronounced, i.e., its width decreases strongly.
Furthermore, the asymptotic behavior of the PEC for large values of R changes with the magnetic-ﬁeld strength. With
an increasing value of B the dissociation limit is reached at much smaller values of the internuclear distance, i.e the
onset of the asymptotic behavior can be observed for much smaller internuclear distances. Furthermore transition
states appear in the PEC for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths B >
∼ 1 a.u.. The corresponding data, i.e., the positions and total
energies of the transition states with respect to the dissociation limit, can be found in Table I. For the position of
the maximum we observe a strong decrease with increasing ﬁeld strength. Simultaneously the height of the maximum
Et, increases from 2 × 10−6 at B = 1.0 a.u. to 6 × 10−4 at
with respect to the dissociation energy , i.e., Et − lim
R→∞
B = 100.0 a.u..

We emphasize that the 1Σg state is not the ground state of the hydrogen molecule in a magnetic ﬁeld of arbitrary
strength. In superstrong magnetic ﬁelds with B >
∼ 103a.u. it is well known that the 3Πu state represents the ground
state of the hydrogen molecule [30, 37]. The ground state for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths in the intermediate regime has
not been investigated up to now, to our knowledge. For suﬃcienly weak magnetic ﬁelds the ground state has to be
the 1Σg state. However, we will show in section III.D that for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths larger than 0.2 a.u. or equal
the lowest total energy of the 3Σu state is lower than the lowest total energy of the 1Σg state. This means that for
B >
∼ 0.2 a.u. the 3Σu state is the ground state of the hydrogen molecule . The “crossing ﬁeld strength” of this lowest
3Σu state with the 3Πu state, which is the ground state in superstrong magnetic ﬁelds, is not known so far.

Now let us compare our results with the few data existing in the literature. Only two investigations were performed
concerning the electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths smaller than B = 100 a.u..
In Ref. [28], PECs were shown for the 1Σg state for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths of 0.5 a.u. and 1.0 a.u.. The authors used
a very simple LCAO ansatz for the electronic wave function, including only one atomic orbital for the construction

of the H2 molecular wave function. The atomic orbitals had the following appearance: ψα (j) =
exp [−ǫrαj]
where rαj is the distance of the α nucleus to the jth electron and ǫ is a variational parameter to be optimized. This
ansatz is restricted to small magnitudes of the magnetic ﬁeld (B < 1 a.u.) where the spherical symmetry of the 1Σg
wave function is approximately conserved. For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths of 0.5 and 1.0 a.u., the authors of Ref. [28]
provided an equilibrium distance of 1.29 a.u. corresponding to a total energy of −1.06 a.u. and an equilibrium distance

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

1/2

2

ǫ
π

5

of 1.17 a.u. with a total energy of −0.83 a.u., respectively. As shown in Table II we were able to improve these results
signiﬁcantly. The improvement in the total energy compared to the calculations of Ref. [28] is approximately twice
as large for B = 1.0 a.u. as for B = 0.5 a.u.. For B = 1.0 a.u. the wave function of the 1Σg state is deformed from a
spherical one to a cylindrosymmetric one, and, therefore, a use of only one atomic orbital with a spherical symmetry
is insuﬃcient even for a qualitative description. In the second investigation performed by Turbiner [27], one of the
simplest wave functions in a zero-order approximation was taken for the description of the 1Σg state (see also Ref. [51]).
In Table II we also compare our data with that of Ref. [27]. We observe an overall improvement of the total energy in
our results compared to the data obtained by Turbiner. For a magnetic-ﬁeld strength of 5.0 × 109 G the equilibrium
distance obtained by Turbiner diﬀers signiﬁcantly from our value leading to a relative diﬀerence in the total energy of
41%. We remark that the accuracy of the calculations in Ref. [27] increases with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength.
For B = 1.0 × 1011 G the relative improvement in the total energy obtained by our calculations amounts to only
about 0.5 % compared to [27].

Finally let us investigate the question of whether vibrational levels exist in the PECs discussed above. This question
is of great importance to the existence of bound states. In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld the determination of
vibrational levels is a much more complicated task than in ﬁeld-free space. First we note that the Born-Oppenheimer
In the presence of a
approximation known from ﬁeld-free space is not valid in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.
magnetic ﬁeld the nuclear charges are partially screened by the electrons against this ﬁeld. In order to describe the
partial screening of the nuclear charges against the magnetic ﬁeld correctly, the diagonal term of the nonadiabatic
coupling elements has to be included in the nuclear equation of motion. This leads to a new kind of adiabatic
approximation, the partially screened Born-Oppenheimer approximation [42,43,52]. Furthermore, the nuclear equation
of motion explicitly not only depends on the internuclear distance but also on the angle between the internuclear axis
and the magnetic-ﬁeld axis. The facts discussed above clearly show that the nuclear dynamics is in general very
complex. Within the present framework of the parallel conﬁguration we can therefore provide only estimations
of the energy levels of the vibrational states. Nevertheless this allows us to decide whether or not we encounter
physically bound states with respect to the vibrational mode R. A lower bound of the vibrational energy within our
approximation is given by the lowest vibrational state in the corresponding PEC using the ﬁeld-free kinetic energy
P
2µ . The corresponding nuclear equation of motion in ﬁeld-free space for the given electronic PEC was solved with
the help of a discrete variable representation [53]. The upper bound for the energy of the lowest vibrational state in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld was obtained by simply adding the Landau energy of the nuclear motion to the value
of the energy obtained for the corresponding vibrational level in ﬁeld-free space. In this way we obtained both upper
and lower bounds for the vibrational levels. These estimations of the vibrational levels were performed for each PEC
shown in Figure 1 as well as the following ﬁgures.

For the PEC of the 1Σg state the procedure described above yields many, i.e., of the order of magnitude of a few
dozens, of vibrational levels for the entire regime B = 0 − 100 a.u. of ﬁeld strengths. This means that the 1Σg state
is a bound state with respect to the internuclear distance R for this wide range of ﬁeld strengths.

2

B. The 1Σu state

The electronic PEC for the 1Σu state in ﬁeld-free space was calculated with high accuracy by Kolos and Wolniewicz
[54, 55]. The energy curve in ﬁeld-free space for this state possesses a minimum at an internuclear distance of
R = 2.43 a.u.. A detailed analysis of the wave function [54] shows the predominantly ionic character of the wave
function for 3 < R < 7 a.u.. This ionic character has also been conﬁrmed by an analysis of the corresponding rotation-
vibration spectrum of the hydrogen molecule [56]. Since H − possesses only one weakly bound state in ﬁeld-free space,
one expects the ionic character of the hydrogen molecule in the 1Σu state to decrease with increasing internuclear
distance. For large internuclear distances the wave function can be described as a mixture of (1sσ2sσ) and (1sσ2pσ)
conﬁgurations, where the (1sσ2pσ) conﬁguration predominates for very large internuclear distances. Therefore, the
dissociation channel is given by H2 → H (1s) + H (2p). The corresponding state in the united atom limit is the
electronic 3P 1s2p helium state. In order to check the convergence of our calculations we compared our results with
the data given in Ref. [55]. The overall relative accuracy in the total energy of the present calculation for the 1Σu
state in ﬁeld-free space is better than 10−3. As can be seen from Table III our equilibrium distance diﬀers by 0.01 a.u.
from the correct value of R = 2.43 a.u..

In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld we observe a monotonous increase in the total energy with increasing magnetic-
ﬁeld strength. The corresponding values are given in Table III. At the same time the dissociation energy increases
monotonously (cf. Fig. 2 and Table III). It can be seen from Table III that the value of the equilibrium distance
exhibits a minor increase from 2.42 a.u. in ﬁeld-free space to 2.53 a.u. for B = 0.2 a.u.. However, for B ≥ 0.2 a.u.
we observe a drastic decrease in the equilibrium internuclear distance with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. For

6

B = 1.0 and 100 a.u., the corresponding values are Req = 2.30 and 0.490 a.u., respectively. Figure 2 shows the
well becoming more and more pronounced with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength while the onset of the asymptotic
convergence behavior is shifted to larger internuclear distances with increasing ﬁeld strength.

Another important property of the 1Σu state in a magnetic ﬁeld is the change of the dissociation channel in
suﬃciently strong ﬁelds. As described above, the wave function in ﬁeld-free space exhibits a partially ionic character
for certain internuclear distances. However, the dissociation into H − + H + is not possible due to the nonexistence
of strongly bound electronic states of H −. In a magnetic ﬁeld, however, it is known that each negative ion possesses
inﬁnitely many bound states in a nonzero constant magnetic ﬁeld [57,58]. This means we encounter an inﬁnite number
of bound states of H − in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld even though H − has only one bound state in ﬁeld-free space.
With increasing ﬁeld strength the ground state energy of H − shows a monotonous behavior, and H − becomes more
and more strongly bound. Consequently, there exists a critical ﬁeld strength for which the total energy of the ground
state of H − and the total energy of H (0+) + H (0−), which is the dissociation limit for weaker ﬁeld strengths, are
equal.

The above considerations help us to understand the asymptotic behavior in the dissociation limit of the 1Σu state
as well as the shape of the PEC: For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths B <
∼ 10.0 a.u. the molecular 1Σu state dissociates into
H (0+) + H (0−). Since the total energy of H − is larger than the energy of H (0+) + H (0−) and since no crossings
are allowed between electronic states of the same symmetry an avoided crossing between the ground state and the
ﬁrst excited state in the 1Σu subspace occurs in this regime of ﬁeld strengths. With increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength
B = 0 → 10 a.u. the position of the avoided crossing is shifted to increasingly larger internuclear distances (for
B = 0.1 and 10.0 a.u. the position of the crossing is at ∼ 12 and 81.47 a.u., respectively). Between B = 10.0
s ) + H +, where the subscribt
and 50.0 a.u. the dissociation channel changes from H (0+) + H (0−) to H2 → H − (0+
s denotes that the H − state is a singlet state. The “transition ﬁeld strength” is approximately B ∼ 20 a.u.. Due
to the change in the dissociation channel the onset of the asymptotic behavior of the PEC is shifted to increasingly
larger internuclear distances. This leads to a totally diﬀerent shape of the PEC which can be seen for B = 100.0 a.u.
from Fig. 2. As a further result we obtain the ionization energy for H − for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths of B = 50.0 and
100.0 a.u.. The resulting total binding energies with respect to both electrons are 3.637999 a.u. and 4.561968 a.u.,
respectively. The best available data for the ionization energy of the H −−ion in a strong magnetic ﬁeld B ≥ 100 a.u.
are given in Refs. [59, 60]. Compared to the value given in Ref. [59] for B = 100.0 a.u. our result of 4.561968 a.u.
is more than 1% lower in energy. The ionization energy for H − at B = 50.0 a.u. amounts to 3.637999 a.u. and no
corresponding values have been known from the literature so far.

Finally, we brieﬂy comment on the existence of vibrational levels. Many vibrational levels were found to exist in
the above PECs for arbitrary ﬁeld strengths up to 100.0 a.u.. With increasing ﬁeld strength the overall tendency is
an increase in the number of vibrational levels.

C. The 3Σg state

The Born-Oppenheimer PEC for the lowest 3Σg state has been calculated with very high accuracy in ﬁeld-free space.
Accurate studies have been performed using explicitly correlated methods, which include wave functions of generalized
James-Coolidge or Kolos-Wolniewicz type [61–63] and full CI calculations with large elliptical basis sets [64]. Our CI
calculation yields 0.737124 a.u. for the total energy at the equilibrium distance of R = 1.87 a.u. (see Table IV). The
relative accuracy compared to the best data available in the literature [63] amounts to 4.4 × 10−5. We emphasize that
this high precision of our data is obtained for arbitrary internuclear distances. The dissociation channel for the 3Σg
state in ﬁeld-free space is H2 → H (1s) + H (2s) and the helium state in the united atom limit is the 3S 1s2s state.
In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld the 3Σg state dissociates into H (0+) + H (0−). The corresponding united
atom state is the 30+ helium state. Due to the spin-Zeeman shift the total energy monotonously decreases with
increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength as can be seen in Table IV. For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths below 0.5 a.u. we ob-
serve a monotonous decrease in the dissociation energy Ed1 with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength from 0.112124 to
0.062317 a.u. for B = 0.0 and 0.5 a.u., respectively. At the same time the equilibrium distance decreases slightly
from 1.87 a.u. to 1.81 a.u.. For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths larger than 0.5 a.u. we observe a drastic increase in the
dissociation energy and a simultaneous decrease in the equilibrium internuclear distance. Detailed numerical data for
the PEC are provided in Table IV and the development of the electronic PEC for internuclear distances smaller than
4.0 a.u. is illustrated in Fig.3. In Fig. 3 we can observe that the well of the PEC becomes increasingly more shallow
for increasing ﬁeld strengths in the range B = 0.0 → 0.5 a.u.. With further increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength the
opposite behavior can be observed and the potential well becomes more and more pronounced and deeper.

A closer look at the PEC reveals that for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths between 0.05 and 50.0 a.u. the 3Σg state develops
a second minimum, which has no counterpart in ﬁeld-free space. However, this minimum is very shallow and the

7

maximum dissociation energy amounts to only 1.91 × 10−3 a.u. at a magnetic-ﬁeld strength of 1.0 a.u.. From Table
IV we see the dependence of the dissociation energy and the equilibrium internuclear distance of this second minimum
on the magnetic-ﬁeld strength. The corresponding PECs are shown in Fig.4. In this ﬁgure we observe a hump of
the 3Σg state at B = 0.05 a.u.. This hump also occurs for higher magnetic-ﬁeld strengths, but is shifted to smaller
internuclear distances and, therefore cannot be seen in Fig. 4. For the location of the maximum we observe an overall
decrease in the internuclear distance with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. Numerical data concerning the position
and total energy of the maximum in the energy curve are also given in Table IV. Both the maximum and second
minimum of the PEC appear at the same magnetic-ﬁeld strength of 0.05 a.u.. However, the second minimum vanishes
for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths larger than 50.0 a.u. whereas the hump remains in the PEC.

Let us ﬁnally focus on the existence of vibrational levels. For the ﬁrst minimum we found in the order of ten
vibrational levels. The number of levels slightly decreases from B = 0.0 to 0.5 a.u. with decreasing depth of the well.
For larger ﬁeld strengths (5.0, 10.0, and 100.0 a.u.) the number of levels slightly increases again. For the second, i.e.,
outer, minimum we found about ﬁve vibrational levels for the ﬁeld strengths 0.05, 0.2, and 1.0 a.u., respectively. For
a ﬁeld strength B = 5.0 a.u. the lower bound of the vibrational energy lies inside the potential well whereas the upper
bound is above the well. Here the detailed dynamical behavior decides on the existence of vibrational levels, and no
deﬁnite conclusion can be drawn from our estimations. For B = 50.0 a.u. the same conclusion holds.

D. The 3Σu state

In ﬁeld-free space the electronic PEC of the 3Σ+

u state is repulsive, i.e., does not exhibit a well-pronounced potential
well. The united atom limit of this state is the 3S 1s2p helium state, and the dissociation channel is H2 → H (1s) +
H (1s). One of the early but very accurate Born-Oppenheimer calculations on the lowest 3Σ+
u state was performed by
Kolos and Wolniewicz [65,66]. Recently several calculations were performed in order to improve the Born-Oppenheimer
potential energy for this state [64,67–69]. Most accurate results were obtained using a Hylleraas-type expansion [65,66],
explicitly correlated Cartesian Gaussian basis functions [68], or elliptical basis functions [64].

As a reference for our calculations we used the data given in Ref. [64] for internuclear distances smaller than 4.0 a.u.
and Refs. [65, 66] for R ≥ 4.0 a.u.. For R ≤ 4a.u. we obtained an overall relative accuracy of 6 × 10−4 compared
to the results in Ref. [64]. For larger values of the internuclear distance this accuracy further increases, and we
obtained a relative accuracy of at least 3 × 10−6. The best conventional CI calculations for this state with a basis
set of spherical Gaussian-type orbitals were performed in Ref. [69]. Comparing our results with the data given in
Ref. [69] it can be seen that our values of the total energy are lower by 1.0% and 0.4% for R ≤ 2.0 and R ≥ 2.0,
respectively. Our accurate results, in particular for the 3Σ+
u state in ﬁeld-free space demonstrate the usefulness of our
basis set of nonspherical nonorthogonal Cartesian Gaussian basis functions. The PEC for the 3Σ+
u state for diﬀerent
magnetic-ﬁeld strengths is presented in Fig.5.
Despite the fact that the PEC of the 3Σ+

u state is predominantly repulsive it exhibits a very shallow van der Waals
minimum around R ∼ 8 a.u.. Due to the dissociation of the 3Σ+
u state into H (1s) + H (1s), we encounter a dipole-
dipole interaction of induced dipole moments for large internuclear distances which is proportional to −1
R6 . The PEC
in the vicinity of the van der Waals minimum is presented in Fig.6, and numerical data are given in Table V. For the
van der Waals minimum we obtained a dissociation energy of 1.885 × 10−5 a.u. at an internuclear distance of 7.9 a.u..
The determination of the van der Waals energy and the corresponding minimum is a delicate task and requires very
large basis sets as well as high numerical accuracy. Within our calculations the position of the minimum has been
determined with ’only’ two signiﬁcant digits. Since the dissociation energy is very small the relative accuracy of
our result of the dissociation energy diﬀers from the high precision calculations in Refs. [65, 66] by about 17%. We
emphasize that the description of the van der Waals minimum is a drastic improvement compared to the results of
Ref. [69] where no minimum was predicted.

In the following we discuss the development of the PEC for the 3Σ+

u state depending on the magnetic-ﬁeld strength.
First, we focus on the global structure which is shown in Fig. 5. In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld the separated
atom limit is given by H2 → H (0+) + H (0+), i.e., the molecule dissociates into two hydrogen atoms in their ground
states with positive z parity. The corresponding united atom state in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld is the 30−
helium state. First of all we mention that the onset of the asymptotic behavior with respect to the dissociation occurs
for increasingly smaller internuclear distances with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. A comparison of the energy
values given in Tables I and Table V reveals that for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths larger than 0.2 a.u. the 3Σu state is
lower in energy than the 1Σg state. Therefore, the crossing between these two states happens between the two ﬁeld
strengths 0.1 and 0.2 a.u.. In Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 we illustrate the crossing of these two states. In Fig. 7, which shows
the total energy of the 1Σg and 3Σu states at a magnetic-ﬁeld strength of B = 0.0 a.u., we can see the 3Σu state
being higher in the total energy as the 1Σg state. Figure 8 shows the same states at a magnetic-ﬁeld strength of

8

B = 0.5 a.u.. In this ﬁgure we observe a drastic decrease in the total energy of the 3Σu state. The crossing of these
two states has an important concequence for the stability of molecular hydrogen in astrophysics. Beyond B ∼ 0.2 a.u.
the ground state of the hydrogen molecule is the 3Σu state which is an unbound electronic state at least for the
parallel conﬁguration. It is a challenging task to clarify whether this is true for any angle of the internuclear axis with
respect to the magnetic-ﬁeld axis. In principle it is possible that a potential well might develop if the internuclear
and magnetic-ﬁeld axes do not coincide. The investigation of such conﬁgurations is an important task in the future.
In addition we mention that beyond B >

∼ 3 × 103 a.u. the global ground state of H2 is the 3Πu state [18, 30].

In ﬁeld-free space the van der Waals potential is given by a law proportional

In the following we investigate the development of the van der Waals minimum depending on the magnetic-ﬁeld
strength which is of particular interest for the determination of the global ground state of the hydrogen molecule
1
R6 due to the
in a magnetic ﬁeld.
dipole-dipole interaction of induced dipoles in ﬁrst order perturbation theory. In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld
we have to pay attention to another interaction between atoms in s states. In ﬁrst-order perturbation theory two
atoms in a magnetic ﬁeld interact like two permanent quadrupoles. Therefore the leading expression in ﬁrst-order
perturbation theory is proportional to 1
R5 . In Fig. 6 we show the development of the van der Waals minimum with
increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. As can be seen from Table V the dissociation energy increases by 0.175 × 10−5a.u.
if we increase the ﬁeld strength from zero to 0.2 a.u.. At the same time we observe a monotonous decrease of the
internuclear distance corresponding to the minimum from 7.9 to 7.7 a.u.. In Fig. 6 we observe that the shape of
the energy curve for B = 0.2 a.u. diﬀers only slightly from that in ﬁeld-free space. For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths
larger than B = 0.2 the dissociation energy decreases drastically with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength down to
0.375 × 10−5 for B = 1.0 a.u.. Simultaneously the energy curve changes its shape. The gradient of the energy with
respect to internuclear distances R ≤ Req becomes larger and a more and more shallow minimum can be observed.
For magnetic-ﬁeld strengths larger than 1.0 a.u. no minimum is observed. The gradient of the energy with respect
to the internuclear distance increases further with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength, changing the appearance of the
PEC to an increasingly ﬂatter curve. No vibrational levels were found for any ﬁeld strength.

Finally we draw the readers attention to the fact that the calculations concerning the position and dissociation
energy of the van der Waals minimum are close to the convergence limit of our calculations. The disappearance of
the van der Waals minimum within our calculations to our opinion reﬂects a real physical eﬀect, but needs further
investigation for a deﬁnite clariﬁcation. In order to answer the question about the lowest bound state of the hydrogen
molecule in the high ﬁeld regime, a detailed and very accurate investigation of the 3Πu electronic state has to be
performed.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In the present paper we investigated the electronic structure of the hydrogen molecule in a magnetic ﬁeld. We hereby
focused on the case of a parallel internuclear axis and a magnetic-ﬁeld axis for a magnetic quantum number equal to
zero. The key ingredient for our CI calculations is a basis set of nonorthogonal nonspherical Gaussian atomic orbitals
which was established previously. The corresponding basis sets can be obtained from the authors upon request. Our
results for the PECs in ﬁeld-free space show a high accuracy compared to the existing data in the literature. The
non-sherical atomic orbitals may therefore be very useful for precision calculations concerning molecules in ﬁeld-free
space.

First we investigated the lowest 1Σg state which is the ground state of the hydrogen molecule in ﬁeld-free space.
In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld we observed a monotonous increase in the total energy. At the same time the
equilibrium distance decreases and the dissociation energy (chemical binding energy) increases rapidly. The few
existing data concerning the total energy of the 1Σg state in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld were signiﬁcantly
improved by our calculations. By calculating lower and upper bounds for the lowest vibrational energy the PEC of
the 1Σg state was shown to contain many vibrational levels for any magnetic-ﬁeld strength up to 100 a.u..

In the next step we studied the lowest state in the 1Σu subspace. With increasing magnetic ﬁeld we ﬁrst observed a
minor increase in the equilibrium internulear distance in the range 0.0 ≤ B ≤ 0.2 a.u.. The dissociation and the total
energy increases monotonously with increasing magnetic-ﬁeld strength. Many vibrational levels were found for the
PEC of the 1Σu state in the entire regime B = 0 − 100 a.u.. The number of levels hereby increase with increasing ﬁeld
strength. An important feature of the 1Σu state is the change in the dissociation channel with increasing magnetic-
ﬁeld strength. In ﬁeld-free space we have H2 → H (1s) + H (2p) in the separated atom limit. The wave function
possesses a predominantly ionic character for large values of the internuclear distance. However, in ﬁeld-free space
the dissociation H2 → H − + H + of the lowest 1Σu state is not possible due to the nonexistence of strongly bound
states for the H −−ion in ﬁeld-free space. In contrast to this strongly bound states of H − exist in the presence of a
magnetic ﬁeld. Therefore a dissociation into H − + H + is possible and we observe a change in the dissociation channel

9

for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths between B = 10.0 and 50.0 a.u.: For B ≤ 10.0 a.u. we have H2 → H (0+) + H (0−).
For ﬁeld strengths slightly larger than 10.0 a.u. the dissociation limit is given by H2 → H − (0+
s ) + H +. As a result
of our calculations we therefore obtained the dissociation energy for H − for B = 50.0 and 100.0 a.u.. Our result of
4.561968 a.u. for the ionization energy for H − at B = 100.0 a.u. shows an improvement of more than one % compared
to the best value given in the literature.

For the 3Σg state we encounter a monotonous decrease in the total energy which is proportional to the ﬁeld strength,
and which arises due to the spin-Zeeman shift in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. In the range 0.0 ≤ B ≤ 0.5 a.u. the
dissociation energy decreases approximately by a factor of two compared to the dissociation energy in ﬁeld-free space.
Simultaneously the equilibrium internuclear distance decreases slightly from 1.87 to 1.81 a.u.. With further increasing
magnetic-ﬁeld strength we observe a drastical increase in the dissociation energy and a simultaneous decrease of the
internuclear quilibrium distance. A more detailed investigation of the PEC for the 3Σg state shows a second minimum
for magnetic-ﬁeld strengths between 0.05 and 50.0 a.u. which has no counterpart in ﬁeld-free space. However, this
additional minimum is very shallow. Vibrational levels were found to exist within the ﬁrst well of the PEC for the
entire range of ﬁeld strengths from B = 0 to 100 a.u.. For the second minimum for ﬁeld strengths B >
∼ 5 a.u. the
existence of vibrational levels depends on the detailed dynamical behavior and cannot be decided within the present
approach. For B <

∼ 5 a.u. a few vibrational levels exist.

Finally we investigated the lowest 3Σu state of the hydrogen molecule which is known to be repulsive in ﬁeld-free
space and possesses only a very shallow van der Waals minimum at R ∼ 8.0 a.u.. The repulsive character of the
PEC of the 3Σu state remains for arbitrary ﬁeld strengths up to B = 100.0 a.u.. Due to the spin-Zeeman shift in a
magnetic ﬁeld a crossing occurs between the 1Σg and 3Σu state in the range 0.1 ≤ B ≤ 0.2 a.u.. Therefore the lowest
state of the Σ subspace of the hydrogen molecule in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld is the 1Σg state for B ≤ 0.1 a.u.
and the 3Σu state for B ≥ 0.2 a.u.. In superstrong magnetic ﬁelds B >
∼ 3 × 103 a.u. the ground state is the 3Πu
state. The determination of the crossing of the 3Σu and 3Πu states is a task which is left to a future investigation.
Furthermore the nonexistence of a strongly bound ground state of the hydrogen molecule has to be conﬁrmed by
investigations concerning arbitrary angles between the internuclear axis and magnetic-ﬁeld axis. After considering
these general properties of the 3Σu state we investigated the development of the van der Waals minimum depending on
the ﬁeld strength. For the van der Waals minimum we observe a monotonous decrease in the equilibrium internuclear
distance with increasing ﬁeld strength. First the dissociation energy increases with increasing ﬁeld strength and
for B ≥ 0.5 a.u. the dissociation energy drastically decreases. For B ≥ 1.0 a.u. no minimum has been found. No
vibrational levels exist for any ﬁeld strength up to 1 a.u..

The existence of a minimum which supports a vibrational frequency for the lowest electronic state of the hydrogen
molecule for intermediate magnetic-ﬁeld strengths is of particular interest to astrophysics in order to determine
whether hydrogen molecules exist in the vicinity of white dwarfs. According to our investigations for B >
∼ 0.2 a.u.
the ground state of the hydrogen molecule is not strongly bound and exhibits only a weak minimum due to the van
der Waals interaction. However, in superstrong magnetic ﬁelds the ground state is strongly bound, and the crossing
between these two states is not known so far. Finally we emphasize that for drawing deﬁnite conclusions about the
existence or nonexistence of a potential well, the case of nonparallel internuclear axis and magnetic-ﬁeld axis has to
be investigated. The determination of the corresponding potential energy surfaces is a complicated task which is left
to future investigations.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft as well as the European Community (F. K. D.) are gratefully acknowledged
for ﬁnancial support. We thank U. Kappes for fruitful discussions. Computer time was generously provided by the
Rechenzentrum Heidelberg, and in particular by the Rechenzentrum Karlsruhe.

APPENDIX A: CONSTRUCTION OF THE MOLECULAR ELECTRONIC WAVE FUNCTION

In order to construct the spatial part of the electronic wave function for the hydrogen molecule we ﬁrst establish
2 ion. The construction of these orbitals was described in detail in Ref. [23]. The

the molecular orbitals Φi for the H +
molecular electronic wave functions for the H +

2 -ion read as follows:

ψ±m,p =

ckΦ±m,p
k

(r, αk, βk, R)

Xk

10

|m|

N

=

ck

Xk

Xa

Xb

|m|
a (cid:19) (cid:18)

N
b (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(±i)a

φnab,k (r, αk, βk, +R/2) + (−1)P +Pa,k φnab,k (r, αk, βk, −R/2)
i

h

(A1)

Each molecular orbital Φi is an eigenfunction to the molecular angular momentum operator Lz and to the molecular
parity operator P of the H +
2 orbitals Φi are labeled by the eigenvalues ±m of Lz and the
eigenvalues p = ±1 of P . Pa is the parity operator of the atomic orbital and ci denote the expansion coeﬃcients. The
atomic orbitals φ building the molecular orbitals Φ have the following structure:

2 -ion. Therefore, the H +

φnab,k (r, αk, βk, ±R/2) = xnx,ab,k yny,ab,k (z ∓ R/2)nz,ab,k exp

−αk

x2 + y2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

n

2
− βk (z ∓ R/2)

,

o

(A2)

where αk and βk are optimized variational parameters [39]. R represents the internuclear distance and rT = (x, y, z)
the electronic position vector. For the dependencies of the powers nx, ny, and nz on the atomic magnetic quantum
number, we refer the reader to Ref. [23]. Now we are able to describe the molecular electronic wave function by
a linear combination of products of these H +
2 orbitals. First, we have to ensure that the H2 molecular orbitals
are eigenfunctions to the molecular angular momentum operator Lz of H2. Therefore, we arrive at the condition
M = m1 + m2 for the magnetic quantum numbers m1 and m2 characterizing the two H +
2 orbitals. Moreover, the
H2 molecular orbitals have to be eigenfunctions to the molecular parity operator Pg of the H2 molecule and the total
molecular electronic wave function has to respect the Pauli principle. Therefore, the electronic wave function of the
hydrogen molecule reads as follows:

ΨM,Pg =

(r1, αi, βi, R) Φ±m2,+1

(r2, αj, βj, R) ± Φ±m1,+1

(r2, αi, βi, R) Φ±m2,+1

(r1, αj, βj, R)

(r1, αi, βi, R) Φ±m2,−1

(r2, αj, βj, R) ± Φ±m1,−1

(r2, αi, βi, R) Φ±m2,−1

(r1, αj, βj, R)

(A3)

i

i

j

j

cij

Φ±m1,+1
n

i

Xi,j

+c′
ij

Φ±m1,−1
n

i

j

j

Φ±m1,±1

i

(r1,2, αi, βi, R) =

ci

|m1|

N

|m1|

(cid:18)

a (cid:19) (cid:18)

N
b (cid:19)

(±i)a ×

Xa

Xb

Xi
φnab,i (r1,2, αi, βi, +R/2) + (−1)P1+Pa,i φnab,i (r1,2, αi, βi, −R/2)
i

h

with

and

Φ±m2,±1

j

(r1,2, αj, βj, R) =

cj

|m2|

′

N

|m2|

(cid:18)

a (cid:19) (cid:18)

N ′
b (cid:19)

(±i)a ×

Xa

Xb

Xj
φnab,j (r1,2, αj, βj, +R/2) + (−1)Pg +P2+Pa,j φnab,j (r1,2, αj, βj, −R/2)
h
i

In order to ensure that the molecular wave function (A3) is an eigenfunction to the molecular parity operator Pg we
multiplied the second atomic orbital φnab,j in Eq. (A5) by an additional factor of (−1)Pg .

In Eq. (A3) we have to pay attention to the special case when two atomic orbitals belonging to the molecular
orbitals Φi, Eq. (A4), and Φj, Eq. (A5), are equal. For both wave functions with ungerade symmetry (1Σu and
3Σu) only one combination of H +
2 orbitals in eq.(A3) contributes to the total wave function. In that case the two
expressions in parenthesis are linear dependent, i.e., they are equal except for a multiplication factor of +1 or −1 for
the 1Σu and 3Σu states, respectively. For the 3Σg state we have no contribution to the total wave function since the
two expressions in parentheses both equal zero due to the Pauli principle.

APPENDIX B: EVALUATION OF THE MATRIX ELEMENTS

Let us introduce the abbreviation:

Φi (r) := Φ±m1,±1

i

(r, αi, βi, R)

(B1)

11

o

o

(A4)

(A5)

(B2)

(B3)

(B4)

(B5)

(B6)

with the H +

2 orbitals Φi given in Appendix A. The following matrix elements have to be evaluated:

dr1Φi (r1) Φk (r1)

Z

dr1Φi (r1)

p1 −

(B × r1)

Φk (r1)

Z

(cid:26)

1
2

2

(cid:27)

dr1Φi (r1)

Z

1
|r1 ± R/2|

Φk (r1)

dr1dr2Φi (r1) Φj (r2)

Φk (r1) Φl (r2)

Z

1
|r1 − r2|

All these integrals are evaluated in Cartesian coordinates. For the simple overlap matrix elements in eq.(B2) a closed-
form analytical expression can be given which has been implemented and optimized with respect to the numerical
performance. The matrix elements for the kinetic, paramagnetic, and diamagnetic operator in Eq.
(B3) can be
reduced to simple overlap matrix elements eq.(B2).

The evaluation of the electron-nucleus (Eq. B4) and electron-electron (Eq. B5) integrals is much more complicated.
First, one has to regularize the singularities. This is done by the following transformation at the expense of an
additional integration [70]:

1
f (r)

= π−1/2

+∞

Z

−∞
1

exp

du

−u2f 2 (r)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
−f 2 (r)

v2
1 − v2 (cid:21)

exp

(cid:20)

=

2
π1/2 Z
0

dv

(1 − v2)

3/2

In our case, f (r) equals |r1 ± R/2| for the electron-nucleus integral or |r1 − r2| for the electron-electron integral,
respectively.

In the case of the electron-nucleus integral, we ﬁrst perform the integration over the electronic coordinates. This
integration is done by a special kind of exact quadrature, the so-called Rys quadrature [71, 72]. The Rys quadrature
has been proved to be very useful for the fast calculation of two electron integrals, in particular for higher angular
momenta of the involved orbitals [73, 74]. We emphasize that this quadrature technique yields the exact result for
the integration. Only one integration over the u coordinate remains to be done. This last integration is performed
by a numerical algorithm. We herefore used a modiﬁed Clenshaw-Curtis quadrature based on a CERN library called
’CHEBQU’. In order to enhance the performance of our calculations, the algorithm of this routine was rewritten in
the following way: Normally the routine is intended to perform one integration at each step. The molecular orbitals
Φi in Eqs. (B2), (B3), (B4), (B5) are constructed by means of diﬀerent atomic orbitals φn in Cartesian coordinates
(A2). Within these integrals, only the powers of the polynomials in the electronic x and y coordinates change but the
power of the z coordinate remains the same. It is therefore useful to perform all integrals over Cartesian coordinates
belonging to a molecular orbital Φi in one step. We hereby avoid the repeated numerical integration of identical
integrals. For the special case of suﬃciently small powers of the z-coordinate we implemented explicitly the analytical
solutions of the integration over the z coordinate, i.e., we implemented 60 diﬀerent functions for the diﬀerent z-
integrations. For a matrix with a dimension of 3500 we are able to evaluate all integrals of the forms Eqs. (B2),(B3),
(B4) within six seconds of CPU time on an AIX 590 computer.

The electron-electron integrals are the most diﬃcult ones to solve. Again we ﬁrst remove the singularity of the
integrand by transformation (B6). Subsequently six integrations over the electronic coordinates are performed with
the Rys quadrature technique. In total this corresponds to a rather lengthy calculation. Finally the last integration
is again done with a modiﬁed Clenshaw-Curtis quadrature. Following these steps for the evaluation of the electron-
electron integrals leads to serious trouble. Integrals centered at diﬀerent nuclei turn out to possess very similar values.
In fact, many numerically evaluated integrals are identical within the accuracy of our numerical integration. Therefore,
if we simply add the results of diﬀerent integrals, the desirable accuracy is easily lost. To avoid this problem the
corresponding integrands have been combined is a suitable manner: Instead of adding the results of diﬀerent integrals
we added the integrands and then numerically performed the integration. We hereby got rid of the accuracy problems.
Due to the new kind of integrands the termination condition of the standard Clenshaw-Curtis quadrature proved to

12

be no longer valid. We therefore implemented a new criterion to ensure the convergence of our numerical integration.
Similar to the electron-nucleus integrals we used a variety of diﬀerent functions for the special cases of the second z
integration. The size of the program package for the evaluation of the electron-electron and electron-nucleus integrals
(programming language C) amounts to 12000 lines.

[1] J. P. Ostriker and F. D. A. Hartwick, Astrophys. J. 153, 797 (1968).
[2] J. Kemp, J. S. Swedlund, J. Landstreet, and J. Angel, Astrophys. J. 161, L77 (1970).
[3] J. Tr¨umper et al., Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 302, 538 (1977).
[4] S. T. Chiu, Phys. Rev. B 9, 3438 (1974).
[5] M. L. Glasser and J. I. Kaplan, Astrophys. J. 199, 208 (1975).
[6] E. G. Flowers et al., Astrophys. J. 215, 291 (1977).
[7] E. M¨uller, Astron. Astrophys. 130, 415 (1984).
[8] I. Fushiki, E. H. Gudmundsson, C. J. Pethik, and J. Yngvason, Ann. Phys. (NY) 216, 29 (1992).
[9] A. M. Abrahams and S. L. Shapiro, Astrophys. J. 382, 233 (1992).
[10] E. H. Lieb, J. P. Solovej, and J. Yngvason, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 749 (1992).
[11] R. O. M¨uller, A. R. P. Rau, and L. Spruch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 1136 (1971).
[12] P. B. Jones, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 216, 503 (1985).
[13] P. B. Jones, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1338 (1986).
[14] J. Virtamo, J. Phys. B 9, 751 (1976).
[15] P. Pr¨oschel et al., J. Phys. B 15, 1959 (1982).
[16] D. Neuhauser, S. E. Koonin, and K. Langanke, Phys. Rev. A 36, 4163 (1987).
[17] M. C. Miller and D. Neuhauser, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 253, 107 (1991).
[18] D. Lai, E. E. Salpeter, and S. L. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4832 (1992).
[19] H. Ruder, G. Wunner, H. Herold, and F. Geyer, Atoms in strong magnetic ﬁelds (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994).
[20] U. Wille, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3210 (1988).
[21] U. Kappes, P. Schmelcher, and T. Pacher, Phys. Rev. A 50, 3775 (1994).
[22] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 2878 (1994).
[23] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. A 51, 4542 (1995).
[24] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. A 53, 3869 (1996).
[25] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. A 54, 1313 (1996).
[26] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Lett. A 210, 409 (1996).
[27] A. V. Turbiner, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 38, 510 (1983), [JETP Lett. 38, 618 (1983)].
[28] S. Basile, F. Trombetta, and G. Ferrante, Nuovo Cimento 9, 457 (1987).
[29] T. S. Monteiro and K. T. Taylor, J. Phys. B 23, 427 (1990).
[30] G. Ortiz, M. D. Jones, and D. M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. A 52, R3405 (1995).
[31] D. Lai and E. E. Salpeter, Phys. Rev. A 53, 152 (1996).
[32] A. V. Korolev and M. A. Liberman, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1762 (1992).
[33] A. V. Korolev and M. A. Liberman, Physica A 193, 347 (1993).
[34] A. V. Korolev and M. A. Liberman, Phys. Rev. B 47, 14318 (1993).
[35] A. V. Korolev and M. A. Liberman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 270 (1994).
[36] A. V. Korolev and M. A. Liberman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4096 (1995).
[37] D. Lai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4095 (1995).
[38] P. Schmelcher and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A 41, 4936 (1990).
[39] P. Schmelcher and L. S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A 37, 672 (1988).
[40] B. Johnson, J. Hirschfelder, and K. Yang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 55, 109 (1983).
[41] J. E. Avron, I. W. Herbst, and B. Simon, Ann. Phys. 114, 431 (1978).
[42] P. Schmelcher, L. S. Cederbaum, and H.-D. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A 38, 6066 (1988).
[43] P. Schmelcher, L. S. Cederbaum, and U. Kappes, in ”Conceptual Trends in Quantum Chemistry”, edited by Eugene S.

Kryachko (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1994).

[44] P. Schmelcher, L. S. Cederbaum, and H.-D. Meyer, J. Phys. B 21, L445 (1988).
[45] A. D. McLean, A. Weiss, and M. Yoshimine, Rev. Mod. Phys. 32, 211 (1960).
[46] H. M. James and A. S. Coolidge, J. Chem. Phys. 1, 825 (1933).
[47] W. Kolos, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 1330 (1994).
[48] L. Wolniewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 1792 (1995).
[49] E. R. Davidson and L. L. Jones, J. Chem. Phys. 37, 1918 (1962).

13

[50] M. Demeur, P. H. Heenen, and M. Godefroid, Phys. Rev. A 49, 176 (1994).
[51] F. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 85, 631 (1952).
[52] T. Detmer, P. Schmelcher, and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Phys. B 28, 2903 (1995).
[53] D. T. Colbert and W. H. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 1982 (1992).
[54] W. Kolos and L. Wolniewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 509 (1966).
[55] W. Kolos and L. Wolniewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 48, 3672 (1968).
[56] G. Herzberg and L. L. Howe, Can. J. Phys. 37, 636 (1959).
[57] J. E. Avron, I. W. Herbst, and B. Simon, Commun. Math. Phys. 79, 529 (1981).
[58] J. Fr¨ohlich, E. H. Lieb, and M. Loss, Commun. Math. Phys. 104, 251 (1986).
[59] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys. B 22, 2089 (1989).
[60] D. M. Larsen, Phys. Rev. B 20, 5217 (1979).
[61] W. Kolos, Chem. Phys. Lett. 31, 43 (1975).
[62] W. Kolos and J. Rychlewski, Chem. Phys. Lett. 59, 183 (1978).
[63] D. M. Bishop and L. M. Cheung, Chem. Phys. Lett. 79, 130 (1981).
[64] J. W. Liu and S. Hagstrom, J. Phys. B 27, L729 (1994).
[65] W. Kolos and L. Wolniewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 43, 2429 (1965).
[66] W. Kolos and L. Wolniewicz, Chem. Phys. Lett. 24, 457 (1974).
[67] J. W. Liu and S. Hagstrom, Phys. Rev. A 48, 166 (1993).
[68] D. Frye, G. C. Lie, and E. Clementi, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 2366 (1989).
[69] F. Borondo, F. Martin, and M. .Yanez, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 4982 (1986).
[70] K. Singer, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 402, 412 (1960).
[71] G. Szeg¨o, Orthogonal Polynomials (American Mathematics Society, New York, 1959).
[72] H. F. King and M. Dupuis, J. Comp. Phys. 21, 122 (1976).
[73] M. Dupuis, J. Rys, and H. F. King, J. Chem. Phys. 65, 111 (1965).
[74] M. Dupuis, J. Rys, and H. F. King, QCPE 338, HONDO (1976).

14

FIG. 1. PECs for B = 0.0 , 1.0 , 10.0 and 100.0 a.u. for the lowest 1Σg state ; the energy is shown with respect to the

dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 2. PECs for B = 0.0 , 1.0 , 10.0 and 100.0 a.u. for the lowest 1Σu state; the energy is shown with respect to the

dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 3. PECs for B = 0.0 , 0.5 , 5.0 , 10.0 and 100.0 a.u. in the range 0.1 < R < 4 a.u. for the lowest 3Σg state showing the

ﬁrst minimum of this state ; the energy is shown with respect to the dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 4. PECs for B = 0.05 , 0.2 , 1.0 , 5.0 and 50.0 a.u. in the range 6 < R < 15 a.u. illustrating the second minimum of the

lowest 3Σg state; the energy is shown with respect to the dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 5. PECs for B = 0.0 , 1.0 , 10.0 and 100.0 a.u. for the lowest 3Σu state; the energy is shown with respect to the

dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 6. van der Waals minima of the lowest 3Σu state for B = 0.0 , 0.2 , 0.5 , 1.0 , 2.0 and 100.0 a.u.; the energy is shown

with respect to the dissociation limit i.e., E (R) = Et (R) − lim
R→∞

Et (R)

FIG. 7. Total energy of the 1Σg and 3Σu state for B = 0.0 a.u. (all quantities are given in atomic units)

FIG. 8. Total energy of the 1Σg and 3Σu state for B = 0.5 a.u. (all quantities are given in atomic units)

TABLE I. Data for the lowest 1Σg state: Total Et1 and dissociation Ed energies at the equilibrium internuclear distancec,
the equilibrium internuclear distances Req, the positions Rmax and total Et2 energies for the maximum and the total energies
Et. (all quantities are given in atomic units). Transition states appear for ﬁeld strengths larger
in the dissociation limit lim
R→∞

than 1.0 a.u..

Req

Ed

Et1

Rmax

Et2

B

0.0

0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
50.0
100.0

1.40

1.40
1.40
1.40
1.40
1.39
1.39
1.33
1.24
1.09
0.86
0.70
0.417
0.334

alarger basis set (see text)

0.173438
0.173892
0.173438
0.173440
0.173450
0.173658
0.174608
0.178001
0.194663
0.228031
0.291170
0.438015
0.615473
1.371618
1.913452

lim
R→∞

Et

−0.999998

−0.999998
−0.999984
−0.999946
−0.998750
−0.995043
−0.980756
−0.894419
−0.662305
−0.044405
2.239227
6.504496
43.964433
92.420426

11.70
7.02
5.15
4.23
2.86
2.48

−0.662307
−0.044395
2.239295
6.504650
43.964915
92.421063

−1.173436
−1.173892 a
−1.173436
−1.173424
−1.173396
−1.172407
−1.169652
−1.158766
−1.089082
−0.890336
−0.335574
1.801212
5.889023
42.592815
90.506974

15

TABLE II. Comparison of the total energies Et as well as equilibrium internuclear distances Req for the lowest 1Σg state
with existing results in the literature in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld (all quantities are given in atomic units except for the
last column which is in per cent)

Ref. [27]

Ref. [28] a

Present work

Et

Req

Et

Req

Et

∆E [%] b

B

0.4254414
0.5
1.0
2.127207
4.254414

21.27207
42.54414

Req

1.337

1.203
0.859
0.528
0.463

−1.0822

−0.1811
1.3326
16.0595
35.76

1.29
1.17

1.06
0.83

1.349
1.33
1.24
1.070
0.898
0.550
0.440

−1.110362
−1.089082
−0.890336
−0.255591
1.233808
15.849134
35.558125

2.60
2.74
7.27
41.13
7.41
1.33
0.57

aEnergy and equilibrium distance may vary to some extent since only PECs and no numerical data are given in Ref. [28].
b∆ is the improvement in the total energy of our results on the existing data of Refs. [27, 28], respectively.

TABLE III. Data for the lowest 1Σu state: Total Et and dissociation Ed energies at the equilibrium internuclear distance,
Et (all quantities are given in atomic

the equilibrium internuclear distances Req and total energies in the dissociation limit lim
R→∞

Req

Ed

units)

B

0.0
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
50.0
100.0

2.42
2.42
2.42
2.42
2.43
2.46
2.53
2.50
2.30
2.01
1.60
1.30
0.666
0.490

Et

−0.756111
−0.756109
−0.756097
−0.756069
−0.753408
−0.746347
−0.722812
−0.602596
−0.316748
0.389051
2.857162
7.327008
45.524983
94.391271

lim
R→∞

Et

−0.624999
−0.624997
−0.624957
−0.624823
−0.620839
−0.609977
−0.575562
−0.421969
−0.091155
0.680087
3.271996
7.869602
46.362001
95.438032

0.131112
0.131112
0.131140
0.131246
0.132568
0.136370
0.147250
0.180626
0.225593
0.291037
0.414834
0.542594
0.837018
1.046760

16

TABLE IV. Total Et1, Et2 and dissociation energies Ed1, Ed2 at the equilibrium internuclear distance, equilibrium internu-
Et for the lowest 3Σg state (all quantities are given

clear distances Req1, Req2 and total energies in the dissociation limit lim
R→∞

in atomic units)

B

Req1

Ed1

Et1

Req2

Ed2

Et2

1.87
1.87
1.87
1.87
1.86
1.84
1.82
1.81
1.76
1.55
1.20
0.96
0.560
0.446

0.112124
0.112104
0.112071
0.111865
0.108885
0.101538
0.085048
0.062317
0.065670
0.090984
0.168071
0.274453
0.781791
1.162187

−0.737124
−0.738101
−0.742027
−0.746688
−0.779724
−0.811515
−0.860609
−0.984286
−1.156825
−1.410897
−1.896074
−2.404851
−4.245251
−5.415591

10.82
10.55
9.72
8.17
7.18
6.91
7.35
7.68
8.19

6.29×10−4
6.90×10−4
1.004×10−3
1.603×10−3
1.910×10−3
1.660×10−3
9.66×10−4
6.13×10−4
2.11×10−4

−0.671469
−0.710667
−0.776566
−0.923572
−1.093065
−1.321573
−1.728970
−2.131011
−3.463671

TABLE V. Data for the lowest 3Σu state: Total Et and dissociation Ed energies at the equilibrium internuclear distance, the
Et (all quantities are given in atomic

equilibrium internuclear distances Req and total energies in the dissociation limit

Req

7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.8
7.7
7.4
7.5

Ed

−5
1.885 × 10
1.897 × 10−5
−5
1.913 × 10
−5
1.919 × 10
1.917 × 10−5
−5
1.935 × 10
−5
2.060 × 10
1.532 × 10−5
−5
0.373 × 10

lim
R→∞

Et

−1.0000173
−1.0010170
−1.0050030
−1.0099656
−1.0487690
−1.0950628
−1.1807764
−1.3944338
−1.6623090

lim
R→∞

Et

−0.624999
−0.625997
−0.629957
−0.634823
−0.670839
−0.709977
−0.775562
−0.921969
−1.091155
−1.319913
−1.728004
−2.130398
−3.463461
−4.253404

lim
R→∞

Et

0.9999985
−1.0009981
−1.0049839
−1.0099464
−1.0487499
−1.0950434
−1.1807558
−1.3944185
−1.6623053
−2.0444046
−2.7607732
−3.4955044
−6.0355668
−7.5795742

0.0
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
50.0
100.0

units).

B

0.0
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
50.0
100.0

17

]
u
a
[
E

-1

0

-2

Fig. 1

B =   0.0

B =   1.0

B =  10.0

B = 100.0

1

2
R[au]

3

4

0.0

]
u
a
[
E

-0.5

-1.0

Fig. 2

B =   0.0

B =   1.0

B =  10.0

B = 100.0

1

2

3

4

5

R[au]

0.0

]
u
a
[
E

-0.5

-1.0

Fig. 3

B =   0.0

B =   0.5

B =   5.0

B =  10.0

B = 100.0

1

2
R[au]

3

4

Fig. 4

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

4
-

]
u
a

0
1
[
E

B =  0.05

B =   0.2

B =   1.0

B =   5.0

B =  50.0

-2.0

6

8

10

R[au]

12

14

]
u
a
[
E

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Fig. 5

B =   0.0

B =   1.0

B =  10.0

B = 100.0

1

2
R[au]

3

4

Fig. 6

B =   0.0
B =   0.2
B =   0.5
B =   1.0
B =   2.0
B = 100.0

5
-

]
u
a

0
1
[
E

2

1

0

-1

-2

6

7

8

10

11

12

9
R[au]

Fig. 7

1Σ

3Σ

g

u

]
u
a
[
E

-0.6

-0.8

-1.0

-1.2

1

2

4

5

6

3
R[au]

Fig. 8

1Σ

3Σ

g

u

]
u
a
[
E

-0.6

-0.8

-1.0

-1.2

-1.4

-1.6

1

2

4

5

6

3
R[au]

