8
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

chem-ph/9802013

POSSIBLE MECHANISM OF FORMATION AND STABILITY
OF ANOMALOUS STATES OF WATER

CHEUK-YIN WONG
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831

SHUI-YIN LO
American Technology Group, Monrovia, CA 91016
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125

We examine the physical processes which are involved in the formation and stability
of the anomalous states of water reported recently. The initial step of adding a
small amount of ionic compound X+Y− to pure water leads to the formation of
water clusters X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n with n >> 1. The structure of the
cluster around the ion depends strongly on the equation of state. We explore
the consequences of possible polymorphic states of H2O in the liquid phase at
room temperature.
If there are low-lying polymorphic states, the local dipole
moment and the local density will change discontinuously as a function of the radial
distance from the ion, and regions of diﬀerent polymorphic states will be found at
diﬀerent separations from the ion. Fragmentation of the cluster by vigorous shaking
may break up the cluster into small domains to allow subsequent coalescence of
these domains or the growth of the domains as seeds to form greater domains of
polymorphic states. Further experimental and theoretical analyses are needed to
study these pictures.

1 Introduction

Recently, experimental observations of anomalous states of water with IE
structures have been reported 1−3. The existence of anomalous states of wa-
ter is an interesting and new phenomenon with important experimental and
theoretical implications. It is therefore essential that the observations be con-
ﬁrmed by an independent experimental group in order to ascertain or refute
the existence of the anomalous states. While we await such a conﬁrmation, it
is useful to make plausible hypotheses on the nature of the anomalous states
so as to guide further experimental and theoretical studies on this interesting
subject.

The addition of a small amount of ionic compound X+Y− to pure water
is a necessary step in the production of the IE water. We shall ﬁrst consider
the formation of clusters brought about by the addition of a small amount of
X+Y− in water. In such a dilute aqueous solution, the X+ and Y− ions are
well separated and become isolated. Stable large water clusters of the type
X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n will form around the ions in the dilute aqueous so-
lution since similar isolated clusters of X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n are found to

1

be stable aggregates in many experiments 4−13. Speciﬁcally, individual assem-
bly of X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n , with X+=H+, Li+, Na+, K+, Ca+2, and
Y−=Cl−, Br−, I−, and OH− have been observed 4−13. Similar cooperative ef-
fects on complexes of alcohol with proton acceptors have also been observed 14.
For the H+(H2O)n cluster, a cluster size up to n = 75 has been identiﬁed 7,
indicating the stability of large clusters with n >> 1. The limiting size of n
has not yet been determined. Computer simulation shows that the six water
molecules in the Na+(H2O)6 cluster prefer the 4+2 structure, with the Na+
ion in the center of the shells 15. Molecular dynamics calculations of the hy-
dration shell around an ion in a supercritical aqueous solution also exhibits the
clustering of H2O molecules around an ion 16. One expects, therefore, that in
a water solution with a small amount of ionic substance, large H2O clusters
will form around the ions. These large H2O clusters carry charges and interact
among themselves. They may arrange themselves in an orderly manner in the
aqueous solution to give rise to clusters of even larger sizes (superclusters) con-
sisting of many X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n clusters. While each X+(H2O)n or
Y−(H2O)n may be only about 10 ˚A in radius, it is interesting to ﬁnd out
whether superclusters may be formed and may be an important component of
the IE water, where clusters of the size of 100-1000 ˚A have been observed 1,3.
Thus, the study of these clusters in IE water will provide information on the
stability and the interactions of the X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n in aqueous
solutions.

Other interesting physics questions can also be studied with IE water. The
consideration of cluster formation leads to the examination of the structure of
the water cluster around an individual ion. One ﬁnds that the stability of the
cluster arises from the strong Coulombic polarizing power of the ion, which
attracts water molecules with their dipole moments aligned along the electric
lines of force of the ion. The density and the average local dipole moment of
the medium need not be spatially uniform near the ion. Their proﬁles depend
on the equation of state of the water medium as a function of both the density
and the average local dipole moment per molecule.

The dependence of the cluster structure on the equation of state leads to
another related and interesting subject. It is well known that under diﬀerent
conditions H2O molecules form diﬀerent stable structures 17,18,19 represented
by diﬀerent energy minima around which the many-body state of H2O can be
locally stable. The study of the structure of the cluster around an ion in IE
water will provide vital information on the equation of state of water in the
dipole moment and the density degrees of freedom. We shall see that if there
are low-lying polymorphic states in water, the dipole moment or density will
change abruptly as a function of the radial distance from the ion.

2

Rigorous motion of the liquid will lead to the fragmentation of the cluster
into small domains. The dipole moment of each fragmented domain has been
aligned by the ions.
If the equation of state of water at room temperature
has polymorphic states as exhibited by the presence of multiple minima in
densities and dipole moments, then these small domains may coalesce to form
larger domains of metastable phases of water 1. The domains may also be the
seeds for the growth of larger domains of the same polymorphic states 1. The
presence of these metastable polymorphic states of water may be important
components of the IE water. They may then appear as an immiscible mixture
without the ions in the aqueous solution. The existence of polymorphic states
can be examined by studying whether the medium responsible for the IE water
contains the X + and the Y− ions in the anomalous state. This signature for
the existence of polymorphic states can be tested with future experimental
investigations.

In the following, we shall review the tetrahedron structure of a H2O
molecule, the structure of a water cluster around an ion, the existence of
polymorphic states of H2O in diﬀerent phases, and the possibility of multi-
ple energy minima of the states of water with diﬀerent dipole moments and
densities at room temperature.

2 Molecular Structure of H2O

ee

O

ee

As is well known, the H2O molecule has
the structure of a tetrahedron. The six
electrons of the oxygen atom in the outer-
most shell and the two electrons from the
hydrogen atoms form an octet structure
of four ee pairs. The four electron pairs
coming out from the oxygen nucleus as the
four supports of the tetrahedron, with the
two hydrogen nuclei at two vertices of the
tetrahedron, are shown in Figure 1. The
opening angle between the two O-H bonds is 104.45o as compared to 109.5o
for a regular tetrahedron. Thus, the four vertices of the tetrahedron can be
characterized as two positively charged H vertices and two negatively charged
ee pair vertices.

Fig.  1

H
H

H
H

Because of the complex geometry of the tetrahedron, many possible ar-
rangements of the tetrahedron network lead to stable conﬁgurations – the
polymorphic states. They diﬀer in their energies. However, under a change of
thermodynamical conditions, the lowest-lying polymorphic state may change

3

to lie higher than another polymorphic state and the role of the ground state
changes. The change of thermodynamical conditions will lead to a phase transi-
tion between diﬀerent polymorphic states. Phase transition in which the order
parameter changes abruptly is a ﬁrst-order phase transition. Phase transition
in which the order parameter changes continuously is a second-order phase
transition.

In the normal liquid state of water, the tetrahedrons of neighboring H2O
molecules are arranged in such a way that the H vertex of one tetrahedron is in
the close vicinity of the ee vertex of another tetrahedron, forming a hydrogen
bond. A hydrogen bond is weak. It is about 30 times weaker than a normal
covalent bond, with a strength of 10-40 kJ/mol 20.

For a single H2O molecule, there is an electric dipole moment with a
magnitude of 1.87×10−18 esu which is 0.39|e|˚A. The electric dipole moment is
a vector which points from the oxygen nucleus to the mid-point between the
two hydrogen nuclei. For a collection of H2O molecules, one can also speak
of the speciﬁc dipole moment which can be deﬁned as the local per-molecule
average of the vector sum of the dipole moments of a local collection of H2O
molecules. Because of the vector addition of the dipole moments of individual
molecules, the speciﬁc dipole moment of a many-body state of H2O can be
quite diﬀerent if the orientations of the molecules are not random. Diﬀerent
arrangements of the orientation of the molecules will lead to diﬀerent speciﬁc
dipole moments. An orderly arrangement of the molecules such that the dipole
moments are aligned nearly in the same direction will lead to an increase of
the magnitude of the speciﬁc dipole moment.

For brevity of notation, we shall use the term “dipole moment” as an
abbreviation to refer to the vector or the magnitude of the electric dipole
moment, the vector or the magnitude of the electric dipole moment in units of
the electron charge, or the vector or the magnitude of the local average of the
dipole moment per molecule (the speciﬁc dipole moment), as the case may be.
The meaning of the diﬀerent cases can be simply inferred from the context.
We shall use the unabbreviated term if its usage will help the understanding
of the discussed concepts.

3 The Structure of a H2O Cluster Around an Ion

Experimental observations 4−13 of water clusters of the type X+(H2O)n and
Y−(H2O)n show that the occurrence of water molecules clustering around an
ion is a common phenomenon. This arises from the strong Coulombic po-
larizing power of the ion. For an isolated assembly of large X+(H2O)n or
Y−(H2O)n, is the charge located at the center of an isolated cluster or at its

4

surface? The interaction of the dipole moments of H2O molecules with the ion
depends on the orientation of the dipole moments. The energy of the system
is lowest when the dipole moments are aligned along the lines of force of the
ionic charge. Then the interaction between a H2O molecule of dipole moment
d with an ion of charge q|e| varies with distance to the ion r as −|q|e2d/r2,
and one can show that the energy is a minimum when the ion is located at the
center. Thus, for a large H2O cluster in equilibrium, the ion is located at the
center.

The largest value of n in the H+(H2O)n cluster which has been observed 7
so far is 75. What is the limiting value of n for which the Xq(H2O)n cluster
is still stable? Those H2O molecules with a binding energy greater than the
thermal energy will not be evaporated by thermal motion. Thus, the condition
for the H2O at the outermost H2O to be bound is

|q|e2d
r2 ≥ kT or

r ≤ r

|q|e2d
kT

.

(1)

For room temperature with kT = 0.025 eV and a water molecule with d =
0.39|e|˚A, the maximum radius of the cluster is r ∼ 15 ˚A , and the maximum
number of water molecules n is about 500.
If the dipole moments are not
completely aligned along the direction of the lines of force of the ion, these
values will be reduced. One expects therefore that the radius of the cluster is
of the order of 10-15 ˚A and a maximum cluster number of the order of 150-
500. The measured heat of evaporation 8 of a H2O molecule from a H+(H2O)n
cluster with n > 10 is close to the bulk heat of evaporation of a H2O molecule
in water in the liquid phase (∆Hv = 44.016 kJ/mol), indicating that for large
n, the water molecules in the cluster are in the liquid phase.

In the water medium, the addition of a small amount of ionic compound
X+Y− will lead to ions dispersed over the water medium. When the medium
is diluted enough with a X+Y− molar concentrations of 10−6 or lower, the ions
can be considered to be well separated and isolated, and physical considerations
similar to those for isolated ions are applicable. The strong polarizing power
of the ions leads to a similar formation of X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n.

We consider the isothermal case and place an insolated ion of charge q|e| at
the origin r0 = 0. To study the response of the water medium to the presence
of the charged ion, we can specify the properties of the water medium by the
“equation of state” function W (n, d) which is the energy per H2O molecule.
The function W (n, d) depends on the temperature, the (number) density n, and
the speciﬁc dipole moment d (the local average dipole moment per molecule).
This function W arises, at least in principle, from all interactions between
H2O molecules. Because of the tetrahedron structure of the H2O moelcule,

5

there is the additional orientation dependence of the equation of state on the
magnitude of the average dipole moment per molecule d. The dipole moment
d(r) at r, in general, has both a magnitude d(r) and a direction.

The total energy of the medium is

E =

W (n(r), d(r))n(r)dr −

n(r)

Z

qe2d(r) cos θ(r)
r2

dr.

Z

(2)

Note that in the above equation, the interactions between H2O molecules have
been included in the equation of state W (n, d).

The energy of the system (Eq.(2)) is a minimum when the angle θ is aligned
along the electric lines of force of the ion, i.e. θ = 0 for q > 0 and θ = π
for q < 0. We shall assume that the dipole moments of the H2O molecules
have settled down such that this alignment has been achieved. Equilibrium is
reached when the energy is stationary upon arbitrary variation of n and d,

δE =

δ
δn (cid:26)

Z (cid:20)

W (n, d)n−n

δn+

W (n, d)n−n

|q|e2d(r)
r2

(cid:27)

δ
δd (cid:26)

|q|e2d(r)
r2

δd

dr = 0.

(cid:27)

(cid:21)

Thus, equilibrium of the medium occurs when

δ
δn (cid:26)

W (n, d) n − n

|q|e2d(r)
r2

=

(cid:27)

(cid:26)

∂[W (n, d) n]
∂n

−

|q|e2d(r)
r2

(cid:27)

= 0

(3)

and

δ
δd (cid:26)

W (n, d) −

|q|e2d(r)
r2

(cid:27)

= 0.

Condition (3) implies that equilibrium is reached at those densities for which

Wext(n, d) n = {W (n, d) n − n |q|e2d(r)/r2}

is a minimum with respect to a variation in n, and (4) implies that equilibrium
occurs for those dipole moment values where the energy per molecule

Wext(n, d) = {W (n, d) − |q|e2d(r)/r2}

is a minimum with respect to a variation in d. The second term in the above
two equations represents the polarization force which moves the location of the
energy minima to diﬀerent densities or dipole moments.

6

(4)

(5)

(6)

4 Density and Dipole Moment Proﬁle of H2O Cluster for a Single

State

It is instructive to give the structure of the H2O cluster when the state of the
water medium consists of a single state whose equation of state is described by

W (n, d) =

Kn

1
2

(n − n0)2
n

1
2

+

Kd(d − d0)2,

where n0 is the equilibrium density, d0 is the equilibrium speciﬁc dipole mo-
ment, Kn is stiﬀness parameter with respect to the density variation and is
related to the compressibility of water, and Kd is the stiﬀness parameter with
respect to the dipole moment variation. We ssume again the alignment of the
dipole moments around the ion, and we look for solutions of the density and
the dipole moment around the equilibrium values. Then, Eq. (3) gives the
density proﬁle of the cluster as

n(r) = n0 +

|q|e2d(r)/Kn
r

.

p

Thus, the deviation of the cluster density from the equilibrium density is in-
versely proportional to the radial distance from the ion, depending on the
compressibility Kn of water. Equation (4) leads to the dipole moment proﬁle
of the cluster as

(7)

(8)

(9)

d(r) = d0 +

|q|e2
Kdr2 .

The deviation of the cluster dipole moment from equilibrium is inversely pro-
portional to the square of the radial distance from the ion, depending on the
stiﬀness of the variation of W with respect to d.

From this analysis, one notes that the density and the magnitude of the
dipole moment of the H2O cluster are greater than the corresponding quanti-
ties in the surrounding medium. It will be of interest to see whether such a
diﬀerence may lead to observable sinking of the clusters due to gravity.

It is of interest to note the diﬀerences of two stiﬀness parameters Kn and
Kd. The stiﬀness parameter Kn involves the compression of the medium. To
compress water in the liquid phase, considerable energy is needed to overcome
the repulsive overlap of the electronic densities of the molecules. One expects
that the water medium is quite stiﬀ against a change in density. On the other
hand, the change of the speciﬁc dipole moment arises from the change of the
local average of the vector sum of the dipole moments of the H2O molecules,
which can be brought about by reorienting the H2O molecules without moving

7

their centers-of-mass. As the energy involved in making a rotational motion
is considerably smaller than the energy required to bring two molecules closer
than the equilibrium separation, one expects that the water medium is much
softer against dipole moment distortions as compared to density distortions.
That is, it is easier to change the speciﬁc dipole moment than the density.

5 Polymorphic States of H2O in the Liquid Phase

The dipole moments for normal water are randomly oriented, and the (aver-
age) speciﬁc dipole moment is essentially zero. Other arrangements of the H2O
moelcues diﬀerent from that of the norm state of water are possible, and they
may lead to polymorphic states of H2O with diﬀerent conﬁgurations, densities
and dipole moments. Polymorphic states of H2O in the solid phase manifest
themselves in diﬀerent structures of ice crystals where the tetrahedron struc-
ture of the molecule is maintained by joining the oxygen nuclei in tetrahedron
network patterns, with a hydrogen nucleus between each link of two oxygen
nuclei. These polymorphic states are well known 17. We are naturally more
interested in polymorphic states of H2O in the liquid phase.

Polymorphic states of H2O in the liquid phase are found experimentally
in supercooled water by Mishima et al. 18,19 and shown theoretically by Poole
et al. 21,22, and by Roberts et al. 23. The polymorphic states of supercooled wa-
ter exist as the low-density amorp (LDA) and the high-density amorp (HDA).
The transition between the two polymorphic states has been observed to occur
reversibly and abruptly at about 135o K and about 0.2 GPa with a volume
change of 0.02 cm3/g and some hysteresis 19. The LDA has a volume-pressure
relation very similar to Ice Ih, while the HDA is similar to Ice V and VI at su-
percooled temperatures (see Fig. 1 of Ref. [ 19 ]). One can interpret LDA and
HDA as conﬁgurations of excited energy minima in the liquid phase in which
the normal ground states at that temperature are diﬀerent conﬁgurations of
ice in the solid phase. For a given temperature in which LDA (or HDA) is the
lower energy ground state, the transition from the other excited HDA state
(or LDA) will involve the release of heat, and such a release of heat has been
observed experimentally 19.

It is worth noting that metastable states in diﬀerent energy minima have
been found in many systems in physics. Hill and Wheeler discussed unstable
shape isomers which diﬀer from the stable ground state by their quadrupole
moment 26.
In this case, the quadrupole moment plays the role analogous
to the order parameter in thermodynamic systems.
Isomers with diﬀerent
quadrupole moments have been found experimentally in many nuclei and can
be understood as the manifestation of multiple minima in the energy surface

8

as a function of the quadrupole moment 27. They are locally stable because
they reside in the energy minima associated with their own local variations.

Recent theoretical work on supercooled water indicates that there are poly-
morphic states of water in which the local density can be an order parame-
ter 21,22,23. The molecular dynamics computer simulations of Sciortino et al. 22
show a ﬁrst-order liquid-liquid phase transition for water molecules interacting
among themselves with the ST2 model interaction. These two phases can co-
exist at diﬀerent spatial locations at a range of temperatures. They diﬀer by
about 15% in density and have diﬀerent local structures, local dynamics, and
mobility, with the molecules in the high-density phase much more mobile than
the molecules in the low-density phase. In separate investigations on a super-
cooled, dense, equilibrium Lennard-Jones liquid using molecular dynamics, it
is found that the more mobile particles form large-scale quasi-stable string-like
clusters and their dynamics is correlated in a string-like motion 24,25. The frac-
tion of these large clusters is about 5% of the liquid in the model considered.
Recently Roberts et al. found from theory and simulations of network-
forming liquid that the polymorphic states occur quite generally in systems
in which the molecules interact via strong directional intermolecular forces, as
in the case of the tetrahedron H2O molecules or Si atoms 23. The qualitative
characteristics of the phase transition depend on the details of bonding and on
the choice of the model parameters. For example, a calculated temperature-
density phase diagram of a model network can exhibit a liquid-liquid phase
transition in a pure substance, in addition to a vapor-liquid phase transition.

H

ee

ee

H ee

It will be of interest to study
many tetrahedron networks simi-
lar to those of the ice crystals to
see whether they lead to polymor-
phic states in the liquid phase.
Furthermore, in view of the elon-
gated shape of the clusters as ob-
served in IE water samples 1,3, it
will be useful to study a network
in which the simplest unit con-
sists of two H2O molecules with
the H vertices of these molecules
in the vicinity of the ee vertices of the other molecule. The dipole moment of
the whole complex is aligned along the symmetry axis of the two molecules,
as in Figure 2. The repeated and parallel arrangement of these basic units
along the same direction may lead to a state with a preferred direction as the
symmetry direction, and may exhibit an elongated string-like behavior.

Fig.  2

ee

H
H

H
H

9

6 Structure of H2O Cluster for Polymorphic States

We note in the last section the experimental observations of the existence of
the polymorphic states in supercooled water 18,19. Theoretical supports for the
occurrence of these polymorphic states in water comes from the directional
nature of the interaction of tetrahedron molecules 21,22,23. There is also the
occurrence of large-scale quasi-stable, string-like clusters in a simple Lennard-
Jones liquid 24,25. It is therefore useful to explore the possibility of polymor-
phism for water at room temperature. The strong polarizing power of the ion
makes it a useful tool for such an investigation.

Accordingly, we consider the
possibility of polymorphic states
of water at room temperature by
representing the equation of state
of water with an energy surface
containing low-lying secondary
minima where the normal ground
state has order parameter d0, and
metastable states with order pa-
rameter d1 and d2, .... The sec-
ondary minima are the anomalous
states diﬀering from the normal
ground state water conﬁguration
by their order parameters which
can be either the density or the
speciﬁc dipole moment. Each en-
ergy minimum represents a con-
ﬁguration with distinct character-
istics of the medium. The case
for the dipole degree of freedom is
shown schematically as the solid
curve in Figure 3.

W(n,d)
Energy/molecule

d1

d0

r>>r1

r=r1

d2

r=r2

Dipole 
Moment

r<r2

Fig.3.
Energy per molecule as a
function of the dipole moment for
diﬀerent distances r from the ion.

If the rate of change of the order parameter is rapid, the water molecule
system will jump from the lowest energy surface to the higher energy surface,
retaining the characteristics of its initial conﬁguration, as in the case of large
Landau-Zener jump probabilities 28. On the other hand, if the rate of change
of the order parameter is small, then the intrinsic energy surface of the water
molecule will follow the lowest surface represented by the solid curve in Figure
3, and the conﬁguration of the system may change slowly from one minimum
In the polarization stage of the pro-
to the next as the dynamics evolves.

10

cess, we shall consider only this case of slow change of the order parameters.
The anomalous states represented by the secondary minima at d1 and d2 are
separated from the minimum for the normal state at d0 by a barrier.

Assuming again the alignment of the molecular dipole moments along the
lines of force of the ion, one can use the equilibrium conditions (3) and (4) to
study the proﬁle of dipole moment and density around the cluster. Consider
ﬁrst the dipole moment as the order parameter with an equation of state
W (n, d) in the form of the solid curve shown in Figure 3. The equilibrium
dipole moment is determined by the condition that the function Wext(n, d) is
a minimum of d. As Wext(n, d) = W (n, d) − |q|e2d/r2, the minimum will be
located at diﬀerent values of d for various values of r. In Fig. 3 the solid curve
gives Wext(n, d) at a distance far from the ion in the bulk part of the water
medium. The metastable minima d1 and d2 are above the normal ground
state d0. At a distance r1 from the ion, the polarization term (−|q|e2d/r2)
proportional to d distorts the function Wext such that the minimum around
d1 is on the same level as that around d0, and a state of coexistence of the
two states is possible. At a shorter distance, the dipole moment will make a
transition to d2. Similarly, at distances closer than r2, the minima at d2 is
pulled down lower than the minimum around d1, and the system will make a
transition to the dipole moment around d2. Thus, the dipole moment is ∼d0
for r > r1, is ∼d1 for r1 > r > r2 and is ∼d2 for r2 > r, and so on. Thus,
in the presence of polymorphic states of water, the local dipole moment of
the cluster abruptly changes as a function of the radial separation from the
ion, corresponding to the diﬀerent minima brought down by the polarizing
interaction.

One can use a similar argument to discuss the density proﬁle of the medium
around an ion. The equilibrium density is determined by the condition that
the function nWext(n, d) = nW (n, d) − n|q|e2d/r2 is a minimum with respect
to a variation in n.
If the function Wext(n, d) possesses secondary minima,
then nWext(n, d) will also possess multiple minima. Using arguments similar
to those for the dipole moments, one ﬁnds that in the presence of polymorphic
states in density, the local density around a cluster changes abruptly as a
function of the radial distance from the ion. After equilibrium is reached, water
molecules at diﬀerent distances will have diﬀerent densities, being greater at
shorter distances from the ion.

The abrupt changes of density or dipole moment arise only when the
heights of the secondary minima in these two degrees of freedom are not too
large so that they can be pulled down by the polarizing power of the ion. If
the heights of these secondary minima are very large, then, for all intents and
purposes, the medium is essentially a single state where the secondary minima

11

play no role.

7 Cluster Interaction and Fragmentation

After equilibrium is reached and the clusters formed around the ions, each
cluster remains charged, and there is a Coulombic interaction between diﬀerent
clusters. Each cluster has a radius of about 10 ˚A , and the Coulomb interaction
energy between two touching clusters of opposite charge is about 0.7 eV which
is still considerable. It may provide suﬃcient attractive interaction for the clus-
ters to arrange themselves in an orderly manner, forming clusters of greater
sizes (superclusters) with many X+(H2O)n and Y−(H2O)n entities. Another
interesting possibility is the formation of a bridge linking the two clusters of
opposite charge between which the dipole moments of the H2O molecules line
It is of interest to examine in IE water whether
up in the same direction.
superclusters or bridges of H2O molecules are components of the anomalous
states in IE water. Thus, the study of these clusters in IE water will pro-
vide information on the stability and the interactions of the X+(H2O)n and
Y−(H2O)n in aqueous solutions.

If the liquid is shaken vigorously after equilibrium is reached, then the
cluster will fragment into many small domains. In each domain, the dipole
moment has been properly aligned by the ion. If the water medium has only
a single phase, these domains will relax and will return to the state of the
normal water, with the orientation of the dipole moments of the H2O molecules
becoming randomized again. No new anomalous state will be formed as a stable
entity.

The situation will be diﬀerent if there are polymorphic states of water and
the domains which break away from the cluster contain metastable polymor-
phic states, which have been produced under the strong ﬁeld of the polarizing
ion. Being a polymorphic state stable under local variations of its order pa-
rameters, these domains will not relax to the normal state of water. They
will remain metastable and may coalesce with other similar domains. Frag-
mented domains of H2O can also act as seeds for the growth of greater regions
of polymorphic states. In this case, anomalous polymorphic states will con-
tain metastable domains of H2O molecules for which the dipole moment or the
density may be diﬀerent from that in the normal state.

8 Conclusions and Discussions

The anomalous states of water are peculiar and unexpected. Their existence
may be connected to the occurrence of metastable polymorphic states of water
It is therefore important to conﬁrm or to refute the
at room temperature.

12

observations of these anomalous states by independent experimental investi-
gations.

Looking at the process of the formation of the anomalous states, one ﬁnds
that isolated ions have great polarizing power which attracts water molecules
around it. Stable clusters in free assembly have been copiously found experi-
mentally and their existence in dilute aqueous solutions is expected. The large
polarizing power of the ionic charge leads to great change of the dipole mo-
ment and density of the medium around the ion. These changes depend on
the stiﬀness of the equation of state against the variation of density and dipole
moments. If there are low-lying polymorphic states of the liquid, the polarizing
action of the ion will lead to local densities and local dipole moments which
change abruptly as a function of the separation from the ion, being greater at
shorter distances from the ion.

Fragmentation of the clusters upon vigorous shaking will produce domains
of the liquid where the dipole moments are aligned. The coalescence of these
domains and the seeding of these regions may allow the formation of polymor-
phic states of the liquid if these polymorphic states are possible metastable
conﬁgurations of the liquid. Pending further experimental conﬁrmations, the
anomalous states of the IE water may be such a substance.

The presence of the polymorphic state can be examined by looking for
the decay of the metastable IE state. It can also be studied by exciting the
IE state above the barrier which will lead to a change of the IE state to the
normal state, and will deplete the IE water population. One can also measure
the dielectric properties of the IE water to show an enhanced dipole moment
of the IE water. The diﬀerence in the dielectric constants as discussed by Lo
et al. 2 needs to be analyzed theoretically to understand its implications on the
nature of the dipole moments in the anomalous states.

The foregoing discussions in the last few sections can be carried over to
discuss many other liquids in which the molecules in the liquid have perma-
nent dipole moments. Because the polarizing interaction for an aligned dipole
depends on −|q|e2d/r2, the interaction is greater, the greater the static elec-
tric dipole moment of a single molecule. Therefore, the addition of a small
amount of ionic compound on a liquid whose molecules have a large static
dipole moment will lead to a very strong clustering of the molecules around
the ion. They can be well utilized to study polymorphism in these liquids to
see whether domains of anomalous states with properties diﬀerent from those
in the ground states may exist in these liquids.

13

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Profs. A. A. Chialvo and S. Christian for help-
ful discussions. The research of CYW is sponsored by the USDOE under Con-
tract DE-AC05-96OR22464 managed by Lockheed Martin Energy Research
Corp.

References

1. S.-Y. Lo, Modern Phys. Lett. 19, 909 (1996).
2. S.-Y. Lo et al., Modern Phys. Lett. 19, 921 (1996).
3. S.-Y. Lo, Proceedings of this Symposium, 1997.
4. A. Good, D. A. Durden, and P. Kebarle, J. Chem. Phys. 52, 212 (1970).
5. R. Yamdagni and P. Kebarle, Can. J. Chem. 52, 2249 (1974).
6. G. Caldwell and P. Kebarle, Can. J. Chem. 63, 1399 (1970).
7. T. Schindler, C. Berg, G. Niedner-Schatteburg, and V. E. Bondybey,

8. T. Schindler, C. Berg, G. Niedner-Schatteburg, and V. E. Bondybey,

Chem. Phys. 201, 491 (1995).

Chem. Phys. Lett. 229, 57 (1995).

9. A. A. Viggiano et al., J. Phys. Chem. 94, 8194 (1990).
10. X. Yang, X. Zhang, and A. W. Castleman, Jr. J. Phys. Chem. 95, 8520

(1991).

11. K. Hiraoka, S. Mizuse, and S. Yamabe, J. Phys. Chem. 92, 3943 (1988).
12. J. W. Larson and T. B. McMahon, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106, 517 (1984).
13. J. Coe, Chem. Phys. Lett. 229, 161 (1994).
14. E. E. Tucker and S. D. Christian, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106, 517 (1984).
15. L. X. Deng, J. E. Rice, J. Caldwell, and P. Kollman, J. Am. Chem. Soc.

113, 2481 (1991).

16. A. A. Chialvo, P. T. Cummings, J. M. Simonson, and R. E. Mesmer,
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Hydrothermal Re-
actions, Gatlinburg, June 1997, (Edited by D. A. Palmaer et al.), pp.
157-160.

17. N. Fletcher, The Chemical Physics of Ice, Cambridge University Press,

1970.

18. O. Mishima, L. D. Calvert, and E. Whalley, Nature 310, 393 (1984).
19. O. Mishima, Jour. Chem. Phys. 100, 5910 (1994).
20. R. Holyst, Encyclopedia of Applied Physics, (http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/

cond-mat/?9603062).

322 (1997).

21. P. H. Poole, T. Grande, C. A. Angell, and P. F. McMillan, Science 275,

22. F. Sciortino, P. H. Poole, U. Essmann, and H.E. Stanley, Phys. Rev. E.

14

55, 727 (1997).

(November, 1997).

23. C. J. Roberts, G. Karayiannakis, and P. G. Debenedetti, AICHE Talk,

24. W. Kob, C. Donati, S. J. Plimpton, P. H. Poole, and S. C. Glotzer, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 79, 2827 (1997).

25. C. Donati, J. K. Douglas, W. Kob, S. J. Plimpton, P. H. Poole, and S.

C. Glotzer, (http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/?9706277).
26. D. L. Hill and J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 89, 1102 (1953).
27. M. Brack, J. Damgaard, A. S. Jensen, H. C. Pauli, V. M. Strutinsky, and

C. Y. Wong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44, 320 (1972).

28. L. D. Landau, Z. Phys. Sow. Un. 2, 46 (1932); C. Zener, Proc. Roy.

Soc. (London) A137, 696 (1932).

15

