Quasi-chemical Theories of Associated Liquids

Lawrence R. Pratt
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545 USA

Randall A. LaViolette
Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory, PO Box 1625, Idaho Falls, ID
83415-2208 USA

LA-UR-98-991
(March 17, 2008)

Abstract

It is shown how traditional development of theories of ﬂuids based upon the
concept of physical clustering can be adapted to an alternative local clus-
tering deﬁnition. The alternative clustering deﬁnition can preserve a detailed
valence description of the interactions between a solution species and its near-
neighbors, i.e., cooperativity and saturation of coordination for strong asso-
ciation. These clusters remain ﬁnite even for condensed phases. The simplest
theory to which these developments lead is analogous to quasi-chemical the-
ories of cooperative phenomena. The present quasi-chemical theories require
additional consideration of packing issues because they don’t impose lattice
discretizations on the continuous problem. These quasi-chemical theories do
not require pair decomposable interaction potential energy models. Since cal-
culations may be required only for moderately sized clusters, we suggest that
these quasi-chemical theories could be implemented with computational tools
of current molecular electronic structure theory. This can avoid an interme-
diate step of approximate force ﬁeld generation.

8
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
3
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1. Introduction

Recent molecular calculations [1,2] have suggested in new ways that a chemical perspec-
tive can be helpful in computing thermodynamic properties of water and aqueous solutions.
This paper follows-up those observations and develops quasi-chemical theories for the ther-
modynamics of associated liquids.

The most direct antecedent of this eﬀort was the recent calculation of the absolute
hydration free energy of the ferric ion (Fe3+) [2]. That calculation used electronic structure
3+ cluster and a simple, physical estimate of further solvation eﬀects.
results on the Fe(H2O)6
Those results were organized according to the pattern of a simple chemical reaction and
a surprisingly accurate evaluation of the hydration free energy was obtained. A second
important antecedent of this work was the recent calculation of the free energy contribution
due to electrostatic interactions in liquid water [1]. That work systematically exploited the
observed distribution of close neighbors of a water molecule, the distribution of clusters,
in liquid water in order to obtain an accurate, simple treatment of the thermodynamics of
electrostatic interactions in water. The work below is a basic theoretical investigation of the
success of these recent calculations.

The developments below are based upon formal theories of association equilibrium that
have a long history [3–6]. Formal developments of that kind have been directed in several
diﬀerent ways. One is the study of mechanisms of condensation [6–10]. A second is towards
development of theories of molecular liquids in which the molecular species of interest are
formed by combination of atoms [11,12]. A third way is towards a theory of associated
liquids, like liquid water [13–23]. The latter two goals often overlap and the formal theory
is interesting more broadly [23].

For liquid water, the idea of distinguishable association species is a ﬁrmly entrenched
historical precedent [24,25]. These ideas are called “mixture models” [26–30]. Though the
mixture models are common and intuitive ideas, they have never been developed to a satis-
factory theoretical conclusion. The available computer simulation data has always suggested
that the molecular description of liquid water is more subtle than is typically imagined when
mixture models are discussed [31]. It should be noted that the search continues for structural
species of special signiﬁcance in the computer simulation of aqueous solutions [31–36]; but
the theoretical connection of such structures to the experimental thermodynamics requires
further elaboration. One goal of this work is to clarify the foundations of those ideas and
eﬀorts.

The theory developed below is akin to good approximations of historical and pedagogi-
cal importance in the areas of cooperative phenomena and phase transitions [37]. In those
areas, similar approximations are called Guggenheim, quasi-chemical, or Bethe approxima-
tions. However, those treatments typically have been developed for lattice gases, utilizing
specialized considerations appropriate for those specialized settings. Our work here empha-
sizes application to ﬂuids, without initial lattice discretizations, and utilizing modern tools of
computational chemistry. As one example, some packing issues that are typically preempted
by lattice gas assumptions must be addressed explicitly here. Thus, these derivations and
the principal results of them have not been given before.

As a ﬁnal introductory point, we note the applications of quasi-chemical approximations
in treating lattice models of water [38–55]. Those eﬀorts may have received less attention
Indeed, such
than they deserve because of their lack of conventional molecular realism.

2

calculations sometimes must make arbitrary, prior decisions that may preclude answers to
subsequent questions. For example, if pentagonal H-bond rings, or some other speciﬁc
structure [31,35,36], were crucial for a particular phenomena, that issue might have to be
speciﬁcally anticipated and accomodated in typical lattice gas treatments. However, the
general success of these approaches should teach us something about how to formulate less
restricted theories of liquid water and learning those lessons is also one of the goals of this
paper.

2. Theory

We consider two diﬀerent clustering concepts. The ﬁrst clustering concept is the more
standard [6,9], more global, and more ambitious. Let lower case Greek letters identify
basic chemical components. For each component pair αγ, provide a geometric criterion
that determines whether a particular αγ pair of particles are clustered. Clusters are then
identiﬁed in a many-body system by the rule that any pair of particles that satisfy the pair
clustering criterion are members of the same cluster. Despite the simplicity of this deﬁnition,
it holds a fundamental diﬃculty for theories of liquids: for intuitive clustering criteria, dense
liquids are typically past the percolation threshold. The cluster size distribution will include
large clusters that have to be directly considered.

The second clustering concept was foreshadowed by the calculations of Hummer, et al. [1]
and is more local. Focus attention on only one particle. Again consider a deﬁnite geometric
clustering criterion for all pairs of species types. Then the clusters are only those involving
the distinguished particle as the central element, or nucleus. These are star-type clusters
nucleated on the central element. For example, if the distinguished particle is of type α,
the clusters considered are those for which (0,1,. . .) neighbors of the distinguished particle
are within the geometric αγ clustering criterion for all γ. The size of these clusters will be
limited by the maximum coordination number of the distinguished central particle. This
will be a practical advantage. But there is the corresponding disadvantage: in the cases that
particular extended clusters are expected on a physical grounds to be especially signiﬁcant,
those extended clusters may not have a direct role to play in this theory.

Theories developed for these diﬀerent clustering concepts will eventually diverge from
each other. But they can be characterized by equations of similar form in which cluster
properties play a decisive role. The derivation of these equations is our goal.

2.1. Preliminaries

Here we make some preliminary comments that serve to simplify the subsequent derivations
and present some of the notation used. A central feature of this development is the potential
distribution theorem [56]. For an atomic solute with no internal degrees freedom this may
be expressed as:

ρνΛ3

ν = he−∆U/RT i0 zν.

(1)

zν = eµν /RT is the absolute activity of the ν particle and Λν is its thermal deBroglie wave-
length. The subscripted brackets indicate the thermal average in the absence of interactions
between the solvent and the solute (test particle). Here the averaged property is the Boltz-
mann factor of the mechanical potential energy of interaction between solvent and solute.

3

An equivalent description of this bath factor is that he−∆U/RT i0 is the average of the Boltz-
mann factor of the solute-solvent interactions over the thermal motion of the solute and
solvent under the condition of no interactions between these two systems.
[We note that
these results are not limited to pairwise decomposable interactions; the quantity ∆U is the
diﬀerence between the potential energy of the composite system and that of the separate
non-interacting systems.] Permitting the possibility of internal degrees of freedom including
orientational degrees for freedom, the required generalization is [56]:

ρνV /qν = he−∆U/RT i0 zν.

(2)

qν ≡ q(Nν = 1, V, T ) is the canonical partition function for the system of one molecule of
type ν in volume V at temperature T.

Fundamental results below that are central to our derivation can be viewed as formally
exact generalizations of this potential distribution expression for the case that molecular
clusters form. For those purposes, we will require some elaborations of notation. We suppose
that a geometric criterion has been given by which a cluster of type M is recognized and that
this criterion is expressed by an indicator function HM ; HM = 1 when a cluster of type M is
formed and zero when it is not. An “M-clustered” conﬁguration is one for which HM = 1.
The results below will involve the canonical partition function, qM for a cluster of type M;
this is understood to be the partition function of the particles that compose a cluster of type
M over the region HM = 1. Suppose that an M-clustered conﬁguration is given and consider
placements of particles other than those that are M-clustered. Not all conﬁgurations of
these additional particles can be permitted without contradiction of the speciﬁcation that a
particular M-cluster is present. A further extension of this notation will use HN |M = 1 to
indicate that region wherein the N-M other particles in the N-body system are outside the
clustering condition for an M-cluster. HN |M = 0 for positions of those additional species that
are not permitted under the condition that the speciﬁed initial particles are M-clustered.
We then consider bath factors denoted by he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M . This will indicate the average
over the thermal motion of the M-cluster and the solvent under condition of no interaction
between them. The averaged quantity involves the exclusion factor HN |M in addition to the
familiar Boltzmann factor of the solute-solvent interactions. This essential exclusion factor
then assigns the value zero as the weight for those conﬁgurations for which the solvent
penetrates the M-clustering volume.

2.2. Global Clustering Deﬁnition

In order to involve information on clusters, we express the density of interest in terms of
cluster concentrations ρM . Thus, for the density of the α particles, we would write

ρα =

nαM ρM

XM

where M identiﬁes a molecular cluster considered, nαM is the number of α species in that
cluster, and the sum is over all molecular clusters that can form.

The cluster concentrations ρM are obtained from

(3)

(4)

ρM = (qM /V )he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M

znγM
γ

.

γ
Y

4

qM = qM (T ) is the canonical partition function covering conﬁgurations of an M-cluster
[6,9,11,12]. The indicated average utilizes the thermal distribution of cluster and solvent
under the conditions that there is no interaction between them. ∆U is the potential energy
of interaction between the cluster and the solvent.

Eq. 4 can be derived by considering the grand ensemble. The average number < NM >

of such clusters is composed as

Ξ(z, T, V ) < NM > =

znσM
σ

(5)

σ
Y

N≥nM
X

×

Q(N, V, T |nM )

Nγ
nγM !

zNγ −nγM
γ

.

γ  
Y

Nγ
nγM

Here Ξ(z, T, V ) is the grand canonical partition function; Nγ is the total number of γ parti-
cles in the system; N is the set of particle numbers {Nγ · · ·} and similarly nM is the set of
particle numbers for the M-cluster, {nγM , · · ·}; Q(N, V, T |nM ) is the canonical ensemble par-
tition function with the constraint that nM speciﬁc particles are clustered. This constraint
means that the general integrand range for the canonical partition function has been parti-
tioned and this integration is weighted by HM HN |M for speciﬁc nM particles clustered. The
is the number of nγM -tuples of γ particles that can be selected
binomial coeﬃcient
from Nγ particles. Because of the particle number factors in the summand the partition
function there can also be considered to be the partition function for N-nM particles but
with an extra, distinguished nM objects that constitute the cluster of interest. A natural
distribution of those nM extraneous objects is the distribution they would have in an ideal
gas phase; the Boltzmann factor for that distribution appears already in the integrand of
the Q(N, V, T |nM ) and the normalizing denominator for that distribution is qM (T )
γ nγM !.
The acquired factorials cancel the denominators of the binomial coeﬃcients. The remaining
fragments of the binomial coeﬃcients merely adjust the factorials involved in the deﬁnition
of Q(N, V, T |nM ). Final alignment of the dummy summation variables then leads to Eq. 4.

Q

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Combining our preceding results, we obtain

ρα =

nαM (qM /V )he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M

znγM
γ

.

(6)

XM

γ
Y

This is an equation that might be solved for the absolute activities z=(zα, . . .) in terms of
the densities, cluster partition functions, and the temperature. If the bath contribution is
neglected, he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M =1, this is exactly the relation of Eq. 11 of [9]. This is the
result that was sought.

Though formally correct, there is a fundamental diﬃculty with this result. Consider a
clustering deﬁnition in which particles at near-neighbor distances in solution are clustered.
Then the sum will diverge as a percolation threshold is approached by increasing the den-
sity of a dilute phase. This is true whether or not cluster interference is neglected. This
divergence is sometimes taken as a practical indication of condensation at low temperatures.
However, the sum will diverge at similar densities even if no condensation occurs. Thus, this
formula is inapplicable to a liquid, traditionally deﬁned, without further considerations.

Notice however that there is a non-trivial special case for which Eq. 6 may be directly
applied to a condensed phase and is likely to be helpful. This is the case where species α is a
dilute solute and the interest is in the eﬀect of the solvent on µα. Then we may adopt such

5

a restricted deﬁnition that no solvent-solvent clusters can form. However, at the same time
we can deﬁne the solute-solvent clustering criteria more physically and study those clusters
in which solvent molecules bind to the solute of interest. Those clusters will be ﬁnite and
the sum of Eq. 6 will involve only a ﬁnite number of terms.

2.3. Local Clustering Deﬁnition

We will derive the result needed through an indirect argument that utilizes the already
derived Eq. 6. We wish to consider non-dilute systems and species for which Eq. 6 does
not apply directly. We will ﬁnd a way to use Eq. 6 by appropriately distinguishing single
molecules in this non-dilute phase.

We begin by noting the well-known fact that the chemical potential, say µα, can
be divided into ideal and interaction parts. The ideal contribution takes the form
RT ln ρα + constant where the constant might be calculated on the basis of molecular prop-
erties; see Eq. (1). The ﬁrst step in our argument is the speciﬁcation that the theory need
only determine the interaction part of the chemical potential since the ideal contribution is
well-known. To determine the interaction part of the chemical potential we distinguish a
single molecule of type α and study its condition in solution. This is natural; for example
a simulation calculation might select a particular α molecule and perform charging or un-
charging calculations, or determine distributions of binding energies experienced [1]. When
an α molecule is selected for the purposes of calculation of the interaction part of µα it can
be treated as a solute at the lowest non-zero concentration, as a solitary impurity. We will
denote the chemical potential of this distinguished solute as µα′, remembering that the inter-
action part of µα′ will be the same as the interaction part of µα. For a dilute solute, we can
deﬁne clustering criteria, as anticipated above, so that no solvent-solvent clustering occurs
as deﬁned, but the deﬁnition of clustering of solvent molecules about the distinguished α
solute is naturally included. Eq. 6 then does apply to the calculation of µα′.

The modiﬁcations of Eq. 6 for this case are two: First, the stoichiometric coeﬃcients of
Eq. 3, that appear later in Eq. 6, are all one (1); since the distinguished solute is at the
lowest non-zero concentration there cannot be more than one such solute in any cluster.
The right side of Eq. 6 is precisely proportional to zα′. Second, all clusters are of star type,
that is, ABn with the distinguished solute at the center.

Before ﬁnally writing the desired result, we ask again about the ideal contribution to µα′
and to µα. This ideal contribution is reﬂected in the density on the left of Eq. 6. For µα
that density is the physical value and is part of the deﬁnition of the problem. For µα′, if our
argument were taken literally, that density on the left would be ρα′ = 1/V . Replacement of
that value by ρα, and on the right simultaneously zα′ by zα, would merely readjust µα′ up
to µα through a ﬁnal assessment of the ideal contribution. Thus, we have

ρα =

(qM /V )he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M

znγM
γ

.

(7)

XM (α)

γ
Y

The sum is over all clusters M(α) that can form on an α nucleus.

A practical example of the importance of the clustering deﬁnition may be helpful. Recent
work on clusters of a chloride ion with water has suggested that the preferred disposition of
the chloride ion may be near the surface of the cluster [57]. This interesting point is unlikely
to be decisive for the application of this cluster formula to the study of the solvation of the

6

chloride ion in liquid water. The cluster deﬁnitions here require that the chloride be the
nucleus of a star-type cluster. That would permit the chloride ion to access the physical
surface of a droplet only for small clusters and larger clusters are likely to be decisive in
establishing the bulk phase thermodynamics of the aqueous solutions containing chloride
ions.

2.4. Cluster Interference

This paper will develop the local clustering alternative; the global clustering results will serve
as contrast. The issue of cluster interference is diﬀerent in the two cases. The development
requires a complete and unique partitioning of phase space into regions characterized by
a speciﬁc cluster population. For each proper conﬁguration, the deﬁnition must uniquely
assign elementary particles to clusters. With this characteristic, we then formally regard
the cluster populations as supplementary integration (summation) variables, ﬁrst integrating
over conﬁgurations with a speciﬁc constraint of a speciﬁc cluster population, then summing
over permitted cluster populations. Cluster interference is a simple implementation of the
constraint.
If a particular cluster of type M is speciﬁed then conﬁgurations that violate
the speciﬁcation cannot be allowed. As a particular example, suppose that an An cluster is
under consideration. Then some conﬁgurations for which an additional A particle approaches
the An cluster must be excluded; otherwise conﬁgurations of An+1 clusters would become
confused with conﬁgurations of An clusters.
In the notation above these constraints are
lumped into the factors he−∆U/RT HN |M i0,M through rigid exclusion interactions. It is in these
bath factors and the cluster partition functions qM that cluster interference is expressed.

For the global clustering development, these cluster interference contributions are compli-
cated because they depend on all the cluster sizes and shapes. However, the global clustering
result Eq. 6 is fundamentally inapplicable to liquids.

In contrast, for the local clustering development cluster interference is much simpler. If
we specify that a cluster of type An is considered, we must only require that the n-1 particles
are within the clustering volume v of a distinguished molecule (easy to do) and that no more
than n-1 additional particles are there. This latter factor is familiar from studies of packing
problems in liquids [58] and in the potential distribution factor it involves the probability
that the clustering volume v is empty of solvent species [59]. We can consider the condition
that the clustering volume is empty of solvent molecules by introducing the probability for
that event, p0. The van der Waals approximation p0 ≈ (1 − ρv) should be qualitatively
satisfactory and provides deﬁniteness to the discussion. Thus, within the local clustering
approach, cluster interference is completely expressed by the form

ρα
zα

= p0

(qM /V )he−∆U/RT i∗

0,M

′znγM
γ

.

XM (α)

γ
Y

(8)

Now the well-decorated term he−∆U/RT i∗
0,M indicates the average over the thermal motion
of the M-cluster and solvent under that condition that the only interactions between them
rigidly enforce the exclusion of the solvent from the M-clustered volume. We have factored
out the zα because this quantity must be present in each term, because the ratio ρα/zα is
a standard form, and because the distinguished α particle that is the nucleus of the cluster
requires a diﬀerent treatment than do the particles on the periphery of the star. The notation

7

′
γ means that the term for the species nucleating the cluster should be stricken from the
product. Though this result is formally complete, an approximate theory will have to be
Q
utilized for p0 in speciﬁc applications.

2.5. Quasi-chemical Approximation

A theory with quasi-chemical form is

he−∆U/RT i∗

0,M

′znγM

γ ≈

′{ργ(V /qγ)}nγM .

(9)

γ
Y

γ
Y

This replacement is motivated by the desire to replace the ‘bare ﬁelds’ ln zσ with eﬀective
ﬁelds, by the recognition that Eq. 2 provides a pattern for that replacement, and by the
appreciation that the bath contributions might reasonably factor for species on the “surface”
of the cluster.

Note that the list of clusters M should include the monomer. One term in this list for

Eq. 8 will have qM = qα. Thus, we can write

(10)

(11)

(12)

where

ραV
zαqα

≈ p0(1 +

′KM (T )

′ρnνM
ν

),

XM (α)

ν
Y

KM (T ) =

qM /V
ν{qν/V }nνM

Q

and the sum of Eq. 10 is over the list of possible star clusters nucleated by an α species but
not including the monomer cluster. This theory deserves the appellation “quasi-chemical”
because the coeﬃcients KM (T ) are the chemical equilibrium ratios for the formation of star
clusters in a dilute gas [60]. Note, however, that the factor p0 will be essential for description
of packing eﬀects and thus for predictions of thermodynamic properties of condensed phases.
The thermodynamic quantity sought is the chemical potential

µα ≈ kT ln[ραV /qα] − kT ln[p0(1 +

′KM (T )

′ρnνM
ν

)].

XM (α)

ν
Y

This formula makes the conventional, helpful separation between the contributions of inter-
molecular interactions and the non-interaction (ideal) terms; see Eq. 2. Quantities such as p0
and the KM (T ) depend on parameters that deﬁne the clustering circumstances. But, since
the physical problem is independent of those parameters, the theory should be insensitive
to them if it is to be satisfactorily accurate.

2.6. Discussion

The formal results Eqs. 7 and 8, and the approximation Eq. 12 are believed to be new. The
approximation Eq. 9 attempts to eliminate the complicated bath contributions. These quan-
tities are formally well-understood and can be formally analyzed with Mayer mathematical
cluster expansions or functional analyses. Here we discuss physically what’s neglected. For

8

dilute solutions where the solvent activities are known separately, Eq. 8 may be used di-
rectly and the issues that follow here are not relevant. This was the pattern of the motivating
calculations [1,2].

Eq. 9 assumes that each activity factor may be replaced using the relation Eq. 2 with
no account of the interference between diﬀerent sites that is formally expressed in the left-
side of Eq. 9. This might be correct for idealized circumstances, e.g. a “Bethe lattice” (no
cycles). [An alternative derivation based upon pedantic diagrammatic arguments makes it
clear that this is a tree approximation.] But for more realistic continuous problems there
are two sources of that interference. Firstly, diﬀerent peripheral sites on the star cluster can
interfere with one another. This eﬀect arises because solvent molecules can interact with two
or more surface sites jointly. The organization of the problem here is designed to mitigate
that interference between diﬀerent surface species. Secondly, “through solvent” interference
between a peripheral site and the nucleus of the cluster arises when solvent molecules can
interact with a surface surface sites and the nucleus or cluster volume jointly. The theory
Eq. 9 neglects both of these eﬀects.

We reiterate that the quantities neglected by the approximation Eq. 9 are well understood
formally. Thus, in speciﬁc applications it should be practical to augment this approximation
with additional contributions that are understood physically and theoretically. An exam-
ple should serve to clarify this point. There has been signiﬁcant recent interest in primitive
electrolyte solution models under circumstances where ion pairing and clustering is acknowl-
edged to be of primary signiﬁcance [61]. The formal developments here apply also to ion
clustering in electrolyte solutions. However, where non-neutral clusters are important the
approximation Eq. 9 must be at the least augmented to treat long range interactions, likely
following a random phase approximation.

3+

A more speciﬁc example is given by the study of the hexa-aquo ferric ion, Fe(H2O)6
reported in Reference [2]. The data given there allow us to estimate the error of the neglect of
long-ranged interactions, Eq. 9. That neglected contribution would be about 391 kcal/mol,
or 38% of the value inferred from experiment for interaction part of µF e3+.
[See Table IV
of that report but note that the packing contribution here present as p0 was neglected in
that previous study.] Thus, for ionic solutes in particular, further consideration of coulomb
ranged interactions will be necessary. Though the physical estimate given for the hexa-
aquo ferric ion example [2] was natural and surprisingly accurate, the value 391 kcal/mol
was essentially empirically derived. To do better than that, the present approach must
be extended to produce the dielectric constant of the liquid in order to assess screening of
electrostatic interactions. Since the this approach has a conceptual overlap with the Onsager-
Kirkwood [62,63] development of the theory of dielectrics that subsequent step should be
natural. We note, however, that the present hybrid approach will improve the treatment
of negative ions in solution, such as the Cl− ion which was a remaining diﬃculty for the
multistate gaussian model [1].

Finally, the hexa-aquo ferric ion example emphasizes that current electronic structure
software can routinely produce KM (T ) in a harmonic approximation. This encourages us to
anticipate that further developments will permit implementation of these theories without an
intermediate eﬀort to obtain approximate force ﬁeld models. In the near term, this approach
should at the least oﬀer a direction for improvement of electronic structure calculations on
solution species, calculations that might presently rely solely on dielectric continuum models.

9

3. Conclusions

The traditional development of theories of ﬂuids based upon the concept of physical clus-
tering can be adapted to an alternative local clustering deﬁnition. The alternative clustering
deﬁnition can straightforwardly preserve a detailed valence description of the interactions
between a solution species and its near-neighbors, i.e., cooperativity and saturation of coor-
dination for strong association. These clusters remain ﬁnite even for condensed phases. The
simplest theory to which these developments lead is analogous to quasi-chemical theories of
cooperative phenomena. The present quasi-chemical theories require additional considera-
tion of packing issues because they don’t impose lattice discretizations on the continuous
problem. These quasi-chemical theories do not require pair decomposable interaction poten-
tial energy models. Since calculations may be required only for moderately sized clusters,
we anticipated that these quasi-chemical theories could be implemented with computational
tools of current molecular electronic structure theory.

Acknowledgement

References and Notes

8523.

This work was supported by the LDRD program at Los Alamos. The work at INEEL

was performed under DOE Idaho Operations Oﬃce Contract DE-AC07-94ID13223.

(1) HUMMER, G., PRATT, L. R., and GARC´IA, A. E., 1997, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119,

(2) MARTIN, R. L., HAY, P. J., and PRATT, L. R., 1997, “Hydrolysis of ferric ion in

water and conformational equilibrium,” Technical report, LA-UR-97-3489.

(3) FRENKEL, J., 1939, J. Chem. Phys., 7, 538.

(4) BAND, W., 1939, J. Chem. Phys., 7, 927.

(5) HILL, T. L., 1956, Statistical Mechanics. (Dover:NY) section 27.

(6) STILLINGER Jr., F. H., 1963, J. Chem. Phys., 38, 1486.

(7) FISHER, M. E., 1967, Physics (NY), 3, 255.

(8) SWAMINATHAN, P.K., and POLAND, D., 1978, J. Chem. Phys., 69, 3660.

(9) LAVIOLETTE, R. A., and PRATT, L. R., 1983, Phys. Rev. A, 28, 2482.

(10) PHILLIPS, P., LAVIOLETTE, R. A., and PRATT, L. R., 1984, J. Chem. Phys., 80,

1605.

(11) CHANDLER, D., and PRATT, L. R., 1976, J. Chem. Phys., 65, 2925.

(12) PRATT, L. R. and CHANDLER, D., 1977, J. Chem. Phys., 66, 148.

(13) ANDERSEN, H. C., 1973, J. Chem. Phys., 59, 4714.

10

(14) ANDERSEN, H. C., 1974, J. Chem. Phys., 61, 4985.

(15) DAHL, L. W., and ANDERSEN, H. C., 1983, J. Chem. Phys., 78, 1962.

(16) DAHL, L. W., and ANDERSEN, H. C., 1983, J. Chem. Phys., 78, 1980.

(17) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1984, J. Stat. Phys., 35, 19.

(18) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1984, J. Stat. Phys., 35, 35.

(19) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1986, J. Chem. Phys., 85, 2929.

(20) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1986, J. Stat. Phys., 42, 477.

(21) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1987, J. Chem. Phys., 87, 7323.

(22) WERTHEIM, M. S., 1988, J. Chem. Phys., 88, 1145.

(23) STELL, G., 1996, Physica A, 231, 1.

(24) LUKE, D. E., and ROBINSON, G. W., 1993, Complete Translation of R¨ontgen’s Water

Paper. Texas Tech University.

(25) ROBINSON, G. W., ZHU, S.-B., SINGH, S., and EVANS, M. W., 1996, Water in

Biology, Chemistry and Physics. (World Scientiﬁc:) section 12.1.2.

(26) EISENBERG, D., and KAUZMANN, W., 1969, Structure and Properties of Water.

(Oxford:NY).

(27) FRANK, H. S. , 1972, “Structural Models,” In Water: A Comprehensive Treatise,

F. Franks, editor, (Plenum:NY) volume 1.

In Water, a Comprehensive Treatise, F. Franks, editor,

(29) BEN-NAIM, A., 1974, Water and Aqueous Solutions: Introduction to a Molecular

(28) BEN-NAIM, A., 1973,
(Plenum:NY) volume 2.

Theory. (Plenum:NY).

(30) BARTELL, L. S., 1997, J. Phys. Chem. B, 101, 7573.

(31) STILLINGER, F. H., 1980, Science, 209, 451.

(32) STILLINGER, F. H., 1980,

In ACS Symposium Series, S.P. Rowland, editor,

(ACS:Washington DC) volume 127, p. 11.

(33) STILLINGER, F. H., and DAVID, C.W., 1980, J. Chem. Phys., 73, 3384.

(34) STILLINGER, F. H., and WEBER, T. A., 1983, J. Phys. Chem., 87, 2833.

(35) HEAD-GORDON, T., 1995, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 8308.

(36) HEAD-GORDON, T., SORENSON, J. M., PERTSEMLIDIS, A., and GLAESER,

R. M., 1997, Biophys. J., 73, 2106.

11

(37) BRUSH, S. G., and KIKUCHI., R., 1965, “Lattice Models for Cooperative Phenomena
I. Survey and Comparison of Approximate Methods,” Technical Report UCRL-14287,
University of California, Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Livermore, California.

(38) FLEMING, P. D., and GIBBS, J. H., 1974, J. Stat. Phys., 10, 157.

(39) FLEMING, P. D., and GIBBS, J. H., 1974, J. Stat. Phys., 10, 351.

(40) STILLINGER, F. H., 1975, Adv. Chem. Phys., volume XXXI, p. 1.

(41) ARAKAWA, K., TOKIWANO, K., and KOJIMA, K., 1977, Bulletin Chem. Soc. Jap.,

50, 65.

(42) BELL, G. M., and SALT., D. W., 1976, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. II, 72, 76.

(43) MEIJER, P. H. E., KIKUCHI, R., and PAPON., P., 1981, Physica A, 109, 365.

(44) MEIJER, P. H. E., KIKUCHI, R., and VANROYEN, E., 1982, Physica A, 115, 124.

(45) BODEGOM, E., and MEIJER, P. H. E., 1984, J. Chem. Phys., 80, 1617.

(46) HUCKABY, D. A., and HANNA, R. S., 1987, J. Phys. A, 20, 5311.

(47) VANROYEN, E., and MEIJER, P. H. E., 1984, Physica A, 127, 87.

(48) SASTRY, S., SCIORTINO, F., and STANLEY, H. E., 1993, J. Chem. Phys., 98, 9863.

(49) BORICK, S. S., and DEBENEDETTI, P. G., 1993, J. Phys. Chem., 97, 6292.

(50) HUININK, H. P., DE KEIZER, A., LEERMAKERS, F. A. M., and LYKLEMA, J.,

1996, J. Phys. Chem., 100, 9948.

(51) BESSELING, N. A. M., and LYKLEMA, J., 1994, J. Phys. Chem., 98, 11610.

(52) BORICK, S. S., DEBENEDETTI, P. G., and SASTRY., S., 1995, J. Phys. Chem., 99,

3781.

(53) ROBERTS, C. J., and DEBENEDETTI, P. G., 1996, J. Chem. Phys., 105, 658.

(54) OTOOLE, E. M., VENKATARAMANI, R., and PANAGIOTOPOULOS, A. Z., 1995,

AICHE Journal, 41, 954.

(55) BESSELING, N. A. M., and LYKLEMA, J., 1997, J. Phys. Chem., 101, 7604.

(56) WIDOM, B., 1982, J. Phys. Chem., 86, 869.

(57) PERERA, L., and BERKOWITZ, M. L., 1993, Zeitschrift Fur Physik D - Atoms

Molecules and Clusters, 26, 166.

(58) PRATT, L. R., 1998, “Molecular Modeling of Hydrophobic Eﬀects,” In Encyclopedia

of Computational Chemistry P. v. R. Schleyer, editor (Wiley:NY).

(59) WIDOM, B., 1978, J. Stat. Phys., 19, 563.

12

(60) MCQUARRIE, D. A., 1976, Statistical Mechanics. (Harper & Row:NY) Chapter 9.

(61) ZUCKERMAN, D. M., FISHER, M. E., and LEE, B. P., 1997, Phys. Rev. E, 56, 6569.

(62) KIRKWOOD, J. G., 1939, J. Chem. Phys., 7, 911.

(63) OSTER, P. G., and KIRKWOOD, J. G., 1943, J. Chem. Phys., 11, 175.

13

