8
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
7
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hydrophobic Eﬀects on a Molecular Scale

G. Hummer,∗ S. Garde, A. E. Garc´ıa, M. E. Paulaitis,† and L. R. Pratt
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
†Department of Chemical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
∗ Corresponding Author. Mail Stop K710. Phone: (505) 665-1923. Fax: (505) 665-3493. E-mail: hummer@lanl.gov
(LA-UR 98-2758)

A theoretical approach is developed to quantify hydrophobic hydration and interactions on a
molecular scale, with the goal of gaining insight into the molecular origins of hydrophobic eﬀects.
The model is based on the fundamental relation between the probability for cavity formation in
bulk water resulting from molecular-scale density ﬂuctuations, and the hydration free energy of the
simplest hydrophobic solute, a hard particle. This probability is estimated using an information
theory (IT) approach, incorporating experimentally available properties of bulk water – the density
and radial distribution function. The IT approach reproduces the simplest hydrophobic eﬀects:
hydration of spherical nonpolar solutes, the potential of mean force between methane molecules,
and solvent contributions to the torsional equilibrium of butane. Applications of this approach to
study temperature and pressure eﬀects provide new insights into the thermodynamics and kinetics
of protein folding. The IT model relates the hydrophobic-entropy convergence observed in protein
unfolding experiments to the macroscopic isothermal compressibility of water. A novel explanation
for pressure denaturation of proteins follows from an analysis of the pressure stability of hydrophobic
aggregates, suggesting that water penetrates the hydrophobic core of proteins at high pressures.
This resolves a long-standing puzzle, whether pressure denaturation contradicts the hydrophobic-
core model of protein stability. Finally, issues of “dewetting” of molecularly large nonpolar solutes
are discussed in the context of a recently developed perturbation theory approach.

I. INTRODUCTION

Hydrophobic interactions play a central role in many self-assembly processes in aqueous solution: protein folding;
the formation of micelles, membranes, and complex mesophases in surfactant solutions; the formation of macro-
molecular complexes; and the non-speciﬁc aggregation of proteins in inclusion bodies during over-expression or in
disease-causing amyloid plaque formation in brain tissue.1–5 Biopolymers such as proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids
contain a signiﬁcant fraction of nonpolar groups: aliphatic and aromatic amino-acid side chains, the faces of nucleic-
acid bases, and the hydrocarbon tails of lipids. Attractive hydrophobic interactions between these nonpolar groups
contribute signiﬁcantly to the stability of folded proteins, base-stacking in helical nucleic acids, and membrane bilayers.
Protein folding may be the most extensively characterized macromolecular self-assembly process in aqueous solution.
Thermodynamic1,2,6–8 and structural studies9,10 on proteins have shown that the formation of a hydrophobic core,
comprising predominantly nonpolar amino acids, plays a signiﬁcant if not the dominating role in protein folding.
Clearly, other interactions, such as electrostatic interactions and intramolecular or water-mediated hydrogen bonding,
cannot be neglected in a full treatment of the thermodynamic stability of amphiphilic molecules and their assemblies.
Nevertheless, a quantitative understanding of the stability of hydrated amphiphilic macromolecules necessitates a
thorough, quantitative description of hydrophobic driving forces as a major contributing factor.

Despite many decades of research on hydrophobic eﬀects, our understanding of key phenomena presumably of
hydrophobic origin is still incomplete, and seemingly contradictory observations have yet to be explained. Surprisingly,
these include the eﬀects of changing even the most elementary thermodynamic variables, temperature and pressure,
or key solution properties, such as salt concentration and composition. The well-known fact that proteins denature
at elevated temperatures and at elevated pressures is an immediate example. Heat denaturation can be explained
by the hydrophobic core model of proteins, which was established on the basis of extensive temperature unfolding
studies.6–8,11,12 These studies show that the thermodynamic characteristics of heat denaturation are similar to those
of transferring nonpolar molecules from a hydrocarbon or gas phase into water. This suggests that nonpolar residues
in the protein interior become exposed to solvent during denaturation. However, as pointed out poignantly by
Kauzmann,13 pressure denaturation appears to contradict the hydrophobic-core model of proteins in the sense that
the hydrocarbon transfer process and protein denaturation exhibit diametrically opposite pressure dependences of the
associated volume change.

One goal of our work has been to reconcile these apparently contradictory results for temperature and pressure
denaturation of proteins within the context of the hydrophobic core model of protein folding. To achieve this, we
developed detailed molecular explanations for the underlying processes.14,15 Here, we will focus speciﬁcally on the

1

observed temperature convergence of hydrocarbon-transfer entropies from calorimetry experiments.14 That entropy
convergence coincides with the observed temperature convergence of the entropy of protein unfolding and thus pro-
vides a thermodynamic foundation for the hydrophobic-core model of protein folding.6,7,11,12,16–18 In addition, we
will suggest a molecular mechanism for pressure denaturation of proteins19–26 and discuss its consequences on folding
kinetics and the characteristics of the ensemble of unfolded protein structures.15 Our explanation of pressure denat-
uration invokes experimental observations regarding the diﬀerences in the structures of heat and pressure-denatured
proteins, the latter being more compact.23,27,28 We will also give preliminary results for the eﬀects of salt concentration
on hydrophobic hydration, as characterized by the Hofmeister series,29 which ranks salts by their ability to increase
(“salt in”) or decrease (“salt out”) the solubility of nonpolar groups in water.

To achieve these goals, we need a model that quantiﬁes hydrophobic hydration and hydrophobic interactions, and
the eﬀects of temperature, pressure, and salt concentration on them. A number of models of the hydrophobic eﬀect
have been developed in the past,1,2,4,30–34 all having their merits and limitations.35 One of the most inﬂuential models
is scaled-particle theory (SPT)36 and its extension to hydrophobic hydration.37,38 SPT laid a molecular foundation
for surface area models of hydrophobic hydration with macroscopic surface tensions.39–41 However, this invocation of
macroscopic parameters limits applications of SPT to study the subtle changes due to temperature and pressure, for
example, that are closely associated with the molecule-scale properties. A thoroughly molecular theory was developed
by Pratt and Chandler (PC),42 based on the theory of simple liquids. The PC theory invokes radial correlation
functions in the context of Ornstein-Zernike integral equations with appropriate closures. Lazaridis and Paulaitis43
(LP) use an expansion of the conformational entropy in terms of particle distribution functions. Both PC and LP
theories relate the structural ordering of water by the nonpolar solute to the hydration thermodynamics through
solute-water pair correlations.

Probably the most powerful approach is the direct computer simulation of hydrophobic hydration phenomena using
molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo methods.44 Computer simulations are ﬂexible and, with the advent of ever faster
computers, the system size and time scale limitations are becoming less of a concern. However, the interpretation
of computer simulation results necessitates a well-founded theoretical framework. Here, and in the aforementioned
theories, computer simulations provide critical input that is not readily available from experiments.

The theoretical approach pursued here describes hydrophobic hydration and hydrophobic interactions using chemical
potentials of the simplest hydrophobic solutes in water – “hard” molecules exerting entirely repulsive interactions on
water molecules. The solvation chemical potentials for hard-core solutes are directly related to the presence of cavity
volumes of molecular size due to density ﬂuctuations in bulk water. We quantify these density ﬂuctuations using an
approach motivated by information theory (IT).45 From a maximum-entropy principle, we ﬁnd the “best-possible”
description of the ﬂuctuations that satisﬁes certain experimental constraints. The virtues of such an approach are
In addition, the IT model expresses the simple
its simplicity, eﬃciency, and accuracy for molecule-size solutes.
hydrophobic phenomena using properties of bulk water alone. This allows us to relate hydrophobic eﬀects to the
peculiar properties of water that distinguishes it from nonpolar solvents. The IT model builds on concepts introduced
in SPT, speciﬁcally the relation between the probability of ﬁnding a molecule-size cavity in water and the chemical
potential of solvation of hard particles. In its simplest form, the IT model is also related to Ornstein-Zernike integral
equation theories and the PC theory.45–48

The paper is organized as follows: After developing the IT model for hard nonpolar solutes and a generalization
to continuous solute-solvent interactions, we will discuss practical aspects of the implementation. Limitations in
the macroscopic limit will be analyzed before we view the IT model from a historical perspective. We will then
present results for the simplest hydrophobic eﬀects – solvation of spherical solutes, methane-methane interaction
in water, and contributions to the torsional equilibrium of butane. The temperature dependence of hydrophobic
hydration and the entropy convergence will be studied subsequently. We will then quantify the eﬀects of pressure
on hydrophobic interactions, leading to a model for the pressure denaturation of proteins. The eﬀects of salt on
hydrophobic hydration will be discussed brieﬂy. We will also introduce a recently developed perturbation theory
model49 based on the energetic loss of water molecules at the solute-water interface. This model allows us to extend
our analysis of hydrophobic eﬀects further to mesoscopic and macroscopic solutes. We will conclude with an attempt
to give answers to the question how water diﬀers from hydrocarbon liquids as a solvent for nonpolar solutes.

II. INFORMATION THEORY MODEL OF HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION

A. Simple hydrophobic eﬀects: thermodynamics of dissolving a hard particle in water

The simplest hydrophobic solute is a cavity or, equivalently, a hard-core particle which excludes water-oxygen
atoms from a volume v of a given shape and molecular size. Cavity formation constitutes the important, ﬁrst step in

2

solvating any nonpolar solute in water. The solvation thermodynamics of a hard particle is determined by the excess
chemical potential µex corresponding to the free energy of its transfer from an ideal gas into the aqueous environment.
Statistical mechanics relates this excess chemical potential to the probability p0 of ﬁnding an empty volume v in
water, i.e., a cavity of a given size and shape,36,50

µex = −kBT ln p0 .

(1)

To determine the chemical potential µex, we need to quantify the probability p0 of successfully inserting a hard-core
solute of a given size and shape into equilibrium conformations of water, as illustrated in Figure 1. A virtue of such
an approach is that the solvation thermodynamics characterized by µex is determined by the properties of pure water,
with the solute entering through its molecular volume v.

B. Information theory approach to excess chemical potentials of solvation

The goal is to estimate accurately the probability p0 that a given hard-core solute inserted into water does not
overlap with any of the solvent centers, deﬁned as the positions of water-oxygen atoms. The IT approach does not
attempt to model this quantity directly. Instead, it focuses on the set of probabilities pn of ﬁnding n water-oxygen
atoms inside the observation volume, with p0 being just one of the pn. We will attempt to get accurate estimates of
the pn, and p0 in particular, using experimentally available information as constraints on the pn. The moments of the
ﬂuctuations in the number of solvent centers within the observation volume v provide such constraints.

For a given observation volume v in bulk water, the moments of the ﬂuctuations in the particle number n are

determined from the pn as follows:

where h· · ·i denotes a canonical average. The zeroth, ﬁrst, and second moment can be expressed in terms of experi-
mentally accessible quantities:

hnki =

pnnk ,

∞

n=0
X

h1i =

pn = 1

hni =

pnn = ρv ,

∞

n=0
X
∞

n=0
X
∞

n=0
X

hn2i =

pnn2 = hni + ρ2

dr

dr′g(|r − r′|) ,

Zv

Zv

where ρ is the number density of bulk water and g(r) is the radial distribution function between water-oxygen atoms
in bulk water, which can be determined from X-ray or neutron scattering measurements or computer simulations.
These moment conditions provide constraints on the pn’s, and guarantee that the pn are normalized and have the
correct ﬁrst and second moments. Higher moments would require knowledge of triplet and higher-order correlation
functions which are not generally accessible to experiments, but can be calculated from computer simulations.52

The IT approach attempts to provide the “best-possible” estimate of the probabilities pn under the constraints of
the available information, deﬁned as the set {pn} that maximizes an information entropy η subject to the information
constraints,

In the most general form, we adopt a relative or cross entropy,53

(2)

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

(4)

(5)

where ˆpn represents an empirically chosen “default model.”

We consider two natural choices of default models: the Gibbs default model ˆpn ∝ 1/n!, which leads to a Poisson
distribution for a given mean, as would be expected for an ideal gas, and a ﬂat distribution (ˆpn = 1 for n ≤ nmax and

max
{constraints}

η({pn}) .

η({pn}) = −

pn ln

∞

n=0
X

pn
ˆpn (cid:19)

(cid:18)

,

3

ˆpn = 0 otherwise), which results in a discrete Gaussian form of pn with given mean and variance. Empirically, we
ﬁnd that the latter choice is accurately applicable to molecule-size cavities.45
Maximizing the information entropy under the constraints of eq 3 leads to

pn = ˆpneλ0+λ1n+λ2n

,

2

where λ0, λ1, and λ2 are the Lagrange multipliers chosen to satisfy the moment conditions eq 3.

Figure 2 shows pn distributions for spherical observation volumes v calculated from computer simulations of SPC51
water.45 The solute exclusion volume is deﬁned by the distance d of closest approach of water-oxygen atoms to the
center of the sphere. For the range of solute sizes studied, we ﬁnd that ln pn values are closely parabolic in n. This
would be predicted from the ﬂat default model with nmax → ∞, as shown in Figure 2 with the corresponding results.
Figure 3 illustrates the eﬀect of including higher moments in the IT model. Results are shown both for the Gibbs
and the ﬂat default models. We ﬁnd that the prediction of µex is greatly improved when the second moment (i.e.,
the variance of the particle number) is included in addition to the mean. However, inclusion of higher moments
initially makes the prediction worse. Only when seven or more moments are used is the prediction as accurate as the
two-moment model. Also shown in Figure 3 is the calculated Shannon information I({pn}),

Including the second moment results in a large gain of information, whereas the gains from including additional higher
moments are small: moments of order three and higher are, essentially, “un-informative” (see also Ref. 55).

I({pn}) =

pn ln pn .

∞

n=0
X

C. Continuous information theory

A more general statement of the principles underlying the IT approach follows from a generalization to continuous
interactions between the solvent and the hydrophobic solute. Such a generalization can be achieved by explicitly
considering solvent positions within a microscopic volume, in addition to the occupancy numbers considered in the
basic IT approach. We deﬁne probability distributions p(j; r1, . . . , rj) of observing exactly j particles within the
observation volume v at positions r1, . . . , rj in inﬁnitesimal volume elements dr1, . . . , drj . The p(j; r1, . . . , rj) allow
us to calculate solvation chemical potentials of a solute with continuous interactions u(r1, r2, . . .) between solvent
molecules at positions r1, r2, . . . and a solute at the origin. Within the observation volume v, the solute-solvent
interactions are treated explicitly. Finite-range interactions provide a natural choice for v; otherwise, a ﬁnite volume
v can be chosen with corrections for long-range interactions.

Widom’s formula56 relates the excess chemical potential of the solute µex to the normalized p(j; r1, . . . , rj),

where β−1 = kBT .

Calculating p(j; r1, . . . , rj) directly would require knowledge of higher-order correlation functions. Instead, our goal
is to infer the p(j; r1, . . . , rj) from available information, such as the one- and two-particle densities in the observation
volume v, expressed as constraint functionals:

ex

e−βµ

=

e−βu(r1,r2,...)

D
i=j

E

j "
X

i=1 Zv
Y

#

=

dri

p(j; r1, . . . , rj)e−βu(r1,...,rj ) ,

ρ(r) =

hδ(r − rα)i

i=j

α
X
j
1
(cid:19) "

=

dri

δ(r − r1)p(j; r1, . . . , rj) ,

Xj≥1 (cid:18)

i=1 Zv
Y
ρ2g(2)(r, r′)/2 = h

#
δ(r − rα)δ(r′ − rγ)i

=

j
2
(cid:19) "
Xj≥2 (cid:18)

i=j

α>γ
X
dri

i=1 Zv
Y

#

4

δ(r − r1)δ(r − r2)p(j; r1, . . . , rj) .

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9a)

(9b)

where r and r′ are positions inside the observation volume v. For a homogeneous ﬂuid, the density will be uniform,
i.e., ρ(r) will be independent of position; and the two-particle density distribution will be the radial distribution
function of the homogeneous system, g(2)(r, r′) = g(|r − r′|).

In analogy to eq 5, we deﬁne an information entropy η for continuous solvent positions and discrete occupancy

numbers,57

(10)

(11)

η ≡ −

dri

p(j; r1, . . . , rj) ln[vjj!p(j; r1, . . . , rj)].

i=j

j "
X

i=1 Zv
Y

#

We include the factor of vj in the logarithm of eq 10 for dimensional consistency. Maximizing this entropy functional
under the constraints of eq 9 results in an expression for the probability distribution p(j; r1, . . . , rj ),

− β−1 ln[vjj!p(j; r1, . . . , rj )] =

ω(1)(rk) +

βω(2)(rk, rl) .

j

Xk=1

j

Xk>l=1

The Lagrange multipliers ω(1)(rk) and ω(2)(rk, rl) are chosen such that the p(j; r1, . . . , rj) satisfy the constraint
functionals eq 9. Incorporating additional n-particle correlation information (n > 2) is straightforward. In a practical
implementation, one can subdivide the observation volume into a ﬁnite number of volume elements. The constraint
functionals, eqs 9, then reduce to a ﬁnite number of constraints.

Note that the probability distributions p(j; r1, . . . , rj) have a Boltzmann-Gibbs structure, i.e., they are proportional
to an exponential of eﬀective interactions ω(1)(rk) and ω(2)(rk, rl) in kBT units, divided by j!. Summation and
integration of the p(j; r1, . . . , rj ) results in the familiar form of a grand-canonical partition function for a microscopic
volume v embedded in a large bath of solvent molecules. The eﬀective interactions entering the Boltzmann-Gibbs
factors in this grand-canonical partition function are the Lagrange multipliers ω(1)(rk) and ω(2)(rk, rl). These eﬀective
interactions are chosen to satisfy available information constraints, rather than being derived directly from integrating
out bath degrees of freedom.

For large observation volumes v, ω(1)(r) must be a spatial constant approximately the negative chemical potential
of the solvent, except in a small region near the surface of the subsystem.49 Similarly, ω(2)(r, r′) will be approximately
an interatomic pair potential, except in a small region near the surface of the subsystem.

D. Some practical aspects of the information theory model

Here, we provide details on the practical implementation the IT model. Before discussing speciﬁc details, we note
that the required moments of particle-number ﬂuctuations can be obtained in situ from simulation data. This idea
is most direct for a uniform liquid. The observation volume v is planted as a stencil in the simulation volume and
the required moments are extracted as averages over a set of simulation conﬁgurations. For a uniform liquid the
positioning of the observation volume is irrelevant and many positions can be used simultaneously. It is worth noting
that since the occupation numbers can only be a ﬁnite number of non-negative integers, only a ﬁnite number of
binomial moments h
i will be non-zero. Similar procedures apply to non-uniform systems such as the solvation
structure near a ﬁxed solute, but the positioning of the observation volume is then relevant.

n
k

It is important to note that the observation volume may be subdivided into several strata. This introduces cross
moments in the general case and permits conceptually interesting possibilities for modeling the probabilities. As an
example, consider the mean density in a volume element external to a core region conditional on the requirement
that the core region be empty. With such considerations, the IT modeling naturally produces a prediction of the
hydration structure near a hydrophobic solute without special geometrical limitations. Such possibilities have scarcely
been studied so far, however. For the calculation of the required moment information, stratiﬁcation is no particular
problem but it may aﬀect the computational eﬃciency. Note, that a stratiﬁed representation can also be derived from
coarse-graining the continuous IT of section II C.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Next, we will illustrate several methods to calculate the second moment of the particle-number ﬂuctuations. Then

we will describe numerical methods for the entropy maximization.

Calculation of particle-number variances. The second-moment constraint eq 3c requires the calculation of a double
integral over the volume v involving the distance-dependent pair correlation function g(r). Such integrals can be
evaluated using Monte Carlo techniques. The average of the pair correlation function, hg(|r − r′|)i can be determined
by placing two points r and r′ randomly inside the volume v according to a uniform probability density. This average
is then multiplied by the square of the volume v to give an estimate of the integral in eq 3c.

5

Alternatively, the variance and higher moments of particle-number ﬂuctuations can be determined directly from
molecular simulations. Unlike p0, the mean and variance can be calculated accurately from insertion also for large
solutes. Objects with volume v (shape and size) are inserted with random positions and orientations into water
conﬁgurations taken from an equilibrium molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulation. The mean and variance of
the particle number n is then determined directly.

Volumes of certain shapes are amenable to analytical evaluation. For spherical volumes v of radius d, Hill58 derived
a transformation of the six-dimensional integral to one-dimensional form. Such transformations can be accomplished
by determining the pair-distance distribution P (R) well known from small-angle scattering theory,59

where δ(x) is Dirac’s delta function. This leads to the following expression for the second moment:

Z
We can also use the three-dimensional analog to eq 12,

Fourier transformation relates P (R) to the form factor S(k) of the volume v,

P (R) =

dr

dr′δ(R − |r − r′|) ,

Zv

Zv

hn2i = hni + ρ2

dR P (R)g(R) .

P (R) =

dr

dr′δ[R − (r − r′)] .

˜P (k) =

drP (r)eik·r

= |S(k)|2 ,

Zv

Zv

Z

Zv

1
(2π)3

Z

S(k) =

dreik·r

.

P (R) =

dk ˜P (k)e−ik·r

.

where

The Fourier transform eq 15 can be inverted as

As a generalization of Hill’s result for a single sphere,58 we ﬁnd for a collection of N non-overlapping spheres of radius
d:

−

+

R
d

R3
12d3

4
3

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

θ(2d − R)

(1 − xij ) −

yij

3/2 − |R − rij |3
3rijRd

(cid:26)(cid:20)

πd3

4
3

P (R) = 4πR2

N πd3

N −1

N

+

i=1
X
yij

(cid:18)

j=i+1 (cid:20)
X
5/2 − |R − rij |5
60rijRd3

+

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:27)

θ[R − (rij − 2d)]θ(rij + 2d − R)

,

(18)

where rij is the distance of the centers of spheres i and j, xij = (R2 +rij
Using this method, analytical results can also be found for rotation ellipsoids with axes a = b and c.

2 −4d2)/(2Rrij ), and yij = R2 +r2

ij −2Rrijxij .

Maximizing the information entropy. Maximization of the information entropy eq 5 is performed most easily using
Lagrange multipliers for the constraints. For constraints on mean and variance, this leads to the expression eq 6 for pn.
Lagrange multipliers λ0, λ1, and λ2 are then calculated such that the corresponding pn satisfy the moment conditions
eq 3. This corresponds to solving three non-linear equations with three unknowns which can be accomplished, for
instance, using a Newton-Raphson method. Alternatively, one can use standard minimization packages, minimizing
the squared diﬀerences of the left and right-hand sides of the moment constraint equations. This is consistent with
the idea of minimizing the “thermodynamic potential”

f (λ1, . . . , λkmax ) ≡ ln

1 +

ˆpj exp

−

kmax

kmax

 

Xk=1

λk

j
k

(cid:18)

(cid:19)!





kmax

Xk=1

j=1
X
j
k

(cid:28)(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:29)

+

λk

,

6

here expressed in terms of the binomial moment information and for a general default model.

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(19)

E. Some pitfalls of the simplest models

It is a helpful, heuristic view that the IT approach studies a model grand partition function associated with a
molecular scale volume and involving eﬀective interactions. Because this is an unusual setting for the consequent
statistical thermodynamic calculations, conventional results are not guaranteed. Here we note some of the pitfalls
that have been encountered for the simplest models. These discussions emphasize that the orientation for development
of this approach is to discover the models that work.

Non-separability of chemical potentials of distant sites within a Gaussian model. Consider two spheres of exclusion
radius λ separated by a distance large compared to λ. The excess chemical potential of the two spheres should be two
times that of the individual spheres, µex(1, 2) = 2µex. The mean and variance of the particle-number ﬂuctuations are
2 are the means and
also additive. For the combined volume, we will have m2 = 2m1 and σ2
variances of the particle-number distributions of an individual sphere (i = 1) and the two spheres (i = 2). Following
the ﬂat default model, we approximate p0 by a Gaussian form,14

2, where mi and σi

2 = 2σ1

p0 ≈

e−mi

2

/2σi

2

(2πσi

2)

.

µex(1, 2) − 2µex ≈ −

ln(πσ1

2) .

kBT
2

We then ﬁnd that the corresponding chemical potential of an inﬁnitely-distant pair of spheres is not exactly that of
two individual spheres,

p

This non-additivity is a direct consequence of the Gaussian model and can be simply repaired by insisting accurately
on zero probability for negative occupancies. In fact, the deﬁnition of our problem here requires that the occupancies
be non-negative integers.

Additivity can be recovered by dividing the two sphere volume into two strata: one for each sphere or, when the
spheres overlap, the individual strata can be deﬁned by utilizing the plane of intersection of the spherical surfaces as
a bounding surface. Suppose again that the spheres are far apart and that the probability of occupancy of one sphere
is independent of the occupancy of the other. The cross correlation between the numbers n1 and n2 of solvent centers
in the two non-overlapping strata is then given by

hn1n2i = ρ2

dr1

dr2g(|r1 − r2|)

Zv1

Zv2

= ρ2v1v2 = hn1ihn2i ,

corresponding to uncorrelated particle-number ﬂuctuations. An expanded IT model uses the joint probabilities
p(n1, n2) of ﬁnding n1 particles in v1 and n2 particles in v2. Including the constraint eq 22 derived from stratiﬁ-
cation in that expanded IT model gives the correct result that the hydration free energy of the two spheres is the sum
of the hydration free energies of the individual spheres.

The non-additivity in the simple model is caused by the possibility of having a zero occupancy of the volume v
with a negative number −n of particles in sub-volume v1 that is compensated by a positive number n of particles in
sub-volume v2. By imposing explicitly that each of the sub-volumes has zero occupancy when the total occupancy
is zero, the non-additivity is eliminated. This argument illustrates that the restriction of the probabilities pn to
non-negative integers can be signiﬁcant. This example also emphasizes that arguments well justiﬁed about the center
of a distribution can lead to fundamental errors when applied to the wings of a distribution.

Macroscopic limit. For the ﬂat default model, we can calculate the limit of large solutes. The variance in the

particle number is then given by isothermal compressibility χT ,

hn2i − hni2
hni

= ρkBT χT

for v → ∞ .

For the ﬂat default model and a spherical solute with exclusion radius λ, we ﬁnd that the chemical potential grows
with the volume of the solute,

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

where we used the Gaussian approximation eq 20. The ﬂat default model predicts the water density G(∞) at contact
with a hard wall to be

∂µ
∂λ

≈

2πλ2
χT

,

7

G(∞) = lim
λ→∞

(4πλ2ρkBT )−1 ∂µ
∂λ

≈ (2ρkBT χT )−1 ,

(25)

which for water under standard conditions results in G(∞) ≈ 8. The contact value for a ﬂat wall, however, is well
known to be G(∞) = p/ρkBT , where p is the pressure. If we use bulk density and pressure of water under standard
conditions, we obtain p/ρkBT ≈ 7.4 × 10−4; for saturated water vapor,38 we ﬁnd p/ρkBT ≈ 2 × 10−5. Clearly,
the contact value at a ﬂat wall, G(∞), would be grossly overestimated if the ﬂat default model were used in this
macroscopic limit.

In the limit of large solutes we expect the multiphasic nature of water to become important. Stillinger38 pointed
out that the solvation of hard spheres much larger than a water molecule can be quantiﬁed by considering that a
thin vapor layer surrounds the solute. For large solutes, the formation of a correspondingly large water-vapor bubble
with subsequent insertion into that bubble will cost less free energy than inserting directly into the liquid phase. The
simplest IT model uses a ﬂat or Gibbs default model and does not account for this possibility, as density ﬂuctuations
are of either Gaussian or Poisson-like character, respectively. More elaborate default models should however be able
to account for the possibility of vaporizing a certain small volume. But clearly, deﬁning such models would require
knowledge about the free energy of microscopic vapor-bubble formation which is a task as formidable as the calculation
of solvation chemical potentials.

An indication of the large-solute eﬀects can already be seen in Figure 2. For solutes of size d = 0.3 nm and larger, we
ﬁnd that p1 is depressed relative to the ﬂat default model. This means that it is relatively less likely to ﬁnd an isolated
water molecule in a cavity than would be predicted from that simple model. Based on the foregoing discussion, for
solutes of increasing size we expect that p0 will be become larger than predicted from the ﬂat default model.

F. Historical perspective

Scaled particle theory ideas. The IT approach can be viewed in the context of preceding studies of the insertion
probability p0. Mayer and Montroll60 and later Reiss et al.36 expressed p0 in terms of higher-order correlation functions
of the bulk ﬂuid,

p0 = 1 +

dr1

dr2 · · ·

drmρmg(m)(r1, r2, . . . , rm) ,

(−1)m
m!

∞

m=1
X

Zv

Zv

Zv

where ρmg(m) is the m-body joint density for solvent centers (here, water-oxygen atoms). These are standard combi-
natorial results, more frequently seen in forms such as61

and

p0 = 1 +

(−1)m

∞

m=1
X

n
m

,

(cid:28)(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:29)

pj =

(−1)m

m=0
X

j + m
j

n
j + m

.

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:28)(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:29)

The ﬁrst of these can be derived directly by noting that p0 = h(−1 + 1)ni where (−1 + 1)n is an indicator function
that is one for n = 0 and zero otherwise. These sums truncate sharply if only a ﬁnite maximum number of particles
can be present in the observation volume. They are of practical value for small volumes where the maximum number
of solvent centers that can possibly occupy that volume is small. For larger volumes, large terms of alternating sign
appear in the expansion eq 27 that make it diﬃcult to use estimated values for the factorial moments in this linear
fashion.

Equating the excess chemical potential µex to the quasi-static work of creating a cavity results in an expression for
p0 in terms of the contact value G(λ) of the solvent density at the surface of the exclusion volume v. For a spherical
exclusion volume of radius λ we have:36,62

µex = −kBT ln p0 = 4πρkBT

G(λ)λ2dλ .

(29)

This result is formally exact for a hard-sphere solute and establishes that 4πρkBT G(λ)λ2 is the compressive force
exerted by the solvent on a hard spherical solute of diameter λ. If the solvent is considered to contain a hard core

d

0
Z

8

(26)

(27)

(28)

itself, there is a maximum number of solvent particles nmax that can occupy a certain volume v. This results in useful,
exact expressions for the case of nmax = 1 and 2. For larger solutes, the expected macroscopic solvation behavior37,38

µex ∼ p(4πλ3/3) + γ(4πλ2) ,

(30)

is used as a basis for extrapolation. Here p is the pressure and γ is the liquid-vapor surface tension. In the intermediate
molecular region, the approximate asymptotic form is connected smoothly to the exact curve for small solutes.37,38

Computer simulation studies. The cavity formation probability p0 lends itself to direct computer simulation studies
by test-particle insertion. Spherical volumes v in water were studied extensively using computer simulations.63–68
Similar insertion methods were also used to study polymer solubilities.69 The simulation studies of Pohorille and
Pratt63–65 clariﬁed a number of interesting speculations on hydrophobicity and provided the ﬁrst discriminating tests
of theoretical models for G(λ).

One hypothesis that has sparked interest in recent years is the idea that the low solubility of inert gases in liquid
water is due to the small size of the water molecule and the “interstitial” cavities will be smaller in water than
in coexisting organic liquids of common interest.70,71 Since the work here deals directly with such cavities, it is
straightforward to test that idea. Figure 4 shows distributions65 of the distances from an arbitrary point to the
nearest interaction site for three cases of interest: liquid n-hexane, liquid water, and an ideal gas with water density.
Reasonable and customary values are used for the van der Waals radii of the solvent interaction sites in each case.
Figure 4 shows that the most probable cavity radii are quite small in all those cases as would be expected for liquids.
Also, the diﬀerence in the most probable cavity size between liquid n-hexane and liquid water is not large, and
smaller than the corresponding diﬀerence between liquid water and an ideal gas with water density. The fact that
the diﬀerences seen here are slight is, presumably, associated with the fact that the most basic units considered in
n-hexane are the methyl and methylene groups. These are not so diﬀerent in size from a water molecule. In contrast,
simple equation of state models might treat the n-hexane molecule as a sphere of substantially larger size. It can also
be noted that on a packing fraction basis, typical organic liquids are denser than liquid water.64

One feature in Figure 4 that does distinguish water is the breadth of the distributions. The distribution of the
nearest solvent site neighboring an arbitrary position in the liquid is narrower in liquid water. The widths of these
distributions are independent of the van der Waals radii assigned to the solvent sites. The interpretation is that,
compared to other liquids, water is “stiﬀer” when larger cavities must be opened.

This comparative stiﬀness can be analyzed further by determining the contact functions G(λ) for water and hy-
drocarbon liquids and comparing the compressive force that such solvents exert on a hard spherical solute. Figure 5
shows the desired data. Water exerts a higher compressive force on such a solute than typical hydrocarbon solvents.
It is thus an accurate view on molecular-scale hydrophobic eﬀects that water “squeezes-out” hydrophobic solutes.72
Field theory models. A perspective related to the IT approach pursued here has been adopted before by Chandler.46
Equilibrium ﬂuctuations of the water density are approximated by a Gaussian model. The partition functions are
then calculated for the two systems with and without a cavity of volume v present, using a ﬁeld-theoretic method.
Chandler then shows that this continuous Gaussian ﬂuctuation model leads to the Pratt-Chandler integral equation
theory.42 For suﬃciently large volumes, a Gaussian ﬁeld model is expected to reproduce accurately the pn if the
continuous probability densities of particle numbers are mapped to discrete values of n and the negative values of n
are disregarded.

III. RESULTS FOR ELEMENTARY HYDROPHOBIC EFFECTS

A. Hydration of simple spherical solutes

The probabilities pn of observing exactly n oxygen centers inside spherical volumes, shown in Figure 2, are repro-
duced accurately using IT with a ﬂat default model. The corresponding excess chemical potentials of hydration of
those solutes, µex = −kBT ln p0, are shown in Figure 6.45 As expected, µex increases with increasing cavity radius.
The agreement between IT predictions and computer simulation results is excellent over the whole range d ≤ 0.36 nm
accessible to direct simulation calculations of p0.

B. Methane-methane potential of mean force

We now focus on the simplest model of hydrophobic interactions exempliﬁed by the free energy of bringing together
two methane-size cavities in water.42,44,73–78 This free energy proﬁle deﬁnes a potential of mean force (PMF). We
obtain the cavity contribution to the methane-methane PMF by calculating the excess chemical potential, µex(r), of

9

a cavity volume described by two spheres each of radius d and separated by distance r. The PMF is then deﬁned
as W (r) = µex(r) − lims→∞ µex(s). This deﬁnition guarantees that W (r) → 0 for r → ∞, avoiding the problem of
non-additivity discussed above for non-stratiﬁed volumes.

Figure 7 shows a comparison of the cavity PMF calculated using IT with that obtained from explicit simulations by
Smith and Haymet.74 The ﬂat default model has been used here and throughout this paper, unless otherwise noted.
Also, an exclusion radius of d = 0.33 nm has been used for methane-size cavities corresponding to a distance where the
methane-water oxygen radial distribution function reaches a value of 1.0 in commonly used models.79,80 The direct
interaction between the two methane molecules has been subtracted from the simulation PMF to get approximately
the cavity contribution to the methane-methane PMF.

In agreement with the simulation data, the PMF calculated using IT shows features characteristic of hydrophobic
interactions. A free energy minimum is observed corresponding to overlapping hard spheres. That deep minimum is
separated by a barrier from a second minimum at a distance of about 0.7 nm. The second minimum corresponds to
solvent-separated pairs of methane-size cavities. In addition, we observe a third shallow minimum which was also seen
in computer simulations by L¨udemann et al.78 The equilibrium between the solvent-separated and contact minimum
as a function of pressure provides insights into pressure denaturation of proteins, as described in section V.

C. Solvent contributions to the torsional equilibrium of butane

As a ﬁnal example of a simple hydrophobic eﬀect, Figure 8 shows the cavity contribution to the torsional PMF for
n-butane in water. IT calculations are compared with explicit computer simulations by Beglov and Roux.81 We ﬁnd
that the the cavity PMF favors the compact cis (φ = 0) structure over the extended trans structure by about 1.8
kJ/mol. The gauche structure (φ = π/3) is favored over trans by about 0.7 kJ/mol. Those diﬀerences and the overall
cavity PMF for the torsional isomerization of butane are in excellent agreement with the simulation data.

IV. TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION

A. Solvation chemical potentials

The hydrophobic eﬀect is often associated with characteristic temperature dependences.11,82 One of the most
astonishing observations is that the entropies of transfer of nonpolar molecules from gas phase or a nonpolar solvent
into water converge at a temperature of about 400 K to approximately zero entropy change. Similar behavior was
also seen in microcalorimetry experiments on unfolding of several globular proteins.6–8 This analogy to the transfer
data supported the hydrophobic-core model of protein folding: during unfolding predominantly nonpolar residues are
transferred from a mostly nonpolar protein core into an aqueous environment.

We have used the IT model to clarify the molecular origin and the quantitative details of this striking entropy-
convergence behavior.14 Computer simulations were carried out to calculate the water-oxygen radial distribution
function g(r) at several temperatures along the experimental saturation curve of water. The g(r)’s together with the
corresponding water densities are used as input in the IT model to calculate chemical potentials of hydration for hard
solutes. Solute sizes of d = 0.28, 0.31, 0.33, and 0.345 nm were considered, corresponding approximately to neon,
argon, methane, and xenon, respectively.

Figure 9 shows the chemical potentials for each of the spherical solutes as a function of temperature T , for T
between 275 and 625 K. Also shown are the results of direct simulation calculations using test-particle insertion
together with representative statistical errors. We ﬁnd excellent agreement between simulation and theory for the
chemical potentials over the whole temperature range. The chemical potentials are approximately parabolic except at
the highest temperatures, and the curves for diﬀerent solute sizes are shifted vertically with the maximum at about
400 K.

We deﬁne a solvation entropy by taking the derivative of the chemical potential along the saturation curve,

Ssat = −

∂µex
∂T

(cid:18)

(cid:19)sat

.

(31)

Additional equation-of-state contributions to the standard solvation entropy are negligible, estimated to be less than
1 and 10 J/(mol K) for temperatures T < 450 and T < 550 K, respectively. Figure 10 shows the temperature
dependence of the entropy Ssat for the diﬀerent solutes. The entropies are large and negative at room temperature
for all the solutes and decrease in magnitude with increasing temperature. The temperature dependence of entropies
is approximately linear with slopes increasing with the increasing solute size. The resulting heat capacity,

10

Csat = T

∂Ssat
∂T

(cid:18)

(cid:19)sat

,

(32)

(33)

(34)

is large and positive (approximately 40 cal mol−1 K−1 for a methane-size cavity). Moreover, the entropies converge at
about 400 K to approximately zero entropy, although at closer inspection the temperature range of the convergence
region is several 10 K and the entropy is not exactly zero at convergence. To understand the origin of this approximate
convergence we will in the following determine the factors entering into the IT model.

B. Origin of entropy convergence in hydrophobic hydration and protein folding

To quantify the diﬀerent factors contributing to the entropy convergence,14 we use the approximate Gaussian
representation eq 20 for p0 with mean m = hni = ρv and variance σ2 = hn2i − hni2. This results in an estimate of
the chemical potential,

µex ≈ T ρ2{kBv2/2σ2} + T {kB ln(2πσ2)/2} .

The second term is smaller than the ﬁrst, and depends only logarithmically on the solute size. The solvation chemical
potential may therefore be lowered by lowering the product of temperature and density T ρ2(T ), or by increasing the
particle-number ﬂuctuations σ2. The temperature dependence of T ρ2(T ) along the saturation curve is non-monotonic.
On the other hand, we ﬁnd that the variance σ2(T, v) changes only little over the range of temperatures in Figure 9.14
Accordingly, we can approximate the chemical potential as

µex ≈ T ρ2(T )x(v) + T y(v) ,

where the functions x(v) = kBv2/2σ2 and y(v) = kB ln(2πσ2)/2 depend only on the solute volume, not on the
temperature. The contributions of the various terms to the entropy convergence are illustrated schematically in
Figure 11. The term T y(v) in eq 33 is generally small. If we neglect T y(v), the solvation entropies eq 31 converge
exactly at zero entropy for solutes of diﬀerent size, and the temperature of convergence corresponds to the maximum
of T ρ2(T ) along the saturation curve. When the second term T y(v) is included, the entropy at convergence is diﬀerent
from zero, but the convergence is still exact. However, both x(v) and y(v) show weak temperature dependences. When
those are considered as well, the resulting entropy convergence is no longer exact but occurs over a temperature range
that is several 10 K wide for the solutes considered here.

Our analysis shows that the main factors leading to an entropy convergence are derived from the properties of pure
water. They are: (1) the non-monotonic behavior of T ρ2(T ) along the saturation curve and (2) the weak temperature
dependence of the particle-number ﬂuctuations σ2(T, v) for solute excluded volumes. The macroscopic analog of σ2
is the isothermal compressibility χT . For macroscopic volumes v, eq 23 relates the two, σ2 = ρ2vkBT χT . Figure 12
compares the isothermal compressibility of water and several organic solvents up to their critical point as a function
of temperature. Indeed, we ﬁnd that water shows far weaker temperature variations of χT than the organic solvents,
which can be seen as the origin of the entropy convergence. In the macroscopic limit, the variance σ2 = ρ2vkBT χT is
a product of T ρ2(T ) with a maximum at about 440 K and χT with a minimum at about 320 K. This results in only
small variations of σ2 in the range of temperatures between 273 and 420 K.

V. PRESSURE DENATURATION OF PROTEINS

A. Denaturation by water transfer into the protein interior

Proteins can be denatured by pressures of typically a few kilobar.19–26 This pressure-induced unfolding has been a
long-standing puzzle in our understanding of protein stability. The “liquid-hydrocarbon model” of protein unfolding11
explains unfolding as a transfer of predominantly hydrophobic residues from the protein interior into the aqueous
solvent. Indeed, this model accurately describes the thermodynamics of temperature denaturation, in particular, the
convergence of the entropies of unfolding. However, as Kauzmann13 pointed out, such a description fails to explain
the pressure denaturation of proteins. In particular, the volume changes associated with transferring hydrocarbons
from a nonpolar phase into water exhibit behavior exactly opposite to that upon pressure unfolding as a function of
pressure. The volume change of hydrocarbon transfer is negative at low pressure and positive at high pressure; the
volume change of protein unfolding is positive at low pressure and negative at high pressure.13

11

To explain the pressure denaturation of proteins, we invoke additional information about the structural properties
of pressure-denatured proteins. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements reveal considerably more struc-
tural organization in pressure-denatured proteins compared to that in temperature-denatured proteins.27 These and
other experiments21–24 indicate that the pressure-denatured proteins are relatively more compact than temperature-
denatured proteins. Accordingly, we depart from the commonly used model explaining protein unfolding thermo-
dynamics as a transfer of nonpolar residues from the protein interior into solution. Instead, we describe pressure
denaturation as a transfer of water molecules from the aqueous phase into the hydrophobic core of a protein.

To quantify this inverted “liquid-hydrocarbon model,” we focus on the stability of hydrophobic aggregates formed
in water as a function of pressure. Aggregate formation of spherical, methane-size solutes serves as an idealized model
of the stability of protein hydrophobic cores. The free energy of forming such aggregates can be expressed in terms
of two-body and higher order PMF’s between the methane-size solutes in water. In the following, we will study the
pair and three-body interactions of methane-like solutes in water which control the stability and formation of larger
aggregates.

B. Eﬀect of pressure on hydrophobic interactions

Figure 13 shows the PMF’s W (r) between two methane-like particles in water for pressures up to about 7 kilobar
(700 MPa) calculated using IT.15 The PMF’s exhibit two minima, a contact minimum at about 0.4 nm distance
and a solvent-separated minimum at a distance of about 0.7 nm. The two minima are separated by the desolvation
barrier. The PMF’s are normalized at the solvent-separated minimum to illustrate that the contact minimum loses
importance with increasing pressure. The free energy of the contact minimum increases relative to the solvent-
separated minimum by about 0.9 kJ/mol when the pressure is increased from 1 bar to 7 kilobar. In addition, the
desolvation barrier between the two minima also increases with increasing pressure. Similar pressure destabilization
of contact conﬁgurations was observed for three methane molecules in contact.15

The eﬀect of pressure on pair PMF’s between two methane molecules has also been studied by computer
simulation.84 These simulation calculations showed a pressure destabilization of contact pairs that is comparable
in magnitude to the IT calculations.
In addition, simulation calculations also showed the formation of methane
aggregates in water at low pressures that dissolved at high pressures.85

The pressure destabilization of hydrophobic contact conﬁgurations can be understood from the following simpliﬁed
model: At low pressures, the interstitial space between two large nonpolar solutes is energetically unfavorable for water
molecules.49,86 As the pressure increases, the space between the nonpolar solutes is more likely to be occupied by
water, increasing the importance of solvent-separated conﬁgurations relative to contact conﬁgurations. A more detailed
analysis indeed shows that the destabilizing eﬀect of pressure on hydrophobic contacts increases with increasing size
of the two nonpolar solutes.15

C. Stability of proteins

We have shown that the stability of hydrophobic aggregates decreases with increasing pressure as a result of water
penetration. When applied to the hydrophobic-core model of proteins, we predict that pressure denatures proteins by
swelling.15 A swelling mechanism has also been proposed for urea-induced protein denaturation.87 Under suﬃciently
high pressures water molecules will intercalate into the hydrophobic protein interior. The resulting structures of
pressure-denatured proteins are predicted to be more ordered and more compact than those of temperature-denatured
proteins. Recent small-angle scattering experiments28 indeed showed that the pressure-denatured staphylococcal
nuclease protein has a considerably smaller radius of gyration of Rg ≈ 3.5 nm compared to the temperature-denatured
protein with Rg ≈ 4.6 nm.

D. Formation of clathrate hydrates

This physical picture of pressure denaturation of proteins is relevant also for the formation of clathrate hydrates,
crystalline compounds forming at elevated pressures from non-polar molecules and water. As solid deposits in gas
pipelines, clathrate hydrates cause problems in natural gas transmission. Methane-water clathrate hydrates, for
instance, form at pressures above about 44 MPa at a temperature of 298 K, with a stoichiometry of about 6-7
water molecules per methane and a methane-methane nearest-neighbor distance of about 0.62-0.74 nm.88 At lower

12

pressures, the two phases separate. Formation of the clathrate structure is consistent with stabilizing the solvent-
separated minimum in the methane-methane PMF relative to the contact minimum, as predicted from the analysis of
pressure eﬀects on hydrophobic interactions. In addition, the present theory predicts that larger hydrocarbons require
lower pressure for clathrate formation,15 in agreement with the experimental observations that led to the gas-gravity
method of phase determination.88

E. Pressure eﬀects on protein folding kinetics

We noted before that increasing pressure results in a higher desolvation barrier between the contact conﬁguration
and the solvent-separated minimum. Figure 14 shows the barrier heights ∆W ‡
u from the solvent-separated
and contact minimum, respectively, as a function of pressure. Thus, ∆W †
u are the barriers for forming
and breaking contact conﬁgurations, corresponding to “folding” and “unfolding” reactions, respectively. We ﬁnd
that ∆W ‡
u both increase approximately linearly with increasing pressure. Activation volumes deﬁned as
∆v‡
f = 3.8 ml/mol and ∆v‡
u = 1.6 ml/mol for folding and unfolding reactions,
respectively. Increasing pressure is thus expected to slow down both the “folding” and the “unfolding” reactions.

f /u/∂p are both positive, ∆v‡

f /u = ∂∆W ‡

f and ∆W ‡

f and ∆W ‡

f and ∆W ‡

Indeed, experimental studies of the pressure-dependent folding and unfolding kinetics of the protein staphylococcal
nuclease showed a reduction of both rates with increasing pressure.89 The experimentally observed activation volumes
for folding and unfolding of staphylococcal nuclease are ∆V ‡
u = 20 ml/mol, respectively. From
the ratio of overall experimental activation volumes and theoretical activation volumes calculated per hydrophobic
contact, we can estimate the number of hydrophobic contacts broken in the folding transition state. For staphylococcal
nuclease we estimate those to be between 10 and 25, in good agreement with the predictions of energy landscape
theory.15,90

f = 92 ml/mol and ∆V ‡

VI. SALT EFFECTS ON HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION

Addition of salts to water generally reduces the solubility of nonpolar solutes. The Hofmeister series29 ranks salts,
in part, according to this reduction of the solubility of nonpolar compounds. Here, we do not attempt to provide a
complete description of salt eﬀects on hydrophobic hydration. Instead, we present some preliminary results for the
solubility of small hard-sphere solutes in a solution of sodium-chloride (NaCl) in water. In particular, we compare
results for NaCl concentrations of 1, 3, and 5 mol/l as well as pure water. The three salt solutions were studied using
molecular dynamics simulations extending over 1 nanosecond each. For simulation details, see Ref. 91.

Figure 15 shows the excess chemical potential of spherical solutes as a function of their exclusion radius d with
water. The solute-solvent interactions are modeled as those of hard spheres with radii Rw = 0.132 nm of water,
RNa = 0.085 nm of Na+, and RCl = 0.18 nm of Cl−. The exclusion radii with water, Na+, and Cl− are d = R + Rw,
R+RNa, and R+RCl, respectively, where R is the solute hard-sphere radius. We ﬁnd that adding salt indeed increases
µex and thus decreases the solubility for a solute of a given size. For a methane-size solute (d = 0.33 nm), the excess
chemical potential increases by about 10 kJ/mol from about 34 to 44 kJ/mol when increasing the NaCl concentration
from 0 to 5 mol/l.

To describe the salt dependence using the IT approach, we extend our formulation to solvent mixtures. For ionic
solutes, the strong interactions between water and ions give rise to the formation of compact hydrated ions which
result in non-trivial density ﬂuctuations near ions. Therefore, instead of trying to model the full distribution of
particle number ﬂuctuations p(nW, nNa, nCl), we focus on a more tractable subset, which contains the probability of
the event we are ultimately interested in, p(nW = 0, nNa = 0, nCl = 0). Further, we factorize this probability into an
ionic part and a conditional water part,

p(nW = 0, nNa = 0, nCl = 0) = p(nNa = 0, nCl = 0)

×p(nW = 0|nNa = 0, nCl = 0) ,

(35)

where p(nW = 0|nNa = 0, nCl = 0) is the conditional probability of having no water-oxygen atoms in the water
exclusion volume, given that there are no ions in the respective ion exclusion volumes. Such a factorization combined
with accurate simulation data provides insights into salt eﬀects on hydrophobic solubilities at a molecular level. The
contributions to the solute chemical potential, −kBT lnp(nNa = 0, nCl = 0) and −kBT lnp(nW = 0|nNa = 0, nCl = 0)
both increase with increasing NaCl concentration. The increase in the salt contribution is primarily due to an increase
Interestingly, the mean of p(nW|nNa = 0, nCl = 0) is approximately
in the mean of the p(nNa, nCl) distribution.

13

independent of salt concentration.
It is the decrease in the variance of this conditional water distribution with
increasing NaCl concentration that leads to a decrease in p(nW = 0|nNa = 0, nCl = 0). The direct salt eﬀect of the
reduction in free volume due to overlap with salt ions and the indirect salt eﬀect of changing the water structure
account for roughly one half each of the total increase in solute chemical potentials.

VII. NEW DIRECTIONS: CAVITY EXPULSION AND AREA LAWS

We mentioned in section II E that for macroscopic solutes physical eﬀects intrude that are not captured in the
simplest IT models. This is a consequence of the multiphasic nature of water.
In the limit of large solutes, the
solvation chemical potential is largely determined by the free energy of forming a vapor bubble of appropriate size.
The free energy of forming large bubbles can be approximated by the product of surface area and liquid-vapor surface
tension, since the contribution from the pressure-volume work is small for water.38 Accordingly, we expect that the
solvation chemical potential grows with the surface area for large solutes. Stillinger38 gave a justiﬁcation of this based
on the water structure near a large hard solute. The contact-value theorem gives, in the limit of a ﬂat hard wall, a
water at contact of about 7.4 × 10−4 times the bulk density of water. Stillinger argued that this “dewetting” implies
the presence of a molecularly thick vapor layer near a hard wall, and as a result, area laws with surface tension
coeﬃcients similar to that of the liquid-vapor surface tension of water.

In an attempt to bridge the gap between microscopic and macroscopic solvation behavior, we have recently developed
a quantitative description of the solvation of nonpolar solutes as a function of their size.49 The water structure near
spherical49 and non-spherical Lennard-Jones solutes92,93 was found to be largely insensitive to the details of the
solute-water interactions except for the solute size, motivating the use of perturbation theory. For spherical solutes,
we ﬁnd that the radial distribution function of water around the solute can be described accurately by

gsw(r) = exp[−βurep(r) − βω(r) + C(r)] ,

(36)

where urep(r) is the repulsive solute-water interaction from, e.g., Weeks-Chandler-Anderson separation;94 C(r) is a
renormalized attractive interaction; and ω(r) represents the free energy of a test water molecule that does not interact
with the solute as a function of the distance r from the solute,49 thus containing the non-trivial solvent contributions.
Interestingly, ω(r) is directly related to the one-body Lagrange multiplier ω(1)(r) of the continuous IT eq 11. We ﬁnd
that ω(r) is dominated by a contribution ω0(r − r0) that is identical for various solutes except for a simple radial
translation with the solute size r0. The remainder ∆ω(r − r0), however, changes non-trivially with the solute size,
acting as a cavity-expulsion potential for the test water molecule.

The cavity-expulsion potential, ∆ω(r − r0), quantiﬁes primarily the loss of energetic interactions of a test water
molecule as it crosses the solute-water interface from the water phase towards the center of the solute. For small
solutes, ∆ω(r − r0) is negligible. As the solute size increases, this loss of interactions becomes important, reaching
−µex
w , the negative excess chemical potential of water, in the limit of large solutes. For solutes of diameters more than
about 0.5 nm the cavity expulsion results in a slight depression in the water density at the solute-water interface. We
ﬁnd that this “weak dewetting” with increasing solute size is suﬃcient to give an approximate surface-area dependence
of the solvation chemical potential, which would otherwise be dominated by solute volume terms.49

VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

How is water diﬀerent from hydrocarbon liquids as a solvent for nonpolar solutes? This is the foremost question
asked of theories of hydrophobic eﬀects and several of the points above constitute relevant parts of the answer. It is
appropriate therefore to ask this question more speciﬁcally and to organize features of the answer that are provided
by the IT models considered here. One basic aspect of the answer is straightforward and on that score we do not
contribute anything further: water is diﬀerent because of the mechanical potential energies of the interactions among
water molecules, including hydrogen bonding, orientational speciﬁcity, and cooperativity.

In the context of solvation thermodynamics, the question how water diﬀers from other solvents solicits information
about a particular structural pattern of the solvent that might be principally responsible for hydrophobic hydration free
energies. For example, clathrate-like structures have been invoked to explain hydrophobic hydration phenomena.95
The answer given by the IT model is that water diﬀers from common hydrocarbon solvents, in the ﬁrst place,
because the distribution of pairs of exclusion spheres, oxygen-oxygen sites in water, is distinctive and has a distinctive
temperature dependence.
In the second place, the isothermal compressibility of water, that can be obtained by
integration of the oxygen-oxygen distribution, is insensitive to temperature compared to the same property of organic

14

solvents. Since the minimum in the temperature dependence of the isothermal compressibility is very distinctive, this
answer is remarkable and remarkably simple.

From our analysis of pressure eﬀects on hydrophobic interactions and protein stability, we can deduce further pecu-
liarities of water. Increasing the pressure in water shifts the balance from attractive and directional hydrogen-bonding
forces to repulsive and isotropic packing forces between water molecules.96 This results in “energetic frustration” of
water molecules in the water phase,97 which in turn reduces the relative cost of incorporating water molecules into
a hydrophobic aggregate. At least two factors make water special in this context: its large negative excess chemical
potential prevents water from penetrating hydrophobic aggregates under normal conditions,49 thus driving the for-
mation of protein hydrophobic cores. Under suﬃciently high pressure, however, the relatively small water molecules
occupy previously empty cavities, exploiting imperfections in the packing of the protein interior. Note that the small
size of water molecules here is not used as an argument that “interstitial” cavities are smaller in water than in typical
organic liquids,70,71 as discussed in section II F, but that water molecules can occupy small cavities in the protein
interior. This incorporation of water molecules is favored further by the versatility of water molecules which can
form favorable hydrogen-bonding interactions in many diﬀerent environments, particularly in the interior of a protein
which is never entirely nonpolar.

These arguments also explain in part the success of simple theories, such as SPT and PC, that take no special
account of the known details of hydrophobic solvation patterning. These theories yield satisfactory predictions for
the simplest hydrophobic eﬀects in part because they incorporate information about the equation of state and the
molecular structure of water. A next stage of basic molecular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects will surely address the
hydration structure in more detail while at the same time preserving equation of state information such as the low,
temperature insensitive values of the isothermal compressibility that have been identiﬁed as particularly important.
IT models of the solvation thermodynamics can easily be generalized to various aqueous and non-aqueous solvents
and mixtures, combined with other approaches, or extended to “unusual” models of water, such as a recently proposed
two dimensional model of water98 or an isotropic water model without directional hydrogen-bond interactions.76 We
have successfully adapted the method to study the solubility of small molecules in polymeric ﬂuids.99,100 Crooks and
Chandler101 compared solvation chemical potentials of hard spheres of varying sizes in hard-sphere ﬂuids to simulation
data, ﬁnding that a Gibbs prior gives a good description of the density ﬂuctuations and the solvation thermodynamics.
Applications of the IT method to study phase equilibria have been suggested.102 Chandler and Lum103 have combined
ﬁeld-theoretic methods46 with the IT approach to describe the solvation thermodynamics and structure of mesoscopic
and macroscopic spherical solutes in water which is tightly associated with “dewetting” of the solute surface.38,49

The development of IT models is an ongoing eﬀort targeting several directions. A better description for molecularly
large solutes can be expected from improved, physically motivated default models that incorporate the multiphasic
nature of water to account for the free energy of forming microscopic vapor bubbles.103 IT models can easily be
generalized to study hydrophobic interactions in inhomogeneous environments, for instance, to describe ligand binding
to proteins. Section II C gives an outline of a continuous IT, which establishes connections to the concepts of cavity
expulsion and dewetting of nonpolar surfaces.49 The volume stratiﬁcation discussed in section II D leads naturally to
predictions of the hydration structure.

In conclusion, we believe that the basic IT model provides a simple theoretical framework to study many hydrophobic
phenomena, as it already led to a new understanding of the temperature dependence of hydrophobic hydration,14 and
resulted in a new description of the pressure denaturation of proteins.15

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was in part supported by the U.S. Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory
LDRD-CD grant for an “Integrated Structural Biology Resource.” S.G. is a Director’s Funded Postdoctoral Fellow
at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

1 Kauzmann, W. Adv. Protein Chem. 1959, 14, 1.
2 Tanford, C. The Hydrophobic Eﬀect: Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes; John Wiley & Sons: New York,

1973.

3 Dill, K. A. Biochemistry 1990, 29, 7133.
4 Blokzijl, W.; Engberts, J. B. F. N. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1993, 32, 1545.

15

5 Fink, A. L. Folding & Design 1998, 3, R9.
6 Privalov, P. L. Adv. Prot. Chem. 1979, 33, 167.
7 Privalov, P. L.; Gill, S. J. Adv. Prot. Chem. 1988, 39, 191.
8 Makhatadze, G. I.; Privalov, P. L. Adv. Prot. Chem. 1995, 47, 307.
9 Richards, F. M. J. Mol. Biol. 1974, 82, 1.
10 Buckle, A. M.; Henrick, K.; Fersht, A. R. J. Mol. Biol. 1993, 234, 847.
11 Baldwin, R. L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1986, 83, 8069.
12 Baldwin, R. L.; Muller, N. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1992, 89, 7110.
13 Kauzmann, W. Nature (London) 1987, 325, 763.
14 Garde, S.; Hummer, G.; Garc´ıa, A. E.; Paulaitis, M. E.; Pratt, L. R. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 4966.
15 Hummer, G.; Garde, S.; Garc´ıa, A. E.; Paulaitis, M. E.; Pratt, L. R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998, 95, 1552.
16 Privalov, P. L.; Khechinashvili, N. N. J. Mol. Biol. 1974, 86, 665.
17 Makhatadze, G. I.; Privalov, P. L. Adv. Protein Chem. 1995, 47, 307.
18 Privalov, P. L.; Makhatadze, G. I. J. Mol. Biol. 1993, 232, 660.
19 Brandts, J. F.; Oliveira, R. J.; Westort, C. Biochemistry 1970, 9, 1038.
20 Zipp, A.; Kauzmann, W. Biochemistry 1973, 12, 4217.
21 Heremans, K. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 1982, 11, 1.
22 Weber, G.; Drickamer, H. G. Quart. Rev. Biophys. 1983, 16, 89.
23 Silva, J. L.; Weber, G. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1993, 44, 89.
24 Jonas, J.; Jonas, A. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 1994, 23, 287.
25 Royer, C. A. Methods Enzymol. 1995, 259, 357.
26 Silva, J. L.; Foguel, D.; Da Poian, A. T.; Prevelige, P. E. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 1996, 6, 166.
27 Zhang, J.; Peng, X.; Jonas, A.; Jonas, J. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 8631.
28 Panick, G.; Malessa, R.; Winter, R.; Rapp, G.; Frye, K. J.; Royer, C. A. J. Mol. Biol. 1998, 275, 389.
29 Baldwin, R. L. Biophys. J. 1996, 71, 2056.
30 Frank, H. S.; Evans, M. W. J. Chem. Phys. 1945, 13, 507.
31 N´emethy, G.; Scheraga, H. A. J. Chem. Phys. 1962, 36, 3382.
32 Ben-Naim, A. Hydrophobic Interactions; Plenum: New York, 1980.
33 Besseling, N. A. M.; Lyklema, J. J. Phys. Chem. B 1997, 101, 7604.
34 Madan, B.; Sharp, K. J. Phys. Chem. B 1997, 101, 11237.
35 Note that it is not within the scope of this article to review the entire literature devoted to the hydrophobic eﬀect. An
electronic literature search produced over 28,000 publications that contain the word hydrophobic in the title or list of
keywords since 1974!

36 Reiss, H.; Frisch, H. L.; Lebowitz, J. L. J. Chem. Phys. 1959, 31, 369.
37 Pierotti, R. A. J. Phys. Chem. 1963, 67, 1840.
38 Stillinger, F. H. J. Solut. Chem. 1973, 2, 141.
39 Hermann, R. B. J. Phys. Chem. 1972, 76, 2754.
40 Chothia, C. Nature 1974, 248, 338.
41 Oobatake, M.; Ooi, T. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 1993, 59, 237.
42 Pratt, L. R.; Chandler, D. J. Chem. Phys. 1977, 67, 3683.
43 Lazaridis, T.; Paulaitis, M. E. J. Phys. Chem. 1992, 96, 3847.
44 Pangali, C.; Rao, M.; Berne, B. J. J. Chem. Phys. 1979, 71, 2975.
45 Hummer, G.; Garde, S.; Garc´ıa, A. E.; Pohorille, A.; Pratt, L. R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93, 8951.
46 Chandler, D. Phys. Rev. E 1993, 48, 2898.
47 Berne, B. J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93, 8800.
48 Percus, J. K. J. Physique IV 1993, 3, 49.
49 Hummer, G.; Garde, S. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998, 80, 4193.
50 Pollack, G. L. Science 1991, 251, 1323.
51 Berendsen, H. J. C.; Postma, J. P. M.; van Gunsteren, W. F.; Hermans, J. In Intermolecular Forces; Pullman, B., Ed.;

Reidel: Dordrecht, Holland, 1981, pp. 331–342.

52 Hummer, G.; Soumpasis, D. M. Phys. Rev. E 1994, 49, 591.
53 Shore, J. E.; Johnson, R. W. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 1980, 26, 26.
54 Berendsen, H. J. C.; Grigera, J. R.; Straatsma, T. P. J. Phys. Chem. 1987, 91, 6269.
55 Pratt, L. R.; Garde, S.; Hummer, G. Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute: New Approaches to old and new

Problems in Liquid State Theory, Patti Marina (Messina) Italy, July 1998; submitted, 1998, [LA-UR 98-98-2712].

56 Widom, B. J. Chem. Phys. 1963, 39, 2808.
57 Stratonovich, R. L. J. Exper. Theoret. Phys. USSR 1955, 28, 409, english translation in Soviet Physics-JETP 1955, 1, 254.
58 Hill, T. L. J. Chem. Phys. 1958, 28, 1179.
59 Guinier, A. Ann. Phys. (Paris) 1939, 1, 11.
60 Mayer, J. E.; Montroll, E. J. Chem. Phys. 1941, 8, 2.

16

61 Riordan, J. An Introduction to Combinatorial Analysis; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1978.
62 Reiss, H. Adv. Chem. Phys. 1965, 9, 1.
63 Pratt, L. R.; Pohorille, A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1992, 89, 2995.
64 Pohorille, A.; Pratt, L. R. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1990, 112, 5066.
65 Pratt, L. R.; Pohorille, A. In Proceedings of the EBSA (Association of the European Biophysical Societies) 1992 International
Workshop on Water-Biomolecule Interactions; Palma, M. U.; Palma-Vittorelli, M. B.; Parak, F., Eds.; Societ´a Italiana de
Fisica: Bologna, 1993, pp. 261–268.

66 Guillot, B.; Guissani, Y. J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 99, 8075.
67 Forsman, J.; J¨onsson, B. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 5116.
68 Beutler, T. C.; B´eguelin, D. R.; van Gunsteren, W. F. J. Chem. Phys. 1995, 102, 3787.
69 Stamatopoulou, A.; Ben-Amotz, D. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 7294.
70 Lee, B. Biopolymers 1985, 24, 813.
71 Lee, B. Biopolymers 1991, 31, 993.
72 Richards, F. M. Scientiﬁc American 1991, 264, 54.
73 Watanabe, K.; Andersen, H. C. J. Phys. Chem. 1986, 90, 795.
74 Smith, D. E.; Haymet, A. D. J. J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 98, 6445.
75 van Belle, D.; Wodak, S. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 647.
76 Head-Gordon, T. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 501.
77 Garde, S.; Hummer, G.; Paulaitis, M. E. Faraday Discuss. 1996, 103, 125.
78 L¨udemann, S.; Abseher, R.; Schreiber, H.; Steinhauser, O. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 119, 4206.
79 Hummer, G.; Pratt, L. R.; Garc´ıa, A. E. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 1206.
80 Jorgensen, W. L.; Madura, J. D.; Swenson, C. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1984, 106, 6638.
81 Beglov, D.; Roux, B. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100, 9050.
82 Dill, K. A. Science 1990, 250, 297.
83 Rowlinson, J. S.; Swinton, F. L. Liquids and Liquid Mixtures; Butterworths: London, 1982.
84 Payne, V. A.; Matubayasi, N.; Murphy, L. R.; Levy, R. M. J. Phys. Chem. B 1997, 101, 2054.
85 Wallqvist, A. J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 96, 1657.
86 Wallqvist, A.; Berne, B. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1995, 99, 2893.
87 Wallqvist, A.; Covell, D. G.; Thirumalai, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120, 427.
88 Sloan, Jr., E. D. Clathrate Hydrates of Natural Gases; M. Dekker: New York, 1990.
89 Vidugiris, G. J. A.; Markley, J. L.; Royer, C. A. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 4909.
90 Bryngelson, J. D.; Onuchic, J. N.; Socci, N. D.; Wolynes, P. G. Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 1995, 21, 167.
91 Hummer, G.; Soumpasis, D. M.; Neumann, M. J. Phys.: Condens. Matt. 1994, 6, A141.
92 Garde, S.; Hummer, G.; Garc´ıa, A. E.; Pratt, L. R.; Paulaitis, M. E. Phys. Rev. E 1996, 53, R4310.
93 Ashbaugh, H. S.; Paulaitis, M. E. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 1900.
94 Weeks, J. D.; Chandler, D.; Andersen, H. C. J. Chem. Phys. 1971, 54, 5237.
95 Head-Gordon, T. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1995, 92, 8308.
96 Stillinger, F. H.; Rahman, A. J. Chem. Phys. 1974, 61, 4973.
97 Sciortino, F.; Geiger, A.; Stanley, H. E. Nature (London) 1991, 354, 218.
98 Silverstein, K. A. T.; Haymet, A. D. J.; Dill, K. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120, 3166.
99 Garde, S.; Khare, R.; Hummer, G. , , unpublished.
100 Cuthbert, T. R.; Wagner, N. J.; Paulaitis, M. E. Macromolecules 1997, 30, 3058.
101 Crooks, G. E.; Chandler, D. Phys. Rev. E 1997, 56, 4217.
102 Wu, J. Z.; Prausnitz, J. M. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 1998, 37, 1634.
103 Chandler, D.; Lum, K. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 1998, 43, 203.

FIG. 1. Schematic two-dimensional representation of the probabilities pn of observing n solvent centers inside a randomly
positioned volume v in the bulk ﬂuid. Two cases are shown: A successful insertion with n = 0 that would contribute to pn and
an insertion with n = 3.

FIG. 2. Probabilities pn for observing n water-oxygen atoms in spherical cavity volumes.45 Results from Monte Carlo
simulations of SPC water51 are shown as symbols. The parabolas are the predictions of the ﬂat default model of the IT
approach. The center-to-center exclusion distance d is noted next to the curves (in nanometers).

17

FIG. 3. Eﬀect of increasing the number of moments used in the IT calculations. Shown as a function of the number of
moments is the predicted excess chemical potential of a methane-size hard sphere with exclusion radius d = 0.33 nm for
solvation in SPC/E water54 (left-hand scale). Also shown for reference is the actual chemical potential (dot-dashed line). The
Shannon information I (right-hand scale) illustrates that the third and higher moments do not result in an appreciable gain in
information.

FIG. 4. Distributions pnn of the distance R + RS from a random point to the nearest neighboring site in water, n-hexane,
and an ideal gas with water density.65 RS is the van der Waals radius of the solvent. For each of the three ﬂuids, the solvent
van der Waals volumes are represented by a superposition of spherical sites of one type only. The ideal-gas curve is the Hertz
distribution 4πρ(R + RS)2 exp[−4πρ(R + RS)3/3] with ρ the molecular (or oxygen) density of liquid water at 301 K and
atmospheric pressure. The van der Waals radius of water oxygen is RS = 1.35 ˚A; that of united-atom carbons in n-hexane is
RS = 1.85 ˚A.

FIG. 5. Contact densities G(λ) of water and n-hexane at the surface of hard-sphere solutes.63 G(λ) gives the compressive

force of the solvent on a hard spherical solute.

FIG. 6. Excess chemical potential of hard-sphere solutes in SPC water51 as a function of the exclusion radius d. The symbols

are simulation results, compared with the IT prediction using the ﬂat default model (solid line).45

FIG. 7. Potential of mean force between two methane-size cavities in SPC water,51 comparing explicit computer simulations74

(dashed line) with the IT prediction45 (solid line).

FIG. 8. Water contribution to the torsional PMF of butane from IT45 and explicit computer simulation81 (dashed line).

FIG. 9. Chemical potential of hard-sphere solutes with exclusion radii corresponding to neon, argon, methane, and xenon as
a function of temperature along the saturation curve of water.14 The solid line is the IT prediction. The symbols are computer
simulation data from insertion. Both simulation and theory data are based on SPC water51 data.

FIG. 10. Entropy of solvating hard-sphere solutes with exclusion radii corresponding to neon, argon, methane, and krypton

as a function of temperature along the saturation curve of water.14 Shown is the entropy deﬁned in eq 31.

FIG. 11. Schematic representation of the diﬀerent factors resulting in approximate convergence of solvation entropies.

FIG. 12. Comparison of the isothermal compressibility of water and nonpolar solvents as a function of temperature along

their respective saturation curves. Data are taken from Ref. 83

FIG. 13. Pressure dependence of the PMF between two methane-like solutes in water. The PMF’s were calculated from
information theory using a ﬂat default model.15 A methane-methane Lennard-Jones interaction was added. SPC water51 g(r)’s
were used. The arrows indicate changes with increasing pressures from −160 to 7250 bar.

FIG. 14. Pressure dependence of the desolvation barrier between the contact and solvent-separated minimum in the
methane-methane PMF of Figure 13. The activation free energy for forming (open squares) and breaking hydrophobic contacts
(ﬁlled squares) is shown as a function of pressure.

FIG. 15. Excess chemical potential of hard-sphere solutes in aqueous NaCl solution as a function of solute size, given by the

exclusion radius with water, and salt concentration.

18

n=3

n=0

Figure 1 (Hummer et al.)

n
p

1

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-8

10-9

0.18

0.22

0.26

0.30

0.34

0.38

0

2

4

6

10

12

14

8

n

Figure 2 (Hummer et al.)

T
B
k
/

x
e
µ

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.5

I
 
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
i
 
n
o
n
n
a
h
S

µex/kBT (flat)
µex/kBT (Gibbs)
I (flat)
I (Gibbs)
µex/kBT

1

2

3

4

5
number of moments

6

7

-3

8

9

Figure 3 (Hummer et al.)

water  •

random  •

n-hexane •

)
1
-
Å

(
 
)
S
R
+
R
(
n
n
p

1.0

0.5

0.0

-1                 0                1

R (Å)

Figure 4 (Hummer et al.)

water

)
λ
(
G

2.0

1.0

0.0

n-hexane

0

1

2

3

λ (Å)

Figure 5 (Hummer et al.)

simulation
information theory

)

1
-

l

o
m
 
J
k
(
 

x
e
µ

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.15

0.2
R (nm)

Figure 6 (Hummer et al.)

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

)

1
-

l

o
m
 
J
k
(
 
)
r
(

W

information theory
simulation

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1

1.1 1.2

r (nm)

Figure 7 (Hummer et al.)

1.5

2

1

0.5

)

1
-

l

o
m
 
J
k
(
 
)
φ
(
W

0

0

trans

cis

gauche

information theory
simulation

π/4

π/2
φ (rad)

3π/4

π

Figure 8 (Hummer et al.)

Xe

Me

Ar

Ne

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
 
x
e
µ

300

350

400

450

500

550

600

T (K)

Figure 9 (Hummer et al.)

100

50

0

)

K

/
l
o
m
/
J
(
 
 
 
t
a
s
)
T
∂
/
x
e
µ
 
∂
(
−

−50

−100

Ne

Ar

Me

Xe

300

350

400

450

500

550

T(K)

Figure 10 (Hummer et al.)

µex ≈ Tρ2(T)x(v)

µex ≈ Tρ2(T)x(v)+Ty(v)

µex = -kBT ln p0

y
p
o
r
t
n
e

y
p
o
r
t
n
e

y
p
o
r
t
n
e

T

T

T

Figure 11 (Hummer et al.)

benzene
n-heptane
carbon-tetrachloride
water

10-3

)

1
-

r
a
b
(
 

T

χ

10-4

280

300

320

340

360

380

400

420

T (K)

Figure 12 (Hummer et al.)

)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
 

W

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
 

W
∆

-0.6

-1

-1.4

7000

0
p (kbar)

0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8
r (nm)

Figure 13 (Hummer et al.)

)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
 

‡

W
∆

4.5

5

4

3

2

3.5

2.5

1.5

∆vu

‡ = 1.6 mL/mol

∆vf

‡ = 3.8 mL/mol

0

2000

4000

p (bar)

6000

Figure 14 (Hummer et al.)

)
 
l
o
m
/
J
k
 
(
 

x
e
µ

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

d  ( nm )

Figure 15 (Hummer et al.)

