9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Molecular Realism in Default Models for Information Theories of Hydrophobic Eﬀects

M. A. Gomez∗, L. R. Pratt† , G. Hummer‡, and S. Garde§
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545, USA
(January 11, 2014)

This letter considers several physical arguments about con-
tributions to hydrophobic hydration of inert gases, constructs
default models to test them within information theories, and
gives information theory predictions using those default mod-
els with moment information drawn from simulation of liquid
water. Tested physical features include: packing or steric
eﬀects, the role of attractive forces that lower the solvent
pressure, and the roughly tetrahedral coordination of water
molecules in liquid water. Packing eﬀects (hard sphere default
model) and packing eﬀects plus attractive forces (Lennard-
Jones default model) are ineﬀective in improving the predic-
tion of hydrophobic hydration free energies of inert gases over
the previously used Gibbs and ﬂat default models. However,
a conceptually simple cluster Poisson model that incorporates
tetrahedral coordination structure in the default model is one
of the better performers for these predictions. These results
provide a partial rationalization of the remarkable perfor-
mance of the ﬂat default model with two moments in previous
applications. The cluster Poisson default model thus will be
the subject of further reﬁnement. LA-UR-98-5431

1. Introduction

The idea of constructing an information theory de-
scription of cavity formation in water [1] has reinvigo-
rated the molecular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects [2–7].
One advantage of this approach is that simple physical
hypotheses can be expressed in a default model. Given
a ﬁxed amount of speciﬁc information, the quality of the
predictions gives an assessment of the physical ideas that
are embodied in the underlying default model. Rele-
vant physical ideas include: whether a direct descrip-
tion of dense ﬂuid packings signiﬁcantly improves the
predictions; or whether incorporation of de-wetting of
hydrophobic surfaces is required; or whether speciﬁc ex-
pression of the roughly tetrahedral coordination of water
molecules in liquid water is the most helpful next step
for these theories.
It is remarkable that the previous
successes of the information models for the primitive hy-
drophobic eﬀects have not required speciﬁc consideration
of these physical points.

This letter considers these physical arguments, con-
structs default models to test them, and gives the re-
sults of information theory predictions using those de-
fault models with speciﬁc moment information drawn
from simulation of liquid water. Occupancy moments are
used as information. Complete moment information pro-
duces results that are independent of the default model.
However, the goal is to judge the default models and the
physical ideas that they express. Therefore, our judge-
ments will center on the accuracy of the predictions with

1

limited moment information. More speciﬁcally, we take
the view that the quality of the prediction with two mo-
ments is critical because information for the ﬁrst two oc-
cupancy moments – the mean and variance – is available
from experiment.

Much of the technical work required to construct the
default models considered involves molecular simulation
calculations for ﬁducial systems. That technical work
will be reported at a later time.

The application of the information theory approach
more broadly than to liquid water immediately turns-up
cases where it works less well. Thus, a broader suite
of default models will clearly be a key ingredient to the
broader utility of this approach.

2. Testing Physical Ideas of Hydrophobic Eﬀects

The information theory approach studied here grew
out of earlier studies of formation of atomic sized cavities
in molecular liquids [8–11]. It has led to new and sim-
ple views of entropy convergence in hydrophobic hydra-
tion [12] and of pressure denaturation of proteins [13]. A
review of these developments has been given [14]; broader
discussions are also available [15,16].

The objective of the information theory prediction is
the interaction part of the chemical potential of a hard
core solute β∆µ = − ln p0 , where p0 the probability
that the hard solute could be inserted into the system
without overlap of van der Waals volume of the solvent;
1/β=kBT. This procedure depends on a default model
ˆpn of the distribution pn of which p0 is the n = 0 mem-
ber. Two default models have been considered in previ-
ous work: (a) the ‘Gibbs default model’ ˆpn ∝ 1/n! that
predicts a Poisson distribution when the moment <n>0
is the only information available; and (b) the ‘ﬂat de-
fault model’ ˆpn = constant>0, n = 0, 1, . . ., nmax, and
zero otherwise. The predictions obtained using these de-
fault models for the hydration free energy of inert gases
in water are similar. Convergence to the correct result
is non-monotonic with increasing numbers of binomial
n
moments Bj = h(cid:0)
j (cid:1)i0 used [14,16]. Because of this non-
monotonic convergence, the most accurate prediction ob-
tained with a small number of moments utilizes only the
two moments, B1 and B2. Furthermore, the ﬂat default
model produces a distinctly more accurate prediction of
this hydration free energy when only two moments are
used than does the Gibbs default model.

The accuracy of the prediction utilizing the ﬂat default
model is remarkable. Furthermore, the Gibbs default
model is conceptually more natural in this framework.

So, the eﬀectiveness of the ﬂat default model relative to
the Gibbs model is additionally puzzling. The work that
follows addresses these issues.

It deserves emphasis that the overall distribution pn is
well described by the information theory with the ﬁrst
two moments, B1 and B2.
It is the prediction of the
extreme member p0 that makes the diﬀerences in these
default models signiﬁcant.

2.1. Packing

A ﬁrst idea is that the default model should contain a
direct description of dense ﬂuid packings that are central
to the theory of liquids [17]. Accordingly, we computed
pn for the ﬂuid of hard spheres of diameter d = 2.67 ˚A
at a density ρd3 = 0.633. Those computations used spe-
cialized importance sampling and will be reported later.
Typical predictions for the hydrophobic hydration free
energies of atomic size solutes obtained using those re-
sults as a default model are shown in Fig. 1. That shows
the non-monotonic convergence with increasing number
of occupancy moments obtained from the ﬂat and the
Gibbs default models. The predictions obtained using
the hard sphere results as a default model are diﬀerent
but not improved in the essential aspects. Direct conver-
gence is only seen if four or more moments are included.
Though the convergence is more nearly monotonic from
the beginning, the prediction obtained from a two mo-
ment model is worse than for the ﬂat and the Gibbs de-
fault cases.

2.2.
Molecules

Attractive Interactions among Solvent

A next idea is that attractive forces between solvent
molecules might play a signiﬁcant role for these proper-
ties because attractive forces lower the pressure of the
solvent. Dehydration of hydrophobic surfaces becomes a
principal consideration for solutes larger in size than the
solvent molecules. But perhaps such eﬀects are being felt
already for atomic solutes. Accordingly, we computed pn
for the Lennard-Jones liquid studied by Pratt and Poho-
rille [10] for which attractive interactions were adjusted
so that the macroscopic pressure of the solvent would
be approximately zero. This Lennard-Jones system thus
gives a cavity formation free energy for atomic sized cav-
ities that is about the same as that of common liquid
water simulation models. The results of Fig. 1 conﬁrm
this latter point but also show that the convergence with
number of moments is again non-monotonic and not bet-
ter than for the ﬂat and the Gibbs default models. Again,
direct, non-monotonic convergence is only seen after four
occupancy moments are included.

10.0

8.0

6.0

4.0

2.0

10.0

9.0

8.0

3

4

1

2

3
4
Number of Moments

5

6

7

Figure 1. Convergence with number of binomial mo-
ments of β∆µ predicted using several default models for
a spherical solute with distance of closest approach λ
= 3.0 ˚A for water oxygen atoms.
Identiﬁcations are:
diamonds (dash-dot lines), hard sphere default; crosses
(short dash line), Lennard-Jones default; squares (long
dash line), Gibbs default; triangles (dotted line), cluster
Poisson default; circles (gray line), ﬂat default. For this
value of λ, binomial moments Bj are non-zero through
j = 9. The horizontal line is the prediction with all
nine moments included. With only two moments the
Lennard-Jones default model makes the best prediction.
However, the diﬀerences are slight with the exception of
the hard sphere model. The results for the hard sphere
default model were obtained from NPT Monte Carlo cal-
culations at β p∗ = 2.989. The average density was
ρd3 = 0.633 ± 0.002 with d = 2.67 ˚A. The Lennard-
Jones model was obtained from NPT Monte Carlo calcu-
lations at p=0.0 and T∗=1.103. σ = 2.67 ˚A and the value
ǫ/kB=272 K was obtained from a ﬁt of zero pressure data
[21]. The mean density was ρ∗ = 0.624±0.001. A system
size of 256 particles was suﬃcient for both simulations.

2.3.
Molecules

Tetrahedral Coordination of Solvent

The ﬁnal idea checked here is whether the predictions
of cavity formation free energies are improved by incor-
porating a tetrahedral coordination structure for water
molecules in liquid water. We use a cluster Poisson model
to accomplish this [18]. The physical picture is: tetra-
hedral clusters of water molecules with prescribed intra-
cluster correlations but random positions and orienta-
tions.

A molecular cluster may contribute to occupants of
a speciﬁc observation volume only if the center of the
cluster is an occupant of a larger augmented volume; see
Fig. 2. Deﬁnition of this augmented volume will depend
on the structures of the clusters and the choice of cluster
center. We then consider the generating function ℘(z)
for the probability ℘N that N cluster centers are present
in the augmented volume:

2

b
D
m
℘(z) = X
N =0

zN ℘N .

(1)

We assume that N is Poisson distributed ℘(z) =
e−<N >(1−z) with <N> the product of the density of clus-
ters and the volume of the augmented region.

Figure 2. A tetrahedral cluster, the observation vol-
ume (sphere with solid line, and the augmented volume
(sphere with dashed line). The cluster may contribute
occupants of the observation volume only if the center is
within the augmented volume.

Next we consider the generating function g(z) deﬁned
by the conditional probabilities, gn, that a cluster with
center in the augmented volume contributes n oxygen
atom occupants to the observation volume:

Deﬁning the generating function for the probabilities of
numbers of oxygen in the observation volume

g(z) = X
n=0

zngn.

p(z) ≡ X
n=0

znpn,

p(z) = ℘(g(z)).

we can express

This is a standard result of probability theory [19].
ln p(z) is a polynomial function of z. Extraction of the
series coeﬃcients from Eq. 3 provides the desired default
model. The numerical eﬀort resides only in the compu-
tation of the gn.

In this study, the clusters are assumed to be tetrahedra
with the oxygen atom of a water molecule at the center
and at each vertex. Thus we take <N> = ρv/5, with v
the volume of the augmented region and ρ the molecular

(2)

(3)

(4)

3

density of the solvent water. The OO intra-cluster near-
neighbor distance, the distance of a point of a tetrahedron
from its center, is 2.67˚A and the augmented volume is a
sphere with radius λ + 2.67˚A. The coeﬃcients of g(z) are
obtained from a Monte Carlo calculation that randomly
positions a tetrahedron with center in the augmented vol-
ume and counts how many O-points of the cluster land
in the observation volume.

Fig. 1 shows the predictions for cavity formation free
energy obtained with the cluster (tetrahedron) Poisson
default model. The non-monotonic convergence is still
evident. The prediction utilizing two moments is more
accurate than that utilizing the Gibbs default model and
similar to the predictions made by the ﬂat default or the
Lennard-Jones default in the best cases considered here
for those models.

3. Discussion

Each of the default models newly considered here
makes speciﬁc assumptions about n-body correlations.
If the default model were the same as the experimental
distribution, the limitation of the data to two moments
would not be signiﬁcant. The optimization would be un-
aﬀected by the number of experimental moments used.

The present results suggests that the eﬃciency of the
ﬂat and Gibbs default models relative to the more so-
phisticated hard sphere and Lennard-Jones default mod-
els might be associated with the avoidance of speciﬁc
assumptions for n-body correlations for the former cases.
In this view, the speciﬁc assumptions for n-body corre-
lations with the hard sphere and Lennard-Jones default
models have to be displaced for a good description of
cavity formation in liquid water. The third and fourth
order factorial cumulants predicted on the basis of each
of these default models using two experimental moments
were evaluated and directly compared. In fact, the infor-
mation theory predictions obtained for these moments
were very similar to each other.

A second point of discussion is that the biggest diﬀer-
ence between the Lennard-Jones and the cluster Poisson
model is in simplicity. Though the diﬀerences in the pre-
dictions seen here are not dramatic, the cluster Poisson
model is simpler. This is particularly true for the de-
pendence on thermodynamic state and the potential for
further development. That the cluster Poisson model ex-
pressing tetrahedral coordination appears to be a help-
ful new direction is intuitive and encouraging. However,
the fact that the predictions are not dramatically im-
proved suggests that this sort of tetrahedral coordination
is not the only or principal physical feature relevent for
improved predictions cavity formation.

The Lennard-Jones default model incorporates some
of the dewetting phenomena that is expected to become
more pronounced as the solute size increases [20]. Fig. 3
shows the variation of hydration free energy with solute
size obtained with the diﬀerent default models and two

moments. At the smallest solute size shown, all the mod-
els give the same result. In the solute size range of 2.2-
2.8 ˚A, the cluster Poisson model gives the best results
overall. For larger solute sizes, the cluster Poisson model
results overestimate the hydration free energy. At this
point, results from the Lennard-Jones default model cross
the simulation results and become slightly too small for
the larger solute sizes shown.

1 2 .0

1 0 .0

8 .0

6 .0

4 .0

2 .0

2 .0 2 .2 2 .4 2 .6 2 .8 3 .0 3 .2

Figure 3. The variation of hydration free energy with
solute size obtained with the diﬀerent default models.
The diﬀerent models are identiﬁed as in Fig. 1. In ad-
dition, simulation results are shown as open diamonds.
At the smallest solute size shown, all the models give the
In the solute size range of 2.2-2.8 ˚A, the
same result.
cluster Poisson model gives the best results overall. For
larger solute sizes, the cluster Poisson model results over-
estimate the hydration free energy. At this point, results
from the Lennard-Jones default model cross the simula-
tion results and become slightly too small for the larger
solute sizes shown.

4. Conclusion

We conclude that direct incorporation of dense ﬂuid
packing eﬀects (hard sphere default model) and packing
eﬀects plus attractive forces that lower the pressure of the

4

solvent (Lennard-Jones default model) are ineﬀective in
improving the prediction of hydrophobic hydration free
energies of inert gases over the previously used Gibbs and
ﬂat default models. However, a cluster Poisson model
that incorporates tetrahedral coordination structure in
the default model is intuitive, simple to implement, and is
one of the better performers for these predictions. These
results provide a partial rationalization of the remarkable
performance of the ﬂat default model with two moments
in previous applications. The speciﬁc cluster Poisson de-
fault model used here is primitive and will be the subject
of further reﬁnement.

5. Acknowledgements

The work was supported by the US Department of En-
ergy under contract W-7405-ENG-36. The support of
M.A.G by the Center for Nonlinear Studies of Los Alamos
National Laboratory is appreciated. LA-UR-98-5431.

References and Notes

(1) Hummer, G; Garde, S; Garcia, A. E; Pohorille, A;
Pratt, L. R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93,
8951.

(2) Berne, B. J. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93,

8880.

4217.

(3) Crooks, G. E; Chandler, D. Phys. Rev. E 1997, 56,

(4) Mountain, R. D.; Thirumalai, D. Proc. Nat. Acad.

Sci. USA 1998, 95, 8436-8440.

(5) Wallqvist, A.; Covell, D. G.; Thirumalai, D. J.

Amer. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120, 427-428.

(6) Arthur, J. W; Haymet, A. D. J. J. Chem. Phys.

1998, 109, 7991.

(7) Lum, K; Chandler, D; Weeks, J. D (unpublished).

(8) Pohorille, A; Pratt, L. R. J. Amer. Chem. Soc.

1990, 112, 5066.

(9) Pratt, L. R. CLS Division 1991 Annual Review Na-
tional Technical Information Service U. S. Depart-
ment of Commerce: 5285 Port Royal Rd., Spring-
ﬁeld, VA 22161, 1991, LA-UR-91-1783.

(10) Pratt, L. R; Pohorille, A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 1992, 89, 2995.

(11) Pratt, L. R; Pohorille, A.

in Proceedings of the
EBSA 1992 International Workshop on Water-
Biomolecule Interactions, edited by Palma, M. U;
Palma-Vittorelli, M. B; Parak, F. Societa Italiana
di Fisica: Bologna, 1993.

(12) Garde, S; Hummer, G; Garcia, A. E; Paulaitis,
M. E; Pratt, L. R. Phys. Rev. Letts. 1996, 77, 4966.

b
D
m
l
(13) Hummer, G; Garde, S; Garcia, A. E; Paulaitis,
M. E; Pratt, L. R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998,
95, 1552.

(14) Hummer, G; Garde, S; Garc´ıa, A. E; Paulaitis,
M. E; Pratt, L. R. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102,
10469.

(15) Pratt, L. R.

in Encyclopedia of Computational
Chemistry, edited by Schleyer, P. v. R; Allinger,
N. L; Clark, T; Gasteiger, J; Kollman, P. A; Schae-
fer III, H. F; Schriener, P. R. John Wiley & Sons:
Chichester, 1998.

(16) Pratt, L. R; Garde, S; Hummer, G. in New Ap-
proaches to Old and New Problems in Liquid State
Theory - Inhomogeneities and Phase Separation
in Simple and Complex Systems, NATO Advanced
Study Institute, edited by Caccamo, C. Kluwer:
Dordrecht, 1998.

(17) Chandler, D; Weeks, J. D; Andersen, H. C. Science

1983, 220, 787.

(18) Neyman, J; Scott, E. L. Scientiﬁc American

September, 1956, 187.

(19) Karlin, S; Taylor, H. M. A First Course in Stochas-
tic Processes Academic Press Inc.: New York, 1975.

(20) Hummer, G; Garde, S. Phys. Rev. Letts. 1998, 80,

(21) MacDonald, I. R; Singer, K. Molec. Phys. 1972, 23,

4193.

29.

5

