9
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
5
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Single and Double Resonance Microwave Spectroscopy in Superﬂuid 4He Clusters

I. Reinhard, C. Callegari, A. Conjusteau, K.K. Lehmann and G. Scoles
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
(February 23, 2013)

Purely rotational transitions of a molecule embedded in large
He clusters have been detected
for the ﬁrst time. The saturation behavior shows that, in contrast to previous expectations, the
microwave line proﬁles are dominated by inhomogeneous broadening mechanisms. Spectral holes
and peaks produced by microwave-microwave double resonance have widths comparable to those of
single resonance lines, indicating that relaxation occurs among quantum states of the inhomogeneous
distribution of each rotational level, at a rate ≈10 times faster than rotationally inelastic relaxation.

4

PACS: 36.40.-c, 67.40.Fd

The spectroscopy of molecules embedded in large 4He
clusters has recently received considerable experimental
and theoretical attention [1,2]. Nanometer scale helium
clusters (nanodroplets), containing from several hun-
dreds to more than 104 He atoms, provide a unique en-
vironment for high resolution matrix spectroscopy where
the advantages of both conventional matrix spectroscopy
and molecular beam spectroscopy are combined [3]. Since
these clusters will pick up molecules or atoms that they
encounter on their path without being appreciably de-
ﬂected [4], they allow for a high degree of synthetic ﬂex-
ibility, and in particular for the formation and stabiliza-
tion of weakly bound and unstable species [5–9]. Evap-
orative cooling has been found to maintain 4He nano-
droplets at a temperature of 0.4 K [10,11], well below the
predicted superﬂuid transition temperature which ranges
from 2.14 K in bulk liquid helium to 1.5 K for clusters
of only 102 He atoms [12]. As the perturbations im-
posed on the guest molecules by the helium host are
minimal, the shift and width of spectroscopic lines in
4He clusters are considerably less than for traditional
matrix environments [1]. Furthermore, rotationally re-
solved spectra have been observed for a large variety of
molecules [11,13–18] which show the structure predicted
by the gas phase symmetry of the molecules with, how-
ever, reduced rotational constants. By showing that ro-
vibrational spectra in 3He clusters collapse into a single
line, the weakly damped molecular free rotation present
in liquid 4He has recently been demonstrated to be a di-
rect consequence of the boson nature of 4He and is con-
sidered a microscopic manifestation of superﬂuidity [16].
An important unresolved question posed by the IR
spectra relates to the physical process responsible for the
line broadening observed in ro-vibrational transitions,
which ranges from 150 MHz in the case of the R(0) line
in the ν3 fundamental in OCS [17] to 5.7 cm−1 for the
case of the P(1) line in the ν3 asymmetric stretch in H2O
[18]. For the carefully studied case of the ν3 fundamental
of SF6 [11], the lines were found to have a Lorentzian
shape of width ≈300 MHz independent of the rotational
transition, which led to the suggestion that the linewidth

reﬂected vibrational relaxation and/or dephasing [17].

Since He clusters remain ﬂuid down to zero temper-
ature and because of the very large zero point motion
of the 4He atoms, it appears natural to assume that the
spectra of molecules seeded in this medium should not
display inhomogeneous eﬀects other than contributions
from the cluster size distribution via size-dependent fre-
quency shifts which, however, have been shown to be
In solids, variations of local binding sites
small [19].
lead to a distribution of vibrational frequencies, which
results in inhomogeneous broadening that dominates the
linewidths at low temperature.
In contrast, in liquids
local solvation ﬂuctuations lead to dynamic dephasing.
Treating the clusters as a classical liquid, one may ex-
pect the timescale of the solvation ﬂuctuation (due to
the large zero point kinetic energy of the He atoms) to be
much faster than the dephasing times observed in most
ro-vibrational spectra and hence the eﬀect of ﬂuctuating
solvation would likely be strongly motionally averaged
[20], leading to homogeneous, Lorentzian lineshapes. The
spectra of SF6 [11] and CH3CCH [13], which are well de-
scribed with a free rotor Hamiltonian and Lorentzian line
shapes, seem to conﬁrm the assumption that the major
source of line broadening is of homogeneous nature.

However, at temperatures as low as 0.4 K in a super-
ﬂuid medium solvation ﬂuctuations are probably more
appropriately described in terms of the interaction with
the thermally populated fundamental modes of the clus-
ter. For typical cluster sizes (well below N =105) only
surface excitations (ripplons) have to be considered [10].
The coupling of the molecular vibration to these modes
has been estimated and found to be too weak to explain
the observed linewidths [21].

The observation of rotational structure in vibrational
transitions suggests that pure rotational spectroscopy,
by excitation of microwave (MW) radiation, should pro-
vide a useful probe of the rotational dynamics of the
dopant molecules in the superﬂuid helium environment.
It should be noted, that it was not clear a priori whether
such spectra could be observed at all. Due to the short
absorption path and low densities characteristic of molec-

1

ular beams, direct MW absorption measurements are not
viable. Whereas transitions in the UV and visible spec-
tral range can be eﬃciently detected by laser induced
ﬂuorescence [7,8,22], beam depletion spectroscopy is em-
ployed to detect transitions in the near and mid IR [5,11].
In this method, photon absorption and subsequent relax-
ation of the molecular excitation energy leads to He atom
evaporation from the cluster and a decrease in the ﬂux
of He atoms in the droplet beam is observed. While ab-
sorption of a single IR photon leads to the evaporation
of hundreds or more He atoms from a droplet, at least
10 microwave photons per droplet will need to be ab-
sorbed to provide suﬃcient energy to evaporate a single
He atom (∼5 cm−1 [23]). In order to produce a signal of
suﬃcient size to be detected, many He atoms per cluster
must be evaporated. This requires the rotational relax-
ation to occur on a time scale signiﬁcantly shorter than
10 µs. Although a lower limit of the rotational relaxation
time of the order of hundreds of ps is established by the
linewidth of typically 1 GHz observed in the IR spectra
[13], the upper limit could be as high as tens of µs, in
which case no signal would be observed. The upper limit
is imposed only by the fact that for all observed IR spec-
tra the rotational populations are fully thermalized at the
temperature of the He droplets by the time the clusters
reach the laser interaction region.

Here we report measurements of the microwave spec-
trum of HCCCN in He nanoclusters detected by the
method of beam depletion spectroscopy. HCCCN was
used because of its large dipole moment (3.7 Debye) and
its linear structure (rotational constant B =1.5 GHz in
the helium nanodroplets [13,14]), which leads to strong
and well resolved rotational transitions.

The molecular beam set-up will be described in detail
elsewhere [13]. Here we will give only a short summary
highlighting the aspects unique to the present study.
Clusters are formed in a supersonic free-jet helium ex-
pansion from a cold 5 µm diameter nozzle which, in the
measurements presented here, is operated at 26 K and a
stagnation pressure of 100 atm yielding an average cluster
size of ≈ 3 · 103 atoms/cluster (estimated from Ref. [24]).
After collimation by a conical skimmer, the clusters pass
through a pickup cell containing typically 3·10−4 torr of
the gas of interest and collect (on average) one foreign
molecule each. Subsequently the clusters pass through a
10 cm long P-band microwave guide (nominal 12-18 GHz)
which is aligned parallel to the cluster beam. The MW
amplitude is modulated at 310 Hz. The molecular beam
enters and exits the waveguide through two 3 mm holes
in E-bends located at each end of the device. If multiple
resonant photon absorption and subsequent relaxation of
the molecule-helium cluster system occurs, the beam de-
pletion signal is recorded by a liquid helium cooled silicon
bolometer using a lock-in technique.

The microwave radiation is produced by a sweep gen-
erator (HP 8350B) with a 0.01-26.5 GHz plug-in (HP

8359A) and is ampliﬁed by a traveling wave tube am-
pliﬁer (Logi Metrics A310/IJ) to a power level between
0.05 W and 3.4 W (corresponding to a ﬁeld strength of
0.78 to 6.5 kV/m in the center of the P-band wave-
guide). The power transmitted through the waveguide
is attenuated by 30 dB and measured by a crystal detec-
tor (HP8473B), the output of which is used to level the
power of the sweep generator during frequency scans.

Spectra of the J= 3→4 and the J=4→5 transitions
in the ground vibrational state of HCCCN obtained for
various MW ﬁeld strengths between 0.78 and 6.5 kV/m
are shown in Fig. 1. The line centers agree well with the
line positions predicted from the molecular constants ob-
tained from the ro-vibrational IR spectrum of HCCCN in
the helium clusters [13]. The linewidths (FWHM) are ob-
served to increase from ∼0.6 to ∼1 GHz for the J= 3→4
transition and from ∼0.8 to ∼1.2 GHz for the J= 4→5
transition when the microwave ﬁeld is increased from 0.78
to 6.5 kV/m. At low MW ﬁelds these linewidths are com-
parable to the width of the corresponding ro-vibrational
transitions in the spectra of the fundamental CH stretch-
ing mode [14], indicating that vibrational relaxation and
dephasing which frequently are the dominant line broad-
ening mechanisms in the spectra of impurities in clas-
sical liquids [20] are not the main source of broadening
for a molecule such as HCCCN in a superﬂuid helium
cluster. Similar linewidths have been observed by us for
the corresponding microwave transitions in CH3CN and
CH3CCH.

4

FIG. 1. Microwave spectra of the J=3→4 and J=4→5
He droplets measured at various
transition in HCCCN in
MW ﬁeld strengths. The arrows indicate the line positions
predicted from the molecular constants obtained from the
Inset:
ro-vibrational spectrum of HCCCN in He clusters.
Signal amplitude of the J=4→5 transition at 13.1 GHz as a
function of microwave ﬁeld strength. The linearity of this plot
demonstrates the inhomogeneous nature of the dominant line
broadening mechanism.

The dependence of the signal amplitude S on the mi-
crowave ﬁeld strength E has been measured for HC-
CCN with the MW frequency ﬁxed at the top of ei-
ther the J=3→4 or the J=4→5 transition and is well

2

described by S ∼ E2/(1 + E2/E2
sat)1/2 with the satu-
ration ﬁeld Esat =1.1(2) kV/m (see Inset Fig. 1). This
saturation behavior, resulting in a linear dependence of
the absorption as function of the MW ﬁeld intensity for
E ≫ Esat, demonstrates that, in contrast to the previ-
ous expectations, the linewidth is dominated by inhomo-
geneous broadening [25]. With the saturation parame-
ter (E/Esat)2, the homogeneous unsaturated linewidth
is calculated to be at least a factor of 6 narrower than
the inhomogeneous linewidth observed at a MW ﬁeld in-
tensity of 6.5 kV/m. This sets the lower limit of the ro-
tational relaxation time to about 2 ns.

An upper limit for the rotational relaxation time has
been set by a MW amplitude modulation experiment:
With the MW frequency ﬁxed on top of the 3→4 transi-
tion at a MW ﬁeld of 7.8 kV/m, the signal height is moni-
tored while the MW ﬁeld is 100% square wave modulated
at a frequency f . By modelling the 3→4 transition as a
driven two level-system, the absorbed microwave power
is calculated to increase by a factor of 2 when f changes
from f ≪ 1/T1 to f ≫ 1/T1, where 1/T1 is the popula-
tion relaxation rate for the transition. This is basically
independent of the dephasing rate (1/T2), as long as the
microwave power is suﬃciently large to allow for satura-
tion. From the fact that no increase in signal is observed
for modulation frequencies up to 10 MHz we estimate an
upper limit for the rotational relaxation time of about
20 ns. This limit is in agreement with the independent
but less stringent estimate inferred from the comparison
of the strengths of the MW spectra and the IR spectra
[13], which implies that the rotational relaxation takes
place at a rate not slower than in tens of ns.

In order to determine the homogeneous linewidth of
the rotational transition, microwave-microwave double
resonance experiments have been carried out. A sec-
ond microwave source (HP8690B, plug-in HP8694B: 8-
12.4 GHz) is employed to generate microwave radiation
at a ﬁxed frequency. While the ﬁrst microwave ﬁeld (the
probe) is frequency scanned across the 3→4 and the 4→5
transition, the second microwave ﬁeld pumps the J=3→4
transition at about 11.1 GHz.

As the probe frequency approaches the pump fre-
quency a strong decrease in signal is observed due to the
depletion of the J=3 state by the pump, whereas the 4→5
transition signal is increased according to the enhanced
population of the J=4 state (Fig. 2). Remarkably, the
hole burnt into the 3→4 transition has a width of ≈ 50-
70 % of the single resonance linewidth, implying that the
rotational population inversion relaxation time is larger
than 4 ns. The increase in the 4→5 signal even occurs
over the total width of the signal, indicating that there is
a fast relaxation within the inhomogeneous distribution
of each individual J level. This observation is important
as it implies that a substantial part of the inhomogeneous
line broadening is due to a dynamic eﬀect rather than to
a static eﬀect such as the cluster size distribution.

FIG. 2. MW-MW double resonance spectrum of HCCCN
4
in
He clusters compared to a single resonance spectrum. The
depletion in the J=3→4 and the enhancement in the J=4→5
transition occur over a signiﬁcant part of the linewidths indi-
cating rapid relaxation among the substates of the inhomo-
geneous broadening of the individual rotational levels with a
rate much faster than the rotational population inversion rate.
The J=3→4 transition is pumped with a ﬁxed frequency at
11.1 GHz and a ﬁeld of 3.75 kV/m while the probing ﬁeld is
5.3 kV/m.

The phenomenon of ‘dynamic’ inhomogeneous broad-
ening can be understood assuming that there are addi-
tional degree(s) of freedom associated with a splitting
of the rotational state into several substates and that
the molecule may transit among these substates. Such
transitions, which may well change the kinetic and po-
tential energy of the molecule, but produce only a small
change in its rotational energy, will be denoted as “elas-
tic”. If the elastic relaxation rate is much less than the
spectral line width, the lineshape reﬂects the distribu-
tion of resonance frequencies of the molecules in these
additional quantum states. Each substate has a homoge-
neous width much narrower than the width of the inho-
mogeneous line. A double resonance experiment would
be expected to show a correspondingly narrow hole in the
pumped transition and a peak on top of the transition
starting from the population enhanced rotor level. How-
ever, if the relaxation rate for the rotor quantum number
is slower still than the relaxation between the substates,
then the population disequilibrium produced by the MW
pumping will be spread over many or all the substates.
This produces, in our case, a broad depletion in the lower
rotor level and an enhancement over the complete width
of the higher rotor level.

The relative areas of the depletion and enhancement
signals compared to the single resonance MW signal can
be used to extract the relative rates of the two relaxation
processes. By kinetic modelling of the transition rates
between the J=3 and J=4 rotational levels and among
the substates of each individual rotational state we es-
timate that the elastic relaxation within one rotational
state is about one order of magnitude faster than the
inelastic population inversion relaxation.

3

In order to determine possible mechanisms underlying
the observed inhomogeneous broadening one of the au-
thors has analyzed the dynamics of a neutral impurity
in a nanometer scale 4He cluster [21] showing that for
an anisotropic impurity signiﬁcant sources of line broad-
ening arise from the coupling of the molecular rotation
with the center of mass motion of the dopant. These cou-
plings arise both from an anisotropic eﬀective potential
for the dopant when shifted from the exact center of the
clusters, and from an orientationally dependent hydro-
dynamic contribution to the eﬀective inertial mass of the
dopant. It should be noted, however, that it is not clear
how the molecular energy is transferred to the cluster
since the energy released or absorbed by the molecular
rotationally inelastic or elastic transition in general is not
likely to match the quantized energy of the lowest cluster
excitations.

The measurements presented here are the ﬁrst observa-
tion of a purely rotational spectrum of any molecule in a
liquid He environment, and have provided a unique win-
dow on the sources of line broadening and in particular
onto the rotational dynamics of the dopant in the super-
ﬂuid helium environment.
It has been unambiguously
demonstrated that the rotational lines are dominated by
inhomogeneous broadening which is attributed to the
coupling of the center of mass motion of the molecule
within the ﬁnite size cluster to the molecular rotation.
The second major observation is that the molecule tran-
sits among the quantum states of the inhomogeneous
distribution on a time scale much faster than the ro-
tational relaxation. These MW-MW double resonance
measurements have been followed by a separate study
using microwave - infrared double resonance which pro-
vides new information on the relaxation dynamics of the
dopant in the cluster and its dependence on the ﬁnite
cluster size [26].

We would like to acknowledge R.E. Miller and his
coworkers for the free ﬂow of information between the
two groups. We are indebted to Prof. W. Warren and
Prof. S. Staggs for providing us with the MW sweep
generators and to Dr. J. Fraser for lending us the trav-
eling wave tube ampliﬁer. This work was supported by
the National Science Foundation (CHE-97-03604). I.R.
is grateful to the Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation
for ﬁnancial support.

[1] K.B. Whaley, “Spectroscopy and Microscopic Theory of
Doped Helium Clusters”, in: Advances in Molecular Vi-
brations and Collision Dynamics, Vol.III, Ed. J. Bow-
man, JAI Press Inc. (1997)

4

[2] J.P. Toennies, A. Vilesov, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 49, 1

[3] K.K. Lehmann and G. Scoles, Science 279, 2065 (1998)
[4] T.E. Gough, M. Mengel, P.A. Rowntree, G. Scoles, J.

Chem. Phys. 83, 4958 (1985)

[5] S. Goyal, D.L. Schutt, G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 2236

(1998)

(1993)

[6] M. Hartmann, R. Miller, J.P. Toennies, A.F. Vilesov,

Science 272, 1631 (1996)

[7] J. Higgins, W.E. Ernst, C. Callegari, J. Reho, K.K. Leh-
mann, G. Scoles, M. Gutowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4532
(1996); J. Higgins, C. Callegari, J. Reho, F. Stienkemeier,
W.E. Ernst, K.K. Lehmann, M. Gutowski, G. Scoles, Sci-
ence 273, 629 (1996)

[8] J. Higgins, C. Callegari, J. Reho, F. Stienkemeier,
W.E. Ernst, M. Gutowski, G. Scoles, J. Phys. Chem.
A 102(26), 4952 (1998)

[9] K. Nauta, R.E. Miller, Science 283, 1895 (1999)
[10] D.M. Brink, S. Stringari, Z. Phys. D 15, 257 (1990)
[11] M. Hartmann, R.E. Miller, J.P. Toennies, A. Vilesov,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1566 (1995)

[12] M.V. Rama Krishna, K.B. Whaley, “Superﬂuidity in He-
lium Clusters”, p.257, in: On Clusters and Clustering,
Ed. P.J. Reynolds, North-Holland (1993)

[13] A. Conjusteau, C. Callegari, I. Reinhard, K.K. Lehmann,

G. Scoles, to be published

[14] K. Nauta, R.E. Miller, private communication
[15] C. Callegari, A. Conjusteau, I. Reinhard, K.K. Lehmann,

G. Scoles, K. Nauta, R.E. Miller, to be published
[16] S. Grebenev, J.P. Toennies, A.F. Vilesov, Science 279,

2083 (1998)

[17] M. Hartmann, doctoral thesis, G¨ottingen (1997)
[18] R. Fr¨ochtenicht, M. Kaloudis, M. Koch, F. Huisken, J.

Chem. Phys. 105, 6128 (1996)

[19] From the analysis of the IR spectra as a function of mean
cluster size, it can be concluded that for large clusters
(N≈3000), the cluster size distribution should produce
a broadening of <200 MHz in the IR spectrum, which is
just a small fraction of the observed linewidth of ≈1 GHz,
though it can be expected to ‘wash out’ any high resolu-
tion features in the spectrum.

[20] D.W. Oxtoby, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1981, 77-101
[21] K.K. Lehmann, accepted for publ. at Mol. Phys. (1998)
[22] M. Hartmann, F. Mielke, J.P. Toennies, A.F Vilesov, G.
Benedek, Phys. Rev. Lett 76, 204 (1997); M. Hartmann,
A. Lindinger, J.P. Toennies, A.F. Vilesov, Chem. Phys.
239, 139 (1998)

[23] S. Stringari, J. Treiner, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 5021 (1987)
[24] E.L. Knuth, B. Schilling, J.P. Toennies, “On Scaling Pa-
rameters for Predicting Cluster Sizes in Free Jets”, in:
Internat. Symp. on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics, p.270, Ox-
ford University Press (1995)

[25] see e.g.: W. Demtr¨oder, Laser Spectroscopy, 2nd ed.,
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1996), chap. 7.2
[26] C. Callegari, I. Reinhard, K.K. Lehmann, G. Scoles, K.

Nauta, R.E. Miller, to be published

