Boundary Conditions on Internal Three-Body Wave Functions

Kevin A. Mitchell and Robert G. Littlejohn

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720

(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

For a three-body system, a quantum wave function Ψℓ

m with deﬁnite ℓ and

m quantum numbers may be expressed in terms of an internal wave function

χℓ

k which is a function of three internal coordinates. This article provides

necessary and suﬃcient constraints on χℓ

k to ensure that the external wave

function Ψℓ

m is analytic. These constraints eﬀectively amount to boundary

conditions on χℓ

k and its derivatives at the boundary of the internal space.

Such conditions ﬁnd similarities in the (planar) two-body problem where the

wave function (to lowest order) has the form r|m| at the origin. We expect the

boundary conditions to prove useful for constructing singularity free three-

body basis sets for the case of nonvanishing angular momentum.

31.15.-p,03.65.Fd,03.65.Ge,02.20.-a

9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Consider a wave function Ψℓ

m for a system of three bodies that is an eigenfunction of L2
s

and Lsz with quantum numbers ℓ and m, respectively, where Ls is the space-ﬁxed orbital

angular momentum. (The s subscript stands for “space-ﬁxed”.) We regard Ψℓ

m, the “external

wave function,” as a function of the two Cartesian Jacobi vectors. It is well known [1–3]

that such a wave function can be written in the form

Ψℓ

m =

mkχℓ
ℓ∗
k,

D

Xk

D

(1.1)

where the Wigner rotation matrix

mk is a function of the three Euler angles and where χℓ
ℓ
k,

the “internal wave function,” is a function of three internal or shape coordinates. As usual,

k is regarded as the quantum number of the body-ﬁxed Lz. The wave function Ψℓ

m need

not be an energy eigenfunction; for example, it could be an element of a basis set in terms

of which an unknown energy eigenfunction is to be expanded. The basis sets we have in

mind include standard orthonormal bases, hyperspherical harmonics [4,5], discrete variable

representation (DVR) bases [6–11], and wave packet [12] or wavelet [13] bases.

This paper concerns boundary conditions which the internal wave function χℓ

k must

satisfy, given that the external wave function Ψℓ

m is a smooth function of the Cartesian

Jacobi vectors. The boundary in question is the boundary of shape space, which consists of

the collinear conﬁgurations. The applications we have in mind are mainly molecular (either

bound states of triatomic molecules or triatomic scattering problems), but the considerations

we raise also apply to atoms or other systems of bodies with Coulomb interactions (with

certain qualiﬁcations discussed below). We ignore spin in this paper. We consider only three-

body systems in this paper, but an important reason for studying boundary conditions in

three-body systems is that it is good practice for the analogous problem for systems of four

or more bodies, which is generally more diﬃcult and much less well understood.

There are at least two practical reasons for being interested in boundary conditions. First,

if one attempts to expand some unknown function in terms of a given basis, and if there are

2

boundary conditions satisﬁed by the unknown function which are not satisﬁed by the basis

functions, then the convergence will be slow. In important cases, the coeﬃcient of the n-th

term in the expansion will fall oﬀ either exponentially or algebraically with n, depending on

whether the basis does or does not satisfy the required boundary conditions, respectively.

For example, it is a bad idea to use the ordinary Legendre polynomials to expand a function

whose θ dependence has the boundary conditions of one of the associated Legendre functions

for m > 0. The importance of properly treating such boundary conditions in three-body

problems has been discussed previously by Kendrick et. al. [14].

Sometimes basis functions are created on the internal space simply by writing down

some internal wave functions χℓ

k that are considered convenient, for example, distributed

Gaussians or wave packets. From the given internal wave functions, one can construct the

corresponding external wave functions according to Eq. (1.1). The question then arises, will

these external wave functions have the same smoothness and analyticity properties as some

unknown wave function (usually an energy eigenfunction) which one wishes to ﬁnd? If not,

the convergence will be poor. For another example, it is common practice to create internal

basis functions by writing down the exact internal Hamiltonian, and then carving out some

piece of it which has eigenfunctions which can be determined analytically. Again there is

a question as to whether the basis functions created in this manner have the boundary

conditions required of the desired unknown eigenfunction. The answer to this question

depends in part on whether the operator created by carving out a piece of the Hamiltonian

is itself well behaved. The analysis of this paper will show how to answer these questions.

A second reason for being interested in boundary conditions is that numerical methods

for solving partial diﬀerential equations on a grid must generally take careful account of

boundary conditions, in order to guarantee reasonable accuracy and convergence. Grid and

basis set methods are related, since grid methods implicitly involve a set of localized basis

functions associated with the grid points. For example, DVR methods involve a basis set

consisting of localized wave functions, resembling diﬀraction patterns from a narrow slit.

The often cited “unexpected accuracy” (that is, rapid convergence) of DVR methods is

3

closely related to satisfying the right boundary conditions. For example, the trapezoidal

rule converges exponentially (rapidly) when an analytic, periodic function is integrated over

a period, but has only power law (slow) convergence if the function is analytic but not

periodic, or if it is integrated only over a partial period. Similarly, if the wrong DVR basis

set is used for a given problem, the (by now expected) unexpected accuracy will be lost.

We will have more to say about boundary conditions and rates of convergence in future

publications, but this paper will concentrate on the boundary conditions themselves.

We will momentarily present the principal results of our analysis of boundary conditions

in three-body systems, but ﬁrst it is well to recall some facts about two-body systems with

rotational invariance. Thinking of energy eigenfunctions, we will speak ﬁrst of the problem

of central force motion. In three spatial dimensions, the energy eigenfunction can be written

Ψℓ

m(r) = Y ℓ

m(θ, φ)χℓ(r), where χℓ(r) is the internal or radial wave function, deﬁned on the

radial half-line 0

r <

, which is the internal space. According to the standard textbook

≤

∞

analysis [15], the radial wave function behaves as rℓ near r = 0. This behavior holds when

the true potential V (r) is analytic at r = 0, but also in other cases such as that of the

singular Coulomb potential.

The standard analysis that produces these results proceeds by expanding the radial

wave function in a Taylor series about r = 0 and balancing terms on the two sides of the

Schr¨odinger equation. Unfortunately, this analysis leaves the impression that the behavior

rℓ of the radial wave function near r = 0 applies only to energy eigenfunctions.

χℓ ∼
Actually this behavior is much more general. Consider any wave function Ψℓ

m(r) which is

an eigenfunction of L2 and Lz and which is analytic at r = 0 when expressed in terms of the

Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z). This would apply to the eigenfunctions of any rotationally

invariant operator which is well behaved at r = 0, including Hamiltonians with central

potentials V (r) which are analytic at r = 0. With standard assumptions about phase

conventions the wave function can be written Ψℓ

m(r) = Y ℓ

m(θ, φ)χℓ(r), where χℓ(r) is the

radial wave function. We note that this form follows from the standard theory of rotations

and the fact that Ψℓ

m is an eigenfunction of L2

s and Lsz; we do not invoke separation of

4

variables, since we are not necessarily separating any wave equation. Then it turns out that

χℓ(r) is analytic at r = 0, and that its Taylor series begins with the rℓ term and thereafter

contains only the powers rℓ+2n, n = 1, 2, . . ., that is, every other integer power of r. Energy

eigenfunctions in the Coulomb problem do not ﬁt this pattern, since Ψℓ

m(r) has a cusp at

r = 0 and is not analytic there. This is because V (r) is not analytic at r = 0. Although

Coulomb radial wave functions χℓ do go as rℓ near r = 0, the Taylor series of χℓ contains

every subsequent power of r, not every other one.

It is also worthwhile mentioning the case of two bodies in two spatial dimensions, since

planar two-body boundary conditions bear a strong analogy to the boundary conditions

in three-body systems. For the planar problem, an eigenfunction of Lsz can be written

Ψm(r) = eimφχm(r), where r = (x, y), φ is the azimuthal angle, and m = 0,

1,

2, . . . is

±

±

the quantum number of Lsz. If Ψm is analytic in the two Cartesian coordinates (x, y) at

r = 0, then the radial wave function χm(r) is analytic at r = 0, its Taylor series begins with

the r|m| term, and subsequently contains only every other power of r, r|m|+2n, n = 1, 2, . . ..

At this point a reader who works with three-body molecular problems may wonder what

the relevance is of two-body boundary conditions at r = 0, since r = 0 is the two-body colli-

sion and the collision of atoms in molecular problems does not happen at ordinary energies.

The answer is that in three-body systems the collinear conﬁgurations play somewhat the

same role as the two-body collision in the planar two-body problem, insofar as boundary

conditions are concerned. This is why it is important to know about two-body boundary

conditions at r = 0, even for molecular problems. Collinear conﬁgurations are not necessarily

suppressed in three-body molecular problems, and are often important.

On the other hand, collisional conﬁgurations are important in Coulomb problems, where

the wave function has cusp-like singularities [16,17], again because of the nonanalyticity of

the potential. Since this paper studies the boundary conditions on the internal wave function

which result from the analyticity of the external wave function, and since the external wave

function in Coulomb problems is not analytic at collisions, the analysis of this paper does not

apply to collisional conﬁgurations in Coulomb problems. But of course Coulomb problems

5

also have collinear conﬁgurations, and our analysis does apply to these, as long as they are

not also collisional. We can summarize by saying that the analysis of this paper applies to

all the important boundary conditions in three-body molecular problems, and to some of

them (the collinear, noncollisional conﬁgurations) in Coulomb problems.

We now return to the three-body problem, and summarize the main results of this paper,

which relate the analyticity of the external wave function Ψℓ

m to the behavior of the internal

wave function χℓ

k at the boundary of the internal space. The boundary of collinear shapes

is a plane speciﬁed by Θ = 0 in Smith’s [18] hyperspherical coordinates, or w3 = 0 in the

coordinates to be introduced below. One point of this plane is the three-body collision, which

is excluded from our analysis. At other points of this plane, we have established necessary

and suﬃcient conditions on χℓ

k such that the external wave function Ψℓ

m should be analytic

functions of the six Cartesian components of the two Jacobi vectors. If Ψℓ

m is analytic at

a collinear conﬁguration (not the three-body collision), then the internal wave function χℓ
k

satisﬁes the following properties. First, χℓ

k is itself analytic at the collinear shape, when

expressed in terms of certain internal coordinates to be described below. Suﬃce it for now

to say that one of these coordinates, call it w3, measures the mass-weighted distance from

the plane w3 = 0 of collinear shapes, while the other two coordinates, w1 and w2, indicate

where we are on this plane.

The second property involves a modiﬁed version of the internal wave function χℓ

µ (in

contrast to χℓ

k). The distinction is that k is the eigenvalue of body-ﬁxed Lz, whereas µ is

the eigenvalue of body-ﬁxed ˆn

L, where ˆn is the body-referred unit vector specifying the

·

axis of a collinear shape. The vector ˆn is deﬁned on the boundary plane of the internal

space (excluding the triple collision), and is a function of where we are on that plane. Both

k and µ range from

ℓ to +ℓ, and the two internal wave functions are related by a rotation

−

which maps the body ˆz-axis into the ˆn-axis. Then, as we shall show, it turns out that if χℓ
µ

is expanded in powers of w3, corresponding to movement in the internal space away from

the boundary in the direction of increasing w3, then the ﬁrst nonvanishing power is w|µ|
3 ,

and subsequently only every other power occurs in the Taylor series, w|µ|+2n

, n = 1, 2, . . ..

3

6

The converse is also true: if χℓ

k satisﬁes these two properties at a collinear shape (not the

triple collision), then the external wave function Ψℓ

m is analytic. Obviously, these boundary

conditions are like those of the planar two-body problem at r = 0, with w3 playing the role

of r.

We have also proved the (plausible) fact that at conﬁgurations which are not at the

boundary of the internal space (noncollinear conﬁgurations), the external wave function Ψℓ
m

is analytic if and only if χℓ

k is analytic. The stated conditions, both on and oﬀ the boundary

plane, are independent of the convention for Euler angles or the convention for body frame,

assuming we avoid certain body frame singularities [19–21].

We exclude the triple collision because there is an inevitable “string” singularity [20]

of the body frame in the neighborhood of this conﬁguration that complicates the analysis.

This conﬁguration is not important in three-body molecular problems, but is so for Coulomb

problems (where the singularity of the potential is a further complication).

The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II contains the main result of the paper,

Theorem 1, which concerns the boundary conditions satisﬁed by the internal wave function.

We have stated this theorem in as nontechnical language as possible. Section II also contains

a description of how the boundary conditions are to be applied and discusses several explicit

conventions for internal coordinates and body frame. Sections III and IV are more technical,

and are devoted to proving Theorem 1. Section III states and proves boundary conditions

for the simpler case of the planar two-body problem. Section IV uses the results of Sect. III

to prove the conditions for the three-body problem. Section V contains the conclusions.

An Appendix collecting several facts about the representations of SO(2) is included for

reference.

II. THE THREE-BODY BOUNDARY CONDITIONS

7

A. Review of three-body formalism

Before stating the boundary conditions on three-body wave functions, we review some

necessary facts about the three-body problem. We closely follow the notation and spirit

of Littlejohn and Reinsch [3]. A three-body conﬁguration in the center of mass frame

is described by two (mass-weighted) Jacobi vectors rsα, α = 1, 2. Jacobi vectors are a

standard topic in n-body problems [22,3]. The s subscript indicates that rsα is referred to

the space, or laboratory, frame. For obvious reasons, we will call the space of Jacobi vectors

“conﬁguration space”.

It is often convenient to specify a conﬁguration by its shape and orientation. By the

shape, we mean the conﬁguration modulo physical rotations; it is parameterized by three

rotationally invariant quantities (called internal, or shape, coordinates). We will denote

shape coordinates in general by qµ, µ = 1, 2, 3. A speciﬁc and particularly useful set of such

coordinates is (w1, w2, w3) (henceforth called the “w-coordinates”) deﬁned by

w1 = r2

s1 −
w2 = 2rs1 ·
w3 = 2

s2 = ρ2 cos 2Θ cos 2Φ,
r2

rs2 = ρ2 cos 2Θ sin 2Φ,

rs1×rs2|

|

= ρ2 sin 2Θ,

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

where we have expressed the w-coordinates both in terms of the Jacobi vectors and in terms

of Smith’s [18,23] symmetric hyperspherical coordinates (ρ, Θ, Φ). Here ρ = (r2

s1 + r2

s2)1/2

is the hyperradius. The w-coordinates have been used by many researchers over the years,

including Gronwall [24], Smith [18], Dragt [25], Iwai [26], Aquilanti et. al. [23], and others.

The w-coordinates have ranges

< w1, w2 <

−∞

, 0

∞

≤

w3 <

∞

and are in one-to-one

correspondence with three-body shapes. Thus shape space is the closed half-space containing

the physical region of coordinate space w3 ≥
consider the region of coordinate space w3 < 0, which we call the unphysical region. The

0. Sometimes it will also be convenient to

boundary plane w3 = 0 consists of all collinear shapes. The boundary conditions to be

presented below occur along this plane. We deﬁne w = (w2

1 + w2

2 + w2

3)1/2 to be the “radius”

8

in w1w2w3-space and note the identity,

w = (w2

1 + w2

2 + w2

3)1/2 = ρ2.

(2.4)

The origin w = 0 is the three-body collision and is an especially singular point.

The orientation of a conﬁguration is deﬁned relative to some convention for body frame.

A body frame convention may be deﬁned by specifying the functions rα(q), where rα repre-

sents the body components of the Jacobi vectors and where q represents an arbitrary shape.

(Equivalently, q stands for (q1, q2, q3)). Our rule is to attach an s-subscript to quantities

referred to the space frame, and to omit this subscript for quantities referred to the body

frame. The quantities rα(q) can also be thought of as specifying a reference orientation for

a given shape q, relative to which other orientations of the same shape are referred. In the

reference orientation, the space frame is identical to the body frame. The orientation of

the conﬁguration is deﬁned as the rotation matrix R

SO(3) which rotates the reference

∈

conﬁguration into the actual conﬁguration,

rsα = Rrα(q).

(2.5)

We discuss several common choices of body frame in Sect. II C, but for now we leave the

body frame unspeciﬁed.

For collinear shapes, R is not uniquely determined by Eq. (2.5) and there is no unique

body frame associated with a particular choice of reference orientation. Nevertheless, the

functions rα(q) are normally well deﬁned at collinear shapes, and the assignment of a refer-

ence orientation for a collinear shape will prove to be a useful concept. We will have more

to say in Sect. II B about the singular nature of the body frame at collinear shapes.

We now turn to the three-body wave function Ψ and give a quick derivation of Eq. (1.1)

from angular momentum theory. The wave function Ψ depends on the two Jacobi vectors

rsα. Rotations act on such wave functions by

(Q)Ψ)(rsα) = Ψ(QT rsα),

(

R

(2.6)

9

where

is the rotation operator parameterized by the rotation matrix Q

SO(3), and

T is the transpose. We consider a collection of 2ℓ + 1 wave functions Ψℓ

∈

m,

ℓ
−

≤

m

≤

ℓ,

with deﬁnite total angular momentum ℓ and transforming under the action of SO(3) via the

standard representation,

Ψℓ

m(QT rsα) = (

(Q)Ψℓ

m)(rsα) =

km(Q)Ψℓ
ℓ

k(rsα),

R

D

Xk

where

km(Q) is the Wigner rotation matrix of Q. We use the (active) conventions of
ℓ

Messiah [15] and Biedenharn and Louck [27]. We deﬁne the internal wave function by

R

D

(2.7)

(2.8)

k(q) = Ψℓ
χℓ

k(rα(q)).

The internal wave function is a multicomponent wave function which we call a “spinor.”

The spinor index is k,

ℓ. Using Eqs. (2.5), (2.7), and (2.8) we obtain the ﬁnal

ℓ
−

≤

k

≤

result

Ψℓ

m(rsα) = Ψℓ

m(Rrα(q)) =

mk(R)χℓ
ℓ∗

k(q).

(2.9)

D

Xk

The importance of Eq. (2.9) is that it completes the one-to-one correspondence between

the external and internal wave functions. Equation (2.8) gives the internal wave function

in terms of the external wave function while Eq. (2.9) gives the external wave function in

terms of the internal wave function. One must realize, however, that all 2ℓ + 1 components

of χℓ

k must be speciﬁed to construct Ψℓ

m, whereas only one Ψℓ

m is needed to construct χℓ
k.

This is because the diﬀerent Ψℓ

m’s are not independent but related by raising and lowering

operations, whereas the χℓ

k’s are not.

B. Statement of Boundary Conditions

We now turn to the principal question addressed in this paper: What are necessary and

suﬃcient conditions on the internal wave function χℓ

k(q) which ensure that the external wave

function Ψℓ

m(rsα) is analytic? Naively, one might expect the only condition to be that χℓ

k(q)

is itself analytic, but this is not suﬃcient as we now explain.

10

First, we review some fundamental issues regarding analyticity. Further clariﬁcation

of these points may be found in any basic reference on diﬀerential geometry, for example

Refs. [28,29]. To say that a function of several variables is analytic at a point means that

the function agrees with its Taylor series in a neighborhood of that point. To say that a

function deﬁned on a smooth manifold is analytic at a point means that the function, when

represented in a suitable choice of coordinates, is an analytic function of those coordinates

at that point. The choice of coordinates is critical since a function analytic with respect

to one set of coordinates may not be analytic with respect to another. Thus, whenever

we say that a function deﬁned on a smooth manifold is analytic, we must be careful to

say with respect to what set of coordinates. Now, if two sets of coordinates are related to

one another by an invertible analytic function (with analytic inverse) then these two sets of

coordinates are said (in standard mathematical terminology) to be “compatible.” A function

analytic with respect to one set of coordinates is also analytic with respect to a compatible

set of coordinates. Thus, the analyticity of a function is deﬁned relative to an entire set of

compatible coordinates.

As an example, consider the plane R2, and take the standard (x, y) coordinates as the

privileged coordinates deﬁning analyticity. Polar coordinates (r, θ) are compatible with (x, y)

everywhere except at the origin (and on a radial line). Thus, a function such as f (r, θ) = r

which is an analytic function of the polar coordinates may still not be an analytic function at

the origin of R2. One needs additional boundary conditions at the origin to guarantee that

a function analytic in polar coordinates is truly analytic on R2. This example contains the

core idea of why boundary conditions may be needed to guarantee analyticity of a function.

We explore this example further in Sect. III.

When considering the three-body wave function Ψℓ

m, we take the privileged set of co-

ordinates deﬁning analyticity to be the Jacobi coordinates rsαk, α = 1, 2, k = x, y, z. The

reason for choosing these coordinates is that in practice the potential energy and the wave

functions are typically analytic (except at collisions) with respect to these coordinates. So

long as one only uses Jacobi coordinates, this fact is suﬃcient and the rest of this paper

11

could be skipped. However, as already pointed out, a shape and orientation description of

conﬁguration space is often advantageous and this naturally involves expressing Ψℓ

m in shape

and orientation coordinates as in Eq. (2.9). An important fact is that shape and orientation

coordinates are never compatible at collinear shapes, because the rotation matrix R is not

deﬁned by Eq. (2.5). This is much like the relation between rectangular and polar coordi-

nates at the origin of the plane, discussed earlier, and it explains why the analyticity of χℓ
k

alone is not suﬃcient to guarantee the analyticity of Ψℓ

m at collinear shapes.

We will also be interested in the analyticity of functions deﬁned on the internal space

(such as the internal wave function χℓ

k). We have found it most useful to take the w-

coordinates as the privileged coordinate system with respect to which the analyticity of

such functions is deﬁned. All internal coordinate systems in common use are compatible

with the w-coordinates at most locations in shape space. On the internal space there is

the additional issue of what we mean by analyticity at the boundary w3 = 0. We will

say that a function deﬁned on the internal space is analytic at a particular point on the

boundary if the function has an analytic continuation into the nonphysical region w3 < 0 in

the neighborhood of that point.

The analyticity of the functions rα(q) requires special comment. These functions have

singularities on certain curves (“strings”) in w1w2w3-space, which emanate from the three-

body collision w = 0 and go out to inﬁnity. The location of these strings depends on the

convention for body frame [19–21].

In the following we wish to work with body frame

conventions which remove the strings from the region of interest in the internal space.

The reader may wonder about the analyticity of the Euler angles, or of functions of them.

As it turns out, we never need to worry about such issues, because the main result of this

paper, which is the establishment of necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the analyticity

of Ψℓ

m, only involves the analytic properties of χℓ

k. The results we prove below are valid for

arbitrary conventions for Euler angles.

Turning away now from general notions of analyticity, we observe that at a collinear

shape, which is not the triple collision, there is a well-deﬁned (up to sign) unit vector,

12

denoted by ˆn, pointing along the body-referred axis of collinearity. The vector ˆn depends on

the position along the boundary plane and is undeﬁned oﬀ of the plane. We therefore choose

a convention for extending ˆn oﬀ of the boundary plane. That is, we choose a function ˆn(q),

deﬁned on shape space, which points along the collinear axis when evaluated at a collinear

shape. When evaluated at a noncollinear shape, we only require that ˆn(q) lie in the plane

spanned by r1(q) and r2(q).

We now introduce a certain basis of spinors τµ(q),

ℓ
−
L of the body-referred angular momentum operator L onto the collinear

ℓ, which are eigenspinors of

the projection ˆn(q)

≤

≤

µ

·
axis. These spinors are chosen to satisfy

(ˆn

L)τµ = µτµ,

·

τ †
µτµ′ =

(τµ)∗

k(τµ′)k = δµµ′,

Xk

where

represents the Hermitian conjugate. Here the µ subscript does not index the com-

†

ponents of τµ but rather labels the spinor; the 2ℓ + 1 components themselves are denoted

by (τµ)k,

ℓ
−

≤

k

≤

ℓ and are taken with respect to the normalized eigenbasis of Lz, using

standard phase conventions. Notice that Eqs. (2.10) and (2.11) determine τµ(q) only up to

an overall phase, which is another convention we have the freedom to choose. We deﬁne an

alternative version of the internal wave function by

where χℓ is the column vector (χℓ

−ℓ, ..., χℓ

ℓ)T . Since the spinors τµ are orthonormal, Eq. (2.12)

may be inverted to give

µ = τ †
χℓ

µχℓ =

(τµ)∗

kχℓ
k,

Xk

χℓ

k =

(τµ)kχℓ
µ.

Xµ

Given some region of interest in the internal space, there are conventions involved in

choosing the coordinates qµ, the functions rα(q), which specify the reference orientations,

the function ˆn(q), which extends the collinear axis away from the boundary, and the spinors

τµ(q). We will be particularly interested in a certain class of conventions which taken

13

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

together we call “valid” conventions. At a noncollinear shape, a set of conventions is said

to be valid if qµ is compatible with the w-coordinates and the functions rα(q), ˆn(q), and

(τµ)k(q) are analytic. In particular, this means that the shape in question does not lie on

a string singularity. At a collinear shape, we still require the compatibility of the internal

coordinates with the w-coordinates and the analyticity of rα(q), ˆn(q), and (τµ)k(q). However,

we further require that the boundary plane be given by q3 = 0. We also require that various

functions be either even or odd. Speciﬁcally,

qµ(

w3) = qµ(w3),

µ = 1, 2,

q3(

w3) =

q3(w3),

−

q3) = (ˆn

rα)(q3),

·
(P⊥rα)(q3),

(ˆn

rα)(

·
(P⊥rα)(

q3) =

−
q3) = ˆn(q3),

ˆn(

(τµ)k(

q3) = (τµ)k(q3),

−

−

−

−

−

−

(2.14)

(2.15)

(2.16)

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

where we have suppressed the dependence on w1, w2, q1, and q2 and where P⊥(q) denotes

the projection operator onto the plane orthogonal to ˆn(q).

With the preceding setup, we state the main result of this paper.

Theorem 1 Let a conﬁguration rsα (which is not the triple collision) have shape q, and

assume valid conventions for the shape coordinates qµ, the reference orientation rα(q), the

vector ˆn(q), and the spinor τµ(q) in the neighborhood of q.

(i) If q is noncollinear, then Ψℓ

m is analytic at rsα if and only if χℓ

µ (equivalently χℓ

k) is

analytic at q.

at q with the Taylor series

(ii) If q is collinear, then Ψℓ

m is analytic at rsα if and only if χℓ

µ (equivalently χℓ

k) is analytic

χℓ

µ(q1, q2, q3) =

aµn(q1, q2)q|µ|+2n

,

3

(2.20)

∞

Xn=0

14

where aµn is an analytic function of (q1, q2).

The most striking aspect of this theorem is that the wave function grows as q|µ|

3 away

from the collinear shapes. We can provide the following heuristic physical interpretation

of this rule.

If a classical three-body system, under the inﬂuence of a smooth potential,

approaches a collinear conﬁguration, any angular momentum about the collinear axis will

create a centrifugal barrier which prevents the system from reaching the collinear conﬁgu-

ration. Quantum mechanically, the centrifugal barrier acts to suppress the wave function in

the classically forbidden region. The more quanta of angular momentum about the collinear

axis, the more the wave function is suppressed resulting in the q|µ|

3 growth. This interpre-

tation is dynamical in nature since it depends on the notion of a Hamiltonian. We stress,

however, that the derivation of Theorem 1 will depend only on notions of analyticity and

symmetry.

C. Explicit Examples of Boundary Conditions

For concreteness, we analyze the boundary conditions explicitly for several choices of valid

conventions. The ﬁrst example uses the w-coordinates and a body frame which coincides

with the principal axes. The body-referred Jacobi vectors are given parametrically by

a
b
1
−
2√2 (cid:16)

w1
ab (cid:17)
w1
ab (cid:17)

ˆz

1/2 w2
w2|
ˆz +

1/2

|

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

− (cid:20)
a
b
−
2√2 (cid:16)

1 +

1/2

w1
ab (cid:17)
1/2 w2
w2|

|

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

ˆx,

ˆx,

−

w1
ab (cid:17)

−

r1(w1, w2, w3) =

1 +

r2(w1, w2, w3) =

(cid:20)

a + b
2√2 (cid:16)
a + b
2√2 (cid:16)
a = √w + w3,

(cid:20)

1

b = √w

w3.

−

(2.21)

(2.22)

(2.23)

(2.24)

Since the collinear axis for a collinear shape is given by ˆn(w1, w2) = ˆz, we deﬁne the extension

to noncollinear shapes by

ˆn(w1, w2, w3) = ˆz.

(2.25)

15

Equations (2.21) and (2.22) exhibit a discontinuity in the function rα(w1, w2, w3) along

the w3-axis. In fact the reference orientation approaches a continuum of diﬀerent values,

depending on the direction of approach. The w3-axis forms the string singularity of the

principal axis frame. This string consists of oblate symmetric tops, and the discontinuity

there is a direct result of the ambiguity in the choice of the principal axes due to the

degeneracy of the principal moments of inertia. Another singularity occurs in the principal

axis frame, arising from the double-valued nature of the frame. Upon circling the w3 axis

once, the principal axis frame does not return to its original value, but rather has rotated by

π. Thus, to make the principal-axis frame single-valued requires introducing a branch cut.

In Eqs. (2.21) and (2.22), we have chosen this branch cut to be the two-dimensional surface

w2 = 0, w1 > 0. Such string singularities and branch cuts are common to other choices of

body frame as well and are discussed further in Ref. [20].

We comment brieﬂy on the validity of the conventions introduced here. The w-

coordinates are trivially valid everywhere, with the w3 coordinate being transverse to the

collinear shapes. The function ˆn(q) = ˆz is constant and hence analytic everywhere. It obvi-

ously satisﬁes Eq. (2.18) as well. Away from the frame singularities discussed above, rα(q)

is analytic, and it is straightforward to show that Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17) are satisﬁed. From

Eq. (2.25) we may take (τµ)k(q) = δµk, which is clearly analytic and satisﬁes Eq. (2.19).

Hence these conventions are valid everywhere except at the frame singularities.

Away from the frame singularities and away from the boundary of shape space, Theorem

1 tells us that analyticity of χℓ

k(q) is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for analyticity of

Ψℓ

m(rsα). In order to guarantee analyticity of Ψℓ

m(rsα) on the boundary of shape space (away

from the positive w1-axis where there is a frame singularity), χℓ

k(q) must have the Taylor

series

χℓ

k(w1, w2, w3) =

akn(w1, w2)w|k|+2n

,

3

(2.26)

where of course akn(w1, w2) is analytic.

In the next example, we keep the principal axis frame, but change coordinates from the

∞

Xn=0

16

w-coordinates to the symmetric hyperspherical coordinates (ρ, Φ, Θ) deﬁned in Eqs. (2.1)

– (2.3). The coordinate Θ is transverse to the boundary of shape space which occurs at

Θ = 0. These hyperspherical coordinates are compatible everywhere except the w3-axis and

the two-dimensional surface w2 = 0, w1 > 0, where they experience a coordinate singularity.

Note that the location of the coordinate singularities agrees exactly with the location of the

singularities in the principal axis frame. We again choose ˆn(q) = ˆz and (τµ)k = δµk. It is

again true that the conventions are valid everywhere except at the frame singularities. Little

modiﬁcation to the form of Eq. (2.26) is necessary except to change the coordinates which

χℓ

k(ρ, Φ, Θ) =

akn(ρ, Φ)Θ|k|+2n.

(2.27)

∞

Xn=0

Of course, the coeﬃcients akn(ρ, Φ) in the above equation are diﬀerent from those in

gives

Eq. (2.26).

In the next example, we again use the w-coordinates but choose a diﬀerent body frame,

called the zxz-frame in Ref. [3] or the BFτ 1 frame in Ref. [19]. This frame places r1 along the

positive z-axis and r2 in the xz-plane. Explicitly, the reference conﬁguration rα(w1, w2, w3)

for the zxz-frame is

r1(w1, w2, w3) =

(w + w1)1/2ˆz,

r2(w1, w2, w3) =

1

(w + w1)1/2 (w3ˆx + w2ˆz) .

1
√2
1
√2

(2.28)

(2.29)

We again take ˆn(q) = ˆz and (τµ)k(q) = δµk, and it is easy to see that Eqs. (2.14) – (2.19)

are again satisﬁed. Equations (2.28) and (2.29) exhibit a string singularity on the negative

w1-axis, which consists of shapes satisfying r1 = 0. Intuitively, we explain the location of

the string by the following observation:

if r1 = 0, then the orientation of r2 within the

xz-plane is not ﬁxed. The conventions are valid everywhere oﬀ of the string; there is no

branch cut for the zxz-frame as there was for the principal axis frame. The Taylor series

given in Eq. (2.26) is again applicable for the present conventions. Of course the coeﬃcients

akn(w1, w2) are diﬀerent here and the domain of validity is also diﬀerent.

17

In the next example, we continue to use the zxz-frame, ˆn(q) = ˆz, and (τµ)k(q) = δµk,

but use a diﬀerent set of hyperspherical coordinates (ρ, ζ, θ) deﬁned by

w1 = ρ2 sin 2ζ,

w2 = ρ2 cos 2ζ cos θ,

w3 = ρ2 cos 2ζ sin θ.

(2.30)

(2.31)

(2.32)

These are the asymmetric hyperspherical coordinates of Smith [18,23]. They are compatible

everywhere in the physical region except on the w1-axis, where there is a coordinate singu-

larity. Notice that this coordinate singularity includes the singularities in the zxz-frame,

which occur on the negative w1-axis. The coordinate θ is transverse to the collinear shapes,

which occur at both θ = 0 and θ = π. We concentrate on the boundary θ = 0 ﬁrst. Since

the conventions are valid over the entire half-plane θ = 0, the Taylor series

χℓ

k(ρ, ζ, θ) =

akn(ρ, ζ)θ|k|+2n

(2.33)

∞

Xn=0

is suﬃcient to guarantee analyticity of the external wave function. With regards to the

half-plane θ = π, by our deﬁnition the conventions are not valid there because we require

the boundary be given by q3 = 0. Nevertheless, by using new coordinates (ρ, ζ, θ′ = π

θ),

−

the conventions are valid on this half-plane. If the external wave function is to be analytic

on this half-plane, χℓ

k must satisfy a Taylor series in θ′ identical in form to Eq. (2.33)

for θ. One set of functions which do satisfy the appropriate conditions at both θ = 0

and θ = π are the associated Legendre polynomials P ℓ

k (θ). An internal wave function

k(ρ, ζ, θ) = bk(ρ, ζ)P ℓ
χℓ

k(θ), with bk(ρ, ζ) analytic, therefore lifts to an analytic external wave

function (in the region of validity). Internal wave functions of this form arise naturally when

constructing hyperspherical harmonics. (See, for example, Aquilanti et al. [5,4].)

III. THE PLANAR TWO-BODY PROBLEM

Before proving the theorem on three-body boundary conditions, we discuss the two-

body problem in the plane. Not only is this simpler case useful practice for the three-body

18

problem, but in fact our proof of the three-body results relies on the the two-body results

presented here.

First, we must adapt the basic concepts and notation introduced for the three-body

problem for use with the two-body problem. The conﬁguration space of a two-body system,

in the center of mass frame, is just the two-dimensional plane, the relative position of one

body with respect to the other being denoted here as rs ∈
system depends only on the separation distance r between the bodies, and we denote the

R2. The shape of the two-body

shape coordinate by q(r). We assign to each shape q a reference orientation r(q). The

reference orientation r(q) is simply a point on the circle of radius r(q) centered at the origin

of R2. This fact makes the reference orientations much easier to visualize here than for the

three-body problem; the reference orientations all lie on a curve beginning at the origin and

intersecting each concentric circle once as it moves out to inﬁnity. An arbitrary conﬁguration

rs = Rr(q),

(3.1)

SO(2) denotes the orientation of the system. We will denote the rotation angle

As an example, one could choose the internal coordinate to be q(r) = r and the reference

r(r) = rˆx.

(3.2)

This choice produces shape and orientation coordinates (r, θ) which are the usual polar

We now discuss the two-body wave function Ψ. The action of Q

SO(2) on Ψ is

∈

(Q)Ψ)(rs) = Ψ(QT rs).

(
R

We denote by Ψm a wave function which transforms according to the irrep m of SO(2),

(3.3)

(3.4)

Ψm(QT rs) = (

(Q)Ψm)(rs) = e−imαΨm(rs),

R

19

rs is given by

where R

∈
of R by θ.

orientation to be

coordinates on R2.

where α is the rotation angle of Q. The internal wave function χm(q) is deﬁned by

χm(q) = Ψm(r(q)).

(3.5)

Given χm(q) we may recover the external wave function Ψm(rs) with the aid of Eqs. (3.1),

(3.4), and (3.5),

problem.

Ψm(rs) = Ψm(Rr(q)) = eimθχm(q).

(3.6)

Equations (3.3) – (3.6) are obviously analogous to Eqs. (2.6) – (2.9) for the three-body

We take the Cartesian coordinates (rsx, rsy) (that is, the usual space-ﬁxed (x, y)) as

the privileged coordinates for deﬁning analyticity of functions on conﬁguration space. We

take the radial coordinate r as the privileged coordinate for deﬁning analyticity of functions

on shape space. Since r is a positive quantity, we must give special consideration to the

boundary r = 0. A function on shape space is said to be analytic at r = 0 if it can be

analytically continued (as a function of r) into the region r < 0.

For the three-body problem, there were four diﬀerent conventions that had to be speciﬁed.

For the two-body problem, we need only specify two conventions: the shape coordinate q and

the reference orientation r(q); there is no analog of ˆn(q) or τµ(q) for the two-body problem.

Away from the two-body collision, these two conventions are said to be “valid” if the shape

coordinate q is compatible with r and if r(q) is analytic. At the two-body collision, q must

still be compatible with r and r(q) must still be analytic. However, we also require that

q = 0 coincide with the two-body collision and that the following conditions be met

(3.7)

(3.8)

We now state the following two-body theorem, which is analogous to Theorem 1 for the

three-body problem.

q(

r) =

q(r),

−

−

−

−

r(

q) =

r(q).

20

Theorem 2 Let a conﬁguration rs have shape q, and assume valid conventions for the shape

coordinate q and the reference orientation r(q) in the neighborhood of q.

(i) If q

= 0, then Ψm is analytic at rs if and only if χm is analytic at q.

(ii) If q = 0, then Ψm is analytic at rs = 0 if and only if χm is analytic at 0 with the Taylor

χm(q) =

amnq|m|+2n,

∞

Xn=0

(3.9)

where the amn are constant complex coeﬃcients.

For the entirety of this proof, when we say that a function of either the Cartesian

coordinates or shape coordinate is analytic, we mean only that it is locally analytic at

the speciﬁc points, rs or q respectively, mentioned in the statement of the theorem.

Equation (3.4) shows that if Ψm is analytic at an arbitrary rs, then Ψm is analytic at any

other orientation QT rs with Q

SO(2) arbitrary. We therefore assume without loss that

∈

the speciﬁc conﬁguration rs in the statement of the Theorem is the reference orientation r.

(i) Assume q

= 0. Assume Ψm(rsα) is analytic. From Eq. (3.5), the fact that r(q)

is analytic, and the fact that the composition of analytic functions is analytic, χm(q) is

Next assume χm(q) is analytic. By the assumption of compatibility, q(r) is analytic.

Furthermore, r(rs) = (r2

sx + r2

sy)1/2 is an analytic function of the Cartesian coordinates.

Hence, q(rs) = q(r(rs)) is analytic. Turning to the rotation matrix R in Eq. (3.1), its

rotation angle θ is given by θ(rs, r) = arcsin (ˆz

(r×rs/r2)), which is an analytic function

of rs and r. (We only consider θ in the range

π/2 < θ < π/2 since we are only checking

for analyticity at the reference orientation θ = 0.) Furthermore, r(rs) = r(q(rs)) is analytic

since r(q) is analytic by the validity assumption and q(rs) was shown to be analytic above.

series

Proof

analytic.

Hence,

θ(rs) = θ(rs, r(rs))

(3.10)

·

−

21

6
6
is analytic. Since exp(imθ) is an analytic function of θ, we conclude that

Ψm(rs) = eimθ(rs)χm(q(rs))

(3.11)

is an analytic function of the Cartesian coordinates.

(ii) Assume q = 0. Assume Ψm(rsα) is analytic. By the same argument as in case (i),

χm(q) is analytic at q = 0. To prove Eq. (3.9), we diﬀerentiate Eq. (3.4) d times with respect

to rs,

Xk1...kd

Qj1k1...Qjdkd (cid:18)

∂rsk1 · · ·

∂

∂
∂rskd

Ψm(cid:19)

(QT rs) = e−imα

∂

(cid:18)

∂rsj1 · · ·

∂
∂rsjd

Ψm(cid:19)

(rs),

(3.12)

where Qjk, j, k = x, y, are the components of Q. Evaluating Eq. (3.12) at rs = 0 produces

Qj1k1...Qjdkd (cid:18)

∂rsk1 · · ·

∂

∂
∂rskd

Ψm(cid:19)

(0) = e−imα

∂

(cid:18)

∂rsj1 · · ·

∂
∂rsjd

Ψm(cid:19)

(0).

(3.13)

Xk1...kd

Equation (3.13) shows that the rank d tensor (∂/∂rsj1...∂/∂rsjdΨm)(0) transforms under the

completely symmetrized action of SO(2) as an irrep of SO(2) labeled by m. (See Appendix.)

The decomposition of the fully symmetrized action of SO(2) on rank d tensors decomposes

into irreps as shown in Eq. (A1). If m does not label one of the irreps included in Eq. (A1),

that is, if m

= d, d

2, ...,

(d

−
−
the chain rule and Eq. (3.5) show that

−

−

2),

d, then (∂/∂rsj1...∂/∂rsjdΨm)(0) = 0. Consequently,

dd
dqd χm(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(0) =

Xk1...kd

drsk1
dq

(0)

· · ·

drskd
dq

(0)

∂

(cid:18)

∂rsk1 · · ·

∂
∂rskd

Ψm(cid:19)

(0) = 0

(3.14)

when m

= d, d

2, ...,

(d

2),

d. This shows that the appropriate Taylor coeﬃcients

−
vanish in order to produce the Taylor series in Eq. (3.9).

−

−

−

Now assume that χm is analytic at q = 0 with Taylor series shown in Eq. (3.9). We

ﬁrst complete the proof of Theorem 2 assuming the internal coordinate q(r) = r and the

reference conﬁguration r(r) = rˆx. We explicitly construct a function ˜Ψm(rs) by

∞

˜Ψm(rs) =

amn

t|m|+2n
m

rsk1...rsk|m|+2n,

(3.15)

Xn=0 Xk1...k|m|+2n

(cid:0)

k1...k|m|+2n
(cid:1)

22

6
6
where the amn are the same Taylor coeﬃcients as in Eq. (3.9) and the t|m|+2n

m

are the rank

m
|
|
t|m|+2n
m

+ 2n tensors deﬁned by Eq. (A2). Clearly the transformation property Eq. (A3) of the

shows that ˜Ψm satisﬁes Eq. (3.4). Hence, we may apply the same analysis to ˜Ψm as

we have for Ψm. In particular, ˜Ψm is uniquely determined via Eq. (3.6) by the internal wave

function ˜χm deﬁned by Eq. (3.5)

˜χm(r) = ˜Ψm(rˆx) =

amnr|m|+2n,

(3.16)

∞

Xn=0

where we have used Eqs. (3.15) and (A4). Since χm and ˜χm have the same Taylor series,

χm = ˜χm. Furthermore, the unique correspondence between internal and external wave

functions guarantees that Ψm = ˜Ψm. From Eq. (3.15), we see that Ψm = ˜Ψm is analytic at 0

by construction. This completes the proof of Theorem 2 for the speciﬁc conventions chosen

above.

We mention two noteworthy special cases of Theorem 2, which the above analysis has

now proven. First, if f (r) is an even analytic function, then f (rs) = f (r(rs)) is an analytic

function of the Cartesian coordinates.

(This fact is quite trivial to prove from scratch

by simply considering the Taylor series of the two functions.) Second, if f (r) is an odd

analytic function, then f (rs) = f (r, θ) = exp(iθ)f (r) is an analytic function of the Cartesian

coordinates, where (r, θ) are the standard polar coordinates.

We now assume arbitrary valid conventions r(q) and q(r) for the reference orientation and

shape coordinate respectively. To complete the proof of Theorem 2 for these conventions,

we ﬁrst deﬁne and discuss three useful functions F(rs), G(rs), and H(rs) related to these

conventions. By the validity assumptions, r(r) is an odd analytic function in the neighbor-

hood of r = 0, and hence ˆr(r) = r(r)/r is an even analytic function in the neighborhood of

r = 0. Deﬁne the matrix-valued function F(r) by

F(r) = ˆxˆrT (r) + ˆy(ˆz×ˆr(r))T .

Notice that F(r) is the unique matrix in SO(2) satisfying

F(r)ˆr(r) = ˆx.

23

(3.17)

(3.18)

Since ˆr(r) is an even analytic function, we see from Eq. (3.17) that F(r) is an even analytic

function. Hence, from the ﬁrst of the two special cases of Theorem 2 mentioned above,

F(rs) = F(r(rs)) is also analytic. Notice of course that F(rs) is invariant under all rotations

Q

∈

SO(2),

By the validity assumptions, q(r) is an odd analytic function of r. Hence, from the

second of the two special cases of Theorem 2 mentioned above, the function

F(Qrs) = F(rs).

G(rs) = eiθq(r)

is an analytic function of the Cartesian coordinates. (Here (θ, r) are the standard polar

coordinates in R2.) We deﬁne a vector-valued version of G(rs), denoted G(rs), by

G(rs) = Re(G(rs))ˆx + Im(G(rs))ˆy = q(r)ˆrs.

(3.21)

Obviously, G(rs) is also an analytic function of the Cartesian coordinates. Recall that the

compatibility of the coordinate q guarantees that q(r) has an inverse, which we denote by

q−1, that is, q−1(q(r)) = r. The function G(rs) therefore has an inverse given by

as may be veriﬁed by inserting this formula into Eq. (3.21). Equations (3.21) and (3.22)

easily admit the following results

G−1(rs) = q−1(r)ˆrs,

G(Qrs) = QG(rs),

G−1(Qrs) = QG−1(rs),

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.22)

(3.23)

(3.24)

where Q

SO(2) is arbitrary.

∈

We deﬁne a new function H(rs) by

H(rs) = F(rs)G(rs).

(3.25)

24

This function has several important properties. First, since both G(rs) and F(rs) are ana-

lytic, H(rs) is analytic. Second,

H(r(q)) = F(r(q))G(r(q)) = qˆx,

(3.26)

which follows from Eqs. (3.18) and (3.21). A third fact is that H is invertible. This fact

requires more work to prove, which we do by explicitly constructing H−1. Let r′

s = H(rs).

rs = G−1(F−1(rs)r′

s) = F−1(rs)G−1(r′

s),

(3.27)

where we use the deﬁnition of H and the fact that G is invertible in the ﬁrst equality and

the second equality follows from Eq. (3.24). Now, the magnitudes of r′

s and rs are related

Then,

by

r′
s|

|

|

=

F(rs)G(rs)

=

G(rs)

= q(

|

|

|

),

rs|

|

where we have used Eq. (3.21) in the ﬁnal equality. Turning this relation around and using

Eq. (3.22) we have,

rs|

|

= q−1(

r′
s|

|

) =

G−1(r′
s)

|

.

|

As witnessed by Eq. (3.19), F(rs) depends only on the magnitude of its argument, and hence

Eqs. (3.27) and (3.29) combine to produce

rs = F−1(G−1(r′

s))G−1(r′

s),

which gives rs in terms of r′

s. Hence,

H−1(r′

s) = F−1(G−1(r′

s))G−1(r′

s).

Another fact regarding H is that if Q

SO(2) is arbitrary, then

∈

H(Qrs) = F(Qrs)G(Qrs) = F(rs)QG(rs) = QF(rs)G(rs) = QH(rs),

(3.32)

25

(3.28)

(3.29)

(3.30)

(3.31)

where the second equality follows from Eqs. (3.19) and (3.23) and the third equality follows

from the commutativity of the group SO(2). From Eq. (3.32) follows an analogous identity

for H−1

H−1(Qrs) = QH−1(rs).

(3.33)

We now have the proper background to complete the proof. Since H is invertible, we

introduce the function ˜Ψm by

˜Ψm(rs) = Ψm(H−1(rs)),

Ψm(rs) = ˜Ψm(H(rs)).

(3.34)

(3.35)

(3.36)

We see from Eq. (3.33) that ˜Ψm satisﬁes Eq. (3.4) since Ψm satisﬁes Eq. (3.4). We deﬁne

the internal wave function ˜χm(q) using the old convention r(q) = qˆx,

˜χm(q) = ˜Ψm(qˆx).

Using the new convention r(q), we have χm(q) given by

χm(q) = Ψm(r(q)) = ˜Ψm(H(r(q))) = ˜Ψm(qˆx),

(3.37)

where the second equality follows from Eq. (3.35) and the third from Eq. (3.26). Thus, the

functional form of χm(q) and ˜χm(q) are identical. Since we have assumed that χm is analytic

at q = 0 with the Taylor series in Eq. (3.9), ˜χm is also analytic with the identical Taylor

series. Now since we have proved Theorem 2 for the old conventions used to deﬁne ˜χm(q), we

have that ˜Ψm(rs) is an analytic function of the Cartesian coordinates. Furthermore, since

H(rs) is analytic, Eq. (3.35) implies that Ψm(rs) is analytic.

.

QED

IV. PROOF OF THREE-BODY BOUNDARY CONDITIONS

In this section, we prove Theorem 1.

Proof

26

For the entirety of this proof, when we say that a function of either the Jacobi coordinates

or shape coordinates is analytic, we mean only that it is locally analytic at the speciﬁc points,

rsα or q respectively, mentioned in the theorem.

A common fact we will use several times is that the Wigner matrices

mk(Q) are analytic
ℓ

D

functions of the rotation matrices Q

SO(3). Equation (2.7) thus shows that if Ψℓ

m is

∈

analytic at an arbitrary rsα, then Ψℓ

m is analytic at any other orientation QT rsα with Q

∈
SO(3) arbitrary. We therefore assume without loss that the speciﬁc conﬁguration rsα in the

statement of the Theorem is the reference orientation rα.

(i) Assume q is noncollinear. The proof here is a straightforward generalization of the

proof of part (i) of Theorem 2. First assume Ψℓ

m(rsα) is analytic. From Eqs. (2.8) and

(2.12), the fact that both rα(q) and (τµ)k(q) are analytic, and the fact that the composition

of analytic functions is analytic, χℓ

µ(q) and χℓ

k(q) are both analytic.

Next assume χℓ

µ(q) is analytic. From Eq. (2.13) and the fact that (τµ)k(q) is analytic,

χℓ

k(q) is also analytic. The validity assumption guarantees that q(wµ) is analytic. From

Eqs. (2.1) – (2.3) it is evident that the functions wµ(rsα) are themselves analytic. Therefore,

q(rsα) = q(wµ(rsα)) is analytic.

of the vectors rsα and rα as

We now focus on the orientation matrix R in Eq. (2.5) which may be expressed in terms

R(rsα, rα) =

1 + rs2vT

2 + (rs1×rs2)(r1×r2)T

,

(cid:3)

2

rs1vT

1
r1×r2|
r2×(r2×r1),
−

(cid:2)

|

v1 =

v2 =

r1×(r1×r2).

−

To conﬁrm the above expression for R, we need only verify Eq. (2.5) and show that

R(r1×r2) = rs1×rs2, both of which follow easily from the simple identities

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

r1×r2|

2,

rα =

vα ·
|
(r1×r2) = 0,

vα ·
r2 = v2 ·

v1 ·

r1 = 0.

27

Since r1×r2 does not vanish, it is clear that R(rsα, rα) is an analytic function of the vectors

rsα and rα. Since both rα(q) and q(rsα) are analytic, the function rα(rsα) = rα(q(rsα))

is analytic. Hence, R(rsα) = R(rsα, rα(rsα)) is also analytic. Recalling that the Wigner

matrices are analytic functions of R and that q(rsα) is analytic, we see that

Ψℓ

m(rsα) =

mk(R(rsα))χℓ
ℓ∗

k(q(rsα))

D

Xk

(4.7)

is an analytic function of the Jacobi coordinates.

(ii) Assume q is collinear. We deﬁne a new set of coordinates on conﬁguration space

consisting of two shape coordinates, two orientation coordinates, and two coordinates con-

structed from the one remaining shape coordinate and the one remaining orientation coordi-

nate. We call these coordinates the “mixed coordinates”. The majority of the remainder of

the proof will be dedicated to deﬁning the mixed coordinates and proving the most impor-

tant fact about them, that they are compatible with the Jacobi coordinates at the collinear

conﬁguration.

First, we discuss the parameterization of the rotation matrix R in Eq. (2.5). Consider

an arbitrary unit vector ˆe lying in the northern hemisphere (excluding the equator), with

ˆn(q) as the north pole. We deﬁne U(q, ˆe)

SO(3) to be the unique rotation such that

∈

U(q, ˆe)ˆn(q) = ˆe

and such that its rotation axis lies on the equator. Speciﬁcally, the rotation axis of U lies in

the direction of

and the rotation angle of U has the value arcsin

. Thus, U(q, ˆe) is explicitly given by

a(q, ˆe) = ˆn(q)×ˆe,

a
|

|

|

U(q, ˆe) = exp[f (

a(q, ˆe)

)(a(q, ˆe)×)],

f (x) =

|
arcsin x
x

,

where we have introduced the notation a× for the 3

3 matrix which maps an arbitrary

vector v into a×v. The purpose of Eqs. (4.10) and (4.11) is to demonstrate the analyticity

×

28

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

of U(q, ˆe). Observe that arcsin(x) is an odd analytic function on the interval (

1, 1), and

−

hence, f (x) is an even analytic function on (

a
|
−
is an analytic function of a. From Eq. (4.9) and the fact that ˆn(q) is analytic at q3 = 0,

1, 1). This in turn implies that f (a) = f (

)

|

a(q, ˆe) is analytic at q3 = 0 and at all ˆe in the northern hemisphere deﬁned by the north pole

ˆn(q3 = 0). The analyticity of the exponential function permits the following ﬁnal statement.

The function U(q, ˆe) expressed in Eq. (4.10) is an analytic function at q3 = 0 and at all ˆe in

the northern hemisphere with ˆn(q3 = 0) as the north pole.

For an arbitrary rotation angle θ we deﬁne V(q, θ) to be the rotation by θ about ˆn(q).

Explicitly, this rotation is given by

V(q, θ) = ˆn(q)ˆnT (q) + [sin θ(ˆn(q)×) + cos θ]P⊥(q).

(4.12)

We now express the rotation matrix R in Eq. (2.5) by

R(ˆe, θ) = U(q, ˆe)V(q, θ),

(4.13)

where we have parameterized R by the quantities ˆe and θ.

We assume without loss of generality that ˆn(q3 = 0) = ˆz. (This assumption simply

amounts to a judicious choice of space frame.) We may thus deﬁne W(q)

SO(3) in the

∈

neighborhood of q3 = 0 to be the unique matrix such that

and such that its axis of rotation lies in the xy-plane. In fact, we see from Eq. (4.8) that

The analyticity property of U implies that W(q) is analytic at q3 = 0. We use W(q) to deﬁne

an orthonormal frame ˆni(q), i = 1, 2, 3, by

W(q)ˆz = ˆn(q)

W(q) = UT (q, ˆz).

ˆn1(q) = W(q)ˆx,

ˆn2(q) = W(q)ˆy,

ˆn3(q) = W(q)ˆz = ˆn(q).

29

(4.14)

(4.15)

(4.16)

(4.17)

(4.18)

The functions ˆni(q) are of course analytic.

The unit vector ˆe is determined by only two of its components, of which we choose

ˆe1 = ˆe

ˆn1 and ˆe2 = ˆe

ˆn2. The third component ˆe3(ˆe1, ˆe2) = (ˆe2

1 + ˆe2

2)1/2 is an analytic

·

·

function of the other two in the northern hemisphere. The function

ˆe(q, ˆe1, ˆe2) = ˆe1 ˆn1(q) + ˆe2 ˆn2(q) + ˆe3(ˆe1, ˆe2)ˆn3(q)

(4.19)

is of course analytic.

We next deﬁne a pair of vectors sα(q, θ), α = 1, 2, by

sα(q, θ) = V(q, θ)rα(q) = (ˆn

rα)(q)ˆn(q) + [sin θ(ˆn(q)×) + cos θ] (P⊥rα)(q),

(4.20)

·

where we have used Eq. (4.12). We introduce two new variables u1 and u2 by

u1 = q3 cos θ,

u2 = q3 sin θ.

(4.21)

(4.22)

We deﬁne u = q3, which is convenient notation since when u is positive, it is the radial coor-

dinate in u1u2-space, that is, u = (u2

1+u2

2)1/2. The vectors sα are conveniently parameterized

by the new coordinates

sα(u1, u2) = (ˆn

rα)(u)ˆn(u) + [u2(ˆn(u)×) + u1]

·

(P⊥rα)(u)
u

,

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(4.23)

where we have dropped the explicit dependence on q1 and q2. Since f (u) is an even analytic

function of u, f (u1, u2) = f ((u2

1 + u2

2)1/2) is analytic in u1 and u2. This fact, together with

Eqs. (2.16) – (2.18), shows that ˆn, ˆn

rα, (P⊥rα)/u, and hence sα are all analytic functions of

·

u1 and u2. Reintroducing the explicit dependence on q1 and q2, we see that sα(q1, q2, u1, u2)

is analytic.

Using similar arguments as above,

from Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10) we see that both

a(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe = ˆz) and U(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe = ˆz) are analytic. Hence, Eq. (4.15) shows

that W(q1, q2, u1, u2) is analytic, from which follows, using Eqs. (4.16) – (4.18), that the

ˆni(q1, q2, u1, u2), i = 1, 2, 3, are analytic. Hence, Eq. (4.19) shows that ˆe(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2)

30

is analytic.

From this

result we also have, using Eqs.

(4.9) and (4.10),

that

a(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2) = a(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2)) and U(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2) =

U(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2)) are both analytic.

We deﬁne the mixed coordinates to be the variables (q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2). We can express

rsα in terms of the mixed coordinates as follows

rsα(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2) = Rrα = UVrα = U(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2)sα(q1, q2, u1, u2).

(4.24)

where we have used Eqs. (2.5), (4.13), and (4.20). Since we have already shown that both

U(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe1, ˆe2) and sα(q1, q2, u1, u2) are analytic, we see that the Jacobi coordinates

are analytic functions of the mixed coordinates.

To show compatibility of the mixed coordinates with the Jacobi coordinates we need

now only show that the mixed coordinates are analytic functions of the Jacobi coordinates.

First, since the internal coordinates qµ are valid coordinates, they are analytic functions

of the w-coordinates. By inspecting Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2), we see that w1(rsα) and w2(rsα)

are analytic, even at a collinear shape. However, because of the absolute value in Eq. (2.3)

the same can not be said of w3(rsα). However, the function w2

3(rsα) is analytic. Thus,

we have the following lemma: Any analytic function of (w1, w2, w2

3) may be viewed, via

composition, as an analytic function of rsα. Using this lemma and noting that q1(wµ) and

q2(wµ) are analytic functions which by Eq. (2.14) are also even in w3, we see that the two

mixed coordinates q1(rsα) and q2(rsα) are both analytic functions of the Jacobi coordinates.

Note that the coordinate q3(rsα) is not analytic. However, since q2

3(wµ) is analytic and by

Eq. (2.15) also even in w3, q2

3(rsα) is analytic. This fact allows us to generalize our previous

lemma regarding the w-coordinates to arbitrary q. As we will have frequent need of this

more general lemma, we record it below.

Lemma 1 If f (q) is an analytic function which is even in q3, then f (rsα) = f (q(rsα)) is

analytic.

This lemma, together with Eqs. (2.16) – (2.18), proves the analyticity of the following

functions: (rα ·

ˆn)(rsα),

P⊥rα|

|

2(rsα), r2

α(rsα), ˆn(rsα). Furthermore, Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10)

31

show that U is even in q3 and hence U(rsα, ˆe) = U(q(rsα), ˆe) is analytic at the collinear

conﬁguration and at all ˆe in the northern hemisphere with ˆn(q3 = 0) at the north pole.

Equation (4.15) proves the analyticity of W(rsα) = W(q(rsα)) and hence Eqs. (4.16) – (4.18)

prove the analyticity of the basis vectors ˆni(rsα) = ˆni(q(rsα)), i = 1, 2, 3.

The vector ˆe is determined by the equation

ˆe = Rˆn,

(4.25)

which follows from Eqs. (4.12), (4.13) and (4.8). We observed earlier that away from a

collinear shape, the matrix R is given by Eq. (4.1), which results in the following formula

for ˆe

where we have used Eq. (4.4) and the fact that

ˆe = ν1(q)rs1 + ν2(q)rs2,

να =

ˆn
rα

,

vα ·
vα ·

(r1×r2)

ˆn = 0

·

(4.26)

(4.27)

(4.28)

since ˆn is assumed to lie in the plane spanned by r1 and r2. We will now show that Eq. (4.26)

is valid not only at noncollinear conﬁgurations, but at collinear conﬁgurations as well. More

speciﬁcally, we will prove that ˆe(rsα) is analytic at collinear conﬁgurations.

Considering Eq. (4.26) in the neighborhood of a collinear conﬁguration, we ﬁrst assume

that neither r1 nor r2 vanishes. Obviously, to show that ˆe(rsα) is analytic, we need only show

that να(rsα) = να(q(rsα)) is analytic. From Lemma 1 this amounts to showing that να(q)

is analytic and even in q3. That να(q) is even in q3 is easily proved by inserting Eqs. (4.2)

and (4.3) into Eq. (4.27) and using Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17). To show that να(q) is analytic

requires the following observation: The ratio of two functions which are both analytic at a

given point is also analytic at that point provided that the ratio is not inﬁnite. (This fact

is easily proved by considering the Taylor series of the two functions.) As q3 tends toward

0, by our previous assumption, rsα does not vanish, nor does ˆn. The quantity vα, however,

32

does vanish, but since it appears to ﬁrst order in both the numerator and denominator of

Eq. (4.27), the ratio is ﬁnite at q3 = 0. Thus, να(q) is analytic, and hence να(rsα) and

consequently ˆe(rsα) are analytic as well.

If one of the Jacobi vectors, say rs1, vanishes at the collinear conﬁguration, the preceding

analysis must be modiﬁed due to the appearance of r1 in the denominator of Eq. (4.27). In

this case, we deﬁne a new set of vectors

and their counterparts tα in the body frame which satisfy

ts1 = rs1 + rs2,

ts2 = rs1 −

rs2,

tsα = Rtα,

analogous to Eq. (2.5). Notice that neither t1 nor t2 vanishes at the collinear shape since

this could only occur if r2 were also to vanish, which only occurs for the triple collision.

Now, Eqs. (4.1) – (4.3), (4.26), and (4.27) are all valid if one replaces rsα and rα by tsα

and tα respectively. We may repeat the same line of reasoning as above to show that the

new να(q), with rα replaced by tα, is analytic and even in q3. Thus from Lemma 1, the

new vα(rsα) and hence ˆe(rsα) are both analytic. Since ˆn1(rsα) and ˆn2(rsα) are analytic, we

ﬁnally ﬁnd that the two mixed coordinates ˆei(rsα) = ˆe(rsα)

ˆni(rsα), i = 1, 2, are analytic

·

functions of the Jacobi coordinates.

We turn now to the ﬁnal two mixed coordinates u1 and u2. They are deﬁned by

Eqs. (4.21) and (4.22), but may also be expressed as

u1 = q3 cos θ = ˆn1 ·
u2 = q3 sin θ = ˆn2 ·

(q3VP⊥)ˆn1 = ˆn1 ·
UT Mˆn1,

UT (q3RP⊥)ˆn1 = ˆn1 ·

UT Mˆn1,

where

(4.29)

(4.30)

(4.31)

(4.32)

(4.33)

(4.34)

M = q3RP⊥.

33

The second equality in Eq. (4.32) follows from Eq. (4.12) and the orthogonality of ˆn1 and

ˆn. The third equality follows from Eq. (4.13).

Recall that U(rsα, ˆe) and ˆe(rsα) are analytic. Hence, U(rsα) = U(rsα, ˆe(rsα)) is also

analytic. We also recall that the ˆni(rsα), i = 1, 2, 3, are analytic. Thus, inspecting Eqs. (4.32)

and (4.33), we need only show that M(rsα) is analytic. The matrix M may be written with

the aid of Eq. (4.1) as

M(q, rsα) = rs1p1(q) + rs2p2(q) + (rs1×rs2)pT

3 (q),

α = 1, 2,

pα =

p3 =

,

q3P⊥vα
vα ·
rα
q3P⊥(r1×r2)
r1×r2|

|

2

.

(4.35)

(4.36)

(4.37)

We ﬁrst assume that r1 and r2 do not vanish at the collinear shape. To prove that M(rsα) =

M(q(rsα), rsα) is analytic, we need only show that pα(rsα), α = 1, 2, and p3(rsα) are analytic.

From Lemma 1 we must therefore show that pα(q), α = 1, 2, and p3(q) are analytic and even

in q3. Using the deﬁnitions Eqs. (4.2), (4.3), (4.36), and (4.37) and the validity conditions

Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17), it is straightforward to prove that pα(rsα), α = 1, 2, and p3(rsα)

are even in q3. As with our proof of the analyticity of να(q), to prove that pα(q), α = 1, 2,

is analytic all we need to do is show that the ratio in Eq. (4.36) is not inﬁnite when q3

tends toward 0. (Both the numerator and denominator are analytic functions of q.) This

fact follows readily from our assumption that rα does not vanish and from the fact that

vα, which does vanish at q3 = 0, appears linearly in both the numerator and denominator.

Proving that p3(q) is analytic requires a bit more care. Since both the numerator and the

denominator in Eq. (4.37) are analytic functions, we again need only verify that p3(q) does

not blow up at q3 = 0, whence

lim
q3→0

p3(q3) = lim

q3→0 (cid:20)

2q3
w3(q3) (cid:21)

lim
q3→0 (cid:20)

P⊥ (cid:18)

r1×r2
r1×r2|

|

(q3),

(cid:19)(cid:21)

where we have used the deﬁnition Eq. (2.3) of w3. We now note

(4.38)

(4.39)

lim
q3→0

q3
w3(q3)

=

1
∂w3
(0)
∂q3

=

∂q3
∂w3

(0),

34

which cannot be inﬁnite since q3 is an analytic function of w3. (We have used l’Hospital’s

rule in the second step of Eq. (4.39).) The second limit in Eq. (4.38) cannot be inﬁnite

either, since P⊥ is well-deﬁned at q3 = 0 and r1×r2/

is a unit vector. Thus, p3(q) is

r1×r2|

|

analytic at q3 = 0. Hence, we have shown the analyticity of pα(rsα), α = 1, 2, and p3(rsα)

from which follows that analyticity of M(rsα) and ui(rsα), i = 1, 2. If the assumption that

r1 and r2 do not vanish at the collinear shape proves to be false, then we can prove the

analyticity of M(rsα) by applying the same trick used earlier of deﬁning the vectors tsα. We

omit the straightforward details of completing this argument. This ﬁnishes the proof of the

compatibility of the mixed coordinates with the Jacobi coordinates.

We turn now to the eigenspinors τµ satisfying Eqs. (2.10) and (2.11). We denote by

(Lsi)mm′, i = x, y, z, m, m′ =

ℓ, ..., ℓ, the components of the space-referred angular mo-

−

mentum operator Lsi with respect to the Lsz eigenbasis. The matrices Lsi transform under

a rotation Q

SO(3) as a vector operator,

∈

QjiLsj =

ℓ(Q)LsiD

D

ℓ†(Q).

Xj

We denote by (Li)kk′, i = x, y, z, k, k′ =

ℓ, ..., ℓ, the components of the body-referred

−
angular momentum operator Li with respect to the Lz eigenbasis. The components of the

two operators Lsi and Li, with respect to their respective bases, are related by (Li)kk′ =

(Lsi)k′k = (Lsi)∗

kk′. (See Ref. [3], Sect. 4.H for a derivation.) Thus, the matrices Li satisfy

QjiLj =

ℓ∗(Q)LiD

D

ℓT (Q).

Xj

In view of Eqs. (4.14) and (4.41), we have

ˆn

L = ˆz

WT L =

·

·

ℓ∗(W)LzD

D

ℓT (W).

From Eq. (4.42) we see that τµ can be expressed as

(4.40)

(4.41)

(4.42)

(4.43)

where σ(q) is a phase factor which must be analytic and even in q3 in order to guarantee

the same properties for (τµ)k(q). This result, together with Eqs. (2.12) and (2.13), yields

(τµ)k = eiσ

ℓ
µk

D

WT

,

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

35

χℓ

µ =

e−iσ

µk(WT )χℓ
ℓ∗
k,

D

χℓ

k =

eiσ

kµ(W)χℓ
ℓ∗
µ.

D

Xk

Xµ

We may use Eq. (4.45) to rewrite Eq. (2.9) as

Ψℓ

m = eiσ

mµ(RW)χℓ
ℓ∗

µ = eiσ

mµ(UVW)χℓ
ℓ∗
µ,

D

Xµ

D

Xµ

where we have used Eq. (4.13).

We now assume that Ψℓ

m(rsα) is analytic, which implies, as in part (i), that both χℓ

k(q)

and χℓ

µ(q) are analytic, and hence χℓ

µ(q) has a Taylor series

χℓ

µ(q1, q2, q3) =

bnµ(q1, q2)qn
3 ,

(4.47)

∞

Xn=0

where bnµ(q1, q2) is analytic. We must now only show that the appropriate coeﬃcients vanish

in the Taylor series Eq. (4.47) to produce the Taylor series Eq. (2.20). Since σ(q) is analytic

and even in q3, Lemma 1 shows that σ(rsα) = σ(q(rsα)) is analytic. Therefore the function

˜Ψℓ

m deﬁned by

˜Ψℓ

m(q1, q2, u1, u2) = e−iσ(q1,q2,u1,u2)Ψℓ

m(q1, q2, u1, u2, ˆe = ˆz),

(4.48)

is analytic. Since ˆe = ˆz, we see from Eq. (4.15) that the matrix product UVW appearing in

Eq. (4.46) is equal to WT VW. From Eqs. (4.12) and (4.14) it is evident that WT VWˆz = ˆz,

and hence WT VW is a rotation by θ about the z-axis, where θ is the rotation angle of V.

Therefore,

Thus, Eqs. (4.46) and (4.48) combine to yield

ℓ∗
mµ(WT VW) = δmµ exp(imθ).

D

˜Ψℓ

m(u1, u2) = eimθχℓ

m(q3),

(4.44)

(4.45)

(4.46)

(4.49)

(4.50)

where we have dropped the explicit dependence on q1 and q2. From this equation and the

fact that (θ, q3) are the usual polar coordinates with respect to the Cartesian coordinates

36

(u1, u2), we may apply Theorem 2. In particular, since ˜Ψℓ

m(u1, u2) is analytic, χℓ

m(q3) has the

Taylor series given in Eq. (3.9). This implies that the appropriate coeﬃcients in Eq. (4.47)

vanish.

Next assume that χℓ

µ(q), and hence χℓ

k(q), is analytic and that χℓ

µ(q) has the Taylor series

given by Eq. (2.20). Then from Theorem 2, the function ˜Ψℓ

m(u1, u2) given in Eq. (4.50) is ana-

lytic in u1 and u2 and based on the analyticity of the coeﬃcients aµn(q1, q2), ˜Ψℓ

m(u1, u2, q1, q2)

is analytic in q1 and q2 as well. We now rewrite Eq. (4.46) as

Ψℓ

m = eiσ

mµ(UW)eiµθχℓ
ℓ∗

µ = eiσ

ℓ∗

mµ(UW) ˜Ψℓ
µ,

(4.51)

D

Xµ

D

Xµ

where we have used Eq. (4.49) in the ﬁrst equality and Eq. (4.50) in the second. We have

already shown that σ, U, W, and ˜Ψℓ

µ are analytic functions of the mixed coordinates. Thus,

Ψℓ

m is an analytic function of the mixed coordinates and hence of the Jacobi coordinates as

well.

.

QED

V. CONCLUSIONS

Assuming valid conventions, Theorem 1 solves the problem of determining whether an

internal wave function for the three-body problem is associated with an analytic external

wave function. The criteria presented are both necessary and suﬃcient. We now propose

several useful extensions of the present work which we plan to consider in future publications.

First, we observe that Theorem 1 says nothing about the properties of the external wave

function in the neighborhood of body frame singularities. Our justiﬁcation for ignoring these

singularities at present is that they may always be moved away from the region of interest

by a change of body frame; they may even be moved into the unphysical region of shape

space. However, in practice it is not always convenient to change body frames or to use a

body frame which places the singularities in the unphysical region. Therefore, one should

like to have a set of criteria on the internal wave function which guarantees the analyticity

of the external wave function in the neighborhood of a body frame singularity.

37

A second desirable extension of the present work would be to develop a set of criteria

applicable at the three-body collision. Such an analysis would almost certainly involve the

analysis of body frame singularities mentioned above. This is because the string (or strings)

of body frame singularities emanates from the three-body collision and no body frame avoids

singularities at the three-body collision.

As mentioned in the introduction, the external wave function for three-body problems

is not necessarily analytic at all points, the collisional conﬁgurations of Coulomb problems

being an obvious example. Yet another useful extension of the present work would be to

develop criteria on the internal wave function which capture such singular behavior of the

external wave function.

Finally, it is natural to try and extend our analysis to four or more bodies. The case

of four bodies is certainly more challenging than that of three bodies. For the three-body

problem, we can always pick valid reference orientations rα(q) which are well deﬁned ana-

lytic functions in the neighborhood of an arbitrary collinear shape (except the three-body

collision). For the four-body problem, however, any reference orientation rα(q), α = 1, 2, 3,

we choose will not be analytic at any collinear shape. This is because all body frames for

the four body problem have singular surfaces emanating from all collinear shapes [21]. Ex-

tending the analysis of this paper to the four body problem will necessarily require a deeper

consideration of frame singularities.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors greatly appreciate the thorough reading and critique given the manuscript

by Dr. M. M¨uller. The research in this paper was supported by the U. S. Department of

Energy under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098.

38

APPENDIX A: FACTS CONCERNING SO(2)

We collect some basic facts concerning SO(2) which are necessary for the proof of The-

orem 2. All irreducible representations (irreps) of SO(2) are one-dimensional and may be

labeled by an integer m, with

< m <

. The components of a vector in an invariant

−∞
one-dimensional carrier space labeled by m are multiplied by exp(

∞

imθ) when rotated by

−

θ.

The fundamental representation of SO(2), that is the representation by 2

2 real or-

thogonal matrices, decomposes into the direct sum of the m =

1 irreps, which we denote

±

+1

1. The two irreducible carrier spaces are spanned by the vectors e± = (1,

⊕ −

d-fold tensor product of the fundamental representation contains (with various multiplici-

×

i)T . The

±

ties) the irreps d, d

2, d

4, ...,

(d

4),

(d

2),

d. However, exactly one irrep for

−
each allowed value of m is totally symmetric. That is, the fully symmetrized tensor product

−

−

−

−

−

−

of the fundamental representation of SO(2) decomposes as

(+1

1) = d

(d

2)

(d

4)

(d

4)

(d

2)

d,

(A1)

⊕ −

⊕

−

⊕

−

⊕ · · · ⊕ −

−

⊕ −

−

⊕ −

where

denotes the tensor product and

denotes the total symmetrization operator. The

S

irrep labeled by m is spanned by a totally symmetric rank d tensor td

m given by

S Od

⊗

td
m =

e+

S

(e+ ⊗ · · · ⊗
u times
{z

|
}
v and d = u + v. Explicitly, td

),

⊗

e−

e− ⊗ · · · ⊗
v times
{z
}
m transforms as

|

where m = u

−

Qj1k1...Qjdkd(td

m)k1...kd = e−imα(td

m)j1...jd,

Xk1...kd

where (td

m)j1...jd are the components of td

m. A ﬁnal fact we need, which follows readily from

Eq. (A2), is that

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(td

m)x...x = 1.

39

REFERENCES

[1] B. T. Sutcliﬀe, in Quantum Dynamics of Molecules, edited by R. G. Wooley (Plenum,

New York, 1980), p. 1.

[2] G. S. Ezra, Symmetry Properties of Molecules (Springer, New York, 1982).

[3] R. G. Littlejohn and M. Reinsch, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 213 (1997).

[4] V. Aquilanti, S. Cavalli, and G. Grossi, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 1362 (1986).

[5] V. Aquilanti, S. Cavalli, and D. De Fazio, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 3792 (1998).

[6] D. O. Harris, G. G. Engerholm, and W. D. Gwinn, J. Chem. Phys. 43, 1515 (1965).

[7] A. S. Dickinson and P. R. Certain, J. Chem. Phys. 49, 4209 (1968).

[8] J. V. Lill, G. A. Parker, and J. C. Light, Chem. Phys. Lett. 89, 483 (1982).

[9] J. C. Light, I. P. Hamilton, and J. V. Lill, J. Chem. Phys. 82, 1400 (1985).

[10] J. V. Lill, G. A. Parker, and J. C. Light, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 900 (1986).

[11] D. Baye and P.-H. Heenen, J. Phys. A 19, 2041 (1986).

[12] M. J. Davis and E. J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 3383 (1979).

[13] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathe-

matics, Philadelphia, 1992).

(1999).

[14] B. K. Kendrick, R. T. Pack, R. B. Walker, E. F. Hayes, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 6673

[15] A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics (North-Holland, New York, 1966).

[16] T. Kato, Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 10, 151 (1957).

[17] V. A. Fock, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Fiz. 18, 161 (1954); K. Nor. Vidensk. Selsk.

Forh. 31, 138 (1958); 31, 145 (1958).

40

[18] F. T. Smith, J. Math. Phys. 3, 735 (1962).

[19] R. T. Pack, in Advances in Molecular Vibrations and Collision Dynamics, edited by J.

M. Bowman (JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 1994), Vol. 2A, p. 111.

[20] R. G. Littlejohn, K. A. Mitchell, V. Aquilanti, and S. Cavalli, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3705

(1998).

A 58, 3718 (1998).

[21] R. G. Littlejohn, K. A. Mitchell, M. Reinsch, V. Aquilanti, and S. Cavalli, Phys. Rev.

[22] V. Aquilanti and S. Cavalli, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 1355 (1986).

[23] V. Aquilanti, S. Cavalli, and G. Grossi, in Advances in Molecular Vibrations and Col-

lision Dynamics, edited by J. M. Bowman (JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 1993), Vol. 2A,

p. 147.

[24] T. H. Gronwall, Annals of Math. 33, 279 (1932).

[25] A. J. Dragt, J. Math. Phys. 6, 533 (1965).

[26] T. Iwai, J. Math. Phys. 28, 1315 (1987).

[27] L. C. Biedenharn and J. D. Louck, Angular Momentum in Quantum Physics (Addison-

Wesley, Reading, 1981).

Perish, Berkeley, 1979).

[28] M. Spivak, A Comprehensive Introduction to Diﬀerential Geometry vol. 1 (Publish or

[29] M. Nakahara, Geometry, Topology, and Physics (IOP Publishing, Bristol, 1990).

41

