9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Light-induced conversion of nuclear spin isomers of
molecules

A.M.Shalagin∗, L.V.Il’ichov
Institute for Automation and Electrometry SB RAS,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Abstract

We report on a new phenomenon of molecular nuclear spin isomers conversion in the
ﬁeld of resonant laser radiation. It is based on the isomer-selective optical excitation
and the diﬀerence of conversion rates for excited and unexcited molecules. We expect
the considerable magnitude of the eﬀect for all molecules which absorb the radiation
of existing lasers.

PACS: 34.30+h

In a recent work [1] a phenomenon of enrichment of nuclear spin isomers of molecules
was predicted. The enrichment appears in the course of selective laser excitation of deﬁnite
spin isomers. It was expected that the proposed enrichment method was the most applicable
to the molecules where the nuclear spin conversion was induced by intramolecular spin-state
mixing interaction. As it was shown in [1], the enrichment could be very high under an
appropriate frequency of excited radiation. On the other hand, there were strict limitations
In particular, the abilities of CO2-laser and other sources
placed on the laser frequency.
appear to be insuﬃcient for CH3F molecule, which is other than that a very convenient
object for investigation of the enrichment phenomenon. The eﬃciently absorbed lines of
CO2-laser in CH3F do not satisfy the conditions from [1]. Thus the realization of the idea
[1] is uneasy due to problems with compatible object and radiation source ﬁnding.

As it turns out the frequency constraints from [1] may be removed without any consid-
erable loss of enrichment. There stays only one condition for the frequency to meet: The
radiation should eﬀectively be absorbed on a vibrational or electronic transition from the
molecule ground state. This indulgence radically expands the set of relevant objects (those,
demonstrating the light-induced conversion with available radiation sources).

The physical nature of the proposed phenomenon is quite similar to that of light-induced
drift (LID) [2]1 and other light-induced gas-kinetic eﬀects (see, e.g., [4]). Their common
essence is in the following: if radiation excites particles selectively with respect to a phys-
ical parameter, than the diﬀerence of rates of relaxation of the parameter for excited and
unexcited particles shifts the mean stationary value of the parameter from the equilibrium.

∗E-mail: shalagin@iae.nsk.su
1In particular, the separation of nuclear spin isomers of molecules was ﬁrstly realized on the basis of LID

[3]

This is the deﬁnite type of nuclear spin isomers, which plays the role of the mentioned
parameter. The concentration of the isomer gives the numerical mean value of the parame-
ter. Radiation excites molecules selectively with respect to their nuclear spin modiﬁcation.
The conversion rates are generally diﬀerent for excited and unexcited molecules in any con-
version scenario. The diﬀerence should be the most dramatic when the conversion is caused
by intramolecular magnetic interaction. This conversion mechanism, which was unambigu-
ously proved for CH3F [5-12] and which seemingly works in other heavy and complicated
molecules, has a resonance nature: the conversion rate increases drastically when the quan-
tum state of mixing spin isomers are nearly degenerate. In the set of all populated rotational
levels of a given spin isomer the resonance condition may distinguish very few or even a sin-
gle one. Through this ”most resonant” level the conversion takes place. The realization of
identical resonance conditions for rotational levels of various vibrational (electron) states is
unfeasible, which leads to the diﬀerence of conversion rates in these states. In what follows
we will keep in mind the mechanism of conversion induced by intramolecular mixing.

For simplicity we assume that there are only two nuclear spin modiﬁcations: ortho- and
para-molecules (see ﬁg.1). Let the laser radiation interact with ortho-isomers only. The

Figure 1: Illustration of the light-induced conversion phenomenon. Solid arrow indicates the
transitions induced by radiation.

population distribution over rotational levels is assumed equilibrium in every vibrational
state. The last assumption is justiﬁed when the vibrational relaxation is suﬃciently slow in
comparison with the rotational one, which can be provided by suitable buﬀer gas admixing.
Under these condition we have

dNo
dt

= γ∗(N ∗

p − N ∗
= (γ∗ − γ)(N ∗

o ) + γ[(Np − N ∗
p − N ∗

p ) − (No − N ∗
o )]
o ) + γ(Np − No);

γ∗ ≡ X
J ∗
o

opW (J ∗
γ∗

o ), γ ≡ X
Jo

γopW (Jo).

(1)

Here No, Np are, respectively, the concentrations of ortho- and para-isomers; γ, γ∗ are the
conversion rates. The asterisk indicates quantities for excited vibrational state. γopW (Jo)

gives the partial conversion rate through the rotational Jo-level of ortho-isomers. W (Jo) is
the Boltzmann factor.

It follows from (1) that in the absence of radiation (N ∗

o = 0) and under stationary
condition, one has Np = No. This is the thermodynamic equilibrium. The equilibrium will
not be disturbed by radiation, if γ∗ = γ.
In the other case (γ∗ 6= γ) a new stationary
situation takes place:

p = N ∗

Np − No = (1 −

)(N ∗

p − N ∗
o ).

γ∗
γ

Although only ortho-isomers are excited by the laser beam, there will appear excited para-
isomers (N ∗
p 6= 0) due to resonant excitation transmission. The conversion is the slowest
relaxation process in our system. Hence the level populations instantly follow the current
concentrations of ortho- and para-isomers. In particular, for excited para-isomers the fol-
lowing balance equation is valid:

αN ∗

o (Np − N ∗

p ) − αN ∗

p (No − N ∗

o ) = ΓvN ∗
p .

Here the ﬁrst term in the lhs describes the creation of excited para-isomers due to excitation
exchange with ortho-isomers; the second term corresponds to the reverse process. The
coeﬃcient α gives the excitation exchange rate. The term in the rhs of (3) is conditioned by
the decay of excited vibrational state. As it follows from (3)

N ∗

p =

αNp
Γv + αNo

N ∗
o

Γv ≫ α(No + Np),

Np
No

1
2

=

(1 +

).

γ∗
γ

By the proper choice of buﬀer gas and its pressure, one can guarantee

p ≪ N ∗

o , and the quantity N ∗

Then N ∗
p in (2) may be neglected. In this case the deviation of
ortho- and para-concentrations from the equilibrium is maximal and most simply related to
the fraction of excited ortho-isomers. It is known that under speciﬁc conditions (suﬃciently
high radiation intensity, proper relations between relaxation rates) this fraction can rich 1/2.
Hence it follows from (2) that

If γ∗ ≪ γ, then No =
Two limiting cases of this expression are clearly interpretable.
2Np because the conversion hardly goes through the excited vibrational state, whereas the
conversion through the ground state leads to equalization of ortho- and para-concentrations
in this state. Remember that the concentration of ortho-isomers in the ground state is the
half of their total concentration. In the opposite limiting case (γ∗ ≫ γ) we have No ≪ Np.
That is, almost all molecules are converted into para-modiﬁcation due to conversion through
the excited state. Note that the reverse process is suppressed because para-isomers are for
the most part in the ground state.

Let us discuss the conditions which provide the rotational distributions in vibrational
states to be close to the Boltzmann ones. If the laser radiation is absorbed on a rovibrational
transition, the relative excess of the population of the upper level JL over the amplitude of
the Boltzmann ”background” is determine by the parameter (see, e.g., [4,13])

a =

Γv
ΓW (JL)

,

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where Γ is the impact line halfwidth, which is mainly conditioned by the rotational relaxation
(the broadening is assumed homogeneous); W (JL) is the Boltzmann factor for the level JL.
The parameter a can be small even for the pure gas of converting molecules. But it can be
made even smaller by admixing a buﬀer gas with the cross-section of the vibrational state
deexcitation being small in comparison with the broadening cross-section. When a ≪ 1
the distribution of population over rotational levels may safely be approximated by the
Boltzmann distribution.

The total population of the excited vibrational state of ortho-molecules is given in this

case by the relation [4,13]

N ∗

o = No

κ/2

1 + κ + Ω2/Γ2 ; κ =

4|G|2
ΓvΓ

W (JL); G =

Ed
2¯h

.

(8)

Here Ω is the frequency detuning; E is the amplitude of the radiation ﬁeld; d is the dipole
moment of the resonant transition; κ is the so-called saturation parameter.
It is evident
from (8) that for high saturation parameter one has N ∗

o = No/2, which was used in (6).

Let us estimate the possible value of the eﬀect for 13CH3F -molecules, which are in good
resonance (Ω ≃ 26 MGz with the Doppler width≃ 40 MGz) with CO2 laser (the line P (32)
of the band 9,6 µ) on the transition R(4, 3).
In this case only ortho-isomers absorb the
radiation. We assume the absorptive cell has the length ≃ 30 cm. Taking into account that
the absorption coeﬃcient ∼ 0, 3 cm−1/Torr [14], the probe testing laser beam is eﬃciently
absorbed on this length, when the pressure of 13CH3F is about 0.1 Torr. For this value
of 13CH3F pressure the forthcoming estimations are done. The condition (5) is not met
without special cares. For the increase of Γv we assume the addition of a buﬀer gas of
molecules with proper vibrational quantum, so that the vibrational excitation can eﬃciently
be transmitted from 13CH3F . To make this process irreversible, it is worth to take the buﬀer
gas with a bit smaller vibrational quantum. Assuming the rate of excitation transfer from
13CH3F to the buﬀer molecules to be comparable with the excitation exchange between two
13CH3F -molecules and making this buﬀer gas pressure 0.5 Torr, we get Γv = 5α(No + Np).
Thus, the condition (5) is fulﬁlled.

Let us consider now the parameter (7). According to the data [15] on the rate of excitation
exchange between 13CH3F and 12CH3F (5·105 s−1/Torr), we get Γv ∼= 40 KGz. For the total
gas pressure and for the broadening caused by the resonant buﬀer gas (≃ 20 MGz/Torr [16]),
we have Γ ≃ 12 MGz. Taking into account that W (JL) ∼ 10−2, the parameter a ≃ 1/3. This
value is not suﬃciently small. If, however, we add 10 Torr of He as a second (nonresonant)
buﬀer gas, then its broadening eﬀect (3 MGz/Torr [16]) gives Γ ∼= 40 MGz. On the contrary,
the value of Γv stays almost untouched because the deexcitation eﬀect of the helium (∼ 102
Gz/Torr [17]) is negligible. Under these conditions we have a ≃ 1/10 ≪ 1, i.e., (7) is fulﬁlled.
Note that the obtained value of Γ is approximately equal to the Doppler halfwidth. So, the
estimations, which are based on the homogeneous broadening assumption, are correct.

Finally, let us estimate the attainable saturation parameter from (8). For the radiation
power density ∼ 103 W/cm2 (the laser beam of 1 mm in diameter and 10 W of power)
we have κ ≃ 50 in accordance with [14]. This guarantee the saturation of the vibrational
transition.

Hence the above suggested experimental conditions are close to the optimum for the
manifestation of the light-induced conversion eﬀect. The considered simple expression (6) is
quite suitable for estimations.

It is worth to note that the fulﬁllment of (5) is not indispensable at least in the case
γ∗ ≫ γ, when one should expect the brightest manifestation of the phenomenon. More
detailed estimations show that even for Γv ≃ α(No + Np) the almost complete conversion
from ortho- to para-isomers takes place, provided N ∗
o is not too small in comparison with
No.

There is one further circumstance: The external electric ﬁeld can radically eﬀect the
conversion rate and as a consequence the stationary state. This is due to the Stark shift
of levels which the conversion goes through (both in the ground and excited states). The
levels can so be put into (or out of) resonance. The inﬂuence of the external electric ﬁeld
on the conversion of nuclear spin isomers of CH3F was rigorously proved and investigated
in [10,11]. There follows a conclusion from these works that the electric ﬁeld method of
identiﬁcation of the converting levels is promising.

Summarizing, we shown that in the system of nuclear spin isomers of molecules where only
one isomer absorbs the resonant radiation the simple experimental conditions can provide
the shift of stationary concentrations of isomers from equilibrium concentrations. There can
be almost total exhaustion of one isomer.

The work was supported in part by the program RFBR (grants 98-02-17924 and 98-03-

33124a).

References

(1998).

[1] L.V.Il’ichov, L.J.F.Hermans, A.M.Shalagin, P.L.Chapovsky, Chem.Phys.Lett. 297, 439

[2] F.Kh.Gel’mukhanov, A.M.Shalagin, JETP Lett. 29, 711 (1979).

[3] L.N.Krasnoperov,

V.N.Panﬁlov,
Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 39, 143 (1984).

V.P.Strunin,

and P.L.Chapovsky,

Pis’ma

[4] S.G.Rautian, A.M.Shalagin, Kinetic Problems of Non-linear Spectroscopy, North-

Holland, 1991.

[5] P.L.Chapovsky, JETP 97, 895 (1990).

[6] P.L.Chapovsky, Phys.Rev. A 43, 3624 (1991).

[7] B.Nagels, M.Schuurman, P.L.Chapovsky, L.J.F.Hermans, J.Chem.Phys. 103, 5161

(1995).

[8] B.Nagels, M.Schuurman, P.L.Chapovsky, L.J.F.Hermans, Phys.Rev. A 54, 2050 (1996).

[9] P.L.Chapovsky, Physica A 233, 441 (1996).

[10] B.Nagels, M.Schuurman, L.J.F.Hermans, P.L.Chapovsky, Chem.Phys.Lett. 242, 48

[11] B.Nagels, N.Calas, D.A.Roozemond, L.J.F.Hermans, P.L.Chapovsky, Phys.Rev.Lett.

(1995).

77, 4732 (1996).

[12] E.Ilisca, K.Bahloul, Phys.Rev. A 57, 4296 (1998).

[13] V.R.Mironenko, A.M.Shalagin, Bull.Acad.Sci.USSR, Phys.Ser. 45, 87 (1981).

[14] V.N.Panﬁlov, V.P.Strunin, and P.L.Chapovsky, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 85, 881 (1983).

[15] E.N.Chesnokov, V.N.Panﬁlov, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 73, 2122 (1977).

[16] W.K.Bihel, P.J.Kelly, Ch.K.Rhodes, Phys.Rev. A 13, 1817 (1976).

[17] E.Weitz, G.W.Flynn, J.Chem.Phys. 58, 2678 (1973).

