A Simple Explanation for

Taxon Abundance Patterns

Johan Chu and Christoph Adami

W.K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory 106-38

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125

Classiﬁcation:
Biological Sciences (Evolution), Physical Sciences (Applied Mathematics)

Corresponding author:

Dr. Chris Adami
E-mail: adami@krl.caltech.edu
Phone: (+) 626 395-4256
Fax: (+) 626 564-8708

0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

J. Chu and C. Adami

2

Abstract

For taxonomic levels higher than species, the abundance distributions of
number of subtaxa per taxon tend to approximate power laws, but often show
strong deviationns from such a law. Previously, these deviations were attributed
to ﬁnite-time eﬀects in a continuous time branching process at the generic
level.
Instead, we describe here a simple discrete branching process which
generates the observed distributions and ﬁnd that the distribution’s deviation
from power-law form is not caused by disequilibration, but rather that it is
time-independent and determined by the evolutionary properties of the taxa
of interest. Our model predicts—with no free parameters—the rank-frequency
distribution of number of families in fossil marine animal orders obtained from
the fossil record. We ﬁnd that near power-law distributions are statistically
almost inevitable for taxa higher than species. The branching model also sheds
light on species abundance patterns, as well as on links between evolutionary
processes, self-organized criticality and fractals.

Taxonomic abundance distributions have been studied since the pioneering work
of Yule [1], who proposed a continuous time branching process model to explain
the distributions at the generic level, and found that they were power laws in the
limit of equilibrated populations. Deviations from the geometric law were attributed
to a ﬁnite-time eﬀect, namely, to the fact that the populations had not reached
equilibrium. Much later, Burlando [2, 3] compiled data that appeared to corroborate
the geometric nature of the distributions, even though clear violations of the law are
visible in his data also. In this paper, we present a model which is based on a discrete
branching process whose distributions are time-independent and where violations of
the geometric form reﬂect speciﬁc environmental conditions and pressures that the
assemblage under consideration was subject to during evolution. As such, it holds
the promise that an analysis of taxonomic abundance distributions may reveal certain
characteristics of ecological niches long after its inhabitants have disappeared.

The model described here is based on the simplest of branching processes, known in
the mathematical literature as the Galton-Watson process. Consider an assemblage of
taxa at one taxonomic level. This assemblage can be all the families under a particular
order, all the subspecies of a particular species, or any other group of taxa at the same
taxonomic level that can be assumed to have suﬀered the same evolutionary pressures.
We are interested in the shape of the rank-frequency distribution of this assemblage
and the factors that inﬂuence it.

We describe the model by explaining a speciﬁc example: the distribution of the
number of families within orders for a particular phylum. The adaptation of this
model to diﬀerent levels in the taxonomic hierarchy is obvious. We can assume
that the assemblage was founded by one order in the phylum and that this order
consisted of one family which had one genus with one species. We further assume that

J. Chu and C. Adami

3

new families in this order are created by means of mutation in individuals of extant
families. This can be viewed as a process where existing families can “replicate” and
create new families of the same order, which we term daughters of the initial family.
Of course, relatively rarely, mutations may lead to the creation of a new order, a
new class, etc. We deﬁne a probability pi for a family to have i daughter families
of the same order (true daughters). Thus, a family will have no true daughters with
probability p0, one true daughter with probability p1, and so on. For the sake of
simplicity, we initially assume that all families of this phylum share the same pi.
We show later that variance in pi among diﬀerent families does not signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the results, in particular the shape of the distribution. The branching process
described above gives rise to an abundance distribution of families within orders,
and its probability distribution can be obtained from the Lagrange expansion of a
nonlinear diﬀerential equation [4]. Using a simple iterative algorithm [5] in place of
this Lagrange expansion procedure, we can calculate rank-frequency curves for many
diﬀerent sets of pi. It should be emphasized here that we are mostly concerned with
the shape of this curve for n . 104, and not the asymptotic shape as n → ∞, a limit
that is not reached in nature.

For diﬀerent sets of pi, the theoretical curve can either be close to a power-law,
a power law with an exponential tail or a purely exponential distribution (Fig. 1).
We show here that there is a global parameter that distinguishes among these cases.

Figure 1: Predicted abundance pattern P (n) (probability for a taxon to have n sub-
taxa) of the branching model with diﬀerent values of m. The curves have been
individually rescaled.

J. Chu and C. Adami

4

Indeed, the mean number of true daughters, i.e., the mean number of diﬀerent families
of the same order that each family gives rise to in the example above,

m =

∞

X

i=0

i · pi

(1)

is a good indicator of the overall shape of the curve. Universally, m = 1 leads to
a power law for the abundance distribution. The further m is away from 1, the
further the curve diverges from a power-law and towards an exponential curve. The
value of m for a particular assemblage can be estimated from the fossil record also,
allowing for a characterization of the evolutionary process with no free parameters.
Indeed, if we assume that the number of families in this phylum existing at one time
is roughly constant, or varies slowly compared to the average rate of family creation
(an assumption the fossil record seems to vindicate [6]), we ﬁnd that m can be related
to the ratio Ro/Rf of the rates of creation of orders and families—by

m = (1 +

Ro
Rf

)−1

(2)

to leading order [5].

In general, we can not expect all the families within an order to share the same
m. Interestingly, it turns out that even if the pi and m diﬀer widely between diﬀerent
families, the rank-frequency curve is identical to that obtained by assuming a ﬁxed m
equal to the average of m across the families (Fig. 2), i.e., the variance of the pi across
families appears to be completely immaterial to the shape of the distribution—only
the average µ ≡ hmi counts.

In Fig. 3, we show the abundance distribution of families within orders for fossil
marine animals [7], together with the prediction of our branching model. The theo-
retical curve was obtained by assuming that the ratio Ro/Rf is approximated by the
ratio of the total number of orders to the total number of families

Ro
Rf

∼=

No
Nf

(3)

and that both are very small compared to the rate of mutations. The prediction
µ = 0.9(16) obtained from the branching process model by using (3) as the sole
parameter ﬁts the observed data remarkably well (P = 0.12, Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test, see inset in Fig. 3). Alternatively, we can use a best ﬁt to determine the ratio
Ro/Rf without resorting to (3), yielding Ro/Rf = 0.115(20) (P = 0.44). Fitting
abundance distributions to the branching model thus allows us to determine a ratio
of parameters which reﬂect dynamics intrinsic to the taxon under consideration, and

J. Chu and C. Adami

5

Figure 2: Abundance patterns obtained from two sets of numerical simulations of the
branching model, each with µ = hmi = 0.5. m was chosen from a uniform probability
distribution of width 1 for the runs represented by crosses, and from a distribution of
width 0.01 for those represented by circles. Simulations where m and pi are allowed
to vary signiﬁcantly and those where they are severely constricted are impossible to
distinguish if they share the same hmi.

the niche(s) it inhabits. Indeed, some taxa analyzed in Refs. [2, 3] are better ﬁt with
0.5 < µ < 0.75, pointing to conditions in which the rate of taxon formation was much
closer to the rate of subtaxon formation, indicating either a more “robust” genome
or richer and more diverse niches.

In general, however, Burlando’s data [2, 3] suggest that a wide variety of taxonomic
distributions are ﬁt quite well by power laws (µ = 1). This seems to imply that actual
taxonomic abundance patterns from the fossil record are characterized by a relatively
narrow range of µ near 1. This is likely within the model description advanced here.
It is obvious that µ can not remain above 1 for signiﬁcant time scales as this would
lead to an inﬁnite number of subtaxa for each taxon. What about low µ? We propose
that low values of µ are not observed for large (and therefore statistically important)
taxon assemblages for the following reasons. If µ is very small, this implies either a
small number of total individuals for this assemblage, or a very low rate of beneﬁcial
taxon-forming (or niche-ﬁlling) mutations. The former might lead to this assemblage
not being recognized at all in ﬁeld observations. Either case will lead to an assemblage
with too few taxons to be statistically tractable. Also, since such an assemblage either

J. Chu and C. Adami

6

Figure 3: The abundance distribution of fossil marine animal orders [7] (squares)
and the predicted curve from the branching model (solid line). The fossil data has
been binned above n = 37 with a variable bin size [5]. The predicted curve was
generated using Ro/Rf = No/Nf = 0.115, where No and Nf were obtained directly
from the fossil data. The inset shows Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) signiﬁcance levels
P obtained from comparison of the fossil data to several predicted distributions with
diﬀerent values of Ro/Rf , which shows that the data is best ﬁt by Ro/Rf = 0.135.
The arrow points to our prediction Ro/Rf = 0.115 where P = 0.12. A Monte
Carlo analysis shows that for a sample size of 626 (as we have here), the predicted
Ro/Rf = 0.115 is within the 66% conﬁdence interval of the best ﬁt Ro/Rf = 0.135
(P = 0.44). The K-S tests were done after removal of the ﬁrst point, which suﬀers
from sampling uncertainties.

contains a small number of individuals or is less suited for further adaptation or both,
it would seem to be susceptible to early extinction.

The branching model can—with appropriate care—also be applied to species-
abundance distributions, even though these are more complicated than those for
higher taxonomic orders for several reasons. Among these are the eﬀects of sexual re-
production and the localized and variable eﬀects of the environment and other species
on speciﬁc populations. Still, as the arguments for using a branching process model
essentially rely on mutations which may produce lines of individuals that displace oth-
ers, species-abundance distributions may turn out not to be qualitatively as diﬀerent
from taxonomically higher-level rank-frequency distributions as is usually expected.
Historically, species abundance distributions have been characterized using fre-
quency histograms of the number of species in logarithmic abundance classes. For

J. Chu and C. Adami

7

Figure 4: The abundance distribution of fossil marine animal orders in logarithmic
abundance classes (the same data as Fig. 3). The histogram shows the number of
orders in each abundance class (left scale), while the solid line depicts the number of
families in each abundance class (right scale). Species rank-abundance distributions
where the highest abundance class present also has the highest number of individuals
(as in these data) are termed canonical lognormal [9].

many taxonomic assemblages, this was found to produce a humped distribution trun-
cated on the left—a shape usually dubbed lognormal [8, 9, 10]. In fact, this distri-
bution is not incompatible with the power-law type distributions described above.
Indeed, plotting the fossil data of Fig. 3 in logarithmic abundance classes produces a
lognormal (Fig. 4).

For species, µ is the mean number of children each individual of the species has.
(Of course, for sexual species, µ would be half the mean number of children per
individual.) In the present case, µ less than 1 implies that extant species’ populations
decrease on average, while µ equal to 1 implies that average populations do not change.
An extant species’ population can decline due to the introduction of competitors
and/or the decrease of the size of the species’ ecological niche. Let us examine the
former more closely. If a competitor is introduced into a saturated niche, all species
currently occupying that niche would temporarily see a decrease in their m until a new
equilibrium was obtained. If the new species is signiﬁcantly ﬁtter than the previously
existing species, it may eliminate the others. If the new species is signiﬁcantly less
ﬁt, then it may be the one eliminated. If the competitors are about as eﬃcient as
the species already present, then the outcome is less certain. Indeed, it is analogous
to a non-biased random walk with a possibility of ruin. The eﬀects of introducing a

J. Chu and C. Adami

8

single competitor are transient. However, if new competitors are introduced more or
less periodically, then this would act to push m lower for all species in this niche and
we would expect an abundance pattern closer to the exponential curve as opposed
to the power-law than otherwise expected. We have examined this in simulations of
populations where new competitors were introduced into the population by means of
neutral mutations—mutations leading to new species of the same ﬁtness as extant
species—and found that these are ﬁt very well by the branching model. A higher
rate of neutral mutations and thus of new competitors leads to distributions closer to
exponential. We have performed the same experiment in more sophisticated systems
of digital organisms (artiﬁcial life) [11, 12] and found the same result [5].

If no new competitors are introduced but the size of the niche is gradually reduced,
we expect the same eﬀect on m and on the abundance distributions. Whether it is
possible to separate the eﬀects of these two mechanisms in ecological abundance
patterns obtained from ﬁeld data is an open question. An analysis of such data to
examine these trends would certainly be very interesting.

So far, we have sidestepped the diﬀerence between historical and ecological distri-
butions. For the fossil record, the historical distribution we have modeled here should
work well. For ﬁeld observations where only currently living groups are considered,
the nature of the death and extinction processes for each group will aﬀect the abun-
dance pattern. In our simulations and artiﬁcial-life experiments, we have universally
observed a strong correlation between the shapes of historical and ecological distribu-
tions. We believe this correspondence will hold in natural distributions as well when
death rates are aﬀected mainly by competition for resources. The model’s validity for
diﬀerent scenarios is an interesting question, which could be answered by comparison
with more taxonomical data.

Our branching process model allows us to reexamine the question of whether any
type of special dynamics—such as self-organized criticality [13] (SOC)—is at work
in evolution [14, 15]. While showing that the statistics of taxon rank-frequency pat-
terns in evolution are closely related to the avalanche sizes in SOC sandpile models,
the present model clearly shows that instead of a subsidiary relationship where evo-
lutionary processes may be self-organized critical, the power-law behaviour of both
evolutionary and sandpile distributions can be understood in terms of the mechanics
of a Galton-Watson branching process [5, 16]. The mechanics of this branching pro-
cess are such that the branching trees are probabilistic fractal constructs. However,
the underlying stochastic process responsible for the observed behaviour can be ex-
plained simply in terms of a random walk [17]. For evolution, the propensity for near
power-law behaviour is found to stem from a dynamical process in which µ ≈ 1 is
selected for and highly more likely to be observed than other values, while the “self-
tuning” of the SOC models is seen to result from arbitrarily enforcing conditions
which would correspond to the limit Ro/Rf → 0 and therefore m → 1 [5].

J. Chu and C. Adami

References

9

[1] Yule, G. U. (1924) A mathematical theory of evolution. Proc. Roy. Soc. London

Ser. B 213, 21-87.

[2] Burlando, B. (1990) The fractal dimension of taxonomic systems. J. theor. Biol.

146, 99-114.

[3] Burlando, B. (1993) The fractal geometry of evolution. J. theor. Biol. 163, 161-

172.

[4] Harris, T. E. (1963) The Theory of Branching Processes. (Springer, Berlin;

Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.).

[5] Chu, J. & Adami, C. (1999) Critical and near-critical branching processes (sub-

mitted).

[6] Raup, D. M. (1985) Mathematical models of cladogenesis. Paleobiology, 11, 42-

52.

[7] Sepkoski, J. J. (1992) A Compendium of Fossil Marine Animal Families, 2nd ed.
(Milwaukee Public Museum; Milwaukee, WI; 1992) with emendations by J. J.
Sepkoski based largely on The Fossil Record 2, Benton, M. J., ed. (Chapman &
Hall; New York; 1993).

[8] Preston, F. W. (1948) The commonness, and rarity, of species. Ecology 29, 255-

283.

[9] Preston, F. W. (1962) The canonical distribution of commonness and rarity.

Ecology 43, 185-215, 410-432.

[10] Sugihara, G. (1980) Minimal community structure: An explanation of species

abundance patterns. Am. Nat. 116, 770-787.

[11] Adami, C. (1998) Introduction to Artiﬁcial Life. (Telos, Springer-Verlag, New

York)

[12] Chu, J. & Adami, C. (1997) Propagation of information in populations of self-
replicating code, in Artiﬁcial Life V: Proceedings of the Fifth International Work-
shop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, Langton, C. G. and
Shimohara, K. eds., p. 462-469 (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).

[13] Bak, P., Tang, C. & Wiesenfeld, K. (1987) Self-organized criticality—an expla-
nation of 1/f noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381-384. Self-organized criticality. Phys.
Rev. A 38, 364-374 (1988).

J. Chu and C. Adami

10

[14] Sneppen, K., Bak P., Flyvbjerg, H. & Jensen, M. H. (1995) Evolution as a self-

organized critical phenomenon. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 5209-5213.

[15] Adami, C. (1995) Self-organized criticality in living systems. Phys. Lett. A 203,

29-32.

[16] Vespignani, A. & Zapperi, S. (1998) How self-organized criticality works: A

uniﬁed mean-ﬁeld picture. Phys. Rev. E 57, 6345-6362.

[17] Spitzer, F. (1964) Principles of Random Walk. (Springer-Verlag, New York).

Acknowledgments. We would like to thank J. J. Sepkoski for kindly sending us
his amended data set of fossil marine animal families. Access to the Intel Paragon
XP/S was provided by the Center of Advanced Computing Research at the California
Institute of Technology. This work was supported by a grant from the NSF.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.A. (e-mail:
adami@krl.caltech.edu).

