A-Tract Induced DNA Bending is a Local Non-Electrostatic Eﬀect

Alexey K. Mazur
Laboratoire de Biochimie Th´eorique, CNRS UPR9080
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique
13, rue Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,75005, France.
FAX: +33[0]1.58.41.50.26 Email: alexey@ibpc.fr
(February 2, 2008)

0
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
2
v
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The macroscopic curvature induced in double helical B-
DNA by regularly repeated adenine tracts (A-tracts) is a
long known, but still unexplained phenomenon. This eﬀect
plays a key role in DNA studies because it is unique in the
amount and the variety of the available experimental informa-
tion and, therefore, is likely to serve as a gate to the unknown
general mechanisms of recognition and regulation of genome
sequences. The dominating idea in the recent years was that,
in general, macroscopic bends in DNA are caused by long
range electrostatic repulsion between phosphate groups when
some of them are neutralized by proximal external charges.
In the case of A-tracts this may be speciﬁcally bound solvent
counterions. Here we report about molecular dynamics sim-
ulations where a correct static curvature in a DNA fragment
with phased adenine tracts emerges spontaneously in condi-
tions where any role of counterions or long range electrostatic
eﬀects can be excluded.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Although the macroscopic curvature of DNA induced
by adenine-tracts (A-tracts) was discovered almost two
decades ago1,2 structural basis for this phenomenon re-
mains unclear. A few models considered originally3,4,5
suggested that it is caused by intrinsic conformational
preferences of certain sequences, but all these and simi-
lar theories failed to explain experimental data obtained
later.6 Calculations show that the B-DNA duplex is
mechanically anisotropic,7 that bending towards minor
grooves of some A-tracts is strongly facilitated,8 and that
the macroscopic curvature becomes energetically prefer-
able once the characteristic A-tract structure is main-
tained by freezing or imposing constraints.9,10,11 How-
ever, the static curvature never appears spontaneously
in calculations unbiased a priori and these results leave
all doors open for the possible physical origin of the ef-
fect.
In the recent years the main attention has been
shifted to speciﬁc interactions between DNA and solvent
counterions that can bend the double helix by speciﬁcally
neutralizing some phosphate groups.12,13,14,15,16 The pos-
sibility of such mechanism is often evident in protein-
DNA complexes, and it has also been demonstrated by
direct chemical modiﬁcation of a duplex DNA.14 In the
case of the free DNA in solution, however, the available
experimental observations are controversial.16,17 Molec-
ular dynamics simulations of a B-DNA in an explicit

1

counterion shell could neither conﬁrm nor disprove this
hypothesis.18 Here we report the ﬁrst example where sta-
ble static curvature emerges spontaneously in molecular
dynamics simulations. Its direction is in striking agree-
ment with expectations based upon experimental data.
However, we use a minimal B-DNA model without coun-
terions, which strongly suggests that they hardly play a
key role in this eﬀect.

Figure 1 exhibits results of a 10 ns simulation of dy-
namics of a 25-mer B-DNA fragment including three
A-tracts separated by one helical turn. This sequence
has been constructed after many preliminary tests with
shorter sequence motives. Our general strategy came out
from the following considerations. Although the A-tract
sequences that induce the strongest bends are known
from experiments, probably not all of them would work
in simulations. There are natural limitations, such as
the precision of the model, and, in addition, the limited
duration of trajectories may be insuﬃcient for some A-
tracts to adopt their speciﬁc conformation. Also, we can
study only short DNA fragments, therefore, it is prefer-
able to place A-tracts at both ends in order to maximize
the possible bend. There is, however, little experimental
evidence of static curvature in short DNA fragments, and
one may well expect the speciﬁc A-tract structure to be
unstable near the ends. That is why we did not simply
take the strongest experimental “benders”, but looked for
sequence motives that in calculations readily adopt the
characteristic local structure, with a narrow minor groove
proﬁle and high propeller twist, both in the middle and
near the ends of the duplex. The complementary duplex
AAAATAGGCTATTTTAGGCTATTTT has been con-
structed by repeating and inverting one such motive.

The upper trace in plate (a) shows the time depen-
dence of rmsd from the canonical B-DNA model. It ﬂuc-
tuates below 4 ˚A sometimes falling down to 2 ˚A, which is
very low for the double helix of this length indicating that
all helical parameters are well within the range of the B-
DNA family. The lower surface plot shows the time evo-
lution of the minor DNA groove. The surface is formed
by 75 ps time-averaged successive minor groove proﬁles,
with that on the front face corresponding to the ﬁnal
DNA conformation. The groove width is evaluated by
using space traces of C5’ atoms as described elsewhere19.
Its value is given in angstr¨oms and the corresponding
canonical B-DNA level of 7.7 ˚A is marked by the straight
dotted lines on the faces of the box. It is seen that the

FIG. 1. (a)

FIG. 1. (b)

FIG. 1. Representative results from the ﬁrst 10 ns MD sim-
ulation of a 25-mer double helical DNA fragment. (a) The
time variation of the heavy atom rmsd from the canonical
B-DNA form and the evolution of the proﬁle of the minor
groove. (b) Dynamics of BI ↔ BII backbone transitions. (c)
The time evolution of the optimal helical axis, which is a best
ﬁt axis of coaxial cylindrical surfaces passing through sugar
atoms.
In all cases considered here it is very close to that
produced by the Curves algorithm.30 Two perpendicular pro-
jections are shown with the corresponding views of the average
conformation during the last nanosecond shown on the right.
(d) The time variation the bending angle and direction. The
bending angle is measured between the two ends of the opti-
mal helical axis. The bending direction is characterized by the
angle between the X-projection plane in plate (c) and the xz
plane of the local DNA coordinate frame constructed in the
center of the duplex according to the Cambridge convention20.

FIG. 1. (c)

2

overall groove shape has established after 2 ns and re-
mained stable later, with noticeable local ﬂuctuations.
In all A-tracts the groove strongly narrows towards 3’
ends and widens signiﬁcantly at the boundaries. There
are two less signiﬁcant relative narrowings inside non A-
tract sequences as well.

Dynamics of BI ↔ BII backbone transitions are shown
in plate (b). The BI and BII conformations are distin-
guished by the values of two consecutive backbone tor-
sions, ε and ζ. In a transition they change concertedly
from (t,g−) to (g−,t). The diﬀerence ζ − ε is, there-
fore, positive in BI state and negative in BII, and it is
used in Fig. (d) as a monitoring indicator, with the cor-
responding gray scale levels shown on the right. Each
base pair step is characterized by a column consisting of
two sub-columns, with the left sub-columns referring to
the sequence written at the top in 5’-3’ direction from
left to right. The right sub-columns refer to the comple-
mentary sequence shown at the bottom. It is seen that,
in A-tracts, the BII conformation is preferably found in
ApA steps and that BI ↔ BII transitions in neighboring
steps often occur concertedly so that along a single A-
strand BI and BII conformations tend to alternate. The
pattern of these transitions reveals rather slow dynamics
and suggests that MD trajectories in the 10 ns time scale
are still not long enough to sample all relevant conforma-
tions. Note, for instance, a very stable BII conformation
in both strands at one of the GpG steps.

Plate (c) shows the time evolution of the overall shape
of the helical axis. The optimal curved axes of all DNA
conformations saved during dynamics were rotated with
the two ends ﬁxed at the OZ axis to put the middle point
at the OX axis. The axis is next characterized by two per-
pendicular projections labeled X and Y. Any time section
of the surfaces shown in the ﬁgure gives the correspond-
ing axis projection averaged over a time window of 75 ps.
The horizontal deviation is given in angstr¨oms and, for
clarity, its relative scale is two times increased with re-
spect to the true DNA length. Shown on the right are two
perpendicular views of the last one-nanosecond-average
conformation. Its orientation is chosen to correspond ap-
proximately that of the helical axis in the surface plots.
It is seen that the molecule maintained a planar bent
shape during a substantial part of the trajectory, and
that at the end the bending plane was passing through
the three A-tracts. The X-surface clearly shows an in-
crease in bending during the second half of the trajec-
tory. In the perpendicular Y-projection the helical axis
is locally wound, but straight on average. The ﬂuctuating
pattern in Y-projection sometimes reveals two local max-
ima between A-tracts, which corresponds to two indepen-
dent bends with slightly divergent directions. One may
note also that there were at least two relatively long pe-
riods when the axis was almost straight, namely, around
3 ns and during the ﬁfth nanosecond. At the same time,
straightening of only one of the two bending points is a
more frequent event observed several times in the surface
plots.

Finally, plate (d) shows the time ﬂuctuations of the
bending direction and angle. The bending direction
is characterized by the angle between the X-projection
plane in plate (c) and the xz plane of the local DNA co-
ordinate frame constructed in the center of the duplex.
According to the Cambridge convention20 the local x di-
rection points to the major DNA groove along the short
axis of the base-pair, while the local z axis direction is ad-
jacent to the optimal helicoidal axis. Thus, a zero angle
between the two planes corresponds to the overall bend
to the minor groove exactly at the central base pair. In
both plots, short time scale ﬂuctuations are smoothed by
averaging with a window of 15 ps. The total angle mea-
sured between the opposite axis ends ﬂuctuates around
10-15◦ in the least bent states and raises to average 40-
50◦ during periods of strong bending. The maximal in-
stantaneous bend of 58◦ was observed at around 8 ns.

The bending direction was much more stable during
the last few nanoseconds, however, it ﬂuctuated at a
roughly constant value of 50◦starting from the second
nanosecond. This value means that the center of the ob-
served planar bend is shifted by approximately two steps
from the middle base pair so that its preferred direction
is to the minor groove at the two ATT triplets, which is
well distinguished in plate (c) as well, and corresponds
to the local minima in the minor groove proﬁles in plate
(a). During the periods when the molecule straightened
the bending direction strongly ﬂuctuates. This eﬀect is
due to the fact that when the axis becomes straight the
bending plane is not deﬁned, which in our case appears
when the central point of the curved axis passes close to
the line between its ends. It is very interesting, however,
that after the straightening, the bending is resumed in
approximately the same direction.

Figure 2 exhibits similar data for another 10 ns tra-
jectory of the same DNA fragment, computed in order
to check reproducibility of the results. A straight DNA
conformation was taken from the initial phase of the pre-
vious trajectory, energy minimized, and restarted with
random initial velocities.
It shows surprisingly similar
results as regards the bending direction and dynamics in
spite of a somewhat diﬀerent minor groove proﬁle and
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent distribution of BI and BII conform-
ers along the backbone. Note that in this case the heli-
cal axis was initially S-shaped in X-projection, with one
of the A-tracts exhibiting a completely opposite bend-
ing direction. Fluctuations of the bending direction are
reduced and are similar to the ﬁnal part of the ﬁrst tra-
jectory, which apparently results from the additional re-
equilibration.
In this case the maximal instantaneous
bend of 71◦ was observed at around 4 ns.

Comparison of traces in plates (a) and (d) in Figs.
1 and 2 clearly shows that large scale slow ﬂuctuations
of rmsd are caused by bending. The rmsd drops down
to 2 ˚A when the duplex is straight and raises beyond 6
˚A in strongly bent conformations. In both trajectories
the molecule experienced many temporary transitions to
straight conformations which usually are very short liv-

3

FIG. 2. (a)

FIG. 2. (b)

FIG. 2. Representative results from the second 10 ns MD
trajectory of the same DNA fragment. Notation as in Fig. 1.

FIG. 2. (c)

4

in trajectories starting from a featureless straight canon-
ical B-DNA conformation strongly suggests that the true
molecular mechanism of the A-tract induced bending is
reproduced. Therefore, it cannot depend upon the com-
ponents discarded in our calculations, notably, speciﬁc
interactions with solvent counterions and long-range elec-
trostatic eﬀects.

We are not yet ready to present a detailed molecu-
lar mechanism responsible for the observed curvature be-
cause even in this relatively small system it is diﬃcult to
distinguish the cause and the consequences. We believe,
however, that all sorts of bending of the double helical
DNA, including that produced by ligands and that due to
intrinsic sequence eﬀects, have its limited, but high ﬂexi-
bility as a common origin. Its own conformational energy
has the global minimum in a straight form, but this min-
imum is very broad and ﬂat, and DNA responds by dis-
tinguishable bending to even small perturbations. The
results reported here prove that in the case of A-tracts
these perturbations are produced by DNA-water interac-
tions in the minor groove. Neither long range phosphate
repulsion nor counterions are essential. The curvature
is certainly connected with the speciﬁc A-tract structure
and modulations of the minor groove width, but it does
In dynamics,
not seem to be strictly bound to them.
conformations, both smoothly bent and kinked at the
two insertions between the A-tracts, are observed period-
ically. Note also, that the minor groove proﬁle somewhat
diﬀers between the two trajectories and that it does not
change when the molecule straightens. We strongly be-
lieve, however, the experimental data already available
will ﬁnally allow one to solve this problem by theoretical
means, including the approach described here, and we
continue these attempts.

METHODS

Molecular dynamics simulations have been performed
with the internal coordinate method (ICMD)21,22 includ-
ing special technique for ﬂexible sugar rings23. The so-
called “minimal B-DNA” model was used24,25 which con-
sists of a double helix with the minor groove ﬁlled with
explicit water. Unlike the more widely used models, it
does not involve explicit counterions and damps long
range electrostatic interactions in a semi-empirical way
by using distance scaling of the electrostatic constant and
reduction of phosphate charges. The DNA model was
same as in earlier reports,24,25 namely, all torsions were
free as well as bond angles centered at sugar atoms, while
other bonds and angles were ﬁxed, and the bases held
rigid. AMBER9426,27 force ﬁeld and atom parameters
were used with TIP3P water28 and no cut oﬀ schemes.
With a time step of 10 fs, these simulation conditions
require around 75 hours of cpu per nanosecond on a Pen-
tium II-200 microprocessor.

The initial conformations were prepared by vacuum en-

FIG. 3. A stereo snapshot of the system at around 8.5 ns
of the second trajectory. AT base pairs are shown in red and
GC base pairs in blue.

ing. These observations suggest that the bent state is rel-
atively more stable than the straight one and, therefore,
the observed behavior corresponds to static curvature. In
conformations averaged over successive one nanosecond
intervals the overall bending angle is 35-45◦ except for a
few periods in the ﬁrst trajectory. Figure 3 shows a snap-
shot from around 8.5 ns of the second trajectory where
the rmsd from the straight canonical B-DNA reached its
maximum of 6.5 ˚A. The strong smooth bent towards the
minor grooves of the three A-tracts is evident, with the
overall bending angle around 61◦.

All transformations exhibited in Figs. 1 and 2 are
isoenergetic, with the total energy ﬂuctuating around
the same level established during the ﬁrst nanosecond
already, and the same is true for the average helicoidal
parameters. Plates (b), however, indicate that there are
much slower motions in the system, and this observation
precludes any conclusions concerning the global stabil-
ity of the observed conformations. Moreover, we have
computed yet another trajectory for the same molecule
starting from the canonical A-DNA form. During 10 ns it
converged to a similarly good B-DNA structure with the
same average total energy, but the bending pattern was
not reproduced. It appears, therefore, that the conforma-
tional space is divided into distinct domains, with tran-
sitions between them probably occurring in much longer
time scales. However, the very fact that the stable curva-
ture in good agreement with experimental data emerges

5

ergy minimization starting from the ﬁber B-DNA model
constructed from the published atom coordinates.29 The
subsequent hydration protocol to ﬁll up the minor
groove24 normally adds around 16 water molecules per
base pair. The heating and equilibration protocols were
same as before24,25. During the runs, after every 200 ps,
water positions were checked in order to identify those
penetrating into the major groove and those completely
separated. These molecules, if found, were removed and
next re-introduced in simulations by putting them with
zero velocities at random positions around the hydrated
duplex, so that they could readily re-join the core sys-
tem. This procedure assures stable conditions, notably, a
constant number of molecules in the minor groove hydra-
tion cloud and the absence of water in the major groove,
which is necessary for fast sampling25. The interval of
200 ps between the checks is small enough to assure that
on average less then one molecule is repositioned and,
therefore, the perturbation introduced is considered neg-
ligible.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I thank R. Lavery for useful discussions as well as crit-

ical comments and suggestions to the paper.

(1988).

1 Marini, J. C., Levene, S. D., Crothers, D. M. & Englund,
P. T., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79, 7664–7668 (1982).
2 Wu, H.-M. & Crothers, D. M., Nature 308, 509–513 (1984).
3 Trifonov, E. N. & Sussman, J. L., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 77, 3816–3820 (1980).

4 Levene, S. D. & Crothers, D. M., J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.

1, 429–435 (1983).

5 Calladine, C. R., Drew, H. R. & McCall, M. J., J. Mol.

Biol. 201, 127–137 (1988).

6 Crothers, D. M. & Shakked, Z., in Oxford Handbook of
Nucleic Acid Structure, edited by Neidle, S. (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York, 1999), pp. 455–470.

7 Zhurkin, V. B., Lysov, Y. P. & Ivanov, V. I., Nucl. Acids

Res. 6, 1081–1096 (1979).

8 Sanghani, S. R., Zakrzewska, K., Harvey, S. C. & Lavery,

R., Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 1632–1637 (1996).

9 von Kitzing, E. & Diekmann, S., Eur. Biophys. J. 14, 13–

10 Chuprina, V. P. & Abagyan, R. A., J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.

26 (1987).

1, 121–138 (1988).

11 Zhurkin, V. B., Ulyanov, N. B., Gorin, A. A. & Jernigan,
R. L., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 7046–7050 (1991).
12 Mirzabekov, A. D. & Rich, A., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

13 Levene, S. D., Wu, H.-M. & Crothers, D. M., Biochemistry

76, 1118–1121 (1979).

25, 3988–3995 (1986).

6

14 Strauss, J. K. & Maher, L. J., III, Science 266, 1829–1834

(1994).

15 Travers, A., Nature Struct. Biol. 2, 264–265 (1995).
16 McFail-Isom, L., Sines, C. C. & Williams, L. D., Curr.

Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 298–304 (1999).

17 Chiu, T. K., Zaczor-Grzeskowiak, M. & Dickerson, R. E.,

J. Mol. Biol. 292, 589–608 (1999).

18 Young, M. A. & Beveridge, D. L., J. Mol. Biol. 281, 675–

687 (1998).

19 Mazur, A. K., J. Mol. Biol. 290, 373–377 (1999).
20 Dickerson, R. E. et al., J. Mol. Biol. 205, 787–791 (1989).
21 Mazur, A. K. & Abagyan, R. A., J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.

6, 815–832 (1989).

22 Mazur, A. K., J. Comput. Chem. 18, 1354–1364 (1997).
23 Mazur, A. K., J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1407–1414 (1999).
24 Mazur, A. K., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 10928–10937 (1998).
25 Mazur, A. K., Preprint http:
// xxx.lanl.gov/abs/

physics/9907028, (1999).

26 Cornell, W. D. et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 5179–5197

(1995).

27 Cheatham, T. E., III, Cieplak, P. & Kollman, P. A., J.

Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 16, 845–862 (1999).

28 Jorgensen, W. L., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 335–340 (1981).
29 Arnott, S. & Hukins, D. W. L., Biochem. Biophys. Res.

Communs. 47, 1504–1509 (1972).

30 Lavery, R. & Sklenar, H., J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 6, 63–91

APPENDIX

This section contains comments from anonymous ref-
erees of peer-review journals where the manuscript has
been considered for publication, but rejected.

A. Journal of Molecular Biology

1. First referee

Dr. Mazur describes molecular dynamics simulations
where a correct static curvature of DNA with phased
A-tracts emerges spontaneously in conditions where any
role of counterions or long range electrostatic eﬀects can
be excluded.

I have several problems with this manuscript:
1) The observed curvature is dependent on the starting
model.
In fact the manuscript uses the phrase ‘stable
static curvature’ incorrectly to describe what is probably
a trapped metastable state. The observed curve is neither
stable nor static.

2) The choice of DNA sequence seems to be biased
toward that which gives an altered structure in simula-
tions, ad is not that which gives the most pronounced
bend in solution.
I would suggest a comparison of
(CAAAATTTTTG)n and (CTTTTAAAAG)n.

3) The result is not consistent with solution results.

See for example:

to the overall bend. The author is understandably con-
cerned about end eﬀect with short sequences; this prob-
lem can be ameliorated by examining DNA fragments
that constrain multiple copies of the chosen motif or
by extending the ends of the motif with mixed-sequence
DNA.

2. Notwithstanding the authors remark bout separat-
ing the cause and the eﬀects with respect to intrinsic
bending some comments about the underlying mecha-
nism of bending seem appropriate. It would be particu-
larly useful to know whether average values of any speciﬁc
conformational variables are unusual or whether strongly
bent states are consistent with narrowing of the minor
groove within A-tracts, for example.

Prodin, F., Cocchione, S., Savino, M., & Tuﬃllaro,
A. “Diﬀerent Interactions of Spermine With a Curved
and a Normal DNA Duplex - (Ca(4)T(4)G)(N) and
(Ct(4)a(4)G)(N) - Gel -Electrophoresis and Circular-
Dichroism Studies” (1992) Biochemistry International
27, 291-901.

Brukner, l, Sucis, S., Dlakic, M., Savic, A., & Pon-
gor, S. “Physiological concentrations of magnesium ions
induces a strong macroscopic curvature in GGGCCC -
containing DNA” (1994) J. Mol. Biol. 236, 26-32.

Diekmann, S., & Wang, J. C. “On the sequence deter-
minants and ﬂexibility of the kinetoplast DNA fragment
with abnormal gel electrophoretic mobilities” (1985) J.
Mol. Biol. 186, 1-11.

Llaudnon, C. H., & Griﬃth, J. D. “Cationic metals
promote sequence-directed DNA bending” (1987) Bio-
chemistry 26, 3759-3762.

4) The result is not consistent with other simulations.

See for example:

Feig, M., & Pettitt, B. M. “Sodium and Chlorine ions
as part of the DNA solvation shell” (1999) Biophys. J.
77, 1769-81.

5) The results should be given by objective statistical
descriptions rather than a series of spot examples, as in
“sometimes reveals two independent bends”.

2. Second referee

This manuscript describes the modeling of a 25-residue
DNA duplex using molecular dynamics simulations. The
DNA sequence in question contains 3 A/T tracts ar-
ranged in-phase with the helix screw and thus is expected
to manifest intrinsic bending. Unlike previous MD stud-
ies of intrinsically bent DNA sequences, these calcula-
tions omit explicit consideration of the role of counteri-
ons. Because recent crystallographic studies of A-tract-
like DNA sequence have attributed intrinsic bending to
the localization of counterions in the minor groove, the
present ﬁnding that intrinsic bending occurs in the ab-
sence of explicit counterions is important for understand-
ing the underlying basis of A-tract-dependent bending.

Overall, the MD procedure appears sound and the cal-
culations were carried out with obvious care and atten-
tion to detail. There are two speciﬁc issues raised by this
study that should be addressed in revision, however.

1. Although the sequence chosen for this study was
based on a canonical, intrinsically-bent motif consisting
of three A tracts, it is unclear to what extent intrin-
sic bending has been experimentally shown for this par-
ticular sequence. There are known sequence-context ef-
fects that modulate A-tract-dependent bending and thus
the author should refer the reader to data in the litera-
ture or show experimentally that intrinsic bending of the
expected magnitude occurs for this particular sequence.
Moreover, one A tract is out-of-phase with respect to the
others and it is therefore not clear how this contributes

7

