0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
8

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formalizing the gene centered view of

evolution

Y. Bar-Yam

New England Complex Systems Institute

24 Mt. Auburn St., Cambridge MA

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA

Abstract

A historical dispute in the conceptual underpinnings of evolution is
the validity of the gene centered view of evolution. [1, 2] We transcend
this debate by formalizing the gene centered view as a dynamic version
of the mean ﬁeld approximation. This establishes the conditions under
which it is applicable and when it is not. In particular, it breaks down
for trait divergence which corresponds to symmetry breaking in evolving
populations.

The gene centered view addresses a basic problem in the interplay of selection
and heredity in sexually reproducing organisms. Sexual reproduction disrupts
the simplest view of evolution because the oﬀspring of an organism are often
as diﬀerent from the parent as organisms that it is competing against. In the
gene centered view the genes serve as indivisible units that are preserved from
generation to generation. In eﬀect, diﬀerent versions of the gene, i.e. alleles,
compete rather than organisms. It is helpful to explain this using the “row-
ers analogy” introduced by Dawkins. [1] In this analogy boats of mixed left-
and right-handed rowers are ﬁlled from a common rower pool. Boats compete
in heats and it is assumed that a speed advantage exists for boats with more
same-handed rowers. The successful rowers are then reassigned to the rower
pool for the next round. Over time, a predominantly and then totally single
handed rower pool will result. Thus, the selection of boats serves, in eﬀect, to
select rowers who therefore may be considered to be competing against each
other. Other perspectives on evolution distinguish between vehicles of selection
(the organisms) and replicators (the genes). However, a direct analysis of the
gene centered view to reveal its domain of applicability has not yet been dis-
cussed. The analysis provided here, including all the equations, is applicable
quite generally, but for simplicity it will be explained in terms of the rowers

1

analogy.1

The formal question is: Under what conditions (assumptions) can allelic
(rower) competition serve as a surrogate for organism (boat) competition in
the simple view of evolution. Formalizing this question requires identifying
the conditions attributed to two steps in models of evolution, selection and
reproduction. In the selection step, organisms (boats) are selected, while in the
sexual reproduction step, new organisms are formed from the organisms that
were selected. This is not fully discussed in the rowers model, but is implicit
in the statement that victorious rowers are returned to the rower pool to be
placed into new teams. The two steps of reproduction and selection can be
written quite generally as:

{N (s; t)} = R[{N ′(s; t − 1)}]
{N ′(s; t)} = D[{N (s; t)}]

(1)

(2)

The ﬁrst equation describes reproduction. The number of oﬀspring N (s; t) hav-
ing a particular genome s is written as a function of the reproducing organisms
N ′(s; t − 1) from the previous generation. The second equation describes selec-
tion. The reproducing population N ′(s; t) is written as a function of the same
generation at birth N (s; t). The brackets on the left indicate that each equa-
tion represents a set of equations for each value of the genome. The brackets
within the functions indicate, for example, that each of the oﬀspring populations
depends on the entire parent population.

To formalize the gene centered view, we introduce a dynamic form of what
is known in physics as the mean ﬁeld approximation. In the mean ﬁeld approx-
imation the probability of appearance of a particular state of the system (i.e.
a particular genome, s) is the product of probabilities of the components (i.e.
genes, si)

P (s1, . . . , sN ) = Y P (si).

(3)

In the usual application of this approximation, it can be shown to be equivalent
to allowing each of the components to be placed in an environment which is an
average over the possible environments formed by the other components of the
system, hence the term “mean ﬁeld approximation.” The key to applying this
in the context of evolution is to consider carefully the eﬀect of the reproduction
step, not just the selection step.

In many models of evolution that are discussed in the literature, the oﬀspring
are constructed by random selection of surviving alleles (a panmictic popula-
tion). In the rowers analogy the return of successful rowers to a common pool
is the same approximation. This approximation eliminates correlations in the

1The rowers analogy may be considered a model of a single gene in an n-ploid organism
with n the number of rowers, or a model of n genes with two alleles per gene and each pair
labeled correspondingly. The formal discussion applies to complete genomes i.e. to homolog
and non-homolog genes.

2

genome that result from the selection step and thus imposes Eq. (3), the mean
ﬁeld approximation, on the reproduction step for the alleles of oﬀspring. Even
though it is not imposed on the selection step, inserting this approximation into
the two step process allows us to write both of the equations in Eq. (4) together
as an eﬀective one-step update

P ′(si; t) = ˜D[{P ′(si; t − 1)}]

(4)

which describes the allele population change from one generation to the next of
oﬀspring at birth. Since this equation describes the behavior of a single allele it
corresponds to the gene centered view.

There is still a diﬃculty pointed out by Lewontin. [2] The eﬀective ﬁtness
of each allele depends on the distribution of alleles in the population. Thus,
the ﬁtness of an allele is coupled to the evolution of other alleles. This is
apparent in Eq. (4) which, as indicated by the brackets, is a function of all
the allele populations. It corresponds, as in other mean ﬁeld approximations,
to placing an allele in an average environment formed from the other alleles.
For example, there is a diﬀerence of likelihood of victory (ﬁtness) between a
right-handed rower in a predominantly left-handed population, compared to
a right-handed rower in a predominantly right-handed population. Since the
population changes over time, ﬁtnesses are time dependent and therefore not
uniquely deﬁned. This problem with ﬁtness assignment would not be present
if each allele separately coded for an organism trait. While this is a partial
violation of the simplest conceptual view of evolution, however, the applicability
of a gene centered view can still be justiﬁed, as long as the contextual assignment
of ﬁtness is included. When the ﬁtness of organism phenotype is dependent on
the relative frequency of phenotypes in a population of organisms it is known as
frequency dependent selection, which is a concept that is being applied to genes
in this context.

A more serious breakdown of the mean ﬁeld approximation arises from what
is known in physics as symmetry breaking. This corresponds in evolution to
trait divergence of subpopulations. Such trait divergence arises when correla-
tions in reproduction exist so that reproduction does not force complete mixing
of alleles. The correlations in reproduction do not have to be trait related. For
example, they can be due to spatial separation of organisms causing correla-
tions in reproduction among nearby organisms. Models of spatially distributed
organisms are sometimes called models of spatially structured environments.
However, this terminology suggests that the environment itself is spatially vary-
ing and it is important to emphasize that symmetry breaking / trait divergence
can occur in environments that are uniform (hence the terminology “symmetry
breaking”). In the rowers model this has direct meaning in terms of the ap-
pearance of clusters of mostly left and mostly right handed rowers if they are
not completely mixed when reintroduced and taken from the rower pool. Trait
related correlations in sexual reproduction (assortive mating) caused by, e.g.

3

sexual selection, would also have similar consequences. In either case, the gene
centered view would not apply.

Historically, the gene-centered view of evolution has been part of the discus-
sion of attitudes toward altruism and group selection and related socio-political
as well as biological concerns. [3] Our focus here is on the mathematical appli-
cability of the gene-centered view in diﬀerent circumstances. While the formal
discussion we present here may contribute to the socio-political issues, we have
chosen to focus here on mathematical concerns.

The problem of understanding the mean-ﬁeld approximation in application
to biology is, however, also relevant to the problem of group selection. In typ-
ical models of group selection asexually (clonally) reproducing organisms have
fecundities determined both by individual traits and group composition. The
groups are assumed to be well deﬁned, but periodically mixed. Similar to the
gene-centered model, an assumption of random mixing is equivalent to a mean
ﬁeld theory. Sober and Wilson (1998) have used the term “the averaging fal-
lacy” to refer to the direct assignment of ﬁtnesses to individuals. This captures
the essential concept of the mean-ﬁeld approximation. However, both the limi-
tations of this approximation in some circumstances and its usefulness in others
do not appear to be generally recognized. For example, it is not necessary for
well deﬁned groups to exist for a breakdown in the mean-ﬁeld approximation
to occur. Correlations in organism inﬂuences are suﬃcient. Moreover, stan-
dard group-selection models rely upon averaging across groups with the same
composition. For this case, where well deﬁned groups exist and correlations in
mixing satisfy averaging (mean-ﬁeld) assumptions by group composition, equa-
tions developed by Price2 separate and identify both the mean ﬁeld contribution
to ﬁtness and corrections due to correlations. These equations do not apply in
more general circumstances when correlations exist in a network of interactions
and/or groups are not well deﬁned, and/or averaging across groups does not
apply. It is also helpful to make a distinction between the kind of objection
raised by Lewontin to the use of averaging, and the failure that occurs due to
correlations when the mean-ﬁeld approximation does not apply. In the former
case, the assignment of ﬁtnesses can be performed through the eﬀect of the en-
vironment inﬂuencing the gene, in the latter case, an attempt to assign ﬁtnesses
to a gene would correspond to inventing non-causal interactions between genes.
The mean ﬁeld approximation is widely used in statistical physics as a “ze-
roth” order approximation to understanding the properties of systems. There
are many cases where it provides important insight to some aspects of a system
(e.g. the Ising model of magnets) and others where is essentially valid (conven-
tional BCS superconductivity). The application of the mean ﬁeld approximation
to a problem involves assuming an element (or small part of the system) can be
treated in the average environment that it ﬁnds throughout the system. This
is equivalent to assuming that the probability distribution of the states of the

2See discussion on pp. 73–74 of [3].

4

elements factor. Systematic strategies for improving the study of systems be-
yond the mean ﬁeld approximation both analytically and through simulations
allow the inclusions of correlations between element behavior. An introduction
to the mean-ﬁeld approximation and a variety of applications can be found in
Bar-Yam (1997). [4]

In conclusion, the gene centered view can be applied directly in popula-
tions where sexual reproduction causes complete allelic mixing, and only so
long as eﬀective ﬁtnesses are understood to be relative to the prevailing gene
pool. However, structured populations (i.e. species with demes—local mating
neighborhoods) are unlikely to conform to the mean ﬁeld approximation / gene
centered view. Moreover, it does not apply to considering the consequences of
trait divergence, which can occur when such correlations in organism mating
occur. These issues are important in understanding problems that lie at scales
traditionaly between the problems of population biology and those of evolu-
tionary theory: e.g. the understanding of ecological diversity and sympatric
speciation. [5]

References

[1] Dawkins, R. (1989) The Selﬁsh Gene, 2nd ed. (Oxford University Press,

Oxford) p. 86.

[2] Lewontin, R. in R. N. Brandon and R. M. Burian, eds. (1984) Genes, Organ-
isms, Populations: Controversies Over the Units of Selection (MIT Press,
Cambridge).

[3] Sober, E. and Wilson, D. S. (1998) Unto Others: The evolution and psy-

chology of unselﬁsh behavior (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).

[4] Bar-Yam, Y. (1997) Dynamics of Complex Systems (Perseus Press, Cam-

bridge).

[5] Sayama, H., Kaufman L. and Bar-Yam, Y. in preparation.

5

