0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
5
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
6
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Real time encoding of motion:
Answerable questions and questionable answers
from the ﬂy’s visual system

Rob de Ruyter van Steveninck,1 Alexander Borst,2 and William Bialek1

1NEC Research Institute
4 Independence Way
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 USA
2ESPM—Division of Insect Biology
University of California at Berkeley
201 Wellman Hall
Berkeley, California 94720, USA

In the past decade, a small corner of the ﬂy’s visual system has become an im-
portant testing ground for ideas about coding and computation in the nervous
system. A number of results demonstrate that this system operates with a preci-
sion and eﬃciency near the limits imposed by physics, and more generally these
results point to the reliability and eﬃciency of the strategies that nature has se-
lected for representing and processing visual signals. A recent series of papers by
Egelhaaf and coworkers, however, suggests that almost all these conclusions are
incorrect. In this contribution we place these controversies in a larger context,
emphasizing that the arguments are not just about ﬂies, but rather about how
we should quantify the neural response to complex, naturalistic inputs. As an
example, Egelhaaf et al. (and many others) compute certain correlation func-
tions and use the apparent correlation times as a measure of temporal precision
in the neural response. This analysis neglects the structure of the correlation
function at short times, and we show how to analyze this structure to reveal a
temporal precision 30 times better than suggested by the correlation time; this
precision is conﬁrmed by a much more detailed information theoretic analysis.
In reviewing other aspects of the controversy, we ﬁnd that the analysis methods
used by Egelhaaf et al. suﬀer from some mathematical inconsistencies, and that
in some cases we are unable to reproduce their experimental results. Finally, we
present results from new experiments that probe the neural response to inputs
that approach more closely the natural context for freely ﬂying ﬂies. These new
experiments demonstrate that the ﬂy’s visual system is even more precise and
eﬃcient under natural conditions than had been inferred from our earlier work.

1

1 Introduction

Much of what we know about the neural processing of sensory information has
been learned by studying the responses of single neurons to rather simpliﬁed
stimuli. The ethologists, however, have argued that we can reveal the full rich-
ness of the nervous system only when we study the way in which the brain
deals with the more complex stimuli that occur in nature. On the other hand
it is possible that the processing of natural signals is decomposable into steps
that can be understood from the analysis of simpler signals. But even then, to
prove that this is the case one must do the experiment and use complex natural
stimuli. In the past decade there has been renewed interest in moving beyond
the simple sensory inputs that have been the workhorse of neurophysiology, and
a key step in this program has been the development of more powerful tools for
the analysis of neural responses to complex dynamic inputs. The motion sensi-
tive neurons of the ﬂy visual system have been an important testing ground for
these ideas, and there have been several key results from this work:

1. The sequence of spikes from a motion sensitive neuron can be decoded to
recover a continuous estimate of the dynamic velocity trajectory (Bialek
et al. 1991; Haag and Borst 1997). In this decoding, individual spikes
contribute signiﬁcantly to the estimate of velocity at each point in time.

2. The precision of velocity estimates approaches the physical limits imposed

by diﬀraction and noise in the photoreceptor array (Bialek et al. 1991).

3. One or two spikes are suﬃcient to discriminate between motions which
diﬀer by displacements in the ‘hyperacuity’ range, an order of magnitude
smaller than the spacing between photoreceptors in the retina (de Ruyter
van Steveninck and Bialek 1995). Again this performance approaches the
limits set by diﬀraction and receptor noise.

4. Patterns of spikes which diﬀer by millisecond shifts of the individual
spikes can stand for distinguishable velocity waveforms (de Ruyter van
Steveninck and Bialek 1988), and these patterns can carry much more
information than expected by adding up the contributions of individual
spikes (de Ruyter van Steveninck and Bialek 1988, Brenner et al. in press).

5. The total information that we (or the ﬂy) can extract from the spike
train continues to increase as we observe the spikes with greater temporal
resolution, down to millisecond precision (de Ruyter van Steveninck et al.
1997, Strong et al. 1998).

6. These facts about the encoding of naturalistic, dynamic stimuli cannot
be extrapolated simply from studies of the neural response to simpler
signals. The system exhibits profound adaptation (Maddess and Laughlin
1985, de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. 1986, Borst and Egelhaaf 1987, de
Ruyter van Steveninck et al. 1996, Brenner et al. submitted), so that
the encoding of signals depends strongly on context, and the statistical

2

structure of responses to dynamic stimuli can be very diﬀerent from that
found with simpler static or steady state stimuli (de Ruyter van Steveninck
et al. 1997).

We emphasize that many of these results from the ﬂy’s visual system have direct
analogs in other systems, from insects to amphibians to primates (Rieke et al.
1997).

In a series of recent papers, Egelhaaf and coworkers have called these results
into question (Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1997, 1998, 1999; Warzecha et al. 1998).
Several of these papers are built around a choice of a stimulus very diﬀerent
from that used in previous work. Rather than synthesize a stimulus with known
statistical properties, they sample the time dependent motion signals generated
by a ﬂy tethered in a ﬂight simulator. The simulator is operated in closed loop
so that the ﬂy, by producing a yaw torque which is measured electronically,
moves a pattern on a CRT monitor, while the animal itself stays stationary.
For experiments on the responses of the motion sensitive neurons these patterns
and motions are replayed to another ﬂy, again through a monitor.
In their
judgement these stimuli “are characteristic of a normal behavioral situation in
which the actions and reactions of the animal directly aﬀect its visual input”
(Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1998).

For these stimuli, Warzecha and Egelhaaf claim that the timing of individ-
ual spikes has no signiﬁcance in representing motion signals in the ﬂy’s motion
sensitive neurons. Instead they suggest that the neuron’s response should be
averaged over time scales of order 40 to 100 ms to recover the essential infor-
mation, and that timing of spikes within this averaging window is irrelevant.
These claims are in conﬂict with points [1], [4], and [5] above. As part of their
discussion of these points Warzecha and Egelhaaf make repeated references to
the noisiness of the neural response, in apparent contradiction of points [2] and
[3], although they do not address speciﬁcally the quantitative results of the ear-
lier work. Finally, they suggest that there is no diﬀerence between the statistics
of spike trains in response to steady state vs. dynamic stimuli, in contradiction
of point [6].

Obviously the recent work of Egelhaaf and coworkers raises many diﬀerent
issues. In this contribution we try to focus on three problems of general interest.
First, how do we deﬁne a meaningful “naturalistic stimulus,” and does their
“behaviourally generated” stimulus fall into this category? In particular, how
do we reach an eﬀective compromise between stimuli that occur in nature and
stimuli that we can control and reproduce reliably in the laboratory? Second,
how do we characterize the neural response to complex dynamic inputs? In
particular, how do we evaluate all the relevant time scales in the sensory signal
itself and in the spike train? Again, these are issues that we must face in the
analysis of any neural system for processing of sensory information; indeed there
are even analogous issues in motor systems. Thus the ﬂy’s visual system serves
here as an example, rather than as an end in itself.

Before we begin our discussion of these two points, we must be clear that the
ﬁrst question—what is a natural stimulus?—is a question about the biology and

3

ecology of the animal we are studying, as well as a question about the design and
constraints of a particular experimental setup. One might well disagree about
the best strategy for generating naturalistic stimuli in the lab. On the other
hand, our second question—how do we characterize the response to complex
signals?—is a theoretical issue which is not tied to the particulars of biology.
On this issue there are precise mathematical statements to be made, and we
hope to make clear how these mathematical results can be used as a rigorous
guide to the analysis of experiments.

The third and ﬁnal question we address concerns the comparison between
static and dynamic stimuli. Although we believe that the most interesting
problems concern the way in which the brain deals with the complex, dynamic
stimuli that occur in nature, much has been learned from simpler static stimuli
and there are nagging questions about whether it really is ‘necessary’ to design
new experiments that need more sophisticated methods of analysis. For reasons
that will become clear below, the comparison of static and dynamic stimuli
also is crucial for understanding whether many of the lessons learnt from the
analysis of the ﬂy’s motion sensitive neurons will be applicable to other systems,
especially the mammalian cortex.

2 What is a natural stimulus?

The ﬂy’s motion sensitive neuron H1 oﬀers a relatively simple testing ground for
ideas about the neural representation of natural signals. This cell is a wide ﬁeld
neuron, so rather than coding the motion of small objects or a component of the
local velocity ﬂow ﬁeld, H1 is responsible primarily for coding the rigid body
horizontal (yaw) motion of the ﬂy relative to the rest of the world. Thus there
is a limit in which we can think of “the stimulus” as being a single function of
time, ν(t), which describes this angular velocity trajectory. It should be clear
that this description is incomplete: the neural response is aﬀected also by the
mean light intensity, the spatial structure of the visual stimulus, and the area of
the compound eye that is stimulated. Further, the system is highly adaptive, so
that the encoding of a short segment of the trajectory ν(t) will depend strongly
on the statistics of this trajectory over the past several seconds.

Traditional experiments on motion sensitive neurons (as on other sensory
cells) have used constant stimuli (motion at ﬁxed velocity), pulsed stimuli (step-
wise motion), or have analysed the steady state behaviour in response to sinu-
soidal motion at diﬀerent frequencies. In nature, trajectories are not so simple.
Instead one can think of trajectories as being drawn from a distribution P [ν(t)]
or “stimulus ensemble.” A widely used example of stimulus ensembles is the
Gaussian ensemble, in which the distribution of trajectories is described com-
pletely by the spectrum or correlation function. We can construct spectra and
correlation functions so that there is a single characteristic stimulus amplitude—
the dynamic range νrms of velocity signals—and a single characteristic time τc
in the dynamics of these signals. A reasonable approach to the study of natural-
istic stimuli might then be to explore the coding of signals in H1 using stimulus

4

ensembles parametrized by νrms and τc. Most of the results enumerated above
have been obtained in this way.

In their recent papers (Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1997, Warzecha et al. 1998),
as well as in their contribution to this volume, Warzecha and Egelhaaf argue
that the stimulus ensembles used in experiments on H1 have been restricted
unfairly to short correlation times. Put another way, the stimuli used in these
experiments have included high temporal frequency components. Warzecha and
Egelhaaf suggest that these high frequency components bias the response of the
motion sensitive cells to artiﬁcially high temporal precision which is not relevant
for the behaviourally generated stimuli that they use.1 The question of whether
timing precision is important under truly natural conditions is left open.

Independent of what is truly natural, one can argue that experiments with
short correlation times have provided evidence on what the ﬂy’s visual system
can do. Although we seldom sit in dark rooms and wait for dim ﬂashes of light,
such experiments led to the demonstration that the human visual system can
count single photons (Hecht et al. 1942). In this spirit, studies of H1 using
stimuli with short correlation times have revealed that the ﬂy’s nervous system
can estimate velocity with a precision limited by noise in the photoreceptor
array and that timing relations between neural responses and stimulus events
can be preserved with millisecond precision, even as the signals pass through
four stages of neural circuitry.
It would seem strange that such impressive
performance would evolve if it were irrelevant for ﬂy behaviour.

Instead of choosing trajectories ν(t) from a known probability distribution,
we could try to sample the trajectories that actually occur in nature. Here we
have to make choices, and these will always be somewhat subjective: Dethier
(1976) reports that female ﬂies spend 12.7%, and male ﬂies 24.3% of their time
walking or ﬂying. The other activities on Dethier’s list are feeding, regurgitating,
grooming and resting, during which information from the ﬂy’s motion sensitive
cells presumably is not too relevant. So it seems the ﬂy could live quite happily
without its tangential cells most of its time. On the other hand, during periods
of ﬂight, the responses of its motion sensitive cells are strongly modulated. On
top of that, the depth and speed of modulation may vary as the ﬂy switches from
periods of relatively quiet cruising to episodes of fast and acrobatic pursuit or
escape, and back (Land and Collett 1974). Although it is not clear at the outset
what portion of the total behavioural repertoire we should analyse, the thing
that presumably tells us most about the “design” of the ﬂy is the dynamics of
neural signal processing during top performance. Correspondingly, Warzecha

1In fact Warzecha and Egelhaaf make two diﬀerent arguments about high frequency stimuli.
They make repeated references to the integration times and noise in the ﬂy’s visual system,
all of which limit the reliability of responses to high frequency components in the input.
These arguments generally are presented in qualitative terms, but Warzecha and Egelhaaf
(1999) state explicitly that signals above 30 Hz are undetectable above the noise and hence
can have no impact on the statistics of the spike train. On the other hand, Warzecha and
Egelhaaf (1997) argue that the inclusion of high frequency components in the input causes
an unnaturally tight locking of spikes to stimulus events, causing us to overestimate the
signiﬁcance of spike timing for the coding of behaviorally relevant stimuli. It should be clear
that these two arguments cannot both be correct.

5

and Egelhaaf propose to use stimuli that are representative of the trajectories
experienced by a ﬂy in ﬂight, and we agree that this is an excellent choice.
There are still some diﬃculties, however. Warzecha and Egelhaaf propose that
meaningful data can be obtained from “behaviourally generated” trajectories
ν(t) recorded from ﬂies that are tethered in a ﬂight simulator apparatus in which
the ﬂy’s measured torque is to move a pattern on a CRT monitor in the visual
ﬁeld of the ﬂy. The combination of ﬂy, torque meter, and moving pattern thus
acts as a closed loop feedback system whose dynamical properties are determined
both by the ﬂy and by the gain and bandwidth of the mechanical and electronic
components involved. The data presented by Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1997,
1998, and this volume) strongly suggest that the dynamics of the feedback
system are dominated by the electromechanical properties of their setup, and
not by the ﬂy itself. This is most clearly seen from direct comparisons between
the trajectories in the ﬂight simulator and those observed in nature.

Trajectories during free ﬂight were recorded in the classic work of Land
and Collett (1974), who studied chasing behaviour in Fannia canicularis and
found turning speeds of several thousand degrees per second. Wehrhahn (1979),
Wehrhahn et al. (1982) and Wagner (1986a,b,c) report very similar results for
the houseﬂy Musca, and recent publications (Schilstra and van Hateren 1998,
van Hateren and Schilstra 1999) report ﬂight measurements at high temporal
and spatial resolution, from Calliphora ﬂying almost free. In their published
dataset ﬂies made about 10 turns per second, during which head velocities
easily exceeded 1000◦/s, while maximum head turning velocities were well over
3000◦/s. If we compare the results of these studies to the motion traces used in
the experiments by Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1997, 1998) we see that their traces
are considerably smoother, and do not go beyond 100◦/s. These diﬀerences are
illustrated in Fig. 1, where we make an explicit comparison between free ﬂight
data obtained by Land and Collett (1974) and the motion traces data presented
in Fig. 1 of Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1997). It is clear that there are dramatic
diﬀerences in the frequency of alternation and, especially, in the amplitude of the
motion signals. We are not sure how Egelhaaf and Warzecha can maintain their
claim that “there are likely to be few instances in the normal world where visual
motion encompasses a wider dynamic range than that which could be tested
here” (Warzecha et al. 1998, p. 362). Simple theoretical arguments suggest
that these diﬀerences between the ﬂight simulator trajectories and true natural
trajectories will have enormous consequences for the reliability of responses in
the motion sensitive neurons. Warzecha and Egelhaaf (Fig 6 of their keynote
paper in this volume) report estimates of the signal and noise power spectra
in the graded voltage response of a motion sensitive cell. If we scale the signal
to noise power ratio they present in proportion to the ratio between the power
spectrum of natural motion and the velocity power spectrum they used, then
the signal to noise ratio will increase so much that the natural trajectories
will produce signal resolvable against the noise at frequencies well above 200
Hz. This would mean that events in natural stimuli will be localizable with
millisecond precision.

There are other diﬀerences between the stimulus conditions studied by War-

6

zecha and Egelhaaf and the natural conditions of free ﬂight. Outdoors, in the
middle of the afternoon, light intensities typically are two orders of magnitude
larger than are generated with standard laboratory displays (Land 1981). Fur-
ther, the wide ﬁeld motion sensitive cells gather inputs from large portions of
the compound eye (Gauck and Borst 1999), which extends backward around
the head to cover a large fraction of the available solid angle; rotation of the
ﬂy produces coherent signals across this whole area, and it is very diﬃcult to
reproduce this “full vision” in the lab with CRT displays. While it is diﬃcult
to predict quantitatively the consequences of these diﬀerences, the qualitative
eﬀect is clear: natural signals are much more powerful and “cleaner” than the
stimuli which Warzecha and Egelhaaf have used.

We can take a substantial step toward natural stimulus conditions by record-
ing from a ﬂy that itself rotates in a natural environment along a trajectory
representative of free ﬂight. Preliminary results from such experiments will be
analysed in more detail below, and a detailed account is forthcoming (Lewen
et al.
in preparation). A female wild ﬂy (Calliphora), caught outdoors, was
placed in a plastic tube and immobilized with wax. A small incision was made
in the back of the head, through which a microelectrode could be advanced to
the lobula plate to record from H1. The ﬂy holder, electrode holder and manip-
ulator were assembled to be as light and compact, yet rigid, as possible. In this
way the ﬂy and the recording setup could be mounted on the axle of a stepper
motor (Berger-Lahr, RDM 564/50, driven by a Divi-Step D331.1 interface with
10,000 steps/revolution) and rotated at speeds of up to several thousand de-
grees per second. The motor speed was controlled through the parallel port of a
laptop computer by means of custom designed electronics, and was played out
at 2ms intervals. The data presented here are from an experiment in which the
setup was placed outside on a sunny day, in a wooded environment not far from
where the ﬂy was caught. A simple, but crucial, control is necessary: H1 does
not respond if the ﬂy is rotated in the dark, or if the visual scene surrounding it
rotates together with the ﬂy. We can thus be conﬁdent that H1 is stimulated by
visual input alone, and not by other sensory modalities, and also that electronic
crosstalk between the motor and the neural recording is negligible. The motion
trace ν(t) was derived from a concatenation of body angle readings over the
course of the ﬂight paths of a leading and a chasing ﬂy as depicted in Fig. 4
of Land and Collett (1974). For technical reasons we had to limit the velocity
values to half those derived from that ﬁgure, but we have no reason to believe
that this will aﬀect the main result very much. Translational motion compo-
nents were not present, representing a situation with objects only at inﬁnity.
Padded with a few zero velocity samples, this trace was 2.5 seconds long. That
sequence was repeated with the sign of all velocity values changed, to get a full
5 second long sequence. This full sequence was played 200 times in succession
while spikes from the axon terminals of H1 were recorded as an analog waveform
at 10 kHz sampling rate. In oﬀ line analysis spike occurrence times were derived
by matched ﬁltering and thresholding.

Before looking at the responses of H1, we emphasize several aspects of the

stimulus conditions:

7

• The motion stimulus is obtained from direct measurement of ﬂies in free
ﬂight, not from a torque measurement of a tethered ﬂy watching a CRT
monitor. As argued above, the electromechanical properties of the setup
used by Warzecha and Egelhaaf are likely to have drastic eﬀects on the
frequency and amplitude characteristics of the motion.

• The ﬁeld of view experienced by the ﬂy in our setup is almost as large as
that for a free ﬂying ﬂy. Most of the visual ﬁeld is exposed to movement,
with the exception of a few elements (e.g. the preampliﬁer) that rotate
with the ﬂy, and occupy just a small portion of the visual ﬁeld.

• The experiment is done outside, in an environment close to where our
experimental ﬂies are caught, so that almost by deﬁnition we stimulate
the ﬂy with natural scenes.

• The experiment is performed in the afternoon on a bright day. ¿From dim
to bright patches of the visual scene the eﬀective estimated photon ﬂux
for ﬂy photoreceptors under these conditions varies from 5× 105 to 5× 106
photons per second per receptor. Warzecha and Egelhaaf’s experiments
(as many experiments of ours) were done with a ﬂy watching a Tektronix
608 cathode ray tube, which has an estimated maximum photon ﬂux of
about 105 photons per second per receptor.

Figure 2 shows the spike trains generated by H1 in the “outdoor” experiment,
focusing on a short segment of the experiment just to illustrate some qualitative
points. The top trace shows the velocity waveform ν(t), and subsequent panels
show the spikes generated by H1 in response to this trajectory (H1+) or its
sign reverse (H1−). Visual inspection reveals that some aspects of the response
are very reproducible, and further that particular events in the stimulus can
be associated reliably with small numbers of spikes. The ﬁrst stimulus zero
crossing at about 1730 ms is marked by a rather sharp drop in the activity of
H1+, with a sharp rise for H1−. This sharp switching of spike activity is not
just a feature of this particular zero crossing, but occurs in other instances as
well. Further, the small hump in velocity at about 2080 ms lasts only about 10
ms, but induces a reliable spike pair in H1+ together with a short pause in the
activity of H1−. The ﬁrst spike in H1− after this pause (Fig. 2c) is timed quite
well; its probability distribution (Fig. 2e) has a standard deviation of 0.73 ms.
Thus, under natural stimulus conditions individual spikes can be locked to the
stimulus with millisecond precision.

In fact the ﬁrst few spikes after the pause in H1− have even greater internal
or relative temporal precision. The raster in Fig. 2c shows that the ﬁrst spike
meanders, in the sense that the ﬂuctuation in timing from trial to trial seems to
be slow. This suggests that much of the uncertainty in the timing of this spike is
due to a rather slow process, perhaps metabolic drift. To outside observers, like
us, these ﬂuctuations just add to the spike timing uncertainty, which even then
is still submillisecond. Note, however, that to some extent the ﬂy may be able to
compensate for that drift. If the eﬀect is metabolic, then diﬀerent neurons might

8

drift more or less together, and the time interval between spikes from diﬀerent
cells could be preserved quite well in spite of temporal drift of individual spikes.
Similarly, within one cell, spikes could drift together (Brenner et al., 2000), and
this indeed is the case here. As a result the interval between the ﬁrst spike and
the next is much more precise, with a 0.18 ms standard deviaton, and it does not
seem to suﬀer from these slow ﬂuctuations (Fig. 2d). The timing accuracy of
ensuing intervals from the ﬁrst spike to the third and fourth, although becoming
gradually less well deﬁned, is still submillisecond (Fig. 2f). So it is clear that
some identiﬁable patterns of spikes are generated with a timing precision of the
order of a millisecond or even quite a bit better.

Although we have emphasized the reproducibility of the responses to natural
stimuli, there also is a more qualitative point to be made. All attempts to
characterize the input/output relation of H1 under laboratory conditions have
indicated that the maximum spike rate should occur in response to velocities
below about 100◦/s, far below the typical velocities used in our experiments.
Indeed, many such experiments suggest that H1 should shut down and not spike
at all in response to these extremely high velocities. In particular, Warzecha
and Egelhaaf (1998) claim that spike rates in H1 are essentially zero above
250◦/s, that this lack of sensitivity to high speeds is an essential result of the
computational strategy used by the ﬂy in computing motion, and further that
this behaviour can be used to advantage in optomotor course control. The
outdoor experiment demonstrates that none of these conclusions are relevant to
more natural conditions, where H1’s response peaks at about 1000◦/s (Lewen
et al. in prep.) and responds robustly and reliably to angular velocities of over
2000◦/s.

The arguments presented here rested chieﬂy on visual inspection of the spike
trains, and this has obvious limitations. Our eyes are drawn to reliable features
in the response, and one may object that these cases could be accurate but rare,
so that the bulk or average behaviour of the spike train is much sloppier. To
proceed we must turn to a more quantitative approach.

3 How do we analyse the responses

to natural stimuli?

When we deliver simple sensory stimuli it is relatively easy to analyse some
measures of neural response as a function of the parameters that describe the
stimulus. Faced with the responses of a neuron to the complex, dynamic signals
that occur in nature–as in Fig. 1–what should we measure? How do we quantify
the response and its relation to the diﬀerent features of the stimulus? The
sequence of spikes from a motion sensitive neuron constitutes an encoding of
the trajectory ν(t). Of course, this encoding is not perfect: there is noise in the
spatiotemporal pattern of the photon ﬂux from which motion is computed, the
visual system has limited spatial and temporal resolution, and inevitably there is
internal noise in any physical or physiological system. This may cause identical

9

stimuli to generate diﬀerent responses. The code also may be ambiguous in
the sense that, even if noise were absent, the same response can be induced by
very diﬀerent stimuli. Conceptually, there are two very diﬀerent questions we
can ask about the structure of this code. First, we can ask about the features
of the spike train that are relevant for the code: Is the timing of individual
spikes important, or does it suﬃce to count spikes in relatively large windows of
time? Are particular temporal patterns of spikes especially signiﬁcant? Second,
if we can identify the relevant features of the spike train then we can ask about
the mapping between these features of the response and the structure of the
stimulus: What aspects of the stimulus inﬂuence the probability of a spike? How
can we (or the ﬂy) decode the spike train to estimate the stimulus trajectory,
and how precisely can this be done?

There are two general approaches to these problems. One is to compute
correlation functions. A classic example is the method of “reverse correlation”
in which we correlate the spike train with the time varying input signal (see
Section 2.1 in Rieke et al. 1997). This is equivalent to computing the aver-
age stimulus trajectory in the neighbourhood of a spike. Other possibilities
include correlating spike trains with themselves or with the spike trains of other
neurons. A more subtle possibility is to correlate spike trains that occur on
diﬀerent presentations of the same time dependent signal, or the related idea of
computing the coherence among responses on diﬀerent presentations (Haag and
Borst 1997). All of these methods have the advantage that simple correlation
functions can be estimated reliably even from relatively small data sets. On
the other hand, there are an inﬁnite number of possible correlation functions
that one could compute, and by looking only at the simpler ones we may miss
important structures in the data.

An alternative to computing correlation functions is to take an explicitly
probabilistic point of view. As an example, rather than computing the average
stimulus trajectory in the neighbourhood of a spike, as in reverse correlation, we
can try to characterize the whole distribution of stimuli in the neighbourhood
of a spike (de Ruyter van Steveninck and Bialek 1988). Similarly, rather than
computing correlations among spike trains in diﬀerent presentations of the same
stimulus, we can try to characterize the whole distribution of spike sequences
that occur across multiple presentations (de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. 1997,
Strong et al. 1998). The probability distributions themselves can be diﬃcult
to visualize, and we often want to reduce these rather complex objects to a few
sensible numbers, but we must be sure to do this in a way that does not introduce
unwarranted assumptions about what is or is not important in the stimulus and
response. Shannon (1948) showed that there is a unique way of doing this,
and this is to use the entropy or information associated with the probability
distributions. Even if we compute correlation functions, it is useful to translate
these correlation functions into bounds on the entropy or information, as is done
in the stimulus reconstruction method (Bialek et al. 1991, Rieke et al. 1997,
Haag and Borst 1997, Borst and Theunissen 1999). Although the idea of using
information theory to discuss the neural code dates back nearly to the inception
of the theory (MacKay and McCulloch 1952), it is only in the last ten years

10

that we have seen these mathematical tools used widely for the characterization
of real neurons, as opposed to models.

3.1 Correlation functions

presentations

(trials)

Although we believe that the best approach to analyzing the neural response to
natural stimuli is grounded in information theory, we follow Warzecha and Egel-
haaf and begin by using correlation functions. From an experiment analogous to
the one in our Fig. 2, Warzecha et al. (1998) compute the correlation function of
the spike trains of simultaneously recorded H1 and H2 cells, ΦspikeH1−spikeH2(τ ),
and also the average crosscorrelation function among spike trains
from
diﬀerent
trajectory,
ΦcrosstrialH1−H2(τ ). If the spike trains were reproduced perfectly from trial to
trial, these two correlation functions would be identical; of course this is not
the case. Warzecha and Egelhaaf conclude from the diﬀerence between the two
correlation functions that the spikes are not “precisely time coupled” to the
stimulus, and they argue further that the scale which characterizes the preci-
sion (or imprecision) of spike timing can be determined from the width of the
crosstrial correlation function ΦcrosstrialH1−H2(τ ). This is one of their arguments
in support of the notion that the time resolution of the spike train under nat-
ural conditions is in the range of 40 to 100 milliseconds, one or two orders of
magnitude less precision than was found in previous work.

of the same stimulus

The crosstrial correlation function obviously contains information about the
precision of the neural response, but there is no necessary mathematical re-
lation between the temporal precision and the width of the correlation func-
tion. To make the discussion concrete, we show in Fig. 3a the autocorrelation
Φspike−spike(τ ) and in Fig. 3b the crosstrial correlation function Φcrosstrial(τ )
computed for the outdoor experiment. We see that Φcrosstrial(τ ) is very broad,
while Φspike−spike(τ ) has structure on much shorter time scales, as found also by
Warzecha and Egelhaaf. But the characterization of the crosstrial correlation
function as broad does not capture all of its structure: rather than having a
smooth peak at τ = 0, there seems to be a rather sharp change of slope or cusp,
and again this is seen in the data presented by Warzecha and Egelhaaf, even
though the stimulus conditions are very diﬀerent. This cusp is a hint that the
width of the correlation function is hiding structure on much ﬁner time scales.
Before analyzing the correlation functions further, we note some connections
to earlier work. Intuitively it might seem that by correlating the responses from
diﬀerent trials we are probing the reproducibility of spike timing in some detail.
But because Φcrosstrial(τ ) is an average over pairs of spikes (one from each trial),
this function is not sensitive to reproducible patterns of spikes such as those we
have seen in Fig. 2. In fact, the crosstrial correlation function is equal (with
suitable normalization) to the autocorrelation function of the time dependent
rate r(t) that we obtain by averaging the spike train across trials. Thus the
crosstrial correlation does not contain information beyond the usual poststim-
ulus time histogram or PSTH, and the time scales in the correlation function
just measure how rapidly the ﬁring rate can be modulated; again, there is no

11

sensitivity to spike timing beyond the rate, and hence no sensitivity to spike
patterns. Since the crosstrial correlation function is equal to the autocorrela-
tion of the rate, the Fourier transform of Φcrosstrial(τ ) is equal to the power
spectrum of the rate, which has been used by Bair and Koch (1996) to discuss
the reproducibility of responses in the motion sensitive neurons of monkey vi-
sual cortex. If we Fourier transform both the crosstrial correlation function and
the spike-spike correlation, their ratio is proportional to the crosstrial coherence
considered by Haag and Borst (1997) in their analysis of H1.

Even granting the limitations of the correlation function as a probe of spike
timing, we would like to reveal the ﬁner time scale structure that seems to be
hiding near τ = 0. To do this we consider a simple model that can be generalized
without changing the basic conclusions. Imagine that each spike has an “ideal”
time htii relative to the stimulus, and that from trial to trial the actual arrival
time of the ith spike ﬂuctuates as ti = htii + δti. The meandering of spikes from
trial to trial in Fig. 2c suggests that the δti and δtj of nearby spikes i and j are
correlated, and if these correlations extend over a suﬃciently long time (roughly
10 ms is suﬃcient) then there is a simple approximate equation relating the
crosscorrelation among trials to the autocorrelation and the distribution of time
jitter, P (δti):

Φcrosstrial(τ ) = ΦPP(τ ) ⊗ Φspike−spike(τ ),

where ⊗ denotes convolution and ΦPP(τ ) is the autocorrelation of the distri-
bution P (δti). Thus ΦPP(τ ) can be computed from the measured correlation
functions by deconvolution. For our outdoor experiment we ﬁnd that ΦPP(τ )
has a width of 3.1 ms (Fig. 3c), so that a reasonable estimate for the width

of the underlying jitter distribution is δtrms = 3.1/√2 ≈ 2.2 ms. This analysis

shows that the diﬀerence between the crosstrial and the spike-spike correlation
functions is consistent with jitter in the range of a few milliseconds, not the
many tens of milliseconds claimed by Warzecha and Egelhaaf.2

Because the interpretation of correlation functions is a crucial issue, let us
give an example from spatial vision, where it is clear that the width of the
correlation function (correlation length) is not a good indicator of the precision
required to read out a signal. It is well documented that natural scenes typically
have broad spatial correlations, often associated with 1/f-like power density
spectra (Srinivasan et al. 1982, Field 1987, Ruderman and Bialek 1994). Using
the same reasoning that Warzecha and Egelhaaf apply to spike trains, one would
conclude that the visual system should not bother to use high spatial resolution.

2There are further diﬃculties in the interpretation of correlation functions oﬀered by War-
zecha and Egelhaaf. One of their arguments for the irrelevance of high frequency stimuli is
based on a comparison of the velocity spectrum with the spectrum of ﬂuctuations in the time
dependent rate (Fig. 2 of Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1997); the spectrum of the time dependent
rate should be the Fourier transform of the crosstrial correlation function, as noted above.
On the down going slope, across a decade of frequency the decline in the response spectrum
is slower than the decline in the stimulus spectrum. If we deﬁne a transfer function by taking
the ratio of the response and stimulus spectra, then the cell is amplifying the higher frequency
components, not attentuating them as Warzecha and Egelhaaf claim. This is consistent with
the experiments of Haag and Borst (1998) demonstrating that the motion sensitive neurons
have active membrane mechanisms to achieve such ampliﬁcation.

12

This would be true for environments with Gaussian statistics, where second
order descriptions–the simplest correlation functions–are suﬃcient. But the
world we live in deﬁnitely is not Gaussian.
It is made out of objects that
typically have well deﬁned edges, and these edges are important to us, not
least because they are often associated with rigid objects. The width of the
spatial correlation function is deﬁned, very roughly, by the apparent size of the
objects in our visual ﬁeld. But this width has nothing to do with the precision
with which we can estimate the position of edges and hence the location of
object boundaries. Just as for spatial edges, the location of temporal edges
may also be important, and we can look at horse racing for an example: In
Warzecha and Egelhaaf’s interpretation we would not need to time horses any
more precisely than the width of the “horse density” correlation function, which
corresponds roughly to the time required for the entire horse to cross the ﬁnish
line. Yet fortunes are won and lost over diﬀerences corresponding to a fraction
of a horse’s nose. What matters here is that we attach importance to features
that are deﬁned very sharply in time, and this temporal precision cannot be
measured from the width of one simple correlation function. For precisely the
same reason one cannot equate the relevant time scale of retinal image motion
to spike timing precision, as Warzecha and Egelhaaf argue in this volume (Sect.
6). Let us then turn to an information theoretic approach.

3.2 Information

Looking at the responses to repeated presentations of a natural complex dynamic
stimulus, as in Fig. 2, we see many diﬀerent features, some of which have been
noted above: there are individual spikes which are reproduced from trial to trial
with considerable accuracy; there are patterns of spikes in which the intervals
between spikes are reproduced more accurately than the absolute spike times,
so that the patterns appear to ‘meander’ from trial to trial; there are trials
in which spikes are deleted, apparently at random, and trials in which extra
spikes appear. How are we to make sense out of this variety of phenomena?
Speciﬁcally, we want to know whether the detailed timing of spikes is important
for the encoding of naturalistic stimuli. How can we analyse data of this sort to
give us a direct answer to this question about the structure of the neural code?
Intuitively, the sequence of action potentials generated by H1 “provides in-
formation” about the motion trajectory. If the response of H1 were always the
same, independent of the trajectory, of course no information would be pro-
vided. Generally, then, the greater the range of possible responses the greater
is the capacity of the cell to provide information: if we think of segments of the
neural response as being like words in a language, then the ability of the neuron
to ‘describe’ the input is enhanced if it has a larger vocabulary. On the other
hand, it clearly is not useful to generate words at random, no matter how large
our vocabulary, and so there must be a reproducible relationship between the
choice of words and the form of the motion trajectory. These intuitive ideas have
a precise formulation in Shannon’s information theory (Shannon 1948): the size
of the neuron’s ‘vocabulary’ is measured by the entropy of the distribution of

13

responses, the (ir)reproducibility of the relation between stimulus and response
is related to the conditional or noise entropy computed from the distribution
of responses seen in multiple trials, and the information that the response con-
veys about the stimulus is the diﬀerence between the entropy and the noise
entropy (see also de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. 1997). These measures from
information theory are not just one of many possible ways of quantifying the
neural response; Shannon proved that these are the only measures of variabil-
ity, reproducibility and information that are consistent with certain simple and
intuitively plausible constraints.

If we believe that the neural code makes use of a time resolution ∆t, then
we can describe the neural response in discrete time bins of this size. If ∆t is
very large this amounts to counting the number of spikes in each bin, while as
∆t becomes small this description becomes a binary string in which we record
the presence or absence of individual spikes in each bin. As our time resolution
improves (smaller ∆t) the size of the response ‘vocabulary’ increases because we
are distinguishing as diﬀerent responses that were, at larger ∆t, lumped together
as being the same. Quantitatively, the entropy of the responses is a function
of time resolution, so that the capacity of the neuron to convey information is
greater at smaller ∆t, as ﬁrst emphasized by MacKay and McCulloch (1952).
The question of whether spike timing is important to the neural code is then
whether neurons make eﬃcient use of this extra capacity (Rieke et al. 1993,
1997). In the next section we address precisely this question in the context of
the ‘outdoor’ experiment on H1, reaching conclusions that parallel closely those
from our earlier work (de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. 1997, Strong et al. 1998).
First we consider the results of Egelhaaf and coworkers, who have drawn nearly
opposite conclusions.

Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1997) and Egelhaaf and Warzecha (1999) set out to
study the dependence of information transmission on time resolution, along the
lines indicated above. Speciﬁcally, they count spikes in bins of size ∆t and then
ask how much information this spike count on a single trial provides about the
local ﬁring rate, or “Stimulus Induced Response Component” (SIRC) computed
as an average over many trials. Their information measure shows a peak for
a window width of ∆t = 80 ms (Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1997, Fig. 3), from
which they conclude that this is the time resolution at which signals are best
represented by H1. It is not clear what measure of information Warzecha and
Egelhaaf (1997) are using to ﬁnd the optimum: the rate at which the spike train
provides information about the stimulus must be a monotonic function of the
time resolution. By marking spike arrival times more accurately we can only
gain, and never lose, information. Thus a proper measure of information rate vs.
time resolution cannot show the behavior reported by Warzecha and Egelhaaf.
In the present volume they substitute the information theoretical analysis by
one in which they quantify the same diﬀerence (that is, between the SIRC and
a running window average count of the single trial spike train) by a standard
deviation. This standard deviation reaches a minimum for a window width ∆t
of about 50ms. This analysis, as their correlation function analysis, is based on
a consideration of second order statistics, and is therefore subject to the same

14

shortcomings discussed before.

Both these approaches suﬀer from the same fundamental problem: Warz-
echa and Egelhaaf do not quantify the relation between the neural response and
the stimulus, but instead between spike counts and the SIRC. Implicitly, then,
they postulate that the stimulus is encoded exclusively in the time dependent
ﬁring rate, or the SIRC as they prefer to call it, and further that all information
about the local rate can be “read out” by counting spikes.3 As in the analysis
of crosstrial correlation functions, this ignores by construction the possibility
that temporal patterns of spikes may play a special role in the code, and their
reasoning is therefore circular. For many investigators this issue of whether pat-
terns are important is the question about the structure of the neural code, and
in the case of H1 it is now more than a decade since de Ruyter van Steveninck
and Bialek (1988) reported that patterns with short interspike intervals carry a
considerable excess of information about the stimulus (see also Rieke et al. 1997
and Brenner et al. in press). The approach taken by de Ruyter van Steveninck
et al. (1997) and by Strong et al. (1998) describes the neural response at ﬁne
time resolution as a binary string, marking the presence or absence of spikes in
each small time bin, and hence all patterns of spikes are included automatically.
This is the approach that we will use below for the analysis of the outdoor
experiment.

In principle, the methods used by de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. (1997)
and by Strong et al. (1998) are independent of any model for the structure of
the neural code: we do not need to assume that we know which features of the
neural response are relevant, nor do we need to assume which features of the
stimulus are most important for the neuron. A number of results on information
transmission by H1 have been obtained with a less direct method, in which we
use the spike train to reconstruct the stimulus and then measure the mutual in-
formation between the stimulus and the reconstruction (Bialek et al. 1991, Haag
and Borst 1997, 1998). Warzecha and Egelhaaf emphasize that errors in the re-
construction result only in part from noise, and they claim that one therefore
cannot conclude anything about the reliability of neurons from the quality of
reconstructions (Warzecha and Egelhaaf 1997; see also their contribution to this
volume). The thrust of their argument is that there need be no conﬂict between
their claim of imprecision in the coding of behaviourally relevant stimuli and
previous work demonstrating precise reconstruction of the velocity waveforms,
because the reconstruction doesn’t really measure the precision of the neural
system. But this discussion ignores the fact that the reconstruction method pro-
vides a lower bound on the performance of the neuron (Rieke et al. 1997, Borst
and Theunissen 1999). Thus it is possible that reconstruction experiments un-
derestimate the precision of neural coding and computation, but properly done
the reconstruction method cannot overestimate neural performance.

3Even if the changing stimulus serves only to modulate the spike rate, it might be that
diﬀerent rates can be distinguished more easily because, for example, the shape of the inter-
spike interval distributon changes as function of rate. This is known to occur in many cells.
Mathematically, counting spikes is the optimal way of recovering rate information only if the
spike train is a modulated Poisson process.

15

Since the reconstruction procedure is a bound on performance and not a di-
rect measurement, it is reasonable to ask how tight this bound will be. Warzecha
and Egelhaaf state that the reconstruction of velocity signals would underesti-
mate the performance of the neuron if the cell is sensitive to derivatives of the
velocity; speciﬁcally they claim that the coherence between the stimulus and
reconstruction would be reduced if the neuron were sensitive to derivatives. In
fact, the particular reconstruction procedure of Bialek et al. (1991) is invariant
to linear transformations of the signal such as diﬀerentiation and integration,
and the computation of coherence always is invariant to these transformations
(Lighthill, 1958). Is there any independent way to assess the eﬃcacy of the re-
construction method? One approach is to try diﬀerent reconstruction algorithms
(Warland et al. 1997). Another is to check for consistency among diﬀerent mea-
sures of coherence (Haag and Borst 1997). Finally, we can compare the noise
levels in the reconstructions with the noise levels that would be generated by
an ideal observer who is limited only by noise in the photoreceptors. In the
high frequency limit (of order 30 Hz), where the ideal observer’s performance
can be calculated from photoreceptor measurements, the ideal observer does not
perform substantially better than the reconstruction (Bialek et al. 1991), which
demonstrates that H1’s response approaches ideal observer performance. This
can only be true if the ﬂy’s visual brain makes eﬃcient use of the information
present in the array of photoreceptors, and does not add a substantial amount
of noise to the computation of motion. This ﬁnding is conﬁrmed by measure-
ments of neural performance that do not depend on reconstructions (de Ruyter
van Steveninck and Bialek, 1995). Of course, the accuracy and eﬃciency of
the reconstructions also imply the functional correctness of the reconstruction
algorithm. Criticism of the reconstruction algorithm itself cannot invalidate the
demonstration of accurate reconstructions.

4 Information transmission with natural stimuli

In the following we use methods described in detail by Strong et al. (1998) to
quantify information transmission in our natural motion experiment. Brieﬂy,
we analyse the statistics of ﬁring patterns that H1 produces in response to the
stimulus used in our experiment, and consider segments of the spike train with
length T divided in a number of bins of width ∆t, where ∆t will range from
very small (order of a millisecond) up to ∆t = T . Each such bin may hold a
number of spikes, and within a bin no distinction is made on where the spikes
appear. However, two windows of length T that have diﬀerent combinations
of ﬁlled bins are considered to be diﬀerent ﬁring patterns, and are therefore
distinct. From an experiment in which we repeat a reasonably long natural
stimulus a number of times (here 200 repetitions of a 5 seconds long sequence)
we get a large number of these ﬁring patterns, and from that set we compute
two entropies:

1. The total entropy, which characterizes the probability distribution of all
spike ﬁring patterns of length T that consist of n adjacent bins each ∆t

16

wide (that is, T = n∆t). This entropy measures the richness of the ‘vo-
cabulary’ used by H1 under these experimental conditions, hence the time
of occurrence of the pattern within the experiment is irrelevant.

2. The noise entropy, which gives us an estimate of how variable the response
to identical stimuli can be. We ﬁrst accumulate, for each point in time in
the stimulus sequence, the distribution across all trials of ﬁring patterns
that begin at that point. The entropy of this distribution measures the
(ir)reproducibility of the response at each instant. Calculating this for
each point in time and averaging all these values we obtain the average
noise entropy.

The information contained in ﬁring patterns of length T and resolution ∆t is the
total entropy minus the average noise entropy (Shannon 1948). One interesting
measure is to estimate this information as we let T become very long, and
∆t very short. This limit is the average rate of information transmission, as
discussed by Strong et al.
(1998). Here, instead, we will just calculate the
information transmitted in constant time windows, T = 30 ms, as a function of
∆t. We choose T = 30 ms because that amounts to the delay time with which
a chasing ﬂy follows turns of a leading ﬂy during a chase (Land and Collett,
1974); the end result, namely the dependence of information transmission on
∆t, does not depend critically on the choice of T .

The data in Fig. 4a show that the information contained in a 30 ms window
depends strongly on ∆t, increasing from about 2 bits to about 5 bits when the
resolution increases from ∆t = 30 ms to ∆t = 1 ms. Although in the limit of
arbitrarily ﬁne time resolution (∆t → 0), the information must reach a ﬁnite
limit, we see no evidence for a plateau at ∆t = 1 ms. For shorter time windows
(T = 12 ms) we ﬁnd that the information keeps on increasing up to ∆t =
0.25 ms. This lack of a clear plateau makes sense: the motion stimuli themselves
have a distribution of temporal features so it is not surprising that there is not a
sharply deﬁned single timescale in the response. We also note that, as in earlier
work with less natural stimuli (Strong et al. 1998), the information rate is a bit
more than half the total entropy, even at millisecond resolution (see Fig. 4b),
so the neuron utilizes a signiﬁcant fraction of its coding capacity even on this
ﬁne time scale.

The question of whether spike timing is important in the neural code has
been debated for decades, and our present experiment addresses the importance
of millisecond resolution in information transmission by a single cell. Ultimately
one would like to connect the responses of neurons to animal behaviour. Thus,
one way to demonstrate the importance of spike timing would be to search
for experimental conditions in which the timing of just a few spikes would be
correlated with a behavioral decision, in the spirit of the work by Newsome
and colleagues (Newsome et al. 1995). Another approach is to look for other
neurons that can “read” the temporal structure, for example along the lines of
recent work from Usrey et al. (1998). Here we focus on the response of a single
neuron, and ask if the precise timing of spikes carries information under natural
stimulus conditions. The answer is yes.

17

5 Responses to static and dynamic stimuli

The measured precision of responses in H1 to dynamic stimuli seems to suggest
that the behavior of the ﬂy visual system might be very diﬀerent from other sys-
tems, especially the mammalian cortex. Neurons in visual cortex, for example,
commonly show a large variance in the responses across repeated presentations
of the same visual stimulus (Tolhurst et al. 1983). To quantify this observa-
tion several groups have studied the variance in the number of spikes that are
counted in a window of ﬁxed size, and then manipulated the stimulus condi-
tions to ﬁnd the relation between the variance of the response and its mean.
Typically, the variance in spike count is found to be close to or somewhat larger
than the mean over a wide range of conditions; there is a tendency for the ratio
variance/mean (the Fano factor) to be larger in larger time windows.

More recently several groups are investigating to what extent accurate spike
timing, such as observed in H1, can be consistent with the variability of neu-
ral responses observed in cortex. Almost all experiments on the variability of
responses in visual cortex had been done with static or slowly varying stimuli,
while all the work indicating precise responses and the importance of spike tim-
ing in H1 had been done using complex, dynamic inputs. Newsome and collab-
orators studied the responses of motion sensitive neurons in the monkey visual
cortical area MT using dynamic random dot stimuli, but their work focused
on the connection of neural responses to the monkeys perception of coherent
motion in the entire display (Newsome et al. 1995). Bair and Koch (1996)
reanalysed some of these data to show that when the monkey saw exactly the
same dynamic dot movies the neural response showed signiﬁcant modulations
on a time scale of 30 ms or less. Strong analysed the same data to show that the
spike train of a cortical neuron could provide information about the movie at a
rate of ∼ 2 bits/spike, comparable to the results in H1 (see note 19 in Strong et
al. 1998), and in unpublished analyses he found that the variance of the spike
count in windows of 30 ms or less could be signiﬁcantly less than the mean.

Mainen and Sejnowski (1995) found that they could produce irregular spike
trains in a slice of cortex if they injected constant current into a neuron: after
some time the cell ‘forgets’ the time at which the current was turned on and the
spikes drift relative to the stimulus. With dynamic currents, however, there can
be precise temporal locking of spikes to particular events in the input signal.
Berry et al. (1997) found that ganglion cells in the vertebrate retina—which
are known to generate irregular and highly variable spike trains in response to
static or slowly varying images—generate highly reproducible spike trains in
response to more dynamic movies. A hint in the same direction had been found
earlier by Miller and Mark (1992), who showed that primary auditory neurons
in the cat give less variable responses to complex speech stimuli than to pure
tones. Finally, de Ruyter van Steveninck et al. (1997) showed explicitly that
the low variance, reproducible response of H1 to dynamic stimuli coexists with
a much more variable response to constant velocity inputs: studying a range of
constant velocities that drove H1 to average ﬁring rates up to about 70 spikes
per second (which corresponds to the time average rate elicited by dynamic

18

stimuli in comparable stimulus conditions), mean counts and variances in 100
ms windows straddled the line at which variance is equal to mean, and fell well
within a cloud of points obtained from experiments in visual cortex.

Taken together, all of these diﬀerent results point to the conclusion that the
statistical structure of the neural response to static stimuli may be very diﬀerent
from that in response to dynamic or naturalistic stimuli. The crucial conclusion
is that we cannot extrapolate from the observation of highly variable responses
under one set of conditions to reach conclusions about the structure of the neu-
ral code under more natural conditions. This ﬁts very well with the ethological
perspective that we introduced at the beginning of this contribution, and in-
deed many of the analysis methods that we have discussed here were developed
to meet the challenges of quantifying the neural response to more naturalistic
stimuli. From a more mechanistic point of view there is now considerable inter-
est in understanding why neurons seem to respond so diﬀerently to static and
dynamic inputs (Schneidman et al. 1999, Jensen 1998).

Against this background it came as a surprise when Warzecha and Egelhaaf
(1999) claimed that the variance of H1’s response to constant velocity is no dif-
ferent from that in response to dynamic stimuli. It would appear that they have
done an experiment very similar to that described by de Ruyter van Steveninck
et al. (1997) but reached the opposite conclusion: while Warzecha and Egelhaaf
conﬁrm the highly reproducible, low variance response to dynamic stimuli, they
ﬁnd similarly reproducible responses to constant velocities. There are many
issues here, but we focus ﬁrst on the explicit disagreement regarding the vari-
ability of responses to constant velocity. Warzecha and Egelhaaf themselves
oﬀer several possible explanations for the discrepancy, but they do not draw
attention to the fact that the stimuli used in the two sets of experiments diﬀer
substantially; these diﬀerences exist along every stimulus dimension known to
aﬀect the response of H1—velocity, image contrast, spatial pattern, and size of
the visual ﬁeld. Further, in the crucial comparison of static to dynamic stimuli,
it is not clear what is being held constant in the Warzecha and Egelhaaf exper-
iments. In the dynamic experiments changes in spike rate are of course driven
by variations in angular velocity, but in their static experiments they hold the
velocity ﬁxed and vary the image size. At best these experiments show that H1
responds with diﬀerent statistics under diﬀerent conditions, but we still ﬁnd the
discrepancies disturbing.

In an attempt to resolve the issue, we have gone back over several years of
experiments to collect all the data which may be relevant to relation between
variance and mean in static experiments, we have done new experiments that
come close to the conditions of the Warzecha and Egelhaaf work, and we have
designed new stimuli that highlight the diﬀerences between static and dynamic
responses in a single experiment. In brief, studying 20 ﬂies under a wide variety
of static stimulus conditions, we ﬁnd a broad distribution of variances at each
value of the mean, but up to rates of about 100 spikes/s there is no overlap
with the results of Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1999). Further, when we match
the conditions of their experiments we cannot reproduce even the mean spike
counts, let alone the variances. For example, their Fig. 4A in this volume shows

19

a mean spike count of about 6.5 in 100 ms windows for a high contrast large
ﬁeld (91◦ × 7.5◦) pattern moving at about 36◦/s, and for the same experimental
conditions Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1999) report a mean count of about 4. These
values correspond to mean ﬁring rates of 65 and 40 spikes/s respectively. In 8
ﬂies tested under comparable conditions (contrast, velocity and stimulated area)
we never get rates below 120 spikes/s, consistent with the ﬁndings of Lenting
et al. (1984).

In Fig. 5 we show the response of H1 to a slowly varying velocity ramp, and
contrast this response to that obtained with dynamic velocities. Computing the
mean spike counts in 100 ms windows across 50 trials, we see that the static and
dynamic stimuli give the same range of mean responses, yet when we compute
the variances there are huge diﬀerences that are obvious to the eye. The count
variance during quasistatic stimulation peaks for mean counts that are about
equal to the average count during dynamic stimulation (that is, in the two places
where the dashed line in Fig. 5b intersects the smooth curve). This is not just
a coincidence of our choice of standard deviation of the dynamic stimulus; it
turns out that the ﬂy’s visual system adapts such that the mean ﬁring rate
during dynamic stimulation is rather insensitive to the standard deviation of
the dynamic stimulus (Brenner et al., submitted). For higher values of the
mean count the variance decreases strongly, due to the eﬀects of refractoriness
(Hagiwara, 1954). So H1 has relatively low count variance both for low and high
rates, but its count variance is high for intermediate rates. Loosely, one may
think of the dynamic stimulus as switching the cell rapidly back and forth from
a state of low rate and low variance to a state of high rate and low variance. By
switching fast, the cell eﬀectively bypasses the intermediate condition of high
variance, so that its count variance for dynamic stimuli always remains low, as
can be seen directly from Fig. 5c. Thus, if we match windows with the same
mean count, up to a count of about 10 for 100 ms windows, we ﬁnd that H1’s
count variance is lower in response to dynamic than to static stimuli, which
was precisely the point of the original work by de Ruyter van Steveninck et al.
(1997).

6 Conclusion

Most of what we know about the nervous system has been learned in experiments
that do not even approach the natural conditions under which animals normally
operate. Much of our recent work, and the core of the debate between our groups
and Warzecha and Egelhaaf, concerns the structure of the neural code under
natural conditions. We emphasize that this is not an easy problem, and by no
means are the issues speciﬁc to ﬂies or even the visual system; in many diﬀerent
sensory and motor systems we would like to design and analyse experiments on
the coding and processing of more natural signals.

Our approach has been to break this large question into (hopefully) man-
ageable pieces, and then to use information theory as a framework to pose these
questions in a form such that suitable experiments should yield precise quan-

20

titative answers. In particular, we endeavour to make statements that do not
depend on multiple prior assumptions, and to develop methods which can be
used in analyzing many diﬀerent kinds of experiments. Thus, we have used
stimulus reconstruction techniques to give lower bounds on the performance of
ﬂy motion sensitive neurons, and we have been able to measure the average in-
formation carried by single spikes, patterns of spikes, and continuous segments
of the spike train, all without assumptions regarding the “important” features of
the stimulus or neural response. Many of the results obtained in this way point
clearly toward a picture of the ﬂy’s visual system as close to optimal in extract-
ing motion information from the photoreceptor cell array, and then encoding this
signal eﬃciently in the timing of action potentials of motion sensitive neurons.
In contrast to the view developed over the past decade, the recent papers from
Egelhaaf and coworkers, including their contribution to this volume, make the
explicit claim that the system is very noisy and that meaningful information is
contained only in averages over time windows containing many spikes. In many
cases these claims are introduced with plausible qualitative arguments. As em-
phasized long ago by Bullock (1970), however, the challenge is to quantify the
degree of noisiness or precision in the nervous system, and there is a danger that
a neuron may appear noisy because we have an incomplete understanding of its
function. Thus we have grown skeptical about qualitative or even semiquanti-
tative arguments for the imprecision of neural responses. The interpretation of
correlation functions, discussed above, provides a good example: Although there
may be an obvious “correlation time” in one correlation function, the hint that
other time scales are relevant is hidden in the cusp of the correlation function at
short times. More detailed analysis shows that the relations among correlation
functions are consistent with temporal precision on scales a factor of 30 smaller
than the nominal correlation time. Further, this measure of temporal precision
is consistent with the results of a rigorous information theoretic analysis.

Because this paper is intended (by the editors) as a response to the contri-
bution of Warzecha and Egelhaaf, we have tried to understand how they have
reached conclusions so nearly opposite from our own. As emphasized at the out-
set, there are two diﬀerent questions. First there is the problem of constructing
an approximately natural stimulus, and then there is the problem of analyzing
the response to such a complex signal. Although there is a whole generation of
quantitative observations on insect ﬂight trajectories, Warzecha and Egelhaaf
present as the stimulus they analyse a signal that is substantially impoverished
both in amplitude and in frequency content, as is clear from Fig. 1. Further,
their visual stimulus is very dim compared to daytime natural conditions, and
has a visible area much smaller than what is experienced by a free ﬂying an-
imal. They repeatedly stress that motion induced responses depend on many
stimulus variables in addition to velocity, but never discuss critically the ex-
trapolation from their experiments to natural behaviour, in spite of the large
diﬀerences in many of the crucial variables. Similarly, although there is now a
decade of papers concerning the quantitative information theoretic analyses of
neural spike trains, and of the cell H1 in particular, Warzecha and Egelhaaf do
not present their results on information transmission in absolute units (bits);

21

closer examination suggests that there are more basic mathematical problems
in their approach, as outlined above.

In this paper we have presented the results from a new experiment (Lewen et
al. in preparation) which brings us much closer to the natural conditions of ﬂy
vision. Visual inspection of the responses of H1 under these conditions indicates
that individual spikes are reproducible on a millisecond time scale, and aspects
of temporal pattern in the spike train can be reproducible on a substantially
submillisecond time scale. This impression is borne out by the quantitative
demonstration that the spike train conveys information with nearly constant
eﬃciency down to millisecond time resolution; indeed, the information provided
by the spike train shows no sign of saturation as we approach millisecond res-
olution. These responses to natural stimuli thus are even more precise than
suggested by our earlier work.

In the early 1960’s Reichardt and his coworkers started working on ﬂies,
with a special emphasis on motion detection (Reichardt, 1961). One of their
motivations was that motion detection in ﬂies represents a good compromise
between a reasonable complexity of information processing properties and an
amenability to quantitative analysis (Reichardt and Poggio 1976). Over the
years this intuition has proved to be very fruitful, and the ﬂy has turned out to
be a system in which many issues could be studied, often with unprecedented
quantitative detail. In particular, the ﬂy’s motion sensitive neurons have been
an important testing ground for ideas about the neural code, especially in the
ongoing eﬀort to characterize the coding of more natural stimuli. Approached
with proper mathematical tools, the ﬂy visual system can continue to provide
answers to many fundamental and quantitative questions in real time neural
information processing.

References

Bialek W, Rieke F, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Warland, D (1991) Reading

a neural code. Science 252:1854–1857

Bair W, Koch C (1996) Temporal precision of spike trains in extrastriate cortex

of the behaving Macaque monkey. Neural Comp 8:1185–1202

Berry MJ, Warland DK, Meister M (1997) The structure and precision of

retinal spike trains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:5411–5416

Borst A, Egelhaaf M (1987) Temporal modulation of luminance adapts time

constant of ﬂy movement detectors. Biol Cybern 56:209–215

Borst A, Theunissen, FE (1999) Information theory and neural coding. Nature

Neurosci 2:947–957

Brenner N, Strong SP, Koberle R, Bialek W, de Ruyter van Steveninck R

Synergy in a neural code. Neural Comp, in press.

22

Brenner N, Bialek W, de Ruyter van Steveninck R Adaptive rescaling maxi-

mizes information transmission. Submitted.

Bullock TH (1970) The reliability of neurons. J Gen Physiol 55:565–584

Cover T, Thomas J (1991) Elements of Information Theory. Wiley, New York

Dethier VG (1976) The hungry ﬂy. A physiological study of the behavior asso-

ciated with feeding. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA

Egelhaaf M, Warzecha A-K (1999) Encoding of motion in real time by the ﬂy

visual system. Curr Opinion in Neurobiol 9:454–460

Field D (1987) Relations between the statistics of natural images and the

response properties of cortical cells. J Opt Soc Am A 4:2379–2394

Gauck V, Borst A (1999) Spatial response properties of contralateral inhibited
lobula plate tangential cells in the ﬂy visual system. J Comp Neurol
406:51–71

Haag J, Borst A (1997) Encoding of visual motion information and reliability

in spiking and graded potential neurons. J Neurosci 17:4809–4819

Haag J, Borst A (1998) Active membrane characteristics and signal encoding

in graded potential neurons. J Neurosci 18:7972-7986

Hagiwara S (1954) Analysis of interval ﬂuctuations of the sensory nerve im-

pulse. Jpn J Physiol 4, 234–240.

van Hateren JH, Schilstra C (1999) Blowﬂy ﬂight and optic ﬂow II. Head

movements during ﬂight. J Exp Biol 202:1491–1500

Hecht S, Shlaer S, Pirenne MH(1942) Energy, quanta and vision. J Gen Physiol

25:819–840

Jensen, RV (1998) Synchronization of randomly driven nonlinear oscillators.

Phys. Rev. E 58:6907–6910

Land MF (1981) Optics and vision in invertebrates. In: Autrum H (ed) Hand-
book of Sensory Physiology VIII/6b. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York, pp 472–592

Land MF, Collett TS (1974) Chasing behavior of houseﬂies (Fannia canicu-

laris). A description and analysis. J Comp Physiol 89:331–357

Lenting, BPM, Mastebroek HAK, and Zaagman WH (1984) Saturation in a
wide–ﬁeld, directionally selective movement detection system in ﬂy vision.
Vision Res 24:1341–1347

Lewen GD, Bialek W, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR Neural coding of natural

stimulus ensembles. In preparation.

23

Lighthill, MJ (1958) An introduction to Fourier analysis and generalised func-

tions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK

MacKay D, McCulloch WS (1952) The limiting information capacity of a neu-

ronal link. Bull Math Biophys 14:127–135

Maddess T, Laughlin SB (1985) Adaptation of the motion-sensitive neuron H1
is generated locally and governed by contrast frequency. Proc R Soc Lond
B 225:251–275

Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ (1995) Reliability of spike timing in neocortical neu-

rons. Science 268: 1503–1506

Miller MI, Mark KE (1992). A statistical study of cochlear nerve discharge
patterns in response to complex speech stimuli, J Acoust Soc Am 92:202-
209.

Newsome WT, Shadlen MN, Zohary E, Britten KH, Movshon JA (1995) Visual
In:
motion: Linking neuronal activity to psychophysical performance.
Gazzaniga M (ed) The Cognitive Neurosciences. MIT Press, Cambridge
MA pp 401–414

Reichardt, W (1961) Autocorrelation, a principle for the evaluation of sen-
sory information by the central nervous system.
In: Rosenblith WA
(ed)Principles of sensory communication. Wiley, New York, NY, pp 303–
317

Reichardt W, Poggio T (1976) Visual control of orientation behavior in the ﬂy.

Part I: A quantitative analysis. Q Rev Biophys 9:311–375

Rieke F, Warland D, Bialek W (1993) Coding eﬃciency and information rates

in sensory neurons. Europhys Lett 22:151–156

Rieke F, Warland D, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Bialek W (1997) Spikes:

Exploring the neural code. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA

Ruderman DL, Bialek W (1994) Statistics of natural images: Scaling in the

woods. Phys Rev Lett 73:814–817

de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Zaagman WH, Mastebroek HAK (1986) Adap-
tation of transient responses of a movement sensitive neuron in the visual
system of the blowﬂy Calliphora erythrocephala. Biol Cybern 54:223–236

de Ruyter van Steveninck R, Bialek W (1988) Real-time performance of a
movement sensitive neuron in the blowﬂy visual system.Proc R Soc Lond
B 234:379–414

de Ruyter van Steveninck R, Bialek W (1995) Reliability and statistical eﬃ-
ciency of a blowﬂy movement–sensitive neuron. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B
348:321–340

24

de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Bialek W, Potters M, Carlson RH, Lewen GD
(1996) Adaptive movement computation by the blowﬂy visual system. In:
Waltz DL (ed) Natural and Artiﬁcial Parallel Computation: Proceedings
of the Fifth NEC Research Symposium. SIAM, Philadelphia, pp 21–41

de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Lewen GD, Strong SP, Koberle R, Bialek W
(1997) Reproducibility and variability in neural spike trains. Science
275:1805–1808

Schilstra C, van Hateren JH (1998) Stabilizing gaze in ﬂying blowﬂies. Nature

395:654

Schneidman E, Freedman B, Segev I (1998) Ion channel stochasticity may be
critical in determining the reliability and precision of spike timing. Neural
Comp 10, 1679–1703

Shannon CE (1948) A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Techn

J 27:379–423 and 623–656

Srinivasan MV, Laughlin SB, Dubs A (1982) Predictive coding: A fresh view

of inhibition in the retina. Proc R Soc Lond B 216:427–459

Strong SP, Koberle R, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Bialek W (1998) Entropy

and information in neural spike trains. Phys Rev Lett 80:197–200

Tolhurst DJ, Movshon JA, Dean AF (1983) The statistical reliability of signals
in single neurons in cat and monkey visual cortex. Vision Res 23:775–785.

Usrey WM, Reppas JB, Reid RC (1998) Paired-spike interactions and synaptic

eﬃcacy of retinal inputs to the thalamus. Nature 395:384–387

Wagner H (1986a) Flight performance and visual control of ﬂight of the free-
ﬂying houseﬂy (Musca domestica L.). I. Organization of the ﬂight motor.
Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 312:527–551

Wagner H (1986b) Flight performance and visual control of ﬂight of the free-
ﬂying houseﬂy (Musca domestica L.). II Pursuit of targets. Phil Trans R
Soc Lond B 312:553–579

Wagner H (1986c) Flight performance and visual control of ﬂight of the free-
ﬂying houseﬂy (Musca domestica L.). III. Interactions between angular
movement induced by wide- and smallﬁeld stimuli. Phil Trans R Soc Lond
B 312:581–595

Warland DK, Reinagel P, Meister M (1997) Decoding visual information from

a population of retinal ganglion cells. J Neurophysiol 78:2336–2350

Warzecha A-K, Egelhaaf M (1997) How reliably does a neuron in the visual mo-
tion pathway of the ﬂy encode behaviourally relevant information? Europ
J Neurosci 9:1365–1374

25

Warzecha A-K, Egelhaaf M (1998) On the performance of biological movement
detectors and ideal velocity sensors in the context of optomotor course
stabilization. Visual Neurosci 15:113–122

Warzecha A-K, Kretzberg J, Egelhaaf M (1998) Temporal precision of the
encoding of motion information by visual interneurons. Curr Biol 8:359–
368

Warzecha A-K, Egelhaaf M (1999) Variability in spike trains during constant

and dynamic stimulation. Science 283:1927–1930

Wehrhahn C (1979) Sex-speciﬁc diﬀerences in the chasing behavior of houseﬂies

(Musca). Biol Cybern 32:239–241

Wehrhahn C, Poggio T, Bulthoﬀ H (1982) Tracking and chasing in houseﬂies

(Musca). An analysis of 3-D ﬂight trajectories. Biol Cybern 45:123–130

26

Figure Captions

Figure 1. Comparison of the rotational velocity traces reported from free ﬂying
and tethered ﬂies. a: Rotation velocity of a ﬂy (Fannia canicularis) in free ﬂight,
derived from video recordings by Land and Collett (1974). b: Rotation velocity
of a pattern in a ﬂight simulator, derived from torque signals measured from a
tethered ﬂy, as reported by Warzecha and Egelhaaf (1997). c: The data from a
and b plotted on the same scale.

Figure 2. Direct observations of H1 spike timing statistics in response to
rotational motion derived from Land and Collett’s (1974) free ﬂight data (see
Fig. 1a). a: A 500 ms segment of the motion trace. b: Top: raster plot with 25
traces representing spike occurrences measured from H1. Bottom: raster plot of
25 traces of spike occurrences from the same cell, but in response to a velocity
trace that was the negative of the one shown in a. For ease of reference we
call these traces H1+ and H1− respectively. c: Raster plot of 25 samples of
the occurrence time of the ﬁrst spike ﬁred by H1− after time t = 2080 ms in
the stimulus sequence (indicated by the dashed line connecting the axis of b to
panel c). d: Raster plots of 25 samples of the interval from the spike shown in
c to the ﬁrst (ﬁlled circles), second (open circles), third (ﬁlled triangles), and
fourth (open triangles) spike following the spike shown in c. Note the time axes:
The rasters in c and d are plotted at much higher time resolution than those in
b. e: Probability density for the timing of the spike shown in c. The spread is
characterized by σ = 0.73 ms, where σ is deﬁned as half the width of the peak
containing the central 68.3% of the total probability. If the distribution were
Gaussian, then this would be equivalent to the standard deviation. Here we
prefer this deﬁnition instead of one based on computing second moments. The
motivation is that there can be an occasional extra spike, or a skipped spike,
giving a large outlier which has a disproportionate eﬀect on the width if it is
calculated from the second moment. Filled squares represent the experimental
histogram, based on 200 observations, while the solid line is a Gaussian ﬁt. f:
Probability densities for the same interspike interval shown in d. The deﬁnition
of σ is the same as the one in e.

Figure 3. Correlation functions for H1 during stimulation with natural mo-
tion, all computed at 0.2 ms resolution. a: The spike–spike autocorrelation
Φspike−spike(t), normalized as a conditional rate. There are strong oscillations in
the conditional rate, due to neural refractoriness. b: The cross-trial correlation
function Φcrosstrial(t), computed as the correlation function of the estimated
time dependent rate minus a contribution from Φspike−spike(t) scaled by 1/N
(N is the number of trials) to correct for intratrial correlations. c: Autocorre-
lation of the assumed underlying distribution of spike jitter times, computed by
deconvolving the data in b by those in a. See text for further explanation.

Figure 4. Information and coding eﬃciency in ﬁring patterns for naturalistic
motion stimuli (see legend for Fig. 2). a: Total entropy, noise entropy and infor-

27

mation in an observation window of T = 30 ms, as a function of time resolution,
∆t. From the trends observed in partitioning the ﬁnite dataset we estimate
ﬁrst and second order extrapolations to the entropies for an inﬁnite dataset.
Filled symbols are ﬁrst order, open symbols are second order extrapolations.
The deviation between ﬁrst and second order extrapolations is small, indicating
that systematic errors in the entropy estimates are small (for details see Strong
et al. 1998). Statistical errors were estimated from the spread in the diﬀer-
ent partitions of the original dataset. These errors are smaller than the size of
the symbols. b: Coding eﬃcieny (information divided by total entropy) as a
function of ∆t.

Figure 5. Mean count and variance compared for quasistatic and dynamic
velocity stimuli. a: Stimulus. for the ﬁrst 48 s the velocity is slowly ramped up
and down. From 50 to 72 seconds the stimulus is dynamic with a standard devi-
ation of 100◦/s, and a cutoﬀ frequency of 250 Hz. Note that the vertical scales
(left for the quasitationary and right for the dynamic stimulus) are diﬀerent.
The peak at 50 s is a reset phase in which the pattern is moved at maximum
speed so as to bring the stimulus pattern into exact register on every trial. b:
Trial average spike count in 100 ms windows, as a function of time. The dashed
line represents the time averaged count in response to the dynamic stimulus. c:
Spike count variance in 100 ms windows, as a function of time.

28

a

b

c

2000

0

-2000

50

0

-50

-100

2000

0

-2000

)
s
/

°

l

(
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
 
r
a
u
g
n
a

l

0.0

0.5

1.0

time (s)

1.5

2.0

de Ruyter et al. FIG 1

)
s
°/
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v

l

2000

1000

0

-1000

-2000

H1+

H1-

a

b

1700

1800

1900

2000
2000

2100

2200

time (ms)

c

e

H1-

2000

1000

σ=0.73 ms

d

f

2000

1000

σ=0.18 ms

σ=0.46 msσ=0.77 msσ=0.84 ms

0
2085

2090

0

0

5

10

15

location of spike 0 (ms)

interval from spike 0 (ms)

)
s
/
1
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
.
b
o
r
p

de Ruyter et al. FIG 2.

a

b

c

5000

4900

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

400

300

200

100

0

150

100

50

0

)
s
/

1
(
 

e

t

a
r
 
l

a
n
o

i
t
i

d
n
o
c

)
s
/

1
(
 

e

t

a
r
 
l

a
n
o

i
t
i

d
n
o
c

)
s
/

1
(
 

n
o

i
t

l

a
e
r
r
o
c
o
t
u
a
 
r
e
t
t
i
j

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

time (ms)

de Ruyter et al. FIG 3.

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

e

 

i

g
n
d
o
c

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

10

)
s
t
i
b
(
 
y
p
o
r
t
n
e

8

6

4

2

0

T = 30 ms

T = 30 ms

total entropy, 1st order
total entropy, 2nd order
noise entropy, 1st order
noise entropy, 2nd order
information, 1st order
information, 2nd order

b

a

1

10

time resolution (ms)

de Ruyter et al. Fig. 4

)
s
°/
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v

l

a
400

200

0

-200

-400

b

c

20

10

0

-10

-20

20

10

0

6

4

2

0

)

s
/
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v

l

 

s
m
0
0
1

 

n

i
 
t

n
u
o
c
 

n
a
e
m

 

s
m
0
0
1

 

n

i
 

e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v
 
t

n
u
o
c

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

time (s)

de Ruyter et al. FIG 5

