0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optimal Mutation Rates in Dynamic Environments

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chalmers University of Technology and G¨oteborg University, S-412 96 G¨oteborg, Sweden

Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 USA

Martin Nilsson

martin@fy.chalmers.se

Nigel Snoad

Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 USA
The Australian National University, ACT 0200, Australia nigel@santafe.edu

(February 2, 2008)

In this paper we study the evolution of the mutation rate
for simple organisms in dynamic environments. A model with
multiple ﬁtness coding loci tracking a moving ﬁtness peak is
developed and an analytical expression for the optimal muta-
tion rate is derived. Surprisingly it turns out that the opti-
mal mutation rate per genome is approximately independent
of genome length, something that also has been observed in
nature. Simulations conﬁrm the theoretical predictions. We
also suggest an explanation for the diﬀerence in mutation fre-
quency between RNA and DNA based organisms.

I. INTRODUCTION

In any given environment the vast majority of muta-
tions that have any eﬀect on the ﬁtness of a biological
organism are deleterious. One might expect the damag-
ing eﬀect of non-zero mutation rates to imply that when
under evolutionary control the lowest mutation rate com-
patible with physiological constraints should be selected
for. However, when examined experimentally bacteria
and viruses (and indeed all organisms) have signiﬁcant
non-zero rate, the magnitude and diversity of which have
failed to ﬁnd satisfactory theoretical explanation. Some
results from a number of experiments measuring the mu-
tation rates of a selection of small DNA-based organisms
are shown in Table I.

Organism
Bacteriophage M 13
Bacteriophage l
Bacteriophage T 2 & T 4
E. coli
S. cerevisiae
N. crassa

ν

6.4 · 103
4.9 · 104
1.7 · 105
4.6 · 106
1.2 · 107
4.2 · 107

µb

7.2 · 10−7
7.7 · 10−8
2.4 · 10−8
4.1 · 10−10
2.2 · 10−10
7.2 · 10−11

µG

0.0046
0.0038
0.0040
0.0025
0.0027
0.0030

TABLE I. Spontaneous mutation rates (per base µb and
per genome µG) in DNA-based microbes with diﬀerent
genome lengths ν. (Data reproduced from Drake et al. [1])

Despite the huge variation in genome length over four
orders of magnitude the mutation rate per genome and
replication µG remains constant roughly within a fac-
tor of roughly 2 (which is at the same level as the esti-
mated accuracy of the ﬁgures). As pointed out by Drake
and others [1,2] this constancy in µG is surprising since
DNA/RNA repair and transcription are primarily local
processes that act on individual bases. Thus the data
strongly suggest that point mutation rates for the diﬀer-
ent organisms have evolved towards individual optimal
values that result in almost constant genomic copying
ﬁdelity.

In this paper we develop a model of the evolution of
mutation rates based on changing environments. The
evolved point mutation rate of this model scales so that
the genomic copying ﬁdelity is approximately indepen-
dent of genome length and insensitive to other parame-
ters in the model. The evolved mutation rates are also of
the same magnitude as observed in Table I for biologically
plausible parameter settings. We also suggest a possible
explanation for the high mutation rates of RNA viruses.
Simulations conﬁrm the predictions of the model.

II. EVOLVING MUTATION RATES

It is impossible to perfectly maintain and copy genetic
information. All molecules, including DNA and RNA are
thermodynamically unstable, and their physical struc-
ture and hence the information they encode changes over
time. In addition the binding sites of enzymes such as
DNA polymerase are not perfectly speciﬁc and errors will
be introduced during replication. Lowering the error rate
requires the use of increasingly complex proof-reading
and repair mechanisms, all of which ultimately impose
an energetic, and hence ﬁtness, cost on the organism. We
can expect a balance to develop between the pressure to
lower mutation rates due to the ﬁtness cost of deleterious
mutants and the physiological cost of high copying accu-
racy [3–5]. Such a balance certainly provides an ultimate
lower limit to the mutation rate of all organisms but ex-
plaining the concstancy in genomic copying ﬁdelity using
such arguments causes unnatural assumptions on the re-
lation between cost of local copying ﬁdelity and genome

1

length. There is also little experimental evidence that
mutation rates are actually determined by such a bal-
ance.

When viewed as a whole the genome encodes not only
proteins that directly inﬂuence its reproductive or sur-
vival ability, but also the copying ﬁdelity with which the
genome reproduces. For example some viroids contain
genes that are translated into surface coat proteins while
others genes code for the replicase enzymes that perform
the copying of its genetic material. In more complex or-
ganisms additional genes may encode for modiﬁers of the
accuracy of copy and repair enzymes, usually increas-
ing mutation rates [6–9], but sometimes resulting in a
decrease [10]. These modiﬁers can have large or small ef-
fects on mutation rate and aﬀect individual bases or the
entire genome [11–13].

One consequence of this ﬂexibility of mutation rates
and their encoding is that if there are random changes
(mutations) in genes determining the mutation rate then
the copying ﬁdelity will itself undergo Darwinian evolu-
tion.

III. POPULATION GENETICS IN CHANGING

ENVIRONMENTS

When comparing two haploid genomes, the one with
lower mutation frequency will produce oﬀspring that are
on average more closely related to itself. This means that
for an asexual haploid replicator evolving on a static ﬁt-
ness landscape the optimal mutation rate for a sequence
whose ﬁtness is already globally maximal is zero. If the
ﬁtness peak moves, however, the situation changes: to
avoid extinction a genome with an initially superior ﬁt-
ness is forced to accept a non-zero mutation rate to sur-
vive. This leads to a non-trivial optimal copying ﬁdelity.
Kimura formalized the evolutionary eﬀect of a chang-
ing environment by considering the genetic load of a pop-
ulation [3]: the proportion by which the population ﬁt-
ness is decreased in comparison with an optimum geno-
type. Genetic load results from a number of competing
factors; most notably the mutational load due to the dele-
terious eﬀects of most mutations and the segregational
load due to the temporary reduction in ﬁtness that occurs
whenever the selective environment changes. Assuming
that a population minimizes the genetic load, the opti-
mal mutation rate can be calculated. Using a descrete
time model, i.e. a model where there is no overlap be-
tween generations, with one ﬁtness determining locus the
optimal mutation rate becomes:

µopt =

1
τ

(1)

where τ is the number of generations between environ-
mental changes. This model only considers the eﬀect of
mutations on the population and is therefore based on
group selection.

Later population genetic models that examined com-
petition between genetic modiﬁers of the mutation rate
demonstrated that (for haploids with a single ﬁtness de-
termining locus) a non-zero mutation rate comes to dom-
inate a population evolving in an oscillating environ-
ment [14–17]. These models are not built on group selec-
tion. However a general and simple to interpret multi-
locus modiﬁer model does not exist.

IV. THE MODEL

We will explore a more general model of the evolution
of mutation rates in a dynamic environment. Consider
a population of haploid genomes where a genome con-
sists of two separated parts, one coding for the ﬁtness
and one coding for the probability per base µ of an er-
ror occurring during copying. There is complete linkage
(no recombination) between the sections of the genome
that encode the mutation rate and those that determine
the ﬁtness. We also assume that the ﬁtness determining
region is of ﬁxed length ν. In general we are interested
in the fates of certain genomes gi which have a (possibly
time-dependent) ﬁtness advantage σ(t) over all other se-
quences. We call these genomes master-sequences. The
genomic copying ﬁdelity of the ﬁtness determining re-
gion of each strain gi is Qi = (1 − µi)ν , the index i refers
to the mutation rate of the strain, diﬀerent strains have
diﬀerent mutation rates but identical ﬁtness σ. We as-
sume that mutations do not aﬀect the copying ﬁdelity,
only the ﬁtness. Changes to the mutation rates occur
on a time-scale signiﬁcantly slower than the time it takes
for the population to reach equilibrium. During a period
when a speciﬁc sequence has superior ﬁtness compared to
the background (i.e. between environmental shifts) the
changes in the relative concentrations xi of the master-
sequences are described by the replicator equation

˙xi(t) = Qiσ(t)xi(t) − f (t)xi(t)

(2)

where f (t) = σ(t)Pj Qjxj (t) normalizes the relative
concentrations of the master-sequence strains. Mutations
from background sequences onto the strains with optimal
ﬁtness are ignored. Since we are only interested in com-
petition between master-sequences the background is not
explicitly expressed in these equations.
The environment changes as follows:

for a time t ∈
[0, τ1] one genotype has superior ﬁtness, followed by a
new gene-sequence for time t ∈ [τ1, τ1 + τ2], etc. The no-
tation is chosen so that τ denotes lengths of time inter-
valls. We assume that the initial concentration of the new
master-sequences xi immediately after the shift (at time
ta = Pm
i=1 τi + ǫ, where m denotes shifts of the ﬁtness-
peak and ǫ is am inﬁnitely small time-period) are propor-
tional to the concentrations of the old master-sequence
before the shift (at tb = Pm

i=1 τi − ǫ)

xi(ta) = h(µi)xi(tb)

(3)

2

It is reasonable to assume that h(µi) is a function with
Taylor-expansion in the mutation rate µ

V. SIMULATIONS

To conﬁrm the theoretical derivations we simulated
the evolution of replicators in continuous time on a mov-
ing single peaked landscape using a birth-death process.
Each time unit in the continuous time replicator equation
is the mean replacement time of the population and could
therefore be identiﬁed as a generation. In the simulation
each generation is devided into N time-steps (where N
is the population size). At each of these time-steps a
single individual is selected to copy and mutate. Individ-
uals are selected wita h probability proportional to their
relative ﬁtness, which is given by σ or 1 on the single-
peaked landscape. Thus a master-sequence of strain gi
(with mutation rate µi) is chosen with probability xiσ
hf i .
This copy replaces a randomly chosen individual in the
existing population which is then discarded. Thus the
population is replaced one by one in discrete birth-death
events. In the limit of large population size the dynamics
of this simulation approaches the continuous time repli-
cator equation.

The ﬁtness peak is changed every τ generations to one
of its nearest neighbors. For the binary genomes used
here it accomplished by ﬂipping a randomly chosen bit
in the deﬁnition of the ﬁtness peak.

The population was ﬁrst seeded with a diverse range of
mutation rates and the population was allowed to evolve
while these rates were kept ﬁxed. This is a true test
of µopt, since the fastest growing sequence should come
to dominate. In general the population converged to the
strain with mutation rate closest to the theoretically pre-
dicted µopt. Figure 1 shows the mean mutation rate of
the population ¯µ evolving down towards the theoretically
predicted optimum µopt ≈ 1
νστ = 0.00445. From about
generation 800 the variance in mutation rates in the pop-
ulation is larger than the ﬂuctuations in the mean and
the evolution of rates has eﬀectively ended.

Simulations were also made to study the eﬀects of more
rapidly changing mutator dynamics. In these simulations
errors in the copying process not only introduce changes
in the ﬁtness determining genotype, but also result in
oﬀspring with slightly diﬀerent mutation rates than their
parents, i.e. the mutation rate is allowed to evolve. The
mutation rate was treated as a continuous variable which
had Gaussian noise introduced during the copying pro-
cess.

h(µ) =

∞

X

j=km

αjµj

(4)

where km is a measure of the environmental change, i.e.
the number of point mutations needed to transform the
old superior sequence into the new. This basically means
that km is the Hamming distance from the old peak to
the new at shift m. The constants αj are combinatorial
factors. It will turn out that the optimal mutation rate
is independent of these factors.

To analyze the long term behavior of this system we

f (s)ds

make a change of variables yi(t) = eR t
xi(t). The
new system of diﬀerential equations is linear and the
equations are decoupled (due to the assumption that the
selective dynamics is signiﬁcantly faster than the changes
in mutation rate), it is therefore easy to ﬁnd the analyt-
ical solution:

0

yi(t) = yi(0)e

Qi R t

0

σm(s)ds

(5)

Since xi is propotional to yi, maximizing the growth
of yi and xi are equivalent. After a suitably long time
interval the population will be completely dominated by
genomes that have a mutation rate closest to the optimal
value µopt which maximizes the long term growth of the
strain

µ (cid:16)Πmh(µ)e(1−µ)ν hσimτm(cid:17)
max

(6)

where h·im denotes a time average during time-period
m. Setting the derivative of this expression to zero and
using Eq. 4 we ﬁnd the optimal copying ﬁdelity to be
approximately

µopt =

hki

νhσihτ i

(7)

where h·i denotes a time average over all time periods.
We also assume no correlation between hσim and τm.
Since the genome lengths is large ν ≫ 1, the optimal
copying ﬁdelity and mutation rate per genome become:

Qopt = e− hki
hki

hσihτ i

µG =

hσihτ i

(8)

(9)

Thus we ﬁnd that the genomic optimal copying ﬁdelity
is independent of the genome length for fairly general
types of environmental change in both the advantage of
the ﬁttest genotype σ(t) and the size of environmental
shifts h(µ).

3

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

0

100

200

300

500

400
600
Generations

700

800

900

1000

FIG. 1. Mean mutation rate evolving towards the optimal
rate of µopt = 0.00445. Error bars are one standard deviation
about the mean. σ = 5, τ = 2, ν = 25, N = 104

Fig. 2 shows the evolution of mutation rates in detail
in a population with a reasonably fast rate of change of
mutation rates. This simulation has the same landscape
parameters as Fig. 1. The mean mutation rate ﬂuctuates
around the optimum. For mutation rates close to the
optimum ﬂuctuations in selection are signiﬁcantly larger
than the selective advantages of one mutation rate over
another. In this region the evolution of mutation rates
is eﬀectively neutral and thus the mean mutation rate
conducts a random walk about the optimum. We also
note that the population typically spends more time with
mutation rates above the optimum than below. This is
mainly a ﬁnite population size eﬀect. When the peak
moves and the population size is limited there is a rela-
tively large probability that there will be no individuals
representing a master-sequence with very low mutation
rate on the new peak. This leads to a temporary increase
in mutation rate in the population after an environmental
shift.

FIG. 2. Evolution of mutation rates of mutationally diverse
population. µopt = 4.45×10−3 , σ = 5, τ = 2, ν = 25, N = 104

4

VI. BIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS

In nature the existence, and value, of an optimum mu-
tation rate that results from a changing environment de-
pends on many diﬀerent parameters: the time between
shifts in the selective environment, the complex struc-
ture of the ﬁtness-landscape, the genome length, co-
evolutionary eﬀects, the strength of selection, neutral-
ity in the ﬁtness landscape and ﬂuctuations due to ﬁnite
population sizes etc. One must therefore be careful when
comparing the results of a simple model, such as the one
we have presented in this paper, and biological measure-
ments. Nonetheless it is this range of possible diﬀerences
between organisms and the complexity of their evolution-
ary environments that leads us to consider the possibility
that simple laws of biology — such as the scaling of point
mutation rates with genome length — are likely to have
quite simple explanations that do not depend on the de-
tails of the particular organism.
It is therefore worth
comparing the results of the model presented in this pa-
per with the biological data.

)

(m
 
e

t

a
r
 

n
o

i
t

i

t

a
u
m
 
c
m
o
n
e
g

0.015

0.0125

0.01

s =2
=2

0.0075

s =5
=5

0.005

0.0025

=10
=10

50

100

150

200

FIG. 3. The shaded region shows the genomic mutation
rates for DNA based organisms listed in Table I. For low
average ﬁtness advantage σ the mutation rate is relatively
insensitive to the frequency of changes in the environment.
For clarity we have assumed hki = 1 in this ﬁgure.

For low mutation rates Eq. 9 is relatively insensitive
to changes in the average ﬁtness or size and frequency of
environmental changes, as shownin Fig. 3. This insen-
sitivity of the optimal genomic mutation rates to evolu-
tionary parameters is important, since the bacteria and
phages illustrated in table I are most unlikely to live in
environments with the same types of time-dynamics and
time-scales. In Fig. 3 we see that the sensitivity to one of
the parameters in the model, σ or τ , depends strongly on
in which region the other parameter is. For most realistiv
populations we may expect the selective advantage σ to
be weak, maybe on average less than 2. The predicted
mutation rate is then highly insensitive to the average
time between shifts in the ﬁtness landscape, e.g. σ = 2
gives τ ∈ [110, 200] for the organisms listed in Table I.
It is also reasonable to assume the ﬁtness landscapes of
the organisms listed in Table I to be more similar to each
other than to higher eukaryotes and since our predictions

m
t
s
as to Qopt are rather insensitive to the details of σ(t), τ
and h(µ) we would expect many organisms to have ap-
proximately the same mutation rate per genome (within
an order of magnitude). This is what we observe for sim-
ple DNA-based organisms.

VII. RNA VIRUSES

The lytic RNA viruses consistently show an extremely
high mutation rate — orders of magnitude larger than
that of any DNA viruses of similar size. This rate of
around one substitution per genome per generation is
inconsistent with the analysis conducted above for muta-
tion rates evolving in a changing selective environment.
Such high rates imply implausible values for the dynamic
environment parameters.

As an explanation for the high mutation rates ob-
served in many RNA viruses and the mutation rate scal-
ing with genome length it has been suggested that these
viruses have evolved the highest mutation rate possible
to be able to adapt to a rapidly changing environment.
The maximal mutation rate is then given by the error-
threshold, which was ﬁrst discussed in a model by Eigen
et al. [18]. It basically states that on a singled peaked
ﬁtness landscape an organism must have high enough
copying ﬁdelity so that its relative superiority in repro-
duction rate multiplied by the probability of reproduc-
ing onto a perfect copy of itself must be larger than one,
otherwise there will be no eﬀective selection for the geno-
type.
It has later been shown that the error-threshold
can rather easily be generalized to include eﬀects of a
dynamic environment [19]. From this argument it is how-
ever not clear why RNA viruses should evolve towards the
error-threshold while DNA based organism tend to have
much lower mutation rates (by orders of magnitude). In
this section we will combine the error-threshold with the
model presented in this paper to suggest a possible ex-
planation to the diﬀerence in observed mutation rates
between DNA and RNA based organisms.

The dynamic environment model presented in this pa-
per applies to organisms where the copying ﬁdelity is en-
coded in a part of the genome that has little or no eﬀect
on ﬁtness.
In many viruses this may not be appropri-
ate, partly because the proteins involved in mutagenesis
may have a multitude of functions but also because the
relatively high selective pressure towards short genome
lengths will result in the overlap and multiple use of ge-
netic material where possible. This give rise to a diﬀer-
ent possibility for the evolution of optimal mutation rates
and might help explain the large diﬀerences between the
observations for RNA and DNA based organisms.

We suggest that for organisms which have strong over-
laps between genes coding for the mutation rate and
genes coding more directly for reproductive advantage
there is no eﬀective selection for lower mutation rates, as
long as the mutation rate is below the error threshold.

This argument is based on the assumption that most
mutations are deleterious in terms of ﬁtness, and that
the relative ﬁtness advantage on the local peak results
in stronger selection pressure than the pressure towards
lower mutation rates. We also assume that evolution
of mutation rates usually aﬀect regions of the genome
where the organism need mutations to be able to adapt
ot changes in the environment. If these assumptions ap-
ply we expect a population to have mutation rates close
to the error-threshold. Changes to mutation rate is tran-
sient, assuming that the organism is not pushed beyond
the error-threshold.

For this hypotheses to apply, viruses with high mu-
tation rate (mainly RNA viruses) should have overlap-
ping genes regulating mutation frequency as well as re-
production rate, whereas organisms with low mutation
rates (such as those listed in Table I) should not have
overlapping reading frames in their genomes. There are
observations that support this, but it is unclear whether
the correlation is strong enough for this hypothesis to be
valid.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have studied the evolution of muta-
tion rates in a population of multi locus genomes. The
genomic mutation rate µG leading to the greatest long
term growth of a strain (the optimal rate) was analyti-
cally determined for reasonably general peak shifts and
time-dependent replication rates σ(t)

µG ≈

hki

hσihτ i

where hki is the mean Hamming distance between suc-
cessive ﬁtness optima and hτ i is the mean time between
shifts. These optimal rates were quantitatively conﬁrmed
by computational simulations of populations whose mu-
tation rates were allowed to evolve.

These continuous time multi-locus replicator models
predict the kind of scaling of point-mutation rate with
genome length that has been observed in some bac-
teria and viruses/phages and puzzled over for years.
When combined with the consequences of the multi-
ple use/pleiotropic encoding of copying machinery these
models of the evolution of mutation rate in dynamic en-
vironments also suggest why lytic RNA viruses may have
rates at or about the error-threshold.

We would like to thank Claes Andersson and Erik van
Nimwegen for useful discussions. Thanks are also due to
Mats Nordahl who has given valuable comments on the
manuscript. Nigel Snoad and Martin Nilsson were sup-
ported by SFI core funding grants. N.S. would also like to
acknowledge the support of Marc Feldman and the Cen-
ter for Computational Genetics and Biological Modeling
at Stanford University while preparing this manuscript.

5

[1] J.W. Drake, B. Charelsworth, D. Charlesworth, and
J.F. Crow. Rates of spontaneous mutation. Genetics,
148(4):1667–86, April 1998.

[2] J. Maynard Smith and E. Szathm´ary. The Major Tran-

sitions in Evolution. W.H. Freeman, Oxford, 1995.

[3] M Kimura. On the evolutionary adjustment of sponta-

neous mutation rates. Genet. Res., 9:23–24, 1967.

[4] E.G. Leigh. Natural selection and mutability. Amer.

Natur., 104:301–305, 1970.

[5] A.S. Kondrashov. Modiﬁers of mutation-selection bal-
ance: general-approach and the evolution of mutation-
rates. Genet. Res., 66:53–69, 1995.

[6] E.C. Cox and T.C. Gibson. Selection for high mutation

rates in chemostats. Genetics, 77:169–184, 1974.

[7] E.C. Cox. Bacterial mutator genes and the control of
spontaneous mutation. Ann. Rev. Genet., 10:135–156,
1976.

[8] L. Chao, C. Vargas, B.B. Spear, and E.C. Cox. Trans-
posable elements as mutator genes in evolution. Nature,
303:633–635, 1983.

[9] P.D. Sniegowski, P.J. Gerrish, and R.E. Lenski. Evolu-
tion of high mutation rates in experimental populations
of E. coli. Nature, 387:703–705, 1997.

[10] G.T. McVean and L.D. Hurst. Evidence for a selectively
favourable reduction in the mutation rate of the X chro-
mosome. Nature, 386:388–392, 1997.

[11] E.R. Moxon, P.B. Rainey, M.A. Nowak, and R.E. Lenski.
Adaptive evolution of highly mutable loci in pathogenic
bacteria. Curr. Biol., 4:24–33, 1994.

[12] E.R. Moxon and D.S. Thaler. The tinkerer’s evolving

toolbox. Nature, 387:659–662, 1997.

[13] M. Radman. Enzymes of evolutionary change. Nature,

401:866–869, 1999.

[14] E.G. Leigh. The evolution of mutation rates. Genetics

Suppl., 73:1–18, 1973.

[15] J.H. Gillespie. Mutation modiﬁcation in a random envi-

ronment. Evolution, 35:468–476, 1981.

[16] K. Ishii, H. Matsuda, Y. Iwasa, and A. Saskai. Evolu-
tionarily stable mutation rate in a periodically changing
environment. Genetics, 121:163–174, January 1989.

[17] J.H. Gillespie. The Causes of Molecular Evolution. Ox-

ford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1991.

[18] M. Eigen and P. Schuster. The hypercycle. A principle of
natural self-organization. Part A: emergence of the hy-
percycle. Naturwissenschaften, 64:541–565, 1977.

[19] M. Nilsson and N. Snoad. Error thresholds on dynamic

ﬁtness landscapes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84:191–194, 2000.

6

