0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quasispecies evolution on a ﬁtness landscape with a ﬂuctuating peak

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chalmers University of Technology and G¨oteborg University, S-412 96 G¨oteborg, Sweden

Martin Nilsson

martin@fy.chalmers.se

Nigel Snoad

Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 USA
The Australian National University, ACT 0200, Australia nigel@santafe.edu

(February 2, 2008)

A quasispecies evolving on a ﬁtness landscape with a single peak of ﬂuctuating height is studied. In
the approximation that back mutations can be ignored, the rate equations can be solved analytically.
It is shown that the error threshold on this class of dynamic landscapes is deﬁned by the time average
of the selection pressure. In the case of a periodically ﬂuctuating ﬁtness peak we also study the
phase-shift and response amplitude of the previously documented low-pass ﬁlter eﬀect. The special
case of a small harmonic ﬂuctuation is treated analytically.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. QUASISPECIES IN DYNAMIC

ENVIRONMENTS

Ever since Eigen’s work on replicating molecules in
1971 [1], the quasispecies concept has proven to be a
very fruitful way of modeling the fundamental behavior
of evolution. A quasispecies is an equilibrium distribu-
tion of closely related gene sequences, localized around
one or a few sequences of high ﬁtness. The kinetics of
these simple systems has been studied in great detail,
and the formulation has allowed many of the techniques
of statistical physics to be applied to replicator and evo-
lutionary systems, see for instance [1–8].

The appearance in these models of an error-threshold
(or error-catastrophe) as an upper bound on the muta-
tion rate above which no eﬀective selection can occur, has
important implications for biological systems. In partic-
ular it places limits on the maintainable amounts of ge-
netic information [1,2] which puts restrictions on theories
for the origins of life.

Until now studies of quasispecies have mainly focused
on static ﬁtness landscapes. However, many organisms in
nature live in a quickly changing environment. In this pa-
per we will study how a population responds to changes
in the ﬁtness landscape. More precisely we will study
the population dynamics on a ﬂuctuating single peaked
ﬁtness landscape. Since the full theory turns out to be
impossible to solve analytically, we introduce a simple ap-
proximation that makes the rate equations analytically
tractable. The expression for the error threshold is then
obtained from the expression in the static case by replac-
ing the height of the ﬁtness peak by the time average of
the height of the ﬂuctuating peak. We also study how
the phase-shift between ﬁtness oscillations and popula-
tion dynamics depends on the frequency in the case of a
small harmonic ﬂuctuation.

1

A quasispecies consists of a population of

self-
replicating genomes, where each genome is represented
by a sequence of bases sk, (s1s2 ··· sν ). We assume that
the bases are binary, sk ∈ {1, 0} and that all sequences
have equal length ν. Every genome is then given by a
binary string (011001 ···), which also can be represented
by an integer k = Pj sj2j (0 ≤ k < 2ν).
To describe how mutations aﬀect a population we de-
ﬁne W l
k as the probability that replication of genome l
gives genome k as oﬀspring. We only consider point mu-
tations, which conserve the genome length ν.

We assume that the point mutation rate µ = 1 − q
(where q is the copying accuracy per base) is constant
in time and independent of the position in the genome.
We can then write down an explicit expression for W l
k in
terms of the copying ﬁdelity:

W l

k = µhkl qν−hkl = qν (cid:18) 1 − q

q (cid:19)hkl

(1)

where hkl is the Hamming distance between genomes k
and l. The Hamming distance hkl is deﬁned as the num-
ber of positions where the genomes k and l diﬀer.

The equations that describe the dynamics of the pop-
ulation take a relatively simple form. Let xk denote the
relative concentration and Ak(t) the time-dependent ﬁt-
ness of genome k. We then obtain the following rate
equations:

˙xk(t) = Xl

W l

kAl(t)xl(t) − e(t)xk(t)

(2)

derivative. The second term ensures the total normal-

where e(t) = Pl Al(t)xl(t), and the dot denotes a time
ization of the population (Pl xl(t) = 1) so that xk(t)

describe relative concentrations.

In the classical theory introduced by Eigen and cowork-
ers [1,9,10], the ﬁtness landscape is static. The rate equa-
tions (2) can then be solved analytically by introducing a
change of coordinates that makes them linear, and then
solving the eigenvalue system for the matrix W l
kAl. The
equilibrium distribution is given by the eigenvector cor-
responding to the largest eigenvalue.

If the ﬁtness landscape is time-dependent, this method
cannot be applied. A time-ordering problem occurs when
we deﬁne exponentials of time-dependent matrices, since
in general the matrix W l
kAl(t) does not commute with
itself at diﬀerent points in time. Later in this paper we
make a simple approximation that makes the rate equa-
tions one-dimensional; time-ordering is then no longer
necessary.

Much of the work on quasispecies has focused on ﬁtness
landscapes with one gene sequence (the master sequence)
with superior ﬁtness, σ, compared to all other sequences.
These are viewed as a background with ﬁtness 1. These
landscapes are referred to as single peaked landscapes.
The master sequence is denoted x0. In this paper we fo-
cus on single peaked landscapes where the height of the
ﬁtness peak is time-dependent. The ﬁtness landscape is
then given by

Ak(t) = (cid:26) σ(t) if k = 0

otherwise

1

(3)

This class of time-dependent landscapes was studied by
Wilke and co-workers [11,12]. They investigated the be-
havior of a periodically ﬂuctuating single peak landscape
by numerically integrating the dynamics to ﬁnd the limit
cycle of the concentrations for a full period.

Fig. 1 shows how the concentration of the master se-
quence responds to a sudden, sharp jump in its ﬁtness.
When the ﬁtness changes it takes some time for the pop-
ulation to reach the new equilibrium.
It is this delay
that causes a phase shift between a periodically changing
ﬁtness function and the response in the concentrations.
The relaxation time of the population to the appropri-
ate equilibrium distribution depends on both the ﬁtness
values of the landscape and the mutation rate. For ex-
tremely slow and smooth changes in the ﬁtness the popu-
lation will eﬀectively reach equilibrium at every point in
time. Thus the continued existence of a quasispecies will
depend on the local dynamics of the landscape. When
the landscape changes quickly the population will fail
to follow the changes adequately and thus responds to
the landscape dynamics in a way that is typical of a low
pass ﬁlter. The following section examines the ﬂuctuat-
ing single peak landscape in some detail. In particular,
we introduce an approximation that lets us ﬁnd an ana-
lytic form for the relaxation time of the population, and
the phase lag it introduces in a periodic landscape.

xmas

0.66

0.65

0.64

0.63

10

11

12

13

14

t

15

FIG. 1. The concentration of the master sequence when
the ﬁtness peak makes a sudden jump. The ﬁtness is given
by σ = 10 when t ∈ [10, 12], σ = 5 otherwise. The genomic
copying ﬁdelity is given by Q = 0.7.

III. APPROXIMATE QUASISPECIES DYNAMICS

We now introduce a simple approximation of the model
presented above. In this approximation we can solve the
rate equations and ﬁnd an expression for the concentra-
tion of the master sequence x0(t). In the limit of long
chain-length (ν ≫ 1) we can neglect back-mutations from
the background to the master sequence. This gives a sim-
pliﬁed one-dimensional version of the rate equation of the
following form:

˙x0(t) = Qσ(t)x0(t) − e(t)x0(t)

(4)

where Q = qν is the copying ﬁdelity of the whole genome
and e(t) = (σ(t) − 1)x0(t) + 1.
Fig. 2 compares the concentration of the master se-
quence calculated by solving approximation 4 and by nu-
merically integrating the full rate equation 2. The ﬁgure
shows that the approximation is quite accurate.

x0

0.675

0.67

0.665

0.66

0.655

0.645

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

t

FIG. 2. The concentration of the master sequence calcu-
lated using the approximation 4 (dashed) and by numerically
solving the rate equations 2 (solid). The ﬁtness is given by
σ = 10 + 5 sin(4t). The genomic copying ﬁdelity is given by
Q = 0.7 and the genome length ν = 25.

Since this equation is one-dimensional there is no time-
ordering problem and it can be solved analytically for

2

non-periodic peak ﬂuctuations. Equation 4 can be trans-
formed to a linear form by introducing a new variable
y(t) = Q−x0(t)

(1−Q)x0(t) . This gives

˙y(t) = 1 − (Qσ(t) − 1)y(t)

(5)

which can be solved. Substituting back gives the concen-
tration of the master sequence

The concentration of the master-sequence is positive.
The left hand side of Eq. 9 is therefore positive and
the last term in the integral, −(σ(t) − 1)x0(t), on the
left hand side is negative. This implies that for x0(t)
to be positive as time goes to inﬁnity, we must assume

R (Qσ(t) − 1) dt > 0. The ﬂuctuating time dependent

equivalent to the static error threshold is therefore given
by

x0(t) = x0

0

(Qσ(s)−1)ds

eR t
0 eR s
(Qσ(u)−1)du(σ(s) − 1)ds

0

1 + x0R t

(6)

Since we are only interested in the long time behavior
of the system we can ignore transients carrying memory

from initial values. Assuming eR t

0

(Qσ(s)−1)ds ≫ 1 gives

x0(t) =

Q

1 + (1 − Q)R t

0 e−R t

s

(Qσ(u)−1)du

ds

(7)

This is a generalization of the static expression for the
asymptotic concentration:

xs
0 =

Qσ − 1
σ − 1

(8)

On a static single peaked ﬁtness landscape there is a
phase transition in the concentration distribution when
the copying ﬁdelity decreases below a critical value [2,13].
At high mutation rate the selective advantage of the
master sequence due to its superior ﬁtness is no longer
strong enough for the gene sequences to be localized
in sequence space. Instead they diﬀuse over the entire
sequence space, and the distribution becomes approxi-
mately uniform. This is generally referred to as the error
catastrophe or error threshold and is one of the main im-
plications of the original quasispecies model. By making
the same approximation as above, i.e. assuming no back-
mutations onto the master sequence, the static landscape
error threshold can be shown to occur when Q = 1
σ . In
other words, the transition occurs when the selective ad-
vantage of the master-sequence no longer is able to com-
pensate for the loss of oﬀspring due to mutations. This
can also be seen from Eq. 8 which deﬁnes the stationary
distribution of the master sequence in the static case.

One has to be careful when discussing the error thresh-
old on a ﬂuctuating peak. The ﬁtness can, for example,
slowly move from being strong enough to localize the
population around the peak, to beibg so weak that the
population delocalizes, and then back again. If we how-
ever consider an average over a time scale much longer
than the ﬂuctuation time of the ﬁtness peak, a sensible
deﬁnition of the error threshold can be made based on the
average concentration of the master sequence. The time
average of the concentrations can be found by rewriting
equation 4 as diﬀerentials

Z dx0

x0

= Z (Qσ(t) − 1 − (σ(t) − 1)x0(t))dt

(9)

3

Qf c =

1
hσit

(10)

This shows that the error threshold on a ﬂuctuating ﬁt-
ness peak is determined by the time average of the ﬁtness,
if the ﬂuctuations are fast compared to the response time
of the population.

Eq. 7 indicates that the response time of the system
is approximately given by (Qσ(t) − 1)−1, i.e. the rela-
tive growth of the mastersequence compared to the back-
ground. For the time average mentioned above to be an
interesting parameter the ﬂuctuations of the ﬁtness peak
must therefore be faster than this response time; only
for this kind of environmental dynamics is it sensible to
talk in terms of the average concentration of the master-
sequence. Thus if the ﬂuctuations occur on a time-scale
faster than the response-time of the quasispecies, then
the error-threshold is deﬁned by Eq. 10. For extremely
slow changes the system will eﬀectively be in equilibrium
around the current value of the ﬁtness. For slightly faster
changes the response of the population will lag somewhat
behind the changes in selective environment.
In these
cases it is more interesting to study the minimal concen-
tration of the master sequence, which occurs when the
ﬁtness peak has a minimum (as we shall see later the
phase-shift decreases when the ﬂuctuation frequency de-
creases).

When the full replicator equations for a rapidly ﬂuctu-
ating peak are numerically integrated, the time-averaged
quasispecies distribution displays an error catastrophe at
high error rates µ = 1 − q. In ﬁgure 3 the ﬁtness peak
ﬂuctuates periodically with σ(t) = 10 + 5 sin(t). The av-
erage ﬁtness is given by hσit = 10 and the genome length
ν = 25 and thus Eq. 10 predicts the error-threshold to
occur at µ = 0.088, which agrees with the value found
by numerically integrating the equations of motion di-
rectly. The analysis in this section demonstrates that
by making the error tail approximation and reducing the
dynamics to one-dimensional form, an analytic form ex-
ists for the error-threshold on fast moving landscapes.
This one-dimensional formulation removes the need to
time-order the changes in selective advantage of the land-
scape. This allows the integrals for the time history of
the master-sequence concentration to be solved explicitly
in equation 6.

k(cid:13)=(cid:13)0(cid:13)

0.5(cid:13)

0.4(cid:13)

xs
k

0.3(cid:13)

0.2(cid:13)

k(cid:13)=(cid:13)1(cid:13)

0.1(cid:13)

0.669(cid:13)

0.668(cid:13)

0.667(cid:13)

x 0

0.666(cid:13)

0.665(cid:13)

k(cid:13)=(cid:13)12,13

0.025(cid:13) 0.05(cid:13) 0.075(cid:13)

0.1(cid:13)
mutation rate m

0.125(cid:13) 0.15(cid:13)

FIG. 3. The time-averaged quasispecies distribution is
shown as a function of the error rate µ = q − 1. The ﬁgure
shows the numerical solution to the full rate equations. The
ﬁtness peak is deﬁned as σ(t) = 10 + 5 sin(t) and the genome
length is ν = 25. The error threshold is located at µ ≈ 0.085,
corresponding to Qf c = 0.109 which can be compared to the
approximate value Qf c = 0.1 predicted by Eq. 10.

IV. PHASE-SHIFTS ON PERIODIC

LANDSCAPES

To study how the master sequence responds to changes
in the height of the ﬁtness peak it is convenient to assume
that the ﬂuctuations are periodic. It then makes sense
to speak of the amplitude of the oscillations in concen-
tration and of the phase-shift between the concentration
and the ﬁtness. It is intuitively clear that when the ﬁt-
ness peak is oscillating slowly (compared to the response
time (Qσ(t)−1)−1) there will be a very small phase-shift;
the population will have time to reach an equilibrium
about every value of σ(t). The amplitude of changes in
the master-sequence concentration will, for the same rea-
son, be as large as possible. This result, together with
the time-averaging eﬀect found in the previous section,
indicates that the population responds to the driving of
the environment with a low pass ﬁlter eﬀect.
In one-
dimensional population genetic models this phenomenon
has been noted for some time [14–16]. Wilke et al. [11]
demonstrated via simulations that the same ﬁltering oc-
curred to quasispecies evolution on a periodically ﬂuctu-
ating single peak. Noting that the maxima and minima
in concentration occurs when ˙x0 = 0, we can ﬁnd a rela-
tion between the phase-shift (between the concentration
and ﬁtness ﬂuctuations), and the amplitude of the ﬁtness
ﬂuctuations. Let txmax be the time when the concentra-
tion has a maximum. Similarly the ﬁtness is at a max-
imum at time tσmax. Thus the phase-shift between the
two is δ = txmax − tσmax. From equation 4 the condition
for the maximum value of x0 during a full cycle can be
derived

max

(x0(t)) =

t

Qσ(tσmax + δ) − 1
σ(tσmax + tδ) − 1

(11)

4

0.5(cid:13)

1(cid:13)

1.5(cid:13)

2(cid:13)

2.5(cid:13)

3(cid:13)

time (t)

FIG. 4. Thhe response in concentration of the master se-
quence (solid line) as the ﬁtness peak oscillates according to
σ(t) = 10 + sin(4t). The genomic copying ﬁdelity is Q = 0.7.
The dashed line shows σ(t), scaled to ﬁt in the plot. Note the
phase-shift between the ﬁtness function and the concentration
response.

In general there is no closed analytic expression for this
phase-shift (δ), or the response amplitude of the master-
sequence concentration. When the ﬂuctuations of the
ﬁtness peak is a small harmonic oscillation equation 11
becomes analytically tractable. For such ﬂuctuations

˙y(t) = 1 − (Qσ(t) − 1)y(t)
σ(t) = ¯σ + ǫ sin(ωt)

(12)
(13)

From equation 7 it is reasonable to assume the solution
to be of the form y(t) = 1
Q¯σ−1 + u(t), where u(t) is small
compared to the average.
Ignoring higher order terms
equation 4 can be written in terms of the perturbation
u(t) as

˙u(t) = (1 − Q¯σ)u(t) −

ǫQ sin(ωt)
Q¯σ − 1

This diﬀerential equation can be solved to obtain

(14)

ǫQ

sin(ωt − δ)

(15)

(16)

u(t) = −

tan(δ) =

ω

(Q¯σ − 1)p(Q¯σ − 1)2 + ω2
Q¯σ − 1

In eq. 15 and 16 transients have been ignored since they
decay exponentially as e−(Q¯σ−1)t. Thus the frequency of
the oscillations is normalized by the (average) response
rate of the population Q¯σ − 1.

d

1

0.5

0.2

0.1

0.05

0.02

0.5

1

5

10

T

50

FIG. 5. The phase shift as a function of the period T = 2π
ω .
The dashed line is a prediction using Eq. 16 and the solid is
derived by numerically solving the reate equations 2. Param-
eters used are σ = 10 + sin(ωt), Q = 0.7 and ν = 25.

Substituting this back into the expression for x0(t)

gives

x0(t) =

¯x

1 − ǫ(1−Q) sin(ωt−δ)
(¯σ−1)√(Q¯σ−1)2+ω2

(17)

where ¯x = Q¯σ−1
¯σ−1 .

The characteristic behavior of a low pass ﬁlter is clearly
shown in equation 16 and 17. As the frequency of the
ﬂuctuations increases, the amplitude of the concentra-
tion response decreases and the phase shift converges to
π
2 . Figure 4 shows how a population responds to har-
monic oscillations of the ﬁtness peak. The phase-shift
makes the concentration of the mastersequence reach its
maximum when the actual ﬁtness has already decreased
below maximum.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have shown that the time dynam-
ics of a quasispecies on a ﬂuctuating peak can be stud-
ied under the standard no back-mutation approximation.
The general time ordering problem stemming from a time
dependent landscape disappears since the rate equation
becomes one–dimensional. We show that the time depen-
dent equivalent to the static error threshold is determined
by the time average of the ﬂuctuations of the ﬁtness peak.
An expression for the typical response time for a popu-
lation is given in terms of copying ﬁdelity and selection
pressure. We also show that for small periodic ﬂuctua-
tions the time dynamics of the population has a phase
shift and a low pass ﬁlter amplitude response. Analytic
expressions for the phase shift and the amplitude are de-
rived in the special case of small harmonically oscillating
ﬂuctuations.

When doing this work Nigel Snoad and Martin Nilsson
were supported by SFI core funding grants. N.S. would
also like to acknowledge the support of Mats Nordahl at
Chalmers University of Technology while preparing this
manuscript. We also Mats Nordahl for valuable com-
ments and discussions.

[1] M. Eigen. Self-organization of matter and the evolution of
biological macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften, 58:465–
523, 1971.

[2] M. Eigen and P. Schuster. The hypercycle. A principle of
natural self-organization. Part A: emergence of the hy-
percycle. Naturwissenschaften, 64:541–565, 1977.

[3] P. Schuster. Dynamics of Molecular Evolution. Physica

D, 16:100–119, 1986.

[4] P. Schuster and K. Sigmund. Dynamics of Evolutionary
Optimization. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 89:668–682,
1985.

[5] I. Leuth¨ausser. An exact correspondence between Eigen’s
evolution model and a two-dimensional Ising system. J.
Chem. Phys., 84(3):1884–1885, 1986.

[6] P. Tarazona. Error thresholds for molecular quasispecies
as phase transitions: From simple landscapes to spin-
glass models. Physical Review A, 45(8):6038–6050, 1992.
[7] J. Swetina and P. Schuster. Stationary Mutant Distribu-
tion and Evolutionary Optimization. Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Biology, 50:635–660, 1988.

[8] M. Nowak and P. Schuster. Error thresholds of replication
in ﬁnite populations: Mutation frequencies and the onset
of M¨uller’s ratchet. J. theor. Biol., 137:375–395, 1989.

[9] M. Eigen and P. Schuster. The hypercycle – a principle

of natural selforganization. Springer, Berlin, 1979.

[10] M. Eigen, J. McCaskill, and P. Schuster. The molecular

quasispecies. Adv. Chem. Phys., 75:149–263, 1989.

[11] C.O. Wilke, C. Ronnewinkel, and T. Martinetz. Molecu-

5

lar evolution in time dependent environments. In H. Lund
and R. Kortmann, editors, Proc. ECAL’99, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, page 417, Heidelberg, 1999.
Springer-Verlag. LANL e-print archive: physics/9904028.
[12] C.O. Wilke, C. Ronnewinkel, and T. Martinetz. Dynamic
ﬁtness landscapes in the quasispecies model. LANL e-
print archive: physics/9912012, December 1999.

[13] J. Maynard Smith and E. Szathm´ary. The Major Tran-

sitions in Evolution. W.H. Freeman, Oxford, 1995.

[14] K. Ishii, H. Matsuda, Y. Iwasa, and A. Saskai. Evolu-
tionarily stable mutation rate in a periodically changing
environment. Genetics, 121:163–174, January 1989.

[15] B. Charlesworth. The evolution of sex and recombination

in a varying environment. J. Hered., 84:345–350, 1993.

[16] R. Lande and S. Shannon. The role of genetic variation
in adaptation and population persistence in a changing
environment. Evolution, 50:434–437, 1996.

6

