0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coupled Two-Way Clustering Analysis of Gene Microarray Data

G. Getz, E. Levine and E. Domany
Department of Physics of Complex Systems,

Weizmann Inst. of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present a novel coupled two-way clustering approach to gene microarray data analysis. The main idea is
to identify subsets of the genes and samples, such that when one of these is used to cluster the other, stable
and signiﬁcant partitions emerge. The search for such subsets is a computationally complex task: we present an
algorithm, based on iterative clustering, which performs such a search. This analysis is especially suitable for gene
microarray data, where the contributions of a variety of biological mechanisms to the gene expression levels are
entangled in a large body of experimental data. The method was applied to two gene microarray data sets, on colon
cancer and leukemia. By identifying relevant subsets of the data and focusing on them we were able to discover
partitions and correlations that were masked and hidden when the full dataset was used in the analysis. Some
of these partitions have clear biological interpretation; others can serve to identify possible directions for future
research.

Introduction

In a typical DNA microarray experiment expression levels
of thousands of genes are recorded over a few tens of dif-
ferent samples1 [1, 3, 4]. Hence this new technology gave
rise to a new computational challenge: to make sense of
such massive expression data [5, 6, 7]. The sizes of the
datasets and their complexity call for multi-variant clus-
tering techniques [8, 9], which are essential for extracting
correlated patterns and the natural classes present in a set
of N data points, or objects, represented as points in the
multidimensional space deﬁned by D measured features.

Gene microarray data are fairly special

in that it
makes good sense to perform clustering analysis in two
ways [1, 2]. The ﬁrst views the ns samples as the N = ns
objects to be clustered, with the ng genes’ levels of ex-
pression in a particular sample playing the role of the fea-
tures, representing that sample as a point in a D = ng
dimensional space. The diﬀerent phases of a cellular pro-
cess emerge from grouping together samples with similar
or related expression proﬁles. The other, not less natural
way, looks for clusters of genes that act correlatively on
the diﬀerent samples. This view considers the N = ng
genes as the objects to be clustered, each represented by
its expression proﬁle, as measured over all the samples, as
a point in a D = ns dimensional space.

Whereas in previous work [1, 2, 10] the samples and
genes were clustered completely independently, we in-
troduce and perform here a coupled two-way clustering
(CTWC) analysis.

Our philosophy is to narrow down both the features

that we use and the data points that are clustered. We
believe that only a small subset of the genes participate in
any cellular process of interest, which takes place only in
a subset of the samples; by focusing on small subsets, we
lower the noise induced by the other samples and genes.
We look for pairs of a relatively small subset F of features
(either genes or samples) and of objects O, (samples or
genes), such that when the set O is clustered using the
features F , stable and signiﬁcant partitions are obtained.
Finding such pairs of subsets is a rather complex mathe-
matical problem; the CTWC method produces such pairs
in an iterative clustering process.

CTWC can be performed with any clustering algo-
rithm. We tested it in conjunction with several clustering
methods, but present here only results that were obtained
using the super-paramagnetic clustering algorithm (SPC)
[16, 11, 12], which is especially suitable for gene microar-
ray data analysis due to its robustness against noise and
its “natural” ability to identify stable clusters.

The CTWC clustering scheme was applied to two gene
microarray data sets, one from a colon cancer experiment
[1] and the other from a leukemia experiment [3]. From
both datasets we were able to “mine” new partitions and
correlations that have not been obtained in an unsuper-
vised fashion by previously used methods. Some of these
new partitions have clear, well understood biological inter-
pretation. We do not report here discoveries of biologically
relevant, previously unknown results. The main point of
our message is twofold: (a) we were able to identify bio-
logically relevant partitions in an unsupervised way and
(b) other, not less natural new partitions were also found,

1By “sample” we refer to any kind of living matter that is being tested, e.g. diﬀerent tissues[1] cell populations collected at diﬀerent

times[2] etc.

1

which may contain new, important information and for
which one should seek biological interpretation.

Coupled Two Way Clustering

Motivation and Algorithm

The results of every gene microarray experiment can be
summarized as a set of numbers, which we organize in
an expression level matrix A. A row of this matrix cor-
responds to a single gene, while each column represents
a particular sample. Our normalization is described in
detail later.

In a typical experiment simultaneous expression lev-
els of thousands of genes are measured. Gene expression
is inﬂuenced by the cell type, cell phase, external signals
and more [13]. The expression level matrix is therefore the
result of all these processes mixed together. Our goal is
to separate and identify these processes and to extract as
much information as possible about them. The main point
is that each biological process on which we wish to focus
may involve a relatively small subset of the genes that are
present on a microarray; the large majority of the genes
constitute a noisy background which may mask the eﬀect
of the small subset. The same may happen with respect
to samples.

The CTWC procedure which we now describe is de-
signed to identify subsets of genes and samples, such that
a single process is the main contributor to the expression
of the gene subset over the sample subset. We start with
clustering the samples and the genes of the full data set
and identify all stable clusters of either samples or genes.
We scan these clusters one by one. The expression levels
of the genes of each cluster are used as the feature set F to
represent object sets. The diﬀerent object sets O contain
either all the samples or any sample cluster. Similarly,
we scan all stable clusters of samples and use them as the
feature set F to identify stable clusters of genes. We keep
track of all the stable clusters that are generated, of both
genes, denoted as vg, and samples vs. The gene clusters
are accumulated in a list V g and the sample clusters in V s.
Furthermore, we keep all the chain of clustering analyses
that has been performed (which subset was used as ob-
jects, which subset was used as features, and which were
the stable clusters that have been identiﬁed).

When new clusters are found, we use them in the next
iteration. At each iteration step we cluster a subset of
the objects (either samples or genes) using a subset of the
features (genes or samples). The procedure stops when
no new relevant information is generated. The outcome
of the CTWC algorithm are the ﬁnal sets V g and V s and
the pointers that identify how all stable clusters of genes
and samples were generated.

A precise, step by step deﬁnition of the algorithm is

given in Fig. 1.

Analyzing the clusters obtained by CTWC

The output of CTWC has two important components.
First, it provides a broad list of gene and sample clus-
ters. Second, for each cluster (of samples, say) we know
which subset (of samples) was clustered to ﬁnd it, and
which were the features (genes) used to represent it. We
also know for every cluster C, which other clusters can be
identiﬁed by using C as the feature set. We present here
a brief selection of the possible ways one can utilize this
kind of information.
Implementations of the particular
uses listed here are described in the Applications section.
Identifying genes that partition the samples ac-
cording to a known classiﬁcation. This particular
application is supervised. Denote by C a known classi-
ﬁcation of the samples, say into two classes, c1 and c2.
CTWC provides an easy way to rank the clusters of genes
in V g by their ability to separate the samples according
to C. It should be noted that CTWC not only provides a
list of candidate gene clusters one should check, but also
a unique method of testing them.

First we evaluate for each cluster of samples vs in V s
two scores, purity and eﬃciency, which reﬂect the extent
to which assignment of the samples to vs corresponds to
the classiﬁcation C. These ﬁgures of merit are deﬁned (for
c1, say) as

purity(vs|c1) =

|vs ∩ c1|

|vs|

; eﬃciency(vs|c1) =

|vs ∩ c1|

|c1|

.

Once a cluster vs with high purity and eﬃciency has been
found, we can use the saved pointers to read oﬀ the clus-
ter (or clusters) of genes that were used as the feature set
to yield vs in our clustering procedure. Clustering, as op-
posed to classiﬁcation, discovers only those partitions of
the data which are, in some sense, “natural”. Hence by
this method we identify the most natural group of genes
that can be used to induce a desired classiﬁcation.

Needless to say, one can also test a gene cluster vg
that was provided by CTWC using more standard statis-
tics, such as the t-test [14] or the Jensen-Shannon distance
[15]. Both compare the expression levels of the genes of
vg on the two groups of samples, c1, c2, partitioned ac-
cording to C. Alternatively, one can also use the genes of
vg to train a classiﬁer to separate the samples according
to C [3], and use the success of the classiﬁer to measure
whether the expression levels of the genes in vg do or do
not correspond to the classiﬁcation.

Discovering new partitions. Every cluster vs of V s
is a subset of all the samples, the members of which have
been linked to each other and separated from the other
samples on the basis of the expression levels of some co-
expressed subset of genes.
It is reasonable therefore to
argue that the cluster vs has been formed for some biolog-
ical or experimental reason.

As a ﬁrst step to understand the reason for the for-
mation of a robust cluster vs, one should try to relate it
to some previously known classiﬁcation (for example, in
terms of purity and eﬃciency). Clusters which cannot be

2

Step 1.

1a.

1b.

1c.

1d.

Step 2.

2a.

2b.

2c.

Step 3.

0 be the

0 } and V s = {vs

0 be the cluster of all genes, and vs

Initialization
Let vg
cluster of all samples.
Initialize sets of gene clusters, V g, and sample
clusters, V s, such that V g = {vg
0}.
Add each known class of genes as a member of V g,
and each known class of samples as a member of
V s.
Deﬁne a new set W = ∅. This set is needed to
keep track of clustering analyses that have already
been performed.

For each pair (vg, vs) ∈ (V g × V s) \ W :
Apply the clustering algorithm on the genes of vg
using the samples of vs as its features and vice
versa.
Add all the robust gene clusters generated by
Step 2a to V g, and all the robust sample clus-
ters to V s.
Add (vg, vs) to W .

For each new robust cluster u in either V g or V s
deﬁne and store a pair of labels Pu = (uo, uf ). Of
these, uo is the cluster of objects which were clus-
tered to ﬁnd u, and uf is the cluster of features
used in that clustering.

Step 4. Repeat Step 2 until no new clusters are added to

either V g or V s.

Figure 1: CTWC algorithm. The input of the algorithm is the full expression matrix. The output is a set V g of stable gene
clusters and a set V s of stable sample clusters. For each stable cluster u, found in a clustering operation, the clusters which
provided the objects and those that served as the features for this operation are stored as a label Pu.

associated with any known classiﬁcation, have to be in-
spected more carefully. Useful hints for the meaning of
such a cluster of samples may come from the identity of
the cluster of genes which was used to ﬁnd it. Clearly,
the CTWC clusters can be used in the same way to inter-
pret clusters of genes which were not previously known to
belong to the same process.

CTWC is a sensitive tool to identify sub-
partitions. Some of the sample clusters in V s may have
have emerged from clustering a subset of the samples, say
vs
0. These clusters reﬂect a sub-partition of the samples
which belong to vs
0. When trying to cluster the full sample
set, this sub-partition may be missed, since other samples,
unrelated to vs

0, are masking it.

CTWC reveals conditional correlations among
genes. The CTWC method collects stable gene clusters
in V g. In many cases the same groups of genes may be
added to V g more than once. This is caused by the fact
that some genes are co-regulated in all cells, and there-
fore are clustered together, no matter which subset of the
samples is used as the feature set. For example, ribosomal
proteins are expected to be clustered together for any set
of samples which is not unreasonably small.

Some gene clusters, however, are diﬀerent; they are co-
regulated only in a speciﬁc subset of samples. We call this
situation conditional correlation. The identity of the sam-

ple cluster which reveals the conditionally correlated gene
cluster is clearly important to understand the biological
process which makes these genes correlated.

Clustering method and similarity
measures

Any reasonable choice of clustering method and deﬁni-
tion of stable clusters can be used within the framework
of CTWC. We describe here the beneﬁts of the particu-
lar clustering algorithm and similarity measure we used,
which we found to be particularly suitable to handle the
special properties of gene microarray data.

SPC provides clear identiﬁcation of stable
clusters in a robust manner.

Super-paramagnetic clustering (SPC) is a hierarchical clus-
tering method recently introduced by Blatt et al [16]. The
intuition that led to it is based on an analogy to the
physics of inhomogeneous ferromagnets. Full details of the
algorithm and the underlying philosophy are given else-
where [11, 17].

As for many hierarchical clustering algorithms, the in-
put for SPC is a distance or similarity matrix dij between

3

the objects O, calculated according to the feature set F .
A tunable parameter T (’temperature’) controls the reso-
lution of the performed clustering. One starts at T = 0,
with a single cluster that contains all the objects. As T
increases, phase transitions take place, and this cluster
breaks into several sub-clusters which reﬂect the structure
of the data. Clusters keep breaking up as T is further in-
creased, until at high enough values of T each object forms
its own cluster.

Blatt et al showed that the SPC algorithm is ro-
bust against variation of its parameters, initialization and
against noise in the data. The following advantages of
SPC makes it especially suitable for gene microarray data
analysis: (i) No prior knowledge of the structure of the
data is assumed; (ii) SPC provides information about the
diﬀerent self organizing regimes of the data; (iii) The num-
ber of “macroscopic” clusters is an output of the algorithm;
and (iv) Hierarchical organization of the data is reﬂected
in the manner clusters merge or split when the control
parameter (the ’temperature’ T ) is varied.

Moreover, the control parameter can be used to provide
a natural measure for the stability of any particular cluster
by the range of temperatures ∆T at which the cluster re-
mains unchanged. A stable cluster is expected to ’survive’
throughout a large ∆T , one which constitutes a signiﬁcant
fraction of the range it takes the data to break into single
point clusters. Inspection of the gene dendrograms of Fig.
4 reveals stable clusters and stable branches.

Normalization of the gene expression array

The Pearson correlation is commonly used as the similar-
ity measure between genes or samples [18, 2, 1]. This mea-
sure conforms with the intuitive biological notion of what
it means for two genes to be co-expressed; this statistic
captures similarity of the “shapes” of two expression pro-
ﬁles, and ignores diﬀerences between the magnitudes of
the two series of measurements [2]. The correlation co-
eﬃcient is high between two genes that are aﬀected by
the same process, even if each has a diﬀerent gain due
to the process, over diﬀerent background expression lev-
els (caused by other processes). One problem of using
the correlation coeﬃcient is that its reliability depends
on the absolute expression level of the compared genes; a
positive correlation between two highly expressed genes is
much more signiﬁcant than the same value between two
poorly expressed genes. This information is ignored in the
clustering process.

However, we ﬁnd that correlations do not always cap-
ture similarity between samples. For example, consider
two samples taken at diﬀerent stages of some process, with
the expression levels of a family of genes much below av-
erage in one sample and much higher in the other. Even if
the expression levels of the two samples over these genes
are correlated, one would like to assign them into diﬀer-
ent clusters. Furthermore, the distance between the two
samples should be aﬀected by the statistical signiﬁcance
of their expression diﬀerences.

We therefore used the following normalization scheme.
Denote by D the matrix of the raw data. D is a ng × ns
matrix, where ng is the number of genes and ns the num-
ber of samples.

We normalize our expression level matrix in two steps.
ij = Dij / ¯Dj ;
i=1 Dij . We then normalize each row, such

First, divide each column by its mean: D′
¯Dj = 1
that its mean vanishes and its norm is one:

ng Png

Aij =

D′

ij − ¯D′
ik
kD′

i

,

where
Pns

=
i(cid:1)2

i

¯D′
ij − ¯D′

1

ns Pns

j=1 D′

ij

and

kD′

ik2

=

.

j=1 (cid:0)D′
For genes and samples we use the Euclidean distance
as the dissimilarity measure. For two genes (rows of A)
the Euclidean distance is closely related to the Pearson
correlation between them.

Applications

In order to show the strength of the CTWC algorithm,
we apply it to two gene microarray experiment data sets.
Here we report only the results which were obtained by
CTWC, and could not be found using a straightforward
clustering analysis. We highlight a small subset of the
partitions that our method was able to extract from the
data; these are the results for which we were able to
ﬁnd satisfactory biological explanation. We do not report
here new discoveries of biologically relevant, previously
unknown results. Rather, we claim to have discovered
a method that is capable to mine such information out of
the available data. New, relevant information may be con-
tained in the new partitions which were found, to which
we were not yet able to assign biological meaning. These
new, uninterpreted results are reviewed brieﬂy below; full
lists of the clusters associated with these results, as well
as their constituent samples or genes can be found at
http://www.weizmann.ac.il/physics/complex/compphys.

Analysis of Leukemia samples

We analyzed data obtained by Golub et al [3] from 72 sam-
ples collected from acute leukemia patients at the time of
diagnosis. 47 cases were diagnosed as ALL (acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia) and the other 25 as AML (acute
myeloid leukemia). RNA prepared from the bone marrow
mononuclear cells was hibridized to high-density oligonu-
cleotide micorarrays, produced by Aﬀymetrix, containing
6817 human genes.

After rescaling the data in the manner described by
Golub et al , we selected only those genes whose minimal
expression over all samples is greater than 20. As a result
of this thresholding operation 1753 genes were left. The
resulting array was then normalized as described previ-
ously, to give the 1753 × 72 expression level matrix A (see
Fig. 2).

4

We found that two iterations of the CTWC algorithm
suﬃced to converge to 49 stable gene clusters (LG1-49)
and 35 stable sample clusters (LS1-35). We highlight here
four of our ﬁndings, which demonstrate the power of the
method to solve problems listed above.

Identifying genes that partition the samples ac-
First we use
cording to a known classiﬁcation.
the known ALL/AML classiﬁcation of the samples to de-
termine which gene clusters can distinguish between the
two classes. We found only a single gene cluster (LG1)
which enables stable separation into AML/ALL clusters2.
This well demonstrates the strength of CTWC, since it
turned out that SPC was not able to clearly identify the
AML/ALL separation using the full set of genes.

Discovering new partitions. Next, we search the
stable sample clusters for unknown partitions of the sam-
ples. We focus our attention on sample clusters which
were repeatedly found to be stable. One such cluster, de-
noted LS1, may be of interest; it includes 37 samples and
was found to be stable when either a cluster of 27 genes
(LG2) or another unrelated cluster of 36 genes (LG3) was
used to provide the features. LG3 includes many genes
that participate in the glycolysis pathway. Due to lack of
additional information about the patients we cannot deter-
mine the biological origin of the formation of this sample
cluster.

Identifying sub-partitions Using a 28 gene cluster
(LG4) as features, we tried to cluster only the samples
that were identiﬁed as AML patients (leaving out ALL
samples). A stable cluster, LS2, of 16 samples was found
(see Fig. 2(B)); it contains most of the samples (14/15)
that were taken from patients that underwent treatment
and whose treatment results were known (either success or
failure). For none of the other AML patients was any in-
formation about treatment available in the data. Some of
the 16 genes of this cluster, LG4, are ribosomal proteins
and some others are related to cell growth. Apparently
these genes can partition the AML patients according to
whether they did or did not undergo treatment.

This result demonstrates a possible diagnostic use of
the CTWC approach; one can identify diﬀerent responses
to treatment, and the groups of genes to be used as the
appropriate probe.

We repeated the same procedure, but discarding AML
and keeping only the ALL samples. We discovered that
when any one of 5 diﬀerent gene clusters (LG4-8) are used
to provide the features, the ALL samples break into two
stable clusters; LS5, which consists mostly of T-Cell ALL
patients and LS4, that contains mostly B-Cell ALL pa-
tients (see Fig. 2(A)). When all the genes were used to
cluster all samples, no such clear separation into T-ALL vs
B-ALL was observed. One of the gene clusters used, LG5,
with T/B separating ability, contains 29 genes, many of
which are T-cell related. Another gene cluster, LG6, which
also gave rise to T/B diﬀerentiation contains many HLA
histocompatability genes.

These results demonstrate how CTWC can be used to
characterize diﬀerent types of cancer. Imagine that the na-
ture of the sub-classiﬁcation of ALL had not been known.
On the basis of our results we could predict that there are
two distinct sub-classes of ALL; moreover, by the fact that
many genes which induce separation into these sub-classes
are either T-Cell related or HLA genes, one could suspect
that these sub-classes were immunology related.

As a diﬀerent possible use of our results, note that
some of the genes in the T-Cell related gene cluster LG5
have no determined function, and may be candidates for
new T-Cell genes. This assumption is supported both by
the fact that these genes were found to be correlated with
other T-Cell genes, and by the fact that they support the
diﬀerentiation between T-ALL and B-ALL.

Analysis of Colon cancer data

The data set we consider next contains 40 colon tumor
samples and 22 normal colon samples, analyzed with an
Aﬀymetrix oligonucleotide array complementary to more
than 6500 human genes and ESTs. Following Alon et al
[1], we chose to work only with the 2000 genes of greatest
minimal expression over the samples. We normalized the
data to get a 2000 × 62 expression level matrix A.

The CTWC algorithm was applied to this data set. 97
stable gene clusters (CG1-97) and 76 stable sample clus-
ters (CS1-76) were obtained in two iterations.

Identifying genes that partition the samples ac-
cording to a known classiﬁcation. Again we search
ﬁrst for gene clusters which diﬀerentiate the samples ac-
cording to the known normal/tumor classiﬁcation. We
found 4 gene clusters (CG1-4) that partition the samples
this way. The genes of these clusters can be used if one
wishes to construct a classiﬁer for diagnosis purposes (see
Fig. 3(A)).

Discovering new partitions. Five clusters of genes
(CG2,CG4-CG7) generated very stable clusters of sam-
ples. Two of the ﬁve (CG2,CG4) diﬀerentiated tumor and
normal; two other were less interesting since the clusters
they generated contained most of the samples. The gene
cluster CG5, however, gave rise to a clear partition of the
samples into two clusters, of 39 and 23 tissues (see Fig.
3(B)). Checking with the experimentalists3 We discov-
ered that this separation coincides almost precisely with a
change of the experimental protocol; 22 RNA samples were
extracted using a poly-A detector (’protocol-A’), and the
other 40 samples were prepared by extracting total RNA
from the cells (’protocol-B’). Cursory examination did not
yield any obvious common features among the 29 genes of
the cluster CG5 that gave rise to this separation of the
tissues.

Identifying conditionally correlated genes and
sub-partitions Finally, we turn to identify conditionally
correlated genes by comparing stable gene clusters formed
when using diﬀerent sample sets as features. We found

2A cluster is identiﬁed with a certain class if both its purity and eﬃciency exceeds 3/4.
3U.Alon, K.Gish, D.Mack & A.Levine, Private communication.

5

s
e
n
e
g

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

AA

T 

40

30

20

10

0 

T 
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

(A)
5

0

(B)

BB

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

20

40

60

0

5

10

15

20

25

samples

samples

Figure 2: The expression level matrix of the leukemia experiment is shown on the left. Rows correspond to diﬀerent genes,
ordered by clustering them using all the samples. The two boxes contain expression data from (A) ALL patients, measured
on one gene cluster and (B) AML patients, on another gene cluster. Clustering the ALL samples, using the data in box (A),
yields good separation between T-ALL (black) and B-ALL (white). Clustering of AML samples, using the data in box (B)
yields a stable cluster, which contains all patients who were treated, with results known to be either success (black) or failure
(gray). The vertical axis is the “temperature” parameter T and on the horizontal axis the samples are ordered according to the
dendrogram.

that most gene clusters form irrespectively of the samples
that are used. We did ﬁnd, however, 4 special groups
of genes (CG8-11) that formed clear and stable clusters
when using only the tumor samples as features, but were
relatively uncorrelated, i.e. spread across the dendrogram
of genes, when clustering was performed based on all the
samples or only the normal ones.

One of these 4 clusters, (CG9), breaks up, at a higher
resolution, into two sub-clusters, as shown in Fig. 4(B).
One of these sub-clusters, (CG12), consists of 51 genes,
all of which are related to cell growth (ribosomal proteins
and elongation factors). The other sub-cluster, (CG13),
contains 17 genes, many of which are related to intestinal
epithelial cells (e.g. mucin, cathespin proteases). Interest-
ingly, when clustering the genes on the basis of the either
all samples or only the normal ones, both clusters (CG12
and CG13) appear as two uncorrelated distinct clusters,
and their positions in the dendrogram are quite far from
each other (Fig. 4).

The high correlation between growth genes and epithe-
lial genes, observed in tumor tissue, suggests that it is the
epithelial cells that are rapidly growing.
In the normal
samples there is smaller correlation, indicating that the
expression of growth genes is not especially high in the
normal epithelial cells. These results are consistent with
the epithelial origin of colon tumor.

Two other groups of genes formed clusters only over
the tumor cells. One (CG11, of 34 genes) is related to
the immune system (HLA genes and immunoglobulin re-
ceptors). The second (CG10, of 62 genes) seems to be a
concatenation of genes related to epithelial cells (endothe-
lial growth factor and retinoic acid), and of muscle and
nerve related genes. We could not ﬁnd any common func-
tion for the genes in the fourth cluster (CG8).

Clustering the genes on the basis of their expression
over only the normal samples revealed three gene clusters
(CG14-16) which did not form when either the entire set of
samples or the tumor tissues were used. Again, we could
not ﬁnd a clear common function for these genes. Each
cluster contains genes that apparently take part in some
process that takes place in normal cells, but is suppressed
in tumor tissues.

Summary and discussion

We proposed a new method for analysis of gene microarray
data. The main underlying idea of our method is to zero
in on small subsets of the massive expression patterns ob-
tained from thousands of genes for a large number of sam-
ples. A cellular process of interest may involve a relatively
small subset of the genes in the dataset, and the process

6

B
Bg

1000

s
e
n
e

A
A

200

400

600

800

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

T 

50

40

30

20

10

0 

T 

50

40

30

20

10

0 

(A)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

(B)

20

40
samples

60

0

10

20

30

samples

40

50

60

Figure 3: The expression level matrix of the colon experiment is shown on the left. Rows correspond to diﬀerent genes, ordered
by clustering them using all the samples. The two boxes contain expression data of all samples for two gene clusters. (A) Using
the genes of the ﬁrst cluster, clear separation between tumor samples (white) and normal ones (black) is obtained. (B) Another
separation of the samples is obtained using the second gene cluster. This separation is consistent with two distinct experimental
protocols, denoted by short and long bars. The vertical axis is the “temperature” parameter T and on the horizontal axis the
samples are ordered according to the dendrogram.

may take place only in a small number of samples. Hence
when the full data set is analyzed, the “signal” of this
process may be completely overwhelmed by the “noise”
generated by the vast majority of unrelated data.

We are looking for a relatively small group of genes,
which can be used as the features used to cluster a subset
of the samples. Alternatively, we try to identify a subset
of the samples that can be used in a similar way to identify
genes with correlated expression levels. Identifying pairs
of subsets of genes and samples, which produce signiﬁcant
stable clusters in this way, is a computationally complex
task. We demonstrated that the Coupled Two-Way Clus-
tering technique provides an eﬃcient method to produce
such subgroups.

The CTWC algorithm provides a broad list of stable
gene and sample clusters, together with various connec-
tions among them. This information can be used to per-
form the most important tasks in microarray data anal-
ysis, such as identiﬁcation of cellular processes and the
conditions for their activation; establishing connection be-
tween gene groups and biological processes; and ﬁnding
partitions of known classes of samples into sub-groups.

We reemphasize that CTWC is applicable with any
reasonable choice of clustering algorithm, as long as it is
capable of identifying stable clusters. In this work we re-
ported results obtained using the super-paramagnetic clus-
tering algorithm (SPC), which is especially suitable for

gene microarray data analysis due to its robustness against
noise which is inherent in such experiments.

The power of the CTWC method was demonstrated on
data obtained in two gene microarray experiments. In the
ﬁrst experiment the gene expression proﬁle in bone mar-
row and peripheral blood cells of 72 leukemia patients was
measured using gene microarray technology. Our main re-
sults for this data were the following: (i) The connection
between T-Cell related genes and the sub-classiﬁcation of
the ALL samples, into T and B-ALL, was revealed in an
unsupervised fashion. (ii) We found a stable partition of
the AML patients into two groups: those who were treated
(with known results), and all others. This partition was
revealed by a cluster of cell growth related genes. This
observation may serve as a clue for a possible use of the
CTWC method in understanding the eﬀects of treatment.
The second experiment used gene microarray technol-
ogy to probe the gene expression proﬁle of 40 colon tumor
samples and 22 normal colon tissues. Using CTWC we
ﬁnd a diﬀerent, less obvious stable partition of the sam-
ples into two clusters. To ﬁnd this partition, we had to
use a subset of the genes. The new partition turned out
to reﬂect two diﬀerent experimental protocols. We de-
duce that the genes which gave rise to this partition of the
samples are the ones which were sensitive to the change of
protocol.

Another result that was obtained in an unsupervised

7

T 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

1

2

200

400

600

800

genes

1000

1200

1400

1600

T 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

2

1

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

genes

Figure 4: Clustering genes of the colon cancer experiment, (A) using all samples and (B) using only tumor samples as the
feature sets. Each node of this dendrogram represents a cluster; only clusters of size larger than 9 genes are shown. The last
such clusters of each branch, as well as non-terminal clusters that were selected for presentation and analysis are shown as
boxes. In each dendrogram the genes are ordered according to the corresponding cluster analysis. The two circled clusters of
the ﬁrst dendrogram are reproduced also in the second, but there the two share a common ’parent’ in the tree. Note that the
stability of a cluster is easily read oﬀ a dendrogram produced by the SPC algorithm.

manner using CTWC, is the connection between epithe-
lial cells and the growth of cancer. When we looked at
the expression proﬁles over only the tumor tissues, a clus-
ter of cell growth genes was found to be highly correlated
with epithelial genes. This correlation was absent when
the normal tissues were used.

These novel features, discovered in data sets which
were previously investigated by conventional clustering
analysis, demonstrate the strength of CTWC. We ﬁnd
CTWC to be especially useful for gene microarray data
analysis, but it may be a useful tool for investigating other
kinds of data as well.

Acknowledgments

We thank N. Barkai for helpful discussions. The help provided
by U.Alon in all stages of this work has been invaluable; he
discussed with us his results at an early stage, provided us
his data ﬁles and shared generously his understanding and in-
sights. This research was partially supported by the Germany
- Israel Science Foundation (GIF).

References

[1] U. Alon, N. Barkai, D.A. Notterman, K. Gish, S. Ybarra,
D. Mack, and A.J. Levine (1999) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 96, 6745–6750.

[2] M. Eisen, P. Spellman, P. Brown, and D. Botstein, (1998)

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 14863–14868.

[3] T.R. Golub, D.K. Slonim, P. Tamayo, C. Huard,
M. Gaasenbeek, J.P. Mesirov, H. Coller, M.L. Loh,
J.R. Downing, M.A. Caligiuri, C.D. Bloomﬁeld, and
E.S. Lander (1999) Science 286, 531 – 537.

[4] C.M. Perou et al (1999) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,

9212–9217.

[5] E. Lander (1999) Nature Genetics 21, 3–4.

[6] M. Zhang (1999) Comput. Chem. 23, 233–250.

[7] E.M.

M.

Marcotte,

Pellegrini,
M.J. Thompson, T.O. Yeates, and D. Eisenberg (1999)
Nature 403, 83–86.

[8] J. Hartigan (1975) Clustering Algorithms. (Wiley, New

York).

[9] T. Kohonen (1997) Self-Organizing Maps.

(Springer,

Berlin).

[10] A.A. Alizadeh et al (2000) Nature 403, 503–511.

[11] E. Domany (1999) Physica A 263, 158.

[12] G. Getz, E. Levine, E. Domany, and M. Zhang (2000)

Physica A In print (physics/9911038).

[13] B. Alberts, D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raﬀ, K. Roberts, and
J.D. Watson (1994) Molecular biology of the cell. (Garland
publishing, NY).

[14] P. Wadsworth, and J. Bryan (1960) Introduction to Prob-
ability and Random Variables. (McGraw-Hill, New York).

[15] T. Cover and J. Thomas (1991) Elements of Information

Theory. (Wiley–Interscience, New York).

[16] M. Blatt, S. Wiseman, and E. Domany (1996) Physical

Review Letters 76, 3251–3255.

[17] M. Blatt, S. Wiseman, and E. Domany (1997) Neural

Computation 9, 1805–1842.

[18] M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. Heller, A. Chai, P.O. Brown,
and R.W. Davis (1996) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93,
10614–10619.

8

