0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
3
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symmetry breaking and coarsening in spatially distributed evolutionary processes

including sexual reproduction and disruptive selection

Hiroki Sayama1, Les Kaufman1,2 and Yaneer Bar-Yam1

1 New England Complex Systems Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138

2 Boston University, Dept. of Biology, Boston, MA 02215

Sexual reproduction presents signiﬁcant challenges to for-
mal treatment of evolutionary processes. A starting point
for systematic treatments of ecological and evolutionary phe-
nomena has been provided by the gene centered view of evolu-
tion. The gene centered view can be formalized as a dynamic
mean ﬁeld approximation applied to genes in reproduction /
selection dynamics. We show that spatial distributions of or-
ganisms with local mating neighborhoods in the presence of
disruptive selection give rise to symmetry breaking and spon-
taneous pattern formation in the genetic composition of lo-
cal populations. Global dynamics follows conventional coars-
ening of systems with nonconserved order parameters. The
results have signiﬁcant implications for ecology of genetic di-
versity and species formation.

PACS:

The dynamics of evolution can be studied by statisti-
cal models that reﬂect properties of general models of the
statistical dynamics of interacting systems [1]. Research
on this topic can aﬀect the conceptual foundations of
evolutionary biology, and many applications in ecology,
population biology, and conservation biology. Among the
central problems is understanding the creation, persis-
tence, and disappearance of genetic diversity.
In this
paper, we describe a model of sexual reproduction which
illustrates mean ﬁeld approaches (the gene-centered view
of evolution) and the relevance of symmetry breaking and
pattern formation in spatially distributed populations as
an example of the breakdown of these approximations.

Before introducing the complications of sexual repro-
duction, we start with the simplest iterative model of ex-
ponential growth of asexually reproducing populations:

Ni(t + 1) = λiNi(t)

(1)

where Ni is the population of type i and λi is their ﬁtness.
If the total population is considered to be normalized, the
relevant dynamics is only of the proportion of each type,
then we obtain

Pi(t + 1) =

λi

Pi λiPi(t)

Pi(t)

(2)

where Pi is the proportion of type i. The addition of
mutations to the model, Ni(t + 1) = Pj λij Nj(t), gives
rise to the quasi-species model [2] which has attracted
signiﬁcant attention in the physics community. Recent
research has focused on such questions as determining
the rate of environmental change which can be followed

1

by evolutionary change. The quasispecies model does not
incorporate the eﬀects of sexual reproduction.

Sexual reproduction causes oﬀspring to depend on the
genetic makeup of two parents. This leads not only to
mathematical but also to conceptual problems because
the oﬀspring of an organism may be as diﬀerent from the
parent as organisms it is competing against. A partial so-
lution to this problem is recognizing that it is suﬃcient
for oﬀspring traits to be correlated to parental traits for
the principles of evolution to apply. However, the gene
centered view [3] is a simpler perspective in which the
genes serve as indivisible units that are preserved from
generation to generation [4]. In eﬀect, diﬀerent versions
of the gene, i.e. alleles, compete rather than organisms.
This view simpliﬁes the interplay of selection and hered-
ity in sexually reproducing organisms.

We will show, formally, that the gene centered view
corresponds to a mean ﬁeld approximation [5]. This clar-
iﬁes the domain of its applicability and the conditions
in which it should not be applied to understanding evo-
lutionary processes in real biological systems. We will
then describe the breakdown of this model in the case of
symmetry breaking and its implications for the study of
ecological systems.

It is helpful to explain the gene centered view using
the “rowers analogy” introduced by Dawkins [3]. In this
analogy boats of mixed left- and right-handed rowers
are ﬁlled from a common rower pool. Boats compete
in heats and it is assumed that a speed advantage exists
for boats with more same-handed rowers. The successful
rowers are then returned to the rower pool for the next
round. Over time, a predominantly and then totally sin-
gle handed rower pool will result. Thus, the selection
of boats serves, in eﬀect, to select rowers who therefore
may be considered to be competing against each other
[6].
In order to make the competition between rowers
precise, an eﬀective ﬁtness can be assigned to a rower.
We will make explicit the rowers model and demonstrate
the assignment of ﬁtness to rowers.

The rowers analogy can be directly realized by con-
sidering nonhomologue genes with selection in favor of a
particular combination of alleles on genes. Speciﬁcally,
for two genes, after selection, when allele A1 appears in
one gene, allele B1 must appear on the second gene, and
when allele A−1 appears on the ﬁrst gene allele B−1 must
appear on the second gene. We can write these high
ﬁtness organisms with the notation (1, 1) and (−1, −1),
and the organisms with lower ﬁtness (for simplicity, non-
reproducing) as (1, −1) and (−1, 1).

The assumption of placing rowers into the rower pool
and taking them out at random is equivalent to assum-
ing that there are no correlations in reproduction (i.e. no
correlations in mate pairing) and a suﬃciently dense sam-
pling of genomic combinations by the population (in this
case only a few possibilities). Then the oﬀspring genetic
makeup can be written as a product of the probability
of each allele in the parent population. This assump-
tion describes a “panmictic population” which is often
used as a model in population biology. The assumption
that the oﬀspring genotype frequencies can be written as
a product of the parent allele frequencies is a dynamic
form of the usual mean ﬁeld approximation neglect of
correlations in interacting statistical systems [7]. While
the explicit dynamics of this system is not like the usual
treatment of mean-ﬁeld theory, e.g.
in the Ising model,
many of the implications are analogous.

In our case, the reproducing parents (either (1, 1) or
(−1, −1)) must contain the same proportion of the cor-
related alleles (A1 and B1) so that p(t) can represent the
proportion of either A1 or B1 and 1 − p(t) can represent
the proportion of either A−1 or B−1. The reproduction
equation specifying the oﬀspring (before selection) are:

P1,1(t + 1) = p(t)2

P1,−1(t + 1) = P−1,1(t + 1) = p(t)(1 − p(t))

P−1,−1(t + 1) = (1 − p(t))2

(3)
(4)

(5)

where P1,1 is the proportion of (1, 1) among the oﬀspring,
and similarly for the other cases.

The proportion of the alleles in generation t+1 is given
by the selected organisms. Since the less ﬁt organisms
(1, −1) and (−1, 1) do not survive this is given by p(t +
1) = P ′
1,1(t + 1), where primes
indicate the proportion of the selected organisms. Thus

1,−1(t + 1) = P ′

1,1(t + 1) + P ′

p(t + 1) =

P1,1(t + 1)

P1,1(t + 1) + P−1,−1(t + 1)

This gives the update equation:

p(t + 1) =

p(t)2

p(t)2 + (1 − p(t))2

(6)

(7)

There are two stable states of the population with all
organisms (1, 1) or all organisms (−1, −1).
If we start
with exactly 50% of each allele, then there is an unsta-
ble steady state. In every generation 50% of the organ-
isms reproduce and 50% do not. Any small bias in the
proportion of one or the other will cause there to be
progressively more of one type over the other, and the
population will eventually have only one set of alleles.
This problem is reminiscent of an Ising ferromagnet at
low temperature: A statistically biased initial condition
leads to alignment.

This model can be reinterpreted by assigning a mean
ﬁtness (analogous to a mean ﬁeld) to each allele as in Eq.
(2). The ﬁtness coeﬃcient for allele A1 or B1 is λ1 = p(t)

with the corresponding λ−1 = 1 − λ1. The assignment
of a ﬁtness to an allele reﬂects the gene centered view.
The explicit dependence on the population composition
(a right handed rower in a predominantly right handed
rower pool has higher ﬁtness than one in a predominantly
left handed rower pool) has been objected to on grounds
of biological appropriateness [8]. For our purposes, we
recognize this dependence as the natural outcome of a
mean ﬁeld approximation.

We can describe more speciﬁcally the relationship be-
tween this picture and the mean ﬁeld approximation by
recognizing that the assumptions of no correlations in re-
production, a random mating pattern of parents, is the
same as a long-range interaction in an Ising model.
If
there is a spatial distribution of organisms with mating
correlated by spatial location and ﬂuctuations so that the
starting population has more of the alleles represented by
1 in one region and more of the alleles represented by −1
in another region, then patches of organisms that have
predominantly (1, 1) or (−1, −1) form after several gen-
erations. This symmetry breaking, like in a ferromagnet,
is the usual breakdown of the mean ﬁeld approximation.
Here, it creates correlations / patterns in the genetic
makeup of the population. When correlations become
signiﬁcant then the species has two types. Thus the gene
centered view breaks down when multiple organism types
form.

Understanding the spatial distribution of organism
genotype is a central problem in ecology and conserva-
tion biology [9,10]. The spatial patterns that can arise
from spontaneous symmetry breaking through sexual re-
production, as implied by the analogy with other models,
may be relevant. A systematic study of the relevance of
symmetry breaking to ecological systems begins from a
study of spatially distributed versions of the model just
described. This model is a simplest model of disruptive
selection, which corresponds to selection in favor of two
genotypes whose hybrids are less viable. Assuming over-
lapping local reproduction neighborhoods, called demes,
the relevant equations are:

p(x, t + 1) = D(¯p(x, t))

D(p) =

¯p(x, t) =

p2

p2 + (1 − p)2
1
NR

X
|xj|≤R

p(x + xj, t)

NR = (cid:12)(cid:12){xj (cid:12)(cid:12) |xj | ≤ R}(cid:12)(cid:12)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

where the organisms are distributed over a two-
dimensional grid and the local genotype averaging is per-
formed over a preselected range of grid cells around the
central cell. Under these conditions the organisms lo-
cally tend to assume one or the other type. In contrast
to conventional insights in ecology and population biol-
ogy, there is no need for either complete separation of or-
ganisms or environmental variations to lead to spatially
varying genotypes. However, because the organisms are

2

not physically isolated from each other, the boundaries
between neighboring domains will move, and the domains
will follow conventional coarsening behavior for systems
with non-conserved order parameters.

Simulations of this model starting from random ini-
tial conditions are shown in Fig. 1. These initial con-
ditions can arise when selection becomes disruptive af-
ter being non-disruptive due to environmental change.
The formation of domains of the two diﬀerent types that
progressively coarsen over time can be seen. While the
evolutionary dynamics describing the local process of or-
ganism selection is diﬀerent, the spatial dynamics of do-
mains is equivalent to the process of coarsening / pat-
tern formation that occurs in many other systems [11].
Fourier transformed power spectra (Figs. 2–4) conﬁrm
the correspondence to conventional coarsening by show-
ing that the correlation length grows as t1/2 after initial
transients. In a ﬁnite sized system, it is possible for one
type to completely eliminate the other type. However,
the time scale over which this takes place is much longer
than the results assuming complete reproductive mixing,
i.e. the mean ﬁeld approximation. Since ﬂat boundaries
do not move except by random perturbations, a non-
uniform ﬁnal state is possible. The addition of noise will
cause slow relaxation of ﬂat boundaries but they can also
be trapped by quenched (frozen) inhomogeneity.

The results have signiﬁcant implications for ecology of
genetic diversity and species formation. The observation
of harlequin distribution patterns of sister forms is gener-
ally attributed to nonhomogeneities in the environment,
i.e. that these patterns reﬂect features of the underly-
ing habitat (=selective) template. Our results show that
disruptive selection can give rise to spontaneously self-
organized patterns of spatial distribution that are inde-
pendent of underlying habitat structure. At a particular
time, the history of introduction of disruptive selection
events would be apparent as a set of overlapping patterns
of genetic diversity that exist on various spatial scales.

More speciﬁc relevance of these results to the theoreti-
cal understanding of genetic diversity can be seen in Fig.
5 where the population averaged time dependence of p is
shown. The gene centered view / mean ﬁeld theory pre-
dicts a rapid homogenization over the entire population.
The persistence of diversity in simulations with symme-
try breaking, as compared to its disappearance in mean
ﬁeld theory, is signiﬁcant. Implications for experimental
tests and methods are also important. Symmetry break-
ing predicts that when population diversity is measured
locally, rapid homogenization similar to the mean ﬁeld
prediction will apply, while when they are measured over
areas signiﬁcantly larger than the expected range of re-
production, extended persistence of diversity should be
observed.

The divergence of population traits in space can also
couple to processes that prevent interbreeding or doom
the progeny of such breedings. These may include as-
sortive mating, whereby organism traits inhibit inter-
breeding. Such divergences can potentially lead to the

formation of multiple species from a single connected
species (sympatric speciation). By contrast, allopatric
speciation where disconnected populations diverge has
traditionally been the more accepted process even though
experimental observations suggest sympatric speciation
is important. Our concept of genetic segregation via
spontaneous pattern formation diﬀers in concept from
models in which sympatric diﬀerentiation is achieved
solely via either runaway sexual selection or transient
or micro-allopatry. More recent papers have begun to
connect the process of symmetry breaking to sympatric
speciation when driven by speciﬁc models of competition
[12–14].

[1] Bar-Yam, Y., Dynamics of Complex Systems, Addison-

Wesley Longman (1997).

[2] Eigen, M., McCaskill, J. and Schuster, P., Adv. Chem.

Phys. 75, 149 (1989).

[3] Dawkins, R., The Selﬁsh Gene, 2nd ed., Oxford Univer-

sity Press, p.86 (1989).

[4] The evolutionary indivisibility of genes is also not neces-

sarily well justiﬁed.

[5] Bar-Yam, Y., Adv. Complex Sys. 2, 277 (2000).
[6] For a collection of articles discussing the “levels of selec-
tion controversy” see: Brandon, R. N. and Burian, R.
M., eds., Genes, Organisms, Populations: Controversies
Over the Units of Selection, MIT Press (1984).

[7] The general relationship between the mean-ﬁeld approx-
imation and the gene centered view can be shown by
considering a two-step of reproduction and selection:

{N (s; t)} = R[{N ′(s; t − 1)}]
{N ′(s; t)} = D[{N (s; t)}]

where s is a particular genome, and N, N ′ are numbers
of reproduced, selected organisms respectively. Using a
mean ﬁeld approximation for oﬀspring, the probability
of a particular genome s is the product of probabilities
of the alleles ai: P (a1, . . . , aN ) = Q P (ai). This enables
the two-step update equations to be written as a one-step
update equation for each allele:

n′(ai; t) = ˜D[{n′(ai; t − 1)}] = λ({n′})n′(ai; t − 1)

where n′(ai) is the number of allele ai. For details see [5].
[8] Sober, E. and Lewontin, R. C., Phil. Sci. 49, 157 (1982).
[9] Tilman, D. and Kariena, P., eds., Spatial Ecology: The
Role of Space in Population Dynamics and Interspeciﬁc
Interactions, Princeton University Press, p.368 (1997).

[10] Durett, R. and Levin, S. A., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.

B 343, 329 (1994).

[11] Bray, A. J., Advances in Physics 43, 357 (1994).
[12] Kondrashov, A. S. and Kondrashov, F. A., Nature 400,

351 (1999).

[13] Dieckmann, U. and Doebeli, M., Nature 400, 354 (1999).

3

[14] Higashi, M., Takimoto, G. and Yamamura, N., Nature

402, 523 (1999).

J

&



$

 

! 

"

$"

 &

 #$

# 

 "

FIG. 1. Spatially distributed evolution with disruptive se-
lection giving rise to two types appearing in patches and coars-
ening. The space is periodic and has 256 × 256 sites, and the
mating neighborhood radius is R = 5.

FIG. 2. Fourier power spectra averaged over ten simu-
lations of evolutionary processes like that shown in Fig. 1
(512 × 512 sites and R = 1).

FIG. 3. Temporal behavior of the peak of a Fourier power
spectrum in the shown case. Top: The peak frequency kp(t)
which follows approximately t−1/2. Bottom: The peak power
S(kp) which follows approximately t1/2.

FIG. 4. Collapsed version of the Fourier power spectra

demonstrating the scaling form S(k) = t1/2f (kt1/2).

4

FIG. 5. Comparison of the time dependence of type prob-
ability in the mean ﬁeld approximation and symmetry break-
ing, calculated using diﬀerent random number sequences. Di-
versity persists much longer in the latter. In some cases, for-
ever.

5

