0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
0
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Damage of cellular material under simultaneous application of pressure and pulsed

electric ﬁeld

aD´epartement de G´enie Chimique, Universit´e de Technologie de Compi`egne, Centre de Recherche de Royallieu, B.P.

M. I. Bazhala,b , N. I. Lebovkaa,c , E. Vorobieva∗

b Ukrainian State University of Food Technologies, 68, Volodymyrska str., Kyiv, 252033, Ukraine

c Institute of Biocolloidal Chemistry named after F.D. Ovcharenko, NAS of Ukraine, 42, blvr.Vernadskogo, Kyiv, 252142,

20529-60205 Compi`egne Cedex, France

Ukraine

Inﬂuence of pulsed electric ﬁeld (PEF) simultaneous to pressure treatment on moisture
expression from ﬁne-cut cellular raw material has been investigated. Dependencies of speciﬁc
conductivity σ, liquid yield Y , instantaneous ﬂow rate v and qualitative juice characteristics
at diﬀerent modes of PEF treatment are discussed. Three main consolidation phases were
observed in a case of mechanical expression. A uniﬁed approach is proposed for liquid yield
data analysis allowing to reduce the data scattering caused by diﬀerences in the quality
of samples. Simultaneous application of pressure and PEF treatment allowed to reveal a
passive form of electrical damage. Pressure provokes the damage of defected cells, enhances
diﬀusion migration of moisture in porous cellular material and depresses the cell resealing
processes. PEF application at a moment when a sample speciﬁc electrical conductivity
reaches minimum and pressure achieves its constant value seemed to be the most optimal.

Notation
d
D
E
k
M 1
N
P
S
ti
tmax
tp
tvmax
∆t
T
v
U
W
Y I
Y II
Y ∗
Greek letters
σ
τ
τ ∗
τD

mean cell’s dimension, µm
diﬀusion coeﬃcient, m2 s−1
electric ﬁeld strength, kV cm−1
area normalizing coeﬃcient
ﬁrst Moment, s
number of pulses
pressure, bar
area under the expression curve Y (t), % s
pulse duration, µs
maximal time of pressing, s
time of PEF treatment application, s
time, where maximum of instantaneous ﬂow rate is observed, s
pulse repetition time, ms
temperature, K
= dY /dt instantaneous ﬂow rate, % s−1
external voltage, V
moisture content, %
ﬁrst normalized form of liquid yield
second normalized form of liquid yield
intensiﬁcation degree of PEF treatment

conductivity, S m−1
characteristic time of expression, s
coeﬃcient of PEF enhanced durability
∼ d2/6D time constant of diﬀusion process, s

∗Corresponding author, E-mail:Eugene.Vorobiev@utc.fr

1

with PEF treatment
without PEF treatment
reduced to the maximal value
in the limit of inﬁnite time

Subscripts
E
E = 0
r
∞
Abbreviations
PEF
SEM

pulsed electric ﬁeld
scanning electron microscopy

I. INTRODUCTION

Mechanical expression (hydraulic pressing) is widely used in the processes of solid-liquid separation for extraction
of fruit juices and vegetable oils, dewatering of ﬁbrous materials, etc. (Schwartzberg, 1983). Eﬃciency of this process
can be increased by raw material plasmolysis, cellular damage or permeabilization prior to its expression. Diﬀerent
methods are traditionally used to increase the degree of raw material plasmolysis: heating, osmotic drying or freezing
dehydration, alkaline breakage, enzymatic treatment, etc. (Rao & Lund, 1986; Aguilera & Stanley, 1999; Tsuruta,
Ishimoto & Masuoka, 1998; Ponant, Foissac & Esnault, 1988; Jones, 1988; Barbosa-C´anovas & Vega-Mercado, 1996).
Earlier on, the method of electric ﬁeld treatment (both d.c. and a.c.) was also proposed for cellular material
plasmolysis (known as electro-plasmolysis). The methods of electro-plasmolysis were shown to be good for juice yield
intensiﬁcation and for improving the product quality in juice production (Scheglov, Koval, Fuser, Zargarian, Srimbov,
Belik et al., 1988; McLellan, Kime & Lind, 1991, Bazhal & Vorobiev, 2000), processing of vegetable and plant raw
materials (Papchenko, Bologa, Berzoi, 1988; Grishko, Kozin, Chebanu, 1991), food stuﬀs processing (Miyahara, 1985),
winemaking (Kalmykova, 1993), and sugar production (Gulyi, Lebovka, Mank, Kupchik, Bazhal, Matvienko et al.,
1994; Jemai, 1997). But all these electric ﬁeld applications are usually restricted by the high and uncontrolled increase
in cellular tissue temperature and product quality deterioration because of electrode material electrolytic reactions,
etc.

Recently, a variety of new high and moderate pulsed electric ﬁeld (PEF) applications were successfully demonstrated
for liquid and solid foods (Barbosa-C´anovas, Pothakamuri, Palou & Swanson, 1998; Wouters & Smelt, 1997; Knorr,
Geulen, Grahl & Sitzmann, 1994; Knorr & Angersbach, 1998, Barsotti & Cheftel, 1998). The PEF application
provides a possibility of ﬁne regulation of electric power input and may result in eﬀective permeabilization of cellular
membranes (Zimmermann, 1975; Chang et al., 1992; Weaver & Chizmadzhev, 1996) without signiﬁcant temperature
elevation (Barbosa-C´anovas et al., 1998).

One of emerging and promising method is the combined PEF and pressure application, which demonstrates signif-
icant yield intensiﬁcation for juice extracted from apples and beets and clariﬁcation of the extracted juice (Vorobiev,
Bazhal & Lebovka, 2000; Gulyi et al., 1994). But the major problem arising from simultaneous application of me-
chanical expression and PEF treatment is the choice of optimal modes of treatment. The mechanism of solid/liquid
expression from cellular materials is rather complex and may include many diﬀerent phases of consolidation process
(Lanoiselle, Vorobiev, Bouvier & Piar, 1996). The electric breakdown of a cellular system can inﬂuence consolidation
phases and change drastically the expression curves. Unfortunately, up to now there are no accepted mechanism
of electric breakdown in the cellular systems and reliable criteria for choosing optimal parameters of electric ﬁeld
treatment (Lebovka et al., 1996, Lebovka, Bazhal & Vorobiev, 2000). Another problem is the poor reproducibility of
the experimental data, which is typical for objects of biological origin.

The properties of cellular materials inﬂuence signiﬁcantly the the electrotreatment eﬃciency. The electrometry
can be used for characterization of changes in tissue properties under the inﬂuence of external factors (electric ﬁeld,
pressure). This is a simple method, as far as the electrical conductivity, σ, reﬂects a degree of a water saturated tissue
permeability (Sahimi, 1995). But the general dependence between the structure of a cellular material and σ may be
rather complex, because the conductivity of a biological tissue may be inﬂuenced by a number of processes, such as
resealing of membranes in cells (Heinz, Angersbach & Knorr, 1999), diﬀusional redistribution of moisture inside the
samples, etc.

The objective of this study is the optimization of moisture expression from biological raw materials under simulta-

neous pressing and PEF treatment.

The liquid expression from ﬁne-cut cellular tissue after PEF application for diﬀerent modes and durations of

precompression has been investigated. Apple was used as the example of cellular material.

The useful method of data treatment, which allows to reduce data scattering caused by diﬀerences in quality of the

samples is described. Discussion of the consolidation kinetics before and after PEF treatment is also given.

2

II. PRELIMINARY REMARKS

The reasons for the simultaneous application of mechanical expression and PEF treatment are as follows. The
excessive quantity of extraparticle liquid and absence of contacts between solid particles increases electrical energy
losses. So the eﬀectiveness of the PEF treatment is restricted by the uniform and tight packing of raw material
between electrodes and previous removing of extraparticle air and excessive liquid (from cells destroyed by cutting).
The method of raw material compact formation is its pre-consolidation. Moreover, eﬀectiveness of the PEF treatment
with respect to the water-saturated cellular materials is restricted by the low values of moisture content, W . The PEF
treatment is ineﬀective for a water-saturated system (which is the case for the ﬁne-cut apple raw material) because
of electric breakage and uncontrolled increase of current ﬂow through the system. The initial steps of consolidation
remove an excess liquid from the extracellular volume. Therefore, we can expect increase of the PEF treatment
eﬃciency after pre-consolidation of the raw material.

III. MATERIALS AND METHODS

A. Preparation of apple slices

Freshly harvested apples of Golden Delicious variety were selected for investigation and stored at 4◦C until required.
The moisture content of apples W was within 80-85%. The ﬁne-cut apple pieces (3-5 mm diameter) were prepared
from an apple pap using rasp.

B. Experimental setup and instrumentations

Figure 1 is a schematic representation of the experimental set-up. All experiments were carried out using laboratory
ﬁlter-press cell equipped with an electrical treatment system. The polypropylene frame had a cylindrical cavity
compartment (20 mm thick, 56 mm in diameter). The cavity compartment of frame was initially ﬁlled up with apple
slices and then was tightly closed from both sides by the steel plates. One of the plates, covered by a ﬁlter cloth, was
used as a stationary electrode. The other plate was attached with an elastic rubber diaphragm. A mobile wire gauze
electrode was installed between the diaphragm and the layer of apple slices. Pressure was applied to the layer of apple
slices through the elastic diaphragm using the hydraulic pressure controller GDS ’Standard’ (GDS Instruments Ltd,
UK) with water as a pressure ﬂuid. The pressure controller provided a constant pressure from 1 to 30 bars. The yield
of liquid was controlled by balance PT610 (Sartorius AG, Germany).

A high voltage pulse generator, 1500V-15A (Service Electronique UTC, France) provided the monopolar pulses of
rectangular shape and allowed pulse duration ti varied within the interval of 10 − 1000 µs (to precision ±2 µs), pulse
repetition time ∆t within the interval of 1 − 100 ms (to precision of ±0.1 ms) and number of pulses n within the
interval of 1 − 100000. The conductivities were measured by contacting electrode method with an LCR Meter HP
4284A (Hewlett Packard, 38 mm guarded/guard Electrode-A HP 16451B) for thin apple slice samples at the frequency
of 100 Hz and with Conductimetre HI8820N (Hanna Instruments, Portugal) for the apple juice samples at a frequency
of 1000 Hz (these frequencies were selected as optimal in order to remove the inﬂuence of polarising eﬀect on electrodes
and inside the samples). Pulse protocols and all the output data (current, voltage, impedance, pressure, juice yield
and temperature) were controlled using a data logger and special software HPVEE v.4.01 (Hewlett-Packard) adapted
by Service Electronique UTC, France).

High resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using the instrument XL30 ESEM-FEG
(Philips, V=15 kV, P=3.5 Torr). The ”WET” chamber mode allowing observation of hydrated apple specimens in
their natural state was applied.

The optical absorbance of an expressed liquid was measured with Photocolorimeter CO75 (WPA Ltd, UK) at
the wavelength 520 nm. The characteristic absorption spectra were determined with respect to distilled water.
Transmittance of an expressed liquid was calculated as a ratio of ﬁltered and nonﬁltered liquid absorptions. The
liquid was ﬁltrated using a Whatman 2V ﬁlter paper.

All experiments were done using electric ﬁeld voltages U from 200 to 1500 V, pulse duration ti = 100 s, pulse
repetition time ∆t = 10 ms, number of pulses N = 50, constant pressure P = 3 bars and total time of mechanical

C. Methods

3

expression t up to 104 s. Pressure value of 3 bars was accepted as the most eﬃcient for exhibition of the eﬀect of
simultaneous pressing and PEF treatment (Vorobiev et al., 2000). The experiments were repeated, at least, ﬁve times.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Phases of consolidation

Figure 2 presents typical experimental curves of liquid yield Yr, instantaneous ﬂow rate vr, pressure Pr and speciﬁc
electrical conductivity σr vs. time t. For convenience of presentation, here all properties are reduced to their maximal
values, e.g., Yr = Y /Ymax, etc., and ﬂow rate is determined as v = dY /dt.

Initially we observe a rather rapid increase of liquid yield Y , and decrease of electrical conductivity, σ. This
behaviour corresponds to the layer pre-compaction (at a constant velocity of elastic diaphragm displacement) and
expulsion of extraparticle air-liquid mixture. The maximum of instantaneous ﬂow rate v is observed approximately
at t = tvmax = 50 − 60 s. In the absence of PEF treatment (U = 0, or E = 0 ) the curve of σ(t) temporarily stabilises
in time interval 300 < t < 1000 s and by this moment the pressure P reaches its maximal value of 3 bars. This
behaviour correspond to the end of pre-compaction period. Then, at t > 1000, the σ(t) curve (E = 0) slightly rises,
which can be explained by mechanical rupture of residual cells, by the material deterioration and by the eﬀects of the
biological activity of microorganisms.

Typical SEM micrographs of apple tissue structure before and after pressing are presented in Figs. 3(a) and (b),
respectively. The mean size of undamaged cells is of order 100 − 200 µm. We see, that after pressing some of the cells
are destroyed, but there exist also intact cells. So, for a given mode of treatment (P = 3 bars, t = 600 s) the cellular
structure is not completely disrupted after pressing and there exists some isolated cells, which remain intact during
pressing period. These cells can be damaged or partially permeabilized by another methods, for example, by PEF,
thermal or another mode of treatment.

In analysing the results presented in Figs. 2, 3(a,b) we can discern the following phases of press-cake layer consoli-

dation process:

• Phase I. Initial compaction of press-cake and expulsion of air-liquid mixture, or pre-consolidation period (0 <
∼= 100 − 120). During this phase the velocity of elastic diaphragm displacement is constant and a

t / 2tvmax
maximum of liquid ﬂow rate is observed.

• Phase II. Mechanical rupture of cells and expulsion of liquid from ruptured cells (100 − 120 / t / 300 − 400).
The decrease of both liquid ﬂow rate and velocity of elastic diaphragm displacement and acceleration of the
pressure increase are observed.

• Phase III. Final consolidation of press-cake at constant pressure, packing of press-cake and retardation of
liquid ﬂow rate (100 − 120 / t). The liquid ﬂowing from intracellular, extracellular and extraparticle volumes
is expressed from the press-cake. At the beginning of this phase a minimum value of the speciﬁc electrical
conductivity is observed. Moisture occupies all channels and so the press-cake is said to be in an impregnated
state.

These phases are shown schematically at the top of Fig. 2.

B. Methods of data analysis for combined pressing and PEF treatment

Signiﬁcant changes in kinetics of moisture expression and press-cake consolidation can be observed after PEF
treatment. Figure 4(a) presents some examples of experimental curves of liquid yield Y (%) versus time t. It can
be seen that Y (t) curves rise signiﬁcantly after PEF application (applied in this case at t = 600 s ) as the result of
damage or partial permeabilization of intact cells and subsequent expression of liquid.

But here, the main problem is in poor reproducibility of the experimental Y (t) data. The measured curves of Y (t)
can deviate substantially because of diﬀerences in initial humidity of samples. This diﬃculty can be overcome by
consideration of the normalized or reduced liquid yield. This normalization procedure was executed in two steps. We
began with the ﬁrst normalized form of liquid yield deﬁned as (see Fig. 4(b)):

Y I
E = YE(t)/YE(tmax),

(1)

4

where tmax is the maximal time of pressing (here we use the value tmax = 5400 s), YE values correspond to the values
of Y at diﬀerent electric ﬁeld strengths E.

We assume that all liquid yield curves should be equal in the time range of t < tp for identical conditions of pressing.
E=0(t) for E = 0 as a reference. Then we calculate
E(t) so as to obtain the same

For experiments with PEF application (E 6= 0), we take the curve Y I
the area under this curve for the time period t < tp and renormalize all the curves Y I
values of

for all curves.

Normalization coeﬃcient is given by

SE =

tp

Z

0

Y I
E(t)dt,

kE = SE=0/SE.

The second normalized form of liquid yield curve is deﬁned as follows (see Fig. 4(c)):

Y II
E (t) = kE · Y I

E(t).

(2)

(3)

(4)

The degree of intensiﬁcation caused by PEF treatment, Y ∗ can be determined as the following ratio of the second

normalized forms for pressing with and without PEF treatment:

Y ∗ = Y II

E (tmax)/Y II

E=0(tmax).

(5)

Here the values of Y II

E,E=0(tmax) were determined in the point of the maximal time of pressing t = tmax.

Another interesting property of the expressing is the mean characteristic time, which characterizes durability of
the process. The theory developed for mechanical expression of cellular materials (Lanoiselle et al., 1996) describes
expression process with the set of characteristic times for the diﬀerent expression phases. These are very valuable
characteristics of the expression processes but, in practice, it is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd them proceeding from the
expression curves. The main problem here is that we can never determine the exact value of limiting expression
quantity Y∞ at t → ∞. For vegetable stuﬀ we are faced with the problem of high enzymatic destruction at continuous
expression. So we always stop the expression process at rather long, but ﬁnite time (in our case we choose tmax = 5400
s) and the obtained values of Y (tmax) are of course less then the actual values of Y∞. More general approach implies
evaluation of the ﬁrst Moment of the function F (t) = Y (tmax) − Y (t):

M 1 =

tmax

F (t)dt

(6)

tmax

F (t)tdt

R0
R0

It is easy to show, that for the simple exponential function F (t) = exp(−t/τ ) and tmax → ∞ the ﬁrst Moment is
equal to the characteristic time, M 1 = τ. For the ﬁnite but large values of tmax, we have M 1 ≈ τ (1 − (tmax/τ )2
2etmax /τ ), and
at tmax/τ = 5 the ﬁrst Moment equals to M 1 ≈ 0.92τ . So, in our case the value of M 1 may serve for approximate
estimation of the eﬀective characteristic time constant of the whole expression process.

It is useful to use this approach for crude estimation of characteristic time or durability of expression process after
PEF intervention. In such a case we can treat M 1 as a mean characteristic time of liquid expulsion processes reﬂecting
the summarized eﬀect of all the mechanisms in a system. We can deﬁne the coeﬃcient of PEF-enhanced durability as

τ ∗ = M 1

E/M 1

E=0.

(7)

This coeﬃcient shows the degree of the durability increase after the PEF treatment.

C. Inﬂuence of ﬁeld strength E and time tp of PEF treatment

1. Liquid yield kinetics

Figure 5 presents the curves of excess normalized liquid yield ∆Y = Y II

E=0 versus time t at diﬀerent times
of PEF application, tp, and diﬀerent values of electric ﬁeld strength, E. We have applied PEF treatment in diﬀerent
characteristic moments:

E − Y II

5

• tp = 0 s (before pressing);

• tp = 20 s (initial phase of pressing);

• tp = 120 s (second consolidation phase and speciﬁc conductivity of a tissue is low);

• tp = 330 s (press-cake pressure is achieved a constant value);

• tp = 600 s and tp = 5400 s (ﬁnal consolidation phase).

The range of voltage values used corresponds to conditions of steady PEF-application regime without any disruption
of electrical treatment caused by overﬂow of acceptable maximal current value. For the given pulses protocol, the
steady electrical treatment regime was observed for the voltages not exceeding the following maximal values: Umax =
600 V for tp = 0 s, Umax = 1000 V for tp = 600 s, and Umax = 1500 V for tp = 5400 s.

As can be seen from Fig. 5 the form of the liquid yield Y II

E curves in the time interval of t < 300 s practically does
not depend on the time of PEF input tp and the electric ﬁeld strength values E (that corresponds to small values of
deviations Y II
E=0). Only at longer time intervals t > 300 s in the phase III of consolidation, we can observe a
behaviour reﬂecting the mode of PEF treatment.

E6=0 − Y II

At short times of PEF treatment, tp . 100 − 200 s, the excess liquid yield increases rapidly with E increase
as compared with untreated sample (see Fig. 5(a-c)). But ineﬀectiveness of PEF treatment at short tp is less in
comparison with the cases of later PEF application. It can be explained by the inﬂuence of excess quantities of air
and extraparticle liquid in the cake pores. The sample is highly water-saturated at earlier period of pre-consolidation
and PEF application during this period may cause dielectric breakage and uncontrolled increase of current ﬂow through
the system. At such conditions, the intensiﬁcation degree of PEF treatment Y ∗ is rather low (see black square for
tp = 0 in Fig. 6(a)).

When we apply the PEF treatment later on, for example, at the beginning of the phase III of consolidation, at
t ∼ 300 − 400 s a liquid excess yield seems to be less dependent on E (Fig. 5(d)). Pressure achieves its constant
value at this time and most of cells that could be destroyed mechanically at a given pressure (3 bars in our experi-
ments) are already disrupted and most of liquid is evacuated from these cells. The residual isolated intact cells are
connected with electrodes through the network of channels containing conductive moisture. At such conditions, the
transmembrane potential on intact cells should be high enough, even at low values of E, and, therefore, the eﬀective
electropermeabilization of cell can be attained even at minimal values of electric ﬁeld intensity (E = 170 V cm−1 in
our experiments).

As we can see from comparison of typical micrographs of apple tissue structure received for pressing with and
without electrical treatment (Figs. 3(b) and (c)), PEF application at t = 330 s (E = 500 V cm−1) causes almost
complete destruction of the material. The similar pictures are observed in the wide interval of E ∼ 250 − 500 V cm−1
and micrographs allow us to identify only certain quantity of single isolated intact cells.

Dependencies of the coeﬃcient of PEF enhanced durability τ ∗ versus electric ﬁeld strength, E (Fig. 6(b)) substan-
tiate conclusions set forth above. We see that the value of τ ∗ depends considerably on the electric ﬁeld strength E
only at small time of PEF input (tp < 100 − 200 s). The best liquid excess yield as compared with untreated sample
may be obtained at the lowest applied ﬁeld E when the PEF is applied at an instant when the pressure in the system
reaches a constant value (tp = 300 − 400 s).

2. Speciﬁc conductivity σ, ﬂow rate v and pressure P kinetics

Figure 7 presents the experimental curves of (a) a speciﬁc electrical conductivity, σ, and (b) instantaneous ﬂow
rate, v, versus time t for the compressed layer of apple slices. The PEF treatment was applied at t = tp = 120 s at
diﬀerent external ﬁeld strengths, E. As can be seen from Fig. 7(a), the σ(t) values begin to rise abruptly after PEF
treatment, and this behaviour becomes more pronounced with increasing E. Such rise of σ(t) values corresponds to
the combined eﬀect of mechanical rupture of cells and their electrical permeabilization.

We present schematically the model of PEF treatment with and without pressing in Fig. 8. In the absence of
mechanical pressure the eﬀect of the hidden (or passive) electrical breakdown can be rather important. The electrical
conductivity of the whole system depends not only on the destruction degree of individual cells, but also on the
character of their connectivity and the presence of continuously conducting channels.

At ﬁrst, after PEF treatment the real degree of electrical breakdown is hidden and does not aﬀect the conductivity
of the whole system. PEF treatment permeabilizates cell membranes and intensiﬁes diﬀusion processes. The time of
electric conductivity build-up in a cellular material after PEF treatment can be estimated from the time constant of
diﬀusion processes: τD ∼ d2/6D ≈ 1 s, where d ≈ 100 is a mean cell dimension, and D ≈ 10−9 m2 s−1 is a diﬀusion

6

coeﬃcient of an endocellular ﬂuid. In general, this eﬀect can exhibit a wide distribution of time constants τD because
of diﬀerences in cell dimensions, diﬀusivity of intracellular solutions, degree of cell permeabilization, etc. Moreover,
it can be masked by another related phenomena of resealing process. Heinz et al. (1999) observed that the insulating
properties of the cell membranes can be recovered within a few seconds after the small power PEF treatment and it
results in decreasing of a cellular system conductivity.

Simultaneous eﬀect of pressing and PEF treatment(P 6= 0 and E 6= 0) can cause the primary changes. First of
all, mechanical and electrical stresses can be coupled to cause membrane breakdown in cells (Akinlaja & Frederick,
1998). Then, the external pressure enhances ﬂowing of the ﬂuid from destroyed cells to extracellular and extraparticle
channels. All these decrease the retardation time of electric conductivity build-up after PEF treatment. Under
simultaneous PEF treatment and material compression we can also eliminate or diminish the eﬀect of a hidden
electric breakdown and to depress the cells resealing processes. So, in a general case, we should observe in ﬁnal state
σP 6=0 > σP =0. This conclusion is conﬁrmed by the data on σ(t) kinetics at P = 0 presented in Fig. 7(a) by the dashed
line. In this experiment we have dropped the pressure after PEF treatment. This results in considerable decrease of
σ(t) values as compared with the curve obtained at P 6= 0 (Fig. 8).

A liquid ﬂow rate v also depends upon the degree of cellular system destruction as a result of PEF treatment. But
the behaviour of v(t) after PEF application does not change drastically (Fig. 7(b)). We can explain such behaviour
by the fact of substantial decrease and termination of liquid expulsion from the press-cake by that time. The most
pronounced peak is observed only at the highest electric ﬁeld strength (E = 400 V cm−1, Fig. 7(b)), and behaviour
of the v(t) curve reveals only increase of its long time tails with increase of E .

Figure 9 presents the experimental curves of (a) reduced pressure values P ∗ = P/Pmax and (b) pressure diﬀerence
P0 − PE versus time t for diﬀerent durations of pre-compression stage before the PEF application. It can be seen
that PEF treatment diminishes tissue rigidity which corresponds to the decrease of an eﬀective pressure in a system.
Electrical treatment during the pressing period up to 330 s delays pressure increase and accelerates the liquid yield.
PEF application (tp > 330 s) can decrease steady-state pressure abruptly and initiate a rise of a liquid ﬂow rate.
The peaks of pressure decrease become sharper with pre-compression time increase. It corresponds to the more rapid
destruction of cellular material pre-compressed during a longer time. But then, at the ﬁnal stage, the mechanical
properties of a press-cake reﬂate and pressure increases again up to the maximal level.

D. Optical properties of expressed liquid

The expressed liquid (apple juice) absorption (or coloration) and transmittance change in the course of a simple
In the ﬁnal phase of
pressing process, due to ﬁltration properties of the cellular material in the course of time.
consolidation (phase III, see Fig. 2), the liquid coloration reduces considerable as compared with coloration of an
initial portion of moisture. As we have demonstrated before (Vorobiev, Bazhal & Lebovka, 2000), the simultaneous
pressing and electric ﬁeld treatment result in considerable reduction of coloration of those diﬀerential portions of liquid
which were obtained after PEF application. Studying the temporal dependencies of optical properties in diﬀerential
liquid for diﬀerent modes of pressing and PEF application is per se of great interest.

Here we will discuss only the optical properties of the cumulative expressed liquid, which is obtained as a result of
combined pressing and PEF treatment at the ﬁnal stage of the process. Figure 10 presents dependencies of absorption
and transmittance versus electric strength E for extracted liquid at diﬀerent values of tp. On the one hand, the PEF
treatment decreases the liquid coloration, as can be seen from absorption curves in Fig.10. This is a positive factor of
PEF treatment. We can explain this phenomena by improvement of the tissue ﬁltration properties during pressing.
Moreover, ﬁltration properties of the PEF treated press-cake also get improved with tp increase because of increase of
the pressed tissue consolidation. On the other hand, transmittance of expressed liquid reduces with tp decrease and
increase of E. This is an undesirable phenomena. It can be explained by the inﬂuence of electrical treatment on the
press-cake ﬁltration properties. It is known that PEF application causes many defects of the tissue. Application of
the PEF treatment increases yield of a liquid with high contents of suspended particles.

That’s why it is so important to choose a proper instant for PEF application allowing to obtain the cumulative
liquid with low coloration and high transmittance. The PEF application at a moment when pressure in the system
achieves a constant value is consistent with requirement of the best quality of a juice.

Investigations of the moisture expression from ﬁne-cut apple raw material under simultaneous mechanical expression
and PEF treatment were done. All experiments were performed using both laboratory ﬁlter-press cell and high voltage

V. CONCLUSION

7

pulse generator which provided monopolar pulses of rectangular shape. The PEF treatment was applied to materials
that were expressed at time t = tp. Then the yield of liquid was analysed in comparison with that of untreated
material. The experimental results were obtained for electric ﬁeld strength E varying from 200 to 1500 V cm−1, pulse
duration ti = 100 s, pulse repetition time ∆t = 10 ms, number of pulses N = 50, constant pressure P = 3 bars and
maximal time of mechanical expression tmax = 5.4 × 103 − 104 s.

The summary of results is as follows:
(1) The data obtained allows us to conclude that all kinetics curves ( σ(t), Y (t), v(t) and P (t)) clearly reﬂect three

main consolidation phases in cellular material.

(2) The combination of pressing and PEF treatment gives the most optimum results and permits to enhance
signiﬁcantly the liquid yield in comparison with samples untreated by PEF. The PEF treatment application permits
to intensify pressing process whenever the PEF is applied. But best liquid excess yield results at lowest value of applied
ﬁeld E may be obtained when PEF is applied after some pre-compression period. Such pressure pretreatment before
PEF application is necessary for structuring uniformity of the press-cake, removing excess moisture and decreasing
the electrical conductivity of cellular material. In our study, the pre-compression period duration of 300 − 400 s was
optimal and for which the pressure in the system reaches a constant value. The PEF application in this moment
of time results in the best quality of the expressed liquid (apple juice), which is conﬁrmed by its coloration and
transmittance.

(3) The simultaneous pressure and PEF treatment application reveals the passive form of the electrical damage.
Electrical damage under a low ﬁeld without pressure application develops very slow. The pressure provokes damage
of defected cells, enhances diﬀusion migration of moisture and depresses cells resealing processes.

(4) The proposed uniﬁed approach for liquid yield data analysis allows to reduce the data scattering caused by the

diﬀerences in the quality of samples.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank the “Pole Regional Genie des Procedes“ (Picardie, France) and the Society
CHOQUENET for providing the ﬁnancial support. Authors also thank Dr. N. S. Pivovarova and Dr. A. B. Jemai
for help with the preparation of the manuscript.

8

REFERENCES

Aguilera, J.M., & Stanley, D.W. (1999). Microstructural principles of food processing and engineering. Gaithers-

burg: Aspen Publishers.

Akinlaja J., & Frederick, S. (1998). The Breakdown of Cell Membranes by Electrical and Mechanical Stress.

Biophysical Journal, 75(1), 247-254.

Barbosa-C´anovas, G.V., & Vega-Mercado, H. (1996). Dehydration of Foods (pp. 289-320). New York: Chapman &

Hall.

Barbosa-C´anovas, G.V., Pothakamury, U.R., Palou, E., & Swanson, B.G. (1998). Nonthermal Preservation of Foods

(pp. 53-72). New York: Marcel Dekker.

Barsotti, L., & Cheftel, J.C. (1998). Traitement des aliments par champs electriques pulses. Science des Aliments,

18(6), 584-601.

Bazhal, M.I., & Vorobiev, E.I. (2000). Electric treatment of apple slices for intensifying juice pressing. Journal of

the Science of Food and Agriculture (in press).

Chang, D.C., B.M. Chassy, J.A. Saunders, & Sowers, A.E., Eds. (1992). Guide to electroporation and electrofusion.

San Diego: Academic Press.

Grishko, A.A., Kozin, V.M., & Chebanu, V.G. (1991). Electroplasmolyzer for processing plant raw material, US

Patent no. 4723483.

Gulyi, I.S., Lebovka, N.I., Mank, V.V., Kupchik, M.P., Bazhal, M.I., Matvienko, A.B., & Papchenko, A.Y. (1994).
Scientiﬁc and practical principles of electrical treatment of food products and materials. Kiev: UkrINTEI (in Russian).
In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Emerging Food Science and Technology, Tampere, Finland, 22-24 November
1999, 34.

Heinz, V., Angersbach, A., & Knorr, D. (1999). High electric ﬁeld pulses and membrane permeabilization.

Jemai, A.B. (1997). Contribution a l’etude de l’eﬀet d’un traitement electrique sur les cossettes de betterave a sucre.
Incidence sur le procede d’extraction. Th`ese de Doctorat, Universit´e de Technologie de Compi`egne, Compi`egne, France.

Jones, G.C. (1988), Cossette pretreatment and pressing, International Sugar Journal, 90(1077), 157-167.
Kalmykova, I.S. (1993). Application of electroplasmolysis for intensiﬁcation of phenols extracting from the grapes
in the technologies of red table wines and natural juice. PhD Thesis, Odessa Technological Institute of Food Industry,
Odessa, Ukraine (in Russian).

Knorr, D., & Angersbach, A. (1998). Impact of high intensity electric ﬁeld pulses on plant membrane permeabi-

lization. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 9, 185-191.

Knorr, D., Geulen, M., Grahl, T., & Sitzmann, W. (1994). Food application of high electric ﬁeld pulses. Trends in

Food Science & Technology, 5, 71-75.

Lanoiselle, J.L., Vorobiev, E.I., Bouvier, J.M. & Piar G. (1996). Modeling of Solid/Liquid Expression for Cellular

Materials, AIChE Journal, 42, 2057-2068.

Lebovka, N.I., Mank, V.V., Bazhal, M.I., Kupchik, M.P. & Gulyi, I.S. (1996). Cascade model of thermal electrical

breakdown of inhomogeneous systems. Surface Engineering and Applied Electrochemistry, 1, 29-33.

Lebovka, N.I., Bazhal, M.I. & Vorobiev E. (2000). Simulation and experimental investigation of food material

breakage using pulsed electric ﬁeld treatment. Journal of Food Engineering, 44, 213-223.

McLellan, M.R., Kime, R.L., & Lind, L.R. (1991). Electroplasmolysis and other treatments to improve apple juice

yield. Journal of Science Food Agriculture, 57, 303-306.

Miyahara, K. (1985). Methods and apparatus for producing electrically processed food stuﬀs, US Patent no. 4522834.
Papchenko, A.Y., Bologa, M.K. & Berzoi, S.E. (1988). Apparatus for processing vegetable raw material, US Patent

no. 4787303.

Ponant, J., Foissac, S. & Esnault, A. (1988). The alkaline extraction of sugar beet. Zuckerindustrie, 113(8),

665-676.

Rao, M.A., & Lund, D.B. (1986). Kinetics of thermal softening of food - a review. J. of Food Proc. and Pres., 10,

311-329.

Sahimi, M. (1995). Flow and transport in porous media and fractured rock. Weinheim: VCH.
Scheglov, Ju.A., Koval, N.P., Fuser, L.A., Zargarian, S.Y., Srimbov, A.A., Belik, V. G., Zharik, B.N., Papchenko,
A.Y., Ryabinsky, F.G., & Sergeev, A.S. (1988). Electroplasmolyzer for processing vegetable stock, US Patent no.
4723483.

Schwartzberg, H.G., (1983) Expression-related properties. In M. Peleg & E.B. Bagley, Eds., Physical properties of

food (pp. 423-472). AVI Pupl. Comp., Connecticut.

Tsuruta, T., Ishimoto, Y., & Masuoka T. (1998). Eﬀect of glycerol on intracellular ice formation and dehydration

of onion epidermis. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 858, 217-226.

9

Vorobiev, E.I., Bazhal, M.I., & Lebovka, N.I. (2000). Optimization of pulsed electric ﬁeld treatment of apple slices
by pressing. In Proceedings of the 8th International Congress on Engineering and Food ICEF8, Puebla, Mexico, 9-13
April, 2000, 265.

Weaver, J.C., & Chizmadzev, Yu.A. (1996). Theory of electroporation: A review. Biolectrochemistry and Bioener-

getics, 41(1), 135-160.

Zimmermann, U. (1975). Electrical breakdown: electropermeabilization and electrofusion. Reviews of Physiology

Biochemistry and Pharmacology, 105, 176-256.

FIG. 1. Experimental set-up.

FIG. 2. Typical experimental curves for diﬀerent reduced properties: liquid yield Yr, instantaneous ﬂow rate vr, pressure
Pr and speciﬁc electrical conductivity σr versus time of the expression t. For the convenience of presentation all properties here
are reduced to their maximal values, e.g., Yr = Y /Ymax, etc., ﬂow rate is determined as v = dY /dt. The error bars represent
standard deviations of data. At the top we show the proposed scheme of changes in the cellular tissue structure with time.

FIG. 3. SEM micrographs of apple tissue: (a) before treatment, (b) after pressing (P = 3 bars, t = 600 s), (c) after

simultaneous PEF & pressing treatment (P = 3 bars, tp = 330 s, E = 500 V cm−1, t = 600 s).

FIG. 4. Execution steps in the procedure of experimental curves normalization: examples of real experimental curves of
expressed liquid yield Y (%) versus time t obtained for E = 520 V cm−1 and tp = 600 s (a); deﬁnition of the ﬁrst normalized
form of liquid yield Y I

E (b); and deﬁnition of the second normalized form of liquid yield Y II

E (c).

FIG. 5. Kinetics of normalized excess liquid yield ∆Y = Y II

E − Y II

E=0 at diﬀerent values of tpand E. The error bars represent

standard deviations in the data.

FIG. 6. Degree of PEF treatment intensiﬁcation Y ∗ (a) and coeﬃcient of PEF enhanced durability τ ∗ (b) versus electric
ﬁeld strength E at diﬀerent values of PEF treatment application time tp. The error bars represent standard deviations in the
data.

FIG. 7. Speciﬁc electrical conductivity, σ, (a) and instantaneous ﬂow rate v (b) versus time of expression, t, at tp = 120 s

and diﬀerent values of E. The error bars represent standard deviations in the data.

FIG. 8. Schematic of the model of PEF treatment with and without pressure P . The conductivity of the sample is higher

for case when the pressure is applied.

FIG. 9. Reduced pressure P ∗ = P/Pmax (a) and pressure diﬀerence PE=0 − PE (a) versus time of expression, t, at diﬀerent

values of tp and E. The error bars represent standard deviations in the data.

FIG. 10. Absorbance and transmittance of liquid yielded during pressing versus electric ﬁeld strength, E, at diﬀerent values

of PEF treatment application time, tp. The error bars represent standard deviations in the data.

10

This figure "f1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f4.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f5.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f6.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f7.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f8.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f9.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

This figure "f10.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005080v1

