0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
8

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optimal Mutation Rates on Static Fitness Landscapes

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chalmers University of Technology and G¨oteborg University, S-412 96 G¨oteborg, Sweden

Martin Nilsson

martin@fy.chalmers.se

(February 2, 2008)

We study the evolution of mutation rates for an asexual population living on a static ﬁtness
landscape, consisting of multiple peaks forming an evolutionary staircase. The optimal mutation
rate is found by maximizing the diﬀusion towards higher ﬁtness. Surprisingly the optimal genomic
1
copying ﬁdelity is given by Qopt = e−
ln ν (where ν is the genome length), independent of all other
parameters in the model. Simulations conﬁrm this theoretical result. We also discuss the relation
between the optimal mutation rate on static and dynamic ﬁtness landscapes.

Evolution on the molecular level can be viewed as a
diﬀusion process. The equations describing the time dy-
namics of a population of gene sequences are a set of
discrete diﬀusion equations with an exponential growth
term. The diﬀusion stems from inaccurate copying of the
genome during replication. This enables the population
to explore the sequence space, i.e., the space spanned by
all possible gene sequences. Point mutations makes the
Hamming distance a natural metric on sequence space,
which becomes topologically equivalent to a hyper-cube
of dimension ν, where ν is the genome length. The high
dimensionality makes analysis of the general diﬀusion
process diﬃcult. In this paper we focus on the evolution
through a speciﬁed path in the hypercube and disregard
the dynamics of all other gene sequences. This gives a
one dimensional sequence space. We are interested in the
optimal mutation rate, which is deﬁned as the mutation
rate that maximizes the diﬀusion speed.

The genome codes mainly for proteins which regulate
the chemical reactions within the cell. One of the pro-
cesses that are under genomic control is the replication
of the genome itself. When the genetic material is copied
there are replicase enzymes involved. This is important
since an unguided base pairing process is highly inaccu-
rate. The enzymes are determined by the genome and
the mutation rate of the organism is therefore under evo-
lutionary control. This implies that the mutation rates
observed in living organisms have been selected for by
Darwinian evolution.

Naively one may think that since most mutations that
aﬀect the ﬁtness are deleterious, organisms should evolve
as low mutation rates as possible. Measurments of mu-
tation rates however show that organisms have copying
ﬁdelities much below what could be expected from this
assumption [1,2]. They also show that the genomic muta-
tion rate, i.e., the probability of one or more mutations to
occur during one replication of the whole genome, is ap-
proximantly constant within similar groups of organisms.
This is surprising since the copying of the genetic mate-
rial is a local process and it is the mutation rate per base
pair that are directly aﬀected by the replicase enzymes.
Most attempts to ﬁnd an evolutionary explanation for

the observed mutation rates have been based on popula-
tions evolving in a changing environment, see e.g., [3–10].
It is easy to understand that a non-zero mutation rate is
selected for on a dynamic ﬁtness landscape, since per-
fect copying will unable adaption to new conditions. Re-
cently a theoretical study has shown that the optimal
genomic copying ﬁdelity in a dynamic environment is
approximately independent of genome length [10]. The
theory also predicts mutation rates of the same order of
magnitude as observed for simple DNA based organisms.
In this paper we study a diﬀerent model. The popula-
tion lives in a static environment, but starts far from the
global ﬁtness maximum. A non-zero mutation rate is se-
lected for by maximizing the rate of evolution towards
better ﬁt genotypes.

Consider an asexual haploid population of individuals,
represented by genomes of length ν. The ﬁtness land-
scape consists of a number of peaks with superior ﬁtness
surrounded by a background. The evolution on this land-
scape is driven by mutations enabling jumps from one
ﬁtness peak to a higher peak in the close neighborhood.
We study a population of N gene sequences starting at a
low ﬁtness peak which then mutate onto successive ﬁtness
peaks of increasing height (σ1 < σ2 < · · ·). Furthermore
we assume the copying ﬁdelity per base, q, to be constant
over the genome. The probability of a gene sequence to
copy onto itself during one replication event, the genomic
copying ﬁdelity, is then given by Q = qν . We also assume
the probability of an individual on peak σi−1 to produce
an oﬀspring on peak σi during a replication event to be
pi(1 − q)αi qν−αi . This means that the number of bases
where the sequences deﬁning peak σi−1 and σi diﬀer is
αi. The factor pi is an arbitrary combinatorial factor,
accounting for possible redundancies in sequence space,
alphabet size, etc. All higher ﬁtness peaks, σk for k > i,
are assumed to be further away so that mutations from
peak σi−1 can be neglected. The evolution of the relative
concentrations xn is described by diﬀerential equation

˙x1 = W1,1θN (x1) + W1,2θN (x2) − f x1
˙x2 = W2,1θN (x1) + W2,2θN (x2) + W2,3θN (x3) − f x2

1

...

˙xn = Wn,n−1θN (xn−1) + Wn,nθN (xn) +

Wn,n+1θN (xn+1) − f xn

(1)

where the function θN is deﬁned as θN (xn) = xn
if x > 1
N and 0 otherwise, and therefore accounts
The factor f =
for the limited population size.

Pi (qν + pi(1 − q)αi ) σiθN (xi) ensures xi to be normal-

ized as relative concentrations. The matrix elements of
W are given by

Wn,n = qν σn

Wn−1,n = pn(1 − q)αn qν−αn σn−1
Wn,n+1 = pn+1(1 − q)αn+1 qν−αn+1 σn+1

(2)

We start with a population that consists of individuals
on the ﬁrst peak σ1, i.e., we deﬁne the initial values as

xi(0) = (cid:26) 1 i = 1

0 i 6= 1

(3)

xk
1

x1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

x2

x3

x4

10

20

30

40

t

FIG. 1. The time dynamics of Eq. 1 is simulated numeri-
cally. When the population diﬀuses oﬀ the initial peak σ1 it
starts evolving to peaks with higher and higher ﬁtness. The
parameters used in this plot are ν = 100, σi = i, p = 0.01,
Q = 0.99 and N = 106.

The inﬁnite population size limit of Eq. 1 corresponds
to a discrete normalized one-dimensional diﬀusion equa-
tion with an exponential growth term. However, this
limit is not interesting for realistic systems since it does
not allow propagating distributions of concentrations lo-
calized in sequence space. If the ﬁtness grows faster than
linearly for example, the concentration on ﬁtness peaks
far from the starting point grow large before the concen-
trations on peaks closer to the origin. This bizarre eﬀect
stems from the exponential growth of very small (expo-
nentially decaying with the distance from the origin) but
non-zero concentrations over all the ﬁtness peaks shortly
after the start.

In this model we implicitly assume the mutation rates
to evolve much slower than the ﬁtness, i.e. there are no
signiﬁcant changes in the mutation rate during the evo-
lution from one ﬁtness peak to the next peak.

The optimal copying ﬁdelity qopt is deﬁned by maxi-
mizing the diﬀusion speed towards genotypes with supe-
rior ﬁtness. Mathematically this corresponds to minimiz-
ing the time T it takes for the concentration xn on peak
σn to reach its maximum, when the population starts
at the proceeding peak σn−1. At the time when mu-
tants from peak σn−1 have enabled the concentration
xn to become large enough, i.e. xn > 1
N , exponential
growth will start with initial concentration proportional
to pn(1 − q)αn . Since the population at this time is lo-
calized around peak n the concentration xn is described
approximately by

xn(t) ∼

γeqν σn t

eqν σn−1t + γeqν σnt + γ2eqν σn+1t

(4)

where γ = pn(1 − q)αn . The denominator normalizes xn
by summing the absolute growth in the surrounding of
peak n, see Fig. 2. The time T when xn(t) has a maxi-
mum can be found by solving dxn(t)

dt = 0, giving

x4

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

5

10

15

t

20

FIG. 2. The picture shows x4 given by Eq. 4. The relevant
parameter are the same as in Fig. 1; ν = 100, σi = i, p = 0.01
and Q = 0.99. The maximum occurs at time T ≈ 14 (de-
ﬁned as the time from the last peak’s maximum). This is in
agreement with the numerical solutions shown in Fig. 1.

T = −

1

σn+1 − σn−1

ln(cid:0)γ2κ(cid:1)

qν

·

(5)

where κ = σn+1−σn
σn −σn−1
v = 1
write

. The diﬀusion speed is deﬁned as
T . By making the approximation κ ≈ 1, we can

V = −

σn+1 − σn−1

2

·

qν

ln (γ)

(6)

v

0.075

0.07

0.065

0.055

q

0.996

0.997

0.998

0.999

2

FIG. 3. The ﬁgure shows V (q) given by Eq. 6. The maxi-
mum gives the optimal copying ﬁdelity qopt. Parameters used
in the ﬁgure are ν = 100, σi = i and p = 0.01. The shape of
the cure is not sensitive to the parameter values, as long as
ν ≫ 1.

The optimal copying ﬁdelity qopt is deﬁned to maxi-
mize the diﬀusion speed, and can therefore be derived
by ﬁnding the maximum of V (q) in Eq. 6 (see Fig. 3).
Setting the derivative to zero, dV
dq = 0, and noting that
q ≈ 1 gives the equation:

1 +

1

ν(1 − q) (ln(¯p) + ln(1 − q))

= 0

(7)

We are interested in the limit where the genome length
is large. In this limit the ﬁrst term in the denominator
(involving ¯p) can be neglected. Eq. 7 then reduces to

ν(1 − q) ln(1 − q) = −1

(8)

There is no closed analytic expressions for the solution to
this equation, but a converging iterative expression can
be found for the optimal copying ﬁdelities

qopt = 1 −

1

ν ln (ν ln (ν ln (· · ·)))
1

Qopt ≈ e−

ln ν

(9)

It is surprising that the optimal genomic copying ﬁdelity
depends so weakly on the genome length, and even more
surprising that it is independent of all other parameters
in the model. This independence is both interesting and
important, especially since we start by assuming a spe-
ciﬁc path for evolution. As it turns out the optimal muta-
tion rate does not depend on the particular path chosen.
The insensitivity of Qopt when the genome length varies
can be seen by considering biologically plausible genome
lengths, see Fig. 5. Note that the genomic copying ﬁ-
delity increases with genome length.

V

0.141

0.139

0.138

0.137

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

Q

0.9

FIG. 4. The ﬁgure shows the region where V (q) has a max-
imum, calculated by numerical simulations of Eq. 1. Parame-
ter settings in the simulations were p = 0.01, α = 1, N = 108
and ν = 1000. The minimum occurs approximately at the
point predicted by Eq. 9, i.e., Qopt = 0.86.

3

Qopt

0.94

0.92

0.9

0.88

1000

100000.

1. · 107

1. · 109

v

FIG. 5. The ﬁgure demonstrates how weakly Qopt scales

with genome length.

In simulations of a population consisting of 2000 indi-
viduals with genome length ν = 70 on a rugged ﬁtness
landscape (created by an elementary folding algorithm
for calculating secondary structures of gene sequences),
Fontana and Schuster [11] ﬁnd that the rate of evolution
is maximal approximately at µ = 0.003. This is in close
agreement with the mutation rate as predicted by Eq. 9
for genome length 70, µopt = 0.0025.

The optimal copying ﬁdelity given in Eq. 9 can also
be derived using a more intuitive argument. The ar-
gument also shows more clearly how evolved mutation
rates on static ﬁtness landscapes relate to evolved muta-
tion rates in dynamic environments. The rate of growth
between two peaks, with ﬁtness diﬀerence ∆σ, is given
by eQ∆σt. The diﬀusion from an occupied peak to the
next is proportional to (1 − q)α, where α measures the
distance in sequence space between the peaks. The time,
T , it takes for a population to evolve from one peak to
an other will therefore be given by the solution of the
equation (1 − q)αeQ∆σt = 1, i.e. T ∼ − α ln(1−q)
qν ∆σ . Or-
ganisms, free to change their mutation rates, evolve a
copying ﬁdelity qopt that minimizes T (q). Deriving an
expression for the equation dT
dq = 0, using qν ≈ 1, gives
1
1−q + ν ln(1 − q) = 0, which is equivalent to Eq. 8 and is
solved by Qopt ≈ e−

1
ln ν .

In a recent paper [10], the evolution of mutation rates
on a dynamic ﬁtness landscape was studied. The ﬁt-
ness landscape consists of a single peak moving around
in sequence space, shifting position on average once ev-
ery τ generations. The relative selective advantage for
a sequence on the ﬁtness peak is σ. A shift of the peak
consist of α changes of bases in the sequence deﬁning the
ﬁtness peak. Since an individual in the population needs
to produce oﬀspring that are able to follow the shifts of
the ﬁtness peak, a non-zero mutation rate is selected for.
It turns out that ﬁnding the optimal copying ﬁdelity is
equivalent to minimizing (1 − q)αeQστ with respect to q.
This is the same expression as for the growth rate be-
tween ﬁtness peaks on a static landscape. However, in
the dynamic case the growth over a cycle, consisting of
a shift and a static period, is be optimized rather than
the time to evolve from one peak to the next. More gen-

in nature, retroviruses (including HIV) conﬁrm this pre-
diction. The model presented here therefore presents a
possible explanation for the observed mutation rates for
retro viruses.

The author would like to thank Jennie Jacobi and
“Mullb¨aret” for providing a nice and stimulating envi-
ronment while working on the ideas behind this paper.
Thanks are also due to Mats Nordahl and Johan Ivarsson
for valuable comments on the manuscript.

[1] J.W. Drake, B. Charlesworth, D. Charlesworth, and
J.F. Crow. Rates of spontaneous mutation. Genetics,
148(4):1667–86, 1998.

[2] J.W. Drake. Rates of spontaneous mutation among RNA
viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 90(9):4171–5,
1993.

[3] M Kimura. On the evolutionary adjustment of sponta-

neous mutation rates. Genet. Res., 9:23–24, 1967.

[4] E.G. Leigh. The evolution of mutation rates. Genetics

Suppl., 73:1–18, 1973.

[5] K. Ishii, H. Matsuda, Y. Iwasa, and A. Saskai. Evolu-
tionarily stable mutation rate in a periodically changing
environment. Genetics, 121:163–174, 1989.

[6] J.H. Gillespie. Mutation modiﬁcation in a random envi-

ronment. Evolution, 35:468–476, 1981.

[7] S.P. Otto and Y. Michalakis. The evolution of recom-
bination in changing environments. Trends Ecol. Evol.,
13(4):145–151, 1998.

[8] S.P. Otto and M.W. Feldman. Deleterious mutations,
variable epistatic interactions, and the evolution of re-
combination. Theor. Popul. Biol., 51(2):134–147, 1997.

[9] G. Ochoa, I. Harvey, and H. Buxton. On recombination
and optimal mutation rates. In Proceedings of Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO-
99), Orlando, Florida, USA, July 1999.

[10] M. Nilsson and N. Snoad. Optimal Mutation Rates
on Dynamic Fitness Landscapes. LANL e-print archive:
physics/0004042, 2000.

[11] W. Fontana and P. Schuster. A computer model of evolu-
tionary optimization. Biophysical Chemistry, 26:123–147,
1987.

[12] L. Tisimring, H. Levine and D. Kessler. RNA Virus
Evolution via a Fitness-Space Model. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
76(23), 4440–4443, 1996.

[13] D. Kessler and H. Levine. Mutator Model on a Smooth
Evolutionary Landscpe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 80(9), 2012–
2015, 1998.

erally, if the evolution of mutation rate is driven by a
dynamic environment it will be selected to optimize the
growth on the changing ﬁtness landscape, whereas on a
static landscape the mutation rate maximizing the rate
of evolution towards higher ﬁt genotypes will be selected
for. Maximizing the growth on a dynamic landscape gives
Qdyn = e−

στ .

α

There are some fundamental diﬀerences between the
two models presented above.
In the model based on
dynamic ﬁtness landscapes the population dynamics is
driven by external changes of the environment. The or-
ganisms have to passively wait for the environment to
change and then adapt to the new ﬁtness landscape. In
the model based on rugged ﬁtness landscapes the situa-
tion is diﬀerent. There always exist a higher ﬁtness peak
in the close neighborhood so the population has to min-
imize the time for diﬀusing to and growing large on the
higher peak. Hence the population should actively search
the surroundings in sequence space. The main diﬀerence
between the models is therefore the preexistent of higher
ﬁtness peaks close in sequence space, which results in
very diﬀerent optimal mutation rates.

The genomic copying ﬁdelity in both the static and
dynamic case is approximately independent of genome
length, a phenomenon that is also observed in nature.
To be more precise, experiments show that the genomic
copying ﬁdelity is approximately constant within groups
of similar organisms, e.g., simple DNA-based organisms
have Q ≈ 0.996 whereas RNA based retroviruses have
Q ≈ 0.9 [1]. Simple DNA based organisms for example
have much too low mutation rates to be explained by
evolution on the static landscapes studied in this paper.
Retroviruses on the other hand show mutation rates that
are in agreement with the predictions made in this pa-
per. However, they may also be explained by mutation
rates evolved as a response to a changing environment as
discussed above. It is therefore unclear whether the ma-
jor force behind the evolution of mutation rates for retro
virus is maximizing the evolution rate towards higher ﬁt-
ness or maximizing the growth in a changing environment
(caused be the immune system).

In conclusion, we show that the optimal genomic copy-
ing ﬁdelity, i.e., that which optimizes the rate of evolu-
tion, on a rugged ﬁtness landscape can be written as
ln(ν) , where ν is the genome length. The op-
Qopt = e−
timal genomic copying ﬁdelity on rugged ﬁtness land-
scapes is predicted to be around 0.9 for realistic genome
lengths (ν ∈ [103, 1010]). Of the mutation rates observed

1

4

