0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

3
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
5
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

modeling study on the validity of a possibly simpliﬁed representation of proteins

National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructure and Physics Department, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China

Jun Wang and Wei Wang

(July 24, 2013)

The folding characteristics of sequences reduced with a possibly simpliﬁed representation of ﬁve
types of residues are shown to be similar to their original ones with the natural set of residues (20
types or 20 letters). The reduced sequences have a good foldability and fold to the same native
structure of their optimized original ones. A large ground state gap for the native structure shows
the thermodynamic stability of the reduced sequences. The general validity of such a ﬁve-letter
reduction is further studied via the correlation between the reduced sequences and the original ones.
As a comparison, a reduction with two letters is found not to reproduce the native structure of the
original sequences due to its homopolymeric features.

PACS numbers: 87.10+e

I. INTRODUCTION

Protein folding is a well known complicated and highly
cooperative dynamic process due to the heterogeneity
in proteins (e.g., see Refs. [1–3] and references therein).
Much eﬀort has been made by considering minimalist
models with a few types of amino acid residues to sim-
plify the natural set of residues (of 20 types) for bet-
ter physical understanding [4–9] and practical purposes
[10–12]. In these models the compositions are much sim-
pler than the real ones. The simplest reduction is the so-
called hydrophobic and polar ones with only two groups
of residues (each group including some types of residues)
by considering the main driving force, the hydrophobicity
[4–9]. Furthermore, these two groups actually are simpli-
ﬁed as two eﬀective monomers or letters, namely H and
P, which is known as the HP model [4]. The studies of
such a model enable people to understand some funda-
mental physics and mechanism of protein folding. How-
ever, as argued in a number of studies (see [13] and refer-
ence therein), the HP model may be too simple and lacks
enough consideration on the heterogeneity and the com-
plexity of the natural set of residues, such as the interac-
tions between the residues [5,6,14]. Moreover, the mini-
mal sets of residues for protein design suggested by bio-
chemical experiments [10–12] seem unfavorable to those
with only two types of residues since a small number of
types obviously introduces the homopolymeric degener-
acy. What is the suitable simpliﬁcation for natural pro-
teins, or how many types of residues are necessary for
reproducing some useful structures and for a simpliﬁed
representation of protein sequence characteristics? These
are not well understood.

Recently, Riddle and et al. made an exciting approach
to the problems mentioned above experimentally [12].
By using combinatorial chemistry along with a screen-
ing strategy, they searched and found out a subset of the
natural amino acids that can be used to construct a well-
ordered protein-like molecule consisting of β-sheets. This
subset contains ﬁve amino acids [12], namely, isoleucine,

alanine, glycine, glutamic acid and lysine, which are sim-
ply represented as I, A, G, E and K [15]. Although about
30% of the residue sites in some of their sequences are not
encoded by the ﬁve-letter palette, rather than by nine
other types of residues, the sequence complexity of the
protein is largely simpliﬁed. These uncoded sites are due
to their direct involvement in binding a proline-rich sig-
nal peptide.
[if the binding was compromised, the pro-
tein would not show up in the screening array [5,12].]
They also found that subtractions of the ﬁve-letter code
to a three-letter one may destroy the structural rebuild-
ing. As argued by Wolynes [5], this experiment shows the
possibility of simpliﬁcation for the protein sequence com-
plexity, and that some complexity with ﬁve-letter code,
but not three-letter code, might be still needed based on
the landscape ideas. This experiment extends the search
for minimal solution of the simpliﬁed representation of
complex protein architecture. However, it is not clear
whether the suggested 5-letter code is valid in general
and feasible for elucidating characteristics of real proteins
with 20 kinds of amino acids. That is, is the 5-letter code
based on a speciﬁc protein generally workable for other
natural proteins?

In this work, we address the questions mentioned
above at the level of a lattice model with some contact-
potential-form interactions. Based on the statistical and
the kinetic characteristics of the folding, and on the ther-
modynamic stability of the ground states of some re-
duced sequences, we study the validity of two reductions,
namely one with the ﬁve-letter palette I, A, G, E and K
[12] and the other composed by two types of amino acids
as an example of HP-like model. We ﬁnd that the ﬁve-
letter reduced sequences display similar native structural
features and folding kinetic behavior to the optimal 20-
letter ones. Diﬀerently, for the two-letter case, our results
show its deﬁciency to act as a good reduction for general
representation of proteins. The ﬁve-letter reduction may
be a suitable description for simplifying the sequences
complexity of 20-letter model chains which may relate to
the natural proteins. A detailed analysis on correlation
between the sequences with 20-letters and their ﬁve-letter

1

substitutes shows the source of such validity of the ﬁve-
letter code.

II. MODELS

In general, a successful reduction implies that an origi-
nal sequence with 20 types of residues can be represented
by a new sequence with fewer types. The reduced se-
quence should have the main statistical and structural
characteristics, as well as the kinetic accessibility, as that
of the original one, such as the basic residue components
of the original sequence, the ground state or the native
conformation, etc [7,9,16,17]. That is, after the reduc-
tion, not only should the statistical characteristics of the
energy spectrum (the existence of a large ground state
gap) be maintained, but also the folded structure should
be kept the same as that of the original one (see Fig.1).
Such a reduction is regarded as a good one. Nevertheless,
if the energy gap is diminished, or the ground state of the
reduced sequence is degenerate (or deviates from that of
the original one), the thermodynamic stability and the
kinetic characteristics are altered. Consequently, the re-
duction is believed to be a bad one. Therefore, to explore
the validity of simpliﬁed reduction means to verify it be-
ing a good one or not.

Let us start by considering a model protein which is
assumed to be a chain with connected residues in a cubic
lattice (Fig.2a). A self-avoided arrangement of the model
chain on the lattice is generally noted as a structure or
conformation of the model protein. The conformation
of the model chain is characterized by the set {ri}, the
spatial position of the i-th residue in the chain, and its
sequence by {si}, the set of various types of residues as-
signed along the chain. An example of such a chain is
shown in Fig.2(a), with s1 = V , s2 = P , and s3 = V , and
so on, and the chain length is L = 27, i.e., 27 residues.
The energy of the chain is determined by its sequence
and conformation,

E({si}, {ri}) =

L

X

i>j

B(si, sj)∆(ri, rj) ,

(1)

where B(si, sj) is the contact potential between the i-th
residue (with residue type si) and the j-th residue (with
residue type sj), and the function ∆(ri, rj) = 1 when
the i-th and the j-th residues are spatial, not sequential,
neighbors and ∆(ri, rj) = 0 otherwise. To study the re-
duction, a number of such sequences, say N = 100, made
of the natural set of amino acids with 20 letters are all
well optimized to a same native structure [the one shown
in Fig.2(a)] using the methods proposed by Shakhnovich
et al [18,19]. All these sequences are referred as “orig-
inal” ones. These original sequences then are reduced
according to a pre-selected ﬁve-letter reduction scheme
as follows [14]: group-I (with residues C, M, F, I, L,
V, W and Y), group-II (A, T and H), group-III (G and

P), group-IV (D and E) and group-V (S, N, Q, R and
K), with a representative residue for each group as I, A,
G, E and K, respectively. That is, an original sequence
is reduced into a sequence of ﬁve-letters by substitut-
ing (or replacing) each letter with its representative let-
ter. In such a reduction, 20 types of residues are divided
into ﬁve groups according to their interaction character-
istics (following the Miyazawa and Jernigan (MJ) matrix
[20]). Each group contains some residues which interact
with others in a similar way [14]. For example, group-
I includes all the hydrophobic residues, and the other
four contain the residues with polar features. Obviously,
this ﬁve-group simpliﬁcation takes into account of more
heterogeneities for the protein, and also considers more
detailed diﬀerences between the polar residues than the
two-letter HP model [5,14]. Then we take Baker’s 5-letter
alphabet, I, A, G, E and K, as the best representative let-
ters for ﬁve groups based on a physical reason, but not
an arbitrary choice (A more detailed description and dis-
cussion see Ref. [14,21]).

The procedure to reduce the original sequences to two-
letter cases is similar as above. Here, we consider group
H including residues C, M, F, I, L, V, W and Y, and
group P including the rest [4,6], and we pick the residues
I and A as the representatives of group H and P, respec-
tively. Some other choices, such as I and E, are also
checked. It is found that these choices give out basically
the same results.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Does the reduced sequence with ﬁve letters have the
same folded native structure as that of the original one
shown in Fig.2(a)? Let us make a statistics on the ratio
of successful reduction (RSR), for the reduced sequences.
Because of the main attractive feature of the MJ inter-
action matrix [20], the native state generally has a struc-
tural motif with the form of maximally compact struc-
ture. Besides, for the 27-mer model chain we studied,
the compact conformations are generally understood as
the 3 × 3 × 3 cube-shape structures [19,22–24]. Thus, the
statistics on the RSR can be found out by enumerating all
possible compact structures in the case of a 3 × 3 × 3 lat-
tice [8]. Interestingly, almost 86 reduced sequences (out
of 100) with ﬁve-letters are “foldable” since they have
unique ground states. Among the foldable sequences, 74
keep the same native structure of the original sequences,
termed as “folded”, and 12 have diﬀerent folded states,
termed as “ground states deviation” [see Fig.2(b)]. This
means that this ﬁve-letter strategy basically reproduces
the original native structure with RSR of 74%. In ad-
dition, there are 14 sequences that do not have unique
ground states, termed “unfoldable”.

As a comparison, the RSR is also evaluated for the
HP reduction. It is found that there are a few foldable
sequences, namely, three reduced sequences (out of 100)

2

but with “ground states deviation”. That is, these three
sequences fold to unique ground states which are diﬀer-
ent from that of the native state of the original sequences,
i.e., the RSR is 0. However, the existence of the unique
ground states basically coincides with the result in Ref.
[7] where there is only 4.57% of the sequences having
unique ground states. Physically, it results from the ho-
mopolymeric degeneracy as argued in Ref. [5] and found
in other lattice simulations [25]. The biochemical exper-
iments also approve this deﬁciency, since it is found that
two types of residues are far insuﬃcient for the rebuild-
ing of four-helix bundle proteins in protein engineering
experiments and in de novo designs [10,11].

Diﬀerently, the ﬁve-letter case is quite good in over-
coming the homopolymeric tendency. The similarity be-
tween the ﬁve-letter case and the 20-letter case with a
large value of RSR indicates the validity of the ﬁve-
letter strategy in simplifying the natural proteins. It is
noted that the selection of the optimal original sequences
and their native structures is rather arbitrary without
any bias on interactions and compositions. Several stud-
ies on some other sequences with diﬀerent native struc-
tures present similar results, which further implies that
this ﬁve-letter reduction scheme is universal for diﬀer-
ent structures. Therefore, the simpliﬁed depiction of the
Riddle et al.’s ﬁve-letter substitutes may catch basically
the physics of natural proteins in their structures.

What kinetic characteristics then do the ﬁve-letter se-
quences show? These are further studied by the stan-
dard lattice Monte Carlo simulations [23,24]. The ther-
modynamic quantities, such as heat capacity Cv of the
model chains, are calculated based on the histogram al-
gorithm over a collection of samples of conformations
[23,26]. In our simulations, the native structures found
in the above enumerations over various compact struc-
tures are checked. It is found that the checked structures
have uniquely minimal energies and frequently appear
in the sampling for these structures. These ensure the
thermodynamic stability and kinetic accessibility. It ap-
proves their characteristics as native structures found in
our enumerations. Therefore, the statistics on the RSR
based on these kinetic Monte Carlo simulations shows
basically the same value ﬁve-letter reduction as that ob-
tained by enumerations. Similar results have also been
obtained for the HP reduction.

Furthermore, we use the foldability σ = |Tθ − Tf |/Tθ
proposed by Klimov and Thirumalai [9] as an indicator
of the kinetic characteristic for the system. Here Tθ indi-
cates the temperature corresponding to the peak of heat
capacity of a model chain, and Tf marks the structural
transition to the well-ordered native structure during the
folding processes, which corresponds to the maximum of
the ﬂuctuation of structural overlap function χ(T ) [9].
A small σ is generally related to a fast folding with few
kinetic traps. On the other hand, a large σ (≈ 1) may re-
sult in many competitive local minima, and in this case a
protein can not fold in a biologically relevant time scale.
Thus, the factor σ is argued as a criterion of the foldabil-

3

ity [9] although there is a controversy on its deﬁnition
[13]. The correlation between the factor σ and folding
ability has been illustrated in many cases (see Ref. [27]
and references therein). Here, we use the factor σ to
characterize the foldability of our model chains. Note
that we do not monitor the actual folding time of the
model chains in our simulations, and our following dis-
cussions on kinetics depend on the presumed relationship
between the kinetics and thermodynamics, i.e., the fold-
ability σ proposed in Ref. [9]. A relevant discussion on
such a relationship is recently made by Dinner et al [28].
We then calculate the foldability σ for the original se-
quences and their ﬁve-letter and two-letter substitutes,
respectively (see Fig.3, the solid circles). One can see
that for the ﬁve-letter substitutes the foldability is σ =
0.46 which is smaller than 0.6, a critical value of slow
folding sequences [9]. This suggests that the native state
is accessible kinetically for the ﬁve-letter reduction, and
shows the similar dynamics of two kinds of sequences,
namely, the original ones and the reduced ones. Diﬀer-
ently, for the two-letter case the foldability is σ ≃ 1 much
larger than 0.6, which means little kinetic accessibility
of its native structure. In addition, some independently
optimized sequences (i.e., some 20-letter sequences opti-
mized with the ﬁve-letter or two-letter alphabet, respec-
tively) are also studied. The values of σ are found to be
0.25 and 0.75 for the ﬁve-letter and two-letter sequences,
respectively, which shows clearly the improvement of the
kinetic accessibility [9] due to the optimization for each
sequence. Moreover, a similar exponential decreasing
tendency can be seen (see Fig.3, the open diamonds). As
a result, both exponential tendencies of decrease clearly
imply the validity of a ﬁve-letter strategy.

It is worth noting that in our simulations, a large num-
ber of extended conformations are explored, not only the
most compact conformations within the 3 × 3 × 3 cubic
lattice. These kinetic folding simulations may be impor-
tant for the case of longer chains since the non-compact
conformations have more eﬀects on the folding features
of the model proteins [13]. Fortunately, the competi-
tion of non-compact structure as a native candidate may
not be so serious in our case (see the remarks at the
end of this sections). Certainly, for a more realistic and
detailed study, we may need to make more extensively
kinetic folding simulations on longer chains, which de-
serves further work. However, we may believe that the
basic physics is the same because many main characteris-
tics of the folding have been found from the lattice model
of proteins previously [2–9].

Now, let us discuss the correlation between the origi-
nal sequences with 20-letter code and their substitutions
with ﬁve-letter code. As we all know, there is mL pos-
sible sequences for the proteins with m types of residues
and length L. Can the optimized part of 20L sequences
be successfully mapped to 5L substitutes as mentioned-
above? To answer this question, we make a detailed
analyses on the sequence set S 0
20, · · ·} in
which all their substitutes with the ﬁve-letter reduction

20 = {S 1

20, S 2

20, S 3

are the same, i.e., a single sequence S 0
5 . We randomly
select a number of compact structures, say 50, from the
ﬁve-letter spectrum as targets for design, i.e., optimizing
the sequences S 0

20 to lower energy [18,19].

20, S 2

20, · · ·, S 30

In practice, from a sequence S 0

5 , we produce a number
of sequences S 1
20 , randomly following the
reduction scheme. That is, each of I,A,G,E, and K is
randomly substituted by a residue belonging to its corre-
sponding group, e.g., A by A, T, or H randomly. Then for
a certain target structure, we process the design for such
a sequence Si
20 by randomly exchanging their positions
of two residues which belong to the same group (keeping
the ﬁve-letter reduced sequence S 0
5 unchanged). The new
sequence is accepted when the energy increment ∆E < 0,
otherwise accepted with a probability P = exp(−∆E/T )
with T = 0.1. Until 107 new sequences are reached, the
optimized sequence is found out for which its energy is
the lowest one. The target is designable if its energy is
the lowest one, otherwise undesignable.

We ﬁnd three cases: 1) Undesignable compact struc-
tures (UDS): Some compact structures never do become
the native states of the set S 0
20 even after very long time
optimization and very slow annealing (see Fig.4). 2) Des-
ignable compact structures with small energy gaps for
their ground states (DSSG): some compact structures
are designable and the related sequences fold exactly into
these structures. However, the energy gaps above their
ground states are quite small, generally less than 0.5 (see
Fig.4). According to the features of the protein energy
spectrum, such small energy gaps result in an unstable
ground state [3], and also many traps in the energy land-
scape [2,3]. Thus these proteins may fold rather slow
and may be unstable in their folded states. 3) Designable
compact structure with large energy gaps for their ground
states (DSLG): there exists a speciﬁc compact structure,
namely, the native structure of the sequence S 0
5 . Tak-
ing it as a design target, the designed sequences, from
all of S 0
20, not only fold to it, but also have large energy
gaps and show good foldability (see Fig.4). This implies
that a set of optimal sequences S ′
20 that have the same
ﬁve-letter reduced sequence shows stable folding and is
20 ∈ S 0
included in the set S 0
20. Thus, if two opti-
20 and S ′j
mized sequences S ′i
20 have the same 5-letter re-
duced sequence S 0
5 , they will behave the same in folding
behavior as that of S 0
5 . [If sequences with 20 letters are
optimized without the condition of keeping S 0
5 unchanged
(see the preceding discussions), most of the optimized se-
quences (about 74%) will have the same folding behavior
after the substitution (see Fig.2(b))]. In other words, the
complexity of the sequences S 0
20 can be simpliﬁed via the
reduction since both the S 0
20 sequences
behave almost the same in the aspects of folding kinet-
ics and folded structure. Thus by the reduction the se-
quence space (with 20 letters) can be reduced to many
sets, and each set has a single ﬁve-letter sequence and a
favorable native structure. In this level, the correlation
of multiple-to-one between a set of 20-letter sequences

5 sequence and S 0

20, S ′

and a ﬁve-letter sequence is well established and ensures
the similarity of two sequence spaces. Finally, it is noted
that other ﬁve-letter reductions do not present such sim-
pliﬁcation from the original sequences, and have a small
(large) value of RSR (σ) since they are not the best rep-
resentative letters for groups [14].

Finally, let us remark on our modeling study. It is ar-
gued that the enumerations over only the compact struc-
tures are questionable for searching the native state of
a lattice chain [13,25]. Indeed, this is true for the usual
HP model (with EHH = −1 and EHP = EP P = 0)
[4] and that used by Li, et al.
(with EHH = −2.3,
EHP = −1, and EP P = 0) [7]. In those models, there
are some binding interactions between residues, such as
EP P = 0, that are as weak as that between a residue and
solvent molecules. This may mean that there is little dif-
ference in energies between the compact structures and
the non-compact ones in those models [13], which intro-
duces some limits in enumeration analysis. However, the
interactions for our chains, not only for 20-letter chains,
but also for the ﬁve-letter cases and two-letter cases, are
taken from the MJ matrix directly, which has an obvious
attraction between any pairs of residues. Thus, there is
a large energy penalty for the extended structures with
fewer bonds, i.e., an energy bias towards maximally com-
pact structure. It improves the stability of the compact
structures in our analysis. This makes our search for the
native structures by enumerations over the set of compact
structures feasible. In addition, the lattice chains with 27
monomers are shorter than those analyzed in Ref. [25].
As a result, we believe that in our cases the determina-
tion of the native structures based on the enumerations
over compact structures is appropriate, though there is
a mixing between the energy spectrum (the energy lev-
els above the native state) of the compact structures and
those of the non-compact structures, which may aﬀect
the kinetic properties. In practice, the native structures
obtained by enumerations in our work are veriﬁed by the
Monte Carlo kinetic simulations. That is, for our cases,
especially the ﬁve-letter chains, we have not found any
other states with lower energy than the native structures
during very-long-time simulations. Besides, using enu-
meration over compact structures is more eﬀective than
the kinetic simulations, which enables us to make an ex-
tensive search over the sequence space on the structural
rebuilding problem, as interested in our work.

IV. SUMMARY

In this work, the ﬁve-letter code for simpliﬁcation of
proteins suggested by Riddle et al. [12] is found to be
valid not only keeping the features of the energy spectrum
but also reproducing the native structure of the sequences
with the natural set of residues. The kinetic resemblance
between the sequences composed with 20 letters and ﬁve-
letters also implies a similarity of their funnel character-

4

istic. This illustrates that the lattice model of proteins
with natural set of residues can be re-constructed with a
smaller set of residues, maybe ﬁve types of residues. Thus
our study suggests that the ﬁve-letter code can act as a
suitable simpliﬁcation considering more heterogeneity of
the model proteins, and may encode the main informa-
tion for model proteins. In addition, since that the fold-
ing kinetics in real proteins and lattice models is believed
to be similar in many aspects [2,3,7], our simulations on
the lattice chains may provide some understanding on
the simpliﬁcation of real proteins. As a comparison, the
unfavorable reductions with two types of residues may in-
dicate that the proteins with a natural set of residues are
too complex to be simpliﬁed by the two-letter representa-
tions. That is, the minimal solution of protein simpliﬁca-
tion could not be as simple as the HP models, at least in
lattice level. This actually coincides with the conclusion
in several protein design experiments [10,11,29]. Finally,
we note that an exact and detailed grouping of residues
for the simpliﬁcation representation of proteins still needs
more theoretical and experimental explorations.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

* W.W. acknowledges support from the Outstanding
Young Research Foundation of the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (Grant No. 19625409). We
thank C. Tang for a critical reading of the manuscript.
The numerical simulations in this work were done on
the SGI Origin 2000 in the National Laboratory of Solid
State Microstructure, Nanjing University.

[1] R. Elber, Recent Developments in Theoretical Studies of
Proteins (World Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore, 1996);
T. E. Creighton, Protein Folding (Freeman, NY, 1992),
Chapter 4.

[2] K. A. Dill and H. S. Chan, Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 10 (1997).
[3] P. G. Wolynes, J. N. Onuchic, and D. Thirumalai, Sci-

ence 267, 1619 (1995).

[4] K. F. Lau and K. A. Dill, Macromolecules 22, 3986
(1989); H. S. Chan and K. A. Dill, ibid. 22, 4559 (1989).

[5] P. G. Wolynes, Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 871 (1997).
[6] H. Li, C. Tang and N. S. Wingreen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,

765 (1997).

[7] H. Li, R. Helling, C. Tang and N. S. Wingreen, Science

273 666, (1996).

[8] E. I. Shakhnovich and A. M. Gutin, J. Chem. Phys. 93,

5967 (1990).

[9] D. K. Klimov and D. Thirumalai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
4070 (1996); T. Veitshans, D. K. Klimov & D. Thiru-
malai, Folding Des. 2, 1 (1997).

[10] L. Regan and W. F. Degrado, Science 241, 976 (1988).

5

[11] S. Kamtekar, J. M. Schiﬀer, H. Xiong, J. M. Babik and

M. H. Hecht, Science 262, 1680 (1993).

[12] D. S. Riddle, J. V. Santiago, S. T. BrayHall, N. Doshi, V.
P. Grantcharova, Q. Yi and D. Baker, Nat. Struct. Biol.
4, 805 (1997).

[13] E. I. Shakhnovich, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 29 (1997).
[14] Jun Wang and Wei Wang, Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 1033

(1999).

[15] C. K. Mathews and K. E. Holde, Biochemistry (Benjamin

Cummings, New York, 1996), Chap. 5.

[16] V. Pande, A. Grosberg and T. Tanaka, J. Chem. Phys.

103, 9482 (1995).

[17] M. Vendruscolo, A. Maritan and J. Banavar, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 78, 3967 (1997).

[18] E. I. Shakhnovich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 72, 3907 (1994).
[19] E. I. Shakhnovich and A. M. Gutin, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. USA 90,7195 (1993).

[20] S. Miyazawa and R. Jernigan, J. Mol. Biol. 256, 623

(1996).

[21] H. S. Chan, Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 994 (1999).
[22] A. Sali, E. I. Shakhnovich and M. Karplus, Nature 369,

248 (1994).

[23] N. D. Socci and J. N. Onuchic, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 4732

(1995).

[24] N. Socci and J. Onuchic, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 1519

(1994).

[25] K. Yue, K. Fiebig, P. Thomas, H. S. Chan, E.I.
Shakhnovich and K. A. Dill, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
92, 325 (1995).

[26] A. M. Ferrenberg and R. H. Swendsen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

61, 2635 (1988);

[27] D. Thirumalai and D. K. Klimov, Curr. Opin. Struct.

Biol. 9, 197 (1999).

[28] A. R. Dinner, V. Abkevich, E. Shakhnovich and M.

Karplus, Proteins: Struct. Func. Genet.35, 34 (1999).

[29] K. W. Plaxco, D. S. Riddle, V. Grantcharova and D.

Baker, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8, 80 (1998).

20, S 2

Fig.1. Sketchy view of the reduction. For the op-
timal sequences, S 1
20 and so on, with 20 types of
residues, there exist large ground state gaps for their na-
tive structures in the energy spectrum. A good reduction
should retain similar spectrum features and keep the na-
tive structures (see Substitute I). A bad reduction dimin-
ishes the energy gap above ground state, and the original
native structure is not located on lowest energy level.

Fig.2.

(a) A target of folding, and an original opti-
mized sequence of L=27 residues (with 20 types) and its
ﬁve-letter and HP substitutes. (b) Ratio of successful re-
duction RSR for 100 original optimized sequences and its
ﬁve-letter and two-letter (HP) substitutes. The “folded”,
“ground state deviation” and “unfoldable” are deﬁned in
the text. The interactions between the ﬁve letters I, A,
G, E and K, and those between the two letters I and A
(or I and E) follow the MJ matrix. The results are the
same for those two two-letter cases.

Fig.3. Foldability σ versus type number of the reduc-
tion based on the Monte Carlo simulations. The solid
circles indicate the case of direct substitutes for 50 orig-
inal optimized sequences, and the open diamonds for 50
random sequences optimized with the ﬁve-letter or two-
letter alphabet. The interactions are described in Fig.2.

Fig.4. Statistics of design. (a) The ratio of successful
folding to the target (RSF). For each target, RSF is ob-
tained by averaging over 30 runnings of optimization; (b)
∆1, ground state gaps averaged over all 30 runnings of op-
timization (including the unique and degeneracy ground
states). (c) ∆2, ground state gaps averaged only over the
unique ground states. The interactions are described in
Fig.2. The marked positions indicate designs for diﬀerent
structures(see the text).

6

Substitute II

bad

reduction

20-letter cases

S1

S2

S3

Substitute I

good

reduction

Structure Kept

Figure 1.
By Jun Wang and Wei Wang
In “Validity…”

(a)



(b)

20-letter case

100%

 

12%

 

 

 

14%

97%

 

74%

3%

5-letter case

 

 

2-letter case

 

folded

ground state deviation

unfoldable

original:
5-letter:
2-letter:

FDNPCDPHSPVTNAGTPECTNDKPRLY

IEKGIEGAKGIAKAGAGEIAKEKGKII

HPPPHPPPPPHPPPPPPPHPPPPPPHH

Figure 2
By Jun Wang and Wei Wang
In "Validity ..."

 s
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
d
l
o
F

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

 

 Original sequences 
           and their substitues

 Independent optimized 

           chain

 

5

10

15

20

Number of groups

Figure 3
By Jun Wang and Wei Wang
in "Validity ..."

F
S
R

1

2

0.9

0.6

0.3

0.0

0.9

0.6

0.3

0.0
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0

5

 

 

 

$$

 

 

&$

$

 

20

15

10
40
Target structure index

25

30

35

45

50

Figure 4
By Jun Wang and Wei Wang
in "Validity ..."

D
D
