Heart Rate Variability: Measures and Models

Malvin C. Teich, Steven B. Lowen, Bradley M. Jost, and Karin Vibe-Rheymer

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University

8 Saint Mary’s Street, Boston, MA 02215

and

Conor Heneghan

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Methods and Measures

2.1 The Heartbeat Sequence as a Point Process

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.1 Conventional Point Processes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.2 Fractal and Fractal-Rate Point Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Standard Frequency-Domain Measures

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Standard Time-Domain Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Other Standard Measures

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5 Novel Scale-Dependent Measures

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5.1 Allan Factor [A(T )] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5.2 Wavelet-Transform Standard Deviation [σwav(m)]

. . . . . . . . . . .

2.5.3 Relationship of Wavelet [σwav(m)] and Spectral Measures [Sτ (f )] . . .

2.5.4 Detrended Fluctuation Analysis [DFA(m)]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6 Scale-Independent Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6.1 Detrended-Fluctuation-Analysis Power-Law Exponent (αD) . . . . . .

2.6.2 Wavelet-Transform Power-Law Exponent (αW ) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6.3 Periodogram Power-Law Exponent (αS)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6.4 Allan-Factor Power-Law Exponent (αA)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6.5 Rescaled-Range-Analysis Power-Law Exponent (αR) . . . . . . . . . .

2.7 Estimating the Performance of a Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.7.1

Statistical Signiﬁcance: p, d′, h, and d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

5

6

6

7

9

10

12

12

13

13

14

16

17

18

18

18

18

19

19

20

20

2.7.2 Positive and Negative Predictive Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.7.3 Receiver-Operating-Characteristic (ROC) Analysis

. . . . . . . . . .

3 Discriminating Heart-Failure Patients from Normal Subjects

3.1 Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Selecting a Scale

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3

Individual Value Plots

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 Predictive Value Plots

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5 ROC Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5.1 Comparison with Detection-Distance Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5.2 ROC-Area Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6 Comparing the Measures for Various Data Lengths

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6.1

Scale-Independent vs Scale-Dependent Measures . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6.2 Computation Times of the Various Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6.3 Comparing the Most Eﬀective Measures

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6.4

Selecting the Best Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Markers for Other Cardiac Pathologies

5 Does Deterministic Chaos Play a Role in Heart Rate Variability?

5.1 Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.1 Phase-Space Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.2 Removing Correlations in the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1.3

Surrogate Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Absence of Chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

21

22

22

23

24

24

26

26

27

28

29

30

30

32

33

34

35

35

36

36

37

3

6 Mathematical Models for Heart Rate Variability

6.1

Integrate-and-Fire Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2 Kernel of the Integrate-and-Fire Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.1 Fractal Gaussian Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.2 Fractal Lognormal Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.3 Fractal Binomial Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.3

Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.3.1

Simulating the Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Point Process

. . . . . . .

6.3.2

Statistics of the Simulated Point Process for Normal Subjects and CHF
Patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.3.3

Simulated Individual Value Plots and ROC-Area Curves

. . . . . . .

6.3.4 Limitations of the Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Model

. . . . . . . . .

6.4 Toward an Improved Model of Heart Rate Variability . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Conclusion

Appendix A

References

Figure Captions

Tables

Contact Information

4

38

39

39

39

40

41

41

42

42

43

44

45

46

48

49

49

53

56

1 Introduction

The human heart generates the quintessential biological signal: the heartbeat. A recording
of the cardiac-induced skin potentials at the body’s surface, an electrocardiogram (ECG),
reveals information about atrial and ventricular electrical activity. Abnormalities in the
temporal durations of the segments between deﬂections, or of the intervals between waves in
the ECG, as well as their relative heights, serve to expose and distinguish cardiac dysfunc-
tion. Because the electrical activity of the human heart is inﬂuenced by many physiological
mechanisms, electrocardiography has become an invaluable tool for the diagnosis of a variety
of pathologies that aﬀect the cardiovascular system [1]. Electrocardiologists have come to
excel at visually interpreting the detailed form of the ECG wave pattern and have become
adept at diﬀerential diagnoses.

Readily recognizable features of the ECG wave pattern are designated by the letters P-
QRS-T; the wave itself is often referred to as the QRS complex. Aside from the signiﬁcance
of various features of the QRS complex, the timing of the sequence of QRS complexes over
tens, hundreds, and thousands of heartbeats is also signiﬁcant. These inter-complex times
are readily measured by recording the occurrences of the peaks of the large R waves which
are, perhaps, the most distinctive feature of the normal ECG.

In this Chapter we focus on various measures of the ﬂuctuations of this sequence of
interbeat intervals and how such ﬂuctuations can be used to assess the presence or likelihood
of cardiovascular disease [2]. This approach has come to be called heart rate variability
(HRV) analysis [3, 4] even when it is the time intervals whose ﬂuctuations are studied
(heart rate has units of inverse time rather than time). HRV analysis serves as a marker for
cardiovascular disease because cardiac dysfunction is often manifested by systematic changes
in the variability of the RR-interval sequence relative to that of normal controls [1, 3, 5, 6]. A
whole host of HRV measures, some scale-dependent and others scale-independent, have been
developed and examined over the years in an eﬀort to develop readily available, inexpensive,
and noninvasive measures of cardiovascular function.

We examine sixteen HRV measures and their suitability for correctly classifying ECG
records of various lengths as normal or revealing the presence of cardiac dysfunction. Par-
ticular attention is devoted to HRV measures that are useful for discriminating congestive-
heart-failure patients from normal subjects. Using receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC)
analysis we demonstrate that scale-dependent HRV measures (e.g., wavelet and spectral
measures) are substantially superior to scale-independent measures (such as wavelet and
spectral fractal exponents) for discriminating these two classes of data over a broad range
of record lengths. The wavelet-transform standard deviation at a scale near 32 heartbeat
intervals, and its spectral counterpart near 1/32 cycles/interval, turn out to provide reliable
results using ECG records just minutes long.

5

A long-standing issue of importance in cardiac physiology is the determination of whether
the normal RR sequence arises from a chaotic attractor or has an underlying stochastic origin
[6]. We present a phase-space analysis in which diﬀerences between adjacent RR intervals
are embedded. This has the salutary eﬀect of removing most of the correlation in the time
series, which is well-known to be deleterious to the detection of underlying deterministic
dynamics. We demonstrate that RR sequences, from normal subjects and from patients
with cardiac dysfunction alike, have stochastic rather than deterministic origins, in accord
with our earlier conclusions [7, 8].

Finally we develop a mathematical point process that emulates the human heartbeat
time series for both normal subjects and heart-failure patients. Using simulations, we show
that a jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model built around a fractal-Gaussian-noise kernel provides
a realistic, though not perfect, simulation of real heartbeat sequences. A construct of this
kind may well be useful in a number of venues, including pacemaker excitation.

2 Methods and Measures

2.1 The Heartbeat Sequence as a Point Process

The statistical behavior of the sequence of heartbeats can be studied by replacing the complex
waveform of an individual heartbeat recorded in the ECG (an entire QRS-complex) with the
time of occurrence of the contraction (the time of the peak of the R phase), which is a
single number [8, 9]. In mathematical terms, the heartbeat sequence is then modeled as an
unmarked point process. This simpliﬁcation greatly reduces the computational complexity
of the problem and permits us to use the substantial methodology that exists for point
processes [10, 11, 12].

The occurrence of a contraction at time ti is therefore simply represented by an impulse
δ(t− ti) at that time, where δ is the Dirac delta function, so that the sequence of heartbeats
is represented by
(1)

h(t) =Xi

δ(t − ti).

A realization of a point process is speciﬁed by the set of occurrence times {ti} of the events.
A single realization of the data is often all that is available to the observer so that the
identiﬁcation of the point process, and the elucidation of the mechanisms that underlie it,
must be gleaned from this one realization.

One way in which the information in an experimental point process can be made more
digestible is to reduce the data into a statistic that emphasizes a particular aspect of the
data (at the expense of other features). These statistics fall into two broad classes which

6

derive from the sequence of interevent intervals and the sequence of counts, as illustrated in
Fig. 1 [10, 13].

Figure 1 illustrates how an electrocardiogram may be analyzed to obtain the sequence of
interbeat intervals as well as the sequence of counts. Fig. 1(a) illustrates an ECG (sequence
of QRS complexes) recorded from a patient. The R waves are schematically represented by
a sequence of vertical lines, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The time between the ﬁrst two R waves
is τ1, the ﬁrst RR (or interbeat) interval, as indicated by the horizontal arrows in this ﬁgure.
The time between the second and third R waves is τ2, and so forth. In Fig. 1(c), the time
axis is divided into equally spaced, contiguous time windows, each of duration T seconds,
and the (integer) number of R waves that fall in the ith window is counted and denoted
Ni. This sequence {Ni} forms a discrete-time random counting process of nonnegative
integers. Varying the duration T yields a family of sequences {Ni}(T ). The RR intervals
{τi} themselves also form a sequence of positive real-valued random numbers, which is shown
schematically in Fig. 1(d). Here the abscissa is the interval number, which is not a simple
function of time.

In this section we examine several statistical measures (including some that are novel) to
characterize these stochastic processes; the development is assisted by an understanding of
point processes.

2.1.1 Conventional Point Processes

The homogeneous Poisson point process, perhaps the simplest of all stochastic point pro-
cesses, is described by a single parameter, the rate λ. This point process is memoryless: the
occurrence of an event at any time t0 is independent of the presence (or absence) of events
at other times t 6= t0. Because of this property, both the intervals {τi} and counts {Ni}
form sequences of independent, identically distributed random variables. The homogeneous
Poisson point process is therefore completely characterized by the interevent-interval distri-
bution (also referred to as the interbeat-interval histogram), which is exponential, or the
event-number distribution (also referred to as the counting distribution), which is Poisson,
together with the property of being independent. This process serves as a benchmark against
which other point processes are measured; it therefore plays the role that the white Gaussian
process enjoys in the realm of continuous-time stochastic processes.

A related point process is the nonparalyzable ﬁxed-dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point
process, a close cousin of the homogeneous Poisson point process that diﬀers only by the
imposition of a dead-time (refractory) interval after the occurrence of each event, during
which other events are prohibited from occurring [10, 14]. Another cousin is the gamma-r
renewal process which, for integer r, is generated from an homogeneous Poisson point process
by permitting every rth event to survive while deleting all intermediate events [10, 15]. Both

7

the dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point process and the gamma-r renewal process require two
parameters for their description.

Some point processes exhibit no dependencies among their interevent intervals at the
outset, in which case the sequence of interevent intervals forms a sequence of identically
distributed random variables and the point process is completely speciﬁed by its interevent-
interval histogram, i.e., its ﬁrst-order statistic. Such a process is called a renewal process
[10], a deﬁnition motivated by the replacement of failed parts, each replacement of which
forms a renewal of the point process. Both examples of point processes presented above
belong to the class of renewal point processes.

The interevent-interval histogram is, perhaps, the most commonly used of all statistical
measures of point processes in the life sciences. The interevent-interval histogram estimates
the interevent-interval probability density function pτ (τ ) by computing the relative frequency
of occurrence of interevent intervals as a function of interval size. Its construction involves the
loss of interval ordering, and therefore of information about dependencies among intervals;
a reordering of the sequence does not alter the interevent-interval histogram since the order
plays no role in the relative frequency of occurrence.

The interevent-interval probability density function for the homogeneous Poisson point

process assumes the exponential form

pτ (τ ) = λ exp(−λτ )

(2)

where λ is the mean number of events per unit time. The interevent-interval mean and
variance are readily calculated to be E[τ ] =R ∞
0 τ pτ (τ )dτ = 1/λ and Var(τ ) = E[τ 2]−E2[τ ] =
1/λ2, respectively, where E[·] represents expectation over the quantity inside the brackets.
The interevent-interval probability density function for the dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point
process exhibits the same exponential form as for the homogeneous Poisson point process,
but is truncated at short interevent intervals as a result of the dead time [10]:

pτ (τ ) =( 0

τ < τd
λ exp[−λ(τ − τd)] τ ≥ τd

(3)

Here τd is the dead time and λ is the rate of the process before dead time is imposed.

If a process is nonrenewal, so that dependencies exist among its interevent intervals,
then the interevent-interval histogram does not completely characterize the process [13]. In
this case, measures that reveal the nature of the dependencies provide information that is
complementary to that contained in the interevent-interval histogram. The heartbeat time
series is such a nonrenewal process.

8

2.1.2 Fractal and Fractal-Rate Point Processes

The complete characterization of a stochastic process involves a description of all possible
joint probabilities of the various events occurring in the process. Diﬀerent statistics provide
complementary views of the process; no single statistic can in general describe a stochastic
process completely. Fractal stochastic processes exhibit scaling in their statistics. Such
scaling leads naturally to power-law behavior, as demonstrated in the following. Consider a
statistic w, such as the Allan factor for long counting times (see Sec. 2.5.1), which depends
continuously on the scale x over which measurements are taken [16, 17]. Suppose changing
the scale by any factor a eﬀectively scales the statistic by some other factor g(a), related to
the factor but independent of the original scale:

w(ax) = g(a)w(x).

(4)

The only nontrivial solution of this scaling equation, for real functions and arguments, that
is independent of a and x is

w(x) = bg(x)

with

g(x) = xc

(5)

for some constants b and c [16, 17, 18]. Thus statistics with power-law forms are closely
related to the concept of a fractal [19, 20, 21]. The particular case of ﬁxed a admits a more
general solution [22]:

g(x; a) = xc cos[2π ln(x)/ ln(a)].

(6)

Consider once again, for example, the interevent-interval histogram. This statistic high-
lights the behavior of the times between adjacent events, but reveals none of the information
contained in the relationships among these times, such as correlation between adjacent time
intervals. If the interevent-interval probability density function follows the form of Eq. (5)
so that p(τ ) ∼ τ c over a certain range of τ where c < −1, the process is known as a fractal
renewal point process [17, 19], a form of fractal stochastic process.

A number of statistics may be used to describe a fractal stochastic point process, and
each statistic which scales will in general have a diﬀerent scaling exponent c. Each of these
exponents can be simply related to a more general parameter α, the fractal exponent, where
the exact relation between these two exponents will depend upon the statistic in question.
For example, the exponent c of the interevent-interval probability density function deﬁned
above is related to the fractal exponent α by c = −(1 + α). As the fractal exponent is a
constant that describes the overall scaling behavior of a statistic, it does not depend on the
particular scale and is therefore scale independent. Scale-independent measures are discussed
in subsections 2.6 and 3.6.1.

Sample functions of the fractal renewal point process are true fractals; the expected
value of their generalized dimensions assumes a nonintegral value between the topological
dimension (zero) and the Euclidean dimension (unity) [19].

9

The sequence of unitary events observed in many biological and physical systems, such as
the heartbeat sequence, do not exhibit power-law-distributed interevent-interval histograms
but nevertheless exhibit scaling in other statistics. These processes therefore have integral
generalized dimensions and are consequently not true fractals. They may nevertheless be
endowed with rate functions that are either fractals or their increments: fractal Brownian
motion, fractal Gaussian noise, or other related processes. Therefore, such point processes
are more properly termed fractal-rate stochastic point processes [17]. It can be shown by
surrogate data methods, e.g., shuﬄing the order of the intervals (see Sec. 5.1.3), that it is
the ordering and not the relative interval sizes that distinguish these point processes [8].

2.2 Standard Frequency-Domain Measures

A number of HRV measures have been used as standards in cardiology, both for purposes of
physiological interpretation and for clinical diagnostic applications [3]. We brieﬂy describe
some of the more commonly used measures that we include in this chapter for comparison
with several novel measures that have been recently developed.

Fourier transform techniques provide a method for quantifying the correlation properties
of a stochastic process through spectral analysis. Two deﬁnitions of power spectral density
have been used in the analysis of HRV [9]. A rate-based power spectral density Sλ(f ) is
obtained by deriving an underlying random continuous process λ(t), the heart rate, based
on a transformation of the observed RR interbeat intervals. The power spectral density of
this random process is well deﬁned, and standard techniques may be used for estimating the
power spectral density from a single observation of λ(t). An advantage of this technique is
that the power spectral density thus calculated has temporal frequency as the independent
variable, so that spectral components can be interpreted in terms of underlying physiological
processes with known timescales. The power spectral density itself is usually expressed in
units of sec−1. However, the choice of how to calculate λ(t), the underlying rate function,
may inﬂuence the calculated power spectral density.

The second spectral measure that is more widely used is an interval-based power spec-
tral density Sτ (f ) that is directly calculated from measured RR interbeat intervals without
transformation [9].
In this case the intervals are treated as discrete-index samples of an
underlying random process, and there is no intermediate calculation of an underlying rate
function. The power spectral density in this case has cycles/interval as the independent
variable, and therefore has units of sec2/interval.

The two types of power spectral densities are easily confused and care must be taken in
their interpretation. For example, one could mistakenly interpret the abscissa of an interval-
based power spectral density plot as being equivalent to temporal frequency (e.g., cycles/sec).
While this is generally incorrect, for point processes whose interevent-interval coeﬃcient of

10

variation is relatively small [9], the interval-based and rate-based power spectral density
plots can be made approximately equivalent by converting the interval-based frequency fint
(in cycles/interval) to the time-based frequency ftime (in cycles/sec) using

ftime = fint/E[τ ].

(7)

For typical interbeat-interval sequences, the coeﬃcient of variation is indeed relatively small
and this conversion can be carried out without the introduction of signiﬁcant error [9]. In
the remainder of this Chapter we work principally with the interval-based power-spectral
density. We use the notation f ≡ fint for the interval-based frequency (cycles/interval) and
retain the notation ftime for temporal frequency (cycles/sec).

We make use of a non-parametric technique for estimating the spectral density. A simple
reliable method for estimating the power spectral density of a process from a set of discrete
samples {τi} is to calculate the averaged periodogram [23, 24, 25]. The data is ﬁrst divided
into K non-overlapping blocks of L samples. After the optional use of a Hanning window,
the discrete Fourier transform of each block is calculated and squared. The results are then
averaged to form the estimate

cSτ (f ) ≡

1
K

KXk=1|˜τk(f )|2.

(8)

Here ˜τk(f ) is the discrete Fourier transform of the kth block of data and the hat explic-
itly indicates that we are dealing with an estimate of Sτ (f ), which is called an averaged
periodogram.

The periodogram covers a broad range of frequencies which can be divided into bands
that are relevant to the presence of various cardiac pathologies. The power within a band
is calculated by integrating the power spectral density over the associated frequency range.
Some commonly used measures in HRV are [3]:

VLF. The power in the very-low-frequency range: 0.003–0.04 cycles/interval. Physiological
correlates of the VLF band have not been speciﬁcally identiﬁed [3].

LF. The power in the low-frequency range: 0.04–0.15 cycles/interval. The LF band may
reﬂect both sympathetic and vagal activity but its interpretation is controversial [3].

HF. The power in the high-frequency range: 0.15–0.4 cycles/interval. Eﬀerent vagal activity
is a major contributor to the HF band [26, 27, 28].

LF/HF. The ratio of the low-frequency-range power to that in the high-frequency range.
This ratio may mirror either sympatho-vagal balance or reﬂect sympathetic modulations [3].

11

2.3 Standard Time-Domain Measures

We consider three time-domain measures commonly used in HRV analysis. The ﬁrst and
last are highly correlated with each other inasmuch as they estimate the high-frequency
variations in the heart rate [3]. They are:

pNN50. The relative proportion of successive NN intervals (normal-to-normal intervals,
i.e., all intervals between adjacent QRS complexes resulting from sinus node depolarizations
[3]) with interval diﬀerences greater than 50 ms.

SDANN. The Standard Deviation of the Average NN interval calculated in ﬁve-minute
segments. It is often calculated over a 24-hour period. This measure estimates ﬂuctuations
over frequencies smaller than 0.003 cycles/sec.

SDNN (σint). The Standard Deviation of the NN interval set {τi} speciﬁed in units
of seconds. This measure is one of the more venerable among the many scale-dependent
measures that have long been used for HRV analysis [3, 5, 29, 30].

2.4 Other Standard Measures

There are several other well-known measures that have been considered for HRV analysis. For
completeness, we brieﬂy mention two of them here: the event-number histogram and the Fano
factor [7, 8]. Just as the interevent-interval histogram provides an estimate of the probability
density function of interevent-interval magnitude, the event-number histogram provides an
estimate of the probability mass function of the number of events. Construction of the event-
number histogram, like the interevent-interval histogram, involves loss of information, in this
case the ordering of the counts. However, whereas the time scale of information contained
in the interevent-interval histogram is the mean interevent interval, which is intrinsic to the
process under consideration, the event-number histogram reﬂects behavior occurring on the
adjustable time scale of the counting window T . The Fano factor, which is the variance of
the number of events in a speciﬁed counting time T divided by the mean number of events
in that counting time, is a measure of correlation over diﬀerent time scales T . This measure
is sometimes called the index of dispersion of counts [31]. In terms of the sequence of counts
illustrated in Fig. 1, the Fano factor is simply the variance of {Ni} divided by the mean of
{Ni}.

12

2.5 Novel Scale-Dependent Measures

The previous standard measures are all well-established scale-dependent measures. We now
describe a set of recently devised scale-dependent measures whose performance we evaluate.
Throughout this chapter, when referring to intervals, we denote the ﬁxed scale as m; when
referring to time, we employ T .

2.5.1 Allan Factor [A(T )]

In this section we present a measure we ﬁrst deﬁned in 1996 [32] and called the Allan factor.
We quickly found that this quantity was a useful measure of HRV [8]. The Allan factor is
the ratio of the event-number Allan variance to twice the mean:

A(T ) ≡

En[Ni+1(T ) − Ni(T )]2o

2E{Ni+1(T )}

.

(9)

The Allan variance, as opposed to the ordinary variance, is deﬁned in terms of the variability
of successive counts [17, 33, 34]. As such, it is a measure based on the Haar wavelet. The
Allan variance was ﬁrst introduced in connection with the stability of atomic-based clocks
[33]. Because the Allan factor functions as a derivative, it has the salutary eﬀect of mitigating
against linear nonstationarities.

The Allan factor of a point process generally varies as a function of the counting time
T ; the exception is the homogeneous Poisson point process. For a homogeneous Poisson
point process, A(T ) = 1 for any counting time T . Any deviation from unity in the value
of A(T ) therefore indicates that the point process in question is not Poisson in nature. An
excess above unity reveals that a sequence is less ordered than a homogeneous Poisson point
process, while values below unity signify sequences which are more ordered. For a point
process without overlapping events the Allan factor approaches unity as T approaches zero.

A more complex wavelet Allan factor can be constructed to eliminate polynomial trends
[35, 36, 37]. The Allan variance, E[(Ni+1− Ni)2] may be recast as the variance of the integral
of the point process under study multiplied by the following function:

ψHaar(t) =

−1
+1
0

for −T < t < 0,
for 0 < t < T ,
otherwise.

(10)

Equation (10) deﬁnes a scaled wavelet function, speciﬁcally the Haar wavelet. This can be
generalized to any admissible wavelet ψ(t); when suitably normalized the result is a wavelet
Allan factor [36, 38].

13

2.5.2 Wavelet-Transform Standard Deviation [σwav(m)]

Wavelet analysis has proved to be a useful technique for analyzing signals at multiple
scales [39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44]. It permits the time and frequency characteristics of a sig-
nal to be simultaneously examined, and has the advantage of naturally removing polynomial
nonstationarities [36, 37, 45]. The Allan factor served in this capacity for the counting process
{Ni}, as discussed above. Wavelets similarly ﬁnd use in the analysis of RR-interval series.
They are attractive because they mitigate against the nonstationarities and slow variations
inherent in the interbeat-interval sequence. These arise, in part, from the changing activity
level of the subject during the course of a 24-hour period.

Wavelet analysis simultaneously gives rise to both scale-dependent and scale-independent
measures [46], aﬀording the experimenter an opportunity to compare the two approaches.
In this latter capacity wavelet analysis provides an estimate of the wavelet-transform fractal
(scaling) exponent αW [46, 47], as discussed in the context of HRV in subsections 2.6.2
and 3.6.1. As a result of these salutary properties we devote particular attention to the
wavelet analysis of HRV in this Chapter.

A dyadic discrete wavelet transform for the RR-interval sequence {τi} may be deﬁned as

[41, 42, 43]

Wm,n(m) =

1
√m

L−1Xi=0

τiψ(i/m − n).

(11)

The quantity ψ is the wavelet basis function, and L is the number of RR intervals in the
set {τi}. The scale m is related to the scale index j by m = 2j. Both j and the translation
variable n are nonnegative integers. The term dyadic refers to the use of scales that are
integer powers of 2. This is an arbitrary choice; the wavelet transform could be calculated at
arbitrary scale values, although the dyadic scale enjoys a number of convenient mathematical
properties [41, 42].

The dyadic discrete wavelet transform calculated according to this prescription generates
a three-dimensional space from a two-dimensional signal graph. One axis is time or, in
our case, the RR-interval number i; the second axis is the scale m; and the third axis is
the strength of the wavelet component. Pictorially speaking, the transform gives rise to a
landscape whose longitude and latitude are RR-interval number and scale of observation,
while the altitude is the value of the discrete wavelet transform at the interval i and the
scale m.

Figure 2 provides an example of such a wavelet transform, where ψ(x) is the simple Haar
wavelet. Figure 2(a) illustrates the original wavelet, a function that is by deﬁnition ψ(x) = 1
for x between 0 and 0.5; ψ(x) = −1 for x between 0.5 and 1; and ψ(x) = 0 elsewhere. Figure
2(b) illustrates the wavelet scaled by the factor m = 16, which causes it to last for 16 samples
rather than 1; and delayed by a factor of n = 3 times the length of the wavelet, so that it

14

begins at x = nm = 48. Figure 2(c) shows a sequence of interbeat-interval values multiplied
by the scaled and shifted wavelet [the summand in Eq. (11)]. The abscissa is labeled i rather
than x to indicate that we have a discrete-time process comprised of the sequence {τi}. In
this particular example, only values of τi between i = 48 and 63 survive. Adding them (with
the appropriate sign) provides the wavelet transform beginning at interval number i = 48 at
a scale of m = 16.

For the Haar wavelet the calculation of the wavelet transform is therefore tantamount to
adding the eight RR intervals between intervals 48 and 55 inclusive, and then subtracting
the eight subsequent RR intervals between intervals 56 and 63 inclusive, as illustrated in
Fig. 2(c). Moving this window across interval number allows us to see how the wavelet
transform evolves with interval number, whereas varying the scale of the window permits
this variation to be observed over a range of resolutions, from ﬁne to coarse (smaller scales
allow the observation of more rapid variations, i.e. higher frequencies).

A simple measure that can be devised from the wavelet transformation is the standard

deviation of the wavelet transform as a function of scale [46, 47, 48, 49]:

σwav(m) =hEn|Wm,n(m) − E[Wm,n(m)]|2oi1/2

(12)

where the expectation is taken over the process of RR intervals, and is independent of n. It
is readily shown that E[Wm,n(m)] = 0 for all values of m so that a simpliﬁed form for the
wavelet-transform standard deviation emerges:

σwav(m) =nEh|Wm,n(m)|2io1/2

(13)

This quantity has recently been shown to be quite valuable for HRV analysis [46, 47, 48, 49,
50]. The special case obtained by using the Haar-wavelet basis and evaluating Eq. (13) at
m = 1 yields the standard deviation of the diﬀerence between pairs of consecutive interbeat
intervals. This special case is therefore identical to the well-known HRV measure referred to
as RMSSD [3], an abbreviation for Root-Mean-Square of Successive-interval Diﬀerences.

Figure 3 provides an example in which the discrete wavelet transform is calculated using
an RR-interval data set.
In Fig. 3(a), the original RR interbeat-interval series is shown,
while Fig. 3(b) shows the dyadic discrete wavelet transform at three diﬀerent scales as a
function of RR-interval number. It is important and interesting to note that the trends and
baseline variations present in the original time series have been removed by the transform.
As illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the wavelet-transform standard deviation σwav typically increases
with the scale m. When plotted versus scale, this quantity provides information about the
behavior of the signal at all scales. In Sec. 3 we show how this measure can be eﬀectively
used to separate heart-failure patients from normal normal subjects.

15

2.5.3 Relationship of Wavelet [σwav(m)] and Spectral Measures [Sτ (f )]

Is there a spectral measure equivalent to the wavelet-transform standard deviation? We
proceed to show that the wavelet-transform standard deviation σwav(m) and the interval-
based power spectral density Sτ (f ) are isomorphic [49], so that the answer is yes under
conditions of stationarity. Though their equivalence is most easily analyzed in the continuous
domain, the results are readily translated to the discrete domain by interpreting the discrete
wavelet transform as a discretized version of a continuous wavelet transform.

The continuous wavelet transform of a signal τ (t) is deﬁned as

Wτ (s, r) =

1

√sZ ∞

−∞

τ (t)ψ∗(cid:18)t − r

s (cid:19) dt

(14)

where s and r are continuous-valued scale and translation parameters respectively, ψ is a
wavelet basis function, and ∗ denotes complex conjugation. Since E[Wτ ] = 0, the variance
of Wτ at scale s is
(15)

D(s) = σ2

wav(s) = Eh|Wτ (s, r)|2i ,

which can be written explicitly as

D(s) = E" 1

√sZ ∞

−∞

τ (t)ψ∗(cid:18)t − r

s (cid:19) dt

1

√sZ ∞

−∞

τ ∗(t′)ψ  t′ − r

s ! dt′# .

For a wide-sense stationary signal the variance can be written as

D(s) =

1

−∞Z ∞
sZ ∞

−∞

R(t − t′)ψ∗(cid:18)t − r

s (cid:19) ψ  t′ − r

s ! dtdt′

(16)

(17)

where R is the autocorrelation function of τ . Routine algebraic manipulation then leads to

D(s) = sZ ∞

−∞

R(sy)Wψ(1, y)dy

or, alternatively,

D(s) = sZ ∞

f =−∞

Sτ (f )(cid:20)Z ∞

y=−∞

Wψ(1, y) exp(j2πf sy)dy(cid:21) df

(18)

(19)

where Wψ(1, y) is the wavelet transform of the wavelet itself (termed the wavelet kernel),
and Sτ (f ) is the power spectral density of the signal.

For the dyadic discrete wavelet transform that we have used, Eq. (19) becomes

D(m) = σ2

wav(m) = mZ ∞
= mZ ∞

−∞

Sτ (f )(cid:20)Z ∞

y=−∞

Wψ(1, y) exp(j2πf my)dy(cid:21) df

f =−∞

Sτ (f )H(mf )df.

(20)

16

We conclude that for stationary signals the interval-based power spectral density Sτ (f ) is
directly related to the wavelet-transform standard deviation σwav(m) through an integral
transform. This important result has a simple interpretation: the factor in square brackets
in Eq. (20) represents a bandpass ﬁlter H(mf ) that only passes spectral components in a
bandwidth surrounding the frequency fm that corresponds to the scale m. This is because the
Fourier transform of a wavelet kernel is constrained to be bandpass in nature. For a discrete-
index sequence, the sampling “time” can be arbitrarily set to unity so that a frequency fm
corresponds to 1/m. We conclude that information obtained from a D(m)-based statistic is
also accessible through interval-based power spectral density measures. In Sec. 3 we explicitly
show that the two measures are comparable in their abilities to discriminate heart-failure
patients from normal subjects.

2.5.4 Detrended Fluctuation Analysis [DFA(m)]

Detrended ﬂuctuation analysis (DFA) was originally proposed as a technique for quantifying
the nature of long-range correlations in a time series [51, 52, 53]. As implied by its name,
it was conceived as a method for detrending variability in a sequence of events. The DFA
computation involves the calculation of the summed series

y(k) =

kXi=1{τi − E[τ ]}

(21)

where y(k) is the kth value of the summed series and E[τ ] denotes the average over the set
{τi}. The summed series is then divided into segments of length m and a least-squares ﬁt is
performed on each of the data segments, providing the trends for the individual segments.
Detrending is carried out by subtracting the local trend ym(k) in each segment. The root-
mean-square ﬂuctuation of the resulting series is then

F (m) =( 1

L

[y(k) − ym(k)]2)1/2
LXk=1

.

(22)

The functional dependence of F (m) is obtained by evaluations over all segment sizes m.

Although detrended ﬂuctuation analysis was originally proposed as a method for esti-
mating the scale-independent fractal exponent of a time series [51], as discussed in Sec. 2.6.1,
we consider its merits as a scale-dependent measure. As will be demonstrated in Sec. 3, a
plot of F (m) versus m reveals a window of separation between congestive-heart-failure pa-
tients and normal subjects over a limited range of scales, much as that provided by the other
scale-dependent measures discussed in this section. Because DFA is an ad hoc measure that
involves nonlinear computations it is diﬃcult to relate it to other scale-dependent measures
in the spirit of Eq. (20). Furthermore, as will become clear in Sec. 3.6.2, relative to other
measures DFA is highly time intensive from a computational point-of-view.

17

2.6 Scale-Independent Measures

Scale-independent measures are designed to estimate fractal exponents that characterize
scaling behavior in one or more statistics of a sequence of events, as discussed in Sec. 2.1.2.
The canonical example of a scale-independent measure in HRV is the fractal exponent αS of
the interbeat-interval power spectrum, associated with the decreasing power-law form of the
spectrum at suﬃciently low frequencies f : Sτ (f ) ∝ f −αS [3, 30, 54]. Other scale-independent
measures have been examined by us [7, 8, 16, 17, 46] and by others [51, 55, 56, 6] in connection
with HRV analysis. For exponent values encountered in HRV, and inﬁnite data length, all
measures should in principle lead to a unique fractal exponent. In practice, however, ﬁnite
data length and other factors introduce bias and variance, so that diﬀerent measures give
rise to diﬀerent results. The performance of scale-independent measures has been compared
with that of scale-dependent measures for assessing cardiac dysfunction [46, 47].

2.6.1 Detrended-Fluctuation-Analysis Power-Law Exponent (αD)

The DFA technique, and its use as a scale-dependent measure, has been described in
Sec. 2.5.4. A number of recent studies [51, 53, 56] have considered the extraction of power-
law exponents from DFA and their use in HRV. As originally proposed [51], log[F (m)] is
plotted against log(m) and scaling exponents are obtained by ﬁtting straight lines to sections
of the resulting curve – the exponents are simply the slopes of the linearly ﬁtted segments
on this doubly logarithmic plot. The relationship between the scaling exponents has been
proposed as a means of diﬀerentiating normal from pathological subjects [51, 55, 56].

2.6.2 Wavelet-Transform Power-Law Exponent (αW )

The use of the wavelet transform as a scale-dependent measure was considered in Sec. 2.5.2.
It was pointed out that a scale-independent measure also emerges from the wavelet-transform
standard deviation. The wavelet-transform fractal exponent αW is estimated directly from
the wavelet transform as twice the slope of the curve log[σwav(m)] versus log(m), measured
at large values of m [46]. The factor of two is present because the fractal exponent is related
to variance rather than to standard deviation.

2.6.3 Periodogram Power-Law Exponent (αS)

The description of the periodogram as a scale-dependent measure was provided in Sec. 2.2.
The periodogram fractal exponent αS [17, 54] is obtained as the least-squares-ﬁt slope of
the spectrum when plotted on doubly logarithmic coordinates. The range of low frequencies

18

over which the slope is estimated stretches between 10/L and 100/L where L is the length
of the data set [17].

2.6.4 Allan-Factor Power-Law Exponent (αA)

The use of the Allan factor as a scale-dependent measure was considered in Sec. 2.5.1. The
Allan factor fractal exponent αA [8, 17] is obtained by determining the slope of the best-
ﬁtting straight line, at large values of T , to the Allan factor curve [Eq. (9)] plotted on doubly
logarithmic coordinates. Estimates of α obtained from the Allan factor can range up to a
value of three [32]. The use of wavelets more complex than the Haar enables an increased
range of fractal exponents to be accessed, at the cost of a reduction in the range of counting
time over which the wavelet Allan factor varies as T αA. In general, for a particular wavelet
with regularity (number of vanishing moments) R, fractal exponents α < 2R + 1 can be
reliably estimated [36, 38]. For the Haar basis, R = 1 whereas all other wavelet bases have
R > 1. A wavelet Allan factor making use of bases other than the Haar is therefore required
for fractal-rate stochastic point processes for which α ≥ 3. For processes with α < 3,
however, the Allan factor appears to be the best choice [36, 38].

2.6.5 Rescaled-Range-Analysis Power-Law Exponent (αR)

Rescaled range analysis [19, 57, 58, 59], provides information about correlations among blocks
of interevent intervals. For a block of k interevent intervals, the diﬀerence between each
interval and the mean interevent interval is obtained and successively added to a cumulative
sum. The normalized range R(k) is the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum
values that the cumulative sum attains, divided by the standard deviation of the interval
size. R(k) is plotted against k. Information about the nature and the degree of correlation
in the process is obtained by ﬁtting R(k) to the function kH, where H is the so-called
Hurst exponent [57]. For H > 0.5 positive correlation exists among the intervals, whereas
H < 0.5 indicates the presence of negative correlation; H = 0.5 obtains for intervals with
no correlation. Renewal processes yield H = 0.5. For negatively correlated intervals, an
interval that is larger than the mean tends, on average, to be preceded or followed by one
smaller than the mean.

The Hurst exponent H is generally assumed to be well suited to processes that exhibit
long-term correlation or have a large variance [19, 57, 58, 59], but there are limits to its
robustness since it exhibits large systematic errors and highly variable estimates for some
fractal sequences [6, 60, 61]. Nevertheless, it provides a useful indication of correlation in a
sequence of events arising from the ordering of the interevent intervals alone.

The exponent αR is ambiguously related to the Hurst exponent H, since some authors

19

have used the quantity H to index fractal Gaussian noise whereas others have used the same
value of H to index the integral of fractal Gaussian noise (which is fractional Brownian
motion). The relationship between the quantities is αR = 2H − 1 for fractal Gaussian noise
In the context of this work, the former
and αR = 2H + 1 for fractal Brownian motion.
relationship holds.

2.7 Estimating the Performance of a Measure

We have, to this point, outlined a variety of candidate measures for use in HRV analysis.
The task now is to determine the relative value of these measures from a clinical perspective.
We achieve this by turning to estimation theory [62].

A statistical measure obtained from a ﬁnite set of actual data is characterized by an
estimator. The ﬁdelity with which the estimator can approximate the true value of the
measure is determined by its bias and variance. The bias is the deviation of the expected
value of the estimator from its true underlying value (assuming that this exists) whereas the
variance indicates the expected deviation from the the mean. An ideal estimator has zero
bias and zero variance, but this is not achievable with a ﬁnite set of data. For any unbiased
estimator the Cram´er-Rao bound provides a lower bound for the estimator variance; measures
that achieve the Cram´er-Rao bound are called eﬃcient estimators. The estimator bias and
variance play a role in establishing the overall statistical signiﬁcance of conclusions based on
the value returned by the estimator.

2.7.1 Statistical Signiﬁcance: p, d′, h, and d

The concept of statistical signiﬁcance extends the basic properties of bias and variance [63].
It provides a probabilistic interpretation of how likely it is that a particular value of the
estimator might occur by chance alone, arising from both random ﬂuctuations in the data
and the inherent properties of the estimator itself.

A frequently used standard of statistical signiﬁcance is the p-value, the calculation of
which almost always implicitly assumes a Gaussian-distributed dependent variable. A lower
p-value indicates greater statistical signiﬁcance, and a measure is said to be statistically
signiﬁcant to a value of p0 when p < p0. The distributions obtained from HRV measurements
are generally not Gaussian, however, so that the usual method for estimating the p-value
cannot be used with conﬁdence. Since other methods for estimating the p-value require more
data than is available we do not consider this quantity further.

Another often-used distribution-dependent standard is the d′-value. It serves to indicate
the degree of separation between two distributions, and has been widely used in signal

20

detection theory and psychophysics where the two distributions represent noise and signal-
plus-noise [64]. The most common deﬁnition of d′ is the diﬀerence in the means of two
Gaussian distributions divided by their common standard deviation. Two closely related
distribution-dependent cousins of d′ are the detection distance h, deﬁned as the diﬀerence
in the means of the two Gaussian distributions divided by the square-root of the sum of
their variances; and the detection distance d, deﬁned as the diﬀerence in the means of the
two Gaussian distributions divided by the sum of their standard deviations. Larger values
of d′, h, and d indicate improved separation between the two distributions and therefore
reduced error in assigning an outcome to one or the other of the hypotheses.

Because HRV measures are intended to provide diagnostic information in a clinical
setting, and do not return Gaussian statistics, the evaluation of their performance using
distribution-independent means is preferred. Two techniques for achieving this, positive and
negative predictive values, and receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis, are described
below. Neither requires knowledge of the statistical distribution of the measured quantities
and both are useful.

2.7.2 Positive and Negative Predictive Values

The performance of the various HRV measures discussed previously can be eﬀectively com-
pared using positive predictive values and negative predictive values, the proportion of cor-
rect positive and negative identiﬁcations respectively. When there is no false positive (or
negative) detection, the predictive value is equal to unity and there is perfect assignment.
Furthermore, when the individual values of a measure for normal subjects and patients do
not overlap, the predictive value curves are typically monotonic, either increasing or decreas-
ing, with the threshold. A detailed discussion of positive and negative predictive values is
provided in Sec. 3.4.

2.7.3 Receiver-Operating-Characteristic (ROC) Analysis

Receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) analysis [62, 64, 65] is an objective and highly eﬀec-
tive technique for assessing the performance of a measure when it is used in binary hypothesis
testing. This format provides that a data sample be assigned to one of two hypotheses or
classes (e.g., pathologic or normal) depending on the value of some measured statistic relative
to a threshold value. The eﬃcacy of a measure is then judged on the basis of its sensitivity
(the proportion of pathologic patients correctly identiﬁed) and its speciﬁcity (the propor-
tion of normal subjects correctly identiﬁed). The ROC curve is a graphical presentation of
sensitivity versus 1−speciﬁcity as a threshold parameter is swept. Note that sensitivity and
speciﬁcity relate to the status of the patients (pathologic and normal) whereas predictive
values relate to the status of the identiﬁcations (positive and negative).

21

The area under the ROC curve serves as a well-established index of diagnostic accuracy
[64, 65]; the maximum value of 1.0 corresponds to perfect assignment (unity sensitivity for
all values of speciﬁcity) whereas a value of 0.5 arises from assignment to a class by pure
chance (areas < 0.5 arise when the sense of comparison is reversed). ROC analysis can be
used to choose the best of a host of diﬀerent candidate diagnostic measures by comparing
their ROC areas, or to establish for a single measure the tradeoﬀ between data length and
misidentiﬁcations (misses and false positives) by examining ROC area as a function of record
length. A minimum record length can then be speciﬁed to achieve acceptable classiﬁcation
accuracy.

As pointed out above, ROC analysis relies on no implicit assumptions about the statistical
nature of the data set [62, 65], so that it is generally more suitable [47] for analyzing non-
Gaussian time series than are measures of statistical signiﬁcance such as p-value, h, and d.
Another important feature of ROC curves is that they are insensitive to the units employed
(e.g., spectral magnitude, magnitude squared, or log magnitude); ROC curves for a measure
M are identical to those for any monotonic transformation thereof such as M x or log(M).
In contrast the values of d′, h, and d are generally modiﬁed by such transformations, as will
be demonstrated in Sec. 3.5.1.

3 Discriminating Heart-Failure Patients from Normal

Subjects

We now proceed to examine the relative merits of various HRV measures for discriminating
congestive-heart-failure (CHF) patients from normal subjects. Speciﬁcally we contrast and
compare the performance of the 16 measures set forth in Sec. 2: VLF, LF, HF, LF/HF,
pNN50, SDANN, SDNN (σint), A(T ), σwav(m), Sτ (f ), DFA(m), αD, αW , αS, αA, and αR.

After discussing the selection of an appropriate scale m, we use predictive value plots
and ROC curves to select a particular subset of HRV markers that appears to be promising
for discerning the presence of heart failure in a patient population.

3.1 Database

The RR recordings analyzed in this section were drawn from the Beth-Israel Hospital (Boston,
MA) Heart-Failure Database which includes 12 records from normal subjects (age 29–64
years, mean 44 years) and 12 records from severe congestive-heart-failure patients (age 22–
71 years, mean 56 years). The recordings were made with a Holter monitor digitized at a
ﬁxed value of 250 samples/sec. Also included in this database are 3 RR records for CHF pa-

22

tients who also suﬀered from atrial ﬁbrillation (AF); these records are analyzed as a separate
class. All records contain both diurnal and nocturnal segments. The data were originally
provided to us in 1992 by D. Rigney and A. L. Goldberger.

A detailed characterization of each of the records is presented in Table 1 of Ref. [8]; some
statistical details are provided in Table A1. Of the 27 recordings, the shortest contained
Lmax = 75821 RR intervals; the remaining 26 recordings were truncated to this length before
calculating the 16 HRV measures.

3.2 Selecting a Scale

A value for the scale m that suitably discriminates heart-failure patients from normal subjects
can be inferred from our recent wavelet studies of the CHF and normal records from the
same database as discussed in Sec. 3.1 [46, 47]. With the help of the wavelet-transform
standard deviation σwav(m) discussed in detail in Sec. 2.5.2, we discovered a critical scale
window near m = 32 interbeat intervals over which the normal subjects exhibited greater
ﬂuctuations than those aﬄicted with heart failure. For these particular long data sets, we
found that it was possible to perfectly discriminate between the two groups [46, 47, 48].

The results are displayed in Fig. 4, where σwav(m) is plotted vs. wavelet scale m for the
12 normal subjects (+), the 12 CHF patients ¯s atrial ﬁbrillation (×), and the 3 CHF patients
¯c atrial ﬁbrillation (△), using Haar-wavelet analysis. The AF patients (△) typically fell near
the high end of the non-AF patients (×), indicating greater RR ﬂuctuations, particularly at
small scales. This results from the presence of non-sinus beats. Nevertheless it is evident
from Fig. 4 that the wavelet measure σwav serves to completely separate the normal subjects
from the heart-failure patients (both ¯s and ¯c AF) at scales of 16 and 32 heartbeat intervals,
as reported in Ref. [46]. One can do no better. This conclusion persists for a broad range
of analyzing wavelets, from Daubechies 2-tap (Haar) to Daubechies 20-tap [46].

The importance of this scale window has been recently conﬁrmed in an Israeli-Danish
study of diabetic patients who had not yet developed clinical signs of cardiovascular disease
[50]. The reduction in the value of the wavelet-transform standard deviation σwav(32) that
leads to the scale window occurs not only for CHF (¯s and ¯c AF) and diabetic patients,
but also for heart-transplant patients [48, 50], and also in records preceding sudden cardiac
death [46, 48]. The depression of σwav(32) at these scales is likely associated with the im-
pairment of autonomic nervous system function. Baroreﬂex modulations of the sympathetic
or parasympathetic tone typically lie in the range 0.04–0.09 cycles/sec (11–25 sec), which
corresponds to the scale where σwav(m) is reduced.

These studies, in conjunction with our earlier investigations which revealed a similar
critical scale window in the counting statistics of the heartbeat [8, 35] (as opposed to the

23

time-interval statistics under discussion), lead to the recognition that scales in the vicinity
of m = 32 enjoy a special status. Those measures that depend on a particular scale are
therefore evaluated at m = 32 and f = 1/32 in the expectation that these values maximize
discriminability in the more usual situation when the two classes of data cannot be fully
separated.

3.3

Individual Value Plots

Having devised a suitable scale value m we now proceed to evaluate the 16 measures for
all 27 normal and CHF data sets, each comprising 75821 RR intervals. The results are
presented in Fig. 5 where each of the 16 panels represents a diﬀerent measure. For each
measure the individual values for normal subjects (+), CHF patients ¯s AF (×), and CHF
patients ¯c AF (△) comprise the left three columns, respectively. Values in the right four
columns correspond to other cardiovascular pathologies and will be discussed in Sec. 4.

To illustrate how particular measures succeed (or fail to succeed) in distinguishing be-
tween CHF patients and normal subjects, we focus in detail on two measures: VLF power
and pNN50. For this particular collection of patients and record lengths, the normal sub-
jects all exhibit larger values of VLF power than do the CHF patients; indeed a horizontal
line drawn at VLF= 0.000600 completely separates the two classes. On the other hand for
pNN50, though the normals still have larger values on average, there is a region of overlap
of CHF patients and normal subjects near 0.05, indicating that the two classes of patients
cannot be entirely separated using this measure. Thus for the full data set, comprising 75821
RR intervals, VLF succeeds in completely distinguishing CHF patients and normal subjects
whereas pNN50 does not.

Examining all 16 panels, we ﬁnd that six measures manage to completely separate the
normal subjects (ﬁrst column) from the heart-failure patients (second and third columns)
while the remaining 10 fail to do so. The six successful measures are highlighted by boldface
font in Fig. 5: VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32), Sτ(1/32), and DFA(32).

3.4 Predictive Value Plots

How can the ability of a measure to separate two classes of subjects be quantiﬁed? Returning
to the VLF panel in Fig. 5 we place a threshold level θ at an arbitrary position on the
ordinate, and consider only the leftmost two columns: normal subjects and heart-failure
patients who do not suﬀer from atrial ﬁbrillation. We then classify all subjects for whom
the VLF values are < θ as CHF patients (positive) and those for whom the VLF values > θ
as normal (negative). (Measures that yield smaller results for normal patients, on average,

24

obey a reversed decision criterion.)

If a subject labeled as a CHF patient is indeed so aﬄicted, then this situation is referred
to as a true positive (PT ); a normal subject erroneously labeled as a CHF patient is referred
to as a false positive (PF ). We deﬁne negative outcomes that are true (NT ) and false (NF )
in an analogous manner. As pointed out in Sec. 2.7.2, the positive predictive value VP =
PT /(PT + PF ) and negative predictive value VN = NT /(NT + NF ) represent the proportion
of positives and negatives, respectively, that are correctly identiﬁed. This determination is
carried out for many values of the threshold θ.

Figure 6 shows the positive (solid curves) and negative (dotted curves) predictive values
for all 16 measures, plotted against the threshold θ, each in its own panel. These curves
are constructed using the 12 normal and 12 heart-failure (¯s AF) records that comprise the
CHF database discussed in Sec. 3.1. For the VLF measure, both predictive values are
simulataneously unity in the immediate vicinity of θ = 0.000600. This occurs because PF
and NF are both zero at this particular value of θ and reconﬁrms that the two classes of
data separate perfectly in the VLF panel of Fig. 5 at this threshold.

For threshold values outside the range 0.000544 < θ < 0.000603, some of the patients
will be incorrectly identiﬁed by the VLF measure. If we set θ = 0.000100, for example, six of
the twelve CHF patients will be incorrectly identiﬁed as normal subjects, which is conﬁrmed
.
by examining the VLF panel in Fig. 5. This yields VN = NT /(NT + NF ) = 12/(12 + 6)
=
0.67 < 1, which is the magnitude of the negative predictive value (dotted curve) in the VLF
panel in Fig. 6. At this value of the threshold (θ = 0.000100) the positive predictive value
remains unity because PF remains zero.

The pNN50 panel in Fig. 5, in contrast, reveals a range of overlap in the individual
values of the normal subjects and CHF patients. Consequently as θ increases into the
overlap region, VP decreases below unity and this happens before VN attains unity value.
Thus there is no threshold value, or range of threshold values, for which the positive and
negative predictive values in Fig. 6 are both unity. The best threshold for this measure lies
in the range 0.026 < θ < 0.050, with the choice depending on the relative beneﬁt of being
able to accurately predict the presence or absence of CHF in a patient.

There are six measures in Fig. 6 (indicated in boldface font) for which the positive and
negative predictive values are both unity over the same range of threshold values. These
measures are, of course, the same six measures for which the normal subjects and heart-
failure patients fall into disjoint sets in Fig. 5.

25

3.5 ROC Curves

Two other important clinically relevant quantities that depend on the threshold θ are the
sensitivity, the proportion of heart-failure patients that are properly identiﬁed [PT /(PT +
NF )]; and the speciﬁcity, the proportion of normal subjects that are properly identiﬁed
[NT /(NT + PF )]. As pointed out in subsections 2.7.2 and 2.7.3, sensitivity and speciﬁcity
relate to patient status (pathologic and normal, respectively) whereas the positive and neg-
ative predictive values relate to identiﬁcation status (positive and negative, respectively).
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity are both monotonic functions of the threshold, but this is not
generally true for the predictive values. The monotonicity property is salutary in that it
facilitates the use of a parametric plot which permits these quantities to be represented in
compact form. A plot of sensitivity versus 1−speciﬁcity, traced out using various values of
the threshold θ, forms the receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curve (see Sec. 2.7.3).

ROC curves are presented in Fig. 7 for all 16 measures, again using the same 12 normal
and 12 heart-failure (¯s AF) records that comprise the CHF database discussed in Sec. 3.1.
Because of the complete separation between the two classes of patients (leftmost two columns
of the VLF panel in Fig. 5) near θ = 0.000600, the VLF ROC curve in Fig. 7 simultaneously
achieves unity (100%) sensitivity and unity (100%) speciﬁcity (the point at upper left corner
of the ROC curve). For the pNN50 statistic, in contrast, the overlap evident in Fig. 5
prevents this, so that the upper left corner of the pNN50 ROC curve in Fig. 7 instead reveals
smaller simultaneous values of sensitivity and speciﬁcity.

Six measures in Fig. 7 simultaneously exhibit unity sensitivity and speciﬁcity; these are
indicated by boldface font and have ROC curves that are perfectly square. They are clearly
the same measures for which the normal subjects and heart-failure patients fall into disjoint
sets in Fig. 5, and for which simultaneous positive and negative predictive values of unity
are observed in Fig. 6.

3.5.1 Comparison with Detection-Distance Measures

For didactic purposes we compare the ROC results presented immediately above with those
obtained using detection-distance analysis. As we indicated in Sec. 2.7.1, care must be exer-
cised when using these techniques for anything other than Gaussian-distributed quantities.
The calculations were carried out using the same 12 normal-subject and 12 CHF-patient
records, each comprising Lmax = 75821 intervals. In Table 1 we provide the detection dis-
tances h and d, in order of descending value of h, for all 16 measures. Large values are best
since they indicate that the two distributions are well separated.

Five of the six measures that entirely separate the CHF patients and normal subjects
using ROC analysis fall in the top ﬁve positions in Table 1. The sixth measure, LF, falls in

26

ninth position. This conﬁrms that detection-distance analysis applied to these long record-
ings provides results that qualitatively agree with those obtained using ROC analysis. How-
ever, detection-distance analysis does not provide any indication of how many (or indeed
whether any) of the measures at the top of the list completely separate the two classes of
patients, nor does it provide estimates of sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Moreover, the rankings
according to d diﬀer from those according to h.

Finally, the detection-distance for a particular measure, as well as the relative ranking
of that measure, depends on what appear to be insigniﬁcant details about the speciﬁc form
in which the measure is cast. For example the h values for σwav(32) and its square σ2
wav(32)
are substantially diﬀerent, and so are their rankings in Table 1. As discussed in Sec. 2.7.3,
ROC analysis is invariant to monotonic transformations of the measure and therefore does
not suﬀer from this disadvantage.

3.5.2 ROC-Area Curves

Perfectly square ROC curves, associated with the group of six boldface-labeled measures
in Figs. 5–8, exhibit unity area. These ROCs represent 100% sensitivity for all values of
speciﬁcity, indicating that every patient is properly assigned to the appropriate status: heart-
failure or normal. Though the perfect separation achieved by these six measures endorses
them as useful diagnostic statistics, the results of most studies are seldom so clear-cut. ROC
area will surely decrease as increasing numbers of out-of-sample records are added to the
database, since increased population size means increased variability [46].

ROC area also decreases with diminishing data length; shorter records yield less informa-
tion about patient condition and these patients are therefore more likely to be misclassiﬁed
[47, 48]. The ROC curves in Fig. 7 have been constructed from Holter-monitor records that
contain many hours of data (75821 RR intervals). It would be useful in a clinical setting
to be able to draw inferences from HRV measures recorded over shorter times, say minutes
rather than hours.
It is therefore important to examine the performance of the 16 HRV
measures as data length is decreased. As indicated in Sec. 2.7.3, ROC-analysis provides an
ideal method for carrying out this task [47, 48].

In Fig. 8 we present ROC-area curves as a function of the number of RR intervals (data
length) L analyzed (64 ≤ L ≤ 75821). The ROC areas for the full-length records (Lmax =
75821), which correspond to the areas under the ROC curves presented in Fig. 7, are the
rightmost points in the ROC-area curves shown in Fig. 8. Results for shorter records were
obtained by dividing the 12 normal and 12 heart-failure (¯s AF) records that comprise the
CHF database (Sec. 3.1) into smaller segments of length L. The area under the ROC curve
for that data length L was computed for the ﬁrst such segment for all 16 measures, and then
for the second segment, and so on, for all segments of length L (remainders of length < L of

27

the original ﬁles were not used for the ROC-area calculations). ¿From the Lmax/L values of
the ROC area, the mean and standard deviation were computed and plotted in Fig. 8. The
lengths L examined ranged from L = 26 = 64 to L = 216 = 65536 RR intervals, in powers of
two, in addition to the entire record of Lmax = 75821 intervals.

To illustrate the information provided by these curves, we direct our attention to the
VLF and pNN50 panels in Fig. 8. For the full-length records the right-most point in the
VLF panel reveals unity area while that for pNN50 lies somewhat lower, as expected from
the corresponding ROC curves in Fig. 7. VLF clearly outperforms pNN50. As the data
length analyzed decreases, so too do the ROC areas for both measures while their variances
increase, also as expected. However, when the data length dips to 256 or fewer RR intervals,
the performance of the two measures reverses so that pNN50 outperforms VLF. There is an
important point to be drawn from this example. Not only does the performance of a measure
depend on data length, but so too does the relative performance of diﬀerent measures.

3.6 Comparing the Measures for Various Data Lengths

Based on their overall ability to distinguish between CHF patients and normal subjects over
a range of data lengths, the sixteen measures shown in Fig. 8 divide roughly into three
classes. The six measures that fall in the ﬁrst class, comprising VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32),
Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32), succeed in completely separating the two classes of patients for data
lengths down to L = 215 = 32768 RR intervals. These six measures share a dependence on a
single scale, or small range of scales, near 32 heartbeat intervals. For this collection of data
sets, this scale appears to yield the best performance. Members of this class outperform the
other ten measures at nearly all data lengths. Apparently the scale value itself is far more
important than the measure used to evaluate it.

The second class, consisting of HF, the ratio LF/HF, pNN50, and σint, fail to achieve
complete separation for any data size examined. Nevertheless the members of this class are
not devoid of value in separating CHF patients from normal subjects. Interestingly, all but
LF/HF provide better results than A(10), a member of the ﬁrst class, for the shortest data
lengths. Results for these four measures varied relatively little with data size, thus exhibiting
a form of robustness.

Members of the third class, consisting of SDANN and the ﬁve scale-independent measures
α[·], exhibit poor performance at all data lengths. These six measures require long sequences
of RR intervals to make available the long-term ﬂuctuations required for accurate estimation
of the fractal exponent. Data lengths L < 5000 RR intervals lead to large variance and
(negative) bias, and are not likely to be meaningful. As an example of the kind of peculiarity
that can emerge when attempting to apply scale-independent measures to short records, the
αA ROC area decreases below 0.5 when the data size falls below 2048 intervals (reversing

28

the sense of the comparison only for these data sizes increases the ROC area, though not
above 0.7; however this clearly violates the spirit of the method). SDANN requires several
5-minute segments to accurately determine the standard deviation.

3.6.1 Scale-Independent vs Scale-Dependent Measures

As indicated in the previous subsection, all ﬁve scale-independent measures (αD, αW , αS,
αA, and αR) perform poorly at all data lengths. These fractal-exponent estimators return
widely diﬀering results as is plainly evident in Fig. 5. This suggests that there is little merit
in the concept of a single exponent for characterizing the human heartbeat sequence, no less
a “universal” one as some have proposed [51, 55, 56].

A variation on this theme is the possibility that pairs of fractal exponents can provide
a useful HRV measure. At small scales m, Fig. 4 reveals that heart-failure patients exhibit
smaller values of the wavelet-transform standard-deviation slope than do normal subjects.
Following Peng et al. [51], who constructed a measure based on diﬀerences of DFA scaling
exponents in diﬀerent scaling regions in an attempt to discriminate CHF patients from
normal subjects, Thurner et al.
[46] constructed a measure based on diﬀerences in the
wavelet-transform standard-deviation slope at diﬀerent scales. However the outcome was
found to be unsatisfactory when compared with other available measures; we concluded the
same about the results obtained by Peng et al. [51]. Using ROC analysis, as described in
Sec. 2.7.3, we determined that the ROC area for the measure described by Thurner et al.
[46] was suﬃciently small (0.917 for m = 4, 16, and 256) that we abandoned this construct.

Four of the techniques we have discussed in this Chapter (spectral, wavelet, detrended
ﬂuctuation analysis, and Allan factor) yield both scale-independent and scale-dependent
measures and therefore aﬀord us the opportunity of directly comparing these two classes
of measures in individual calculations: αW ↔ σwav(32); αS ↔ Sτ (1/32); αD ↔ DFA(32);
αA ↔ A(10). In each of these cases the ﬁxed-scale measure is found to greatly outperform
the fractal-exponent measure for all data sizes examined, as we previously illustrated for the
pairs αW ↔ σwav(32) and αS ↔ Sτ (1/32) [47]. These results were recently conﬁrmed in a
follow-up Israeli–Danish study [66]. Moreover, in contrast with the substantial variability
returned in fractal-exponent estimates, results for the diﬀerent scale-dependent measures at
m = 32 intervals bear reasonable similarity to each other.

Nunes Amaral et al.

[56] recently concluded exactly the opposite, namely that scaling
exponents provide superior performance to scale-dependent measures. This may be because
they relied exclusively on the distribution-dependent measures η ≡ h2 and d2 (see subsec-
tions 2.7.1 and 3.5.1) rather than on distribution-independent ROC analysis. These same
authors [56] also purport to glean information from higher moments of the wavelet coef-
ﬁcients, but the reliability of such information is questionable because estimator variance

29

increases with moment order [17].

3.6.2 Computation Times of the Various Measures

The computation times for the 16 measures considered in this Chapter are provided in
Table 2. All measures were run ten times and averaged except for the two DFA measures
which, because of their long execution time, were run only once. These long execution times
are associated with the suggested method for computing DFA [67], which is an N 2 process.
DFA computation times therefore increase as the square of the number of intervals whereas
all 14 other methods, in contrast, are either of order N or N log(N).

Based on computation time, we can rank order the six scale-dependent measures that
fall into the ﬁrst class, from fastest to slowest: σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), A(10), LF, VLF, and
DFA(32). Because of its computational simplicity the wavelet-transform standard deviation
σwav(32) computes more rapidly than any of the other measures. It is 3 times faster than
that of its nearest competitor Sτ (1/32), 16.5 times faster than LF, and 32500 times faster
than DFA(32).

3.6.3 Comparing the Most Eﬀective Measures

In subsections 3.3–3.5, we established that six measures succeeded in completely separating
the normal subjects from the CHF patients in our database for data lengths L ≥ 215 = 32768
RR intervals: VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32). We now demonstrate from
a fundamental point of view that these measures can all be viewed as transformations of the
interval-based power spectral density and that all are therefore closely related.

Consider ﬁrst the relationships of VLF and LF to Sτ (1/32). At a frequency f = 1/32 ≈
0.031 cycles/interval, Sτ (f ) separates CHF patients from normal subjects; however, a range
of values of f provide varying degrees of separability. For the data sets we analyzed, sep-
aration extends from f = 0.02 to f = 0.07 cycles/interval [49]. Recall that VLF and LF
are simply integrals of Sτ (f ) over particular ranges of f : from f = 0.003 to f = 0.04 cy-
cles/interval for VLF, and from f = 0.04 to f = 0.15 cycles/interval for LF. Since these
ranges overlap with those for which the power spectral density itself provides separability, it
is not surprising that these spectral integrals also exhibit this property. This illustrates the
close relationship among VLF, LF, and Sτ (1/32).

We next turn to the relation between σwav(32) and Sτ (1/32). In Sec. 2.5.3 the relationship

between these two measures was established as

σ2

wav(m) = mZ ∞

−∞

30

Sτ (f )H(mf )df,

(23)

revealing that σ2
wav(m) is simply a bandpass-ﬁltered version of the interval-based power
spectral density for stationary signals. For the Haar wavelet, the bandpass ﬁlter H(mf )
has a center frequency near 1/m, and a bandwidth about that center frequency also near
1/m [49]. Accordingly, σ2
wav(32) is equivalent to a weighted integral of Sτ (f ) centered about
f = 1/32 ≈ 0.031, with an approximate range of integration of 0.031±0.016 (0.016 to 0.047).
Thus the separability of σ2
wav(32) is expected to resemble that of Sτ (1/32), and therefore that
of VLF and LF as well.

Now consider the count-based Allan factor evaluated at a counting time of ten seconds,
A(10). Since the Allan factor is directly related to the variance of the Haar wavelet trans-
form of the counts [36], A(10) is proportional to the wavelet transform of the counting
process evaluated over a wavelet duration of T = 20 sec. The count-based and interval-
based measures are approximately related via Eq. (7) so that A(10) should be compared
with σwav(20/E[τ ]) ≈ σwav(25) whose value, in turn, is determined by Sτ (1/25 = 0.04) and
spectral components at nearby frequencies. Since this range of Sτ (f ) is known to exhibit
separability, so too should A(10).

The relationship between detrended ﬂuctuation analysis and the other measures proves
more complex than those delineated above. Nevertheless, DFA(32) can also be broadly in-
terpreted in terms of an underlying interval-based power spectral density. To forge this link,
we revisit the calculation of F (m) (see Sec. 2.5.4). The mean is ﬁrst subtracted from the
sequence of RR intervals {τi} resulting in a new sequence that has zero mean. This new ran-
dom process has a power spectral density everywhere equal to Sτ (f ), except at f = 0 where
it assumes a value of zero. The summation of this zero-mean sequence generates the series
y(k), as shown in Eq. (21). Since summation is represented by a transfer function 1/j2πf

for small frequencies f , with j = √−1, the power spectral density of y(k) is approximately

given by

Sy(f ) ≈

0
Sτ (f )
4π2f 2

f = 0
f 6= 0.

(24)

Next, the sequence y(k) is divided into segments of length m. For the ﬁrst segment, k = 1
to m, the best ﬁtting linear trend ym(k) = β + γk is obtained; the residuals y(k) − ym(k)
therefore have the minimum variance over all choices of β and γ. Over the duration of the
entire sequence y(k), the local trend function ym(k) will consist of a series of such linear
segments, and is therefore piecewise linear. Since ym(k) changes behavior over a time scale
of m intervals, its power will be concentrated at frequencies below 1/m. Since the residuals
y(k) − ym(k) have minimum variance, the spectrum of ym(k) will resemble that of y(k) as
much as possible, and in particular at frequencies below 1/m where most of its power is
concentrated. Thus

(25)

Sym(f ) ≈( Sy(f )

0

|f| < 1/m
|f| > 1/m.

31

Equation (22) shows the mean-square ﬂuctuation F 2(m) to be an estimate of the variance
of the residuals y(k)− ym(k). By Parseval’s theorem, this variance equals the integral of the
spectrum of the residuals over frequency. Therefore

F 2(m) ≈ 2Z ∞

0+

[Sy(f ) − Sym(f )]df = (2π2)−1Z ∞

1/m

Sτ (f )f −2df

(26)

so that the mean-square ﬂuctuation F 2(m) can be represented as a weighted integral of the
RR-interval spectrum over the appropriate frequency range.

We conclude that all six measures that best distinguish CHF patients from normal sub-

jects are related in terms of transformations of the interval-based power spectral density.

3.6.4 Selecting the Best Measures

In the previous section we showed that the six most eﬀective measures are interrelated from
a fundamental point of view. This conclusion is conﬁrmed by the overall similarity of the
ROC-area curves for these measures, as can be seen in Fig. 8.

We now proceed to compare these ROC areas more carefully in Fig. 9. This ﬁgure
presents 1−ROC area plotted against the data length analyzed L on a doubly logarithmic
plot. This is in contrast to the usual presentation (such as Fig. 8) in which ROC area is
plotted against L on a semilogarithmic plot. The unconventional form of the plot in Fig. 9
is designed to allow small deviations from unity area to be highlighted. Clearly, small values
of the quantity 1−ROC area are desirable. Of course, as the data length L diminishes, ROC
area decreases (and therefore 1−ROC area increases) for all six measures.

The trends exhibited by all six measures displayed in Fig. 9 (VLF, A(10), DFA(32),
σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and LF) are indeed broadly similar, as we observed in Fig. 8. For
data sets that are suﬃciently long, the six measures provide identical diagnostic capabilities
(unity ROC area). At shorter data lengths, however, VLF, A(10), and DFA(32) exhibit more
degradation than do the other three measures. In accordance with the analysis provided in
Sec. 3.6.3, VLF deviates the most at small values of L because it incorporates information
from values of Sτ (f ) well below the frequency range of separability. Similarly DFA(32) favors
low-frequency contributions by virtue of the 1/f 2 weighting function in Eq. (26). Finally,
the performance of A(10) is suppressed because of the confounding eﬀect of values of Sτ (f )
for f > 0.07, as well as from possible errors deriving from our assumptions regarding the
equivalence of the count-based and interval-based wavelet-transform variances.

The remaining three measures therefore emerge as superior: LF, σwav(32), and Sτ (1/32).
Judged on the basis of both performance (Fig. 9) and computation time (Table 2), we
conclude that two of these are best: σwav(32) and Sτ (1/32).

32

It is desirable to conﬁrm these conclusions for other records, comprising out-of-sample
data sets from CHF patients and normal subjects. It will also be of interest to examine the
correlation of ROC area with severity of cardiac dysfunction as judged, for example, by the
NYHA clinical scale. It is also important to conduct comparisons with other CHF studies
that make use of HRV measures [3].

A suﬃciently large database of normal and CHF records would make it possible to ex-
amine the detailed distinctions between the two classes of patients over a range of scales
surrounding m = 32. A superior measure which draws on these distinctions in an optimal
way could then be designed; for example the weighting function in an integral over Sτ (f )
could be customized. Other measures that simultaneously incorporate properties inherent
in collections of the individual measures considered here could also be developed.

4 Markers for Other Cardiac Pathologies

Returning to the individual-value plots in Fig. 5, we brieﬂy examine the behavior of the
16 measures for several other cardiovascular disorders for which these measures may hold
promise. Among these are three CHF patients who also suﬀer from atrial ﬁbrillation (CHF
¯c AF, third column, △), one heart-transplant patient (TRANSPLANT, fourth column, ×+),
one ventricular-tachycardia patient (VT, ﬁfth column, ♦), one sudden-cardiac-death patient
(SCD, sixth column, ⊔⊓), and two sleep-apnea patients (APNEA, last column, +). A summary
of the more salient statistics of the original RR recordings for these patients is presented in
Table A1. Prior to analysis, the RR records were truncated at Lmax = 75821 RR intervals
to match the lengths of the CHF-patient and normal-subject records. The two sleep-apnea
data records were drawn from the MIT-BIH Polysomnographic Database (Harvard-MIT
Division of Health Sciences and Technology) and comprised 16874 and 15751 RR intervals
respectively. Because of the limited duration of the sleep period, records containing larger
numbers of RR intervals are not available for this disorder.

Too few patient recordings are available to us to reasonably evaluate the potential of
these HRV measures for the diagnosis of these forms of cardiovascular disease, but the
results presented here might suggest which measures would prove useful given large numbers
of records.

We ﬁrst note that for most of the 16 measures, the values for the three CHF patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation (△) tend to fall within the range set by the other twelve CHF patients
In particular the same six measures that completely separate
without atrial ﬁbrillation.
normal subjects from CHF patients ¯s AF continue to do so when CHF patients ¯c AF are
included. The inclusion of the AF patients reduces the separability only for three of the 16
measures: pNN50, HF, and αW .

33

Results for the heart transplant patient (×+) appear towards the pathological end of the
CHF range for many measures, and for some measures the transplant value extends beyond
the range of all of the CHF patients. Conversely, the sleep apnea values (+) typically
fall at the end of, or beyond, the range spanned by the normal subjects.
Indeed, three
thresholds can be chosen for Sτ (1/32) (i.e., 0.000008, 0.0006, and 0.00436) which completely
separate four classes of patients: sleep apnea [largest values of Sτ (1/32)], normal subjects
(next largest), CHF with or without atrial ﬁbrillation (next largest), and heart transplant
(smallest). While such separation will no doubt disappear as large numbers of additional
patient records are included, we nevertheless expect the largest variability (measured at 32
intervals as well as at other scales) to be associated with sleep-apnea patients since their
ﬂuctuating breathing patterns induce greater ﬂuctuations in the heart rate. Conversely,
heart-transplant patients (especially in the absence of reinnervation) are expected to exhibit
the lowest values of variability since the autonomic nervous system, which contributes to the
modulation of heart rate at these time scales, is subfunctional.

Results for the ventricular tachycardia patient (♦) lie within the normal range for most
measures, though the value for LF/HF is well beyond the pathological end of the range for
CHF patients. Interestingly, four measures [VLF, HF, SDANN, and A(10)] yield the largest
values for the ventricular tachycardia patient of the 32 data sets examined. Perhaps A(10),
which exhibits the largest separation between the value for this patient and those for the
other 31 patients, will prove useful in detecting ventricular tachycardia.

Finally we consider results for the sudden-cardiac-death patient (⊔⊓), which lie between
the ranges of normal subjects and CHF patients for all but one (LF) of the six measures
which separate these two patient classes. The pNN50 and HF results, on the other hand,
reveal values beyond the normal set, thereby indicating the presence of greater variability
on a short time scale than for other patients. The value of SDANN for the SCD patient is
greater than that for any of the other 31 patients so it is possible that SDANN could prove
useful in predicting sudden cardiac death.

5 Does Deterministic Chaos Play a Role in Heart Rate

Variability?

The question of whether normal HRV arises from a low-dimensional attractor associated
with a deterministic dynamical system or has stochastic underpinnings has continued to
entice researchers [61]. Previous studies devoted to this question have come to conﬂicting
conclusions. The notion that the normal human-heartbeat sequence is chaotic appears to
have been ﬁrst set forth by Goldberger and West [68]. Papers in support of this hypothesis
[69], as well as in opposition to it [70, 71], have appeared recently. An important factor that
pertains to this issue is the recognition that correlation, rather than nonlinear dynamics, can

34

lie behind these seemingly chaotic recordings [8].

We address this question in this section and conclude, for both normal subjects and
patients with several forms of cardiac dysfunction, that the sequence of heartbeat intervals
does not exhibit chaos.

5.1 Methods

5.1.1 Phase-Space Reconstruction

One way of approaching the question of chaos in heartbeat recordings is in terms of a
phase-space reconstruction and the use of an algorithm to estimate one or more of its fractal
dimensions Dq [6, 59, 72]. The box-counting algorithm [73] provides a method for estimating
the capacity (or box-counting) dimension D0 of the attractor [6, 8, 72, 74].

The phase-space reconstruction approach operates on the basis that the topological prop-
erties of the attractor for a dynamical system can be determined from the time series of a

single observable [75, 76, 77]. A p-dimensional vector →T ≡ {τi, τi+l, ...τi+(p−1)l} is formed
from the sequence of RR intervals {τi}. The parameter p is the embedding dimension, and
l is the lag, usually taken to be the location of the ﬁrst zero crossing of the autocorrelation
function of the time series under study. As the time index i progresses, the vector →T traces
out a trajectory in the p-dimensional embedding space.

The box-counting algorithm estimates the capacity dimension of this trajectory. Specif-
ically, the negative slope of the logarithm of the number of full boxes versus the logarithm
of the width of the boxes, over a range of 4/[max(τ ) − min(τ )] to 32/[max(τ ) − min(τ )]
boxes, in powers of two, provides an estimate of D0. For convenience in the generation of
phase-randomized surrogates, data sets were limited to powers of two: 216 = 65536 intervals
for all but the two sleep apnea data sets, for which 214 = 16384 and 213 = 8192 intervals were
used respectively (the sleep apnea data sets are much shorter than the others as indicated in
Table A1). For uncorrelated noise, the capacity dimension D0 continues to increase as the
embedding dimension p increases. For an attractor in a deterministic system, in contrast, D0
saturates as p becomes larger than 2D0 + 1 [74]. Such saturation, however, is not a deﬁnitive
signature of deterministic dynamics; temporal correlation in a stochastic process can also be
responsible for what appears to be underlying deterministic dynamics [8, 78, 79, 80]. The
distribution of the data can also play a role.

Surrogate data analysis, discussed in Sec. 5.1.3, is useful in establishing the underlying
cause, by proving or disproving various null hypotheses that the measured behavior arises
from other, non-chaotic causes.

35

5.1.2 Removing Correlations in the Data

Adjacent intervals in heartbeat sequences prove to exhibit large degrees of correlation. The
serial correlation coeﬃcient for RR intervals

ρ(τ ) ≡

E[τi+1τi] − E2[τi]
E[τ 2
i ] − E2[τi]

,

exceeds 0.9 for two thirds of the data sets examined, with an average value of 0.83; the
theoretical maximum is unity, with zero representing a lack of serial correlation. Since
such large correlation is known to interfere with the detection of deterministic dynamics,
we instead employ the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the RR intervals: vi ≡ τi − τi+1. Such a simple
transformation does not change the topological properties of dynamical system behavior,
and a related but more involved procedure is known to reduce error in estimating other
fractal dimensions [81].

The serial correlation coeﬃcient for the diﬀerenced sequence {vi} turns out to have a
mean value of -0.084, and none exceeds 0.6 in magnitude. This sequence will therefore be
used to generate the embedding vector →T ≡ {vi, vi+1, ...vi+p−1}, with the lag l set to unity
since ρ(v) ≈ 0.

5.1.3 Surrogate Data Analysis

Information about the nature of an interval or segment series may be obtained by applying
various statistical measures to surrogate data sets. These are processes constructed from the
original data in ways designed to preserve certain characteristics of the original data while
eliminating (or modifying) others. Surrogate data analysis provides a way of determining
whether a given result arises from a particular property of the data set.

We make use of two kinds of surrogate data sets: shuﬄed intervals and randomized
In particular, we compare statistical measures calculated from both the original
phases.
data and from its surrogates to distinguish those properties of the data set that arise from
correlations (such as from long-term rate ﬂuctuations) from those properties inherent in the
form of the original data.

Shuﬄed intervals. The ﬁrst class of surrogate data is formed by shuﬄing (randomly
reordering) the sequence of RR intervals of the original data set. Such random reordering
destroys dependencies among the intervals, and therefore the correlation properties of the
data, while exactly preserving the interval histogram. As a reﬁnement, it is possible to
divide the data into blocks and shuﬄe intervals within each block, while keeping each block

36

separate. In this case dependencies remain over durations much larger than the block size,
while being destroyed for durations smaller than it.

Randomized phases. The other class of surrogate data we consider is obtained by Fourier
transforming the original interval data, and then randomizing the phases while leaving the
spectral magnitudes intact. The modiﬁed function is then inverse-transformed to return to
a time-domain representation of the intervals. This technique exactly preserves the second-
order correlation properties of the interval sequence while removing other temporal structure,
for example that needed for phase-space reconstruction. The interval histogram typically
becomes Gaussian for this surrogate as a result of the central limit theorem.

5.2 Absence of Chaos

In Fig. 10 we present plots of the capacity dimension D0 plotted against the embedding
dimension p for the 12 normal subjects. Similar plots are presented in Fig. 11 for CHF
patients without atrial ﬁbrillation, and in Fig. 12 for patients with other cardiac pathologies.
For most of the panels in Fig. 10, the D0 estimate for the original data (solid curve) is indeed
seen to rise with increasing embedding dimension p, and shows evidence of approaching an
asymptotic value of about 2. The phase-randomized data (dotted curve) yields somewhat
higher results, consistent with the presence of a deterministic attractor.

However, estimates of D0 for the shuﬄed data (dashed curve) nearly coincide with those
of the original data. This surrogate precisely maintains the distribution of the relative sizes
of the diﬀerenced RR intervals, but destroys any correlation or other dependencies in the
data. Speciﬁcally, no deterministic structure remains in the shuﬄed surrogate. Therefore,
the apparent asymptote in D0 must derive from the particular form of the RR-interval dis-
tribution, and not from a nonlinear dynamical attractor. To quantify the closeness between
results for original and shuﬄed data, the shuﬄing process was performed ten times with ten
diﬀerent random seeds. The average of these ten independent shuﬄings forms the dashed
curve, with error bars representing the largest and smallest estimates obtained for D0 at
each corresponding embedding dimension. Results for the original data indeed lie within
the error bars. Therefore, the original data does not diﬀer from the shuﬄed data at the
[(10 − 1)/(10 + 1)]100% = 82% signiﬁcance level.

Results for a good number of the other 31 data sets, normal and pathological alike, are
nearly the same; the original data lie within the error bars of the shuﬄed surrogates and
consequently do not exhibit signiﬁcant evidence of deterministic dynamics. However for
some records the original data exceed the limits set by the ten shuﬄings. But attributing
this behavior to low-dimensional chaos proves diﬃcult for almost all the data records, for
three reasons. First, the surrogates often yield smaller results for D0 than the original data,

37

while shuﬄing data from a true chaotic system will theoretically yield larger D0 estimates.
Second, of those data sets for which the original results fall below those of their shuﬄed
surrogates, few achieve an asymptotic value for D0, but rather continue to climb steadily
with increasing embedding dimension. Finally, for the remaining data sets, the original and
shuﬄed data yield curves that do not diﬀer nearly as much as do those from simulated systems
known to be chaotic, such as the H´enon attractor (not shown) [82]. Taken together, these
observations suggest that ﬁnite data length, residual correlations, and/or other unknown
eﬀects in these RR-interval recordings give rise to behavior in the phase-space reconstruction
that can masquerade as chaos.

Results for the phase-randomized surrogates (dotted curves in Figs. 10-12), while exhibit-
ing a putative capacity dimension in excess of the original data and of the shuﬄed surro-
gates for every patient, exhibit a remarkable similarity to each other. This occurs because
the diﬀerenced-interval sequence {vi} displays little correlation and the phase-randomization
process preserves this lack of correlation while imposing a Gaussian diﬀerenced-interval dis-
tribution. The result is nearly white Gaussian noise regardless of the original data set, and
indeed results for independently generated white Gaussian noise closely follow these curves
(not shown).

Time series measured from the heart under distinctly non-normal operating conditions
such as ventricular ﬁbrillation [83], or those obtained under non-physiological conditions such
as from excised hearts [84], may exhibit chaotic behavior under some circumstances. This is
precisely the situation for cellular vibrations in the mammalian cochlea [85, 86, 87]. When
the exciting sound pressure level (SPL) is in the normal physiological regime, the cellular-
vibration velocities are nonlinear but not chaotic. When the SPL is increased beyond the
normal range, however, routes to chaos emerge.
It has been suggested that since chaos-
control methods prove eﬀective for removing such behavior, the heartbeat sequence must be
chaotic. This is an unwarranted conclusion since such methods often work equally well for
purely stochastic systems, which cannot be chaotic [88].

6 Mathematical Models for Heart Rate Variability

The emphasis in this Chapter has been on HRV analysis. The diagnostic capabilities of
various measures have been presented and compared. However the results that emerge from
these studies also serve to expose the mathematical-statistical character of the RR time
series. Such information can be of beneﬁt in the development of mathematical models which
can be used to simulate RR sequences. Such models may prove useful for generating realistic
heartbeat sequences in pacemakers, for example, and for developing improved physiological
models of the cardiovascular system. In this section we evaluate the suitability of several
integrate-and-ﬁre constructs for modeling heart rate variability.

38

6.1

Integrate-and-Fire Model

Integrate-and-ﬁre models are widely used in the neurosciences [89] as well as in cardiology
[8, 90, 91, 92, 93]. These models are attractive in part because they capture known physiology
in a simple way. The integration of a rate process can represent the cumulative eﬀect of
neurotransmitter on the postsynaptic membrane of a neuron, or the currents responsible
for the pacemaker potential in the sino-atrial node of the heart. The crossing of a preset
threshold by the integrated rate then gives rise to an action potential, or a heart contraction.

The sequence of discrete events comprising the human heartbeat can be viewed as a point
process deriving from a continuous rate function. The integrate-and-ﬁre method is perhaps
the simplest means for generating a point process from a rate process [8, 17]. In this model,
illustrated schematically in Fig. 13, the rate function λ(t) is integrated until it reaches a ﬁxed
threshold θ, whereupon a point event is generated and the integrator is reset to zero. Thus
the occurrence time of the (i + 1)st event is implicitly obtained from the ﬁrst occurrence of

Z ti+1

ti

λ(t) dt = θ.

(27)

The mean heart rate λ (beats/sec) is given by λ = E[λ(t)] = 1/E[τ ]. Because the conversion
from the rate process to the point process is so direct, most statistics of the point process
closely mimic those of the underlying rate process λ(t). In particular, for frequencies sub-
stantially lower than the mean heart rate, the theoretical power spectral densities of the
point process and the underlying rate coincide [17].

6.2 Kernel of the Integrate-and-Fire Model

The detailed statistical behavior of the point process generated by the integrate-and-ﬁre
construct depends on the statistical character of the rate function in the integrand of Eq. (27)
[8]. The fractal nature of the heartbeat sequence requires that the rate function λ(t) itself
be fractal. Assuming that the underlying rate is stochastic noise, there are three plausible
candidates for λ(t) [17]: fractal Gaussian noise, fractal lognormal noise, and fractal binomial
noise. We brieﬂy discuss these three forms of noise in turn.

6.2.1 Fractal Gaussian Noise

Fractal Gaussian noise served admirably in our initial eﬀorts to develop a suitable integrate-
and-ﬁre model for the heartbeat sequence [8]. A Gaussian process has values that, at any
set of times, form a jointly Gaussian random vector. This property, along with its mean and
spectrum, completely deﬁne the process. We consider a stationary rate process with a mean

39

equal to the expected heart rate, and a 1/f -type rate-based spectrum that takes the form
[17]

Sλ(ftime) = λ2δ(ftime) + λ[1 + (ftime/f0)−α].

(28)

Here, λ (beats/sec) and α are the previously deﬁned heart rate and fractal exponent re-
spectively, δ(·) is again the Dirac delta function, and f0 is the cutoﬀ frequency (cycles/sec).
Mathematically, cutoﬀs at low or high frequencies (or sometimes both) are required to ensure
that τ has a ﬁnite variance. In practice, the ﬁnite duration of the simulation guarantees the
former cutoﬀ, while the ﬁnite time resolution of the simulated samples of τ guarantees the
latter. It is to be noted that the designation fractal Gaussian noise properly applies only for
α < 1; the range 1 < α < 3 is generated by fractal Brownian motion [19]. In the interest of
simplicity, however, we employ the term fractal Gaussian noise for all values of α.

There are a number of recipes in the literature for generating fractal Gaussian noise
[94, 95, 96, 97]. All typically result in a sampled version of fractal Gaussian noise, with
equal spacing between samples. A continuous version of the signal is obtained by using a
zeroth-order interpolation between the samples.

The use of a fractal Gaussian noise kernel in the integrate-and-ﬁre construct results in
the so-called fractal-Gaussian-noise driven integrate-and-ﬁre model [8, 17]. The mean of the
rate process is generally required to be much larger than its standard deviation, in part so
that the times when the rate is negative (during which no events may be generated) remain
small.

The interval-based spectrum is obtained by applying Eq. (7) to Eq. (28) (see Sec. 2.2
and Ref. [9]). The following approximate result, in terms of interval-based frequency f , is
obtained:

Sτ (f ) ≈ λ−2[δ(f ) + 1 + (λf /f0)−α].

(29)

We proceed to discuss two other physiologically based noise inputs [17]; both reduce to

fractal Gaussian noise in appropriate limits.

6.2.2 Fractal Lognormal Noise

A related process results from passing fractal Gaussian noise through a memoryless ex-
ponential transform. This process plays a role in neurotransmitter exocytosis [98]. Since
the exponential of a Gaussian is lognormal, we refer to this process as fractal lognormal
noise [17, 98]. If X(t) denotes a fractal Gaussian noise process with mean E[X], variance
Var[X], and autocovariance function KX(τ ), then λ(t) ≡ exp[X(t)] is a fractal lognormal
noise process with moments E[λn] = exp(nE[X] + n2Var[X]/2) and autocovariance function
Kλ(τ ) = E2[λ](exp[KX(τ )] − 1) [98].

40

By virtue of the exponential transform, the autocorrelation functions of the Gaussian
process X(t) and the lognormal process λ(t) diﬀer; thus their spectra diﬀer. In particular,
the power spectral density of the resulting point process does not follow the exact form of
Eq. (28), although for small values of Var[X] the experimental periodogram closely resembles
this ideal form [98]. In the limit of very small values of Var[X], the exponential operation
approaches a linear transform, and the rate process reduces to fractal Gaussian noise.

6.2.3 Fractal Binomial Noise

A third possible kernel for the integrate-and-ﬁre model is fractal binomial noise. This process
results from the addition of a number of independent identical alternating fractal renewal pro-
cesses. The sum is a binomial process with the same fractal exponent as each of the individual
alternating fractal processes [99, 100]. This binomial process can serve as a rate function for
an integrate-and-ﬁre process; the result is the fractal-binomial-noise driven integrate-and-ﬁre
model [17]. This construct was initially designed to model the superposition of alternating
currents from a number of ion channels with fractal behavior [99, 100, 101, 102]. As the num-
ber of constituent processes increases, fractal binomial noise converges to fractal Gaussian
noise with the same fractal exponent therefore leading to the fractal-Gaussian-noise driven
integrate-and-ﬁre point process [17].

6.3 Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Model

Conventional integrate-and-ﬁre constructs have only a single source of randomness, the rate
process λ(t).
It is sometimes useful to incorporate a second source of randomness into
such models. One way to carry this out is to impose random jitter on the interevent times
generated in the integrate-and-ﬁre process [17].

The procedure used for imposing this jitter is as follows. After generating the time of the
(i + 1)st event ti+1 in accordance with Eq. (27), the (i + 1)st interevent time τi+1 = ti+1 − ti
is multiplied by a dimensionless Gaussian-distributed random variable with unit mean and
variance σ2. This results in the replacement of ti+1 by

ti+1 + σ(ti+1 − ti)Ni

(30)

before the simulation of subsequent events (ti+2, ti+3,. . . ). The quantity {Ni} represents
a sequence of zero-mean, unity-variance independent Gaussian random variables and the
standard deviation σ is a free parameter that controls the strength of the proportional jitter.
In accordance with the construction of the model, events at subsequent times experience
jitter imposed by all previous events (see Fig. 14).

41

The overall result is the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model. The jitter serves to introduce a
source of scale-independent noise into the point process. Depending on the character of the
input rate function, this model can give rise to the fractal-Gaussian-noise, fractal-lognormal-
noise, or fractal-binomial-noise driven jittered integrate-and-ﬁre processes, among others.
Two limiting behaviors readily emerge from this model. When σ → 0, the jitter disappears
and the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model reduces to the ordinary integrate-and-ﬁre model.
At the other extreme, when σ → ∞, the jitter dominates and the result is a homogeneous
Poisson process. The fractal behavior present in the rate function λ(t) then disappears and
λ(t) behaves as if it were constant. Between these two limits, as σ increases the fractal onset
time 1/f0 of the resulting point process increases and the fractal characteristics of the point
process are progressively lost, ﬁrst at higher frequencies (shorter times) and subsequently at
lower frequencies (longer times) [17].

6.3.1 Simulating the Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Point Process

We use a fractal Gaussian noise kernel in the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre construct to simulate
the human heartbeat. Fractal Gaussian noise with the appropriate mean, standard deviation,
and fractal exponent αS is generated using Fourier-transform methods. This noise serves as
the kernel in an integrate-and-ﬁre element [Eq. (27)], the output of which is jittered in
accordance with Eq. (30). For each of the 12 normal subjects and 15 CHF (¯s and ¯c AF)
patients, the model parameters were adjusted iteratively to obtain a simulated data set that
matched the patient recording as closely as possible. In particular, each of the 27 simulations
contained exactly Lmax = 75821 RR intervals, displayed mean heart rates that fell within 1%
of the corresponding data recordings, and exhibited wavelet-transform standard deviations
that were nearly identical with those of the data. The simulation results for CHF patients
with and without atrial ﬁbrillation were very similar.

6.3.2 Statistics of the Simulated Point Process for Normal Subjects and CHF

Patients

Having developed the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model and simulated sequences of RR inter-
vals, we proceed to examine some of the statistical features of the resulting point processes.

Figure 15 displays representative results in which the data (solid curves) and simulations
(dotted curves) are compared for a single normal subject (left column) and a single CHF (¯s
AF) patient (right column). Figure 15(a) illustrates that the RR-interval sequences obtained
from the model and the data are qualitatively similar, for both the normal and heart-failure
cases. Furthermore, the agreement between the simulated and actual wavelet-transform
standard-deviation curves is excellent in both cases, as is evident in Fig. 15(b). Even the
gentle increase of σwav for the heart-failure patient at small scale values is reproduced, by

42

virtue of the jitter introduced into the model. It is apparent in Fig. 15(c), however, that
the simulated RR-interval histogram for the heart-failure patient does not ﬁt the actual
histogram well; it is too broad which indicates that σint of the simulation is too large. Finally,
Fig. 15(d) shows that the simulated spectra of the RR intervals match the experimental
spectra quite nicely, including the whitening of the heart-failure spectrum at high frequencies.
This latter eﬀect is the counterpart of the ﬂattening of σwav at small scales, and results from
the white noise introduced by the jitter at high frequencies.

6.3.3 Simulated Individual Value Plots and ROC-Area Curves

To examine how well the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model mimics the collection of data from
a global perspective, we constructed individual-value plots and ROC-area curves using the
27 simulated data sets. The results are presented in Figs. 16 and 17 respectively. Direct
comparison should be made with Figs. 5 and 8, respectively, which provide the same plots
for the actual heart-failure patient and normal-subject data.

Comparing Fig. 16 with Fig. 5, and Fig. 17 with Fig. 8, we see that in most cases
the simulated and actual results are remarkably similar. Based on their overall ability to
distinguish between CHF and normal simulations for the full set of 75821 RR intervals,
the 16 measures portrayed in Fig. 16 roughly fall into three classes. A similar division was
observed for the actual data, as discussed in Sec. 3.6

As is evident in Fig. 16, ﬁve measures (indicated by boldface font) succeed in fully
separating the two kinds of simulations and, by deﬁnition, fall into the ﬁrst class: VLF, LF,
σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32). These measures share a dependence on a single scale, or
small range of scales, near 32 heartbeat intervals. However, of these ﬁve measures only two
(LF and VLF) successfully separate the simulated results for the next smaller number of RR
intervals (L = 65536) and none succeeds in doing so for yet smaller values of L.

These same ﬁve measures also fully distinguish the normal subjects from the CHF patients
(see Fig. 5); however a sixth measure, A(10), also achieves this. For the actual data all six
of these measures successfully separate the actual heart-failure patients from the normal
subjects for data lengths down to L = 32768 RR intervals.

The simulated ROC-area curves presented in Fig. 17 resemble the curves for the normal
and CHF data shown in Fig. 8, but there are a few notable distinctions. The simulated and
actual ROC areas (Figs. 17 and 8 respectively) for the interval measures SDANN and σint
are just about the same for L = 64 RR intervals. However both of these measures exhibit
decreasing ROC areas as the number of simulated RR intervals (L) increases (Fig. 17). In
contrast, the ROC areas based on the actual data increase with increasing data length L
in normal fashion (Fig. 8). The decrease in ROC area observed in Fig. 17 means that

43

performance is degraded as the simulated data length increases. This paradoxical result
likely arises from a deﬁciency of the model; it proved impossible to simultaneously ﬁt the
wavelet-transform standard deviation at all scales, the mean heart rate, and the RR-interval
standard deviation. Choosing to closely ﬁt the two former quantities to the data rendered
inaccurate the simulated interval standard deviation. Since shorter ﬁles have insuﬃcient
length to exhibit the longer term ﬂuctuations that dominate fractal activity, the interval
standard deviation for small values of L is not inﬂuenced by these ﬂuctuations. Apparently
the manner in which the long-term eﬀects are expressed diﬀers in the original data and in
the simulation.

The most surprising distinction between the actual and simulated results, perhaps, is the
dramatic putative improvement in the ability of the ﬁve scale-independent fractal-exponent
measures to separate simulated heart-failure and normal data, as the number of RR intervals
increases. The Allan factor exponent αA appears to oﬀer the greatest “improvement”, as
is seen by comparing Figs. 17 and 8. All of the exponents except αW attain an ROC area
exceeding 0.97 for Lmax = 75821 RR intervals. Nevertheless, the improved separation yields
performance that remains inferior to that of the ﬁxed-scale measures. The apparent improved
separation in the simulated data may therefore arise from a nonlinear interaction in the model
between the fractal behavior and the signal component near a scale of 32 heartbeat intervals.
Or it may be that some aspect of the data, not reliably detected by fractal-exponent measures
applied to the original data, emerges more clearly following the modeling and simulation.
This could mean that another measure of the fractal exponent of the actual data, perhaps
incorporating in some way the processing provided by the modeling procedure, might yield
better results than the more straightforward fractal-exponent measures that we have used
to this point.

6.3.4 Limitations of the Jittered Integrate-and-Fire Model

Figure 18 presents a direct comparison between four measures derived from the original data
and from the corresponding simulations. Each panel contains 12 normal results (+), 12 CHF
¯s AF results (×), and 3 CHF ¯c AF results (△). The diagonal lines correspond to perfect
agreement.

The results for Sτ (1/32) and σwav(32) are excellent, illustrating the remarkable ability of
the model to mimic the data at a time scale of 32 interbeat intervals. The correlation coeﬃ-
cients for these two measures lie very close to unity, indicating almost perfect correspondence
between the original and simulated data.

The upper left panel presents values for σint, the standard deviation of the RR intervals.
Agreement between the simulation and original data is only fair, with simulated values of
σint generally somewhat higher than desired. The correlation coeﬃcient ρ = 0.71 for all 27

44

simulations indicates signiﬁcant correlation (p < 0.0003 that 27 random pairs of numbers
with the same distribution would achieve a magnitude of ρ ≥ 0.71), but not extremely close
agreement between simulated and original RR-interval sequences.

This disagreement highlights a problem with the simple jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model.
The fractal-Gaussian-noise integrate-and-ﬁre model without jitter yields substantially closer
agreement between the data and simulation for this statistic [8]. Although the introduction
of jitter leads to improved agreement for σwav, it brings the model results further away from
the data as measured by σint. Apparently, a method other than jitter must be devised to
forge increased agreement with σwav, while not degrading the agreement with σint. One
possibility is the reordering of the individual RR intervals over short time scales.

The simulated exponent αW also fails to show close agreement with the data, suggesting
that there are other features of the model that are less than ideal. However, since this
measure is of little use in separating CHF patients from normal subjects, this disagreement
takes on reduced importance.

6.4 Toward an Improved Model of Heart Rate Variability

Agreement between the simulations and data would most likely be improved by adding
other inputs to the model aside from fractal noise, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 19.
Input signals related to respiration and blood pressure are two likely candidates since it is
well known that variations in these physiological functions inﬂuence heart rate variability.
Experience also teaches us that there is a measure of white Gaussian noise present, possibly
associated with the measurement process.

As indicated in Sec. 6.3.4, the introduction of jitter in the integrate-and-ﬁre construct
improves the agreement of the model with certain features of the the data, but degrades it for
others. An adaptive reset will provide a more ﬂexible alternative to the jitter. Moreover, the
threshold θ could be converted into a stochastic process as a way of incorporating variability
in other elements of the system [17].

All things considered, the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre construct does a rather good job of
mimicking the actual data, though the introduction of a more physiologically based model
would be a welcome addition.

45

7 Conclusion

For the purposes of heart-rate-variability analysis, the occurrence times of the sequence
of R phases in the electrocardiogram can be represented as a fractal-rate stochastic point
process. Using a collection of standard and novel heart-rate-variability measures, we have
examined the sequence of times between the R phases, viz. the RR time series, of ECGs
recorded from normal subjects and congestive heart-failure patients, as well as from several
patients with other cardiovascular disorders. Congestive-heart-failure patients who also suf-
fered from atrial ﬁbrillation were treated as a separate class. We examined sixteen heart-rate-
variability measures, comprising frequency-domain, time-domain, scaling-exponent, Allan-
factor, detrended-ﬂuctuation-analysis, and wavelet-transform methods.

Receiver-operating-characteristic analysis was used to compare and contrast the per-
formance of these sixteen measures with respect to their abilities to properly distinguish
heart-failure patients from normal subjects over a broad range of record lengths (minutes to
hours). Scale-dependent measures rendered performance that was substantially superior to
that of scale-independent ones. Judged on the basis of performance and computation time,
two measures of the sixteen emerged at the top of the list: the wavelet-transform standard
deviation σwav(32) and the RR-interval-based power spectral density Sτ (1/32). They share
in common the dependence on a single scale, or small range of scales, near 32 heartbeat
intervals. The behavior of the ECG at this particular scale, corresponding to about 25 sec,
turns out to be a signiﬁcant marker for the presence of cardiac dysfunction. The scale value
itself is far more important than the details of the measures used to examine it.

Application of these techniques to a large database of normal and CHF records will make
it possible to uncover just how the ECGs of pathological patients diﬀer from those of normal
subjects in the vicinity of this special scale. This would facilitate the development of an op-
timal diagnostic measure, which might take the form of a specialized weighting function over
the interval-based power spectral density or over some combination of elementary measures.

We also addressed an issue of fundamental importance in cardiac physiology: the deter-
mination of whether the RR time series arises from a chaotic attractor or has an underlying
stochastic origin. Using nonlinear-dynamics theory, together with surrogate-data analysis,
we established that the RR sequences from both normal subjects and pathological patients
have stochastic, rather than deterministic, origins. The use of a special embedding of the
diﬀerences between adjacent RR intervals enabled us to reach this conclusion. This tech-
nique substantially reduced the natural correlations inherent in the interbeat-interval time
series which can masquerade as chaos and confound simpler analyses.

Finally, we developed a jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model built around a fractal-Gaussian-
noise kernel. Simulations based on this model provided realistic, though not perfect, replicas
of real heartbeat sequences. The model was least successful in predicting interbeat-interval

46

statistics and fractal-exponent values. Nevertheless it could ﬁnd use in some applications
such as pacemaker excitation.

To conﬁrm the observations we have reported, it will be desirable to carry out continua-
tion studies using large numbers of out-of-sample records. It will also be useful to examine
how the performance of the various measures correlates with the severity of cardiac dysfunc-
tion as judged, for example, by the NYHA clinical scale. Comparisons with existing CHF
studies that make use of HRV measures should also be conducted.

47

Appendix A

Table A1 provides a summary of some signiﬁcant statistics of the RR records analyzed in
this Chapter, before truncation to 75821 intervals.

48

Figure Captions

Fig. 1. In HRV analysis the electrocardiogram (ECG) schematized in (a) is represented by
a sequence of times of the R phases which form an unmarked point process [vertical arrows
in (b)]. This sequence may be analyzed as a sequence of counts {Ni}(T ) in a predetermined
time interval T as shown in (c), or as a sequence of interbeat (RR) intervals {τi} as shown in
(d). The sequence of counts forms a discrete-time random counting process of nonnegative
integers whereas the sequence of intervals forms a sequence of positive real-valued random
numbers.

Fig. 2. Estimating the wavelet transform using the Haar wavelet: (a) original Haar
wavelet; (b) delayed and scaled version of the wavelet (m = 16, n = 3); and (c) time series
multiplied by this wavelet.

Fig. 3. (a) Series of interbeat intervals τi versus interval number i for a typical nor-
mal patient (data set n16265). (Adjacent values of the interbeat interval are connected by
straight lines to facilitate viewing.) Substantial trends are evident. The interbeat-interval
standard deviation σint ≡ SDNN is indicated. (b) Wavelet transform Wm,n(m) (calculated
using a Daubechies 10-tap analyzing wavelet) at three scales (m = 4, 16, 256) vs. interval
number i (=mn) for the RR-interval sequence shown in (a). The trends in the original
interbeat-interval time series are removed by the wavelet transformation. The wavelet-
transform standard deviation σwav(m) for this data set is seen to increase with the scale
m.

Fig. 4. Haar-wavelet-transform standard deviation σwav(m) vs scale m for the 12 normal
subjects (+), 12 CHF patients without (¯s) atrial ﬁbrillation (×), and the 3 CHF patients
with (¯c) atrial ﬁbrillation (△). Each data set comprises the ﬁrst 75821 RR intervals of a
recording drawn from the Beth-Israel Hospital heart-failure database. Complete separation
of the normal subjects and heart-failure patients is achieved at scales m = 16 and 32 interbeat
intervals.

Fig. 5. Individual value plots (data) for the 16 measures. Each panel corresponds to a
diﬀerent HRV measure. The seven columns in each panel, from left to right, comprise data
for (1) 12 normal subjects (+), (2) 12 CHF patients ¯s AF (×), (3) 3 CHF patients ¯c AF (△),
(4) 1 heart-transplant patient (×+), (5) 1 ventricular tachycardia patient (♦), (6) 1 sudden-
cardiac-death patient (⊔⊓), and (7) 2 sleep apnea patients (+). Each data set comprises 75821
RR intervals except for the two sleep apnea data sets which comprise 16874 and 15751 RR
intervals respectively. The six measures highlighted in boldface font succeed in completely
separating normal subjects and CHF patients (¯s and ¯c atrial ﬁbrillation) VLF, LF, A(10),
σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32).

Fig. 6. Positive (solid curves) and negative (dotted curves) predictive values for all

49

16 HRV measures plotted against the threshold θ, each in its own panel. These curves
are constructed using the 12 normal and 12 heart-failure (¯s AF) records drawn from the
CHF database, each of which has been truncated to 75821 RR intervals. The six measures
highlighted in boldface font exhibit threshold regions for which both the positive and negative
predictive values are unity: VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32), Sτ(1/32), and DFA(32). This
indicates that the normal subjects and CHF (¯s AF) patients can be completely distinguished
by these six measures, in accordance with the results established in Fig. 5.

Fig. 7. Receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curves (sensitivity vs 1 − speciﬁcity) for
all 16 HRV measures, each in its own panel. These curves are constructed using the 12
normal and 12 heart-failure (¯s AF) records drawn from the CHF database, each of which
has been truncated to 75821 RR intervals. The six measures highlighted in boldface font
simultaneously achieve 100% sensitivity and 100% speciﬁcity so that the ROC curve is per-
fectly square: VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32). This indicates that
the normal subjects and CHF (¯s AF) patients can be completely distinguished by these six
measures, in accordance with the results established in Figs. 5 and 6.

Fig. 8. Diagnostic accuracy (area under ROC curve) as a function of record length
analyzed L (number of RR intervals) for the 16 HRV measures (mean ±1 S.D.). An area
of unity corresponds to perfect separability of the two classes of patients. The six measures
highlighted in boldface font (VLF, LF, A(10), σwav(32), Sτ(1/32), and DFA(32) )
provide such perfect separability at the longest record lengths, in accordance with the results
in Fig. 7. As the record length decreases performance degrades at a diﬀerent rate for each
measure. The ﬁve scale-independent measures, αD, αW , αS, αA, and αR, perform poorly at
all data lengths.

Fig. 9. 1−ROC area as a function of data length L, on a doubly logarithmic plot,
for the six most eﬀective measures: VLF, A(10), DFA(32), σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and LF.
The unconventional form of this ROC plot allows small deviations from unity area to be
highlighted. The trends exhibited by all six measures are broadly similar, but VLF, A(10),
and DFA(32) exhibit more degradation at shorter data lengths than do the other three
measures. Thus three measures emerge as superior: LF, σwav(32), and Sτ(1/32). When
computation time is taken into account in accordance with the results provided in Table 2,
σwav(32) and Sτ(1/32) are the two preferred measures.

Fig. 10. Capacity dimension D0 as a function of embedding dimension p for the 12 normal
subjects. The three curves shown for each subject correspond to the original diﬀerenced
intervals (solid curves), the shuﬄed surrogates (dashed curves), and the phase-randomized
surrogates (dotted curves). The dashed curves are quite similar to the solid curves in each
panel while the 12 dotted curves closely resemble each other.

Fig. 11. Capacity dimension D0 as a function of embedding dimension p for the 12 CHF
patients without atrial ﬁbrillation. The three curves shown for each patient correspond to

50

the original diﬀerenced intervals (solid curves), the shuﬄed surrogates (dashed curves), and
the phase-randomized surrogates (dotted curves). The dashed curves are reasonably similar
to the solid curves in most panels while the 12 dotted curves closely resemble each other.

Fig. 12. Capacity dimension D0 as a function of embedding dimension p for the eight
patients with other cardiac pathologies. The three curves shown for each patient correspond
to the original diﬀerenced intervals (solid curves), the shuﬄed surrogates (dashed curves),
and the phase-randomized surrogates (dotted curves). The dashed curves are reasonably
similar to the solid curves in most panels while the 8 dotted curves closely resemble each
other.

Fig. 13. Simple integrate-and-ﬁre model often used in cardiology and neurophysiology.
A rate function λ(t) is integrated until it reaches a preset threshold θ whereupon a point
event is generated and the integrator is reset to zero.

Fig. 14. Schematic representation of the jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model for generating
a simulated RR-interval series. An underlying rate process λ(t), assumed to be bandlimited
fractal Gaussian noise, is integrated until it reaches a ﬁxed threshold θ, whereupon a point
event is generated. The occurrence time of the point event is jittered in accordance with
a Gaussian distribution and the integrator is then reset. The continuous rate process is
thereby converted into a point process representing the sequence of R phases in the human
heartbeat.

Fig. 15. Comparison between data (solid curves) and simulations (dotted curves) for a
single normal subject (left column, data set n16265), and a single CHF ¯s AF patient (right
column, data set a6796). The parameters E[τi] (representing the mean interbeat interval)
and αW (representing the fractal exponent) used in the simuluations were derived from the
data for the two individuals. The normal-subject simulation parameters were 1/λ = 0.74 sec,
αS = 1.0, f0 = 0.0012 cycles/sec, and σ = 0.022; the CHF-patient simulation parameters
were 1/λ = 0.99 sec, αS = 1.5, f0 = 0.00055 cycles/sec, and σ = 0.025. The lengths
of the simulated data sets were identical to those of the experimental records analyzed.
(a) RR-interval sequence over the entire data set. Qualitative agreement is apparent in
both the normal and heart-failure panels. (b) Wavelet-transform standard deviation versus
scale. The simulations mimic the scaling properties of the data in both cases, as well as the
gentle ﬂattening of σwav for the heart-failure patient at small scale values. (c) Interbeat-
interval histogram. The model is satisfactory for the normal subject but fails to capture the
narrowing of the histogram (reduction of σint) for the heart-failure patient. (d) Spectrum of
the sequence of RR intervals (the data are displaced upward by a factor of 102 for clarity).
The simulations capture the subtleties in the spectra quite well, including the whitening of
the heart-failure spectrum at high frequencies.

Fig. 16. Individual value plots (jittered integrate-and-ﬁre simulations) for the 16 mea-
sures. Each panel corresponds to a diﬀerent HRV measure. The three columns in each panel,

51

from left to right, comprise data for (1) 12 simulations using normal-subject parameters (+),
(2) 12 simulations using CHF-patient (¯s AF) parameters (×), and (3) 3 simulations using
CHF-patient (¯c AF) parameters (△). Each simulation comprises 75821 RR intervals and is
carried out using parameters drawn from a single actual data set. The ﬁve measures high-
lighted in boldface font succeed in completely separating normal-subject and CHF-patient (¯s
and ¯c atrial ﬁbrillation) simulations: VLF, LF, σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32). Each
panel should be compared with the corresponding panel for the actual normal and CHF data
in Fig. 5 (leftmost three columns).

Fig. 17. Area under the ROC curve (jittered integrate-and-ﬁre simulations) as a function
of number of RR intervals analyzed (L) for the 16 HRV measures (mean ±1 S.D.). An area of
unity corresponds to perfect separability of the two classes of simulations. The ﬁve measures
highlighted in boldface font [VLF, LF, σwav(32), Sτ (1/32), and DFA(32)] provide such
perfect separability, but only for the largest number of RR intervals analyzed. Each panel
should be compared with the corresponding panel for the actual normal and CHF data in
Fig. 8. The ROC-area simulations diﬀer from those for the data in two principal respects:
the performance of the two interval measures SDANN and σint severely degrades as the
number of RR intervals increases, and the performance of the ﬁve fractal-exponent measures
is substantially enhanced as the number of RR intervals increases.

Fig. 18. Simulation accuracy for four measures with their correlation coeﬃcients ρ. The
jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model performs remarkably well for the measures Sτ (1/32) and
σwav(32); however it does not perform nearly as well for the measures σint and αW . These
disagreements highlight problems with the simple jittered integrate-and-ﬁre model.

Fig. 19. Potential modiﬁcations to the simple integrate-and-ﬁre model. Multiple phys-
iologically based inputs and adaptive feedback could serve to produce more realistic RR-
interval simulations.

52

Tables

TABLE 1: Detection distances h and d for all 16 HRV measures applied to the 12 normal
and 12 CHF records of length Lmax. The measures are listed in order of descending value
of h. The rankings according to d diﬀer from those according to h. The wavelet-transform
standard deviation σwav(32) and variance σ2
wav(32), though related by a simple monotonic
transformation, yield diﬀerent values of h and have diﬀerent rankings.

h

Measure
2.48253
DFA(32)
2.33614
σwav(32)
2.32522
A(10)
1.84285
VLF
1.77422
Sτ (1/32)
1.74750
σint
σ2
1.71343
wav(32)
1.64883
αD
SDANN 1.46943
1.36580
LF
pNN50
1.36476
1.24507
LF/HF
1.09916
αW
1.02367
αR
HF
0.85361
0.82125
αS
αA
0.38778

d

1.81831
1.70153
1.77482
1.56551
1.55200
1.32475
1.47165
1.17679
1.04079
1.28686
1.20896
0.91444
0.77800
0.72463
0.73077
0.58071
0.27895

53

TABLE 2: Computation times (to the nearest 10 msec) for the 16 HRV measures for data
sets comprising 75821 RR intervals. The long execution times for the two DFA measures
results from the fact that it is an N 2 process whereas the 14 other methods are either N or
N log(N).

Measure
VLF, LF, HF, and LF/HF
pNN50
SDANN
σint
A(10)
σwav(32)
Sτ (1/32)
DFA(32)
αD
αW
αS
αA
αR

Execution
Time (msec)
330
40
160
190
160
20
60
650,090
650,110
220
920
610
570

54

TABLE A1: Elementary statistics of the original RR-interval recordings, before truncation
to 75821 RR intervals.

Condition RR Intervals Dur. (sec) Mean (sec)

Number of Recording RR-Interval Mean Rate RR-Interval
S.D. (sec)

Normal

(sec)−1
1.255
1.104
1.208
1.313
1.371
1.279
1.051
1.209
1.165
1.146
1.352
1.235
1.054
1.124
1.673
1.285
1.260
1.616
2.058
1.605
1.613
1.607
1.301
1.601
1.664
1.557
1.660
1.583
1.242
1.234
1.172
1.193

0.171
0.142
0.146
0.101
0.089
0.150
0.245
0.116
0.212
0.159
0.103
0.132
0.091
0.062
0.051
0.058
0.060
0.034
0.024
0.084
0.100
0.027
0.070
0.066
0.039
0.062
0.091
0.083
0.202
0.089
0.103
0.103

”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”

File-
name
n16265
n16272
n16273
n16420
n16483
n16539
n16773
n16786
n16795
n17052
n17453
nc4
a6796
a8519
a8679
a9049
a9377
a9435
a9643
a9674
a9706
a9723
a9778
a9837
a7257
a8552
a8988
tp987 TRANSPLANT
vt973
sd984
slp59
slp66

VT
SCD

HF ¯c AF

”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”

”
”

”

HF ¯s AF

APNEA

0.797
0.906
0.828
0.762
0.729
0.782
0.951
0.827
0.858
0.873
0.740
0.810
0.949
0.890
0.598
0.778
0.794
0.619
0.486
0.623
0.620
0.622
0.769
0.624
0.601
0.642
0.603
0.632
0.805
0.810
0.853
0.838

100460
93177
89846
102081
104338
108331
82160
101630
87061
87548
100674
88140
75821
80878
119094
92497
90644
114959
148111
115542
115064
115597
93607
115205
118376
111826
118058
106394
86992
77511
16874
15751

80061
84396
74348
77761
76099
84669
78141
84052
74735
76400
74482
71396
71934
71948
71180
71959
71952
71158
71958
71968
71339
71956
71955
71944
71140
71833
71131
67217
70044
62786
14399
13199

55

Contact Information

Malvin C. Teich
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, and Physics,
Boston University, 8 Saint Mary’s Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-2421, USA
Phone: 617-353-1236; Fax: 617-353-1459
E-mail: teich@bu.edu; URL: http://people.bu.edu/teich/

Steven B. Lowen
Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School,
Developmental Biopsychiatry Research Program, McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Bel-
mont, Massachusetts 02478, USA
E-mail: lowen@mclean.org

Bradley M. Jost
Air Force Research Laboratory, DELA,
3550 Aberdeen Avenue SE, Kirtland AFB, New Mexico 87117, USA
E-mail: bjost@ieee.org

Karin Vibe-Rheymer
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University,
8 Saint Mary’s Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-2421, USA
E-mail: kvibe@ieee.org

Conor Heneghan,
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
E-mail: Conor.Heneghan@ucd.ie

References

[1] J. R. Levick, An introduction to cardiovascular physiology. London: Butterworths,

1991.

[2] R. Kitney, D. Linkens, A. Selman, and A. McDonald, “The interaction between heart
rate and respiration: part II – nonlinear analysis based on computer modeling,” Au-
tomedica, vol. 4, pp. 141–153, 1982.

[3] M. Malik, J. T. Bigger, A. J. Camm, R. E. Kleiger, A. Malliani, A. J. Moss, P. J.
Schwartz, and the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North
American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology, “Heart rate variability – standards

56

of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” Euro. Heart J., vol. 17,
pp. 354–381, 1996. Also published in Circulation, vol. 93, pp. 1043–1065, 1996.

[4] E. H. Hon and S. T. Lee, “Electronic evaluations of the fetal heart rate patterns
preceding fetal death, further observations,” Am. J. Obstet. Gynec., vol. 87, pp. 814–
826, 1965.

[5] R. E. Kleiger, J. P. Miller, J. T. Bigger, A. J. Moss, and the Multicenter Post-Infarction
Research Group, “Decreased heart rate variability and its association with increased
mortality after acute myocardial infarction,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 59, pp. 256–262,
1987.

[6] J. B. Bassingthwaighte and G. M. Raymond, “Evaluating rescaled range analysis for

time series,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 22, pp. 432–444, 1994.

[7] R. G. Turcott and M. C. Teich, “Long-duration correlation and attractor topology of
the heartbeat rate diﬀer for healthy patients and those with heart failure,” Proc. SPIE,
vol. 2036 (Chaos in Biology and Medicine), pp. 22–39, 1993.

[8] R. G. Turcott and M. C. Teich, “Fractal character of the electrocardiogram: distin-
guishing heart-failure and normal patients,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 24, pp. 269–293,
1996.

[9] R. W. DeBoer, J. M. Karemaker, and J. Strackee, “Comparing spectra of a series of
point events particularly for heart rate variability data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. BME-31, pp. 384–387, 1984.

[10] D. R. Cox and P. A. W. Lewis, The Statistical Analysis of Series of Events. London:

Methuen, 1966.

[11] P. A. W. Lewis, ed., Stochastic Point Processes: Statistical Analysis, Theory, and

Applications. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1972.

[12] B. E. A. Saleh, Photoelectron Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1978.

[13] M. C. Teich and S. M. Khanna, “Pulse-number distribution for the neural spike train

in the cat’s auditory nerve,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 77, pp. 1110–1128, 1985.

[14] P. R. Prucnal and M. C. Teich, “Refractory eﬀects in neural counting processes with
exponentially decaying rates,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. SMC-13, pp. 1028–
1033, 1983.

[15] M. C. Teich, C. Heneghan, S. B. Lowen, T. Ozaki, and E. Kaplan, “Fractal character
of the neural spike train in the visual system of the cat,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 14,
pp. 529–546, 1997.

57

[16] S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, “Estimation and simulation of fractal stochastic point

processes,” Fractals, vol. 3, pp. 183–210, 1995.

[17] S. Thurner, S. B. Lowen, M. C. Feurstein, C. Heneghan, H. G. Feichtinger, and M. C.
Teich, “Analysis, synthesis, and estimation of fractal-rate stochastic point processes,”
Fractals, vol. 5, pp. 565–595, 1997.

[18] W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed.,

1976.

[19] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: W. H. Freeman,

2nd ed., 1983.

[20] J. Feder, Fractals. New York: Plenum, 1988.

[21] L. S. Liebovitch, Fractals and Chaos Simpliﬁed for the Life Sciences. New York:

Oxford, 1998.

[22] M. F. Shlesinger and B. J. West, “Complex fractal dimension of the bronchial tree,”

Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 67, pp. 2106–2108, 1991.

[23] A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes. New York:

McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed., 1991.

[24] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Englewood

Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989.

[25] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes

in C. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed., 1992.

[26] S. Akselrod, D. Gordon, F. A. Ubel, D. C. Shannon, A. C. Barger, and R. J. Cohen,
“Power spectrum analysis of heart rate ﬂuctuation: a quantitative probe of beat to
beat cardiovascular control,” Science, vol. 213, pp. 220–222, 1981.

[27] B. Pomeranz, R. J. Macaulay, M. A. Caudill, I. Kutz, D. Adam, D. Gordon, K. M. Kil-
born, A. C. Barger, D. C. Shannon, and R. J. Cohen, “Assessment of autonomic func-
tion in humans by heart rate spectral analysis,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 248, pp. H151–
H153, 1985.

[28] A. Malliani, M. Pagani, F. Lombardi, and S. Cerutti, “Cardiovascular neural regulation

explored in the frequency domain,” Circulation, vol. 84, pp. 482–492, 1991.

[29] M. M. Wolf, G. A. Varigos, D. Hunt, and J. G. Sloman, “Sinus arrhythmia in acute

myocardial infarction,” Med. J. Australia, vol. 2, pp. 52–53, 1978.

[30] J. P. Saul, P. Albrecht, R. D. Berger, and R. J. Cohen, “Analysis of long term heart
rate variability: methods, 1/f scaling and implications,” in Computers in Cardiology
1987, pp. 419–422, Washington: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1988.

58

[31] D. R. Cox and V. Isham, Point Processes. London: Chapman and Hall, 1980.

[32] S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, “The periodogram and Allan variance reveal fractal
exponents greater than unity in auditory-nerve spike trains,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
vol. 99, pp. 3585–3591, 1996.

[33] D. W. Allan, “Statistics of atomic frequency standards,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 54, pp. 221–

230, 1966.

[34] J. A. Barnes and D. W. Allan, “A statistical model of ﬂicker noise,” Proc. IEEE,

vol. 54, pp. 176–178, 1966.

[35] M. C. Teich, “Fractal behavior of the electrocardiogram: distinguishing heart-failure
and normal patients using wavelet analysis,” Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., vol. 18, pp. 1128–1129, 1996.

[36] M. C. Teich, C. Heneghan, S. B. Lowen, and R. G. Turcott, “Estimating the fractal
exponent of point processes in biological systems using wavelet- and Fourier-transform
methods,” in Wavelets in Medicine and Biology (A. Aldroubi and M. Unser, eds.),
ch. 14, pp. 383–412, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.

[37] P. Abry and P. Flandrin, “Point processes, long-range dependence and wavelets,” in
Wavelets in Medicine and Biology (A. Aldroubi and M. Unser, eds.), pp. 413–437,
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.

[38] C. Heneghan, S. B. Lowen, and M. C. Teich, “Wavelet analysis for estimating the
fractal properties of neural ﬁring patterns,” in Computational Neuroscience: Trends
in Research 1995 (J. M. Bower, ed.), pp. 441–446, San Diego: Academic Press, 1996.

[39] S. Mallat, “A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet representa-

tion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intel., vol. 11, pp. 674–693, 1989.

[40] Y. Meyer, Ondelettes et op´erateurs. Paris: Hermann, 1990.

[41] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets. Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and

Applied Mathematics, 1992.

[42] A. Aldroubi and M. Unser, eds., Wavelets in Medicine and Biology. Boca Raton, FL:

CRC Press, 1996.

[43] M. Akay, ed., Time Frequency and Wavelets in Biomedical Signal Processing. New

York: IEEE Press, 1997.

[44] M. Akay, “Wavelet applications in medicine,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 50–56,

1997.

59

[45] A. Arneodo, G. Grasseau, and M. Holschneider, “Wavelet transform of multifractals,”

Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 61, pp. 2281–2284, 1988.

[46] S. Thurner, M. C. Feurstein, and M. C. Teich, “Multiresolution wavelet analysis of
heartbeat intervals discriminates healthy patients from those with cardiac pathology,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 80, pp. 1544–1547, 1998.

[47] S. Thurner, M. C. Feurstein, S. B. Lowen, and M. C. Teich, “Receiver-operating-
characteristic analysis reveals superiority of scale-dependent wavelet and spectral mea-
sures for assessing cardiac dysfunction,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 81, pp. 5688–5691, 1998.

[48] M. C. Teich, “Multiresolution wavelet analysis of heart rate variability for heart-failure
and heart-transplant patients,” Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 20,
pp. 1136–1141, 1998.

[49] C. Heneghan, S. B. Lowen, and M. C. Teich, “Analysis of spectral and wavelet-based
measures used to assess cardiac pathology,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 1999. paper no. SPTM-8.2.

[50] Y. Ashkenazy, M. Lewkowicz, J. Levitan, H. Moelgaard, P. E. Bloch Thomsen, and
K. Saermark, “Discrimination of the healthy and sick cardiac autonomic nervous sys-
tem by a new wavelet analysis of heartbeat intervals,” Fractals, vol. 6, pp. 197–203,
1998.

[51] C.-K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, “Quantiﬁcation of scaling
exponents and crossover phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time series,” Chaos,
vol. 5, pp. 82–87, 1995.

[52] C.-K. Peng, S. Havlin, J. M. Hausdorﬀ, J. Mietus, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Gold-
long-range correlations and

berger, “Fractal mechanisms and heart rate dynamics:
their breakdown with disease,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 28, pp. 59–65, 1996.

[53] K. K. L. Ho, G. B. Moody, C.-K. Peng, J. E. Mietus, M. G. Larson, D. Levy, and A. L.
Goldberger, “Predicting survival in heart failure case and control subjects by use of
fully automated methods for deriving nonlinear and conventional indices of heart rate
dynamics,” Circulation, vol. 96, pp. 842–848, 1997.

[54] M. Kobayashi and T. Musha, “1/f ﬂuctuations of heartbeat period,” IEEE Trans.

Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-29, pp. 456–457, 1982.

[55] C.-K. Peng, J. Mietus, J. M. Hausdorﬀ, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger,
“Long-range anticorrelations and non-Gaussian behavior of the heartbeat,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 70, pp. 1343–1346, 1993.

[56] L. A. Nunes Amaral, A. L. Goldberger, P. Ch. Ivanov, and H. E. Stanley, “Scale-
independent measures and pathologic cardiac dynamics,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 81,
pp. 2388–2391, 1998.

60

[57] H. E. Hurst, “Long-term storage capacity of reservoirs,” Trans. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng.,

vol. 116, pp. 770–808, 1951.

[58] W. Feller, “The asymptotic distribution of the range of sums of independent random

variables,” Ann. Math. Stat., vol. 22, pp. 427–432, 1951.

[59] H. E. Schepers, J. H. G. M. van Beek, and J. B. Bassingthwaighte, “Comparison of
four methods to estimate the fractal dimension of self-aﬃne signals,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 11, pp. 57–64, 1992.

[60] J. Beran, Statistics for Long-Memory Processes. New York: Chapman and Hall, 1994.

[61] J. B. Bassingthwaighte, L. S. Liebovitch, and B. J. West, Fractal Physiology. New

York: Oxford, 1994.

[62] H. L. Van Trees, Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory, Part I. New York:

Wiley, 1968.

[63] A. Hald, Statistical Theory with Engineering Applications. New York: Wiley, 1952.

[64] D. M. Green and J. A. Swets, Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics. Los Altos,

CA: Peninsula Press, 1988.

[65] J. A. Swets, “Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems,” Science, vol. 240,

pp. 1285–1293, 1988.

[66] Y. Ashkenazy, M. Lewkowicz, J. Levitan, S. Havlin, K. Saermark, H. Moelgaard,
P. E. Bloch Thomsen, M. Moller, U. Hintze, and H. Huikuri, “Scale speciﬁc and
scale independent measures of heart rate variability as risk indicators,” e-print
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9909029, 1999.

[67] S. V. Buldyrev, A. L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, R. N. Mantegna, M. E. Matsa, C.-K.
Peng, M. Simons, and H. E. Stanley, “Long-range correlation properties of coding and
noncoding DNA sequences: GenBank analysis,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 51, pp. 5084–5091,
1995.

[68] A. L. Goldberger and B. J. West, “Applications of nonlinear dynamics to clinical

cardiology,” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 504, pp. 195–213, 1987.

[69] C.-S. Poon and C. K. Merrill, “Decrease of cardiac chaos in congestive heart failure,”

Nature, vol. 389, pp. 492–495, 1997.

[70] J. K. Kanters, N.-H. Holstein-Rathlou, and E. Agner, “Lack of evidence for low-
dimensional chaos in heart rate variability,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 5,
pp. 591–601, 1994.

61

[71] D. E. Roach and R. S. Sheldon, “Information scaling properties of heart rate variabil-

ity,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 274, pp. H1970–H1978, 1998.

[72] J. Theiler, “Estimating fractal dimension,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 7, pp. 1055–1073,

1990.

[73] L. S. Liebovitch and T. T´oth, “A fast algorithm to determine fractal dimensions by

box counting,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 141, pp. 386–390, 1989.

[74] M. Ding, C. Grebogi, E. Ott, T. Sauer, and J. A. Yorke, “Plateau onset for correlation

dimension: when does it occur?,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 70, pp. 3872–3875, 1993.

[75] P. Grassberger and I. Procaccia, “Measuring the strangeness of strange attractors,”

Physica D, vol. 9, pp. 189–208, 1983.

[76] L. S. Liebovitch, “Introduction to the properties and analysis of fractal objects, pro-
cesses, and data,” in Advanced Methods of Physiological System Modeling (V. Z. Mar-
marelis, ed.), vol. 2, pp. 225–239, New York: Plenum Press, 1989.

[77] A. Wolf, J. B. Swift, H. L. Swinney, and J. A. Vastano, “Determining Lyapunov

exponents from a time series,” Physica D, vol. 16, pp. 285–317, 1985.

[78] A. R. Osborne and A. Provenzale, “Finite correlation dimension for stochastic systems

with power-law spectra,” Physica D, vol. 35, pp. 357–381, 1989.

[79] S. J. Schiﬀ and T. Chang, “Diﬀerentiation of linearly correlated noise from chaos in a

biologic system using surrogate data,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 67, pp. 387–393, 1992.

[80] J. Theiler, S. Eubank, A. Longtin, B. Galdrikian, and J. D. Farmer, “Testing for
nonlinearity in time series: the method of surrogate data,” Physica D, vol. 58, pp. 77–
94, 1992.

[81] A. M. Albano, J. Muench, C. Schwartz, A. I. Mees, and P. E. Rapp, “Singular-
value decomposition and the Grassberger-Procaccia algorithm,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 38,
pp. 3017–3026, 1988.

[82] C. Grebogi, E. Ott, and J. A. Yorke, “Chaos, strange attractors, and fractal basin

boundaries in nonlinear dynamics,” Science, vol. 238, pp. 632–638, 1987.

[83] F. X. Witkowski, K. M. Kavanagh, P. A. Penkoske, R. Plonsey, M. L. Spano, W. L.
Ditto, and D. T. Kaplan, “Evidence for determinism in ventricular ﬁbrillation,” Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 75, pp. 1230–1233, 1995.

[84] A. Garﬁnkel, J. N. Weiss, W. L. Ditto, and M. L. Spano, “Chaos control of cardiac

arrhythmias,” Trends Cardiovasc. Med., vol. 5, pp. 76–80, 1995.

62

[85] C. Heneghan, S. M. Khanna, ˚A. Flock, M. Ulfendahl, L. Brundin, and M. C. Teich,
“Investigating the nonlinear dynamics of cellular motion in the inner ear using the
short-time Fourier and continuous wavelet transforms,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process-
ing, vol. 42, pp. 3335–3352, 1994.

[86] M. C. Teich, C. Heneghan, S. M. Khanna, ˚A. Flock, M. Ulfendahl, and L. Brundin,
“Investigating routes to chaos in the guinea-pig cochlea using the continuous wavelet
transform and the short-time Fourier transform,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 23, pp. 583–
607, 1995.

[87] M. C. Teich, C. Heneghan, and S. M. Khanna, “Analysis of cellular vibrations in
the living cochlea using the continuous wavelet transform and the short-time Fourier
transform,” in Time Frequency and Wavelets in Biomedical Engineering (M. Akay,
ed.), pp. 243–269, New York: IEEE Press, 1997.

[88] D. J. Christini and J. J. Collins, “Controlling nonchaotic neuronal noise using chaos

control techniques,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 75, pp. 2782–2785, 1995.

[89] H. C. Tuckwell, Stochastic Processes in the Neurosciences. Philadelphia: Society for

Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1989.

[90] R. D. Berger, S. Akselrod, D. Gordon, and R. J. Cohen, “An eﬃcient algorithm for
spectral analysis of heart rate variability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-33,
pp. 900–904, 1986.

[91] B. W. Hyndman and R. K. Mohn, “A pulse modulator model for pacemaker activity,”

in Digest 10th Int. Conf. Med. Biol. Eng., (Dresden, Germany), p. 223, 1973.

[92] B. W. Hyndman and R. K. Mohn, “Model of the cardiac pacemaker and its use in
decoding the information content of cardiac intervals,” Automedica, vol. 1, pp. 239–
252, 1975.

[93] O. Rompelman, J. B. I. M. Snijders, and C. J. van Spronsen, “The measurement of
heart rate variability spectra with the help of a personal computer,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-29, pp. 503–510, 1982.

[94] P. Flandrin, “Wavelet analysis and synthesis of fractional Brownian motion,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 38, pp. 910–917, 1992.

[95] B. B. Mandelbrot, “A fast fractional Gaussian noise generator,” Water Resources Res.,

vol. 7, pp. 543–553, 1971.

[96] T. Lundahl, W. J. Ohley, S. M. Kay, and R. Siﬀert, “Fractional Brownian motion:
A maximum likelihood estimator and its application to image texture,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 5, pp. 152–161, 1986.

63

[97] M. A. Stoksik, R. G. Lane, and D. T. Nguyen, “Accurate synthesis of fractional Brow-

nian motion using wavelets,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, pp. 383–384, 1994.

[98] S. B. Lowen, S. S. Cash, M.-m. Poo, and M. C. Teich, “Quantal neurotransmitter

secretion rate exhibits fractal behavior,” J. Neurosci., vol. 17, pp. 5666–5677, 1997.

[99] S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, “Fractal renewal processes generate 1/f noise,” Phys.

Rev. E, vol. 47, pp. 992–1001, 1993.

[100] S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, “Fractal renewal processes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. The-

ory, vol. 39, pp. 1669–1671, 1993.

[101] S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, “Fractal auditory-nerve ﬁring patterns may derive from
fractal switching in sensory hair-cell ion channels,” in Noise in Physical Systems and
1/f Fluctuations (P. H. Handel and A. L. Chung, eds.), pp. 781–784, New York:
American Institute of Physics, 1993. AIP Conference Proceedings 285.

[102] L. S. Liebovitch and T. I. T´oth, “Using fractals to understand the opening and closing

of ion channels,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 18, pp. 177–194, 1990.

64

(cid:28)	

(cid:28)

(cid:28)

(cid:28)
(cid:28)
N=

(a)(b)
(cid:28)
(cid:28)
(cid:28)
(cid:28)
(c)
N=
N=
(d)
INTERVALNUMBERi(cid:28)

i

 (x) 

(cid:0)+

(=) (x=(cid:0))
(cid:0)=+=


(b)



-x

(=)(cid:28)i (i=(cid:0))
(cid:0)=+=rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr


-i

(c)



-x

=
(a)

This figure "fig03a.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008016v1

This figure "fig03b.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008016v1

NORMAL
HEARTFAILURE(cid:22)sAF
HEARTFAILURE(cid:22)cAF
 
 
WAVELETSCALEm(cid:27)

  
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)

(
v
a
w

)

m

 

E
U
L
A
V
D
E
R
U
S
A
E
M

LF=HF
A( )
(cid:11)D
(cid:11)R

VLF
pNN 
(cid:27)wav()
(cid:11)W

 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
  
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 

INDIVIDUALVALUES:DATA
HF
LF
   
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:27)int=SDNN
SDANN
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
DFA()
S(cid:28)(=)
 (cid:0)
 
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)S
(cid:11)A
 
 
 
VTSCDAPNEA
CONDITION
TRANSPLANT
CHF(cid:22)cAF
CHF(cid:22)sAF
NORMAL

. 
 .
. 
 .
. 
 .
. 
 .

E
U
L
A
V
E
V
T
C
D
E
R
P

I

I

 

 (cid:0)
  

PREDICTIVEVALUES:NORMALANDCHFDATA
VLF
LF=HF
  
 
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
A( )
pNN 
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)D
(cid:27)wav()
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)

(cid:11)W
(cid:11)R




LF
HF
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
SDANN
(cid:27)int=SDNN
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
S(cid:28)(=)
DFA()
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)S
(cid:11)A
 


 

THRESHOLD

 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 
 




 (cid:0)

 (cid:0)



.  . . 
.  . . 
.  . . 
.  . . 

 . 

I

I

Y
T
V
T
I
S
N
E
S

ROCCURVES:NORMALANDCHFDATA
LF=HF
VLF
pNN 
A( )
(cid:11)D
(cid:27)wav()
(cid:11)R
(cid:11)W
 .
 .

LF
HF
(cid:27)int=SDNN
SDANN
S(cid:28)(=)
DFA()
(cid:11)S
(cid:11)A
 .
 .
 . 
(cid:0)SPECIFICITY

. 

. 

 . 

. 

 . 

. 

.  . .
.  . .
.  . .
.  . .

A
E
R
A
C
O
R

ROC-AREACURVES:NORMALANDCHFDATA
LF=HF
LF
VLF
pNN 
A( )
SDANN
(cid:11)D
S(cid:28)(=)
(cid:27)wav()
(cid:11)S
(cid:11)R
(cid:11)W
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATALENGTHANALYZEDL

HF
(cid:27)int=SDNN
DFA()
(cid:11)A
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)

DFA()A( )VLF
(cid:27)wav()
S(cid:28)(=)
LF
DATALENGTHANALYZEDL

 

 

 

A
E
R
A
C
O
R
(cid:0)


 

I

D
N
O
I
S
N
E
M
D
Y
T
C
A
P
A
C

I

  
 

NORMAL



















EMBEDDINGDIMENSIONp
PHASE-RANDOMIZED
SHUFFLED(MEAN(cid:6)S.D.)
ORIGINALDATA

 

I

D
N
O
I
S
N
E
M
D
Y
T
C
A
P
A
C

I

  
 

HEARTFAILURE(cid:22)sAF













EMBEDDINGDIMENSIONp
PHASE-RANDOMIZED
SHUFFLED(MEAN(cid:6)S.D.)
ORIGINALDATA







  HF(cid:22)cAF
 


VT
 



D
N
O
I
S
N
E
M
D
Y
T
C
A
P
A
C

I

I

TRANSPLANT



APNEA




OTHERPATHOLOGIES
HF(cid:22)cAF
HF(cid:22)cAF






APNEA
SCD






EMBEDDINGDIMENSIONp
PHASE-RANDOMIZED
SHUFFLED(MEAN(cid:6)S.D.)
ORIGINALDATA




INTEGRATOR

THRESHOLD
DETECTOR

RESET

FRACTAL
NOISE

INTEGRATOR

THRESHOLD
DETECTOR

JITTER

SIMULATED
RR-INTERVAL 
SERIES

RESET

 

c
e
s
(

i

N
D
S
=

v
a
w

DATA
SIM.

NORMAL
    
)     
    
INTERVALNUMBERi(cid:28)
 
N  
 
SCALEm(cid:27)
 .
 .

.
RRINTERVAL(cid:28)(sec)p
DATA((cid:2) )
SIMULATION
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
)  (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
FREQUENCYf(cycles/interval)S

.  ..  . 
  
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 
 .
    

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

)
(cid:28)
(
(cid:28)

f
(
(cid:28)

DATA
SIM.

 

HEARTFAILURE
INTERVALNUMBERi    
    
    
 
 
 
SCALEm
 .
 .

.
RRINTERVAL(cid:28)(sec)
DATA((cid:2) )
SIMULATION
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
FREQUENCYf(cycles/interval)

.

 .

.

 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
  
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 

LF=HF
A( )
(cid:11)D
(cid:11)R

INDIVIDUALVALUES:SIMULATION
VLF
   
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
pNN 
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:27)wav()
 (cid:0)
 
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)W
 
 
CHF(cid:22)cAF
CHF(cid:22)sAF
NORMAL

LF
HF
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
SDANN
(cid:27)int=SDNN
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
S(cid:28)(=)
DFA()
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)S
(cid:11)A
 
CONDITION

E
U
L
A
V
D
E
R
U
S
A
E
M

.  . .
.  . .
.  . .
.  . .

A
E
R
A
C
O
R

ROC-AREACURVES:SIMULATION
LF=HF
VLF
LF
pNN 
A( )
SDANN
(cid:11)D
(cid:27)wav()
S(cid:28)(=)
(cid:11)W
(cid:11)R
(cid:11)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIMULATEDDATALENGTHANALYZEDL

HF
(cid:27)int=SDNN
DFA()
(cid:11)A
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SIMULATIONACCURACY
(cid:27)int=SDNN
S(cid:28)(=)
(cid:26)= :
(cid:26)= :		
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
N  (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
(cid:11)W
(cid:27)wav()
(cid:26)= :
(cid:26)= :		
 (cid:0)
(cid:26)= :
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)


NORMAL
HEARTFAILURE(cid:22)sAF
HEARTFAILURE(cid:22)cAF

 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 (cid:0)
 
DATA

 

I

O
T
A
L
U
M
I
S

 (cid:0)

RESPIRATION

FRACTAL
NOISE

BLOOD
PRESSURE

WHITE
NOISE

INTEGRATOR

THRESHOLD
DETECTOR

SIMULATED
RR-INTERVAL
SERIES

RESET

ADAPTIVE
FILTER

