0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamic ﬁtness landscapes: Expansions for

small mutation rates

Claus O. Wilke

Digital Life Laboratory

Mail Code 136-93, Caltech

Pasadena, CA 91125

wilke@caltech.edu

Christopher Ronnewinkel

Institut f¨ur Neuro- und Bioinformatik

Medizinische Universit¨at L¨ubeck

Seelandstraße 1a

D-23569 L¨ubeck, Germany
ronne@inb.mu-luebeck.de

Abstract

We study the evolution of asexual microorganisms with small mutation rate in ﬂuc-
tuating environments, and develop techniques that allow us to expand the formal
solution of the evolution equations to ﬁrst order in the mutation rate. Our method
can be applied to both discrete time and continuous time systems. While the be-
havior of continuous time systems is dominated by the average ﬁtness landscape
for small mutation rates, in discrete time systems it is instead the geometric mean
ﬁtness that determines the system’s properties. In both cases, we ﬁnd that in sit-
uations in which the arithmetic (resp. geometric) mean of the ﬁtness landscape is
degenerate, regions in which the ﬁtness ﬂuctuates around the mean value present a
selective advantage over regions in which the ﬁtness stays at the mean. This eﬀect
is caused by the vanishing genetic diﬀusion at low mutation rates. In the absence of
strong diﬀusion, a population can stay close to a ﬂuctuating peak when the peak’s
height is below average, and take advantage of the peak when its height is above
average.

Key words: dynamic ﬁtness landscape, quasispecies, error threshold, molecular
evolution, ﬂuctuating environment
PACS: 87.23.Kg

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

A major part of all living creatures on Earth consists of prokaryotes and
phages. These organisms replicate mainly without sexual recombination [1],
and typically produce oﬀspring on a time-scale of hours. Because of their short
gestation times, microbes experience ubiquitous environmental changes such
as seasons on an evolutionary time scale. Most of the DNA based microbes
have developed error correction mechanisms, such limiting the amount of dele-
terious mutations they experience. In a changing environment, however, small
mutation rates might severely curtail a species’ ability to react to new sit-
uations. The observed genomic mutation rates of asexual organisms such as
bacteria and DNA viruses lie typically around 2− 4× 10−3 [2], implying that a
few out of every thousand oﬀspring get mutated at all. It has been proposed [3]
that even lower genomic mutation rates are not observed simply because they
would stiﬂe a species’ adaptability in a changing environment. While this is
certainly a reasonable assumption, we do not currently have a deep under-
standing of what types of ﬁtness landscapes require what mutation rates, and
whether a small mutation rate is always disadvantageous in a changing envi-
ronment. In this paper, we address the eﬀects of a changing environment on
a population evolving in a small mutation rate. Our main objective is to de-
velop an expansion to ﬁrst order in the mutation rate which enables us to ﬁnd
approximate solutions for inﬁnite asexual populations evolving in arbitrary
dynamic landscapes.

Due to the nature of the expansions that we use, we are led to a comparison
between discrete time and continuous time systems. Our main result from
the comparison is that in dynamic ﬁtness landscapes, continuous and discrete
time systems have qualitative diﬀerences in the low mutation rate regime.
This diﬀerence can manifest itself, for example, in populations that replicate
either continuously or synchronized in discrete generations. Given that all
other factors are equal, the continuously replicating strains will have a selective
advantage. As a generic result for both continuous and discrete time, we ﬁnd
that a low mutation rate can enable a population to draw a selective advantage
from ﬂuctuations in the landscape.

Our analysis is based on the quasispecies model [4–6]. The quasispecies lit-
erature was for a long time focused on static ﬁtness landscapes, but recently
more emphasis has been put on the aspect of changing environments [3,7–14].
Here, we mainly use methods developed in Ref. [12]. The paper is structured
as follows. In Sec. 2, we demonstrate how systems with discrete as well as con-
tinuous time can be treated to ﬁrst order in the mutation rate. In Sec. 3, we
discuss the expansions we have found in Sec. 2. We treat the case of a vanish-
ing mutation rate in Sec. 3.1, and that of a very small but positive mutation
rate in Sec. 3.2. In Sec. 3.3, we study the localization of a population around a

2

oscillating peak, and in Sec. 3.4, we discuss the problems we encounter when
approximating a continuous time system with a discrete time system. We close
our paper with concluding remarks in Sec. 4.

2 Analysis

2.1 The model

Consider a system of evolving bitstrings. The diﬀerent bitstrings i replicate
with rates Ai, and they mutate into each other with probabilities Qij. Through-
out this paper, we assume that the probability of an incorrectly copied bit is
uniform over all strings, and denote this probability by R. The mutation ma-
trix Q = (Qij) is then given by

Qij = (1 − R)l(cid:18) R

1 − R(cid:19)d(i,j)

,

(1)

where d(i, j) is the Hamming distance between two sequences i and j. The
matrix Q is a 2l × 2l matrix, and it is in general diﬃcult to handle numeri-
cally. Therefore, in the following we impose the additional assumption that all
sequences with equal Hamming distance from a given reference sequence have
the same ﬁtness. This is the so-called error class assumption [15]. The matrix
Q is then an (l + 1) × (l + 1) matrix,
k! l − j

i − k!(1 − R)l(cid:18) R

min{i,j}Xk=max{i+j−l,0} j

Qij =

1 − R(cid:19)i+j−2k

.

(2)

The generality of our results is not aﬀected by this choice, because the calcu-
lations we present in the following can be performed with either of the two
matrices Q, and they lead to very similar expressions.

Let us write down the quasispecies equations for sequences evolving in con-
tinuous or discrete time and in a static ﬁtness landscape. We introduce the
replication matrix A = diag(A0, A1, . . . ). The continuous diﬀerential equation
of the (unnormalized) concentration variables y = (y0, y1, . . . ) then reads

˙y(t) = QAy(t) .

The discrete diﬀerence equation, on the other hand, can be written as

y(t + ∆t) = [∆tQA + λ]y(t) ,

(3)

(4)

where ∆t is the duration of one generation, and λ gives the proportion of
parents that survive one generation and enter the next one together with

3

their oﬀspring. Both Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) converge for t → ∞ towards a se-
quence distribution given by the Perron eigenvector of the matrix QA. Hence,
for a static landscape the discrete time and the continuous time quasispecies
equations are equivalent, as far as the asymptotic state is concerned. The dis-
tinction between discrete and continuous time, however, is important when
the ﬁtness landscape changes over time. Consider the situation of a dynamic
ﬁtness landscape, represented by a time dependent matrix A(t). Equation (3)
becomes

˙y(t) = QA(t)y(t) .

The time-dependent diﬀerence equation, on the other hand, reads

y(t + ∆t) = [∆tQA(t) + λ]y(t) ,

(5)

(6)

The dynamic attractors of both Eqs. (5) and (6) are not immediately obvious,
and therefore we cannot know to what extent the two systems diﬀer unless we
perform a more elaborate analysis. Moreover, in a static landscape, a nonzero λ
does not aﬀect the asymptotic state of the system, which is why it normally is
set to zero in Eq. (4) [16,17]. The situation is diﬀerent in a dynamic landscape,
and we have to allow for a non-zero λ in general.

2.2 Discrete time

Let us begin our analysis with the discrete system. We set λ = 0, because that
leads to the simplest equation describing a discrete time evolutionary system
in a dynamic ﬁtness landscape. The more complicated cases with λ > 0 can be
constructed from the equation for λ = 0, as we will see later on. We address
the equation

y(t + ∆t) = ∆tQA(t)y(t) .

(7)

The solution to this equation is formally given by the time-ordered matrix
product [12] [using n = t/∆t and A′(ν) = ∆t A(ν∆t)]

y(n) = T (n−1Yν=0

QA′(ν)) y(0)

=: Ydisc(n)y(0) .

(8)

In the second line, we have introduced the notation Ydisc(n) for this matrix
product. We will occasionally refer to Ydisc(n) as a propagator, since Ydisc(n)
fully determines the state of the system at time t = n ∆t, given an initial state
at time t = 0.

4

Ydisc(n) can be evaluated to ﬁrst order in R. The only dependency of Ydisc(n)
on R is the one in Q. When we expand Q [Eq. (2)] in R, we ﬁnd

Qij =

min{i,j}Xk=max{i+j−l,0} j

k! l − j

i − k![δβ,0 + R(δβ,1 − αδβ,0) + . . . ] ,

(9)

with α = l−β and β = i+ j−2k. As usual, δi,j denotes the Kronecker symbol.
The sum collapses into a single term, and we ﬁnd to ﬁrst order in R

Qij = (1 − lR)δi,j + (l − j)Rδi,j+1 + jRδi,j−1 .

(10)

After some algebra, we obtain from that for the matrix Ydisc(n)

(cid:18)Ydisc(n)(cid:19)ij

A′

j(ν)# δi,j
="(1 − lRn)
n−1Yν=0
+(l − j)R
µYν1=0
t−1Xµ=0
+jR
µYν1=0
t−1Xµ=0

j(ν1)

A′

A′

j(ν1)

t−1Yν2=µ+1

A′

j+1(ν2) δi,j+1
t−1Yν2=µ+1
j−1(ν2) δi,j−1 ,

A′

(11)

This expression fully describes to ﬁrst order in R the state of the system after
n time steps.

2.3 Continuous time

Let us now turn to the continuous system. We can use the expansion of Ydisc(n)
to ﬁnd an expansion for the propagator of the static continuous case. If the
ﬁtness landscape is static, the solution to Eq. (3) is given by

y(t) = exp(QAt)y(0) .

(12)

It is useful to recall that the exponential operator of a matrix is deﬁned as

exp(QAt) = 1 + QAt +

1
2!

(QAt)2 + . . . .

(13)

We can expand the single terms in that sum separately. Equation (11) allows
us to write (QA)k as

(cid:18)(QA)k(cid:19)ij

j δi,j +(l − j)R
= (1 − klR)Ak
kXµ=1

+jR

j−1 δi,j−1 + O(R2) .

kXµ=1

j Ak−µ

Aµ

Aµ

j Ak−µ

j+1 δi,j+1

(14)

5

Both the sums in the expression for (QA)k and the remaining sum in Eq. (13)
can then be taken analytically. We ﬁnd

(cid:18) exp(QAt)(cid:19)ij

= (1 − lRAjt)eAjtδi,j + (l − j)RK[Ajt, Aj+1t]δi,j+1

+ jRK[Ajt, Aj−1t]δi,j−1 ,

where the function K[a, b] is of the form

K[a, b] =

a

a − b(cid:16)ea − eb(cid:17) .

(15)

(16)

With Eq. (15), we have an expansion of the propagator of the continuous
system in a static landscape to ﬁrst order in R. Similarly, we can treat piece-
wise constant landscapes. Under a piecewise constant landscape we under-
stand a landscape for which we can deﬁne intervals I1 = [0, t1), I2 = [t1, t2),
I3 = [t2, t3), . . . , such that the landscape does not change within any of these
intervals. Any dynamic ﬁtness landscape can be approximated in that way.
The solution to the diﬀerential equation for that type of landscapes is given
by

y(t) = exp[QA(tn)(t − tn)] exp[QA(tn−1)(tn − tn−1)] · · ·

· · · exp[QA(0)t1]y(0) .

(17)

With the two simplifying assumptions that all intervals have the same length
τ and that we are observing the system only at the end of an interval, Eq. (17)
becomes (for n = t/τ )

y(t) = T (n−1Yν=0

exp[QA(ντ )τ ]) y(0)

=: Ycont(t)y(0) .

(18)

The similarity to Eq. (8) is evident. Hence, in analogy to the calculation that
leads from Eq. (10) to Eq. (11), we ﬁnd in the piecewise constant, continuous
case

(cid:18)Ycont(t)(cid:19)ij

="(cid:18)1 − lR
+(l − j)R
n−1Xµ=0
+jR
n−1Xµ=0

K (µ)

j,j−1

Ac

n−1Xν=0

K (µ)

j,j+1

Ac

j(ν)(cid:19) exp(cid:18) n−1Xν=0
µ−1Yν1=0
µ−1Yν1=0

j(ν)(cid:19)# δi,j
n−1Yν2=µ+1
n−1Yν2=µ+1

exp[Ac

exp[Ac

exp[Ac

j(ν1)]

j(ν1)]

exp[Ac

j+1(ν2)] δi,j+1
j−1(ν2)] δi,j−1 .

(19)

We have used the abbreviations

Ac(ν) = τ A(ντ )

and K (ν)

i,j = K[Ac

i (ν), Ac

j(ν)].

(20)

6

Equation (19) fully determines to ﬁrst order in R the state of the continuous
system after t units of time have passed.

3 Discussion

With Eqs. (11) and (19), we have expansions for the propagators of discrete-
time and continuous time evolving systems in a dynamic ﬁtness landscape. In
this section, we will examine these expansions and discuss their properties.

3.1 A vanishing mutation rate

For R = 0, both Ydisc(t) and Ycont(t) turn into diagonal matrices. We ﬁnd
(choosing τ = ∆t and n = t/τ )

Ydisc(t) = exph n−1Xν=0
Ycont(t) = exph n−1Xν=0

log(cid:16)A′(ν)(cid:17)i =(cid:18) nqA′(n − 1) · · · A′(0)(cid:19)n
Ac(ν)i .

,

(21)

(22)

This result shows that in a dynamic ﬁtness landscape the discrete and the
continuous model have not only quantitative, but also important qualitative
diﬀerences. While in the continuous case the state of the system at time t is
determined by the exponential of the arithmetic mean of the ﬁtness landscape
until time t, in the discrete case it is determined by the exponential of the
geometric mean of the ﬁtness landscape, which can be written as arithmetic
mean of the logarithm of the ﬁtness landscape. The latter corresponds to
results from population genetics [18]. Since arithmetic and geometric mean
are in general diﬀerent, the same ﬁtness landscape can have very diﬀerent
eﬀects in a continuous or discrete system for R = 0. Consider a landscape, for
example, with an oscillating sharp peak,

A0(t) =

Ai(t) = 1

σ(1 − a)
σ(1 + a)

0 ≤ t < T /2

for
for T /2 ≤ t < T

for 0 < i ≤ l ,

(23a)

(23b)

with 0 ≤ a < 1 and σ > 0.
In the continuous system without mutations, the master sequence grows with
the rate A0 = σ if time is measured in integer multiples of T . Hence, if σ >
1, the peak sequence will always supersede all other sequences for t → ∞.

Contrasting to that, the geometric mean is eA0 = σ√1 − a2. Even for σ > 1 it

7

is possible to have eA0 < 1 if a is large enough, in which case in the discrete
system the master sequence grows slower than all others. Consequently, it will
be expelled from the population for t → ∞. The special case of σ = 1 is
depicted in Fig. 1. There, the ﬁtness landscape becomes ﬂat in continuous
time, but acquires a hole in discrete time.

3.2 Small non-zero mutation rates

Let us now turn to the case of a small but non-zero R. From the above, we
can expect that there is a qualitative diﬀerence between discrete and con-
tinuous time even for ﬁnite R. In order to see this diﬀerence, we take the
oscillating sharp peak landscape as a generic example. A two concentration
approximation has proven useful to describe situations with σ ≫ 1 [14] but is
not applicable here, since we are particularly interested in the case σ = 1, for
which the average landscape is ﬂat in continuous time and acquires a hole in
discrete time.

The analysis of the landscape Eq. (23) is facilitated by its periodicity in time
(with period length T ). For periodic landscapes, it has been shown in Ref. [12]
that a periodic attractor with period length T exists. Its state at phase φ = 0
(the phase is deﬁned as φ := t mod T ) is given by the principal eigenvector of
the monodromy matrix

X(0) = Y(T ) ,

(24)

where Y(t) is the propagator of the system. Equation (24) holds regardless
of continuous or discrete time. The attractor’s state at other phases φ can be
calculated in a similar fashion.

In Figure 2, we have displayed the order parameter ms [19,20] in the sharp
peak landscape as a function of R for the discrete time and the continuous
time system. The order parameter is given by

ms(t) =

1
l

lXi=0

xi(t)(l − 2i) ,

(25)

where the xi(t) represent the total (normalized) concentration of all sequences
in error class i at time t. We have calculated the order parameter both from
the full monodromy matrix and from the expansions to ﬁrst order in R. We
ﬁnd that the expansions give reliable results for small mutation rates, but
start deviating from the true value as R approaches 1/lT . Note that both
expansions must break down beyond 1/lT , as both the discrete and the con-
tinuous propagator assume unphysical negative values on the diagonal when
R exceeds 1/lT [Eqs. (11) and (19)].

8

From Fig. 2, it is evident that there exists a qualitative diﬀerence between the
discrete and the continuous time system. In the system with continuous time,
the sequences stay centered around the currently active peak for arbitrarily
small but non-zero mutation rates, whereas in the system with discrete time,
the sequence distribution becomes ever more homogeneous as R → 0.
The behavior of the discrete system is easily explained. In the geometric mean
of the landscape, the peak position is actually disadvantageous, and hence
the population is driven into the remaining genotype space, which it occupies
homogeneously due to the lack of selective diﬀerences. Formally, the popula-
tion feels the geometric mean only for a vanishing mutation rate. However, by
continuity, the disadvantage at the peak position will remain for some small
but non-zero R, which leads to the continuous decay of the order parameter as
R → 0. Interestingly, the order parameter does not decay exactly to zero, but
to a value slightly below zero. This happens because the population becomes
homogeneously distributed over the whole sequence space except for the po-
sition of the oscillating peak. The resulting small imbalance in the sequence
distribution towards the opposite end of the boolean hypercube then leads to
a negative order parameter. The inset in Fig. 2 shows that our approximation
predicts this behavior accurately for small R.

Now consider the continuous system. For an inﬁnitesimal R > 0, the depen-
dence of the asymptotic state on the initial condition is lost, as we know from
the Frobenius-Perron theorem. Since for R = 0 the evolution of the popula-
tion in time steps of size T is guided by the ﬂat average landscape, one might
suspect that for inﬁnitesimal R > 0 a homogeneous distribution is found as
the unique asymptotic state. This is what we observe for a population evolv-
ing in a ﬂat static landscape with little mutation. However, the situation in a
dynamic landscape may be diﬀerent, because the dynamics of the landscape
has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the asymptotic sequence distribution. In fact, it
is possible that a ﬂat average landscape leads to an ordered asymptotic state
for ﬁnite mutation rates R > 0. In the next subsection, we will demonstrate
this eﬀect for the oscillating sharp peak.

3.3 Localization around an oscillating peak

We will now have a closer look at the oscillating sharp peak landscape, Eq. (23).
We are interested in the case σ = 1, which leads to a degenerate average in
continuous time. First we note some general properties of the monodromy ma-
trix X(φ) for a periodic landscape with ﬂat arithmetic mean. If X(φ) is given
to ﬁrst order in R, it reads (assuming the average ﬁtness is 1)

X(φ) = (1 − T lR)1 + R ˜X(φ) ,

(26)

9

where ˜X(φ) is independent of the mutation rate R and contains only the
oﬀ-diagonal entries from Eq. (19). Since ˜X(φ) diﬀers from X(φ) only by a
scalar factor and an additional constant on the diagonal, the eigenvectors
of the former matrix are identical to the ones of the latter matrix, while the
eigenvalues are related through λi = (1−T lR)+R˜λi. As a consequence, we ﬁnd
that the asymptotic species distribution is given by the principal eigenvector of
the oﬀ-diagonal matrix ˜X(φ), which is independent of R. If we took terms up
to the kth order of R into account in Eq. (19), we would ﬁnd the higher order
contributions to the eigenvectors up to (k − 1)th order of R. However, with
our ﬁrst-order approximation, we are only able to calculate the asymptotic
sequence concentrations to 0th order in R.

For small mutation rates R, we can restrict our analysis to the ﬁrst three error
classes. For the oscillating peak, we ﬁnd with help of Eq. (19) the following
expressions

˜X(φ) ≈ T exp(T )

where



lβφ(aT )αφ(aT )

0

0

αφ(aT ) 0

0
2
l − 1 0



αφ(ξ) = (2/ξ)[1 − e−ξ/2]eξ|φ−1/2|
βφ(ξ) = eξ/2e−2ξ|φ−1/2|

ξ = aT .

The (unnormalized) asymptotic state follows as



y0

y1

y2



(φ, ξ) =



αφ(ξ)

q2(l − 1) + α2
l − 1

φ(ξ)βφ(ξ) l

.



,

(27)

(28a)

(28b)
(28c)

(29)

Now, if the third error class concentration is negligibly small compared to the
other two concentrations, the concentrations of the higher error classes can
be neglected as well, and the asymptotic state is approximately given by the
concentrations of the ﬁrst two error classes only. From Eq. (29), we can derive
the following criterion for this approximation to be valid,

exp(ξ/2) ≫ lξ2/4.

(30)

Hence, if ξ = aT is large, which means that the ﬁtness ﬂuctuations are large
and slow, the population is exclusively distributed over the peak and the ﬁrst
error class. For this case, we ﬁnd the following simpliﬁed description of the

10

population:

x0(φ, ξ) = 1(cid:30)(cid:20)1 +qlβφ(ξ)(cid:21) ,
x1(φ, ξ) =qlβφ(ξ)(cid:30)(cid:20)1 +qlβφ(ξ)(cid:21) ,
ms(φ, ξ) = 1 − 2x1(φ, ξ)/l .

(31a)

(31b)

(31c)

The last equation implies that in the limit R → 0, the order parameter is
always larger than 1 − 2/l. This means that although the peak does not have
an average selective advantage, the evolving sequences are attracted to the
peak nonetheless. As long as l > 1, the order parameter averaged over one
oscillation cycle is positive, which means that a population can draw a selective
advantage from being close to the peak in comparison to being far away from
it.

In Figure 3A, we display the predicted behavior of the system in a very small
mutation rate, as given by Eq. (31). The observed change in the sequence
concentrations is explained as follows. During the times at which the peak has
above-average ﬁtness, the sequences on the peak replicate faster than all others
and hence grow exponentially until the peak’s concentration saturates around
one, while all oﬀ-peak sequences assume vanishing concentrations. Similarly,
during the times at which the peak has below-average ﬁtness, the peak’s rela-
tive concentration decays, while the population moves onto the nearest advan-
tageous sequences, which can be found in the ﬁrst error class. The sequences in
all other error classes are adaptively neutral compared to the ﬁrst error class.
Hence, the amount of sequences that move into higher error classes is solely
determined by the mutation rate. If the mutation rate is small enough, the
diﬀusion among these neutral sequences becomes negligibly small on the time
scale of the peak oscillations T . Therefore, the population stays mainly within
the ﬁrst error class until the peak ﬁtness switches back to the above-average
value. Thus, we ﬁnd the qualitative behavior of Eq. (31): In a landscape with
a large and slowly oscillating sharp peak and a small mutation rate, the pop-
ulation oscillates between the peak sequence and the ﬁrst error class in the
asymptotic state. In short, the population becomes localized close to the peak.

For extremely small mutation rates, Eq. (31) agrees perfectly with the full
numerical solution. For somewhat larger mutation rates, the main discrepancy
that arises is a phase shift between the full solution and the approximation
(Figure 3B). The phase shift moves the concentration curves towards earlier
times, i.e., the system becomes more responsive to the changing peak as the
mutation rate increases. This is intuitively clear. With a higher mutation rate,
the ﬁrst error class will already be occupied to a larger extent when the peak
switches to the below-average value, so that the concentration of the one-
mutants can grow faster towards their equilibrium value. Similarly, when the
peak switches back to the above-average value, the peak sequences have a more

11

favorable initial concentration, which makes them grow faster in comparison
to a lower mutation rate.

Let us shortly extend the above argumentation to broader peaks, like peaks
with linear ﬂanks of width 1 ≤ w ≤ l:

(32)

Ai(t) = max(cid:26)1,

w − i
w

[A0(t) − 1](cid:27) for all 0 < i ≤ l.

The sharp peak from above corresponds to a peak of width w = 1. For ar-
bitrary chosen width 1 ≤ w ≤ l, the population gets transported to the wth
error class due to the selection pressure during the below-average peak ﬁtness
phases. The wth error class is in that case the boundary of the advantageous
region. Again, if the mutation rate is suﬃciently small, diﬀusion can be ne-
glected and the population will stay in the wth error class until the peak ﬁtness
switches back to the above-average value. This implies that for peaks of width
w ≥ l/2, it is possible to have ms(φ) ≤ 0 for some intermediate oscillation
phases. In particular for the maximum width w = l, the order parameter
ms(φ) will oscillate symmetrically around zero.

In this subsection, we have only considered continuous time systems. We have
established that in a dynamic ﬁtness landscape with ﬂat average, a population
can draw a selective advantage from peaks that ﬂuctuate around the average
ﬁtness value. The same eﬀect will occur in a discrete time system if we con-
sider the geometric mean of the ﬁtness landscape instead. In other words, in a
landscape with ﬂat geometric mean, a population with a small mutation rate
will draw a selective advantage from a peak that ﬂuctuates around that geo-
metric mean. The origin of that eﬀect is again the vanishing diﬀusion, which
causes the population to remain close to the peak when the peak has a height
below the mean.

3.4 Discrete systems with overlapping generations

When discussing the discrete system in Sec. 3.1 and 3.2, we have set λ = 0,
i.e., we have made the assumption that every sequence can generate oﬀspring
only once, and dies before the next generation starts to replicate. The opposite
extreme is λ = 1, for which no sequence ever dies. With λ = 1, a sequence
can theoretically stay inﬁnitely long in the system (in practice, the growth
of new sequences is compensated through an out-ﬂux of old sequences, but
that is not our concern here. The details of the out-ﬂux do not inﬂuence the
unnormalized concentration variables y(t) in Eqs. (3)–(6) [12]). For λ = 1,
Eq. (6) converges to Eq. (5) for ∆t → 0. In other words, for λ = 1 and a small
∆t, Eq. (6) is an approximation to Eq. (5). This fact has been exploited in
Ref. [12] in order to calculate the continuous system numerically. However, it

12

has not been evaluated in Ref. [12] to what extend the discrete approximation
behaves qualitatively diﬀerent from the continuous system.

Let us brieﬂy examine how the discrete equation with λ = 1 ﬁts into the
concepts we have developed so far. For λ = 1, the propagator Ydisc(t) assumes
the form

Ydisc(t) = T (n−1Yν=0

[∆tQA(ν∆t) + 1]) ,

which can be rewritten into

Ydisc(t) = T(1 + ∆t

n−1Xν=0

QA(ν∆t) + ∆t2

QA(ν∆t)QA(ν′∆t)

ν−1Xν ′=0
n−1Xν=0
QA(ν∆t)) .

+ · · · + ∆tn

n−1Yν=0

(33)

(34)

(35)

With the formulae given in Section 2, it is possible to expand this expression
to ﬁrst order in R. Since the corresponding calculation is tedious, and the
result does not give any new insights, we omit this expansion here. Let us just
consider the zeroth order term,

Ydisc(t) = 1 + ∆t

A(ν∆t) + ∆t2

A(ν∆t)A(ν′∆t)

n−1Xν=0
+ · · · + ∆tn

n−1Yν=0

ν−1Xν ′=0

n−1Xν=0
A(ν∆t) + O(R) .

Compare this expression to Eqs. (21) and (22). For λ = 1, we neither have
the exponential of the averaged landscape, nor do we have an expression that
depends solely on the geometric mean of the landscape. We obtain a mix-
ture between the two cases, and the size of ∆t determines which case we are
closer to. Consequently, we obtain qualitatively wrong results from the dis-
crete approximation if the arithmetic and geometric mean of the landscape
diﬀer signiﬁcantly. Nevertheless, the discrepancies between the results can be
restricted to arbitrary small values of the mutation rate if we choose ∆t small
enough.

As an example, consider Fig. 4. There we display the order parameter in the
oscillating sharp peak landscape obtained from the full continuous propaga-
tor, and compare it to the result from the discrete approximation for various
values of ∆t. For a relatively large ∆t = 2 (n = 50), Eq. (33) gives a poor
approximation of the continuous system. Throughout the whole range of R
there are signiﬁcant deviations from the full solution. As we decrease ∆t (in-
crease n), the approximation moves much closer to the true value of the order
parameter. Yet, for very small R, the order parameter always decays to zero in

13

the approximation, whereas it stays close to one in the full solution. However
small we choose ∆t, there will always be some contribution from the geometric
mean at R = 0. That causes the order parameter in the discrete approximation
to vanish for this particular landscape.

Contrasting to above situation, however, the diﬀerences between approxima-
tion and full solution are hardly noticeable in landscapes where the arithmetic
and the geometric mean have a comparable structure (a peak in the averaged
landscape is also a peak in the geometric mean of the geometric mean of the
landscape, only with a slightly diﬀerent height).

4 Conclusions

We have studied time-dependent ﬁtness landscapes in the quasispecies model
for the particular regime of small mutation rates. We have shown that the
discrete time formulation and the continuous time formulation yield qualita-
tively diﬀerent outcomes in that regime. If time is updated continuously, an
evolving population adapts for R → 0 to the exponential of the average ﬁtness
landscape, whereas in discrete time, the population adapts to the geometric
mean of the landscape.

If the arithmetic or the geometric mean of the ﬁtness landscape have degen-
eracies, then the behavior of the respective continuous time or discrete time
system for R → 0 is determined by the eﬀect of the landscape on the popu-
lation for some small but ﬁnite R, which can be very diﬀerent from its eﬀect
for R = 0. In particular, for the case of a slowly oscillating peak, the growth
of the population onto the peak when the peak is high is much faster than
the diﬀusion away from the peak when the peak is low, which implies that a
population can draw a selective advantage from that peak even if the average
(resp. geometric mean) height of the peak does not exceed the surrounding
landscape. From that observation, the following picture emerges: If the average
height of a slowly oscillating peak is larger than or equal to the surrounding
ﬁtness landscape, than in a small mutation rate environment a population will
draw a selective advantage from being close to the peak position. Only if the
average height is truly smaller than the surrounding ﬁtness, the peak position
will be necessarily disadvantageous.

The diﬀerences that we have found between continuous time and discrete time
systems are not only interesting from a modeling perspective. They also have
implications for the evolution of organisms that have the ability to inﬂuence
their replication cycle. In a ﬂuctuating environment, a strain that feels the
average of the landscape will have a selective advantage over a strain that
feels the geometric mean, as the latter is generally smaller. Hence, if two

14

strains are identical apart from the fact that one replicates in a synchronized
manner (all individuals generate their oﬀspring at the same time, every ∆t
units of time), whereas the other one replicates unsynchronized (at any point
in time, some individuals may generate oﬀspring), then the unsynchronized
strain will out-compete the synchronized strain.

Throughout this paper, we have exclusively considered inﬁnite populations. It
is quite likely that ﬁnite populations experience the arithmetic or geometric
mean ﬁtness just as inﬁnite populations do. However, since ﬁnite population
sampling occurs at every time step, the sampling might well interfere with the
averaging, such that ﬁnite populations could experience a somewhat diﬀerent
landscape. Nevertheless, the eﬀect that a ﬂuctuating peak can lead to a se-
lective advantage will also exist in a ﬁnite population. With a small mutation
rate, the ﬁnite population will not drift away from the peak when it is below
average, and hence the population will most likely rediscover the peak when
it rises again to above average.

We thank Erik van Nimwegen for useful comments and suggestions, and Chris
Adami for carefully reading the manuscript. This work was supported in part
by the National Science Foundation under contract No. DEB-9981397, and by
the BMBF under F¨orderkennzeichen 01IB802C4.

References

[1] Bruce R. Levin and Carl T. Bergstrom. Bacteria are diﬀerent: Observations,
interpretations, speculations, and opinions about the mechanisms of adaptive
evolution in prokaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97:6981–6985, 2000.

[2] J. W. Drake, B. Charlesworth, D. Charlesworth, and J. F. Crow. Rates of

spontaneous mutations. Genetics, 148:1667–1686, 1998.

[3] Martin Nilsson and Nigel Snoad. Optimal mutation rates in dynamic

environments. eprint physics/0004042, April 2000.

[4] M. Eigen.

Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological

macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften, 58:465–523, 1971.

[5] Manfred Eigen, John McCaskill, and Peter Schuster. Molecular quasi-species.

J. Phys. Chem., 92:6881–6891, 1988.

[6] Manfred Eigen, John McCaskill, and Peter Schuster. The molecular quasi-

species. Adv. Chem. Phys., 75:149–263, 1989.

[7] B. L. Jones. Selection in systems of self-reproducing macromolecules under the

constraint of controlled energy ﬂuxes. Bull. Math. Biol., 41:761–766, 1979.

[8] B. L. Jones. Some models for selection of biological macromolecules with time

varying constants. Bull. Math. Biol., 41:849–859, 1979.

15

[9] Claus O. Wilke. Evolutionary Dynamics in Time-Dependent Environments.

Shaker Verlag, Aachen, 1999. PhD thesis Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum.

[10] Claus O. Wilke, Christopher Ronnewinkel, and Thomas Martinetz. Molecular
In Dario Floreano, Jean-
evolution in time dependent environments.
Daniel Nicoud, and Francesco Mondada, editors, Advances in Artiﬁcial Life,
Proceedings of ECAL’99, Lausanne, Switzerland, Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 417–421, New York, 1999. Springer-Verlag.

[11] Martin Nilsson and Nigel Snoad.

Error thresholds on dynamic ﬁtness

landscapes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84:191–194, 2000.

[12] Claus O. Wilke, Christopher Ronnewinkel, and Thomas Martinetz. Dynamic
in press. (eprint

Phys. Rep.,

ﬁtness landscapes in molecular evolution.
physics/9912012).

[13] C. Ronnewinkel, C. O. Wilke, and T. Martinetz. Genetic algorithms in time-
dependent environments.
In L. Kallel, B. Naudts, and A. Rogers, editors,
Theoretical Aspects of Evolutionary Computing, New York, 2000. Springer-
Verlag.

[14] Martin Nilsson and Nigel Snoad. Quasispecies evolution on a ﬁtness landscape

with a ﬂuctuating peak. eprint physics/0004039, April 2000.

[15] J¨org Swetina and Peter Schuster. Self-replication with errors—A model for

polynucleotide replication. Biophys. Chem., 16:329–345, 1982.

[16] Lloyd Demetrius, Peter Schuster, and Karl Sigmund. Polynucleotide evolution

and branching processes. Bull. Math. Biol., 47:239–262, 1985.

[17] Ellen Baake and Wilfried Gabriel. Biological evolution through mutation,
selection and drift: An introductory review. Ann. Rev. Comp. Phys., 7, 1999.
in press.

[18] Jin Yoshimura and Vincent A. A. Jansen. Evolution and population dynamics

in stochastic environments. Res. Popul. Ecol., 38:165–182, 1996.

[19] Ira Leuth¨ausser. Statistical mechanics of Eigen’s evolution model. J. Stat.

Phys., 48:343–360, 1987.

[20] P. Tarazona. Error thresholds for molecular quasispecies as phase transitions:
From simple landscapes to spin-glass models. Phys. Rev. E, 45:6038–6050, 1992.

16

i  aigeak

dieeie
R=0

i		ie
R=0

Fig. 1. A landscape with an oscillating peak whose average height coincides with the
ﬁtness of all other sequences. In continuous time, the landscape becomes completely
ﬂat for R = 0. In discrete time, however, the population feels the geometric mean
of the ﬁtness landscape for R = 0, which has a hole at the position of the peak.

	0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2





e

e

a

a



e
d







e

e

a

a



e
d



i		ie
10 0
10 2
jj
10 4
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
dieeie=1
eaeR
10 6
10 4
10 8
eaeR

10 2

10 0

Fig. 2. Order parameter ms in a dynamic ﬁtness landscape with a single oscillating
peak in a continuous time system and a discrete time system. The solid lines have
been obtained from diagonalizing the full monodromy matrix X, the dotted lines
represent the approximation to ﬁrst order in R. We have used the ﬁtness landscape
deﬁned in Eq. (23), with a = 8/10, T = 30, and l = 10. The graph shows a snapshot
of the order parameter at phase φ = 0 of its limit cycle. The inset shows the same
data, but in a log-log plot. There, we have plotted the absolute value of ms for the
discrete-time system, because ms assumes a value slightly below 0 in that case.

17

1.0

00.20.40.60.8
00.20.40.60.8

0
1.0

0

A

B

0.6

(cid:30)
x0(cid:30)
0.4
x0(cid:30)(cid:30)
x1(cid:30)
x2(cid:30)
0.6
0.4
hae(cid:30)=T

0.2

0.2

1 2= 
x1(cid:30)
0.8
1.0
1 2= 
1.0

0.8

Fig. 3. Sequence concentrations and order parameter of the steady state versus the
relative phase φ/T . The upper plot (A) shows the predictions for R → 0 from
the three-concentration model [Eq. (31)], with T = 100, a = 0.4 and l = 10. The
line for x2(φ) is indistinguishable from the abscissa. For suﬃciently small mutation
rates and given Eq. (30), the full numeric solution is in perfect agreement with the
three-concentration model. For larger mutation rates, the main discrepancy arises
as a phase shift. For R = 10−4 (B), the prediction is still in good agreement with
the full numeric solution (shown as circles) if we phase-shift our prediction by an
amount of ∆φ/T = 0.088.

18

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0





e

e

a

a



e
d



=0:67=1:0
10 6
10 8

=2:0
10 4
eaeR

10 2

10 0

Fig. 4. Order parameter in a ﬁtness landscape similar to that of Fig. 2, but with
T = 100. The solid line stems from the full continuous time propagator, and the
dots have been calculated from the discrete approximation Eq. (33). The number of
discretization time steps n is deﬁned as T /∆t. The graph shows a snapshot of the
order parameter at phase φ = 0 of its limit cycle.

19

