0
0
0
2

 

v
o
N
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

physics/0011002

A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON CANCER *

Rafael D. Sorkin

Department of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244-1130, U.S.A.

internet address: sorkin@physics.syr.edu

Abstract

It is proposed that cancer results from the breakdown of universal con-
trol mechanisms which developed in mutual association as part of the
historical process that brought individual cells together into multi-cellular
communities. By systematically comparing the genomes of uni-celled with
multi-celled organisms, one might be able to identify the most promising
sites for intervention aimed at restoring the damaged control mechanisms
and thereby arresting the cancer.

More or less by deﬁnition, a cancerous cell is one that grows and reproduces uncon-

trollably. Of course, this characterization presupposes that the cell in question lives within

a multi-celled organism — a community of cells. The identical behavior would appear

perfectly normal for a cell existing in isolation.

But there is more to cancer than uncontrolled growth; for this behavior occurs in

association with another trait which — in itself — would not seem to be related to growth

at all: loss of diﬀerentiation. Why should a “histologic” characteristic like (lack of) dif-

ferentiation be correlated in this way with a “dynamical” characteristic like growth rate?

I believe that, far from being necessary for reasons of biochemistry or cellular dynamics,

this association is historical in origin.

Let us try to imagine the transformation that took place when the ﬁrst multicellular

organisms coalesced from collections of cells living in relative isolation from each other.

* The main idea exposed herein occurred to me some 20 years ago. I tried once to get
it published, but failed. After some hesitation, I am posting it here in the hope that the
historical viewpoint it utilizes may still be of some use to people trying to understand
cancer.

1

Aside from the mutual “solidarity” of its members, such a community of cells has the

advantage that diﬀerent cells can specialize in diﬀerent tasks and collectively accomplish

all these tasks more eﬀectively than any individual cell could by itself. In other words,

a division of labor becomes possible (specialized tissues, specialized organs, etc.) But

for such an arrangement to function, the relative multiplicities of the cells with diﬀerent

specializations must be suitable, which in practice means controlling their absolute numbers

as well. To participate in such a community, then, a cell needs (at least) the ability to

specialize itself for a range of functions and the ability to regulate its rate of reproduction

as needed: precisely the features whose absence typiﬁes the disease of cancer.

It seems clear that, in order to provide these twin abilities, new biological “machinery”

would have been required, either at the cellular level, or the supercellular level, or both.

Furthermore, since the required mechanisms must have arisen in association with one

another as part of the same historical process (a process presumably occupying an extended

period of time), it would be natural for them to overlap and share components to a great

extent. That is, there should have developed, in some measure, only a single (and universal)

mechanism responsible on one hand for regulating growth and on the other hand for

producing functional diﬀerentiation. Cancer would then result from the breakdown of this

mechanism. From this perspective, cancer would not be a disease like measles, caused

by the presence of some pathogen or some actively harmful abnormality, but a disease

of deﬁciency like scurvy, caused by the absence or the failure of some mechanism that is

present in normal cells (or normal tissue). It would be the consequent regression, on the

part of the tumor cells, to an earlier, pre-social form of behavior.

The focus for ﬁnding a cure (or for prevention) would thus shift from removing the

abnormality to restoring the missing or damaged machinery, and a strategy of trying to

destroy the defective cells would be less likely to succeed than one of providing them

with “replacement parts” for their damaged control mechanisms. How this could be done

would naturally depend on the nature of the defect, but one might imagine, for example,

delivering the replacement parts by means of retro-viruses or similar agents. With luck,

such replacement parts would not harm healthy tissue, and hence they (unlike traditional

chemotherapeutic agents) could be introduced in numbers suﬃcient to reach all the cells

they needed to reach.

2

Before it could be repaired, however, the relevant “machinery” would have to be

identiﬁed. Here a plausible concomitant of the postulated historical transition to communal

life becomes relevant, namely the universality of the control mechanisms that evolved then.

Assuming that the transition to multi-celled organisms was a prolonged process, one would

expect the control mechanisms that developed in its course to be shared by all, or almost all,

multi-celled forms. Conversely, uni-celled organisms should lack these control mechanisms.

To test this idea, one could compare the genomes of one-celled organisms with those of

multi-celled organisms susceptible to cancer, searching for genes, or sequences thereof, that

were universally present in the latter and absent in the former. These genes (or sequences)

would then be the ones responsible for the postulated control mechanisms. Moreover, the

oldest such genes (or sequences), would furnish better candidates than the newer ones,

assuming that age could be identiﬁed reliably. Any attempt to develop a “gene therapy”

or diagnostic test for cancer could then focus on the components of the genome identiﬁed

in this way.

Of course, it might be overly optimistic to expect that the postulated control mech-

anisms could be identiﬁed simply with some well delineated portion of a cell’s genome.

They might involve non-genetic components whose failure was not occasioned by genetic

mutations. On the other hand, one knows that genetic change is involved in cancer and

that, in particular, there is a close correlation between mutagenicity and carcinogenicity.

Given these facts, it does not seem too much to hope that the required “social skills”

are coded into universal portions of the genome which could be identiﬁed and catalogued.

Conversely, the failure to discover such portions would constitute evidence against the

historical explanation of cancer put forward in this article.

This research was partly supported by NSF grant PHY-9600620 and by a grant from

the Oﬃce of Research and Computing of Syracuse University.

3

