1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Recycling probability and dynamical
properties of germinal center reactions

Michael Meyer-Hermann1, Andreas Deutsch2 and Michal Or-Guil2

1Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
E-Mail: meyer-hermann@physik.tu-dresden.de

2Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme,
N¨othnitzer Str.38, D-01187 Dresden, Germany

Abstract: We introduce a new model for the dynamics of centroblasts and centrocytes in a
germinal center. The model reduces the germinal center reaction to the elements considered
as essential and embeds proliferation of centroblasts, point mutations of the corresponding
antibody types represented in a shape space, diﬀerentiation to centrocytes, selection with
respect to initial antigens, diﬀerentiation of positively selected centrocytes to plasma or
memory cells and recycling of centrocytes to centroblasts. We use exclusively parameters
with a direct biological interpretation such that, once determined by experimental data,
the model gains predictive power. Based on the experiment of Han et al. (1995b) we predict
that a high rate of recycling of centrocytes to centroblasts is necessary for the germinal
center reaction to work reliably. Furthermore, we ﬁnd a delayed start of the production
of plasma and memory cells with respect to the start of point mutations, which turns
to be necessary for the optimization process during the germinal center reaction. The
dependence of the germinal center reaction on the recycling probability is analyzed.

1

1 Introduction

Germinal centers (GCs) are essential elements of the humoral immune response (for a
review see MacLennan, 1994). In a primary immunization some B-cells respond to the
presented antigen and are activated. These active cells migrate to follicular dendritic
cells (FDCs) present in lymphoid tissues. Unprocessed fragments of the antigen, so called
epitopes, are expressed on the FDCs. In the milieu of the FDCs the B-cells are in a phase of
intense proliferation and show the essential features of B-blasts such that they are denoted
as centroblasts. These proliferating centroblasts together with the FDCs develop to a GC.
This morphological development is initiated through an unidentiﬁed diﬀerentiation sig-
nal after about three days. The resulting GC is characterized by two zones (Nossal, 1991):
the dark zone ﬁlled with continuously proliferating and mutating centroblasts and the light
zone containing the FDCs and centrocytes. The latter are generated from the centroblasts
(Liu et al., 1991), which are available in great diversity (Weigert et al., 1970) because of
a very high mutation rate (Nossal, 1991; Berek & Milstein, 1987).
In contrast to cen-
troblasts the centrocytes express antibodies of cell speciﬁc types on their surface. In this
way they are able to undergo a speciﬁc selection process through the interaction with the
epitopes presented on the FDCs in the light zone. The diversity of the proliferating and
mutating centroblasts together with the speciﬁty of the selection process in the light zone
allow an optimization of the aﬃnity between the antibodies and the epitopes. This aﬃnity
maturation in the GC leads to a dominant population of cells with high aﬃnity of the
corresponding antibodies to the epitopes within 7-8 days after immunization (Jacob et al.,
1993).

All centrocytes undergo apoptosis if they are not positively selected in an appropriate
range of time. They are rescued from apoptosis (Liu et al., 1989; Lindhout et al., 1993;
Lindhout et al., 1995; Choe & Choi, 1998) if they are able to bind to the antigen on the
FDCs and to interact successfully with T-helper cells present in the external region of the
light zone. Even antigen independent signals may be required for the centrocytes to survive
(Fischer et al., 1998). Successfully selected centrocytes receive a diﬀerentiation signal which
determines their fate. They may diﬀerentiate into memory cells that are important in the
case of a second immunization. Alternatively they diﬀerentiate to antibody producing
plasma cells. These are intensifying the immune response in two manners: the number
of antibodies increases and their speciﬁty with respect to the direct unspeciﬁc immune
response without GC reaction is optimized. In both cases the corresponding cell is leaving
the GC environment.

A third possibility exists for the positively selected centrocytes: they may be recycled to
centroblasts and reenter the highly proliferating and mutating stage of development in the
dark zone (Kepler & Perelson, 1993). This recycling hypothesis has been neither directly
checked experimentally (for an indirect check see Han et al., 1995b) nor – if true – the
probability of recycling is known. It would be of great interest to know about the necessity
of a centrocyte recycling process for the aﬃnity maturation. The most evident argument to
support the recycling hypothesis is based on the occurence of multi-step somatic hypermu-
tations in the GC reaction. Under the assumption of random hypermutations, recycling of
already mutated cells to fast proliferating centroblasts appears to be a necessary process.

2

In this paper we estimate how large the recycling probability should be, i.e. which
proportion of the positively selected centrocytes should be recycled to get a reliable GC
reaction. For this purpose we introduce a simpliﬁed model of the GC dynamics based on
a functional view on it. The model diﬀers from others (Oprea & Perelson, 1996; Oprea &
Perelson, 1997; Rundell et al., 1998) by omitting some details of the GC reaction which we
consider as unnecessary to understand the obligatory occurence of the recycling procedure.
On the other hand compared to the model introduced in (Kesmir & de Boer, 1999) we
added a formalism to treat somatic hypermutation in a shape space, which seems to be
essential to understand the process of aﬃnity maturation. A very important diﬀerence to
related models is that we embed the experiment (Han et al., 1995b) for the ﬁrst time. This
experiment provides an indirect evidence for the existence of the recycling process and we
will interpret it in a quantitative way in order to extract information on the recycling
probability from it. We use exclusively parameters with a direct biological interpretation
to ensure the predictive power of the model.

In the next section we will deﬁne the shape space in which the cell population dynam-
ics takes place and the corresponding dynamical quantities and parameters including their
dynamical interdependence. All parameters introduced in the model are determined by
experimental observations. The third section is dedicated to the presentation and inter-
pretation of the behaviour of the model in comparison with experimental GC reactions.
We will analyze the stability of our results to verify the notion of a prediction. Finally we
investigate the dependence of some characteristics of the germinal center reaction on the
variation of the recycling probability and give some concluding remarks.

2 Deﬁnition of the model

2.1 Shape space and aﬃnity space

Before deﬁning a model for the GC dynamics it is necessary to specify the space in which
the dynamics takes place. As we want to represent centroblasts corresponding to diﬀerent
types of antibodies we use the already known shape space concept (Perelson & Oster,
1979) in the following form: The shape space is taken as a D-dimensional lattice of discrete
equidistant points, each of them representing one speciﬁc type of antibody. Thus the shape
space becomes a phenotype space, i.e. it is not primarily a representation of genetic codes
but of the resulting features due to speciﬁc genetic codes.

Nevertheless, we want to represent point mutations deﬁned in an unknown genotype
space in the shape space. To this end we are compelled to formulate the action of a point
mutation in the shape space:
A point mutation of a given antibody is represented in the phenotypical shape space by a
jump to one of the nearest neighbor points.
This assumption is not very spectacular as it only requires that a point mutation does
not lead to a random jump of the antibody phenotype, i.e. that conformation, electrical
properties, etc. are not dramatically changed. Surely, the mutation of some key base pairs
may exist leading to fundamental changes of the encoded antibody features. However,

3

these exceptions will not alter the dynamics of the GC until the number of such key base
pairs remains small with respect to the number of smooth mutation points.

As the number of possible antibody types is limited the size of the shape space is
ﬁnite. In order to get an idea of how to interpret the dimensions of the shape space, one
may associate a phenotypical feature of the antibody to each dimension such that there
exists a correspondence between the number of dimensions and the number of independent
properties of the antibodies relevant for its aﬃnity to antigens.

A central quantity is the aﬃnity of a given antibody and an antigen epitope. Having
a representation of antibodies in the shape space, a counterpart for antigens is necessary.
We represent an antigen on the B-cell shape space at the position of the B-cell with highest
aﬃnity to the antigen, i.e. at the position of an antibody with optimal complementarity to
the antigen. In this way we are able to deﬁne an antigen distribution on the shape space,
where we denote the points of best aﬃnity to an antigen with φ∗. In this context it should
be emphasized that the number of possible antibodies is ﬁnite, whereas the diversity of
antigens is principally unbounded. On the other hand the immune system of an organism,
e.g. human or mouse, is able to respond to almost all antigens such that it is reasonable
to expect a non-vanishing aﬃnity of an optimal antibody to an arbitrary antigen. In this
sense, we expect that for all possible antigens there exists at least one antibody type of
optimal complementarity, i.e. with maximum aﬃnity to it.

Starting from these assumptions we have reached a representation of antibodies and
antigens in a shape space, which has the property of aﬃnity neighborhood, i.e. that neighbor
points in the shape space have comparable aﬃnity to a given antigen. This property is
a direct consequence of the deﬁnition of mutations in the shape space. Starting from
a non-directed mutation as base for aﬃnity maturation in GCs, we estimate an aﬃnity
neighborhood as a necessary property of the underlying shape space. An initial B-cell with
a particular aﬃnity to a certain antigen must have the possibility of successively optimizing
the aﬃnity, i.e. of stepwise climbing an aﬃnity hill. If no aﬃnity neighborhood would exist,
i.e. if there was a random aﬃnity distribution on the shape space, each mutation would
lead to a random jump in the aﬃnity. An optimization of the aﬃnity to the antigen may
occur accidentally in this scenario, but should be a very rare event.

The aﬃnity neighborhood allows for the deﬁnition of an aﬃnity weight function which
determines the aﬃnity of antigen and antibody in dependence of their distance in the
shape space. We assume this weight function a(φ, φ∗) to apply equally well in all regions
of the shape space which corresponds to a homogeneous aﬃnity distribution over the shape
space, and to be of exponential form:

a(φ, φ∗) = exp

−

||φ − φ∗||η
Γη

!

 

(1)

where Γ is the width of the aﬃnity weight function and || · || denotes the Euclidean metric.
The question remains with which exponent η the distance enters the exponential weight
function and it will be argued that η = 2 is a reasonable value (see Fig. 1).

4

2.2 Formulation of the dynamics

Having a shape space at hand it is possible to deﬁne distributions B(φ), C(φ) and A(φ∗) of
centroblasts, of centrocytes and of the presented antigen epitopes on the shape space. We
focus on the centroblast distribution B and analyze its dynamical behavior in the diﬀerent
phases of the GC reaction.

There were several attempts to divide the germinal center reaction in diﬀerent working
phases. From the point of view of our model we are led to a new functional phase distinction
of the GC reaction. Our three-phase description of the GC reaction is in accordance with
most of the models established so far (see e.g. MacLennan, 1994; Liu et al., 1991; Kelsoe,
1996) but is in contradiction to the time scales found in (Camacho et al., 1998), which
diﬀer strongly.

The ﬁrst phase is the already mentioned phase of fast proliferation of a low number
of seeder cells in the environment of FDCs. In this phase it is likely that somatic hyper-
mutation is not taking place to a relevant amount (Han et al., 1995b; Jacob et al., 1993;
McHeyzer-Williams et al., 1993; Pascual et al., 1994b) such that it may be understood as
an enlargement phase of the cell pool available for the following process of aﬃnity matu-
ration. The corresponding dynamical behavior of the centroblast distribution is described
as

(φ) = pB(φ)

for

t − t0 < ∆t1

,

(2)

dB
dt

where p denotes the proliferation rate and t0 is the time of ﬁrst immunization. This phase
lasts ∆t1 = 3 days and is well established by experiment (Liu et al., 1991).

After three days the GC gets its morphological form, i.e. dark and light zone emerge.
In the dark zone the centroblasts continue to proliferate but additionally somatic hyper-
mutations are broadening the initial centroblast distribution on the shape space. At the
same time the selection process operates in the light zone and the selected centrocytes are
either recycled to centroblasts or diﬀerentiate to plasma and memory cells. The dynamical
behavior of the centroblast distribution in the shape space is now described by

dB
dt

(φ) = (p − 2pm − g)B(φ) +

B(φ + ∆φ)

pm
D

X||∆φ||=1
C(φ)A(φ∗) a0 a(φ, φ∗)

,

+(1 − q)

Xφ∗

(3)

for t − t0 ≥ ∆t1. Here g is the rate of diﬀerentiation to centrocytes. m is the mutation
probability, a0 the probability of an optimal centrocyte to be positively selected, q the
probability of diﬀerentiation to plasma and memory cells for positively selected centrocytes,
and D the dimension of the underlying shape space. The diﬀerent contributions to Eq. (3)
are discussed in detail below. Note that this equation does not include eventual ﬁnite size
eﬀects due to small populations.

It is not clear a priori, if diﬀerentiation into antibody producing plasma and memory
cells is triggered already in this second phase. To allow a start of the output cell production
delayed by the space of time ∆t2 we divide the second phase into two subphases which

5

diﬀer in the output probability q:

q = 0 for 0 ≤ t − ∆t1 < ∆t2
q > 0 for 0 ≤ t − ∆t2 < ∆t3

.

The time delay ∆t2 will be ﬁxed by experimental data (see Sec. 2.8). The third phase is
the phase of the fully working GC lasting for the remaining GC life-time, which is about
∆t3 = 21 − 3 − ∆t2/day days (Choe & Choi, 1998; Kelsoe, 1996; Jacob et al., 1991). Then,
only a few proliferating B-blasts remain in the environment of the FDCs (Liu et al., 1991).

Proliferation

During the whole GC reaction a fast proliferation of B-cells takes place. After the activation
of B-cells by an interaction with an antigen, these move to FDCs and undergo a fast
proliferation phase in their environment (Liu et al., 1991; Hanna, 1964; Zhang et al., 1988;
Grouard et al., 1995). It is likely that the fast proliferation is triggered by the dendritic
cells (Dubois et al., 1999). After about three days (Liu et al., 1991) the GC starts to
develop its characteristic light and dark zone (Camacho et al., 1998). In the latter one still
fast proliferation of centroblasts occurs. The extremely high rate of proliferation could be
determined to be (Liu et al., 1991; Zhang et al., 1988)

(4)

(5)

p
ln(2)

≈

1
6 h

,

a result known already for a long time (Hanna, 1964). The population of centroblasts at
φ grows exponentially, which is represented by the term pB(φ) in Eq. (2) and Eq. (3).

Mutation

It is likely that somatic hypermutation does not occur in the ﬁrst phase of the GC reaction
(Han et al., 1995b; Jacob et al., 1993; McHeyzer-Williams et al., 1993; Pascual et al.,
1994b). On the other hand the growth of the centroblast population is reduced by possible
mutations from state φ to its neighbors φ + ∆φ, where ||∆φ|| = 1. In a continuous space
this corresponds to a diﬀusion process as used in (Perelson & Wiegel, 1999) to represent
mutation. Each pair of cells produced by proliferation will populate a neighbor state with
a probablilty of m. This mutation probability turns out to take extremely high values
of m ≈ 1/2 (Nossal, 1991; Berek & Milstein, 1987), which corresponds to a factor 107
larger probability compared to mutations outside the GCs (Janeway & Travers, 1997).
We want to point out that here only point mutations of phenotypical relevance are taken
into account. As a consequence the population growth by proliferation is reduced by the
important amount 2pm, which results in an eﬀective proliferation rate at φ of p(1 − 2m).
One observes that for m = 1/2 the two ﬁrst terms in Eq. (3) cancel. This corresponds to
the situation that in each centroblast replication one new cell remains in the old state and
the second new cell mutates to a neighbor state such that the total number of cells in state
φ remains unaltered.

6

In the same way as mutation depopulates the state φ in the shape space and populates
its neighbors, φ is populated by its neighbors. This gives rise to the non-diagonal term in
Eq. (3). Each neighbor of φ mutates with the same rate 2pm from φ + ∆φ to one of its
2D neighbors. Only the mutation from φ + ∆φ to the particular neighbor φ enhances the
population of centroblasts at φ such that the rate is weighted by the inverse number of
neighbors 1/(2D) and is summed over all possible neighbors of φ.

Selection, recycling and cell production

After the establishment of the light and dark zones in the GC the diﬀerentiation of cen-
troblasts to antibody presenting centrocytes is triggered to allow a selection process in the
light zone. The centroblasts in the shape space state φ are diminished with the rate of
diﬀerentiation g, leading to the term −gB(φ) in Eq. (3). The centrocyte population C(φ)
of type φ is enhanced simultaneouly by the same amount of cells:

C(φ) = +gB(φ)

.

(6)

The centrocytes move to the light zone where they undergo a selection process. Their
further development is splitted three-fold. The non-selected centrocytes die through apop-
It is known for a long time that the
tosis and are eliminated from the GC dynamics.
centrocytes undergoing apoptosis were in cell cycle a few hours ago (Fliedner, 1967) such
that it is likely that they diﬀerentiated from the centroblasts. On the other hand apoptosis
takes place in the light zone (Hardie et al., 1993) where centroblasts are not present in
high density. The selected centrocytes are emitted from the GC with probability q and
diﬀerentiate either to antibody producing plasma cells or to memory cells. The model does
not distinguish between plasma and memory cells. Only their sum is taken into account
and is denoted by output cells O(φ). Nevertheless, the dynamics of both types of output
cells may be diﬀerent (Choe & Choi, 1998). Also, the degree of aﬃnity maturation diﬀers
(Smith et al., 1997). In addition, we do not consider any further proliferation of output
cells in or outside of the GC, which may be important for a quantitative comparison with
experimental measurements.

Alternatively the selected centrocytes are recycled to become centroblasts and to reenter
the proliferation process in the dark zone. This happens with probablility 1 − q and
contributes to the centroblast distribution, corresponding to the last term in Eq. (3).

We want to emphasize that we do not resolve the time course of the selection process,
which is regarded to be fast with respect to the centroblast proliferation time scale. This
procedure is justiﬁed by a minimal duration of a typical selection process of 1 − 2 hours
(van Eijk & de Groot, 1999), which is about one fourth of the proliferation time scale.
Nevertheless, one should be aware of possible implications due to the fact that the selection
process does not occur instantaneously. We eﬀectively enclose the selection time in the
parameter g, which in this way becomes a measure of a complete selection cycle including
the diﬀerentiation to centrocytes, a ﬁrst selection at the FDCs, a second selection at T-
helper cells and ﬁnally the recycling process. This has two consequences for the model:
The number of selectable centrocytes for each shape space state φ is given at every time by
Eq. (6), i.e. the number of centrocytes just being in the selection phase. Furthermore, the

7

details of the multi-step selection process (Lindhout et al., 1997) are omitted. The whole
selection process is modeled by a sum over the shape space of the antigen distribution
presented on the FDCs weighted by the aﬃnity function Eq. (1).
In other words the
centrocytes gB(φ) are selected if an antigen is close enough in the shape space. The
meaning of close enough is determined by the width of the aﬃnity function and by the
probability a0 of a positive selection for an optimal centrocyte with respect to one presented
antigen.

One should be aware that the probability a0 is not necessarily equal to one, as centro-
cytes are in the state of activated apoptosis (Cohen et al., 1992) such that their life time is
ﬁnite and they have to be selected within this life time to be rescued from apoptosis. This
maximum selection probability is determined by the relation of the centrocyte life time of
about 10 h (Liu et al., 1989, 1994) and the duration of the selection process of 1 − 2 h (van
Eijk & de Groot, 1999). A rough estimate using two Gaussian distributions with reason-
able widths for the life time and the selection time peaked at 10 h and 1.5 h respectively
leads to a0 ≈ 0.95. Thus, if a GC contains only centrocytes of optimal complementarity
to a presented antigen, still about 5% of them will undergo apoptosis.

Concluding the last remarks we are led to a selection driven by the convolution term

C(φ)A(φ∗) a0 a(φ, φ∗)

,

Xφ∗

where the number of selectable centrocytes is given by Eq. (6) and A(φ∗) represents the dis-
tribution of antigens on the shape space. This selection term contributes with probability
q to the production of plasma and memory cells

(φ) = q

C(φ)A(φ∗) a0 a(φ, φ∗)

.

dO
dt

Xφ∗

All selected centrocytes not emitted from the GC are recycled and in this way enhance the
centroblast population giving rise to the last term in Eq. (3).

(7)

(8)

2.3

Initial conditions

Antigen distribution

Throughout the paper the antigen distribution will be unequal to zero at exactly one point
in the shape space:

A(φ∗) = A(φ0) = δ(φ∗ − φ0)

,

(9)

where δ(·) is one for its argument equal to zero and zero otherwise. Consequentially, the
sum in the convolution term in Eq. (3) is reduced to one contribution. This means that
we consider only one type of antigen epitope to be present in the GC. What seems to be a
restriction at ﬁrst sight turns out to be a premise without any loss of generality. In view
of about 1011 for humans (Berek & Milstein, 1988) possible states in the naive repertoire
two randomly chosen antigen epitopes will not be in direct neighborhood of each others
in the shape space. Both antigen epitopes will have an inﬂuence on each other during

8

the GC reaction when centroblasts corresponding to one of the antigen epitopes have a
non-negligible aﬃnity to the other epitope. In the language of shape space this situation
corresponds to an overlap of two spheres centered at both antigen epitopes. The radius of
these spheres is determined by the maximum number of mutations which may occur during
a GC reaction. This number will rarely exceed 9 (K¨uppers et al., 1993; Wedemayer et al.,
1997) such that in a 4-dimensional shape space (a more detailed discussion of the shape
space dimension follows in the next section) one sphere of this kind covers about 10−8 of
the space. An overlap turns out to be improbable, as one needs an unreasonable large
number of 108 antigen epitopes to get an important probability for a mutual inﬂuence.
Therefore we consider one-antigen epitope GC reactions only. A multiple-antigen or a
multiple-antigen epitope GC reaction has to be considered as sum of one-antigen epitope
GCs.

There exist hints that the amount of presented antigens is diminished during a GC
reaction (Tew & Mandel, 1979). Since this number is only halved during 30 days (Tew
& Mandel, 1979; Oprea et al., 2000) we do not expect an important recoil eﬀect on the
selection probability, which would become time dependent otherwise. Furthermore, we
think that this antigen diminution is too weak to be responsible for the vanishing cell
population in GCs after about 3-4 weeks. Anyhow, we aim to show that the vanishing
population may occur solely due to the dynamics of the system, without the inclusion of
any antigen distribution dynamics.

Initial B-cell distribution

The number of seeder cells

The B-cells which moved to FDCs are in a fast proliferation phase.
In this ﬁrst phase
of GC development the cell population grows exponentially to reach about 104 cells after
three days. One may ask how many seeder cells are necessary and suﬃcient to give rise to
this large cell population in such a short space of time. One ﬁnds experimentally that the
follicular response is of oligoclonal character (Liu et al., 1991; Jacob et al., 1991; K¨uppers
et al., 1993; Kroese et al., 1987) and the number of seeder cells is estimated between two
and six. This result is in accordance with the proliferation rate of ln(2)/(6 h) cited above.
φ B(φ, t = 0) determines the initial B-cell distribution
B(φ) in our model. Corresponding to the experimental results cited above, we start with
the reasonable number of three seeder cells for the follicular response to an immunization
with a speciﬁc antigen. These cells are chosen randomly on the shape space within a sphere
of radius R0 around the presented antigen. Due to the assumed aﬃnity neighborhood this
reﬂects a threshold aﬃnity of antigen and activated initial B-cells. This was already found
experimentally (Agarwal et al., 1998): The activation of a B-cell by an antigen is necessarily
connected with a minimum aﬃnity of the corresponding epitopes and antibodies. The
radius of the sphere may be determined by the maximum number of mutations occuring
during the process of aﬃnity maturation in GCs:

P

which is found to be 8 or 9 (K¨uppers et al., 1993; Wedemayer et al., 1997). In this picture,
B-cells with an aﬃnity above threshold are activated by a speciﬁc antigen, giving rise to

R0 = Nmax

,

(10)

9

a fast immune response with antibodies of low but non-vanishing aﬃnity. The germinal
center reaction has to be understood as an optimization process for these initially activated
B-cells leading to a second slower primary immune response of high speciﬁty.

2.4 Width of aﬃnity function

Due to the assumption of aﬃnity neighborhood in the shape space the aﬃnity function
may be chosen according to Eq. (1). The width Γ has to be consistent with the aﬃnity
enhancement reached during a GC optimization process. Let the factor of aﬃnity enhance-
ment be 10ξ and the number of corresponding somatic hypermutations be N. Then from
Eq. (1) we get

N

Γ =

(ξ ln(10))

.

1
η

(11)

Typical numbers of somatic hypermutations are N = 6 (K¨uppers et al., 1993) correspond-
ing to an aﬃnity enhancement of 100 (ξ = 2) (Janeway & Travers, 1997), while a large
number of mutations is considered to be N = 8 (K¨uppers et al., 1993) corresponding to
a high factor of aﬃnity enhancement of 2000 (ξ = 3.3) (Janeway & Travers, 1997). A
huge aﬃnity enhancement by a factor of 30000 (ξ = 4.5) is reached with N = 9 mutations
(Wedemayer et al., 1997). As can be seen in Fig. 1, these values for the aﬃnity enhancement
with growing number of somatic hypermutations are consistent with a Gaussian aﬃnity
function (η = 2) having a width of Γ ≈ 2.8. It should be mentioned that a consistent
value for the width of the aﬃnity function can not be obtained for other integer values of
η. But one should be aware that the used aﬃnity enhancements are very rough estimates
and thus our result should be understood as a ﬁrst guess – even if the compatability with
the experimental data is convincing.

2.5 Shape space dimension

The shape space dimension D enters the model through the mutation term in Eq. (3)
and has to be chosen appropriately to our model. We already mentioned that somatic
hypermutation is likely to occur randomly (Weigert et al., 1970; Radmacher et al., 1998),
i.e. that the direction of mutation in the shape space is not governed by the position of
the antigen. The term describing mutation in Eq. (3) is in analogy to a diﬀusion term in
a continuous space as used in (Perelson & Wiegel, 1999). Let us assume for a moment
that the development of the GC reaction is governed by this diﬀusion process and let the
number of maximum point mutations be Nmax. Then the diﬀusion process takes place in
a sphere around a seeder cell of radius Nmax in the shape space. In order to reach the
position of the antigen with at least one centroblast, all positions in this sphere have to
be reached by diﬀusion. This means that the total number of centroblasts Nc present in
the GC 3 days after immunization, i.e. when the selection is triggered, should be of the
order of magnitude of the number of points in the sphere. The number of points in the
sphere grows exponentially with the dimension of the shape space. Thus, for Nmax = 8

10

Figure 1: The width of the Gaussian aﬃnity function as a function of the factor of aﬃnity en-
hancement for diﬀerent numbers of somatic hypermutations. Vertical lines denote the positions
of the used experimental values of aﬃnity enhancement. One can observe that consistently for
all three values the resulting width becomes approximately 2.8.

and Nc = 12000 it follows that the shape space dimension should be 4. From the point of
view of a pure diﬀusion process this is an upper bound for the shape space dimension.

Naturally, the above statement does not include the proliferation and the selection rate
and of the recycling probability. The eﬀective number of centroblasts available to reach
the antigen may become larger than the 12000 cells assumed above through proliferation
and recycling. As we want to describe a decreasing population in the long term behaviour
without further assumptions, the eﬀective rate of production of additional centroblasts
during the GC reaction cannot exceed some small value, since the centroblast population
would explode otherwise for large times. So it seems unlikely that the shape space dimen-
sion appropriate for our model is substantially larger than 4. We will start with D = 4 and
check the dependence of our results for the dimensions 5 and 6. We want to remind that
we are dealing with a phenotype space in this model and that a genotype space probably
has a substantially higher dimension.

2.6 Long term behaviour

The parameter g was introduced in the model as the rate of diﬀerentiation from centroblasts
in the dark zone to antibody presenting centrocytes ready to undergo a selection process.
As we do not consider the centrocyte dynamics during the multi-step selection process

11

(Lindhout et al., 1997), this parameter eﬀectively describes the total time of the selection
procedure including the diﬀerentiation mentioned above, the selection at the FDCs and
with T-helper cells and the recycling to centroblasts. Only those cells having successfully
ﬁnished this program are contributing to the centroblast population described in Eq. (3).
Thus, being an eﬀective measure of the velocity of the selection process, we are able to
give an upper bound for it. Solely the inhibition of apoptosis during the selection process
at FDC and with T-helper cells takes at least 1-2 hours (Lindhout et al., 1995; van Eijk
& de Groot, 1999). This gives us an upper bound for the rate g of

g
ln(2)

<

1
2 h

.

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Nevertheless, this upper bound is not suﬃcient to ﬁx g. As g governs the whole reaction
velocity it will play a crucial role for the ﬁnal state 21 days after immunization. As we
know that at the end of the GC reaction only a few cells remain in the environment of the
FDCs (Liu et al., 1991; Kelsoe, 1996), the parameter g will be adjusted to get exactly this
result.

Mathematically, this requirement has the form of a long term condition. Let us look
for an equilibrium condition at the point φ0 representing the antibody type of optimal
complementarity to a presented antigen:

dB
dt

(φ = φ0, t) = 0 .

Then, the selection term in Eq. (3) becomes simply (1 − q)ga0B(φ0, t) and for a non-
vanishing centroblast distribution at φ0 we get

ε ≡ p − 2pm − g +

+ (1 − q)ga0 = 0 ,

pmβ
D

where we introduced ε as a measure for the equilibrium condition to be fulﬁlled and

β(t) =

||∆φ||=1 B(φ0 + ∆φ, t)
B(φ0, t)

P

.

β(t) is a measure of the sharpness of the centroblast distribution in the shape space around
the antigen position φ0. It becomes constant when the selection process starting at day
3 after immunization has reached a more quiet phase. This phase is reached when the
centroblasts at the position of the antigen dominate, which according to experiments is
already the case 8 days after immunization (Jacob et al., 1993). This is conﬁrmed in our
model (see Fig. 5).

Thus, at large times β can already be considered as constant in the equilibrium condi-
tion Eq. (14) and the same applies to ε. In this stage of GC development the centroblast
population at φ0 has a pure exponential form

B(φ0, t) = eεt

.

(16)

The sign of ε determines whether the centroblasts population explodes (ε > 0) or dies out
(ε < 0). As we know about the ﬁnite life times of GCs, ε should adopt values slightly
smaller than zero.

12

2.7 Recycling probability

The recycling probability 1 − q determines the fate of the positively selected centrocytes
in the light zone. The apoptosis was inhibited for these cells and they may either become
plasma or memory cells or return to the dark zone to reenter the fast proliferation phase.
This recycling hypothesis (Kepler & Perelson, 1993) has been intensively discussed and
the main position is that random somatic hypermutation – and it is likely that somatic
hypermutation occurs randomly (Weigert et al., 1970; Radmacher et al., 1998), i.e. that
the direction of mutation in the shape space does not depend on the position of the antigen
– does not lead to a sustained optimization of aﬃnity in a one-pass GC reaction (Oprea
et al., 2000). To reach a speciﬁc position in the shape space a multi-step optimization
and veriﬁcation process is required to avoid an arbitrary aimless walk through this high
dimensional space.

To propose a new sight on this question we consider the most convincing experimental
evidence for the existence of such a recycling process (Han et al., 1995b). A GC reaction
was initiated in mice with one antigen. 9 days after immunization, i.e. in a stage of the
reaction in which the good cells already dominate (Jacob et al., 1993), a second diﬀerent,
but related antigen was injected. This change of the reaction conditions in the course
of the GC reaction leads to some very interesting observations. The rate of apoptosis of
centrocytes is enhanced by a factor of about ν ≈ 5 compared to the non-disturbed GC
reaction. This can be explained by the fact that the antigen distribution in the shape space
was changed such that most of the cells present after 9 days may ﬁt to the ﬁrst antigen
but not to the second one. The probability of a positive selection is diminished and the
inhibition of apoptosis does not occur to the same extent as before. On the other hand the
total cell population in the GC vanishes with a ω ≈ 8-fold higher velocity with respect to
the unperturbed GC reaction. This is very diﬃcult to explain without assuming recycling
to exist: As we know that the centrocytes – only very small numbers of centroblasts –
undergo apoptosis if not rescued in time, the change of the apoptosis rate is of relevance
only for the centrocyte population. The faster reduction of the whole GC cellularity can
not be explained by the enhanced apoptosis rate, if there exists no recoil eﬀect of the
centrocyte apoptosis to the centroblast population. This is an indirect conﬁrmation of the
recycling hypothesis.

We want to consider this argument in a more quantitative way by translating this ex-
periment into the language of our model. As we know from our consideration in Section
2.6 at day 9 after immunization the selection process is already completed and the cen-
troblast population at the antigen position φ = φ0 in the shape space behaves according
to Eq. (16). But due to the modiﬁcation of the antigen distribution at day 9 after immu-
nization the GC reaction returns back to its dynamical selection phase. Thus, until day 9
the centroblast population B1(φ, t) evolves with respect to the antigen distribution A1(φ∗)
as in Eq. (9) and after day 9 two GC developments have to be compared: One continues
its usual reaction as before. The second B2(φ, t) starts with the distribution B1(φ, t = 9 d)
and evolves with respect to the new antigen distribution

A2(φ∗) =

δ(φ∗ − φ0) +

δ(φ∗ − (φ0 + ∆φ∗))

,

(17)

1
2

1
2

13

where ∆φ∗ denotes the shift of the additional second antigen with respect to the ﬁrst one.
The factor 1/2 is required for normalization as the antigen distribution A(φ∗) has to be
understood as a relative distribution.

Now we are able to calculate the apoptosis rate in both scenarios for the cells of some
ﬁxed but arbitrary type φ. The number of centrocytes available for selection at every
moment is gB(φ). The apoptosis rate is given by this number reduced by the selected cells





(cid:19)

.

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

Vi(φ) = gB(φ)

1 − a0

Ai(φ∗)a(φ − φ∗)

,





Xφ∗

where i enumerates the two scenarios. For the original GC reaction this becomes

V1(φ) = gB(φ) (1 − a0a(φ − φ0))

,

while in the GC with the new antigen distribution we ﬁnd

V2(φ) = gB(φ)

1 −

a0a(φ − φ0) (1 + α(φ))

,

1
2

(cid:18)

where we have shifted φ∗ in the second term of Eq. (17) and introduced the ratio

valid for each point φ separately. The factor ν of the apoptosis enhancement found in the
experiment above is then given by the ratio of both apoptosis rates

α(φ) =

a(φ − φ0 + ∆φ∗)
a(φ − φ0)

ν =

=

V2
V1

1 − 1

2a0a(φ − φ0) (1 + α(φ))

1 − a0a(φ − φ0)

On the other hand, this enhancement of apoptosis leads to a faster population reduction
by a factor ω, which in our model is given by the ratio of the changes of the cell distributions
over the shape space at the time of the presentation of the new antigen. According to
Eq. (3) and using the new antigen distribution A2 this ratio is given by

−1

dB1
dB2
dt #
dt "
p − 2pm − g + pm

(φ, t = 9 d)

ω =

=

D β(φ) + (1 − q)ga0a(φ − φ0) 1

2 (1 + α(φ))

p − 2pm − g + pm

D β(φ) + (1 − q)ga0a(φ − φ0)

,

(23)

where the cell distributions B(φ, t = 9 d) cancel as they are equal in both scenarios for
t = 9 d.

Taking the results for ν (Eq. (22)) and for ω (Eq. (23)) at the shape space point of the
primary antigen φ = φ0 the aﬃnity function becomes equal to one. β is already a constant
for t = 9 d such that we may eliminate 1 + α(φ0) from both equations to get

ν − 1
ω − 1

=

p − 2pm − g + pm

D β(φ0) + (1 − q)ga0

(1 − q)g(a0 − 1)

(24)

14

or for the recycling probability

1 − q = −

p − 2pm − g + pm

D β(φ0)

g

a0 + (1 − a0) ν−1
ω−1

.

h

i

(25)

This relation allows us to ﬁx the parameter q and in this way to give a quantitative
prediction for the recycling probability for selected centrocytes to reenter the dark zone
and to continue proliferation. Our model requires the value given by Eq. (25) in order to
be consistent with the experiment of Han et al., (1995b).

2.8 Output dynamics

The production of plasma and memory cells optimized with respect to the presented antigen
in the course of the GC reaction is governed by Eq. (8). According to our discussion of
diﬀerent phases of the GC reaction in Sec. 2.2, the question when the whole production
of output cells starts is not necessarily correlated with the moment of the beginning of
the mutation and selection process about 3 days after immunization. There may occur a
time delay of the output production in relation to the selection process. This possibility is
encountered by comparing the dynamics of the number of produced output cells with the
number predicted in the experiment (Han et al., 1995a). The number of output cells of high
aﬃnity to the presented antigen φ0 is compared at day 6 and day 12 after immunization
and their relation is found to be approximately

vO ≡

12d
0d dt O(φ0)
6d
0d dt O(φ0)
R

≈ 6

.

(26)

R

As output cells are already present at day 6 after immunization, the starting point of
output cell production has to fulﬁll 0 h < ∆t2 < 72 h (∆t2 denotes the time window
between the start of mutation and selection and the start of output cell production, see
Sec. 2.2). It is intuitively clear that for large ∆t2 the velocity of output cell production vO
will be enhanced, for the cell population of the GC will already be peaked at the position
of the antigen in the shape space. Thus, we are able to adjust ∆t2 to get the correct output
cell dynamics.

3 Results and Predictions

Starting from a randomly chosen antigen epitope and – following the oligoclonal character
of the B-cell population of a GC – three randomly chosen activated B-cells in a sphere of
radius R0 according to Eq. (10), we let the GC reaction develop as described by Eq. (2)
and Eq. (3), where the diﬀerent phases (see Sec. 2.2) of the GC reaction are respected. The
parameters are taken from experimental data as summarized in Tab. 1. The parameters g,
1−q and ∆t2, describing the diﬀerentiation rate of centroblasts to centrocytes, the recycling
probability for the selected centrocytes and the time delay for the production of output
cells, respectively, are adjusted in interaction with the results obtained in test runs to ﬁt

15

Parameter
Proliferation rate
Somatic hypermutation probability
Rate of diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes
Dimension of shape space
Selection probability for optimal centrocytes
Output probability of selected centrocytes
Number of seeder cells at FDCs
Radius of B-cell activation around antigen
Time duration of phase one of GC reaction
Time duration of phase two of GC reaction
Time duration of the whole GC reaction

quantity = value
p/ ln(2) = 1/(6 h)
m = 0.5

g/ ln(2) = ?
D = 4
a0 = 0.95
q = ?
φ B(φ, t = 0) = 3

R0 = 8 − 10
∆t1 = 72 h
∆t2 = ?
3
i=1 ∆ti = 504 h

P

Table 1: Summary of the parameters ﬁxed experimentally. For explanations and references see
the last section. Parameters with a question-mark are not free rather than ﬁxed in the course
of the solution of Eq. (3) with respect to experimental data discussed before.

P

with the experiments characterized in the previous section. The time variable is running
from t0 = −72 h to accentuate the ﬁrst phase of pure proliferation as a preGC-phase. The
mutation and selection process is started at t = 0 h and the production of plasma and
memory cells begins at t = ∆t2. The diﬀerential equation is solved numerically with a
modiﬁed Euler method in a subroom, in which we assume Dirichlet boundary conditions
with B = 0.

The best results are obtained by an iteration procedure for

g
ln(2)

=

0.355
h

,

1 − q = 0.8

, ∆t2 = 52 h .

(27)

At t = 0 h we ﬁnd a large oligoclonal population of 12288 centroblasts as a result of the
proliferation phase started with 3 initial cells (see Fig. 2). These cells are of diﬀerent
type compared to +the cells of optimal aﬃnity to the presented antigen and in a typical
distance from them (varying between 3 and 8 point mutations to reach the optimal cell
type). The selection process at the FDCs and with the T-helper cells starts and reduces
the centroblast population with low aﬃnity to the presented antigen. At the same time
somatic hypermutation leads to a spreading of centroblast distribution over the shape
space, resulting in a small but non-vanishing amount of centroblasts at the shape-space
position of the antigen (see Fig. 3). The large majority of the B-cells does not survive the
selection process (see the whole cell population decrease in Fig. 2), dies through apoptosis
and is rapidly phagocytosed by macrophages present in the GC. As all positively selected
centrocytes reenter the proliferation process at this stage of the GC reaction, the number
of centroblasts at the antigen position grows. We remark that ε > 0 follows for the
equilibrium condition Eq. (14) because of q = 0, according to Eq. (4). As a consequence, the
overall centroblast population would restart to grow if this growth was not inhibited by the

16

Figure 2: Time course of the centroblast population integrated over the whole sphere in the
shape space around the antigen φ0. In the ﬁrst phase the initial B-cells proliferate. The large
population reached at t = 0 h is then decreased by the selection process. At t = 52 h the
production of plasma and memory cells is started, leading to an exponential decrease in the
overall centroblast population.

production of plasma and memory cells after 52 h. Especially, this secondary proliferation
process is found for the centroblasts encoding antibodies of high aﬃnity to the antigen
(see Fig. 3). The centroblasts at the antigen position are practically all recycled (beside
the reduction due to a0 < 1) such that no reduction process exists any more. This gives
rise to a new perspective on the GC reaction: We need just as many initially proliferated
cells, that a spreading of the distribution through somatic hypermutation leads to at least
one or two cells at the antigen position in the shape space. Then a considerable amount of
cells of this optimized type is reached by the time delay ∆t2 of the production of output
cells, opening the possibility of a full proliferation process for these cells.

The secondary proliferation process is stopped when the output production is turned
on at t = 52 h. Now ε < 0 in Eq. (14) holds, such that an exponential decrease of the
whole centroblast population is initiated – including the population of the optimized cells
(see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). Nevertheless, this decrease is slow enough to produce a considerable
amount of plasma and memory cells (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4). It is an interesting observation
that a rather small number of centroblasts of the optimal type with respect to the antigen
is suﬃcient to produce this large number of plasma and memory cells – even with a small

17

Figure 3: The centroblast population and the integrated plasma/memory cell production at
the position of the antigen in the shape space. The centroblast population shows a smooth
enhancement due to somatic hypermutation starting at t = 0 h. The population growth is
stopped by the production of output cells starting at t = 52 h. Instead the number of produced
plasma and memory cells is increased steadily until the end of the GC reaction. At this time
only 4 cells remain in the environment of the FDCs.

output probability of q = 0.2. On the contrary, a higher output probability may decrease
the integrated number of plasma and memory cells, as less cells reenter the proliferation
phase. In conclusion, we claim that a high recycling probability of 80% of the positively
selected centrocytes is not only necessary to achieve a multi-step mutation optimization of
the cell type but also to realize a high number of resulting plasma and memory cells.

Finally, at day 21 after immunization, only a few cells with maximum aﬃnity to the
antigen remain in the environment of the FDCs, as required from experiment (Liu et al.,
1991; Kelsoe, 1996). The absolute number of remaining cells depends on the distance of
the initial B-cells from the antigen φ0. For numbers of mutations N necessary to reach the
antigen between N = 3 and N = 8 the number of remaining B-blasts varies from 43 to 0.
For the typical number of mutations of N = 5 about 10 B-blasts remain in the environment
of the FDCs at day 21 after immunization. In other words, the GC life time depends on
the initial distribution of the seeder cells with respect to the presented antigen. It would be
interesting to check this statement experimentally by observing GCs with variable number
of mutations occuring during the optimization process. Indeed, there is an experimental

18

Figure 4: A cut through the sphere in the shape space around the presented antigen at position
2. The seeder cells are at a distance of at least 5 mutation steps. The number of produced
plasma and memory cells grows considerably during the GC reaction. The velocity of growth
diminishes in course of time because of the decreasing number of optimized centroblasts at the
antigen position.

hint that the intensity of the GC reaction depends on the quality of the initially activated
B-cells (Agarwal et al., 1998). Also imaginable is a self-regulating process which depends
on the already positively selected centrocytes and thus prolongs the GC reactions with
large distances between seeder cells and antigen, and shortens correspondingly the ones
with small distances.

3.1 Result stability

We have to clarify what is meant with the best results: The experimental conditions Eq. (25)
and Eq. (26) are fulﬁlled for typical initial conditions. Therefore, the prediction of the
recycling probability to be 80% is a statement which – in the framework of our model – is
justiﬁed to the same degree as the experiments are exact. Nevertheless, the sensitivity of
the predicted high recycling probability to such modiﬁcations is weak.

It should be mentioned that in addition there is a certain freedom of choice concerning
the number of remaining cells at day 21 after immunization. For example, the parameter

19

set with a still higher recycling probability

g
ln(2)

=

0.5
h

,

1 − q = 0.9 , ∆t2 = 58 h .

(28)

leads to a result of comparable quality as under the conditions of Eq. (27) – it is clear
that a higher recycling probability slows down the production of output cells such that
simultaneously the time delay of the production start has to be larger – with the diﬀerence
that the number of remaining cells is reduced with respect to the previous result such that
no cells remain at the end of typical GC reactions. For this reason and because g is on its
upper bound Eq. (12), this parameter set was not considered as reasonable.

If one requires a smaller recycling probability the parameter set

g
ln(2)

=

0.287
h

,

1 − q = 0.7

, ∆t2 = 48 h .

(29)

leads to correct values for v0 and Eq. (25) is also fulﬁlled. The reduced recycling probablility
accelerates the output cell production such that it has to be decelerated by a reduction of
the time delay ∆t2. Even if the diﬀerentiation rate stays in a reasonable range, the number
of remaining cells in the GC at day 21 after immunization is about ten-fold with respect
to Eq. (27). More generally one may consider the number of remaining cells for typical GC
reactions with an average number of mutations necessary to reach the antigen.

Recycling probability 1 − q

φ B(φ, t = 21 d)

0.5
1393

0.6
357

0.7
134

0.8
10

0.9
0

P

The mentioned experimental data are all reproduced for each value of 1 − q, solely the
number of remaining cells is left open. To ensure that this number is in accordance with
the experimental statement that a a few proliferating B-blasts remain at the FDCs at
this stage of GC development, we are led to a recycling probability of 80%. We want to
emphasize that this result is determined very clearly, as for the other recycling probablilities
the remaining number of cells in the GC ﬁnal state diﬀers by at least an order of magnitude.

This variation of parameters shows the range of stability of our prediction:

First, the window of possible time delays ∆t2, which are in accordance with Eq. (26) is
very narrow. Already for ∆t2 > 58 h the condition Eq. (12) will be violated. On the other
hand for ∆t2 < 42 h, despite the immense number of remaining cells in the ﬁnal GC state,
the condition Eq. (26) can not be fulﬁlled anymore. In consequence it is not possible that
the production of plasma and memory cells already starts with the establishment of light
and dark zone, i.e. it starts with the existence of a fully developed GC. The emphasized
experimental bounds require necessarily a time delay for the production of output cells of
at least 48 h. This means that the production process should be initiated by a separate
signal and is not present in a working GC automatically.
Secondly, the window of possible recycling probabilities is strongly bound by the experi-
ments (Han et al., 1995a, 1995b) and by the experimentally required number of remaining
cells at day 21 after immunization. This leads to the conclusion that the recycling proba-
bility should be at least 70% and not larger than 85%. Even ignoring the required number

20

of cells in the ﬁnal state, Eq. (26) does not allow a recycling probability smaller than 60%.
We would like to emphasize that this result diﬀers extremely from the value for the recy-
cling probability of 0.15 assumed in (Kesmir & de Boer, 1999). Nevertheless we do not
regard this discrepancy as a contradiction because in this model not all parameters were
ﬁxed by experimental data.

Finally, we want to address our attention to the shape space dimension. The analysis
presented above was performed with a shape space dimension of 4, which was chosen
according to a general argument (see Sec. 2.5). It is an important remark that our results
remain essentially unaﬀected for D = 5 or 6. Using for instance D = 5, only the parameter
g, controling the selection velocity, has to be reduced slightly by 7% in order to stay in
accordance with the experimental bounds. The total number of remaining cells at day 21
after immunization stays constant but its distribution is spread out on the shape space.
Going to D = 6, the parameter g is again reduced by 6%, while all other parameters remain
unchanged to get accordance with the experimental dat. The cell distribution at day 21
after immunization becomes again less centered at the antigen position. We conclude that,
for the values tested, the dependence on the shape space dimension is weak enough such
that our results are not aﬀected from it. Even, the slower selection velocity for higher
dimensions of less than 10% per dimension remains in the range of accuracy of our results.
Note, that the dependence on the shape space dimension is restricted to a intermedi-
In the ﬁrst phase of pure proliferation D does not enter
ate stage of the GC reaction.
the dynamics at all. In the late phase of selection, when the distribution B(φ) becomes
approximately spherically symmetric around the point representing the antigen, D cancels
exactly with the factor 1/D in Eq. (3) as there are D equal terms contributing to the sum
such that D factorizes. A dependence of our results on the shape space dimension may
only occur during the early phase of selection, in which the distribution B(φ) is clearly not
symmetric around the position of the antigen. As we will see that the distribution of the
centroblasts develops into a spherically symmetric distribution around φ0 already before
day 8 after immunization (see Fig. 5), we decduce that a dependence on the shape space
dimension may occur between day 3 and day 8 of the GC reaction only.

3.2 Optimization velocity

As already mentioned it is expected that the cells with high aﬃnity to the antigen dominate
already at day 8 after immunization (Jacob et al., 1993). This is translated into the model
by checking if the asymptotic regime of the GC reaction is reached in the sense that β
deﬁned in Eq. (15) becomes constant. As can be seen in Fig. 5, β becomes constant in
the course of day 7 after immunization, which is in accordance with the constraint above.
This was found for the parameter set Eq. (27) but the behavior of β is not altered in a
great range of parameter variation. Besides the reproduction of the experimental evidence
for the optimization process to be accomplished after 8 days, this result is an a-posteriori
check for the determination of the recycling probability, which is based on a constant value
of β(φ0) at day 9 after immunization (see Eq. (24)).

21

Figure 5: The time course of β(φ0, t) (see Eq. (15)) at the shape space position of the antigen
for the parameter set Eq. (27). β becomes constant shortly after t = 96 h, i.e. at day 7 after
immunization.

3.3 Optimization quality

It may be interesting to verify if larger or smaller recycling probabilities lead to better
optimization of the antibody types. The statement, that recycling may be necessary to
achieve a considerable aﬃnity enhancement in a multi-step mutation process is widely
discussed (Oprea et al., 2000) and enforced by the present work. We would like to point
out that the relative number of good outcoming plasma or memory cells increases with
In the language of distributions in the shape
larger recycling probabilities (see Fig. 6).
21 d
0 d dt O(φ, t). A too small
space this corresponds to a sharper peak of the distribution
recycling probability leads to a spreading of the outcoming plasma and memory cells in
the shape space, i.e. to a weaker speciﬁty of the GC output.

R

On the other hand, we have already seen that a larger recycling probability lowers the
absolute number of produced plasma and memory cells such that we are confronted with
two competitive tendencies. Large recycling probabilities lead to speciﬁc but weak GC
reactions, while small ones lead to unspeciﬁc but intense GC reactions. One may agree,
that the value of 80% calculated here and supported by experimental data, is a good
compromise between these two extremes.

22

Figure 6: Comparison of the total plasma and memory cell distribution on a cut in the shape
space with the antigen at position 2 at day 21 after immunization. The parameters are uniquely
determined by the experimental data. Solely the remaining number of cells at the end of the
GC reaction is not ﬁxed to allow diﬀerent recycling probabilities 1 − q. The distribution of the
output cells becomes sharper for larger 1 − q.

3.4 Start of somatic hypermutation

Even though there is experimental evidence that somatic hypermutation does not occur
during the ﬁrst phase of pure proliferation of centroblasts in the environment of the FDCs
(Han et al., 1995b; Jacob et al., 1993; McHeyzer-Williams et al., 1993; Pascual et al.,
1994b), we checked if this statement is conﬁrmed in the framework of our model. As the
primary reason for the retardation of the output production is to give time to the GC to
develop suﬃcient good centroblasts before the GC population is weakened through an ad-
ditional output, one may in principle think of a mutation starting long before the selection
process. In this scenario the output production would start simultaneously with selection
process and one is led to a two phase process only: A ﬁrst one with proliferation and
somatic hypermutation and a second one with additional selection and output production.
The centroblast-types would already be spread out in the shape space when selection and
output start.

There is no parameter set in accordance with all experimental data. Especially, it is
impossible to get the correct output dynamic as described in Eq. (26). Typically we get

23

Figure 7: The centroblast population and the integrated plasma/memory cell production at
the position of the antigen in the shape space. Except for the time phases we used the same
parameters as in Eq. (27). The centroblast population shows a smooth enhancement due to
somatic hypermutation starting at t = −52 h. The population growth is stopped by the
production of output cells starting at t = 0 h. The slope of the summed output is substantially
smaller than expected from experiment. 21 days after immunization only 1 cell remains.

v0 = 2.8 being strongly diﬀerent from the required value and a much smoother result
(compare Fig. 7 to Fig. 3). In addition the distribution of plasma and memory cells is not
as well pronounced at the position of the cells with optimal aﬃnity to the antigen such
that the GC reaction gives rise to output cells with weaker speciﬁty. Thus, we deduce from
our model that the dynamic of plasma and memory cell production in real GC reactions
does not allow somatic hypermutation to occur considerably before the selection process
is started.

4 Conclusions

We developed a new model for the GC reaction using its main functional elements. The
GC reaction is described by the evolution of a centroblast distribution on an aﬃnity shape
space with respect to an initially ﬁxed antigen distribution. On this shape space an aﬃnity
function, describing the complementarity of antibody and antigen, was deﬁned and its

24

functional behaviour as well as its width were deviated from aﬃnity enhancements known
for real GC reactions.

In the model the reaction is decomposed into three phases. First, a proliferation phase,
in which a few seeder cells multiply. Our model excludes somatic hypermutation to occur
already at this stage of the GC development. Secondly, it follows an optimization phase,
in which apart from proliferation, mutation of the antibody type and selection take place.
This leads to a competition of spreading and peaking of the centroblast distribution in
the shape space. In this phase, all positively selected cells reenter the proliferation phase
in the dark zone, i.e. no plasma or memory cells are produced. This occurs solely in the
production phase. In this third phase all elements of the GC reaction are in progress.

The dynamical evolution of the cell population in a GC is described by a set of coupled
linear diﬀerential equation. Having ﬁxed all parameters with known experimental data
and especially using (Han et al., 1995b), the model shows the typical behavior of GCs
without any further adjustments. Due to the oligoclonal character of GCs a large amount
of identical centroblasts is produced in the proliferation phase. These diﬀuse over the shape
space in the second phase, where only those cells are retained that exhibit a high aﬃnity
to the presented antigen. As the good cells reenter the proliferation process, this leads
to a domination of good cells within 7 to 8 days after immunization in accordance with
experiments. The already optimized cell distribution then gives rise to plasma and memory
cells leaving the FDC environment in the production phase, leading to large numbers of
output cells of optimized type due to the long duration of this third phase. The GC reaction
is rather weak 21 days after immunization and only a small number of cells remain in the
environment of the FDCs. This shows that the end of a GC reaction is not necessarily
coupled with an antigen consumption or additional signals, but may occur simply due to
the (unchanged) dynamical development of the GC.

Our main result is that the experimental data and especially the evaluation of (Han
et al., 1995b) lead to the following view of the GC reaction. The optimization phase lasts
for not less than 42 h and not longer than 58 h. During this time all selected centrocytes
are recycled and reenter the proliferation phase. Without such a non-output phase the
number of optimal cells with respect to the presented antigen is not large enough to allow
a considerable output rate during the remaining life time of the GC. We looked for an
experimental evidence for this delayed production of output cells. Indeed, comparing two
experiments (Jacob et al., 1993; Pascual et al., 1994a) we found that plasma and memory
cells were ﬁrst observed more than two days later than mutated cells during a GC reaction.
This conﬁrms the existence of the non-output phase that we found. As output cells are
not produced from the beginning of the GC reaction, the output should be triggered by a
special signal, related to the aﬃnity of the B-cells and the corresponding antigen. But even
in the production phase, the recycling probability turns out to lie between 70% and 85%
and thus is substantially larger than values expected until now (Kesmir & de Boer, 1999).
We want to emphasize that such large recycling probabilities turned out to be crucial for a
GC result of high speciﬁty. Larger recycling probabilities lead to speciﬁc GC reactions of
low intensity, while smaller ones to less speciﬁc but more intense GC reactions. The value
of about 80% that we found represents a good compromise between these competetive

25

tendencies. On the other hand it is not surprising that these recycled cells were not found
experimentally: The absolute number of recycled cells is very small compared to the total
number of cells present in the GC, so that a measured signal for recycled cells is suppressed
by more than two orders of magnitudes. A better signal should be observed in later phases
of the GC reaction when the cells of high aﬃnity to the antigen are already dominating.
Furthermore, we conclude that the whole selection process including diﬀerentiation of
centroblasts to antibody presenting centrocytes, the multi-step selection process itself and
ﬁnally the recycling take around 3 or 4 h. This result is compatible with the experimental
observation that the inhibition of apoptosis during the selection may take about 1 or 2 h.
It is interesting, that the produced cells possess a certain broadness in the shape space,
i.e. not only the centrocytes of optimal aﬃnity to the antigen diﬀerentiate to plasma and
memory cells. This may be of relevance for the resistance of an immune system against
a second immunization with a mutated antigen. A considerable number of memory cells
with high aﬃnity to the mutated antigen may still be present for this reason.

The results of our model suggest new experiments. A systematic and quantitative
analysis of the GC reaction in dependence of the initial conditions, i.e. the number of
necessary point mutations to reach the cell type of optimal aﬃnity to the antigen, would
lead to new insights into the interdependence of the essential elements of the GC. This may
yield hints about self-regulating processes. Furthermore, it would be interesting to analyze
quantitatively the total number of cells in the course of the GC reaction. Finally, it may
be interesting to compare our model with its continuous counterpart. The translation of
Eq. (3) into continuous space leads to a diﬀerential equation of Schr¨odinger type with a
Gaussian potential. It may be interesting to compare both models.

26

References

Agarwal, A., Nayak, B.P. & Rao, K.V.S. (1998). B-Cell Responses to a Peptide
Epitope – VII – Antigen-Dependent Modulation of the Germinal Center Reaction, J.
Immunol. 161, 5832–5841.

Berek, C. & Milstein, C. (1987). Mutation drift and repertoire shift in the maturation

of the immune response, Immunol. Rev. 96, 23–41.

Berek, C. & Milstein, C. (1988). The Dynamic Nature of the Antibody Repertoire,

Immunol. Rev. 105, 5–26.

Camacho, S.A., Koscovilbois, M.H. & Berek, C. (1998). The Dynamic Structure

of the Germinal Center, Immunol. Today 19, 511–514.

Choe, J. & Choi, Y.S. (1998).

IL-10 Interrupts Memory B-Cell Expansion in the
Germinal Center by Inducing Diﬀerentiation into Plasma-Cells, Eur. J. Immunol.
28, 508–515.

Cohen, J.J., Duke, R.C., Fadok, V.A. & Sellins, K.S. (1992). Apoptosis and

programmed cell death in immunity, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10, 267–293.

Dubois, B., Barth´el´emy, C., Durand, I., Liu, Y.-J., Caux, C. & Bri`ere, F.
(1999). Toward a Role of Dendritic Cells in the Germinal Center Reaction – Triggering
of B-Cell Proliferation and Isotype Switching, J. Immunol. 162, 3428–3436.

Eijk, M. van & Groot, C. de, (1999). Germinal Center B-Cell Apoptosis Requires

Both Caspase and Cathepsin Activity, J. Immunol. 163, 2478–2482.

Fischer, M.B., Goerg, S., Shen, L.M., Prodeus, A.P., Goodnow, C.C., Kel-
soe, G. & Carroll, M.C. (1998). Dependence of Germinal Center B-Cells on
Expression of Cd21/Cd35 for Survival, Science 280, 582–585.

Fliedner, T.M. (1967). On the origin of tingible bodies in germinal centers in immune
responses, in: H. Cottier (Hrsg.), Germinal Centers in Immune Responses. Springer,
Berlin, pp. 218–224.

Grouard, G., De Bouteiller, O., Banchereau, J. & Liu, Y.-J. (1995). Hu-
man follicular dendritic cells enhance cytokine-dependent growth and diﬀerentiation
of CD40-activated B cells, J. Immunol. 155, 3345–3352.

Han, S.H., Hathcock, K., Zheng, B., Kelper, T.B., Hodes, R. & Kelsoe, G.
(1995a). Cellular Interaction in Germinal Centers: Roles of CD40-Ligand and B7-1
and B7-2 in Established Germinal Centers, J. Immunol. 155, 556–567.

Han, S.H., Zheng, B., Dal Porto, J. & Kelsoe, G. (1995b). In situ Studies of
the Primary Immune Response to (4–Hydroxy–3–Nitrophenyl) Acetyl IV. Aﬃnity-
Dependent, Antigen-Driven B-Cell Apoptosis in Germinal Centers as a Mechanism
for Maintaining Self-Tolerance, J. Exp. Med. 182, 1635–1644.

Hanna, M.G. (1964). An autoradiographic study of the germinal center in spleen white

pulp during early intervals of the immune response, Lab. Invest. 13, 95–104.

Hardie, D.L., Johnson, G.D. & MacLennan, I.C.M. (1993). Quantitative analysis
of molecules which distinguesh functional compartments in germinal centers, Eur. J.
Immunol. 23, 997–1004.

Jacob, J., Kassir, R. & Kelsoe, G. (1991). In situ studies of the primary immune
I. The architecture and dynamics of

response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl.

27

responding cell populations, J. Exp. Med. 173, 1165–1175.

Jacob, J., Przylepa, J., Miller, C. & Kelsoe, G. (1993). In situ studies of the
III. The kinetics of V region

primary response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl.
mutation and selection in germinal center B cells, J. Exp. Med. 178, 1293–1307.
Janeway, C.A. & Travers, P. (1997). Immunologie. Spektrum Akademischer Verlag,

Kelsoe, G. (1996). The germinal center: a crucible for lymphocyte selection, Semin.

Heidelberg, Berlin, Oxford.

Immunol. 8, 179–184.

Kepler, T.B. & Perelson, A.S. (1993). Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B cells and

the eﬃciency of aﬃnity maturation, Immunol. Today 14, 412–415.

Kesmir, C. & Boer, R.J. de, (1999). A Mathematical Model on Germinal Center

Kinetics and Termination, J. Immunol. 163, 2463–2469.

Kroese, F.G., Wubbena, A.S., Seijen, H.G. & Nieuwenhuis, P. (1987). Germinal

centers develop oligoclonally, Eur. J. Immunol. 17, 1069–1072.

K¨uppers, R., Zhao, M., Hansmann, M.L. & Rajewsky, K. (1993). Tracing B
Cell Development in Human Germinal Centers by Molecular Analysis of Single Cells
Picked from Histological Sections, EMBO J. 12, 4955–4967.

Lindhout, E., Lakeman, A. & Groot, C. de, (1995). Follicular dendritic cells inhibit
apoptosis in human B lymphocytes by rapid and irreversible blockade of preexisting
endonuclease, J. Exp. Med. 181, (1985–1995.

Lindhout, E., Mevissen, M.L., Kwekkeboom, J., Tager, J.M. & Groot, C. de,
(1993). Direct evidence that human follicular dendritic cells (FDC) rescue germinal
centre B cells from death by apoptosis, Clin. Exp. Immunol. 91, 330–336.

Lindhout, E., Koopman, G., Pals, S.T. & Groot, C. de, (1997). Triple check for
antigen speciﬁcity of B cells during germinal centre reactions, Immunol. Today 18,
573–576.

Liu, Y.-J., Barth´el´emy, C., De Bouteiller, O. & Banchereau, J. (1994). The
diﬀerences in survival and phenotype between centroblasts and centrocytes, Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 355, 213–218.

Liu, Y.-J., Joshua, D.E., Williams, G.T., Smith, C.A., Gordon, J. & MacLen-
nan, I.C. (1989). Mechanism of antigen-driven selection in germinal centres, Nature
342, 929–931.

Liu, Y.-J., Zhang, J., Lane, P.J., Chan, E.Y. & MacLennan, I.C.M. (1991). Sites
of speciﬁc B cell activation in primary and secondary responses to T cell-dependent
and T cell-independent antigens, Eur. J. Immunol. 21, 2951–2962.

MacLennan, I.C.M. (1994). Germinal Centers, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12, 117–139.
McHeyzer-Williams, M.G., McLean, M.J., Labor, P.A. & Nossal, G.V.J.
(1993). Antigen-driven B cell diﬀerentiation in vivo, J. Exp. Med. 178, 295–307.
Nossal, G. (1991). The molecular and cellular basis of aﬃnity maturation in the antibody

response, Cell 68, 1–2.

Oprea, M. & Perelson, A.S. (1996). Exploring the Mechanism of Primary Antibody

Responses to T-Cell-Dependent Antigen, J. Theor. Biol. 181, 215–236.

Oprea, M. & Perelson, A.S. (1997). Somatic mutation leads to eﬃcient aﬃnity

28

maturation when centrocytes recycle back to centroblasts, J. Immunol. 158, 5155–
5162.

Oprea, M., Nimwegen, E. van & Perelson, A.S. 2000). Dynamics of One-pass
Germinal Center Models: Im¨oications for Aﬃnity Maturation, Bull. Math. Biol. 62,
121–153.

Pascual, V., Cha, S., Gershwin, M.E., Capra, J.D. & Leung, P.S.C. (1994a).
Nucleotide Sequence Analysis of Natural and Combinatorial Anti-PDC-E2 Antibodies
in Patients with Primary Biliary Cirrhosis, J. Immunol. 152, 2577–2585.

Pascual, V., Liu, Y.-J., Magalski, A., De Bouteiller, O., Banchereau, J. &
Capra, J.D. (1994b). Analysis of somatic mutation in ﬁve B cell subsets of human
tonsil, J. Exp. Med. 180, 329–339.

Perelson, A.S. & Oster, G.F. (1979). Theoretical Studies of Clonal Selection: Mini-
mal Antibody Repertoire Size and Reliability of Self-Non-self Discrimination, J. Theor.
Biol. 81, 645–670.

Perelson, A.S. & Wiegel, F.W. (1999). Some Design Pinciples for Immune System

Recognition, Complexity 4, 29–37.

Radmacher, M.D., Kelsoe, G. & Kepler, T.B. (1998). Predicted and Inferred
Waiting-Times for Key Mutations in the Germinal Center Reaction – Evidence for
Stochasticity in Selection, Immunol. Cell Biol. 76, 373–381.

Rundell, A., Decarlo, R., Hogenesch, H. & Doerschuk, P. (1998). The Humoral
Immune-Response to Haemophilus-Inﬂuenzae Type-B – A Mathematical-Model Based
on T-Zone and Germinal Center B-Cell Dynamics, J. Theor. Biol. 194, 341–381.
Smith, K., Light, A., Nossal, G. & Tarlington, D. (1997). The extent of aﬃnity
maturation diﬀers between the memory and antibody-forming cell compartments in
the primary immune response, EMBO J. 16, 2996–3006.

Tew, J. & Mandel, T. (1979). Prolonged antigen half-life in the lymphoid follicles of

speciﬁcally immunized mice, Immunology 37, 69–76.

Wedemayer, G.J., Patten, P.A., Wang, L.H., Schultz, P.G. & Stevens, R.C.
(1997). Structural insigths into the evolution of an antibody combining site, Science
276, 1665–1669.

Weigert, M., Cesari, I., Yonkovitch, S. & Cohn, M. (1970). Variability in the

light chain sequences of mouse antibody, Nature 228, 1045–1047.

Zhang, J., MacLennan, I.C.M., Liu, Y.-J. & Land, P.J.L. (1988). Is rapid prolifer-
ation in B centroblasts linked to somatic mutation in memory B cell clones, Immunol.
Lett. 18, 297–299.

29

