1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NONLINEAR DYNAMICS IN THE BINARY DNA/RNA
CODING PROBLEM 1

M. Martinis, 2

Department of Physics, Theory Division,

Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, P.O.B. 1016, 10001 Zagreb,CROATIA

Abstract. The presence of low dimensional chaos in the protein secondary struc-
tures, using the binary coded α-helices and β-sheet motifs, has been investigated.

In order to analyse symbolic DNA/RNA sequences the assignment, based on the

purine/pyrimidine and strong/weak H - bond classiﬁcation sheme, of binary num-

bers to the nucleotides was made. We have found that this assignment leads to

diﬀerent averaged fractal dimensions for α-helices and β-sheets. When embedded

in the two dimensional phase space the binary string structures show the attractor

type behavior which depends on the value of the time lag parameter.

1 Presented at the 7th Int. Summer School on Biophysics, Rovinj, Sept.14.-25. 2000.
2 e-mail address: martinis@thphys.irb.h r

1

1 Introduction

The concepts of chaos, nonlinearity and fractal can be applied to a number of prop-

erties of proteins. Recently, there has been a rapid accumulation of new information

in this area [1,2]. However, since proteins are ﬁnite systems, although highly inho-

mogeneous in their structure, their fractal description can only be true in an average

or statistical sense. Even if a fractal description is applicable, the question, ’What

new insight does it provide?’

is sometimes necessary to answer. For proteins this

answer is not always clear and straightforward. Nevertheless, deterministic chaos if

detected oﬀers a striking explanation for irregular behaviour and anomalies in the

protein structure which can not be attributed to the randomness alone.

A protein consists of a polypeptide chain that is made up of residues of amino

acids (20 commonly occuring that diﬀer in their side-chains) linked together by

peptide bonds. What distinguishes diﬀerent proteins, other than the number of

amino acids, is the sequence of amino acids, referred to as the primary structure of

the protein, in the polypeptide chain. From the analysis of many protein structures

determined by X-ray crystalography, it is found that the folding of portions of the

polypeptide chain often has certain regularities, referred to as elements of secondary

structure. The most important secondary structural elements are the α-helices and

β-pleated sheets. The α-helix is a compact rod like structure, whereas the β- sheet

is an extended structure. Since globular proteins have ﬁnite size , the secondary

structural elements ( α-helix , β-sheet) are also limited in lenght. Hence the validity

of a fractal description as applied to these structures must be taken with care.

In this paper we shall, as one of the tests for nonlinearity, calculate the fractal

dimensions for diﬀerent secondary structure elements of proteins (α-helices and β-

sheets). We shall show that fractal dimensions can be used to discriminate an

2

α-helix from a β-sheet. We shall also show how the two-dimensional embedding of

the structure can produce an attractor type behavior. The paper is organized in the

following way. In Section 1. we introduce the basic mathematical tools necessary

for nonlinear analysis of ﬁnite protein sequences treated as ﬁnite time series.

In

Section 2. we apply this formalism to DNA/RNA and protein sequences and study

a particular aspect of it by ﬁnding the fractal dimensions of α-helices and β-sheets

using the Hurst exponent approach [4] which measures the smoothness of a sequence.

2 Nonlinear analysis of ﬁnite sequences

The most direct link between chaos theory and the real world is the analysis of

measured signals/ time series in terms of nonlinear dynamics. In this sense, each

nucleotide sequence is represented by a string of suitably chosen numbers u(n), n =

1,...,N which give a novel representation of a sequence that can be further studied

using techniques derived from nonlinear analysis [3]. Next step is to detect and

quantify possibly complicated structures in a sequence which are real and not just

random ﬂuctuations. The most convincing argument for the presence of some pat-

tern in the sequence is if it can be used to give an improved prediction of a next term

in the sequence. A simple prediction algorithms always assume some deterministic

structure in the sequence which can be either linear based on the assumption that

the next observation is given approximatelly by a linear combinations of the previous

ones plus noise, ξ, i.e.,

or nonlinear

u(n + 1) = a0 +

aku(n

m + k) + ξ(n),

m

Xk=1

−

u(n + 1) = F [u(n) + ξ(n)]

(1)

(2)

3

where the mapping F is usually an unknown nonlinear function. In that case some

additional assumption about the properties of F (e.g., continuity) and ξ(n) (e.g.,

white noise) should be made. One test for nonlinearity is to compare the linear

and nonlinear models to see which more accurately predict the next term in the

sequence [5]. However, in cases where the considered sequences are not manifestly

deterministic and are in addition ﬁnite and noisy like in biology, physiology and

medicine the usefulness of chaos theory becomes controversal.

It is clear that, a priori, we cannot assume existence of deterministic chaos for

any real data that are ﬁnite and noisy. The crutial step in resolving this problem is

to look for signatures of determinism which can tell us how far we are from the linear

case and how close we are to the nonlinear deterministic case. The usual estimators

of nonlinearity are:

nonstationarity

fractal dimensions

phase space embeddings

Lyapunov exponents.

•

•

•

•

2.1 Nonstationarity

A scientiﬁc measurement of any kind is only useful if it is reproducible, at least in

principle. Reproducibily is closely connected with the problem of stationarity of

sequence measurements. If the process under observation is a probabilistic one, it

will be characterised by probability distributions. Stationarity means that they are

independent of time translations.

4

Almost all methods of time series analysis,linear or nonlinear, require some

kind of stationarity. For ﬁnite sequences the stationarity is not well deﬁned and

dependents on the lenght of the sequence. Most of the tests for stationarity are

based on the estimate of a certain parameter using diﬀerent segments of a sequence.

If the observed variations are outside the expected statistical ﬂuctuations ( standard

error), the sequence is considered as nonstationary. In many applications of linear

statistics, weak stationarity is assumed which means that the mean and the variance

of a sequence are constant. Strict stationarity in addition also requires that the

sequence is normally distributed. Therefore, the obvious test for nonstationarity is

to consider the length dependece of the mean and the variance of diﬀerent segments

of a sequence:

¯ui(l) =

u(il

l + k)

−

1
l

l

Xk=1

σ2
i (l) =

1
l(l + 1)

l

Xk=1

(u(il

l + k)

−

−

¯ui(l))2

(3)

(4)

where the index i denotes the i-th segment of the sequence u(n) having the length

l. For these two quantities the ordering of elements inside the segment is irrelevant

and thus they cannot give any information about the evolutin of a system. Such

information can be obtained from the sample autocorrelation function

C(n) =

(u(k)

¯u)(u(n + k)

¯u)

−

−

(5)

1

−

N

n

N −n

Xk=1

which measures, at ﬁxed lag n, how the points u(k) and u(n + k) are distributed in

the plane.

Autocorrelation can be detected visually by examining a regression line scatter-

plot. Distances from the regression line to the actual values represent error. When

no autocorrelation exists, dots representing actual values will be randomly scattered

5

around the full length of the series. The value of the autocorrelation function at lag

n=0 is the variance σ2 of the sequence.

The autocorrelation function C(n) may be used to detect deterministic com-

ponents masked in a random background because deterministic data usually have

long range correlations in which C(n)

n−β for large n, while random data have

∼

short-range correlations and C(n) decays exponentialy for large n. Observation of

long-range correlations in a sequence may be a ﬁrst sign for underlying nonlinear

dynamics.

Another useful characteristic of nonstationarity is the behaviour of the low-

frequency part of the power spectrum which is deﬁned as the Fourier transform of

the autocorrelation function C(n). An equivalent deﬁnition of the power spectrum

is the squared modulus of the Fourier transform of a sequence u(n):

P (f ) =

1
√N

|

N

n=1
X

u(n)e2πif n

2

|

(6)

where the frequencies in physical units are f

fk = k/N, k = -N/2,...,N/2. The

≡

relation between the power spectrum P(f) and the autocorrelation function C(n) is

known as the Wiener-Khinchin theorem. The sequencies with the power spectra at

low frequences proportional to

−α with positive α are considered nonstationary.

f

|

|

This trend usually characterizes the most biological signals. White noise is deﬁned

by a ﬂat spectrum; it has a spectral exponent α= 0. When white noise is summed

up over n, the result is a random walk process with a spectral exponent α= 2,

known as a brown noise. The intermediate case with α= 1, known as a pink noise,

is encountered in a wide variety of physical, chemical, and biological systems.

It

implies that all lenght-scales in a sequence, over which 1/f behaviour holds, are

equally important. A power spectrum with α > 2 is known as a black noise; it

governs the phenomena connected with natural and unnatural catastrophes which

6

often come in clusters.

For fractal sequences to be discussed below there is a simple relation between

the exponent α and the fractal dimension D of the sequence given by α = 5 - 2D .

2.2 Fractal Dimensions

The recent realization that nonlinear dynamical systems can display deterministic

chaos has had a strong inﬂuence on the researchers to interpret complex physiologi-

cal data in terms of chaos. A number of techniques based on concepts from nonlinear

dynamics have been proposed [6]. The fractal dimension [7] as one of them gives a

statistical measure of the geometry of the clouds of points. In deterministic chaotic

systems the dimension is not always an integer number but fractional. Therefore,

fractals are disordered systems whose disorder can be described in terms of nonin-

teger dimensions. The focal point of fractal geometry is the repetition of disorder

at all length scales (scale symmetry), or simply, the repetition of structure within

structure. There are various ways and levels of precision of deﬁning and calculating

the fractal dimensions. We shall present here the calculation of the fractal dimension

of an irregular sequence by means of the Hurst’s rescaled range analysis exponent

[4].

For a given sequence u(n), n = 1,...,N the rescaled range is deﬁned as the

range R(n) of the sum of the deviations of data from the mean divided by the

sample standard deviation S(n). The relevant quantities are deﬁned in the following

way. The sample mean over the length n is

it is used to construct the accumulated departure X(l,n) of u(k) from the mean ¯u(n),

¯u(n) =

u(k),

1
n

n

Xk=1

X(l, n) =

[u(k)

¯u(n)].

−

l

Xk=1

7

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

The range R(n) is obtained as the diﬀerence between the maximum and the mini-

mum of X(l,n) for ﬁxed n,

R(n) = max

X(l, n)

l

min
l

−

X(l, n).

The standard deviation S(n) is estimated from

S(n) =

[u(k)

¯u(n)]2

−

1
2

.

!

1
n

 

n

Xk=1

The rescaled range is then the dimensionless ratio R/S. The Hurst exponent H is

deﬁned in the range of n where the Hurst law R/S

nH is valid. In general, H is not

∼

a constant but a n-dependent quantity which can be estimated using the log(R/S)

versus log(n) plot. For these reasons the R/S analysis is considered as robust. The

Hurst exponent is used to estimate the smoothness of an irregular sequence. Thus,

if H = 0.5, the behaviour of the sequence is similar to a random walk;

if H< 0.5, the sequence is very spiky and is dominated by short-range ﬂuctuations;

if H> 0.5, the sequence is less spiky and is dominated by long-range ﬂuctuation.

There is a simple relation between H and the fractal dimension D:

D = 2

H.

−

(11)

H is related to the ”1/f” spectral slope α = 2H + 1 and can also be estimaded

by means of the Detrendet Fluctuation Analysis (DFA) [8] used for quantifying the

correlation properties in a nonstationary sequence. DFA is based on the computation

of a scaling exponent ”d” by means of a modiﬁed root mean square analysis of a

random walk: d = H + 1.

2.3 Phase space embeddings

When analysing a ﬁnite sequence u(n), n = 1,...,N, we will almost always have only

incomplete information about the underlying dynamical system which may live in

8

a high-dimensional state space. Therefore, in order to construct a dynamical model

for a given sequence of data it is necessary ﬁrst to reconstruct a state space. One

technique to do so is, for example, the phase plane embedding or phase portrait of

a sequence, which involves plotting u(n + τ ) vs. u(n) with time lag τ , giving a

trajectory in the two-dimensional phase space. Embeddings of a sequence in higher

dimensional phase space rest on the assumption that a genuine trajectory x(t) of a

dynamical system is a state vector in a d-dimensional space. The delay embedding

theorem by Takens [9] states that a τ -delayed reconstructed state vector

u(n) = (u(n), u(n

τ ), ..., u(n

Eτ + τ ))

−

−

(12)

in E-dimensional embedding phase space will, in the absence of noise, approximate

dynamical system provided E

2d + 1; in practise E > 2dBox, where dBox is the

≥

box counting fractal dimension of a sequence [10]. For a deterministic dynamical

system a phase-space description is an optimal way of studying its dynamical and

geometrical properties. The problem of ﬁnding a good embedding is to estimate the

embedding dimension E and to ﬁnd the correct time lag τ [3].

2.4 Lyapunov exponents

So far we have discussed predictive criteria for ﬁnding nonlinear dynamics in a

sequence of data. A parameter for diagnosing whether or not a dynamical system

is chaotic are the Lyapunov exponents which measure the average local exponential

growth rate of inﬁnitesimal initial errors, that is, of neighboring trajectories in phase-

space embeddings [11].

If u(n1) and u(n2) are two points in state space with the Euclidean distance

u(n1)

u(n2)

k
−
k
trajectories will be

≪
u(n1 + δn)

k

−

= d0

1 then the distance after a time δn between the two

u(n2 + δn)

= dδn. Then the Lyapunov exponent

k

9

λ is deﬁned by

d0eλδn,

dδn

≃

(13)

with dδn

1 and δn

1. If a system is known to be deterministic, a positive

≪

≫

Lyapunov exponent can be taken as a deﬁnition of a chaotic system. Critical issues

in the reliability of the estimation of Lyapunov exponents are the inﬂuence of noise.

3 Fractal dimensions of DNA sequences in all-α

and all-β proteins

In this Section we report on the ﬁnding the fractal dimensions of DNA sequences

appearing in the secondary strucures of proteins [12]. We have analysed 12 α-helices

and 12 β-sheets using the Hurst exponent approach which measures the smoothnes

of a given sequence. Since the Hurst exponent H is related to the fractal dimension

D = 2 - H of the sequence, to its ”1/f” spectral slope α = 2H + 1 and to the DFA

slope d = H + 1 it is a suitable parameter for studying correlation properties in

DNA sequences.

A DNA sequence consists of four kinds of bases: A, C, G and T/U. The

bases can be divided in classes: purine (R = A, G), pyrimidine (Y = C, T/U),

strong H-bonds (S = G, C) and weak H-bonds (W = A, T/U). In order to analyse

symbolic DNA sequences the assignment of numbers to the nucleotides A, C, G and

T/U is necessary. Taking into account the classes we choose the following binary

assignment:

Y

R

→

→

0 , S

1

→

1 , W

0.

→

(14)

(15)

This assignment maps the simbolic nucleotide sequence on a sequence u(n), n = 1,...,

N(length of the sequence) where u(n) can take values 0 or 1 only. Similar approach,

10

based on the purine–pyrimidine classiﬁcation sheme, has been proposed by Peng et

al.,[13]. Our analysis has shown that α-helices and β-sheets have diﬀerent fractal

dimensions, Dα < Dβ with Dα

1.41.

≈

We have also studied the behaviour of sequences in 2-dimensional phase-space

embeddings by ﬁrst transforming the digital sequence u(n) into an analoge signal

by means of the scaled sinc(t) function:

A(t) =

u(k)sinc(

k),

t
2 −

N

Xk=1

sinc(t) =

sin(πt)
πt

.

(16)

(17)

The phase portrait A(t + 1) vs. A(t) shows the attractor type behaviour.

4 Conclusion

In this paper we have discussed several simple methods which are useful for analysing

and estimating complex structures in DNA sequences. We have argued using the

Hurst exponent approach that fractal dimensions of DNA sequences in all-α and all-

β proteins are diﬀerent. Observation of scale dependent fractal dimension ( breaks

in the slopes of log–log plots of R/S ) may indicate a transition from one pattern

of variation at one scale to another pattern at a larger scale. There are probably

several contributing causes to these observed variations in D. Although the DNA

sequences exibit statistical characteristic which might be explained by nonlinear

statistical methods, no deﬁnite sign of chaos has been evidenced yet.

11

Acknowledgment

under Contract No.980104.

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science of the Republic of Croatia

12

References

[1] R. Elber, in The Fractal Approach to Heterogeneous Chemistry, ( D. Anvir,

ed.) John Willey & Sons, NY 1990;

[2] Proceedings of Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Vol.

XV, (A. S. Weigend and N. A. Gershenfeld, eds.) Addison-Wesley, Reading,

MA 1993;

[3] H. Katz and T. Schreiber, Nonlinear Time Series Analysis, Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, UK 1997;

[4] J. Feder, Fractals, Plenum Press, NY 1989;

[5] M. Casdagli and A. S. Weigend, in Proc. of Santa Fe Institute Studies in the

Sciences of Complexity, Vol. XV, Addison-Wesley,Reading, MA 1993;

[6] P. Grassberger et al., Intl. J. Bif. & Chaos 1 (1991) 512;

[7] J. D. Farmer, Physica 4D (1982) 366,

P. Grassberger and I. Procaccia, Physica 9D (1983) 189,

P. Grassberger, Phys.Lett. A97 (1983) 227;

[8] C. K. Peng et al., Chaos 5 (1995) 82;

[9] N. H. Packard et al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 45 (1980) 712,

F. Takens, in Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, (D. Rand and L.-S. Young,

eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1981,

D. Ruelle, Proc.Roy.Soc. London Ser. A427 (1990) 241;

[10] T. Sauer et al., J.Stat.Phys. 65 (1991) 579;

[11] A. Wolf et al., Physica 16D (1985) 285;

13

[12] M. Martinis, N. ˇStambuk and A. Kneˇzevi´c, Fractal Dimensions of DNA–

sequences, in preparation;

[13] C. K. Peng et al., Nature 356 (1992) 168.

14

