Does Recycling in Germinal Centers Exist?

Michael Meyer-Hermann

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
E-Mail: meyer-hermann@physik.tu-dresden.de

Abstract: A general criterion is formulated in order to decide if recycling of B-cells exists
in GC reaction. The criterion is independent of the selection and aﬃnity maturation
process and based solely on total centroblast population arguments. An experimental test
is proposed to check if the criterion is fulﬁlled.

1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1 Introduction

The aﬃnity maturation process in germinal center (GC) reactions has been well charac-
terized in the last decade. Despite a lot of progress concerning the morphology of GCs
and the stages of the selection process, one fundamental question remains unsolved: Does
recycling exist? Recycling means a back diﬀerentiation of antibody presenting centrocytes
(which undergo the selection process and interact with antigen fragments or T-cells) to
centroblast (which do not present antibodies and therefore do not interact with antigen
fragments but proliferate and mutate).

The recycling hypothesis was ﬁrst formulated in 1993 [1] and there exists a number
of works to verify it (e.g. [2, 3, 4]). The major conceptual problem in the theoretical
contributions is the number of assumptions which are necessary to describe the aﬃnity
maturation process. The recycling hypothesis was formulated because it seemed unlikely
that a complex optimization process (involving up to about 9 somatic hyper-mutations
[5, 6]) may occur in a one-pass GC, i.e. without recycling: Starting from about 12000
cells which mutate in a (shape) space of high-dimensionality the stochastic probability
(mutation is likely to occur stochastically [7, 8]) for at least one cell to ﬁnd the right path
of mutations is very small.
It would help, if the already aﬃnity maturated cells could
reenter the proliferation process in order to multiply and to enhance the chance to ﬁnd the
optimal mutation path.

Due to this origin of the recycling hypothesis, the eﬀorts to show its existence were based
on the inﬂuence of recycling on the maturation process. Consequently, it was found that
the number of maturated cells becomes substantially larger with recycling than without
[3]. A quantitative description showed, that in order to bring the aﬃnity maturation
process into accordance with all experimental observations, the recycling probability of
positively selected centrocytes should get as high values as 80% [4]. Naturally, in both
models important assumptions were made to represent the antibody-types in a shape space
(aﬃnity classes, dimension of shape space) and to allow a successive aﬃnity maturation
(aﬃnity neighborhood).

Here, a new and simpler perspective is presented. Not the inﬂuence of recycling on
the maturation process is examined but its inﬂuence on a magnitude which is completely
independent of aﬃnity maturation or selection: the total centroblast population. The
analysis starts from the presupposition that no recycling exists. Under a minimal set
of assumptions (see Sec. 2) the implications which follow are described (see Sec. 3). The
robustness of the results is checked (see Sec. 4) and it is proposed to test these implications
experimentally (see Sec. 5).

2 Requirements

2.1 General assumptions

In this Gedanken experiment the total centroblast population B(t) in a one-pass GC
(without recycling) is considered. Total means, that the encoded antibody-type is ignored
and all centroblasts enter the total population with equal weight (despite any diﬀerences

2

in aﬃnity to the antigen).

Presuming a one-pass GC no centrocytes are recycled to centroblasts, so that the total
centroblast population becomes independent of the number of centrocytes. Basically, only
centrocytes present antibodies and thus may undergo a selection process. As recoil eﬀects
to the total centroblast population are excluded, this magnitude is also independent of
any properties or dynamics of the selection process. Especially, no inﬂuence of the already
achieved aﬃnity maturation during the optimization process exists. Also, neither the
number of positively selected centrocytes, nor the speed of the selection process, nor the
interaction with T-cells, nor the fate of the rejected centrocytes, nor the production of
plasma and memory cells have any inﬂuence on the total centroblast population.

The total centroblast population changes exclusively according to centroblast prolif-
eration and the diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes. Therefore, B(t) follows a
diﬀerential equation of the following type

dB
dt

(t) = −f (t)B(t) ≡ p(t)B(t) − g(t)B(t) ,

(1)

with time t, the centroblast proliferation rate p(t), the rate of centroblast diﬀerentiation
to centrocytes g(t), and the total rate function f (t) = g(t) − p(t).

Cell proliferation has unquestionably to be described by an exponential increase of the
population. Therefore, it is more than reasonable to assume a linear term for proliferation
at each moment of the GC reaction. This applies in the same way to the diﬀerentiation term
which should be directly proportional to the centroblast population at each moment. So
it is assumed that nonlinear terms do not enter the total centroblast population dynamics
Eq. (1).

Note that no place is determined where proliferation or diﬀerentiation occurs. There-
fore, the following argument is not restricted by the appearance or not-appearance of dark
and light zones [9, 10] during a GC reaction.

2.2 About the rates

It is assumed that after an initial pure proliferation phase of some seeder cells, the total
centroblast population does not further increase. This is in accordance with measurements
of the follicle center volume, which show a peak 3 or 4 days after immunization [11], i.e. after
the ﬁrst pure proliferation phase. As a consequence, the function f (t) in Eq. (1) is positive
during the whole GC reaction.

The proliferation rate is probably constant during the whole GC reaction. This has
not been shown experimentally in all details but is well established by a lot of independent
data taken at diﬀerent moments of the GC reaction [11, 12, 13]. All these data lead to the
same large proliferation rate of

p(t)
ln(2)

≈ 1
6 h

.

(2)

Nevertheless, for the following considerations the value of the proliferation rate will not be
ﬁxed. In order to assure generality of the argument proliferation rates according to Eq. (2)
will be discussed as special case only.

3

The situation is more complicated in the case of the diﬀerentiation rate g(t). This value
is not known experimentally, so its absolute number as well as its time course are unclear.
From the injection of BrdUrd (5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine) one is able to identify the cells
which were in cell cycle in the last 6 hours. In this way it was found in GCs with established
dark and light zones, that the centrocyte population is renewed from centroblasts every 7
hours [11]. It follows for the diﬀerentiation rate that

g(t)
ln(2)

>

1
7 h

.

(3)

Because of the lack of more detailed information, diﬀerent possibilities for the time depen-
dence of the centroblasts to centrocytes diﬀerentiation rate have to be considered in the
following.

2.3 A standard germinal center

Before analyzing the implication in this Gedanken experiment a typical GC has to be
deﬁned as reference system. The GC reaction is initiated by a few seeder cells in the
environment of follicular dendritic cells (FDC) [5, 11, 14, 15]. These cells proliferate for
about 3 days, and give rise to about 12000 centroblasts [11]. At this time t0 = 0 h the
intrinsic GC reaction starts, including a continuation of proliferation and, additionally, the
diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes. The analysis made here does not consider
the ﬁrst phase of pure proliferation, but deals solely with the GC properties in this second
phase. The life time T of a germinal center is about 18 days (T = 432 h) [11, 16], where
the ﬁrst phase of pure proliferation is not included. At the end of the GC reaction, only a
few cells remain in the FDC environment [11, 16], which is assumed to be 5 for a standard
GC. The sensitivity of the results on these assumptions will be analyzed (see Sec. 4).

3 Analysis of the centroblast population

The diﬀerent time courses considered for the total centroblast population of a standard
GC (deﬁned in Sec. 2.3) are shown in Fig. 1. An exponential decrease corresponds to a
constant rate function (see Fig. 2 dashed line). A linear population decrease is achieved
with the rate function Eq. (15) (see Fig. 2 dotted line). Finally, using a quadratic rate
function Eq. (17) (see Fig. 2 full line) the centroblast population remains unchanged for
the major duration of the GC reaction and is steeply reduced at the very end.

Experimentally, the time course of the GC total centroblast population seems to lie
in between these three scenarios [11]. The scenario with Eq. (17) is certainly a reasonable
upper bound for monotonically decreasing centroblast populations. A population decrease
which is faster than exponentially is unlikely.

It follows that during the major life time of GCs (t < 15 d) the condition

f (t) = g(t) − p(t) < 0.018/h

(4)

holds (see Fig. 2). On the other hand the requirement of a monotonically decreasing
centroblast population leads to the bound f (t) > 0, i.e. g(t) > p(t). Taking these results

4

Figure 1: Possible time courses of the centroblast population during GC reactions.

together one is lead to

p(t) < g(t) < p(t) + 0.018/h ,

(5)

which is a very powerful condition. This means that in an experiment the centroblast to
centrocyte diﬀerentiation rate g(t) has to fulﬁll this condition during the ﬁrst 15 days of
the GC reaction. If it turns out that the above condition is not guaranteed experimentally,
then – assuming the rather weak requirement made to be valid – a GC reaction without
recycling of centrocytes to centroblasts is ruled out.

Note that assuming the proliferation rate to adopt the value Eq. (2), the above condition
It follows a lower bound for the diﬀerentiation rate which is in

can be reformulated.
accordance with Eq. (3):

1
6 h

<

g(t)
ln(2)

<

1
5.19 h

.

This means that if GCs without recycling exist, a centroblast shall (in average) take not
less than 5.19 hours to diﬀerentiate into centrocytes.

Supposing that the linear centroblast population behavior is the realistic one, the upper

bound becomes even more powerful. During the ﬁrst 10 days the condition

(6)

(7)

p(t) < g(t) < p(t) + 0.005/h

5

Figure 2: The function f (t) corresponding to the diﬀerent time courses of the centroblast
population in Fig. 1.

must hold in a GC reaction without recycling. With the proliferation rate in Eq. (2) this
corresponds to an average centroblast diﬀerentiation time of at least 5.75 hours. This result
demonstrates, that the condition for a one-pass GC may become stronger than in Eqs. (5)
and (6), depending on the characteristics of the total centroblast population decrease.

4 Robustness of the results

4.1 The case of constant rates

In order to check the robustness of the results Eqs. (5) and (6) the most critical scenario
(with weakest conditions) is considered in some more detail: the scenario with constant
rates. If the proliferation and diﬀerentiation rate are constant, the centroblast population
model reduces to a pure exponential decrease of the population

B(t) = B(0) exp ((p − g)t) ,

(8)

6

where the constant rate g is unknown. Focussing on the population after T = 18 days of
the GC reaction, the rate function

f = g − p = − 1
T

ln

B(T )
B(0) !

 

(9)

is found. The resulting values for the diﬀerentiation rate are shown in Fig. 3 in dependence
of the GC life time and for diﬀerent numbers of remaining cells at the end of the reaction.
As expected the rate becomes larger for shorter GC life times T . Even supposing a rather

Figure 3: The rate function f = g − p in dependence of the life time of the GC for diﬀerent
numbers of remaining centroblasts at the end of the GC reaction.

short life time of 12 days and further supposing that only one cell remains at the end of
the GC reaction, one gets an upper bound of

for possible values of the diﬀerentiation rate. Incorporating the proliferation rate Eq. (2)
it follows

p(t) < g(t) < p(t) + 0.033/h

1
6 h

<

g(t)
ln(2)

<

1
4.7 h

.

7

(10)

(11)

As a consequence, the statement that in one-pass GCs (without recycling) the centroblast
to centrocyte diﬀerentiation rate should respect the above bounds Eqs. (5) and (6) is not
altered dramatically by variation of the GC properties.

The initial number of centroblasts B(0) was not varied until now. Note that only the
ratio B(T )/B(0) enters Eq. (9), so that a variation of the initial number of centroblast is
equivalent to the variation of the ﬁnal number of remaining cells B(T ). Therefore, the
above constraints Eqs. (10) and (11) are also valid with e.g. 60000 initial and 5 remaining
cells. Lower numbers of initial cells allow stronger bounds than the above ones.

4.2 The case of linear centroblast decrease

Figure 4: The time dependence of the rate function f = g − p (corresponding to a linear
centroblast population decrease) for diﬀerent GC life times T and for diﬀerent numbers of
remaining centroblasts B(T ) at the end of the GC reaction.

In the case of a linear centroblast population decrease (see Fig. 1 pointed line) the
corresponding rate function f (t) (see Eq. (15)) is analyzed for various border conditions.
The result is shown in Fig. 4. Condition Eq. (7) is not aﬀected at all by a variation of
the number of remaining cells at the end of the GC reaction in a range of three orders

8

of magnitude (the values chosen for B(T ) are 0.1, 5, and 100). The three corresponding
curves are practically not distinguishable (see Fig. 4).

The situation is diﬀerent for the variation of the GC life time T . Here, the period in
which condition Eq. (7) remains valid is prolonged for long living GCs and shortened for
short living GCs (see Fig. 4 dashed and pointed line, respectively). For a very short life
time of 12 days (plus 3 days of pure proliferation) the condition remains valid for 4 days
only (7 days after immunization). However, condition Eq. (5) remains valid even in this
case for 11 days, so for approximately the whole GC life time.

5 Conclusions

The above analysis is summarized with the statement that in a one-pass GC (without
recycling) the centroblast to centrocyte diﬀerentiation rate should respect the condition
Eq. (5) p(t) < g(t) < p(t) + 0.018/h during the ﬁrst 15 days of the GC reaction. For a
standard proliferation rate Eq. (2) of ln(2)/6h this translates into an average time for a
centroblast to diﬀerentiate into a centrocyte which cannot be substantially shorter than
5 hours. If this condition is not fulﬁlled, recycling has necessarily to be present in GC
reactions. Note that, the other way round, if the average diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to
centrocytes takes more than 5 hours, recycling is not necessarily absent.

This statement is based basically on exclusively two (weak) assumptions: Firstly, a
linear population dynamic (see Eq. (1)) for the total centroblast number in GCs. Secondly,
a monotonic decrease of the total centroblast population. Therefore, the conclusion is
independent of all speculation on shape spaces, selection processes, and aﬃnity maturation.
In order to decide if recycling exists in GC reactions one has to check the centroblast
to centrocyte diﬀerentiation rate experimentally at least at one representative moment of
the GC reaction. The moment has to be chosen such that on one hand the GC reaction is
already well established. On the other hand, the later the measurement is done the less is
known on the proliferation rate. In addition, one approaches the regime where the above
condition looses its validity (see Fig. 2). Therefore, an optimal moment will be about 8
days after immunization. Technically, this may be achieved by labeling studies of cells in
the GC which are in cell cycle as it was done in [10, 11].
Alternatively, a systematic and time resolved analysis of the total centroblast population at
diﬀerent moments of the GC reaction may improve the criterion (see e.g. Eq. (7)) because
one could distinguish which of the cell population scenarios presented in Fig. 1 corresponds
to existing GC reactions. This may be done by the measurement of the GC volume at
several times of the GC reaction as in [11, 17].

Appendix

The diﬀerential equation Eq. (1) is formally solved by

B(t) = B(t0 = 0 h) exp

dx f (x)

.

(12)

t

−

(cid:18)

0
Z

(cid:19)

9

(cid:19)

df
dt

= f 2 ,

f (t) = − 1

.

t − c1

c1 =

T
1 − B(T )
B(0)

,

f (t) =

(1 h)
(t − c2)2

In the following, the border conditions (life time of GC T , and centroblast population at
t0 = 0 h and T ) are incorporated into the rate function f .

To achieve a linear decrease of the centroblast population, the second derivative of the

population function is required to vanish. From Eq. (1) and using Eq. (12) it follows

B − f

dB
dt

d2B

dt2 = −df
dt
= −df
dt

t

−

(cid:18)

0
Z

This expression vanishes for

which is solved by

B(0) exp

dx f (x)

+ f B(0)f exp

dx f (x)

.

(13)

t

−

(cid:18)

0

Z

(cid:19)

The integration constant c1 is ﬁxed by the condition that the ﬁnal population at time T
is given by B(T ). With Eq. (12) this leads to

which is a positive constant for B(T ) < B(0).
In the case of a quadratic rate function

an analogous calculation which incorporates the ﬁnal centroblast populations leads to

c2 =

+

T
2

T 2
4

− (1 h) T
B(T )
ln
B(0)

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

v
u
u
t

Other solutions are formally possible but do not lead to biologically reasonable centroblast
populations.

References

[1] Kepler, T.B., and Perelson, A.S., Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B cells and the

eﬃciency of aﬃnity maturation. Immunol. Today 14 (1993), 412-415.

[2] Han, S.H., Zheng, B., Dal Porto, J., Kelsoe, G., In situ Studies of the Primary Immune
Response to (4–Hydroxy–3–Nitrophenyl) Acetyl IV. Aﬃnity-Dependent, Antigen-
Driven B-Cell Apoptosis in Germinal Centers as a Mechanism for Maintaining Self-
Tolerance. J. Exp. Med. 182 (1995), 1635-1644.

10

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

[3] Oprea, M., Nimwegen, E. van, and Perelson, A.S., Dynamics of One-pass Germinal
Center Models: Implications for Aﬃnity Maturation. Bull. Math. Biol. 62 (2000),
121-153.

[4] Meyer-Hermann, M., Deutsch, A., and Or-Guil, M., Recycling probability and dy-
namical properties of germinal center reactions. e-print:physics/0101015, submitted
to J. Theor. Biol. (2001).

[5] K¨uppers, R., Zhao, M., Hansmann, M.L., and Rajewsky, K., Tracing B Cell Develop-
ment in Human Germinal Centers by Molecular Analysis of Single Cells Picked from
Histological Sections. EMBO J. 12 (1993), 4955-4967.

[6] Wedemayer, G.J., Patten, P.A., Wang, L.H., Schultz, P.G., and Stevens, R.C., Struc-
tural insights into the evolution of an antibody combining site. Science 276 (1997),
1665-1669.

[7] Weigert, M., Cesari, I., Yonkovitch, S., and Cohn, M., Variability in the light chain

sequences of mouse antibody. Nature 228 (1970), 1045-1047.

[8] Radmacher, M.D., Kelsoe, G., and Kepler, T.B., Predicted and Inferred Waiting-
Times for Key Mutations in the Germinal Center Reaction - Evidence for Stochasticity
in Selection. Immunol. Cell Biol. 76 (1998), 373-381.

[9] Nossal, G., The molecular and cellular basis of aﬃnity maturation in the antibody

response. Cell 68 (1991), 1-2.

[10] Camacho, S.A., Koscovilbois, M.H., and Berek, C., The Dynamic Structure of the

Germinal Center. Immunol. Today 19 (1998), 511-514.

[11] Liu, Y.J., Zhang, J., Lane, P.J., Chan, E.Y., and MacLennan, I.C.M., Sites of speciﬁc
B cell activation in primary and secondary responses to T cell-dependent and T cell-
independent antigens. Eur. J. Immunol. 21 (1991), 2951-2962.

[12] Hanna, M.G., An autoradiographic study of the germinal center in spleen white pulp
during early intervals of the immune response. Lab. Invest. 13 (1964), 95-104.

[13] Zhang, J., MacLennan, I.C.M., Liu, Y.J., and Land, P.J.L., Is rapid proliferation in
B centroblasts linked to somatic mutation in memory B cell clones. Immunol. Lett.
18 (1988), 297-299.

[14] Jacob, J., Kassir, R., and Kelsoe, G., In situ studies of the primary immune response
to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. I. The architecture and dynamics of responding
cell populations. J. Exp. Med. 173 (1991), 1165-1175.

[15] Kroese, F.G., Wubbena, A.S., Seijen, H.G., and Nieuwenhuis, P., Germinal centers

develop oligoclonally. Eur. J. Immunol. 17 (1987), 1069-1072.

[16] Kelsoe, G., The germinal center: a crucible for lymphocyte selection. Semin. Immunol.

8 (1996), 179-184.

11

[17] de Vinuesa, C.G., Cook, M.C., Ball, J., Drew, M., Sunners, Y., Cascalho, M., Wabl,
M., Klaus, G.G.B., and MacLennan, C.M., Germinal Centers without T Cells. J. Exp.
Med. 191 (2000), 485-493.

Acknowledgments

I thank Andreas Deutsch and Michal Or-Guil for intense discussions and valuable com-
ments.

12

