1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From features to expression: High-density

oligonuleotide array analysis revisited.

Félix Naef

, Daniel A. Lim

and Marelo O. Magnaso

1

2

1∗

Otober 21, 2013

The Laboratories of

Mathematial Physis and

Neurogenesis, The

1

2

Rokefeller University, New York NY 10021

Abstrat

r(cid:13)

One of the most popular tools for large sale gene expression studies are

high-density oligonuleotide (GeneChip

) arrays. These urrently have

16-20 small probe ells ((cid:16)features(cid:17)) for evaluating the transript abundane

of eah gene. In addition, eah probe is aompanied by a mismathed

probe designed as a ontrol for non-spei(cid:28)ity. An algorithm is presented

to ompute omparative expression levels from the intensities of the indi-

vidual features, based on a statistial study of their distribution. We show

that our algorithm improves signi(cid:28)antly upon the urrent standard and

leads to a substantially larger number of genes brought above the noise

(cid:29)oor for further analysis.

.

Bioinformatis is based on the existene of vast quantities of information of

unknown signi(cid:28)ane whose internal relationships are analyzed using statistial

methods. The individual data in these data sets are usually highly inhomo-

geneous in quality, with the number of elements inreasing rapidly for lower

quality levels. A reurrent problem in the statistial analysis of suh data sets

is that while no sophistiated methods are needed to asertain the meaning of

the few high quality elements, the bulk of the data often lies near the noise

(cid:29)oor, where fairly fany statistial tools may beome neessary.

In suh ir-

umstanes, seemingly innouous improvements to data treatment may yield

large improvements to the analysis simply beause of the way the data quality

is distributed.

Among the many experimental tehniques generating large datasets from

biologial experiments today, oligonuleotide hybridization arrays have rapidly

beome a popular tool for large sale gene expression sreens[1, 2℄. Currently,

DNA hybridization array tehniques aim at obtaining several thousand low qual-

ity measurements of transript abundane in a single parallel experiment. From

this (cid:16)bulk(cid:17) data, the goal is to identify groups of genes partiipating in a given

1

pathway and hopefully unravel some features of their transriptional regulation,

to be on(cid:28)rmed by more sensitive and preise methods.

There are urrently two main trends in miroarray tehnology, DNA bi-

olor glass slides [3, 4℄ and the high-density oligonuleotide arrays (HDONAs)

manufatured by A(cid:27)ymetrix [5, 6℄. In the (cid:28)rst ase, PCR-derived DNAs from

libraries are spotted onto a glass slide as hybridization probes. In the seond,

hybridization probes onsist of hemially synthesized 25-mer oligonuleotides

on a grided array. Under the best onditions, one would expet a linear rela-

tionship between the measured (cid:29)uoresene and the onentration of original

mRNA. However, the onstant of proportionality is urrently strongly depen-

dent on the hybridization sequenes. As a onsequene, large sale hybridization

experiments do not give quantitative information on a gene vs. gene fashion for

a single preparation, i.e., it is not possible to infer the ratio of mRNA onen-

tration for atin to tubulin within a single sample. The meaningful information

lies in the ratios of intensities for the same hybridization sequene taken from

di(cid:27)erent samples. Usually one thinks of one sample (e.g.

'normal' tissue or

unsynhronized ells) as a baseline to whih all other onditions are ompared.

In what follows, we onentrate exlusively on HDONAs. On these, probe

el ls (or features) are grouped into probe sets for a given gene, a probe set on-

sisting of ∼ 20 (depending on the gene and the hip series) probe pairs (pairs of

probe ells). Eah pair is designed to probe a di(cid:27)erent 25 base sequene from

the gene. The identities of the 25-mers are not revealed by A(cid:27)ymetrix, only

the region from whih the whole probe set is taken is indiated. To hek for

non-spei(cid:28) hybridization, eah probe pair onsists of a PM (Perfet Math) ell

ontaining the exat sequene of that gene and a MM (single MisMath) ell

whose middle oligonuleotide has been hanged. Hene, a full probe set onsists

of ∼ 40 hybridization probes, and omposite sores (for intensity or ratios) must

be derived for eah gene. The omposites usually used are the ones provided

by default by the A(cid:27)ymetrix software. To generate an absolute intensity mea-

sure (Avg Di(cid:27) ), this algorithm subtrats the MM from the PM intensity for

eah probe pair (an attempt to orret for the non-spei(cid:28) hybridization and

bakground), and the obtained di(cid:27)erenes are then arithmetially averaged after

trunation of the largest and smallest values [5℄.

We propose an improved method for obtaining omposite ratios (and inten-

sities) of transript abundane between two samples, based on a study of the

statistial distribution of individual ell ratios within eah probe set. A few

ideas guided our approah: (i) the experimental protool is designed suh that

the hybridization is kinetially dominated; (ii) data distributed on an exponen-

tial sale should not be averaged algebraially but geometrially. Having these

in mind, we show how the study of raw A(cid:27)ymetrix data (.CEL (cid:28)les) leads to

an algorithm whose essential ingredients are: (i) MM ells are not utilized as

ontrols for non-spei(cid:28)ity, we use them only for the alulation of the bak-

ground intensity; (ii) outliers need to be disarded; (iii) averages are taken in

log-oordinates. Signi(cid:28)ant advantages over the urrent A(cid:27)ymetrix software in-

lude (i) the ability to obtain reliable sores for a greater proportion of genes

(+30%), espeially in the mid to low intensity range; (ii) repliate experiments

2

show greater reproduibility (i.e.

tighter satter plots); (iii) ratio sores for

genes probed twie or more on the miroarray show a vastly inreased orrela-

tion (there are ∼ 700 suh genes on the ombined Mu11k A and B mouse hip

series).

In the remaining, we demonstrate how this proedure emerges from

studying the data sets, and report evidene for the improvements.

Raw intensities and bakground subtration

The starting point in our analysis of HDONAs onsists of the (cid:29)uoresent in-

tensities of all the 25-base probes on the hip, inluding both the PM and MM

ells (.CEL (cid:28)les). This data has already gone through one proessing step by

A(cid:27)ymetrix, namely an average of the pixel intensities (36 pixels per ell for the

Mu11k mouse hip) for eah probe ell. Before moving on to onsider whih

probes belong to whih gene, it is instrutive to inquire about the reproduibil-

ity of the raw data in repliate experiments. The igar shaped loud in Fig. 1(a)

shows suh a typial example. In an ideal (noiseless) experiment, the satter plot

of the repliates should produe a single straight line with unit slope, so that

the broadening of the line in a real experiment re(cid:29)ets the noise. In HDONAs,

this noise has multiple soures, inluding intrinsi biologial and sample pro-

essing variability, hybridization kinetis and thermodynamis, noise related to

the inorporation and ampli(cid:28)ation of (cid:29)uoresent dyes, and the measurement of

the (cid:29)uoresene in the sanning proess. Despite all these potential soures, the

experimental situation is enouraging as indiated by the high reproduibility

in (a).

The intensity dependene of the noise envelope is ommonly referred to as

the noise funnel. In Fig. 1(a), the funnel is only very weakly intensity depen-

dent. We observe that the onset of the intensities is shifted from zero to ∼ 500,

indiating that ell intensities have an additive bakground omponent. Esti-

mating this bakground intensity is essential when proessing low intensity data

points. In HDONAs, identifying bakground is a priori a di(cid:27)erent problem from

its analogue in DNA spotted arrays. There, one tries to measure the intensity

of regions in between adjaent spots as a measure for the loal bakground. In

ontrast, the inter-feature distane in A(cid:27)ymetrix arrays is too small for a sim-

ilar measurement and one must estimate the bakground from the probe ells

themselves. Bakground is by de(cid:28)nition non-spei(cid:28), and should therefore not

be sensitive to the single base sequene modi(cid:28)ation in the MM ells. Conse-

quently, we onsider the subset of probe pairs whose PM and MM intensities

di(cid:27)er by less than a given small quantity (PM-MM < ǫ) as representative of the

bakground. The distributions of either the PM or MM ells obtained in this

manner depend only weakly on ǫ, and an be reasonably (cid:28)tted to Gaussians from
their low-intensity onset up to their maximum (Fig. 1(d)). We used ǫ = 50 in
units of the .CEL (cid:28)le intensities, but using ǫ = 100 leads to hanges of the order
of only ∼ 1% for the mean bakground hbi and standard deviation σ . Fig. 1(b)

shows the raw data after bakground subtration. The typial broadening of

the noise funnel at low intensities end re(cid:29)ets the residual bakground (the fat

3

that σ 6= 0). In ontrast, the A(cid:27)ymetrix proedure estimates hbi and variane
var(b) from the 2% lowest intensity ells. The mean and variane obtained this
way are strongly dependent on the arbitrary uto(cid:27) (2%). Typially, we obtain a
hbi larger than the value reported by the A(cid:27)ymetrix software (∼ +15%), so that
we are left with ∼ 86% of the features lying above hbi + 2σ , rather that ∼ 93%.

In addition, our noise funnel is slightly broader. Nevertheless, our algorithm for

omposite sores still leads to a signi(cid:28)ant noise redution (f. Results).

As a preview, we show in Fig. 1() whih subset of PM probes are onsidered

by our algorithm when omputing ratio sores between the two samples. It turns

out onsistently that noisier ells are automatially disarded, however, not on

the basis of an evaluation of the funnel shape (f. Probe ell seletion).

Construting good estimators

The previous disussion about bakground intensity distributions raises the fol-

lowing general issue: what are good estimators for data drawn from an unknown

distribution? The answer involves (cid:28)nding the oordinates in whih the distri-

bution is most well behaved. In the best situation, a distribution is short tailed,

whih ensures that moments are not only well de(cid:28)ned but are also relevant

quantities for a statistial desription of the data set.

In a situation of long

tailed distributions (e.g. driven by a large number of outliers in a dataset),

the situation is more ompliated. Then, one either needs to establish a model

desribing how one should trunate the dataset before alulating averages, or

work with estimators whih are more robust to outliers, like perentiles. To

formulate this more preisely, we onsider the following problem: suppose we

have n samples from a positive distribution p(x), and samples from the saled
distribution λp(x/λ). The problem is to (cid:28)nd the optimal estimator for λ. The
If p is a well behaved distribution, then
solution learly shall depend on p.
n
hλp(x/λ)i/hp(x)i (hxi = 1
i=1 xi denotes the arithmeti average) is a (cid:28)ne
estimator; but it miserably fails if p is long tailed. Conversely, the median is a

n P

suboptimal estimator in the ase of well behaved distributions, but it has the

advantage of being more robust in the long tailed ase.

Datasets from HDONAs do exhibit suh long tails, as we show in Fig. 2. The

histograms (Fig. 2A) show the log2 PM intensity distributions of all probe sets,

eah PM ell being normalized by their probe set median. Probe sets are las-

si(cid:28)ed into four windows aording to their median magnitude; we have veri(cid:28)ed

that re(cid:28)ned windows do not hange the shape of the distributions signi(cid:28)antly.

These distributions show that ell intensities vary by fators of ∼ 25

around

their median in all the intensity windows, and that the distributions are far

from Gaussian. Nevertheless, log-oordinates lead to roughly symmetri distri-

butions, at least up to the last intensity window. We think of these distributions

as the sum of a well behaved omponent (with onverging moments to whih

the Central Limit Theorem applies), plus a long tailed part due to outliers.

These need to be identi(cid:28)ed (f. Probe ell seletion) and disarded. Then, the

meaningful estimators for the trunated data sets onsist of arithmeti averages

4

in log-oordinates (geometri means).

The ordered intensity pro(cid:28)les of individual, randomly piked probe sets are

also shown (Fig. 2B), eah of them for dupliate experiments. These emphasize

the reproduibility of the broad intensity pro(cid:28)les.

The mysterious MM ells

Before explaining how to disard outliers and ompute a ratio sore, we explain

why we do not utilize the MM ells for the alulation of omposite intensity

and ratio sores. Single mismath ells seem not to be onsistently doing what

they were originally designed for, namely to serve as a ontrol for non-spei(cid:28)

hybridization. Instead, we (cid:28)nd that MM ells often at as a pale PM, essen-

tially binding the same oligonuleotide as the PM do, but on average ∼ 1.8 times

weaker than the PM probes (Fig. 3). Notie that (a) presents the raw ell inten-

sities, whereas (b) reports the distributions of omposite intensities obtained by

onsidering the PM and MM probe sets as if they were two di(cid:27)erent onditions

for the same gene. It is somewhat disturbing that in the high intensity region,

the loud (a) exhibits a valley around the diagonal. This means that there is a

signi(cid:28)ant number of probes where the target RNAs bind more spei(cid:28)ally to

the MM. We found no onvining explanation for this matter, but is is unlikely

to be the onsequene of non-spei(cid:28) hybridization (non-spei(cid:28) hybridization

would result in a maximum on the diagonal). Therefore, subtrating the MM

from the PM intensities is likely to be misleading, and we found it favorable to

not onsider the MM ells any further. As a matter of fat, it is not entirely

surprising that a single base hange does not provide a lear ut disrimina-

tion for non-spei(cid:28) hybridization in a proess dominate by kinetis rather that

equilibrium thermodynamis.

Probe ell seletion and ratio omposites

We now desribe our algorithm for the seletion of ells used in the alulation

of ratios. We observed that omparing two idential probe sets hybridized to

two di(cid:27)erent samples leads to series of pairwise PM ells ratios (r1, r2, . . . , rN )
behaving quite far from an idea homogeneous situation (all ri being the same).

Instead, the individual ell ratios often vary over a deade; it also ours that

some ells indiate an up-regulation whereas others indiate the opposite (f.

Fig. 4 () and (d)). In this situation, a straightforward linear regression between

PM intensities of the two samples is not adequate. It further happens that high

intensity ells saturate in one or both of the samples, leading to useless (even

misleading) ell ratios. Suh probe ells are disarded from our analysis. The

saturation thresholds (most likely due to the photomultiplier) an be read o(cid:27) the

.CEL (cid:28)les, by plotting the mean ell intensities versus the standard deviation

of the pixel intensities. Our purpose here is not to address the question of

why suh broad ratio distributions may arise, but rather how to optimize sores

5

for them. In a (cid:28)rst step, we order the series (log r1, log r2, . . . , log rN ). Next,
we aim at splitting this set in an interval Imed with optimally narrow range,

and a subset of outliers to be omitted from the ratio sore alulation. We

require the median to be a member of Imed and optimize for its left and right
boundaries il and ir .
absene of knowledge about how the ratios are distributed within Imed , exept

l = log rir − log ril denotes the range of Imed .

In the

for the range from whih the ratios are drawn, the most unbiased assumption

l and p′ = 1

is to assume a uniform probability p within this range. Hene, the probability
of (cid:28)nding a log-ratio in Imed is p = 1
L for an outlier. We then
retain Imed that maximizes the likelihood of the full probe set ratios given our
model. We must therefore maximize L = −(N − n) log L − n log l, where N is
the total number of ells and n the ells in Imed .
piks the optimal interval Imed as a tradeo(cid:27) between having too many outliers,
and letting the range of Imed beome too wide. Prototype situations showing
how our model selets Imed are presented in Fig. 5 for two di(cid:27)erent onditions.
After having identi(cid:28)ed Imed , we ompute sores by taking geometri means of
ell ratios and intensities from PM ells inside Imed .

In essene, this proedure

It is now worthwhile looking bak at Fig. 1(b) and () showing whih probe

ells are atually seleted. As a fat, there are only few probe sets that have

ommon low intensity ells(f. Fig. 2A). Instead, the low intensity ells are

distributed among the probe sets, whih is learly re(cid:29)eted in Fig. 1() by the

low density of points at the low end.

Results

To demonstrate the potential of our method, we analyzed a set of HDONA hy-

bridizations evaluating the transriptional pro(cid:28)les of six di(cid:27)erent mouse brain

regions using the Mu11k mouse A and B hip series. The dissetions and en-

zymati steps (making the target RNA) were performed in dupliate in all

experiments and the two obtained samples were hybridized onto separate ar-

rays. Fig. 5A shows the satter plots of the repliates from four brain regions,

the A and B hips being superimposed on the same plot.

Our sores exhibit a muh tighter satter, espeially in the mid to low in-

tensity range. Further, we are able to report sores for all the genes on the

arrays, whereas the A(cid:27)ymetrix algorithm reports non-negative values (negative

intensities are meaningless and not plotable on a logarithmi sale) for ∼ 70% of

the probe sets. As mentioned, the reason we obtain relatively few low intensity

genes (2σ of residual bakground ∼ 100 in these units) is that low intensity ells

tend to be distributed among di(cid:27)erent probe sets rather than being grouped.

The histograms in Fig. 5B show the distributions of the log2 ratios from the

four ombined regions in intensity windows. Our distributions are well (cid:28)tted

by narrow Gaussians with standard deviations σ ∼ 0.2 for intensities > 300.
2σ then orresponds to a fold hange of ∼ 1.25. In ontrast, the A(cid:27)ymetrix

sores lead to longer tails espeially in the mid to low intensity range. Next,

we ontrast a repliate experiment Fig. 6(a) with a omparison of two di(cid:27)erent

6

experimental onditions Fig. 6(b). As σ is not strongly intensity dependant,
we have tentatively indiated in red the fold hanges of 1.25. Consistently, 6%
of the genes lie beyond the 2σ lines in (a). For the omparison of two di(cid:27)erent
ondition (b), 20% of the genes are di(cid:27)erentially expressed by a fator ≥ 1.25.

We should further mention that the loation of our points in the satter plot

is equivalent to the reported ratio, whih is not the ase for the Fold Change

alulated by A(cid:27)ymetrix.

Finally, we demonstrate that our proedure leads to a greatly enhaned on-

sistene between the sores obtained from probe sets for idential genes. There

are ∼ 700 genes represented twie or more on the ombined A and B Mu11k

mouse hips. The sequenes for two suh sets may probe di(cid:27)erent loations

on the same gene, or one probe set may represent a subsequene of the other.

Nevertheless, they orrespond to the same physial gene and should ideally lead

to idential sores. Let p1 and p2 be two suh probe sets for a ommon gene,
and ri (i = 1, 2) the ratio of the pi intensities probed in two di(cid:27)erent brain
r1
r2 ) for two omparisons
regions. In Fig. 7, we show the distributions of log2(

C1 and C2 (C2 orresponds to Fig. 1(b)). The (cid:28)gure is separated into left

and right aording to whether the A(cid:27)ymetrix fold hange was reported with a

(cid:16)∼(cid:17) in at least one of the two representations p1 or p2 (the (cid:16)∼(cid:17) indiates that

the baseline intensity was within the residual bakground, suggesting that the

reported value is unreliable). It is evident that our ratios are far more onsistent

than the A(cid:27)ymetrix sores, espeially in the right panels. Our standard devia-

tions σ are similar throughout all plots, the σ on the right panels being barely
larger. Taking 2σ ∼ 0.4 implies that 95% of the pairs (r1, r2) di(cid:27)er in ratios by
a fator less than ∼ 1.3, whih is a signi(cid:28)ant narrowing in omparison to the

distributions produed by the urrent A(cid:27)ymetrix algorithm.

Summary

We presented an improved approah for omputing omposite ratio sores for

high-density oligonuleotide arrays. Our new method di(cid:27)ers signi(cid:28)antly from

the urrent A(cid:27)ymetrix algorithm in the following manner: (i) MM ells are not

inluded beause their information ontent is unlear; (ii) ratios between two

di(cid:27)erent samples are derived from omparing the PM ell intensities pairwise,

and then identifying a subset of probe ells leading to optimally onsistent

sores; (iii) geometri averages are used beause the intensity and ratios of

probe sets are distributed on a exponential sale. We showed that our method

ats as a noise reduing (cid:28)lter in the sense that (i) repliate experiments show an

inreased reproduibility; (ii) ratio sores for probe sets probing the same gene

show a muh greater orrelation. We emphasized that beause the distribution

of intensities within a probe set is often muh broader than the distribution

of ell ratios taken from a pairwise omparison, the most reliable information

lies in ratio and not in absolute intensity omposites. Therefore, we designed

our algorithm to primarily ompute ratios, and reported intensities (e.g.

in

satterplots) always dependent upon a omparison.

7

We have applied our method to a large miroarray data set studying the

neurogenesis in adult mie brains, whih lead to highly signi(cid:28)ant biologial

results[7℄. The generated data sets ould be lustered robustly using standard

hierarhial tehniques.

Finally, the fat that MM ells are not expliitely needed opens the possi-

bility of sreening twie as many genes on a given miroarray. Considering that

the urrent estimates about the number of genes in the human genome predit

fewer than 40, 000 genes, it is not unrealisti to expet single arrays for all hu-

man genes in the near future.

We bene(cid:28)tted from very helpful disussions with E. van Nimwegen, J. Luban

and M. Asmal. F. N. aknowledges the the Swiss National Siene Foundation

for (cid:28)nanial support. D. A. L. was supported by the NIH grant GM07739.

Referenes

[1℄ Lander, E. S. (1999) Nature Genet. 21, 3-4.

[2℄ Lokhart, J. and Winzeler, E. A. (2000) Nature 405, 827-836.

[3℄ Shena, M., Shalon, D., Davis, R. W., Brown, P. O. (1995) Siene 270,

467-70.

[4℄ Shalon, D., Smith, S. J., Brown, P. O. (1996) Genome Res. 6, 639-45.

[5℄ Chee, M., Yang, R., Hubell, E., Berno, A., Huang, X. C., Stern, D., Winkle,

R. J., Lokhart, D. J., Morris, M. S., Fodor, S. P. (1996) Siene 274, 610-14.

[6℄ Lipshutz, R. J., Fodor, S. P. , Gingeras, T. R., and Lokhart, D. J. (1999)

Nature Genet. 21, 20-24.

[7℄ Lim, D. A., et al. will be submitted for publiation in the same issue.

8

This figure "fig1.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig2.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig3.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig4.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig5.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig6.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

This figure "fig7.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102010v1

