Designer Gene Networks: Towards Fundamental
Cellular Control

Jeﬀ Hasty1, Farren Isaacs1, Milos Dolnik2, David McMillen1, and
J. J. Collins1

1Center for BioDynamics and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, 44

Cummington St., Boston, MA 02215

2Dept. of Chemistry and Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA

August 20, 2000

02454

Submitted to Chaos

1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT The engineered control of cellular function through the design of synthetic

genetic networks is becoming plausible. Here we show how a naturally occurring network

can be used as a parts list for artiﬁcial network design, and how model formulation leads

to computational and analytical approaches relevant to nonlinear dynamics and statistical

physics. We ﬁrst review the relevant work on synthetic gene networks, highlighting the

important experimental ﬁndings with regard to genetic switches and oscillators. We then

present the derivation of a deterministic model describing the temporal evolution of the

concentration of protein in a single-gene network. Bistability in the steady-state protein

concentration arises naturally as a consequence of autoregulatory feedback, and we focus on

the hysteretic properties of the protein concentration as a function of the degradation rate.

We then formulate the eﬀect of an external noise source which interacts with the protein

degradation rate. We demonstrate the utility of such a formulation by constructing a protein

switch, whereby external noise pulses are used to switch the protein concentration between

two values. Following the lead of earlier work, we show how the addition of a second network

component can be used to construct a relaxation oscillator, whereby the system is driven

around the hysteresis loop. We highlight the frequency dependence on the tunable parameter

values, and discuss design plausibility. We emphasize how the model equations can be used

to develop design criteria for robust oscillations, and illustrate this point with parameter

plots illuminating the oscillatory regions for given parameter values. We then turn to the

utilization of an intrinsic cellular process as a means of controlling the oscillations. We

consider a network design which exhibits self-sustained oscillations, and discuss the driving

of the oscillator in the context of synchronization. Then, as a second design, we consider a

synthetic network with parameter values near, but outside, the oscillatory boundary. In this

case, we show how resonance can lead to the induction of oscillations and ampliﬁcation of a

cellular signal. Finally, we construct a toggle switch from positive regulatory elements, and

compare the switching properties for this network with those of a network constructed using

negative regulation. Our results demonstrate the utility of model analysis in the construction

of synthetic gene regulatory networks.

1

Lead Paragraph

Many fundamental cellular processes are governed by genetic programs which

employ protein-DNA interactions in regulating function. Owing to recent tech-

nological advances, it is now possible to design synthetic gene regulatory net-

works. While the idea of utilizing synthetic networks in a therapeutic setting is

still in its infancy, the stage is set for the notion of engineered cellular control at

the DNA level. Theoretically, the biochemistry of the feedback loops associated

with protein-DNA interactions often leads to nonlinear equations, and the tools

of nonlinear analysis become invaluable. Here we utilize a naturally occurring

genetic network to elucidate the construction and design possibilities for syn-

thetic gene regulation. Speciﬁcally, we show how the genetic circuitry of the

bacteriophage λ can be used to design switching and oscillating networks, and

how these networks can be coupled to cellular processes. This work suggests

that a genetic toolbox can be developed using modular design concepts. Such

advancements could be utilized in engineered approaches to the modiﬁcation or

evaluation of cellular processes.

1 Introduction

Remarkable progress in genomic research is leading to a complete map of the building blocks

of biology. Knowledge of this map is, in turn, fueling the study of gene regulation, where

proteins often regulate their own production or that of other proteins in a complex web of

interactions. Post-genomic research will likely center on the dissection and analysis of these

complex dynamical interactions. While the notions of protein-DNA feedback loops and

network complexity are not new [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], experimental advances

are inducing a resurgence of interest in the quantitative description of gene regulation [13,

14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. These advances are beginning to set the stage for

2

a modular description of the regulatory processes underlying basic cellular function [13, 26,

27, 28, 29, 34]. In light of nearly three decades of parallel progress in the study of complex

nonlinear and stochastic processes, the project of quantitatively describing gene regulatory

networks is timely.

The concept of engineering genetic networks has roots that date back nearly half a cen-

tury [30, 31]. It is relatively recent, however, that experimental progress has made the design

and implementation of genetic networks amenable to quantitative analysis. There are two

dominant reasons for constructing synthetic networks. First, simple networks represent a

ﬁrst step towards logical cellular control, whereby biological processes can be manipulated

or monitored at the DNA level [32]. Such control could have a signiﬁcant impact on post-

genomic biotechnology. From the construction of simple switches or oscillators, one can

imagine the design of genetic code, or software, capable of performing increasingly elabo-

rate functions [33, 34]. A second complementary motivation for network construction is the

scientiﬁc notion of reduced complexity; the inherently reductionist approach of decoupling

a simple network from its native and often complex biological setting can lead to valuable

information regarding evolutionary design principles [35].

Ultimately, we envision the implementation of synthetic networks in therapeutic appli-

cations. However, such a utilization depends on concurrent progress in eﬀorts to uncover

basic genomic and interspecies information. For example, broad applicability will only arise

with detailed information regarding tissue-speciﬁc promoters, proteins, and genes. Likewise,

quantitative network design is contingent on a ﬁrm understanding of cellular diﬀerentiation

and fundamental processes such as transcription, translation, and protein metabolism. More

crucially, delivery is a major hurdle; without identiﬁable cell-speciﬁc recognition molecules,

there is no method for introducing a network to a speciﬁc type of cell. Since, in many re-

gards, therapeutic applications are somewhat premature, we focus on the implementation of

synthetic networks in less complicated organisms. The design of synthetic circuits and opti-

mization of their function in bacteria, yeast, or other plant organisms should reveal nonlinear

3

properties that can be employed as possible mechanisms of cellular control.

In this paper, we develop several models describing the dynamics of the protein concen-

tration in small self-contained synthetic networks, and demonstrate techniques for externally

controlling the dynamics. Although our results are general, as they originate from networks

designed with common gene regulatory elements, we ground the discussion by considering

the genetic circuitry of bacteriophage λ. Since the range of potentially interesting behavior

is wide, we focus primarily on the concentration of the λ repressor protein. We ﬁrst show

how bistability in the steady-state value of the repressor protein can arise from a single-gene

network. We then show how an external noise source aﬀecting protein degradation can be

introduced to our model, and how the subsequent Langevin equation is analyzed by way

of transforming to an equation describing the evolution of a probability function. We then

obtain the steady-state mean repressor concentration by solving this equation in the long-

time limit, and discuss its relationship to the magnitude of the external perturbation. This

leads to a potentially useful application, whereby one utilizes the noise to construct a genetic

switch. We next show how the addition of a second network component can lead to a genetic

relaxation oscillator. We study the oscillator model in detail, highlighting the essential de-

sign criteria. We introduce a mechanism for coupling the oscillator to a time-varying genetic

process. In the model equations, such coupling leads to a driven oscillator, and we study

the resulting system in the framework of synchronization. We illustrate the utility of such

driving through the construction of an ampliﬁer for small periodic signals. Finally, we turn

to the construction of a genetic toggle switch, and compare switching times for our network

with those of a network constructed using negative regulation.

2 Background

Many processes involving cellular regulation take place at the level of gene transcription [36].

The very nature of cellular diﬀerentiation and role-speciﬁc interaction across cell types im-

plicates a not yet understood order to cellular processes. Various modeling approaches

4

have successfully described certain aspects of gene regulation in speciﬁc biological sys-

tems [9, 12, 13, 14, 18, 24, 25, 38, 39]. It is only recent, however, that designed network

experiments have arisen in direct support of regulatory models [21, 22, 23]. In this section,

we highlight the results of these experimental studies, and set the stage for the discussion of

the network designs described in this work.

For completeness, we ﬁrst discuss the basic concepts of promoters and regulatory feedback

loops [40, 41]. A promoter region (or, simply, a promoter) denotes a segment of DNA where

an RNA polymerase molecule will bind and subsequently transcribe a gene into an mRNA

molecule. Thus, one speaks of a promoter as driving the transcription of a speciﬁc gene.

Transcription begins downstream from the promoter at a particular sequence of DNA that

is recognized by the polymerase as the start site of transcription. A chemical sequence

of DNA known as the start codon codes for the region of the gene that is converted into

amino acids, the protein building blocks. Feedback arises when the translated protein is

capable of interacting with the promoter that drives its own production or promoters of other

genes. Such transcriptional regulation is the typical method utilized by cells in controlling

expression [42, 43], and it can occur in a positive or negative sense. Positive regulation,

or activation, occurs when a protein increases transcription through biochemical reactions

that enhance polymerase binding at the promoter region. Negative regulation, or repression,

involves the blocking of polymerase binding at the promoter region. Proteins commonly

exist as multi-subunits or multimers which perform regulatory functions throughout the cell

or serve as DNA-binding proteins. Typically, protein homodimers (or heterodimers) regulate

transcription, and this fact is responsible for much of the nonlinearity that arises in genetic

networks [19].

Recently, there have been three important experimental studies involving the design of

synthetic genetic networks. All three employ the use of repressive promoters. In order of

increasing complexity, they consist of (i) a single autorepressive promoter utilized to demon-

strate the interplay between negative feedback and internal noise [23], (ii) two repressive

5

promoters used to construct a genetic toggle switch [22], and (iii) three repressive promoters

employed to exhibit sustained oscillations [21]. We now brieﬂy review the key ﬁndings in

these three studies.

In the single gene study, both a negatively controlled and an unregulated promoter were

utilized to study the eﬀect of regulation on variations in cellular protein concentration [23].

The central result is that negative feedback decreases the cell-to-cell ﬂuctuations in protein

concentration measurements. Although the theoretical notion of network-induced decreased

variability is not new [44], this study empirically demonstrates the phenomenon through the

measurement of protein ﬂuorescence distributions over a population of cells. The ﬁndings

show that, for a repressive network, the ﬂuorescence distribution is signiﬁcantly tightened,

and that such tightening is proportional to the degree to which the promoter is negatively

controlled. These results suggest that negative feedback is utilized in cellular design as

a means for mitigating variations in cellular protein concentrations. Since the number of

proteins per cell is typically small, internal noise is thought to be an important issue, and

this study speaks to issues regarding the reliability of cellular processes in the presence of

internal noise.

The toggle switch involves a network where each of two proteins negatively regulates

the synthesis of the other; protein “A” turns oﬀ the promoter for gene “B”, and protein B

turns oﬀ the promoter for gene A [22]. In this work, it is shown how certain biochemical

parameters lead to two stable steady states, with either a high concentration of A (low

B), or a high concentration of B (low A). Reliable switching between states is induced

through the transient introduction of either a chemical or thermal stimulus, and shown to be

signiﬁcantly sharper than for that of a network designed without co-repression. Additionally,

the change in ﬂuorescence distributions during the switching process suggests interesting

statistical properties regarding internal noise. These results demonstrate that synthetic

toggle switches can be designed and utilized in a cellular environment. Co-repressive switches

have long been proposed as a common regulatory theme [45], and the synthetic toggle serves

6

as a model system in which to study such networks.

In the oscillator study, three repressible promoters were used to construct a network ca-

pable of producing temporal oscillations in the concentrations of cellular proteins [21]. The

regulatory network was designed with cyclic repressibility; protein A turns oﬀ the promoter

for gene B, protein B turns oﬀ the promoter for gene C, and protein C turns oﬀ the promoter

for gene A. For certain biochemical parameters, the “repressilator” was shown to exhibit self-

sustained oscillations over the entire growth phase of the host E. coli cells. Interestingly, the

period of the oscillations was shown to be longer than the bacterial septation period, suggest-

ing that cellular conditions important to the oscillator network were reliably transmitted to

the progeny cells. However, signiﬁcant variations in oscillatory phases and amplitudes were

observed between daughter cells, and internal noise was proposed as a plausible decorrela-

tion mechanism. These variations suggest that, in order to circumvent the eﬀects of noise,

naturally-occurring oscillators might need some additional form of control. Indeed, an im-

portant aspect of this study was its focus on the utilization of synthetic networks as tools

for biological inference. In this regard, the repressilator work provides potentially valuable

information pertaining to the design principles of other oscillatory systems, such as circadian

clocks.

These studies represent important advances in the engineering-based methodology of

synthetic network design.

In all three, the experimental behavior is consistent with pre-

dictions which arise from continuum dynamical modeling. Further, theoretical models were

utilized to determine design criteria, lending support to the notion of an engineering-based

approach to genetic network design. These criteria included the use of strong constitutive

promoters, eﬀective transcriptional repression, cooperative protein interactions, and similar

protein degradation rates. In the immediate future, the construction and analysis of a circuit

containing an activating control element (i.e., a positive feedback system) appears to be a

next logical step.

In this work, we present several models describing the design of synthetic networks in

7

prokaryotic organisms. Speciﬁcally, we will utilize genetic components from the virus bacte-

riophage λ. While other quantitative studies have concentrated on the switching properties

of the λ phage circuitry [9, 12, 18, 38], we focus on its value as a parts list for designing

synthetic networks. Importantly, the biochemical reactions that constitute the control of λ

phage are very well characterized; the fundamental biochemical reactions are understood,

and the equilibrium association constants are known [9, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50]. In its naturally

occurring state, λ phage infects the bacteria Escherichia coli (E. coli). Upon infection, the

evolution of λ phage proceeds down one of two pathways. The lysis pathway entails the viral

destruction of the host, creating hundreds of phage progeny in the process. These progeny

can then infect other bacteria. The lysogenous pathway involves the incorporation of the

phage DNA into the host genome. In this state, the virus is able to dormantly pass on its

DNA through the bacterial progeny. The extensive interest in λ phage lies in its ability

to perform a remarkable trick; if an E. coli cell infected with a lysogen is endangered (i.e.

exposure to UV radiation), the lysogen will quickly switch to the lysis pathway and abandon

the challenged host cell.

The biochemistry of the viral “abandon-ship” response is a textbook example [36] of

cellular regulation via a naturally-occurring genetic switch. The lytic and lysogenic states

are controlled by the cro and cI genes, respectively. These genes are regulated by what are

known as the PRM (cI gene) and PR (cro gene) promoters. They overlap in an operator

region consisting of the three binding sites OR1, OR2, and OR3, and the Cro and λ repres-

sor (“repressor”, the cI product) protein actively compete for these binding sites. When

the Cro protein (product of cro gene) binds to these sites, it induces lysis. When repressor

binds, lysogeny is maintained and lysis suppressed. When potentially fatal DNA damage is

sensed by an E. coli host, part of the cellular response is to attempt DNA repair through the

activation of a protein called RecA. λ phage has evolved to utilize RecA as a signal; RecA

degrades the viral repressor protein and Cro subsequently assumes control of the promoter

region. Once Cro is in control, lysis ensues and the switch is thrown.

8

3 Bistability in a Single-Gene Network

In this section, we develop a quantitative model describing the regulation of the PRM operator

region of λ phage. We envision that our system is a DNA plasmid consisting of the promoter

region and cI gene.

As noted above, the promoter region contains the three operator sites known as OR1,

OR2, and OR3. The basic dynamical properties of this network, along with a categorization

of the biochemical reactions, are as follows. The gene cI expresses repressor (CI), which in

turn dimerizes and binds to the DNA as a transcription factor. This binding can take place

at one of the three binding sites OR1, OR2, or OR3. The binding aﬃnities are such that,

typically, binding proceeds sequentially; the dimer ﬁrst binds to the OR1 site, then OR2,

and lastly OR3 [37]. Positive feedback arises due to the fact that downstream transcription

is enhanced by binding at OR2, while binding at OR3 represses transcription, eﬀectively

turning oﬀ production and thereby constituting a negative feedback loop.

The chemical reactions describing the network are naturally divided into two categories

– fast and slow. The fast reactions have rate constants of order seconds, and are therefore

assumed to be in equilibrium with respect to the slow reactions, which are described by rates

of order minutes. If we let X, X2, and D denote the repressor, repressor dimer, and DNA

promoter site, respectively, then we may write the equilibrium reactions

(1)

X + X

D + X2

D1 + X2

D2D1 + X2

K1⇀↽ X2
K2⇀↽ D1
K3⇀↽ D2D1
K4⇀↽ D3D2D1

where Di denotes dimer binding to the ORi site, and the Ki = ki/k−i are equilibrium

constants. We let K3 = σ1K2 and K4 = σ2K2, so that σ1 and σ2 represent binding strengths

relative to the dimer-OR1 strength.

The slow irreversible reactions are transcription and degradation. If no repressor is bound

9

to the operator region, or if a single repressor dimer is bound to OR1, transcription proceeds

at a normal unenhanced rate. If, however, a repressor dimer is bound to OR2, the binding

aﬃnity of RNA polymerase to the promoter region is enhanced, leading to an ampliﬁcation of

transcription. Degradation is essentially due to cell growth. We write the reactions governing

these processes as

D + P

D + P + nX

(2)

D1 + P

D1 + P + nX

D2D1 + P

D2D1 + P + nX

kt
→
kt
→
αkt
→
kx
→

X

where P denotes the concentration of RNA polymerase, n is the number of repressor proteins

per mRNA transcript, and α > 1 is the degree to which transcription is enhanced by dimer

occupation of OR2.

Deﬁning concentrations as our dynamical variables, x = [X], x2 = [X2], d0 = [D],

d1 = [D1], d2 = [D2D1], and d3 = [D3D2D1], we can write a rate equation describing the

evolution of the concentration of repressor,

˙x =

2k1x2 + 2k−1x2 + nktp0(d0 + d1 + αd2)

kxx

(3)

−

−

where we assume that the concentration of RNA polymerase p0 remains constant during

We next eliminate x2 and the di from Eq. (3) as follows. We utilize the fact that the

reactions in Eq. (1) are fast compared to expression and degradation, and write algebraic

time.

expressions

x2 = K1x2

(4)

d1 = K2d0x2 = (K1K2)d0x2

d2 = K3d1x2 = σ1(K1K2)2d0x4

d3 = K4d2x2 = σ1σ2(K1K2)3d0x6

10

Further, the total concentration of DNA promoter sites dT is constant, so that

mdT = d0(1 + K1K2x2 + σ1(K1K2)2x4 + σ1σ2(K1K2)3x6)

(5)

where m is the copy number for the plasmid, i.e., the number of plasmids per cell.

We next eliminate two of the parameters by rescaling the repressor concentration x

and time. To this end, we deﬁne the dimensionless variables

x = x√K1K2 and

t =

t(ktp0dT n√K1K2). Upon substitution into Eq. (3), we obtain

e

˙x =

m(1 + x2 + ασ1 x4)
1 + x2 + σ1x4 + σ1σ2x6 −

γx x

e

(6)

where γx = kx/(dT nktp0√K1K2), the time derivative is with respect to

t, and we have

suppressed the overbar on x. The equilibrium constants are K1 = 5.0

107M−1 and

e
×

K2 = 3.3

×

108M−1 [9, 46, 48, 49], so that the transformation from the dimensionless vari-

able x to the total concentration of repressor (monomeric and dimeric forms) is given by

[CI]= (7.7x + 3.0x2) nM. The scaling of time involves the parameter kt, and since transcrip-

tion and translation are actually a complex sequence of reactions, it is diﬃcult to give this

lump parameter a numerical value. However, in Ref. [58], it is shown that, by utilizing a

model for the lysogenous state of the λ phage, a consistency argument yields a value for the

product of parameters (dtnktp0) = 87.6 nM min−1. This leads to a transformation from the

dimensionless time

t to time measured in minutes of t(minutes) = 0.089

t.

Since equations similar to Eq. (3) often arise in the modeling of genetic circuits (see

e

e

Refs. [53]) of this Focus Issue), it is worth noting the speciﬁcs of its functional form. The ﬁrst

term on the right hand side of Eq. (6) represents production of repressor due to transcription.

The even polynomials in x occur due to dimerization and subsequent binding to the promoter

region. As noted above, the σi prefactors denote the relative aﬃnities for dimer binding to

OR1 versus that of binding to OR2 (σ1) and OR3 (σ2). The prefactor α > 1 on the x4 term

is present because transcription is enhanced when the two operator sites OR1 and OR2 are

occupied (x2x2). The x6 term represents the occupation of all three operator sites, and arises

11

in the denominator because dimer occupation of OR3 inhibits polymerase binding and shuts

oﬀ transcription.

For the operator region of λ phage, we have σ1 ∼

2, σ2 ∼

0.08, and α

11 [9, 46, 48, 49],

∼

so that the parameters γx and m in Eq. (6) determine the steady-state concentration of

repressor. The parameter γx is directly proportional to the protein degradation rate, and

in the construction of artiﬁcial networks, it can be utilized as a tunable parameter. The

integer parameter m represents the number of plasmids per cell. While this parameter is not

accessible during an experiment, it is possible to design a plasmid with a given copy number,

with typical values in the range of 1-100.

The nonlinearity of Eq. (6) leads to a bistable regime in the steady state concentration of

repressor, and in Figure 1A we plot the steady-state concentration of repressor as a function

of the parameter γx. The bistability arises as a consequence of the competition between the

production of x along with dimerization and its degradation. For certain parameter values,

the initial concentration is irrelevant, but for those that more closely balance production and

loss, the ﬁnal concentration is determined by the initial value.

Before turning to the next section, we make one additional observation regarding the

synonymous issues of the general applicability of a synthetic network and experimental mea-

surement. In experimental situations, a Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) is often employed

as a measurement tag known as a reporter gene. This is done by inserting the gene encoding

GFP adjacent to the gene of interest, so that the reporter protein is produced in tandem

with the protein of interest. In the context of the formulation given above, we can generalize

Eq. (6) to include the dynamics of the reporter protein,

˙x = f (x)

γx x

˙g = f (x)

γg g

−

−

(7)

where f (x) is the nonlinear term in Eq. (6), γg = kg/(dT nktp0√K1K2), and the GFP con-

centration is scaled by the same factor as repressor (

g = g√K1K2). In analogy with the

equation for x, kg is the degradation rate for GFP, and we have assumed that the number

e

12

of proteins per transcript n is the same for both processes. This ability to co-transcribe two

genes from the same promoter and transcribe in tandem has two important consequences.

First, since proteins are typically very stable, it is often desirable to substantially increase

their degradation rate in order to access some nonlinear regime [21, 22]. Such a high degra-

dation rate typically will lead to a low protein concentration, and this, in turn, can induce

detection problems. The utilization of a GFP-type reporter protein can help to mitigate this

problem, since its degradation rate can be left at a relatively low value. Second, and perhaps

more importantly, are the signiﬁcant implications for the generality of designer networks; in

prokaryotic organisms, any protein can be substituted for GFP and co-transcribed, so that

one network design can be utilized in a myriad of situations.

4 A Noise-Based Protein Switch

We now focus on parameter values leading to bistability, and consider how an external noise

source can be utilized to alter the production of protein. Physically, we take the dynamical

variables x and g described above to represent the protein concentrations within a colony of

cells, and consider the noise to act on many copies of this colony. In the absence of noise,

each colony will evolve identically to one of the two ﬁxed points, as discussed above. The

presence of a noise source will at times modify this simple behavior, whereby colony-to-colony

ﬂuctuations can induce novel behavior.

Noise in the form of random ﬂuctuations arises in biochemical networks in one of two

ways. As discussed elsewhere in this Focus Issue [52], internal noise is inherent in biochem-

ical reactions, often arising due to the relatively small numbers of reactant molecules. On

the other hand, external noise originates in the random variation of one or more of the

externally-set control parameters, such as the rate constants associated with a given set of

reactions. If the noise source is small, its eﬀect can often be incorporated post hoc into the

rate equations. In the case of internal noise, this is done in an attempt to recapture the lost

information embodied in the rate-equation approximation. But in the case of external noise,

13

one often wishes to introduce some new phenomenon where the details of the eﬀect are not

precisely known. In either case, the governing rate equations are augmented with additive

or multiplicative stochastic terms. These terms, viewed as a random perturbation to the

deterministic picture, can induce various eﬀects, most notably, switching between potential

attractors (i.e., ﬁxed points, limit cycles, chaotic attractors) [54].

In previous work, the eﬀects of coupling between an external noise source and both

the basal production rate and the transcriptional enhancement process were examined [55].

Here, we analyze the eﬀect of a noise source which alters protein degradation. Since the

mathematical formulation is similar to that of Ref. [55], our goal here is to reproduce the

phenomenology of that work under diﬀerent assumptions. As in Ref.[55], we posit that the

external noise eﬀect will be small and can be treated as a random perturbation to our existing

treatment; we envision that events induced will be interactions between the external noise

source and the protein degradation rate, and that this will translate to a rapidly varying

protein degradation embodied in the external parameters γx and γg. In order to introduce

this eﬀect, we generalize the model of the previous section such that random ﬂuctuations

enter Eq. (7) multiplicatively,

˙x = f (x)

˙g = f (x)

(γx −
(γg −

−

−

ξx(t))x

ξg(t))g

(8)

(9)

where the ξi(t) are rapidly ﬂuctuating random terms with zero mean (< ξi(t) >= 0). In order

to encapsulate the independent random ﬂuctuations, we make the standard requirement

that the autocorrelation be “δ-correlated”, i.e., the statistics of the ξi(t) are such that <

ξi(t)ξj(t′) >= Dδi,j(t

t′), with D proportional to the strength of the perturbation, and we

−

have assumed that the size of the induced ﬂuctuations is the same for both proteins.

Since, in Eqs. (8) and (9), the reporter protein concentration g does not couple to the

equation for the repressor concentration, the qualitative behavior of the set of equations

may be obtained by analyzing x. We ﬁrst deﬁne a change of variables which transforms the

14

multiplicative Langevin equation to an additive one. Letting x = ez, Eq. (8) becomes,

1 + e2z + 22e4z

ez + e3z + 2e5z + .16e7z −
g(z) + ξx(t)

˙z =

≡

γx + ξx(t)

(10)

Eq. (10) can be rewritten as:

where the potential φ(z) is introduced:

˙z =

∂φ(z)
∂z

−

+ ξx(t)

φ(z) =

g(z)dz

− Z

φ(z) can be viewed as an “energy landscape”, whereby z is considered the position of a

particle moving in the landscape. One such landscape is plotted in Fig. 1B. Note that the

stable ﬁxed points correspond to the minima of the potential φ in Fig. 1b, and the eﬀect of

the additive noise term is to cause random kicks to the particle (system state point) lying

in one of these minima. On occasion, a sequence of kicks may enable the particle to escape

a local minimum and reside in a new valley.

In order to analyze Eq. (11), one typically introduces the probability distribution P (z, t),

which is eﬀectively the probability of ﬁnding the system in a state z at time t. Then, given

Eq. (11), a Fokker-Planck (FP) equation for P (z, t) can be constructed [56]. The steady-state

solution for this equation is given by

where A is a normalization constant determined by requiring the integral of Ps(z) over all z

be unity.

Using the steady-state distribution, the steady-state mean (ssm), < z >ss, is given by

Ps(z) = Ae− 2

D φ(z)

< z >ss=

zAe− 2

D φ(z)dz

∞

Z
0

15

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

In Fig. 1C, we plot the ssm value of z as a function of D, obtained by numerically integrating

Eq. (14). It can be seen that the ssm of z increases with D, corresponding to the increasing

likelihood of populating the upper state in Fig. 1B.

Figure 1C indicates that the external noise can be used to control the ssm concentration.

As a candidate application, consider the following protein switch. Given parameter values

leading to the landscape of Fig. 1B, we begin the switch in the “oﬀ” position by tuning the

noise strength to a very low value. This will cause a high population in the lower state, and

a correspondingly low value of the concentration. Then at some time later, consider pulsing

the system by increasing the noise to some large value for a short period of time, followed

by a decrease back to the original low value. The pulse will cause the upper state to become

populated, corresponding to a concentration increase and a ﬂipping of the switch to the “on”

position. As the pulse quickly subsides, the upper state remains populated as the noise is

not of suﬃcient strength to drive the system across either barrier (on relevant time scales).

To return the switch to the oﬀ position, the upper-state population needs to be decreased to

a low value. This can be achieved by applying a second noise pulse of intermediate strength.

This intermediate value is chosen large enough so as to enhance transitions to the lower

state, but small enough as to remain prohibitive to upper-state transitions.

Figure 1D depicts the time evolution of the switching process for noise pulses of strengths

D = 1.0 and D = 0.1. Initially, the concentration begins at a level of

0.4 µM, correspond-

∼

ing to a low noise value of D = 0.01. At 40 minutes, a noise burst of strength D = 1.0 is

used to drive the concentration to a value of

2.2 µM. Following this burst, the noise is

returned to its original value. At 80 minutes, a second noise burst of strength D = 0.1 is

used to return the concentration to its original value.

5 A Genetic Relaxation Oscillator

The repressillator represents an impressive step towards the generation of controllable in vivo

genetic oscillations. However, there were signiﬁcant cell-to-cell variations, apparently arising

∼

16

from small molecule number ﬂuctuations [21, 35]. In order to circumvent such variability,

the utilization of hysteresis-based oscillations has recently been proposed [35]. In this work,

it was shown how a model circadian network can oscillate reliably in the presence of internal

noise.

In this section, we describe an implementation of such an oscillator, based on the

repressor network of Section 3.

The hysteretic eﬀect in Fig. 1A can be employed to induce oscillations, provided we can

couple the network to a slow subsystem that eﬀectively drives the parameter γx. This can

be done by inserting a repressor protease under the control of a separate PRM promoter

region. The network is depicted in Fig. 2A. On one plasmid, we have the network of Section

3; the repressor protein CI, which is under the control of the promoter PRM , stimulates its

own production at low concentrations and shuts oﬀ the promoter at high concentrations.

On a second plasmid, we again utilize the PRM promoter region, but here we insert the

gene encoding the protein RcsA. The crucial interaction is between RcsA and CI; RcsA

is a protease for repressor, eﬀectively inactivating its ability to control the PRM promoter

region [57].

The equations governing this network can be deduced from Eq.(6) by noting the following.

First, both RcsA and repressor are under the control of the same promoter, so that the

functional form of the production term f (x) in Eq.(6) will be the same for both proteins.

Second, we envision our network as being constructed from two plasmids – one for repressor

and one for RcsA, and that we have control over the number of plasmids per cell (copy

number) of each type. Lastly, the interaction of the RcsA and repressor proteins leads to the

degradation of repressor. Putting these facts together, and letting y denote the concentration

of RcsA, we have

(15)

˙x = mxf (x)

γxx

γxyxy

−

= mxf (x)

γ(y)x

˙y = myf (x)

γyy

−

−

−

17

where γ(y)

γx + γxyy, and mx and my denote the plasmid copy numbers for the two

≡

species.

In Fig. 2B, we present simulation results for the concentration of repressor as a function

time. The nature of the oscillations can be understood using Fig. 1A. Suppose we begin

with a parameter value of γ(y) = 4 and on the upper branch of the ﬁgure. The large

value of repressor will then serve to activate the promoter for the RcsA, and thus lead to

its increased production. An increase in the RcsA acts as an additive degradation term

for repressor (see Eq. 15), and thus eﬀectively induces slow motion to the right on the

upper branch of Fig. 1A. This motion will continue until the repressor concentration falls

oﬀ the upper branch at γ(y)

5.8. At this point, with the repressor concentration at a

∼

very low value, the promoters are essentially turned oﬀ. Then, as RcsA begins to degrade,

the repressor concentration slowly moves to left along the lower branch of Fig. 1A, until it

encounters the bifurcation point at γ(y)

3.6. It then jumps to its original high value, with

∼

the entire process repeating and producing the oscillations in Fig. 2B.

The oscillations in Fig. 2B are for speciﬁc parameter values; of course, not all choices

of parameters will lead to oscillations. The clariﬁcation of the speciﬁc parameter values

leading to oscillations is therefore important in the design of synthetic networks [21]. For

proteins in their native state, the degradation rates γx and γy are very small, corresponding

to the high degree of stability for most proteins. For example, a consistency argument

applied to a similar model for λ phage switching [58] leads to γx ∼
a temperature-sensitive variety of the repressor protein, γx can be made tunable over many

0.004. However, using

orders of magnitude. Other techniques, such as SSRA tagging or titration, can be employed

to increase the degradation rate for RcsA. The copy numbers mx and my can be chosen for a

particular design, and the parameter γxy, which measures the rate of repressor degradation

by RcsA, is unknown.

In Fig. 3A, we present oscillatory regimes for Eq. (15) as a function of γx and γy, and

for two ﬁxed values of the parameter γxy. We see that the oscillatory regime is larger for

18

smaller values of the parameter γxy. However, the larger regime corresponds to larger values

of the degradation rate for RcsA. Interestingly, if we take the native (i.e., without tuning)

degradation rates to be γx ∼
near the oscillatory regime. In Fig. 3B, we present the oscillatory regime as a function of

0.005, we note that the system is naturally poised very

γy ∼

γx and γxy, and for two ﬁxed values of γy. The regime is increased for smaller values of

γy, and, in both cases, small values of γx are preferable. Moreover, both Figs. 3A and 3B

indicate that the system will oscillate for arbitrarily small values of the repressor degradation

parameter γx. In Fig. 3C we depict the oscillatory regime as a function of the copy numbers

mx and my, and for ﬁxed degradation rates. Importantly, one can adjust the periodic regime

to account for the unknown parameter γxy. Figure 3C indicates that, for oscillations, one

should choose as large a copy number as possible for the plasmid containing the repressor

protein (mx). Correspondingly, one should design the RcsA plasmid with a signiﬁcantly

smaller copy number my.

We now turn brieﬂy to the period of the oscillations. If designed genetic oscillations are to

be utilized, an important issue is the dependence of the oscillation period on the parameter

values. In Fig. 4A we plot the oscillation period for our CI-RcsA network as a function of

the degradation parameter γy, and for other parameter values corresponding to the lower

wedge of Fig. 3A. We observe that an increase in γy will decrease the period of oscillations.

Further, since the cell-division period for E. coli is

35

40 minutes, we note that the lower

∼

−

limit roughly corresponds to this period, and that, at the upper limit, we can expect four

oscillations per cell division. The utilization of tuning the period of the oscillations to the

cell-division time will be discussed in the next section. In Fig. 4B, we plot the period as a

function of the copy number mx. We observe that the period depends very weakly on the

copy number.

19

6 Driving the Oscillator

We next turn to the utilization of an intrinsic cellular process as a means of controlling the

oscillations described in the previous section. We will ﬁrst consider a network design which

exhibits self-sustained oscillations (i.e., with parameters that are in one of the oscillatory

regions of Fig. 3), and discuss the driving of the oscillator in the context of synchronization.

As a second design, we will consider a synthetic network with parameter values near, but

outside, the oscillatory boundary. In that case, we will show how resonance can lead to the

induction of oscillations and ampliﬁcation of a cellular signal.

We suppose that an intrinsic cellular process involves oscillations in the production of

protein U, and that the concentration of U is given by u = u0 sin ωt. In order to couple the

oscillations of U to our network, we imagine inserting the gene encoding repressor adjacent

to the gene encoding U. Then, since U is being transcribed periodically, the co-transcription

of repressor will lead to an oscillating source term in Eq. (15),

˙x = mxf (x)

γxx

γxyxy + Γ sin(ωt)

(16)

˙y = myf (x)

γyy

−

−

−

We ﬁrst consider parameter values as in Fig. 2, so that the concentrations x and y oscillate

in the absence of driving. Here, we are interested in how the drive aﬀects the “internal”

oscillations. Although there are many interesting properties associated with driven nonlinear

equations such as Eq. (16), we focus on the conditions whereby the periodic drive can cause

the dynamics to shift the internal frequency and entrain to the external drive frequency ω.

We utilize the numerical bifurcation and continuation package CONT [59] to determine the

boundaries of the major resonance regions. These boundaries are depicted in the parameter-

space plot of Fig. 5A, where the period of the drive is plotted versus the drive amplitude.

The resonance regions form the so-called Arnold tongues, which display an increasing range

of the locking period as the amplitude of drive is increased. Without the periodic drive, the

period of the autonomous oscillations is equal to 14.6 minutes. As one might expect, the

20

dominant Arnold tongue is found around this autonomous period. Within this resonance

region, the period of the oscillations is entrained, and is equal to the external periodic force.

The second largest region of frequency locking occurs for periods of forcing which are close

to half of the period of the autonomous oscillations. As a result of the periodic driving,

we observe 1:2 locking, whereby the system responds with one oscillatory cycle, while the

drive has undergone two cycles. Other depicted resonant regions (3:2, 2:1, 5:2, 3:1) display

signiﬁcantly narrower ranges for locking periods. This suggests that higher order frequency

locking will be less common and probably unstable in the presence of noise. Outside the

resonance regions shown in Fig. 5A one can ﬁnd a rich structure of very narrow M:N locking

regions with M and N quite large, together with quasiperiodic oscillations. The order of

resonances along the drive period axis is given by the Farey sequence [60], i.e.

in between

two resonance regions characterized by rational numbers, M1:N1 and M2:N2, there is a region

with ratio (M1+M2):(N1+N2).

The preceding notions correspond to the driving of genetic networks which are intrinsi-

cally oscillating. We now turn to a network designed with parameter values just outside the

oscillatory region, and consider the use of resonance in the following application. Suppose

there is a cellular process that depends critically on oscillations of a given amplitude. We

seek a strategy for modifying the amplitude of this process if, for some reason, it is too small.

For concreteness, consider a cellular process linked to the cell-division period of the host for

our synthetic network. For E. coli cells at a temperature of

37 degrees C, this period is

∼

of order 35

40 minutes. Using Figs. 3A and 4A, we can deduce parameter values that will

−

cause a CI-RscA network to oscillate, when driven, with this period. The lower wedge of

Fig. 3A implies that, for γxy = 0.1, we should design the network with values of γx and γy

just below the lower boundary of the wedge. Fig. 4A implies that, for γx = 0.1, a choice

of γy = 0.004 will yield oscillations with a period close to the cell-division period. In order

to stay outside the oscillatory region, we therefore choose γy just below this value. Taken

together, these choices will yield a network whereby oscillations can be induced by cellular

21

processes related to cell division. In Fig. 6A, we plot the drive versus response amplitudes (Γ

vs Γx) obtained from numerical integration of Eq. (16). We see that, depending on the prox-

imity to the oscillatory region, oscillations are triggered when the drive reaches some critical

amplitude. In Fig. 6B, we plot the gain g

(Γ + Γx)/Γ as a function of the drive amplitude

≡

Γ, and observe that, for certain values of the amplitude of the drive, the network can induce

a signiﬁcant gain.

7 Harnessing the Lambda Switch

The ability to switch between multiple stable states is a critical ﬁrst step towards sophis-

ticated cellular control schemes. Nonlinearities giving rise to two stable states suggest the

possibility of using these states as digital signals to be processed in cellular-level computa-

tions (see, for example, [33, 34]). One may eventually be able to produce systems in which

sequences of such switching events are combined to control gene expression in complex ways.

In any such application, the speed with which systems make transitions between their sta-

ble states will act as a limiting factor on the time scales at which cellular events may be

controlled. In this section, we describe a bistable switch based on the mechanism used by λ

phage, and show that such a system oﬀers rapid switching times.

The genetic network of λ phage switches its host bacterium from the dormant lysogenous

state to the lytic growth state in roughly twenty minutes [51]). As discussed in Section 2, the

regulatory network implementing this exceptionally fast switch has two main features: two

proteins (CI and Cro) compete directly for access to promoter sites; and one of the proteins

(CI) positively regulates its own level of transcription. Here, we compare a synthetic switch

based on the λ phage’s switching mechanism to another two-protein switch (the toggle switch

described in Ref. [22]), and numerically show that the λ-like system oﬀers a faster switching

time under comparable conditions.

To implement the synthetic λ switch, we use the plasmid described in Section 3, on

which the PRM promoter controls the expression of the λ repressor protein, CI. To this,

22

we add a second plasmid on which the PR promoter is used to control the expression of

Cro. The operator regions OR1, OR2, and OR3 exist on each plasmid, and both proteins

are capable of binding to these regions on either of the plasmids. On the PRM -promoter

plasmid, transcription of CI takes place whenever there is no protein (of either type) bound

to OR3; when CI is bound to OR2, the rate of CI transcription is enhanced. On the PR-

promoter plasmid, Cro is transcribed only when operator site OR3 is either clear, or has a

Cro dimer bound to it; either protein being bound to either OR1 or OR2 has the eﬀect of

halting the transcription of Cro.

Letting y represent the concentration of Cro, the competition for operator sites leads to

equations of the form ˙x = f (x, y)

γxx,

˙y = g(x, y)

γyy. We derive the form of these

−

−

equations by following the process described in Section 3. As with the CI plasmid of that

section, we have Eq. 1 describing the equilibrium reactions for the binding of CI to the

various operator sites. To these, we add the reactions entailing the binding of Cro, and the

reactions in which both proteins are bound simultaneously to diﬀerent operator sites:

(17)

Y + Y

D + Y2

DY

3 + Y2

DY

3 + Y2

DY

3 DY

2 + Y2

DX

2 DX

1 + Y2

DX

1 + Y2

3

K3⇀↽ Y2
K4⇀↽ DY
β1K4⇀↽ DY
β2K4⇀↽ DY
β3K4⇀↽ DY
β4K4⇀↽ DY
β5K4⇀↽ DY

3 DY

2

3 DY

1

3 DY

2 DY

1

3 DX

2 DX

1

3 DX
1 ,

where Y represents the Cro monomer, and Dp

i represents binding of protein p to the ORi

site. For the operator region of λ phage, we have β1 ≃
[46, 48, 49]

β2 ≃

β3 ∼

0.08, and β4 ≃

β5 ∼

1

The transcriptional processes are as follows. Transcription of repressor takes place when

23

there is no protein (of either type) bound to OR3. When repressor is bound to OR2, the

rate of repressor transcription is enhanced, and Cro is transcribed only when OR3 is either

vacant, or has a Cro dimer bound to it. If either repressor or Cro is bound to either OR1

or OR2, the production of Cro is halted. These processes, along with degradation, yield the

following irreversible reactions,

D + P

D + P + nxX

(18)

DX

1 + P

DX

1 + P + nxX

DX

2 DX

1 + P

DX

2 DX

1 + P + nxX

D + P

D + P + nyY

DY

3 + P

DY

3 + P + nyY

ktx
→
ktx
→
αktx
→
kty
→
kty
→
kdx
→
kdy
→

X

Y

Following the rate equation formulation of section 3, we obtain

˙x =

˙y =

mx(1 + x2 + ασ1x4)
Q(x, y)
myρy(1 + y2)
Q(x, y)

γyy

−

γxx

−

(19)

where

Q(x, y) = 1 + x2 + σ1x4 + σ1σ2x6 + y2 + (β1 + β2)y4 + β1β3y6 + σ1β4x4y2 + β5x2y2.

The derivatives are with respect to dimensionless time, with scaling as in Section 3; ˜t =

t(ktxp0dT nx√K1K2), where ktx is the transcription rate constant for CI, and nx is the number

of CI monomers per mRNA transcript. The integers mx and my represent the plasmid copy

numbers for the two species; ρy is a constant related to the scaling of y relative to x. The

parameters γx and γy are directly proportional to the decay rates of CI and Cro, respectively;

24

we will tune these values to cause transitions between stable states. The system exhibits

bistability over a wide range of parameter values, and we plot the null-clines in Fig. 7A.

For comparison, we now consider the co-repressive toggle switch brieﬂy reviewed in sec-

tion 2 [22]. This switch uses the CI and Lac proteins, where each protein shuts oﬀ transcrip-

tion from the other protein’s promoter region. The experimental design was guided by the

model equations,

α1

1 + vδ −

u

α2

˙u =

˙v =

kv

µ −

1 +

u
K )η
(1+ [IP T G]

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(20)

where u and v are dimensionless concentrations of the Lac and CI proteins, respectively,

and the time derivatives are with respect to a dimensionless time: τ = kdt, with kd =

2.52h−1 [12, 18] being the protein decay rate. The dimensionless parameters α1, α2, δ, and

µ deﬁne the basic model. The CI protein used in the experiments is temperature-sensitive,

changing its rate of degradation with temperature[66, 67]; we modify the original model

slightly to include the factor k, which represents a varying decay rate for the CI protein.

Switching is induced either by changing k, or by adjusting the concentration of isopropyl-β-

D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG); the parameters K = 2.9618

10−5 M and η = 2.0015 deﬁne

×

the eﬀect of the inducer molecule IPTG on the Lac protein. Over a wide range of parameter

values, the system has two stable ﬁxed points; the null-clines are shown in Figure 7B.

The time courses of switching between stable states in the two models are shown in

Figure 8; transitions are induced by eliminating the bistability, then restoring it. The precise

time course of switching from one stable state to another is determined by the way in which

the model parameters are adjusted to eliminate the bistability. In each case, some parameter

is increased until the system passes through a saddle node bifurcation: two stable ﬁxed points

and one unstable ﬁxed point collapse into a single stable point. In an eﬀort to examine the

behaviour of the two systems under analogous conditions, we eliminate the bistability in

every case by setting the system to a parameter value 10% past the bifurcation point.

25

The transitions shown in Figure 8 are generated as follows. The system begins (0-1

hour) in its default bistable state, sitting at one of the two stable ﬁxed points. Then (1–4

hours) the bistability is eliminated (as described above), with the only remaining ﬁxed point

being such that the other protein has a high concentration. Once the concentrations have

switched, the default parameters are restored and the system moves to the nearby stable

ﬁxed point (4–7 hours). Finally, the system is rendered monostable again (7–10 hours),

causing another transition, followed by a period (10–11 hours) during which the bistable

parameters are restored.

Under the conditions shown, the λ switch model displays signiﬁcantly more rapid tran-

sitions between its stable states than those seen in the model of the toggle switch. The

numerical results indicate that the properties of the λ switch do oﬀer an advantage in terms

of the speed of transitions, indicating that it may be fruitful to study synthetic models based

on this natural system. Future analytical work on models such as the one presented in this

section may allow us to make more precise statements regarding the source of this advantage.

8 Conclusion

From an engineering perspective, the control of cellular function through the design and

manipulation of gene regulatory networks is an intriguing possibility. Current examples of

potential applicability range from the use of genetically engineered microorganisms for envi-

ronmental cleanup purposes [68], to the ﬂipping of genetic switches in mammalian neuronal

cells [69]. While the experimental techniques employed in studies of this nature are certainly

impressive, it is clear that reliable theoretical tools would be of enormous value. On a strictly

practical level, such techniques could potentially reduce the degree of “trial-and-error” ex-

perimentation. More importantly, computational and theoretical approaches will lead to

testable predictions regarding the current understanding of complex biological networks.

While other studies have centered on certain aspects of naturally-occurring genetic regu-

latory networks [9, 12, 13, 14, 18, 24, 25, 38, 39], an alternative approach is to focus on the

26

design of synthetic networks. Such an engineering-based approach has signiﬁcant technolog-

ical implications, and will lead, in a complementary fashion, to an enhanced understanding

of biological design principles. In this work, we have shown how several synthetic networks

can be designed from the genetic machinery of the virus λ phage. We have highlighted some

of the possible behavior of these networks through the discussion of the design of two types

of switches and a relaxation oscillator. Additionally, in the case of the oscillator, we have

coupled the network to an existing cellular process. Such coupling could lead to possible

strategies for entraining or inducing network oscillations in cellular protein levels, and prove

useful in the design of networks that interact with cellular processes that require precise

timing.

With regard to model formulation, there are several intriguing areas for further work.

For one, the number of molecules governing the biochemistry of genetic networks is of-

ten relatively small, leading to interesting issues involving internal noise. Recent pivotal

work [17, 18, 27] has led to a systematic modeling approach which utilizes a Monte Carlo-

type simulation of the biochemical reactions [61]. While this approach is impressively com-

plete, its complexity makes analysis nearly impossible. An alternative approach could entail

the use of Langevin equations, whereby the eﬀects of internal noise are incorporated into

stochastic terms whose magnitudes are concentration-dependent. Indeed, in the context of

genetic switches, this approach has recently been suggested [62]. The advantage of this

formulation is that stochastic eﬀects can be viewed as a perturbation to the deterministic

picture, so that analytic tools can be utilized.

A potentially important technical issue involves the implicit assumption that the reactions

take place in three-dimensional space. While this assumption is perhaps the most natural,

proteins have been observed sliding along a DNA molecule in search of a promoter region [64],

so that protein-DNA reactions might eﬀectively take place on a surface. While this would

not alter the qualitative form of Eq. (6), the exponents on the variable x could take on other

values [65], and this, in turn, could lead to signiﬁcant quantitative diﬀerences.

27

It has been nearly 30 years since the pioneering theoretical work on interacting genetic

networks [1]-[8]. Due, in part, to the inherent complexity of regulatory networks, the true

signiﬁcance of these studies had to await technological advances. Current progress in the

study of both naturally occurring and synthetic genetic networks suggests that, as the pio-

neers envisioned, tools from nonlinear dynamics and statistical physics will play important

roles in the description and manipulation of the dynamics underlying cellular control.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. We warmly acknowledge insightful discussions with William

Blake, Michael Elowitz, Doug Mar, John Reinitz, and John Tyson. This work is supported

by The Fetzer Institute (J. H.) and the Oﬃce of Naval Research.

28

References

[1] L. Glass and S. A. Kauﬀman, “The logical analysis of continuous, non-linear biochemical

control networks,” J. Theor. Biol. 39, 103 (1973).

[2] M. A. Savageau, “Comparison of classical and autogenous systems of regulation in in-

ducible operons,” Nature, 252, 546 (1974).

[3] S. Kauﬀman, “The large-scale structure and dynamics of gene control circuits: an en-

semble approach,” J. Theor. Biol. 44, 167 (1974).

[4] L. Glass, “Classiﬁcation of biological networks by their qualitative dynamics,”

J. Theor. Biol. 54, 85 (1975).

J. Chem. Phys. 63, 1325 (1975).

[5] L. Glass, “Combinatorical and topological methods in nonlinear chemical kinetics,”

[6] M. Savageau, Biochemical System Analysis, (Addison Wesley, Reading, 1976).

[7] B. C. Goodwin, Analytical Physiology of Cells and Developing Organisms, (Academic

Press, London, 1976).

[8] J. J. Tyson and H. G. Othmer, “The dynamics of feedback control circuits in biochemical

pathways,” Prog. Theor. Biol. 5, 1 (1978).

[9] G. K. Ackers, A. D. Johnson, and M. A. Shea, “Quantitative model for gene regulation

by λ phage repressor,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79 1129 (1982).

[10] B. O. Palsson and E. N. Lightfoot, “Mathematical modeling of dynamics and control

in metabolic networks,” J. Theor. Biol. 113, 279 (1985).

[11] F. Moran and A. Goldbeter, “Onset of birhymicity in a regulated biochemical system,”

Biophys. Chem. 20, 149 (1984).

29

[12] J. Reinitz and J. R. Vaisnys, “Theoretical and experimental analysis of the phage lambda

genetic switch implies missing levels of co-operativity,” J. Theor. Biol. 145, 295 (1990).

[13] B. Novak and J. J. Tyson, “Modeling the control of DNA replication in ﬁssion yeast,”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci 94, 9147 (1997).

[14] B. Novak and J. J. Tyson, “Quantitative analysis of a molecular model of mitotic control

in ﬁssion yeast,” J. Theor. Biol. 173, 283 (1995).

[15] B. J. Hammond, “Quantitative study of the control of HIV-1 gene expression,”

J. Theor. Biol. 163, 199 (1993).

Theor. Biol. 172, 169 (1995).

[16] A. Keller, “Model genetic circuits encoding autoregulatory transcription factors,” J.

[17] H. H. McAdams and A. Arkin, “Simulation of prokaryotic genetic circuits,”

Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27, 199 (1998).

[18] A. Arkin, J. Ross, and H. H. McAdams, “Stochastic kinetic analysis of developmen-

tal pathway bifurcation in phage λ-infected Escherichia coli cells,” Genetics 149, 1633

(1998).

43, C531 (1998).

[19] P. Smolen, D. A. Baxter, and J. H. Byrne, “Frequency selectivity, multistability, and

oscillations emerge from models of genetic regulatory systems,” Am. J. Physiol.–Cell Ph.

[20] D. M. Wolf and F. H. Eeckman, “On the relationship between genomic regulatory

element organization and gene regulatory dynamics,” J. Theor. Biol. 195, 167 (1998).

[21] M. B. Elowitz and S. Leibler, “A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional regu-

lators,” Nature 403, 335 (2000).

[22] T. S. Gardner, C. R. Cantor, and J. J. Collins, “Construction of a genetic toggle switch

in Escherichia coli,” Nature 403, 339 (2000).

30

[23] A. Becksei and L. Serrano, “Engineering stability in gene networks by autoregulation,”

Nature 405, 590 (2000).

[24] D. Endy, L. You, J. Yin, and I. J. Molineux, “Computation, prediction, and ex-

perimental tests of ﬁtness for bacteriophage T7 mutants with permuted genomes,”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 5375 (2000).

[25] A. Sveiczer, A. Csikasz-Nagy, B. Gyorﬀy, J. J. Tyson, and B. Novak, “Modeling

the ﬁssion yeast cell cycle: Quantized cycle times in wee1−cdc25∆ mutant cells,”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 7865 (2000).

[26] H. H. McAdams and L. Shapiro, “Circuit simulation of genetic networks,” Science 269,

650 (1995).

Acad. Sci. 94, 814 (1997).

[27] H. H. McAdams and A. Arkin, “Stochastic mechanisms in gene expression,” Proc. Natl.

[28] L. H. Hartwell, J. J. Hopﬁeld, S. Leibler, and A. W. Murray, “From molecular to modular

cell biology,” Nature 402, C47-C51 (1999).

[29] D. A. Lauﬀenburger, “Cell signaling pathways as control modules: Complexity for sim-

plicity?” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 5031 (2000).

[30] J. Monod, J. Wyman, and J. P. Changeux, “On the nature of allosteric transitioins: A

plausible model,” J. Mol. Biol. 12, 88 (1965).

[31] A. Novick and M. Weiner, “Enzyme induction as an all-or-none phenomenon,”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 43, 553 (1957).

[32] W. Chen, P. Kallio, and J. E. Bailey, “Construction and characterization of a novel

cross-regulation system for regulating cloned gene expression in Escherichia coli,” Gene

130, 15 (1993).

31

[33] D. Bray, “Protein molecules as computational elements in living cells,” Nature 376, 307

[34] R. Weiss and T. F. Knight, “Engineered communications for microbial robotics,” DNA6:

Sixth International Meeting on DNA Based Computers (Leiden, The Netherlands),

(1995).

(2000).

[35] N. Barkai and S. Leibler, “Biological rhythms: Circadian clocks limited by noise,”

Nature 403, 267 (2000).

[36] B. Lewin, Genes VI (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1997).

[37] A more general treatment would incorporate all possible DNA-repressor binding con-

ﬁgurations. However, the additional reactions have binding aﬃnities characterized by

equilibrium constants that are signiﬁcantly smaller than for those considered, and their

inclusion will not alter the general conclusions derived in this work.

[38] M. A. Shea and G. K. Ackers, “The OR control system of bacteriophage lambda: A

physical-chemical model for gene regulation,” J. Mol. Biol. 181, 211 (1985).

[39] P. Wong, S. Gladney, and J. D. Keasling, “Mathematical model of the lac operon:

Inducer exclusion, catabolite repression, and diauxic growth on glucose and lactose,”

Biotechnol. Prog. 13, 132 (1997).

Ann. Rev. Biochem. 54, 171 (1985).

[40] W. R. McClure, “Mechanism and control of transcription initiation in prokaryotes,”

[41] P. H. von Hippel, “An integrated model of the transcription complex in elongation,

termination, and editing,” Science 281, 660 (1998).

[42] F. Jacob and J. Monod, “Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins,”

J. Mol. Biol. 3, 318 (1961).

32

[43] R. Dickson, J. Ableson, W. Barnes, and W. Reznikoﬀ, “Genetic regulation: the lac

control region,” Science 187, 27 (1975).

[44] M. A. Savageau, “Comparison of classical and autogenous systems of regulation in

inducible operons,” Nature 252, 546 (1974).

[45] J. Monod and F. Jacob, “General conclusions: Teleonomic mechanisms in cellular

metabolism, growth, and diﬀerentiation,” In: Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol.,

26, 389 (1961).

[46] M. Ptashne et al, “How the λ repressor and cro work,” Cell 19, 1 (1980).

[47] B. J. Meyer, R. Maurer, and M. Ptashne, “Gene regulation at the right operator (OR)

of bacteriophage λ,” J. Mol. Biol. 139, 163 (1980).

[48] A. D. Johnson et al, “λ repressor and cro – components of an eﬃcient molecular switch,”

Nature 294, 217 (1981).

[49] A. D. Johnson, C. O. Pabo, and R. T. Sauer, “Bacteriophage λ repressor and cro protein:

Interactions with operator DNA,” Methods Enzymol. 65, 839 (1980).

[50] D. H. Ohlendorf and B. W. Matthews, “Structural studies of protein-nucleic acid inter-

actions,” Ann. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 12, 259 (1983).

[51] M. Ptashne, A Genetic Switch: Phage λ and Higher Organisms (Cell, Cambridge, Mas-

sachusetts, 1992).

[52] Eds. to update – the citation points to another work in this Focus Issue.

[53] Eds. to update – the citations point to other works in this Focus Issue.

[54] W. Horsthemke and R. Lefever, Noise-Induced Transitions (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

1984).

33

[55] J. Hasty, J. Pradines, M. Dolnik, and J. J. Collins, “Noise-based switches and ampliﬁers

for gene expression,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 2075 (2000).

[56] N. G. Van Kampen, Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry (North-Holland,

Amsterdam, 1992).

[57] D. V. Rozanov, R. D’Ari, and S. P. Sineoky, “RecA-Independent Pathways of Lambdoid

Prophage Induction i Escherichia coli,”J. Bacteriol. 180, 6306 (1998).

[58] J. Hasty, D. McMillen, F. Isaacs, and J. J. Collins, in preparation.

[59] M. Marek and I. Schreiber, Chaotic Behavior of Deterministic Dissipative Systems

(Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1991).

[60] G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright E.M., eds. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers

(Claredon, Oxford, 1979).

J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340 (1977).

Alamos Preprint Server (2000).

[61] D. Gillespie,

“Exact

stochastic

simulation of

coupled chemical

reactions,”

[62] W. Bialek, “Stability and noise in biochemical switches,” cond-mat/0005235 – Los

[63] J. Sancho, M. S. Miguel,and S. Katz, Phys. Rev. A 26, 1589 (1982).

[64] Y. Harada et al., “Single-molecule imaging of RNA polymerase-DNA interactions in

real time,” Biophys. J. 76, 709 (1999).

[65] M. A. Savageau, “Development of fractal kinetic theory for enzyme-catalysed reactions

and implications for the design of biochemical pathways,” Biosystems 47, 9 (1998).

[66] A. Villaverde, A. Benito, E. Viaplana, and R. Cubarsi, “Fine regulation of cI857-

controlled gene expression in continuous culture of recombinant Escherichia coli by tem-

perature,” App. Env. Microbiology 59(10), 3485 (1993).

34

[67] H. B. Lowman and M. Bina, “Temperature-mediated regulation and downstream in-

ducible selection for controlling gene expression from the bacteriophage λ PL promoter,”

Gene 96, 133 (1990).

[68] P. Szafranski et al., “A new approach for containment of microorganisms: Dual con-

trol of streptavidin expression by antisense RNA and the T7 transcription system,”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94, 1059 (1997).

[69] T. C. Harding et al., “Switching transgene expression in the brain using an adenoviral

tetracycline-regulatable system,” Nature Biotech. 16, 553 (1998).

35

Figure Captions

FIG. 1. Results for additive noise with parameter value m = 1. (A) Bifurcation plot for

the steady-state concentration of repressor versus the model parameter γx. (B) The energy

landscape. Stable equilibrium values of Eq. (10) (with D = 0) correspond to the valleys

at z =

1.6 and 0.5, with an unstable value at z =

0.52. (B) Steady-state probability

−

−

distributions for noise strengths of D = 0.04 (solid line) and D = 0.4 (dotted line). (C)

The steady-state equilibrium value of z plotted versus noise strength. The corresponding

concentration will increas as the noise causes the upper state of (B) to become increasingly

populated.

(D) Simulation of Eqs. (8) and (9) demonstrating the utilization of external

noise for protein switching. Initially, the concentration begins at a level of [GFP]

0.4 µM

∼

corresponding to a low noise value of D = 0.01. After 40 minutes, a large 2-minute noise

pulse of strength D = 1.0 is used to drive the concentration to

2.2 µM. Following this

∼

pulse, the noise is returned to its original value. At 80 minutes, a smaller 10-minute noise

pulse of strength D = 0.1 is used to return the concentration to near its original value. The

simulation technique is that of Ref. [63].

FIG. 2. The relaxation oscillator.

(A) Schematic of the circuit. The PRM promoter is

used on two plasmids to control the production of repressor (X) and RcsA (Y). After dimer-

ization, repressor acts to turn on both plasmids through its interaction at PRM . As its

promoter is activated, RcsA concentrations rise, leading to an induced reduction of repres-

sor.

(B) Simulation of Eqs. (15). Oscillations arise as the RcsA-induced degradation of

repressor causes a transversal of the hysteresis diagram in Fig. 1A. The parameter values are

mx = 10, my = 1, γx = 0.1, γy = 0.01, and γxy = 0.1.

FIG. 3. Oscillatory regimes for the relaxation oscillator.

(A) The bifurcation wedge is

larger for smaller values of the parameter γxy. This larger regime corresponds to larger

values of the RcsA degradation parameter γy. Note that the native (i.e., without tuning)

36

degradation rates of γx ∼
diagrams as a function of γx and γxy, and for two ﬁxed values of γy. The oscillatory regime

0.005 are very near the oscillatory regime. (B) Bifurcation

γy ∼

is increased for smaller values of γy, and, in both cases, small values of γx are preferable

for oscillations. (C) The bifurcation diagram as a function of the copy numbers mx and

my, and for ﬁxed degradation rates.

Importantly, one can adjust the periodic regime to

account for the unknown parameter γxy. The ﬁgure also indicates that, for oscillations, one

should choose as large a copy number as possible for the plasmid containing the repressor

protein (mx). In (A) and (B), constant parameter values are mx = 10 and my = 1, and in

(C) γx = 1.0 and γy = 0.01.

FIG. 4. Parameter dependence of the oscillatory period. (A) An increase in γy decreases

the period of oscillations. (B) The period depends very weakly on the copy number. In (A)

mx = 10 and in (B) γy = 0.01, and for both plots, other parameter values are γx = 0.1,

γxy = 0.1, and my = 1.

FIG. 5. Dynamics of a periodically driven relaxation oscillator - Eq.(15); γx = 0.1, γy = 0.01,

γxy = 0.1. (A) Resonant regions in period-amplitude parametric plane. Solid lines (limit

lines of periodic solutions) together with dashed (period doubling) lines deﬁne boundaries

of stable periodic solutions for a given phase locking region M:N, where M is the number of

relaxation oscillation and N is the number of driving sinusoidal oscillations. (B,C,D) Oscilla-

tions in periodically driven repressor (top curve) concentration together with the oscillations

of the sinusoidal driving (bottom curve). (B) 1:1 synchronization; the 14.6 minute period of

cI oscillations is equal to the driving period. (C) 1:2 phase locking; the 29.2 minute period

of the cI oscillations is twice as long as the driving period. (D) 2:1 phase locking; the 7.6

minute period of the cI oscillations is equal to one half of the driving period.

FIG. 6. (A) As a function of the driving amplitude Γ, the amplitude Γx of the induced

37

network oscillations shows a sharp increase for a critical value of the drive. The critical

value corresponds to a drive large enough to induce the hysteretic oscillations, and it in-

creases as one decreases γy and moves away from the oscillatory region in parameter space.

The three curves denoted 1,2, and 3 are for γy values of 0.0038, 0.0036, and 0.0034. (B) The

gain as a function of the drive amplitude for γy = 0.0038. Close to the oscillatory region, a

signiﬁcant gain in the drive amplitude can be induced. Parameter values for both plots are

γx = 0.1, γxy = 0.1, mx = 10, and my = 1. Note that, corresponding to these values, the

network does not oscillate (without driving) for γy < 0.004 (see the bottom wedge of Fig. 3A).

FIG. 7 Null-clines for the two-protein bistable switch systems. Stable ﬁxed points are marked

with circles, and unstable ﬁxed points are marked with squares. (A) Null-clines for the syn-

thetic λ switch, Eqs. (19). Solid line:

˙x = 0 cline. Dashed line:

˙y = 0 cline. Parameter

values: γx = 0.004; γy = 0.008; ρy = 62.92; α = 11; mx = my = 1; σ1 = 2; σ2 = 0.08;

β1 = β2 = β3 = 0.08; and β4 = β5 = 1. (B) Null-clines for the toggle switch, Eqs. (20). Solid

line:

˙u = 0 cline. Dashed line:

˙v = 0 cline. Parameter values (from Ref. [22]): α1 = 156.25;

α2 = 15.6; δ = 2.5; µ = 1; η = 2.0015; [IP T G] = 0; k = 1.

FIG. 8. Transitions between stable states for the two-protein bistable switch systems. The

protein concentrations have been normalized (the trace for each protein is normalized rela-

tive to its own maximum value). The system parameters are varied over time, altering the

stability of the system and causing transitions, as described in the text. Upper Plots: The

switching of Lac (solid) and CI (dashed) in the synthetic toggle model [22]. The parameter

values are as given in the caption to Fig. 7, except as follows. (1–4 hours):

[IP T G] = 2

mM, k = 1.0. (7–10 hours):

[IP T G] = 0.0, k = 50.81. Lower Plots: The switching of

CRO (dashed line) and CI (solid) in the synthetic λ model. The parameter values are as

given in the caption to Fig. 7, except as follows. (1–4 hours): γx = 0.004, γy = 21.6. (7–10

hours): γx = 18.0, γy = 0.008.

38

)
M
n
(
 
]
I
C
[

40

A

30

20

10

0

3

-0.75

C

>
 
z
 
<

-1.00

-1.25

-1.50

-1.75

4

5

g

6

7

-2.5 -1.5 -0.5 0.5

1.5

z

0.1

0.3

0.4

0

100

200

300

400

Time (Minutes)

0.2
D

B

D

f

7.5

6.5

5.5

4.5

)
M
m
(
 
]
P
F
G
[

4

3

2

1

0

Figure 1 - Hasty et al.

A

+
P
RM

B

30

20

10

)
M
n
(
 
]
I
C
[

0

0

X

-
+

P
RM

Y

20

40

60

Time (Minutes)

Figure 2 - Hasty et al.

A
Oscillatory Regimes

g
   xy= 0.2

g
   xy= 0.1

10

20

30

gx

gy =0.02

gy =0.03

10

gx

20

30

0.05

0.04

0.03

gy

0.02

0.01

0.00
0

B

0.8

0.6

g
   xy

0.4

C

0.2

0.0
0

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

m

y

g
   xy= 0.1

g
   xy= 0.2

50

150

200

100
m x

Figure 3 - Hasty et al.

A

40

)
s
e
t
u
n
i
M
(

0

T

30

20

10

4.0

B

)
s
e
t
u
n
i
M
(

0

T

16

14

12

10

40

5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0
-3
g
y    (x10    )

60

80

100

m x

Figure 4 - Hasty et al.

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A
 
g
n
v
i
r

i

D

A

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

B

]

M
n
[
 
I

C

30

20

10

0

1:1

3:2

3:1

1:2

5:2

2:1

 9.0

18.0

27.0

36.0

45.0

Period (Minutes)

C

30

20

10

0

D

30

20

10

0

0

20

40
Time (Minutes)

60

80

0

20

40
Time (Minutes)

60

0

40

60
20
Time (Minutes)

80

100

Figure 5 - Hasty et al.

G
x

1

2

3

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0 A

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

30

20

10

B

g

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

G

G

Figure 6 - Hasty et al.

A

y

20

15

10

5

0

B

15

v

10

5

0

0

10

20

x

30

0

40

120

160

80
u

Figure 7 - Hasty et al.

n
o

i
t

a
r
t

n
e
c
n
o
c
 

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

8

10

6
Time [h]

0

1

2

3

4

7

8

9

10

11

6
5
Time [h]

Figure 8 - Hasty et al.

