February 2, 2008

Hong Qian

Synopsis

1
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
4
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Analysis of the Thermodynamics of Hydrophobic Solvation
Based on Scaled Particle Theory

Department of Applied Mathematics and Bioengineering
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195

A comprehensive, semi-quantitative model for the thermodynamics of hydrophobic sol-
vation is presented. The model is based on a very simple premise suggested by the scaled
particle theory and treats both solute and solvent molecules as hard spheres. A connec-
tion between the peculiarly large heat-capacity change for hydrophobic solvation and the
large temperature dependence of the thermal expansivity of water is found. Analysis reveals
a possible physical origin for the converging behavior of solvation entropies for a series of
homologous hydrophobic compounds. The model suggests that the low solubility and the
large heat-capacity change of hydrophobic solvation stem from two distinct aspects of water
molecules: the static geometry of the molecule and the dynamic hydrogen bonding network,
respectively.

Running title: Hydrophobic Solvation Thermodynamics

1

Introduction

The scaled particle theory (SPT), a statistical mechanical model for liquids and solutions
made of hard spherical molecules, is a powerful conceptual framework and a useful com-
putational tool for molecular solvation.1−4 Even though the SPT was originally developed
only for hard spherical molecules,5
recent studies have shown that it also provides insight
into the solvation of hydrophobic solutes in associative liquid like water. There are several
reasons for this wide applicability of SPT:

1) The SPT is not a statistical mechanical theory based on the ﬁrst principle. Rather,
an independently obtained solvent density has to be provided in addition to temperature,
pressure, and molecular parameters. This is in contrast to a genuine statistical mechanical
theory of liquid, in which density is derived from temperature, pressure, and molecular
parameters. Some essential properties of an associative liquid are contained in the density
data.5,6

2) Recent studies have shown that the SPT provides accurate numerical calculations for sol-
vation free energy of hydrocarbons in water, but does so with less success for calculating the
entropy and enthalpy.2,6 This result is consistent with the concept of entropy-enthalpy com-
pensation, which occurs with the solvent reorganization when introducing a solute molecule
into a solvent.6−9

3) To apply the SPT to an associative liquid like water, one practical diﬃculty is how to
determine the hard sphere radii for water and the solute molecules.2 While these diﬃculties
aﬀect quantitative numerical calculation, it does not alter the qualitative physical insight one
obtains from the SPT. In this paper, our primary interest is in the qualitative relationship
between diﬀerent physical quantities, the numerical values are not essential for our analysis.

Based on these arguments, we try to use SPT as a semi-quantitative model for under-
standing various experimental results which are essential to the solvation of small organic
molecules in aqueous solutions. We show that much of the characteristics of hydrophobic
solvation can be understood in terms of this over-simpliﬁed model. Our approach is very
much in the same spirit of the earlier work of Grunwald.8 Treating the hydrophobic solutes
as inert hard spheres, of course, completely neglects the solute-solvent interaction.3,6 This
should be kept in mind when applying the result of the present analysis to the solvation
of hydrocarbons. On the other hand, the dissolution of inert gases like xenon exhibits all
the characteristics of hydrophobic solvation. Hence, neglecting solute-solvent interaction is
justiﬁed in our present study.

Some Basic Facts

2

The essential features in the data for dissolution of hydrophobic compounds in aqueous

solutions are summarized as follows:

1) Dissolution entropy changes, ∆S(T )’s, associated with transferring a series of hydrophobic
solutes from solid → water, liquid → water, and gas → water form three distinct, respective
groups. Within each group, ∆S(T )’s for diﬀerent solute species converge to a common ∆S∗
at a temperature T ∗
s . While ∆S∗’s are diﬀerent for the three groups, T ∗
s ’s for all three groups
are approximately equal to 110◦C.10 The two groups of data on the transfer from liquid →
water and gas → water are in agreement with the Trouton’s rule.

In order to compare free energies calculated from SPT with experimentally obtained
solubility, one has to calculate the solvation free energy from a measurement based on con-
centration scale in molarity rather than in mole fraction.5,11,12 The numerical diﬀerence
between the two calculations is −RT ln(v1/v2) where v1 and v2 are the molar volumes of the
solvent systems before and after the transfer, respectively. For the gas phase, v = kBT /p
where p is the gas pressure (= 1 atm); for water, v =18.08 cm3/mol.6 This changing of
concentration scale increases the free energy values given by Murphy et al.10 by about 60 J
per degree per mole13 (e.g., shift the lines in their Figure 1 upward).

2) The heat-capacity changes, ∆Cp’s, for all the dissolution reactions are approximately
temperature independent.14

3) There also appears to have a convergence temperature for enthalpy changes in disso-
lution of organic compounds from gas → water (see Appendix for more discussion). The
temperature is not known, but the corresponding ∆H ∗ is about a few KJ/mol.

There have been many diﬀerent ways of presenting experimental data on the thermody-
namics of dissolution. Here we have summarized several key results from the literature which
are useful in organizing and relating various data representations. It is important to note
that many presentations are in fact concerning same experimental measurements. They are
related by the basic thermodynamic formulae, as shown in the following theorems.

Baldwin’s Theorem

Based on the observations of Sturtevant15 and Privalov14, R.L. Baldwin gave the following
theorem in 1986.16 For a series of homologous reactions, designated by i, with temperature-
independent ∆Cpi, the following two statements are equivalent:

1) At one temperature T †, there are unique constants a and b such that:

2) there is a unique temperature T ∗

s at which ∆S(T ∗

s ) is unique. That is, T ∗

s and ∆Si(T ∗
s )

∆Si = a + b∆Cpi

(1)

3

are independent of i. Hence:

∆Si(T ) = ∆S(T ∗

s ) + ∆Cpiln(T /T ∗
s )

(2)

Compare Eq. (1) with (2), we have a = ∆S(T ∗
s ). From now on, we will
follow Lee13 and refer to the ∆Si versus ∆Cpi relation in Eq. (1) as a SMPG plot named after
Sturtevant, Murphy, Privalov, and Gill.10,15 Baldwin’s theorem states that a linear SMPG
plot is equivalent to having a convergence temperature for ∆Si, and the intersection a in
the SMPG plot is the unique ∆S∗. Conversely, the existence of a convergence temperature
indicates a linear SMPG plot at every temperature.

s ) and b = ln(T †/T ∗

Lee’s Theorem

Lee’s theorem13

is an application of the mathematical property of a bilinear function:
if a function f (x, y) is linear as a function of either x or y, as well as a function of their
product, xy, then there exists a y∗ at which f (x, y∗) is independent of x. To express this by
equation:

f (x, y) = a + bx + cy + dxy = d(x +

)(y +

) +

c
d

b
d

ad − bc
d

so when y = y∗ = −b/d, f (x, y∗) is independent of x.

The bilinear function has to be a linear function of either variables when the other one is
at a ﬁxed value. To apply this result to the thermodynamics of dissolution, we identify the
logarithmic temperature and a certain molecular parameter as the variables x and y, and
the entropy (or enthalpy or Gibbs free energy) of dissolution as the function f (x, y). Hence,
at a given temperature, the entropy is a linear function of the molecular parameter X. Lee
proposed the parameter to be a size measure of the solute molecule. In fact, Lee’s proposal
of

∆Si(T ) = as + bsXi

(3)

is a structural interpretation of the linear SMPG plot given in (1). The subscript “s” here
stands for entropy. (There is a similar relation for enthahlpy, with its respective ah and bh.13 )
It is well known that ∆Cp’s are proportional to molecular size of a hydrophobic solute. It
is also worth noting that a linear relationship due to substituents of a series of functional
groups is widely observed in organic reactions.17

Therefore, the bilinear argument immediately leads to the existence of a convergence
temperature from the linear entropy relation in Eq. (3). Combining Lee’s and Baldwin’s
theorems, it can be shown that the linear entropy relation is suﬃcient but not necessary for
generating a convergence temperature.

The BMDW Theorem

4

This theorem, which was given by Baldwin and Muller,18 and also independently by
Doig and Williams,19
establishes an intrinsic relationship between the three convergence
temperatures for entropy, enthalpy, and Gibbs free energy. Consider a series of homologous
reactions designated by i and each has a temperature-independent ∆Cpi of its own. If two
out of the three thermodynamics quantities (entropy, enthalpy, and Gibbs free energy) have
convergence temperatures, then there is a convergence temperature for the third quantity.
If we denote by T ∗

g these convergence temperatures, we have:

h , and T ∗

s , T ∗

and also a relation for the corresponding thermodynamic quantities:

g − T ∗
T ∗

h − T ∗

g ln(T ∗

g /T ∗

s ) = 0

∆G(T ∗

g ) = ∆H(T ∗

h ) − T ∗

g ∆S(T ∗
s )

(4)

(5)

This theorem was used by Baldwin and Muller18 to explain the intriguing fact of approx-
s and T ∗
imately equal convergence temperatures T ∗
h for a set of protein folding reactions. It is
discovered that this set of proteins have approximately equal melting temperatures, i.e., T ∗
g
g ) ≈ 0. Using the same theorem, Doig and Williams19 have reached a
= 331 ± 9 K and ∆G(T ∗
similar conclusion. They pointed out that most proteins of the same set have approximately
equal ∆G per residue at room temperature. These two arguments are consistent with each
other if we note that all the proteins in the set have approximately same ∆Cp per residue.

A Physical Model Based on SPT

The basic results of SPT are summarized here.

It is not necessary for the readers to
know the technical details of SPT;5 rather, our model starts with Eqs. (6) and (7) below.
SPT is a rigorous statistical mechanical theory for liquids made of hard spheres. The theory
also provides an approximated formula for calculating the free energy of dissolving a hard
spherical solute from gas phase into a hard spherical solvent, which is equivalent to intro-
ducing a spherical cavity in the hard sphere liquid. The free energy, which is a function of
the radius of solute as well as the density and the radius of pure solvent, has three dominant
terms. The ﬁrst term is independent of solute size; it is associated with the reduction of
conformational space of the liquid upon introducing a solute molecule of zero physical size
into the solvent. With the physical point being present in the middle of the solution, no sol-
vent molecule can occupy the same point in space. Hence such conformations are no longer
accessible. This term is a function of the density and the radius of pure solvent only. The
second term is proportional to the square of the radius of the solute, i.e., its surface area.
And the third term is proportional to the cubic power of the radius, i.e., its volume, and
external pressure. It has been repeatedly demonstrated, both theoretically and empirically,

5

that the volume term is negligible for any molecular size cavity, and the dominant eﬀect is
from the surface term which deﬁnes a proportional coeﬃcient called surface tension. For
hard spherical solvent and solute, SPT gives an expression for the surface tension, and also
a minor correction term on the free energy due to diﬀerent curvature of the solute molecule.

The free energy is given as:5

∆G
kBT

= −ln(1 − ξ) +

3ξ
1 − ξ

+

9
2  

ξ
1 − ξ !

r2
a2 


2





where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature in Kelvin, a is the radius of solvent
molecule, ξ is the packing density for pure solvent (the volume fraction occupied by the hard
spheres), and r is the radius of solute molecule.

Our model starts with a very simple premise:

∆G(T ) = δ(T, ξ) + σ(T, ξ)r2

where δ and σ are solvation energies for a point and surface tension, respectively. Thermo-
dynamics for solvation will depend on the functional form of δ, σ, and implicit temperature
dependence of ξ. Eq. (7) oﬀers the possibility for connecting thermodynamics of solvation
with the thermal expansion coeﬃcient of pure solvent (see below).

From Eq. (7), it is straightforward to obtain:

∆S(T ) = −δT − δξξT − (σT + σξξT )r2

∆H(T ) = δ − T δT − T δξξT + (σ − T σT − T σξξT )r2

where subscripts “T ” and “ξ” represent partial derivatives with respect to these variables.
Let’s now estimate the magnitudes of the various terms using values for water3
(SPT
parameters for water at room temperature are ξ = 0.363 and a = rw = 1.38 ˚A.) ξT is
proportional to the thermal expansion coeﬃcient of the pure solvent: ξT = −αξ, where α
for water is very small. At 1 atm, the values of α for water range from −0.064 × 10−3 at
0◦C to 0.7 × 10−3 at 100◦C, and α = 0.257 × 10−3 at room temperature (25◦C). The thermal
expansion coeﬃcients for non-associative liquids are around 1 × 10−3 at 1 atm and between
0◦C to 100◦C, so these values are not very diﬀerent from that of water.

Quantitatively, compare Eqs. (6) and (7), we have:

|δξξT | =

kBT αξ
1 − ξ (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

while

≈ kB

300 × 0.257 × 10−3 × 0.363
1 − 0.363

!

 

= 0.04kB

δT = −kBln(1 − ξ) = 0.5kB >> |δξξT |

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

6

where we have used T = 300K. Similarly by simple diﬀerentiation,

Hence |σξξT | ≈ 0.56kB/r2

w, while σT = 3.17kB/r2

σξ = kBT

3(1 + 2ξ)
w(1 − ξ)3 = 20kBT /r2
w.
r2
w >> |σξξT |.

The Heat Capacity ∆Cp

The heat capacity can be obtained from either Eq. (8) or Eq. (9):

∆Cp = −T (δT T + 2δT ξξT + δξξξ2

T + δξξT T ) − T (σT T + 2σT ξξT + σξξξ2

T + σξξT T )r2

(10)

While the values for α are not very diﬀerent between water and non-associative liquids,
there is a dramatic diﬀerence between α’s dependence on temperature. This diﬀerence
contributes a large term to the ∆Cp of solvation in water, in contrast to non-associative
solvent. In other words, even though α for water is very small, its temperature dependence
is quite large, in contrary to most organic solvents. Hence we will neglect contribution from
ξT but shall keep the terms with ξT T . Thus we have:

∆Cp = −T ξT T (δξ + σξr2)

(11)

where, according to SPT (i.e., Eqs (6) and (7)), both δξ and σξ are explicitly proportional
to T. Therefore if ξT T is proportional to T −2, then ∆Cp will be approximately temperature
independent.

It is clear from the above argument that, for a non-associative solvent, the solvation of
a inert solute should have very small ∆Cp since non-associative liquid has almost zero ξT T .
For water, δξ = 1.57kBT and σξr2 = 20.0kBT (r/rw)2. Therefore, Eq. (11) gives a linear
relationship between ∆Cp and molecular surface area r2 with almost zero intersection when
r > rw. Note, however, that for hydrocarbon solutes like propane and isobutane, there are
signiﬁcant solute-solvent interactions which contribute to the overall ∆Cp.6 Therefore, our
present result is only semi-quantitative and has to be augmented with such interactions when
applied to real experimental data.

∆S∗ and ∆H ∗

We now return to Eq. (8). According to Lee’s theorem:13

∆S∗ = −δT − δξξT

(12)

Note that in order to compare calculation from SPT with experimental measurements, we
have to obtain the entropy from experimental measurements according to molarity con-
centration scale.5,11 When this was done,13 Lee found that the calculation given by SPT
compares favorably with experimental results.

7

Similarly, we have:

∆H ∗ = δ − T δT − T δξξT = −T δξξT

(13)

the second equality is because δ is a linear function of T (see Eqs. (6) and (7)). Numerically,
−T δξξT is about 0.034 kBT , that is, 2.5 kJ/mol. It should be noted that Eq. (13) neglects
It is known that diﬀerent hydrocarbons, for
contribution from solute-solvent interaction.
example aromatics and aliphatics, have diﬀerent ∆H ∗. On the other hand, inert gases could
be used as a test for the present model.

Thus, according to our analysis, the converging values for entropy and enthalpy are the
consequence of point solvation energy. This is an interesting conjecture. A rigorous statistical
mechanical treatment of this problem seems possible, but has never been developed.
In
general, point solvation energy is dependent upon whether it is solid, or liquid, or gas, from
which the solutes are transferred. A quantitative theory might be able to explain the small
diﬀerences between the three SMPG plots.10 (Note: after correction according to molarity
scale, the intersection, ∆S∗, for gas → water dissolution is increased by about 60 J per
degree per mole, see ref. 10).

It is natural to suspect that the unique convergence temperature, T ∗

s , for entropy of all
three diﬀerent groups of dissolution transferred from either solid, liquid, or gas, is due to
some intrinsic properties of water. T ∗
s is the temperature at which ∆S(T ) in Eq. (8) equals
∆S∗ given in Eq. (12). That is:

σT + σξξT = 0

(14)

s and T ∗
T ∗
h

i.e.,

By an approximated calculation, σT /σξ = 0.158/T. Hence:

ξT (T ∗

s ) = −α(T ∗

s )ξ(T ∗

s ) = −σT /σξ.

s α(T ∗
T ∗

s )ξ(T ∗

s ) = 0.158.

This is consistent with the laboratory measurements T ∗
1.1 × 10−3.

Similarly for T ∗

h , from Eqs. (9) and (13) we have:

s = 383 K, ξ = 0.363 and α =

σ − T σT − T σξξT = 0.

(15)

According to SPT, the ﬁrst two terms cancel each other. The third term, as we have
(15) is buried in our various
indicated, is indeed quite small. Thus unfortunately, Eq.
approximations and fails to provide an estimation for T ∗
h . A more accurate estimation is
required to obtain the convergence temperature for ∆H.

8

Discussion

With the physical insight provided by SPT, we now attempt to answer some key questions

concerning the thermodynamics of hydrophobic solvation and the hydrophobic eﬀect.

1) What is the Hydrophobic Eﬀect?

Ever since Kauzmann’s seminal paper on hydrophobic eﬀect,20 people have believed that
hydrophobic eﬀect is mostly due to the reorganization of hydrogen bonds among the solvent
molecules around the solute, and the contribution of direct interaction between solvent and
solute is rather minimal. So what is the relation between the hydrophobic eﬀect and the
solvation thermodynamics for hydrophobic solute in water? To address the question, one
has to be precise about the meaning of “hydrophobic eﬀect”. There is an experimental
(thermodynamic) side and there is a structural (theoretical) side of conventional wisdom on
“hydrophobicity”. The experimental side is that non-polar solutes in water have very low
solubility and the dissolution has large heat-capacity changes, in contrast to the dissolution
in organic solvent. The structural side is that hydrogen bonding arrangement has been
altered when an non-polar solute is dissolved in water.

From our analysis, it seems that low solubility and large ∆Cp in fact stem from two
distinct sources.21 While the large ∆Cp is associated with rearrangement of water molecules,
the low solubility is primarily due to the geometric properties of water molecules. This
suggestion is consistent with our understanding of entropy-enthalpy compensation, which
says that the ability of rearrangement of solvent should only have minor eﬀect on solubility.7
The more dynamic aspect of water will be reﬂected only through quantities like entropy,
enthalpy, and heat capacity. The reorganization process within solvent contributes to entropy
change through heat capacity ∆Cp, which in turn is related to the peculiar large temperature
dependence of α, the thermal expansivity, of water. Hence it seems legitimate to identify
∆Cp with the hydrophobic eﬀect.

However, could one simply identify the ∆Cp term as hydrophobic free energy? This indeed
is the central issue behind the work by Murphy et al.10
It was, of course, well recognized
that the ∆Cp term is not uniquely determined until an appropriate reference temperature(s)
h as reference temperatures,10
is chosen.22 Murphy et al. proposed the using of T ∗
and thereafter a ∆Cp term was uniquely deﬁned. However, as we have seen, the existence
of convergence temperatures and their values are not the hallmark of the reorganization of
associative solvent. We suspect that many other solvation processes might also have such
convergent properties. The basis for the existence of convergence temperatures is Eq. (7),
and it is clear that this equation is not unique for hydrophobic solvation (more discussion
later).

s and T ∗

2) What is the Role of Hydrogen Bond?

9

An inevitable objection to our approach from many readers will be the complete ne-
glect of hydrogen bond which has central importance in Kauzmann’s structural model for
hydrophobicity.20 We would like to emphasize that we do accept the hydrogen bond in
water as the structural base for hydrophobicity, but we want to seek the speciﬁc ther-
modynamic aspect or aspects of the hydrogen-bond structure which are responsible for
the thermodynamics of hydrophobic solvation. The large temperature dependence of α no
doubt is a manifestation of hydrogen bonding reorganization in water, the ultimate source of
hydrophobicity. However, other aspects of the water molecules might also be relevant or even
crucial; for example, the tetrahedral chemistry of hydrogen bonding,20 or more generally
the non-isotropic pair-wise interaction between two water molecules,23 and the high ratio
between physical volume and thermodynamic volume of water.3 In our model, SPT indeed
uses all these properties of water, though not explicitly. The fact is that water molecule in
the SPT model has large thermodynamic volume, i.e., low packing density, but at the same
time a small radius leads to high solvation number around a cavity.3 This indicates that the
solvent molecule is not isotropic, and there are preferences for these molecules to surround a
cavity, which is exactly the Kauzamnn’s argument! A crude analogy will be a wedge-shaped
molecule, and that is quite consistent with water molecules.

3) What is the basis of convergence temperature? As pointed out by Lee,13 the presence of
convergence temperature is due to some kind of linear free energy dependence on molecular
substituents, i.e., Eq. (7).

4) What determine the magnitudes of ∆S∗ and ∆H ∗? They are determined primarily by
the thermodynamics of solvation of zero size point solutes.

5) Why is there a large ∆Cp? The ∆Cp of hydrophobic solvation stems from the peculiar
large temperature dependence of thermal expansion coeﬃcient, ∂α/∂T .

6) How to Obtain Molecular Interaction Energy From the Thermodynamic Data?

This is an age-old question. Twenty-ﬁve years ago, T.H. Benzinger proposed a new
deﬁnition for enthalpy of chemical reaction.24 His argument was that for a chemical reaction
with non-zero ∆Cp, there would be no unique heat of formation for the reaction. Since the
true heat of formation is mechanical (athermal), Benzinger suggested to use ∆H(0) at zero
Kelvin as the “true” heat of formation, and argued that the remains of free energy should
be lumped into one term:

When taking into account the fact ∆S(0) = 0, he obtained:

∆W (T ) = ∆H(0) − ∆G(T ).

∆W (T ) =

∆Cp(X)

− 1

dX

T

0
Z

T
X

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

10

In some sense, what Benzinger did was similar to what Murphy et al. did. They were both
trying to divide the total free energy into a part with direct (mechanical) interaction and the
rest part with surrounding eﬀect due to thermodynamics. They both realized that ∆Cp term
was related to the latter since it characterizes the ﬂuctuation in enthalpy due to thermal
agitation. The crucial question is of course whether it is possible to ﬁnd an appropriate
reference temperature(s) based on purely thermodynamic analysis without any molecular
model. Chan and Dill recently have extensively discussed this issue, and they concluded
that without a molecular model, purely thermodynamic analysis would not provide much
meaningful result.12

7. The Validity of Using SPT to Model Hydrophobic Solvation.

Let’s now reiterate the rationales for using SPT to model solvation in associative solvents.
In SPT, the reorganization of solvent is considered implicitly through experimental data on ξ
as function of temperature. This approach is consistent with the assertion that the ultimate
reason for reorganization in a solvent is its temperature dependence as a pure liquid.7 The
presence of hydrogen bonds between solvent molecules is manifested in the experimental
data on water density and its temperature dependence. SPT, of course, completely neglects
the soft interaction between solute and solvent.

Our second defense is based on a recent analysis of how thermodynamic systems respond
to small perturbations.7
It has been shown that if we classify thermodynamic quantities
by the orders of derivative of free energy, there is a relationship between thermodynamic of
perturbation and the thermodynamics of unperturbed system. Since one can treat solvation
as a perturbation, one only needs the thermodynamics of one order higher for pure solvent
in order to calculate the thermodynamics of solvation. For example, αT of solvent gives
∆Cp of solvation. All the structural changes in hydrogen bonding will be captured in these
thermodynamic quantity of pure water, and our analysis made use of them.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that we are not attempting to use SPT to model
the properties of water; rather, we are merely using SPT to relate the thermodynamics of
dissolution of an inert solute in water to that of pure water. In the past, many models for
water which are based on multi-state of water conformation have been successful in providing
calculations for thermal expansion coeﬃcient, α, but have failed to deal with its temperature
dependence.25 This situation is completely in accord with our analysis.

Acknowledgments

I thank Buzz Baldwin, B.K. Lee, and John Schellman for many detailed and helpful
I wish to specially dedicate this work to Professor
discussion in the past several years.
Baldwin on the occasion of his 70th birthday. His pioneer work on helical peptide, protein

11

hydrogen exchange, DNA ﬂexibility, and hydrophobic eﬀect have been guiding lights for my
research.

References

1. Stillinger, F. H. (1973) J. Solution Chem., 2, 141-158.

2. Postma, J.P.M., Berendsen, H.J.C., & Haak, J.R. (1982) Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc., 17,
55-67.

3. Lee, B. (1985) Biopolymers, 24, 813-825.

4. Morton, A., Baase, W.A., & Matthews, B.W. (1995) Biochemistry, 34, 8564-8575.

5. Reiss, H. (1965) Adv. Chem. Phys. 9, 1-84.

6. Lee, B. (1991) Biopolymers, 31, 993-1008.

7. Qian, H. & Hopﬁeld, J.J. (1996) J. Chem. Phys., 105, 9292-9298.

8. Grunwald, E. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc., 196, 5414-5420.

9. Ben-Naim, A. (1975) Biopolymers, 14, 1337-1355.

10. Murphy, K., Privalov, P.L., & Gill, S.L. (1990) Science, 247, 559-561.

11. Ben-Naim, A. (1978) J. Phys. Chem., 82, 792-803.

12. Chan, H.S. & Dill, K.A. (1997) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 26, 423-457.

13. Lee, B. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 5154-5158.

14. Privalov, P. (1979) Adv. Protein Chem. 33, 167-241.

15. Sturtevant, J.M. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 2236-2240.

16. Baldwin, R.L. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 8069-8072.

17. Leﬄer, L. & Grunwald, E. (1963) Rates and Equilibria of Organic Reactions, John-Wiley
& Sons, New York.

18. Baldwin, R.L. & Muller, N. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 7110-7113.

19. Doig, A.J. & Williams, D.H. (1992) Biochemistry, 31, 9371-9375.

20. Kauzmann, W. (1959) Adv. Protein Chem., 14, 1-63.

21. Lee, B. (1994) Biophys. Chem., 51, 271-278.

22. Becktel, W.J. & Schellman, J.A. (1987) Biopolymers, 26, 1859-1877.

12

23. Ben-Naim, A. (1992) Statistical Thermodynamics for Chemists and Biochemists, Plenum
Press, New York.

24. Benzinger, T.H. (1971) Nature, 229, 100-102.

25. Kauzmann, W. (1975) Colloq. Inter. C.N.R.S., 246, 63-71.

Appendix: A possible ∆H ∗ in gas to water dissolution?

Let’s proceed with the dissolution of a gas into water (g → w) by ﬁrst liquefying the gas

(g → l) and then transferring the liquid into water (l → w):

∆Hg→w = ∆Hg→l + ∆Hl→w.

There seems to be a convergence temperature for dissolution enthalpy change from liquid
→ water at about 20◦C, and corresponding ∆H ∗ is about few KJ/mol.16 According to
Trouton’s rule, we can write

∆Hg→l = −88Tb J/mol

It is well known that the boiling temperature Tb is scaled with molecular size, hence ∆Hg→w
and ∆Hl→g should have similar converging ∆H ∗ but at diﬀerent temperatures. Mathemati-
cally, if we have:

where b1 = 0 when T = 20◦C, and

∆Hl→w = ∆H ∗ + b1(T )r2

∆Hg→l = b2(T )r2

then:

∆Hg→w = ∆H ∗ + [b1(T ) + b2(T )]r2

the convergence temperature is the value of T at which b1 + b2 = 0.

13

