1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Doublet Formation in the Flocculation
Process of the Yeast Cells

S. Stan∗
Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Center for Malting and Brewing Science,
K.U. Leuven, Kardinaal Mercierlaan 92,
B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium

F. Despa
Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Department of Physics,
K. U. Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200D,
B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium

January 12, 2014

Abstract

The combination of single cells to form doublets is regarded as the
rate-limiting step of ﬂocculation and requires the presence of surface
proteins in active form. The process of activation of the ﬂocculation
proteins of yeast cells is described in the frame of the autocrine inter-
action regime (Cantrell, D. A. and Smith, K. A., 1984, Science 224,
1312-1316). The inﬂuence of several eﬀectors (the cell eﬃciency to use
sugars, the calcium content in the external medium and the probabil-
ity that free cells collide each other under thermal motion conditions)
on the initial rate of ﬂocculation and on the fraction of remaining free

∗Corresponding author (the present address: Department of Food Sciences and Tech-

nology, Oregon State University, Wiegand Hall 240B, Corvallis, OR 97331-6602, USA)

1

cells in the steady state is brieﬂy discussed in the paper. The present
model oﬀers an useful tool for further quantitative investigations in
this topic. Also, it indicates qualitatively a way in which the regula-
tion of ﬂocculation might be controlled at the level of the expression
of cell-surface activation abilities.

Keywords: ﬂocculation; yeast; autocrine binding; lectin hypothesis

2

1 Introduction

Flocculation is a well-known example of natural, active aggregation and is de-
ﬁned as the reversible aggregation of cells into ﬂocs (Stradford, 1992; Straver
et al., 1993). Particularly, the ﬂocculation process is important in industrial
processes related to fermentation technology (brewing, wine-making, biocon-
versions).

In essence, ﬂocculation is an ongoing process in which a yeast cell pop-
ulation, initially consisting entirely of single cells, is transformed into two
fractions, ﬂocculated and single cells. This results in a bimodal ﬂoc-size dis-
tribution (Davis and Hunt, 1986), which means that there are single cells
and ﬂocs with a clear dividing line between them, not a whole spectrum
of sizes of miniﬂocs spreading themselves over large distances in the solute
volume. Also, the visual examination of single cells and small ﬂocs falling
under gravity showed that large fast-moving ﬂocs did not collide with single
cells in their path but swept them aside in mass ﬂows of liquid ahead of
the particles (Stradford, 1992). The only collision observed, and subsequent
adhesion, were between ﬂoc particles of approximately similar sizes.

In the light of this evidence, Stratford (1992) proposed the cascade theory
to approach the ﬂocculation process. According to this theory, the particles
only succeed in colliding with particles of similar size. The rate-limiting step
of the process is the combination of single cells to form doublets. Flocs then
rapidly build up in size by combining with similar-sized ﬂocs until they reach
the maximum size limit imposed by shear forces of agitation. As a conse-
quence of rapid formation of large ﬂocs, the relocation of the remaining sin-
gle cells and ﬂoc compression elapses. The overall eﬀect is that ﬂocs become
progressively less dense and incorporate more empty space as size increases
In the empty spaces of the large ﬂoc structure,
(Davis and Hunt, 1986).
the remaining single cells form small clusters. Such a system showing local
symmetry repeated at diﬀerent enlargements and scales is a fractal structure
(Mandelbrot, 1990). The fractal dimension measured for yeast ﬂocs conﬁrms
the supercluster nature of the ﬂoc structure (Davis and Hunt, 1986), and also
indicates that the structure was formed by a diﬀusion-limited process (Schae-
fer, 1989). Thus, the properties of the ﬂoc structure are strongly related to
their microstructured morphologies resulting from a speciﬁc agglutination
and growth process.

Since major macroscopic features of the ﬂocculation process seem to be

3

well understood, several questions regarding the microscopic aspects of the
process still remain open. For example, it is of a crucial importance to
know how two cells form a dimer structure? How will factors in the external
cellular medium prevent or induce the dimer formation and which are the
main external factors intervening in the mechanism of dimer formation?

Within a fully developed yeast-culture, most cells are ﬂocculating or re-
tain the option to ﬂocculate when activated by calcium ions. The ﬂocculation
process of the yeast cells requires the presence of surface proteins and mannan
receptors. If these are not available, or masked, blocked by binding speciﬁc
sugars or generally inhibited or denatured, ﬂocculation can not occur. Floc-
culation, once developed, is an intrinsic property of the cell wall. To sum up
at this point, sugar-binding proteins, lectins and ﬂocculation share the char-
acteristics of inhibition by speciﬁc sugars and a requirement for calcium ions.
Also, for ﬂocculation to be expressed, receptor groups must be available on
the other yeast walls to allow bonding by the ﬂocculation protein (Stradford,
1992).

We are entering an exciting phase within which links are being forged
between transduction events at the plasma membrane and the surface cell
receptors (carbohydrate and proteins), which contribute to the onset of ﬂoc-
culation. Indeed, there are several transduction steps to elucidate in order to
understand how the regulatory factors (antigens) act on the genes involved
in the protein secretion, and how the secreted proteins become surface cell
receptors and bring about the onset of ﬂocculation. Nevertheless, the precur-
sor stage of dimerization, after the ﬂocculation proteins are fully expressed
in the cell wall but not activated yet for the ﬂocculation onset, is rather com-
plex. Further investigation at this stage is one pressing issue in the general
problem of understanding how the ﬂocculation eﬀectors govern the dynamics
of the process and how can the regulation of ﬂocculation can be controlled
at the level of the expression of cell-surface activation abilities.

With this background we can state the main issues of this paper. What
is the precursor stage of the dimer formation and how do we characterize
it? What is the physical mechanism of the process and what mathematical
equation governs this process?

To address these topics the objective of this study was twofold: First,
we aimed to demonstrate that the process of activation of the ﬂocculation
proteins can be seen in a more general context of cellular processes, that is
the autocrine interaction regime (Cantrell and Smith, 1984). In turn, this

4

would mean ﬂocculation has a kinetic base and informations can at least
be mathematically attainable on a computer (Despa and Despa, 1997). A
second objective was to explore quantitatively the inﬂuence of the ﬂocculation
eﬀectors on the rate of the dimer formation. Beyond this was the idea of
varying both the cell intrinsic parameters and external eﬀectors to see how
modifying their range would aﬀect, within the limitations of the present
approach, the tendency of cells to form dimers.

2 Theoretical model

In order to achieve a rapid progress in describing ﬂocculence, we will use in
the following a more simpliﬁed model which, indeed, retains the important
features observed so far.

Suppose that the conditions for binding between speciﬁc surface lectin
proteins of ﬂocculent cells and carbohydrate receptors on nearby cells are ful-
ﬁlled satisﬁed. This is the lectin-like binding hypothesis (Miki et al., 1982).
The surface proteins need active conformations (lectin properties) in order
to bond to the corresponding carbohydrate receptors. This is fully ensured
by bonding Ca2+ ions to the ﬂocculation proteins, which lead consequently
to their lectin (active) conformation. Note that, another hypothesis of the
doublet formation assumes the leading role to the calcium ions (the calcium-
bridging hypothesis (Harris, 1959; Mill, 1964)). There, the divalent calcium
ions form bridges between surface carboxyl or phosphate groups on diﬀerent
cells. The calcium-bridging hypothesis falls to explain the inhibition of ﬂoc-
culation by sugars while, the lectin-like binding hypothesis succeeded. The
lectin-like binding hypothesis gets further support by the observation that
various non-ﬂocculent strains of yeast are able to co-ﬂocculate when mixed
together (Stradford, 1992a).

We recall from above that the onset of the ﬂocculation process needs a
primary insertion of the ﬂocculation proteins from the plasma membrane
into the cell wall and is based on the calcium-dependent interaction between
lectins and cell wall mannan receptors. The mechanisms leading to the ac-
tivation of the ﬂocculation proteins (this implicitly assumes correct lectin
conformation by Ca2+ binding) are largely unknown. In the following, we
propose an activation mechanism for the ﬂocculation proteins much in the
same manner as it has used to describe the activation of helper T -cells by

5

IL − 2 growth factors (Cantrell and Smith, 1984; Despa and Despa, 1997).
There, the interaction between the helper T − cells and their corresponding
IL − 2 growth factors obey a self-interaction mechanism within the limit of
the autocrine binding regime.

Similarly, we assume here that the activation mechanism of the ﬂoccula-
tion proteins and the onset of the ﬂocculation process involve an autocrine
binding regime for sugar radicals and Ca2+ ions. It implies a self-interaction
phenomenon, which means the following: The presence of sugars (and the
other nutrients) in the autocrine region leads primarily to its consumption
and consequent production of metabolic energy. Production of metabolic
energy is vital at all stages of the cell development including the protein
encoding by ﬂocculation genes (Novick et al., 1981). Once the ﬂocculation
proteins developed, these are inserted in the cell wall and, afterwards, acti-
vated by Ca2+ binding. Concomitantly, the activated surface proteins may
be blocked to onset ﬂocculation by the inhibitory action of sugars. Lectins
may have great aﬃnity for wort sugars but the interaction in the wall man-
nan of the cell with other sugar residues may be also possible. So that,
on one hand the sugar promotes ﬂocculation by providing the cell with the
metabolic energy for ﬂocculation protein formation and, on the other hand,
it fetters the ongoing process by speciﬁc binding to the active ﬂocculation
proteins.

In the following, we consider that the surface proteins are preformed at
an earlier stage of development and inserted in the cell wall. The abundance
of ﬂocculation proteins in the cell wall is direct related to the cell eﬃciency
to use sugars (nutrients). We also assume that the calcium ions have the
physical access to the ﬂocculation proteins. The active conformation of the
ﬂocculation proteins is achieved by bonding Ca2+ ions. Accordingly, we
propose the following rate equation

dW
dt

= α + Nbound (t) − α−1W (t) ,

(1)

to describe the activation of the surface proteins. The ﬁrst term in the right
side of this equation represents the cell eﬃciency to use sugars (nutrients)
in order to produce the metabolic energy needed for the activation of the
ﬂocculation proteins. (Actually, the ratio of concentration of signal nutrient
to sugar may conceivably inﬂuence ﬂocculation (Stradford, 1992).) The ef-
fective value of this term accounts for the sugar depletion in unit time. The

6

second term, Nbound (t), represents the time-depending number of receptors
(ﬂocculation proteins) where the Ca2+ ions are bound. This depends on the
size of the autocrine region (i.e., the region close to the cell in which any
Ca2+ ion will be undoubtedly bound to the surface protein). The third term
represents the self-interaction term, which induces a saturation eﬀect due to
the extra-sugar content (α−1 ≡ 1 − α, in the absolute value).

In such a way, we may observe that the external concentration of sugar
controls both early events, prior the activation, (starting the signaling cas-
cade of proteins encoding by structural genes) and later events (e.g., the
inhibition of the surface cell receptors). Ca2+ has the secondary role to
promote the lectin properties of the surface proteins. Other cumbersome ef-
fects related to the cofactors action on the ﬂocculation proteins (proteolytic
cleavage, physical exposure) are disregarded in the present model.

Further on, let us consider a suspension of cells at the moment of time
t, each of them having an average number W0 of surface proteins uniformly
distributed on the cell surface. We assume that the calcium ions having
the concentration nCa2+ move diﬀusively around the yeast cells. The surface
proteins bind calcium ions from the autocrine region resulting ﬂocculation
proteins in active (lectin) forms. The bonding process has a certain prob-
ability P (t). The simplest choice for the binding probability in unit time
is

P (t) =

[W0 − Nbound (t)]
W0

,

W0 − Nbound (t) is the number of the available receptors (surface proteins) at
the moment of time t. Consequently, the time variation of the number of sur-
face proteins (receptors) where calcium ions are bound (receptor occupation),
Nbound (t) , is given by the following equation

d
dt

Nbound (t) = nCa2+VarP (t) ,

(3)

where Var is the volume of the autocrine region. For numerical applications
we may approximate the radial dimension of the autocrine region by the
characteristic Debye length (λD). The Debye length measures the size of the
ionic cloud which surrounds the (charged) yeast cell. Doing so, Var results in

(2)

(4)

Var

∼
=

4π
3 h(R + λD)

3 − R3

i ,

7

where R is the radius of (spherical) cell. The size of the ionic cloud surround-
ing the cell is undoubtedly related to the pH value of the medium. Any
change of the pH value does aﬀect both surface charge and Debye length
(λD). Implicitly, the equilibrium value of the calcium concentration around
the cell is changed.

To obtain the solution of eq. (1), which gives us the number of activated
surface proteins, ready for ﬂocculation, we have to integrate numerically the
equations system composed from eqs. (1), (2) and (3). In the assumptions
of the present model, W0 entering eq. (2) has a constant value.

Before embarking on other details, we see that the activation of the sur-
face proteins which, in turn, promotes ﬂocculation, depends in the present
kinetic model on: the total number of surface proteins (W0), the average
concentration of calcium ions (nCa2+), the rate and/or eﬃciency of the cell
to use sugars and the degree of saturation of sugar content in the external
medium (α−1), and on the speciﬁcity of the medium (temperature, viscosity,
charge density on the cell membrane) by the net value of the Debye length.
According to the cascade theory of ﬂocculation the rate-limiting step of
the process is the combination of single cells to form doublets (Stradford,
1992). The doublets combine to form groups of four, and on to eight, 16, 32,
64, etc. (cascade theory). Subsequent collisions between pairs of increasingly
larger particles are energetically easier and are therefore not rate-limiting.

The rate of the dimer formation is in a direct proportion with the con-
centration of free cells (c0 − cf ) (where c0 is the initial concentration of free
cells and cf stands for the dimers at the moment of time t), with the relative
number of activated proteins in unit time 1
dW
dt and, indeed, depends on the
W0
probability that free cells collide each other under thermal motion conditions
ν. Therefore, this can be written as

dcf
dt

∼
=

1
W0

dW
dt

(c0 − cf ) ν .

The number of collisions which occur between molecules in a ﬂuid system
can be calculated from a complex function (Chapman and Cowling, 1970)
depending, mainly, on the temperature T and on the viscosity of the medium.
This resolves to

where a is a constant measured in appropriate units.

ν = aT

1
2

,

8

(5)

(6)

3 Results

The present model assumes that yeast ﬂocculation is an kinetic process de-
pending on several eﬀectors. The eﬀectors may change both the initial rate
of ﬂocculation and the net value of the content of remaining free cells. Their
inﬂuence will be examined in the following. The initial number of free cells
was set at 109 per litter and any cell division was disregarded at the present
level of approximation. Also, we assumed that each yeast cell has approxi-
mate 106 surface proteins. The cell is considered as having a spherical form
with the radius equal to about 5 µm.

3.0.1 Cell eﬃciency to use sugar/nutrients

We proceeded to integrate numerically (5) over a wide interval of time, be-
tween 0 and 100 (arbitrary) time units. The calcium content is maintained
at a constant value nCa2+ = 3.1 1021 ions per unit volume. The Debye length
was set at λD = 0.1 µm and, for simplicity, ν equal to unity. Generally,
we observed that the ﬂocculation process proceeds from a high initial rate
which progressively declines until a steady state is reached where no further
ﬂocculation occurs, leaving a small fraction of free cells. This general be-
havior agrees with the experimental observations (see Stradford, 1992 and
references therein). Speciﬁcally, in Fig. 1 we may see the behavior of the free
cells concentration, c0 − cf , for two diﬀerent values of the α parameter. For
α = 0.9, which means an almost ideal eﬃciency of cell to use sugar/nutrients,
we can see a high initial rate of ﬂocculation. The steady state is achieved
relatively soon and is characterized by a small fraction (cid:16)
(cid:17) of free
cells. (The last result is not evident from Fig. 1 .) Lowering the eﬃciency
of yeast cell to use sugar/nutrients to α = 0.5, the value of the remaining
free cells fraction is drastically enhanced about three orders of magnitude
(cid:17) . In the latter case, the initial rate of ﬂocculation is dramati-

(cid:16)
cally changed, the slope being modiﬁed with about 20%.

≃ 10−4

≃ 10−1

c0−cf
c0

c0−cf
c0

3.0.2 Calcium content

In the following, we will keep the eﬃciency parameter at a constant value
(α = 0.5). The concentration of the calcium ions is now varied while, all
the parameters in above remain at their previous values. We increased the

9

calcium content of three times, from 3.1 1021 ions to 9.3 1021 ions per unit
volume. Looking at Fig. 2, we may observe that the initial rate of ﬂocculation
is strongly inﬂuenced by the calcium content, as we just expected. Supplying
the calcium content at the initial stage of evolution of the cell culture, the
activation rate of the surface proteins is sped up resulting in a more rapid
ﬂocculation process. The steady state free cells fraction is almost the same
for both calcium contents.

The same eﬀect, as above, can be achieved by changing the Debye length
and, implicitly, the volume of the autocrine region. (In the practicality the
Debye length should be related to the pH value in the external medium.)

4 Final remarks

Although sporadic ﬂocculation may appear even from an earlier stage of the
yeast culture development, it is actually initiated after the growth process
ceased. The quantity of free cells in solution decreases sharply after a certain
time has elapsed. Under brewing conditions, the initiation of this process is
triggered after the growth limitation proceeded by a limited oxygen supply
(i.e., oxygen saturation of the wort at the beginning of fermentation), as it
was shown recently (Straver et. al, 1993a). The CO2 formation during the
fermentation produces a natural agitation among the suspended cells that
is a causal factor in ﬂocculation. Agitation causes rapid and progressive
ﬂocculation but, if at any time, due to various reasons, agitation ceased,
In the present model, the above
ﬂocculation stopped (Stradford, 1987).
observation can be easy correlated with the appropriate number of collisions
ν, which occur between cells in the suspension. By increasing ν the rate of
ﬂocculation goes into higher values.

On the other hand, the delay in the initiation of ﬂocculence has been
seen as an expression of the fact that the synthesis of the lectin involved
in ﬂocculation of brewer’s yeast is not regulated during the growth process
(Straver et. al, 1993a). This observation indicates that the regulation of
ﬂocculation might be controlled at the level of the expression of cell-surface
activation abilities. Characterization and regulation of ﬂocculation at this
level of surface cell activation is a real challenge in the development of indus-
trially feasible methods for manipulating yeast-cell components in order to
control ﬂocculence during fermentation. The theoretical model of ﬂoccula-

10

tion developed in the present paper oﬀers, at a certain extent, an useful tool
for further investigations on this line.

Moreover, a sum of other similar biological processes can be described
by using the present kinetic approach. For example, the adhesion of yeast
cells to carbon dioxide bubbles (ﬂotation) in the wine-making technology or
the binding of cells to the matrix and to microorganisms that have already
adhered can be subject of the present approach.

11

REFERENCES
Cantrell, D. A. and Smith, K. A., 1984, The Interleukin-2 T-Cell System:

a New Cell Growth Model, Science 224, 1312-1316.

Chapman, S. and Cowling T.G., 1970, The Mathematical Theory of Non-

Uniform Gases, 3rd ed. (Cambridge University Press) pp. 235-236.

Davis, R.H. and Hunt, T.P., 1986, Modeling and Measurement of Yeast

Flocculation, Biotechnology Progress 2, 91-97.

Despa, S.-I.., and Despa, F., 1997, Diﬀusion Model for Growth Factors-

Cell Receptors Interaction, BioSystems, 44 59-68.

Harris, J.O., 1959, Possible Mechanism of Yeast Flocculation, Journal of

the Institute of Brewing 65, 5-6.

Mandelbrot, B.B., 1990, Fractals - a Geometry of Nature, New Scientist

127, 38-43.

Miki, B.L.A., Poon, N.H., James, A.P. and Selegy, V.L., 1982, Possible
Mechanism for Flocculation Interactions Governed by the Gene FLO1 in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, J. Bacteriol. 150, 878-889.

Mill, P.J., 1964, The Nature of the Interactions between Flocculent Cells
in the Flocculation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Journal of General Microbi-
ology 35, 61-68.

Novick, P., Ferro, S. and Schekman, R., 1981, Order of Events in the

Yeast Secretory Pathway, Cell 25, 461-469.

Schaefer, D.V., 1989, Polymers, Fractals, and Ceramic Materials, Science

243, 1023-1027.

crob. Physiol. 33, 2-71.

Stradford, M., 1992, Yeast Flocculation: A New Perspective, Adv. Mi-

Stratford, M. 1992a, Yeast Flocculation: Reconciliation of physiological

and Genetic Viewpoint, Yeast 8, 25-38.

Stratford, M. and Keenan, M.H., 1987, Yeast Flocculation: Kinetics and

Collision Theory, Yeast 3, 201-206.

Straver, M.H., Kijne, J.W. and Smith, G., 1993, Cause and Control of

Flocculation in Yeast, Trends in Biotechnology 11, 228-232.

Straver, M.H., Smit, G. and Kijne, J.W., 1993a, Determinants of Floccu-

lence of Brewer’s Yeast During Fermentation in Wort, Yeast 9, 527-532.

12

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig.

1 - The inﬂuence of the eﬃciency of the yeast cell to use the

sugar/nutrients on the ﬂocculation process.

Fig. 2 - The inﬂuence of the calcium content on the ﬂocculation process.

13

This figure "FLOC11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0105062v1

This figure "FLOC22.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0105062v1

