1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

Frank J¨ulicher

Institut Curie, Physicochimie Curie, Section de Recherche, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75248 Paris
Cedex 05, France

Abstract. Active phenomena which involve force generation and motion play a key
role in a number of phenomena in living cells such as cell motility, muscle contrac-
tion and the active transport of material and organelles. Here we discuss mechanical
oscillations generated by active systems in cells. Examples are oscillatory regimes in
muscles, the periodic beating of axonemal cilia and ﬂagella and spontaneous oscilla-
tions of auditory hair cells which play a role in active ampliﬁcation of weak sounds
in hearing. As a prototype system for oscillation generation by proteins, we discuss a
general mechanism by which many coupled active elements such as motor molecules
can generate oscillations.

Keywords: biophysics/motility/oscillations/hearing/axoneme

Abstract. Les ph´enom`enes actifs impliquant la g´en´eration de forces et de mouve-
ment, jouent un rˆole primordial dans de nombreux ph´enom`enes de la vie cellulaire tels
que la motilit´e, la contraction musculaire et le transport actif d’organelles ou de com-
pos´es. Nous discutons ici les oscillations m´ecaniques g´en´er´ees par des syst`emes actifs
dans les cellules. Des exemples sont les r´egimes oscillatoires des muscles, le battement
p´eriodique des cils et des ﬂagelles axonemaux et les oscillations spontan´ees des cel-
lules auditives. Ces oscillations spontan´ees ci pourraient jouer un rˆole important dans
l’audition par l’ampliﬁcation des faibles sons. Nous discutons un syst`eme prototype de
g´en´eration d’oscillations par des prot´eines, en d´ecrivant un m´ecanisme g´en´eral impli-
quant l’intervention de nombreux ´el´ements actifs, comme des moteurs mol´eculaires.

Mots cl´es: biophysique/motilit´e/oscillations/audition/axoneme

1 Introduction

The generation of forces and the ability to move represent some of the most
striking abilities of living cells. Prominent examples are cell motility, the con-
traction of muscles but also active transport of materials and of organelles, for
example during cell division and mitosis. Such movements are generated on the
molecular level by protein molecules that convert chemical energy to mechanical
work. Prominent examples are linear motor proteins of eucariotic cells. These
motors are specialized to work by interacting with ﬁlaments of the cytoskeleton
[1]. They consume Adenosintriphosphate (ATP) as a fuel and convert its chem-
ical energy to mechanical work. Myosin motors for example generate motion
along actin ﬁlaments. They are the active components in muscles, while kinesin
and dynein motors move along microtubules [2].

2

Frank J¨ulicher

In certain situations, cells can generate oscillatory motion and operate as
mechanical oscillators. Oscillatory behaviors of muscles have been known for a
long time in the case of some ﬂight muscles which move the wings of insects
[3]. Many insects such as wasps and bees have muscles called ”asynchronous”
which generate oscillatory contractions by a mechanism located in the muscle
itself which drives the beating of the wings. This type of muscle diﬀers from
”synchronous” ﬂight muscles of some other insects for which contractions are
triggered by a periodic nerve signal and are not generated in the muscle. More
recently, oscillatory behaviors have been observed under certain conditions in
ﬁbrils of ordinary skeletal muscles which under normal conditions do not oscillate
[4, 5].

An important example for mechanical oscillations on the cellular scale is
the periodic motion of cilia and ﬂagella [6, 7]. These hair-like appendages of
many cells are used for swimming and self-propulsion by sperm and some small
organisms or to stir ﬂuids surrounding a cell or cell layer. The common structural
feature of these cilia and ﬂagella is the axoneme, a well conserved arrangement
of microtubule doublets organized in a cylindrical fashion. Dynein molecular
motors are attached to these microtubules and can exert forces on neighboring
microtubules. This structure is very well conserved and appears in a large number
of diﬀerent cells of diﬀerent organisms [8]. The activity of the dynein molecular
motors coupled to the microtubules leads to periodic bending deformations and
waves along the cilium. In the case of sperm, the ﬂagellum propagates bending
waves from the head towards the tail [9]. These waves are very regular and
essentially planar [10, 11] and break the necessary symmetries to allow the sperm
to swim in a viscous solution [12, 13].

In the following sections, we describe some properties of mechanical oscil-
lators and their implications for biological situations. Close to an oscillating
instability called Hopf-bifurcation [14], the behavior of a mechanical oscillator
and its response to externally imposed oscillating forces are generic [15, 16]. As
a prototype system for the generation of oscillations in cells, we discuss a general
mechanism by which a large number of active elements such as molecular mo-
tors which are coupled to an elastic element and which undergo a chemical cycle
of fuel consumption can generate mechanical oscillations [17, 18]. These oscilla-
tions are a result of collective behavior of many motors [19, 20] which can give
rise to diﬀerent types of dynamic transitions [17, 21, 22, 23]. The same physical
mechanism can also generate oscillatory modes and bending waves along elastic
ﬁlaments which interact with many motors as in the case of cilia [24, 25, 26].
Finally, oscillating instabilities can play an important role in sensory systems.
A lot of evidence points to an active system involved in the detection of sound
by the ear [27, 29, 30, 31]. The inner ear shows a frequency selective nonlinear
response to sound stimuli and actively ampliﬁes weak sounds [32]. These prop-
erties allow the ear to cover a large dynamic range of 120dB and to detect weak
sounds which per cycle of oscillation impart an energy that is less than kT [33].
These properties of the ear can be understood if we assume that the inner ear
contains dynamical systems which operate at Hopf bifurcation with critical fre-

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

3

quencies that cover the audible range. A simple self-tuning mechanism involving
a feedback control can explain how these systems tune reliably to their critical
point. The concept of a self-tuned Hopf bifurcation can explain many apparently
distinct phenomena observed in hearing such as otoacoustic emissions, nonlin-
earities, adaptation and fatigue as well as the response to complex sounds in a
uniﬁed framework [15, 34].

2 Mechanical oscillators

A large variety of nonlinear dynamic systems is capable to generate periodic,
oscillating motion. In order to illustrate some of the general properties of me-
chanical oscillators, we consider a dynamical system related to the Van der Pol
oscillator which is standard model for nonlinear oscillators [35, 36]. Consider the
dynamic equations

γ ¨x + r ˙x − Λ ˙x3 + kx = fext(t)

,

(1)

which represent a damped oscillator with additional nonlinear friction. Here x
is a displacement variable and fext an external force. We assume that γ, k and
Λ are positive parameters and that r can become negative. Note that while
the term characterized by γ could be an inertial term, we will consider in the
following only situations where all inertial terms are neglected. However, γ is in
this case nonzero and arises from the intrinsic dynamics of the system.

In the absence of external forces, the system is stable for r > 0. It shows
damped oscillations or is overdamped, and relaxes to x = 0. For r = 0, the system
becomes unstable and undergoes a Hopf-bifurcation. For r < 0 spontaneous
oscillations are generated. In this regime the nonlinearity characterized by Λ is
essential to stabilize the system and to determine the oscillation amplitude. In
the periodic limit cycle for fext = 0, we can write

x(t) =

xneinωt

Xn

as a Fourier sum with oscillation frequency ω. Close to the bifurcation point,
i.e. for small but negative r, the ﬁrst Fourier mode x1 dominates and obeys to
lowest order

Ax1 + B|x1|2x1 = 0

Here, higher modes xn ∼ xn
1 are neglected and the complex coeﬃcients are
given by A = k − γω2 + iωr and B = 3iΛω3. Spontaneous oscillations occur with
frequency ω = ωc ≡ (k/γ)1/2. This is the only choice for which Eq. (3) has a
solution for which the oscillation amplitude

|x1|2 = −

= −

A
B

rγ
3Λk

is real and positive. The bifurcation point r = 0 is characterized by the condition
that A = 0 vanishes at the critical frequency ω = ωc. If this system is subject

(2)

(3)

(4)

4

Frank J¨ulicher

to an external force fext = 2f1 cos(ωextt) with frequency ωext, there are two
frequencies in the system, the spontaneous frequency and the externally imposed
one. For simplicity, we focus on the situation where only one frequency is present,
i.e. the system is either outside the spontaneously oscillating regime (r ≥ 0), or
both frequencies are the same ω = ωext. In this case, Eq. (3) becomes simply

Ax1 + B|x1|2x1 = f1

(5)

)

m
n
(
 
|
1
 
x
|

2

10

10

1

-1

10

-2

10

1/3

1

-2

10

-1

10

1

10

3

2

10

10
|f |   (pN)
1

Fig. 1. Fourier amplitude |x1| of the response of a dynamical system at a Hopf bifurca-
tion to a stimulus force of amplitude |f1| at diﬀerent frequencies. The data is obtained
by a numerical solution of the model described in the subsequent section, see [15]. The
power law of the response is indicated.

This Equation is generic in the sense that all other terms can be neglected
if the system is suﬃciently close to its bifurcation point. We therefore focus on
the case where r = 0 and the system is exactly at the bifurcation. Two diﬀerent
regimes of the response to an oscillating force can be distinguished, see Fig.1. If
the applied frequency is close to the critical frequency, the linear term can be
ignored and

|x1| ≃ |B|

−1/3|f1|1/3 ≃

|f1|1/3
31/3Λ1/3ωc

If the frequency mismatch is larger, |ω − ωc| ≫ |f 2/3
term is unimportant and the response is linear

1

| |B|1/3γ|ω + ωc|, the cubic

(6)

(7)

|x1| ≃ |A|

−1|f1| =

|f1|
γ|ω2 − ω2
c |

The response of the system given by Eq. (5) together with the oscillation am-
plitude (4) characterize the main properties of an oscillator near the bifurcation

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

5

point. This approach can be generalized to situations where more than one fre-
quency are present [34].

3 Oscillations generated by molecular motors

How can a system of the type described in the last section be realized using
biological materials? A spontaneously oscillating system must be active, i.e. it
has to consume energy from some input. Furthermore the system must be able
to generate motion and active displacements. A prototype system for motion
generation in cells are molecular motors which are enzymes that are driven by a
chemical reaction (usually the hydrolysis of ATP) and which are able to generate
motion and mechanical work. An individual motor behaves stochastically and
generates on average motion in a preferred direction along a polar track ﬁlament.
Because of the stochastic function of individual molecules, phase coherent oscil-
lations can only be generated if many motors are involved and their ﬂuctuations
become unimportant for the collective behavior of the entire system.

(a)

k

(b)

W

W

2

W1

x

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic representation of many motors collectively working against a
spring of elastic modulus k. (b) Two state model for many motors. Each state is
characterized by an energy landscape Wi(x).

We consider here a speciﬁc situation where a large number of molecular
motors which are rigidly connected and coupled to elastic elements can undergo
a Hopf-bifurcation [17], see Fig. 2 (a). This description is based on simple models

6

Frank J¨ulicher

for the force generation of molecular motors [37, 38, 39, 41, 17, 42] generalized
to situations where many motors are coupled [19, 20]. In the limit of a very large
number of motors N , ﬂuctuations in the motor function become irrelevant and
the system can be described by simple mean-ﬁeld equations [43]. We consider
motors moving along a periodic linear structure of period ℓ, see Fig. 2 (b). In the
context of a two-state model for the motors, we study the probability density
P (ξ, t) to ﬁnd a motor at position ξ in state i = 1, 2, which is normalized,
P1 + P2 = ℓ−1, and satisﬁes

∂tP1 = −v∂ξP1 − ω1P1 + ω2P2
∂tP2 = −v∂ξP2 + ω1P1 − ω2P2

Here, ω1 and ω2 are the rates of chemical transition between the two conforma-
tions of the motors. The velocity v = λ−1(fext + fmot − kx) is generated by the
sum of the externally applied force per motor fext, the average force

fmot = −

dξ(P1∂ξW1 + P2∂ξW2)

ℓ

Z
0

generated per motor and an elastic force in presence of an elastic element of
modulus k per motor. The total friction coeﬃcient per motor is denoted λ. The
energy landscapes Wi characterize the interaction with the ﬁlament and are
usually considered to be periodic with period ℓ. Using the condition ˙x = v, the
system can undergo a Hopf-bifurcation in the vicinity of which Eq. (5) is satisﬁed
with linear and nonlinear coeﬃcients

A(ω, C) = iωλ + k − iω

dξ∂ξR

ℓ

Z
0

∂ξ(W1 − W2)
α + iω

B(ω, C) = iω3(F1,1,−1 + F1,−1,1 + F−1,1,1)

where

ℓ

Fklm =

dξ

∂ξ

(cid:18)

Z
0

1

∂ξR

∂ξ

α + ikω (cid:18)

α + ilω (cid:19)(cid:19)

∂ξ(W1 − W2)
α + imω

Here, α(ξ) ≡ ω1(ξ) + ω2(ξ), R ≡ ω2/ℓα, and we have assumed for simplicity
that the potentials and transitions are symmetric with respect to ξ → −ξ. The
coeﬃcients A and B are functions of frequency and also depend on other model
parameters such at the transition rates ω1 and ω2. We introduce a control param-
eter C which summarizes changes in the transition rates which keep α constant
and which will be varied in order to cross the bifurcation point. C could repre-
sent the concentration of any agent that inﬂuences chemical rates, in the case of
motor molecules for example those of ATP or Ca++.

In order to discuss these somewhat uninstructive expressions, we consider

the simpler case where α is a constant. In this case, we ﬁnd

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

A = k − γ(ω)ω2 + iωr(ω)

B = −3iK (nl)
eﬀ

ω3
(α2 + ω2)(α + iω)

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

7

Eq. (12) corresponds to Eq. (1), however with coeﬃcients that depend on both
the frequency and the control parameter C

The eﬀective Hookian and nonlinear elasticities of the cross-bridges

γ(ω) =

K (2)
eﬀ
α2 + ω2

r(ω) = λ −

K (2)
eﬀ α
α2 + ω2

K (2)

eﬀ (C) =

dξ R ∂2

ξ (W1 − W2)

K (4)

eﬀ (C) =

dξ R ∂4

ξ (W1 − W2)

ℓ

ℓ

Z
0

Z
0

(13)

(14)

(15)

which are functions of C and characterize the second and fourth derivative of
the eﬀective potential of a motor in the bound state. Note that the elasticity
K (2)
eﬀ together with the chemical transitions generates an eﬀective ”mass” γ(ω)
and a negative contribution to friction.

If the control parameter C is varied, the system undergoes for a critical
value Cc a Hopf-bifurcation. This happens as soon as K (2)
eﬀ takes a value for
which A(ωc, Cc) = 0 vanishes for a critical value of the frequency ωc. In order to
characterize this point, note ﬁrst that the imaginary part of A vanishes if r = 0,
or λ = αγ. The critical frequency at the bifurcation satisﬁes ωc = (k/γ(ωc))1/2
and is thus given by

.

(cid:18)

ωc =

αk
λ (cid:19)
The range of frequencies that can be obtained by this mechanism depends on
the range of eﬀective elasticities K (2)
eﬀ which can result from motor-ﬁlament in-
teractions. If the motor is detached most of the time this elasticity is small
K (2)
eﬀ ≃ 0, while in the other extreme of a motor that rests most of the time in
rigor will generate a K (2)
eﬀ ≃ Kcb where Kcb is the cross-bridge elasticity. The
highest frequencies the system can attain at the bifurcation are thus determined
by Kcb:

(16)

1/2

ωmax ≃

αKcb
λ

(cid:18)

− α2

(cid:19)

1/2

.

(17)

In the limit of a large number of motors discussed here, the generated oscil-
lations are phase coherent and ﬂuctuations have been neglected. If the number
of active elements is ﬁnite, the stochasticity of the chemical transitions leads to
a stochastic component in the motion. In addition to this noise resulting from
active processes, thermal ﬂuctuations can also become relevant. These resulting
noisy oscillations have a ﬁnite time of phase coherence [17, 15]. While a small
number of motors could already generate noisy oscillations with short coherence
time, a real Hopf-bifurcation with phase coherent oscillations is only possible as
a collective phenomenon of a large number of active elements as described here.

8

Frank J¨ulicher

4 Self-organization of motors and ﬁlaments

Cilia and ﬂagella which contain an axoneme are important examples of mechani-
cally oscillating biological structures. In these hair-like appendages of many cells,
microtubule doublets are arranged in a cylindrical fashion and undergo bending
deformations as a result of relative forces exerted by a large number of dynein
molecular motors which are densely attached to the surface of microtubules and
act on a neighboring microtubules [8], see Fig. 3. At the basal end, microtubules
are connected in order to prevent global relative sliding. Internal stresses gen-
erated by the motors are thus directly coupled to bending deformations of the
elastic microtubule doublets which are all bundled in parallel.

M

D

N

(a)

(b)

h(x)

x

Fig. 3. (a) Schematic representation of the axoneme. Nine microtubule doublets (M)
are arranged in a cylindrical fashion around a pair of central microtubules. Dynein
motors (D) are attached to the microtubules and exert forces on their neighbors. Elastic
elements such as nexins (N) are also present. (b) Two-dimensional representation. Two
parallel elastic ﬁlaments are connected at one end. Active elements exert internal forces.
For small amplitudes, the shape can be characterized by the deformation h(x) as a
function of length.

Axonemes are able to generate periodic deformations and to propagate bend-
ing waves along the elastic cilium. These systems fall thus in the class of sys-
tems where many motors coupled to elastic ﬁlaments generate oscillations and
spatio-temporal deformation patterns. Basic physical properties of these struc-
tures can be captured by considering a two-dimensional version of this system

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

9

[24, 44, 45, 25, 26]. Two elastic ﬁlaments are arranged in parallel at ﬁxed dis-
tance a. At one end both ﬁlaments are rigidly connected, everywhere else active
elements such as molecular motors induce locally relative sliding of ﬁlaments. As
motors in this situation generate an increasing displacement, the ﬁlament pair
bends and generates an elastic force which opposes ﬁlament sliding. This situa-
tion therefore corresponds to the case discussed in the last section where motors
work against an elastic element. Here, this elasticity is provided by the bending
elasticity of ﬁlaments. If this system undergoes a Hopf bifurcation, the whole
ﬁlament shape oscillates and exhibits spatio-temporal deformation patterns.

For small deformation amplitudes, the equations of motion of the active ﬁl-
ament pair can be discussed in Monge representation, where the perpendicular
displacement h(s) as a function of arclength s with 0 < s < L is considered. To
linear order in h we ﬁnd,

ξ⊥∂th = −κ∂4

s h − a∂sf

(18)

where we have assumed for simplicity local viscous friction with coeﬃcient ξ⊥
and where f (t, s) is the internal force per unit length exerted by the motors. If
the coupled motor-ﬁlament system undergoes a Hopf-bifurcation, the selected
modes of periodic ﬁlament deformations are generic and can be calculated from
very few assumptions as long as the system is suﬃciently close to the bifurcation
such that deformation amplitudes remain small [26].

In this case, we can use Eq. (5) to lowest order to express the relation f1(s) ≃
ρA∆1(s), between the Fourier amplitude of local sliding displacements ∆ =
a(∂sh(s) − ∂sh(0)) and the amplitude f1(s) of the density of shear forces, where
ρ is the linear density of motors along the ﬁlaments. Therefore,

iωξ⊥˜h + κ∂4
s

˜h = −a2ρA∂2
s

˜h

(19)

together with boundary conditions characterizes the bending patterns selected
at a Hopf-bifurcation with critical frequency ω. In this equation, the dynamic
linear response function of the motors, A, plays the role of a complex eigenvalue.
At a Hopf bifurcation, A must take one of a discrete set of complex values. This
approach leads to bending waves which propagate along the ﬁlament in a direc-
tion which depends on the imposed boundary conditions [26]. These patterns
only depend on the solvent viscosity and the bending rigidity of microtubules
and for given oscillation frequency are independent of the physical details of the
mechanism that generates the forces.

The frequency selected by the system however is more diﬃcult to obtain. It
depends on properties of the active and passive elements which generate internal
shear forces. Two diﬀerent regimes have to be distinguished: For long ﬁlaments
complex bending waves are propagated at rather low frequency. For shorter ﬁla-
ments, there exists a simpler regime where ﬁlaments vibrate without signiﬁcant
wave propagation. In this latter case, one can ignore to good approximation
the detailed shape of the bending patterns. And characterize the deformations
simply by a typical deformation amplitude h. We can now think of a situation

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

10

Frank J¨ulicher

where an external force of amplitude F1 acts on the tip of the vibrating cilium
and express the linear response as h1 ∼ Aeﬀ F1. Approximating the gradient
terms in Eq. (19) by their scaling behavior we can write approximately

Aeﬀ ≃ iωξ⊥L + κ/L3 + a2ρA/L

Using Eq. (12) to express A(ω, C), this leads to

Aeﬀ = keﬀ − γeﬀ ω2 + iωreﬀ

where

keﬀ ≃ κ/L3 + a2ρk/L
γeﬀ ≃ a2ργ(ω)/L
reﬀ ≃ a2ρr(ω)/L + ξ⊥L

ωc ≃

ακ
ξ⊥ (cid:19)

1/2 1
L2

(cid:18)

which allows us to estimate the critical beating frequency of the active ﬁlament
pair as a function of parameters in several regimes. For example in the case
where κeﬀ ≃ κ/L3 and ξ⊥ ≫ a2ρλ/L we ﬁnd

This result represents a regime in which the system generates oscillations at fre-
quencies which increase signiﬁcantly for decreasing length if all other parameters
are constant. Furthermore, in this simple regime, the frequency is completely de-
termined by the bending rigidity of microtubules κ, the viscosity of the solvent
ξ⊥ and a typical ATP cycling rate α of the motors.

5 Oscillations in sensory systems: hearing

The cochlea of the inner ear contains about 16000 specialized sensory cells,
called hair cells, which are able to detect sounds at a range of frequencies from
50Hz to 40000Hz. The auditory system has an extraordinary dynamic range
which covers 120dB or 12 orders of magnitude in sound intensity. Each hair
cell has a characteristic frequency at which it is most sensitive. Hair cells are
characterized by a bundle of about 50 ﬁnger-like structures called stereocilia
which have a length of 1-10µm and a diameter of 300nm. The stereocilia consist
predominantly of bundles of actin ﬁlaments that are surrounded by a membrane
which contains mechano-sensitive ion channels. Upon a tiny shear deformation
of the hair bundle of less than a nm, these channels open and the subsequent
inﬂux of Potassium and Calcium induced changes in the membrane potential
[46] (Fig. 4).

The mechanical response of the basilar membrane, which is the structure
inside the cochlea that contains the hair cells, has been measured as a function
of frequency and amplitude of sound stimuli [32]. These and other observations

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

11

IC

2+

Ca

TL

SC

KC

L

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the hair bundle of an auditory hair cell. A bundle
of stereocilia (SC) containing actin ﬁlaments form the hair bundle. They are cou-
pled at their tips by ﬁne ﬁlaments called tip-links (TL). The kinocilium (KC) is
present in the hair bundles on non-mammalian vertebrates and contains an axoneme.
Mechano-sensitive ion channels (IC) open upon a bundle deﬂection and let to an inﬂux
of K+ and Ca++.

have let to a revival of an idea of Thomas Gold, proposed about 50 years ago
[27], that the basilar membrane of the inner ear is not a passively resonating ﬁl-
ter as assumed by the classical theory of hearing developed by Van Bekesy and
others [28]. Instead, Gold suggested that active, energy consuming systems are
required by the ear in order to explain some of its extraordinary properties such
as a sharp frequency tuning. The mechanical response of the basilar membrane
reveals a distinct nonlinear behavior which has all the characteristic properties of
a dynamical system placed exactly at a Hopf bifurcation as described in section
2 [15, 16]. Most remarkable is the nonlinear response to stimuli at the critical
frequency ωc, see Eq. (6) which implies a diverging gain |x1|/|f1| ∼ |f1|−3/2 for
small stimulus amplitudes. This nonlinear behavior of the gain and a dramatic
increase at small amplitudes has been observed in hearing [32]. This actively
enhanced gain together with a power-law nonlinearity provides extraordinary
sensitivity and sound detection over a large dynamic range of 6 orders of mag-
nitude in amplitude and 12 orders of magnitude in intensity.

While the properties of a Hopf bifurcation can explain the main properties
of sound detection by the ear, it raises a number of important questions. In
particular, in order to exhibit a nonlinear response for small amplitudes, the
system has to be tuned with high precision to its critical point. This requires
a ﬁne-tuning of parameters which raises doubts as to whether a living cell can

12

Frank J¨ulicher

proﬁt from the special properties at a critical point in a reliable way.

A simple and general mechanism to maintain a dynamical system at a point
of operation close to the bifurcation point can be achieved by a feedback regu-
lation of the control parameter [15, 47]. This self-tuning implies that the control
parameter is regulated towards the instability as long as the system is not spon-
taneously oscillating, while it is automatically stabilized as soon as oscillations
are detected. This self-tuning works best in the absence of external stimuli, when
highest sensitivity is needed, by adapting the control parameter C as a function
of the detected amplitude of hair-bundle deﬂections.

(a)

(b)

|x |
1

(c)

(cid:13)P(x)

x

C

C
c

C
o

x

Fig. 5. Simple self-tuning mechanism (schematic). (a) Regulation of the control pa-
rameter C associated with the concentration of ions such as Ca++ which enter the
hair cell vie transduction channels. A permanent outﬂux drives the system towards the
oscillating side of the bifurcation, inﬂux of ion via transduction channels provides a
stabilizing feedback. (b) Fourier amplitude |x1| of spontaneous oscillations as a function
of the control parameter near the bifurcation point Cc. Self-tuning brings the system
to an operating point Co. (c) Opening probability P (x) of ion channels as a function
of the deﬂection amplitude x. A signal is generated for deﬂections larger than δ.

An illustrative example for self-tuning is achieved in a situation where the
Ca++ concentration in the hair cell plays the role of the control parameter at
the bifurcation (Fig. 5). Since hair-bundle deﬂections lead to an inﬂux of Ca++
into the hair cell, this provides for a regulation of the control parameter C of
the form

C
τ
where τ is a relaxation time of the control parameter in the absence of hair
bundle deﬂections x. This relaxation drives the system in the oscillatory regime.
As soon as deﬂections x occur, ion channels open with probability

+ JP (x)

dC
dt

= −

(24)

P (x) =

1
1 + e−(x−δ)/ℓ

(25)

d
d
Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

13

and each open channel gives rise to an inﬂux J of Ca++, which drives the system
towards the non-oscillating regime. Here we assume τ ≫ ω−1, i.e. changes in
C occur on time-scales long compared to the oscillation frequency. The length
scale δ, which for hair bundles is of the order of 0.3-1nm, indicates the smallest
deﬂection amplitudes at which a signal is generated by the hair bundle and the
parameter ℓ characterizes the sharpness of the response.

The self-tuning can now be summarized as follows. In the absence of spon-
taneous oscillations (and if no external sound stimulus is present), the control
parameter is decreased within a relaxation time τ . As soon as the critical point
Cc is reached, the system starts to oscillate and the decrease of C is halted as
soon as the typical oscillation amplitude is of the order of magnitude δ, |x1| ∼ δ.
Remember that the onset of spontaneous oscillations in the absence of a force
given by Eq. (4) can be expressed as

|x1| ≃ ∆

C − Cc

1/2

(cid:18)

Cc (cid:19)

(26)

(27)

where ∆ is a characteristic saturation amplitude. We can therefore estimate
how close to the bifurcation point the system will be tuned via this mechanisms.
introducing the distance ∆C = Cc − C from the bifurcation, the self tuning
brings the system slightly to the oscillating side of the bifurcation with

∆C/Cc ∼ (δ/∆)2

.

For a typical hair cell we estimate δ ∼ 1nm and ∆ ∼ 100nm, thus the system
can self-tune with ∆C/Cc ≃ 10−4.

These estimates for the useful amplitude range of hair bundle deﬂections can
also explain the dynamic range of hearing. In the regime of nonlinear response,
the hair cell can map changes in force amplitude |f1| that vary by a factor of
(∆/δ)3 ≃ 106 onto hair bundle deﬂections |x1| which vary over the usable range
of ∆/δ. This range of detectable force amplitudes corresponds to a dynamic
range of 120dB.

The concept of self-tuning to a Hopf bifurcation can explain seemingly dis-
connected but well-known properties of hearing. In addition to providing an
explanation for the high sensitivity at one frequency and a large dynamic range,
it can naturally account for what is called adaptation and fatigue. Fatigue im-
plies that the sensitivity to weak stimuli is reduced after a subject is exposed to
a loud stimulus which is a natural consequence of self-tuning. In the presence
of a stimulus, Eq. (24) tunes the system away from the bifurcation point where
sensitivity is reduced. The recovery of high sensitivity after a strong stimulus
only happens after a relaxation time τ of the self-tuning feedback to its operation
point.

This theory of hearing by a generic mechanism could apply to many diﬀerent
animals such as mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians. These classes of an-
imals however have diﬀerent cochleas and diﬀerent types of hair cells and they
might thus use diﬀerent physical systems to realize a Hopf bifurcation and the

14

Frank J¨ulicher

self-tuning. In the case of mammals, there is some evidence that so-called outer-
hair cells are able to generate active motion by contracting the whole cell body
[29]. Recently, a protein which could play an active role in these contractions has
been identiﬁed [31]. Non-mammalian vertebrates do not possess outer hair-cells.
Active oscillators are therefore expected to exist within the hair bundle itself.
Spontaneous hair-bundle oscillations of amphibian hair-cells have been observed
and studied in detail [48, 49].

While the physical mechanism at the origin of hair-bundle oscillations re-
mains mysterious, the preceding sections show that molecular motors operating
in groups could be responsible for oscillations even at frequencies up to 10kHz.
It is well established that myosins occur within the stereocilia and could thus
be involved in active movements. Finally, the hair bundles of non-mammalian
vertebrates contain in addition to many stereocilia a single cilium which con-
tains an axoneme. Such a structure is ideally suited to play an active role as an
oscillator and because of its well-conserved structure, its oscillation frequency
could be controlled by just varying its length. If a cilium operates in the regime
described by Eq. (23), using a typical α ≃ 103s−1, ξ⊥ = 10−3kg/ms being the
viscosity of water and choosing κ = 4 × 10−22Nm2 which is the bending rigidity
of 20 microtubules, the critical frequency is ωc ≃ 2 × 104s−1 for L = 1µm. For
L = 10µm, the frequency drops to ωc ≃ 102s−1. The physical mechanisms for
oscillations generated by molecular motors in a cilium therefore could cover the
audible frequency range by using a simple morphological gradient in the cochlea.

6 Discussion

An variety of cells contain structures which are able to spontaneously generate
mechanical oscillations. The principal examples discussed here are muscle my-
oﬁbrils, axonemal cilia and ﬂagella as well as auditory hair cells of the inner
ear. While the details of how these oscillations are generated still remain largely
unknown, it is expected that motor proteins which undergo a chemical cycle and
stochastically generate displacements and forces are the active elements involved.
Molecular motors of the cytoskeleton which interact with elastic ﬁlaments are
omnipresent in eucariotic cells and are likely to be involved in such activities.
While in the case of myoﬁbrils and axonemes the crucial role of such motors is
established, in the case of hair cells the nature of active proteins is still quite
unknown.

The general principles of how oscillations can be generated using such ac-
tive proteins can be studied using simpliﬁed descriptions. Such studies reveal
that spontaneous oscillations occur naturally in systems where a large number
of active elements and elastic elements interact and form an eﬀective material
with active properties. Of particular interest is the Hopf bifurcation where the
system becomes unstable with respect to oscillatory behavior. In the vicinity
of a bifurcation, the system has generic properties that can be understood and
characterized without detailed knowledge of the underlying mechanisms. Fur-
thermore, the bifurcation point has extraordinary response properties which are

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

15

ideal to be used for a frequency sensitive detector. A lot of evidence points in-
deed to the fact that the ear has adopted this principal mechanism, aided by a
self-tuning feedback that tunes the oscillators to their critical points.

Phase coherent oscillations and a true Hopf-bifurcation only exist in the ther-
modynamic limit where an inﬁnite number of active force-generators are present.
In a realistic situation with a ﬁnite number of molecules present, oscillations are
noisy and phase coherence is lost on long times. Oscillations of very few, maybe
only a single dynein motors have been reported [50], which however are very
noisy. Phase coherent oscillations always result from collective eﬀects in systems
with a large number of degrees of freedom. Noise plays an important role for
cellular oscillations, in particular in the case of hearing for the detection of weak
sounds [15]. A hair cell tuned to its operation point in the absence of an exter-
nal stimulus will exhibit a spectrum of ﬂuctuations centered around its critical
frequency. Because of the active nature of the oscillator, these ﬂuctuations arise
partly due to stochastic activity of active elements in addition to thermal noise.
As a result of these ﬂuctuations, the hair cell generates already in the absence
of any sound hair-bundle motions which have a strong ﬂuctuating component.
Consequently, unstimulated hair-cells already generate action potentials at low
rate. Because of their stochastic nature these action potentials can be distin-
guished from the excitation due to a sinusoidal stimulus. As soon as a weak
stimulus is present, its main eﬀect is to phase lock the spontaneous motion. This
phase locking to a stimulus can be detected before amplitude changes occur. By
this mechanism the ear can detect sounds which have an eﬀect on the amplitude
that is smaller than the noise.

Oscillatory behaviors are also observed in very diﬀerent types of systems. An
interesting example are lymphoblasts which usually do not show oscillatory be-
haviors. However, if the microtubule network is depolymerized using nocodazole,
the cell attains a state where the actin system forms a contractile ring which
generates a constriction of the cell. Interestingly, this ring slowly oscillates be-
tween the two poles of the cell [51]. The mechanism leading to these oscillations
is not understood. However, it is likely that these oscillations are a result of a
self-organization of the actin cytoskeleton with the help of myosin motors and
maybe other components.

The self-organization of motors and ﬁlaments can lead to complex phenom-
ena in various situations. Such phenomena have in particular been studied in
ﬁlament systems which are driven by molecular motors that temporarily form
active crosslinks between ﬁlament pairs. In such active ﬁlament systems, complex
behaviors such as contractions and the formation of asters and spirals have been
observed [52, 53, 54, 55, 56]. A phenomenological description of the dynamics
of active ﬁlament bundles can be used to describe tension generation and con-
tractions in non-organized bundles [57]. This description takes into account two
diﬀerent ﬁlament interactions: (i) interactions between parallel ﬁlaments which
point in the same direction and (ii) between ﬁlaments that are anti-parallel. If
both interactions are present at the same time, the system can generate patterns
of contracted regions along the bundle which propagate. In periodic systems such

16

Frank J¨ulicher

as contractile rings, this can lead to oscillatory behaviors of bundle contractions
[58].

Mechanical oscillations in cells thus occur in a large variety of diﬀerent situa-
tions and with frequencies which can vary over large ranges. Slow oscillations of
contractile rings start from several minutes per period; the highest frequencies of
active oscillations in hair cells could exceed 100kHz, e.g. during high frequency
sound detection in bats and whales.

I thank S. Camalet, T. Duke, K. Kruse and J. Prost for stimulating collab-
orations and A. Ajdari, M. Bornens, H. Delacroix, R. Everaers, A.J. Hudspeth,
A. Maggs, P. Martin for helpful discussions.

References

Press, New York).

Amsterdam, 177.

1. Kreis T., and Vale R. (1993): Cytoskeletal and Motor Proteins, (Oxford University

2. Alberts B., Bray D., Lewis J., Raﬀ M., Roberts K. and Watson J.D. (1994): The

molecular biology of the cell, (Garland, New York).

3. Pringle J.W.S. (1977): in Insect Flight Muscle, R.T. Tregear, Ed. , North-Holland,

4. Yasuda K., Shindo Y. and Ishiwata S. (1996): Biophys. J. 70, 1823.
5. Fujita H. and Ishiwata S. (1998): Biophys. J. 75, 1439.
6. Bray D. (1992), Cell Movements (New York, Garland).
7. Murase M. (1992): The dynamics of cell motility (New York, Wiley).
8. Lindemann C.B. and Kanous K.S. (1997): Int. Rev. Cytology 173, 1.
9. Gibbons I.R. (1975): in Molecules and Cell Movement, S. Inou´e and R.E. Stephens

(Eds.), Raven Press, New York.

10. Brokaw C.J. (1991): J. Cell. Biol. 114, 1201.
11. Brokaw C.J. (1996): Cell. Mot. Cytoskel. 33, 6.
12. Taylor G.I. (1951): Proc. R. Soc. A 209, 447.
13. Purcell E.M. (1977): Am. J. Phys. 45, 3.
14. Strogatz S.H. (1994): Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos (Addison-Wesley, Reading,

15. Camalet S., Duke T., J¨ulicher F. and Prost J. (2000): Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97,

MA).

3138.

16. Eguiluz V.M., Ospeck M., Choe Y., Hudspeth A. J. and Magnasco M.O. (2000):

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5232.

17. J¨ulicher F., and Prost J. (1997): Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4510.
18. J¨ulicher F., Ajdari, A. and Prost J. (1997): Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 1269.
19. Huxley A.F. (1957): Prog. Biophys. 7, 255.
20. J¨ulicher F., and Prost J. (1995): Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2618.
21. Riveline D., Ott A., J¨ulicher F., Winkelmann D.A., Cardoso O., Lacap`ere J.-J.,
Magnusdottir S., Viovy J.-L., Gorre-Talini L. and Prost J. (1998): Eur. Biophys.
J. 27 403.

22. Reimann P., Kawai R., Van den Broek C., and H¨anggi P. (1999): Europhys. Lett.

45, 545.

23. Reimann P. (2000): preprint cond-mat/0010237.
24. Brokaw C.J. (1975): Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 72, 3102.

Mechanical Oscillations at the Cellular Scale

17

25. Camalet S., J¨ulicher F., and Prost J. (1999): Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1590.
26. Camalet S. and J¨ulicher F. (2000): New. J. Phys. 2 (2000) 24, 1.
27. Gold T. (1948): Proc. R. Soc. B 135, 492.
28. von B´ek´esy, Experiments in Hearing (McGraw Hill, New York).
29. Dallos P.J. (1992): J. Neurosci. 12, 4575.
30. Hudspeth A.J. (1997): Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7, 480.
31. Zheng J. et al. (2000): Nature 405, 155.
32. Ruggero M.A. (1992): Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2, 449.
33. Bialek W. (1987): Annu. Rev. Biophys. Chem. 16, 455.
34. J¨ulicher F., Andor D. and Duke T., in preparation.
35. Van der Pol B. (1926): Phil. Mag. 2, 978.
36. Nayfeh A.H., Mook D.T. (1979): Nonlinear oscillations, Pure and applied mathe-

matics (Wiley, New York).

37. Ajdari A., and Prost J. (1992): C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris II, 315, 1635.
38. Magnasco M.O. (1993): Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1477 (1993).
39. Prost J., Chauwin J.F., Peliti L., and Ajdari A. (1994): Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2652.
40. Astumian R.D., and Bier M. (1994): Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1766.
41. Peskin C.S., Ermentrout G.B., and Oster G.F. (1994): Cell Mechanics and Cellular

Engineering, V.Mow et al eds. (Springer, New-York).

42. Astumian R.D. (1997): Science 276, 917.
43. F. J¨ulicher (1999): in Transport and Structure: Their Competitive Roles in Bio-
physics and Chemistry edited by S.C. Mller, J. Parisi and W. Zimmermann, Lecture
Notes in Physics, Springer (Berlin).

44. Hines M. and Blum J.J. (1978): Biophys. J. 23, 41.
45. Brokaw C. (1985): Biophys. J. 48, 633.
46. Hudspeth A.J. and Gillespie P.G. (1994): Neuron 12, 1.
47. Camalet S. (2001): Th`ese Universit´e Paris 6.
48. Martin P. and Hudspeth A.J. (1999): Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 14306.
49. Martin P., Metha A.D. and Hudspeth A.J. (2000): Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97, 12026.
50. Shingyoji C., Higuchi H., Yoshimura M., Katayama E. and Yanagida T. (1998):

Nature 393, 711.

51. Bornens M., Paintrand M. and Celati C. (1989): J. Cell. Biol. 109, 1071 (1989).
52. Takiguchi K. (1991): J. Biochem.109, 502.
53. N´ed´elec F.J. et al. (1997): Nature (London) 389, 305.
54. Surrey T. et al. (1998): Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 4293.
55. Nakazawa H. and Sekimoto K. (1996): J. Phys. Soc. Japan 65, 2404.
56. Sekimoto K. and Nakazawa H. (1998): in Current Topics in Physics, Y.M. Cho, J.B.
Hong, and C.N. Yang (eds.) vol1, p.394 (World Scientiﬁc, 1998); physics/0004044.

57. Kruse K. and J¨ulicher F. (2000): Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1778.
58. Kruse K., Camalet S. and J¨ulicher F., unpublished.

