Self-organizing approach for automated gene identiﬁcation in whole genomes

Alexander N. Gorban1,2, Andrey Yu. Zinovyev1,2,∗ and Tatyana G. Popova1
1 Institute of Computational Modeling RAS, 660036 Krasnoyarsk, Russia and
2 Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientiﬁques, France
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

An approach based on using the idea of distinguished coding phase in explicit form for identiﬁca-
tion of protein-coding regions in whole genome has been proposed. For several genomes an optimal
window length for averaging GC-content function and calculating codon frequencies has been found.
Self-training procedure based on clustering in multidimensional space of triplet frequencies is pro-
posed.

1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 87.15.Cc, 87.10.+e, 87.14.Gg

Most of the computational approaches for identiﬁca-
tion of coding regions in DNA have following limitations
[1]: they need a training set of already known exam-
ples of coding and non-coding regions, they work with a
comparably short subsequence of DNA rather than whole
sequence and they are able to recognize mainly protein-
coding regions.

Recently some approaches appeared which promise to
be free of these limitations. In the works by Yeramian
E. [2, 3] DNA sequence is considered as a linear chain of
strong (GC-bond) and weak (AT-bond) hydrogen bonds.
Applying a kind of Ising model to the calculation of par-
tition function one can obtain a thermal DNA stability
map (a plot of probability of every DNA basepair to be
disrupted). With appropriate temperature chosen, the
map in some cases shows believable correlation with the
arrangement of coding regions in DNA. This fact was ex-
ploited with some success to identify coding regions in
Plasmodium falsiparum in some non-standard for gene-
ﬁnders situations.

Another promising approach is to partition the DNA
sequence into homogenious in some sense subsequences
and to ﬁnd such a way of partitioning that corresponds
to the ”coding – non-coding” partition. In the works of
Bernaola-Galvan et.al.[4] method of entropic segmenta-
tion was formulated that uses diﬀerence in codon compo-
sitions in coding and non-coding regions. The hypothesis
is that codon composition in coding regions is diﬀerent
from junk because of well-known fact of biasing in codon
usage.

Methods of gene ﬁnding use a variety of numerical
characteristics reﬂecting statistical regularities in some
subsequence (window) of DNA. Inphase hexamers seem
to be the most eﬀective single measure (see, for exam-
ple, [5]). Calculation of inphase hexamers based on di-
vision of given subsequence into non-overlapping triplets
and counting for every triplet dicodon occurences start-
ing from the ﬁrst, second and third position in the triplet.
In this work we introduce a method for identiﬁcation of
protein-coding regions in DNA that uses notion of distin-

∗Electronic address: gorban@icm.krasn.ru

a)

b)

Eﬀectiveness of

FIG. 1:
(local GC-
concentration (a), mixing entropy (b)) for several genomes.
Bimodal character of graphs can be explained: ﬁrst maximum
is the diﬀerence of coding and non-coding regions themselves,
second is statistical diﬀerence of long regions (isochores)

two measures

guished coding phase. We try to explain the reasons for
measures which use in a way the idea of coding phase (in-
cluding such measures as inphase hexamers, assymetry,
entropy etc., see [5, 6] for deﬁnitions) to be useful in
the methods of identiﬁcation of protein coding regions.
Using the idea in the explicit form we formulate pro-
cedure for identiﬁcation of protein-coding regions in a
self-organizing manner.

Let’s take arbitrary subsequence of DNA (below we

think of both DNA strands as of one chain, not touching
problem of possible genes overlapping) and divide it into
non-overlapping triplets in three diﬀerent ways, starting
from the ﬁrst, second and third basepair in the window.
We get 3 distributions of triplet frequencies f (1)
ijk , f (2)
ijk ,
f (3)
ijk , i, j, k ∈ {A, C, G, T }. Then we can consider mixed
distribution f (s)
ijk + f (2)

ijk + f (3)
ijk ).

ijk = 1

3 (f (1)

If we suppose that given subsequence is protein coding
and homogeneous (without introns) then one of the three
distributions is the real codon distribution and it deﬁnes
distinguished coding phase. No matter the distribution
is, other two are derivable from it (provided ﬁxed mixed
distribution and under several assumptions) and, gener-
ally speaking, should be diﬀerent. This happens due to
the fact that the distribution of triplets in coding phase
is strictly conserved in the process of evolution.

The situation is fairly opposite in non-coding regions.
Due to allowable operations of deleting and inserting a
basepair in sequence, all three distributions are expected
to be mixed and equal to f (s)
ijk.

ijk , f (2)
It is worth noticing, that distributions f (1)
ijk ,
f (3)
ijk are projections of distribution of pentamers pijklm,
i, j, k, l, m ∈ {A, C, G, T } which counted from every third
position starting from the ﬁrst basepair in a window. It
means that information contained in distribution of pen-
tamers seems to be suﬃcient for prediction of coding re-
gions with the same accuracy as using hexamers (but
requires shorter subsequence to evaluate frequencies).

Another interesting note is that GC-concentration in a
window is the linear function of the frequencies of triplet
distribution in any phase.
It means that in the space
of triplet (or pentamer, hexamer etc.) frequencies gra-
dient of this functional determines a distinguished direc-
tion along what the separation of coding and non-coding
windows is good. Really, it is well-known fact that cod-
ing regions are GC-rich comparing to non-coding. We
will show below that the diﬀerence in GC-concentration
between coding and non-coding regions is most contrast
at the scales comparable to the average gene length in
genome.

To implement the simple idea of distinguished phase as
a procedure for identiﬁcation of protein coding regions in
DNA, ﬁrst we investigated dependence of eﬀectiveness of
two simple measures on the length of sliding window. It
was done on the known genome anotations and it was
shown that the dependence has bimodal character and is
not very strong in some range of window lengths.

Suppose every nucleotide in one strand of DNA to be
”coding” or ”non-coding”. Then assume that this prop-
erty depends on some measure calculated over the whole
window with length W, centered in the position of the nu-
cleotide. We may evaluate the eﬀectiveness of this mea-
sure for separation of coding subset G and non-coding
subset J in the set of all nucleotides. Let AW (i) be our
measure calculated for the i-th position and

2

FIG. 2: Distribution of triplet frequencies in the space of ﬁrst
three principal components for P.Wickerhamii

FIG. 3: Distribution of triplet frequencies in the space of ﬁrst
three principal components for S.Cerevisiae III

∆W =

1
W (Pi∈G AW (i) − Pi∈J AW (i))
pDAW (i)

be a measure of eﬀectiveness, where D is dispersion of
AW (i) over the whole set {G, J}. In ﬁgures 1(a), 1(b)
dependence of ∆W on W for two measures and several
genomes is shown. First (ﬁg.2(a)) is local concentration

3

c)

FIG. 4: Two-dimensional visualization of distribution density
using method of elastic map: a) form of constructed elastic
map; b) position of the map in data space (projection on
the ﬁrst three principal components); c) resulting picture of
estimation of density distribution.

ijk ln f (s)

ijk ln f (m)

ijk, S(m) = − Pijk f (m)

of GC-bonds in a window. Second (ﬁg.2(b)) is so called
”mixing entropy” SM = 1
3 (3S − S(1) − S(2) − S(3)), where
S = − Pijk f (s)
ijk . It
is clear that sets J and G can be separated with conﬁ-
dence (with enormous number of points we have diﬀer-
ence of two mean values more than one standard devia-
tion) and eﬀectiveness of SM measure seems to be better
then GC-average. An optimal window length for calcu-
lating the measures is about 400 bp for S.Cerevisiae and
P.Falsiparum genomes and about 120 bp in the case of
short mitochondrial genome.

Using these values we constructed a ﬁnite set of points
in 64-dimensional space of triplet frequencies, each point
corresponds to the frequencies distribution f (1) of non-
overlapping triplets with phase 1 (starts from the ﬁrst
basepair in window). Then coordinates of points in the
set X = {xi}, i = 1...N were normalized on unit standard
deviation:

˜xij =

xij − ¯xj
σj

,

where xij is the j-th coordinate of the i-th point and
¯xj, σj are mean value and standard deviation of the j-th
coordinate.

The set of normalized vectors ˜xi was projected into
the subspace spanned by the ﬁrst three principal com-
ponents of the distribution and visualized with showing
known separation for coding and non-coding nucleotides
(see ﬁg.2,3). The distribution has bullet-like structure
with a kernel corresponding to the non-coding regions
(where there is no distinguished phase) and three tails

FIG. 5: Prediction of protein-coding regions using clustering
in the space of triplet frequencies for P.Wickerhamii. X-axis
is basepair position in sequence, Y-axis is number of cluster
(coding phase).

which correspond to the three possible shifts of real codon
distribution to the phase of test triplets in a window.

To visualize density of the distribution more advanced
technology was used named ”method of elastic maps”(see
[7, 8, 9, 10]). The method of elastic maps just like self-
organizing maps [11] constructs point approximation to
the non-linear principal 2D-surface using minimization of
elastic energy functional that consist of three parts de-
scribing ”node – data points” attraction and energies of
stretching and binding of the net of nodes with appropri-
ate topology. More isometric than in SOM net of nodes
allows to construct piece-wise linear 2D-manifold and to
project data points in a piece-wise linear fashion onto it,
then using the manifold as a 2D screen for visualization
purposes. In our case we initialized the net on the 2D-
hemisphere put into multidimensional space. After that
it was deformed using algorithm of construction elastic
net for the optimal approximation and the coloring was
used to visualize the resulting density of projections of
data points (more precisely, its non-parametric estima-
tion). The distribution of data points has four clusters
(ﬁg.4), corresponding to the non-coding regions (central
cluster) and protein coding (three peripherial clusters).
Using this fact the procedure for unsupervised predic-
tion of protein coding regions may be formulated. We
construct distribution of triplet frequencies just as we did
it (using some suboptimal value of window length) and
then cluster it for 4 clusters, using appropriate cluster-
ing algorithm. It gives separation of all nucleotides into
non-coding (0-phase) and protein-coding (1,2,3-phase).

We used simplest method of K-means for clustering
and found that separation of nucleotides in investigated
genomes relates to the known data with accuracy from
65% up to 85% (calculating accuracy as percentage of
correctly predicted nucleotides - coding and non-coding).
Though these results are comparable with performance
of gene-ﬁnders used in real practice [1], more advanced
techniques for clustering promise better results. Frag-
ments of the resulting graphs of phase (that is actually

4

quencies shows symmetric bullet-like structure. Linear
dimensions of the structure are determined by amplitudes
of two measures: local GC-concentration and mixing en-
tropy.

These two measures have maximum of their eﬀective-
ness for separating coding and non-coding regions in the
same quite wide range of window lengths (relating to the
average length of gene). As average mixing entropy mea-
sure is more eﬀective, but it can separate only protein-
coding regions, while eﬀectiveness of GC-concentration
does not depend on the type of the coding region.

Analysis shows that distribution of windows of DNA
in triplet frequencies space forms 4 clusters (central one
for junk region, where there is no coding phase, and 3
side ones for three possible phase shifts). Though this
clustering is not very compact, it may be used for gene-
ﬁnding without any learning dataset.

FIG. 6: Prediction of protein-coding regions using clustering
in the space of triplet frequencies for S.Cerevisiae III. X-axis
is basepair position in sequence, Y-axis is number of cluster
(coding phase). Dotted line shows positions of ORFs, the
height of bar corresponds to the conﬁdence of gene presence
(highest bars are experimentally discovered genes.)

cluster number) of sliding window (calculated through
every 3 bp) are shown in ﬁg.5,6.

So, in this paper it was demonstrated that simple no-
tion of distinguished coding phase in three possible dis-
tributions of triplets in a window of DNA lays as back-
ground in various methods of gene ﬁnding. Visualization
of the set of sliding windows in the space of triplet fre-

Our eﬀorts were inspired by attention of Prof.
M.Gromov to the work. We are thankful to Prof.
A.Carbone (IHES) for stimulating discussion and help.
The paper of A.Carbone and M.Gromov [12] was a good
inspiring example for us of how molecular biology can be
thought from a mathematical angle.

Acknowledgments

[1] J.-M. Claverie, Human Molec. Genetics 6, 1735 (1997).
[2] E. Yeramian, Gene 255, 139 (2000).
[3] E. Yeramian, Gene 255, 151 (2000).
[4] P. Bernaola-Galvan, I. Grosse, P. Carpena, and et.al.,

Phys.Rev.Lett. 85(6) (2000).

[5] J. Fickett, Computers Chem. 20(1), 103 (1996).
[6] A. Gorban, A. Zinovyev, and T. Popova, Statisti-
cal approaches to automated gene identiﬁcation with-
out teacher, Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientiﬁques
Preprint, IHES/M/01/34 (2001).

[7] A. Gorban and A. Rossiev, Journal of Computer and

System Sciences International 38(5), 825 (1999).

[8] A. Zinovyev, Visualisaton of Multidimensional Data
(Krasnoyarsk State Technical University Press, Russia,

2000).

1997).

[9] A. Gorban, A. Zinovyev, and A. Pitenko, Informatsionnie

technologii, Moscow. 6, 26 (2000).

[10] A. Gorban and A. Zinovyev, Visualization of data by
method of elastic maps and its application in genomics,
economics and sociology, Institut des Hautes Etudes Sci-
entiﬁques Preprint, IHES/M/01/36 (2001).

[11] T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps (Berlin - Heidelberg,

[12] A. Carbone and M. Gromov, Mathematical slices of
molecular biology, La Gazette des Math´ematiciens, 88:11-
80 (2001), num´ero Sp´ecial.

