1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Species Orthogonalization

Petr Kr´al

Department of Chemical Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science,
76100 Rehovot, Israel

Present address: ITAMP, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

We discuss general formation of complementary behaviors, functions and forms in
biological species competing for resources. We call orthogonalization the related
processes on macro and micro-level of a self-organized formation of correlations in
the species properties. Orthogonalization processes could be, for example, easily
observed in sympatric speciation, as we show in numerical studies carried with a
new population equation. As a practical result, we ﬁnd that the number of species
is proportional to the eﬀective richness of resources and depends on their history.

Introduction

Individuals in any biological species diﬀer a little in their behaviors, forms and
other parameters, which can help to relax their otherwise large competition. If the
diﬀerences become too large, individuals can decrease their interest for interbreeding,
and species can consequently split up. During speciation and species coexistence
correlations are formed between parameters of the species, which adjust distributions
for diﬀerent species in such a way that resources are eﬀectively shared. In this process
complex patterns of complementary sets of parameters are formed, where species can
be seen to approach discrete orthogonal states. These “orthogonalization processes”
(OP) can be modeled in multidimensional mathematical spaces, with coordinates
given by the species parameters.

It appears natural to deﬁne species by a mutual reproducibility of their indi-
viduals (Mayr (1942, 1963)). Since OP are strong in clusters of evolutionary and
functionally close species, they could give a clear substance to the species deﬁni-
tions. Globally, we can deﬁne species orthogonalization as a process in which species
approach a state, where they share resources and habitats in the most eﬀective way,
fully stabilized in time. Since species not only passively approach this ideal state,
but they prefer to overturn the “status quo”, by permanently improving the quality

1

of their gene equipment, full orthogonalization can not be realized. Instead, evolu-
tion gives a relatively stable coexistence (quasi-orthogonality) of biological species,
time from time disturbed by speciation events. Close to these events OP are the
most intense, but they are strong until the new species “settle down”. Species in-
teractions, which enable this process, last even after the species get in the resulting
orthogonal states.

The need for orthogonalization might have caused the disappearance of many
“intermediate” species, since these would hamper orthogonalization in the short
and long term run, the last because both the resources volume and speciation rate
are relatively stable. A more speciﬁc trace of OP are character shifts observed in
species sharing habitats or in sympatric speciation (Brown & Wilson (1956), Smith
(1966), May & Mac Arthur (1972), Slatkin (1980), Schluter & Mac Phail (1988),
Doebeli (1996a), Drossel & Mac Kane (1999)), which reveal eﬃcient division of
resources from the point of structure, day time or form of consumption. Competition
for (orthogonal) discrete niches (Hutchinson (1968)) is conﬁrmed, for example, by
simple speciation/extinction models (Valentine & Walker (1988)). Therefore, OP
might even control the numbers of species living in given areas (Rosenzweig (1995),
Plotkin et al. (2000)).

To understand OP, we discuss ﬁrst some evolution aspects of species on the
micro and macro-level, and ﬂow of information between the levels. Then, we focus
on modeling of a sympatric speciation of species (Doebeli (1996b), Bagnoli & Bezzi
(1997), Kondrashov & Kondrashov (1999), Dieckman & Doebeli (1999), Drossel &
Mac Kane (2000)), and ﬁnd a new speciation equation. We present it in numerical
examples, where OP can be observed.

The concept of species orthogonalization

We can look on species orthogonalization from diﬀerent levels of the OP activity. In
a self-organized molecular system (Eigen (1971)), diﬀerent types of molecules play
diﬀerent roles, expressed by their microscopic structures. Evolution processes lead-
ing to separation of these roles can be called orthogonalization on the micro-level
(OMIL). Since correlations are also built between clusters of cooperating but dif-
ferent types of molecules, natural orthogonalizing units are molecular quasispecies
(Eigen & Schuster (1977), Eigen, M., McCaskill, J, & Schuster, P., (1989)). There-
fore, eigensolutions of the Eigen’s equations implicitly incorporate quasispecies or-
thogonalization on the micro-level.

The molecular system can be a part of a macro-system, competing or coop-
erating with other macro-systems of the same or diﬀerent types. Diﬀerent types of
macro-systems (individuals in diﬀerent species or diﬀerent organs inside individuals)
analogously develop complementary functions and signaling, activities in diﬀerent

2

times or space regions. Processes leading to such a diﬀerentiation of biological
species can be called orthogonalization on the macro-level (OMAL). We could again
ﬁnd that OMAL is rather realized between self-organized clusters of species, anal-
ogously to the quasispecies on the micro-level, which can help to improve species
deﬁnitions. Forces leading to OMAL have predominantly macroscopic origin, but
their inﬂuence must be “inheritably” ﬁxed on a micro-level, which can be realized
there as a part of “externally driven” OMIL.

REALIZATION OF ORTHOGONALIZATION PROCESSES

Realization of OP on all structural levels of biological species is rather fascinating.
Starting from the micro-level, proteins on the tertiary level, for example, resemble
macro-tools, where prototypical sections can be identiﬁed with letters in a hypo-
thetical alphabet (Lesk (1951), Creighton (1992), Holm & Sander (1998)), showing
the activity of OMIL, i.e. a functional orthogonalization of certain protein sections.
Recently, for example, orthogonalization as a measure of similarity between diﬀer-
ent molecules was used in a modeling of prebiotic species formation (Segr´e et al.
(2000)). Proteins also reﬂect the environment temperature, pressure or acidity by
the compactness of their folding (Lumsden et al. (1997)), which shows that some de-
grees of freedom can be tuned in proteins from the macro-level, without qualitatively
aﬀecting their functions.

Comparative studies show (Creighton (1992)) that proteins, common among
diﬀerent species, have nearly zero mutations at some regions, reﬂecting functional
importance of these sections. Other sections are nearly neutral with respect to
protein’s functions, since compositions of amino-acids present here are reasonably
varied between evolutionary distant species (Wang (1996)). Such a structural “self-
averaging” often applies to elongated sections stretching out of the proteins. The
fact that ﬂuctuations in these sections between individuals in a single species are
still statistically small could reveal their use for ongoing OMAL processes. These
processes can be engaged in a structural tuning of the neutral sections, with the
goal to inﬂuence speed (catalytic strength), timing and other aspects of protein’s
functions, and thus vary the species morphology and general activity. Some genes,
present in the gene-pool in many similar copies (Creighton (1992)), are also tuned
by OMAL to perform the same functions in diﬀerent evolution stages of the organ-
ism, which carries them. Therefore, proteins and other microscopic units probably
ﬁrst internally develop by OMIL, and later are being externally tuned by OMAL,
according to the needs on the macro-level.

OMAL is realized through an information (vertical) ﬂow between the species
macro and micro-levels, where each level expresses its needs and possibilities in
a speciﬁc way. Stimulations between the levels are rich: the macro-world provides

3

species individuals with various resources, acts on them through a set of macroscopic
variables Φ (like radiation, temperature, humidity, ...), and checks their ability to
ﬁt a given time-dependent environment. The individuals react according to their
inherited and gained informations (Irwin & Price (1999)), coded in their gene-pools
and memories, evolving as a response to the living conditions.

Description of orthogonalization processes

Mathematically, an individual can be represented by a point in a vector space, where
coordinates φi are related to codons, genes, or other microscopic units (Baake et al.
(1997)). Giving the ﬂuctuations in their composition, a species with many indi-
viduals occupies a ﬁnite volume ∆φ of this space. An extreme example are viral
quasispecies (Eigen (1993)), where ∆φ is very large and rapidly grows in time by
mutations. The species individuals can be also described in a vector space with coor-
dinates given by their macroscopic characteristics x (Pr¨ugel-Bennett (1997)). Some
sets of microscopic parameters φ (genotypes) can lead to morphological solutions
with close macroscopic parameters x (phenotypes). Ambiguity of this reﬂection can
be traced by a genotype-phenotype mapping (Fontana & Schuster (1998)).

=

...

H1 × H2 ×

The two types of vector spaces are formed by a direct product of their subspaces
× Hn for the involved microscopic or macroscopic parameters.
H
In dependence on the studied level, an individual can be thus identiﬁed with the
vector x = (x1, x2, ..., xn) or φ = (φ1, φ2, ..., φn). A species with many individuals
can be described by a (character) distribution f (x) or ˜f (φ), which reﬂect various
correlations in the populations. The distributions can be smoothed and normalized
f0(x) = f (x)/N, where N is the number of involved individuals.

EVALUATION OF ORTHOGONALIZATION PROCESSES

To quantitatively appreciate OP, we can formally introduce a measure of species
orthogonality. We say that two species are orthogonal with a weight µ, if a scalar
product (Prugoveˇcki (1981)) of their distributions

f0|
f0(x1, x2, ..., xn) g0(x1, x2, ..., xn) = 1

fulﬁlls

g0i

h

µ .

−

(1)

f0|

g0i ≡ Z

h

dx1dx2...dxn q

Any species is orthogonal to itself with a weight µ = 0. Similarly, µ = 1 for any
two species, if their distributions for at least one component of the vector x totally
avoid each other. Deﬁnition (1) just touches the aspect of a “visual dissimilarity”
of the character distributions in species. The value µ
1, for example, does not
assure that the two involved species are related in any way, and if they are, it does
not prove that OP are completed. The last should be independently checked from
the time-independence of the distributions f , g, as outlined in the Introduction.

≈

4

To get more reﬁned tools for capturing OP, we should rather focus on some
“dynamical aspects” of OP, like the fact that species living in close contacts often
largely interact, even if they are practically orthogonal
Interactions,
which enable orthogonalization, are realized through competition, described here by
broadened distributions fC, gC (see Eqn. 8). For interacting species, these functions
thus have a nonzero overlap
0. When the interactions
proceed vertically on the food-web (Amaral & Meyer (1999)), OP can be traced
analogously.

= 0, even if

gCi 6

fC|

i ≈

i ≈

0.

f

f

g

g

h

h

h

|

|

It is also important to know in which way OP form correlations between the
parameters x1, x2, ..., xn of interacting species. This can be tested from the species
distributions F (xk, xl, ...), G(xk, xl, ...), resulting by projection of f (x), g(x) on the
selected xk, xl, ... parameters

F, G(xk, xl, ...) =

dx1dx2...dxk−1dxk+1...dxl−1dxl+1...dxn f, g(x) .

(2)

Z

Similarly as fC, gC, the projected distributions F , G could also overlap

F

G

h

|

i ≡ Z

q

dxkdxl...

F (xk, xl, ...)G(xk, xl, ...)

= 0 ,

(3)

0. For interacting species, this
even if the species are quasi-orthogonal
h
can be largely due to correlations formed by OP between the individual parameters
x1,2,...,n, in contrast to the overlap of fC, gC due to broadening (interaction).

i ≈

f

g

|

|

h

h

F

F

G

i ≈

These correlations can be traced, if we project f , g on a functionally relevant
cluster of parameters. An example for two interacting bird species might be the
triplet: xb-beak length, xl-leg length and xw-wing size. This triplet could give a
0, while projections on subsets of (xb, xl, xw)
reasonably small overlap
G
might already result in large overlaps
= 0. This can be especially relevant for
|
the projected and competition broadened distributions FC, GC. We can thus deﬁne
an eﬀective orthogonalization variable x, which would give the least overlap when
we project on it. This variable then speaks about the character of correlations built
by OP. The simplest possibility how to deﬁne it (see Fig. 1) is to project along the
CG) x, oriented in the direction between the centers of gravity
vector x = (CF
CF = (xF
l , xG
w) of the projected species distributions
F (xb, xl, xw), G(xb, xl, xw), and integrate these distributions out in the remaining
two orthogonal directions. We will apply the eﬀective one dimensional variable x in
our numerical studies.

−
w) and CG = (xG
l , xF

b , xG

b , xF

i 6

In Fig. 1 we schematically present the distributions f (x1, x2), g(x1, x2) for
0, while the
two species. They are practically orthogonal
projected distributions F (x1), G(x1) or F (x2), G(x2) are not
G(x1,2)
= 0.
When we project f (x1, x2), g(x1, x2) on the eﬀective orthogonalization variable x,
deﬁned by the direction between the distribution “centers”, the resulting projected

i ≈
F (x1,2)
|

f (x1, x2)

g(x1, x2)

i 6

h

h

|

5

6
Figure 1: Scheme of the distributions f (x1, x2), g(x1, x2) for two species, quasi-orthogonal (
f
i ≈
h
0) in the parameters x1, x2. The projected distributions F (x1), G(x1) or F (x2), G(x2) overlap
= 0, while the distributions F (x), G(x) resulting by the projection along the
G(x1(2))
F (x1(2))
h
|
eﬀective orthogonalization variable x are still nearly orthogonal

g
|

0.

i 6

G(x)
F (x)
|
h

i ≈

distributions F (x), G(x) become also nearly orthogonal
reveals the OP-built correlations between parameters x1, x2 in the two species.

F (x)

G(x)

i ≈

h

|

0. This

Orthogonalization in sympatric speciation

Investigation of OP in species is a demanding task, due to the formation of the
complex correlations between species parameters and the diﬀerent involved levels.
OMAL processes can be often observed in evolutionary or functionally close species.
Very interesting from the point of OP is the sympatric speciation, with its many
mutually interconnected aspects, like the presence of competition or the role of
assortativity in sexual interbreeding (Doebeli (1996b), Kondrashov & Kondrashov
(1999), Dieckman & Doebeli (1999)). The activity of OMAL could help us to under-
stand some problems of sympatry, like its possible existence on a “ﬂat landscape”
solely due to competition (Rosenzweig (1978)).

SPECIATION EQUATION

Here, we model sympatric speciation on the macro-level, where we investigate the
presence of OMAL. For simplicity, we do not explicitly model here the parallel
ﬁxation on the micro-level. Only sexually reproducing organisms are considered,
but the results could be extended also to clonal species. We describe the total

6

character distribution f (x) by the new equation

∂f (x)
∂t

=

(Φ, x)

R

Z Z

dxI dxII S

(xI, xII)

f (x

xI) f (x + xII)

(cid:16)

−

α

(cid:17)

−

f (x)
τ (x)

,

(4)

and assume that f (x) splits into several sub-populations fi(x) for individual species
with a limited interbreeding. The front term on the r.h.s., representing growth of
, with abiotic and biotic compo-
the species, is controlled by the eﬀective resources
nents, and dependence on factors from the set Φ, like temperature or radiation. It is
also inﬂuenced by the sexual function
with a second order mating (two partners)
in a power α. The last term in Eqn.(4) represents dying of individuals with a time
τ (x), due to natural reasons, predator-prey coupling or catastrophes. It can also
reﬂect possible extinctions, since f (x) would keep a constant norm for τ (x)

R

S

.

≈ ∞

RESOURCES FUNCTION

The resources function
speciation studies (Peliti (2000)). We use it in the form

R

plays the role of a “ﬁtness landscape”, considered in other

(Φ, x) =

R

R0(Φ, x) exp

n−(cid:16)Z

d¯x

C(Φ, x

¯x)f (¯x)

R

−

β

(cid:17)

o

,

(5)

′

R

R

R0(x) = R0 e−|x−xR|2/(σR)2

R0(Φ, x) represents all the resources
where competition can be largely varied. Here,
available for an individual with parameter x, in the absence of other individuals,
and the external parameters Φ. We simply assume that it is given by the Gaussian
. Exploitation of the resources is controlled by
function
the exponential function in Eqn.(5) with the distribution f (x), which is competition-
C. This broadening expresses the fact that individuals
broadened by the function
with parameter x
can eat the food already consumed by individuals with parameter
C is also Gaussian, its width σC determines the eﬀective “dis-
x. If we assume that
tance” of the consumption/competition, and additional nonlinearity of this process
can be tuned by the parameter β.
Roughening of the landscape

R0(Φ, x) reﬂects the discrete character of species,
which form the resources, and the structured ability of other species to consume
them.
In principle, both can be related to a “limited scaling” in the species pa-
rameters. For example, individuals of some species cannot get just smaller without
qualitatively changing their properties, like the ability to hide by digging a hole, be-
cause of the increasing danger from predators, as they become smaller. In this way,
complex correlations in species parameters are built by OMAL, which are roughen-
R0(Φ, x). We do not explicitly consider here the food-web struc-
ing the landscape
ture, where landscape roughening could propagate, and neglect also predator-prey
dynamics.

7

SEXUAL TERM

In the growth term from Eqn.(4), we assume that the progeny population f (x)
receives the properties x from the parents with distributions f (x
xI), f (x + xII).
In the mean heritage approximation, only parents with xI = xII contribute to this
solution. The dependence of the birth rate on the distance of parents parameters
X = xI + xII is given by the sexual correlation function
(X, ξ). Declination
of the progeny properties from this mean solution is described by the diﬀerence
xII, which originates in mutations and other eﬀects, like gene mixing and
ξ = xI −
activation. We can again assume that

has a Gaussian form

−

S

S

(X, ξ) = S0 e−|X|2/σ2

S −|ξ|2/σ2

M

,

2πσSσM

S

(6)

where the width of sexual interests σS and the declination σM can be partly tuned
by OMAL. The factor α in Eqn.(4) reﬂects the “power of interbreeding”. Speciation
is rather sensitive to the departure of the equation from the quasi-linearity α
0.5,
as we discuss below. The nonlinearity could be also incorporated in a more general
f (x)/τ (x) in Eqn.(4), where it would reﬂect a decreased
version of the decay term
defense ability of small size populations.

−

≈

Numerical Studies

In numerical studies, we use projected distributions with just one scalar property x
for the eﬀective orthogonalization variable (see Fig. 1), in which the species overlap
the least. We assume, for simplicity, that the projected distribution F (x) (called
here also f (x)) follows the same Eqn. 4 as the full distribution f (x1, x2, ..., xn).
We deﬁne the formed species i as separate sub-populations fi(x) in the character
distribution f (x), similarly as in (Doebeli (1996b), Drossel & Mac Kane (2000)).
The species i, j are considered to be orthogonal if their ﬁnal steady-state distribu-
tions fi(x), fj(x) do not overlap
0. The sub-populations of the consump-
tion/competition function fC(x) can still overlap
= 0, which leads to the
fact that the species separation in the variable x is mostly controlled by the ﬁnite
consumption/competition width σC.

fji ≈

fCji 6

fCi|

fi|

h

h

We transform in Eqn. 4 the internal variables (xI, xII ) or equivalently (X, ξ)

to the new variables (z, ¯z), where X = 2¯z, ξ = 2(x

z). Then the equation reads

∂f (x)
∂t

=

(x)

R

Z Z

8 dz d¯z

e−4¯z2/σ2

S −4(x−z)2/σ2

M

10πσSσM

(cid:16)

−

f (z

¯z) f (z + ¯z)

α

(cid:17)

−

f (x)
τ

, (7)

−

where, the resources function is

(x) = R0 e−x2/σ2

R−aC (fC (x))β

R

, fC(x) = Z

d¯x

e−(x−¯x)2/σC
√2πσC

f (¯x) .

(8)

8

In Eqns.(7-8) we use the values S0 = 0.2 and aC = 4 to easily present numerical
results for diﬀerent functions.

PRACTICAL EXAMPLES

We use Eqns.(7-8) to study under which conditions sympatric speciation can be
obtained on broad Gaussian resources, and pay also attention to the role of their
local inhomogeneities. We also specify the role of OMAL in the obtained solutions.
In Fig.2 we present the steady-state (globally stable) numerical solutions of
Eqns.(7-8) for species formed by sympatric speciation. The dashed and dash-dotted
curves correspond to the free and unused resources without and with the competition
exponential from (8), respectively. The solid and dotted curves represent the total
population f (x) and the consumption/competition function fC(x), respectively. The
situations with one to four species are obtained for the Gaussian resources of the
width σR = 0.2 and strengths R0 = 0.5, 1, 2, 4. The consumption/competition width
is σC = 0.1, the sexual and mutation widths are chosen the same σS = σM = 0.015,
the power parameters are α = β = 0.6 and the lifetime is τ = 100.

The broad Gaussian resources can be seen as “quasi-ﬂat”, since σR is larger
than other parameters in the model. When the richness of resources R0 is rather
small, only σC is close in size to σR. As R0 increases, an eﬀective width of resources
ΣR (on which species can survive) becomes larger than σR, so the resources can
feed more and more species. If σR alone (not R0) is enlarged to get a nearly ﬂat
landscape, the number of species grows, but their separation is always given by σC.
If σC does not vary much, the resulting self-organized speciation quasi-periodicity
as a function of x determines a universal speciation volume. In the present broad
Gaussian landscape, with an exponential form of competition (see (8)), speciation
can be obtained only if the power of interbreeding is slightly nonlinear α > 0.5. This
adds to the speciation conditions on a quasi-ﬂat landscape.

/

−

fCji

− − − −

The unused resources (

.) in Fig.2 are ﬂattened by the total distribution
.
−
fC(x), which largely copies the shape of the resources (
), even though
the total distribution f (x) has sharply separated sub-populations. This shows an
eﬃcient sharing of resources by the orthogonalized consumption needs of the species
(Roughgarden (1976)). We have used Eqn. 3 to calculate the relative overlaps rCij =
of the individual contributions fCi(x) to fC(x). These fCi(x) can
fCi|
h
be obtained from Eqn. 8, where we substitute the individual distributions fi(x).
The situations with n = 2
4 species in Fig.2 give: n = 2, r12 = 0.296; n = 3,
r12 = 0.219, r13 = 0.045 and n = 4, r12 = 0.17, r13 = 0.062, r14 = 0.008, r23 = 0.213.
The values rCij show the steady-state strength of coupling of the orthogonal species
fi|
(
0). The related pressures can be relaxed by inhomogeneities in the broad
h
Gaussian resources.

fji ≈

fCi

fC|

−

h

9

Figure 2: Species population f (competitive population fC) in a sympatric speciation is shown by
full (dotted) lines as a function of the eﬀective parameter x. The dashed (dash-dotted) lines rep-
resent the free (competitive) landscape of resources. The plots with one to four species correspond
to strength of resources R0 = 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and other parameters in the text.

10

Note also that the ﬁnal distributions fi(x) in Fig.2 do not depend on the size
of the initial Gaussian population used in iterations of Eqns.(7-8), unless this is very
small. Then, for the present parameters, initial populations which are by 2-3 orders
smaller than the ﬁnal population tend to follow the single-peaked landscape. This
means that the ﬁnal solution gives 2n
1 species where 2n species would normally
appear, so the initial condition is “frozen in” the ﬁnal state of a reasonable stability.
For even smaller initial populations species die out, due to ﬁnite lifetime τ .

−

Stepwise speciation resembling our results has been observed, for example,
in stickleback species in small lakes of the coastal British Columbia (Schluter &
Mac Phail (1992)). Speciation driven by the increased strength of resources could
be also the reason of diversity gradients of marine life, as induced by the solar
radiation in coastal regions (Roy et al. (1998)). Similarly, richness gradients of other
species observed towards the equator (Rapoport (1975)) could be the consequence
of enlarged radiation, temperature and food zones.

Figure 3: (top plot) The maxima xM of the populations, for the species with parameters in Fig. 2,
as a function of the resources strength R0. (bottom plot) The same dependence for the maxima
of the species populations fM , with the number of peaks denoted.

In Fig.3 we show the size fM and position xM of the sub-population maxima

11

as a function of the resources strength R0 and other parameters as in Fig. 2. In
the top plot for xM , we can see that after a new species emerges the positions xM
for the peaks slightly move. Since the Gaussian resources rapidly fall down at the
tails, the eﬀective width ΣR increases very slowly with R0, and so does the number
of species n for n > 3. For example, the ﬁfth species appears only at R0 ≈
13. In
the bottom plot, we show the dependence of the maxima fM on R0, and add the
number of peaks in each curve. As R0 grows and the number of species increases
from odd to even, the main maxima jump in values for this shape of resources, while
in transitions from even to odd the changes are reasonably continuous. The separa-
tion of species parameters (character shift) shows that OMAL is accompanied by a
pressure between the coexisting species (Slatkin (1980)), induced by the overlap of
their fCi(x) distributions. The activity is especially large close to speciation events,
where the species parameters move. Experimentally observed pressure induced vari-
ation of the character shift, as the species move between an island and a continent,
is discussed for example by Schluter (1988).

Population branching could be also studied in a time region (Kisdi (1999)). In
our work, globally stable solutions in Fig.3 are calculated by using at each point R0
a Gaussian initial population comparable in size with the ﬁnal value. We will also
study a time evolution, but limit to the investigation of speciation for an adiabatic
time evolution of the resources richness R0; we slightly change R0 in each time run,
and start from the populations of the previous R0. The results for the species posi-
tions xM are shown in Fig.4, where thin doted lines correspond to the solutions from
Fig.3. In the upper plot, we show by thick solid (dashed) lines runs with increasing
R0 starting from the situation in the single-species (triple-species) region. In the
former case, the ﬁrst speciation occurs delayed in the double-species region, while
three species would appear only deeply in the region where four species should be; a
start from the double-species region follows this solution as well. If we start from the
triple-species region, the number of species keeps unchanged for the used parameters.
If the resources become poorer, the situation is rather diﬀerent, as we show on the
bottom plot. A start from the four-species region gives evolution skipping over so-
lutions with three species, but it “smoothly transfers in advance” to a solution with
two species, and the solution with one species appears delayed. Starting from the
triple-species region, the evolution skips over solutions with two species, and later
jumps to a solution with one species. Thus, if R0 increases, all numbers of species
appear, but they are delayed, while if R0 decreases, sequences with odd or even
number of species seem to be realized. Since the frozen nonequilibrium solutions are
locally stable with respect to perturbations, the system experiences hysteresis in the
number of species if R0 slowly oscillates with a large enough amplitude. It is likely
that the species parameters would change by OMAL, to partially follow the slow

12

evolution of resources and bypass the mounting pressures from a ﬁxed number of
species. The crucial aspect is the ratio of timescales of these eﬀects. In nature, such
a behavior can be also largely stabilized by year seasons and other random eﬀects,
but if we take into account the evolution on micro-level one could essentially face
only irreversible behavior.

Figure 4: Positions xM of the species as the resources richness R0 is slowly varied. The upper
(lower) plot shows situations for increasing (decreasing) R0. Thin doted lines correspond to the
In the upper plot thick solid (dashed) lines present runs
globally stable solutions from Fig.3.
starting from regions with a single (triple) species.
In the lower plot the solid (dashed) lines
present runs starting from regions with a triple (quadruple) species. In all cases speciation freezing,
dependent on history, can be observed.

In Fig.5 we show speciation in the previous landscapes, modiﬁed by additional
disturbances. The disturbances can trigger speciation at smaller competition pres-
sures, induced by the fCi distributions; speciation could even take place for α = 0.5,
which would not be possible on the broad Gaussian landscape. In the upper plot,
we take the situation with one species in Fig.2, and subtract from the resources
R0 e−x2/σ2
F with R1 = 0.1, σF = 0.07. The resulting
landscape ﬂattening can split the single species in two sub-populations, since the
resources become more eﬃciently explored by two species. We have also found such

R the exponential R1 e−x2/σ2

13

Figure 5: The situations from Fig.2 presented for a perturbed Gaussian landscape. The top plot
shows how the single species from Fig.2 breaks in two, when the resources are ﬂattened. Next,
one of the side species, from the third plot in Fig.2, shifts and decreases in size to ﬁt the new
landscape. In the third plot, for the same parameters, but the sexuality width σS = 0.035, the
side peaks dissapear, but the resources are not well explored. This is improved on the last plot,
where, instead of σS, the consumption width is broadened to the value σC = 0.15.

14

splitting/joining jumps for the case of two or three species. For R0 = 1.5 the num-
ber of species goes from three to two, while for R0 = 2.5 it goes from three to four,
copying thereby in both cases the ﬂatter shape of resources.

From a theoretical point of view, we could also consider that x represents one of
the parameters Φ, like temperature, radiation or humidity. Then, the resources show
how much food for the species is available at this parameter x, and other changes are
analogous. Therefore, we should in principle be able to describe certain situations
with allopatric speciation. For example, splitting of a Drosophila population, similar
to the top part of Fig.5, was observed on a microsite in a valley with two diﬀerently
irradiated slopes, giving a radiation/temperature space gradient corresponding to
our parameter x (Harry et al. (1999)). A sharply diﬀerent character of the slope
sides could give ﬂatter resources in the middle radiation/temperatures with side
maxima as in Fig.5.

In the second plot of Fig.5, we present the population for the situation with
three species in Fig.2, where we subtract, similarly as before, the shifted exponential
R1 e−(x+x1)2/σ2
F with R1 = 1, x1 = 0.1 and σF = 0.07. Due to this asymmetry of the
resources, the ﬁrst side species largely shifts and decreases, in order to eﬃciently
explore the new landscape, but the total number of species still remains the same.
This inhomogeneity-shifted species competes a little with the other species. In the
next plot, we use the same resources, but we broaden the sexual width to σS = 0.035.
This decreased assortativity fully prevents speciation, and the resources are poorly
used in the tails. Much better exploration is obtained in the last plot, where,
instead, the consumption width is increased by 50 % to σC = 0.15, so the single
species population is also larger. The width σM is also crucial, since it can broaden
and smooth the population. For example, the single peaked distribution in the third
plot of Fig. 5 can be also obtained if σM is increased to the value 0.035.

GENERAL TUNING OF PARAMETERS

≈

Other parameters in Eqns.(7-8) could also interplay in a sensitive way. For example,
0.5 to promote/suppress speciation.
the power α can ﬂuctuate around the value α
The power β can reﬂect the way of food consumption as well as possible deterrence
actions aimed in protecting it (screening). For β < 0.5 (β > 0.5) side populations
become suppressed (enhanced) with respect to the middle populations. The absolute
strength of consumption/competition aC can be tuned to control the size of the
population. Finally, the time τ maintains the speciation pressure and keeps the
population stability (Smith & Brown (1986)). The term with τ in Eqn.(4) diminishes
individuals present in regions between the landscape maxima. It also gives sharper
and a more regular speciation. Without competition and with large τ , the population
would simply follow the landscape, while with competition, it would not speciate

15

sharply until τ is decreased.

Recent studies point to the increased role of food-web resources in species
survival (Amaral & Meyer (1999)). Proportionality between the number of species
and the resources richness, obtained above, can be also supported in diﬀerent ways.
For example, in poor resources, generalist species might be triggered by broadening
σC and σS. Clusters of species can be extinct, and surviving species can broaden
their distributions, so that correlations formed by OMAL become decreased. Since
mutations are less suppressed, speciation could eventually be also promoted in these
conditions. If the resources get richer, individualists could do better. Species can
narrow their consumption needs σC, but they need to live eﬃciently in other ways.
Consequently, they also narrow their sexual interests σS and trigger further specia-
tion. Since the populations largely copy resources, their richness does not make life
easier for the numerous individuals. This drives the lasting self-organized evolution.
OMAL can tune all these parameters in a limited amount to balance coexistence
of species with an eﬃciency exploration of resources. The timescale of this activity
goes over many generations, when these changes get ﬁxed on the micro-level.

FIXATION OF OMAL

We noted that neutral sections of proteins, with a relatively stable composition
in each individual species, might be used for transcription of OMAL. This can
support selectionist views on the problem of molecular evolution clock (Ohta (1996)),
which underlines the quasi-deterministic origin of observed constant mutation rates
in neutral sections of proteins. Recent observations show, that when bacteria are
placed in a new environment, some of their genes start to mutate faster (Sniegowski
et al. (1997), Schmid & Tautz (1997)). Growth of RNA in vitro also shows that
under strong selections the molecules go to the same limit form (Strunk & Ederhof
(1997)). These experiments point to a possibly deterministic role of the environment
on the proteins, where OMAL takes an active role.

We can imagine, that tuning of protein catalytic strength can be regulated by
other proteins, enforced by the complex molecular environment, evolving under the
pressure of globally changing conditions on the macro-level. If these possibilities are
exploited, and a larger change is needed, a jump in neutral positions of the tuned
proteins could be induced by OMAL, which is analogous to avalanche ticking in
other systems (Wu et al. (1993)). This ticking could largely go in parallel with the
formation of new species, shown for example in Fig. 2.

These ideas could be tested on bacteria, with short reproduction periods. A
working scenario could be obtained by modifying some neutral protein region, and
keeping the remaining gene-pool frozen by a periodical exchange. If OMAL is rele-
vant, the protein would eventually evolve in many bacteria generations to the same

16

or a similar form. The problem is if OMAL can be reached in artiﬁcial laboratory
conditions. Such experiments could also reveal to which extent one can speak about
proteins in nonequilibrium with the cell environment.

Summary

We have introduced the concept of species orthogonalization on the micro and macro-
level. OMAL is related with the need for formation of complementary functions
and habits of diﬀerent biological species living in close contacts. OMIL separates
functions of molecular species, and assists OMAL on the micro-level. We have
shortly discussed the ways of evaluating orthogonalization processes.

As a practical example, we have investigated OMAL in sympatric speciation,
but limited so far our study to the macro-level. To this goal, we have found a new
population equation, and presented it in several numerical examples. Its solutions,
for the projected distribution with one eﬀective variable x, show that the number
of species grows in richer resources, divided between the species. This could help
to explain the increase of species diversity close to the equator, where sun radiation
provides richer resources. We have also observed speciation dependent on history,
which might be useful in modeling of ecology, and discussed possible ways of OMAL
ﬁxation on the micro-level. We expect that orthogonalization mechanisms are active
in other systems with competitive structures.

I would like to acknowledge T. Pavl´ıˇcek for stimulating and encouraging discussions.
I would also like to kindly thank M. Shapiro for a partial ﬁnancial support.

Acknowledgments:

REFERENCES

Amaral, L. A. N., & Meyer, M., (1999). Environmental Changes, Coexistence, and
Patterns in the Fossil Record. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 652-655.

Baake, E., Baake, M. & Wagner, M., (1997). Ising Quantum Chain is Equivalent to
a Model of Biological Evolution. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 559-563.

Bagnoli, F. & Bezzi, M., (1997). Speciation as pattern formation by competition in
a smooth ﬁtness landscape. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3302-3305.

Brown W. L. & Wilson E. O., (1956). Character displacement, Syst. Zool. 5, 49-64.

Creighton, T. E., (1992). Proteins. Structure and Molecular Properties. (Freeman,
New York).

17

Dieckman, U. & Doebeli, M., (1999). On the origin of species by sympatric specia-
tion. Nature 400, 354-357.

Doebeli, M., (1996a). An explicit genetic model for ecological character displace-
ment. Ecology 77, 510-520.

Doebeli, M., (1996b). A quantitative genetic model for sympatric speciation. J.
Evol. Biol. 9, 893-909.

Drossel, B. & Mac Kane, A., (1999). Ecological Character Displacement in Quanti-
tative Genetic Models. J. Theor. Biol., 196, 363-376.

Drossel, B. & Mac Kane, A., (2000). Competitive Speciation in Quantitative Genetic
Models. J. Theor. Biol., 204, 467-478.

Eigen, M., (1971). Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological macro-
molecules. Naturwisseschaften 58, 465-523.

Eigen, M. & Schuster, P., (1977). The hypercycle. A principle of natural self-
organisation, Oart A: emergenece of the hypercycle. Naturwisseschaften 64, 541-
565.

Eigen, M., McCaskill, J, & Schuster, P., (1989). The Molecular Quasi-Species. Adv.
Chem. Phys. 75, 149-263.

Eigen, M., (1993). Viral Quasi-species. Sci. Am., 269, 42-49.

Fontana, W. & Schuster, P., (1998). Shaping Space: the Possible and the Attainable
in RNA Genotype-phenotype Mapping. J. Theor. Biol., 194, 491-515.

Harry, M., E., Rashkovetsky, T., Pavlicek, S. Baker, E.M. Derzhavets, P. Capy,
M.L. Cariou, D. Lachaise, N. Asada and E. Nevo, (1999). Fine-scale biodiversity
of Drosophilidae in ”Evolution Canyon” at the Lower Nahal Oren Microsite, Israel.
Biologia 54, 685-705.

Holm, L. & Sander, C., (1998). Dictionary of recurrent domains in protein struc-
tures. Proteins 33, 88-96.

Hutchinson, G. E., (1968). When are species necessary? In R. C. Lewontin (Ed.).
Population Biology and Evolution: 177-186. Syracuse, New York: Syracuse Univer-
sity Press.

Irwin, D. E. & Price, T., (1999). Sexual imprinting, learning and speciation. Hered-
ity 82, 347-354.

Kisdi, E., (1999). Evolutionary Branching under Asymmetric Competition. J.
Theor. Biol., 197, 149-162.

Kondrashov, A. S. & Kondrashov, F. A., (1999). Interactions among quantitative

18

traits in the course of sympatric speciation. sympatric speciation, Nature 400, 351-
354.

Lesk, A. M., (1951). Protein Architecture, Oxford University Press 1991, (Ed. D.
Rickwood & B. D. Hames).

Lumsden, Ch. J., Brandts, W. A. & Trainor, L. E. H., (1997). Physical Theory in
Biology, (World Scientiﬁc); (L. Luo p.380)

May, R. M. & Mac Arthur, R. H., (1972). Niche Overlap as a Function of Environ-
mental Variability. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 69, 1109-1103.

Mayr, E., (1942). Systematics and the Origin of Species. (New York, Columbia
University Press).

Mayr, E., (1963). Animal Species and Evolution.
MA).

(Belknapp Press, Cambridge,

Ohta, T., (1996). The neutralist-selectionist debate. BioEssays, 18, 673-683.

Peliti, L., (2000). Fitness Landscapes and Evolution. (cond-mat/9505003).

Plotkin J. B., Potts M. D., Yu D. W., Bunyavejchewin S., Condit R., Foster R.,
Hubbell S., LaFrankie J., Manokaran N., Lee H.-S., Sukumar R., Nowak M. A., and
Ashton P. S. (2000). Predicting species diversity in tropical forests. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 10850-10854.

Pr¨ugel-Bennett, A., (1997). Modeling Evolving Populations. J. Theor. Biol, 185,
81-95. 82, 1983-1986.

Prugoveˇcki, E., (1981). Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space.
Press).

(NY, Academic

Rapoport, E. H., (1975). Areograﬁa: estrategias de las especieses. Mexico City:
Fondo de Cultura Economica.

Roughgarden, J., (1976). Resources Partitioning Among Competing Species - A
Coevolutionary Approach. Theor. Popul. Biol, 9, 388-424.

Rosenzweig, M. L., (1978). Competitive speciation. Biol. J. Lin. Soc., 10, 275-289.

Rosenzweig, M. L., (1995). Species Diversity in Space and Time. (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, NY).

Roy, K., Jablonski, D., Valentine, J. W. & Rosenberg, G., (1998). Marine latitudinal
diversity gradients: Tests of causal hypotheses. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 3699-
3702.

Schluter, D., (1988). Charactery Displacement and the Adaptive Divergence of
Finches on Islands and Continents. Amer. Natur., 131, 799-824.

19

Schluter, D. & Mac Phail, J. P., (1992). Ecological Charactery Displacement in
Sticklebads. Amer. Natur., 140, 85-108.

Schmid, K. J. & Tautz, D., (1997). A screen for fast evolving genes from Drosophila.
P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 9746-9750.

Segr´e, D., Ben-Eli, D. & Lancet, D., (2000). Compositional genomes: Prebiotic
information transfer in mutually catalytic noncovalent assemblies. P. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 97, 4112-4117.

Slatkin, M., (1980). Ecological character displacement. Ecology 61, 163-177. Smith,

J. M., (1966). Sympatric Speciation. Amer. Natur., 100, 637-650.

Smith, J. M. & Brown, R. L. W., (1986). Competition and Body Size. Theor.
Popul. Biol. 30, 166-179.

Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J. & Lenski, R. E., (1997). Evolution of high mutation
rates in experimental populations of E. coli. Nature 387, 703-705.

Strunk, G. & Ederhof, T., (1997). Machines for automated evolution experiments
in vitro based on the serial-transfer concept. Biophys. Chem. 66, 193-202.

Valentine, J. W. & Walker, T. D., (1988). Diversity Trends within a Model Taxo-
nomic Hierarchy. Physica 22D, 31-42.

Wang, Zhi-Xin, (1996). How many fold types of protein are there in nature? Proteins
26, 186-191.

Wu X-l., Maloy K. J., Hansen A., Ammi M., & Bideau D. (1993). Why hour glasses
tick. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1363-1366.

20

