1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coordinated Slowing of Metabolism in
Enteric Bacteria under Nitrogen Limitation:
A Perspective

Ned S. Wingreen
NEC Research Institute, 4 Independence Way
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
and Department of Physics, University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720

Sydney Kustu
Department of Plant Biology, Molecular and Cell Biology
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720

Abstract

It is natural to ask how bacteria coordinate metabolism when depletion of an
essential nutrient limits their growth, and they must slow their entire rate of biosyn-
thesis. A major nutrient with a ﬂuctuating abundance is nitrogen. The growth rate
of enteric bacteria under nitrogen-limiting conditions is known to correlate with
the internal concentration of free glutamine, the glutamine pool. Here we compare
the patterns of utilization of L-glutamine and L-glutamate, the two central inter-
mediates of nitrogen metabolism. Monomeric precursors of all of the cell’s macro-
molecules – proteins, nucleic acids, and surface polymers – require the amide group
of glutamine at the ﬁrst dedicated step of biosynthesis. This is the case even though
only a minority (∼12%) of total cell nitrogen derives from glutamine. In contrast,
the amino group of glutamate, which provides the remainder of cell nitrogen, is
generally required late in biosynthetic pathways, e.g. in transaminase reactions for
amino acid synthesis. We propose that the pattern of glutamine dependence coor-
dinates the decrease in biosynthesis under conditions of nitrogen limitation. Hence,
the glutamine pool plays a global regulatory role in the cell.

1

INTRODUCTION

Enteric bacteria are notable for their varying environment. Within a host they can

experience conditions of high nutrient availability, high osmolarity, and high toxicity;

outside a host, they can encounter the opposite. Evolution has adapted enteric bacteria

to grow and divide, albeit at diﬀerent rates, under both conditions. One can reasonably

ask “How does the metabolism of these bacteria remain in balance under such diﬀerent

conditions?” Here we consider this question in relation to the response of E. coli and S.

typhimurium to nitrogen availability.

We chose to consider nitrogen metabolism for several reasons. First, central metabolism

of nitrogen is well studied and is relatively simple compared to carbon metabolism: there

are only two central intermediates in nitrogen metabolism, the amino acids glutamate and

glutamine, and these are synthesized from a single precursor, 2-oxoglutarate. In contrast,

carbon metabolism entails the synthesis of 12 central intermediates. Second, all assim-

ilated nitrogen is used for biosynthesis, so it is not necessary to consider storage forms

or waste products. Finally, enteric bacteria have a strong nitrogen starvation response.

It appears that transcription of up to 2% of the E. coli genome is activated by nitrogen

regulatory protein C (NtrC) [1].

Enteric bacteria assimilate inorganic NH3 into organic molecules by two means. In

the reaction catalyzed by biosynthetic glutamate dehydrogenase, NH3 is assimilated di-

rectly into glutamate.

In the reactions of the glutamine synthase/glutamate synthase

(GS/GOGAT) cycle, which is widely present in prokaryotes, NH3 is assimilated ﬁrst into

glutamine and then into glutamate (Fig. 1). Under nitrogen-limited growth conditions, the

major assimilatory pathway is the glutamine synthase/glutamate synthase (GS/GOGAT)

cycle [2, 3]. If one traces biosynthetic nitrogen back to its last appearance in one of the two

central intermediates, then only ∼ 12% of cellular nitrogen derives from glutamine. The

remainder comes from glutamate [4]. Nevertheless, enteric bacteria appear to perceive

2

external nitrogen limitation as internal glutamine limitation [5]. For a variety of nitrogen-

limiting conditions, the growth rate of enterobacteria was found to correlate with the

glutamine pool, which dropped by a factor of 10 or more. The glutamate pool remained

high.

Motivated by the above observations, we explored whether the metabolic uses of glu-

tamine might be better suited than those of glutamate to slowing biosynthesis in a coor-

dinated manner. It is remarkable that glutamine is required at the ﬁrst dedicated step in

the biosynthesis of many of the cell’s major biosynthetic monomers: amino acids, purines

and pyrimidines, and UDP-GlcNAc, a precursor of the cell-surface polymers murein and

lipopolysaccharide. We consider the consequences of this pattern of glutamine utiliza-

tion and propose that the uses of glutamine in metabolism, coupled to the drop in the

glutamine pool, may be important in maintaining homeostasis under nitrogen-limiting

conditions.

METHODS

To compare patterns of glutamine and glutamate utilization in metabolism, we made

use of the following sources: Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium edited by Neid-

hardt [6], and references contained therein; The Enzymes of Glutamine Metabolism edited

by Prusiner and Stadtman [7]; and The Amidotransferases by Zalkin [10]. We made ex-

tensive use of original literature, particularly for Km values for the enzymes of glutamine

and glutamate metabolism (Tables 1 and 2). Because these apparent Km values – con-

centrations required for half-maximal velocity – were measured in vitro under a variety of

conditions, they can be regarded as only approximate guides to in vivo properties of the

enzymes. Two easily accessible Web databases and portals that we utilized are EcoCyc,

a database of metabolic pathways in E. coli (http://ecocyc.pangeasystems.com/ecocyc/),

and KEGG, a database of metabolic pathways for a collection of organisms

(http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/).

3

RESULTS

Glutamine and glutamate play diﬀerent roles in biosynthesis. (i) Though the source

of only 12% of cell nitrogen, the amide group of glutamine is required directly for the

biosynthesis of monomeric units of all macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids, and surface

polymers). (ii) With the exception of the histidine biosynthetic pathway, glutamine is

required at the ﬁrst dedicated step of every pathway in which it is utilized. By contrast,

glutamate is required more often than not at the end or in the middle of pathways. (iii)

Glutamine-dependent reactions are generally coupled to ATP hydrolysis, and hence are

essentially irreversible. More than half of the reactions involving glutamate are reversible

transaminase reactions.

We ﬁrst consider the utilization of glutamine. The enzymes of glutamine metabolism

are listed in Table 1, along with their Km values for glutamine. Co-reactants for these

enzymes and the conventional pathway designations are also listed. The Km values for

glutamine of the enzymes fall in the range 0.2 - 1.7 mM. The glutamine pool concentra-

tion of S. typhimurium dropped from approximately 3-4 mM on ammonia, the optimal

nitrogen source, to < 0.3 mM on growth-rate-limiting nitrogen sources, or in continuous

culture with ammonia as the limiting nutrient. Comparison of pool sizes to Km values

provides evidence that the velocities of many enzymes that utilize glutamine fall below

half-maximal under nitrogen-limiting conditions. The ﬂuxes in the corresponding biosyn-

thetic pathways will be concomitantly reduced.

Figures 2-7 diagram the biosynthetic pathways that require glutamine. Glutamine

is required directly for the biosynthesis of all of the major macromolecules of the cell:

proteins (via the amino acids tryptophan, histidine, arginine, and glutamine itself), nu-

cleic acids (via purines and pyrimidines), and cell-surface polymers (via glucosamine).

Glutamine is also required for the biosynthesis of the cofactor folic acid. In all of these

cases, glutamine acts as a “nitrogen carrier”, losing its amide group and hence yielding

4

glutamate as an immediate product.

In all but one case, the glutamine-dependent reaction is the ﬁrst dedicated step in

a biosynthetic pathway or the ﬁrst dedicated step in synthesis of a parent compound

of the pathway (e.g. carbamyl phosphate for the arginine and pyrimidine pathways).

For example, as shown in Fig. 2, glutamine is a substrate for the ﬁrst reaction unique

to tryptophan biosynthesis. The other substrate, chorismate, is a precursor for many

other aromatic compounds. Likewise, glutamine is required at the ﬁrst dedicated step in

purine biosynthesis. For this reaction, the other substrate, phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate

(PRPP), is a common precursor for several pathways, including the histidine, tryptophan,

and pyrimidine biosynthetic pathways. The fourth dedicated step of purine biosynthesis

also requires glutamine, as does the biosynthesis of guanosine monophosphate (GMP)

from xanthosine monophosphate (XMP).

Figure 4 shows the glutamine-dependent steps in the pyrimidine pathway. Glutamine

is required for the biosynthesis of carbamyl phosphate. The latter is a parent compound

for both the pyrimidines and for arginine. Glutamine is also required in the pyrimidine

pathway at the ﬁnal step from UTP to CTP.

The major intermediate in the biosynthesis of surface polymers is the compound UDP-

GlcNAc. Initiation of the synthesis of peptidoglycan (murein), lipid A, O antigen, and

enterobacterial common antigen all require UDP-GlcNAc [8]. As shown in Fig. 5, the

synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc requires the amino sugar D-glucosamine 6-phosphate, which is

a product of glutamine and the central metabolite D-fructose 6-phosphate [10]. Hence,

glutamine is required at the ﬁrst dedicated step in the biosynthesis of the cell-surface

polymers.

Glutamine is also required for the biosynthesis of the folic-acid family of coenzymes.

As shown in Fig. 6, glutamine enters at the ﬁrst dedicated step of the folic-acid pathway.

The other substrate is the common precursor chorismate.

5

The utilization of glutamine in histidine biosynthesis breaks with the above pattern.

As shown in Fig. 7, glutamine is required at the ﬁfth step of the dedicated histidine

pathway. The enzyme which catalyzes this reaction has a Km for glutamine of 0.24 mM,

the lowest of the enzymes of glutamine metabolism. This is below the concentration

of glutamine measured by Ikeda et al. Therefore, the velocity of this reaction may not

depend strongly on glutamine in the range of nitrogen limitation studied.

Finally, the amino acid asparagine is synthesized directly from glutamine, aspartate,

and ATP. There is also an enzyme aspartate-ammonia ligase in E. coli that utilizes NH3

in place of glutamine to synthesize asparagine. However, strains lacking the glutamine-

dependent enzyme asnB cannot grow in nitrogen-limited media [9].

We consider now the utilization of glutamate. The enzymes of glutamate metabolism

are listed in Table 2. They are divided into two classes: transaminase reactions and all

others. The co-reactants and pathways are listed, along with the Km values for glutamate

of the enzymes where available. Most of the measured Km values for glutamate are roughly

10 times as large as those for glutamine. This is consistent with the observation that the

glutamate pool stays ﬁxed in the range 15-25 mM, approximately 6 times larger than the

glutamine pool of 3-4 mM under unlimited nitrogen [5].

In all the transaminase reactions, glutamate loses its amine group yielding 2-oxoglutarate

as one product. For these reactions, glutamate plays the role of a nitrogen carrier, similar

to the role played by glutamine. In contrast, the entire glutamate molecule is assimilated

in the non-transaminase reactions.

In the interests of space, we have chosen to show only a few characteristic examples of

metabolic pathways involving glutamate. Figure 8 shows the tyrosine pathway, starting

from the common precursor chorismate. The reaction involving glutamate is a reversible

transaminase reaction and occurs at the ﬁnal step of the pathway. As shown in Table

2, there are twelve other pathways in which glutamate is involved via a transaminase

6

reaction.

In nine of the twelve, the glutamate dependent step is later than the ﬁrst

dedicated step of the pathway. The cases in which glutamate is required for the ﬁrst

dedicated step are the aspartate pathway and the valine pathways, both of which are

one-step pathways from common precursors, and the enterobacterial common antigen

(ECA) pathway. In the ECA pathway, the co-substrate with glutamate, dTDP-4-dehydro-

6-deoxy-D-glucose, is also an intermediate in the biosynthesis of rhamnose, a common

constituent of gram-negative O-antigens [11].

Figure 9 shows the arginine pathway. Glutamate is the precursor compound and is

also required for a transaminase reaction at the fourth step. Ornithine, an intermediate

product in the arginine pathway, is also a precursor for the polyamines putrescine and

spermidine [12].

As shown in Table 2, glutamate is required in seven non-transaminase reactions. Of

these, the two in the folic-acid pathway occur later than the ﬁrst dedicated step of the

pathway. In contrast to the transaminase reactions, ﬁve of the non-transaminase reactions

are coupled to ATP hydrolysis, and hence are expected to be irreversible in the cell.

Essentially all nitrogen in cell products derives ultimately from glutamine or gluta-

mate. For example, amino groups of amino acids not listed in Table 2 still come indirectly

from glutamate. Speciﬁcally, aspartate and serine provide nitrogens in the synthesis of

several other amino acids, and their nitrogens are derived from glutamate. Unlike the

reversible transaminase reactions involving glutamate, the amino-acid biosynthetic reac-

tions involving aspartate or serine are either coupled to hydrolysis of ATP, or involve

incorporation of the entire amino-acid molecule into the ﬁnal product.

DISCUSSION

Several aspects of glutamine utilization appear to suit it to a general metabolic regula-

tory role. While the amide group of glutamine donates only 12% of cellular nitrogen (with

the remainder derived from glutamate), glutamine dependent monomers are required to

7

initiate the syntheses of the cell’s macromolecules. Primary depletion of the free pool of

glutamine under nitrogen-limiting conditions would therefore presumably slow ﬂuxes into

a number of biosynthetic pathways simultaneously. As a consequence of glutamine depen-

dence at the ﬁrst dedicated step in these pathways, no useless and/or toxic intermediates

would accumulate. Instead, any accumulation would be of precursors for the pathways,

i.e. substrates for their ﬁrst enzymatic steps. These are substances like chorismate, PRPP,

D-fructose 6-P, and HCO

−
3 , which are common precursors for several pathways and are

readily converted into other central metabolites (e.g. ribose 5-P and ATP from PRPP).

In addition, many of the glutamine-utilizing reactions are essentially irreversible because

they are coupled to hydrolysis of ATP. Thus, these reactions cannot reverse to reﬁll a glu-

tamine pool depleted by a decrease in ammonia assimilation. Glutamine product pools

can therefore be maintained high – thus preventing product starvation responses – even in

the presence of a depleted glutamine pool. Finally, maintenance of a high glutamate pool

under nitrogen-limiting conditions would insure that synthesis of biosynthetic monomers,

once initiated, would be completed. There are transaminase-type reactions in both the

purine and arginine pathways that utilize the amino group of aspartate rather than that

of glutamate. All these reactions are coupled to hydrolysis of ATP or GTP, thus also

assuring completion of monomer synthesis.

By contrast, if depletion of the glutamate pool were the primary consequence of de-

creased ammonia assimilation, the result would be the accumulation of useless and/or

toxic intermediates in many biosynthetic pathways, e.g. folic-acid, histidine, iso-leucine,

and lysine pathways. The presence of excess glutamine under these conditions would ex-

acerbate the accumulation of such intermediates in pathways initiating with glutamine,

e.g. the intermediate 7,8-dihydropteroate and its precursors in the folic-acid pathway.

Moreover, the reversibility of the transaminase reactions utilizing glutamate would tend

to replenish a depleted glutamate pool and would carry down the pools of its products. A

8

drop in product pools would induce product starvation responses, including upregulation

of enzymes metabolizing glutamate, resulting in a futile tug-of-war with overexpressed

enzymes competing for the depleted glutamate pool.

If the free pool of glutamine does indeed regulate biosynthetic ﬂuxes, we believe it

is critical to determine as directly as possible which pool or pools of glutamine-derived

products are, like the pool of glutamine itself, actually depleted under nitrogen-limiting

conditions.

It is these secondary depleted pools which will directly limit the growth

of the cell. Knowledge of which glutamine-product pools are depleted will give insight

into the mechanisms the cell has adopted for slowing growth without disrupting, for

example, the expression of proteins responsible for nitrogen assimilation. (The Km value

for glutamine of glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase is measured to be 0.15-0.21 mM [13, 14],

well below the glutamine concentrations measured for slow-growing cells [5], so direct

glutamine-dependent slowing of protein synthesis can be discounted as a primary cause

of slow growth.)

At least one glutamine-product pool must become depleted under nitrogen limitation

or there would be no slowing of growth. However, it is unclear whether glutamine depletion

propagates into depletion of multiple product pools, or into depletion of just a single

product pool. The depletion of multiple product pools would provide a simple functional

explanation for why so many biosynthetic pathways depend on glutamine. Moreover, a

slowing of growth by depletion of multiple pools would likely be robust to ﬂuctuations in

product pool sizes.

If only a single glutamine-product pool is depleted, the slowing of growth would result

in reduced demand for other cell products and, potentially, large and measurable increases

in other product pools. In this scenario, the widespread dependence of biosynthesis on

glutamine would function to reduce these accumulations by directly reducing biosynthetic

rates. Insofar as growth rate is limited by the overall rate of nitrogen assimilation, no

9

obvious growth advantage would accrue from a mutation to increase the pool of the one

depleted product.

Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids – Glutamine is a substrate for the ﬁrst enzymatic steps

in synthesis of ATP, GTP, UTP, and CTP. A signiﬁcant drop in the pool concentrations of

these nucleotides would presumably decrease rates of synthesis of both RNA and DNA. A

global decrease in mRNA synthesis might, in turn, decrease protein synthesis. However,

genes of the nitrogen-starvation response are known to be upregulated under nitrogen

limitation [1], and would have to escape such a global decrease in mRNA synthesis. ATP

and GTP are widely employed by the cell as energy carriers, so a signiﬁcant drop in

their pools would have a widespread eﬀect on metabolic rates. CTP, which is a direct

glutamine-product from UTP (Fig. 4), is also required in the biosynthesis of phospholipids

[15] and coenzyme A [16].

Cell-surface polymers – Similar to its role in nucleotide synthesis, glutamine is required

for synthesis of glucosamine from the common precursor D-fructose 6-P (Fig. 5). Glu-

cosamine is the substrate for synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc and UDP-MurNAc (Fig. 10). The

latter is used to initiate synthesis of the repeating unit of the osmotically-resistant layer

of the cell envelope, murein [17]. UDP-GlcNAc is also used to initiate synthesis of two of

the three portions of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) component of the outer membrane, the

lipid A and core portions [8]. The biosynthesis of lipid A begins with the fatty acylation

of UDP-GlcNAc and later the core region is assembled using lipid A as a substrate. In E.

coli, UDP-GlcNAc is also required to initiate synthesis of the third portion of LPS, the

O-antigen. UDP-galactose is used in place of UDP-GlcNAc in O-antigen synthesis in S.

typhimurium. Finally, as shown in Fig. 11, UDP-GlcNAc is used to initiate synthesis of

the trisaccharide repeating unit of the enterobacterial common antigen (ECA), a glycol-

ipid found in the outer membrane of enterobacteriaceae [18]. Depletion of glucosamine

under nitrogen limitation would therefore potentially impact synthesis rates of the entire

10

suite of cell-surface polymers.

Amino acids and proteins – In comparison to the above, the roles of glutamine in

synthesis of the amino acids tryptophan, histidine, arginine, and asparagine are less clear-

cut, both in terms of the positions of the glutamine-dependent reactions in their biosyn-

thetic pathways and in terms of the potential eﬀects of depletion of these amino acids

on growth. Although glutamine is required to initiate synthesis of tryptophan and is

required for the synthesis of asparagine from aspartate, glutamine is utilized later in the

arginine and histidine biosynthetic pathways. Given that ornithine, the co-substrate of

the glutamine-dependent (or more speciﬁcally carbamyl phosphate-dependent) reaction

in the arginine biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 9), is also a precursor of polyamines, the posi-

tion of the glutamine-dependent reaction can be rationalized. As noted in Results, this is

not the case for the histidine pathway, where glutamine is required at the ﬁfth dedicated

step (Fig. 7). However, the enzyme involved in histidine synthesis, imidazole glycerol-p

synthase, has an unusually low Km (0.24mM) for glutamine, suggesting that this reaction

is driven to completion even under nitrogen-limited conditions.

Although depletion of the tryptophan, histidine, arginine, and asparagine pools could

certainly slow the rate of elongation of proteins, it would not be expected to slow their

rate of initiation. Depletion of amino-acid pools therefore runs the risk of stalling protein

elongation in the midst of synthesis. Interestingly, a requirement for glutamine by the

enzyme that catalyzes the ﬁrst committed step in folate biosynthesis might indirectly

aﬀect initiation of protein synthesis. This enzyme, aminodeoxychorismate synthase, has

an unusually high Km (1.6mM) for glutamine (Table 1) so that ﬂux into this pathway will

be strongly reduced following glutamine depletion. The co-factor, folate, is required for

one-carbon transfer reactions and hence is essential for both the synthesis of methionine

and for the formylation of methionine that allows it to serve in the ﬁrst step of protein

synthesis. Though not in the context of nitrogen limitation, the possibility that initiation

11

of translation may be modulated by the folate pool has been noted by Gold [19].

As outlined above, primary glutamine depletion is expected to translate into secondary

depletion of pools of one or more glutamine products. Under conditions of depletion, the

speciﬁc regulatory systems for many of these product pathways (e.g. tryptophan and

histidine) are known to increase activity and synthesis of pathway enzymes. Increased

synthesis of these enzymes due to depletion of product pools would consume already scarce

nitrogen without beneﬁt and would result in a futile tug-of-war between speciﬁc regulatory

mechanisms and our postulated general metabolic regulatory role for glutamine. Recent

data from DNA microarrays indicate that transcription of the tryptophan and histidine

biosynthetic operons is, in fact, slightly repressed under nitrogen-limiting conditions, and

hence that this tug-of-war does not occur. For product pools that rise under nitrogen

limitation, repression of enzyme expression is expected. For the speciﬁc product pools

that deplete under nitrogen limitation, the regulatory mechanisms may be designed to

avoid upregulation of enzymes under this condition.

Interestingly, Rose and Yanofsky

[20] described an uncharacterized “override mechanism” that allows repression of the

tryptophan operon under conditions of slow growth, even when tryptophan pools are low.

To conclude, measurement of pools of glutamine products will shed light on how cel-

lular homeostasis is maintained under nitrogen limitation. Comparative measurements

between pool sizes under maximal and slow growth conditions, rather than absolute mea-

surements, will suﬃce for this purpose. Bioassays may therefore be appropriate to measure

relative pools of, e.g. folates [21], and other products for which absolute assays are not

We acknowledge valuable conversations with W. van Heeswijk, J. Ingraham, R. A. Lewis,

practical.

R. Simon, and D. Zimmer.

Abbreviations used:

AICAR – aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide,

12

C55-P – undecaprenyl monophosphate,

CoA – coenzyme A,

ECA – enterobacterial common antigen,

FGAM – 5’-phosphoribosyl-N-formylglycinamidine,

FGAR – 5’-phosphoribosyl-N-formylglycinamide,

Fuc4NAc – 4-acetamido-4,6-dideoxy-D-galactose,

GlcNAc – N-acetyl-D-glucosamine,

LPS – lipopolysaccharide,

ManNAcA – N-acetyl-D-mannosaminuronic acid,

MurNAc – N-acetyl-D-muramic acid,

PRFAR – phosphoribulosylformimino-AICAR-P,

PRPP – phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate,

THF – tetrahydrofolate,

THF(glu)n – folylpolyglutamate,

XMP – xanthosine monophosphate

13

References

[1] Zimmer, D. P., Soupene, E., Lee, H. L., Wendisch, V. F., Khodursky, A. B., Pe-

ter, B. J., Bender, R. A., & Kustu, S. (2000) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 14674-14679.

[2] Tempest, D. W., Meers, J. L., & Brown, C. M. (1970) Biochem. J. 117, 405-407.

[3] Reitzer, L. J. (1990) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, ed. in chief,

Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1, pp. 391-407.

[4] Wohlhueter, R. M., Schutt, H., & Holzer, H. (1973) The Enzymes of Glutamine

Metabolism, eds. Prusiner, S. & Stadtman, E. R. (Academic Press, New York), pp.

45-64.

[5] Ikeda, T. P., Shauger, A. E., & Kustu, S. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. 259, 589-607.

[6] Neidhardt, F. C. (1996) ed. in chief, Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium

(ASM Press, Washington, D. C.).

(Academic Press, New York).

[7] Prusiner, S. & Stadtman, E. R. (1973) eds. The Enzymes of Glutamine Metabolism

[8] Raetz, C. R. H. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, ed. in chief,

Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1, pp. 1035-1063.

[9] Reitzer, L. J. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, ed. in chief,

Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1, pp. 380-390.

[10] Zalkin, H. (1993) Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 66, 203-309.

[11] Stern, R. J., Lee, T. Y., Lee, T. J., Yan, W., Scherman, M. S., Vissa, V. D.,

Kim, S. K., Wanner, B. L., & McNeil, M. R. (1999) Microbiol. 145, 663-671.

14

[12] Davis, R. H., Morris, D. R., & Coﬃno, P (1992) Microbiol. Rev. 56, 280-290.

[13] Kern, D., Potier, S., Lapointe, J., & Boulanger, Y. (1980) Biochim. Biophys. Acta

607, 65-80.

Sci. 93, 6953-6958.

pp. 612-636.

[14] Ibba, M., Hong, K. W., Sherman, J. M., Sever, S., & Soll, D. (1996) Proc. Nat. Acad.

[15] Cronan, J. E. Jr. and Rock, C. O. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella ty-

phimurium, ed. in chief, Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1,

[16] Jackowski, S. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, ed. in chief,

Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1, pp. 687-694.

[17] Park, J. T. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, ed. in chief,

Neidhardt, F. C. (ASM Press, Washington, D. C.) Vol. 1, pp. 48-57.

[18] Meier-Dieter, U., Starman, R., Barr, K., Mayer, H., & Rick, P. D. (1990) J. Biol.

Chem. 265, 13490-13497.

[19] Gold, L. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 57, 199-233.

[20] Rose, J. K. & Yanofsky, C. (1972) J. Mol. Biol. 69, 103-18.

[21] Basso, J., Tiganos, E., & Herrington, M. B. (1993) Mol. Gen. Genet. 238, 218-224.

[22] Boehlein, S. K., Richards, N. G. J., & Schuster, S. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,

7450-7457.

[23] Miller, R. E. & Stadtman, E. R. (1972) J. Biol. Chem. 247, 7407-7419.

[24] Klem, T. J. & Davisson, V. J. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 5177-5186.

15

[25] Srinivasan, P. R. (1973) in The Enzymes of Glutamine Metabolism, eds. Prusiner, S.

& Stadtman, E. R. (Academic Press, New York) pp. 545-568.

[26] Kim, J. H., Krahm, J. M., Tomchick, D. R., Smith, J. L., & Zalkin, H. (1996) J.

Biol. Chem. 271, 15549-15557.

28, 2459-2471.

[27] Schendel, F. J., Mueller, E., Stubbe, J., Shiau, A., & Smith, J. M. (1989) Biochemistry

[28] Zalkin, H. & Truitt, C. D. (1977) J. Biol. Chem. 252, 5431-5436.

[29] Meister, A. (1989) Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 62, 315-74.

[30] Levitsky, A. (1973) in The Enzymes of Glutamine Metabolism, eds. Prusiner, S. &

Stadtman, E. R. (Academic Press, New York), pp. 505-521.

[31] Badet, B. Vermoote, P. Haumont, P.-Y., Lederer, F., & Le Goﬃc, F. (1987) Bio-

chemistry 26, 1940-1948.

[32] Viswanath, V. K., Green, J. M., & Nichols, B. P. (1995) J. Bacteriol. 177 5918-5923.

[33] Kuramitsu, S., Hiromi, K., Hayashi, H., Morino, Y., & Kagamiyama, H. (1990)

Biochemistry 29, 5469-5476.

[34] Matsuhashi, M. & Strominger, J. L. (1966) J. Biol. Chem. 241, 4738-4744.

[35] Hsu, L. C., Okamoto, M., Snell, E. E. (1989) Biochimie 71, 477-489.

[36] Powell, J. T. & Morrison, J. F. (1978) Eur. J. Biochem. 87, 391-400.

[37] Peterkofsky, B. & C. Gilvarg (1961) J. Biol. Chem. 236, 1432-1438.

[38] Abdelal, A. T. & Nainan, O. V. (1979) J. Bacteriol. 137, 1040-1042.

16

[39] Bognar, A. L., Osborne, C., Shane, B., Singer, S. C., & Ferone, R. (1985) J. Biol.

Chem. 260, 5625-5630.

[40] Alibhai, M. & Villafranca, J. J. (1994) Biochemistry 33, 682-686.

[41] Watanabe, K., Murata, K., & Kimura, A. (1986) Agric. Biol. Chem. 50, 1925-1930.

[42] Huang, C. S., Moore, W. R, & Meister, A. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 85, 2464-

[43] Doublet, M., Heijenoort, J. v., & Mengin-Lecreulx, D. (1994) Biochemistry 33, 5285-

2468.

5290.

[44] Baich, A. (1969) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 192, 462-467.

[45] Smith, C. J., Deutch, A. H, & Rushlow, K. E. (1984) J. Bacteriol. 157, 545-551.

17

Enzyme

Enzymes of Glutamine Metabolism
KM (mM)

Other Substrate(s)

Pathway(s)

Amino acids:
Asparagine synthetase (asnB)
Glutamate synthase (gltB,D)
Imidazole glycerol-P synthase (hisF,H)
Anthranilate synthase (trpD,E)

Nucleotide bases:
Glutamine PRPP amidotransferase (purF)
FGAM synthetase (purL)
GMP synthetase (guaA)
Carbamyl-P synthase (carA,B)
CTP synthetase (pyrG)

Amino sugar:
Glucosamine 6-P synthase (glmS)

Coenzyme:
Aminodeoxychorismate synthase (pabA)

0.66 [22]
0.4 [23]
0.24 [24]
0.5 [25]

Aspartate, ATP
2-oxoglutarate
PRFAR
Chorismate

Asparagine
Glutamate
Histidine
Tryptophan

PRPP
FGAR, ATP

1.7 [10, 26]
10.8 [27]
0.16 - 0.72 [28] XMP, ATP
0.4 [10, 29]
0.16-1 [30]

HCO
UTP, ATP

−
3 , ATP(2)

AMP, GMP
AMP, GMP
GMP
UTP, CTP, Arginine
CTP

0.4 [31]

D-fructose 6-P

Glucosamine 6-P

1.6 [32]

Chorismate

Folic acid

Table 1: Enzymes of glutamine metabolism. The Km for CTP synthetase ranges from 0.16
mM with a saturating GTP concentration to 1 mM in the absence of GTP [30]. FGAM
synthetase is inhibited by glutamate according to Km ≃ 0.06(1 + [glutamate]/[1.6mM])
[27], in the table we have taken [glutamate] = 20 mM. GMP synthetase is sensitive to
pH, with Km = 0.16 mM at pH = 7.5 and Km = 0.72 mM at pH = 8.2 [28].

18

Enzyme

KM (mM)

Other Substrate(s)

Pathway(s)

Enzymes of Glutamate Metabolism

Transaminase (TA) reactions:
Branched-chain-amino-acid TA (ilvE)

Acetylornithine TA (argD)
Aspartate TA (aspC)
TDP-4-oxo-6-deoxy-D-glucose TA (rﬀA)
Histidinol-phosphate TA (hisF,H)
Aromatic-amino-acid TA (tyrB)

Succinyldiaminopimelate TA (dapC)
Phosphoserine TA (serC)

Non-transaminase reactions:
N-acetylglutamate synthase (argA)
Dihydrofolate synthase (folC)
Folylpolyglutamate synthase (folC)
Glutamine synthase (glnA)
Glutamate-cysteine lygase (gshA)
Glutamate racemase (murI)
Glutamate 5-kinase (proB)

Alanine, Valine
Iso-leucine
Leucine
Arginine
Aspartate

2-keto-isovalerate
2-keto-3-methyl-valerate
2-keto-4-methyl-pentanoate
N-acetylglutamyl-phosphate
Oxaloacetic acid
dTDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-glucose TDP-fucose (ECA)
Imidazole acetol-phosphate
Phenylpyruvate
p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
N-succinyl-2-amino-6-ketopimelate
3-phospho-hydroxypyruvate

Histidine
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Lysine, Diaminopimelate
Serine

24 [33]
5.1 [34]
10.4 [35]
0.28 [36]

5.2 [37]

5 [38]
3.9 [39]
0.3 [39]
5.5 [40]
0.5-1.7 [41, 42]
4 [43]
7-10 [44] 33 [45] ATP

Acetyl-CoA
7,8-dihydropteroate, ATP
THF(glu)n, ATP
NH3, ATP
Cysteine, ATP

Arginine
Folic acid
Folic acid
Glutamine
Glutathione
Peptidoglycan
Proline

Table 2: Enzymes of glutamate metabolism. A putative transaminase acting directly from
pyruvate to alanine has not been puriﬁed [9]. The histidinol-phosphate transaminase is
competitively inhibited by imidazole acetol-phosphate; Km = 7 mM at non-inhibiting
concentrations [35]. N-acetylglutamate synthase Km = 5mM in the absence of arginine,
and increases with arginine concentration [38].

19

2-oxoglutarate

transaminase
products

L-glutamine

L-glutamate

pyrimidines

purines

amino
acids

glucosamine

folates

NH

3

proline

arginine

Figure 1: Nitrogen central intermediates L-glutamine and L-glutamate. Under nitrogen-
limited conditions, nitrogen is incorporated via the GS/GOGAT cycle as shown. The
metabolism of glutamine is the source of only ∼ 12% of the nitrogen content of the cell.
Nevertheless, L-glutamine is required for the ﬁrst dedicated step in the biosynthesis of
monomeric precursors of all the cell’s macromolecules - purines and pyrimidines for nucleic
In contrast, L-
acids, amino acids for proteins, and glucosamine for surface polymers.
glutamate is generally required late in biosynthetic pathways. For a more complete listing
of reactions requiring L-glutamine or L-glutamate, see Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

Figure 1

20

Tryptophan

chorismate

anthranilate 
synthase

L-glutamine

L-glutamate
  + pyruvate

anthranilate

(4 steps)

L-tryptophan

Figure 2

21

Figure 2: Tryptophan biosynthetic pathway. The ﬁrst dedicated step of tryptophan
biosynthesis requires glutamine.

Purines

PRPP

L-glutamine + H

O

2

L-glutamate + PP

i

glutamine
PRPP
amidotransferase

5-phosphoribosylamine

(10 steps)

inosine-monophosphate

(2 steps)

(2 steps)

GMP

AMP

Figure 3

22

Figure 3: Purine biosynthetic pathway. The ﬁrst dedicated step of purine biosynthesis
requires glutamine. The fourth step also requires glutamine, as does the ﬁnal step in
GMP biosynthesis.

L-glutamine

L-glutamate

+ 2 ADP + P

i

Pyrimidines

-

HCO 3 + 2 ATP

carbamyl-P
synthase

carbamyl phosphate

(7 steps)

(3 steps)

L-arginine

UTP

CTP 
synthetase

L-glutamine + ATP

L-glutamate
+ ADP + P

i

CTP

Figure 4

23

Figure 4: Pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway. Glutamine is required for the biosynthesis
of carbamyl phosphate, which is a parent compound for both pyrimidine and arginine
biosynthesis. The ﬁnal step in CTP biosynthesis also requires glutamine.

Cell-Surface Polymers

D-fructose 6-P

L-glutamine

L-glutamate

glucosamine 6-P
synthase

D-glucosamine 6-P

(3 steps)

UDP-GlcNAc

lipid A

peptidoglycan

O antigen
enterobacterial common antigen

Figure 5

24

Figure 5: Cell-surface polymer biosynthetic pathways. Glutamine is required for the
ﬁrst dedicated step of the biosyntheses of peptidoglycan (murein), lipid A, O antigen, and
enterobacterial common antigen.

Folic Acid

chorismate

L-glutamine

L-glutamate

aminodeoxychorismate
synthase

4-amino-4-deoxychorismate

(4 steps)

tetrahydrofolate

Figure 6

25

Figure 6:
requires glutamine.

Folic-acid biosynthesis. The ﬁrst dedicated step of folic-acid biosynthesis

L-glutamine

L-glutamate
+ AICAR

imidazole glycerol-P
synthase

D-erythro-imidazole-glycerol-phosphate

Histidine

PRPP + ATP

(4 steps)

PRFAR

(5 steps)

L-histidine

Figure 7

26

Figure 7: Histidine biosynthesis. Glutamine is required for the ﬁfth dedicated step of
histidine biosynthesis.

p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate

L-glutamate

2-oxoglutarate

aromatic-amino-acid
transaminase

Tyrosine

chorismate

(2 steps)

L-tyrosine

Figure 8

27

Figure 8: Tyrosine biosynthesis. Glutamate is required at the last step in the pathway
for a transaminase reaction.

Arginine

L-glutamate

acetyl-CoA

Co-A

N-acetylglutamate
synthase

N-acetyl-L-glutamate

(2 steps)

N-acetylglutamate semialdehyde

L-glutamate

2-oxoglutarate

acetylornithine
transaminase

N-alpha-acetylornithine

carbamyl

phosphate

P

i

L-ornithine

citrulline

(2 steps)

polyamines

Figure 9

L-arginine + fumarate

Figure 9: Arginine biosynthetic pathway. Glutamate is the precursor and is also required
at the fourth step for a transaminase reaction. Ornithine is a precursor for both arginine
and the polyamines putrescine and spermidine. The co-reactant with ornithine, carbamyl
phosphate, is a direct product of glutamine (see Fig. 4)

28

phosphoenolpyruvate

UDP-MurNAc

UDP-GlcNAc

UDP-GlcNAc
enolpyruvoyl
transferase

UDP-N-acetyl-3-

              (1-carboxyvinyl)-glucosamine

Pi

NADPH

NADP

UDP-MurNAc
dehydrogenase

UDP-MurNAc

Figure 10

Figure 10: Biosynthesis of UDP-MurNAc from UDP-GlcNAc. UDP-MurNAc is required
to initiate synthesis of peptidoglycan.

29

Enterobacterial Common Antigen

UDP-GlcNAc

C55

-P

UMP
 

UDP-ManNAcA

55C

-PP-GlcNAc

55C

-PP-GlcNAc-ManNAcA

TDP-Fuc4NAc

UDP

TDP

55C 

-PP-GlcNAc-ManNAcA-Fuc4NAC

ECA

Figure 11

30

Figure 11: Biosynthesis of enterobacterial common antigen (ECA). UDP-GlcNAc, a
product of glutamine, is required to inititiate ECA synthesis.

