1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physical Constraints and Functional Characteristics of Transcription
Factor-DNA Interaction

Ulrich Gerland∗, J. David Moroz†∗, and Terence Hwa

Department of Physics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319

(Dated: September 23, 2013)

We study theoretically the binding of transcription factors to their target sequences in bacteria,
focusing particularly on the statistical interaction of the factors with the genomic background.
An upper bound on the binding speciﬁcity of a factor is derived by requiring that the factors not
be trapped kinetically by a small fraction of preferred background sequences. Together with the
requirement of equilibrium occupation at reasonable cellular factor concentrations, we obtain a
range for the physically-allowed factor-DNA interactions. Within this allowed range, we identify
a special subset of interactions for which the threshold of factor binding is completely controlled
by the target sequences. We argue that this special class of interactions is highly desirable since
it makes the strength of factor-DNA binding individually programmable for each regulated target.
We expect a large number of transcription factors to belong to this special class, and discuss their
thermodynamic signatures.

With the rapid advance in the sequencing and an-
notation of entire genomes, the task of understanding
the associated regulatory networks becomes increasingly
prominent. Both studies of exemplary gene circuits and
general design principles are desirable and mutually ben-
eﬁcial. The elementary molecular component in gene reg-
ulation is the interaction of transcription factors with
their target sites on the DNA, also known as opera-
tors [1]. A study of the design of factor-DNA interaction
is a ﬁrst step in a ‘bottom-up approach’ to regulatory
networks. A functional factor-DNA system requires the
factors to be able to ﬁnd their target sites rapidly and
bind to them with a high probability; these constitute
the minimal physical conditions on the design. Addi-
tional functional requirements arise in the context of gene
regulation. In the present theoretical analysis, we ﬁrst
perform a biophysical study of the physical constraints
and then compare the functional performance of diﬀer-
ent conceivable designs to identify the optimal design.
To focus our discussion, we limit ourselves exclusively to
the case of bacterial transcription factors, which are best
characterized experimentally.

The biological function of the binding of a transcrip-
tion factor to its operator is to up- or down-regulate the
level of gene expression as the concentration of the fac-
tor in the cell changes. For instance, in response to a
change in the environment, transcription factors are ei-
ther newly produced or existing factors become activated
or deactivated by small inducer molecules (a prominent
example is cAMP for the catabolism regulator CRP in
E. coli [2]). The factor-DNA interaction partly consists of
a general, non-speciﬁc electrostatic attraction and partly
of basepair-speciﬁc hydrogen bonds. Speciﬁcity of the in-

∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Present address: NEC Research Institute, 4 Independence Way,
Princeton, NJ 08540

teraction can be deﬁned quantitatively as the fraction of
sequences a factor selects in a pool of random sequences.
For proper function, the interaction needs to be suﬃ-
ciently speciﬁc such that above a desired factor concen-
tration, one of the factors can correctly identify its target
sequence among the vast majority of non-operator se-
quences in the genome. On the other hand, higher speci-
ﬁcity also has negative consequences:
it increases not
only the binding energy to the targets, but also the bind-
ing energies to a small fraction of non-operator sequences
that have spurious, partial sequence similarity with the
targets. (The existence of such spurious sequence similar-
ity is statistically unavoidable in a large genome). When
the speciﬁcity is too large, these sequences with spurious
similarity can serve as kinetic traps which prevent the
factors from reaching the target in a reasonable amount
of time. The bulk of this paper is devoted to a quantita-
tive analysis of the conﬂicting demands of high speciﬁcity
needed for proper discrimination and an upper bound on
speciﬁcity required for kinetic accessibility.

Von Hippel and Berg have already discussed many is-
sues related to the speciﬁcity of protein-DNA interaction
in a series of seminal articles [3, 4, 5]. Our study is
built ﬁrmly upon their work, but includes the additional
issue of kinetic accessibility which cannot be taken for
granted due to spurious traps present statistically in the
genomic background. In our analysis, this complicated
but important dynamics issue is treated approximately
by a much simpler quasi-thermodynamic consideration.
In particular, we require the factor-DNA interaction to be
far from the “glass phase” which is characterized by expo-
nentially slow dynamics. For the sake of concreteness, we
apply our general approach to a simple two-state model
of protein-DNA interaction originally introduced by Berg
and von Hippel [4, 5]. We use the above-mentioned physi-
cal constraints to deduce limits on the model parameters,
thereby obtaining a quantitative estimate of the allowed
range of binding speciﬁcities.

Finally, we examine the functional demands on the
factor-DNA binding: We note that the same factor may
be required to bind at diﬀerent regulatory sites at diﬀer-
ent thresholds of factor concentrations. We suggest that
an optimal design of the factor-DNA interaction should
allow the binding strength (and hence the threshold fac-
tor concentration) to be “programmable”, i.e., be con-
trolled simply by the choice of the binding sequence. We
show that this programmability condition singles out a
narrow range of parameters within the much larger pa-
rameter space allowed by the physical constraints. We
expect “programmability” to be a design principle re-
spected by a wide class of transcription factors, and dis-
cuss our prediction in terms of thermodynamic observ-
ables.

Model of Factor-DNA Interaction

Much of our knowledge on the details of transcription
factor-DNA interaction is derived from extensive bio-
chemical experiments on a few exemplary systems, dating
back to pioneering work in the late 70’s [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]
and continuing through recent years [12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
Furthermore, detailed structural information is available
for many transcription factors from various structural
families [17]. Based on this knowledge, quantitative
models of factor-DNA interaction have been established
[3, 4, 5, 9, 13]. Together with the recent availability of
genomic sequences, these models can be used to charac-
terize the thermodynamics of transcription factors with
genomic DNA in a cell. We brieﬂy review the primary
model of factor-DNA interaction in this section, which
serves to introduce our notation and formulate the prob-
lem.

Biochemical and structural experiments have estab-
lished ﬁrmly that (i) transcription factors bind strongly
to the DNA regardless of its sequence due to electrostatic
interaction alone, and (ii) additional sequence-speciﬁc
binding energy can be gained (via hydrogen bonds) if
the binding sequence is somewhat close to the recog-
nition sequences of the factor. Let the binding energy
of a factor to a sequence ~S = {S1, S2, ..., SL} of L nu-
cleotides Si ∈ {A, C, G, T} be E[~S]. Then given the ge-
nomic sequence {S1, S2, ..., SΓ} of length Γ, and assum-
ing that the factor is bound to the DNA essentially all
the time1, all thermodynamic quantities regarding this
factor can be computed from the partition function2

1 In vivo measurements for the case of lac-repressor found less than
10% of the factors were unbound [8]. This agrees well with an
estimate based on a typical prokaryotic cell volume of 3 µm3, a
genome length of 5·106 bases, and a non-speciﬁc binding constant
on the order of 104 M−1 under physiological conditions [6], which
yields a fraction of unbound factors at a few percent level.

2 One should also include the reverse-complement of the genomic
sequence in the actual evaluation of the partition function Z. In

2

Γ

j=1 e−βE[~Sj], where β−1 = kBT ≈ 0.6 kcal/mol
Z =
and ~Sj denotes the subsequence of the genomic sequence
from position j to j + L − 1.

P

The form of the binding energy E[~S] has been stud-
ied experimentally for several transcription factors [12,
13, 14, 15]. In particular, recent experiments on the fac-
tor Mnt from bacteriophage P22 [12] support the earlier
model [4] that the contribution of each nucleotide in the
binding sequence to the total binding energy is approxi-
mately independent and additive, i.e.,

E[~S] =

Ei(Si) .

(1)

L

Xi=1

For the factors Mnt, Cro, and λ-repressor, the param-
eters of the “energy matrix” Ei(Si) have actually been
determined experimentally by in vitro measurements of
equilibrium binding constants K[~S] ∝ e−βE[ ~S] for ev-
ery single-nucleotide mutant of the best binding sequence
~S∗ [12, 14, 15].
(For these factors, L = 15 ∼ 20 nu-
cleotides.) While the simple form of the binding energy
(1) will certainly not hold for all transcription factors,
and di- or tri-nucleotide correlation eﬀects are likely to
be important in many cases (e.g., to some extent for lac-
repressor [16]), the key results of our study are not sensi-
tive to such correlations as long as there is a wide range
of binding energies for diﬀerent binding sequences.

Careful experiments with lac-repressor [7, 10, 16] have
shown that the sequence-speciﬁc binding energy E[~S] is
replaced by a non-speciﬁc energy Ens if ~S is suﬃciently
far from the best sequence ~S∗ that the binding energy ac-
cording to (1) exceeds Ens. However, for the lac-repressor
the threshold for non-speciﬁc binding is quite high3, with
Ens being ∼ 10 kcal/mol above the energy of the best
binder, E[~S∗]. In general, it is believed that non-speciﬁc
binding does not occur until the binding sequence is at
least 4 to 5 mismatches from the best binder. With Ens
in such a high range, it does not make a signiﬁcant dif-
ference to our ﬁnal result (see below). Thus we will
not include the eﬀect of nonspeciﬁc binding here, and
take the binding energy to be given by the form (1) for
all sequences. For simplicity, we will choose our energy
scale such that E[~S∗] = 0 for the best binder. Thus,
Ei(Si) = 0 if Si = S∗
i . For the
three well-studied transcription factors, the non-zero en-
tries of Ei(S) are typically in the range 1 ∼ 3kBT .

i , Ei(Si) > 0 if Si 6= S∗

order not to make the notation too complicated, we extend the
deﬁnition of “genomic sequence” to include its complement.
3 But Ens is still low enough to keep the factor bound to the DNA

almost all of the time.

Functional

site

k
 
0
4

k
 
0
3

k
 
0
2

k
 
0
1

e
m
o
n
e
g
 
2
2
P
 
n
o
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

 
0
0

6

10

4

10

2

10

≈Ens

10
5
E  [kBT]

≈Ens

0

10

0

10 20 30 40
E  [kBT]

FIG. 1 For the purpose of transcription factor binding, the
genomic DNA may be treated as a random DNA plus a target
site with binding energy close to 0: (a) Energy landscape for
Mnt on the bacteriophage P22 DNA using the energy matrix
determined in Ref. [12]. The landscape appears to be random,
e.g. no “funnel” guides the factor to the target site. The spa-
tial correlation function of the landscape (not shown) decays
quickly to zero beyond the scale of L = 17 for this case. Ran-
dom energy landscapes are also found for the other two factors
with known energy matrices (not shown). (b) Histogram of
binding energies for Cro [solid line] on the E. coli genome (con-
tains no target for Cro), together with the average histogram
[circles] for Cro on random nucleotide sequences (synthesized
with the same length and single-nucleotide frequencies as the
E. coli genome). Except for statistical ﬂuctuations at the low
energy end, the histograms are indistinguishable from each
other. In both ﬁgures, the approximate position of the non-
speciﬁc energy is indicated.

Genomic Background and Target Recognition

The binding of a factor to its targets is strongly aﬀected
by its interaction with the genomic background. In order
to characterize this interaction statistically, we examined
the “energy landscape” and the histogram of the binding
energies for the factors with known energy matrices along
their natural genomes; see Fig. 1. We ﬁnd that, as far as
the interaction with transcription factors are concerned,
we may model the real genome by one or more target
sites interspersed in a random genomic background (see
the caption of Fig. 1 for details). For simplicity, let us
consider a single target sequence ~St.

It is convenient to split the partition function for the
factor into a contribution from the target site and an-
other contribution Zb due to binding to the “random
background”. The latter can be written down formally
as

Zb =

e−βE[ ~S]

X~S∈S(Γ)

(2)

where S(Γ) denotes a given collection of Γ random nu-
cleotide sequences of length L, drawn according to the
frequency pS for each nucleotide S. Let the binding en-
ergy to the target sequence be E[~St] ≡ Et (which is ex-
pected to be close to zero). Then Z = e−βEt + Zb in
our model, and the probability that a factor binds to the

3

(3)

target becomes

Pt =

1
1 + eβ(Et−Fb) ,

where Fb = −kBT ln Zb is the eﬀective binding energy (or
free energy) of the entire genomic background. Eq. (3) is
a sigmoidal function of Et with a (soft) threshold at Fb,
i.e., a factor binds (with probability Pt > 0.5) if Et < Fb.
Of course, there is usually more than one factor present
in the cell. The generalization of the binding probabil-
ity to an arbitrary number of factors NTF is the Fermi
distribution [18] since each site on the genome can accom-
modate at most one transcription factor due to physical
exclusion. The Fermi distribution has the same form
as Eq. (3) except that the value of the soft threshold
for binding, Fb, is replaced by the “chemical potential”
µ = Fb + kBT ln NTF. Since the number of factors in a
cell is typically no more than N max
TF ∼ 1000, the eﬀective
binding energy of the background is constrained to

Fb > −kBT ln N max

TF ∼ −7 kBT

(4)

in order to allow at least the best possible target site
(with Et = E[~S∗] ≡ 0) to be occupied at the maximal
factor concentration.

How do we calculate the background binding energy
Fb? From its deﬁnition, it is clear that Fb is a random
variable, and its precise value will depend on the actual
collection of sequences S(Γ); see (2). We are interested
in the typical value of Fb; a reasonable approximation
is its statistical average, Fb ≡ −kBT ln Zb.
[We use an
overbar to denote averages over an ensemble of diﬀerent
sequence collections S(Γ).] Computing the average ln Zb
is however diﬃcult to do for an arbitrary energy matrix
Ei(S) short of performing numerical simulations. An al-
ternative is to compute the ensemble average of Zb,

Zb = Γ

e−βEi(S) pS

(5)

L





Yi=1

XS=A,C,G,T



with the single-nucleotide frequencies pS, and assume

βFb ≈ − ln Zb = − ln Γ + L · ln ζb ,

(6)

b

is the quantity in the bracket in (5). This
for example, the approach taken by Stormo and

where ζ−1
is,
Fields [13] in their analysis of the factor Mnt4.

The relation (6) is based on the so-called “annealed
approximation” ln Z ≈ ln Zb which is valid for Γ → ∞
but not always appropriate for ﬁnite Γ. A great deal is
known about systems of the type deﬁned by the partition

4 In Ref. [13], the energy scale was in fact shifted by ln ζb per base

such that Zb = Γ.

function Zb in (2), generically known as the Random En-
ergy Model or REM5, introduced and ﬁrst solved by Der-
rida [19]. It is known that the annealed approximation
breaks down when the entropy of the system approaches
0. This is accompanied by a phase transition of the sys-
tem to a “glass phase” which is marred by exponentially
slow dynamics. As we will elaborate in the next section,
proper function of the transcription factor requires the
factor-DNA interaction to be far from the glass transi-
tion, so that the annealed approximation is justiﬁed. We
will thus take the relation (6) for granted, and study how
Fb (and through it the probability of target binding, Pt,
and various other quantities) depends on the energy ma-
trix Ei(S), the length of the binding sequence L, and the
genome size Γ.

It will be useful to caricaturize the energy matrix E so
that we may extract the salient features of the behavior
that are not biased by the detailed form of a particular
energy matrix. We will adopt the two-state model origi-
nally introduced by Berg and von Hippel, characterizing
all of the non-zero entries of the signiﬁcant positions6 of
the energy matrix by a single value, i.e.,

βEi(S) =

if S = S∗
0
i
ε > 0 if S 6= S∗
i

(cid:26)

,

(7)

where, ε is a dimensionless “discrimination energy” (in
units of kBT ). Note that ε describes the preference of
the factor for the optimal binding sequence ~S∗, and is a
crucial parameter controlling the speciﬁcity of the factor.
The two-state model (7) allows an explicit evaluation
of the background energy Fb via the formulae (5) and (6).
Assuming for simplicity equal single-nucleotide frequen-
cies in the background (i.e., pS = 1/4), one ﬁnds ζb in
(6) to be ζb(ε) = 4/(1 + 3e−ε). Note that ζb(ε) is in the
range between 1 ≤ ζb ≤ 4, and can be viewed as the ef-
fective size of the nucleotide “alphabet”. The maximum
value ζb = 4 is attained if the energy matrix has inﬁnite
discrimination, ε → ∞, while no discrimination can be
achieved at ε = 0 where ζb = 1.

Kinetic Traps and Target Accessibility

In order to carry out their function properly, transcrip-
tion factors not only need to have a high equilibrium
binding probability to their targets, but also must be

5 Note that in many applications including protein folding [20],
the REM was introduced to approximate the random background
interaction. Factor-DNA interaction as deﬁned by (2) represents
one of the few systems for which the REM description is directly
applicable.

6 Note that the energy matrices for most factors contain a number
of (ﬁxed) positions which have no strong preference for any of the
nucleotides. We will not consider these positions in the ensuing
discussion of the two-state model, and will use L to refer to the
total number of signiﬁcant positions.

4

able to locate it in a reasonably short time (e.g.
less
than a few minutes) after they have been activated by an
inducer or freshly produced by a ribosome. This consti-
tutes a constraint on the “search dynamics” of transcrip-
tion factors. Early in vitro experiments [9, 10, 11] have
shown that a factor’s search proceeds by a combination
of 1D and 3D diﬀusion, involving “sliding” of the fac-
tor along the DNA backbone at short length scales and
“hopping” between diﬀerent segments of DNA through
the cytoplasm. For a given DNA concentration, there
is an optimal combination of 1D and 3D diﬀusion which
maximizes the eﬃciency of the search process [9]. It is
believed that the observed factor-DNA aﬃnity yields a
nearly optimal combination for the DNA concentration
inside the cell, with the search mode being mostly 3D
diﬀusion [11].

In these studies of factor dynamics, binding of the fac-
tor to the genomic background was assumed to occur at
a single energy value, namely Ens [9, 11]. On the other
hand, the “energy landscape” of Fig. 1(a) clearly shows
that there exist large variations in the binding energies
below Ens. Such variations lead to isolated sites with ex-
ceptionally low binding energies (deep energy valleys) in
the genomic background and can drastically impede the
search process regardless of whether it is in the 1D or 3D
mode: the factors will be trapped most of the time in
these valleys, if the energy diﬀerence between the valleys
and their surroundings are suﬃciently large (see below).
As a consequence, thermal equilibrium cannot be reached
within reasonable time. Thus to understand the binding
of the factor to its target, we need to characterize the
eﬀect of kinetic trapping due to variations in the binding
energies of the genomic background.

A detailed quantitative study of the search dynamics
in the cell is however diﬃcult to carry out. The large
scale organization of the bacterial DNA with architec-
tural proteins is complicated and largely unknown — the
dense packing of the DNA inside the cell suggests that it
forms a 3-dimensional network as illustrated in Fig. 2(a),
with the network conformation changing with time in
an unknown fashion. Here, we will adopt an alternative
strategy which gives us a useful constraint on the dy-
namics independent of its details: First, we assume that
the factor-DNA interaction is such that thermal equilib-
rium can be established in reasonable time, despite the
existence of variations in the binding energies along the
genome. Then, we determine the magnitude of the vari-
ations where this assumption breaks down, thereby ob-
taining a constraint on the factor-DNA interaction im-
posed by the search dynamics. In the remainder of this
section, we develop this approach.

In the absence of any target site, the thermal expecta-
tion value of a factor’s binding energy to a sequence in the
~S∈S(Γ) E[~S] e−βE[ ~S]/Zb in
random collection is E0 =
equilibrium, which can be computed as E0 = − ∂
∂β ln Zb
in the annealed approximation. Note that E0 is in be-
tween the minimal binding energy, min~S∈S E[~S], and the

P

Γ/Γ

0

∆

e
m
o
n
e
g
 
n
o
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

0

E0

Eb

Energy

FIG. 2 Schematic illustration of the search dynamics: (a)
A transcription factor (represented by a solid ellipse) moves
among genomic DNA (lines) via a combination of 1D diﬀu-
sion (along the genome) and 3D diﬀusion (hopping between
nearby segments) as illustrated by the arrows. The open cir-
cles indicate the potential kinetic traps which are sites that
are preferred by the factor in a random background. (b) Sim-
pliﬁed background energy landscape, with Γ0 preferred back-
ground sites of energy E0, separated typically by Γ/Γ0 bases.
The binding energy of a typical site in the genomic back-
ground is Eb. To insure kinetic accessibility, we must have
Eb − E0 <∼ 5 ∼ 10kB T .

P

~S∈S E[~S]/Γ. This is a
average binding energy, E ≡
manifestation of the fact that sequences with very low
binding energies do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the
partition function Zb because there are too few of them,
while sequences with energy close to E have too small
Boltzmann weights e−βE to contribute. The dominant
contribution to Zb stems from the sites with binding en-
ergy E0 [18]. We can view these sites as being preferen-
tially selected by the factor out of the entire collection of
random sequences S(Γ), when the system is in thermal
equilibrium. The total number Γ0 of these preferred sites
can be obtained by exploiting the dominant contribution
of these sites to the partition sum, i.e., Zb = Γ0 e−βE0,
or alternatively from

Fb = E0 − kBT ln Γ0

(8)

(kB ln Γ0 is known as the “entropy” of the system).

We next observe that in order for the system to be
in equilibrium, a factor must be able to move between a
preferred site and its surrounding within a short time (see
Fig. 2a). This requires that the diﬀerences between the
binding energy of the preferred sites, E0, and the lowest
binding energy of the typical surrounding sites, denoted
by Eb, is not larger than a maximally tolerable activation
barrier (see Fig. 2b),

Eb − E0 ≡ ∆ < ∆max .

(9)

Otherwise, the preferred sites would become kinetic traps
that impede the factor from ﬁnding the true target. Since
the activation time to overcome an energy diﬀerence ∆
grows as eβ∆, the maximally tolerable barrier is not likely
to exceed the range ∆max = 5 ∼ 10kBT .

5

Mnt
-1.2
6.2

Fb
H

Cro
-1.6
9.4

λ-repressor
-0.8
8.8

TABLE I Relative entropy H and background free energy Fb
for Mnt, Cro, and λ-repressor, in units of kBT ≈ 0.6 kcal/mol.

A naive estimate of Eb is the average binding energy
E. This is likely to be an overestimate given the time-
dependence of the DNA network conﬁguration and the
3D nature of the search process. A lower bound on Eb
can be obtained by noting that the contribution to the
total free energy from Γ typical sites cannot exceed the
full free energy of the background7, and thus, we have
Eb − kBT ln Γ > Fb. When combined with (9) this yields
the condition Fb − E0 + kBT ln Γ < ∆max, which can be
rewritten using Eq. (8) as

H ≡ ln(Γ/Γ0) < β∆max ,

(10)

where H is known as the “relative entropy” (in units of
kB). In fact, H has been used to characterize the (spe-
ciﬁc) information content of the energy matrix [12, 13]
and is a direct measure of binding speciﬁcity. Our con-
straint (10) thus sets an upper bound on the speciﬁcity.
Note that this bound is substantially below the maxi-
mal possible value for H which occurs when Γ0 = 1.
(For Γ = 107 the maximum is H ≈ 16.)
In fact, if
the factor-DNA interaction is such that Γ0 = 1, then
the annealed approximation is no longer valid (since the
partition sum is dominated by a single term).
In this
case, the thermodynamics of the system is marked by a
“phase transition” to the glass phase with exponentially
slow dynamics [21, 22]. Intuitively, it seems undesirable
to have the factor-background interaction be in the glass
phase for eﬀective gene regulation. The upper bound we
obtained above for H provides an explicit illustration of
this intuitive preference. We note that the speciﬁcities
computed for the factors with known energy matrices in-
deed lie within our bound; see Table I.

Physical Constraints and Functional Demands

We now seek to understand the combined eﬀect of the
thermodynamic occupancy and kinetic accessibility con-
ditions on the allowed parameters for factor-DNA inter-
action. To this end, we apply the constraints to the ex-
plicit two-state model (7). Within the annealed approxi-
mation (6), the thermodynamic occupancy condition (4)

7 Here we have assumed that the non-speciﬁc binding energy Ens
is suﬃciently large that it does neither dominate the thermody-
namics, nor the dynamics. We will verify this assumption below
for the relevant parameter regimes.

2

10

1

10

10

0
0

30

20

10

L

kinetically
not accessible

N*

TF

3

10

9
=

2.5, L

ε=

5
1
=
2, L
ε=

ε=1.3, L=20
ε=1.7, L=20

thermodynamically

0
0

1

not occupied

2
3
ε [kBT]

4

5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

r*

(a) Plot of the two bounds (11) [dashed line] and
FIG. 3
(12) [solid line] as a function of the discrimination energy
ε, using Γ = 107, N max
TF = 1000 and a representative value
of ∆max = 7kBT . The dotted line indicates L1(ε, NTF = 1),
and the symbols mark the parameter sets whose characteristic
is shown in (b). See text for discussion.
(b) Plot of the
functional characteristic N ∗
TF(r∗) for four diﬀerent parameter
sets indicated by the symbols in (a).

implies

L > L1(ε) =

ln Γ − ln N max
TF
ln ζb(ε)

.

(11)

TF < ζL

This condition is equivalent to Γ/N max
b , and ex-
presses the fact that the target length L must be suﬃ-
ciently long so that the probability of ﬁnding a particu-
lar L-mer in a random sequence of character size ζb and
length Γ/N max
TF is small. On the other hand, the kinetic
constraint (10) can be expressed as an upper bound on
the length of the binding sequence: For the two-state
model, we ﬁnd E0 within the annealed approximation to
3 eε); together
be given by βE0 = e0·L, where e0 = ε/(1+ 1
with Eq. (6), the kinetic constraint (10) becomes

L < L2(ε) =

β∆max
ln ζb(ε) − e0(ε)

.

(12)

max

Fig. 3a shows the two bounds (11) [dashed line] and
(12) [solid line] as a function of the discrimination en-
ergy ε, using a representative value of ∆max = 7kBT with
which the dynamics at the potential trap sites are slowed
down by a factor of eβ∆
≈ 103. The discrimination
energy ε has to stay in the range between the dashed
and the solid line, which is of order kBT for large L and
vanishes for L below ∼ 10. Taken together, the ther-
modynamic and the kinetic constraints therefore lead to
a limited ‘allowed region’ in the (ε, L) parameter space.
Note that the observed data for the well-studied factors
is compatible with this result, since the discrimination
energies are typically in the range from 1 to 3 kBT , while
the energy matrices have about 10 to 14 signiﬁcant posi-
tions.

So far, we considered the interaction of the factors with
the genomic background which lead us to general physical
constraints on the interaction parameters. We now take a
diﬀerent perspective, focusing on the biological function

6

of factor-target binding in the context of typical demands
arising in gene regulation.

The bacterial cell speciﬁes factor-DNA binding by set-
ting the desired threshold N ∗
TF such that the binding
probability to a target site is small if NTF < N ∗
TF and
large if NTF > N ∗
TF. When a factor has only a sin-
gle target in the genome, the desired threshold N ∗
TF can
be implemented either by choosing the correct combina-
tion of interaction parameters (i.e., ε and L within the
two-state model) or by choosing a binding sequence with
the correct binding energy, Et(N ∗
TF.
However, oftentimes the same factor is needed to bind
to several diﬀerent target sites to regulate the expression
of genes in diﬀerent operons.
In these cases, diﬀerent
thresholds at diﬀerent targets can be required:

TF) = Fb + kBT ln N ∗

Consider for example a case where a particular tran-
scription factor X is involved in the regulation of two
operons, A and B. Suppose it is desired that X activates
the transcription of operon A on its own at a concentra-
tion NX , while operon B is only activated if X is present
(at the concentration NX ) together with another factor Y
that can bind cooperatively with X. It is then desirable to
have a strong binding site for X in the regulatory region
of operon A such that its threshold N ∗
X,A < NX, and a
weak binding site in the regulatory region of operon B,
with a threshold N ∗
X,B ≫ NX . The latter insures that
operon B will not be accidentally activated by ﬂuctua-
tions in NX alone, and only when the factor Y is present
would the attractive interaction between X and Y in-
duce the two to bind to their targets. Another example
where diﬀerent thresholds may be desirable functionally
is to produce temporal order in the expression of diﬀer-
ent operons, as the concentration of the controlling fac-
tor gradually changes over time. This was observed re-
cently in E. coli ﬂagella assembly [23] and SOS response
(U. Alon, private communication).

A straightforward way to set the threshold for each
of the target sites individually is to select the appropri-
ate binding energy Et(N ∗
TF) for each target by choosing
the binding sequence. Thus a superior functional charac-
teristic of the factor-DNA interaction is to yield maximal
control of N ∗
TF to the choice of binding sequence; we refer
to factors with such attributes as programmable. In the
following, we examine which parameter sets (ε, L) within
the physically allowed region provide the best functional
characteristics.

Within the two-state model, βEt = r · ε, where r is the
number of mismatches of the target sequence from the
best binder. Using (6), the target sequence to produce a
desired threshold N ∗
TF should contain

r∗ = [L ln ζb(ε) + ln N ∗

TF − ln Γ]/ε

(13)

mismatches. We regard N ∗
TF(r∗) as a key functional char-
acteristic of the factor-DNA system. To illustrate the
diﬀerent characteristics of the system at diﬀerent points
within the allowed region, we plot N ∗
TF(r∗) in Fig. 3b
for four representative parameter sets (ε, L) marked with
symbols in Fig. 3a. In order to aid the ensuing discus-

sion, the dotted line in Fig. 3a indicates L1(ε, NTF = 1),
i.e. the line where a single factor suﬃces to occupy the
best binding sequence.

The system described by the parameter set (ε =
2.5, L = 9) located close to the intersection between
L1(ε, NTF = 1000) and L2(ε) and marked by a circle
in Fig. 3a is not very programmable since no choice of
r∗ can set N ∗
TF below 300. This limits the utility of this
system and should be regarded an undesirable charac-
teristic. Generally, this characteristic is shared by all
systems with L < L1(ε, NTF = 1). In contrast, for the
parameter set (ε = 2.0, L = 15), located at the inter-
section of L1(ε, NTF = 1) with L2(ε) [square], diﬀerent
TF can be set by diﬀerent r∗ with a 10-fold resolu-
N ∗
tion, since for r∗ = 0 ∼ 3, N ∗
TF changes from 1 to 1000.
This system is thus programmable. For the parameter
set (ε = 1.7, L = 20) [diamond] above L1(ε, NTF = 1),
the target sites with less than 2 mismatches are always
occupied. While this does not diminish the programma-
bility of the system, there is no apparent functional gain
either, and 2 positions in the binding region seem super-
ﬂuous, eventually leading to their loss by mutation. Fur-
thermore, a cost is associated with longer binding sites,
since these require bigger transcription factors (or mul-
timers). For these reasons, systems with L considerably
above L1(ε, NTF = 1) are in general unlikely to be se-
lected. Finally, for the parameter set (ε = 1.3, L = 20)
[triangle] located along L1(ε, NTF = 1), the system also
pays the price of the large factors required for large L,
but appears to be more programmable on ﬁrst sight, since
N ∗
TF can be set to a resolution of 3-fold. However, this
seeming advantage may not be realized for two reasons:
(i) Statistical ﬂuctuations in NTF and thermal ﬂuctua-
tion of the target occupancy strongly limit the potential
for ﬁne tuning of N ∗
TF, and (ii) the heterogeneity of the
energy matrix Ei(Si) (i.e. the deviation from the two-
state model) can be exploited to ﬁne tune N ∗
TF already
with the system at (ε = 2.0, L = 15). We conclude that
the interaction parameters in the vicinity of the inter-
section between L2(ε) and L1(ε, NTF = 1) optimize the
programmability of the system without unduly increas-
ing the physical size of the factors.

TF

In the above consideration we have stressed the impor-
tance of a programmable threshold N ∗
TF. There of course
may be other situations where NTF takes on approximate
and N ON
binary values of N OFF
TF , with the desired func-
tion that the factor is bound to the site if NTF = N ON
TF
TF . For such situations, N ∗
and unbound if NTF = N OFF
TF
can be anywhere in between N OFF
TF . As de-
scribed in more detail in Ref. [24], the opposing forces of
mutation and selection then lead to a distribution of r
which is strongly peaked at the maximally allowed value
r(N ON
TF ); see also Refs. [5, 25]. The advantage of the pro-
grammable factor-DNA systems is that they may be used
to implement a wide range of desired functions.

and N ON

TF

We close this section with a discussion of the non-
speciﬁc binding, which we have neglected throughout
the above analysis. Let us assume that the thermo-

7

dynamics of the factor-DNA interaction is dominated
by non-speciﬁc binding, and determine the range of ε
and L that would be allowed by the same physical and
functional considerations: Maximal programmability is
achieved with a background free energy of Fb ≈ 0. If non-
speciﬁc binding indeed dominates, then the factor binds
with energy Ens to most of the sites along the genome
and Fb is given by −kBT ln Γ + Ens rather than the ex-
pression (6). Thus, Ens ≈ kBT ln Γ ≈ 16 kBT , while the
right hand side of (6) is allowed to take on any positive
values; this corresponds to the regime above the dotted
line in Fig. 3a. The kinetic accessability condition also
needs to be reevaluated for this case, with (9) replaced by
Ens − E0 < ∆max. We obtain the condition L > 9/e0(ε)
for ∆max = 7kBT . This opens up a limited range of al-
lowed ε’s at and above the parameter set (ε = 2, L = 15).
However as discussed already, the incremental advantage
in function is small for large L’s, so that the parameter
set with the smallest L, namely (ε = 2, L = 15), is still
favored. For very large ε’s, the annealed approximation
actually breaks down and L · e0(ε) becomes an under-
estimate of E0. In fact, for L ≈ 15, kinetic accessability
can be satisﬁed for ε >
∼ 5kBT . However, having large ε’s
would strongly limit the programmability of the factor-
DNA system: Since r∗ = ln N ∗
TF/ε for Fb ≈ 0, a discrim-
ination energy of 5 kBT would only allow one to set N ∗
TF
with a 150-fold resolution. Hence we conclude that the
parameter region close to (ε = 2.0, L = 15) remains the
optimal choice.

Summary and Outlook

In this study, we analyzed quantitatively the function
of the simplest molecular component of gene regulation.
We ﬁnd the factor-DNA interaction can be characterized
by two important numbers, (i) the free energy Fb which
characterizes the relative binding strength of the genomic
background, and (ii) the relative entropy H which quan-
tiﬁes the binding speciﬁcity; they are intrinsic proper-
ties of the factor (through the binding energy E[~S]) and
the statistics of the genomic background. We ﬁnd an
upper bound for the speciﬁcity, H < β∆max, where
∆max ≈ 5 ∼ 10kBT is the maximally tolerable depth of
kinetic traps presented by the preferred background sites.
This upper bound, together with the criterion for ther-
modynamic occupancy (4), leads to a limited region of
the allowed interaction parameters within the two-state
model (7) for factor-DNA binding. If we further demand
the functional characteristic of maximal programmability
of the binding threshold, without unduly increasing the
physical size of the factors, we obtain a small optimal
parameter range in the vicinity of (ε = 2.0, L = 15).

While our optimal parameter set is rather close to the
typical range of the discrimination energy and binding
length known for several well-studied transcription fac-
tors, we note that the precise values depend on the spe-
ciﬁc choice for ∆max, and should not be taken too liter-

ally. Furthermore, the two-state model itself is only an
approximation that allows us to get a quantitative sense
of the possible behavior. On the other hand, our char-
acterization of the factor-DNA interaction by Fb and H
is independent of the two-state model and also largely
independent of the additive form (1) assumed for the in-
teraction energy. The physical constraints (4) and (10)
on these two quantities should apply as long as there is
a broad distribution of binding energies E[~S] for the en-
semble of random sequences. These constraints, together
with the desirable functional property of ‘maximal pro-
grammability’ of the binding threshold, can be reformu-
lated generally in terms of H and Fb, resulting in the
conditions H ≈ β∆max ≈ 5 ∼ 10 and Fb ≈ 0 (within
a few kBT ’s). The values of Fb and H for the factors
with known binding energy matrices are listed in Table I
and are consistent with these conditions. These ﬁndings
lead us to postulate that maintaining high programma-
bility might be a design principle guiding the selection of
factor-DNA interaction, and predict that a large class of
transcription factors follows this optimal choice of inter-
action parameters. This prediction can be veriﬁed with
biochemical experiments. In particular, it would be use-
ful to measure the thermodynamic observables Fb and
H directly for a large number of factors (rather than in-
ferring them from the much more tedious measurement
of the complete binding energy matrix Ei(S)), and see
whether they generally lie in the predicted region.

The basic issue discussed here, i.e., the recognition of a
target in the presence of a random background, is of inter-
est not only to the factor-DNA binding problem, but also
to a broader class of molecular recognition systems. Ob-
vious examples are recognition of small ligand molecules
by receptors, and the binding of proteins to each other.
In fact, an interaction model similar in spirit to ours
was already proposed in the context of ligand recognition
in olfactory systems several years ago [26]. All of these
molecular recognition systems must satisfy the same con-
straints of thermodynamic occupancy and kinetic accessi-
bility, as we showed for the factor-DNA system, although
the relevant properties of the “background” (e.g., the ef-
fective number of states) become more diﬃcult to quan-
tify. However, as long as the molecular interaction in-
volved is not too cooperative (i.e., graded rather than
drastic changes in binding between similar targets) and
the distribution of the diﬀerent types of molecules con-
stituting the background is not too speciﬁcally arranged
(so that the histogram of binding background energies
is smooth), we expect the salient features of our ﬁnd-
ing to be of relevance. In particular, we expect a small
fraction of the background states with natural high aﬃn-
ity to the factor to serve as potential kinetic traps. We
hope that our study will stimulate quantitative, statis-
tical characterization of the “background” for whichever
molecular recognition system one analyzes, because the
background is as important as the target which most cur-
rent studies focus on. Finally, the programmable aspect
of factor-DNA interaction leads one to question whether

the design of protein-protein interaction might be guided
by a similar principle.

8

Acknowledgments

It is a pleasure to acknowledge useful discussions with
G. Stormo, P. von Hippel, and K. Sneppen on many as-
pects of factor-DNA interaction. We are also grateful to
the hospitality of the Institute for Theoretical Physics
in Santa Barbara where some of the work was carried
out. This research is supported in part by the National
Science Foundation through Grant Nos. DMR-9971456.
UG is supported additionally by a German DAAD fel-
lowship, and TH by a Burroghs-Wellcome functional ge-
nomics award.

References

[1] McKnight, S.L. & Yamamoto, K.R., eds. (1992) Tran-
scriptional regulation (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, Plainview, N.Y.)
ed.

(1996) Escherichia coli and
Salmonella: cellular and molecular biology (ASM Press,
Washington D.C.)

[2] Neidhardt, F.C.,

[3] von Hippel, P.H. (1979) in Biological regulation and de-
velopment, ed. Goldberger, R.F. (Plenum, New York)
279–347.

[4] von Hippel, P.H. & Berg, O.G. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. USA 83 1608–1612.

[5] Berg, O.G. & von Hippel, P.H. (1987) J. Mol. Biol. 193

723–750.

[6] deHaseth, P.L., Gross, C.A., Burgess, R.R. & Record,

M.T. Jr. (1977) Biochemistry 16 4777-4783.

[7] Record, M.T., Jr., deHaseth, P.L. & Lohman, T.M.

(1977) Biochemistry 16 4791–4796.

[8] Kao-Huang, Y., Revzin, A., Butler, A.P., O’Conner, P.,
Noble, D.W. & von Hippel, P.H. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 74 4228–4232.

[9] Berg, O.G., Winter, R.B. & von Hippel, P.H. (1981) Bio-

chemistry 20 6929–6948.

[10] Winter, R.B. & von Hippel, P.H. (1981) Biochemistry 20

6948–6960.

[11] Winter, R.B., Berg, O.G. & von Hippel, P.H. (1981) Bio-

chemistry 20 6961–6977.

[12] Fields, D.S., He, Y., Al-Uzri, A.Y. & Stormo, G.D.

(1997) J. Mol. Biol. 271, 178–194.

[13] Stormo, G.D. & Fields, D.S. (1998) Trends in Biochem-

ical Sciences 23, 109–113.

[14] Sarai, A. & Takeda, Y. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

86, 6513–6517.

[15] Takeda, Y., Sarai, A. & Rivera, V.M. (1989) Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 86, 439–443.

[16] Frank, D.E., Saecker, R.M., Bond, J.P., Capp, M.W.,
Tsodikov, O.V., Melcher, S.E., Levandoski, M.M. &
Record, M.T., Jr. (1997) J. Mol. Biol. 267 1186–1206.

[17] Pabo, C.O. & Sauer, R.T. (1992) Annu. Rev. Biochem.

61 1053–1095.

(Reed, Oxford).

[18] Landau, L.D. & Lifshitz, E.M. (1980) Statistical Physics

[19] Derrida, B. (1981) Phys. Rev. B 24 2613–2626.

[20] Bryngelson, J.D. & P.G. Wolynes (1987) Proc. Natl.

Science 292 2080–2083.

Acad. Sci. USA 84 7524–7528.

[24] Gerland, U. & Hwa, T. (2001) submitted to J. Mol. Evol.;

[21] Binder, K. & Young, A.P. (1986) Rev. Mod. Phys. 58

preprint physics/0112039.

801–976.

[25] Sengupta, A.M. & B.I. Shraiman, 2001, submitted for

[22] Marinari, E. & Hwa, T. (2001) unpublished.
[23] Kalir, S., McClure, J., Pabbaraju, K., Southward, C.,
Ronen, M., Leibler, S., Surette, M.G. & Alon, U. (2001)

publication.

[26] Lancet, D., Sadovsky, E. & Seidemann, E. (1993) Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 3715–3719.

9

