2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FINDING REGULATORY SITES FROM STATISTICAL
ANALYSIS OF NUCLEOTIDE FREQUENCIES IN THE
UPSTREAM REGION OF EUKARYOTIC GENES.

M. Casellea and P. Proveroa,b
a Dipartimento di Fisica Teorica, Universit`a di Torino, and INFN,
sezione di Torino, Via P. Giuria 1, I-10125 Torino, Italy.

e-mail:

caselle@to.infn.it,

provero@to.infn.it

b Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Avanzate, Universit`a del
Piemonte Orientale, I-15100 Alessandria, Italy.

F. Di Cunto and M. Pellegrino
Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Universit`a di Torino,
Via Santena 5 bis, I-10100, Torino, Italy.
e-mail: ferdinando.dicunto@unito.it

We discuss two new approaches to extract relevant biological information on the
Transcription Factors (and in particular to identify their binding sequences) from
the statistical distribution of oligonucleotides in the upstream region of the genes.
Both the methods are based on the notion of a “regulatory network” responsible
for the various expression patterns of the genes.
In particular we concentrate
on families of coregulated genes and look for the simultaneous presence in the
upstream regions of these genes of the same set of transcription factor binding sites.
We discuss two instances which well exemplify the features of the two methods:
the coregulation of glycolysis in Drosophila melanogaster and the diauxic shift in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

1 Introduction

As more and more complete genomic sequences are being decoded it is becom-
ing of crucial importance to understand how the gene expression is regulated.
A central role in our present understanding of gene expression is played by the
notion of “regulatory network”. It is by now clear that a particular expression
pattern in the cell is the result of an intricate network of interactions among
genes and proteins which cooperate to enhance (or depress) the expression
rate of the various genes. It is thus important to address the problem of gene
expression at the level of the whole regulatory network and not at the level of
the single gene1,2,3,4,5.

In particular, most of the available information about such interactions
concerns the transcriptional regulation of protein coding genes. Even if this
is not the only regulatory mechanism of gene expression in eukaryotes it is
certainly the most widespread one.

1

In these last years, thanks to the impressive progress in the DNA array
technology several results on these regulatory networks have been obtained.
Various transcription factors (TF’s in the following) have been identiﬁed and
their binding motifs in the DNA chain (see below for a discussion) have been
characterized. However it is clear that we are only at the very beginning of
such a program and that much more work still has to be done in order to
reach a satisfactory understanding of the regulatory network in eukaryotes
(the situation is somehow better for the prokaryotes whose regulatory network
is much simpler).

In this contribution we want to discuss a new method which allows to re-
construct these interactions by comparing existing biological information with
the statistical properties of the sequence data. This is a line of research which
has been pursued in the last few years, with remarkable results, by several
groups in the world. For a (unfortunately largely incomplete) list of references
see 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. In particular the biological input that we shall use is the fact
that some genes, being involved in the same biological process, are likely to be
“coregulated” i.e. they should show the same expression pattern. The simplest
way for this to happen is that they are all regulated by the same set of TF’s.
If this is the case we should ﬁnd in the upstreama region of these genes the
same TF binding sequences. This is a highly non trivial occurrence from a sta-
tistical point of view and could in principle be recognized by simple statistical
analysis.

As a matter of fact the situation is much more complex than what appears
from this idealized picture. TF’s not necessarily bind only to the upstream
region. They often recognize more than one sequence (even if there is usually
a “core” sequence which is highly conserved). Coregulation could be achieved
by a complex interaction of several TF’s instead than following the simple
pattern suggested above. Notwithstanding this, we think that it is worthwhile
to explore this simpliﬁed picture of coregulation, for at least three reasons.

• Even if in this way we only ﬁnd a subset of the TF’s involved in the coreg-
ulation, this would be all the same an important piece of information: It
would add a new link in the regulatory network that we are studying.

• Analyses based on this picture, being very simple, can be easily per-
formed on any gene set, from the few genes involved in the Glycolysis
(the ﬁrst example that we shall discuss below) up to the whole genome
(this will be the case of the second example that we shall discuss). This

aWith this term we denote the portion of the DNA chain which is immediately before the
starting point of the open reading frame (ORF). We shall characterize this region more
precisely in sect.3 below.

2

feature is going to be more and more important as more and more DNA
array experiment appear in the literature. As the quantity of available
data increases, so does the need of analytical tools to analyze it.

• Such analyses could be easily improved to include some of the features
outlined above, keeping into account, say, the sequence variability or the
synergic interaction of diﬀerent TF’s.

To this end we have developed two diﬀerent (and complementary) ap-
proaches. The ﬁrst one (which we shall discuss in detail in sect.3 below) fol-
lows a more traditional line of reasoning: we start from a set of genes which
are known to be coregulated (this is our “biological input”) and then try to
recognize the possible binding sites for the TF’s. We call this approach the
“direct search” for coregulating TF’s.

The second approach (which we shall brieﬂy sketch in sect.4 below and is
discussed in full detail in 10) is completely diﬀerent and is particularly suitable
for the study of genome-wide DNA array experiments. In this case the bio-
logical input is taken into account only at the end of the analysis. We start
by organizing all the genes in sets on the basis of the overrepresented common
sequences and then ﬁlter them with expression patterns of some DNA array
experiment. We call this second approach the “inverse search” for coregulating
TF’s.

It is clear that all the candidate gene interactions which we identify with
our two methods have to be tested experimentally. However our results may
help selecting among the huge number of possible candidates and could be
used as a preliminary test to guide the experiments.

This contribution is organized as follows. In sect.2 we shall brieﬂy intro-
duce the reader to the main features of the regulatory network (this introduc-
tion will necessarily be very short, the interested reader can ﬁnd a thorough
discussion for instance in 11). We shall then devote sect.3 and 4 to explain
our “direct” and “inverse” search methods respectively. Then we shall discuss
two instances which well exemplify the two strategies. First in sect.5 we shall
study the coregulation of glycolysis in Drosophila melanogaster. Second, in
sect.6 we shall discuss the diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The last
section will be devoted to some concluding remarks.

2 Transcription factors.

As mentioned in the introduction, a major role in the regulatory network is
played by the Transcription Factors, which may have in general a twofold action
on gene transcription. They can activate it by recruiting the transcription

3

machinery to the transcription starting site by binding enhancer sequences
in the upstream noncoding region, or by modifying chromatine structure, but
they can also repress it by negatively interfering with the transcriptional control
mechanisms.

The main point is that in both cases TFs act by binding to speciﬁc, often
short DNA sequences in the upstream noncoding region.
It is exactly this
feature which allows TF’s to perform a speciﬁc regulatory functions. These
binding sequences can be considered somehow as the ﬁngerprints of the various
TF’s. The main goal of our statistical analysis will be the identiﬁcation and
characterization of such binding sites.

Even if TF’s show a wide variability it is possible to try a (very rough) clas-
siﬁcation. Let us see it in some more detail, since it will help understanding
the examples which we shall discuss in the following sections. There are four
main classes of binding sites in eukaryotes.

2.1 Classiﬁcation

• Promoters

These are localized in the region immediately upstream of the coding
region (often within 200 bp from the transcription starting point). They
can be of two types:

– short sequences like the well known CCAAT-box, TATA-box, GC-
box which are not tissue speciﬁc and are recognized by ubiquitous
TFs

– tissue speciﬁc sequences which are only recognized by tissue speciﬁc

TFs

• Response Elements

These appear only in those genes whose expression is controlled by an
external factor (like hormones or growing factors). These are usually
within 1kb from the transcription starting point. Binding of a response
element with the appropriate factor may induce a relevant enhancement
in the expression of the corresponding gene

• Enhancers

these are regulatory elements which, diﬀerently from the promoters, can
act in both orientations and (to a large extent) at any distance from the
transcription starting point (there are examples of enhancers located even

4

50-60kb upstream). They enhance the expression of the corresponding
gene.

• Silencers

Same as the enhancers, but their eﬀect is to repress the expression of the
gene.

2.2 Combinatorial regulation.

The main feature of TF’s activity is its “combinatorial” nature. This means
that:

• a single gene is usually regulated by many independent TF’s which bind
to sites which may be very far from each other in the upstream region.

• it often happens that several TF’s must be simultaneously present in
order to perform their regulatory function. This phenomenon is usually
referred to as the “Recruitment model for gene activation” (for a review
see 1) and represents the common pattern of action of the TF’s. It is
so important that it has been recently adopted as guiding principle for
various computer based approaches to detect regulatory sites (see for
instance 4).

• the regulatory activity of a particular TF is enhanced if it can bind to
several (instead of only one) binding sites in the upstream region. This
“overrepresentation” of a given binding sequence is also used in some
algorithms which aim to identify TF’s. It will also play a major role in
our approach.

3 The “direct” search method.

In this case the starting point is the selection of a set of genes which are known
to be involved in the same biological process (see example of sect. 5).

Let us start by ﬁxing a few notations:

• Let us denote with M the number of genes in the coregulated set and

with gi, i = 1 · · · M the genes belonging to the set

• Let us denote with L the number of base pairs (bp) of the upstream non
coding region on which we shall perform our analysis. It is important to
deﬁne precisely what we mean by “upstream region” With this term we
denote the non coding portion of the DNA chain which is immediately
before the transcription start site. This means that we do not consider as

5

part of this region the UTR5 part of the ORF of the gene in which we are
interested. If we choose L large enough it may happen that other ORFs
are present in the upstream region. In this case we consider as upstream
region only the non coding part of the DNA chain up to the nearest ORF
(even if it appears in the opposite strand). Thus L should be thought of
as an upper cutoﬀ. In most cases the length of the upstream region is
much smaller and is gene dependent. We shall denote it in the following
as L(g).

• In this upstream region we shall be interested in studying short sequences
of nucleotides which we shall call words. Let n be the length of such a
word. For each value of n we have N ≡ 4n possible words wi, i = 1 · · · N .
The optimal choice of n (i.e.
the one which optimize the statistical
signiﬁcance of our analysis) is a function of L and M . We shall see
some typical values in the example of sect.5 In the following we shall
have to deal with words of varying size. When needed, in order to avoid
confusion, we shall call k-word a word made of k nucleotides.

Let us call U the collection of upstream regions of the M genes g1, . . . gM . Our
goal is to see if the number of occurrences of a given word wi in each of the
upstream regions belonging to U shows a “statistically signiﬁcant” deviation
(to be better deﬁned below) from what expected on the basis of pure chance.
To this end we perform two types of analyses.

First level of analysis.

This ﬁrst type of analysis is organized in three steps

• Construction of the “Reference samples”. The ﬁrst step is the con-
struction of a set of p “reference samples” which we call Ri, i = 1, · · · p.
The Ri are nonoverlapping sequences of LR nucleotides each, extracted
from a noncoding portion of the DNA sequence in the same region of
the genome to which the genes that we study belong but “far” from any
ORF. From these reference samples we then extract for each word the
“background occurrence probability” that we shall then use as input of
the second step of our analysis. The rationale behind this approach is the
idea that the coding and regulating parts of the genome are immersed
in a large background sea of “silent” DNA and that we may recognize
that a portion of DNA has a biological function by looking at statisti-
cal deviations in the word occurrences with respect to the background.

6

However it is clear that this is a rather crude description of the genome,
in particular there are some obvious objections to this approach:

– There is no clear notion of what “far” means. As we mentioned
in the introduction one can sometimes ﬁnd TF’s which keep their
regulatory function even if they bind to sites which are as far as
∼ 50kb from the ORF

– It is possible that in the reference samples the nucleotide frequencies
reﬂect some unknown biological function thus inducing a bias in the
results

– It is not clear how should one deal with the long repeated sequences

which very often appear in the genome of eukaryotes

We shall discuss below how to overcome these objections.

• Background probabilities. For each word w we study the number of
occurrences n(w, i) in the ith sample. They will follow a Poisson distribu-
tion from which we extract the background occurrence probability of the
word. This method works only if p and LR are large enough with respect
to the number of possible words N (we shall see in the example below
some typical values for p and LR). However we have checked that our
results are robust with respect to diﬀerent choices of these background
probabilities.

• Signiﬁcant words. From these probabilities we can immediately con-
struct for each n-word the expected number of occurrences in each of
the upstream sequences of U and from them the probabilities p(n, s) of
ﬁnding at least one n-word simultaneously present in the upstream re-
gion of s (out of the M ) genes. By suitably tuning L, s and n we may
reach very low probabilities. If notwithstanding such a low probability
we indeed ﬁnd a n-word which appears in the upstream region of s genes
then we consider this fact as a strong indication of its role as binding
sequence for a TF’s. We may use the probability p(n, s) as an estimate
of the signiﬁcance of such a candidate binding sequence.

As we have seen the critical point of this analysis is in the choice of the
reference sample. We try to avoid the bias induced by this choice by crossing
the above procedure with a second level of analysis

Second level of analysis.

7

The main change with respect to the previous analysis is that in this case we
extract the reference probabilities for the n-words from an artiﬁcial reference
sample constructed with a Markov chain algorithm based on the frequencies
of k-words with k << n (usually k = 1, 2 or 3) extracted from the upstream
regions themselves. Then the second and third step of the previous analysis
follow unchanged. The rationale behind this second approach is that we want
to see if in the upstream region there are some n-words (with n = 7 or 8,
say) that occur much more often than what one would expect based on the
frequency of the k-words in the same region.

These two levels of analysis are both likely to give results that are biased
according to the diﬀerent choices of reference probabilities that deﬁne them.
However, since these biases are likely to be very diﬀerent from each other, it
is reasonable to expect that by comparing the results of the two methods one
can minimize the number of false positives found.

4 The “inverse” search method.

A major drawback of the analysis discussed in the previous section is that it
requires a precise knowledge of the function of the genes examined. As a matter
of fact a large part of the genes of eukaryotes have no precisely know biological
function and could not be studied with our direct method. Moreover in these
last years the richest source of biological information on gene expression comes
form microarray experiments, thus it would be important to have a tool to
study gene coregulation starting from the output of such experiments. These
two observations suggested us the inverse search method that we shall brieﬂy
discuss in this section. We shall outline here only the main ideas of the method,
a detailed account can be found in 10.

The method we propose has two main steps: ﬁrst the ORFs of an eukaryote
genome are grouped in (overlapping) sets based on words that are overrepre-
sented in their upstream region, with respect to their frequencies in a reference
sample which is made of all the upstream regions of the whole genome. Each
set is labelled by a word. Then for each of these sets the average expression
in one ore more microarray experiments are compared to the genome-wide av-
erage: if a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence is found, the word that labels the
set is a candidate regulatory site for the genes in the set, either enhancing or
inhibiting their expression.

An important feature is that the grouping of the genes into sets depends
only on the upstream sequences and not on the microarray experiment consid-
ered: It needs to be done only once for each organism, and can then be used
to analyse an arbitrary number of microarray experiments.

8

Table 1: Genes involved in the glycolysis.

Description
Aldolase
Enolase

Gene
Locus
Ald
AE003755
AE003585
Eno
Gapdh1 Glyceraldehyde 3-ph. dehydrogenase 1 AE003839
Gapdh2 Glyceraldehyde 3-ph. dehydrogenase 2 AE003500
AE003756
Hex
AE003563
ImpL3
AE003755
Pfk

Hexokinase
L-lactate dehydrogenase
6-phosphofructokinase

Chromosome
3R
2L
2R
X
3R
3L
2R

We refer to 10 for a detailed description of how the sets are constructed, we
only stress here that this construction only requires three external parameters
which must be ﬁxed by the user: the length L of the upstream region (see
sect.3 for a discussion of this parameter), the length n of the words that we
use to group the sets and a cutoﬀ probability P which quantiﬁes the notion of
“overrepresentation” mentioned above.

5 Example: glycolysis in Drosophila melanogaster.

As an example of the analysis of sect.3, we studied the 7 genes of Drosophila
melanogaster involved in glycolysis. These genes are listed in Tab.1. We per-
formed our analysis with two choices of the parameters:

1] Promoter region.

In this ﬁrst test we decided to concentrate in the
promoter region. Thus we chose L ≤ 100. With this choice, and since
M = 7, we are bound to study n-words with n = 3, 4, 5 in order to have a
reasonable statistical signiﬁcance. In particular we concentrate on n = 3
In the ﬁrst level of analysis we chose LR = 100 and p = 1000 (p is the
number of reference samples). In the second level of analysis we chose
k = 1 (k being the number of nucleotides of the k-words used to construct
the Markov chain). We found (among few other motifs which we do not
discuss here for brevity) that a statistically relevant signal is reached by
the sequence GAG. This result has a clear biological interpretation since
it is the binding site of an ubiquitous TF known as GAGA factor which
belongs to the class of the so called “zinc ﬁnger” TF’sb. We consider this
ﬁnding as a good validation test of the whole procedure.

bThe commonly assumed binding site for the GAGA factor is the sequence GAGAG, however
it has been recently realized that the minimal binding sequence is actually the 3-word GAG12.

9

Table 2: Probability p(n, 7) of ﬁnding a n-word in the upstream region of all the 7 genes
involved in glycolysis. In the ﬁrst column the value of n, in the second the result obtained
using the background probabilities. In the last two columns the result obtained with the
Markov chains with k = 1 and k = 2 respectively.

n p(n, 7)
6
7
8

0.346
0.007
0.00025

p(n, 7), k = 1
0.76
0.013
0.000034

p(n, 7), k = 2
0.78
0.022
0.00011

2] large scale analysis

In this second test we chose L = 5000. This allowed us to address n-
words with n = 6, 7, 8. For the reference samples we used LR = 5000 and
p = 21 As a result of our analysis we obtained the probabilities p(n, s)
of ﬁnding at least one n-word in the upstream region of s out of the 7
genes that we are studying. As an example we list in Tab.2 the values of
p(n, s) for s = 7 and n = 6, 7, 8. For the Markov chain analysis we used
k = 1, 2.

In this case we found a 7-word which appeared in the upstream region of
all the seven genes: A fact that, looking at the probabilities listed in tab.3
certainly deserves more attention. The word is TTTAAAT. A survey
in the literature shows that this is indeed one of the binding sequences of
a TF known as “even-skipped” which is known to regulate segmentation
(and also the development of certain neurons) in Drosophila. This TF has
been widely studied due to its crucial role in the early stages of embryo
development, but it was not directly related up to now to the regulation
of glycolysis.

6 Example: diauxic shift in S. cerevisiae

As an example of the analysis of sect.4, we studied the so called diauxic shift,
(i.e.
the metabolic shift from fermentation to respiration), in S. cerevisiae
the pattern of gene expression during the shift was measured with DNA mi-
croarrays techniques in Ref. 13. In the experiment gene expression levels were
measured for virtually all the genes of at seven time-points while glucose in
the medium was progressively depleted. As a result of our analysis we found
29 signiﬁcant words, that can be grouped into 6 motifs (i.e. groups of similar
words). Five of them correspond to known regulatory motifs (for a database of
known and putative TF’s binding sites in S. cerevisiae see ref. 4). In particular

10

three of them: STRE, MIG1 and UME6 (for the meaning of these abbrevi-
ations see again 4) were previously known to be involved in glucose-induced
regulation process, while for the two other known motifs: PAC and RRPE
this was a new result. We consider the fact of having found known regulatory
motifs a strong validation of our method.

Finally we also found a new binding sequence: ATAAGGG, which we

could not associate to any known regulatory motif.

7 Conclusions

We have proposed two new methods to extract biological information on the
Transcription Factors (and more generally on the mutual interactions among
genes) from the statistical distribution of oligonucleotides in the upstream re-
gion of the genes. Both are based on the notion of a “regulatory network”
responsible for the various expression patterns of the genes, and aim to ﬁnd
common binding sites for TFs in families of coregulated genes.

• The methods can be applied both to selected sets of genes of known
biological functions (direct search method) or to the genome wide mi-
croarrays experiments (inverse search method).

• They require a complete knowledge of the upstream oligonucleotide se-
quences and thus they can be applied for the moment only to those
organisms for which the complete genoma has been sequenced.

• In the direct method, once the set of coregulated genes has been chosen,
no further external input is needed. The signiﬁcance criterion of our
candidates binding sites only depends on the statistical distribution of
oligonucleotides in the upstream region (or in nearby regions used as test
samples)

• Both can be easily implemented and could be used as standard prelimi-

nary tests, to guide a more reﬁned analysis.

Even if they already give interesting results, both our methods are far from
being optimized. In particular there are three natural directions of improve-
ment.

a] Taking into account the variability of the binding sequences,

b] Recognizing dyad like binding sequences (see for instance 7) which are

rather common in eukaryotes,

11

c] Recognizing synergic interactions between TF’s.

Work is in progress along these lines.

Needless to say the candidate binding sequences that we ﬁnd with our
method will have to be tested experimentally. However our method could help
to greatly reduce the number of possible candidates and could be used as a
guiding line for experiments.

References

1. M. Ptashne and A. Gann, Nature 386 (1997) 569
2. A. Wagner, Nucleic Acids Research 25 3594-3604 (1997).
3. S. Tavazoie, J.D. Hughes, M.J. Campbell, R.J. Cho and G.M. Church,

Nature Genetics 22 281-285 (1999).

4. Y. Pilpel, P. Sudarsanam and G.M. Church, Nature Genetics 29 153-159

(2001). Web supplement:
http://genetics.med.harvard.edu/˜tpilpel/MotComb.html

5. H.J. Bussemaker, H. Li and E.D. Siggia, Nature Genetics 27 167-171

6. J. van Helden, B. Andr´e and J. Collado-Vides, J. Mol. Biol. 281 827-842

7. J. van Helden, A. F. Rios and J. Collado-Vides, Nucleic Acids Research

(2001).

(1998).

28 1808-1818 (2000).

296 1205-1214 (2000).

8. J. D. Hughes, P. W. Estep, S. Tavazoie and G. M. Church, J. Mol. Biol.

9. R.Hu and B. Wang, Archive: http://xxx.sissa.it/abs/physics/0009002
10. M. Caselle, F. DiCunto and P.Provero, “Correlating overrepresented up-
stream motifs to gene expression: a computational approach to regula-
tory element discovery in eukaryotes.” Submitted to BMC Bioinformat-
ics.

11. B. Alberts et al., Molecular Biology of the Cell

(Garland Publishing

Inc., New York, 1994).

12. R.C. Wilkins and J.T. Lis Nucleic Acids Research 26 2672-2678 (1998).
13. J.L. DeRisi, V.R. Iyer and P.O. Brown, Science 278 680-686 (1997).

12

