2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Presynaptic calcium dynamics of
learning neurons

Michael Meyer-Hermann, Frido Erler, Gerhard Soﬀ

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
E-Mail: meyer-hermann@physik.tu-dresden.de

Abstract: We present a new model for the dynamics of the presynaptic intracel-
lular calcium concentration in neurons evoked by various stimulation protocols.
The aim of the model is twofold: We want to discuss the calcium transients
during and after speciﬁc stimulation protocols as they are used to induce long-
term-depression and long-term-potentiation. In addition we would like to provide
a general tool which allows the comparison of diﬀerent calcium experiments. This
may help to draw conclusions on a wider base in future.

Introduction

A most fascinating challenge in neuron biology is a deep understanding of the
mechanisms involved in long-term-eﬀects (LTE) such as long-term-potentiation
(LTP) and long-term-depression (LTD). The multiplicity of possibly important
mechanisms is immense and is explored in a great variety of experiments [1].
However, the interpretations of those experiments are not as conclusive as they
could be if it was possible to better compare experiments executed on diﬀerent
systems. We claim that a lot of detailed information on LTE is hidden in presently
available experiments.

One possible way to uncover this hidden knowledge is to construct a tool which
is able to translate diﬀerent experiments into a common language and then to
compare them quantitatively. Such a tool is provided here for the analysis of
the intracellular calcium concentration in presynaptic nerve terminals. It is very
well established by experiments that LTE are mostly connected with dynamical
changes in the calcium concentration which, therefore, is an appropriate observ-
able to study the origin of eﬀects as LTD and LTP. Already on this very early
level of LTE-induction a comparative quantitative evaluation of diﬀerent experi-
ments may lead to new insights. The experiments have been done using diﬀerent
systems or using the same system under diﬀerent conditions. In addition, a de-
pendence of the presynaptic calcium dynamics on the corresponding target cell
has been observed [2]. In order to compare those experiments quantitatively one
has to determine characteristics of the experiment that are important for the
calcium dynamics and to introduce them into the model terminology.

In the following we will develop a corresponding model which can be used for
comparison of presynaptic calcium dynamics in diﬀerent experiments. The model

1

has to be adjusted to speciﬁc experiments in a well-deﬁned procedure, which is
illustrated for the example of presynaptic nerve terminals in the rat neocortex
[2]. The results found here are discussed in the context of LTE. For more details
of the model and the results presented here we refer to [3].

The model on the level of single proteins

We construct a new deterministic one-compartment model for the presynaptic
calcium dynamics. It is formulated in terms of a set of coupled diﬀerential equa-
tions for the intracellular calcium concentration c:

∂c
∂t

=

G
zF

ρUJU

gU(U), U(t), U (c)

− ρPJP(gP(c)) − ρEJE(gE(c)) + L

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

1 + Θb(c) + Θi(c)

(1)

where ρU,P,E are the surface densities of the voltage-gated channels (HVA), the
PMCA-type calcium pumps, and the natrium-calcium exchanger (type 1), re-
spectively. JU,P,E are the corresponding single protein currents, and gU,P,E the
single protein open probabilities. G is a geometry factor (ratio of surface and
volume in the compartment), z is the valence of the calcium ions, F the Faraday
constant, U(t) the stimulating transmembrane voltage function, U (c) the calcium
dependent calcium reversal potential, and L the leak current which is determined
by the steady state condition. The open probabilities gP,E follow a standard
Hill equation in the case of the pumps and the exchangers [4, 5] while the open
probability for the voltage gated calcium channels obeys [6]

∂gU(U)
∂t

=

1
τ 


1 + exp
"

(

−1

U1/2 − U
κ

)#

− gU(U)

,

(2)






with τ the channel mean open time, U1/2 the half activation voltage, and κ the
steepness factor. The buﬀers (endogenous and indicator) are treated in a quasi-
steady state approximation, which claims that the calcium binds and dissociates
faster than the typical time scale under consideration. Then the dynamical be-
havior of the buﬀers reduces to a correction factor in Eq. (1) which depends on
the calcium concentration only:



Θb(c) =

and Θi(c) =

(3)

bmaxKb
(Kb + c)2

imaxKi
(Ki + c)2

.

Here bmax and imax are the total concentrations of the endogenous buﬀer and the
indicator, respectively. Kb,i are the corresponding dissociation constants.

The diﬀerential equations are solved numerically and the solution describes
the time course of the calcium concentration resulting in response to single action
potentials or to series of action potentials (as they are used to induce LTD or
LTP). The above mentioned aspired generality of the model is reﬂected in a
separation of the model parameters into three classes, described in the following
subsections.

2

Universality

The model is universal enough to be applicable to a wide class of diﬀerent neuron
types. To this end the model is based on the experimental knowledge about
single proteins which are postulated to have neuron-type independent properties.
These are the single protein characteristics gx (including all derived physiological
properties) and the single protein transmembrane currents Jx, where x stands for
the corresponding type of protein (see e.g. [4, 5, 6]).

Type speciﬁcity

The model is speciﬁc enough to be applicable to well deﬁned neuron types. This
is achieved by the introduction of measurable neuron-type speciﬁc parameters
which has to be determined for each experiment separately. Basically, these are
the protein densities ρx in the membrane. As no space resolution of the calcium
concentration is considered, these densities may be thought as average values over
the whole synaptic membrane. Also the concentration of the endogenous buﬀer
bmax and its dissociation constant Kb belong to the neuron-type speciﬁc class
of parameters. Finally, the surface to volume ratio G of the synaptic compart-
ment quantitatively determine the concentration changes due to transmembrane
currents.

Condition speciﬁcity

The model includes enough general speciﬁcations in order to adjust the model to
speciﬁc experimental conditions. The form and amplitude of the action poten-
tial U(t) is simulated with a system of coupled diﬀerential equations (not shown
here). The LTE-stimulation protocols used in experiment are simulated with a
corresponding series of single action potentials. Intracellular calcium concentra-
tions are generally visualized with the help of calcium indicators. They act as an
additional buﬀer in the cell and, therefore, may inﬂuence the calcium dynamics.
In the model they are treated in complete analogy to the endogenous buﬀer and
are characterized by the indicator speciﬁc dissociation constant Ki and the used
indicator concentration imax.

Adjustment to a speciﬁc experiment

The idea of this semi-universal model for presynaptic calcium dynamics is to de-
termine the universal parameters using single protein experimental data and to
maintain the resulting values for the evaluation of diﬀerent systems and exper-
imental conditions. Universality has to be understood as the postulated state-
ment, that universal parameters are not the parameters that are most sensitive
to a transfer from one experiment to another. The adjustment of the model to a

3

speciﬁc experiment is achieved through the determination of the system-speciﬁc
and condition-speciﬁc parameters. Note, that without any exception these are
parameters with direct physiological interpretation. Therefore, most of them may
be accessible up to a suﬃcient precision in several experiments.

In the described procedure the main part of the model is determined by sources
that are independent of the experiment under consideration. Therefore, the value
of the model is tested by its capability of reproducing the answer of the calcium
concentration to single action potentials on the basis of those independent and
ﬁxed universal parameters. As in general not all speciﬁc parameters will have
been determined in the experiment under consideration, we will ﬁt the remaining
unknown parameters to the single action potential calcium response. With the
help of a thus deﬁned model it should be possible to analyse the measured calcium
transients evoked by LTD or LTP stimulation protocols.

This has been executed for an experiment on single nerve terminals of pyra-
midal neurons in the neocortex of rats [2]: Most speciﬁc parameters used in the
model are directly accessible in this experiment. This concerns for example the
form of the action potential applied to the nerve terminal, the geometry (i.e. the
surface to volume ratio), the concentration of endogenous buﬀer, and the char-
acteristics and concentrations of the used calcium indicator (magnesium green).
Therefore, we are in the situation that the whole model is a priori determined ei-
ther by independent sources (concerning universal parameters) or by the available
data from the experiment under consideration. The only unknown parameters
are the surface densities of the calcium transport proteins. These are ﬁtted to the
measured calcium transient evoked by single action potentials. The result Fig. 1
shows, that the measured calcium transient is reproduced correctly.

LTE stimulation

In order to check if the thus deﬁned model has predictive power, we calculate
the intracellular calcium transients evoked by series of action potentials with
varying frequency. Basically, the model parameters remain unchanged. As in
the corresponding experimental setup (see [2] Fig. 9) a diﬀerent action poten-
tial (compared to Fig. 1) has been used, the action potential is adapted in the
model and the channel densities are ﬁtted to the single action potential calcium
response, correspondingly. In addition the indicator concentration is enhanced,
which is considerably higher in this experimental setup. Now the 10 Hz stimulus
is applied and the result is shown in Fig. 2. The model result is in quantitative
agreement with the calcium transients seen in the experiment: The intracellular
calcium concentration reaches a new baseline level during the stimulation process
which breaks down when the stimulus is switched oﬀ. The calcium concentra-
tion oscillates on the top of the new base line in coherence with the stimulation
potential. The amplitude of those oscillations is slightly overestimated by the
model.

4

Figure 1: The calcium transients evoked by single action potentials in single
boutons of pyramidal neurons in the rat neocortex (100µM magnesium green).
The dotted line shows the best single exponential ﬁt to the experimental values
[2], and the full line shows the model result with ﬁtted protein densities.

On this basis we can calculate the calcium transients in response to stimu-
lation protocols with various frequencies. We ﬁnd that the calcium transients
do not overlap for low frequencies typical for LTD-induction. The emergence of
a new baseline in the calcium concentration at frequencies around 10 Hz may
be interpreted as threshold for the induction of LTP. Note, that this threshold
frequency strongly depends on the used calcium indicator concentration. This is
especially relevant for the interpretation of experimental results. A stimulation
with frequencies around 50 Hz (typical for the induction of LTP) leads to a more
pronounced enhancement of the calcium baseline. This qualitative behavior is in
agreement with experiments carried out on dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons
[7].

Conclusion

Our new model for transients of the presynaptic intracellular calcium concen-
tration evoked by various stimulation protocols reproduces the general behavior
observed in experiment. It is exclusively constructed with parameters that have
a direct physiological interpretation. Its basis are the single proteins properties.
The characteristics of single proteins are considered to be universal in the sense

5

Figure 2: The calcium transients evoked by a 10Hz stimulus in single boutons
of pyramidal neurons in the rat neocortex (500µM magnesium green). The full
line represents the model result and the triangles represent the corresponding
measured transients [2] (the peak and baseline values, respectively). The dashed
line represents the best single exponential ﬁt to the experimental baseline values
[2].

that they remain unchanged for diﬀerent experimental setups. The model has
been adjusted to a speciﬁc experiment that measured intracellular calcium tran-
sients in nerve terminals of pyramidal neurons of the rat neocortex. To this end
the parameters speciﬁc for this experiment have been extracted from it or, if not
available, have been ﬁtted to the single action potential calcium response. The
model results turned out to be in quantitative agreement with the experiment,
so that we conclude that the model correctly describes the presynaptic calcium
dynamics. We did not ﬁnd any reason for the involvement of calcium-induced-
calcium-release in the induction of LTE. However, it seems that an additional
mechanism (e.g. calcium channel inactivation) may be necessary to understand
the induction of LTD on the level calcium transients.

More generally, the separation of universal and speciﬁc parameters enables us
to analyse diﬀerent results observed in several experiments. With the help of our
new model one may decide, if those diﬀerences are signiﬁcant or due to diﬀerent
experimental setups.

6

References

[1] Baudry, M. & Davis, J.L. (eds.), Long-Term Potentiation. The MIT
Press, Cambridge Massechusetts, London. Vol. 1 (1991), Vol. 2 (1994), Vol. 3
(1996).

[2] Koester, H.J. & Sakmann, B., Calcium dynamics associated with action
potentials in single nerve terminals of pyramidal cells in layer 2/3 of the
young rat neocortex. J. Physiol. 529.3, 625-646 (2000).

[3] Erler, F., Meyer-Hermann, M. & Soff, G., A quantitative model for
the presynaptic calcium dynamics during the induction of long-term eﬀects
in neurons. In preparation (2002).

[4] Elwess, N.L., Filoteo, A.G., Enyedi, A. & Penniston, J.T., Plasma
Membrane Ca2+ Pump Isoforms 2a and 2b are Unusually Responsive to
Calmodulin and Ca2+. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 17981-17986 (1997).

[5] Blaustein, M.P. & Lederer, W.J., Sodium/Calcium Exchange:

Its

Physiological Implications. Physiol. Rev. 79, 763-854 (1999).

[6] Magee, J.C. & Johnston, D., Characterization of single voltage-gated
Na+ and Ca2+ channels in apical dendrites of rat CA1 pyramidal neurons.
J. Physiol. 487.1, 67-90 (1995).

[7] Helmchen, F., Imoto, K. & Sakmann, B., Ca2+ Buﬀering and Ac-
tion Potential-Evoked Ca2+ Signaling in Dendrites of Pyramidal Neurons.
Biophys. J. 70, 1069-1081 (1996).

7

