A mathematical model for the germinal
center morphology and aﬃnity maturation

Michael Meyer-Hermann

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
E-Mail: meyer-hermann@physik.tu-dresden.de

Abstract: During germinal center reactions the appearance of two speciﬁc zones is ob-
served: the dark and the light zone. Up to now, the origin and function of these zones
are poorly understood. In the framework of a stochastic and discrete model several possi-
ble pathways of zone development during germinal center reactions are investigated. The
importance of the zones in the germinal center for aﬃnity maturation, i.e. the process of
antibody optimization is discussed.

2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1 Introduction

Germinal centers (GC) are an important part of the humoral immune response. They
develop after the activation of B-cells by antigens. Such activated B-cells migrate into
the follicular system where they begin a monoclonal expansion in the environment of
follicular dendritic cells (FDC). This phase of pure centroblast multiplication is followed
by a phase of intense hypermutation and proliferation which leads to a larger repertoire of
diﬀerent centroblast types. This seems to be the basis of the aﬃnity maturation process,
i.e. the optimization process of the antibodies with respect to a given antigen during
germinal center reactions. Antigen fragments are presented on the surface of the FDCs
which enables antibody presenting cells to interact with them. It is widely believed that
centroblasts do not present antibodies (Han et al., 1997). Accordingly, the selection process
must begin after the diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes (the initiation of this
diﬀerentiation process is still unclear) which do neither proliferate nor mutate but which
present antibodies. The centrocytes have initiated a process of apoptosis, so that they have
a ﬁnite life time (Liu et al., 1989; Liu et al., 1994). They have to be rescued from apoptosis
through an interaction with the antigen fragments on the FDCs and with T-helper cells
(Brandtzaeg, 1996; Tew et al., 1997; Hollmann & Gerdes, 1999; Hur et al., 2000; Eijk et al.,
2001). This at least two step selection process (Lindhout et al., 1997) primarily depends
on the aﬃnity of the tested antibody and the antigen. Therefore, the aﬃnity maturation
during GC reactions rests on two major pillars: the hypermutation of centroblasts and the
aﬃnity dependent antigen-speciﬁc selection of centrocytes.

The morphology of the GCs is very speciﬁc and shows properties which are character-
istic for diﬀerent stages of the reaction (Liu et al., 1991; Camacho et al., 1998). In a ﬁrst
stage – the phase of monoclonal expansion – a system of FDCs is continuously ﬁlled with
proliferating centroblasts. Then the centroblasts begin to diﬀerentiate into centrocytes and
the selection process begins. In this second phase the two types of B-cells, centroblasts
and centrocytes, form two zones (Nossal, 1991): the dark zone which is dominated by pro-
liferating and hypermutating centroblasts, and the light zone containing centrocytes and
FDCs. These two zones are stable for at least some days and may then disappear. In the
third morphological phase the centroblasts and centrocytes are homogeneously distributed
over the GC (Camacho et al., 1998). The number of cells is now continuously declining
until the end of the GC reaction. The total GC life time is about 21 days (Jacob et al.,
1991; Liu et al., 1991; Kelsoe, 1996).

Up to now, the role and the reason for the appearance of the dark and the light zone have
not been resolved. These problems are here investigated in the framework of a stochastic
2+1-dimensional space-time model. Until now, only dynamical models for the GC reaction
without resolution of spatial aspects have been developed (Oprea & Perelson, 1996, 1997;
Rundell et al., 1998; Kesmir & de Boer, 1999; Oprea et al., 2000; Meyer-Hermann et al.,
2001). However, for the analysis of the GC zones this is essential. In the present article
several possible dynamic pathways and requirements for the development of dark and light

2

zones are discussed. The stability of the zones, i.e. the duration of centroblast-centrocyte
separation, and their role within the aﬃnity maturation process are analysed.

It is very important to carefully analyse the existing experimental knowledge. There-
fore, the discussion of the model assumptions (see Sec. 2) will frequently refer to the
experimental situation, and the model parameters will be determined directly or indirectly
using corresponding data. The section on the model development is divided into three
parts: A short review of the shape space concept for the representation of antibody types
(Sec. 2.1), a discussion of the dynamical properties of the GC during diﬀerent stages of
the reaction (Sec. 2.2), and the introduction of the spatial aspects, i.e. cell movements and
cell interactions (Sec. 2.3). Naturally, these subsections are interlinked, so that some rep-
etition is unavoidable. The dynamical properties and the local cell interactions lean upon
a deterministic model developed before (Meyer-Hermann et al., 2001). A presentation of
the results follows in Sec. 3 including a discussion of necessary and suﬃcient requirements
for the development of dark zones (Sec. 3.1), of the implications of dark zones for aﬃnity
maturation (Sec. 3.3 and 3.4), and of the robustness of the results with respect to diﬀerent
physiological quantities entering the model (Sec. 3.6). Finally, the results are summarized
and evaluated (Sec. 4).

2 Model development

A model describing morphological properties of the GC reaction needs to have three basic
aspects: the representation of antibodies, the dynamics and the interaction between the
cells, and their spatial distribution. These aspects already deﬁne the structure of this
section. It is worth emphasizing that this section is not only devoted to the formulation
of postulates, but also to give an experimental motivation for the assumptions and to
determine the physiological quantities which enter the model. A careful discussion of the
physiological parameters builds the fundament of the model stability and of its relation to
real GCs. The resulting parameter values are summarized in Table 1.

2.1 Representation of antibody and antigen phenotype

In order to describe the aﬃnity maturation process during GC reactions, the antibodies
encoded by B-cells as well as antigens are represented with the help of the shape space
concept (Perelson & Oster, 1979). A D-dimensional ﬁnite size lattice is deﬁned in which
each point corresponds to one antibody phenotype (accordingly, the shape space does not
provide a representation of the genetic variability of antibodies). A phenotypically relevant
mutation is represented by a jump to a nearest-neighbor point in the shape space, which
means that a single mutation of the B-cell does not lead to a random change of the antibody
phenotype.

The antigen is represented in the same shape space using the assumption of optimal
complementarity, i.e. it exists a corresponding type of antibody having a maximal aﬃnity.

3

The antigen is represented by the point in the shape space, which corresponds to this
optimal antibody.

The representation of mutations by jumps to neighbor points in the shape space allows
the aﬃnity of antibodies of mutating B-cells to be enhanced successively, which is believed
to happen during GC reactions. This property may be called aﬃnity neighborhood and
means that antibodies on neighboring points in the shape space do not have drastically
diﬀerent aﬃnities with respect to a given antigen. The relevance of possibly existing key
mutations that imply considerable changes of the aﬃnity was discussed before (see Meyer-
Hermann et al., 2001).

This concept allows a quantitative formulation of a smooth aﬃnity function on the
shape space, describing the aﬃnity of a given antibody to a given antigen. Denoting the
antibody type and the antigen by the shape space points φ and φ∗, respectively, one can
deﬁne the aﬃnity weight function

a(φ, φ∗) = exp

||φ − φ∗||η
Γη

−

 

!

,

(1)

where Γ ≈ 2.8 is the width of the aﬃnity weight function, || · || denotes the Euclidean
metric, and η = 2 is the exponent of the distance in the shape space. These values were
determined from existing data of aﬃnity enhancement in dependence on the number of
observed mutations (for details see Meyer-Hermann et al., 2001, Fig. 2).

In a physiological GC reaction we do not only expect to ﬁnd diﬀerent antigen fragments
but also diﬀerent antigens. Nevertheless, in experiments the immunization is often per-
formed by the injection of one speciﬁc antigen. Therefore, in the present model we assume
only one antigen to be present during the GC reaction. However, it may be interesting to
investigate the dynamical changes of GC reaction with more than one antigen.

2.2 Germinal center phases

There exist many diﬀerent pictures describing the stages of a GC reaction, both from
the perspective of dynamical interactions and of morphological properties. Here, a rather
general point of view is adopted which is based on widely accepted observations and inter-
pretations of the GC. We hope that this enhances the validity of the model implications.
The whole GC reaction is initiated by the migration of antigen-activated B-cells into
the follicle system. The model description starts when the activated B-cells are present in
the environment of antigen presenting FDCs in the follicle system. The aﬃnity of these
cells to the antigen is assumed to be low but non-vanishing (as they were activated). In the
model this is represented by a typical distance of the B-cells from the antigen in the shape
space between 5 and 10, i.e. the B-cells have to hypermutate at least 5 times in order to
ﬁnd the optimal antibody type with respect to the antigen. This number is in accordance
with the one observed in experiment (K¨uppers et al., 1993; Wedemayer et al., 1997). Note
that here only the hypermutations of phenotypical relevance are counted.

4

2.2.1 The phase of monoclonal expansion

The activated B-cells (centroblasts) start to multiply in the presence of the FDCs. This
process of intense expansion – the proliferation rate is about 1/(6hr) (Hanna, 1964; Zhang
et al., 1988; Liu et al., 1991) – is believed to be monoclonal (Jacob et al., 1993; McHeyzer-
Williams et al., 1993; Pascual et al., 1994a; Han et al., 1995a), so that no somatic hyper-
mutations occur in this stage of the GC reaction, and the antibody type encoded by the
centroblasts remains unchanged. Furthermore, the expanding centroblasts do not seem to
present antibodies on their surface (Han et al., 1997) – at least in this ﬁrst phase (this has
recently been questioned (Berek, 2001)). As a consequence, in the model no interaction
with antigen fragments or T-helper cells is provided during this phase.

GCs develop oligoclonally (Kroese et al., 1987; Liu et al., 1991; Jacob et al., 1991;
K¨uppers et al., 1993), i.e. the number of initial centroblasts is small. It has been shown
that after three days of centroblast expansion all B-cells in average stem from about three
to six seeder cells. Within three days (this is the duration of this ﬁrst phase (Liu et al.,
1991)) the FDC network is completely ﬁlled with centroblasts (Camacho et al., 1998). The
volume occupied by centroblasts even exceeds the FDC network. The total number of
centroblasts reaches about 12000 cells in this stage of the reaction.

2.2.2 Early optimization phase

The phase of B-cell selection by interaction of antibody presenting centrocytes with antigen
fragments on the FDCs is characterized by the following additional dynamical properties:

Somatic hypermutation The centroblasts continue to proliferate at the same rate.
Additionally, they have a high probability of somatic hypermutations of m = 0.5 (Berek &
Milstein, 1987; Nossal, 1991) leading to a higher variability of antibody types in the GC.
This property provides the basis of the aﬃnity maturation process and is incorporated into
the model by a random probability of m = 0.5 for each dividing centroblast to switch to a
randomly chosen neighbor point in the shape space. Consequently, in average one of the
two new centroblasts emerging from a cell division will correspond to a changed antibody.

Diﬀerentiation to centrocytes The centroblasts diﬀerentiate into centrocytes (Liu
et al., 1991; MacLennan, 1994; Choe et al., 2000). The initiation of this diﬀerentiation
process is still unclear. One may suspect a centroblast diﬀerentiation after a ﬁxed lifetime
or an unknown signal of unknown provenience. Several options for the initiation of the
diﬀerentiation process will be discussed in the framework of the model. The process itself
is assumed to take some time, i.e. a centroblast in the state of diﬀerentiation will become
a centrocyte with a rate g1. This rate determines the speed of the whole GC reaction
(Meyer-Hermann, 2001) and has been observed in experiment. At a certain stage of the
GC reaction the proliferating cells were labeled and it was found that after 7 hours these
cells were present in the light zone in a non-proliferating stage (Liu et al., 1991; Berek,

5

2001), i.e. they diﬀerentiated to centrocytes and moved into the light zone within 7 hours.
Therefore, the diﬀerentiation rate has to be slightly larger than 1/(7hr). On the other
hand, it should not diﬀer drastically from the proliferation rate as otherwise the total cell
population would either die out or explode on a small time scale (Meyer-Hermann, 2001).
Taking these arguments together one is led to a centroblast to centrocyte diﬀerentiation
rate of approximately g1 = 1/(6hr).

Apoptosis of centrocytes Unbound centrocytes have initiated an apoptotic process.
If apoptosis is not suppressed in time the centrocytes will die. The typical life time of
centrocytes has been estimated to be 6 to 16 hours (Liu et al., 1994). Correspondingly,
the rate of centrocyte death z is chosen in this range. A value of z = 1/(7hr) turns out
to be most advantageous for the aﬃnity maturation. Dead cells are rapidly engulfed by
macrophages so that in the model they are removed from the lattice rapidly. The speed
of this process has a marginal impact on the space available for the movement of the
remaining cells.

Centrocyte-FDC-interaction As the GC contains more and more centrocytes due to
the centroblast diﬀerentiation process during this phase, the interaction of the presented
antibodies with the antigen fragments on the FDCs has to be taken into consideration.
The inhibition of centrocyte apoptosis is believed to depend on this interaction process as
well as on the interaction with T-helper cells (Lindhout et al., 1995; Brandtzaeg, 1996; Tew
et al., 1997; Hollmann & Gerdes, 1999; Hur et al., 2000; van Eijk et al., 2001). Conversely,
also the acceleration of apoptosis of non-binding centrocytes has been discussed (Hollmann
& Gerdes, 1999). In the framework of such regulation processes, the role of CD40-CD40L-
interaction, Fas-FasL-interaction, and bcl-2-expression are currently under investigation
(Han et al., 1997; Choe & Choi, 1998; Choe et al., 2000; van Eijk et al., 2001; Siepmann
et al., 2001). We do not propose a solution to this puzzle in the model, but we eﬀectively
incorporate the inhibition of apoptosis.

In order to allow aﬃnity maturation the interaction of centrocytes with FDCs is as-
sumed to depend on the aﬃnity of antibody and antigen (Liu et al., 1989; Koopman et al.,
1997; Radmacher et al., 1998). In the model this is represented by the aﬃnity weight func-
tion Eq. (1): Each time a centrocyte is in local contact with an FDC, i.e. they are direct
neighbors on the spatial lattice, it will bind to the antigen with a probability a(φ, φ∗) that
is given by the aﬃnity of the antibody presented by the centrocyte to the antigen fragment
presented by the FDC. An eﬀective binding rate for centrocytes and FDCs is implicitly
introduced using corresponding rules for the interaction (see Sec. 2.3.1 Centrocytes). This
binding rate basically depends on the centrocyte diﬀusion constant DCC and on the cell
distribution around the centrocyte.

Once a centrocyte is bound, it remains bound to the FDC for a certain time. The above
mentioned rescue processes are thought to take place during this time. Unfortunatly, the
duration of binding is not known experimentally. However, the observation that the process

6

of apoptosis of a centrocyte is stopped within 2 hours (Lindhout et al., 1995; van Eijk &
de Groot, 1999) may provide a valuable hint: Assuming that the inhibition of apoptosis is
done during the binding of centrocyte and FDC and that the centrocytes dissociate from
the FDC afterwards, the rate of centrocyte-FDC dissociation becomes g2 = 1/(2hr).

Recycling of centrocytes Positively selected centrocytes, i.e. B-cells encoding antibod-
ies of high aﬃnity to the antigen, may reenter the state of proliferation and mutation. This
possibility is the frequently discussed recycling hypothesis (Kepler & Perelson, 1993; Han
et al., 1995a; Oprea et al., 2000; Meyer-Hermann et al., 2001), which has not been proven
in experiment until today. It has to be clariﬁed what is explicitly meant by recycling. In
some deﬁnitions of the recycling process the recycled cells do not only restart to proliferate
and to mutate but also return to the dark zone (Kelsoe, 1996; Han et al., 1997). In the
present model a more modest variant is adopted, i.e. recycling solely denotes the possibility
of reentering the state of proliferation and mutation – independently of where this happens
and where these cells tend to go. Therefore, our model does not exclude proliferating cells
in the light zone, and it will be discussed if a reentry into the dark zone is possible or even
necessary.

Diﬀerentiation into plasma- and memory-cells During the phase of early optimiza-
tion no production of plasma- and memory-cells is provided by the model (see Sec. 2.2.3),
i.e. all positively selected centrocytes are recycled.

Signal molecules All processes described so far are based on the production of signal
molecules which lead to a local interaction between the cells, i.e. each signal is related to
an interaction with a very specifc B-cell. This especially is the case for the inhibition of
apoptosis in positively selected centrocytes as well as for the diﬀerentiation path of rescued
B-cells (into plasma- or memory-cells or back into a stage of proliferation). Such local
interaction processes are assumed to be necessary for aﬃnity maturation, as it is diﬃcult
to imagine a non-local interaction rescuing speciﬁc B-cells of high aﬃnity to the antigen.
Therefore, we assume in our model that these interactions take place during the binding
of centrocytes to FDCs. For this reason no signal molecule has to be speciﬁed explicitly,
since it is completely suﬃcient to incorporate the corresponding functional answer of the
cells into the model.

Nevertheless, one should be aware that the centrocytes take the antigen fragments
with them, i.e. B-cells that have successfully interacted with the FDCs are recognizable
in this way. Therefore, a non-local interaction with a diﬀusing signal molecule (which
may be secreted for example by the FDCs) which targets speciﬁc B-cells with bound
antigen fragments may exist. Such a speciﬁc non-local interaction may be in accordance
with aﬃnity maturation if a mechanism is utilized which recognizes B-cells transporting
antigen fragments. This case is not covered by the model assumption of local interactions.
However, the eﬃciency of such a non-local interaction process would be smaller compared

7

to a local interaction: If a high aﬃnity B-cell is detected at the FDCs, this information
is lost through its dissociation from the FDC, and the same cell must be detected for a
second time by signal molecules. This is an unreasonable procedure, especially for the
inhibition of apoptosis which is a time critical process.

The situation is diﬀerent for the diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes. Adopting
the reasonable assumption that all centroblasts will diﬀerentiate into centrocytes indepen-
dently of their aﬃnity to the antigen there exists no obvious reason for a local interaction.
On the other hand, the presence of FDCs and T-cells is believed to be important for the
diﬀerentiation process of centroblasts (Dubois et al., 1999a, 1999b; Choe et al., 2000). So
if FDCs or T-cells trigger the diﬀerentiation of centroblasts but not by a local interaction
with single B-cells, a non-local interaction becomes obligatory. In order to allow a non-
local interaction in the model we incorporate a diﬀusing signal molecule (see Sec. 2.3.1)
which triggers the centroblast diﬀerentiation, is produced by the FDCs, and is bound by
the centroblasts. This feature should not be considered an assumption but an option of
the model. Alternative pathways of diﬀerentiation will be discussed.

2.2.3 The phase of late optimization and output production

The duration of the early optimization phase ∆t2 determines the starting point of the phase
of late optimization and output production, which diﬀers from the early optimization phase
solely by an additional pathway of diﬀerentiation for positively selected centrocytes. It is
widely believed that the interaction between centrocytes and FDCs may involve a local
diﬀerentiation signal which enables the centrocytes to further diﬀerentiate into plasma or
memory cells (shortly denoted as output cells in the following) or – as discussed before –
back into a proliferating B-cell state.

A delay ∆t2 in the production of plasma- and memory-cells with respect to the start
of hypermutations was indeed observed experimentally (Jacob et al., 1993; Pascual et al.,
1994b) and is of the order of 48 hours. This justiﬁes the separation of optimization and
output production phase in the model. In addition it has previously been shown that such
a delay is necessary in order to get an appropriate average quality of produced output cells.
This delay could be determined quantitatively using the experimental observation that the
number of produced output cells multiplies by a factor of 6 between day 6 and day 12 after
immunization (Han et al., 1995b). The steepness of the number of produced output cells
versus time is directly inﬂuenced by the duration of the optimization phase. In this way
one is led to a delay of the output production phase of 48 hours (Meyer-Hermann et al.,
2001), which is in perfect accordance with the above mentioned experimental observation.
Therefore, this value is assumed for the present model and the resulting steepness of the
it would
output production will be veriﬁed subsequently (see Sec. 3.2). Nevertheless,
be interesting to discuss possible mechanisms which may generate the start of output
production dynamically.

Positively selected centrocytes diﬀerentiate into output cells at a rate of g3 = 1/(7 hr).
As we assumed recycling to exist, the proportion of diﬀerentiation into output cells to

8

diﬀerentiation into a re-proliferating cell state has to be chosen. The recycling probability
of positively selected B-cells is determined by the only known experimental evidence for
recycling (Han et al., 1995a). A quantitative evaluation (Meyer-Hermann et al., 2001) leads
to a probability of q = 80%, i.e. 4 out of 5 positively selected B-cells do not diﬀerentiate
into plasma- or memory-cells but restart to proliferate and mutate, and only one cell
diﬀerentiates into an output-cell.

2.2.4 The end of the GC reaction

The whole GC reaction lasts about 21 days (Jacob et al., 1991; Liu et al., 1991; Kelsoe,
1996). No consumption of antigen fragments (Tew & Mandel, 1979) is postulated and no
production of antibodies by plasma cells is assumed in order to stop the GC reaction. The
model assumes that the main course of the cell population dynamics is governed by the
local cell interactions and thus is independent of antigen consumption (Meyer-Hermann et
al., 2001). As the amount of presented antigen is reduced to 50% during 30 days (Oprea
et al., 2000), i.e. during the whole GC life time, it is unlikely that the fast reduction of the
total cell population after about 5 days (Liu et al., 1991; Hollowood & Macartney 1992)
is due to antigen consumption.

Note, that if plasma cells diﬀerentiate inside the GC they may also produce antibodies
there. These antibodies could bind the antigen fragments and in this way reduce the
probability of selection of centrocytes if a large number of antibodies is present inside the
GC. This eﬀect may become important at the end of the GC reaction, when the number
of plasma cells has already increased. The ﬁnal phase of the GC would be shortened
compared to the model results. The resulting ﬁnal state of the GC reaction as it appears
in this model will be further discussed (see Sec. 3.5).

2.3 Spatial distribution on a lattice

One major task of the model is to ﬁnd possible explanations for the speciﬁc morphological
appearance of GCs. Especially, the dark and light zones are of interest, as it remains unclear
if they may be or why they are essential for aﬃnity maturation. A deeper understanding
of these connections may be important in view of malignant GCs as well (Falini et al.,
2000; Dunn-Walters et al., 2001).

The spatial distribution of the B-cells and FDCs is implemented in an equidistant
lattice of ﬁxed volume. This constant volume is considered as reaction volume and thus
is not identical to the real GC volume. The latter is deﬁned by the volume occupied by
all B-cells in the reaction volume and will consequently change in time. The resulting GC
volume time course is compared to experimental data from real GC reactions in Sec. 3.5.
Note, that in this prescription possible changes of the GC dynamical behavior due to the
interaction with naive B-cells in the mantle zone, for example, are neglected.

Each lattice point can contain one cell only. Signal molecules can accumulate at every
lattice point. The cell movement is basically governed by diﬀusion (see Sec. 2.3.4). The

9

lattice constant is chosen to correspond to a typical B-cell diameter. Centroblasts have a
radius of about rCB ≈ 7.5 µm (Kroese et al., 1987; Hostager et al., 2000) and centrocytes
are substantially smaller (Liu et al., 1994). The average radius is of the order of 5 µm,
and we are led to a lattice constant of ∆x = 10 µm. However, this value solely has an
inﬂuence on the cell mobility and therefore is not an independent parameter of the model
but determines the meaning of the diﬀusion constants (see Sec. 2.3.4).

2.3.1 B-cell, FDC, and signal representation

In the following the speciﬁc treatment of the diﬀerent cell types on the lattice and the
corresponding actions are explained in terms of rules for cell behavior. In principle, every
cell is characterized by its position on the lattice, the state of diﬀerentiation, and the type
of encoded antibody in the shape space (see Sec. 2.1). Note that not all possible actions
will occur in all phases of the GC reaction (see Sec. 2.2). Note further that in general some
actions are forbidden to occur in the same time step. This is no relevant restriction if the
time steps are suﬃciently small, so that in most time steps no action occurs at all.

Centroblasts
can be in two diﬀerent states: Originally, an unsignaled centroblast can
proliferate, mutate, and diﬀuse. When it meets a threshold concentration of the diﬀer-
entiation signal it switches to the state signaled and can additionally diﬀerentiate into
centrocytes (with rate g1).
At each time step the concentration of signal molecules is checked at the same lattice point.
The state of the centroblast is chosen correspondingly. In any case the B-cell remains a
centroblast. It then tries to proliferate (see Sec. 2.3.3) and, provided that it is in the state
signaled, tries to diﬀerentiate into centrocytes (with rate g1). Only one of the last two
actions is allowed and both actions are tried in a random sequence.
If the centroblast
proliferates both new centroblasts mutate (change the position in the shape space) with
probability m. If the centroblast did not diﬀerentiate to a centrocyte it might also diﬀuse
with diﬀusion constant DCB. A diﬀusion beyond the GC volume is forbidden.

Centrocytes
emerge through diﬀerentiation of centroblasts only. They can be in three
diﬀerent states: First they are unselected, may then get in contact with FDCs, and ﬁnally
may become positively selected.

• An unselected centrocyte dies with a rate z. A dead centrocyte is eliminated from

the lattice.

• During its life time it checks for an FDC on the neighbor lattice points.

If there
is one, the switch to the state contact is weighted with the aﬃnity function Eq. 1.
A centrocyte which has tried in vain to get into contact with an FDC has to move
by diﬀusion before it may try again (this introduces an absolute time scale for the
binding process which is basically determined by the centrocyte diﬀusion constant
DCC).

10

• A centrocyte in contact with an FDC dissociates from it and switches to the state

selected with rate g2. It can neither move nor die.

• A positively selected centrocyte further diﬀerentiates with rate g3 into an output cell
with probability 1 − q or a centroblast with probability q. If the centrocyte did not
diﬀerentiate it might diﬀuse with diﬀusion constant DCC.

• The diﬀusion of centrocytes beyond the GC volume is forbidden independently of its

state.

Output cells diﬀuse on the lattice with diﬀusion constant DCC. They have no restriction
at the border of the GC volume, i.e. if an output cell diﬀuses beyond the GC volume it is
eliminated from the lattice. An eliminated output cell is memoried and contributes to the
total (i.e. time integrated) output production.

FDCs
are represented on the lattice by a center with 2d arms of 30 µm length, where
d is the space dimension of the lattice. These cells are assumed to be immobile. This
does not correspond to reality as at least the arms of the FDCs are steadily looking for
an interaction partner. However, this is not an important restriction, since the movement
of the FDCs would primarily change the interaction frequency of FDCs and centrocytes,
which may be achieved by a faster centrocyte diﬀusion as well.

The diﬀerentiation signal
is represented as a discretized density on the whole lat-
tice. One quantum of the signal is thought to contain exactly as many molecules as are
necessary to induce the diﬀerentiation process in one centroblast. Those quanta move on
the lattice according to a classical diﬀusion equation (see Sec. 2.3.4) independently of the
cell distribution on the lattice. In order to keep the quanta undivided, the movement of
the remaining non-integer part of a quantum is chosen randomly in each time step.
If
an unsignaled centroblast is present on the same lattice point at some time step, one of
those quanta at this point is eliminated from the lattice and the state of the centroblast
is changed to signaled. The signal molecules may diﬀuse beyond the GC volume. In this
case they are eliminated from the lattice.

2.3.2

Initial cell distribution

At the beginning of the GC reaction only FDCs and a few seeder cells (centroblasts)
are present in the follicle system. The follicular network is completely ﬁlled during the
phase of monoclonal expansion (Liu et al., 1991; Camacho et al., 1998). The centroblasts
even need slightly more space than provided by the FDC network. This is incorporated
into the model by a random initial distribution of the FDC on a lattice area which is
restricted to about 70% of the maximal GC volume. However, for reasons of clarity and of
comparability of the results, all simulations presented in this article are based on the same

11

FDC distribution (see Sec. 3.6.1). The number of seeder cells is chosen to be 3 (Kroese et
al., 1987; Liu et al., 1991; Jacob et al., 1991; K¨uppers et al., 1993). They are randomly
distributed on the FDC network.

2.3.3 Spatial aspects of proliferation

The proliferation process itself is not only dependent on the proliferation rate but also on
the environment of the dividing centroblast. Principally, a centroblast can only proliferate
if there is a free lattice point in its neighborhood. On the other hand, this scenario
is not realistic, as the centroblasts may deform and the dividing process does conserve
the total volume of both new cells. A strong exclusion rule that forbids proliferation if all
neighbor points are occupied would therefore strongly decrease the number of proliferations
compared to a realistic or exponential increase of the total cell number. The solution we
propose is to allow the proliferation if there is a free lattice point within a sphere around
the dividing cell. The centroblasts in the environment of the dividing cell are rearranged in
such a way that the proliferation becomes possible. In this picture a dividing cell is able to
push away a maximal number of cells which corresponds to the radius RP of this theoretical
sphere. Within the sphere the centroblasts expand exponentially. When the centroblasts
expand beyond our theoretical sphere a nucleus of centroblasts, which are no longer able
to proliferate until the surrounding cells are spread through diﬀusion, emerges, and the
exponential growth is slowed down. Therefore, the resulting total number of centroblasts is
directly changed in dependence on the sphere radius. As the number of centroblasts after
3 days of the GC reaction is known experimentally, the radius is chosen correspondingly,
where a value of RP = 60 µm appears to be reasonable. This spatial proliferation model
has realistic features which are suﬃcient for our purpose as we are not primarily interested
in the details of the proliferation process. Nevertheless, a more detailed mechanistic model
may lead to new dynamical insights (Beyer & Meyer-Hermann, 2002).

2.3.4 Movement of cells and molecules

Centroblasts, centrocytes, and signal molecules essentially move by diﬀusion. This is real-
ized on the lattice by a probability of moving to a free neighbor point on the lattice which
can be calculated using the classical diﬀusion equation

∂c
∂t

= D

d

∂2c
∂x2
i

,

Xi=1
where c is the population of the diﬀusing cell type, d denotes the dimension of the lattice, t
the time, and xi the spatial coordinates. This equation is translated to a discrete equation
with lattice constant ∆x = ∆xi (the lattice is equidistant) and time step ∆t

(2)

(3)

∆c
∆t

= D

d

Xi=1

∆2c
∆x2 = D

−N
∆x2

,

12

where N is the number of free neighbor points that can adopt values between 0 and 2d.
Using this one may deﬁne a statistical probability pdiﬀ for one cell to move to a free neighbor
point:

pdiﬀ = D N

∆t
∆x2

.

One should be aware that this probability is based on the assumption that each lattice
point can be occupied by one cell only. Therefore, the diﬀusion of signal molecules, which
do not underly this restriction, has to be treated according to the more general ﬁrst part
of Eq. (3).

It is worth emphasizing that the assumption to allow only one centroblast or centrocyte
at each lattice point, independently of the volume occupied by these cells, does not imply
the neglection of the diﬀering cell diameters. The cell volume primarily has an impact on
the mobility of the cells. Therefore, the cell diameters are incorporated into the model by
using diﬀerent diﬀusion constants DCB and DCC for centroblasts and centrocytes, respec-
tively. Quantitatively, the relation between both parameters is determined by the relation
between the diameters: Considering the cells as spheres of a speciﬁc radius r moving in
a medium of viscosity η at temperature T under inﬂuence of friction according to Stokes,
the diﬀusion constant becomes

D =

kT
6πηr

,

where k = 1.3806610−23J/K is the Boltzmann constant. At room temperature T = 293 K,
with a viscosity for blood of η = 0.02Js/m3 (Skalak & Chien, 1987), and with a cell radius
of 2.5 µm and 7.5 µm for centrocytes and centroblasts, respectively, (Kroese et al., 1987)
(see also Liu et al., 1994 for the ratio of both radii) one ﬁnds

DCB ≈ 5

; DCC ≈ 15

µm2
hr

µm2
hr

.

Surely, the absolute values of these diﬀusion constants have been estimated very roughly.
Especially, the lymphocytes do not diﬀuse in blood but in lymphoid organs. Addition-
ally, the movement of the FDCs eﬀectively increases the observed diﬀusion constant in the
model. Finally, the assumption of a friction according to Stokes may be questioned. Never-
theless, the assumption that the diﬀusion constants depend on the cell radii is reasonable,
and the ratio of the radii is relatively sure. Therefore, the main uncertainty concerns the
absolute values of the diﬀusion constants, not their ratio (see Sec. 3.6.4).

The diﬀusion of signal molecules is assumed to be considerably faster than the diﬀusion

of the cells, with the diﬀusion constant being of the order of (Murray, 1993)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

2.3.5 A two-dimensional projection

In order to compare the model results with pictures of slices containing GCs, the model is
realized on a two-dimensional (2D) lattice. One should be aware that a three-dimensional

DSig ≈ 200

µm2
hr

.

13

(3D) model may open new pathways for cell movements, so that a more realistic three-
dimensional model may lead to diﬀerent dynamical properties in some aspects. Never-
theless, we expect the basic properties to remain untouched from this projection on a
two-dimensional lattice. The comparison of the results in a 2D and a 3D model is the task
of a separate work.

It is important to project the physiological parameters on the 2D lattice. This concerns
all parameters which have an impact on the spatial distribution of the cells in the GC,
i.e. the proliferation rate, which controls the creation of new cells at speciﬁc positions, the
number and the geometry of the FDCs, and the total volume of the GC. The diﬀusion
constants are deﬁned for an arbitrary lattice dimension (see above) and the diameters of
the spheric cells remain unchanged in a two dimensional plane.

Proliferation rate The proliferation rate in a 3D-GC of 1/(6hr) corresponds to 1/(9hr)
in a 2D lattice, as only 4 of 6 new cells emerging from a proliferation process will appear in
the 2D plane. Therefore, the ﬁnal number of B-cells after 3 days of monoclonal expansion
will not be 12288 as in an idealized 3D model but 768.

GC-volume The maximal number of cells determines the total size of the 2D lattice.
According to experimental observations (Liu et al., 1991; Camacho et al., 1998) the FDC
network, i.e. the volume of the GC is completely ﬁlled with centroblasts after 3 days
of proliferation. Starting from a typical GC volume three days after immunization of
0.05 mm3, we end up with a GC radius of 232 µm or 47 lattice points per dimension.
Based on this rough estimate, the number of lattice points per dimension is ﬁxed to 45
corresponding to a radius of 220 µm. This still allows a certain cell movement even if the
cell number in the GC is at its maximum.

FDCs The number of arms of the FDCs is reduced from 6 (3D) to 4 in the 2D model.
The length of the FDC arms remains unchanged. It is worth emphasizing that the FDC
arm length and the number of FDCs together determine the available surface for interac-
tion with centrocytes, and in this way inﬂuence the interaction frequency of centrocytes
and FDCs. The total number of FDCs is chosen in such a way that the centrocytes have
enough space to move and at the same time have enough possibilities to interact with
FDCs, i.e. the number of binding sites on the FDCs should be of the order of the maximal
number of centrocytes. As centrocytes diﬀerentiate from centroblasts and the centroblast
diﬀerentiation rate is of the same order as the centrocyte apoptosis rate, the maximal
number of centrocytes will lie roughly in the same range as the maximal number of cen-
troblasts. For an FDC arm length of 30 µm this leads to about 20 FDCs in a 2D-GC with
a radius of 220 µm.

14

3 Results

The previous section was devoted to the physiological motivation of model assumptions
and to the determination of the model parameters by experimental data. In the present
section the results of the numerical realization of this stochastic model will be presented.
As in some cases the experimental constraints for the physiological quantities were not
strong enough, there still remains a certain freedom of choice for some of them. Therefore,
these quantities will have to be optimized iteratively with respect to the outcome within
their physiological range. The parameters in Tab. 1 turned out to be an optimal choice
with respect to diﬀerent aspects of the GC reaction, which will be described below.

However, the presentation of the results will not start from these optimal values, since
the necessity of some model assumptions is better illustrated by going through the diﬀerent
stages of the model development. Therefore, the discussion starts with the consideration
of diﬀerent scenarios for the establishment of the dark zone during GC reactions (see
Sec. 3.1). Based on the results of this subsection a reference GC is deﬁned (see Sec. 3.2).
Afterwards, it is discussed how the duration of the dark zone is determined (see Sec. 3.3),
and the inﬂuence of B-cell recycling and the dark zone on the optimization process, i.e. on
aﬃnity maturation, is investigated (see Sec. 3.4). Finally, we discuss the evolution of the
total GC volume (see Sec. 3.5).

3.1 Requirements for dark zones

FDC inhomogeneity An important task of this work is to investigate necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for the emergence of a dark zone during GC reactions. The seed of
a dark zone appears to be an inhomogeneity of the FDC distribution on the GC volume.
During the ﬁrst phase of the reaction the initial centroblasts proliferate beside and/or in-
side the FDC network. However, at least some of the centroblasts proliferate outside the
FDC network or expand beyond it. It is exactly these centroblasts that give rise to the
development of the dark zone. As in the model the maximal GC volume (i.e. the lattice
volume) is ﬁxed a priori, this dynamical behavior is simulated by a statistical distribu-
tion of the FDCs on a restricted area of the GC which occupies about 70% of the total
GC volume. Without such a restricted distribution of the FDCs the distribution of cen-
troblasts and centrocytes on the GC necessarily becomes homogeneous. Accordingly, the
expansion of centroblasts beyond or beside the FDC network is a necessary condition for
the development of dark zones, and is independent of the mechanism which is assumed for
the initiation of centroblast diﬀerentiation into centrocytes. In this perspective, centrob-
lasts, which primarily proliferate outside the FDC network (Camacho et al., 1998), would
fascilitate the emergence of a dark zone. In the following we start from the more modest
point of view, that only a part of the centroblasts is present outside the FDC network after
3 days of proliferation.

15

Centroblast speciﬁc diﬀerentiation As will be shown in the following, the centroblast
diﬀerentiation process is a key element in the development of the dark zone. In a ﬁrst step
we do not investigate any interaction of FDCs with centroblasts or any signal molecules
that trigger the diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes. One may imagine for example
the centroblasts to have an internal clock which lets them diﬀerentiate after some more or
less ﬁxed time. Alternatively, a ﬁxed number of proliferation rounds for each centroblast
may be supposed.
In both scenarios the diﬀerentiation should merely start after three
days of monoclonal centroblast expansion, as centrocytes are not present in GCs before
this time. This type of hypothesis was tested in the present model and the expected result
was found: No dark zone appears at all at any moment of the reaction. This can easily
be understood, as the diﬀerentiation process is started everywhere in the GC volume at
the same time. The diﬀerentiating centroblasts are distributed homogeneously, especially
in an area which has the potential of becoming the dark zone, i.e. an area without FDCs.
This process ends up with a homogeneous distribution of centroblasts and centrocytes over
the whole GC volume.

As a consequence, in the framework of the above scenarios the appearance of dark
zones is necessarily coupled to an additional force, driving the separation of centroblasts
and centrocytes. One may investigate mechanical forces in this context, since both cell
types diﬀer in size. This has an impact on their diﬀusion constant. The radii diﬀer by
a factor of at least 2 (Liu et al., 1994), so that the distance the cells may overcome by
random walk diﬀers by a factor of about 1.4. Apparently, there exists a slight diﬀerence in
the mobility of both cell types, but without deﬁnite direction. The separation of both cell
types may be achieved either by a local attractor for one cell type or by a homogeneous
force ﬁeld. The latter possibility corresponds to the problem of sorting large and small
balls in the ﬁeld of gravity and is presently under investigation (Beyer & Meyer-Hermann,
2002). This possibility cannot be excluded here, even if the origin of such a force ﬁeld
remains unclear from the physiological point of view. At ﬁrst sight, the existence of a local
attractor seems to be a promising assumption as the FDCs may bind only centrocytes but
no centroblasts. We tested how long this centrocyte-FDC binding process has to endure in
order to get a realistic separation of centrocytes and centroblasts. Unfortunately, no dark
zone appears at all (see Fig. 1), even using extremely long centrocyte-FDC interaction
times of about 100 hr, which is completely unreasonable as in experiment the binding time
is estimated to be of the order of 2 hr (Lindhout et al., 1995; van Eijk & de Groot, 1999).
The reason is that the centroblast diﬀerentiation occurs independently of the position in the
GC, i.e. homogeneously distributed. Even if there was an increased amount of centroblasts
in the area without FDCs, this tendency to a dark zone would be destroyed in the same
moment due to the centroblast diﬀerentiation process, which takes place everywhere in the
dark zone. Therefore, in this scenario one cannot expect to get stable dark zones. They
could at the best appear as statistical ﬂuctuations of the centroblast population.

16

Local centroblast-FDC interaction Now let us turn to a third scenario, where the
FDCs initiate the centroblast diﬀerentiation by a local interaction. In this case only those
centroblasts which are placed at the surface of an already established dark zone would
diﬀerentiate into centrocytes and the nucleus of the dark zone would remain unaﬀected
by the diﬀerentiation at the surface. Therefore, a stable establishment of a dark zone is
possible in this scenario. This gives rise to two important questions: How long does a dark
zone exist? How does the GC reaction stop? Both questions are answered very clearly
by the model and the answers are stable against variations of the model parameters:
The dark zone develops early and remains present until the end of the reaction. The
total cell population in the GC does not decline but approaches a constant. The FDCs
are surrounded by centrocytes which are in selection process, so that spots of FDCs with
centrocytes appear on a background of centroblasts (see Fig. 2). The fraction of centrocytes
in the FDC network is governed by the selection rates and the FDC density: For large
centroblast- and large (selected) centrocyte-diﬀerentiation rates and for large FDC densities
the fraction of centrocytes can be increased. But the qualitative appearance of the GC
does not change. This spot-like GC is not in agreement with experimentally observed GCs.
Those have no spots and after a while one ﬁnds more centrocytes than centroblasts. In
addition, the GC reaction declines after 3 weeks. In the model a reduction of the total cell
population can only be achieved by an additional assumption concerning the proliferation
rate. Taking into account that the dark zone has been observed to disappear after 8 days
(Camacho et al., 1998) and that the total GC volume already decreases at day 5 (Liu et al.,
1991; Hollowood & Macartney 1992), the proliferation rate would have to be substantially
diminished in this early phase of the GC reaction. It is very unlikely that this is really
the case, since the proliferation rate has been frequently measured to be of the order of
1/(6hr), and this value was found at diﬀerent moments of the GC reaction (Hanna, 1964;
Zhang et al., 1988; Liu et al., 1991).

Non-local centroblast-FDC interaction As has been shown, centroblast-speciﬁc dif-
ferentiation scenarios, even being combined with an attractor which incorporates an in-
homogeneity into the GC volume, do not lead to the expected appearance of dark zones.
A centroblast diﬀerentiation process which is governed by a local interaction with FDCs
leads to conceptual problems concerning the centroblast proliferation rate.

Therefore, in a fourth scenario, a nonlocal interaction of centroblasts and FDCs is
investigated in order to ﬁnd the experimentally observed morphology. Such a nonlocal in-
teraction may be mediated by a diﬀusing signal molecule which is produced by the FDCs
during the GC reaction. Each time when a centroblasts meets a threshold density of signal
molecules it starts to diﬀerentiate into centrocytes at a certain rate. The signal molecules
that initiated the diﬀerentiation process are not eliminated from the lattice, because they
are not consumed by the centroblasts. The model then predicts a short appearance of a
dark zone which is depleted within hours. The fast depletion is due to the large diﬀusion
constant for the signal molecule in comparison to the diﬀusion constant of centroblasts.

17

Therefore, the signal molecules become homogeneously distributed on the whole GC vol-
ume, especially in the dark zone, within a short time. A homogeneous distribution of the
diﬀerentiation signal is undistinguishable from the ﬁrst scenario Centroblast speciﬁc diﬀer-
entiation: All centroblasts diﬀerentiate into centrocytes, independently of their position.
Consequently, the dark zone is destroyed in the same way as in the scenario discussed
before. In the present scenario dark zones cannot survive until the diﬀusion constant of
the signal molecules is reduced to an unreasonable small value.

This leads us to a ﬁfth scenario which builds upon the previous one by incorporating
the consumption of signal molecules. It is rather plausible that the signal molecules have
to bind to the centroblasts in order to initiate the diﬀerentiation process. Then, bound
molecules are not available for a second initiation of centroblast diﬀerentiation as they
have been before. We investigated this scenario in the model: As the FDC network is the
source of signal molecules, only the centroblasts at the surface of the dark zone go into
interaction with the diﬀerentiation signal and consume it. Therefore, the nucleus of the
dark zone is widely protected against contact with signal molecules and can survive for
signiﬁcantly longer periods.

A representative simulation result is shown in Fig. 3: A large amount of proliferating
centroblasts develops from 3 seeder cells. Those centroblasts which are placed beside the
FDC network give rise to the dark zone (in the lower hemisphere). The dark zone is stable
for a certain time and evaporates cells at its surface by diﬀerentiation into centrocytes in
dependence on the diﬀusing signal molecules. The centrocytes generated at the interphase
of the dark and the light zone tend to diﬀuse into the FDC network. The resulting life
time of the dark zone directly depends on the production rate of signal molecules. When
the dark zone has disappeared, centroblasts and centrocytes are distributed more or less
homogeneously on the GC volume. During the remaining time the GC reaction declines.
Summarizing, we ﬁnd two conditions which are together suﬃcient for the appearance

of dark zones:

1. A monoclonal expansion of centroblasts beyond the FDC network.

2. A nonlocal interaction between FDCs and centroblasts, which may be realized with a
diﬀerentiation signal molecule which is produced by FDCs and bound by centroblasts.

As has already been argued at the beginning of this section (see the subsection on FDC
inhomogeneity) condition 1 is also a necessary condition for the development of the dark
zone. However, concerning the non-locality of the centroblast-FDC interaction the situa-
tion is less clear and the argument for the necessity of this condition is a negative one: All
alternative scenarios for the centroblast diﬀerentiation process lead to conceptual prob-
lems. As a consequence, non-locality cannot be deduced to be an imperative feature of
the centroblast-FDC interaction. Nevertheless, the reader may agree that the presented
scenario is an attractive and plausible way to explain the development of dark zones in
GC reactions as it has been observed in experiment.

18

3.2 The reference germinal center

After having determined features of GC reactions that are suﬃcient for the development
of dark zones, a reference GC can be deﬁned. As we are dealing with a stochastic model
we have to analyse ensembles of simulations with the same set of parameters but diﬀerent
generators of random numbers. Therefore, the results will always be given with an un-
certainty corresponding to one standard deviation. The parameters in Tab. 1 that were
mostly determined in Sec. 2, are used as a reference system. Nevertheless, some values
had to be determined by an iterative optimization procedure depending on the outcome
of the model. All simulations were done with time steps of 0.004 hr. A dependence of the
results on the time resolution has not been observed in this regime. In each time step all
lattice points are actualized in a random sequence. In the following, the general character
of the reference GC will be shortly described. Special aspects will follow in the subsequent
sections.

The simulation shows the three phases that were postulated: In the ﬁrst phase the
three seeder cells proliferate, so that the B-cell population grows exponentially. After 3
days the increase is slowed down due to spatial restrictions and due to the start of the
centroblast diﬀerentiation process, which is governed by the signal molecules produced by
the FDCs. The dark zone develops as shown in the previous section and vanishes at day
8.2 ± 0.4 (see Sec. 3.3). The selection of centrocytes takes place in the environment of
the FDCs (see Fig. 4). At day 5 the production of output cells is started. It has been
observed in experiment that between day 6 and 12 of the reaction the number of output
cells multiplies 6-fold (Han et al., 1995b). In the model this number is 5.9 ±1.2. The whole
GC population, i.e. proliferating B-cells and centrocytes, decreases during this last phase
and reaches a ﬁnal number of 49 ± 29 proliferating B-cells after 21 days of the reaction.
This number is inﬂuenced by the variation (within the physiological constraints) of the
speed of the selection process, especially by changes of the centroblast diﬀerentiation rate
(see also Sec. 3.5).

3.3 Duration of the dark zone

Experimentally, the dark zone has been observed in a lot of diﬀerent GCs. It has been
observed that the dark zone is already present 4 or 5 days after immunization and vanishes
approximately at day 8 (Camacho et al., 1998). In the latter experiment no dark zone
has been observed at later times. Nevertheless, it remains unclear if this observation is
independent of the system under consideration and of the experimental conditions. GCs
with long lasting dark zones may exist. On the other hand, one may suspect that the
complete absence of a dark zone is a sign for a malignant immune reaction (Loeﬄer &
Stein, 2001).

In the following we will analyse what determines the duration of the intermediate
appearance of dark zones. It is obvious that the amount of signal molecules in the GC
will inﬂuence the speed of dark zone reduction by centroblast diﬀerentiation. In order to

19

quantify this statement, the dark zone is said to have vanished if the number of centrocytes
in the lower hemisphere dominates the number of centroblasts. In Fig. 5 this corresponds to
the crossing of the relative centroblast and centrocyte populations. The dark zone vanishes
at day 8.2 ± 0.4. A variation of the signal molecule production rate (or equivalently of the
threshold concentration that is necessary to induce centroblast diﬀerentiation) shows that
the life time of the dark zone indeed depends on this parameter (see Fig. 5 (b) and (c)).
Principally, all durations of dark zones may be produced by a corresponding choice of the
signal production rate. Therefore, the concept of non-local centroblast-FDC interaction
allows intermediate dark zones as well as dark zones which remain stable during the whole
GC reaction.

The duration of the dark zone is also inﬂuenced by other physiological magnitudes.
One ﬁnds an interesting interplay of the signal production rate, the rate of centroblast
diﬀerentiation, and the rate of centrocyte apoptosis. A slower centroblast diﬀerentiation
prolongs the total GC reaction, i.e. more B-cells remain after 21 days. Naturally, this
especially applies to the duration of the dark zone.

The apoptosis rate has a slightly more complex eﬀect. This rate is the inverse centrocyte
life time which, at the same time, determines how much time a centrocyte is given to be
rescued from apoptosis by interaction with FDCs. A smaller apoptosis rate of 1/(10hr)
would still be in accordance with experiment (Liu et al., 1994). We observe that the
prolonged life time of centrocytes has two basic eﬀects: the duration of the dark zone
is shortened and the total cell population is increased, so that the total GC reaction is
prolonged. The latter eﬀect is rather intuitive, as the death rate of centrocytes is reduced.
At the same time this implies that, in average, the number of centrocytes is increased,
especially, when compared to the number of centroblasts. Since the moment of break-
down of the dark zone is deﬁned by the relative numbers of centroblasts and centrocytes,
the duration of the dark zone is shortened in this way.

This section is concluded with the remark, that the presented non-local concept for cen-
troblast diﬀerentiation is compatible with almost all intermediate or non-intermediate ap-
pearances of GC dark zones. The moment of dark zone destruction is basically determined
by the (experimentally unknown) signal production rate, the centroblast diﬀerentiation
rate, and the life time of centrocytes.

3.4 Optimal optimization

Until here, the origin of the dark zone has been enlightened and its stability during the GC
reaction has been analysed. Now, the interest turns towards its function in the GC reaction,
especially for the aﬃnity maturation process. At ﬁrst, the aﬃnity maturation process will
be described from the point of view of the model. Then the interplay of recycling and dark
zone, and its importance for aﬃnity maturation will be pointed out. Finally, the inﬂuence
of the dark zone on the achieved aﬃnity to the antigen will be discussed.

20

3.4.1 Aﬃnity maturation

Among the major tasks of the GC reaction is the optimization of the antibody type with
respect to the presented antigen and the production of plasma cells which secrete these
optimized antibodies. Therefore, it is important to verify that a model which aims to help
understand the origin and the function of the GC morphology also describes the aﬃnity
maturation process. B-cells are considered high aﬃnity cells if they have at least a 30%
probability to bind the antigen in the sense of Eq. (1), i.e. if a(φ, φ∗) > 0.3. The time
course of the thus deﬁned fraction of high aﬃnity cells is depicted in Fig. 6. After about
9.4 ± 1.4 days the high aﬃnity cells dominate in the GC, which compares to about 8 days
observed in experiment (Jacob et al., 1993).

Figs. 6 and 9 show that the kinetics of the fraction of high aﬃnity B-cells can be grouped
into four phases: During the phase of monoclonal expansion no high aﬃnity B-cells exist
at all. As no somatic hypermutation takes place at this time, no high aﬃnity cells may
emerge. When the mutation begins after 3 days, the number of high aﬃnity B-cells grows
in a controlled way. It then turns to a steep increase and ﬁnally reaches a plateau on a
high level for the last days of the GC reaction. In the following the relation of this general
behavior to some characteristic features of the GC reaction is discussed.

3.4.2 The role of recycling

The importance of recycling for aﬃnity maturation has already been emphasized (Kepler
& Perelson, 1993; Oprea et al., 2000). Furthermore, it has been shown using a dynamical
model without space resolution that a large recycling probability is necessary in order to
get a reliable optimization process (Meyer-Hermann et al., 2001). As has already been
mentioned, the model considers those B-cells as recycled which have been positively se-
lected, at least once, in interaction with FDCs and which restart to proliferate. This does
not mean that these cells reenter the dark zone. On the contrary, the model predicts that
recycling occurs in the light zone and – most interestingly – that recycled cells remain in
the light zone and do not return to the dark zone, as was suspected several times (Kelsoe,
1996; Han et al., 1997). This can clearly be seen in Fig. 4: the recycled cells all remain in
the light zone.

The kinetics of the fraction of non-recycled and recycled B-cells is shown in Fig. 7. In
the beginning the population of proliferating B-cells is dominated by non-recycled B-cells,
and recycling does not play an important role. After 10.0 ± 0.5 days the proliferating cells
are composed by equal parts of non-recycled and recycled B-cells. After 13.7 ±1.2 days the
non-recycled B-cell population vanishes. Afterwards, all proliferating B-cells are recycled
cells, i.e. they are stemming from at least one positive selection.

The interpretation of this result is quite obvious. Until day 10 of the GC reaction an
important part of the optimization procedure has already taken place (see Fig. 6). This
is in accordance with the experimental observation that at this time the GC is already
dominated by good cells (Jacob et al., 1993). As a consequence, recycling does not seem

21

to be of great importance for the aﬃnity maturation process at this time. If one stopped
the GC reaction at this time, the cell population would have a higher average aﬃnity to
the antigen than the seeder cells. Nevertheless, the number of optimal cells would still be
small and also a lot of low aﬃnity cells would remain in the GC. The situation completely
changes afterwards, when the dark zone has disappeared, and non-recycled B-cells become
dominated by recycled B-cells. At this stage no low aﬃnity cells are present in the GC
anymore and there remains a slowly decreasing population of already positively selected
B-cells.

Note that the average number of mutations of B-cells that diﬀerentiate into output cells
is about 3 when the dark zone vanishes and about 9 at the end of the GC reaction – which
is in accordance with experiment (K¨uppers et al., 1993; Wedemayer et al., 1997). It follows
that about 2/3 of all mutations in B-cells, that do not die by apoptosis but are selected
and diﬀerentiate into output cells later on, occur in recycled B-cells. As can be seen in
Fig. 8, these late mutations are not useless ﬂuctuations of the aﬃnity but still substantially
increase the aﬃnity to the antigen. This reveals that a major part of the aﬃnity maturation
process is realized during domination of the recycled B-cells. Consequently, recycling is
not only the basis for the multiplication of those cells which are already of relatively high
quality but also for the ﬁne tuning of these cells which appears to be a relevant part of the
aﬃnity maturation process.

3.4.3 The role of the dark zone

One can observe an interesting correlation between the moment when recycled B-cells
dominate over non-recycled centroblasts in the GC and the onset of the steep growth
phase (mentioned at the beginning of this section) of the average cell aﬃnity to the antigen
(compare Fig. 6 and 7, 9 (a) and (c), as well as 9 (b) and (d)). The domination of recycled
B-cells has to be preceded by the destruction of the dark zone which is indeed the case.
Therefore, the phase of accelerated growth of average aﬃnity in the GC is not primarily due
to an accelerated aﬃnity maturation but to the elimination of low aﬃnity cells which still
proliferate in the dark zone. Note that when the non-recycled centroblasts are completely
eliminated from the GC, the average cell aﬃnity already reaches a plateau.

As a second interesting observation, the aﬃnity development of all produced output
cells and of centroblasts and centrocytes diﬀers considerably. Before the steep increase
in average aﬃnity the output cells are of better quality than the proliferating B-cells –
afterwards the proliferating B-cells are better or at least equally good (see Fig. 9 (c), and
(d)). Note that the aﬃnity of centroblasts and centrocytes has to become larger than the
aﬃnity of the already produced output cells. Otherwise, a further increasing quality of all
produced output cells together becomes impossible.

Taking both observations together one is led to the following hypothesis: The aﬃnity
gap between the cells in the dark and the light zone becomes larger during the GC reaction,
and in the late phase of the GC reaction a further enhancement of the total aﬃnity is
inhibited by the low aﬃnity cells in the dark zone. Consequently, the dark zone has to be

22

dissolved in time in order to optimize the aﬃnity maturation process.

If this hypothesis holds true, a correlation should exist between the fraction of high
aﬃnity output cells (averaged over the whole GC reaction) and the duration of the dark
zone. This can be studied by varying the production rate s for the centroblast diﬀerentia-
tion signal molecule, which is one of the parameters that control the life span of the dark
zone. The parameters in Tab. 1 are used and the signal production rate is varied in the
range of 6/hr ≤ s ≤ ∞, where ∞ implies that the centroblasts receive the signal without
any time delay. Since the ﬁnal number of B-cells is inﬂuenced from these changes, the
centroblast diﬀerentiation rate is adapted correspondingly: 5.5/hr ≤ g1 ≤ 6.4/hr. This
ensures to ﬁnd (in average) the same number of cells at the end of the GC reaction.

It is important to take care of comparability of the simulations, as in a stochastic model
the quantitative results are variable to some extent. This is especially true for the ﬁnal
state of the GC reaction, i.e. the number of proliferating B-cells which remain in the GC
at the end of the reaction. As can be seen in Fig. 10, the quality of the produced output
cells (averaged over the whole GC reaction) clearly correlates with the ﬁnal number of
proliferating cells at day 21 of the reaction up to a certain level of those cells. Above
that level the output cell quality seems to saturate. Therefore, an analysis concerning the
correlation between the length of the dark zone and the output-quality has to be based
on simulations with comparable ﬁnal states, in order not to hide one correlation with
another one. Consequently, only those simulations were taken into account that resulted
in a reasonable number of remaining proliferating B-cells in the range of 50 ± 1σ, where
the standard deviation σ is taken over all simulations. The resulting dependency of the
total output quality (i.e. averaged over the whole GC reaction) on the duration of the dark
zone is depicted in Fig. 11. Indeed, the fraction of high aﬃnity output cells decreases if
the dark zone remains stable for a too long period of more than 10 days. In conclusion,
intermediate dark zones which vanish before day 10 of the GC reaction are advantageous
for the aﬃnity maturation process in GC reactions.

On the other hand, Fig. 11 shows that for too short living dark zones that vanish
before day 7 of the reaction, the quality of all produced output cells is again reduced. This
leads to the clear conclusion that the intermediate appearance of dark zones optimizes the
aﬃnity maturation process in GC reactions. The best results are found for dark zones that
vanish between day 7 and 10 of the GC reaction.

Finally, the number of output cells resulting from the GC reaction is correlated with
the dark zone duration. The maximum number of output cells is found for dark zones of
exactly the same duration as that one required from the point of view of cell quality (see
Fig. 11). Note, that the error bars are larger here than in the result for the output quality.

3.5 Evolution of the total volume

The evolution of the total GC volume during the GC reaction after primary immunization
has been observed in experiment by measuring the follicle center volume in per cent of the

23

total splenic volume (Liu et al., 1991) or the total GC volume itself (Hollowood & Macart-
ney, 1992). In both cases a statistical average over a lot of GCs found in the spleen was
performed. These measurements are suitable for comparison with the present model, even
if the absolute numbers cannot be interpreted. The observed time course has the following
properties: At ﬁrst, the splenic GC volume increases steeply. It reaches a maximum at
day 4 (Liu et al., 1991) or day 5 (Hollowood & Macartney, 1992) of the reaction, and,
subsequently, decreases until the end of the reaction at day 21. This qualitative behavior
is perfectly reproduced by the model for intermediate dark zones that vanish between day
6.5 and 9.1 of the GC reaction (see Fig. 12). As in experiment, the model shows an expo-
nential increase of the GC volume, that is slowing down around day 3 of the reaction and
reaches its maximum at day 4. Finally, a fast decrease of the volume follows becoming
more moderate in the late phase of the reaction. An interesting observation is that the
time course of GC reactions with longer dark zones until day 14.1 quantitatively is not in
accordance with the data found in experiment (see Fig. 12). This is another indication for
an intermediate and relative short appearance of dark zones in GC reactions.

However, one important question remains unresolved in this context: How does the
GC reaction end? In the framework of this model no mechanism was assumed in order
to stop the reaction. The resulting ﬁnal state of the reaction is a strongly decreased but,
nevertheless, relatively stable population of B-cells. Therefore, we are led to the question
if, eventually, there exists an additional mechanism that terminates the GC reaction.

Comparing the GC-volume with the already mentioned experiment (Liu et al., 1991) we
can ﬁnd a ﬁrst hint. It seems that in the last phase of the GC reaction the volume remains
on a higher level than in the model and decreases faster at the very end (see Fig. 12).
This behavior may be achieved in the model e.g. with a slower selection procedure which
stabilizes the total B-cell population on a higher level. However, the model does not provide
any possibility for the rapid population decrease during the last days, so that the reaction
would remain on a high level after 21 days. This would have to be introduced separately,
e.g. by incorporating a change of the proliferation rate or the recycling probability during
the GC reaction. The latter one may be favored: It is believed that the diﬀerentiation
process of positively selected centrocytes is determined by a local interaction with FDCs.
It would not be very surprising if the proportion of the signals that induce recycling and
diﬀerentiation into output cells changed during the GC reaction, for example in dependence
on the already achieved level of aﬃnity to the antigen.

In this context it is interesting to note that the total number of produced output cells
(summed over the whole GC reaction) becomes larger if more proliferating B-cells remain
in the GC during its last phase (see Fig. 10). This correlation indicates that a prolonged
high number of B-cells that decreases rapidly at the very end of the reaction may be
advantageous for the quantity of the GC output.

3.6 Robustness of the results

24

3.6.1 Stochastic variation

One should be aware of the fact that all simulations were based on the same FDC and
seeder cell conﬁguration. This has been necessary in order to uncover the GC features
and dependencies on the model parameters. If the simulation is started by a stochastic
process from the very beginning of the GC reaction the variability of the results becomes
substantially larger. Especially, the speciﬁc correlations during the dynamic development
of the GC reaction would partly be hidden by the variability of the state after 3 days
of pure monoclonal expansion of centroblasts. This state is very sensitive to the initial
cell distribution and to changes of the generator of random numbers, as the number of
cells is very low during the ﬁrst hours of the reaction. Therefore, slight diﬀerences at the
beginning are crucial for the development and blow up when the GC further expands.

This restriction of stochasticity was useful, as the main interest was an analysis of
the main part of the GC reaction. However, the variability of real healthy GCs may be
substantially larger than shown here.

3.6.2 Aﬃnity of seeder cells

As mentioned in Sec. 2.2 the seeder B-cells that initiate the GC reaction have a low but
non-vanishing aﬃnity to the antigen. In the presented simulation runs they have to mutate
at least 5 times in order to ﬁnd the optimal mutant. In this case one gets a rather stable
answer measured in terms of the quality of the resulting cells. However, the number of
necessary mutations starting from the initial state is crucial for the GC development. If
the aﬃnity of the seeder cells is too low, the optimal mutant remains unreached in the
framework of the model. Consequently, the initial distribution of the seeder cells in the
shape space is important for the outcome of the GC reaction (see also Meyer-Hermann et
al., 2001).

It has been observed in experiments that GCs developing during an immune response
can be divided into two classes: Either high aﬃnity cells remain practically absent or
they already dominate in an early stage of the reaction (Berek et al., 1991; Radmacher et
al., 1998). This behavior may correspond to the above mentioned limits of high and low
aﬃnity seeder cells. It is the aim of current statistical investigation to decide if the model
reproduces a sharp switch between the two observed GC classes or not.

3.6.3 Selection process

The aﬃnity maturation process is basically governed by the centrocyte life time, the time
a centrocyte needs to bind to an FDC, and the total selection time. The model results
are indeed insensitive to a complementary change of the duration of diﬀerent selection
substate, i.e. one may increase the centrocyte diﬀerentiation rate and reduce the rate of
centrocyte-FDC-dissociation, correspondingly. But the results are sensitive to a change of
only one of these parameters or of the apoptosis rate. We conclude that in the framework
of the model the duration of the diﬀerent selection substates (starting from the binding

25

of centrocytes and FDCs and ending with the diﬀerentiated centrocyte) is not of direct
relevance for the aﬃnity maturation process. However, the total selection time turned out
to be important.

3.6.4 Diﬀusion constants

The diﬀusion constants – besides the availability of space – determine the mobility of the
B-cells in the GC volume. Unfortunately, their values for centroblasts and centrocytes are
rather uncertain. Therefore, it is important to check the relevance of these parameters for
the characterization of the GC reaction. If the mobility of the B-cells is larger, the total
number of B-cells is increased in the late phase of the GC reaction. The B-cells get a
higher chance of reaching an FDC and, in this way, have a higher chance of being selected.
This becomes especially relevant in the late phase of the GC reaction as the density of
cells becomes small and their mobility plays a major role.
It is not surprising that for
smaller diﬀusion constants the total number of cells is reduced in the late phase. Since the
total number of produced output cells is directly related to the ﬁnal number of B-cells (see
Fig. 10) the produced output should not be interpreted in terms of absolute numbers.

The aﬃnity maturation process is slightly inﬂuenced by the diﬀusion constants. A
faster diﬀusion basically has the same eﬀect as a slower apoptosis rate. However, the
relation of the aﬃnity maturation process to the dark zone is not altered.

The outcome of the simulations does not depend on the diﬀusion constant of the signal
molecule until the values remain substantially larger than the diﬀusion constant of the
B-cells.

4 Discussion

The aim of this article was to reveal the origin and the function of the speciﬁc morphology
of the GC reaction. Concerning the origin, two requirements were found: It is essential
for the development of dark zones that during the ﬁrst phase of monoclonal expansion
the centroblasts also occupy a volume besides the FDC network. Secondly, it was shown
that a dark zone develops if the centroblast diﬀerentiation to centrocytes is governed by a
signal molecule, which is produced by the FDCs and consumed by the centroblasts. This
is surely not the only possible scenario. However, the non-local character of the interaction
between cells outside the dark zone and centroblasts is an essential ingredient. It has been
shown that other obvious concepts for the centroblast diﬀerentiation lead to contradictions
with experimental observations. For example, centroblast-speciﬁc diﬀerentiation does not
allow for the development of dark zones at all, even with a centrocyte attractor in the FDC
network. A local centroblast-FDC interaction leads to a dominance of centroblasts that is
completely untypical in real GC reaction. This concept may be restored if one introduces
an early decreasing proliferation rate, which again is not in agreement with experimental
data.

26

The concept of non-local centroblast-FDC interaction is compatible with dark zones of
diﬀerent durations, i.e. with stable or intermediate dark zones. Intermediately appearing
In order to un-
dark zones have been observed in experiment (Camacho et al., 1998).
derstand the function of the dark zone, the quality of the B-cells resulting from the GC
reaction with respect to the antigen, i.e. the quality of the aﬃnity maturation process, has
been examined. We showed that the aﬃnity maturation process is inhibited if the dark
zone does not vanish until day 10 of the GC reaction. Shorter dark zones lead to a better
optimization process and, consequently, to plasma- and memory-cells of higher quality.
On the other hand, the dark zone has to exist until day 7 of the GC reaction in order
to optimize the aﬃnity maturation process. Also, the quantity of produced plasma- and
memory-cells were found to be maximized for dark zones of exactly this duration. These
results suggest that the dark zone has the function to present a large pool of diﬀerent
B-cells with a great diversity to the FDCs for selection, and at the same time to increase
the total number of resulting antibody-producing cells. Therefore, the development of a
dark zone as well as its depletion in time are essential elements of the aﬃnity maturation
process.

The time course of the GC volume predicted by the model was compared to experimen-
tally observed GC volumes. The model results are in agreement with experiment for dark
zones that vanish between day 6.5 and 9.1 of the GC reaction. This supports the above
argument for the existence of an intermediate dark zone, and suggests that nature has
chosen to realize GCs with exactly this property. So the main conclusion of this analysis is
that aﬃnity maturation is optimized for intermediate dark zones that vanish around day
8 of the GC reaction, and that it seems that this optimal procedure has been realized in
existing GCs.

In accordance with previous works, recycling,

i.e. the process that centrocytes re-
proliferate, turned out to be essential for a well working aﬃnity maturation. More explic-
itly, the aﬃnity maturation process is divided into a phase of rough optimization which is
dominated by B-cells in the dark zone and into a phase of ﬁne tuning which is dominated
by recycled B-cells. It is worth emphasizing in this context, that the number of recycled
B-cells that reenter the dark zone is negligible.

At this point one should think about the optimization of the model. The present
model is in accordance with experimentally observed GCs, especially including quantitative
statements. Also the time course of the GC volume has been found to be in agreement with
experiment and supports the hypothesis of an intermediate dark zone of relatively short
duration. The total GC volume is reduced to a reasonable small number of remaining cells
without any changes in the dynamical parameters. However, the quality of the resulting
plasma- and memory-cells is enhanced and their quality is increased if the total number
of B-cells remains larger than in the model during the last days of the GC reaction. This
points towards an additional mechanism that stops the GC reaction at the very end of
the reaction. It was argued, that a recycling probability which is reduced depending on
the already achieved aﬃnity maturation is a good candidate. Also the production of

27

antibodies inside the GC and the implied binding of antigen fragments may be considered
in this context.

Finally, the role of T-helper cells should be investigated. They are believed to have
an important inﬂuence on the selection process as well as on the inhibition of apoptosis
(Lindhout et al., 1995; Brandtzaeg, 1996; Tew et al., 1997; Hollmann & Gerdes, 1999;
Hur et al., 2000; van Eijk et al., 2001). Therefore, T-helper cells should be considered if
one is interested in the details of the selection process, which did not turn out to be of
primary importance for the development of the dark zone analysed in the present article.
In addition, T-helper cells instead of the FDCs are also a good candidate to produce the
centroblast diﬀerentiation signal (Dubois et al., 1999a, 1999b), that has been postulated
here.

28

References

Berek, C. & Milstein, C., 1987: Mutation drift and repertoire shift in the maturation

of the immune response, Immunol. Rev. 96, 23-41.

Berek, C., Berger, A. & Apel, M., 1991: Maturation of the Immune Response In

Germinal Centers, Cell 67, 1121-1129.
Berek, C., 2001: private communication.
Beyer, T. & Meyer-Hermann, M., 2002: A corresponding work is currently in prepa-

ration.

Brandtzaeg, P., 1996: The B-cell development in tonsillar lymphoid follicles, Acta

Otolaryngol. Suppl. (Stockh) 523, 55-59.

Camacho, S.A., Koscovilbois, M.H. & Berek, C., 1998: The Dynamic Structure

of the Germinal Center, Immunol. Today 19, 511-514.

Choe, J. & Choi, Y.S., 1998: IL-10 Interrupts Memory B-Cell Expansion in the Ger-
minal Center by Inducing Diﬀerentiation into Plasma-Cells, Eur. J. Immunol. 28,
508-515.

Choe, J., Li, L., Zhang, X., Gregory, C.D. & Choi, Y.S., 2000: Distinct Role
of Follicular Dendritic Cells and T Cells in the Proliferation, Diﬀerentiation, and
Apoptosis of a Centroblast Cell Line, L3055, J. Immunol. 164, 56-63.

Dubois, B., Barth´el´emy, C., Durand, I., Liu, Y.-J., Caux, C. & Bri`ere, F.,
1999a: Toward a Role of Dendritic Cells in the Germinal Center Reaction – Triggering
of B-Cell Proliferation and Isotype Switching, J. Immunol. 162, 3428-3436.

Dubois, B., Bridon, J.-M., Fayette, J., Barth´el´emy, C., Banchereau, J.,
Caux, C. & Bri`ere, Francine, 1999b: Dendritic Cells directly modulate B cell
growth and diﬀerentiation, J. Leukoc. Biol. 66, 224-230.

Dunn-Walters, D., Thiede, C., Alpen, B. & Spencer, J., 2001: Somatic hyper-
mutation and B-cell lymphoma, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 356,
73-82.

Falini, B. et al., 2000: A monoclonal antibody (MUM1p) detects expression of the
MUM1/IRF4 protein in a subset of germinal center B cells, plasma cells, and activated
T cells, Blood 95, 2084-2092.

Han, S.H., Zheng, B., Dal Porto, J. & Kelsoe, G., 1995a: In situ Studies of the Pri-
mary Immune Response to (4-Hydroxy-3-Nitrophenyl) Acetyl IV. Aﬃnity-Dependent,
Antigen-Driven B-Cell Apoptosis in Germinal Centers as a Mechanism for Maintaining
Self-Tolerance, J. Exp. Med. 182, 1635-1644.

Han, S.H., Hathcock, K., Zheng, B., Kelper, T.B., Hodes, R. & Kelsoe, G.,
1995b: Cellular Interaction in Germinal Centers: Roles of CD40-Ligand and B7-1 and
B7-2 in Established Germinal Centers, J. Immunol. 155, 556-567.

Han, S., Zheng, B., Takahashi, Y. & Kelsoe, G., 1997: Distinctive characteristics

of germinal center B cells, Immunology 9, 255-260.

Hanna, M.G., 1964: An autoradiographic study of the germinal center in spleen white

29

pulp during early intervals of the immune response, Lab. Invest. 13, 95-104.

Hollmann, C. & Gerdes, J., 1999: Follicular Dendritic Cells and T-Cells – Nurses and

Executioners in the Germinal Center Reaction, J. Pathol. 189, 147-149.

Hollowood, K. & Macartney, J., 1992: Cell kinetics of the germinal center reaction

– a stathmokinetic study, J. Immunol. 22, 261-266.

Hostager, B.S., Catlett, I.M. & Bishop, G.A., 2000: Recruitment of CD40 and Tu-
mor Necrosis Factor Receptor-associated Factors 2 and 3 to Membrane Microdomains
during CD40 Signaling, J. Biol. Chem. 275, 15392-15398.

Hur, D.H., Kim, D.J., Kim, S., Kim, Y.I., Cho, D., Lee, D.S., Hwang, Y.-I.,
Bae, K.-W., Chang, K.Y. & Lee, W.J., 2000: Role of follicular dendritic cells in
the apoptosis of germinal center B cells, Immunol. Lett. 72, 107-111.

Jacob, J., Kassir, R. & Kelsoe, G., 1991: In situ studies of the primary immune
I. The architecture and dynamics of

response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl.
responding cell populations, J. Exp. Med. 173, 1165-1175.

Jacob, J., Przylepa, J., Miller, C. & Kelsoe, G., 1993: In situ studies of the
III. The kinetics of V region

primary response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl.
mutation and selection in germinal center B cells, J. Exp. Med. 178, 1293-1307.
Kelsoe, G., 1996: The germinal center: a crucible for lymphocyte selection, Semin.

Immunol. 8, 179-184.

Kepler, T.B. & Perelson, A.S., 1993: Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B cells and

the eﬃciency of aﬃnity maturation, Immunol. Today 14, 412-415.

Kesmir, C. & de Boer, R.J., 1999: A Mathematical Model on Germinal Center Kinetics

and Termination, J. Immunol. 163, 2463-2469.

Koopman, G., Keehnen, R.M., Lindhout, E., Zhou, D.F., de Groot, C. &

Pals, S.T., 1997: Eur. J. Immunol. 27, 1-7.

Kroese, F.G., Wubbena, A.S., Seijen, H.G. & Nieuwenhuis, P., 1987: Germinal

centers develop oligoclonally, Eur. J. Immunol. 17, 1069-1072.

K¨uppers, R., Zhao, M., Hansmann, M.L. & Rajewsky, K., 1993: Tracing B Cell
Development in Human Germinal Centers by Molecular Analysis of Single Cells Picked
from Histological Sections, EMBO J. 12, 4955-4967.

Lindhout, E., Lakeman, A. & de Groot, C., 1995: Follicular dendritic cells inhibit
apoptosis in human B lymphocytes by rapid and irreversible blockade of preexisting
endonuclease, J. Exp. Med. 181, 1985-1995.

Lindhout, E., Koopman, G., Pals, S.T. & de Groot, C., 1997: Triple check for
antigen speciﬁcity of B cells during germinal centre reactions, Immunol. Today 18,
573-576.

Liu, Y.J., Barthelemy, C., De Bouteiller, O. & Banchereau, J., 1994: The
diﬀerences in survival and phenotype between centroblasts and centrocytes, Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 355, 213-218.

Liu, Y.J., Joshua, D.E., Williams, G.T., Smith, C.A., Gordon, J. & MacLen-
nan, I.C., 1989: Mechanism of antigen-driven selection in germinal centres, Nature

30

342, 929-931.

Liu, Y.J., Zhang, J., Lane, P.J., Chan, E.Y. & MacLennan, I.C.M., 1991: Sites
of speciﬁc B cell activation in primary and secondary responses to T cell-dependent
and T cell-independent antigens, Eur. J. Immunol. 21, 2951-2962.

Loeffler, M. & Stein, H., 2001: private communication.
MacLennan, I.C.M., 1994: Germinal Centers, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12, 117-139.
McHeyzer-Williams, M.G., McLean, M.J., Labor, P.A. & Nossal, G.V.J.,
1993: Antigen-driven B cell diﬀerentiation in vivo, J. Exp. Med. 178, 295-307.
Meyer-Hermann, M., Deutsch, A. & Or-Guil, M., 2001: Recycling Probability and

Dynamical Properties of Germinal Center Reactions, J. Theor. Biol. 210, 265-285.

Meyer-Hermann, M., 2002: Does Recycling in Germinal Centers exist?, Immunol. Cell

Murray, J.D., 1993: Mathematical Biology. Springer, Berlin u.a., 2. Auﬂ.
Nossal, G., 1991: The molecular and cellular basis of aﬃnity maturation in the antibody

Biol. 80, 30-35.

response, Cell 68, 1-2.

Oprea, M. & Perelson, A.S., 1996: Exploring the Mechanism of Primary Antibody

Responses to T-Cell-Dependent Antigen, J. Theor. Biol. 181, 215-236.

Oprea, M. & Perelson, A.S., 1997: Somatic mutation leads to eﬃcient aﬃnity mat-
uration when centrocytes recycle back to centroblasts, J. Immunol. 158, 5155-5162.
Oprea, M., van Nimwegen, E. & Perelson, A.S., 2000: Dynamics of One-pass
Germinal Center Models: Implications for Aﬃnity Maturation, Bull. Math. Biol. 62,
121-153.

Pascual, V., Liu, Y.-J., Magalski, A., de Bouteiller, O., Banchereau, J. &
Capra, J.D., 1994a: Analysis of somatic mutation in ﬁve B cell subsets of human
tonsil, J. Exp. Med. 180, 329-339.

Pascual, V., Cha, S., Gershwin, M.E., Capra, J.D. & Leung, P.S.C., 1994b:
Nucleotide Sequence Analysis of Natural and Combinatorial Anti-PDC-E2 Antibodies
in Patients with Primary Biliary Cirrhosis, J. Immunol. 152, 2577-2585.

Perelson, A.S. & Oster, G.F., 1979: Theoretical Studies of Clonal Selection: Minimal
Antibody Repertoire Size and Reliability of Self-Non-self Discrimination, J. Theor.
Biol. 81, 645-670.

Radmacher, M.D., Kelsoe, G. & Kepler, T.B., 1998: Predicted and Inferred
Waiting-Times for Key Mutations in the Germinal Center Reaction – Evidence for
Stochasticity in Selection, Immunol. Cell Biol. 76, 373-381.

Rundell, A., Decarlo, R., Hogenesch, H. & Doerschuk, P., 1998: The Humoral
Immune-Response to Haemophilus-Inﬂuenzae Type-B – A Mathematical-Model Based
on T-Zone and Germinal Center B-Cell Dynamics, J. Theor. Biol. 194, 341-381.
Siepmann, K., Skok, J., van Essen, D., Harnett, M. & Gray, D., 2001: Rewiring
of CD40 is necessary for delivery of rescue signals to B cells in germinal centres and
subsequent entry into the memory pool, Immunol. 102, 263-272.

Skalak, R. & Chien, S., 1987: Handbook of Bioengineering. McGraw-Hill, New York

31

et al.

Tew, J. & Mandel, T., 1979: Prolonged antigen half-life in the lymphoid follicles of

speciﬁcally immunized mice, Immunology 37, 69-76.

Tew, J.G., Wu, J., Qin,D., Helm, S., Burton, G.F. & Szakal, A.K., 1997:
Follicular dendritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory signals to B
cells, Immunol. Rev. 156, 39-52.

van Eijk, M. & de Groot, C., 1999: Germinal Center B-Cell Apoptosis Requires Both

Caspase and Cathepsin Activity, J. Immunol. 163, 2478-2482.

van Eijk, M., Medema, J.P. & de Groot, C., 2001: Cellular Fas-Associated Death
Domain-Like IL-1-Converting Enzyme-Inhibitory Protein Protects Germinal Center
B Cells from Apoptosis During Germinal Center Reactions, J. Immunol. 166, 6473-
6476.

Wedemayer, G.J., Patten, P.A., Wang, L.H., Schultz, P.G. & Stevens, R.C.,
1997: Structural insigths into the evolution of an antibody combining site, Science
276, 1665-1669.

Zhang, J., MacLennan, I.C.M., Liu, Y.J. & Land, P.J.L., 1988: Is rapid prolifera-
tion in B centroblasts linked to somatic mutation in memory B cell clones, Immunol.
Lett. 18, 297-299.

Acknowledgments

I thank Tilo Beyer and Andreas Deutsch for intense discussions and valuable comments.

32

symbol physiological

assumed
4

10 µm

Parameter
Shape space dimension
Width of Gaussian aﬃnity weight function
Lattice constant
Radius of GC
Number of seeder cells
Diﬀusion constant for centroblasts
Ratio of centroblast to centrocyte radius

Diﬀusion constant of signal molecules
Number of FDCs
Length of FDC arms
Duration of phase of monoclonal expansion
Duration of optimization phase
Rate of proliferation (2D)
Maximal distance for CB proliferation
Mutation probability
Rate of diﬀerentiation signal production by FDCs
Rate of centroblast diﬀerentiation
Rate of FDC-centrocyte dissociation
Rate of diﬀerentiation of selected centrocytes
Probability of recycling of selected centrocytes
Rate of centrocyte apoptosis

ds
Γ
∆x
R

DCB
rCB
rCC
Dsig

∆t1
∆t2
p
RP
m
s
g1
g2
g3
q
z

2 .8

220 µm
3
5 µm2
hr
3
200 µm2
20
30 µm
72 hr
48 hr
1/(9hr)

hr

0.5

1/(6hr)
1/2hr
1/(7hr)
0 .8
1/(7hr)

60 µm

9/hr

Table 1: Summary of all physiological and assumed magnitudes entering the 2D model. The
parameters are classiﬁed in two basic categories: Those with a direct physiological interpre-
tation and those which were assumed for conceptual reasons of the model. The physiological
parameters are shown in bold, if they are known experimentally with a suﬃcient precision.
If
the parameter has a physiological counterpart and is not known experimentally but has been
determined indirectly by the analysis of experimental data, the value is shown in italic. Note,
that all given rates are the physiological ones which enter with an additional factor of ln(2)
into the model. The symbols correspond to those used in the text.

33

day 0

day 3

day 4

day 8

day 12

day 21

Figure 1:
If the centroblast diﬀerentiation is independent of the FDCs (especially without
diﬀerentiation signals) no dark zone appears during the GC reaction. This remains true even
with a centrocyte attractor in the FDC network. Here, the centrocyte-FDC interaction time is
g−1
2 = 10 hr, and the centroblast diﬀerentiation rate is g1 = 1/(8.7 hr). All other parameters
are like in Tab. 1. The initial distribution and the stages of the reaction after 3, 4, 8, 12, 21 days
are shown. The represented cell types are (from dark to light): proliferating cells, centrocytes
(in all stages of the selection process), output cells, FDCs, and empty space.

34

day 3

day 8

day 21

Figure 2: Using the concept of centroblast diﬀerentiation by local interaction with FDCs, the
dark zone is established very early and is stable until the end of the GC reaction. The parameters
are like in Tab. 1, except that the centroblast diﬀerentiation occurs in the moment of contact
with FDCs (realistic diﬀerentiation rates further enhance the fraction of centroblasts) and that
no diﬀerentiation signal exists. The stages of the reaction after 3, 8, 21 days are shown. The
represented cell types are (from dark to light): proliferating cells, centrocytes (in all stages of
the selection process), output cells, FDCs, and empty space.

35

day 0

day 3

day 4

day 8

day 12

day 21

Figure 3: Development of the dark zone during a GC reaction: The initial distribution and
the stages of the reaction after 3, 4, 8, 12, 21 days. The represented cell types are (from dark
to light): proliferating cells, centrocytes (in all stages of the selection process), output cells,
FDCs, and empty space. The used parameters are given in Tab. 1.

36

centroblasts

centrocytes

Figure 4: The same GC reaction as in Fig. 3 is shown at day 6 for proliferating cells (left)
and centrocytes (right) separately. The recycled proliferating B-cells (grey, left ﬁgure) do
not reenter the dark zone, where only non-recycled centroblasts (black, left ﬁgure) are found.
The unselected centrocytes (black, right ﬁgure) are selected (grey, right ﬁgure) in the narrow
neighborhood of the FDCs (light grey).

37

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5: Representative time courses of the relative centroblast and centrocyte populations in
the lower hemisphere of the GC for diﬀerent durations of the dark zone. In (a) the parameters
in Tab. 1 were used. The production rate of signal molecules has been changed to s = 6/hr
(and the apoptosis rate to z = 1/8 hr) in (b) and to s = 12/hr in (c). The dark zone breaks
down after 8.3 days (a), 6.9 days (b), 14.9 days (c). Recycled B-cells have practically no impact
on the dark zone population.

38

Figure 6: The time course of the fraction of high aﬃnity cells (cells which bind with a probability
of at least 30%) in the GC reaction is shown for centroblasts, centrocytes, and for the sum of
all output cells produced during the whole GC reaction. The parameters in Tab. 1 were used.

39

Figure 7: The time course of the whole population of centroblasts, the subset of recycled
centroblasts, and non-recycled centroblasts in the GC reaction. The parameters in Tab. 1 were
used.

40

Figure 8: The time course of the fraction of high aﬃnity centroblasts in the GC reaction
(cells which bind to FDCs with a probability of at least 30%) shown for the total centroblast
population and for the subsets of recycled B-cells and non-recycled centroblasts separately. The
fractions are deﬁned with respect to the total population of the corresponding subset (e.g. high
aﬃnity recycled B-cells divided by all recycled B-cells). The parameters in Tab. 1 were used.

41

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 9: The time courses of the populations of non-recycled centroblasts, recycled centrob-
lasts, and the sum of all proliferating B-cells, as well as of the fractions of high aﬃnity B-cells.
The duration of the dark zone was changed with respect to Fig. 6 and 7 by the use of diﬀerent
diﬀerentiation signal productions rates of s = 12/hr in (a,c) and s = 6/hr in (b,d). The
apoptosis rate is z = 1/(8 hr) in (b,d). All other parameters are like in Tab. 1. One observes a
clear correlation between the moment of domination of recycled B-cells (see (a) and (b)) and
the starting time of a phase of steep increase in the aﬃnity (see (c) and (d)).

42

Figure 10: The dependence of the fraction of high aﬃnity output cells and of the total num-
ber of produced output cells (summed up to the end of the GC reaction) on the number of
proliferating cells that remain in average in the GC during the last 2 days of the reaction. The
grey area denotes one standard deviation of the average values along the full line. The param-
eters in Tab. 1 were used with diﬀerent rates of centroblast diﬀerentiation signal production
s, i.e. with dark zones of variable duration. The centroblast diﬀerentiation rate g1 is adapted
correspondingly.

43

Figure 11: The dependence of the fraction of high aﬃnity output cells and of the total number
of produced output cells (summed up to the end of the GC reaction) on the duration of the dark
zone. The grey area denotes one standard deviation of the average values along the full line.
The parameters in Tab. 1 were used, where the production rate of the centroblast diﬀerentiation
signal s and the centroblast diﬀerentiation rate g1 were varied in order to generate diﬀerent
durations of the dark zone.

44

Figure 12: Representative time courses of the total number of B-cells (i.e. centroblasts and
centrocytes) in the GC reaction for four diﬀerent durations of the dark zone. The parameters
in Tab. 1 were used for the GC reactions with dark zones until day 7.5 and 9.1. The short
dark zone was generated with a faster diﬀerentiation signal production of s = 12/hr.
In the
case of the long dark zone the centroblast diﬀerentiation signal is produced with a lower rate
of s = 6/hr and the centroblast diﬀerentiation rate is g1 = 1/(5.65 hr). For comparison, the
average data from (Liu et al., 1991; Hollowood & Macartney, 1992) were normalized to the
maximum of the simulation results and rescaled correspondingly.

45

