Geometry of compact tubes and protein structures

Jayanth R. Banavar†,∗, Alessandro Flammini‡, Davide Marenduzzo‡, Amos
Maritan‡,∗ & Antonio Trovato§

† Department of Physics, 104 Davey Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, Uni-
versity Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA

‡ International School for Advanced Studies (S.I.S.S.A.), Via Beirut 2-4, 34014 Trieste,
INFM and the Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy

§ Niels Bohr Institutet, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 København Ø, Denmark

* To whom correspondence should be addressed (E-mail: banavar@psu.edu and mari-
tan@sissa.it).

2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Proteins form a very important class of polymers. In spite of major advances
in the understanding of polymer science, the protein problem has remained
largely unsolved. Here, we show that a polymer chain viewed as a tube not
only captures the well-known characteristics of polymers and their phases but
also provides a natural explanation for many of the key features of protein be-
havior. There are two natural length scales associated with a tube subject to
compaction – the thickness of the tube and the range of the attractive interac-
tions. For short tubes, when these length scales become comparable, one obtains
marginally compact structures, which are relatively few in number compared to
those in the generic compact phase of polymers. The motifs associated with the
structures in this new phase include helices, hairpins and sheets. We suggest
that Nature has selected this phase for the structures of proteins because of its
many advantages including the few candidate strucures, the ability to squeeze
the water out from the hydrophobic core and the ﬂexibility and versatility as-
sociated with being marginally compact. Our results provide a framework for
understanding the common features of all proteins.

2

A revolution [1] in the understanding of biomolecular structure took place about 50 years ago
using the precise geometrical relationships among the atoms and molecules and the rigorous
application of the new structural principles enunciated by Linus Pauling [2]. Earlier, in 1939,
J. D. Bernal [3] had noted that the symmetry of protein crystals is much higher than would be
expected statistically from compounds of such great complexity. This would seem to indicate
that each molecule is built of subunits, themselves unsymmetrical but arranged in a symmet-
rical way. The protein folding problem, the determination of the structure of the folded
state of a protein from knowledge of the sequence of amino acids, has remained unsolved
despite a large amount of experimental information on protein structures, the availability
of powerful computers and detailed knowledge of the building blocks of proteins and their
chemistry. The approach pioneered by Pauling is exceedingly eﬀective for understanding
small scale structures in great detail but becomes harder to apply at the scale of full protein
structure. The complexity arises from the 20 types of naturally occurring amino acids and
the solvent and their mutual interactions.

An independent approach to the study of such complex problems consists of stepping back
and adopting a coarse-grained view which incorporates just the most essential elements which
capture the important emergent features. For example, given a speciﬁc chemical compound,
one may use the principles of quantum mechanics and chemistry to determine its crystalline
structure. Alternatively, in a coarse-grained sense, one may deduce the existence of several
types of crystalline structure based on general symmetry and packing considerations.
In
this case, the speciﬁc chemistry of a material would dictate which one of these candidate
structures the material would adopt. A common example is the face-centered-cubic (fcc)
arrangement adopted both by common salt with strong electrostatic interactions and hard
spheres (oranges packed by a grocer) in order to achieve the most eﬃcient packing.

In order to attack a problem of the magnitude of the structure of complex biomolecules, we
suggest that it is necessary to consider both points of view. Even assuming that computa-
tional power in the future reaches a point which allows a brute force solution incorporating
all details, one might be able to mimic Nature but not necessarily understand her. On
adapting a statement by Pauling [4] (we have added three words of our own), the problem
has been examined, in the main, from one point of view only – not the wrong point of view,
but one which, unaided, gives a vista insuﬃcient to reveal the simplicity underlying the true
complex nature.

The power of the coarse-grained approach is illustrated by considering some of the familiar
states of matter. The gas, liquid and solid phases can be understood in terms of atoms
and their interactions modelled as hard spheres (there is no distinction between the gas
and liquid phases in the absence of any attractive interaction) or Lennard-Jones systems.
On varying the nature of interactions and thermodynamic quantities such as temperature
and/or pressure, it is possible to obtain these states of matter, which arise from the col-
lective, emergent behavior of a large number of atoms. Glassy behavior ensues when the
crystallization is thwarted by dynamical constraints. Entirely new classes of behavior are
found on considering anisotropic molecules as in liquid crystals [5] – the breaking of the
symmetry of the building blocks introduces qualitatively new features.

3

The molecules of life are chain molecules, polymers, which introduce the feature of connectiv-
ity along the chain. Indeed, this feature has been exploited by Nature in the DNA molecule
to code for genes. Detailed studies of polymers have revealed several phases including a
swollen phase (analogous to the gas phase) corresponding to self-avoiding conformations, a
highly degenerate compact phase in which diﬀerent monomers of a chain have an eﬀective
attraction to form a dense globule and semi-crystalline phases [6].

Proteins are an important class of chain biomolecules made up of amino acids. These
molecules fold into a somewhat compact state with the folded structures controlling their
functionality. The folding is driven by hydrophobic interactions or the tendency of certain
amino acids to avoid water. The structures of folded proteins do not correspond to the
generic compact phase of a polymer. First, the total number of protein folds is only a few
thousand [7] instead of the innumerable compact conformations of a generic chain of the
same length and second, the building blocks of biomolecular structure are pretty motifs
including helices and sheets.
Indeed, generic compact conformations are neither suitable
for encoding speciﬁcity nor are they dynamically accessible in a simple manner. Further-
more, proteins, while stable and able to fold rapidly and reproducibly to their native state
structures [8], are sensitive to the right types of perturbations and are consequently able
to perform a dizzying array of functions. Here, we shall argue that this phase adopted by
molecules embodying life is a new one distinct from the well-studied polymeric phases.

Let us begin with a set of unconstrained hard spheres with an attraction of a given range.
When the attraction has a range smaller than the diameter of the hard sphere, it is inef-
fective and the ground state is a gas. On increasing the range to a value equal to the hard
sphere diameter, the ground state changes from a gas to a fcc crystal – each hard sphere
is surrounded by the maximum possible number of other hard spheres. Consider now a
polymer chain made up of hard spheres tethered together. When the attraction between
the hard spheres is suﬃciently short range, the analog of the gas phase is a swollen phase
corresponding to self-avoiding conformations of the chain. On turning on the attraction by
increasing its range, there is a change in the ground state structure. One now gets a fcc
lattice but this time with the tethers running through the hard spheres. There are a huge
number of ways of doing this and so the ground state is highly degenerate. Of course, a
plethora of other compact states would be obtained if this crystallized state is dynamically
inaccessible due to the tethering or other constraints. Such compact states are not good
candidates for structures of proteins because there are too many of them and accessing a
speciﬁc structure is next to impossible. Of course, constraints on the local curvature of
the chain could lead to other structures, such as lamellar semi-crystalline phases [6], at low
temperatures.

The model of spheres tethered together to form a chain does capture the notion of connec-
tivity of a chain but it leaves out a second key factor, the inherent anisotropy associated
with the local directionality of the chain. In other words, for a given sphere, the adjacent
spheres along the chain deﬁne a local direction adopted by the chain. This anisotropy is
most easily captured by replacing the sphere by an object with axial symmetry, the simplest

4

example of which is a coin or a circular disc. Indeed, an object made up of tethered coins of
identical size resembles a tube of uniform thickness such as a garden hose. Such a tube like
geometry is a coarse-grained representation of the well-known steric eﬀects [9] of the basic
constituents of proteins. One may then ask what the analog of the fcc crystal phase is for
such a tube.

There are two physical consequences of the tube picture. First, there is a local curvature
constraint that does not permit radii of curvature smaller than the tube thickness. This
feature may equally well be captured for the case of spheres tethered together by an ex-
plicit bond-bending energy term. The second consequence, which is unique to the tube
description, is the inherent anisotropy which is reﬂected in the dependence of the potential
energy of interaction between two spatially nearby segments of the tube, not only on their
distance from each other but also on their mutual orientation (Figure 1). This change in the
symmetry of isotropic interactions between spheres (that is conventionally considered in the
well-studied polymer case) to the cylindrical symmetry associated with the tube leads to
qualitative changes in the nature of the ground state conformations. At high temperatures,
for a tube, one expects a swollen phase in which the local directions deﬁning the tube are
distributed isotropically. At suﬃciently low temperatures, there is a spontaneous symmetry
breaking leading to the selection of a preferred tube direction. This transition is analogous
to the isotropic-nematic transition in liquid crystals [5] for tubes. For tube segments, which
are thin compared to the range of the attractive interaction and which are near each other,
there is a larger ﬂexibility in their relative orientation (see Figure 1). Thus, in this case, a
dense globule phase with no signiﬁcant orientational ordering is expected at intermediate
temperatures between the swollen and the orientationally ordered phases.

We now turn to the ground state structures of a simpler situation, one exploited by Nature
in proteins, of a short tube when the forces promoting its compaction just set in. Indeed the
interaction range and the tube size are matched for proteins because, on the one hand, the
eﬀective interactions in the presence of the solvent are short range and the squeezing out of
water is facilitated by the outer atoms of nearby side chains coming together and, on the
other, it is these same side chains that determine the eﬀective thickness of the tube. Detailed
analytic and numerical calculations show that one obtains far fewer conformations than the
corresponding generic polymer chain or a thin tube (allowing a protein only relatively few
selection choices for its native state conformation) because the diﬀerent parts of the tube
have to position themselves just right relative to each other in order to respect the inherent
anisotropy and yet avail of the eﬀective attraction (Figure 1).

Consider the eﬀect of tuning the thickness of the short tube for a given range of attraction.
When the tube thickness is bigger than the range of attraction, one obtains a swollen phase
because the attraction is ineﬀective. The other extreme is when the tube thickness is very
small compared to this range. In this limit, the greater degrees of freedom for the relative
positioning of nearby tube segments due to the longer range of attraction leads to many
degenerate conformations.

On varying the tube thickness, near the point when the attractive forces have just set in,

5

as described below, diﬀerent segments of the tube have to position themselves just right
with respect to each other in order to avail of this attraction. This has two important con-
sequences: ﬁrst, the tube compaction leads to the formation of a hydrophobic core in the
interior of the folded structure and, second, this careful relative positioning of the tube seg-
ments combined with the anisotropy associated with the tube weeds out all but a few from
the list of possible candidate structures for ground state conformations. These conforma-
tions may be thought of as being marginally compact and are thus attractive candidates for
versatility and ﬂexibility, because they are able to respond to small changes in an eﬀective
manner. Furthermore, on lowering the temperature, starting from the swollen phase, one
would expect an almost immediate ordering at a relatively low temperature (with respect
to a thinner tube) into one of the ground state conformations without any partially folded
intermediates. This “two-state” character is an important feature of small globular proteins
and arises in the tube context because the scale of the interaction energy goes down as the
tube becomes thicker, entropic eﬀects are less important at the low temperatures of ordering
and the orientational eﬀects become stronger (see Figure 1).

We show below that the building blocks of these structures are the familiar helix, hairpins
and sheets. Furthermore, elementary considerations predict the geometry of an ideal helix,
which is very close to that observed in Nature, and the zig-zag appearance of the strands.

We have carried out computer simulations and analytic calculations of short tubes in the
marginally compact phase. The resulting structures are shown in Fig. 2. Helices and hair-
pins (sheets) are of course the well-known building blocks of protein structures [10,11] (see
Fig. 2 (A1) and (D1) for two examples from a protein and (A2), (D2) and (D3) for the tube
structures in our simulations). In addition to the prediction of these motifs in our calcu-
lations, it is interesting to note that some of the other marginally compact conformations
bear a qualitative resemblance to secondary folds in biopolymers. Helices analogous to Fig.
2 (A3) with an irregular contact map occur, e.g., in the HMG protein NHP6a [12] with pdb
code 1CG7. Fig. 2 (C1) shows the “kissing hairpins” [13] of RNA (pdb code 1KIS), each
of which is a distorted and twisted hairpin structure while Fig. 2 (C2) is the corresponding
tube conformation. Fig. 2 (B1) shows a helix of strands found experimentally in Zinc met-
alloprotease [14] (pdb code: 1KAP), whereas Fig. 2 (B2) is the corresponding marginally
compact conformation obtained in our calculations.

It is possible to understand the results shown in Fig. 2 by means of simple arguments.
Let us begin by taking a piece of tube of radius R0 and length equal to 2πR0. Gonzalez
and Maddocks [15] have shown that a simple description of a tube is obtained by taking all
triplets of points along the axis of the tube and measuring the radii of the circles passing
through them with a view of ensuring that none of these radii is smaller than the thickness.
In particular, the local radius of curvature of a tube can never be smaller than its thickness.
By placing the tube in the form of a donut of radius R0, one can eﬀectively ﬁll all the space
in the middle of the donut. When the tube is longer than 2πR0, the most eﬃcient means of
compactifying it is to place it in a helical conformation with local radius of curvature equal
to R0 and with the pitch chosen so that the segments of the tube in successive turns lie on
top of each other. This is, of course, a valid structure only when the range of attractive

6

interactions allows contacts to be made in this geometry. This ideal space-ﬁlling helix has a
special pitch to radius ratio (see Fig. 2 (A2)), which is observed not only in α-helices in glob-
ular proteins but also in the helices of collagen [16]. An eﬀective squeezing out of the space
between the successive turns of the helix is accomplished by the fact that the orientations
of the interacting segments of the tube are parallel to each other. Were this not to be the
case, the inherent anisotropy of the tube (imagine a tube made up of discrete coins) would
lead to a mismatch, a factor of no consequence in a chain made up of tethered hard spheres.
One may show analytically that, on increasing the tube thickness, helices are excluded from
being the ground states, when the tube thickness exceeds Rmax,hel
/2 ∼ 0.943
(R1 is the range of the attractive interaction and is chosen to be 1.6 units in Fig. 2 – all
lengths in the simulation are measured in units of the distance between successive Cα atoms)
which is obtained when two parallel straight lines (successive turns of the helix treated as
circles with inﬁnite radius) are at a distance of R1 from each other. Indeed this structure is
one that corresponds to a hairpin.

1 + R2
1

(cid:18)q

∼

(cid:19)

0

The zig-zag hairpin of Fig. 2 (D2) is a distorted version of this idealized case due to the
discreteness of the protein chain. One can use elementary geometrical considerations to
prove that the zig-zag nature accommodates a tube of larger thickness compared to straight
segments. For two zig-zag antiparallel strands facing each other, one can show analytically
that the maximum thickness is obtained (leaving aside the edge eﬀect of how the strands
Indeed,
are connected together in a hairpin) when one has a space-ﬁlling conformation.
this condition leads to the following relationship between the tube thickness R0 and the
interaction range R1

R1
R0
which yields a value of R0 ∼ 1.2124, when R1 = 1.6, in perfect accord with our simulations.

− 4R2

1 + 2 +

0 = 0,

R2

For intermediate tube thicknesses between those corresponding to a helix or a hairpin, we
ﬁnd only a few other structures that may be thought of as interpolating between the two
limiting cases. In order of decreasing thickness, one obtains ﬁrst the kissing hairpin structure
(Fig. 2 (C2)), which is a hairpin twisted into three dimensions – a feature allowed for by
the slightly smaller thickness compared to the planar hairpin; a helix made up of strands
(Fig. 2 (B2)); and irregular, somewhat non-ideal helices (Fig. 1 (A3)). In all cases, nearby
parts of the tube are oriented parallel to each other.

It is interesting to consider the ground state of many long tubes subject to compaction.
Packing considerations suggest that the tubes become essentially straight and parallel to
each other and are arranged (when viewed end on) in a triangular lattice, analogous to
the Abrikosov ﬂux lattice phase in superconductors [17]. Returning to the case of a single
tube, in the very long length limit, a similar phase would be expected with the additional
constraint of the bending of the tube segments at the ends. As stated before, for a discrete
chain, a planar placement of zig-zag strands is able to accommodate the largest thickness
tube that can yet avail of the attraction – however, the thickness for this limiting case is too
large to produce the three dimensional ordering alluded to above. It would be interesting
to consider how the ground state structure crosses over from the “ﬂux-lattice” type phase

7

to the familiar planar phase. Indeed, for thick tubes of moderate length, one may expect
to form a large sheet-like structure analogous to the cross-β-scaﬀold observed as a building
block of amyloid ﬁbrils [18]. Such ﬁbrils have been implicated in a variety of human disorders
including Alzheimer’s disease and spongiform encephalopathies such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease. Remarkably, recent ﬁndings suggest that the ability of proteins to form amyloid is
a generic property of polypeptide chains [18].

Many strategies for attacking the protein folding problem have been put forward which
employ a coarse-grained description [19]. None of the currently used methods has been
successful. Our results suggest that a deﬁciency of all these methods has been that the
context provided by the local tube orientation is neglected while considering the interaction
between coarse-grained units. The novel phase discussed here arises from the addition of
anisotropy to the well-studied polymer problem just as one obtains rich liquid crystal behav-
ior on studying anisotropic molecules. A mapping of the phase behavior of tubes on varying
the nature of interactions, the thickness of the tube, the length of the tube and temperature
might yield additional surprises.

In 1939, J. D. Bernal [3] wrote: Any eﬀective picture of protein structure must provide at the
same time for the common character of all proteins as exempliﬁed by their many chemical
and physical similarities, and for the highly speciﬁc nature of each protein type. Our results
provide a simple framework for the common character of all proteins. Our analysis is based
on just three ingredients – all proteins share a backbone, there are eﬀective forces which
promote the folding of a protein and the one and only new idea that a protein can be viewed
as a tube (see Fig. 3). We have not introduced any input into our analysis which pertains
to the highly speciﬁc nature of each protein type [3] as encoded by the amino acid sequence.
It would be interesting to extend our calculations to a tube of non-uniform thickness. For
example, the presence of a small amino acid like glycine at backward bends allows for tight
turns to be formed to facilitate good packing and lead to low values of local thickness. Also,
the wide variety of amino acid properties such as hydrophobicity, charge and ability to form
disulﬁde or hydrogen bonds may be captured in a coarse-grained way by inhomogeneous
attractive amino acid speciﬁc interactions, which respect the inherent anisotropy of a tube.

It is important to stress that our results are not at odds with or meant as a substitute for
the detailed and beautiful work involving the laws of quantum mechanics and biochemistry.
The virtue of our approach is that it predicts a novel phase with selected types of structures
and the attendant advantages. It is then necessary to complement this information with the
principles of quantum chemistry to assess whether a given biomolecule would ﬁt one of these
structures. We do not invoke hydrogen bonds as Pauling did in his prediction of protein
secondary motifs [10,11] and indeed not all the structures in the marginally compact phase
are compatible with hydrogen bond placement. What is remarkable, however, is that the
lengths of the covalent and hydrogen bonds and the rules of quantum chemistry conspire to
provide a perfect ﬁt to the basic structures in this novel phase. One cannot but be amazed
at how the evolutionary forces of Nature have shaped the molecules of life [20] ranging from
the DNA molecule, which carries the genetic code and is eﬃciently copied, to proteins, the
work horses of life, whose functionality follows from their form which, in turn, is a novel

8

phase of matter.

Acknowledgements We are indebted to Flavio Seno and Michele Vendruscolo for useful
discussions. This work was supported by INFM, MURST coﬁn2001, NASA and the Penn
State MRSEC under NSF grant DMR-0080019.

9

REFERENCES

[1] Watson, J. D. and Crick, F. H. C., A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid, Nature

171, 737 (1953).

[2] Pauling, L., Modern structural chemistry, Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1954. Reprinted

in several places, including Science 123 (1956).

[3] Bernal, J. D., Structure of proteins, Nature 143, 663-667 (1939).
[4] Pauling, L., Molecular architecture and biological reactions, Chemical and engineering

[5] Chaikin, P. M. and Lubensky, T. C., Principles of condensed matter physics, Cambridge

news 24, 1064-1066 (1946).

University Press, Cambridge (1995).

[6] Woodward, A. E., Atlas of polymer morphology, Hanser Publishers, New York (1988).
[7] Chothia, C., One thousand families for the molecular biologist. Nature 357, 543-544

[8] Anﬁnsen, C., Principles that govern the folding of protein chains. Science 181, 223-230

(1992).

(1973).

[9] Ramachandran, G. N. and Sasisekharan, V., Conformations of polypeptides and pro-

teins. Adv. Protein Chem. 23, 283-438 (1968).

[10] Pauling, L., Corey, R. B. and Branson, H. R., The structure of proteins: two hydrogen-
bonded helical conformations of the polypeptide chain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 37,
205-211 (1951).

[11] Pauling, L. and Corey, R., B., Conformations of polypeptide chains with favored orien-
tations around single bonds: two new pleated sheets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 37,
729-740 (1951).

[12] Allain, F. H. T., Yen, M., Masse, J. E., Schultze, P., Dieckmann, T., Johnson, R. C.
and Feigon, J., Solution structure of the HMG protein NHP6A and its interaction with
DNA reveals the structural determinants for non sequence speciﬁc binding. Embo J. 18,
2563 (1999).

[13] Chang, K. Y. and Tinoco, I., The Structure of an RNA “kissing” hairpin complex of

the HIV tar hairpin loop and its complement. J. Mol. Biol. 269, 52 (1997).

[14] Baumann, U., Wu, S., Flaherty, K. M. and Mckay, D. B., Three-dimensional structure of
the alkalyne protease of pseudomonas aeruginosa: a two-domani protein with a calcium
binding parallel beta roll motif. Embo J. 12, 3357 (1993).

[15] Gonzalez, O. and Maddocks, J. H., Global curvature, thickness and the ideal shapes of

knots. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 4769-4773 (1999).

[16] Maritan, A., Micheletti, C., Trovato, A. and Banavar, J. R., Optimal shapes of compact

strings. Nature 406, 287-290 (2000).

[17] Tinkham, M., Intorduction to superconductivity, McGraw-Hill, New York (1996).
[18] Dobson, C. M., Protein misfolding, evolution and disease, Trends in Biochem. Sci., 24,

[19] Banavar, J. R. and Maritan, A., Computational approach to the protein folding problem.

329 (1999).

Proteins 42, 433-435 (2001).

[20] Denton, M. and Marshall, C., Laws of form revisited, Nature 410, 417 (2001).

10

FIGURE CAPTIONS
Figure 1:
Potential energy of interaction of two straight tubes as a function of their mutual distance
and relative orientation.
The top panel shows the simpliﬁed geometry that we have considered. Two straight tubes,
each of length 2l, are placed a distance d from each other with their axes making an angle θ
with respect to each other. The line joining the centers of the tubes is perpendicular to both
the tube axes. We consider a favorable energy of interaction when a pair of inﬁnitesimal seg-
ments of the axes of the two tubes are within a distance R1 (chosen to be 1.6 units as in the
simulations described in Fig. 2), which is the range of a uniform attractive interaction. The
lower panel shows plots of the potential energy both as a function of d and θ for l = 1. The
left hand ﬁgure shows how the tube geometry leads to an anisotropic interaction, reﬂected
by an energy which depends on θ, for three values of d. Note that in each case the energy has
been scaled by the energy when the tubes are parallel to each other with the corresponding
value of d. The anisotropy becomes more pronounced as the tubes become thicker because
this restricts the possible range of d to values closer to R1. The weak minimum for the d = 0
case away from θ = 0 is due to the short length of the tubes. The lower right hand panel
shows a plot of the magnitude of the potential energy when the tubes are oriented parallel
to each other as a function of d. (we have chosen units such that the scale of the attractive
interaction energy of two segments within the range of attraction is simply given by the
product of their lengths.) The potential energy is zero when the value of d exceeds that of
R1. Note that, for a continuum tube, as the tube thickness, R0, increases towards R1/2,
restricting d to values close to but smaller than R1, there are two simultaneous eﬀects. First
the scale of the interaction energy becomes very weak and second, the anisotropy becomes
pronounced. As described in the text, both these eﬀects play a crucial role in simplifying
the behavior of proteins.

Figure 2:
Building blocks of biomolecules and ground state structures associated with the marginally
compact phase of a short tube.

In order to mimic a protein, the axis of the tube of non-zero thickness (radius of cross-
section) R0 is modelled as a one dimensional discrete chain, whose bonds are of ﬁxed length
(set equal to 1 without loss of generality – all other lengths will be measured in these units
from now on) and which connect neighboring Cα atoms along the chain. The thickness [15]
of the tube is captured by disallowing conformations for which R0 > mini6=j6=kRi,j,k, where
Ri,j,k is the radius of the circle going through the centers of the atoms i, j and k:

where Ai,j,k is the area of the triangle through i, j and k and ri,j is the distance between
the centers of the i-th and the j-th atoms. Indeed, one may ascribe a local thickness to
the tube by measuring all three body radii associated with a given atom and all other pairs
and selecting the smallest radius among these. Figure 3 shows the distributions of the local
tube thickness for the native state structures of 30 proteins and underscores the excellent

Ri,j,k =

ri,jrj,kri,k
4Ai,j,k

11

approximation of viewing the protein as a tube of uniform thickness.

The interaction between non-consecutive atoms is modeled via a 2-body potential with a
hard core and a square well:

if ri,j < 2Rh.c.

∞
−1 if 2Rh.c. < ri,j < R1
0

if R1 < ri,j

V (ri,j) = 




The three-body interactions capture the inherent anisotropy of a tube, whereas the pairwise
potential drives the compaction. For the results shown here, Rh.c. has been set to 0.55, R1
to 1.6 and R0 was increased in the vicinity of the transition to the swollen phase until the
number of pairwise contacts was reduced to three. While these values have been selected
in order to mimic the protein backbone formed by the Cα atoms, we have veriﬁed that our
results are robust to variations in these values.

The top row shows some of the building blocks of biomolecules, while the second row depicts
the corresponding structures obtained for a tube. (A1) is an α-helix of a naturally occur-
ing protein, while (A2) and (A3) are the helices obtained in our calculations – (A2) has a
regular contact map and is obtained when R0 = 0.80267 whereas (A3) (R0 = 0.833) is a
distorted helix in which the distance between successive atoms along the helical axis is not
constant but has period 2. (B1) is a helix of strands in the alkaline protease of pseudomonas
aeruginosa, whereas (B2) shows the corresponding structure (R0 = 0.88) obtained in our
computer simulations. (C1) shows the “kissing” hairpins of RNA and (C2) the correspond-
ing conformation obtained in our simulations with R0 = 0.95. Finally (D1) and (D2) are
two instances of quasi-planar hairpins. The ﬁrst structure is from the same protein as before
(the alkaline protease of pseudomonas aeruginosa) while the second is a typical conformation
found in our simulations when R0 > 0.98. The sheet-like structure (D3) is obtained for a
longer tube.

Figure 3:
Distribution of local thicknesses of the native state structures of 30 proteins. The peaked
distribution shows that it is a good approximation to think of a protein as a tube of uniform
thickness of around 2.7˚A.

12

FIGURES

R 0

θ

2l

ε(θ)

ε(0)

−0.1

−0.3

−0.5

−0.7

−0.9

−1.1

0

d

d=1.595

d=1.45

d=0

0

−1

ε(0)

−2

−3

−4

0

50

100
θ (degrees)

150

200

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

d/R1

13

(A1)

(B1)

(C1)

(D1)

(A2)

(B2)

(C2)

(D2)

(A3)

(D3)

14

800

600

400

200

l

s
t
e
p
i
r
t
 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
n

0

1

2

3

4

5

triplet radius (local thickness)

(A)

15

