2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Possible Role of Chemotaxis in Germinal
Center Formation

Tilo Beyer, Michael Meyer-Hermann, and Gerhard Soﬀ

Technische Universit¨at Dresden
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik
D-01062 Dresden, Germany
Tel.: +49 351 463-35539
Fax.: +49 351 463-37299
E-mail: tilbey@theory.phy.tu-dresden.de

Abstract

During the germinal center reaction a characteristic morphology is developed.

In the
framework of a recently developed space-time-model for the germinal center a mechanism
for the formation of dark and light zones has been proposed. The mechanism is based on
a diﬀusing diﬀerentiation signal which is secerned by follicular dendritic cells (1). Here, we
investigate a possible inﬂuence of recently found chemokines for the germinal center formation
in the framework of a single-cell-based stochastic and discrete three-dimensional model. We
will also consider alternative possible chemotactic pathways that may play a role for the
development of both zones. Our results suggest that the centrocyte motility resulting from a
follicular dendritic cell-derived chemokine has to exceed a lower limit to allow the separation
of centroblasts and centrocytes. In contrast to light microscopy the dark zone is ring shaped.
This suggests that FDC-derived chemoattractants alone cannot explain the typical germinal
center morphology.
Keywords: B cells, centroblasts, centrocytes, folliuclar dendritic cells, spatial model

1

1

Introduction

Germinal centers (GC) play an important role during secondary immune response (for an overview
see (2)). The reaction starts with the activation of B cells by antigen (Ag) during a T cell-dependent
or independent immune response (3). Within secondary lymphoid organs such as the spleen, tonsils,
or lymph nodes the major part diﬀerentiates into plasma cells while a small number of activated
B cells—the seeder cells—migrate into the primary follicle which now develops to a secondary
follicle. There, the seeder cells develop to centroblasts (4, 3) which start to proliferate rapidly
and replace the naive B cells inside a dense network of follicular dendritic cells (FDC) within 3–4
days (3,5). At about the same time a yet unknown signal provides the centroblasts to start somatic
hypermutation (6, 2) leading to a diversiﬁcation of antibodies (Ab) amongst the monoclonally
expanded cells (3). Several experiments suggest that the expression of Ab is suppressed on the
centroblast surface (7). The centroblasts diﬀerentiate into smaller apoptotic centrocytes which
express Ab to a higher degree (8, 9). To rescue centrocytes from programmed cell death they
ﬁrst have to interact with Ag presenting FDCs (10, 11, 12).
In order to do so the centrocyte
has to present an Ab with high aﬃnity for the Ag.
If the interaction is successful centrocytes
are positively selected. Furthermore they have to pass a second checkpoint where T cells test
for autoimmune reaction and provide signals for further diﬀerentiation either into plasma cells or
memory cells (13, 12). The process of somatic hypermutation together with those two stages of
selection lead to aﬃnity maturation, i.e. to an optimization of Abs (14).

During the GC reaction a characteristic morphology occurs. When the processes of somatic
hypermutation and diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes have started basically two speciﬁc
areas can be seen in the GC around day 5: a centroblast rich dark zone and a light zone primarily
ﬁlled with centrocytes (3, 15, 2, 5). Until now it has not been resolved which mechanisms lead to
the separation of both cell types.
In the framework of a recent model for the GC morphology
it has been shown that a slowly diﬀusing signal which is secerned by FDCs and consumed by
centroblasts, indeed, leads to the intermediate development of dark and light zones as observed in
experiment (1).

The importance of an intermediatly appearing dark zone for aﬃnity maturation has been
emphasized. The two zones remain for at least a few days before the light zone enriches with
centroblasts and the GC is homogeneously ﬁlled with centroblasts and centrocytes (5). The total
cell number than decreases until the whole GC reaction stops about 3 weeks after initiation and
only a few centroblasts remain (3, 2).

Today the model mentioned above (1) is the only one considering spatial aspects of the GC
reaction. Many other models deal exclusively with kinetic aspects or aﬃnity maturation (16, 17,
18,19,20). In this article we will present the ﬁrst three-dimensional model of the GC reaction. The
model is lattice-based and includes chemotaxis as well as a more detailed spatial resolution. We
discuss several known chemotactic pathways which may play an essential role for GC formation
(21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28).

2 The Model

To represent a GC in a spatial model we have taken into account three important concepts which
are mirrored in the following three subsections: antibodies and antigen, the dynamics of cell-cell
interactions, and the spatial distribution of cells. In all cases we want to stay as close as possible
to experimental results. Of course there are still unknown parameters. One part of them are
physiological parameters which are not yet measured or which are not determined consistently
in experiments. A second part consists of model parameters that have no direct physiological
correspondence but have to be motivated by physiological properties. All parameter values are

2

(1)

summarized in Table 1. The model incorporates individual cells on a three-dimensional lattice.
Each cell has its unique set of properties described in the following sections.

2.1 Representation of antibody and antigen

The representation of the Ab phenotype of each cell follows the model of Perelson and Oster (29).
In this model a shape space, i.e. a N -dimensional ﬁnite size lattice is deﬁned in which each point
corresponds to an Ab phenotype Φ. The Ag is represented by the complementary Ab position Φ0
in the shape space. Since non-optimal Abs may also bind an Ag, the interaction between both is
described by an aﬃnity distribution function

a (Φ, Φ0) = exp

η

1

Φ

k

Φ0
−
Γη

k

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

1 denotes the 1-norm (sum over the absolute values of the coordinates) in the shape
where
.
k
k
space, Γ
2.8 is the aﬃnity width and η = 2 is the exponential weight (20). The aﬃnity function
≈
is interpreted as probability of an Ab Φ to bind the Ag Φ0 ranging from 1 for a perfect matching
Ab to 0 for a non-binding Ab. In this scheme hypermutation is described as a jump from an Ab
position Φ to one of 2N possible next neighbor Ab positions Φ + ∆Φ. Here we do not consider
key mutations which would require a description closer to the details of somatic hypermutation.
This may be provided by a genetic model including hot spots and their implication for Abs. For a
discussion of the inﬂuence of key mutations see (30, 20, 31). Further we do not consider eﬀects as
Ag consumption or decay (16, 17).

2.2 Germinal center dynamics

It exists a great variety of diﬀerent pictures for the dynamics and morphological properties of
GC reactions. In our model we want to consider a rather general and simpliﬁed perspective on a
representative GC. We will concentrate on B cells and FDCs and do not model T cells, monocytes
or tingible body macrophages which may also inﬂuence the morphology. It is known that GCs can
develop their typical structure in the absence of T cells (32, 33, 34). The GC reaction is initiated
by activated B cells which migrate into the FDC network. It has been shown that the seeder cells
have at least a low aﬃnity for the Ag which is presented by the FDCs (35). In the model this
is taken into account by using an Ab position Φ about 5 to 10 mutation steps away from the Ag
position Φ0 in the shape space. This is in agreement with experimental observations (36, 37).

2.2.1 Proliferation phase

When the seeder cells have entered the FDC network they receive a signal that induces a fast
proliferation phase with an average cell division time of 6–7 hr (38, 39, 3, 9, 2). During the ﬁrst
three days of GC reaction about 3 seeder cells (40, 3) increase their number to about 104 cells
replacing the naive B cells inside the FDC network. The naive B cells form the mantle zone
now (3).

Since our model is single-cell based we will not simulate the proliferation in terms of a linear
diﬀerential equation with constant cell division rate. Instead, let us consider an ensemble of equal
cells in the same stage of cell cycle and measure the time they need to complete the process of
mitosis. Qualitatively this leads to a peak centered at the mean cell cycle time TP = 6 hr with
width σ = 0.6 hr. As a simple ansatz we use a Gauss-function whcih leads to a proliferation rate

p(ti) =

1
√2πσ

exp

 −

2
TP )

(ti −
2σ2

!

(2)

3

where ti denotes the eigentime of the cell i. The eigentime describes an internal clock of the cell
indicating its cell cycle status and is an individual property of each cell. We will make use of this
concept throughout the model to describe time-dependent processes such as proliferation (Sec.
2.3.1), diﬀerentiation (Sec. 2.3.1), or centrocyte-FDC interaction (Sec. 2.3.3).

2.2.2 Diﬀerentiation to Centrocytes

Some experiments show that centroblasts express low levels of Abs on their surface (7). Thus
selection is very unlikely to take place in terms of Ab aﬃnity. After three days of monoclonal
expansion centroblasts diﬀerentiate into centrocytes which express higher levels of Ab. Now B
cells can be selected according to their aﬃnity for the Ag presented by the FDCs (13). The ﬁrst
step of B cell selection within GCs is a close cell-cell interaction between centrocytes and FDCs
which takes about 1–4 hours (41, 42).

It has been shown that about at the same time when the diﬀerentiation to centrocytes starts

the process of somatic hypermutation is initiated in centroblasts (6, 2).

The capability of positively selected centrocytes to recycle back to centroblasts has been fre-
quently discussed (43, 44, 45, 20). This is incorporated to the model using the recycling probability
r = 0.8 (16, 20). This implies that 20% of all positively selected centrocytes become either plasma
or memory cells. The model does not distinguish between plasma and memory cells which are
denoted as output cells in the following. In fact not all centrocytes that survive the ﬁrst selection
step become output cells due to the last selection step taking place in interaction with T cells. So
only a certain fraction s = 0.9 of these cells will survive (2, 13, 20).

We also include a time delay ∆τ = 48 hr between the onset of centroblast diﬀerentiation and
the start of output cell production. All positively selected centrocytes are recycled during this
optimization phase (20, 46, 47), which lasts until the onset of output cell production.

2.3 Spatial modeling of the germinal center

At ﬁrst we consider the spatial resolution of the model. We do not need to consider the details of
the cell shape since we are not primarily interested in surface properties. But we cannot neglect the
volume of the cells because centroblast are more than 10-times larger than centrocytes (centroblast
diameter dCB = 15 µm (48), centrocyte diameter dCC = 6.5 µm (49, 9)). If we allow only one cell
per lattice point we have essentially two possibilities to choose the lattice constant. On one hand,
the lattice constant can be chosen to be of the order of the centroblast diameter dCB. This provides
a well deﬁned volume concept in the sense that one lattice point embeds a volume larger than the
volume of one cell. However, this implies that a lattice area ﬁlled with centrocytes would mainly
consist of empty space. On the other hand, if we choose a lattice constant equal to the centrocyte
diameter dCC we do not have problems with empty spaces but one lattice point provides not
enough space for a centroblast. As a consequence, we are led to a subcellular description that
would contain more information than necessary for the present purposes.

To solve this conﬂict we proceed as follows. The lattice constant a is deﬁned as the average of
the diameters of centroblasts and centrocytes. In the following the lattice constant a denotes the
distance between nearest neighbor lattice points. This is a natural unit for the discretization of
parameters depending on the lattice constant (such as cell velocities). To minimize eﬀects of lattice
anisotropy we choose a face centered cubic (fcc) lattice which has the highest symmetry amongst
regular lattices. Second, we consider polyeders at each lattice point formed by nearest neighbor
points. Within this polyeder the volume of all cells that intersect with the polyeder are summed
up. We assume spherical cells and the lattice constant to be large enough to exclude an intersection
of cells on second next neighbor points with the polyeder. Then, only nearest neighbors have to
be considered. A cell is allowed to move to a next neighbor point if three conditions are fulﬁlled:

4

(3)

(4)

(5)

the point is not occupied by another cell, there is enough volume remaining in the corresponding
polyeder to take up the volume of the new cell, and the polyeders belonging to the next neighbors
of the considered target point can take up the intersecting volume of the new cell.

We consider two origins for cell movement: undirectioned random movement and chemotaxis.
This is incorporated into the model by separating the cell movement into an isotropic random
part and a cell type-dependent deterministic part.
In each timestep a randomly chosen cell is
highlighted to perform a motion. All next neighbor points are checked if the cell is allowed to
move to this point in the sense explained above. Then the deterministic part is calculated as a
velocity vector v based on chemokine concentration gradients to free next neighbor points (the
calculation of the concentrations is described in section 2.3.4). If the cell responds to multiple
chemokines the corresponding velocity vectors are summed up to give the resulting velocity vector
v. This vector is projected onto the lattice via unit vectors en, where n denotes all 12 possible
directions of movement. The result is multiplied with the factor ∆t/a in order to convert it into a
probability for moving to a lattice point via channel n in the time interval ∆t:

In an analogous way we calculate a probability for undirected random movement.

wn,deterministic = v

en

∆t
a

·

wrandom = vrandom

∆t
aNnn

where vrandom is the cell velocity for undirectioned movement and Nnn = 12 is the number of next
neighbors in the fcc lattice. The total probability for the movement of a cell to a neighbor point
using the channel n is then given by

wn = (wn,deterministic + wrandom)δn,free

where δn,free is the Kronecker symbol for channel n which is equal 1 if the channel is free and 0
otherwise.

n wn ≤

In order to interprete wn as probability we demand wn ≥

0 and set wn = 0 otherwise. As only
movements to next neighbor points are allowed we have to choose the time step ∆t small enough
1. This condition depends on the highest possible cell velocity.
to keep
Knowing the probabilities of cell movement for each free channel, one of the available channels
is selected by using a pseudo random number. Note, that this procedure alters the eﬀective values
for the random velocity and the chemotactic response, e.g. in the case that all next neighbor points
are occupied by other cells both values are zero.

P

2.3.1 Representation of B cells

B cells are modeled as individual cells with several properties: position, volume Vi, Ab phenotype
Φi, and eigentime ti. Each cell has a certain probability to proliferate, if it is a centroblast, or
to die by apoptosis, if it is a centrocyte, which grows according to eq. (2) when the eigentime ti
reaches the average cell division time TP or lifetime TL, respectively. The eigentime is always set
to zero when the cell has proliferated, i.e. both new cells start with eigentime ti = 0. The same
holds true if the cell has diﬀerentiated.

Growth and diﬀerentiation of cells Since we included the cell volume in the model we have to
explain how to diﬀerentiate from large centroblasts to small centrocytes and back. If centroblasts
diﬀerentiate to centrocytes additional volume around the cell becomes available which is not a real
problem. But the other way round additional volume is suddenly required. In order to provide a

more realistic description of cell volume we include cell growth in the model. We use an equation
of the type

dVi
dti

= βV α
i

,

where α and β determine the time course of the growth process.

When a centrocyte recycles back into a centroblast it starts to grow. To ensure the volume
restriction the cell may only grow if the polyeder associated to the occupied lattice point and the
polyeders associated to the next neighbor points can hold the additional volume βV α
i ∆t. If this
is not possible the cell stops growing until the required space becomes available. Note, that this
process depends on the movement and growth of cells in the vicinity. Therefore, it is important to
calculate cell growth by choosing cells in a random sequence in each time step—as it is done for
cell movement.

Addionally, the growth process of a recycled cell takes longer compared to a new cell emerging
from mitosis because the initial volume is substantially smaller. Proliferation requires the cell
to have an above threshold volume.
If this is not required for the process of diﬀerentiation as
well, recycled cells would preferentially diﬀerentiate and proliferation would become a rare event.
However, the multiplication of high aﬃnity B cells through recycling is an important feature of
GC dynamics. Therefore, we forbid diﬀerentiation of a recycled centroblast until it reaches the
volume of a freshly proliferated cell.

The diﬀerentiation of centroblasts to centrocytes is assumed to occur with a constant rate
after activation by a quantum of signal molecules (50, 51). The inﬂuence of spatial inhomogeneous
diﬀerentiation signals on the GC morphology has been been studied before (1). We want to exclude
a spatial inhomogeneity of signal molecules in order to avoid an interference with the chemotactic
response of GC B cells. Therefore we introduce a homogeneous density of quanta of signal molecules
ρ. A centroblast consumes such quanta with a rate u = ρ
1/hr proportional to this density ρ. One
quantum of signal molecules is assumed to contain enough molecules to induce the diﬀerentiation
process. The centroblast then diﬀerentiates with rate 1/TD = 1/(3 hr). The signal quanta are
produced with rate q from day 3 on.

·

In order to perform the diﬀerentiation process the cell ’shrinks’ to the proper centrocyte volume
and acquires all characteristic properties as the ability to interact with FDCs and the initiation of
the process of apoptosis. The cell is assumed to be already able to respond to chemokines before
the typical centrocyte volume has been reached.

The constants α and β in eq. (6) have to be speciﬁed yet. The exponent α describes the volume
dependence of the growth process and is determined to be α = 3/4 according to observations made
for many diﬀerent organisms (52). The coeﬃcient β is chosen for the process of shrinking and
growing separately. In the case of cell shrinking βs is determined by the time TS a centroblast
needs to fully diﬀerentiate into a centrocyte. Unfortunately this time is not known but seems to be
substantially smaller than 7 hr (3, 5). Therefore, we assume TS = 3 hr. In the case of cell growth
we chose βg in respect to the proliferation of centroblasts. The centroblast volume is doubled
during the G1-phase of the cell cycle. We assume the duration of the G1-phase to be of the order
of TG1 = 5.4 hr. It results

(1
for the process of growing (V0 = (π/6)d3

(cid:0)
−

1−α
V
0

βg =

2α−1

1
−
α) TG1

≈

(cid:1)

0.8

µm3/4
hr

CB denotes the maximum centroblast volume), and

βs =

−

1−α
V
0

1

12α−1

−
α) TS

(1

(cid:0)
−

≈ −

(cid:1)

µm3/4
hr

4

in the case of shrinking. The centroblast diameter dCB is a little more than two times larger than
the centrocyte diameter dCC resulting in a volume ratio of about 12 : 1.

5

(6)

(7)

(8)

6

Proliferation of centroblasts The proliferation of the centroblasts is described as the replace-
ment of a large mother cell by two daughter cells with half volume thus respecting the volume
conservation but violating the condition that only one cell can occupy one lattice point. The latter
condition is restored automatically when a lattice point in the close proximity becomes available
for one of the cells to move to. To each new cell the eigentime zero is attributed and it restarts
to grow. If the growth process stops for a short period of time because there is not enough space
available the eigentime is frozen as well. This mirrors the inﬂuence of the growth process—the
G1-phase of the cell cycle—on the proliferation time. The other phases of cell cycle are more or less
of constant duration and do not depend on space restrictions since the volume does not change.

Both daughter cells have to maintain a certain distance in order to have suﬃcient space to
grow. In the case of very low mobility the B cells may not reach this minimum distance at every
moment and therefore proliferation is inhibited, i.e. the expected 104 cells after three days of clonal
expansion will not be seen. This implies a lower bound for the mobility of the B cells.

We do not consider apoptosis of centroblasts. Experiments show that centroblasts can enter
apoptosis when left without proper surviving signals (50, 53, 54, 55). Thus we neglect two possible
eﬀects: A time dependence and a spatial dependence of an eﬀective proliferation rate. Also we do
not include proliferation signals (51). Thus the proliferation probability p(t) depends neither on
the position of the cell nor on the time course of the GC reaction. Only volume restrictions modify
the proliferation rate. The results will be discussed in this context.

Hypermutation For the selection process each B cell has its own Ab phenotype Φi. Before the
onset of somatic hypermutation all centroblasts have the same Ab phenotype. Hypermutation is
started at the same time point as diﬀerentiation. A cell jumps to a next neighbor point in the
shape space with hypermutation probability m = 0.5 (56, 15). Hypermutation is allowed during
cell division only, and both new cells mutate with the same probability.

2.3.2 FDC representation

Follicular dendritic cells are represented as a soma with dendrites attached to it. The soma is
assumed to be immobile and to have a volume comparable to B cells. The volume of the dendrites
is neglected so that B cells and dendrites may occupy the same lattice points. Each FDC has six
dendrites with a length of four lattice constants a resulting in an overall length of 254 µm which is
in good agreement with morphological studies (57). The total number of FDCs is NFDC = 104 (58).
This provides enough sites for centrocytes to interact with FDCs without saturation eﬀects.

2.3.3 Interaction between centrocytes and FDCs

The interaction between centrocytes and FDCs takes place when the centrocyte is next neighbor
of a dendrite or the soma of an FDC or shares a lattice point with a dendrite. We assume that
the process of selection takes about 3 hours (41, 42). During that time the centrocyte is in close
contact with the FDC and therefore the centrocyte is assumed not to move. Thereafter the aﬃnity
between Ag and the Ab phenotype of the centrocyte is calculated according to eq. 1. The aﬃnity
is interpreted as probability of positive selection. If the cell is positively selected it may become
an output cell or a centroblast again. During the optimization phase, i.e. before the production
of output cells is started (approximately at day 5 (20, 46, 47)), all positively selected B cells are
recycled.

2.3.4 Chemotaxis

Every FDC soma generates a chemotactic ﬁeld by secreting a chemokine into the GC. We assume
that the decay and the uptake of signal molecules by B cells is small enough to neglect the feedback

7

on the chemotactic ﬁeld. Thus the concentration of the chemokine remains in equilibrium during
the whole GC reaction. The concentration of the chemokine is proportional to one over distance
for each FDC and is calculated once at the beginning of the GC reaction. We further assume that
∇c
k∇ck (γa,b denoting the
the response of cells to a chemotactic gradient
∇
velocity of the cell type b in response to a chemoattractant stemming from cell type a), i.e. the
cell detects the gradient and actively moves into that direction. At every lattice point we calculate
all concentration diﬀerences to free next neighbor points resulting from all FDCs and use a vector
sum to compute the corresponding velocity vector v which enters eq. (3). For our purposes γa,b
is the key parameter and is varied over several magnitudes to investigate its inﬂuence on the GC
morphology.

c is constant: v = γa,b

2.3.5 Boundary and initial conditions

We restrict the whole GC reaction to a sphere with diameter dGC = 345 µm (59) of a fully developed
GC. This ensures suﬃcient space for slightly more than 12000 centroblast on the lattice. No cells
except output cells can leave this volume. We do not consider adhesion or pressure of surrounding
naive B cells. This assumption, or more generally, the boundary conditions will have to be further
discussed.

The starting point of our model are three activated B cells which already entered the network
of FDCs which are homogeneously distributed on one half of the sphere mentioned above. Some
experiments indicate that the FDC network is not homogeneous. There may exist regions where
FDCs present Ag and other regions where FDCs present less or almost no Ag. In the ﬁrst region
centrocytes are primarily found while in the second region centroblasts are dominating (60). In
our model only the Ag containing region is take into account.

In all of our simulations we will use the same conﬁguration of the initial Ab phenotype of the
seeder cells and the Ag held by the FDCs for reasons of comparibility. The initial aﬃnity of the
Ab is a(Φseeder cell, Φ0) = 0.04.

3 Results

GC population kinetics The inclusion of a diﬀerentiation signal allows various scenarios for
the GC population kinetics. Therefore at ﬁrst, we have to determine realistic time courses of the
GC reaction.

The GC kinetics is strongly dependent on the production rate q of the signal molecule quanta
and the boundary conditions. High production rates q result in an exponentially declining cell
population. Too small production rates q imply a domination of proliferation over diﬀerentiation
and the cells ﬁll the whole lattice until the proliferation is inhibited by space limitations. This
leads to a durable dynamic equilibrium with a stable B cell population (data not shown). For
production rates between these two extreme scenarios the time course of the B cell population
becomes realistic. At the beginning B cells ﬁll the whole lattice. After a certain time (depending
on the signal production rate q) the signal molecule density increases and more centroblasts start
to diﬀerentiate. This results in a controled reduction of the centroblasts population (Fig. 1).

The typical GC reaction in the model shows a nearly exponential increase of the centroblast
population during the ﬁrst 72 hr (Fig. 1). Then the diﬀerentiation process starts and the centrocyte
population increases. The peak of the reaction is reached at about 96 hr in good agreement with
experiment (34). The total population then stabilizes on a plateau for some days before it declines
rapidly entering a long lasting low level reaction with a very slowly decreasing B cell population.
The time course of such a GC reaction is only slightly dependent on the diﬀerentiation rate
1/TD, describing the rate with which activated centroblasts diﬀerentiate into centrocytes. The

8

diﬀerentiation rate has basically to be large enough to guarantee a declining GC population in the
late stages of the reaction (20). Note, that observable diﬀerentiation rates are eﬀective rates which
already include the eﬀect of signal molecules.

FDC-derived chemoattractant for centrocytes For our purpose we deﬁne the appearance
of a light zone as a cluster of cells in which centrocytes dominate. The dark zone is analogously
deﬁned. To achieve a separation of centrocytes and centroblasts in a GC the FDCs may selectively
attract centrocytes but not centroblasts (22). To test this hypothesis we simulate the GC reaction
with a chemotactic response of centrocytes only.

A light zone is observed if the centrocyte velocity resulting from the chemokine allows the cells to
leave the centroblast population before they die by apoptosis. A dark zone develops if this velocity
is high enough to allow centrocytes to leave the centroblast population before new centrocytes
arise from centroblast diﬀerentiation, thus generating a centroblast dominated area. For very
small chemotactic coeﬃcients γFDC,CC no zones occur at all (data not shown). Large chemotactic
coeﬃcients γFDC,CC result in the formation of a light and dark zone. While the light zone consists of
a dense cluster of centrocytes with only few centroblasts, the dark zone is formed in an asymmetric
ring like structure of less dense packed centroblasts (Fig. 2). This can be understood by assuming a
quasi-stationary situation in which cell numbers do not signiﬁcantly change. Then the centrocytes
get entrapped in the local minima of the chemotactic ﬁeld reproducing the equipotential lines of
the signal molecule concentration (Fig. 3). Note, that not all cells can achieve local minima since
volume restrictions have to be respected. The unphysiological ring structure of the dark zone is
caused by the fact that the centroblasts have no attractor and behave like a gas inside the GC
sphere. With intermediate chemotactic coeﬃcients the zones appear less clearly and later (Fig. 4
left column). The resulting deterministic velocity critical for the formation of light zones is of the
order of several µm per min.

≈

Required motility of centroblasts The reaction also requires that the undirected movement of
the centroblasts is fast enough (with a random velocity vrandom
2 µm/min) in order to allow the
centrocytes to escape the centroblast dominated areas. For random velocities which are signiﬁcantly
below this threshold no light zone develops as long as the centroblast population forms a dense
packed cluster. Only when the density of centroblasts declines a light zone occurs for a short
period of time (data not shown). Remarkably, the necessary random velocity shows no signiﬁcant
dependence on the chemotactic coeﬃcient γFDC,CC. The undirected movement of centroblasts is
necessary to oﬀer the possibility to centrocytes to use small gaps for movement. Higher centrocyte
velocities have basically no eﬀect if the space for movement is lacking. On the other hand a faster
undirected movement of centroblasts may oﬀer enough dynamically produced gaps to ensure the
mobility of centrocytes. However, the directed centrocyte movement may be to slow to use the
available space. We conclude that a reasonable relation of centroblasts and centrocytes mobility is
necessary to allow the separation of both cell types.

In the cases where dark and light zones appear it can be observed that the centrocytes can
leave the centroblast dominated areas. This results from the high mobility and small diameter of
centrocytes which use every available space around the large centroblasts to perform a movement
in direction of the FDC network. However, they do not replace all of the centroblasts inside the
FDC network. This is in parts related to the process of recycling which acts as an additional source
of centroblasts in the FDC network. In addition, centroblasts rarely leave the FDC network due
to their relatively weak mobility. In conclusion, dark zones with very low numbers of centrocytes
and light zones with relatively high fraction of centroblasts are generated.

9

Chemoattractant for centroblasts
In a second step we let the centroblasts also respond to
the FDC chemokine with equal, higher and weaker response compared to the centrocytes. In all
three cases there exists neither a dark nor a light zone during the whole GC reaction (Fig. 4 right
column) except if the chemotactic response of the centroblasts is weak enough so that the undirected
movement dominates. Then, the centroblasts behave similar to a free gas as in the scenario where
only centrocytes respond to the chemokine. In the case of weak chemotactic response of centroblasts
(γFDC,CB) and strong chemotactic response of centrocytes (γFDC,CC) a very small symmetric ring
of centroblasts occurs (Fig. 4 right column, day 7).

Mantle zone-derived chemotactic signals
In order to avoid the ring structure we investigate
the mantle zone as an alternative source for a chemokine that may act on centrocytes. We include a
preformed mantle zone of a GC which is polarized, i.e. the mantle zone is thicker on the side of the
FDC network. Similar to the FDCs we let the cells in the mantle zone segregate a chemokine. As
before this is reﬂected in a stationary conﬁguration. This signal alone is suﬃcient to form light and
dark zones (Fig. 5). The dark zone is even more physiological than with FDC-derived chemokine
but begins to penetrate the FDC network from day 8 on while the light zone moves towards the
boundary of the FDC network around day 9 (Fig. 5). This is due to the new location of the local
minima of the chemotactic ﬁeld situated at the outer boundary of the FDC network. Centrocytes
are densely packed in these local minima. When their number begins to decline they do not longer
extend to the FDC network. The centroblasts behave like a gas and are dispersed over the free
space including the part of the FDC network opposite to the mantle zone. This aﬀects also the
late stage of the GC reaction. The B cell population declines much faster than with FDC-derived
chemokine and therefore generates less output cells (data not shown).

Combined chemotactic signals When the centrocytes respond to signals from FDC and man-
tle zone cells, a light zone and a dark zone can be observed (Fig. 6). The light zone stays within
the FDC network during the whole reaction. The dark zone neither is ring shaped nor penetrates
the FDC network. The GC morphology is closer to observed morphologies than with FDC-derived
chemokine alone. Also the GC kinetics stays in good agreement with experiment (data not shown).
Only the diﬀerentiation rate 1/TD has to be adjusted to restore the late stage of the reaction. Oth-
erwise, the B cell population would decline faster than with FDC-derived chemokine only, because
the FDC-centrocyte interaction is slightly reduced when some of the centrocytes are entrapped at
the boundary of the FDC network.

The relative strength of the chemotactic response must be tightly balanced. The velocity in
response to the mantle zone-derived chemokine has to be twice the strength compared to the
response to FDC-derived chemokines. Higher values lead to structures like in Fig. 5 and smaller
values to structures like in Fig. 2. To explain this behavior we plot the equipotential lines of the
resulting chemotactic ﬁeld (Fig. 7). The shift of the isolines towards the mantle zone compared
to Fig. 3 can clearly be seen. We want to emphasize that the B cells in the mantle zone are not
necessarily the source for the chemokine. Any other cell type with similar spatial distribution leads
to the same result.

Aﬃnity maturation If we investigate the aﬃnity of the output cells we recognize that we
have approximately 60% output cells with high aﬃnity (a(Φ, Φ0)
0.8) and about 30% medium
aﬃnity cells (0.4
0.8) (Fig. 8). The plot shows the fraction of corresponding numbers
of output cells integrated over time intervals of 6 hr and reﬂects the quality of produced output
cells. The small numbers of produced output cells during those short time intervals lead to huge
statistical ﬂuctuations. Remarkably, the ratio between medium and high aﬃnity cells is reversed
after two weeks. At the beginning of the output production most cells have still low aﬃnity for the

a(Φ, Φ0)

≥

≤

≤

10

Ag. Then, the fraction of medium and high aﬃnity cells increases. After two weeks the fraction
of high aﬃnity cells increases further while the fraction of medium aﬃnity cells is declining. This
behavior is in good quantitative agreement with experiment (61).

Interestingly, this behavior seems to be independent of the GC morphology as long as the
general GC kinetics remains unaﬀected. In contrast, the number of output cells changes for diﬀerent
morphologies. The output quantity depends on the probability for centrocytes to interact with
FDCs. Some morphologies of GC reaction induce volume constellations that inhibit the movement
of centrocytes and in this way reduce this interaction probability. However, the fact that the
quality remains almost the same (data not shown), at ﬁrst sight, seems to be in contradiction to
results of Meyer-Hermann (1). But we use another indicator for the quality of the GC reaction.
Considering the time course of the time integrated output quality instead, the GC morphology,
indeed, inﬂuences the total output quality (data not shown). This value memorizes the total
output production and is therefore sensitive to the eﬀectivity of aﬃnity maturation in the early
phase (around day 6) of the GC reaction which is inhibited by the absence of zones (1).

Robustness of the model and the results The model results are stable against small varia-
tions of most of the experimentally unknown parameters. This applies especially to the parameters
of cell movement (vrandom, γa,b). The most sensitive parameter is the production rate of the signal
molecule quanta q. Its value determines the duration of the plateau phase in the GC kinetics and
variations of more than 10% cause exponentially declining reactions or persistent plateau phases,
respectively. Also the total size of the GC represented by dGC inﬂuences the GC kinetics. The
plateau phase of the reaction is reached when the proliferation is inhibited due to limited space.
This results in an increased number of centroblasts. When the signal production rate q is adjusted
the GC kinetics in Fig. 1 is restored on a higher level of cell numbers. In order to ﬁt the cell
numbers to experiment (3), the value for the diameter of the GC is ﬁxed to dGC = 345 µm.

Despite the stochastical nature of the model, the results are reproducible without signiﬁcant
statistical variations. The only exception are the details of the aﬃnity maturation (Fig. 8) due to
small cell numbers.

Also the morphology is independent of the details of the FDC distribution. An expansion of

the FDC network slightly beyond the boundary of the GC does not alter the results in general.

4 Discussion

In the present study we enlarged our previous model for the GC morphology in order to investigate
the inﬂuence of chemotaxis on the GC formation. To this end it was necessary to develop a
more detailed description of cell mobility. Besides a minimization of lattice-anisotropy eﬀects,
this, especially, includes a self-consistent cell-volume concept on a discrete regular lattice without
going into the details on a subcellular level. We included cell growth and shrinking, as well as
cell diﬀerentiation. The resulting model is the ﬁrst three-dimensional attempt to simulate GC cell
population dynamics and GC morphology. It should, therefore, provide a more realistic description
of processes involved in the GC development.

Within our model the diﬀerent cell volumes of centroblasts and centrocytes strongly inﬂuence
their mobility. We observe in the simulations that small centrocytes are able to move in the
environment of large centroblasts even when the latter ones are densely packed. The centrocytes
ﬁnd small gaps and slip through the centroblasts. The mobility of the centroblasts is inhibited
by their larger volume. The restrictions on the total GC volume inhibit centroblasts growth and
in this way centroblast proliferation. All of these observations in the GC simulations are quite
realistic eﬀects which have an equivalent in real GCs, and which seem to be important on the

11

way towards a realistic picture of moving cells during the GC reaction. We consider therefore our
model to be suitable for studying possible eﬀects of chemotactic signals.

First, we investigated the inﬂuence of a FDC derived chemoattractant (21, 22) on the GC
morphology. This signal is suﬃcient to separate centroblasts and centrocytes but can not explain
the formation of the characteristic GC structures. If the chemotactic response of the centrocytes
and the random movement of the centroblasts exceeds given values (γFDC,CC = 4 µm/min for
centrocytes and vrandom = 2 µm/min for centroblasts, respectively) a light and a dark zone develop.
But in contrast to experiment the centroblasts form an asymmetric ring like structure (Fig. 2). For
smaller values of the cell mobility (about one order of magnitude) the zones are developed later in
the GC reaction when the total density of cells becomes small enough (Fig. 4). For signiﬁcantly
reduced cell mobility no separation into light and dark zone occurs at all. The corresponding
velocities of both cell types are within physiological relevant values and are comparable to relatively
slowly moving cells (62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67).

Interestingly, chicken GCs seem to have such a ring structure suggesting that FDC-derived
chemotaxis acting on centrocytes is adequate to describe their morphology (68).
In contrast,
in mammalian GCs other or addional mechanisms cause the formation of dark and light zones.
To test this hypothesis the mantle zone was taken into consideration as source of a chemokine
acting on centrocytes. Again a separation into light and dark zone can be observed. The dark
zone is sickle-shaped and the light zone is shifted within the FDC network towards the source of
the chemoattractant. This causes an inhibited FDC-centrocyte interaction resulting in reduced
numbers of recycled centroblasts and output cells.

In addition we investigated centroblasts responding to FDC-derived chemokines. Only a small
ring shaped dark zone can be achieved for small values of the chemotactic coeﬃcient γFDC,CB =
2 µm/min and a more intense chemotactic response of centrocytes γFDC,CC = 10 µm/min (Fig. 4).
The ring of centroblasts is now symmetric in contrast to the results when the centroblasts do
not respond to the FDC-derived chemoattractant. The asymmetric ring structure is restored for
signiﬁcantly reduced chemotactic response when the random motility dominates (data not shown).
It is known that the seeder B cells enter the primary follicle via chemotaxis provided by the BLC
- CXCR5 pathway (27, 24, 25, 69). Our results suggest that centroblast only weakly respond to
FDC-derived chemokines during the GC reaction. In agreement with this GC B cells showed no
response to BLC (70), SDF-1α (23,70), SLC, and MIP-3α (70), and a weak response to rC5a (71).
We also analyzed alternative sources for the chemokines. If the mantle zone B cells or cells
with a similar distribution secrete a chemokine acting as attractant for centrocytes, dark and light
zones are formed (Fig. 5). The separation of dark and light zone is more physiological but results
in a shorter GC reaction because the light zone shifts to the boundary of the FDC network while
the dark zone enters it. This may be related to the model assumptions. We did not include the
dynamics of the mantle zone thus neglecting a possible movement of the minima of the chemotactic
ﬁeld relative to the FDC network. The duration of the GC reaction can only be prolonged if
unrecycled centroblasts are attributed a longer lifetime to. But the quality of the output cells still
remains too low (data not shown).

When centrocytes respond to both chemokines—the mantle zone-derived and FDC-derived
chemokine—a longer lasting light zone can be observed which remains inside the FDC network.
The dark zone is sickle shaped and does not expand into the FDC network (Fig. 6). This is
the most realistic scenario we could generate. The GC kinetics and the aﬃnity maturation are
similar to the scenario with FDC chemokine alone (Fig. 1 and Fig. 8) while the unphysiological
ring structure of the dark zone turns into a more realistic sickle shaped dark zone. This result
still does not reproduce the observations of light microscopy (3, 72, 73, 74) suggesting that other
mechanism are necessary to generate the typical GC morphology. One possible mechanism is a
diﬀusing diﬀerentiation signal secerned by the FDCs (1).

In general we achieved physiologically realistic GC population kinetics for the diﬀerent scenarios

12

of the GC morphology Fig. 1. In the late stages of the reaction when low numbers of GC B cells
remain diﬀerences occur aﬀecting the number of output cells. This results in diﬀerent total average
aﬃnities of output cells depending on the various GC morphologies. However, the quality of output
cells produced at the end of the reaction are comparable provided that the number of output cells is
large enough. The distribution between high, medium, and low aﬃnity cells (Fig. 8) quantitatively
mirrors experimental results very well (61). We can conclude that the morphology of the GC
mainly inﬂuences the quantity and not the quality of output cells.

One assumption of the model is that centrocytes respond to a chemokine with constant velocity
only detecting the direction of the chemotactic gradient. We addressed the question if a linear
dependency of the velocity on the chemokine concentration gradient (v
c), would change the
results. Indeed, the results can not be restored within reasonable parameter values, i.e. velocities.
Centrocytes far away from the FDC network have the smallest velocities and at the same time
the longest way to go. However, increasing the over all velocity in response to the chemotactic
gradient means, especially, also increasing the velocity of cells close to the FDC network reaching
unphysiological high values. If the chemotactic response was linear to the concentration itself one
would get almost the same result with a slightly ﬂatter velocity distribution (one over distance
compared to one over distance squared). Taken together, this suggests that centrocytes use the
chemokine concentration mainly to detect the direction of movement and have a more or less
constant velocity in response to the chemoattractant.

∼ ∇

One may think about a possible inﬂuence of cell-cell adhesion. It is known that GC B cells and
FDCs form clusters in vitro (75). The cooperation of chemotaxis and diﬀerential adhesion for the
separation of cells has been studied in other systems (76). The major diﬀerence to this study is
that centroblasts diﬀerentiate into centrocytes and vice versa while in the model of Jiang et al. the
cell fractions remain constant. In addition, the cells have no gaps between them while in our model
small gaps are necessary to allow the centrocytes to move towards the FDC. It would be interesting
to investigate if adhesion could substitute the boundary condition, namely the restriction of cell
movement to a sphere, and thus circumvent the gas behavior of the centroblasts.

We conclude, that FDC-derived chemokines acting on centrocytes lead to a separation of cen-
troblasts and centrocytes in GC reaction. However, the GC morphology as observed in mammalians
is not correctly reproduced. This problem persists even using a combined centrocyte response to
mantle zone-derived and FDC-derived chemokines. These results suggests that chemotaxis for its
own is not suﬃcient to induce a realistic development of dark and light zones. The present model
points towards an additional role either of cell-cell adhesion or of cells surrounding the GC.

References

1 Meyer-Hermann, M. 2002. A mathematical model for the germinal center morphology and

aﬃnity maturation. To appear in J. Theor. Biol.

2 MacLennan, I. C. M. 1994. Germinal centers. Annu. Rev Immunol., 12:117–139.

3 Liu, Y.-J., Zhang, J., Lane, P. J. L., Chan, E. Y.-T., and MacLennan, I. C. 1991. Sites of
speciﬁc B cells activation in primary and secondary response to T cell-dependent and T cell
independent antigens. Eur. J. Immunol., 21:2951–2962.

4 Li, L., Zhang, X., Kovacic, S., Long, A. J., Bourque, K., Wood, C. R., and Sung Choi, Y. 2000.
Identiﬁcation of a human follicular dendritic cell molecule that stimulates germinal center B
cell growth. J. Exp. Med., 191(6):1077–1083.

5 Camacho, S. A., Kosco-Vilbois, M. H., and Berek, C. 1998. The dynamic structure of the

germinal center. Immunol. Today, 19(11):511–514.

13

6 McHeyzer-Williams, M. G., McLean, M. J., A., L. P., and Nossal, G. J. 1993. Antigen-driven

B cell diﬀerentiation in vivo. J. Exp. Med., 178(1):295–307. hypermutation.

7 Han, S., Zheng, B., Takahashi, Y., and Kelsoe, G. 1997. Distinctive characteristics of germinal

center B cells. Semin. Immunol., 9:255–260.

8 Liu, Y.-Y., Joshua, D. E., Williams, G. T., Smith, C. A., Gordon, J., and MacLennan, I. C.

1989. Mechanism of antigen-driven selection in germinal centres. Nature, 342:929–931.

9 Liu, Y.-J., Barth´el´emy, C., de Boutellier, O., and Banchereau, J. 1994. The diﬀerences in
survival and phenotype between centroblasts and centrocytes. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 355:213–
218.

10 Tew, J. G., Wu, J., Qin, D., Helm, S., and Burton, Gregory F. Szakal, A. K. 1997. Follicular
dendritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory signals to B cells. Immunol. Rev.,
156:39–52.

11 Hur, D. Y., Kim, D. J., Kim, S., Kim, Y. I., Cho, D., Lee, D. S., Hwang, Y.-I., Bae, K.-W.,
Chang, K. Y., and Lee, W. J. 2000. Role of follicular dendritic cells in the apoptosis of germinal
center B cells. Immunol. Lett., 72:107–111.

12 van Eijk, M., Defrance, T., Hennino, A., and de Groot, C. 2001. Death-receptor contribution

to the germinal-center reaction. Trends Immunol., 22(12):677–681.

13 Lindhout, E., Koopman, G., Pals, S. T., and de Groot, C. 1997. Triple check for antigen

speciﬁty of B cells during germinal centre reactions. Immunol. Today, 18(12):573–576.

14 Bancheraeau, J. and Steinmann, R. M. 1998. Dendritic cells and the control of immunity.

15 Nossal, G. 1991. The molecular and cellular basis of aﬃnity maturation in the antibody

Nature, 392:245–252.

response. Cell, 68:1–2.

16 Oprea, M. and Perelson, A. S. 1997. Somatic mutation leads to eﬃcient aﬃnity maturation

when centrocytes recycle back to centroblasts. J. Immunol., 158(11):5155–5162.

17 Ke¸smir, C. and de Boer, R. J. 1999. A mathematical model on germinal center kinetics and

termination. J. Immunol., 163:2463–2469.

18 van Nimwegen, E., Oprea, M., and Perelson, A. S. 2000. Dynamics of one-pass germinal center

models: Implications for aﬃnity maturation. Bull. Math. Biol., 62(1):121–153.

19 Kleinstein, S. H. and Pal Singh, J. 2001. Toward quantitative simulation of germinal center
dynamics: Biological and modeling insights from experimental validation. J. Theor. Biol.,
211:253–275.

20 Meyer-Hermann, M., Deutsch, A., and Or-Guil, M. 2001. Recycling probability and dynamical

properties of germinal center reaction. J. Theor. Biol., 210(3):265–285.

21 Bouzahzah, F., Antoine, N., Simar, L., and Heinen, E. 1996. Chemotaxis-promoting and
adhesion properties of human tonsillar follicular dendritic cell clusters. Res. Immunol., 147:165–
173. chemotaxis, follicular dendritic cells, adhesion.

22 Komai-Koma, M., Donachie, A. M., and Wilkinson, P. C. 1997. Antigen-speciﬁc chemotaxis

of b cells. Immunol., 91:579–585. chemotaxis.

14

23 Bleul, C. C., Schultze, J. L., and Springer, T. A. 1998. B lymphocyte chemotaxis regulated in
association with microanatomic localization, diﬀerentiation state, and B cell receptor engage-
ment. J. Exp. Med., 187(5):753–762.

24 Gunn, M. D., Ngo, V. N., Ansel, M. K., Ekland, E. H., Cyster, J. G., and Williams, L. T. 1998.
A B-cell-homing chemokine made in lymphoid follicles activates burkitt’s lymphoma receptor-1.
Nature, 391:799–803.

25 Legler, D. F., Loetscher, M., Stuber Roos, R., Clark-Lewis, I., Baggiolini, M., and Moser, B.
1998. B cell-attracting chemokine 1, a human CXC chemokine expressed in lymphoid tissues,
selectively attracts B lymphocytes via BLR1/CXCR5. J. Exp. Med., 187(4):655–660.

26 Tarlinton, D. 1998. Germinal centers: form and function. Curr. Opin. Immunol., 10(3):245–251.

27 Ansel, K. M., Ngo, V. N., Hyman, P. L., Luther, S. A., F¨orster, R., Sedgwick, J. D., Browning,
J. L., Lipp, M., and Cyster, J. G. 2000. A chemokine-driven positive feedback loop organizes
lymphoid follicles. Nature, 406:309–314.

28 Dubois, B., Massacrier, C., and Caux, C. 2001. Selective attraction of naive and memory B

cells by dendritic cells. J. Leukoc. Biol., 70:633–641.

29 Perelson, A. S. and Oster, G. F. 1979. Theoretical studies of clonal selection: Minimal antibody
repertoire size and reliability of self-non-self discrimination. J. Theor. Biol., 81:645–670.

30 Radmacher, M. D., Kelsoe, G., and Kepler, T. B. 1998. Predicted and inferred waiting times for
key mutations in the germinal centre reaction: Evidence for stochasticity in selection. Immunol.
Cell Biol., 76:373–381. somatic hypermutation, key mutation.

31 England, P., Nageotte, R., Renard, M., Page, A.-L., and Bedouelle, H. 1999. Functional
characterization of the somatic hypermutation process leading to antibody D1.3, a high aﬃnity
antibody against lysozyme. J. Immunol., 162:2129–2136. key mutations, hypermutation.

32 Garside, P., Ingulli, E., Merica, R. R., Johnson, J. G., Noelle, R. J., and Jenkins, M. K.
1998. Visualization of speciﬁc B and T lymphocyte interactions in the lymph node. Science,
281:96–99.

33 Lentz, V. M. and Manser, T. 2001. Cutting edge: Germinal centers can be induced in the

absence of T cells. J. Immunol., 167:15–20.

34 Garc´ıa de Vinuesa, C., Cook, M. C., Ball, J., Drew, M., Sunners, Y., Cascalho, M., Wabl, M.,
Klaus, G. G. B., and MacLennan, I. C. M. 2000. Germinal centers without T cells. J. Exp.
Med., 191(3):485–493.

35 Agarwal, A., Nayak, B. P., and Rao, K. V. S. 1998. B cell responses to a peptide epitope. VII.

antigen-dependent modulation of the germinal center reaction. J. Immunol., 161.

36 K¨uppers, R., Zhao, M., Hansmann, M. L., and Rajewsky, K. 1993. Tracing B cell development
in human germinal centers by molecular analysis of single cell picked from histological sections.
EMBO J., 12(13):4955–4967.

37 Han, S., Zheng, B., Dal Porto, J. M., and Kelsoe, G. 1995. In situ studies of the primary
immune response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl) acetyl IV. aﬃnity-dependent, antigen-driven B-
cell apoptosis in germinal centers as a mechanism for maintaining self-tolerance. J. Exp. Med.,
182(6):1635–1644.

15

38 Hanna, M. G. 1964. An autoradiographic study of germinal center in spleen white pulp during

early intervals of the immune response. Lab. Invest., 13:95–104.

39 Zhang, J., MacLennan, I. C. M., Liu, Y., and Lane, P. J. L. 1988. Is rapid proliferation in B
centroblasts linked to somatic mutation in memory B cell clones. Immunol. Lett., 18:297–299.

40 Kroese, F. G., Wubbena, A. S., Seijn, H. G., and Nieuwenhuis, P. 1987. Germinal centers

develop oligoclonally. Eur. J. Immunol., 17(7):4955–4967.

41 Lindhout, E., Lakeman, A., and de Groot, C. 1995. Follicular dendritic cells inhibit apoptosis
in human B lymphocytes by a rapid and irreversible blockade of preexisting endonuclease. J.
Exp. Med., 181(6):1985–1995.

42 van Eijk, M. and de Groot, C. 1999. Germinal center B cell apoptosis requires both caspase

and cathepsin activity. J. Immunol., 163:2478–2482.

43 Kepler, T. B. and Perelson, A. S. 1993. Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B cells and the

eﬃciency of aﬃnity maturation. Immunol. Today, 14:412–415.

44 Liu, Y.-J. 1997. Reuse of B lymphocyte in germinal centers. Science, 278:238–239.

45 Oprea, M. and Perelson, A. S. 2000. Dynamics of one-pass germinal center models: Implications

for aﬃnity maturation. Bull. Math. Biol., 62:121–153.

46 Jacob, J., Przylepa, J., Miller, C., and G., K. 1993. In situ studies of the primary immune
response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. III. the kinetics of V region mutation and selection
in germinal center B cells. J. Exp. Med., 178(4):1293–307.

47 Pascual, V., Cha, S., Gershwin, E., Capara, J. D., and Leung, P. S. C. 1994. Nucleotide sequence
analysis of natural and combinatorial anti-PDC-E2 antibodies in patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis. J. Immunol., 152:2577–2585.

48 Hostager, B. S., Catlett, I. M., and Bishop, G. A. 2000. Recruitment of CD40 and tumor
necrosis factor receptor-associated factors 2 and 3 to membrane microdomains during CD40
signaling. J. Biol. Chem., 275(20):15392–15398.

49 Thompson, C. B., Scher, I., Schaefer, M. E., and Lindstein, T. 1984. Size-dependent B lympho-
cyte subpopulations: Relationship of cell volume to surface phenotype, cell cycle, proliferative
response, and requirements for antibody production to TNP-Ficoll and TNP-BA. J. Immunol.,
133:2333–2342. centrocyte diameter, cell cycle.

50 Choe, J., Li, L., Zhang, X., Gregory, C. D., and Sung Choi, Y. 2000. Distinct role of follicular
dendritic cells and T cells in the proliferation, diﬀerentiation, and apoptosis of a centroblast
cell line, L3055. J. Immunol., 164:56–63.

51 Zhang, X., Li, L., Jung, H., Xiang, S., Hollmann, C., and Sung Choi, Y. 2001. The distinct
role of T cell-derived cytokines and a novel follicular dendritic cell-signaling molecule 8d6 in
germinal center-b cell diﬀerentiation. J. Immunol., 167:49–56.

52 Kleiber, M. 1932. Body size and metabolism. Hilgardia, 6:315–353.

53 Hennino, A., B´erard, M., Krammer, P., and Defrance, T. 2001. FLICE-inhibitory protein is a

key regulator of germinal center B cell apoptosis. J. Exp. Med., 193(4):447–458.

54 Kim, H.-S., Xinhong, Z., Klyushnenkova, E., and Sung Choi, Y. 1995. Stimulation of germinal
center B lymphocyte proliferation by an FDC-like cell line, HK. J. Immunol., 155:1101–1109.

16

55 Lebecque, S., de Bouteiller, O., Arpin, C., Banchereau, J., and Liu, Y.-J. 1997. Germinal
center founder cells display propensity for apoptosis befor onset of somatic mutation. J. Exp.
Med., 185(3):563–571.

56 Berek, C. and Milstein, C. 1987. Mutation drift and repertoire shift in the maturation of the

immune response. Immunol. Rev., 96:23–41.

57 Szakal, A. K., Gieringer, R. L., Kosco, M. H., and Tew, J. G. 1985. Isolated follicular dendritic
cells: cytochemical antigen localization, Nomarski, SEM, and TEM morphology. J. Immunol.,
134:1349–1359.

58 Tew, J. G., Thorbecke, . J., and Steinmann, R. M. 1982. Dendritic cells in the immune response:
characteristics and recommended nomenclature. J. Reticuloendothel. Soc., 31(5):371–380.

59 Breitfeld, D., Ohl, L., Kremmer, E., Joachim, E., Sallusto, F., Lipp, M., and F¨orster, R. 2000.
Follicular B helper T cells express CXC chemokine receptor 4, localize to B cell follicles, and
support immunoglobulin production. J. Exp. Med., 192(11):1545–1551.

60 Kosco-Vilbois, M. H., Zentgraf, H., Gerdes, J., and Bonnefoy, J.-Y. 1997. To ’B’ or not to ’B’

a germinal center. Immunol. Today, 18(5):225–230.

61 Smith, Kenneth, G., Light, A., Nossal, G., and Tarlinton, D. M. 1997. The extend of aﬃnity
maturation diﬀers between the memory and antibody-forming cell compartments in the primary
immune response. EMBO J., 16(11):2996–3006.

62 Boll, I. T., Domeyer, C., and Buhrer, C. 1992. Locomotion of human bone marrow and
peripheral blood leukocytes is associated with maturational stage and altered in malignancy.
Blood Cells, 18(2):278–279.

63 Murray, J., Vawter-Hugart, H., Voss, E., and Soll, E. R. 1992. Three-dimensional motility

cycle in leukocytes. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton, 22(3):211–223.

64 Felder, S. and Kam, Z. 1994. Human neutrophil motility: time-dependent three-dimensional

shape and granule diﬀusion. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton, 28(4):285–302.

65 Masellis-Smith, A., Belch, A. R., Mant, M. J., Turley, E. A., and Pilarski, L. M. 1996.
Hyaluronan-dependent motility of B cells and leukemic plasma cells in blood, but not of bone
marrow plasma cells, in multiple myeloma: alternate use of receptor for hyaluronan-mediated
motility (RHAMM) and CD44. Blood, 87(5):1891–1899.

66 Niggemann, B., Maaser, K., Lu, H., Kroczek, R., Zanker, K. S., and Friedl, P. 1997. Locomotory
phenotypes of human tumor cell lines and T lymphocytes in a three-dimensional collagen lattice.
Cancer Lett., 118(2):173–180.

67 Friedl, P., Borgmann, S., and Br¨ocker, E.-B. 2001. Amoeboid leukocyte crawling through
lessons from the Dictyostelium paradigm of cell movement. J. Leukoc.

extracellular matrix:
Biol., 70(4):491–509.

68 Yasuda, M., Taura, Y., Yokomizo, Y., and Ekino, S. 1998. A comparative study of germinal

cente: fowls and mammals. Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis., 21:179–189.

69 Shi, K., Hayashida, K., Kaneko, M., Hashimoto, J., Tomita, T., Lipsky, P. E., Yoshikawa, H.,
and Ochi, T. 2001. Lymphoid chemokine B cell-attracting chemokine-1 (CXCL13) is expressed
in germinal center of ectopic lymphoid follicles within the synovium of chronic arthritis patients.
J. Immunol., 166:650–655.

17

70 Bowman, E. P., Campbell, J. J., Soler, D., Dong, Z., Manlongat, N., Piracella, D., Hardy,
R. R., and Butcher, E. C. 2000. Developmental switches in chemokine response proﬁles during
B cell diﬀerentiation and maturation. J. Exp. Med., 191(8):1303–1317.

71 Ottonello, L., Corcione, A., Tortolina, G., Airoldi, I., Albesiano, E., Favre, A., D’Agostino, R.,
Malavasi, F., Pistoia, V., and Dallegri, F. 1999. rC5a directs the in vitro migration of human
memory and naive tonsillar B lymphocytes: Implications for B cell traﬃcking in secondary
lymphoid tissues. J. Immunol., pages 6510–6517.

72 Schaerli, P., Willimann, K., Lang, A. B., Lipp, M., Loetscher, P., and Moser, B. 2000. CXC
chemokine receptor 5 expression deﬁnes follicular homing t cells with B cell helper function. J.
Exp. Med., 192:1553–1562.

73 Steininger, B., Barth, P., and Hellinger, A. 2001. The perifollicular and marginal zones of the

human splenic white pulp. Am. J. Pathol., 159(2):501–512.

74 Verbeke, C. S., Wenthe, U., and Zentgraf, H. 1999. Fas ligand expression in the germinal

centre. J. Pathol., 189(2):155–161.

75 Kosco, M. H., Pﬂugfelder, E., and Gray, D. 1992. Follicular dendritic cell-dependent adhesion

and proliferation of B cells in vitro. J. Immunol., 148:2331–2339.

76 Jiang, Y., Levine, H., and Glazier, J. 1998. Possible cooperation of diﬀerential adhesion and

chemotaxis in mound formation of Dictyostelium. Biophys. J., 75:2615–2625.

18

parameter
time resolution ∆t
lattice constant a
centrocyte diameter dCC
centroblast diameter dCB
germinal center diameter dGC
random velocity vrandom
number of seeder cells
number of FDCs NFDC
proliferation time TP
proliferation time width σ
diﬀerentiation time TD
production of diﬀerentiation signal
molecule q
centrocyte lifetime TL
duration of selection process
growth exponent α
duration of growth TG1
growth coeﬃcient βg
duration of diﬀerentiation process TS
shrink coeﬃcient βs
recycling probability r
aﬃnity width Γ
exponential weight η
shape space dimension N
hypermutation probability m
time delay between start of diﬀerentiation and
production of output cells ∆τ

source

value
10−2 hr
10.6 µm

6.5 µm (49, 9)
15 µm (48)
345 µm (59)

(3)
(58)
(38, 39, 3, 9, 2)

2 µm/min
3
104
6hr
0.6 hr
3 hr
900/hr

6 hr
3 hr
0.75
5.4 hr
0.8 µm3/4/hr
3 hr
4 µm3/4/hr
0.8
2.8
2
4
0.5
48 hr

−

(3, 20)

(3)
(41, 42)
(52)

(20)
(20)
(20)
(29, 20)
(56, 15)
(20)

Table 1:
corresponding experimental results are inconsistent or not available.

Summary of model parameters. Model parameters in bold are non-physiological or

19

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

r
e
b
m
u
n
 
l
l

e
c

centroblasts
centrocytes
recycled cells
output cells

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

time in hr

Figure 1: Diﬀerent cell populations during the GC reaction. Recycled and output cells are shown
as time integrated cell numbers. For centroblast and centrocytes cell numbers at given time points
are plotted. After 72 hr the diﬀerentiation into centrocytes starts and the centrocyte population
increases rapidly. The total B cell number (centroblast and centrocytes) has a peak around day 4
(= 96 hr) followed by a plateau. After 10 days the populations is declining.

20

Figure 2: A 2a thick slice of the germinal center (centrocytes - white, FDC - grey, centroblasts
- black). Only centrocytes respond to the chemokine secerned by the FDCs with γFDC,CC =
13 µm/min (for all other parameters see Table 1). From day 5 on a light zone can be observed. It
remains stable for at least ﬁve days but never exclusively consists of centrocytes. There are always
centroblasts present which are mostly recycled centroblasts (not distinguished in the ﬁgure). The
dark zone has a ring like shape. The last ﬁgure shows the GC after 3 weeks with only small
numbers of centroblast and centrocytes remaining.

21

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

Figure 3: The equipotential lines of the chemotactic signal concentration. From outside to inside
every line represents an increase of 0.5 of the chemokine concentration in arbitrary units.

22

Figure 4: A 2a thick slice of the germinal center (centrocytes - white, FDC - grey, centroblasts
- black). The left column shows a GC reaction with an intermediate chemotactic response of
centrocytes to a FDC-derived chemokine γFDC,CC = 1 µm/min. The light zone is less clearly
formed compared to Fig. 2 day 5-10. Only, when the density of the cells is reduced around day 7
a more pronounced light zone can be observed. The right column shows a GC with centroblasts
responding to a FDC-derived chemokine γFDC,B = 2 µm/min. Almost no separation of centrocytes
and centroblasts can be seen. Only a small dark zone appears. All other parameters remain as in
Table 1.

23

Figure 5: A 2a thick slice of the germinal center (centrocytes - white, FDC - grey, centroblasts
- black). A GC reaction with mantle zone-derived chemokines only. Dark and light zone can be
distinguished. The dark zone is sickle shaped instead of ring shaped (Fig. 2 day 5-10) but begins
to penetrate the FDC network from day 8 on. The light zone is shifted towards the boundary of
the FDC network after day 9 and the GC reaction stops very soon because positive selection and
recycling are suppressed (not shown).

24

Figure 6: A 2a thick slice of the germinal center (centrocytes - white, FDC - grey, centroblasts -
black). The centrocytes respond to chemokines from FDCs γFDC,CC = 7 µm/min and mantle zone
cells γMZ,CC = 13 µm/min. We can observe a sickle shaped dark zone and a light zone. The ring
structure of the dark zone is clearly reduced (compare Fig. 2 day 5-10). The dark zone does not
penetrate the FDC network, and the centrocytes stay within the light zone (compare Fig. 5 day 8
and 9). The diﬀerentiation rate was adjusted to 1/TD = 1/3.5 hr (all other parameters see Table
1).

25

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

Figure 7: The equipotential lines of the eﬀective chemokine concentration. Isolines of the FDC-
derived plus the mantle zone-derived chemokine concentrations are shown. The relative strength of
the signals is 1 : 2. From outside to inside every line represents an increase of 0.5 of the chemokine
concentration in arbitrary units (same as in Fig. 3). The global minimum is shifted to the mantle
zone but remains within the FDC network.

26

medium affinity
high affinity

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
 
l
l

e
c

0
100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

550

time in hr

Figure 8: The fraction of medium and high aﬃnity output cells in small time windows of 6 hours.
1.0. Φ∗
Medium aﬃnity is deﬁned as 0.4
denotes all Φ in the given intervals and Φ0 the position of the Ag. The output production begins
after 5 days (120 hr).

0.8 and high aﬃnity as 0.8 < a(Φ∗, Φ0)

a(Φ∗, Φ0)

≤

≤

≤

