2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A model for mutation in bacterial populations

R. Donangelo1 and H. Fort2
1 Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, C.P. 68528, 21945-970 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
E-mail:donangel@if.ufrj.br
2 Instituto de F´ısica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la Repblica, Igu´a 4225, 11400 Montevideo, Uruguay. E-mail:
hugo@ﬁsica.edu.uy

We describe the evolution of E.coli populations through
a Bak-Sneppen type model which incorporates random muta-
tions. We show that, for a value of the mutation level which
coincides with the one estimated from experiments, this model
reproduces the measures of mean ﬁtness relative to that of a
common ancestor, performed for over 10,000 bacterial gener-
ations.

PACS numbers: 05.65.+b, 87.23.-n, 89.75.Fb

The last decade has seen a renewed interest in the
study of biological evolution. Besides the painstaking
work of analyzing fossil records, spanning 108−9 years,
there are now experiments performed by Lenski and co-
workers with E.coli, which already comprise tens of thou-
sands of generations [1]. This has opened an entire “ex-
perimental evolution” area, and their data are extremely
useful to study the long-term evolutionary dynamics of
populations.

We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the essentials of Lenski’s ex-
periment. It considered 12 initially identical populations,
each of them founded by a single cell from an asexual
clone, propagating in similar environments during 1500
days, in the following manner. At the beginning of each
24 hour period, an initial batch of around 5×106 bacteria
is placed in a growth medium, and, 24 hours later, when
the population has increased by a factor of about 100,
which implies log2 100 ≈ 6.6 generations, the process is
repeated by starting a new batch with 1% of the bacteria
present.

The mean cell volume and mean ﬁtness of bacterial
populations relative to the ancestor hRF i were measured
every 100 generations. The hRF i of these populations,
in its g−th generation is measured by placing a sample
of each of them in contact with its original ancestor (un-
freezing a sample taken at time 0, the ﬁrst generation),
and measuring the ratio of their rates of increase.
In
all the experiments the hRF i shows a rapid increase for
≈ 2000 generations after its introduction into the exper-
imental environment, and then becomes practically con-
stant. The average asymptotic value of the relative ﬁtness
¯hRF i∞ ≃ 1.48 [1] (the bar denotes the average over the
is
12 populations). This behavior may be parameterized
by an hyperbolic ﬁt, f = (A + Bg)/(C + Dg), where f
represents the relative ﬁtness of the g-th generation and
A, B, C, D are constants.

On the theoretical side, several approaches to the
evolutions of species in interactive systems have been pro-

posed: the well known models of Kauﬀman and collab-
orators for co-evolving species operating at the edge of
criticality [2], models inspired on them [3], [4], and the
Bak-Sneppen (BS) model [5], among others.

An essential ingredient of evolution theory, comple-
menting the natural selection mechanism, is the existence
of spontaneous mutations which produce hereditary dif-
ferences among organisms. Such an ingredient is not ex-
plicitly considered in the standard BS model, but it is
clearly an essential mechanism in the evolution of bacte-
rial cultures.

In this work we modify the BS model in order to
include random mutations so as to explain the E.coli
results. The reasons for constructing such a model are
twofold. First, it was experimentally found that the 12
E.coli replicate populations approached distinct ﬁtness
peaks (diﬀerent asymptotic hRF i into a band from ≈ 1.4
to ≈ 1.6) [7], supporting the multi-peaked ﬁtness land-
scape of the kind assumed in BS-type models. Second,
as the initial populations were identical, and the environ-
ment for bacterial growth was kept constant, the evolu-
tion of these quantities resulted solely from spontaneous
random genetic changes and competition between the dif-
ferent cell varieties resulting from those changes.

The model thus assumes two kinds of changes, one
arising from the disappearance of the less ﬁt strains and
another, completely random, that may be attributed it
e.g.
to errors in the replication mechanism. All these
changes are associated, in the model, to real mutations in
the genome. In the case of the ﬁtness driven changes, such
mutations appear as a two-step process: the extinction of
a bacterial strain, and its substitution by another, as in
the original BS model. The new random mutations are
associated to changes in the genoma unrelated to any
selection process.

Some clarifying remarks concerning the proper inter-
pretation of the model in the context of E.coli experiment
are necessary:
i) Despite the fact that the original BS model considered
evolution in a coarse grained sense (an entire species was
represented by a single ﬁtness parameter), here we will
describe a system of evolving bacterial populations rather
than whole species.
ii) The focus of the BS model was to study the dy-
namic equilibrium properties of an ecology, i.e. its Self-
Organized Critical (SOC) behavior after the initial tran-
[1] consider explicitly the transient
sient. The data of
evolution starting from the ﬁrst bacterial generations. In

1

particular, changes are observed to be larger for the ﬁrst
2000 generations, and then gradually taper oﬀ. There-
fore, we consider the evolution of the system from its
very initial state, and not after it has equilibrated.

iii) In our model we consider a number of cellular
automata N , which, for practical purposes, must take
values much smaller than the number of E.coli in Lenski’s
experiment (5 × 106 − 5 × 108). Below we show that
the model has scale invariance properties that justify this
assumption.

As in the case of BS, the model consists of a one-
dimensional cellular automata of size N , with cells la-
belled by a subindex i = 1, ..., N . Therefore each of these
N cells represents a group of bacteria, and not single
individuals.
In other words, the system in the model
is a coarse-grained representation of the cell population.
Each vector cell is characterized by a real number be-
tween 0 and 1, Bi. This parameter may be interpreted
as measuring the ﬁtness of the “species”, i.e. a barrier
against changes.

In order to emulate the experimental condition that
each of the 12 populations was initiated by a single cell
from an asexual clone, we start with the same barrier for
all cells, Bi = 0.5. The dynamics of the model consists
in performing the some operations at steps corresponding
to the time needed for an average E.coli to divide, i. e. a
generation. Those operations are the following: at each
step, corresponding to the doubling time of the bacteria:
a) eliminate the cell with the lowest ﬁtness b) eliminate,
on the average, Q other cells c) replace the barriers asso-
ciated to the cells eliminated by random numbers gener-
ated with a uniform distribution in the interval [0,1], as
in the BS model

Results do not depend on the choice of distribution
employed in operation c). Operations a) and b) are as-
sociated to either ﬁtness driven or random mutations,
respectively.

We should remark that in order to simulate the ex-
periment, one would need to double the total number
of cells at the end of each step, assigning copies of the
barriers associated to the existing cells to the ones cre-
ated. Furthermore, every G ≈ 6 − 7 steps, the population
should be reduced to its original value N by selecting at
random this number of cells among the total population.
However, since the mutation probability is found to be
constant and independent of the size of the population,
scaling properties [11] allow us to avoid these population
doublings and reductions, keeping the number of cells
constant. Because of this simpliﬁcation, the model be-
comes formally equivalent to the mean ﬁeld version of
the BS model (MFBS) [6] However, here the Q barrier
changes in c) are interpreted as random mutations, and
not as changes to neighbors of the least ﬁt specimen in
the population as in the MFBS model.

Since, as in the BS model, after a transient, the
model ﬁtness barrier distribution self-organizes in a step
its asymptotic mean ﬁtness is
at Bc = 1/(1 + Q),

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

>
F
R
<

2

(Bc + 1)/2 = (Q + 2)/(Q + 1), while the mean ﬁtness
of the original uniform barrier distribution is 0.5. There-
fore, in this model the asymptotic relative ﬁtness to the
ancestor is

hRF i∞ =

Q + 2
Q + 1

.

(1)

We select the value of Q so as to adjust

¯hRF i∞ ≃
1.48. Hence, from (1) we obtain Q ≃ 1.1. It is interesting
to note that the model suggests an approximately equal
number of ﬁtness driven and random mutations for the
E.coli under the conditions of Lenski’s experiment.

While Q determines the asymptotic value of hRF i∞,
the number of cellular automata, N , is determined by
the empirically observed mutation rate per replication µ,
which was estimated as µ ≈ 0.002 per replication [8], [9].
Since in the model we have on the average Q + 1 = 2.1
changes per generation, then the number of cells in the
simulation should be N ≈ 1000.
In this way, the two
parameters of the model, Q and N , are ﬁxed so as to re-
produce the experimentally observed asymptotic ﬁtness
and mutation rate found in the experiment. The simula-
tions were performed for Q = 1.1 and for several values
of N in the interval 500 ≤ N ≤ 2000.

The agreement between the model and experiment
is quite reasonable. In Fig. 1 we plot the hRF i trajectory
every 500 generations for N = 1000 (✷) and N = 1500
(△) and 3 of the Lenski et al. best hyperbolic ﬁts to 3
(of the 12) sets of data for the E.coli experiments.

0.8

0

2000

4000
6000
generation

8000

10000

FIG. 1. Trajectories for mean ﬁtness relative to the origi-
nal ancestor during 10,000 generations. Averages from 1000
numerical simulations for Q = 1.1 for N = 1000 (squares) and
N = 1500 (triangles) compared with the 3 best hyperbolic ﬁts
(lines) to data of 3 of the 12 corresponding experiments.

In order to analyze the initial rapid grow of hRF i,
in Fig. 2 we plot the experimental data and the model
results for the ﬁrst 2000 generations, every 100 gener-
ations. Once again notice the overall agreement of the
model with experimental E.coli data.

>
F
R
<

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0

1.6

1.4

>
F
R
<

1.2

1

500

1000
generation

1500

2000

FIG. 2. Finer scale analysis of the trajectories of the mean
ﬁtness relative to the ancestor for the 2000 initial generations.
Experimental data (ﬁlled circles), and model averages from
1000 numerical simulations with Q = 1.1: N = 1000 (squares)
N = 1500 (triangles). The standard deviations of the experi-
mentally measured relative ﬁtness are indicated as error bars
in the data points. The model calculations have negligible
dispersion in the scale of the plots presented in this work.

It was suggested in [1] that periods of stasis, charac-
teristic of punctuated evolution, might be present in the
data. Although the relatively large experimental error
bars could make the data consistent with a monotonic
increase like the one predicted by the model, we believe
that further studies are needed to settle this issue.

The results presented thus far assume that there is
no neighbor relation between diﬀerent strains of E.coli in
the system. However, as in other ecological system in-
terdependencies among species arise, one should explore
the possibility that also in this case they exist. To do
this, we think it is illustrative to present here also the
results of a variation of the standard BS-type model. In
this variation, as in the original model, at each time step
the changes occur at the cell with lowest barrier and its
two neighbors. In addition to this ﬁtness driven form of
evolution we include, with probability p per time step, a
similar change in a randomly chosen cell. In this way the
number of changes per time step is Q = 2 + p (the two
neighbors of the cell with minimum barrier plus, with
probability p, a cell at a random location). We denote
this version of the model as BS+p.

The stationary properties of this BS+p model will
be presented elsewhere [10]. We have observed that the
barrier distribution self-organizes into a step function at a
position Bc which decreases as the parameter p increases
from Bc ≃ 0.667 for p = 0 (the standard BS model) to
Bc ≃ 0.22 for p = 1. Thus hRF i∞ lies in the interval
between 1.22 (for p = 1) and 1.667 (for p = 0). We
¯hRF i∞ ≃ 1.48 may be adjusted taking p ≃
found that
0.2. Hence, here the purely random mutations are taken
with a weight proportional to 0.2, while those mutations
related to natural selection are proportional to 3.

In this BS+p version, in an analogous way as it hap-
pens in the MFBS version, while p determines the asymp-
totic value of hRF i∞, the number of cellular automata,
N , is determined to ﬁt with the estimated µ ≈ 0.002.
Since, we now have, on the average, 3.2 changes per time
step, in order to get roughly the same mutation rates
in the simulation and in the experiment we should take
N ≃ 1500. In Fig. 3 we plot the hRF i trajectory every
500 generations for N = 1000 (✷) and N = 1500 (△)
and 3 diﬀerent hyperbolic ﬁts of [1]. Notice the good
agreement with the Lenski et al. hyperbolic ﬁt to data
corresponding to the “A-1” experiment [7].

0.8

0

2000

4000
6000
generation

8000

10000

FIG. 3. Trajectories for mean ﬁtness relative to the original
ancestor during 10,000 generations, in the BS+p model. Aver-
ages from 1000 numerical simulations for p = 0.2 for N = 1500
(squares) compared with the data (ﬁlled circles) and their best
hyperbolic ﬁt (line). See text for further details.

In the case of the E.coli, the MFBS model appears,
in principle, more reasonable, as it does not seem plausi-
ble to have interdependencies among closely related bac-
terial strains. The BS+p model could be applicable to
other situations, where diﬀerent microorganisms coexist
and are interdependent. Our point here was to show that

3

it is not possible to distinguish between the two models
based solely on the measurements of the evolution of the
ﬁtness.

To conclude, when considered during the transient
from the initial ordered distribution, BS models with ran-
dom mutations were shown to qualitatively reproduce the
experimental results of Lenski and co-workers. The inclu-
sion of random mutations, besides making more realis-
tic the models, is required to get quantitative agreement
with the experimental results, both for the transient and
the asymptotic regime. While both ﬁtness driven and
random mutations were shown to be needed, their rela-
tive importance remains an open question. One should
remark that the calculations presented here are just an
starting point in the exploration of this complex biologi-
cal system. In particular, the existence of stasis regions,
suggested by the data, remains another open issue.

Work supported in part by PEDECIBA (Uruguay)
and CNPq (Brazil). We thank L. Acerenza, G. Gonz´alez-
Sprinberg and K. Sneppen for valuable discussions and
suggestions.

[1] R. Lenski and M. Travisano, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91,

[2] S. A. Kauﬀman and S. J. Johnsen, J. Theor. Biol. 149,

[3] H. Flyvberg and B. Lautrup, Phys. Rev. A 46, 6714

[4] P. Bak, H. Flyvbjerg and B. Lautrup, Phys. Rev. A 46,

6808 (1994).

467 (1991).

(1992).

6724 (1992).

[5] P. Bak and K. Sneppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4083 (1993);
K. Sneppen, P. Bak, H. Flyvbjerg and M. H. Jensen,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92, 5209 (1995).

[6] H. Flyvbjerg, P. Bak and K. Sneppen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

71, 4087 (1993);

[7] A summary data from the long-term evolution ex-
periment of Lenski and co-workers can be found at
http://myxo.css.msu.edu/ecoli/summdata.html.
[8] J. W. Drake, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 88, 7160 (1991).
[9] S. F. Elena, V. S. Cooper and R. Lenski, Science 272,

1802 (1996).

[10] R. Donangelo and H. Fort, to be published.
[11] Henrik Jeldtoft Jensen. Self-Organized Criticality: emer-
gent complex behavior in physical and biological systems,
Cambridge University Press, 1998, eq. 5.39.

4

