2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A continuous isotropic-nematic liquid crystalline transition of F-actin solutions

Jorge Viamontes and Jay X. Tang∗
Physics Department, Indiana University, 727 East Third St, Bloomington, IN 47405, U.S.A.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The phase transition from the isotropic (I) to nematic (N) liquid crystalline suspension of F-actin
of average length 3 µm or above was studied by local measurements of optical birefringence and
protein concentration. Both parameters were detected to be continuous in the transition region,
suggesting that the I-N transition is higher than 1st order. This ﬁnding is consistent with a recent
theory by Lammert, Rokhsar & Toner (PRL, 1993, 70:1650), predicting that the I-N transition may
become continuous due to suppression of disclinations. Indeed, few line defects occur in the aligned
phase of F-actin. Individual ﬁlaments in solutions of a few mg/ml F-actin undergo fast translational
diﬀusion along the ﬁlament axis, whereas both lateral and rotational diﬀusions are suppressed.

PACS numbers: 61.30.Eb, 61.30.Jf, 64.70.Md, 82.35.Pq, 87.15.-v

The isotropic (I) to nematic (N) liquid crystalline tran-
sition occurs in solutions of rodlike particles including
stiﬀ polymers [1], protein ﬁlaments [2, 3], and ﬁlamen-
tous viruses [4]. Such a phase transition is predicted to be
1st order based on statistical mechanical theories [5, 6].
Landau and de Gennes [7] treated the I-N transition by a
general method of free energy expansion, as a function of
the nematic order parameter, which contains a 3rd order
term and thus predicts the I-N transition to be 1st order.
This classic analysis led to the conventional wisdom that
the I-N transition belongs to a diﬀerent universality class
as the magnetic systems, for which the order-disorder
transition is generally continuous.

In a recent theory examining topology and nematic
ordering by Lammert, Rokhsar & Toner (LRT) [8], it
is shown, however, that the weakly 1st order I-N tran-
sition can break into two continuous transitions if the
disclination core energy is raised suﬃciently high. The
LRT theory has been developed with the thermotropic
nematogens in mind, although no particular experimen-
tal system has been shown to date in direct support of
the theory. In this report, we ﬁrst present experimental
features of the I-N transition of F-actin, and then discuss
the relevance of our ﬁndings to the theory of LRT.

The protein ﬁlaments F-actin provide us a challenging
system to study the liquid crystalline transition. On one
hand, since the protein is well characterized biochemi-
cally, special techniques such as ﬂuorescence labeling are
available to probe both structure and dynamics of an F-
actin solution [9]. On the other hand, extreme polydis-
persity in ﬁlament length due to the stochastic nature
of actin polymerization renders the theoretical analysis
of the I-N transition less deﬁnitive than for the sim-
pler monodisperse systems. Recent experimental stud-
ies show that F-actin forms a nematic phase at slightly
above 2 mg/ml protein concentrations [3, 10, 11, 12],
and the onset actin concentration for the I-N transition
is inversely proportional to the average ﬁlament length,
¯l [10, 12]. There have also been bulk measurements sug-
gesting a concentration range in which partially aligned

domains exist [12]. The goal of our study was set to deter-
mine the I-N transition phase diagram by measuring local
alignment of actin ﬁlaments, the co-existing domains of
aligned ﬁlaments (N) and ﬁlaments with random orien-
tations (I), all in close correlation with variation of local
protein concentrations, c. Through these measurements,
we discovered surprising features suggesting that the I-N
transition of F-actin is continuous as a function of c.

For a sample of an aligned array of rodlike ﬁlaments,
the diﬀerence in index of refraction between the direc-
tion of the alignment and the direction perpendicular to
it can be measured optically. This diﬀerence, known as
the optical birefringence, ∆n, is directly proportional to
the order parameter of a uniaxial nematic suspension,
S = R dΩ f (θ)P2(θ), where f (θ) is the orientational dis-
tribution function and P2(θ) = (cid:0)3 cos2 (θ) − 1(cid:1) /2 is the
2nd Legendre polynomial.
In this report, the birefrin-
gence measurements were performed on a Nikon TE-300
microscope, equipped with a Cambridge Research Inc
(CRI) Polscope package (Cambridge, MA). The Polscope
software is capable of determining ∆n at each pixel po-
sition, thus reporting local ∆n, as well as the directions
of slow axis throughout the sample [13].
In contrast,
other birefringence measurement techniques average over
a bulk sample, and are prone to large variability due to
cancellation of random orientations of separately aligned
domains. The measured values by the Polscope can also
be averaged over all pixel values for the entire ﬁeld of
view, free of the cancellation eﬀect due to diﬀerent align-
ment directions at diﬀerent positions.

Fig. 1 shows the birefringence of F-actin as a function
of c and ¯l, measured using the Polscope technique. Rect-
angular capillary tubes of 0.4 mm thickness and 8 mm
width were used to observe the alignment of F-actin in
large domains. After injecting an actin solution of the de-
sired concentration into the capillary tube immediately
following the addition of 50 mM KCl and 2 mM MgCl2 to
start polymerization, both ends were sealed with melted
plastic. The sample was aligned by upside down inver-
sions using a table top centrifuge. Repeated spins showed

2

with white stripes and black grooves appeared occasion-
ally in both thick (up to 0.4 mm thickness using a rect-
angular capillary) and thin samples (10 µm, for example,
as shown in Fig. 2). Due to the continuous variation in
both ∆n and direction of the slow axis over the entire
region, the dark and bright areas do not correspond to
separate I-N domains. The black grooves are not discli-
nation lines [14]. In most cases of our observations for
the nematic samples of ¯l ≥ 3µm, zebra patterns were
either not formed, or too fuzzy to be discerned. Instead,
the birefringence pictures appeared rather uniform, with
few line defects. Disclinations were observed less frequent
than once per hundreds of sample slides.

The corresponding ﬂuorescence image (Fig. 2, C and
D) shows constant c over the entire region of this sam-
ple. The same result of uniform concentration holds for
weakly birefringent regions of less deﬁned patterns, as
well (data not shown).
In all actin concentrations up
to 7.3 mg/ml and ¯l ≥ 3µm, we saw no discernable do-
main boundaries of co-existence based on the birefrin-
gence data. Instead, a blending of domains of compara-
ble levels of alignment was occasionally observed, which
led to either zebra patterns or other variants. In all cases,
c was measured to be strictly uniform, forcing us to con-
clude that no co-existence occurred to F-actin spanning
the region of I-N phase transition.

7

6

Additional experiments were performed to examine
two possible causes for the lack of concentration variation
in the I-N transition of F-actin. First, we suspected that
the F-actin network at several mg/ml might be weakly
crosslinked [15]. As a result, the polymerizing actin so-
lution may ﬁrst form a nematic phase when ¯l reaches
the value required by the excluded volume eﬀect. Fur-
ther polymerization and/or annealing by the crosslink-
ing eﬀect may lead to gelation so that the network is
unable to achieve its true thermodynamic equilibrium,
with well separated I-N domains in co-existence. A sec-
ond possibility is that the extremely long F-actin tend
to get suﬃciently entangled and thus kinetically trapped
in a gel-like or glassy state with local orientational or-
der but no global phase equilibrium. We address these
concerns by mixing a small number of labeled ﬁlaments
with 7 mg/ml unlabeled F-actin, both of ¯l = 3µm, and
show that the labeled ﬁlaments undergo rapid thermal
motions. Fig. 3 shows a time sequence of one ﬁlament in
a nematic domain by overlaying images with 0.5 sec inter-
vals. The ﬁlaments diﬀuse preferentially along their axis.
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient of each labeled ﬁlament was de-
termined by calculating the h∆x2i over a movie sequence
of 50–150 frames. The translational diﬀusion of labeled
ﬁlament along its axis is found to be 1.30/L (µm2/sec),
where L, omitting its unit of µm, is the length of the dif-
fusing ﬁlament. The pre-factor of 1.30 obtained from the
ﬁt in Fig. 3 is smaller than the theoretical value of 3.90
for the translational diﬀusion along ﬁlament axis in the
dilute limit. This reduction by a factor of 3 is not surpris-

3

5
Concentration (mg/ml)

4

FIG. 1: Average speciﬁc birefringence, ∆n/c, plotted for F-
actin in the concentration range of 1.0-7.3 mg/ml, and of 5
diﬀerent ¯l. The data show the region of I-N transition for
F-actin.

5

)
)
l

/

m
g
m

0

4

3

(
/

m
n
(
 
e
c
n
e
g
n
i
r
f
e
r
i

no gelsolin
12 m m
9 m m
6 m m
3 m m

that the average birefringence of the sample reached a
saturation value after two or three inversions (data not
shown). Our measurements conﬁrm the previous ﬁndings
that the threshold concentration of the I-N transition is
inversely related to ¯l [11, 13]. The speciﬁc birefringence,
∆n/c, increases with the c and reaches a saturated level
at the long ﬁlament conditions. Further increase in c in-
creased ∆n but not ∆n/c, suggesting that the entire sam-
ple was in the nematic state. Actin samples of shorter
¯l did not reach the saturation level for ∆n/c, suggest-
ing that either the ﬁlaments were only weakly aligned,
or that the measured value was the weighed average of
co-existing domains. Variation of birefringence with po-
sition was observed, but usually over relatively large re-
gions with no sharp boundaries. No clearly separated
domains of either I or N phase were detected based on
the birefringence measurements.

B
 
c
i
f
i
c
e
p
S

2

1

2

1

0

Co-existing I-N domains were expected theoretically
to contain ﬁlaments of diﬀerent concentrations, which is
the basic criterion for a 1st order phase transition of a
rodlike suspension. In order to detect the concentration
diﬀerence between co-existing I-N domains of F-actin,
TRITC- phalloidin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was added
into F-actin to a ratio of 1/1000 and the intensity of ﬂuo-
rescence provided a quantitative report of concentration
variation, especially in regions of the capillary where local
birefringence varied. Measurements of birefringence and
ﬂuorescence were performed for F-actin samples in order
to correlate variations of both parameters. Fig. 2 displays
a set of combined measurements in one representative
condition of a 7.3 mg/ml F-actin sample of ¯l = 3µm. It
is shown in Fig. 1 that F-actin under this condition is in
the I-N transition region. Therefore, one would expect to
have I-N co-existence based on the theoretical predictions
of a 1st order transition. The ∆n in the particular region
shows alternating stripes of high and low values, a phe-
nomenon reported earlier [10, 12]. Such a zebra pattern

3

FIG. 2: A. Birefringence values of 7.3 mg/ml F-actin with ¯l = 3µm. The gray scale of 0–4 nm covers the range of ∆n. B. A
line plot of ∆n along the diagonal cut, shown from the top right to the bottom left. C. Fluorescence image of the same region.
The measured intensity values varied from 82 to 85 only, over the camera range of 0–255. D. A line plot diagonally across the
image, showing little variation in intensity value. The sample thickness is 10 µm.

ing since F-actin are highly entangled at a few mg/ml. In
contrast, the lateral and rotational diﬀusion coeﬃcients
are suppressed by factors of at least 10 and 100, respec-
tively, although we were unable to obtain these small
values limited by the image resolution.

We propose that the I-N transition of F-actin of ¯l ≥
3µm corresponds to the continuous transition between a
topologically ordered isotropic phase (T) and a weakly
aligned nematic phase (N), as predicted theoretically by
Lammert, Rokhsar & Toner (LRT) [8]. First, the suspen-
sion of long (aspect ratio over 300) and stiﬀ (persistence
length 15 µm [17]) actin ﬁlaments satisfy one key crite-
rion of defect suppression, which according to the LRT
theory renders the transition continuous. The disclina-
tion lines are energetically costly for F-actin, as the bend-
ing elastic constant (K3) is far greater than splay (K1)
and twist (K2) for long and stiﬀ rods [16]. Indeed, few
line defects and nearly no disclinations were observed in
F-actin samples. Second, suppression of rotational diﬀu-
sion likely leads to breaking the inversion symmetry of
long ﬁlaments in the concentrated F-actin. Therefore,
vectorial directionality can be assigned to individual ﬁl-
aments, and in this context, the isotropic state becomes
topologically ordered. A schematic phase diagram for
F-actin as shown in Fig. 4, which translates the main

predictions of the LRT theory, as depicted in Fig. 2 of
ref. [8].

We now brieﬂy discuss two other features that aﬀect
the I-N transition: the ﬁlament ﬂexibility and the poly-
dispersity of length. The ﬂexibility is known to suppress
the concentration gap between co-existing I-N domains.
For instance, such a gap for the I-N transition of the semi-
ﬂexible fd/M13 viruses is reduced to about 10% of the
up limit concentration of the isotropic phase [4], down
from over 30% predicted by the Onsager theory for rigid
rods [5]. The fd or M13 virus has about the same di-
ameter as F-actin, but a persistence length of 2.2 µm
[4], much shorter than that of F-actin (15–20 µm) [17].
Therefore, the eﬀect of limited ﬂexibility for F-actin is
insuﬃcient to lead to disappearance of the concentration
gap characteristic of a 1st order transition for most poly-
mer liquid crystals [18]. While polydispersity has been
speculated as a possible cause of smearing the I-N phase
boundary, calculations for bidispersed rods suggest not
narrower but wider co-existing regions [19]. Experimen-
tal study of polydisperse systems of short rods suggests
a wider co-existence region for the I-N transition [20].

Dogic and Fraden recently attempted to detect co-
existence for the I-N transition of pf1, another ﬁlamen-
tous bacteriophage of 2 µm length. Similar to our ﬁnd-

N 

M 
 

 

Isotropic (I) 

 
)
l

m
/
g
m

(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

 
 

 
0
.
6
 
 
 
 
0
.
4
 
 

 
0
.
2

 
|
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
|
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
|
 
 
 

N em atic (N ) 

H 
  Isotropic (T) 

 I 

      | 

  | 
2.0               4.0 
Filament length (m m) 

FIG. 3: Measurement of ﬁlament diﬀusion by image record-
ing. A. Conﬁguration and traces of one labeled ﬁlament in
the nematic matrix. Left inset: a typical frame. Right in-
set: trajectory of the ﬁlament without overlay of the ﬁlament
images. B. Diﬀusion coeﬃcient determined for various ﬁla-
ment length and two F-actin preparations. The ﬁt line shows
D ∝ 1/L.

FIG. 4: Sketch of a proposed phase diagram for the I-N tran-
sition of long and stiﬀ rods. Each phase region follows what
is shown in Fig. 2 of ref. [8]. The nematic interaction (J) and
the defect suppression (K) parameters of ref. [8] are mapped
to the concentration and ﬁlament length, respectively.

ings for the long F-actin, they observed no domain sepa-
ration for the I-N transition (Dogic and Fraden, private

4

communications). Since the pf1 virus has similar diame-
ter and persistent length to fd/M13, but is twice as long,
the diﬀerent behavior between their I-N transitions im-
plies that even the 2 µm ﬁlaments are perhaps too long
to lead to domain separation. The similar behavior of
pf1 to F-actin also supports the argument that polydis-
persity is unlikely to account for the observed continuous
transition for F-actin, since pf1 viruses are monodisperse.

In summary, the I-N transition for F-actin of ¯l ≥ 3µm
is continuous in alignment and protein concentration.
This experimental ﬁnding, and more importantly, its pro-
posed relevance to the LRT theory, will likely provoke fur-
ther query, such as a search for the I-T transition closely
related to the T-N transition and the resultant critical
ﬂuctuations.

 

We appreciate helpful discussions with Bob Pelcovits,
John Toner, James Swihart, Seth Fraden, and Zvonimir
Dogic. This work is supported by NSF DMR 9988389.
Jorge Viamontes is a GAANN fellow, supported by the
US Department of Education.

∗

E-mail:jxtang@indiana.edu

[1] Sato, T., Y. Jinbo, and A. Teramoto. Macromolecules,

1997. 30: 590.

[2] Buxbaum, R.E., et al. Science, 1987. 235: 1511.
[3] Kerst, A., et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 1990. 87: 4241.
[4] Tang, J.X. and S. Fraden. Liquid Crystals, 1995. 19: 459.
[5] Onsager, L. Ann. NY Acad. Sci., 1949. 51: 627.
[6] Flory, P.J., Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules.

1969, Interscience Publishers, New York.

[7] de Gennes, P.G. and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid

Crystals. 1994, Clarendon: Oxford.

[8] Lammert, P.E., D.S. Rokhsar, and J. Toner. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 1993. 70: 1650. Phys. Rev. E, 1995, 52: 1778 and
1801.

[9] Kas, J., et al. Biophys. J., 1995. 70: 609.

[10] Coppin, C. and P. Leavis. Biophys. J., 1992. 63: 794.
[11] Furukawa, R., R. Kundra, and M. Fechheimer. Biochem-

istry, 1993. 32: 12346.

[12] Suzuki, A., T. Maeda, and T. Ito. Biophys. J., 1991. 59:

[13] Oldenbourg, R. and G. Mei. J. of Microscopy, 1995. 180:

[14] Chandrasekhar, S. and G.S. Ranganath. Adv. in Phys.,

1986. 35: 507.

[15] Tang, J.X., et al. Biophys. J., 1999. 76: 2208.
[16] Lee, S.D. and R.B. Meyer. J. Chem. Phys., 1986. 84:

[17] Gittes, F., et al. J. Cell Bio., 1993. 120: 923.
[18] Ciferri, A., W.R. Krigbaum, and R.B. Meyer, eds. Poly-
mer Liquid Crystals. 1982, Academic Press: New York.
[19] Vroege, G.L. and H.N.M. Lekkerkerker. J. Phys. Chem.,

[20] Buitenhuis, J., et al. J. of Colloid and Interface Science,

1993. 97: 3601.

1995. 175: 46.

25.

140.

3443.

