2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probability of ﬁxation of an advantageous
mutant in a viral quasispecies

Claus O. Wilke
Digital Life Laboratory 136-93
Caltech, Pasadena CA 91125

January 12, 2014

1

Running head: Quasispecies ﬁxation

Keywords: quasispecies, ﬁxation probability, RNA virus evolution, neutral
network

Corresponding author:

Claus O. Wilke
Digital Life Laboratory 136-93
Caltech, Pasadena CA 91125
Tel.: 626 395 2338
Fax: 626 395 2944
wilke@caltech.edu

Abstract: The probability that an advantageous mutant rises to ﬁxation in
a viral quasispecies is investigated in the framework of multi-type branching
processes. Whether ﬁxation is possible depends on the overall growth rate
of the quasispecies that will form if invasion is successful, rather than on the
individual ﬁtness of the invading mutant. The exact ﬁxation probability can
only be calculated if the ﬁtnesses of all potential members of the invading
quasispecies are known. Quasispecies ﬁxation has two important charac-
teristics: First, a sequence with negative selection coeﬃcient has a positive
ﬁxation probability as long as it has the potential to grow into a quasis-
pecies with an overall growth rate that exceeds the one of the established
quasispecies. Second, the ﬁxation probabilities of sequences with identical
ﬁtnesses can nevertheless vary over many orders of magnitudes. Two approx-
imations for the probability of ﬁxation are introduced. Both approximations
require only partial knowledge about the potential members of the invading
quasispecies. The performance of these two approximations is compared to
the exact ﬁxation probability on a network of RNA sequences with identical
secondary structure.

2

INTRODUCTION

One of the most remarkable aspects of the dynamics of RNA viruses is the
high rate at which mutant variants are produced. At mutation rates close to
one substitution per genome per generation (Drake 1993; Drake and Holland
1999), a virus population forms a highly diverse cloud of mutants (Domingo
et al. 1976; Domingo et al. 1978; Holland et al. 1982; Steinhauer et al. 1989;
Biebricher and Luce 1993; Burch and Chao 2000), a so-called quasispecies
(Eigen and Schuster 1979; Nowak 1992; Domingo and Holland 1997; Domingo
et al. 2001). At the same time, the sequence space is so large that even for
population sizes up to 1012, there is a constant stream of new mutants that
have never existed before. Most of these mutants have impaired ﬁtness,
but occasionally, a new mutant will fare better than all currently existing
virions, for example by presenting an epitope that the immune system fails to
recognize. With a certain probability, this mutant will rise to ﬁxation, where
ﬁxation is understood in the sense that the mutant becomes the ancestor of
a new quasispecies which completely replaces the currently existing one.

The problem of the ﬁxation of an advantageous mutant is an old one,
with a long history of investigations in classical population genetics, reach-
ing back to Haldane and Fisher (Fisher 1922; Fisher 1930; Haldane 1927;
Kimura 1957; Kimura 1964; Kimura 1970; Kimura and King 1979; Ewens
1967; B¨urger and Ewens 1995; Barton 1995; Otto and Barton 1997; Pollak
2000). However, these investigations diﬀer from the quasispecies case in one
important aspect: the mutation rates considered.
In classical population
genetics, the usual assumption is that mutations are rare events, such that
an invading mutant will not mutate again while it is moving towards either
ﬁxation or extinction. In the quasispecies setting, on the other hand, most
of the immediate oﬀspring of a mutant will have further mutations, and their
oﬀspring as well, and so on. As a consequence, the ﬁtness of a prospective
invading quasispecies is not given by the ﬁtness of the initial mutant, but
rather by the average ﬁtness of the oﬀspring mutant cloud that will form
eventually. One of the more surprising results of this dynamics is that a
mutant with the ability to replace the currently existing quasispecies may
actually have a reduced replication rate, if at the same time its robustness
against further mutations is increased (Schuster and Swetina 1988; Wilke
et al. 2001; Wilke 2001b; Krakauer and Plotkin 2002).

Quasispecies theory in its original formulation by Eigen and Schuster
(1979) is based on deterministic diﬀerential equations, and as such cannot

3

deal with the ﬂuctuations that are responsible for ﬁxation or extinction of
individual mutants. Within the more general mathematical framework of
multi-type branching processes, it is possible to describe both the determin-
istic aspects of large populations as well as the ﬂuctuations inherent in the
dynamics of small and very small populations (Demetrius et al. 1985; Hof-
bauer and Sigmund 1988; Hermisson et al. 2002). An expression for the
probability of ﬁxation follows naturally from branching process theory. We
will discuss how this expression relates to the predictions of the determin-
istic quasispecies equations, as well as to the results of classical population
genetics.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we derive
a general expression for the probability of ﬁxation in an arbitrary ﬁtness
landscape. Then, we discuss the special case of ﬁxation on a neutral network,
that is, the case in which all sequences of the invading quasispecies have the
same ﬁtness, and derive two approximations for the ﬁxation probability that
can be evaluated without the knowledge of the full ﬁtness landscape.
In
order to give a concrete example, we apply both the exact expression and
the approximations to a known network of over 50,000 RNA sequences. For
this neutral network, we also discuss how the ﬁxation probability changes if
multiple sequences invade at the same time.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

For a population evolving under high mutational pressure, we have to un-
derstand ﬁxation in the sense that a mutant is ﬁxed once it has become a
common ancestor of the whole population. The more traditional deﬁnition
of ﬁxation, which is to regard a mutation as ﬁxed if all sequences in the
population carry it, is not applicable: The mutational pressure constantly
creates new deleterious mutants, which may not carry a particular mutation
although their ancestors did so. If we understand ﬁxation as the process by
which a mutant becomes a common ancestor of the whole population, then
the probability that a mutant is ﬁxed is given by the probability that the
cascade of further mutated oﬀspring of the invading mutant does not come
to a halt. We can calculate this probability from the theory of multi-type
branching processes.

The general setting to which our theory applies is as follows. Consider a
viral quasispecies in mutation-selection balance, with an average ﬁtness hwi.
If generations are discrete and non-overlapping, and the population size N

4

is constant, then the probability that a virion i produces k oﬀspring in one
generation is given by Wright-Fisher sampling,

P (k|i) =

i (1 − ξi)N −k ,
ξk

(1)

N
k

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

with ξi = wi/(hwiN), where wi is the ﬁtness of virion i.

Assume that a rare mutation leads to the emergence of a virion with the
potential to form a new quasispecies, and to replace the already established
one in the process. This new quasispecies (in the following also called the
invading quasispecies) may consist of sequences of type 1, 2, . . . , n, with repli-
cation rates wi. Let the probability that a sequence j produces an erroneous
copy i be given by Qij. As long as the total abundance of the invading quasis-
pecies is small compared to the established quasispecies, we can assume that
hwi is not aﬀected by the presence of the invading quasispecies. Then, the
probability that a single sequence of type i generates (k1, . . . , kn) oﬀspring of
types 1, . . . , n can be expressed as (see Appendix)

P (k1, . . . , kn|i) =

(N −

N!
r kr)!
n
Q
(Mir/N)kr

r kr!

×

P

n

N −

r kr

1 −

Mir/N

P

,

(2)

r=1
Y

(cid:18)

r=1
X

(cid:19)

with Mij = wiQji/hwi. The matrix elements Mij give the expected number
of oﬀspring of type j from sequences of type i in one generation.
In the
following, we will assume that the population size is so large that we can
approximate P (k1, . . . , kn|i) by its limit for an inﬁnitely large population.
This limit is a multivariate Poisson distribution:

P (k1, . . . , kn|i) =

(3)

n

r=1 (cid:18)
Y

1
kr!

M kr
ir

e−

r Mir .

(cid:19)

P

By using the theory of branching processes, and by assuming an inﬁnite
population size in Eq. (3), we restrict the applicability of our theory to certain
scenarios. We can apply our theory only to those types of ﬁxation events
that increase the average ﬁtness of the population. The situation of genetic
drift, whereby a neutral or deleterious mutant is ﬁxed because of stochastic
ﬂuctuations in a small population (Kimura 1970; Kimura and King 1979),

5

is not covered by our theory. This latter type of ﬁxation events reduces the
average ﬁtness or leaves it unaltered.

Let xi be the probability that the oﬀspring cascade spawned by a se-
quence i goes extinct after a ﬁnite number of generations. From the the-
ory of multitype branching processes (Harris 1963), we know that the vec-
tor of extinction probabilities x = (x1, . . . , xn) satisﬁes x = f (x), where
f (z) =
is the probability-generating function of the distri-
bution of oﬀspring probabilities P (k1, . . . , kn|i). The probability-generating
function is deﬁned as

f1(z), . . . , fn(z)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

fi(z) =

P (k1, . . . , kn|i) zk1

1 . . . zkn
n .

k1,...,kn
X

After inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (4), we obtain fi(z) = e
the convention ex = (ex1, . . . , exn), we can rewrite this expression as

P

r Mir(zr−1). With

f (z) = eM(z−1) .

Since the probability of ﬁxation πi of a sequence i is given by the probability
that the oﬀspring cascade spawned by i does not go extinct, we have πi =
1−xi. The vector of ﬁxation probabilities satisﬁes therefore 1−π = f (1−π).
With Eq. (5), we ﬁnd

1 − π = e−Mπ .

This equation has exactly one solution with 0 < πi < 1 for all i if the spectral
radius1 ρM of M is larger than one (Harris 1963). Otherwise, πi = 0 for all
i.

In order to compare Eq. (6) to the result of Haldane (1927), we take the

logarithm on both sides of Eq. (6) and expand to second order:

log(1 − πi) ≈ −πi − π2

i /2 = −

Mikπk .

k
X

With si = Mii − 1, this simpliﬁes to

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

πi = si +

s2
i + 2

Mikπk .

s

k6=i
X

1For the matrices M we are considering here, the spectral radius coincides with the

largest positive eigenvalue of M, by virtue of the Frobenius-Perron theorem.

6

If si > 0 and all oﬀ-diagonal elements of M are zero, then Eq. (8) reduces
to Haldane’s result πi = 2si, that is, the ﬁxation probability of a sequence
is twice its selective advantage.
If the oﬀ-diagonal elements are non-zero,
then the ﬁxation probability is increased, because the invading sequence gets
support from its mutational neighbors. In particular, even if some si < 0,
the corresponding πi are positive as long as ρM > 1. This means that in
quasispecies ﬁxation, sequences that by themselves reproduce too slowly to
outcompete the currently established quasispecies can nevertheless found a
new quasispecies that grows fast enough to overtake the population.

For simplicity, we have considered only discrete, non-overlapping gener-
ations. Generalization to continuous time is straightforward, see e.g. (Her-
misson et al. 2002; Harris 1963). In the continuous time case, the vector
of ﬁxation probabilities π is again determined by an equation of the form
1 − π = f (1 − π). However, the generating function f (z) is in general not
given by Eq. (5). Its functional form depends on the details of the continu-
ous time process that is being modeled. For example, if reproduction occurs
through binary ﬁssion, f (z) will be quadratic in the variables z1, . . . zn.

FIXATION ON A NEUTRAL NETWORK

Exact expressions and estimates
So far, we have made no assumptions about the structure and ﬁtness dis-
tribution of the invading quasispecies. This has led to a general equation
for the vector of ﬁxation probabilities π, but not much further analysis is
possible without a concrete model for the ﬁtness landscape of the invading
quasispecies (we do not have to make any further assumptions about the es-
tablished quasispecies, since it enters the equations only through its average
ﬁtness hwi). The concrete ﬁtness landscape we study is that of a neutral net-
work (Huynen et al. 1996; Bornberg-Bauer 1997) of related sequences with
identical replication rate σ. All sequences that are not part of the neutral
network are assumed to have a vanishing replication rate. Mutations occur
as random substitutions of single bases, and we allow for at most one sub-
stitution per replication event, similar to the approach of van Nimwegen et
al. (1999). The probability of a substitution is given by µ. The restriction
to at most a single substitution is a technicality that simpliﬁes the analysis.
Generalization to more elaborate mutation schemes is possible along the lines
of (Wilke 2001a).

We denote the sequence length by L, and the number of diﬀerent bases

7

by κ (κ = 4 for RNA/DNA). For the matrix M, we only have to take
into account the sequences belonging to the neutral network. It is useful to
introduce the connection graph G = (Gij). The elements Gij are 1 if and
only if two sequences i and j are exactly one mutation apart. In all other
cases, Gij = 0. We can express M in terms of G as

M = (s + 1)1 + βG ,

(9)

where s = σ(1 − µ)/hwi − 1, β = σµ/[hwiL(κ − 1)], and 1 is the identity
matrix. We restrict our analysis to primitive connection graphs, in which
case the spectral radius ρG of G is given by the unique positive eigenvalue of
largest modulus of G (Varga 2000). (Irreducibility, which is often assumed
in similar contexts, is not suﬃcient, since complex eigenvalues of modulus
ρG may exist if G is not primitive. Irreducible undirected connection graphs
of the kind we are considering here are primitive if they contain at least one
cycle of odd length.)

The spectral radius of M is given in terms of the spectral radius of the

connection graph ρG as

ρM = s + 1 + βρG .

(10)

This implies that ﬁxation can occur as long as s is not smaller than −βρG.
In an experimental setting, we cannot expect to have knowledge of the
complete connection graph G. Therefore, it is important to have approxima-
tions for the ﬁxation probability πi. We consider two alternative methods.
Both are based on replacing the matrix M in Eq. (6) by a suitable diagonal
matrix. This replacement leads to a decoupling of the equations for diﬀerent
πi.

The quantity that is easiest to obtain experimentally is the growth rate
of the invading quasispecies relative to the established quasispecies, when
initially both are present in large and equal amounts. From the deﬁnition of
M, we see that this relative growth rate corresponds to the spectral radius ρM
of M. If we assume that every mutant present in the invading quasispecies
has an expectation of ρM oﬀspring per generation, then we can replace M
in Eq. (6) with a matrix that has entries ρM on the diagonal, while all oﬀ-
diagonal elements are zero. Then, Eq. (6) simpliﬁes to 1−πi = e−ρM πi for all i.
Clearly, this approximation will overestimate the πi for some mutants (mostly
those that produce on average less than ρM oﬀspring) and underestimate it for
others (mostly those that produce on average more than ρM oﬀspring). In the

8

following, we will refer to this estimate as the deterministic growth estimate,
because it is based on the assumption that the invading quasispecies grows
according to the deterministic equations from the outset.

The alternative method of estimating πi is as follows. It is reasonable to
assume that the ﬁrst couple of replication cycles mostly determine ﬁxation
or extinction for an invading sequence. During these initial generations, the
subpopulation descending from the invading sequence cannot explore the full
neutral network if the network is large. Therefore, the major contribution
to the ﬁxation probability comes from the connection matrix of the local
genetic neighborhood of the invading sequence, and sequences further away
on the neutral network are relatively unimportant. The idea behind the sec-
ond approximation is therefore to calculate the ﬁxation probability based
on a small area of genotype space surrounding the invading sequence.
In
the simplest case, we consider only the invading sequence and its immedi-
ate mutational neighbors. Assume sequence i has νi neutral neighbors, i.e.,
j Gij = νi. Then the total expected number of oﬀspring of sequence i is
j Mij = s + 1 + βνi. Under the assumption that all oﬀspring of i have the
P
same expected number of further oﬀspring, the probability of ﬁxation satis-
P
ﬁes the equation 1 − πi = e−(s+1+βνi)πi. We call the solution to this equation
the neutrality estimate. As in the case of the deterministic growth estimate,
it will overestimate the true ﬁxation probability for some sequences, and
underestimate it for others.

Fixation on a RNA neutral network
We compared the two estimates to the exact ﬁxation probabilities on a neu-
tral network of RNA sequences. The network of 51,028 sequences of length
L = 18 was found through exhaustive enumeration by van Nimwegen et al.
(1999). The spectral radius of the network’s connection graph is ρG = 15.7.
In order to calculate ﬁxation probabilities on this neutral network, we have
to make an assumption about the average ﬁtness hwi of the established qua-
sispecies. We assume hwi = 1 − µ[1 − ρG/(3L)], in which case the relative
growth rate of the invading quasispecies (at macroscopic concentration) with
respect to the established quasispecies follows from Eq. (10) as ρM = σ,
independent of the mutation rate.

Figure 1 displays the exact ﬁxation probabilities (obtained numerically
from Eq. 6) and the two estimates as functions of the mutation rate. We have
shown the average ﬁxation probability ¯π =
πi/n, the minimum probabil-
ity πmin = mini{πi}, and the maximum probability πmax = maxi{πi}. Since

P

9

we chose hwi such that ρM is independent of µ, the deterministic growth
estimate is independent of µ. We observe that the deterministic growth es-
timate lies consistenly above the average ¯π, but below the maximum πmax.
The neutrality estimate underestimates the smallest ﬁxation probabilities
and overestimates the largest ones. Its average lies slightly below ¯π for small
mutation rates, and above ¯π for large mutation rates. A more detailed plot
of the ﬁxation probabilities at a ﬁxed mutation rate of µ = 0.5 is given
in Fig. 2. There, we display the ﬁxation probability versus the neutrality
(number of neutral neighbors) of the invading sequence. The spread in the
ﬁxation probabilities is remarkable. For sequences with a given neutrality,
the ﬁxation probabilities vary over up to seven orders of magnitude. This
demonstrates the important inﬂuence of not only the nearest neighbors, but
also the wider genetic neighborhood on the fate of a single sequence in qua-
sispecies evolution. The neutrality estimate substantially underestimates the
ﬁxation probabilities of those sequences that have only few immediate neu-
tral neighbors, but are otherwise located in a region of the genotype space
where the density of neutral sequences is high. In principle, we could im-
prove the neutrality estimate by taking into account all neutral sequences up
to some distance d, but in practice this method becomes quickly as unwieldy
as calculating the exact ﬁxation probabilities.

Q

Multiple invading sequences
The above considerations address only the case of a single invading sequence.
The generalization to more than one invading sequence is straightforward.
Assume that a set S of N sequences, with S = {i1, . . . , iN }, invades an
established quasispecies. The probability that this invasion is successful is
given by 1 −
i∈S(1 − πi), where πi are the ﬁxation probabilities of the
individual sequences. The probability of successful invasion of N sequences
can be used as an indicator for the population size at which the deterministic
quasispecies equations capture the relevant dynamics of a ﬁnite population.
The ﬂuctuations distinguishing the stochastic process of a ﬁnite population
from the deterministic description can be neglected if the invasion probability
is close to one. In Fig. 3, the ﬁxation probability on the same neutral network
of RNA sequences that we have used before is displayed against the size of
the invading population. The individual data points are averaged over 1000
independent trials, where for each trial the N starting sequences were chosen
at random. As before, hwi is chosen such that σ is the average number of
oﬀspring of the invading quasispecies in the deterministic limit.

10

Figure 3 shows that the population need not cover the relevant sequence
space in order to behave as predicted by the deterministic equations. On a
neutral network of over 50,000 sequences, a population of about 1000 behaves
deterministically at an advantage in growth rate of only 1%. It is important
to note that this advantage has been calculated under the assumption of an
inﬁnite population, and that suﬃciently small populations will grow substan-
tially slower (van Nimwegen et al. 1999). Apparently, here a population that
covers only 2% of the neutral network is not suﬃciently small to experience
this reduction in growth rate.

DISCUSSION

The exact expression for the probability of ﬁxation in the quasispecies con-
text is easy to evaluate numerically if the ﬁtnesses of all relevant sequences
are known. However, this data is normally not available for experimental
systems, and approximations have to be used. What is most easily avail-
able experimentally is the relative rate of growth of the two quasispecies at
macroscopic concentrations, which is the basis of the deterministic growth es-
timate. Since this estimate gives only a single number, independently of the
sequence actually seeding the invading quasispecies, it does not reﬂect local
variations in the density of viable sequences around the invading sequence.
The neutrality estimate does not suﬀer from this shortcoming. However, it
requires the knowledge of the ﬁtnesses of the immediate neighbors of the
invading sequence. Although experimentally tedious, these ﬁtnesses can be
measured in principle. For example, Elena and Lenski (1997) generated 225
mutant strains of the bacterium Escherichia coli (each mutant diﬀered from
the wild type by one, two, or three mutations), and measured the realtive
ﬁtnesses of the mutant strains to the wild type. The mutant neighborhood
of an RNA virus can conceivably be measured in a similar manner.

The predictive power of both the deterministic growth estimate and the
neutrality estimate depends strongly on the distribution of neutral sequences
in sequence space. For example, both estimates become exact for the case of a
uniform neutral lattice, in which all sequences have exactly the same neutral-
ity. Furthermore, we expect the neutrality estimate to perform particularly
well in networks in which a sequence’s neutrality is strongly correlated to
the neutralities of its immediate and more distant neutral neighbors. The
deterministic growth estimate, on the other hand, will yield best results if the
neutral network does not decompose into areas that are substantially more

11

densely or less densely connected than other areas. However, to what ex-
tent these conditions are met in natural systems is questionable. As we have
seen in the present paper, the connection graph of a comparatively simple
neutral network—consisting of RNA sequences that are only eighteen base
pairs long—is already so heterogeneous that both estimates fail to give an
accurate prediction of the ﬁxation probability for a substantial fraction of
sequences on that network. It is reasonable to assume that the distribution
of high-ﬁtness sequences in sequence space for a RNA virus that consists of
several thousand bases is at least as heterogeneous as the one in our toy RNA
network, probably more so.

In the present work, we have only considered the fate of a single invading
quasispecies. However, while an invading quasispecies is moving towards
ﬁxation or extinction, another mutant, one that belongs to a quasispecies
of even higher mean ﬁtness, may appear. The ﬁxation probability of the
ﬁrst invader will then be modulated by the dynamics of the second one and
vice versa, an eﬀect commonly referred to as “clonal interference” (Gerrish
and Lenski 1998). Clonal interference has been reported in experiments with
vesicular stomatitis virus (Miralles et al. 1999; Miralles et al. 2000) and
with the bacterium Escherichia coli (de Visser et al. 1999). Currently, an
accurate mathematical description of clonal interference for the quasispecies
case is not available.

The approach we have followed in this work cannot directly be gener-
alized to include clonal interference, because the assumption of a constant
background average ﬁtness hwi is not justiﬁed in the context of two (or more)
competing branching processes. A second problem that we have to solve in
a theory of quasispecies clonal interference is the identiﬁcation of advanta-
geous mutants. Throughout the present paper, we have used the deﬁnition
that an advantageous mutant is one that can grow into a quasispecies with
higher average ﬁtness than that of the currently established quasispecies. In
order to use this deﬁnition in the context of clonal interference, we need to
have a priori knowledge about how to best subdivide the sequence space into
independent quasispecies. Only with this knowledge can we decide whether
a particular new mutant is part of the parent quasispecies, or rather the
founding member of a new quasispecies. A possible way to study clonal inter-
ference in future work will be to consider a particular ﬁtness landscape—for
example, a set of intertwined neutral networks at diﬀerent ﬁtness levels—for
which the a priori separation into distinct quasispecies is possible. For such
a landscape, numerical studies of clonal interference will be straightforward,

12

and an analytic description should be possible as well. For landscapes that
are a priori unknown, even the numerical investigation of clonal interference
will remain diﬃcult until a workable method for the identiﬁcation of advan-
tageous mutants has been found.

Recently, Jenkins et al. (2001) and Holmes and Moya (2002) expressed
doubts regarding the relevancy of the quasispecies model for virology (but
see Domingo 2002). They argued that there is no unequivocal experimental
evidence for the quasispecies nature of RNA viruses, and that the determin-
istic quasispecies equations are potentially not applicable to viral evolution
on theoretical grounds, due to the immense size of the sequence space. The
results of the present paper show that the second concern is not entirely
justiﬁed. A single sequence has a positive probability to rise to ﬁxation if
and only if the average ﬁtness of the quasispecies that will form eventually
exceeds the average ﬁtness of the currently established quasispecies. The
individual ﬁtness of the invading sequence has some inﬂuence on the exact
value of that probability, but does not aﬀect whether ﬁxation is possible
at all. Moreover, when the population size reaches several hundred, with
probability of almost one the population will, for reasonable choices of the
parameters, behave as predicted by the deterministic equations. A similar
result has been obtained by (van Nimwegen et al. 1999) for ﬂow reactor
simulations, where on the same neutral network of RNA sequences that we
have studied here, quasispecies eﬀects started to become important when the
product of population size and mutation rate Nµ exceeded the value 10 [see
Fig. 3 of (van Nimwegen et al. 1999)].

Wilke (2001b) studied the probability of ﬁxation for RNA sequences in a
simulated ﬂow reactor. The measured ﬁxation probability was compared to
an expression equivalent to the deterministic growth estimate of the present
work (since continuous time simulations were used to generate the data, the
exact expressions diﬀer from those given here). The analytic expression cor-
rectly predicted the parameter regions for which ﬁxation was possible.
In
particular, the mutation rate at which a slower replicator with better muta-
tional support could successfully invade a quasispecies consisting of sequences
with higher individual ﬁtnesses was determined accurately. However, the ex-
act ﬁxation probabilities seemed to be slightly overestimated. (Within the
statistical accuracy of the data, a deﬁnite decision on this issue could not be
made. While the data was in agreement with the model according to a χ2
test, it was not in agreement according to a non-parametric test based on
how often the data points fell above or below the predicted value.)

13

The probability of ﬁxation of advantageous mutants is obviously of tremen-
dous importance for disease dynamics and vaccines. For example, live vac-
cinces of attenuated poliovirus can contain small amounts of virulent po-
liovirus variants (Chumakov et al. 1991), the reason being that attenuated
and virulent virus variants are often separated by only one or a few muta-
tions. In experiments, small amounts of highly virulent virus remain typically
suppressed by the less virulent virus, but once a threshold concentration of
the highly virulent virus variant is reached, infection occurs (de la Torre and
Holland 1990; Chumakov et al. 1991; Teng et al. 1996). The apparent ex-
istence of such a threshold may well be a result of insuﬃcient resolution of
the experiments. Whether the highly virulent strain will grow is determined
by stochastic ﬂuctuations, and as we have seen in Fig. 3, the probability of
ﬁxation decays quickly with shrinking initial concentration of the virulent
strain. If such a strain in a vaccine has a 1% chance to cause infection, then
well over a hundred replicates of the appropriate assay are necessary to ob-
serve at least one infection with certainty. Probabilities of this magnitude or
lower can easily be missed at low numbers of replicates, so that the virulent
strain appears to be safely suppressed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank C. Adami for extensive discussions and encouragement, and E. C.
Holmes for commenting on an earlier version of this manuscript. Moreover, I
thank M. Huynen for providing the neutral network data from (van Nimwe-
gen et al. 1999). Financial support by the NSF under contract No DEB-
9981397 is gratefully acknowledged.

References

ics 140: 821-841.

Barton, N. H., 1995 Linkage and the limits to natural selection. Genet-

Biebricher, C. K., and R. Luce, 1993 Sequence analysis of RNA species
synthesized by Qβ replicase without template. Biochemistry 32: 4848-
4854.

Bornberg-Bauer, E., 1997 How are model protein structures distributed in

sequence space? Biophys. Journal 73: 2393-2403.

14

Burch, C. L., and L. Chao, 2000 Evolvability of an RNA virus is determined

by its mutational neighbourhood. Nature 406: 625-628.

B¨urger, R., and W. J. Ewens, 1995 Fixation probabilities of additive alleles

in diploid populations. J. Math. Biol. 33: 557-575.

Chumakov, K. M., L. B. Powers, K. E. Noonan, I. B. Roninson, and I. S.
Levenbook, 1991 Correlation between amount of virus with altered
nucleotide sequence and the monkey test for acceptability of oral po-
liovirus vaccine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88: 199-203.

de la Torre: J. C., and J. J. Holland, 1990 RNA virus quasispecies pop-
ulations can suppress vastly superior mutant progeny. J. Virol. 64:
6278-6281.

de Visser, J. A. G. M., C. W. Zeyl, P. J. Gerrish, J. L. Blanchard, and
R. E. Lenski, 1999 Diminishing returns from mutation supply rate in
asexual populations. Science 283: 404-406.

Demetrius, L., P. Schuster, and K. Sigmund, 1985 Polynucleotide evolution

and branching processes. Bull. Math. Biol. 47: 239-262.

Domingo, E., 2002 Quasispecies theory in virology. J. Virol. 76: 463-465.

Domingo, E., C. K. Biebricher, M. Eigen, and J. J. Holland, 2001 Qua-
sispecies and RNA Virus Evolution: Principles and Consequences.
Georgetown, TX: Landes Bioscience.

Domingo, E., R. A. Flavell, and C. Weissmann, 1976 In vitro site directed
mutagenesis: generation and properties of an infectious extracistronic
mutant of bacteriophage Qβ. Gene 1: 3-25.

Domingo, E., and J. J. Holland, 1997 RNA virus mutations and fitness for

survival. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 51: 151-178.

Domingo, E., D. Sabo, T. Taniguchi, and C. Weissmann, 1978 Nucleotide
sequence heterogeneity of an RNA phage population. Cell 13: 735-744.

Drake, J. W., 1993 Rates of spontaneous mutation among RNA viruses.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 4171-4175.

Drake, J. W., and J. J. Holland, 1999 Mutation rates among RNA viruses.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 13910-13913.

Eigen, M., and P. Schuster, 1979 The Hypercycle - A Principle of Natural

Self-Organization. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

15

Elena S. F., and R. E. Lenski, 1997 Test of synergistic interactions among

deleterious mutations in bacteria. Nature 390: 395-398.

Ewens, W. J., 1967 The probability of fixation of a mutant: the two-locus

case. Evolution 21: 532-540.

Fisher, R. A., 1922 On the dominance ratio. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. 42:

321-341.

Fisher, R. A., 1930 The distribution of gene ratios for rare mutations.

Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. 50: 204-219.

Gerrish, P. J., and R. E. Lenski, 1998 The fate of competing beneficial
mutations in an asexual population. Genetica 102/103: 127-144.

Haldane, J. B. S., 1927 A mathematical theory of natural and artificial
selection. Part V: Selection and mutation. Proc. Camp. Phil. Soc. 23:
838-844.

Harris, T. E., 1963 The Theory of Branching Processes. Berlin: Springer.

Hermisson, J., O. Redner, H. Wagner, and E. Baake, 2002 Mutation-
selection balance: Ancestry, load, and maximum principle. Theor.
Pop. Biol.. in press.

Hofbauer, J., and K. Sigmund, 1988 The Theory of Evolution and Dynam-

ical Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Holland, J., K. Spindler, F. Horodyski, E. Grabau, S. Nichol, and S. Vande-
Pol., 1982 Rapid evolution of RNA genomes. Science 215: 1577-1585.

Holmes, E. C., and A. Moya, 2002 Is the quasispecies concept relevant to

RNA viruses? J. Virol. 76: 460-462.

Huynen, M. A., P. F. Stadler, and W. Fontana, 1996 Smoothness within
ruggedness: The role of neutrality in adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93: 397-401.

Jenkins, G. M., M. Worobey, C. H. Woelk, and E. C. Holmes, 2001 Ev-
idence for the non-quasispecies evolution of RNA viruses. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 18: 987-994.

Kimura, M., 1957 Some problems of stochastic processes in genetics. Ann.

Kimura, M., 1964 Diffusion models in population genetics.

J. Appl.

Math. Statist. 28: 882-901.

Prob. 1: 177-232.

16

Kimura, M., 1970 The length of time required for a selectively neutral
mutant to reach ﬁxation through random frequency drift in a ﬁnite
population. Genetical Research 15: 131-133.

Kimura, M., and J. L. King, 1979 Fixation of a deleterious allele at one
of two “duplicate” loci by mutation pressure and random drift. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76: 2858-2861.

Krakauer, D. C., and J. B. Plotkin, 2002 Redundancy, antiredundancy, and
the robustness of genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99: 1405-1409.

Miralles, R., P. J. Gerrish, A. Moya, and S. F. Elena, 1999 Clonal inter-
ference and the evolution of rna viruses. Science 285: 1745-1747.

Miralles, R., A. Moya, and S. F. Elena, 2000 Diminishing returns of popu-
lation size in the rate of RNA virus adaptation. J. Virol. 74: 3566-3571.

Nowak, M. A., 1992 What is a quasispecies? TREE 7: 118-121.

Otto, S. P., and N. H. Barton, 1997 The evolution of recombination: re-

moving the limits to natural selection. Genetics 147: 879-906.

Pollak, E., 2000 Fixation probabilities when the population size undergoes

cyclic fluctuations. Theor. Pop. Biol. 57: 51-58.

Schuster, P., and J. Swetina, 1988 Stationary mutant distributions and

evolutionary optimization Bull. Math. Biol. 50: 635-660.

Steinhauer, D. A., J. C. de la Torre, E. Meier, and J. J. Holland, 1989
Extreme heterogeneity in populations of vesicular stomatitis virus. J.
Virol. 63: 2072-2080.

Teng, M. N., M. B. A. Oldstone, and J. C. de la Torre, 1996 Suppres-
sion of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus - induced growth hormone
deficiency syndrome by disease-negative virus variants. Virology 223:
113-119.

van Nimwegen, E., J. P. Crutchfield, and M. Huynen, 1999 Neutral evolu-
tion of mutational robustness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 9716-
9720.

Varga, R. S., 2000 Matrix Iterative Analysis (2nd ed.). New York: Springer

Wilke, C. O., 2001a Adaptive evolution on neutral networks. Bull. Math.

Verlag.

Biol. 63: 715-730.

17

Wilke, C. O., 2001b Selection for fitness versus selection for robustness in

RNA secondary structure folding. Evolution 55: 2412-2420.

Wilke, C. O., J. L. Wang, C. Ofria, R. E. Lenski, and C. Adami, 2001
Evolution of digital organisms at high mutation rate leads to survival
of the flattest. Nature 412: 331-333.

APPENDIX

We consider a model with discrete, non-overlapping generations, and a
constant population size N. Under the assumption that the reproductive
success of a sequence i is proportional to its ﬁtness wi, the probability that
a randomly chosen sequence in the next generation is oﬀspring of sequence
i is given by ξ = wi/(hwiN), where hwi is the average ﬁtness in the popu-
lation. Since there are N sequences in the population, the probability that
ξk(1 − ξ)N −k.
k of them are oﬀspring of sequence i is binomial, P (k|i) =
Now consider a sequence of type r in the oﬀspring generation. For the prob-
ability that the parent of sequence r is a particular sequence i of the previous
generation, we ﬁnd ξr = Qriξ = wiQri/(hwiN), because only a fraction Qri
of the total oﬀspring of i will be of type r. Following the previous argument,
we ﬁnd for the probability that sequence i leaves kr oﬀspring of type r:
P (kr|i) =

r (1 − ξr)N −kr.
ξk

N
k

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

N
kr

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

We can extend the above argument to sequences of two types r and s.
The probability that sequence i leaves kr oﬀspring sequences of type r and
ks oﬀspring sequences of type s is the probability that kr oﬀspring are of
type r, ξkr
r , times the probability that ks oﬀspring are of type s, ξks
s , times
the probability that the remaining oﬀspring are either of diﬀerent types, or
have diﬀerent parent sequences, (1 − ξr − ξs)N −kr−ks, times the number of
possible ways in which kr and ks sequences can be chosen out of the total of N
sequences in the population. This latter number is a multinomial coeﬃcient,
N!/[kr!ks!(N − kr − ks)!]. Putting everything together, we ﬁnd

P (kr, ks|i) =

N!
kr!ks!(N − kr − ks)!

r ξks
ξkr

s (1 − ξr − ξs)N −kr−ks .

(A1)

By repeating this argument for n diﬀerent sequence types, and with the
deﬁnition Mij := Nξj = wiQji/hwi, we arrive at Eq. (3).

18

Figure 1: Fixation probability versus mutation rate in a neutral network of
51,028 RNA sequences taken from (van Nimwegen et al. 1999). Solid lines
correspond to the solution of the full equations, dashed lines correspond
to the neutrality estimate, and the dotted line indicates the deterministic
growth estimate. (σ = 1.05, L = 18, ρG = 15.7, hwi = 1 − µ[1 − ρG/(3L)].)

Figure 2: Fixation probability versus neutrality ν of the invading sequence
in a neutral network of 51,028 RNA sequences taken from (van Nimwe-
gen et al. 1999). The dots stem from the exact numerical solution, the
dashed line corresponds to the neutrality estimate, and the dotted line in-
dicates the deterministic growth estimate. The inset shows the distribution
(µ = 0.5, σ = 1.05, L = 18, ρG = 15.7,
of neutralities in the network.
hwi = 1 − µ[1 − ρG/(3L)].)

Figure 3: Fixation probability π versus size of the invading population N
in neutral network of 51,028 RNA sequences. The ﬁxation probability is
averaged over 1000 independent sets of invading sequences, chosen at random.
The error bars indicate the standard deviation. Lines are meant as a guide
to the eye. (µ = .2, L = 18, ρG = 15.7, hwi = 1 − µ[1 − ρG/(3L)].)

19

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
n
o
i
t
a
x
i
F

min.

max.

average

0.0001
0

0.2

Figure 1

0.4
0.6
Mutation rate µ

0.8

1

20

Figure 2

21

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
n
o
i
t
a
x
i
F

0

1

Figure 3

σ=1.01
σ=1.05
σ=1.10

10

100

1000

Size of invading population N

22

