2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Protein induced morphological transitions in KCl crystal growth

B´alint Szab´o and Tam´as Vicsek
Department of Biological Physics, E¨otv¨os University,
Budapest, P´azm´any P´eter s´et´any 1/A, 1117 Hungary
(Dated: October 23, 2013)

We investigated the formation of KCl crystals on glass surface by phase contrast, ﬂuorescent, and
atomic force microscopy on the micrometer scale, and observed interesting morphological transitions
as a function of the experimental conditions. The presence of proteins in the solution from which
the salt crystals grow during the drying up leads to complex microscopic patterns of crystals some of
which are analogous to those commonly observed on the macroscopic scale. We tested the eﬀect of
tubulin, FITC-labeled albumin and IgG on the morphology of crystals grown either slowly or fast. A
rich variety of protein speciﬁc and concentration dependent morphologies was found and described
by a morphological diagram. We give a phenomenological interpretation, which can explain the
growth of complex patterns. Fluorescent images prove that a protein layer covers the surface of the
KCl structures. We propose that this layer reduces the anisotropy of the eﬀective surface tension
during growth. The tip splitting fractal regime is attributed to the decrease of anisotropy. We found
elongated saw-toothed crystals induced by proteins, especially IgG and identiﬁed their structure.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Kd, 47.20.Dr, 68.37.-d

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

The eﬀect of proteins, especially albumin and IgG on
crystal growth has biological relevance.
In crystal in-
duced arthritis e.g., gout proteins bind the crystals [1]
and have signiﬁcant impact on crystal growth [2]. The
immune response to the appearance of crystals is driven
by the speciﬁc IgG-crystal interaction. This interaction
stimulates crystal formation [3, 4, 5].

Although the rich morphology of several

inorganic
macroscopic crystals grown on the surface of gels (i.e., in
the presence of protein) has been studied and discussed
[6, 7] up to our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study of pattern
formation induced by crystal-protein interactions.

Moving unstable interfaces tipically lead to the forma-
tion of complex patterns. Surface tension of the bound-
ary between the growing and surrounding phases is es-
sential in pattern formation [8, 9, 10]. A growth mode of
crystals covered with a thin layer has been observed and
explained by the surface tension between the diﬀerent
phases in a metal system [11]. The growth of nonequi-
librium interfaces covered by a thin surfactant ﬁlm was
both experimentally and theoretically studied [12]. The
anisotropy of the surface tension has crucial role. Viscous
ﬁngering, crystallization, electrochemical deposition, and
some other phenomena can be relatively well described by
Laplacian growth with appropriate boundary conditions.
We argue that the growth of the numerous diﬀerent mi-
croscopic patterns we observed in our KCl crystallization
experiments in the presence of proteins can be explained
by the change of the boundary conditions of the mov-
ing interface: the anisotropy of its surface tension is de-
creased by proteins.

5 µl drops of 5 mg/ml KCl solution containing no
protein or tubulin (prepared from bovine brain [13])
or FITC-BSA (bovine serum albumin conjugated with
FITC, SIGMA) or human IgG-FITC (immunoglobulin
G conjugated with FITC, SIGMA) were placed on clean
glass cover slips. We prepared samples either by slow dry-
ing at ∼40 ◦C in air or by fast drying in a strong airﬂow.
Slow drying took ∼5 minutes, airﬂow dried the surface on
the scale of seconds. Bright ﬁeld, phase contrast and ﬂuo-
rescent images were acquired by an inverse Leica DM IRB
microscope, 40x objective and a Nikon Coolprix 700 digi-
tal camera mounted on the microscope by homemade op-
tical coupling. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of
tubulin coated crystals were captured with a commercial
AFM (TopoMetrix Explorer, Santa Clara, CA) in contact
mode with a soft silicon nitride cantilever (Thermomi-
croscopes, coated sharp microlevers, model No. MSCT-
AUHW, with typical force constant 0.03 N/m, 20 nm
nominal radius of curvature) under ambient conditions.

III. RESULTS

A. Tubulin

The fast drying of 0.5 mg/ml tubulin containing drops
of 5 mg/ml KCl solution on glass surface with air-
ﬂow results in a heterogeneous population of patterns
that we investigated by AFM and phase contrast mi-
croscopy. The morphology of KCl crystals can be similar
to diﬀusion-limited aggregates known to have fractal ge-
ometry. Dendritic patterns with stable and unstable tips
are typical. FIG. 1 shows a pattern, which began to grow
with stable tips, 4-fold symmetry. After a while tip split-
ting occurs at all the 4 tips. Anisotropy drops dramati-

cally at this point. The slow drying of drops containing
0.05 mg/ml tubulin gives elongated saw-toothed crystals
similar to the ones induced by IgG discussed below. In
high concentration tubulin inhibits crystal growth, an ap-
parently homogeneous stain can be observed after the
drop dries up.

B. FITC-BSA

We tried to shed light on the role of protein in pattern
formation of salt crystals with the use of FITC labeled
proteins. In case of the fast drying procedure 5 mg/ml
FITC-BSA had similar eﬀect to that of tubulin. Various
branching morphologies were found. Tip splitting caused
fractal growth (FIG. 2). The comparison of bright ﬁeld
and phase contrast images with the ﬂuorescent ones show
that crystals are covered by a layer of albumin. Protein
concentration dependence of the morphology was stud-
ied with the slow drying technique. Under a critical pro-
tein concentration (∼1µg/ml) only blocks of rectangular
prism-shaped crystals grew corresponding to the protein
In the concentration range of 1-1000 µg/ml
free case.
cubic crystal centered structures formed (FIG. 3). This
observation reinforce that during a single growth process
the symmetry (anisotropy) of the pattern can dramat-
ically change due to the change of the local conditions.
As the growth process elongates, the initial 4-fold symme-
try with high anisotropy disappears and rather isotropic
growth takes place. In the higher protein concentration
range dendritic crystals grew with stable tips (FIG. 4).

C.

IgG-FITC

To study the protein speciﬁcity of the phenomena we
examined the impact of human IgG-FITC on the KCl
crystal growth. After the fast drying procedure using 2
mg/ml IgG the typical pattern we found was the elon-
gated saw-toothed crystal (FIG. 5). Branching struc-
tures can be observed. The angle between the branches
is ∼70◦. Concentration dependence of the morphology
was investigated by the slow drying method. Under ∼20
µg/ml only blocks of the prism-shaped crystals grew.
Above this concentration up to ∼1 mg/ml cubic and saw-
toothed crystal centered structures were observed with
an isotropic surrounding pattern. FIG. 6 shows the cen-
ter of a typical one. In the higher concentration range
dendritic patterns formed with stable tips.

D. Gold substrate

2

(1)

(2)

of prism-shaped crystals on gold instead of the patterns
described above. This fact indicates the protein and sub-
strate speciﬁcity of the phenomenon.

IV. DISCUSSION

Proteins have signiﬁcant impact on KCl crystallization.
The presence of proteins in the solution from which KCl
crystals grow during the drying up leads to the formation
of protein speciﬁc and concentration dependent complex
patterns, which we described by a morphological diagram
(FIG. 7). We can give a partial explanation of the dia-
gram.

A layer of protein aggregates covers the surface of crys-
tals. This cover means 2 interfaces: one between the KCl
crystal and the protein layer and one between the protein
layer and the liquid. While the surface tension of the for-
mer one γc−p is anisotropic, that of the latter one γp−l
is considered to be isotropic. The fact that proteins ad-
here to the crystal surface spontaneously infers that the
free energy (i.e., surface tension) of the crystal-protein
surface is lower than that of the protein-liquid surface:

γc−p < γp−l,

The total surface tension γt of the interface between
the growing and surrounding phases is given by the sum
of these two terms:

γt = γc−p + γp−l,

It means that the total surface tension is dominated
by the isotropic term.
In the absence of protein the
extra isotropic term corresponding to the protein-liquid
interface is missing. We propose that tip splitting and
fractal growth instead of the formation of single crystals
with 4-fold symmetry and stable tips can be attributed
to the reduced anisotropy of the surface tension in case
of the fast growth. Similarly, slowly grown single crys-
tal centered structures are explained by the decrease of
anisotropy of surface tension during the growth process.
Our results demonstrate that the level of anisotropy can
change dramatically during the growth of a single pat-
tern. This is likely to be caused by the increase and the
reaching of a critical level of protein precipitation as the
drop is drying up.

Various examples of pattern formation driven by mov-
ing unstable interfaces can be described by Laplacian
growth. In this case the boundary condition along the Γ
interface containing the dimensionless uΓ concentration
term is [8, 9, 10]:

We also studied the eﬀect of the substrate surface,
which was glass in the above experiments. However, IgG
gave similar results on gold substrate to those on glass
in case of the slow drying method, albumin induced the
appearance of amorphous protein aggregates and blocks

uΓ = −d0κ − βvη,

(3)

where the capillary length d0 is proportional to the sur-
face tension, κ denotes the local curvature of the inter-
face, β is the kinetic coeﬃcient, v is the normal velocity

3

2

FIG. 1: 80x80 µm
deﬂection mode AFM image of tubulin
induced patterns of KCl after the fast drying procedure. Note
the transition of the initially 4-fold symmetric crystallization
to isotropic fractal growth at all the 4 tips of the structure
caused by consecutive tip splittings.

2

FIG. 2: 135x135 µm
ﬂuorescent image of 2 patterns of KCl
crystals with diﬀerent fractal dimensions grown in the pres-
ence of FITC-BSA with the fast drying method. Brightness
is proportional to the concentration of FITC-BSA. The com-
parison with phase contrast and bright ﬁeld images prove that
albumin covers the crystals.

can adhere to speciﬁc faces of the crystal with increased
aﬃnity [2]. This anisotropic interaction inﬂuences the
anisotropy of the surface tension at the crystal-protein
interface γc−p, which may result in the change of the di-
rection of the fast growing tip. Some of the observed
features are likely to be due to the growth velocity de-
pendent term in (3).

The background of the protein speciﬁc behavior is un-
clear. As the experiment on the gold substrate indicates,
in addition to the protein-crystal interaction protein-
substrate and crystal-substrate eﬀects also should be con-
sidered in further studies.

of the interface, η is an exponent depending on the phys-
ical process. To explain the stable tip-tip splitting tran-
sition, we propose that d0 is altered and its anisotropy
is decreased due to the adherence of the protein layer to
the KCl crystal surface.

IgG typically and under some conditions tubulin and
albumin also induced the growth of elongated saw-
toothed crystals instead of rectangular needle-shaped
ones. Branching saw-toothed structures were also found,
the angle between the branches is ∼70◦. We argue that
these are single crystals elongated in the (111) direction
of the cubic crystal i.e., their axis lies in this direction.
The angle between (111) and directions with the same
symmetry e.g. (11-1) is 70.5◦. The mechanism leading
to the formation of these crystals is unknown. Proteins

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Hungarian National
Scientiﬁc Research Fund (OTKA, No. T-034995). We
thank No´emi Rozlosnik and Andr´as Czir´ok for the help
in establishing the instrumental background of our ex-
periments, and Judit Ov´adi and Emma Hlavanda for the
tubulin samples.

2

FIG. 3: 135x135 µm
ﬂuorescent image of a cubic crystal cen-
tered structure of KCl crystals induced by FITC-BSA using
the slow drying method. The anisotropic single crystal in the
center is surrounded by an isotropic pattern.

[1] O. Antommattei, R. Heimer, D. G. Baker, H. R. Schu-

[7] J. Suda, M. Matsushita, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 64(2), 348

macher, Jr., Clin. Exp. Rheum. 8, 29 (1990)

(1995)

[2] D. Perl-Treves, L. Addadi, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 235,

[8] T. Vicsek, Fractal growth phenomena, 2nd ed., World

145 (1988)

Scientiﬁc, London, 1992, pp. 271-339.

[3] E. Ortiz-Bravo, M. S. Sieck, H. R. Schumacher, Jr.,

[9] D. A. Kessler, J. Koplik, H. Levine, Adv. Phys. 37, 255

Arthr. Rheum. 36(9), 1274 (1993)

(1988)

[4] M. Kam, D. Perl-Treves, D. Caspi, L. Addadi, FASEB J.

6(8), 2608 (1992)

[5] M. Kam, D. Perl-Treves, R. Sfez, L. Addadi, J. Mol.

Recognit. 7(4), 257 (1994)

[6] M. Yasui, M. Matsushita, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 61(7), 2327

(1992)

[10] E. Ben-Jacob, P. Garik, Nature 343, 523 (1990)
[11] C. Nagl, E. Platzgummer, M. Schmid, P. Varga, S.
Speller, W. Heiland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75(16), 2976 (1995)

[12] A-L. Barab´asi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70(26), 4102 (1993)
[13] G. C. Na, S. N. Timasheﬀ, Biochemistry 25, 6214 (1986)

FIG. 4: 135x135 µm
ﬂuorescent image of stable tipped den-
dritic KCl crystals induced by high concentration of albumin.

2

4

FIG. 5: 135x135 µm2 ﬂuorescent image of KCl crystals with
saw-toothed shape grown with IgG by the fast drying proce-
◦
dure. The angle between the branches is ∼70
. The bright
contour of the crystals corresponds to the IgG-FITC cover on
their surface.

2

FIG. 6: 205x205 µm
ﬂuorescent image. Saw-toothed crystals
are shown in the center of a pattern, which is isotropic in the
surrounding regions. This sample was prepared with the slow
drying procedure in the presence of IgG.

FIG. 7: Morphological diagram of the protein induced pat-
terns of KCl crystals.

This figure "fig1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0209005v1

