2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A model of memory, learning and recognition

Bruce Hoeneisen

Universidad San Francisco de Quito
6 May 2002

Abstract

We propose a simple model of recognition, short-term memory, long-
term memory and learning.

1 Introduction

For years I have been thinking about how conscience emerges from the un-
derlying neuron clatter (by conscience I mean awareness, i.e. the diﬀerence
between being awake and asleep). Last night the inspiration came all at once,
just as visitors were arriving. I put my thoughts aside due to the visitors,
but today I hasten to write them down. The model explains a lot and in
hindsight is almost “obvious” (why did I not think of it before?) I mention
these details because they illustrate how the mind works.

For the sake of simplicity I will be very speciﬁc, almost telegraphic.
I
will mention only the essential points. The reader should not take seriously
the speciﬁc details. I have no pretense that the brain works with exactly the
implementation I will describe below. However I do believe that many of the
ideas discussed here are in fact implemented by the brain in some equivalent
way.

To make this article self-contained I list in Section 2 characteristics of
the brain that are relevant to our model.[1-6] Some of these characteristics
have been obtained directly from experiments or observations and some have
been inferred indirectly and are therefore only educated guesses. Our model
is presented in Section 3. Estimates of the number of memory neurons are
obtained in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are collected in Section 5.

1

synapse

synapse

dendrite

axon

soma

Figure 1: Schematic drawing of a neuron.

2 Characteristics of the brain

The human brain has approximately 1010 “neurons”. A neuron is a cell with
a central body (the “soma”) and up to ≈ 105 ramiﬁcations. One of these ram-
iﬁcations, called “axon”, is long and carries the output electrical pulse of the
neuron. These pulses have an amplitude of 145mV and a duration of about
0.2 milliseconds. The remaining ramiﬁcations, called “dendrites”, carry the
input electrical pulses to the neuron. The axon is connected to dendrites of
other neurons (or to muscle cells). These connections, or “synapses”, are of
a chemical nature. Each synapse carries a “weight” that can be excitatory or
inhibitory. The neuron “ﬁres”, i.e. sends an output impulse along its axon,
if the weighted sum of inputs is above a threshold. A schematic diagram of
a neuron is shown in Figure 1.

“There are roughly a quarter of a million nerve cells and two billion

synapses below one square millimeter of cerebral-cortex surface.”[4]

The programing of the brain consists of the making or breaking of synapses
(or more generally of the modiﬁcation of the weights of the synapses). Cer-
tain programing occurs at critical periods (such as the breaking of synapses
to obtain registration of the images seen by the right and left eyes[2]) and
programing that occurs throughout the lifetime (such as storing information
in the long-term memory).

Many brain processes occur at the same time: parallel computation is

widespread.

Let us describe “sensory registers”, “short-term memory” and “long-term
memory” from the point of view of a psychologist. A block diagram is shown
in Figure 2. The stimuli from the environment arrive at our sense organs
where they are transformed into electro-chemical impulses in neurons. This
information is processed and analyzed hierarchically in the sensory registers,
and in the lapse of about one quarter of a second are either discarded (if
they are not interesting) or passed on to the short-term memory. This is

2

long-term

memory

classify and
relate

short-term

memory

8 to 20 s

senses

sensory

registers

1/4 s

repetition

discard

forget

Figure 2: Memory as seen by a psychologist.

the “cocktail eﬀect”: at a party we can pay attention to one conversation,
unaware of other conversations until our name (or some gossip of interest) is
mentioned.

The short-term memory can store a limited amount of information: about
seven random letters, or ﬁve random words, or four random phrases, or one
low resolution image. After up to eight to twenty seconds this information is
discarded (forgotten) unless it is of our interest and we refresh the memory
by repetition (as when we are given a new telephone number).

We can transfer information from the short-term memory to the long-term
memory. This transfer requires that the information be classiﬁed and related
to other information in the long-term memory. This is the learning process.
As more relations are established the easier it becomes to ﬁnd and recover
information from the long-term memory and “re-live” it in the short-term
memory. The long-term memory can store practically an unlimited amount
of information which lasts for a life time (it seems that the information is
lost only by disease or death).

We are aware of, or can pay attention to, a limited amount of information.
Therefore we associate conscience with the short-term memory. Conscious
perception takes hundreds of milliseconds.

“Neurobiologists believe that memories are encoded in the synapses, and
two billion synapses per square millimeter of cortex can hold a lot of memories.”[4]
Most brain processes are unconscious. We have perception and knowledge

with and without awareness.

“Long-term memory enriches our lives incredibly, but you don’t need it to
be aware. All that’s necessary for base-level awareness is short-term memory

3

image neurons

Figure 3: The ﬁlled circles represent image neurons all over the cerebral
cortex that ﬁre in response to a particular event observed by the senses.
The empty circles are image neurons that do not ﬁre in response to that
particular event.

and attention.”[4]

“When you superimpose a PET image on an MRI image, you can see
which brain structures are active in a particular task.”[4] With this technique
it is discovered that diﬀerent brain areas are active when, for example, we
hear a word, see the word, speak the word or write the word.[4]

Let us quote Christof Koch again: “So every time I see an event, that
event corresponds to electrical activity all over the brain. If I look at my
friend Bill, say, his face is represented in the brain area where my face neurons
are located, the hue of his face is processed in V4, the fact that he’s moving
around is represented in MT, my memories of him correspond to activity in
the temporal lobes, and if he talks, his speech activates my auditory cortex.”
“Yet if I look at Bill I see a coherent whole.” “How come I don’t get Bill’s
voice coming from the man behind him?”[4]

Diﬀerent qualities (form, movement, color, depth information from binoc-
ular vision, sound, smell, ...) are processed in parallel and in hierarchical form
in diﬀerent parts of the brain. Presumably at the highest level of these hi-
erarchies “all of the neurons responding to the stimulus ﬁre at roughly the
same time.”[4]

Christof Koch and Francis Crick (yes, the same Crick of the double helix)
“think that if you are aware of an event, all the nerve cells involved in the
perception of that event anywhere in the brain ﬁre at the same time”[4] at
about 40 pulses per second. They also argue that “to be aware of something
you need to attend to it, and you need to put it into short-term memory”.[4]
There does not appear to be a speciﬁc place in the brain where conscious-
ness resides. A model of distributed processing appears to best describe brain
activity.

Conscience of the environment emerges in the child as he or she acquires
experience. According to Piaget, before the ﬁrst month of age the reﬂexes
lack will. From one to eight months of age the child successively learns to
repeat voluntarily actions that cause him pleasure, acquires the intention of
his actions, searches for hidden objects, and acquires long-term goals. Self-

4

memory

neuron

image

neurons

Figure 4: Image neurons, and one memory neuron before being programed.
The ﬁlled circles are image neurons that ﬁre in response to a particular event
observed by the senses.

consciousness emerges around the eighteenth month of age when the child
recognizes himself in the mirror (seeing in the mirror that he has a spot
painted on the nose he reaches his nose). At about the age of twenty four
months the child distinguishes the words “I” and “you”. So the brain is in
constant development.

3 A model of memory and recognition

The following is a simpliﬁed model of memory and recognition that ﬁts the
observations described in Section 2.

The model distinguishes two types of neurons according to their diﬀerent
connections and hence diﬀerent functions. I will call these neurons “image
neurons” and “memory neurons”.

When I see an event, each quality of the event (shape, movement, color,
distance, sound, smell...) is processed in parallel, each in hierarchical form.
At the top level of these hierarchies are image neurons.

When I see the event, image neurons all over the cerebral cortex ﬁre. In
Figure 3 are shown three image neurons that ﬁre in response to a particular
external stimulus. The sub-set of image neurons that ﬁres will be called an
“image”.

The crucial question is this one: How can image neurons that ﬁre all over

the cerebral cortex synchronize their pulses?

To answer this question we introduce a memory neuron as shown in Figure

5

memory

neuron

image

neurons

Figure 5: The same as Figure 4 but after the memory neuron has been
programed. Note that the synapses connecting the memory neuron dendrites
and axon to image neurons that do not ﬁre have been broken. The memory
neuron and the black image neurons form a positive feedback loop. The black
image neurons now ﬁre in synchronism due to this feedback loop.

4. The unprogramed memory neuron has its dendrites and its axon connected
to many image neurons.

The memory neuron becomes programed and encodes an image as follows.
The memory neuron breaks the synapses of its dendrites and axon to the
image neurons that are not ﬁring. See Figure 5. This breaking of synapses
is the storage of the image into the long-term memory. Each memory neuron
can store one image. (It is important to mention that similar programing of
neurons has been studied in kittens before the age of three months when the
excess of synapses are broken to obtain registered binocular vision.[2]) From
the experiments we speculate that the programing of a memory neuron takes
of order ≈ 1 second.

The memory neuron serves three functions: recognition, short-term mem-

ory, and long-term memory as we now explain.

If I see the same event again, most of the same image neurons ﬁre. This
will cause the “memory neuron” to “recognize” the image and ﬁre. This
is how we recognize events. The ﬁring of the memory neuron in turn re-
inforces, synchronizes and completes the ﬁring of the image neurons
involved in the perception. Thus a positive feedback loop is established.
Even when the stimulus is removed the neurons keep ﬁring in synchronism
(at about 40 pulses per second[4]) due to the positive feedback loop of the
memory neuron. The threshold of the memory neuron raises (or, equiva-

6

lently, the coupling weight of the synapses is reduced) so that after up to
eight to twenty seconds the oscillation ceases. According to the model, this
is the mechanism of short-term memory.

Examples of the brain completing images are the ﬁlling in of the blind

spot, the coloring of periferal vision and the completion of a square.

If, for some reason, the memory neuron is excited, then the image neurons
involved in the perception of the event ﬁre in synchronism. The memory
neuron “recognizes” this event, ﬁres, and establishes a positive feedback loop.
Self sustaining synchronized pulses occur for a few seconds. This is how the
event is retrieved from the long-term memory and is “re-created” or “re-lived”
in the short-term memory.

There is a hierarchy of memory neurons, so that if I see a dog coming
towards me I ﬁrst recognize a dog in general, and then I recognize the special
dog Snoopy. The dog in general corresponds to a particular set of image
neurons ﬁring in synchronism. Snoopy corresponds to those same image
neurons plus additional image neurons all ﬁring in synchronism. A simple
hierarchy is shown in Figure 6.

In Section 2 we mentioned that to transfer information from the short-
term memory to the long-term memory it is necessary to classify it and relate
it to other information already in the long-term memory. This classiﬁcation
and relation is the construction of the hierarchy of memory neurons such as
the case shown in Figure 6. According to the model, this is the learning
process.

We propose that there are memory neurons that recognize parts of images,
e.g. a square, a face, the visual image of a letter, the sound of a word, the
smell of a rose...

Consider Figure 3 again. I see an external event through my senses. As
a result, image neurons all over my cerebral cortex ﬁre. This ﬁring is not
in synchronism (yet). The qualities of the event (shape, movement, color,
sound...) have not been related with each other. No memory neuron has
recognized the image yet.

After a few hundred milliseconds memory neurons recognize the image,
these memory neurons ﬁre and synchronize the pulses of the image neurons
all over the cerebral cortex. Positive feedback loops have been closed. The
qualities of the event have been related with each other. The perception
of the image no longer needs input from the senses since the positive feedback
is self-sustaining for the next few seconds. Because the memory neurons
form part of a hierarchy, the information of the image has been related to
other knowledge in the long-term memory. The image may now become
conscious.

If the feedback loops are prevented from oscillating we loose conscious-

7

image

neurons

DOG

memory

neurons

SNOOPY

Figure 6: Two memory neurons are shown. The memory neuron labeled
“DOG” recognizes a dog in general. The memory neuron labeled “SNOOPY”
recognizes a special dog.

ness. General anesthesia “shuts oﬀ” consciousness by acting on the synapses.
Likewise, the “center of sleep”, located near the hypothalamus, regulates the
couplings at the synapses.

When a feedback loop oscillates we may become conscious of the corre-
sponding image. The threshold of the memory neuron rises (or equivalently
the coupling at the synapses is weekend) so that after a few seconds the
oscillation is no longer self-sustaining. Then another memory neuron that
codes a related image (and is therefore close to threshold) can begin oscil-
lating, perhaps with the aid of input from the senses or noise. Thus one
image in conscience leads to a related image. This is the “stream of
consciousness”.

4 Estimates

The following are rough order-of-magnitude estimates. We humans have
about ≈ 1010 neurons. Our eyes have ≈ 108 rods and cones. The retina,
which is part of the brain[5], processes the visual information so that “only”
≈ 106 axons connect the retina to the (rest of the) brain. Further processing
will reduce this number. So a rough estimate of the number of image neurons
(including all senses) is of order ≈ 105. This number is of the same order as
the maximum number of dendrites of a neuron. A very rough estimate of the
number of memory neurons is obtained as follows: assume a memory neuron

8

is programed, i.e. an image is stored into long-term memory, every ≈ 10 sec-
onds (the duration of short-term memory) for a lifetime. The corresponding
number of memory neurons is of order ≈ 108.

Let us now consider a bee. It has of order ≈ 106 neurons. The bee has
eyes with a total of ≈ 27000 facets. After processing, we will need perhaps
≈ 3000 image neurons for all senses. If 10% of the bees neurons are memory
neurons then they can store up to ≈ 105 images in long-term memory. So
a worker bee that lives, say, six months, can store into memory about one
image every minute or so. The bee will have some degree of consciousness.

5 Conclusions

The feedback loops shown in Figure 6 account for many observations on
recognition, short-term memory, long-term memory and the learning process,
and shed some light on consciousness. We propose that some implementation
of those feed back loops is wide spread in the cerebral cortex.

We have not touched on the diﬃcult questions: How does feeling (such
as pain) arise from the ﬁring of neurons? How do I become aware? Can
a silicon neural network feel pain and become aware of itself? Does our
attention wander randomly from one image to a related one, or do we have
some control on our point of attention? How?

I hope the model serves as a point of departure for further experimental

and theoretical research on the brain.

References

Penguin Books (1980).

Inc. (1986).

[1] Douglas R. Hofstadter, “G¨odel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid”,

[2] Max Delbr¨uck, “Mind from matter?”, Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,

[3] Roger Penrose, “The Emperor’s New Mind - Concerning Computers,
Minds, and The Laws of Physics”, Oxford University Press (1989).

[4] Christof Koch, “When looking is not seeing: towards a neurobiological
view of awareness”, Engineering & Science, California Institute of Tech-
nology (1993).

9

[5] Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton and Mathew Sands, “The Feyn-
man lectures on physics”, Vol. 1, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company
(1977).

[6] Kai Zinn, “Building an Insect Brain”, Engineering & Science, California

Institute of Technology (1994).

10

