2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

International Review of Law and Economics . . . . . . . . . . . forthcoming

Ownership and Trade
from Evolutionary Games

Kenton K. Yee†
Columbia University

January 1, 2014

Abstract

Ownership and trade emerge from anarchy as evolutionary sta-
ble strategies. In these evolutionary game models, ownership status
provides an endogenous asymmetrizing criterion enabling cheaper res-
olution of property conﬂicts.

†Assistant Professor, Columbia University, 615 Uris Hall, 3022 Broadway,
New York, NY 10027. The author acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the
Brown and Bain Fellowship in Law and High Technology, the John M. Olin
Fellowship in Law and Economics at Stanford Law School, and the Santa Fe
Institute’s Complex Systems Summer School.

www.columbia.edu/~kky2001

1 Introduction

In the last three decades behavioral ecology has made strides in understand-

ing the origin and utility of behavioral traits in animal societies (Maynard

Smith 1988; Wilson 1975). Much of this success has come within the analytic

framework of evolutionary game theory. Evolutionary games, which mimic

the dynamics of Darwinian natural selection, diﬀer fundamentally from clas-

sical games (Maynard Smith 1982). While the latter focus on strategic in-

teractions between rationally calculating agents, evolutionary games model

repeated interactions between adaptive but otherwise non-thinking agents.

As one tends to believe humans think, it is not surprising that classi-

cal game theory has established a dominant position in law and economics

(Baird, Gertner, and Picker 1994) while evolutionary game theory has at-
tracted much less attention.1 A notable exception to this trend is Hirshleifer,

who pointed out parallels between evolved animal behaviors (and their game

theory models) and economically eﬃcient human practices (Hirshleifer 1977,

1980, 1982). Hirshleifer proposed three metallic norms in particular: the

“Golden Rule of communal sharing,” the “Silver Rule of private rights,” and

the “Iron Rule of dominance.” Each, he asserted, has evolved because they

have suﬃcient socioeconomic advantages.

This article develops an evolutionary game model of property ownership

and trade. To start, it extends and interprets a well-known evolutionary

model of animal territoriality as a model of human property ownership. That

one could do this is perhaps not surprising. The more surprising result is that

1This is not to suggest the absence of a strong evolutionary tradition in law. Scholars
who have written about the evolution of law include Boyd and Richerson (1985); Cooter
and Kornhauser (1980); Elliot (1985); Ellickson (1991); Epstein (1980); Hirshleifer (1982);
Huang and Wu (1994); Johnston (1996); Priest (1977); Rubin (1977); and Yee (1998).

1

trade – the bilateral transfer of property for renumeration – then emerges as a

strategy which is evolutionarily preferred over permanent ownership without

trade. In other words, traders are evolutionarily superior to owners who do

not trade. The identiﬁcation that trade is an evolutionary stable strategy in

evolutionary game theory is the main contribution of this article.

The swallowtail butterﬂy, Papilio zelicaon, provides a provacative ex-
ample of what may underlie animal territorial behavior2 (Maynard Smith

1988, p. 214). Because the swallowtail lives in low density populations, one

might expect matchmaking—the ﬁnding of a sexual partner—to be a prob-

lem. This problem is solved in swallowtail society by “hilltopping.” Males

establish territories at or near the tops of hills and wait for virgin females,

who instinctively seek out hilltops to mate. Since there are typically more

males than hilltops, most males are relegated to disadvantageous positions

lower down the slopes, where they attempt to waylay females on their way

uphill. Although the lower altitude males sometimes succeed, hilltop males

mate most. Curiously, despite their enviable estates, hilltoppers are seldom

challenged by intruders. On occasion when an intruder does confront a hill-

topper, the visitor tends to retreat after a brief, mild contest.

How is hilltop occupancy negotiated? In experiments, Larry Gilbert3

tested two alternative explanations: (A) Potential intruders are intimidated

from invading because hilltoppers are physically strongest, and because this

fact is perceived by the intruders; or (B) Swallowtails defer to prior posses-

2Other species, such as the hamadryas baboon, have been documented to exhibit similar

behavior.

3Because a caterpillar virus wiped out his butterﬂy population before Gilbert completed
his studies, Gilbert’s original study, the one described in Maynard Smith (1988), was never
In any case, R. Lederhouse
published (L. E. Gilbert, private communication to Yee).
describes similar observations of a closely related butterﬂy species (see Scriber, Tsubaki,
and Lederhouse 1995).

2

sors, that is, whoever ﬁrst stakes out a hilltop is granted a socially-established

privilege to keep it (not unlike in the Anglo-American doctrine of adverse

possession).

In a series of experiments with pairs of randomly selected male butter-

ﬂies, Gilbert ruled out A, and found support for the prior possessor theory,

B, as follows. He convinced each butterﬂy of a pair that it was the sole oc-

cupier of the same hilltop by letting it be the hilltopper on alternate days.

On its days oﬀ, Gilbert kept the sidelined butterﬂy unaware of its counter-

part’s existence by conﬁning it in dark room. After a couple of weeks, each

male clearly acted as the hilltop’s rightful proprietor, chasing away all com-

ers, who invariably retreated without much protest. When Gilbert ﬁnally

released both males to the same hilltop on the same day, an abnormally pro-

longed contest between the two “proprietors” ensued, lasting many minutes

and causing serious injury to each contestant. As a result, Gilbert concluded

that deference to prior hilltop possessors is an instinctive trait of swallowtails.

Maynard Smith (1982) and others hypothesized that such instincts

evolved by natural selection of the ﬁttest and constructed evolutionary game

theories modeling the evolutionary processes.

In these models, deference

to possession—a dispute resolution strategy based on pre-existing status—is

evolutionarily preferred over an always-ﬁght strategy, which costs too much,

and a never-ﬁght strategy, which yields too little.

Ownership conventions in human societies range from the simplest un-

spoken norms, such as not cutting ahead of somebody else in a grocery store

queue to much more involved rights bundles expressed in the Common Law.

A broad range of viewpoints (Rose 1985), ranging from Locke’s labor-mixing

3

theory of property4 to law and economics5 may be called upon to justify

them. Legal property rights can be enforced by various combinations of

liability and injunctive remedies (e.g. Calabresi and Melamed 1972).

Whatever the justiﬁcations, most ownership rights bundles consist of

two primitive strands: (a) Possession, the right to occupy or possess what one

owns, and (b) Trade, the right to buy and sell ownership. By constructing

evolutionary game theory models, I will illustrate how evolutionary forces

can serve to establish these two strands as stable strategies. The trade model

shows that those who trade are evolutionarily preferred over Possessors who

don’t. What is new here is that evolutionary forces are enough by themselves

to establish Possession and, given Possession, the practice of trade.

Section 2 reviews Maynard Smith’s (1982) construction of evolutionary

stable strategy (ESS) and argues that ESSes have interpretation as social

norms. Sections 3 and 4 present two models corresponding, respectively, to

the two strands of ownership. In the Section 3 model, possession is an ESS;

in Section 4, possession with the right to trade is an ESS.

2 Evolutionary Stable Strategies

Social beneﬁts come only at a price: for every beneﬁt accrued, there must

be set of behavioral constraints or obligations to be fulﬁlled. Social norms—

prevalent responses to recurring social situations—are the reciprocal con-

4In a nutshell, Locke’s view is that one owns one’s body and, by extension, the fruits
of his body’s labor. Hence, ﬁrst useful possession establishes a property right (Epstein
1979).

5The normative law and economics view may be summarized as follows. Property rights
may be thought of as a bundle of strands of primitive rights. Particular strands—tailored
to the situation—are granted to encourage social-welfare-optimizing use and investment.
A beneﬁt-cost balance determines whether a particular strand should be granted enforce-
ment. Costs include enforecement costs (Posner 1992).

4

straints enabling the social beneﬁts.

Evolutionary game theory provides a quantitative dynamical theory of
how such social constraints on behavior can emerge from anarchy.6 The basic

ingredients of evolutionary game models for our purposes are:

• a self-contained community of disputants interacting in repeated, ran-

dom pairwise encounters;

• who, at each encounter, select from a predetermined7 menu of strate-

gies, say, {α, β, γ, · · ·} which may be either pure or mixed.

• If player #1 chooses strategy α and #2 chooses β, the payoﬀ to player

#1 is denoted wαβ, which is determined entirely by α and β.

• A round consists of many random encounters for each player. After

each round, the community undergoes “natural selection,” in which

strategies replicate in proportion to how far above average their scores

in the just-completed round were; those with below average scores die

oﬀ in proportion to how far below average they were.

Consequently, an adaptive population evolves according to a set of cou-

pled ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equations—one corresponding to each strategy—

in the same spirit as the Malthusian predator-prey relations. Solving the

equations yields a phase diagram in strategy space, which typically has sev-

eral ﬁxed points (Friedman 1991). Some of these ﬁxed points are attractive:

6Axelrod (1986) argues that social norms cannot survive unless there is a secondary
norm enforcing the ﬁrst norm. This implies the need for a tertiary norm to enforce the
secondary norm, and so forth ad inﬁnitem. (See also Martinez Coll and Hirshleifer 1991;
Lomborg 1996.) In contrast, the elegance of evolutionary stable strategies (as exempliﬁed
by the models herein) is that, within the context of the game, they do not require such an
inﬁnite hierarchy of supporting norms.

7In more ambitious formulations the strategy space is permitted to evolve via mutations

in analogy to genes in biology.

5

populations always evolve into them so that they are evolutionarily stable

against subversive mutations. Each attractive ﬁxed point in a phase diagram

represents an “evolutionary stable strategy (ESS).”

In other words, an ESS is a possible mode of behavior that might lock-

in. Thus, an ESS can be interpreted as a social norm.

For purposes of this article, it will be suﬃcient to state a criteria deﬁn-
ing ESS(es) given the game’s deﬁning payoﬀ matrix.8 To this end, for a

given game strategy α⋆ is an ESS if, starting from a status quo where α⋆ is

the norm, it is not possible for insurgents to achieve higher payoﬀs with a

renegade strategy, say, γ. Algebraically, this means α⋆ is an ESS if either

wα⋆α⋆ > wγα⋆ ∀γ

or

wα⋆α⋆ = wγα⋆ and wα⋆γ > wγγ ∀γ.

(1)

(2)

Condition (2) is suﬃcient to establish an ESS because, even if wγα⋆ = wα⋆α⋆,

invaders behaving according to γ cannot successfully gain a foothold if they

perform so poorly against each other that they prevent themselves from be-

coming a sizable fraction of the population. Note that whether a strategy is

an ESS or not depends on the strategy space, the set of competing strategies.

What is an ESS in one strategy space may cease to be an ESS if the strategy

space is expanded to include other strategies. Also, games can (and usually

do) have more than one ESS.

Of direct relevance to us is the Hawk-Dove game (Maynard Smith 1973),

whose payoﬀs are depicted in Figure 1. In this game, two equally matched

8From Maynard Smith (1982). Other authors (e.g. Zeeman 1981) have pointed out
that these criteria expressed in terms of payoﬀ matrix elements do not always recover all
the aforementioned attractive ﬁxed points. For our models, the technical distinction is
immaterial.

6

H

#2

D

V

2 − h, V

2 − h
(cid:17)

#1

(cid:16)

H

D

0, V
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

V, 0
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

V

2 , V

2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Figure 1: Payoﬀs to disputants (#1, #2) in the two-player “Hawk-Dove”
game. Each disputant values the asset at $V . Fighting has expected harm
$h to each Hawk, and yields a 1
2 chance of winning $V . If both are Doves
(D), they have a 1
2 chance of getting the asset without ﬁghting. If one is a
Hawk while the other is a Dove, the Dove retreats leaving the prize for the
Hawk.

parties vie for the same asset, worth $V to each. (Imagine two randomly

paired strangers ﬁghting over a parking space at a crowded shopping mall.)

Suppose only two strategies, Hawk (H) and Dove (D), are available. Hawks

always ﬁght and, since both parties are equal, in a ﬁght each Hawk has only

a one-half chance of winning the asset. Fighting has an expected total cost

to each participant of $h. In addition to the expected injury, h contains all

other costs including the expected energy expenditure and any risk-bearing

costs. Doves retreat when confronted by a Hawk.

If two Doves meet, a

random one of the two Doves retreats and leaves the other to the spoils.

In neoclassical game theory (e.g. Baird, Gertner, and Picker 1994),

1

2V > h corresponds to the Prisoner’s Dilemma while 1
to the Chicken game.

2V < h corresponds
In the Prisoner’s Dilemma, H is called “defection”

and defection is the unique Nash equilibrium strategy for both players. In

the Chicken game, the unique Nash equilibrium is for one player to be the

7

chicken (D) and the other to be the hawk (H).

When 1

2V > h (the Prisoner’s Dilemma case), H is an ESS and D is not
by virtue of Criterion (1). In other words, aggressiveness is evolutionarily

preferred when the rewards outweigh the costs of ﬁghting. Note that this

does not mean H optimizes social welfare. In fact, an all-Dove population

maximizes social welfare.

When the possibility of serious injury is suﬃciently large, 1

2V < h (the
Chicken game case). In this case, neither pure strategies H or D are ESSes.

It turns out that the only ESS (within the H-D strategy subspace) is a mixed
strategy α⋆ = pH + (1 − p)D, where p ≡ 1

2V /h. This mixed strategy can
be achieved in two ways. Either the population is homogeneous and at an

encounter each individual exercises H with probability p, or the population

is comprised of fraction p Hawks and (1 − p) Doves.

In either case, the

more potential costs exceed potential gains the less evolutionarily attractive

hawkishness is.

The material in this section was established by Maynard Smith (1982)

and others. While the Hawk-Dove game has provided insights into animal

behavior, it is too simple to allow for more sophisticated human strategies.

Humans act like neither Hawks, Doves, nor mixtures thereof. Rather, we

have more sophisticated options. The next section turns to one of them.

3 Possession as an ESS

“Finder’s keepers” and “ﬁrst come, ﬁrst serve” are not only basic thumb rules

in playground citizenship, they are powerful norms that have been recognized

by the courts and applied widely in such varied settings as adverse possession,

abandoned property, ﬁsheries, wildlife, seabed minerals, groundwater rights,

8

H

P

#2
D

V, 0

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

V

2 , V

2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

( V
2 +h)f
+ V
2 −h

 

, ( V

2 − h)f

!

V

2 f, V

2 (1 + f )

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

H

V

2 − h, V

2 − h
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

#1 D

0, V

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

P

( V
2 − h)f,

 

( V
2 +h)f
+ V

2 −h !

V

2 (1 + f ), V

2 f

f V, f V

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Figure 2: Payoﬀs to disputants (#1, #2) in the “Hawk-Dove-Possessor”
game.
If Possessor P owns a piece of land, it will ﬁght for it as a Hawk;
if P’s opponent is the owner, P defers to him and acts as a Dove. f is the
fraction of time on average a disputant expects to be in the role of owner.

9

intellectual property, debt collection, oil and gas, pollution permits, the radio

frequency spectrum, satellite orbits, and ownership of wartime spoils.

To model this norm as an ESS, introduce the “Possessor (P)” strategy:

P ≡

(cid:26)

H if current owner;
D if current intruder.

The Possessor strategy models the practice of “possession”. Unlike Hawks

and Doves, Possessors observe convention based on their status; their behav-

ior depends on whether they are the owner or intruder.

Figure 2 depicts the Hawk-Dove-Possessor game payoﬀs.

If f = 1
2 ,
the Hawk-Dove-Possessor game reduces to the Hawk-Dove-Bourgeois game

(Maynard Smith 1988; Hirshleifer 1982, pp. 22-23). What distinguishes the

Hawk-Dove-Possessor game from the Bourgeois game is the parameter f . f

is the expected fraction of confrontations in which a disputant anticipates

she will be in the role of Owner. We will show that P is the unique ESS for

all f in the interval (0, 1). This implies that the Possessorship strategy is

robust to the wealth (or dearth) of ownership opportunities available – all

one requires is a nonzero chance (f 6= 0) to be an owner.

The payoﬀs of the Hawk-Dove-Possessor game are motivated as follows.

First, the parameter f has the following interpretation. Imagine a neighbor-

hood in which everyone possesses a separate (but otherwise identical) plot of

land. At the same time, everyone is wandering the neighborhood interested

in obtaining possession of additional plots. Suppose that each agent wanders

randomly throughout the neighborhood so that, in the repeated disputes

which arise, each disputant is in the role of owner fraction f the time and

intruder the other 1−f . For instance, if there were N disputants each owning

one plot of land, in a round-robin tournament every disputant would intrude

N − 1 times and be reciprocally intruded upon N − 1 times. In this case,

10

f = 1

2 because every disputant is an owner half the time and an intruder the

other half.

Also of interest is when land is scarce and not everyone can own a plot.

Then the probability f of being an owner in a random encounter is no longer

1
2, but will be some positive number less than that. To obtain an expression
for f , let n denote the number of available plots, and N the total number of

disputants. Assume N ≥ n and that N is very large. Assume everyone has

an equal chance to be an owner and nobody owns more than one plot of land
at any time. Then the chance to be an owner is g = n

N . The total number of
encounters a plot-owner endures in a round-robin tournament where every

disputant (owners and non-owners alike) attempts to intrude once on every

alien plot is (N − 1) + (n − 1) because the owner defends his land once

against the other N − 1 disputants and intrudes once on the other n − 1

plot owners. Hence, ignoring the higher order eﬀect of what happens when

property transfers resulting from encounters lead to a disputant temporarily

owning more than a single plot of land, the fraction of encounters where an

owner plays the role of owner is

N − 1
N − 1 + n − 1

.

The overall fraction f of time a random disputant plays the role of owner in

an encounter is

×

fraction of encounters
in owner′s role if owner !

 

f =

chance to be an owner
(cid:16)
= g ×

N − 1
N − 1 + n − 1 !

 

(cid:17)

= g ×

1 − 1
N

 

1 + n

N − 2

N !

.

11

In the limit where the number N of disputants is large and the ratio g = n/N

is ﬁnite (n may or may not be large depending on the value of g, but n is

strictly less than N),

f ∼

lim
N7→∞
g=n/N

g
1 + g

.

In this limit, 0 ≤ f ≤ 1

2 because 0 < g < 1. In particular, f = 0 when the
chance of land ownership is zero (g = 0). When land is scarce (n << N), the

chance of land ownership is small (g << 1) and so is f ∼ g. On the other
hand, when the chance of land ownership is almost certain9 (g 7→ 1), then
f = 1
2.
In the Hawk-Dove-Possessor game, at each encounter a disputant can

either behave like a Hawk, a Dove, or a Possessor. Figure 2 depicts the

payoﬀs of the Hawk-Dove-Possessor game. In deriving Figure 2, payoﬀs have

been averaged over many encounters. Since disputants are owners f of the

time, and intruders 1 − f of the time, the payoﬀ to disputant #1 is the

weighted average of two conditional payoﬀs:

w = f w| owner + (1 − f )w| intruder.

For example,

and

wP H = f (

V − h) + (1 − f ) × 0 = (

V − h)f,

1
2

wHP = f V + (1 − f )(

V − h) =

V − h + (

V + h)f,

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

wP P = f V + (1 − f ) × 0 = f V.

9When land is plentiful relative to the number of disputants (n >> N ), the chance g
for a disputant to be an owner is given by a complex combinatoric function if disputants
are allowed to own more than one plot of land; the expression g = n/N is valid only when
ownership is capped at one plot per person.

12

When 1

Hawk-Dove-Possessor game.

2V < h (the Chicken game case), P is the only ESS of the
(The reader is invited to conﬁrm this using

Conditions (1) and (2).) In fact, one can go further and prove there is no

mixed ESS so that P is the unique ESS if the strategy space is H-D-P.) As

this is true for any value of f ∈ (0, 1), it takes only a tiny (any nonzero)

chance f of ownership to establish P as an ESS. The fact that P is not an

ESS exactly at f = 0 is moot because f = 0 means there is no property to

be owned (n = 0).

In deﬁning the Hawk-Dove-Possessor payoﬀ matrix, I assumed that

owners and intruders value the disputed plots equally, that it costs owners

and intruders the same to engage, and that owners and intruders each have

equal chances of winning a ﬁght. In real life, due to informational advantages

of being an owner, owners probably value and can defend their properties

more and better than intruders. So it is likely that possessorship is even

more preferred than in this stylized model. What the Hawk-Dove-Possessor

model shows is that possessorship is evolutionarily stable despite ignoring

all the likely advantages an owner has over an alien intruder .

While P is an ESS for the Chicken game, it does not resolve the Pris-

oner’s Dilemma. When 1

2V > h (the Prisoner’s Dilemma case), H remains
the only pure-strategy ESS. When the expected gain from ﬁghting exceeds

expected losses, aggressiveness is evolutionarily preferred over dovishness and

possessorship.

Possessor is an ESS for the Chicken game because it provides a pre-

dictable and costless mechanism for resolving disputes. As in the game, pos-

session in the real world serves to establish an asymmetric dispute resolution

mechanism in an otherwise symmetric situation. This role is consistent with

the proliﬁc public notice requirements usually associated with possession, in-

13

cluding title registration requirements and the adverse possession doctrine,

under which owners can be divested of property for failing to protest against

dispossession in a timely manner.

The utilitarian value of possession was recognized early on in the com-
mon law. In Pierson v. Post10 a famous wild-fox case from the nineteenth

century, a hunter, Post, had a fox in his gunsight but before he could ﬁre an

interloper killed the fox and ran oﬀ with the prize. The indignant Post sued

the interloper on the theory that his pursuit of the fox established his right

to have it. The court disagreed. It held that possession requires a clear act

putting the world on notice that the “pursuer has an unequivocal intention of

appropriating the animal to his individual use.” (Id. at 178.) Gaining prop-

erty rights over a wild animal requires either establishing physical control

over it or mortally wounding it.

3.1 Why not Anti-Possessor?

I asserted at the beginning of Section 3 that the virtue of Possessorship is

dispute resolution via an objective symmetry-breaking criterion. Yet, Pos-

sessorship is not the only symmetry-breaking mechanism one can imagine.

In particular, consider its mirror image, the “Anti-Possessor (AP) strategy:”

AP ≡

(cid:26)

D if current owner;
H if current intruder.

One might reasonably guess that Anti-Possessorship would serve just

as well as Possessorship as a symmetry-breaking device. AP indeed is an

ESS in a game consisting of Hawks, Doves, and Anti-possessors.

In animal societies, AP is rare, but not totally unheard of. The social

spider Oecibus civitas lives together in groups, but each constructs its indi-

10Pierson v. Post. 3 Cai. R. 175 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1805)

14

vidual web. If a spider is driven from its web, it may dart into the web of

a neighbor. If the neighbor is in residence, it does not expel the intruder,

but instead darts out into somebody else’s web. As a result, dislocating a

single spider may trigger a chain reaction—a game of musical webs (Maynard

Smith 1982, p. 96).

It is apparent why P is more common than AP in both nature and

culture. AP is disfavored due to nomadicy costs. In an AP culture, citizens

are forced to alternate as owners and intruders in an unending tag-team

match. Due to relocation costs, AP is not as viable as P.

4 Trade as an ESS

While possession retention is the ﬁrst strand of property rights, the trading is

the second strand. Trade is eﬃcient because if an intruder values a property

at $V while the current owner values it at $v < $V , then both beneﬁt if the

owner sells it to the intruder for $x where

v < x < V.

Beyond restricting x to the interval (v, V ), the model here does not have

anything to say about whether the transaction price $x is paid in money or

another asset of value $x. The model also does not specify how the value of

x is determined – whether by case-by-case negotiation or by an exogenously

given recipe. In this section, I will simply show that trading is an ESS for

any x ∈ (v, V ). The point is that trade is evolutionarily preferred over stoic

possessorship (P).

Suppose in every encounter, the two disputants do not value the dis-

puted property equally because, for example, they always have slightly dif-

ferent reasons for wanting the property. Let $V and $v, with v < V , denote

15

the two mismatched valuations. Deﬁne a “Trader (T)” as a Possessor who is

willing to sell or buy for $x when dealing with a fellow Trader. In particular,

when both owner and intruder of a particular encounter are Traders, and

the intruder values the property more (e.g., at $V ) than the owner, he will

want to purchase the property from the owner for $x, where v < x < V .

Symbiotically, a Trader-owner who values the property less (e.g., at $v) than

a Trader-intruder will readily agree to sell the property to the latter for $x.

In other words,

T ≡ 








P
sell for x
buy for x if V -valuing intruder;
otherwise;

if v-valuing owner;

P

if counterpart is not T;

if counterpart is T.

Figure 3 depicts the payoﬀs of the Hawk-Dove-Possessor-Trader game

(“Trader game” for short). In deriving the payoﬀ matrix, I have assumed

that disputants are owners fraction f of the time, and intruders 1 − f of

the time. Additionally, each encounter is between a disputant valuing the

property at $V and one valuing it at $v. Thus, the payoﬀ to disputant #1

is the weighted average of four conditional payoﬀs:

w =

(w| V −valuing

owner

+ w| v−valuing

owner

) +

(w| V −valuing

intruder

+ w| v−valuing

intruder

).

1 − f
2

f
2

For instance,

wT T =

(V + x) +

(V − x + 0) =

V − (

− f )x.

f
2

1 − f
2

1
2

1
2

The ESSes of the Trader game depends the relative values of the cost

of ﬁghting h, the average spoils of sharing without ﬁghting V ≡ V +v
the incremental expected per party gain from trading V −v

4 , and
2 . As depicted in
Figure 4, when the cost of ﬁghting is small (Region I), H is an ESS and T

16

H

D

P

T

#2

H (wHH, wHH) (wHD, wDH)

(wHP , wP H) (wHT , wT H)

#1 D (wDH, wHD) (wDD, wDD)

(wDP , wP D) (wDT , wT D)

P

T

(wP H, wHP )

(wP D, wDP )

(wP P , wP P )

(wP T , wT P )

(wT H, wHT )

(wT D, wDT )

(wT P , wP T )

(wT T , wT T )

P

T

V +v
4 − h

V +v

4 (1+f )
−h(1−f )

V +v

4 (1+f )
−h(1−f )

H

0

D

V +v
2

V +v
4

wαβ ≡

V +v
4 f

V +v
4 f

V +v
2 f

V +v

4 f − hf V +v

4 (1 + f )

V +v
2 f

V +v

4 f − hf V +v

4 (1 + f )

V +v
2 f

V

2 − ( 1

2 − f )x

H

D

P

T

Figure 3: The top table depicts the payoﬀs to disputants (#1, #2) in the
Hawk-Dove-Possessor-Trader game. The lower table lists the payoﬀ values
wαβ for i, j ∈ {H, D, P, T }. A disputant is an owner fraction f of the time
and an intruder 1 − f of the time. One party values the disputed property
at $V and the other at $v < $V . Half the time, the V -valuer is the owner,
half the time the intruder. If both owner and intruder are Traders (T) and
the intruder values the property more, he purchases from the owner for $x
17
where v < x < V .

|
V − f
1+f ∆

|

V

I

II

III

✲
h

Figure 4: V ≡ V +v
is average value each party would walk away with if they
4
equally shared the asset. ∆ ≡ V −v
2 > 0 is the incremental expected gain of
trading. h is the cost of ﬁghting. In Region I (where h < V − f
1+f ∆), H is the
unique pure strategy ESS. In Region II (where V − f
1+f ∆ < h < V ), both
T and H are possible ESSes. In Region III (where h > V ), T is the unique
pure strategy ESS.

is not. On the other hand, when the cost of ﬁghting is comparably large

(Region III), T is an ESS and H is not.

When ﬁghting cost is intermediate (Region II), both H and T are ESSes.

If V = v, then ∆ = 0 and Region II is subsumed by Region I. Hence, Region

II owes its existence to a valuation discrepancy between owner and intruder.

In Region II, hawkishness is viable because the cost of ﬁghting is less than the

expected spoils V . At the same time, the cost of ﬁghting exceeds the expected

harm from not Trading, so Trading is also viable. As it is, if everyone is

trading in Region II, a disputant is better oﬀ to trade. On the other hand,

if everyone is a Hawk in Region II, a disputant is advised to also be a Hawk.

These results follow from verifying the necessary and suﬃcient ESS

Criteria (1) and (2). The intuition for why Region III (h > V ) is a trade-

only region is as follows. In this case, within the H-D-P strategy subspace

P is the ESS (for the same reasons why P is the ESS in the Hawk-Dove-

Possessor game). T fares no worst than P against Hawks and Doves since

Traders and Possessors act the same way against Hawks and Doves. The

remaining issue is why T fares better than P within the P-T subspace. The

18

reason is because, in trades the seller-owner always nets a surplus of $(x − v)

while the buyer-intruder nets a surplus of $(V − x). Because both parties

gain and nobody loses in a trade, Traders fare better than Possessors and T

is the only pure-strategy ESS.

Clearly, Region III corresponds to bartering in ancient societies and

commerce in modern ones. When the cost of ﬁghting is high, trade evolves.

Likewise, Region I is reminiscent of nations ﬁghting over land, oil ﬁelds,

and governance structures. When the expected value of the asset far exceeds

the cost of war, hawkishness emerges.

Region II, when ﬁghting cost is intermediate, is the most interesting. In

this case, either H or T can emerge and, once one of them does, it locks in as

the ESS. However, either H or T has an equal ex ante chance of emerging. For

instance, Region II may help explain some litigation practices in the United

States, but whether it does or not is diﬃcult to assess because determining the

parties’ costs and beneﬁts in these situations is diﬃcult. Suppose costs are

such that Region II applies in some legal disputes, such as bankruptcy or tort

cases. Then bankruptcy cases may be more likely settled out of court (a T

strategy) while tort litigation may go to trial more frequently (an H strategy)

simply because historically a T strategy has emerged as normal practice in

bankruptcy while an H strategy is the norm in tort litigation. Once an ESS

is established, the strategy (T or H) becomes the modus operandi when that

kind of dispute arises even though the other strategy could fare equally well

if everyone were to adopt it instead.

Finally, Figure 4 highlights the cost h, which is exogenously given, as

the critical determinant of whether T or H or both are evolutionarily favored.

As law has the power to change h by exacting extra penalties and fees on

disputants, an implication of the Trading game is that law can inspire or

19

hinder the evolution of trade by its assessment of penalties on hawkishness

or trading.

5 Concluding Remarks

The Hawk-Dove-Possessor game and the Hawk-Dove-Possessor-Trade game

provide two messages. The ﬁrst message is that deference by intruders to

owners is evolutionarily preferred over non-status-based behavior. This is

because prior possession provides a ready asymmetrizing criterion enabling

resolution of possession conﬂicts. Individuals who avoid transactions costs

by resolving conﬂicts based on a cultural asymmetrizing criterion are better

oﬀ than those who do not.

Can one do better than mere possession? The second message answers

this question aﬃrmatively. A Trade strategy trumps Possessorship with no

trade. Trade is the ability to buy and sell according to what optimizes per-

sonal gain; trading does not occur unless both parties gain. Accordingly,

traders always beneﬁt from trade and, so, are evolutionarily preferred. Anal-

ysis of the Hawk-Dove-Possessor-Trade game shows that those who trade are

evolutionarily preferred over Possessors who don’t. That voluntary exchange

tends to improve social welfare is not new; it is already well known from

traditional Walrasian analysis. What is new here is that, without the help of

rationality or utility maximization, evolution is enough by itself to generate

trade.

This raises the question, If trade is evolutionarily preferred over posses-
sion without trade, why don’t Gilbert’s butterﬂies in Section 1 trade?11 Why

11To be more precise, there is no evidence to suggest that butterﬂies trade. However,
we cannot rule out the possibility that they do trade. Other species exhibit a rudimentary
form of trade biologists call “mutualism.” Cleaning ﬁsh, which eat debris oﬀ the bodies

20

doesn’t an animal with extra food barter away some in exchange for a future

meal? To be sure, this does occur in a rudimentary way when animal family

groups hunt together in cooperative packs and share prey. But it is probably

fair to say that animals do not trade with strangers unless the exchange is

immediately mutually gratifying (as in the cleaning ﬁsh example).

The main barrier to animal trade is probably logistical and traces back

to the exchange value x in the Hawk-Dove-Possessor-Trade game. The exis-

tence of x tacitly presumes a form of book keeping, either mental accounting

or the use of money. Money has not evolved in the animal kingdom and,

absent money, anonymous trading is diﬃcult because unrelated animals can-

not keep track of who owes who how much. Hence, the failure of animals to

evolve a monetary system probably has obstructed the emergence of animal

trade from animal territoriality instincts. But why has money not evolved in

animal kingdoms? Perhaps, like law or other sociopolitical structures, money

is higher up in the evolutionary path, and it emerges only along with human

(or prehistoric human) traits such as language and agriculture.

Beyond property rights, can evolutionary games explain the origin of

other human social norms? An aﬃrmative answer requires two ingredients:

a theory of the origin of social norms, and an identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc

evolutionary games corresponding to each norm. This article has illustrated

how to realize the second of these two ingredients by constructing the games

corresponding to the practice of Possession and Trade. Let’s now turn to the

ﬁrst.

For an evolutionary theory of social norms, it is unlikely that human

social norms are biologically evolved like butterﬂy territoriality is. Rather,

the allusion to biological evolution must be metaphorical. In biological evo-

of bigger ﬁsh, trade their cleaning services for food (Chapter 13, Maynard Smith 1982).

21

lution, genes undergo natural selection in an ecology of water, geology, food,

and weather. To survive, genes and their organic manifestations must adapt,

mutate, and establish parasitic, predatory, or mutualistic niches in the food

chain. Natural selection of the ﬁttest weeds out inappropriate genes. In the

long run only genes which manage to stake out biological niches in the food

chain reproduce and propagate.

Norms are the “genes” undergoing natural selection. Through their

embodiment in the behaviors of their human carriers, norms compete against

each other for social popularity against a backdrop of cultural traditions and

legal and political institutions – themselves manifestations of successful ideas.

Not unlike between genes in biological evolution, the competition between

norms for social acceptance and inﬂuence is a life and death struggle. Those

that don’t successfully adapt across time and sociopolitical barriers die.

This notion that norms are like genes is not new. In The Selﬁsh Gene,

Dawkins (1976) proposes that social ideas, what he calls “memes,” are a

nonorganic form of life. His examples of memes include tunes, catch-phrases,

taboos, and architectural fashions. In Dawkins’ view, the fundamental char-

acteristics of life are replication and evolution. In biological life, genes serve

as the fundamental replicators. In human culture, memes are the fundamen-

tal replicators. Both genes and memes evolve by mutation-coated replication

and natural selection of the ﬁttest. Analogous to how genes encode the

essence of biological life, Dawkins regards memes as genetic carriers of a

memotic life form—what we know as human culture. This theme has found

popularity in several ﬁelds (Waldrop 1992; Wilson 1975; Yee 1997).

Epstein’s theory (1980) of evolutionary norms goes beyond Dawkins’ by

incorporating a sociobiological dimension. The thrust of Epstein’s hypoth-

esis is that human beings who abide by certain rules of conduct are more

22

likely to survive, reproduce, and pass on both biological genes and ideologi-

cal memes to their children. Over generations, natural selection operating at

a combined biological and cultural level leads to ingrained behavioral traits.

Epstein listed four categories of law which he thinks has evolutionary roots:

(i) prohibition against violence except in self-defense; (ii) ﬁrst possession as

the root of title; (iii) obligations of parents to their oﬀspring; (iv) promissory

obligations.

A cross between Dawkins’ memes and Epstein’s theory of sociobiolog-

ical enhancement is compelling. In this picture, less successful individuals

and groups within a population must imitate the behavior of their more suc-

cessful peers in order to successfully compete for resources. Accordingly, the

more above average an individual is, the more others copy his behavior. As

a result of peer mimicry, the population establishes and self-enforces over

time standards of normal behavior. Normal behavior may either be time-

independent or it may cycle through a range of behaviors. This picture is

naturally reconciled with evolutionary games because the evolutionary pro-

cess is essentially a scenario of replication dynamics based on survival of the

ﬁttest. Any process which favors iterated, merit-based growth of some sub-

groups at the expense of peers—such as Darwinian evolution or proportional

group learning—can be described by evolutionary games.

The appeal of evolutionary games is that participants do not have to be

endowed with superhuman characteristics like unfailing Bayesian rationality.

Even butterﬂies and baboons are qualiﬁed to play. All that is asked is that

the parties learn by trial and error, incorporate what they learn in future

behavior, and die if they don’t.

This article also raises another question, What is the connection be-

tween norms and formal law. The Possessor and Trade ESSes suggest only

23

that these ownership conventions may emerge as social norms – they do

not draw any connection between norms and formal law.

Indeed, Ellick-

son (1991) suggests that not only are fundamental norms like neighborly

cooperation pervasive but they exist independently of and oblivious to legal

standards. Based on a case study of ranchers in Shasta County, California,

Ellickson conjectures that the omnipresent threat of reputation-damaging

gossip is an eﬀective means of enforcing social norms in the Shasta County

ranching community without the need of laws. So why laws?

If law is not necessary to sustain Trade in Regions II or III of Figure 4,

is the (only) role of law to guide society into (or out of) these two Regions

by twiddling cost h with the exaction of penalties?

References

[1] Axelrod, Robert (1986) “An Evolutionary Approach to Norms,” Amer-

ican Political Science Review 80:1095-1111.

[2] Baird, R., R. Gertner, and R. Picker (1994) Game Theory and the Law,

Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[3] Boyd,

R.

and

P.

Richerson

(1985)

Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago: University of Chicago

[4] Calabresi, G. and A. Melamed (1972) “Property Rules, Liability Rules,

and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral,” 85 Harv. L. Review

Press.

1089.

24

sity Press.

1221.

59:637-666.

[5] Cooter, R. and L. Kornhauser (1980) “Can Litigation Improve the Law

without the help of Judges?” J. Legal Studies 9:139.

[6] Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selﬁsh Gene, Oxford, Great Britian: Oxford

University Press.

[7] Elliott, D. (1985) “The Evolutionary Tradition in Jurisprudence,”

Columbia Law Review 85:38-94.

[8] Ellickson, R. (1991) Order Without Law, Cambridge: Harvard Univer-

[9] Epstein, R. (1979) “Possession as the Root of Title,” 13 Ga. L. Review

[10] Epstein, R. (1980) “A Taste for Privacy?: Evolution and the Emergence

of a Naturalistic Ethic,” 9 J. Legal Studies 665.

[11] Friedman, D. (1991) “Evolutionary Games in Economics,” Econometrica

[12] Hirshleifer, J. (1977) “Economics from a Biological Viewpoint,” J. of

Law and Economics 20:1-52.

Legal Studies 649.

[13] Hirshleifer, J. (1980) “Privacy: Its Origin, Function and Future,” 9 J.

[14] Hirshleifer, J. (1982) “Evolutionary Models in Economics and Law: Co-

operation Versus Conﬂict,” Research in Law and Economics 4:1-60.

[15] Huang, P. and H.-M. Wu (1994) “More Order without More Law: A

Theory of Social Norms and Organizational Cultures,” 10 Journal of

Law, Economics, & Organization 390-406.

25

[16] Johnston, J. (1996) “Legal Enforcement of Contracts and the Evolution

of Cooperation,” Contemporary Legal Issues (Univ. of San Diego Law

School), to appear.

[17] Lomborg, B. (1996) “Nucleus and Shield: The evolution of social struc-

ture in the iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma,” 61 Am. Sociological Review

[18] Martinez Coll, J. and J. Hirshleifer (1991) “The Limits of Reciprocity,”

278-307.

3 Rationality and Society.

Nature 246:15-18.

[19] Maynard Smith, J. and G. Price (1973) “The Logic of Animal Conﬂicts,”

[20] Maynard Smith, J. (1982) Evolution and the Theory of Games, Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press.

[21] Maynard Smith, J. (1988) Games, Sex and Evolution, New York:

Harvester-Wheatsheaf.

and Company (4th ed.).

[22] Posner, R. (1992) Economic Analysis of Law, Boston: Little, Brown

[23] Priest, George (1977) “The Common Law Process and the Selection of

Eﬃcient Rules,” 6 J. Legal Studies 65.

[24] Carol Rose (1985) “Possession as the Origin of Property” 52 U. Chi. L.

[25] Rubin, Paul (1977) “Why is the Common Law Eﬃcient?” 6 J. Legal

Review 73, 79-81.

Studies 51.

26

[26] Scriber, J., Y. Tsubaki, and R. Lederhouse (1995) “Comparative Mating

Behavior and Sexual Selection in North American Swallowtail Butter-

ﬂies,” Chapter 13 of Swallowtail Butterﬂies: Their Ecology & Evolu-

tionary Biology, Scientiﬁc Publishers, Inc., Gainesville, FL

[27] Waldrop,

M.

(1992)

Complexity: the emerging science at the

edge of order and chaos, New York: Simon & Schuster.

[28] Wilson, E. O. (1975) Sociobiology: the new synthesis, Cambridge: Har-

vard University Press.

[29] Yee, K. (1997) “Coevolution of law and culture: a coevolutionary games

approach,” 2n.4 Complexity 4-6. Additional articles may be downloaded

www.columbia.edu/~kky2001

from

or

201-243.

http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/cf dev/AbsByAuth.cfm?per id=240309

[30] Yee, K. (1998) “location.location.location: Internet Addresses as Evolv-

ing Property,” 6.2 Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal

[31] Zeeman, (1981) “Dynamics of the Evolution of Animal Conﬂicts,” 89

Journal of Theoretical Biology 249-70.

27

