2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hydration of Krypton and Consideration of
Clathrate Models of Hydrophobic Eﬀects from
the Perspective of Quasi-Chemical Theory

Henry S. Ashbaugh, D. Asthagiri, Lawrence R. Pratt1,
and
Susan B. Rempe2

February 2, 2008

1Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM

87545, USA

2Sandia National Laboratory, Albuquerque, NM 87185 USA

Abstract

Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) results on a liquid krypton-water sys-
tem are presented and compared to recent XAFS results for the radial hydra-
tion structure for a Kr atom in liquid water solution. Though these AIMD
calculations have important limitations of scale, the comparisons with the
liquid solution results are satisfactory and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
radial distributions extracted from the data on the solid Kr/H2O clathrate
hydrate phase. The calculations also produce the coordination number distri-
bution that can be examined for metastable coordination structures suggest-
ing possibilities for clathrate-like organization; none are seen in these results.
Clathrate pictures of hydrophobic hydration are discussed, as is the quasi-
chemical theory that should provide a basis for clathrate pictures. Outer
shell contributions are discussed and accurately estimated; they are positive
and larger than the positive experimental hydration free energy of Kr(aq),
implying that inner shell contributions must be negative and of comparable
size. Clathrate-like inner shell hydration structures on a Kr atom solute are
obtained for some, but not all, of the coordination number cases observed
in the simulation. The structures found have a delicate stability; inner shell
coordination structures extracted from the simulation of the liquid, and then
subjected to quantum chemical optimization, always decomposed. Interac-
tions with the outer shell material are decisive in stabilizing coordination
structures observed in liquid solution and in clathrate phases. The primitive
quasi-chemical estimate that uses a dielectric model for the inﬂuence of the
outer shell material on the inner shell equilibria gives a contribution to hydra-
tion free energy that is positive and larger than the experimental hydration
free energy. The “what are we to tell students” question about hydrophobic
hydration, often answered with structural models such as clathrate pictures,
is then considered; we propose an alternative answer that is consistent with
successful molecular theories of hydrophobic eﬀects and based upon distinc-
tive observable properties of liquid water. Considerations of parsimony, for
instance Ockham’s razor, then suggest that additional structural hypotheses
in response to “what are we to tell students” aren’t required at this stage.

Keywords: hydrophobic hydration, clathrate hydrate, ab initio molecu-

lar dynamics, quasi-chemical theory, scaled particle theory, krypton.

1 Introduction

Kauzmann’s analysis (1) established the topic of hydrophobic eﬀects as rel-
evant to the structure, stability, and function of soluble proteins. Remi-
niscences on protein research of that period emphasize that the concept of
hydrophobic stabilization of globular proteins was non-trivial (2). Decades
have passed, and the language of hydrophobic eﬀects has become common. It
is, therefore, astonishing to note that consensus on a molecular scale concep-
tualization of hydrophobic eﬀects, and on molecular theories, has not been
obtained. For a recent example, see reference (3). In the present setting of
competing ideas, theories, and selected results, it isn’t uncommon to hear
from biophysical chemists, “What are we to tell students?” Of course, one
response is to question what we tell ourselves.

In addressing the most primitive hydrophobic eﬀects, molecular theory
has achieved some surprising steps recently. A compelling molecular theory
for primitive hydrophobic eﬀects is now available (4), though a variety of
more complex cases haven’t been similarly resolved (5). Still, the recent
theoretical advance means that we can scrutinize conﬂicting theories more
seriously and begin to build a more objective answer to the “what are we to
tell students” question.

The recent XAFS studies of the hydration of Kr in liquid water and in
a comparable solid Kr/H2O clathrate phase (6) seem particularly helpful
to the task of consolidation of molecular theories of primitive hydrophobic
eﬀects. These experiments were directed toward characterization of the ice-
berg pictorial interpretations and conclusions of Frank & Evans (7) that were
supported in part by the known structures of solid clathrate hydrates.

In the panoply of pictures of hydrophobic phenomena, clathrate mod-
els are especially appropriate as initial targets for modern scrutiny:
it has
been discovered recently how these structural models might be developed
logically as a basis for molecular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects (8; 9). Those
approaches are quasi-chemical theories. They hold promise for higher molec-
ular resolution, and particularly for treating context hydrophobicity in which
proximal hydrophilic groups aﬀect the hydration of hydrophobic moieties.

A drawback that can be foreseen for quasi-chemical theories is one that is
common to computational chemistry: several competing contributions must
be evaluated at an appropriate accuracy and assembled. The net hydration
free energy of Kr(aq) is an order of magnitude smaller than several of the
primitive contributions to it. Every little thing counts in the assembled re-

1

sults and experience in evaluating the various required contributions is thin.
The chemically simple case of Kr(aq) is an appropriate starting point be-
cause the various contributions that must be evaluated seem to be in hand.
Nevertheless, detailed computational determination of the hydration free en-
ergy of Kr(aq) is not sought in the present eﬀort, which instead takes the
goals of testing clathrate pictures of hydrophobic hydration and of scoping
molecularly detailed quasi-chemical theories.
The plan for this paper is as follows:

in the next section we give some
background on clathrate models of hydrophobic hydration. After that, we
discuss quasi-chemical theory in order to explain the coordination number
distribution that is the principal target of the following ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD) calculations. AIMD results for the hydration of Kr(aq)
are then compared with results from the XAFS experiments. To guide quasi-
chemical descriptions of these phases, we then estimate the inner and outer
shell contributions required for the most primitive approximations. The ﬁnal
sections discuss “what are we to tell students” and identify conclusions.

Though AIMD calculations might seem to be excessive for this chemically
simple problem, this approach is available and the results aren’t limited by as-
sumptions of non-cooperativity of the interactions. Modern work (10; 11; 12)
on hydrophobic hydration has suggested that attractive interactions between
solute and solvent water might play a role less trivial than assumed by con-
ventional van der Waals theories (13). This point is consistent with the fact
that clathrate phases involving inert gases as light as Ne are more exotic and
are to be sought at relatively higher pressures than similar phases involving
heavier inert gases (14; 15; 16; 17).

The present work is centered on the physical chemical basics of a founda-
tional concept of molecular structural biology. We hope this focus follows the
example provided by Kauzmann’s wide-ranging considerations of molecular
science, including topics of water and aqueous solutions (18) and molecular
biophysical chemistry.

2 Clathrate Model Background

The status of clathrate pictures of hydrophobicity is reﬂected in the current
literature; for example, see (19): “Conventional views hold that the hydra-
tion shell of small hydrophobic solutes is clathrate-like, characterized by local
cage-like hydrogen-bonding structures and a distinct loss in entropy.” An ad-

2

mirably clear and appropriately circumspect early consideration of clathrate
models for solutions of hydrophobic gases in liquid water was given by Glew
(20). The data available at that time suggested “. . . that the nature of the wa-
ter solvent surrounding weakly interacting aqueous solutes should be likened
geometrically to those co¨ordination polyhedra experimentally observed in
the solid gas-hydrates.” Still, “in no sense is it considered that the water
molecules adjacent to the solute are permanently immobilized or rigid as
in solid structures . . . ” (20). The more recent discussion of (21) explains
conventional views of hydrophobic hydration “. . . that the organization of
water molecules in the ﬁrst shell surrounding the solute is like an ‘iceberg,’
a clathrate, or a ‘ﬂickering cluster.’ ” It may be disconcerting that a series of
non-equivalent descriptors are used to describe the same phenomenon. This
fact reﬂects the imprecision of these conceptualizations and we won’t distin-
guish them further. Another much earlier expression of such a physical view
can be found in (22); at the same time a clathrate model of liquid water with-
out solutes was proposed by Pauling (23). The review in (24) discussed again
Kauzmann’s consideration (1) of clathrate models of hydrophobic hydration,
which argued that the degree of ordering suggested by measured hydration
entropy changes upon dissolution was too small to be conceived as crystalline
ordering. Concluding, Kauzmann (1) stated: “There is no justiﬁcation for
using the iceberg concept as a basis for the hypothesis that protein molecules
are surrounded and stabilized by regions of ordered water molecules.”

On the solution structure side of this issue, Head-Gordon (25) exam-
ined the question of whether the structure of liquid water near hydropho-
bic inert gas molecules was clathrate-like by exploiting computer simulation
to compute the numbers of H-bonded pentagons present near those solutes
compared to bulk regions of liquids. The idea was that pentagonal bonding
structures are evident in clathrate crystals so pentagons might be a suitable
diagnostic of clathrate-like structures in liquid solutions. Some enhancement
of the populations of pentagons was observed in the ﬁrst hydration shell of
model CH4 solute in liquid water, but the conclusions were ultimately mixed
and included that “it is important to emphasize that no direct connection
between structure and thermodynamics is made — i.e., through a formal
statistical mechanical theory.”

On the crystal side of this issue, clathrate phases with impressively com-
plex guests have been discovered (26; 27). But it can happen that, though
the water molecules are ordered, the structure of the guest molecule is disor-
dered. That is opposite to the case sought in protein crystallography. Earlier

3

(28) analysis of crambin crystals had identiﬁed a cluster of pentagonal rings
of water molecules at the surface of that protein. Those rings are extensively
H-bonded to the protein and crystal packing eﬀects are involved in principle.
It has been challenged (29) whether pentagonal H-bond structures are gen-
eral features of hydration of soluble proteins. Furthermore, as noted in the
statement above, the thermodynamic signiﬁcance of such structures hasn’t
been established.

The XAFS results of Bowron, et al. (6), which are a motivation for this
work, were directed toward an experimental test of this clathrate concept.
Conditions were chosen to permit formation of a Kr clathrate from the liquid
solution in the sample cell. Temperatures ranged from an initial 5 C to -5 C
with pressures of approximately 110 bar. Results taken before and after the
transition permitted comparison of the radial distribution of water oxygen
atoms conditional on a Kr atom. Those inferred radial distributions for the
liquid solution and the clathrate phase were qualitatively diﬀerent, as is dis-
cussed further below. This diﬀerence would be a serious problem for a literal
interpretation in terms of a clathrate model of hydrophobicity. A reasonable
correspondence of radial solvent density certainly should be a fundamental
requirement of a successful clathrate model and it is a requirement that has
received less attention than orientational distributions.

Molecular-scale simulation of aqueous solutions of hydrophobic solutes
and of systems that form clathrates of common interest has been pursued
many times over several decades. Much of that work on solutions is ref-
erenced in (4). An early example of molecular simulation of a methane
clathrate is (30); a comparable more recent example can be found in (31)
and a comprehensive review is given by Sloan (17). Conclusions from that
body of work are consistent with the results of the XAFS experiments dis-
cussed above. The radial layering of oxygen density conditional on the guest
is much weaker in the solution case. Results from studies of liquid solu-
tions yield a modest maximum value of oxygen radial distribution, typically
slightly larger than 2, and with a weak minimum that provides little phys-
ical distinction between ﬁrst and second hydration shells. In contrast, the
maximum values of gCO in the methane clathrate calculations are greater
than 4 with an unambiguous physical deﬁnition of the ﬁrst hydration shell.
The important work of Owicki & Scheraga (32) compared the radial distri-
butions of oxygen atoms neighboring a methane solute in liquid solution to
an ideal clathrate possibility. In that case the mean inner shell occupancy
was about 23 and the correspondence with a clathrate case seemed closest for

4

the 24 vertex cage (17), which larger than the smaller 20 vertex possibility
presented by known clathrate crystals. The radial distribution was noted to
be relatively diﬀuse in the solution case.

Distributions of orientational angles are often presented in solution simu-
lations and sometimes compared explicitly to ideal results for clathrate crys-
tal geometries (33). This question of the connection between angle distribu-
tions and solution phase hydrophobicities was addressed by an information
theory analysis that arranged to include systematically 2, 3, . . . , n-body sol-
vent correlations in thermodynamic predictions of solution phase hydropho-
bic hydration free energies. It was a surprise that inclusion of just n=2 and
3-body correlations worsened the thermodynamic predictions obtained when
only n=2-body correlations were used (4; 34). That work suggested that an
exclusive focus on distributions of angles, which are obtained from 3-point
distributions, can be problematic for drawing conclusions about clathrate
models of hydrophobicity.

It is helpful to keep in mind the observation discussed by Friedman and
Krishnan (35): The sum of the solvation entropies of K+ and Cl− in water is
roughly the same as twice the solvation entropy of Ar(aq), though the case
of methanol as solvent was diﬀerent. These hydration entropies are negative
so solvent ordering is suggested. But the speciﬁc molecular ordering of near
neighbor water molecules is expected to be qualitatively diﬀerent in each of
these cases. So there is no simple, unique inference of molecular structuring
available from the measured hydration entropy; furthermore, the observed
entropies generally don’t imply that H-bonding interactions among water
molecules aren’t substantially inﬂuenced by the solute.

Still, clathrate pictorial interpretations are widely assumed. Sloan (17)
notes that “. . . the water scientiﬁc community refers to short-lived cavities
(not unit crystals sI, sII, or sH) as clathrate-like structures in water.” Indeed,
it is common to describe the liquid solution results as ‘clathrate-like’ without
scrutiny of likeness or unlikeness to speciﬁc clathrate possibilities.

3 Perspective from Quasi-Chemical Theory

Quasi-chemical theories are built upon a distinction between deﬁned inner
and outer shell regions (9; 36). The intention is to deﬁne an inner shell
that can be studied at molecular resolution using tools of modern computa-
tional chemistry. For the outer shell region, in contrast, genuine statistical

5

Figure 1: Structures for Kr[H2O]n. H-bonds between the water molecules are
depicted by broken lines. From left to right, the structures have 18, 19, and
20 water molecules, respectively. Oxygen atoms are red, hydrogen atoms are
blue, and the krypton atom is blue.

mechanics can’t be avoided but it ought to be simpler because complicated
chemical interactions aren’t a direct concern there. The inner shell is deﬁned
geometrically (8) by speciﬁcation of an indicator function b(j) that is one
(1) when solution molecule j occupies the intended inner shell and zero (0)
otherwise. Fig. 1 shows candidates for inner shell complexes Kr(H2O)n and
suggests how this approach might apply to build statistical thermodynamic
models starting from ‘clathrate-like’ concepts.

With the inner shell deﬁned, the interaction contribution to the chemical

potential of the Kr solute can be expressed as (8; 9)

βµex

Kr(aq) = − ln

1 +

KmρH2O

m



Xm≥1

− ln


e−β∆UKrΠj (1 − b(j))





DD

.

0

EE

(1)

(β−1 = kT, with T the temperature and k the Boltzmann constant.) This
excess chemical potential is partitioned into an inner shell contribution (the
ﬁrst term on the right of Eq. 1) and an outer shell contribution (the remain-
der). The inner shell contribution is associated with equilibrium of chemical
equations

Kr + nH2O ⇀↽ Kr(H2O)n
for formation of inner shell complexes, as in Fig. 1, in situ. The coeﬃcients

(2)

6

Km are equilibrium ratios for these equations.

The coeﬃcients Km might be obtained by observations of the population
of Kr atoms coordinated to m water molecules, m=0,1,. . . This directs atten-
tion to the probability that a distinguished Kr atom has m inner shell water
molecule ligands. Those fractions will be denoted by xm and are given by

xm =

KmρH2O

m

1 +

n≥1 KnρH2O

n .

(3)

P

The probabilities xm are physical observables that could be obtained, for
example, from a simulation. Our ﬁrst goal is to investigate these xm to see
whether they give any suggestion of coordination species present in corre-
sponding known clathrate hydrates. We note these distributions, xm, were
conventionally considered in historical computer simulations for these prob-
lems; they were then referred to as ‘quasi-component’ distributions (10).
This discussion attempts to situate these distributions in helpful statistical
thermodynamic theories.

The natural initial implementation of these quasi-chemical ideas, partic-
ularly to ion hydration, has been to treat eﬀects of material external to the
cluster by an approximation

Km ≈ exp

−β
h

µex
Kr(H2O)m − mµex
(cid:16)

H2O

(cid:17)i

(0)

Km

(4)

(0) is the equilibrium ratio for Eq. 2 in a dilute gas. The required
where Km
hydration free energies are obtained standardly from a dielectric continuum
model (37) and includes a contribution from the outer shell term correspond-
ing to the bare ion. This approach will be used in the results below. and
the required hydration free energies are obtained standardly from a dielectric
continuum model (37) and includes a contribution from the outer shell term
corresponding to the bare ion. This approach

Recently it has been indicated in Ref. (9) how these inner and outer
shell contributions can be naturally recombined after the most natural prim-
itive approximations. In that sense, it isn’t necessary to consider these two
terms separately. That development leads further to a revised approximation
scheme in which Km ≈ γmKm
(0), with γ a Lagrange multiplier that plays the
same role here as an activity coeﬃcient. Further, -kTln γ can also be seen
as an eﬀective external ﬁeld operating on each ligand molecule, analogous
(0) in Eq. 4. This leads ﬁnally to the concept of a
to the prefactor of Km
self-consistent ﬁeld treatment of quasi-chemical approximations (38).

7

Figure 2: Oxygen coordination of the Kr atom as a function of time (upper
trace and left axis). The total kinetic energy of the atomic motion shown in
the lower trace demonstrates the stability of the temperature state.

4 Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics for Kr(aq)

and Comparison with XAFS Results

The system simulated by AIMD consisted of one Kr atom surrounded by
32 water molecules in a cubic box with sides of length 9.87 ˚A and periodic
boundary conditions. An initial structure was obtained utilizing results from
an earlier study of Li+(aq) (39; 40). A Kr atom was substituted for the
Li+ ion in a conﬁguration from that calculation, the full system was then
optimized in a much larger cell and replaced in the original simulation cube.
Optimization of conﬁgurations drawn from the subsequent molecular dynam-
ics trajectory and variations of total optimized energies with the simulation
cell size suggests that this system is at a realistically low pressure. A more
precise estimate of the pressure was not possible in the present eﬀort.

The calculations based upon an electron density functional description(41)

8

Figure 3: Pair distribution function for Kr-O measured by experiment
(dashed line) and by AIMD simulation (solid line). In the latter case, in-
dicated error bars of ±2σ were estimated on the assumption that the last
four 2.5 ps trajectory segments are independent. Error bars of ±σ are plotted
with the experimental data.

of the electronic structure and interatomic forces were carried out on the
Kr(aq) system utilizing the VASP program(42; 43). The ions were repre-
sented by ultrasoft pseudopotentials(44; 45), in the local density approxima-
tion for Kr and in the gradient-corrected approximation for O and H, and
a kinetic energy cutoﬀ of 29.10 Ry deﬁned the plane wave basis expansions
of the valence electronic wave functions. The valence electrons consisted of
eight (8) electrons for Kr (4s and 4p), six (6) electrons for O (2s and 2p),
and one (1) electron for H (1s). The equations of motion were integrated
in time steps of 1 fs with a thermostat set at 300 K during the ﬁrst 4 ps
of simulation time. The thermostat was then abandoned; the temperature
rose and settled at 341±24 K (see Fig. 2), higher than the experiments of
interest here. The precision of temperature characterization and the corre-

9

sponding awkwardness in temperature adjustment is a practical limitation
of these simulations that treat small systems over short times. Subsequent
work should investigate temperature eﬀects on these simulations, but we will
proceed here in considering the results.

The structural analyses presented here apply to the last 10 ps of the 18
ps trajectory. During this time, the initial structure with hydration number
n = 19 relaxed into structures with n = 15 to n = 22 nearest neighbors within
a radius of 5.1 ˚A; see Fig. 2. The resulting Kr-O radial distribution function,
plotted with the solid line in Fig. 3, shows a build-up of water density to
slightly more than double the bulk value, gmax(r)≈2.4 at a radius r≈3.7˚A
from the Kr atom. A comparison with the experimental XAFS data produced
by (46) (Fig. 3) shows an overlap of error bars between the calculated and
the experimentally determined radial distribution functions. The maximum
value, gmax(r)≈2.4, is about the same as the value found from a force ﬁeld
model adjusted to give experimental solution thermodynamics (11; 12) and
is slightly larger than the result found by (47) for the case of a corresponding
sized hard sphere solute in SPC water, which is, as shown there, also in good
agreement with the revised scaled particle model (48).

The average occupancy of the inner shell deﬁned by the radius r≤5.1˚A is
hni =18±1 and n=18 is found also to be the most probable structure, as is
shown in Fig. 4. The n=20 case is about half as likely as the most probable
n=18 case and either n=19 or n=17 is more probable than n=20 by these
results. This xn distribution of coordination numbers is unimodal. In a lim-
ited range of thermodynamic states approaching a clathrate phase boundary,
the xn distribution might be expected to exhibit magic number features re-
ﬂecting metastable coordination possibilities (49). Those possibilities are not
observed here.

Consideration of the radial Kr-H pair distribution function (Fig. 5) shows
a featureless distribution. These results are not dissimilar to recent compu-
tations of radial hydrogen distributions conditional on a hard sphere solute
in SPC water (47); although those calculations have better spatial resolution
and thus additional observable structure, the maximum hydrogen density is
about the same here.

Although these calculations have clear limitations of scale and thus cor-
respondence to the experiment, to within the errors of the theoretical and
experimental measurements, they do corroborate the experimentally observed
local ﬂuid structure. They provide also the more probable features of the
coordination number distribution, xn, of physical interest from the point of

10

Figure 4: Probability distributions of inner-shell structures with n water
molecules surrounding Kr atom where the inner-shell boundary is deﬁned at
r=5.10 ˚A.

view of quasi-chemical models. The coordination structures observed in the
AIMD simulation should provide an appropriate starting point in considering
inner shell coordination species that might found quasi-chemical models.

The following sections consider the outer and inner shell contributions to

the hydration free energy of Kr in turn.

5 Outer Shell Contributions

The outer shell term would be the hydration free energy under the hypothet-
ical constraint that inner shell occupancy be prohibited. We anticipate that
an electrostatic contribution, estimated with a dielectric continuum model,
will be included in the modiﬁed equilibrium ratios obtained below; see Eq. 4
and the supporting discussion. For the Kr case considered here, that leaves
packing interactions associated with hard spherical exclusion volume and
weaker London dispersion interactions. We will discuss those outer shell
contributions here.

Scaled particle theory provides a connection between outer shell contribu-

11

Figure 5: Pair distribution function for Kr-O and Kr-H determined by AIMD
simulation. Error bars indicate the estimated 95% conﬁdence level.

tions to the free energy and the packing of water about an evacuated cavity.
The free energy for emptying the inner sphere is given by the work of growing
a hard sphere solute in aqueous solution

βµex(outer shell) = 4πρH2O

G(λ)λ2dλ

(5)

R

Z0

where R is the inner shell radius, and G(λ) is the contact value of the
cavity-water oxygen radial distribution function as a function of the dis-
tance of closest approach λ. This expression can be thought of as the p · dV ,
ρH2OkT G(λ) · 4πλ2dλ, work associated with growing an empty cavity into
solution. The surface tension associated with diﬀerentially increasing the
surface area of the outer shell cavity is given by the derivative of Eq. 5 with
respect to outer shell surface area

βγ(R) =

∂βµ
∂R !

∂R
∂ (4πR2)

 

1
2

=

ρH2OG(R)R

(6)

12

This derivative has also been approximated simply by the ratio of the hydra-
tion free energy of exclusion volume to its surface area

βγ(R) ≈ ρH2O

G(λ)(

R

Z0

λ
R

)2dλ

(7)

These two distinct expressions, Eq. 6 and 7, yield diﬀerent values for the
surface tension for submacroscopic cavities.

The contact function G(λ) is readily obtained from molecular simulations
of hard sphere hydration at discrete values of λ. Alternatively, Stillinger
proposed (48) a functional form for G(λ) that interpolates between the known
microscopic and macroscopic limiting forms:

2λ

1+(πρ/λ)

gOO(z)(z−2λ)z2dz






G(λ) =

1−4πρλ3/3+(πρ)2

2λ

0
R
gOO(z)(z3/6−2λ2z+8λ3/3)z2dz

, λ < 1.75˚A

(8)

0
psat/ρkT + (2γlv /ρkT )
R

λ

+ G2

λ2 + G4

λ4 , λ > 1.75˚A

where gOO(r) is the water oxygen-oxygen radial distribution function, psat
is the saturation pressure of water in equilibrium with its vapor, γlv is the
vapor-liquid surface tension. The coeﬃcients G2 and G4 are chosen so that
the contact function is seamless, matching G(λ) and its ﬁrst derivative at
λ=1.75˚A, diﬀerent from the originally suggested 1.95˚A (48; 47). Extensive
molecular simulations (47) have veriﬁed Stillinger’s functional form for water
and give conﬁdence for calculating outer shell contributions to the hydration
of Kr.

To this end we have used simulation results for the radial distribution
function of SPC/E water along the saturation line (Prof. S. Garde - per-
sonal communication) with the experimental surface tension of water and
the corresponding surface hydration properties to evaluate G(λ) using Eq. 8.
The resulting surface tension as a function of cavity size at 25 C is shown
in Fig. 6. While Eqs. 6 and 7 for the surface tension are zero for a cavity
of zero size and converge to the same ultimate value for an inﬁnite cavity
(γ = 0.411 kJ/mol-˚A2 = 72 dyn/cm) assuming the saturation pressure of
water is negligible, they diﬀer at intermediate molecular sizes. In particular,
Eq. 6 nearly attains its plateau value for cavities on the order of 5 to 10 ˚A
in radius, while Eq. 7 more slowly approaches the large sphere limit and is
still less than 0.4 kJ/mol-˚A2 for the largest sizes considered. Particularly

13

interesting is the temperature dependence of the outer shell cavity hydra-
tion free energy; Fig. 6 shows a distinct negative entropy for hydrophobic
hydration for molecularly sized cavities that dominates the hydration free
energy and is consistent with the known thermodynamic characteristics of
small hydrophobe hydration. With increasing cavity size the entropy changes
sign and becomes favorable with increasing size, approaching the surface free
energy of a ﬂat surface. Drying phenomena are, of course, not a separate
issue for this revised scaled particle model(4; 50; 51).

Figure 6: Apparent surface tension γ, and its temperature dependence, pre-
dicted by the revised scaled particle model Eq. 6 at 25 C, as a function of
inner shell cavity radius. Where the solid curve exceeds the dotted curve,
entropic contributions increase the value of this apparent surface tension.

The formula Eq. 5 gives a free energy contribution of 9 kcal/mol which
represents the work of rearranging water to grow an empty cavity of radius
R=3.9˚A corresponding approximately to the distance of the inner shell water
molecules in minimum energy cage structures discussed below. The ﬁrst-
order perturbation theory estimate (52) of the eﬀects of dispersion interac-
tions between the Kr solute and outer shell water molecules is - 16πǫ
R0 )3ρW σ3;

3 ( σ

14

with ǫ= 0.19 kcal/mol, and σ=3.38˚A, the Lennard-Jones parameters for Kr-
W van der Waals interactions, this is roughly -3 kcal/mol with R0=3.9˚A.

We conclude this discussion by emphasizing the important point that
this treatment of the outer shell term gives a positive contribution, roughly
6 kcal/mol. The experimental value for the hydration free energy of Kr(aq)
is roughly 2 kcal/mol (53). Although these observations are straightforward,
the non-trivial implication here is that inner shell contribution must be neg-
ative and of comparable size.

6 Inner Shell Structures and Contributions

The advantage of the quasi-chemical formulation is that Eq. 4 is a reasonable
initial approximation to the equilibrium constants for complex formation in
solution, the quantities sought for the inner shell contribution to the solute
(0) is available
hydration free energy. The harmonic approximation to Km
from electronic structure calculations.

Fig. 1 shows inner shell structures that have been obtained and we note
some basic observations. Firstly, these complexes are large enough that satis-
factory electronic structure calculations are non-trivial(54). Secondly, ﬁnding
mechanically stable structures for these complexes is non-trivial, particularly
for values of n<18. For example, extracting inner shell structures from the
AIMD trajectory and then energy optimizing always resulted in decomposi-
tion, i.e., some of the water molecules were repositioned to the outer shell and
then b(j)=0 for some j. Finding mechanically stable complexes required some
subtlety, as described below, and still only n≥ 18 complexes were obtained.
A 20-vertex pentagonal dodecahedron cage, present as the small cavity in
all known clathrate hydrate structures (17), was built enclosing a Kr atom in
several steps. First we built a carbon cage and minimized that structure with
molecular mechanics. Then each vertex of this dodecahedron was replaced
by oxygen atoms and hydrogen atoms were added to give a cage composed of
water molecules with the Kr embedded inside it. This structure was energy
minimized with a molecular mechanics potential for Kr-water interactions.
The minimization occurred over multiple stages in which the force constant
of a harmonic force restraining the oxygen atoms was progressively decreased.
The ﬁnal structure obtained with a low force constant (5 kcal/mole/˚A2) was
then subjected to quantum chemical optimization. The n=19 and n=18
structures were obtained by removal of water molecules from the optimized

15

n=20 structure. For the n=18 structure, we had to once again go through
the routine of employing molecular mechanics before any cage-like structure
could be obtained.

Limited computational resources permitted only optimizations using HF/6-

31G theory. The quantum chemical optimizations ﬁrst employed steepest
descent to relax the molecular mechanics structure rapidly with the ﬁnal
geometry obtained using the Newton-Raphson procedure. All calculations
were performed using Gaussian (55). Frequencies (and zero-point and ther-
mal contributions to the free energy) were computed at the HF/6-31G level
of theory. Non-negative curvatures conﬁrmed a true minimum. These struc-
tures (Fig. 1) are clearly metastable and the diﬃculty in ﬁnding these minima
suggests that the catchment volumes are small.

Table 1: ∆E, electronic energy change upon complexation. ∆Gcorr, zero-
point and thermal corrections upon complexation. ∆G298 is the free energy
change accounting for the actual density of water, that is the free energy
change at 1 atm. pressure is adjusted by -nRT ln (1354). ∆µ is the change
in the solvation free energy. ∆G(aq) is the excess chemical potential of Kr
for the assumed hydration structures. All values are in kcal/mole.

n
18
19
20

∆E ∆Gcorr ∆G298
-52.4
220.6
-59.3
226.6
-59.0
245.9

-195.6
-204.2
-218.9

∆µ ∆G(aq)
40.6
93.0
39.1
98.4
46.7
105.7

For the single point energies we used the B3LYP hybrid density func-
tional, but with two diﬀerent basis sets. This functional doesn’t account
for Kr-H2O interactions of London dispersion character; but it does treat
electrostatic induction phenomena and is adequate for the water-water in-
teractions. We will address this omission of Kr-H2O dispersion interactions
later. The basis sets were 6-31+G(d,p) for all atoms or the 6-31G for Kr and
a much larger 6-311+G(2d,p) basis for the O and H atoms. Only the results
with the latter choice are presented here (see Table 1).

The electrostatic contributions required by Eq. 4 for the Kr[H2O]n cluster
and the individual water molecules were computed using a continuum dielec-
tric model. The exterior of the system was assigned the dielectric constant of
liquid water and the interior had a dielectric constant of 1. The calculations

16

were performed using a boundary integral formulation of the governing equa-
tions (56), with the surface tessellation obtained using the MSMS program
(57). The partial atomic charges needed in this calculation were ESP charges
obtained using the ChelpG procedure in Gaussian (55). For the charge ﬁt-
ting procedure, the Gaussian default radii for O (1.75˚A) and H (1.45˚A) atoms
were used. For Kr a radius of 2.0˚A was used. A radius of 3.0˚A for Kr leads
to an unphysically high positive charge on the Kr atom and, therefore, was
not used. The solvation free energies are, in fact, insensitive to this choice
and the values diﬀer by only about 0.6 kcal/mole. Table 1 summarizes the
inner shell results.

In the calculations above, the zero-point energies were scaled by a factor
of 0.9135. This factor is suitable for the HF/6-31G(d) level and has been used
for the present HF/6-31G level calculations. For the cases that we could build
closed cages, we included an approximate correction for residual entropy
corresponding to conformational multiplicity. Assuming ideal tetrahedral
coordination for each water, this residual entropy amounts to S/k ≈ ln(3/2)n
(58), where n is the number of water molecules in the cage. Further, MP2
level calculations that do treat dispersion interactions between an isolated
Kr-water pair suggest a correction that amounts to about -0.3 kcal/mole for
each Kr-water pair; the excess chemical potentials would need to be adjusted
by this amount also. Thus for the n=18 case, the excess free energy of Kr
is 30.9 kcal/mole and 35.9 kcal/mole for the n=20 case. With or without
these additional corrections, it is clear that the inner shell contribution is
in the range of 30-50 kcal/mole, which is an order of magnitude greater
than the experimental value of around 2 kcal/mole. Note that accuracies of
2 kcal/mole are barely achievable with all but the highest level of electronic
structure methods.

Considering the balance of inner and outer shell contributions, we return
to the fact that the accurately known outer shell contributions discussed
above are positive and larger than the thermodynamical value. This im-
plies that the inner shell contributions must be negative and about as large
in magnitude as the experimental value. Here our estimates for that inner
shell contributions are positive and large; this qualitative situation is unlikely
to change substantially with more sophisticated electronic structure calcula-
tions. We conclude that the eﬀects of the medium external to our clusters
are decisive in stabilizing these structures. They must help to pull open and
stabilize the cage. This physical realization is consistent with Sloan’s view
that these structures should be visualized as dandelions rather than spherical

17

complexes (17).

More speciﬁcally, the results of Table 1 suggest that the the dielectric
model used here to describe the inﬂuence of the outer sphere material, though
satisfactory for some corresponding ion hydration problems, is not satisfac-
tory for the present application. It is possible that the eﬀective ﬁelds, hinted
following Eq. 4, which are self-consistent with the known ﬂuid densities and
reﬂect the inﬂuence of outer shell material on the Kn’s (38; 51), should de-
scribe these eﬀects more satisfactorily, but resolution of that possibility will
remain for subsequent work.

7 “What are we to tell students?”

Work on the problem of hydrophobic eﬀects has the maturity of many decades
of eﬀort; that time scale certainly reﬂects the diﬃculty of this theoretical
problem. A conceptualization reﬂecting that maturity might be subtle, ex-
pressing the complexity of water as a material, but can be simple. An exam-
ple of a surprising simple result is the formula

µex
Kr(aq) = −AρW (T ) + BT ρW (T )2 + CT ,

(9)

with parameters A, B, and C, and ρW (T ) is the density of liquid water co-
existence with its vapor at temperature T (4). That this formula describes
signature hydrophobic thermodynamic properties for small hydrophobic so-
lutes was unanticipated (59), but it would have been unreasonable to hope
for a simpler result. This simple formula points to the distinctive equation
of state of liquid water as a primary feature of hydrophobicity.

A recent attempt at an answer to “what are we to tell students” appeared
in (5). That attempt tried to produce a faithful physical paraphrase of the
recent molecular theories which, though non-committal on simple structural
hypotheses, have identiﬁed a simple explanation of entropy convergence of
hydrophobicities (59; 60; 61). Here we reﬁne and thus simplify that previous
answer.

Several points can be made in preparation for this discussion. Firstly, we
note that the revised scaled particle model (48) is the most successful theory
of hydrophobicity for spherical solutes (47; 62; 63). The widely recognized
point that “. . . the orientational arrangement of vicinal water molecules, is
absent from the theory” (64) does not mean that these theoretical approaches
are speciﬁcally approximate because of a neglect of orientational eﬀects.

18

Though the truth-content of this assertion has never changed, reappreciation
of molecular theories has made this point explicit over recent years (4; 8; 65).
In fact, the revised scaled particle model along with the Pratt-Chandler the-
ory (66), the information theory models (8; 34), and quasi-chemical treat-
ments (4) speciﬁcally do not neglect orientational eﬀects. What is more,
because these theoretical models ﬁrmly incorporate experimental informa-
tion (65), they do not assume that H-bonding among water molecules is
non-cooperative, as is the case for most computer simulations of aqueous
solutions.

Secondly, hydrophobicity as judged by hydration free energy is great-
est at moderately elevated temperatures >100 C along the vapor saturation
curve, as was emphasized by (67). This observation may be non-canonical
(68; 69; 70); but the unfavorable hydration free energy of simple hydropho-
bic species is an objective property of those systems and is largest in these
higher temperature thermodynamic states. What is more, the most provok-
ing puzzle for molecular mechanisms of hydrophobic phenomena has always
been the apparent increase in attractive strength of hydrophobic eﬀects with
increasing temperature for temperatures not too high. This point is experi-
mentally clear in the phenomena of cold-denaturation wherein unfolded solu-
ble proteins fold upon heating. [See, for example, (71). Proteins are complex
molecules, but in that elastin example no hydrophilic side chains compli-
cated the considerations in that way. And the experimental temperature for
collapse upon heating — 27 C — is in the stable range of the liquid phase
of water.] This point is conceptually troublesome because the molecular
structural pictures, including clathrate models, seem to point to low tem-
perature regimes and behaviors as identifying the essence of hydrophobicity.
The discussion of (72), which suggested connections between the behaviors
of supercooled liquid water and hydrophobic eﬀects, provides an example of
those intuitions.

There are two characteristics of liquid water that are featured in the new
answer that we propose. The ﬁrst characteristic is that the liquid water
matrix is stiﬀer on a molecular scale than are comparative organic solvents
when confronted with the excluded volume of hydrophobic molecular solutes
(5; 8; 63; 73). An indication of this relative stiﬀness is provided by compari-
son of experimental compressibilities of the usual solvents (4). We don’t give
a structural picture for that relative stiﬀness, but it is due to intermolec-
ular interactions among solvent molecules, H-bonding in the case of liquid
water (74). This stiﬀness is the principal determinant of the low solubility

19

of inert gases in liquid water. Furthermore, this stiﬀness is weakly tempera-
ture dependent in the case of liquid water. This temperature insensitivity is
again suggested by consideration of the isothermal compressibility of water;
the temperature variation of that isothermal compressibility displays a min-
imum at 46 C and low pressure. In theories such as Eq. 8, this stiﬀness and
its temperature dependence is carried by the experimental gOO(r), which is
distinctive of liquid water.

[We note in passing, that the liquid-vapor interfacial tension and its tem-
perature dependence, γlv(T ), appears also in the model Eq. 8.
In previ-
ous scaled particle models where this empirical information was not spec-
iﬁed, the temperature dependence of the implied γlv(T ) was found to be
improper(48; 75), though the magnitude of this parameter in the tempera-
ture region of most interest was reasonable. In some other important aspects
that more primitive scaled particle model was satisfactory(76; 77). Thus,
a reasonable view is that the speciﬁc empirical temperature dependence of
γlv(T ) better resolves the conﬂicting temperature dependences, but is sec-
ondary to the classic hydrophobic temperature dependences that are clearest
for submacromolecular scales (see Fig. 6).]

The second characteristic in our answer is the variation of the liquid den-
sity along the liquid-vapor coexistence curve in the temperature regimes of
interest here (61). The critical temperature of liquid water is signiﬁcantly
higher than is the case for the comparative organic solvents. The coeﬃcient
of thermal expansion along the coexistence curve, ασ (78), is typically more
than ﬁve times smaller for water than for common organic solvents.
It is
a secondary curiosity that liquid water has a small regime of density in-
crease with increasing temperature; we are interested here in a much broader
temperature region. Nevertheless, the densities of typical organic solvents
decrease more steadfastly with increasing temperature than does the density
of water.

These two points lead to a picture in which the aqueous medium is stiﬀer
over a substantial temperature range and expands with temperature less sig-
niﬁcantly than the natural comparative solvents. If these structural features
of the aqueous medium are thus buﬀered against normal changes with increas-
ing temperatures, then at higher temperatures the solvent exerts a higher
kinetic pressure through repulsive collisions with hydrophobic solutes which
don’t experience other interactions of comparable signiﬁcance. These colli-
sions are proportionally more energetic with increasing temperature and the
aqueous environment thus becomes more unfavorable for hydrohobic solutes

20

with increasing temperature. The rate of density decrease with increasing
temperature eventually does dominate this mechanism at the highest tem-
peratures of interest here, >100 C, and less unconventional behavior is then
expected. This is our response to “what are we to tell students?”

If a balancing act minimizing the variations of the structure of the aque-
ous medium with temperature is possible, it should be a useful trick since
it should have the consequence of expanding the temperature window over
which biomolecular structures are stable and functional (5).

We emphasize again, as in Ref. (5), that hydrogen bonding, tetrahedrality
of coordination, random networks and related concepts are not direct features
of this answer. Nevertheless, they are relevant to understanding liquid water;
they are elements in the bag of tricks that is used to achieve the engineering
consequences that are discussed in the picture above.

8 Conclusions

The coordination number of Kr in liquid water solution is signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from known clathrate hydrate phases. These coordination numbers
play a direct role in quasi-chemical descriptions of the hydration thermody-
namics. Thus, the coordination number diﬀerences between liquid solution
and clathrate phases can be expected to lead to substantial thermodynamic
eﬀects. In these respects, a clathrate picture is not supported by our cur-
rent information on the molecular scale hydration of Kr(aq); the euphemism
‘clathrate-like’ has to be understood as ‘clathrate-unlike’ in these respects.

The present results for the distribution of Kr(aq) coordination numbers
give no suggestion of lower probability, metastable, magic number coordina-
tion structures that might reﬂect the coordination possibilities in a known,
lower temperature, clathrate hydrate phase; see Fig. 4.

The isolated inner shell Kr[H2O]n complexes that have been obtained
for n=18, 19, and 20 have a delicate stability. When inner shell coordina-
tion structures were extracted from the simulation of the liquid, and then
subjected to quantum chemical optimization, they decomposed. Inner shell
complexes for n<18 were not found here and therefore possibilities for inner
shell complexes that cover the coordination number range observed in the
simulation were not found. Evidently, interactions with the outer shell ma-
terial can be decisive in stabilizing coordination structures observed in liquid
solution and in clathrate phases.

21

Although quasi-chemical approaches are formally exact and eﬃcient in
applications to the hard sphere ﬂuid (38; 51) and to ion hydration prob-
lems (39; 40), these ab initio quasi-chemical theories applied to Kr(aq) will
be more diﬃcult. Several contributions have to be assembled that are an
order-of-magnitude larger than the net result for the hydration free energy.
Modest errors in any one of those several contributions can easily destroy
any reasonable correspondence with experimental results.

We have developed a response to the “what are we to tell students” ques-
tion that is based upon the known thermodynamic peculiarities of liquid
water and doesn’t require speciﬁc molecular structural hypotheses. In ad-
dition to that simple argument, we can tell students several other points
of context. We can tell students that although the primitive concepts of
hydrophobic eﬀects based upon water-oil ﬂuid phase separation are reason-
able, the structural molecular conceptualizations of hydrophobic eﬀects, such
as clathrate models, have achieved no consensus. A lack of speciﬁcity and
quantitativeness in the thermodynamic analyses of these molecular pictures
contributes to this lack of consensus. We can tell students that there is an
orthodox clathrate picture that is not literally correct. A reformed ‘clathrate-
like’ picture also appears in the extant literature; this reformed picture sug-
gests connections to the orthodox picture, and could be regarded as a poetic
‘explanation,’ borrowing Stillinger’s identiﬁcation of a limiting possibility.
Established quantitative connections to signature thermodynamic properties
aren’t available for either the orthodox or the reformed ‘clathrate-like’ pic-
tures of hydrophobic hydration.

Despite the fact that the various molecular scale pictures have not been
proven, a role for molecular theory in this setting can follow the conventional
understanding of scientiﬁc inference: approximate theories should provide
clear expression of a physical idea at a molecular level and should be quan-
titatively testable. The degree of success in those tests then contributes
to the degree of conﬁdence in the physical pictures. Molecular mechanisms
that are tested only at an impressionistic level, even after an investment in
quantitative computer simulations, are less conclusive.

This discussion leads to consideration of Ockham’s razor (79). For ther-
modynamics of primitive hydrophobic eﬀects, we have simple, logical, well-
tested molecular theories (4) and those theories don’t explicitly involve struc-
tural mechanisms such as clathrate models. Additional hypotheses in re-
sponse to “what are we to tell students” aren’t required at this stage.

22

Acknowledgements

The work was supported by the US Department of Energy, contract W-7405-
ENG-36, under the LDRD program at Los Alamos and Sandia. LA-UR-02-
6362.

23

References

[1] W. Kauzmann, Some factors in the interpretation of protein denatura-

tion, Adv. Protein Chem. 14 (1959) 1–63.

[2] C. Tanford, How protein chemists learned about the hydrophobic factor,

Protein Science 6 (1997) 1358–1366.

[3] T. Lazaridis, Solvent size vs cohesive energy as the origin of hydropho-

bicity, Acc. Chem. Res. 34 (2001) 931–937.

[4] L. R. Pratt, Molecular theory of hydrophobic eﬀects: ‘She is too mean
to have her name repeated’, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 53 (2002) 409–436.

[5] L. R. Pratt and A. Pohorille, Hydrophobic eﬀects and modeling of bio-
physical aqueous solution interfaces, Chem. Rev. 102 (2002) 2671–2691.

[6] D. T. Bowron, A. Filipponi, M. A. Roberts and J. L. Finney, Hydropho-
bic hydration and the formation of a clathrate hydrate, Phys. Rev. Letts.
81 (1998) 4164–4167.

[7] H. S. Frank and M. W. Evans, Free volume and entropy in condensed
systems. III. Entropy in binary liquid mixtures; partial molal entropy in
dilute solutions; structure and thermodynamics of aqueous electrolytes,
J. Chem. Phys. 13 (1945) 507.

[8] G. Hummer, S. Garde, A. E. Garc´ıa and L. R. Pratt, New perspectives

on hydrophobic eﬀects, Chem. Phys. 258 (2000) 349–370.

[9] M. E. Paulaitis and L. R. Pratt, Hydration theory for molecular bio-

physics, Adv. Prot. Chem. 62 (2002) in press.

[10] S. Swaminathan, S. W. Harrison and D. L. Beveridge, Monte Carlo
studies on structure of a dilute aqueous-solution of methane, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 100 (1978) 5705–5712.

[11] W. C. Swope and H. C. Andersen, A molecular-dynamics method for
calculating the solubility of gases in liquids and the hydrophobic hydra-
tion of inert-gas atoms in aqueous-solution, J. Phys. Chem. 88 (1984)
6548–6556.

24

[12] K. Watanabe and H. C. Andersen, Molecular-dynamics study of the hy-
drophobic interaction in an aqueous-solution of krypton, J. Phys. Chem.
90 (1986) 795–802.

[13] D. Chandler, J. D. Weeks and H. C. Andersen, Van der Waals picture of
liquids, solids, and phase-transformations, Science 220 (1983) 787–794.

[14] Y. A. Dyadin, E. G. Larionov, A. Y. Manakov, F. V. Zhurko, E. Y. Al-
adko, T. V. Mikina and V. Y. Komarov, Clathrate hydrates of hydrogen
and neon, Mendeleev Comm. (1999) 209–210.

[15] V. I. Kosyakov and V. A. Shestakov, Simulation of phase equilibria in the
water-helium and water-neon systems, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. 76 (2002)
716–719.

[16] W. L. Mao, H.-K. Mao, A. F. Goncharov, V. V. Struzhkin, Q. Guo,
J. Hu, J. Shu, R. J. Hemley, M. Somayazulu and Y. Zhao, Hydrogen
clusters in clathrate hydrate, Science 297 (2002) 2247–2249.

[17] E. D. Sloan Jr., Clathrate Hydrates of Natural Gases (Marcel Dekker,

Inc., New York, 1998), 2nd, revised and expanded edition.

[18] D. Eisenberg and W. Kauzmann, The Structure and Properties of Water

(Oxford University Press, New York, 1969).

[19] Y. Cheng and P. J. Rossky, Surface topography dependence of biomolec-

ular hydrophobic hydration, Nature 392 (1998) 696–699.

[20] D. N. Glew, Aqueous solubility and the gas-hydrates. The methane-

water system, J. Phys. Chem. 66 (1962) 605–609.

[21] K. A. Dill, Dominant forces in protein folding, Biochem. 29 (1990) 7133–

7155.

822.

[22] I. M. Klotz, Protein hydration and behavior, Science 128 (1958) 815–

[23] L. Pauling, The structure of water, in D. Had˘zi, ed., Hydrogen Bonding,

1–6 (Pergamon, New York, 1959).

[24] N. T. Southall, K. A. Dill and A. D. J. Haymet, A view of the hydropho-

bic eﬀect, J. Phys. Chem. B 106 (2002) 521–533.

25

[25] T. Head-Gordon,

Is water-structure around hydrophobic groups

clathrate-like?, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92 (1995) 8308–8312.

[26] K. A. Udachin and J. A. Ripmeester, A complex clathrate hydrate struc-
ture showing bimodal guest hydration, Nature 397 (1999) 420–423.

[27] K. A. Udachin, C. I. Ratcliﬀe and J. A. Ripmeester, A dense and eﬃcient
clathrate hydrate structure with unusual cages, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
40 (2001) 1303–+.

[28] M. M. Teeter, Water-structure of a hydrophobic protein at atomic reso-
lution: Pentagon rings of water-molecules on crystals of crambin, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 81 (1984) 6014–6018.

[29] L. A. Lipscomb, F. X. Zhou and L. D. Williams, Clathrate hydrates are
poor models of biomolecule hydration, Biopolymers 38 (1996) 177–181.

[30] J. S. Tse, M. L. Klein and I. R. McDonald, Molecular-dynamics studies
of ice Ic and the structure-I clathrate hydrate of methane, J. Phys.
Chem. 87 (1983) 4198–4203.

[31] O. K. Forrisdahl, B. Kvamme and A. D. J. Haymet, Methane clathrate
hydrates: Melting, supercooling, and phase separation from molecular
dynamics computer simulations, Mol. Phys. 89 (1996) 819–834.

[32] J. C. Owicki and H. A. Scheraga, Monte Carlo calculations in isothermal-
isobaric ensemble. 2. dilute aqueous-solution of methane, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 99 (1977) 7413–7418.

[33] G. Alagona and A. Tani, Structure of a dilute aqueous-solution of argon:

Monte-Carlo simulation, J. Chem. Phys. 72 (1980) 580–588.

[34] M. A. Gomez, L. R. Pratt, G. Hummer and S. Garde, Molecular real-
ism in default models for information theories of hydrophobic eﬀects, J.
Phys. Chem. B 103 (1999) 3520–3523.

[35] H. L. Friedman and C. V. Krishnan, Water A Comprehensive Treatise,

volume 3, 1–118 (Plenum Press, New York, 1973).

[36] L. R. Pratt and S. B. Rempe, Quasi-chemical theory and implicit solvent
models for simulations, in L. R. Pratt and G. Hummer, eds., Simula-
tion and Theory of Electrostatic Interactions in Solution. Computational

26

Chemistry, Biophysics, and Aqueous Solutions, volume 492 of AIP Con-
ference Proceedings, 172–201 (American Institute of Physics, Melville,
NY, 1999).

[37] P. Grabowski, D. Riccardi, M. A. Gomez, D. Asthagiri and L. R. Pratt,
Quasi-chemical theory and the standard free energy of H+(aq), J. Phys.
Chem. A 106 (2002) 9145–9148.

[38] H. S. Ashbaugh and L. R. Pratt, A quasi-chemical self-consistent ﬁeld
model for the statistical thermodynamics of the hard sphere ﬂuid, un-
published work vvv (2002) ppp–ppp.

[39] S. B. Rempe, L. R. Pratt, G. Hummer, J. D. Kress, R. L. Martin and
A. Redondo, The hydration number of Li+ in liquid water, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 122 (2000) 966–967.

[40] S. B. Rempe and L. R. Pratt, The hydration number of Na+ in liquid

water, Fluid Phase Equilibria 183 (2001) 121–132.

[41] Y. Wang and J. P. Perdew, Correlation hole of the spin-polarized elec-
tron gas with exact small-wave-vector and high-density scaling, Phys.
Rev. B 44 (1991) 13298.

[42] G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular-dynamics for liquid-metals,

Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993) RC558.

[43] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Eﬃcient iterative schemes for ab initio
total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54
(1996) 11169.

[44] D. Vanderbilt, Soft self-consistent pseudopotentials in a generalized

eigenvalue formalism, Phys. Rev. B 41 (1990) 7892.

[45] G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Norm-conserving and ultrasoft pseudopoten-
tials for ﬁrst-row and transition-elements, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 6
(1994) 8245.

[46] A. Filipponi, D. T. Bowron, C. Lobban and J. L. Finney, Structural
determination of the hydrophobic hydration shell of Kr, Phys. Rev. Lett.
79 (1997) 1293–1296.

27

[47] H. S. Ashbaugh and M. E. Paulaitis, Eﬀect of solute size and solute-
water attractive interations on hydration water structure around hy-
drophobic solutes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123 (2001) 10721–10728.

[48] F. H. Stillinger, Structure in aqueous solutions of nonpolar solutes from
the standpoint of scaled-particle theory, J. Sol. Chem. 2 (1973) 141–158.

[49] J. P. Long and E. D. Sloan Jr., Quantized water clusters around apolar

molecules, Molec. Sim. 11 (1993) 145–161.

[50] K. Lum, D. Chandler and J. D. Weeks, Hydrophobicity at small and

large length scales, J. Phys. Chem. B 103 (1999) 4570–4577.

[51] L. R. Pratt, R. A. LaViolette, M. A. Gomez and M. E. Gentile, Quasi-
chemical theory for the statistical thermodynamics of the hard-sphere
ﬂuid, J. Phys. Chem. B 105 (2001) 11662–11668.

[52] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids (Oxford

Science Publications, Oxford, 1987).

[53] H. L. Clever, ed., Krpton, Xenon, and Radon – Gas Solubilities, vol-
ume 2 of Solubility Data Series, 1 (Pergamon Press, New York, 1979).

[54] R. Ludwig and F. Weinhold, Quantum cluster equilibrium theory of
liquids: Freezing of QCE/3-21G water to tetrakaidecahedral “Bucky-
ice”, J. Chem. Phys. 110 (1999) 508–515.

[55] M. J. Frisch, et al. Gaussian 98 (Revision A.2) (1998), Gaussian, Inc.,

Pittsburgh PA.

[56] B. J. Yoon and A. M. Lenhoﬀ, A boundary element method for molecular
electrostatics with electrolyte eﬀects, J. Comp. Chem. 11 (1990) 1080–
1086.

[57] M. F. Sanner, J.-C. Spehner and A. J. Olson, Reduced surface: an
eﬃcient way to compute molecular surfaces, Biopolymers 38 (1996) 305–
320.

[58] L. Pauling, The structure and entropy of ice and of other crystals with
some randomness of atomic arrangement, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 57 (1935)
2680–2684.

28

[59] S. Garde, G. Hummer, A. E. Garc´ıa, M. E. Paulaitis and L. R. Pratt,
Origin of entropy convergence in hydrophobic hydration and protein
folding, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 4966–4968.

[60] S. Garde and H. S. Ashbaugh, Temperature dependence of hydrophobic
hydration and entropy convergence in an isotropic model of water, J.
Chem. Phys. 115 (2001) 977–982.

[61] H. S. Ashbaugh, T. M. Truskett and P. G. Debenedetti, A simple molec-
ular thermodynamic theory of hydrophobic hydration, J. Chem. Phys.
116 (2002)(7) 2907–2921.

[62] L. R. Pratt and A. Pohorille, Theory of hydrophobicity: Transient cav-
ities in molecular liquids, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89 (1992) 2995–
2999.

[63] L. R. Pratt and A. Pohorille, Hydrophobic eﬀects from cavity statistics,
in M. U. Palma, M. B. Palma-Vittorelli and F. Parak, eds., Proceed-
ings of the EBSA 1992 International Workshop on Water-Biomolecule
Interactions, 261–268 (Societ´a Italiana de Fisica, Bologna, 1993).

[64] B. Guillot and Y. Guissani, A computer simulation study of the tem-
perature dependence of the hydrophobic hydration, J. Chem. Phys. 99
(1993) 8075–8094.

[65] L. R. Pratt, G. Hummer and S. Garde, Theories of hydrophobic eﬀects
and the description of free volume in complex liquids, in C. Caccamo,
J.-P. Hansen and G. Stell, eds., New Approaches to Problems in Liquid
State Theory, volume 529, 407–420 (Kluwer, Netherlands, 1999), NATO
Science Series.

[66] L. R. Pratt and D. Chandler, Theory of the hydrophobic eﬀect, J. Chem.

Phys. 67 (1977) 3683–3704.

[67] K. P. Murphy, P. L. Privalov and S. J. Gill, Common features of protein
unfolding and dissolution of hydrophobic compounds, Science 247 (1990)
559–561.

[68] K. A. Dill, The meaning of hydrophobicity, Science 250 (1990) 297–297.

29

[69] P. L. Privalov, S. J. Gill and K. P. Murphy, Reply to Dill, Science 250

(1990) 297–297.

88–88.

[70] J. Herzfeld, Understanding hydrophobic behavior, Science, 253 (1991)

[71] B. Li, D. O. V. Alonso and V. Daggett, The molecular basis for the
inverse temperature transition of elastin, J. Mol. Bio. 305 (2001) 581–
592.

[72] F. H. Stillinger, Water revisited, Science 209 (1980) 451–457.

[73] G. Hummer, S. Garde, A. E. Garc´ıa, M. E. Paulaitis and L. R. Pratt,
Hydrophobic eﬀects on a molecular scale, J. Phys. Chem. B 102 (1998)
10469–10482.

[74] T. Head-Gordon and F. H. Stillinger, An orientational perturbation-
theory for pure liquid water, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 3313–3327.

[75] A. Ben-Naim and H. L. Friedman, On the application of the scale par-
ticle theory of aqueous solutions of nonpolar gases, J. Phys. Chem 71
(1967) 448–449.

[76] R. A. Pierotti, The solubility of gases in liquids, J. Phys. Chem. 67

(1963) 1840–1845.

[77] R. A. Pierotti, A scaled particle theory of aqueous and nonaqueous

solutions, Chem. Rev. 76 (1976) 717–726.

[78] J. S. Rowlinson and F. L. Swinton, Liquids and Liquid Mixtures (But-

terworths, London, 1982).

[79] R. Hoﬀman, V. I. Minkin and B. K. Carpenter, Ockham’s razor and

chemistry, HYLE: Int. J. Phil. Chem. 3 (1997) 3–28.

30

