Red Herrings and Rotten Fish

Geoﬀrey B. West1,2 ∗, Van M. Savage1,2, James Gillooly3, Brian J. Enquist4, William. H.

Woodruﬀ1, James H. Brown2,3

1 Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.

2 The Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA.

3 Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

4 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721,

USA

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed. email: gbw@lanl.gov.

2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A longstanding problem in biology has been the origin of pervasive quarter-power allo-

metric scaling laws that relate many characteristics of organisms to body mass (M) across

the entire spectrum of life from molecules and microbes to ecosystems and mammals [1] -

[3]. In particular, whole-organism metabolic rate, B = aM b, where a is a taxon-dependent

normalisation constant and b ≈ 3

4 for both animals and plants. Recently Darveau et al. [4]

(hereafter referred to as DSAH) proposed a “multiple-causes model” for B as “the sum of

multiple contributors to metabolism”, Bi, which were assumed to scale as Bi = aiM bi. They

obtained for average values of b: 0.78 for the basal rate and 0.86 for the maximally active

rate. In this note we show that DSAH contains serious technical, theoretical and conceptual

errors, including misrepresentations of published data and of our work [5]- [8]. We also show

that, within experimental error, there is no empirical evidence for an increase in b during

aerobic activity as suggested by DSAH. Moreover, since DSAH consider only metabolic rates

of mammals and make no attempt to explain why metabolic rates for other taxa and many

other attributes in diverse organisms also scale with quarter-powers (including most of their

input data), their formulation is hardly the “unifying principle” they claim. These problems

were not addressed in commentaries by Weibel [9] and Burness [10].

All of the results of DSAH follow from their Eq. (2), B = a P ciM bi. Since, by deﬁnition,

the control coeﬃcients [11], ci, and exponents, bi, of the ith process are dimensionless, this

equation must be incorrect since it violates the basic dimensional homogeneity constraint

required of any physical equation, namely, that all terms must have the same dimensions.

Their Eq. (2) is therefore meaningless. For example, it necessarily gives diﬀerent results

when using identical data but with diﬀerent units for mass. To illustrate: we used their

data in their Eq. (2) over the same mass range to obtain b for the basal rate; with mass in

Kg, b ≈ 0.76, when in g, b ≈ 0.78, and when in pg, b ≈ 1.08.

DSAH merely state Eq. (2) without proof, derivation or reference. General considera-

tions from standard control theory [11] expose some of the problems. For a given metabolic

state, consider B as a function of the independent contributions, Bi: B = B(Bi). By

deﬁnition, ci ≡ ∂ ln B/∂ ln Bi, leading to the well-known sum rule, P ci = 1, imposed by

2

DSAH. Considering B as a function of mass, B(M) = B[Bi(M)], it follows that b = P cibi,

where b(M) ≡ d ln B/d ln M, is the slope of the allometric plot of ln B vs.

ln M, and

bi(M) ≡ d ln Bi/d ln M, that of ln Bi vs. ln M. This is the formula that DSAH should have

used to determine b. It is equivalent to the standard elasticity sum rule [11], P ciǫi = 0,

with ǫi = b − bi. These equations are very general, requiring no assumptions about how

B and Bi scale or whether the Bi are in parallel or series.
added in parallel so B = P Bi. Thus, ci ≡ ∂ ln B/∂ ln Bi = Bi/B = (ai/a)M −ǫi, leading to

In DSAH contributions are

B = a P(ciM ǫi)M bi, which is the correct, dimensionally homogeneous, version of Eq. (2).

If a and ai are constants, as assumed by DSAH, then, to be consistent, ci must scale as
M −ǫi; this M dependence was omitted by DSAH. Moreover, they assume that ci (and bi)

are also independent of M, so b(= P cibi) must likewise not depend on M, in contradiction

to their Eq. (2). This inconsistency is concealed in their plots, which cover only 3 orders

of magnitude in M over which b is nearly constant (∼ 0.78 for the basal case). However,

when we extend their plots to the realistic 8 orders of magnitude spanned by mammals, the

average value of b for the basal rate increases to ∼ 0.85 and, for the maximal rate, to ∼ 0.98;

both values are clearly inconsistent with data [1], [3].

Even if DSAH had used correct equations, there are many serious problems with the data

and methodology used to estimate the ci, bi and, in particular, b for maximal activity. Their

treatment contains no statistical analysis: they give no conﬁdence intervals for the ci and

bi, nor do they consider how, as data are combined, the errors propagate to determine the

conﬁdence intervals for their estimate of b. Most ci quoted in DSAH are derived quantities.

Almost none of the references cited actually mention “control coeﬃcients” and DSAH’s

Methods section gives insuﬃcient information for how they were derived. For example,

ci should be obtained from inﬁnitesimal responses in B rather than the large ﬁnite ones

(∼ 50%) used by DSAH. Furthermore, the “data” taken from Wagner [12] for cardiac output,

alveolar ventilation and diﬀusion capacities, are theoretical estimates just for humans, based

only on a “very simple model” [12] whose basic assumption is that “ ˙V max

is O2 supply-

O2

limited” [12], directly contradicting DSAH’s central contention. Several other ci are literally

3

guesses (the 0.01 values) and values for the Ca++ pump were obtained from scaling of stride

frequency of running mammals.

In addition, a factor of 0.8 is arbitrarily introduced to

rescale some ci to satisfy the sum rule, P ci = 1. The need for such a “fudge” factor is

hardly surprising given the empirical uncertainties and theoretical misconceptions.

Also problematic is DSAH’s contention that b for maximal activity is signiﬁcantly larger

than its basal value of ∼ 0.75. Both DSAH and Burness quote b = 0.88 ± 0.02 from Bishop

[13], which is based on the combined data from only 9 mammals (including 2 bats) and 6

birds. Bishop obtained this value as the exponent for ˙V max

O2

expressed as a power function of

heart mass times hemoglobin concentration rather than body mass, M. When expressed as

a function of M his unadjusted data gives b = 0.73 ± 0.04 for the basal state and 0.78 ± 0.08

for ˙V max

O2

[13], in excellent agreement with previous studies [1], [3]. One of the most quoted

of these (though ignored by DSAH) is the comprehensive study by Taylor et al. [14] referred

to by Weibel (who was a co-author of the paper) [9]. For 22 wild mammals (which the

authors “prefer to use....as the general allometric relationship for ˙V max

O2 ” [14] and which are

of relevance here), they found b = 0.79 ± 0.05 and concluded that ˙V max

“is nearly a constant

O2

multiple of 10 times resting metabolism ˙VO2, and scales approximately proportional to M 0.75”

[14]. In his commentary Weibel cites this paper as giving b = 0.86 for ˙V max

but fails to

O2

remark that this is derived from only 8 domestic mammals and has very poor precision: the

95% conﬁdence limits, (0.611, 1.100), obviously include 0.75 [14].

Conservation of energy requires that summing all “ATP-utilising processes” [4] (linked

in parallel) must give B: B = P Bi. Consequently, the DSAH “model” is only a consistency

check of energy conservation, which must be trivially correct. As such, it cannot be in

conﬂict with our theory. However, in addition to the above problems, the processes that

DSAH include in the sum lead to problems of multiple-counting and thereby to a violation

of energy conservation. For example, they add together contributions from cardiac output,

alveolar ventilation, and pulmonary and capillary-mitochondria diﬀusion as if they were

independent and in parallel. But, as shown in the cartoon in Weibel’s commentary [9], these

processes are, in fact, primarily in series. The only reason DSAH obtain a result for b in

4

reasonable agreement with data is that nearly all the exponents, bi, have similar values.

Since the bi are simply taken from empirical data, DSAH’s formulation does not provide a

fundamental explanation for why B scales non-linearly with body mass. Such an explanation

would require models in which the bi (and ci) are derived from basic principles. It is surely

no accident that the bi cluster around 3

4; understanding this is the real challenge. Why, for
example, should molecular processes like Na+ and Ca++ pumps or AT Pase activity scale

other than linearly with M? The simplest expectation, implicit in DSAH, would be that the

contributing biomolecular processes, and therefore cellular metabolic rates, do not depend on

body size, so that B would scale linearly with M. Moreover, nothing in DSAH suggests why

cellular level processes scale diﬀerently in vivo than in vitro. By contrast our theory, based

on scaling constraints inherent in distribution networks and exchange surfaces, correctly

predicts that, when these constraints are lifted by removing cells from the body and by

culturing these cells for several generations, in vitro cellular metabolic rates converge to a

constant value - only in vivo do they scale with body mass, as M −1/4 [8].

Finally, we respond to DSAH’s contention that our network theory is supply rate-limiting

and cannot accommodate metabolic scope. For a given metabolic state, scaling between

organisms of diﬀerent sizes (varying M with a and ai ﬁxed) is indeed rate-limited by the

network, and this is the origin of quarter-powers. However, within an organism of a given size

(ﬁxed M), the absolute rate (as distinct from the relative rate) of resource ﬂow and power

output (measured by the a and ai, for example) is clearly not rate-limited by the network.

Changes in supply and demand cause the ﬂow through the network to change accordingly,

as in any transport system. A simpliﬁed analogy is the power output of automobile engines:

this scales with size, but the power of any given vehicle can be varied on demand by varying

fuel supply. Thus, our theory accommodates metabolic scope in a natural and simple way

and could be extended to calculate the overall magnitude of increase.

To conclude: DSAH present their “model” as an alternative to our theory for the origin

of quarter-power scaling in biology. Unlike their framework, however, our theory oﬀers a

comprehensive, quantitative, integrated explanation for allometric scaling, not just of whole-

5

organism metabolism in mammals, but also of many other characteristics in a wide variety

of animals, plants, and microbes.

It shows how the geometric, physical, and biological

constraints on distribution networks and exchange surfaces with fractal-like designs give

the ubiquitous quarter-power scaling laws. Our theory explains why body size has such a

powerful inﬂuence on biological structure and function at all levels of organization, from the

oxygen aﬃnity of hemoglobin molecules and the density of mitochondria, to the rate of ﬂuid

ﬂow in the vessels of plants and animals, to ontogenetic and population growth [1]- [3].

By contrast, DSAH present a ﬂawed model that purports to explain only how the scal-

ing of whole-organism metabolic rate in mammals is related to the scaling of some of the

underlying processes at molecular, cellular, and organ-system levels. Most importantly it

oﬀers no explanation why any of these processes vary with body size, let alone why they

should exhibit their observed allometric exponents. Thus, even if the errors were corrected,

DSAH’s framework cannot explain the quarter-power scalings of structures, rates, and times

that have so fascinated biologists for the last century.

6

REFERENCES

[1] Schmidt-Nielsen, K., Scaling; Why is Animal Size So Important, Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, UK (1984).

[2] Calder III, W. A., Size, Function and Life History, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA

(1984).

(1983).

(2002).

[3] Peters, R. H. The Ecological Implications of Body Size, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge

[4] Darveau, C. A., Suarez, R. K., Andrews, R. D. and Hochachka, P. W. Nature 417, 166

[5] West, G. B., Brown, J. H. and Enquist, B. J. Science 276, 122 (1997).

[6] Enquist, B. J., Brown, J. H. and West, G. B. Nature 395, 163 (1998)

[7] Gillooly, J. F., Brown, J. H., West, G. B., Savage, V. M. and Charnov, E. L. Science,

293, 2248 (2001).

[8] West, G. B., Brown, J. H. and Woodruﬀ, W. H. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 99, 2473 (2002).

[9] Weibel, E. R. Nature 417, 166 (2002).

[10] Burness, G. P. Science 296, 1245 (2002).

[11] Westerhoﬀ, H. V. and van Dam, K. Thermodynamics and Control of Biological Free-

Energy Transduction, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (1987).

[12] Wagner, P. D. Respir. Physiol. 93, 221 (1993).

[13] Bishop C. M. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 266, 2275 (1999).

[14] Taylor, C. R., Maloiy, G. M. O., Weibel, E. R., Langman, V. A., Kamau, J. M. Z.,

Seeherman, H. J. and Heglund, N. C. Respir. Physiol. 44, 25 (1981).

7

