3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Investigation by physical methods of the possible role of telomeres in DNA
in aging process

Md. Ashrafuzzaman and Ahmed Shafee∗
Institut de Physique, Universit´e de Neuchˆatel,
Rue A.L.Breguet, 2000 Neuchˆatel, Switzerland
*Department of Physics,
University of Dhaka, Bangladesh
contact: md.ashrafuzzaman@unine.ch

The interaction energies between the diﬀerent types of bases of a single strand of DNA molecule
have been calculated. Using these original values of energies the harmonic behavior of a number of
base patterns of DNA has been studied. In view of the great interest aroused by the discovery of
the role of the telomere segment of the DNA in the replication process and its possible link with
the aging process, we have investigated, with simple models, the harmonic behavior of the telomeric
pattern of bases as well as the thermodynamic response in the biological system. With these results
a conclusion on the probable role of the telomeric pattern on aging has also been drawn. Here the
calculated values of harmonic frequencies of the telomeric pattern of bases and of other possible
patterns show that the telomeric pattern is associated with the highest vibrational frequency among
all patterns of base combinations at the replication end of DNA. This seems to suggest that due
to the existing telomeric pattern being closest to the frequencies of the electromagnetic radiation
coming from sunlight, resonance of the telomeric frequency with such radiation may be responsible
for damage to the reproductive ability of the cells and consequent aging and other problems. On the
other hand in the last part of this work we have calculated the thermal vibrational amplitudes of
the telomeric pattern and other possible patterns which show that the amplitude for the telomeric
pattern is the least, and this suggests that the telomeric pattern is more mechanically and thermally
stable than other possible patterns in the biological environment against damage from ordinary heat
and mechanical eﬀects.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Most of the activities of the diﬀerent parts of a liv-
ing system are controlled in nucleic acids DNA (deoxyri-
bonucleic acids) and RNA (ribonucleic acids). The nu-
cleic acids are made of some combinations of purine and
pyrimidine bases called genetic codons. The behavior
and functioning of a living system are all controlled by
diﬀerent combinations of genetic codons. The possibility
of the control of genetic characteristics is the most impor-
tant area of the latest genome research. People are trying
to ﬁnd out how the genetic codes arrange themselves to
make DNA and how they have evolved with time. Since
the central dogma of biology is that genetic changes are
brought about by changes in the macromolecules, it is of
great importance also to investigate the stability of the
molecules and their patterns responsible for the genotyp-
ical variations. It can of course be expected that some of
the patterns of bases are more stable and they may be
more persistent in organisms.

Attempts are being made to gain a full understand-
ing of the role of the diﬀerent molecules involved in the
passing of genetic information to succeeding generations
and of the pitfalls which lie in the path. That structure
and function of macromolecules are interrelated is fully
established at present. Hence any eﬀort to understand
biological processes at the molecular level requires a rea-
sonable understanding of their structure, which in turn,
can only be achieved by a thorough study of stability and

energy considerations. Molecular biophysics, therefore, is
an integral part of man’s quest for complete control of his
inner world.

For a long time biochemists and biologists have been
trying to gather more information on structural and func-
tional behavior of biomolecules in terms of enzymatic ac-
tivities. They met some success in certain areas but the
complete ideas of the behavior of the molecules are to
be established. The nature of biochemical or enzymatic
approach to know the structural and functional behavior
of biomolecules is biological aspects and the limitations
of these methods force the scientists to ﬁnd other ways
to explain the cause of stability or instability and some
functional behavior of biomolecules. Therefore scientists
are trying to impose the physical methods to explain
the structural and functional behavior of biomolecules.
In this new process to learn the behavioral aspects of
biomolecules, the established methods or sometimes some
modiﬁcations of the existing methods according to the
problem of real or imaginary structures of biomolecules
and their functioning are used.

For more than two decades physicists have been study-
ing the structure-function relationship of the proteins.
People now have a fairly good idea about how muscle
ﬁlaments work or how some of the simpler enzymes per-
form their catalytic activities. Protein crystallography is
an established science and using this method coordinates
of the atoms of the smaller proteins, such as dihydro-
folate reductase (DHFR), are known accurately. Many

research groups all over the world are active in the ambi-
tious task of designing molecules which will accelerate or
inhibit the action of enzymes by attaching themselves to
the enzyme at the active site. While this approach does
remain a promising ﬁeld, more recently it is becoming
attractive to try to do the same with nucleic acids, i.e.,
to suppress or promote speciﬁc genes. Genes that cause
diseases should be repaired, and if that is not possible, at
least those causing production of harmful proteins should
be inhibited. Some antibiotics prevent bacterial growth
by stopping nucleic acid (NA) synthesis, others attempt
to arrest the growth of cancer cells. However present
methods do not allow choice of speciﬁc targets, e.g., bac-
terial NA or the NA of cancer cells. More knowledge
is required about the conformational structures of the
NAs, about their ﬂexibility and their binding to diﬀer-
ent ligands. Here too energy considerations are of vital
importance.

Recently scientists have become aware of the existence
of the link between aging and NAs. It is well known that
cells can not replicate indeﬁnitely in vivo. It is possible
that despite the high accuracy of the process of replica-
tion, with proofreading arrangements to correct errors,
it is impossible to eliminate errors altogether. The bio-
logical process continues independently and man can not
control any biological activity completely. Any disorder
initiated inside the biological system therefore sometimes
grows multi-dimensionally. The random noise is accumu-
lated and eventually replication stops.

Very recently scientists have begun to look into another
possible source of loss of replicability of nucleic acids.
The DNA molecule contains a tail called telomere, a cer-
tain pattern of bases which do not code for any gene, but
on which the DNA polymerase has to stand when per-
forming replication. It has been suspected that with each
new cell generation in an organism, i.e., in the replica-
tion of somatic cells, parts of the telomere gets lost. As
the telomere keeps shrinking with age, eventually a time
comes when they can no longer replicate. As dying cells
are not replaced by new cells, the organism decays or
’gets old’ and ﬁnally faces death. This biological activity
of DNA [1,2] is known to scientists but they don’t know
why and how this activity occurs.

M. Olovnikov formulated the problem of terminal un-
der replication of linear DNA molecules in 1971[3]; this
phenomenon is caused by the inability of DNA poly-
merases to replicate several nucleotides at 3 ends of DNA
templates. Olovnikov also suggested that a speciﬁc bi-
ological mechanism should normally prevent this phe-
nomenon. This mechanism was expected to be active in
gametes, cancer cells, as well as in cells of vegetatively re-
producing organisms. In most other cases, e.g., in many
human somatic cells, this mechanism is suppressed.

Further studies revealed the enzyme telomerase [4,5]
(whose existence had been predicted by Olovnikov) that
compensates for DNA shortening in the mentioned cell
types. The function of telomerase is to add a repeated se-
quence (the hexamer TTAGGG in humans), which forms

2

the so-called telomere, to ends of nuclear DNA. Here A
is for adenine, G for guanine and T for thymine. After
this, underreplication of the linear DNA molecule only
shortens this nontranscribed sequence of the telomeric
fragment of the chromosome without damaging the ge-
netic information or the mechanism that reads it. At
certain stages of development in early embryogenesis, the
gene encoding telomerase in the majority of human so-
matic cells is switched oﬀ, thereby making the genome
susceptible to shortening. The telomere shortens at a
low but appreciable rate which impairs the functioning
of the chromosome. This impairment begins long before
the disappearance of the whole telomere, which removes
protection from genetic information contained in tran-
scribed regions. This role is still poorly understood.

There is close correlation between shortening of telom-
eric DNA regions and Hayﬂick’s limit [1,2]. To surpass
this limit and continue reproduction, the cell should ac-
tivate its telomerase gene.

The most remarkable feature is that switching oﬀ the
telomerase gene is an ontogenetic stage that occurs at a
distinct time point in the life of an organism and involves
only some of its cell types. This event seems to perform a
speciﬁc function and cannot be regarded as a disorder in
the living system or a kind of unpredictable age-related
defect, although it clearly promotes aging. In this con-
text, we are reminded of an observation made in exper-
iments with barley germs. During the development of
the germ, the telomere suddenly loses 50 kb (kilo bases).
It loses an additional 20 kb during growth of the spike
[6]. The mechanism responsible for this event remains
unknown. If the arrest of telomerase synthesis is consid-
ered as an accidental fault, telomere shortening in cells
containing no functional telomerase appears to be an act
of deliberate damage to the organism. An alternative in-
terpretation is that the inhibition of the telomerase gene
and the telomere shortening are biologically important
events. To understand the meaning of this process, one
should remember that telomerase genes of somatic cells
are switched oﬀ only in sexually reproducing organisms,
but not in vegetatively reproducing organisms. It is ex-
actly in the former case that the appearance of a new
trait, which can result from a combination of parental
genomes, becomes the most probable event. However, in
vegetatively reproducing organisms, the appearance of a
new trait results from random mutations occurring in the
same cell.

The above mentioned properties of the telomere make
understanding the cause of its instability is an exciting
problem. Again, it is possible that evolution has chosen
the most stable pattern. This may be investigated by
studying the energy of the telomere portion of the DNA.
We can try to interpret this stability with respect to ra-
diation, vibration etc i.e., by using physical rather than
biological methods. If the energies involved between the
bases of DNAs can be determined and if using these har-
monic behaviors of the telomere can be calculated (i.e.,
the harmonic frequencies and thermal vibrational ampli-

tudes of bases) it can probably be possible to get some
ideas about the stability of this all important tail which
needs to be retained for good health and to continue nor-
mal living behavior. Application of quantum mechanics
can give a very good solution of energies and other nec-
essary parameters to explain the states of a single body
or in some cases two or three body problems. The ab-
solutely correct way of carrying out such investigations
would be to solve the Schrodinger equation for the entire
DNA, which is, of course, quite impossible. Even small
molecules can not be solved quantum mechanically, ex-
actly or even by approximation methods. However, one
can, as a zeroth order approximation, completely ignore
the details of the interactions and study only the symme-
try aspects of the problem by taking square well poten-
tials or harmonic behavior, as is often done in condensed
matter physics. The harmonic attitude has been adopted
in this work and the telomere has been studied as a spe-
ciﬁc pattern of bases represented by harmonic oscillators.
For this work the bases are considered as simple atoms
connected to the nearest atom (base) by a force constant
’k’ i.e., between the bases linear restoring forces are in-
volved. We believe that even with such a drastic approx-
imation a meaningful beginning can be made in trying
to understand the stability problem of the telomere and
the response of the pattern with the thermal, electro-
magnetic and other agents involved in environment. We
have also introduced the thermodynamics eﬀect on the
telomere molecules in this work which would represent
the dependence of structure and function of biological
molecules, especially of telomere on thermal condition of
the biological system.

In sec.II, the energies between the diﬀerent bases in
DNA have been calculated. For this some established
methods of energy calculation have been used and the
values of some parameters needed for this work of cal-
culating the energies involved in DNA have also been
calculated. In sec.III, a method of calculating the har-
monic frequency of telomere and other possible patterns
taking four purines and two pyrimidines and also for few
other imaginary patterns of bases has been developed.
For this a matrix has been developed and using the ener-
gies involved between the bases in DNA the harmonic fre-
quency of telomere has been calculated and a conclusion
on the stability of telomere pattern in the replication end
of DNA has been drawn. In sec.IV, the thermodynamic
behavior of DNA molecules especially the temperature ef-
fect on the stability of telomere has been discussed. Here
it is tried to ﬁnd the eﬀect of the environment especially
the biological environment where the DNA exists on the
structure and function of telomere. Finally in sec.V, the
results are discussed and the conclusions are presented.

3

II.

ENERGY CALCULATION FOR BASE

SEQUENCES IN DNA

A.

Introduction

In DNA the successive bases exist in energetically equi-
librium state. The most important energies between the
successive bases are stacking energy and van der Waals
interaction. Stacking energy is due to interaction be-
tween the magnetic moments of the helical structure of
bases and van der Waals interaction is the well known
6-12 potential that arises when the two bases come very
near to each other. In this work these two types of inter-
actions between the bases of DNA have been calculated
using the well known formulae.

B.

Energy Modeling

A computer model has been constructed to make DNA
double helices according to whatever base pattern se-
quence we required. This was done by smoothly ﬁtting
experimental data for each base pair conﬁguration with
one another to form a straight double helical structure
. However some ﬂexibility were also retained so as to
vary the inter base separation to some extents. While
lengthening the double helix by stretching it our method
also changes the twist angles to some extends so that the
interbase angles which are normally 36o for 10 base pairs
per turn per piece can vary to some extends in keep-
ing with the inter base separation h which is normally
0.36 nm [7-12]. It is well known that the most impor-
tant energy in forming double helix is stacking energy.
The model described here has been used to calculate this
stacking energy for diﬀerent base pair neighbors. The
pyrimidine (Cytosine and Thymine ) have single aromatic
six side a ring pattern whereas for the ring in purine
(Adenine and Guanine) each has adjoining six sided and
a ﬁve sided aromatic rings. These rings content electrons
that contribute magnetic moments. The energy between
two rings i.e., between two such magnetic moments is
given by

U (r1, r2) =

µo
4π

[

µ1 · µ2
|r1 − r2|3 − 3

µ1 · (r1 − r2)µ2 · (r1 − r2)
|r1 − r2|5

]

(1)
When taking into account the orthogonality of the s (i.e.,
the base planes) with the helical axis, this reduces to

U (|r1 − r2|) =

µo(lg)2
4π

[1 − 3

d2
s2 ]

(2)

where µo = 4π × 10−7 SI unit, is the magnetic perme-
ability in free space, s is the actual distance between the
centers of the two rings and d is the 2 dimensional pro-
jection of the separation in the plane of the base l is a
no. and r’s are coordinates. µ1 and µ2 are proportional
to the angular momentum of electrons by the usual gy-

romagnetic ratio (g) and can be taken identical for other
rings because always π electrons are involved.

It is to be mentioned the part of energy that can
counter the DNA to be collapsed by the attractive stack-
ing energy. This type of energy is the van der Waals
interaction which is given by

U (i, j) = −

+

A
r6
ij

B
r12
ij

(3)

where A and B are van der Waals constants. The van der
Waals interactions becomes dominating when two atoms
come within van der Waals limit distance. This type of
interaction is also called the 6-12 potential.

Special feature for DNA double helix is that all the
base rings are perpendicular to the axis of the double he-
lix. This feature is included in the energy calculation. It
has also been taken in the term the rotation of the bases
as the helix goes down as is already mentioned. Combin-
ing the two energies mentioned above the equation for
the calculation of the total interaction energy [13] be-
tween the two bases of DNA is being calculated which is
as follows

Vij =

A
(z2 + r2)6 +

B

(z2 + r2)3/2 (1 − 3

z2
z2 + r2 )

(4)

where z represents the variable separation between the i
th and j th bases and r represents the radius.

In the real conﬁguration of DNA the average separa-
tion of two successive bases is about 0.36 nm and in the
calculation of the total energy here this separation has
been used as the minimum energy state and thus this
state is more stable. Using this minimum energy state at
0.36 nm separation the constants A and B have been cal-
culated. In calculating the values of the force constants
the value of energy has been taken from the deviated
portion from this minimum level.

C. Results

The results for the stacking energies and the total
energies including the van der Waals energy with re-
spect to the diﬀerent distances between the bases in
DNA are shown in Fig.2 and Fig.3 respectively. In these
calculations the stacking energies between purine-purine
bases at diﬀerent separations are seen to be higher to-
wards negative than those between purine-pyrimidine
and pyrimidine-pyrimidine bases respectively. Similar se-
quence is also seen for the calculation of total interaction
energies between the bases.

D. Discussion

The stacking energy calculation between the bases
shows that the stacking energies for diﬀerent order of
separation between purine purine bases are higher than

4

those between purine pyrimidine and pyrimidine pyrim-
idine bases. This is because pyrimidine (Cytosine and
Thymine ) have single aromatic six side a ring pattern
whereas for the ring in purine (Adenine and Guanine)
each has adjoining six sided and a ﬁve sided aromatic
rings. So for purine purine interaction extra stacking
for extra rings exists and therefore the stacking energy
between purine purine bases is much higher than that be-
tween pyrimidine pyrimidine bases. When the two rings
come close due to their attraction by stacking energy they
should collapse as the stacking interaction is only attrac-
tive. So in lieu of being stable the whole DNA molecule
should collapse. But this type of collapsing is encoun-
tered by van der Waals high repulsive 12 potential which
becomes dominating when the charge distributions of two
atoms overlap. So the attractive interaction of stacking
energy is thus compensated by the high repulsive van der
Waals interaction.

III.
FREQUENCY CALCULATION FOR
DIFFERENT BASE SEQUENCES IN DNA

A.

Introduction

DNA bases are considered as molecules those are at-
tached to each other by intermolecular forces that are
harmonic. So between two bases there exists force con-
stants. The values of force constants k between diﬀerent
pairs e.g., purine-purine, pyrimidine-pyrimidine, purine-
pyrimidine etc. are diﬀerent. Due to this force DNA
molecules follow the harmonic behavior and therefore
they vibrate with some harmonic frequencies.

B. Derivation of Expression for Frequency

The values of k’s are calculated from the van der Waals
interaction and stacking interaction [7,11,12] between
bases of diﬀerent types e.g., purine-purine, pyrimidine-
pyrimidine, purine-pyrimidine etc. Using these values the
harmonic frequencies of the telomere in DNA are calcu-
lated. To illustrate the technique for obtaining the res-
onant frequencies and normal modes it is considered in
detail a model based on a linear symmetrical six atomic
molecule. All these six atoms are considered to be on
one straight line, the equilibrium distances apart being
denoted by b. For simplicity it is considered that only
vibrations along the line of the molecule, and the actual
complicated interatomic potential are approximated by
two spring of two diﬀerent or similar force constants on
both sides of an atom. There are six obvious coordi-
nates marking the position of the six atoms on the line.
The atomic arrangement then repeats for the telomere
in DNA like AGGGTT then again AGGGTT and so on
upto a huge number of repeatation. If the mean positions
of the atoms are considered as x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 then
the positions of the atoms repeat and thus the arrange-

ment completes a cyclic arrangement. In telomere system
it is assumed that there exists two types of atoms: four
purine (one Adenine and three Guanine) and two pyrimi-
dine (two Thymine). It is true that Adenine and Guanine
have about the same mass which is considered as M and
the mass of pyrimidine (Thymine and Cytocine) is diﬀer-
ent from that of purine and let this be m. Both these M
and m have been calculated from the total atomic weights
of their constituent atoms. In the arrangement there may
exist the sequences like purine-purine, purine-pyrimidine,
pyrimidine-pyrimidine and the force constants for these
arrangements are considered k1, k2, k3 respectively. If a
force constant k in between two atoms of mass M each,
the potential energy in this system is given by Potential
energy

V2 =

k(x2 − x1 − b)2

(5)

1
2

For a three atoms system this potential energy becomes

V3 =

k(x2 − x1 − b)2 +

k(x3 − x2 − b)2

(6)

1
2

1
2

with the atomic arrangement as follows
m(x1) − k − M (x2) − k − m(x3)

Similarly if we increase the number of atoms ac-
cording to our real problem of telomere (AGGGTT)
in DNA with six atoms the arrangement becomes like this

or,

M (x1) − k1 − M (x2) − k1 − M (x3) − k1 − M (x4) −

k2 − m(x5) − k3 − m(x6) − k2 − M (x1)

For this system of atoms the total potential energy V

is

V = +

k1(x2 − x1 − b)2 +

k1(x3 − x2 − b)2

k1(x4 − x3 − b)2 +

k2(x5 − x4 − b)2

k3(x6 − x5 − b)2 +

k2(x1 − x6 − b)2

(7)

1
2
1
2
1
2

+

+

Now we introduce coordinates relative to the equilib-

rium positions:

(8)

(9)

where

xo2 − xo1 = b = xo3 − xo2,

etc.

The potential energy then reduces to

V = +

k1(y2 − y1)2 +

k1(y3 − y2)2

1
2
1
2
1
2

+

+

k1(y4 − y3)2 +

k2(y5 − y4)2

k3(y6 − y5)2 +

k2(y1 − y6)2

(10)

1
2
1
2
1
2

1
2
1
2
1
2

Hence the V matrix has the form,

Vm =










−k1
0
0
0
−k2

k1 + k2 −k1

0

0
0

2k1 −k1
−k1 2k1 −k1

0
0
0

−k2
0
0
0

0 −k1 k1 + k2 −k2
0
0

−k2
0

−k3

0
0

k2 + k3 −k3

k2 + k3

The kinetic energy T has the form

T =

M ( ˙y2

1 + ˙y2

2 + ˙y2

3 + ˙y2

4) +

m( ˙y2

5 + ˙y2
6)

(12)

1
2

1
2

The T matrix is diagonal which is of the form,

Tm =

0
M 0
0 M 0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0 M 0
0
0
0

0 0
0 0
0 0
0 M 0 0
0 m 0
0
0 m
0
0



















5









(11)

(13)

Combining these two matrices, the secular equation

appears as

|Vm − ω2Tm| = 0

(14)

k1+k2
M
−k1
M
0
0
0
−k2
m











−k1
M
2k1
M
−k1
M
0
0
0

0
−k1
M
2k1
M
−k1
M
0
0

0
0
−k1
M
k1+k2
M
−k2
m
0

0
0
0
−k2
M
k2+k3
m
−k3
m

−k2
M
0
0
0
−k3
m
k2+k3
m











= 0

(15)

Eigen values of this matrix give the square of the
frequencies(iω). Here the values for k’s (at the separation
0.36 nm between bases) are used from the calculated val-
ues from the total energies (stacking and van der Waals
interaction) between the bases of DNA. The masses of
purine and pyrimidine are the total mass of their con-
stituent atoms.

The eigenvalues of the derived matrix gives the square
of the frequencies (iω). Hence negative values of the eigen
values give the real parts of the frequencies and positive
values give the imaginary parts of the frequencies. From
the eigenvalues of the matrix the values of the frequencies
of the harmonic oscillator of telomeric pattern have been
calculated. Similarly rearranging the patterns of the ma-
trices for other patterns of base combination of telomere
and for some imaginary patterns taking all purine or all
pyrimidines the eigenvalues and thus the frequencies have
been calculated.

yi = x − xoi

C. Results

The highest values of the frequencies [13] of telomere
and other diﬀerent patterns of base combinations are as
follows:

Telomere (AGGGTT) pattern:
ω =-3.104028110062502×1012 Hz
ω =+3.104028110062502×1012 Hz

AGTGGT pattern:

ω =-2.586737456962528×1012 Hz
ω =+2.586737456962528×1012 Hz

AGTGTG pattern:

ω =-2.944491229994985×1012 Hz
ω =+2.944491229994985×1012 Hz

AAAAAA or GGGGGG pattern:

ω =-3.333518830239974×1012 Hz
ω =+3.333518830239974×1012 Hz

TTTTTT or CCCCCC pattern:
ω =-1.668814797430148×1012 Hz
ω =+1.668814797430148×1012 Hz

D. Discussion

In the calculation of the frequencies of the oscillators
of the telomere pattern of bases and the other patterns
it is seen that the value of the frequency for the telomere
pattern is the highest among those patterns having four
purine and two pyrimidine bases. So the frequency of
the telomere pattern is close to the frequencies available
in the sunlight. So a resonance of this frequency with
the frequencies of the infrared rays existing in the lower
side of the band of light coming from the sun may oc-
cur. Most of the people stay under shade most of the
time of their life. The infrared light of the frequency of
the order of the frequency of telomere are in the lower
end of the band of light coming from the sunlight and
staying in the shade (in most time) people experience
this infrared lights. The interference of this infrared rays
with the frequency of the telomere may be one of the
causes of the aging i.e., the shrinking of the skin and
decaying of the normal activities of the cells of human
body and ﬁnally leading to death. The frequencies of the
two imaginary patterns of bases e.g., all purine and all
pyrimidines are diﬀerent from the original pattern with
four purines and two pyrimidines. For all purines the
value of the frequency is higher than that for telomeric
pattern which supports for being more stable than the
telomeric pattern but there may arise some problem in
replicability of DNA due to the heavy attraction of the
pattern GGGGGG in the ﬁrst strand with CCCCCC in
the second strand because GC has very high attraction
between two strands. On the other hand if all purines
like AAAAAA pattern exists the frequency for this pat-

6

tern is the lowest among all other patterns which shows
that the pattern to be unstable and this is also proved
from the real data of lower energy of interaction between
the bases TA or AT where one exists in one strand and
the other in the other strand than that of CG or GC.
Hence to continue the normal living behavior of biologi-
cal molecules telomere pattern should the the most stable
pattern at the replication end of DNA.

IV. AMPLITUDE OF VIBRATION IN
THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM

A.

Introduction

Human body exists at a particular temperature. This
temperature is at an average about 37oC. The tempera-
ture normally does not change with the change of the ex-
ternal or environmental temperature. DNA molecules ex-
ist inside this temperature state. The telomeres in DNA
thus exist in the thermodynamic state of temperature
37oC. The telomere pattern AGGGTT has been con-
sidered as an oscillator that vibrates with some frequen-
cies. This vibration should create some thermodynamic
motion of these molecules due to the thermal state. It
is known from the well known kinetic interpretation of
temperature an atom being in the thermal state of tem-
perature T has an average translational kinetic energy
which is equal to 3
2 kT . Here k is the Boltzmann con-
stant that is equal to 1.38 × 10−23 joule/molecule K and
T is the absolute temperature of the environment i.e.,
T = 273 + t, where t is in oC and T is in oK. For one
dimentional motion the average energy is one third of the
previous that is equal to 1
2 kT . Now any atom or molecule
of mass M and vibrating with the frequency should have
the total energy that is equal to 1
2 M a2ω2 where a is the
amplitude of the vibration.
In this problem it is con-
sidered for DNA telomere bases (purine and pyrimidine)

1
2

M a2ω2 =

kT

1
2

(16)

The calculated values of the frequencies for telomere
pattern AGGGTT and other possible random patterns
have been used here. The calculation has given us the
following results for the amplitudes of vibration.

B. Results and Discussions

The following results show the amplitudes of thermal
vibration for purine (Adenine and Guanine) and pyrimi-
dine (Uracil and Thymine) in DNA.

TELOMERE:

Pyrimidine: a = +/ − 0.0311nm
Purine: a = +/ − 0.0292nm

AGTGTG pattern:

Pyrimidine: a = +/ − 0.0328nm
Purine: a = +/ − 0.0308nm

AGTGGT pattern:

Pyrimidine: a = +/ − 0.0374nm
Purine: a = +/ − 0.0351nm

AAAAAA pattern:

Pyrimidine: a = +/ − 0.0290nm
Purine: a = +/ − 0.0272nm

TTTTTT pattern:

Pyrimidine: a = +/ − 0.0579nm
Purine: a = +/ − 0.0543nm

The least values for amplitudes for purine and pyrim-
idine are found in the telomere pattern (AGGGTT)
among the patterns having two pyrimidine and four
purine base sequences in DNA. The higher the values
of the thermodynamic vibrational amplitudes from the
mean position of rest the higher the possibility of the
breaking of the biological structure. Hence the lowest
values of the amplitudes of thermodynamic vibrational
for telomere structure support for the stability of telom-
ere pattern from the thermodynamic point of view.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this work some basic parameters involved in DNA,
the biggest molecule, have been calculated. In doing this
some approximations are considered but these approxi-
mations do not aﬀect the reality of the problem. Though
the method of calculation is fairly simple, using some-
times somewhat drastic approximations, it is remarkable
that the results which are achieved here are either in
agreement with experimental observations, or, when that
is lacking, in agreement with the idea of molecular evo-
lution, viz. the approach to states of stability or lower
energy in molecular conﬁgurations that presumably are
less susceptible to perturbations of the environment.

A possible cause of the stability of the telomeric pat-
tern in the replication end of DNA has been suggested
in this work. Before that the interaction energies in-
volved between the successive bases in a DNA single helix
have been calculated. With these energies the values of
the force constants have been calculated for the diﬀerent
patterns of base combinations i.e., between the purine-
purine, purine-pyrimidine and pyrimidine-pyrimidine se-
quence. It is seen that the minimum energy state for the
sequence purine-purine is lower than all other sequences
i.e., purine-pyrimidine and pyrimidine-pyrimidine. In re-
ality too it should be so, because in purine there exists
one additional ring than the single ring in pyrimidine
base.

Using the values of force constants k’s [13] from slightly
deviated portions of the minimum energy positions, the

7

frequencies for the telomeric pattern (AGGGTT) and
other patterns have been calculated. Here the results
show that the highest frequency exists in the telomeric
pattern among the diﬀerent possible patterns, taking four
purines and two pyrimidines. The value of the frequency
for telomeric pattern is close to the infrared band of the
frequencies available in sunlight. The frequency of the
telomeric pattern may have thus a resonance with the
infrared rays existing below the lower end of visible spec-
trum of sunlight. Human beings can not avoid exposure
to direct or indirect sunlight during most of their lifetime,
and are therefore vulnerable to the eﬀects of the infrared
frequencies. The possible resonance of the telomeric fre-
quency with the infrared frequencies may play an impor-
tant role in the aging process and other maladies such as
cancer in the lives of human beings.

On the other hand this frequency for the telomeric
pattern may be the cause of the thermal and mechan-
ical stability of the pattern AGGGTT in the replication
end of DNA and therefore the pattern repeats such a
large number of times. In this work the frequencies for
some imaginary patterns with all purines and with all
pyrimidines in a single helix are also calculated where
the results show that the frequency of the pattern with
all purines (Adenine or Guanine) is the highest among all
the patterns and the frequency for the pattern with all
pyrimidines (Thymine or Cytosine) is the lowest. There-
fore the pattern AAAAAA or GGGGGG show most sta-
ble than other patterns. Here only a single strand of the
DNA is considered. When both strands are considered
together, of course there is an equality of the purines
and pyrimidines. A problem may arise here due to the
anomaly of attraction of these patterns with their counter
strand in DNA as GC has higher attraction than AT. So
if all Gs exist in the 1st coil then in the 2nd coil there will
be all Cs. So highest binding between GC bonding may
be a cause of stopping of the replication of DNA, but that
would be impossible for continuing the living activity of
human beings, or any other organism. So, for stabil-
ity of the telomeric pattern (AGGGTT) there should be
an optimization between the stability and replicability of
DNA and that might be a reason why the speciﬁc telom-
eric pattern continues in human DNA at the replication
end.

With the values of the frequencies of the telomeric pat-
tern and other possible patterns of DNA bases with four
purines and two pyrimidines, the thermodynamic vibra-
tional amplitudes have been calculated in this work. Here
too telomeric pattern shows the lowest value of the am-
plitude of vibration, which supports the stability of the
conﬁguration with this pattern (AGGGTT) in the ther-
mal environment of human cells. For purines (A or G)
the amplitudes are smaller than that of pyrimidine (T or
C) because purines are more massive than pyrimidines
due to the presence of extra ring in purines.

In this work some physical methods are used and
some mathematical formulas have been developed for
calculating the interaction energies and frequencies of

DNA molecules. Calculations have been performed
with these formulas and appropriate conclusions have
been drawn. In future when more crystallographic data
become available for base sequences of DNA for human
genome or other living organs, the work can be extended
to test this hypothesis about the association between
lower energy and preferred molecular conﬁgurations with
molecular arrangements. Thus the work can be extended
to a level which can explain the most important causes
of aging and other phenomena involved in living bodies,
not only for human beings but also for other living
systems.

Acknowledgment
This research was partly supported by the Min-
istry of Science and Technology, Peoples’ Republic of
Bangladesh and Bangladesh University of Engineering
and Technology. The authors are grateful to Prof. Gias
uddin Ahmad, Department of Physics, Bangladesh Uni-
versity of Engineering and Technology, for his valuable
suggestions.

References

585-621.

2.Hayﬂick, L. (1997) Biochemistry (Moscow), 62, 1380-1393

8

(Russ.).

1496-1498.

3.Olovnikov, A. M. (1971) Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 201,

4.Melek, M., Greene, E. C., and Skippen, D. E. (1996) Mol.

Cell Biol., 16, 3437-3445.

5.Harley, C. B. (1991) Mutat. Res., 256, 271-282.

6.Kim, N. W., Piatyszek, M. A., Prowse, K. R., Harley, C.

B., West, M. D., Ho, P. L. C., Coviello, G. M., Wright, W.

E., Weinrich, S. L., and Shay, J. W. (1994) Science, 266,

2011-2015.

7.Fengelman, M. et al.: Nature London 175, 834 (1955)

8.Biophysics by Walter Hoppe, Lohmann, H. Markl, H.

10.G.N. Ramachandran, C. Ramakrisanan and V. Sasisekha-

9.G.N. Ramachandran and V. Sasisekharan, Adv. Protein

Ziegler, ed. 2nd p25, t2.2

Chem. 23 (1968) 283-437

ran, J. Mol.,7 (1963) 95-99

London, Plenum Press 1970

Ziegler, ed. 2nd p24,s2.2.4

11.Volkenshtein, M.V.: Molecules and Life. New York-

12.Biophysics by Walter Hoppe, Lohmann, H. Markl, H.

13. M.Phil.

thesis, submitted by Md. Ashrafuzzaman,

Department of Physics, Bangladesh University of Engineering

1.Hayﬂick, L., and Moorhead, P. S. (1961) Exp. Cell Res., 25,

and Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh,July, 2000.

9

FIG. 1: Sequence of bases in DNA single strand are
shown. Here it is seen that the aromatic rings of the
bases are parallel to each other.

10

FIG. 2: Stacking Energy versus Separation plot be-
tween bases in DNA. Diﬀerent curves from upper to
lower are for successive pyrimidine pyrimidine, purine
pyrimidine, purine purine bases in DNA.

11

FIG. 3: Total Energy (stacking+van der Waals) ver-
sus Separation plot between bases in DNA. Diﬀerent
curves from upper to lower are for successive pyrim-
idine pyrimidine, purine pyrimidine, purine purine
bases in DNA.

