3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A model of population dynamis -

further investigations

Iwona Mróz

∗

Institute of Experimental Physis, University of Wroªaw

Pla Maxa Borna 9, 50(cid:21)204 Wroªaw, Poland

20th Deember 2013

Abstrat

We present supplementary investigations referring to the model of

an evolving population desribed in Physia A 252 (1998) 325(cid:21)335.

The population is omposed of individuals haraterised by their

geneti strings, phenotypes and ages. We disuss the in(cid:29)uene of prob-

abilities of survival of the individuals on the dynamis and phenotypi

variability of the population.

We show that onstant survival probabilities of individuals are pro-

pitious for preserving phenotypi variability of the population. For

onstant survival probabilities osillations of 'the average (cid:28)tness' of

the population and normal distributions of the phenotypes are ob-

served. When the probabilities of survival are diretly proportinal to

the individuals' adaptations the population an reah the maximum

1

e-mail: imrozifd.uni.wro.pl

1

possible average adaptation, but the phenotypi variability of the pop-

ulation is ompletely lost and osillations of 'the average (cid:28)tness' of the

population do not our.

We also investigate the behaviour of the population aused by the

probabilities of survival that partly depend on the individuals' adap-

tations. The role of the length of the individuals' geneti strings is

Keywords: Biologial evolution, Population dynamis, Monte Carlo

onsidered here.

PACS: 87.23; 05.10.L

simulations.

1

Introdution

Variability observed in biologial populations allows the populations to evolve

in di(cid:27)erent habitats that may in some ases lead to speiation. Natural pop-

ulations that have low variability are not resistant to hanges of their envi-

romnent and an easily extint. Preservation of variability is then ruial for

biologial evolution. Beause of this, it has been investigated intensively by

biologists (e.g.[1℄(cid:21)[3℄), and, in reent years, by physiists (e.g.[4℄(cid:21)[5℄). Vari-

ability is onsidered at di(cid:27)erent levels: phenotypi (the most general), geneti

or environmental. Population dynamis is often analysed.

In biologial onsiderations it is usually assumed that at the phenotypi

level the distribution of intensity of phenotypi features is normal [6℄.

In

1996 Doebeli avoided this assumption and presented an interesting model

of population dynamis [7℄. Some of his intriguing onlusions (desribed

below) were tested in 1998 by P(cid:11)ekalski [8℄, who used a simpli(cid:28)ed version of

the model presented in [9℄. In this paper we disuss and develop some of

2

P(cid:11)ekalski's results.

Aording to Doebeli's model, a population onsists of haploid individ-

uals. Eah individual is haraterised by a geneti string that has c genes

situated at c loi (a lous is the plae at a hromosome where a gene is lo-

ated). Eah gene an be in two states: 1 and 0 orresponding to two alleles.

Phenotypes of individuals are haraterised by 'a harater' h that orre-

sponds to a number of 1's in its geneti string. The population is in(cid:28)nite. It

an be either sexual or asexual. Generations do not overlap.

In ase of a sexual population two individuals an reate o(cid:27)springs. The

harater of an o(cid:27)spring is established by hoosing, independently for eah

lous, an allele from the alleles of the parents with equal probability. The

mean (cid:28)tness of the population, de(cid:28)ned as N(t + 1)/N(t) (where N(t) denotes

the total density of the population at time t) and the distribution of the

phenotypes existing in the population are ontrolled. As a result, it is shown

that the mean (cid:28)tness an osillate and the type of the osillations depends on

the number of loi c . For some parameters, when the total population density

is onstant, the phenotypes alternate between two distributions. Then, the

phenotypi variability of the population is preserved and shows unexpeted

and very interesting behaviour.

Osillations of the mean (cid:28)tness of an evolving polulation and strange

distribution of phenotypes inspired P(cid:11)ekalski, who tried to on(cid:28)rm Doebeli's

results. He used a lattie model based on the standard Monte Carlo simu-

lations. Aording to the model, a population is loated on a L × L square

lattie. Eah lattie site may be either empty or ontain an individual. The

total initial number of individuals is N(t = 0). An individual is haraterised

by: its loation on the lattie j , its age wj and its genome. The individual's

age wj is less or equal to the maximum age M . M de(cid:28)nes the maximum

3

number of Monte Carlo steps (MCS) during whih an individual an be a

member of the population. If the individual's age exeedes M , the individual

is removed from the lattie. The same M is assumed for all individuals. As a

parameter, M an vary from 1 to the total duration (in MCS) of a performed

simulation. The individual's genome is assumed to be a string ontaining c

loi with c genes that ode c phenotypi features. Genomes and phenotypes

are onstruted analogially to [7℄. During the simulation an individual is

hosen randomly, its adaptation is alulated aording to the formula:

aj =

1
c

c

X
k=1

f k
j

(1)

where f k

j denotes the fration of 1's in its geneti string. The individual sur-
vives if its adaptation is greater than a generated, random number r ∈ [0, 1]

(its probability of survival is then strongly onneted to the individual's

adaptation). Then the individual moves aross the lattie and meets another

individual. Movement aross the lattie and meeting the neighbour is ne-

essary for mating. Adaptation and probability of survival of the neighbour

are alulated. If the neighbour survives, the individuals mate and reate

o(cid:27)springs. The o(cid:27)springs are loated on empty sites inside a square LG × LG

entered at the (cid:28)rst parent loation. The number of the o(cid:27)springs depends

on the number of empty sites of the square. Their maximum number is q .

The o(cid:27)springs' phenotypes are established in the same way as desribed for

Doebeli's model. After eah Monte Carlo step of the simulation the age of all

individuals is inreased by 1 and all individuals whih age exeedes the max-

imum age M are removed from the population. Sine individuals of di(cid:27)erent

age an mate, generations overlap.

In his paper P(cid:11)ekalski ontrolled the time dependene of the density of the

population and its average age (relative to the maximum one). In partiular

4

he investigated the average adaptation of the population de(cid:28)ned by:

and the ratio of the numbers of individuals in two sueeding moments of

time (Monte Carlo steps). He alled this quantity the average (cid:28)tness:

a(t) =

1
N(t)

N (t)

X
j=1

aj(t)

< f (t) >=

N(t + 1)
N(t)

(2)

(3)

As the main result P(cid:11)ekalski on(cid:28)rmed Doebeli's onlusion that osilla-

tory harater of the quantity N(t + 1)/N(t) depends on the number of loi

of individuals' geneti strings. The osillations are damped, their amplitude

depends on c and M . The period of osillations depends on M . However,

in ontrast to Doebeli's results, periodi hanges of the distribution of the

phenotypes are not observed. It is always normal. Normal distribution of

the phenotypes indiates that the population ontains individuals better and

less adapted. The population does not reah the maximum possible adap-

tation, but its phenotypi variability is preserved. The maximum possible

adaptation would orrespond to the situation when the adaptation of every

individual equals 1. It is suggested that the population ould ahieve perfet

adaptation, but, as it is shown in Fig.1 of [8℄ the adaptation of the population

seems to stabilise at about 0.7. This onlusion is in ontrast to the results

desribed in [10℄ and [9℄ where initially random populations quikly reah the

maximum possible adaptation a = 1 (see e.g. [9℄, Fig.2., (cid:28)rst region). This

fat should be onsidered sine, as it has been mentioned above, P(cid:11)ekalski's

model is a simpli(cid:28)ed version of the model presented in [9℄, whih bases on

the model presented in [10℄. The di(cid:27)erenes between the models are that

in [9℄ a population evolves in two di(cid:27)erent, spatially separated habitats and

individuals are diploids while in [8℄ a population evolves in one habitat and

5

individuals are haploids. Then it will be interesting to indiate a reason of

suh big di(cid:27)erenes among the adaptations of the populations.

2 Simulations and Results

To investigate the onditions under whih the adaptation of the population

an reah the maximum value and other lower values we have performed

omputer simulations based on the model desribed in [8℄. We have used

the same parameters as in [8℄: a 100 × 100 square lattie, LG = 5, q = 4

and x(0) = 0.3. Averaging has been done over 25 independent runs. The

simulations have been performed for the maximum ages M = 5 and M = 3

and for the numbers of loi c = 10, c = 20 and c = 40.

We have tested populations in whih:

1. Individuals are eliminated from the population only beause of aging

(when their age is greater than the assumed maximum age). In this

ase probability of survival is p = 1.00.

2. Individuals are eliminated with some onstant probability 1 − p, where

survival probability p=0.95; 0.90; 0.85; 0.80. Moreover they are elimi-

nated beause of their age.

3. Probability of survival depends on individuals' adaptation, alulated

aording to the formula (1), as assumed in [8℄. They are also elimi-

nated beause of their age.

When the population evolves with the probability of survival p = 1.00,

large osillations of N(t+1)/N(t) are observed. The period of the osillations

depends on M (Fig.1), but none of the features of the osillations depends

on c.

6

Figure 1: Time dependene of N(t + 1)/N(t) and the average adaptation

of the population for di(cid:27)erent maximum ages M . Probability of survival of

individuals p = 1.00. Number of loi c = 20.

7

This an be explained as follows: before reating o(cid:27)springs an individual

has to move and meet a neighbour. When the population density is high,

the individual an not move. Even if it manages to move and meets the

neighbour, there is not enough spae for many o(cid:27)springs. Individuals have

to be eliminated beause of aging, then the population density beomes lower,

some spae required for mating ours and new o(cid:27)springs are reated. At

the beginning of the simulations phenotypes are randomly hosen so the

average adaptation of the population is 0.5. Sine there are not many fators

that may in(cid:29)uene the average adaptation (individuals are eliminated only

beause of their age), the population is never adapted well and its average

adaptation is onstant (equals 0.5).

When individuals are eliminated with some onstant probability, inde-

pendently on their adaptation, the average adaptation of the population is

also low and onstant (still equals 0.5). The osillations of N(t + 1)/N(t)

are however smaller (Fig.2). The additional mehanism of individuals' elim-

itation auses that there is more free spae on the lattie. This results in

perturbations of big, age-dependent osillations.

When probability of survival depends on the individual's adaptation, the

population ahieves the maximum possible adaptation and, in ontrast to

the results presented in [8℄, it reahes the average adaptation equal 1 inde-

pendently on the number of loi c (Fig.3). Osillations of N(t + 1)/N(t) are

not observed here (Fig.4). When the average adaptation of the population

equals 1 all individuals are idential - their geneti strings ontain only 1's.

Then, a typial, normal distribution of phenotypes is not observed and the

phenotypi variability of the population is lost.

The above desribed proedures lead to two types of populations: a badly

adapted one and a perfetly adapted one. The average adaptation of 0.7

8

Figure 2: Time dependene of N(t + 1)/N(t) for di(cid:27)erent probabilities of

survival of individuals. Number of loi c = 20. Maximum age M = 5.

9

Figure 3: Time dependene of the average adaptation of the population

when the probability of survival of an individual strongly depends on its

adaptation. Maximum age M = 5. The parameter is the number of loi c.

10

Figure 4: Time dependene of N(t+1)/N(t) when the probability of survival

of an individual strongly depends on its adaptation. Maximum age M = 5.

The parameter is the number of loi c.

11

presented in [8℄ seems to be an intermediate ase.

It is possible to obtain suh an average adaptation if the probability of

survival of an individual depends on its adaptation, but not so strongly as the

probability alulated previously, aording to the formula (1). For example,

(1) an be transformed to

Aj =

1
B

c

X
k=1

f k
j

(4)

where B is a onstant equal or smaller than c. Aj may be onsidered as an

individual's adaptation, but it must be assumed that all values of Aj equal

or greater than 1 denote perfet adaptation. For example, let c = 20 and

B = 10. The individuals that have ten or more 1's in their phenotypes will

surely survive (Aj = 1 for ten 1's and Aj is greater than 1 for more than

ten 1's. The maximum possible Aj = 2 haraterises an individual with all

1's in its phenotype). Therefore, only really badly adapted individuals an

be eliminated. The e(cid:27)et beomes stronger for inreasing c. At the same

time, perfetly adapted individuals, eliminated only beause of their age,

may ause osillations of N(t + 1)/N(t).

Now it is possible to reeive osillating N(t + 1)/N(t) and the average

adaptation of a population that is between 0.5 and 1. The results for c = 20

and B = 10 are presented in Fig.5.

When B = 10 and c = 10 the formulas (1) and (4) are idential. Fig.6

presents the time dependene of N(t + 1)/N(t) for di(cid:27)erent c. Probability of

survival is alulated using the formula (4). There is some similarity between

the results presented in Fig.5 and Fig.6 and, respetively, Fig.1 and Fig.2 of

[8℄.

12

Figure 5: Time dependene of N(t + 1)/N(t) and the average adaptation

of the population. Probability of survival of an individual depends on its

adaptation aording to (4). Number of loi c = 20, B = 10. Maximum age

M = 5.

13

Figure 6: Time dependene of N(t + 1)/N(t). Probability of survival of an

individual depends on its adaptation aording to (4). B = 10. Maximum

age M = 5. The parameter is the number of loi c.

14

3 Conlusions

To summarise, for the presented model the osillatory harater of N(t +

1)/N(t) and values of the average adaptation of the population depend on

the way how individuals are eliminated from the population.

1. When the individuals are eliminated only beause of exeeding the

maximum possible age, big, damped osillations of N(t + 1)/N(t) are

observed while the average adaptation is low. In this ase high pheno-

typi variability (and normal distribution of phenotypes) is preserved.

2. The osillations an be redued without a(cid:27)eting the phenotypi vari-

ability of the population if the individuals are eliminated with some

onstant probability.

3. If the individual's survival probability depends on the individual's adap-

tation and it is alulated aording to the formula (1), the osillations

of N(t + 1)/N(t) do not our and the population quikly reahes per-

fet adaptation. All individuals are idential and the population has

no phenotypi variability.

4. When individuals haraterised by the lowest adaptation are eliminated

aording to the formula (4) it is possible to observe many values of the

average adaptation of the population and osillations of N(t + 1)/N(t).

In this ase the population an be better adapted than when the in-

divduals are eliminated beause of aging. Moreover, the phenotypi

variability of the population is preserved. The average adaptation of

the population depends on the number of individuals' phenotypi fea-

tures (the number of phenotypi features of an individual equals the

number of loi c in its geneti string). Then, populations omposed of

15

organisms that have di(cid:27)erent c might evolve in a di(cid:27)erent way: for small

c the phenotypi variability would be lost while for bigger c the pheno-

typi variability would be preserved. Therefore, for populations har-

aterised by small c other mehanisms, for example mutations, should

be introdued to keep the variability. This ase seems to be interesting

also from biologial point of view and we hope that we will investigate

it in details.

Aknowledgements

IFD/ 02).

This work was supported by The State Committee for Sienti(cid:28) Researh

(grant no. 2PO3B 149 18) and University of Wroªaw (grant no. 2016/ W/

I also thank Professor Andrzej P(cid:11)ekalski (Institute of Theoretial Physis,

University of Wroªaw) for disussion and Professor Marel Ausloos (Univer-

sity of Liège) for his valuable omments.

Referenes

[1℄ N.H. Barton, Genet. Res. 47 (1986) 209.

[2℄ T. Kaweki, Pro. R. So. Lond. B, 263 (1996) 1515.

[3℄ M. Doebeli, G.D. Ruxton, Evolution, 51 (1997) 1730.

[4℄ P. Derrida, P. Higgs, J. Phys. A 24 (1991) L985.

[5℄ L. da Silva, C. Tsallis, Physia A, 271 (1999) 470.

[6℄ M. Slatkin, Eology, 61 (1980) 163.

[7℄ M. Doebeli, Evolution, 50 (1996) 532.

16

[8℄ A. P(cid:11)ekalski, Physia A, 252 (1998) 325.

[9℄ I. Mróz, A. P(cid:11)ekalski, Eur. Phys. J. B 10 (1999) 181.

[10℄ I. Mróz, A. P(cid:11)ekalski, K. Szna jd(cid:21)Weron, Phys Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 3025.

17

