Metachronal wave and hydrodynamic interaction for deterministic switching rowers

M. Cosentino Lagomarsino
FOM Institute for Atomic and Molecular Physics (AMOLF), Kruislaan 407, 1098 SJ Amsterdam,
The Netherlands; Tel. +31 - (0)20 - 6081275 ; fax +31 - (0)20 - 6684106∗

P. Jona
Politecnico di Milano, Dip. Fisica, Pza Leonardo Da Vinci 32, 20100 Milano,
Italy; Tel. +39 - (0)2 - 23996133 ; fax +39 - (0)2 - 23996126†

B. Bassetti
Universit`a degli Studi di Milano, Dip. Fisica, Via Celoria 16, 20100 Milano,
Italy; Tel. +39 - (0)2 - 50317477 ; fax +39 - (0)2 - 50317480 and I.N.F.N., Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy

We employ a model system, called rowers, as a generic physical framework to deﬁne the problem
of the coordinated motion of cilia (the metachronal wave) as a far from equilibrium process. Rowers
are active (two-state) oscillators interacting solely through forces of hydrodynamic origin. In this
work, we consider the case of fully deterministic dynamics, ﬁnd analytical solutions of the equation of
motion in the long wavelength (continuum) limit, and investigate numerically the short wavelength
limit. We prove the existence of metachronal waves below a characteristic wavelength. Such waves
are unstable and become stable only if the sign of the coupling is reversed. We also ﬁnd that with
normal hydrodynamic interaction the metachronal pattern has the form of stable trains of traveling
wave packets sustained by the onset of anti-coordinated beating of consecutive rowers.

3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗e-mail address cosentino-lagomarsino@amolf.nl
†e-mail address patrizia.jona@polimi.it

I.

INTRODUCTION

Cilia are hair-like extroﬂections of the cell membrane found in a variety of species from protists to humans, which
contain active elements (molecular motors, ﬁlaments) acting as an internal drive [1]. Because of their size and typical
velocities, the motion of cilia is in the low Reynolds number regime. Ciliary motion can be divided in two stages,
called power and recovery strokes. The diﬀerence between the two is that in the power stroke a higher portion of the
surface of the cilium pushes against the ﬂuid compared to the recovery stroke so that, as in the breast stroke of human
swimming, the two eﬀective viscous drags are diﬀerent, and the ﬁlament is able to propel the ﬂuid [2, 3, 4]. Cilia
normally appear in arrays, and show coordinated wave-like motion, referred to as metachronal wave. The behavior
of the metachronal wave is thought to be strictly linked to the hydrodynamic interactions between cilia [5, 6, 7, 8].
The question of how these collective motions are generated, from the interplay between the internal, active degrees
of freedom and the external interaction is still open. The scope of this work is to investigate this problem, using a
simple deterministic model containing very few parameters, consistent with experimental observations and previous
more detailed modeling, which can be easily simulated and solved analytically in the limit of large wavelengths.

Modeling of cilia [9, 10, 11] normally requires including the inﬁnite degrees of freedom of an inextensible line-like
object, its bending elasticity, and its interaction with the ﬂuid (slender body hydrodynamics), plus an active force,
which can be imposed based on physical observations or treated starting from the “microscopic” internal active degrees
of freedom [12, 13]. The model we present here (section II) is extremely simpliﬁed and economic in degrees of freedom.
It is intended to be treatable analytically. The cilia are represented by point particles, two-state active oscillators
which we call rowers. The active force is inspired by the switch mechanism introduced by Gueron and others [6].
Planar or linear arrays of interacting rowers are considered. In a previous work we used the same model to study
the role of noise [14], proving that if the switch mechanism of single rowers is purely stochastic the hydrodynamic
interaction generates metachronal waves which are statistically frustrated by the presence of random ﬂuctuations, but
can be stabilized by the presence of a short ranged coupling of the internal states, for example of chemical origin.
An alternative scenario we proposed was that the presence of a coupling between position and transition frequency
of the single rower would lead to wave like solutions. In this work we would like to pursue this second possibility, in
the limiting case where the dynamics for the switch is governed deterministically by the conﬁguration of the rower,
as in the geometric switch of Gueron et alii.

After an introduction of the model (section II), we devote the main body of the paper (section III) to the onset
of metachronal coordination. The discussion is divided in two parts. In the ﬁrst we discuss an analytical solution
of the continuum limit of our model equation, which enables to look for the onset of wave-like patterns with large
wavelengths. In the second part we look at the short wavelengths through numerical simulations. As we will show,
rowers with a deterministic conﬁgurational switch interacting hydrodynamically self-organize in patterns in which
nearest neighbor particles beat in anti-phase, and propagate trains of wave packets with typical wavelength of a few
particles. Only with an eﬀectively attractive interaction do long-wavelength wave-like solutions appear.

II. THE MODEL: ROWERS AND EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNAL STATE

In the model we adopt, the movement of a single cilium is reduced to that of a low Reynolds number rower that
maximizes the eﬀective drag in its active phase (power stroke) and minimizes it in the passive, recovery stroke. More
precisely, a rower is described by two degrees of freedom, of which the ﬁrst, f is translational and continuous and
represents a displacement from a reference position. It can be thought of as the displacement of the center of mass
of the ﬁlament from an equilibrium position. The second, σ = ±1, is discrete and labels the internal state of the
object, active or passive. The rowing direction is ﬁxed, while the orientation can in general be left open, to approach
the problem of symmetry breaking in the generation of ﬂuid ﬂow [14]. The two states carry diﬀerent eﬀective drags
γσ = 1 + ǫσ (with ǫ > 0) to the ﬂuid, corresponding to diﬀerent surface impacts of the rower (diﬀerent shapes of
the ﬁlament) in the two phases, together with diﬀerent potentials (free energy landscapes) V (f, σ), that generically
describe diﬀerent active or relaxation forces felt by the cilium. This is the implementation of the so-called scallop
theorem [3] at this crude level of description, and makes it possible for a rower to generate a net ﬂow in the ﬂuid.
There is no interaction between rowers other than the force propagated by the presence of the ﬂuid. This force is
modeled by the Oseen tensor for low Reynolds number ﬂows, appropriate in the case of cilia [3]. The array of cilia is
modeled as a linear or planar lattice of rowers labeled by the index n, and the conﬁgurations are speciﬁed by fn, σn.
This approach to the system contains a radical simpliﬁcation in the degrees of freedom of the object, a string with
inﬁnite degrees of freedom, and of the active drive, generated by the collective behavior of many molecular motors.
This reduction enables us to carry an analytical study. At our level of description, the substitution of cilia with point
particles does not change qualitatively the interaction induced by the ﬂuid. However, it’s a more delicate issue to
reduce the collective motion of molecular motors to a single dynamic variable. We choose to maintain this variable

FIG. 1: Potential V (f, σ) for k = 0 (+) and k = 1 (o). The dotted lines indicate σ = −1, the solid lines σ = 1.

discrete, justiﬁed by the experimental observation that the motion of a cilium is divided into two distinct phases and
by previous, more detailed modeling that suggested this picture [6]

The evolution of a rower internal state can be modeled generically as a stochastic process [14], deﬁned by the tran-
sition frequencies between states. Here we analyze a limiting case where the transition frequencies depend singularly
on the conﬁguration in a way that reduces the dynamics to a deterministic one. Essentially, a rower contains a switch
that alters instantaneously its internal state when a particular limit conﬁguration is reached. The dynamics of the
internal switch is entirely local, in the sense that there is no interaction of chemical origin between nearby rowers.
With these choices, the evolution of σn may be represented by the following equation containing a Dirac δ distribution

∂σn(t)
∂t

dfn
dt (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

= −2sgn(fn(t))

δ(fn(t) − sσn(t))

(1)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where ±s are the switch points in correspondence of which the discrete internal state is inverted. These parameters set
the amplitude of oscillation of a single particle and determine its window of motion relatively to the driving potentials
of the two states (ﬁgure 1).

Let’s now turn to the evolution of the rower displacement and the hydrodynamics. Considering the fact that an
overdamped motion follows the maximum slope toward the minimum free energy and that we consider no metastability,
there are generically two possible qualitative choices for the local conformation of the potentials in the two internal
states. These can be linear, provided the system is far from a minimum, or quadratic if it is close. Therefore, rescaling
all the constants that are not essential to our discussion (Stokes coeﬃcient, prefactors), we write:

V (f, σ) =

(kσf − σ)2 −

1
2kσ

1
2kσ

where the parameter kσ ∈ [0, 1] determines the shape of the potential (ﬁgure 1). For consistency reasons, here s< 1.

Thermodynamically,

- if the switch is close to a minimum of the energy, kσ = 1 and we take a quadratic potential, the rower has time
to dissipate completely its excess energy to the environment before it reaches the switch. The dynamics is a
cyclical repetition of such relaxation processes

- if the switch is far from a minimum energy conﬁguration, kσ → 0 and the potential is linear. The switching
process is faster than the thermalization time of the rower, that does not have time to dissipate all its energy.
In this case at the switch the rower must undergo a collision-like process, which conserves the dissipation rate
and the magnitude of the macroscopic velocity.

The considerations above refer generically to the active mechanism of model rowers, but leave aside the link with
real cilia. If one wants to give this drive a microscopic interpretation, it has to be in terms of collective motions of
the internal motors and elastic degrees of freedom of the cilium. For example, in the linear potential scenario one
can imagine that motors attach/detach slowly generating a constant force, while in the nonlinear one they attach
simultaneously, giving the cilium a well-deﬁned minimum energy curvature, and they detach collectively after reaching
it.

The equation of motion for the rowers has to contain the hydrodynamic interaction. We think of rowers as sources
for the velocity ﬁeld and not as boundary conditions, which means introducing a (nondimentional) coupling constant
α between the ﬂuid and the rowers as a substitute for the geometric constraints. α is proportional to the Reynolds
number, or to the inverse of the kinematic viscosity. To avoid complications, we do not take into account additional
boundary conditions, such as walls, but it is straightforward to include them in the model. As the system is in a low

Reynolds and Strouhal number regime [15], it is possible to use the regularized Oseen tensor [16] to eliminate the
velocity ﬁeld and obtain an evolution equation for the sole rowers degrees of freedom [14]:

dfn(t)
dt

= (1 + ǫσn(t))

+ α

Ω[n, m]

Xm6=n

∂[−V (fn(t), σn(t))]
∂fn

+

∂[−V (fm(t), σm(t))]
∂fm

(2)

where ǫ is the parameter that represents the diﬀerence between the eﬀective viscous drags in the two states and
rnm ˆxˆx(I + ˆrnmˆrnm) is the Oseen tensor projected on the beating direction ˆx of the rowers. Strictly
Ω[n, m] = 1
speaking, Ω[n, m] depends on fn, fm. However, to ease things in an analytical calculation, we approximated it with
a quantity that depends only on the relative distance of the lattice sites, assuming that the oscillations are small
compared to this distance. Most of our simulations, though, were carried with the full Ω.

III. METACHRONAL COORDINATION

The scope of this section is to establish whether hydrodynamic interactions are suﬃcient to re-phase the rowers in
absence of a more direct coupling of chemical or mechanical origin. The oscillatory motion of a single rower in an
array is guaranteed by the structure of its equation of motion. A mean ﬁeld description of the array can be carried out
considering the overall eﬀect of the velocity ﬁeld generated on one rower by all the others. This procedure is outlined
in appendix A, and leads to the main result that a collection of rowers can generate a macroscopic ﬂow if ǫ 6= 0, and
that, provided there is no intrinsic orientation in the beating mechanism, symmetry will be broken. However, in a
description that goes beyond mean ﬁeld, nothing can be said about the beating time, which can in general vary with
the dynamics, so that the question can be restated as whether this variability in the beating time is stabilized or
disrupted by the hydrodynamic interactions. The problem is hard to approach analytically due to the discontinuous
nature of the switch σ and the nonlinearities. However, the continuous limit of the model, which describes the long
wavelength behavior of the system, can be approached analytically. The results obtained in this way can then be
compared with the numerical study of the discrete case.

From the point of view of solving the equation of motion one has to investigate:
(1) The existence of wave-like solutions. We deﬁne metachronal waves motions of the kind fn(t) = f (t ± τ xn), and

simple metachronal waves those for which f (and thus σ) is a periodic function.

(2) The stability and attractivity properties of these solutions.

(3) Their statistical weight in a macroscopic description of the system on large time scales. As one cannot establish
a priori its initial conditions, the metachronal solutions will be signiﬁcant if the phase space volume of the
initial conditions they attract is nonzero, and the relaxation time scales do not exceed a cutoﬀ deﬁned by the
lifetime of the system.

In what follows we will be mainly concerned with the ﬁrst two points. The third point will be approached in general
numerically for systems of a few rowers (short wavelengths).

A. Metachronal pattern in the large wavelength limit. Continuous model

We will show that in the continuum limit of the equation of motion 2 it is possible to ﬁnd simple metachronal wave
solutions and study their stability analytically. We can take the continuous limit analyzing selectively metachronal
solutions whose wavelength is large compared to the spacing between rowers. Then fn(t) = f (xn, t) becomes the
continuous ﬁeld f (x, t) and we can rewrite the hydrodynamic interaction tensor Ω[n, m] as (−∇2 + q2)−1, where we
incorporate also the possibility of screening with inverse screening length q. With one inversion of this operator, the
evolution equation 2 for the continuous f can be written as

(q2 − ∇2)

∂f
∂t

(cid:20)

+ (1 + ǫσ)(kf − σ)

= −α(kf − σ)

(cid:21)

(3)

The laplacian in the above expression is one dimensional, along the ﬁxed direction of beating ˆx . We look for planar
metachronal wave solutions with the ansatz f = f (t − τ x), so that we can reduce to a 1+1 dimensional problem.

The transverse hydrodynamic interactions are irrelevant as the rowers are constrained to beat in one dimension, and
the anisotropic terms can be absorbed in the prefactor of the interaction tensor. Calling y = t − τ x, we can assume
without loss of generality that y = 0 is the coordinate of a wave-front, where the switch σ has a jump. This translates
in the condition

where θ is the Heaviside step function. The local displacement f can be decomposed in the sum of power stroke and
recovery stroke parts, f+θ(−y) + f−θ(y), this implies that

σ = θ(−y) − θ(y)

σf = f+θ(−y) − f−θ(y)

With this procedure one obtains two linear third order diﬀerential equations for f− and f+, together with four
joining conditions for f± and their derivatives in correspondence with the jumps of σ. Metachronal solutions can
be constructed starting from the initial condition y(0) = 0 and generating a succession of wave-front coordinates
y(1), y(2) . . . y(n) imposing the joining conditions above on the solutions of the third order diﬀerential equations for
f±. The iteration of this process, starting from the initial conditions for f± and its ﬁrst and second derivatives,
or equivalently on the vector of the (two at the most) independent arbitrary constants (A±, B±) of the solution of
the diﬀerential equations, generates a ﬂux in phase space, described by an aﬃne transformation. The existence of
a ﬁxed point of the succession (A(n)
± ) and its attractive properties determine the nature and stability of the
constructed metachronal wave. At every iteration, the y(n) must satisfy the relation f (y(n)) = ±s. Note that despite
every step involves linear operations, a strong nonlinearity is introduced by the inversion for y(n) of the solutions
of the diﬀerential equations. It is also important to stress that the solutions constructed in this way are in general
not periodic, and may have a domain of existence which is bounded in y, as after a number of iterations it could be
impossible to invert for y(n). More details on these calculations for the exemplifying case k = 1, ǫ = 0 are reported in
appendix B.

± , B(n)

FIG. 2: Analytical solution of the continuum equation (3) computed for the case s = 0.8, p = 0.01, k = 1. The ﬁxed point
values of the parameters in this case are A± = −0.435, B± = −1.456.

Our results can be summarized as follows. We ﬁnd that, from the point of view of the existence and stability of
metachronal solutions, ǫ plays no qualitative role, so that the discussion can be simpliﬁed restricting to the case ǫ = 0.
A necessary condition to ﬁnd y(n) is that s < 1, which gives a good consistency test.

- For quadratic potentials (k > 0) the qualitatively relevant parameter is p = q+α

τ 2 . Fixing s, there is a critical
value pc such that for p > pc there exist no solution. This set an upper critical wavelength λc for the metachronal
waves. For 0 < p < pc, a ﬁxed point exists, and the stability analysis gives a marginally stable saddle point
in the planes of coeﬃcients (A±, B±). In other words there is one line (a region of zero measure) of stability
in this plane, with runaway hyperbolic trajectories around it. We report this case in ﬁgure 3 as an example.
Finally, for p < 0 the wave like solutions are always stable. However, this last condition implies p < 0, therefore
an eﬀective “attractivity” of the hydrodynamic interactions. We will discuss below two cases that could lead to
this situation.

- In the case k = 0 (linear potentials) the solution always exists. Stability analysis gives solutions that are always

unstable (two positive eigenvalues) for p > 0 and stable for p < 0.

In both cases we can conclude that metachronal solutions at long wavelengths are unstable unless p < 0, and the
interaction becomes attractive. We would like to spend a few words on the possible physical meaning of this change
in sign, with an eﬀectively attractive interaction. One ﬁrst consideration is that interaction between colloidal objects

FIG. 3: Stability analysis for s= 0.3, p = 0.05, k = 1. The ﬁxed point values of the parameters are A± = ±0.337, B± =
±0.865. The ﬁxed point is marked with a black square, and the lines with arrows indicate the direction of evolution of
diﬀerent initial conditions, showing that the ﬁxed point is marginally stable. The trajectories are obtained iterating the
transformation on (A±, B±) starting from diﬀerent initial conditions. The lines reported are Bezier interpolations of these
(discrete) transformations.

can be more complicated than how we represent it, in presence of hydrodynamic eﬀects or charge. For example, it
has been speculated that the presence of a wall in combination with a surface charge, all neglected in our model,
lead to eﬀectively attractive potentials between colloids of like charges [19]. Lubrication forces are another possibility,
provided that cilia are able to get suﬃciently close to each other. Coming back to the more orthodox case p > 0, the
results above show that in the continuous limit simple metachronal waves (with nearest neighbor rowers in phase) exist
for all wavelengths (below a characteristic one, for k 6= 0), but they are (marginally for k 6= 0) unstable. These results
are not suﬃcient to establish in general the statistical behavior of metachronal waves, as the hypotheses adopted here
reduce the analysis to a particular class of solutions and the local region of the phase space that surrounds them. For
negative p only we can conclude that wave-like solutions attract all the initial conditions. In the other cases, where
the solutions are not attractive, we have to look for other basins of attractions in the phase space. One possibility
is that these lie in the shorter wavelength region, which is overlooked by the continuous model. This motivates the
numerical analysis of the next sections.

B. Numerical simulations with many rowers

A conﬁrmation of these results, and more insight on the behavior of the system comes from numerical simulations
of linear and two dimensional arrays of many (50-250) rowers. These were run starting from random initial conditions,
with nearest neighbor Oseen-like interactions, the simpliﬁed interaction tensor Ω[n, m] and the full Ω[fn, fm], robustly
showing the same phenomenology in all cases. In particular, for linear arrays with k > 0:

- For p > 0 the relaxed solutions look like trains of traveling wave packets where nearby rowers are show anti-
coordinated motion.
In the patterns observed in the simulations the packets have typically a characteristic
length of the order of 10 particles. Their traveling direction coincides almost always with the beating direction
of single rowers.

- For p < 0 long wavelength traveling solutions appear. These always have a wavelength that is exactly the size
of the array. For every solution of this kind traveling in one direction, there is another one in the opposite one,
leading to mirror symmetric standing waves. The same solutions are found if α is kept positive, and a nearest
neighbor attractive interaction is added.

This is exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 4. For linear arrays with k = 0 wave-like solutions appear only for p < 0. Two dimensional
arrays show the same qualitative behavior.This results in wave patterns that propagate in directions that are diﬀerent
from the beating direction of the rowers (they are non-simplectic in the language of metachronal waves).

We can give a heuristic argument based on the switch mechanism to account for this anti-phase coordination. Let’s
consider three consecutive rowers X,Y,Z, and suppose they are in phase. Immediately after X reaches the +1 switch it
feels a strong negative force due to the change in the potential, which is propagated mainly to Y and much less to Z.
Provided Y was going toward the same switch, it will be slowed down, and therefore de-phased with respect to X. If we
imagine now that X,Y,Z are in anti-phase and A reaches the +1 switch. Now the force felt by Y (and much less by Z)

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 4: Metachronal solutions from numerical simulations of linear arrays of rowers interacting with the full Oseen tensor.
The distance between successive rowers is 2 in our rescaled units. (a) and (b): case p => 0. α = 0.4, k = 1, 150 rowers. In (a)
a part the conﬁguration fn as a function of the rower index is shown. The dashed line shows the actual conﬁguration, while
the solid one, obtained connecting the points relative to odd rowers, outlines the shape of the wave packet. (b) represents the
time evolution f (t) of the 40th rower of this array. (c): case p < 0. α = −0.1, k = 1, 200 rowers. The conﬁguration fn shows
a long wavelength metachronal wave. The part of the conﬁguration for i > 100 is mirror symmetric, due to the same pattern
traveling in the opposite direction

will be driving it toward the -1 switch, reinforcing the dephasing. As a result, the anti-phase beating between X and
Y is more stable than the coordinated motion. According to this argument, this will be the case in all the instances
where the inﬂuence of nearest neighbors is stronger than that of far away ones. More formally, one can ﬁnd a reason
for this behavior the in the analytical solution of the continuum equation. Conﬁgurations where rowers, interacting
with the normal Oseen tensor have opposite phase are overlooked by the continuum limit. However, roughly speaking,
these conﬁgurations lead eﬀectively to a change of sign of α in the continuum limit equation, as one can easily see
imposing feven = −f odd in equation 2. Therefore one can think that the stable waves found for p < 0 in the continuum
model have a trace of this anti-phase behavior.

C. Stability of the metachronal wave at short wavelengths.

To analyze the system at shorter wavelengths we ran numerical simulations of linear arrays of a few rowers with
periodic boundary conditions, choosing to truncate the interaction to nearest neighbors. We interpret the boundary
condition as a constraint on the wavelength of the resulting wave patterns. For up to four rowers, we analyzed the
system using Poincar´e maps. This study leads to more general considerations on the statistical weight of metachronal
solutions. The maps are obtained graphing the positions of two rowers when a reference one reaches the switch over
many cycles of the motion and for diﬀerent initial conditions. If the resulting graph is, or converges to a single point,
the motion is coordinated. If it is a closed orbit the coordination is quasi-periodic, which means that the motion in
general does not look like a traveling wave. Finally, if the resulting graph is a random scatter plot, the motion is
chaotic. Indeed, the system can be either chaotic or quasi-periodic if the potentials are linear, (k = 0), as can be
seen in ﬁgure 5. The phase space volume of the quasi-periodic region delimited by the concentric loops is therefore a
measure of the statistical weight of quasi-periodic solutions. The volume of this region decreases with increasing α.
The case k 6= 0 is somewhat diﬀerent. Here, there is no chaos, and the stable tori become attractors to a ﬁxed point of
the parameter space (ﬁgure 6, (a)). This means in principle that all the initial conditions lead to pattern formation.
Therefore, the relevant parameter becomes the relaxation time. This diverges as k → 0 as a power-law with exponent
b ≃ 0.85 and as α → 0 with exponent c ≃ 0.74. The curvature of the potential, which as we discussed has to do
with the activity of the microscopic active degrees of freedom, seems therefore to be important in determining the
organization properties of the system.

IV. OVERVIEW AND CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a simple model system of two-state low Reynolds number oscillators called rowers as a generic
framework for the problem of cooperation of cilia. The dynamics adopted in this work, speciﬁed setting the transition
rates between the two potentials, is entirely deterministic, determined by a switch mechanism coupled to the conﬁgu-
ration. We solved analytically for wave like solutions the continuum, long wavelength, limit of the equation of motion
for an array of rowers with hydrodynamic interaction and we analyzed the stability of the solutions, confronting with

(a)

(b)

FIG. 5: Poincar´e map for the case k = 0, three rowers, periodic boundary conditions. Here, ǫ = 0.02 and s= 0.9. The allowed
conﬁgurations are conﬁned in the square region [-s,s]×[-s,s]. However, to increase clarity, the ﬁgures were divided in four regions,
corresponding to the diﬀerent values of the two switches, which were “folded outside”, so that the axes correspond to the actual
conﬁguration of the rowers after a mirror reﬂection dependent on the state of the switches. (a) α = 0.1. (b) α = 0.01.

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 6: (a) Poincar´e maps for k 6= 0, three rowers, ǫ = 0.02. Left: α = 0.01 attracting trajectories for diﬀerent values of k. △
k = 0.15. O k = 0.2. ✷ k = 0.3. ✸ k = 0.4. Right: diﬀerent initial conditions for k = 1. (b) log-log plot of the relaxation time
as a function of k for α = 0.01(✷) and α = 0.1 (O). The power law ﬁts (solid lines) yield an exponent of 0.85. (c) Relaxation
time as a function of α for k = 0.3. The power law ﬁt gives the exponent 0.74.

results from numerical simulations. Finally, we analyzed through Poincar´e maps the phase space dynamics of systems
of a few rowers, to study their behavior at short wavelengths.

Our most important result is that metachronal patterns exist at all wavelengths (below a characteristic one, for
k 6= 0), but long wavelength solutions are (marginally for k 6= 0) unstable. The stable patterns have the form of
consecutive wave-packets where nearest neighbor oscillators are in anti-phase, propagated with constant speed, with
a characteristic length of a few rowers. We showed that the statistical weight of these solutions can be determined
numerically imposing an upper cutoﬀ on the wavelength of the pattern. Only in the presence of a reversed coupling
constant, can long wavelength metachronal solutions be stable. We proposed two possible physical reasons for this
reversal in sign. Deterministic switching rowers, as two state oscillators, show a rich and unusual phenomenology,
of which we could explore a number of aspects. Their behavior is in many ways opposite to our usual notion of
oscillations, starting from the fact that no normal modes can be deﬁned, but the oscillators self-tune to a chosen
frequency determined by the characteristic relaxation times in the two states, much as in systems close to a Hopf
bifurcation [13].

Comparing the behavior our abstract entities with that of real or model cilia, the ﬁrst puzzling question seems to
lie in the anti-phase motion. As discussed, a solution of this could lie in a short ranged interaction with a diﬀerent
origin. One good candidate for this are lubrication forces, as real cilia can be really close to each other. Also, a short
ranged synchronization between the switches of chemical origin could lead to the same result, consistently with the

scenario proposed in our previous work. The relevant parameters in our discussion are the stiﬀness of the potential k
and the hydrodynamic interaction coupling strength α. The ﬁrst is related to the internal active degrees of freedom,
which are hard to access experimentally, while the second can be used for a qualitative comparison of our results
with experiments where arrays of cilia are observed beating in ﬂuids with varying viscosity [8]. One other question
is the relation with more detailed models of cilia and their internal drive, in particular with the geometric switch
model of Gueron and collaborators [5, 6]. Rowers, with their few degrees of freedom constitute a system much more
under control than ﬁlaments to test. We can conclude that generically simple hydrodynamic interaction does not
synchronize but anti-synchronizes nearest neighbor rowers, so that, if ﬁlamentous objects are to be synchronized by
a similar mechanism, an extra (to be found) ingredient is needed.

The authors would like to thank Davide Rossi for his contribution to this work.

APPENDIX A: MEAN FIELD APPROACH, SYMMETRY BREAKING

It is possible to estimate the magnitude of the characteristic beating times and the macroscopic speed generated on
the ﬂuid without having to solve explicitly the equations of motion, using simple self-consistency considerations [14].
This is done writing the equations of motion (1 and 2) for a single rower in a constant external eﬀective velocity ﬁeld
v along its beating direction and supposing that this velocity is generated by the eﬀect of the surrounding rowers.
Equation 2 looks then like

df0(t)
dt

= (1 + ǫσ0(t))

∂[−V (f0(t), σ0(t))]
∂f0

+ v

where we labeled conventionally with the index 0 the rower around which we do the selfconsistent calculation. It is
then straightforward to calculate the beating times t± for this single rower, deﬁned as the times required to go from
-s to +s and back respectively:

t+ = [k(1 + ǫ)]−1ln

(1+ǫ)(1+k s)+v
(1+ǫ)(1−k s)+v

t− = [k(1 − ǫ)]−1ln

(1−ǫ)(1−k s)−v
(1−ǫ)(1+k s)−v

h

h

i

i

vsc = 

α

Ω0,n

Xn6=0





T

1
T Z
0

−

∂V (f, σ)
∂f

dt

These quantities can be used to determine self-consistently the absolute value of the “macroscopic” ﬂuid velocity v,
taking into account the average force exerted by the single rower on the ﬂuid in one cycle.

where the total period T = t+ + t− depends on v. Therefore

1
T

vsc = −



α

Ω0,n

vsc

Xn6=0



(cid:20)



t+
1 + ǫ

(cid:18)

+

t−
1 − ǫ (cid:19)

+ 4ǫ s

(cid:21)

(A1)

In this expression the summed hydrodynamic propagator simply plays the role of a multiplicative constant, and s
determines the self-consistent value for the velocity (see ﬁgure 7). For ǫ = 0, vsc = 0, and the scallop theorem is
found again in the description of a collection of rowers. The same argument yielding a non zero self-consistent velocity
can be extended to the case of one - or a collection of- rowers whose rowing direction is not ﬁxed. This is obtained
taking reﬂection symmetric potentials V (f, σ) = V (−f, σ), one of which with a single minimum for f = 0, the other
with a double well. A thermal noise needs to be added for the problem to be well posed. Rowers are able to break
spontaneously the symmetry to generate a ﬂow in the ﬂuid [14]. For real cilia, the problem of symmetry breaking can
be relevant in the context of generation of left-right asymmetry through nodal ﬂow in vertebrate embryos [17].

APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE OF EXPLICIT SOLUTION OF THE CONTINUOUS MODEL AND ITS
STABILITY

We will solve equation 3 analytically with the ansatz f = f (x − τ t) on the solution. For simplicity we can restrict
ourselves to the case k = 1, q = 0, ǫ = 0, as the general case carries no further conceptual complication. Calling

FIG. 7: Selfconsistent velocity calculation. The right hand side (solid line) and the left hand side (dashed line) of equation
A1 are plotted as a function of v in the graph above. The intersection between the two lines yields vsc. The values of the
n6=0 Ω0,n = 0.2. With these values, vsc ≃ 0.365 in
parameters for the curves shown are k = 0.8, ǫ = 0.25, s = 0.8, and α
nondimensional units.

P

y = x − τ t, the equation reads:

′′′

′′

− τ 2(f

+ f

) + α(f − σ) + τ 2σ

= 0

′′

where ′ indicates derivatives with respect to y. For a transition of σ from 1 to -1 at the wave-front y = 0, the right
joining conditions are, as already discussed,

where θ is the Heaviside step function, and f± = f±(y). Analogue expressions hold for the transition −1 → 1. The
decompositions above generate two linear ordinary diﬀerential equations for f±.

with p = α
τ 2 . Moreover, the same conditions B2, B3, B4 and their derivatives can be substituted in equation B1,
obtaining an expression containing terms in θ(±y), δ(y) and its derivatives. Equating all the terms to zero one obtains
three joining conditions. That is,

σ = θ(−y) − θ(y)
f = f+θ(−y) + f−θ(y)
σf = f+θ(−y) − f−θ(y)

′′′

′′

f

± + f

± − pf± = ∓p

(f

′

′

+ − f

(f+ − f−)|switch = 0;
2
3
4
9

−)|switch = −

−)|switch =

+ − f

;

′′

′′

(f

(B1)

(B2)
(B3)
(B4)

(B5)

(B6)

(B7)

(B8)

Here, and more generally in the case ǫ = 0, the two equations B5 are the same with the identiﬁcation −f− = f+.
The solution of equation B5 is easily obtained; f± = ±1 is always a particular solution, and one has to solve the
characteristic equation z3 + z2 = p. This admits three real solutions for 0 < p < ¯p, and one for p < 0.p > ¯p, ¯p = 4/27.
We will analyze in detail here the case with three solutions (−z1, −z2, z3), with z1, z2, z3 > 0 . In this situation,

f±(y) = ±

1 + A±e−z1y + B±e−z2y + C±ez3y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

The constant C± can be eliminated using the condition f±(0) = ∓s, meaning that after the ﬁrst jump the rower is
located at the switch. The next step is to evolve this solution up to a certain y± where the next switching event will
take place, imposing that

y± is obtained inverting this last expression, and has to satisfy the joining conditions B8 for the next “piece”. For
example, supposing we start from state σ = 1

f±(y±) = ±s

(B9)

′

′

′′

′′

(f

+(y+) − f

−(0)) =

;

(f

+(y+) − f

−(0)) = −

2
3

4
9

This gives a linear transformation (A+, B+) → (A−, B−). A complete solution can be constructed iterating this
procedure. This solution is in general non-periodic, as y± may vary at every step, and also cease to exist. The
equations that determine y(n)

+ and y(n)
± H(1,3)(y(n)
A(n)

− at the n-th step can be written as
± ) + B(n)

± ) − (1 + s)E3(y(n)

± H(2,3)(y(n)

± ) + (1 − s) = 0

(B10)

where we used the notation

H(i,3)(y) = e−ziy − e−z3y

i = 1, 2

Ei(y) = e−ziy

i = 1, 2; E3(y) = e−z3y

The joining conditions for step n are

= E1(y(n)
= E2(y(n)
where w1, w2 are rational functions of the solutions z1, z2z3.

A(n+1)
±
B(n+1)
±

∓ )A(n)
∓ )B(n)

∓ + w1
∓ + w2

(B11)

A simple (periodic) metachronal solution exists when the transformation has a ﬁxed point, which can be imposed

setting the equality between A(n+1)

and A(n)

+

+ . This wave is characterized by a unique y+ = y− = ¯y solution of

w1
1 + E1(¯y)

w2
1 + E2(¯y)

H(1,3)(¯y) +

H(2,3)(¯y) − (1 + s)E3(¯y) + (1 − s) = 0

and by coeﬃcients A− = A+ ≡ ¯A, B− = B+ ≡ ¯B given by

¯A =

¯B =

w1
1 + e−z1 ¯y

w2
1 + e−z2 ¯y

The equation for ¯y admits solution only if s < 1, and, for any given value of s, if p is lower than the critical value pc < ¯p
introduced in the paper, which can be found numerically. This sets a maximal wavelength λc for the metachronal
wave. The stability of the solution can be evaluated linearizing the ﬂow, starting from the point ( ¯A + δA, ¯B + δB)
in parameter space, inverting equation B10 for ¯y and calculating the total variation (δA, δB) from B11. In this case
this yields one negative and one positive eigenvalue corresponding to a marginally stable ﬁxed point. The procedure
outlined in this appendix can be carried out more in general, leading to the results discussed in the body of the paper.

[1] Alberts D., et. al. The Molecular Biology of the Cell, (Garland, NY, 2002).
[2] Cilia and Flagella, edited by M.A.Sleigh, (Academic Press, London, 1974).
[3] E.M.Purcell, Am. Jour. of Phys.,45, 1 (1977).
[4] J.R.Blake, N. Liron, and G.K.Aldis, J.Theor.Biol. 98, 127 (1982).
[5] S.Gueron, K.Levit-Gurevitch, N. Liron, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 6001 (1997).
[6] S.Gueron, K.Levit-Gurevich Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 22:12240 (1999).
[7] Gheber L., Priel Z. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 16, 167 (1990).
[8] L.Gheber, A. Korngreen, Z. Priel, Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 39, 9 (1998).
[9] J.Gray, and G.Hancock ,J.Exp.Biol. 32, 802 (1955).
[10] C.J.Brokaw, Biophys. J. 12, 564 (1972).
[11] M.Hines, J.J.Blum, Biophys. J. 23, 41 (1978).
[12] M.Murase, J.theor.Biol. 146, 209 (1990).
[13] Camalet S. and Julicher F., New J. Phys. 2, p.24 (2000).
[14] Cosentino Lagomarsino, M. B. Bassetti, P. Jona, Eur. Phys. J. B 26, 81 (2002).
[15] L.D.Landau, E.M.Lifshitz Fluid Mechanics (Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford 1998).
[16] M.Doi, S.F.Edwards The Theory of Polymer Dynamics (Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1986).
[17] Nonaka, S. et. al. Nature 418, 96 (2002).
[18] Rossi, D. Thesis. Universit`a degli studi di Milano (2002).
[19] Squires, T.M., M.P. Brenner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4976 (2000).

