manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pressure wave model for action potential propagation in excitable cells

Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Physics Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Marat M. Rvachev

Dated: January 24, 2003

Abstract Speed of propagation of small-amplitude pressure
waves through the cytoplasmic interior of myelinated and un-
myelinated axons of different diameters is theoretically esti-
mated and is found to generally agree with the action poten-
tial (AP) conduction velocities. This remarkable coincidence
allows to surmise a model in which AP spread along axon
is propelled not by straggling ionic currents as in the widely
accepted local circuit theory, but by mechanoactivation of the
membrane ion channels by a traveling pressure pulse. Hy-
draulic pulses propagating in the viscous axoplasm are cal-
culated to decay over ∼ 1 mm distances, and it is further hy-
pothesized that it is the role of inﬂuxing during the AP Ca2+
ions to activate membrane skeletal protein network attached
to the membrane cytoplasmic side for a brief radial contrac-
tion amplifying the pressure pulse and preventing its decay.

The model correctly predicts that the AP conduction ve-
locity should vary as the one-half power of axon diameter for
large unmyelinated axons, and as the ﬁrst power of the di-
ameter for myelinated axons, provided that speciﬁc mechan-
ical properties of axons are independent from diameter; that
myelinization increases the conduction velocity; that the con-
duction velocity increases with the temperature. Unlike the
local circuit theory, the model is able to qualitatively explain
observed increase in the AP duration in axons of smaller di-
ameters. Predictions of absolute AP conduction velocities are
limited by the knowledge of relevant to propagation of pres-
sure waves mechanical properties of axons, still, the veloci-
ties are predicted well for myelinated axons, while an agree-
ment for unmyelinated axons requires 3 orders of magnitude
higher resistance of axons to deformation increasing their di-
ameter compared to values deduced from published data on
membrane area expansion moduli.

The model can be viewed as competing with the local cir-
cuit theory for AP propagation, and, if realized in neurons,
would imply that pressure-related phenomena could partici-
pate in various aspects of neuron function, such as the synap-
tic vesicle release, synaptic integration, learning and memory.

Correspondence to: M. M. Rvachev ( Fax: +1-617-2585440, email:
maratr@mit.edu, after June 2003 rvachev@alum.mit.edu)

The model also suggests a new outlook on the evolution of the
signal transmission in cells, a rationale behind mechanosensi-
tivity of many ion channels and a physiological role of axonal
calcium inﬂux.

1 Introduction

Depolarization of interior of an excitable cell to a critical
level leads to a spiking behavior of the voltage across the
cell membrane, or action potential (AP). The spike has been
shown to arise from changes in membrane ion-speciﬁc per-
meability, allowing ﬂow of transmembrane ionic currents pow-
ered by electrochemical gradients (Hille 1977). The mem-
brane permeability to ions was demonstrated to depend on
the voltage across membrane, and a self-regenerating scheme
of the timecourse of the AP was developed (Hodgkin and
Huxley 1952). The changes in the membrane permeability
were later shown to arise from activation of voltage-gated
ion-selective protein channels embedded in membrane (Shepherd
1994). These ﬁndings are supported by variety of conclusive
experimental evidence and are a basis of modern research in
neuroscience (Shepherd 1994).

Phenomenon of propagation of the AP through excitable
cells (as opposed to development of the AP at a given cell
point) has been explained by the local circuit theory, which
postulates that spread of ionic currents caused by the volt-
age spike across membrane depolarizes adjoining unexcited
membrane and brings it to the critical level for excitation
(Hodgkin and Huxley 1952). Prediction of velocity of AP
conduction is critical for veriﬁcation of this model and can be
found from solution of second-order partial differential equa-
tion for time-dependent potential along axon length with sys-
tem’s electrical properties as parameters (Hodgkin and Huxley
1952). A simpliﬁed form of this equation was numerically
solved by Hodgkin and Huxley (1952) for a squid giant axon
model, in which variable membrane permeability to sodium
and potassium was parametrized as a function of time and

2

Marat M. Rvachev

voltage history across membrane as deduced from voltage-
clamp data. The conduction velocity was found to be 18.8
m/s for a 476 µm diameter axon at 18.5 ◦C with 21.2 m/s
experimental value.

The local circuit theory predicts that the conduction ve-
locity in unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers should vary as the one-
half power of axon diameter if axoplasmic resistivity and
membrane electrical properties per unit area are constant, with
experimental data ﬁtting powers between 0.57 and 1 depend-
ing on the ﬁber class (Hille 1977). For myelinated ﬁbers Rush-
ton (1951) has shown theoretically that the velocity should
vary as the ﬁrst power of diameter, again with provisions
of constant speciﬁc properties, and proportional scaling of
axon diameter, external myelin diameter, distance between
the nodes of Ranvier and membrane area at the nodes. The
ﬁrst power relationship is well established for large myeli-
nated ﬁbers (Hille 1977).

Experiments show a tendency toward longer APs in the
smaller nerve ﬁbers of a related class, a fact not explained
by the local circuit theory (Hille 1977). The conduction ve-
locity increases with temperature, e.g. for cat vagus myeli-
nated ﬁbers Q10 (ratio of the velocity at one temperature to
the value at a temperature 10 ◦C lower) is 4.8 at 18 ◦C, 2.5
at 28 ◦C and 1.6 at 37 ◦C (Paintal 1965), and for desheathed
rabbit vagus unmyelinated ﬁbers Q10 is 3.5 at 10 ◦C, 2.1 at
20 ◦C and 1.7 at 30 ◦C (Hille 1977). These changes are also
not explained within the local circuit theory, but are gener-
ally attributed to increased rate of conformational changes in
the membrane channel proteins at higher temperatures (Hille
1977).

Overall, except for the direct computation of the conduc-
tion velocity for the squid giant axon model, agreement be-
tween the local circuit theory predictions and measurements
is close but rather loose. Agreement in the ﬁber diameter de-
pendence for unmyelinated ﬁbers requires variation in spe-
ciﬁc properties of axoplasm or membrane with diameter, while
for similar agreement for myelinated ﬁbers these are assumed
to be constant with additional scaling conditions imposed.
Temperature affects conduction velocity similarly in myeli-
nated and unmyelinated ﬁbers, while if due only to changes
in activation rate of membrane channels, simple reasoning
suggests that myelinated ﬁbers would be affected much less,
since their conduction velocity would change at the Ranvier
nodes only. As already mentioned, longer duration of the AP
in ﬁbers of smaller diameters is not explained.

The purpose of this paper is to show that by making two
assumptions, namely, that a hydraulic pulse propagating through
axoplasm along axon length is able to mechanoactivate enough
membrane ion channels to depolarize membrane to the ex-
citation level, and that at least one of inﬂuxing during the
AP ions, presumably Ca2+, activates the membrane skeletal
protein network for a brief contraction timed to amplify the
propagating hydraulic pulse, one obtains a competing with
the local circuit theory model of AP propagation, and that
this model agrees reasonably well with experimental data on
the AP conduction velocities.

The exact mechanisms of how a traveling hydraulic pulse
may be ampliﬁed and how it might elicit membrane depolar-
ization are uncertain and most appealing to author possible
processes are discussed here. However, exact nature of these
processes does not change basic model features and conclu-
sions drawn, as long as these processes do amplify the hy-
draulic pulse and do excite the membrane upon arrival of the
pulse. Just as in the local circuit theory it is assumed that
depolarization of a membrane segment to the critical for ex-
citation level causes membrane voltage to spike due to activa-
tion of membrane voltage-gated ion channels. The distinction
from the local circuit theory is that this initial depolarization
is brought about by a propagating hydraulic pulse and not
by the straggling ionic currents, and thus the velocity of AP
conduction is equal to the velocity of propagation of the hy-
draulic pulse. Although most of the discussion here is con-
cerned with the AP propagation in neurons, the model should
be easily transferable to non-neuronal excitable cells.

2 Model features and necessary assumptions

Hydraulic pulses can propagate through viscous liquids en-
closed in ﬂexible tubes, a fact illustrated by a blood pulse
propagating through blood vessels. In addition to a normal
force on the tube wall exerted by the pulse, viscosity of the
liquid introduces shear stress in the direction parallel to the
axis of the tube (Morgan and Kiely 1954). These forces act-
ing on an extensible axolemma should lead to a membrane
stretch, which, according to the ﬁrst assumption, alone or
in combination with bending and compression of the mem-
brane during propagation of the pulse, should open enough
ion channels to bring membrane voltage to the excitation level.
Evidence is now mounting that many unrelated types of ion
channels are mechanosensitive (Gu et al. 2001), but still it is
not here possible to quantitatively substantiate this assump-
tion, partly because magnitude of the membrane deforma-
tions depends on an unknown pulse amplitude. Since many
mechanosensory channels are activated by protein links an-
choring channel proteins to extracellular structures and to the
cytoskeleton (Gillespie and Walker 2001), it is also reason-
able to propose that perturbation of the cell interior cytoskele-
ton by the propagating hydraulic pulse could be directly me-
chanically coupled by the protein links to the channel proteins
for a fast and sensitive activation.

As will be shown later, pressure waves in axoplasm de-
crease e-fold in amplitude over ∼1 mm distances, so that
their sustained propagation in long axons would require am-
pliﬁcation. Although other possibilities cannot be excluded,
it appears that forceful circumferential (and consequently ra-
dial) contraction of the membrane skeletal protein network
triggered by inﬂuxing during the AP Ca2+ ions is the most
plausible mechanism of such ampliﬁcation. Indeed, virtually
every excitable cell has voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in its
membrane and, in fact, calcium is the basis of the AP in
muscles of many invertebrates, in smooth muscles and many
gland cells of vertebrates (Shepherd 1994). At the same time

Pressure wave model for action potential propagation in excitable cells

3

increase in free intracellular calcium in many cells is associ-
ated with initiation of motion, from muscle contraction and
motility in freely moving cells to synaptic vesicle release in
synapses (Shepherd 1994). Inﬂuxing during the AP calcium
would instantly increase its concentration in the membrane
skeletal protein network near the inner membrane surface and
that, coupled with calcium ability to rapidly induce confor-
mational changes in proteins such as upon its binding to actin
ﬁlaments in actin-myosin muscle complex, could provide for
a fast contractile response necessary to amplify a quickly prop-
agating pressure pulse. The well-known sodium impulse in
this scheme could simply be the means to rapidly change
transmembrane voltage by the sodium current and thus quickly
open relatively sparse voltage-gated calcium channels.

The purpose of the voltage spike in this model is to ac-
tivate voltage-gated calcium channels, but clearly it will cre-
ate straggling axoplasmic ionic currents that, just as in the
local circuit theory, will depolarize adjacent unexcited mem-
brane. This depolarization, then, will decrease the number of
mechanoactivated by the hydraulic pulse ion channels needed
to bring the membrane to the excitation voltage; but if the
straggling currents are able to excite adjacent membrane be-
fore arrival of the pressure pulse, AP will obviously spread
according to the local circuit theory mechanism. Thus, it ap-
pears that the two mechanisms of propagation can be viewed
as competing, and it is conceivable that different cells, de-
pending on their particular electrical and mechanical proper-
ties, are able to realize one or the other mechanism.

Another argument in favor of the pressure pulse ampliﬁ-
cation by structures adjacent to the membrane inner surface is
the existence of a dense undercoating just beneath axon plas-
malemma in the axon hillock and the nodes of Ranvier (Palay
and Chan-Palay 1977). Initiation of a hydraulic pulse in the
axon hillock, as well as restoration of its amplitude in the
nodes of Ranvier after its passive propagation through myeli-
nated part of axon, would require extra effort, and it is rea-
sonable to expect that features underlying pulse creation and
ampliﬁcation should be emphasized. Expression in these re-
gions of the dense membrane undercoating might suggest that
structures adjacent to the membrane inner surface take part in
the processes, possibly, as hypothesized above, by a forceful
circumferential contraction of a protein network included in
the undercoating. Another well-known feature of the nodes of
Ranvier, high density of voltage-gated sodium channels, can
be justiﬁed within this model by necessity to rapidly change
voltage across membrane by the sodium current to quickly
open voltage-gated calcium channels, by an increase in mem-
brane depolarization at the next Ranvier node due to aug-
mented axoplasmic currents, and possibly by an increase in
number of the sodium channels mechanically coupled to in-
terior cytoskeleton structures, thus improving mechanosensi-
tivity of the membrane to axoplasmic disturbances.

In the model being presented axon acts as a sensor of
mechanical disturbances in the axoplasm, transducing them
into pressure-generating motion by utilizing mechanosensi-
tivity of the membrane ion channels and ionic electrochem-
ical gradients across the membrane. Considering preponder-

ance of mechanical stimuli in nature, an appealing scheme of
how cells could have evolved to transmit signals by pressure
waves can be constructed.

Let’s suppose that a cell has developed an ability to rapidly
withdraw a part of its membrane to which an external nega-
tive pressure and/or stretch was applied. This reaction could
be aimed at detachment from adhesion surfaces or simply at
preservation of shape of a freely moving cell in a dynamic
mechanical environment. If such cell happens to have cylin-
drical shape and an external stimulus causes rapid membrane
withdrawal at a cell end, a wave of increased cytoplasmic
pressure will be created and will propagate along the axis of
the cell toward its other end. Since passive membrane move-
ment is determined by pressure difference across it, circu-
lar membrane segments subjected to increased intracellular
pressure in the pulse will move as if negative pressure was
applied at the extracellular side; membrane stretch caused by
the motion of the viscous cytoplasm in the pulse should also
be indistinguishable from a membrane stretch exerted from
outside the cell. If these stimuli are sufﬁcient to elicit force-
ful inward retraction of the circular membrane segments, new
cytoplasmic pressure waves will be created, which, if timed
properly, might amplify the original hydraulic pulse carrying
the signal of stimulation at one cell end to the other.

3 Passive propagation of hydraulic pulses through axons

Propagation of pressure waves in incompressible viscous liq-
uids enclosed in ﬂexible tubes has been theoretically studied
by Morgan and Kiely (1954). For the case of thin-walled elas-
tic tube, small-amplitude harmonic waves with wavelength
large compared to the radius of the tube and the case of “large”
liquid viscosity (deﬁned below), speed of propagation of the
harmonic waves vinc and decay length Linc (length over which
amplitude of the waves decreases e-fold) are

vinc =

1
2

Eh
2ρR

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ωρ
µ

1
(5 − 4ν)

,

1
2

1
2

1
2

Linc =

1
ω

Eh
2ρR

ωρ
µ

1
(5 − 4ν)

,

1
2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

R

1
2

R

(1)

(2)

where E is the Young’s modulus of the tube wall material, h
is the thickness of the tube wall, R is the radius of the tube,
ρ is the liquid density, µ is the liquid viscosity, ω is the wave
frequency, ν is the Poisson’s ratio of the tube wall material.

The condition of “large” viscosity (or small tube radius,
or low frequency) is R(ωρ/µ)1/2 ≪ 1. That this condition
holds well for axons of diameters at least up to ∼40 µm
can be seen from the following estimate. Measurements of
macroscopic cytoplasm viscosity with ∼1 µm objects freely
diffusing or moving under ∼1 pN forces yield µ ∼ 0.2 Pa s
(Alexander and Rieder 1991, Marshall et al. 2001), while ap-
plication of larger ∼1 nN forces to objects of similar sizes
yields µ ∼ 210 Pa s (Bausch et al. 1999). Duration of the
pressure pulse should be close to that of the contraction that
created and ampliﬁed it, which in turn should be determined

4

Marat M. Rvachev

by the duration of inﬂux of calcium ions, rate of dissipation
of free intracellular calcium and time properties of the pre-
sumed process of contraction. Lacking detailed knowledge
of the last two processes it is here simply assumed that the
duration of the pressure pulse is the same as the AP dura-
tion, ∼0.34 ms for large-diameter cat myelinated axons at
37.1 ◦C (Paintal 1966), with corresponding ω = 2π/(2 · 0.34
ms) ≈ 9200 rad/s (here for simplicity it is taken that the shape
of the AP and of the pressure pulse is a half-sine). Taking
R = 20 µm, ρ = 1000 kg/m3, lower value of µ = 0.2 Pa s,
ω = 9200 rad/s, yields R(ωρ/µ)1/2 ≈ 0.14, which should
be smaller enough than 1 for the large viscosity limit to hold.
Another condition used to derive (1)–(2), of large wavelength
λ of the pressure waves compared to the radius of the tube,
or λ = 2πv/ω ≫ R, as will be seen later, also holds well for
axons.

For the case of small-amplitude harmonic waves in a com-
pressible liquid enclosed in a rigid tube and the above condi-
tions of large viscosity (R(ωρ/µ)1/2 ≪ 1) and large wave-
length (λ ≫ R), Rayleigh (1945) has obtained:

vcomp = vsoundR

ωρ
µ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1

2 1
2

,

1

1
ω
where vsound is the speed of sound in the liquid.

Lcomp =

vsoundR

ωρ
µ

2 1
2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

,

It should be noted that in the absence of viscosity speed
of propagation of small-amplitude harmonic pressure waves
in a compressible liquid enclosed in a thin-walled elastic tube
is given by (e.g. Chevray and Mathieu 1993)

(3)

(4)

(5)

vµ=0 =

1
ρ(k + 2R

Eh ) !

 

1
2

,

where k is the intrinsic bulk compressibility of the liquid, and
k + 2R/Eh is the compressibility of the liquid in the tube
stemming from both the intrinsic compressibility of the liq-
uid and distensibility of the walls. In the limit of rigid tube
walls so that their distensibility can be ignored, i.e. when
k ≫ 2R/Eh, (5) reduces to vµ=0 = (1/ρk)1/2, which is
equal to the speed of sound in the liquid vsound (e.g. Chevray
and Mathieu 1993) and the ﬁrst factor in (3) and the second in
(4). In the opposing limit of k ≪ 2R/Eh, i.e. when internal
compressibility of the liquid can be ignored, (5) gives vµ=0 =
(Eh/2Rρ)1/2, which is known as the Moens-Korteweg equa-
tion (Hardung 1962) and the ﬁrst factor in (1) and the second
in (2). It now can be seen that the outcome of introduction of
large liquid viscosity in the inviscid case is independent from
whether compressibility of the liquid in the tube arises from
distensibility of the walls or from intrinsic compressibility of
the liquid, except for an additional factor 2/(5 − 4ν)1/2 in
(1) and (2), which takes into account movement of the tube
wall in the direction of the tube axis by the viscous liquid
(Morgan and Kiely 1954). In principle it is a straightforward,
although cumbersome, task to modify the equation of con-
servation of mass (3) in (Morgan and Kiely 1954) to include

intrinsic compressibility of the liquid in the approximate form
dρ = kρdp, repeat derivations and obtain expressions for the
wave speed and decay length for the case of a compressible
viscous liquid in an elastic tube. Here, however, it is noted
that the factor 2/(5 − 4ν)1/2 varies from 0.89 to 1.15 for
physical values of Poisson’s ratio 0 < ν < 0.5, and is close
enough to 1 to be neglected in the present analysis. There-
fore, neglecting axial motion of the tube wall, (1)–(5) can be
combined to obtain for the case of small-amplitude harmonic
waves in a compressible liquid enclosed in a thin-walled elas-
tic tube with the conditions of large liquid viscosity and large
wavelength:

v =

1
ρ(k + 2R

Eh ) !

 

1
2

R

1
2

R

1

2 1
2

,

ωρ
µ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ωρ
µ

1

2 1
2

.

L =

1
ω  

1
ρ(k + 2R

Eh ) !
In general, when velocity of harmonic waves (phase ve-
locity) v depends on frequency of the waves ω, velocity of
propagation of a wave packet is equal to the group velocity
vgr, given by (e.g. Chevray and Mathieu 1993)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(6)

(7)

(8)

vgr = v + ω

dv
dω

.

Application of (8) to (6) leads to the group velocity vgr =
1.5v.

Derivations in (Morgan and Kiely 1954) assumed isotropy
of the tube wall material, while structure of lipid membranes
suggests high anisotropy of their elastic properties in the trans-
verse direction compared to the in-plane directions. By fol-
lowing the derivations, however, one can ascertain that terms
corresponding to the transverse elasticity of the wall material
have to be neglected. Then Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s
ratio ν in the formulas above represent membrane resistance
to a tangential to the membrane stretch and shrinkage of per-
pendicular to stretch in-plane dimensions respectively under
assumption of in-plane isotropy of membrane elastic proper-
ties. Then, neglecting transverse stresses on membrane, Hook’s
law yields (e.g. Timoshenko 1934): e1 = (σ1−νσ2)/E, e2 =
(σ2 − νσ1)/E, where e1, e2 – relative orthogonal elonga-
tion of membrane subjected to orthogonal tangential stresses
σ1, σ2. From the deﬁnition of elastic area expansion modu-
lus K (e.g. Thompson et al. 1997): (τ1 + τ2)/2 = KdA/A,
where τ1 and τ2 are orthogonal tensions in the membrane sur-
face, dA/A – fractional area change. Taking into account that
τ1 = σ1h, τ2 = σ2h, and for small e1, e2: dA/A = e1 + e2,
one can obtain:

Eh = 2K(1 − ν).

(9)

4 Numerical estimates and comparison of model
predictions to experiment

Inspection of formulas (6)–(8) in relation to propagation of
pressure pulses through axons leads to the following state-
ments: velocity of propagation v for a given ω, µ, k, R in-
creases with increased membrane rigidity Eh; for a given

Pressure wave model for action potential propagation in excitable cells

5

ω, µ, k, Eh dependence on the axon radius is intermediate
between R1/2 and R and speciﬁcally depends on the prod-
uct Ehk; for a limiting case of a soft membrane (Eh ≪
2R/k), v ∼ R1/2; for the opposing case of a rigid membrane
(Eh ≫ 2R/k), v ∼ R; for an axon of ﬁxed R, Eh and k:
v ∼ (ω/µ)1/2; decay length L behaves similarly to v, except
for the L ∼ ω−1/2 dependence.

As has been mentioned earlier, the local circuit theory is
unable to explain increased duration of the AP in the smaller
diameter ﬁbers of a related class (Hille 1977). Since in the
model being presented membrane channels are activated not
only by the voltage across membrane (as in the local circuit
theory), but also by the traveling pressure pulse, hydraulic
pulses of longer duration should increase duration of the AP
due to longer mechanostimulation of the membrane channels.
Since lower frequency components of a pressure pulse de-
cay less with distance (see (7)), increased damping in ﬁbers
of smaller diameters (again from (7)) in general means that
propagating pressure pulses will have lower frequency and
longer duration and, as just mentioned, longer duration of the
AP. From these considerations it also follows that duration of
a “membrane” AP should in this approximation be indepen-
dent from the ﬁber diameter and equal to the values predicted
by the local circuit theory, owing to the absence of a propa-
gating pressure pulse in this case. Duration of a propagated
AP, however, is in general predicted to be longer than that for
a membrane AP and should increase with decreasing ﬁber
diameter reﬂecting increased duration of the pressure pulse.
The idea that the AP duration ∆TAP adjusts to the duration of
the pressure pulse ∆Tpr reinforces the approximate relation
∆TAP ≈ ∆Tpr, assumed earlier from converse arguments
that duration of the pressure pulse should be close to that of
inﬂux of calcium ions.

4.1 Myelinated axons

As follows from (6)–(8), the larger the stiffness of the ax-
olemma, the larger the speed of propagation of the pressure
waves and the lesser their decay with distance. From this
perspective myelinization of axons by Schwann or oligoden-
droglial cells tightly wrapping around axon in a spiral manner
is aimed at increase of rigidity of the axon membrane. Suc-
cessive layers of the same myelin cell are known to ﬁrmly ad-
here together by proteins from the cell surface glycoprotein
family, which are in fact main protein constituents of myelin
(Shepherd 1994). This adherence should be effective against
unwinding of the myelin spiral when subjected to increased
pressure in the hydraulic pulse and should transfer the dis-
tending load to lipids and proteins of all myelin layers. In
order to be able to neglect distensibility of the myelin sheath
compared to intrinsic compressibility of the axoplasm, “ef-
fective” Young modulus E of the myelin should satisfy stem-
ming from (6) approximate condition E > 2R/(hk). Taking
k as for saline water at 37 ◦C k = (ρv2
sound)−1 ≈ 4.04·10−10
Pa−1 (Lide 2002) and R ≈ h leads to the condition E >
5 ·109 Pa. Area expansion modulus K for plasma membranes

is on the order of 0.4 N/m with membrane thickness of h ≈ 6
nm (Thompson et al. 1997), which corresponds to Eh ≈ 0.6
N/m (from (9), ν taken as 1/4) and “effective” Young mod-
ulus of E = Eh/h ≈ 108 Pa. Thus, if myelin sheath is as
elastic as plasma membrane, it cannot be considered indisten-
sible compared to the intrinsic compressibility of axoplasm.
However, considering that lipid composition of myelin differs
markedly from that of plasma membranes, in particular in that
it contains signiﬁcantly more cholesterol known to increase
membrane rigidity (Smith 1996, Thompson et al. 1997), that
the protein-rich major dense lines might also signiﬁcantly
contribute to myelin rigidity, and that in the model being pre-
sented increased myelin stiffness is beneﬁcial for propaga-
tion of the pressure pulses and thus should be sought after by
the cellular mechanisms, it is here assumed that circumferen-
tial distensibility of myelin sheath does not appreciably effect
velocity of propagation of axoplasmic pressure waves. Then,
also neglecting reduction of the propagation velocity in the
nodes of Ranvier, the quotient 2R/(Eh) in (6) and (7) can be
disregarded for myelinated axons.

Substituting in (6) compressibility of saline water k =
4.04 · 10−10 Pa−1, viscosity µ = 0.2 Pa s, frequency ω =
2π/(2 · 0.6 ms) ≈ 5200 rad/s, axon radius R = 1 µm leads
to the pressure pulse velocity vgr = 6 m/s, which, given the
approximate nature of the estimate, is in a good agreement
with the experimental value of 10 m/s for the AP conduc-
tion velocity in cat myelinated axons of 1 µm radius at 38
◦C (Hille 1977); the AP duration of 0.6 ms for the mentioned
ﬁbers was measured at 37.1 ◦C by Paintal (1966). Use of µ =
0.2 Pa s in the estimate can be justiﬁed by considering that it
should represent viscosity arising from small-amplitude cy-
toskeletal deformations (Alexander and Rieder 1991, Mar-
shall et al. 2001) that are likely to accompany propagation
of a small-amplitude pressure pulse, while larger values of
µ = 210 Pa s were obtained with forceful displacement of
cytoplasmic objects that possibly disrupted the cytoskeleton
or distorted it considerably (Bausch et al. 1999); still, given
the large scatter of values for µ available in the literature, the
uncertainty in µ should represent a major contribution to the
overall error of the estimate.

From (7), e-fold amplitude decay length for the consid-
ered case is then L ≈ 1.2 mm and wavelength λ = 2πv/ω ≈
7.3 mm.

4.2 Unmyelinated axons

For unmyelinated axons of radius R = 0.65 µm, assuming
membrane Eh = 0.6 N/m as before, and taking µ = 0.2
Pa s, k = 4.04 · 10−10 Pa−1, ω = 5200 rad/s as for the
myelinated axons, (6) and (8) yield the pressure pulse veloc-
ity vgr = 0.053 m/s, which is ∼40 times lower compared
to measurements of 2.3 m/s for the AP conduction veloc-
ity in cat unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers of 0.65 µm radius at 38
◦C (Hille 1977), notwithstanding the low value for viscosity
used. Taking into account agreement obtained with the same
values of µ, k, ω for myelinated axons, and that the main

6

Marat M. Rvachev

difference in mechanical properties between myelinated and
unmyelinated axons should be in the axolemmal resistance
Eh to increases in axon diameter, one can conclude that in
order for the model to predict correct AP conduction velocity
for the unmyelinated axons, “effective” membrane Eh has to
be ∼ 1600 times larger than the value of 0.6 N/m used. This
latter value represents resistance of lipid plasma membranes
to area expansion. Additional resistance to increases in di-
ameter of unmyelinated axons can come from deformation
of adjacent glial cells; from deformation of the cytoskeleton
tethering diametrically opposing membrane segments; from
passive resistance of the membrane skeletal protein network
to the radial deformation and from active contraction of the
network during ampliﬁcation of the hydraulic pulse. Since
axial membrane elasticity does not appreciably inﬂuence ve-
locity and decay length of the pressure waves, the mentioned
above factors might selectively increase membrane resistance
to the circumferential expansion, leaving axial rigidity at a
lower value. From this perspective, the model predicts “effec-
tive” area expansion modulus for the deformation described
∼3 orders of magnitude larger than for lipid membranes.

4.3 Velocity dependence on axon diameter and temperature

From (6)–(8) it follows that for unmyelinated ﬁbers of small
diameters (2R ≪ Ehk), vgr ∼ R, while in the opposing
limit of large diameters (2R ≫ Ehk), vgr ∼ R1/2. In un-
myelinated C-ﬁbers (diameters 0.4–1.2 µm) of cat saphenous
nerve AP conduction velocity vAP is proportional to R, in un-
myelinated ﬁbers (1.6–20 µm) of locust and cockroach vAP ∼
R0.7–R0.8, while in unmyelinated ﬁbers (2–520 µm) of cephaloid
molluscs vAP ∼ R0.57 (Hille 1977). Thus, assuming that
Ehk is on the order of 10 µm and is not signiﬁcantly differ-
ent for the mentioned ﬁbers, predicted gradual change in de-
pendence from R to R0.5 with increasing unmyelinated ﬁber
diameter is very well matched by experiment.

For myelinated ﬁbers, assuming Eh ≫ 2R/k, (6)–(8)
give vgr ∼ R dependence, again closely matched by exper-
imentally determined vAP ∼ R (Hille 1977). In the con-
sidered above limit of small unmyelinated ﬁbers, condition
2R ≪ Ehk is the same as for myelinated ﬁbers, Eh ≫
2R/k, which indicates that for these ﬁbers myelinization would
not increase the speed of propagation or decay length. Very
small diameter ﬁbers are indeed usually unmyelinated (Rushton
1951).

The analyses above implicitly assumed that speciﬁc me-
chanical properties of axons, k, µ, Eh, are constant across
ﬁbers of varying diameters, or that their variation is small
enough not to appreciably change obtained R dependences.
The same condition was assumed for the central frequency
ω of the pressure wave packet. In cat saphenous myelinated
ﬁbers at 37.1 ◦C, AP duration ∆TAP changes from 0.6 ms
to 0.34 ms with 8-fold increase in diameter (Paintal 1966).
Corresponding change in ω = 2π/(2 · ∆TAP ), from 5.2 · 103
to 9.2 · 103 rad/s, can be shown to introduce not more than an
additional 0.14 power of R in the predicted dependences. A

larger variation of ω with R, however, would have a greater
impact on the predictions.

Assuming that Eh, k and R do not signiﬁcantly depend
on temperature T , and that changes in ω and µ with T are in-
dependent from degree of ﬁber myelinization, (6)–(8) predict
that myelinated and unmyelinated ﬁbers should be similarly
affected by a temperature change, just as observed experi-
mentally (Hille 1977); the predicted dependence is vAP ∼
(ω(T )/µ(T ))1/2. Experimental data on µ(T ) is not readily
available, however, for most liquids viscosity increases with
decreasing temperature (Poling et al. 2001). An increase in
viscosity means (see (7)) augmented damping of pressure
waves of all frequencies, and, just as in the case of ﬁbers of
smaller diameters considered earlier, duration of the AP can
be argued to increase. AP duration indeed increases with de-
creasing temperature, e.g. with Q10 of 3.4 at 37 ◦C for cat
vagus myelinated ﬁbers (Paintal 1966), but this large vari-
ation could mainly stem from change in rate of activation of
voltage-gated membrane channels (Hille 1977). According to
vgr ∼ ω1/2 and the assumed relation ω = 2π/(2 · ∆TAP ),
Q10 of 3.4 for the AP duration ∆TAP implies that Q10 for
the pressure pulse propagation velocity should be 3.41/2 ≈
1.8 without even considering µ(T ) dependence. Experimen-
tal value of Q10 = 1.6 for the AP conduction velocity in
the cat vagus myelinated ﬁbers at 37 ◦C (Paintal 1965) thus
might indicate that viscosity of the axoplasm does not change
appreciably in the 27–37 ◦C range.

It is also interesting to note that cooling-related removal
of AP conduction block in damaged (e.g. by multiple sclero-
sis) myelinated axons (Franssen et al. 1999) can be naturally
explained within the model by an increase in the decay length
L with the decrease of ω ∼ (∆TAP )−1 at lower tempera-
tures.

4.4 Depletion of sodium and calcium concentrations

Depletion of sodium concentration around a squid giant axon
leads to wider and slower propagating APs (Hodgkin and
Katz 1949), in close agreement with the Hodgkin-Huxley equa-
tions (Hille 1992). However, longer duration of the AP in the
presented model also decreases velocity of AP propagation,
through relation vAP ∼ (∆TAP )−1/2; qualitative analysis of
vAP and ∆TAP from Fig. 4 in (Hodgkin and Katz 1949) does
not exclude validity of this relation.

Termination of axonal inﬂux of calcium, or injection of
calcium-chelating agents could potentially provide a good
test of the model (if the ampliﬁcation process is indeed acti-
vated by calcium inﬂux), which predicts that under such con-
ditions conduction should seize or switch to a lower veloc-
ity local circuit theory mechanism. Presence of free calcium
exerts large inﬂuences on ion channel gating (Hille 1992),
which in the local circuit theory framework should in gen-
eral increase the conduction velocity: decrease in free extra-
cellular calcium signiﬁcantly decreases thresholds for activa-
tion of both sodium and potassium channels; free intracellu-
lar calcium can activate polarizing calcium-dependent potas-
sium currents (Hille 1992). Therefore, observed decrease in

Pressure wave model for action potential propagation in excitable cells

7

the conduction velocity under such conditions could be inter-
preted in favor of the presented model; observed increase in
the velocity would favor the local circuit theory, but, without
detailed analysis, would not disprove the model, since it is
possible that the velocity deduced from the local circuit the-
ory became larger than the one predicted by the model after
modiﬁcation of channel gating. Data on the AP propagation
velocities in axons with manipulated calcium concentrations
is not readily available, since most experiments use voltage-
clamp methods under these conditions; detailed analysis of
these phenomena will be done in a subsequent work.

5 Discussion

It is very remarkable that transmission of hydraulic pulses
through axoplasm, a process so disparate from passive con-
ductance of ionic currents, reasonably well reproduces all
major features of AP conduction: changes in the velocity with
membrane rigidity, with axon diameter and with the temper-
ature; changes in the AP duration with ﬁber diameter. Accu-
rate predictions of absolute AP conduction velocities by the
model are limited by the knowledge of relevant to propaga-
tion of the pressure pulses cytoplasm viscosity, resistance of
myelinated and unmyelinated axons to increases in diameter,
cytoplasm compressibility, and an approximate nature of the
estimate of the duration of the hydraulic pulse. Still, estimates
of the velocity for myelinated ﬁbers with an assumption of in-
distensibility of the myelin sheath give values close to those
observed experimentally; for unmyelinated ﬁbers, although
the velocity is underpredicted, the situation might change as
the appropriate experimental data on membrane distensibility
becomes available.

On the other hand it is noteworthy that all fundamental in-
gredients necessary for realization of the described model are
in place: mechanosensitivity of many membrane ion chan-
nels (e.g. Gu et al. 2001), low free calcium concentration in a
resting cell (Shepherd 1994), ubiquity of the calcium impulse
and its trait to induce motion in ﬁlaments (Shepherd 1994),
and high ﬁlament content of the cell interior (Shepherd 1994).
Whether or not these ingredients are present to a degree suf-
ﬁcient for the active propagation of the hydraulic pulses, and
whether any cells in fact use the described mechanism for AP
conduction, should be best settled by experiment.

In fact, a small axon swelling followed by a smaller shrink-
age, both roughly synchronous with propagating APs, was
demonstrated by Iwasa et al. (1980) in crab and squid giant
axons. Beyond increased pressure inside axon, the swelling
can be caused by variation of the voltage across membrane
through the ensuing change in difference in surface tensions
between the two membrane interfaces (Zhang et al. 2001).
Axial motion of an axoplasmic object such as a vesicle ob-
served simultaneously with the AP could be less inﬂuenced
by the voltage-dependent membrane movement and more sen-
sitive to axoplasm disturbances induced by the hydraulic pulse.
The model predicts that a swelling should immediately pre-
cede the voltage spike, and a careful analysis of delays in

electronics in an experiment similar to that by Iwasa et al.
(1980) could provide another test of the model.

Other tests can come from measurements of the AP con-
duction velocity in axons with manipulated mechanical prop-
erties; from measurements of velocity of propagation of pres-
sure pulses through axons; from precise measurements of me-
chanical properties of neurons and other excitable cells; from
experiments on mechanical stimulation of AP in excitable
cells; from measurements of changes in the conduction ve-
locity with pressurization, depletion of intracellular calcium,
or disruption of the membrane skeletal proteins.

The following circumstances can be recognized to indi-
rectly support the model: in many non-neuronal excitable cells
AP seems to be connected to mechanical motion (Shepherd
1994); neurons often have convex shape as if pressurized from
inside; myelinization appears to be the only feasible way to
substantially increase mechanical resistance of axolemma, while
resistivity of the membrane to leak currents could in principle
be accomplished by other means, e.g. decrease in the number
of leak channels; many freely moving cells have an ability
to control membrane movement by forces of microﬁlaments
located just beneath the plasma membrane (Shepherd 1994);
the same ability is attributed to neurons, where the forces are
believed to arise from interactions of actin, fodrin and other
elements (Shepherd 1994). In addition, the main components
of the model, propagating hydraulic pulses and radially con-
tracting tubes generating a directed axial force on the tube
contents, are exploited in cardiovascular, intestinal and other
tubular systems in many organisms, which might even sug-
gest an evolutionary link between the systems and excitable
cells.

Central role of hydraulic pulses and pressure-generating
processes in the model implies that pressure-related phenom-
ena might play important roles in the function of neurons
and other excitable cells: synaptic vesicle release in neurons
might be aided by impact of the AP-associated hydraulic pulse
on the vesicles or by contraction of the bell-shaped membrane
skeletal protein network of the synapse creating a directed
push on the cytoplasm and the vesicles; depolarization of the
axon hillock to the excitation level might be accomplished
not only by passive spread of ionic currents from postsynap-
tic sites, but also by mechanoactivation of the membrane ion
channels by cytoplasm displacement or pressurization; there-
fore, synaptic integration might involve relay of displacement
or pressurization of cytoplasm through the dendritic tree to
the axon hillock, and learning and memory in neurons might
be partially reﬂected in the strength and duration of Ca2+-
activated contraction of postsynaptic membrane skeletal pro-
teins, or in those of another pressure-generating process; AP
generated in a neuron might inﬂuence processes in the cell
body, dendrites and contacting synapses by mechanical dis-
turbances introduced by the back-propagating pressure pulse;
AP-associated hydraulic pulses might participate in transport
of substances in excitable cells. Other outcomes of the model
are the hypotheses on the evolution of the signal transmission
in cells, on reasons for mechanosensitivity of many unrelated

8

Marat M. Rvachev

Paintal, A. S. (1965), ‘Effects of temperature on conduction in sin-
gle vagal and saphenous myelinated nerve ﬁbres of the cat’, J
Physiol 180, 20–49.

Paintal, A. S. (1966), ‘The inﬂuence of diameter of medullated nerve
ﬁbres of cats on the rising and falling phases of the spike and
its recovery’, J Physiol 184, 791–811.

Palay, S. L. and Chan-Palay, V. (1977), General morphology of neu-
rons and neuroglia, in E. R. Kandel, ed., ‘Handbook of physiol-
ogy’, Vol. I/1 part 1, American Physiological Society, Bethesda,
pp. 5–37.

Poling, B. E., Prausnitz, J. M. and O’Connell, J. P. (2001), The prop-
erties of gases and liquids, 5 edn, McGraw-Hill, London Mon-
treal New York Sydney Washington.

Rayleigh, J. W. S. B. (1945), The theory of sound, Vol. 2, Dover

Publications, New York, pp. 317–327.

Rushton, W. A. H. (1951), ‘A theory of the effects of ﬁbre size in

medullated nerve’, J Physiol 115, 101–122.

Shepherd, G. M. (1994), Neurobiology, 3 edn, Oxford University

Press, New York Oxford.

Smith, C. U. M. (1996), Elements of molecular neurobiology, 2 edn,
John Wiley and Sons, Chichester New York Brisbane Toronto.
Thompson, T. E., Sankaram, M. B. and Huang, C. (1997), Organiza-
tion and dynamics of the lipid components of biological mem-
branes, in J. F. Hoffman and J. D. Jamieson, eds, ‘Handbook
of physiology’, Vol. I/14, Oxford University Press, New York
Oxford, pp. 23–57.

Timoshenko, S. (1934), Theory of elasticity, 1 edn, McGraw-Hill

Book Company, London New York.

Zhang, P. C., Keleshian, A. M. and Sachs, F. (2001), ‘Voltage-

induced membrane movement’, Nature 413, 428–432.

types of ion channels, and on the physiological role of axonal
calcium inﬂux.

In the case the presented model is not experimentally con-
ﬁrmed, the calculations in the paper show that velocity of
propagation of ∼1 kHz pressure waves through axons can
be close to the AP conduction velocities, and hence pressure
waves generated by voltage-induced membrane movement
during AP conduction (Zhang et al. 2001) might accumulate
into a larger shock-like wave.

Acknowledgements The author gratefully thanks his father Prof.
Michael A. Rvachov for reminding of the idea, Prof. William Bertozzi
for immense help and support, and Prof. Guosong Liu for a con-
structive discussion. While working on the project the author was
supported by US DOE grant DE-FC02-94ER40818.

References

Alexander, S. P. and Rieder, C. L. (1991), ‘Chromosome motion dur-
ing attachment to the vertebrate spindle: initial saltatory-like be-
havior of chromosomes and quantitative analysis of force pro-
duction by nascent kinetochore ﬁbers’, J Cell Biol 113, 805–
815.

Bausch, A. R., Moller, W. and Sackmann, E. (1999), ‘Measurement
of local viscoelasticity and forces in living cells by magnetic
tweezers’, Biophys J 76, 573–579.

Chevray, R. and Mathieu, J. (1993), Topics in ﬂuid mechanics, Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge New York.

Franssen, H., Wieneke, G. H. and Wokke, J. H. J. (1999), ‘The
inﬂuence of temperature on conduction block’, Muscle Nerve
22, 166–173.

Gillespie, P. G. and Walker, R. G. (2001), ‘Molecular basis of

mechanosensory transduction’, Nature 413, 194–202.

Gu, C. X., Juranka, P. F. and Morris, C. E. (2001), ‘Stretch-activation
and stretch-inactivation of shaker-ir, a voltage-gated k+ chan-
nel’, Biophys J 80, 2678–2693.

Hardung, V. (1962), Propagation of pulse waves in visco-elastic tub-
ings, in P. Dow, ed., ‘Handbook of physiology’, Vol. I/2, Amer-
ican Physiological Society, Washington, pp. 107–135.

Hille, B. (1977), Ionic basis of resting and action potentials, in E. R.
Kandel, ed., ‘Handbook of physiology’, Vol. I/1 part 1, Ameri-
can Physiological Society, Bethesda, pp. 99–136.

Hille, B. (1992), Ionic channels of excitable membranes, 2 edn, Sin-

auer Associates, Inc, Sunderland.

Hodgkin, A. L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952), ‘A quantitative descrip-
tion of membrane current and its application to conduction and
excitation in nerve’, J Physiol 117, 500–544.

Hodgkin, A. L. and Katz, B. (1949), ‘The effect of sodium ions on
the electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid’, J Physiol
108, 37–77.

Iwasa, K., Tasaki, I. and Gibbons, R. C. (1980), ‘Swelling of nerve
ﬁbers associated with action potentials’, Science 210, 338–339.
Lide, D. R., ed. (2002), CRC handbook of chemistry and physics, 83
edn, CRC Press, Boca Raton London New York Washington.
Marshall, W. F., Marko, J. F., Agard, D. A. and Sedat, J. W.
(2001), ‘Chromosome elasticity and mitotic polar ejection force
measured in living drosophila embryos by four-dimensional
microscopy-based motion analysis’, Curr Biol 11, 569–578.
Morgan, G. W. and Kiely, J. P. (1954), ‘Wave propagation in a
viscous liquid contained in a ﬂexible tube’, J Acoust Soc Am
26, 323–328.

