3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interplay between geometry and ﬂow distribution in an airway tree

B. Mauroy1, M. Filoche2, J. S. Andrade Jr.1,3, and B. Sapoval1,2
1Centre de Math´ematiques et de leurs Applications, CNRS, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Cachan, 94235 Cachan, France
2Laboratoire de Physique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau, France
3Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal do Cear´a, 60451-970 Fortaleza, Cear´a, Brazil
(February 21, 2014)

Uniform ﬂuid ﬂow distribution in a symmetric volume can be realized through a symmetric
branched tree.
It is shown here, however, that the ﬂow partitioning can be highly sensitive to
deviations from exact symmetry if inertial eﬀects are present. This is found by direct numerical
simulation of the Navier-Stokes equations in a 3D tree geometry. The ﬂow asymmetry is quantiﬁed
and found to depend on the Reynolds number. Moreover, for a given Reynolds number, we show
that the ﬂow distribution depends on the aspect ratio of the branching elements as well as their
angular arrangement. Our results indicate that physiological variability should be severely restricted
in order to ensure uniform ﬂuid distribution in a tree. This study suggests that any non-uniformity
in the air ﬂow distribution in human lungs should be inﬂuenced by the respiratory conditions, rest
or hard exercise.

PACS number : 47.60.+i, 87.19.Uv

The problem of ﬂuid ﬂow in a branching geometry ap-
pears in many physical, geological, chemical and biolog-
ical systems. Examples include catalysis, ﬂow through
porous media, blood circulation and respiration. When
studying transport in any of these systems, a common
objective is to understand the mechanisms that govern
the ﬂow partitioning at the interconnections level. Until
recently, it has been generally assumed that the use of
Darcy’s law should be suﬃcient to describe the propaga-
tion of ﬂow through branched structures. Such a relation
corresponds to the linear dependence between ﬂow and
pressure drop, Q ∝ ∆P , which is strictly valid at small
Reynolds number. Regardless of this limitation, a large
number of studies have been based on this approxima-
tion. In the context of porous media, for instance, a sim-
ple paradigm to represent ﬂow through the pore space
is a network of bifurcating and merging channels where
the transport of ﬂuid is analogous to the distribution of
electrical currents in a resistor network. However these
models can only predict a perfectly uniform and syn-
chronous ﬂow distribution through airways bifurcations
[1]. A major problem in modeling of ﬂow through trees
arises from the fact that, due to inertial eﬀects, Darcy’s
law breaks down as a phenomenological description for
large Reynolds numbers. Even at moderate Reynolds,
the inertial non-linearities become relevant as compared
to viscous eﬀects.

Unambiguous experimental and numerical evidences of
inertial eﬀects have been observed in several studies on
ﬂow though branched structures, with special emphasis
on the bronchial tree [2–14]. Such phenomena exists in
real lungs but they are more simple to study in a sym-
metric geometry [15,16]. In particular, in order to irrigate
uniformly a symmetric volume it is easy to show, through
the following collage argument, that this is ensured by a
symmetric tree. Suppose that an asymmetric tree feeds

a volume which has a plane of symmetry. If the tree is
asymmetric the ﬂow will be diﬀerent in the two parts of
the volume which are symmetrical. Then one can replace
the tree with a non-uniform ﬂow by the symmetry image
of the more eﬃcient region. The new tree, which is now
symmetric, is more eﬃcient for ﬂow distribution.

In the Poiseuille approximation, the only way to have
perfect symmetry is to work with an equivalent resistor
network that is symmetric. In other words, at each bifur-
cation the daughter branches should be exactly identical
irrespectively of their real geometrical arrangement. This
might not be true if inertial eﬀects are present. It should
be recalled that, as the lung is a succession of branch bi-
furcations, the ﬁnal ﬂow distribution can be represented
by a multiplicative process. In consequence, even a rather
small asymmetry could lead to a strong inhomogeneity
of the ﬂow distribution [17]. Because the geometrical ar-
rangement of the bronchial tree of mammals is always
subjected to some physiological variability [18], it ap-
pears natural to question whether a small modiﬁcation
of the structure disturbs the distribution of ﬂuid ﬂow.

The purpose of this work is to investigate how the tree
geometry inﬂuences the ﬂow in order to shed some light
on the optimal aspect of the bronchial tree for distribut-
ing air uniformly in the lung volume. The direct 3D nu-
merical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations is by far
the most practical way to elucidate this problem. The
simpliﬁed tree model used here is shown in Fig. 1.
It
consists in a 3-dimensional cascade of cylinders branch-
ing through two bifurcations. Each bifurcation ABC or
BDE or CFG, is coplanar as found approximately in real
lungs. The bifurcation geometries are modeled in such
a way to minimize geometrical singularities as shown in
Fig. 2. For simplicity, we assume that the radii of the
tubes decrease with a factor 2−1/3 at each bifurcation
[19] and choose the branching angle to be 45◦.

1

The mathematical description for the detailed ﬂuid me-
chanics in the branched structure is based on the steady-
state form of the continuity and Navier-Stokes equations
for mass and momentum conservation [20]

∇ · u = 0 ,

ρ u · ∇u = −∇p + µ ∇2u ,

(1)

(2)

where u and p are the local velocity and pressure ﬁelds,
respectively. The diameter of the ﬁrst tube is equal to
2 cm, corresponding approximately to the diameter of
the human trachea. The ﬂuid is air with viscosity µ =
1.785 × 10−5 kg m−1s−1 and density ρ = 1.18 kg m−3,
and the ﬂow is considered to be incompressible. Non-
slip boundary conditions are imposed at the tube walls
(Dirichlet condition u = 0) and the velocity at the en-
trance A is parabolic. The outlets are free with the same
reference pressure and ∂u/∂n = 0. Equations (1) and (2)
are solved using ﬁnite elements [21]. For all simulations,
the relative conservation error is smaller than 3%.

The parameters governing the ﬂow are the bronchi as-
pect ratio (length to diameter ratio of the tubes) L/D,
the rotation angle α between successive bifurcations, and
the Reynolds number, Re ≡ ρDV /µ, where V is the mean
velocity at the entrance. The reference angle α = 0◦
corresponds to a coplanar tree. The ﬂow asymmetry is
deﬁned as

Σ(α, L/D) ≡

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

q1 − q2
q1 + q2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

,

(3)

where q1 and q2 are the outﬂows at (D,G) and (E,F)
branches, respectively. We perform simulations for sev-
eral values of α, L/D and Re to ﬁnd their inﬂuence on
the ﬂow partitioning Σ. Note that the air velocity at
the entrance of human lungs range from 1 m/s at rest
(Re ≈ 1200) to 10 m/s for the condition of very hard
exercise (Re ≈ 12000) [19]. Due to the number of pa-
rameters governing the ﬂow and the computation time
for each set of parameters, we ﬁrst discuss the depen-
dence of the ﬂow asymmetry on the geometry for a ﬁxed
Reynolds value, namely, Re = 1200. This corresponds to
the human inspiration state at rest.

The results are shown in Fig. 3. The main result is
that, whatever the conditions, the behavior of Σ around
the minimum is not parabolic. Even a small departure
from geometrical symmetry can cause a non negligible
ﬂow disturbance. For a given value of L/D, the distur-
bance increases with the deviation of the rotation angle
from 90◦. Σ is therefore maximum for a planar tree and,
for a ﬁxed α value, it decreases with increasing aspect
ratio.

There are then two facts to interpret. First, why the
ﬂow is inﬂuenced by breaking the symmetry only. Sec-
onds why this eﬀect is attenuated for long branches or

large aspect ratios. The ﬁrst fact can be understood by
considering the velocity distribution in a cut of the sec-
ondary branch B shown in Fig. 4. The ﬂow keeps the
symmetry of the ABC bifurcation plane but, due to iner-
tia, the high velocity regions are drifted vertically and an
M-shape type of distribution is observed [9]. This shape
governs the ﬂow partitioning at the second bifurcation.
Note that if the branches B and C are long enough and for
small Re, the proﬁle should tend to a parabolic type. As
a consequence, the distribution shown in Fig. 3 will pro-
gressively change along the second generation branch. It
is because the branch length is too short that the grand-
daughter branches can capture the asymmetry seen in
Fig. 4. This provides a qualitative answer for the second
question. The position of the intersection relatively to
the M-shape is then the key for asymmetry. For exam-
ple in Fig. 4, the branch E obviously receives more ﬂow
than branch D. It is also clear that, if α = 90◦, the ﬂow
symmetry is restored for any value of L/D.

The dependence of the ﬂow asymmetry as a function
of the Reynolds number is shown in Fig. 5. A strong
increase of Σ is observed up to Re ≈ 250 followed by a
region of weaker dependence. This type of behavior has
been previously reported for 2D ﬂow in trees comprising
more than two generations of branches [9,10]. It is re-
markable that the onset at Re ≈ 250 is approximately
the same whatever the angle α. This is a clear indica-
tion that, at the entrance of the second bifurcation, the
velocity proﬁle reaches the same pattern for a given Re
value. Again, the ﬁnal asymmetry of the distribution of
ﬂow is a result of the inertial eﬀects originated from the
ﬁrst bifurcation. All these arguments are illustrated in
Fig. 6, where the contour plots of the velocity ﬁelds are
shown at the entrance of the second bifurcation. At large
Re, the M-shape is revealed and, as expected, the lower
the Re, the closer the proﬁle is to parabolic ﬂow. The
smaller variation of Σ for Re > 250 can be explained by
the presence of a secondary ﬂow [13].

Some implications of our results are noteworthy. If the
inertial eﬀects observed here are present in a larger tree,
the relative ﬂows delivered to the outlets of this struc-
ture may become strongly non-uniform. This broadness
in the ﬂow distribution is a typical signature of a multi-
plicative process [22], where an observable can be viewed
as a “grand process” depending on the successful com-
pletion of a number n of independent “subprocesses”. It
is then possible to associate the ﬂow at each branch with
a probability pi, so that the ﬂow at a given outlet k be
qk ∝ p1p2 · · · pn, where i = 1, 2, 3, · · · , n corresponds to
the set of branches constituting the pathway going from
the entrance to the exit k. It can be easily demonstrated
that, if the pi’s are independent variables and n large, the
distribution of qk should be approximately log-normal.
Furthermore, this distribution might mimic a power-law
if its dispersion is suﬃciently large [22]. Note that this
situation is that of the human bronchial tree (where L/D

2

is close to 3) even at rest. In this case Re ≈ 1200 and
the multiplicative process due to inertia can propagate
further down in the tree. If we consider that these eﬀects
only disappear for Re less than 100 and that the local
Reynolds decreases by a factor of 22/3 at each genera-
tion, we obtain that the ﬂow asymmetry can be signiﬁ-
cant up to the 6th generation of the bronchial tree under
rest conditions [23].

In conclusion, we have investigated the eﬀect of inertia
on ﬂuid ﬂow through three-dimensional rigid branched
structures by direct numerical simulation of the Navier-
Stokes equations. It has been found that for trees with 3
generations of cylindrical conduits, the ﬂow distribution
at the outlets strongly depends on the Reynolds number
and on the geometry of the ramiﬁed structure. Moreover,
our simulations indicate that the ﬂow imbalance through-
out the tree is highly sensitive to the aspect ratio L/D of
its cylindrical units and to the variation of the rotation
angle α between successive bifurcations. While a uniform
distribution of ﬂows at the outlets of the third generation
branches is always obtained for α = 90◦, our calculations
show that a small deviation from this geometrical con-
ﬁguration is capable to induce a large asymmetry on the
ﬂow. Note that the presence of long branches would lead
to purely axi-symmetric parabolic proﬁles and ﬂow sym-
metry. However, long tubes exhibit large hydrodynamic
resistance (proportional to L/D4).
It is therefore not
surprising that in real lungs L/D ≈ 3 and α ≈ 90◦.

Finally, our results suggest that small deviations from
the “best” structure should have the same type of con-
sequences in the real (asymmetric) lung, namely, strong
dependence on geometry and Reynolds number. In par-
ticular, the ﬂow distribution at rest and exercise might
be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. These results could also help
to better understand lung morphology. It has been ar-
gued [24] that the asymmetric structure of the lung is
solely due to geometrical constraints. Our study indi-
cates that the inertial eﬀects plays also an important
role in air distribution.
In other words, the asymme-
try of the bronchial tree is determined not only by geo-
metrical constraints but also by the existence of inertial
eﬀects. Of course, if the ﬂow distribution is found uni-
form although the geometry is “imperfect”, the following
question would naturally arise [25]: what are the physi-
ological regulation mechanisms that can compensate the
ﬂow non-uniformity due to inertial eﬀects? In addition,
the ﬂuid dynamics studied here is certainly relevant to
understand particle deposition in the airway tree [13], a
problem of crucial importance both from the physiologic
and the therapeutic points of view.

We thank CNPq, CAPES, COFECUB and FUNCAP
for support. The Centre de Math´ematiques et de leurs
Applications and the Laboratoire de Physique de la
Mati`ere Condens´ee are “Unit´e Mixte de Recherches du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque” no. 8536
and 7643.

3

[1] T.J. Pedley, R.C. Shroter and M.F. Sudlow, Respir.

Physiol. 9, 387 (1970).

[2] J. B. Grotberg, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 3, 421 (2001).
[3] B. Snyder, D. R. Dantzker, and M. J. Jaeger, J. Appl.

Physiol. 51, 598 (1981).

[4] B. Snyder and M. J. Jaeger, J. Appl. Physiol. 54, 749

(1983).

[5] A. S. Slutsky, G. G. Berdine, and J. M. Drazen, J. Appl.

Physiol. 49, 417 (1980).

[6] D. J. Isabey, J. Biomech. 15, 395 (1982).
[7] J. L. Allen, I. D. Frantz, and J. J. Fredberg, J. Clin.

Invest. 76, 620 (1985).

[8] A. Tsuda, and J. J. Fredberg, J. Appl. Physiol. 69, 546

(1990); ibid., 69, 553 (1990).

[9] F. Wilquem and G. Degrez, J. Biomech. Eng. 119, 59

(1997).

[10] J. S. Andrade, Jr. et al., Phys. Rev. Let. 81, 926 (1998);
M. P. Almeida et al., Phys. Rev. E 60, 5486 (1999).
[11] Y. Zhao, C. T. Brunskill, and B. B. Lieber, J. Biomech.

[12] T. B. Martonen, X. Guan, and R. M. Schreck, Inhal.

Eng. 119, 52 (1997).

Toxicol. 13, 261 (2001).

Mech. 435, 25 (2001).

[13] J. K. Comer, C. Kleinstreuer, and Z. Zhang, J. Fluid

[14] H. K. Chang, and M. Paiva, Respiratory Physiology

(Dekker, New York, 1989), p. 63.

[15] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature (W.

H. Freemann, San Francisco, 1982).

[16] W. I. Newman, D. L. Turcotte, and A. M. Gabrielov,

Fractals 5, 603 (1997).

[17] B. Sapoval, Universalit´es et fractales (Flammarion, Paris,

[18] M. F. Shlesinger and B. J. West, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67,

[19] E. R. Weibel, The Pathway for Oxygen (Harvard Univ.

1997).

2106 (1991).

Press, 1984).

[20] The steady state assumption for inspiration ﬂow has been
justiﬁed in several papers; T. J. Pedley, R. C. Schroter,
and M. F. Sudlow in Bioengineering Aspects of the Lung,
edited by J. B. West (Dekker, New York, 1977).

[21] We apply the solver N3S4.0 in a discretized geometry
build through the code Simail, both from Simulog. Be-
tween 200 000 and 350 000 tetrahedral elements are used
with P 2 interpolation for the velocity ﬁeld and P 1 inter-
polation for pressure. The convergence is monitored for
ﬂow asymmetry and ﬂow conservation.

[22] B. J. West, and M. F. Shlesinger, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B

3, 795 (1989).

[23] The situation addressed here corresponds to the func-
tioning of the normal lung of adults. Peripheral airway
closure might occur in pathological situations; B. Suki
et al., Nature 368, 615 (1994) and A.-L. Barabasi et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett 76, 2192 (1996).

[24] T. R. Nelson and D. K. Manchester, IEEE Trans. on

Med. Imag. 7, 321 (1988).

[25] K. C. Beck and T. A. Wilson, J. Appl. Physiol. 90, 2151

(2001).

FIG. 1. Example of the tree geometry used in the simula-
tions. The aspect ratio is L/D = 3 and the rotation angle is
◦
α = 45

.

◦
.
FIG. 4. The M-shape contour for L/D = 3 and α = 45
The colours indicate the magnitude of the ﬂuid velocity at the
mid-length cross-section of branch B. The velocity magnitude
increases in the colour order of blue, green, yellow and red.
The ternary branches D and E are shown in blue. Note the
presence of a low velocity region at the center. At the plane
of the second bifurcation, the entering ﬂow is larger at the
bottom. The branch E therefore captures a larger ﬂow than
D.

10

8

6

4

2

)

%

(
 

y
r
t
e
m
m
y
s
a
w
o
F

l

 

0

0

FIG. 2. Geometry and mesh of a typical bifurcation used

in the simulations.

500
1000
Reynolds number

1500

FIG. 5. Dependence of the ﬂow asymmetry Σ on the
Reynolds number Re for L/D = 3. The circles correspond
◦
to α = 60

◦
and the squares to α = 75

.

L/D=2.5
L/D=3.0
L/D=3.5
L/D=4.0

25

20

15

10

5

)

%

(
 

y
r
t
e
m
m
y
s
a
w
o
F

 

l

0

0

30

60
90
120
Angle (degrees)

150

180

FIG. 3. Dependence of the ﬂow asymmetry Σ on the
branching angle α for a ﬁxed Reynolds value, Re = 1200. The
observed non-monotonous dependences are due to numerical
◦
◦
uncertainties. The values of α = 0
correspond
and 180
◦
to a planar tree. α = 90
represents the average value for
mammalian lungs.

4

FIG. 6. Contour plot of the velocity magnitude at the
cross-section of the second bifurcation for diﬀerent values of
Re (L/D = 3 and α = 60◦). As Re increases, the proﬁles
gradually change from parabolic to M-shape.

5

