3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Genetic Algorithms for the Imitation of
Genomic Styles in Protein Backtranslation

Andr´es Moreira

Center for Mathematical Modeling and Departamento de Ingenier´ıa Matem´atica
FCFM, U. de Chile, Casilla 170/3-Correo 3, Santiago, Chile

Abstract

Several technological applications require the translation of a protein into a nucleic
acid that codes for it (“backtranslation”). The degeneracy of the genetic code makes
this translation ambiguous; moreover, not every translation is equally viable. The
common answer to this problem is the imitation of the codon usage of the target
species. Here we discuss several other features of coding sequences (“coding statis-
tics”) that are relevant for the “genomic style” of diﬀerent species. A genetic algo-
rithm is then used to obtain backtranslations that mimic these styles, by minimizing
the diﬀerence in the coding statistics. Possible improvements and applications are
discussed.

Key words: Backtranslation, Sythetic Genes, Coding Statistics, Gene Fishing

1 Introduction

The main components of the cell are nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and pro-
teins. Both are polymers, long words written in alphabets of 4 and 20 letters:
4 nucleotides for DNA and RNA, and 20 amino acids, for proteins. The “fun-
damental dogma” of molecular biology describes the usual ﬂow of information
in the cell, from DNA to mRNA to protein. The ﬁrst step, transcription, pre-
serves the sequence read from DNA, which is reversed and complemented in
the mRNA (in addition, the alphabet is slightly changed). It is straightfor-
ward to obtain the DNA from a given mRNA (it is called then complementary
DNA, or cDNA); in fact, Nature does it: retrotranscription is performed by
viruses and several small “selﬁsh” units of information.

Email address: anmoreir@dim.uchile.cl (Andr´es Moreira).

Preprint submitted to Theoretical Computer Science

2 February 2008

The second step, translation, is more complicated: the mRNA is read, three
nucleotides at a time, and an amino acid encoded by them is added to the
forming protein, according to the well known genetic code (see Table 1). This
nearly universal code associates to each triplet (codon) an amino acid, or the
“stop” meaning.

Table 1: The (standard) Genetic Code

aaa K aga

caa Q cga R gaa

E

gga G taa

stop

stop

aac N agc

cac H cgc R gac D ggc G tac

aag K agg

cag Q cgg R gag

E

ggg G tag

stop

tgg W

aat N agt

cat H cgt

R gat D ggt G tat

aca

acc

acg

act

T

T

T

T

ata

atc

att

cca

ccc

cct

P

P

P

P

cta

ctc

ctg

ctt

L

L

L

L

gca A gta V tca

gcc A

gtc

V tcc

gct

A

gtt

V

tct

atg M ccg

gcg A gtg V tcg

tga

tgc

tgt

tta

ttc

ttg

ttt

Y

Y

S

S

S

S

C

C

L

F

L

F

R

S

R

S

I

I

I

Unlike retrotranscription, the reversal of this second step (called backtrans-
lation) is ambiguous, due to the degeneracy of the genetic code: as can be
seen in Table 1, amino acids are encoded by 1, 2, 3, 4 or 6 diﬀerent codons.
Backtranslation does not occur in natural systems 1 , but is required for sev-
eral purposes in genomics and biotechnology. The problem is not trivial, since
diﬀerent species have diﬀerent “genomic styles” that determine which of the
many preimages is used to code for a protein. Thus it may happen that we
know the DNA for a given protein produced by, for instance, a plant, but we
want to synthesize the protein in a bacterium[31]. We will need to backtrans-
late the protein into the genomic style of this kind of bacteria. In other cases,
the protein is known but no DNA is known for it at all; this may happen with
artiﬁcial proteins, or with proteins from unsequenced organisms. Other ap-
plications, like degenerate primers (for “gene ﬁshing”) and sequence analysis,
will be discussed in the last section.

The best known statistical feature of coding sequences is the presence of a
periodicity of period 3, which is caused by the structure of the genetic code
and the asymmetry of the diﬀerent codon positions[14,21]. This property is
very important for distinguishing coding from non-coding sequences; however,
it is not important for backtranslation, since it is shared by all organisms. On
the other hand, we know that codon usage (the degree of preference for the
diﬀerent codons inside each synonymous class) does distinguish one species
from another; it is the best known feature of the diﬀerent “genomic styles”.

The common approach to backtranslation relies on the imitation of the codon
usage of the target species (the species whose style we want to imitate)[28].
This is the solution currently given by all commercial and non-commercial

1 Though [27] suggests that it did occur at the origin of life, and even proposes an
in vitro device for backtranslation.

2

software, like GCG, EMBOSS, VectorNTI, EditSeq, AiO, and the online tools
of Molecular Toolkit and Entelechon. The only diﬀerent approach we know is
[36], where a neural network was trained to perform backtranslation. However,
it was done at the single amino acid level, and thus it cannot account for
anything but codon usage.

This current solution can be improved; there are more features peculiar to
the diﬀerent coding styles[11,18], which are in part or completely independent
from codon usage[10]. In the present article, we consider diﬀerent possible
statistics that may be associated to genomic styles, and then we apply a ge-
netic algorithm to perform backtranslation, taking these features into account.
Our approach considers DNA only as a symbolic sequence, ignoring chemical
properties or biological features. Furthermore, we will not use biological con-
siderations to decide whether or not a statistical property needs to be imitated:
we assume that any property distinguishing the style of a species must be con-
sidered in backtranslation (after all, in some cases the origin of known features
remains obscure). All the statistics we consider were taken from the literature
on sequence analysis, where their possible interpretations are discussed.

2 Notation, Materials

Let A={A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S, T, V, W, Y} and
B={a,c,g,t} be the alphabets for amino acids and nucleotides, respectively,
and denote B3∗ = (B3)∗. Let τ : B3∗ → (A ∪ {stop})∗ be the translation
of a sequence according to the genetic code. In fact, τ may depend on small
variations to the code which do occur in some species and organelles; however,
here we will assume the code to be universal. Furthermore, we will consider
the sequences without the start and stop signals, i.e., cutting the atg codon
that initiates a protein and the stop codon that marks its end.

We will say that a function (or stochastic procedure) β : A∗ → B3∗ is a
guess iﬀ τ ◦ β = idA∗. If C ⊂ A∗, we will denote β(C) = {β(u) : u ∈ C}.
A particular guess that will be used for comparison purposes is the canonical
backtranslation procedure, which backtranslates each amino acid using the
empirical frequencies of its codons as probabilities; we will denote it as βcu
sp ,
with the subindex indicating the species whose codon usage table was used.

Given a sequence w ∈ B3∗, w = w0, w1, . . . and i = 1, 2, 3, we will talk about
the letters in codon position i to refer to wi−1, wi+2, wi+5, . . . . We will denote
with πry, πws and πmk the three most usual projections of B into {0, 1}, as
follows. We will use the same symbols to refer to the extensions of these
functions to B3∗ (projecting each letter).

3

a

0

0

0

c

1

1

0

g

0

1

1

t

0

1

πry

πws

πmk

refers to:

1 purine/pyrimidine

weak/strong

amino/keto

It is important to notice that many characters in β(u) are almost or completely
determined by u. Amino acid K, for instance, is coded by aaa and aag; the ﬁrst
and the second position will be a in any backtranslation, and the third one will
be either a or g (and will have πry = 0, so that for any β, πry(β(K)) = 001).
The next table shows the number of amino acids for which characters are ﬁxed
in the diﬀerent codon positions for the diﬀerent binary alphabets. Most of the
ambiguity of backtranslation is in the third position.

πry

πws πmk

Cod. Pos. 1

Cod. Pos. 2

Cod. Pos. 3

18

19

11

18

20

2

18

19

2

Materials

We extracted coding sequences from Genbank[3] release 131 (August 2002),
belonging to the following species: Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A (A1), Sul-
folobus solfataricus (A2), Escherichia coli (B1), Bacillus subtilis (B2), Strep-
tomyces coelicolor A3(2) (B3), Mesorhizobium loti (B4), Nostoc sp. PCC 7120
(B5), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (E1), Arabidopsis thaliana (E2), Drosophila
melanogaster (E3), Caenorhabditis elegans (E4) and Homo sapiens (E5). The
selection of species was done trying to have abundant sequences and a rather
good representation of the tree of life. All coding sequences (“CDS” features
in Genbank) were extracted, provided that they were complete, univoque, and
longer than 1029 nucleotides. The average length of the sequences varies be-
tween 1500 for A1 and 2456 for E3. Please notice that introns -intervening
sequences- were removed from the sequences; this may aﬀect the coding statis-
tics that depend on relations between distant nucleotides. We will use the ab-
breviation of a species to refer to the set of its coding sequences, or to the set of
the corresponding proteins, depending on the context. Thus, an expression like
βcu
B1(E5) denotes a set of backtranslations obtained for all proteins encoded by
the coding sequences of E5, obtained by the standard backtranslation method,
considering the codon usage of B1.

4

3 Coding Statistics

Here we discuss the results of computations performed on our set of species for
several features that have been studied in coding sequences, “generally known
as coding statistics, since their behavior is statistically distinct on coding and
non-coding regions”[10]. Discussions about the most common coding statistics,
their relations, and their use for gene ﬁnding, can be found in [11] and [18].
However, we are not interested in the diﬀerence between coding and non-
coding regions; rather, we want those statistics that contribute to the “genomic
style” of a species.

The notion of genomic style has been around since the “genome hypothesis” of
Grantham [8,9], who ﬁrst recognized the idiosyncratic nature of codon usage.
Later, Karlin used the bias in dinucleotide usage as the “genomic signature”
of a species [19]. Forsdyke suggests that the species “broadcast” their genes in
diﬀerent g + c frequencies [6], and that this could be crucial for speciation; in
this way, genomic styles could be the ﬁrst line of an immune system 2 . There
have been other proposals, usually for phylogenetic purposes. The reasons for
the existence of diﬀerent styles are debatable: for instance, changes in the
molecular machinery, tRNA abundance, environmental temperature, diﬀerent
biases in the mutation rates, the requirements of messages other than the
protein sequences[35], etc. The exact causal relations are subject to discussion.

In order to improve the proﬁle of genomic styles, we want to choose those
statistics which: (1) have typical and statistically sound values for each species,
with small variability, (2) have diﬀerent values in diﬀerent species, and (3) do
not depend (exclusively) on the amino acids encoded by a sequence (i.e., they
do depend on backtranslation). Because of space limitations, we will not give
the values of all computations; in the graphics, not all the species will be
displayed, if it is not required. Moreover, we will dispense from data in the
case of well known facts. All computations and data sets can be found at [1].

3.1 Nucleotide frequencies

The most natural computation is the frequency of the four nucleotides in the
sequences, as well as their frequencies in the diﬀerent codon positions. For each
sequence w ∈ B3∗, w = w0, . . . , w3N −1, and each nucleotide α, we compute

ρα(w) =

δα(wi)

,

ρj
α(w) =

δα(w3i+j−1), j = 1, 2, 3

1
3N

3N −1

X
i=0

1
N

N −1

X
i=0

2 Indeed, [5] shows that some viruses may mimic the genomic style of their host,
in order to be expressed.

5

where δα(x) is 1 if x = α and 0 otherwise. Our computations conﬁrm a number
of facts already known in the literature, like “Chargaﬀ’s second law”, which
states that ρa ≈ ρt and ρc ≈ ρg as can be observed in Graphic 1a. Since, in
addition, Pα∈B ρα = 1, Chargaﬀ’s law implies positive correlation between
complementary nucleotides (a with t, and c with g) and negative correlation
between non-complementary ones. Thus we can reduce the study to a single
value; the usual choice is ρg+c = ρc +ρg. It is well known that ρg+c has diﬀerent
values in diﬀerent species, and that all the genes in a species have similar
values; this can be seen in Graphic 1b, with histograms showing the number of
sequences of each species in diﬀerent ρg+c ranges. Some qualiﬁcations are due:
First, it is also known that eukaryotic genomes are organized in large “islands”
called isochores [24], with diﬀerent ρg+c values but each of them relatively
homogeneous. Moreover, in a set of closely related species ρg+c may depend
more on the genes than on the species[23]. However, the general pattern holds,
and it is used both for the detection of genes (since genes tend to be ρg+c-richer
than non-coding regions) and in the detection of horizontally transferred genes
(see section 5).

Fig. 1. (a) Nucleotide frequencies. (b) Histograms for ρg+c. (c) ρg+c in diﬀerent
codon positions.

c +ρj

g+c = ρj

Graphic 1c shows the values of ρj
g for the diﬀerent species, together
with ρg+c. We notice the existence of wide variations in the ρg+c composition
depending on the codon position. In addition, extreme values of ρg+c are usu-
ally supported by extreme values of ρ3
g+c; this shows that the sequences were
adapted to get a certain ρg+c level, and that the third -usually synonymous-
codon position was used for this purpose. As can be seen in Table 2, ρ1
g+c and
ρ2
g+c are almost entirely determined by the encoded amino acids.

6

3.2 Codon usage

The frequency of a given codon C = c0, c1, c2 ∈ B3 in a sequence w =
N −1
w0, . . . , w3N −1 ∈ B3∗ is deﬁned as 1
i=0 δc0(w3i)δc1(w3i+1)δc2(w3i+2). For
N P
each codon C ∈ B3, we deﬁne its synonymous class θ(C) = {C ′ ∈ B3
:
τ (C) = τ (C ′)}. Then the synonymous codon usage and the relative synony-
mous codon usage [29] of C are deﬁned as

SCUC =

, RSCUC =

= |θ(C)| SCUC

ρC

ρ′
C

X
C′∈θ(C)

|θ(C)| ρC
ρ′
C

X
C′∈θ(C)

As we mentioned above, the codon choice pattern was noted very early to
be a signature of the species, and our data conﬁrm this. We will dispense
with extensive SCU tables, since they are well known in the literature, and
available in public databases[26]. As we said before, the common approach to
backtranslation uses SCU as the probability of choosing a certain codon, given
the amino acid. RSCU is used for comparisons between codons from diﬀerent
synonymous classes.

3.3 Dinucleotides

Most published results on dinucleotide frequencies consider long DNA se-
quences, including both coding and non-coding regions [4,12,30]. Our own
computations, in spite of being limited to coding sequences, conﬁrm most of
the facts already noted by the diﬀerent authors. This accounts for the fact
that dinucleotide frequencies are not considered as “coding statistics”: their
behavior is similar in coding and in non-coding sequences. However, they do
exhibit characteristic patterns according to the diﬀerent species and groups.
Karlin [19] even used them to deﬁne the genome signature of a species as the
collection {̺∗
αβ}, with α and β ranging over B. Here ̺αβ = ραβ/ραρβ (with
ραβ being the frequency of the dinucleotide αβ) and ̺∗ is the computation of
̺ over the sequence concatenated to its inverse complement (in order to get
the information about both DNA strands).

IDH. There is an interesting set of indices which can be computed from
dinucleotide frequencies. The so called index of DNA homogeneity (IDH) was
proposed by Miramontes et al [25] and is deﬁned for a binary sequence as
d = ρ00ρ11−ρ01ρ10
. We deﬁne dry(w) = d(πry(w)), dws(w) = d(πws(w)), and
dmk(w) = d(πmk(w)). This index expresses the degree of local homogeneity of
the sequence: long stretches of 0 or 1 will cause d to be near 1, while strong
alternation will push it toward -1. The three indices dry, dws and dmk are not

ρ0ρ1

7

independent, and since πmk is the least meaningful of the binary projections,
the choice in [25] was to plot the species in the (dry, dws) plane. The corre-
sponding map with our own data is in Graphic 2a. Graphic 2b displays the
distribution of the values in the sequences of some species. Both the speciﬁcity
and the classiﬁcatory power of IDH can be clearly noted.

Fig. 2. (a) Position of species in the (dry, dws) plane. (b) Histograms for IDH in
some species.

3.4 Fourier harmonics and Periodicities

Another common tool for DNA analysis is the discrete Fourier transform[22].
For a binary sequence w = w0, . . . , wN −1, we deﬁne the spectrum and its
m-smoothed version:

Sn(w) =

wk e

1
N 2

N −1

X
k=0

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2 π i n k

2
N (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

,

˜Sm
n (w) =

n+m

X
k=n−m

Sk(w)
2m + 1

Sn(w) measures the frequency content of ‘frequency’ n, which corresponds to
a period N
n ; the smoothed value helps to remove the dispersion that appears
for small data sets.

The main and better known periodicity in DNA sequences is of period 3; it
can be explained by the asymmetry in the codon positions [14,21], though its
presence in tRNA genes suggests some other origin. Another well documented
periodicity is of period 10.5 ± 0.5; it has been attributed to requirements from
the structure of both DNA and proteins, and the exact contribution of each
is unclear. Some periodicities of higher periods have been shown, but they are
not statistically signiﬁcant for the typical lengths of genes.

We divided each sequence in non-overlapping windows of length 256, and
used the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm to compute ˜S5 ◦ πry, ˜S5 ◦ πws
and ˜S5 ◦ πmk for all the species. The results were averaged and are shown in

8

Fig. 3. ˜S5 for (a) πws, (b) πry and (c) πmk.

Graphics 3a, 3b and 3c for some of the species; only part of the ordinate axis is
used, in order to highlight their diﬀerences. The two periodicities mentioned
before are present: there is a big peak at n = 85 for the three projections
in almost all the species (the top of the peaks is outside the graphics); this
corresponds to a period of 256
85 ≈ 3. There is also a minor peak around n = 24,
present for most species and for most projections, corresponding to the period
256
24 ≈ 10.5; there are some diﬀerences between species, a fact that has been
observed before and is related to the various origins of this periodicity.

To show the speciﬁcity of the spectrum, we chose a set of 20 collections of
sequences, each set selected at random to be 1% of E5. We computed the
average of spectra for each set; the results for πws are shown in Graphic 4a.

Position dependent spectra. To take into account the asymmetry of the
diﬀerent codon positions, we computed the spectra for the three subsequences
w(i)
n = w3n+i, i = 0, 1, 2, using windows of length 64 (data not shown). In
absence of period 3, the most notorious feature is a peak at n = 18, cor-
responding to a period 64
18 ≈ 3.5 in the subsequence, and hence 10.5 in the
sequences; it is by far stronger for the middle codon position, a fact that hints
for dependence on the amino acid sequence.

Fig. 4. Dispersion of (a) ˜S5 and (b) ˜Γ for πws in E5.

9

3.5 Autocorrelation functions

Correlation functions [13,15] measure the excess or defect of nucleotides at
diﬀerent distances; if ρα,β(d) is the frequency with which we ﬁnd a ‘β’ d posi-
tions after a ‘α’, then what we compute is ρα,β − ραρβ. More precisely, what
we compute for a sequence w = w0, . . . , wN −1 is

Γα,β(d)[w] =

δα(wi)δβ(wi+d) − ρα(w)ρβ(w)

1
N − d

N −d−1

X
i=0

3 P

We computed Γ0,0 for πry, πws, πmk. The most notorious result of this com-
putation is the strong oscillation due to period 3; this can be removed by
considering the smoothed version, ˜Γαβ(d) = 1
d+1
i=d−1 Γαβ(i); when this was
done, the periodicity of period 10.5 could also be seen. To give an idea of the
shape of the curves, and to show their speciﬁcity, Graphic 4b shows the results
for πws, for B1, E5, and the same subsets of E used in Graphic 4a. In general, Γ
behaves very similar to the Fourier transform, in speciﬁcity and in the depen-
dencies on alphabet and/or codon position. This is no surprising, since both
express the same information (if Γ is computed for a circular sequence, then
it can be recovered form the spectra, and vice versa, by the Wiener-Khinchin
theorem). Position dependent autocorrelation functions were also computed,
with no unexpected results.

4 Backtranslation strategy

4.1 Genomic style beyond codon usage

We will consider all of the coding statistics reviewed in the previous section as
features deﬁning the genomic style of a species. It is important to notice that
they are not (or not directly) dependent on the codon usage; if this were the
case, then genomic style would reduce to RSCU, and the current approach to
backtranslation would be already optimal.

It is clear that ρα and ρj
α are recovered by RSCU, if the amino acid composition
is kept constant (this is the case in βcu
E5(E5)); in general, since
amino acid composition is rather similar in all the diﬀerent species (data not
shown), we can expect nucleotide frequencies to be conserved.

B1(B1) and βcu

For dinucleotides, this is not so clear, even if the amino acid frequencies are
kept: in spite of recovering the number of dinucleotides starting at the ﬁrst and
second codon positions, RSCU will not recover those starting at the third. This

10

is important, since most of the degeneracy is in this position, and “genomic
style” depends strongly on it; moreover, mutation rates tend to be aﬀected
by the neighboring nucleotides [2,16], in ways that are species-dependent. In
particular, Miramontes et al [25] show that their indices (IDH) are not deter-
mined by codon usage, even when the amino acid frequency was conserved.
Our data (not shown) conﬁrm it.

B1(E5), βcu

E5(E5) and βcu

E5(B1); results for ˜S5

As for the Fourier spectra, Guig´o [10,11] shows that it is rather independent
from ρg+c. To discard dependence on RSCU, we computed the spectra on
βcu
B1(B1), βcu
n ◦ πws are displayed in
Graphic 5a. We can see that all the sets of guesses lie between the real spectra,
with codon usage being a bit more relevant than the amino acid sequences (the
species); this was also the case for πry and πmk (data not shown). Although
the autocorrelation function contains the same information as the spectrum,
the details of each one are the main lines of the other, and thus, each may be
considered apart. Graphic 5b displays computations of ˜Γ0,0 ◦πws over the same
sets; it can be noticed that in this case the species (amino acid sequences) are
the major contribution, with only a small eﬀect of RSCU.

(a) ˜S5 and (b) ˜Γ for the πws projection of B1, E5, βcu

B1(B1), βcu

B1(E5),

Fig. 5.
E5(B1) and βcu
βcu

E5(E5).

4.2 Genetic Algorithms for Backtranslation

We want to obtain a backtranslation that imitates the genomic style of a target
species as close as possible; thus, we will look for a backtranslation for which
the coding statistics listed above are close to those of the target species, i.e.,
their distance is minimum. We choose, for w ∈ B3∗,

f1(w) = |ρg+c(w) − ρ∗

g+c|

f2(w) = PC∈B3 |RSCUC(w) − RSCU ∗
C|

f3(w) = |dry(w) − d∗
k=3 ak| ˜S5

125

f4(w) = P

k(w) − ˜S5,∗
k |

ry| + |dws(w) − d∗

ws| + |dmk(w) − d∗

mk|

f5(w) = P

99

d=2 bk|˜Γk(w) − ˜Γ∗
k|

11

where the values with “*” are obtained averaging over the known coding se-
quences of the target species, and ak and bk are weights, incorporated in order
to give more importance to some parts of the curves, e.g. to encourage a uni-
form convergence. The indices in the sums of ˜S and ˜Γ follow our particular
choices of window lengths 256 and 30, respectively.

With these deﬁnitions, what we want, for a given u ∈ A∗ and a given target
species, is to minimize ~f (w), with w ∈ τ −1(u). There are two main diﬃculties
involved. First, we have a non-convex problem, in a vast search space, with
terms depending on several scales of the sequences. Moreover, it is a problem of
multiobjective optimization. For these reasons, we propose the use of genetic
algorithms[17] (GA), specially suited for problems with these characteristics.
Our particular implementation of a genetic algorithm for backtranslation fol-
lows here.

• for 1 ≤ i ≤ n initialize wi = βcu(u)
• while not stop condition

· for 1 ≤ j ≤ 5, ¯fj = maxi fj(wi)
· for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ j ≤ 5, N i

j =

¯fj − fj(wi)
n ¯fj − Pk fj(wk)

· for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, N i = Pj λjN i
· Update P using {N i} [stoch. univ. sampling]
· Apply genetic operators: crossover and mutation

j

For a given u ∈ A∗, we iterate on a population of n guesses of τ −1(u), denoted
by {wi}. As seen in the scheme, our initial condition is the usual backtransla-
tion (imitation of RSCU); the GA is iterated then to optimize coding statistics.
N i
j are the expected number of copies of a guess in the next generation; pon-
derating them with {λj} we combine the diﬀerent objective functions, without
needing to make their numeric values comparable. The genetic operators used
are crossover and mutation, both adapted to maintain the encoded amino acid
sequence u. In addition, the probability of crossover between two guesses wi
and wj depends on the Hamming distance between them, making crossing be-
tween distant guesses less probable (this is introduced in order to encourage
the exploration of a bigger region in search space).

A special feature of this approximation is the use of the candidate solutions
(guesses) as their own encodings for the GA. Of course, this is made possible
by the sequential and digital nature of genetic sequences, which were the very
inspiration of GA and other forms of evolutionary computation. Obvious as
it may seem, this is the only application we know about in which genetic
algorithms are applied to genetic sequences.

12

4.3 Results of GA application

The genetic algorithm was run several times for randomly selected sequences
of B1 and E5 (with the other species as target, in each case), in order to ﬁnd
the best values for its parameters (mutation and crossover rates, population
size, etc.), for the ponderations, etc.; this was done ﬁrst for each fi, and then
for the combined optimization (detailed data can be found at [1]). Even when
a single function was optimized, we computed all the statistics on the resulting
guesses, in order to see the eﬀect of each statistics on the rest. Optimization of
spectra and autocorrelation functions, for instance, do not have the same eﬀect
on the sequence, in spite of working with the same information. Optimization
of ˜S causes strong oscillations in ˜Γ, whereas optimization of ˜Γ alone tends
to cause a ﬂattening of ˜S. In general, imitation of ˜Γ is the most diﬃcult,
followed by ˜S, with ρg+c, RSCU and specially IDH being the easier. The
joint optimization of the fi arrived at values of each fi only slightly worse
than those obtained in single function optimization, with the exception of f4,
which was actually better. Optimization of ρg+c and RSCU appeared to be
almost unnecessary: when only f3, f4 and f5 were considered (with βcu as initial
condition), the ﬁnal ρg+c and RSCU were still closer to the target species than
the original sequence was to its own. In general, all fi are optimized by the
genetic algorithm; it is even possible to make the periodicity of period 10.5
appear in sequences from which it was absent.

Fig. 6. ˜S11 for the πry projection of B1, W B, βcu

B1(W E), β∗

B1(W E) and W E.

To remove the diﬀerences due to the amino acid sequences (which can strongly
inﬂuence any coding statistic in a sample with just a few sequences), we con-
structed a test set with sequences encoding homologue proteins in B1 and E5.
To do this, we extracted from the euGenes database [7] the list of homologies
between these species, chose the cases with a higher identity percentage, and
cut the segment of each sequence corresponding to the alignment. Thus we
obtained a set W B = {wB
20} of sequences from B1, and another set
W E = {wE
1 , . . . , wE
i encoding very similar
amino acid sequences. We performed a canonical backtranslation on τ (W E),
B1(W E); we perform also a backtranslation by means of our ge-
obtaining βcu

20} from E5, with each pair wB

1 , . . . , wB

i , wE

13

netic algorithm, obtaining what we will call β∗
B1(W E). The computation of
the diverse coding statistics allows us to see how this procedure gets the back-
translation closer to the average style of B1; moreover, since we do have W B,
we can compare with the values of that particular set of B1. For instance, for
IDH, we can compute a distance between two sets of sequences S1 and S2 as
didh(S1, S2) = |dry(S1) − dry(S2)| + |dws(S1) − dws(S2)| + |dmk(S1) − dmk(S2)|.
We obtain that didh(W E, W B) = 0.275, while didh(βcu
B1(W E), W B) = 0.104,
and didh(β∗
B1(W E), W B) = 0.049. Something similar happens with the other
statistics. Graphic 6 shows the graphs of ˜S11 ◦ πry for the diﬀerent sets; we can
see again how β∗ builds a preimage for the image of W E (which is a typical E5
subset) which is far more similar to B1 and W B than the usual backtranslation
procedure, βcu. For ˜Γ the results are similar, but not so easy to observe in the
graphics; instead of that, Table 3 displays the average diﬀerence between the
curve ˜Γ(W B), and those for W E, βcu
B1(W E). Again, β∗ improves
with respect to βcu.

B1(W E) and β∗

Projection

Table 3: Average distance of curves ˜Γ
d(β∗
d(W E, W B)

B1(W E), W B)

d(βcu

B1(W E), W B)

πws

πry

0.0018

0.0016

0.0013

0.0019

0.0008

0.0011

5 Discussion

The purpose of this article is to propose an improvement of the current pro-
cedures of protein backtranslation, through the inclusion of coding statistics
other than RSCU which contribute to characterize the diﬀerent genomes; this
can be accomplished by the use of genetic algorithms. We ﬁrst presented sev-
eral known coding statistics, showing their idiosyncratic nature. Then we pro-
posed a particular implementation of genetic algorithms, for a small set of
coding statistics; this is only an example, since other choices of the statis-
tics, or other implementations of evolutionary computation, may give better
results. Our implementation, which is available at [1], does already produce
backtranslations which mimic the coding statistics of the target species, in
ways that are not automatically reproduced by RSCU imitation.

The deﬁnitive test for our approach would be the use of our procedure for
the in vitro generation of actual artiﬁcial genes: we expect it to have a higher
success frequency than the canonical backtranslation. Meanwhile, the in silico
experiment consisting in the backtranslation of a human protein into “bacte-
rial” style, and the comparison of the statistics of the resulting gene to those
of an homologue bacterial gene (see section 4.3), suggest that our approach
is correct. In fact, the “optimized” preimages had more exact matches with

14

the bacterial genes (at the aligned codon positions) than the simple RSCU-
based backtranslation; this happened when human proteins were optimized for
“bacterial style”, and also when bacterial proteins were translated into “hu-
man”. Though small, the systematic increase in exact matches is surprising:
we did not expect the imitation of coding statistics to have this eﬀect, since
the number of preimages satisfying a given proﬁle is still huge.

This increase in exact matches suggests that the algorithm could be also ap-
plied to the problem of “gene ﬁshing” through PCR reactions primed by de-
generate primers, or “guessmers”. This is a particular case of backtranslation,
limited to short sequences selected for their minimal ambiguity. Thus, cod-
ing statistics are hard to evaluate (sequences are short) and hard to optimize
(sequences are rigid). In spite of these diﬃculties, preliminary in silico exper-
iments seem to support this application.

Another ﬁeld of application for the ideas presented here is the analysis of
sequences: discussions on the relations and origins of coding statistics can be
illuminated by massive backtranslation of sequences under some criteria, like
we did in 4.1 with RSCU to study its relation to spectra and autocorrelation
functions. Of special interest are the comparisons between genes suspected, or
known, to be related by horizontal transfer[34]. Values of RSCU and/or ρg+c
divergent from the style of a genome have been used to detect horizontally
transferred genes; the degree of their divergence has been used as a clock
to determine when a gene was acquired[33]. Some authors[20] have done this
through a “reverse amelioration” which is a kind of backtranslation, and could
be enriched by the results and procedures given here.

6 Acknowledgments

This research was supported by CONICYT through the FONDAP program
in Applied Mathematics, and was started during a visit to the GREG (Group
de Recherche et d’Etude sur les Genomes) at the Institut of Mathematics at
Luminy, University of Marseille, France. Special thanks to Alejandro Maass
for his lasting support.

References

[1] http://www.dim.uchile.cl/∼genoma/tip

Data sets, computations, extended bibliography, and software. The source code
(which is available) is very ﬂexible, to allow interested researchers to include
their own functions to be optimized.

15

[2] P.F. Arndt, C. Burge, T. Hwa, 2002. DNA Sequence Evolution with Neighbor-
Dependent Mutation. In Proc. 6th Annual Intern. Conf. on Comp. Biol., 32–38.

[3] D. Benson et al, 2002. Genbank. Nucl. Acids Res. 30:17–20.

[4] C. Burge, A. Cambell, S. Karlin, 1992. Over- and under-representation of short
oligonucleotides in DNA sequences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:1358–1362.

[5] A.D. Cristillo et al, 2001. Double-stranded RNA as a not-self alarm signal:
to evade, most viruses purine-load their RNAs, but some (HTLV-1, EBV)
pyrimidine-load. J. Theor. Biol. 208:475–491.

[6] D.R. Forsdyke, 1996. Diﬀerent biological species “broadcast” their DNAs at

diﬀerent (G+C)% “wavelengths”. J. Theor. Biol. 178:405–417.

[7] D. Gilbert, 2002. euGenes: a eukaryote genome information system. Nucl. Acids

Res. 30:145–148.

[8] R. Grantham, 1980. Workings of the genetic code. Trends Bioch. Sci. 5:327–331.

[9] R. Grantham et al, 1986. Patterns of codon usage in diﬀerent kinds of species.

Oxford Surveys of Evolutionary Biology 3:48–81.

[10] R. Guig´o, J. Fickett, 1995. Distinctive Sequence Features in Protein Coding,
Genic Noncoding, and Intergenic Human DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 253:51–60.

[11] R. Guig´o, 1999. DNA Composition, Codon Usage and Exon Prediction. In

Genetic Databases, M.J. Bishop ed., Academic Press, 1999.

[12] D. H¨aring, J. Kypr, 1999. Variations of the Mononucleotide and Short
Oligonucleotide Distributions in the Genomes of Various Organisms. J. Theor.
Biol. 201:141–156.

[13] H. Herzel, I. Grosse, 1995. Measuring correlations in symbol sequences. Physica

A 216:518–542.

[14] H. Herzel, I. Grosse, 1997. Correlations in DNA sequences: The role of protein

coding segments. Phys. Rev. E 55:800–810.

[15] H. Herzel, E.N. Trifonov, O. Weiss, I. Grosse, 1998. Interpreting correlations in

biosequences. Physica A 249:449–459.

[16] S. Hess, J. Blake, R. Blake, 1994. Wide variations in neighbor-dependent

substitution rates. J. Mol. Biol. 236:1022-1033.

[17] J.H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. The University of

Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1975.

[18] D. Holste et al, 2000. Optimization of Coding Potentials Using Positional

Dependence of Nucleotide Frequencies. J. Theor. Biol. 206:525–537.

[19] S. Karlin, J. Mr´azek, 1997. Compositional diﬀerences within and between

eukaryotic genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:10227–10232.

16

[20] J. Lawrence, H. Ochman, 1997. Amelioration of bacterial genomes: Rates of

change and exchange. J. Mol. Evol. 44:383–397.

[21] W. Lee, L. Luo, 1997. Periodicity of base correlation in nucleotide sequences.

Phys. Rev. E 56:848–851.

[22] V.V. Lobzin, V.R. Chechetkin, 2000. Order and correlations in genomic DNA
sequences. The spectral approach. Physics - Uspekhi 43:55–78; available at
http://ufn.ioc.ac.ru/Index00.html.

[23] J. Ma et al, 2002. Cluster analysis of the codon use frequency of MHC genes

from diﬀerent species. Biosystems 65:199–207.

[24] G. Macaya, J.P. Thiery, G. Bernardi, 1976. An approach to the organization of
eukaryotic genomes at a macromolecular level. J. Mol. Biol. 108:237–254.

[25] P. Miramontes et al, 1995. Structural and Thermodynamic Properties of DNA

Uncover Diﬀerent Evolutionary Histories. J. Mol. Evol. 40:698–704.

[26] Y. Nakamura et al, 1999. Codon usage tabulated from the international DNA

sequence databases; its status 1999. Nucl. Acids Res. 27:292.

[27] M. Nashimoto, 2001. The RNA/Protein Symmetry Hypothesis: Experimental
Support for Reverse Translation of Primitive Proteins. J. Theor. Biol. 209:181–
187.

[28] G. Pesole et al, 1988. A backtranslation method based on codon usage strategy.

Nucl. Acids Res. 16:1715–1728.

[29] P.M. Sharp, W.H. Li, 1987. The codon adaptation index - a measure of
directional synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucl.
Acids Res. 15:1281–1295.

[30] C. Shioiri, N. Takahata, 2001. Skew of mononucleotide frequencies, relative
abundance of dinucleotides, and DNA strand asymmetry. J. Mol. Evol.53:364–
376.

[31] A. Smith et al, 1990. Expression of a Synthetic Gene for Horseradish Peroxidase
C in Escherichia coli and Folding and Activation of the Recombinant Enzyme
with Ca2+ and Heme. J. Biol. Chem. 265:13335–13343.

[32] R. Staden, A. McLachlan, 1982. Codon preference and its use in identifying
protein coding regions in long DNA sequences. Nucl. Acids Res. 10:141–156.

[33] N. Sueoka, 1993. Directional mutation pressure, mutator mutations, and

dynamics of molecular evolution. J. Mol. Evol. 37:137–158.

[34] M. Syvanen, C.I. Kado, eds, Horizontal Gene Transfer. Chapman & Hall,

London, 1998.

[35] E.N. Trifonov, 1998. 3-, 10.5-, 200- and 400-base periodicities in genome

sequences. Physica A 249:511–516.

[36] G. White, W. Seﬀens, 1998. Using a neural network to backtranslate amino

acid sequences. Electronic Journal of Biotechnology 1:3.

17

