3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electric ﬁeld-controlled water permeation coupled to ion transport through a
nanopore

J. Dzubiella,∗ R. J. Allen, and J.-P. Hansen
University Chemical Laboratory, Lensﬁeld Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom
(Dated: October 30, 2013)

We report Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations of a generic hydrophobic nanopore connect-
ing two reservoirs which are initially at diﬀerent Na+ concentrations, as in a biological cell. The
nanopore is impermeable to water under equilibrium conditions, but the strong electric ﬁeld caused
by the ionic concentration gradient drives water molecules in. The density and structure of water in
the pore are highly ﬁeld dependent. In a typical simulation run, we observe a succession of cation
passages through the pore, characterized by approximately bulk mobility. These ion passages reduce
the electric ﬁeld, until the pore empties of water and closes to further ion transport, thus providing
a possible mechanism for biological ion channel gating.

PACS numbers: 61.20.Ja, 68.08.Bc, 87.16.Ac, 87.16.Uv

Water and ion permeation of nanopores is a key issue
for biological membrane-spanning ion channels and aqua-
porins, as well as for materials like zeolites, gels and car-
bon nanotubes. Recent simulations report intermittent
ﬁlling of hydrophobic nanopores by water under equilib-
rium conditions [1, 2, 3]. However, imbalances in ion con-
centrations in the inside and outside of cell membranes
create strong electric ﬁelds [4]. Experiments on water
near interfaces show that strong ﬁelds can induce con-
siderable electrostriction of water [5]. The nonequilib-
rium behavior of conﬁned water and ions in strong ﬁelds
should therefore be very important for ion permeation
and ion channel function.
In particular, biological ion
channels “open” and “close” to ion transport in response
to changes in the electric ﬁeld across the membrane. This
behavior, know as voltage gating, is crucial to their func-
tion, but its mechanism is so far not well understood [4].
Related approaches [6] to ion transport include the appli-
cation of a uniform external electric ﬁeld [7, 8], more spe-
ciﬁc models of particular proteins [9, 10, 11, 12], Brow-
nian Dynamics [8] and continuum theories [13]. Here we
present the results of MD simulations in which a strong
electric ﬁeld across the pore is explicitly created by an
ionic charge imbalance, as in a cell. We follow the relax-
ation of this nonequilibrium system to equilibrium.

Our generic model ion channel consists of a cylindri-
cal hydrophobic pore of length Lp = 16˚A and radius
Rp = 5 to 7˚A, through a membrane slab which separates
two reservoirs containing water and Na+ and Cl− ions, as
shown in Fig. 1. One reservoir has initial concentrations
cNa+ ≈ 0.9M (12 cations) and cCl− ≈ 0.6M (8 anions),
while for the second reservoir, cNa+ ≈ 0.3M (4 cations)
and cCl− ≈ 0.6M (8 anions). This imbalance of charge
generates an average electric ﬁeld of 0.37V/˚A across the
membrane. These ion concentrations and electric ﬁeld
are typically ﬁve times larger than under ”normal“ phys-
iological conditions, but they could be achieved in the

∗e-mail address: jd319@cam.ac.uk

course of a rare, large ﬂuctuation at the pore entrance.
The enhanced ion concentrations in the initial state were
chosen to improve the signal-to-noise ratio in the simula-
tion and to allow the detection of novel transport mech-
anisms. The chosen pore dimensions are comparable to
those of the selectivity ﬁlter of a K+ channel [9, 14].

The simulation cell contains two pores in sequence
along the z-axis, one of which is shown in Fig.1. The
reservoir to the right of this pore thus forms the left
reservoir for the other pore. Due to periodic boundary
conditions, the right reservoir of the latter is also the left
reservoir of the ﬁrst. In this arrangement, the simplest
to allow the use of full three-dimensional periodic bound-
aries, the ﬂows of ions in response to the concentration
gradient will be anti-parallel in the two channels. The
relaxation towards equilibrium, where the two reservoirs
are individually electroneutral, will thus involve an indi-
rect coupling between the two pores.

The water molecules are modelled by the SPC/E po-
tential [15] which consists of an O atom, carrying an
electric charge q = −0.8476e, and two H atoms with
q = 0.4238e. The O-atoms on diﬀerent water molecules
interact via a Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential with pa-
rameters ǫ = 0.6502kJmol−1 and σ = 3.169˚A . The
model is rigid, with OH bond length 1˚A and HOH
angle 109.5◦. The Na+ ions have LJ parameters ǫ =
0.3592kJmol−1, σ = 2.73˚A and q = +e and for the Cl−,
ǫ = 0.1686kJmol−1, σ = 4.86˚A and q = −e [16].

Ions and water O-atoms interact with the conﬁning
pore and membrane surfaces by a potential of the LJ
form V = ǫ′[(σ′/r)12 −(σ′/r)6], where r is the orthogonal
distance from the nearest conﬁning surface. The poten-
tial parameters are ǫ′ = 1.0211kJmol−1 and σ′ = 0.83˚A .
If Rp is the geometric radius of the cylindrical pore, one
may conveniently deﬁne an eﬀective radius R by the ra-
dial distance from the cylinder axis at which the interac-
tion energy of a water O-atom with the conﬁning surface
is kBT , leading at room temperature to R ≈ Rp − 2˚A ;
similarly the eﬀective length of the pore is L ≈ Lp + 4˚A .
Ion-water, ion-ion, water-surface and ion-surface cross
terms are deﬁned using the usual Lorentz-Berthelot com-

2

bining rules. Polarizability of the membrane [17] and of
the water molecules and ions is neglected.

The total simulation cell including both of the channels
is of dimensions lx = ly = 23.5 ± 0.3˚A and lz = 112.9 ±
1.5˚A and contains 1374 water molecules, 16 Na+ and 16
Cl− ions. Molecular Dynamics simulations were carried
out with the DLPOLY2 package [18], using the Verlet
algorithm [19, 20] with a timestep of 2fs. The pressure
was maintained at P = 1bar and the temperature at
T = 300K using a Berendsen barostat and thermostat
[21]. Electrostatic interactions were calculated using the
particle-mesh Ewald method [22].

FIG. 1: Simulation snapshots. Molecular conﬁgura-
tions (a) before a cation (dark grey spheres) perme-
ates the channel and (b), 10 ps later, while it goes
through. Anions are shown as light grey spheres. Only
half of the periodically repeated simulation cell is shown.

Water permeation of the pore is strongly aﬀected by
the electric ﬁeld. The eﬀective channel radius chosen
for most of the simulations (R = 3˚A) is such that under
equilibrium conditions (i.e. with equal numbers of anions
and cations on both sides and hence no electric ﬁeld),
the channel is empty of water and ions [4]. However, the
ionic charge imbalance across the the membrane causes
the pore to ﬁll spontaneously with water. The electric
ﬁeld throughout the system was monitored by measur-
ing the electrostatic force on phantom test particles on
a three dimensional grid [7]. Fig. 2a shows the average
local electric ﬁeld around one pore before the ﬁrst ion
moves through a channel. It is nearly zero in the reser-
voirs. Inside the pore the ﬁeld is very strong (∼ 0.37V/˚A)
and has a small inward radial component. The proﬁle of
the z-component of the ﬁeld Ez is shown in Fig. 2b and
is constant inside the pore.

During the course of the simulation, a number of Na+
ions move through the pore. Each of these events changes
the reservoir charge imbalance and reduces the electric

(a),
FIG. 2: Electric ﬁeld in and around the pore.
Magnitude and direction of the electric ﬁeld, depicted
by vectors on a two dimensional rectangular grid in
the x-z-plane. The contour of the membrane pore
is sketched as black solid line.
(b), Averaged z-
component Ez(z) of the electric ﬁeld inside the channel.

ﬁeld in the pore. This has a dramatic eﬀect on the be-
havior of the water, as shown in Fig. 3 in which the num-
ber nH2O of water molecules inside one pore is plotted as
a function of time for a typical simulation run.

Initially, the water in the pore undergoes strong elec-
trostriction, comparable to experimental observations [5],
with an average density

ρ ≈ nH2O/(πR2L),

(1)

(2)

twice as large as that of bulk water in equilibrium.
If
we assume bulk density of water ρ0 inside a channel of
radius R and length L we expect an average number nbulk
of molecules inside the channel with

nbulk = ρ0(πR2L).

nbulk is indicated with an arrow on the right-hand side
in Fig. 3. At each ion crossing, the number nH2O of
water molecules inside the pore drops but is still larger
than nbulk.
In this particular simulation run shown in
Fig.3 three cations went through this pore. After the
third ion crosses (t ≈ 2.25ns), the electric ﬁeld is no
longer strong enough to sustain channel ﬁlling and the
pore spontaneously empties of water, thereby becoming
impermeable to further ion transport. However the other
pore in the simulation cell remains ﬁlled and the ﬁnal

3

FIG. 3: Occupancy and structure of water inside the
pore. The number of water molecules inside the channel
nH2O is plotted as a function of time t. The shades of
grey code the average magnitude of the electric ﬁeld in-
side the pore: from black to light grey: E ≈ 0.37V /˚A,
E ≈ 0.25V /˚A, E ≈ 0.15V /˚A , E ≈ 0.10V /˚A. The in-
set shows the corresponding radial density proﬁles of the
water molecules inside the channel averaged over periods
of constant ﬁeld. ρ0 is the bulk density of water in equi-
librium. nbulk (eq. (2)) is the expected number of wa-
ter molecules inside the pore if bulk density is assumed.

ion crossing eventually occurs through this pore which
after that also empties of water. Finally equilibrium is
restored to the system and both channels are empty of
water. On repeating the simulation 5 times we observe
that the closing of one pore after the third ion passed
through it occurs in all runs.

The structure of water in the ﬁlled pore is strongly
aﬀected by the ﬁeld, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3.
Before the ﬁrst ion crossing, water forms clear layers near
the pore wall and along the z-axis. The central layer
disappears after the ﬁrst ion crossing and the outer layer
becomes less well-deﬁned. After a further ion crossing,
water is more-or-less evenly distributed.

Ion transport through the pore is found to occur es-
sentially at constant velocity. Fig. 1 shows snapshots
from a typical simulation run just before (a) and while
(b) a sodium ion passes through the channel. Within the
reservoirs the anions and cations diﬀuse among the wa-
ter molecules. When a cation in the Na+-rich reservoir
comes close to the channel entrance, it experiences the
strong axial ﬁeld shown in Fig. 2 and is dragged into
the channel. Analysis of 15 simulation runs, with the
same initial charge imbalance but diﬀerent initial conﬁg-
urations, shows that once the ﬁrst ion enters the channel,
it moves with a constant velocity which is approximately
the same in all runs, and then reverts to diﬀusive motion
at the other end of the channel.

Fig. 4 shows typical cation positions along the z-axis,
as a function of time, for the ﬁrst, second and third ion

FIG. 4: Cation trajectories inside the pore and in its
vicinity. The z-coordinate of the cations is plotted versus
time for three successive permeations in one typical simu-
lation run. The channel is located between z = −8˚A and
z = 8˚A marked by the two long dashes lines. t = 0 deﬁnes
the time at which the ions are located at the entrance of
the channel. The shades of grey code the average magni-
tude of electric ﬁeld experienced by the ions, as in Fig.3

crossings, as shown in Fig. 3. The second ion also tra-
verses the channel at constant, somewhat reduced ve-
locity, although it appears to pause for approximately
10ps at the channel entrance, perhaps in order to shed
its bulk-like solvation shell. We observe that this “paus-
ing time” is rather widely distributed between simulation
runs. The cation mobility µ+, deﬁned by ~v = µ+e ~E, can
be calculated from the slopes of the trajectories in Fig.
4, together with the measured electric ﬁelds, as in Fig.2.
The resulting values are µ+ ≈ 4.5 × 1011 s kg−1 for the
ﬁrst ion, µ+ ≈ 3.8 × 1011 s kg−1 for the second ion, and
µ+ ≈ 2.4 × 1011 s kg−1 for the third ion. These values are
close to the value of µ+ ≈ 2.3×1011 s kg−1 obtained from
the self-diﬀusion constant in the reservoir D+, using Ein-
stein’s relation µ+ = D+/kBT , but seem to increase with
the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld inside the pore. This
enhancement of the mobility correlates with the change
of structure of the water inside the channel, shown in
the inset of Fig. 3. The tetrahedral hydrogen bond net-
work which water forms under equilibrium conditions is
disrupted inside the pore under high electric ﬁelds.

Simulations of wider (R = 5˚A) pores and with diﬀerent
lengths give qualitatively the same results. The critical
electric ﬁeld for water permeation is, however, sensitive
to the pore radius and length. This suggests that voltage-
dependent gating in ion channels, if it were to occur by
changes in water permeation of a hydrophobic section of
the pore [3, 4], might be strongly dependent on channel
geometry.

The key ﬁnding which emerges from our simulations
is the strong correlation between water and ion behavior
Ionic charge imbal-
under non-equilibrium conditions.

ance across the membrane induces water permeation of
the hydrophobic pore and thus makes it permeable to
ions. This suggests that voltage gating of ion channels
may be linked to the coupling between water and ion per-
meation in pores far from equilibrium. The structure and
density of water in the pore is dramatically aﬀected by
the strong electric ﬁeld. The passage of a cation through
the channel causes an abrupt jump of the electric ﬁeld,
and an ensuing jump in the number of water molecules
inside the pore. Ion passage through the pore occurs at
constant velocity and with a mobility coeﬃcient similar

to that of the bulk solution at equilibrium.

4

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Jane Clarke and Michele
Vendruscolo for a careful reading of the manuscript. This
work was supported in part by the EPSRC. R. J. A. is
grateful to Unilever for a Case award.

[1] G. Hummer, J. C. Rasaih, and J. P. Nowortya, Nature

[13] W. Nonner and B. Eisenberg, Biophys. J. 75, 1287

[2] O. Beckstein, P. C. Biggin, and M. S. P. Sansom, J. Phys.

[14] Y. Zhou, J. M. Morais-Cabral, A. Kaufman, and

[3] R. Allen, S. Melchionna, and J.-P. Hansen, Phys. Rev.

[15] H. J. C. Berendsen, J. R. Grigera, and T. P. Straatsma,

414, 188 (2001).

Chem. 105, 12902 (2001).

Lett. 89, 175502 (2002).

auer, 1992).

[4] B. Hille, Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes (Sin-

[5] M. Toney, Nature 368, 444 (1994).
[6] S. Kuyucak, O. S. Andersen, and S.-H. Chung, Rep.

Prog. Phys. 64, 1427 (2001).

Manual.

(1998).

R. MacKinnon, Nature 414, 43 (2001).

J. Phys. Chem. 91, 6269 (1987).

[16] E. Spohr, Electrochim. Acta 44, 1697 (1999).
[17] R. Allen, J.-P. Hansen, and S. Melchionna, J. Phys.:

Condens. Matt. 15, 5297 (2003).

[18] W. Smith and T. R. Forester (1999), the DLPOLY 2 User

[19] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Sim-
ulation: From Algorithms to Applications (Academic
Press, 1996).

[20] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of

Liquids (Clarendon Press, 1987).

[21] H. J. C. Berendsen, J. P. M. Postma, W. F. V. Gunsteren,
A. DiNola, and J. R. Haak, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 3684
(1984).

[22] U. Essmann, L. Perera, M. L. Berkowitz, T. Darden, and
H. L. L. G. Pedersen, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8577 (1995).

[7] P. S. Crozier, R. L. Rowley, N. B. Holladay, D. Hender-
son, and D. D. Busath, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2467 (2001).
[8] S.-H. Chung, T. W. Allen, and S. Kuyucak, Biophys. J.

83, 262 (2002).

[9] S. Berneche and B. Roux, Nature 414, 73 (2001).
[10] D. P. Tieleman, P. C. Biggin, G. R. Smith, and M. S. P.

Sansom, Quart. Rev. Biophys. 34, 473 (2001).

[11] B. Roux and M. Karplus, Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol.

Str. 23, 731 (1994).

[12] C. F. Lopez, M. Montal, J. Blasie, M. L. Klein, and P. B.

Moore, Biophys. J. 83, 1259 (2002).

