LA-UR-03-2144

Scaled Particle Theory and the Length-scales Involved in

Hydrophobic Hydration of Aqueous Biomolecular

Assemblies

Henry S. Ashbaugh and Lawrence R. Pratt

Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545,

USA

(Dated: February 21, 2014)

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

Hydrophobic hydration plays a crucial role in self-assembly processes over multiple-

length scales, from the microscopic origins of inert gas solubility in water, to

the mesoscopic organization of proteins and surfactant structures, to macro-

scopic phase separation. Many theoretical studies focus on the molecularly de-

tailed interactions between oil and water, but the extrapolation of molecular-scale

models to larger length scale hydration phenomena is sometimes not warranted.

Scaled particle theory approaches are based upon an interpolative view of that

microscopic

macroscopic issue. We revisit the scaled particle theory proposed

→

thirty years ago by Stillinger (J. Soln. Chem. 2, 141-158 (1973)), adopt a prac-

tical generalization, and consider the implications for hydrophobic hydration in

light of our current understanding. The generalization is based upon identifying a

molecular length, implicit in previous applications of scaled particle models, that

provides an eﬀective boundary radius for joining microscopic and macroscopic de-

scriptions. We demonstrate that the generalized theory correctly reproduces many

of the anomalous thermodynamic properties of hydrophobic hydration for molec-

ularly sized solutes, including solubility minima and entropy convergence, success-

fully interpolates between the microscopic and macroscopic extremes, and provides

new insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms. The model considered

here serves as a reference for theories that bridge microscopic and macroscopic hy-

drophobic eﬀects. The results are discussed in terms of length scales associated

with component phenomena; in particular we ﬁrst discuss the length locating a

micro-macroscopic boundary identiﬁed by the theory, then we discuss in turn the

Tolman length that leads to an analogous length describing curvature corrections of

a surface area model of hydrophobic hydration free energies, and the length scales

on which entropy convergence of hydration free energies are expected.

2

III. Application to Hydrophobic Hydration

A. Cavity contact correlation functions: the micro-macro boundary

B. Hydration thermodynamics of hydrophobic species: temperature signatures and solubility minima17

C. Surface area dependence of hydration thermodynamic properties: the Tolman length and curvature corrections19

Contents

I. Introduction

II. A Primer on Scaled Particle Theory

A. Classic Scaled Particle Theory

B. Revised Scaled Particle Theory

C. Computational Implementation

D. Entropy convergence and solute size

IV. Summary and Conclusions

Acknowledements

References

Figures

I. INTRODUCTION

3

9

9

12

14

14

14

21

25

27

27

31

The adage ‘oil and water don’t mix’ dominates thinking about hydrophobic eﬀects that

are upheld, nearly universally, as the primary thermodynamic impetus for a number of

important aqueous solution phenomena,

including the environmental fate of pollutants,

surfactant assembly, biological membrane formation, and the folding of globular proteins

(Blokzijl and Engberts, 1993; Kauzmann, 1959; Simonson, 2003; Tanford, 1980). Enigmatic

temperature signatures — such as the fact that many soluble proteins unfold both upon

heating and cooling — oﬀer the primary puzzles of hydrophobic eﬀects, and are character-

istic of the aqueous milieu. An organized ability to reproduce these temperature signatures

3

from basic principles is esssential for understanding the temperature range of functional be-

havior of biophysical structures, and of aqueous phase nanotechnology invented by analogy

with the molecular machinery of biophysics. An important aspect of these puzzles is that

the hydrophobic temperature signatures are strongly aﬀected by the spatial or length scale

of the hydrophobic solution structures. This review focuses on recent progress in unravel-

ing the puzzles of temperature signatures and length scales characteristic of hydrophobic

hydration.

The aqueous phase solutes that motivate study of hydrophobic eﬀects are typically molec-

ularly complicated, often water soluble but amphiphilic chain molecules. Thus, hydrophobic

phenomena usually do not occur in isolation. Researchers studying these systems have been

comfortable, however, with a hydrophilic-hydrophobic dichotomy. A helpful review of elec-

trostatic hydrophilic interactions involved in protein molecular structure with an emphasis

on the diﬀerent lengths scales involved appeared recently (Simonson, 2003). That review

can serve to supply a current picture of aqueous phase interactions complementary to the

hydrophobic eﬀects discussed here. It is not uncommon for aqueous solutions interactions

that have been clearly identiﬁed, such as classic electrostatic interactions, to provide by this

hydrophilic-hydrophobic dichomoty an identiﬁcation of hydrophobic eﬀects (Pratt, 1998).

This is particularly true if the temperature dependences of the complementary interactions

are also somewhat murky! Our review here will emphasize standard model solutes, inert

excluded volume models, that do permit study of hydrophobic eﬀects exclusively. Gases that

are sparingly soluble in water, and small hydrocarbon molecules, can be brought simply into

correspondence with hardcore molecular models. These simple systems and models permit

precision in isolating the peculiar temperature signatures that are the target of studies of

hydrophobic eﬀects.

Experimental heats of hydration, determined from high precision calorimetric studies,

show that unfavorable entropies of transferring nonpolar solutes into water dominate hy-

dration free energies at room temperature, and are only partly compensated by favorable

dissolution enthalpies. These measurements are incongruous with regular solution notions,

which ascribe insolubility to unfavorable cohesive interactions between the solute and water

compared to water with itself (Lazaridis, 2001). Of foremost importance, the entropies and

enthalpies of hydrophobic hydration are strongly temperature dependent, following from the

large positive transfer heat capacities observed. Thus, at elevated temperatures the roles of

4

entropy and enthalpy are reversed, with unfavorable enthalpies dominating hydration free

energies, partly compensated by favorable entropies. The resulting solubilities of nonpolar

gases are nonmonotonic, exhibiting a solubility minimum between 310 K and 350 K. Anal-

ogously, proteins undergo hot and cold denaturation (Brandts, 1964; Franks and Hatley,

1991) as noted above, while ionic and nonionic surfactants display a minimum in their

critical micelle concentrations with respect to temperature (Chen et al., 1998a,b), point-

ing to a common underlying mechanism with the solubility behavior of nonpolar species.

Careful analysis of the experimental entropy changes upon hydrocarbon hydration, as a

function of temperature, reveals that these curves intersect at an entropy change close to

zero at

385 K (Baldwin, 1986; Lee, 1991; Makhatadze and Privalov, 1995; Muller, 1993;

≈

Murphy et al., 1990; Privalov, 1979; Privalov and Gill, 1988). The coincidence of this en-

tropy convergence temperature for hydrocarbons with comparable behavior in protein un-

folding has been used as empirical justiﬁcation for the hydrophobic core model for protein

folding, and has inﬂuenced the interpretation of biomolecular assembly. But in the com-

plex context of soluble protein molecules, a clear relevence of entropy convergence can be

questioned (Robertson and Murphy, 1997).

Puzzlements about hydrophobic eﬀects derive from entropic origins in molecular-scale hy-

dration structure. The theoretical description of hydrophobic eﬀects has recently progressed

markedly, and the understanding of the roles played by this entropic force in the functional

stabilization of micelles, membranes, soluble proteins, and hierarchical biomolecular aggre-

gation in aqueous solution has similarly advanced.

It is now understood that the scaled

particle theories can properly describe primitive hydrophobic eﬀects associated with the hy-

dration of simple mono-atomic species. Scaled particle theories identify — inadvertantly at

ﬁrst, but ﬁrmly nonetheless — a length that separates a microscopic from a macroscopic

description of hydration structure. This point has not been widely appreciated. This radial

length establishes a boundary at which microscopic and macroscopic descriptions of hydra-

tion structure join eﬀectively. A basic understanding of this micro-macroscopic boundary

region, together with primitive constitutive information speciﬁc to liquid water, can provide

an eﬀective description of hydrophobic eﬀects for meso-scale aqueous assembly processes.

Much of the recent progress in understanding hydrophobic eﬀects can be discussed on the

basis of length scales associated with component phenomena of long standing interest. This

paper lays out that basic view which generalizes the application of scaled particle theories,

5

establishes on that basis the micro-macroscopic boundary length, and then discusses in turn

the Tolman length that leads to an analogous length describing curvature corrections of a

surface area model of hydrophobic hydration free energies, and the length scales on which

entropy convergence of hydration free energies can be expected.

It has been traditionally argued that hydrophobic eﬀects for molecular solutes stem from

orientational constraints in the hydration shell of nonpolar solutes to maintain the integrity

of a hydrogen-bonding water network forming cage-like structures or microscopic icebergs

(Frank and Evans, 1945). While providing a language for discussing hydrophobic hydration

suggestive of the molecular origins of the insolubility of oils, this interpretation has done

nothing to resolve the relative magnitudes of the opposing enthalpic and entropic contribu-

tions to hydration. Theoretical studies of the impact of local clatharate formation about

krypton in liquid water have demonstrated that such ordered structures are far too unfa-

vorable to play a role in hydration thermodynamics (Ashbaugh et al., 2003). Experimental

probes of the local structure of water proximal to purely nonpolar solutes are scarce, and

hampered by the low solute concentrations attainable. The structures that have been mea-

sured by neutron and X-ray scattering techniques suggest that while water surely adopts

orientational preferences in the hydration shell of nonpolar moieties, the solute induced

structure is more disordered than that in ice or clatharate hydrates (Bowron et al., 1998a,b;

Broadbent and Neilson, 1994; DeJong et al., 1997; Filipponi et al., 1997).

Molecular level

investigations of hydrophobic hydration have been largely theoreti-

cal and simulation eﬀorts (Henderson, 2002; Hummer et al., 1998, 1996; Pierotti, 1976;

Pohorille and Pratt, 1990; Pratt, 2002; Pratt and Pohorille, 1992; Stillinger, 1973). Wa-

ter structure and orientational preferences in the vicinity of hydrophobic species has

been connected to the characteristic entropies of hydrophobic hydration through the

application of a statistical mechanical correlation function expansion for the entropy

(Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 1996; Lazaridis and Paulaitis, 1992; Silverstein et al., 2001). More

recently, information theory (IT) (Hummer et al., 1998, 2000) with tenticles to the Pratt-

Chandler (Pratt and Chandler, 1977) and the Gaussian ﬁeld (Chandler, 1993; Lum et al.,

1999) theories, has provided a quantitative link between the microscopic density ﬂuctua-

tions determined from water oxygen pair correlations and the hydration free energies of

hard solutes. More importantly, IT implicates the unique equation-of-state properties of

water as a dominant factor in hydrophobic hydration, diﬀerentiating water from other com-

6

mon solvents.

In addition to capturing temperature and pressure eﬀects associated with

hydrophobic hydration and interactions, (Hummer et al., 1998) IT provides a facile expla-

nation of the enhanced solubility of nonpolar species in D2O compared to H2O as a result

of diﬀerences in the isothermal compressibilities of these isotopic alternative forms of water

(Hummer et al., 2000).

The distinction between molecular hydrophobic eﬀects, quantiﬁed by hydrocarbon-water

transfer free energies, and the hydrophobic forces that drive assembly on larger length

scales was ﬁrst noted by Tanford (Tanford, 1979). His observation was based on the

large discrepancy between the measured water-hydrocarbon interfacial tension and the

eﬀective microscopic surface tensions obtained from hydrocarbon solubility data. More-

over, the relationship between macroscopic and microscopic surface tensions is contentious

due to fundamental diﬀerences in their temperature dependencies. More recent examples

of the distinction between molecular and macroscopic hydrophobic interactions is found

in measurements of the long-range attractive force between macroscopic hydrophobic sur-

faces (Christenson and Claesson, 1988; Israelachvili and Pashley, 1982; Pashley et al., 1985)

which have not been explained on the basis of molecular hydrophobic eﬀects. Vibrational

sum frequency experiments suggest that aqueous hydrogen-bonding is weaker at macroscopic

water-carbon tetrachloride and water-hexane interfaces than that near individual hydropho-

bic species dissolved in water (Scatena et al., 2001). The lack of a deﬁnitive interpretation

of these surface force measurements, and the changes in water energetics at macroscopic

interfaces underscores the need for a quantitative theory of hydrophobic phenomena beyond

molecular hydrophobic eﬀects. In general, the need for a uniﬁed, quantitative description of

both molecular and macroscopic hydrophobic phenomena arises because hydrophobic driv-

ing forces play an important role in self-assembly on multiple length scales and the fact

that quantitative descriptions of these driving forces are derived from molecular solubility

data, macroscopic interfacial tension measurements, or interpolations of these quantities

(Ashbaugh et al., 1999; Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001; Hermann, 1977; Sharp et al., 1991;

Tanford, 1979).

Chandler and coworkers (Lum et al., 1999) have suggested bridging these vast length

scales by integrating a Gaussian ﬁeld theory for molecular level ﬂuctuations with mean-ﬁeld

theory for larger scale ﬂuctuations ultimately responsible for macroscopic phase transitions.

Their approach successfully predicts many of the thermodynamic anomalies characteristic of

7

small molecule hydration, and goes further, predicting the onset of long-range hydrophobic

forces between surfaces as a result of a aqueous liquid-vapor phase transition in conﬁned

geometries. Indeed surface force apparatus studies of the long-range hydrophobic interaction

observed cavitation between nonpolar surfaces (Christenson and Claesson, 1988), consistent

with theoretical predictions. Mean-ﬁeld modeling and simulations of methane clusters, how-

ever, suggest that when ubiquitous attractive dispersion interactions between water and hy-

drophobic surfaces are taken into account, the length scales over which conﬁnement induces

an aqueous phase transition is suppressed (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001; Truskett et al.,

2001). Moreover, experiments on the eﬀects of electrolyte addition and degassing on the

range of surface forces, and the stability of surfactant free aqueous emulsions challenge the

theoretical predictions (Considine et al., 1999; Kokkoli and Zukoski, 1998; Pashley, 2003).

A conceptual basis for unifying molecular and macroscopic hydrophobic hydration can

be found in scaled particle theory (SPT). Thirty years ago Frank Stillinger (Stillinger, 1973)

presented an inﬂuential paper on the application of the classic SPT of Reiss (Pierotti, 1976;

Reiss, 1965, 1977; Reiss et al., 1959) to the hydration thermodynamics of purely excluded

volume solutes. The purpose of that paper was, in part, to illuminate the pitfalls and

diﬃculties in applying classic SPT, originally developed for hard-sphere ﬂuids, to aqueous

solvents. In doing so Stillinger opened up new avenues of inquiry into hydrophobic hydration

within the context of SPT. Nevertheless, direct exploration of the validity and consequences

of Stillinger’s suggested revised theory have been rare (Pratt and Pohorille, 1992, 1993). We

presently revisit SPT and critically discuss its implications in light of our current under-

standing of hydrophobic hydration. For the ﬁrst time, we demonstrate that the revised SPT

reproduces many of the characteristic thermodynamic signatures of molecular hydrophobic

eﬀects and can be used to extend the results of molecular simulations of small hydrophobic

hard solutes in water to meso- and macroscopic surface hydration. The present analysis pro-

vides insights into the diﬀerences and similarities for hydrating molecular and macroscopic

surfaces. In addition, we examine the validity of surface area correlations commonly used in

biophyscial models for hydration thermodynamics over a range of length scales, as well as

the origins of entropy convergence behavior at molecular lengths scales and how solute size

moderates the convergence temperature.

8

II. A PRIMER ON SCALED PARTICLE THEORY

A. Classic Scaled Particle Theory

The chemical potential of a hydrated mono-atomic solute, S, can be expressed formally

as

µS(aq) = kT ln

ρS(aq)Λ3
S
h

i

+ µex

S (aq)

where we have adopted Ben-Naim’s standard state in the deﬁnition of the chemical potential

(Ben-Naim and Marcus, 1984). Here k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, ρS(aq)

is the solute number density in the solution, ΛS is the thermal de Broglie wavelength of

the solute, and µex

S is the excess chemical potential, i.e., the coupling work of turning on
interactions between the solute and water, which disappears if those interactions vanish.

At thermal equilibrium the Ostwald partition coeﬃcient determining the distribution of

the solute between an aqueous and ideal gas (µex

S (ideal) = 0) phase at inﬁnite dilution is

(Pollack, 1991)

Keq =

ρS(aq)
ρS(ideal)

= exp [

µex

S (aq)/kT ] .

−

Thus, the excess chemical potential is central to resolving the aqueous solubility of the

solute. Conﬁning our discussion to impenetrable hard sphere (HS) solutes, the solute excess

chemical potential in water is

(1)

(2)

(3)

µex

S (aq) =

kT ln p0(R)

−

where the insertion probability, p0(R), is the probability that a solute sized stencil randomly

placed in water is devoid of water oxygen centers; this follows directly from Widom’s po-

tential distribution theorem for species interacting with a hard potential (Pratt et al., 1999;

Widom, 1982). The solvent accessible radius, R, is the radius of closest approach between

the solute center and a water oxygen. The solvent accessible radius is the sum of the ef-

fective hard sphere radius of water and the hard van der Waals radius of the solute, i.e.,

R = (σW W + σSS) /2. As R

0, the solute van der Waals radius becomes negative, and

→

the solute can penetrate the nominal excluding volume of water molecules. While physically

novel, the negative van der Waals radius stems from the requirement that R must equal zero

for the solute to be completely absent from solution. This requirement poses no conceptual

9

or mathematical diﬃculties on the underlying statistical thermodynamic formulation.

In

this context, the insertion probability can be viewed as the fractional free (or available)

volume in solution available for the solute to occupy, i.e., p0(R) = Vf ree/Vtotal.

A physical picture of p0(R) is illustrated in Figure 1. Given a molecular snapshot of

liquid water (left hand box in Fig. 1), taken for example from a computer simulation, Vf ree

for a given cavity radius is determined by the points at which a cavity can be successfully

inserted yielding a negative image templated by the aqueous conﬁguration (right hand box

in Fig. 1). As would be expected Vf ree decreases with increasing cavity radius, and as

such successful insertions become increasingly rare. p0(R) is subsequently determined as an

ensemble average over a large number of molecular conﬁgurations.

An alternative relationship for the chemical potential that draws a connection to the

structure of water in the vicinity of the solute is

µex

S (aq)
kT

=

R

0
Z

ρW G(r)4πr2dr

where ρW G(r) is the density of water in contact with a hard solute cavity of radius r. The

product ρW kT G(r) has units of force per unit area and can be thought of as a pressure

due to solvent collisions with the hard solute surface. The chemical potential then is the

reversible pressure-volume work required to grow the solute into solution. The etymology of

scaled particle theory is derived from this expression (Reiss, 1965, 1977) since the solute is

introduced by scaling it up from a particle with a solvent accessible radius of zero to a ﬁnal

size of R. The relationship between the contact function and the insertion probability is

as determined by diﬀerentiation of Eq. 4. For suﬃciently small solute cavities that only one

solvent molecule might ﬁt within the cavity boundary, the insertion probability is

The corresponding expression for the contact correlation function is

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

G(R) =

1
4πR2ρW

∂ ln p0(R)
∂R

−

,

p0(R

0) = 1

→

4π
3

−

ρW R3 .

G(R

0) =

→

1
3 ρW R3 .
4π

1

−

≈

10

These expressions are exact in hard sphere ﬂuids and accurate in solvents with realistic

interactions for cavities up to a radius of R

σW W /2, where the solute corresponds to a

point particle with a van der Waals radius of zero. Packing considerations indicate that

between solvent accessible radii of σW W /2 and σW W /√3 at most two solvent centers might

ﬁt within the solute cavity. Increasingly more solvent molecules can ﬁt within cavities of

increasing size, requiring information on dauntingly more complex multi-body correlations.

In the limit of a macroscopically large cavity, the contact correlation function can be

represented as an asymptotic expansion in 1/R

G(R)

Gj
Rj .

∼

Xj≥0

(8)

(9)

Retaining contributions up to j = 2 yields an expression equivalent in form to that required

by classical thermodynamics for the force acting on the cavity surface (Henderson, 2002;

Pierotti, 1976; Reiss, 1965, 1977; Stillinger, 1973)

kT ρW G(R)

p +

∼

2γ∞
R −

4γ∞δ
R2

where p is the bulk pressure (typically assumed to be equal to the liquid saturation pressure

psat), γ∞ is the surface tension of a ﬂat interface, and δ, the Tolman length (Tolman, 1949),

describes the initial curvature correction to the surface tension. The third order coeﬃcient,

G3 is necessarily equal to zero so that the chemical potential is free of logarithmic contri-

butions, as required by the general theory (Stillinger and Cotter, 1971). The relationship

between higher order terms of the contact correlation function and classical thermodynamic

quantities is uncertain. Such considerations motivated (Reiss et al., 1959) to truncate Eq. 8

after the ﬁrst curvature correction in order to develop a tractable, physically reasonable

model for the contact correlation function.

Evaluating the j=0 term in Eq. 8 by comparison with the classical thermodynamic ex-

pression and the ﬁrst and second order terms in the expansion by requiring the microscopic

and macroscopic limits smoothly meet at σW W /2, the expression

1

3 ρW R3 ,

1− 4π
2−η
+
(1−η)2 −
(1−η)2 + psat

h
(1+2η)

psat
kT ρW
+

2psat
kT ρW

σW W
2R

2

i (cid:16)
σW W
2R

R

σW W /2

≤

(cid:17)
, R > σW W /2

(10)

−
h
is obtained for the contact correlation function. Here η = π

i (cid:16)

(cid:17)

kT rhoW

6 ρW σW W

3 is the solvent packing

G(R) =






11

fraction. Integration of the contact correlation function yields the excess chemical potential

ln (1

−
h

ln

1
(cid:16)
2(1−η)2 −
3ηpsat
kT ρW

η) + 9η2
3η(2+η)
2(1−η)2 −

4π

3 ρW R3
+

−
ηpsat
kT ρW

,
(cid:17)
3η(1+2η)
(1−η)2 + 3ηpsat

i
2R
σW W

−
2
h
+ ηpsat
kT ρW

kT ρW
3

2R
σW W

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i (cid:16)
,

i (cid:16)

(cid:17)

−
+

h

2R
σW W

(cid:17)

R

σW W /2

≤

(11)

R > σW W /2 .

Eqs. 10 and 11 constitute the classic SPT originally developed for HS solvents (Reiss, 1965,

µex
S
kT

= 



1977), which has subsequently been applied to water by Pierotti (Pierotti, 1976) and Lee

and coworkers (Lee, 1985). Fundamental diﬃculties arise in the application of classic SPT to

water, however, including the erroneous prediction that the surface tension of water increases

with temperature and passes through a maximum near 425K (Stillinger, 1973).

B. Revised Scaled Particle Theory

The scaled particle model described above incorporates little molecular detail, other than

the eﬀective HS diameter, that might diﬀerentiate water from other solvents, and thereby

limits the interpretation of complex hydration phenomena. The insertion probability is

formally expressed on the basis of solvent structure by an inclusion-exclusion development

(Reiss, 1965, 1977; Stillinger, 1973)
ρW )n
n!

p0 (R) = 1 +

−

(

Xn≥1

ZV (R)

ZV (R)

. . .

g(n) (r1 . . . rn) d3r1 . . . d3rn

(12)

where V (R) = 4πR3/3 is the observation volume, and g(n) (r1 . . . rn) are the n-body solvent

oxygen distribution functions. The terms in this series vanish for n exceeding the maximum

number of solvent molecular centers that can be packed into a sphere of volume 4πR3/3. It

is on this basis that the limiting results Eq. 6 are established. As noted above, these distri-

bution functions are complicated and impractical to evaluate beyond the pair-distribution

function (n = 2). Considering the small cavity pair-correlation contribution and the asymp-

totic macroscopic thermodynamic limits, Stillinger proposed a revised expression for the

cavity correlation function (Stillinger, 1973)

1− 4π

2R

0

1+

πρW
R
R )2
3 ρW R3+( πρW
R
+ 2γ∞
p
R
kT ρW

0

2R

g(2)(r)r2(r−2R)dr

g(2)(r)(r3/6−2R2r+8R3/3))dr

kT ρW R −

4γ∞δ

kT ρW R2 + λ

R4 ,

, R

R∗

≤
R > R∗

(13)

G(R) = 



where R∗ is the point at which three-body correlations begin to contribute to the cavity

insertion probability. While the experimental pressure, surface tension, density, and solvent

12

radial distribution function are employed, δ and λ are treated as adjustable parameters

chosen so that the small cavity and macroscopic limits of the contact correlation func-

tion join smoothly at R∗. This expression incorporates molecular information on the pair

structure of water as well as the known macroscopic properties of bulk water and its in-

terfacial behavior, and thereby is expected to discriminate more sensitively between water

(Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001) and other solvents (Huang and Chandler, 2000). Indeed, it

has been demonstrated by extensive molecular simulations that Eq. 13 provides a descrip-

tion superior to the classic SPT expression Eq. 10 of the solvent contact density for solutes

several times larger than the solvent.

Stillinger’s revised SPT prediction for G(R) relies on the assumption that multi-body

water correlations at intermediate, but molecularly sized, solute radii are adequately repre-

sented by the parameters δ and λ ﬁtted at a single point R∗. Consideration of alternative
values for R∗ shows that this parameter is associated with the greatest sensitivity displayed

by this revised scaled particle theory (Pratt and Pohorille, 1992). That procedure might be

improved by obtaining these parameters over a range of radii which include solute sizes for

which multi-body correlations are signiﬁcant. While this information is not readily available

experimentally, multi-body correlation contributions to the HS solute chemical potential

can be interrogated by direct evaluation of the insertion probabilities from molecular simu-

lations of water. In the spirit of Stillinger’s revised SPT, we interpolate between the chemical

potential evaluated from explicit simulation and the macroscopic thermodynamic limit

µex

S (R) =

kT ln p0(R)

−

|simf (R) + µex

S (R)

|macro [1

−

f (R)]

(14)

where f (R) is a switching function equal to one below Rsim and zero above Rmacro that

smoothly interpolates between these between these two limits. Presently we use a cubic

spline interpolating function, though other reasonable functions yield essentially indistin-

guishable predictions. The macroscopic chemical potential, determined by integration of

the macroscopic cavity expression Eq. 13 in

µex

S (R)

|macro =

−

4πkT ρW λ
R

−

+ ǫ

16πRγ∞δ + 4πR2γ∞ +

R3psat

(15)

4π
3

Rather than ﬁtting the microscopic and macroscopic limits at a single point as in Eq. 13, the

parameters δ, λ, and the integration constant ǫ are ﬁtted to the simulation results between

Rsim and Rmacro. The contact correlation function is then determined by diﬀerentiation

13

of the chemical potential (Eq. 5). An additional beneﬁt of ﬁtting Eq. 15 to the simulation

insertion probabilities is that we do not have to evaluate numerically ﬁrst and second deriva-

tives of the simulated insertion probabilities, which become more statistically uncertain with

increasing cavity size.

C. Computational Implementation

Water conﬁgurations were generated using Monte Carlo simulations in the canonical en-

semble (Frenkel and Smit, 2002). Bulk water was modeled using 268 SPC/E water molecules

with periodic boundary conditions (Berendsen et al., 1987). SPC/E was chosen because, for

a simple three point potential, it provides one of the more accurate representations of the

structure, equation-of-state, and interfacial tension of liquid water over a broad range of tem-

peratures (Alejandre et al., 1995; Hura et al., 2003). Lennard-Jones potential interactions

were evaluated smoothly truncating the potential based on the separation of water oxygens
between 9.5˚A and 10˚A, while longer ranged electrostatic interactions were calculated using

Ewald summation with conducting boundary conditions (Frenkel and Smit, 2002). Simula-

tions were carried out from 260 K to 470 K in 10 K increments at the experimental liquid

density along the saturation curve. After an equilibration phase of at least 105 MC passes

(where one pass corresponds to one attempted move per water molecule with 30% move

acceptance), 5

106 MC production passes were carried out for analysis of thermodynamic

averages. After every 50 MC passes, 105 particle insertions were attempted to determine

×

p0(R) for a total of 1010 insertions at each temperature. Statistical uncertainties were de-
termined by grouping results into block averages over 106 MC passes each.

III. APPLICATION TO HYDROPHOBIC HYDRATION

A. Cavity contact correlation functions: the micro-macro boundary

The cavity contact function at 300K is shown in Fig. 2. Beginning at a value of one at zero

radius, the cavity contact density increases with increasing HS cavity size. Simulation values
of G(R) appear to plateau at a maximum at approximately 3˚A. Just beyond this radius,

the simulation results for G(R) become progressively noisy as a result of poor sampling of

infrequent large cavity ﬂuctuations. A dominating observation is that this curve imposes a

14

non-arbitrary deﬁnition of a length scale for the present problem: the radius Rmax, at which

G(R) is a maximum. Solutes with smaller radii are identiﬁed as intrinsically molecular scale.

The description of the hydration of solutes of larger radii can be built from a macroscopic

perspective. An interpolative strategy extending to large solutes, such as that adopted here,

is likely to be particularly eﬀective if the region at which the molecular and macroscopic

expressions are joined encompasses Rmax. The revised SPT ﬁt, determined by diﬀerentiation
of Eq. 14 ﬁtted to the simulation insertion results between Rsim = 2.5˚A and Rmacro =
3.5˚A, accurately extends G(R) to HS cavities considerably larger than observable with any

statistical accuracy during the molecular simulations. The revised SPT result places the
maximum contact density at R = 3.0˚A where G(R) achieves the value of

2.3. Solutes of

≈

this size are candidates for ‘most hydrophobic’ because the compressive force exerted by

the solvent is largest in this case; see Fig. 3. Beyond this maximum, water pulls away from
10˚A the contact density equals

the cavity surface with increasing size, at length scales of

≈

the bulk density of water, decreasing further for larger cavities. In the limit R
contact correlation approaches psat

, the
10−5 for water at 300K, and does not impact the

→ ∞

2

ρW kT ≈

×

contact correlation function for molecular and mesoscopic cavities at any of the temperatures

considered.

This apparently anomalous dewetting behavior was anticipated by (Stillinger, 1973), and

has only recently been conﬁrmed by molecular simulations in Lennard-Jones and aqueous

solvents (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001; Huang and Chandler, 2000). The surface dewetting

has been previously interpreted in terms of an eﬀective expulsion potential between water

and the solute cavity (Hummer and Garde, 1998; Weeks et al., 1998). In bulk water, the in-

dividual water molecules feel attractive interactions with the other water molecules, and the

average force on a water molecule in the bulk is zero. To approach a large solute, however,

a water molecule must shed hydration partners, or limit their possible conﬁgurations. This

unbalances the interactions with the aqueous medium and gives rise to an additional repul-

sive force between a water molecule and the surface. If the solute is unable to compensate

for these lost interactions and counter the cavity expulsion potential, water will be repelled

by the surface.

The classic SPT prediction for the contact correlation function (Eq. 10) is in qualitative

agreement with the simulation and revised SPT results (Fig. 2). Classic SPT predicts a

maximum in the contact density, followed by a decrease to values below the bulk density of

15

water with increasing cavity radius. The quantitative agreement is poor, however, even if

the eﬀective HS diameter of water is treated as an adjustable parameter. Notably, classic
2˚A. This shift likely

SPT predicts that the maximum in G(R) is shifted to smaller radii of

≈

results from diﬀerences in the packing in HS ﬂuids versus hydrogen-bonded water networks.

Water has a more open structure favoring larger cavities than the less structured HS ﬂuid at

comparable packing fractions (Pohorille and Pratt, 1990; Pratt and Pohorille, 1992). The

resulting maximum in the pressure acting on the solute surface, kT ρW G(R), then is shifted

out to larger cavity radii for water.

If the objective of classic SPT is to reproduce the chemical potentials of solutes using
3.3˚A, encompassing the sizes of a number of nonpolar
Eq. 11 up to solvent accessible radii of
gases, a typical HS diameter of water ﬁtted to experimental data is 2.7˚A (Lee, 1985), though
a more appropriate value based on the simulation results reported in Fig. 2 is 2.8˚A. In this

≈

case, the ﬁtted radius of water splits the diﬀerence between the classic SPT over-prediction of

G(R) at intermediate radii and the under-prediction at radii close to the maximum solute size

to balance out these inaccuracies in the calculation of the chemical potential. This HS size for

water then is a consequence of the ﬁtting, and does not contribute to the interpretation of the

molecular signatures of hydrophobicity. Indeed, if we extend the predictions of classic SPT

outside the range ﬁtted for small solutes, we ﬁnd the theory under-predicts the hydration free
2.9˚A) is required
energies of mesoscopic cavities and that a larger water diameter (σW W ≈
to match the dewetting observed in G(R) (Fig. 2). This cavity size dependent HS diameter

for water, much less its temperature dependence, results from the fact that σW W is the only

molecular parameter in classic SPT for the interpretation of hydration eﬀects. While this

solute size dependence may seem small, the chemical potential depends on the integral of the

cavity contact correlation function and small diﬀerences in the solvent diameter signiﬁcantly

alter the predictions. Broadly viewed, this is the natural observation that slight adjustment

of boundary information in boundary value problems can make large changes in the solution

away from the boundary.

Revised SPT predictions for G(R) as a function of temperature are shown in Fig. 4.

While all the curves are qualitative similar, the magnitude of the contact correlation func-

tion decreases with increasing temperature. Classic SPT fails to describe the temperature

dependence of G(R) and inferences similar to those described above regarding the applicabil-

ity of classic SPT to the contact correlation function in water apply. In the following sections

16

we use these revised SPT results to draw conclusions regarding the size and temperature

dependence of the hydration of hydrophobic hard spheres.

B. Hydration thermodynamics of hydrophobic species: temperature signatures and

solubility minima

The hydration free energy of a methane sized (R = 3.3˚A) HS in water as a function of

temperature along the saturation curve is shown in Fig. 5. The simulation results for the

deﬁned by sex

S = -∂µex

S t/∂T

chemical potential pass through a maximum at

hydration from the chemical potential, we assume that the heat capacity ∂hex

≈

400K, at which point the hydration entropy
|sat is zero. To extract the enthalpy and entropy of hydrophobic
|sat =
In this case, the hydration enthalpy,

S /∂T

is independent of temperature.

-∂sex

S /∂T

|sat = cex
entropy, and free energy are

0

S = hex
hex

0 + (T

T0) cex
0

,

−
T
T0 (cid:19)

cex
0

,

S = sex
sex

0 + ln

S = µex
µex

(cid:18)
0 + (T

T0) (cex

0 −

−

sex
0 )

−

T ln

T
T0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

cex
0

,

(16-a)

(16-b)

(16-c)

respectively, where the subscript 0 corresponds to the value of the individual thermodynamic

properties at the reference temperature T0.

The enthalpy and entropy of hydration of the methane-sized HS solute is shown alongside

the ﬁtted free energy in Fig. 5. As expected for hydrophobic hydration, the hydration entropy

is negative and unfavorable at room temperature (Blokzijl and Engberts, 1993; Kauzmann,

1959; Tanford, 1980). With increasing temperature the entropy changes sign indicative of a

positive heat capacity increment. The entropy and heat capacity at 298K for the HS solute

are -69.5 J/(mol K) and 214 J/(mol K), respectively, which is in excellent agreement with

the experimental values for the entropy and heat capacity of -66.7 J/(mol K) and 209 to

237 J/(mol K) for methane at 298K. Over most of the temperature range considered, the

HS hydration enthalpy is positive and unfavorable for hydration, in disagreement with the

experimental enthaply for methane of -11.5 kJ/mol at 298K (Lazaridis and Paulaitis, 1992),

largely a result of the neglect of attractive interactions with water. The iceberg hypothesis

of Frank and Evans (Frank and Evans, 1945) suggests that local freezing of water in the

vicinity of hydrophobic species contributes to the experimental negative hydration enthalpy.

17

In the case of the methane sized hard sphere though, the hydration enthalpy at 298K is 5.0

kJ/mol, contrary to phenomenological expectations.

The Ostwald solubility is dictated by the ratio of the chemical potential and kT . The

solubility of the methane sized solute in water as a function of temperature is shown in

Fig. 6. This ratio passes through a maximum near 280K, corresponding to a minimum

in the solubility. This observation is in agreement with information theory (Garde et al.,

1999) and equation-of-state (Ashbaugh et al., 2002) models of HS solubilities that link the

corresponds to the point at which the enthalpy, hex

solubility minimum to the density maximum at 277K for pure water. The solubility minimum
|sat equals zero.
Real nonpolar solutes display solubility minimum at temperatures well above the density

S = -T 2∂ (µex

S /T ) /∂T

maximum, largely as a result of attractive interactions between the solute and water. These

missing interactions can be included, albeit in an approximate manner, assuming they are

a result the chemical potential can be written as µex

proportional to the density of liquid water, as in the van der Waals equation-of-state. As
S |HS - aSW ρW (Garde et al.,
1999). The eﬀect of including solute-water interactions on the solubility is shown in Fig. 6.

S = µex

Increasing these interactions systematically shifts the maximum in µex

S /kT , out to greater

temperatures, in agreement with the experimental observation of solubility minima at higher

temperatures.

For the HS solutes that the simulation results have slightly more curvature at temper-

atures near the solubility minimum than predicted by Eq. 16-c (Fig. 6). While the ﬁt is

accurate, the enhanced curvature suggests the heat capacity is not constant as assumed

above, but is slightly larger at low temperatures. Indeed this has been observed experimen-

tally (Gill et al., 1985), and is born out by theoretical models of hydrophobic hydration as

well (Ashbaugh et al., 2002; Hummer et al., 2000; Silverstein et al., 2001). Nevertheless, the

temperature dependence of the heat capacity is minor and including it only complicates the

interpretations here. We therefore neglect it in our thermodynamic analysis.

Fig. 7 shows the chemical potential density, µex
S /

, of hard cavities in water as a

function of temperature with increasing solute size. In the range of sizes shown, the max-

4πR3
3

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

imum in the chemical potential shifts from temperatures above 470K, above the window
of temperatures simulated, for the 2˚A radius solute to lower temperatures with increasing
solute sizes. For cavities not much larger than 12˚A (not shown in ﬁgure), the maximum falls

below 260K, below the simulation window and the normal freezing point of water. Thus,

18

for molecularly sized cavities, hydrophobic hydration is opposed by a negative entropy, at

temperatures below the chemical potential maximum, over most of the range of tempera-

tures simulated. For meso- and macroscopic cavities, however, this trend is reversed and

hydration is favored by a positive dissolution entropy but ultimately insoluble by an even

larger positive enthalpy (demonstrated in the following section), as ultimately expected from

the temperature dependence of the surface tension of water.

C. Surface area dependence of hydration thermodynamic properties: the Tolman

length and curvature corrections

In an eﬀort to compare and correlate hydration free energies of a variety species, it is

common to calculate the free energy cost per unit area of hydrating nonpolar solute sur-

faces, also referred to as a molecular surface tension (Hermann, 1977; Tanford, 1979). This

molecular surface tension, however, is generally not equal to the free energy of creating a

macroscopic ﬂat interface, in part due to solute curvature and structural diﬀerences between

water at molecular and macroscopic interfaces. Nevertheless, SPT systematically interpo-

lates the surface tension between these two length scale extremes and provides insight into

their relationship (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001; Huang and Chandler, 2000).

Under the assumption that the pressure contribution to the hydration free energy

is negligible, an excellent assumption for liquid water, the surface tension for hydrat-

ing a HS solute is determined by the surface area derivative of the chemical potential

(Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001). This derivative depends, however, on the deﬁnition of

the solute surface area. A natural choice for the solute area is deﬁned by R, and is referred

to as the solvent accessible surface (SAS) area. Diﬀerentiating the chemical potential with

respect to this surface yields

∂µex
S
∂4πR2 =
More generally, the solute surface can be deﬁned by a radius R - ∆R . In this case the

kT ρW G(R)R .

γSAS(R) =

∂µex
S
∂A

(17-a)

1
2

=

surface tension is

γ∆R(R) =

∂µex
S

−

∂

4π (R

∆R)2

h

i

=

kT ρW G(R)R2
∆R)
2 (R

=

γSAS(R)
∆R/R

1

.

−

−

(17-b)

The SAS surface tension as a function of R at 300K is shown in Fig. 8. The surface

enthalpy, ∂hex

0 /∂ASAS, entropy, ∂sex

0 /∂ASAS, and heat capacity, ∂cex

0 /∂ASAS, are included

19

in this ﬁgure. For small cavities, all the surface thermodynamic properties go to zero as

R
0. With increasing size, the surface tension increases monotonically and approaches
its asymptotic limit for a ﬂat interface of γ∞ = 0.432 kJ/(mol ˚A2) = 71.7dyne/cm. The

→

other surface properties, particularly the heat capacity, approach their asymptotic plateaus

more slowly with increasing R. Like the surface tension, the surface enthalpy monotonically

increases with increasing solute size. The surface entropy and heat capacity, on the other

hand, vary in distinctly diﬀerent ways for molecular and macroscopic surfaces, indicating

changes in the mechanism of hydration (Southall and Dill, 2000). In particular, the surface

entropy is initially negative beginning from R = 0, consistent with the experimental thermo-
3.3˚A and

dynamics of hydrophobic hydration for molecular solutes, reaches a minimum at

≈

then increases, eventually becoming positive as expected from the temperature dependence

of the liquid-vapor interface. It is curious that the size at this minimum is close to the size

of the maximum of G(R), that is for the most hydrophobic hard sphere solute. While the

surface heat capacity is positive over the entire size range, is reaches a maximum at solute

radii comparable to the position of the minimum in the entropy, suggesting the two are

related.

Sharp and coworkers (Sharp et al., 1991) suggested that rather than relying solely on

the SAS to determine the molecular surface tension, this tension needs to be corrected

for the curvature of the molecular interface to reconcile the diﬀerence between molecular

and macroscopic surface tension. Based on geometric arguments, they proposed that the

radius of a water molecule is the length scale over which this correction must be applied. In
eﬀect, their work indicates then that the van der Waals surface, i.e., ∆R = σW W /2 = 1.4˚A,

provides a superior description of molecular solute hydration (Jackson and Sternberg, 1994;

Sharp et al., 1991). A schematic illustration of the van der Waals, solvent accessible, and

curvature corrected radii of a hard sphere solute in water is given in Fig. 9. For a methane
sized solute γSAS(3.3˚A) = 0.300 kJ/(mol ˚A2), 30% lower than the macroscopic value, while
= 0.521 kJ/(mol ˚A2), 20% greater than the macroscopic value. While neither

∆R=1.4˚A
of these two surfaces gives a surface free energy in agreement with the macroscopic limit,

γ

they do bracket γ∞ suggesting there an optimal intermediate value of ∆R for which the

surface tension is size independent. In Fig. 10 we show how the surface tension varies with

increasing ∆R. The divergence in γ∆R results from the divergence in Eq. 17-b as R
∆R.
For solutes larger than 2.5˚A, using ∆R = 1˚A yields a surface tension that is only weakly

→

20

dependent on size. Indeed, γ

(3.3˚A). = 0.430 kJ/(mol ˚A2) is in excellent agreement

∆R=1˚A

with the macroscopic value, suggesting that Honig and coworker’s geometric estimate of the

curvature correction length scale is essentially correct. This argument breaks down, however,

when we consider the temperature dependence of the Tolman length.

Expanding the surface free energy in terms surface curvature, (Tolman, 1949) derived the

leading order curvature correction for the surface tension as

where δ is the Tolman length described above in the foundations of SPT. Substituting this

expression into Eq.17-b yields (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001)

γSAS = γ∞

1

 

−

2δ
R !

γ∆R = γ∞

2δ
R
∆R
R !

1
1

−
−

 

(18-a)

(18-b)

Thus, as a ﬁrst approximation, the optimal surface for obtaining a size independent surface

free energy is ∆R = 2δ. The Tolman length can be calculated from classic SPT, see Eq. 10
in Ref. 17, and yields an essentially temperature independent δ = 0.5 ˚A (Fig. 11), in good

agreement with the empirical ∆R at 300K obtained above. The revised SPT, however, ﬁnds

that δ has a signiﬁcant temperature dependence (Fig. 11). While the classic SPT correctly

predicts the magnitude of δ at low temperature, δ decreases with temperature and changes

sign near 350K. Thus assuming ∆R is dictated by the size of a water molecule can lead to

signiﬁcant diﬃculties when interpreting the temperature dependence of microscopic surface

tensions (Ashbaugh et al., 1999; Jackson and Sternberg, 1994; Sharp et al., 1991). In retro-

spect, the temperature dependence of the curvature correction may have been anticipated

by the entropic diﬀerences between hydrating a molecular and mesoscopic interface and the

signiﬁcantly diﬀerent temperature dependencies of the associated surface thermodynamic

properties (Fig. 8). The curves observed in this ﬁgure are simply too rich to be described

by a temperature independent length scale.

D. Entropy convergence and solute size

A feature of hydrophobic hydration believed to be shared between small molecule hydra-

tion and protein unfolding free energies is the phenomenon of entropy convergence. That is,

when the hydrophobic component of the hydration entropies of these molecules is extrapo-

21

lated to high temperatures the entropies apparently converge to one another at a single tem-

perature or narrow range of temperatures near 385K (Baldwin, 1986; Murphy et al., 1990;

Privalov, 1979; Privalov and Gill, 1988). Baldwin and Privalov have demonstrated this can

result from the empirical suggestion that the entropy and heat capacity of hydration are

proportional to one another. Perhaps the most successful explanations for the convergence

temperature for small molecules have related the convergence temperature to the equation-

of-state of pure water (Ashbaugh et al., 2002; Garde and Ashbaugh, 2001; Hummer et al.,
10˚A in radius

1998). Still, Huang and Chandler have argued that for species greater than

≈

entropy convergence does not occur, and therefore proteins may not exhibit this phenomenon

(Huang and Chandler, 2000).

In Fig. 12 we have plotted the hydration entropies for HS solutes as a function of temper-
ature for solutes ranging in size from 2˚A to 10˚A in radius. Indeed, there is a broad range of

convergence temperatures observed at each point where an entropy curve, for a given size,
crosses that for another solute. For example, the 2˚A solute entropy intersects the 3˚A solute
at 410K, while the 2˚A solute intersects the 10˚A solute curve at 300K, indicating that there is

no unique convergence temperature. If we note, however, that entropy convergence studies

have largely concerned themselves with solutes similar in size or at least of similar local

curvature, e.g., the local curvature of an alkane is comparable to that of a constituent CH2

group as far as water is concerned. We therefore consider how the convergence temperature

changes with diﬀerential perturbations in the solute size. In this case, convergence occurs at

the temperature for which ∆sex

S (R
is independent of temperature, Tc is determined by the relationship

→

R + δR) = 0. Assuming the hydration heat capacity

Tc = T0 exp

∂sex
0
∂ASAS

/

∂cex
0
∂ASAS !

 −

(19)

with a size dependence dictated by the relationship between ∂sex

0 /∂ASAS and ∂cex

0 /∂ASAS

on the solute radius in Fig. 8. The diﬀerential entropy convergence temperature curve de-

termined by these expressions is shown in Fig. 12. Two points of interests are immediately

apparent: ﬁrst the convergence entropy is negative and becomes more negative with increas-

ing solute size, second the convergence entropy curve more or less forms a lower bound on

the hydration entropy as a function of temperature, although this behavior is not exact.

One of the implications of Eq. 19 is that if the entropy is a linear function of the heat

capacity, i.e., sex

0 = mcex

0 + b, as suggested by (Baldwin, 1986; Murphy et al., 1990), then the

22

convergence temperature would be independent of solute size. In Fig. 13 we see that Tc has

a signiﬁcant solute size dependence, indicating this assumption is not generally correct or,

at best, is valid only over limited circumstances of solute size. For solutes approaching zero

radius, Tc plateaus at a maximum. With increasing solute size Tc decreases so that above a
8˚A it is less than the normal freezing point of water. At the intermediate methane
radius of
radius of 3.3˚A, however, the convergence temperature is 382K in excellent agreement with

≈

the experimental convergence temperature of 385K for simple nonpolar gases and linear

alkanes.

We note that the convergence temperature as R

0 plateaus at 655K, above the critical

→

temperature of water at 647K. This unphysical result is due, in part, to our extrapolation of

the entropies beyond the range, 260K to 470K, to which we ﬁtted Eq. 16-c. For cavities for

which only one water molecule can ﬁt inside so that the free energy is determined by Eq. 6,

entropy convergence is determined as the temperature at which

1

Tc =

−

4π

3 R3ρW
αsat

(20)

is satisﬁed, where αsat = -∂ρW /∂T is the thermal expansion coeﬃcient of liquid water along

the saturation curve. When this criteria is applied, it displays a plateau at a physically more
realistic temperature of Tc ≈
525K (Fig. 13). With increasing solute size, Eq. 20 indicates
1˚A, comparable to what was observed assuming
a sudden decrease in Tc above radii of
the heat capacity is temperature independent. Above radii of 1.25˚A, Eq. 20 breaks down as

≈

multi-particle correlations began to play a role in the solute entropy. At this radius, however,

the convergence temperatures are now within the range of temperatures simulated and the

application of Eq. 19 becomes more accurate. It is reasonable then to interpolate between

the convergence temperatures determined by eqs. 19 and 20, as indicated in Fig. 13. We

note that information theory, under reasonable assumptions for liquid water, suggests that
entropy convergence occurs when Tc = (2αsat)−1 (Garde et al., 1996; Hummer et al., 1998).
2.1˚A on Fig. 13,
This criteria is satisﬁed at 420K, corresponding to a solute radius of

≈

decidedly placing IT among small solute theories. Relaxing the assumptions used to arrive

at the IT criteria lowers the convergence temperature prediction for methane sized solutes

to

390K, in markedly improved agreement with the present result of 382K.

≈
The apparent convergence of the entropy change at 385K to a value close to zero for a

range of hydrophobic solutes and proteins has suggested empirically that the hydration of

23

these chemically distinct solutes are related (Baldwin, 1986; Murphy et al., 1990). Assuming

that the temperature dependence for protein unfolding arises solely from the exposure of

hydrophobic side chains to water, phenomenological models have been developed which sep-

arate out residual temperature independent components of the entropy, from contributions

such as changes in the chain conformation, by extrapolating to the convergence temperature.

This procedure relies, in part, on the assumption that the hydration of surface hydrophobic

groups is the same in the native and denatured conformations, and therefore cancels in the

entropy diﬀerence.

Huang and Chandler (Huang and Chandler, 2000) suggested that the hydration of surface

nonpolar groups is better described by the hydration entropy of a solute surface comparable

in size to the protein radius on the order of tens of angstroms, rather than treating the

surface groups individually as having sizes comparable to simple hydrophobic units. In this

case, the hydration entropy of the surface groups depends on the protein conformation and

the diﬀerence between folded and unfolded states is not negligible, as illustrated by the

diﬀerences between the hydration entropies for HS solutes of diﬀering size in Fig. 12. This

hypothesis presumes that entropic contributions for hydrating large hydrophobic surfaces

with attractive dispersion interactions and vicinal polar/charged groups is the same as that

for a hard repulsive surface. Recent simulations of convex methane clusters have found

that when realistic attractive interactions between water and methane are included, water

packs around the cluster methane sites just as it does around a solitary methane in so-

lution (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001). Moreover, Cheng and Rossky (Cheng and Rossky,

1998) found that the orientational correlations between water and proximal hydrophobic

residues on the convex surfaces of the bee venom protein, meletin, are comparable to those

near individual solitary hydrophobic groups in solution. These observations suggest that

the available conﬁgurational space, and by extension the entropy, for waters near realis-

tic surface hydrophobic units is the same in the folded and unfolded states, supporting

the assumptions of the phenomenological folding models. We note, however, that in the

same study Cheng and Rossky found that waters proximal to hydrophobic residues in ﬂat

portions of meletin were more orientationally disordered as a result of the diﬃculties as-

sociated with maintaining the aqueous hydrogen-bonding network near restrictive solute

topologies.(Cheng and Rossky, 1998) Thus, the applicability of the phenomenological un-

folding model may be complicated by the protein surface topography and the impact of

24

hydrophobic pockets on the overall unfolding entropy. As a result, scatter can be introduced

into folding entropies as determined by calorimetric studies (Robertson and Murphy, 1997).

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The revised scaled particle theory (SPT) proposed here, which extends Stillinger’s SPT

(Stillinger, 1973), utilizes information on multi-body correlations in liquid water, interro-

gated with detailed molecular simulations, and experimental information (the macroscopic

liquid-vapor surface tension and the saturation pressure of water) to construct a functional

form for the hydration free energy of hard sphere (HS) model hydrophobic solutes that suc-

cessfully bridges the known molecular and macroscopic limits. Most notably, the revised

SPT provides a more accurate representation of the contact correlation function in aqueous

solution, central to scaled particle calculations, than predicted by the classic SPT expres-

sions extracted from the basic theory Reiss for the hard sphere ﬂuid. Relying on classic SPT

for predictions of HS hydration free energies results in a number of suspicious conclusions,

including an unphysical increase in the surface tension of water with increasing temperature

and a temperature independent Tolman length, which do not agree with experimental or

revised SPT observations. As a result, application of classic SPT to hydration free energies

is largely a ﬁtting exercise to obtain the eﬀective HS diameter of water, and conclusions

drawn have weak signiﬁcance regarding the molecular origins of the hydrophobic eﬀect.

The revised SPT is more successful, but the success of the scaled particle approach

generally derives from the remarkable fact that the results sharply identify a molecular
length scale, near 3.0˚A, that provides a good joining point for microscopic and macroscopic

descriptions. It could have been otherwise, and the corresponding results are less simple in

the cases of comparative organic solvents (Graziano, 2003; Pratt and Pohorille, 1992). That

micro-macro boundary length does exhibit interesting, non-simple temperature variation;

an accurate description of those temperature variations is an important part of the higher

ﬁdelity of the revised scaled particle results. The revised SPT does reproduce the well

documented solubility minimum behavior for small hydrophobic solutes and demonstrates

signiﬁcant changes in the hydration mechanism of HS solutes with increasing solute size. In

particular, while the hydration thermodynamics of small solutes is predominantly entropic in

origin at room temperature, the hydration of mesoscopic cavities is entropically favorable and

25

opposed by a dominating hydration enthalpy. While it is tempting to describe these changes

in hydration thermodynamic quantities in terms of aqueous hydrogen-bonding near the

hydrophobic entity — and that may be plausible sometimes — the SPT provides little in the

way of information on the integrity of bonded networks. Nevertheless the revised SPT does

provide thermodynamic information that challenges phenomological views of hydrophobic

eﬀects, particularly the cherished iceberg hypothesis. Indeed, the iceberg hypothesis suggests

that local freezing of water molecules in the vicinity of hydrophobic solutes is a source for

the negative hydration enthalpies, we ﬁnd that at room temperature the hydration of solutes

comparable in size to methane and a number of nonpolar gases is actually unfavorable from

an enthalpic as well as an entropic standpoint.

Attempts to reconcile the diﬀerences between molecular and macroscopic values of the

surface tension suggest that on a molecular level there is a unique surface that maps macro-

scopic surface tensions to molecular values. This reduces the reconciliation to the program of

ﬁnding the appropriate dividing surface. The utility of that program rests on the optimistic

expectation that the Tolman length might be only weakly dependent on temperature. Al-

though there is some support for that expectation from classic SPT, the revised SPT model

demonstrates that the Tolman length has a signiﬁcant temperature dependence in water,

changing signs from positive to negative at

350K. Indeed, that possibility was put forth by

≈

Stillinger (Stillinger, 1973). As a result then, while the optimal surface for the description

of hydration may be approximated by the solute van der Waals surface at low temperatures

(Ashbaugh et al., 1999; Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001), with increasing temperature this op-

timized surface moves out to the solvent accessible surface at

350K and ultimately extends

≈

beyond this surface at even higher temperatures as a result of the nontrivial temperature

dependencies to the hydration thermodynamics of molecular sized solutes.

Finally, the revised SPT provides detailed information on the curious entropy convergence

behavior observed for small molecular solutes and nonpolar gases and the size dependence

of the convergence temperature on increasing size. While Huang and Chandler have cited

the eclipsing of the convergence temperature below the freezing temperature of water for

large, protein-sized, cavities as the source for scatter in the convergence temperature in the

analysis of protein unfolding thermodynamic data, the SPT analysis suggests that even the

moderate diﬀerences in hydrophobic amino acid side chain sizes is suﬃcient to scatter the

results of unfolding thermodynamics. While the treatment of small hydrophobic species as

26

an eﬀective HS is justiﬁable, a similar extension to mesoscopic assemblies may be doubtful.

Indeed, simulation analyses of the structure of water near proteins and hydrophobic clusters

suggest that it bears resemblances to the hydration structure near the constituent amino

acids (Ashbaugh and Paulaitis, 2001; Cheng and Rossky, 1998). A primary diﬃculty in the

interpretation of assembly processes is that the hydration of amphiphilic species is complex

and distinct contributions may not be individually separable. That is to say, local context

matters.

Acknowledements

References

This work was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy, contract E-7405-ENG-

36. HSA gratefully acknowledges support from a Los Alamos Director’s Fellowship. This

research has beneﬁted from conversations with Andrew Pohrille, Angel Garc´ıa, Gerhard

Hummer, Shekhar Garde, Dilipkumar Asthigiri, and Michael Paulaitis.

Alejandre, J., D. J. Tildesley, and G. A. Chapela, 1995, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 4574.

Ashbaugh, H. S., D. Asthagiri, L. R. Pratt, and S. B. Rempe, 2003, Biophys. Chem. In press.

Ashbaugh, H. S., E. W. Kaler, and M. E. Paulaitis, 1999, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 9243.

Ashbaugh, H. S., and M. E. Paulaitis, 1996, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 1900.

Ashbaugh, H. S., and M. E. Paulaitis, 2001, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 10721 .

Ashbaugh, H. S., T. M. Truskett, and P. G. Debenedetti, 2002, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 2907.

Baldwin, R. L., 1986, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 8069.

Ben-Naim, A., and Y. Marcus, 1984, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 2016 .

Berendsen, H. J. C., J. R. Grigera, and T. P. Straatsma, 1987, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 6269 .

Blokzijl, W., and J. B. F. N. Engberts, 1993, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 32, 1545.

Bowron, D. T., A. Filipponi, C. Lobban, and J. L. Finney, 1998a, Chem. Phys. Letts. 293, 33.

Bowron, D. T., A. Filipponi, M. A. Roberts, and J. L. Finney, 1998b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4164 .

Brandts, J. F., 1964, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86, 4291.

Broadbent, R. D., and G. W. Neilson, 1994, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 7543 .

Chandler, D., 1993, Phys. Rev. E 48, 2898 .

27

Chen, L. J., S. Y. Lin, and C. C. Huang, 1998a, J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 4350.

Chen, L. J., S. Y. Lin, C. C. Huang, and E. M. Chen, 1998b, Colloids Surf. A 135, 175 .

Cheng, Y. K., and P. J. Rossky, 1998, Nature 392, 696.

Christenson, H. K., and P. M. Claesson, 1988, Science 239, 390 .

Considine, R. F., R. A. Hayes, and R. G. Horn, 1999, Langmuir 15, 1657 .

DeJong, P. H. K., J. E. Wilson, G. W. Neilson, and A. D. Buckingham, 1997, Molecular Physics

91, 99.

Filipponi, A., D. T. Bowron, C. Lobban, and J. L. Finney, 1997, Phys. Rev. Letts. 79, 1293.

Frank, H. S., and M. W. Evans, 1945, J. Chem. Phys. 13, 507.

Franks, F., and R. H. M. Hatley, 1991, Pure Appl. Chem. 63, 1367.

Frenkel, D., and B. Smit, 2002, Understanding Molecular Simulation. From Algorithms to Appli-

cations (Academic Press, San Diego), 2nd edition.

Garde, S., and H. S. Ashbaugh, 2001, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 977.

Garde, S., A. E. Garc´ıa, L. R. Pratt, and G. Hummer, 1999, Biophys. Chem. 78, 21.

Garde, S., G. Hummer, A. E. Garc´ıa, M. E. Paulaitis, and L. R. Pratt, 1996, Phys. Rev. Letts.

77, 4966.

Gill, S. J., S. F. Dec, G. Olofsson, and I. Wadso, 1985, J. Phys. Chem. 89, 3758 .

Graziano, G., 2003, Biophys. Chem. 104, 393 .

Henderson, J. R., 2002, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 5039 .

Hermann, R. B., 1977, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 4144 .

Huang, D. M., and D. Chandler, 2000, Phys. Rev. E 61, 1501.

Hummer, G., and S. Garde, 1998, Phys. Rev. Letts. 80, 4193.

Hummer, G., S. Garde, A. E. Garcia, M. E. Paulaitis, and L. R. Pratt, 1998, J. Phys. Chem. B

102, 10469.

USA 93, 8951 .

Hummer, G., S. Garde, A. E. Garcia, A. Pohorille, and L. R. Pratt, 1996, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

Hummer, G., S. Garde, A. E. Garcia, and L. R. Pratt, 2000, Chem. Phys. 258, 349.

Hura, G., D. Russo, R. M. Glaeser, T. Head-Gordon, M. Krack, and M. Parrinello, 2003, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 5, 1981 .

Israelachvili, J., and R. Pashley, 1982, Nature 300, 341.

Jackson, R. M., and M. J. E. Sternberg, 1994, Prot. Eng. 7, 371 .

28

Kauzmann, W., 1959, Adv. Protein Chem. 14, 1.

Kokkoli, E., and C. F. Zukoski, 1998, Langmuir 14, 1189.

Lazaridis, T., 2001, Acc. Chem. Res. 34, 931.

Lazaridis, T., and M. E. Paulaitis, 1992, J. Phys. Chem. 96, 3847.

Lee, B., 1985, Biopolymers 24, 813.

Lee, B., 1991, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 5154 .

Lum, K., D. Chandler, and J. D. Weeks, 1999, J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 4570.

Makhatadze, G. I., and P. L. Privalov, 1995, Adv. Protein Chem. 47, 307 .

Muller, N., 1993, Biopolymers 33, 1185 .

Murphy, K. P., P. L. Privalov, and S. J. Gill, 1990, Science 247, 559.

Pashley, R. M., 2003, J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 1714 .

Pashley, R. M., P. M. McGuiggan, B. W. Ninham, and D. F. Evans, 1985, Science 229, 1088.

Pierotti, R. A., 1976, Chem. Rev. 76, 717.

Pohorille, A., and L. R. Pratt, 1990, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 5066.

Pollack, G. L., 1991, Science 251, 1323.

Pratt, L., G. Hummer, and S. Garde, 1999, in New Approaches to Problems in Liquid State Theory,

edited by C. Caccamo, J.-P. Hansen, and G. Stell (Kluwer, Netherlands), volume NATO Science

Pratt, L. R., 1998, in Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester),

Series 529, pp. 407–420.

pp. 1286–1294.

Pratt, L. R., 2002, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 53, 409.

Pratt, L. R., and D. Chandler, 1977, J. Chem. Phys. 67, 3863.

Pratt, L. R., and A. Pohorille, 1992, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 2995.

Pratt, L. R., and A. Pohorille, 1993, in Proceedings of the EBSA 1992 International Workshop on

Water-Biomolecule Interactions, edited by M. U. Palma, M. B. Palma-Vittorelli, and F. Parak

(Societ´a Italiana de Fisica, Bologna), pp. 261–268.

Privalov, P. L., 1979, Adv. Prot. Chem. 33, 167.

Privalov, P. L., and S. J. Gill, 1988, Adv. Prot. Chem. 39, 191 .

Reiss, H., 1965, Adv. Chem. Phys. 9, 1.

Reiss, H., 1977, in Statistical Mechanics and Statistical Methods in Theory and Application, edited

by U. Landman (Plenum, New York), pp. 99–138.

29

Reiss, H., H. L. Frisch, and J. L. Lebowitz, 1959, J. Chem. Phys. 31, 369.

Robertson, A. D., and K. P. Murphy, 1997, Chem. Rev. 97, 1251.

Scatena, L. F., M. G. Brown, and G. L. Richmond, 2001, Science 292, 908.

Sharp, K. A., A. Nichols, R. F. Fine, and B. Honig, 1991, Science 252, 106.

Silverstein, K. A. T., K. A. Dill, and A. D. J. Haymet, 2001, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 6303.

Simonson, T., 2003, Rep. Prog. Phys. 66, 737 .

Southall, N. T., and K. A. Dill, 2000, J. Phys. Chem. B 104, 1326 .

Stillinger, F. H., 1973, J. Soln. Chem. 2, 141.

Stillinger, F. H., and M. A. Cotter, 1971, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 3449.

Tanford, C., 1979, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 76, 4175.

Tanford, C., 1980, The Hydrophobic Eﬀect: Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes (John

Wiley & Sons, New York), 2nd edition.

Tolman, R. C., 1949, J. Chem. Phys. 17, 333 .

Truskett, T. M., P. G. Debenedetti, and S. Torquato, 2001, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 2401.

Weeks, J. D., K. Katsov, and K. Vollmayr, 1998, Phys. Rev. Letts. 81, 4400.

Widom, B., 1982, J. Phys. Chem. 86, 869.

30

Figures

FIG. 1 Available volume for a 3˚A hard sphere in a simulation box of water. The box on the left

shows a conﬁguration of water taken from a simulation at 300 K. The box on the right shows the

volume available to a 3˚A hard sphere cavity in that same water conﬁguration.

31

)
R
(
G

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0.5

0

s

WW

 = 3.0 Å

s

WW

 = 2.6 Å

2

4

6

8

10

R (Å)

FIG. 2 Cavity contact correlation function for water at 300K at the liquid saturation conditions.

The points are obtained by diﬀerentiation of the simulation cavity insertion probabilities. The

dashed lines are obtained from Reiss’s original SPT theory predictions for a hard sphere solvent,

Eq. 10, using eﬀective water hard sphere diameters between σW W = 2.6˚A to 3.0˚A in 0.1˚A in-

crements. The solid line is obtained by diﬀerentiation of the revised SPT, Eq. 15, ﬁtted to the

simulation results between Rsim = 2.5˚A and Rmacro = 3.5˚A.

32

50

40

30

20

10

0

9

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

0

2

)
r
(
g

N
(
r
)

N(5.1Å) = 17.8

3

4

5

7

8

6
r (Å)

FIG. 3 Cavity-water oxygen radial distribution function for a 3˚A cavity at 300K. The thin solid line

indicates the radial distribution function, while the dashed line indicates the radial integral N (r) =

r
0 ρW g(λ)4πλ2dλ. The occupation of the ﬁrst hydration shell, corresponding to the ﬁrst minimum
R
in g(r) at 5.1 ˚A, is 17.8 water molecules as indicated by the thick horizontal line. Note that the

ﬁrst minimum, which physically discrimates between ﬁrst and suceeding hydration shells, is mild,

and structuring of outer hydration shells is weak (Pratt and Pohorille, 1993). These features are in

good qualitative agreement with the predictions of the Pratt-Chandler theory (Pratt and Chandler,

1977), though that limited theory has been substantially amended (Pratt, 2002).

33

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

0

0

)
R
(
G

curve.

T = 260K

T = 460K

5

10

15

20

25

R (Å)

FIG. 4 Cavity contact function for water as a function of temperature along the liquid saturation

curve determined by the revised SPT, Eq. 14, with Rsim = 2.5˚A and Rmacro = 3.5˚A. Results are

shown between 260K to 460K in 20K increments. Notice that the length deﬁned by the maximum of

this curve decreases with decreasing density following increasing temperature along the saturation

34

l
o
m
/
J
k

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

ex
m

S

hex
S

Tsex
S

250

300

350

400

450

500

T (K)

FIG. 5 Excess chemical potential, enthalpy, and entropy of a methane sized hard sphere solute

(R = 3.3˚A) in water as a function of temperature along the saturation curve. The points are

the explicit simulation results for the chemical potential. Error bars are comparable in size to

the points. The curves for the excess chemical potential, enthalpy, and entropy are labeled in the

ﬁgure. The curves were determined under the assumption that the heat capacity is independent

of temperature (Eqs. 16).

35

q
e

S

K
n
l
-

 

=

 

x

me
b

10

8

6

4

2

0
250

300

350

400

450

500

T (K)

FIG. 6 Solubility of a 3.3˚A HS solute with increasing attractive interactions as a function of

temperature. The points are simulation results from particle insertion probabilities. The solid

curves are the solubilities with lower curves indicating increasing attractive interactions, aSW .

The dashed curve indicates the maxima in µex

S /kT with increasing interactions, corresponding to

minima in the Ostwald solubility.

36

)

3

Å

 
l
o
m

(
/
J
k
(
 

V

/

S

S

x

me

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

3Å
4Å

2Å

6Å

8Å

10Å

12Å

250

300

350

400

450

500

T (K)

FIG. 7 Excess solute chemical potential density (VS = 4πR3
3

) as a function of temperature for

solutes of varying size. The solid lines correspond to the revised SPT model. The solid circles,

open circles, and crosses correspond to explicit molecular simulation results simulation results for

the 2˚A, 3˚A, and 4˚A radius solutes, respectively. The error bars, greatest for the 4˚A cavity, indicate

one standard deviation. The dashed line indicates the locus of chemical potential maxima, where

sex
S t = 0, with changing cavity size.

37

)

2

Å

 
l
o
m

(
/
J
k

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

R (Å)

FIG. 8 HS solvent accessible surface area derivatives of the thermodynamic variables as a function

of solute radius at T0 = 300K. The thin solid, long-short dashed, and short dashed, and long dashed

lines correspond to ∂µex

S /∂A, ∂hex

S /∂A, T ∂sex

S /∂A, T ∂cex

S /∂A, respectively. The thick horizontal

line indicates the macroscopic surface tension for a ﬂat surface.

38

R

R-∆ R

R-σ

WW/2 = σ

SS/2 

FIG. 9 Alternative deﬁnitions of the radius of a hard sphere cavity. The solvent accessible radius,

R, is given by the distance of closest approach between the center of the cavity and the water

oxygen center. The radius R

σW W /2 demarks the van der Waals boudary of the cavity at σSS/2.

−

R - ∆R denotes the surface tension curvature corrected radius.

39

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

)

2

Å

 
l
o
m

(
/
J
k

1˚A.

5

15

20

10
R (Å)

FIG. 10 Surface tension of HS hydration in water as a function of solute radius at 300K employing

diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the solute surface. The thick solid line corresponds to the surface tension

determined by the derivative with respect to the solvent accessible surface area deﬁned by the radius

R (Eq. 17-a). The lines above the baseline SAS surface tension indicate the eﬀect of increasing ∆R

in 0.25˚A increments from 0.25˚A to 1.25˚A (Eq. 17-b). The thick dashed line corresponds to ∆R =

40

)

Å

(

d

0.5

1

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

250

300

350

400

450

500

T (K)

FIG. 11 Tolman length, δ, as a function of temperature along the saturation curve of water. The

points correspond to the values determined by the ﬁt of Eq. 14 to the simulation free energies. The

solid line is a guide to the eye for the ﬁtted results. The dashed line corresponds to the classic

SPT prediction for the Tolman length, Eq. 10 in ref. 17.

41

R = 10Å 9Å 8Å 7Å

6Å

5Å

)
)

K

 
l
o
m

(
/
J
(

S

x
e

s

100

0

-100

-200

-300

-400

2Å

3Å

4Å

5Å

6Å

-500

250

300

400

450

350
T (K)

FIG. 12 Entropy of hydrophobic hydration as a function of temperature for solutes ranging in

radius from 2˚A to 10˚A in 1˚A increments. The dashed lines are the excess entropies of hydration.

The open circles are the convergence temperatures for consecutive solutes, i.e., sex

S (R) = s∗

S(R+1˚A).

The thick solid line indicates the entropy convergence temperature in the limit of inﬁnitesimal

perturbations in R.

42

)

K

(
 

c

T

700

600

500

400

300

200

0

2

4

6

8

10

R (Å)

FIG. 13 Variation of the entropy convergence temperature with increasing HS radius. The thin

solid line is the convergence temperature determined under the assumption the heat capacity is

independent of temperature. The thick solid line is the exact entropy convergence temperature for

spheres smaller than R < σW W /2, which satisfy Eq. 20. The dashed line smoothly interpolates

between the exact and constant heat capacity curves at 1.25˚A and 3.3˚A, respectively. The ﬁlled

circle indicates the entropy convergence temperature of a methane-sized solute (Tc = 382K). The

open circle indicates the entropy convergence temperature based on the IT criterion (Tc = 420K).

43

