EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mechano-chemical coupling in growth process of actin gels and

a symmetry breaking instability

Ken Sekimoto1a, Jacques Prost1b, Frank J¨ulicher1c, Hakim Boukellal1 and Anne Bernheim-Grosswasser1d

Physico-Chimie, UMR168 Institut Curie, 26, rue d’Ulm 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. It has been observed experimentally that the actin gel grown from spherical beads coated with

polymerization enzymes spontaneously breaks the symmetry of its spherical shape, and yields a “comet”

pushing the bead forward. We propose a mechano-chemical coupling mechanism for the initialization of

this symmetry breaking. Key assumptions are that the dissociation of the gel takes place mostly in the

region of the external surface, and that the rates of the dissociation depends on the tensile stress in the

gel. We analyze a simpliﬁed two-dimensional model with a circular substrate. Our analysis shows that

the symmetric steady state is always unstable against the inhomogeneous modulation of the thickness of

the gel layer, for any radius of the circular substrate. We argue that this model represents the essential

feature of the three-dimensional systems for a certain range of characteristic lengths of the modulation.

The characteristic time of the symmetry breaking process in our model depends linearly on the radius

of curvature of the substrate surface, which is consistent with experimental results, using spherical latex

beads as substrate. Our analysis of the symmetry breaking phenomenon demonstrates aspects of mechano-

chemical couplings that should be working in vivo as well as in vitro.

PACS. 87.17.Jj Cell locomotion; chemotaxis and related directed motion – 87.15.Rn Reactions and kinet-

ics; polymerization – 62.40.+j Anelasticity, internal friction, stress relaxation, and mechanical resonances

a Present address: Universit´e Louis Pasteur, 3 rue de

l’Universit´e, 67084, Strasbourg, France

b Present address: also at ESPCI 10 rue Vauquelin 75231

PARIS Cedex 05, France

c Present address: Max Planck Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer

University, P.O. Box 653, 84105 Beer-Sheva, Israel

d Present address: Chemical Engineering Dept. Ben-Gurion

Systeme N¨othnitzer Str. 38 01187 Dresden, Germany

2

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

1 Introduction

Biophysical approaches have taken the Listeria as a

model system of cellular motility. Furthermore, a bio-mimetic

Polymerization of actin is one of the main mechanisms

responsible for cellular motility. Filaments of F-actin are

polymerized on the cytoplasmic side of a cellular mem-

brane with the barbed ends oriented towards the surface

of the membrane. The branching of the actin ﬁlaments

takes place mainly in the vicinity of the surface. The re-

sulting branched F-actin ﬁlaments take a form of a soft

elastic solid, [1], which we call an actin gel or a gel, sim-

ply. This actin gel pushes the cellular membrane outwards.

Polymerization of actin gels is also a locomotive mecha-

nism for intracellular bacteria like Listeria monocytogenes,

and perhaps also for the endosomes and lysosomes ([2]).

In these cases, the gel is grown in the form of a comet.

This comet pushes the bacterium forward. For the pur-

pose of understanding this mechanism of motility, various

experimental model systems have been developed using

both biochemical and biophysical approaches.

Biochemical approaches have isolated the basic cyto-

plasmic ingredients needed for the motility of Listeria

monocytogenes [3]:(1) actin and ATP for the formation of

F-actin ﬁlaments, (2) Arp2/3 as the cross-linker and/or

the nucleator of the F-actin growth (i.e., the precise role

is still under debate), (3) ADF as the depolymerization

factor at the pointed end of F-actin, (4) the capping pro-

tein,(5) a bacterial protein called ActA expressed on the

surface of Listeria which is necessary for inducing poly-

merization from the surface. These ingredients constitute

in vitro system of the bacterial motility has been intro-

duced. This system consists of a spherical latex bead,

coated by the enzymatic protein complexes, ActA ( [4],

[5]), or a fragment of its homologue from human cells,

WASP [Wiskott-Aldrich-Syndrome Protein] [6,7]. The cy-

toplasm has also been replaced by the reconstituted cyto-

plasm [7]. Despite the spherical form of the bead, the gel

has grown in a shape of a comet, like the bacteria Liste-

ria (see for example Fig.2 of [6]). Fig.1 shows the initial

stage of the creation of the comet, observed using ﬂuores-

cent probe attached to actin monomers.

This process bares the signature of a spontaneous symme-

try breaking, which is the subject of the present paper.

The phenomenon of the symmetry breaking is relevant to

some biological systems of sub-cellular level. For instance

the endosomes, which consist of spherical soft substrate

(liquid vesicle), grow a comet [2]. Also, the motility of

a mutant Listeria, which moves preferentially in lateral

directions [8] grows the actin gel by breaking its cylin-

drical symmetry. Our principal aim is to assess, through

the study of the symmetry breaking, the relevance of the

elastic aspects to the biological motilities based on the

polymerization of protein ﬁlaments, and to provide for

several basic ingredients related to the mechano-chemical

coupling. The three ingredients essential for explaining the

symmetry breaking are (details will be given in sections

a model cytoplasm for the motility.

§2-§4):

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

3

Fig. 1. Experimentally observed time sequence of the actin gel grown around a spherical latex bead. The diameter of the bead

is 10 µm. The bead is coated with a fragment of WASP, and it is placed in a reconstituted solvent as described in the text. The

actin monomers in the gel is visible by a ﬂuorescent marker. The observation started at t = 0 after several tens of seconds when

gel has started to grow.

(i) The creation of a tensile stress due to the curvature

tion is accelerated through the mechano-chemical cou-

of the substrate surface (§2):

pling. This dissociation may be either through the un-

As the gel is continuously created at the bead surface

binding of the branching points along actin ﬁlaments, or

(at the radius, r = r0), the part that has been already

through the depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments.

formed is continuously pushed outwards (r > r0). Since

the perimeter (2πr) increases as r, and since the surface

has a closed topology, the gel is stretched by the ratio,

r/r0(> 1).

These three ingredients (i)-(iii) constitute a positive

feedback loop leading to an instability of the symmetric

shape of the growing gel. This will be described in §5.1.

In short, the region of gel with smaller thickness becomes

(ii) The concentration of the tensile stress by a geo-

preferentially dissociated due to the higher tensile stress,

metrical eﬀect (§3):

implying further thinning of that region.

The gel layer around a bead is in mechanical equilibrium,

so that the integrated tension across the layer thickness of

the gel must be constant along the surface of the bead. In

particular, if the thickness is locally thinner, such a region

must bear a stronger tension in order to support the same

integrated tension.

All symmetry breaking models [9,10] take the mechano-

chemical coupling into account. Previous models have fo-

cused their attention on the compressive force acting on

the actin ﬁlaments at the polymerization sites, that is on

the substrate surface. Our analysis takes into account the

global stress distribution. Of particular importance is the

(iii) The acceleration of dissociation of the gel under

tensile stress generated at the outer surface of the gel. In-

tensile stress (§4):

deed, on general grounds, the depolymerization rate must

We suppose that, under tensile stress, the gel dissocia-

be an increasing function of the tensile stress. We show in

4

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

the following that it leads inevitably to symmetry break-

ing. In the discussion section §6, after a brief summary,

we compare, in more details our analysis with the existing

ones, and suggest experiments designed for distinguishing

between the diﬀerent possibilities.

2 Distribution of stress within the gel with

Fig. 2. The cross section of F-actin gel around a bead. The

symmetric shapes

relevant stress components in the gel are schematically shown.

The gel occupies the space between the radii r = r0 and

Suppose that a gel has been polymerized steadily from a

r = r0 + h. The compressive component of the stress at the

substrate surface of either spherical or cylindrical shape

with radius r0, until the gel forms a layer of a thickness h,

enclosing the substrate surface and keeping its symmetry

(see, Fig.2). As already noted, the part of the gel that

has been formed has been continuously pushed outwards.

An element of the gel at the radius r is then stretched by

substrate surface (r = r0), σrr|r0

, and the tensile component

at the outer surface (r = r0 + h), σ⊥⊥|r0+h, are indicated by

the pairs of oppositely oriented open arrows. In this symmetric

state, the tensile component at the substrate surface, σ⊥⊥|r0

,

as well as the normal compressive component at the outer sur-

face, σrr|r0+h, vanish.

r/r0 times relative to the native state of polymerization.

We remark that the present approximation ignores the

To know the tensile stress in the lateral direction, σ⊥⊥,

radial deformation due to the lateral stretching, in other

let us use the “stacked rubber band model” [5,11,12]: A

words, it assumes a vanishing Poisson ratio. Although this

freshly cross-linked gel at the latex surface (r = r0) is

has no justiﬁcation for actin gels, the main results of the

unstretched and has no lateral stresses, σ⊥⊥|r=r0

= 0. As

present paper do not depend on this property. More re-

the layer is pushed outward, its circumference increases

ﬁned calculation conﬁrm the validity of this statement

which introduces a lateral stress ([11]),

[13].

σ⊥⊥|r = B

r − r0
r0

,

(1)

where, for symmetry reasons:

The shear component of the stress σr⊥ vanishes every-

with B being the Young modulus. In particular, when the

σr⊥ = 0.

thickness of the gel layer is h, the tangential stress at the

outer surface of the gel is

Radial force balance requires that the radial stress, σrr,

at the radius r obeys the following equations:

σ⊥⊥|r0+h = B

h
r0

.

(2)

1
r2

∂
∂r

2
r

r2σrr

−

σ⊥⊥ = 0

(3)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

5

for a spherical surface ([5], see Appendix A), or

corresponds to the constant function, h(ˆω) = h∗, with a

∂
∂r

(rσrr) − σ⊥⊥ = 0

(4)

constant thickness h∗.

for a cylindrical surface [11]. Since no external force is

applied on the outer surface of the gel layer, the normal

stress must vanish:

The analysis of the thickness perturbation is done in

the following two steps: In the ﬁrst step, we suppose that

this function, h(ˆω), is slightly perturbed from a constant

function, but we still do not allow for the displacement of

σrr|r0+h = 0.

(5)

the gel. In the second step, we let the gel layer relax until

where T is the integrated tension across the symmetric gel

of gel along the direction ˆω than the average. (It could be

slab, deﬁned by

due to the enhanced/depressed polymerization, or, to the

Under this condition, the normal stress at the substrate

surface, σrr|r0

, can be calculated in terms of the lateral

stress, σ⊥⊥. In the case of cylindrical substrate, we inte-

grate Eq.(4) from r = r0 to r = r0 + h, and have

σrr|r0

= −

T
r0

,

r0+h

T =

σ⊥⊥dr.

r0

Z

(6)

(7)

Using Eq.(1) we ﬁnd T = Bh2/(2r0), and thus σrr|r0 =

−Bh2/(2r2

0). For the spherical substrate, the relation is

not as simple as the cylindrical case. Still, σrr is given as

an integration of σ⊥⊥.

3 Concentration of the tensile stress under a

modulated surface proﬁle

it reestablishes the mechanical balance. We calculate how

the stress in the gel is distributed in this new balanced

state. To avoid any confusion, we stress that, the pertur-

bations (h(ˆω)−h∗ 6= 0) at the end of the ﬁrst step does not

imply the swelling or deswelling of the gel layer. The per-

turbation rather implies that there is more or less material

depressed/enhanced dissociation of the gel along this di-

rection.) As we discuss a situation such that there is no

external force on the outer surface, we require stress-free

conditions on the outer surface of the gel layer.

σrr|r0+h = σr⊥|r0+h = 0.

(8)

What we demonstrate is that, under the above condi-

tions, the tensile stress σ⊥⊥ under the reestablished me-

chanical balance is locally enhanced in the thinned region

of the gel layer, that is, in the zone of the orientation ˆω

In this section, we consider how small perturbations to

that satisﬁes h(ˆω) < h∗. On the one hand, the physical

the surface proﬁle of the gel layer lead to the redistribu-

origin of the stress concentration is quite simple and uni-

tion of the stress components within the gel layer. We

versal. In fact the authors have noticed, after completion

introduce the function representing the thickness of the

of the present work, that essentially the same mechanism

gel layer, h(ˆω), with the variable ˆω representing the orien-

of stress concentration has been discussed long before in

tation from the origin. A spherically symmetric gel layer

the context of crystal growth under stress (see, for exam-

6

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

1. We limit our concern to the modulations h(ˆω) − h∗

within a “skin layer” of thickness λ.

ple, a concise review on the related history in the litera-

ture [14]). In Appendix B we describe the basic mecha-

nism of this phenomenon by using an illustrating example

in a very simple geometry. On the other hand, the direct

analysis of the present case with the distributed thickness

h(ˆω) is diﬃcult, because of the three spatial dimensional-

ities and the tensorial character of the stress associated to

this space. We can avoid, however, this diﬃculty by the

following lines of reasoning.

whose characteristic wavelengths are comparable to the

average thickness, h∗. Experimentally, h∗/r0 is at most

about 0.2 [15]. The radius of curvature of the outer sur-

face (≃ r0 + h∗) is, therefore, not appreciable in view of

such short wavelength of modulation. We may then ignore

the eﬀect of a speciﬁc curved geometry of the substrate

surface except for the fact that the curvature gives rise to

the lateral tension σ⊥⊥ in the gel layer.

2. We notice the following fact: As far as the stress dis-

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the outer gel surface before

(a) and after (b) perturbation. A perturbation of the surface

proﬁle with characteristic length λ aﬀects the stress proﬁle only

spherical one, with (b) a “slip” boundary condition on the

substrate surface, to see how the stress in the actual three-

dimensional case is distributed after the reestablishment

of the mechanical balance. Moreover, (c) the neglect of

the shear stress components within the gel layer is justi-

ﬁable for the experimentally realized situation where the

mean thickness of the gel layer h∗ is much smaller than

the radius r0. We will formulate these assumptions in more

tribution inside the gel layer is concerned, the inﬂuence of

the surface proﬁle perturbation is practically limited to a

details below:

region near the outer surface (see, Fig.3). More precisely,

if the perturbation is characterized by a wavelength, λ,

sional circle of radius r0.

(a) We consider the gel layer grown around a two dimen-

then the thickness of the disturbed region is also charac-

terized by λ. (The boundary condition far from this layer

is therefore irrelevant to this disturbance.) For detailed

arguments, see Appendix C.

In two dimension, we represent the thickness of the gel

layer by h(θ0) as a function of the angle θ0 with 0 ≤

θ0 < 2π, instead of h(ˆω) above. (See, Fig.4: h(θ0) is

deﬁned before the reestablishment of the mechanical bal-

ance.) The lateral components of the stress, which we have

3. With our wavelength choice in 1., and with the fact

denoted symbolically by ⊥, corresponds now to the az-

just mentioned above 2., we can justify the study of (a)

imuthal direction. We then use the suﬃx θ in place of

a two dimensional circular geometry rather than the real

⊥ hereafter. For example, we write σrθ for σr⊥, and σθθ

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

7

(Remark: Note that we do not claim this boundary con-

dition to be always realistic. We rather use this condition

since it is justiﬁable for the calculation of the stress distri-

bution under the modes of perturbations with q ≃ 2πr0
h∗ :

See the argument 2 above and the appendix C for the de-

tails. )

(c) The shear stress σrθ within the gel layer is negligible.

As mentioned above, the experimental value of h∗/r0 is

≪ 1. In such situation we may, in the lowest order ap-

proximation, estimate the magnitude of the shear stress,

with a parabolic proﬁle of the shear stress σrθ: σrθ =

Fig. 4. Deﬁnition of the angler variable θ0 and the hight func-

tion h(θ0) of a gel with modulated thickness due to depolymer-

ization before an elastic deformation reestablishes mechanical

equilibrium.

instead of σ⊥⊥. For small perturbations of the thickness,

˜µǫq(r0 + h − r)(r − r0)/r2

0 for r0 ≤ r ≤ r0 + h, which

|h(θ0) − h∗|/h∗ ≪ 1, we may use the linear analysis. Then

satisﬁes the boundary conditions, Eqs.(8) and (10). Here,

it suﬃces to consider the form

˜µ is a constant proportional to the shear modulus µ of

h(θ0) = h∗ [1 + ǫq cos(q θ0)] ,

(9)

the gel. The magnitude of σrθ is, therefore, at most of the

order of ˜µǫq(h∗/r0)2. We compare this with the change of

where the integer q indicates the number of nodes of the

σθθ due to the perturbations of the thickness, which is of

spatial undulations, and ǫq is supposed to be small (|ǫq| ≪

order ǫqBh∗/r0 (see Eq.(1)). Then σrθ is smaller than this

1). The characteristic wavelength for the the q-th mode is

by a factor of h∗/r0, and is therefore negligible.

about 2πr0/q, and the restriction (1) is represented as

In the Appendix D we show how the stress distribu-

tion within the gel is calculated for the model described

(Remark: Besides our purpose of analysis, the two-dimensional

by (a)-(c). Below we show only the results for the ten-

geometry applies rather directly to a Listeria mutant [8]

sile stresses σθθ|r0+h at the external gel surface and the

mentioned in §1: This mutant moves preferentially in lat-

normal compression, − σrr|r0

at the substrate surface:

eral directions, breaking its cylindrical symmetry.)

(b) On the substrate surface (r = r0), the shear stress is

(cid:0)

σθθ|r0+h −

σθθ|r0+h

= −

ǫq=0

ǫq cos(q θ0) + O(ǫq

2)

Bχ2
2 + χ

−σrr|r0

−

−σrr|r0

ǫq=0

= O(ǫq

2),

(11)

(12)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

The slip boundary condition for the shear stress is written

with χ ≡ h∗/r0. The bracketed terms with the subscript

(cid:1)

q ≃ 2πr0
h∗ .

negligible.

as

ǫq = 0 are those terms without perturbation:

σrθ|r0

= 0.

(10)

σθθ|r0+h

ǫq=0

= Bχ and

−σrr|r0

ǫq=0

= B

2 χ2 (see Eqs.(2)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

8

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

and (6)). In Eq.(12), O(ǫq

2) indicates the terms of at least

assumption: (i) On the substrate surface, the polymeriza-

second order of ǫq. Since ǫq cos(q θ0) = (h(θ0)−h∗)/h∗, the

tion is the dominant process. The pre-exponential factor

minus sign on the right hand side of Eq.(11) implies that

¯kp represents the kinetic constants in the absence of com-

the lateral tension is augmented, σθθ|r0

>

σθθ|r0

, in

ǫq=0

pressive stress ( σrr|r0

= 0). ¯kp depends on the concen-

the thinned portion of the layer, h(θ0) < h∗.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

tration of actin monomers in the solvent. In our analysis

we assume this to be constant. The exponential factor

4 Mechano-chemical coupling: Growth and

represents the fact that the polymerization is decelerated

dissociation of gel under stress

In this section, we consider the time evolution of the thick-

by the compression, σrr|r0

(< 0). The parameter cp has

been introduced so that −cp σrr|r0

accounts for the in-

crease in the polymerization potential barrier due to the

ness of the gel layer. We denote the proﬁle of the thickness

cost in elastic energy (divided by kBT ) to push out the gel

at the time t as h(θ0, t). We are interested in the chemi-

layer outward against the compressive stress. We have ne-

cal processes which take place on time scales much larger

glected the dissociation of the gel at the substrate surface.

than the establishment of the mechanical balance within

Such process could be easily incorporated in the model

the gel. We suppose that the relevant microscopic chemi-

[16,13], but has little eﬀect in our context. In the exper-

cal processes are the polymerization and branching of the

iment of the polymerization of microtubules, it has been

actin ﬁlaments to form the gel, and the unbinding of the

shown that the negligence of the depolymerization on the

branching points and/or through the depolymerization of

growing end (the plus end) is a good approximation [17].

actin ﬁlaments to dissociate the gel. We adopt a simpliﬁed

version of the model proposed previously [15,5]:

∂h(θ0, t)
∂t

= a

¯kpe σrr |r0
h

cp − kde σθθ |r0+h(θ0 ,t)cd

,

(13)

i

The second term in the square bracket on the r.h.s.

of Eq.13 represents the gel dissociation. We have intro-

duced the assumption: (ii) The dissociation process is al-

where a, ¯kp, kd, cp and cd are positive constants. The pref-

most localized on the outer surface of the gel at r = r0 +

actor a outside the square bracket on the right hand side

h(θ0, t). The pre-exponential factor, −akd, therefore rep-

(r.h.s.) is a length of about the size of an actin monomer.

resents the rate of thickness decrease which occurs due

This represents the rate of conversion between the chemi-

to the dissociation of the gel under the stress-free condi-

cal processes and the change of the thickness, h. The other

tion, σθθ|r0+h(θ0,t) = 0. (Remark: Here we can identify

parameters are described below.

σθθ|r0+h(θ0,t) as the tensile stress along the tangent of the

In the square bracket on the right hand side (r.h.s.) of

outer surface, since the correction is of second order of the

Eq.13, the ﬁrst term represents the polymerization at the

deviation angle, | ∂h
∂θ0

|/(r0 + h), between the tangential di-

substrate surface (r = r0). Here we have introduced the

rection and the azimuthal direction.) The exponential fac-

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

9

tor of this term represents the fact that the dissociation

physiological concentrations of the actin monomers and

is accelerated by the lateral tensile stress σθθ|r0+h(θ0,t)

of the cross-linker molecules, diﬀusion does not limit the

(> 0). The parameter cd has been introduced so that

thickness evolution, h(θ0, t).

cd σθθ|r0+h(θ0,t) accounts for decrease in the depolymer-

The evolution equation Eq.(13) has a solution corre-

ization potential barrier due to the release of the elastic

sponding to the symmetric stationary state, h(θ0, t) = h∗

energy (divided by kBT ) when the gel is dissociated un-

[5]. If we restrict our analysis to the circularly symmet-

der the tensile stress. We have neglected the dissociation

ric proﬁles, h(θ0, t) = h(t), this solution is stable. In fact,

of the gel occurring inside the gel. There are good reasons

substituting the form h(θ0, t) = h∗ into Eq.(13), we obtain

to belive that the gel dissociation is strongly accelerated

the equation for χ ≡ h∗/r0 as

under tensile stress [16], as compared with spontaneous

dissociation under the stress-free condition.

In fact, the

experiments using the full cell extract as the solvent have

cp
cd

χ2 + χ −

2
cdB

log

¯kp
kd (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= 0.

(14)

This equation has a positive, therefore physically meaning-

ful, solution for ¯kp/kd > 1, Furthermore, if we substitute

shown that the mean thickness of the gel layer around

the latex bead is much smaller than the average length of

the form

the comet produced by Listeria of similar size. It implies

h(θ0, t) = h∗ [1 + ǫ0(t)] ,

(15)

that the Boltzmann factor of the form, ecdσθθ , is crucial to

the Eq.(13) reduces, up to linear order in ǫ0(t), to the

determine the dissociation rate. As σθθ is largest on the

following equation:

outer surface of the gel, we suppose that the gel dissocia-

tion occurs mostly in the vicinity of the outer surface.

dǫ0(t)
dt

= −

ǫ0(t)
τ0

,

(16)

with τ0 = kd

−1Ω0

−1r0/a,

The kinetic equation Eq.(13) also assumes the follow-

ing: (iii) The diﬀusion of actin monomer is fast enough.

Ω0 = cdBecdBχ

1 +

χ

.

(17)

cp
cd

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

This limits our analysis to a bead radius range smaller

Equation (16) shows, as already mentioned, that the steady

than a cross-over size, rc, separating a stress governed

state solution h(θ0, t) = h∗ is stable with respect to per-

regime from a diﬀusion controlled regime. Indeed, on the

turbations keeping the overall symmetry. This result is un-

substrate surface, the actin gel is formed from the adjunc-

derstandable since a radius with h > h∗ (< h∗) would lead

tion of actin monomer molecules. And for these molecules

to an increase (decrease) of both (− σrr|r0

) and σ⊥⊥|r0+h,

to reach the substrate surface, they have to diﬀuse through

and these in turn make the r.h.s of Eq.(13) negative (pos-

the network of the actin gel. Previous experimental and

itive), leading to a decrease (increase) of h toward the

theoretical analysis [5] indicates that, as far as the diam-

stationary value h∗. From Eqs.(14) and (17), χ and τ0 are

eter of the latex bead is less than about 5 µm, and under

functions of three parameters, cdB, cp
cd

, and

. Note that

¯kp
kd

10

10.

5 Result

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

τ0 is a few orders of magnitude larger than the microscopic

our analysis predicts that a quasi symmetric steady state

time kd

−1, with r0/a being of order 103 and Ω0 of order

should be reached signiﬁcantly earlier than the onset of

symmetry breaking. This is indeed what is observed.

(ii) The characteristic time of the instability is propor-

tional to the radius of the substrate if the other parameters

are ﬁxed.: It is reasonable to suppose that τq represents

the characteristic time of the growth of the perturbation.

5.1 Symmetry breaking instability

We now consider symmetry breaking perturbations and

Then, from (19), τq is written in a scaling form:

we assume the following form for the gel layer proﬁle:

τq
−1 = Ωq
kd

−1 r0
a

,

(21)

h(θ0, t) = h∗ [1 + ǫq(t) cos(q θ0)] ,

(18)

where kd

−1 and a play the role of intrinsic timescale and

with q 6= 0. Substituting the expressions of the stress com-

lengthscale, respectively. The dimensionless constant of

ponents, Eqs.(11) and (12) into Eq.(13), where ǫq is re-

placed by ǫq(t), we have the following equation up to the

linear order of ǫq(t),

with τq = τ0

Ω0
Ωq

,

dǫq(t)
dt

=

ǫq(t)
τq

,

Ωq = cdB ecdBχ χ
2 + χ

,

(19)

(20)

where χ ≡ h∗/r0 as before. (Remember that χ can be ex-

pressed in terms of the parameters cdB, cp
cd

, and

¯kp
kd

.)

Note that since Ω0Ωq ≃ 2/χ ≃ 10, τ0 ≪ τq. Eqs.(19) and

proportionality, Ωq

−1, depends on the properties of the

gel and of the solvent through the parameters, cdB, cp
cd

,

and

. Note that, in fact, the quantity τq thus deﬁned

¯kp
kd

shows no dependence on q(6= 0), as Ωq does not. This

apparently anomalous behaviour should not be taken se-

riously, because the range of wavenumber validity of of

our analysis is limited to q ≃ 2πr0

h∗ .)

Quantitatively, we can evaluate the characteristic time

τq using the experimentally known data in the literature:

The stationary velocity vgel at which the gel material moves

outward is identiﬁed from Eq.(13) as

(20) imply the following characteristics of the symmetric

vgel/r0 = kd(a/r0)ecd σθθ |r0+h(θ0 ,t) = kd(a/r0)ecdBχ. Com-

stationary state h(θ0, t) = h∗.

(i) The symmetric stationary state is unstable against per-

turbations which break the symmetry, since all τq are pos-

itive. In fact, the applicability of our model is guaranteed

paring this with the expression of τq obtained from Eqs.(20)

and (21), τ −1 = kd(a/r0) ecdBχ cdBχ/(2 + χ), we see that

τ =

r0
vgel

2 + χ
cdBχ

.

(22)

only in the range of q satisfying q ≃ 2πr0
h∗

(see, §3). Nev-

As described in [5], cdBχ is the decrease in energy barrier

ertheless, the presence of an unstable mode is suﬃcient

(in units of kBT ) in the dissociation of an actin ﬁlament

for the proof of instability. Note also that since τ0 ≪ τq,

under tensile stress, compared to the unstressed case. For

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

the eﬀects described in this manuscript to be observable,

small but ﬁnite source term, ǫe
q,

this decrease must be of order one. Noting that χ ≪ 2,

our analysis requires the combination τqvgel/(2r0) to be

dǫq(t)
dt

=

1
τq

(ǫq(t) + ǫe

q).

11

(23)

of order one. The experiment gives τsym/r0 ≃ 5 min/µm

We can solve this equation with the initial condition ǫq(0) =

and vgel ≃ 1µm/min (note that it is the polymerization

0:

rate under stress), which leads to τqvgel/(2r0) ≃ 2.5. This

is in the expected range.

5.2 Role of external symmetry breaking perturbations

ǫq(t) = ǫe

qτ (e

t

ǫe
q/τqt, for t < τ

τ − 1) ≃ 


ǫe
qe

t

τ ,

for t > τ

.

(24)


This shows that, after a time t ∼ a few τ , the eﬀect of

the non-symmetric disturbance is exponentially ampliﬁed

In reality, a strictly symmetric substrate, either spherical

(et/τ ≫ 1) by the instability mechanism, while the direct

or cylindrical, is impossible. Also, the chemical properties

eﬀect of the source is small in the sense that ǫe

qt ≪ 1

of the substrate surface are never perfectly homogeneous.

even for t ≃ few τq. In this way, the symmetry break-

A nominally spherical latex bead may contain a weak lo-

ing mechanism manifests itself as an ampliﬁer of small

cal deviation of the surface curvature and a weak het-

heterogeneous disturbance in the system, which can be

erogeneity of the polymerization constant, ¯kp, along the

experimentally observable.

surface. Thus we should suppose that there are a distur-

An other way to think about the external perturbation

bances which break externally the symmetry of the sys-

is to deﬁne the time τSq required for developing an ǫq of

tem, and modify Eq.(13) or its linearized form Eq.(19).

a speciﬁed value ǫS

q : Equation (24) leads to:

A legitimate question is, therefore, “if and how the above

symmetry breaking instability plays a role?” In short, the

τSq = τq ln

1 +

 

ǫS
q
ǫe
q !

.

(25)

answer is that, despite these extrinsic factors, the insta-

Changing the prescribed value ǫS

q or the external pertur-

bility mechanism of symmetry breaking manifests itself in

bation ǫe

q by orders of magnitude changes τS only by a

the evolution of the gel’s thickness, justifying our compar-

small factor. This tells us that, as already announced the

ison with experiments done in the above §§5.1 We discuss

scaling of the characteristic observable times is essentially

it ﬁrst in a formal manner, and then in the context of the

given by τq. It also tells us that the detailed knowledge of

geometrical and chemical heterogeneities.

the early dynamics is not essential in the deﬁnition of τSq

Within the linear approximation, the evolution equa-

provided τq is suﬃciently larger than τ0, so that a quasi

tion Eq.(13) is decomposed into the equation for each

spherical state is obtained before the symmetry breaking

mode, like Eqs.(16) or (19). In the latter equation the

process is observed. We know this to be true both from

system’s intrinsic heterogeneity may be represented as a

our analysis and from experiment.

12

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

Now we describe how the parameter ǫe

q reﬂects the ef-

standing the main feature of the dynamics if τ0 < τq. We,

fect of the heterogeneity of the surface curvature and of

therefore, only mention about the restricted case where

the polymerization rate. Under the linear approximation,

those heterogeneities are switched on at a certain moment

we only need to consider the proﬁle of the substrate sur-

of time after the symmetric steady state has been estab-

face which can be described in terms of the radius r0(θ0) as

lished. The result then reads

a function of the angle θ0: r0(θ0) = r0 + ∆(geo)

q

cos(qθ0).

Additionally we consider the spatial distribution of the

ǫe
q =

ecdBχ
Ωqχ  

q

∆(chem)
¯kp

−

cpBχ2
2

(q2 − 1)

.

(27)

∆(geo)
q
r0 !

polymerization rate constant ¯kp represented as a function

The positive coeﬃcient in front of ∆(chem)

q

reﬂects the

of θ0: ¯kp(θ0) = ¯kp0 + ∆(chem)

q

cos(qθ0). ∆(geo)

q

and ∆(chem)
q

acceleration of the turnover of the gel material where ¯kp is

characterize the amplitudes of geometrical and chemical

increased, while the minus sign in front of the second term

perturbations, respectively. The geometric proﬁle r0(θ0)

in the bracket reﬂects the polymerization being slowed

leads to the non-homogeneous curvature κ(θ0), which has

down where the surface extrudes, or, where κ(θ0) > 1
r0

.

the following form,

κ(θ0) =

1 +

1
r0 "

∆(geo)
q
r0

(q2 − 1) cos(qθ0)
#

.

6 Discussion

Along the line of calculation in Appendix D, this expres-

sion of the curvature should replace the factor r0

−1 in

Eq.(34). The normal stress on the substrate surface is

therefore given by

Our analysis based on gel elasticity leads to the essential

prediction that the spherical symmetry is always unsta-

ble. The expected scenario is that in a ﬁrst step a quasi-

spherical steady state is reached which should obey the

prediction contained in [5] and [18]. Then on a time scale

σrr|r0

= −κ(θ)T.

(26)

signiﬁcantly larger than the characteristic time for reach-

As for the chemical heterogeneity in the polymerization

ing the isotropic quasi-steady state, symmetry is broken.

rate, ¯kp(θ0) should replace ¯kp in Eq.(13). In general these

In the regime we discuss, governed by elasticity, these two

eﬀect can be summarized in the form of

times are predicted to scale like the radius of the bead on

q = β(chem)
ǫe

q

(∆(chem)
q

/¯kp)+β(geo)

q

(∆(geo)
q

/r0), with dimen-

which the experiment is conducted. This scaling should be

sionless numbers β(chem)

q

and β(geo)
q

. However, if these

very robust in the elastic regime, since r0 is the only length

source terms have existed from the start of polymeriza-

scale in the problem. In particular it should hold for wave-

tion, the expressions of β(chem)

q

and β(geo)
q

are complex be-

length larger than those considered here. All these expec-

cause in the early stages of the gel growth none of the lin-

tations are well born out by experiment [7]. In a number

ear equation is valid. However, as we have already pointed

of cases symmetry is not observed to be broken: this may

out the exact knowledge of ǫe

q is not essential for under-

be due to three diﬀerent causes: - the experiment dura-

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

13

tion might not be long enough for the symmetry breaking

the microtubule/centrosome (or microtubule/bead) sys-

event to take place, - the gel/bead friction, considered in

tem. The latter system does not exhibit an instability

appendix E might further slow down the symmetry break-

whereas the ﬁrst does. The diﬀerence in behavior results

ing process, - the gel might not behave fully elastically at

from diﬀerence in boundary conditions. All these cases do

very long time scales. In this latter case, a new time scale

not consider the situation where ﬁlaments are crosslinked.

would come into play, namely that over which a signiﬁcant

Actin gels are crosslinked and we propose that in two and

stress may be maintained, and a new calculation should

three dimensions these crosslinks change profoundly the

be developed. We discuss various possible improvements

behavior. Indeed, if the thickness of the gel layer is locally

to our current analysis in appendix E.

decreased, the compressive stress there, σrr|r0

, should ei-

As explained in this manuscript the main ingredient for

the occurrence of symmetry breaking comes from the ten-

sile stress concentration where the gel thickness is small-

est. This feature, added to a stress dependent depolymer-

ization in the immediate vicinity of the gel outer surface,

leads to an absolute instability of the system. This is in

contrast with earlier models [9,10] in which symmetry is

broken at polymerizing gel bead surface. Their interpre-

tation is most transparent in the one dimensional case;

consider two opposing sides on which parallel ﬁlaments

ther stay constant if full-slip boundary conditions are achieved,

or decrease, irrespective of the thinning cause. The lateral

displacement of the gel layer along the substrate surface

might at most relax some of this local decrease of σrr|r0

,

but it will never be able to increase it. Thus the mecha-

nism described [9,10] for non-crosslinked ﬁlaments do not

apply to gels.

A direct experimental assessment of the symmetry break-

ing mechanism could involve monitoring simultaneously

the depolymerization and the polymerization processes at

the outer and inner gel surfaces, respectively. This is not

are grown. The force on individual ﬁlaments, i.e. the ra-

tio of the total force (equal on both sides because of force

an easy experiment.

balance) to the number of supporting ﬁlaments, is the key

notion. The smaller the number of ﬁlaments participat-

Acknowledgement

ing, the slower the eﬀective polymerization rate; it is nat-

ural to expect a force dependence and diﬀerent scenarios

We thank M.-F. Carlier for the gift of the medium of motil-

ity. We also thank C.Sykes for fruitful discussions and for

have been discussed [9,10] if an unbalance between the two

critical reading of the manuscript.

sides arises at some point, it grows since the “weak” side

tends to become “weaker”. The two-dimensional version of

this mechanism, simulated by van Oudenaarden et al. [9]

is closely related to simulation and experiments done on

14

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

This pressure integrated over the surface, r2∆Ω (3D) or

r∆θ (2D), gives the total force exerted by this thin layer.

These force in the respective dimensionality are shown on

the right hand side of the equations below. Now, these

forces must be the origin of the diﬀerence between the in-

tegrated normal stress acting at r and that at r + ∆r. The

diﬀerences in the respective dimensionality are shown on

the left hand side of the equations below.

Fig. 5. Forces acting on a curved slice of gel of thickness ∆r

and length r∆θ. The slice is under lateral tension because of

forces σ⊥⊥∆r. It is radially compressed because of the forces

(r+∆r)2∆Ω σrr|r+∆r−r2∆Ω σrr|r = r2∆Ω

,(3D)

(r + ∆r)∆θ σrr|r+∆r and r∆θ σrr|r.

(r + ∆r)∆θ σrr|r+∆r − r∆θ σrr|r = r∆θ

,(2D)

2σ⊥⊥∆r
r
σ⊥⊥∆r
r

Appendix A. Heuristic derivation of the equa-

Dividing the both hand sides of the above equations by

tions of mechanical balance

Eqs. (3) and (4) in § 2 are the equation of mechanical bal-

ance of stress components in the spherically and circularly

symmetric geometries, expressed in respective relevant co-

ordinate systems. Instead of deriving these from the famil-

∆r, and letting ∆r → 0, we arrive at Eqs. (3) and (4).

Note that σrr < 0 for compressive stresses.

Appendix B: Elementary physical mechanism

of the stress concentration

iar form in the Cartesian coordinates (symbolically writ-

We describe the basic mechanism of the stress concentra-

ten as ∇ · σ = 0) through coordinate transformations, we

tion by an illustrating example with a very simple geom-

will present an elementary physical interpretation of the

etry (see, Fig.6(a)).

equations of mechanical balance. It might help to under-

Suppose that there is a long elastic rod whose diame-

stand how the lateral tensile stress and the normal com-

ter d(z) is inhomogeneous along its long axis, z. We now

pressive stress are related. See, Fig.5. Consider, within

apply a tensile force to this rod by pulling its ends apart.

a layer of actin gel occupying the radii r0 and r0 + h, a

Once the balance of force is reestablished within the rod,

slice of gel between the radii r and r + ∆r spanning a

the total tensile force integrated over a sectional plane

solid angle ∆Ω (3D) or an angle θ (2D). The lateral ten-

perpendicular to the z-axis is constant along of the z-

sion σ⊥⊥ gives an eﬀective surface tension ∆Γ = σ⊥⊥∆r

coordinate. Thus the tensile stress σzz averaged over this

to this slice. Because of the curvature radius, r, of this

section is inversely proportional to its area, π(d(z)/2)2. By

slice, a sort of the Laplace pressure, 2∆Γ/r (3D) or ∆Γ/r

such geometrical eﬀect, the tensile stress is concentrated

(2D) is generated towards the center (r = 0) of curvature.

at the thinnest part of the rod.

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

15

(ex. the momentum, the charge, etc.) which is conﬁned

along some direction(s).

Appendix C

Fig. 6. Stress distribution in elastic structures of varying

We demonstrate that the perturbations of the surface pro-

thickness: (a) Elastic rod of thickness d(z) under tension due

ﬁle have a limited inﬂuence on the stress, practically con-

to forces F acting at the ends. The tension at coordinate z:

ﬁned within a “skin depth” near the outer surface of the

σzz ≃ F/A(d), where A(d) = π

4 d(z)2. (b) Analogous situation

gel layer, where the skin depth is of the order of the wave-

in a gel layer of thickness h(θ0) under integrated tension T .

length of the perturbation (see Fig.3 in the text).

The tensile stress can be approximated as σ⊥⊥ ≃ T

h(θ) .

(i) To the spherically symmetric gel layer, we introduce a

xyz-coordinate system so that its xy-coordinate plane is

We could mention a analogous situation in an electric

tangent to the outer surface of the gel layer at its origin,

wire transporting a steady electric current. If the thick-

x = y = z = 0. We deﬁne the sign of z-coordinate so that

ness of the wire is inhomogeneous, the electronic current

the bulk of the gel is on the side of z ≤ 0. We will consider

density is high in the region where the wire is thin, by the

a small neighborhood of the origin so that the curvature of

same geometrical eﬀect. The electric current density plays

the gel surface is negligible. This apparently ﬂat gel layer

the role of the tensile stress σzz in the former case. In fact,

is under lateral tension along the xy-plane.

the stress is the current density of the momentum [12].

(ii) We introduce a slight sinusoidal perturbation of the

We may compare these quasi one dimensional exam-

ples with the geometry studied in §3 (see Fig.6(b)). In

the latter situation, the gel is under lateral tensile force T .

By the same reasoning as above, the lateral tensile stress

is large where the thickness is small. Although the shear

force between the gel and the cylinder would weaken this

eﬀect, the basic mechanism still works.

surface proﬁle of the gel layer, without allowing the dis-

placement of the gel material. The perturbed surface pro-

ﬁle is written as

z = ǫQ Re[eiQx+φ], with the amplitude ǫQ, the wave num-

ber Q and the phase φ being constant.

(iii) We then let the gel to relax until the mechanical

balance is reestablished within the layer. By this process

the stress components σαβ with α = x, y, or z are also

The geometrical eﬀect discussed here is quite universal:

perturbed. We denote by δσαβ the perturbed part of the

We only need a current density of some physical quantity

stress components. These δσαβ obeys the following equa-

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

16

tions:

equation:

with

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

δσxα +

δσyα +

δσzα = 0,

∂
∂z

with α = x, y, or z We assume that the usual linear elas-

ticity relationship applies to the system. Then the per-

turbed stress components is related with the displace-

gel layer.

ments (ux, uy, uz) from the unperturbed state through the

with the form eQz for z < 0. This indicates that the inﬂu-

ence of the perturbations to the surface proﬁle with the

wavelength ∼ Q−1 is practically limited within a region

with a“skin depth” ∼ Q−1 from the outer surface of the

Appendix D. The derivation of Eqs.(11) and

δσαβ = 2µ(uαβ −

uγγδαβ) + K

uγγδαβ,

(12)

1
3

γ
X

γ
X

uαβ ≡

1
2

(

∂uα
∂xβ

+

∂uβ
∂xα

),

where µ and K are the shear and bulk moduli, the suﬃces

α, β and γ take x, y or z, and {xx, xy, xz} ≡ {x, y, z}. The

summation index γ runs over x, y and z, and δαβ is the

Kronecker’s delta.

(iv) The question is how the quantities δσαβ depend on z

Here we show how the stress distribution within the gel

layer is calculated for the model described by (a)-(c) in

§3. In the polar coordinate, the equations of mechanical

balance in the gel layer is written as follows:

(rσrr) +

σrθ − σθθ = 0,

∂
∂r
∂
∂r

∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ

(rσrθ) +

σθθ + σrθ = 0.

(28)

for z < 0. In the lowest order of ǫQ, δσαβ , and therefore

We integrate the left hand side of these equations with

the displacements uα should depend on x sinusoidally with

respect to r from r0 to r0 + h, noting the boundary con-

the wavenumber, Q. Therefore, the above equations can

ditions Eqs.(10) and (8). The result reads

be reduced to the following matrix equation:

2µ ∂2

3 µ)Q2

∂z2 − (K + 10

(K + 4

0
= 

0




This equation can be ﬁnally reduced to the following

∂z2 − 2µQ2

3 µ)iQ ∂

3 µ) ∂2

(K + 10
















ux

uz

∂z

iQ ∂
∂z






.

and

T −

¯T = −r0σrr|r0

∂
∂θ

¯T +

T = 0,

∂
∂θ

equations:

(∂z

2 − Q2)2ψ = 0

where we have introduced the total tension,T ≡

and its analogue for the shear stress, ¯T ≡

r0+h
r0

σθθdr,

R
r0+h
r0

σrθ dr.

where ψ is a combination of ux and uz. From this equa-

Based on our estimates of the shear stress, σrθ ∼ ˜µǫq(h∗/r0)2,

R

tion, we ﬁnd that the displacements should depend ex-

and the perturbed part of the tensile stress, δσθθ ∼ ǫqBh∗/r0

ponentially on z. Among mathematically possible forms

(see §3), we can evaluate the terms on the left hand side of

e±Qz, we discard the form e−Qz since this factor grows

the above equations. Since ∂

∂θ ∼ 1 under our limitation of

exponentially towards negative z axis. We are then left

the wavenumber q, we have, δT ∼ ∂

∂θ T ∼ Bǫqh∗2/r0 and

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

17

¯T ∼ ∂
∂θ

¯T ∼ ˜µǫqh∗3/r0

2, where δT is the perturbed part of

the total tension T . Assuming ˜µ ∼ B, we ﬁnd that ¯T and

¯T are smaller than T and ∂

∂
∂θ

∂θ T by a factor of h∗/r0. We,

therefore, ignore the terms with ¯T , and have the following

equations:

∂
∂θ

T = 0, T = −r0σrr|r0.

(29)

The ﬁrst equation requires the lateral balance of the inte-

grated tension T , while the second equation requires the

homogeneity of the normal compressive stress on the sub-

strate surface, σrr|r0 .

Fig. 7. (a) θ0 is deﬁned as the angle with respect to a reference

line, when a material point (for example, the black dot) is

located before the gel is deformed. (b) as a result of elastic

deformation, the material point characterized by θ0 is displaced

to a new position at θ. The function θ(θ0) characterizes the

From (29) we can calculate σθθ|r0+h∗ and −σrr|r0

.

elastic deformation.

We employ the “stacked rubber band model” [5,11,12]

for the lateral tensile stress σθθ, as we did for the sym-

nition of T given above, we obtain

metric case (see Eq.(1) in the text). Here we take into

T = B

h(θ0) +

account the possible lateral displacement of the gel layer

upon the reestablishment of the mechanical balance. We

introduce an unknown function θ(θ0) such that the ma-

terial of gel layer originally at θ0 is moved to θ(θ0) upon

the reestablishment of the mechanical balance (see Fig.7).

The elongation ratio, (r−r0)/r0 in the Eq.(1) is, therefore,

replaced by the form which dependents on the parame-

ter θ0: (rdθ(θ0) − r0dθ0)/r0dθ0. Thus the lateral tension

is written as

σθθ = B

r
r0

dθ(θ0)
dθ0

(cid:18)

− 1

,

(cid:19)

h(θ0)2
2r0 (cid:19)

dθ(θ0)
dθ0

− h(θ0)
(cid:21)

.

(31)

(cid:20)(cid:18)

The function θ(θ0) can be related to h(θ0) through the

ﬁrst equation in (29), which requires that T is constant.

To ﬁx the value of the constant, T , we recall an apparent

condition

2π
0

dθ(θ0)
dθ0

dθ0 = 2π. The result of T is

R

T = B

−1

2π

2r0 #

dθ0
h(θ0) + h(θ0)2
2π
h(θ0)
h(θ0) + h(θ0)2
2r0

"Z
0

2π −

"

0
Z

dθ0

.

#

(32)

dθ(θ0)
dθ0

can thus be ﬁnally determined in terms of h(θ0)

(which we do not show explicitly). From the second equa-

(30)

tion of (29) and from Eq.(30), we have

where, the shear deformation within the layer has been

consistently ignored. (The justiﬁcation of this approxima-

tion concerning another source of error will be discussed

in the Discussion section, see Appendix E.)With the deﬁ-

−1

h(θ0)2
2r0 (cid:21)
+ B

h(θ0)2
2r0 (cid:21)

,

σθθ|r0+h(θ0) =

h(θ0) +

(cid:20)
1 +

T

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

h(θ0)
r0 (cid:19)
T
r0

=

.

− σrr|r0

(33)

(34)

18

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

To reach the expressions Eqs.(11) and (12) in the text, we

bility result. For the other modes, especially for q < 2πr0
h∗ ,

may simply substitute the form h(θ0) = h∗ [1 + ǫq cos(q θ0)] ,

we should take into account the friction on this surface

into Eqs.(32)-(33), and develop them with respect to ǫq up

due to the temporal linkage between the actin ﬁlament

to the linear order.

with the substrate ([11]). (About the discussion of the re-

Appendix E

Below we mention brieﬂy aspects which could be improved

in our present analysis:

1. Extend the analysis to modes with q 6= 2πr0
h∗ :

Although the instability against the disturbances of modes

q ≃ 2πr0
h∗

is suﬃcient to destroy the system’s stability, our

analysis can say nothing about what is the fastest, or the

lation between the friction and the temporal linkage, see

[19,15].) As a modiﬁcation of the present model, we have

incorporated the ﬁnite friction force on the substrate sur-

face, which is proportional to the slipping velocity of the

gel along the surface. Though details will not be shown

[13]. the result indicate that, while the all modes remain

unstable, the instability is weakened for long wavelengths,

i.e. for small values of q.

most unstable, mode of the disturbance. The fact that

3. Extend the analysis to non-linear regime:

the characteristic time of the symmetry breaking in our

Our analysis does not infer how the comet of actin gel is

analyses gives reasonable values suggests that the other

formed and continues to grow after the symmetric shape of

modes of perturbations might grow, if they do, at a rate

the layer around the bead is lost. This is a nonlinear prob-

not highly exceeding the one we have analyzed. In fact,

lem. [9] have demonstrated in their numerical modelling

some eﬀorts to reﬁne the present analysis (see below) in-

dicate that, for q < 2πr0

h∗ , the instability is weakened or

even suppressed, while for the modes, q > 2πr0

h∗ , there is

no sign of appreciable q dependences. However, the mod-

that the comet formation shows its optimal performances

for a certain parameter value related to the depolymeriza-

tion at the substrate surface. The comparative study from

our point of view is yet to be done. (As for the steady

ulation of the micro-scale comparable to the mesh size of

growth of the comet from Listeria, see ([11])).

the gel is not accessible by the continuum approach. (Note

4. Extend the analysis to soft beads:

that the quasi one-dimensional analysis of [10] claims the

Endosomes, lysosomes, vesicles and ﬂuid drops deform as

instability of the mode q = 2.)

the comet develops, revealing the importance of mechan-

2. Remove the full slip boundary condition:

ical stresses [2,20,21]. The deformation of a ﬂuid drop

As discussed in §3 we have justiﬁed this boundary con-

has been fully analyzed within the framework of the elas-

dition when we analyzed the evolution of the modes q ≃

tic analysis and shown to be quantitatively in agreement

2πr0
h∗ , since, there, the choice of boundary condition on the

with the experiment[22]. The symmetry breaking onset

substrate surface is expected to be insensitive to the sta-

remains to be worked out. As proposed in the discussion,

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

19

the early stages would discriminate between the diﬀerent

mechanisms.

5. Removal of the assumption of the isotropic gel:

Generally speaking, the micro-structure of the gel poly-

merized from a surface must distinguish the radial direc-

tion from the lateral ones. Especially, for the actin gel

branched by the help of the protein Arp2/3 is shown to

Fig. 8. Generation of a mechanical frustration caused by

have a topology like a “forest” rather than the network

simultaneous polymerization and lateral deformation a rect-

[?]. It will be the entanglement among the branches of

anglar piece of gel (marked block) is displaced and deformed

the “trees” of semi-ﬂexible ﬁlaments that supports the

while keeping the connectivity with its neighboring piece (block

tensile stress within the gel. Though we expect no quali-

shown by dotted lines).

tative change of our result upon the incorporation of the

elastic anisotropy of the gel, there should be quantitative

tion is advanced in a portion of gel layer than elsewhere,

diﬀerences. For the further analysis, we also need the ex-

the stress concentration is most likely to occur and the

perimental data on the anisotropic elastic constants [12].

degradation will further accelerated there. Visco-elastic or

6. Extend the analysis where the gel density is spatially

frictional eﬀects in the bulk gel or on the substrate sur-

heterogeneous:

face, respectively, may limit this positive feedback loop.

The eﬀect of the spatial heterogeneity of the catalytic ac-

The detailed discussion will be the task of future works.

tivity of enzyme may have several aspects. The one which

7. Take account of the frustration of stress in gel:

has been discussed in §§5.2 is the the modulation of the

In the analysis of §4, the total tension T ≡

r0+h
r0

σθθdr

polymerization rate, ¯kp. The other aspect which is related

has been calculated by substituting the expression of the

R

to the spatial heterogeneity of elastic moduli of gel may

stacked rubber band model, Eq.(30). This operation ig-

also deserve consideration. In fact, the heterogeneity of

nores the fact that the gel material at two diﬀerent radii

the elastic moduli will be closely related to the hetero-

are created at diﬀerent points of time. The Fig.8 illustrates

geneity of the factors kd and cd both concerning the de-

how the simultaneous polymerization and lateral deforma-

polymerization processes kinematically and energetically,

tion create a mechanical frustration within the gel mate-

respectively. It is therefore impossible to predict where

rial: (a) Consider a thin slice of actin gel created at the

does the thinning of the gel layer proceed most rapidly.

substrate surface during a short time interval, say, between

However, the rule of thumbs is again that the positive

t1 and t1 + dt (the dark gray region occupying the angle

feedback mechanism mentioned above: once the degrada-

∆θ0). We may expect that this part of gel which is just

20

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

grown bears no lateral stress, to a good approximation. In

ξ = 30nm for the mesh size of the actin gel.We, there-

the context concerning this slice just above the substrate

fore, suppose that our approximation is pretty good for

surface, we would then set dθ(θ0)/dθ0 = 1 in Eq.(30). (b)

the above parameter range.

After the consecutive time interval, t1 + dt < t < t1 + 2dt,

the same spatial region, which is now indicated by the

dotted lines, is occupied by a newly grown gel under no

References

lateral tension. Thus again dθ(θ0)/dθ0 = 1 for this region.

However, as for the previously grown material which we

1. Gerbal, F., V. Laurent, A. Ott, P. Chaikin, J. Prost. Mea-

have marked in dark gray in (a), it now occupies the region

surement of the elasticity of the actin tail of Listeria mono-

just outside the original one (shown again in dark gray),

cytogenes Eur. Biophys. J. 29 (2000) 134-140.

and occupies the angle ∆θ. Generally, ∆θ is diﬀerent from

2. Taunton, J., B.A. Rowning, M.L. Coughlin, M. Wu,

∆θ0 as far as there is a global lateral displacement of gel

R.T. Moon, T.J. Mitchison, C.A. Larabell. Actin-dependent

during the time interval t1 + dt < t < t1 + 2dt. Thus in the

context concerning this region in dark gray, we would set

Propulsion of Endosomes and Lysosomes by Recruitment of

N-WASP. J. Cell Biol. 148 (2000) 519-530

dθ(θ0)/dθ0 6= 1 in Eq.(30). This contradiction indicates

3. Loisel, T.P., R. Boujemaa, D. Pantaloni, and M.F. Car-

a natural process through which a mechanical frustration

is created within the gel layer, and shows that Eq.(30) is

only approximative.

lier. Reconstitution of actin-based motility of Listeria and

Shigella using pure proteins. Nature 401 1999 613-616

4. Cameron, L.A., M.J. Footer, A.van Oudenaarden, J.A. The-

riot. 1999. Motility of ActA protein-coated micro-spheres

Taking account of this fact in the model requires a lot

driven by actin polymerization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA

of complication of the formalism, but the linear analysis is

96 (1999) 4908-4913.

still feasible. Though the details will not be shown [13], the

5. Noireaux, V., R.M. Golsteyn, E. Friedrich, J. Prost, C.

result indicates that, while the modes with small q values

Antony, D. Louvard, and C. Sykes. Growing an Actin Gel

now become stable, the instability persists for q > qc with

on Spherical Surfaces. Biophys. J. 78 (2000) 1643-1654.

a ﬁnite positive threshold qc. Our simple analysis with

6. Yarar, D., W. To, A. Abo and M. D. Welch. The Wiskott-

Eq.(30) is still a good approximation if the characteris-

Aldrich syndrome problem directs actin-based motility by

tic time of the instability τ is short enough as compared

stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2/3 complex. Curr.

with the turnover time of the gel, r0/vgel. From Eq.(22)

Biol. 9 (1999) 555-558.

this criterion reads (2 + χ)/(cdBχ) ≪ 1. Substituting the

7. Bernheim-Grosswasser, A., S. Wiesner, R.M. Goldsteyn,

same values for cd = ξ3/T , B, and χ as in §§5.1, the left

M.-F. Carlier, C. Sykes. The dynamics of actin-based motility

hand side of the above criterion becomes 0.16 if we take

depend on surface parameters Nature 417 (2002) 308-311.

Sekimoto et al.: Mechano-chemical coupling in growing actin gels

21

8. Rafelski,

S., P. Lauer, D. Portnoy,

J. Theriot.

18. Plastino, J., I. Lelidis, J. Prost, C. Sykes. The eﬀect of

http://cmgm.stanford.edu/theriot/movies.htm:

“Skidding

diﬀusion, depolymerization and nucleation promoting factors

motility of mutant Listeria” (2002).

on actin gel growth. (2003) Submitted.

9. Oudenaarden, A.van., and Julie A. Theriot. Cooperative

19. Tawada, K., and K. Sekimoto. Protein friction exerted

symmetry-breaking by actin polymerization in a model for

by motor enzymes through a weak-binding interaction. J.

cell motility. Nature Cell Biol. 1 (1999) 493-499.

Theor. Biol. 150 (1991) 193-200.

10. Mogilner, A., G. Oster. Force generation by actin polymer-

20. Giardini P. A., D. A. Fletcher, J. A. Theriot. Compression

ization: The elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments. Biophys.

forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles. Proc.

J. 84 (2003) 1591-1605.

Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 100 (2003) 6493-8.

11. Gerbal, F., P. Chaikin, Y. Rabin, and J. Prost. An Elastic

21. Upadhyaya A, J. R. Chabot, A. Andreeva, A. Samadani,

Analysis of Listeria monocytogenes Propulsion. Biophys. J.

A. van Oudenaarden A. Probing polymerization forces by

79 (2000) 2259-2275.

using actin-propelled lipid vesicles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

12. Landau, L., and E. Lifchitz. The Theory of Elasticity. (Mir.

100 (2003) 4521-6.

Moscow 1967)

22. Campas, O. J.-F. Joanny and J. Prost, unpublished.

13. Sekimoto, K., F. J¨ulicher, J. Prost. Unpublished work.

(2001).

14. Kassner, K., C. Misbah, J. Muller, J. Kappey, P. Kohlert.

2001. Phase-ﬁeld modelling of stress-induced instabilities.

Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 036117. (The original literatures

on the crystal growth related to the stress concentration,

such as Asaro, R. J., W. A. Tiller, Metall. Trans. 3 (1972)

1789 and Grinfeld, M.A., Doklady Akademii Nauk USSR 265

(1982):836 are cited and described therein.)

15. Gerbal, F., V. Noireaux, C. Sykes, F. J¨ulicher, P. Chaikin,

A. Ott, J. Prost, R.M. Golsteyn, E. Friederich, D. Louvard,

V. Laurent, and M.F. Carlier. On the ‘Listeria’ propulsion

mechanism. PRAMANA - J.of Physics 53 (1999) 155-170

16. Prost, J. Lecture Note of the Les Houches Summer School

(Les Houches, 2001).

17. Dogterom, M., and B. Yurke. Measurement of the Force-

Velocity Relation for Growing Microtubules. Science 278

(1997) 856-860

σ
αβ

=

σ
0
αβ

gel

bead

+∆r

θ
0h(    ,t)
σ

(a)

∆r

F

(a)

∆θ

(r+  r)∆
σ
rr r
d(z)
F−actin gel
∆ 0θ
F−actin gel
(a)
z
F−actin gel
cylinder
bead
σ
∆θr
bead

rr r

λ

θ
0

σ ∆r

λ

~

∆θ

θ
σ
0
: perturbed
αβ

r
0
σ
αβ

σ
0
αβ

~
−

h

gel

T

σ
r
rr
0
(b)

(<0)
(a)

cylinder

σ

+h (>0)
(b)

r0

elastic rod

(b)

∆ 0θ

θ
∆

F

(θ  )
h 0

θ(θ  )
0

T

(b)

