3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Simulations of Oligomeric Intermediates in Prion Diseases

David L. Mobley∗, Daniel L. Cox, Rajiv R. P. Singh, and Rahul V. Kulkarni†
Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616

Alexander Slepoy
MS 0316, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87175-0316
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We extend our previous stochastic cellular automata based model for areal aggregation of prion proteins on
neuronal surfaces. The new anisotropic model allow us to simulate both strong β-sheet and weaker attachment
bonds between proteins. Constraining binding directions allows us to generate aggregate structures with the
hexagonal lattice symmetry found in recently observed in vitro experiments. We argue that these constraints
on rules may correspond to underlying steric constraints on the aggregation process. We ﬁnd that monomer
dominated growth of the areal aggregate is too slow to account for some observed doubling time-to-incubation
time ratios inferred from data, and so consider aggregation dominated by relatively stable but non-infectious
oligomeric intermediates. We compare a kinetic theory analysis of oligomeric aggregation to spatially explicit
simulations of the process. We ﬁnd that with suitable rules for misfolding of oligomers, possibly due to water
exclusion by the surrounding aggregate, the resulting oligomeric aggregation model maps onto our previous
monomer aggregation model. Therefore it can produce some of the same attractive features for the description
of prion incubation time data. We propose experiments to test the oligomeric aggregation model.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Prion diseases are a group of neurodegenerative diseases
including bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle,
scrapie in sheep and goats, chronic wasting disease in deer and
elk, and kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) in humans.
These diseases came to the forefront after BSE reached epi-
demic proportions in Great Britain in the early 1990s, and it
was later shown that transmission of BSE to humans can lead
to new variant CJD (vCJD) in humans (Bruce et al., 1997),
(Hill et al., 1997), (Scott et al., 1999).

Prion diseases are unusual in that they appear to be caused
by infection with some minimal infectious ”seed” of mis-
folded prion protein, which alone may be able to cause dis-
ease by catalyzing further misfolding and, in many cases, ag-
gregation of the prion protein. These aggregates are typi-
cally amyloid-like ﬁbrils or amyloid plaques (Caughey, 2000).
The infectious agent is unusually hard to eliminate by vari-
ous methods including UV irradiation, suggesting it contains
no nucleic acid and ratheronly protein, the so-called ”protein-
only” hypothesis in prion diseases(Weissmann et al., 2002).

In the case of CJD, a sporadic form of the diseases also
exists, occurring more or less randomly worldwide with an
incidence of about one in a million people per year. It has been
suggested that this incidence is due to the very rare event of
nucleating the minimal infectious seed by chance in a healthy
individual (Come et al., 1993).

Developing an understanding of these diseases is important
because, for one, they are invariably fatal. To date, no treat-
ment exists. Additionally, it is not yet clear how large the

∗To whom reprint requests should be addressed, Tel.: 530-752-0446; Fax:
530-752-4717; E-mail: mobley@physics.ucdavis.edu
†Current address NEC Research Labs, 4 Independence Way, Princeton, N.J.
08540

vCJD epidemic in humans will be; an understanding of the
disease process is important to be able to guide the search for
treatment ideas.

In many cases, prion diseases result in large, up to micron-
scale plaques in the brains of people and animals with these
diseases. They also involve vacuolization or spongiform
change in the brain due to death of neurons(Scott et al., 1996).
Additionally, the normal form of the prion protein (known as
PrPC ) has long been known to misfold and aggregate in vitro
when catalyzed by the presence of a misfolded prion protein
(PrPSc) seed (Come et al., 1993). Together, these observations
have suggested to some that the aggregation process itself may
be important in these diseases (Come et al., 1993; Masel et al.,
1999). It has also been suggested that the rate-limiting step in
aggregation is nucleation of an appropriate seed, thus the rapid
aggregation in the seeded case described above (Come et al.,
1993).

Another fact which may be important to this issue is that
the prion protein is normally GPI-anchored to the cell sur-
face. Aggregation in vitro as mentioned above is observed in
solution rather than in the presence of the GPI anchor on a cell
surface, leaving the possibility that the aggregation process in
vivo is different.

Aggregation models developed to explore the aggregation
process in prion disease include one-dimensional, ﬁbrillar
aggregation-and-ﬁssion models(Masel et al., 1999; Slepoy et
al., 2001), since aggregates grown in vitro are typically seen
to be ﬁbrillar. Additionally, our earlier work suggested that a
two-dimensional areal aggregation model could explain cer-
tain other properties of the diseases (Slepoy et al., 2001). This
earlier model is attractive in that it can provide a simple ex-
planation for the long lag phase which is sometimes observed
in growth of the amount of infectious material in the brain.
This lag phase of little or no growth is followed by a doubling
phase with a short characteristic doubling time. Additionally,
our earlier model provides a possible explanation of some of
the difference between infectious and sporadic forms of CJD

(Slepoy et al., 2001). In later work, we used this model to ex-
plain and ﬁt experimental dose incubation curves (Kulkarni et
al., 2002).

However, there were drawbacks to the earlier aggregation
model we proposed. First, no such areal aggregates had so far
been observed. Second, the ﬁssioning essential to the model
would involve breaking of strong bonds between the proteins,
probably bonds between β-sheets (Serag et al., 2002).

More recent experimental work found two-dimensional
areal aggregates of prion protein produced during the puriﬁca-
tion process. These aggregates were examined under electron
microscope (EM) and found to consist trimeric or hexameric
subunits. These subunits are linked together in a regular array,
possibly by their N-terminal sugars or a weak protein-protein
interaction (Wille et al., 2002).

This suggested we should modify our earlier model and at-
tempt to reproduce this aggregate morphology. We thought
of two basic schemes for growing aggregates of this sort: (1)
Growing the aggregate outward monomer by monomer from
an initial seed, or (2) Oligomeric intermediates (possibly very
ﬂexible and of unstable shape), form on their own in solu-
tion and are only catalyzed into stably misfolding in the pres-
ence of an existing misfolded seed. Some evidence in favor of
(2) has already been produced: Monomers of yeast prion can
form intermediates if left to stand, which allows aggregation
to proceed at an initial faster rate when catalyzed by addition
of a seed (Serio et al., 2000). Additionally, the conformation-
dependent immunoassay developed by Safar et al. (2002) de-
tects both protease-sensitive and protease-resistant PrPSc. In
hamster brains, sensitive PrPSc is observed earlier, followed
by resistant PrPSc. This could correspond to (2) above, where
the sensitive PrPSc is the intermediates that are not yet stably
misfolded and the resistant PrPSc is stably misfolded interme-
diates.

Work here has been done to further explore these two po-
tential modiﬁcations of our earlier model to examine whether
they retain the same features and if additional insight can be
gained.

It is important to note that even if areal aggregation is not
important to the time course of these diseases, the aggregates
observed by Wille et al. have already provided insight into the
structure of the misfolded prion protein (Wille et al., 2002).
Theoretical modeling may be able to place further constraints
on the protein or subunit structure necessary to reproduce
these aggregates, and hence provide valuable information be-
cause these aggregates can form, even if they are not impor-
tant to the disease progression.

II. BASICS OF OUR MODEL

Here we explore the two basic schemes suggested above for
growing aggregates like those observed by Wille et. al. To do
so, we use a modiﬁcation of our earlier model. Therefore a
recap of common features of these models is useful.

These models are stochastic cellular automata models,
meaning that they take place on a lattice with probabilistic in-
teraction and diffusion rules governing the progression of the

2

system. In this case, sites on the lattice are either occupied by
individual prion proteins, or water (empty, in the simulation).
The protein form at a site can also vary from PrPC to PrPSc.
Rules vary depending on the model being explored, but the
basic procedure is the same. Every simulation step, which
represents a small amount of time, we allow proteins and any
aggregates to diffuse a small amount on the lattice (each ob-
ject has a probability 1/(size)1/2 of moving one lattice site
in a given step). Then we look at every protein in the lattice
and update its state according to the rules. For example, in our
original model, the conformation of an individual prion pro-
tein is determined solely by its number of neighboring prion
proteins, and this can vary from step to step. After doing this,
we add more normal prion monomers to replace any that con-
verted to PrPSc. This is due to the assumption that this process
would be taking place in a small area on a cell, and the nor-
mal prion monomers would be added by the cell or diffuse in
from other locations on the cell surface to keep the monomer
concentration relatively constant.

III. MONOMER GROWTH MODEL

First, case (1) from above was explored. Simple rules were
developed (ﬁgure 1) which can reproduce aggregates similar
to those observed by Wille et al. It is important to note that
though the rules were designed to reproduce such aggregates,
most modiﬁcations of these rules could not do so. This means
that the rules provide some constraints on the protein-protein
interactions necessary to reproduce such aggregates. Also, for
the purposes of this model, we are assuming the subunits are
hexameric, but the corresponding model for trimeric interme-
diates is actually much simpler than this model and will pro-
duce similar results.

Details of the algorithm for this model are covered in ﬁgure

2.

The rules are as follows: The simulation begins with a sin-
gle hexagonal subunit consisting of six misfolded monomers
(light gray hexagons in ﬁgure 1) which stick some of their
residues into an adjacent site, excluding anything else from
occupying that site (black). Healthy monomers (light gray
spheres) can then attach via a sugar-bond or other weak
protein-protein interaction to this subunit (dark gray spheres
to dark gray hexagons) but only radially outward from a
monomer in the initial hexamer. Additional monomers mov-
ing adjacent to the attached monomer can, together with it,
misfold but only if the second monomer does not also neigh-
bor the original hexamer. Then additional monomers can at-
tach to this forming hexamer, allowing it to complete. Re-
peating this process many times can produce mostly regular
aggregates with some holes, similar to those observed.

The rules are also probabilistic: above, ”can” means that
some fraction of the time the event occurs. These probabilities
can be changed in the simulation and give different growth
rates, but the same essential features and scaling as described
below.

If this is in fact how these aggregates are forming, we ﬁnd
out about the orientation of monomers within a hexagonal

3

FIG. 1: Simple rules for monomer-by-monomer growth of aggregates like those observed. Some possible rules can be excluded, thus these
rules give insight into how the proteins involved must be interacting with one another. (a) The initial seed consists of six misfolded monomers
(light gray hexagons) surround a central region (black) which is occupied by some residues sticking into it from the adjacent six sites. (b) A
healthy monomer (light gray sphere) can move adjacent to a misfolded one and attach via a sugar bond or other weak protein-protein interaction
(proteins sugar bonded are colored dark gray). This cannot happen if the monomer moves into the site between two misfolded proteins. (c)
Subsequent monomers can move next to the attached one and misfold and begin to form a new hexamer. Residues from the two stick into the
black region, preventing anything else from moving there. This cannot happen if the second monomer is adjacent to the existing hexamer;
this would produce irregular aggregates unlike those observed by Wille et al. (d) The forming hexamer can grow and ﬁnish via subsequent
monomer addition. (e) Continue (a)-(d) for a long time and an aggregate like the one shown can form.

subunit. We ﬁnd, as mentioned in the discussion of the rules
above, that the N-terminal sugars or attachment sites must
stick radially outward from each monomer in a hexagonal-
subunit (ﬁgure 1b). This is in agreement with the hexagonal
structure proposed by Wille. Additionally, we ﬁnd that no
such regular aggregates can be produced unless the monomer
attaching to a previously attached monomer (ﬁgure 1(c)) can
only attach if it is not adjacent to an existing hexamer. This
seems to indicate that the other spaces must be occupied by
residues from the existing hexamer, preventing attachment in
those sites.

This model can also reproduce gaps in aggregates as ob-
served. In this model gaps are due to variations of the growth
rate from average for part of the aggregate, causing several
parts of the aggregate to grow apart and then rejoin after leav-
ing a gap.

One reason for developing this model was to see if it would
capture the same features of the disease as our original model.
Our original model explained the difference between the lag
phase and the doubling phase by suggesting that the doubling
phase is initiated when aggregates begin to ﬁssion, then re-
grow to a certain ﬁssioning size and break again. Key to this
explanation is our result that aggregation speeds up, so that
the time for an aggregate to double in size from half its ﬁssion
size to its ﬁssion size is much much less than the time for it to
get from its initial size to its ﬁssioning size.

To see if this model could produce the same separation of
lag and doubling phases, we examined the aggregate growth
rate as a function of size in this model (ﬁgure 3) and found it
speeds up only slowly. Na¨ıvely, one would expect the growth
rate to be roughly proportional to the square root of the size,
as the growth rate is proportional to the circumference of the
aggregate, which, assuming a circular aggregate, is 2πr. The

size of the aggregate is proportional to the area, πr2, so the
radius is proportional to the square root of the size and thus
the rate proportional to the square root of the size. To a good
approximation, the growth rate observed here is well-ﬁt by an
offset plus a term proportional to (size)1/2, as expected.

In this simple picture, one can calculate the ratio of the dou-
bling time to the lag time. The lag time is the time to go from
the initial size, say size 0 for simplicity, to size n; the dou-
bling time from size n/2 to size n. Integrating the rate to get
1/√2
the times and taking the ratio we ﬁnd tdoub/tlag = 1
or about 0.293. This means that this model cannot produce
such a large separation between lag and doubling times as our
earlier model could, at least without further modiﬁcation.

−

This also indicates that if there is a lag phase and if the dif-
ference between it and the doubling phase is due to accelera-
tion of aggregation, this picture is not sufﬁcient and something
more like (2), growth from intermediates, may be a better rep-
resentation of the disease process.

IV. GROWTH VIA INTERMEDIATES

In this case, aggregation is assumed to be the assembly of
independent hexameric intermediates into a larger areal ag-
gregate. The intermediates themselves are not misfolded but
only misfold, in this model, when they either aggregate with
an existing misfolded seed, or come together in such a way
that they can misfold and and form a new stable seed. In this
way, the model works essentially just like the model of Slepoy
et al. except now hexameric intermediates are playing the role
of monomers (ﬁgure 4). As mentioned above, there is some
evidence that intermediates greatly increase aggregation rate
in studies of yeast prions, so this emphasis on the importance

4

FIG. 3: Growth rate (change in aggregate size per step) as a function
of size for seeded areal aggregation in the monomer growth model.
Growth rate goes as the square root of the size with an offset, which
was as expected for this model.

FIG. 2: Flow chart of simulation for monomer addition model. We
typically use P3 = 0.2; we tried a variety of different values for this
and values near 0.2 seem to produce the most regular aggregates.
We also typically use PS = 0.9. This is not important and roughly
sets the simulation timescale. Also, for our statistics, we typically
average over 1000 such runs as the one described here. For a larger
version of this ﬁgure (and Fig. 6 and Fig. 10) see the author’s web
page at http://asaph.ucdavis.edu∼dmobley/

of intermediates may be reasonable.

To be able to map this model back into our old model,
though, it must be known how the intermediate concentration
depends on monomer concentration. And this is not obvious.
So a simulation was developed to explore how the concentra-
tion of hypothetical hexameric intermediates would depend on
monomer concentration. Again, here we are assuming the in-
termediates are hexameric but we can easily modify the model
to accomodate trimers.

To get at the concentration of intermediates, it was assumed
that two monomers have a probability P1 of beginning a new
hexameric subunit when they come into contact (see ﬁgure 5).
This new subunit can grow by addition of monomers when
they move into appropriate positions (changing this probabil-
ity does not affect the outcome of the simulation, only the
timescale, so it was set to 1). However, this growth process
competes with a ”dissolving” process by which a monomer
that is part of an intermediate but only has one neighboring

FIG. 4: Top, in Slepoy’s model, subunits were healthy monomers
(light gray spheres) aggregating with misfolded monomers (dark
gray hexagons); bottom, subunits are hexagonal intermediates (light
gray/dark gray) aggregating with misfolded hexagonal structures
(medium gray/dark gray). In both cases, the aggregation process and
kinetics ought to be, and indeed are, similar.

monomer can break off with a probability P3. Thus the end
destiny of any intermediate that begins is either to form a com-
plete hexameric intermediate, in which case it can persist, or
to dissolve completely.

Details of the algorithm for this model are shown in ﬁgure

6.

This dissolving, or reversibility, was included because it
was not obvious that at low monomer concentrations, one
would expect a reasonable formation rate of intermediates via
this mechanism. It was initially thought that at concentrations
below something on the order of P3, breaking would dominate
and the formation rate of intermediates would be almost zero.
First, the simulation that was developed was used to examine

5

FIG. 7: Simulation steps (time) to form a hexameric intermediate
as a function of monomer concentration. Log-log scale. Note the
broad transition to dissolving-dominated behavior at low concentra-
tion. The transition actually continues to even lower concentration
than can be seen here. At very low concentration the time eventually
scales as 1/c6. Standard deviations fall within the size of the data
points on this plot.

the dependence of time for intermediate formation as a func-
tion of monomer concentration (ﬁgure 7). It was found that at
high monomer concentration, the time to form an intermediate
scales between 1/c and 1/c2 (c is concentration). This is be-
cause the likelihood of starting an intermediate scales as the
dimer concentration (1/c2) while the time to add monomers
to it scales as 1/c. On the other hand, at very low monomer
concentration, the time asymptotically approaches 1/c6. This
is due to the fact that at these concentrations, dissolving dom-
inates and it is only in the very rare event that six monomers
are in the same place at almost the same time that an interme-
diate can ﬁnish. The probability of that scales as 1/c6.

It is interesting to note that the beginning of the transition
between high concentration behavior, where most intermedi-
ates successfully become complete, and low concentration be-
havior, where only a lucky few do, begins at a concentration
on the order of the breaking probability, P3. This suggests that
if the strength of bonds between intermediates could be weak-
ened somehow, the biological number of intermediates could
be drastically decreased by pushing biological monomer con-
centrations into the 1/c6 regime.

The goal, however, was to determine the dependence of the
intermediate concentration on monomer concentration. This
just provided a formation rate, and the functional form was
uncertain. So another sort of result was examined: We began
examining behavior of the system as a function of time, and
measured the number of different partial intermediates (two
monomers, . . . ﬁve monomers, hexameric intermediates). We
ﬁrst examined the case with no breaking (P3 = 0) to check
our results, because it is relatively easy to work out kinetics
in that case. A sample of one of these plots is shown in ﬁgure
8, with symbols as data points and solid lines as approximate
kinetics ﬁts. It is important to note that in this case, and in the

FIG. 5: Rules for the formation of intermediates. Note that growth
and dissolving compete, so that any intermediate eventually ei-
ther becomes a complete, stable hexagon or dissolves back into
monomers. (a) Two monomers have a probability P1 of joining to
begin a new intermediate, which is not yet stably misfolded. Black
represents a region blocked by some of their residues. (b) This can
grow by addition of monomers to either “end”. After attaching, the
monomer sandwiched between the other two has two neighbors and
is not allowed to break off, while the ones with only one neighbor
can.
(c) A monomer with only one neighboring monomer has a
probability P3 of breaking off in a given step. This competes with
the growth process. (d) Continuing addition of monomers can result
in a ﬁnished hexameric intermediate where every monomer has two
neighbors and is safe from breaking off.

FIG. 6: Flow chart of simulation for the formation of intermediates.
Note that P1 we vary for different runs, P2 we typically set to 1
(it sets the simulation timescale and is unimportant) and P3 we also
vary. Finished intermediates are removed so that we can run to a
larger number of ﬁnished intermediates without the lattice getting
clogged. Here, also, we typically average over 1000 trials for good
statistics.

simulation are relatively simple. With rnm the rate constant
for forming m-mers from n-mers, and bnm the rate of breaking
n-mers into m-mers plus monomers, we can write:

[c1] = c

6

(1)

d[c2]
dt

= r12[c1]2

−

r23[c1][c2]

b21[c2] + b32[c3]

(2)

= r23[c1][c2]

r34[c1][c3]

b32[c3] + b43[c4]

(3)

d[c3]
dt

d[c4]
dt

−

−

= r34[c1][c3]

r45[c1][c4]

b43[c4] + b54[c5]

(4)

d[c5]
dt

= r45[c1][c4]

r56[c1][c5]

b54[c5]

(5)

−

−

−

−

−

d[c6]
dt

= r56[c1][c5]

(6)

Since we know that the hexamer number grows linearly at
steady state and all of the other concentrations are unchang-
ing, we can greatly simplify the above kinetics by looking at
the steady state only. We can work backwards from the steady
state behavior of the hexamers to ﬁnd the dependence of the
steady state rate of hexamer formation on the different kinetic
parameters and ultimately on the monomer concentration.

This straightforward kinetics analysis produces the equlib-

rium result

m =

1 + b21

r23c n1 + b32

r45c (cid:16)1 + b54

r56c (cid:17)io

r12c2
r34c h1 + b43

(7)

where m is the slope at equilibrium of the hexamer formation
rate.

The constants in our simple result for m, above, can be
measured from our simulation. However, our simulation does
not necessarily reproduce what these constants would be in
a biological system. So it is difﬁcult to say exactly what the
rate of intermediate formation, m, would be in a real system.
However, it is nevertheless useful to know the functional form
of its dependence on the monomer concentration.

The result that the hexamer number begins growing linearly
eventually is independent of monomer concentration. This is
important because it means some hexamers can form given
these simple rules even if breaking dominates. Given that re-
sult, it seems safe to assume that if hexameric intermediates
are stable, some will form in biological systems.

In our model, the hexamer number grows linearly indeﬁ-
nitely, which is obviously unrealistic biologically. The reason
for this is that we include no mechanism to remove ﬁnished
hexamers. Realistically, they would be cleared from the body

FIG. 8: Number of each size as a function of time (simulation steps),
with zero breaking. Note at long times intermediates reach equilib-
rium and the hexamer number begins growing linearly with time.
Points are simulation dat points; solid lines (mostly overlapping
points) are approximate kinetics results.

FIG. 9: Number of each size as a function of time (simulation steps)
with nonzero breaking. Compare to ﬁgure 6; note that the number of
intermediates reaches equilibrium faster and at smaller numbers but
the hexamer number still grows linearly at long times.

case of nonzero breaking probability, the number of dimers,
trimers, tetramers, and pentamers reaches equilibrium rela-
tively quickly and then the hexamer number begins to grow
linearly at a rate equal to the rate of dimer formation.

Sample results with nonzero breaking are shown in ﬁg-
ure 9. These results are qualitatively similar, except the
number of pre-intermediates that persists is much lower. In
the high-breaking limit, the very low level of intermediates
demonstrates that either a potential intermediate gets “lucky”
and quickly forms an intermediate, or it dissolves back to
monomers, leaving few dimers, trimers, and so on.

The kinetics equations we can write down to describe this

somehow. They could be endocytosed from the cell surface
and degraded via the proteasome mechanism or some other
pathway. Additionally, any hexamers being taken up into ag-
gregates would reduce this number. Regardless, realistically
the number should stabilize at some ﬁxed value determined by
the balance of the clearance rate and the formation rate.

With the result that some hexamers form even at low
monomer concentrations (and more would form if they are
trimers), a model was developed where now hexameric in-
termediates occupy a single cell on the lattice (equivalently,
these could be trimeric intermediates). This model, described
below, largely maintains the same attractive features of the
original, showing that if areal aggregation is the explanation
for these features, as we suggested, this aggregation could be
of hexameric intermediates.

Part of our basis for this model is the observation that the in-
termediates are not yet stably misfolded since formation of in-
termediates in studies of yeast prions does not lead to a change
in circular dichroism results; it is only when they aggregate
with a seed that they stably misfold (Serio et al., 2002). If any
aggregates consist of oligomers like those observed by Wille
et al., then any misfolding of these intermediates must be cat-
alyzed by existing aggregates or few-hexamer oligomers. We
hypothesize that the mechanism for this is intermediates form-
ing bonds to an existing seed. When solvent is excluded lo-
cally around these oligomers and their neighbors include a
misfolded oligomer or aggregate, they misfold. The impor-
tant point is that it is solvent exclusion around an intermediate
that can cause it to misfold, making this a very rare sporadic
event. But a misfolded seed can help this process by pro-
viding a place where intermediates bond, helping the solvent
exclusion process. These rules make this model essentially
identical in terms of kinetics to our original model.

Details of the algorithm for this model and mapping are

shown in ﬁgure 10.

However, from our old model we estimated the sporadic
form of the disease could have a peak around 1000 years given
a biological concentration of 10−3%. In our new model we
ﬁnd that it is very difﬁcult to estimate this number as the scal-
ing of the time as a function of monomer concentration is
complicated. It was hoped that this model would give a re-
sult for the onset of sporadic disease that could be compared
with the time for onset of the infectious form to see if the re-
sults were consistent with the roughly 1 in 106 incidence of
sporadic CJD that we earlier pointed out. Unfortunately, it is
difﬁcult for our model to give a concrete answer at this time
as the answer depends too much on the value of the biological
monomer concentration. We do ﬁnd, however, that the power
law used previously to scale the sporadic data, c−3, is a lower
bound on the separation. That is, the actual exponent should
be larger, meaning that we previously underestimated the sep-
aration of timescales. Thus although we cannot say exactly
what the separation of timescales here will be, we can say that
it will be greater than the two orders of magnitude that we
previously estimated.

This work suggests that a model like our earlier one, mod-
iﬁed to involve areal aggregation of hexameric or trimeric in-
termediates, could maintain the same attractive features of

7

FIG. 10: Flow chart for simulation mapping back into our origi-
nal model. Here we basically have free monomers (fM’s), attached
monomers that are not yet stably misfolded (aM) and monomers that
have stably misfolded and aggregated (H). We have some choice of
a parameter, Qbc = m. This model will capture the features of our
original model for m between 3 and 6. We compute Nbc, the bond
coordination number, with Nbc = nf M + naM + (m − 1) ∗ nH
where the n’s are the number of neighboring f M ’s and so on. Nhc,
the “hardening” or aggregating coordination number, is given by
Nhc = nf M +naM +nH . We refer to Qbc as the bonding critical co-
ordination number and Qhc as the “hardening” critical coordination
number.

our earlier model in explaining certain aspects of the dis-
eases. However, without precise knowledge of the biological
monomer concentration and a way to measure relevant rate
constants, it is difﬁcult to make numerical predictions from
this model.

V. DISCUSSION

Our work has shown that both in the case of monomer ad-
dition to a seed, and in the case of growth via intermediates, it
is possible to produce aggregates like those observed by Wille
et al. This leaves the question of how such aggregates actually
grew. If areal aggregation is the cause, or part of the cause, of
the difference between lag and doubling times, as suggested

8

typically observed in vitro and 2D areal aggregates like those
suggested by the model of Slepoy et al. Direct measurements,
or detailed simulations, giving the strengths of beta bonds be-
tween monomers compared to bonds between subunits would
be very useful.

One general scheme for experimentally testing the possi-
ble role of intermediates and estimating their concentration is
via spin labelling (Hubbell 1998, Columbus 2002). Brieﬂy,
a small molecule with a free spin can preferentially react
and attach to cysteine residues in proteins. Frequently, these
residues are moved around a protein via mutagenesis to then
map out structures, but for these purposes a less reﬁned ap-
proach is required. Since the PrP protein already possesses
cysteine residues at the position of the disulﬁde bond, the
spin labels can attach there (and will not disrupt the disulﬁde
bond). Then the spin-spin interactions will produce a different
characteristic spectrum for monomers, incomplete intermedi-
ates and complete intermediates, in particular, with a progres-
sive broadening upon moving from monomers to complete in-
termediates. Since the spins can have interactions with other
spins within a 3 nm sphere, we don’t doubt that the broaden-
ing will be observable. Of course, since the spin labels will re-
act with any cysteines present, it is important to carry this out
ﬁrst in in vitro aggregation experiments with puriﬁed prion ex-
tracts. This will help to identify the conditions which can lead
to areal aggregation as observed by Wille et al. (2000), and
serve as an existence proof at least for signiﬁcant oligomeric
intermediate concentrations.

This research is supported in part by the NEAT-IGERT program
sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IGERT Grant DGE-
9972741).

We gratefully acknowledge fruitful discussions on spin labelling
with John Voss, and on areal prion aggregates with Holger Wille.
R.R.P.S. and D.L.C. have beneﬁtted from discussions at workshops
of the Institute for Complex Adaptive Matter.

Sandia is a multiprogram laboratory operated by Sandia Corpora-
tion, a Lockheed Martin Company, for the United States Department
of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract
DE-AC04-94AL85000.

by Slepoy et al., then our work suggests that intermediates are
already present in vivo prior to aggregation.

Our work has also shown that a model can be developed
which, with suitable parameters, can reproduce areal aggre-
gates like those actually observed while maintaining the same
features of our original model.

Whether or not areal aggregation is actually important in
these diseases, we can gain insight from this model. If the ag-
gregates observed are growing via monomer addition, we gain
some constraints on the structure simply from our rules. On
the other hand, if intermediates are important to aggregation,
then our results indicate the intermediate concentration can be
quite important. At high intermediate concentrations, inter-
mediates form relatively fast. However, at low intermediate
concentrations, intermediate formation time scales as 1/c6.
This result is exciting because it suggests the intermediates as
a target to prevent aggregation. Simply reducing the monomer
concentration by a factor of 2 would decrease the number of
intermediates by a factor of 26 or 64. Within our model, this
would certainly increase the aggregation time, and thus slow
down the disease, by at least the same factor. For a disease
which can typically incubate for years, this obviously would
be a great advantage.

In this case, the location of the transition between low
concentration behavior and high concentration behavior is,
roughly speaking, set by the probability of monomers break-
ing off from an intermediate before it becomes a stable hex-
amer. Thus if this probability could be increased slightly
— that is, the bonds between monomers could be weak-
ened slightly — it would have the result described above.
This could provide an explanation for one experimental ob-
servation. Humans have a methionine/valine polymorphism
at codon 129 of the gene for the prion protein. To date, ev-
eryone affected by vCJD has been methionine/methionine ho-
mozygous. This effect was also seen in the prion disease
Kuru, where the methionine/methionine genotype was associ-
ated with increased susceptibility and the shortest incubation
time (Goldfarb, 2002). If replacing methionine with valine
weakened the monomer-monomer bonds within a forming in-
termediate and reduced intermediate concentration, this could
have exactly the effect described above.

In all, our work shows that our earlier model can be ex-
tended to produce aggregates like those observed in vitro
while still maintaining its attractive features. Our work also
suggests possible mechanisms for formation of these aggre-
gates. If the aggregates form by monomer addition, it con-
strains protein structure.
If they form by addition of inter-
mediates, it highlights the importance of bonds within the in-
termediates as a target for possible treatment strategies. Our
model suggests that an experiment to measure the biological
intermediate concentration, if there is such a concentration,
would be very useful. That would indicate whether such in-
termediates are present at a high enough concentration to be
important biologically. Additionally, this work suggests that
experimentalists should check and see whether reasonably-
sized aggregates of prion protein can be found in vivo on the
cell surface. This conﬁnement to the cell surface concievably
could make the difference between the 1D ﬁbrillar aggregates

References:
Bruce, M.E., Will, R.G., Ironside, J.W., McConnell, I.,
Drummond, D., Suttie, A., McCardle, L., Chree, A., Hope,
J. Birkett, C., Cousens, S., Frasier, H., Bostock, C.J. 1997.
Transmissions to mice indicate that ’new variant’ CJD is
caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389: 498-501.

Caughey, B. 2000. Prion protein interconversions. Philos.

Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 356:197-202.

Columbus, L. and Hubbell, W.L. 2002. A new spin on pro-

tein dynamics. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27: 288-295.

Come, J.H., Fraser, P.E., Lansbury, P.T. Jr. 1993. A kinetic
model for amyloid formation in the prion diseases: Impor-
tance of seeding. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 5959-5963.
Goldfarb, L.G. 2002. Kuru: The old epidemic in a new

mirror. Microbes Infect. 4: 875-882.

Hubbell, W.L., Gross, A., Langen, R., and Lietzow, M.A.
1998. Recent advances in site-directed spin labelling of pro-
teins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 8: 649-656.

Hill, A.F., Desbruslais, M., Joiner, S., Sidle, K.C.L., Gow-
land, I., Collinge, J., Doey, L.J., Lantos, P. 1997. The same
prion strain causes vCJD and BSE. Nature 389: 448-450.

Kulkarni, R., Slepoy, A., Singh, R.R.P., Pazmandi, F. 2003.
Theoretical modeling of prion disease incubation. Biophys. J.
In press.

Masel, J., Jansen, V.A.A., Nowak, M.A. 1999. Quantifying
the kinetic parameters of prion replication. Biophys. Chem.
77: 139-152.

Philips, Lord of Worth Malraven, Bridgeman, J., Ferguson-
Smith, M. October 2000. Report of the BSE Inquiry, Volume
1, Chapter 12, Paragraph 1122(i). http://www.bseinquiry.gov.
Jan. 4, 2003.

Safar, J.G., Scott, M., Monaghan, J., Deering, C., Di-
dorenko, S., Vergara, J., Ball, H., Legname, G., Leclerc, E.,

9

Solforosi, L., Serban, H., Groth, D., Burton, D.R., Prusiner,
S.B., Williamson, R.A. 2002. Measuring prions causing
bovine spongiform encephalopathy or chronic wasting disease
by immunoassays and transgenic mice. Nature Biotech. 20:
1147-1150.

Scott, M.R.D., Telling, G.C., Prusiner, S.B. 1996. Trans-
genetics and Gene Targeting in Studies of Prion Diseases. In
Prions Prions Prions, S.B. Prusiner, editor. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg. 95-123.

Scott, M.R., Will, R., Nguyen, H.-O. B., Tremblay, P.,
DeArmond, S., Prusiner, S.B. 1999. Compelling transge-
netic evidence for transmission of bovine spongiform en-
cephalopathy prions to humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA
96(26):15137-15142

Slepoy, A., Singh, R.R.P, P´azm´andi, F., Kulkarni, R.V.,
Cox, D.L. 2001. Statistical Mechanics of Prion Diseases.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87(5): 581011 to 581014.

Serag, A.A., Altenbach, C., Gingery, M., Hubbell, W.L.,
Yeates, T.O. 2002. Arrangement of subunits and ordering of
beta-strands in an amyloid sheet. Nature Struct. Biol. 9: 734-
739.

Serio, T.R., Cashikar, A.G., Kowal, A.S., Sawicki, G.J.,
Moslehi, J.J. Serpell, L., Arnsdorf, M.F., Lindquist, S.L. 2000.
Nucleated conformational conversion and the replication of
conformational information by a prion determinant. Science
289: 1317-1321.

Wille, H., Michelitsch, M.D., Guenebaut, V., Supattapone,
S., Serban, A., Cohen, F.E., Agard, D.A., Prusiner, S.B. 2002.
Structural studies of the scrapie prion protein by electron crys-
tallography. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 99(6): 3563-3568.

Weissmann, C., Enari, M., Klohn, P-C., Rossi, D., Flechsig,
E. 2002. Transmission of Prions. J. Infect. Dis. 186(Suppl.
2): S157-65.

