3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Internal Motility in Stiﬀening Actin-Myosin Networks

J¨org Uhde, Manfred Keller, Erich Sackmann
Physik Department, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, D-85747 Garching, Germany

Andrea Parmeggiani1, Erwin Frey1,2
1Hahn-Meitner-Institut, Abteilung Theorie, Glienicker Strasse 100, D-14109 Berlin, Germany
2Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Arnimallee 14, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We present a study on ﬁlamentous actin solutions containing heavy meromyosin subfragments of
myosin II motor molecules. We focus on the viscoelastic phase behavior and internal dynamics of
such networks during ATP depletion. Upon simultaneously using micro-rheology and ﬂuorescence
microscopy as complementary experimental tools, we ﬁnd a sol-gel transition accompanied by a
sudden onset of directed ﬁlament motion. We interpret the sol-gel transition in terms of myosin II
enzymology, and suggest a “zipping” mechanism to explain the ﬁlament motion in the vicinity of
the sol-gel transition.

PACS numbers: 87.16.Ka, 87.15.La, 87.15.Nn, 87.16.Nn

Eucaryotic cells show an amazing versatility in their
mechanical properties. Not only can they sustain stresses
ranging from some tenths to hundreds of Pascals, but
they can equally well perform such complex processes as
cytokinesis and cell locomotion. A vital role for these
and other cellular functions is played by the cytoskele-
ton, the structural framework of the cell composed of a
network of protein ﬁlaments. A major component is ﬁl-
amentous actin (F-Actin), whose physical properties are
by now well characterized [1]. The length distribution,
spatial arrangement and connectivity of these ﬁlaments
is controlled by a great variety of regulatory proteins.

An important family of these regulatory proteins are
cross-linkers, which can be further classiﬁed as passive
or active. The function of passive cross-linkers, e.g. α-
actinin, is mainly determined by their molecular struc-
ture and the on-oﬀ kinetics of their binding sites to actin.
Upon changing the association-dissociation equilibrium
and hence the degree of cross-linking by varying the tem-
perature the network can be driven from a sol into a gel
state [2]. Depending on both the concentration and the
aﬃnity of these cross-linkers for F-actin there is a ten-
dency to either form random networks or bundles [3].
Motor proteins of the myosin family can also act as active
cross-linkers. When both of its functional head groups
are bound to two diﬀerent ﬁlaments they can use the en-
ergy of adenosine-triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis to exert
relative forces and motion between them. However, such
an event is very unlikely under physiological conditions
and ATP saturation, because then myosin II spends only
a short fraction of its chemomechanical cycle attached
to the ﬁlament (duty ratio: r . 0.02 [4]). Active rela-
tive transport yet becomes possible due to the concerted
action of several motors if in vitro myosin II proteins
assemble into multimeric miniﬁlaments [5].

In this letter we study actin networks containing the
heavy meromyosin (HMM) subfragment lacking the light

meromyosin domain responsible for myosin II assembly.
Our focus is on the viscoelastic phase behavior and in-
ternal dynamics of such networks during ATP depletion.
We use an experimental setup combining microrheology
with ﬂuorescent microscopy of labeled ﬁlaments. This
allows us to identify a sol-gel transition accompanied by
a sudden onset of directed ﬁlament motion.

Monomeric actin (G-actin) was prepared from rabbit
skeletal muscle as described by Spudich and Watt [6]. In
order to reduce residual cross-linking and capping pro-
teins it was puriﬁed by an additional step using gel col-
umn chromatography (Sephacryl S-300). Actin was ster-
ile ﬁltered and kept in G-buﬀer [6] on ice. Myosin II
was obtained from rabbit skeletal muscle according to a
procedure by Margossian and Lowey [7]. Then, HMM
was prepared from this myosin II by TLCK-treated chy-
motrypsin digestion following Kron et al. [8] with one
modiﬁcation: After the chymotrypsin treatment the so-
lution was dialyzed against a large volume of low-salt
buﬀer. The concentration was determined by absorption
spectroscopy (absorption coeﬃcient = 0.64 cm2/mg at
280 nm) [9]. HMM was stored either by rapid immersion
of droplets in liquid nitrogen or by mixing with 30 % su-
crose. The frozen droplets or small aliquots of the mixed
solution where stored at −70 ◦C. Function tests for both
myosin and HMM were performed by motility assays ac-
cording to Kron and Spudich [10].

Fluorescently labelled reporter ﬁlaments were pro-
duced by polymerizing G-actin in slightly modiﬁed F-
buﬀer ([6], using 0.2 mM ascorbic acid instead of DTT)
in presence of equimolar tetramethylrhodamineisothio-
cyanate labelled phalloidin at room temperature. The
actin concentration was 5 µM. For storage, the re-
porter ﬁlaments were kept on ice and used within three
days. The surrounding actin network was prepared in
F-buﬀer [6]. The ATP concentration was adjusted to
values between 150 µM and 1 mM. An antioxidant sys-

tem (0.2 mg/mL glucose, 0.05 mg/mL glucose oxidase,
0.01 mg/mL catalase, 0.5 Vol.-% mercaptoethanol) was
added to the buﬀer solution. Then, approximately 1.5–
3.0 µL of the ﬂuorescently labelled reporter ﬁlaments
were carefully diluted in 0.5 mL of this antioxidant buﬀer.
Second to last, HMM was added. With the ﬁnal ad-
dition of G-actin polymerization was started. We used
200 µL of this solution for ﬂuorescence microscopy mea-
surements. The rest was carefully mixed with magnetic
beads (Dynabeads M-450, Dynal, Hamburg, Germany;
4.5 µm radius) and used for magnetic tweezers experi-
ments, as described in [11].

All experiments were performed with freshly prepared
actin kept on ice for at most 10 days. We worked with
9.5 and 19 µM actin solutions, corresponding to an actin
concentration cA of 0.4 and 0.8 mg/mL, equivalent to a
mesh size ξ ∼ 0.6 and ∼ 0.4 µm, respectively, [12]. The
ratio of labelled to unlabelled actin was between 1 : 300
and 1 : 1000. The molar ratios of actin to HMM were
rAH = 8, 12, 25, 50, and 175, corresponding to HMM
concentrations between 360 and 55 nM. After approxi-
mately 15–20 min, 90 % of G-actin is polymerized into F-
actin [13]. Measurements were started at least 5 min after
the polymerization was initiated. 80% of the reported ﬁl-
ament transport events happened 15 min or later after
polymerization start.

Fluorescence measurements were performed in a closed
sample chamber (containing approximately 100 µL) with
an inverse microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200, 100× oil
immersion objective (N.A. 1.3)) and a CCD camera
(Orca C4742-95-12ER, Hamamatsu, Herrsching, Ger-
12 bit images of size 672 × 512 pixels (using
many).
2 × 2 binning) were stored directly on the hard disk of
a personal computer using the on-line image processing
software “Open Box” developed in this laboratory [11].
The frame rate was approximately 17 Hz. A given re-
gion in the sample could be observed for several minutes
before the contrast of the image was decreased by photo
bleaching signiﬁcantly.

We now discuss our results obtained with a magnetic
tweezers micro-rheometer [11, 14]. Magnetic beads of
4.5 µm diameter, embedded in the network during poly-
merization, were subjected to an oscillating magnetic
force of f = 1.5–3 pN. Figure 1 shows the resulting oscil-
latory motion, analyzed by a particle tracking procedure
with an accuracy better than 10 nm and time resolution
less than 8 ms. All our data show a characteristic time
tsg, where the bead amplitude starts to shrink drastically.
This is followed by a transition regime, tsg ≤ t ≤ tg,
during which the bead amplitude falls below the noise
level. We interpret this as a sol-gel transition caused by
the continuous depletion of ATP. For t ≤ tsg, ATP is
present in abundance producing a fast release of HMM
from actin such that it cannot act as a cross-linker. In
this ﬁrst phase we have a network with the mechanical
properties of a semidilute solution of F-actin. When ATP

2

FIG. 1: Amplitude of an oscillating magnetic bead embed-
ded in an actin-HMM network showing an abrupt transition
from a non-cross-linked F-actin solution to a gel state af-
ter 105 min. The initial ATP concentration was 145 µM,
cA = 9.5 µM , rAH = 175, f = 2.55 pN and the oscillation fre-
quency 150 mHz. The solid line shows the time dependence
of the ATPase rate (see text).

starts to lack, the residence time of HMM on actin in-
creases, which in turn induces progressive cross-linking
of the ﬁlaments leading to a stiﬀening of the network. In
addition to their role as passive cross-linkers HMM also
can actively generate forces between ﬁlaments. These
two diﬀerent roles are not easily distinguished when look-
ing at rheology data alone, but become evident from the
dynamics of the embedded reporter ﬁlaments, which we
discuss below.

Upon using known features of myosin II enzymology
we can give an almost quantitative picture of the dynam-
ics of the HMM molecules in the actin network and the
resulting time-dependence of the bead amplitudes dur-
ing the process of ATP consumption. A rough estimate
of the consumption rate is kc ≃ [ATP]0/[M]0tg, where
[ATP]0 is the initial ATP concentration and [M]0 is the
total HMM concentration. This estimate neglects coop-
erative eﬀects of preferential binding of HMM molecules
close to already bound HMMs [15]. From the experimen-
tal data in Fig. 1 one gets kc ≈ 0.4 s−1 for each HMM,
which is much closer to the ATPase rate in the absence of
actin than in a saturated F-actin solution [4]. We explain
this as a consequence of the diﬀusive search of the HMM
for an actin ﬁlament being the rate limiting process. The
characteristic rate of search and binding to an actin ﬁla-
ment can be estimated as ks ∼ kdφ, where kd ≃ 6Dξ−2 is
the rate for diﬀusing a distance comparable to the mesh
size ξ; D is the diﬀusion constant of HMM in water and
φ is the volume fraction of actin in solution. From ex-
perimental data we estimate [19] ks ∼ 0.3 s−1 which is
of the right order of magnitude.

Starting from these considerations we calculated the
ATP consumption rate as a function of time using known
rates from the literature [20] with the exception of ks,
which was computed along the lines explained above.
The results are shown as the solid line in Fig. 1. The sol-
gel transition occurs at a time tsg when ATP depletion

becomes signiﬁcant and the typical ATPase rate starts to
decrease strongly. Note that we have taken into account
the inhibition eﬀect of ADP, which increases in solution
because of the ATP hydrolysis. Indeed, ADP plays an
important role in both the shape of the ATPase rate and
in the estimate of tsg and tg. For example, an increase
of the initial ADP concentration decreases tsg while it
increases tg [16].

Our experimental setup allows us to simultaneously
measure the amplitude of embedded beads and the dy-
namics of ﬂuorescently labelled reporter ﬁlaments. At
the beginning of the experiment, while the network is still
not fully polymerized, these ﬁlaments show a rather uni-
form diﬀusive behavior similar to free ﬁlaments in aque-
ous solutions. Towards the end of the polymerization
process, the movement of the reporter ﬁlaments becomes
more and more restricted by the surrounding network.
In this phase, t ≤ tsg, the actin ﬁlaments show ther-
mal undulations and perform Brownian motion along the
cylindrical cages formed by the surrounding F-actin. In
contrast to an actin network containing myosin II miniﬁl-
aments [5], here long term directed motion of F-actin
is observed only rarely. During the sol-gel transition,
tsg ≤ t ≤ tg, any drift that sometimes was observed in
the sample chamber came to a rather abrupt end indi-
cating the stiﬀening of the network. At the same time
single ﬁlaments that shortly before had hardly shown any
ﬂuctuations, suddenly started long term directed motion
inside the three dimensional network (Fig. 2a–c).

For our study, 132 moving ﬁlaments were evaluated.
The phenomenon of moving ﬁlaments in the actin-HMM
network occurs in a narrow time slot of some minutes
in the proximity of tsg, i.e. when ATP depletion starts.
There are also some rare events of directed ﬁlament mo-
tion outside this time window.
In some regions of the
sample up to 40% of the ﬁlaments in focus move, in oth-
ers only a small fraction is mobile. The described phe-
nomena occur under diﬀerent buﬀer conditions, diﬀerent
actin and HMM concentrations and diﬀerent molar actin-
to-HMM ratios. Also, aging of HMM stock solutions is
aﬀecting the motion. Therefore, only experiments per-
formed on the same day with the same actin preparation
and HMM stock solution were compared. The values ob-
tained for the ﬁlament mean run length and mean veloc-
ity are compatible with two dimensional motility assays
at low ATP concentration [4]. The longitudinal motion
occurred at speeds up to 2.6 µm/s over distances up to
37 µm. Single ﬁlaments were moving continuously for up
to 100 s. The movement consists of an acceleration phase,
a phase of constant speed and a deceleration phase (cf.
Fig. 2c). Due to experimental limitations, not all the ob-
served ﬁlaments could be monitored in all three phases.
In many cases, the ﬁlaments moved a distance of approx-
imately their own visible length and then paused.

What is causing this sudden onset of directed ﬁlament
motion in the vicinity of the sol-gel transition? We inter-

3

FIG. 2: Sequence of ﬂuorescence microscopic images showing
the movement of an actin ﬁlament in the three dimensional
actin-HMM network with cA = 9.5 µM (ξ ∼ 0.6 µm) and
rAH = 12. Note that the leading end of the ﬁlament is moving
out of focus. (a) The time sequence shows a reporter ﬁlament
of length 16.5 µm (see arrow), which within 8 s moves over
a distance of 16.5 µm at an average speed of 2 µm/s. (b)
Superposition of 69 traced contours. Traces corresponding to
the reporter ﬁlament before (t = 0 s) and after (t = 7.8 s) ac-
tive transport are shown explicitly. (c) Time evolution of the
ﬁlament position along its average contour. Note the sudden
onset and halt.

pret it as follows. In a three-dimensional actin network
double-headed myosin can exert relative forces between
ﬁlaments only if its heads are simultaneously attached to
two diﬀerent ﬁlaments while one of its heads is perform-
ing a power stroke. Since under saturating ATP con-
dition myosin II has a very low duty ratio, such events
are extremely rare. Actin ﬁlaments can be transported
only if a certain amount of motors work together like
in the thick ﬁlament of a sarcomere. A similar eﬀect
seems to be at work in recent experiments where myosin
II molecules arrange themselves into miniﬁlaments [5]. In
the present study we use HMM, which does not form such
miniﬁlaments. Hence cooperativity of the motors must
be achieved by a diﬀerent route. Now, ATP is needed to
trigger the dissociation of the motor from the ﬁlament,
and an initial ATP concentration is depleted due to the
ATP-hydrolysis of the motor. This prolongs the time a
myosin head stays bound to a ﬁlament (duty ratio), which
increases the chance for the other head to also bind to
a ﬁlament while the ﬁrst one is still bound. As a conse-
quence one can have two opposing eﬀects. First, an in-
creasing fraction of HMM molecules acts as cross-linkers
in the actin network, and stiﬀens it. This explains the
sol-gel transition observed by the sudden decrease in the
amplitude of the oscillating magnetic bead (see Fig. 1),
and also the stop of a drift in the sample chamber as
mentioned above. Second, the probability that myosin
molecules can exert directed forces onto actin ﬁlaments

4

is increased. One may envisage the following “zipping”
mechanism, illustrated in Fig. 3a–d. After one myosin
dimer happens to bind two anti-parallel ﬁlaments simul-
taneously, thermal ﬂuctuations in the vicinity of the bind-
ing site are reduced. This enhances the probability that
nearby myosin molecules also bind to both ﬁlaments and
leads to a nucleation process which zips the ﬁlaments to-
gether and generates relative ﬁlament motion. During
the transport the overlap region may grow. This would
explain the sudden onset of ﬁlament motion with a mod-
erate acceleration phase. Such an interpretation is also
supported by the broad distribution of run lengths and
run times seen in our traces; zipping of the ﬁlaments can
either occur at one of the ends leading to a maximal run
length identical to the ﬁlament length or along the con-
tour which potentially greatly reduces the run length due
to entanglement eﬀects.

distributions in running length, time and speed. This
may be due to heterogeneities in the network (see Fig.
3e), length distribution of actin ﬁlaments, their relative
orientation [17] as well as the location of the initial seed
in the zipping process. Future experiments with a much
larger number of traced ﬁlaments and samples are cer-
tainly necessary to explore the details of this fascinating
dynamic phenomenon.

We thank H. Kirpal for HMM preparations, M. Rusp
for actin preparations and her help with the electron mi-
croscope, and J. Schilling for providing the image pro-
cessing software “Open Box”. This research has been
ﬁnancially supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (SFB 413) and the Fonds der Chemischen Indus-
trie. A.P. is supported by a Marie-Curie Fellowship under
contract no. HPMF-CT-2002-01529. We acknowledge
helpful discussions with K. Kroy and G. Lattanzi.

[1] L. LeGoﬀ, O. Hallatschek, E. Frey, and F. Amblard,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 258101 (2002).

[2] M. Tempel, G. Isenberg, and E. Sackmann, Phys. Rev. E

54, 1802 (1996).

65, 205 (1993).

[3] D. Wachsstock, W. Schwarz, and T. Pollard, Biophys. J.

[4] J. Howard, Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cy-
toskeleton (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, 2001).

[5] D. Humphrey et al., Nature 416, 413 (2002).
[6] J. A. Spudich and S. Watt, J. Biol. Chem. 246, 4866

(1971).

55 (1982).

[7] S. S. Margossian and S. Lowey, Methods Enzymol. 85,

[8] S. J. Kron et al., Methods Enzymol. 196, 399 (1991).
[9] A. G. Weeds and B. Pope, J. Mol. Biol. 111, 129 (1977).
[10] S. J. Kron and J. A. Spudich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.

[11] M. Keller, J. Schilling, and E. Sackmann, Rev. Sci. Inst.

S. A. 83, 6272 (1986).

72, 3626 (2001).

[12] C. F. Schmidt et al., Macromolecules 22, 3638 (1989).
[13] P. Detmers et al., J. Biol. Chem. 256, 99 (1981).
[14] F. G. Schmidt, F. Ziemann, and E. Sackmann, Eur. Bio-

phys. J. 24, 348 (1996).

[15] A. Orlova and E. Egelman, J. Mol. Biol. 265, 469 (1997).
[16] M. Keller, A. Parmeggiani, E. Sackmann, and E. Frey,

[17] K. Kruse and F. J¨ulicher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1778

(unpublished).

(2000).

[18] M. Keller, Ph.D. thesis (TU M¨unchen, 2003)
[19] For the estimate we take the Einstein-Stokes relation D =
−21 J,
kBT /6πηwr, where ηw = 10
and the hydrodynamic radius of HMM is r ∼ 20 nm. Our
estimate for the volume fraction is φ ∼ 0.1% within an
uncertainty of 30% [18].

−3 kg s/m, kBT = 4·10

[20] We use the enzymatic rates of table 14.2 in Ref. [4]. A de-
tailed analysis and study of the inhibition eﬀect of ADP
will be published in a more extended article [16].

FIG. 3: (a-d) Illustration of the “zipping” mechanism: Af-
ter one myosin dimer happens to bind two anti-parallel ﬁl-
aments simultaneously, thermal ﬂuctuations in the vicinity
of the binding site are greatly reduced. This enhances the
probability that nearby myosin molecules also bind to both
ﬁlaments and leads to a nucleation process which zips the ﬁl-
aments together and generates relative ﬁlament motion. (e)
Electron micrograph of the partially bundled network in the
vicinity of the sol-gel-transition.

We have explored how the observed eﬀects depend on
actin, cA, and HMM concentration, cH, and obtained the
following tendencies. Doubling cA from 9.5 to 19 µM
while keeping cH = 0.38 µM constant reduces the av-
erage transport length by a factor of 3. Within the
“zipping” mechanism this can be attributed to entan-
glement eﬀects. Reducing cH from 1.05 to 0.38 µM with
cA = 9.5 µM ﬁxed lowers the average transport speed
from 0.5 to 0.31 µm/s. This may be understood as a
result of the reduced number of motors in the zipped re-
gion between the ﬁlaments. In general we observe broad

