3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modeling Amyloid β Peptide Insertion into Lipid Bilayers

David L. Mobley,1 Daniel L. Cox,1 Rajiv R.P. Singh,1 Michael W. Maddox,2 and Marjorie L. Longo2
1Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616
2Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of California, Davis, CA 95616
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Inspired by recent suggestions that the Alzheimer’s amyloid β peptide (Aβ), can insert into cell
membranes and form harmful ion channels, we model insertion of the peptide into cell membranes
using a Monte Carlo code which is speciﬁc at the amino acid level. We examine insertion of the
regular Aβ peptide as well as mutants causing familial Alzheimer’s disease. We present our results
and develop the hypothesis that partial insertion into the membrane, leaving the peptide in one
leaﬂet, increases the probability of harmful channel formation. This hypothesis can partly explain
why these mutations are neurotoxic simply due to peptide insertion behavior, and also explains why,
normally, Aβ42 is more toxic to some cultured cells than Aβ40, but the E22Q mutation reverses
this eﬀect. We further apply this model to various artiﬁcial Aβ mutants which have been examined
experimentally, and oﬀer testable experimental predictions contrasting the roles of aggregation and
insertion with regard to toxicity of Aβ mutants. These can be used through further experiments to
support or disprove our hypothesis.

INTRODUCTION

Scientiﬁc and public interest in Alzheimer’s disease has
surged in the last several decades. The reason for this
is simple: with increasing life expectancy, Alzheimer’s
disease has emerged as the most prevalent form of late-
life mental failure in humans [1].

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative dis-
ease involving progressive memory impairment, altered
behavior, decline in language function, disordered cog-
nitive function, eventual decline in motor function, and,
ﬁnally, death [1]. In AD, the brain is typically marked
by lesions [1], neuronal damage, and vascular damage [2].
These lesions are typically associated with extracellular
plaques, called amyloid plaques, and intraneuronal ﬁbril-
lar tangles [1, 2]. The tangles are composed of a protein
called Tau and are called Tau tangles, while the extracel-
lular plaques are largely composed of amyloid β peptide
(Aβ) in 40 and 42 residue forms [1] (denoted Aβ40 for the
form consisting of residues 1-40 of the precursor protein
and Aβ42 for that consisting of residues 1-42). These
insoluble amyloid plaques composed of Aβ are consid-
ered a hallmark of AD. However, they are not speciﬁc
to AD [3] and have been observed in older patients free
from AD symptoms [4]. It has been pointed out that cor-
relations between amyloid plaque density and severity of
dementia are weak, while there are stronger correlations
between soluble Aβ levels and severity of dementia [5].
This is one reason for the suggestion that oligomers of Aβ
may be more important to toxicity than large insoluble
aggregates or plaques. Evidence for this idea has been
provided in vivo [5] and in vitro [6, 7].

One mechanism by which oligomers can damage cells
is formation of pores or ion channels through the cell
membrane. Early work in this area showed that Aβ can
insert into model planar lipid bilayers and allow a calcium
current upon insertion, and further that these channels

can be blocked [8], suggesting that the calcium current is
really due to channel formation, not just bilayer perme-
abilization by the peptide. Theoretical modeling based
on predicted secondary structures for membrane-bound
Aβ has suggested that the Aβ peptide can form channels
with four or six Aβ subunits [2]. More recent work has
been done using atomic force microscopy (AFM) to look
at the structure of channels in model planar lipid bilay-
ers and has found what appear to be channels consisting
of four or six monomers in each leaﬂet (for a total of 8
or 12 per channel) with a central pore. The monomers
oligomerize after insertion into the bilayer. Furthermore,
in the presence of these oligomers, current can ﬂow [9].
Lin et al. [9] also show that Aβ42 induces neuritic degen-
eration and death in cell culture and that this toxicity is
calcium-dependent and blocked by zinc. Imaging work
by another group has also shown that Aβ40 oligomers
with the E22G mutation, which causes a form of familial
AD, can form pore-like structures [10]. These pore-like
structures actually could be intermediates which, when
not membrane bound, build up into the amyloid plaques
observed in the brain of AD patients [10].

Based on these suggestions, and the observation of Lin
et al. [9] that oligomers in the membrane form after in-
sertion of monomers, we model insertion of the Aβ pep-
tide into the cell membrane. We ﬁrst examine the regular
Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides, then the 40 and 42 residue ver-
sions of all of the mutations in the Aβ peptide that are
known to cause familial AD (FAD) and reduce the aver-
age age of onset for the disease compared to people with
sporadic AD [1]. Our reasoning is that if the insertion
behavior of the FAD mutant peptides is diﬀerent, this
could make a diﬀerence on the prevalence of oligomers
in the membrane and thus have an eﬀect on toxicity, if
membrane-associated oligomers are indeed important for
toxicity in vivo.

To do this modeling, we use a Monte Carlo code which

has been developed to study insertion behavior of pep-
tides into lipid bilayers. This code, which is speciﬁc at
the amino acid level, allows modeling of larger peptides
and longer timescales than most molecular dynamics sim-
ulation studies. Energy steps are suﬃciently small that
it has been used successfully to suggest insertion mecha-
nisms, and the model has been shown to work well to de-
scribe insertion conformations for some peptides [11, 12].
We ﬁnd diﬀerences in insertion behavior of the FAD pep-
tides relative to the normal Aβ peptide in that the mu-
tants are less likely to penetrate through the bilayer and
become fully transbilayer. We suggest that this may fa-
cilitate formation of channels, as the experimentally ob-
served channels consist of two hemi-channels, one in each
leaﬂet [9], so less penetration may help form single-leaﬂet
oligomers.

INTRODUCTION TO THE MODEL

The Monte Carlo model used here has been described
in detail earlier [11] but it is useful to give a brief discus-
sion here.

The model uses a mean-ﬁeld approach to modeling the
lipid membrane, in that it replaces individual lipids with
functions describing polarity, hydrophobicity, and hydro-
gen bonding properties. More speciﬁcally, there are func-
tions describing the fractional water content, polarity,
and hydrophobicity of the local environment as a func-
tion of the z-coordinate (where z is perpendicular to the
plane of the bilayer) [11].

Individual peptides are treated as 3.0 ˚A spheres with
rigid peptide-peptide bonds. The energy of a given con-
ﬁguration is evaluated by the sum of an angle energy,
torsional energy, steric energy, hydrogen bonding energy,
hydrophobic energy, and polar energy. The angle en-
ergy is the energy cost of bending peptide bonds away
from their equilibrium angle in-plane, while the torsional
energy is the energy cost of rotating the plane of two
peptides relative to the next two in the chain (i.e. the
angle between the plane of residues 1 and 2 and that of
2 and 3). The steric energy simply ensures none of the
hard sphere peptides overlap. The other three terms take
into account the local environment including the frac-
tional water content, polarity, and hydrophobicity. The
hydrogen bonding energy is calculated from the local wa-
ter content and an estimate of the local helicity, which
contributes hydrogen bonds. The polar energy is calcu-
lated based simply on the polarity of each residue and
the polarity of the local environment at each residue’s
position. The hydrophobic energy is calculated based on
each residue’s normal hydrophobicity, its hydrophobicity
when in a helix (based on solvent exclusion) and the local
helicity [11].

Because of the way the hydrophobic and hydrogen
bonding energies are calculated – simply based on lo-

2

cal helicity – the simulation is biased toward alpha he-
lices, as beta structure involves longer range interactions
and is not taken into account by the model. Therefore,
the model will not accurately describe insertion behav-
ior of any peptide that inserts while in a conformation
rich in beta structure. Fortunately, the monomeric Aβ
peptide is predicted, based on secondary structure, to be
alpha helical between residues 15 and 40 or 42 [2] when
membrane-bound. Experimental NMR work in aqueous
sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles, which to some extent
resemble a water-membrane medium, conﬁrms this for
Aβ40 [13]. Thus the model’s bias away from beta struc-
ture should not play a signiﬁcant role here. Indeed, we
ﬁnd that the region mentioned above inserts into the
membrane in a largely helical structure, as described be-
low.

All of our modeling presented below is done at pH 7.0
with temperature 305 K. Unless otherwise noted we use
100 million MC steps in the simulation and lipids with
a 4.5 ˚A head region and 13.5 ˚A tail region for a total
bilayer thickness of 3.8 nm. We start peptides from a
random initial conﬁguration outside the lipid bilayer.

NORMAL Aβ PEPTIDE INSERTION

Here, we simply run our simulation for Aβ40 and Aβ42
and look at residue coordinates. We show mainly two
basic kinds of results: (i) Distributions of z coordinates
for each residue collected over the course of the simula-
tion (after a 50 million step equilibration period where
this data is not collected), and (ii) coordinates of ev-
ery residue in representative inserted conﬁgurations. The
ﬁrst type of result is shown in Fig. 1(a) for the regular
Aβ40 peptide. The horizontal axis is residue number and
the vertical axis is z axis, so it shows the distribution of
z-coordinates for every residue. Simply by looking at the
residues near the C-terminus, we note that the peptide
has a roughly bimodal distribution – it spends most of
its time in basically one of two conformations: A fully
transbilayer, fairly well-deﬁned conformation; and a con-
formation where the N-terminus is in the bilayer head
region as before, but the C-terminus is not fully transbi-
layer and is fairly ﬂoppy, giving a much broader distribu-
tion than the fully inserted conformation. From a residue
near the end which has this bimodal distribution func-
tion we can calculate the percentage of time the peptide
spends in each conformation and we ﬁnd that it spends
25% of its time fully transmembrane and the rest in the
ﬂoppy C-terminus conformation.

During an initial run of the simulation, it is diﬃcult to
know if a conﬁguration of the peptide on an individual
step is representative of a typical conﬁguration, and sim-
ply averaging over all conﬁgurations would clearly not
give a typical conﬁguration in this case of a bimodal dis-
tribution. However, once we run the simulation, we can

3

FIG. 2: Two representative conformations for Aβ40. Residues
are represented by spheres since in the code we use, they are
1.5 ˚A radius spheres. It is apparent for both of these struc-
tures, though, that a large section of the peptide is fairly
helical. Since the code is Monte Carlo, these are sample struc-
tures which are taken to sample conformations where the den-
sities are highest in Fig. 1. Double lines bracket approximate
locations of the lipid head region. (a) A sample conformation
where the peptide is fully inserted. (b) A sample conforma-
tion where the peptide has a ﬂoppy C-terminus.

FIG. 3:
Insertion behavior showing distributions of z co-
ordinates for every residue in Aβ42 and various familial
Alzheimer’s disease mutants of the peptide, like Fig. 1 ex-
cept for Aβ42. Vertical axis corresponds to the z axis. (a)
Wild-type Aβ42, (b) A21G, (c) E22G, (d) E22Q, (e) E22K,
and (f) D23N.

FIG. 1:
Insertion behavior showing distributions of z co-
ordinates for every residue in Aβ40 and various familial
Alzheimer’s disease mutants of the peptide. Horizontal axis
is simply residue number and is not meaningful for structure.
Vertical axis corresponds to the z axis. Dark regions are where
the residue spends many steps; white regions are where it
spends no steps. Double lines denote the lipid head regions;
the region between double lines is the lipid tail regions and
outside the double lines is water. Residues are numbered from
N-terminus to C-terminus. (a) Wild-type Aβ40, (b) A21G,
(c) E22G, (d) E22Q, (e) E22K, and (f) D23N.

look at the distributions of z-coordinates and locate the
peak of the two main modes for every residue, then use
this as input to tell the simulation how to recognize con-
ﬁgurations that are near these peaks. Thus we can get
the simulation to give us structures of each of the two
conformations described above, as we show in Fig. 2,
again for Aβ40.

Results for the regular Aβ42 distribution function is
shown in Fig. 3(a).
It is interesting to note that now
the peptide only spends about 3% of its time in the fully
inserted conﬁguration. A representative structure for the
ﬂoppy C-terminus conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 4(a),
and a structure for the conformation where residues 22-
28 remain in or near the head region is shown in Fig.
4(b).

It is important to notice that the last two residues of
Aβ42 are isoleucine and alanine, which are both nonpolar
and alanine is hydrophobic. Thus, Aβ42 is found here to
be much less likely to be fully transmembrane than Aβ40
because the last two residues prefer to avoid water. We
suggest that this may be important to allow formation
of channels like those observed by Lin et al. [9], in which
peptides are only in one leaﬂet. In other words, channels

4

Italian E22K mutant peptides interact with cell surfaces
of cerebralvascular smooth muscle cells and cause cell
death in vitro [17]. Thus, it is conceivable that the mech-
anism may be similar to that described by Lin et al. [9]
and the type of cells being damaged may simply be diﬀer-
ent – either cerebralvascular smooth muscle cells [17] or
brain pericytes [18] rather than neurons. For simplicity,
we will call all of these FAD mutations.

It is also important to note that these Aβ mutations
are autosomal dominant [16] and, in addition to lower-
ing the age of onset for AD compared to sporadic cases,
cause AD in all subjects with the mutations who live long
enough. Many mutations are known to lead to increased
Aβ levels in addition, but that cannot be the sole cause,
as at least the Arctic mutation [10] leads to decreased
levels. The cause of disease also cannot be simply due
to increased propensity to form ﬁbrils or aggregates, be-
cause at least the Flemish mutation does not increase
ﬁbril formation [14].

Modeling FAD mutations

We simply run the various FAD mutations through
the peptide insertion code as we described above and ex-
amine their equilibrium conformations to determine how
they diﬀer from those of the normal Aβ peptides. Here
we ﬁnd, generally speaking, that mutants which cause
FAD lead to Aβ40 insertion in which the peptide spends
a much larger percentage of simulation steps in a con-
formation in which most of the peptide is in or near the
head region (not fully inserted), more like the Aβ42 con-
formation of Fig. 4(b). This is clearly the case for all the
mutants except the D23N (Iowa) mutant. Additionally,
all of these except the A21G (Flemish) mutation reduce
the occurrence of transmembrane Aβ40, but for A21G
Aβ42 is never transmembrane in our model (Fig. 3(b)).
This suggests that for A21G the diﬀerence may be due to
the 42 residue version of the peptide. Generally speak-
ing, however, there does not seem to be a consistent link
between FAD mutations and the eﬀect on insertion be-
havior of Aβ42. Thus, as we just discussed, we put most
of our attention on Aβ40. Density plots for the mutants
just discussed are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3, and a sum-
mary of some of our results and what is known about the
various mutations is shown in Table 1.

Thus, we suggest that the mutations could promote
hemi-channel formation by causing the peptide to spend
more time in only one leaﬂet of the bilayer, increasing
the probability of contacting other peptides in the same
leaﬂet and joining to form a hemi-channel. While Lin et
al. [9] observed ion channels composed of Aβ42, we sug-
gest that Aβ40, in these FAD cases, can nucleate forma-
tion of hemi-channels. Although Aβ40 does not normally
remain in only one leaﬂet, causing it to hang up, as the
FAD mutants do, could increase its propensity to form

FIG. 4: Two representative conﬁgurations for Aβ42. Double
lines bracket approximate locations of the lipid head region.
The peptide spends most of its time in conformations similar
to the two shown here, where (a) the peptide is fairly inserted
but the tail region is ﬂoppy, and (b) residues 20-28 are held
up in or near the upper lipid head region.

consist of two hemi-channels, each residing in only half
of the bilayer. We suggest Aβ42 may naturally form
these channels more easily since it is less likely to be
transbilayer.

FAMILIAL ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Aβ
PEPTIDE INSERTION

FAD mutations

There are a number of known FAD mutations,
in-
cluding some involving Aβ (as well as others involved
in other aspects of the disease including Aβ produc-
tion). These are named by the populations they were
ﬁrst found in and include Flemish, an alanine to glycine
substitution at residue 21 (A21G); Arctic (E22G); and
Iowa (D23N) [14]. Murakami also includes Dutch (E22Q)
and Italian (E22K) but there is some dispute about
whether these are properly to be considered AD muta-
tions [15, 16, 17]. To understand this, it is important to
note that AD is often accompanied by cerebral amyloid
angiopathy (CAA), deposition of Aβ in blood vessels of
the brain potentially leading to vessel rupture and stroke,
especially in FAD cases [14]. Wattendorﬀ et al. [15] point
out that classic Alzheimer’s plaques are rarely found in
the Dutch CAA case and dementia and death are due to
cerebral hemorrhage involving damage to blood vessels,
as is also the case in the Italian E22K mutant [17]. But
the fact that AD also involves amyloid angiopathy leaves
open the possibility that the Dutch and Italian forms are
vascular forms of AD [15].

Here, we set aside the issue of whether or not the Dutch
and Italian Aβ mutations are actually AD mutations or
whether they should be regarded as something diﬀerent
and simply model insertion of these peptides into cell
membranes. It is known that even the Dutch E22Q and

5

Onset Aggregation

Aβ levels % transmembrane Single leaﬂet

72.8 Yes (<< than Aβ42) Normal

Peptide form
Normal AD, Aβ40
Aβ42
A21G Aβ40
Aβ42
E22G Aβ40
Aβ42
E22Q Aβ40
Aβ42
E22K Aβ40
Aβ42
D23N Aβ40
Aβ42

Yes (normal)

None (decrease)

52 ?

57 ?

? ?

? ?

69 ?

Increased

Increased

Increased

Increased

Increased

Decreased

Increased

Increased

Increased

27% Rarely (Normal)
4% Mostly (Normal)

27% Slight increase
0.5% Always

5% Med. increase

10% Rarely (decrease)
15% Large increase

5% Rarely (decrease)

0.2% Large increase
0.2% Decreased
15% No change
10% No change

TABLE I: Ages of onset (where known) [16, 19, 20, 21], eﬀect on propensity for ﬁbrillar aggregation of Aβ42 in vitro [14], eﬀect
of mutation on total concentration of circulating Aβ [10, 16], percent of steps peptide inserts fully transmembrane (from our
simulation), and how often it inserts so that it is only in one leaﬂet of the bilayer (from our simulation). For each mutation, one
row represents Aβ40 and the other Aβ42. Onset age and circulating Aβ levels are not speciﬁc to the 40- or 42-residue forms.

channels.

INSERTION OF OTHER MUTANT Aβ PEPTIDES

A variety of other data is available on mutant Aβ pep-
tides. Some reduce reduce aggregation in vitro [22], some
might cause FAD [23], and some have various eﬀects on
cultured cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells [17, 24].
Here, we examine some of the mutations which have been
mentioned in the literature to check whether our results
are consistent and whether we can make further predic-
tions.

First, we address the E22Q,D23N Aβ40 double mu-
tant created by Van Nostrand et al. [24]. This muta-
tion’s eﬀect has been examined on human cerebrovascular
smooth muscle cells (HCSM cells) because the E22Q mu-
tation causes especially pronounced cerebral amyloid an-
giopathy and patients with this mutation typically die of
hemorrhage, as discussed above. HCSM cells are known
to degenerate in CAA in a manner that is associated
with Aβ deposition [17]. Van Nostrand et al. [24] found
that the E22Q,D23N double mutant is even more toxic
to HCSM cells than E22Q or D23N alone. Our idea was
that the mechanism for this toxicity also involves inser-
tion of the peptide and formation of channels, so we mod-
eled this mutant as well. Results for this mutation are
shown in Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 7(a). We ﬁnd that its be-
havior for Aβ40 is between E22Q and D23N in terms
of how much it is only in one leaﬂet, but it does spend
fewer steps transmembrane in its Aβ40 form than both
E22Q and D23N (10% for the double mutant compared
to 15% for the other two). For Aβ42 it spends 6% of
steps transmembrane. So our results are consistent with
the observation that it is more toxic, but we would not
necessarily have predicted it since it falls between E22Q

FIG. 5: Distributions of z-coordinates for a variety of artiﬁ-
cial Aβ40 mutants which have been mentioned in the liter-
ature. (a) E22Q, D23N double mutant; (b) H6R; (c) E22D;
(d) E22A.

and D23N in terms of how many steps it spends in a
single leaﬂet.

Melchor et al. [17] have found that an artiﬁcial E22D
mutant of Aβ40 does not aﬀect HCSM cells, in contrast
to biological E22Q and E22K mutants. Therefore we
model insertion of E22D and ﬁnd (Fig. 5(c)) that Aβ40
E22D inserts just like normal Aβ40. Thus our results are
consistent. However, they also observed that the Aβ40
E22A mutant is toxic to HCSM cells, while our E22A
mutant appears just like wild-type Aβ40, (Fig. 5(d))
suggesting that some other factor inﬂuences toxicity of
this mutant.

6

FIG. 6: Distributions of z-coordinates for artiﬁcial Aβ40 mu-
tants mentioned in the literature which, in their Aβ42 form,
reduce aggregation into ﬁbrils in vitro [22]. (a) A2S; (b) F19S;
(c) I32V; (d) I32S; (e) V36E.

FIG. 8: Distributions of z-coordinates for artiﬁcial Aβ42 mu-
tants mentioned in the literature which reduce aggregation.
(a) A2S; (b) F19S; (c) I32V; (d) I32S; (h) V36E.

(Figure 5(b)). If our hypothesis is correct in that toxicity
is ordinarily due to the propensity of the Aβ peptide to
hang up in a single leaﬂet of the membrane, we would
suggest that this mutation would actually reduce toxic-
ity, since it reduces the propensity of Aβ42 to do this.
This could be taken as an argument against our model,
or an argument against the cause of the AD in these two
patients being due to the H6R mutation in Aβ. It would
be relatively easy to distinguish between these two sce-
narios by testing the toxicity of Aβ H6R in both the 40-
and 42- residue forms in cell culture, as previously done
for normal Aβ42 [9]. A third possibility, of course, is that
the mechanism for toxicity may be diﬀerent in this case.
Some in vitro work has been done to ﬁnd artiﬁcial mu-
tants that can reduce aggregation of Aβ42 [22]. Unfortu-
nately, this has not yet been extended to include Aβ40.
However, we selected some of the point mutations which
are known to reduce aggregation of Aβ42 and modeled
the insertion of these. We tried A2S, F19S, I32V, I32S,
and V36E. Results are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8. We
ﬁnd that the F19S, I32S, and I32V mutations inﬂuence
the insertion of Aβ40 by hanging up the peptide similarly
to FAD mutants in a way which, if our hypothesis is cor-
rect, should promote neurotoxicity. The weakest eﬀect is
in the case of I32S and the strongest in F19S. This, how-
ever, is for Aβ40, which the paper did not address. Thus
we suggest that experimentally, the aggregation of Aβ40
for these forms be examined. If these mutations reduce
the aggregation of Aβ40 as well as Aβ42, yet are more
neurotoxic, as we suggest, it certainly would support the

FIG. 7: Distributions of z-coordinates for a variety of artiﬁcial
Aβ42 mutants from the literature. (a) E22Q, D23N double
mutant; (b) H6R; (c) E22D.

Janssen et al. [23] recently identiﬁed a previously un-
known mutation in the Aβ peptide in two early-onset
AD patients in the same family. This mutation, H6R,
produced ages of onset around 55. We have here tried
this mutation also and we ﬁnd that it produces insertion
behavior diﬀerent from any of the other AD peptides we
have examined. There is essentially no change in the in-
sertion of the 40-residue form, but the 42-residue form
closely resembles the insertion behavior of the normal
40 residue form, in that it spends its time either trans-
membrane or in a mostly helical conﬁguration with the C
terminus fairly ﬂoppy and near the opposite head region

channel formation mechanism for neurotoxicity, rather
than the aggregation mechanism. We also ﬁnd that the
A2S mutation results in no change in the insertion of
Aβ40.

We can make a second prediction which is simply based
on the observed insertion behavior of Aβ42. Looking at
the insertion behavior of the Aβ42 versions of the Wurth
et al. mutants, we ﬁnd that I32S, I32V, and V36E insert
more like natural Aβ42, while A2S and F19S insert dif-
ferently. The reduction in aggregation splits the group
diﬀerently – I32S aggregates most, then A2S, V36E, and
F19S are similar to one another and intermediate, and
I32V aggregates least [22]. So if ﬁbrillar aggregation pri-
marily causes toxicity, experiments looking at toxicity
should see the latter grouping, while if insertion behavior
is of much more importance, toxicity experiments should
see the former grouping.

We also can oﬀer one more experimental suggestion.
We ﬁnd the V36E mutant has a drastic eﬀect on insertion
of Aβ40 because E36 strongly prefers to be in a region
with more water relative to V36. This eﬀectively forces
the peptide to insert transmembrane. If our hypothesis
is correct this would reduce toxicity of Aβ40 with this
mutation in cell culture.

CONCLUSIONS

We have here presented work applying a model of pep-
tide insertion to Aβ, a peptide implicated in Alzheimer’s
disease. When studying eﬀects of various FAD muta-
tions, several authors have pointed out that it is diﬃcult
to establish a consistent picture which will explain the
reason the mutations cause FAD, or even toxicity at the
cellular level. Some lead to increased levels of Aβ, but
one decreases levels [10, 16]. Many increase aggregation
in vitro, but the A21G (Flemish) mutation does not [14].
Motivated by the work of Lin et al. [9] and others, we
show that these mutations all aﬀect insertion of the Aβ
into cell membranes, and we suggest that a consistent
picture can be developed based on this which can help
explain toxicity in every case examined. Examining the
insertion behavior can also help to explain toxicity of sev-
eral artiﬁcial mutations examined in vitro, as described
above. We also point out that the fact that the last two
residues of Aβ42 are hydrophobic has an important eﬀect
on the insertion of Aβ42 relative to Aβ40, which may ex-
plain why Aβ42 is typically more neurotoxic in vitro. We
suggest, however, that for the FAD mutations, it may be
their eﬀect on Aβ40 which is more important.

This issue has been addressed somewhat by Verbeek
et al. [18], who point out that wild-type Aβ40 has little
toxicity to cultured smooth muscle cells, while Aβ42 is
quite toxic. The eﬀect is reversed with the Dutch (E22Q)
mutation, where Aβ40 is quite toxic and Aβ42 has lit-
tle eﬀect. This has been attributed to charge substitu-

7

tions [17]. If our hypothesis – that having peptides insert
and remain more in the upper leaﬂet and less transmem-
brane can promote harmful ion channel formation – is
correct, our picture can completely explain this eﬀect, as
shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3. Wild-type Aβ40 spends few
steps exclusively in the upper leaﬂet, so it may be dif-
ﬁcult for it to form ion channels, while wild-type Aβ42
spends a signiﬁcant number of steps, so it can form chan-
nels much more easily. In contrast, Aβ40 E22Q spends
a large percentage of steps in the upper leaﬂet only, so
it could easily form channels, while Aβ42 E22Q spends
many fewer steps in the upper leaﬂet so it could have
more trouble forming channels.

We especially want to emphasize that our results show
the most signiﬁcant and consistent eﬀect of FAD muta-
tions is found on insertion of Aβ40. Much work has been
done looking at toxicity of Aβ42 [14, 16, 17, 22] with
comparatively little on Aβ40. Our work and the experi-
mental work by Verbeek et al. [18] highlights that Aβ40
probably deserves more attention. Simply because wild-
type Aβ40 aggregates less than Aβ42 is not a reason to
exclude it from toxicity studies.

This approach of modeling peptide insertion provides a
simple way of making concrete predictions to distinguish
the proposed mechanism of channel formation from oth-
ers. While there are certainly other factors inﬂuencing
channel formation aside from the insertion behavior, it is
certainly true that before an ion channel can penetrate
the cell membrane, the peptides involved must insert into
that membrane in a conformation such that it can form
a channel. As discussed above, we would suggest that
the V36E mutation would drastically reduce toxicity of
Aβ40 if our hypothesis is correct. There are several mu-
tations known to reduce aggregation of Aβ42 that we
predict would promote the insertion behavior that would
facilitate channel formation. If these also reduce aggrega-
tion of Aβ40, it would be simple to distinguish between
the channel formation toxicity mechanism and the aggre-
gation toxicity mechanism by looking at the toxicity of
these mutants. Even more evidence could be provided
by replicating the work of Lin et al. [9] but using various
FAD mutants and looking at how these eﬀect the abun-
dance of channels. Additional information could also be
gained from theoretical work along the lines of that by
Durell et al. [2] to see what aﬀect these FAD mutants
would have on channel structures.

In conclusion, our work shows that FAD mutations
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the insertion of the Aβ peptide
in lipid bilayers in this theoretical model. We also ﬁnd
that we can oﬀer a hypothesis based on promoting chan-
nel formation by causing peptides to insert less fully that
can help explain toxicity of Aβ FAD mutants, as well as
several artiﬁcial mutants studied in vitro. While this hy-
pothesis is unproven, it is based on the observation that
these peptides do insert into cell membranes and form
ion channels [9], and it can provide a more consistent

explanation of toxicity than other hypotheses involving
increased aggregation or Aβ levels, as seen in Table 1. It
should be simple for experimentalists to disprove this hy-
pothesis, if it is false, or to oﬀer additional evidence for
it, if they follow the experimental suggestions we oﬀer
above.

We are grateful to R. Lal and G. Millhauser for useful
discussions. We acknowlege support of the National Sci-
ence Foundation NEAT-IGERT program (IGERT Grant
DGE-9972741) (DLM), the U.S. Army (Congression-
ally Directed Medical Research Fund, Grant NP020132)
(DLC), the MRSEC Program of the NSF under award
number DMR-0213618 (MLL), and the NIRT Program
of the NSF under award number 0210807. MLL acknowl-
edges the generous gift of Joe and Essie Smith for endow-
ing part of this work.

[1] D. J. Selkoe, Physiol. Rev. 82, 741 (2001).
[2] S. R. Durell, H. R. Guy, N. Arispe, E. Rojas, and H. B.

Pollard, Biophys. J. 67, 2137 (1994).

[3] T. C. Dickson and J. C. Vickers, Neuroscience 105, 99

(2001).

[4] J. T. Jarrett, E. P. Berger, and P. T. Lansbury, Jr., Bio-

chemistry 32, 4693 (1993).

[5] D. M. Walsh, I. Klyubin, J. V. Fadeeva, W. K. Cullen,
R. Anwyl, M. S. Wolfe, M. J. Rowan, and D. J. Selkoe,
Nature 416, 535 (2002).

[6] M. P. Lambert, A. K. Barlow, B. A. Chromy, C. Ed-
wards, R. Freed, M. Liosatos, T. E. Morgan, I. Rozovsky,
B. Trommer, K. L. Viola, et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA 95, 6448 (1998).

[7] D. M. Hartley, D. M. Walsh, C. P. Ye, T. Diehl,
S. Vasquez, P. M. Vassilev, D. B. Teplow, and D. J.
Selkoe, J. Neurosci. 19, 8876 (1999).

[8] N. Arispe, E. Rojas, and H. B. Pollard, Proc. Nat. Acad.

8

Sci. USA 90, 567 (1993).

[9] H. Lin, R. Bhatia, and R. Lal, FASEB J. 15, 2433 (2001).
[10] H. A. Lashuel, D. Hartley, B. M. Petre, T. Walz, and

P. T. Lansbury, Jr., Nature 418, 291 (2002).

[11] M. W. Maddox and M. L. Longo, Biophys. J. 82, 244

[12] M. W. Maddox and M. L. Longo, Biophys. J. 83, 3088

(2002).

(2002).

[13] M. Coles, W. Bicknell, A. A. Watson, D. P. Fairlie, and

D. J. Craik, Biochemistry 37, 11064 (1998).

[14] K. Murakami, K. Irie, A. Morimoto, H. Ohigashi,
M. Shindo, M. Nago, T. Shimizu, and T. Shirasawa,
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 294, 5 (2002).

[15] A. R. Wattendorﬀ, B. Frangione, W. Luyendijk, and
G. T. A. M. Bots, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 69,
699 (1995).

[16] C. Nilsberth, A. Westlind-Danielsson, C. B. Eckmman,
M. M. Condron, K. Axelman, C. Forsell, C. Stenh,
J. Luthman, D. B. Teplow, S. G. Younkin, et al., Na-
ture Neurosci. 4, 887 (2001).

[17] J. P. Melchor, L. McVoy, and W. E. Van Nostrand, J.

Neurochem. 74, 2209 (2000).

[18] M. M. Verbeek, R. M. W. de Waal, J. J. Schipper, and
W. E. Van Nostrand, J. Neurochem. 68, 1135 (1997).
[19] Y.-J. Li, W. K. Scott, D. J. Hedges, F. Zhang, et al., Am.

J. Hum. Genet. 70, 985 (2002).

[20] G. Roks, F. Van Harskamp, I. De Koning, C. De Jonghe,
S. Kumar-Singh, A. Tibben, et al., Brain 123, 2130
(2000).

[21] T. J. Grabowski, H. S. Cho, J. P. G. Vonsattel, G. W. Re-
beck, and S. M. Greenberg, Ann. Neurol. 49, 697 (2001).
[22] C. Wurth, N. K. Guimard, and M. H. Hecht, J. Mol. Biol.

319, 1279 (2002).

[23] J. Janssen, J. Beck, T. Campbell, A. Dickinson, N. Fox,
R. Harvey, H. Houlden, M. Rossor, and J. Collinge, Neu-
rology 60, 235 (2003).

[24] W. E. Van Nostrand, J. P. Melchor, H. S. Cho, S. M.
Greenberg, and G. W. Rebeck, J. Biol. Chem. 276, 32860
(2001).

