3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamics of Immobilized Flagella

D. Fry1∗, N. Hutchings2†, and A. Ludu1‡Northwestern State University
1Department of Chemistry and Physics, 2Department of Biology,
Natchitoches, LA 71497, USA
E-mail: ludua@nsula.edu

September 28, 2013

Abstract

Although the auger-like ’swimming’ motility of the African trypanosome was
described upon its discovery over one hundred years ago, the precise biomechan-
ical and biophysical properties of trypanosome ﬂagellar motion has not been elu-
cidated. In this study, we describe ﬁve diﬀerent modes of ﬂagellar beat/wave pat-
terns in African trypanosomes by microscopically examining the ﬂagellar move-
ments of chemically tethered cells. The dynamic nature of the diﬀerent beat/wave
patterns suggests that ﬂagellar motion in Trypanosoma brucei is a complex mix-
ture of oscillating waves, rigid bends, helical twists and non-linear waves. Inter-
estingly, we have observed soliton-like depression waves along the ﬂagellar mem-
brane, suggesting a nonlinear mechanism for the dynamics of this system. The
physical model is inspired by the 2-dimensional elastic dynamics of a beam, and
by taking into account uniform distribution of molecular motors torque and non-
linear terms in the curvature.

1 Introduction

Understanding the biomechanics and biophysics of cellular motility is of vital
importance to advance our knowledge of how the cell’s use their unique cytoar-
chitecture to sense, respond, and adapt to their surroundings. However, without
a strong foundational understanding of how the cytoarchitecture facilitates the
various states of cell motility, we can only superﬁcially appreciate how motile
behavior depends on intercellular and extracellular stimuli. A large volume of
work currently describes cellular architecture in both motile and non-motile cells.

∗E-mail fryd@nsula.edu
†E-mail hutchingsn@nsula.edu
‡E-mail ludua@nsula.edu

1

However, a high-resolution understanding of dynamic motility requires us to ex-
tend the various cell-biological microscopy techniques that are used to exam-
ine nonmotile and ’ﬁxed’ cells to facilitate investigating real-time behavior of
highly motile cells. Through technological advancements in cellular immobiliza-
tion (tethering), careful biological observations, and physical and mathematical
modeling, we can apply our understanding of cellular architecture to elucidate
the biomechanical properties of motile cells. Research in cell motility has im-
plications on our understanding biological complexity, cell behavior, drug design
and delivery, infection and disease modeling, and may provide critical insight into
engineering potential novel propulsion solutions for future. In addition to beneﬁts
for the biological sciences, the disciplines of mathematics, physics, organic chem-
istry, and analytical chemistry also share the rewards from studies in dynamic cell
motility. For example, understanding how cells use their unique shape and surface
chemistry to interact with other cells and surfaces is a question best solved by
investigative analytical chemistry. Cell motility is an ideal model system in which
to observe and mathematically model complex waves and to physically elucidate
how a cell’s environment aﬀects its biomechanical properties. By conducting in-
terdisciplinary research on individual living cells, we are seeking to complete the
following experimental objectives: 1) successfully tether the insect stage of the
monoﬂagellated protozoan parasite, Trypanosoma brucei, to chemically modiﬁed
glass to enable high-resolution visualization of trypanosome ﬂagellar motion; 2)
apply molecular and cell biological tool to describe the diﬀerent types of ﬂag-
ellar motion that can be observed in procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei; and
3) use recent advancements in linear and non-linear waves to mathematically
model the nature of the various ﬂagellar beat patterns observed by quantifying
the movements of the ﬂagella and simulating ﬂagellar beating in-silica. There
are currently several established and several emerging eukaryotic model systems
available in which to examine the biophysical/biochemical properties of ﬂagellar
motion. There are additional thousands of diﬀerent species of ﬂagellated cells
that have been classiﬁed, each with speciﬁc nuances regarding the structure and
function of the eukaryotic ﬂagellum. At this early stage in the establishment of
core principles regarding cell motility, it is imperative to consider the work from
each model system and try to bridge the principles and observations between
the various systems. Conversely, it is important to utilize the technologies and
unique biology of each model system to conduct creative and intuitive studies
within that particular model system regarding ﬂagellated motility. The biﬂag-
ellated green algae, Chlamydomonas rheinhardti, is an established system for
using classical genetics to studies the genes that encode ﬂagellar constituents and
their respective protein’s function within the ﬂagellum. There are over 50 dif-
ferent motility mutant cell lines currently described by their structural and/or
functional role in motility [1]. The Chlamydomonas ﬂagella are comprised of a
membrane-covered axoneme that is attached to the cell only at the basal body.
The waves generated by the axonemal sliding can be either asymmetric or sym-
metric waves [2]. Recently, it was suggested that the central pair of microtubules
rotate within the nine outer-doublet microbutules, activating their movements
sequentially as the C1 microtubule of central pair is appropriately oriented [3].

2

Classically, ﬂagellar motility is associated with cell ’swimming’ in a liquid me-
dia. However, recent experiments with Paranema indicate that ﬂagella are also
important for motile cells to move along solid supports [4]. Interestingly, sim-
ilarly to the Trypanosomatids, the Paranema ﬂagellum is attached to cell body
along most of its length and contains a second ﬁlament within the ﬂagellum called
the paraﬂagellar rod (PFR). Mutational analysis has shown the PFR is required
for productive cell motility in African trypanosomes, American Trypanosomes
(T. cruzi) and in Leishmania [5]. With a variety of protozoan motility models
choose from, we chose to utilize trypanosomes because of the speciﬁc advantages
the system oﬀers relative to the other model systems. For example, although try-
panosomes can not be used in classical genetic studies, the molecular biology tools
(expression vectors, dsRNAi, etc) that are available for African trypanosomes far
exceed those in any of the other protozoan models. Additionally, the African try-
panosome has an attached ﬂagellum that allows us to observe wave propagations
along the ﬂagellar membrane. The foundational cell biology of trypanosomes has
been exquisitely characterized and oﬀers other unique features (such the absence
of any ﬁlamentous actin) that aﬀect cell motility. The African trypanosome ﬂag-
ellum consists of a cononical 9+2 axoneme, the paraﬂagellar rod (PFR), and the
ﬂagellar adhesion zone (FAZ), all of which are required for successful propulsion
[6]. The resulting movement of swimming trypanosome is an auger-like motility
with the cell body following the free-end of the ﬂagellum. Recently, we observed
that the movements of the ﬂagellum are not simple wave oscillations, but rather
appeared to be a complex variety of bends, twists, and waves. In fact, we also no-
ticed that trypanosomes exhibit a slithering-like motility in high viscosity liquid
(unpublished observation), and a push rod like motility when covalently attached
to a solid substrate (glass). This is not surprising if light of the fact that try-
panosomes are capable of moving through virtually all non-mineralized biological
tissues (including epithelium, muscle, and the blood-brain barrier).

2 Chemistry immobilization of Trypanosome

The immobilization of whole, living cells is gaining importance because of two
independent objectives. One objective stems from the need to know the chemical
and biological composition of our environment.
Indeed, with the recent scare
from bio-weapons and the SARS virus, the detection of biological entities is gain-
ing not only a scientiﬁc audience but a lay audience as well. Biosensors are the
subset of sensors, which take advantage of the exquisite speciﬁcity of biological
entities such as antibodies and enzymes. For example, antibodies are often im-
mobilized onto sensing surfaces, because of their exquisite speciﬁcity-an antibody
can distinguish a single protein from a population of 10 million proteins [7]. The
immobilization schemes used to immobilize antibodies are varied: Sepaniak and
co-workers were the ﬁrst to covalently immobilize antibodies onto a surface [8].
while antibodies have been immobilized within a sol-gel matrix by Bright and
co-workers [9] and immobilized within polymer networks [10]. However, there are
a very few research groups currently which are taking a diﬀerent approach-that

3

is to immobilize an entire cell onto a surface and to use the whole cell as a sensor.
Francis Ligler, at the Navel Research Lab has immobilized whole cells (but dead)
for use with optical ﬁber biosensors in order to determine TNT concentration [11].
The second objective stems from basic biological research. For instance, Suzaki
and co-workers immobilized living Peranema trichophorum using poly-L-lysine
in order to study the gliding movement [12]. Furthermore, Engman and Tyler
immobilized living Trypanosoma cruzi using a hydrophobic attraction in order
to study how environmental change eﬀects cell response [12]. A common thread
exists between both biosensor development and fundamental biological research:
the immobilization of living cells.

Here we report the two simple immobilization procedures to the immobiliza-
tion of Trypanosome onto glass surfaces. All chemicals were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO.) and used without puriﬁcation. The ﬁrst chem-
istry is non-lethal and is a silane-amine-aldehyde-cell linkage. Speciﬁcally, glass
coverslips were incubated in chromic acid for 2 hours. The slides were removed
and dried. Then approximately 250 microliters of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
were placed on the coverslips and allowed to sit for approximately 5 minutes. The
3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane was removed via aspiration. Next, approximately
250 microliters of gluteraldehyde (EM grade) was allowed to stand on the glass
coverslips for 5 minutes. Finally 200 microliters of cells at a density of 6.0105
cells/ml were allowed to incubate on the modiﬁed surface. The net result is
shown schematically in Figs. I and II. The second immobilization chemistry is
lethal and is a silane-cell linkage. Glass coverslips were incubated in chromic acid
for 2 hours. The slides were removed and dried. Then approximately 250 micro-
liters of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane were placed on the coverslips and allowed
to sit for approximately 5 minutes. Finally 200 microliters of cells at a density of
6105cells/ml were allowed to incubate on the modiﬁed surface.

3 Physical model

[14].

Flagella are enlongated elastic systems which can generate motion and self-propulsion
in the surrounding ﬂuid. The axoneme is characterized by nine parallel pairs of
microtubules arranged in a circular fashion together with a large number of dynein
molecular motors
In this work we introduce a two-dimensional physical
model for ﬂagellum dynamics. Our approach is inspired by the theory of elastic
deformation of beams with continuous distribution of internal forces and torque
produced by the molecular motors [15]. We consider two parallel straight lines of
length L separated by a distance a. When we introduce the dynamics, these two
lines are deformed into two parallel arbitrary curves (same separation distance
a = a(s)) ~r(s) and ~r(s)− a(s)~n(s), parametrized by the natural arc length param-
eter s. Our deﬁnition for ”parallel” curves is given below. In this deformation we
consider that at the initial point (s = 0)the shift between curves is always zero.
From diﬀerential geometry we know that the local shift δ(s) that occurs between

4

the parallel curves is given by the diﬀerential equation

dδ
ds

=

a(s)
R(s)

,

δ(s) =

L

a(s)
R(s)

ds.

Z

0

1

R(s) = | d2~r

ds2 | is the local curvature, and ~n(s) = R(s) d2~r
ds2 is the normal to
where
the ~r(s) curve. Consequently, in any point of the pair of parallel curves we have
a total shift given by

If we consider elastic ends (free end at s = L) for the pair of strings (the
curves described above) there is no restriction for the shape. If one imposes rigid
ends, one has to use only zero total curvature shapes, unless the shift produced
by curvature is compensated by a variable distance between the curves. In other
words, a constant diameter ﬂagellum with rigid ends cannot have any shape. In
the following we consider an uniform distribution of molecular motors, between
the two lines (initial moment). When the motors ar activated they start to crawl
along the lines and to extend their lengths. This dragging force is balanced by
the elastic contribution of the strings and consequently the system starts to have
a non-zero curvature. In Fig. 4 we present such a scenario for the deformation
of the lines into an arch of circle. Each arrow describes actually several motors,
so we have variable magnitude for the local displacement. In the end, because of
the constant curvature on the circle, the spacing is again equal.

From general theory of elastic beams [16] we have the distribution of inﬁnitez-

imal torque along the beam given by

~M = ǫlij

Z∂V

(xiσjk − xjσik)dSk~el,

where ~ei are the versors of the coordinate system, dS is the area element, V is
the volume of the beam, and σij is the stress tensor. For thin beams the local
deformation ~u(~r) in given by

where σ is the average value of the diagonal elements of the stress tensor for a
homogenous material. By introducing Eq. (3) in Eq. (2) we obtain a simpler
equation for the local torque in a 2-dimensional motion, namely

where E is Young modulus of elasticity, Jy is the moment of inertia of the beam,
and we have chosen deformation in the x − z-plane.

ux = −

(z2 + σ(x2 − y2)),

uy = −σ

uz = σ

xz
R

,

1
2R

xy
R

,

My =

x2dS =

E
R ZV

EJy
R

,

5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The dynamical equation for the local transversal deformation u(s) of a beam
under the action of force ﬁeld ~F , in the limit of small deformations is described
by

∂2
∂s2 (EJy

∂2u
∂s2 ) −

∂
∂s

∂u
∂s

(P

) + m

∂2u
∂t2 = F,

where we have also included additional axial pressure P . Here m is the mass per
unit of length. In the approximation of constant parameters along the beam, that
is E and Jy we can write the equation for general deformations. In this case a
nonlinear term is introduced by the curvature

∂4u
∂s4 −

P
EJy (cid:18)

∂2u
∂s2 −

3
2 (cid:18)

∂u
∂s (cid:19)

2 ∂2u

∂s2 (cid:19)

+

m
EJy

∂2u
∂t2 =

F
EJy

.

Eq. (6) is nonlinear partial diﬀerential equation which allows localized solutions
in the form of solitary waves. For example if we choose a soliton-like shape for
initial data [17], the numerical solution shows a conservation of the localization
for long time scale, enough to allow the perturbation to travel along the ﬂagellum
with a speed of the order of surface linear waves.

In the following we have investigated the displacement and rotation of a system
cell+ﬂagellum during a relative rigid rotation of the ﬂagellum. By taking into
account the conservation of center of mass and angular momentum, we can make
an estimation of the change of direction of the cell. We approximated the cell
with an ellipsoid of semiaxes A, B, B and density ρC, and the ﬂagellum by a rigid
rode of length L, diameter a, and density ρF . For a relative rotation angle α
between the long ellipsoid axis and ﬂagellum we have a translation of the system
~τ and an absolute rotation of the cell ψ. The masses and moments of inertia of
the cell and ﬂagellum are approximated with

mC =

4πAB2
3

ρC, mF = πa2LρF ,

JC =

(6a2 + B2mC
5

,

JF =

. (7)

L2mF
3

The global translation of the system is given by

τx =

Acos βα

β−1 − 1
1 + ǫ

2 ǫLcos α
β−1

A

(cid:18)

sin βα

β−1 − 1

+ 1

2 ǫL

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1 − sin α

β−1 (cid:19)

,

τy =

1 + ǫ

ψ =

β(α + (β − 1) π
2)
β − 1

− (β − 1)

π
2

.

where β = JF /JC , ǫ = mF /mC. The absolute rotation angle of the symmetry
axis of the cell is given by

(5)

(6)

(8)

(9)

From these equations one can make average estimation for the speed and the
angle of turning of the cell during a ”rigid rotation” type of motion. In these
calculations the viscosity of the ﬂuid around the system was neglected. We use

6

the following values for the parameters: A = 20µm, B = 5µm, L = 3µm,
a = 0.7µm, ρC = 478 kDa/µ3=0.793 g/cm3. By correlating these values with
the kinematic data obtained from experiment (Fig. III), namely angular speed
of rotation of about ω = 8.7 − 9.2 rad/s, we obtain a value for the density of
the ﬂagellum of ρF = 1, 020 kDa/µ3 =2.14 g/cm3. A picture of a rotation of
α = ±30o is presented in Fig. 3.

In Fig.4 we present speciﬁc values of translation and rotation of the cell+ﬂagellum

system for relative ﬂagellar rotation between −45o and 45o. The correlation be-
tween rotation and translation is in very good agreement with experimental data.

4 Results

By examining the movements of individual procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei
brucei (strain Ytat1.1), we were able to characterize ﬁve distinct modes of ﬂag-
ellar motility. Three of the ﬁve modes are bending-like movements and two of
the modes are wave-like undulations (Fig.
III). In this ﬁgure the left column
graphically describes the general mode of the ﬂagellum. The right columns are
sequential images of a time-lapse series (0.125 sec/frame). DIC time-lapse images
were captured on an Olympus BX60 microscope equipped with ’The Spot’ CCD.
Individual images were processed in Adobe Photoshop 5.5 (Palo Alto, CA).

The bending-like movements are described as ’elastic vibration’, ’rigid trans-
lation’, and ’rotation’. Rigid oscillation of the ﬂagellum is characterized by a
primarily two-dimensional whip-like movement of the distal end of the ﬂagellum
relative to the rest of the tethered cell (Fig.
IIIA). During elastic vibrations,
the ﬂagellum is ﬂexible, as indicated by changes in shape along the length of the
ﬂagellum, but the motile force appears to be generated by a pivot or oscillating
origin near the mid-point of the cell. The dashed line in ’A’ show the original
position of the ﬂagellum, and the arrow head in indicates the tip of the ﬂagellum
in each frame. Likewise, during ’rigid translation’ movements of the ﬂagellum,
the movement of the ﬂagellum is restricted to bending at the mid-point of the
cell, but in this case the ﬂagellum does not change shape along its length during
(Fig. IIIB). The perpendicular in ’B’ provides a point of reference for the bending
ﬂagellum, and the arrow indicates the original position of the ﬂagellar tip in the
ﬁrst frame. The rotational mode of ﬂagellar motility is characterized by a ’rigid
translation’-like motion with an angular displacement that causes the path of the
ﬂagellum to be conical. The dashed circle in ’C’ indicates the rotational path of
the ﬂagellar tip, and the arrow indicates the direction of rotation. The modes
of motility described in A, B, and C do not appear to contain wavelike undula-
tions. This type of motility resembles that of the whip-like rotation of a bacterial
ﬂagellum (Fig. IIIC). The rotation mode is most often observed when there is a
bend in the ﬂagellum between the distal tip of the ﬂagellum and the mid-point of
the cell. All three bending modes can persist for several seconds without break-
ing the symmetry. The 4th type of motion, namelly ’wave propagation’ type
ﬂagellar motility is characterized by symmetric or asymmetric undulations of the
ﬂagellum. The arrows in each frame indicate the phase of the wave. We have

7

identiﬁed a 4th possible type of motion, the ’depression wave’ movements which
are characterized by a single membrane depression moving along the ﬂagellum
without a symmetric oscillating wave following it. Arrows indicate the depression
in the membrane, and the brackets indicate the movement of depression (notice
the lack of another depression behind the arrow). The cell in ’E’ (the 5th type of
motion) is had nearly completed cell division. The depression waves are typically
observed only brieﬂy between transitional wave patterns or changes in modes of
motility. The last two modes of motility that we have characterized in this study
are the ’wave propagation’ and ’depression wave’
[18]. The ’wave propagation’
type ﬂagellar motility is characterized by symmetric or asymmetric undulations of
the ﬂagellar membrane. This mode of motility is the typical sinus wave-like mo-
tion that is classical associated with the eukaryotic ﬂagellum. Interestingly, the
amplitude, period, and frequency of the waves can be highly variable, even within
sequential frames of the same time series. Wave propagation can persist for rela-
tively long periods, although variations in frequency are often noticeable. During
the dynamic periods of wave propagation, we noticed the ’depression wave’ mode,
which is characterized by a single membrane depression moving along the ﬂagel-
lum without an oscillating wave following it. This type of wave is observed only
brieﬂy (but consistently) between transitional wave patterns or diﬀerent modes
of motility. When monitoring an individual cell for extended periods (minutes
- hours), we can observe many diﬀerent modes motility that occur at diﬀerent
frequencies and persist for diﬀerent amounts of time. We are currently quanti-
fying the relative ratio of each mode of motility in individual cells and within
populations of cells.

From the point of view of the dynamical model (physical model) we note that
for a given shape of the ﬂagellum we can provide the average distribution of active
molecular motors inside it. For exampl, and experimental snap shot of the motion
can be interpolated with analytic functions in order to obtain the mathematical
form of the curve. For this curve we can calculate the local curvature which is
responsible for the action of molecular motors. Both the local torque produced
by the motors, and the relative shift are proportional with the curvature. In Fig.2
we present such examples.

5 Experiment-model comparison and predic-
tions

We measured in 13 movies (in about 2000 frames) regular patterns in about 400
frames, that is 20% of the total movie volume. The relative error was about
10%, but this can be improved by a better statistics. The amplitude of motions
ranges from A=0.5-1.2m for waves and oscillations to 7-10m for rotation, helix and
translation motions. In all movies we detected in a reproducible way wavelength
in the range of 4-5m for traveling waves, to 7m for stationary waves, both for waves
and breaking-symmetry modes. The frequency of periodic motions ranges from
1.33 - 1.4 Hz for waves and rotations, to 4 HZ for rigid moves. The speed has

8

a large range. For wave-like, elastic oscillations, and rigid translation motions
we have in general 2-8 m/s. For helix-like rotations the speed is larger, like
v=10-11 m/s, and for free almost moving cells we measured about 60 m/s. We
also mention the possibility of having nonlinear behavior through breaking of
symmetry between diﬀerent modes (see also [15]). We noticed an interesting
breaking of a 2 mode in a 4 mode, that is a frequency doubling eﬀect which
occurs only for nonlinear dynamical systems.

The most important phenomenon predicted by our theory, and put into evi-
dence experimentally is the occurance of a depression wave along the cell-attached
part of the ﬂagellum (see Fig. III). The dynamics of the system can be modeled
by Eq. (6) which is a nonlinear partial diﬀerential equation in time-space for the
deformation of the ﬂagellum with a ﬁxed end. If denote ∂u
∂x = η(x, t), and we look
for traveling solutions of the form η(x, t) = f (x − V t), where V is the supposed
velocity of the wave, Eq.(6) reads:

fξξξ −

(fξξ −

f 2fξ) +

P
EJ

3
2

m
EJ

=

F
EJ

(10)

where ξ = x − V t. This equation is nothing but the most general, and at the
same time the simplest, version of a 1-dimensional nonlinear model, namely a
Korteweg-de Vries equation (terms 1,3, and 4) with dissipation (term 2) and
external sources (RHS). If we neglect the non-homogenous term provided by
the internal forces of molecular motors (relaxed motors) we have a dissipative
KdV [17, 18]. The critical dissipation term can be tuned to have either positive
or negative value by tuning the elongation force P acting at the cell-attached
end of the ﬂagellum. Consequently we can have either solitons, or anti-solitons
(i.e. the observed depression waves) along the ﬂagellum, function of the pres-
sure/depression boundary condition produced by the interaction with the cell.
Of course, there is still much to be checked, especially since in that investigated
part, the ﬂagellum is fully attached to the membrane, but an intuitive picture
about such localized traveling waves (which can also bring some hint concerning
the coherence and synchronization of molecular motor action) can be proved.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we describe how chemical immobilization facilitates investigating
ﬂagellar motion, and we present a physical model for these types of motion We
found at least 5 distinct modes of ﬂagellar motility in procyclic form African try-
panosome and we note that Trypanosoma brucei ﬂagellar beating is a complex
combination of diﬀerent modes of beating/bending.The physical model includes a
nonlinear dynamical equation which can justify the occurence of stable, localized
traveling depression waves, among other linear waves. This work is just the begin-
ing of a series of papers in which we will describe in detail the nonlinear dynamics
and approaches to a full three-dimensional one. In the end we want to address
several open questions raised by this work. Are the diﬀerent modes of ﬂagellar
beating are diﬀerentially regulated by temporal, spatial, and/or chemical signals.

9

Does the axoneme beat at a constant frequency?Are diﬀerent trypanosome ﬂagel-
lar mutants defective in diﬀerent modes of motility? Do chemically immobilized
cells behave diﬀerent than electrostatically.?Do motility-altering chemicals aﬀect
diﬀerent modes of motility? In addition we would like to develope in the future
the following issues: Flagellar mutants, the role of the PFR in motility, descrip-
tion of tension and slack within the ﬂagellar membrane, and limitations of cell
’position’ and tethering, angle of view. Forthcoming papers will try to give partial
answer to these questions.

Acknowledgments

The contribution work of one of us (AL) was supported by the National Science
Foundation under NSF Grant 0140274. We greatly appreciate the work of our
undergraduate research assistants A. Jones, L. Archuleta, J. Rains, J. Cain, A.
Dunham, H. Moﬀett, and C. Radcliﬀ.

References

[1] Dutcher SK. ,Trends Genet. 1995 Oct;11(10):398-404. Review.

[2] Wakabayashi K, Yagi T, Kamiya R., Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 1997;38(1):22-8.

[3] Wargo MJ, Smith EF., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 7;100(1):137-42.

Epub 2002 Dec 23.

[4] Saito A, Suetomo Y, Arikawa M, Omura G, Khan SM, Kakuta S, Suzaki E,
Kataoka K, Suzaki T. . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 2003 Aug;55(4):244-53.

[5] Maga JA, LeBowitz JH., Trends Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;9(10):409-13. Review;
Bastin P, Pullen TJ, Sherwin T, Gull K., J Cell Sci. 1999 Nov;112 ( Pt
21):3769-77; Bastin P, MacRae TH, Francis SB, Matthews KR, Gull K. ,
Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8191-200.

[6] Bastin, P., Z. Bagherzadeh, et al. (1996). , Mol Biochem Parasitol 77(2):
235-9; Gull, K. (1999)., Annu Rev Microbiol 53: 629-55; Hutchings, N. R.,
J. E. Donelson, et al. (2002). , J Cell Biol 156(5): 867-77; Kohl, L. and K.
Gull (1998)., Mol Biochem Parasitol 93(1): 1-9; Kohl, L., T. Sherwin, et al.
(1999)., J Eukaryot Microbiol 46(2): 105-9.

[7] Benjamine, E. and S. Leskowitz, Immunology: A hort Course. 2nd edition.

1991, New York: Wiley-Liss. Pg 459.

[8] Tromberg, B.J., et al. Analytical Chemistry, 1987 59 (8): p 1226-1230; Vo-

Dinh, T., et al., Applied Spectrscoy, 1987 41(51):p. 735-738.

[9] Ingersoll, C.M. and F.V. Bright, Chemtech, 1997 27(1): p. 26-31; MacCraith,

B.J., Sensors and actuators B, 1993. 11: p.29-34.

[10] Disley, D.M., et al., Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 1998 13(3-4): p. 383-396.

10

[11] L.C. Shriver-Lake, K.A. Breslin, J.P. Golden, F. S. Ligler. (2001), Fiber
optic biosensor for the detection of TNT pp.52-58 SPIE Proceedings: Vol.
2367:52-58.

[12] Saito, Akira et al., Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 55:244-253(2003).

[13] Tyler, Kevin and Engman, David, Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 46:269-

278(2000).

(1997)

[14] F. J¨ulicher, and J. Prost, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2618 (1995) and 78, 4510

[15] S. Camalet, F. Julicher, and J. Prost, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1590 (1999); L.
Bourdieu, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 176 (1995); K. Sekimoto, N. Mori, K,
Tawada, and Y. Y. Toyoshima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 172 (1995)

[16] L. Landau and E. Lifchitz, Theorie de Elasticite (MIR, Moscow, 1967); E.
B. Magrab, Vibrations of Elastic Structural Members (Sijthoﬀ and Noordhoﬀ,
Germantown, MD 1979); E. Skudrzyk Simple and Complex Vibratory Systems
(The Pennsylvania State Univ. Press, University Park, 1968)

[17] D. J. Korteweg and G. de Vries, Phil. Mag. 39, 422L (1895); M. Remoissenet,

Waves Called Solitons (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999)

[18] A. Ludu, and J. P. Draayer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2125 (1998)

11

Figure Captions

Fig. I and II
Schematic result of chemical immobilization of cells.

Fig. III
Characterizing ﬁve diﬀerent modes of ﬂagellar motility in procyclic African
trypanosomes. The left column graphically describes the general mode of the
ﬂagellum. The right columns are sequential images of a time-lapse series (0.125
sec/frame). A. ’Elastic vibration’ of the ﬂagellum is characterized by a whip-like
movement of the distal end of the ﬂagellum relative to the rest of the tethered
cell. The dashed line in ’A’ show the original position of the ﬂagellum, and the
arrow head in indicates the tip of the ﬂagellum in each frame. B. ’Rigid Trans-
lation’ of the ﬂagellum is characterized by a stiﬀ ﬂagellum that is moving due to
ﬂagellar bending near the mid-point of the cell body. The perpendicular in ’B’
provides a point of reference for the bending ﬂagellum, and the arrow indicates
the original position of the ﬂagellar tip in the ﬁrst frame. C. ’Rotation’ of the
ﬂagellum is characterized by a ’rigid translation’-like motion with an angular dis-
placement that causes the path of the ﬂagellum to be conical. The dashed circle
in ’C’ indicates the rotational path of the ﬂagellar tip, and the arrow indicates
the direction of rotation. The modes of motility described in A, B, and C do
not appear to contain wavelike undulations. D. ’Wave propagation’ type ﬂagellar
motility is characterized by symmetric or asymmetric undulations of the ﬂagellum.
The arrows in each frame indicate the phase of the wave. E. ’Depression wave’
movements are characterized by a single membrane depression moving along the
ﬂagellum without a symmetric oscillating wave following it. Arrows indicate the
depression in the membrane, and the brackets indicate the movement of depres-
sion (notice the lack of another depression behind the arrow). The cell in ’E’ is
had nearly completed cell division. The depression waves are typically observed
only brieﬂy between transitional wave patterns or changes in modes of motility.
DIC time-lapse images were captured on an Olympus BX60 microscope equipped
with ’The Spot’ CCD. Individual images were processed in Adobe Photoshop 5.5
(Palo Alto, CA).

Fig. 1
The deformation and relative shift of two parallel ﬁlaments from straight line
into circular pattern. The arrows represent the action of molecular motors. The
local relative shifts are equal in the end because of the constant curvature, while
in between the shifts have variable magnitudes.

Fig. 2

12

We present the distribution of molecular motor torque along the ﬁlaments for
three examples of ﬁlament patterns: Damped sinus oscialltion, localized deforma-
tion with zero global curvature, and localized deformation with non-zero global
curvature.

Fig. 3
Displacement and rotation of the system cell+ﬂagellum for two symmetric
relative rotations of the ﬂagellum of 60o each. Conservation of momentum and
angular momentum results in possible change of direction of the swimming.

Fig. 4
Plot of displacement of center of mass and rotation of the system cell+ﬂagellum
versus relative rotation of the ﬂagellum with respect to the cell axis of symmetry.

13

This figure "Fig.1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0309026v1

This figure "Fig.2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0309026v1

This figure "Fig.3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0309026v1

=.008, P=.011, J=.025

Flagellar shape

-50

Motor torque

0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

1.2 1.4

=.008, P=.011, J=.025

Flagellar shape

Motor torque

0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

1.2 1.4

=.008, P=.011, J=.025

Motor torque

x

x

100

50

0

-100

100

50

0

-50

-100

2

1

0

100

50

0

-1

-50

-2

-100

3
Flagellar shape
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

x
-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.40.6

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

-1

-2

0

1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
1
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.40.6
1
2

1.2 1.4

0

