3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Protein folding in high-dimensional spaces:
hypergutters and the role of non-native interactions

T.C.B. McLeish
Department of Physics and Astronomy and Astbury Centre for Molecular Biology
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK

September 8, 2013

Abstract

We explore the consequences of very high dimensionality in the dynamical land-

scape of protein folding. Consideration of both typical range of stabilising interac-

tions, and folding rates themselves, leads to a model of the energy hypersurface that

is characterised by the structure of diﬀusive “hypergutters” as well as the familiar

“funnels”. Several general predictions result: (1) intermediate subspaces of conﬁg-
urations will always be visited; (2) speciﬁc but non-native interactions are impor-

tant in stabilising these low-dimensional diﬀusive searches on the folding pathway;

(3) sequential barriers will commonly be found, even in “two-state”proteins; (4)

very early times will show charactreristic departures from single-exponential kinet-

ics; (5) contributions of non-native interactions to Φ-values are calculable, and may

be signiﬁcant. The example of a three-helix bundle is treated in more detail as an

illustration. The model also shows that high-dimensional structures provide con-

ceptual relations between the “folding funnel”, “diﬀusion-collision”, “nucleation-

condensation” and “topomer search” models of protein folding.

It suggests that

kinetic strategies for fast folding may be encoded rather generally in non-native,

rather than native interactions. The predictions are related to very recent ﬁndings

in experiment and simulation.

1 Introduction

The current conceptual map of protein folding kinetics is dominated by the coexistence

of several apparently distinct approaches. They may be categorised loosely into “energy

landscape” [1][2], “diﬀusion-collision” [3][4], “nucleation-condensation”[5] and “topomer

search” [6] models. Each of these has its own way of visualising how the collapse of a

1

random coil to a native globule can ever be accomplished in observable time scales, a

problem pointed out long ago [7]. Each has advantages and drawbacks, but it is not

clear whether each applies to a restricted subset of real cases, or whether all might have

something to say about the folding of any one protein.

The “folding-funnel” picture of the energy landscape has the advantage of visualising

both guided folding and the emergence of on-pathway and oﬀ-pathway intermediate states

[8]. Yet it is hard to escape from the deceptive simplicity of low-dimensional projections

of folding funnels that appear necessarily in all graphical portrayals of it.

In practice of

course, the dimensionality of the folding space is enormous. Even small (

100 residue)

proteins have a conﬁgurational space dimensionality of several hundred (think of the

∼

bond angles along the polypeptide main chain alone).

In such high-dimensional spaces,

qualitatively new features may arise, such as energetically-ﬂat domains that nonetheless

are extremely diﬃcult to escape from and so behave as kinetic traps. A second feature

is the potential for high cooperativity of structure in several simultaneous dimensions.

This corresponds to the existence of narrow gullies in the hypersurface that are hard to

ﬁnd. In more biochemical language these structures might be exempliﬁed by cooperative

secondary structure formation alongside native or near-native distant contacts in α-helix

bundle proteins [9], or simultaneous folding and anion binding [10].

The “diﬀusion-collision” approach, on the other hand, is supported by strong experi-

mental evidence that folding rates are controlled by the rate of diﬀusion of pieces of the

open coil in their search for favourable contacts, rather than a driven collapse along some

continuous energy surface [11][12][13]. Pre-formed units of secondary structure diﬀuse

hydrodynamically and merge. Larger proteins may do this in an increasingly hierar-

chical way. The importance of diﬀusive searches is unsurprising, since under biological

conditions, all candidates for energetic interactions, including electrostatics, are locally

screened to a few angstroms: much smaller than the dimensions over which sections of

protein must move to ﬁnd their native conﬁgurations. Put another way, the vast major-

ity of the space covered by the energy landscape must actually be ﬂat (on a scale of kBT )
rather than funneled. Simple versions of these models have indeed been able to account

rather well for folding rates as a function of secondary structure formation [9][14]. How-

ever, it is not clear how applicable this approach is to cases in which secondary structure

forms within a collapsed globule or cooperatively with it.

An attempt to articulate a range of scenarios in which partial ordering of secondary

and tertiary structures mutually enhance a favourable folding pathway has been presented

under the label of “nucleation-condensation”[5]. Originally conceived as a kinetic theory

in which a nucleus of native structure corresponds to the transistion-state for folding,

the picture now also encompasses the hierarchical folding routes of the diﬀusion-collision

2

model.

A challenge faced by all these models is that the most successful search for inher-

ent features of tertiary structure that correlate with folding rates has found that the

topological measure of “contact order” is far more closely related than, for example,

molecular weight itself in the case of “two-state” folders [15]. Rationalisation of this

observation has given rise to a third view of the critical pathway of protein folding, the

“topomer search” model [16]. The rate determining step is not the rapid formation

of local secondary structure, nor the diﬀusion of subdomains per se, but the organisa-

tion of large pieces of secondary structure into the same topological conﬁguration as the

native state, which is thereafter is able to form rapidly. This suggests a partition of

the folding space into “rapid” dimensions representing the local formation of secondary

structure, and “slow” dimensions representing the topomer search. However, a quantita-

tive relation between the topomer search space and contact order is still unclear, since no

native contacts are actually required to form at a purely topologically-deﬁned transition

state at all (although many are to be expected from the patial ordering at the secondary

level at least). Furthermore, information on the eﬀect on folding rate of replacing spe-

ciﬁc residues via mutation or “Φ-value” analysis [17] needs to be taken together with

correlations of contact order.

These four approaches have one important aspect in common: they all eﬀectively

reduce the dimensionality of the search-space by assumption, rather than in a derived

way. This is both natural and necessary, since data from kinetic experiments do just

the same, but there is a danger in overlooking aspects of folding that rely essentially

on the presence of many degrees of freedom. Our aim in this work is to take a fresh

look at the issue, embracing many simpliﬁcations but on this occasion not that of a low

dimension of conﬁgurational search space. We ﬁnd in the next section that quite general

conclusions may be drawn about the topology of this search space if the dimensionality is

kept high. Some general predictions follow which we work out in more detail in the case

of three-helix proteins. The approach will additionally allow us to see how the existing

apparently-distinct paradigms for protein folding are related, and suggest places to look

for the information content of the “kinetic code” within proteins that encodes the folding

search path, as distinct from the native structure itself.

2 High-Dimensional Diﬀusive Subspaces and Searches

We start with a very simple and abstract model for protein folding, but one that ex-

plicitely retains a very large number of degrees of freedom. The total search space is

modelled as the interior of a hypersphere of dimension d and radius R, and the native

3

(target) state as a small sphere of radius RN at the origin of the space. The entire con-
ﬁguration of the protein corresponds to a single-point particle executing a random walk

in the hypersphere. The ratio of R to RN describes the typical localisation on folding
If the degree of freedom is spatial the ap-
in the values of a degree of motional freedom.

propriate scales are the size of a molten globule and the radius of gyration of a denatured

protein.

If it is angular, then they are the angle of libration of a bond ﬂuctuating in

one local minimum as a fraction of 2π.

In either case the appopriate order of magnitude

estimate is which is

10. Bicout and Szabo [18] introduced this very general

framework for discussing ﬂat and funneled landscapes, but then restricted themselves to

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

three-dimensional spaces, a simpliﬁcation that we shall try to avoid. To explore the

R
RN

≃

timescales of the search for the target space (on which the diﬀuser will “stick”) we write

down the time-dependent diﬀusion equation for a particle, restricting ourselves to the

case of a ﬂat potential at ﬁrst. The most convenient function to use is the probability

density P (r, t), that the system is a radial distance r from the centre of the hypersphere

at time t, which obeys:

1
rd−1
supplemented by the absorbing boundary condition P (RN , t) = 0, signifying the stability
of the native state. The timescale for the search steps is set by the eﬀective diﬀusion

rd−1 ∂P (r, t)

∂P (r, t)
∂t

∂
∂r

= D

(1)

∂r

constant D. The mean passage time from the unfolded ensemble to the native state can

be calculated by introducing a uniform current J of diﬀusers (representing a population

of folding proteins) on the boundary of the hypersphere at r = R, as the other boundary

condition, and ﬁnding the consequent steady state solution to (1). The mean time to

pass from R to RN over the ensemble of systems is then just the total number of diﬀusers
at steady state normalised by the current, leading to

1

τ f =

d (d

2)

(d−2) R2
D

R
RN (cid:19)

(2)

(cid:18)
This expression indicates how very much qualitatively longer the mean search time is in

−

high dimensions (d > 2), than the low-dimensional estimation of the characteristic time
R2/D, which replaces (2) in d = 1, and 2. This fundamental time is scaled up by

τ

the denatured system size (measured in units of the target size RN ) to the power of the
number of eﬀective dimensions greater than 2. An analysis of the eigenmode structure of

≃

the problem indicates why this is so: for large d nearly all the diﬀusers exist in the lowest

eigenfunction of the diﬀusion operator, that is in turn localised to the exponentially large

surface of the hyperspherical search space. Single-exponential kinetics are also a general

property of such high-d search spaces.

4

The central result of (2) depends on two key physical assumptions: (1) the dimen-

sionality of the space is of realistic values for protein folding - of the order of a hundred

or more, and (2) the stability of the folded state is governed by local interactions in the

native state only. With these assumptions alone, the model of high dimensional diﬀusion

we have described is inevitable, and the timescales unreasonably long. The exponentially

large search times arise transparently from the factor

in equation (2). This

is of course a restatement of Levinthal’s paradox [7], but a helpful one, in that the two

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

necessary assumptions for the paradox to arise are clearly seen. The ﬁrst just gives the

(d−2)

R
RN

large dimensionality of hypersphere, the second the ﬂat diﬀusive landscape.

Put this way, there are two ways of circumventing the problem. One may drop

the assumption of local forces and allow the protein to “fall” towards the single native

state down a “funnel” created by forces whose range permeate the entire volume. As

we have remarked above, however, candidates for such long range forces do not present

themselves. Without recourse to a continuous funnel-shaped landscape, there is only

one other possibility: all diﬀusive searches take place in low dimensional subspaces of the

full conﬁgurational space.

∼

To see how this works, we suppose at ﬁrst that the d

O(102) dimensions of the full

folding space are now arranged sequentially so that diﬀusive searches in one dimension

at a time allow the protein to ﬁnd “gateways” into the next subspace (we will see how

this may arise naturally in a physical way below). For simplicity we assume that the

kinetics of each diﬀusive search is single exponential with characteristic time τ . Since

the diﬀusion is always maintained in some low-dimensional subspace of the full folding
d2R2/D rather than the exponentially
R2/D for each subspace, so that τ f old ≃
N )d. This clearly reduces the folding time enormously, signifying that only

space, τ
larger (R2/R2

∼

a tiny fraction of possible states is visited in the search [8].

How has such a remarkable reduction in folding time been achieved without the use

of a “funnel” energy landscape? Of course energetic interactions have been implied, but

these have not been of the spatially-extended “funnel” type.

Instead they have served

just to keep the diﬀusive search within the smaller (d

1) or (d

2) dimensional space,

once the ﬁrst sub-dimensional search is over, then within a (d

4) dimensional

−

−
3) or (d

−

−

space after the subsequent successful “adsorption” into the still-smaller subspace, and

so on.

So, when the high-dimensionality of the search space is retained, the energy

landscape looks less like a funnel, and more like a series of high-dimensional gutters

(ﬁgure 1). The diﬀusing particle (representing of course the random search of the protein

through its available conformations) does not have to search simultaneously through both

the dimensions of the ﬁgure.

Instead, it exploits the lower energy state of the entire
1)th dimensional subspace to reach it via a one-dimensional diﬀusion in the

(d

n

−

−

5

(d

n)th dimension, which it performs ﬁrst. By partitioning the conﬁgurational space

in this way, and by providing an attractive “gutter”, relying on local forces alone, to

−

connect one diﬀusive subspace to the next, all the advantageous consequences of a funnel

landscape may be acquired without the requirement of long-range potentials. Of course,

if the high-dimensional structure is projected into a 1 or 2 dimensional diagram then the

many discrete steps of potential energy that arise from the sequence of “hypergutters”

appear artiﬁcially close, and serve to create a funnel-like projected energy landscape.

The disadvantage of the projection is that the subtle origin of the directed search is

obscured.

In detail the folding energy landscape will look more like a series of low-

dimensional terraces (inset to ﬁgure 1) nested within the full high-dimensional search

space.

How big do the attractive potentials creating the gutters need to be, and what physical

interactions might be enlisted to provide them? Their scale is familiar: these potential

steps are just the energies required to counterbalance the entropy-loss associated with

reduction of the conﬁguration space by one dimension, or degree of freedom. The

associated translational space reduces from the order of R to the order of RN on restriction
to the gutter subspace. Completely reversible folding along the route connecting the

gutters is produced by rendering the free energy change on entering the gutter zero. This

is in turn the case if the binding energies to the gutters are of the order of the entropic

free energy gain on making such a restriction to a degree of freedom:

∆Ugutter ≃

kBT ln

R
RN (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(3)

To quantify ∆Ugutter therefore needs just an estimate of the order of magnitude of the
ratio
, the dimensionless ratio of the sizes of space enjoyed by a degree of freedom

R
RN

in and out of a restricting gutter. As discussed above, a realistic order or magnitude

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

R
RN

10, giving a value for ∆Ugutter of the order of a few (2-4) kBT
estimate is
(or of order 4-8 kJmol−1) for realistic proteins. The energy scale of a few kBT is highly
suggestive: we note that the relatively weak, non-native like interactions between residues

≃

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

are candidates for these gutter-stabilising interactions, and that it is not necessary to

invoke the strength of native contacts during the diﬀusive search. This is good news,

since there is no guarantee that signiﬁcant native interactions will form during at least the

early phases of search, if at all, and experimental evidence of strong “co-operativity” is to

the contrary [19]. Of course we do not assume that the energy-entropy balance is exact

at each step - indeed it is the mismatches in this picture that give rise to roughness in the

landscape, but matching within a few kBT is necessary in most dimensional reductions
to avoind unrealistically long folding times.

Furthermore, the evolutionary tailoring of non-native interactions provides additional

6

“design-space” within which a pathway to the folded state may be coded, but without

compromising the stability of the ﬁnal, native state. For proteins containing N residues,
there are of order N 2 non-native interactions that may be encountered during a diﬀusive

search, but only of order N interactions that deﬁne the native state. A second conse-

quence of this high-dimensional viewpoint is therefore the general expectation of tuned

but non-native, interactions between sections of partially structured chain that stabilise

intermediate search spaces (which may or may not be identiﬁed as intermediate states,

depending on their occupancy lifetime). We need to articulate carefully what is meant

in this context by “non-native”, for this term is sometimes used to refer to indiscriminate

interactions.

In that sense, the role of non-native interactions in determining the type

and rate of folding pathways is not a new idea [20]. But such previous studies have not

introduced any speciﬁcity, or evolutionary reﬁnement, into the non-native interactions,

and ﬁnd, signiﬁcantly, that increasing the strength of such indiscriminate interactions

actually slows folding. Our suggestion is that a discriminating design of key non-native

interactions may signiﬁcantly speed the search for the native state.

It is also likely that

a signiﬁcant proportion of such tailored non-native interactions that we envisge guiding

the search will be increasingly near-native as the search proceeds. This will be the

more likely as secondary structure forms, as we shall see by the example of a three-helix

buundle below.

Gutter-like landscapes have appeared in the literature, and are sometimes apparent

even in the 2-dimensional representations of projected folding surfaces. Reference [4],

for example, shows a fast folding route of hen lysozyme in which the early formation of

β-sheet structure permits the ﬁnal approach to the native state to proceed in a subspace

of reduced dimension.

In this case the gutter-like structure survives a projection onto

just two dimensions of folding space.

In this case the mutual diﬀusion of the helical and

beta-sheet portions of the protein is the dynamical process responsible for the gutter-like

feature on the reduced folding surface. This example serves also to indicate an important

qualiﬁcation - some dimensions clearly do possess funnel-like landscapes even without a

projection onto low dimensional spaces. Those involved with the formation of a local

α-helix or β

turn structures, for example, create subspaces that have real funnel-like

features, directed towards the point in the subspace representing the formation of the

−

complete local secondary structure. However, higher-dimensional hypergutters must

already have been visited at higher levels in the regions of locally α and β secondary

structure. We now take a much simpler fold as an example.

7

3 An example: three-helix proteins

A clean example of a “hypergutter” structure is furnished by the well-studied triple-helix

proteins such as the B-domain of staphylococcal protein A (BdpA) [9] (and see ﬁgure 2).

In this case, the division of the folding landscape is clearly suggested by the formation of

the helices (fast “funneled” or “zipper” dimensions [21]), and by the diﬀusive search of

the helical domains for their native juxtaposition. Note that we do not require the helix

formation to be complete before the diﬀusive search begins - indeed the formation of

native or non-speciﬁc contacts and secondary structure stability will in general be highly

cooperative [17]. All that is required is that the zipper dimensions are explored at much

faster timescales than the diﬀusive dimensions. A very simple model has been successful

in describing the kinetics of this protein [9], using the physical abstraction normal to

“diﬀusion-collision” models of the real protein as spherical domains executing a spatial

search.

Such models have recently been extended to a family of three-helix bundle

proteins [22]. However, in the light of our expectation that fast-folding proteins ﬁnd

their native state via a sequence of stabilised subspaces, the diﬀusive degrees of freedom

of a three-helix bundle might be more accurately represented by angular coordinates

deﬁned at the two turns connecting the three helical sections.

In fact the diﬀusive

space of internal angles thus deﬁned is exactly three dimensional: between helix 1 and

2 only one angle needs be speciﬁed, while between helices 2 and 3 we need two more.

This construction is illustrated as in ﬁgure 2. The three angular diﬀusive degrees of

freedom are labelled Xi with i = 1, 2, 3. Since the diﬀusive coordinates are angles, they
In practice the
exhibit periodicity, and the search space is itself a periodic 3-d lattice.

continuously varying angular co-ordinate may model a more discrete set of more or less

favourable packings [23], but the coarse-grained structure of the search space will be the

same. In the ﬁgure we illustrate periodicity in the dimension X2 only. The region of
conﬁguration space in which the ﬁrst two helices are both in contact with the third is

shaded, and the native state is represented by the periodic lattice of small spheres. If the

shaded “helical contact” region is enhanced by a weak attraction (it becomes a “gutter”

for diﬀusion in the X2 coordinate), then the search for the native state will typically
proceed by diﬀusion in the one-dimensional manifold of X2 (without contact between
helices), followed by diﬀusion in the two-dimensional manifold of X1 and X3 (now with
helices 1 and 3 in contact). As calculated in the last section, the non-native binding

potential of the third helix to the gutter sub manifold needs to be of the order of 3kBT .
Providing that the gutter is as attractive as this, then the predicted mean search time

(including prefactors and a weak logarithmic term) for the native state is

τ 1/2 =

R2
D

16
π2 +

1
2

ln

R
RN −

1

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(4)

8

rather than the much longer time for the full 3-d search without the gutter subspace of

τ 3 =

R2
D

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

R
RN (cid:19) (cid:18)

4
3π2

(cid:19)

(5)

Examples of experimental evidence for staged diﬀusive searches in simple proteins has

also been observed in the case of cytochrome C, lysozyme [25], and in the B1 domain of

protein G [26].

The 3-helix example illustrates our general conclusion that searches within diﬀusional

subspaces in protein folding may be accelerated by local, but not necessarily native,

interactions between sections of partially structured chain.

In the context of the three-

helix protein the necessary non-speciﬁc interactions are those that keep the third helix

in contact with the other two. This permits the ﬁnal diﬀusive search for the native

state to take place in a 2-dimensional space, rather than the full 3-dimensional search

conﬁguration space of the diﬀusive degrees of freedom. Remarkably, just this conclusion

was reached very recently by experiments on the helical immunity protein Im7 [27], in

which an on-pathway intermediate state was shown by careful mutation studies to be

stabilised by non-native interactions between two of the helices. An additional example

of tuned non-native interactions guiding a folding pathway occurs in the rather larger

Phage 22 Tailspike protein [28], where a non-native disulphide bond controls the folding

search. We remark that in both these cases, the stabilised hypergutter provides an

arena in which “diﬀusion-collision” calculations can operate within a molten globule, so

constituting a signiﬁcant generalisation of that model to non-spatial degrees of freedom

[20].

4 Predictions of the Hypergutter model

We have identiﬁed two general predictions of this high-dimensional view of folding: (1)

the sequential diﬀusive exploration of low-dimensional subspaces favoured by fast folding

and (2) the stabilisation of these subspaces by discriminate but non-native (or near-

native) interactions, without recourse to long-range guiding forces. But it has other

things to say concerning common experimental measures of even the deceptively simple

“two-state” folders. We derive here three further consequences: (3) early-time structure

in kinetics, (4) temperature and denaturant dependence and the free-energy structure of

the folding pathway, (5) non-native contributions to Φ-values.

4.1 Relaxation functions in folding kinetics

We ﬁrst take a very simple case:

if the non-native gutter-stabilising interactions are

perfectly balanced with the entropy changes at each stage of the dimension reduction,

9

then the free-energy proﬁle is itself ﬂat, and the d diﬀusive dimensions form an eﬀec-

tive one dimensional path along which the folding takes place. This is not, of course,

to suggest that the path is unique, since: (i) a large fraction of each sub-dimension

may be explored, (ii) the path is at each stage reversible and (iii) the non-diﬀusive

“zipper” dimensions describing the local folding of secondary structure are perpetually

exploring their own conﬁgurational space rapidly and cooperatively with the slow dimen-

sions. Nonetheless, casting the high-dimensional problem into this form shows that a

na¨ıve “reaction co-ordinate” picture can actually emerge from the concatenation of the

sequentially-stabilised hypergutters.

An eﬀective 1-dimensional coordinate, X arises from such concatenation of the gutter

dimensions of a very high dimensional space, whose initial condition (for a quenching

experiment) will favour the high entropy of the early dimensions: every initial state

is completely disordered, and the resulting one-dimensional diﬀusion equation will be

supplemented by the approximate initial condition p (X, 0) = 2δ (x).

If the native state

is representes by a sink for diﬀusers at X = 1, it is straightforward to calculate the

fraction of unfolded proteins after a quench as:

4 (

1)n
−
π (2n + 1)

∞

n=0
X

−
(cid:0)

exp

(2n + 1)2 t

(cid:1)

(6)

which we plot as a solid line in ﬁgure 3. For most of its trajectory, this function mimics

a single exponential, but with an eﬀective delay from the moment of quench. This

arises from the time it takes for the higher subspaces to be ﬁlled - at ﬁrst the native

conﬁguration is “screened” by virtue of being buried in a cloud of states of low entropy.

The apparent delay would be noticed only in experiments able to capture the very fastest

kinetics after a quench.

4.2 Temperature dependence and the folding pathway

It is very common to represent diagrams of the folding and unfolding rates kf of proteins
plotted against the concentration of denaturant, the so-called “chevron plot”. A more

challenging experiment is represented by the Eyring plot (ln kf with 1/T ). These plots
do not typically show the simple linear form characteristic of chemical reactions with

a transition state free energy that is itself independent of temperature.

In the case of

protein folding reactions they are generally negatively curved, and may contain discon-

tinuities of gradient [29]. A common interpretation is to claim that the local gradient

of the Eyring plot gives the activation enthalpy at that temperature, and therefore that

curvature implies a change in the enthalpy of the transition state. Possible causes sug-

gested have included melting of the diﬀerently-sized hydration shells in the unfolded and

transition states.

10

Such a curvature in Eyring plots is, however, a natural consequence of the hyper-

gutter model. Low-dimensional diﬀusive subspaces of progressively lower entropy are

stabilised by increasingly negative non-speciﬁc binding energies. On average the energies

(enthalpies) of the subspaces towards the native state must have large negative values,

since the folded native state has such a low entropy compared to the fully denatured
state. The enthalpies ∆Hn of the nth diﬀusive subspace must attempt to counterbalance
their increasingly large (negative) entropies T ∆Sn.

Without any further information on the implicit optimisation of these sets of energies

and entropies, but with only one overall constraint that the total free energy to fold

∆GD→N be a ﬁxed value (at some temperature, zero at the folding temperature Tf ),
we can deﬁne, as in the last section, a free energy pathway as one-dimensional random

walk through the diﬀusive subspaces (see ﬁgure 4). The transition state is the diﬀusive

subspace with the highest free energy. From the ﬁgure, it is clear that this corresponds

to the greatest positive excursion of the random free energy trajectory.

It is also clear

that, at the folding temperature Tf (ﬁgure 4(b)) this tends to occur midway through the
walk, at the point least controlled by the boundary conditions at the endpoints. Well

into the folding regime of T < Tf , however, this maximum excursion is much more likely
to be near the unfolded state, D.

Calculations of the mean excursions of a random walk of Q steps of an average energy-

diﬀerence ǫ and constrained to a total (negative) free energy change ∆GN , can be pa-
rameterised by the dimensionless quantity x
In terms

Q1/2 (see appendix A) .

of x, the expectation value of the transition state free energy is the surprisingly universal

∆GN
ǫ

≡

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

form

∆G‡
ǫQ1/2 =
(cid:10)
(cid:11)

1
4

1
(cid:18)
(cid:19)
This form may be recast as an Eyring plot using kf ∼
assumption of a linear dependence on temperature for the depth of the native state

, together with the

1
(cid:18)

∆G‡
kBT

(cid:19) (cid:18)

exp

1 +

(7)

r

s

r

r

−

−

−

(cid:19)

x

(cid:17)

x
1 + x

x
1 + x

x
1 + x

energy near the folding temperature itself, so that x = β

1

, with β a dimensionless

(cid:16)
T
Tf

−

number. The dimensionless Eyring plot for the parameter β = 1 is given in ﬁgure 5. The

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

curvature of the plot comes from the mean shift of the transition state to more denatured

diﬀusive subspaces along the folding pathway. Alternatively, it can be interpreted as a

particular prediction for the Hammond shift of the transition state for high-dimensional

protein folding with only the minimal requirements of overall entropy and enthalpy

balance at each entry down the sequence of gutters. Qualitatively, the eﬀect is close

that seen in several cases, and with a comparable magnitude [29].

There are, of course, several caveats attached to such a general calculation. Clearly

this crudest form cannot pick up speciﬁc and discontinuously large shifts of the transition

11

state, which in small proteins will often dominate particular cases (see, for example, the

two regimes of temperature for which continuously-curved Eyring plots hold in the case

of barnase [29]). Nor does it anticipate speciﬁcally evolved favourable departures from

the random imbalances of entropy and energy assumed here, which certainly arise and

roughen the landscape, nor does is account for speciﬁc behaviour from hydration shells.

Nonetheless, we can see that the qualitative features of temperature-dependent folding

do arise without any special assumptions of these kinds. Furthermore, it suggests a

rather general structure for the free-energy along a folding pathway, in which successive

ﬂuctuations in entropy and energy create a sequence of intermediate states. This type

of structure has been investigated theoretically [31] and evidence for its rather general

emergence has arisen experimentally very recently [30][32].

4.3 Phi-Values: non-native contributions

As a ﬁnal general prediction, and as an example of the speciﬁc calculations possible with

the model, we examine the important question of Φ-value analysis and its interpretation.

When the mutation of a residue gives rise to a value of Φ close to 1, it means that the

change in folding rate arising from the mutation is consistent with comparable changes

in the transition state and native state energies. This is usually interpreted to mean

that the residue in question enjoys the majority of its native contacts at the transition

state [17]. However, this model suggests another physical source of positive values for

Φ, since it identiﬁes non-native interactions as potentially crucial in establishing folding

rates. For if a residue contributes via non-native interactions to the stable hypergutter

that concludes the dominant (longest) diﬀusive search, then mutations to that residue will

aﬀect the folding rate, even though it does not necessarily possess any native contacts at

the transition state.

In the hypergutter model, the “transition state” is, by deﬁnition,

the subspace following that which takes the longest time to search - the rate-determining

step.

To make this more precise, we return to the case of the three-helix bundle and calculate

the dependence of the total folding rate on the non-native potential that stabilises the
2-dimensional “gutter” of the ﬁnal search. Deﬁning a “fugacity” ∆ = σeε/kT , where

ε is the stabilising energy of the 2-d gutter and σ =

, the measure of the relative

sizes of the two spaces, we expect that as ∆ is increased (by increasing ε) we take the

RN
R

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

system from the the slower 3-dimensional search to the accelerated “1+2” dimensional

search. By adding the currents of diﬀusers that ﬁnd the native state from the 2 and 3

dimensional spaces separately, we ﬁnd an approximate cross-over formula for the folding

12

rate kf (ignoring weak logarithmic factors):

kf =

k1+2 +

∆
1 + ∆

1
1 + ∆

k3

(cid:18)
where k1+2 = τ −1
σk2. The expression (8) also contains,
by implication, a prediction of the contribution of the non-native interactions to the

1+2 and the slow rate k3 = τ −1

3 ≈

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

Φ-values of the residues that contribute to it. For, a mutation of any residue will change

its contribution to the gutter potential, so

(8)

(9)

Φg =

1
ng

∂ ln k

∂ε ≈

∆
n (1 + ∆) (σ + ∆)

where ng is the number of residues that share the burden of providing the non-native
gutter potential ε. We have also assumed in the derivation of (9) that ε is also the scale

of a single residue’s contribution to the stability of the native state - but other reasonable

assumptions will only introduce an order-1 prefactor. The functional dependence of Φg
on the fugacity ∆ is actually a rather weakly varying function once the gutter is large

enough to produce a reasonable fraction of the maximum acceleration of the folding

rate, and is close to the value 0.6/ng (it possesses a broad maximum of this value when
√σ, see ﬁgure 6, which shows how both folding rate and Φg depend on the gutter
∆
potential). This non-native contribution to Φ will naturally be weak in the two limits of

≃

vanishing gutter-potential (when all searches are high-dimensional) and very high gutter

potential (when they are always low-dimensional).

Again, a rather general result emerges that may be compared with rate measure-

ments on selectively-mutated systems. For the three-helix bundles, contributions to the

stabilising potential that encourages the terminal helices to diﬀuse in contact with each
other will arise typically from one residue per helical turn, so that ng - 10 (by count-
ing about two residues per turn on the contact face of a 5-turn helix). Since the total

predicted non-native contribution to Φ is or order 1 (from the dimensionless function of

(9) plotted in ﬁgure 6), this means in turn that mutating these residues might generally

give non-native contributions to their apparent individual Φ-values of order 0.1 . The

inset to ﬁgure 6 displays the expected pattern of such enhanced Φ-values against residue

index. Remarkably, this is precisely what is seen, again in very recent experiments, on

the immunity family of helical proteins Im7 and Im9: the member of the family with an

on-pathway intermediate (Im7) also exhibits increased Φ-values in the appropriate region

of the helices 1, 2 and 4 (helix 3 only forms co-operatively with the native state) by just

this amount, relative to the protein without the intermediate, Im9 [33].

The magnitude of incremental contributions to Φ from the gutter potentials is re-

stricted to these low values only in very simple topologies such as the three-helix bundle.

When key stabilising interactions succeed in reducing the dimensionality of the search

13

space more drastically, much higher values can result (from diﬀerentiation of the higher-

dimensional analogues of (8)). In more complex spaces of mutual diﬀusion of helices and

β-turns, values greater than 1 are not unexpected. This approach suggests a natural

interpretation of Φ-values greater than one, such as recorded in acylphosphatase [34], but

which do not bear an interpretation in terms of native structure [35].

The interpretation of non-classical Φ-values outlined here is closely-related to a recent

suggestion arising from some simple lattice Go-type simulations [36]. The simulation

also found that kinetic properties are more closely connected with Φ than local “degree

of nativeness”.

It shares with the present treatment the essential departure from a

one-dimensional projection of a transition state, and an identiﬁcation of the number of

permissable pathways, or transition entropy, in controlling the rate of folding.

5 Relationship to other models

The model of high-dimensional diﬀusive hypergutters is not incompatible with the frame-

works or results of the other models discussed in the introduction, but rather serves to

show how the apparently alternative models are related. Each emerges from the high-

dimensional hypergutter picture when a diﬀerent projection into a low-dimensional space

is applied.

When the ﬂat, diﬀusional, freedom are projected away onto a reaction co-ordinate
pair such as Rg and φnative, then a folding funnel appears, and does so without the
presence of any long-range forces. The diﬀerence is that, on close examination, the

funnel is discrete, or terraced, rather than continuous. Furthermore, it appears when

the interactions generating coil-collapse are projected along an ordinate of sequential

sub-spaces, rather than along a spatial co-ordinate. But when there are many sequential

subspaces, an apparently continuous folding funnel appears with all of the features of

intermediate states, multiple pathways etc. ascribed to it [1][8] arising in a natural way.

Another example of this projection is found in the master-equation approach [37], in

which the smoothly funneled high dimensional energy landscape implies some shaping of

the non-native contacts of the underlying model.

When the projection is orthogonal to one of the later diﬀusional subspaces, on the

other hand, then the same system will appear to map onto a diﬀusion-collision model.

In this case the projection concentrates on the diﬀusive degrees of freedom one by one,

rather than projecting them away into a funnel. The advantage of the hypergutter

approach, however, is that it identiﬁes diﬀusive subspaces in cases where the standard

diﬀusion-collision model does not. The case of diﬀusion in mutual angular space of

helical bundles discussed above is an example, since this occurs within a globule, rather

14

than in the collisional formation of a globule.

It also recognises intermediate cases in

which diﬀusional searches occur simultaneously in high and low-dimensional spaces, such

as a partially-stabilised 2-d gutter in the three-helix case, and provides a structure for

introducing tailored, rather than indiscriminate, non-native interactions. The interesting

and unexpected prediction of non-native and positive Φ-values emerges in just this case.

Of particular interest is the relationship of the hypergutter picture to the topomer

search model. This is because the rate-determining diﬀusive searches will in general be

completed only when a topological, as well as a spatial, constraint in the ﬁnal native

state is satisﬁed for the ﬁrst time.

It is also to be expected since this model also seeks

to understand folding rates without recourse to their dependence on native interactions.

Again, the three helix bundle serves as a model example- restriction from the 3-d helical

angular space to the faster 2-d space with helices 1 and 3 in contact occurs when the

topological orientation of the helices is satisﬁed. Similar conclusions would emerge if

the slow-searches were between a helix and a β-sheet, or between two or more β-turns.

Retaining all the diﬀusional degrees of freedom leads to a close relationship between the

contact order QD of the topomer search model, and the number of diﬀusional dimensions
d of the space of hypergutters in the rate-determining diﬀusive search.
For we can

identify the exponent QD in the rate expression in the topomer search model [6]

kf ∼

γ

K

h

i

QD

(10)

with that in the diﬀusive-search result (2) above to ﬁnd, formally at the level of the

exponent that QD = (d
We note, however, that departures from the correlation of folding time with contact order

2) where here d is the dimension of the largest diﬀusive search.

−

might be expected when non-native interactions are tuned to speed up folding in the way

we have outlined. This is because such a strategy can reduce the eﬀective dimension of

the search without changing the topology of the ﬁnal state. Strong outlying behaviour

in the correlation of folding time with contact order may be connected with the potential

variability in the eﬃciency of hypergutter stability portrayed in ﬁgure 6.

6 Discussion and Conclusions

We have discussed a conceptual approach to the protein landscape problem that attempts

to remain faithful to the high dimensionality of the system. Rather than invoking a con-

tinuous energy landscape with long-range forces giving rise to a funneled landscape, we

use rather general considerations to point to a high dimensional structure of “hypergut-

ters”. These structures describe the search for the native state as a sequence of relatively

low-dimensional diﬀusive subspaces. Only spatially-local interactions are required to di-

rect the folding towards the native state in reasonable times. As a by-product, this

15

procedure also draws together into a single picture the apparently divergent views of the

folding funnel, collision-diﬀusion, nucleation-condensation and topomer search models.

The rate-determining “gutter” dimensions lie orthogonal to other “zipper” dimensions

describing the local formation of secondary structure, that are characterised by a con-

tinuous folding funnel.

Looked at another way, our structure is a more detailed examination of the sort of

dynamic processes that must be occurring within the “molten globule” phase of protein

folding. The formation of the globule itself from the denatured state corresponds in this

picture to the ﬁrst hypergutter in a series. It is clearer in experiment than the subsequent

dimensional reductions because it is the only one that makes signiﬁcant changes to the

radius of gyration of the protein.

We might note that such a pattern of non-speciﬁc binding in diﬀusive searches is a

common motif in biology, appearing for example in the search of DNA-binding repressors

for their operons [38].

In this case, the slow search for a speciﬁc binding site in d = 3

is substituted for a much more rapid diﬀusive search in d = 1 (along the DNA) by non-

speciﬁc binding of the repressor proteins.

In this process too, there is strong evidence

that the non-speciﬁc interactions are themselves subtly coded to further speed the search

for the binding target.

Several general predictions follow. The ﬁrst is that special tuning of non-native

interactions may contribute signiﬁcantly to rapid folding; they stabilise the hypergutter-

potentials that keep diﬀusive search dimensions under control.

In the case of helical

proteins, candidates for the structure of the gutters are non-speciﬁc contacts of the helices,

and the angular, rather than translational, degrees of freedom describing their mutual

conﬁgurations.

In proteins with more complex structures, other candidates suggest

themselves, such as the orientation of helices with respect to β-sheets with which they

are in contact in α/β proteins, and the relative orientations of β-turns and partially-folded

β-sheets in all-β elements. Very recently, the role of non-native interactions in stabilising

an on-pathway intermediate, together with a diﬀusion-collision kinetic route, has been

experimentally veriﬁed in the case of the immunity protein Im7 [27]. This precisely

exempliﬁes the general mechanism we have suggested, with the additional feature that one

of the hypergutters has become so stabilised (and therefore so populated) that it attracts

the label of “intermediate state”. Other examples of non-natively stabilised folding

pathways are emerging [28]. Perhaps the most remarkable example is the determination

by fast kinetic experiments that β-lactoglobulin employs an transient helical motif that is

entirely non-native [39]. By stabilising a β-turn that otherwise relies on highly non-local,

and late-forming, structure for its stability, this temporary helix reduces the dimension

of the search space for the non-local contacts. Of course, it is not impossible to achieve

16

the dimensional reduction we have outlined by using fully native, rather than non-native

interactions.

Such proteins would present a highly bimodal distribution of Φ-values,

clustering closely to 0 and 1. A candidate would be acylphosphatase [40] in which the

“transition state” strongly constraints the environment of just three residues and the

immediate neighbours.

In the hypergutter picture, the nine-dimensional search space of

these critical regions separately is reduced to three sequential three-dimensional searches

by the long lifetimes of the native regions when the remainder of the protein is disordered.

One possible advantage of using broadly distributed non-native interactions, rather than

a few local native ones, to stabilise hypergutters, is that the intermediate states are

thereby more tightly conﬁned. This is turn may assist in suppressing the pathway to

aggregated states, or amyloid formation [41]. This suggestion has recently been made

from observations of competing folding pathways in a β-sandwich protein

As both the sensitivity and time-resolution of kinetic experiments increases, ﬁner

details of the intermediate diﬀusional subspaces in this and other proteins should become

equally transparent. Another recent, theoretical, contribution has pointed out that ﬁne-

structure of a few kBT within the transition state on a reaction pathway can accelerate
folding [31]. As an example of the type of ﬁne-structure predicted, the model contains

a natural explanation of the generic curvature seen in Eyring plots of the temperature

dependence of folding rates. The pseudo-random diﬀerences in the enthalpy and entropy

of the transitions from one diﬀusive subspace to the next result in the transition state

energy becoming typically more and more negative as the quench depth increases. This

Hammond-like behaviour will contribute at least in part to the experimental signals, and

suggest the gathering of a wider data sets of this type. Very recent ﬁndings suggest that

a structure very similar to this predicted one is indeed rather general [32].

Features of the time-dependent folding curves as functions of temperature or denat-

urant also follow from the model, including the possibility of an apparent delay before

single exponential kinetics set in.

It is also possible that “kinetic traps” arise not just

from low-energy intermediate states, but from intermediate diﬀusive subspaces of higher

dimension than 2, for which the control of dimensionality has been incomplete. This

is signiﬁcant for the topomer search model: we might expect to ﬁnd departures from

the folding time/contact order correlation when, in spite of sharing the same topology of

fold, one protein in a pair has an important diﬀusional subspace stabilised while the other

does not. Alternatively, our picture suggests ways of increasing folding times greatly by

selective mutations that retain topology and stability of the native state, but destabilise

one or more of the on-pathway diﬀusional subspaces so that intermediate searches are

required in d > 3.

The model provides an alternative interpretation of the results of protein engineering

17

analysis, and suggests that not all contributions to measured Φ-values at the transition

state arise from native-like interactions.

It suggests interpretations for Φ-values of order

0.1-0.2, but also indicates that contributions to larger values (including the non-classical

range Φ > 1) may arise from non-native interactions with that residue that serve to

restrict the folding space. More detailed predictions of non-native contributions to Φ

for the family of bacterial immunity proteins and their mutants are in accord with very

recent experiments.

Finally it suggests that the “kinetic code” that informs the search for the native state

may be found in evolved selection of some of the non-native interactions. The large

number of these, of order N times greater than the number of native interactions, make

them a likely candidate for information storage, as well as their natural propensity for

kinetic control.

The framework and speciﬁc examples discussed here suggest useful coarse-grained

models of other families of proteins that may be simulated very eﬃciently, or even ap-

proached analytically, as we have done with the 3-helix bundles. Strong experimental

evidence is currently emerging that supports all of the main predictions of the approach;

other experimental tests of the more surprising conclusions are awaited.

A Diﬀusive subspaces and random energy excursions

We consider the free-energy as a directed one-dimensional walk W in energy space of Q

steps each of mean (free) energy ǫ. We ﬁrst consider the case of return to the origin,

which corresponds to the folding temperature Tf at which ∆GD→N = 0. To ﬁnd the
typical excursion of the walk we may map the problem onto a one-dimensional polymer

(so that the free-energy walk itself has a free energy F (W )). At a coordinate z = n/Q,
corresponding to the nth diﬀusional subspace of the Q total, this free energy of the walk is

composed of the segment before x and the segment after.

If ∆G(z) is the free energy at

coordinate z, the free energy of the whole walk, integrating over all other possible energies

for the individual subspaces is the sum of the two “entropic elastic” contributions from

these pieces:

F (W ) =

(∆G(z))2
ǫ2Qz

+

(∆G(z))2
ǫ2Q (1
z)

−

Since the probability for energy excursions ∆G(x) is proportional to e−F (W )/kB T , the

distribution of ∆G(x) at each point is Gaussian, with mean

(11)

(12)

which peaks, of course, at x = 1/2.

∆Gmax(z)

= ǫQ1/2

z

z2

1/2

h

i

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

18

Now taking the directed random walk, the expected maximum value of the free energy

at x is just the random excursion calculated above superimposed on a steady drift towards

the native state x = 1 at the native free energy. Taking out constants with dimensions

we write:

h

∆Gmax(z)
ǫQ1/2

i

=

z

1/2

z2

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

xz

−

(13)

where the parameter x = |∆GD→N |
matter to maximise this function over z, and then to ﬁnd the maximum value. The

Q1/2 is a measure of the quench depth.

It is a simple

ǫ

result is equation 7.

References

[1] Bryngelson, J.D., Onuchic, J.N., Socci, N.D and Wolynes, P.G., Funnels, pathways
and the energy landscape of protein folding. Proc. Struc. Func. Gen., 21, 167-175

[2] Onuchic, J.N., Wolynes, P.G., LuthySchulten Z. and Socci, N.D., Toward and

outline of the topography of a realistic protein folding funnel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 92, 3626-3630 (1995)

[3] Karplus, M. and Weaver, D.L., Protein folding dynamics. Nature, 260, 404-406

[4] Karplus, M. and Weaver, D.L., The diﬀusion-collision model and experimental data.

Protein Sci., 3, 650-668 (1994).

TIBS, 28, 18-25 (2003).

[5] Dagett, V. and Fersht, A.R., Is there a unifying mechanism for protein folding?

[6] Makarov, D.E. and Plaxco K.W., The topomer search model: a quantitative, ﬁrst-
principles description of two-state protein folding kinetics, Protein Sci., 12, 17-26

[7] Karplus, M., The Levinthal paradox: yesterday and today. Fold Des., 2, S69-S76

[8] Dinner, A.R., ˇSali, A, Smith, L.J., Dobson, C.M and Karplus, M., Understanding
protein folding via free-energy surfaces from theory and experiment. TIBS, 25, 331-

(1995)

(1976).

(2003)

(1997)

339 (2000)

19

[9] Myers, J.K. and Oas, T.G., Preorganised secondary structure as an important de-

terminant of fast protein folding. Nature Struct. Bio., 8, 552-558 (2001)

[10] Henkels, C.H., Kurz, J.C., Fierke, C.A. and Oas, T.G., Linked folding and anion
binding of the bacillus subtilis ribonuclease P protein. Biochemistry, 40, 2777-2789

(2001).

[11] Jacob, M., Geeves, M, Holtermann, G. and Schmidt, F.X., Diﬀusional barrier cross-

ing in a two-state protein folding reaction. Nature Struct. Bio., 6, 923-926 (1999)

[12] Plaxco, K.W. and Baker, D., Diﬀusional barrier crossing in a two-state protein

folding reaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 13592-13596 (1998)

[13] Goldberg, J.M. and Baldwin, R.L., Diﬀusional barrier crossing in a two-state protein

folding reaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 2019-2024 (1999)

[14] Myers, J.K. and Oas, T.G., Reinterpretation of GCN4-p1 folding kinetics: partial
helix formation precedes dimerisation in coiled coil folding. J. Mol. Biol., 289, 205-

209 (1999)

11177-11183 (2000).

8, 659-670 (2001).

[15] Plaxco, K.W., Simons, K.T., Ruczinski, I. and Baker, D., Contact order, transition
state placement and the refolding rates of single domain proteins. Biochemistry, 39,

[16] Plaxco, KW. and Gross, M., Unfolded, yes, but random? Never! Nat. Struct. Biol.,

[17] Ferscht, A. R., Transition state structure as a unifying basis in protein folding mecha-

nisms: contact order, chain topology, stability and the extended nucleus mechanism.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 1525-1529 (2000)

[18] Bicout, D.J. and Szabo A., Entropic barriers, transition states, funnels, and expo-
nential protein folding kinetics: a simple model. Protein Sci., 9, 452-465 (2000).

[19] Flanagan, J.M., Katoka, M. Shortle, D. and Engelman, D.M., Truncated staphylo-
coccal nuclease is compact but disordered. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 748-752

(1992)

ture, 401, 400-403 (1999).

3475-3487 (1993)

[20] Zhou, Y. and Karplus, M., Interpreting the folding kinetics of helical proteins. Na-

[21] Fiebig, K.M. and Dill, K.A., Protein core assembly processes. J. Chem. Phys., 98,

20

[22] Islam, S.A., Karplus, M. and Weaver, D.L., Application of the diﬀusion-collision
model to the folding of three-helix bundle proteins, J. Mol. Biol., 318, 199-215

(2002).

[23] Chothia, C., Levitt, M. and Richardson, D., Helix to Helix Packing in Proteins, J.

Mol. Biol., 145, 215-250 (1981).

[24] Shastry, M.C.R. and Roder, H., Evidence for barrier-limited protein folding kinetics

on the microsecond time scale. Nat. Struct. Biol., 5, 385-392 (1998).

[25] Bai, Y., Kinetic evidence of an on-pathway intermediate in the folding of lysozyme.

Protein Sci., 9, 194-196 (2000).

[26] Park, S.-H., Shastry, M.C.R. and Roder, H., Folding dynamics of the B1domain of

protein G explored by ultrarapid mixing, Nature Struct. Biol., 6, 943-947 (1999).

[27] Capaldi, A.P., Kleanthous, C and Radford, S.E., Im7 folding mechanism: misfolding

on a path to the native state. Nature Struct. Biol., 9, 209-216 (2002).

[28] Robinson, A.S. and J. King, Disulﬁde-Bonded Intermediate on the Folding and

Assembly Pathway of a Non-Disulﬁde Bonded Protein. Nature Structural Biology,

4, Pp. 450-455 (1997).

[29] Oliveberg, M., Tan Y.-J. and Fersht, A.R., Negative activation enthalpies in the
kinetics of protein folding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 8926-8929 (1995)

[30] Pappenberger,G., Saudan, C., Becker, M., Merbach, A.E. and Kiefhaber, T.,

Denaturant-induced movement of the transition state of protein folding revealed
by high-pressure stopped-ﬂow measurements. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 17-22

[31] Wagner, C. and Kiefhaber, T., Intermediates can accelerate protein folding. Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 6716-6721 (1999)

[32] Sanchez, I.E. and Kiefhaber, T., Evidence for sequential barriers and obligatory
intermediates in apparent two-state protein folding., J. Mol. Biol., 325, 367-376

(2000)

(2003).

[33] Friel, C.T., Capaldi, A.P. and Radford, S.E., Structural Analysis of the Rate-limiting

Transition States in the Folding of Im7 and Im9: Similarities and Diﬀerences in the
Folding of Homologous Proteins, J. Mol. Biol., 326, 293-305 (2003).

21

[34] Chiti, F., Taddei, N., White, P. M., Bucciantini, M., Magherini, F., Stefani, M. &

Dobson, C. M., Mutational analysis of acylphosphatase suggests the importance of
topology and contact order in protein folding, Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 1005–1009

(1999).

[35] Fersht, A. R., Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme

Catalysis and Protein Folding, W.H. Freeman, New York (1999).

[36] Ozkan, S.B., Bahar, I. and Dill, K.A., Transition states and the meaning of -values

in protein folding kinetics, Nature Struct. Biol. 8, 765–769 (1999).

[37] Zwanzig, R., Simple model of protein folding kinetics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,

21, 9801-9804 (1995)

[38] Winter, R.B., Berg, O.G. and von Hippel, P.H., Diﬀusion-driven mechanisms of pro-

tein translocation on nucleic acids. III. The E. coli lac repressor-operator interaction:
kinetic measurements and conclusions. Biochemistry, 20, 6961-6977 (1981).

[39] Kuwata, K., Sashtry, M.C.R., Cheng, H., Hoshino, M., Batt, C.A., Goto, Y. and

Roder, H., Structural and early kinetic characterisation of early folding events in
β-lactoglobulin, Nature Struct. Biol., 8, 151-155 (2001).

[40] Paci, E., Vendruscolo, M., Dobson, C.M. and Karplus, M., Determination of a

transition state at atomic resolution from protein engineering data, J. Mol. Biol.,
324, 151–163 (2002).

[41] Dobson, C.M., Protein misfolding, evolution and disease, TIBS, 24, 329-333 (2002)

[42] Wright, C.F, Lindorﬀ-Larsen, K., Randles, L.G. and Clarke, J., Parallel protein-
unfolding pathways revealed and mapped, Nature Struct. Biol. 10, 658–662.

Acknowledgement 1 I would like to thank Sheena Radford, Kevin Plaxco and Joan

Shea for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscripts, and the Kavli Institute

for Theoretical Physics for the hospitality of its 2002 programme “Dynamics of Complex

and Macromolecular Fluids”, where the bulk of this work was done (preprint number

NSF-ITP-02-55).

22

Figure Captions
Figure 1

Part of the d-dimensional folding space containing a diﬀusive hypergutter projected

onto 2 dimensions. The diﬀusing particle (representing the random search of the protein

through its available conformations) does not have to search simulataneously through

both the dimensions of the ﬁgure.

entire diﬀusive subspace of the (d

Instead, it exploits the lower energy state of the
1)th subspace to reach it via a one-dimensional

n

−
n)th dimension.

−

diﬀusion in the (d

−

Figure 2

The 3-helix bundle (BdpA on the left) is coarse-grained to a system of three rods.

The three angles constituting the diﬀusive subspaces are labelled Xi for i = 1, 2, 3. The
folding space then looks like the periodic cubic lattice on the right (only the X2 direction
is shown periodic, for clarity). The attractive gutter is the 2-d space spanned by X1
and X3 once X2-diﬀusion has brought the third helix into contact with the other two.
But for small angles X2 there is a large topological barrier between the “correct” and
“incorrect” sides of attachment of the third helix onto the bundle formed by the other

two, and identical with the rapid diﬀusional subspace of X1 and X3.

Log-linear plot of three relaxation functions. Dashed is the single exponential. Dot-

ted is the decay to the native state for 1-dimensional diﬀusion with a uniform distribution

of initial states. Solid curve is the decay of an eﬀective 1-dimensional folding path created

from a high dimensional landscape with ﬂat free energy.

The one-dimensional folding free-energy in terms of sequential diﬀusive subspaces. (a)

T < Tf ; the landscape is a directed random walk - the maximum excursion (transition
state) lies towards the start of the walk. (b) T = Tf ; the walk returns to the origin of
free energy - the maximum lies near the middle of the trajectory.

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

Dimensionless Eyring plot of the universal form in the version of the gutter-landscape

model in which only the energies of native and denatured states are speciﬁed (to convert

to numbers on an experimental Arrhenius plot, the ﬁgures on the ordinate should be

multplied by the square root of the number of diﬀusive dimensions, or contact order, of

the protein). The inset shows experimental results on the protein CI2, from [29].

23

Figure 1: Part of the d-dimensional folding space containing a diﬀusive hypergutter
projected onto 2 dimensions. The diﬀusing particle (representing the random search of
the protein through its available conformations) does not have to search simulataneously
Instead, it exploits the lower energy state of
through both the dimensions of the ﬁgure.
1)th subspace to reach it via a one-dimensional
the entire diﬀusive subspace of the (d
n)th dimension. Embedding such structures into the total energy
diﬀusion in the (d
landscape leads to a high-dimensional series of “terraces” as depicted in the boxed inset.

−

−

−

n

Figure 2: The 3-helix bundle on the left is represented on the left by three rods. The
three angles constituting the diﬀusive subspaces are labelled Xi for i = 1, 2, 3. The
folding space then looks like the periodic cubic lattice on the right (only the X2 direction
is shown periodic, for clarity). The attractive gutter is the 2-d space spanned by X1 and
X3 once X2-diﬀusion has brought the third helix into contact with both of the other two.
But for small angles X2 there is a large topological barrier between the “correct” and
“incorrect” sides of attachment of the third helix onto the bundle formed by the other
two, and identical with the rapid diﬀusional subspace of X1 and X3.

24

Figure 3: Log-linear plot of the predicted relaxation functions when folding is reversible.
Dashed is a single exponential for comparison. Solid curve is the decay of an eﬀective 1-
dimensional folding path created from a high dimensional landscape with ﬂat free energy.

25

Figure 4: The one-dimensional folding free-energy in terms of sequential diﬀusive sub-
spaces. (a) T < Tf ; the landscape is a directed random walk - the maximum excursion
(transition state) lies towards the start of the walk. (b) T = Tf ; the walk returns to the
origin of free energy - the maximum lies near the middle of the trajectory.

26

Figure 5: Dimensionless Arrhenius plot of the universal form in the version of the gutter-
landscape model in which only the energies of native and denatured states are speciﬁed
(to convert to numbers on an experimental Arrhenius plot, the ﬁgures on the ordinate
should be multplied by the square root of the number of diﬀusive dimensions, or contact
order, of the protein). The inset shows experimental results on the protein CI2, from
[29].

27

Figure 6: Predictions of the folding rate (solid line) relative to the rate of the optimal
1+2 dimensional search path, and sum of non-natively generated Φ-values from residues
contributing to a 2-d diﬀusive hypergutter (3 helix bundle) (dashed line). The ordinate
is the “fugacity” measure of the attractive potential ∆ = σeεkT . The value assumed for
the spatial reduction σ, is 0.1. The inset contains the expected magnitude of increase
in Φ-values with residue index (dashed lines) in a 3-helix protein with a 2-d kinetic
intermediate gutter (Im7), relative to one without (Im9). We expect the modiﬁcations
to be concentrated onto helices 1 and 4, whose mutual contacts stabilise the 2D search
space.

28

