§

†
USA

Abstract.

Neven Simicevic†

Center for Applied Physics Studies, Biomedical Engineering and Institute for

‡
Micromanufacturing, Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA 71272, USA

Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses

and Donald T. Haynie‡
Center for Applied Physics Studies, Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA 71272,

4 FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ultra-wideband (UWB) electromagnetic pulses of nanosecond duration, or
nanopulses, are of considerable interest to the communications industry and are being
explored for various applications in biotechnology and medicine. The propagation of
a nanopulse through biological matter has been computed in the time domain using
the ﬁnite diﬀerence-time domain method (FDTD). The approach required existing
Cole-Cole model-based descriptions of dielectric properties of biological matter to be
re-parametrized using the Debye model, but without loss of accuracy. The approach
has been applied to several tissue types. Results show that the electromagnetic ﬁeld
inside a biological tissue depends on incident pulse rise time and width. Rise time
dominates pulse behavior inside a tissue as conductivity increases. It has also been
found that the amount of energy deposited by 20 kV /m nanopulses is insuﬃcient to
change the temperature of the exposed material for the pulse repetition rates of 1
M Hz or less.

PACS numbers: 87.50.Rr, 87.17.d, 77.22.Ch, 02.60.x

To whom correspondence should be addressed Louisiana Tech University, PO Box 10348, Ruston,

§
LA 71272, Tel: +1.318.257.3591, Fax: +1.318.257.4228, E-mail: neven@phys.latech.edu

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 2

1. Introduction

∼

A facility for bioelectromagnetics research has recently been established at Louisiana
Tech University (LA Tech) through sponsorship by Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research. LA Tech leads a multi-university collaboration in this area which involves
three other institutions in north Louisiana: Grambling State University, University
of Louisiana at Monroe, and Louisiana State University-Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport. Current focus of research is bioeﬀects of non-ionizing ultra-wideband
(UWB) electromagnetic (EM) pulses of nanosecond duration, or nanopulses. The
research program encompasses experimental studies of biological matter, equipment
design and fabrication, and computational modeling. Goals of the research include
providing a sound basis for nanopulse exposure safety standards.

The literature on UWB radiation is extensive [1]. In the present work, a nanopulse
is a rapid, transient change in amplitude, from a baseline to peak, followed by a relatively
rapid return to baseline. It is a short duration, high-intensity burst of electromagnetic
In the LA Tech bioelectromagnetics facility, fondly known as the Nanopulse
energy.
Factory, a typical nanopulse has a width of 1-10 ns, a rise time of
100 ps, and an
amplitude of

20 kV /m.

∼

Extensive research has been done on biological eﬀects of EM ﬁelds. Detailed
descriptions are provided in Reference [2]. Bioeﬀects of nanopulses, however, may be
qualitatively diﬀerent from those of narrow-band radiofrequencies. The LA Tech-led
collaboration is currently testing nanopulse bioeﬀects using a range of model systems.
At the cellular level this includes E. coli, photosynthetic bacteria, bovine red blood
cells, bovine platelets, mouse hepatocytes, mouse mammary epithelial cells, and human
dermal ﬁbroblasts; that is, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The main sub-cellular
model is horseradish peroxidase. A whole animal model is C. elegans.

The basic exposure equipment consists of a pulse generator, a parallel-plate
transmission line (e.g. gigahertz transverse electromagnetic mode or GTEM cell),
measuring/recording instruments, and a radiofrequency enclosure (screen room, Faraday
cage). A schematic is shown in Figure 1. Output of a commercial or home-built
nanosecond pulse generator [3] is fed into the GTEM cell or a home-built parallel-plate
capacitor, through which the pulse propagates virtually unperturbed to the position of
the sample.

Pulse generator output is measured and recorded using a digital storage oscilloscope.
Nevertheless, it is a challenge to make accurate real-time measurements of the electric
ﬁeld in an exposure chamber in the vicinity of the sample, and it is practically impossible
to measure the ﬁeld inside the sample in real time. To ﬁnd the ﬁeld inside a sample,
which is what one cares about, it is necessary to consider a computational approach.

The interaction of short EM pulses and biological matter has not been modeled in
such detail as the interaction of radio frequency radiation. A number of computational
approaches exist for modeling the experimental apparatus, biological cell, and cellular
environment, and the EM interaction mechanisms and their eﬀects [2]. The complexity

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 3

Screen room 1

13‘-9 1/2''

TEMPERATURE-CONTROL CHAMBER
TEMPERATURE CONTROL ROOM

EXHAUST
VENT

GTEM CELL

Screen room 2

D – DOT PROBE

PULSER

'
'

2

/

1

 

4
-
‘
0
1

HEAT
PUMP

CABLE
TERMINATION
PANELS

DOOR

TRIGGER
PULSER

EXHAUST
FAN

DIGITAL
STORAGE
OSCILLOSCOPE

6‘-10 1/2''

INTAKE VENT

DOOR

COPPER PLATE SHIELDED ROOM
ATTENUATION AT 10 GHz: -85 dB

COPPER MESH SHIELDED ROOM

Figure 1.
It consists of
Schematic of LA Tech nanopulse exposure facility.
two Faraday cages, the GTEM cell and pulser in one and the measuring/recording
instruments in the other.

of any realistic situation requires a numerical rather than an analytical approach. The
latter, however, should be taken in parallel with the former, since the dynamic range of
the problem could span many orders of magnitude in some physical quantities and an
“external” check on computational method is needed. In the case of a biological cell, for
example, the length scale ranges over nine orders of magnitude, from the thickness of the
plasma membrane to the size of the exposure chamber. This represents a considerable
challenge for any numerical method.

For the calculations described in the present work, ﬁnite-diﬀerence time domain
FDTD was applied. This method of solving Maxwell’s equations is relatively simple,
can easily deal with a broadband response, has almost no limit in the description of
geometrical and dispersive properties of the material being simulated, is numerically
robust, and is appropriate for the computer technology of today. Originally introduced
by Kane Yee in the 1960s [4], FDTD was developed extensively in the 1990s [5, 6, 7, 8],
owing in part to the increasing availability of fast computers. In this paper we describe
FDTD calculations of the EM ﬁeld inside samples exposed to nanopulses in a GTEM
cell. The EM properties of the environment are included in the calculation to the fullest
extent. The object is to advance understanding of dominant mechanisms of interaction
of nanopulses with biological structures.

2. Computational Inputs

In order to characterize the response of a biological system to an EM pulse, two
important quantities must be known with a reasonable degree of precision: the value
of the ﬁeld surrounding the system and in the system, and the extent of conversion
of EM energy into mechanical or thermal energy, both in the system itself and in
the surroundings. FDTD has been applied for this purpose, and an original set of

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 4

Figure 2. Geometry of exposed sample: cuvette inside the GTEM cell.

computer programs has been developed at LA Tech to compute the EM ﬁeld in any
dimension for almost any choice of geometry and EM properties of a material. Some
of the computations were performed using a 3-dimensional model, the results presented
here, however, were obtained using 2-dimensional FDTD. The approach was based on
4.5 cm, with 1mm thick
the following dimensions: samples in a cuvette (1 cm
×
walls), and a GTEM cell in which exposure occurs (8 cm
58 cm
at absorbing cones, and 100 cm long). 2-dimensional FDTD reduces the computation
time without compromising essential features of the solution. Geometry of the exposed
sample is shown in Figure 2.

8 cm at inlet, 58 cm

1 cm

×

×

×

Each calculation depends on the shape of nanopulses fed into the GTEM cell,
deﬁned geometrical properties of the exposed “system”, and its dispersive or dielectric
properties (including conductivity).
It was important that each property be both
realistic and appropriate for numerical simulation. Further details of each feature are
given in the following subsections.

2.1. Electromagnetic Pulse Inside GTEM Cell

The EM ﬁeld of a nanopulse inside a GTEM cell can be measured when the cell is
empty [9]. FDTD calculation of pulse propagation through a ﬂared transmission line
shows that the shape of the pulse is preserved as it propagates and, as expected, only
the amplitude decreases. This agrees with the results of work done at Brooks Air Force
Base (now Brooks City-Base) on modeling a GTEM cell [10]. The pulse in a GTEM
cell can be described as a double exponential function:

E = E0(e−αt

e−βt),

−

(1)

where E0 is pulse amplitude and α and β coeﬃcients describing pulse rise time, fall
time, and width. Parameters that describe pulse shape in the empty GTEM cell at LA
Tech in the vicinity of the region under test (sample position) are E0 = 18.5 kV /m,
1010 s−1. This pulse, having a rise time of 150 ps and
α = 1.
width of 10 ns, was the input in the present work.

108 s−1, and β = 2.

×

×

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 5

2.2. Geometrical Properties of Exposed Sample

Most biological specimens in experiments in the LA Tech-led research program consist of
1 mm). This size is small in comparison
mammalian cells or microorganisms (length
to the dimensions of the GTEM cell and will not perturb the general character of the
EM ﬁeld. In other words, the character of the ﬁeld, anywhere in a GTEM cell except
in the vicinity of the sample, will be roughly the same as in an empty cell. The largest
object in the GTEM cell during an experiment is the sample container. Ordinarily this
will be a polystyrene cuvette, whose shape and dimensions are shown in Figure 3, a
Petri dish, or a 96-, 48-, or 8-well plate.

≤

Other considerations must be made when describing geometrical properties of an
object in an FDTD simulation. The method requires space and time to be discretized.
The discretization of space is done by means of Yee cells, cuboids having edge lengths
∆x, ∆y, and ∆z. If ∆x = ∆y = ∆z, a Yee cell represents a discrete cube of space. The
discretization of time is obtained from the size of the Yee cell by imposing the Courant
stability criterion:

(2)

(3)

1

∆t

≤

c

q

(∆x)2 + (∆y)2 + (∆z)2

,

where c is the speed of light.

Yee cell must be small enough not to distort the shape of the sample container, has
to account for the full frequency range of the EM pulse, and must be large enough for
the time step to be practical for overall computation. Its size is related to the highest
frequency which needs to be considered, fmax, by an accepted rule

∆x

≃

c
10 fmax

,

where c is the speed of light and fmax is a cut-oﬀ frequency above which the calculation
becomes unreliable for the chosen cell size. In the present work the maximum considered
frequency was fmax = 100 GHz, which required the size of the Yee cube edge lengths
to be ∆x = ∆y = ∆z
0.3 mm. A cell edge length of 1/4 mm satisﬁes the frequency
criterion and is small enough to describe the shape of the sample, and derived time
step satisfying the Courant stability criterion, ∆t
0.6 ps, is large enough to allow the
entire calculation to be performed in about 50,000 steps.

≃

≃

It is not always possible to achieve optimal agreement between geometrical and
physical descriptions of a situation. Fortuitous circumstances in the present work
minimized the number of computational operations, eliminated need of additional
approximations, and allowed the entire 2-dimensional FDTD calculation to be performed
on a modern computer in about 10 minutes.

2.3. Dielectric Properties of Exposed Sample

Dielectric properties of the exposed sample were treated using a recursive convolution
scheme [12]. Brieﬂy, a relation between the electric ﬂux density, ~D, and the electric

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 6

Wall thickness = 1 mm

3 cm

1 cm

1 cm

Figure 3. Shape and dimension of a cuvette used in experiment and studies described
here.

ﬁeld strength, ~E, at points in the material at which the ﬁeld was calculated, for a
monochromatic EM wave, is

~D(ω) = ǫ(ω) ~E(ω).

Electric permittivity ǫ(ω) is a function of frequency ω of the monochromatic wave.
FDTD requires a connection between ~D and ~E in the time domain, which can be found
by Fourier transformation of Equation 4. The result can be written as [11]

~D(t) = ǫ0 ~E(t) + ǫ0 Z

t

0

χ(τ ) ~E(t

τ ) dτ.

−

where ǫ0 is the permittivity of free space, and χ(τ ), the electric susceptibility of a
material, is described by the following Fourier transform:

χ(τ ) =

1
2π Z

+∞

−∞

(ǫ(ω)/ǫ0 + 1)e−iωtdω.

In FDTD all physical quantities are discretized and

~D(t)

7→

~D(n∆t) = ǫ∞ǫ0 ~E(n∆t) + ǫ0 Z

χ(τ ) ~E(n∆t

τ ) dτ.

−

n∆t

0

The quantity ǫ∞ describes the property of the material at frequencies approaching
inﬁnity, and n is a time step of length ∆t. Without going into details of FDTD, which
in any case can be found in References [12, 13, 15], the value of each vector component
in Equation 7 at time step n can be written in discrete form as

Dn = ǫ∞ǫ0En + ǫ0

En−mχm,

n−1

Xm=0

where

(m+1)∆t

χm =

Z

m∆t

χ(τ ) dτ.

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 7

EM properties of a biological material are normally expressed in terms of frequency-
dependent dielectric properties and conductivity. They have been measured and
modeled for over a 100 years, and a great deal of information on them is available
in the literature [2]. Data used in the present work are from References [16] and [17],
where the measured values of 45 tissues were parametrized using the Cole-Cole model:

ǫ(ω) = ǫ∞ +

4

Xk=1

∆ǫk
1 + (iωτk)1−α +

σ
iωǫ0

,

(10)

−

where i = √
1. Permittivity in the terahertz frequency range ǫ∞, drop in permittivity
in a speciﬁed frequency range ∆ǫk, coeﬃcient α, relaxation time τ , and the ionic
conductivity σ, constitute up to 14 real parameters of the ﬁt. This approach can
generally be used with conﬁdence for frequencies above 1 MHz [16], the frequency
range of interest in nanopulse bioeﬀects study. A plot of all the ﬁt curves [16] reveals
similarities of the dispersive properties of the various tissues.

While formally the electric susceptibility is just a Fourier transformation of
Equation 10, the transformation is hardly easy [18] and can only be achieved
numerically. An example of a numerical Fourier transformation of a Cole-Cole
expression, Equation 10, for blood is shown in Figure 4. Although this simple function
can be modeled with just one free parameter, its application is problematic.

Cole-Cole parametrization can provide a useful empirical description of the
dielectric properties of tissues over a broad frequency range. This model, however,
does not reﬂect a speciﬁc underlying physical mechanism, as it is apparent from the
divergence of ǫ(ω) as the frequency goes to inﬁnity when it should go to unity [19]. In
addition, the components of the electric displacement ~D, are calculated as a convolution
of the electric ﬁeld and material susceptibility, Equation 5. The response of a material to
an external EM pulse is very fast. Susceptibility, as shown in Figure 4, is largest at the
beginning of the response. Hence, precisely in the most important region for evaluating
the integral in Equation 5 information on susceptibility will not exist. The time step in
calculating ~D using Equation 8 was 0.6 ps. The ﬁrst several steps of the computation
therefore required the use of an extrapolated value of susceptibility. Because the Cole-
Cole expression does not describe a physical mechanism, making such extrapolation has
dubious validity and could represent a substantial source of error.

There is another diﬃculty in applying the Cole-Cole parametrization. Numerically,
the electric displacement is calculated by Equation 8 as part of the overall Yee algorithm
[4, 13, 14, 15]. Evaluation of the integral in Equation 9 for all Yee cells at each time
step, however, will be extremely time consuming for even the most eﬀective integration
techniques.

Both problems - extrapolation of susceptibility and numerical evaluation of
Equation 9 - are more satisfactorily solved if Debye parametrization is substituted for
Cole-Cole parametrization. The Debye model describes relaxation of a material at the
molecular level using an exponential function deﬁned by a relaxation time τ . In place

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 8

Figure 4. Top, relative permittivity (solid line) and conductivity (dashed line) of
blood in the frequency range
100 GHz, calculated by Equation 10 as parametrized
in References [16] and [17]. Bottom, the electric susceptibility obtained by numerical
Fourier transformation of the same equation.

≤

of Equation 10, neglecting conductivity σ for the moment, dielectric properties of a
material can be described as
N

N

ǫ(ω) = ǫ∞ +

= ǫ∞ +

χk(ω),

Xk=1
where N is the number of
Response of the
dielectric material to an external ﬁeld in the time domain can be obtained by Fourier
transformation of each independent ﬁrst-order process χk(ω) in Equation 11:

Xk=1
independent ﬁrst-order processes.

∆ǫk
1 + iωτk

χk(t) =

∆ǫk
τk

e−t/τk ,

t

0.

≥

where τk is the relaxation time for process k.

As to static conductivity σ, it is deﬁned in the time domain as the constant of
proportionality between the current density ~J and the applied electric ﬁeld ~E as ~J = σ ~E.
It is important to mention that its implementation in FDTD does not require additional
or diﬀerent Fourier transforms [6]. The dependence of ~J on ~E in the conductive material
is simply

~J = σ ~E +

N

Xk=1

∆ǫkǫ0
τk

e−t/τk ~E,

t

0.

≥

The second term represents the eﬀects of dielectric properties of the material.

The advantage of Debye parametrization becomes clear when evaluating
Equations 8 and 9. After including the permittivity from Equation 8 in Equation 9, it
follows, for each independent ﬁrst-order process, that

χm+1 =

∆ǫ
τ Z

(m+2)∆t

(m+1)∆t

e−t/τ dt = ∆ǫe−(m+1)∆t/τ (1

e−∆t/τ ) = e−∆t/τ χm.(14)

−

(11)

(12)

(13)

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 9

y
t
i
v
i
t
t
i

m
r
e
P

 
.
l
e
R

10 3

10 2

)

m
/
S
(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
C

10 2

10

1

10

6

10

7

10

8

10

9

10

10

10

f (Hz)

6

10

7

10

8

10

9

10

10

10

f (Hz)

Figure 5. Relative permittivity (left) and conductivity (right) of blood parametrized
by the Debye model (Equation 11; solid line) and the Cole-Cole model (Equation 10;
dashed line). Data are from References [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].

From this it follows that the permittivity at time step (m + 1) is simply the permittivity
at time step m multiplied by a constant. A detailed description of this approach is given
in Reference [6].

The Debye parametrization thus solves all the indicated problems associated with
Cole-Cole parametrization. It remains to be determined, however, whether the Debye
approach also provides a suﬃciently accurate description of physical properties of a
biological material. To ascertain this, we compared the Debye and Cole-Cole models
in the case of blood. As shown in Figure 5, the two parameterizations describe equally
well data from References [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] in the frequency range 1 MHz-
100 GHz, important for nanopulse research.
It can be concluded that replacing the
Cole-Cole model with the Debye model does not compromise the level of description of
physical properties of the material.

3. Field Calculation

Above we outlined an approach to applying FDTD to calculate an EM ﬁeld based on
the Debye model and compared it to the Cole-Cole model. Requirements include a
description of the source ﬁeld and of the geometry and electromagnetic properties of
the material that is both accurate and suitable for computational modeling. Now we
present some results of calculations more speciﬁcally pertinent to nanopulse bioeﬀects
research.

The cuvette shown in Figure 3 was exposed to the EM pulse described by
Equation 1. Electrical properties of the material inside the cuvette were described

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 10

Material

Plastic
Water
Ionized Water
Blood
Bone (Cancellous)
Bone (Cortical)

ǫ∞
2.0
4.9
4.9
7.0
2.5
2.5

ǫs1
-
80.1
80.1
4007.0
97.5
37.5

ǫs2
-
-
-
62.0
11.0
5.5

τ1(s)
-
10.0 10−12
10.0 10−12
6.0 10−8
1.5 10−8
1.5 10−8

τ2(s)
-
-
-
8.37 10−12
8.37 10−12
8.37 10−12

σ(S/m)
0.
0.
Variable
0.7
0.07
0.02

Table 1. Debye parameters for the materials used in the computation. Parameters
for water are based on Reference [27]. Parameters for blood and bones are from a ﬁt
to data in Reference [16]. Static conductivity, σ, is also from Reference [16].

by Equation 11, explicitly written as

ǫ(ω) = ǫ∞ +

ǫ∞
ǫs1 −
1 + iωτ1

+

ǫ∞
ǫs2 −
1 + iωτ2

.

(15)

Parameters of materials used in the calculations are presented in Table 1. The choice
of materials was intended to provide a close approximation of the materials in the
experimental work of the LA Tech-led collaboration.

FDTD calculations of exposure of a biomaterial to a nanopulse provide a description
of the ﬁeld throughout the time range. This enables the creation of animated movies
and analysis of the behavior of the EM ﬁeld in time. Snapshots only can be presented
here. As an example, Figure 6 shows penetration of an EM pulse in a cuvette ﬁlled with
blood. The complete animation can be accessed on-line [28].

Properties of exposing the blood-ﬁlled cuvette to a linearly-polarized EM pulse

described by Equation 1 can be summarized as follows:

•

•

Penetration of the electric component is deﬁned substantially more by pulse rise
time than pulse width, and the width inside the blood sample is an order of
magnitude shorter than the width of the incident pulse (Figure 7). The component
of the electric ﬁeld in the direction of polarization (y) is at least a factor of two
larger than the component induced in the perpendicular direction (x).

The magnetic ﬁeld component in the material is dominated at ﬁrst by rise-time
induction and then, as the penetrated electric ﬁeld components fall to zero, behaves
as though no material were present (Figure 8).

Ionized water of the conductivity of blood gave essentially the same result as
blood. This means that in nanopulse research the dielectric properties of biological
It follows that model
matter are dominated by those of water at high frequencies.
parameterization at high frequencies is important for describing the propagation of a
nanopulse in biological matter.

For pure water the situation can be summarized as follows:

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 11

Figure 6. Penetration of an EM pulse into a blood-ﬁlled polystyrene cuvette.
Contours represent the y-component of the electric ﬁeld in steps of 1000 V /m.

Figure 7. Comparison of components of the electric ﬁeld in the blood-ﬁlled cuvette
to shape of the incident pulse for a span of 2.5 ns. Distribution of the ﬁeld values in
a particular time is a measure of the inhomogeneity of the ﬁeld across the sample.

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 12

Figure 8. Magnetic ﬁeld component multiplied by the impedance of free space,
Z0 = 376.7 Ω. Left, ﬁeld components (red vertical lines) are superimposed to the
shape of the incident pulse for the ﬁrst 2.5 ns. Right, calculated data for 50 ns. The
distribution of the ﬁeld values in a particular time is a result of inhomogeneity of the
ﬁeld across the sample.

•

•

•

Penetration of the electric component in the direction of polarization (y) is deﬁned
by both rise time and pulse width. The pulse inside water is a superposition of a
short pulse, induced by a fast rise time, and the longer incident pulse (Figure 9).

The electric ﬁeld perpendicular to the direction of polarization (x) is deﬁned by
rise time only (Figure 9).

The magnetic ﬁeld component is at ﬁrst dominated by electrical induction, and, as
the penetrated electric ﬁeld components fall to zero, behaves as though no material
were present, as in the case of blood.

Bacterial growth medium was simulated as water with a conductivity of 11.6 mS/m.
The results agree with expectations based on the calculations on blood and water. The
shape of the electric component in the direction of polarization is in essence similar
to that for pure water. The width, however, is shortened by the low conductivity, as
shown in top panel of Figure 10. The bottom panel shows the result of the calculation
for cortical bone, the biomaterial least similar to water.

It became apparent in the course of this work that pulse penetration is a function
of both rise time and pulse width. For a non-conductive material, both pulse features
are important. For a conductive material, depending on conductivity, penetration is
dominated by rise time. For blood, a material of considerable conductivity, incident
pulse width is relatively unimportant. Left side of Figure 11 shows the penetration of
a nanopulse inside a material as a function of conductivity. As conductivity increases
amplitude and width of the penetrating pulse decrease; the pulse becomes a function of
rise time only. In the right side of Figure 11, the conductivity of water was a constant
0.5 S/m while the pulse rise time varied from 780 ps to 100 ps.

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 13

Figure 9. Components of the electric ﬁeld inside water (red) plotted with incident
pulse (blue) for the ﬁrst 30 ns. The distribution of ﬁeld components for a particular
time point reﬂects the inhomogeneity of the ﬁeld across the sample.

Figure 10. Electric ﬁeld in the direction of polarization in bacterial growth medium
(left) and in cortical bone (right), plotted with the shape of the incident pulse in the
ﬁrst 30 ns. The distribution of the ﬁeld values for a particular time point measures
inhomogeneity of the ﬁeld across the sample.

FDTD also allows quick calculation of the pulse energy deposited in a biological
material. Conversion of electromagnetic energy into mechanical or thermal energy is
computed using [11]

P = ZV

~J

~E dV,

·

(16)

where P is deposited energy in unit of time, and ~J and ~E are, respectively, current
density and electric ﬁeld inside the material. FDTD provides the values of ~E and ~J (from
Equation 13) through the entire volume at any time. Numerical integration of Equation
16, used to determine the amount of energy deposited per pulse, is straightforward.
The results show that this energy is small and does not inﬂuence the temperature of
the exposed material for the pulse repetition rates of the order of few MHz or less.

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 14

Figure 11. Left side: Electric ﬁeld in the direction of polarization inside water with
a conductivity of 0 S/m (top), 0.5 S/m (middle), and 1 S/m (bottom). The rise time
of the incident pulse was 100 ps in each case. Right side: Electric ﬁeld in the direction
of polarization inside water of conductivity 0.5 S/m. The incident pulse rise time was
780 ps (top), 380 ps (middle), and 100 ps (bottom).

The average converted energy per pulse of the pulse described by Equation 1 was
0.0005 J/m3 for water. The resulting temperature

0.003 J/m3 for blood and

∼
increase, about

10−10 K per pulse, is clearly negligible.

∼

Finally, the power spectrum or spectral energy density must be modeled to
understand the interaction of short EM pulses with biological material. The spectrum
for the cases of blood and water, obtained by Fourier transformation of Equation 16, is
shown in Figure 12.

∼

4. Conclusion

We have presented a series of results of FDTD calculations on nanopulse (ultra-
wideband) penetration of biological matter. Calculations included a detailed geometrical
description of the material exposed to nanopulses, which is typically contained inside
a cuvette or a Petri dish in an exposure chamber (e.g. GTEM cell), and a state-of-
the-art description of the physical properties of the material. To ensure that the
results would be sound, the length of a side of the Yee cell was set at 1/4 mm,
smaller than the value required by the cut-oﬀ frequency of 100 GHz, and the Cole-Cole
100 GHz
parametrization of the dielectric properties of tissue in the frequency range
was used to describe the exposed material. To minimize computation time, the Cole-
Cole parametrization was reformulated in terms of the Debye parametrization with no
In 2-dimensional FDTD, the decreased computation
loss of accuracy of description.
time enabled comparison of diﬀerent materials on exposure to nanopulses. The results

≤

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 15

-12

x 10

0.4

)

3

m
/
J
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
D
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

1000

2000
x 10

7

f (Hz)

Figure 12. Spectral energy density for blood (upper red curve) and water (lower blue
curve). The integral of a distribution over all frequencies is the total pulse energy.

can be summarized as follows:

a) The shape of a nanopulse inside a biomaterial is a function of both rise time
and width of the incident pulse. The importance of the rise time increases and becomes
dominant as the conductivity of the material increases.

b) Biological cells inside a conductive material are exposed to pulses deﬁned by rise
time only, which is often substantially shorter than the duration of the incident pulse.
It is possible to deﬁne the pulse inside the material by the conductivity of the material
and the rise time of the incident pulse.

c) The amount of energy deposited by the pulse is so small that no eﬀect observed
20 kV /m amplitude will have a

on exposure of a biological sample to nanopulses of
thermal origin.

∼

is the ﬁrst step
Calculation of the electric ﬁeld surrounding a biological cell
in understanding any eﬀect resulting from exposure to nanopulses.
Fast and
accurate numerical programs are necessary not only for such computation but also for
optimization of future experiments. Results of the 2-dimensional FDTD calculations
reported here have been compared in selected cases with the full 3-dimensional
calculation. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in pulse propagation has been found thus far.
Graphical results of the full 3-dimensional computation will be reported in a subsequent
paper.

Acknowledgments

We thank Weizhong Dai, Shengjun Su, and other members of the research team for
helpfull discussions.

This material is based on research sponsored by the Air Force Research Laboratory,

FDTD Simulation of Exposure of Biological Material to Electromagnetic Nanopulses 16

under agreement number F49620-02-1-0136. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation thereon. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the oﬃcial policies or
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the Air Force Research Laboratory or the
U.S. Government.

References

[1] Taylor J D ed. 1995 Introduction to Ultra-Wideband Radar Systems Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC.
[2] Polk C and Postow E eds. 1995 Handbook of Biological Eﬀects of Electromagnetic Fields Boca

[3] Sunkam R K, Hill J S, Selmic R R, and Haynie D T 2004 Rev. Sci. Instrum., accepted for

Raton: CRC Press LLC.

publication

[4] Yee K S 1966 IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. AP-14 302
[5] Sadiku M N O 1992 Numerical Techniques in Electromagnetics Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC.
[6] Kunz K and Luebbers R 1993 The Finite Diﬀerence Time Domain Method for Electromagnetics

[7] Sullivan, D M 2000 Electromagnitic Simulation Using the FDTD Method New York: Institute of

Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC.

Electrical and Electronics Engineers.

[8] Taﬂove A and Hagness S C 2000 Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite-Diﬀerence Time-

Domain Method, 2nd ed. Norwood: Artech House.

[9] Bao J-Z 1997 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68 2221
[10] Samn S and Mathur S 1999 Preprint AFRL-HE-BR-TR-1999-0291, McKesson HBOC BioServices

[11] Jackson J D 1999 Classical Electrodynamics New York: John Willey & Sons Inc.
[12] Luebbers R J, Hunsberger F, Kunz K S, Standler R B, and Schneider M 1990 IEEE Trans.

Brooks AFB.

Electromagn. Compat. 32 222

[13] Lubbers R J, Hunsberger F, and Kunz K S 1991 IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 39 29
[14] Bui M D, Stuchly S S, and Costache G I 1991 IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 39 1165
[15] Lubbers R J and Hunsberger F 1992 IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 40 1297
[16] Gabriel C 1996 Preprint AL/OE-TR-1996-0037, Armstrong Laboratory Brooks AFB,

http://www.brooks.af.mil/AFRL/HED/hedr/reports/dielectric/home.html

[17] Gabriel S, Lau R W and Gabriel C 1996 Phys. Med. Biol. 41 2251
[18] Su S, Dai W, Haynie D, Nassar R and Simicevic N 2004 XXX, accepted for publication
[19] Landau L D and Lifshitz 1960 Electrodynamics of Continuous Media Reading: Addison-Wesley

[20] Schwartz J L and Mealing G A R 1985 Phys. Med. Biol. 30 117
[21] Hahn G M, Kernahan P, Martinez A, Pounds D and Prionas S 1980 Annals of the New York

Academy of Sciences 327

[22] Cook H 1952 British Journal of Applied Physics 3 249
[23] Pfutzner H 1984 Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing 22 142
[24] Burdette E C, Cain F L and Seals J 1980 IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques 4

Inc.

414

[25] Alison J M and Sheppard R J 1993 Phys. Med. Biol. 38 971
[26] Schwan H P 1963 Biophysik 1 198
[27] Chang A T C and Wilheit T T 1979 Radio Science 14 793
[28] http://caps.phys.latech.edu

neven/pulseﬁeld/

∼

