4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Engines at molecular scales

Raishma Krishnan and A. M. Jayannavar∗
Institute of Physics, Sachivalaya Marg, Bhubaneswar-751005, India

In recent literature there has been a lot of interest in the phenomena of noise induced transport in
the absence of an average bias occurring in spatially periodic systems far from equilibrium. One of
the main motivations in this area is to understand the mechanism behind the operation of biological
motors at molecular scale. These molecular motors convert chemical energy available during the
hydrolysis of ATP into mechanical motion to transport cargo and vesicles in living cells with very
high reliability, adaptability and eﬃciency in a very noisy environment. The basic principle behind
such a motion, namely the Brownian ratchet principle, has applications in nanotechnology as novel
nanoparticle separation devices. Also, the mechanism of ratchet operation ﬁnds applications in game
theory. Here, we brieﬂy focus on the physical concepts underlying the constructive role of noise in
assisting transport at a molecular level. The nature of particle currents, the energetic eﬃciency of
these motors, the entropy production in these systems and the phenomenon of resonance/coherence
are discussed.

PACS numbers: 05.40.-a,05.60.cd,02.50.Ey.,05.70.lw
Keywords: Ratchets, Molecular motors, energetics, transport coherence

I.

INTRODUCTION

Noise or ﬂuctuations, that arise either due to the
coupling of the system with external incompletely de-
scribed system or from the bath is traditionally thought
of as an unwanted eﬀect. Recently, much work has been
done the outcome of which reveal clearly the construc-
tive role of noise in many systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Particularly, biological systems provide an important
motivation to study the physics of active processes. In
the molecular scale, these systems transduce chemical
energy obtained from chemical reactions out of equilib-
rium into mechanical work, generating net motion in a
very noisy environment. In terms of magnitude, the par-
ticle is acted upon by a noise power of about 8−9 orders
of magnitude greater than the chemical power available
to drive the motion. Even then the molecular motors,

∗Electronic address: jayan@iopb.res.in

for instance, are able to move and transfer cargo from
one point to another and sometimes against the poten-
tial gradient. They perform this useful work with high
eﬃciency and reliability even when the environmental
conditions are changing all the time.

Examples of molecular motors include cytoskele-
tal motor proteins namely kinesin, dynein, etc., which
move on the microtubules. Also molecular pumps, for
example, sodium or potassium pumps etc., maintain ac-
tive transport across membranes against a concentration
gradient. What distinguishes these machines from their
macroscopic counterparts or heat engines is the fact that
they operate in a highly viscous medium which is char-
acterised by low Reynolds number and are subjected to
strong thermal ﬂuctuations due to which their motion is
stochastic. Hence these motors are termed as Brownian
motors or rectiﬁers. Also, they operate at isothermal
conditions. They work by harnessing the force of ran-
dom motion in the surrounding medium in the absence
of a conventional energy source and use it for creating

directed motion. Here we focus mainly on some general
physical principles behind such phenomena without go-
ing into the details of its biological implications.

Any system which is in equilibrium with a ther-
mal bath at temperature T has the presence of noise in
it. Though these thermal noise/ﬂuctuations are ubiqui-
tous, the validity of the second law of thermodynamics
forbids the harnessing of noise for useful purposes with-
out spending any energy from the external sources. A
Brownian particle executes a random motion in a liq-
uid without any preferential direction. The principle of
detailed balance, which essentially means that the rate
of forward motion is equal to the rate in the backward
direction, forbids current in any preferential direction
and hence one cannot extract useful work.
In other
words, one can extract energy only when the system
is driven away from equilibrium. This has been very
well demonstrated by Feynman in his ‘Feynman Lec-
tures on Physics’ [8] by introducing a mechanical ratchet
and pawl subjected to thermal ﬂuctuations to demon-
strate the impossibility of the violation of the second law
of thermodynamics. Hence building a motor that uses
thermal energy from a single heat bath to do mechanical
work is not possible.

II. CONDITIONS FOR THE EFFECT

The model to understand such noise induced ac-
tive transport in a ﬂuctuating environment is provided
by the so called Brownian ratchets. These are sys-
tems with an underlying spatially asymmetric periodic
potential, that exploit the nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations,
present in the medium, to generate a directed ﬂow.
The eﬀect of the thermal environment is modeled by
considering randomly ﬂuctuating force ξ(t) and a con-
comitant viscous (frictional) force with a friction coef-
ﬁcient η. η and random noise ξ(t) with < ξ(t) >= 0
are related through the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem,
i.e., < ξ(t)ξ(s) >= 2ηkBT δ(t − s). Physical models
like ﬂashing ratchets, rocking ratchets, time asymmetric
ratchets, inhomogeneous (frictional) ratchets etc., have
been proposed to achieve essential nonequilibrium con-
ditions for net motion in a periodic system. As long as
the system is left alone and remains in thermodynamic
equilibrium particles in a ratchet cannot diﬀuse in any

2

preferential direction, in spite of the spatial asymme-
try in the potential. But in the presence of additive or
multiplicative nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations the particles
in general start to move in one direction as the princi-
ple of detailed balance does not hold in this case. Thus
both nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations and spatial or tempo-
ral asymmetry in potential conspire to generate a uni-
directional ﬂow in the absence of bias. In the following
we brieﬂy discuss the essential ideas behind some of the
ratchet models.

III. DIFFERENT TYPES OF RATCHETS

A. Flashing ratchets

This is a simple model that closely resembles the
mode of operation of protein motors. In this model the
periodic potential is allowed to ﬂuctuate with ﬁnite time
correlation between two states characterised by diﬀerent
barrier heights. For example, the overdamped Brownian
particles are subjected to two potential states periodi-
cally, i.e., Von which corresponds to an asymmetric saw
tooth like potential for a time τon and Vof f which cor-
responds to zero potential (ﬂat) state for a time interval
τof f as is shown in Fig. 1. During the period when the

Ratchet potential

−(1−   )Lα

α

L

ON

−L

0

L

Particle distribution

OFF

ON

−L

0

x

L

FIG. 1: Flashing ratchet model. Here L is the period of the
potential and α is the asymmetry parameter.

potential is on the particles will slide down the poten-

(a)

(b)

(c)

tial slope to the bottom of the potential minima due
to which there is a peak in the probability density of
particles at these minima. Switching the potential oﬀ
allows the particles to diﬀuse freely and the density of
particles spread into a Gaussian curve centered around
the minima as shown in Fig. 1b. At the end of τof f the
potential is again put back to the on state for an inter-
val τon and the particles will again slide down along the
direction of local force to the nearest minima, Fig. 1c.
This process is continued indeﬁnitely resulting in a net
current in one direction because of spatial asymmetry
in the potential within a period.

The main point to be taken care of is the time in-
terval between switching on and oﬀ periods of the po-
tential. If τof f is adjusted such that by the end of τof f
the diﬀusive motion takes the particle out of the earlier
existing potential minima in the steeper slope (smaller
distance) direction of the saw tooth potential but fails to
do so in as much proportion in the gentler slope (larger
distance) direction, then in the next on interval of the
potential the particles will slide along the gentler slope
to the adjacent minimum of the saw tooth potential.
This process of sequential ﬂipping of the potential be-
tween on and oﬀ states is continued and in the long
time limit one gets a net ﬂow of current to the right
side. The system is supplied with the required energy
to ﬂip the potential states externally thereby render-
ing the system nonequilibrium. It is to be emphasized
that thermal ﬂuctuations are necessary for the working
of ﬂashing ratchets. Moreover, no macroscopic bias is
applied to the system.

1. Equivalence to Carnot engine

The ﬂashing ratchet model where the potential is
ﬂipped between on and oﬀ states is analogous to the case
where the particle is coupled to two temperature baths.
From statistical mechanics it is well known that the
probability to cross a barrier is governed by the factor
exp −(V /kBT ) where V is the potential barrier height.
When the temperature T is large the average kinetic
energy of the particle is large and so is the violent ther-
mal ﬂuctuations. Due to this the particle hardly feels
the presence of potential in comparison with the ther-
mal noise and hence the probability to cross the barriers

3

is large. This is equivalent to the particle being in the
oﬀ state of the ﬂashing ratchet discussed above. In the
opposite case when the temperature of the medium is
small, the average kinetic energy and the thermal ﬂuctu-
ations are small and the particles will feel the presence
of the asymmetric potential. This case is akin to the
on state in the ﬂashing ratchet. Thus the systematic
coupling of the particle randomly to two temperature
baths is equivalent to ﬂashing ratchet model where the
potential is switched on and oﬀ and in the long time
limit one gets unidirectional current. In this spirit the
ratchet system has direct equivalence to a Carnot en-
gine which extracts work by making use of two thermal
baths held at diﬀerent temperatures.

The relevant system variables for the ratchets are
temperature T (t) and the position x(t) while that for
a Carnot engine are pressure and volume. However,
there exists qualitative diﬀerences between the two. For
the case of ratchets, after one periodic variation in time
of T (t) or one temperature cycle the particle may or
maynot come to the same position or in otherwords
there is no synchronization between the relevant sys-
tem variables. But for a Carnot engine there is a com-
plete synchronization between the relevant system vari-
ables along the cycle. The ideal Carnot engine moreover
will not be simultaneously in contact with two temper-
ature baths assuring the reversible mode of operation.
In contrast, ratchets or molecular motors work in an
intrinsically irreversible mode of operation with a very
low eﬃciency. It has to be emphasised that Carnot en-
gine gives high eﬃciency only in the quasi-static mode
of operation and though there is net work done by the
engine the net power delivered in the cycle is zero. For
the case of molecular motors we may get a higher eﬃ-
ciency in the nonadiabatic regime (i.e. by increasing the
frequency of oscillation or cycling) as compared to the
values obtained in the adiabatic or quasi-static regime
of operation. This behaviour is quite contrary to the
case of reversible macroscopic heat engines. The distin-
guishing factor of a Brownian motor is that noise plays
a dominant role and that noise may facilitate energy
transduction leading to high eﬃciency of these molecu-
lar engines which is counterintuitive [9].

In these molecular engines noise and associated dis-
persion of particles are no longer thought of as a hin-

drance, but are instead incorporated as a part of the
design. Moreover, an eﬃcient microscopic engine is
not necessarily the microscopic equivalent of an eﬃcient
macroscopic engine.

2. Current reversals and mass separation devices

With a judicious choice of asymmetric potential
the current reverses its sign as a function of suitable
system parameter. This phenomenon is called cur-
rent reversal. Thus, Brownian particles with diﬀer-
ent friction coeﬃcients, masses or charges move in op-
posite directions and hence they can be readily sep-
arated. This is a new modern method of separating
particles at nanometer scale. To illustrate the phe-

m

J

0

m c

λ

c

λ

1

  

FIG. 2: Figure to illustrate current reversal.

nomenon of current reversal consider a potential of the
form Vλ(x, t) = λV2(x, t) + (1 − λ)V1(x, t) where V1(x, t)
and V2(x, t) are two ﬂuctuating ratchet potentials such
that the unidirectional ﬂow of currents in V1(x, t) and
V2(x, t) are in opposite directions in the presence of
nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations and λ is a parameter be-
tween 0 and 1. If V2(x, t) is a mirror reﬂection of V1(x, t),
the ﬂuctuating ratchet potential shown in Fig. 1, then
under the inﬂuence of V2(x, t) alone current ﬂows in the
negative direction. The current has a smooth depen-
dence on mass and the higher the mass the lower is the
current. A particle of mass m will move in respective
directions depending on the potential to which it is sub-
jected to. Suppose that the particle is subjected to the
potential Vλ(x) which is a combination of V1(x, t) and
V2(x, t). The plausible curve for unidirectional current
as a function of λ in shown Fig. 2. When λ is zero there
will be contribution only from V1(x, t) and one gets a

4

current which is positive. When λ = 1 the contribution
to the current will be from V2(x, t) and hence the ﬂow
will be in the opposite direction. Thus by continuously
deforming one potential into another, i.e., V1(x, t) into
V2(x, t) there must exist an intermediate potential with
the property that the particle current is zero at some ﬁ-
nite value of the parameter λc. Hence there is a critical
λc at which the current curve passes with a ﬁnite slope
through this zero point thereby implying the existence
of current inversion as a function of λ.

Once a current inversion upon variation of one pa-
rameter of the model is established an inversion upon
variation of any other parameter can be inferred along
the same line of reasoning. Suppose we ﬁx a point, say,
the value of λ = λc at which the current for a particu-
lar mass, mc, is zero. Now if we vary the mass around
the value mc one would see that the current as a func-
tion of mass will smoothly go through this zero point at
m = mc with a ﬁnite slope. This means that a current
reversal is obtained as a function of mass. That is, par-
ticles of mass greater than mc and that with mass less
than mc get separated in opposite directions.

The phenomenon of current reversal can play a ma-
jor role in separation devices. This method of particle
separation has many features far superior than the ex-
isting methods like electrophoresis, centrifugation, chro-
matography etc., which rely on the motion caused by
long range gradients.
In these methods the thermal
noise inturn degrades the quality of separation due to
the diﬀusive broadening of the bands. It is also possible
to get multiple current reversals by properly choosing
the potential as a function of system parameters. By
multiple reversals one can separate blocks of particles
of diﬀerent masses with parameters within a character-
istic window. It may be noted that for two dimensional
ratchets, particles of diﬀerent masses get separated in
diﬀerent directions.

3. Parrondo’s paradox

The concept of Brownian ratchets, where there is
rectiﬁcation of ﬂuctuations to give unidirectional cur-
rent also has its extensions to game theory opening up
a new area of paradoxical gambling games under the
subject of Parrondo’s paradoxes [10]. These games can

be thought of as a discrete time version of ﬂashing Brow-
nian ratchets with the interesting consequence that by
randomly switching between two losing games one tends
to win. To begin with, consider a ﬂashing ratchet model

(a)

− L

(b)

0

ON

L

OFF

J

cF

(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

FA

F

FIG. 3: Illustration of Parrando’s paradox. (a) and (b) cor-
responds to the on and oﬀ potential states in the presence
of bias ﬁeld.

in the absence of any external force as discussed in
Sec. III A with a current ﬂow towards the right, Fig. 1,
or in the positive direction when the potential is ﬂuctu-
ating between the on and oﬀ states. To this a constant
tilting force F , as in Fig. 3, is applied opposite to the
direction of current in the ratchet. Then, as expected,
the current (J) in the positive direction decreases and
beyond a particular value called the stopping force Fc
the current crosses over to the negative direction. This
is illustrated in the J vs F plot in Fig. 3. Let us con-
sider a particular value of force say FA in the J vs F
plot. The corresponding ﬂashing ratchet proﬁle is as in
the ﬁgure. In the presence of a bias force FA, the cur-
rent ﬂows in the negative direction as expected in both
the on and oﬀ states of the potential in the absence
of ﬂipping. But ﬂipping between the on and oﬀ states
randomly for a long time will result in a current in the
positive direction. Thus at the point FA one gets cur-
rent in the positive direction though when considered
separetely ( i.e., when the potential is as shown either
in Fig. 3a or in Fig. 3b) the ﬂow of current is in the
negative direction.

The current in the negative direction for the two
diﬀerent potentials is analogous to a losing game and
thus alternating randomly between these two losing

5

games one has a ﬁnite probability to win (current in
the positive direction). The game reveals the fact that
the outcome of the alternation of two stochastic dynam-
ics can signiﬁcantly be diﬀerent from each separate one.
Parrando’s paradox, where one basically converts two
losing strategies into a winning one, has numerous ap-
plications in the ﬁeld of economics, sociology and many
other interdisciplinary areas. An example is the forma-
tion of spatial patterns in spatially extended systems
by alternation between two dynamics which in turn is
absent in the presence of only a single dynamics.

B. Rocking ratchets

In the ratchet model we had considered before
namely, ﬂashing ratchet, the potential ﬂuctuates be-
tween on and oﬀ states. Another type of ratchet corre-
sponds to rocking ratchets where given an asymmetric
potential one applies a random time varying force with
mean zero. Due to the anisotropy of the potential (a
special case is shown in Fig. 4a), when a force having
same magnitude but diﬀerent signs +F and −F are ap-
plied, the motion of the particle on the average will be
along positive and negative direction respectively. How-
ever, particles will have to overcome only the smaller
barriers along the direction of their average motion in
the presence of a positive force as opposed to the case
when the force is negative with the same magnitude.
We consider a case where the average slope of the saw
tooth potential, Fig. 4a, is changed in time either slowly
or abruptly with a ﬁnite maximum value on either side
of the zero slope line ensuring that the time average of
the force acting on the particle due to rocking is zero
(Fig. 4b and c). The rocking or changing of slopes can
be done either periodically or randomly in time.

At very low temperature when the particles do not
have enough energy to overcome the barrier the par-
ticles get trapped in the minima of the potential. A
special case of rocking force, +F and −F , imposed on
the ratchet potential is shown in Fig. 4b and 4c respec-
tively. For the case when force is negative, Fig. 4b, the
particle remains trapped in one of the trenches whereas
when the force is positive, Fig. 4c, the particle is capable
of running down the potential hill. With such a geomet-
rical construction one can notice that the current when

)
x
(
V

(b)

(a)

x

(c)

structures also have space dependent friction coeﬃcient.
The peculiarity of this type of ratchets is that the system

6

(a)

(b)

Potential, V(x) = − Sin (x)

Temperature coefficient, T(x) = (1 − λ    Sin (x − 

))φ

 

FIG. 4: Rocking ratchet model.

FIG. 5: Illustration of an inhomogeneous ratchet. The tem-
perature and potential proﬁles are depicted in the ﬁgure.

the force is +|F | is not equal and opposite to the case
when force is −|F |. In otherwords, J(|F |) 6= −J(−|F |)
remains valid even for ﬁnite temperatures. Thus sys-
tem acts as a nonlinear rectiﬁer in the presence of zero
average periodic or random force.

Unlike in the case of ﬂashing ratchets, the direc-
tion of current for the rocking ratchet is in the direction
of the steeper slope and this mechanism of rocking is
equivalent to generating dc current in semiconductor pn
junctions under an applied ac bias.

C.

Inhomogeneous ratchets

There is yet another type of ratchet, namely, fric-
tional ratchets [7, 11] which unlike the ones discussed
above gives unidirectional current even in the presence
of spatially periodic symmetric potential, V (x) but in
the presence of space dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
D(x) = kBT (x)/η(x). The space dependence of diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient could arise either due to space dependent
temperature T (x) or space dependent friction coeﬃcient
η(x). Such inhomogeneous systems are common in na-
ture. For example, particles diﬀusing close to surface
have space dependent friction coeﬃcient. The molecu-
lar motor proteins are believed to be moving close along
the microtubules and therefore experience space depen-
dent mobility. Semiconductor systems and superlattice

dissipates energy during its time evolution diﬀerently
at diﬀerent places due to the space dependent diﬀusion
coeﬃcient arising from variation in temperature T (x)
which in turn implies that the system is out of equilib-
rium. The only criterion that has to be satisﬁed here
is that both the potential V (x) as well as temperture
T (x) has to be periodic and should be separated by a
phase diﬀerence other than 0 and π with respect to the
potential as shown in Fig. 5. A similar eﬀect of varia-
tion in temperature can also be obtained if we have a
medium with space dependent friction coeﬃcient η(x)
in the presence of external noise. The noise being exter-
nally imposed the system always absorbs energy due to
the absence of a concomitant loss factor. At the regions
where the friction coeﬃcient is high the overdamped
particle stays for a longer time due to which the pos-
sibility of absorption of energy from the external noise
in that region is correspondingly high. This leads to an
increase in the local temperature in these regions. Thus
system with space dependent friction at constant tem-
perature in the presence of external parametric noise is
equivalent to a system with a space dependent temper-
ature ﬁeld.

To illustrate the net unidirectional transport in
these systems consider a periodic potential V (x) as
shown in Fig. 5a. Also consider a space dependent tem-
perature proﬁle with same periodicity as that of po-
tential but shifted by a phase diﬀerence φ as shown in

Fig. 5b.
In Fig. 5a the darkened regions specify re-
gions of higher temperature corresponding to the re-
gions where the temperature proﬁle has peaks Fig. 5b.
The particle in the darkened regions (high temperature
regions) on the average gains more energy as compared
to other regions. As a consequence the particle in any
potential minima will ﬁnd it easier to cross the peak of
the potential and go over to the right side than to the
left side. Hence current in the right side is assured. The
magnitude as well as the direction of current depends
on the phase diﬀerence φ.

It may be noted that unidirectional motion in in-
homogeneous systems arise as a corrollary to the well
known Landauer’s blow torch principle [12]. This prin-
ciple states that the behaviour of nonequilibrium sys-
tems will depend sensitively on the speciﬁc details of its
kinetics, even on pathways that traverse infrequently oc-
cupied kinetic states far from the stable state. In other-
words, the stability criteria which examine only the im-
mediate vicinity of a locally stable state are inadequate
to assess the relative stability of states in nonequilibrium
systems. In contrast, microscopically reversible systems
can well be characterised by criteria that depend only
on the local neighbourhood of the equilibrium state.

IV. ENERGETICS OF BROWNIAN MOTORS

As mentioned above, ratchets extract energy from
random ﬂuctuations and generate currents or ordered
motion.
In this sense they can be considered as in-
formation engines analogous to Maxwell’s demon which
extract work out of bath at the expense of an overall
increase in entropy. The usefulness of any engine lie in
the extent of work that can be eﬃciently extracted out
of it. The molecular motors in living cells are found to
be very eﬃcient in their noisy environment. In all the
ratchet models that we have discussed above no use-
ful work has been performed. This is because particles
moving in a periodic potential system ends up with the
same potential energy even after crossing over the ad-
jacent potential minimum. There is no extra energy
stored in the particle which can be usefully expended
when needed. To have an engine out of a ratchet it is
necessary to use its systematic motion to store poten-
tial energy which inturn is achieved if a ratchet lifts a

7

load. Thus for the ratchet to perform work a small force

External
agent

Ein

Q

Thermal
bath

Motor

W

Load

FIG. 6: Schematic ﬁgure of the energy ﬂow in a Brownian
motor.

called load (Fig. 6) has to be applied opposite to the di-
rection of current in the ratchet. Then the particles will
keep on moving, on the average, against the force or
load performing work. Part of the input energy, Ein,
coming from the source of nonequilibrium is converted
into mechanical energy related to the load.

A general framework has been developed wherein
the compatibility between the Langevin or Fokker-
Planck formalisms, used to discuss stochastic processes,
and the laws of thermodynamics, which characterize the
thermal and mechanical behaviour of macroscopic sys-
tems, have been established [13]. The concept of heat on
mesoscopic scales has been deﬁned in terms of Langevin
dynamics and the essential point behind this formalism
is that the heat transferred to the system is nothing but
the microscopic work done by both the frictional and
random force in the Langevin equation (i.e., work done
by the bath on the system). This is also consistent with
the fact that we cannot control all the details of energy
transfer which inturn leads to the concept of heat (via
stochastic dynamics) as a form of energy ﬂow. The sub-
ject of the energetics of Brownian motors has developed
into an entire subﬁeld on its own right. Fig. 6 represents
the energy ﬂow between the isothermal Brownian motor
and its surroundings. The ﬁrst and the second law of
thermodynamics is now given as

Ein = Q + W

∆Sagent +

= Sprod ≥ 0

Q
T

(1)

(2)

In the above equation Ein is the input energy into the
system from the external agent, Q, the heat dissipated
to the bath, and W the work done. All these quanti-
ties can be deﬁned for each microscopic realization of
the motion of Brownian particle or motor. Eqns. 1 and

2 correspond to the ﬁrst and second law of thermody-
namics. Again, ∆Sagent is the change in entropy of the
external agent, Q/T is the entropy given to the bath and
Sprod is the total entropy production of the universe. T
corresponds to the absolute temperature. Magnitudes
of all the physical quantities are taken over a cycle or
per unit time in the stationary regime. In this regime
the entropy and the internal energy of the motor (sys-
tem) which are the state variables does not change. The
formal expressions for all the above mentioned physical
quantities are known in terms of the probability distri-
bution of the particles.

Using this framework of stochastic energetics one
can readily calculate various physical quantities like ef-
ﬁciency of energy conversion (η = W/Ein), energy dissi-
pation (hysteresis loss), entropy production [14], input
energy, work etc. The important point to be noted here
is that an analysis of ﬂuctuations, which is completely
ignored in the working of heat engines at larger scale,
is essential for the calculation of eﬃciency of ratchet
systems at the molecular scale. The eﬃciency of the
Brownian motors is sensitively dependent on system pa-
rameters.

The study of the eﬃciency of energy transduction
by diﬀerent types of ratchet models show the ratchets
to have very low eﬃciency. The observed eﬃciency val-
ues of the several ratchet models like ﬂashing ratchets,
rocking ratchets etc., are found to fall in the subpercent-
age regime (< .01). This is due to the fact that every
time the potential changes the particle distribution also
changes and tries to adapt to the changing environmen-
tal conditions. This leads to an inevitable loss in the
medium or in other words the mode of operation of the
ratchets is intrinsically irreversible. As a consequence
the unattainability of Carnot eﬃcieny in Brownian heat
engines has been emphasized in literature. Currently,
the notion of reversible ratchets where the energy dis-
sipation or entropy production is almost zero are be-
ing pursued. These reversible ratchets are sometimes
termed as adiabatic pumps wherein transport of parti-
cles with zero entropy production is generated by cyclic
adiabatic variations of atleast two parameters of the pe-
riodic potential (which are out of phase in time) in the
absence of bias [13].

The energetic eﬃciency of a ratchet is not an intrin-

8

sic property of the device and it depends on the char-
acteristics of the imposed external load. By a judicial
choice of the external load one can improve the eﬃciency
considerably. Recently [15] a ﬂashing rachet model has
been developed, wherein with two asymmetric double-
well periodic-potential- states displaced by half a period
a high eﬃciency has been achieved due to the blocking
of particle motion in the opposite direction to that of
the net average current. Such ﬂashing ratchet models
were found to be highly eﬃcient with eﬃciency an order
of magnitude higher than in the earlier models. The ba-
sic idea behind this enhanced eﬃciency is that even for
diﬀusive Brownian motion the choice of appropriate po-
tential proﬁle ensures suppression of backward motion
and hence a reduction in the accompanying dissipation.

We have studied the motion of a particle in a new
class of rocking ratchets rocked purposefully as to favour
current in one direction but to suppress motion in the
opposite direction. This is accomplished by applying a
temporally asymmetric but unbiased periodic forcings.
It may be noted that in this type of ratchets a larger
force ﬁeld is applied for a short time interval of the pe-
riod in the forward direction as compared to a smaller
force for a longer time interval in the other direction.
The intervals are so chosen that the net external force
or bias acting on the particle over a period is zero. In
these new class of temporally asymmetric driven ratch-
ets one gets unidirectional current even in the presence
of spatially symmetric potential [16].

At low temperatures when kBT is much less than
V0, the modulation amplitude of the periodic symmetric
potential, signiﬁcant current arises only when the bias
ﬁeld is greater than a critical ﬁeld Fc, the value of which
should be greater than V0 [17]. If the bias ﬁeld is less
than V0, the particle will feel the barriers and hence cur-
rent ﬂux in the negative direction is very small or there
is blocking of current. A signiﬁcant current ﬂux in the
positive direction arises only when the temporally asym-
metric bias force ﬁeld in that direction is greater than
V0. When this condition, of bias ﬁeld being less than V0
in the backward direction and being greater than V0 in
the forward direction, is satisﬁed the barriers for motion
in the forward direction disappears and one gets unidi-
rectional current. Interestingly, such choice of forcings
help in obtaining rectiﬁed currents with high eﬃciency

of the order of 50% without ﬁne tuning of the physical
parameters. This eﬃciency is several orders of magni-
tude larger than the obtained eﬃciency in several other
ratchet models. Moreover, the range of parameters of
operation of such ratchets is quite wide sustaining large
loads.

ima in current to be related to the maxima in the over-
all entropy production as a function of noise strength.
However, we have shown that the total entropy produc-
tion does not extremize at the same parameter value at
which the current exhibits a maximum [14]. The fact

9

A. Currents, Stochastic resonance and Coherence

The noise induced currents in most of the ratchet
systems exhibits a peak with respect to noise strength
and other physical parameters. Such peaking behaviour
is expected when system exhibits a resonance phenom-
ena.
Infact, some recent studies have tried to reveal
the relation between two unrelated phenomena, namely
stochastic resonance and Brownian ratchets in a formal
way through the consideration of Fokker-Planck equa-
tions. We have analysed this issue by using the method
of stochastic energetics in several classes of adiabatically
rocked ratchets.

The resonance behaviour can be well characterised
by the behaviour of input energy. It is expected that at
resonance the system extracts maximum energy from
the external source and hence in the time periodic sta-
tionary state this energy is dissipated to the environ-
ment (hysteresis loss). Our studies show the input en-
ergy to have a monotonous behaviour as a function of
noise strength. Thus the resonance like feature observed
in the nature of currents as a function of noise strength
is not related to the intrinsic resonance in the dynamics
of the particle with the external ac drive. The above
observations are valid only for a class of adiabatically
rocked ratchets.

The presence of net currents (ordered motion) in
the ratchets increases the amount of known information
about the system than otherwise. This extra bit of in-
formation comes from the negentropy or the physical in-
formation supplied by the external nonequilibrium bath.
The amount of information that is transferred by the
nonequilibrium bath is quantiﬁed in terms of algorith-
mic complexity of the position of Brownian particle. It
has been argued that the algorithmic complexity or Kol-
mogorov information entropy is maximum when the cur-
rent is maximum [18]. Since the currents are generated
at the expense of entropy we naively expect the max-

(a)

(b)

∆

x < < L

x∆

Coherent transport

(Reliable)

∆

x > > L

Incoherent transport

(Unreliable)

L

L

∆ x

FIG. 7: Evolution of particle distribution for a given time
interval is depicted for two separate cases of particle trans-
port.

that noise strength at which the maxima seen in both
current and entropy production do not coincide may be
related to the quality of the current or the coherence in
transport. Noise induced currents are always accompa-
nied by a dispersion or diﬀusion. When the diﬀusion
is large, ∆x >> L with ∆x being the diﬀusive spread
when the mean position of the particle is shifted by a
distance L which is the period of the potential, then the
quality of transport degrades and the coherence in the
unidirectional motion is lost. The coherent transport
(optimal transport) refers to the case of large mean ve-
locity at fairly small diﬀusion (see Fig. 7). This is in turn
quantiﬁed by a dimensionless Pe´clet number which is
the ratio of current to the diﬀusion constant [19]. From
Fig. 7 we see that in both the cases there is a noise in-
duced current of the same magnitude, but transport in
Fig. 7a is more coherent due to the fact that particles
are reliably transferred from one point to the other due
to the less diﬀusive spread. In Fig. 7b though there is
a shift in the peak (or there is current of same magni-
tude) due to the large diﬀusive spread the probability
that the particle is delivered to the desired region is less.
There is a ﬁnite probability that the particle may still
be around the region where it has started.

For a given magnitude of current the transport may

be coherent or incoherent. Thus analysis of the relation
between current and the entropy production requires
not only the magnitude of current but also the quality
of transport. These studies are expected to reveal a
deep connection between eﬃciency, quality of transport,
entropy and information.

systems has led to the discovery of quantum ratchets.
These quantum ratchets make use of quantum eﬀects
such as tunneling and wave interference eﬀects. Such
electron ratchets can not only be used to generate par-
ticle current but also to pump heat in the reversible
mode of operation.

10

V. CONCLUSIONS

To summarize, we have given a qualitative picture
of the constructive role of noise in nonequilibrium sys-
tems. This area has attracted great interest from diverse
areas of science and technology. We have presented a
brief description of the diﬀerent ratchet models or Brow-
nian motors and also the method of stochastic energetics
that was developed in order to understand the energet-
ics in such systems with special emphasis on our work
and results.

In our discussion so far we had restricted only to
the case of isolated Brownian motors. Infact, the coop-
erativity among Brownian motors has far reaching con-
sequences [3]. The coupling among these motors can
lead to a marked increase in the eﬃciency of energy
transduction as well as the magnitude of macroscopic
current. Cooperative motors also exhibit other fasci-
nating phenomena such as phase transitions, normal
to anomalous hysteretic behaviour, absolute negative
mobility etc. The parallel development in mesoscopic

To conclude, we have shown that molecular motors
work as engines at molecular scale. These microscopic
engines are not the microscopic equivalent of the eﬃ-
cient macroscopic engines that we come across in our
daily life. Noise play an inherent constructive role in
the mode of operation of these engines. Thus noise is
not a nuisance but rather an inseparable part of the de-
sign of the engine operation. In some cases increase in
noise strength is found to even enhance the eﬃciency of
these engines. The operation of these engines are done
by the engines themselves and they are out of equilib-
rium. As such there are no general principles that de-
termines the mode of optimal eﬃciency of these engines.
Further studies in this interdisciplinary area could lead
to a better knowledge of the functioning of these bio-
logical motors in living cells and also in the creation of
eﬃcient man made nanoscale machines. Such studies
could also bear important consequences in understand-
ing the fundamental issues in nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics.

[1] F. J¨ulicher, A. Adjari & J. Prost, (1997) Rev. Mod.

Phys. 69 : 1269.

[2] R. D. Astumian, (2001) Scientiﬁc American, 285 : 56.
[3] P. Reimann, (2002) Phys. Rep. 361 : 57. and references

[4] Special issue on “Ratchets and Brownian motors: ba-
sics, experiments and applications” ed. H. Linke, (2002)
Appl. Phys. A75(2).

[5] R. D. Astumian & P. Hanggi, (2002) Phys. Today, 55 :

therein.

33.

[6] M. C. Mahato & A. M. Jayannavar, Resonance (2003)
8, Number 7 : 33, M. C. Mahato & A. M. Jayannavar,
Resonance (2003) 8, Number 9 : 4.

[7] A. M. Jayannavar, cond-mat 0107079; in Frontiers in
Condensed Matter Physics, (A commemorative volume

th

year of Indian Journal of Physics), ed.

to mark the 75
J. K. Bhattacharjee & B. K. Chakrabarti (in press).
[8] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton & M. Sands, The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1963), Vol. 1.

[9] D. Dan, M. C. Mahato & A. M. Jayannavar, (2000) Int.
J. Mod. Phys. B 14 : 1585; (2001) Physica A 296 : 375;
D. Dan & A. M. Jayannavar, (2002) Phys. Rev. E65 :
37105.

[10] G. P. Harmer & D Abbott, (2002) Fluct. and Noise Lett.
2 : R71-R107; J. M. R. Parrondo & Luis Dinis, (2004)
Contemp. Phys. 45 : 147.

[11] M. C. Mahato, T. P. Pareek & A. M. Jayannavar, (1996)

Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 10 : 3857.

[12] R. Landauer, (1978) Phys. Today, 31 : 23.

[13] K. Sekimoto, (1997) J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66 : 1234; J. M.
R. Parrondo & B. J. De Cisneros, (2002) Appl. Phys.
A75 : 179.

[14] Raishma Krishnan & A. M. Jayannavar, Physica A (in
press), cond-mat 0310726, Debasis Dan & A. M. Jayan-
navar, Physica A (in press), cond-mat 0303417.

[15] Yu.A. Makhnovskii, V. M. Rozenbaum, D.-Y. Yang, S.
H. Lin & Tsong, (2004) Phys. Rev. E69 : 021102.
[16] M. Millonas, (1995) Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 : 10; M. C.
Mahato & A. M. Jayannavar, (1995) Phys. Lett. A 209
:21.

11

[17] H. Risken,

(1984) The Fokker-Planck Equation

[18] J. R. Sanchez, F. Family & C. M. Arizmendi, (1998)

(Springer Verlag, Berlin).

Phys. Lett. A249 : 281.

[19] B. Linder & L Schimansky-Geier, (2002) Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89 : 230602 ; P. Reimann et al., (2002) Phys.
Rev. E65 : 31104; D. Dan & A. M. Jayannavar, (2002)
Phys. Rev. E66 : 41106; Raishma Krishnan, D. Dan &
A. M. Jayannavar, cond-mat 0309617.

