5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Autonomous free-energy transducer
working under thermal ﬂuctuations

Ken Sekimoto

Groupe Physico-Chimie Th´eorique, ESPCI
10 rue Vauquelin, F75231 Paris Cedex 05, France 1

Abstract

By a modular combination of mesoscopic detectors and gates, we present a thought-
ful pump that transports gas particles against the diﬀerence of their density at the
expense of the diﬀusion of another species of gas particles. We also discuss brieﬂy
the relevance of the model to the study of structure-function relationship of the
biomolecular machines.

free energy conversion, detector, gate, thermal ﬂuctuation, control,

Key words:
stochastic energetics
PACS: 05.40.-a, 05.70.Ln, 34.10.+x, 82.39.-k

1 Introduction

Biological molecular machines such as ion pumps, molecular motors (myosin,
F1 motor, etc.) or signal transducers (G-proteins) have attracted a lot of inter-
est among physicists as well as biologists (Alberts el al., 1998). The molecular
machines works under thermal ﬂuctuations, where the latter serve as an energy
source (Sekimoto, 1997) for the free energy transduction (Eisenberg and Hill,
1985) 2 as well as for the thermal activation (Wong et al., 1997). Moreover,
the cycle of free-energy transduction in a single molecular machine requires no
external control. As many of these molecular machines share highly conserved
three-dimensional structural modules, it is widely believed that they have been

Email address: sekimoto@turner.pct.espci.fr (Ken Sekimoto).

1 On leave from Universit´e Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.
2 Upon a single ATP hydrolysis reaction in vivo, about 70% of the maximally
available work (20kBT with kBT ≃ 4pN·nm) is ascribed to the change of the mixing
entropy.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

20 December 2013

evolved from a common ancestors (Kull et al., 1998). This fact suggests that
such molecular machines may be composed of a few modular structures each
of which bears some elementary functional role. With recent rapid develop-
ment of nano-biology and the structural biology, the biologists have begun to
look for such modular structure-function relationships within a single molec-
ular motors (Higuchi and Endow, 2002; Nitta et al., 2004; Tsiavaliaris et al.,
2004).

From the theoretical physicists side, there is no surprise about the mere
fact that a molecular machine without any special forward-backward sym-
metry can move in one direction under non-equilibrium conditions (e.g. un-
der the ATP hydrolysis), as stated in the Curie’s principle (Curie, 1894) 3 .
With this in mind, the question of our interest is how we can construct,
in combining well-deﬁned simple functional modules, an autonomously con-
trolled system that can work under thermal ﬂuctuations. Since the early works
by Feynman et al. (1966) and B¨uttiker et al. (1987), several models of au-
tonomous free energy transducer have been proposed, and their improvements
through the incorporation of a “gate” have been proposed (Sakaguchi, 1998;
Der´enyi and Astumian, 1999) (see also the review by Reimann (2002)). These
models were, however, rather ad hoc and the modular nature of the construc-
tion was not clearly visible. In the present paper, we would construct a free
energy transducer with being more conscious about the modules and taking
the object oriented approach (Sekimoto, 2000). We start by introducing the
concept of “semi-detectors”, the detectors that can perceive a certain exter-
nal state, but not all, with arbitrary sureness despite the thermal ﬂuctuation
(§ 2). We then combine these semi-detectors together with the gates, under
the designing concept that we call the “bidirectional control”, to realize an
autonomous particle transporter (§ 3). Because of the limited space of this
special issue, the extensive discussion on the possible relations to the real
biological molecular machines will be given elsewhere.

2 semi-detectors in the ﬂuctuating world

The detector is the mechanism that correlates the states of the outside to those
of the inside of the system in question. We focus on the case where the de-
tection site admits a single ligand particle coming randomly from the outside.
We will limit ourselves to the energetically “neutral” detections, involving no
change of the total energy. Let us deﬁne the mapping from a state of the
outside, x, to a subset of the states of the inside, Φ(x). In the discrete repre-
sentation, the states of outside consists of IN (i.e. a ligand particle is on the

3 “Lorsque certaines causes produisent certains eﬀets, les ´el´ements de sym´etrie des
causes doivent se retrouver dans les eﬀets produits.”

2

detection site) and OUT (otherwise), while those states inside consist of ON
and OFF. The perfect detector would establish the mapping, Φ(IN) = {ON}
and Φ(OUT) = {OFF}. But these correspondences are too stringent to realize
under thermal ﬂuctuations. We will show below that there can be the physical
mechanisms which assure either one of the above correspondences. We will
call the mappings corresponding to such mechanisms the semi-detectors.

Semi-detector of absence: This module functions as the mapping Φab(x) that
prohibits only the output of OFF under the input of IN. That is,

Φab(IN) = {ON}, Φab(OUT) = {ON, OFF}.

(1)

Then the OFF surely indicates the absence of the particle (OUT). Such aspect
is useful for repressive processes like the suppression of DNA transcription by
an repressor (Lewin, 2003). In the continuum representation, one may deﬁne
x as the position of a ligand particle in a half space 0 ≤ x < ∞, where x = 0
corresponds to the detection site (see Fig. 1 Left). The state of the inside, a,
is assumed to be bounded, say, in the region of −1 ≤ a ≤ 0 without loosing
generality. The semi-detector of absence may be realized by the steric repulsion
between the ligand particle and a movable object (thick bars in Fig. 1 Left).
The total energy of the ligand-detector system, U(x, a), is written as U(x, a) =
0 for x ≥ a+1 and U(x, a) = ∞ otherwise. OFF and ON states correspond,
respectively, to a ≥ −1+δ and −1 ≤ a < −1+δ with a small δ > 0.

OUT

OFF
IN

ON

ON

−1

a

0

+1

x

1

a

0

−1

forbidden

x

U

  (x,a) = 0

Fig. 1. Left: Schematic representation of the semi-detector of absence in a continuum
representation. The movable object (thick bar) and the ligand particle (thick dot)
are sterically excluding with each other. a represents the coordinate of the left
extremity of the object. x = 0 is the detection cite. Right: The shadowed region on
the (x, a)-plane indicates the accessible phase space, where U (x, a) =0.

Semi-detector of presence: This module functions complementarily to the for-
mer semi-detector. The mapping Φpr(x) that it deﬁnes prohibits only the out-
put of ON under the input of OUT. That is,

Φpr(IN) = {ON, OFF}, Φpr(OUT) = {OFF}.

(2)

Then the ON surely indicates the presence of the particle (IN). Such aspect is
useful for active processes like the uptake of ATP by a molecular motor. In

3

the continuum representation, the semi-detector of presence may be realized
by the compensation of a strong restoring potential for the movable object,
Mφ(a) (M ≫ kBT ), by the strong attractive interaction energy, −Mφ(a − x),
between the ligand particle and the movable object (see Fig. 2 Left). Here φ(z)
is deﬁned on −∞ < z ≤ 0 so that φ(z) = 0 for z ≤ −1 and that φ(z) increases
monotonically from φ(−1) = 0 to φ(0) = 1. Energetically, this movable object

OUT

OFF

OFF

−1

IN

ON
0

a

+1

x

a

0

−1

1

forbidden

x

U (x,a) = 0

Fig. 2. Left: Schematic representation of the semi-detector of presence. a and x
represent, respectively, the position of the movable object (ﬁlled square) and that
of the ligand particle (thick dot). Unless the particle is within the proximity of the
detection cite (0 ≤ x < δ) with small δ, the movable object is constrained at a ≃ −1
even under thermal agitations. Right: The accessible phase space is indicated as a
shadowed region, where U (x, a) ∼ kBT .

can take the value a ≥ −1 + δ only when the particle is near the binding site,
that is 0 ≤ x ≤ δ with a small δ > 0 so that Mφ(δ)<
∼kBT 4 . Therefore ON
and OFF correspond, respectively, to a ≥ −1 + δ and −1 ≤ a < −1 + δ. The
compensation mechanism similar to the one discussed here has been discussed
and called induced ﬁt by Koshland (1973) in the context of the ligand binding
by enzymes.

The above two semi-detectors establishes the correlations between the outer
world of the detectors and the detectors themselves in the way that the
semi-detectors represent certain error-free information despite the thermal
ﬂuctuations. If the state variables of two semi-detectors of presence, say a1
and a2, respectively, are coupled energetically with each other, the result-
ing system might function to realize the “cooperative binding” (Monod et al.,
1965; Koshland et al., 1996) or the “exchange of binding” (Eisenberg and Hill,
1985), depending on the nature of the coupling.

3 Free-energy transducer based on the semi-detectors of presence

and the gates

In order to focus on the subject of the autonomous control, we would like to
avoide energetic aspects as far as possible. To this end, we will construct a
pump of the ideal “load”(L) gas particles from a dilute reservoir, (L, l), to a

4 One can verify this by drawing M {φ(a) − φ(a − x)} vs a for various values of x.

4

dense reservoir, (L, h), at the expense of the diﬀusion of the ideal “fuel”(F)
particles from a dense reservoir, (F, h), to a dilute reservoir, (F, l), see Fig 3.
If we denote the chemical potentials of these reservoirs by µL,l, µL,h, µF,h and

F,h

L,l

FUEL

LOAD

F,l

L,h

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of how the free-energy transducer (the hexagon) pumps
up the load particles at the expense of the diﬀusion of the fuel particles. See the
text.

µF,l, respectively, then the decrease of the total Gibbs’ free energy in the course
of the transport of ∆NL,l→h of the load particles at the expense of ∆NF,h→l of
the fuel particles is (µF,h − µF,l)∆NF,h→l− (µL,h − µL,l)∆NL,l→h. Below we will
present a completely symmetric model in which the roles of the fuel and the
load are totally exchangeable depending on the relative magnitude of µF,h−µF,l
and µL,h − µL,l

5 .

The cyclic process in the above mentioned pump requires at least two internal
degrees of freedom 6 . To construct such pump with using the semi-detectors
of presence as constituent modules, the most natural way would be to put one
semi-detector on the fuel side (with the variable aF) and the another one on
the load side (with the variable aL), and to have them to control the access
of the particles on the opposite sides, via allosteric couplings (Monod et al.,
1965), see Fig. 4. We would call this scheme “bidirectional control”. We will
describe in three steps the details of the model which implements this scheme:
Step-1: Introduction of the “reaction” coordinates ˜xL and ˜xF. Being inspired
by Fig. 2, we introduce the convenient coordinate ˜x (0 ≤ ˜x < ∞) which

5 Under this symmetry, the currents of the active transport of the load particles,
JL,l→h, and that of the passive diﬀusion of the fuel particles, JF,h→l, are given in
the linear non-equilibrium thermodynamics as JL,l→h = Lasy∆µasy − Lsym∆µsym
and JF,h→l = Lasy∆µasy + Lsym∆µsym. Here Lasy ≥ 0 and Lsym ≥ 0 are the kinetic
coeﬃcients, and ∆µasy ≡ µF,h−µF,l−µL,h+µL,l and ∆µsym ≡ µF,h−µF,l+µL,h−µL,l.
This pump can work almost reversibly near the stalled condition, ∆µasy = 0, if Lsym
is suﬃciently small.
6 This statement does not contradicts with the fact that the existing models of
heat engine (Feynman et al., 1966; B¨uttiker et al., 1987) have assumed only one
rotational degree of freedom to lift a load, since such degree of freedom corresponds
to two bounded degrees of freedom.

5

FUEL SIDE

Semi−detector

Gate

a

F

a

L

Gate

Semi−detector

LOAD SIDE

a

L

0

−1

E

C,D

a

F

F,A

B

−1

Fig. 4. Left: Scheme of the bidirectional control. Right: Typical cycle realized by the
two independent internal state variables. A-F correspond to those in Fig. 7.

describes a ligand particle and a semi-detector of presence: x = max(˜x−1, 0),
a = − min(˜x, 1). Then we extend this deﬁnition of ˜x to the case of two particle
reservoirs: We assume that the high-density [low-density] reservoir occupies
the half space x > 0 [x < 0], respectively. We redeﬁne the mapping ˜x 7→ (x, a)
so that ˜x can take the values on the entire axis, −∞ < ˜x < ∞, with:

x = (˜x/|˜x|) max(|˜x| − 1, 0),

a = − min(|˜x|, 1).

(3)

A ligand particle is on the detection site if |˜x| ≤ 1, in the high-density reser-
voir if ˜x > 1, and in the low-density reservoir if ˜x < −1. We interpret ˜x so
that the region of |˜x| ≤ 1 − δ with small δ > 0 corresponds to the state ON
of the semi-detector, while |˜x| > 1 − δ corresponds to the state OFF. Finally
we apply this type of mapping for both the load side (˜xL) and the fuel side
(˜xF). The coordinate plane (˜xL, ˜xF) can then represent the positioning of one
representative load particle and the one fuel particle together with the states
of the semi-detectors of presence, aL and aF

7 .

Step-2: Deﬁnition of the gates’ action. For the fuel particles, we construct
the gate which allows the access of the particles exclusively from one of their
reservoirs at a time. In the Top of Fig. 5, the potential barrier (the hight
≫ kBT ) is established at ˜xF = 1 + ǫ with a small ǫ > 0, so that the access
of the fuel particles from the high-density reservoir is blocked at a distance ǫ
oﬀ the detection site (|˜xF| ≤ 1). The same architecture is deﬁned for the load
particles. Similarly the gate represented in the Bottom of Fig. 5 blocks the
access of the fuel particles from the low-density reservoir at the distance ǫ oﬀ
the detection site.

Step-3: Coupling of the semi-detectors to the gates. We deﬁne the bidirec-

tional control by the following symmetric rules:
[Control by aF] If a fuel particle is detected, i.e. if |˜xF| ≤ 1 − δ (Top-Left of
Fig. 6), only the load particles in the low-density reservoir (˜xL < −1) can access
to their detection site. If a fuel particle is not detected i.e., if |˜xF| > 1−δ (Top-

7 By the introduction of ˜xL and ˜xF, we can avoid to be lost in the four-dimensional
space. The trade-oﬀ that we pay is that any value of aF > −1 is represented by the
two equivalent points, ˜xF = ±aF. The same holds also on the load side.

6

1+ ε

−1−

ε

~
x

F

~
x

F

Low−density
reservoir

Detection 

site

High−density
reservoir

Fig. 5. Top: Potential proﬁle of the gate that opens to the fuel particles in their
low-density reservoir. Bottom: Similar to the above but the accessibility is for the
high-density side. The thick horizontal bars indicate the detection site for the fuel
particles.

Fuel

Load

Fig. 6. Top: The control of the load particles by the detection of the fuel particles.
Bottom: The control of the fuel particles by the detection of the load particles. The
J-shaped symbol in, for example, the Top-Left indicates the exclusive accessibility
from the low-density reservoir of the load particles, as indicated in the Top of Fig. 5.
The other cases would be understood similarly.

Right), then only the load particles in the high-density reservoir (˜xL > −1)
can access to their detection site.
[Control by aL]: If a load particle is detected, i.e. if |˜xL| ≤ 1 − δ (Bottom-
Left of Fig. 6), only the fuel particles in the low-density reservoir (˜xF < −1)
can access to their detection site. If a load particle is not detected, i.e. if
|˜xL| > 1 − δ (Bottom-Right), then only the fuel particles in the high-density
reservoir (˜xF > −1) can access to their detection site.

The consequence of these simple and symmetric combination of the semi-
detectors and the gates is immediately seen by the graphical representation
in Fig. 7. There, the potential barriers of the gates are indicated by the thick
horizontal or vertical bars. For example, the short horizontal bar at ˜xF = 1 + ǫ
in the range of |˜xL| < 1 − δ represents the blockade of the access of the
fuel particles from their high-density reservoir. We see how the combination
of those bars organizes a broad passageway joining the second and the forth
quadrants on the (˜xL, ˜xF)-plane. This passageway corresponds to the diﬀusion
of a single fuel particle from its high-density reservoir to the low-density one

7

A

B

ε1+
δ1−

C

0

δ1−

ε1+

~
x

L

~
x

F

D

E

F

In the (˜xL, ˜xF)-plane, the thick horizontal and vertical bars represent the
Fig. 7.
presence of the potential barriers either for the fuel particles (the horizontal bars) or
for the load particles (the vertical bars). The shaded regions are where the bidirec-
tional control prohibits to access except for a small “leak” due to the ﬁnite values
of ǫ and δ. See the text for the details. The dashed curve shows one representative
process (cf. the footnote on the multiplication of the state points). B-E on the curve
correspond roughly to those in Fig 4.

accompanying the active transport of a single load particle from its low-density
reservoir to the high-density one. Therefore, if we could neglect the small gaps
between the bars due to the ﬁnite values of ǫ and δ, this pump would work
tightly with ∆NF,h→l = ∆NL,l→h, whose mean ﬂow direction is determined by
the sign of (µF,h − µF,l)− (µL,h − µL,l). Actual autonomous pump seems not
be able to avoid the “leak” due to the above mentioned gaps, but this leak
would be of importance only near the stalled state (µF,h − µF,l = µL,h − µL,l)
as far as ǫ and δ are small 8 .

How would the pump thus constructed looks like for an observer who can
survey only the load particles? Let us suppose that (µF,h − µF,l)− (µL,h − µL,l)
is positive and enough greater than kBT . As long as the detection site of
the load particle is empty, this site is almost always accessible from the low-
density reservoir of the load particle (B along the dashed curve in Fig. 7).
When a load particle arrives at the detection site and is detected (C,D), the
gate is very likely to reverse its accessibility so that the load particle on the
detection site can leave now for the high-density reservoir (E). Then as soon
as the load particle quits the detection site (F), the gate comes back to the
initial conformation (B). Thus the pump behaves as if it responded by itself
to the arrival and the leave of the load particle.

8 In the context of the the linear non-equilibrium thermodynamics, we expect that
Lsym/Lasy is at most of the order of ǫ and δ.

8

4 Discussion

We have constructed theoretically an autonomous system that works under
thermal ﬂuctuations. The errors of the detection was avoided by introducing
what we call the semi-detectors. The concept of the semi-detectors on meso-
scopic scale might also be of interest in the context of the mesoscopic devices
(Imry, 1997). The cyclic process was enabled by what we call the bidirectional
control. The latter idea is applicable also to the macroscopic autonomous
processes. For example, in the operation protocols of vending machines or
of pay-phones, the gate on one side (taking up the money) and that on the
other side (rendering goods or services in exchange) are controlled by their
respective detectors on the opposite sides.

The biological molecular motors are not as simple as we have discussed. Still,
the present analysis might help as a reference frame when we look for the
structure-function relationship in those systems. For example, we might ask
if the hydrolysis reaction of ATP (fuel) in a molecular motor corresponds to
changing the accessibility from the reservoir of the ATP to that of the ADP and
the inorganic phosphate [Pi]. Also we might wonder if the putative Pi-sensors
(“switch loop” etc., Vale (1996); Brendza et al. (2000)) can be compared to the
semi-detector of the ligand in our model. As for the kinetics of the interaction
between the molecular motor and its counterpart ﬁlament (load), we might
ask if the motors have a degree of freedom to detect its own mechanical strain
(Tsiavaliaris et al., 2004; Sekimoto, 2000), in addition to the degree of freedom
to control the binding to the ﬁlament (Nitta et al., 2004). As a qualitative

.

x~

F

x~

F

~
x L

~
x L

.

"Wilde−type"

"Mutant"

Fig. 8. The pump of the “wild-type” (left, see Fig. 7) and a “mutant” with blocked
fuel reactions (right). See the text.

prediction, we might mention the possibility of the “mutants” in which the
degree of freedom related to the detection of, say, the load particles, aL, is
immobilized, as shown in Fig. 8. In this case, the rate of passive diﬀusion of
the load particles should depend on the density of the (non-consumed) fuel
particles in their high-density reservoirs.

9

I would like to thank K. Kitamura, H. Miyashita, E. Muneyuki, H. Noji, I.
Ojima, Y. Okada, Y. Oono, and K. Sutoh for stimulating discussions. It is my
great pleasure to dedicate this paper to Y. Kuramoto.

References

Alberts, B., Bray, D., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raﬀ, M., Roberts, K. & Walter,
P. Essential Cell Biology: An introduction to the molecular biology of the
cell (1998), §12. New York: Garland Pub. Inc.

Brendza, K.M., Sontag, C.A., Saxton, W.M., Gilbert, S.P. (2000) J. Biol.

Chem. 29, 22187-22195.

B¨uttiker, M. (1987) Zeitschrift der Physik B 68, 161-167,
P. Curie (1894) J. Phys. (Paris) 3`eme s´erie, 3, 393-415.
Der´enyi, I. & Astumian, R.D. (1999) Phys. Rev. E. 59, R6219-22.
Duke, T.A.J. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 2770-2775.
Eisenberg, E. & Hill, T.L. (1985) Science, 227, 999-1006.
Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R.B., & Sands, M. (1966) The Feynman Lectures

on Physics Vol.I, Chap.46. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Higuchi, H. and Endow, S. A. (2002) Current Opinion Cell Biol. 14, 50-57.
Imry, Y. (1997) Introduction to mesoscopic physics. Oxford University Press,

Koshland, D. E. (1973) Sci. Amer. 229 52-64.
Koshland, D.E., Nemethy, G., & Filmer, D. (1966) Biochem. 5, 365-85.
Kull, F.J., Vale R.D. & Fletterick, R.J. (1998) J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 97,

Lewin, B. (2003) Genes VIII. Prentice Hall.
Monod, J, Wyman, J, & Changeux, J.P. (1965) J. Mol.Biol. 12, 88-118.
Nitta, R., Kikkawa, M., Okada, Y. & Hirokawa, N. (2004) Science 305, 678-

877-886.

UK.

683.

Reimann, P. (2002) Physics Reports 361, 57-265 [condmat/0010237].
Sakaguchi, H. (1998) J. Phys. Soc. Japan 67, 709-712.
Sekimoto, K. (1997) J. Phys. Soc. Japan 66,1234-1237.
Sekimoto, K. (2000) private note to S. Esaki.
Sekimoto, K. (2000) A version of this paper has been presented at the Inter-
national Conference on Dynamical Aspects of Complex Systems from Cells
to Brain at Sendai, Japan.

Tsiavaliaris, G., Fujita-Becker, S. & Manstein, D. J. (2004) Nature 427, 558-

Vale, R.D. (1996), J. Cell Biol. 135, 291-302.
Wong, J. Y., Kuhl, T. L., Israelachvili, J. N., Mullah, N., Zalipsky, S. (1997)

561.

Science 7 820-822.

10

