Euler buckling in red blood cells: An optically driven biological

micromotor

A. Ghosha,b, S. Sinhaa,b, J. A. Dharmadhikaric, S. Royc, A. K.

Dharmadhikaric, J. Samuela,b, S. Sharmac, and D. Mathurc

aHarish Chandra Research Institute,

Chhatnag Road, Allahabad 211 019, India.

bRaman Research Institute, Bangalore 560 080, India. and

cTata Institute of Fundamental Research,

1 Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India.

(Dated: February 20, 2014)

Abstract

We report the observation of an optically driven micromotor of biological origin. A single red

blood cell (RBC) folds when placed in an optical trap. The folded RBC is birefringent and rotates

in circularly polarized light. Optical forces permit a high degree of control over the speed and

direction of rotation of such a micromotor. This cellular micromotor has potential applications

in micromanipulation, possibly like an “optical screwdriver” to apply torques at the micron scale.

A simple theoretical model captures the main observed features and makes predictions that are

successfully tested.

PACS numbers: 87.80.Cc, 87.80.Fe, 89.20.-a, 87.17.Aa

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

In a classical experiment Beth [1] demonstrated the converion of optical energy into me-

chanical energy in a micron-sized quartz crystal that rotates in circularly polarized light.

In the last few years there has been considerable interest in the design of miniature rotors

as components of optically-driven micro-motor systems. Developments in nanotechnology

place immediate needs for instrumentation to measure material properties such as, for exam-

ple, the torsional elasticity of single proteins and DNA, and their microscopic viscosity [2].

Devices that are based on optical forces carry the obvious advantage that rotation can be

caused without mechanical contact, so that an optically-driven micro-device may be rotated

while in a sealed environment. Non-contact modes of rotation have been demonstrated in

micro-motors [3, 4] involving specially shaped dielectrics and birefringent particles. Friese et

al. [5] have demonstrated that optically-driven micromachine elements are possible in prin-

ciple by transferring angular momentum from circularly polarized light to a birefringent,

photolithographically fabricated micro-structure with a resulting rotation speed as high as

350 Hz. Specially shaped rotors have been microfabricated by means of two-photon poly-

merization of light curing resins [4]. However, the stringent constraint on the shape and

microfabrication of rotors continues to be a key challenge in hitherto existing work on light-

driven micromotors. Very recently, experiments have been reported in which the necessity

for microfabrication of special shapes has been obviated by optical trapping of a naturally

occurring material, biconcave disk-shaped red blood cells (RBCs) [6]. The rotation induced

by optical forces can be ﬁnely controlled because it depends on controllable parameters like

incident laser power and polarization state. One possible application of this eﬀect is to use

the rotating cell like an “optical screwdriver” to apply torques at the micron scale. This

would be useful for instance, in probing the torsional elasticity of biopolymers like DNA. It

has been shown that conversion of optical energy into mechanical energy leads to rotation

of trapped RBCs, yielding overall torques as high as 55,000 pn nm, a value that may be

compared with typical torques of 40 pn nm that have been reported for molecular motors

based on enzymatic action [8].

Experiments show that there is an initial step in the optically-induced process that in-

volves a morphological change: the optical ﬁeld ﬁrst induces the biconcave disk to fold into

a rod-like shape and it is this folded shape that rotates. The application of optical forces

to naturally-occurring materials of cellular dimensions also holds much promise for new

vistas in both basic research, like single cell molecular biology [9], and in applications like

2

laser-assisted in-vitro fertilization [7], cell biosensors [10], and new possibilities of microma-

nipulation, including cell sorting and construction of patterns for cellular microchips [10, 11].

However, there still remains a paucity of insight into the physics that governs the trapping of

cellular level biological material. Although some initial insights have been developed on how

imbalances in intracellular ionic concentrations may lead to anisotropies in polarizability [6],

thereby generating optically-induced torques, the important physics of the precursor state

involving the shape alteration of the trapped cell remains unaddressed. We seek to address

this lacuna by presenting here the results of a combined experimental and theoretical study

on the optically-induced folding of RBCs that enables a new level of understanding to be

reached on the light-matter interaction that governs the overall dynamics.

Our optical trapping measurements on healthy RBCs were conducted using a single beam

optical trap. A 1064 nm, 1 W diode pumped Nd:YVO4 laser was used in conjunction with

a 100X oil-immersed objective of large numerical aperture (NA =1.3) to create a trap for

micron-sized particles. Typical trapping forces of 2-10 pN were used. Blood samples from

humans and mice were collected in a sterile anticoagulant containing glucose (136 mM), citric

acid monohydrate (38.1 mM) and sodium citrate (74.8 mM) and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for

10 minutes. The plasma and buﬀy coat containing white blood cells was aspirated out and

puriﬁed RBCs were washed with sterile RPMI medium containing 28 mM NaHCO3, 25 mM

HEPES and 80 g/ml gentamycin sulphate. The RBCs were resuspended in sterile RPMI

medium containing 10% serum as a 50% s uspension v/v and stored at 4oC. Before imaging

RBCs were pelleted at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes, resuspended in PBS solution comprising

of NaCl (136 mM), KCl (2.7 mM), Na2HPO4 (10.1 mM) and KH2PO4 with 2% BSA at a

dilution of about 106 cells/ml, from which 40-50 l was used on a microscope slide with a

cover slip for imaging and trapping.

The normal RBC shape is a ﬂattened biconcave disk; when an RBC is placed in an

optical trap of suﬃcient strength, the compressive trap forces overcome the elasticity of

the cell and fold it into a rod-like shape. Upon removal of the trap, the cells unfold into

their original shape. Images that depict such deformation are shown in Fig. 1. The left

column shows snapshots from a movie while the right column shows the folding in a cartoon

format. The long axis of the folded RBC aligns itself along the laser polarization vector. Our

measurements indicate that typical folding times (ca. 1s) are much smaller than unfolding

times (ca. 14s). In the following we attempt to model these observations in a manner that

3

adequately captures the main experimental observations and make predictions that we are

able to test.

We focus on the folding of RBCs. Neglecting its biconcave geometry, we take an RBC to

be a ﬂat, disc shaped elastic membrane with an energy cost for bending and deformation.

The energy function for this elastic disc has two terms [12]: (i) The energy cost associated

with the extrinsic curvature of the membrane,

Ec = B

Z

d2σ(η)2,

(1)

(2)

(3)

where d2σ represents an area element on the membrane, B is the bending modulus and η

is the extrinsic curvature of the membrane and (ii) the energy cost of the strain internal to

the membrane that is given by an integral over the membrane of the square of the strain

tensor and is characterized by two elastic constants, the Lame constants [13]. We assume

that internal strains are prohibitively expensive and the internal geometry of the membrane

is ﬁxed. So, an untrapped RBC is a disc whose intrinsic and extrinsic curvatures are both

zero. It is clear that the membrane can assume only shapes with zero intrinsic curvature

because it takes far greater energy to change the intrinsic geometry. Apart from the elastic

energy of the membrane there is also energy associated with the optical trap, and this is

given by

light),

Etrap = −1
2 Z

d2σǫI(x, y, z),

where ǫ is the dielectric constant of the RBC and I(x, y, z) is the local intensity of light,

which provides an external potential in which the RBC sits. The higher the intensity, the
lower is the potential V (x, y, z) = − 1

2 ǫI(x, y, z). We expand the potential in a Taylor series
around the minimum of the potential (z is chosen along the direction of propagation of

V (x, y, z) =

A(x2 + y2) +

Cz2,

1
2

1
2

where A and C are constants proportional to the incident laser power. Ec is lowest when the

RBC is ﬂat and unfolded. Etrap is lowest when the RBC is at the bottom of the potential.

The shape of the membrane is determined by a competition between Ec and Etrap. So, when

the trap is switched on, for high enough laser power the folded state is more favorable, and

when it is switched oﬀ the ﬂat state is more favorable. This points to the fact that the trap

stiﬀness wins over the membrane stiﬀness and thus the trap induces folding. The constraint

4

of preserving the intrinsic geometry of the membrane forces it to assume, as seen in Fig. 1, a

rod-like shape rather than, for instance, a hemispherical shape. This is because a hemisphere

has a non-zero intrinsic curvature unlike a cylinder. The allowed conﬁgurations of the elastic

membrane in this model are similar to the allowed conﬁgurations of a disc made of paper: it

can be bent into a cylinder, but not into a sphere as this deforms its internal geometry. An

analysis of the two competing terms, the curvature energy and the trap energy shows that

the threshold power needed for folding is inversely proportional to the cube of the linear

dimension of the cell. This is a prediction of the model which can be tested against future

experiments on this system.

We view the folding of the trapped RBC as an analog of the classical Euler buckling

instability [13]: take an elastic rod (a ballpoint pen reﬁll will do nicely) and compress it

along its length. For small compressive forces, the rod remains straight. But at a critical

value of the compressive force, the elastic rod buckles into a bent conﬁguration. The buckling

is a result of a competition between two energies, the energy associated with the force of

compression, which tries to bend the rod and the elastic energy, which tries to keep it

straight. Notice that although the RBC is modelled as a two dimensional disc, it bends

only in one direction because of the constraint of preserving intrinsic geometry and so the

problem is essentially one dimensional, just like the compressed rod. We can simplify the

analysis even further by focussing on the lowest energy mode of deformation: one in which

the RBC assumes a shape which is part of a cylinder of radius R. We may use as the order

parameter the quantity α = d/R, where d is the diameter of the RBC. α = 0 corresponds to
R = ∞, the unfolded state; a non-zero α describes a curved conﬁguration. We would expect
that the energy of bending is proportional to α2, since bending in either direction costs the

same amount of energy. Ec = aα2, where a is a constant related to the bending modulus.
Similarly, the trap energy is also symmetric in α and can be expressed as Etrap = bα2, where

b is a constant related to the intensity of the laser radiation.

The time scales for folding and unfolding can also be understood in this simple model

which has two parameters - the depth of the trap (experimentally controlled by the intensity

of light) that is represented by b and the stiﬀness of the membrane represented by a. When
α deviates from 0, it experiences a restoring force given by F = (a − b)α. We note that

all our experiments are conducted at low Reynolds number where viscous forces dominate

over the negligible [14] inertial forces. As in any viscous medium, the force F causes a

5

motion whose velocity ˙α is proportional to the applied force ˙α ∝ (a − b)α. From this we
conclude that the timescale for folding is given by Tfold = 1/(a − b), or in terms of the folding
rate, 1/Tfold ∝ P − P0, where P0 is the critical laser power for folding. Since velocities are

directly proportional to forces, timescales are inversely proportional to forces. The higher

the force, the smaller the timescale. This picture explains why the folding time is much

shorter than the unfolding time. The optical trap force induces folding and the process

is fast. In contrast, when the trap is turned oﬀ, the membrane spontaneously and slowly

relaxes back to its ﬂat state as there are no forces on the membrane to keep it folded. Based

on our model we expect that by controlling the intensity of the light beam one can change

the folding time. As the laser power is lowered, the folding time is expected to increase and

at a certain low power when the trap energy just cancels the elastic energy, we expect to see

large ﬂuctuations in the shape of the membrane. This is because at this power level there is

no restoring force in the α variable. The membrane is ﬂoppy and susceptible to Brownian

ﬂuctuations. These large shape ﬂuctuations have been experimentally seen. Figure 2 shows

results of measurements of the dependence of the folding rate on normalized laser power;

the results are in agreement with the predictions of our model.

It is also interesting to note that the folding corresponds to a broken symmetry. The
RBC in the trap is subject to compressive forces, which are isotropic in the x − y plane.

Since the RBC has to fold along one direction, this direction is randomly picked out from all
possible directions in the x − y plane. We have explored what happens when we model the

RBCs as elliptical objects. As indicated in Fig. 3, imagine the RBC as lying in the xy-plane,

and we observe it along the z-direction. The optical forces act on the cell radially inwards

and are exactly balanced. The buckling initiated by a random thermal kick can take place
about an axis along L1, L2, or in general along any arbitrary axis in the x − y plane. Since,

in general, folding occurs about any arbitrary axis one expects to see simultaneous changes

in L1 and L2. Measurements of L1 and L2 that we have made are shown in Fig. 3 and are,

again, in agreement with the expectations of our model.

Having accounted for the folding behavior, we now consider the rotation of a trapped

RBC. To compute the light forces on the RBC we have used classical electromagnetic theory

to express the force and torque on the cell as integrals of bilinears of the electromagnetic

ﬁeld over the cell. However, an equivalent but more intuitive way is to think in terms of

photons: each photon which is incident on the cell has momentum pi and spin Si. When

6

this photon leaves the cell it carries momentum pf and spin Sf , since both its direction and

state of polarization may have changed. We can then compute the forces and torques on

the cell by using momentum and angular momentum conservation. Each photon produces

a “recoil” momentum and angular momentum. Multiplying this by the number of photons

per second we ﬁnd the forces and torques that are generated on the RBC. The ﬁnal answer

can, of course, be expressed purely in terms of classical notions like laser power, frequency
and polarization. The momentum p carried by a photon is ¯h~k, where ~k is the wave vector.

The “spin” or polarization is best described using the Poincare Sphere. For a photon, whose
spin is 1¯h, the north pole (θ = 0◦) represents right circularly polarized light with angular
momentum ¯h and the south pole (θ = 180◦) represents left circularly polarized light, with
angular momentum of −¯h. Linearly polarized light carries no spin angular momentum and

is represented along the equator while all other points on the sphere represent elliptically

polarized light. In passing through the RBC, which is birefringent, the state of polarization

of the incident photon changes from circular to elliptical. The diﬀerence in spin angular

momentum is imparted to the RBC, thus exerting a torque on the RBC causing it to rotate.

The change in angular momentum is proportional to the change in cos θ, and therefore to

the change in the z- coordinate of the Poincare Sphere, multiplied by the unit of angular

momentum. One can express the torque as τ = γN¯h, where γ is a dimensionless number,

the change in the z co-ordinate on the Poincare sphere and N is the number of photons per

second. By multiplying and dividing by ω, the frequency of the radiation, we obtain the

purely classical formula for the torque τ = γP/ω, where P is the power of the incident laser

light, which is the number of photons per second multiplied by the energy ¯hω of each photon.

We, therefore, expect the torque that is generated to be proportional to the incident laser

power. This is indeed what is observed in the measurements that we show in Fig. 4.

To summarize, we address the physics that governs the two stages leading to optically-

induced micromotor action of a red blood cell in an optical trap. The ﬁrst stage involves a

morphological change that makes use of the elasticity of the biomembrane; the second stage

involves micromanipulation of the folded cell using light forces. A theoretical model that

uses the concept of Euler instability is successfully employed to rationalize the cell folding

that is observed. We expect this work to generate interest amongst biologists and physicists

to explore new avenues in this emerging area of optically-driven biological micromotors. We

expect this integration into the physics of cellular dynamics of a treatment of instabilities

7

that has hitherto been of considerable utility in polymer physics, soft condensed matter

physics, and mechanical engineering might also assume importance in forthcoming develop-

ments in the interdisciplinary area of optically-driven biological micromotors and membrane

dynamics.

Lett. 78, 547 (2001).

12, 1179 (2004).

(1997).

(2000).

[1] R. A. Beth, Phys. Rev. 50, 115 (1936).

[2] C. Bustamante, Z. Bryant, and S. B. Smith, Nature 421, 423 (2003).

[3] E Higurashi, O. Ohguchi, T. Tamamura, H. Ukita, and R. Sawada, J. Appl. Phys. 82, 2773

[4] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 249 (2001).

[5] M. E. J. Friese, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, J. Gold, P. Hagberg, and D. Hanstorp, Appl. Phys.

[6] J. A. Dharmadhikari, S. Roy, A. K. Dharmadhikari, S. Sharma, and D. Mathur, Opt. Express

[7] M. Zahn and S. Seeger, Cell. Mol. Biol. 44, 747 (1998).

[8] K. Kinosita Jr., R.Yasuda, H. Noji, and K. Adachi, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London B 355, 473

[9] K. Schutze, G. Posl, and G. Lahr, Cell. Mol. Biol. 44, 735 (1998).

[10] A. Clement-Sengewald, K. Schutze, A. Ashkin, G.A. Palma, G. Kerlen, and G. Brem, J.

Assisted Reproduction Genetics 13, 259 (1996).

[11] M. Zahn, J. Renken, and S. Seeger, FEBS Letters 443, 337 (1999).

[12] Y. Kantor and D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2774 (1987).

[13] L.D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity, Pergammon Press, NY, 1986.

[14] H. C. Berg, Random Walks In Biology, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1993.

8

FIG. 1: On placing a biconcave, disk-like red blood cell in an optical trap, it undergoes folding

that is depicted in (a) frames from a real-time movie and (b) in cartoon format. Each movie frame

is taken 250 ms after the preceding one. Upon removal of the trap, unfolding occurs over a typical

timescale of ca. 14s.

FIG. 2: Dependence of folding rate on normalized laser power, P − P0, where P is the incident

laser power and P0 is the power below which folding does not occur for a 6µm RBC.

FIG. 4: Variation of the torque generated in a rotating RBC with incident laser power, using

circularly polarized light.

FIG. 3: Variation of the RBC dimensions, L1 and L2, with folding time.

9

 

               (a)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

)

1
-

c
e
s
(
 
 

d
l
o
f

T

 
/
 
1

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Normalized laser power (mW)

 

      

 

 

 

)
 

m

 m
(

1

L

6

5

4

3

2

 
 
    
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

L1 

 
 
 

 
 

L2 

2

L

(
 

m

 
)

6

5

4

3

2

1

 

0

240

480

720

960

Time (ms)

m
 
 

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

)

m
n
 
N
p
(
 
e
u
q
r
o
T

8000

6000

4000

2000

15

30

45

60

75

Laser power (mW)

 
 

 

