5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tumor growth instability and the onset of invasion

Mario Castro,1 Carmen Molina-Par´ıs,2 and Thomas S. Deisboeck3
1Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC) and Grupo de Din´amica No Lineal (DNL),
Escuela T´ecnica Superior de Ingenier´ıa (ICAI), Universidad Pontiﬁcia Comillas, E-28015 Madrid, Spain
2Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK and
Departamento de Matem´aticas, F´ısica Aplicada y F´ısico-qu´ımica,
Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad San Pablo CEU, E-28660 Madrid, Spain
3 Complex Biosystems Modeling Laboratory, Harvard-MIT (HST) Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA

Motivated by experimental observations, we develop a mathematical model of chemotactically directed tumor
growth. We present an analytical study of the model as well as a numerical one. The mathematical analysis
shows that: (i) tumor cell proliferation by itself cannot generate the invasive branching behaviour observed
experimentally, (ii) heterotype chemotaxis provides an instability mechanism that leads to the onset of tumor
invasion and (iii) homotype chemotaxis does not provide such an instability mechanism but enhances the mean
speed of the tumor surface. The numerical results not only support the assumptions needed to perform the
mathematical analysis but they also provide evidence of (i), (ii) and (iii). Finally, both the analytical study and
the numerical work agree with the experimental phenomena.

PACS numbers: 87.18.Hf 87.18.Ed 87.17.Aa 82.39.Rt

I.

INTRODUCTION

Experiments have shown that a variety of tumor cells pro-
duce both protein growth factors and their corresponding re-
ceptors, enabling a mechanism termed autocrine or paracrine,
if the stimulus not only affects the source but also its bystander
cells [1]. Such polypeptide growth factors can, for example,
stimulate tumor cell growth and invasion, such as in the case
of hepatocyte growth factors [2] and epidermal growth fac-
tor [3], or induce tumor angiogenesis (through secretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF [4]). The biologi-
cal evidence supporting these paracrine/autocrine loops sug-
gests that such signaling factors have signiﬁcance for cell-
cell interaction [5]. Depending on the cancer type, its char-
acteristic features include a combination of rapid volumetric
growth and genetic/epigenetic heterogeneity, as well as ex-
tensive tissue invasion with both local and distant dissemi-
nation. Such tumor cell motility has been intensely investi-
gated and found to be guided by diffusive chemical gradients,
a process called chemotaxis, e.g., [6]. Since cell signaling
and information processing on the microscopic scale should
also determine the emergence of both multicellular patterns
and macroscopic disease dynamics, it is intriguing to charac-
terize the relationship between environmental stimuli and the
cell-signaling code they trigger.

In a recent paper, Sander and Deisboeck [7] showed that a
combined heterotype and homotype diffusive chemical signal
can yield invasive cell branching patterns seen in microscopic
brain tumor experiments [8] by means of a discrete model, for
some speciﬁc form of the interactions. There is a long history
on the study of this type of assay [4, 9]. There are also quite
a few mathematical models that address the issue of tumor
growth and cell migration [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17].
In Ref. [7] the authors carry out a linear stability analy-
sis from the steady state and show that both homo and het-
erotype chemotaxis are required for the development of inva-
sive branching behaviour. Employing an improved version of

our previously developed reaction-diffusion model [18], we
now speciﬁcally investigate the relationship between an ex-
trinsic nutrient signal, heterotype chemoattractant Q, and the
homotype soluble signal C, produced by the tumor cells them-
selves. The underlying oncology concept is that in the process
of spatio-temporal tumor expansion, C functions as a guiding
cue for mobile cancer cells, directing the trailing ones towards
sites of higher Q concentration and thus avoiding tissue areas
with low or decreasing density of Q. In a sense, the dynami-
cally changing C proﬁle, secreted by the tumor cells, encodes
the underlying Q map, which in itself represents a particular
tissue environment. However, this picture is difﬁcult to quan-
titatively assess with conventional experimental assays, and it
has not yet been theoretically demonstrated in a clear-cut way.

In this paper, we are therefore particularly interested in how
these mechanisms, homo and heterotype chemotaxis, compete
and/or cooperate in the formation of tumor branching struc-
tures and how the mathematical reaction terms must be cho-
sen in order to reproduce, with some degree of universality,
the experimentally observed patterns. Thus, we will study
the impact of a ﬁxed extrinsic nutrient source, and how the
interplay among nutritive, mechanical and chemical proper-
ties support the principle of least resistance, most attraction
for spatio-temporal tumor cell expansion [8]. The analytical
and numerical results provide insight as to the cells’ ability
to readily modulate C, as well as, more generally, to the im-
portance of paracrine growth factors for information transfer
in multicellular biosystems. We have kept the mathematical
model as general as possible in order to understand the essen-
tial features of the time evolution of the system.

The report of our results is organized as follows. We de-
scribe our reaction-diffusion mathematical model in Sec. II,
where a detailed discussion of each of the involved mecha-
nisms is given separately. Section III reports general analyti-
cal results for the model of Sec. II. We numerically check the
validity of our analytical results in Sec. IV. Finally, we con-
clude in Sec. V with a discussion of our results and provide

a picture of chemotactic cell invasion as triggered by tumor
growth instability.

II. MATHEMATICAL MODEL

Tumor expansion is a multi-step process that involves, in a
non-trivial fashion, several mechanisms of progression. Here,
we concentrate on tumor cell proliferation and chemotacti-
cally guided invasion, induced by both a diffusive heterotype
and a homotype attractant (produced by the very tumor cells).

A. Extracellular matrix gel (matrigel)

The experimental setting, which we have modeled here,
consisted of a multicellular tumor spheroid (MTS) embed-
ded in a tissue culture medium-enriched extracellular matrix
(ECM) gel, Matrigel [8]. We consider M = M (x, t), the av-
erage density ﬁeld of the gel matrix as a function of space x
and time t. The role of M is twofold. From a nutrient perspec-
tive, the tumor cells (whose concentration will be described by
the density ﬁeld U (x, t) hereafter) metabolize M and hence
they are able to proliferate. Besides, from a mechanical per-
spective, the solid gel matrix has an impact on tumor cell mo-
bility, i.e., it conﬁnes the tumor cells and so they are guided
by least or lesser resistance areas throughout the ECM here
in vitro, or, in vivo, by the distinct mechanical properties of
the surrounding tissue. Therefore, at a particular site, more
M can sustain a higher concentration of tumor cells, which in
turn will metabolize more of the nourishing gel medium and
thus, over time, will lead to an on-site reduction of the ECM
matrix’ mechanical resistance, which had initially hindered
cell motility.

Mathematically, we assume that the consumption rate of M
by U , which we denote by RM (M, U ), grows monotonically
with both variables, and is a non-negative function. Later, we
will make some assumptions regarding the mechanical impact
of M on the diffusivity of tumor cells and of both heterotype
and homotype chemoattractants.

For the sake of generality, we assume that the matrigel
medium can diffuse, with constant diffusivity µM . The order
of magnitude of µM depends on the speciﬁc type of medium
under consideration (see Sec. III A for further discussion on
this issue). In summary, we can write the following equation
for the matrigel M

∂tM = µM ∇

2M

λM RM (M, U ),

(1)

−
where λM is the inverse of the characteristic time of the M
consumption process. Equation (1) reﬂects the fact that the
matrigel nutrient is metabolized by the tumor cells and not
replenished.

B. Heterotype chemoattractant

Chemotaxis can be generally deﬁned as motility induced
and guided by a concentration gradient. As in our previous

2

model [18], the heterotype chemoattractant represents nutri-
ents diffusing from a source, e.g., in vivo, a blood vessel, and
as such is what should guide both on-site cell proliferation and
the onset of invasion. Chemotaxis has been extensively stud-
ied in the literature [19, 20]. It is generically assumed that the
chemotactic ﬂux takes the form

Jchem = χQ(Q, M )U

Q.

∇

Note that this ﬂux is proportional to the tumor cell concentra-
tion U . The function χQ(Q, M ) is usually called the chemo-
tactic sensitivity, and is a positive decreasing (or at least con-
stant) function of both arguments Q and M . The explicit de-
pendence of χQ on M reﬂects the effect of the mechanical
pressure of the underlying medium, that constrains both tu-
mor cell and heterotype chemoattractant movement. Besides,
tumor cells digest chemoattractant molecules, so as the former
move towards a positive gradient of Q, the concentration of Q
diminishes. This reduction is governed by the reaction term
RQ(Q, U ).

Combining these ideas, we obtain the following equation

for the heterotype chemoattractant ﬁeld density Q:

∂tQ =

(µQ(M )

Q)

aQRQ(Q, U ),

∇

∇
where aQ is the inverse of the characteristic time of the Q
consumption process.

−

(2)

In the experimental in vitro setting modeled here, the het-
erotype chemoattractant was supplied externally. Acknowl-
edging that the original experimental setting [8] used a non-
replenished nutrient source, here, for simplicity, we model a
replenished source of Q and equation (2) thus has to be sup-
plemented accordingly. This can be modeled by means of the
following boundary condition:

Q(x = L, t) = Q0,

for one-dimensional systems, where L is the size of the sys-
tem, and

Q(x = Lx, y, t) = Q0,

for two-dimensional ones, where Lx is the horizontal size of
the system and Ly the vertical one.

(3)

(4)

C. Homotype chemoattractant

Tumor cells have been shown to produce protein growth
factors such as the transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-
α). These growth factors can affect the tumor producing cell
itself, hence generate an “autocrine” feedback loop, as well
as bystander cells, an effect called “paracrine” [21]. In the
following, we refer to this soluble chemical effector, as ho-
motype chemoattractant and we denote by C its density ﬁeld.
Since an ever growing population of tumor cells digests
more Q, the homotype chemoattractant C may take over at
some point as guidance cue in the regions with low Q concen-
tration. First, we assume that the homotype chemoattractant
is both released and internalized, or (for the purposes here),

taken up or consumed by the tumor cells. The latter is based
on a ligand-receptor interaction and thus on internalization of
the class of protein growth factors, which C represents. Note,
that if all cells produce C, a cell close to the main tumor would
be less inclined to move away from it, since it is close to a
large basin of C. One could tune the production rate of C in
such a way as to ensure that only the density proﬁle of C near
the tumor surface has an impact on the “decision” of a tumor
cell to stay (proliferate) or to start moving (invasion). This
effect should have an impact on the tumor cell density U .

The above discussion implies that C is also chemotactic for
U . The main difference with the heterotype chemoattractant
Q is that the homotype chemoattractant C is produced (and
consumed) by the tumor cells. We denote by R(p)
C (M, U ) and
R(d)
C (C, U ) the production and digestion rates of C, respec-
tively. Earlier studies have shown [22, 23, 24] that eventually
a central dead area develops due to the lack of nutrients in-
side the tumor spheroid, which in turn leads to the release of
growth inhibitory factors from the dying cells [25]. A full
consideration of the development of such a necrotic core is
out of the scope of this paper [26]. We consider the existence
of this “dead area” in the dependence of Rp
C on the matrigel
density M . This dependence means that the production of C
is enhanced where M is high (outside the main tumor, as in-
side the tumor the matrigel has been degraded) and therefore,
the production of C is maximized for reactive tumor cells,
i.e., surface tumor cells outside the necrotic core of the tu-
mor [8]. We also assume that χQ(Q, M ) is typically larger
than the chemotactic sensitivity of C, χC (C, M ), for the con-
centrations involved in the problem and that χC(C, M ) de-
pends both on C and M . The explicit dependence of χC
on M reﬂects the fact that the matrigel constrains homotype
chemoattractant movement as well. Finally, C also diffuses
with diffusion coefﬁcient µC (M ).

In summary, the homotype chemoattractant obeys the fol-

lowing equation:

C) + αC R(p)

∇

∂tC =

(µC (M )

C (C, U ),
(5)
where αC and aC are the inverse of the characteristic time of
the C production and consumption process, respectively.

C (M, U )

∇

−

aC R(d)

D. Tumor cells

The global nutrient density available to tumor cells is pro-
portional to the medium density M . We then assume that
tumor cells proliferate with a rate that is proportional to the
rate of consumption of M . Moreover, we consider that tumor
cells diffuse with a diffusion constant µU , and that µU de-
pends on M to reﬂect the mechanical pressure of the matrigel
M . As tumor cells are much larger than the chemoattractant
molecules we have µQ > µC > µU . As we discussed above,
tumor cells move towards positive gradients of both hetero
and homotype chemoattractants, so we can write

3

where λU is the inverse of the characteristic time of tumor pro-
liferation. Equations (1)-(6) constitute our reaction-diffusion
tumor growth mathematical model.

III. ANALYTICAL STUDY

As we have stated above, the precise relevance of each of
the factors summarized in Sec. II is not clearly understood.
Partly, this is due to the complex interaction amongst these
factors but, mainly, due to the lack of a systematic analytical
and numerical analysis of each individual mechanism operat-
ing in the full system.

In this section, we analyze in detail every mechanism in-
volved in tumor growth to determine which conditions trig-
ger the formation of invasive branches, and how the inter-
play among those mechanisms allows these branches to be
sustained in time.

A. Growth due to cell proliferation

Consider the subsystem of equations formed by Eq. (1) and
Eq. (6) with χQ = χC = 0, deﬁned in a d-dimensional vol-
ume V . The tumor and nutrient particles are conﬁned into the
system and so the ﬂux of material through the boundaries van-
ishes. This physical constraint introduces a conservation law
in the problem, namely,

d
dt ZV

dx(λM U + λU M ) = 0,

(7)

independently of the precise functional form of the reaction
term RM (M, U ).

In the absence of diffusion (µM = µU = 0) this conserva-

tion law provides the following closed relation

M = K

λM /λU U,

(8)

−
where K depends on the initial conditions of M and U . If the
diffusion coefﬁcients do not vanish, we cannot obtain such
closed relation between U and M , except in some simpler
cases (related to the geometry of the volume and the initial
conditions). With no loss of generality, we restrict ourselves to
one and two-dimensional systems, V = L and V = Lx ×
Ly,
respectively, and initial conditions such that M (x, t = 0) = 0
= 0 and U (x, t = 0) = 0 where M (x, t =
where U (x, t = 0)
= 0. Then, we can obtain a relation similar to Eq. (8).
0)
Physically, this means that initially the nutrient surrounds the
implanted tumor. In this case, Eq. (8) is valid after a small
transient time (see Sec. IV), although the shape of the front
(i.e., surface of the tumor) changes slightly. However, as we
are interested in the case where tumor cells diffuse slowly, this
front will be assumed to be sharp, and hence its exact shape
is not relevant for our discussion below [13]. Thereby, we
simply get

∂tU =

(µU (M )

U )

∇
(U χC (C, M )

(U χQ(Q, M )
C) + λU RM (M, U ),

Q)

∇

(6)

− ∇
∇

∇
−∇

∂tU =

(µU (K

λM /λU U )

U )+λU RM (K

λM /λU U, U ).

∇

−

∇

−

(9)

6
6
Tumor cells digest the matrigel nutrient when they are in di-
rect contact. Thus, the reaction term RM (M, U ) must van-
ish when any of its arguments does. The simplest choice of
such a reaction term is RM (M, U ) = M U . Although other
choices are possible (leading qualitatively to the same results),
we consider this choice to illustrate the main properties of the
reduced system given by Eq. (9).

At this stage of the formal presentation, we need to consider
µU . Note that µU
separately the cases µM ≪
is M -dependent so these inequalities need to be understood in
an average sense.

µU and µM ≫

1. µM ≪ µU

We can deﬁne a small parameter ε2 = µM /µU . As the dif-
fusion coefﬁcient of M is so small, the evolution of the density
ﬁeld M is slow in time, and therefore, random ﬂuctuations in
its initial condition remain at late times. Hence, the under-
lying medium is quenched from the perspective of the tumor
cells. Moreover, these ﬂuctuations take place on fast length
¯µU (x/ε) [27]. There
scales, namely, we can write µU (M )
are many studies devoted to the propagation of fronts in het-
erogeneous media (as is the case here for late times from the
point of view of the tumor cells) [28]. Thus, it can be shown
that, to leading order in ε, Eq. (9) can be assumed homoge-
neous. Namely, we can make the substitution

≡

¯µU (x/ε)

1

−

1
¯µU (cid:29)

≡

→ (cid:28)

µU = constant + O(ε),

(10)

. . .
i
h

where
denotes the average over a region of length l much
greater than the characteristic length scale of the quenched
ﬂuctuations of M . This means that to lowest order we can as-
sume a constant diffusion coefﬁcient for U and that Eq. (9) be-
comes the well-known Fisher equation [29]. Fisher’s equation
admits planar traveling front solutions, with minimal wave
speed v0 given by [30]

4

FIG. 1: Depicted is an overlaid image of human U87 brain tumor
cells which were stably transfected with a Green Fluorescent Protein
(EGFP) Histone 2B marker for nuclei. The image is taken from a
central cross-section of the MTS cultured in a three-dimensional ex-
tracellular matrix (Matrigel, Becton Dickinson, USA) environment
in vitro. Note the chain-like invasive patterns. The image was taken
one day post transferring the MTS from liquid medium to Matrigel
(scale bar = 100 um).

a time independent random function [28]. Curvature correc-
tions to Eq. (12) give the so-called quenched Kardar-Parisi-
Zhang equation [31]. Thus, the heterogeneity of the matrigel
medium will produce rough tumor interfaces. As we will see
below, some tumor ﬂuctuations (large length scales) are am-
pliﬁed by chemotaxis, so they act as initial seeds for invasive
branches.

v0 = 2(µU λU K)1/2.

(11)

2. µM ≫ µU

Moreover, any deviation from the planar front (or circular for
two-dimensional tumors) damps out, so cell proliferation by
itself cannot generate the branches observed in our experi-
ments (see Fig. 1). Equation (11) provides the mean velocity
of the tumor whenever proliferation is the only mechanism of
tumor growth. However, chemotaxis drives tumor cells faster
than proliferation itself, so v0 is a small quantity. Thus, we
can infer that cell proliferation is a long time process and con-
0. We, therefore, assume that
0 and λU ≈
sequently λM ≈
tumor cell proliferation is much slower than the chemotacti-
cally induced tumor cell growth (see Sec. III B).

Equation (10) is only valid to lowest order in ε. Corrections
to the leading behaviour of µU provide also corrections to the
velocity v0. It can be shown that [28]

v0 = 2(µU λU K)1/2(1 + ξ1/2),

(12)

where ξ is obtained from the expansion of µU (M ) to ﬁrst or-
der in ε, and can be understood as a quenched noise term, i.e.,

Despite the fact that the branching morphology in Fig. 1
µU , for completeness,

has been obtained in the case µM ≪
we include in this section the opposite limit as well.

In this limit the diffusion coefﬁcient of M is so large that
any ﬂuctuation of M is rapidly damped out. In this case, we
cannot clearly separate the regions where M takes its limiting
values (0 and M0), as was possible to do in the limit µM ≪
µU (see Fig. 2).
In this case we have to deal with the full
nonlinear equation that includes the dependence of µU on M .
Hence, the speciﬁc form of the diffusion coefﬁcient µU (M ) is
required in order to fully understand the evolution of the sys-
tem. M¨uller and van Saarloos [32] have studied the speciﬁc
U k,
case in which (in our notation) µU (K
with k > 0. In such case, the gradient of the tumor ﬁeld den-
sity U at the boundary of the tumor is discontinuous. This
could be checked experimentally in order to determine the
qualitative form of the diffusion coefﬁcient µU (M ).

λM /λU U )

−

∼

INSIDE
THE TUMOR

OUTSIDE
THE TUMOR

densities Q and U . Thus, considering an initial tumor con-
centration U0 located in a bounded region of the system and a
replenished source of heterotype chemoattractant modeled by
Eqs. (4), we deﬁne:

5

(16)

(17)
(18)
(19)

(20)

(21)

1/2

,

aQ
µQ (cid:19)

x′ = x

(cid:18)
t′ = taQ,
u = U/U0,
q = Q/Q0.

Eqs. (14) and (15) can be written (we drop primes for clarity)
as follows

∂tu = µU /µQ∇
∂tq =
∇

2q

−

2u
νQ0/µQ∇
−
uγU γ
0 f (Q0q)/Q0,

(u ¯χ(q)

q),

∇

where ¯χ(q) is a dimensionless version of χQ(Q) and ν is de-
ﬁned through the relation ν

χQ(Q)/ ¯χ(q).

Note that µQ is the fastest diffusivity in the problem, so we
can deﬁne an small parameter ǫ = µU /µQ. Moreover, we
also assume that the cross diffusion coefﬁcient νQ0 is smaller
than µQ [33]. With these considerations Eq. (20) becomes

≡

∂tu = ǫ

2u

ρǫ

(u ¯χ(q)

q),

∇

−

∇

∇

(22)

with ρ = νQ0/µU . Typically, the tumor ﬁeld will be con-
stant almost everywhere except in a narrow region (boundary
layer [34]). This region deﬁnes an interface between the in-
side and the outside of the tumor.
In fact, if we take the limit ǫ

0 (the so-called outer

limit [34]) in Eq. (22), we have ∂tu = 0, and

→

1 inside the tumor,
0 outside the tumor.

u =

n

(23)

One can see that in the outer limit the mathematical analy-
sis of the problem is much simpler as Eq. (21) reduces to the
equations

2q
2q

−

∂tq =

∇
∇
In the case ǫ

n

U γ

0 f (Q0q)/Q0

inside the tumor,
outside the tumor.

(24)

= 0 (the so-called inner limit [34]) we need to
proceed with care: in order to solve Eq. (20) for u and Eq. (21)
for q, we need the behavior of q exactly at the tumor boundary
layer (interface). With this in mind, we deﬁne a new local set
of curvilinear coordinates: a coordinate n normal to the tumor
interface and a coordinate s tangential to it. Elementary com-
putations (see Ref. [35]) give us the formulas for converting
derivatives with respect to x to derivatives with respect to the
new coordinates (n, s):

2 = ∂nn + ˜κ∂n + ∆s,

∇

where ˜κ is the local dimensionless curvature of the tumor in-
terface and ∆s is the surface Laplacian [35]. Similarly, we
can write

(25)

(26)

∂t = ∂t −

˜v∂n + st∂s,

FIG. 2: M density ﬁeld for the two limiting cases: µM ≪ µU (dot-
ted line) and µM ≫ µU (dashed line). The solid line represents the
density ﬁeld of tumor cells U .

B. Growth due to heterotype chemoattraction

In this paper we are interested in the case where the nutrient
medium M diffuses slowly, and so the homogenization given
by Eq. (10) can be assumed for all diffusion coefﬁcients and
chemotactic sensitivities. We, therefore, drop any dependence
of these quantities on M . In what follows we restrict ourselves
to a two-dimensional study, with no loss of generality (the
three-dimensional analysis can be carried out as well).

As we have shown, cell proliferation cannot by itself pro-
vide invasive behaviour. The next mechanism that we must
include in order to understand cell invasion is heterotype
chemoattraction, where the attractant molecules are provided
externally to the tumor. They diffuse rapidly until they reach
the tumor boundary and then two independent events take
place: the heterotype chemoattractant is degraded by the tu-
mor cells and the tumor cells are (chemotactically) drifted to
higher heterotype chemoattractant concentration gradients.

The consumption rate of the heterotype chemoattractant,
RQ(Q, U ), cannot be arbitrarily large as it saturates for large
values of Q. This assumption is based on the concept that
each tumor cell carries a ﬁnite number of Q-uptaking cell re-
ceptors, which in turn determine the cell’s maximum uptake
rate. Besides, it is also a growing function of the tumor cell
density, U . We do not need to specify the precise mathemati-
cal form of RQ at this point, but taking into account the above
assumptions, we can write, without loss of generality,

(13)

(14)

(15)

RQ(Q, U ) = U γf (Q),

with γ a positive constant.

In summary, the evolution equations in this case are

∂tU = µU ∇

2U

− ∇

(U χQ(Q)

Q),

∇

and

∂tQ = µQ∇

−

2Q

aQU γf (Q),

where we have assumed that tumor cell proliferation is neg-
ligible compared to chemotaxis, so we can set λM = λU =
v0 = 0. In this limit the dynamics of M is uncoupled from
that of Q and U .

Despite the fact that Eqs. (14) and (15) are highly nonlinear,
due to the functions χQ(Q) and f (Q), we can obtain useful
information by properly rescaling space, time and both ﬁeld

6
6

(39)

(40)

(41)

where ˜v is the normal (dimensionless) velocity of the inter-
face. We also need the following derivative

∇

∇

(u ¯χ(q)

q) = ∂n(u ¯χ(q)∂nq)+˜κ(u ¯χ(q)∂nq)+

∇sq).
(27)
Our aim now is to ﬁnd solutions for q and u in the tumor
interface. We start by rescaling the normal coordinate n, in
terms of the fast variable η = n/ǫ, and time in terms of τ =
t/ǫ. We denote by ˜u and ˜q the inner ﬁelds, and expand them,
¯χ(˜q) and ˜v in a power series of ǫ [36]:

∇s(u ¯χ(q)

˜u(η, s, t) = ˜u0 + ǫ˜u1 + . . . ,
˜q(η, s, t) = ˜q0 + ǫ˜q1 + . . . ,
˜v(η, s, t) = ˜v0 + ǫ˜v1 + . . . ,

¯χ(˜q) = ¯χ(˜q0) + ¯χ′(˜q0)ǫ˜q1 + . . . ,

(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)

which states the fact that, to ﬁrst order, the tumor cells simply
diffuse. Note that to this order ˜u0 does not depend on s, so
that ∂s ˜u0 = 0, due to the boundary conditions on u.

2. Order ǫ1

To next order in ǫ and from Eq. (33) we ﬁnd,

∂ηη ˜q1 = 0

∂η ˜q1 = constant,

(37)

⇒

due to the boundary conditions on q.

The next order equation for ˜u1 is given by

∂τ ˜u1 = ˜v1∂η ˜u0 +∂ηη ˜u1+ ˜κ∂η ˜u0 −
The Fredholm alternative (or solvability condition) for ˜u1 pro-
vides [36]

ρ(∂η ˜u0) ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q1. (38)

where the prime in Eq. (31) denotes a derivative with respect
to ˜q. Using Eqs. (22), (25), (26) and (27), the original system
of equations can be written as

∂τ ˜u0 + ǫ∂τ ˜u1 = ǫ˜v1∂η ˜u0 + ∂ηη ˜u0

where

ǫst∂s ˜u0 + ǫ˜κ∂η ˜u0

+ ǫ∂ηη ˜u1 −
−
−

ρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0)
ǫρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q1)
ǫρ˜κ˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0 + O(ǫ2),
ǫ∂τ ˜q0 = ∂ηη ˜q0 + ǫ∂ηη ˜q1 + ǫ˜κ∂η ˜q0 + O(ǫ2).

ǫρ∂η(˜u1 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0)
ǫρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ′(˜q0)˜q1∂η ˜q0)
(32)

−
−

(33)

−

1. Order ǫ0

We start by solving Eqs. (32) and (33) to order ǫ0. As we
stated above, tumor cell proliferation is negligible when com-
pared to chemotaxis, which means that ˜v0 = 0. Otherwise
we have to include the reaction term RM in the dynamical
equation for U and then, to order ǫ0, Eq. (32) becomes:

∂τ ˜u0 + ǫ∂τ ˜u1 = ˜v0∂η ˜u0 + ǫ˜v1∂η ˜u0 + ǫ˜v0∂η ˜u1 + ∂ηη ˜u0

ǫst∂s ˜u0 + ǫ˜κ∂η ˜u0

+ ǫ∂ηη ˜u1 −
−
−
−
+ ǫ

ρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0)
ǫρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q1)
ǫρ˜κ˜u0 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0
λU K
1
aQ (cid:18)

λM U0
λU K

−

−
−

ǫρ∂η(˜u1 ¯χ(˜q0)∂η ˜q0)
ǫρ∂η(˜u0 ¯χ′(˜q0)˜q1∂η ˜q0)

˜u0 + O(ǫ2).

(34)

˜u0(cid:19)

Notice that in the absence of chemotaxis Eq. (34) becomes
Fisher’s equation in the set of coordinates (η, s) and with time
given by τ .

From Eq. (33) we ﬁnd

∂ηη ˜q0 = 0.

(35)

We know that ˜q0 must be bounded at η =
, corresponding
to the inside and outside of the tumor in the scaled variable
η. This implies ∂η ˜q0 = 0 and, therefore, ˜q0 = constant.
Substituting this into Eq. (32), we obtain

±∞

˜v1 =

˜κ + ρB∂η ˜q1,

−

B = R

∞
−∞

dη(∂η ˜u0)2 ¯χ(˜q0)
dη(∂η ˜u0)2

.

∞
−∞

R

Matching the inner and outer expansions yields the normal
velocity of the tumor in the original dimensions [36]:

vn =

µU κ + νB

Q

n,

∇

·

−

where n is a unit vector normal to the tumor interface and
directed away from the tumor.

Chemotactically induced tumor growth requires

n to
be a positive quantity, so that vn is positive. This can be
achieved whenever the heterotype chemoattractant concentra-
tion grows as we move away from the tumor surface. Before
performing the analysis of Eqs. (24) and (41) to check this
requirement, we consider two interesting features related to
Eq. (41). First of all, in the absence of chemotaxis and prolif-
eration, for an initially circular tumor of radius R0, Eq. (41)
reduces to

∇

Q

·

dR
dt

=

µU
R

,

−

(42)

R2

p

0 −

which gives the diffusive behavior R(t) =
2µU t.
This means that the mean velocity of the tumor due to diffu-
1/2. At this stage, and for an initially circular
sion decays as t−
tumor, one could now perform the following analysis: (i) sup-
pose the tumour continues to grow as a two-dimensional disc
and (ii) perturb the boundary and study the development of
instabilities. This is out of the scope of this paper and will be
addressed in future work. Secondly, for a general tumor front
geometry, Eq. (41) provides a critical curvature, (reminiscent
of the classical Greenspan model [13])

κc =

νB
µU ∇

Q

n,

·

(43)

∂τ ˜u0 = ∂ηη ˜u0,

(36)

such that for κ < κc the tumor interface has locally a positive
velocity, for κ > κc the tumor interface has locally a negative

velocity and for κ = κc the tumor interface has locally van-
ishing velocity. Note that this is precisely the reason of the
dynamical instability that guarantees the development of in-
vasive branches. Tumor invasion will take place on the tumor
surface wherever the local curvature is below the critical value
κc, given by Eq. (43). Our result agrees with the speciﬁc case
considered in Ref. [17].

∇

As a ﬁnal remark concerning Eq. (41), note that it resembles
the equation for the velocity of a solidiﬁcation front [37, 38].
In that case, the local normal velocity of the front depends
on the local curvature, κ as above, but on the value of the
ﬁeld (temperature) at the boundary, instead of the value of the
gradient,
Q, at the tumor interface. This is to be expected as
in the tumor picture it is the heterotype chemoattractant that is
driving the dynamics, and in the case of a solidiﬁcation front,
the dynamics of the front is linked to the temperature ﬁeld [37,
38]. The branching behaviour of the tumor also resembles the
ﬁngering instability of the Hele-Shaw problem [39]
We now turn to the requirement on the value of

n. In
·
n)
order to check that, indeed,
q
Q
∇
∇
is a positive quantity at the tumor boundary, we need to solve
Eq. (24) supplemented by Eq. (41), with initial condition,

Q
∇
n (or equivalently

·

·

q(x, y, t = 0) = δ(x

Lx),

−

and boundary conditions

q(x = 0, y, t) = 0,
q(x = Lx, y, t) = 1.

(44)

(45)
(46)

These equations cannot be solved in general without the pre-
cise form of the function f (Q). Nevertheless, we may assume
that, as tumor cells degrade the heterotype chemoattractant,
the concentration of q inside the tumor is small enough, and
we can approximate f (Q) by a linear function f (Q0q)
δq.
We now proceed by solving Eq. (24) inside and outside the
tumor (we denote the solutions, respectively, by q− and q+)
and matching both solutions at the boundary, for an initially
ﬂat tumor, i.e., a tumor for which the radius of curvature is
much smaller than the system lateral size Lx [40]. We ﬁrst
notice that q+ is invariant under the transformation group
ǫ0q+. Simi-
(Lx −
ǫ2t and
larly, eδtq− is invariant under the group, x
ǫ0q−. Thus, it can be straightforwardly seen that [41]
q−

ǫ(Lx −

ǫ2t and q+

→
ǫx, t

x), t

→

→

→

→

x)

≃

→

x/√t

dξ e−

2

ξ

/4,

Z
0
(Lx

x)/√t

−

q+(x, y, t) = 1

A

−

Z

0

dξ e−

2

ξ

/4,

(48)

where A and C are positive constants that can be deter-
mined by continuity of the solutions at the tumor boundary
x = x0(s, t). As we are interested in the gradient of the Q
density ﬁeld, we ﬁnd

∂xq−(x, y, t) =

2

e−

δte−

x

/4t,

∂xq+(x, y, t) =

(Lx

e−

−

2

x)

/4t.

C
√t
A
√t

7

Note that Eq. (50) states that the gradient of Q is a positive
function, and so the tumor velocity is increased by chemotaxis
as we had anticipated. Moreover, the larger the distance from
x to the tumor is, the larger the value of ∂xq+ becomes and
the larger the value of the velocity front is (see Fig. 3). This is
indeed, the reason why small ﬂuctuations on the tumor surface
become emerging invasive branches. We will see in Sec. IV
that this chemotactically enhanced velocity is also obtained
numerically.

TUMOR

FIG. 3: Sketch of the heterotype chemoattractant effect on tumor cell
invasive drift. Dashed lines represent level sets of Q and arrows rep-
resent the local normal velocity of the tumor cells due to chemotaxis
(the length of the arrows is proportional to the normal velocity).

C. Growth due to homotype chemoattraction

Finally, we consider the role of homotype chemoattractants.
Representing protein growth factors, these chemoattractants
are produced and internalized [42], or (for the purposes here),
consumed by the tumor cells that move towards their positive
gradients, in a similar fashion as in the heterotype case. Yet,
there is no wide time scale separation between tumor and ho-
motype chemoattractant dynamics. Thus, we cannot, in gen-
eral, neglect tumor cell proliferation when analyzing homo-
type chemoattractant dynamics. This means that the equations
in this case are Eqs. (1), (5) and (6) with χQ = 0. Performing
a similar analysis to that of Sec. III B above we ﬁnd:

Despite the fact that Eq. (51) is equivalent to Eq. (41), the
main differences between the evolution of Q and C are due to
the behaviour of both density ﬁelds away from the tumor in-
terface, namely, due to the production term R(p)
C (that is absent
in the dynamical equation for Q) and the different boundary
conditions (no external source for C).

Following the same steps as those carried out in Sec. III B,

we ﬁnd that the outer limit yields the following equation

(49)

(50)

∂tc =

∇
∇

n

2c + r(p)(0, 1)
2c

−

r(d)(c, 1)

inside the tumor,
outside the tumor,

(52)

q−(x, y, t) = Ce−

δt

(47)

vn = 2(µU λU K)1/2

µU κ + ν′B′

C

n.

(51)

−

∇

·

with r(p) and r(d) scaled (dimensionless) versions of R(p)
C and
R(d)
C , respectively. Note that we have considered m = 0
where u = 1. The conservation relation given by Eq. (8) still
holds in this case so, without loss of generality, we reduce the
system of equations (1), (5) and (6) to Eq. (5) and Eq. (6), with
χQ = 0 and M given by Eq. (8).

·

C

∇

Just as we did in Sec. III B, we must now compute the
n in order to determine whether or not homo-
sign of
type chemotaxis increases the velocity of the tumor bound-
ary, and if it can generate a dynamical instability leading to
a tumor branching morphology. We cannot in general ﬁnd a
transformation group under which Eq. (52) is invariant. This
means that we cannot study homotype chemotaxis with the
tools of the previous section. However, we can analyze homo-
type chemoattraction by means of its homogeneous and steady
state solutions, based on generic assumptions regarding the re-
action terms R(p)

C (M, U ) and R(d)

C (C, U ).

The homogeneous, steady state solutions (nullclines [43])

of equations (9) and (5) are given by the solutions of

RM (K
R(p)

C (K

−

−

λM /λU U, U ) = 0,
λM /λU U, U ) = R(d)

C (C, U ).

(53)

(54)

These nullclines yield the ﬁxed points U1 = 0 and U2 =
λU K/λM , and C1 and C2 given implicitly by Eq. (54). We
must distinguish between the inside and the outside of the tu-
mor when analyzing tumor growth due to homotype chemo-
taxis. Outside the tumor U1 = 0 and there is no production
of C (as there are no tumor cells). This implies that the corre-
sponding ﬁxed point value of C is then C1 = 0. On the other
hand, inside the tumor, Eq. (54) reﬂects the fact that there is
a balance between production and consumption of C. This
means that the value of the density ﬁeld C reaches the ﬁxed
point C2, which is a constant (equilibrium) value. This simple
picture holds even far enough from the tumor boundary (dif-
fusion tends to spread these uniform concentration phases).
Therefore, let us consider a point in the C
U plane where
U = UP and C = 0 (point P in Fig. 4a), namely, a point
outside the tumor boundary, with U so small that there has
been no previous secretion of homotype chemoattractant C.
The concentration C eventually grows (as U increases due to
proliferation wherever M

= 0) because the slope given by

−

dC
dU

=

R(p)

C (K

λM /λU U, U )

R(d)
λM /λU U, U )

−

−
RM (K

C (C, U )

,

(55)

−

is positive [44]. Then, the slope decreases [45] until it reaches
the nullcline where the slope is 0 (point Q in Fig. 4a). Finally,
the curve approaches the stable point (U2, C2) with inﬁnite
slope (point R in Fig. 4a). Thus, C grows from the outside
of the tumor, reaches a maximum value and then decreases to
a constant value C2 inside the tumor. This can be schemat-
ically seen in Fig. 4b). In other words, the density ﬁeld C
tends to grow as U decreases namely, as we move outside of
the tumor from inside. But, as we have shown, outside the
tumor and far enough from it C tends to 0. This means that
C also tends to grow as we move inside of the tumor from the
outside. Consequently, C behaves as a pulse from the con-
stant value C2 inside the tumor to C1 = 0 outside the tumor.

8

This qualitative picture is sketched in Fig. 4, where we have
shown that the nullcline given by Eq. (54) can have three dif-
ferent qualitative behaviours N1, N2 and N3, that are plotted
as well. This pulse-like structure for the density proﬁle of C
agrees well with the intuitive picture provided in Sec. II C. It
also explains why tumor cells are chemotactically guided by
the gradient of C. These facts will be numerically conﬁrmed
in Sec. IV below. We conclude as follows: the density proﬁle
of C grows at the tumor boundary, which implies that the lo-
cal normal velocity of the tumor surface increases due to the
presence of a positive homotype chemoattractant gradient.

a)

N2

N3

N1

C

P

Q

U

b)

C

R

R

Q

x

P

FIG. 4: a) Qualitative behaviour of the trajectory of the density ﬁeld
C in the phase-plane. The arrows indicate the direction of time evo-
lution. Curves N 1-N 3 are the three types of nullclines that can be
expected for our system. b) Same trajectory of the density ﬁeld C
with respect to the spatial coordinate x. Again, arrows indicate time
evolution.

IV. NUMERICAL STUDY

0, λU ≈

In Sec. III we have presented a general analytical frame-
work to study tumor growth (proliferation and chemotactic
invasion). The previous analysis has been carried out by
means of several assumptions and limits, (e.g., νQ0 ≪
µQ,
0), that have not been fully justiﬁed. In this
λM ≈
section we provide numerical simulations that check the va-
lidity of those assumptions and limits. We, thus, numerically
solve the main differential equations of Sec. II following a
similar organization to that of Sec. III. It is clear that in order
to carry out a numerical study we must specify the detailed
mathematical form of the reaction terms in our equations (1)-
(6). These reaction terms are chosen following the spirit of
the oncology concept previously reported in Refs. [8, 18].

A. Growth due to cell proliferation

In this section, we check the validity of Eq. (8) as an ap-
proximation to Eq. (7). Thus, we have integrated Eqs. (1)
and (6) with χQ = χC = 0 and RM (U, M ) = M U and,
independently, Eq. (6) with M = K

λM /λU U .

−

1. One-dimensional results

Initially, we place a one dimensional tumor such that
U (x, t = 0) = 1 for 0 < x < L/2 and U (x, t = 0) = 0

6
−

elsewhere. This implies that at the initial time M (x, t = 0) =
U (x, t = 0). We have numerically solved Eqs. (1) and (6)
1
with χQ = χC = 0 and RM (U, M ) = M U and, indepen-
dently, Eq. (6) with M = K
λM /λU U . The lattice separa-
−
tion has been taken dx = 0.5, the lattice size Lx = 128, the
diffusion coefﬁcients µU = 0.01 and µM = 0.0, the reaction
rates λM = λU = 0.1, the time step ǫt = 0.005, the initial
time t0 = ǫt and the ﬁnal time tf = 50000ǫt.

As can be seen in Fig. 5, after a small transient time, the ap-
proximation is accurate enough. As we mentioned in Sec. III,
the shape of the tumor front changes slightly.

transient behavior

9

dx = dy = 0.5, the lattice size Lx = Ly = 128, the diffu-
sion coefﬁcients ¯µU = 0.01 and µM = 0.0, the reaction rates
λM = λU = 1.5, the time step ǫt = 0.005, the initial time
t0 = ǫt, the ﬁnal time tf = 5000ǫt, and the intermediate times
(1000, 2000, 3000, 4000)ǫt.

Figure 6 displays the time evolution of the tumor surface.
Notice how the tumor conserves during its evolution its ini-
tial circular shape but develops a rough interface with the ma-
trigel.

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

time

40

60

x

80

100

FIG. 5: One dimensional tumor proliferation. Solid lines represent
the U density ﬁeld for the model given by Eqs. (1) and (6). Dashed
lines represent U for the solution of Fisher’s equation, i.e., Eq. (6)
with M = K − λM /λU U .

2. Two-dimensional results

We now consider tumor growth due to proliferation in a
two-dimensional setting with χQ = χC = 0. Initially, the
matrigel density M is a random distribution to reﬂect the fact
that it is an heterogeneous medium. As we are interested in
a slowly varying nutrient, we choose ε
µM /¯µU = 0.01,
where ¯µU is the maximum attainable value of µU (M ). We
assume that this value of µU corresponds to the value M = 0.
The conﬁnement due to the matrigel is unlimited, namely, for
large concentrations of M , tumor cells can no longer diffuse.
Hence, we take the following diffusion coefﬁcient

≡

µU (M ) =

¯µU
1 + M/Mth

,

(56)

where Mth is a reference threshold concentration.

We have solved Eqs. (1) and (6) with the following initial
conditions: at time t = 0 we place a circular tumor centered at
(Lx/2, Ly/2) of radius Lx/4 and surrounded by a heteroge-
neous nutrient substrate M . Thus, M (x, y, t = 0) = 0 inside
the initial circular tumor and M (x, y, t = 0) = 1 + ξ(x, y)
elsewhere, with ξ(x, y) a random Gaussian distribution with
zero mean and variance 0.2, that encodes the initial hetero-
geneities of the matrigel. The lattice separation has been taken

FIG. 6: Numerical simulation of an initially circular tumor embedded
in a matrigel medium M with slow dynamics (µM ≪ ¯µU ). Different
curves represent different times with the initial time t0 corresponding
to the inner perfect circle.

B. Growth due to heterotype chemoattraction

The experimental branches of Fig. 1 have two characteris-
tic lengths, namely, their width and their height with respect to
the main tumor substrate. Section III B was devoted to deter-
mine the conditions that trigger the formation of the invasive
branches. We know that the height of the branches depends in
a crucial way on the mathematical form of the reaction term
RQ(Q, U ) of Eq. (2), namely, the height depends on the con-
centration thresholds associated with the bio-chemical reac-
tion of Q consumption by tumor cells [8]. Thus, we choose

aQRQ(Q, U ) = aQU

(57)

Q
bQ + Q

,

where aQ is the inverse of the time scale of consumption and
bQ a characteristic heterotype chemoattractant concentration
(threshold value). Note that, in the notation of Eq. (15) we
have set γ = 1.

1. Two-dimensional results

We have integrated Eqs. (1), (6) and (2) with RQ given by
Eq. (57) and χC = 0. At the initial time we place a circu-
lar tumor at (Lx/2, Ly/2) with radius Lx/4 + ξ, where ξ
is a Gaussian random number with zero mean and variance
Lx/20. This initial condition mimics the effect of the slowly
varying underlying substrate (matrigel) as shown in the pre-
vious section IV A. The lattice separation has been taken

dx = dy = 0.5, the lattice size Lx = Ly = 128, the diffusion
coefﬁcients µU = 0.001, µQ = 10.0 and µM = 0.00001, the
reaction rates λM = λU = 0.0050, aQ = 0.75, bQ = 0.5, the
chemotactic sensitivity χQ = 2.0, the time step ǫt = 0.005,
the initial time t0 = ǫt and the ﬁnal time tf = 20000ǫt.

Figure 7a) displays the numerically obtained tumor when
the replenished source of Q is placed at x = Lx (i.e., the right
hand side of the lattice). Moreover, in Fig. 7b) we show the
cross-section of an invasive, chemotactically induced branch
obtained in the same simulation. Clearly, we can distinguish
between the main tumor spheroid and a given branch. Notice
the good agreement with the experimental results and with the
qualitative analysis provided in Sec. III.

a)

transient behavior b)

transient behavior

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

time
time

branch
branch

60

80

x

100

FIG. 7: a) Numerical simulation of tumor branching induced by a
heterotype chemotactic source located at x = Lx. The plot rep-
resents the tumor density ﬁeld U (x, y, t = 20000ǫt). b) Cross-
section of the tumor in panel a) for different times between 2000ǫt
and 20000ǫt.

10

−

same as those chosen in the previous section IV B. For the
matrigel and the homotype chemoattracctant, we have chosen
U (x, y, t = 0) and C(x, y, t = 0) = 0,
M (x, y, t = 0) = 1
respectively. The lattice separation has been taken dx = dy =
0.5, the lattice size Lx = Ly = 128, the diffusion coefﬁcients
µU = 0.01, µC = 1.0 and µM = 0.0, the reaction rates
λM = λU = 0.1, aC = 1.75, bC = 0.1, αC = βC = 1.0, the
chemotactic sensitivity χC = 1.0, the time step ǫt = 0.005,
the initial time t0 = ǫt and the ﬁnal time tf = 50000ǫt.

Fig. 8 displays the time evolution of the tumor proﬁle in
the x direction for times 10000ǫt, 15000ǫt, 20000ǫt, 25000ǫt
and 30000ǫt. The dotted line in Fig. 8 displays the C proﬁle
at time t = 10000ǫt, magniﬁed by a factor of 4. In agree-
ment with the analysis presented in section III C, the numer-
ical results show that (i) there is no emergence of chemotac-
tically induced branches, as was the case for the heterotype
chemoattractant and (ii) the mean speed of the tumor bound-
ary increases due to C. That is, the tumor proﬁle follows qual-
itatively the behaviour anticipated in Sec. III C.

transient
behavior

time

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

C. Growth due to homotype chemoattraction

The segregation and eventual degradation of the homo-
type chemoattractant is limited, i.e., the rates associated with
both processes cannot be arbitrarily large. Thus, following
Ref. [18] we choose

αC R(p)

C (U ) = αC

U
βC + U

,

aCR(d)

C (C, U ) = aC U

C
bC + C

.

(58)

(59)

The constants αC and aC are the inverse of the characteris-
tic time scales of production and degradation, respectively,
and βC and bC are characteristic saturation concentrations (for
production and degradation, respectively). Note the Eqs. (59)
and (57) have the same mathematical form.

1. Two-dimensional results

We have numerically integrated Eqs. (1), (6) and (5) with
χQ = 0, and R(p)
C given by Eqs. (58) and (59), re-
spectively. The initial conditions for U (x, y, t = 0) are the

C and R(d)

60

80

x

100

FIG. 8: Cross-section of a tumor for the case of coupled dynamics
between matrigel M , tumor cells U and homotype chemoattractant
C for different times between t0 = ǫt and tf = 30000ǫt. Solid
lines: U subject to homotype chemotaxis; dashed lines: U subject to
no homotype chemotaxis. Dotted line: C (times a factor of four) for
t = 10000ǫt.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In summary we conclude that:

1. The matrigel M induces tumor cell proliferation. This
growth is an overall expansion of the initial tumor that
follows the principle of least resistance [18]. Moreover,
in the case of interest here, that of a slowly diffusing
matrigel, the tumor boundary (or surface) becomes in-
homogeneous due to the random nature of the slowly
varying nutrient M . It is noteworthy that the roughness
of the tumor surface depends also on the proliferation
rate of the cells.

2. The homotype chemoattractant enhances the velocity of
the tumor cells due to the increase of C at the boundary

of the tumor. This effect combined with cell prolifer-
ation (due to M ) would induce the onset of invasion
of tumor cells towards regions of lower matrigel den-
sity. We have been able to show that the secretion and
subsequent diffusion of C catalyzes the motion of the
tumor cells.

3. Finally, as the heterotype chemoattractant is introduced
into the system at a given distance from the tumor
(in our case at the boundary), and because it diffuses,
an initially circular tumor develops unstable invasive
branches that move towards the source of the heterotype
chemoattractant. These branches develop from initial
seeds (i.e., ﬂuctuations on the tumor boundary), which
are due to the mechanical conﬁnement from M , and the
velocity enhancement due to C and Q.

Our results are an improvement over [7, 18]. We have not
limited ourselves to (i) performing a linear stability analy-
sis from the steady state solutions as was done in [7] or to
(ii) numerically solving a simpliﬁed version of the reaction-
diffusion equations as carried out in [18]. On the other hand,
we have analytically and numerically studied the full non-
linear problem. The results of the work presented here allow
us to say that proliferation is a requirement for invasion. In
fact, there can be no (chemotactic) invasion without prolif-
eration, as proliferation due to M provides the initial seeds
that trigger the onset of invasion. That is, the slow diffu-
sion of M is crucial to the development of those initial seeds
(rough tumor interface) that become invasive branches due to
heterotype chemotactically induced instability.

Admittedly, our model still does have several shortcomings
as it inevitably has to simplify the complex biological sce-
nario considered here. For instance, tumor cell apoptosis and
thus, the development of a central necrotic core is currently
not included [26]. Incorporating this characteristic tumor fea-
ture would also have implications for the simulation itself.
Speciﬁcally, detrimental byproducts released from the dying
virtual cells would render this area “toxic”, resulting in a cen-
tral space within the growing tumor, which is not being re-
populated by the proliferative tumor surface. In future work,

11

this tumor characteristic can be implemented e.g., by some dy-
namic, internal boundary condition within the tumor. We have
also failed to model the ﬁnite receptor occupancy of the tumor
cell surface. This issue is important in order to ﬁnd biologi-
cal support for implementing a maximum threshold of (e.g.,
homotype) chemoattractant uptake rate (by each tumor cell).
On the other hand, the minimum threshold is given by the
maximum sensitivity of the cell surface-based receptor sys-
tem. Nonetheless, even in its present form the model already
proves very useful for interdisciplinary cancer research as it
provides the following, at least in part experimentally testable
hypotheses: (i) tumor cell proliferation by itself cannot gener-
ate the invasive branching behaviour observed experimentally,
yet, proliferation is a requirement for invasion (ii) heterotype
chemotaxis provides an instability mechanism that leads to the
onset of tumor cell invasion and (iii) homotype chemotaxis
does not provide such a mechanism but enhances the mean
speed of the tumor surface.

Combined with more speciﬁc experimental data, both on
the molecular and on the microscopic scale, this ongoing work
may therefore reveal novel and exciting insights into the role
of tumor cell signaling and its impact on the emergence of
multicellular patterns.

Acknowledgments

C. M.-P. and T. S. D. would like to thank S. Habib (Los
Alamos National Laboratory) for very valuable discussions.
C. M.-P. would like to thank B. D. Sleeman (University of
Leeds) for a very careful reading of the manuscript and for
useful discussions. This work has been partially supported by
MECD (Spain) Grant No. BFM2003-07749-C05-05. T. S. D.
would like to acknowledge support by NIH grants CA 085139
and CA 113004 and by the Harvard-MIT (HST) Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging and the Department
of Radiology at Massachusetts General Hospital. We thank
C. Athale (Complex Biosystems Modeling Laboratory, Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital) for providing the microscopy im-
age.

[1] C. Betsholtz, B. Westermark, B. Ek and C. H. Heldin, Co-
expression of a PDGF-like growth factor and PDGF receptors
in a human osteosarcoma cell line: implications for autocrine
receptor activation. Cell 39, 447-57 (1984).

[2] J. Laterra, E. Rosen, M. Nam, S. Ranganathan, K. Field-
ing and P.
Johnston, Scatter factor/hepatocyte growth fac-
tor expression enhances human glioblastoma tumorigenicity
and growth. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 235(3), 743-7
(1997).

[3] M. R. Chicoine, C. L. Madsen and D. L. Silbergeld, Modiﬁ-
cation of human glioma locomotion in vitro by cytokines EGF,
bFGF, PDGFbb, NGF, and TNF alpha. Neurosurgery 36(6),
1165-70 (1995).

[4] M. J. Plank, B. D. Sleeman and P. F. Jones, A mathematical
model of an in vitro experiment to investigate endothelial cell

[5] S. Koochekpour, M.

migration, Jour. Theor. Medic. 4, 251-270 (2002); M. J. Plank
and B. D. Sleeman, Lattice and non-lattice models of tumour
angiogenesis, Bull. Math. Biol. 66, 1785-1819 (2004).

Jeffers, S. Rulong, G. Taylor, E.
Klineberg, E. A. Hudson, J. H. Resau and G. F. Vande
Woude, Met and hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor expres-
sion in human gliomas. Cancer Res. 57, 5391-8 (1997); A. J.
Ekstrand, C. D. James, W. K. Cavenee, B. Seliger, R. F.
Pettersson and V. P. Collins, Genes for epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor, transforming growth factor alpha, and epidermal
growth factor and their expression in human gliomas in vivo.
Cancer Res. 51(8), 2164-72 (1991).

[6] A. Wells, Tumor invasion: role of growth factor-induced cell

motility. Adv Cancer Res.78, 31-101 (2000).

[7] L. M. Sander and T. S. Deisboeck, Phys. Rev. E 66, 051901

(2002).

[8] T. S. Deisboeck, M. E. Berens, A. R. Kansal, S. Torquato, A. O.
Stemmer-Rachamimov and E. A. Chiocca, Cell Prolif. 34, 115
(2001).

[9] R. B. Vernon and E. H. Sage, A novel, quantitative model for
study of endothelial cell migration and sprout formation within
three-dimensional collage matrices. Microvasc. Res. 57, 118-
133 (1999).

[10] H. M. Byrne and M. A. J. Chaplain, Free boundary problems
arising in models of tumour growth and development. Euro. Jnl.
of Applied Mathematics 8, 639-658 (1998).

[11] T. L. Jackson, S. R. Lubkin and J. D. Murray, Theoretical anal-
ysis of conjugate localization in two-step cancer chemotherapy.
J. Math. Biol. 39, 353-376 (1999).

[12] L. Preziosi, From population dynamics to modeling the compe-
tition between tumor and immune system. Math. Comp. Mod-
elling 23, 135-152 (1996).

[13] H. Greenspan, On the growth and stability of cell cultures and

solid tumors. J. Theor. Biol. 56, 229-242 (1976).

[14] J. P. Ward and J. R. King, Mathematical modelling of
avascular-tumor growth. IMA J. Math. Appl. Med. Biol. 14, 39-
69 (1997).

[15] M. J. Holmes and B. D. Sleeman, A Mathematical Model of
Tumour Angiogenesis Incorporating Cellular Traction and Vis-
coelastic Effects. J. Theoretical Biology 202, 45-112 (2000).

[16] T. Alarcon, H. Byrne and P. Maini, A mathematical model
of the effects of hypoxia on the cell cycle of normal and cancer
cells. J. Theor. Biol. (2004).

[17] D. S. Jones and B. D. Sleeman, Differential equations and
mathematical biology (CRC Press, London) (2003) and refer-
ences therein.

[18] S. Habib, C. Molina-Par´ıs and T. S. Deisboeck, Physica A 327,

501 (2003).

[19] E. F. Keller, L. A. Segel, Model for chemotaxis. J. Theor. Biol.
30, 225-234 (1971); E. F. Keller and L. A. Segel, Traveling
bands of chemotactic bacteria: a theoretical analysis. J. Theor.
Biol. 30, 235-248 (1971).

[20] J. A. Sherratt, Chemotaxis and chemokinesis in eukaryotic
cells: the Keller-Segel equations as an approximation to a de-
tailed model. Bull. Math. Biol. 56, 129-146 (1994); K.
J.
Painter, P. K. Maini and H. G. Othmer, Development and
applications of a model for cellular response to multiple chemo-
tactic cues. J. Math. Biol. 41, 285-314 (2000).

[21] A. J. Ekstrand, C. D. James, W. K. Cavenee, B. Seliger, R. F.
Pettersson and V. P. Collins, Genes for epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor, transforming growth factor alpha, and epidermal
growth factor and their expression in human gliomas in vivo.
Cancer Res. 51(8), 2164-2172 (1991).

[22] J. Folkman and M. Hochberg, Self-regulation of growth in

three dimensions. J. Exp. Med. 138, 745-753 (1973).

[23] C. K. N. Li, The glucose distribution in 9L rat brain multicell
tumor spheroids and its effect on cell necrosis. Cancer 50, 2066-
2073 (1982).

[24] J. P. Freyer, Role of necrosis in regulating the growth saturation
of multicellular spheroids. Cancer Res. 48, 2432-2439 (1988).
[25] J. P. Freyer and R. M. Sutherland, Regulation of growth sat-
uration and development of necrosis in EMT6/Ro multicellular
spheroids by the glucose and oxygen supply. Cancer Res. 46(7),
3504-3512 (1986).

12

[26] H. M. Byrne and M. Chaplain, Growth of necrotic tumors in
the presence and absence of inhibitors. Math. Biosci. 135 187-
216 (1996).

[27] Note that the characteristic time, τ , and length, λ, scales are
related to the diffusivity through the relation λ2/τ ∼ µM ∼ ε2.
This motivates a change of variable x → x/ε.

[28] J. Xin, SIAM Review 42, 161 (2000).
[29] R. A. Fisher, Ann. Eugenics VII 355, (1936); A. Kolmogorov,
I. Petrosvky and N. Piscounov, Moscow Univ. Bull. Math. A
1, 1 (1937).

[30] Fisher’s equation has a minimal speed v0 and a continuum of
speeds v > v0, which depend on the boundary conditions. In
our case we have a ﬁnite domain with no ﬂux boundary condi-
tions.

[31] See A.-L. Barab´asi and H. E. Stanley, Fractal Concepts in Sur-
face Growth (Cambridge University Press, Cambdridge, 1995).
and references therein.

[32] J. M¨uller and W. van Saarlos, Phys. Rev. E 65, 061111 (2002).
[33] M. R. Chicoine and D. L. Silbergeld, Assessment of brain
tumor cell motility in vivo and in vitro. J Neurosurg. 82(4), 615-
622 (1995); R. K. Jain, Transport of molecules in the tumor
interstitium: a review. Cancer Res. 47(12), 3039-51 (1987).
[34] A. H. Nayfeh, Introduction to Perturbation Techniques (John

Wiley and Sons, Mew York, 1981).

[35] P. C. Fife, Dynamics of Internal Layers and Diffusive Inter-

faces, (SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 1988).

[36] R. F. Almgren, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 59, 2086 (1999).
[37] J. S. Langer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 1 (1980).
[38] A. Karma and W.-J. Rappel, Phys. Rev. E 60, 3614 (1999).
[39] P. G. Saffman and G.

I. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. London A
245, 312 (1958); D. Bensimon, L. Kadano , S. Liang, B. I.
Shraiman and C. Tang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 977 (1986).
[40] We have placed the initial ﬂat tumor at a constant value of the
x coordinate, that is: u(x, y, t = 0) = δ(x − x0). This choice
and the initial condition for q, Eq. (44) imply that the system of
equations only depends on x and is independent of y. We are
dealing with an effectively one-dimensional system.

[41] P. Grindrod, The Theory and Applications of Reaction-Diffusion
Equations: Patterns and Waves, (Oxford University Press, New
York, 1996).

[42] F. Brightman and D. Fell, Differential feedback regulation
of the MAPK cascade underlies the quantitative differences in
EGF and NGF signalling in PC12 cells. FEBS Lett. 482, 169-
174 (2000); B. Schoeberl, C. Eichler-Jonsson, E. D. Gilles
and G. Muller, Computational modeling of the dynamics of the
MAP kinase cascade activated by surface and internalized EGF
receptors. Nat. Biotechnol. 20, 370-375 (2002).

[43] S. H. Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applica-
tions to Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, (Perseus
Books Group,New York , 1994).

[44] Notice that the numerator of equation (55) is positive (the pro-
C is larger than the R(d)
duction term R(p)
C consumption term)
and the denominator RM is always a positive function of both
arguments.

[45] Notice that the numerator of equation (55) is positive but de-
C consumption rate catches up

creases as U increases (the R(d)
with the production term R(p)
C ).

