Forced unfolding of protein domains determines cytoskeletal rheology

Brenton D. Hoﬀman, Gladys Massiera†, and John C. Crocker
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

We describe a model of cytoskeletal mechanics based on thermally activated, forced unfolding
of protein cross-links in a stressed semi-ﬂexible polymer gel. In a simulated network, cooperative
unfolding events produce a nearly exponential distribution of cross-link tension. Such tension distri-
butions readily lead to stress relaxation spectra that have a power-law tail, and which reproduce the
recently observed power-law form of cells’ dynamic shear moduli. Moreover, our model naturally
explains the reported eﬀects of strain on cells’ mechanical response and suggests mechanisms for
cell shape sensing and mechano-transduction.

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 83.60.Bc, 87.16.Ac, 87.15.La

Understanding the mechanical properties of cell struc-
tures is a prerequisite for the complete understanding of
many biological processes involving force:
intracellular
traﬃcking, cell crawling and division, gene transcription,
and mechano-transduction [1, 2].
In animal cells, me-
chanical response is dominated by the cytoskeleton, a
three-dimensional, ﬁlamentous network of semi-ﬂexible
biopolymers and cross-linking proteins. Many puriﬁed
entangled actin) have a frequency-
biopolymers (e.g.
independent plateau elasticity [3] at low frequency.
In
contrast, both cells [4, 5] and biopolymers mixed with
common cross-linking proteins (ﬁlamin [6] and α-actinin
[7]) have shear moduli with a weak power-law frequency
dependence, |G∗(ω)| ∼ ωβ, spanning several decades of
frequency, with a non-universal exponent, 0.1 < β < 0.3.
Such a mechanical response requires stress relaxation
mechanisms having a very broad distribution of char-
acteristic times, which is especially surprising in sys-
tems with only two structural components. Many cross-
linking proteins (e.g. ﬁlamin, α-actinin, spectrin, plakin,
etc.) have a structure consisting of repeated domains
resembling beads on a string. The domains in many of
these proteins can be serially unfolded by applied force
[8, 9, 10], allowing the cross-link to signiﬁcantly extend.

In this Letter, we develop a cell rheology model based
on the forced unfolding of protein domains within cy-
toskeletal cross-links.
[Fig. 1]. Among cross-links in a
stressed network those under higher tension should un-
fold exponentially faster than those with little or no ten-
sion, leading naturally to a very broad distribution of
stress relaxation times. Our goal here is to produce the
simplest possible model for the mechanical response of
this complex physical situation. First, network viscoelas-
ticity is estimated analytically from the distribution of
tension in the unfoldable cross-links. Next, simulations of
idealized networks with serially extensible elements dis-
play a cooperative behavior that produces a roughly ex-
ponential tension distribution. Combining these results
yields a model that strikingly reproduces many features
of cells’ dynamic shear moduli. Simple extensions to our

FIG. 1: (a) Schematic representation of the cytoskeleton con-
sisting of a network of generic semi-ﬂexible polymers and ex-
tensible cross-links. (b) As cross-links are extended, domains
serially unfold. (c) A typical force vs. extension curve having
rupture at a critical force, Fc, with states in (b) labeled.

model can also naturally account for the observed depen-
dence of cells’ shear moduli on external stress [11, 12, 13].
While the role, if any, of protein unfolding in cell rheology
is currently somewhat controversial, our results would be
diﬃcult to replicate with a comparable model based on,
for instance, cross-link unbinding.

When a generalized chemical bond is stressed, there is
a critical force, Fc, at which the energy barrier to bond
rupture vanishes. Thermal activation causes spontaneous
bond rupture at forces less than the critical force. Mean
rupture times are typically estimated by assuming an en-
ergy barrier that decreases with the applied force, F , as
in the Bell model [14]:

τB(F ) = τa exp[EB(1 −

)], EB =

(1)

F
Fc

Fcro
kBT

where τa is an attempt time for rupture, ro is a character-
istic bond length-scale, and kBT is the thermal energy.
Forced protein unfolding experiments often report Bell
kinetics, suggesting that each folded domain is stabilized
by a single critical bond, and completely unfolds when
it is ruptured. If a single cross-link molecule contains a
number of similar domains, it can unfold many times,
becoming progressively longer and longer [Figure 1(b)].

The entropic elasticity of the unfolded protein gives rise
to a nearly Hookean response between ruptures, produc-
ing a ‘sawtooth’ force-extension proﬁle, [Fig. 1(c)].

The frequency dependent shear modulus of a network
with dynamic cross-links can be readily estimated.
If
stress relaxation events are uncorrelated with a distri-
bution of times P (τ ), we can compute the rheology by
superposing Maxwell modes [15] weighted by the corre-
sponding P (τ ). We will assume that unfolding a single
domain extends the length of the cross-link enough to
signiﬁcantly decrease the local stress in the network. In
this case, we can identify P (τ ) with the expected life-
time distribution for forced domain unfolding. For a
steady-state distribution of cross-link tensions in the net-
work, P (F ), the relaxation spectrum is simply P (τ ) =
P (F )/|dτB(F )/dF |. Such a calculation neglects the ef-
fects of non-extensible cross-links and entanglements, ﬁl-
ament scission or cross-link unbinding, not to mention
the bending or Rouse modes that dominate at high fre-
quencies, which we shall not discuss in detail here.

As a cross-linked network of semi-ﬂexible polymers is
deformed, a distribution of cross-link tension develops.
As some of these tensions approach the critical force
for domain unfolding, Fc, unfolding occurs, redistribut-
ing network stress to neighboring cross-links (perhaps
inducing secondary, cooperative unfolding events). To
compute the P (F ) resulting from such cooperativity, we
performed simple, athermal simulations of an idealized
network. We sheared two-dimensional, disordered tri-
angular networks containing ∼ 104 links [Fig. 2(a,b)],
each link having a linear ‘sawtooth’ force-extension curve:
F = k[(x − x0) mod xc], where k is a spring constant, x
is the instantaneous link extension, xc ≡ Fc/k is the
critical extension for bond rupture and x0 is the link
length at the beginning of the simulation (typically 5-
20 xc). Conceptually, each simulated link may be con-
sidered an inextensible rod of length x0 connected to
the network through a cross-link with an inﬁnite num-
ber of unfoldable domains. In an athermal simulation,
the links ‘unfold’ instantaneously at the critical force
F = Fc, and ‘refold’ at F = 0 without hysteresis. Com-
pressed links generate a compressive force (if x − x0 < 0,
(x − x0) mod 1 = −(|x − x0| mod 1)). The network was
sheared by moving the upper boundary by small strain
steps. At each step, all nodes are initially moved by an
aﬃne shear deformation and then relaxed to mechanical
equilibrium using a simple steepest descent algorithm.

As the network is sheared, ﬁrst a roughly uniform dis-
tribution of link tension develops. As the strain is in-
creased past γ ≈ 0.4, links begin to accumulate at ten-
sions somewhat smaller than Fc [Fig. 2(c)]. The distribu-
tion of these link tensions has an exponential character
over a small range. As the strain is increased further,
the range of the exponential extends to lower tension,
but its characteristic force, Fe ≈ 0.4Fc, remains roughly
constant. Provided that the individual strain steps are

2

FIG. 2: (a) and (b) Shear simulations of an extensible cross-
link network at γ =0.3 and 1.5 respectively.
(c) Proba-
bility distributions of scaled force, curves for strains γ =
0.3, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 (thin to thick) respectively. Inset: Num-
ber of unfolded domains as a function of strain

suﬃciently small (∆γ ≤ 10−3), the observed distribu-
tion of dimensionless tension (normalized by Fc) does not
vary signiﬁcantly with step size, network disorder, xc/xo
or details of the relaxation method. Important for later
discussion, the number of ‘unfolded’ domains [Fig. 2(c)
inset] is a monotonic function of network strain, with lit-
tle hysteresis upon strain reversal.

Stress relaxation in our model is cooperative, with a
number of neighboring links often ‘unfolding’ due to a
single, arbitrarily small strain step. Such cooperative re-
laxation is common in slowly driven, strongly coupled
systems with microscopic thresholds, as in self-organized
criticality (SOC) models. However our model does not
display SOC, deﬁned as a power-law distribution of large
relaxation events in the large system, long time limit.
The time-dependent geometry of our model precludes
consideration of the required long-time limit. Further-
more, our collective events have an exponential tail, with
a mean size of only 5 links (< 0.1% of our largest sim-
ulated network). There are also system spanning relax-
ations, which occur periodically starting at γ ≈ 2.5.

The arrangement and behavior of our model resem-
ble the Olami, Feder and Christensen (OFC) earth-
quake model [16] of SOC, mapped onto a network with
quenched disorder. The OFC model with closed bound-
aries also has an exponential event size distribution and
periodic, system-spanning events [17, 18]. The distri-
bution of energies in the OFC model (analogous to our
P (F )) has a well-deﬁned stationary state, consistent with
our Fe/Fc value being essentially independent of our
model parameters.

How accurately does our athermal model reﬂect the
behavior of real networks with thermally activated bond
rupture? Studies of SOC-like models consistently show

3

FIG. 3: Dimensionless storage (solid) and loss (dashed) mod-
uli predicted from the simulated P (F ) and the Bell model
with parameters EB = 15, 20, 25, 32.5 (thin to thick).

that thermalization does not destroy the ‘self-organized’
stationary state, provided that the thermal energy is
much smaller than the threshold energy (i.e. EB ≫ 1)
and that external driving compensates the slow loss in en-
ergy due to thermally activated relaxation. In our model,
this would correspond to a slow strain creep to provide a
continuous input of energy to maintain a stationary P (F )
and P (τ ). Experiments which unfold molecules at con-
stant pulling speed (akin to the constant network strain
rate supposed here) report a well deﬁned most probable
force at rupture, F ′
c, which is a logarithmic function of
pulling speed [9]. We then expect a thermal network at
constant strain rate to converge to a P (F ) of the same
form as the athermal case, but with Fc replaced by a
somewhat smaller F ′
c.

In the interest of simplicity, we estimated the eﬀec-
tive shear modulus of the network in the stationary state
by superposing Maxwell modes whose characteristic fre-
quencies are determined by P (F ) and the Bell model.
In addition to Bell unfolding, however, sub-critical cross-
links can also unfold due to transient forces generated by
the unfolding of neighboring cross-links, as in the ather-
mal simulation. Scrutiny of the simulation data indi-
cates that such cooperative activation becomes increas-
ingly rare in cross-links with tensions below 0.6 Fc, the
peak of the stationary P (F ). Thus, our model likely
overestimates the shear modulus at frequencies above
1/τB(0.6Fc), and becomes a good approximation at lower
frequencies. As we shall see, it is this low frequency be-
havior that is relevant for modeling cell response data.

The computed shear moduli, [Fig. 3] have a roughly
|G∗(ω)| ∼ ωβ, over a wide fre-
power-law form,
quency range.
Smaller values of the dimensionless
well depth, EB, lead to steeper frequency dependence
(β ≈ (Fe/Fc)−1E−1
B ), but narrower power-law frequency
regimes. Due to superposition, the modeled shear mod-
ulus has a Maxwellian terminal mode at frequencies be-
low the unforced dissociation rate, exp(−EB)/τa and a
plateau value, Go, at frequencies higher than 1/τa. Sys-
tems with weak power law rheology have a logarithmic
creep response, which resembles a slow, constant strain

FIG. 4: The experimental shear modulus data of Fabry et
al. for human airway smooth muscle (HASM) cells subjected
to drug modiﬁcations. Lines are the best ﬁts of our forced
unfolding model using the simulated P (F ). (Top) Shows the
(Bottom) Shows the loss modulus. Fits
storage modulus.
generated with (from bottom to top) EB = 17, 18.5, 21, 24,
−5sec. To al-
Go = 1000, 2000, 5500, 6500 Pa and τa=5x10
low for comparison at high frequencies, a power-law modulus,
G∗ ∼ ω0.75, was added to the model (dashed lines).

rate at long times, allowing a constant stress (as from a
rheometer or a cell’s contractile apparatus) to maintain
the stationary state. Formally, our model describes the
diﬀerential response to a small applied stress superposed
on this much larger internal ‘prestress’. This conforms to
the emerging view that cell mechanics experiments actu-
ally report such a diﬀerential shear modulus at a cell-
generated prestress, rather than a true linear modulus.

We were able to ﬁt our model [Fig. 4] to the exten-
sive cell mechanical response data reported by Fabry et
al.[4]. To adapt our model to the physical situation, a
high-frequency contribution was added [Fig. 4, dashed
lines]. Speciﬁcally, we added a modulus, G∗ ∼ ω0.75,
the functional form expected for semi-ﬂexible polymer
ﬂuctuations [3], with an amplitude set by the high fre-
quency portion of G′′(ω). The scaling parameters, τa
and Go were considered free parameters. For simplicity,
we considered τa to have the same value for the diﬀer-
ent datasets, and allowed Go to vary. We were able to
achieve reasonable ﬁts for τa in the range 5-500 µsec and
Go of a few kPa, with the latter varying about a factor of
six between curves. Replacing Bell unfolding with a dif-
ferent model, the spring model [19], yielded comparable
ﬁts (not shown).

Fabry and co-workers described their data using the
Soft Glassy Rheology (SGR) model [20], a generic ‘trap

model’ of glassy behavior developed to describe foams,
pastes and slurries. SGR assumes structural elements are
trapped in energy minima having an exponential distri-
bution of well depths, and are activated by a non-thermal
eﬀective temperature, x. Such models give rise to power-
law rheology with a non-universal exponent, G∗ ∼ ωx−1,
resembling the cell response. The abstract nature of the
SGR model, however, has frustrated its application and
testing in cell biology. The power-law response of our
model is due to exponentially distributed tensions low-
ering a uniform (unfolding) barrier height, producing an
SGR-like exponential distribution of well depths. In this
sense, our model is a possible biophysical realization of
the SGR picture. Unlike SGR, however, our model has
a maximum well depth, EB, that limits the range and
slope of its predicted power-law behavior in a manner
resembling the reported data: β < 0.3 over ﬁve decades.
While we have modeled cross-links containing identi-
cal repeated domains, real proteins typically contain do-
mains with a range of EB values. Since ‘weak’ (low EB)
domains unfold before ‘strong’ (high EB) ones, the eﬀec-
tive EB increases and β decreases with increased stress
or strain (assuming Fe/Fc remained constant). Indeed,
recent cell rheology studies show just such reduced power-
law exponent and stiﬀening with increased internal [12]
or externally [13] applied stress. Very similar behavior
has recently been observed in stressed actin-ﬁlamin gels
[6], supporting a physical rather than a cell signaling
explanation for the cell response. While increased cell
stiﬀness due to applied stress is often explained by the
tensegrity model [11] or strain hardening, neither expla-
nation accounts for the change in the frequency depen-
dence, while our model does. Cooperative unbinding of
stressed cross-links could hypothetically produce a rhe-
ology model similar to that considered here, provided it
produced a roughly exponential P (F ). However, because
unbound cross-links would presumably rebind, the eﬀec-
tive EB and β would be strain independent.

Recent work indicates that cells can sense the com-
pliance of their substrate and surroundings, which ap-
pears to require the cell to sense both intracellular stress
and strain. While there are many proposed molecular
force/stress sensors [2, 21], we are unaware of any plau-
sible suggestions for a molecular strain sensor. It is dif-
ﬁcult to imagine, a priori, how a molecular-scale object
could detect cytoskeletal deformation on micron or larger
scales. As noted earlier, however, the average number of
unfolded domains in our model is a monotonic function
of network strain. Moreover, while we have considered
cross-links to be isolated objects, in vivo they speciﬁcally
bind a number of other proteins with known signaling
functions, including heat shock proteins, protein kinase
C, Ral A, PIP2, PIP3, PI3-kinase, and MEKK1 (for re-
views [22, 23]). We hypothesize that if one or more of
these proteins speciﬁcally bind or unbind cross-link do-

4

mains upon forced unfolding, they would biochemically
transduce the shear or extensional strain of the network,
enabling the sensing of compliance or even cell shape.

The myriad, multi-domain cross-link proteins local-
ized to diﬀerent parts of the cell suggest that such a
strain/extension sensor may be a motif repeated through-
out diﬀerent cell sub-structures. Our model might ex-
plain how similar power-law rheology could be reported
for cell types with radically diﬀerent internal concentra-
tions of diﬀerent polymer species. Such ‘universal’ power-
law rheology may not be physiologically important in it-
self, but could be the hallmark of cross-links producing
and sensing compliance in the network.

We thank A Bausch, B DiDonna, JJ Fredberg, A
Levine, T Lubensky, P Janmey and especially M Gardel
and D Weitz, for useful conversations and sharing the
unpublished data that inspired this work. Support came
from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, the
Bourse Lavoisier and Penn’s Ashton Fellowship.

†Present Address:

Laboratoire de Spectometrie
Physique, Universit´e Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

[1] J. Howard, Mechanics of motor proteins and the cy-
toskeleton (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, 2001).
[2] P. A. Janmey and D. A. Weitz, Trends Biochem Sci 29,

364 (2004).

[3] M. L. Gardel et al., Phys Rev Lett 91, 158302 (2003).
[4] B. Fabry et al., Phys Rev Lett 87, 148102 (2001).
[5] J. Alcaraz et al., Biophys J 84, 2071 (2003).
[6] M. Gardel and D. Weitz, private communication (????).
[7] Y. Tseng and D. Wirtz, Biophysical Journal 81, 1643

(2001).

[8] S. Furuike et al., FEBS Lett 498, 72 (2001).
[9] M. Rief et al., Science 276, 1109 (1997).
[10] M. Rief et al., J Mol Biol 286, 553 (1999).
[11] N. Wang et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98, 7765

[12] D. Stamenovic et al., J Appl Physiol 96, 1600 (2004).
[13] N. Rosenblatt et al., Biochem Biophys Res Commun 321,

(2001).

617 (2004).

[14] G. I. Bell, Science 200, 618 (1978).
[15] H. H. Winter, Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechan-

ics 68, 225 (1997).

[16] Z. Olami et al., Phys Rev Lett 68, 1244 (1992).
[17] H. Jensen, Self-Organized Criticality (Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, UK, 1998).

[18] H.-M. Br¨oker and P. Grassberger, Phys Rev E 56, 3944

(1997).

(1988).

[19] M. Dembo et al., Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 234, 55

[20] P. Sollich, Physical Review E 58, 738 (1998).
[21] M. Tamada et al., Dev Cell 7, 709 (2004).
[22] T. P. Stossel et al., Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2, 138 (2001).
[23] C. A. Otey and O. Carpen, Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 58,

104 (2004).

