5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
2
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Inﬂuence of subunit structure on the
oligomerization state of light harvesting
complexes: a free energy calculation study

L. Janosi a, H. Keer b, I. Kosztin a, T. Ritz b,∗

aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211, USA
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA

Abstract

Light harvesting complexes 2 (LH2) from Rhodospirillum (Rs.) molischianum and
Rhodopseudomonas (Rps.) acidophila form ring complexes out of eight or nine iden-
tical subunits, respectively. Here, we investigate computationally what factors gov-
ern the diﬀerent ring sizes. Starting from the crystal structure geometries, we embed
two subunits of each species into their native lipid-bilayer/water environment. Using
molecular dynamics simulations with umbrella sampling and steered molecular dy-
namics, we probe the free energy proﬁles along two reaction coordinates, the angle
and the distance between two subunits. We ﬁnd that two subunits prefer to arrange
at distinctly diﬀerent angles, depending on the species, at about 42.5◦ for Rs. molis-
chianum and at about 38.5◦ for Rps. acidophila, which is likely to be an important
factor contributing to the assembly into diﬀerent ring sizes. Our calculations sug-
gest a key role of surface contacts within the transmembrane domain in constraining
these angles, whereas the strongest interactions stabilizing the subunit dimers are
found in the C-, and to a lesser extent, N-terminal domains. The presented com-
putational approach provides a promising starting point to investigate the factors
contributing to the assembly of protein complexes, in particular if combined with
modeling of genetic variants.

Key words: membrane protein, transmembrane helix, protein complex assembly,
bacteriochlorophyll protein

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: ++1-949-824-4345

Email addresses: KosztinI@missouri.edu (I. Kosztin), tritz@uci.edu

(T. Ritz).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

23 March, 2005

1 Introduction

In photosynthesis, assemblies of pigment-protein complexes absorb sunlight
and convert its energy into a biochemical potential. In recent years, tremen-
dous progress has been made towards identifying the in vivo structure of the
photosynthetic apparatus, in particular that of purple bacteria [1–4]. Calcu-
lations and spectroscopic measurements reveal that a close relationship exists
between the eﬃciency of light harvesting and the geometrical arrangements of
pigment-protein complexes [5–8].

This raises the question as to how nature governs the assembly of its photosyn-
thetic apparatus within its membrane. The antenna light-harvesting complex
2 (LH2) of purple bacteria can be considered a paradigmatic model system
to address this question, because (i) atomic-resolution crystal structures exist
for LH2s with diﬀerent organizations and (ii) mutagenesis and reconstitution
assays allow for direct experimental studies of key factors in the assembly of
LH2 complexes.

LH2s are composed of repetitions of a basic unit of two transmembrane polypep-
tides, α and β. Each αβ heterodimeric subunit non-covalently binds three
bacteriochlorophylls (BChls) and one carotenoid.Figure 1 shows the basic sub-
unit of LH2 from Rhodospirillum (Rs.) molischianum and Rhodopseudomonas
(Rps.) acidophila, respectively, as taken from their crystal structures [9, 10].
Figure 2 shows the corresponding sequences of LH2 α and β polypeptides.
Both α and β polypeptides consist of polar N- and C-termini and a central
hydrophobic region. The N-termini lie on the cytoplasmic side of the mem-
brane, the C-termini on the periplasmic side. Amino acids in the central hy-
drophobic region form two transmembrane α-helices. B850 BChls are ligated
to the highly conserved His0 residues near the C-terminus.

Interestingly, the crystallographic structures of LH2 reveal a diﬀerent organi-
zation of subunits, a ring of nine αβ-subunits for Rps. acidophila [9, 11], but of
eight αβ-subunits for Rs. molischianum [10]. EM and AFM studies reveal non-
americ organizations for LH2s from Rhodovulum suﬁdophilum [12], Rhodobac-
ter (Rb.) sphaeroides [13, 14], and Rubrivivax gelatinosus [15, 16], whereas a
low-light variant form of LH2 from Rps. palustris reveals an eight-fold sym-
metry [17]. In all of the above cases, the octameric or nonameric organization
appears to be homogeneous within a given species, although chromatographies
for 3D crystallization of LH2 from Rs. molischianum suggest the possibility of
unstable LH2 forms with diﬀerent numbers of subunits (H. Michel, personal
comm.). Structural heterogeneity within a species has been described only for
Rs. photometricum, where AFM studies suggest that most LH2s are organized
in either eight-, nine-, or ten-fold symmetry [18].

2

Fig. 1. Structure of a subunit of LH2 from Rs. molischianum (left) and from
Rps. acidophila (right). Each subunit consists of one α polypeptide (blue ribbon),
one β-polypeptide (red ribbon), three BChls (green; phytyl chains truncated), and
one carotenoid (yellow). The N-terminal domains are on top, the C-terminal do-
mains on bottom. The surface of the subunit is superimposed onto the simpliﬁed
representations

LH2 α

LH2 β

Rps. acidophila

MNQGKIWTVVNPAIGIPALLPSVTVIAILVHLAILSHTTWFPAYWQGGVKK

Rs. molischianum

SNPKDDYKIWLVINPSTWLPVIWIVATVVAIAVHAAVLAAPGFNWIALGAAKSAAK

|

-30

|

-20

|

-10

|

+10

|

+20

Rps. acidophila

ATLTAEQSEELHKYVIDGTRVFLGLALVAHFLAFSATPWLH

Rs. molischianum

AERSLSGLTEEEAIAVHDQFKTTFSAFIILAAVAHVLVWVWKPWF

|

-30

|

-20

|

-10

|

+10

|

0

|

0

Fig. 2. Amino acid sequences of the light-harvesting polypeptides of LH2 from
Rs. molischianum and Rps. acidophila. Transmembrane helical domains are high-
lighted in red.

3

Diﬀerences in organization have also been reported for the core light-harvesting
complex 1 (LH1), surrounding the photosynthetic reaction center. LH1, like
LH2, is composed of repetitions of an αβ heterodimeric subunit; however it
contains only two instead of three BChls per subunit. LH1 complexes were re-
ported to be formed of 16 αβ-subunits (Rsp. rubrum [19], Blastochloris viridis
[20]), 15 αβ-subunits and one PufX-like peptide Rps. palustris [21], or 12 αβ-
subunits plus one PufX peptide plus a gap (Rb. sphaeroides [3, 22])

Reconstitution assays [23] show that in many cases light harvesting complexes
with very similar optical properties to the wild-type complexes can be recon-
stituted in vitro from their individual components [24, 25]. Truncated versions
of natural proteins, chemically synthesized de novo proteins, and mutagenetic
gene products have been studied, revealing residues essential to formation of
αβ-subunits and full complexes [26–30]. A recent study demonstrated in vivo
assembly of redesigned peptides from Rb. sphaeroides into fully functional
light-harvesting complexes [31]

These results suggest that the building blocks of light harvesting complexes
can self-assemble to form stable, functional complexes. Thus, one should be
able to relate the observed diﬀerences in complex organization to the structure
of their subunits. What features of the subunits govern the organization of
the complete ring complexes, in particular the oligomerization state, i.e., the
number of subunits employed in forming a ring?

In the present manuscript, we investigate in how far the variations in oligomer-
ization states can be explained by changes in the local interaction angle be-
tween neighboring subunits. In theory, one expects that subunits with a pre-
ferred interaction angle of 45◦ would assemble into a ring of eight subunits
(8 × 45◦ = 360◦), whereas subunits with a preferred interaction angle of 40◦
should form rings of nine subunits. It appears a remarkable feat for subunits
of two helical proteins to control a diﬀerence in angle as small as 5◦ in the
presence of conformational ﬂuctuations and solvent dynamics.

Starting from the crystal structures of LH2 from Rs. molischianum and Rps. aci-
dophila, henceforth referred to as MOLI and ACI, respectively, we embed two
αβ-subunits from either species into their native lipid-water environment. We
use molecular dynamics with umbrella sampling and steered molecular dy-
namics to probe the free energy surfaces along various reaction coordinates,
namely changes in the angle and distance between the subunits. The calcu-
lation techniques, reviewed in the following section, represent, arguably, the
most accurate calculations possible on a system of this scale. They provide a
reference point against which results from simpler models can be compared.
The calculations reveal signiﬁcant diﬀerences between subunits from MOLI
and ACI that we discuss with view of the consequences for protein complex
assembly. We discuss future studies necessary to capture the essential proper-

4

ties governing the oligomerization state of light harvesting complexes.

2 Theoretical and Computational Model

As a ﬁrst step in understanding how LH2 subunits assemble into precise ring
structures, we have focused on determining and characterizing the interaction
between two LH2 subunits. We started from a geometry characteristic to a full
aggregate. Atomic models for two LH2 subunit dimers, namely for MOLI and
ACI, can be readily built starting from their high resolution crystal structures
available from the Protein Data Bank (entry codes 1LGH [32] and 1KZU [33],
respectively). In order to mimic their native environment, we have embedded
a pair of subunits for both MOLI and ACI into properly solvated lipid bilayers.
The dynamical behavior of the systems were investigated by means of all atom
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Details about the built systems and
the MD protocols used are presented at the end of this section.

Since, presently, MD simulations studies are restricted to the 10-100 nanosec-
ond time scale, they cannot be applied directly to describe the complete as-
sembly process between two LH2 subunits. Indeed, lateral diﬀusion of these
protein units in the lipid membrane occurs on a much longer time scale than
the one accessible by MD simulations. However, suitably designed MD simula-
tions, combined with statistical mechanical analysis, can be used to determine
the free energy proﬁle or potential of mean force (PMF) [34] between the inter-
acting subunits. The PMF then can be used as input in a suitable stochastic
model (e.g., Fokker-Planck or Smoluchowski equation [35]) for describing the
dynamics of the system at a mesoscopic or even macroscopic scale. To this
end, one ﬁrst needs to identify a small number of variables (e.g., distances
and/or angles), hereafter referred to as reaction coordinates that describe the
relative separation and orientation of the subunits. Then, one should use a
properly designed set of equilibrium or non-equilibrium MD simulations to
calculate the PMF (i.e, free energy) U(Q) of the system as a function of the
reaction coordinates Q. Once the PMF is determined, the generalized force
exerted between the subunits is equal to F = −∂U(Q)/∂Q.

In what follows, we deﬁne reaction coordinates suitable for describing the
self-assembly of LH2 subunits. Then we brieﬂy describe two well established
methods for calculating PMFs from MD simulations, namely (i) umbrella sam-
pling [36, 37] combined with the weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM)
[38], and (ii) steered molecular dynamics (SMD) [39, 40] in conjunction with
the application of the Jarzynski equality [41]. Method (i) uses equilibrium MD
simulations, while (ii) relies on non-equilibrium simulations [34].

5

2.1 Reaction Coordinates R and θ

The self-assembly of LH2 rings can be envisioned as a process in which pre-
formed LH2 subunits are ﬁrst inserted into the membrane, then brought within
contact distance through diﬀusion in the lipid membrane, followed by ﬁnal
locking into the ring speciﬁc geometry. In a ﬁrst approximation, this process
can be modeled as a purely two dimensional one in which each subunit has a
speciﬁc anisotropic 2D structure (e.g., a deformed disk) that at the end of the
process forms an N-fold symmetric ring (N=8 for MOLI and N=9 for ACI).

We deﬁne two reaction coordinates to characterize the spatial interaction be-
tween LH2 subunits in their native membrane environment, namely R - the
separation between them, and θ - their relative angular orientation. A more
precise deﬁnition of reaction coordinates is illustrated in Fig. 3, displaying
two MOLI subunits (from the equilibrated system) in a side view (a) and in a
top view (b from the N-terminal or cytoplasmic side. Fig. 3c shows only the
transmembrane helical domains of the two subunits (A1, B1) and (A2, B2),
showing a clear separation of α and β polypeptides.

We deﬁne the center-of-mass (COM) of the α (β) apoproteins in subunit i =
1, 2 as Ai (Bi). Then θ by deﬁnition is the angle made by the projections of the
−−→
vectors vi =
AiBi, i = 1, 2, on the xy-plane of the membrane. The separation
distance reaction coordinate is deﬁned as the distance between the COMs
of the αβ-apoprotein heterodimer within the xy-plane, i.e., R = |R1 − R2|,
where Ri, i = 1, 2 are the projections of the position vectors of these COMs on
the xy-plane. Note that, at any instant of time, the reaction coordinates are
determined (through the COMs) by the coordinates and masses of a selected
group of atoms from both subunits.

In selecting the group of atoms that deﬁne the reaction coordinates one has
to make sure that under equilibrium (or stationary) conditions, the reaction
coordinates have well deﬁned mean values and suﬃciently small ﬂuctuations.
Otherwise, the reaction coordinates are ill deﬁned and cannot be used to
characterize the system quantitatively. For example, we have found that (see
Sec. 3) R and θ are well deﬁned if one considers only the heavy atoms in the
transmembrane helical (TMH) domains of the αβ-apoproteins. Adding to the
selection all the heavy atoms in the N- and C-terminal domains, would lead
to substantial increase in the ﬂuctuations of θ rendering the latter reaction
coordinate meaningless. Finally, in what follows, we use the convention that
R and θ refer to particular target values of the reaction coordinates, while
˜R ≡ ˜R(q) and ˜θ ≡ ˜θ(q) refer to the instantaneous values of the reaction
coordinates determined from the corresponding positions q ≡ qj(t) of all
deﬁning atoms.

6

( )a

( )c

1B

2B

( )b

1A

A
2

R

θ

Fig. 3. Deﬁnition of the reaction coordinates θ and R illustrated for two subunits
of LH2 from Rs. molischianum. (a) Side view with the N-termini on top. (b) Top
view from the N-terminal or cytoplasmic side in space-ﬁlling representation with
transmembrane helices highlighted in ribbon representation. (c) Top view from from
the N-terminal or cytoplasmic side of only the α and β polypeptides with deﬁnition
of reaction coordinates.

2.2 Potential of Mean Force U(θ, R)

The PMF U(Q) ≡ U(θ, R) is the free energy of the system formed by the two
interacting subunits for well deﬁned spatial R and angular θ separations; for
brevity we have introduced the compact notation Q ≡ {θ, R}. In principle, the
PMF can be calculated by integrating out all the degrees of freedom except
for the reaction coordinates [34], i.e.,

e−βU (Q) ≡ p0(Q) =

dΓ

δ[Q − ˜Q(Γ)] ,

(1)

e−βH0(Γ)
Z0

Z

where β = 1/kBT is the temperature factor (kB is the Boltzmann constant
and T is the absolute temperature), p0(Q) is the equilibrium distribution func-
tion of the reaction coordinates, H0(Γ) is the Hamiltonian of the system as
a function of Γ ≡ {q, p} (i.e., all the atomic coordinates and momenta), Z0
is the partition function and δ(x) is the Dirac-delta function whose ﬁltering
property guarantees that the integrand in Eq. (1) is nonzero only when the
reaction coordinates have the requested value, i.e, when ˜Q(Γ) = Q. In princi-
ple, the equilibrium distribution function p0(Q) can be easily computed from
MD simulations, since it is proportional to the binned histogram of the reac-
tion coordinates calculated along the MD trajectory. Thus, the PMF is readily

7

given by

U(Q) = −kBT log p0(Q) .

(2)

However, in practice, even the longest equilibrium MD trajectories will sample
only a restricted region of the reaction coordinate domain (i.e., within the
vicinity of the PMF minimum) of interest and the direct application of Eq. (1)
is impractical.

There exist two basic methods for calculating PMFs from MD simulations
widely known as (1) umbrella sampling [36], and (2) steered molecular dynam-
ics [42, 43]. Next we present brieﬂy both methods within a unifying conceptual
framework, and point out under what conditions one should opt for using one
or the other. In both methods a crucial step is to alter the dynamics of the
system by applying a suitable guiding potential.

2.3 Harmonic Guiding Potential

During equilibrium MD simulations the system explores only a small region
of the phase space Γ about the minimum of the sought PMF U(Q). In order
to properly sample energetically more diﬃcult to reach regions, one needs to
guide or steer our system towards those regions by employing, e.g., a harmonic
guiding potential (HGP)

VQ( ˜Q) ≡ V ( ˜Q(Γ)|Q) =

[ ˜Q(Γ) − Q]2 ,

kQ
2

where kQ is the stiﬀness of the HGP. With this extra potential energy, the
Hamiltonian of the new, biased system becomes

HQ = H0 + VQ( ˜Q) ,

and, as a result, the atoms in the selections that deﬁne the reaction coordinates
will experience extra forces

(3)

(4)

(5)

Fi = −

= −kQ[ ˜Q(Γ) − Q]

∂VQ
∂ri

∂ ˜Q(Γ)
∂ri

Thus, the HGP (3) will force the system to evolve in the phase space in such
a way that during its time evolution ˜Q will stay conﬁned in the vicinity of the
target Q value.

8

2.4 Method I: Umbrella sampling and WHAM

In umbrella sampling, one divides the reaction coordinate interval of interest
(Qmin, Qmax) that one wants to sample in Nw windows by conveniently chosen
values Qi, i = 1, . . . , Nw. Next, the reaction coordinate is sampled in each
window separately by preparing identical replicas of the system and applying
the harmonic guiding potential VQi( ˜Q). As a result, the biased distribution
functions can be readily obtained by direct sampling of the reaction coordinate
for the biased system [34, 36, 38], i.e,

pi(Q) =

dΓ

Z

e−βHi(Γ
Zi

Z0
Zi

δ[Q − ˜Q(Γ)] =

e−βVi(Q)p0(Q) ,

(6)

where, for brevity, the index Qi has been replaced by i. The equilibrium dis-
tribution in each window is related to the biased distribution of the reaction
coordinate through

p0(Q) =

eβVi(Q)pi(Q) .

Zi
Z0

The standard method to eﬃciently stitch together the biased pi(Q)’s in order
to obtain the equilibrium p0, and therefore the sought PMF (2), is the so called
weighted histogram analysis method or WHAM. According to this method,
p0(Q) is expressed as a weighted sum over the biased distributions pi(Q) as
follows

p0(Q) =

Nw
i=1 Nipi(Q)
e−βVi(Q)
Nw
i=1 Ni
P
he−βVi i

where

he−βVii =

dQp0(Q)e−βVi(Q) .

P

Z

(7)

(8)

(9)

The above non-linear coupled WHAM equations, that need to be solved it-
eratively, minimize the errors in determining p0(Q), and therefore the PMF
U(Q). This method will give good PMFs only if the overlap between windows
is substantial. Whenever a reasonable number of well overlapping windows
can be constructed, the umbrella sampling method with WHAM should be
the top choice for calculating PMFs. In general, this method works very well
for determining both 1D and 2D PMFs. We have used this method to calcu-
late the θ dependent PMF for a constrained separation distance R between
LH2 subunits as reported in Sec. 3.

9

2.5 Method II: Steered Molecular Dynamics and Jarzynski Equality

In many cases, it is desirable to vary in time the target value of the RC
according to a prescribed rule. For example, we can guide or steer our system
in the direction of increasing the separation distance R between the two LH2
subunits during a given simulation time τ from an initial value Ri to a ﬁnal
one Rf by setting in the HGP (3)

Q(t) ≡ R(t) = Ri + vRt ,

vR = (Rf − Ri)/τ .

(10)

By choosing two or more reaction coordinates, one can easily devise compli-
cated reaction coordinate paths along which the system can be steered using
a moving HGP. With such HGP the Hamiltonian of the system becomes time
dependent, and it can be expressed by inserting Eq. (10) into Eqs. (4) and
(3). Then, the extra forces that need to be applied to the atoms deﬁning the
reaction coordinates can be calculated with the same formula (5). Clearly,
the corresponding SMD simulations are non-equilibrium. Already a few SMD
pulling simulations may help us gain some qualitative insight into the behav-
ior of the system as it evolves along the reaction coordinate. We apply this
method to investigate the correlation between θ and R in LH2 subunit dimers
when one of the reaction coordinates is either increased or decreased in time.
The reconstruction of the PMF U(Q) from such non-equilibrium simulations
requires a suﬃciently large number of SMD trajectories. These trajectories
then need to be analyzed by employing the Jarzynski’s equality that connects
the free energy diﬀerences of two equilibrium states with the exponential av-
erage of the irreversible mechanical work done in non-equilibrium processes
that connect the equilibrium states in question [41–44], i.e.,

where the irreversible work along a path that connects states with given RC
values Q0 and Q is given by

e−β(FQ−F0) = he−βWQi ,

WQ =

dt

dQ
dt  

∂HQ
∂Q !

.

τ

Z0

(11)

(12)

Here, h. . .i denotes the average over an ensemble of trajectories.

It should be noted that for very large switching times τ (adiabatic approxima-
tion), the work becomes reversible and we recover the expected equilibrium
result Wτ →∞ = FQ − F0. On the other hand, for an instantaneous switching
time Wτ →0 = HQ[Γ(0)] − H0[Γ(0)] = ∆H, and the Jarzynski equality (11)
yields again the expected result, i.e., exp(−β∆F ) = hexp(β∆H)i.

10

In general, the PMF calculation based on the application of the Jarzynski
equality to trajectories from SMD simulations is preferred to the umbrella
sampling method whenever the ﬂuctuations of the reaction coordinate are
small and a huge number of sampling windows would be required for assuring
proper overlap of the reaction coordinate distribution histograms. However, it
is not totally clear how many SMD trajectories one should use in such a case
for calculating the PMF with suﬃcient accuracy. Since for our LH2 subunit
dimer system the ﬂuctuations in R are rather small, i.e., ∼ 0.2 ˚A, and a
complete detachment of the subunits requires an increase in R of 20 − 30 ˚A,
the present method would be more suitable to calculate U(R|θ) than the
umbrella sampling method.

2.6 System modeling and MD simulations

Here we provide a brief description of the modeling of our MOLI and ACI
dimers, and of the MD simulations performed.

ACI dimer – two adjacent complete LH2 subunits (protein and cofactors) were
extracted from the PDB structure 1KZU [33]. After adding the missing hy-
drogens, the protein complex was inserted in a pre-equilibrated and hydrated
POPC lipid bilayer. Finally, the system was solvated by adding extra water
layers to the two sides of the lipid bilayer. Besides the proteins and cofactors
the system contained 4014 water molecules and 169 POPC lipid molecules,
with a total system size of 38,594 atoms. The +4e charge of the system was
neutralized by properly adding 4 Cl− counter ions. The system was built by
using XPLOR [45] and VMD [46].

MOLI dimer – using VMD [46] and its plugins, two complete neighboring
units extracted from a fully equilibrated 8-fold LH2 MOLI ring, reported in
one of our previous MD studies [47] were inserted in a pre-equilibrated and
hydrated POPE lipid bilayer, and then solvated by adding two pre-equilibrated
8 ˚A thick water layers to each side of the membrane. The +4e charge of the
system was neutralized by properly adding 4 Cl− counter ions. In addition
to the protein and cofactors, the ﬁnal system contained 8299 water molecules
and 128 POPE lipids, with a total system size of 44,997 atoms.

Equilibrium MD simulations – After proper energy minimization, the ACI
(MOLI) system was equilibrated at 300 K (310 K), normal atmospheric pres-
sure through a 4 ns (5 ns) long MD simulation in the NPT ensemble. Peri-
odic boundary conditions and full electrostatics via the Particle Mash Ewald
method were used. All MD simulations were carried out with the NAMD [48]
program using the CHARMM 27 parameter set [49]. The simulations were
carried out on local Linux Beowulf clusters, and the required time for 1 ns

11

simulation running on 30 CPUs was about 1.5 days.

SMD simulations – A total of 20 SMD simulations were carried out for each
system, starting from the same state that coincided with the last frame of
equilibrium MD run. The details of the applied harmonic guiding potential
for each of the runs are described in Sec. 3.2.

Umbrella sampling simulations – To determine the PMF U(θ|R) for R = R0 =
18 ˚A and R = Rx = 25 ˚A, umbrella sampling MD runs were carried out in
a a number of windows, starting from θ = 33◦ to θ = 53◦, that resulted
in well overlapping histograms. For ACI (MOLI) at R0 the windows were
centered around the following θi angels (measured in degrees): 33, 35, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 49, 51 and 53 (35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,
45, 47, 49, 51 and 53). For Rx the choice of window positions were similar.
The target angle was enforced by applying a 2D harmonic guiding potential
2
Vi,j(θ, R) = ki(θ − θi)2/2 + kR(R − Rj)2/2 with j = 0, x, kR = 80 kcal/mol ˚A
,
and ki tuned between 8−10×103 kcal/mol rad2 for achieving optimal sampling
in each window. After exhaustive testings, simulations were performed for
0.7 ns for each window. Only the last 0.5 ns parts of the trajectories were used
to construct the histograms. Test runs conﬁrmed that complete sampling in
each window is achieved on this time scale. The ki, θi and θ histograms have
been used in the WHAM equations to calculate the PMF U(θ|R) as described
in Sec. 3.3.

3 Results

3.1 Equilibrium MD simulations of MOLI and ACI dimers

In order to test their reliability and usefulness, we have monitored the time
evolution of the reaction coordinates R and θ, during 5 ns long equilibrium MD
simulations of two LH2 subunit dimers, one from MOLI (Rs. molischianum)
and one for ACI (Rps. acidophila). The simulated systems were prepared as
described in Sec. 2. The calculated values of the reaction coordinates, i.e., R –
the separation, within the plane of the membrane, between the center-of-mass
(COM) of the αβ-polypeptide pairs in the two subunits, and θ – the angle
between the projection on the membrane plane of the lines that connect the
COM of the α- and β-polypeptides for each subunit (cf. Fig. 3), depends on the
selection of atoms used to determine the COMs. Through extensive testing,
we found that the most stable reaction coordinates correspond to the situation
in which only the heavy atoms of the trans-membrane helical (TMH) domain
of the αβ-apoproteins are considered. In this case, the reaction coordinate
assumes well deﬁned mean equilibrium values. The distribution histograms of

12

the values of the reaction coordinates for the last 2 ns of the MD trajectories
are shown in Fig. 4. The peak positions in the histograms (corresponding
to the most probable values of the reaction coordinates) in Fig. 4 are R0 ≈
18 ± 0.08 ˚A, θ0 ≈ 42.4◦ ± 1.7◦ for MOLI, and R0 ≈ 17.8 ± 0.15 ˚A, θ0 ≈
38.1◦ ± 1.4◦ for ACI. For comparison, Fig. 4 also includes the corresponding
histograms for a complete Rs. molischianum LH2 ring, obtained from the last
3 ns part of a 5 ns long equilibrium MD run, and with R0 ≈ 18.2 ± 0.2 ˚A and
θ0 = 45 ± 2.1◦. According to these results, we ﬁnd that for both MOLI and
ACI subunit dimers, θ0 is about 2-3 ◦ smaller than the compared theoretically
expected value (i.e., 45◦ for MOLI and 40◦ for ACI). However, there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the most probable angle of about 4◦, close to the
theoretically expected diﬀerence of 5◦. For the MOLI LH2 ring θ0 coincides
with the expected 45◦, albeit the ﬂuctuations in the angle are noticeably larger
than for the subunit dimers.

Furthermore, ﬂuctuations in R are much smaller than ﬂuctuations in θ, and
the mean value R0 is essentially the same (within less than half of one ˚A)
for all three systems. If one tries to extend the protein atoms selection in the
deﬁnition of the reaction coordinates, e.g., by including the CT (C-terminus)
and NT (N-terminus) domains of the αβ-polypeptides, the resulting reaction
coordinates become ill deﬁned especially due to the sharp increase in the
magnitude of the ﬂuctuations. In such cases, we ﬁnd that during test MD
simulations (not shown) the ﬂuctuations both in θ and R increase by more
than a factor of 2. These ﬁndings are consistent with the knowledge that in
general the TMH regions of membrane proteins are more rigid than the outer
membrane parts.

1LGH  (2 ns)

1KZU  (2 ns)

1LGH ring  (3 ns)

1LGH  (2 ns)

1KZU  (2 ns)

1LGH ring  (3 ns)

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

34

36

38

40

46

48

50

52

17.5

18.0

18.5

19.0

42
44
θ [deg]

R [Å]

Fig. 4. Histograms of the reaction coordinates θ (left) and R (right) corresponding
to equilibrium MD simulations as follows: MOLI dimer, 2 ns run (solid curve), ACI
dimer, 2 ns run (dashed curve), and MOLI LH2 ring, 3 ns (long-dashed curve).

5

4

3

2

1

0

13

3.2 Forced detachment of the subunits using SMD

Next we employ the reaction coordinates introduced above to investigate the
relationship between the spatial separation and relative orientation of the two
LH2 subunits as a result of their forced detachment. In principle, such a study
requires the knowledge of the 2D potential of mean force (PMF) U(R, θ), that
describes the statistical mechanical state of the system as a function of the two
reaction coordinates. However, a brute force determination of the PMF (by
direct application of either methods of calculating PMFs described in Sec. 2)
is computationally prohibitively expensive.

Fig. 5. Two dimensional density plot of the volume overlap of the transmembrane
protein regions of MOLI (left) and ACI (right) dimers along the reaction coordinates
θ and R recorded in the SMD simulations described in the text; the trajectories
corresponding to the four diﬀerent sets of simulations are indicated by numbered
arrows. The volumes are relative to the value corresponding to the equilibrium
reaction coordinates θ0 and R0 (see text), marked by the small circle.

Thus, to gain some insight into the mechanism that governs the relationship
between the relative distance and orientation of the LH2 subunit dimer dur-
ing the forced separation or compression of the subunits, we have conducted
four sets of 5 SMD simulations each, starting from initial states that coin-
cide with the last frames of the equilibrium simulations shown in Fig. 4, and
characterized by R0 = 18.2 ˚A and θ0 = 43.7◦ for MOLI and R0 = 18.1 ˚A
and θ0 = 41◦ for ACI. These starting values are marked by small circles in
Fig. 5. In the ﬁrst (second) set of simulations θ was unconstrained while R
was increased (decreased) with a constant rate of vR = 0.1 ˚A/ps, by ap-
plying a harmonic guiding potential V ( ˜R|R) = kR( ˜R − R)2/2, as described
2
in Sec. 2, with kR = 500 kcal/mol˚A
. Similarly, in the third (fourth) set
of simulations R was unconstrained while θ was increased (decreased) with
vθ = 0.1 deg/ps through a harmonic guiding potential V (˜θ|θ) = kθ(˜θ − θ)2/2
with kθ = 5 × 104 kcal/mol rad2. In these potentials, R and θ are the target
values of the reaction coordinates while ˜R and ˜θ represent the instantaneous

14

value of the reaction coordinate as determined from the corresponding atomic
coordinates. The SMD trajectories in the reaction coordinate plane (i.e., the
loci of points with coordinates {R(t), θ(t)}) are shown in Fig. 5 for both MOLI
and ACI. The diﬀerent trajectories belonging to diﬀerent sets of simulations
are indicated by numbered arrows. Trajectory points are color-coded according
to the current volume overlap of the TM parts of the two subunits, normalized
to the corresponding initial state value.

The reaction coordinate trajectories exhibit distinctive features for each set of
simulations, with manifest diﬀerences between the two systems.

As soon as the separation R between the two subunits is increased (set 1) past
R0, the TMH domains of the αβ-apoproteins separate for both MOLI and ACI,
an event which is accompanied by a noticeable increase in the ﬂuctuations of
the angle reaction coordinate. While in the case of ACI, the separation of the
N-terminal and TMH domains seem to occur simultaneously as R increases,
in contrast, for MOLI, the N-terminal domains of the subunits do not detach
until R becomes larger than 35 ˚A. On the other hand, the C-terminal domains
remain connected in both systems even for separations as large as 40 ˚A. This
diﬀerence may also be responsible for the proﬁle of the trajectories in set 1.
For MOLI, as R increases, the trajectories cluster in three well distinguished
paths, with occasional partial overlaps and are subject to large θ ﬂuctuations.
This suggests that the PMF U(θ|R), for a given R > R0, has a broad global
minimum with several (at least three) local minimums separated by relatively
small potential barriers. The location of the minimum is shifted to θ > θ0
values (see below). On the other hand, for ACI, as R increases, the trajectories
remain clustered (albeit with enhanced θ ﬂuctuations) suggesting that the
PMF U(θ|R) has a potential well that is broader than the one for R0. However,
the dramatic deviation of one of the trajectories from the rest for R & 35 ˚A
suggests that for larger separation U(θ|R) may develop a structure with at
least two well separated local minimums, with one equilibrium angle smaller
and the other one larger than θ0.

The behavior of the reaction coordinate trajectories for the simulations in sets
2, 3 and 4 are qualitatively similar for both MOLI and ACI. Already a few ˚A
compression of R (set 2) increases the overlap of the protein subunits several
times, accompanied by a decrease of the angle variable. The trajectories nicely
overlap, indicating that the corresponding PMF U(θ|R) is similar to the one
corresponding to R0, with the minimum shifted towards a smaller angle than
θ0.

Finally, it is remarkable that for the simulations in sets 3 and 4, in which R
is unconstrained, the latter shows only a slight increase with respect to R0 as
the angle is increased (decreased) by as much as 20◦ (10◦). Thus, based on
the results of our SMD simulations, one may conclude that in general forced

15

subunit 1

subunit 2

residue

residue(s)

average distance

contact region

for breaking links

α1GLY+8

β1LYS+7

β1PRO+8

α2ALA+16
α2ALA+16, SER+19, ALA+20 > 40 ˚A
> 40 ˚A

α2GLY+15, SER+19

> 40 ˚A

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

N-terminus

N-terminus

TM

> 40 ˚A

36 - 38 ˚A

32 - 35 ˚A

21 - 22 ˚A

21 - 24 ˚A

β1TRP+9

α2GLY+15

α1PHE+9

α2ILE+12

β1ARG−32

β2LEU−27

β1LEU−30

α2SER−18

α1VAL−22

α2PRO−14, SER−18

Table 1
Average separation distances at which the most important inter-residue links be-
tween two LH2 subunits of Rs. molischianum are broken in SMD simulations.

subunit 1

subunit 2

average distance

contact region

residue

residue(s)

for breaking links

α1THR+7

α1THR+8

α1TRP+9

β1PRO+8

α2TRP+14, GLN+15 > 40 ˚A
> 40 ˚A

α2GLN+15
α2TRP+14, GLN+15 > 40 ˚A
> 40 ˚A

α2GLN+15

β1TRP+9

α2TYR+13

α1VAL−21 α2ALA−18, PRO−13

α1VAL−22 α2ALA−18, PRO−19

α1ALA+2

α2LEU+4

34 - 38 ˚A

20 - 22 ˚A

21 - 27 ˚A

23 - 25 ˚A

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

C-terminus

N-terminus

N-terminus

TM

Table 2
Average separation distances at which the most important inter-residue links be-
tween two LH2 subunits of Rps. acidophila are broken in SMD simulations.

rotation of the relative orientation of the subunits has only very limited ef-
fect on their spatial separation. On the other hand, the modiﬁcation of the
distance between the subunits in general has strong impact on the angle be-
tween the subunits. This conclusion also provides support to the notion that
the preferred angle between LH2 subunits is mainly determined by contact
interactions between subunits.

Steered molecular dynamics simulations also provide insights into the key
interactions between the subunits: as two subunits are pulled apart, the links
between the subunits break from the weakest to the strongest. We consider a

16

link broken, if the distance between the closest contact between two residues
becomes larger than 3 ˚A. A list of strongest links, as presented in Tables 1
and 2, provides qualitative information on the basis of SMD simulation data.
With increased sampling, more reﬁned analysis in terms of e.g. interaction
energies or free energy barriers would become possible. Inspection of the Tables
shows that all links in the TMH domain become separated for distances larger
than R = 25 ˚A for both cases. In the N-terminal domain, all links become
separated for distances around 25 ˚A for ACI and around 35 ˚A for MOLI.
This is consistent with the overlapping volume data shown in Fig. 5. On the
other hand, there is one group of links in the C-terminal domain for both ACI
and MOLI that persists even for separations larger than 40 ˚A. This group
represents the strongest interactions conferring overall stability of the binding
of the two subunits. An immediately recognizable diﬀerence is that most of the
links in ACI are between the α-apoproteins while they are between between
the β1 and α2 in MOLI.

3.3 Calculation of PMF U(θ, R)

Our focus in the present manuscript is to investigate the interaction angle
between two subunits. To this end, we have determined two 1D PMFs Ui(θ|Ri)
along θ by using umbrella sampling and WHAM, as described in Sec. 2.

The calculations were performed for both MOLI and ACI, for two represen-
tative separations, i.e, the equilibrium R0 = 18 ˚A and Rx = 25 ˚A. While the
choice for the equilibrium value is obvious, the reason for the Rx selection is
that at this particular distance MOLI and ACI are in qualitatively diﬀerent
separation states. While, for Rx, the TMH domains of the αβ-polypeptides
are already separated in both MOLI and ACI, the N-terminal domain is fully
separated only in ACI, but not in MOLI; the C-terminal domains are still in
contact for both systems.

The computed PMFs, using umbrella sampling and WHAM, are shown in
Fig. 6. For R0, as expected, the PMF for both MOLI and ACI exhibits a
nearly parabolic lineshape with a minimum that coincides with the position
of the peak θ0 in the corresponding equilibrium angle distribution histogram
in Fig. 4a θp. In fact, the PMFs calculated from those histograms as U0(θ) ∝
−kBT ln[p0(θ)] matches rather well the bottom of the full PMF obtained from
umbrella sampling and WHAM (data not shown). At the equilibrium distance,
the PMF of ACI is narrower than that of MOLI, corresponding to stronger
angular constraints for ACI compared to MOLI. This is consistent with the
ﬁnding from the SMD simulations that the ﬂuctuations in the angular reaction
coordinate are smaller for ACI than for MOLI. Compared to the R0 case, for
Rx the PMF for both systems widens up and acquires additional features.

17

MOLI
ACI

]
l
o
m

/
l
a
c
k
[
 
)

|

R
θ
(
U

8

6

4

2

0

35

40

50

55

45
θ [deg]

Fig. 6. Calculated potentials of mean force U (θ|R) for both MOLI (solid lines)
and ACI (dashed lines) dimers. The thick (thin) curves correspond to R = 18 ˚A
(R = 25 ˚A).

For MOLI, the PMF exhibits a small plateau at angles around 40◦, and a
steep downhill region for θ & 42◦ that ends in a broad minimum around 49◦,
followed by a modest potential barrier at ∼ 53◦. These features are consistent
with the SMD results. Indeed, the angle spread of the SMD trajectories at
Rx extends from ∼ 40◦ to ∼ 55◦. The steep potential barrier in the PMF at
. 40◦ explains the lack of trajectory points below this value. Also, the higher
trajectory points density along the plateau region and the broad minimum is
expected. For ACI, the PMF for Rx shows a ∼ 10◦ wide, rather ﬂat region
starting from 39◦. The fact that the corresponding SMD trajectory points are
clustered only in the interval 38◦ < θ < 44◦ does not conﬂict with the PMF
data but raises the question why there are no trajectory points up to angles
of ∼ 50◦? There are several possible answers. First, the small number of SMD
trajectories may not provide a proper sampling of the angles for Rx. Secondly,
the θ self diﬀusion coeﬃcient may be very small, so that a ﬂat PMF does not
lead to signiﬁcant dispersion. The second well in the PMF at 54◦ suggests
that eventually a second branch of trajectories may appear oriented towards
higher angle values as it appears indeed for R > 32 ˚A.

4 Discussion and Conclusions

Understanding the assembly of a protein complex requires that one addresses
a set of interrelated questions: (1) What is the temporal order in which parts
are put together? (2) What interactions stabilize the protein complex or parts
of the complex? (3) What factors govern the (reproducible) stable geometry
of the complex?

In this manuscript, we focus on the assembly of a two-subunit complex from

18

two fully formed αβ-subunits with three BChl and one carotenoid bound.
Spectroscopic observations support the assumption that this is an important
step in the formation of light harvesting complexes as they show a progression
from monomeric BChl (777 nm) to a BChl dimer bound to an αβ-subunit (820
nm) to a complex formed of two αβ-subunits (851 nm) [50, 51]. It is, however,
unknown whether carotenoids are already incorporated at this step and how
closely the structure of the αβ-subunit at this point matches the structure of
the αβ-subunit in the crystal structures, from which we took the coordinates.

An initial analysis of ﬂuctuations in a two-subunit complex equilibrated in a
lipid-water environment revealed that the hydrophobic core region is rather
rigid. Fluctuations in the centers-of-mass of the core regions in free molecular
dynamics runs are small enough to allow for a meaningful deﬁnition of global
coordinates (distance, angle) of the subunits as introduced above.

In order to probe the assembly process, we performed two sets of calcula-
tions with diﬀerent philosophies. In one set of calculations, we constrain the
subunits at diﬀerent angles and allow the system to equilibrate under this con-
straint. From such umbrella sampling, we then extract information about the
free energy proﬁle as a function of angle. Pulling two subunits apart through
steered molecular dynamics gives complementary information into key events
of the binding/unbinding process and a rough order of interaction strengths.

4.1 Preferred angle

Our calculations show that two subunits in van-der-Waals contact (center-to-
center distance of 18 ˚A) arrange at a preferred angle with each other. Figs. 7a,c
show the transmembrane domains of subunits in the preferred arrangements
at this distance. For subunits of LH2 from Rs. molischianum, the minimum
of the free energy proﬁle (PMF; cf. Fig. 6) is located at about 42.5◦, whereas
for Rps. acidophila subunits, the minimum is located at 38.5◦. The free en-
ergy proﬁles closely match parabolic proﬁles. Whereas changes of about one
degree around the minimum position carry only a small energetic penalty,
it requires about 3 kcal/mol to force two subunits from Rps. acidophila into
the angle of 42.5◦ preferred by subunits from Rs. molischianum. Likewise,
about 2 kcal/mol are required to force two subunits from Rs. molischianum
into the angle of 38.5◦ preferred by subunits from Rps. acidophila. This sug-
gests that the preferred angle between the subunits plays an important role in
guiding the assembly of light harvesting complexes into a particular ring size
or oligomerization state. However, the preferred angles, while comparing well
to the theoretically expected angles of 45◦ (8-fold symmetry) and 40◦ (9-fold
symmetry) are somewhat smaller than these. It is possible that the theoreti-
cally expected preferred angle is only assumed once each subunit is in contact

19

with a subunit on either side, as would be the case in a ring geometry. The
fact that the average interaction angle in a free molecular dynamics simulation
run of a completed ring is 44.8◦, much closer to the expected 45◦, supports
this assumption.

(a)

(b)

MOLI
R=18Å
θ=43deg

(c)

ACI
R=18Å
θ=39deg

MOLI
R=25Å
θ=50deg

(d)

ACI
R=25Å
θ=48deg

Fig. 7. Top view from the N-terminus of the transmembrane region of MOLI (a and
b) and ACI (c and d) dimers. The values of the corresponding reaction coordinate
R and θ are indicated for each case. The backbone of the transmembrane helices are
shown in cartoon representation. The sidegroups of the proteins and the enclosed
cofactors (BChls and Car) are shown in transparent space-ﬁlling representation.

To see whether the surface contact between the two subunits is important
in deﬁning a preferred angle, we performed additional calculations where two
subunits are constrained to a center-to-center distance of 25 ˚A. At this dis-
tance, subunits of Rs. molischianum are still connected at both their C- and
N-terminal domains, and subunits of Rps. acidophila are connected at their
C-terminus only. However, the αβ polypeptides in the transmembrane region
are no longer in contact for either subunit pairs (cf. Fig. 7). In this case, the
free energy decreases at larger angles with considerably more shallow minima
than the free energy proﬁles at the equilibrium distance of 18 ˚A.

These ﬁndings suggest that the exact preferred angle between two subunits
is largely deﬁned by the surface interactions in the transmembrane region.
Once the αβ-polypeptides in the transmembrane region become disconnected,
the angular variation increases signiﬁcantly (see Fig. 5). However, angular
constraints, albeit more relaxed, still exist even at larger separations of the
subunits.

20

Interestingly, the angle between two subunits is more constrained in Rps. aci-
dophila than in Rs. molischianum. The parabola of the free energy proﬁle at
equilibrium distance (18 ˚A) is narrower for Rps. acidophila than for Rs. molis-
chianum. Moreover, the ﬁve trajectories of Rps. acidophila during the steered
molecular dynamics simulations show relatively little angular spread after the
transmembrane regions are disconnected and even after the links in the N-
terminal domain are broken. Much more angular spread can be observed in
the case of equivalent steered molecular dynamics runs for Rs. molischianum,
even for cases when the links in both the C- and N-terminal regions are still
intact. As stated above, the fast pulling and small sample size during this sim-
ulation raises a caveat, as the conﬁguration space may not have been sampled
well.

If a more complete sampling of the 2D free energy surface conﬁrms the ob-
served diﬀerences in angular constraints, it would suggest that in Rps. aci-
dophila a motif in the C-terminal domain plays a role in constraining the
angle between subunits in addition to the hydrophobic surface contacts. One
can speculate that this double constraint of the angle could be the reason why
9-rings are much more prevalent among LH2 complexes than rings of other
sizes.

4.2 Stabilizing links

In addition to exploring the factors constraining the angle between two sub-
units, the main focus of this publication, we chose computationally inexpen-
sive SMD calculations to obtain qualitative, but not quantitative information
about the factors stabilizing the connection between two subunits.

The results from these calculations suggest that links in the terminal domains
play an important role in stabilizing the complex. These links break last as
subunits are pulled apart and thus represent the strongest interactions between
the two subunits. The strongest interactions are all found in the C-terminal
domain. Interactions in the TMH domain are weakest (cf. Tables 1,2). Only
a limited number of experiments address the question of the requirements for
formation of a light harvesting complex; most mutagenesis experiments are
concerned with the formation of a αβ-subunit. In experimental studies that
led to successful formation of a complete light harvesting complex, the termi-
nal domains were taken from native sequences, thus oﬀering little insight into
what parts of the terminal domains are required for successful formation of
complete light-harvesting complexes [24, 25, 30]. Recently, Braun et al. demon-
strated formation of functional light harvesting complexes from polypeptides
in which all amino acids in the TMH domain except for the ligating His0 were
replaced by alternating pairs of alanin and leucine residues [31]. An addition

21

of four amino acids in the C-terminal domain resulted in a complete loss of
light harvesting complex formation. This study supports a crucial role the
C-terminal domain in connecting subunits to form complete light harvesting
complexes, whilst indicating a less important role of the TMH domain.

So far, we have discussed the two dimensions distance and angle separately
from each other. Interestingly, the diﬀerences between Rs. molischianum and
Rps. acidophila suggest diﬀerent rules by which distances and angles are stabi-
lized. In Rs. molischianum, separation of two subunits appears to require more
energy as the N-terminal domains stay connected far beyond distances where
they are disconnected in Rps. acidophila. On the other hand, as discussed
above, the angle is more constrained in Rps. acidophila. A proper discussion
of the interplay between constraints in angle and distance, requires evaluation
of the full two-dimensional PMF, which is beyond the scope of this publication.

4.3 Outlook

Our results suggest a guided key-lock principle in the assembly of light har-
vesting complexes. Interactions in the terminal domains, in particular the
C-terminal domain serve as ’hooks’ that connect the subunits; however, they
do not constrain the angle between the subunits very strongly, although in
the case of Rps. acidophila, the C-terminus may assist in constraining the an-
gle. Once the surfaces of the subunits, in particular the BChl co-factors, start
to interlock in the hydrophobic core region, the angle between the subunits
becomes well deﬁned.

To our knowledge, no previous theoretical study has attempted to address the
question as to why some LH2 complexes form 8-rings, while most form 9-rings.
It is therefore a very intriguing result that we found a distinct diﬀerence in
the preferred angle between two subunits that closely matches the expected
angle diﬀerence of 5◦ between an 8-ring in Rs. molischianum and a 9-ring in
Rps. acidophila.

This result is a promising starting point towards understanding the rules by
which light harvesting complexes assemble into rings of deﬁned sizes. Ob-
viously, many questions remain to be answered, for example: Do the rules
underlying assembly of two subunits remain the same when many subunits
assemble? In other words, are there eﬀects of diﬀerent subunit concentrations,
leading to phase transitions between diﬀerent ring sizes (see e.g., [52])? What
is the role of transcription factors and chaperones for assembly in vivo?

Genetic manipulation is a powerful tool to obtain information about the as-
sembly of light harvesting complexes. Several experimental studies attempting
to modify the size of an LH ring by truncating or swapping C-terminal do-

22

mains [15, 30] did not observe any alterations of the ring size, although changes
in the hydrogen bonding could be observed. Olsen et al. speculate that steric
constraints involving BChls, especially B800 BChls play a role in determining
the ring size [30]. Our study supports this view as it suggests an important
role of surface contacts in the hydrophobic region in constraining the angle be-
tween two subunits. Most contacts in the transmembrane region are made by
the BChls ligated to the α and β polypeptides. Thus, constraining the angle
between two subunits requires positioning BChls into an orientation that in
turn favors a particular angle between two subunits due to steric constraints.
Amino acid substitutions will therefore only have an indirect eﬀect on the
ring size, by repositioning the (conserved) BChls into diﬀerent orientations
through changes in the binding pocket or ligation pattern. It is therefore by
no means straightforward to predict the eﬀects of amino acid substitutions on
the ring size.

Through homology modeling of light-harvesting complexes, one can, in princi-
ple, emulate the genetic manipulation process. Based on such in silico mutants
and using the calculation techniques presented here, one can then calculate the
preferred interaction angles of complexes with amino acid deletions or substi-
tutions. The goal of such calculations would be to predict new complexes for
which, e.g. a 10-ring or 7-ring architecture is expected. Using established in
vivo assembly experiments and AFM imaging techniques, one can test whether
these de novo designs indeed form the expected ring sizes.

A successful demonstration of the predictive power of molecular dynamics
combined with non-equilibrium techniques could pave the way towards un-
derstanding the principles underlying the assembly of multimeric membrane
protein complexes. Such understanding would have relevance in controlling
nanodevices built from photosynthetic materials. Furthermore, formation of
multimeric protein complexes occurs in many membrane protein complexes.
Combining in silico with experimental genetic manipulation could therefore
yield information on the assembly not only of light harvesting complexes, but
of membrane protein complexes in general.

5 Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the University of Missouri Research
Board (LJ and IK), the Institute for Theoretical Sciences, a joint institute
of Notre Dame University and Argonne National Laboratory, and the U.S.
Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science through contract No. W-31-109-ENG-
38 (IK and TR).

23

References

[1] X. Hu, T. Ritz, A. Damjanovic, F. Autenrieth, K. Schulten, Photosynthetic

apparatus of purple bacteria., Q Rev Biophys 35 (1) (2002) 1–62.

[2] R. Cogdell, A. Gardiner, A. Roszak, C. J. Law, J. Southall, N. W. Isaacs,
Rings, ellipses and horseshoes: How purple bacteria harvest solar energy,
Photosynthesis Research 81 (2004) 207–214.

[3] S. Scheuring, J. Sturgis, V. Prima, A. Bernadac, D. L´evy, J. Rigaud, Watching
the photosynthetic apparatus in native membranes., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
101 (2004) 11293–11297.

[4] S. Bahatyrova, R. Frese, C. Siebert, J. Olsen, K. van der Werf, R. van Grondelle,
R. Niederman, P. Bullough, C. Otto, C. Hunter, The native architecture of a
photosynthetic membrane., Nature 430 (2004) 1058–1062.

[5] G. Fleming, R. van Grondelle, Femtosecond spectroscopy of photosynthetic

light-harvesting systems, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7 (1997) 738–748.

[6] T. Sundstrom, V.and Pullerits, R. van Grondelle, Photosynthetic light-
harvesting: reconciling dynamics and structure of purple bacterial LH2 reveals
function of photosynthetic unit, J. Phys. Chem. B 103 (1999) 2327–2346.

[7] T. Ritz, S. Park, S. K., Kinetics of excitation migration and trapping in the
photosynthetic unit of purple bacteria., Journal of Physical Chemistry B 105
(2001) 8259–8267.

[8] T. Ritz, A. Damjanovic, K. Schulten, The quantum physics of photosynthesis.,

Chemphyschem 3 (3) (2002) 243–8.

[9] G. McDermott, S. Prince, A. Freer, A. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Papiz,
R. Cogdell, N. Isaacs, Crystal structure of an integral membrane light-
harvesting complex from photosynthetic bacteria., Nature 374 (1995) 517–521.

[10] J. Koepke, X. Hu, C. Muenke, K. Schulten, H. Michel, The crystal structure of
the light-harvesting complex II (B800-850) from Rhodospirillum molischianum.,
Structure 4 (1996) 581–597.

[11] M. Papiz, S. Prince, T. Howard, R. Cogdell, N. Isaacs, The structure and
thermal motion of the B800-850 lh2 complex from rps. acidophila at 2.0
˚Aresolution and 100 k: new structural
features and functionally relevant
motions., J. Mol. Biol. 326 (2003) 1523–1538.

[12] G. Montoya, M. Cyrklaﬀ, I. Sinning, Two-dimensionalcrystallization and
preliminary structure analysis of light harvesting II (B800-850) complex from
the purple bacterium Rhodovulum sulﬁdophilum., J. Mol. Biol. 250 (1995) 1–10.

[13] T. Walz, S. Jamieson, C. Bowers, B. P.A., C. Hunter, Projection structures of
three photosynthetic complexes from rhodobacter sphaeroides: LH2 at 6 ˚A, LH1
and RC-LH1 at 25 ˚A, J.Mol.Biol. 282 (1998) 833–845.

24

[14] S. Scheuring, J. Seguin, S. Marco, D. Levy, B. Robert, J. Rigaud, Nanodissection
and high-resolution imaging of the Rhodopseudomonas viridis photosynthetic
core complex in native membranes by AFM., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100
(2003) 1690–1693.

[15] J. Ranck, T. Ruiz, G. Pehau-Arnaudet, B. Arnoux, F. Reiss-Husson,
Two-dimensional structure of the native light-harvesting complex lh2 from
Rubrivivax gelatinosus and of a truncated form., Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1506
(2001) 67–78.

[16] S. Scheuring, F. Reiss-Husson, A. Engel, J.-L. Rigaud, J.-L. Ranck, High
resolution topographs of the rubrivivax gelatinosus light-harvesting complex
2., EMBO J. 20 (2001) 3029–3035.

[17] N. Hartigan, H. Tharia, F. Sweeney, A. Lawless, M. Papiz, The 7.5-˚Aelectron
low-light b800 lh2 from

density and spectroscopic properties of a novel
rhodopseudomonas palustris., Biophys J. 82 (2002) 963–977.

[18] S. Scheuring, J. Rigaud, J. Sturgis, Variable LH2 stoichiometry and core
clustering in native membranes of Rhodospirillum photometricum., EMBO J.
23 (2004) 4127–4133.

[19] S. Jamieson, P. Wang, P. Qian, J. Kirkland, M. Conroy, C. Hunter, P. Bullough,
Projection structure of the photosynthetic reaction centre-antenna complex of
Rhodospirillum rubrum at 8.5 ˚A resolution., EMBO J. 21 (2002) 3927–3935.

[20] S. Scheuring, J. Seguin, S. Marco, D. L´evy, C. Breyton, B. Robert, J. Rigaud,
AFM characterization of tilt and intrinsic ﬂexibility of Rhodobacter sphaeroides
light harvesting complex 2 (LH2)., J. Mol. Biol. 325 (2003) 569–580.

[21] A. Roszak, T. Howard, J. Southall, A. Gardiner, C. Law, N. Isaacs, R. Cogdell,
Crystal structure of the RC-LH1 core complex from Rhodopseudomonas
palustris., Science 302 (2003) 1969–1672.

[22] C. Jungas, J.-L. Ranck, J.-L. Rigaud, P. Joliot, A. Vermeglio, Supramolecular
organization of the photosynthetic apparatus of rhodobacter sphaeroides,
EMBO J. 18 (1999) 534–542.

[23] P. Parkes-Loach, J. Sprinkle, P. Loach, Reconstitution of the B873 light-
harvesting complex of rhodospirillum rubrum from the separately isolated α
and β polypeptides and bacterichlorophyll a, Biochemistry 27 (1988) 2718–
2727.

[24] J. Todd, P. Parkes-Loach, J. Leykam, P. Loach, In vitro reconstitution
of the core and peripheral Light-Harvesting complexes of Rhodospirillum
molischianum from separately isolated components., Biochemistry 37 (1998)
17458–17468.

[25] J. Todd, P. Recchia, P. Parkes-Loach, J. Olsen, G. Fowler, P. McGlynn,
C. Hunter, P. Loach, Minimal requirements for in vitro reconstitution of
the structural subunit of light-harvesting complexes of photosythesis bacteria,
Photosynth. Res. 62 (1999) 85–98.

25

[26] J. Kehoe, K. Meadows, P. Parkes-Loach, P. Loach, Reconstitution of Core
Light-Harvesting Complexes of Photosynthetic Bacteria Using Chemically
Synthesized Polypeptides. 2. Determination of Structural Features That
Stabilize Complex Formation and Their Implications for the Structure of the
Subunit Complex., Biochemistry 37 (1998) 3418–3428.

[27] K. Meadows, P. Parkes-Loach, J. Kehoe, P. Loach, Reconstitution of core light-
harvesting complexes of photosynthetic bacteria using chemically synthesized
polypeptides. 1. minimal requirements for subunit formation., Biochemistry 37
(1998) 3411–3417.

[28] C. Davis, P. Bustamante, J. Todd, P. Parkes-Loach, P. McGlynn, J. Olsen,
L. McMaster, P. Hunter, C.N.and Loach, Evaluation of structure-function
relationships in the core light- harvesting complex of photosynthetic bacteria by
reconstitution with mutant polypeptides, Biochemistry 12 (1997) 3671–3679.

[29] P. Parkes-Loach, A. Majeed, C. Law, P. Loach, Interactions stabilizing the
structure of the core light-harvesting complex (LH1) of photosynthetic bacteria
and its subunit (B820)., Biochemistry 43 (2004) 7003–7016.

[30] J. Olsen, B. Robert, C. Siebert, P. Bullough, C. Hunter, Role of the c-terminal
extrinsic region of the alpha polypeptide of the light-harvesting 2 complex of
rhodobacter sphaeroides: a domain swap study, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 15114–
15123.

[31] P. Braun, J. Olsen, B. Strohmann, C. Hunter, H. Scheer, Assembly of Light-
Harvesting bacteriochlorophyll in a model transmembrane helix in its natural
environment., J. Mol. Biol. 318 (2002) 1085–1095.

[32] J. Koepke, X. C. Hu, C. Muenke, K. Schulten, H. Michel, The crystal structure
of the light-harvesting complex ii (b800-850) from rhodospirillum molischianum,
Structure 4 (5) (1996) 581–597.

[33] S. M. Prince, M. Z. Papiz, A. A. Freer, G. McDermott, A. M. Hawthornthwaite-
Lawless, R. J. Cogdell, N. W. Isaacs, Apoprotein structure in the lh2 complex
from rhodopseudomonas acidophila strain 10050: modular assembly and protein
pigment interactions, J. Mol. Biol. 268 (2) (1997) 412–423.

[34] D. Frenkel, B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation From Algorithms to

Applications, Academic Press, California, 2002.

[35] H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck Equation: Methods of Solution and Applications,

3rd Edition, Springer-Verlag Telos, 1996.

[36] B. Roux, The calculation of the potential of mean force using computer-

simulations, Comput. Phys. Commun. 91 (1-3) (1995) 275–282.

[37] D. Frenkel, B. Smit, Extension to the weighted histogram analysis method:
combining umbrella sampling with free energy calculations, Biophys. J. 81 (3)
(2001) 1295–1313.

26

[38] S. Kumar, D. Bouzida, R. H. Swendsen, P. A. Kollman, J. M. Rosenberg,
The weighted histogram analysis method for free-energy calculations on
biomolecules .1. the method, J. Comput. Chem. 13 (8) (1992) 1011–1021.

[39] B. Isralewitz, J. Baudry, J. Gullingsrud, D. Kosztin, K. Schulten, Steered
molecular dynamics investigations of protein function, J. Mol. Graphics Modell.
19 (1) (2001) 13–25.

[40] H. Grubmuller, B. Heymann, P. Tavan, Ligand binding: Molecular mechanics
calculation of the streptavidin biotin rupture force, Science 271 (5251) (1996)
997–999.

[41] C. Jarzynski, Nonequilibrium equality for free energy diﬀerences, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 78 (14) (1997) 2690–2693.

[42] S. Park, K. Schulten, Calculating potentials of mean force from steered
molecular dynamics simulations, J. Chem. Phys. 120 (13) (2004) 5946–5961.

[43] G. Hummer, A. Szabo, Free energy reconstruction from nonequilibrium single-
molecule pulling experiments, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (7) (2001)
3658–3661.

[44] J. Gore, F. Ritort, C. Bustamante, Bias and error in estimates of equilibrium
free-energy diﬀerences from nonequilibrium measurements, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 100 (22) (2003) 12564–12569.

[45] C. D. Schwieters, J. J. Kuszewski, T. N, G. M. Clore, The xplor-nih nmr
molecular structure determination package, J. Magn. Res. 160 (2003) 66–74.

[46] W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, K. Schulten, VMD: Visual molecular dynamics, J.

Mol. Graph. 14 (1) (1996) 33.

[47] A. Damjanovic,

I. Kosztin, U. Kleinekathfer, K. Schulten, Excitons in
a photosynthetic light-harvesting system: a combined molecular dynamics,
quantum chemistry, and polaron model study, Phys. Rev. E 65 (2002) 031919.

[48] L. Kale, R. Skeel, M. Bhandarkar, R. Brunner, A. Gursoy, N. Krawetz,
J. Phillips, A. Shinozaki, K. Varadarajan, K. Schulten, Namd2: greater
scalability for parallel molecular dynamics, J. Comput. Phys. 151 (1) (1999)
283–312.

[49] A. D. MacKerell Jr, D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack Jr, J. Evanseck,
M. J. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph, L. Kuchnir,
K. Kuczera, F. T. K. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo, D. T. Nguyen,
B. Prodhom, I. W. E. Reiher, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. Smith, R. Stote,
J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin, M. Karplus, All-
hydrogen empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of
proteins using the charmm22 force ﬁeld, J. Phys. Chem. B 102 (1998) 3586–
3616.

[50] A. Pandit, R. Vischers, I. van Stokkum, R. Kraayenhof, R. van Grondelle,
Oligomerization of Light-Harvesting I antenna peptides of Rhodospirillum
rubrum, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 12913–12924.

27

[51] A. V´egh, B. Robert, Spectroscopic characterisation of a tetrameric subunit
form of the core antenna protein from Rhodospirillum rubrum., FEBS Lett.
528 (2002) 222–226.

[52] A. Schubert, A. Stenstam, W. J. D. Beenken, J. L. Herek, R. Cogdell,
T. Pullerits, V. Sundstrom, In vitro self-assembly of the light harvesting
pigment-protein lh2 revealed by ultrafast spectroscopy and electron microscopy,
Biophys. J. 86 (4) (2004) 2363–2373.

28

