5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
2
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Local driving and global interactions in the progression of seizure dynamics

Benjamin H. Singer, Miron Derchansky, Peter L. Carlen, and Micha l

˙Zochowski

Neuroscience Program,
Department of Physics and Biophysics Research Division
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 and
Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology
Toronto Western Research Institute, Ontario
Toronto, Canada
(Dated: November 19, 2013)

The dynamics underlying epileptic seizures are well understood. We present a novel analysis of
seizure-like events (SLEs) in an ex vivo whole hippocampus, as well as a modeling study that sheds
light on the underlying network dynamics. We show that every SLE can be divided into two phases.
During the ﬁrst, SLE dynamics are driven by the intra-network interaction of a network exhibiting
high internal synchrony. The second phase is characterized by lead switching, with the leading
region exhibiting low internal synchrony. We show that the second phase dynamics are driven by
inter-network feedback among multiple regions of the hippocampus.

PACS numbers: 87.18.Hf, 05.45.Xt, 05.65.Tp

Epilepsy is a disease that occurs in 2% of the popula-
tion and is though to be caused by interplay of variety of
molecular, cellular and network mechanisms[1]. However,
the common underlying feature of all epilepsies is reoc-
curring seizures due to spontaneous indiscriminate syn-
chronization and bursting of cell populations [2]. Thus,
it is crucial to understand the fundamental properties of
seizure dynamics in order to reduce their occurrence.

The hippocampus is thought to play a central role
in the genesis of seizures in the most common form of
epilepsy [3]. While many studies have elucidated the dy-
namics of seizure onset [4, 5, 6, 7], less in known about
internal seizure dynamics. Here, we use a novel tech-
nique to analyze seizure-like events (SLEs) in an ex vivo
preparation of the whole hippocampus. We have found
that the observed seizure-like activity can be divided
into two phases. During the ﬁrst phase SLE dynam-
ics are driven by the region of the hippocampus which
exhibits the highest internal synchrony. Using a com-
putational model, we propose that in the ﬁrst phase
the intra-network dynamics of a single region drive the
SLE throughout the hippocampus. The second phase is
marked by the onset of lead switching among regions of
the hippocampus and, contrary to the ﬁrst phase, the
leading region has the lowest internal synchrony. We at-
tribute this inversion of the relationship between leading
region and local synchrony to SLE dynamics reﬂecting
inter-network feedback among hippocampal regions.

Seizure activity in animal models of epilepsy has long
been studied in transverse hippocampal slices [1]. How-
ever, slicing the hippocampus creates artiﬁcial two di-
mensional neuronal circuits which do not capture dy-
namics resulting from the three dimensional organization
of the hippocampus. Here, spontaneous seizure-like ac-
tivity is studied by ﬁeld potential recording from whole
hippocampi dissociated from the brains of C57/BL mice,

as described in [8]. The excitability of the neural tis-
sue is increased by superfusing with low Mg2+ artiﬁcial
cerebrospinal ﬂuid, thus inducing spontaneous, recurrent
SLEs. Four electrodes are placed along the temporal-
septal axis of the hippocampus (Fig. 1A). Recordings
from the four electrodes thus represent neural activity
in widely separated regions along the longitudinal hip-
pocampal axis, and reﬂect both network dynamics within
the local networks of the four regions, and inter-network
interactions among them. Bursts recorded in these four
regions are highly coincident with relatively small lead
and width variations. Our goal is to characterize how the
interaction among distinct regions along the temporal-
septal axis relate to the evolution and termination of in-
dividual SLEs.

Recordings from the ex vivo hippocampus reveal
abrupt transitions from interictal periods to SLEs, which
are composed of slow bursts and superimposed fast spikes
(Fig. 1B). To discern the dynamic relationship among
the four recorded regions, we examine the small tempo-
ral variations in the onset of slow bursts (Fig. 1B, inset),
as recorded in the four electrodes. We use a modiﬁed ver-
sion of a measure we have ealier developed [9] to quantify
diﬀerences in relative inter-burst intervals (IBIs) between
electrode pairs (Fig. 2), with the underlying idea that ac-
tivity in a driven region will closely and systematically
follow the activity of the driving region with minimally
variable IBIs . The IBIs are calculated separately for
every electrode pair (i, j) in the the network, and distri-
butions of IBI values are constructed. The running distri-
butions of relative IBIs (IBIi,j ) are updated and renor-
malized over time with each the onset of each burst. Af-
ter each update, the Shannon entropy, S =
k pk ln pk,
of the renormalized IBI distribution is calculated. This
quantity depends on the relative timing of bursts in both
electrodes in the pair, and is referred to as a conditional

P

electrode i

electrode j

2

.

U
A

.

IBI i,i

IBI i,j

IBI j,j

IBI i,j

IBI j,i

IBI j,i

Time

FIG. 2: The interval IBIi,j of the i-th electrode with respect to
the j-th electrode is calculated as the time diﬀerence between an
event in j and the immediately preceding event in i. CEi,j is up-
dated after every calculation of the running distribution of IBIi,j ,
and assigned to the time of the originating event in i. Analogous
calculations carried out for CEj,i, Si,i, and Sj,j .

is no signiﬁcant interdependence between the signals,
whereas if SE tends to one this indicates strong temporal
interdependence. This measure detects and categorizes
three basic regimes: the two electrodes are independent
(both SEi,j and SEj,i are low); the signal at electrode i
leads electrode j (SEi,j is high while SEj,i is low); the
signal is nearly periodic or is completely synchronized
(both SEi,j and SEj,i are high).

SE values are computed for every burst of an SLE.
In order to determine which SE values are due to un-
derlying neural activity and which are due to chance,
we compute surrogate datasets by randomly reassigning
burst times from an individual recording to new elec-
trode labels (shuﬄed dataset). Thresholds for signiﬁ-
cance are then based on the distribution of (SEj,i+SEi,j)
and (SEj,i − SEi,j) over 10 shuﬄed datasets (Fig. 1C).
Events that fall outside the signiﬁcance threshold for
both SE sum and diﬀerence for each of the electrode pairs
(i, j) = {(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4)} are depicted in a raster plot
of individual events and lead pattern (Fig. 1D). Within
the SLE depicted, the focus of activity is initially stable
and located in the septal (electrode 1) region of the hip-
pocampus (Fig. 1D, region a). The lead pattern rapidly
switches so that temporal (electrode 4) activity leads sep-
tal activity (Fig. 1D), region b). The lead pattern then
switches so that a region in the mid-hippocampus (elec-
trode 2) leads both septal and temporal poles, and this
pattern remains stable until the SLE ends (Fig. 1D, re-
gion c). We ﬁnd that this pattern of septal, temporal,
and central lead transitions is remarkably stable over dif-
ferent SLEs recorded from diﬀerent hippocampi . This
pattern is observed in 19/23 (82 %) of SLEs analyzed,
recorded from 6 hippocampi.

In order to further elucidate this observed switching
behavior, we build a simple computational model cap-
turing basic properties of the experimental system. We
assume that each region recorded by a single electrode
constitutes a local network which is interconnected with
other networks along the temporal-septal axis of the hip-
pocampus. To model the simplest case of two such inter-

FIG. 1: A: Schematic of the hippocampus showing the temporal
and septal poles and the approximate placement of electrodes. B:
Representative local ﬁeld potential recording of a single SLE (elec-
trode 2). Inset: a single burst from mid-SLE, showing electrode
2 (black) leading electrode 1 (gray). C: Two dimensional plot of
SEj,i +SEi,j vs. SEj,i −SEi,j for data shown in B (black). Values
of SEi,j are paired with their nearest temporal neighbors in SEj,i.
Thresholds for SE sum and diﬀerence are set based on the distribu-
tions for a randomly shuﬄed surrogate dataset (gray). Thresholds
are set at the 95th percentile of SEj,i + SEi,j (horizontal line), and
the 2.5th and 97.5thpercentiles of SEj,i−SEi,j (vertical lines). The
intersection of these thresholds form six sectors. In sector I, activ-
ity in i signiﬁcantly leads activity in j, while in sector III, activity
in j signiﬁcantly leads activity in i. Events in other sectors are not
signﬁcant. D: Raster plots showing times of events pairs among ad-
jacent electrodes {(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4)}with signiﬁcant SE sum and
diﬀerence values. Color denotes septal electrode leading temporal
(gray) and temporal electrode leading septal (black). The overall
pattern of leading changes from septal → temporal (a) to temporal
→ septal (b) to center → poles (c).

entropy of electrode i vs. electrode j (CEi,j ).

Since the relative IBIs are measured unidirectionally
(Fig. 2), the pairwise comparison of CEi,j and CEj,i al-
lows the asymmetric measurement of temporal interde-
pendencies between the activity at two electrodes. To
account for the possibility that the temporal interdepen-
dence between two signals could be an artifact of au-
tonomous signal properties on one (or both) electrodes
we calculate the quantity:

SEi,j =

min(Si,i, Sj,j) − CEi,j
min(Si,i, Sj,j)

,

(1)

where Si,i is the entropy of (continuously updated) IBI
distributions observed on a single electrode (IBIi,i) . The
values of SEs around and below zero indicate that there

connected networks, we create two networks of integrate-
and-ﬁre neurons with a Small World Network (SWN) ar-
chitecture (N = 15x15 grid each, Fig. 3A). The SWN
architecture constitutes an intermediate type of connec-
tivity between local and global connectivity [10], has been
reported in neural structures, and has been linked to
seizure generation [6]. The neurons in both networks
are positioned on a 2-dim lattice with a lattice constant
a = 1 and periodic boundary conditions. Initially, in each
network all the neurons within a radius k = 2 are con-
nected. A fraction (p = 0.3) of those initial connections
are then randomly rewired. This results in a networks
having 0.05 connectivity ratio. Additionally, a fraction,
(f = 0.3), of randomly chosen neurons in one network re-
ceives the synaptic current from randomly chosen group
of m = 10 neurons from the other network. The dynam-
ics of each neuron are given by:

dVi
dt

= −αiV (t) + A

Jij(t) + B

Jik(t) + ξ(t) (2)

Xj∈C

Xk∈I

where A = 4 determines the intra-network signal am-
plitude, B = 0.4 is the inter-network signal amplitude,
αi ∈ (1.0, 1.5) is the membrane leakage coeﬃcient (diﬀer-
ent for every neuron in the network), and ξ ∈ (0.0, 1.4)
is a random variable simulating white noise. C denotes
the set of all neurons connected to i-th neuron via intra-
network connections, while I denotes the neurons con-
nected via inter -network connections. Jij is the term de-
scribing synaptic current arriving from the j-th neuron
and is given by:

Jij = (exp (−

) − exp (−

))

(3)

ts
τs

ts
τf

where ts is the time from the last spike generated at j-
th neuron; τs = 0.3ms is a slow time constant, whereas
tauf = 0.03ms is a fast time constant. The interplay of
those two constants deﬁnes the time course of the spike
decay.

When the threshold Γspike = 1 is reached, a spike is
generated and the membrane potential is reset to 0. Dur-
ing a built-in post-spike refractory period, T = 10ms, the
membrane does not potentiate in response to incoming
stimuli. Every neuron in both networks has an additional
inhibitory mechanism that resets the incoming synaptic
current to zero if it is below a threshold level (Γcut = 0.3).
Inclusion of this threshold imposes a requirement for co-
incident input in spike generation, much as in dendritic
processing. The parameters if the model (p, A, B, ξ) are
set so that both networks are just below a spontaneous
bursting regime. At a set point in time (t = 10s, Fig.
3B, bottom) Γcut is set to zero in network 1, shifting net-
work 1 into spontaneous bursting. The change in Γcut is
a phenomenological model of a transiently lowered ﬁring
threshold, which could be due to multiple neurobiological
mechanisms. For example, on the single-cell level it could

3

be driven by changes in Ca2+ dynamics and loss of hy-
perpolarizing activity from Ca2+-dependent K+ channels
[11].

Bursting in network 1 (N1) is generated when suﬃcient
numbers of neurons spike simultaneously, generating a
cascade eﬀect in the network. Thus bursting in network
1 is initially generated through intra-network dynamics
following a delay after lowering Γcut. The activity in
N1, in turn, provides input to network 2 (N2), result-
ing in seizure-like activity in both networks. Bursting
in N2 is therefore a result of synchronous, inter-network
signalling, the pattern of which is dictated by the inter-
nal dynamics of N1. In this phase of the model seizure,
when Γcut is low, the bursts of N1 lead those of N2 (Fig.
3B, black bar). N1 bursts are also generally higher and
narrower than N2 bursts, indicating greater internal syn-
chrony of N1.

At t = 60s Γcut in N1 is reset to its original value. As
a result, the dynamics of the 2 network system changes
dramatically. Bursting dynamics are no longer due to an
increased intrinsic ﬁring rate of neurons in N1, but are
sustained by synaptic input alone. Thus, the bursting
activity of both networks is not predominantly mediated
by the internal dynamics of N1, but by inter-network
feedback.
In this phase, switching in temporal leading
and internal synchrony are observed among the two net-
works, due to an inverse driving phenomenon (Fig. 1B,
gray bar). The instantaneous rate of bursting in each
network is inversely linked to the size and coherence of
the bursts generated by the other, consistent with burst-
ing sustained by inter-network interactions For example,
if a low-amplitude, diﬀuse burst in N1, will result in less
activation of N2. This, in turn, leads to decreased instan-
taneous frequency and gradual desynchronization of N2.
Due to the slowing of N2 bursts, N1 activity will tem-
porally lead bursting in N2. Thus, the less synchronous
and smaller bursts of one network will lead the more syn-
chronous and larger bursts of the other until bursting
ceases.

To quantify this inverse driving eﬀect, we compare the
ratio γ = height
width of bursts in each network to the iden-
tity of the leading network for 10 simulated seizures of
the type shown in (Fig. 3B). To measure relationship be-
tween γ and temporal leading, we deﬁne the expectivity
of a burst as +1 if the leading burst has a greater value
of γ than the following burst, and −1 if the leading burst
is smaller in γ than the following burst. In order to cap-
ture the temporal pattern in expectivity and control for
variations in burst freqency, we average expectivity over
a sliding window. In the simulated seizures, expectivity
is positive while Γcut = 0 in N1, and undergoes a rapid
transition to negative values when Γcut is restored (Fig.
4A). This ﬁnding is consistent with the transition from
driving by intra-network dynamics to bursting sustained
by inter-network feedback.

To determine if similar dynamics may be observed in

Network 1

Network 2

A

B

]
.

U
A

.

[
 
t

n
e
r
r
u
c
 
c
i
t

p
a
n
y
s
 
l

t

a
o
T

Network 1

Network 2

0

20

40

60

80

100

Time [s]

FIG. 3: A: Schematic connectivity of two connected SWN net-
works. B: Total synaptic activity from each network. In the ﬁrst
phase of the model seizure, activity in N1 leads activity in N2
(black bar).
In the second phase, switching occurs and activity
in N2 leads activity in N1 (gray bar). Step function denotes the
period (t ∈ [10, 60]) when Γcut = 0.

recordings from the whole hippocampus, we deﬁne ex-
pectivity among two electrodes as:

Ei,j =

+1, (Wi − Wj )(SEj,i − SEi,j ) ≥ 0
−1, (Wi − Wj )(SEj,i − SEi,j ) < 0 (cid:27)

(cid:26)

(4)

where W is the burst width. Expectivity (Ei,j ) is calcu-
lated on a burst-by-burst basis and averaged over sliding
windows for each adjacent electrode pair. We use burst
width as a measure of intra-network synchrony, since it
is less confounded by current source location than burst
amplitude. In order to account for the variable length of
SLEs across recordings, we linearly map the time from
SLE onset to switching onset to the interval [0, 0.5], and
the time from switching onset to the end of the SLE to the
interval [0.5, 1.0]. These normalized time series are then
averaged over 45 comparisons of activity in adjacent elec-
trodes to calculate average expectivity (E). We observe
that before the onset of switching (t < 0.5), E > 0, and
the electrode displaying narrower bursts leads the pair
(Fig. 4B, left). After the onset of switching (t > 0.5),
E < 0, with wider bursts leading (Fig. 4B, right), as ob-
served in our model. Thus, these ﬁndings are consistent
with a transition from the intra-network dynamics of a
single region driving activity throughout the hippocam-
pus to bursting sustained by inter-network feedback, as
observed in our model.

4

A

U
A

.

 
)

E

(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
e
p
x
E

0.5

1

0

-0.5

-1

B

.

U
A

.

 
,
)

E

(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
e
p
x
E

0.5

1

0

-0.5

-1

0

20
Time (s)

40

60

0.2

0
Normalized Time (A.U.)

0.4

0.8

0.6

1

FIG. 4: A: Average of expectivity among 10 simulated seizures, as
deﬁned in the text. Left of dashed vertical line: Γcut = 0.0. Right
of dashed vertical line: Γcut = 0.3. B: Average (black) ± SEM
(gray) of expectivity (E) among 45 electrode pairs, as deﬁned in the
text. Time from SLE onset to switching is normalized to [0, 0.5],
and time from switching to SLE end is normalized to [0.5, 1.0].
Vertical line: onset of switching.

To our best knowledge this is the ﬁrst such record-
ing, characterization, and proposed mechanism for the
dynamics of SLE in the whole hippocampus. Using a
novel measure, we observe and characterize lead switch-
ing among regions of the hippocampus over the course
of an SLE. We contruct a simple model to provide in-
sight into the dynamics underlying these observations.
We show that each SLE is divided into two phases. The
ﬁrst phase is driven by local intra-network dynamics of
the region with greatest local synchrony, while the sec-
ond phase is characterized inter-network feedback and an
inverse leading relationship.

B.S. and M.Z. thank Professor Eshel Ben-Jacob, Pro-
fessor Geoﬀ Murphy, and Professor Jack Parent. This
work was supported by a UM Research Incentives Grant
(M.Z.) and CIHR research grant MT14447 (P.L.C). B.S.
is supported by the UMMS Medical Scientist Training
Program (NIH T32-GM007863).

[1] M. Avoli, M. D’Antuono, J. Louvel, R. Kohling, G. Bi-
agini, R. Pumain, G. D’Arcangelo, and V. Tancredi, Prog
Neurobiol. 68, 167 (2002).

[2] F. Dudek, P. Patrylo, and J. Wuarin, Adv Neurol 79,

699 (1999).

[3] C. Wasterlain, Y. Shirasaka, A. Mazarati, and I. Spigel-

man, Epilepsy Res. 26, 255 (1996).

[4] T. Netoﬀ and S. Schiﬀ, J. Neurosci. 22, 7297 (2002).
[5] F. Mormann, R. Andrzejczak, T. Kreuz, C. R. nad
P. David, C. Elger, and K. Lehnertz, Phys. Rev. E 67,
021912 (2003).

[6] T. Netoﬀ, R. Clewley, S. Arno, T. Keck, and J. White,

J. Neurosci 24, 8075 (2004).

[7] F. L. da Silva, W. Blanes, S. Kalitzin, J. Parra, P. Suf-

fczynski, and D. Velis, Epilepsia 44, 72 (2003).

[8] M. Derchansky, E. Shahar, R. Wennberg, M. Samoilova,
S. Jahromi, P. Abdelmalik, L. Zhang, and P. Carlen, Hip-
pocampus 14, 935 (2004).

[9] M.

˙Zochowski and R. Dzakpasu, J. Phys. A 37, 3823

(2004).

[10] D. Watts and S. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).

[11] J. Gorter, A. Borgdorﬀ, E. van Vliet, F. L. da Silva, and

W. Wadman, Eur J Neurosci 16, 701 (2002).

5

