5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A model for codon position bias in RNA editing

Tsunglin Liu and Ralf Bundschuh
Department of Physics, Ohio State University, 191 W Woodruﬀ Av., Columbus OH 43210-1117

RNA editing can be crucial for the expression of genetic information via inserting, deleting, or
substituting a few nucleotides at speciﬁc positions in an RNA sequence. Within coding regions in
an RNA sequence, editing usually occurs with a certain bias in choosing the positions of the editing
sites. In the mitochondrial genes of Physarum polycephalum, many more editing events have been
observed at the third codon position than at the ﬁrst and second, while in some plant mitochondria
the second codon position dominates. Here we propose an evolutionary model that explains this
bias as the basis of selection at the protein level. The model predicts a distribution of the three
positions rather close to the experimental observation in Physarum. This suggests that the codon
position bias in Physarum is mainly a consequence of selection at the protein level.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg, 05.40.-a, 87.14.Gg, 87.14.Ee

INTRODUCTION

The central dogma of molecular biology states that the
transfer of genetic information ﬂows from the genomic
DNA to messenger RNA to proteins. This implies that
there are two fundamental processes involved in the fab-
rication of proteins. The ﬁrst such process is transcrip-
tion and it consists of copying the genomic DNA into a
messenger RNA of identical sequence. Both, the genomic
DNA and the messenger RNA use an alphabet of four let-
ters which makes direct copying of one sequence into the
other possible. The second process is called translation
and consists of synthesizing a protein, i.e., a sequence
of amino acids, following the instructions contained in
the sequence of the messenger RNA. During translation
groups of three consecutive bases of the messenger RNA
— the codons — are read in order to determine which of
the 20 amino acids is to be appended to the protein being
synthesized. The map from the 43 = 64 possible codons
into the 20 possible amino acids is called the genetic code.
Before translation into proteins, it has been discovered
that RNAs transcribed from most eukaryotic genes un-
dergo a variety of processing events, that convert RNA
precursors into mature RNAs ready for translation. For
example, the splicing process removes extended stretches
of the nucleotide sequences called introns from an RNA
precursor such that only the remaining RNA sequence
codes for a protein.

Besides these normal processing events, many novel
phenomena that change the content of RNA sequences
before translation have been discovered in several diﬀer-
ent organisms [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. These
phenomena, which are now coined as RNA editing, con-
sist of inserting, deleting, or changing individual or a very
small number of nucleotides. Still, even by changing only
a few nucleotides RNA editing can signiﬁcantly alter the
In
coding and result in functionally distinct proteins.
addition, RNA editing has also been found to occur in
non-coding regions like tRNAs and rRNAs, and can alter
the function of these RNA molecules as well.

For editing within the coding regions, there is often a
signiﬁcant codon position bias. For example, it has been
discovered that in the mitochondrial genes of the slime
mold Physarum polycephalum, about two thirds of the
editing events that insert Cs happen at the third posi-
tions of their respective codons [5, 6]. On the contrary,
in mitochondrial genes of Arabidopsis and other plants,
about 90 percent of the editing events, which in this case
convert Cs to Us, happen at the ﬁrst two positions of the
codons [12, 13, 14].

Codon position bias is somewhat surprising since there
is no obvious relation between the editing which happens
on the RNA level and codons which in principle have a
meaning only during translation. The underlying reason
why the editing machinery might prefer certain codon
positions for editing is still not understood.

Here, we propose an evolutionary model which explains
the editing position bias in mRNAs. In the evolutionary
scheme, a population of an organism undergoes muta-
tions which alter the DNA sequences of the individuals
in the population and change their genetic information.
Under natural selection, the members in the gene pool
that carry the genes with higher ﬁtness grow faster and
increase their relative frequency in the total population.
The ﬁtness of a gene in general depends on the encoded
protein sequence as well as other biological parameters.
In our model we will assume that the only dominant se-
lection mechanism is the ﬁtness of the resulting protein
sequence. This assumption is reasonable if editing is rela-
tively inexpensive, because in this case most editing sites
will be random in nature rather than involve some other
biological factors. Comparing our results with the actual
codon position bias data then reveals if this assumption
is true or if there are other, more fundamental selection
mechanisms at work in a given organism.

The two cases we apply our model to are the mito-
chondrial mRNAs of Physarum polycephalum and of the
plants Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, and Oryza
sativa. Abundant editing events have been observed in
In Physarum mitochondrial mRNAs,
these organisms.

one in every 25 bases is edited on average, which leads
to about 1 in every 8 codons being edited on average.
In plant mitochondrial mRNAs, about 2% of the nu-
cleotides are edited on average. In the remainder of this
article, we brieﬂy describe the editing events in these or-
ganisms. Then we focus ﬁrst on the evolutionary model
for Physarum. Following similar approaches for the case
of Physarum, we then move on to the case of plant mi-
tochondria.

Mitochondrial RNAs of Physarum polycephalum have
been found to be edited extensively by insertions of
mono-(C,U) and dinucleotides (CU,GU,UA,AA,GC, and
UU) [5, 6]. Among the editing events within mRNAs of
Physarum polycephalum, C insertions are the most fre-
quent events. In plant mitochondria, the most abundant
events are C to U conversions. Thus, we only focus on
these most frequent editing events in this communication.
For C insertions in 11 mitochondrial mRNAs of
Physarum polycephalum [15], some editing positions are
ambiguous as nucleotide Cs are inserted right next to an-
other C. Excluding these ambiguous editing sites, 227 C
insertions are observed within the coding regions. Among
these, 58 and 24 insertions occur at the ﬁrst and second
positions of the codons, respectively. The remaining 145
insertions are found at the third codon position. In this
case, the third position is the most favorable and the
second position is the least favorable as already noted
in previous work comprising only 5 mitochondrial mR-
NAs [16].

In plant mitochondria, the dominant editing event is
a C to U conversion. Thus, there is no ambiguity in de-
termining the codon position of these events. The edit-
ing codon position preferences of the three plant mito-
chondria studied here are quite similar. In Arabidopsis,
154/236/51 C to U conversions have been observed at
the three positions [12]. In Oryza [13] and Brassica [14],
142/243/33 and 174/230/77 conversions have been ob-
served respectively. This suggests that the editing posi-
tion bias stems from the same mechanism for the three
organisms. Notice that the order of the position bias is
the opposite to that of Physarum.

We now develop our model for the insertional edit-
ing events of Physarum. This model will later be easily
adapted to the case of substitutional editing such as in
the plant mitochondria.

The scheme of our evolutionary model is the follow-
ing. During the proliferation of Physarum, nucleotide
mutations occur at random positions in the mitochon-
drial DNA sequence. These mutations can be substi-
tutions, insertions, and deletions. Although we model
all three types of mutations, we are mostly interested
in deletions in the DNA sequence. Most oﬀspring with
a deletion die because the protein produced according
to the mutated DNA sequence is out of frame from the
site of the deletion on and thus cannot function properly.
However, some few deletions may be accepted by the edit-

2

AAA

ACA

ACC

ACG

ACU

CCG

CCA

CCG

ACG

ACC

CCC

FIG. 1: Mutations among codons of the evolutionary model
for Physarum. Solid lines stand for mutations between regular
codons. Dashed lines are for mutations between a regular
codon and a codon with an editing site.

ing machinery which would insert back nucleotides C to
those positions of mutation and thus rescue them. Un-
der natural selection, these oﬀspring would survive if the
resulting protein could function properly in place of the
original one.

The genetic code, i.e., the rules of translation from
codons to amino acids, is organized such that often the
third codon position is irrelevant to the identity of the
amino acid interpreted into the protein sequence. Thus,
the third codon position is the least sensitive to nu-
cleotide changes to C generated by editing events. There-
fore, in this mutation-selection model, random deletions
at the third codon position survive much better than at
the ﬁrst and second position.

Beyond this qualitative picture, the random mutations
and selection can be rigorously formulated in the follow-
ing way using as an example the codon ACG. For random
mutations, we assume the substitutions and deletions oc-
cur randomly at one of the three positions with certain
mutation rates µs and µe. The random substitutions re-
sult in 9 regular codons by converting the base in each
position into 3 other nucleotides (Fig. 1). The random
deletions generate 3 codons with editing sites ¯CCG, or
A ¯CG, or AC ¯C, where the bar stands for a vacant site in
the DNA sequence after mutation. As an amino acid is
expressed, this vacant site will be treated as a C to repre-
sent the editing event in which a nucleotide C is inserted
before translation. Note that µe is the eﬀective rate for
a deletion that is accepted by the editing machinery and
rescued by inserting a C. This rate is in general smaller
than the base deletion rate. For codons with a vacant
site, they also undergo insertions which randomly insert
one of the four nucleotides (A,C,G,U) back into the va-
cant site with a mutation rate µe, which we take to be
the same as the random deletion rate.

The basic assumption of our model is that selection
happens only at the amino acid level. Thus, the ﬁtness
of a codon, i.e., the growth rate, depends only on the
similarity of the new amino acid coded for by the mutated
codon to the original amino acid. To be speciﬁc, we will
use the amino acid scoring matrix BLOSUM62 [17] to
quantify the similarities between amino acids. However,

our results are not very sensitive to the choice of this
matrix. As an example, the initial codon ACG is assigned
a large growth rate of 6 because it translates into the
desired amino acid threonine. The mutated codon ¯CCG
would express the amino acid proline and is assigned a
growth rate of -1 since proline behaves quite diﬀerently
from thrieonine according to the BLOSUM62 matrix.

Apart from the ﬁtness at the amino acids level, a codon
created by an editing event is considered as less ﬁt than
a regular one because the editing machinery presumably
uses up resources in order to perform the editing. We
thus reduce the growth rate for a codon created by an
editing event by an editing cost c.

In order to cast this model in mathematical terms we
deﬁne the fraction of codon i as xi, where i = 1 ∼ 64
is for the 64 regular codons and i = 65 ∼ 112 is for
all codons containing an editing site. The corresponding
growth rates and editing costs are deﬁned as gi and ci,
where gi is obtained from the BLOSUM62 matrix and
ci = c for i = 65 ∼ 112 and zero otherwise. We then
write the general model as

˙xi = 


gi −ci −

µij

xi +

µjixj −xi

X
j6=i





X
j6=i





X
j

gjxj





Mijxj − xi

=

X
j





X
j

gjxj





(1)

where µij is the general mutation rate from codon i to
codon j, and is set as µs for substitutions, µe for deletions
and insertions, and 0 for codons that cannot be mutated
into each other.

We will look at the distribution of regular codons and
codons with editing sites in this model at equilibrium.
Although the last term in this equation is non-linear,
Eigen’s theory [18, 19] tells us that the equilibrium dis-
tribution is proportional to the eigenvector of the ma-
trix Mij for the largest eigenvalue. Thus, obtaining the
equilibrium distribution is merely a matter of numeri-
cally ﬁnding the eigenvector for the largest eigenvalue of
a 112 × 112 matrix which we do with Mathematica [20].
To obtain some insight into this evolutionary model,
we again ﬁrst look at the case where the initial codon
is ACG. We will focus on the limit of strong selection
in which most results become largely independent of the
individual mutation rates µs and µe. We obtain this
strong selection limit by setting µs and µe to be much
smaller than 1 since the growth rates that set the time
scale are of order 1. To be more speciﬁc, we set µs = µe =
10−6 because the relative magnitude of µs to µe only
slightly aﬀects the result. As expected, the equilibrium
distribution shows that only those codons that translate
into the original amino acid survive. Thus, among the
codons with editing sites, only A ¯CA, A ¯CC, A ¯CG, A ¯CU,
AC ¯C survive since the genetic code depends only on the

3

ﬁrst two positions in this case. We also ﬁnd that the ratio
between editing at the second position and at the third
position is about one. Thus, we arrive at a simple scheme
in the strong selection limit that only the mutations that
result in the same amino acid survive and each position
that survives contributes equally at equilibrium.

This simple scheme allows us to quickly predict the ra-
tio among edited positions for each codon. The overall
ratio is then easily obtained by considering all possible
codons with proper weights. The weights of the codons
are determined by the experimentally observed unedited
codon frequencies in the DNA sequence. This scheme re-
sults in the ratio of editing positions as 17/11/72 percent
which is rather close to the experimental observed ratio
25/11/64 percent.

The above result is obtained without any editing cost,
i.e., c=0. We ﬁnd that the role of the editing cost is
mainly to reduce the fraction of the total number of
codons with editing sites; the ratio among the editing
positions is only slightly changed upon introducing an
editing cost. Thus, by adjusting the editing cost, we can
tune the fraction of codons with C insertions to match
the experimental result of about 7%.
In this case, the
overall ratio of editing positions is about 19/15/66 per-
cent, which is still very close to the experimental result.
We conclude that this simple evolutionary model pro-
vides a possible scenario for the editing codon position
bias. This suggests that in Physarum the majority of
editing events might indeed be subject to no other bio-
logical constraint but the ﬁtness of the resulting protein
sequence. Thus, editing events might be randomly ac-
quired.

This is also consistent with the evolution of RNA edit-
ing in Physarum and its close relatives [21]. Abun-
dant editing has also been observed in the organisms
Didymium nigripes and Stemonitis ﬂavogenita. However,
in Arcyria cinerea and Clastoderma debaryanum, only
few C insertions or even none are observed. This indi-
cates that the editing machinery in Arcyria and Clasto-
derma is not yet fully developed. The fact that Physarum
has acquired so many editing sites since the divergence
from Arcyria and Clastoderma suggests that editing in
Physarum is less expensive and that thus random editing
is likely.

To study plant mitochondrial genes, we slightly modify
our evolutionary model as follows. The random substitu-
tions between regular codons remain the same as in the
case of Physarum, and they occur with a rate µs. As
to the editing events that convert Cs to Us, we assume
that for certain bases that mutate to Cs, the editing ma-
chinery would recognize these sites and convert them to
Us before translation. Here, we use ¯U to represent such
a mutation. Thus, as an example, the codon ACG can
mutate into ¯U CG, A ¯U G, and AC ¯U as the correspond-
ing nucleotide mutate to a C and then is recognized by
the editing machinery. This process involving an editing

event occurs with a mutation rate µe. Again, the back
mutation that converts a ¯U to one of the four nucleotides
(A,C,G,U) is modeled to also occur with the same mu-
tation rate µe. Mathematically, the evolutionary model
for Physarum and plant mitochondria are identical.

This evolutionary model, when applied to plant mito-
chondrial genes, does not predict the correct preference
in the codon positions for editing. Instead, it still pre-
dicts the majority of editing sites to occur at the third
codon position. This suggests that in plant mitochon-
drial genes editing events do not just happen randomly,
but that there exist some other biological mechanisms
that bias the choice of editing sites.

This assertion is consistent with what is known about
the editing mechanism in subcellular organelles of plants.
Recent experiments show that diﬀerent editing sites in
subcellular organelles of plants usually require diﬀerent
proteins in the editing process [22]. In such a case, each
editing site is quite expensive in terms of resources the
cell has to provide. It is highly unlikely that such expen-
sive editing sites are randomly acquired. The existence of
editing events in spite of the fact that they are expensive
is an indication that these editing sites are signiﬁcantly
involved in biological functions beyond simply providing
the correct protein sequence.

In summary, the closeness of the result of our evo-
lutionary model to the experimental observations in
Physarum suggests that the editing position bias in
Physarum is mainly a consequence of random mutations
with selection at the protein level. In the case of plant
mitochondria, the disagreement between the evolution-
ary model and the observations implies that some other
biological factors besides selection at the protein level
must also play a role in the evolution, so that the ran-
dom mutation-selection scheme does not ﬁt in these or-
ganisms.

We gratefully acknowledge contributions by Taeyoung

4

Choi to the very early stages of this project and fruit-
ful discussions with Jonatha Gott. This work has been
supported by grant no. DMR-0404615 from the National
Science Foundation.

[1] H. Grosjean, R. Benne, eds. 1998. Modiﬁcation and Edit-

ing of RNA, Washington, DC: ASM Press.

[2] B. Bass, ed. 2000. RNA editing: Frontiers in Molecular

Biology. Oxford Univ. Press

[3] R. Benne et al., Cell 46, 819 (1986)
[4] L. Simpson and J. Shaw, Cell 57, 355 (1989)
[5] R. Mahendran, M. R. Spottswood and D. L. Miller, Na-

[6] J. M. Gott, L. M. Visomirski, and J. L. Hunter, J. Biol.

ture 349, 434 (1991)

Chem. 268, 25483 (1993)

[7] J. M. Gualberto et al., Nature 341, 660 (1989)
[8] P. S. Covello and M. W. Gray, Nature 341, 662 (1989)
[9] R. Hiesel, B. Wissinger, W. Schuster, and A. Brennicke,

Science 246, 1632 (1989)

[10] L. M. Powell et al., Cell 50, 831 (1987)
[11] S. H. Chen et al., Science 238, 363 (1987)
[12] P. Gieg´e and A. Brennicke, PNAS 96, 15324 (1999)
[13] H. Handa, Nucl. Acids. Res., 31, 20 (2003)
[14] Y. Notsu et al., Mol. Genet. Genomics 268, 434 (2002)
[15] N. Parimi, R. Bundschuh and J. M. Gott (to be pub-

lished)

[16] D. Miller et al., Sem. Cell Biol. 4, 261 (1993)
[17] S. Henikoﬀ and J. G. Henikoﬀ, PNAS.89, 10915 (1992)
[18] J. B. Plotkin, J. Dushoﬀ, M. M. Desai, H. B. Fraser,

q-bio.PE/0410013 (2004)

[19] C. J. Thompson and J. L. McBride, Math. Biosci. 21,

127 (1973)

[20] Wolfram Research,

Inc., Mathematica, Version 5.0,

Champaign, IL (2003).

[21] T. L. Horton and L .F. Landweber, RNA 6, 1339 (2000)
[22] T. Miyamoto, J. Obokata, M. Sugiura, Mol. Cell Biol.

22, 6726 (2002)

