5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Alice in a micro-factory: modeling materials and mechanisms
of natural nano-machines∗

Debashish Chowdhury1
1Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur 208016, India.
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

Imagine an under water factory which is about 10µm long in each direction. The factory is ﬁlled
with machines, each typically a few tens of nanometers long, which have specﬁc tasks and operate
in a well coordinated manner. A cell, the structural and functional unit of life, is not very diﬀerent
from this micro-factory. In this article I begin with Alice’s guided tour of this micro-factory in her
dream during which the guide shows her wide varieties of the nano-machines in this factory. Then,
I summarize excerpts from the note book of Alice’s father, a professor of biophysics, to introduce
the methods of studying the materials and mechanisms of these machines. These excerpts empha-
size the crucial diﬀerences between the natural nano-machines and their macroscopic counterparts.
Finally, I highlight some potential applications of the fundamental research on molecular machines
in biomedical science and nano-technology.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Alice was sitting on a window seat beside her father inside the aircraft. The departure was getting delayed because
of the bad weather. She was coming back to Delhi with her parents after a two-week vacation with her grand parents.
Soon her ﬁnal year in school will begin. Her father is a professor of biophysics at a university in Delhi and he utilzed
the vacation to prepare his lecture notes for the next semester. Alice picked up the note book from his father’s tray
table and started reading the following paragraph from the notes.

“Three centuries ago Marcello Malpighi conjectured “Nature, in order to carry out the marvelous operations in
animals and plants, has been pleased to construct their organized bodies with a very large number of machines, which
are of necessity made up of extremely minute parts so shaped and situated, such as to form a marvelous organ, the
composition of which are usually invisible to the naked eye, without the aid of the microscope.” (As quoted by Marco
Piccolino [1])”.

Alice had already learnt a lot about machines from her physics teacher in school. A machine is a device, hav-
ing a unique purpose, that augments or replaces human or animal eﬀort for the accomplishment of physical tasks.
The operation of a machine may involve the transformation of chemical, thermal, electrical, or nuclear energy into
mechanical energy or vice versa. All machines have an input, an output, and a transforming (or, modifying) and a
transmitting device. A man-made complex macroscopic device is usually an assembly of simpler components each of
which is designed to achieve a speciﬁc function. For example, a hair dryer consists of a heater, a fan and a switch
suitably connected by electric wires and assembled in a compact framework; combined and coordinated operation of
these components gives rise to the function of the hairdryer- blowing hot wind.

Alice continued with the next paragraph in her father’s note book. “Naturally, to understand how a machine works,
one has to understand the structure and functions of its components. So, the belief in the role of organic machines
in sustaining life led to intense anatomical investigations in the seventeenth century. Curiously, the emphasis shifted
from organic machines during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; a critical analysis for plausible reasons has been
carried out by Piccolino [1]. With the triumph of the molecular theory of matter in the beginning of the twentieth
century molecule became the prime object of investigation in chemistry as well as in biology. Interestingly, already in
1906, Loeb (as quoted in ref.[2]) referred to the cell as a “chemical machine” (see also [3]).

Alice couldn’t believe what she read. So, she asked her father, “does a cell really function as a machine?”. Her father
replied, “indeed, each of the cells in our body is like a ‘factory’ made up of an enormously large number of molecular
machines [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. However, unlike man-made machines, these are products of Nature’s evolutionary design
over billions of years and the mechanisms underlying their function are often very diﬀerent from their macroscopic
counterparts in spite of many superﬁcial similarities. The typical sizes of the molecular machines in our body cells
range from tens to a few nano-meters. Therefore, one of the biggest challenges of modern science is to determine
the principles behind the design of these natural nano-machines and to understand their dynamics which help in

∗ A popularized version of the introductory lecture in an undergraduate course on “Natural Nano-machines” taught at IIT, Kanpur

2

elucidating the mechanisms of their functions in terms of the fundamental principles of physics”. The aircraft now
started running along the runway of the airport. Alice’s father said, ”Alice, if you do not have lot of home work
during the next weekend, I’ll be glad to tell you some of the intellectual challenges posed by the unusual mechanisms
of these nano-machines inside our cells each of which is like a micron-sized factory.

II. A GUIDED TOUR OF THE LIVING CELL IN A DREAM

The aircraft lifted oﬀ the runway and was climbing to higher altitude. Alice looked through the window and saw
the busy vehicular traﬃc on the streets below. At one corner of the city she saw the high chimneys of the factories;
that is the industrial area where her grandfather owned a small company that manufactured some chemicals. Few
other high structures that she could recognise were huge water tanks that supplied drinking water to the adjoining
residential area. Several years ago she had seen one of the pumps which raised water up to those tanks from the water
ﬁltration plant below.

Alice recalled the days when she was still in her kindergarten and her grandmother used to narrate the stories of
Ramayana and Mahabharat in the evening during the summer vacations. One story she liked most was that of the
underwater kingdom of the snakes. She was so tired that even before she realized, she was fast asleep in her seat and
started dreaming.

Alice found herself at the entrance of the underwater kingdom. It was entirely covered by an approximately spherical
membraneous soft wall. A water molecule greeted Alice with a smile: “Welcome Alice! Enjoy a guided tour of our
kingdom which you call “cell”. I’m Neera and I’ll be your guide during the next ninety minutes of your guided tour
of our kingdom”.

Neera warned Alice that the “channel”-like passage of the entry gate was very narrow and Alice will have to squeeze
through it. The wall of the kingdom actually consisted of two layers and the space in between was densely populated
by what looked like two-tailed ﬁshes; Neera seemed to have a special dislike for these ﬁshes. When Alice asked the
name of these unusual species of the ﬁsh, Neera said they are called lipids. The peculiar feature of these lipids was
that the ones at the outer layer had their heads facing water outside the kingdom and those in the inner layer had
their heads staring inside the kingdom; Neera said that the two monolayers of the lipids always stay together forming
a bilayer. The tails of these ﬁshes looked rather slippery and smelt like soap.

While Alice was looking at the wall, spellbound by what she saw, Neera had donned a special swimming suit,
somewhat like the ones used by swimmers at the Olympics. Neera said, I’ll have tough time swimming across that
channel unless I put on this swim suit.

Just as they slipped in through the channel, Alice found a net of ropes which resembles ﬁshing nets. First she thought
that these are perhaps intended to prevent the two-tailed ﬁshes from entering the kingdom. But, immediately she
realized her mistake; she had never seen such a dual-purpose net. While taking oﬀ her swim suit, Neera said that
this special net is called cytoskeleton. The girdirs and cables together form a skeleton that gives strength to the
architecture of the kingdom and, at the same time, also form the back bone of the transportation network of the
kingdom [8, 9].

It was water everywhere inside the kingdom. But, unlike the freely ﬂowing transparent water Alice has always been
familiar with, it was rather viscous and turbid because of the enormous crowd swimming all around. Alice requested
Neera for a brief pause as she wanted to watch the busy transportation system for a while before proceeding to their
next destination.

Alice found that the motors were not moving smoothly; their jerky motion was similar to that of a person trying
to move stright in a blizzard. The motors moving along the cables and struts had no wheels. They looked more like
two-legged humans than the four-wheeled vehicles Alice was familar with. Each carried a heavy bundle of cargo on
their head and moved like porters. Alice’s father owned a Toyota and her uncle had a Ford. Neera pointed at the
motor passing by and said it was a kinesin. Another coming from the opposite direction was a dynein. Neera said
that these two brands are like trains of the rapid mass transit system that ran from the city centre to the peripheral
subarbs. The stiﬀ struts that forms the tracks for these motors are called microtubules. The shuttle buses that carried
the passengers in these subabrbs were mostly myosins and they move on more ﬂexible cables called actin.

Alice did not ﬁnd a single petrol pump (gas station) anywhere in the city and asked Neera how the motors were
running without fuel. Neera corrected her mistake; the motors were consuming “chemical fuels”. Each of the motors
was utilizing the chemical energy released by a chemical reaction. The fuels, namely molecules of a compound called
ATP, were abundant everywhere and the motors were using the energy released by their hydrolysis to generate the
mechanical energy required for their directed movement. Alice was well aware of the environmental problems created
by the emissions from the motor vehicles back at home. So, she asked Neera how they disposed the spent fuel. Neera
said that all of the spent fuel is recycled in their kingdom; the spent fuel is recharged to manufacture fresh fuel. Neera
also added that some other machines in their kingdom directly use sunlight and, therefore, is very eco-friendly as no

3

FIG. 1: A cartoon of a two-headed molecular motor moving on a ﬁlamentary track. (Copyright: Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced
with permission).

waste product is generated by those machines. Moreover, another advantage of the machines running on light energy
is that light can be switched on and oﬀ easily and rapidly.

FIG. 2: A cartoon of a DNA helicase motor that moves on a nucleic acid track locally unzipping the double stranded DNA.
(Copyright: Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

As it was getting late, Alice resumed her sightseeing tour of the kingdom. Soon Alice and Neera were at the
pore-like entrance to the palace, called nucleus, at the center of the kingdom. Alice was spellbound by the chemical
factory inside the nucleus. A member of a special class of machines, called DNA helicase, was walking along a DNA
ﬁber unwinding the two strands. This process resembled disentangling of two strands of ﬁnd thread that are snarled
together. The local opening of the double stranded DNA (see ﬁg.2) is, eﬀectively, an unzipping process that cuts the
weak bonds which hold the two strands together. “Such openings form one step in the overall processes of DNA repair
or polymerisation of DNA and proteins” explained Neera. RNA polymerase (see ﬁg.3) are also nucleotide-assocaited
machines whose main purpose is to polymerise the so-called messenger RNA joining nucleotides that are selected on
the basis of the templates formed by a single-strand of DNA. The input energy for these machines comes from NTP
condensation and the output is the work done by the machine against opposing force.

Alice saw the synthesis of one such m-RNA strand in front of her eyes in a matter of seconds. Then, the serpentine
m-RNA headed towards the nuclear pore. Neera said, “after moving out of the nucleus the m-RNA will serve as a

4

FIG. 3: A cartoon of a RNA polymerase motor that moves on a nucleic acid track synthesizing a m-RNA strand using a
single-stranded DNA as the template. (Copyright: Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

template for the synthesis of a protein by another set of machines”. Alice was excited and wanted to see the whole
process. She rushed out of the nucleus behind the m-RNA closely followed by Neera. Alice saw little ball-like machines
decorating the m-RNA. She looked at Neera. “Those are the ribosomes, explained Neera. Alice saw a stiching-like
action by the ribosome, which also involved the m-RNA, t-RNA and amino acids, that, ﬁnally, gave birth to a fresh
protein chain. However, almost instantaneously the nascent protein folded into a complex three-dimensional structure
that Neera identiﬁed as the tertiary structure of the protein.

On the way back, Alice saw many buildings of wide variety of shapes and sizes; each of these was enclosed by a
soft membranous wall. Neera pointed her ﬁger at one and said, “can you see that labyrinthine structure? That’s
endoplasmic reticulum. And, the small balls sticking to its membranous wall are the ribosomes.” Then Neera turned
in another direction, “that one over there is called the Golgi apparatus. Alice could not help her curiosity. She asked,
“why do you need the Golgi appratus?”. Neera was brief, “The Golgi appratus is like a letter sorting station of
a postal system; the proteins are sorted here, packaged and forwarded to their onward destination.” Neera added
further, “ We’ll visit some endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi appratus during your visits in future and show you the
functions of those. In particular, there are some translocation machines on and near their walls which pull and push
proteins in and out of the building; without them, no protein would be able to cross their walls” (see ﬁg.4).

Suddenly, Neera seemed very excited: “Alice, can you see that small sausage-shaped building over there? That’s a
mitochondrion, one of the power houses that recharge the spent fuel ADP into fresh fuel ATP. It looks very diﬀerent
from the chemical factories in your world. This is achived by a tiny machine, called ATP synthase [10] stuck on the
wall of the mitochondrion. Perhaps you cannot see it from here (see ﬁg.5. But, I can assure you that this rotary
motor currently holds the world record: it is the smallest rotary motor. This is, at least superﬁcially, very similar to
the motor of a hair dryer”. ”Is this the only rotary motor that exists in this kingdom?”, asked Alice. “No. Bacteria,
which sometimes sneak into this kingdom, also have a slightly larger rotary motor ﬁxed in their skin [11]. This motor
rotates a helical ﬁlament called a ﬂagellum” (see ﬁg.6).

On their way back, Neera followed a shorter route and reached a gate diﬀerent from the one through which they had
entered. Neera wanted to show Alice a pump in action [12]. It was ﬁtted on the boundary wall and was constantly
pumping sodium ions from inside to outside while simultaneously, it was pumping potassium ions in the reverse
direction. Neera emphasized, “ the pump is continuously consuming energy to carry the ions against concentration
gradient, i.e., opposite to the direction of the spontaneous ﬂow, just as a water pump consumes electrical energy to
draw water upward against gravity”.

Alice and Neera came out of the kingdom through another slippery channel close to the pump. Neera told Alice,
“I hope you liked our kingdom and will visit us again”. Unfortunately, this kingdom of ours will not last long”. This
came as a shock to Alice, “why will this cell perish?” Neera consoled her, “That’s the rule in the world of cells; each
goes through a life cycle and ends with a split. This one is no exception and it will split into two daughter kingdoms
in a few days and I’ll be your guide during your next tour inside one of those two daughter kingdoms. Next time
I’ll also show you how cells use their machines to move [13]; some “swim” in their aqueous environment while others
“crawl” where the piston-like action of some machines play a crucial role”.

5

FIG. 4: A cartoon of a translocation machine that translocates a biological macromolecule across a membrane. (Copyright:
Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

FIG. 5: A cartoon of ATP synthase, a rotary motor associated with a membrane. The cylindrical part is called the F0 motor
while the other part represents the F1 motor. Both F0 and F1 are reversible and are tightly coupled to each other. (Copyright:
Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

Just as Alice and Neera were about to part ways, she saw a torpedo-shaped creature. It seemed it was just looking
It had a helical propeller attached to its skin that was rotating at an
for some way to snek into the kingdom.
astonishingly high angular speed. Neera stopped Alice, “beware! that is a bacterium”. Alice immediately realized
the rotating propeller must be the ﬂagellum that Neera had mentioned earlier. Neera continued, “this bacterium is
trying to invade the kingdom. If it succeeds, it will hijack motors to get a free ride to the center of the town and
then enter even the nucleus. If it can seize control of the machines involved in the protein synthesis, the future of the
kingdom is doomed”. Suddenly the bacterium spotted Alice and, she thought, it was approaching her aggressively.
Alice shrieked in fear... and her eyes opened. Her mother put her palm on Alice’s head. “What happened Alice?”,
she asked. “Nothing mom, I just saw something in my dream”. There was an announcement, the aircraft was going
to land soon in Delhi.

As anticipated, Alice had very little home work during the next weekend. So she sat down with her father and
narrated what she had seen in her dream. Her father listened quietly and, then remarked, “Alice, the kingdom you
are describing is very much like the micron-sized factory-like environment inside the cells of our body. You can learn
more about the nano-machines inside the cells from the notes I have prepared during the last one week”.

6

FIG. 6: A cartoon of the ﬂagellar motor of bacteria, a rotary motor associated with a membrane.
Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

(Copyright:

Indrani

FIG. 7: A cartoon of a molecular ion pump associated with a membrane. (Copyright: Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with
permission).

The next few sections are excerpts from the note book of Alice’s father.

III. MODELS AND METHODS FOR MATERIALS AND MECHANISMS

Let me brieﬂy mention our methods of investigation, namely, experimental, theoretical and computational tech-
niques, for studying the common fundamental physical principles that govern the generic features of the structure and
dynamics of the biological nano-machines as well as the corresponding underlying mechanisms of their operations.
This is a frontier area of current interdisciplinary research that involves molecular cell biology, (bio-)chemistry, physics
as well as engineering [14].

A. Materials: soft matter and weak forces

7

The durable parts of macroscopic machines are normally “hard” so as to survive the regular wear and tear. In con-
trast, the structural elements of the cell, e.g., ﬁlaments and membranes, are “soft”. These materials can be deformed
easily because their conformations are determined by weak forces like, for example, Van der Waals forces, hydrogen
bonding, etc. Moreover, since the thermal energy kBT available at a temperature T (kB being the Boltzamann
constant) is comparable to these weaker forces, thermal ﬂuctuations can also lead to conformational changes. Fur-
thermore, straightening of a ﬁlament or ﬂattening of a membrane reduces its entropy and the corresponding restoring
force is of entropic origin. Therefore,the free energy of soft matter are often dominated by entropy which gives rise to
phenomena that are not observed in hard materials. Therefore, biomolecular machines operate in a domain where the
appropriate units of length, time, force and energy are, nano-meter, milli-second, pico-Newton and kBT , respectively.

B. Experimental methods: imaging vs. manipulation

Seeing is believing. However, until late twentieth century, scientists could not see individual molecules although
everybody believed in its existence. In fact, in those days, the existence of a molecule could only be inferred indirectly
from circumstantial evidences gathered from experiments on samples which used to be very large compared to single
molecules. Search for microscopes which would allow us to see this elusive object seemed like a “holy grail”. We got
our ﬁrst glimpse of the macromolecules via X-ray diﬀraction and, then, electron microscopy. But, these were static
pictures. Towards the end of the twentieth-century a series of novel imaging techniques emerged which allowed us
to monitor the dynamics of single-molecules [15]. Confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy is, perhaps, the most versatile
among these methods.

FIG. 8: A broad classiﬁcation of the experimental techniques available for the manipulation of single molecules. (Copyright:
Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

No wonder, last ten years have witnessed a ﬂurry of activities in the area of molecular machines which are either
single macromolcule or tiny molecular aggregate; after all, invention of novel experimental techniques always lead
to enormous progress in natural sciences. In order to understand the mechanisms of molecular machines we need
experimental probes with suﬃciently high spatial as well as temporal resolutions that would be adequate to watch the
dynamics of the machine.

The recently developed single-molecule techniques can be broadly classiﬁed into two groups: (i) Methods of imaging,
and (ii) methods of manipulation. For example, green (and red) ﬂuorescence microscopy enables us to monitor
the dynamics of single motors just as ecologists use “radio collars” to track individual animals. But, for a clear
understandng of the mechanism of the molecular machines it is not enough merely to watch them passively; we must
be able also to manipulate them (see ﬁg.8). Such manipulations have been possible over the last decade because of
the availability of sophisticated techniques like, for example, optical tweezers and scanning force microscopes (SFM).
Almost all kinds of cells can live and multiply through cell division in a tissue culture dish provided proper conditions
are created. Such cells can be used for wide variery of experiments. Biologists usually refer to experiments on such

8

cultured cells as “in-vitro” (i.e., in glass) and experimnts on living organisms as “in-vivo”. However, biochemists
use these terms in a diﬀerent sense- by the term ”in-vitro” they mean processes occuring outside living cells whereas
the term “in-vivo” is used by them exclusively for processes occuring inside living cells. Naturally, more controlled
experiments are possible in-vitro than in-vivo.

C. Theoretical methods

By “theoretical methods” we mean analytical (mathematical) treatment of theoretical models. Since such an
analysis can be accomplished exactly only in rare cases, one has to make sensible approximations so as to get results
as accurate as possible.
• Theoretical models: molecular and mesoscopic

In biology, often the simplest among a family of objects is called a model system for the purpose of experimental
investigations. For example, the fruit ﬂy Drosophila and the worm C-elegans are often called model organisms because
of their simpler features among all multi-cellular organisms. However, by the term model we shall almost exclusively
mean theoretical model. A theoretical model is an abstract representation of the real system. Biologists often develope
qualitative models to explain empirical observations. In contrast, physicists work with quantitative models, formulated
in terms of mathematical symbols, not only to interpret experimental data but also to make new predictions that can
be tested through experiments.

Every theoretical model is intended to address a set of questions. The modeler must choose a level of description
appropriate for this purpose keeping in mind the phenomena that are subject of the investigation. Otherwise, the
model may have either too much redundant details or it may be too coarse to provide any useful insight. For example,
a molecular model of a hair dryer will have too much redundant information. Similarly, a continuum model of liquid
water will be too coarse to study dynamics of individual molecules of water. Since physicists most often focus only on
generic features of the various classes of machines, rather than speciﬁc features of individual members of these classes,
they normally develop minimal models which may be regarded as mesoscopic, rather than molecular, i.e., their status
in somewhere in between those of the macroscopic and molecular models.
• Mechanisms- conceptual challenges

Are the mechanisms of molecular machines identical to their macroscopic counterparts except that the machines are
nano-meter sized objects and the forces are in the range of pico-Newtions? NO, there are crucial diﬀerences between
the molecular machines and their macroscopic counterparts.

The molecular machines get bombarded from all sides by the randomly moving water molecules. The masses
of molecular machines are so small that these random thermal forces have strong infuence on their movement. It
is because of these random forces that the molecular motors inside the cell move in a manner that resembles the
movement of a human being in a strong blizzard. However, unlike passive Brownian particles (like, for example,
pollen grains in water), the molecular machines consume (free-) energy [16]. At least some of these machines are
physical realizations of Brownian ratchet, a device that exhibits directed, albeit noisy, movement in spite of being
subjected to random Brownian forces as they operate in conditions far from thermodynamic equilibrium [17, 18].

Interestingly, the nano-motors can come to a halt practically instantaneously as soon as they put on brake. This is
a consequence of low Reynold’s number. let me explain the phenomenon. Using the Stokes formula Fd = γv = 6πηrv
for the viscous drag force Fd experienced by a globular protein of radius r ∼ 3nm moving with an average velocity
v ∼ 8nm/sec in a aquous medium of viscosity η ∼ 10−3P as we get an estimate Fd ∼ 480pN . Surprisingly, this viscous
drag force is about 500 times larger than the corresponding elastic force experienced by the motor protein!

The Reynold’s number R is deﬁned as the ratio of the inertial and viscous forces. It can be written as R = ρLv/η
where L is a characteristic linear size of the object, ρ and η are, respectively, the density and viscosity of the liquid
and v is the relative velocity of the object with respect to the liquid. For proteins in aqueous solution, L ≃ 10nm,
ρ ≃ 103Kg/m3, η ≃ 10−3P as, v ≃ 1m/s (corresponding to 1nm/ns). Consequently, the corresponding Reynold’s
number is R ≃ 10−2 (and even smaller for slower motions). Thus, hydrodynamics at low Reynold’s number is expected
to dominate the mechanism of molecular machines.

In order to appreciate the diﬃculties of swimming at low Reynold’s number, let us multiply L by a factor of 107,
without altering ρ and v, so that η must be multiplied by 107 to keep R unaltered. In other words, if a bacterium
tried to swim in an aqueous medium adopting the swimming styles of humans, the diﬃculties it would face will be
very similar to those that you and I would face if we ever tried to swim in honey.

D. Computational methods

9

Computational biology has two distinct branches-

(i) Knowledge discovery (or, data mining) which extracts hidden patterns or laws from huge quantities of experi-
mental data, forming hypotheses. Knowledge discovery is used extensively in bio-informatics.
(ii) Simulation-based analysis, which tests hypotheses with computer simulations, provide predictions that, at least
in principle, can be tested by in-vitro and/or in-vivo experiments in the laboratory. The starting point of a computer
simulation is to develop an algorithm, which can be implemented numerically, for calculating the desired quanti-
ties. The sequence of instructions to a computer specifying the numerical procedure of that algorithm constitutes a
computer program.

There are close analogies between laboratory experiments and computer simulation:

laboratory experiments are
performed on a sample of a material whereas computer simulation is an experiment with models, the computer program
is the analogue of the experimentalist’s apparatus, testing of a program with known and well understood models is the
analogue of the calibration of the apparatus in laboratory, computation is the analogue of experimental measurement
and, ﬁnally, both require data analysis. Therefore, computer simulation is often referred to as “computer experiments”
or, in analogy with in-vivo and in-vitro experiments, also called in-silico experiments. The main diﬃculties faced in
computer simulations arise from the limited size of the available computer memory and the limitations imposed by
the available CPU time.

IV.

IMPORTANCE OF RESEARCH ON MOLECULAR MACHINES

A.

Importance in fundamental research- understanding life

Interest in molecular machines blossomed with the realization that much of cellular architecture, dynamics and
function depend on those of molecular machines. So far as the molecular machines are concerned, some of the
fundamental questions are as follows:

(i) Machine components: what are the moving parts of the motor and what are their molecular constituents?

(ii) Fuel: what is the fuel that supplies the (free-)energy input for the machine ?
(iii) Mechanisms of energy transduction: How does the transduction of energy take place?
(iv) Eﬃciency: What is the most appropriate deﬁnition of eﬃciency of the motor and how to estimate that eﬃciency?
(v) Regulation and control: How is the operation of the machine regulated? For example, how is the machine
switched on and oﬀ?
In addition to these general questions, several other fundamental questions are addreesed in the context of speciﬁc
molecular machines.

B.

Importance in biomedical research- improving quality of life

Just as occasional disruption of work in any department of a factory can bring entire factory to a standstill, defective
molecular machines can cause diseases [19, 20]. If we understand how motors work at the molecular level we will
be able to ﬁx them when they malfunction and perhaps manipulate them to improve human health and ﬁtness. We
might also devise ways to selectively either arrest sub-cellular processes that cause diseases like cancer or slow down
metabolism of organisms that invade cells causing other types of disease.

C.

Importance in research on nano-technology- mimicking life

Although quest for ever-smaller size of devices began long ago, Feynman’s famous talk of 1959 mentioned above
[21] is accepted by the majority of physicists as the deﬁning moment of nano-technology. Feynman ﬁrst attracted the
attention of the physics communiy to the unlimited possibilities of manupilating and controlling things on the scale of
nano-meters. He indicated the potential advantages of nano-technlogy. He also speculated on the possible methods;
today Nano-technology is the latest trend in the twenty-ﬁrst century.

From the perspective of applied research, the natural molecular machines opened up a new frontier of nano-
technology. The miniaturization of components for the fabrication of useful devices, which are essential for modern
technology, is currently being pursued by engineers following mostly a top-down (from larger to smaller) approach.

10

On the other hand, an alternative approach, pursued mostly by chemists, is a bottom-up (from smaller to larger)
approach [22].

In order to get some lessons from Nature’s billion year experience in nano-technolgy, we must carry out reverse
engineering. What is reverse engineering? Reverse engineering is “the process of analyzing a system to identify the
system’s components and their interrelationships and create representations of the system in another form or at a
higher level of abstraction [23]. Reverse engineering of natural nanomachines will give us clue as to the possible
design principles that can be utilized to synthesize artiﬁcial nanomachines. In fact, the terms biomimetics and bionics
has become a popular buzzword; this ﬁeld deals with the design of artiﬁcial materials utilizing the principles of
biomaterials [24, 25]. Feynman, a great visionary, made the prophetic statement in his famous talk at the American
Physical Society [21]: “ultimately, we can do chemical synthesis...The chemist does a mysterious thing when he wants
to make a molecule. He ....mixes this and that, and he takes it, and he ﬁddles around. And, at the end of a diﬃcult
process, he usually does succeed in synthesizing what he wants”. Indeed, in recent years, several artiﬁcial molecular
machines have been synthesized chemically [22].

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In recent years it has become clear that the cell is not a passive ﬂuid medium. Rather, a cell is more like a
factory where active biological processes are driven by coordinated operation of a large variety of molecular machines
each of which performs a speciﬁc function. One of the challenges of fundamental research on these machines is
to understand the mechanisms of their operation in terms of the physical principles governing their structure and
dynamics. The results of these investigations are likely to have signiﬁcant impact on applied research in biomedical
sciences and has opened novel approaches to nano-technology. Biomolecular nano-machines have become a subject of
truly interdisciplinary research that involves biology, chemistry, physics as well as engineering and technology.

[1] M. Piccolini, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1, 149 (2000)
[2] E.W. Taylor, Mol. Biol. of the cell 12, 251 (2001).
[3] B. Alberts, Cell, 92, 291-294 (1998)
[4] C. Mavroidis, A. Dubey and M.L. Yarmush, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng, (Annual Reviews, 2004).
[5] M. Schliwa, (ed.) Molecular Motors, (Wiley-VCH, 2003).
[6] S. Iyer, B. Romanowicz and M. Laudon, A DARPA commissioned overview on “Biomolecular Motors” (with highlights

from the special session at nanotech 2004, Boston, USA).

[7] D. D. Hackney and F. Tanamoi, The Enzymes, vol.XXIII Energy Coupling and Molecular Motors (Elsevier, 2004).
[8] J. Howard, Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton (Sinauer Associates, massachusetts, 2001).
[9] T. Kreis and R. vale, Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and Motor Proteins, 2nd edition (Oxford University Press, 1999).
[10] G. Oster and H. Wang, in ref.[5].
[11] H.C. Berg, E. coli in Motion, (Springer, 2003).
[12] J. P. Andersen and E.E. Bittar, Ion Pumps: Advances in molecular and cell biology, vol.23A ( 1998).
[13] D. Bray, Cell Movements: from molecules to motility (Garland Publishig, Taylor and Francis, 2001).
[14] E. Frey, Chem.Phys.Chem. 3, 270 (2002).
[15] J. M. Imhof and D.A. Vanden Bout, Am. J. Phys. 71, 429 (2003).
[16] D. Chowdhury, Resonance (in press, 2005); cond-mat/0504610.
[17] P. Reimann, Phys. Rep. 361, 57 (2002).
[18] F. J¨ulicher, A. Ajdari and J. Prost, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 1269 (1997).
[19] M. Aridor and L.A. Hannan, Traﬃc, 1, 836 (2000); 3, 781 (2002).
[20] N. Hirokawa and R. Takemura, Trends in Biochem, Sci. 28, 558 (2003).
[21] R. P. Feynman 1959, included also in: The pleasure of ﬁnding things out, (Perseus Books, Cambridge, Massachusetts,

1999), chapter 5.

[22] V. Balzani, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Molecular devices and machines: a journey into the nano-world (Wiley-VCH, 2003).
[23] E.J. Chikofsky and J.H. Cross, II. IEEE Software 7, 13-17 (1990).
[24] M. Sarikaya, PNAS 96, 14183 (1999).
[25] M.H. Dickinson, PNAS96, 14208 (1999).

