Extracellular polymeric bacterial coverages as minimal surfaces

Alberto Saa∗
Departamento de Matem´atica Aplicada, IMECC - UNICAMP, 13083-859 Campinas, SP, Brazil

Omar Teschke†
Laborat´orio de NanoEstruturas e Interfaces, Instituto de F´isica - UNICAMP, 13083-970 Campinas, SP, Brazil

Surfaces formed by extracellular polymeric substances enclosing individual and some small com-
munities of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans on plates of hydrophobic silicon and hydrophilic mica are
analyzed by means of atomic force microscopy imaging. Accurate nanoscale descriptions of such
coverage surfaces are obtained. The good agreement with the predictions of a rather simple but real-
istic theoretical model allows us to conclude that they correspond, indeed, to minimal area surfaces
enclosing a given volume associated with the encased bacteria. This is, to the best of our knowl-
edge, the ﬁrst shape characterization of the coverage formed by these biomolecules, with possible
applications to the study of bioﬁlms.

potential elastic energy and the total amount of EPS nec-
essary to form them. Our analyses conﬁrm this hypoth-
esis, EPS coverages of A. ferrooxidans adhered to mica
and silicon plates can be indeed understood as minimal
area surfaces enclosing some ﬁxed volumes. For a review
of the biological signiﬁcance of free (i.e., without any vol-
ume constraint) minimal surfaces, see [8, 9].

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 87.64.Dz, 82.35.Pq, 68.37.Ps

Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) are pro-
duced by microorganisms during the process of adhesion
to an environmental surface, acting mainly to protect
them and to facilitate their interactions [1]. The exact
functions of EPS have not been completely elucidated
yet because of their extremely heterogeneous nature. It
is known, however, that EPS play signiﬁcant roles in the
formation and function of microbial aggregates, includ-
ing matrix structure formation and microbial physiolog-
ical processes[2]. Here, we report an analysis, based ex-
perimentally on atomic force microscopy (AFM) imag-
ing, of the EPS coverage produced in communities of
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans adhered to ﬂat plates of sil-
icon (hydrophobic) and mica (hydrophilic). AFM has the
ability to image the surface morphology in aqueous condi-
tions, without any chemical ﬁxation. In particular, AFM
has recently proved to be useful in imaging the morphol-
ogy of bacteria[3], liposomes[4], and DNA molecules[5]
on solid surfaces. Beech et al.[6], furthermore, showed
that AFM allows the estimation of the width and height
of bacterial exopolymeric capsule and bacterial ﬂagella.

As we will show, AFM can be also used to determine
the shape of diﬀerent EPS coverage patterns of individ-
ual bacterium and some small communities of A. ferroox-
idans. Since EPS production costs resources and energy
to the bacteria, it would be natural to expect that EPS
coverage surfaces should obey some variational principle,
implying, therefore, that the observed surfaces should be
minimal with respect to some criteria. At this scale (
1
µm), on the other hand, one does not expect any other
force to be relevant besides of surface tension[7, 8, 9].
Consequently, the observed surfaces should correspond
to minimal area surfaces enclosing a given and ﬁxed vol-
ume, associated, of course, with the encased bacteria. In
this way, the observed surfaces would minimize both the

∼

∗Electronic address: asaa@ime.unicamp.br
†Electronic address: oteschke@iﬁ.unicamp.br

FIG. 1: A. ferrooxidans adhered to a hydrophilic mica plate
observed in air. For all bacteria, the covering material form
a cap-like structure.

The images have been gotten by using an A. ferroox-
idans strain LR[10] isolated from an acid eﬄuent of the
column leaching of uranium ore from Lagoa Real, BA,
Brazil. Bacteria were grown under constant shaking at
30◦ C in modiﬁed TK liquid medium[11]: K2HPO43H2O,
0.4 g/L; MgSO4.7H2O, 0.4 d/L; (NH4)2SO4, 0.4 g/L;
FeSO47H2O, 33.4 g/L; 1.8 and 3.0 pH. The ThermoMi-
croscope AutoProbe CP[12] was chosen for the measure-
ments. Tips selected with small radius of curvature (
5
nm) and the ultra-low spring constant of the cantilever
(
0.03N/m), allowed us to interrogate the living cells
∼
to suit our objectives without damaging them. The size
and shape of the AFM probe were characterized by us-

∼

ing a titanium reference silicon grating sample[12], and
contact mode topographic images were recorded. During
imaging, the contact force was kept below 1 nN and the
scan rate in the range of 1-4 Hz. Further details on our
experimental setup will be published elsewhere[13].

∼

∼

Fig. 1 shows a typical distribution of bacteria adhering
to a hydrophilic mica plate at the center of the deposited
droplet (
5 mL, 3.0 pH), corresponding to a view on an
∼
2000 µm2. We notice that, typically, each bac-
area of
terium is isolated from the others and the area is almost
uniformly covered. The shapes of the covering structures
are shown in details in Fig. 2, where top views of indi-
vidual covered bacteria are displayed; all bacteria show a
cap-like structure formed by the covering material. Also,
images recorded after scanning large areas provide direct
evidence for the presence of a continuous layer covering
the substrate. Although layers as thin as
20 nm are
observed, most of the covered substrate has thicker layers
(
∼

600 nm) of deposited material.
The problem[14] of ﬁnding a minimal (area) surface
enclosing a given volume is a classical isoperimetric (iso-
volume) variational problem, and several mathematical
and computational tools are available to solve it in the
most generic contexts. Strictly speaking, the isoperimet-
ric problem, dating from the antiquity, concerns ﬁnding
the plane ﬁgure of maximal area with a given perimeter.
In a broader sense, however, it includes the problem of
ﬁnding minimal area surface enclosing a given volume.
The coverage surfaces are mathematically modeled by
a smooth function f (x, y)
0 with support restricted
to a region
, simply connected or not, of the plane
(x, y). The details of our mathematical analysis will be
reported elsewhere[13]. For the case of axisymmetric sur-
faces, analytical solutions are available, whereas for the
non-symmetric case we had to use some approximations
or iterative numerical methods. For the ﬁrst case, by in-
troducing appropriate polar coordinates (ρ, θ), one has
yet two qualitative distinct cases according to the nature
of the support region
, the
minimal surface enclosing a given volume corresponds to
a spherical cap with equation

. For simply connected

≥

D

D

D

(f (ρ)

d)2 + ρ2 = r2,

−

(1)

−

−

−

d3

r3
(cid:0)

max = r2

d2), and ρ2

where d and r are free parameters. The volume of the
associated spherical cap is given by V0 = 2π
+
3
πd(r2
d2. Hence, ρmax and V0
would be enough to determine unambiguous the surface.
However, it is not a easy task to infer the volume en-
closed by the surface from our AFM images, it is more
convenient, instead, to use maximal high of the surface
f (0) = r + d or the contact angle θ between the plate
and the surface at the boundary ∂
. One can check that
ρmax, f (0), and θ are not independent quantities, they,
instead, obey

D

(cid:1)

2
tan θ

=

ρmax
f (0) −

f (0)
ρmax

.

(2)

2

The relation (2) can be veriﬁed (and it could be falsi-
ﬁed) easily from our axisymmetric images with simply
. The spherical cap is the global minimum
connected
of the problem, i.e., if no other constraint is imposed,
the minimal area surface enclosing a given volume is the
spherical cap.

D

The second axisymmetric case corresponds to the sur-
faces with multiply connected support. The minimal sur-
face in this case is given by

ρ

f (ρ)

d =

−

Z

ρmin

c

2 s2
λ
−
2 s2
λ

−

(cid:0)

−

c

(cid:1)

s2

q

ds,

2

(3)

−

with ρmin = (√1 + 2λc
1)/λ, where d, λ and c are free
parameters. Eq. (3) can be expressed in a closed, but
rather cumbersome, form by means of elliptic functions.
1/λ. In such a
A very interesting case occurs for c
case, by introducing the new variable s = τ +
2c/λ,
1/λ, 1/λ], Eq. (3) can be accurately approximated
τ
∈
by

[
−

≫

p

τ

t

f (

2c/λ + τ )

d

p

−

≈ Z

− 1
λ

1
λ2

t2

−

q

dt =

1
λ2 −

r

τ 2 (4)

Eq. (4) is easily recognized as the equation for a segment
of a torus with radii
2c/λ and 1/λ. As we will see, such
minimal surfaces with multiply connected support will
be useful to enlighten some of the observed structures,
notably for the case of silicon plates.

p

Fig. 2 shows some observed images of the EPS cover-
age for single A. ferrooxidans. The typical surface image
for the mica plates is axisymmetric and has simply con-
nected support. As it was already said, relation (2) is a
ﬁngerprint of the spherical cap. Table I shows the rel-
evant parameters, including the observed and predicted
values of the contact angle θ, for several samples in mica
plates with nearly circular support
. As one sees, the
concordance is very good. Another property of the spher-
ical cap that can be properly checked is that its intersec-
tion with any plane must be circle arcs. Fig. 3 shows the
χ2 ﬁtting of all the samples considered in Table I. Again,
the agreement is remarkable.

D

Sample ρmax f (0) θcalc θobs −d
(µm)

(µm) (nm)

(rad) (rad)

χ2
r
(µm) (10

−4

)

a (43) 3.497 193 0.110 0.09 30.699 31.015
b (158) 5.158 262 0.107 0.10 51.452 51.868
c (118) 2.345 207 0.171 0.15 12.836 13.203
67 0.097 0.09 14.206 14.322
d (124) 1.379

2.1
3.5
6.0
1.0

TABLE I: The relevant parameters, including the observed
and calculated (according to (2)) contact angles for some sam-
ples of EPS axisymmetric coverage on a mica plate. The
values of d, r, and χ2 corresponds to the χ2 ﬁtting of the
spherical cap (1). Between parenthesis, in the ﬁrst column,
we have the number of points read by AFM for each sample.

3

FIG. 2: Some AFM images of the EPS coverage of single A. ferrooxidans adhered to hydrophilic mica (a-c) and hydrophobic
silicon (d-f) plates. The curves correspond to the slices indicated in the images. All images except (c) were obtained in aqueous
condition. Fig. (c) corresponds to a rinsed sample similar to (b), where one can see clearly the circular ring corresponding to
the thicker basis of the coverage. See the text for further details.

1

0.98

0.96

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

FIG. 3: For illustrative purposes, all the 543 points of the
samples considered in Table I are plotted on the unitary circle
deﬁned by x2/r2 + (y − d)2/r2 = 1 (the solid line), where the
values of d and r for each sample correspond to the χ2 ﬁtting
of Table I. The concordance is remarkable.

An interesting image of an axisymmetric EPS cover-
age surface, often observed for A. ferrooxidans on mica
It consists of
plates, is that one showed in Fig. 2(b).
a spherical cap born by a thicker circular ring, which,
incidentally, also has its external surface well described
by a spherical segment. After rinsing these samples, one
can see clearly (Fig. 2(c)) that the ring is composed by
a less soluble EPS. The ring shape is very suggestive of a
structure similar to the minimal toric segment discussed
above.

For the case of hydrophobic silicon plates, the images
are typically more irregular when compared with that
ones observed for hydrophilic mica. This can be under-
stood recalling that, while for a hydrophilic substrate the
EPS produced by the adhered bacteria can spread over

easily, occupying large areas if compared with the bacte-
ria size, for a hydrophobic substrate the produced EPS
do tend to clump and to be very sensitive to eventual sur-
face microdefects of the substrate. Nevertheless, some of
these non-symmetric coverages can be understood with
the help of the axisymmetric minimal surfaces with mul-
tiply connected support. It is the case, for instance, of
the image presented in Fig. 2(d). It corresponds to a seg-
ment of a long and curved ﬁgure. Sections as that one
indicated in Fig. 2(d) are nearly circle arcs, but some
samples have shown up with a high degree of irregulari-
ties. The central part of the curve is also well described
by circles. The question about why the coverage has
such a shape has no easy answer. We foresee basically
two possibilities. Such a disposition could correspond
to some frustrate minimal toric segment, or maybe an
initially symmetric situation, as, for instance, a section
of a long prolate ﬁgure, could evolve toward the non-
symmetric situation due the surface stresses induced by
the microdefects of the hydrophobic substrate. The cov-
erage surface depicted in Fig. 2(e), despite of being not
exactly symmetric, is also very suggestive of a minimal
toric segment. The minimal surfaces with multiply con-
nected support show up for the hydrophobic substrate
presumably because the EPS coverage is prevented to
evolve towards the globally minimal surface (the spheri-
cal cap) due to the diﬃculties of spreading over the hy-
drophobic substrate. The EPS coverage tends, in this

way, to some locally minimal surface as, for instance, the
toric segment.

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

FIG. 4: The χ2 ﬁtting of the circle arc x2/r2 +(y −d)2/r2 = 1
(the solid line) for the transversal slice indicated in Fig. 2(f).
The ﬁtting corresponds to r = 1.043 µm and −d = 0.725 µm.
Circular transversal sections are good approximations for long
symmetric prolate ﬁgures.

D

The non-axisymmetric image displayed in 2(f) is a typ-
ical example of a coverage surface we had to analyze nu-
merically. There is no analytical solution for the general
non-symmetric case. However, a plenty of numerical and
semi-analytical methods are available to attack this prob-
lem. These EPS coverage surfaces shall be understood as
minimal area surfaces enclosing a given volume and with
. There is no hope in solv-
a given region of support
ing this problem analytically for generic
. K. Brakke’s
public domain software SURFACE EVOLVER[15], nev-
ertheless, has proved to be a powerful tool to this kind of
problem. It is based on an iterative algorithm capable of
ﬁnd minimal surfaces, according to quite general criteria,
subjected to a given set of constraints, and for virtually
, simply connected or not, convex or not.
any support
We have used it with success for solving our non sym-
metric cases. However, in these cases, due to the numer-
ical nature of the solutions, we are basically restricted to
some qualitative analysis. We have proceeded as follows.
First, we ﬁnd a parametric representation of the bound-

D

D

4

D

ary ∂
. Then, EVOLVER is ran for various volumes
V0, until the maximal hight of the surface coincides with
the observed coverage high. Then, a speciﬁc slice of the
sample is compared with the results of EVOLVER. No
χ2 tests could be properly done in this case. However,
a good agreement is observed. We notice that, by ap-
proximating the coverage 2(f) by a very long symmetric
prolate surface, the central slice should correspond also
to a circle arc[13], see Fig. 4.

Bioﬁlms[1] are composed primarily of cells and EPS.
Presumably, with some typical distance between the
cells, their EPS coverage could touch each other with-
out clumping together in a large and common coverage,
forming a EPS mesh that will certainly conditionate the
physical properties of the associated bioﬁlm. With the
cells disposed in a quasi-regular way, such EPS mesh
should resemble the periodic free minimal surfaces[8, 9].
In the same way that some important physical and bi-
ological properties of lipd-water phases, cell membranes
and biopolymers are related to certain periodic free mini-
mal surfaces (see [8, 9] for further references), one expects
that relevant properties of a bioﬁlm composed by such a
EPS mesh might depend closely on the geometrical de-
tails of the EPS coverage. In this context, we notice that
the complete solution of the problem of ﬁnding the mini-
mal area surface (the double-bubble) enclosing and sepa-
rating two given volumes appeared only very recently[16].
These points are still under investigation.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to F.H.P. Knegt, R.F. Berg-
amo and L.M.M. Ottoboni for providing A. ferrooxidans
bacteria cultures, J. R. Castro and L. O. Bonugli for
technical assistance, B. Longo and J. Queiroz for valu-
able discussions, and the funding support of FAPESP
(2003/12529-4) and CNPq (523.268/1995-5).

[1] L.V. Evans, Bioﬁlms: recent advances in their study and

B.V. (1997).

control, Harwood Academic Publishers (2000).

[9] S. Andersson, S.T. Hyde, K. Larsson, and S. Lidin,

[2] B.E. Christensen, J. Biotechnol. 10, 181 (1989); T.R.
Neu, and K.C. Marshall, Biofouling 3, 101 (1991); T.R.
Neu, Microbiol. Rev. 6, 151 (1996); C.M. Buswell, et al.,
J. Appl. Microbiol. 83,477 (1997); S. Burdman, et al.,
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 189, 259 (2000).

[3] A. da Silva, Jr. and O. Teschke, Bioch. et Biophys. Acta

1643, 95 (2003).

[4] O. Teschke and E.F. de Souza, Langmuir 18, 6513 (2002).
[5] O. Teschke, R.A. Douglas, and T.A. Prolla, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 70, 1977 (1997).

[6] I.B. Beech, C.W.S. Cheung, D.B. Johnson, and J.R.

Smith, Biofouling 10, 65 (1996).

[7] A.W. Adamson, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, John

Wiley Sons, Inc. (1990).

[8] S. Hyde, et al. The Language of Shape, Elsevier Science

Chem. Rev. 88, 221 (1988).

[10] O. Garcia, Jr, Rev. Microbiol. 22, 1 (1991).
[11] O.H. Tuovinen, and D.P. Kelly, Archiv fur Mikrobiologie

88, 285 (1973).

[12] Veeco Instruments Inc., Woodbury, NY.
[13] A. Saa and O. Teschke, Mathematical characterization
of the bacterial coverage surfaces formed by extracellular
polymeric substances, to appear.

[14] L.E. Elsgolts, Diﬀerential equations and the calculus of

variations, Mir Publishers (1970).

[15] K. Brakke, Exper. Math. 1, 141 (1992); software (v2.24)
available on-line at http://www.susqu.edu/brakke/
[16] M. Hutchings, F. Morgan, M. Ritore, and A. Ros, Ann.

Math, 155, 459 (2002).

