5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Simple unbiased estimation of absolute free energies for biomolecules

F. Marty Ytreberg ∗ and Daniel M. Zuckerman †
Department of Computational Biology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

One reason that free energy diﬀerence (∆F ) calculations are notoriously diﬃcult in molecular
systems is due to insuﬃcient conformational overlap, or similarity, between the two states or systems
of interest. The degree of overlap is irrelevant, however, if the absolute free energy of each state can
be computed. We present a method for calculating the absolute free energy that employs a simple
construction of an exactly computable reference system which possesses high overlap with the state of
interest. The approach requires only a physical ensemble of conformations generated via simulation,
and an auxiliary calculation of approximately equal CPU cost. Moreover, the calculations can
converge to the correct free energy value even when the physical ensemble is incomplete or improperly
distributed. We use the approach to correctly predict free energies for test systems where the
absolute values can be calculated exactly, and also to predict the conformational equilibrium for
leucine dipeptide in GBSA implicit solvent.

PACS numbers: pacs go here
Keywords: free energy,entropy

INTRODUCTION

Knowledge of the free energy for two diﬀerent states
or systems of interest allows the calculation of solubilities
[1, 2], determines binding aﬃnities of ligands to proteins
[3, 4], and determines conformational equilibria (e.g., [5]).
Free energy diﬀerences (∆F ) therefore have potential ap-
plication in structure-based drug design where current
methods rely on ad-hoc protocols to estimate binding
aﬃnites [6, 7].

Poor “overlap”, the lack of conﬁgurational similarity
between the two states or systems of interest, is a key
cause of computational expense and error in ∆F calcu-
lations. The most common approach to improve overlap
in free energy calculations (used in thermodynamic inte-
gration, and free energy perturbation) is to simulate the
system at multiple hybrid, or intermediate stages (e.g.,
Refs. [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]). However, the simulation of inter-
mediate stages greatly increases the computational cost
of the ∆F calculation.

Here, we address the overlap problem by calculating
the absolute free energy for each of the end states, thus
avoiding the need for any conﬁgurational overlap. Our
method relies on the calculation of the free energy dif-
ference between a reference system (where the exact free
energy can be calculated, either analytically or numeri-
cally) and the system of interest.

Such use of a reference system with a computable free
energy has been used successfully in solids where the ref-
erence system is generally a harmonic or Einstein solid
[13, 14], and liquid systems, where the reference system
is usually an ideal gas [15, 16]. The scheme has also been

∗E-mail: fmy1@pitt.edu
†E-mail: dmz@ccbb.pitt.edu

applied to molecular systems by Stoessel and Nowak, us-
ing a harmonic solid in Cartesian coordinates as a refer-
ence system [17].

Other approaches to calculate the absolute free ener-
gies of molecules have been developed. Meirovitch and
collaborators calculated absolute free energies for pep-
tides in vacuum, for liquid argon and water using the hy-
pothetical scanning method [18, 19]. Computational cost
has thus far limited the approach to peptides with sixty
degrees of freedom [20]. The “mining minima” approach,
developed by Gilson and collaborators, estimates the ab-
solute free energy of complex molecules by attempting
to enumerate the low-energy conformations and estimat-
ing the contribution to the conﬁgurational integral for
each [21, 22]. The mining minima method does not
include potential correlations between the torsions and
bond angles or lengths, and uses an approximate method
to compute local partition functions. Other investigators
have estimated absolute free energies for molecules using
harmonic or quasi-harmonic approximations; however lo-
cal minima can be deviate substantially from a parabolic
shape [23, 24, 25].

We introduce, apparently for the ﬁrst time, a refer-
ence system which is constructed to have high overlap
with fairly general molecular systems. The approach can
make use of either internal or Cartesian coordinates. For
biomolecules, using internal coordinates greatly enhances
the accuracy of the method since internal coordinates are
tailored to the description of conformations. Further, all
degrees of freedom and their correlations are explicitly
included in the method.

Our method diﬀers in several ways from the important
study of Stoessel and Nowak [17]: (i) we use internal
coordinates for molecules which are key for optimizing
the overlap between the reference system and the sys-
tem of interest; (ii) we may use a nearly arbitrary ref-
erence potential because only a numerical reference free

energy value is needed, not an analytic value; (iii) there
is no need, in cases we have studied, to use multi-stage
methodology to ﬁnd the desired free energy due to the
overlap built into the reference system,

In outline, this report ﬁrst introduces our reference
system method. The method is tested on single and
double-well two-dimensional systems, and on a methane
molecule where absolute free energy estimates can be
compared to exact values. The method is then used to
compute the absolute free energy of the alpha and beta
conformations for leucine dipeptide (ACE-(leu)2-NME)
in GBSA implicit solvent, using all one-hundred ﬁfteen
degrees of freedom, correctly calculating the free energy
diﬀerence ∆Falpha→beta. Extensions of the method to
larger systems are then discussed.

SMART REFERENCE SYSTEM METHOD

To calculate the absolute free energy of the system of
interest (“phys” for physical) from a reference system
(“ref”) the following relationship is used,

Zphys = Zref

=

Zphys
Zref

8π2
σC◦ Zc
d~x e−βUphys(~x),

Zc =

Z

(1)

where β = 1/kBT , C◦ is the standard concentration, σ is
the symmetry number [22], and Zc is the conﬁgurational
partition function.
In our notation Zphys is the parti-
tion function for the system of interest (i.e., the physical
system), Zref is the partition function for the reference
system, and ~x represents the full set of conﬁgurational
coordinates (internal or Cartesian). Equation (1) im-
plies that the desired absolute free energy of the system
of interest, Fphys, can be calculated using

Fphys = Fref + ∆Fref→phys,

(2)

where Fref is the trivially computable free energy of the
reference system, and ∆Fref→phys is the free energy dif-
ference between the reference and physical system which
can be calculated using standard techniques.

For this report, we include estimates of the conﬁgu-
rational integral Zc only, i.e., the leading constant term
in Eq. (1) is not included in our results.
Ignoring the
constant term is not a limitation since, for the conforma-
tional free energies studied here, the term cancels for free
energy diﬀerences.

The physical ensemble and construction of the
reference system

2

internal or Cartesian coordinates) based on a “physical
ensemble” of conformations generated via molecular dy-
namics, Monte Carlo or other canonical simulation. The
histograms deﬁne a reference system with a free energy
that is trivially computable. A analytical solution need
not be available. A well-sampled ensemble of reference
system conﬁgurations is then readily generated. Finally,
both the reference and physical ensembles are utilized to
calculate the absolute free energy of the system of inter-
est via Eq. (2).

The ﬁrst step in constructing the reference system is
to generate a physical ensemble (i.e., a trajectory) by
simulating the system of interest using standard molec-
ular dynamics, Monte Carlo, or other canonical sam-
pling techniques. The trajectory produced by the sim-
ulation is used to generate histograms for all coordinates
as described below.
In creating histograms, note that
constrained coordinates, such as bond lengths involving
hydrogens constrained by RATTLE [26], need not be
binned since these coordinates do not change between
conﬁgurations. Such coordinate constraints are not re-
quired in the method, however.

If

internal coordinates are used (such as for the
molecules in this study), care must be taken to account
for the Jacobian factor. Using bond lengths r, bond an-
gles θ and dihedrals ω, a volume element in internal co-
ordinate space is

d~x1 = r2

r3
1/3
1dr1 sin θ1dθ1 dω1 = d
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

d(cos θ1) dω1, (3)

where ~x1 represents one possible set of internal coordi-
nates. Equation (3) holds for every possible set of in-
ternal coordinates and thus, the simplest strategy to ac-
count for the Jacobian is to bin according to a set of rules:
bond lengths are binned according to r3/3, bond angles
are binned according to cos θ, and dihedrals are binned
according to ω (i.e., the same as Cartesian coordinates).
It is important to note that one may choose to bin coor-
dinates as independent (i.e., one-dimensional histograms)
or with correlations (i.e., multi-dimensional histograms).
For example, in peptides, one may choose to bin all sets
of backbone φ, ψ torsions as correlated, and all other co-
ordinates (bond lengths, bond angles, other torsions) as
independent. One might think that it is always advan-
tageous to bin some coordinates (at least backbone tor-
sions) as correlated, since reference structures drawn ran-
domly from the histograms (detailed below) will be less
likely to have steric clashes. However, including correla-
tions with small bin sizes is impractical. As an example,
imagine that for the leucine dipeptide molecule used in
this study, one binned the four φ, ψ backbone torsions
as correlated. If ﬁfty bins for each torsion were used (as
should be done according to the discussion below), then
there would be 504 = 6, 250, 000 multi-dimensional bins
to populate, which is simply not feasible.

The method used in this report relies on simple his-
tograms for all degrees of freedom (in principle, with

The most important advantage to binning all coordi-
nates independently is that a large portion of conforma-

tional space becomes available to the reference ensemble
(as compared to including any correlations between co-
ordinates). Since coordinates for the reference structures
are drawn randomly and independently, it is possible to
generate reference structures that are in entirely diﬀerent
energy basins than those in the physical ensemble. It is
thus possible to overcome the inadequacies of the physical
ensemble by binning internal coordinates independently,
and so for the molecular systems in this report we al-
ways internal coordinates independently. The optimal
(presumably) limited use of correlations will be consid-
ered in future work.

Regardless of the degree of correlations included in
Uref , the ﬁnal results fully include correlations in the
physical potential Uphys.

Generation of the reference ensemble

Once the histograms are constructed and populated
using the physical ensemble, the reference ensemble is
generated. To generate a single reference structure, for
each coordinate one chooses a histogram bin according
to the probability associated with that bin. Then a co-
ordinate value is chosen at random uniformly within the
bin according the Jacobian factor in Eq. (3). Repeat the
process for every degree of freedom in the system. Once
every coordinate in the system has been determined, the
entire process is repeated, generating as many reference
structures as desired (i.e., the reference ensemble).

Note that, unlike the typical case for molecular me-
chanics simulation, we sample the reference ensemble
“perfectly”—there is no possibility of being trapped in
a local basin. By construction, since all coordinate val-
ues are generated exactly according to the reference dis-
tributions, the reference ensemble can only suﬀer from
statistical (but not systematic) error.

The reference energy

The reference potential energy consistent with the pre-
viously described approach to generating the reference
ensemble, is simply given by

Uref (~x) = −kBT ln P (~x),

(4)

where P (~x) is the probability of choosing a particular
conﬁguration (or histogram bins). For example, if all
coordinates are binned as independent, then

P (~x) =

Pi(xi),

(5)

Ncoords

Yi=1

3

Histogram from simulation

Physical potential energy Uphys

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

0

Reference energy Uref

2

4

6
Coordinate

8

10

12

FIG. 1: Depiction of how the reference potential energy Uref is
calculated for a one-coordinate system. First the coordinate
is binned, creating a histogram (shown in black) populated
according to the physical ensemble. Then Eq. (4) is used to
calculate reference energies for each coordinate bin (shown in
red). A possible physical potential is shown in blue for com-
parison to Uref . For a multi-coordinate system Uref would be
the sum of the single-coordinate reference potential energies.

nate, and there are Ncoords degrees of freedom in the sys-
tem. If all coordinates are binned as parwise correlated,
then

P (~x) =

Pij (xi, xj),

(6)

Y{i,j}

where Pij (xi, xj) is the probability of choosing two par-
ticular coordinate values from the two-dimensional his-
togram for these coordinates. It is also possible to use
an arbitrary combination of independent and correlated
coordinates—so long as each coordinate occurs in only
one P factor.

We emphasize that the ﬁnal computed free energy val-
ues include all correlations embodied in the true potential
Uphys. This is true regardless of whether or how coordi-
nates are correlated in the reference potential.

A schematic of how Uref

is computed for a one-
coordinate system is shown in Fig. 1. The coordinate
histogram is ﬁrst determined (shown in black) using a
simulation trajectory, then Eq. (4) is used to calculate
Uref (shown in red). A possible physical potential is also
included (shown in blue) for comparison to Uref . For a
system containing many degrees of freedom, the process
is carried out for every coordinate, and Uref is the sum
of all the single-coordinate reference energies, consistent
with Eqs. (4) and (5).

The free energy of the reference system can now be

calculated via the reference partition function

Zref =

Z

d~x e−βUref (~x) =

d~x P (~x).

(7)

Z

where Pi(xi) is the probability of choosing a particular
coordinate value from the histogram for the ith coordi-

In practice, we normalize the histogram for each coordi-
nate to one independently by summing over all histogram

bins. So, for a particular bond length r1, that is binned
as independent, using Eq. (3) we deﬁne ξ = r3
1/3, and
then

Zξ =

dξ P (ξ) =

∆ξ P (ξ) = 1,

(8)

Z

XNbin

where ∆ξ is the histogram bin size, and Nbin is the num-
ber of bins in the r1 histogram. Similar relationships are
used for all coordinates. Thus the reference free energy
Fref = 0 and Eq. (2) becomes

Fphys = ∆Fref→phys

(Fref ≡ 0)

(9)

Calculation of the absolute free energy

We

calculate Fphys=∆Fref→phys using Bennett’s
method, which eﬀectively utilizes both physical and ref-
erence ensembles. Speciﬁcally, Bennett’s identity is given
by [27]

Nref

Xi=1 (cid:16)
Nphys

Xj=1 (cid:16)

1 + eβ

η+Uphys−Uref −Fphys
(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:17)

−1

=

−1

,

(cid:1)(cid:17)

1 + eβ

−η+Uref −Uphys+Fphys
(cid:0)

(10)

where Nref and Nphys represent the number of structures
in the reference and physical ensemble respectively, and
η = 1/β log(Nref /Nphys). The energy function Uref uses
Eq. (4) and Uphys is the physical potential energy func-
tion used in the simulation (i.e., the forceﬁeld) which
may also include implicit solvation energies. Since Fphys
occurs on both sides of Eq. (10), the equation must be
solved in an iterative fashion. Eq. (10) has been shown
to be the optimal use of “bi-directional” free energy data
in several studies [5, 28, 29, 30, 31].

In summary, the method is implemented by ﬁrst con-
structing properly normalized histograms for all internal
(or Cartesian) coordinates based on a physical ensem-
ble of structures. An ensemble of reference structures is
then chosen at random from the histograms. The refer-
ence energy (Uref of Eq. (4)) and physical energy (Uphys
from the forceﬁeld) must be calculated for each structure
in both the physical and reference ensembles—i.e., the
CPU cost of the method, above that of the equilibrium
simulation, is one energy evaluation for each of the Nref
reference structures, plus the less expensive cost of gener-
ating reference structures. Finally, both the physical and
reference ensembles are utilized in Eq. (10) to calculate
the desired absolute free energy of the system of interest.

RESULTS

To test the eﬀectiveness of the reference system method
we ﬁrst estimated the absolute free energy for three test

4

Exact
System
-1.1443 -1.1444 (0.0005)
two-dimensional single-well [32]
two-dimensional double-well [32] 5.4043 5.4059 (0.0003)
10.948 (0.001)
Methane molecule

Estimate

10.943

TABLE I: Absolute free energy estimates obtained using our
reference system for cases where the absolute free energy can
be determined exactly. In all cases, the estimate is in excellent
agreement with the exact free energy. The uncertainty, shown
in parentheses (e.g., 3.14 (0.05) = 3.14±0.05), is the standard
deviation from ﬁve independent simulations. The results for
the two-dimensional systems are in kBT units and methane
results have units of kcal/mole. The table shows estimates of
the conﬁgurational integral Zc in Eq. (1), i.e., the constant
term is not included in the estimate.

systems where the free energy is known exactly. We chose
the two-dimensional potentials from reference [32], and
a methane molecule in vacuum. Finally, we used the
method to estimate the absolute free energies of the alpha
and beta conformations of the 50-atom leucine dipeptide
(ACE-(leu)2-NME), and compared the free energy diﬀer-
ence obtained via our method with an independent esti-
mate. In all cases, the free energy estimate computed by
our approach is in excellent agreement with independent
results.

Simple test systems

Table I shows the results of the method applied to test
systems of varying complexity where the exact free ener-
gies can be determined analytically or numerically. We
used the two-dimensional single and double-well poten-
tials from Ref. [32],

U single
phys (x, y) = (x + 2)2 + y2,

U double
phys

(x, y) =

((x − 1)2 − y2)2 + 10(x2 − 5)2

1
10 n

+(x + y)4 + (x − y)4

. (11)

o

We then extended the method to molecular systems
by predicting the absolute free energy for a methane
molecule in vacuum. Absolute free energy estimates were
obtained using Bennett’s method, Eq. (10).

Table I shows the excellent agreement between the
reference system estimates and the exact free energies
(obtained analytically) for the two-dimensional poten-
tials used in this study, Eq. (11). The simulations used
Metropolis Monte Carlo with kBT = 1.0 and one million
snapshots in the physical and reference ensembles. For
all two-dimensional simulations, both coordinates were
treated with full correlations—i.e., two-dimensional his-
tograms were used—and the bin sizes were chosen such
that the number of bins ranged from 100-1000. The er-
ror shown in Tab. I in parentheses is the standard devia-

tion from ﬁve independent estimates using ﬁve separate
physical ensembles—and thus ﬁve diﬀerent reference sys-
tems. Good estimates were also obtained using fewer
snapshots—e.g., we obtained F = −1.139 (0.002) for
the single-well potential and F = 5.412 (0.004) for the
double-well potential using 10,000 snapshots in both the
physical and reference ensembles.

Table I also shows the excellent agreement between
the reference system estimates and the exact value of
the free energy for methane in vacuum. Methane trajec-
tories were generated using TINKER 4.2 [33] with the
OPLS-AA forceﬁeld [34]. The temperature was main-
tained at 300.0 K using Langevin dynamics with a fric-
tion coeﬃcient of 91.0 ps−1 and a time step of 0.5 fs. The
physical ensemble was created by generating ﬁve 10.0 ns
trajectories with a snapshot saved every 0.1 ps. Using
the 100,000 methane structures in the physical ensemble,
the absolute free energy was estimated via our reference
system method by binning internal coordinates into his-
tograms and then generating 100,000 structures for the
reference ensemble. All coordinates were binned as in-
dependent using ﬁfty bins per coordinate, thus only one-
dimensional histograms were required. The uncertainty
shown in parenthesis in Tab. I is the standard deviation
from ﬁve independent estimates using the ﬁve separate
methane trajectories—and thus ﬁve diﬀerent reference
systems.

Methane was chosen as a test system because intra-
molecular interactions are due only to bond lengths and
angles. In the OPLS-AA forceﬁeld no non-bonded terms
are present in the potential energy Uphys, and thus the
exact absolute free energy can be computed numerically
without great diﬃculty. For methane a conﬁguration is
determined by four bond lengths, which are independent
of each other and all other coordinates in the forceﬁeld,
and ﬁve bond angles which are correlated to one another
but not to the bond lengths. Thus the exact partition
function Zmeth is a product of four bond length partition
functions Zr and one angular partition function Zθ,

Zmeth = Z 4

r Zθ,

Zr =

dr e−βUphys(r),

∞

Z

−∞

Zθ =

dθ1dθ2dθ3dθ4dθ5 e−βUphys(θ1,θ2,θ3,θ4,θ5). (12)

π

Z
0

Uphys(r) is harmonic and thus Zr was computed an-
alytically using parameters from the forceﬁeld. For
Uphys(θ1, θ2, θ3, θ4, θ5) the correlations between angles
must be taken into account, thus Zθ was estimated
numerically using TINKER to evaluate Uphys
in the
ﬁve-dimensional
integral. We found that Fmeth =
−(1/β) ln Zmeth = 10.943 kcal/mol as shown in Tab. I.

Methane was also used to show that the method cor-
rectly computes the free energy even when the physical
In our studies we
ensemble is incorrect or incomplete.

12

11.5

11

 
s
y
h
p

)
l
o
m

/
l
a
c
k
(

F

 
,
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
e
e
r
F

5

Nref = Nphys = 10,000

Nref = Nphys = 100,000

10.5

Exact F

Methane results

10

10

100

1000

Number of histogram bins, Nbin

FIG. 2: Absolute free energy for methane estimated by the
reference system method as a function of the number of his-
togram bins used for each degree of freedom. The plot shows
the “sweet spot” where histogram bins are small enough to
reveal histogram features, yet large enough to give suﬃcient
population in each bin. The results are shown with a ver-
tical scale of two kcal/mol and on a log scale to emphasize
the wide range of bin sizes that produce excellent results for
the reference system approach. Results shown were obtained
using Bennett’s equality (10) for a methane molecule using
Nphys = Nref = 10, 000 (blue) and Nphys = Nref = 100, 000
(green). The black line shows the exact free energy and the
errorbars are the standard deviations of ﬁve independent tri-
als. The plot demonstrates at least ﬁfty bins should be used
for each coordinate, and that the maximum number of bins
depends on the number of snapshots in the physical ensemble.

found that the correct free energy is obtained using our
method even when the histogram for each coordinate was
assumed to be ﬂat, i.e., without the use of a physical en-
semble (data not shown).

Choosing the size of the histogram bins is an impor-
tant consideration. Figure 2 shows the large “sweet spot”
where bins are large enough to be well populated, and
yet small enough to reveal histogram features. The ﬁg-
ure shows results from a methane molecule using Ben-
nett’s equality (10) for a methane molecule using Nphys =
Nref = 10, 000 (blue) and Nphys = Nref = 100, 000
(green). The vertical scale is two kcal/mol and the hor-
izontal scale is logarithmic to emphasize that there is
a wide range of bin sizes that produce excellent results
for the reference system approach. Error bars are the
standard deviation of ﬁve independent simulations. The
black line shows the exact free energy and the curves
are free energy estimates, using Bennett’s equality Eq.
(10) as a function of the number of bins used for the
histograms for all degrees of freedom. From this plot
it is clear that one should choose at least ﬁfty bins,
and that the maximum number of bins that should be
used depends on the number of snapshots in the physi-
cal ensemble—more snapshots in the physical ensemble
means one can use more bins for the reference system.

System
Falpha
Fbeta
∆Falpha→beta

Estimate (kcal/mol) Independent Estimate

91.86 (0.04)
91.01 (0.02)
-0.85 (0.05)

—
—
-0.80 (0.08)

TABLE II: Absolute free energy estimates of the alpha
(Falpha) and beta (Fbeta) conformations obtained using the
reference system method for leucine dipeptide with GBSA
solvation, in units of kcal/mol. The reference-system-based
estimate is in excellent agreement with the independent mea-
surement for the free energy diﬀerence obtained via a 1.0 µs
unconstrained simulation. The uncertainty for the absolute
free energies, shown in parentheses, is the standard deviation
from ﬁve independent 10.0 ns leucine dipeptide simulations.
The uncertainty for the free energy diﬀerences is obtained
by using every possible combination of Falpha and Fbeta, i.e.,
twenty-ﬁve independent estimates. The table shows estimates
of the conﬁgurational integral Zc in Eq. (1), i.e., the constant
term is not included in the estimate.

Leucine dipeptide

Table II shows the agreement for leucine dipep-
tide (ACE-(leu)2-NME) between the free energy diﬀer-
ence ∆Falpha→beta as predicted by the reference sys-
tem method, and as predicted via long simulation. The
leucine dipeptide physical ensembles were generated us-
ing TINKER 4.2 [33] with the OPLS-AA forceﬁeld [34].
The temperature was maintained at 500.0 K (to en-
able an independent ∆F estimate via repeated cross-
ing of the free energy barrier between alpha and beta
conﬁgurations), using Langevin dynamics with a fric-
tion coeﬃcient of 5.0 ps−1. GBSA [35] implicit sol-
vation was used, and RATTLE was utilized to main-
tain all bonds involving hydrogens at their ideal lengths
[26] allowing the use of a 2.0 fs time step. We calcu-
lated the absolute free energies of the alpha and beta
conformations by generating ﬁve 10.0 ns trajectories
with constrained backbone torsions, namely, for alpha:
−105 < φ < −45 and − 70 < ψ < −10; and for beta:
−125 < φ < −65 and 120 < ψ < 180. Free energy
estimates were then obtained via our method using the
100,000 simulated snapshots in each trajectory and by
generating 1,000,000 structures for the reference ensem-
ble for each estimate. All one-hundred ﬁfteen (excludes
bond lengths constrained by RATTLE [26]) internal co-
ordinates were binned as independent with ﬁfty bins for
each coordinate. The uncertainty shown in parenthe-
sis is the standard deviation from the ﬁve independent
estimates using the ﬁve separate trajectories, i.e., ﬁve
diﬀerent physical ensembles and ﬁve diﬀerent reference
systems.

Since independent estimates of the absolute free en-
ergies of the alpha and beta conformations of leucine
dipeptide are not available, we calculated the free energy
diﬀerence ∆Falpha→beta = −0.80 (0.08) kcal/mol via a

6

1.0 µs unconstrained simulation. The uncertainty of the
independent estimate was obtained using block averages.
The temperature was chosen to be 500.0 K which allowed
around 1500 crossings of the free energy barrier between
the alpha and beta conformations, providing an accurate
independent estimate. As can be seen in Tab. II, our
estimated free energy diﬀerence is in excellent agreement
with the independent value obtained via long simulation.

EXTENSION TO LARGER PEPTIDES AND
PROTEINS

While the initial results of our reference system method
are very promising, a naive implementation of the
method will ﬁnd diﬃculty with large proteins (as do
all absolute and relative free energy methods). For our
method, the diﬃculty with including a very large num-
ber of degrees of freedom is due to the fact that, if one
does not treat all correlations in the backbone, then steric
clashes will occur frequently when generating the refer-
ence ensemble.

However, it is possible to extend the method to larger
peptides, still include all degrees of freedom, and bin
all coordinates independently (important for broaden-
ing conﬁgurational space, as discussed above), by using
a “segmentation” technique motivated by earlier work
[36, 37]. Consider generating reference structures for
a ten-residue peptide in the alpha helix conformation.
Due to the large number of backbone torsions, most of
the reference structures chosen at random will not be
energetically favorable. However, if one breaks the pep-
tide into two pieces, then one can generate many struc-
tures for each segment, and only “keep” segment struc-
tures with energies below some threshold. Then the low
energy segment structures may be joined to form full
structures which are reasonably likely to have low en-
ergy. For example, if one generates 105 structures for
each of the two segments and ﬁnds that 103 of those
have energies below some threshold, then one only need
evaluate 103 × 103 = 106 full structures out of a possi-
ble 105 × 105 = 1010. It is important to note that while
the 1010 − 106 high energy structures are not explicitly
evaluated, roughly speaking, they are assumed to have
Uref = ∞ when computing the free energy via Eq. (10).
A statisically correct segmentation strategy is currently
being investigated by the authors for use in large pep-
tides.

Another strategy which may prove useful for larger
proteins is to use the reference system method with multi-
stage simulation. Multi-stage simulation requires the in-
troduction of a hybrid potential energy parameterized by
λ, e.g.,

Uλ = λUphys + (1 − λ)Uref .

(13)

Thus, U0 = Uref and U1 = Uphys. Simulations are per-

formed using the hybrid potential energy Uλ (and thus a
hybrid forceﬁeld, if using molecular dynamics) at inter-
mediate λ values between 0 and 1. Conventional free en-
ergy methods such as thermodynamic integration or free
energy perturbation can then be used to obtain Fphys.

We also believe that including correlations, in ways
other than the simple approach embodied in Eq. (6), may
be useful. This also will be explored in future work. (We
also remind the reader that the ﬁnal free energy value
includes the full correlations in Uphys, regardless of Uref .)

QUALITY OF THE PHYSICAL ENSEMBLE

Since the reference ensemble is generated by drawing
at random from histograms which, in turn, were gener-
ated from the physical ensemble, a natural question to
ask is: how complete does the physical ensemble need
to be? The surprising answer is that, for our reference
system method, the physical ensemble does not need to
be complete, or even correct (properly distributed), as
can be seen by noting that Eqs. (2) and (9) are valid
for arbitrary reference systems. In our reference system
approach the convergence of the free energy estimate to
the correct value is guaranteed, in the limit of inﬁnite
sampling (Nref → ∞), regardless of the quality of the
reference ensemble. In cases where the physical ensem-
ble is poor, one would expect that the reference ensemble
should be large (Nref ≫ Nphys) in order that the Bennett
relation (10) weights the reference ensemble more heavily.
For methane it was possible to obtain the correct free en-
ergy based on 10,000 reference structures even when the
histogram for each coordinate was assumed to be ﬂat, i.e.,
without the use of a physical ensemble (data not shown).
Given the fact that the physical ensemble need not
be correct, it is easy to imagine a modiﬁed method that
does not require simulation, but instead populates the
histogram bins using the “bare” potential for each in-
ternal coordinate (e.g., Gaussian histograms for bond
lengths and angles). Of course, the conformational state
must be deﬁned explicitly, with upper and lower limits for
coordinates. Allowed ranges for the torsions (especially
φ, ψ) are naturally obtainable via, e.g., Ramachandran
propensities (e.g., [38]), and reasonable ranges for bond
lengths and angles could be chosen to be, e.g., several
standard deviations from the mean.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have introduced and tested a simple
method for calculating absolute free energies in molec-
ular systems. The approach relies on the construction
of an ensemble of reference structures (i.e., the reference
system) that is constructed to have high overlap with the
system of interest. The method was ﬁrst shown to repro-

7

duce exactly computable absolute free energies for simple
systems, and then used to correctly predict the stability
of leucine dipeptide conformations using all one-hundred
ﬁfteen degrees of freedom.

Some strengths of the approach are that: (i) the refer-
ence system is built to have good overlap with the system
of interest by using internal coordinates and by using a
single equilibrium ensemble from Monte Carlo or molec-
ular dynamics; (ii) the absolute free energy estimate is
guaranteed to converge to the correct value, whether or
not the physical ensemble is complete and, in fact, it is
possible to estimate the absolute free energy without the
use of a physical ensemble; (iii) the method explicitly
includes all degrees of freedom employed in the simula-
tion; (iv) the reference system need only be numerically
computable, i.e., the exact analytic result is not needed;
and (v) the method can be trivially extended to include
the use of multi-stage simulation. The CPU cost of the
approach, beyond generating the physical ensemble, is
one energy call for each reference structure, plus the less
expensive cost of generating the reference ensemble.

In the present report, our method was used to study
conformational equilibria; however we feel that the sim-
plicity and ﬂexibility of the method will ﬁnd broad use
in computational biophysics and biochemistry for a wide
variety of free energy problems. We have also described
a segmentation strategy, currently being pursued, to use
the approach in much larger systems.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Edward Ly-
man, Ronald White, Srinath Cheluvarajah and Hagai
Meirovitch for many fruitful discussions.

[1] A. Grossﬁeld, P. Ren, and J. W. Ponder, J. Am. Chem.

[2] J. W. Pitera and W. F. van Gunsteren, J. Phys. Chem.

Soc. 125, 15671 (2003).

B 105, 11264 (2001).

[3] S. B. Singh, Ajay, D. E. Wemmer, and P. A. Kollman,

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA) 91, 7673 (1994).

[4] B. C. Oostenbrink, J. W. Pitera, M. M. van Lipzip,
J. H. N. Meerman, and W. F. van Gunsteren, J. Med.
Chem. 43, 4594 (2000).

[5] F. M. Ytreberg and D. M. Zuckerman, J. Phys. Chem. B

[6] B. K. Shoichet, Nature 432, 862 (2004).
[7] J. Y. Trosset and H. A. Scheraga, J. Comput. Chem. 20,

109, 9096 (2005).

412 (1999).

[8] R. W. Zwanzig, J. Chem. Phys. 22, 1420 (1954).
[9] D. Beveridge and F. DiCapua, Ann. Rev. Biophys. Bio-

phys. Chem. 18, 431 (1989).

[10] W. L. Jorgensen and C. Ravimohan, J. Chem. Phys. 83,

3050 (1985).

8

[11] W. Yang, R. Bitetti-Putzer, and M. Karplus, J. Chem.

[25] C. E. Chang and M. K. Gilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126,

Phys. 120, 2618 (2004).

13156 (2004).

[12] J. A. McCammon, Curr. Opin. Struc. Bio. 2, 96 (1991).
[13] W. G. Hoover, S. G. Gray, and K. W. Johnson, J. Chem.

Phys. 55, 1128 (1971).

[26] H. C. Andersen, J. Comput. Phys. 52, 24 (1983).
[27] C. H. Bennett, J. Comput. Phys. 22, 245 (1976).
[28] M. R. Shirts and V. S. Pande, J. Chem. Phys. 122,

[14] D. Frenkel and A. J. C. Ladd, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 3188

144107 (2005).

(1984).

(1967).

3573 (2000).

(1990).

101, 9241 (2004).

101, 9235 (2004).

054903 (2004).

[15] W. G. Hoover and F. H. Ree, J. Chem. Phys. 47, 4873

Rev. Lett. 91, 140601 (2003).

[16] L. M. Amon and W. P. Reinhardt, J. Chem. Phys. 113,

[29] M. R. Shirts, E. Bair, G. Hooker, and V. S. Pande, Phys.

[30] G. E. Crooks, Phys. Rev. E 61, 2361 (2000).
[31] N. Lu, D. A. Kofke, and T. B. Woolf, J. Comput. Chem.

25, 28 (2004).

120, 10876 (2004).

[17] J. P. Stoessel and P. Nowak, Macromolecules 23, 1961

[32] F. M. Ytreberg and D. M. Zuckerman, J. Chem. Phys.

[18] S. Cheluvaraja and H. Meirovitch, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

[33] J. W. Ponder and F. M. Richard, J. Comput. Chem. 8,

[19] R. P. White and H. Meirovitch, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

[34] W. L. Jorgensen, D. S. Maxwell, and J. Tirado-Rives, J.

[20] S. Cheluvaraja and H. Meirovitch, J. Chem. Phys. 1022,

[35] W. C. Still, A. Tempczyk, and R. C. Hawley, J. Am.

1016 (1987), http://dasher.wustl.edu/tinker/.

Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 11225 (1996).

Chem. Soc. 112, 6127 (1990).

[21] M. S. Head, J. A. Given, , and M. K. Gilson, J. Phys.

[36] K. D. Gibson and H. A. Scheraga, J. Comput. Chem. 8,

Chem. A 101, 1609 (1997).

826 (1987).

[22] M. K. Gilson, J. A. Given, B. L. Bush, and J. A. Mc-

[37] A. R. Leach, K. Prout, and D. P. Dolata, J. Comput.

Cammon, Biophys. J. 72, 1047 (1997).

Aid. Mol. Des. 2, 107 (1988).

[23] M. Karplus and J. N. Kushick, Macromolecules 14, 325

[24] J. Carlsson and J. Aqvist, J. Phys. Chem. B 109, 6448

[38] S. C. Lovell, I. W. Davis, W. B. Arendall III, P. I. W.
de Bakker, J. M. Word, M. G. Prisant, J. S. Richardson,
and D. C. Richardson, Proteins 50, 437 (2003).

(1981).

(2005).

