5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PHYSICS of TRANSPORT and TRAFFIC PHENOMENA in BIOLOGY:
from molecular motors and cells to organisms

Debashish Chowdhury∗,1 Andreas Schadschneider†,2 and Katsuhiro Nishinari‡3
1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, India.
2Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Cologne, D-50937 K¨oln, Germany.
3Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Faculty of Engineering,
University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.
(Dated: December 3, 2011)

Traﬃc-like collective movements are observed at almost all levels of biological systems. Molecular
motor proteins like, for example, kinesin and dynein, which are the vehicles of almost all intra-
cellular transport in eukayotic cells, sometimes encounter traﬃc jam that manifests as a disease
of the organism. Similarly, traﬃc jam of collagenase MMP-1, which moves on the collagen ﬁbrils
of the extracellular matrix of vertebrates, has also been observed in recent experiments. Traﬃc-
like movements of social insects like ants and termites on trails are, perhaps, more familiar in our
everyday life. Experimental, theoretical and computational investigations in the last few years
have led to a deeper understanding of the generic or common physical principles involved in these
phenomena. In particular, some of the methods of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, pioneered
almost a hundred years ago by Einstein, Langevin and others, turned out to be powerful theoretical
tools for quantitaive analysis of models of these traﬃc-like collective phenomena as these systems
are intrinsically far from equilibrium. In this review we critically examine the current status of our
understanding, expose the limitations of the existing methods, mention open challenging questions
and speculate on the possible future directions of research in this interdisciplinary area where physics
meets not only chemistry and biology but also (nano-)technology.

PACS numbers: 45.70.Vn, 02.50.Ey, 05.40.-a

I.

INTRODUCTION

Motility is the hallmark of life. From intracellular molecular transport and crawling of amoebae to the swimming
of ﬁsh and ﬂight of birds, movement is one of life’s central attributes. All these ”motile” elements generate the forces
required for their movements by actively converting some other forms of energy into mechanical energy. However, in
this review we are interested in a special type of collective movement of these motile elements. What distinguishes
a traﬃc-like movement from all other forms of movements is that traﬃc ﬂow takes place on “tracks” and “trails”
(like those for trains and street cars or like roads and highways for motor vehicles) for the movement of the motile
elements. From now onwards, the term “element” will mean the motile element under consideration.

We are mainly interested in the general principles and common trends seen in the mathematical modeling of
collective traﬃc-like movements at diﬀerent levels of biological organization. We begin at the lowest level, starting
with intracellular biomolecular motor traﬃc on ﬁlamentary rails and end our review by discussing the collective
movements of social insects (like, for example, ants and termites) and vertebrates on trails. Some examples of motile
elements and the corresponding tracks are shown in ﬁg.1.

A. Diﬀerent types of traﬃc in biology

Now we shall give a few examples of the traﬃc-like collective phenomena in biology to emphasize some dynamical
features of the tracks which makes biological traﬃc phenomena more exotic as compared to vehicular traﬃc. In any
modern society, the most common traﬃc phenomenon is that of vehicular traﬃc. The changes in the roads and
highway networks take place over periods of years (depending on the availability of funds) whereas a vehicle takes
a maximum of a few hours for a single journey. Therefore, for all practical purposes, the roads can be taken to be
independent of time while studying the ﬂow of vehicular traﬃc. In sharp contrast, the tracks and trails, which are

∗ E-mail: debch@iitk.ac.in (Corresponding author)
† E-mail: as@thp.uni-koeln.de
‡ E-mail: tknishi@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

2

FIG. 1: Examples of motile elements and the corresponding tracks.

the biological analogs of roads, can have nontrivial dependence on time during the typical travel time of the motile
elements. We give a few examples of such traﬃc.

Time-dependent track whose length and shape can be aﬀected by the motile element: Microtubules, a class of
•
ﬁlamentary proteins, serve as tracks for two superfamilies of motor proteins called kinesins and dyneins [1, 2, 3].
Interestingly, microtubules are known to exhibit an unusual polymerization-depolymerization dynamics even in the
absence of motor proteins. Moreover, in some circumstances, the motor proteins interact with the microtubule tracks
so as to inﬂuence their length as well as shape; one such situation arises during cell division (the process is called
mitosis).

Time-dependent trail created and maintained by the motile element: A DNA helicase [4, 5] unwinds a double-
•
stranded DNA and uses one of the single strands thus opened as the track for its own translocation. Ants are known
to create the trails by dropping a chemical which is generically called pheromone [6]. Since the pheromone gradually
evaporates, the ants keep reinforcing the trail in order to maintain the trail networks.

Time-dependent track destroyed by the motile element: A class of enzymes, called MMP-1, degrades their tracks

•
formed by collagen ﬁbrils [7, 8].

Our aim is to present a critical overview of the common trends in the mathematical modelling of these traﬃc-like
phenomena. Although the choice of the physical examples and modelling strategies are biased by our own works and
experiences, we put these in a broader perspective by relating these with works of other research groups.

This review is organized as follows: the general physical principles and the methods of modelling traﬃc-like collective
phenomena are discussed in sections II-VI while speciﬁc examples are presented in the remaining sections. A summary
of the various theoretical approaches followed so far in given in section II. The totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process (TASEP), which lies at the foundation of the theoretical formalism that we have used successfully in most of
our own works so far, has been described separately in section III. The Brownian ratchet mechanism, an idealized
generic mechanism of directed, albeit noisy, movement of single molecular motors, is explained in section IV. Traﬃc
of ribosomes, a class of nucleotide-based motors, is considered in section V. Intracellular traﬃc of cytoskeletal motors
is discussed in detail in section VI while those of matrix metalloproteases in the extra-cellular matrix is summarized
in section VII. Models of traﬃc of cells, ants and humans on trails are sketched in sections VIII, IX and X. The main
conclusions regarding the common trends of modelling the traﬃc-like collective phenomena in diverse systems over a
wide range of length scales are summarized in section XI.

II. DIFFERENT TYPES OF THEORETICAL APPROACHES

First of all, the theoretical approaches can be broadly divided into two categories: (I) “Individual-based” and (II)
“Population-based”. The individual-based models describe the dynamics of the individual elements explicitly. Just
as “microscopic” models of matter are formulated in terms of molecular constituents, the individual-based models
of transport are also developed in terms of the constituent elements. Therefore, the individual-based models are
often referred to as “microscopic” models. In contrast, in the population-based models individual elements do not
appear explicitly and, instead, one considers only the population densities (i.e., number of individual elements per

unit area or per unit volume). The spatio-temporal organization of the elements are emergent collective properties
that are determined by the responses of the individuals to their local environments and the local interactions among
the individual elements. Therefore, in order to gain a deep understanding of the collective phenomena, it is essential
to investigate the linkages between these two levels of biological organization.

Usually, but not necessarily, space and time are treated as continua in the population-based models and partial
diﬀerential equations (PDEs) or integro-diﬀerential equations are written down for the time-dependent local collective
densities of the elements. The individual-based models have been formulated following both continuum and discrete
approaches. In the continuum formulation of the Lagrangian models, diﬀerential equations describe the individual
trajectories of the elements.

Suppose ρ(~x, t) is the local density of the population of the motile elements at the coarse-grained location ~x at time

t. If the elements are conserved, one can write down an equation of continuity for ρ(~x, t):

A. Population-based approaches

∂ρ
∂t

+ ~

~J = 0.

∇ ·

where ~J is the current density corresponding to the population density ρ. In addition, depending on the nature of
the motile elements and their environment, it may be possible to write an analogue of the Navier-Stokes equation for
the local dynamical variable ~v(~x, t). However, in this review we shall focus almost exclusively on works carried out
following individual-based approaches.

B.

Individual-based approaches

•

For developing an individual-based model, one must ﬁrst specify the state of each individual element. The dynamical
laws governing the time-evolution of the system must predict the state of the system at a time t + ∆t, given the
corresponding state at time t. The change of state should reﬂect the response of the system in terms of movement of
the individual elements.
Langevin equation:
One possible framework for the mathematical formulation of such models is the deterministic Newton’s equations
for individual elements; each element is modelled as a “particle” subjected to some “eﬀective forces” arising out of
its interaction with the other elements. In addition, the elements may also experience viscous drag and some random
forces (“noise”) that may be caused by the surrounding medium. In that case, instead of the Newton’s equation,
one can use a Langevin equation [9]. In case the element is an organism that can think and take decision, capturing
inter-element interaction via eﬀective forces becomes a diﬃcult problem.

For a particle of mass M and instantaneous velocity v, the Langevin equation describing its motion in one-

dimensional space is written as

where Fext is the external force acting on the particle, and Fbr(t) is the random force (noise) while the second term
on the right hand side represents the viscous drag on the particle. In order that the average velocity satisﬁes the
Newton equation for a particle in a viscous medium, we further assume that

M

dv
dt

= Fext −

Γv + Fbr(t)

ξ(t)
i
h

= 0.

ξ(t)ξ(t′)
i
h

= 2DT δ(t

t′)

−

and

where, ξ = Fbr/M and, at this level of description, D is a phenomenological parameter. The prefactor 2 on the right
hand side of equation (4) has been chosen for convenience.

An alternative, but equivalent approach is to write down what is now generally referred to as a Fokker-Planck
equation [10]. In this approach, one deals with a deterministic partial diﬀerential equation for a probability density.
~r0, ~v0) be the conditional probability that, at time t, the motile element is located at ~r
For example, suppose P (~r, ~v; t
|

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

4

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

and has velocity ~v, given that its initial (i.e., at time t = 0) position and velocity were ~r0, ~v0. Since the total probability
integrated over all space and all velocities is conserved (i.e,, does not change with time), the probability density P
satisﬁes an equation of continuity. The probability current density gets contribution not only from a diﬀusive motion
of the motile elements but also a drift caused by the external force.

Often it turns out that real forces (i.e., forces arising from real physical interactions) alone cannot account for the
observed dynamics of the motile elements; in such situations, “social forces” have been incorporated in the equation
of motion [11, 12]. However, a priori justiﬁcation of the forms of such social forces is extremely diﬃcult. It is also
worth pointing out that, in contrast to passive Brownian particles, the motile agents are active Brownian particles
[13].

•

Hybrid approaches:
Suppose a set of “particles”, each of which represents a motile element, move in a potential ﬁeld U [σ(x)], where the
potential at any arbitrary location x is determined by the local density σ(x) of the molecules of a chemical used by
the elements for communication among themselves. In the case of ants, for example, such chemicals are generically
called “pheromone”. Consequently, each “particle” experiences an “inertial”force ~F (x) =
U (x). Each “particle” is
also assumed to be subjected to a “frictional force” where “friction” merely parametrizes the tendency of an element
to continue in a given direction: a smaller “friction” implies that the element’s velocity persists for a longer time in
a given direction. The motion for the “particles” is assumed to be governed by the Langevin equation

−∇

where η(t) is a Gaussian white noise with the statistical properties

and

¨x =

γ ˙x

U [σ(x)] + η(t)

−

− ∇

η(t)
i
h

= 0

η(t)η(t′)
i
h

=

δ(t

1
β

t′)

−

The strength 1/β of the noise determines the degree of determinacy with which the particle would follow the gradient
of the local potential; the larger the value of β the stronger is the tendency of the particle to follow the potential
gradient.

Thus, the movement of an element may be described as the noisy motion of a particle in an “energy landscape”.
However, this energy landscape is not static but evolves in response to the motion of the particle as each particle
drops a chemical signal (pheromone) at its own location at a rate g per unit time. Assuming that pheromone can
diﬀuse in space with a diﬀusion constant D and evaporate at a rate κ, the equation governing the pheromone ﬁeld,
in one-dimension, is given by

where ρ(x) is the local density of the particles at x. In order to proceed further, one has to assume a speciﬁc form of
the function U [σ(x)]; one possible form assumed in the case of ants [14] is

∂σ(x, t)
∂t

∂2σ(x, t)

= D

∂x2 + gρ(x)

−

κσ(x, t)

U [σ(x)] =

ln

1 +

−

(cid:18)

σ
1 + δσ (cid:19)

•

where 1/δ is called the capacity.
Stochastic cellular automata:
Numerical solution of the Newton-like or Langevin-like equations require discretization of both space and time.
Therefore, the alternative discrete formulations may be used from the beginning. In recent years many individual-
based models, however, have been formulated on discretized space and the temporal evolution of the system in discrete
time steps are prescribed as dynamical update rules using the language of cellular automata (CA) [15, 16] or lattice
gas (LG) [17]. Since each of the individual elements may be regarded as an agent, the CA and LG models are someties
also referred to as agent-based models [18]. There are some further advantages in modeling biological systems with
CA and LG. Biologically, it is quite realistic to think in terms of the way each individual motile element responds
to its local environment and the series of actions they perform. The lack of detailed knowledge of these behavioral
responses is compensated by the rules of CA. Usually, it is much easier to devise a reasonable set of logic-based
rules, instead of cooking up some eﬀective force for dynamical equations, to capture the behaviour of the elements.
Moreover, because of the high speed of simulations of CA and LG, a wide range of possibilities can be explored which
would be impossible with more traditional methods based on diﬀerential equations. Most of the models we review in
this article are based on CA and LG; this modelling strategy focusses mostly on generic features of the system. One
of the most important transport properties is the relation between the ﬂux and the density of the motile elements; a
graphical representation of this relation is usually referred to as the fundamental diagram.

5

x
u
F

l

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Density

FIG. 2: Fundamental diagrams of the TASEP with periodic boundary conditions and (a) random-sequential updating (solid
curve) (b) parallel updating (dashed curve), both for p = 0.75.

III. ASYMMETRIC SIMPLE EXCLUSION PROCESSES

The asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP) [19] is a simple particle-hopping model. In the ASEP particles
can hop (with some probability or rate) from one lattice site to a neighbouring one, but only if the target site is
not already occupied by another particle. “Simple Exclusion” thus refers to the absence of multiply occupied sites.
Generically, it is assumed that the motion is “asymmetric” such that the particles have a preferred direction of motion.
For a full deﬁnition of a model, it is necessary to specify the order in which the local rule described above is to be
applied to the sites. The most common update types are random-sequential dynamics and parallel dynamics. In the
random-sequential case, sites are chosen in random order and then updated. In contrast, updating for the parallel
case is done in a synchronous manner; here all the sites are updated at once.

Most often the one-dimensional case is studied, where particles move along a linear chain of L sites. This is rather
natural for many applications, e.g. for modelling highway traﬃc [20, 21]. If motion is allowed in only one direction (e.g.
”to the right”), the corresponding model is sometimes called Totally Asymmetric Simple Exclusion Process (TASEP).
The probability of motion from site j to site j + 1 will be denoted by p; in the simplest case, where all the sites are
treated on equal footing, p is assumed to be independent of the position of the particle.

For such driven diﬀusive systems the boundary conditions turn out to be crucial. If periodic boundary conditions are
imposed, i.e., the sites 1 and L are made nearest-neibours of each other, all the sites are treated on the same footing.
For this system the fundamental diagram has been derived exactly both in the cases of parallel and random-sequential
updating rules [20]; these are shown graphically in ﬁg.2.

If the boundaries are open, then a particle can enter from a reservoir and occupy the leftmost site (j = 1), with
probability α, if this site is empty. In this system a particle that occupies the rightmost site (j = L) can exit with
probability β.

The ASEP has been studied extensively in recent years and is now well understood (see e.g. [19, 22] and references
therein). In fact its stationary state for diﬀerent dynamics can be obtained exactly [23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. It shows an
interesting phase diagram (see Fig. 3) and is the prototype for so-called boundary-induced phase transitions [28].

Fig. 3 shows the generic form of the phase diagram obtained by varying the boundary rates α and β. One can
distinguish three phase, namely (A) a low-density phase (α < β, αc(p)), (B) a high-density phase (β < α, βc(p))
and (C) a maximal-current phase (α > αc(p) and β > βc(p)). The appearance of these three phases can easily be
understood. In the low-density phase the current depends only on the input rate α. The input is less eﬃcient than
the transport in the bulk of the system or the output and therefore dominates the behaviour of the whole system. In
the high-density phase the output is the least eﬃcient part of the system. Therefore the current depends only on β.
In the maximal current phase, input and output are more eﬃcient than the transport in the bulk of the system. Here
the current has reached the largest possible value corresponding to the maximum of the fundamental diagram of the
periodic system.

Mean-ﬁeld theory [29] predicts the existence of a shock or domain wall that separates a macroscopic low-density
region at the start-end of the chain from a macroscopic high-density region at the stop-end. The exact solution [23, 24],
on the other hand, gives a linear increasing density proﬁle. These two results do not contradict each other since the

6

p

FIG. 3: Processes allowed in the ASEP (left); Phase diagram of the ASEP for parallel dynamics (right) and p = 0.75. The
insets show the typical shape of the density proﬁles in the corresponding region. The broken line indicates points with a ﬂat
density proﬁle.

sharp domain wall, due to current ﬂuctuations, performs a random walk along the lattice. The mean-ﬁeld result
therefore corresponds to a snapshot at a given time whereas the exact solution averages over all possible positions of
the shock.

In [30] a nice physical picture has been developed which explains the structure of the phase diagram not only
qualitatively, but also (at least partially) quantitatively. It remains correct even for more sophisticated models [31]. It
relates the phase boundaries to properties of the periodic system which can be derived from the fundamental diagram,
namely the so-called shock velocity vs = J(ρ+)−J(ρ
∂ρ . vs is the velocity of a
ρ+−ρ−
’domain-wall’ which in nonequilibrium systems denotes an object connecting two possible stationary states. Here
these stationary states have densities ρ+ and ρ−, respectively. The collective velocity vc describes the velocity of the
center-of-mass of a local perturbation in a homogeneous, stationary background of density ρ. The phase diagram
of the open system is then completely determined by the fundamental diagram of the periodic system through an
extremal-current principle [32] and therefore independent of the microscopic dynamics of the model.

and the collective velocity vc = ∂J(ρ)

−

)

A. Modelling defects and disorder in ASEP-type models

At least three diﬀerent types of defects and randomness of the hopping rates have been considered so far in the

context of the ASEP-type models [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39].

(a) First, the randomness may be associated with the track on which the particles move [33, 34, 35, 39]; typical
examples are the defects on the microtubules (in intra-cellular transport). For example, as shown in ﬁg.4(a), normal
hopping probability at unblocked sites is Q whereas that at the bottleneck is q (q < Q). This type of quenched defect
and disorder of the track leads to interesting phase-segregation phenomena (see [20] for a review).

(b) The second type of randomness is associated with the hopping particles [36, 37, 38, 39], rather than with the
track. For example, the normal hopping probabilities of the particles may vary randomly from one particle to another
(see ﬁg.4(b)); the hopping probabilities are, however, “quenched” random variables, i.e., independent of time. In this
case, the system is known to be exhibit coarsening of queues of the particles and the phenomenon has some formal
similarities with Bose-Einstein condensation (reviewed in [20]).

Note that in case of the randomness of type (a), the hopping probability depends only on the spatial location on the
track, independent of the identity of the hopping particle. On the other hand, in the case of randomness of type (b),
the hopping probability depends on the hopping particle, irrespective of its spatial location on the track. In contrast
to these two types of randomness, the randomness in the hopping probabilities of the particles in some models arises
from the coupling of their dynamics with that of another non-conserved dynamical variable. For example, the hopping
probability of a particle may depend on the presence or absence of a speciﬁc type of signal molecule in front of it (see
ﬁg.4(c)). Therefore, in such models with periodic boundary conditions, a given particle may hop from the same site,
at diﬀerent times, with diﬀerent hopping probabilities.

a
b
7

Q

q

(b)

(a)

i

j

q1

q2
(c)

q

Q

.

FIG. 4: Schematic representation of the diﬀerent types of randomness in particle-hopping models. In (a) the randomness is
associated with the track; the hopping probability q at the bottleneck (partially hatched region) is smaller than the normal
hopping probability Q, In (b) the randomness is associated with the particles; q1 and q2 being the time-independent hopping
probabilities of the particles i and j, respectively. In (c) the randomness arises from the coupling of the dynamics of the hopping
particles (ﬁlled circle) with another species of particles that represent speciﬁc type of signal molecules; the two possible states
of the latter are represented by open and ﬁlled squares.

IV. GENERIC MECHANISMS OF SINGLE MOLECULAR MOTOR

Two extremely idealized mechanisms of motility of single-motors have been developed in the literature. The power-
stroke mechanism is analogous to the power strokes that drive macrscopic motors. On the other hand, the Brownian
ratchet mechanism is unique to the microscopic molecular motors.

Let us now consider a Brownian particle subjected to a time-dependent potential, in addition to the viscous drag
(or, frictional force). The potential switches between the two forms (i) and (ii) shown in ﬁg.5. The sawtooth form (i)

8

FIG. 5: The two forms of the time-dependent potential used for implementing the Brownian ratchet mechanism. (Copyright:
Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

FIG. 6: The direction of the motion of the particle in a Brownian ratchet, is determined by the form of the spatial asymmetry
of the potential in each period when observed over times much longer than the time period of switching between the two forms
of the potential. (Copyright: Indrani Chowdhury; reproduced with permission).

is spatially periodic where each period has an asymmetric shape. In contrast, the form (ii) is ﬂat so that the particle
does not experience any external force imposed on it when the potential has the form (ii). Note that, in the left part
of each well in (i) the particle experiences a rightward force whereas in the right part of the same well it is subjected
to a leftward force. Moreover, the spatially averaged force experienced by the particle in each well of length ℓ is

=

F
h

i

−

ℓ

1
ℓ Z

0 (cid:18)

∂U
∂x (cid:19)

dx = U (0)

U (ℓ) = 0

−

(10)

because of the spatially periodic form of the potential (i). What makes this problem so interesting is that, in spite of
vanishing average force acting on it, the particle can still exhibit directed, albeit noisy, rightward motion.

In order to understand the underlying physical principles, let us assume that initially the potential has the shape
(i) and the particle is located at a point on the line that corresponds to the bottom of a well. Now the potential is

9

switched oﬀ so that it makes a transition to the form (ii). Immediately, the free particle begins to execute a Brownian
motion and the corresponding Gaussian proﬁle of the probability distribution begins to spread with the passage of
time. If the potential is again switched on before the Gaussian proﬁle gets enough time for spreading beyond the
original well, the particle will return to its original initial position. But, if the period during which the potential
remains oﬀ is suﬃciently long, so that the Gaussian probability distribution has a non-vanishing tail overlapping with
the neighbouring well on the right side of the original well, then there is a small non-vanishing probability that the
particle will move forward towards right by one period when the potential is switched on.

In this mechanism, the particle moves forward not because of any force imposed on it but because of its Brownian
motion. The system is, however, not in equilibrium because energy is pumped into it during every period in switching
the potential between the two forms. In other words, the system works as a rectiﬁer where the Brownian motion,
in principle, could have given rise to both forward and backward movements of the particle in the multiples of ℓ,
but the backward motion of the particle is suppressed by a combination of (a) the time dependence and (b) spatial
asymmetry (in form (i)) of the potential. In fact, the direction of motion of the particle can be reversed by replacing
the potential (i) by the potential (iii) shown in ﬁg.6.

The mechanism of directional movement discussed above is called a Brownian ratchet [40, 41]. The concept of
Brownian ratchet was popularized by Feynman through his lectures [42] although, historically, it was introduced by
Smoluchowski [43].

A. Modelling defects and disorder in Brownian ratchets

Eﬀects of quenched disorder on the properties of Brownian ratchets have been considered by several authors [44,

45, 46, 47]. Quenched disorder can arise in Brownian ratchets, for example, from
(i) random variation of the heights (or depths) of the sawtooth potential from one site to another where all the
sawteeth have the same type of asymmetry,
(i) a random mixture of forward and reversed sawteeth where the heights of all the sawteeth is identical.

Suppose ω is the frequency of both the transitions from (i) to (ii) and (ii) to (i) forms of the potential. Also,
let PD be the probability of ﬁnding a defect, i.e., a reversed sawtooth in case (ii). In that case, the eﬀective drift
ω phase diagram [44] including some
and eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient exhibit three diﬀerent regions on the PD −
anomalous behaviour.

V.

INTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT: NUCLEOTIDE-BASED MOTORS

Helicases and polymerases are the two classes of nucleotide-based motors that have been the main focus of experi-
mental investigations. In this section, we discuss only the motion of the ribosome along the m-RNA track. Historically,
this problem is one of the ﬁrst where TASP-like model was successfully applied to a biological system.

The synthesis of proteins and polypetids in a living cell is a complex process. Special machines, so-called ribosomes,
translate the genetic information ‘stored’ in the messenger-RNA (mRNA) into a program for the synthesis of a protein.
mRNA is a long (linear) molecule made up of a sequence of triplets of nucleotides; each triplet is called a codon. The
genetic information is encoded in the sequence of codons. A ribosome, that ﬁrst gets attached to the mRNA chain,
“reads” the codons as it moves along the mRNA chain, recruits the corresponding amino acids and assembles these
amino acids in the sequence so as to synthesize the protein for which the “construction plan” was stored in the mRNA.
After executing the synthesis as per the plan, it gets detached from the mRNA. Thus, the process of “translation” of
genetic information stored in mRNA consists of three steps: (i) initiation: attachment of a ribosome at the “start”
end of the mRNA, (ii) elongation: of the polypeptide (protein) as the ribosome moves along the mRNA, and (iii)
termination: ribosome gets detached from the mRNA when it reaches the “stop” codon.

Let us denote each of the successive codons by the successive sites of a one-dimensional lattice where the ﬁrst and
the last sites correspond to the start and stop codons. The ribosomes are much bigger (20-30 times) than the codons.
Therefore, neighbouring ribosomes attached to the same mRNA can not read the same information or overtake each
other. In other words, any given site on the lattice may be covered by a single ribosome or none. Let us represent
each ribosome by a rigid rod of length Lr. If the rod representing the ribosome has its left edge attached to the i-th
site of the lattice, it is allowed to move to the right by one lattice spacing, i.e., its left edge moves to the site i + 1
provided the site i + Lr is empty. In the special case Lr = 1 this model reduced to the TASEP. Although the model
was originally proposed in the late sixties [29], signiﬁcant progress in its analytical treatment for the general case of
arbitrary Lr could be made only three decades later; even the eﬀects of quenched disorder has also been considered
in the recent literature [48, 49, 50, 51, 52].

10

FIG. 7: The process of biopolymerization: Ribosomes attach to mRNA and read the construction plan for a biopolymer which
is stored in the genetic code formed by the sequence of codons.

As mentioned above, a ribosom is much bigger than a base triplet. However, modifying the ASEP by taking
into account particles that occupy more than one lattice site does not change the structure of phase diagram [29].
Physically this can be understood from the domain-wall picture and the extremal-current principle [19, 24].

VI.

INTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT: CYTOSKELETON-BASED MOTORS

Intracellular transport is carried by molecular motors which are proteins that can directly convert the chemical
energy into mechanical energy required for their movement along ﬁlaments constituting what is known as the cy-
toskeleton [1, 2]. Three superfamilities of these motors are kinesin, dynein and myosin. Members of the majority
of the familities have two heads whereas only a few families have single-headed members. Most of the kinesins and
dyneins are like porters in the sense that these move over long distances along the ﬁlamentary tracks without get-
ting completely detached; such motors are called pocessive. On the other hand, the conventional myosins and a
few unconventional ones are nonprocessive; they are like rowers. But, a few families of unconventional myosins are
processive.

These cytoskeleton-based molecular motors play crucially important biological functions in axonal transport in
neorons, intra-ﬂagellar transport in eukaryotic ﬂagella, etc. The relation between the architectural design of these
motors and their transport function has been investigated both experimentally and theoretically for quite some time
[53, 54, 55].

However, in this review we shall focus mostly on the eﬀects of mutual interactions (competition as well as co-
operation) of these motors on their collective spatio-temporal organisation and the biomedical implications of such
organisations. Often a single MT is used simultaneously by many motors and, in such circumstances, the inter-motor
interactions cannot be ignored. Fundamental understanding of these collective physical phenomena may also expose
the causes of motor-related diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) [56, 57, 58, 59] thereby helping, possibly, also in their
control and cure. The bio-molecular motors have opened up a new frontier of applied research- “bio-nanotechnology”.
A clear understanding of the mechanisms of these natural machines will give us clue as to the possible design principles
that can be utilized to synthesize artiﬁcial nanomachines.

Derenyi and collaborators [60, 61] developed one-dimensional models of interacting Brownian motors, each of which
is subjected to a time-dependent potential of the form shown in ﬁg.5. They modelled each motor as a rigid rod and
formulated the dynamics through Langevin equations of the form (2) for each such rod assuming the validity of the
overdamped limit; the mutual interactions of the rods were incorporated through the mutual exclusion. However,

11

in this section we shall focus attention on those models where the dynamics is formulated in terms of “rules” for
undating in discrete time steps.

A. TASEP-like generic models of molecular motor traﬃc

The model considered by Aghababaie et al.[62] is not based on TASEP, but its dynamics is a combination of
Brownian ratchet and update rules in discrete time steps. More precisely, this model is a generalization of TASEP,
rather than TASEP, where the hopping probabilities are obtained from the local potential which itself is time-
dependent and is assumed to have the form shown in ﬁg.5.

In this model, the ﬁlamentary track is discretized in the spirit of the particle-hopping models described above and
the motors are represented by ﬁeld-driven particles; no site can accomodate more than one particle at a time. Each
time step consists of either an attempt of a particle to hop to a neighbouring site or an attempt that can result in
switching of the potential from ﬂat to sawtooth form or vice-versa. Both forward and backward movement of the
particles are possible and the hopping probability of every particle is computed from the instantaneous local potential.
The fundamental diagram of the model [62], computed imposing periodic boundary conditions, is very similar to
those of TASEP. This observation indicates that further simpliﬁcation of the model proposed in ref.[62] is possible
to develope a minimal model for interacting molecular motors. Indeed, the detailed Brownian ratchet mechanism,
which leads to a noisy forward-directed movement of the ﬁeld-driven particles in the model of Aghababaie et al. [62],
is replaced in some of the more recent theoretical models [63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73] by a TASEP-like
probabilitic forward hopping of self-driven particles. In these simplied versions, none of the particles is allowed to
hop backward and the forward hopping probability is assumed to capture most of the eﬀects of biochemical cycle
of the enzymatic activity of the motor. The explicit dynamics of the model is essentially an extension of that of
the asymmetric simple exclusion processes (ASEP) [19, 75] (see section III) that includes, in addition, Langmuir-like
kinetics of adsorption and desorption of the motors.

Model proposed by Parmeggiani et al.

•

FIG. 8: A schematic description of the TASEP-like model introduced in ref.[70] for molecular motor traﬃc.

In the model of Parmeggiani et al. [70], the molecular motors are represented by particles whereas the sites for the
binding of the motors with the cytoskeletal tracks (e.g., microtubules) are represented by a one-dimensional discrete
lattice. Just as in TASEP, the motors are allowed to hop forward, with probability q, provided the site in front is
empty. However, unlike TASEP, the particles can also get “attached” to an empty lattice site, with probability A,
and “detached” from an occupied site, with probability D (see ﬁg.8) from any site except the end points. The state
of the system was updated in a random-sequential manner.

Carrying out Monte-Carlo simulations of the model, applying open boundary conditions, Parmeggiani et al.[70]
demonstrated a novel phase where low and high density regimes, separated from each other by domain walls, coexist
[71, 72]. Using a MFT, they interpreted this spatial organization as traﬃc jam of molecular motors. This model has
interesting mathematical properties [74] which are of fundamental interest in statistical physics.

•

Model proposed by Klumpp et al.
A cylindrical geometry of the model system (see ﬁg.9) was considered by Lipowsky, Klumpp and collaborators
[63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69] to mimic the microtubule tracks in typical tubular neurons. The microtubule ﬁlament
was assumed to form the axis of the cylinder whereas the free space surrounding the axis was assumed to consist of

12

FIG. 9: A schematic description of the TASEP-like model introduced in ref.[63] for molecular motor traﬃc.

Nch channels each of which was discretized in the spirit of lattice gas models. They studied concentration proﬁles
and the current of free motors as well as those bound to the ﬁlament by imposing a few diﬀerent types of boundary
conditions. They have also compared the results of these investigations with the corresponding results obtained in a
diﬀerent geometry where the ﬁlaments spread out radially from a central point (see ﬁg.10).

FIG. 10: A schematic description of the radial geometry for the TASEP-like model of intra-cellular molecular motor traﬃc
introduced in ref.[69].

•

Model proposed by Klein et al.
It is well known that, in addition to generating forces and carrying cargoes, cytoskeletal motors can also depolymerize
the ﬁlamentary track on which they move processively. A model for such ﬁlament depolymerization process has been
developed by Klein et al.[76] by extending the model of intra-cellular traﬃc proposed earlier by Parmeggiani et al.
[70].

The model of Klein et al.[76] is shown schematically in ﬁg. 11. The novel feature of this model, in contrast to the
similar models [69, 70, 71] of intracellular transport, is that the lattice site at the tip of a ﬁlament is removed with
a probability W per unit time provided it is occupied by a motor; the motor remains attached to the newly exposed
tip of the ﬁlament with probability p (or remains bound with the removed site with probability 1
p). This model
clearly demonstrated a dynamic accumulation of the motors at the tip of the ﬁlament arising from the processivity of
the motors; a motor which was bound to the depolymerizing monomer at the tip of the ﬁlament is captured for the
monomer at the newly exposed tip.

−

•

Model proposed by Kruse and Sekimoto:
Kruse and Sekimoto [77] proposed a particle-hopping model for motor-induced relative sliding of two ﬁlamentary
motor tracks. The model is shown schematically in ﬁg.12. Each of the two-headed motors is assumed to consist of
two particles connected to a common neck and are capable of binding with two ﬁlaments provided the two binding
sites are closest neighbours as shown in the ﬁgure. Each particle can move forward following a TASEP-like rule and
every movement of this type causes sliding of the two ﬁlaments by one single unit.

13

FIG. 11: A schematic description of the model suggested by Klein et al. [76] for motor induced depolymerization of cytoskeletal
ﬁlaments.

FIG. 12: Schematic representation of Kruse and Sekimito’s model [77] for the motor-induced sliding of two cytoskeletal ﬁlaments.

B. Traﬃc of interacting single-headed motors KIF1A

The models of intracellular traﬃc described so far are essentially extensions of the asymmetric simple exclusion
processes (ASEP) [19, 75] that includes Langmuir-like kinetics of adsorption and desorption of the motors. In reality,
a motor protein is an enzyme whose mechanical movement is loosely coupled with its biochemical cycle. In a recent
work [78], we have considered speciﬁcally the single-headed kinesin motor, KIF1A [79, 80, 81, 82, 83]; the movement
of a single KIF1A motor was modelled earlier with a Brownian ratchet mechanism [40, 41]. In contrast to the earlier
models [69, 70, 71, 73] of molecular motor traﬃc, which take into account only the mutual interactions of the motors,
our model explicitly incorporates also the Brownian ratchet mechanism of individual KIF1A motors, including its
biochemical cycle that involves adenosine triphosphate(ATP) hydrolysis.

The ASEP-like models successfully explain the occurrence of shocks. But since most of the bio-chemistry is cap-

tured in these models through a single eﬀective hopping rate, it is diﬃcult to make direct quantitative comparison
with experimental data which depend on such chemical processes. In contrast, the model we proposed in ref.
[78]
incorporates the essential steps in the biochemical processes of KIF1A as well as their mutual interactions and involves
parameters that have one-to-one correspondence with experimentally controllable quantities.

The biochemical processes of kinesin-type molecular motors can be described by the four states model shown in
Fig. 13 [79, 82]: bare kinesin (K), kinesin bound with ATP (KT), kinesin bound with the products of hydrolysis,
i.e., adenosine diphosphate(ADP) and phosphate (KDP), and, ﬁnally, kinesin bound with ADP (KD) after releasing
phosphate. Recent experiments [79, 82] revealed that both K and KT bind to the MT in a stereotypic manner
(historically called “strongly bound state”, and here we refer to this mechanical state as “state 1”). KDP has a very
short lifetime and the release of phosphate transiently detaches kinesin from MT [82]. Then, KD re-binds to the
MT and executes Brownian motion along the track (historically called “weakly bound state”, and here referred to as
“state 2”). Finally, KD releases ADP when it steps forward to the next binding site on the MT utilizing a Brownian
ratchet mechanism, and thereby returns to the state K.

K

ATP

KT

KDP

KD

K

ADP

P
state 2

state 1

FIG. 13: The biochemical and mechanical states of a single KIF1A motor. In the chemical states on the left of the dotted line,
KIF1A binds to a ﬁxed position on the MT (state 1), while in those on the right KIF1A diﬀuses along the MT track (state 2).
At the transition from state 1 to 2, KIF1A detaches from the MT.

Thus, in contrast to the earlier ASEP-like models, each of the self-driven particles, which represent the individual
motors KIF1A, can be in two possible internal states labelled by the indices 1 and 2. In other words, each of the
lattice sites can be in one of three possible allowed states (Fig. 14): empty (denoted by 0), occupied by a kinesin in
state 1, or occupied by a kinesin in state 2.

For the dynamical evolution of the system, one of the L sites is picked up randomly and updated according to the

rules given below together with the corresponding probabilities (Fig. 14):

14

(11)
(12)
(13)

(14)

(15)

Attachment : 0
Detachment : 1
Hydrolysis : 1

→
→

Ratchet :

→
2
20

→
→

(cid:26)

1 with ωadt
0 with ωddt
2 with ωhdt
1 with ωsdt
01 with ωf dt

Brownian motion :

20
02

(cid:26)

→
→

02 with ωbdt
20 with ωbdt

ー
ー

a
a

g
g

2,1
2,1

Brownian, ratchet
Brownian, ratchet

0
0

1
1

1 0
1 0

0 2 0
0 2 0

1 2
1 2

1 2 1
1 2 1

＋
＋

d
d

b
b

2,1
2,1

Attachment
Attachment

Detachment
Detachment

FIG. 14: A 3-state model for molecular motors moving along a MT. 0 denotes an empty site, 1 is K or KT and 2 is KD.
Transition from 1 to 2, which corresponds to hydrolysis, occurs within a cell whereas movement to the forward or backward
cell occurs only when motor is in state 2. At the minus and plus ends the probabilities are diﬀerent from those in the bulk.

The probabilities of detachment and attachment at the two ends of the MT may be diﬀerent from those at any
bulk site. We chose α and δ, instead of ωa, as the probabilities of attachment at the left and right ends, respectively.
Similarly, we took γ1 and β1, instead of ωd, as probabilities of detachments at the two ends (Fig. 14). Finally, γ2 and
β2, instead of ωb, are the probabilities of exit of the motors through the two ends by random Brownian movements.
It is possible to relate the rate constants ωf , ωs and ωb with the corresponding physical processes in the Brownian
ratchet mechanism of a single KIF1A motor. Suppose, just like models of ﬂashing ratchets [40, 41], the motor “sees” a
time-dependent eﬀective potential which, over each biochemical cycle, switches back and forth between (i) a periodic

but asymmetric sawtooth like form and (ii) a constant. The rate constant ωh in our model corresponds to the rate
of the transition of the potential from the form (i) to the form (ii). The transition from (i) to (ii) happens soon after
ATP hydrolysis, while the transition from (ii) to (i) happens when ATP attaches to a bare kinesin[79]. The rate
constant ωb of the motor in state 2 captures the Brownian motion of the free particle subjected to the ﬂat potential
(ii). The rate constants ωs and ωf are proportional to the overlaps of the Gaussian probability distribution of the
free Brownian particle with, respectively, the original well and the well immediately in front of the original well of the
sawtooth potential.

Let us denote the probabilities of ﬁnding a KIF1A molecule in the states 1 and 2 at the lattice site i at time t by
the symbols ri and hi, respectively. In mean-ﬁeld approximation the master equations for the dynamics of motors in
the bulk of the system are given by

dri
dt
dhi
dt

=

= ωa(1

−

hi)

ri −
−
ωshi + ωhri −
ri+1 −
ωbhi(2
−

ωhri −
ωf hi(1
ri+1 −
−
ri−1 −
hi+1 −

−

−

hi+1)

ωdri + ωshi + ωf hi−1(1

ri −

−

hi),

hi−1) + ωb(hi−1 + hi+1)(1

ri −

−

hi).

The corresponding equations for the boundaries are also similar [83].

15

(16)

(17)

FIG. 15: Phase diagram of the model in the ωh − ωa plane, with the corresponding values for ATP and KIF1A concentrations
given in brackets. These quantities are controllable in experiment. The boundary rates are α = ωa, β1,2 = ωd, γ1,2 = δ = 0.
The position of the immobile shock depends on both ATP and KIF1A concentrations.

Assuming that each time step of updating corresponds to 1 ms of real time, we performed simulations upto 1
minute. We also extracted good estimates of the parameters of our model from the experimental data [79, 81]. Such

16

FIG. 16: Formation of comet-like accumulation of kinesin at the end of MT. Fluorescently labeled KIF1A (red) was introduced
to MT (green) at 10 pM (top), 100 pM (middle) and 1000 pM (bottom) concentrations along with 2 mM ATP. The length of
the white bar is 2µm.

one-to-one correspondence between our model parameters and experimentally controllable quantities enabled us to
make quantitative predictions. In the limit of low density of the motors we have computed, for example, the mean
speed of the kinesins, the diﬀusion constant and mean duration of the movement of a kinesin on a microtubule from
simulations of our model; these are in excellent quantitative agreement with the corresponding empirical data from
single molecule experiments.

Using this model we have also calculated the ﬂux of the motors in the mean ﬁeld approximation imposing periodic
boundary conditions. Although the system with periodic boundary conditions is ﬁctitious, the results provide good
estimates of the density and ﬂux in the corresponding system with open boundary conditions. Moreover, in contrast to
β-plane reported by earlier investigators [69, 70, 71], we have drawn the phase diagram
the phase diagrams in the α
ωh plane (see ﬁg.15) by carrying out extensive computer simulations for realistic parameter
of our model in the ωa −
values of the model with open boundary conditions. The phase diagram shows the strong inﬂuence of hydrolysis on
the spatial distribution of the motors along the MT. Interestingly, the shocks in density proﬁles of kinesins in the
states 1 and 2 always appear at the same position.

−

The formation of the shock has been established by our direct experimental evidence. The “comet-like structure”,
shown in the middle of Fig. 16, is the collective pattern formed by the red ﬂuorescent labelled kinesins where a domain
wall separates the low-density region from the high-density region. The position of the domain wall depends on both
ATP and KIF1A concentrations. Our ﬁndings on the domain wall are in qualitative agreement with the corresponding
experimental observations.

VII. EXTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT: COLLAGEN-BASED MOTORS

The extracellular matrix (ECM) [7] of vertebrates is rich in collagen. Monomers of collagen form a triple-helical
structure which self-assemble into a tightly packed periodic organization of ﬁbrils. Cells residing in tissues can secret
matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), a special type of enzymes that are capable of degrading macromolecular constituents
of the ECM. The most notable among these emzymes is MMP-1 that is known to degrade collagen. The collagen
ﬁbril contains cleavage sites which are spaced at regular intervals of 300 nm. The collagenase MMP-1 cleaves all the
three α chains of the collagen monomer at a single site.

Breakdown of the ECM forms an essential step in several biological processes like, for example, embryonic devel-
opment, tissue remodelling, etc. [7]. Malfunctioning of MMP-1 has been associated with wide range of diseases [8].
Therefore, an understanding of the MMP-1 traﬃc on collagen ﬁbrils can provide deeper insight into the mechanism

17

FIG. 17: Schematic representation of the two-dimensional burnt bridge model of MMP-1 dynamics.

of its operation which, in turn, may give some clue as to the strategies of control and cure of diseases caused by the
inappropriate functions of these enzymes.

A. Phenomenology of MMP-1 dynamics

Saﬀarian et al. [84] used a technique of two-photon excitation ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy to measure the
correlation function corresponding to the MMP-1 moving along the collagen ﬁbrils. The measured correlation function
strongly indicated that the motion of the MMP-1 was not purely diﬀusive, but a combination of diﬀusion and drift.
In other words, the “digestion” of a collagen ﬁbril occurs when a MMP-1 executes a biased diﬀusion processively
(i.e., without detachment) along the ﬁbril. They also demonstrated that inactivation of the enzyme eliminates the
bias but the diﬀusion remains practically unaﬀected. They claimed that the energy required for the active motor-like
transport of the MMP-1 comes from the proteolysis of the collagen ﬁbrils.

Saﬀarian et al. [84] also carried out computer simulations of a two-dimensional model of the MMP-1 dynamics on
collagen ﬁbrils; this model is a generalization of the one-dimensional “burnt bridge model” introduced earlier by Mai
et al. [85]. (We shall discuss this model in the next subsection). By comparing the results of these simulations with
their experimental observations, Saﬀarian et al. they concluded that the observed biased diﬀusion of the MMP-1 on
collagen ﬁbrils can be described quite well by a Brownian ratchet mechanism [40, 41].

B. A stochstic burnt-bridge model of MMP-1 dynamics

A one-dimensional “burnt-bridge” model was developed by Mai et al.

[85] to demonstrate a novel mechanism of

directed transport of a Brownian particle.

The model is sketched schematically in ﬁg.18. A “particle” performs a random walk on a semi-inﬁnite one-
. Each site of the lattice is connected to the two nearest
dimensional lattice that extends from the origin to +
neighbour sites by links; a fraction c of these links are called “bridges” and these are prone to be burnt by the random
walker. A bridge is burnt, with probability p, if the random walker either crosses it from left to right or attempts
to cross if from right to left [85, 86]. In either case, if the bridge is actually burnt, the walker stays on the right of

∞

18

FIG. 18: Schematic representation of the one-dimensional burnt bridge model of MMP-1 dynamics proposed in ref.[85].

the burnt bridge and cannot cross it any more. The hindrance against leftward motion, that is created by the burnt
bridges, is responsible for the overall rightward drift of the random walker.

Mai et al.[85] studied the dependence of the average drift velocity v on the parameters p and c by computer
1

simulation. They also derived approximate analytical forms of these dependences in the two limits p
using a continuum approximation.

1 and p

≪

≃

≃

Almost every event of crossing of a bridge from left to right or attempt of crossing from right to left burns the
bridge in the limit p
1. Whenever the walker burns a bridge, it can take the right edge of the burnt bridge as the
new origin. Thus, every event of burning of a bridge deﬁnes a new segment of the lattice having a burnt bridge at its
left end and a intact bridge at its right end. The random walker performs its diﬀusive movement in the segment such
that there is a reﬂecting boundary for the random walker at the left end of the segment and an absorbing boundary
at the right end of the segment. If the bridges were equispaced, each of these segments will have a length ℓ = 1/c.
Therefore, τ , the time taken to cross the distance ℓ will be given by ℓ2 = 2Dτ and, hence, the corresponding speed
of the walker v = ℓ/τ = 2D/ℓ = 2cD. Mai et al. argued that if the bridges are intially distributed randomly, the
average speed will be reduced to v = cD. Thus, in the limit p
1, they found
v

c. In contrast, in the limit p

1, v

→

≪

∝

√pc.

∝

VIII. CELLULAR TRAFFIC

A Mycoplasma mobile (MB) bacterium is an uni-cellular organism. Each of the pear-shaped cells of this bacterium
is about 700 nm long and has a diameter of about 250 nm at the widest section. Each bacterium can move fast on
glass or plastic surfaces using a gliding mechanism.

In a recent experiment [87] narrow linear channels were constructed on lithographic substrates. The channels were
typically 500 nm wide and 800 nm deep. Note that each chennel was approximately twice as wide as the width of a
single MB cell (see the sketch on the left side of the ﬁg.19). The channels were so deep that none of the individual
MB cells was able to climb up the tall walls of the channels and continued moving along the bottom edge of the walls
of the cannels. In the absence of direct contact interaction with other bacteria, each individual MB cell was observed
to glide, without changing direction, at an average speed of a few microns per second.

When two MB cells made a contact approaching each other from opposite directions within the same channel, one

of the two cells gave way and moved to the adjacent lane. However, in a majority of the cases, two cells approaching
each other from the opposite directions simply passed by as if nothing had happened; this is because of the fact that
the width of the chennel is roughly twice that of the individual MB cell. Moreover, when two cells moving in the same
direction within a channel collided with each other, the faster cell moved to the adjacent lane after the collision.

19

FIG. 19: Schematic description of the traﬃc ﬂow of Mycoplasma in (a) the expertment of Hiratsuka et al. (b) the model of
Vartak et al. [88].

Hiratsuka et al.[87] attached micron-sized beads on the MB cells using biochemical technique and demonstrated
that the average speed of each MB cell remained practically unaﬀected by the load it was carrying. In contrast to the
nonliving motile elements discussed in all the preceedings sections, the cells are the functional units of life. Therefore,
the MB cells have the potential for use in applied research and technology as “micro-transporters”. More recently,
the unicellular biﬂagellated algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (CR), which are known to be phototactic swimmers,
have been shown to be even better cadidates as “micro-transporter” as these can attain average speeds that is about
two orders of magnitude higher than what was possible with MB cells [89]. However, to our knowledge, the eﬀects of
mutual interactions of the CR cells on their average speed at higher densities has not been investigated.

IX. TRAFFIC IN SOCIAL INSECT COLONIES: ANTS AND TERMITES

From now onwards, in this review we shall study traﬃc of multi-cellular organisms. We begin with the simpler
(and smaller) organisms and, then, consider those of organisms with larger sizes and more complex physiology in the
next section.

Termites, ants, bees and wasps are the most common social insects, although the extent of social behavior, as
compared to solitary life, varies from one sub-species to another [6]. The ability of the social insect colonies to function
without a leader has attracted the attention of experts from diﬀerent disciplines [90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97]. Insights
gained from the modeling of the colonies of such insects are ﬁnding important applications in computer science (useful
optimization and control algorithms) [98], communication engineering [99], artiﬁcial “swarm intelligence” [100] and
micro-robotics [101] as well as in task partitioning, decentralized manufacturing [102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107] and
management [108].

In this section we consider only ants as the collective terrestrial movements of these have close similarities with the
other traﬃc-like phenomena considered here. When observed from a suﬃciently long distance the movement of ants
on trails resemble the vehicular traﬃc observed from a low ﬂying aircraft.

Ants communicate with each other by dropping a chemical (generically called pheromone) on the substrate as they
move forward [6, 109, 110]. Although we cannot smell it, the trail pheromone sticks to the substrate long enough for
the other following sniﬃng ants to pick up its smell and follow the trail. This process is called chemotaxis [6].

Rauch et al.[14] developed a continuum model, following a hybrid of the individual-based and population-based
approaches in terms of an eﬀective energy landscape. They wrote one set of stochastic diﬀerential equations for the
positions of the ants and another set of PDEs for the local densities of pheromone. Both this model and the CA
model introduced by Watmough and Edelstein-Keshet [111] were intended to address the question of formation of the
ant-trail networks by foraging ants.

20

Couzin and Franks [112] developed an individual based model that not only addressed the question of self-organized
lane formation but also elucidated the variation of the ﬂux of the ants with two important parameters of the model.
The “internal angle” α may be interpreted as angle of local visual ﬁeld or that of olfactory perception, or tactile range
of the antennae of the individual ants. Moreover, each individual ant is assumed to turn away from others within
these zones by, at most, an angle θa∆t in time ∆t.

Imposing periodic boundary conditions, Couzin and Franks [112] computed the ﬂux of ants in their model by
computer simulations. The ﬂux was found to be a nonmonotinic function of both α and θa. At low α, ants cannot
detect others ahead whereas at high α they spend most of their time avoiding others even through collisions with
others may be unlikely; both these reduce the ﬂux considerably. Similarly, at low θa ants cannot turn suﬃciently
rapidly to avoid collision whereas at high θ they change their direction quickly so that not many move in the same
direction at any time. Thus, only in the intermediate range of values of α and θa, the ants are optimally sensitive.
Therefore, the ﬂux exhibits a maximum both as a function of α and as a function of θa.

In the recent years, we have developed discrete models that are not intended to address the question of the emergence
of the ant-trail [113], but focus on the traﬃc of ants on a trail which has already been formed. We have developed
models of both unidirectional and bidirectional ant-traﬃc by generalizing the totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process (TASEP) [19, 114, 115] with parallel dynamics by taking into account the eﬀect of the pheromone.

A. Model of single-lane uni-directional ant-traﬃc

In our model of uni-directional ant-traﬃc the ants move according to a rule which is essentially an extension of
the TASEP dynamics. In addition, a second ﬁeld is introduced which models the presence or absence of pheromones
(see Fig. 20). The hopping probability of the ants is now modiﬁed by the presence of pheromones. It is larger if a
pheromone is present at the destination site. Furthermore, the dynamics of the pheromones has to be speciﬁed. They
are created by ants and free pheromones evaporate with probability f per unit time. Assuming periodic boundary
conditions, the state of the system is updated at each time step in two stages (see Fig. 20). In stage I ants are allowed
to move while in stage II the pheromones are allowed to evaporate. In each stage the stochastic dynamical rules are
applied in parallel to all ants and pheromones, respectively.

Stage I: Motion of ants

An ant in a site cannot move if the site immediately in front of it is also occupied by another ant. However, when
this site is not occupied by any other ant, the probability of its forward movement to the ant-free site is Q or q,
depending on whether or not the target site contains pheromone. Thus, q (or Q) would be the average speed of a free
ant in the absence (or presence) of pheromone. To be consistent with real ant-trails, we assume q < Q, as presence
of pheromone increases the average speed.

Stage II: Evaporation of pheromones

Trail pheromone is volatile. So, pheromone secreted by an ant will gradually decay unless reinforced by the following
ants. In order to capture this process, we assume that each site occupied by an ant at the end of stage I also contains
pheromone. On the other hand, pheromone in any ‘ant-free’ site is allowed to evaporate; this evaporation is also
assumed to be a random process that takes place at an average rate of f per unit time.

The total amount of pheromone on the trail can ﬂuctuate although the total number N of the ants is constant
because of the periodic boundary conditions. In the two special cases f = 0 and f = 1 the stationary state of the
model becomes identical to that of the TASEP with hopping probability Q and q, respectively.

One interesting phenomenon observed in the simulations is coarsening. At intermediate time usually several non-
compact clusters are formed (Fig. 21(a)). However, the velocity of a cluster depends on the distance to the next cluster
ahead. Obviously, the probability that the pheromone created by the last ant of the previous cluster survives decreases
with increasing distance. Therefore clusters with a small headway move faster than those with a large headway. This
induces a coarsening process such that after long times only one non-compact cluster survives (Fig. 21(b)). A similar
behaviour has been observed also in the bus-route model [116, 117].
If the system evolves from a random initial
condition at t = 0, then during coarsening of the cluster, its size R(t) at time t is given by R(t)

t1/2 [116, 117].

∼

In vehicular traﬃc, usually, the inter-vehicle interactions tend to hinder each other’s motion so that the average
speed of the vehicles decreases monotonically with increasing density. In contrast, in our model of uni-directional
ant-traﬃc the average speed of the ants varies non-monotonically with their density over a wide range of small values

21

FIG. 20: Schematic representation of typical conﬁgurations of the uni-directional ant-traﬃc model. The symbols • indicate
the presence of pheromone. This ﬁgure also illustrates the update procedure. Top: Conﬁguration at time t, i.e. before stage I of
the update. The non-vanishing probabilities of forward movement of the ants are also shown explicitly. Middle: Conﬁguration
after one possible realisation of stage I. Two ants have moved compared to the top part of the ﬁgure. The open circle with
dashed boundary indicates the location where pheromone will be dropped by the corresponding ant at stage II of the update
scheme. Also indicated are the existing pheromones that may evaporate in stage II of the updating, together with the average
rate of evaporation. Bottom: Conﬁguration after one possible realization of stage II. Two drops of pheromones have evaporated
and pheromones have been dropped/reinforced at the current locations of the ants.

of f because of the coupling of their dynamics with that of the pheromone (see ﬁg.22). This uncommon variation of
the average speed gives rise to the unusual dependence of the ﬂux on the density of the ants in our uni-directional
ant-traﬃc model (see ﬁg.22). Furthermore, the ﬂux is no longer particle-hole symmetric.

B. Model of single-lane bi-directional ant-traﬃc

The single-lane model of uni-directional ant traﬃc, which we have discussed above, has been extended to capture
the essential features of bi-directional ant-traﬃc in some special situations like, for example, on hanging cables (see
ﬁg.23).

In our model the right-moving (left-moving) particles, represented by R (L), are never allowed to move towards
left (right); these two groups of particles are the analogs of the outbound and nest-bound ants in a bi-directional
traﬃc on the same trail. Thus, no U-turn is allowed. In addition to the TASEP-like hopping of the particles onto
the neighboring vacant sites in the respective directions of motion, the R and L particles on nearest-neighbour sites
and facing each other are allowed to exchange their positions, i.e., the transition RL K
LR takes place, with the
→
probability K. This might be considered as a minimal model for the motion of ants on a hanging cable as shown in

22

FIG. 21: Snapshots of the spatial conﬁgurations demonstrating coarsening of the clusters of ants.

Fig.23. When a outbound ant and a nest-bound ant face each other on the upper side of the cable, they slow down
and, eventually, pass each other after one of them, at least temporarily, switches over to the lower side of the cable.
Similar observations have been made for normal ant-trails where ants pass each other after turning by a small angle
to avoid head-on collision [112, 118]. In our model, as commonly observed in most real ant-trails, none of the ants is
allowed to overtake another moving in the same direction.

We now introduce a third species of particles, labelled by the letter P , which are intended to capture the essential
features of pheromone. The P particles are deposited on the lattice by the R and L particles when the latter hop
out of a site; an existing P particle at a site disappears when a R or L particle arrives at the same location. The P
particles cannot hop but can evaporate, with a probability f per unit time, independently from the lattice. None of
the lattice sites can accomodate more than one particle at a time.

The state of the system is updated in a random-sequential manner. Because of the periodic boundary conditions,
the densities of the R and the L particles are conserved. In contrast, the density of the P particles is a non-conserved
variable. The distinct initial states and the corresponding ﬁnal states for pairs of nearest-neighbor sites are shown in

23

d
e
e
p
s
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.25

0.2

0.15

x
u
l
F

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Density

Density

FIG. 22: The variation of the average speed (left) and ﬂux (right) of the ants with their density on trail.

FIG. 23: A snapshot of an ant-trail on a hanging cable. It can be regarded as strictly one-dimensional. But, nevertheless,
traﬃc ﬂow in opposite directions is possible as two ants, which face each other on the upper side of the cable, can exchange
their positions if one of them, at least temporarily, switches over to the lower side of the cable.

ﬁg.24 together with the respective transition probabilties.

Suppose N+ and N− = N

N+ are the total numbers of R and L particles, respectively. For a system of length M
the corresponding densities are c± = N±/M with the total density c = c+ + c− = N/M . Of the N particles, a fraction
φ are L particles. The corresponding ﬂuxes are
φ = N+/N = c+/c are of the type R while the remaining fraction 1
denoted by J±. In both the limits φ = 1 and φ = 0 this model reduces to the model reported in ref.[119, 120] and
reviewed in section IX.A, which was motivated by uni-directional ant-traﬃc and is closely related to the bus-route

−

−

initial ﬁnal
RL RL
LR

rate
1 − K
K

RP RP (1 − f )(1 − Q)

R0
0R
PR
R0 R0
0R
PR

f (1 − Q)
f Q
(1 − f )Q
1 − q
f q
(1 − f )q

initial ﬁnal

rate
PR PR 1 − f
0R
P0
00

f
1 − f
f

P0

PP PP (1 − f )2
P0 f (1 − f )
0P f (1 − f )
00

f 2

FIG. 24: Nontrivial transitions and their transition rates. Transitions from initial states P L, 0L and 0P are not listed. They
can be obtained from those for LP , L0 and P 0, respectively, by replacing R ↔ L and, then, taking the mirror image.

24

0.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Density

f=0.001
f=0.005
f=0.01
f=0.05
f=0.10
f=0.25

(b)

(a)

f = 0.00
f = 0.20
f = 0.30
f = 0.50
f = 0.70
f = 0.80
f = 1.00

0.15

0.10

0.05

)

+

F
(
 
x
u
l
F

0.20

0.15

)

+

F
(
 
x
u
l
F

0.10

0.05

0.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Density

FIG. 25: The fundamental diagrams in the steady-state of the PRL model for several diﬀerent values of (a) f (for φ = 0.5) and
(b) φ (for f = 0.001). The other common parameters are Q = 0.75, q = 0.25, K = 0.5 and M = 1000.

models [116, 117].

One unusual feature of this PRL model is that the ﬂux does not vanish in the dense-packing limit c

1. In fact,
in the full-ﬁlling limit c = 1, the exact non-vanishing ﬂux J+ = Kc+c− = J− at c+ + c− = c = 1 arises only from the
exchange of the R and L particles, irrespective of the magnitudes of f, Q and q.

→

In the special case Q = q =: qh the hopping of the ants become independent of pheromone. This special case of the
PRL model is identical to the AHR model [121] with q− = 0 = κ. A simple mean-ﬁeld approximation (MFA) yields
the estimates

J±

c±

qh(1

c) + Kc∓

≃

(cid:20)

−

(cid:21)

(18)

irrespective of f , for the ﬂuxes J± at any arbitrary c. We found that the results of MFA agree reasonably well with
1/2 but deviate more from the exact values for qh < 1/2, indicating the
the exact values of the ﬂux [122] for all qh ≥
presence of stronger correlations at smaller values of qh.

For the generic case q

= Q, the ﬂux in the PRL model depends on the evaporation rate f of the P partcles. In Fig. 25
we plot the fundamental diagrams for wide ranges of values of f (in Fig. 25(a)) and φ (in Fig. 25(b)), corresponding
to one set of hopping probabilities. First, note that the data in ﬁgs. 25 are consistent with the physically expected
value of J±(c = 1) = Kc+c−, because in the dense packing limit only the exchange of the oppositely moving particles
contributes to the ﬂux. Moreover, the sharp rise of the ﬂux over a narrow range of c observed in both Fig. 25 (a) and
(b) arise from the nonmonotonic variation of the average speed with density, an eﬀect which was also observed in our

6
25

3

10

2

10

1

10

R

10

0
10

2

f 
 = 1.0
f   = 0.5(R)
f 
 = 0.5 (L)

3

10

4

10

5
10

6

10

7

10

t

FIG. 26: Average size of the cluster R plotted against time t for φ = 1.0, and φ = 0.5, both for the same total density c = 0.2;
the other common parameters being Q = 0.75, q = 0.25, K = 0.50, f = 0.005, M = 4000.

FIG. 27: Space-time plot of the PRL model for Q = 0.50, q = 0.25, f = 0.005, c = 0.2, φ = 0.3, K = 1.0 and M = 4000. The
black and grey dots represent the right-moving and left-moving ants, respectively.

earlier model for uni-directional ant traﬃc [119, 120].

−

∼

(1

φ)2M 2.

φ2M 2 and τ−

In the special limits φ = 0 and φ = 1, this model reduces to our single-lane model of unidirectional ant traﬃc;
therefore, in these limits, over a certain regime of density (especially at small f ), the particles are expected [119, 120]
to form “loose” (i.e., non-compact) clusters [120]. Therefore, in the absence of encounter with oppositely moving
particles, τ±, the coarsening time for the right-moving and left-moving particles would grow with system size as
τ+ ∼
In the PRL model with peridic boundary conditions, the oppositely moving ‘loose” clusters “collide” against each
other periodically where the time gap τg between the successive collisions increases linearly with the system size
M ; we have veriﬁed this scaling relation numerically (see the typical space-time diagram in ﬁg.27).
following τg ∼
During a collision each loose cluster “shreds” the oppositely moving cluster; both clusters shred the other equally
if φ = 1/2. However, for all φ
= 1/2, the minority cluster suﬀers more severe shredding than that suﬀered by the
majority cluster because each member of a cluster contributes in the shredding of the oppositely moving cluster. In
small systems the “shredded” clusters get opportunity for signiﬁcant re-coarsening before getting shredded again in
the next encounter with the oppositely moving particles. But, in suﬃciently large systems, shredded appearance of
the clusters persists. However, we observed practically no diﬀerence in the fundamental diagrams for M = 1000 and
M = 4000.

Following the methods of ref.[117], we have computed R(t) starting from random initial conditions. The data

6
26

t1/2. In sharp contrast, for
(Fig. 26(a)) corresponding to φ = 1 are consistent with the asymptotic growth law R(t)
φ = 0.5, R(t) saturates to a much smaller value (Fig. 26(b)) that is consistent with highly shredded appearance of
the corresponding clusters.

∼

Thus, coarsening and shredding phenomena compete against each other and this competition determines the overall
spatio-temporal pattern. Therefore, in the late stage of evolution, the system settles to a state where, because of
alternate occurrence of shredding and coarsening, the typical size of the clusters varies periodically. Moreover, we
ﬁnd that, for given c and φ, increasing K leads to sharper speeding up of the clusters during collision so long as K is
not much smaller than q. Both the phenomena of shredding and speeding during collisions of the oppositely moving
loose clusters arise from the fact that, during such collisions, the domainant process is the exchange of positions, with
probability K, of oppositely-moving ants that face each other.

C. Model of two-lane bi-directional ant-traﬃc

It is possible to extend the model of uni-directional ant-traﬃc to a minimal model of two-lane bi-directional ant-
traﬃc [123]. In such models of bi-directional ant-traﬃc the trail consists of two lanes of sites. These two lanes need
not be physically separate rigid lanes in real space. In the initial conﬁguration, a randomly selected subset of the ants
move in the clockwise direction in one lane while the others move counterclockwise in the other lane. The numbers of
ants moving in the clockwise direction and counterclockwise in their respective lanes are ﬁxed, i.e. ants are allowed
neither to take U-turn.

FIG. 28: A typical head-on encounter of two oppositely moving ants in the model of bi-directional ant-traﬃc. This is a totally
new process which does not have any analog in the model of uni-directional ant-traﬃc.

The rules governing the dropping and evaporation of pheromone in the model of bi-directional ant-traﬃc are identical
to those in the model of uni-directional traﬃc. The common pheromone trail is created and reinforced by both the
outbound and nestbound ants. The probabilities of forward movement of the ants in the model of bi-directional
ant-traﬃc are also natural extensions of the similar situations in the uni-directional traﬃc. When an ant (in either
of the two lanes) does not face any other ant approaching it from the opposite direction the likelihood of its forward
movement onto the ant-free site immediately in front of it is Q or q, respectively, depending on whether or not it
ﬁnds pheromone ahead. Finally, if an ant ﬁnds another oncoming ant just in front of it, as shown in Fig. 28, it
moves forward onto the next site with probability K. Since ants do not segregate in perfectly well deﬁned lanes,
head-on encounters of oppositely moving individuals occur quite often although the frequency of such encounters and
the lane discipline varies from one species of ants to another. In reality, two ants approaching each other feel the
hindrance, turn by a small angle to avoid head-on collision [112] and, eventually, pass each other. At ﬁrst sight, it
may appear that the ants in our model follow perfect lane discipline and, hence, unrealistic. However, that is not
true. The violation of lane discipline and head-on encounters of oppositely moving ants is captured, eﬀectively, in

27

0.2

0.15

x
u
l
F

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.1

0.08

x
u
l

F

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Density

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

0.04

0.08

0.12

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Density

FIG. 29: Fundamental diagrams of the model for bi-directional traﬃc for the cases q < K < Q (left) and K < q < Q (right)
for several diﬀerent values of the pheromone evaporation probability f . The densities for both directions are identical and
therefore only the graphs for one directions are shown. The parameters in the left graph are Q = 0.75, q = 0.25 and K = 0.5.
The symbols ◦, •, (cid:4), △, ∗, +, ▽, ♦ and ⊳ correspond, respectively, to f = 0, 0.0005, 0.005, 0.05, 0.075, 0.10, 0.25, 0.5 and 1. The
parameters in the right graph are Q = 0.75, q = 0.50 and K = 0.25. The symbols ◦, (cid:3), (cid:7), △, ⊳ and ▽ correspond, respectively,
to f = 0, 0.0005, 0.005, 0.05, 0.5 and 1. The inset in the right graph is a magniﬁed re-plot of the same data, over a narrow range
of density, to emphasize the fact that the unusual trend of variation of ﬂux with density in this case is similar to that observed
in the case q < K < Q (left). The lines are merely guides to the eye. In all cases curves plotted with ﬁlled symbols exhibit
non-monotonic behaviour in the speed-density relation.

an indirect manner by assuming K < Q. But, a left-moving (right-moving) ant cannot overtake another left-moving
(right-moving) ant immediately in front of it in the same lane. It is worth mentioning that even in the limit K = Q
the traﬃc dynamics on the two lanes would remain coupled because the pheromone dropped by the outbound ants
also inﬂuence the nestbound ants and vice versa.

Fig. 29 shows fundamental diagrams for the two relevant cases q < K < Q and K < q < Q and diﬀerent values
of the evaporation probability f for equal densities on both lanes. In both cases the unusual behaviour related to a
non-monotonic variation of the average speed with density as in the uni-directional model can be observed [123].

An additional feature of the fundamental diagram in the bi-directional ant-traﬃc model is the occurrence of a
plateau region. This plateau formation is more pronounced in the case K < q < Q than for q < K < Q since they
appear for all values of f . Similar plateaus have been observed earlier [33, 34] in models related to vehicular traﬃc
where randomly placed bottlenecks slow down the traﬃc in certain locations along the route.

The experimental data available initially [118, 124] were not accurate enough to test the predictions mentioned

28

above. However, more accurate recent data [125] exhibit non-monotonic variation of the average speed with density
thereby conﬁrming our theoretical prediction.

One of the interesting open questions, which requires careful modelling, is as follows: how does a forager ant, which
gets displaced from a trail, decides the correct direction on rejoining the trail? More speciﬁcally, an ant carrying food
should be nest-bound when it rejoins the trail to save time and to minimize the risk of an encounter with a predator.
In other words, do the pheromone trails have some “polarity” (analogous to the polarity of microtubules and actin,
the ﬁlamentary tracks on which the cytoskeletal motors move)? On the basis of recent experimental observations,
it has been claimed [126] that the trail geometry gives rise to an eﬀective polarity of the ant trails. However, other
mechanisms for polarity of the trails are also possible.

X. PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC ON TRAILS

Although there are some superﬁcial similarities between the traﬁc-like collective phenomena in ant-trails and the
pedestrian traﬃc on trails, there are also some crucial diﬀerences. At present, there are very few models which can
account for all the observed phenomena in completely satisfactory manner.

A. Collective phenomena

We present only a brief overview of the collective eﬀects and self-organization; for a more comprehensive discussion,

see ref.[127, 128].

Jamming: At large densities various kinds of jamming phenomena occur, e.g. when the ﬂow is limited by a door
or narrowing. Therefore, this kind of jamming does not depend strongly on the microscopic dynamics of the particles,
but is typical for a bottleneck situation. It is important for practical applications, especially evacuation simulations.
Furthermore, in addition to the ﬂow reduction, eﬀects like arching [129, 130], known from granular materials, play an
important role. Jamming also occurs where two groups of pedestrians mutually block each other.

Lane formation: In counterﬂow, i.e. two groups of people moving in opposite directions, a kind of spontaneous
symmetry breaking occurs (see Fig. 30a). The motion of the pedestrians can self-organize in such a way that (dy-
namically varying) lanes are formed where people move in just one direction [131]. In this way, strong interactions
with oncoming pedestrians are reduced and a higher walking speed is possible.

a)

b)

FIG. 30: Patterns observed in counterﬂow. a) Lane formation in a narrow corridor. b) Oscillations of the ﬂow direction at a
door.

Oscillations: In counterﬂow at bottlenecks, e.g. doors, one can observe oscillatory changes of the direction of
motion. Once a pedestrian is able to pass the bottleneck it becomes easier for others to follow in the same direction
until somebody is able to pass (e.g. through a ﬂuctuation) the bottleneck in the opposite direction (see Fig. 30b).

Patterns at intersections: At intersections various collective patterns of motion can be formed. Short-lived

roundabouts make the motion more eﬃcient since they allow for a “smoother” motion.

Panics:

In panic situations, many counter-intuitive phenomena can occur.

In the faster-is-slower eﬀect [129]
a higher desired velocity leads to a slower movement of a large crowd. Understanding such eﬀects is extremely
important for evacuations in emergency situations.

B. Modelling Pedestrian Dynamics

Several diﬀerent approaches for modelling the dynamics of pedestrians have been proposed, either based on a

continuous representation of space or on a grid.

29

The earliest models of pedestrian dynamics belonged to the population-based approaches and took inspiration
from hydrodynamics or gas-kinetic theory [132, 133, 134, 135]. However, it turned our [133] that several important
diﬀerences to normal ﬂuids are important, e.g. the anisotropy of interactions or the fact that pedestrians usually have
an individual preferred direction of motion.

Later several individual-based approaches in continuous space and time have been proposed. In the social force
models (see e.g. [127, 131] and references therein) and other similar approaches [136] pedestrians are treated as particles
subject to repulsive forces induced by the social behaviour of the individuals. This leads to (coupled) equations of
motion similar to Newtonian mechanics. There are, however, important diﬀerences since, e.g., in general the third
law (“actio = reactio”) is not fulﬁlled. Furthermore a two-dimensional variant of the optimal-velocity model [137] has
also been suggested.

Active walker models [113, 138] have been used to describe the formation of human or animal trails etc. Here the
walker leaves a trace by modifying the underground on his path. This modiﬁcation is real in the sense that it could
be measured in principle. For trail formation, vegetation is destroyed by the walker.

In [139] a kind of mesoscopic approach inspired by lattice gas models [140] has been suggested. Thus the exclusion

principle is relaxed and the dynamics is based on a collision-propagation scheme.

Most cellular automaton models for pedestrian dynamics proposed are rather simple [141, 142, 143] and can be
considered as two-dimensional generalizations of the ASEP (see Sec. III). However, these models are not able to
reproduce all the collective eﬀects described in the preceeding subsection. The same is true for more sophisticated
discrete models [144, 145].

In the following we discuss a promising new approach, the ﬂoor ﬁeld model [146, 147, 148, 149], for the description
of pedestrian dynamics in more detail which is takes inspiration from the ant trail model of Sec. IX. The interaction
in this model is implemented as ’virtual chemotaxis’ which allows to translate a long-ranged spatial interaction into
a local interaction with “memory”. Guided by the phenomenon of chemotaxis the interactions between pedestrians
are thus local and allow for computational eﬃciency.

C. Floor ﬁeld cellular automaton model

Pedestrians are modelled as particles that move on a two-dimensional lattice of cells. Each cell can be occupied
by at most one particle which reﬂects that the interactions between them are repulsive for short distances (’private
sphere’). Particles can move to one of the neighbouring cells based on certain transition probabilities that are are
determined by three factors: (1) the desired direction of motion, (2) interactions with other pedestrians, and (3)
interactions with the infrastructure (walls, doors, etc.).

First of all, basic transition probabilities are determined which reﬂect the preferred walking direction and speed of
each individual in the form of a matrix of preferences M which can be related to the preferred velocity vector and its
ﬂuctuations [146].

Next interactions between pedestrians are taken into account. The exclusion principle accounts for the fact that one
likes to keep a minimal distance from others. However, for larger distances the interaction is assumed to be attractive
to capture the advantage in following the predecessor. This is implemented by virtual chemotaxis. Moving particles
create a ”pheromone” at the cell which they leave, thus creating a kind of trace, the dynamic ﬂoor ﬁeld D. It has its
own dynamics given by diﬀusion and decay [146] which leads to a dilution and ﬁnally the vanishing of the trace after
some time.

For a uniﬁed description another ﬂoor ﬁeld is introduced, the static ﬂoor ﬁeld S. It is constant and takes into

account the interactions with the infrastructure, e.g. preferred areas, walls and other obstacles.

The transition probabilities given by the matrix of preference Mij are now modiﬁed by the strengths of the ﬂoor
ﬁelds Dij and Sij in the target cell (i, j); the details are given in ref.[146]. Due to the use of parallel dynamics it
might happen that two (or more) pedestrians choose the same target cell. Such a situation is called a conﬂict. Due
to hard-core exclusion, at most one persons can move. Introducing a friction parameter µ [148], with probability µ
all pedestrians remain at their site, i.e. nobody is allowed to move. With probability 1
µ one of the individuals
is chosen randomly and allowed to move to the target cell. The eﬀects of µ > 0 are similar to those arising from a
moment of hesitation when people are about to collide and try to avoid the collision.

−

The details of the update rules can be found in [146, 148]; this ﬂoor ﬁeld model has been able to reproduce the
empirically observed phenomena listed earlier in this section. Another interesting phenomenon which has been studied
successfully using the ﬂoor ﬁeld model is the evacuation from a large space with only one exit [147, 148]. However,
this is beyond the scope of this review as we restrict our attention here mostly on traﬃc-like ﬂow properties.

XI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

30

Because of restrictions imposed by the allowed length of the review, we have excluded several biological traﬃc
phenomena where, to our knowledge, very little progress has been made so far in theoretical modelling of the processes.
These include, for example,
(i) bidirectional transport along microtubules where the same cargo moves along the same microtubule track using
sets of opposing motors [150, 151];
(ii) self-organized patterns like, for example, asters and vortices, which have been in several in-vitro experiments [152]
and model calculations [153, 154, 155]

In this article we have reviewed our current understanding of traﬃc-like collective phenomena in living systems
starting from the smallest level of intra-cellular transport and ending at the largest level of traﬃc of pedestrians. So
far as the theoretical methods are concerned, we have restricted our attention to those works where the language of
cellular automata or extensions of TASEP has been used. The success of this modelling strategy has opened up a
new horizon and, we hope, we have provided a glimpse of the exciting frontier.

Acknowledgements: It is our great pleasure to thank Yasushi Okada, Alexander John and Ambarish Kunwar for
enjoyable collaborations on the topics discussed in this review. We are indebted to many colleagues for illuminating
discussions although we are unable to mention all the names because of space limitations.

[1] J. Howard, Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton, (Sinauer Associates, 2001) .
[2] M. Schliwa (ed.), Molecular Motors, (Wiley-VCH, 2002).
[3] D.D. Hackney and F. Tamanoi, The Enzymes, vol.XXIII, Energy Coupling and Molecular Motors (Elsevier, 2004).
[4] M.K. Levin, in ref.[2].
[5] D.J. Crampton and C.C. Richardson, in ref.[3].
[6] E.O. Wilson, The Insect Societies (Belknap, Cambridge, USA, 1971); B. H¨olldobler and E.O. Wilson, The Ants (Belknap,

Cambridge, USA, 1990)

[7] H. Nagase and J. F. Woessner, J. Biol. Chem. 274, 21491 (1999).
[8] M. Whittaker and A. Ayscough, Celltransmisions 17, 3 (2001).
[9] W.T. Coﬀey, Yu. P. Kalmykov and J.T. Waldron, The Langevin Equation 2nd edn. (World Scientiﬁc, 2004).
[10] H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck Equation, (Springer 1984).
[11] A. Mogilner, L. Edelstein-Keshet, L. Bent and A. Spiros, J. Math. Biol. 47, 353 (2003).
[12] S. Gueron, S.A. Levin and D.I. Rubenstein, J. Theor. Biol. 182, 85 (1996).
[13] F. Schweitzer: Brownian Agents and Active Particles, Springer Series in Synergetics (Springer 2003).
[14] E.M. Rauch, M. M. Millonas and D.R. Chialvo, Phys. Lett. A 207, 185 (1995).
[15] S. Wolfram, Theory and Applications of Cellular Automata (World Sci., 1986); A New Kind of Science (Wolfram Research

[16] B. Chopard and M. Droz, Cellular Automata Modeling of Physical Systems (Cambridge University Press, 1998).
[17] J. Marro and R. Dickman, Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions in Lattice Models (Cambridge University Press, 1999).
[18] V. Grimm, Ecological modeling, 115, 129 (1999); S. F. Railsback, Ecological modeling 139, 47 (2001); J. Odell, J. Object

Technol. 1, 35 (2002); See also the special issue of the Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. May 14, 2002, Supplement 3.

[19] G.M. Sch¨utz: Exactly Solvable Models for Many-Body Systems, in C. Domb and J.L. Lebowitz (eds.), Phase Transitions

and Critical Phenomena, Vol. 19 (Academic Press, 2001).

[20] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen, and A. Schadschneider, Phys. Rep. 329, 199 (2000); A. Schadschneider, Physica A 313, 153

Inc., 2002)

(2002).

[21] R. Mahnke, J. Kaupuzs and I. Lubashevsky, Phys. Rep. 408, 1 (2005).
[22] M.R. Evans and R.A. Blythe, Physica A313, 110 (2002).
[23] B. Derrida, M.R. Evans, V. Hakim and V. Pasquier, J. Phys. A 26, 1493 (1993).
[24] G. Sch¨utz and E. Domany, J. Stat. Phys.72, 277 (1993).
[25] N. Rajewsky, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, J. Stat. Phys. 92, 151 (1998).
[26] M.R. Evans, N. Rajewsky and E.R. Speer, J. Stat. Phys. 95, 45 (1999).
[27] J. de Gier and B. Nienhuis, Phys. Rev. E 59, 4899 (1999).
[28] J. Krug, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1882 (1991)
[29] C. MacDonald, J. Gibbs, and A. Pipkin, Biopolymers 6, 1 (1968); C. MacDonald and J. Gibbs, Biopolymers 7, 707 (1969)
[30] A.B. Kolomeisky, G. Sch¨utz, E.B. Kolomeisky and J.P. Straley, J. Phys. A 31, 6911 (1998)
[31] V. Popkov, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and G.M. Sch¨utz: J. Phys. A34, L45 (2001)
[32] V. Popkov and G. Sch¨utz, Europhys. Lett. 48, 257 (1999)
[33] S.A. Janowsky and J.L. Lebowitz, Phys. Rev. A 45, 618 (1992)

31

[34] G. Tripathi and M. Barma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 3039 (1997).
[35] S. Goldstein and E.R. Speer, Phys. Rev. E 58, 4226 (1998).
[36] J. Krug and P.A. Ferrari, J. Phys. A 29, L465 (1996).
[37] M.R. Evans, Europhys. Lett. 36, 13 (1996); J. Phys. A 30, 5669 (1997).
[38] D. Ktitarev, D. Chowdhury and D.E. Wolf, J. Phys. A 30, L221 (1997).
[39] R. Juhasz, L. Santen and F. Igloi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 10601 (2005), cond-mat/0507197.
[40] F. J¨ulicher, A. Ajdari, and J. Prost, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 1269 (1997).
[41] P. Reimann, Phys. Rep. 361, 57-265 (2002).
[42] R.P. Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, vol.1 (Addison-Wesley, 1963).
[43] M. Smoluchowski, Physik. Z. 13, 1069 (1912).
[44] T. Harms and R. Lipowsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2895 (1997).
[45] F. Marchesoni, Phys. Rev. E 56, 2492 (1997).
[46] M.N. Popescu, C.M. Arizmendi, A.L. Salas-Brito and F. Family, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3321 (2000).
[47] Y. Kafri, D.K. Lubensky and D. R. Nelson, Biophys. J. 86, 3373 (2004).
[48] L.B. Shaw, R.K.P. Zia and K.H. Lee, Phys. Rev. E 68, 021910 (2003).
[49] L.B. Shaw, J. P. Sethna and K.H. Lee, Phys. Rev. E 70, 021901 (2004).
[50] L.B. Shaw, A.B. Kolomeisky and K.H. Lee, J. Phys. A 37, 2105 (2004).
[51] G. Lakatos and T. Chou, J. Phys. A 36, 2027 (2003).
[52] T. Chou and G. Lakatos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 198101 (2004).
[53] G. Oster and H. Wang, in ref.[2].
[54] M.E. Fisher and A.B. Kolomeisky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98, 7748 (2001).
[55] R.D. Astumian, Appl. Phys. A 75, 193 (2002).
[56] M. Aridor and L.A. Hannan, Traﬃc 1, 836 (2000); 3, 781 (2002).
[57] N. Hirokawa and R. Takemura, Trends in Biochem. Sci. 28, 558 (2003)
[58] E. Mandelkow and E.M. Mandelkow, Trends in Cell Biol. 12, 585 (2002).
[59] L.S. Goldstein, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98, 6999 (2001); Neuron 40, 415-425 (2003). 28, 558 (2003); Curr. Op. Neurobiol.

14, 564-573 (2004).

[60] I. Derenyi and T. Vicsek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 374 (1995).
[61] I. Derenyi and A. Ajdari, Phys. Rev. E 54, R5 (1996).
[62] Y. Aghababaie, G.I. Menon and M. Plischke, Phys. Rev. E 59, 2578 (1999).
[63] R. Lipowksy, S. Klumpp, and Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 108101 (2001).
[64] Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, S. Klumpp, and R. Lipowksy, Europhys. Lett. 58, 468 (2002).
[65] S. Klumpp and R. Lipowksy, J. Stat. Phys. 113, 233 (2003).
[66] S. Klumpp and R. Lipowksy, Europhys. Lett. 66, 90 (2004).
[67] Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, S. Klumpp, and R. Lipowksy, Phys. Rev. E 69, 061911 (2004).
[68] S. Klumpp, Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, and R. Lipowksy, Biophys. J. 88, 3118 (2005).
[69] R. Lipowksy and S. Klumpp, Physica A 352, 53 (2005).
[70] A. Parmeggiani, T. Franosch, and E. Frey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 086601 (2003); Phys. Rev. E 70, 046101 (2004).
[71] M.R. Evans, R. Juhasz, and L. Santen, Phys. Rev. E 68, 026117 (2003).
[72] R. Juhasz and L. Santen, J. Phys. A 37, 3933 (2004).
[73] V. Popkov, A. Rakos, R.D. Williams, A.B. Kolomeisky, and G.M. Sch¨utz, Phys. Rev. E 67, 066117 (2003).
[74] S. Mukherji and S.M. Bhattacharjee, J. Phys. A 38, L285 (2005).
[75] B. Schmittmann and R.P.K. Zia, in C. Domb and J.L. Lebowitz (eds.), Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Vol. 17

(Academic Press, 1995).

[76] G.A. Klein, K. Kruse, G. Cuniberti and F. J¨ulicher, Phys Rev. Lett. 94, 108102 (2005).
[77] K. Kruse and K. Sekimoto, Phys. Rev. E 66, 031904 (2002).
[78] K. Nishinari, Y. Okada, A. Schadschneider and D. Chowdhury, Phys. Rev. Lett. (2005), in press.
[79] Y. Okada and N. Hirokawa, Science 283, 1152 (1999).
[80] Y. Okada and N. Hirokawa, Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 97, 640 (2000).
[81] Y. Okada, H. Higuchi, and N. Hirokawa, Nature, 424, 574 (2003).
[82] R. Nitta, M. Kikkawa, Y. Okada, and N. Hirokawa, Science 305, 678 (2003).
[83] Y. Okada, K. Nishinari, D. Chowdhury, A. Schadschneider, and N. Hirokawa (to be published).
[84] S. Saﬀarian, I. E. Collier, B.L. Marmer, E.L. Elson and G. Goldberg, Science 306, 108 (2004).
[85] J. Mai, I.M. Sokolov and A. Blumen, Phys. Rev. E 64, 011102 (2001).
[86] T. Antal and P.L. Krapivsky, cond-mat/0504652.
[87] Y. Hiratsuka, M. Miyata and T. Q. P. Uyeda, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 331, 318 (2005).
[88] A. Vartak et al. to be published.
[89] D. B. Weibel, P. Garstecki, D. Ryan, W. R. DiLuzio, M. Mayer, J. E. Seto and G. M. Whitesides, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

USA, 102, 11963 (2005).

[90] E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz, J.L. Deneubourg, S. Aron and S. Camazine, Trends in Ecol. Evol. 12, 188 (1997)
[91] C. Anderson, G. Theraulaz and J.L. Deneubourg, Insect. Sociaux 49, 99 (2002)
[92] Z. Huang and J.H. Fewell, Trends in Ecol. Evol. 17, 403 (2002).
[93] E. Bonabeau, Ecosystems 1, 437 (1998).
[94] G. Theraulaz, J. Gautrais, S. Camazine and J.L. Deneubourg, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 361, 1263 (2003).

32

[95] J. Gautrais, G. Theraulaz, J.L. Deneubourg and C. Anderson, J. Theor. Biol. 215, 363 (2002).
[96] L. Edelstein-Keshet, J. Math. Biol. 32, 303 (1994).
[97] G. Theraulaz, E. Bonabeau, S.C. Nicolis, R.V. Sole, V. Fourcassie, S. Blanco, R. Fournier, J.L. Joly, P. Fernandez, A.

Grimal, P. Dalle and J.L. Deneubourg, Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. 99, 9645 (2002).

[98] M. Dorigo, G. di Caro and L.M. Gambardella, Artiﬁcial Life 5(3), 137 (1999); Special issue of Future Generation

Computer Systems dedicated to ant-algorithms (2000).

[99] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo and G. Theraulaz, Nature 400, 39 (2000).
[100] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo and G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Oxford University

Press, 1999).

[101] M.J.B. Krieger, J.B. Billeter and L. Keller, Nature 406, 992 (2000).
[102] F.L.W. Ratnieks and C. Anderson, Insectes Sociaux 46, 95 (1999).
[103] C. Anderson and F.L.W. Ratnieks, Am. Nat. 154, 521 (1999).
[104] F.L.W. Ratnieks and C. Anderson, Am. Nat. 154, 536 (1999).
[105] C. Anderson and F.L.W. Ratnieks, Insectes Sociaux 47, 198 (2000).
[106] C. Anderson and D.W. McShea, Biol. Rev. 76, 211 (2001).
[107] C. Anderson and F.L.W. Ratnieks, in: Complexity and complex systems in industry, eds. I.P. McCarthy and T. Rakotobe-

Joel, (University of Warwick, U.K.), 92 (2000).

[108] E. Bonabeau and C. Meyer, Harvard Business Review (May), 107 (2001).
[109] S. Camazine, J.L. Deneubourg, N. R. Franks, J. Sneyd, G. Theraulaz, E. Bonabeau: Self-organization in Biological

Systems (Princeton University Press, 2001).

[110] A.S. Mikhailov and V. Calenbuhr, From Cells to Societies: Models of Complex Coherent Action (Springer, 2002).
[111] J. Watmough and L. Edelstein-Keshet, J. Theor. Biol. 176, 357 (1995).
[112] I.D. Couzin and N.R. Franks, Proc. Roy Soc. London B 270, 139 (2003).
[113] D. Helbing, F. Schweitzer, J. Keltsch, P. Molnar: Phys. Rev. E56, 2527 (1997)
[114] B. Derrida, Phys. Rep. 301, 65 (1998)
[115] B. Derrida and M.R. Evans, in: Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics in One Dimension, ed. V. Privman (Cambridge

University Press, 1997)

[116] O.J. O’Loan, M.R. Evans, M.E. Cates, Europhys. Lett. 42, 137 (1998); Phys. Rev. E58, 1404 (1998).
[117] D. Chowdhury, R.C. Desai, Eur. Phys. J. B15, 375 (2000)
[118] M. Burd and N. Aranwela, Insect. Sociaux 50, 3 (2003).
[119] D. Chowdhury, V. Guttal, K. Nishinari, A. Schadschneider, J. Phys. A:Math. Gen. 35, L573 (2002)
[120] K. Nishinari, D. Chowdhury, A. Schadschneider, Phys. Rev. E 67, 036120 (2003)
[121] P. F. Arndt, T. Heinzel and V. Rittenberg, J. Phys. A 31, L45 (1998); J. Stat. Phys. 97, 1 (1999).
[122] N. Rajewsky, T. Sasamoto and E.R. Speer, Physica A 279, 123 (2000).
[123] A. John, A. Schadschneider, D. Chowdhury and K. Nishinari, J. Theor. Biol. 231, 279 (2004).
[124] M. Burd, D. Archer, N. Aranwela and D.J. Stradling, Am. Nat. 159, 283 (2002).
[125] M. Burd et al. (2005) unpublished.
[126] D. E. Jackson, M. Holcombe and F.L.W. Ratnieks, Nature, 432, 907 (2004).
[127] D. Helbing: Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 1067 (2001)
[128] M. Schreckenberg, S.D. Sharma (Ed.): Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics, Springer 2001
[129] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, T. Vicsek: Nature 407, 487 (2000)
[130] D.E. Wolf and P. Grassberger (Editors): Friction, Arching, Contact Dynamics, (World Scientiﬁc, 1997)
[131] D. Helbing, P. Molnar: Phys. Rev. E51, 4282 (1995)
[132] L.F. Henderson: Transp. Res. 8, 509 (1974)
[133] D. Helbing: Complex Systems 6, 391 (1992)
[134] R. Hughes: Math. Comp. Simul. 53, 367 (2000)
[135] R. Hughes: Transp. Res. B 36, 507 (2001)
[136] P. Thompson and E. Marchant: Fire Safety Journal 24, 131 (1995)
[137] A. Nakayama, K. Hasebe, Y. Sugiyama: Phys. Rev. E71, 036121 (2005)
[138] D. Helbing, J. Keltsch, P. Molnar: Nature 388, 47 (1997)
[139] S. Marconi, B. Chopard: In Cellular Automata, Lect. Notes Comp. Sc. 2493, 231 (2002)
[140] B. Chopard, M. Droz: Cellular automata Modeling of Physical Systems, Cambridge University Press (1998)
[141] M. Fukui and Y. Ishibashi: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 68, 2861 (1999)
[142] M. Muramatsu and T. Nagatani: Physica A275, 281 (2000)
[143] H. Kl¨upfel, T. Meyer-K¨onig, J. Wahle and M. Schreckenberg: in Theory and Practical Issues on Cellular Automata, S.

Bandini, T. Worsch (Eds.), Springer (2000)

[144] P.G. Gipps and B. Marksj¨os: Math. and Comp. in Simulation 27, 95 (1985)
[145] K. Bolay: Diploma Thesis, Stuttgart University (1998)
[146] C. Burstedde, K. Klauck, A. Schadschneider, J. Zittartz: Physica A295, 507 (2001)
[147] A. Kirchner, A. Schadschneider: Physica A312, 260 (2002)
[148] A. Kirchner, K. Nishinari, A. Schadschneider: Phys. Rev. E67, 056122 (2003)
[149] A. Kirchner, H. Kl¨upfel, K. Nishinari, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreckenberg: J. Stat. Mech.: Theor. Exp., P10011 (2004)
[150] M.A. Welte, Curr. Biol. 14, R525 (2004).
[151] S.P. Gross, Phys. Biol. 1, R1 (2004).

[152] F.J. Nedlec, T. Surrey, A.C. maggs and S. Leibler, Nature 389, 305 (1997); T. Surrey, F. Nedlec, S. Leibler and E.

Karsenti, Science 292, 1167 (2001); F. Nedlec, T. Surrey and E. Karsenti, Curr. Op. Cell Biol. 15, 118 (2003).

[153] H. Y. Lee and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. E 64, 056113 (2001).
[154] S. Sankararaman, G. I. Menon and P.B. Sunil Kumar, Phys. Rev. E 70, 031905 (2004).
[155] F. Ziebert and W. Zimmermann, cond-mat/0502236 (2005).

33

