5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chaotic desynchronization of multi-strain diseases

Ira B. Schwartz1, Leah B. Shaw1, Derek A. T. Cummings3, Lora Billings2, Marie McCrary2, Donald S. Burke3
1US Naval Research Laboratory, Code 6792, Nonlinear Systems Dynamics Section,
Plasma Physics Division, Washington, DC 20375
2Montclair State University, Department of Mathematical Sciences, Upper Montclair, NJ 07043 and
3Johns Hopkins University, Department of International Health,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205

Multi-strain diseases are diseases that consist of several strains, or serotypes. The serotypes may
interact by antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), in which infection with a single serotype is
asymptomatic, but infection with a second serotype leads to serious illness accompanied by greater
infectivity. It has been observed from serotype data of dengue hemorrhagic fever that outbreaks
of the four serotypes occur asynchronously. Both autonomous and seasonally driven outbreaks
were studied in a model containing ADE. For suﬃciently small ADE, the number of infectives of
each serotype synchronizes, with outbreaks occurring in phase. When the ADE increases past a
threshold, the system becomes chaotic, and infectives of each serotype desynchronize. However,
certain groupings of the primary and secondary infectives remain synchronized even in the chaotic
regime.

Recently there has been a wide range of work on
chaotic synchronization in dynamical systems [1, 2].
When synchronizing chaotic systems, almost all of the
work deals with coupled or connected systems [3] and
analyzing their stability. In biological systems, such as
population models, synchronization may result from cou-
pling strengths being enhanced [4], while desynchroniza-
tion may take place as a result of vaccine control as in
measles [5].
In this work, we consider the dynamics of
a single population to shed light on the phase dynamics
of multi-strain diseases [6]. The dynamics observed ex-
hibits phase-locked regular behavior, as well as chaotic
phase desynchronization between strains. Although we
consider a single population model, we use the term “syn-
chronization” to describe phase locking between variables
[7].

Many population models in the past have considered
single strain diseases, as in childhood diseases. In this
case, the population may be grouped into the following
compartments: susceptibles, infectives, and recovered [8].
With no seasonal forcing included in the model, the only
endemic solution to the single strain SIR models is an
equilibrium point [9].

However, many diseases have co-circulating strains, or
serotypes, such as inﬂuenza [10], malaria [11], and dengue
virus [12]. Such diseases display anti-genic diversity, ex-
hibiting distinct serotypes when measured. Recent ef-
forts at modeling multi-strain diseases have explored the
oscillatory dynamics generated by multiple co-existing
serotypes with partial cross-immunity [10, 13, 14]. How-
ever, current thinking regarding the interacting serotypes
of dengue virus is that cross-reactive antibodies act to en-
hance the infectiousness of a subsequent infection by an-
other serotype [15]. This is known as antibody-dependent
enhancement.

It has been shown through recent serology measure-
ments in Thailand that dengue fever, which has four co-
circulating serotypes, exhibits asynchronous outbreaks.
That is, each serotype has peaks that occur at diﬀerent

(See Fig. 7 in the Appendix.) Note that most
times [16].
observed infections are secondary [16], due to increased
symptom severity.

In this paper, we analyze how the antibody-dependent
enhancement (ADE) factor controls the onset of oscilla-
tory outbreaks, as well as how asynchronous secondary
infections are controlled dynamically.

I. DESCRIPTION OF MODEL

To model the spread of multi-strain diseases, we follow
the approach of Ferguson et. al [17], where they restrict
the model to two serotypes. Our modeling approach dif-
fers in the general number of serotypes and in that all
compartments are distinct from one another. The full
model for n serotypes is described below. Our simula-
tions will be based on four serotypes, based on measured
dengue data in Thailand [16].

The variable deﬁnitions are as follows: s, Susceptible
to all serotypes; xi, Primary infectious with serotype i;
ri, Primary recovered from serotype i; xij, Secondary
infectious, currently infected with serotype j, but previ-
ously had i (i 6= j). The model is a system of ODEs
describing the rates of change of the population fractions
within each compartment [18]:

ds
dt

dxi
dt

dri
dt

= µ − βs



xi + φ

xji

− µds

(1)

n

Xi=1



Xj6=i



= βs 

xi + φ

xji

− σxi − µdxi

(2)



Xj6=i



= σxi − βri



xj + φ

xkj 

− µdri (3)

Xj6=i



Xk6=j



dxij
dt

= βri 

xj + φ

xkj 

− σxij − µdxij .

(4)



Xk6=j



The parameters µ, µd, β, and σ denote birth, death, con-
tact, and recovery rates, respectively. We assume that
individuals who have recovered from two infections are
immune to further infection since tertiary infections are
reported very rarely [16]. The ﬁxed parameters through-
out the paper are given by: µ = µd = 0.02, β = 200,
and σ = 100, all with units of years−1 [18]. (Mortality
rate, µd, is set equal to the birth rate so that the pop-
ulation remains constant in time.) Antibody-dependent
enhancement is governed by the parameter φ, which has
not previously been measured for populations. Notice
that in Eqs. 1-4, ADE enters in a nonlinear enhancement
factor when φ > 1. We use a single φ for all strains for
ease of analysis. Thus any loss of synchrony between the
strains will result not from asymmetry but from the dy-
namics itself. Finally, notice that since the value of µ
is small compared to β and σ, it can be considered as a
small parameter.

II. RESULTS

A. Bifurcation structure

Unlike the usual SIR models for single strains, which
in the absence of forcing have only steady state behav-
ior, the addition of multiple serotypes can induce regular
and chaotic outbreaks. In particular, for a critical value
of φ, there exists a Hopf bifurcation to periodic oscilla-
tions. See the bifurcation diagram given in Fig. 1 for the
transition from steady state to oscillatory behavior as a
function of φ. The usual trivial steady state, which has
the population consisting of all susceptibles (s = 1) and
the rest of the components at zero, is unstable.
(The
trivial solution of Eqs. 1-4 with n = 4 serotypes has 4
unstable, 12 strongly attracting, and 5 weakly attract-
ing directions.) The non-trivial, or endemic, steady state
may be computed numerically for arbitrary φ. At steady
state, we notice the following: 1. The primary infectives
are equal. 2. The recovered variables are equal. 3. All
secondary infectives are equal.

Compartmental equality at steady state holds before
the Hopf bifurcation point as well as after the Hopf point
(although past the Hopf bifurcation point the steady
state solution is unstable). We make these assumptions
about the model at equilibrium, and the resulting local
dynamics can be reduced to a four-dimensional system:

dy1
dt
dy2
dt
dy3
dt

= µ − n β y1y2 − n (n − 1) β φ y1y4

= β y1y2 + (n − 1) β φ y1y4 − σ y2

(5)

(6)

= σ y2 − (n − 1) β y3y2 − (n − 1)2 β φ y3y4 (7)

2

FIG. 1: Bifurcation diagram for the autonomous model with
β = 200, σ = 100, µ = 0.02. Shown for each φ are the
maxima (black) and minima (gray) of the susceptibles during
a 100 year run, after transients were removed.

dy4
dt

= β y3y2 + (n − 1) β φ y3y4 − σ y4

(8)

Notice that for simplicity we have removed the mortality
terms in each of the variables, since they are of O(µ) and
have a negligible eﬀect on the steady states. Moreover,
removing the mortality terms allows an analytical esti-
mate of the endemic steady states and stability. Mortal-
ity does need to be included in the long time asymptotic
runs, which we do below. The reduced model has the
following steady state solution:

σ
β (φ + 1)

,

µ
n σ

,

σ
(n − 1) β (φ + 1)

,

µ
n (n − 1) σ (cid:21)

.

(cid:20)

(9)

Given the steady state solution as a function of φ in
Eq. 9, to compute the stability we need to evaluate the
linearization about the steady state. Therefore, we take
the Jacobian of the vector ﬁeld of the reduced model
about the steady state and examine the characteristic
polynomial for the eigenvalues. Recalling that µ is a
small parameter, we can expand the solutions to the char-
acteristic equation in terms of µ. Since the data in [16]
displays four serotypes, the number of serotypes is set to
n = 4. We have a strongly attracting direction given by
z1(µ) = −σ + O(µ), a weakly attracting direction given
by z2(µ) = −(3 β µ (φ + 1)2)/(4 σ) + O(µ2), and a pair of
complex eigenvalues:

z±(µ) =

β D(φ)
8 σ

µ ± i(βµ)3/2(1 − f (φ)) + O(µ2), (10)

where f ′(φ) < 0. The sign of the expression D(φ) ≡
3 φ2 − 4 φ − 4 determines the stability of the complex
pair. Since φ is assumed to be greater than or equal
to unity, D(φ) < 0 if φ ∈ [1, 2) and positive otherwise.
Therefore, the steady state undergoes a Hopf bifurcation
at φ = 2. The results are close to numerical simulation,
since mortality terms were dropped in the analysis but
included in the simulations.

3

(a)

0.24

0.23

s

0.22

0.21

0.2

0

(b)

0.26

0.24

s

0.22

0.2

0

(c)

(a)

(c)

5

15
10
time (years)

20

25

(b)

10

20

30

time (years)

40

50

FIG. 2: Time series plots of the susceptibles for the au-
tonomous case, where β = 200, σ = 100, µ = 0.02.
(a)
Periodic case for ADE factor φ = 1.725.
(b) Chaotic case for
φ = 1.73. (c) Longer time series for chaotic case, φ = 1.73,
with sampling once a year.

Since the reduced model does not capture the asyn-
chronous behavior past the Hopf point, we continue our
analysis using the full model. As we increase φ beyond
the Hopf point, the dynamics exhibits periodic time se-
ries, as plotted in Fig. 2(a). The susceptibles exhibit a
period of approximately ﬁve years when φ = 1.725. The
actual range of stable periodic solution is quite small, and
occurs over a ∆φ of 0.004838. (See the quick transition
to irregular oscillations after the steady state in the bifur-
cation diagram given in Fig. 1.) Past the φ value where
periodic solutions become unstable, we ﬁnd chaotic be-
havior, indicated by a positive maximum Lyapunov ex-
ponent for most φ values in that region. (The chaotic at-
tractors persist over many initial conditions chosen from
a random distribution.) We note that in this complicated
region, there are small windows with attracting limit cy-
cles resulting in a zero maximum Lyapunov exponent.
Lyapunov exponents were computed by integrating lin-
ear variational equations along solutions to Eqs. 1-4. We
show examples of chaotic oscillations in Fig. 2 (b) and (c)
for short and long time series. Notice that in Fig. 2(c),
the time series exhibits oscillatory regions which have a
slowly growing envelope, interspersed with chaotic inter-
vals. We will exploit this structure to examine how each
serotype behaves dynamically.

for autonomous system.

FIG. 3: Phase diﬀerence analysis of time series in a chaotic
region with φ = 1.73
(a) Time
intervals between local maxima of secondary infective group
x2,1. (b) Phase diﬀerences between compartments currently
infected with serotype 1. Primary infective x1 and secondary
infectives x3,1 and x4,1 are compared to x2,1. Maxima occur
in phase. (c) Comparison between compartments currently
infected with diﬀerent serotypes. Secondary infectives x1,2,
x1,3, and x1,4 are compared to x2,1. Maxima occur out of
phase during chaotic intervals.

B. Phase analysis

Since the measured data for dengue fever shows that
the serotypes oscillate out of phase, we investigate the
phase of primary and secondary infectives with respect
to a particular secondary infective in the full model of
Eqs. 1-4. To measure phase diﬀerences with respect to a
reference infective, let Y (t) denote the reference infective,
and Z(t) another infective. Let {tk} denote the sequence
of times for local maxima of Y (t), and {τk} the times
for local maxima of Z(t). For τm ∈ (tk, tk+1), deﬁne the
phase of Z relative to Y in the interval as ΨZY (τm) =
2π τm−tk

tk+1−tk .
In Fig. 3, we compare the relative phases of infective
groups for φ = 1.73. For the secondary infective group
x2,1, we plot the inter-maximum intervals in years in
Fig. 3(a). Notice that during the non-chaotic times, the
oscillation intervals grow slowly, until they begin to vary
in an irregular manner during the chaotic phase. In pan-
els (b) and (c), a direct comparison between x2,1 and the
other groups is plotted using the phase diﬀerencing equa-
tion ΨZY (τm), normalized between −π and π. In panel
(b), all other infectives who have serotype 1 as the cur-
rent infection are practically in-phase with group x2,1. In
contrast, in panel (c), all those having serotype 1 as the
primary infection, and currently a diﬀerent serotype as

4

1

2
3
time (years)

4

5

(c)

(a)

(b)

S

0.247

0.246

0.245

0.244

0.243

0.242

0

(a)

(b)

0.24

0.23

S

0.22

0.21

0

20

40

time (years)

60

FIG. 4: Dynamics of seasonally driven ADE model, where
β0 = 200, σ = 100, µ = 0.02, and the forcing amplitude
β1 = 0.05. (a) Periodic time series of susceptible population,
for the ADE factor φ =1.5.
(b) Quasi-periodic time series
of susceptibles, for φ = 1.7244.
(c) Projected time series
sampled at intervals of one year for the susceptible population,
showing the quasi-periodicity (same parameters as in (b)).

the secondary infection, lose synchronization when the
dynamics exhibits chaotic behavior. During the slow
buildup phase, however, the groups are still synchronized.
Similar desynchronization during chaotic time series oc-
curs for the other primary and secondary infectives (not
pictured here).

C. Seasonally driven case

Although the analysis suggests that chaos is respon-
sible for the observed lag between serotypes, one could
argue that since there is a seasonal component to the
disease, adding a periodic forcing term should synchro-
nize the serotypes, even when they are chaotic. To ad-
dress this issue, we modiﬁed the model to include a con-
tact rate that modulates with a period of one year; i.e.,
β(t) = β0(1 + β1 cos(2πt)), where β1 is the forcing am-
plitude. (β1 = 0.05 was used in this study, but similar
behavior is observed for other forcing amplitudes.) The
contact rate prefactor, β0 = 200, is constant as before.
Analogous to the Hopf bifurcation in the autonomous
system, bifurcation onto a torus occurs at φc = 1.7243.
For an ADE factor below φc, we observe periodic be-
havior, as shown in Fig. 4(a), while for an ADE factor
just above φc, we ﬁnd quasi-periodic behavior, plotted in
Figs. 4(b) and (c). In panel (c), the time series of suscep-
tibles was sampled at the forcing period and plotted as
successive iterates to show a cross-section of the torus. In
both periodic and quasi-periodic cases, the serotypes are
all in phase, and there is no desynchronization. However,
for higher ADE, we ﬁnd that the driven system becomes
chaotic, and there is desynchronization.

Figure 5 shows the phase diﬀerences between the x2,1
secondary infective and other infectives, for an ADE fac-
tor of φ = 1.74 and forcing amplitude β1 = 0.05, where

FIG. 5: Chaotic phase desynchronization in periodically
driven system. The ADE factor is φ = 1.74. (a) Phase diﬀer-
ences between compartments currently infected with serotype
1. Primary infective x1 and secondary infectives x3,1 and x4,1
are compared to x2,1. Maxima usually occur in phase. (b)
Comparison between compartments currently infected with
diﬀerent serotypes. Secondary infectives x1,2, x1,3, and x1,4
are compared to x2,1. Maxima occur out of phase. (Windows
of synchrony occur during the oscillatory regions that have a
slowly growing envelope.)

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

−π

0
phase difference

π

FIG. 6: A histogram plot showing the statistics of the phase
diﬀerences between secondary infections and primary infec-
tions from Fig. 5. Black bars: frequency of phase diﬀerences
for compartments currently infected with serotype 1 (data
from Fig. 5(a)), gray bars:
frequency of phase diﬀerences
for compartments currently infected with diﬀerent serotypes
(data from Fig. 5(b)).

the solution is chaotic. Notice that in the top panel,
where the phase diﬀerences are for other compartments
currently infected with serotype 1, there is phase syn-
chrony on average when compared to the case where the
secondary infections are from a diﬀerent serotype (second
panel). Although the phase synchrony is not as good as
in the autonomous case in Fig. 3, we can get a statistical
measure showing how on average the phase locking com-
pares by computing a histogram of both cases. This is
shown in Fig. 6, where the grey bars correspond to phase
diﬀerences of Fig. 5(b), and the black bars correspond to
the data from 5(a). Notice that when comparing primary
infections of serotype 1 to secondary infections that cur-
rently have serotype 1, there is a strong phase locking

component on average.

III. CONCLUSIONS

We have analyzed a model for multi-strain diseases
with antibody-dependent enhancement. When the ADE
factor increases above a threshold, the system’s behavior
is chaotic, and outbreaks of diﬀerent strains occur asyn-
chronously. This observation corresponds qualitatively
with epidemiological data on asynchronous outbreaks of
dengue fever (see Appendix).

We have also observed that although the diﬀerent
serotypes desynchronize when the solutions are chaotic,
there is surprising structure in the peak outbreaks of the
serotypes when comparing the appropriate secondary in-
fectives to the appropriate primary infectives. Although
there is no current vaccine available for all serotypes, the
results here point to potential new methods of analysis
and monitoring of multi-strain diseases. In the ﬁeld, the
majority of the cases reported are secondary infections.
Therefore, by observing a small percentage of the inci-
dence in the secondary infections of one serotype, syn-
chronization would imply that the data is representative
of the general behavior of all the groups infected with
that serotype, including those with only a primary infec-
tion. Further global analysis techniques based on center

5

manifold methods can be used to explain the synchro-
nization of particular primary and secondary infectives
when the time series becomes chaotic; this approach is
the subject of further study.

Research was supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Re-
search and the Center for Army Analysis. LB and MM
were supported by the National Science Foundation un-
der Grants DMS-0414087 and CTS-0319555. LBS is cur-
rently a National Research Council post doctoral fellow.
DATC and DSB were supported by the National Insti-
tutes of Health under Grant U01GM070708 and by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration un-
der Grant NA04OAR4310138.

APPENDIX A: EPIDEMIOLOGICAL DATA

Fig. 7, reprinted from [16], shows the frequency of de-
tection of each of the four dengue types at one hospital
in Bangkok, Thailand, over a continuous 27 year period
of monitoring. Infecting serotypes were deﬁned by iso-
lation of replication- competent virus and/or detection
of viral genome in peripheral blood. (It should be noted
that serological measurements were performed for only a
fraction of all dengue cases.) Observe that peaks of the
dengue virus types are asynchronous.

[1] D. H. Z. S. C. Marubia, A. S. Mikhailov, Emergence of
dynamical order (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2004).
[2] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, and J. Kurths, Synchro-
nization: A universal concept in nonlinear science (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001).
[3] S. Boccaletti et al., Phys. Lett. 366, 1 (2002).
[4] A. L. Lloyd and V. A. A. Jansen, Math. Biosciences 188,

[5] P. Rohani, D. J. D. Earn, and B. T. Grenfell, Science

1 (2004).

286, 968 (1999).

[6] L. M. Bartley, C. A. Donnelly, and G. P. Garnett, Am.

J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 96, 387 (2002).

[7] Although it has been common practice to examine
chaotic synchronization in coupled systems, it is not the
most general setting. One can indeed have general slaved
behavior, including chaotic saddles, in a single dynami-
cal system, where the dynamics is constrained to a center
manifold. The result is that part of the system is slaved to
another. See [19] for a description and review of dynam-
ics on center and singular manifolds, and the references
within.

[8] R. Anderson and R. May, Infectious diseases of humans:

Dynamics and Control (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1991).

[9] I. B. Schwartz, and H. L. Smith, J. Math. Bio. 18, 223

[10] V. Andreasen, J. Lin, and S. A. Levin, J. Math. Bio. 35,

(1983).

825 (1997).

[11] S. Gupta, K. Trenholme, R. M. Anderson, and K. P. Day,

Science 263, 961 (1994).

[12] N. M. Ferguson, C. A. Donnelly, and R. M. Anderson,
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B 354, 757 (1999).

[13] J. Dawes and J. Gog, J. Math. Bio. 45, 471 (2002).
[14] L. Esteva and C. Vargas, J. Math. Bio. 46, 31 (2003).
[15] D. W. Vaughn et al., J. Infect. Diseases 181, 2 (2000).
[16] A. Nisalak et al., Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 68, 191 (2003).
[17] N. Ferguson, R. Anderson, and S. Gupta, Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 96, 790 (1999).

[18] D.A.T. Cummings, Doctoral Thesis, Johns Hopkins Uni-

[19] D. Morgan, E. M. Bollt, and I. B. Schwartz, Phys. Rev.

versity, 2004.

E 68, 056210 (2003).

6

FIG. 7: Frequency of detection of each of the four Dengue virus types per month at the Queen Sirikit National Institute for
Child Health from 1973-1999. Reprinted from [16].

