Coarse-graining protein energetics in sequence variables

Fei Zhou,1 Gevorg Grigoryan,2 Steve R. Lustig,3 Amy

E. Keating,2 Gerbrand Ceder,4 and Dane Morgan4

1Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute

of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

2Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

3DuPont Central Research and Development,

Experimental Station, Wilmington, Delaware 19880, USA

4Department of Materials Science and Engineering,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

(Dated: December 5, 2013)

Abstract

We show that cluster expansion (CE), previously used to model solid-state materials with binary

or ternary conﬁgurational disorder, can be extended to the protein design problem. We present a

generalized CE framework suitable for protein studies, in which properties such as the energy can

be unambiguously expanded in the amino-acid sequence space. The CE coarse-grains over non-

sequence degrees of freedom (e.g., sidechain conformations) and thereby simpliﬁes the problem

of designing proteins, or predicting the compatibility of a sequence with a given structure, by

many orders of magnitude. The CE is physically transparent, and can be evaluated through linear

regression on the energy of training sequences. The approach is demonstrated on two distinct

backbone folds. We show that good prediction accuracy is obtained with up to pairwise interactions

for a coiled-coil backbone, and that triplet interactions are important in the energetics of a more

globular zinc-ﬁnger backbone.

PACS numbers: 87.14.Ee, 87.15.Aa

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Protein folding and protein design stand among the most formidable challenges in con-

temporary computational biology. The 3-D structure of a protein is uniquely encoded in its

1-D sequence of amino acids (AA), and enormous theoretical and computational research

eﬀort has been devoted to understanding how [1, 2, 3]. The problem can be posed two

ways: protein folding deals with predicting the ﬁnal 3-D structure of a protein given its AA

sequence, whereas protein design is concerned with ﬁnding an optimal sequence to fold to

a pre-deﬁned structure. Protein design is useful both because it allows for the engineering

of macromolecules with desired properties [4, 5, 6], and because the development of compu-

tational design methods deepens our general understanding of protein folding and stability.

Scoring functions that indicate the ability of sequences to fold to any given structure are

central to both the folding and design problems. These range from statistical knowledge-

based functions derived from databases of known protein structures [7] to empirical functions

mainly based on experimental measurements [8], to more physics-based functions that at-

tempt to model protein free energy [8, 9].

Physics-based energy functions have the potential of being the most accurate and inter-

pretable. These express the energy of a protein sequence adopting a speciﬁed structure in

terms of atomic coordinates, and account for energies arising from van der Waals (vdW)

forces, electrostatics, and solvation. All atoms in a protein can be classiﬁed as either “back-

bone” or “side-chain”. The backbone atoms are the same for each AA and represent the

overall structure or “fold” of a protein, as shown for two examples in Fig. 1. The side-chain

atoms are diﬀerent for diﬀerent AAs, and give rise to additional degrees of freedom termed

“side-chain conformations” or “rotamers” (see Fig. 1B-C). Even for a relatively small pro-

tein fold of 100 AAs there are roughly 10130 possible sequences. Accounting for side-chain
conformations expands the search space to ˜10230 structures. The computational complex-

ity of high-quality physics-based scoring functions makes a search for optimal sequences

intractable. Because sequence determines the structure of a protein, however, a function

should exist that maps sequence directly to energy. A suﬃciently accurate and computa-

tionally tractable approximation of this function would ﬁnd wide spread use in computational

studies of protein structure.

Mapping sequence to energy is similar to the conﬁgurational problem in alloy theory

[10, 11, 12] where distributions of A and B atoms on a ﬁxed topology of lattice sites speciﬁes

the energy [13, 14, 15, 16]. The technique of cluster expansion (CE) [10, 11] has proven

2

extremely useful for rapidly evaluating the energies of alloys and searching for low-energy

conﬁgurations.

In this Letter, we apply CE to the protein design problem, deriving two

structure-speciﬁc functions that can determine the energies of a sequence adopting either

a coiled-coil or a zinc-ﬁnger geometry. Searches using these functions can be used in the

future to identify low-energy sequences that adopt these folds. Further, CE can potentially

be applied directly to the more challenging protein folding problem by deriving a function

speciﬁc to each of the ∼1,000 known protein folds. Rapid evaluation of a sequence with the

full panel of functions could identify the best structure. This approach, termed “threading”

or “fold recognition”, is widely used for structure prediction in combination with statistically

derived energy functions.

While in alloys one typically treats binary distributions (two possible species per site) or

on rare occasions ternaries [17, 18], the general protein design problem requires extension

to all twenty possible AAs. For a protein of L residues let the variable σi = 1 . . . m indicate

which of the m AAs is present at site i. A sequence is then expressed by ~σ = {σ1, . . . , σL}.

The energy of a protein E[~σ, ~τ ] depends on this sequence and on the other microscopic infor-

mation ~τ (e.g. positions of all atoms on the protein and solvent molecules). The important

energy function in protein design, Emin[~σ], can be obtained by optimizing over ~τ :

Emin[~σ] = min

E[~σ, ~τ ].

~τ

The CE is a general approach to obtain Emin by expanding in a suitable set of independent

basis functions. Let i, j, k = 1 . . . L denote AA sites and α, β, γ = 1 . . . m − 1 index basis

functions {1, φi

α, φi

αφj

β, φi

αφj

βφk

γ, . . .}. The energy can be expanded as:

Emin[~σ] = J∅ + X
i,α
J ijk
αβγφi

+ X
ijk,αβγ

αφi
J i

α(σi) + X

J ij
αβφi

α(σi)φj

β(σj)

ij,αβ

α(σi)φj

β(σj)φk

γ(σk) + . . .

where the Js are expansion coeﬃcients. We leave it to a future paper to describe the

mathematical properties of this basis set and to show its completeness in the space of all

possible L-site AA sequences. Eqn. 2 is in principle exact, though in practice the expansion

has to be truncated. While the J coeﬃcients depend on the choice of basis functions, the

sum over terms spanning an cluster of AA sites {i, . . . , j} has a physical interpretation, and

(1)

(2)

3

can be deﬁned as eﬀective interaction (EI) between the AA’s on these sites:

EI(σi . . . σj) = X

J i...j
α...βφi

α(σi) . . . φj

β(σj).

(3)

α...β

The choice of point basis functions φα is in principle arbitrary though we have found that pre-

viously proposed basis functions [10] have poor numerical stability for the high dimensional

conﬁguration spaces of proteins and make the expansion converge slowly. In this Letter we

use φα(σ) = δ(σ − α). Hence φα(m) ≡ 0 and the hypothetical sequence {m, . . . , m} has
energy J0. If we assign m to Alanine (Ala) any point EI(σi) equals the energetic contribu-
tion of σi relative to Ala. Therefore, point EIs exactly correspond to the change in energy

upon mutating a residue to alanine, a quantity that is frequently measured experimentally

to assess the importance of a residue to stability. Pair EI(σi, σj) is the interaction of an AA

pair. This is also a measure well known to biochemists [19, 20]. This concept can be taken

beyond pairs – contributions purely from triplets can be measured similarly. Although this

is diﬃcult to do experimentally, the CE allows one to systematically analyze the importance

of higher order interactions.

Given Emin for enough sequences, Js can be extracted by standard ﬁtting procedures.

Determining which Js to keep in the ﬁt is not always obvious. While one may be guided by

the idea that point terms are larger than pairs, which in turn are larger than triplets, this

is not always true. We use a more systematic way for evaluating important Js based on the

cross-validation (CV) score [21]. Essentially, the CV score is the average error with which

each sequence is predicted when left out of the ﬁtting, and as such is a good measure of the

prediction power. Our procedure consists of ﬁtting a selected set of candidate clusters and

order them by the average |J|. Clusters for which the J value largely arises from numeric

noise increase the CV score, and are excluded. When a cluster is included, so are all of its

sub-clusters.

We demonstrate the power of the CE by testing it on two diﬀerent protein folds, mimicking

the protein design problem. The folding energy is deﬁned as the energy diﬀerence between

the folded and the unfolded states: Efolding = Efolded − Eunfolded. Although the CE can in

principle be used with any energy model, we test it here with a physically meaningful but

relatively simple expression similar to Hamiltonians commonly used in the design ﬁeld [22]:

E[~σ, ~τ ] = EvdW + Eelec,wat + Esolv,sc + Etorsion,

(4)

4

FIG. 1: A) Two protein folds - the coiled coil (top - side view; left - helix axis view) and the zinc-

ﬁnger (right). Orange spheres are backbone atoms and the ribbons are a cartoon representation of

the backbone geometry. The coiled-coil unit cells are highlighted. B) The optimal rotamers for two

AA’s in an all-atom representation. C) A set of common rotamers for one AA shown superimposed.

where EvdW is the vdW interaction modeled as a 6-12 Lennard-Jones potential, Eelec,wat is

the total electrostatic energy (excluding intra-sidechain interactions), Esolv,sc is the solvation

energy of all backbone and sidechain atoms [23], and Etorsion is the sidechain torsional

energy. All energy terms are calculated using the CHARMM package [24] with the param19

parameters. The unfolded state is modeled by retaining only sidechain self energies and local

interactions between sidechains and their surrounding penta-peptide backbone. Because

E[~σ, ~τ ] in Eq. 4 is pairwise-decomposable, we are able to apply the dead-end-elimination

(DEE) algorithm [25, 26] followed by a branch-and-bound search to arrive at the optimal

sidechain conformations corresponding to Emin. Thus in a CE derived from these Emin,

the Js, and hence EIs, parameterize optimized energies whereby all the sidechain degrees

of freedom are coarse-grained out. The EI, deﬁned at the sequence level, may include

higher order terms even though the initial energy expressions at the conformational level are

pairwise decomposable. The advantage of this procedure is an enormous reduction in the

search space, from (20m)L to mL, where 20 is the average number of rotamers considered

In order to more accurately ﬁt the important low energies, our ﬁtting is weighted by

max(e−(E−E0)/K, w0), where E0 is the lowest energy in the data set, K is approximately

the range of interest above E0 and w0 is the minimal weight at large E to avoid numeric

per AA.

instability.

5

FIG. 2: RMS and CV scores vs. # of clusters included for coiled-coil ﬁtting. Inset: CE predicted

vs. atomistic Emin for 3995 random sequences (only Emin ≤ 10 kcal/mol shown).

Our ﬁrst case study involves the coiled coil, a common and well-characterized protein

interaction interface. (Fig 1). An ideal coiled-coil backbone possesses a screw axis with a

repeating unit every 7 residues (a heptad) as well as C2 symmetry about the coil axis [27].

We use a unit cell (highlighted on Fig. 1) consisting of 4 heptads. With the assumption

that signiﬁcant interactions are short range, the unit cell incorporates all clusters important

to describe coiled-coil stability. Only 4 sites in each heptad are each modeled as one of 16

selected AA species (the 3 remaining sites are set to Ala). These 4 sites have been shown,

in many cases, to be suﬃcient to determine coiled-coil dimerization preferences and other

properties [28, 29]. The backbone is extended by an identical unit cell sequence at both

ends to avoid edge eﬀects. The optimized sidechain conﬁgurations correspond to Emin of the

entire protein. The energy of the central unit cell plus half of its interaction with the rest

of the system is presented.

Our

training set

consists of 21,066 randomly chosen sequences weighted by

max(e−(E+26)/120, 0.01). Truncating the CE at the pair level is suﬃcient to accurately re-

produce the energetics of the system. The structural symmetry reduces all 137 clusters up

to pairs to 1 constant, 4 point and 36 pair-level independent cluster (7741 independent Js).

6

We are therefore able to include all of them as candidate clusters in the ﬁtting. Fig. 2 shows

the weighted RMS and CV scores of the least square ﬁtting versus the number of included

clusters (ordered by h|J|i). Although the RMS decreases monotonically as expected, the

CV score reaches a minimum at 22 clusters, and ﬂuctuates (mostly increases) slightly after-

wards. We thus come to an “optimal” set of 22 clusters (3676 Js) for energy prediction, with

weighted RMS = 1.0 kcal/mol and CV = 1.1 kcal/mol. The most signiﬁcant EIs are found

to correspond to residues that mediate contacts between diﬀerent helices, in agreement with

biologists’ intuition about the system.

To test the predictive character of the CE we compare its energy for 3995 random se-

quences not included in training to the directly calculated energy ( Fig. 2 inset). The

unweighted RMS error is 2.4 kcal/mol for all energies and 1.7 kcal/mol for -26< Emin <10

kcal/mol. The error is suﬃciently small for such applications as sequence optimization, and

is comparable with the accuracy of the underlying energy model. We trade such a small

error for being able to predict the optimal energy of any sequence by summation of EIs for

22 clusters, as opposed to performing global optimization in side-chain conformation space

of 5.9 × 1055 on average. Even compared to the highly eﬃcient DEE method for sidechain

positioning, the time to calculate Emin of a sequence is reduced from ∼200 sec to ∼1 µs with

our coarse-grained Hamiltonian, a 2 × 108-fold acceleration.

As a second application we consider the zinc-ﬁnger, a conserved DNA-binding fold (Fig

1A). The backbone of Zif268 (PDB ID 1ZAA) residues 33-60 is used as a model Zn-ﬁnger

structure. Following Mayo et al. [30], we consider a sequence space in which 2 sites are ﬁxed,

1 site has 7 candidate species, 18 sites have 10 and the other 7 sites have 16. No symmetry

condition is applied. The training set consists of 29,864 random sequences weighted by

max(e−(E+35)/100, 0.01). Since there are too many pairs (325 pairs, or 4 × 104 Js) to easily

include in one single ﬁtting, we start with constant and point terms and add pairs one by

one to the existing clusters, retaining a pair if it decreases CV. We iterate until no new pair

can be selected. However, truncation at pairs leads to an unsatisfactory ﬁtting with CV> 6

kcal/mol. Instead of trying all 2,600 triplets, we use the characteristics of the poorly ﬁtted

sequences A : |∆E| > 10 kcal/mol to locate important triplets. We calculate the information

content I i = ln mi − S(p(σi|A)), I ij = ln mimj − S(p(σiσj|A)) − I i − I j for each site i and
each pair {i, j} out of the AA distribution in A (S(p) = − P{p} p ln p denotes entropy).
Four sites have large I i that are almost exclusively occupied by aromatic sidechains W, H,

7

FIG. 3: RMS and CV scores for Zn-ﬁnger ﬁtting. Inset: CE predicted vs. atomistic Emin for 4000
random sequences (only Emin ≤ 10 kcal/mol shown).

Y and F. Five out of the 6 pairs formed by these sites have signiﬁcant I ij. Located in

proximity to each other, these sites constitute 2 triplet clusters (see ﬁg. 1A). Thus we use

one constant, 26 point, 24 pair, and 2 triplet clusters (5692 Js in total) for ﬁtting. RMS

and CV scores versus the number of clusters included are shown in Fig. 3. The two triplets

are found to be indispensable in correctly reproducing the energies. This demonstrates the

existence of complex correlation in a globular protein, and the CE provides a systematic,

quantitative way of identifying such correlated sites. Prediction of 4000 random Zn-ﬁnger

sequences is shown in Fig. 3 inset. Again a reasonably good accuracy of 2.7 kcal/mol for

−35 < Emin < 10 kcal/mol is obtained. Although a larger prediction error 15.4 kcal/mol

is obtained with all energies, high energy sequences are correctly detected. Such error is

traded for a remarkable reduction in search space: from 1.4 × 1060 to 1.9 × 1027 states.

In summary, we have demonstrated how the energetics of a protein with pre-deﬁned

backbone can be coarse-grained to a function of sequence only. The expansion’s accuracy

can be systematically improved. We have successfully applied the method to two distinct

families of proteins, and found two diﬀerent types of interactions determining stability. The

accuracy of the CE predictions implies that this much simpler expression can be used in

8

place of traditional Hamiltonians, dramatically improving computational eﬃciency.

The CE methodology can be coupled with any energy model, e.g. more accurate Hamil-

tonians or experimentally determined energies, and properties other than energy are poten-

tially expandable. Thus, it can be extended to treat any multi-species search problem for

which an appropriate scoring scheme can be generated. In structural biology, this includes

modeling not only protein stability, but protein interaction speciﬁcity, DNA and RNA struc-

ture, protein-DNA interactions, and potentially the interactions of small-molecule pharma-

ceuticals. We are optimistic that the method will ﬁnd a wide range of practical applications

in biology research.

This work is supported by funding from the DuPont-MIT Alliance to GC and NIH grant

GM67681 to AK. FZ thanks M. Kardar for critical reading of the manuscript.

[1] C. M. Kraemer-Pecore, A. M. Wollacott, and J. R. Desjarlais, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 5, 690

[2] N. Pokala and T. M. Handel, J. Struct. Biol. 134, 269 (2001).

[3] M. Vendruscolo and E. Paci, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 13, 82 (2003).

[4] M. A. Dwyer, L. L. Looger, and H. W. Hellinga, Science 304, 1967 (2004).

[5] M. Allert, S. S. Rizk, L. L. Looger, and H. W. Hellinga, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101,

[6] B. Kuhlman, G. Dantas, G. C. Ireton, G. Varani, B. L. Stoddard, and D. Baker, Science 302,

(2001).

7907 (2004).

1364 (2003).

[7] W. P. Russ and R. Ranganathan, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 447 (2002).

[8] R. Guerois and L. Serrano, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 101 (2001).

[9] J. Mendes, R. Guerois, and L. Serrano, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 441 (2002).

[10] J. M. Sanchez, F. Ducastelle, and D. Gratias, Physica A 128, 334 (1984).

[11] D. de Fontaine, vol. 47 of Solid State Phys. (Academic Press, 1994).

[12] G. Ceder, Comput. Mater. Sci. 1, 144 (1993).

[13] G. D. Garbulsky and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 51, 67 (1995).

[14] V. Blum and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 69, 020103(R) (2004).

[15] C. Wolverton, X. Y. Yan, R. Vijayaraghavan, and V. Ozolins, Acta Mater 50, 2187 (2002).

9

[16] G. Ceder, P. D. Tepesch, A. F. Kohan, and A. Van der Ven, J Electroceram 1, 15 (1997).

[17] J. D. Althoﬀ, D. D. Johnson, and F. J. Pinski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 138 (1995).

[18] R. McCormack, D. de Fontaine, C. Wolverton, and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 51, 15808 (1995).

[19] D. Krylov, I. Mikhailenko, and C. Vinson, EMBO J. 13, 2849 (1994).

[20] A. Acharya, S. B. Ruvinov, J. Gal, J. R. Moll, and C. Vinson, Biochemistry 41, 14122 (2002).

[21] A. van de Walle and G. Ceder, J. Phase Equil. 23, 348 (2002).

[22] M. H. Ali, C. M. Taylor, G. Grigoryan, K. N. Allen, B. Imperiali, and A. E. Keating, Structure

13, 225 (2005).

[23] T. Lazaridis and M. Karplus, Proteins 35, 133 (1999).

[24] B. R. Brooks, R. E. Bruccoleri, B. D. Olafson, D. J. States, S. Swaminathan, and M. Karplus,

J. Comput. Chem. 4, 187 (1983).

[25] J. Desmet, M. Demaeyer, B. Hazes, and I. Lasters, Nature 356, 539 (1992).

[26] R. F. Goldstein, Biophys. J. 66, 1335 (1994).

[27] F. H. Crick, Acta. Cryst. 6, 689 (1953).

[28] E. K. Oshea, R. Rutkowski, and P. S. Kim, Cell 68, 699 (1992).

[29] J. H. Fong, A. E. Keating, and M. Singh, Genome Biol 5, (2004).

[30] B. I. Dahiyat and S. L. Mayo, Science 278, 82 (1997).

10

