5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ab initio study of alanine polypeptide chains twisting

Ilia A. Solov’yov∗, Alexander V. Yakubovitch, Andrey V. Solov’yov†, and Walter Greiner

Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies,

Max von Laue Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

We have investigated the potential energy surfaces for alanine chains consisting

of three and six amino acids. For these molecules we have calculated potential en-

ergy surfaces as a function of the Ramachandran angles ϕ and ψ, which are widely

used for the characterization of the polypeptide chains. These particular degrees

of freedom are essential for the characterization of proteins folding process. Calcu-

lations have been carried out within ab initio theoretical framework based on the

density functional theory and accounting for all the electrons in the system. We have

determined stable conformations and calculated the energy barriers for transitions

between them. Using a thermodynamic approach, we have estimated the times of

characteristic transitions between these conformations. The results of our calcula-

tions have been compared with those obtained by other theoretical methods and with

the available experimental data extracted from the Protein Data Base. This com-

parison demonstrates a reasonable correspondence of the most prominent minima

on the calculated potential energy surfaces to the experimentally measured angles ϕ

and ψ for alanine chains appearing in native proteins. We have also investigated the

inﬂuence of the secondary structure of polypeptide chains on the formation of the

potential energy landscape. This analysis has been performed for the sheet and the

helix conformations of chains of six amino acids.

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is well known that proteins consist of amino acids whose number may vary in the

range from hundreds up to tens of thousands. Small fragments of proteins are usually called

polypeptide chains or polypeptides. This work is devoted to a study of the conformational

∗ On leave from the A.F. Ioﬀe Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia. E-mail: ilia@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de
† On leave from the A.F. Ioﬀe Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia. E-mail: solovyov@ﬁas.uni-frankfurt.de

2

properties of alanine polypeptide chains.

Since recently, it became possible to study experimentally small fragments of proteins

and polypeptides in the gas phase with the use of the MALDI mass spectroscopy [1, 2, 3, 4]

and the ESI mass spectroscopy [5, 6]. From theoretical viewpoint, investigation of small

polypeptides is of signiﬁcant interest because they can be treated by means of ab initio

methods which allowing accurate comparison of theoretical predictions with experiment.

The results of ab initio calculations can be then utilized for the development of model

approaches applicable for the description of larger and more complex protein structures.

Polypeptides are characterized by the primary and the secondary structure [7, 8, 9, 10].

Diﬀerent geometrical conﬁgurations of a polypeptide are often called as the conformations.

One can expect that chemical and physical properties of various conformations of complex

molecules might diﬀer signiﬁcantly. The number of various conformations (isomeric states)

grows rapidly with the growth of a system size. Thus, a search for the most stable confor-

mations becomes an increasingly diﬃcult problem for large molecules. With the help of the

NMR spectroscopy and the X-rays diﬀraction analysis it has been shown [9], that the sheet

and the helix structures are the most prominent elements of the protein secondary structure.

The main diﬀerence between the sheet and the helix structures is due to the diﬀerence of

the dihedral angles formed by the atoms of the polypeptide chains in the two cases. These

degrees of freedom are responsible for the transition of the molecule from one conformation

to another. By increasing the temperature of the system, the degrees of freedom responsible

for twisting of the polypeptide chain can be activated. The study of this transition and

evaluation of its characteristic duration are of signiﬁcant interest, because this problem is

closely related to one of the most intriguing problems of the protein physics - the protein

folding. To study this transition it is necessary to investigate the potential energy surface of

amino acid chains with respect to their twisting. Besides the protein folding, the potential

energy landscapes of polypeptides carry a lot of detail and useful information about the

structure of these molecules.

In the present paper we have studied the potential energy surfaces for small alanine

chains. These molecules were chosen because they are often present in native proteins as

fragments, and also because they allow ab initio theoretical treatment due to their relatively

small size.

Previously, only glycine and alanine dipeptides were studied in detail.

Sometimes

3

their analogues were used to reduce the computational costs (for example,

(S)-α-

(formylamino)propanamide). In refs. [11, 12, 13] alanine and glycine dipeptides were inves-

tigated within the Hartree-Fock theory. In these papers the potential energy surfaces were

calculated versus the twisting angles of the molecules. Diﬀerent stable states of the dipep-

tides, corresponding to diﬀerent molecular conformations, were determined. Each stable

state of the molecule was additionally studied on the basis of the perturbation theory, which

takes into account many-electron correlations in the system. In refs. [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]

diﬀerent conformations and their energies were determined within the framework of the den-

sity functional theory. In ref. [19] dynamics of the alanine dipeptide analog was discussed

and the time of the transitions between the two conformations of the alanine dipeptide was

found.

A number of papers were devoted to the study of tripeptides. In refs. [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]

dynamics of the alanine and glycine tripeptides was studied by means of classical molecular

dynamics and with the use of semi-empirical potentials (such as GROMOS, CHARMM and

AMBER). In [25] within the framework of the Hartree-Fock theory several stable conforma-

tions of alanine and glycine tripeptides were found. In ref. [26] the Raman and IR spectra

for alanine and glycine tripeptides were measured in neutral, acidy and alkali environments.

Polypeptides have been studied less. We are aware of only several related papers. In

particular, stable conformations of neutral and charged alanine hexapeptides were obtained

with the use of empirical potentials and discussed in ref. [27]. Experimental NMR study of

various conformations of alanine heptapeptides at diﬀerent temperatures was carried out in

ref.

[28]. In ref.

[29] with the use of empirical molecular dynamics based on Monte-Carlo

methods, a polypeptide consisting of 21 amino acids was described.

In the present paper we have performed an ab initio calculation of the multidimensional

potential energy surface for the alanine polypeptide chains consisting of three and six amino

acids. The potential energy surface versus twisting degrees of freedom of the polypeptide

chain has been calculated. The calculations have been performed within ab initio theoretical

framework based on the density functional theory (DFT) accounting for all the electrons in

the system. Previously, this kind of calculations were performed only for dipeptides (see,

e.g., [11, 12, 19]). For larger molecules, only a few conformations were considered (see cita-

tions above). We have calculated the energy barriers for the transitions between diﬀerent

conformations and determined the energetically most favorable ones. Using a thermody-

4

namic approach, we have estimated times of the characteristic transitions between the most

energetically favorable conformations. The results of our calculation have been compared

with other theoretical simulations and with the available experimental data. We have also

analyzed how the secondary structure of polypeptide chains inﬂuences the potential energy

landscapes.

In particular, the role of the secondary structure in the formation of stable

conformations of the chains of six amino acids being in the sheet and in the helix conforma-

tions has been elucidated. Some preliminary results of our work were published as electronic

preprints [30, 31].

Our paper is organized as follows. In section II we give a brief overview of theoretical

methods used in our work. In section III we present and discuss the results of our com-

putations. In section IV we draw a conclusion to this paper. The atomic system of units,

|e| = me = ¯h = 1, is used throughout the paper unless other units are indicated.

II. THEORETICAL METHODS

In the present paper we study the multidimensional potential energy surfaces for alanine

polypeptides within the framework of the density functional theory. The potential energy

surfaces are multidimensional functions of atomic coordinates. In our work the potential

energy surfaces are considered as a function of the dihedral angles formed by the atoms of

the polypeptide chain. For this calculation the Born-Oppenheimer approximation allowing

to separate the motion of the electronic and ionic subsystems is used.

The density functional theory (DFT) is a common tool for the calculating of properties

of quantum many body systems in which many electron correlations play an important role.

The DFT formalism is well known and can be found in many textbooks (see e.g. [32, 33]).

Therefore in our work we present only the basic equations and ideas of this method.

Electronic wave functions and energy levels within the framework of DFT are obtained

from the Kohn-Sham equations, which read as (see e.g. [32, 33]):

ˆp2
2

(cid:18)

+ Uions + VH + Vxc

ψi = εiψi,

i = 1...N

(1)

(cid:19)

where the ﬁrst term represents the kinetic energy of the i-th electron with the wavefunction

ψi and the energy εi, Uions describes the electron attraction to the ionic centers, VH is the

Hartree part of the interelectronic interaction ref. [34], Vxc is the local exchange-correlation

5

(2)

potential.

correlation energy functional:

The exchange-correlation potential is deﬁned as a functional derivative of the exchange-

Vxc =

δExc[ρ]
δρ(~r)

,

Equation (2) is exact and follows from the Hohenberg theory ref. [35]. However, no unique

potential Exc, universally applicable for diﬀerent systems and conditions, has been found so

far.

Approximate functionals employed by the DFT usually partition the exchange-correlation

energy into two parts, referred to as the exchange and the correlation terms:

Exc[ρ] = Ex(ρ) + Ec(ρ)

(3)

Both terms are the functionals of the electron density, which can be of two distinctly diﬀerent

types: either a local functionals depending only on the electron density ρ, or a gradient-

corrected functionals depending on both ρ and its gradient, ∇ρ. A variety of exchange

correlation functionals can be found in literature.

In our work we have used the hybrid

Becke-type three-parameter exchange functional ref. [36] paired with the gradient-corrected

Lee, Yang and Parr correlation functional (B3LY P ) refs. [37, 38].

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Determination of the polypeptide twisting degrees of freedom

In this section we present the potential energy surfaces for the glycine polypeptide chains

calculated versus dihedral angles ϕ and ψ deﬁned in ﬁgure 1. In particular, we focus on the

chains consisting of three and six amino acids.

Both angles are deﬁned by the four neighboring atoms in the polypeptide chain. The angle
i−1 − Ni − C α
i )
i −C
i)

ϕi is deﬁned as the dihedral angle between the planes formed by the atoms (C
and (Ni −C α
and (C α

i). The angle ψi is deﬁned as the dihedral angle between the (Ni −C α
i − Ni+1) planes. Beside the angles ϕi and ψi there is an angle ωi, which is

i − C

i −C

′

′

′

′

deﬁned as the dihedral angle between (C α

i − C

i − Ni+1) and (C

i − Ni+1 − C α

i+1) planes. The

′

′

atoms are numbered from the NH2− terminal of the polypeptide. The angles ϕi, ψi and

6

FIG. 1: Dihedral angles ϕ and ψ used to characterize the potential energy surface of the polypeptide

chain.

ωi take all possible values within the interval [−180o;180o]. For the unambiguous deﬁnition

we count the angles ϕi, ψi and ωi clockwise, if one looks on the molecule from its NH2−

terminal (see ﬁg. 1). This way of angle counting is the most commonly used [10].

The angles ϕi and ψi can be deﬁned for any amino acid in the chain, except the ﬁrst and

the last ones. Below we omit the subscripts and consider angles ϕ and ψ for the middle

amino acid of the polypeptide.

B. Optimized geometries of alanine polypeptides

In order to study twisting of a polypeptide chain one needs ﬁrst to deﬁne its initial

structure. Although, the number of its conformations increases with the growth of the

molecule size, there are certain types of polypeptide structure, namely the sheet and the

helix conformations, which are the most typical. In the present paper we have investigated

twisting of the polypeptide chains of the sheet and the helix conformations. By varying the

angles ϕ and ψ in the central amino acid one can create the structure of the polypeptide

diﬀering signiﬁcantly from the pure sheet or helix conformations.

If the structure of a

polypeptide can be transformed to a helix or a sheet one by a trivial variation of ϕ and ψ,

such polypeptides for the sake of simplicity are referred below as belonging to the group of

the helix or the sheet structure, respectively.

7

FIG. 2: Optimized geometries of alanine polypeptide chains calculated by the B3LYP/6-

31++G(d,p) method: a) Alanine tripeptide; b) Alanine hexapeptide (sheet conformation); c)

Alanine hexapeptide (helix conformation).

In ﬁgure 2 we present the optimized geometries of alanine polypeptide chains that have

been used for the exploration of the potential energy surfaces. All geometries were optimized

with the use of the B3LYP functional. Figure 2a shows the alanine tripeptide structure. In

the present work we choose the sheet conformation, because the tripeptide is too short to

form the helix conformation. Figures 2b and 2c show alanine hexapeptide in the sheet and

the helix conformations, respectively. The total energies (in atomic units)of the molecules

are given below the images.

C. Polypeptide energy dependance on the dihedral angle ω

For each amino acid there are only three dihedral angles formed by atoms of the polypep-

and ψ, because C

tide chain which describe its twisting. The angle ω (see ﬁg. 1) diﬀers from the angles ϕ
i atom has the sp2 hybridization state, what leads to formation of a quasi-
i and Ni+1 atoms. Therefore, the angle ω is often referred as a ”stiﬀ”

double bond between C

′

′

degree of freedom, whose value depends only slightly on both the polypeptide constituent

amino acids and the values of other degrees of freedom. To illustrate this fact, in ﬁgure 3 we

present the energy dependencies on ω calculated for alanine dipeptide with diﬀerent values

of angles ϕ and ψ in the cenral amino acid.

From this ﬁgure it is clear that there are two stable states in the system with ω = 0o and

ω = 180o which do not depend on the angles ϕ and ψ. The heights of the barriers between

these states are weakly depend on ϕ and ψ, being equal to ∼1 eV=23.06 kcal/mol.

8

FIG. 3: Dependance of alanine tripeptides energy on angle ω calculated by the B3LYP/6-31G(d)

method at diﬀerent values of angles ϕ and ψ.

The calculation shows that at temperatures close to the room temperature, the value of

the angle ω changes insigniﬁcantly. The potential energy surface as a function of the angles

ϕ and ψ appears to be much more complex as it is shown in the next section.

D. Potential energy surface for alanine tripeptide

In ﬁgure 4 we present the potential energy surface for the alanine tripeptide calculated

by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p) method. The energy scale is given in eV, kcal/mol and Kelvin.

Energies on the plot are measured from the lowest energy minimum of the potential energy

surface.

From the ﬁgure follows that there are several minima on the potential energy surface.

They are numbered according to the value of the corresponding energy value. Each min-

imum corresponds to a certain conformation of the molecule. These conformations diﬀer

9

FIG. 4: Potential energy surface for the alanine tripeptide calculated by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p)

method. Energies are given in eV, kcal/mol and Kelvin. Numbers mark energy minima on the

potential energy surface. Arrows show transition paths between diﬀerent conformations of the

molecule.

signiﬁcantly from each other. In the case of alanine tripeptide there are six conformations,

shown in ﬁgure 5. Dashed lines show the strongest hydrogen bonds in the system, which arise

when the distance between hydrogen and oxygen atoms becomes less then 2.9 angstroms.

To calculate the potential energy surface the following procedure was adopted. Once the

stable structure of the molecule has been determined and optimized, all but two (these are

the angles ϕ and ψ in the central amino acid) degrees of freedom were frozen. Then the

energy of the molecule was calculated by varying ϕ and ψ. This procedure was used to

calculate all potential energy surfaces presented below in this section. It allows one to ﬁnd

eﬃciently the minima on the energy surface and to determine the main stable conformations

of the molecule. The absolute energy values of diﬀerent conformations of the tripeptide

found by this method are not too accurate, because the method does not account for the

relaxation of other degrees of freedom in the system. To calculate the potential energy

10

FIG. 5: Optimized conformations of the alanine tripeptide. Diﬀerent geometries correspond to

diﬀerent minima on the potential energy surface (see contour plot in ﬁgure 4). Below each image

we present angles ϕ and ψ, which have been obtained with accounting for relaxation of all degrees

of freedom in the system. Values in brackets give the angles calculated without accounting for

relaxation. Above each image the energy of the corresponding conformation is given in eV. The

energies are counted from the energy of conformation 1 (the energy of conformation 1 is given in

a.u.). Values in parentheses correspond to the energies obtained without relaxation of all degrees

of freedom in the system. Dashed lines show the strongest hydrogen bonds. Their lengths are

given in angstroms.

11

surface with accounting for the relaxation one needs 20-30 times more of the computer time.

Therefore, a calculations with accounting for the relaxation have not been performed in our

work. Instead, we have performed a complete optimization of the molecular conformations,

corresponding to all minima on the calculated potential energy surface.

In ﬁgure 5 we compare stable conformations of the alanine tripeptide calculated with and

without accounting for the relaxation of all atoms in the system. As it is seen from this

ﬁgure the angles ϕ and ψ diﬀer by about 10 percent in the two cases. This diﬀerence arises

due to the coupling of ϕ and ψ with other degrees of freedom. Note the change of the sign of

the relative energies of some conformations. This eﬀect is due to the rearrangement of side

atoms (radicals) in the polypeptide chain which lowers the energies of diﬀerent conformations

diﬀerently.

In our work the potential energy surface has been calculated and interpolated on the grid

with the step of 18◦. This step size is an optimal one, because the interpolation error is

about 9◦, i.e. comparable with the angle deviations caused by the relaxation of all degrees

of freedom in the system.

Note that for the alanine tripeptide an additional maximum appears at ϕ = 120o ± 50o,

ψ = 30o±30o, while it is absent on the potential energy surface for the glycine tripeptide [30].

This maximum is a result of overlapping of the side CH3- radicals, which are substituted in

the case of the glycine polypeptide with the H- atoms.

TABLE I: Comparison of dihedral angles ϕ and ψ corresponding to diﬀerent conformations of

alanine tripeptide.

Conformation

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

ϕ[11]

-168.4

ψ[11]

170.5

63.8

32.7

74.1

-128.0

-57.3

29.7

-

-

-

-

-

-

ϕ[12]

-157.2

-60.7

67.0

76.0

-130.9

-

-

ψ[12]

159.8

-40.7

30.2

-55.4

22.3

-

-

ϕ

-157.4

-82.3

64.7

-166.9

72.0

-119.1

57.9

ψ

166.2

-68.3

30.5

-52.1

-60.5

13.6

-136.3

In ref. [11] and ref. [12] several stable conformations were found for alanine and glycine

12

dipeptides. The values of angles ϕ and ψ for the stable conformations of dipeptide and

tripeptide are close indicating that the third amino acid in tripeptide makes relatively small

inﬂuence on the values of dihedral angles of two other amino acids. In earlier papers refs.

[11, 12] dipeptides were studied within the framework of the Hartree-Fock theory. In ref.

[11], values of ϕ and ψ were obtained by the HF/6-31+G* method, and in ref.

[12] by

HF/6-31G**. In table I we compare the results of our calculation for tripeptide with the

corresponding data obtained for dipeptides. Some discrepancy between the values presented

is due to the diﬀerence between the dipeptide and tripeptide (i.e. the third alanine in the

tripeptide aﬀects the values of angles ϕ and ψ). However, another source of discrepancy

might arise due to accounting for the many-electron correlations in the DFT and neglecting

this eﬀect in the Hartree-Fock theory used in refs. [11, 12].

FIG. 6: Transition barriers for between conformations 1 ↔ 2 of the alanine tripeptide. Circles and

squares correspond to the barriers calculated without and with relaxation of all degrees of freedom

in the system.

Figure 4 shows that some domains of the potential energy surface, where the potential

energy of the molecule increases signiﬁcantly, appear to be unfavorable for the formation

13

of a stable molecular conﬁguration. The growth of energy takes place when some atoms in

the polypeptide chain approach each other at small distances. Accounting for the molecule

relaxation results in the decrease of the system energy in such cases, but the resulting

molecular conﬁgurations remain unstable. We call such domains on the potential energy

surface as forbidden ones. In ﬁgure 4 one can identify two forbidden regions in the vicinity

of the points (0, 0) and (0, 180). At (0, 0)a pair of hydrogen and oxygen atoms approach

to the distances much smaller than the characteristic H − O bond length. This leads to a

strong interatomic repulsion caused by the exchange interaction of electrons. At (0, 180)

the Coulomb repulsion of pair of oxygen atoms causes the similar eﬀect.

Figure 4 shows that there are six minima on the potential energy surface for alanine

tripeptide. The transition barrier between the conformations 1 ↔ 2 is shown in ﬁgure 6.

The barrier has been calculated with and without relaxation of the atoms in the system.

The corresponding transition path is marked in ﬁgure 4 by an arrow. This comparison

demonstrates that accounting for the relaxation signiﬁcantly lowers the barrier height and

inﬂuences the relative value of energy of the minima.

Let us now estimate the time needed for a system for the transition from one conformation

to another. To do this we use the Arhenius equation, which reads as:

= Ωe− ∆E

kT

1
τ

(4)

where τ is the transition time, Ω is the factor, determining how frequently the system

approaches the barrier, ∆E is the barrier height, T is the temperature of the system, k is

the Bolzmann factor.

Figure 7 shows the transition barrier between two main conformations of the alanine

dipeptide analog ((S)-α-(formylamino)propanamide). It is seen that ∆E1→2 = 0.047 eV for

the transition 1 → 2, while ∆E2→1 = 0.079 eV for the transition 2 → 1. The frequency
Ω for this molecule is equal to 42.87 cm−1. Thus, at T = 300 K, we obtain τ 1→2
ps and τ 2→1

2×Ala ∼ 17 ps. This result is in excellent agreement with the molecular dynamics
[19] predicting τ ∼ 7 ps for the transition 1 → 2 and

simulations results obtained in ref.

2×Ala ∼ 5

τ ∼ 19 ps for the transition 2 → 1. This comparison demonstrates that our method is

reliable enough and it can be used for the estimation of transition times between various

conformations of the polypeptides.

Using the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p) method we have calculated the frequencies of normal

14

FIG. 7: Transition barriers for between conformations 1 ↔ 2 of alanine dipeptide analog calculated

by the B3LYP/6-31+G(2d,p) method accounting for the relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the

system. Structure of the conformations 1 and 2 is shown near each minimum.

vibration modes for the alanine tripeptide. The characteristic frequency corresponding to
twisting of the polypeptide chain is equal to 32.04 cm−1. From ﬁgure 6 follows that ∆E1→2 =

0.066 eV for the transition 1 → 2 and ∆E2→1 = 0.114 eV for the transition 2 → 1. Thus,
we obtain τ 1→2

3×Ala ∼ 86 ps. Let us note that these transition times can be

3×Ala ∼ 13 ps and τ 2→1

measured experimentally by means of NMR refs. [10, 39].

E. Potential energy surface for alanine hexapeptide with the sheet and the helix

secondary structure

In ﬁgure 8 we present contour plots of the potential energy surface for the alanine hexapep-

tide with the sheet (part a) and the helix (part b) secondary structure respectively versus

dihedral angles ϕ and ψ. In both cases the forbidden regions arise because of the repulsion

of oxygen and hydrogen atoms analogously to the alanine tripeptide case.

Minima 1-6 on the potential energy surface 8a correspond to diﬀerent conformations of

15

the alanine hexapeptide with the sheet secondary structure. Note that these minima are

also present on the potential energy surface of the alanine tripeptide (see ﬁg. 4). Geometries

of the conformations 1-6 are shown on the right-hand side of ﬁgure 8a.

Energy barrier as a function of a scan variable (see ﬁgure 8a) for the transition between

conformations 1 and 2 is shown in ﬁgure 9. The energy dependence has been calculated with

and without relaxation of all the atoms in the system. In the case of alanine hexapeptide

with the sheet secondary structure the barrier height for the transition 1 → 2 is signiﬁcantly

higher than for the transition 2 → 1, being equal to 0.095 eV and 0.023 eV, respectively. The

FIG. 8: Potential energy surface for the alanine hexapeptide with the sheet secondary structure

(part a) and with the helix secondary structure (part b) calculated by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p)

method. Energy scale is given in ﬁgure 4. Numbers mark energy minima on the potential en-

ergy surface. Images of optimized conformations of the alanine hexapeptide are shown near the

corresponding energy landscape. Values of angles ϕ and ψ, as well as the relative energies of the

conformations are given analogously to that in ﬁgure 5.

16

FIG. 9: Transitions barriers between conformations 1 ↔ 2 of the alanine hexapeptide with the

sheet secondary structure. Circles and squares correspond to the barriers calculated without and

with relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the system.

normal vibration mode frequency, corresponding to the twisting of the polypeptide chain is
equal to 6.24 cm−1 and was calculated with the B3LYP/STO-3G method. Using equation
(4) one derives the transition times at room temperature: τ 1→2

6×Gly ∼ 211 ps, τ 2→1

6×Gly ∼ 13 ps.

Let us now consider alanine hexapeptide with the helix secondary structure. The potential

energy surface for this polypeptide is shown in ﬁgure 8b. The positions of minima on this

surface are shifted signiﬁcantly compared to the cases discussed above. This change takes

place because of the inﬂuence of the secondary structure of the polypeptide on the potential

energy surface. The geometries of the most stable conformations are shown on the right-hand

side of ﬁgure 8b.

side radicals.

For the alanine hexapeptide with the helix secondary structure there is a maximum at

ϕ ∼ 180o and ψ ∼ 40o in addition to the central maxima on the potential energy surface.

This maximum appears because of the repulsive interaction of the outermost amino acids

It is worth noting that for some conformations of alanine hexapeptide the angles ϕ and

ψ change signiﬁcantly when the relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the system account-

17

ing for (see for example conformations 1, 5 in ﬁg. 8a and conformations 2, 4 in ﬁg. 8b).

This means that the potential energy surface of the alanine hexapeptide in the vicinity of

the mentioned minima is very sensitive to the relaxation of all degrees of freedom. How-

ever, calculation of the potential energy surface with accounting for the relaxation of all

degrees of freedom is unfeasible task. Indeed, one needs about 2000 hours of computer time

(Pentium Xeon 2.4 GHz) for the calculation of the potential energy surface for the alanine

hexapeptide. To perform an analogues calculation with accounting for the relaxation about

5 years of computer time would be needed. Nevertheless, the potential energy surface cal-

culated without accounting for the relaxation carries a lot of useful information. Thus, one

can predetermine stable conformations of polypeptide, which then can be used as starting

conﬁgurations for further energy minimization.

F. Comparison of calculation results with experimental data

Nowadays, the structure of many proteins has been determined experimentally ref.

[9].

Knowing the protein structure one can ﬁnd the angles ϕ and ψ for each amino acid in the

protein.

In ﬁgure 10a we show a map of the allowed and forbidden conformations for alanine

residues in poly-alanine chain taken from ref. [41] (steric Ramachandran diagram). This map

was obtained from pure geometrical considerations, in which the structure of the polypeptide

was assumed to be ﬁxed and deﬁned by the interatomic van der Waals interaction radii. De-

pending on the distances between the atoms one could distinguish three regions: completely

allowed, conventionally allowed and forbidden. The conformation is called completely al-

lowed if all the distances between atoms of diﬀerent amino acids are larger than some critical

value rij ≥ rmax. Conventionally allowed regions on the potential energy surface correspond

to the conformations of the polypeptide, in which the distances between some atoms of

diﬀerent amino acids lie within the interval rmin ≤ rij < rmax. All other conformations are

referred to as forbidden. The values of rmin and rmax are deﬁned by the types of interact-

ing atoms and can be found in the textbooks (see, e.g., [41]). In ﬁgure 10a we mark the

completely allowed regions with white, the conventionally allowed regions with light gray

and the forbidden regions with dark gray color. In this ﬁgure we mark the points, which

correspond to the geometries of alanine, whose periodical iteration leads to the formation

18

FIG. 10: Comparison of angles ϕ and ψ of alanine residues in protein structures selected from

the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 40] with the steric diagram for poly-alanine [41] (part

a)). Comparison of angles ϕ and ψ of alanine residues in protein structures selected from the

Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 40] with the minima on the calculated potential energy surfaces

for: alanine tripeptide (b); alanine hexapeptide in sheet conformation (c); alanine hexapeptide in

helix conformation (d). Transparent rhomboids correspond to alanines surrounded with alanines,

while ﬁlled circles correspond to alanines surrounded by other amino acids. Dashed ellipses mark

the regions of higher concentration of the observed angles.

of chains with speciﬁc secondary structure. In table II we compile the values of angles ϕ

and ψ, which correspond to the most prominent poly-alanine secondary structures. For the

illustrative purposes we mark these points by white circles with the corresponding type of

the secondary structure typed in. Thus, 2R

7 , 2L

7 are the right-handed and the left-handed

27 helix; 3R

10, 3L

10 are the right-handed and the left-handed 310 helix; αR, αL are the right-

handed and the left-handed α−helix (413); πR, πL are the right-handed and the left-handed

π−helix (516); ↑↑, ↑↓ are the parallel and antiparallel β sheets. βI, βII correspond to the

β−turns of types I and II respectively.

TABLE II: Angles ϕ and ψ corresponding to the most prominent poly-alanine secondary structures.

Structure type

right-handed (left-handed) 27 helix

right-handed (left-handed) 310 helix

right-handed (left-handed) α−helix (413)

right-handed (left-handed) π−helix (516)

parallel β sheet (↑↑)

antiparallel β sheet (↑↓)

β−turn of type I

β−turn of type II

ϕ (Deg.)

-78 (78)

-49 (49)

-57 (57)

-57 (57)

-119

-139

-90

90

19

ψ (Deg.)

59 (-59)

-26 (26)

-47 (47)

-70 (70)

113

135

0

0

Note that not all of the structures listed above are present equally in proteins. In ﬁgure

10a we show the distribution of the angles ϕ and ψ of alanine residues in protein structures

selected from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 40]. It is possible to distinguish four

main regions, in which most of experimental points are located. In ﬁgure 10 these regions are

schematically shown with dashed ellipses. Note, that these ellipses are used for illustrative

purposes only, and serve for a better understanding of the experimental data. The regions

in which most of the observed angles ϕ and ψ are located correspond to diﬀerent secondary

structures of the poly-alanine. Thus, region I corresponds to the parallel and antiparallel

β−sheets. Region II corresponds to the right-handed 2R

7 helix. Region III corresponds to the

right-handed αR−helix, right-handed πR−helix, right-handed 3R

10 helix and β−turn of type

I. Region IV corresponds to the left-handed αL−helix, right-handed πL−helix, left-handed
3L
10 helix and β−turn of type II. In some cases there are several types of secondary structure

within one domain.

In the present work we have not studied the secondary structure of

proteins systematically enough to establish the univocal correspondence of the observed

experimental points to diﬀerent types of the secondary structure.

20

Let us now compare the distribution of angles ϕ and ψ experimentally observed for pro-

teins with the potential energy landscape calculated for alanine polypeptides and establish

correspondence of the secondary structure of the calculated conformations with the predic-

tions of the simple Ramachandran model.

Region I corresponds to the minimum 1 on the both potential energy surfaces of the

alanine tripeptide (ﬁg. 10b) and the alanine hexpeptide with the secondary structure of

sheet (ﬁg. 10c). These conformations correspond exactly to the alanine chains in the β-

sheet conformation (see ﬁg. 5 and 8a). Note that there is no minimum in that region of the

potential energy surface for alanine hexapeptide with the secondary structure of helix (see

ﬁg. 10d).

Region II corresponds to the minimum 2 on the both potential energy surfaces 10b and

10c, as well as to the minimum 3 on the potential energy surface 10d. On the steric diagram

for poly-alanine this region corresponds to the right-handed 2R

7 helix. The structure of

conformations 2 on the surfaces 10b and 10c diﬀers from the structure of this particular

helix type. Only the central alanines, for which the angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgures 10b and 10c

are deﬁned, have the structure of 2R

7 helix. Thus, one can refer to the conformations 2 as

to the mixed states, where the central part of the polypeptide chain has the conformation

of helix and the outermost parts have the conformation of sheet. Conformation 3 on the

surface 10d is also a mixed state. Here one can distinguish one turn of 3R

10 helix and two

turns of 2R

7 helix (see ﬁg. 8b).

Region III corresponds to the structure of right-handed αR−helix, right-handed 3R

10 helix,

right-handed πR−helix and β−turn. It corresponds to minima 6, 5 and 4 on the potential

energy surfaces 10b, 10c and 10d respectively. Conformation 6 can not be assigned to any

speciﬁc type of secondary structure because the chain is too short. Note, that conformation

6 is even not a stable one on the potential energy surface of the alanine tripeptide. The

most probable types of secondary structures in that region of the potential energy surface are

right-handed αR−helix and β−turn. However, for the formation of a single turn of αR−helix

(or for the formation of β−turn) at least four amino acids are needed. Conformation 5 on

the potential energy surface of the alanine hexapeptide can be characterized as a partially

formed β−turn because the alanine, for which the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgure 10c

are deﬁned has the geometry of β−turn, but its neighbor forms a β−sheet (see ﬁg. 8a).

Conformation 4 on the potential energy surface 8b changes signiﬁcantly after accounting for

21

the relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the system, and gets outside the region III. In

this conformation one can locate fragments of right-handed 2R

7 and 3R

10 helixes. The point

corresponding to the minimum 4 (after accounting for the relaxation) lies outside regions II

and III because angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgure 10d are deﬁned for the amino acid between two

helix fragments.

Region IV is represented by the structure of left-handed αL−helix, left-handed 3L

10 helix,

left-handed πL−helix and β−turn of type II. The fragments with those types of secondary

structures are very rare met in native proteins. To form these structures it is necessary to

have at least four amino acids, therefore minima 3 on the potential energy surface for alanine

tripeptide can not be compared to any type of the mentioned secondary structures. Region

IV corresponds to the conformations 3 and 2 on the surfaces 10c and 10d respectively.

Conformation 3 on the surface 10c corresponds to partially formed β−turn, because the

alanine, for which the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgure 10c are plotted has the conﬁguration

of β−turn but the neighboring amino acid in the polypeptide chain forms β−sheet (see ﬁg.

8a). Conformation 2 on the potential energy surface 10d lies outside the region IV, but

accounting for the relaxation of all degrees of freedom shifts the minimum on the potential

energy surface to the allowed region of left-handed αL− and 3L
geometry of conformation 2 is similar to the geometry of left-handed 3L

10 helix (see ﬁg. 8b). The

10 helix (see ﬁg. 8b).

The main diﬀerences in the structure are caused by the insuﬃcient length of the polypeptide

chain to form a regular helix structure.

IV. CONCLUSION

In the present paper the multidimensional potential energy surfaces for amino acid chains

consisting of three and six alanines has been investigated and the conformational properties

of these systems with respect to the twisting of the polypeptide chain have been described.

The calculations have been carried out within ab initio theoretical framework based on

the density functional theory and accounting for all the electrons in the system. We have

determined stable conformations and calculated the energy barriers for transitions between

them. Using a thermodynamic approach, we have estimated times of the characteristic

transitions between the conformations. It was demonstrated that the transition times lie

within the picosecond region. Our estimates are compared with the available molecular-

22

dynamics simulations results, and the correspondence between the results of the two diﬀerent

methods is reported. A strong barrier asymmetry between neighboring stable conformations

on the potential energy surface was found.

We compared for the ﬁrst time values of angles ϕ and ψ for alanine residues experi-

mentally observed in real proteins with the coordinates of minima on the potential energy

surfaces. This comparison showed that all profound minima on the potential energy surfaces

correspond to the regions in which experimentally measured values of ϕ and ψ are located.

We have also analysed how the secondary structure of polypeptide chains inﬂuences the

formation of the potential energy landscapes. For the chains of six amino acids with the

secondary structures of sheet and helix the inﬂuence of the secondary structure on the stable

conformations of the molecule has been demonstrated.

The results of this work can be utilized for modeling more complex molecular systems.

For example, the suggested model for for the estimation of the characteristic transition times

can be used for longer polypeptide chains, also consisting of diﬀerent amino acids and for

estimates of time of proteins folding. It is also possible to use the results of the present work

for testing the applicability and accuracy of diﬀerent model approaches for the polypeptide

description requiring much less computer time than ab initio calculations.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is partially supported by the European Commission within the Network of

Excellence project EXCELL, by INTAS under the grant 03-51-6170 and by the Russian

Foundation for Basic Research under the grant 06-02-17227-a. We are grateful to Dr. A.

Korol and Dr. O. Obolensky for their help in preparation of this manuscript. The possibility

to perform complex computer simulations at the Frankfurt Center for Scientiﬁc Computing

is also gratefully acknowledged.

[1] M. Karas and F. Hillenkamp, Anal. Chem. 60, 2299 (1988).

[2] F. Hillenkamp and M. Karas, Int. J. of Mass Spect. 200, 71 (2000).

[3] M. Karas, U. Bahr, I. Fournier, M. Gluckmann, and A. Pfenninger, J. of Mass Spect. 226,

239 (2003).

23

[4] M. Wind and W. Lehmann, J. Anal. At. Spect. 19, 20 (2004).

[5] J. Fenn, M. Mann, C. Meng, S. Wong, and C. Whitehouse, Science 246, 64 (1989).

[6] S. B. ndsted Nielsen, J. Andersen, P. Hvelplund, B. Liu, and S. Tomita, J. Phys. B: At. Mol.

[7] A. Finkelstein and O. Ptizin, Physics of Proteins (Moscow University Press ”Universitet”,

Opt. Phys. 37, R25 (2004).

2002).

[8] A. M¨ulberg, Protein Folding (St. Petersburg University Press, 2004).

[9] H. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. Bhat, H. Weissig, I. Shindyalov, and

P. Bourne, Nucleic Acids Research 28, 235 (2000).

[10] A. Rubin, Biophysics: Theoretical Biophysics (Moscow University Press ”Nauka”, 2004).

[11] T. Head-Gordon, M. Head-Gordon, M. Frisch, C. B. III, and J. Pople, J. Am. Chem. Soc.

113, 5989 (1991).

[12] I. Gould, W. Cornell, and I. Hillier, J. Am. Chem. Soc 116, 9250 (1994).

[13] Z. Wang and Y. Duan, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1699 (2004).

[14] A. Percel, O. Farkas, I. J´akli, I. Topol, and I. Csizmadia, J. Comp. Chem. 24, 1026 (2003).

[15] I. H´udaky, P. H´udaky, and A. Percel, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1522 (2004).

[16] R. Improta and V. Barone, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1333 (2004).

[17] R. Vargas, J. Garza, B. Hay, and D. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 3213 (2002).

[18] R. Kashner and D. Hohl, J. Phys. Chem. A 102, 5111 (1998).

[19] D. Wei, H. Guo, and D. Salahub, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001).

[20] S. Woutersen, Y. Mu, G. Stock, and P. Hamm, Chem. Phys. 266 (2001).

[21] S. Woutersen, R. Pﬁster, Y. Mu, D. Kosov, and G. Stock, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 6833 (2002).

[22] Y. Mu and G. Stock, J. Phys. Chem. B. 106, 5294 (2002).

[23] Y. Mu, D. Kosov, and G. Stock, J. Phys. Chem. B. 107, 5064 (2003).

[24] P. Nguyen and G. Stock, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 11350 (2003).

[25] H. Torii and M. Tasumi, Journ. of Ram. Spect. 29, 81 (1998).

[26] R. Schweitzer-Stenner, F. Eker, Q. Huang, and K. Griebenow, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123 (2001).

[27] Y. Levy and O. Becker, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 993 (2001).

[28] Z. Shi, C. Olson, G. Rose, R. Baldwin, and N. Kallenbach, PNAS 99, 9190 (2002).

[29] A. Garcia, Polymer 45, 669 (2004).

[30] A. Yakubovitch, I. Solov’yov, A. Solov’yov, and W. Greiner, arXiv: physics/0406093.

24

[31] A. Yakubovitch, I. Solov’yov, A. Solov’yov, and W. Greiner, arXiv: physics/0406094.

[32] C. Guet, P. Hobza, F. Spiegelman, and F. David, eds., Atomic Clusters and Nanoparticles,

NATO Advanced Study Institute, les Houches Session LXXIII, les Houches, 2000 (EDP Sci-

ences and Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2001).

[33] A. Solov’yov and J.-P. Connerade, eds., Latest Advances in Atomic Cluster Collisions Fission,

Fusion, Electron, Ion and Photon Impact (World Scientiﬁc Press, 2004).

[34] L. Lindgren and J. Morrison, Atomic Many-Body Theory (Springer-Verlag, New York, Hei-

delberg, Berlin, 1986).

[35] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).

[36] A. Becke, Phys.Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).

[37] C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. Parr, Phys. Rev. B 37, 785 (1988).

[38] R. Parr and W. Yang, Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules (Oxford University

Press, Oxford, New York, 1989).

[39] A. Bax, Prot. Sci. 12, 1 (2003).

[40] S. Sheik, P. Sundararajan, A. Hussain, and K. Sekar, Bioinformatics 18, 1548 (2002).

[41] D. Voet and J. Voet, Biochemistry (John Willey and Sons, Inc., USA, 2004).

