5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Conformational changes in glycine tri- and hexapeptide

Alexander V. Yakubovitch, Ilia A. Solov’yov∗, Andrey V. Solov’yov†, and Walter Greiner

Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies,

Max von Laue Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

We have investigated the potential energy surfaces for glycine chains consisting

of three and six amino acids. For these molecules we have calculated potential en-

ergy surfaces as a function of the Ramachandran angles ϕ and ψ, which are widely

used for the characterization of the polypeptide chains. These particular degrees

of freedom are essential for the characterization of proteins folding process. Calcu-

lations have been carried out within ab initio theoretical framework based on the

density functional theory and accounting for all the electrons in the system. We

have determined stable conformations and calculated the energy barriers for transi-

tions between them. Using a thermodynamic approach, we have estimated the times

of the characteristic transitions between these conformations. The results of our

calculations have been compared with those obtained by other theoretical methods

and with the available experimental data extracted from the Protein Data Base.

This comparison demonstrates a reasonable correspondence of the most prominent

minima on the calculated potential energy surfaces to the experimentally measured

angles ϕ and ψ for the glycine chains appearing in native proteins. We have also

investigated the inﬂuence of the secondary structure of polypeptide chains on the

formation of the potential energy landscape. This analysis has been performed for

the sheet and the helix conformations of chains of six amino acids.

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is well known that proteins consist of amino acids whose number may vary in the

range from hundreds up to tens of thousands. Small fragments of proteins are usually called

polypeptide chains or polypeptides. This work is devoted to a study of the conformational

∗ On leave from the A.F. Ioﬀe Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia. E-mail: ilia@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de
† On leave from the A.F. Ioﬀe Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia. E-mail: solovyov@ﬁas.uni-frankfurt.de

2

properties of glycine polypeptide chains.

Since recently, it became possible to study experimentally small fragments of proteins

and polypeptides in the gas phase with the use of the MALDI mass spectroscopy [1, 2, 3, 4]

and the ESI mass spectroscopy [5, 6]. From theoretical view point, investigation of small

polypeptides is of signiﬁcant interest because they can be treated by means of ab initio

methods allowing accurate comparison of theoretical predictions with experiment. The

results of ab initio calculations can be then utilized for the development of model approaches

applicable for the description of larger and more complex protein structures.

Polypeptides are characterized by the primary and the secondary structure [7, 8, 9, 10].

Diﬀerent geometrical conﬁgurations of a polypeptide are often called as the conformations.

One can expect that chemical and physical properties of various conformations of complex

molecules might diﬀer signiﬁcantly. The number of various conformations (isomeric states)

grows rapidly with the growth of a system size. Thus, a search for the most stable confor-

mations becomes an increasingly diﬃcult problem for large molecules. With the help of the

NMR spectroscopy and the X-rays diﬀraction analysis it has been shown [9], that the sheet

and the helix structures are the most prominent elements of the protein secondary structure.

The main diﬀerence between the sheet and the helix structures is due to the diﬀerence of

the dihedral angles formed by the atoms of the polypeptide chains in the two cases. These

degrees of freedom are responsible for the transition of the molecule from one conformation

to another. By increasing the temperature of the system, the degrees of freedom responsible

for twisting of the polypeptide chain can be activated. The study of this transition and

evaluation of its characteristic duration are of signiﬁcant interest, because this problem is

closely related to one of the most intriguing problems of the protein physics - the protein

folding. To study this transition it is necessary to investigate the potential energy surface of

amino acid chains with respect to their twisting. Besides the protein folding, the potential

energy landscapes of polypeptides carry a lot of detail and useful information about the

structure of these molecules.

In the present paper we have studied the potential energy surface for small glycine chains.

These molecules were chosen because they are often present in native proteins as fragments,

and also because they allow ab initio theoretical treatment due to their relatively small size.

Previously, only glycine and alanine dipeptides were studied in detail.

Some-

times their analogues were used to reduce the computational costs (for example (S)-α-

3

(formylamino)propanamide). In refs. [11, 12, 13] alanine and glycine dipeptides were inves-

tigated within the Hartree-Fock theory. In these papers the potential energy surfaces were

calculated versus the twisting angles of the molecules. Diﬀerent stable conformations of

the dipeptides, corresponding to diﬀerent molecular conformations, were determined. Each

stable conformation of the molecule was additionally studied on the basis of the pertur-

bation theory, which takes into account many-electron correlations in the system. In refs.

[14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19] diﬀerent conformations and their energies were determined within

the framework of the density functional theory. In ref. [19] dynamics of the alanine dipep-

tide analog was discussed and time of the transition between the two conformations of the

alanine dipeptide was found. In [20] the glycine molecule was studied with accounting for

the many electron correlations within the many-body perturbation theory. In this work the

most important glycine isomers and the frequencies of the normal vibration modes were

determined.

A number of papers were devoted to the study of tripeptides. In refs. [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]

dynamics of the alanine and glycine tripeptides was studied by means of classical molecular

dynamics and with the use of semi-empirical potentials (such as GROMOS, CHARMM

and AMBER). In ref. [26] within the framework of the Hartree-Fock theory several stable

conformations of alanine and glycine tripeptides were found. In ref.

[27] the Raman and

IR spectra for alanine and glycine tripeptides were measured in neutral, acidy and alkali

environments.

Polypeptides have been studied less. We are aware of only several related papers. In

particular, stable conformations of neutral and charged alanine hexapeptides were obtained

with the use of empirical potentials and discussed in ref. [28]. Experimental NMR study of

various conformations of alanine heptapeptides at diﬀerent temperatures was carried out in

ref.

[29]. In ref.

[30] with the use of empirical molecular dynamics based on Monte-Carlo

methods, a polypeptide consisting of 21 amino acids was described.

In the present paper we have performed an ab initio calculation of the multidimensional

potential energy surface for the glycine polypeptide chains consisting of three and six amino

acids. The potential energy surface versus twisting degrees of freedom of the polypeptide

chain has been calculated. The calculations have been performed within ab initio theoretical

framework based on the density functional theory (DFT) accounting for all the electrons

in the system. Previously, this kind of calculations were performed only for dipeptides

4

(see, e.g., [11, 12, 19]). For larger molecules, only a few conformations were considered

(see citations above). We have calculated the energy barriers for the transitions between

diﬀerent molecular conformations and determined the energetically most favorable ones.

Using a thermodynamic approach, we have estimated times of the characteristic transitions

between the most energetically favorable conformations. The results of our calculation

have been compared with other theoretical simulations and with the available experimental

data. We have also analysed how the secondary structure of polypeptide chains inﬂuences

the potential energy landscapes. In particular, the role of the secondary structure in the

formation of stable conformations of the chains of six amino acids being in the sheet and

in the helix conformations has been elucidated. Some preliminary results of our work were

published as electronic preprints [31, 32].

Our paper is organized as follows. In section II we give a brief overview of theoretical

methods used in our work. In section III we present and discuss the results of our com-

putations. In section IV we draw a conclusion to this paper. The atomic system of units,

|e| = me = ¯h = 1, is used throughout the paper unless other units are indicated.

II. THEORETICAL METHODS

In the present paper we study the multidimensional potential energy surfaces for glycine

polypeptides within the framework of the density functional theory. The potential energy

surfaces are multidimensional functions of atomic coordinates. In our work the potential

energy surfaces were considered as a function of the dihedral angles formed by the atoms of

the polypeptide chain. For this calculation the Born-Oppenheimer approximation allowing

to separate the motion of the electronic and ionic subsystems is used.

The density functional theory (DFT) is a common tool for the calculation of properties

of quantum many body systems in which many electron correlations play an important role.

The DFT formalism is well known and can be found in many textbooks (see e.g. [33, 34]).

Therefore in our work we present only the basic equations and ideas of this method.

Electronic wave functions and energy levels within the framework of DFT are obtained

from the Kohn-Sham equations, which read as (see e.g. [33, 34]):

ˆp2
2

(cid:18)

+ Uions + VH + Vxc

ψi = εiψi,

i = 1...N

(1)

(cid:19)

5

(2)

where the ﬁrst term represents the kinetic energy of the i-th electron with the wavefunction

ψi and the energy εi, Uions describes the electron attraction to the ionic centers, VH is

the Hartree part of the interelectronic interaction [35], Vxc is the local exchange-correlation

potential.

correlation energy functional:

The exchange-correlation potential is deﬁned as a functional derivative of the exchange-

Vxc =

δExc[ρ]
δρ(~r)

,

Equation (2) is exact and follows from the Hohenberg theory [36]. However, no unique

potential Exc, universally applicable for diﬀerent systems and conditions, has been found so

far.

Approximate functionals employed by the DFT usually partition the exchange-correlation

energy into two parts, referred to as the exchange and the correlation terms:

Exc[ρ] = Ex(ρ) + Ec(ρ)

(3)

Both terms are the functionals of the electron density, which can be of two distinctly diﬀerent

types: either a local functional depending only on the electron density ρ or a gradient-

corrected functionals depending on both ρ and its gradient, ∇ρ. A variety of exchange

correlation functionals can be found in literature.

In our work we have used the hybrid

Becke-type three-parameter exchange functional [37] paired with the gradient-corrected Lee,

Yang and Parr correlation functional (B3LY P ) [38, 39].

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Determination of the polypeptide twisting degrees of freedom

In this section we present the potential energy surfaces for the glycine polypeptide chains

calculated versus dihedral angles ϕ and ψ deﬁned in ﬁgure 1. In particular, we focus on the

chains consisting of three and six amino acids.

Both angles are deﬁned by the four neighboring atoms in the polypeptide chain. The angle
i−1 − Ni − C α
i )
i −C
i) and

ϕi is deﬁned as the dihedral angle between the planes formed by the atoms (C
and (Ni −C α

i). The angle ψi is deﬁned as the dihedral angle between (Ni −C α

i −C

′

′

′

6

FIG. 1: Dihedral angles ϕ and ψ used to characterize the potential energy surface of the polypeptide

chain.

(C α

i − C

′

i − Ni+1) planes. Beside the angles ϕi and ψi there is an angle ωi, which is deﬁned

as the dihedral angle between the (C α

i − C

i − Ni+1) and (C

i − Ni+1 − C α

i+1) planes. The

′

′

atoms are numbered from the NH2− terminal of the polypeptide. The angles ϕi, ψi and
ωi take all possible values within the interval [−180◦;180◦]. For the unambiguous deﬁnition

we count the angles ϕi, ψi and ωi clockwise, if one looks on the molecule from its NH2−

terminal (see ﬁg. 1). This way of angle counting is the most commonly used [10].

The angles ϕi and ψi can be deﬁned for any amino acid in the chain except for the ﬁrst

and the last ones. Below we omit the subscripts and consider angles ϕ and ψ for the middle

amino acid of the polypeptide.

B. Optimized geometries of glycine polypeptides

In order to study the twisting of a polypeptide chain one needs ﬁrst to deﬁne its initial

structure. Although the number of its conformations increases with the growth of the

molecule size, there are certain types of polypeptide structure, namely the sheet and the

helix conformations, which are the most typical. In the present paper we have investigated

7

twisting of the polypeptide chains of the sheet and the helix conformation. By varying the

angles ϕ and ψ in the central amino acid one can create the structure of the polypeptide

diﬀering signiﬁcantly from the pure sheet or helix conformations.

If the structure of a

polypeptide can be transformed to a helix or a sheet one by a trivial variation of ϕ and

ψ, such polypeptides are referred below as belonging to the group of the helix or the sheet

structure respectively.

FIG. 2: Optimized geometries of glycine polypeptide chains calculated by the B3LYP/6-

31++G(d,p) method: a) Glycine tripeptide; b) Glycine hexapeptide (sheet conformation); c)

Glycine hexapeptide (helix conformation).

In ﬁgure 2 we present the optimized geometries of glycine polypeptide chains that have

been used for the exploration of the potential energy surfaces. All geometries have been

optimized with the use of the B3LYP functional. Figure 2a shows the glycine tripeptide

structure. In the present work we choose in the sheet conformation, because the tripeptide

is too short to form the helix conformation. Figures 2b and 2c show glycine hexapeptide in

the sheet and the helix conformations respectively. The total energies (in atomic units) of

the molecules are given below the images.

C. Potential energy surface for glycine tripeptide

In ﬁgure 3 we present the potential energy surface for the glycine tripeptide calculated

by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p) method. The energy scale is given in eV, kcal/mol and Kelvin.

Energies on the plot are measured from the lowest energy minimum of the potential energy

surface.

From the ﬁgure follows that there are several minima on the potential energy surface.

They are numbered according to the value of the corresponding energy value. Each min-

imum corresponds to a certain conformation of the molecule. These conformations diﬀer

8

FIG. 3: Potential energy surface for the glycine tripeptide calculated by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p)

method. Energies are given in eV, kcal/mol and Kelvin. Numbers mark energy minima on the

potential energy surface. Arrows show the transition paths between diﬀerent conformations of the

molecule.

angstroms.

signiﬁcantly from each other. In the case of glycine tripeptide there are only three confor-

mations, shown in ﬁgure 4. Dashed lines show the strongest hydrogen bonds in the system,

which arise when the distance between hydrogen and oxygen atoms becomes less then 2.9

To calculate the potential energy surface the following procedure was adopted. Once

the stable structure of the molecule has been determined and optimized, all but two (these

are the angles ϕ and ψ in the central amino acid) degrees of freedom were frozen. Then

the energy of the molecule was calculated by varying ϕ and ψ. This procedure was used

to calculate all potential energy surfaces presented below in this section. It allows one to

ﬁnd eﬃciently the minima on the potential energy surface and to determine the main stable

conformations of the molecule. The absolute energy values of diﬀerent conformations of

the tripeptide found by this method are not too accurate, because the method does not

account for the relaxation of other degrees of freedom in the system. To calculate the

9

FIG. 4: Optimized conformations of the glycine tripeptide. Diﬀerent geometries correspond to

diﬀerent minima on the potential energy surface (see contour plot in ﬁgure 3). Below each image

we present angles ϕ and ψ, which have been obtained with accounting for relaxation of all degrees

of freedom in the system. Values in brackets give the angles calculated without accounting for

relaxation. Above each image, the energy of the corresponding conformation is given in eV. The

energies are counted from the energy of conformation 1 (the energy of conformation 1 is given in

a.u.). Values in brackets give the energies obtained without accounting for the relaxation of all

degrees of freedom in the system. Dashed lines show the strongest hydrogen bonds. Their lengths

are given in angstroms.

potential energy surface with accounting for the relaxation one needs 20-30 times more of

the computer time. Therefore, a systematic calculations with accounting for the relaxation

have not been performed in our work. Instead, we have performed a complete optimization

of the molecular conformations, corresponding to all minima on the calculated potential

energy surface.

10

In ﬁgure 4 we compare stable conformations of the glycine tripeptide calculated with and

without accounting for the relaxation of all atoms in the system. As it is seen from this

ﬁgure the angles ϕ and ψ diﬀer by about 10 percent in the two cases. This diﬀerence arises

due to the coupling of ϕ and ψ with other degrees of freedom. Note the change of the sign of

the relative energies of some conformations. This eﬀect is due to the rearrangement of side

atoms (radicals) in the polypeptide chain which lowers the energies of diﬀerent conformations

diﬀerently.

In our work the potential energy surface has been calculated and interpolated on the grid

with the step of 18◦. This step size is an optimal one, because the interpolation error is

about 9◦, i.e. comparable with the angle deviations caused by the relaxation of all degrees

of freedom in the system.

TABLE I: Comparison of dihedral angles ϕ and ψ corresponding to diﬀerent conformations of

glycine tripeptide (column 3) with angles ϕ and ψ for glycine dipeptide from [11, 12] (column 1

and 2).

1

2

3

conformation

ϕ, [11]

ψ[11]

-

-180.0

-85.2

-

180.0

67.4

ϕ[12]

76.0

-157.2

-85.8

ψ[12]

-55.4

159.8

79.0

ϕ

80.1

-164.2

-81.2

ψ

-70.2

176.2

62.8

In refs.

[11] and [12] several stable conformations were found for alanine and glycine

dipeptides. The values of angles ϕ and ψ for the stable conformations of dipeptide and

tripeptide are close indicating that the third amino acid in tripeptide makes relatively small

inﬂuence on the values of dihedral angles of two other amino acids. In earlier papers [11, 12]

dipeptides were studied within the framework of the Hartree-Fock theory. In ref. [11], values

of ϕ and ψ were obtained by the HF/6-31+G* method, and in ref.

[12] by HF/6-31G**.

In table I we compare the results of our calculation for tripeptide with the corresponding

data obtained for dipeptides. Some discrepancy between the values presented is due to the

diﬀerence between the dipeptide and tripeptide (i.e. the third glycine in tripeptide aﬀects

the values of angles ϕ and ψ). However, another source of discrepancy might arise due to

accounting for the many-electron correlations in the DFT and neglecting this eﬀect in the

Hartree-Fock theory used in refs. [11, 12].

11

FIG. 5: Transition barriers between conformations 1 ↔ 2 ↔ 3 of the glycine tripeptide. Circles

and squares correspond to the barriers calculated without and with relaxation of all degrees of

freedom in the system.

Figure 3 shows that some domains of the potential energy surface, where the potential

energy of the molecule increases signiﬁcantly, appear to be unfavorable for the formation

of a stable molecular conﬁguration. The growth of energy takes place when some atoms in

the polypeptide chain approach each other of small distances. Accounting for the molecule

relaxation results in the decrease of the system energy in such cases, but the resulting

molecular conﬁgurations remain unstable. We call such domains on the potential energy

surface as forbidden ones. In ﬁgure 3 one can identify two forbidden regions in the vicinity

of the points (0, 0) and (0, 180). At (0, 0) a pair of hydrogen and oxygen atoms approach

to the distances much smaller than the characteristic H − O bond length. This leads to a

strong interatomic repulsion caused by the exchange interaction of electrons. At (0, 180)

the Coulomb repulsion of pair of oxygen atoms causes the similar eﬀect.

Figure 3 shows that there are three minima on the potential energy surface for glycine

tripeptide. The transition barriers between the conformations 2 ↔ 1 and 2 ↔ 3 are shown in

ﬁgure 5. They have been calculated with and without relaxation of the atoms in the system.

The corresponding transition paths are marked in ﬁgure 3 by arrows. This comparison

demonstrates that accounting for the relaxation signiﬁcantly lowers the barrier height and

inﬂuences the relative value of energy of the minima.

12

FIG. 6: Transition barriers between conformations 1 ↔ 2 of alanine dipeptide analog calculated

by the B3LYP/6-31+G(2d,p) method accounting for the relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the

system. Structure of the conformations 1 and 2 is shown near each minimum.

Let us now estimate the time needed for a system for the transition from one conformation

to another. To do this we use the Arhenius equation, which reads as:

= Ωe− ∆E

kT

1
τ

(4)

where τ is the transition time, Ω is the factor, determining how frequently the system

approaches the barrier, ∆E is the barrier height, T is the temperature of the system, k is

the Bolzmann factor.

Figure 6 shows the barrier for the transition between the two main conformations of the

13

alanine dipeptide analog ((S)-α-(formylamino)propanamide). It is seen that ∆E1→2 = 0.047

eV for the transition 1 → 2, while ∆E2→1 = 0.079 eV for the transition 2 → 1. The
frequency Ω for this molecule is equal to 42.87 cm−1. Thus, at T = 300 K, we obtain
2×Ala ∼ 5 ps and τ 2→1
τ 1→2
2×Ala ∼ 17 ps. This result is in excellent agreement with the molecular
dynamics simulations results obtained in [19] predicting τ ∼ 7 ps for the transition 1 → 2

and τ ∼ 19 ps for the transition 2 → 1. This comparison demonstrates that our method is

reliable enough and it can be used for the estimation of transition times between various

conformations of the polypeptides.

Using the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p) method we have calculated the frequencies of normal

vibration modes for the glycine tripeptide. The characteristic frequency corresponding to
twisting of the polypeptide chain is equal to 33.49 cm−1. From ﬁgure 5 follows that ∆E2→3 =

0.103 eV for the transition 2 → 3, and ∆E3→2 = 0.132 eV for the transition 3 → 2. Thus,
we obtain τ 2→3

3×Gly ∼ 164 ps. Let us note that these transition times can

3×Gly ∼ 54 ps and τ 3→2

be measured experimentally by means of NMR [10, 40].

D. Potential energy surface for glycine hexapeptide with the sheet and the helix

secondary structure

In ﬁgure 7 we present contour plots of the potential energy surfaces for the glycine

hexapeptide with the sheet (part a) and the helix (part b) secondary structure, respectively,

versus dihedral angles ϕ and ψ. In both cases the forbidden regions arise because of the

repulsion of oxygen and hydrogen atoms analogously to the glycine tripeptide case.

Minima 1-5 on the potential energy surface 7a correspond to diﬀerent conformations

of the glycine hexapeptide with the sheet secondary structure. Note that minima 1-3 are

also present on the potential energy surface of the glycine tripeptide. Geometries of the

conformations 1-5 are shown on the right-hand side of ﬁgure 7a.

For the glycine hexapeptide with the sheet secondary structure additional minima 4-5

arise. The appearance of these minima is the result of the interaction of the outermost

amino acids, which are absent in the case of tripeptide.

Energy barrier as a function of a scan variable (see ﬁgure 7a) for the transition between

conformations 1 and 2 is shown in ﬁgure 8. The energy dependence has been calculated with

and without relaxation of all the atoms in the system. In the case of glycine hexapeptide

14

FIG. 7: Potential energy surface for the glycine hexapeptide with the sheet secondary structure

(part a) and with the helix secondary structure (part b) calculated by the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p)

method. Energy scale is given in ﬁgure 3. Numbers mark energy minima on the potential en-

ergy surface. Images of optimized conformations of the glycine hexapeptide are shown near the

corresponding energy landscape. Values of angles ϕ and ψ, as well as the relative energies of the

conformations are given analogously to that in ﬁgure 4.

with the sheet secondary structure the barrier height (0.128 eV) for the transition 1 → 2

appears to be close to the corresponding barrier height of the glycine tripeptide (0.103 eV),

while the barrier height for the transition 2 → 1 is signiﬁcantly lower (0.028 eV). The normal

vibration mode frequency, corresponding to the twisting of the polypeptide chain is equal to
15.45 cm−1 and was calculated with the B3LYP/6-31G(2d,p) method. Using equation (4)

15

FIG. 8: Transition barriers between conformations 1 ↔ 2 of the glycine hexapeptide with the sheet

secondary structure. Circles and squares correspond to the barriers calculated without and with

relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the system.

one derives the transition times at room temperature: τ 1→2

6×Gly ∼ 305 ps, τ 2→1

6×Gly ∼ 6 ps.

Let us now consider glycine hexapeptide with the helix secondary structure. The potential

energy surface for this polypeptide is shown in ﬁgure 7b. The positions of minima on this

surface are shifted signiﬁcantly compared to the cases discussed above. This change takes

place because of the inﬂuence of the secondary structure of the polypeptide on the potential

energy surface. The geometries of the most stable conformations are shown on the right

hand-side of ﬁgure 7b.

It is worth noting that for some conformations of glycine hexapeptide the angles ϕ and

ψ change signiﬁcantly when the relaxation of all degrees of freedom in the system is ac-

counted for (see for example conformations 1, 4, 5 in ﬁg. 7a and conformations 3, 4 in

ﬁg. 7b). This means that the potential energy surface of the glycine hexapeptide in the

vicinity of mentioned minima is very sensitive to the relaxation of all degrees of freedom.

However, calculation of the potential energy surface with accounting for the relaxation of all

degrees of freedom is unfeasible task. Indeed, one needs about 1000 hours of computer time

(Pentium Xeon 2.4 GHz) for the calculation of the potential energy surface for the glycine

hexapeptide. To perform an analogues calculation with accounting for the relaxation about

16

3 years of computer time would be needed. Nevertheless, the potential energy surface cal-

culated without accounting for the relaxation carries a lot of useful information. Thus, one

can predetermine stable conformations of polypeptide, which then can be used as starting

conﬁgurations for further energy minimization.

E. Comparison of calculation results with experimental data

Nowadays, the structure of many proteins has been determined experimentally [9]. Know-

ing the protein structure one can ﬁnd the angles ϕ and ψ for each amino acid in the protein.

In ﬁgure 9a, we show a map of the allowed and forbidden conformations for glycine

residues in poly-glycine chain taken from [42] (steric Ramachandran diagram). This map

was obtained from pure geometrical considerations, in which the structure of the polypep-

tide was assumed to be ﬁxed and deﬁned by the interatomic van der Waals interaction

radii. Depending on the distances between the atoms one could distinguish three regions:

completely allowed, conventionally allowed and forbidden. The conformation is called com-

pletely allowed if all the distances between atoms of diﬀerent amino acids are larger than

some critical value rij ≥ rmax. Conventionally allowed regions on the potential energy sur-

face correspond to the conformations of the polypeptide, in which the distances between

some atoms of diﬀerent amino acids lie within the interval rmin ≤ rij < rmax. All other

conformations are referred to as forbidden. The values of rmin and rmax are deﬁned by the

types of interacting atoms and can be found in the textbooks (see, e.g., [42]). In ﬁgure 9a

we mark the completely allowed regions with white, the conventionally allowed regions with

light-gray and the forbidden regions with dark gray color. In this ﬁgure we mark the points,

which correspond to the geometries of glycine, whose periodical iteration leads to the forma-

tion of chains with speciﬁc secondary structure. In table II we compile the values of angles

ϕ and ψ, which correspond to the most prominent poly-glycine secondary structures. For

the illustrative purposes we mark these points by white circles with the corresponding type
7 , 2L

of the secondary structure typed in. Thus, 2R

7 are the right-handed and the left-handed

27 helix; 3R

10, 3L

10 are the right-handed and the left-handed 310 helix; αR, αL are the right-

handed and the left-handed α−helix (413); πR, πL are the right-handed and the left-handed

π−helix (516); ↑↑, ↑↓ are the parallel and antiparallel β sheets. βI, βII correspond to the

β−turns of types I and II respectively.

17

FIG. 9: Comparison of angles ϕ and ψ of glycine residues in protein structures selected from

the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 41] with the steric diagram for poly-glycine [42] (part

a)). Comparison of angles ϕ and ψ of glycine residues in protein structures selected from the

Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 41] with the minima on the calculated potential energy surfaces

for: glycine tripeptide (b); glycine hexapeptide in sheet conformation (c); glycine hexapeptide in

helix conformation (d). Transparent rhomboids correspond to glycines surrounded with glycines,

while ﬁlled circles correspond to glycines surrounded by other amino acids. Dashed ellipses mark

the regions of higher concentration of the observed angles.

TABLE II: Angles ϕ and ψ corresponding to the most prominent poly-glycine secondary structures.

Structure type

right-handed (left-handed) 27 helix

right-handed (left-handed) 310 helix

right-handed (left-handed) α−helix (413)

right-handed (left-handed) π−helix (516)

parallel β sheet (↑↑)

antiparallel β sheet (↑↓)

β−turn of type I

β−turn of type II

ϕ (Deg.)

-78 (78)

-49 (49)

-57 (57)

-57 (57)

-119

-139

-90

90

18

ψ (Deg.)

59 (-59)

-26 (26)

-47 (47)

-70 (70)

113

135

0

0

Note that not all of the structures listed above are present equally in proteins. In ﬁgure

9a we show the distribution of the angles ϕ and ψ of glycine residues in protein structures

selected from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank [9, 41]. It is possible to distinguish four

main regions, in which most of the experimental points are located. In ﬁgure 9 these regions

are schematically shown with dashed ellipses. Note that these ellipses are used for illustrative

purposes only, and serve for a better understanding of the experimental data. The regions

in which most of the observed angles ϕ and ψ are located correspond to diﬀerent secondary

structure of the poly-glycine. Thus, region I corresponds to the parallel and antiparallel

β−sheets. Region II corresponds to the right-handed 2R

7 helix. Region III corresponds to

the right-handed αR−helix, right-handed 3R
type I. Region IV corresponds to the left-handed αL−helix, left-handed 3L

10 helix, right-handed πR−helix and β−turn of

10 helix and β−turn

of type II. In some cases there are several types of secondary structure within one domain.

In the present work we have not studied the secondary structure of proteins systematically

enough to establish the univocal correspondence of the observed experimental points to

diﬀerent types of the secondary structure. Figure 9a demonstrates that πL and 2L

7 helixes

are rarely observed in experiment.

Note that some experimental points lie in the forbidden region of the steric Ramachandran

diagram (see region IV in ﬁg. 9a). The quantum calculation shows that in fact this region

is allowed and has several minima on the potential energy surface (see ﬁg 9c and 9d). This

comparison shows that for an accurate description of polypeptides it is important to take

19

quantum properties of these systems into account.

Let us now compare the distribution of angles ϕ and ψ experimentally observed for pro-

teins with the potential energy landscape calculated for glycine polypeptides, and establish

correspondence of the secondary structure of the calculated conformations with the predic-

tions of the simple Ramachandran model.

Region I corresponds to the minima 2, 1 and 5 on the potential energy surfaces of the

glycine tripeptide (ﬁg. 9b), the glycine hexpeptide with the secondary structure of sheet (ﬁg.

9c), and the glycine hexapeptide with the secondary structure of helix (ﬁg. 9d) respectively.

Conformations 2 and 1 in ﬁgures 9b and 9c correspond exactly to the glycine chains in the

β-sheet conformation (see ﬁg. 4 and 7a). Conformation 5 in ﬁgure 9d is a mixed state. Here

the central amino acid has the conformation of sheet, while the outermost amino acids have

the conformation of helix.

Region II corresponds to the minima 3, 2 and 1 on the potential energy surfaces 9b,

9c, and 9d, respectively. On the steric diagram for poly-glycine (see ﬁg. 9a) this region

corresponds to the right-handed 2R

7 helix. The structure of conformations 3 and 2 on the

surfaces 9b and 9c diﬀers from the structure of this particular helix type. Only the central

glycines, for which the angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgures 9b and 9c are deﬁned, have the structure

of 2R

7 helix. Thus, one can refer to conformations 3 and 2 as to the mixed states, where the

central part of the polypeptide chain has the conformation of helix and the outermost parts

have the conformation of sheet. Conformation 1 on the surface 9d is also a mixed state.

Here one can distinguish one turn of 3R

7 helix (see ﬁg. 7b).
Region III corresponds to the structure of right-handed αR−helix, right-handed 3R

10 helix and two turns of 2R

10 helix,

right-handed πR−helix and β−turn I. It corresponds to minimum 5 on the potential energy

surface of the glycine hexapeptide with the secondary structure of sheet 9c. Conformation 5

can be characterized as partially formed β−turn, because the glycine, for which the dihedral

angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgure (ﬁg. 9c) are deﬁned, has the geometry of β−turn and its neighbor

forms a β−sheet (see ﬁg. 7a). There are no minima in region III on the potential energy

surfaces presented in ﬁgures 9b and 9d. This happens because in this case most probable

is the structure of right-handed αR−helix. To form one turn of the helix of this type it is

necessary to link at least four amino acids, so the glycine tripeptide is too short for that. As

well, six amino acids chain is too short to form a stable fragment of an αR−helix, because it

does not have enough hydrogen bonds to stabilize the structure. For the hexapeptide more

20

probable are the elements of 3R

10 and 2R

7 helixes, because in these cases 2 and 3 helical turns

respectively can be formed.

Region IV is represented by the structure of left-handed αL−helix, left-handed 3L

10 helix

and β−turn of type II. To form these structures it is necessary to have at least four amino

acids, therefore there is no minima in this region on the potential energy surface of glycine

tripeptide (ﬁg. 9b). Region IV corresponds to the conformations 4 and 3 on the surfaces

9c and 9d respectively. Conformation 4 on the surface 9c corresponds to partially formed

β−turn, because the glycine, for which the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ in ﬁgure 9c are plotted

has the conﬁguration of β−turn, but the neighboring aminoacid in the chain forms a β−sheet

(see ﬁg. 7a). Conformation 3 on the surface 9d can be characterized as deformed turn of

left-handed αL−helix, which turns out to be energetically the most favorable in this region

of the potential energy surface (see ﬁg. 7b).

Finally, we mention a few peculiarities of the calculated potential energy landscapes.

At each of the potential energy surfaces discussed in this work one can see a minimum at

ϕ ∼ 80o and ψ ∼ −70o. On the steric diagram for poly-glycine this region corresponds to

the left-handed 2L

7 helix. Conformations 1, 3 and 2 on the potential energy surfaces 9b, 9c,

and 9d respectively partially represent this structure (see ﬁg. 4, 7a and 7b). The structure

of conformation 4 on the potential energy surface 9d is similar to left-handed αL−helix,

but diﬀers from it due to the short length of the polypeptide chain, resulting in signiﬁcant

variation of angles ϕ and ψ in all the residues along the chain.

IV. CONCLUSION

In the present paper the multidimensional potential energy surfaces for amino acid chains

consisting of three and six glycines has been investigated and the conformational properties

of these systems with respect to the twisting of the polypeptide chain have been described.

The calculations were carried out within ab initio theoretical framework based on the density

functional theory accounting for all the electrons in the system. We have determined stable

conformations and calculated the energy barriers for transitions between them. Using a

thermodynamic approach, we have estimated times of the characteristic transitions between

the conformations. It was demonstrated that the transition times lie within the picosecond

region. Our estimates are compared with the available molecular-dynamics simulations

21

results, and the correspondence between the results of the two diﬀerent methods is reported.

A strong barrier asymmetry between neighboring stable conformations on the potential

energy surface was found.

We have compared for the ﬁrst time values of angles ϕ and ψ for glycine residues exper-

imentally observed in real proteins with the coordinates of minima on the potential energy

surfaces. This comparison has showed that all profound minima on the potential energy

surfaces correspond to the regions in which experimentally measured values of ϕ and ψ are

located. We have also analysed how the secondary structure of polypeptide chains inﬂuences

the formation of the potential energy landscapes. For the chains of six amino acids with

the secondary structures of sheet and helix the inﬂuence of the secondary structure on the

stable conformations of the molecule was demonstrated.

The results of this work can be utilized for modeling more complex molecular systems.

For example, the suggested model for the estimation of the characteristic transition times

can be used for longer polypeptide chains, also consisting of diﬀerent amino acids and for

estimates of time of proteins folding. It is also possible to use the results of the present work

for testing the applicability and accuracy of diﬀerent model approaches for the polypeptide

description requiring much less computer time than ab initio calculations.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is partially supported by the European Commission within the Network of

Excellence project EXCELL, by INTAS under the grant 03-51-6170 and by the Russian

Foundation for Basic Research under the grant 06-02-17227-a. We are grateful to Dr. A.

Korol and Dr. O. Obolensky for their help in preparation of this manuscript. The possibility

to perform complex computer simulations at the Frankfurt Center for Scientiﬁc Computing

is also gratefully acknowledged.

[1] M. Karas and F. Hillenkamp, Anal. Chem. 60, 2299 (1988).

[2] F. Hillenkamp and M. Karas, Int. J. of Mass Spect. 200, 71 (2000).

[3] M. Karas, U. Bahr, I. Fournier, M. Gluckmann, and A. Pfenninger, J. of Mass Spect. 226,

239 (2003).

22

[4] M. Wind and W. Lehmann, J. Anal. At. Spect. 19, 20 (2004).

[5] J. Fenn, M. Mann, C. Meng, S. Wong, and C. Whitehouse, Science 246, 64 (1989).

[6] S. Br¨ondsted-Nielsen, J. Andersen, P. Hvelplund, B. Liu, and S. Tomita, J. Phys. B: At. Mol.

[7] A. Finkelstein and O. Ptizin, Physics of Proteins (Moscow University Press ”Universitet”,

Opt. Phys. 37, R25 (2004).

2002).

[8] A. M¨ulberg, Protein Folding (St. Petersburg University Press, 2004).

[9] H. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. Bhat, H. Weissig, I. Shindyalov, and

P. Bourne, Nucleic Acids Research 28, 235 (2000).

[10] A. Rubin, Biophysics: Theoretical Biophysics (Moscow University Press ”Nauka”, 2004).

[11] T. Head-Gordon, M. Head-Gordon, M. Frisch, C. B. III, and J. Pople, J. Am. Chem. Soc.

113, 5989 (1991).

[12] I. Gould, W. Cornell, and I. Hillier, J. Am. Chem. Soc 116, 9250 (1994).

[13] Z. Wang and Y. Duan, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1699 (2004).

[14] A. Percel, O. Farkas, I. J´akli, I. Topol, and I. Csizmadia, J. Comp. Chem. 24, 1026 (2003).

[15] I. H´udaky, P. H´udaky, and A. Percel, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1522 (2004).

[16] R. Improta and V. Barone, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1333 (2004).

[17] R. Vargas, J. Garza, B. Hay, and D. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 3213 (2002).

[18] R. Kashner and D. Hohl, J. Phys. Chem. A 102, 5111 (1998).

[19] D. Wei, H. Guo, and D. Salahub, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001).

[20] O. Bludskˇy, J. Chocholouˇsov´a, J. Vacek, F. Huisken, and P. Hobza, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4629

(2000).

[21] S. Woutersen, Y. Mu, G. Stock, and P. Hamm, Chem. Phys. 266 (2001).

[22] S. Woutersen, R. Pﬁster, Y. Mu, D. Kosov, and G. Stock, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 6833 (2002).

[23] Y. Mu and G. Stock, J. Phys. Chem. B. 106, 5294 (2002).

[24] Y. Mu, D. Kosov, and G. Stock, J. Phys. Chem. B. 107, 5064 (2003).

[25] P. Nguyen and G. Stock, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 11350 (2003).

[26] H. Torii and M. Tasumi, Journ. of Ram. Spect. 29, 81 (1998).

[27] R. Schweitzer-Stenner, F. Eker, Q. Huang, and K. Griebenow, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123 (2001).

[28] Y. Levy and O. Becker, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 993 (2001).

[29] Z. Shi, C. Olson, G. Rose, R. Baldwin, and N. Kallenbach, PNAS 99, 9190 (2002).

23

[30] A. Garcia, Polymer 45, 669 (2004).

[31] A. Yakubovitch, I. Solov’yov, A. Solov’yov, and W. Greiner, arXiv: physics/0406093.

[32] A. Yakubovitch, I. Solov’yov, A. Solov’yov, and W. Greiner, arXiv: physics/0406094.

[33] C. Guet, P. Hobza, F. Spiegelman, and F. David, eds., Atomic Clusters and Nanoparticles,

NATO Advanced Study Institute, les Houches Session LXXIII, les Houches, 2000 (EDP Sci-

ences and Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2001).

[34] A. Solov’yov and J.-P. Connerade, eds., Latest Advances in Atomic Cluster Collisions Fission,

Fusion, Electron, Ion and Photon Impact (World Scientiﬁc Press, 2004).

[35] L. Lindgren and J. Morrison, Atomic Many-Body Theory (Springer-Verlag, New York, Hei-

delberg, Berlin, 1986).

[36] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).

[37] A. Becke, Phys.Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).

[38] C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. Parr, Phys. Rev. B 37, 785 (1988).

[39] R. Parr and W. Yang, Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules (Oxford University

Press, Oxford, New York, 1989).

[40] A. Bax, Prot. Sci. 12, 1 (2003).

[41] S. Sheik, P. Sundararajan, A. Hussain, and K. Sekar, Bioinformatics 18, 1548 (2002).

[42] D. Voet and J. Voet, Biochemistry (John Willey and Sons, Inc., USA, 2004).

