5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comment on ”Can one predict DNA Transcription Start Sites by Studying Bubbles?”

C.H. Choi,1 A. Usheva,1 G. Kalosakas,2 K. Ø. Rasmussen,3 and A. R. Bishop3
1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School,
99 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
2Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems,
N¨othnitzer Str. 38, D-01187 Dresden, Germany
3Theoretical Division and Center for Nonlinear Studies,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545

Recently, van Erp et al. published an article [1] pre-
senting conclusions which contradict earlier works by us
[2, 3]. We believe this criticism to be misguided - indeed
the authors conclusions largely substantiate the original
discovery. This needs to be clariﬁed so that the broader
community is not mislead.

In our earlier work we provided experimental and the-
oretical evidence that functionally important sites for
transcription can coincide with thermally induced open-
ings of double-stranded DNA. The comment by van Erp
et al. regarding the veracity of our experiments is with-
out foundation. The theoretical basis for these stud-
ies was provided by the simple Peyrard-Bishop-Dauxois
(PBD) model. Using parameters already established in
the literature, we performed Langevin simulations on
the PBD model for a few speciﬁc viral DNA sequences.
The object of our simulations was to establish whether
there were certain regions in these highly heterogeneous
real sequences that were more prone to sustain large
thermally induced openings (’bubbles’) of the double
stranded molecule. Our simulations indicated that there
indeed were such regions, and we experimentally veriﬁed
their existence using the S1 nuclease technique. Based
on these combined theoretical and experimental ﬁndings
we made the observation that in these viral sequences
the regions sustaining the large bubbles coincided with
known binding sites active in transcription events. These
included, but were not limited to the transcription initia-
tion site itself. Based on these observations, we concluded
that it might be possible more generally to identify DNA
functionally active sites, including transcription initia-
tion sites, by studying the thermal ﬂuctuations (partic-
ularly large amplitude coherent openings) of the double
strand. It is very important to note that in fact these
observations and speculations could have been made en-
tirely based on experimental evidence. We were, how-
ever, fortunate to also possess a model (PBD) which suf-
ﬁciently contains essential entropic ingredients to accu-
rately guide the location of openings.

The claim of van Erp et al.

is that our simulation
technique was inadequate and therefore the entire work
is ﬂawed. As in our own independent elaborations [4]
of our original discovery, van Erp et al. assume that
thermodynamic equilibrium averages are suﬃcient and
perform explicit integrations of the integrals involved in
the partition function for the above model. It is there-
fore correct that their and our [4] results with respect
to obtaining thermodynamic averages are more accurate
than our initial results. However, the two crucial aspects
of our initial ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by these studies of

thermodynamical equilibrium properties:

1. In all three of the viral sequences examined by van
Erp et al. they ﬁnd the regions which sustain large
bubbles to be precisely those we originally identi-
ﬁed [2, 3], and these regions indeed include the sites
active during transcription.

2. van Erp et al. ﬁnd that the two base pair mutation
of the AAVP5 promoter causes a signiﬁcant sup-
pression of large thermal ﬂuctuations at the former
transcription sites, exactly as we reported earlier
[2, 3] to be the case.

We emphasize again that
these observations were
strongly supported by experiments (notably missing in
the work of van Erp et al.). It is indeed true that our
subsequent studies [4] have found that the relevant quan-
tities for function is likely to be the probability of bubbles
of speciﬁc sizes – presumably associated with physical di-
mensions of, e.g., transcription machinery – but this does
not dilute our primary discovery.

Van Erp et al. make one valid point in regard to our
earlier work: We published results on a ”control” se-
quence, which consisted of a non-promoter containing a
similar number of base pairs as the promoter sequences.
The results we showed for this case were unfortunate as
they indicated that no bubbles occurred in this sequence.
More accurate Langevin results do show the occurrence
of bubbles in this sequence, as noted by van Erp et al.
This may indicate that a human coding gene was a poor
choice for the control sequence, and that our scenario is
best suited to viral sequences or, again that the speciﬁc
bubble sizes are key. In any case this does not aﬀect the
validity of our original results for the active promoters.
in essence
conﬁrm our initial discovery:
is in-
deed an accurate guide to the location of experimentally-
identiﬁed active openings. Clearly this simple model
must be further augmented to describe either fully re-
alistic dynamics, or how biological machinery (such as
RNA polymerase) engages these active regions. We are
working to implement these augmentations.

In conclusion the results of van Erp et al.

the PBD model

[1] T.S. van Erp, S. Cuesta-Lopez, J.-G. Hagmann, and M.

Peyrard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 218104 (2005).

[2] C.H. Choi, G. Kalosakas, K.Ø. Rasmussen, M. Hiromura,
A. R. Bishop and A. Usheva, Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1584
(2004).

[3] G. Kalosakas, K.Ø. Rasmussen, A. R. Bishop, C.H. Choi,

and A. Usheva, Europhys. Lett. 68, 127 (2004).

[4] http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0511128.

