5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AN INVERTED PENDULUM WITH A SPRINGY CONTROL AS
A MODEL OF HUMAN STANDING

FRANK G. BORG

Abstract. The normal and the inverted pendulum continue to be one of
the main physical models and metaphors in science. The inverted pendulum
is also a classic study case in control theory.
In this paper we consider a
special demonstration version of the inverted pendulum which is controlled
via a spring. If the spring constant is below a critical level the springy control
will be unstable and the pendulum will be kept from falling only by exercising
a dynamically varying control. This situation resembles the case of human
bipedal quiet standing with the Achilles tendon serving as the spring.

1. Introduction

With little exaggeration one can say that one of the most important contribu-
tions to physics ever made was by Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) through his
investigations of the pendulum.1 Among other things they inspired Newton on his
road to the Principia. Subsequently also the inverted version of the pendulum has
been used in order to demonstrate a number of fundamental topics in physics, such
as instability and chaos, in many papers too numerous to be listed here. A quick
online search using the key phrase ”inverted pendulum” yielded no less than 22
papers from 1965 onwards in the American Journal of Physics alone.2 We will
describe in the present paper a controlled inverted pendulum version inspired by a
biomechanical model of human standing which thus may be of additional interest
to physics students. Human quiet standing is in fact one of the classical problems of
biomechanics and it has occasionally given rise to lively debates about the nature of
the supposed physiological control mechanism of balance.3 Everyone though seems
to agree that, for quiet standing, the human subject can be described to a good ap-
proximation by an inverted pendulum pivoted at the ankle joints, and especially so
if one restricts the attention to the forward-backward (anterior-posterior) sways. If
we consider the human inverted pendulum (HIP), then during normal quiet stand-
ing the center of gravity of the person will on the average be a few centimeters
ahead (anterior) of the ankle joints; that is, the person leans slightly forward. One
implication is that in order to keep the person from falling only the leg muscles
on the back side of the leg need to be active, pulling the body backwards against
gravity. (Naturally there must be other postural muscles involved which will keep
the trunk, legs and head from moving relative to each other, but they have a more
static role during quiet standing. Thanks to the postural muscles ”freezing” the
degrees of freedom of the system we may use the HIP approximation.) A simpliﬁed
model of the situation is shown in Fig. 1. The muscles responsible for the backward
torque vis-`a-vis the ankle joint are the so called plantar ﬂexors making up the triceps
surae consisting of the Soleus and the lateral and medial heads of Gastrocnemius.
These muscles are all joined at the Achilles tendon which in turn is attached to the
heel bone (calcaneus). The interesting point here is that the muscle-tendon system

Jyv¨askyl¨a University, Chydenius Institute, POB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby, Finland. Email:
borgbros@netti.fi.

1

2

FRANK G. BORG

cannot lock the HIP into a steady position, instead the person sways back and forth
with an amplitude, in term of the center of mass, of the order of 10-20 mm. Fig.
2 gives and example of a the time series (stabilogram) of the anterior/posterior
center of pressure (A/P COP) during quiet standing, showing the erratic nature of
the swayings. The stabilogram has been measured with a force plate, which is a
rectangular plate with force transducers in each corner sensing the vertical forces
Fi.4 If the rear transducers are numbered 1 and 2, and the front transducers by 3
and 4, then the A/P COP coordinate u is given by,

u =

b
2 ·

F2
F3 + F4 −
F3 + F4 + F1 + F2

F1 −

.

(1)

Here b denotes the distance between the front and rear transducers and the A/P
COP variable u is measured from the center of the force plate. As will be shown
below, the A/P COP coordinate u is closely related to the torque acting vis-`a-vis
the ankle joints. Thus, Fig. 2 demonstrates the incessant modulating activity of the
plantar ﬂexors. In fact, stabilograms like that in Fig. 2 have suggested a comparison
with Brownian motion5 (of a trapped particle), and the use of methods from statis-
tical physics, such as the Fluctuation Dissipation Theorem6, and it has even lead to
an application of the notion of Stochastic Resonance.7 Although these contributions
from physics have brought new methods of analysis into posturology, such as the
Stabilogram Diﬀusion Analysis (based on the Detrended Fluctuation Methods),8
the reason for the apparent chaotic swayings have not been much touched upon. An
important factor that has often been overlooked is the compliance of the Achilles
tendon, as has been emphasized in the recent discussion.9 With a stiﬀ tendon the
muscles could in principle lock the person in a forward leaning position and the
observed swaying would be attributed to fatigue, or some sort of tremor; however,
with an enough compliant tendon such an equilibrium position is unstable. In order
to demonstrate the phenomenon one can use an inverted pendulum as described in
section 3. The pendulum is manually operated via the wire which runs by a pul-
ley (whose placement corresponds roughly to the heel bone) and connects with the
pendulum by a spring. The task is to try to keep the pendulum in a slightly forward
leaning position by pulling from the wire. With a spring whose spring constant is
below a critical value the forward leaning position is unstable. A small disturbance
forward will lead to gravity taking over and the pendulum falling forward; a small
disturbance backwards again will lead to the spring taking over and a toppling
backwards. This situation forces one to employ an oscillatory mode of control in
order to keep the pendulum from toppling. For the demonstration device it is easy
to measure the parameters, such as the spring constant, but in the physiological
case it is more involved. Yet measurements in vivo, using ultrasound techniques,
suggest indeed that the tendon stiﬀness is near, or below the critical value.9

Still, many of the basic questions about balance control remain far from settled.
Anyway, we feel that the springy controlled inverted pendulum may be an inter-
esting and simple device for demonstrating an unstable equilibrium system with
biological relevance. The eﬀect of the compliant link can be demonstrated by com-
paring the balancing task with, and without the spring. Instead of manual control
one may use a computer controlled actuator pulling the wire, employing various
sensors for feedback data (force, inclination angle, spring extension). In fact, mus-
cles are equipped with sensor organs called muscle spindles which basically record
muscle length and its rate of change, while the muscle force is gauged by the Golgi
tendon organs (GTO) located in the tendons.10 These organs enable the human
motor system to act as a feedback control system with delay (due to ﬁnite neural
conduction speed and processing time). The vestibular system is also important

AN INVERTED PENDULUM ...

3

for balance, but during quiet standing the acceleration of the head is normally too
small to trigger vestibular reﬂexes. One set of interesting questions is related to
the issue how damage (e.g. due to neural degeneration) might aﬀect balance and
the control system, and whether there might be compensatory strategies. Similarly
one may investigate using the demonstration device how suppression of feedback
data, or a change in the feedback delay, aﬀect its balance control.

In the following sections we will give a mathematical description of the inverted
pendulum system, and a few possible control methods, together with some practical
details about the demonstration device. While the use of the pendulum in analyzing
walking and running may be well known in physics circles11, the fact that it is also
used for analyzing quiet standing may be less well known. As neither the spring-
coupled pendulum seems to be very familiar, we ﬁnd the it justiﬁed to present the
following detour. The topic also provides a link between basic physics and biology,
and it may convince some students that interesting research questions can arise
from such deceivingly simple phenomena as quiet standing.

2. Theory

2.1. The human inverted pendulum (HIP). We will ﬁrst consider the HIP
model depicted in the Fig. 2. Using the notation of that ﬁgure, and applying
Newtonian mechanics, we can write the following equations,12

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

m¨y = Fy,
m¨z = Fz,
I ¨θ = mgL sin(θ)
N = uFz + ζFy.

N,

−

Here I denotes the moment of inertia of the body (minus feet)13 with respect to
the ankle joints, m is the body mass (minus feet - the feet may account for about 3%
9.81 m/s2), L is the distance
of the body mass), g is the gravitational acceleration (
from the ankle joints to the center of gravity (COG), Fy and Fz are the components
of the ground reaction force (GRF) related to N , the torque produced by the plantar
ﬂexors counteracting the gravitational torque mgy. For small inclinations θ we can
use the approximation y = L sin(θ)
Lθ in Eq.(4). Substituting Eqs.(2), (3), and
(5) into Eq.(4), and taking into account that14 Fz

mg, we get

≈

≈

y

u =

−

(cid:18)

ζ
g

+

I
mgL

≈

¨y,

(cid:19)

or equivalently

with the characteristic frequency

¨y = ω2
c ·

(y

−

u),

1
2π s
From Eq.(5) we can infer that the muscle torque N is about proportional to

g
ζ + I
mL

ωc
2π

fc =

(8)

=

.

the A/P COP coordinate u. Indeed, using the above approximations we get N
≈
umg + ζm¨y. The term umg is in general much larger than ζm¨y since u usually
varies in the range of 2 - 7 cm while ¨y may be of the order of ca 1 cm/s2, and
981 cm/s2. That the A/P COP coordinate u varies
ζ less than 10 cm while g
with the muscle activity has been veriﬁed (by ourselves among others) by measuring

≈

4

FRANK G. BORG

Gastrocnemius activity using Electromyography (EMG) during quiet standing, and
then comparing the EMG signal with A/P COP.

The HIP model for quiet standing has been tested in several investigations.15
Usually one needs, besides the force plate, elaborate video-systems in order to
track the body segment and obtain the resultant COG and its y-coordinate. We
have, by the way, employed a much simpler system where a thin wire was attached
to the person at the waist level (which is close to the COG of a human being), then
let to run over a small pulley and ﬁnally connected to a lever arm of a rotational
optical encoder (resolution of 5000 pulses per revolution). With this arrangement
it was easy to measure the backward-forward motion with an accuracy better than
0.1 mm. If one uses this system in combination with the force plate one obtains
both the A/P COP coordinate u and the COG coordinate y. The HIP model
predicts then, by writing Eq.(7) in the frequency domain (the ”hat” denotes the
Fourier-transformation of the function),

ˆy(f ) =

ˆu(f )

1 +

f
fc

2 ,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(9)

(10)

that y should be a low-pass ﬁltered version of u(t). This was indeed veriﬁed
within reasonable limits by computing the low-pass ﬁltered transform of u using
Eq.(9) with fc = 1/2 Hz, and then comparing the result with the measured y-
series.16

2.2. Feedback control. Within the above mathematical representation the task
of the balance control is to vary the function u(t) (the control function) in Eq.(7)
such that y(t) remains bounded in a small interval. It is a straightforward exercise
to solve for y(t) in term of u(t) as an initial value problem. One can proceed by
deﬁning a new variable

q(t) = y(t) +

˙y(t),

1
ωc

which together with

from Eq.(10),

(11)
(q(t)
is equivalent to Eq.(7). Knowing q(t) we can solve for the original variable y(t)

˙q(t) = ωc

u(t))

−

·

y(t) = y(0)

e−ωct +

eωc(s−t)q(s)ds =

·

t

1
ωc Z
sinh(ωc(s

0

t

−

0
Z

y(0) cosh(ωct) +

sinh(ωct) + ωc

t))u(s)ds.

(12)

˙y(0)
ωc

From this it is apparent that y(t) stays bounded whenever

< C for some
constant C. In fact, the decomposition of Eq.(7) into Eqs.(10) and (11) is a basic
example of a decomposition into a stable and an unstable manifold of a dynamical
system.
It makes sense for the control system to address the unstable variable
component, since once this is controlled the stable part will take care of itself. We
may observe that we also have a solution of the form

q(t)
|
|

y(t) =

e−ωc|s−t|u(s)ds.

(13)

ωc
2

∞

−∞

Z

A direct substitution of Eq.(13) into Eq.(7) demonstrates that it is indeed a
solution if the integral exists. This may seem like a strange solution because it does
not directly depend on the initial values y(0) and ˙y(0), instead it depends on the

AN INVERTED PENDULUM ...

5

future values of the control function u(t). When we compute y(t) from the u(t)-data
using the low-pass ﬁlter Eq.(9) this will correspond to assuming a solution of the

1 + (f /fc)2
form given by Eq.(13). Indeed, the ﬁlter factor
Fourier transform of the Green’s function G(t) = ωc
(cid:16)
2 ·
Using Eq.(13) we obtain for q the expression

in Eq.(9) is the
e−ωc|t| appearing in Eq.(13).

(cid:17)

−1

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

which agrees with the causal solution if17

q(t) = ωc

e−ωc(s−t)u(s)ds,

∞

t
Z

q(t)e−ωct

0

as

→

t

.
→ ∞

We may thus consider it justiﬁed to use Eq.(13), or rather its Fourier version,

when we are concerned with bounded motion (no falling).

In view of Eq.(11) one may design a threshold controller18 which starts to pull
on the pendulum whenever q crosses a threshold value qth (”bang”-control); that
is, the feedback is of the form u(t) = f (q(t

τ )), with a delay τ included,

−

f (q) =

(cid:26)

0
C + ǫ1

qth + ǫ2

if
q
otherwise

≤

.

Here the parameter C determines the strength of the feedback force, while ǫi
represent additional stochastic elements (”noise”). Thus, when q exceeds a thresh-
old qth plus a random ﬂuctuation, a controlling force C + ǫ1 will act with a delay
τ . The equation of motion becomes,

˙q(t) = ωcq(t)

ωcf (q(t

τ )),

−

−

and it is apparent that this system may sustain an oscillatory motion (for a
Indeed, let’s ﬁrst neglect the ”noise” terms, then if we
simulation see Fig. 3).
exp(ωct)
start from q(0) < qth we will have an exponential increase q(t) = q(0)
exp(ωcτ ), the
until q(t
feedback force will reverse the motion and the force persists until q(t
τ ) crosses
the threshold again from the other side, and so on. The system thus settles into a
periodic motion whose period can be calculated to be

τ ) reaches the threshold value qth. Then, if C > qth

−

−

·

·

T = 2τ +

ln

1
ωc

C

qth

−
eωcτ

+

ln

1
ωc

qth (cid:19)
if the following requirement for bounded motion is satisﬁed,

qth

(C

−

−

−

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

C

·

qth
qth) (eωcτ

,

(18)

1)

(cid:19)

−

Cmax

qth

1

−

·

≡

e−ωcτ

−1

> C > Cmin

qth

eωcτ .

≡

·

(19)

(cid:0)

Computer simulations of Eq.(17) with added (not too large) noise still produce
bounded oscillations. The oscillating case may be regarded as an ”attractor” of
1)−1,
the postural control system. From Eq.(19) we see that Cmax/Cmin = (eωcτ
and because this ratio must be larger than 1 for bounded motion, there is an upper
stability limit for the delay τ set by

−

(cid:1)

τmax =

ln(2)
ωc

,

(20)

yielding τmax

230 ms for a typical adult value ωc

3 s−1. This conclu-
sion is of course only valid with respect to this particular feedback model. Still,
the human neuro-motor postural control system operates with feedback delays in
the range from 40 ms (myotatic stretch reﬂexes), and 100 ms (”programmed”,

≈

≈

6

FRANK G. BORG

automatic postural responses), to ca 150 ms (voluntary postural movements), de-
pending of the pathway (spinal pathway; brain stem and subcortical pathway; cor-
tical pathway). So, in this sense the model is within physiological limits. The
model also mimics the physiological situation in that it only uses a pulling feed-
back force which corresponds to the fact that during quiet standing only the plan-
tar ﬂexors are active. Furthermore, the ansatz for the feedback force Eq.(16) im-
plies that the neuro-muscular system employs the information about muscle length
plus its rate of change for the control of balance, in the form of the combination
q(t) = y(t) + ˙y(t)/ωc. Physiologically this is possible since the muscle spindle con-
fers information about the muscle length (x1) and its rate of change ( ˙x1). True, y
is not directly proportional to the muscle length x1, but to the total muscle-tendon
length l (l = x1 + x2, where x2 is the tendon length). However, if x1 is known from
spindle data, and the neuro-muscular system can infer the tendon length (x2) from
the force (F ) data provided by the Golgi tendon organ (GTO) using some learned
empirical tendon force-length relation, F = F (x2), then an estimate of the total
length l (and consequently of y) will be available for the feedback control.

2.3. Instability through compliance. By simple geometry the Gastrocnemius
muscle-tendon lengthens, for an adult, by about 1 mm per degree of forward incli-
nation. A study19 of 8 cadaveric limbs yielded the relationship,

100

=

22.18 + 0.30

ϑ

0.00061

(21)

·

−

ϑ2

·

∆l
l

·

−

≈

≈

×

0.196/100

5 cm) and at this point we get from Eq.(21) that ∂∆l/∂ϑ

for the length change in percent segment length as a function of the ankle angle
ϑ expressed in degrees. The angle ϑ = 86.8◦ corresponds to a 3.2◦ forward leaning
position (and to y
≈
(0.196%); thus, for a shank length of 400 mm the length change becomes 400
l
·
mm
0.8 mm per degree. This has interesting consequences when
we consider the tendon properties. As the muscle and the tendon are in series the
total length is l = x1 + x2, where x1 is the muscle length and x2 is the tendon
length. The elastic properties of the tendon is determined by the relation between
its elongation (∆x2) and the load (∆F ). Maganaris and Paul (see note 9) have,
among others, tried to measure the tendon elongation as function of the load using
ultrasound viewing in vivo. The result is that the tendon behaves as a nonlinear
spring. Mapping data from their published graph (based on data from 8 young
male adults) and ﬁtting a 2nd order polynomial gives the relationship (∆F in units
of N, and ∆x2 in units of mm),

∆F = 39.1

∆x2 + 3.4
This covers a force range of 0 - 870 N and an elongation range of 0 - 11 mm.
During unloading the force ∆F was about 18% larger than during loading for the
same elongation (hysteresis). Eq.(22) is to be regarded mainly as an illustrative
example, but the nonlinear behaviour of the tendon is a general feature. From
Eq.(22) we can calculate the tendon stiﬀness K by,

∆x2

(22)

·

·

2.

,

K =

∂F
∂∆x2
which yields e.g. K = 81 N/mm when ∆x2 = 6.2 mm. Using Eqs. (23), (22),
and (21), one may estimate the torque r
∆F generated by tendon for a given
elongation, assuming a moment length r = 0.05 m vis-`a-vis the heel. Thus, suppose
we have a person with m = 76 kg, L = 0.9 m, who leans forward by 0.05 m in term
of COG y (an inclination around θ = 3.2◦ ). The weight will then be 373 N per leg
on the average, corresponding to an elongation ∆x2 = 6.2 mm and a stiﬀness K =

(23)

×

AN INVERTED PENDULUM ...

7

r

×

×

×

×

×

81

∂∆F /∂∆θ = r

∂∆F /∂∆x2 ×

81 N/mm. Assuming that the tendon lengthens by 1 mm per 1 degree of inclination,
it follows that both (left and right leg) Achilles tendons together would generate
a torque of 464 Nm/rad (= 2
∂∆x2/∂∆θ
180/π Nm/rad, the last factor coming from 1◦ = π/180 radians), to
= 2
be compared with the gravitational ”stiﬀness” mgL = 671 Nm/rad. That is (see
Fig. 4), if the muscle locks its length x1 and leaves it to the tendon to rebound
from any forward disturbance (∆θ > 0), then the torque generated by the tendon
will be overcome by gravity and the person topples over (the resulting torque being
∆Ttot = (671 - 464) Nm/rad
∆θ for small disturbances ∆θ). Conversely, for a
backward disturbance (∆θ < 0) the tendon will win over gravity (∆Ttot < 0) and
the person falls on his/her back. The implication is that the muscle must actively
change its length in response to disturbances so that the ”eﬀective stiﬀness” of the
muscle-tendon system is larger than the gravitational stiﬀness.

×

For a simple model of how the ”eﬀective stiﬀness” can be aﬀected, assume that
the muscle manages to keep the proportion of length change of the muscle, ∆x1 =
x1 −

x0
1, and the tendon, ∆x2 = x2 −

x0
2, constant; that is,

∆x2 =

γ

−

·

∆x1.

The change in the total length becomes ∆l = (1

exerted by of the tendon can be written K∆x2 = K (γ/(γ
that the ”eﬀective” muscle-tendon stiﬀness is

−

−

1/γ) ∆x2. Thus, the force
1)) ∆l, which implies

Kef f =

γ

K.

γ

(cid:18)

·

1

(cid:19)

−
Therefore, if the muscle contracts half as fast as the tendon lengthens (γ =
2) then the eﬀective muscle-tendon stiﬀness will be twice as large as the tendon
stiﬀness.

The threshold feedback model discussed in section (2.2) did not directly relate
to the intrinsic instability caused by compliance, since the feedback control was
formulated in term of a feedback force not caring about how this force is transmitted
(such as by a springy link). However, the feedback force must be related to the
spring elongation by (linear example and not counting hysteresis)

(24)

(25)

f (q(t

τ )) = K

x2(t)

−

x0
2

,

−

(26)

where x0

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

2 is the tendon length at the ”operating” point. This adds a compatibility
condition for the feedback control since x2 has a restricted range. Physiologically
the ”bang”-character of the feedback control Eq.(16) would be rather odd since,
as the force switches between 0 and C, the tendon length would switch between
x0
2 and x0
2 + C/K. We can hardly expect such a discrete behaviour in reality. For
instance, the muscle contracts with a ﬁnite velocity. Yet, if we look at the level of
muscle cells (ﬁbers), then we have more or less an on-oﬀ behaviour. The ﬁbers of
the muscle are organized in motor units (MU), each controlled by a single motor
nerve, such that a MU is either on or oﬀ. The total force of the muscle depends on
the number of motor units activated. Thus, in a more reﬁned feedback model the
number of MUs activated could be a (probabilistic) function of q. The stochastic
terms in Eq.(16) partly reﬂects such an approach through the ﬂuctuations in the
threshold level and the force.

2.4. PID-control. The most common approach, in an engineering context at least,
is to assume a PID-type feedback control in which the feedback torque N (Eq.(5))

8

FRANK G. BORG

is proportional to deviation (plus its derivative and its integral) from the desired
position, as for instance described by Masani et alii,20

KD ˙θ(t

−

−

−

τ ).

KP θ(t

N (t) =

(27)
τ )
The authors decompose the delay as τ = τF + τM + τE where τF is termed
”feedback delay” assumed to be ca 40 ms, τM is the ”motor command time delay”
for which they used 135 ms, and τE is the ”electromechanical delay” estimated to
be around 10 ms. The parameter KP in Eq.(27) is not the (passive) muscle-tendon
stiﬀness constant but describes a gain of the active muscular feedback system.
Whether the resulting equation of motion has stable solutions can be investigated
by inserting θ(t)

eλt which yields (assuming sin(θ)

θ),

−

∝

≈

ℜ

mgL = 0.

If the real part

Iλ2 + KDλ e−λτ + KP e−λτ
(λ) of its solutions λ satisﬁes

(28)
−
(λ) < 0 then stability is ensured.
ℜ
For instance, using m = 76 kg, I = 66 Nm s2, L = 0.87 m, KP = 750 Nm/rad,
-0.49 s−1
KD = 350 Nm s/rad, and τ = 185 ms we get the numerical solution λ
to Eq.(28) thus implying a stable case. If we replace the derivative term in Eq.(27)
τ )ds, we can obtain a proportional
with an integrated average, such as
minus delay (PMD) controller21 of the special form,

t
t−τ

˙θ(s

≈

−

R

−
In fact, Atay (1999)22 has shown that the system

−

N (t) = A θ(t

τ ) + B θ(t

2τ ).

¨x(t) + kx(t) = ax(t

(30)
can be stabilized in case of k < 0 (inverted pendulum) for special choices of a and
(ωτ )2,

b. Eq.(30) can be related to our case if we rescale time as t
a = Aτ 2, and b = Bτ 2. The characteristic equation for Eq.(30) is

t/τ , set k =

1) + bx(t

→

2)

−

−

−

and Atay proves that, for k < 0, we have solutions

(λ) < 0 if and only if,

λ2 + k

ae−λ

be−2λ = 0,

−

−

ℜ

(a)

(b)

(c)

k >

1,

−

k < b <

2

π
2

k,

−

(cid:17)
2b cos √k + b < a < k

(cid:16)

b.

(29)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

−
Condition (a) for instance means that we must have τ < 1/ωc

300 ms using
3 s−1. Thus, this special PMD-controller seems to be able
the typical value ωc
to ensure stability with a bit longer delay than the ”bang”-control with the limit
given by Eq.(20). A direct numerical evaluation shows that, using for example ωc
= 3 s−1, a = -0.9 and b = 0.6, we obtain the root λ

-0.289.

−

≈

≈

The point of mentioning the PMD-control model is that it shows that knowledge
of the point-derivative is not necessary for stabilization, but that time-shifted copies
of the position might do instead. Theoretically there are apparently a large num-
ber of control methods available for quiet standing. Which ones might be realized
physiologically? Again, a common engineering approach is to study the class of
linear models (ARMAX, Autoregressive-Moving Average process) and try to ﬁnd
the parameter values by ﬁtting the model to experimental data (System Identiﬁ-
cation), this is especially the method followed by Peterka.23 Yet we would like to
know whether balancing implements some sort of an optimal strategy, considering
the requirement of robustness in a noisy environment and the need to economize

≈

AN INVERTED PENDULUM ...

9

with the muscle energy. For instance, ”bang-bang” type controlls may result when
one tries to minimize the time for going from one position to another. Optimiza-
tion principles have been considered for voluntary movements, such as walking and
reaching, but quiet standing seems to be harder to adapt to such a procedure. One
objective may be to try to keep the swayings below the vestibular trigger level and
such that no extra limb or hip movements are required. Given any control model
one can ask which parameter regime will keep the system in a reasonable physiolog-
ical range. Thus, in the ”bang”-model, the proper average feedback force C must
be somewhere in the interval given by Eq.(19) such that the projection of the COG
will stay within ca 10-20 mm of the middle of feet (deﬁning the threshold point) in
order not to provoke extra stabilizing measures too often. Fig. 5 shows the stable
range for C as a function of the delay τ . The amount of ”noise” and the size of the
delay τ will constrain the choices of C.

Finally one may wonder why nature uses compliant tendons, which are the essen-
tial advantages? They may enable a smoother control, protect muscles at sudden
pulls, and store potential energy in jumps and cyclic movements.24

2.5. Bifurcations. One question of principal interest with regards to the inverted
pendulum control is whether there is sort of bifurcation phenomena with regards to,
say, the delay parameter25 τ or the spring constant K. We have argued that for a
subcritical spring constant a robust length-locking control is no longer possible and
that a phasic control becomes necessary. Thus, if we consider the simple control
model which keeps the muscle length constant, we will have a ”bifurcation” in the
stiﬀness parameter Kθ (in units of Nm/rad, stiﬀness as Nm/rad related to stiﬀness
as Nm/mm by Kθ∆θ = K∆x2) when it crosses the critical value of mgL. The same
is true also for the PID-control Eq.(27) for small delays τ . The general meaning of
a bifurcation point µ0 for a dynamical system depending on a parameter µ,

˙x = f (µ, x),

µ

(a, b),

∈

(35)

is that the topology of the phase portrait of Eq.(35) changes when µ crosses
x2 which for
the value µ0. A simple example is obtained by setting f (µ, x) = µ
µ < 0 has no equilibrium point, while for µ = 0 there is exactly one equilibrium
point x = 0 which for µ > 0 ”bifurcates” into a stable (x = √µ) and an unstable
(x =
√µ) equilibrium point (”sink” resp. ”source”). For a delay equation, like
the simple linear feedback model (a Stochastic Delay Diﬀerential Equation studied
also by Yao et al.25)

−

−

−

−

βq(t

τ ) + ǫ ,

˙q(t) = ωcq(t)

(36)
it may not be that obvious what ”bifurcation” might mean because we do not
have the phase portrait as in the case Eq.(35).
(In Eq.(36) β characterizes the
magnitude of the feedback force and ǫ represents a ”noise” contribution.) In this
case τ is a bifurcation parameter in the sense that the stability properties of the
system may change as τ changes. Thus, for τ = 0 it is apparent that the system
Eq.(36) is stable only if β > ωc. For nonzero τ we can again study behaviour of
the system using the characteristic equation, neglecting the noise,

If we assume λτ to be small and set e−λτ

ωc + βe−λτ = 0.

λ

−

(37)
λτ then we obtain from Eq.(37)

1

−

≈
β
−
βτ

ωc
1

−

λ

≈

10

FRANK G. BORG

which indeed yields a negative value for λ in case β > ωc. It also suggests that
instability may enter the picture when τ approaches 1/β. Using the variable µ =
λτ and decomposing it into the real and imaginary parts, µ = x + iy, we can write
Eq.(37) as,

x + βτ e−x cos y
y

ωcτ = 0,
βτ e−x sin y = 0.

−

−

(38)

(39)

From Eq.(39) it follows (y

= 0) that ex = βτ
βτ , whence βτ < 1
implies that x < 0; i.e., stability. Typically we have for βτ < 1 two roots on the
x-axis with x < 0. When βτ approaches 1 the roots merge and then split oﬀ from
the x-axis. A further analysis shows that this happens for τ = τ ⋆ determined by the
equation ωcτ ⋆ = 1
ln (1/(βτ ⋆)) in the interval (1/(βe), 1/β). One may investigate
how x changes at the point x = 0 with respect to τ by calculating ˙x = dx/dτ from
Eqs.(38) and (39), which yields,

sin y/y

| ≤

−

|

˙x (1

(40)
−
From this it follows, when β > ωc, that ˙x > 0 and x thus becomes positive when
τ increases; i.e., an instability emerges. These features can be nicely studied by
plotting the contour/surface map of

at x = 0.

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

τ

ωcτ )2 =

β2

ω2
c

−
and varying the parameters. (For plotting purposes it may better to use the

|

F (x, y) =

µ + βτ e−µ
|

ωcτ

(µ = x + iy),

logarithm ln F (x, y) instead of F (x, y).)

Besides bifurcations associated with the delay τ and the stiﬀness K we may
also mention a sort of bifurcation associated with disturbance; e.g., during quiet
standing the force plate is suddenly translated with a given velocity v. For small
disturbances the person is able to maintain the balance using the ”ankle strategy”
alone, but when the disturbance reaches a critical range new kinds of strategies
become necessary (moving the limbs, moving the hip, etc).

3. A demonstration device

In order to actually feel how a springy controlled inverted pendulum behaves one
of course has to build one, and then try to balance it by operating it manually. I use
to challenge visitors by letting them try their hands on a device we have next to the
oﬃce. None has mastered it right oﬀ. Indeed, it takes a bit of practice to learn how
to intermittently pull and release the wire so that the pendulum will sway around
an average forward leaning position and does not topple over. By using springs
with varying degree of stiﬀness one can compare how stiﬀness aﬀects the task. The
construction of a demonstration device is straightforward (see Fig. 6). In our case
we used a steel shaft supported by bearings, and attached to a foundation made of
a heavy metallic plate. For the pivot one could also use some (discarded) electric
motor (kW-size), which gives stable support when bolted to a foundation, and has
good bearings. One can also build miniature versions. There are several ways to
add computer control to the system, the most challenging part being to design the
mechanical actuator, and to equip the system with reliable sensors for generating
feedback data. Force transducer, rotational encoders, and potentiometers are the
most obvious sensor choices. It may be too tough for inclinometers that are based
on accelerometers because they pick up vibrations which mess up the signal. Yet,
the intention is not to boost the input data quality, the task is rather to try to get
the system working with a minimum level of input data. Thus, one may start with
a high grade input data and then add noise, delays, etc, and check how the control

6
Notes

11

algorithm copes with the situation. When it comes to actuators the choice in an
industrial context would be a linear motor. A cheaper alternative that we have
tested is to use a pneumatic cylinder controlled by the computer via solid state
relays connected to magnetic air valves. Our data acquisition system was based on
the multipurpose 16 bit A/D card NI PCI-6036E (National Instruments), but any
equivalent will do, the sample rate is not critical. The programs were written using
NI Labwindows CVI, a C-based tool which may appeal to those who are used to
programming in C/C++. (One can also program the NI-cards directly using any
standard C/C++-compiler by employing the libraries that come with the cards.)
In the simplest version one can use the Timer-function for interrupting, reading
data and generating outputs. Set at maximum speed the update intervals on our
system were on the average around 54 ms. If one feeds the potentiometer (or other
transducer) with current from the computer one will get extra disturbances (e.g.
spikes when the hard disk turns on/oﬀ), so it may be advisable to use an external
regulated source or a battery.

4. Conclusion

In this paper we have highlighted the versatility of the pendulum as a model
in science by describing yet another application, in this case to the modelling of
human standing, which is one of the classical problems of biomechanics. We have
also discussed some of the intriguing physical aspects of the model such as instability
and delayed control which have become a major research topic in physics in recent
years.

5. Acknowledgments

Thanks to CEO Mats Manderbacka, HUR Co. (http://www.hur.fi), for sup-
port and help with the parts for the demonstration device. Part of this work is
based on a project (Bema+Bisoni) on Biosignals sponsored by the Finnish na-
tional technology agency (Tekes). I am indebted to Prof. Ismo Hakala for the
opportunity to work at the Chydenius Institute (Jyv¨askyl¨a University).

Notes

1C. Huygens, Horologium oscillatorium (Paris, 1673). (English translation by R. J. Blackwell,
Iowa State Press, 1986.) Despite that Newton was not in a habit of commending other researchers
he held Huygens in highest esteem and referred to him as ”Summus Hugenius” though Huygens
would disagree with Newton’s theory of gravity. A recent book pays homage to the pendulum: G.
L. Baker and J. A. Blackburn, The pendulum. A case study in physics (Oxford University Press,
2005).

2Of these we may mention Duchesne, C. W. Fischer, C. G. Gray, and K. R. Jeﬀrey, ”Chaos in
the motion of an inverted pendulum: An undergraduate laboratory experiment,” Am. J. Phys.
59, 987-992 (1991), and J. A. Blackburn, H. J. T. Smith, and N. Grønbech-Jensen, ”Stability and
Hopf bifurcations in an inverted pendulum,” Am. J. Phys. 60 (10), 903-908 (1992). A large listing
of ”pendulum references in physics education” compiled by C. Gauld and M. R. Matthews can be
found at the web site http://www.arts.unsw.edu.au/pendulum/bibliography.html hosted by the
University of New South Wales.

3 Of the recent contributions to the discussion on the nature of the balance control we may
mention the following representative papers: D. A. Winter et al., ”Ankle muscle stiﬀness in the
control of balance during quiet standing.” Journal of Neurophysiology 85, 2630-2633 (2001); R.
J. Peterka, ”Postural control model interpretation of stabilogram diﬀusion analysis,” Biological
Cybernetics 82, 335-343 (2000); P. G. Morasso and M. Schieppati, ”Can muscle stiﬀness alone
stabilize upright standing?,” Journal of Neurophysiology 83, 1622-1626 (1999); I. D. Loram, S.
Kelly and M. Lakie, ”Human balancing of an inverted pendulum: is sway size controlled by ankle
impedance?,” Journal of Physiology 532, 879-891 (2001); P. Gatev et al., ”Feedforward ankle
strategy of balance during quiet stance in adults,” Journal of Physiology 514.3, 915-928 (1999).
One of the controversial issues is whether balance is controlled by ”passive” stiﬀness, or whether
active feedback/forward control is necessary.

12

Notes

4Note that the ingenious force plate described by R Cross , ”Standing, walking, running,
and jumping on a force plate,” Am. J. Phys. 67 (4), 304-309 (1999), is not quite suitable for
quasistatic balance measurements which record the center of pressure. One has to employ e.g.
strain-gauge force transducers for this purpose. In principle a minimal tripod system could suﬃce
using only two transducers if the third corner rests on a ball bearing. When making quiet standing
measurements the following standard test conditions are recommended: a stance with 30◦ between
the medial sides of the feet and ca 2 cm heel-to-heel distance (clearance); arms relaxed at the sides;
the participant is instructed to ﬁx the eyes on a spot on the wall ca 3 m away (eyes open condition,
EO). For clinical aspects of balance measurements see P.-M Gagey and B. Weber, Posturologie.
Regulation et d´er`eglements de la station debout (Masson, 1999), 2nd ed., and http://perso.club-
internet.fr/pmgagey/.

5J. J. Collins and C. J. De Luca, ”Random walking during quiet standing,” Phys. Rev. Lett.

73 (5), 764-767 (1994).

6M. Lauk et al., ”Human balance out of equilibrium: Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics in
posture control,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2, 413-416 (1998); C. C. Chow and J. J. Collins, ”Pinned
polymer model of posture control,” Phys. Rev. E 52 (1), 907-912 (1995).

7A. Priplata et al., ”Noise-enhanced human balance control,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (23), 238101

(2002).

8For a review of some of these methods see F. G. Borg, ”Review of nonlinear methods and
modelling,” http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0503026physics/0503026 (2005); ”Random walk and
balancing,” http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0411138physics/0411138 (2004).

9C. N. Maganaris and J. P. Paul, ”Tensile properties of the in vivo human gastrocnemius ten-
don,” Journal of Biomechanics 32, 1639-1646 (2002); I. D. Loram, C. N. Maganaris, and M. Lakie,
”Human postural sway results form frequent, ballistic bias impulses by soleus and gastrocnemius,”
Journal of Physiology 564.1, 295-311 (2005a), ”Active, non-spring-like muscle movements in hu-
man postural sway: how might paradoxical changes in muscle length be produced?,” Journal of
Physiology 564.1, 283-293 (2005b). Ultrasound allows direct measurements of the length changes
of the muscle ﬁbers and the tendon.

10For a standard reference on the human neuro-muscular system see R. M. Enoka, Neurome-

chanics of human movement (Human Kinetics, 2002), 3. ed.

11B. K. Ahlborn and R. W. Blake, ”Walking and running at resonance,” Zoology 105, 165-174
(2002), presents one of the most recent pendulum models for walking and running. (Note that
due to some typographic problems there seems to be a lot of missing π’s in the online paper.)
Such pendulum models go at least back to a work by E. Weber and W. Weber, Mechanik der
menschlichen Gehwerkzeuge (Dietrich, 1836), while the scientiﬁc analysis of locomotion began in
earnest by G. A. Borelli, the ”father of biomechanics”, in De motu animalum (1680) (the same
Latin title has been used for a book by Aristotle). The younger brother Wilhelm Weber is by the
way known in physics for his work on electromagnetism and for the Weber -unit. Boye Ahlborn
has also written a delightful textbook, Zoological physics (Springer, 2004), with an emphasis on
the physical principles underlying animal locomotion.

12We may note that the same Eq.(4) is obtained for the control of an unicycle with the feedback
term N given by mL¨y cos(θ) where y is the position of the wheel in the forward direction. See R.
C. Johnson, ”Unicycles and bifurcations,” Am. J. Phys. 66 (7), 589-592 (1998).

13The problem of determining the moment of inertia of the (living) human body is an interesting
and challenging exercise in itself for students (cadavers are also been used for this purpose but
the method is somewhat cumbersome and the samples may not be representative). Two standard
references on data and methods for measuring and calculating the momenta of inertia and the
centers of mass of body segments are D. A. Winter, Biomechanics and motor control of human
movement (Wiley, 2005), 3.
ed., and V. M. Zatsiorsky, Kinetics of human motion (Human
Kinetics, 2002). See also I. W. Griﬃths, J. Watkins, and D. Sharpe, ”Measuring the moment of
inertia of the human body by a rotating platform method,” Am. J. Phys. 73 (1), 85-92 (2005).
Given data on the properties of the body segments one can calculate the moment of inertia of
the body with respect to the ankle joints. We may quote a representative value of I = 66 kg m2,
for a male adult with m = 76 kg and L = 0.87 m, from K. Masani et al., ”Importance of body
sway velocity information in controlling ankle extensor activities during quiet stance,” Journal of
Neurophysiology 90, 3774 - 3782 (2003).

14The vertical ground rection force Fz is not exactly equal to mg during quiet standing. In fact,
the heartbeats, and the changing bloodﬂow (hemodynamics), cause ﬂuctuations in Fz by around
5-8 N, which are however only about one percent of the average value of Fz for an ordinary adult.
15Se for example A. Karlsson and H. Lanshammar, ”Analysis of postural sway strategies using an
inverted pendulum model and force plate data,” Gait & Posture 5 (3), 198-203 (1997); W. H. Gage
et al., ”Kinematic and kinetic validity of the inverted pendulum model in quiet standing,” Gait
& Posture 19 (2), 124-132 (2004). The validity of the HIP model presupposes that the standing

Notes

13

person adopts the so called ankle strategy; that is, controls the balance using the muscles acting
over the ankle joints. This comes naturally for most people during quiet standing, but some people,
perhaps due to neurogenic or myogenic disorders, may have to keep the balance by moving the hip
also. To describe such cases the one-segment HIP model must be replaced with a multi-segment
version.

16A validation study of the spectrum method for calculating A/P COG from A/P COP has been
presented by O. Caron, B. Faure, and Y. Breni`ere, ”Estimating the centre of gravity of the body
on the basis of the center of pressure in standing posture,” Journal of Biomechanics 30 (11/12),
1169 - 1171 (1997).

17Professor Olof Staﬀans (Math. dept., The Abo Akademi University) pointed out to me that
this property is linked to the concept of ”exponential dichotomy” in the ﬁeld of Dynamical Systems.
Those who have encountered advanced/retarded solutions in electrodynamics and the action-at-
a-distance formulations (e.g. the Wheeler-Feynman theory) may see a connection here too; for a
review see F. Hoyle and J. V. Narlikar, ”Cosmology and action-at-a-distance electrodynamics,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 113-155 (1995), which has also appeared in a book form as Lectures on
cosmology and action-at-a-distance electrodynamics (World Scientiﬁc, 1996).

We may note that there is a simple discrete analogy to the case (14) in the form an equation
xk+1 = a · xk − uk with a > 1. Suppose the control function uk is chosen such that xk remains
bounded, then xk may be expressed in terms of the future u-values by

xk =

1
a

ujak−j =

uk
a

+

uk+1
a2 + . . . ,

Xj≥k

which follows by developing xk = uk/a + xk+1/a and assuming that xN /aN → 0 as N → ∞.

Thus, in this case xk can be determined without knowing the initial values.

18A similar feedback function for balance has been considered by C. W. Eurich and J. G. Milton,
”Noise-induced transitions in human postural sway,” Phys. Rev. E 54 (2), 6681-6684 (1996).
However, they start from the equation for a damped inverted pendulum (we replacw here sin(θ)
by θ), mR2 ¨θ(t) + γ ˙θ(t) − mgRθ(t) = f (θ(t − τ )), and argue that the system is over damped and
that the ¨θ-term may therefore be dropped in comparison, thus arriving at a ﬁrst order diﬀerential
equation. To assume such a large friction coeﬃcient γ for the ankle joint appears nonphysiological.
(The static and dynamic friction coeﬃcients for synovial joints are about µs = 0.01 and µk =
0.003, to be compared with µk ≈ 0.05 for lubricated ball bearings.) If the motion seems like being
heavily damped this might be the result of an active control, and it is how this can be achieved
which one has to try to explain in the ﬁrst place. Since we use the variable q of Eq.(10) we can
employ a similar feedback control, but now in term of q, without the need of recourse to the
hypothesis of over damping. In a recent paper, A. L. Hof, M. G. Gazendam, and W. E. Sinke,
”The condition of dynamic stability,” Journal of Biomechanics 38 (1), 1-8 (2005), the authors
introduce the combination q, which they call ”the extrapolated center of mass position (XcoM)”,
in a biomechnical analysis the ”base of support” (BoS).

Milton has been involved in another interesting study of the inverted pendulum, namely in in-
vestigating the balancing of a stick on the tip of a ﬁnger; see J. L. Cabrera and J. G. Milton, ”On-oﬀ
intermittency in human balancing task,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (15), 158702 (2002). In this case the
pendulum is controlled by moving the pivot point (ﬁnger). Based on their data Cabrera and Milton
concluded that the time series of the tilt angle exhibited characteristics of the so called L´evy-ﬂight.
For a critical review see F. Borg, http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0411138physics/0411138. An in-
teresting issue is whether one could ﬁnd some similarities between the dynamics of quiet standing
and stick balancing.

19D. W. Grieve, S. Pheasant, and P. R. Cavanagh, ”Prediction of Gastrocnemius length from
knee and ankle posture,” in Biomechanics VI-A, Proceedings of the sixth international congress
of biomechanics, Copenhagen, Denmark, edited by E. Asmussen and K. Jørgensen (University
Park Press, 1978), pp. 405-412. The limbs in the study were from people aged 60 years plus.

20 K. Masani, A. H. Vette, and M. R. Popovic, ”Controlling balance during quiet standing:
Proportional and derivative controller generates preceding motor command to body sway position
observed in experiments,” Gait & Posture (article in press, online). The controller discussed
in this paper is really a PD-controller only since the integration (I-) term is not used. For a
reference on control theory in the physiological context and with Matlab codes, see M. C. K.
Khoo, Physiological control systems. Analysis, simulation, and estimation (IEEE Press, 2000).

21I. H. Suh and Z. Bien, ”Proportional minus delay controller,” IEEE Transaction on Automatic

Control, AC-24 (2) 370-2 (1979).

12 (5) 51-56 (1999).

22F. M. Atay, ”Balancing the inverted pendulum using position feedback,” Appl. Math. Lett.

14

Notes

23R. J. Peterka, ”Simplifying the complexities of maintaining balance,” IEEE Engineering in

Medicine and Biology Magazine, 63-68 (March/April 2003).

24R. McN. Alexander, ”Storage and release of elastic energy in the locomotor system and the
stretch-shortening cycles,” in B. M. Nigg, B. R. Macintosh, and J. Meister (eds.), Biomechanics
and biology of movement (Human Kinetics, 2000) 19-29.

25 The paper W. Yao, P. Yu, and C. Essex, ”Delayed stochastic diﬀerential model for quiet
standing,” Phys. Rev. E 63, 021902 (2001), presents a delay-bifurcation analysis based on the
model of Eurich and Milton referred to above. Note that the authors give an erroneous mathe-
matical description of the inverted pendulum - among other things they identify COP with COG
- but if we use instead of their x our q, as in Eq.(17), then one can still apply their results. A
bifurcation analysis in term of reﬂex gain and delay has been presented by B. W. Verdaasdonk
et al., ”Bifurcation and stability analysis in musculo-skeletal systems: a study of human stance,”
Biological Cybernetics 91, 48-62 (2004). This study, however, assumes that we have an ”ankle
stiﬀness” generated by a coactivation of Gastrocnemius and Tibialis anterior (TA, which pulls for-
ward), while in fact TA is mostly silent during quiet standing. For an introduction to bifurcations
in biological systems see A. Beuter et al. (eds.), Nonlinear dynamics in physiology and medicine
(Springer, 2003), and especially the chapter by M. R. Guevara.

Notes

15

6. Figures and captions

Fig1: The human inverted pendulum model (HIP). The pendulum is leaning
forward by an angle θ while being supported by the plantar ﬂexor muscles
Gastrocnemnius (GA) and Soleus, of which GA is indicated in the ﬁgure.
These muscles are attached to the heel bone via the Achilles tendon. The
moment length r with respect to the ankle joint is about 5 cm for adults.
The ankle joint is taken as the origin of the (y, z) coordinate system. The
y-axis represents the forward (anterior) direction. If the person stands on a
rectangular force plate, then one can measure the center of pressure (COP)
as explained in the text. In the ﬁgure we have shown the force component
F1+F2 due the rear transducers numbered 1 and 2, and the force component
F3 + F4 due to the front transducers 3 and 4. The COP-component in the
y-direction (A/P COP) is denoted by u.

− h

Fig2: The graph shows the time series (called stabilogram) of the A/P COP
coordinate minus its average, u
, during quiet standing. A lot of
u
i
research has gone into attempts to extract meaningful information from
this apparently random curve and the corresponding one for lateral sways.
Fig3: The graphs show a result of simulating the feedback case Eq.(16). The
”saw” line represents the unperturbed data q(t) with noise ǫi set to zero.
The thick line shows the perturbed result in terms of the COG-coordinate
y. For the parameters we used C = 80; qth = 40; ωc = 3.142 s−1 (fc = 0.5
1/ωc = 159 ms; integration time step ∆t = 0.01/ωc
Hz); delay τ = 0.5
= 3.18 ms. For ”noise” we used uniformly distributed random numbers in
the interval [-10, 10] (ǫ1) and [-25, 25] (ǫ2).

×

Fig4: A schematic illustration of the case when the muscle length x1 is ﬁxed
and only the tendon changes length. The torques excerted by the spring
and gravity are equal at the equilibrium point EP corresponding to the
inclination θEP . For a subcritical spring constant K we have the situation
depicted by the ﬁgure. For inclination θ > θEP gravity wins causing the
pendulum to fall forwards, and for θ < θEP the spring wins causing the
pendulum to fall backwards, and the equlibrium point is thus an unstable
one.

≈

≈

Fig5: The diagram shows the stability area bounded by Cmax and Cmin for
the feedback parameter C as a function of the delay τ for the ”bang”-control
3.14 s−1.
Eq.(16), neglecting noise. The illustration is for the case ωc
For small delays the range of allowed C grows rapidly. When τ increases
221 ms.
the stabile C-range decreases and evaporates at τmax = ln(2)/ωc
Fig6: A device for demonstrating the springy control. It consists of a shaft
pivoted by bearings (at Pi) and controlled by the force F which is transmit-
ted via a wire, running over a pulley (P), in series with a spring. When the
spring constant is below a given critical value it is no longer possible to lock
the pendulum into a stable tilted position. If the spring constant is above
the critical value then it is possible to keep the pendulum steady by simply
keeping the wire ﬁxed. For subcritical values one has to intermittently pull
and release the wire in order to stop the pendulum from toppling over. Our
device has a shaft length of 1.02 m and its natural frequency of the pendu-
0.86 Hz. The pneumatic cylinder has
lum can thus be estimated to be fc
≈
a radius of 10 mm, while the piston has a radius of 4 mm, so that when op-
erating at a pressure of 5 bar the corresponding pulling force will be about
130 N. By adjusting the pressure one can thus control the magnitude of
the feedback force too. The system managed to keep the balance using a
spring which elongated from 180 mm to 270 mm when loaded with 5.85 kg.

16

Notes

For feedback control we used the threshold control and feedback variable
θ + B ˙θ where B is a parameter (”velocity gain”) that could be tuned in real
time through the control program. The other adjustable parameter was the
threshold level.

Notes

17

Figure 1. The basic inverted pendulum model of standing.

18

Notes

Figure 2. An example of the measured forward-backward sway
in term of the center of pressure (COP).

Notes

19

Figure 3. Saw-line represents motion of the un-perturbed bang
control data q. The wavy line represents the perturbed COG-
coordinate y.

20

Notes

Figure 4. Tendon compliance leads to instability.

Notes

21

Figure 5. Stability region for the bang-control.

22

Notes

Figure 6. Outline for the demonstration device.

