APS/123-QED

Osmotically Driven Shape Transformations in Axons

Pramod A. Pullarkat1, Paul Dommersnes2, Pablo Fern´andez1, Jean-Fran¸cois Joanny2, and Albrecht Ott1
1Experimentalphysik I, University of Bayreuth, D-95440, Bayreuth, Germany
2Institut Curie, UMR 168, 26 rue d’Ulm, F-75248, Paris Cedex 05, France
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We report a cylindrical–peristaltic shape transformation in axons exposed to a controlled osmotic
perturbation. The peristaltic shape relaxes and the axon recovers its original geometry within
minutes. We show that the shape instability depends critically on swelling rate and that volume
and membrane area regulation are responsible for the shape relaxation. We propose that volume
regulation occurs via leakage of ions driven by elastic pressure, and analyse the peristaltic shape
dynamics taking into account the internal structure of the axon. The results obtained provide a
framework for understanding peristaltic shape dynamics in nerve ﬁbers occurring in vivo.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 47.20.Dr, 87.16.-b, 87.19.La

Axons and dendrites, collectively known as neurites,
are thin, tubular extensions produced by neuronal cells
[1]. Structurally, they consist of an outer lipid membrane
sheath bound to a core made up of an elastic network of
highly cross-linked biopolymers known as the cytoskele-
ton. Neurites are known to lose their normal cylindrical
geometry and become peristaltically modulated–a pro-
cess commonly known as beading–under a wide range
of situations. These include neuro-degenerative diseases
like Alzheimer’s [2], brain trauma [3], stretch injuries to
nerves [4] and in vitro as well as in vivo application of
neurotoxins or drugs [5], among others.
In stretch in-
juries, tension in the axon is responsible for beading. In
the other examples, disruption of cytoskeletal integrity
appears to be a common feature.

Peristaltic modes have been studied in tubular mem-
branes and gels under tension [6, 7, 8]. This “pearling
instability” is driven by surface tension, as in the
Rayleigh-Plateau instability of liquid columns [9]. In liq-
uid columns, peristaltic perturbations with wavelengths
larger than the circumference grow as they reduce surface
area at constant volume. Unlike liquid columns, cylin-
drical vesicles/gels are unstable only beyond a critical
tension, when the gain in surface energy due to a reduc-
tion in area overcomes the elastic energy for deforming
the membrane/gel. Similar arguments can explain peri-
staltic modes observed in stretched nerves [10] and cell
protrusions exposed to toxins [11]. In all the above men-
tioned biological examples the beaded state persists and
no recovery has been observed.

We report a novel, reversible, peristaltic instability ob-
served in chick-embryo axons and in PC12 neurites [12]
after a sudden dilution of the external medium, as shown
in Fig. 1. The transition to the peristaltic state occurs
at a threshold membrane tension, induced by osmotic
swelling. However, unlike previous reports on beading,
the osmotically induced instability relaxes and the neu-
rite recovers its original shape within minutes. We show
that the relaxation is due both to cell volume and mem-
brane surface regulation. Remarkably, the shape stabil-
ity depends critically on the swelling rate. We model
the pearling/beading instability taking into account the

FIG. 1:
(a) Osmotically induced shape instability in chick-
embryo neurons. (b) Image sequence showing the growth and
relaxation of the instability in a PC12 neurite.

gel-like dynamics of the cytoskeleton and the membrane-
cytoskeleton coupling, and ﬁnd wavelengths in agreement
with experimental observations. Further, we propose
that elastic stresses in the cytoskeleton provide the driv-
ing force for water and ions to leak through channel pro-
teins in the membrane [1] to eﬀect volume regulation.

±

×

×

Experiments.- The experiments are performed using
1 mm3 ﬂow chamber with temperature main-
a 10
5
0.2 ◦C. The cells are grown on treated
tained within
glass coverslips [12] and transfered to the ﬂow-chamber.
The ﬂow velocity in the plane of the axon is about 1
µms−1 and the shear rate is about 1 s−1, well below val-
ues needed to cause any signiﬁcant shear stress on the
neurites. The ﬂow is switched from normal medium, with
an ion concentration φ0 = 0.3 mol/l, to a diluted medium
to induce a hyposmotic shock. Phase contrast images are
recorded using a CCD camera at a magniﬁcation of 0.084
µm/pixel. The neurite boundaries are traced with a typ-
ical error of a couple of pixels using a home-developed
image analysis software. The volume and area are com-
puted assuming axial symmetry. Only neurites which
are ﬁrmly adherent at the two ends and freely suspended
along the length are used for measurements.

After exposure to a hyposmotic solution the neurite
immediately starts to swell with a uniformly increasing
radius from its initial value R0. Fig. 2 shows the typ-
ical variation of the normalized volume ˜V = V /V0 and

2

neurites more resistant to peristaltic shape change.

Discussion.- Volume regulation.— We assume the
neurite to be a cylindrical, isotropic gel with an adher-
ing ﬂuid membrane on its surface. Based on ﬂuorescence
microscopy, we conclude that the membrane is ﬁrmly at-
tached to the cytoskeleton at least during the onset of
the instability. The osmotic pressure diﬀerence across
φe), where φe and φi are
the membrane is ∆Π = kT (φi −
the external and internal net ion concentrations. The
volume ﬂux of water through the membrane is

Jw = Lp (∆Π

∆p) ,

−

(1)

where Lp is the membrane permeability to water and ∆p
is the hydrodynamic pressure diﬀerence over the mem-
brane. The gel response time is faster than the timescale
of swelling, which is determined by Lp. The local nor-
mal force balance at the membrane determines the hy-
drodynamic pressure jump ∆p = (K + 4µ/3)∆R/R0 +
0 = ˜K∆R/R0, where R = R0+∆R is the neurite
E∆R/R2
radius, K and µ are the compression and shear moduli,
and E the stretching modulus of the membrane. The
volume growth rate of the neurite is ˙V = JwA.

Volume relaxation occurs due to the opening of
membrane-bound ion-channel proteins [1]. This Regu-
latory Volume Decrease is known to involve both “ac-
tive” as well as “passive” processes, many of which are
poorly understood and cell-type dependent [14]. In gen-
eral, it is known that the ion conductivity G depends of
the charge distribution across the membrane. However, it
has been shown for PC12 cells that the membrane poten-
tial vanishes during swelling induced by an hyposmotic
shock and it does not recover during the entire relaxation
phase [14, 15]. Hence, we assume a constant average G
for simplicity and write the ion ﬂux as

Jion = GkT ln

φe
φi

.

(2)

0

R0

≈

The time variation of the internal number N of ions is
˙N = JionA. Rescaling the conservation Eqs. (1,2) re-
veals two characteristic timescales: τw = R0
2LpΠ0 for wa-
ter inﬂux and τion = Π
2G(kT )2 for ion conduction, where
Π0
700 kPa is the osmotic pressure of normal medium.
For weak osmotic shocks the conservation Eqs. (1,2) can
be linearized, resulting in a double exponential relaxation
form for the volume, with characteristic timescales re-
lated to τw and τion. At short times the volume change
is given by ∆V = Lp∆ΠeA0t, where ∆Πe = ∆Π(t = 0).
Thus, the initial swelling is not inﬂuenced by elastic
forces or ion ﬂow. Lp measured from experiments in-
10−14 m/(Pa.s), in
creases from Lp = 0.8
1.6(
a 15–37 ◦C range.

0.3)

−

±

×

Numerical analysis of the volume response given by
Eqs. (1,2) produces either a smaller swelling or a longer
relaxation as compared to experiments. To account for
these, we consider the following biological processes. (i)
The open probability of mechano-sensitive ion channels

◦

C. The ratio p

FIG. 2: Evolution of the normalized volume ˜V and area ˜A of a
˜V / ˜A (dotted
neurite with R0 = 0.5 µm at 33
line) reﬂects any deviations from the cylindrical geometry.
The inset shows the volume and shape responses when the
370s−→ φ0.
concentration is switched in the sequence φ0
The initial slow swelling is due to a non-steplike change in
concentration, as revealed by using an absorbing dye. Note:
the shape remains cylindrical for the 0.5φ0 → φ0 shock.

0s→ 0.5φ0

−

∼

50

500 µm reveals the following.

area ˜A = A/A0. For suﬃciently large osmotic shocks, a
standing peristaltic mode sets in at a threshold radius Rc.
˜V / ˜A shows the evolution of the peristaltic
The plot of p
˜V / ˜A indicates a reduction in
shape. An increase in p
surface area compared to a cylinder with identical vol-
ume. The mode amplitude increases with time, reaches
a maximum and then decreases back to zero. The ampli-
tude and the wavelength appear uniform along the entire
length of the neurite (see Fig. 1). An analysis of the in-
stability observed on more than a hundred PC12 neurites
with lengths of
(i) The instability occurs only above a critical dilution,
which is about 0.5φ0 at 37 ◦C and about 0.7φ0 at 25 ◦C
0.7 µm. The critical dilution
for an initial radius R0 ≃
decreases for smaller R0 or for lower temperature.
(ii) The wavelength λ increases with increasing R0 but is
independent of the neurite length. For a given neurite,
the wavelength remains approximately constant during
both the growth and relaxation of the instability.
(iii) The maximum volume Vm scales linearly with V0,
i.e., Vm/V0 is largely independent of the neurite selected.
(iv) Typically, the instability sets in when the area in-
creases by 3–8%. The maximum increase can reach 20%.
(v) For osmotic shocks slightly below the critical value,
no shape change occurs even when the area increases well
beyond the 3–8% mentioned earlier. The growth rate of
the area decreases with decreasing osmotic shock. There-
fore, we conclude that the stability depends on the rate
of area increase as well as its magnitude. In another set
of experiments, when the dilution is performed in several
steps of very weak osmotic shocks the neurites remain
cylindrical even when the external solution is diluted to
pure water. In this case the volume and area remain close
to their initial values throughout the experiment.
(vi) Water ﬂow across the membrane is mainly through
water speciﬁc channel proteins belonging to the aqua-
porin family [13]. Blocking them using 500mM dimethyl-
sulfoxide signiﬁcantly reduced swelling and made the

3

growth rate ω(q). We assume that the gel is in elas-
tic equilibrium at the onset of the instability, i.e. radial
compression modes have relaxed.

The membrane imposes boundary conditions at the
neurite surface. The solvent velocity is continuous, and
the solvent ﬂow through the membrane is governed lo-
cally by Eq. (1). The osmotic pressure diﬀerence is
preserved within linear instability analysis, since a peri-
staltic modulation conserves volume to linear order. Con-
servation of membrane area implies ∂tur+Rc∂zvz = 0 [7].
The total radial stress jump (hydrodynamic and elastic)
at the neurite surface must balance the Laplace pressure
due to membrane tension ∆σrr = PLaplace. Tangential
force balance implies σE
∂tuz), where σE is the
rz = ξ(vz −
gel elastic surface stress, and ξ the sliding friction coeﬃ-
cient between the cortical actin network and membrane.
Rescaling the equations reveals two timescales for the
gel dynamics: the relaxation time of compression modes,
τC = ζR2/K, and that of shear modes τS = η/µ. The
compression modes relax slower than the shear modes,
(R/ℓ)2τS, where ℓ is the mesh size of the gel. For a
τC ∝
1 kPa and solvent viscosity 50 times
shear modulus µ
∼
water viscosity, τS ∼
We ﬁnd that the membrane-cytoskeleton sliding fric-
tion ξ aﬀects the instability to order ξ/(ζR). Assuming
that the friction is due to anchored membrane proteins,
and using common values for membrane viscosity, we es-
timate that ξ

ζR, showing that ξ can be neglected.

10−4 s.

∼

O

1
τC

σ−σc
2σc

( σ−σc
σc

The neurite is unstable above a critical tension σc =
Close to σc the fastest growing

6KµRc
K+4/3µ +
with a corresponding
wavenumber is ¯q = qRc = q
)2, thus initially the dynam-
growth rate ω
ics is governed by the gel compression modes, which is
qualitatively similar to the result in [8]. Above a second
critical tension σc2 = 6µRc, the instability grows with
1/√τSτC . The tension σc2
the much faster rate ω
corresponds to the critical tension for pearling instabil-
),
ity in an incompressible gel (σc →
which suggests that above σc2 the instability grows via
a peristaltic shear deformation of the gel. For high ten-
sion the fastest growing mode converges to the universal
value ¯q
0.65, independently of the gel elasticity and
gel-solvent friction [see Fig. 4(a)].

σc2 when K

→ ∞

∼

≈

3

×

∼

∼

Using K

0.2. For R0 ∼

20 kPa, estimated from volume relaxation
1.07σc and
0.5 µm the critical tension for

1 kPa [19] gives σc2 ≈
10−4 N/m.

analysis, and µ
¯qc2 ≈
pearling is σc ∼
The above analysis sets an upper limit ¯q < 0.65 on
the fastest growing wavenumber which is in good agree-
ment with observations [see Figs. 4(a,b)]. Remarkably,
we never observed wavenumbers below ¯q . 0.2, even for
dilutions close to the pearling threshold. This could be
due to the steep increase in ¯q close to σc. Also, the
timescale for the growth of modes with small ¯q, which oc-
cur close to σc, may be longer than the volume regulation
time and hence these modes are not easily observable.

Surface area regulation.— Figure 2 shows some re-

≪
(¯q4).

FIG. 3: Comparison between volume evolutions obtained
experimentally and from the analysis. (a) For φ0 → 0.7φ0
shock. ˜K = 0.025Π0, Pa = 0.06Π0, τw = 22 s, and τion = 70 s
for 25◦C. ˜K = 0.03Π0, Pa = 0.09Π0, τw = 18 s, and τion = 60
◦
C. (b) For 0.5φ0 → φ0, using ˜K = 1.5Π0, Pa = 0,
s for 36
τw = 34 s, and τion = 24. The neurite is densely ﬁlled with
cytoskeleton and organelles which have to be compressed close
to their “dead volume” for V < V0 giving a higher eﬀective
value of K for (b).

increases with membrane tension [1]. Therefore, we ex-
pect an increase in ion conductivity upon swelling. In-
cluding a tension dependence on G, however, cannot ac-
count for the fast relaxation and large swelling. (ii) Fil-
amentous actin undergoes a transient depolymerization
mainly due to an inﬂux of Ca2+ followed by repolymeriza-
tion and contractility, due to myosin activation by Ca2+,
during volume relaxation [14, 16]. Thus, this actin dy-
namics may account for both increased swelling and fast
relaxation.
Indeed, including an active pressure Pa in
Eq. 1, after the maximum in volume, gives quantitative
agreement with experiments as in Fig. 3(a). From the
1038/(Jm2s). Converting
ﬁts, we estimate G = 0.7
4
10 S/m2,
2
to electrical conductivity units gives G
in agreement with reported values [17]. We also esti-
0.1Π0. At suﬃciently high tempera-
mate Pa ∼
tures, we often observe an “undershoot” of the volume
(see Fig. 2), which could be attributed to active con-
traction of actin. This complex actin dynamics has not
been reported for hyperosmotic shocks (sudden increase
in external concentration).
Indeed, the simpler analy-
sis without active pressure ﬁts well to our hyperosmotic
shock data as shown in Fig. 3(b). Shrinking responses
have previously been analyzed for kidney cells in sus-
pension assuming volume dependent conductivities and
neglecting elastic pressure [18].

0.05

−

×

≡

−

−

Shape instability.— As the neurite swells, the mem-
brane tension σ increases and for a critical swelling ra-
dius Rc it is unstable to peristaltic shape modulations.
In [11] a scaling argument was developed to determine
the fastest growing wavelength in cylindrical cells, as-
suming that dissipation is due to viscous ﬂow inside the
cell. Here, we take into account the gel-like structure
of the neurite cytoskeleton. The solvent ﬂow inside the
2v
∂tu) = 0, where
gel is given by
∇
−
v is the solvent velocity (
v = 0), p the hydrody-
∇ ·
namic pressure, u the gel elastic deformation, η the sol-
vent viscosity and ζ the gel-solvent friction. In addition
the gel elastic force is balanced by hydrodynamic friction
ζ(∂tu
u). The solvent
ﬂow outside the neurite is given by the Stokes equations.
We consider the stability of a modulation in the neu-
rite radius R = Rc + ǫeωt sin(qz), with amplitude ǫ and

2u + (K + 1

(
∇ ·
∇

v) = µ

p + η

3 µ)

−∇

ζ(v

∇

−

−

4

ulation in maintaining or recovering their normal cylin-
drical shape. Recovery to cylindrical shape has not been
observed in previous experiments on beading cells. A
possible explanation is that osmotic swelling is a gentle
perturbation to which the cell has time to react before the
deformation results in irreversible damage. Indeed, we
observe that the instability is irreversible for suﬃciently
strong osmotic shocks. Moreover, it is not just the mag-
nitude of osmotic swelling which triggers the instability,
but also the rate at which the cell swells. Thus, observa-
tion of the instability is a direct way to probe the mem-
brane surface regulation dynamics in neurites. We have
also performed preliminary experiments on pulling neu-
rites using a glass needle. There is a critical rate as well
as magnitude of pulling beyond which peristaltic modes
appear. For small amplitude modulations, the instability
relaxes, whereas for strong modulations it persists. Phys-
iologically, the volume and membrane surface regulation
mechanisms should play an important role in stabilizing
axon shape to suﬃciently slow and gentle perturbations
occurring in vivo. The theoretical analysis highlights the
importance of cytoskeletal elasticity in the volume reg-
ulation processes, and suggests that active contractions
of the cytoskeleton may play an important role. The im-
plications of our investigation to pathological conditions,
especially to dendritic beading due to local inﬂammation
[22], is an interesting topic for further research.

Acknowledgments.- We are extremely grateful to J.
Prost for valuable discussions and suggestions. We thank
the referees for interesting suggestions. Preliminary ex-
periments were conducted at Institut Curie, Paris, where
P. A. P. was supported by Institut Curie and CNRS. P.
D. was supported by a Marie Curie fellowship. Financial
support from the European Commission is acknowledged
under project HPRN-CT-2002-00312.

FIG. 4: (a) Theoretical plot for the fastest growing wavenum-
ber with tension and histogram of observed wavenumbers. (b)
Variation of λ with R0 at 25 ◦C for φ0 → 0.67φ0. The scatter
in the data is due to natural variations between cells.

markable features: (i) the instability begins to relax be-
fore the area and hence the apparent tension has reached
its maximum value, (ii) the instability disappears when
the measured area and volume are well above their val-
ues at its onset and (iii) a 20% increase in area due to
stretching alone is unexpected as most biological mem-
branes are known to rupture beyond 3–5% of stretching.
A reasonable explanation for these observations is that
lipids are continuously added to the membrane thereby
relaxing tension. Assuming that the membrane tension
is the same at the onset and disappearance of the in-
stability, we estimate a rate of increase of area of about
10−3 µm2/s per unit length. This process would lead
4
to a viscoelastic-like rate dependence of tension, giving
rise to the critical rate of dilution mentioned earlier. The
increase in area is most likely due to the fusion of tiny
multi-lamellar vesicles to the outer membrane [20, 21].
It is unlikely that this tension relaxation is due to ﬂow
of membrane from the extremities as (a) the onset and
relaxation of the instability appears uniform along the
length even in the longest neurites (
1 mm) and (b) we
do not observe any ﬂow of extraneous particles sticking
to the outer membrane.

×

∼

Conclusion.- Our experiments on the dynamics of the
pearling instability in neurites reveal the role of volume
regulatory mechanisms and direct membrane tension reg-

[1] B. Alberts et al., Molecular Biology of the Cell (Garland

[12] E. G. Banker and K. Goslin, Culturing Nerve Cells (MIT

[2] C. J. Pike, B. J. Cummings, and C. W. Cotman, Neu-

Science Publ., NY, 2002).

roreport. 3(9), 769 (1992).

[3] P. Shannon et al., Acta Neuropathol. 95, 625 (1998).
[4] S. Ochs et al., Prog. Neurobiol. 52, 391 (1997).
[5] S. Al-Noori and J. Swann, Neurosc. 101, 337 (2000); D.
Tanelian and V. Markin, Biophys. J. 72, 1092 (1997).
[6] R. Bar-Ziv and E. Moses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1392
(1994); R. Bar-Ziv, T. Tlusty, and E. Moses, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 79, 1158 (1997).

[7] P. Nelson, T. Powers, and U. Seifert, Phys. Rev. Lett.

74, 3384 (1995).

105, 1735 (1996).

[8] B. Barri`ere, K. Sekimoto, and L. Leibler, J. Chem. Phys.

[9] S. Chandrasekhar, Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic

stability (Dover, NY, 1981).

[10] V. S. Markin et al., Biophys. J. 76, 2852 (1999).
[11] R. Bar-Ziv et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96, 10140 (1999).

Press, Cambridge, MA, 1998).

[13] P. Agre and D. Kozono, FEBS Letters 555, 72 (2003).
[14] F. Lang et al., Physiological Reviews 78, 247 (1998).
[15] M. Cornet, J. Ulb, and H. A. Kolb, J. Memb. Biol. 133,

[16] J. H. Henson, Microsc. Res. and Tech. 47, 155 (1999).
[17] T. F. Weiss, Cellular Biophysics, vol. 1, 2 (MIT Press,

161 (1993).

London, 1995).

[18] A. D. L´ucio, R. A. S. Santos, and O. N. Mesquita, Phys.

Rev. E 68, 041906 (2003).

[19] B. Fabry et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 148102 (2001).
[20] Electron micrographs of PC12 cells show very few mem-
brane invaginations, which could act as reservoirs (P. A.
Pullarkat, A. Ott, and G. Acker, unpublished).

[21] J. Dai et al., J. Neurosc. 18, 6681 (1998).
[22] B. Zhu et al., Am. J. Pathol. 162, 1639 (2003).

