6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Possibility of Large Upconversions and Mode Coupling between Fr¨ohlich
States and Visible Photons in Biological Systems

J. Swain
Physics Department, Northeastern University
110 Forsyth Street,
Boston, MA 02115, USA
and
International Institute of Biophysics (IIB)
Landesstiftung Hombroich, Raketenstation
D-41472 Neuss, Germany
john.swain@cern.ch
E-mail:

At least two signiﬁcant roles for large scale quantum coherence in living systems have been sug-
gested: Herbert Fr¨ohlich’s coherent excitations of nonlinearly coupled ensembles of large polarizable
molecules, with frequencies in the microwave region, and Fritz Popp’s coherent visible photon emis-
sion arising from metabolically active cells. The large diﬀerence in frequencies has made it diﬃcult
to see these two phenomena as being linked. Here a case is made for a potentially large coupling
between these modes, and suggestions are made for the biological roles played by these coherent
excitations.

PACS numbers:

INTRODUCTION

This paper is based on contributions I made to a joint
paper[1] to be presented by Fritz Popp at the Fr¨ohlich
Centenary Symposium in Liverpool in April 2006.

There are two main streams of thought which suggest
macroscopic quantum mechanical eﬀects associated with
the living state. One is Herbert Fr¨ohlich’s suggestion[2, 3]
that one would expect coherent excitations in the mi-
crowave region of the spectrum due to nonlinear cou-
plings of biomolecular dipoles – a suggestion which is per-
haps more theoretically developed than experimentally
investigated. For brevity, I will refer to microwave pho-
tons in such a state as “Fr¨ohlich photons”. The other is
Fritz Popp’s observation[4] that the photocount statistics
of ultraweak bioluminescence (biophotons) around the
visible region of the spectrum, and other data, suggest a
coherent component linked to the living state. Here it is
important to note that one is not forgetting that there
are plenty of reactions – in particular oxidative ones –
which will give rise to incoherent photoemission and are
simply a part of the normal chemistry that goes on in liv-
ing things. Such a traditional contribution would always
be expected, but here we are considering the rather re-
markable, spectrally ﬂat distribution which seems to be
associated with life. I will refer to visible photons of this
kind as “Popp photons”.

Fr¨ohlich’s original model was based on phenomenolog-
ical rate equations representing a set of harmonic oscilla-
tors labelled by an index i of various frequencies, ωi , each
excited with ni quanta, and coupled to each other. In or-
der to be able to couple these oscillators and still have
conservation of energy, the oscillators are also coupled

to a heat bath at some temperature T which provides
or accepts whatever energy is needed (i.e. ¯h(ω1 − ω2)
for couplings of oscillators of frequencies ω1 and ω2). In
addition, an external pump source was included which
could drive the oscillators.

Fr¨ohlich showed that under rather general conditions
one could, even at high temperatures, for a suﬃciently
strong external pump, ﬁnd a macroscopic excitation of
just one oscillator – the one with the lowest energy – at
the expense of the other modes. It was this macroscopic
quantum state, which is reminiscent of lasing, or of Bose-
Einstein condensation, which has been identiﬁed as pos-
sibly characteristic of the living state. While Fr¨ohlich
came upon this sort of mechanism while thinking about
the very large electric ﬁelds across the membranes of liv-
ing cells, it is important to keep in mind that this could
occur multiple times in diﬀerent systems in one living or-
ganism, and one should be open to the idea of multiple
Fr¨ohlich states appearing in various contexts. That being
said, if one imagines the dipoles in question to be large
biological molecules, one is naturally led to frequencies
in the microwave region and it is far from clear what, if
anything, this has to do with biophotons.

Before dismissing any connection right away due to the
fact that there is a diﬀerence in energy scales between
Fr¨ohlich and Popp photons, let us recall that large up-
conversions are, in fact, well-known, although rarely con-
sidered in any detail in the standard texts. For example,
consider a light bulb running from a 1.5 V battery. There
are two natural energy scales going into the system. One
is 1.5 eV – the total energy that an electron can give
up as it crosses the ﬁlament of the bulb, and the other
is zero (!) – the frequency of the input current (which

is DC here). Even the 1.5 eV is rather optimistic since
one expects an electron to undergo many collisions as it
passes through the ﬁlament, each time giving up only a
small fraction of an eV. Nevertheless, common experience
shows that there is strong emission in the visible spec-
trum of several electron volts. That is, a macroscopic
nonlinear system, even without coherence, manages to
couple many low energy quanta into one higher energy
quantum of, say, blue light. A ﬁrst response on hear-
ing this argument is to trivialize it, saying “Well, isn’t
that just blackbody radiation?”. The answer, of course,
is yes, but whenever one treats the approach to black-
body radiation one has to imagine complicated couplings
between many oscillators which one subsumes into state-
ments like “one lets the oscillators exchange energy until
the most probable distribution (via maximizing entropy)
is reached”. With this in mind, it may come as less of
a surprise that a highly organized system may be more
eﬃcient at large upconversions.

Let us now slightly generalize Fr¨ohlich’s model (J.
Swain, August 2005, talk at the Fr¨ohlich Symposium,
IIB, Neuss, Germany)[5] and add one more term to his
rate equations. This will be a coupling of the whole
Fr¨ohlich system (which is a large number of oscillators
all coupled together, with the lowest energy oscillator co-
herently excited) to one external oscillator. The system
is already coupled to an entire heat bath of oscillators,
so this is just one more oscillator. The diﬀerence is that
the entire heatbath of oscillators in Fr¨ohlich’s model are
constrained to have their energy thermally distributed at
a temperature T. Here we add just one oscillator, not re-
quiring it to be a part of a thermal ensemble. Thinking in
concrete terms, this can be an oscillator corresponding to
the QED vacuum and its occupation number represents
the number of photons in that state.
It could also be
an oscillator corresponding to the excitation energy for
some chemical reaction, or some other process. Such an
additional coupling outside the original Fr¨ohlich model
will drain energy from the system, which we can com-
pensate for by an increase in pumping so as to not lose
the coherent Fr¨ohlich excitations.

Now let us consider the probability that N Fr¨ohlich
photons of frequency ωF can couple to a Popp photon of
frequency ωP ( equal to N ωF ). Here is it useful to think
of Feynman diagrams which represent quantum mechani-
cal amplitudes for such photons to couple. Think then of
a line which represents a charged particle in a living sys-
tem. This can be an electron, or a dressed quasiparticle.
In keeping the Fr¨ohlich’s original work which stressed the
generality of a mechanism rather than details of a speciﬁc
model, we will refer to this as an “electron”, keeping in
mind that generalizations are possible (a dipole, a quasi-
particle, etc.). Diagrams contributing to the process we
want have N incoming photon lines and one outgoing

2

photon line. The amplitude for the process has a factor
of electron charge (e) for each photon, and the transition
probability is obtained by adding all diagrams with all
permutations of incoming photons, ﬁnding the squared
magnitude of the resulting complex quantity, and mul-
tiplying by the amount of phase space available for the
outgoing photons. In general, this is a diﬃcult problem
to work out, and one expects (assuming that diﬀerent
diagrams have diﬀerent phases and are unlikely to con-
structively interfere) a result of order αn where α is the
ﬁne structure constant – a pure number roughly equal
to 1/137. It would then seem that coupling of a large
number n of photons will be very unlikely, and it is this
sort of intuition which tends to make one immediately
dismiss large upconversions as impossible or unlikely.

The Fr¨ohlich state, however, is a special one in that
it is a coherent state in which all the photons carry the
same energy.
In fact, as a coherent state, it does not
have a well-deﬁned number of photons at all, but for
the following we can consider projecting out a certain
number N by the requirement that N must be combined
in order to get the single photon of frequency (details
will appear elsewhere, Swain, 2006, in preparation, but
they are not diﬃcult). Now we have N indistinguishable
photons coming in and N! diagrams all of which must
be counted and all of which have the same numerical
value and thus which interfere constructively. This is
nothing more than Bose-symmetrization (with an atten-
dant 1/sqrtN ! for N identical incoming photons – that is,
one must add each diagram corresponding to an indistin-
guishable process (corresponding to diﬀerent photon line
orderings) with the same amplitude. Now the original
naive estimate of a rate proportional to must be replaced
by αN N ! . For small N , the N ! term is negligible com-
pared to the rapid falloﬀ in powers of the ﬁne structure
constant, but for N of about 400, αN N ! becomes unity
and the factorial term begins to dominate and in fact
the perturbative concepts become unreliable. As N goes
to inﬁnity, the probability of this process grows with-
out bound, and violates unitarity, signaling that one has
pushed perturbation theory beyond its limits of validity.
This sort of breakdown of perturbation theory is in fact
to be expected, as it is well-known that the perturba-
tive QED expansion is divergent[6] and in fact it is still
quite mysterious that the results of low order perturba-
tion theory are as good as they are! It should be noted
here that one cannot extend the argument to suggest the
the outgoing photon energies would grow without limit.
With perturbation theory breaking down one would need
additional non-perturbative eﬀects to set in and enforce
unitarity. Qualitatively, however, one might expect a low
probability for a few photons to couple, a large probabil-
ity for about 400, and a ﬂattening oﬀ thereafter with
increasing numbers.

In all honesty one must be aware that one is really us-
ing the structure of perturbation theory as a guide rather
than going a full non-perturbative calculation. Interest-
ing though this is, a non-perturbative treatment is in
preparation[7] which suggests a similar result from a dif-
ferent point of view.

A similar factor of N ! was anticipated on phenomeno-
logical grounds by Popp et al. [8], but here ﬁnds its ex-
pression rooted in a microscopic model linking Fr¨ohlich
and Popp photons. Rather remarkably, the factor of 400
or so derived above is about what one would want to
get from Fr¨ohlich frequencies in the microwave region to
visible Popp photons! The picture which emerges then,
subject to more (nonperturbative) theoretical work and,
of course, experimental veriﬁcation, is:

• there are at least two types of quantum electromag-
netic systems associated with the living state. One
is in the microwave frequency range as suggested
by Fr¨ohlich, and one is around the visible region as
suggested by Popp

• there is a coupling of these two which is natural
within the context of known physics, assuming that
the Fr¨ohlich mechanism takes place

• the model here is predictive in that it suggests
coherent excitations in the microwave region fol-
lowed by small excitations at integer multiples of
the Fr¨ohlich frequency, decreasing rapidly in inten-
sity at ﬁrst and then rising again at about 400 times
the Fr¨ohlich frequency, then levelling oﬀ, and, even-
tually falling in order to preserve unitarity. Exact
details here are beyond perturbation theory and re-
quire diﬀerent mathematical methods. The physics
here is, however, experimentally accessible, at least
over part of the frequency range, with the THz re-
gion still being quite challenging in terms of instru-
mentation.

There is even a degree of reversibility in the system and
one can imagine coupling what we have so-far considered
as an outgoing photon mode to an external visible pho-
ton which could in turn be down-converted into Fr¨ohlich
photons. This oﬀers the possibility of aﬀecting Fr¨ohlich
dynamics inside a cell via visible photons injected from
outside, as well as to the possibility of a long range cou-
pling of internal cellular Fr¨ohlich dynamics between cells
via visible Popp photons.This also suggests new experi-
ments looking for microwave responses to visible stimu-
lation and vice-versa.

One might well ask what use such a setup with two
such disparate frequency ranges is in living things. An
immediate suggestion is that living things require a large
range of quanta of energy to drive various reactions. This

3

is akin to going shopping where one needs to make pur-
chases using a wide range of sums of money.
In order
to ensure the correct energy for each reaction (correct
change, in the monetary analogy), one would do well to
store one’s energy (money) in small quanta (small coins).
There is a smallest sensible quantum to store (smallest
coin to keep) set by what quantity can be had or lost for
essentially nothing. This is about kT of energy for a bi-
ological system which is bathed in quanta of this energy
(i.e. is in a heat bath of temperature T) and a penny in
the money analogy since nobody really cares about get-
ting or losing one. Storing energy in microwaves ensures
that one can be very close to just about any amount of
energy that would be needed to drive an electronic tran-
sition (chemical reaction) as needed. Storing in lower
energy excitations makes no sense then, and higher fre-
quencies would, perhaps surprisingly, not be expected to
couple as easily to the required energy scale. Even a de-
gree of automatic speciﬁcity is expected since a reaction
which is all set to go but for the energy required con-
stitutes a resonance (extra phase space) into which the
outgoing quantum can couple. This is complementary to
Fr¨ohlich’s “selective long range dispersion forces between
large systems”[3] now extended beyond physical forces to
selective transfer of energy.
In other words, there is a
natural framework not just for a biological molecule to
experience long-range forces pulling it to where it should
go, but also for the appropriate amount of energy to be
transferred between them. The use of single photons as
part of cell-to-cell signalling is also fascinating and the
sort of system here could allow for a high degree of se-
lectivity with little cross-talk by choosing slightly diﬀer-
ent optical frequencies for diﬀerent communications. Of
course just what nature does is an experimental question,
and likely to provide even more surprises!

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank the NSF for continuing support
of other research, and the members of the IIB in Neuss,
and especially Fritz Popp, for fascinating discussions.

[1] Fritz-Albert Popp, Lev Beloussov, Wolfgang Klimek, John
Swain, and Yu Yan, “Coupling of Fr¨ohlich-Modes as a
Basis of Biological Regulation”, 2006, to be published.
[2] H. Fr¨ohlich, “Long-range coherence and energy storage in
biological systems”, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 2 (1968) 641-
649.

[3] H. Fr¨olich, Physics Letters, 39A, Number 2 (1972) 153.

4

[4] See, for example F. A. Popp, “Coherent Photon Stor-
age of Biological Systems. In: Electromagnetic Bio-
Information” (1979) (in F.A.Popp, G.Becker, H.L.K¨onig
and W.Peschka, eds.), Urban & Schwarzenberg, Munich-
Vienna-Baltimore; F. A. Popp, B. Ruth, W. Bahr, J.
B¨ohm, P. Grass, G. Grolig, M. Rattemeyer, H. G.
Schmidt, P. Wulle, “Emission of visible and ultraviolet
radiation by active biological systems”, Collect. Phenom-
ena 3 (1981) 187; F. A. Popp, “Some Essential Questions
of Biophoton Research and Probable Answers” (1992) in
“Recent Advances in Biophoton Research and its Appli-
cations” (F. A. Popp, K. H. Li and Q. Gu, eds.), World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore-New Jersey- London- Hong Kong; F.
A. Popp, K.H.Li, “Hyperbolic relaxation as a suﬃcient
condition of a fully coherent ergodic ﬁeld”, Int. J. Theor.
Phys. 32 (1993) 1573; F. A. Popp, “About the coher-
in “Macroscopic Quantum Coher-
ence of biophotons”,

ence”, (E.Sassaroli, Y.Srivastava, J.Swain and S.Widom,
eds.), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore- New Jersey, 1998; F.
A. Popp and Y. Yan, “Delayed luminescence of biological
systems in terms of coherent state”. Physics Letters A293
(2002) 93; F. A. Popp, J. J. Chang, A. Herzog, Z. Yan
and Y. Yan, “Evidence of non-classical (squeezed) light
in biological systems”, Physics Letters A293 (2002) 98;
F. A. Popp, “Quantum Phenomena of Biological Systems
as Documented by Biophotonics”, in “Quo Vadis Quan-
tum Mechanics?” (A. Elitzur, S. Dolev, N. Kolenda eds.),
Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg-N.Y., 2004..

[5] J. Swain, August 2005, talk at the Fr¨ohlich Symposium,

IIB, Neuss, Germany.

[6] F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 631.
[7] J. Swain, 2006, in preparation.
[8] J. Slawinski and F.-A. Popp, J. Plant. Physiol. 130 (1987)

121.

