6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A master relation deﬁnes the nonlinear viscoelasticity of single
ﬁbroblasts.

Pablo Fern´andez, Pramod A. Pullarkat, and Albrecht Ott.

Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Bayreuth
D-95440 Bayreuth, Germany

2nd February 2008

Accepted for publication in Biophysical Journal
Corresponding author: Pablo Fern´andez
E-mail: pablo@ep1.uni-bayreuth.de

ABSTRACT

Cell mechanical functions like locomotion, contraction and
division are controlled by the cytoskeleton, a dynamic
biopolymer network whose mechanical properties remain
poorly understood. We perform single-cell uniaxial stretch-
ing experiments on 3T3 ﬁbroblasts. By superimposing
small amplitude oscillations on a mechanically prestressed
cell, we ﬁnd a transition from linear viscoelastic behavior
to power-law stress stiffening. Data from different cells
over several stress decades can be uniquely scaled to ob-
tain a master-relation between the viscoelastic moduli and
the average force. Remarkably, this relation holds indepen-
dently of deformation history, adhesion biochemistry, and
intensity of active contraction. In particular, it is irrele-
vant whether force is actively generated by the cell or exter-
nally imposed by stretching. We propose that the master-
relation reﬂects the mechanical behavior of the force bear-
ing actin cytoskeleton, in agreement with stress stiffening
known from semiﬂexible ﬁlament networks.

INTRODUCTION

Mechanical forces are essential for biological systems and their
interaction with the environment. Tissues can generate forces,
but forces also inﬂuence tissue development, as in embryogen-
esis, bone growth or scar tissue formation (1). In vitro, single
eucaryotic cells develop tension spontaneously on a substrate
(2), and respond to extracellular elasticity (3). Cell mechan-

ics is controlled by the cytoskeleton (4, 5), a highly dynamic
biopolymer network far from thermodynamic equilibrium. Its
main components are actin, tubulin and intermediate ﬁlaments.
Different types of crosslinking proteins join these ﬁlaments into
a myriad of geometries. Particularly interesting for cell me-
chanical properties are actin ﬁlaments, which can generate ac-
tive forces through interaction with myosin motor proteins.

In the last years, much progress has been made in the study
of reconstituted biopolymer systems with a known and lim-
ited number of components. The rheological behavior of such
biopolymer networks has been experimentally studied and ex-
plained by simple models (6, 7, 8, 9, 10). Relating the so
gained framework to living cells, however, is a daunting task.
Unlike passive networks, the actin cytoskeleton actively gener-
ates forces. Further, because of cytoskeleton restructuring or
changes in motor activity, the mechanical behavior evolves in
time. This evolution is controlled by signaling cascades, which
in turn are inﬂuenced by mechanical perturbations.

Probing the mechanical properties of the actin network at the
micrometer scale has become possible thanks to newly devel-
oped microrheological techniques (11, 12, 13, 14). However,
cell heterogeneity complicates the extrapolation of local prop-
erties to the whole cell scale. Many-cell experiments, such as
those on tissue or cell-populated gels (15, 16, 17), are efﬁcient
and reproducible, but they average over heterogeneous sets of
cells interconnected by extracellular matrix. This hampers an
interpretation in single cell terms. The quantitative study of the
mechanical properties of entire, single cells is thus an essential
step towards a global understanding of cell mechanics.

We report uniaxial stretching experiments on single 3T3 ﬁ-
broblasts, suspended between two parallel, biochemically func-
tionalized walls (see Fig. 1). This microplate rheometer allows
us to clearly distinguish active behavior from the passive me-
chanical response to applied forces or strains (18).

1

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

2

Figure 1: Image of an actively contracting ﬁbroblast between two
ﬁbronectin coated microplates. The distance between plates is ≃ 5µm.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Experimental setup

We describe the main features of our cell-rheometer, schemati-
cally shown in Fig. 2. This is an improved version of the orig-
inal, home built micromanipulation setup previously described
(18). 3T3 Fibroblasts (19, 20) are held between two parallel,
coated glass microplates. One of them is rigid and provides a
reference point. The other microplate is thin and narrow and
therefore ﬂexible, with an effective stiffness ∼ 100 nN/µm,
which is of the order of the elastic modulus of a typical ﬁbrob-
last. Its bending provides the force acting on the cell in the y-
axis (see Fig. 2). The ﬂexible microplate is translated by means
of a piezoelectric actuator P-841.40 (Physik Instrumente, Karl-
sruhe, Germany) with a resolution of 1 nm. An optical ﬁber in
contact with the ﬂexible microplate couples microplate bending
to translation of the emergent laser beam. The optical ﬁber is
etched with hydroﬂuoric acid to a diameter of 6 µm, so that its
stiffness is far lower than that of the ﬂexible plate and does not
interfere with the force measurement. The cell is illuminated
with green light and observed with an Axiovert 135 microscope
(Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). A dichroic mirror separates
the green illumination light from the He-Ne laser beam, which
reaches a S-1880 two dimensional position sensitive detector
(Hamamatsu photonics, Japan) through one of the microscope
ports. A personal computer reads the signal from the position
detector, controls the piezoelectric actuator and calculates the
normal force F and the cell length ℓ. The precision in the mea-
surement of the ﬁber position is about 100 nm. In most cases a
high resolution in time is not needed and averaging can improve
the resolution to 30 nm. By controlling the piezoelectric trans-
lator, a feedback loop can impose user deﬁned force or length
histories. The response time of the piezoelectric translator lim-
its dynamic measurements to frequencies below 30 Hz. Due to
the large length of the ﬂexible microplate, its tip deﬂects by less

Figure 2: Schematic of the micromanipulation set-up. A ﬁbroblast is
held between two coated microplates. The deformation of the ﬂexible
microplate gives the force F acting on the cell. The position of the
laser beam emerging from the optical ﬁber which is in contact with the
tip of the ﬂexible plate is detected using a position sensitive detector
(PSD). A personal computer reads the signal from the detector and
controls the piezoelectric translator.

than 6 arc min during an experiment. Hence, the experimental
geometry can be described as two parallel walls, which can be
separated by a translation in the perpendicular direction.

Temperature Control. The temperature of the cell-culture
medium inside the chamber is controlled by means of two ITO-
coated glass slides, one on the bottom of the chamber, the other
one above, with holes for the microplates and the optical ﬁber
to pass through. In order to avoid convection in the medium,
these slides are kept at different temperatures, imposing a tem-
perature gradient pointing upwards with a magnitude of ∼ 1
◦C/cm.

Microplates. The glass microplates used for the experi-
ment are obtained by pulling glass strips (Vitrocom, NJ) as de-
scribed previously (18), using a modiﬁed P-97 Flaming/Brown
micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). Mi-
croplates are then cleaned and coated with ﬁbronectin from
bovine plasma (Sigma-Aldrich) or 3-aminopropyl triethoxysi-
lane (Sigma-Aldrich) and glutaraldehyde (Fluka Chemie,
Buchs, Switzerland).
Cell culture.

Experiments where the cells stick to
ﬁbronectin-coated plates are performed in ISCOVE medium,
with 25 mM HEPES buffer and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
Experiments with a glutaraldehyde coating start in pure saline

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

3

solution (HBSS) to avoid inactivation of the coating by proteins
and amino-acids. After attachment of the cell to both plates,
FBS is added to a ﬁnal concentration of 2%. All cell culture
reagents are from Gibco (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). 3T3 ﬁ-
broblasts are obtained from the German Collection of Microor-
ganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany)
(21).

RESULTS

Active response at constant cell-length

We ﬁrst perform experiments to characterize the response of
ﬁbroblasts to their presence in the rheometer (see Fig. 1).
To stimulate contractility, we use high serum concentrations
of 10%, and ﬁbronectin mediated adhesion using coated mi-
croplates. Fibronectin binding to integrins is known to trigger
the formation of focal complexes, which connect the extracel-
lular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton (22, 23). To minimize the
mechanical perturbation to the cell, we keep the cell length ℓ,
given by the distance between the rheometer microplates con-
stant and measure the force F . A typical response is shown in
Fig. 3. After contact with the ﬁbronectin coatings, most cells
generate contractile tension, the force F reaches values up to
1 µN and eventually decays to zero. The force relaxation is an
adaptation to the constant length condition, since active con-
traction can be induced again by a sudden change in cell length
ℓ. The behavior is reproducible only in its broad, qualitative
features. The force and time scales are strongly cell-dependent.

Figure 3: Force as a function of time at constant cell extension,
recorded immediately after incorporation of the ﬁbroblast into the
rheometer. No signiﬁcant cell shape alterations are seen throughout.
The experiment is performed using ﬁbronectin mediated adhesion.

Dynamic viscoelastic moduli

In order to probe cell rheological properties during complex
adaptive processes, we superimpose sinusoidal length oscilla-
tions at small amplitudes and high frequencies. These are cho-
sen so that the corresponding maximum rate of change of force
is at least two orders of magnitude above the values typically
seen in active contraction.

Cells have both an elastic and a viscous response to imposed
length oscillations (1, 24). As the viscous response depends
on deformation rate instead of absolute deformation, it causes
a phase-shift between length and force. The cell length is im-
posed as

ℓ = hℓi + ∆ℓ sin(ωt),

where hℓi is the average length over an oscillation period, and
∆ℓ is the amplitude of the superimposed length-oscillations. In
the linear regime, force is then given by

′′
′
F cos(ωt).
F sin(ωt) + ∆
F = hF i + ∆

We now introduce the initial contact area A0 = π (D/2)2,
where D is the apparent cell diameter. The amplitudes are re-
lated by

∆′
F
A0

= Θ

′ ∆ℓ
hℓi

and

∆′′
F
A0

= Θ

′′ ∆ℓ
hℓi

,

where Θ′ and Θ′′ are differential viscoelastic stretching mod-
uli. The storage modulus Θ′ reﬂects the purely elastic (non-
dissipative) part of the cell reaction, and the loss modulus Θ′′
the viscous (dissipative) contribution. In order to compare cells
of different sizes and with biological gels, we use formal engi-
neering stress units for the moduli. Accordingly, stress is taken
as σ = F/A0.

The differential stretch moduli Θ′ and Θ′′ should not be con-
fused with material parameters like the Young’s modulus. The
spatial distribution of force bearing structure inside the cell is
unknown. Rather than introducing ad hoc hypotheses, such as
assuming a uniform material, we simply treat the cell as a me-
chanical black box. The unconventional symbol Θ for the mod-
uli intends to emphasize their experiment-speciﬁc nature. Fur-
ther, these moduli characterize the response of the material to
small perturbations around a situation which may be far away
from the resting state. Indeed, we show below that it is suitable
to study Θ′ and Θ′′ as a function of the average force hF i. A
similar approach has been successfully used in stretching ex-
periments on whole tissues, such as skin or muscle (1). Equiv-
alent procedures have recently been applied to biopolymer gels
under shear deformations, where the differential shear moduli
are measured as a function of the average stress or strain (6, 7).
Instead of the loss and storage moduli Θ′ and Θ′′, it will be
more convenient to regard the absolute modulus |Θ| and the

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

4

Figure 4: Lissajoux ﬁgures for different amplitudes. Top) Typical response at forces above crossover. Force F as a function of relative cell
length ℓ/hℓi for strain amplitudes 3.5%, 6%, 13%, and 20%. The oscillation frequency is 0.2 Hz. Bottom) Typical response at compressive
forces. Force F as a function of relative cell length ℓ/hℓi for strain amplitudes 3%, 5%, 12%, and 20%. The oscillation frequency is 0.2 Hz.

loss angle δ, deﬁned as

|Θ| =

Θ′ 2 + Θ′′ 2

p
δ = arctan

Θ′′
Θ′ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

10

)
a
P
k
(
 
|

Θ

|
 
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

1

Fig. 5 shows the dependence of the stiffness |Θ| as a func-
tion of the strain amplitude ∆ℓ/hℓi. In general, at strain ampli-
tudes in the range 0.02–0.06, the moduli do not change by more
than 20%. Moreover, no signiﬁcant distortion of the response
is seen below relative deformations of 0.1, as shown in Fig. 4.
This holds irrespective of the frequency in the range 0.1–1 Hz.
Thus, in subsequent experiments the amplitude is kept small,
∆ℓ = 0.5 µm, which corresponds for all cell length values to
0.02–0.06 strain amplitudes. More amplitude sweeps, includ-
ing the amplitude dependence of the loss angle δ, can be found
as supplementary material.

For completeness, in Fig. 7 we show preliminary results on
the frequency dependence of the modulus |Θ| and the loss angle
δ, in the range 0.1–1 Hz. We are currently modifying the setup
in order to explore a wider frequency range, as at present we are
limited to just one frequency decade. Keeping this in mind, our
results are consistent with the literature on cell mechanics. On

0.01

strain amplitude ∆

l / <l>

0.1

Figure 5: Amplitude sweep. Stiffness |Θ| as a function of the strain
amplitude ∆ℓ/hℓi for an arbitrary selection of cells. Each curve is a
different experiment. All frequencies are 0.2 Hz.

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

5

0.1 Hz
0.2 Hz
0.5 Hz
1.0 Hz
1.7
y ~ x

c

d

8

4

2

33

30

27

24

Θ

)
a
P
k
(
 
 
|

|
 
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

)
°
(
 

 
δ
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
s
s
o
l

a

b

)

N
n
(
 
 

>
F
<
 
e
c
r
o
f
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

Θ

)
a
P
k
(
 
 
|

|
 
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

240

220

200

180

160

6

5

4

3

2

0.1 Hz
0.2 Hz
0.5 Hz
1.0 Hz

)
°
(
 
δ
 
e
l
g
n
a
 
s
s
o
l

39

23

14

20

25

40

137

165

198

237

30

35
time (min)

average force <F> (nN)

Figure 6: Stress stiffening at constant length. The average cell length is kept constant throughout, hℓi = 9µm. Sinusoidal oscillations are
superimposed with a strain amplitude ∆ℓ/hℓi = 0.03. The frequency of the oscillations is cyclically changed from 0.1 to 1.0 Hz. a) The
average force hF i is seen to increase in time. b) The modulus |Θ| increases in time for all frequencies. c) Stiffness |Θ| as a function of average
force hF i, for different frequencies. The line shows a power-law function y ∼ x1.7. d) Loss angle δ as a function of average force hF i, for
different frequencies.

10

)
a
P
k
(
 
|

Θ

|
 
s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s

1

0.1

Stress stiffening at constant cell length

During the initial phase of force development after contact with
the ﬁbronectin-coated microplates, the cell sweeps force-space
at a constant length. We superimpose sinusoidal oscillations
to the constant average length, in order to probe the temporal
evolution of the moduli Θ′ and Θ′′. The frequency of the os-
cillations is cyclically changed in the range 0.1 – 1.0 Hz. As
shown in Fig. 6, as the average force increases with contractile
activity of the cell, so does the modulus |Θ|. Figs. 6 c, d show
the dependence of the response parameters |Θ| and δ on the
average force hF i for different frequencies. This is an exam-
ple of active stress stiffening, since it takes place at an average
constant length.

frequency (Hz)

1

0.1

frequency (Hz)

1

Figure 7: Frequency sweep (preliminary data). Modulus |Θ| and loss
angle δ as a function of frequency. Each curve is obtained using a
different cell.

the average, |Θ| increases weakly with the frequency, whereas
δ is approximately constant. The modulus |Θ| increases with
the frequency roughly as a power-law with exponents in the
range 0.1–0.3. Such a frequency dependence, the signature of
a ﬂat, broad continuous spectrum of relaxation times, has been
known in soft tissues for a long time (1) and has recently been
observed at the micrometer scale (14, 25). Accordingly, recent
experiments at the whole-cell scale performed with a setup sim-
ilar to ours have revealed power-law creep functions (26).

A master-relation characterizes stress stiffening

Not all ﬁbroblasts generate such high forces as in the experi-
ment shown in Fig. 6. In order to span a larger range of aver-
age force hF i and length hℓi, we step-stretch the cell and then
keep the average length constant, superimposing oscillations to
record the moduli Θ′ and Θ′′. The procedure is periodically
repeated, as shown in Fig. 8. As a reaction to a sudden change
in length a force relaxation always occurs, usually followed by

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

6

Figure 8: The force response as result of imposed length changes. We
step-strain the cell by about 50% at a rate of 1.5 µm/s, and apply length
oscillations at an amplitude of 0.5 µm and a frequency of 0.2 Hz. The
experiment was performed using ﬁbronectin mediated adhesion.

active contraction. As the average force hF i evolves at a ﬁxed
length hℓi, the viscoelastic moduli are continuously recorded.
We also perform step experiments controlling the average force
hF i. In this way, it is possible to span large areas in the hℓi –
hF i diagram.

We see that both viscoelastic moduli depend only on the av-
erage force, and are independent of the average length. The
dependence of the loss angle δ = arctan(Θ′′/Θ′) on the av-
erage force hF i is erratic and weak, at most decreasing about
20% in the whole force range. As a function of the individ-
ual cell, it is within the range 10-30◦. The absolute modulus
|Θ| = (Θ′ 2 + Θ′′ 2)1/2 remains constant at low forces, in a
1–30 kPa range depending on the individual cell. Above a cell-
dependent crossover force, we observe stress stiffening:
|Θ|
increases as a function of the average force hF i. This depen-
dence of |Θ| on the average force can be well approximated by
a power-law, as shown in Fig. 9 (inset). More than one stress
decade above crossover, most cells deform signiﬁcantly and be-
gin to detach or yield.

A collapse of all data to a single master-relation can be
achieved by introducing cell-dependent scaling factors, the zero
force stiffness Θ0 and the crossover stress σC . On the average,

Θ0

γ
hσi
σC (cid:19)

Θ0

(cid:18)

for

for

hσi < σC

hσi > σC

|Θ| = 




The exponent γ is independent of the scaling factors. At
26◦C, 0.2 Hz, and 5% deformation amplitude, it is approxi-
mately 1, as shown by the collapsed data in Fig. 9. The scaling
factors are roughly related by Θ0 ∝ σ 1.3
C . Thus, an approxi-
mate collapse can be reached with a single parameter.

Figure 9: The inset shows the elastic modulus |Θ| as a function of
average stress for 13 cells, measured using length steps plus oscillation
experiments such as in Fig. 8. The main plot shows the data scaled
using 2 factors, which gives an exponent X ≃ 1.0. All experiments
are performed at 26◦C and using ﬁbronectin mediated adhesion.

This master-relation is consistently found in all cells strong
enough to reach average stresses above ∼ 0.1 Θ0. This repro-
ducibility shows that oscillatory measurements are effective in
probing cell mechanical properties independently of an under-
lying slow active behavior.

Ramp experiments with superimposed oscilla-
tions

The master-relation holds at a constant cell length while an
underlying active contraction occurs. In this case, the rate of
change of the average stress is set by the cell. As a means of
assessing the validity of the master-relation while the average
cell length changes, we increase hℓi at a constant rate in the
range 0.1 – 2 µm/s, and simultaneously superimpose small os-
cillations at an amplitude ∆ℓ ≃ 0.5 µm and a frequency of 1
Hz, to measure the dynamic moduli Θ′ and Θ′′. As shown in
Fig. 10 a, by stretching the cell, a change in average stress is in-
duced. The average stress hσi depends roughly linearly on the
average length hℓi throughout a ramp. Remarkably, stress stiff-
ening of the dynamic moduli is simultaneously observed. The
master-relation between |Θ| and hσi is seen to remain valid at
low deformation rates. These experiments show that the par-
ticular way of sweeping force space is not relevant, since the
|Θ|(hσi) function is qualitatively the same to that found in ac-
tive contraction experiments. Only at rates higher than a cell-
dependent value in the vicinity of 100 nm/s, |Θ|(hσi) falls be-

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

7

ization inducer Latrunculin-A at 1 µg/ml (27). The same ef-
fect is seen with the myosin heavy chain ATPase inhibitor
2,3-butanedionemonoxime at 2 mg/ml (28), as well as with
the myosin light chain kinase inhibitor ML-7 at 100 µM (29).
Since transmembrane proteins are covalently bound to the glu-
taraldehyde coating, they must rip off from the membrane dur-
ing drug-induced cell detachment. Thus, the cell membrane
alone is not able to hold transmembrane proteins under signif-
icant tension. An internal structure must bear the load under
normal conditions. After disruption of either actin or myosin
activity, this structure cannot sustain strong forces anymore. At
4-fold lower concentrations, Latrunculin-A and ML-7 reduce
|Θ| up to a factor of 5, while hσi goes to zero. No signiﬁcant
effect is seen with the microtubule-disrupting drug Nocodazol
at 10 µg/ml (30). Taken together, these results show that the
actomyosin system bears the tension, without any other signif-
icant force-bearing structure in parallel.

Stress stiffening with glutaraldehyde coatings

In order to reduce active responses, we use glutaraldehyde-
aminosilane coated walls, where accessible membrane pro-
teins are covalently and non-speciﬁcally bound through imine-
groups. Further, the serum concentration is reduced to 2%. In
this way, the biochemical conditions are changed, but the ex-
perimental cell geometry remains the same. Active responses
are indeed found to be weaker in these conditions. Compared
to ﬁbronectin mediated adhesion, the stiffness values are scaled
down by about a factor of three. However, the master-relation
between |Θ| and hσi can still be observed.

DISCUSSION

The master-relation is a general feature, which reproducibly
occurs in our experiments. It holds during active contraction
and adaptive responses, such as those seen in Figs. 3, 6 and
8, as well as in ramp experiments with superimposed oscilla-
tions, as in Fig. 10 b. It is observed in different biochemical
environments, which change the intensity of active responses.
From this generality of the master-relation, we conclude that
it reﬂects a fundamental property of the cell force-bearing ele-
ments.

Figure 10: a) Ramp experiment with glutaraldehyde coating. Aver-
age stress (top), loss angle (middle) and average length (bottom) as a
function of time. Oscillations at 1 Hz, 5% amplitude are superposed
throughout, also during the ramps (shaded areas). The phase differ-
ence δ increases with the deformation rate.
b) Stiffness as a function of average stress. The relationship between
|Θ| and hσi depends on the deformation rate. The curves correspond
to the shaded areas 1, 2, 3 in Fig. 10 a.

low the master-relation, and the cell becomes more ﬂuid as evi-
denced by an increase in the loss angle δ (see Fig. 10, a and b).
In general, the master-relation cannot be deduced from the re-
lationship between the average values hσi and hℓi, since these
are linearly related in a ramp experiment. This absence of stiff-
ening agrees well with results from ramp experiments on whole
tissues (1, 16) and ﬁbroblast populated collagen gels (15).

Stress stiffening in actin networks

Cytoskeleton perturbation using drugs

In order to distinguish between different cytoskeletal sub-
components, experiments are performed in presence of drugs,
which disrupt speciﬁc ﬁlament types. Only cells able to
sustain tensions above σC are subsequently treated with
drugs. We observe sudden detachment of the cells from
glutaraldehyde-coated microplates with the actin depolymer-

Our cytoskeleton perturbation experiments point towards the
actin network as the main component responsible for stress
stiffening. Actin ﬁlaments, with a persistence length of 15 µm
(5, 31), behave as semiﬂexible ﬁlaments in vivo, where typical
ﬁlament lengths are about 1 µm. It has recently become ap-
parent that crosslinked as well as entangled networks of semi-
ﬂexible ﬁlaments show characteristic nonlinear mechanical be-

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

8

havior. In vitro prestressed biopolymer gels under shear defor-
mation, including crosslinked actin networks, generally show
a transition from a linear regime to power-law strain stiffen-
ing (6, 7, 32, 33, 34). The connection to our results has to be
established with care. In vitro gels are passive minimal sys-
tems, generally studied under shear deformations. Instead, the
living cell is a complex entity where a multitude of crosslink-
ing proteins are available, many of them of a dynamic nature.
Cytoskeletal restructuring might take place within an oscilla-
tion period. Keeping this in mind, we still ﬁnd the qualitative
similarity between the stiffness-force relations very suggestive.
In scruin-crosslinked actin networks (7), the ratio between the
crossover stress and the zero force modulus is of the order of
10−1, and the stress-stiffening exponent is in the range 1–1.5,
in remarkable agreement with our results. In experiments on
ﬁlamin-crosslinked actin gels (6), where the storage modulus
G′ is actually studied as a function of strain, the crossover strain
is also of this order.

Intrinsic stress stiffening

The master-relation connects the viscoelastic moduli to the av-
erage force independently of cell length. Rather than strain
stiffening, ﬁbroblasts exhibit intrinsic stress stiffening. To rec-
oncile this to our interpretation of the master-relation, we pos-
tulate that the internal strain of the gel, i.e., the stress, uncou-
ples from the cell length ℓ as a result of active contraction, via
rearrangements of the connection points of the network.

As shown by ramp experiments with superimposed oscilla-
tions, the master-relation holds even during an externally im-
posed length increase, if the extension rate is sufﬁciently slow.
The magnitude of the deformations which can then be imposed
(more than 50%), without the cell yielding, suggests that ad-
dition of material takes place. As the loss angle δ does not
change under such conditions, we speculate that the cytoskele-
ton grows without major structural changes. The cytoskeleton
is certainly capable of such restructuring, as exempliﬁed by the
growth under compression of the actin tail of Listeria (35, 36),
towed growth in neurites (37) or stress ﬁbers losing material
while contracting (38). The maximal growth speed from our
ramp experiments would be around 6 µm/min, in good agree-
ment with the growth of the actin tails of the bacteria Liste-
ria (35). At higher deformation rates the cell starts to ﬂuidize,
which can be interpreted by an increased fraction of ruptured
bonds.

Master-relation in the context of cell mechanics

Several features of the master-relation can be observed in ex-
periments performed at very different length scales, corroborat-
ing our interpretation as a general feature of the force-bearing
elements in the cell. This shows the master-relation to be gen-

eral, independent of the type of mechanical experiment or cell
geometry. Uniaxial stretching experiments performed on skin,
myosin ﬁbers, tendons (1, 16, 17) and on ﬁbroblast-populated
collagen gels (15) show proportionality between dynamic stiff-
ness and force. These results can be seen as a particular case of
power-law stress stiffening, for an exponent γ = 1.

Our results are also similar to stress stiffening in skeletal
and smooth muscle, where stiffness is proportional to force.
The generally accepted explanation is that both stiffness and
force are a function of the variable number of actomyosin cross-
bridges (39). Although such an explanation is attractive, it does
not seem to apply to our case. We have measured forces up
to 1 µN, in agreement with total forces exerted by spreading
ﬁbroblasts of ∼ 2 µN (2, 40). This corresponds to ∼ 106
myosins working in parallel, very close to the total amount re-
ported in ﬁbroblasts (41). Taking crossbridge stiffness as 0.6
pN/nm (5), an arrangement of 106 myosins in parallel would
be a factor of 100 stiffer than the maximum |Θ| we have mea-
sured in ﬁbroblasts.

At the subcellular scale, microrheology experiments per-
formed on adhering cells show proportionality between the
shear storage modulus G′ of the actin cortex and the force ap-
plied by the cell on the substrate (12). Here, the force was
increased by stimulating cell contractility with histamine, or
decreased by the relaxing agonist isoproterenol. The result
compares well to our observation of stress stiffening at con-
stant length, though no crossover to a linear regime is reported
here. Recently, simultaneous increase of both the storage and
loss shear moduli G′ and G′′ of the actin cortex after stretch-
ing epithelial cells has been observed (13). Accordingly, we
see stress stiffening of both longitudinal moduli Θ′ and Θ′′
when stretching the cell in a ramp experiment with superim-
posed oscillations. Thus, the fact that the master-relation holds
regardless of the way force-space is explored agrees with these
microrheological studies taken together.

A similar example of length scale invariance is given by the
agreement between microrheological studies in the frequency
domain (14, 25) and whole-cell experiments in the time do-
main (26). Fabry et al (14, 25), studying the shear moduli G′
and G′′ of the actin cortex as a function of frequency, could
collapse data from cells in different conditions onto master
curves. The response in the frequency domain as revealed by
these microrheological procedures was subsequently found to
agree with the power-law creep function of single cells (26).
Hence, scale invariance and self similarity may well be gen-
eral properties of cell mechanics in the force, as well as in the
time-frequency domain.

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

9

Possible stiffening mechanisms

Aiming at describing crosslinked biopolymer networks, theo-
retical frameworks have been developed recently. Networks are
modeled as a 2-dimensional random arrangement of ﬁlaments,
characterized by a bending and a stretching modulus. Tem-
perature effects have been addressed by including an entropic
stretching modulus (8, 42). At a non-zero temperature, thermal
energy is stored in bending ﬂuctuations, so that the distance
between crosslinks is smaller than the actual contour length of
the ﬁlament. Separating these crosslinks by stretching reduces
the amplitude of these shape ﬂuctuations, which gives rise to
an increased effective stretching modulus. In general, the me-
chanical response of 2-dimensional random networks depends
strongly on the length scales involved, the ﬁlament length and
the mesh size ξ (the average distance between ﬁlaments). For
long ﬁlament lengths or small mesh sizes, the deformation of
the network is afﬁne, i.e., the macroscopic mechanical response
is essentially given by that of single ﬁlaments (8). The non-
linear elasticity of crosslinked biopolymer networks has been
explained in terms of random networks (6, 7), as an afﬁne
stretching-dominated regime where the macroscopic response
is given by single-ﬁlament entropic stretching. This response is
highly nonlinear, since thermal ﬂuctuations are suppressed as
the ﬁlament ends are separated close to full contour length. At
high forces, the stiffness-force relation becomes a power-law
with exponent 3/2 (7).

An alternative explanation for stiffening in crosslinked ran-
dom networks has been recently presented by Onck et al (43).
Here, stiffening arises as a transition from bending to stretch-
ing. Thermal effects are mostly irrelevant; increasing the tem-
perature from 0 to 300 K increases the crossover strain, but does
not affect the stiffening regime. Also the transition to stiffening
arises in spite of a certain degree of non-afﬁnity.

Below we point out some remarkable features of single ﬁla-
ment bending response which may be relevant for crosslinked
ﬁlament networks. We discuss the bending response of inex-
tensible ﬁlaments, characterized by a length L and a bending
modulus κ. We show that bending itself shows a crossover to
power-law stress stiffening with an exponent 1.75, as well as
a crossover strain of the order of 10−1. This can be seen in
Fig. 11. At large forces, the stiffness-force relation becomes a
power-law with exponent 3/2, similar to the entropic stretching
response. The details of the calculation are left to the appendix.
It is noteworthy that many features of the master-relation are
similar to the mechanical response of single ﬁlaments. The ex-
perimental fact that a single parameter is sufﬁcient to obtain
the master relation may be captured by both the force and stiff-
ness scales varying as κ/L2. Interestingly, the magnitude of
the experimental crossover stress, when expressed as a strain
σC /Θ0, is of the order of 10−1, in good agreement with the
theoretical crossover strain. As Fig. 11 b shows, the ﬁrst force

Figure 11: a) Single-ﬁlament nonlinear elasticity: ﬁlaments are re-
garded as inextensible, characterized by a contour length L and a
bending modulus κ. One end is clamped, the other one free. The
force F bends the ﬁlament by an amount x. The dimensionless force
is deﬁned as f = F L2/κ.
b) Differential stiffness df /d(x/L) as a function of the dimensionless
force f .
c) Euler-Bernoulli elastica: ﬁlament shapes for different forces.

decade above crossover of the theoretical stiffness-force rela-
tion is an approximate power-law with exponent 1.7, within the
experimentally observed range. Further, the magnitude of the
force scale is the right one if one assumes a realistic cytoskele-
ton mesh size of 100 nm (5, 44, 45) and an actin bending mod-
(5). This corresponds to the open-
ulus of κ = 60 nN(nm)
cell foam model proposed by Satcher and Dewey as a general
model for the cytoskeleton (44), which gives a zero-force stiff-
ness Θ0 ∼ 10 kPa, in good agreement with our measurements
and with literature (17, 44).

2

These observations suggest that the bending response of ﬁl-
aments may play a role in the nonlinear mechanical properties
of crosslinked gels. Therefore, it is worthwhile considering this
effect in further modeling of such systems. With the present
set of experiments, we cannot distinguish between the differ-
ent mechanisms proposed for stiffening. Further experimental
work and theoretical modeling will be required to elucidate the
relative contributions of these effects for physiologically rele-
vant values of mesh sizes and ﬁlament lengths.

Summary, conclusion and outlook

By performing single ﬁbroblast mechanical measurements we
have revealed a master-relation relating stress and dynamical
cell stiffness. This relation is obtained by a simple scaling of
data from different cells. For the measurement we use the fact
that cells are active: as a reaction to a sudden perturbation the
cell sweeps a range of mechanical stresses. We probe the cell
elastic properties during this active response. In spite of this
underlying complex behavior which may involve multiple bio-
chemical pathways, the master relation is surprisingly simple

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

10

and reproducible. If the average force is externally changed,
by slowly stretching the cell in a ramp experiment while su-
perimposing small-amplitude oscillations, the master-relation
between hF i and the stiffness |Θ| is seen again. Thus, a dis-
tinction between active and passive stress is artiﬁcial – regard-
less of deformation history, the response to small perturbations
is always given by the average force. In view of this general-
ity, and the remarkable agreement with the mechanic behavior
of biopolymer networks, we interpret the master-relation as re-
vealing the nonlinear response of the actin network.

These experiments provide a framework where simpliﬁed
biomimetic systems can be connected to living cell mechan-
ics. Here, the active nature of the cytoskeleton is naturally in-
tegrated into the phenomenology. Along these lines, we are
currently extending our frequency and amplitude range, to un-
dertake a more detailed analysis of the master-relation.

As a ﬁnal remark, ﬁbroblasts reach the stress-stiffening
regime naturally by active contraction and we expect the
crossover force to be within the physiological force-range.
Thus stress stiffening may play a role in vivo. For example,
cells are known to sense the extracellular elasticity and exert
forces along lines of maximum effective stiffness, a process
In
which has been modeled within linearized elasticity (3).
the future, power-law stress stiffening could be included in the
modeling of cell organization by mechanosensing.

We thank A. Bausch, G. Massiera, H. Brand, L. Mahadevan, O. Thoumine,
F. J¨ulicher and R. Everaers for helpful discussions, and B. Wehrle-Haller for his

generous gift of GFP-actin ﬁbroblasts. Assistance from A. Hanold in taking

care of the cell culture is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Y. Marcy
and A. Micoulet for work on the setup. Finally, we are very grateful to the

reviewers for constructive criticism and helpful suggestions, and to the editor
for his interest in the manuscript. This work has been funded by the Universit¨at

Bayreuth and the Institut Curie (Paris). Some of the results of this work were

presented in the PHYNECS workshop in Peyresq, France, September 2002,
and in the DPG Fr¨uhjahrtagung, Regensburg, Germany, March 2004.

ditions are the minimum requirements for bending. At small
strains x/L, the mechanical equilibrium equation can be lin-
earized and the zero-force stiffness analytically calculated as
dF/dx = 3κ/L3.

Numerically solving the nonlinear equilibrium equation, we
ﬁnd a relatively sharp crossover to a strain-stiffening regime at
strains x/L > 0.3, as shown in Fig. 11 b. At large strains, the
stiffness-force relation asymptotically becomes a power-law
with an exponent 1.5. At high forces, the ﬁlament shape tends
to a straight line along the force direction, with a sharp kink
at the clamped end (see Fig. 11 c). In this limit, the effect of
increasing F can be shown to be a scaling of the ﬁlament shape
at the clamped end; the endpoint coordinates and curvature ra-
dius remain linearly related as they change as a function of
F . Thus, we can introduce a force-dependent scaling factor ε,
which tends to zero as the force is increased to inﬁnity. In terms
of this factor, the full contour length L and the projection length
x (see Fig. 11 a) can be written as L − x ∝ ε, and the torque
balance equation as F ε ∝ 1/ε. Therefore, F ∝ 1/(L − x)2,
which gives power-law stiffening, dF/dx ∝ F 3/2.

In general, an entropic contribution to the longitudinal ﬁl-
ament stretching modulus is expected due to thermal ﬂuctua-
tions. At low forces, this leads to a thermal longitudinal modu-
lus kT = 90κ2/(kBT L4) (42), where L is the contour length,
and kBT the thermal energy. Taking a mesh size of 100 nm, this
thermal longitudinal modulus k T is about a factor of 104 larger
than the low-force mechanical bending stiffness, k⊥ = 3κ/L3.
Since k⊥/k T ∝ L, the mechanical response of a regular net-
work such as the open-cell foam model (44) remains dominated
by bending stiffness for physiological mesh sizes. Further, for
such mesh sizes the mechanical bending energy already ex-
ceeds the thermal energy at strains above ∼ 4%, well within
the linear regime. Thus, thermal effects are not relevant for the
bending response itself.

References

Appendix

Bending response of an inextensible ﬁlament

In what follows we show that a transition to power law stiff-
ening is already present in the nonlinearity of bending defor-
mations. We analyze the mechanical response of inextensible
ﬁlaments characterized by a bending modulus κ and a contour
length L. We assume that the relationship between bending
moment and curvature stays linear, so that any nonlinearity is
of geometrical nature. The ﬁlament shape then corresponds
to Euler-Bernoulli elastica (46). Our boundary conditions are
one ﬁlament end free and the other one clamped perpendicular
to the force direction, as illustrated in Fig. 11 a. These con-

1. Fung, Y. C. 1993. Biomechanics: Mechanical properties

of living tissues. Springer Verlag, New York.

2. Wrobel, L. K., T. R. Fray, J. E. Molloy, J. J. Adams, M. P.
Armitage, and J. C. Sparrow. 2002. Contractility of single
human dermal myoﬁbroblasts and ﬁbroblasts. Cell Motil.
Cytoskel. 52:82–90.

3. Bischofs, I. B., and U. S. Schwarz. 2003. Cell organization
in soft media due to active mechanosensing. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100:9274–9279.

4. Alberts, B., D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and
J. Watson. 1994. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 3rd edi-
tion. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York.

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

11

5. Howard, J. 2001. Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the
Cytoskeleton. Sinauer Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Mas-
sachusetts.

6. Storm, C., J. J. Pastore, F. C. MacKintosh, T. C. Lubensky,
and P. A. Janmey. 2005. Nonlinear elasticity in biological
gels. Nature 435:191–194.

7. Gardel, M. L., J. H. Shin, F. C. MacKintosh, L. Mahade-
van, P. Matsudaira, and D. A. Weitz. 2004. Elastic behav-
ior of cross-linked and bundled actin networks. Science
304:1301–1305.

8. Head, D. A., A. J. Levine, and F. C. MacKintosh. 2003.
Deformation of cross-linked semiﬂexible polymer net-
works. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91:108102.

9. Humphrey, D., D. Duggan, D. Saha, D. Smith, and J. K¨as.
2002. Active ﬂuidization of polymer networks through
molecular motors. Nature 416:413.

10. Keller, M., R. Tharmann, M. A. Dichtl, A. R. Bausch,
and E. Sackmann. 2003. Slow ﬁlament dynamics and vis-
coelasticity in entangled and active actin networks. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 361:699.

11. Wang, N., J. P. Butler, and D. E. Ingber. 1993. Mechan-
otransduction across the cell surface and through the cy-
toskeleton. Science 260:1124–1127.

12. Wang, N., I. M. Tolic-Nørrelykke, J. Chen, S. M. Mi-
jailovich, J. P. Butler, J. J. Fredberg, and D. Stamenovic.
2002. Cell prestress. I. Stiffness and prestress are closely
associated in adherent contractile cells. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 282:C606–C616.

13. Trepat, X., M. Grabulosa, F. Puig, G. N. Maksym,
D. Navajas, and R. Farr´e. 2004. Viscoelasticity of human
alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch. Am. J. Physiol.
Lung. Cell. Mol. Physiol. 287:L1025–L1034.

14. Fabry, B., G. N. Maksym, J. P. Butler, M. Glogauer,
D. Navajas, and J. J. Fredberg. 2001. Scaling the microrhe-
ology of living cells. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87:148102.

15. Wakatsuki, T., M. S. Kolodney, G. I. Zahalak, and E. L.
Elson. 2000. Cell mechanics studied by a reconstituted
model tissue. Biophys. J. 79:2353–2368.

16. Fung, Y. C. B. 1967. Elasticity of soft tissues in simple

elongation. Am. J. Physiol. 213:1532–1544.

17. Verdier, C. 2003. Rheological properties of living materi-

als. From cells to tissues. J. Theo. Med. 5:67–91.

18. Thoumine, O., and A. Ott. 1997. Time scale dependent
viscoelastic and contractile regimes in ﬁbroblasts probed
by microplate manipulation. J. Cell. Science 110:2109–
2116.

19. Todaro, G. J., and H. Green. 1963. Quantitative studies
of the growth of mouse embryo cells in culture and their
development into established lines. J. Cell. Biol. 17:299–
313.

20. Todaro, G. J., K. Habel, and H. Green. 1965. Antigenic and
cultural properties of cells doubly transformed by polyoma
virus and sv40. Virology 27:179–185.

21. Drexler, H. G., W. Dirks, W. R. A. F. MacLeod, H. Quent-
meier, K. G. Steube, and C. C. Uphoff. 2001. DSMZ Cat-
alogue of Human and Animal Cell Lines. Braunschweig.

22. Katsumi, A., A. Wayne Orr, E. Tzima, and M. A. Schwartz.
2004. Integrins in mechanotransduction. J. Biol. Chem.
279:12001–12004.

23. Choquet, D., D. P. Felsenfeld, and M. P. Sheetz. 1997. Ex-
tracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin-
cytoskeleton linkages. Cell 88:39–48.

24. Findley, W. N., J. S. Lai, and K. Onaran. 1976. Creep
and relaxation of nonlinear viscoelastic materials: with an
introduction to linear viscoelasticity. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, Toronto.

25. Fabry, B., G. N. Maksym, J. P. Butler, M. Glogauer,
D. Navajas, N. A. Taback, E. J. Millet, and J. J. Fredberg.
2003. Time scale and other invariants of integrative me-
chanical behavior in living cells. Phys. Rev. E 68:041914.

26. Desprat, N., A. Richert, J. Simeon, and A. Asnacios. 2005.
Creep function of a single living cell. Biophys. J. 88:2224–
2233.

27. Spector, I., N. R. Shochet, Y. Kashman, and A. Groweiss.
1983. Latrunculins: novel marine toxins that disrupt
microﬁlament organization in cultured cells.
Science
219:493–495.

28. Herrmann, C., J. Wray, F. Travers, and T. Barman. 1992.
Effect of 2,3-butanedione monoxime on myosin and my-
oﬁbrillar ATPases. An example of an uncompetitive in-
hibitor. Biochemistry 31:12227–12232.

29. Saitoh, M., T. Ishikawa, S. Matsushima, M. Naka, and
H. Hidaka. 1987. Selective inhibition of catalytic activ-
ity of smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase. J. Biol.
Chem. 262:7796–7801.

Nonlinearviscoelasticityofﬁbroblasts

12

42. MacKintosh, F. C., J. K¨as, and P. A. Janmey. 1995. Elastic-
ity of semiﬂexible biopolymer networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.
75:244425.

43. Onck, P., T. Koeman, T. van Dillen, and E. van der Giessen.
2005. Alternative explanation of stiffening in cross-linked
semiﬂexible networks. Phys.Rev.Lett. 95:178102.

44. Satcher, R. L., and C. F. Dewey, Jr. 1996. Theoretical es-
timates of mechanical properties of the endothelial cell cy-
toskeleton. Biophys. J. 71:109–118.

45. Medalia, O., I. Weber, A. S. Frangakis, D. Nicastro,
G. Gerisch, and W. Baumeister. 2002. Macromolecular
architecture in eucaryotic cells visualized by cryoelectron
tomography. Science 298:1209–1213.

46. Love, A. E. H. 1944. A treatise on the mathematical theory

of elasticity. Dover, New York.

30. De Brabander, M., R. Van de Veire, R. Aerts, M. Borg-
ers, and P. Janssen. 1976. The effects of methyl[5-(2-
thienylcarbonyl)-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl]carbamate (R 17
934, NSC 238159), a new synthetic antitumoral drug in-
terfering with microtubules, on mammalian cells cultured
in vitro. Cancer Res. 36:905–916.

31. Ott, A., M. Magnasco, A. Simon, and A. Libchaber.
1993. Measurement of the persistence length of polymer-
ized actin using ﬂuorescence microscopy. Phys. Rev. E.
48:R1642–R1645.

32. Janmey, P. A., S. Hvidt, J. Lamb, and T. P. Stossel. 1990.
Resemblance of actin-binding protein/actin gels to cova-
lently crosslinked networks. Nature 345:89–92.

33. Xu, J., Y. Tseng, and D. Wirtz. 2000. Strain Hardening
of Actin Filament Networks. Regulation by the dynamic
cross-linking protein α-actinin. J. Biol. Chem. 275:35886–
35892.

34. Groot, R. D., A. Bot, and W. G. M. Agterof. 1996. Molecu-
lar theory of strain hardening of a polymer gel: Application
to gelatin. J. Chem. Phys. 104:9202–9219.

35. Gerbal, F., V. Noireaux, C. Sykes, F. J¨ulicher, P. Chaikin,
A. Ott, J. Prost, R. Golsteyn, E. Friederich, D. Louvard,
V. Laurent, and M. Carlier. 1999. On the ”listeria” propul-
sion mechanism. Pramana - J. Phys. 53:155–170.

36. Marcy, Y., J. Prost, M. F. Carlier, and C. Sykes. 2004.
Forces generated during actin-based propulsion: A direct
measurement by micromanipulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 101:5992–5997.

37. Dennerll, T. J., P. Lamoureux, R. E. Buxbaum, and S. R.
Heidemann. 1989. The cytomechanics of axonal elonga-
tion and retraction. J. Cell Biol. 109:3073–3083.

38. Kolega, J., L. W. Janson, and D. Lansing Taylor. 1991. The
role of solation-contraction coupling in regulating stress
ﬁber dynamics in nonmuscle cells. J. Cell Biol. 114:993–
1003.

39. Ford, L. E., A. F. Huxley, and R. M. Simmons. 1981. The
relation between stiffness and ﬁlament overlap in stimu-
lated frog muscle ﬁbres. J. Physiol. 311:219–249.

40. Dembo, M., and Y. L. Wang. 1999. Stresses at the cell-to-
substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts. Bio-
phys. J. 76:2307–2316.

41. Bray, D., and C. Thomas. 1975. The actin content of ﬁ-

broblasts. Biochem. J. 147:221–228.

