6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Stepwise bending of DNA by a single TATA-box
Binding Protein

Simon F. Toli´c-Nørrelykke*#
1
§
Francesco S. Pavone#

Mette B. Rasmussen*

Kirstine Berg-Sørensen*¶

Lene B. Oddershede*

*The Niels Bohr Institute, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
#European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Fl), Italy
§Max-Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01187 Dresden, Germany
¶Present address: Dept. of Physics, Technical University of Denmark

DK-2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

November 19, 2013

1Corresponding author. Address: Max-Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems,
N¨othnitzerstr. 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany, Tel.: (+49) 351 871 1211, Fax: (+49) 351 871 1999,
E-mail: simonftn@pks.mpg.de

Abstract

The TATA-box Binding Protein (TBP) is required by all three eukaryotic RNA polymerases
for the initiation of transcription from most promoters. TBP recognizes, binds to, and bends
promoter sequences called “TATA-boxes” in the DNA. We present results from the study of
individual Saccharomyces cerevisiae TBPs interacting with single DNA molecules containing
a TATA-box. Using video microscopy, we observed the Brownian motion of beads tethered
by short surface-bound DNA. When TBP binds to and bends the DNA, the conformation
of the DNA changes and the amplitude of Brownian motion of the tethered bead is reduced
compared to that of unbent DNA. We detected individual binding and dissociation events
and derived kinetic parameters for the process. Dissociation was induced by increasing
the salt concentration or by directly pulling on the tethered bead using optical tweezers.
In addition to the well-deﬁned free and bound classes of Brownian motion, we observed
another two classes of motion. These extra classes were identiﬁed with intermediate states
on a three-step, linear binding pathway. Biological implications of the intermediate states
are discussed.

Key words: tethered-particle-motion; single-molecule; optical tweezers; video microscopy;

transcription initiation

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

INTRODUCTION

2

Observation of biological systems on the single-molecule level can reveal information that
is not easily obtainable in ensemble studies. By studying individual molecules it is possible
to address whether an observed variation in activity is caused by temporal variations in the
individual molecules or by variation in activity from molecule to molecule (1, 2, 3). Also,
single-molecule techniques often allow the application of a mechanical force to the system
and thus the introduction of a well deﬁned reaction coordinate (4).

The TATA-box Binding Protein is a small, single-chain, saddle-shaped protein (5), the
DNA-binding part of which is highly conserved throughout evolution. The inner, concave
side of TBP directly contacts the DNA, whereas the outer and evolutionary more variable
side interacts with various other proteins involved in the regulation of transcription (6). With
120◦ (7, 8). DNA distortion
TBP bound, the DNA is bent by
is thought to play a role in transcription initiation, the distortion inﬂuencing recruitment
and stabilization of RNA polymerases and associated proteins. Furthermore, this distortion
may have a direct mechanical role in chromatin remodeling: Histones have been shown to
slide along the DNA upon TBP binding (9). Association of TBP with promoter DNA is
a slow process, but after binding the complex can support multiple rounds of transcription
initiation (10).

80◦ and locally unwound by

∼

∼

Most DNA-binding proteins interact with DNA through the major groove, where the
base-paired sequence is easily accessible. TBP, however, interacts with DNA through the
minor groove (7, 8) in a manner that diﬀers also from that of other minor-groove-binding
proteins (11). The TBP-DNA interaction is well studied at the ensemble level: Bending
angles (7, 8, 12) as well as the speciﬁcity of the binding (12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18) to diﬀer-
ent DNA sequences under various conditions of pH, temperature, osmolyte, and electrolyte
concentrations have been revealed using X-rays, electron microscopy, gel-retardation, DNase
I foot-printing, ﬂuorescence anisotropy, and F¨orster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET).
However, no previously reported studies have addressed this system at the single-molecule
level.

TBP is known to bind to several consensus and non-consensus TATA-boxes (13). The
best studied TATA-box is the adenovirus major late promoter (AdMLP), which serves as
a reference example of TBP-DNA interactions. When binding to the AdMLP, TBP has to
overcome an activation barrier of nearly 10 kcal/mol, but once bound, the protein resides in
an energetic minimum that is almost 11 kcal/mol deep (17). A careful analysis of ensemble
data taken at a range of temperatures and protein concentrations led to a prediction of two
intermediate states on the reaction pathway between the initial, unbound state and the ﬁnal,
bound state (17). The structure of the TBP-DNA complex in these intermediate states is
not known, but was proposed (17) to be nearly identical to the ﬁnal bound form. However,

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

3

direct observation of these intermediates has not previously been reported.

We set up a tethered-particle-motion system (19, 20) to study the interaction between
TBP and DNA at the single-molecule level. A microsphere (“bead”) was tethered to a
microscope coverslip by 324 bp of DNA. In the center of the DNA sequence we placed a
TATA-box, the rest of the DNA contained no TATA-like sequences. Using video microscopy
we followed the Brownian motion of the bead and from this motion constructed a measure for
the conformation of the DNA tether. Upon introduction of TBP, we observed a decrease in
Brownian motion and interpreted this decrease as the binding of TBP to the DNA. A series of
control experiments were undertaken to ensure that the observed eﬀect was caused by active
TBP, binding speciﬁcally to the TATA-sequence. We showed that TBP can be forced oﬀ the
TATA-box sequence by increasing the electrolyte concentration or by mechanically pulling on
the DNA using laser tweezers. The choice of a short DNA-tether and relatively large beads
ensured that any change in conformation of the DNA was ampliﬁed into a larger change
in the position of the tethered bead. Using this system, we studied the binding kinetics of
TBP to DNA and showed by direct observation that at least one of the intermediate states
is less bent than the ﬁnal state. This constitutes the ﬁrst direct observation of a structural
intermediate on the TBP-DNA binding pathway, a ﬁnding that may have implications for
our understanding of the regulation of transcription initiation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

DNA

DNA-tethers for binding experiments (“TATA-DNA”) were engineered to have the AdMLP
sequence 5’-TATAAAAG-3’ at position 155. 324-bp double stranded DNA labeled with
digoxigenin at one end and biotin at the other was produced by 10 rounds of polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) ampliﬁcation from pSF1 (see (21) for details). DNA-tethers without
the TATA-box (“control-DNA”) were produced by site-directed mutagenesis using PCR to
have the XhoI recognitions sequence (underlined) 5’-TACTCGAG-3’ at position 155. We
screened the DNA for consensus as well as non-consensus TBP binding sequences known
from the literature (18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26). In the TATA-DNA we found no high-aﬃnity
sequences other than the AdMLP TATA-box and in the control-DNA we found no high-
aﬃnity sequences.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

4

Beads

The beads used were streptavidin coated polystyrene spheres of diameter d = 0.46 µm (BangsLabs),
as well as 1.0 µm streptavidin coated silica spheres (Spherotech). One end of the DNA tether
was speciﬁcally attached to the avidin coated micro-sphere by biotin-streptavidin binding.
The other end was attached to a glass coverslip by digoxigenin/anti-digoxigenin interaction.
Nuclease-free bovine serum albumin (BSA; Roche Applied Sciences) was added to the beads
to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mg/ml and incubated for >14 h at 4 ◦C before use, to suppress
sticking to the glass coverslip. Figure 1 shows a schematic drawing of the setup.

TATA-box Binding Protein

Saccharomyces cerevisiae TBP was prepared as described in (16, 27). The protein was
stored at -80◦C, at a concentration of 33.9 µM, in Buﬀer A (25 mM Hepes-KOH, 2.7 M
glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.9) until immediately before use, at which time
it was thawed, diluted in Buﬀer 1 (10 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM
CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.4) to the working concentration of 50–678 nM, and kept on ice
between experiments. The stock concentration of TBP was determined from the absorbance
at 280 nm using an extinction coeﬃcient of 12,700 M−1cm−1 (27). TBP is monomeric under
the conditions and concentrations used in the experiments described here (17, 28).

Preparation of Samples

∼

20 µl) were prepared by placing one coverslip No. 0 on top of another,
Microscopy ﬂow cells (
separated by spacers made from a single thickness of Paraﬁlm (American National Can,
Menasha, WI, USA) coated with silicone vacuum grease (Dow-Corning). Anti-digoxigenin
was attached to the working surface by injecting the ﬂow cell with 20 µg/ml anti-digoxigenin
in PBS and incubating at 4◦C for >14 hours. The ﬂow cells were then washed with 3
100 µl
100 µl Buﬀer 1. To
Buﬀer 1, incubated with DNA for 15 min, and again washed with 3
suppress non-speciﬁc binding of beads and TBP to the surface, the ﬂow cells were incubated
with 2 mg/ml BSA in Buﬀer 1 for 15 min saturating all surfaces with BSA. Samples were
mounted on a microscope for observation, and beads were ﬂowed in at high concentrations
(40–160 pM) and allowed to form tethers for 20 min before unbound beads were removed by
washing with 3–5

100 µl Buﬀer 1.

×

×

×

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

5

Video Microscopy and Optical Tweezers

Time-lapse video images for the experiments using silica beads were acquired using a mod-
iﬁed microscope (Leica DM IRB, 100
oil-immersion objective, (29)). Bead positions were
determined in each video-frame using a cross-correlation type tracking algorithm written
in MatLab (The MathWorks, MA, USA) (21). The laser tweezers experiments were also
performed on this setup.

×

To zoom in (temporally) on the binding step, a diﬀerent microscope was used (Nikon
Eclipse TE300, 60
water immersion objective, (30)). Bead positions were determined by
using a thresholded centroid-tracking method for each of the two de-interlaced video-ﬁelds
that comprise a video-frame, thus obtaining a time resolution of 1/50 s.

×

Brownian Motion Measure

The shortness of the DNA ensured that tethered beads stayed in the focal plane of the
microscope. Motion perpendicular to the surface was not detected. Motion parallel to the
surface, in the (x, y)-plane, was detected using one of the two above mentioned tracking al-
gorithms. Time-series of (x, y)-positions were broken into non-overlapping segments and the
variances, σ2
y, were calculated in each segment. As measure for the Brownian motion
y)/2.
of a tethered bead, we chose the root-mean-square-deviation (RMSD),
Additional measures were applied that allowed us to distinguish between beads tethered by
one, two, or more DNA-molecules (see Appendix A.1 and A.2, and Fig. 6).

x and σ2

x + σ2

(σ2

q

=

B

Establishment of Method

To investigate the nature of the tether between the bead and the coverslip, and the eﬀect of
TBP, we did a series of control experiments:

Tethers

A concentration series of DNA showed that the number of tethered beads varied linearly
with the amount of DNA, with few or no beads tethered when no DNA was present and
saturation at high DNA concentrations. Flow cells prepared without anti-digoxigenin lead
to a >90% decrease in the number of tethers formed, as did pre-blocking the streptavidin
coated beads with saturating amounts of biotin.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

6

Eﬀect of glycerol

The presence of osmolytes, e.g. glycerol and glucose, have been reported to dramatically
increase both binding aﬃnity and bending angle for TBP binding to DNA (12). Since our
protein was stored in a glycerol-rich buﬀer, we decided to investigate the eﬀect of glycerol
on our single-molecule experiments. We added 226 nM TBP in 0.91 M glycerol (1/3 Buﬀer A
and 2/3 Buﬀer 1) to ﬂow cells with beads tethered by either TATA-DNA or control-DNA.
Essentially all of the tethered beads showed large and instant decreases in Brownian RMSD,
making it impossible to distinguish between beads tethered by TATA-DNA and beads teth-
ered by control-DNA. To avoid this eﬀect, all experiments reported hereafter were conducted
at 4–18 mM glycerol. This is within the range of intracellular concentrations found in S.
cerevesiae at diﬀerent growth stages (31), and below the concentration where bend-angles
are expected to be aﬀected (12). The eﬀect of osmolytes on the binding to nonspeciﬁc versus
target DNA was recently reported in detail for the lac repressor system (32).

Protein

TBP not competent in binding DNA might interact with the bead directly by sticking to
the glass and the bead simultaneously, or indirectly through entropic eﬀects (33). Such
interaction would inﬂuence the motion of the bead and hence also the conformations of the
DNA. To clarify whether any such eﬀects were present, we conducted experiments with
heat-inactivated protein: TBP was incubated at 100◦C for 5 min, allowed to cool to room
temperature, and then added at a concentration of 226 nM to microscopy samples with
either TATA-DNA tethers or control-DNA tethers. No change in the Brownian RMSD of
the tethered beads was observed in samples where inactivated TBP was added.

Speciﬁcity of TBP binding

To investigate whether the interaction between TBP and DNA was conﬁned to the TATA-box
of the DNA we used the control-DNA described above. Any eﬀect of TBP on the Brownian
motion of beads tethered by control-DNA would be caused by non-speciﬁc interactions be-
tween TBP and DNA, since no TATA-box is present in this tether. At low concentrations
of TBP (<100 nM) we detected no change in the Brownian RMSD of beads tethered by
control-DNA. At intermediate concentrations (226 nM) a small fraction of beads tethered
by control-DNA showed brief (
10 nm) decreases in Brownian RMSD. At
high concentrations of TBP (678 nM) beads tethered by control-DNA showed abrupt de-
creases in Brownian RMSD, often resulting in the bead becoming irreversibly stuck on the
coverslip—this behavior was also observed for beads tethered by TATA-DNA. We interpret
this latter high-concentration-behavior as the “collapse” of DNA induced by non-speciﬁc

1 min), minor (

∼

∼

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

7

action of the protein, a process also observed in the non-speciﬁc interaction of other proteins
with DNA (34, 35). To collect the data summarized in Fig. 3 we used 226 nM TBP, and for
the data shown in Fig. 4 we worked at 50–100 nM TBP.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Binding and Dissociation Events

B

∼

B ≃

decreased abruptly to

Initially (negative times) no TBP was present and

Figure 2 shows the Brownian RMSD, as a function of time, for a single DNA-tether containing
a TATA-box:
75 nm; 200 s after
50 nm; ﬁnally, after exposure to 1 M KCl and
addition of TBP,
washing with Buﬀer 1, the Brownian RMSD returned to 75 nm. We interpret this type of
behavior as the speciﬁc binding of TBP to the recognition sequence in the middle of the
DNA, concurrent with a decrease in Brownian RMSD (henceforth referred to as a “binding
event”). Addition of a high concentration of salt was followed by an increase in Brownian
RMSD. We interpret this increase as the release of TBP from the TATA-box (henceforth
referred to as a “dissociation event”). The inset in Fig. 2 shows a scatterplot of the positions
visited by the DNA-tethered bead. The recorded positions visited before TBP bends the
DNA-tether are shown as grey points connected by lines. Black dots and lines show the
recorded positions visited after TBP has bound to and bent the DNA-tether. The positions
visited by the bead are isotropically distributed in the (x, y)-plane, both before and after
addition of TBP.

The Brownian RMSD, both before and after addition of TBP, varied from one tether to
the next. In n = 48 observed binding events using DNA-tethered silica beads the Brownian
RMSD decreased from 69
SD). That is, the step-size, the
±
change in Brownian RMSD upon binding by TBP, was 25

12 nm (mean

13 nm to 46

9 nm.

±

±

When ﬂowing in 1 M KCl we consistently, after a brief waiting time, saw

return to
the value it had prior to the addition of TBP. We interpret this as the release of individual
molecules of TBP from single DNA-tethers. Any non-speciﬁc, as well as speciﬁc, interaction
keeping the TBP in contact with the DNA under normal conditions is suppressed at this
concentration of salt because the electrostatic interactions are screened. Thus, once no longer
bound to the TATA-box, the protein is expected to diﬀuse away from the DNA-tether.

B

±

Another way to force TBP oﬀ DNA is by stretching the tether using an externally ap-
plied mechanical force (36). As a proof of principle, experiments were performed using laser
tweezers to pull on the bead, thereby stretching the DNA and forcing the protein oﬀ. These
experiments are described in Appendix A.3. Our observations are in accordance with previ-
ously published results, showing that proteins do not stay as readily attached to stretched

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

8

DNA as to relaxed DNA (37, 38).

Binding kinetics

We investigated the binding kinetics by measuring the time elapsed between the addition of
TBP and the ﬁrst detected decrease in Brownian RMSD. In Fig. 3, a histogram of these
waiting times is shown.
If the binding of protein to DNA has a constant probability of
success per time interval it is a Poisson process. The waiting times are then exponentially
distributed. A ﬁt of a single exponential to the data returned a time-constant of 143 s. The
corresponding second-order association rate constant is ka = [TBP]−1τ −1 = (3.1
×
104 M−1s−1 (mean
SE, n = 45). This value is in rough agreement with values determined
in ensemble experiments performed under similar buﬀer conditions and temperature (ka = 8–
104 M−1s−1 (17, 25)). The diﬀerence, if any, could be caused by a lower than assumed
14
concentration of binding-competent TBP in our experiments—the presence of surfaces is
expected to diminish the amount of TBP through adsorption and denaturation (39, 40).
Furthermore, the protein is very sensitive to repeated freeze/thaw cycles: We kept these to
a minimum, but the experimental protocol meant that a few cycles of freeze/thaw could not
be avoided. Finally, the proximity of the tethered bead to the coverslip gives rise to a force
on the DNA-tether due to excluded volume eﬀects (41). This force is expected to suppress
the rate of association by 25–50% (see Appendix A.4).

0.5)

±

×

±

Dissociation kinetics

Characteristic times for the single-exponential decay of the TBP-AdMLP complex have been
reported in the range from 10 to 170 min (14, 15, 17, 26, 42). The existence of an additional,
fast phase in the dissociation, nearly two orders of magnitude faster than the dominant slow
phase, was revealed only by detailed kinetic studies (17).

We did not determine the kinetics of spontaneous dissociation in our experiments. An
experiment was typically ended after 15–20 min by exchanging the assay-buﬀer with 1M KCl,
and then looking for dissociation events. We did this to conﬁrm that any observed change in
Brownian RMSD was caused by TBP-DNA interactions. Furthermore, tethered beads had
a tendency to get stuck on the coverslip after extended observation, thus terminating any
further observation.

Intermediate States

To further investigate the binding kinetics, we modiﬁed the experimental setup. By using
polystyrene beads of a smaller diameter (0.46 µm instead of 1.0 µm) as well as separately

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

9

analyzing each of the two video-ﬁelds that constitute a video-frame, the temporal resolution
was increased. The TBP concentration was 50–100 nM, i.e., lower than in the experiments
described above. At these protein concentrations approximately 50% of the tethers showed
binding events. The expected equilibrium dissociation constant for the TBP-DNA interaction
is 16 nM, with the buﬀer and temperature conditions used here (17). However, due to the
previously mentioned eﬀects of surfaces, freeze/thaw cycles, and tension in the DNA, the
observed single-molecule dissociation constant is expected to be higher. During 10 out of
11 observed binding events, the Brownian RMSD was observed to decrease and sometimes
increase in a stepwise manner in the presence of TBP, see Fig. 4. The kinetic scheme
suggested in (17) (boxes added by us):

DNA + TBP

H

k1⇀↽

k2

I1

M

k3⇀↽

k4

I2

k5⇀↽

k6

L

DNA:TBPﬁnal

,

predicts the existence of two intermediate states I1 and I2, on the path to the ﬁnal, bound
state. The intermediates and the ﬁnal complex were all postulated to have the same bend
in the DNA and to diﬀer only in their stability (17).

In an experiment where only the ﬁrst and the last state is resolved the forward reaction
can be described by a second-order association rate constant ka that depends on the micro-
scopic rate constants ki, i = 1. . . 6 (17). This rate-constant ka is the one cited above, because
we were not able to discern intermediates using the silica beads (chosen for their high optical
trapping eﬃciency, see Appendix A.3) In the following we distinguish between the observed
classes of Brownian motion, and their interpretation in terms of diﬀerent underlying states
of the TBP-DNA complex.

Three classes of Brownian motion were observed in the histograms

B

as well as histograms of

.
Figure 4 shows three examples of the time-development of
B
Each histogram shows a distribution of the Brownian RMSD with three separate peaks.
Based on such histograms we divided the Brownian motion into three classes. Each of these
three classes must correspond to a diﬀerent conformation of the TBP-DNA complex: i) The
-class is deﬁned from the Brownian RMSD observed before addition of TBP. Thus, the
H
-class corresponds to DNA that is not bound by TBP, but includes also the transient
H
encounter complex that is implicit in all bimolecular reactions.
-class is deﬁned
from the Brownian RMSD observed several minutes after addition of TBP. We identify this
class with a superposition of the ﬁnal bound state and the second intermediate state I2 (see
-class was a surprise. It is deﬁned from the Brownian RMSD
discussion below). iii) The

ii) The

L

M

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

10

that was of a magnitude midway between the
corresponding to the ﬁrst intermediate state I1.

H

L

and

classes. We interpret this class as

Each of these three classes is indicated by a box in the kinetic scheme shown above. The
-class),
SDs, n = 10 individual tethers). The three
10−5,

observed Brownian RMSD in each class was: 71
and 46
classes diﬀer from each other with statistical signiﬁcance:
10−4, and

10−5 using right-tailed t-tests.

-class) respectively (means

with P = 8.3

with P = 1.6

with P = 6.3

-class), 56

10 nm (

7 nm (

7 nm (

M

M

H

H

×

±

±

±

±

=

=

=

L

M

L

×

H

L

×

A fourth class of Brownian motion was observed in the time-series

B

B

: The temporal development of

. However, there is valuable extra information in the time-series of

The histograms do not show a second intermediate with a Brownian RMSD diﬀerent from
that of the three classes already mentioned. Assuming the existence of a second intermediate
state I2, this lack of its observation suggests that the I2 state is structurally similar to the
ﬁnal-bound state and for that reason does not show up as a separate peak in the histograms
compared to the
of
in Fig. 4 shows an initial period of multiple
histograms of
transitions to and from the lower class
[100 : 325]), followed by a quies-
cent period with no transitions (panel A, t
[325 : 650]). That is, we observed two classes
of
with the same Brownian RMSD but with diﬀerent stability. We interpret this as the
existence of two states of the TBP-DNA complex with equally bent DNA, but with diﬀerent
stabilities. We identify the ﬁrst period (fast dynamics) with the second intermediate state
I2, and the second period (slow dynamics) with the ﬁnal-bound state. The rate constants
determined in (17) indicate that the second intermediate should indeed be populated for only
very short periods of time (mean-occupancy-time = (k4 + k5)−1 = 1.2 s), whereas the ﬁnal
state is populated for a much longer time (1/k6 = 282 s). Without a second intermediate we
cannot explain the observed rapid transitions from the

(e.g., panel A, t

class.

L

L

∈

∈

B

B

L

Comparison of rate constants to ensemble values

B

we estimated the two microscopic rate-

From manual inspection of ten time-series of
constants k1 and k3, and the macroscopic rate-constant ka. From the time spent in the
H
class, we found k1 = 1.6
class, after addition of TBP and until a transition to the
±
SE, n = 10), in agreement with the ensemble value (1.59 µM−1s−1,
0.5 µM−1s−1 (mean
16 ms−1
class and found k3 = 54
(17)). From the
30 ms−1,
SE, n = 11) again in reasonable agreement with the ensemble value (
(mean
(17)). Finally, from the waiting time between addition of TBP and until reaching the ﬁnal-
bound state we found ka = (9
SE, n = 8), in agreement with
reported ensemble values (17, 25) and with the value we found using silica beads. The

±
class we measured transitions to the

104 M−1s−1 (mean

±
∼

M

M

3)

±

±

±

×

L

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

11

remaining microscopic rate-constants could not be determined with suﬃcient accuracy, due
to the ﬁnite time-resolution and sample size, to allow comparison with ensemble data.

What are the Structures of the Intermediates?

∼

M

-class and another pair to the

Co-crystal structures of TBP bound to the AdMLP TATA-box show two sharp kinks in the
DNA (7, 11). The ﬁrst kink occurs where two phenylalanine residues intercalate between the
ﬁrst two base-pairs. The second kink occurs where another pair of phenylalanine residues is
inserted between the last two base-pairs (5’-T▽ATAAAA▽G-3’, triangles indicate intercala-
45◦ (7, 11). Based on the crystal
tions). Both sets of intercalations produce DNA-kinks of
structure, the most straightforward interpretation of our data assigns one pair of intercala-
tions to the
-class. The high ﬂexibility of the 5’-end of
the TATA-box implies that this is where the ﬁrst pair of intercalations is most likely to take
place (43), whereas the more rigid 3’-end (A-tract) is expected to delay the second set of
intercalations. We therefore propose the following sequence of events: Step One, leading to
I1, consists of the intercalation of one pair of phenylalanine residues in the upstream, 5’-end,
of the AdMLP. Step Two, leading to I2, consists of the intercalation of the second pair of
phenylalanine residues in the downstream, 3’-end, of the AdMLP. Step Three, leading to
the ﬁnal complex, has no major structural change, but consist of a slight rotation of one
TBP domain relative to the other (11), as well as the formation of van der Waals’ contacts
between the minor groove of the DNA and the concave surface of the TBP, leading to the
stable structure known from crystallography (7, 11).

L

Assuming a three-step pathway there are two other possible assignments for the two
pairs of intercalation events, both of which have previously been proposed: The ﬁrst set of
intercalations takes place in step Two and the second set in step Three (17). Alternatively,
the ﬁrst set of intercalations take place in step One and the second set in step Three (25).
Based on the data presented in this paper we favor the ﬁrst model over the latter two.
However, we emphasize that it is not possible to make any deﬁnitive distinction between
these three models based on the existing data—all assignments of structures to states are
speculation, so far.

What are the Biological Implications of the Intermediates?

From in vitro experiments a picture of the assembly of the transcription pre-initiation com-
plex (PIC) has emerged (44). In this picture, assembly takes place in steps: TBP binds to
DNA, followed by the binding of TFIIB, after which a preformed complex that includes the
polymerase is recruited. Later yet, additional factors bind to the complex. It is possible for
TFIIA to enter the PIC at any point after TBP. Now, assume that the I1-state exists and

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

12

has a single kink in the upstream part of the TATA-box. This will allow TFIIA to bind
stably to the complex, since this factor makes contacts only with upstream DNA-sequences
and TBP (45, 46). On the other hand, TFIIB makes contacts with both upstream and
downstream DNA, as well as the TBP (47). In the one-kink I1-state, geometry dictates that
proximal to the TBP, upstream and downstream DNA is further apart than in the two-kink
I2-state. In the I1-state therefore, the formation of a stable association between TFIIB and
In the I2-state both pairs of phenylalanine interca-
DNA will presumably be suppressed.
lations are in place, the DNA is fully bent, and TFIIB can form the contacts known from
its crystal structure (47). Thus, we arrive at a picture in which assembly of the PIC can
proceed already from the I1-state, and in which the structural conformation of I1 suggests
an ordering of events with TFIIA binding before TFIIB, see Fig. 5 . The kinetics of the
I1-state may facilitate the correct orientation of DNA-bound TBP, as discussed in (17).

CONCLUSIONS

We made single-molecule experiments investigating the speciﬁc binding of a TATA-box Bind-
ing Protein to DNA. In the experiments, beads were attached to a surface by short DNA-
tethers and underwent restricted Brownian motion. When bound by protein the DNA was
bent and the Brownian RMSD of the tethered beads decreased. With this setup we measured
kinetic parameters describing the binding of TBP to DNA.

Intriguingly, changes in Brownian motion during a binding event revealed the existence of
two intermediate states on the binding pathway. This constitutes the ﬁrst direct experimental
corroboration of a model suggested in (17), in which the kinetic pathway of the TBP-DNA
interaction has two such intermediates. By direct observation of individual departures and
their time of occurrence, we measured kinetic constants describing rates to and from the
intermediate states. These rates were in agreement with the model-dependent rates derived
in (17) and thus support the kinetic scheme given there. However, contrary to what is
speculated in (17, 25), we found that the DNA is less bent in the ﬁrst intermediate than in
the ﬁnal complex. This, in turn, might have implications for the order of the assembly of
the transcription pre-initiation complex, favoring the association of TFIIA before TFIIB.

The results presented here prove that it is possible to make time-resolved observations
of single binding and dissociation events of TBP to promoter DNA. This shows that DNA-
distortions that are much less dramatic than e.g. the looping induced by the lac repressor
(48), can be reliably detected using well established single-molecule techniques. Furthermore,
the work presented here opens the door to a number of studies of the system, such as
quantitative measurements of the force and torque dependence of rate-constants describing
the TBP-DNA interaction.

13

(1)

(2)

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

A Appendix

A.1 Brownian Motion Measure

The time-series of (x, y)-positions for the DNA-tethered bead was broken into non-overlapping
segments. Each segment contained a distribution of positions in the (x, y)-plane for which
we calculated the tensor of inertia. In two dimensions, the tensor of inertia is a two-by-two
matrix

˜I =

Ixx
Iyx

(cid:18)

Ixy
Iyy (cid:19)

.

The principal moments are the entries of the diagonalized matrix, and we denote them Imin
and Imax in order of increasing magnitude. They are:

Imin =

Imax =

Ixx + Iyy − q
Ixx + Iyy +

1
2 n
1
2 n
¯y)2, Iyy = 1
N −1

(Ixx −
(Ixx −

Iyy)2 + 4I 2
xy

o

Iyy)2 + 4I 2
xy

,

N

N

N

o

P

P

i=1(yi−

¯x)2, Ixy = Iyx = 1
N −1

q
where Ixx = 1
¯y),
i=1(xi−
N −1
xi and yi are the recorded positions of the tethered bead, and ¯x and ¯y are averages calculated
from the N positions in each segment. The sum of the principal moments equals the sum of
x + σ2
the variances along the x and y axes: Imin + Imax = σ2
y. As a measure for the amplitude
(Imin + Imax)/2, and as a measure
of the Brownian motion of a tethered bead we used
=
for the isotropy of the bead-motion we used the ratio r =
Imin/Imax. Thus,
is the RMSD
for the positions visited by a tethered bead. The isotropy-measure was approximately 50–
100% for a bead with only a single DNA tether. If r was consistently smaller than
50%
we interpreted this as a bead tethered by two DNA molecules, a polystyrene link, or some
other, non-speciﬁc interaction, and discarded the data. An example of non-isotropic motion
is shown in Fig. 6.

i=1(xi−

¯x)(yi−

p
p

P

∼

B

B

A.2 Multiple Tethers

We varied the DNA concentration during sample preparation and observed that the fraction
of beads with multiple tethers increased as a function of DNA concentration. Inspection of
scatter plots of bead positions revealed several classes of motion: At low DNA concentrations,
the vast majority of scatter plots was isotropic; as the DNA concentration was increased some
of the scatter-plots were observed to be anisotropic; see Fig. 6, left panel. At even higher
DNA concentrations, approximately isotropic plots with a small radius began to appear along
with the previously described shapes. These observations are consistent with the formation

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

14

of one, two, or more tethers per bead: One tether gives rise to an isotropic scatter plot, two
tethers yields an elongated, less isotropic, scatter plot, and three or more tethers result in
roughly isotropic scatter plots, but with a small radius. The ease with which multiple tethers
are detected owes to the fact that the DNA tether is short, just two persistence lengths.

An example is shown in Fig. 6: This scatter-plot of bead-positions indicates that two
DNA-molecules tethered the bead. Addition of restriction enzyme lead to a step-wise change
in Brownian motion, with interpretation:
Initially the bead was tethered by two DNA-
molecules. The presence of two tethers broke the rotational symmetry of the setup and
forced the bead to move in a quasi one-dimensional fashion. After 120 s an enzyme cut one
of the DNA tethers and rotational symmetry was restored. After an additional 40 s the
other DNA tether was also cut, and the bead diﬀused away. See movie in Supplementary
Information.

A.3 Laser Tweezers Stretching Experiments

×

Laser tweezers were used to stretch DNA tethers with TBP attached, thereby forcing TBP
oﬀ the DNA tether. For this experiment, ﬂow cells were prepared as described in ‘Methods’,
with streptavidin coated silica beads attached to TATA-DNA tethers. The protocol included
the following steps: i) TBP was ﬂowed in and allowed to bind to the DNA; ii) unbound TBP
100 µl Buﬀer 1; iii) tension was applied to the DNA-
was removed by ﬂowing through 3
tether. The Brownian motion of the tether was measured before and after each of these
steps. Tension was applied by moving the laser back and forth over the tethered bead six
times: The peak-to-peak distance of the motion was 5 µm and the speed was kept constant
at 0.1 µm/s, i.e., this procedure lasted 5 min. The maximum force exerted on the silica bead
4 pN by an escape-method calibration (49).
by the laser tweezers was estimated to be 38
Figure 7 shows how the Brownian motion changed during the laser tweezers experiment.
Before TBP was ﬂowed in (at t = 0 seconds),
was equal to the length of a normal, unbent
B
tether. After TBP was ﬂowed in, it bound to DNA. Unbound TBP was washed out 20 min
after it was ﬂowed in, the Brownian motion was measured, and the laser tweezers were applied
for the 5 min stretching procedure. After application of the laser tweezers,
returned to the
value of an unbent DNA tether. We interpret this length-change as the dissociation of TBP
from DNA. Due to irreversible sticking of the bead to the coverslip, the Brownian motion of
the tethered bead was determined in only four cases after application of the laser tweezers.
Results similar to those shown in Fig. 7 were found in all cases.

±

B

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

A.4 Weak Entropic Forces Tense the DNA-Tether

In tethered-particle-motion-experiments no external forces are applied. However, the conﬁg-
uration of the system gives rise to a weak entropic force that tends to stretch the DNA-tether:
If no tether were present, the bead would diﬀuse away (see movie in supplementary infor-
mation). Since it does not, a force must be acting on the bead. The tether is mediating this
force, hence is under tension. To ﬁnd the tension in the DNA we ﬁrst write down the par-
tition function Z for the system, i.e., the sum of all possible conﬁgurations in which we can
ﬁnd our system (ignoring all gravitational, inertial, electrostatic, and hydrodynamic eﬀects):

Z(ℓ, R) =

g(l) dl

l dθ

l sin θ dφ

ℓ

π/2

2π

Z
0

Z
0

αmax

2π

R dα

R sin α dβ ,

Z
0

Z
0

Z

0

ℓ

Z

0

where αmax = cos−1(1
e−βE(l) is the Boltzmann weight-factor, and E(l) is
the energy associated with the tether extension (see Fig. 8). Integrating over α, β, θ, and φ
we are left with:

l
R cos θ), g(l)

−

∝

Z(ℓ, R) = 2π2R

l3g(l) dl ,

In the Micro-Canonical Ensemble, the particle number and energy of a system is ﬁxed; in
the Canonical Ensemble only the particle number is ﬁxed; in the Grand-Canonical Ensemble
both the the particle number and energy can vary. Our system consists of one DNA-molecule
and one bead, and this number is ﬁxed. However, the system is in thermal contact with the
buﬀer, so its energy can vary. Thus, our system is described by the Canonical Ensemble and
the free energy H of our system is

where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature of the buﬀer solution.
From this expression we directly ﬁnd the tension FDNA by diﬀerentiating with respect to ℓ

If the tether is a stiﬀ rod of length ℓ, g(l)
this case the tension is given by the simple expression

δ(l

−

∝

ℓ), where δ is Dirac’s delta function. In

H =

kBT ln Z ,

−

FDNA =

∂H
∂ℓ

−

=

kBT
Z

∂Z
∂ℓ

.

FDNA = 3

kBT
ℓ

.

15

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

Because work is done against a force when DNA is bent by TBP, the rate of association
is expected to be reduced. Making the approximation that the association rate-constant
decreases as

ka = k0e−FDNA∆ℓ/kBT ,

where k0 is the rate measured in bulk with no external forces applied, we estimate that
the association rate should be reduced by 25–50% due to tension in the DNA-tether (50):
300 bp dsDNA is approximately 15% shorter than its
In bulk, the end-to-end distance of
contour length (51). Thus, when no external force is applied, the end-to-end distance of a
324 bp DNA is expected to be 94 nm, assuming a 0.34 nm axial rise per bp (52). If we model
the DNA as a stiﬀ rod of length ℓ = 94 nm, an 80◦ kink in the middle of the rod, decreases
the end-to-end distance of the rod by ∆ℓ = 22 nm. The actual change in end-to-end distance
is likely to be somewhat smaller due to the ﬂexibility of the DNA and the presence of the
force FDNA. A lower limit of ∆ℓ

7.3 nm is set by FRET experiments (18)

∼

≥

16

(8)

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

17

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

An online supplement to this article can be found by visiting BJ Online at http://www.biophysj.org.

S. cerevisiae TBP was a generous gift from Michael Brenowitz and Elizabeth Jamison. We are
grateful to Stanley Brown for help and advice on constructing the DNA. LabView software for ac-
quisition of de-interlaced images was kindly provided by Francesco Vanzi. We thank M. Brenowitz,
H. Flyvbjerg, J. Gelles, E.-M. Sch¨otz, and I. M. Toli´c-Nørrelykke for comments on the manuscript.
This work was supported by the Danish research councils and the Carlsberg Foundation.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

18

References

282:1877–1882.

1. Lu, H. P., L. Xun, and X. S. Xie. 1998. Single-molecule enzymatic dynamics. Science

2. Neuman, K. C., E. A. Abbondanzieri, R. Landick, J. Gelles, and S. M. Block. 2003.
Ubiquitous transcriptional pausing is independent of RNA polymerase backtracking.
Cell 115:437–447.

3. Tolic-Nørrelykke, S. F., A. M. Engh, R. Landick, and J. Gelles. 2004. Diversity in the
Rates of Transcript Elongation by Single RNA Polymerase Molecules. J. Biol. Chem.
279:3292–3299.

4. Bustamante, C., J. C. Macosko, and G. J. Wuite. 2000. Grabbing the cat by the tail:

manipulating molecules one by one. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1:130–136.

5. Nikolov, D. B., S. H. Hu, J. Lin, A. Gasch, A. Hoﬀmann, M. Horikoshi, N. H. Chua,
R. G. Roeder, and S. K. Burley. 1992. Crystal structure of TFIID TATA-box binding
protein. Nature 360:40–46.

6. Alberts, B., A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raﬀ, K. Roberts, and P. Walter. 2002. Molecular

Biology of the Cell. 4th edition. Garland Publishing.

7. Kim, J. L., D. B. Nikolov, and S. K. Burley. 1993. Crystal structure of TBP recognizing

the minor groove of a TATA element. Nature 365:520–527.

8. Kim, Y., J. H. Geiger, S. Hahn, and P. B. Sigler. 1993. Crystal structure of a yeast

TBP/TATA-box complex. Nature 365:512–520.

9. Lomvardas, S., and D. Thanos. 2001. Nucleosome sliding via TBP DNA binding in vivo.

Cell 106:685–696.

10. Yean, D., and J. Gralla. 1997. Transcription reinitiation rate: a special role for the

TATA box. Mol Cell Biol 17:3809–3816.

11. Kim, J. L., and S. K. Burley. 1994. 1.9 ˚A resolution reﬁned structure of TBP recognizing

the minor groove of TATAAAAG. Nature structural biology 1:638–653.

12. Wu, J., K. M. Parkhurst, R. M. Powell, and L. J. Parkhurst. 2001. DNA sequence-
dependent diﬀerences in TATA-binding protein-induced DNA bending in solution are
highly sensitive to osmolytes. J Biol Chem 276:14623–14627.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

19

13. Hahn, S., S. Buratowski, P. A. Sharp, and L. Guarente. 1989. Yeast TATA-binding
protein TFIID binds to TATA elements with both consensus and nonconsensus DNA
sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86:5718–5722.

14. Hoopes, B. C., J. F. LeBlanc, and D. K. Hawley. 1992. Kinetic analysis of yeast TFIID-
TATA box complex formation suggests a multi-step pathway. J Biol Chem 267:11539–
11547.

15. Perez-Howard, G. M., P. A. Weil, and J. M. Beechem. 1995. Yeast TATA binding pro-
tein interaction with DNA: ﬂuorescence determination of oligomeric state, equilibrium
binding, on-rate, and dissociation kinetics. Biochemistry 34:8005–8017.

16. Parkhurst, K. M., M. Brenowitz, and L. J. Parkhurst. 1996. Simultaneous binding and
bending of promoter DNA by the TATA binding protein: real time kinetic measurements.
Biochemistry 35:7459–7465.

17. Parkhurst, K. M., R. M. Richards, M. Brenowitz, and L. J. Parkhurst. 1999. Intermediate
species possessing bent DNA are present along the pathway to formation of a ﬁnal TBP-
TATA complex. J Mol Biol 289:1327–1341.

18. Wu, J., K. M. Parkhurst, R. M. Powell, M. Brenowitz, and L. J. Parkhurst. 2001.
DNA bends in TATA-binding protein-TATA complexes in solution are DNA sequence-
dependent. J Biol Chem 276:14614–14622.

19. Schafer, D. A., J. Gelles, M. P. Sheetz, and R. Landick. 1991. Transcription by single
molecules of RNA polymerase observed by light microscopy. Nature 352:444–448.

20. Yin, H., R. Landick, and J. Gelles. 1994. Tethered particle motion method for studying

transcript elongation by a single RNA polymerase molecule. Biophys J 67:2468–2478.

21. Tolic-Nørrelykke, S. F. 2002. A Single Molecule Study of RNA Polymerase and TATA-

box Binding Protein. Phd thesis, Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen University.

22. Singer, V. L., C. R. Wobbe, and K. Struhl. 1990. A wide variety of DNA sequences
can functionally replace a yeast TATA element for transcriptional activation. Genes Dev
4:636–645.

23. Starr, D. B., B. C. Hoopes, and D. K. Hawley. 1995. DNA bending is an important
component of site-speciﬁc recognition by the TATA binding protein. J Mol Biol 250:434–
446.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

20

24. Wobbe, C. R., and K. Struhl. 1990. Yeast and human TATA-binding proteins have
nearly identical DNA sequence requirements for transcription in vitro. Mol Cell Biol
10:3859–3867.

25. Powell, R. M., K. M. Parkhurst, M. Brenowitz, and L. J. Parkhurst. 2001. Marked
stepwise diﬀerences within a common kinetic mechanism characterize TATA-binding
protein interactions with two consensus promoters. J Biol Chem 276:29782–29791.

26. Hoopes, B. C., J. F. LeBlanc, and D. K. Hawley. 1998. Contributions of the TATA box
sequence to rate-limiting steps in transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. J Mol
Biol 277:1015–1031.

27. Petri, V., M. Hsieh, and M. Brenowitz. 1995. Thermodynamic and kinetic character-
ization of the binding of the TATA binding protein to the adenovirus E4 promoter.
Biochemistry 34:9977–9984.

28. Daugherty, M. A., M. Brenowitz, and M. G. Fried. 1999. The TATA-binding protein
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae oligomerizes in solution at micromolar concentrations to
form tetramers and octamers. J Mol Biol 285:1389–1399.

29. Oddershede, L., S. Grego, S. F. Nørrelykke, and K. Berg-Sørensen. 2001. Optical Tweez-

ers: Probing Biological Surfaces. Probe Microscopy 2:129–137.

30. Capitanio, M., G. Romano, R. Ballerini, M. Giuntini, F. S. Pavone, D. Dunlap, and
L. Finzi. 2002. Calibration of optical tweezers with diﬀerential interference contrast
signals. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 73:1687–1696.

31. Cronwright, G. R., J. M. Rohwer, and B. A. Prior. 2002. Metabolic Control Analysis of
Glycerol Synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:4448–4456.

32. Fried, M. G., D. F. Stickle, K. V. Smirnakis, C. Adams, D. MacDonald, and P. Lu. 2002.
Role of Hydration in the Binding of lac Repressor to DNA. J. Biol. Chem. 277:50676–
50682.

33. Crocker, J. C., J. A. Matteo, A. D. Dinsmore, and A. G. Yodh. 1999. Entropic Attraction
and Repulsion in Binary Colloids Probed with a Line Optical Tweezer. Phys Rev Lett
82:4352–4355.

34. Ali, B. M., R. Amit, I. Braslavsky, A. B. Oppenheim, O. Gileadi, and J. Stavans. 2001.
Compaction of single DNA molecules induced by binding of integration host factor (IHF).
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:10658–10663.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

21

35. Brewer, L. R., R. Friddle, A. Noy, E. Baldwin, S. S. Martin, M. Corzett, R. Balhorn,
and R. J. Baskin. 2003. Packaging of Single DNA Molecules by the Yeast Mitochondrial
Protein Abf2p. Biophys J 85:2519–2524.

36. Marko, J. F., and E. D. Siggia. 1997. Driving proteins oﬀ DNA using applied tension.

Biophys J 73:2173–2178.

37. Harada, Y., T. Funatsu, K. Murakami, Y. Nonoyama, A. Ishihama, and T. Yanagida.
1999. Single-molecule imaging of RNA polymerase-DNA interactions in real time. Bio-
phys J 76:709–715.

38. Dixit, S., M. Singh-Zocchi, J. Hanne, and G. Zocchi. 2005. Mechanics of Binding of a

Single Integration-Host-Factor Protein to DNA. Phys Rev Lett 94:118101.

39. Edwards, R. A., and R. E. Huber. 1992. Surface denaturation of proteins: the thermal
inactivation of beta-galactosidase (Escherichia coli) on wall-liquid surfaces. Biochem Cell
Biol 70:63–69.

40. Craig, D. B., E. A. Arriaga, J. C. Y. Wong, L. H., and N. J. Dovichi. 1996. Studies
on Single Alkaline Phosphatase Molecules: Reaction Rate and Activation Energy of a
Reaction Catalyzed by a Single Molecule and the Eﬀect of Thermal Denaturation-The
Death of an Enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118:5245–5253.

41. Segall, D. E., P. C. Nelson, and R. Phillips. 2005. Excluded-Volume Eﬀects in Tethered-

Particle Experiments: Bead Size Matters. arXiv:q-bio.BM :050802.

42. Kuddus, R., and M. C. Schmidt. 1993. Eﬀect of the non-conserved N-terminus on the
DNA binding activity of the yeast TATA binding protein. Nucleic Acids Res 21:1789–
1796.

43. Juo, Z. S., T. K. Chiu, P. M. Leiberman, I. Baikalov, A. J. Berk, and R. E. Dickerson.

1996. How proteins recognize the TATA box. J Mol Biol 261:239–254.

44. Roeder, R. G. 1996. The role of general initiation factors in transcription by RNA

polymerase II. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 21:327–335.

45. Geiger, J. H., S. Hahn, S. Lee, and P. Sigler. 1996. Crystal structure of the yeast

TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Science 272:830–836.

46. Tan, S., Y. Hunziker, D. F. Sargent, and T. J. Richmond. 1996. Crystal structure of a

yeast TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Nature 381:127–151.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

22

47. Nikolov, D. B., H. Chen, E. D. Halay, A. A. Usheva, K. Hisatake, D. K. Lee, R. G.
Roeder, and S. K. Burley. 1995. Crystal structure of TFIIB-TBP-TATA-element ternary
complex. Nature 377:119–128.

48. Finzi, L., and J. Gelles. 1995. Measurement of lactose repressor-mediated loop formation

and breakdown in single DNA molecules. Science 267:378–380.

49. Svoboda, K., and S. M. Block. 1994. Biological applications of optical forces. Ann. Rev.

Biophys. Biomol. Struct 23:247–285.

50. Evans, E. 1998. Energy landscapes of biomolecular adhesion and receptor anchoring at

interfaces explored with dynamic force spectroscopy. Faraday Discuss. 111:1–16.

51. Wilhelm, J., and E. Frey. 1996. Radial Distribution Function of Semiﬂexible Polymers.

Physical Review Letters 77:2581–2584.

52. Yanagi, K., G. G. Prive, and R. E. Dickerson. 1991. Analysis of local helix geometry in
three B-DNA decamers and eight dodecamers. Journal of Molecular Biology 217:210–
214.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1

23

Scale-drawing of 0.46 µm bead tethered to surface by 324 bp of DNA, side view. The full-line
circles illustrate the extremal positions the bead can take when the DNA is straight. The
dashed-line circles show the extremal positions the bead can take when the DNA is modeled
as two stiﬀ rods at right angles to each other. The diﬀerence between the positions of the
center of the bead at the two extrema is nearly 100 nm. The Brownian RMSD is a measure
for the variance in the bead’s x, y-positions. Thus, the change in Brownian RMSD upon
bending of the DNA will be less than the change in extremal positions.

Example of TBP binding to and dissociating from TATA-DNA. Main panel: Time-series
of the Brownian RMSD of a DNA-tethered 1.0 µm silica bead. Discontinuities of the time-
series, due to buﬀer exchange, are indicated by white spaces on the time-axis. Line: Brownian
RMSD calculated in non-overlapping 2 s (50 video-frames) windows. 30 µl 226 nM TBP was
ﬂowed through at t = 0 (ﬁrst arrow); the DNA-tether was bound by TBP after t = 210 s;
30 µl 1 M KCl was ﬂowed through at t = 760 s; 300 µl Buﬀer 1 was ﬂowed through at t = 850 s,
around which time the dissociation took place (second arrow). Inset: Positions visited by
the tethered bead before (grey, t
[210 : 270] s) TBP
bound to the DNA. The time of binding was determined from the time-series of
(main
panel).

[112 : 210] s) and after (black, t

∈

∈

B

Figure 2

Figure 3

Distribution of waiting times between addition of TBP and observation of a binding event.
Abscissa: time in seconds. Ordinate: number of observed events. A total of 48 binding
events were observed in 29 individual experiments under identical conditions of 226 nM
SD; interval [20 : 25] ◦C), using
TBP in Buﬀer 1 at room-temperature (22.1
TATA-DNA tethered silica beads. The dynamics of the spatial distribution of TBP in the
ﬂow cell was modeled as a diﬀusive process with reﬂecting boundary conditions: Setting the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of TBP to 50 µm2/s, the height of the ﬂow cell to 160 µm, and the initial
distribution of TBP to a delta-function, the distribution of TBP in the ﬂow cell was found to
60 s (indicated by vertical dashed line). We proceeded by excluding
be homogeneous after
from further analysis all events in the ﬁrst 60 s (n =3). A maximum likelihood, single-
exponential ﬁt returned a characteristic time of τ = 143
SE). White circles
show expected counts in each bin, assuming an exponential distribution. Error-bars shown

1.5 ◦C, mean

22 s (mean

≤

±

±

±

±

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

24

are expected standard deviations, calculated assuming a binomial distribution of counts in
each bin. The maximum likelihood ﬁt does not depend on the bin-width, because the ﬁt was
done directly to the observed waiting times.

Figure 4

Direct observation of sub-steps on the TBP-DNA binding-pathway. Panels A1, B1, and C1
show 3 examples (n = 10 observed) of the temporal development of the Brownian RMSD
calculated in non-overlapping 1 s windows for TATA-DNA tethered 0.46 µm polystyrene
B
beads. 100 µl TBP was ﬂowed through at time t = 0 (indicated by arrows). Panels A2,
formed from the data shown in panels A1, B1, and C1,
B2, and C2 show histograms of
respectively. Three peaks are present in each of the histograms, corresponding to three
classes of Brownian motion. Horizontal dashed lines in the time-series-panels indicate the
positions of the peaks in the histograms. Multiple back and forth transitions, from the
diﬀerent classes of Brownian motion, can be seen in all three examples. A-panels: 100 nM
[50 : 400] s. B-panels: 68 nM TBP, histogram
TBP, histogram shows
shows
in the
B
interval t

[0 : 100] s. C-panels: 68 nM TBP, histogram shows

B
in the interval t
[0 : 290] s.

in the interval t

∈

∈

B

B

∈

Figure 5

Figure 6

Suggested step-wise order of events for the binding of TBP, TFIIA, and TFIIB to DNA.
Starting in the upper left corner, TBP binds to the TATA-box and the ﬁrst pair of pheny-
lalanines are intercalated in the 5’ end of the TATA-box, producing a 45◦ kink. This cor-
responds to the I1 state. Starting from this state TFIIA can bind. Next, the second pair
of phenylalanines are intercalated, in the 3’ end of the TATA-box, producing another 45◦
kink. This conformation corresponds to the I2 and ﬁnal-bound state. In this conformation
the DNA is brought close enough together that TFIIB can bind to it.

Time series of Brownian motion for a 1 µm diameter silica bead tethered by control-DNA, in
the presence of Xho1. Left panel: Scatter-plot showing principal axes. Right panel: The
square-root of the two principal moments, √Imax and √Imin, are shown in grey and black,
respectively. During the ﬁrst 120 s the motion of the bead was highly anisotropic (isotropy
measure r =39%). After 120 s, the motion of the bead was isotropic (r =94%); the bead
released from the surface after 160 seconds.

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

25

Time-evolution of Brownian RMSD (calculated in non-overlapping 2 s windows) during laser
tweezers experiment. The stepwise binding of TBP to DNA started approximately 80 s after
30 µl 226 nM TBP was ﬂowed in. Approximately 20 min after addition and binding of TBP,
the tweezers were used to pull the silica bead horizontally, thus stretching the tether. After
this stretching,
returned to its original value, suggesting that the protein was forced oﬀ
the DNA.

B

Figure 7

Figure 8

A point P on the surface of a rigid sphere of radius R is attached to a point O on a ﬂat
surface by a tether of contour length L. The only constraints on our system are that the
L. θ is the angle
sphere stays in the upper half-plane and that the distance
between ~OP and the surface normal, and α is the angle between ~P C and the surface normal.
Two more angles are needed to fully determine the conﬁguration of the system: φ describes
the rotation of ~OP around the surface normal through O, and β describes the rotation of
~P C around the surface normal through P . Rotation of the sphere around ~P C contributes
an additional degree of freedom, but this degree of freedom is independent of the other
parameters, and does not change in our experiment.

~OP

= l

≤

|

|

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

26

Figure 1:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

27

Figure 2:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

28

Figure 3:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

29

Figure 4:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

30

Figure 5:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

31

Figure 6:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

32

Figure 7:

Stepwise TBP-DNA interaction

33

Figure 8:

