6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interplay between function and structure in complex networks

Timothy C. Jarrett+, Douglas J. Ashton∗, Mark Fricker∗∗ and Neil F. Johnson+
+Physics Department, Oxford University, Oxford, OX1 3PU, U.K.
∗Physics Department, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, U.K. and
∗∗Department of Plant Sciences, Oxford University, Oxford, OX1 3RB, U.K.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We show that abrupt structural transitions can arise in functionally optimal networks, driven by
small changes in the level of transport congestion. Our results oﬀer an explanation as to why so
many diverse species of network structure arise in Nature (e.g. fungal systems) under essentially the
same environmental conditions. Our ﬁndings are based on an exactly solvable model system which
mimics a variety of biological and social networks. We then extend our analysis by introducing
a novel renormalization scheme involving cost motifs, to describe analytically the average shortest
path across multiple-ring-and-hub networks. As a consequence, we uncover a ‘skin eﬀect’ whereby
the structure of the inner multi-ring core can cease to play any role in terms of determining the
average shortest path across the network.
PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge, 05.70.Jk, 64.60.Fr, 89.75.Hc

I.

INTRODUCTION

There is much interest in the structure of the com-
plex networks which are observed throughout the nat-
ural, biological and social sciences [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14]. The interplay between structure and
function in complex networks has become a major re-
search topic in physics, biology, informatics, and soci-
ology [3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12]. For example, the very
same links, nodes and hubs that help create short-cuts
in space for transport may become congested due to in-
creased traﬃc yielding an increase in transit time [6]. Un-
fortunately there are very few analytic results available
concerning network congestion and optimal pathways in
real-world networks [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].

The physics community, in particular, hopes that a
certain universality might exist among such networks.
On the other hand, the biological community knows all
too well that a wide diversity of structural forms can
arise under very similar environmental conditions.
In
medicine, cancer tumors found growing in a given organ
can have very diﬀerent vascular networks. In plant biol-
ogy, branching networks of plant roots or aerial shoots
from diﬀerent species can co-exist in very similar en-
vironments, yet look remarkably diﬀerent in terms of
their structure. Mycelial fungi [15] provide a particu-
larly good example, as can be seen in Figs. 1(a) and
1(b) which show diﬀerent species of fungi forming net-
works with varying degrees of lateral connections (anas-
tomoses). Not only do fungi represent a wide class
of anastomosing, predominantly planar, transport net-
works, but they have close parallels in other domains,
including vascular networks, road and rail transport sys-
tems, river networks and manufacturing supply chains.
But given that such biological systems could adapt their
structures over time in order to optimize their functional
properties, why do we observe such diﬀerent structures
as shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) under essentially the
same environmental conditions?

In this paper, we provide exact analytic results for

the eﬀects of congestion costs in networks with a com-
bined ring-and-star topology [13]. We thus address the
question above by showing that quite diﬀerent network
structures can indeed share very similar values of the
functional characteristics relevant to growth. We also
show that small changes in the level of network conges-
tion can induce abrupt changes in the optimal network
structure. In addition to the theoretical interest of such
phase-like structural transitions, our results suggest that
a natural diversity of network structures should arise un-
der essentially the same environmental conditions – as
is indeed observed for systems such as fungi (see Figs.
1(a) and (b)). We then extend this analysis by introduc-
ing a novel renormalization scheme involving cost motifs,
to describe analytically the average shortest path across
multiple-ring-and-hub networks. We note that although
some of the ﬁndings of Ref.
[10] appear similar to the
present ones in terms of the wording of the conclusions,
the context and structures considered are quite diﬀerent
– in addition, the results in the present paper are analytic
and are obtained in a completely diﬀerent way.

As a consequence of the present analysis, we uncover
an interesting ‘skin eﬀect’ whereby the structure of the
inner multi-ring core can cease to play any functional
role in terms of determining the average shortest path
across the network. The implication is that any food
that is found on the perimeter of the network structure,
can be transported across the structure without having to
go through the central core – and as a result, the network
structure in the central core may begin to die out because
of a lack of nutrient. Interestingly, there is experimental
evidence that real fungal networks [15] do indeed exhibit
such a skin-eﬀect. Other real-world examples in which
an inner network core ceases to be fed by nutrients being
supplied from the perimeter, and hence dies out, include
the vasculature inside the necrotic (i.e. dead) region in a
growing cancer tumour, and the inner core of a growing
coral reef.

Our analytically-solvable model system is inspired by
the transport properties of real fungi (see Fig. 1(c)).

A primary functional property of an organism such as
a fungus, is to distribute nutrients eﬃciently around its
network structure in order to survive. Indeed, fungi need
to transport food (carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and phospho-
rous (P)) eﬃciently from a localized source encountered
on their perimeter across the structure to other parts of
the organism. In the absence of any transport congestion
eﬀects, the average shortest path would be through the
center – however the fungus faces the possibility of ‘food
congestion’ in the central region since the mycelial tubes
carrying the food do not have inﬁnite capacity. Hence the
organism must somehow ‘decide’ how many pathways to
build to the center in order to ensure nutrients get passed
across the structure in a reasonably short time. In other
words, the fungus – either in real-time or as a result of
evolutionary forces – chooses a particular connectivity to
the central hub. But why should diﬀerent fungi (Figs.
1(a) and (b)) choose such diﬀerent solutions under es-
sentially the same environmental conditions? Which one
corresponds to the optimal structure? Here we will show
that, surprisingly, various structurally distinct fungi can
each be functionally optimal at the same time.

Figure 1(d) shows our model’s ring-and-hub structure.
Although only mimicking the network geometry of nat-
urally occurring fungi (Figs. 1(a) and (b)), it is actually
a very realistic model for current experiments in both
fungal and slime-mold systems.
In particular, experi-
ments have already been carried out with food-sources
placed at peripheral nodes for fungi (Fig. 1(e)) and slime-
mold [16] with the resulting network structures showing
a wide range of distinct and complex morphologies [16].
We use the term ‘hub’ very generally, to describe a cen-
tral portion of the network where many paths may pass
but where signiﬁcant transport delays might arise. Such
delays represent an eﬀective cost for passing through the
hub. In practice, this delay may be due to (i) direct con-
gestion at some central junction, or (ii) transport through
some central portion which itself has a network structure
(e.g. the inner ring of the Houston road network in Fig.
1(f)). We return to this point later on.

II. THE MODEL

A. The Dorogovtsev-Mendes model of a
Small-World network

We begin by introducing the Dorogovtsev-Mendes
(hereon DM) model [14] of a small world network. The
DM-model consists of a ring-hub structure, and places
n nodes around a ring, each connected to their nearest
neighbour with a link of unit length. Links around the
ring can either be directed in the “directed” model or
undirected in the “undirected” model. With a proba-
bility p each node is connected to the central hub by a
link of length 1
2 , and these links are undirected in both
models.

We may proceed to solve this model, as in [14], by ﬁrst

2

(a) Typical network for the fungus Resinicium bi-
FIG. 1:
colour. (b) Typical network for the fungus Hypholoma fas-
ciculare. This network has a far denser set of connections
than (a), yet both are able to thrive in the same environmen-
tal conditions. (c) Schematic representation of the nutrient
ﬂows through a mycelial fungus. The food resources (carbon
(C), nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P)) need to be transported
eﬃciently across the entire structure. (d) Our analytically-
solvable model showing radial connections from peripheral
nodes to an eﬀective hub. (e) Mycelial fungus Phanerochaete
velutina after 98 days growing from a central hub-like re-
source. From day 48, the system is supplied with pairs of
fresh 4 cm3 wood resources at 10 day intervals. The resultant
network has both radial and circumferential connections, as
in our model (Fig. 1(d)). (f) The man-made road network in
Houston, showing a complicated inner ‘hub’ which contains
an embedded inner ring.

ﬁnding the probability P (ℓ, m) that the shortest path be-
tween any two nodes on the ring is ℓ, given that they are
separated around the ring by length m. These expres-
sions can be found explicitly for both directed and undi-
rected models. Summing over all m for a given ℓ and
1) yields the probability P (ℓ) that the
dividing by (n
shortest path between two randomly selected nodes is of
length ℓ. The average value for the shortest path across
n−1
the network is then ¯ℓ =
ℓ=1 ℓP (ℓ). For the undirected

−

P

Q(z, ρ) where ρ

model, the expressions are more cumbersome due to the
additional possible paths with equal length. However, if
ℓ/n, a
we deﬁne nP (ℓ)
simple relationship may be found between the undirected
and directed models in the limit n
0, that
is Qundir(z, ρ) = 2Qdir(2z, ρ). Thus the “directed” and
“undirected” models only diﬀer in this limit by a factor
of two: z

2z, with z now running from 0 to 1/2.

pn and z

with p

→ ∞

→

≡

≡

≡

→

B. The addition of congestion costs

We generalize the DM model of section II A to include
a cost, c, for passing through the central hub[13]. This
cost c is expressed as an additional path-length, however
it could also be expressed as a time delay or reduction in
ﬂow-rate for transport and supply-chain problems. We
then consider a number of cases for the structure of such
a cost, e.g. a constant cost c where c is independent
c
of how many connections the hub already has, i.e.
is independent of how ‘busy’ the hub is; a linear cost c
where c grows linearly with the number of connections
to the hub, and hence varies as ρ
np; or nonlinear
cost c where c grows according to a number of nonlinear
cost-functions.

≡

For a general, non-zero cost c that is independent of ℓ
and m, we can write (for a network with directed links):

P (ℓ, ℓ ≤ c) =

1
n − 1

P (ℓ < m, ℓ > c) = (ℓ − c)p2(1 − p)ℓ−c−1

(1)

(2)

P (ℓ = m, ℓ > c) = 1 − p2

(i − c)(1 − p)(i−c)−1 (3)

ℓ−c−1

i−c=1
X

Performing the summation gives:

P (ℓ = m, ℓ > c) = (1 + (ℓ

c

1)p)(1

−

−

−

The shortest path distribution is hence:

1
n−1
1
n−1

1 + (ℓ − c − 1)p

P (ℓ) = 



h
+(n − 1 − ℓ)(ℓ − c)p2

(1 − p)ℓ−c−1

∀ ℓ > c

i

Introducing the variable γ

Using the same analysis for undirected links yields a
simple relationship between the directed and undirected
c
n with z and ρ
models.
as before, we may deﬁne nP (ℓ)
Q(z, γ, ρ) and hence
that Qundir(z, γ, ρ) =
ﬁnd in the limit p
2Qdir(2z, 2γ, ρ). For a ﬁxed cost, not dependent on net-
work size or the connectivity, this analysis is straightfor-
ward. Paths of length l
c are prevented from using
the central hub, while for l > c the distribution P (l) is
similar to that of Ref. [14].

→ ∞

0, n

→

≡

≡

≤

p)ℓ−c−1

(4)

∀ ℓ ≤ c

III. RESULTS FOR LINEAR AND QUADRATIC
COST-FUNCTIONS

For linear costs, dependent on network size and con-
nectivity, we can show that there exists a minimum value

3

FIG. 2: Our model network showing transport pathways
through the central hub (connections of length 1/2 denoted
by thick lines) and around the ring (connections of length 1
denoted by thin lines). Graph shows average shortest path
length between any two nodes in a n = 1000 node ring, with
a cost-per-connection to the hub of k = 1. There is an opti-
mal value for the number of connections (ρ ≡ pn ≈ 44) such
that the average shortest path length ¯ℓ is a minimum. We
denote this minimal shortest path length as ¯ℓ ≡ ¯ℓ|min.

FIG. 3: Minimal shortest path length ¯ℓ|min (i.e. minimum
value of ¯ℓ) as obtained from Eq. (5). (a) Optimal number of
connections ρ ≡ pn as a function of the cost-per-connection k
to the hub. Results are shown for n = 1000 and n = 10000.
(b) Optimal number of connections ρ as a function of the
network size. Results are shown for k = 2 and k = 4.

of the average shortest path ¯ℓ as a function of the connec-
tivity to the central hub. We denote this minimal path
length as ¯ℓ
¯ℓ
min. Such a minimum is in stark contrast
|
to the case of zero cost per connection, where the value of
¯ℓ would just decrease monotonically towards one with an
increasing number of connections to the hub. The aver-
n−1
age shortest path can be calculated from ¯ℓ =
ℓ=1 ℓP (ℓ)

≡

P

from which we obtain

¯ℓ(p, n, c) =

(1 − p)n−c

3 + (n − 2 − c)p

(cid:16)
p2(n − 1)

(cid:17)

p

2 − 2c + 2n − (c − 1)(c − n)p

− 3

+

(cid:16)

p2(n − 1)

(cid:17)

+

c(c − 1)
2(n − 1)

(5)

Figure 2 shows the functional form of ¯ℓ with a cost
of 1 unit path-length per connection to the hub (i.e.
c = knp = kρ, with k = 1). The optimal number of con-
nections in order that ¯ℓ is a minimum is approximately
44 and depends on n. The corresponding minimal short-
est path ¯ℓ
min is approximately 85. Figure 3(a) shows
|
analytic results for the optimal number of connections
which yield the minimal shortest path ¯ℓ
min, as a func-
|
tion of the cost per connection for a ﬁxed network size.
Figure 3(b) shows analytic results for the optimal num-
ber of connections which yield the minimal shortest path
¯ℓ
min, as a function of the network size for a ﬁxed cost
|
per connection to the hub.

To gain some insight into the underlying physics, we
make some approximations that will allow us to calculate
the average shortest path analytically for a given cost-
function that is valid within the approximations. We
begin by noting that for large n, or more importantly
c, the ﬁrst term in Eq. (5) may be written as
large n
e−ρ. With the condition that the cost for
(1
→
using the hub isn’t too high, the region containing the
¯ℓ
minimum shortest path ¯ℓ
min will be at suﬃciently
|
≡
high ρ to ignore this term, yielding a simpliﬁed form for
the average shortest path:

−
p)n−c

−

p

2 − 2c + 2n − (c − 1)(c − n)p

− 3

p2(n − 1)

i

+

c(c − 1)
2(n − 1)

.

(6)

¯ℓ ≈

h

We may then proceed by considering that, for a ﬁxed
network size and a cost that depends on connectivity, to
locate the minima we diﬀerentiate Eq. (6) with respect
to p and set the result equal to zero and obtain

−

2
p2 (1−c+n)−

2
p

dc
dp

dc
dp

−c

+(1+n)

+

= 0. (7)

dc
dp

6
p3 −

1
2

dc
dp

We substitute into this expression the scaled connectiv-
ity, ρ

np, and it then becomes

1 − c + n

=

n +

− c −

+ 6.

(8)

ρ3
n2

 

1
2

2n
ρ !

dc
dρ

(cid:16)
In the limit of n
both sides of Eq. (8) are those in n leaving

c and ρ

≫

≫

(cid:17)

1, the dominant terms on

≡

2ρ
n

dc
dρ

=

2n
ρ2 .

From this expression we may obtain the location of the
minimum of the average shortest path for a given cost-
function for which the approximations are valid. For ex-
ample, in the case of linear cost c = knρ, we ﬁnd that for
2n
k .

the optimum number of connections we have ρ =

(9)

q

4

(10)

(11)

≈

Using k = 1 and n = 1000, we obtain the value of the op-
timum number of connections as 44.7, which agrees well
with the exact value calculated from Eq. (5). Inserting
the optimum value for ρ into Eq. (6) and keeping the
largest terms we obtain ¯ℓ
√8kn, which also agrees well
with the exact result.

We now consider quadratic cost-functions, c = kρ2.
This could be a physically relevant cost-function when
the cost for using the central hub depends on the number
of connected pairs created, rather than the number of di-
rect connections made to the hub. Solving for the optimal
n
k , cor-
number of connections using Eq. (9) gives ρ
responding to a minimum average shortest path length
¯ℓ
3√27kn2. One is also able to consider a cost depen-
dant on a general exponent c = kρα. This gives for the
optimal number of connections

p

≈

≈

3

1
1+α

.

ρ

≈

(cid:18)

2n
αk

(cid:19)

¯ℓ
min
|

∝

1
1+α n

α
1+α .

k

The corresponding average shortest path is a more com-
plicated expression, but it scales with k and n as

This analysis can be adapted to the ‘undirected’ model
by using the usual scaling relation between the models
that was described above. For the case of linear costs
on an undirected network one gets an optimal number of
n
k and a minimum average shortest
connections at ρ
path of ¯ℓ
min
|

≈
√4kn.
p

≈

IV. RESULTS FOR NON-LINEAR
COST-FUNCTIONS

We now consider the functional form of ¯ℓ for non-
linear cost functions, speciﬁcally a cubic cost-function
and a ‘step’ cost-function. We show that for these
non-linear cost-functions, a novel and highly non-trivial
phase-transition can arise. First we consider the case of
a general cubic cost-function:

c(ρ) = Aρ3 + Bρ2 + Cρ + D,

(12)

where ρ is the scaled probability, ρ = pn and A, B, C, D
∈
R.
In order to demonstrate the richness of the phase
transition and yet still keep a physically reasonable
model, we choose the minimum in this cubic function to
be a stationary point. Hence the cost-function remains a
monotonically increasing function, but features a regime
of intermediate connectivities over which congestion costs
remain essentially ﬂat (like the ‘ﬁxed charge’ for London’s
congestion zone). Since we are primarily concerned with
an optimization problem, we can set the constant D = 0.
Hence

c(ρ) = Aρ3

3Arρ2 + 3Ar2ρ,

(13)

−

5

may estimate the approximate value of the cubic function
parameter, A, that will lead to two minima in the average
shortest path distribution. We proceed by solving Eq.
(9) with our cubic function as the cost-function:

ρ2 dc

dρ −

2n = 3A(ρ2

2rρ + r2)ρ2

2n = 0 .

(14)

−

−

The solutions to this equation are then stationary points
in ¯ℓ, and at least three stationary points are required for
the distribution to have multiple minima. We thus have
√7)r. Inserting the central value,
ρ = 0 and ρ = (3
(14) gives an approximate lower
(3
bound for A:

±
√7)r, into Eq.

−

Amin

n
r4 .

∼

(15)

Although this calculation does not give us the value of
Acrit, it is expected (and results conﬁrm such a conjec-
ture) to be close to Amin. From this analysis, we can also
see that both the location of the minima and the distance
between them is governed by the cubic parameter r.

We have checked that similar structural transitions can
arise for higher-order nonlinear cost-functions. In partic-
ular we demonstrate here the extreme case of a ‘step’
function, where the cost is ﬁxed until the connectivity
to the central hub portion reaches a particular threshold
value. As an illustration, we consider the particular case:

c(ρ, r0) = 50

Sgn(ρ

ir0) + 50

(16)

−

,
(cid:19)

50

(cid:18)

i=1
X

−

1, 0, 1 depending on whether x is nega-
where Sgn(x) =
tive, zero, or positive respectively, and r0 determines the
frequency of the jump in the cost. Figure 5 (top) shows
the average shortest path ¯ℓ for this step cost-function
(Fig. 5 (bottom)) as ρ and r0 are varied. A multitude of
structurally-distinct yet optimal network conﬁgurations
emerge. As r0 decreases, the step-size in the cost-function
decreases and the cost-function itself begins to take on a
linear form – accordingly, the behavior of ¯ℓ tends towards
that of a linear cost model with a single identiﬁable min-
imum. Most importantly, we can see that once again a
gradual change in the cost parameter leads to an abrupt
change in the structure of the optimal (i.e. minimum ¯ℓ)
network.

V. THE RING-HUB STRUCTURE AS A
NETWORK MOTIF

We have allowed our ring-and-hub networks to seek
optimality by modifying their radial connectivity while
maintaining a single ring. Relaxing this constraint to
allow for transitions to multiple-ring structures yields a
number of related ﬁndings. In particular, allowing both
the radial connectivity and the number of rings to change
yields abrupt transitions between optimal networks with

FIG. 4: Top: Landscape of the average shortest path length ¯ℓ
(vertical axis) as a function of the cubic cost-function param-
eter A and the average number of connections to the central
hub ρ. Bottom: The value of ρ corresponding to a global
minima in ¯ℓ, as a function of the cubic cost-parameter A.

where r = −B
3A is the location of the stationary point.
Substituting into Eq. (5) yields the shortest path dis-
tribution for this particular cost-function in terms of the
parameters A, r, p and n. The result is too cumber-
some to give explicitly – however we emphasize that it
is straightforward to obtain, it is exact, and it allows
various limiting cases to be analyzed analytically.

Figure 4 (top) shows the value of the average shortest
path ¯ℓ for varying values of ρ and A. As can be seen, the
optimal network structure (i.e. the network whose con-
nectivity ρ is such that ¯ℓ is a global minimum) changes
abruptly from a high connectivity structure to a low con-
nectivity one, as the cost-function parameter A increases.
Figure 4 (bottom) shows that this transition resembles
a ﬁrst-order phase transition. At the transition point
A = Acrit, both the high and low connectivity structures
are optimal. Hence there are two structurally inequiva-
lent networks having identical (and optimal) functional
properties. As we move below or above the transition
point (i.e. A < Acrit or A > Acrit respectively) the high
or low connectivity structure becomes increasingly supe-
rior.

Using the same approximations as those in Sec. III, we

C

B

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

=

A

Level 4

6

C

B

A

FIG. 6: Schematic description of hierarchies in a human or-
ganization, institution or company. As shown, this diagram
can be re-drawn as a multiple-ring-and-hub structure. Similar
networks are likely to exist in a range of social systems.

path in a network with i + 1 rings to that for i rings:

¯ℓi+1(pi+1, ni+1, c) =

(1 − pi+1)ni+1−¯ℓi(pi,ni,c)
(cid:16)
p2
i+1(ni+1 − 1)

3 + (ni+1 − 2 − ¯ℓi(pi, ni, c))pi+1

(cid:17)

2pi+1

+

1 − ¯ℓi(pi, ni, c) + ni+1)
p2
i+1(ni+1 − 1)

(cid:16)

pi+1

(¯ℓi(pi, ni, c) − 1)(¯ℓi(pi, ni, c) − ni+1)pi+1

− 3

(cid:16)

+

p2
i+1(ni+1 − 1)
¯ℓi(pi, ni, c)(¯ℓi(pi, ni, c) − 1)
2(ni+1 − 1)

(cid:17)

≥

0 and ¯ℓ0 = c with c being a general cost for
where i
the inner-most hub. The case i = 0 is identical to Eq.
(1). As before, pi+1 represents the probability of a link
between rings i + 1 and i and ni+1 is the number of nodes
in ring i + 1.

We investigate the properties of our renormalized N -
ring network by placing a number of constraints on the
parameters and observing the average shortest path be-
haviour, so we may once again determine regimes of func-
tionally optimal network conﬁgurations. We begin by
increasing the number of rings to N = 2, with the con-
straint that the number of nodes on each ring is ﬁxed. We
ﬁnd that the conﬁguration that yields the minimum av-
erage shortest path length has all the ring probabilities,
pi, equal. Figure 7 demonstrates the average shortest
path distribution for such a case. Figure 7 also demon-

FIG. 5: Top: Landscape of the average shortest path length
¯ℓ (vertical axis) as a function of the ‘step’ cost-function pa-
rameter r0 and the connectivity ρ. Bottom: The ‘step’ cost-
function as a function of the step-frequency parameter r0 and
ρ. As r0 decreases, the cost-function becomes increasingly
linear.

−

diﬀerent radial connectivities and diﬀerent numbers of
rings. One could, for example, consider this to be a model
of a complicated fungal structure (Figs. 1(b), 1(e)) or of
the interactions between hierarchies within an organiza-
tion, such as in Fig. 6.

To analyze analytically such multiple-ring structures
we introduce the following renormalization scheme. Con-
sider the two-ring-and-hub network in Fig. 1(f). For
paths which pass near the center, there is a contribution
to the path-length resulting from the fact that the inner
ring has a network structure which needs to be traversed.
Hence the inner-ring-plus-hub portion acts as a renormal-
ized hub for the outer ring. In short, the ring-plus-hub
of Eq. (1) can be treated as a ‘cost motif’ for solving
multiple-ring-and-hub problems, by allowing us to write
a recurrence relation which relates the average shortest

7

strates the accuracy of our analytic renormalized result,
as compared to a full-scale numerical calculation for ¯ℓ.
If we allow the number of nodes on the two rings to be
diﬀerent, we ﬁnd that the conﬁguration that optimizes
the shortest path favours a larger number of connections
on the ring with the most nodes. Returning to the orig-
inal conﬁguration, N = 2 with an equivalent number of
nodes on each ring, we consider the eﬀect of a cost on
the central hub of the inside ring. We ﬁnd that a greater
number of connections on the ring without costs opti-
mizes the network, as one might expect.

detachment of the center of the network from the whole.
By comparison of the shortest path values of our mul-
tiple ring networks, we have found a further important
result. We ﬁnd that there are optimal network structures
with diﬀerent numbers of rings and radial connectivities,
yet which have the same average shortest path length
across them [17]. Hence, as before, optimal network
structures exist which are structurally very diﬀerent, yet
functionally equivalent. Figure 9 shows an explicit exam-
ple of two such functionally equivalent, optimal networks.
It is remarkable that these images are so similar to the
real fungi shown in Figs. 1(a) and (b).

VI. CONCLUSION

In summary, we have analyzed the interplay between
the structure and function within a class of biologically-
motivated networks, and have uncovered a novel struc-
tural phase transition. Depending on the system of inter-
est (e.g. fungus, or road networks) these transitions be-
tween inequivalent structures might be explored in real-
time by adaptive re-wiring, or over successive generations
through evolutionary forces or ‘experience’. Through the
use of an approximation, we treated the original network
as a cost-motif for a larger network and considered the
circumstances under which such networks obtained their
optimal functional structure. The equivalence in func-
tion, deﬁned by the networks transport properties, be-
tween various topologically distinct structures may pro-
vide insight into the existence of such disparate structure
in real fungi. An important further implication of this
work is that in addition to searching for a universality in
terms of network structure, one might fruitfully consider
seeking universality in terms of network function.

Acknowledgements

We kindly acknowledge L. Boddy, J. Wells, M. Har-
ris and G. Tordoﬀ (University of Cardiﬀ) for the fun-
gal images in Figs. 1(a), (b) and (e). N.J. and M.F.
acknowledge the support of EU through the MMCOM-
NET project, and N.J. acknowledges the support of the
EPSRC through the Life Sciences Program.

FIG. 7: Average shortest path ¯ℓ for a network with N = 2
rings, each of size n = 103 and with equal connectivity p1 =
p2 ≡ p.

≫

The addition of further rings, such that N > 2, leads
to some interesting results. For a network with an equiv-
alent number of nodes on each ring the optimal conﬁgu-
ration remains such that all the ring probabilities, pi, are
equal. However, for N
2, we begin to see a deviation:
connections should be moved to the outer rings of the
network (those furthest away from the hub) in increasing
numbers out to the edge of the network to obtain the
minimum shortest path. We thus consider the properties
of a network with varying N ; equal ring probabilities pi;
; both ﬁxed
inner ring costs, c0, that vary from 0
numbers of nodes on each ring, ni = n = constant, and
varying numbers of nodes on each ring such that ni ∝ i.
Figure 8 shows the average shortest path distribution for
several such cases. Interestingly, for large N the system
becomes indiﬀerent to the cost of the central hub, c0,
and all the distributions converge, in both the case of
ﬁxed and varying numbers of nodes on each individual
ring. This is suggestive of an eﬀective ‘skin eﬀect’, as the
center of the network becomes eﬀectively disconnected
after the addition of a large number of rings. The re-
dundance of the central portion of the network oﬀers an
explanation for an earlier ﬁnding: that as we approach
2 the optimal conﬁguration ceases to be such that
N
all innermost ring probabilities, pi, are equal. We ﬁnd
that to optimize the network we need to move the con-
nections into the skin, more than likely as a result of the

→ ∞

≫

8

FIG. 8: Average shortest path ¯ℓ as a function of the number of
rings N that make up the network. In (a) all rings are of size
n = 106 and in (b) the rings increase according to ni = 106i
where i is the ring index. In both cases, the probability of
connectivity of a node is a constant and equal to pi = 0.001.
The innermost ring has a hub with a constant cost c0. Here c0
ranges from 0 to eﬀectively inﬁnite. In all cases the limiting
value for ¯ℓ is the same, demonstrating the ‘skin eﬀect’ and
hence the eﬀective disconnection of the inner rings.

FIG. 9: Two structurally inequivalent networks, which are
functionally equivalent in the sense that they have the same
average shortest path across them. The average shortest path
across the structure is the same for both networks, and both
networks are themselves optimal (i.e. minimum ¯ℓ). Nutrients
found on the perimeter of each structure should therefore take
the same average time to cross it – this in turn implies that
both structures would co-exist in the same favourable envi-
ronmental conditions. (a) A single-ring-and-hub network with
a linear cost-function. (b) A two-ring-and-hub conﬁguration.
The inner ring-hub structure has the same cost-function as in
(a). The similarity to the real fungi in Figs. 1(a) and (b) is
striking.

[1] M.E.J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).
[2] M.T. Gastner, M.E.J. Newman, cond-mat/0409702.
[3] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).

[4] D. S. Callaway, M. E. J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and

D. J. Watts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5468 (2000)

[5] R. Albert and A.L. Barabasi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5234

9

(2000).

[13] D.J. Ashton, T.C. Jarrett, and N.F. Johnson, Phys. Rev.

[6] L.A. Brunstein, S.V. Buldyrev, R. Cohen, S. Havlin and

Lett. 94, 058701 (2005).

H.E. Stanley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 168701 (2003).

[14] S.N. Dorogovtsev and J.F.F. Mendes, Europhys. Lett.

[7] B. Danila, Y. Yu, S. Earl, J.A. Marsh, Z. Toroczkai and

50, 1 (2000).

K.E. Bassler, cond-mat/0603861.

[8] C. Moore, G. Ghoshal

and M.E.J. Newman,

cond-mat/0604069.

[9] M.T. Gastner, and M.E.J. Newman, cond-mat/0603278.
[10] R. Guimera, A. Diaz-Guilera et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,

[11] V. Colizza, J. R. Banavar et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

248701 (2002).

198701 (2004).

[12] Z. Toroczkai, K. E. Bassler, Nature 428, 716 (2004).

[15] M. Tlalka, D. Hensman, P.R. Darrah, S.C. Watkinson
and M.D. Fricker, New Phytologist 158, 325 (2003).
[16] T. Nakagaki, R. Kobayashi, Y. Nishiura, and T. Ueda,

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 271, 2305 (2004).

[17] The networks need to be optimal in order that this ques-
tion of equivalence be meaningful and non-trivial. By
contrast, it is a fairly trivial exercise to ﬁnd non-optimal
structures which are functionally equivalent.

