6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Isotropic to Nematic Liquid Crystalline Phase Transition of F-actin Varies from
Continuous to First Order

Jorge Viamontes, Patrick W. Oakes, and Jay X. Tang∗
Department of Physics, Brown University, Rhode Island 02912, USA
(Dated: January 18, 2014)

We report that the properties of the isotropic to nematic liquid crystalline phase transition of
F-actin depend critically on the average ﬁlament length. For average ﬁlament lengths longer than
2 µm, we conﬁrm previous ﬁndings that the phase transition is continuous in both alignment and
concentration. For average ﬁlament lengths shorter than 2 µm, we show for the ﬁrst time a ﬁrst
order transition with a clear discontinuity in both alignment and concentration. Tactoidal droplets
of coexisting isotropic and nematic phases, diﬀering in concentration by approximately 30%, form
over the course of hours and appear to settle into near equilibrium metastable states.

PACS numbers: 61.30.Eb, 64.70.Md, 87.15.-v

The cytoskeletal protein actin is vital to both cell mor-
phology and motility. In its globular form, G-actin, the
protein can be polymerized to form long ﬁlaments, F-
actin. These ﬁlaments have a diameter of 8 nm [1] and
a distribution of lengths characteristic of the stochastic
polymerization process [2]. They behave as semiﬂexi-
ble polymers with persistence lengths of 15-18 µm [3, 4],
which are larger than the average lengths found in cells
and in vitro. Due to the important role actin plays in bi-
ological functions there have been extensive studies con-
cerning many properties of F-actin, including dynamic
ﬁlament assembly and dissembly [5], phase transitions
[6, 7, 8], and viscoelasticity [9, 10, 11].

Of particular relevance to this report is that F-actin
undergoes an isotropic (I) to nematic (N) liquid crys-
talline phase transition. Understanding this thermody-
namic property in the biological process is essential be-
cause of the role that ﬁlament alignment plays in cellular
dynamics [2] and possibly the anisotropic viscoelasticity
of the cytoskeletal network [10]. The onset concentration
of the I-N transition of F-actin is inversely proportional
to the average ﬁlament length ℓ [6, 7, 8, 12], consistent
with statistical mechanical theories [13, 14]. Experimen-
tal studies use optical birefringence methods to measure
the F-actin alignment across the I-N transition region.
Under certain preparation conditions, zebra birefringence
patterns were observed, which have been attributed to
the spontaneous separation of F-actin into I and N do-
mains [12]. More recently, however, two studies [6, 8]
have shown that the F-actin I-N transition appears to be
continuous in both ﬁlament alignment and concentration
for ℓ ≥ 2 µm. The large length, polydispersity and semi-
ﬂexibility of the ﬁlaments may contribute to entangling
the network, ultimately resulting in a continuous transi-
tion [8]. This phenomenon may also be relevant to the
theory of Lammert, Rokshar, and Toner (LRT) [15, 16],
which predicts that a high disclination line defect energy
renders the I-N transition into two continuous ones.

In this paper we conﬁrm the continuous features of the
I-N transition for solutions of long F-actin (ℓ ≥ 2 µm),

but also show for the ﬁrst time a true ﬁrst order phase
separation for solutions of F-actin with ℓ ≤ 2 µm. Up
to this point a clear separation of phases into distinct
domains has not been observed in solutions of F-actin.
Tactoidal droplets characteristic of phase separation in
such a rod-like system were observed in at least three
types: N tactoids in an I background, I tactoids in an
N background, and the coexistence of N and I tactoids
in a background of weak alignment. Quantitative ﬂuo-
rescence measurements show a distinct diﬀerence in con-
centration between the I and N regions. In addition bire-
fringence measurements show a diﬀerence in alignment,
further demonstrating the ﬁrst order nature of the tran-
sition.

Actin was extracted from rabbit skeletal muscle fol-
lowing an established method [17]. The globular G-actin
was polymerized upon addition of KCl and MgCl2 up to
50 mM and 2 mM, respectively. The ℓ of F-actin was
controlled through the addition of gelsolin, a ﬁlament
severing and end-capping protein [18, 19]. Rectangular
capillary tubes from VitroCom Inc. (Mt. Lks., N.J) of
cross-sectional dimensions 0.2×2 mm were used for mea-
surements by ﬂuorescence and birefringence microscopy.
Both ends of the capillary tube were sealed by an in-
ert glue to eliminate ﬂow. Birefringence measurements
were performed on a Nikon E-800 microscope equipped
with the CRI PolScope (Cambridge, MA) package [8].
PolScope is capable of measuring the optical birefrin-
gence and the direction of the slow axis at each pixel
position, thus reporting local alignment [20]. For ﬂu-
orescence imaging F-actin was labeled 1 to 1000 with
TRITC-phalloidin (Sigma, St Louis, MO) as previously
described [8].

Diﬀerent features are observed between samples of sev-
eral ℓ of F-actin in their respective ranges of concentra-
tion over which the I-N transition occurs. A sample of
F-actin with no gelsolin added was measured to have an
ℓ = 11 µm, a value representative of most of our sam-
ples. Fig. 1 shows typical results of birefringence and
ﬁlament alignment for F-actin in the I phase (Fig. 1A),

2

FIG. 1: Birefringence measurement of F-actin solutions at ℓ = 11 µm (A,B,C) and at ℓ = 1 µm (D,E,F). The 50 µm scale
bar and the gray scale intensity bar, indicating retardance values from 0 to 10 nm, apply to all the images. The line segments
represent the local direction and relative magnitude of ﬁlament alignment. (A,B,C) Representative samples are shown in the
I phase, in the I-N transition region for long F-actin, and in the N phase, respectively. No discontinuity is detected in the
transition region. (D,E,F) At ℓ = 1 µm and in the I-N transition region, F-actin phase separates into tactoidal droplets: N
droplet in an I background (D), coexistence of N and I droplets (E), and an I droplet in a N background (F).

transition region (1B), and the N phase (1C). Of par-
ticular note is that uniform retardance is found in the
I-N transition region (1B). This suggests that F-actin is
continuous in alignment during the transition in addition
to being continuous in concentration as found previously
[8]. Zebra patterns were occasionally observed, especially
near the wall of a capillary tube or at an air liquid in-
terface, examples of which have been shown by previous
studies [6, 8, 12, 21]. These zebra patterns, representing
regions of diﬀerent alignment, do not show a diﬀerence
in concentration. Coexistence is never observed in long
F-actin samples [8, 21, 22]. In stark contrast, however,
further reduction of ℓ to ≤ 2 µm results in the F-actin
solution phase separating into tactoidal droplets and a
surrounding medium (Fig. 1D). A small increase in ei-
ther concentration or average ﬁlament length can then
give rise to co-existence of I and N tactoids (1E), and I
tactoids in a N background (1F).

While the formation of tactoids is a robust process,
the tactoids themselves are sensitive to mechanical per-
turbations. Even gentle shaking distorts the boundary
between phases. Strong shaking or sonication almost en-
tirely distorts the order in the system. When the agi-
tation is stopped the system again phase separates and
settles back into a stable state over a period of a few
hours. Tactoids are almost always present in this re-
settled system. Once stable, the system remains so for
days. It is important to note that, while being sensitive
to mechanical perturbations, this phase separation does
not necessarily require the initial alignment created by

injection of the ﬁlaments into the capillary. In fact, tac-
toids have also been observed on slides where there is no
initial alignment.

Quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy has been per-
formed on selected tactoids (top, Fig. 2). The ﬂuores-
cence image clearly shows a diﬀerence in concentration
between the tactoid and the surrounding solution. This
ﬂuorescence intensity data allows us to quantitatively de-
termine the diﬀerence in concentration between the ne-
matic and isotropic regions. We have measured a number
of N tactoids and found that the N region has a concen-
tration 36 ± 5% greater than the background I medium
[29]. Measurements reveal that I tactoids in a N back-
ground show similar concentration diﬀerences. These re-
sults conﬁrm the ﬁrst order nature of the I-N transition.
Additional properties of the tactoids are obtained via
birefringence imaging (middle, Fig. 2). Average align-
ment is represented by a line segment through each white
dot where the length of the segment depicts the magni-
tude of the retardance. The I solution surrounding the
tactoid shows no average alignment and clearly illustrates
the diﬀerence in alignment between the tactoid and its
surrounding regions. Slow axis measurements inside the
N tactoids suggest that the director ﬁeld is bipolar, con-
necting two point defects, termed boojums [23], at the
opposite poles. Retardance data plotted below the im-
age, shown with a ﬁt to an equation scaled from a semicir-
cle [30], support the three dimensional characterization
of the tactoid.

Using this technique we have also measured the average

3

FIG. 3: The speciﬁc retardance of F-actin is plotted as a
function of concentration with varying ℓ. An F-actin solution
with no added gelsolin ((cid:3)) and with average ﬁlament lengths
of 3.9µm (◦), 2.5 µm (△), and 1.0 µm (⋄). The letter desig-
nations correspond to regions denoted in Fig. 1. The dashed
lines are guides for the eye.

completely in the N phase (Region C). As ℓ decreases,
the onset concentration of the I-N transition increases,
consistent with the earlier reports [6, 7, 8, 12]. D, E,
and F in Fig. 3 indicate the I-N transition region for ℓ
= 1.0 µm, where the speciﬁc birefringence values were
measured prior to phase separation as shown in Fig. 1.
These birefringence measurements help deﬁne the range
of concentrations over which the I-N transition occurs.

When actin is polymerized at slightly above the I con-
centration, nascent tactoids are nucleated in the transi-
tion region for F-actin with ℓ ≤ 2 µm. Coalescence of
tactoidal droplets is often observed, along with the con-
tinuous growth of separate tactoids over the time span of
hours. When the actin concentration is close to midway
between the co-existing I and N concentrations (both are
sensitive functions of ℓ), we reproducibly observed the
phenomenon of spinodal decomposition. The details of
this are the subject of further investigation. Brieﬂy, at
the high concentration of several mg/ml, F-actin poly-
merization occurs within seconds following the addition
of KCl and MgCl2 [24]. The solution, therefore, becomes
weakly aligned by the shear ﬂow as it is injected into the
capillary tube. A granular structure appears through-
out the capillary tube within minutes after the initiation
of polymerization. By the 30 minute time point, both I
and N droplets are discernable. The late stage growth
lasts for many hours, with both continuous growth of ex-
isting tactoids and occasional coalescence of neighboring
tactoids.

Several features which suggest metastability are ob-
served in the I-N transition region. While the shape of
the tactoids is consistent throughout the sample, there is

FIG. 2: A tactoid measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy (top)
and birefringence microscopy (middle) in a solution of 10.8
mg/ml F-actin. The arrows depict line scans performed across
the width of the tactoid and the 25 µm scale bar applies to
both images. Fluorescence intensity (⋄), birefringence retar-
dance (•), and a ﬁt of a scaled semicircle to the birefringence
data (solid line) are plotted. The plot illustrates the agree-
ment between the two methods of imaging, both showing the
three dimensional symmetry of the tactoid. The ﬂuorescence
image reveals distinct concentrations in each region and yields
a result 36 ± 5% greater inside the tactoid than the surround-
ing solution. The birefringence image shows a clear diﬀerence
in alignment inside the nematic tactoid and the surrounding
solution.

alignment of F-actin at four ℓ as a function of actin con-
centration over the range of the I-N transition (Fig. 3).
The ℓ was determined by ﬂuorescence imaging or AFM
(for the shortest ℓ) of single F-actin for at least 500 ﬁl-
aments of each ℓ. Below a threshold concentration, F-
actin solutions are in the I phase, thus producing zero
retardance (Region A). As the concentration increases,
the solution reaches the I-N transition region, character-
ized by a sharp increase of speciﬁc retardance (Region
B). In the high concentration region, F-actin solution is

appreciable scatter in the data comparing the dimensions
of the droplets (not shown). Furthermore, measurements
indicate that the local concentration within the I and N
regions shows a dependence on the total average con-
centration. For a true ﬁrst order phase transition, the
volume fraction of the solution in the I or N phase would
depend on the total average concentration of the solution,
but the local concentration of each phase would remain
constant. Both I and N tactoids are also regularly found
to be present in a weakly aligned background. taken to-
gether these observations lead us to conclude that the
system often exists in a metastable state.

It is important to note that the actin tactoids we report
here are fundamentally diﬀerent from what we previously
reported [25]. Actin granules characterized in our previ-
ous report were induced by an actin cross-linking protein,
alpha-actinin. As a result, the density of actin in the
actin granules is over 10 times higher than in this study.
The tactoids formed here due to the I-N separation also
easily disappear upon dilution and slight agitation, unlike
the permanent tactoids due to the cross-linking of alpha-
actinin. The similarity in shape likely has to do with a
minimization of the free energy density where there is a
competition between the splay and bending elastic en-
ergies and the surface tension of a droplet [23, 26].
It
is thus not surprising that tactoids of similar shapes are
found in two distinct types of actin granules, in concen-
trated suspensions of Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV) [27],
and in that of ﬁlamentous phage fd [28].

In conclusion, we have shown new features of the I-N
phase transition of F-actin solutions as a function of ℓ. At
ℓ ≥ 2 µm, the I-N phase transition is continuous, consis-
tent with previous ﬁndings [6, 8]. However, biphasic be-
havior characteristic of a ﬁrst order transition is observed
for ℓ ≤ 2 µm, including both phenomena of nucleation-
growth and spinodal decomposition. A clear separation
of phases with diﬀerent concentrations is shown for the
ﬁrst time. Tactoidal droplets of either I or N domains
form in the N or I background, respectively. Tactoids
of both phases can also coexist with a weakly aligned
background state, suggesting metastability. The process
for tactoidal growth involves both constant recruitment
of the surrounding ﬁlaments and coalescence of existing
neighboring tactoids.

This work is supported by the National Science Foun-
dation (NSF) awards DMR 0405156 and DMR 0079964
(MRSEC), and the Petroleum Research Fund (PRF
42835-AC7), administered by the American Chemical So-
ciety. We thank Professors Robert Meyer, Robert Pelcov-
its, Thomas Powers and James Valles for valuable sug-
gestions.

∗

Correspondence address:Jay˙Tang@Brown.edu

4

[1] K. C. Holmes et al., Nature 347, 44 (1990).
[2] D. Sept et al., Biophys. J. 77, 2911 (1999).
[3] H. Isambert et al., J. of Biol. Chem. 270, 11437 (1995).
[4] F. Gittes et al., J. Cell Biol. 120, 923 (1993).
[5] I. Fujiwara et al., Nature Cell Biol. 4, 666 (2002).
[6] C. Coppin and P. Leavis, Biophys. J. 63, 794 (1992).
[7] R. Furakawa, R. Kundra, and M. Fechheimer, Biochem-

istry 32, 12346 (1993).

[8] J. Viamontes and J. X. Tang, Phys. Rev. E 67, 040701(R)

6486 (1998).

(2003).

(1996).

(1991).

[9] M. L. Gardel et al., Phys Rev. Lett. 91, 158302 (2003).
[10] J. Xu, A. Palmer, and D. Wirtz, Macromolecules 31,

[11] H. Isambert and A. C. Maggs, Macromolecules 29, 1036

[12] A. Suzuki, T. Maeda, and T. Ito, Biophys. J. 59, 25

[13] L. Onsager, Ann. NY. Acad. Sci. 51, 627 (1949).
[14] P. J. Flory, Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules (In-

terscience Publishers, New York, 1969).

[15] P. Lammert, D. Rokhar, and J. Toner, Phys. Rev. Lett.

70, 1650 (1993).

1778 (1995).

[16] P. Lammert, D. Rokhar, and J. Toner, Phys. Rev. E 52,

[17] J. Pardee and J. Spudich, Method Cell. Biol. 24, 271

[18] P. Janmey et al., J. Biol. Chem. 261, 8357 (1986).
[19] J. X. Tang and P. A. Janmey, J. Biol. Chem. 271, 8556

[20] R. Oldenbourg and G. Mei, J. of Microsc. 180, 140

(1982).

(1996).

(1995).

[21] E. Helfer et al., Biophys. J. 89, 543 (2005).
[22] P. Das et al., J. Chem. Phys. 116, 9028 (2002).
[23] P. Prinsen and P. van der Schoot, Phys. Rev. E 68,

[24] M.-F. Carlier, D. Pantaloni, and E. D. Korn, J. Biol.

[25] J. X. Tang, H. Kang, and J. Jia, Langmuir 21, 2789

021701 (2003).

Chem. 259, 9983 (1984).

(2005).

[26] A. Kaznacheev, M. Bogdanov, and S. Taraskin, J. Exp.

Theor. Phys. 95, 57 (2002).

[27] H. Freundlich, J. Phys. Chem. 41, 1151 (1938).
[28] Z. Dogic et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 125503 (2004).
[29] Coexistence concentrations were determined based on
two known properties. First, the tactoid has rotational
symmetry about the long axis. This property was con-
ﬁrmed through confocal imaging as well as the functional
ﬁt in Fig. 2. Second, within the thickness of the capillary
the labeled protein along the direction perpendicular to
the ﬂat face contribute nearly equally to the local ﬂuores-
cence intensity reading. This was conﬁrmed by adjusting
the focal position and noting negligible changes when the
top, middle, or bottom layer of the sample was best in fo-
cus. Thus by knowing the thickness of the capillary, the
thickness of the tactoid and the intensity values inside
and outside of the tactoid, we obtained the relative pro-
tein concentrations in the nematic and isotropic regions.
. A and D
shift the center of the circle, B is a pre-factor to account
for diﬀerent units, and C is the radius of the circle at the
middle cross section.

[30] The data is ﬁt to y = A + B(C 2 − (x − D)

1/2

)

2

