6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collective eﬀects in intra-cellular molecular motor transport:
coordination, cooperation and competetion ∗

Debashish Chowdhury1
1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, India.
(Dated: April 18, 2009)

Molecular motors do not work in isolation in-vivo. We highlight some of the coordinations, coop-
erations and competitions that determine the collective properties of molecular motors in eukaryotic
cells. In the context of traﬃc-like movement of motors on a track, we emphasize the importance of
single-motor bio-chemical cycle and enzymatic activity on their collective spatio-temporal organi-
sation. Our modelling strategy is based on a synthesis- the same model describes the single-motor
mechano-chemistry at suﬃciently low densities whereas at higher densities it accounts for the col-
lective ﬂow properties and the density proﬁles of the motors. We consider two speciﬁc examples,
namely, traﬃc of single-headed kinesin motors KIF1A on a microtubule track and ribosome traﬃc
on a messenger RNA track.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Molecular motors [1, 2] perform crucial functions at
almost every stage in the life of a cell. The motor-
dependent activities begin with DNA replication [3]
which is essential before cell division. A motor called
DNA helicase [4, 5] unzips the double-stranded DNA
so that another motor, called DNA polymerase [6] can
synthesize two copies of the DNA using the two single
strands as templates. Protein synthesis [3], one of the
crucial activities within a cell, is accomplished by some
other motors at diﬀerent stages of operation, the most
notable among these are RNA polymerase [7] and ribo-
somes [8]. Normally, the proteins are synthesized near
the cell center and need to be transported to appropri-
ate locations some of which are far from the cell center.
Besides, some cargoes are also transported from the cell
periphery to the cell center. Most of these transporta-
tions of cargoes (often in appropriately packaged form)
in the cytoplasm are carried out by yet another set of
molecular motors which are collectively referred to as cy-
toskeletal motors [9].

The molecular motors at the cellular and subcellular
levels can be grouped together is several diﬀerent ways.
One possible way of grouping these is based on the na-
ture of the tracks on which the motors move- one group
moves on ﬁlamentary proteins whereas the other moves
on nucleic acid strands. Among the cytoskeletal motors,
which walk on ﬁlamentary proteins, kinesin and dynein
move on microtubules (MT) whereas myosins move on
actin ﬁlaments. Some motors are processive, i.e., capable
of long walk without getting detached from the track. Ki-
nesins and dyneins are not only processive but can carry

molecular cargo; therefore, these are functionally similar
to “porters”.

Molecular motors do not work in isolation in-vivo.
Wide range of biophysical phenomena observed at sub-
cellular and cellular levels are manifestations of diﬀerent
types of collective processes, involving molecular motors,
at several diﬀerent levels of biological organisation [10].
The nature of the collective eﬀect depends on the situ-
ation; it can be the coordination of diﬀerent parts of a
single motor or, on a larger scale, it can be a cooperation
or competition between two diﬀerent motors. These col-
lective eﬀects can manifest as spontaneous oscillations,
dynamic instabilities, hysteresis, dynamical phase tran-
sitions [11, 12] and motor traﬃc jam [13]. In this paper,
we ﬁrst give examples of diﬀerent types of coordination,
cooperation and competition in molecular motor trans-
port. Then, we focus on our works on molecular motor
traﬃc on two diﬀerent types of tracks, namely, on MT
and on messenger RNA (mRNA).

II. COORDINATION THROUGH ELASTIC
COUPLING

In this section we consider coordination of elastically
coupled motor domains of a given motor as well as that of
motors which are elastically coupled to a common back-
bone. The structures and mechanisms of single cytoskele-
tal motors have been discussed in this proceedings by Ray
[14], and by Mallik and Gross [15] while those of helicase
motors have been reviewed by Tuteja and Tuteja [16].

A. Coordination of diﬀerent heads of oligomeric
motors

∗Section V B is based on original work [59, 67] carried out in col-
laboration with K. Nishinari, Y. Okada, A. Schadschneider, P.
Greulich and A. Garai. Section VI is based on original work [78]
done in collaboration with A. Basu.

Most of the known common molecular motor proteins
are dimeric or, in general, oligomeric [17]. It is generally
believed that coordination of the ATPase activities of
diﬀerent motor domains is essential for the processivity

of a given motor. The mechanism of this coordination has
been investiagted extensively over the last decade using
many diﬀerent techniques.

It is now quite well established that the conventional
double-headed kinesins follow a hand-over-hand mecha-
nism (exactly similar to the steppings used by humans for
walking) [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Similar hand-over-hand
mechanism is also believed to govern the movement of
myosin-V, an unconventional processive myosin [24, 25].
However, the corresponding mechanism for dimeric cyto-
plasmic dynein is much more complex because the archi-
tecture of its motor domain is very diﬀerent from those
of kinesin and myosin-V [26, 27].

Majority of the molecular motors that move on nucleic
acid tracks (DNA or RNA) are also oligomeric. For exam-
ple, most DNA helicases are either dimeric or hexameric
[4]. Both “inchworm” and “hand-over-hand” (also called
“rolling”) mechanisms for the coordination of the motor
domains of dimeric DNA helicases have been considered
[28]. The corresponding mechanism for hexameric DNA
helicases remains unclear; at least three diﬀerent plausi-
ble scenarios have been suggested. The ATPase activity
of the motor domains in hexameric DNA helicases can
run (i) in parallel, or (ii) in ordered sequential, or (iii) in
random-sequential manner [29].

B. Collective dynamics of cytoskeletal motors
bound to a common elastic backbone

Consider a group of identical motors bound to an elas-
tic backbone as shown in ﬁg.1. It has been shown [30]
that, even if each individual motor is non-processive, such
a system of elastically coupled motors can move collec-
tively on a ﬁlamentary track in a processive manner in
one direction for a period of time and, then, sponta-
neously reverse its direction of motion. Such spontaneous
oscillations can account for the dynamics of axonemes,
which are core constituents of eucaryotic cilia, as well
as oscillatory motions of ﬂight muscles of many insects
[11, 31].

III. TWO SUPERFAMILIES OF PORTERS:
LOAD-SHARING VERSUS TUG-OF-WAR

Kinesins and dyneins are both processive (i.e.,
“porters”), but move in opposite directions along MT
tracks. Often several members of the same superfam-
ily together carry a single cargo. On the other hand,
if members of both the superfamilies are adsorbed si-
multaneously on the same cargo, they compete against
each other trying to pull the cargo in opposite directions.
Recent progress in theoretical modelling of these phe-
nomena have been summarized in this proceedings by
Lipowsky et al.[32]

2

FIG. 1: Schematic description of the model of elastically cou-
pled cytoskeletal motors [30]; the horizontal curve represents
the elastic backbone.

A. Unidirectional transport: load-sharing by
members of one superfamily

Two types of in-vitro motility assays have been used
for studying cytoskeletal molecular motors. In particu-
lar, in the bead assay the ﬁlamentary tracks are ﬁxed to
a substrate and motors are attached to a micron-sized
bead (usually made of glass or plastic). The movement
of the bead in the presence of ATP is monitored using
appropriate optical micropscopic methods. In such sit-
uations, each bead is likely to be covered by N motors
where, in general, N > 1. More than one motor is also
used for transportation of large organelles in-vivo. This
phenomenon of unidirectional cooperative cargo trans-
port by more than one motor of the same superfamily
has been studied theoretically [33]. The average walking
distance increase with increasing N . In the face of oppo-
sition by external load force, the force is shared by the
N motors.

Cooperative pulling of lipid bilayer membranes by ki-
nesin motors can generate membrane tubes [34, 35, 36].
Such minimal systems are adequate to gain insight into
the role of motor-mediated interaction between the cy-
toskeleton and organelles in the formation of endoplasmic
reticulum and Golgi membrane networks.

In case of transport by cytoplasmic dynein motors, if
more than one motor work together then collectively they
can improve the performance as porter although individ-
ually, while working in isolation, they often pause and
experience slippage in presence of load force [37].

B. Bidirectional transport: tug-of-war between two
superfamiles

In the preceeding section we have mentioned how the a
single assembly of elastically coupled motors can sponta-

3

ment of the cargo is observed when the attached mo-
tors are replaced by motors of opposite polarity. (ii) The
second possible mechanism is the closest to the real life
“tug-of-war”; the competion between the motors of op-
posite polarity, which are simultaneously attached to the
same cargo and tend to walk on the same ﬁlament gener-
ates a net displacement in a direction that is decided by
the stronger side. (iii) The third mechanism is based on
the concept of regulation; although motors of opposite
polarity are simultaneously attached to the cargo, only
one type of motors are activated at a time for walking on
the track. In this mechanism, the reversal of the cargo
movement is caused by the regulator when it disengages
one type of motor and engages motors of the opposite po-
larity. For experimentalists, it is a challenge not only to
identify the regulator, if such a regulator exists, but also
to identify the mechanism used by the regulator to act
as a switch for causing the reversal of cargo movement.
Dynactin has been identiﬁed as a possible candidate for
the role of such a regulator [40, 41].

IV. TRANSFER FROM MT NETWORKS TO
ACTIN NETWORKS: PARK-AND-RIDE
TRANSPORT SYSTEM

The networks of MTs and actin ﬁlaments are not dis-
connected. The cytoskeleton is MT-rich near the cell cen-
ter whereas dense actin ﬁlaments dominate the cytoskele-
ton near the cell periphery. In recent years functional co-
operation between the MT-based and actin-based trans-
port systems have been discovered [42, 43, 44].

Several organisms are known to have an intrinsic abil-
ity to manipulate their skin colour. For example,
in
ﬁsh and frog this change of skin colour is caused by
the appropriate movement of pigment-containing vesicles
called melanosome within a special type of cells called
melanophore. When stimulated, melanosomes disperse
throughout the cell causing darkening of the skin colour.
A second stimulus can reverse the process by aggrega-
tion of the melanosomes near the cell center. During dis-
persion melanosomes are transported, some part of their
way towards the cell periphery, by kinesin motors. Then,
melanosomes switch from the MT-based kinesin motors
to actin-based myosin motor (unconventional myosin-
V which is a processive motor) for further distribution
around the cell periphery. During the reverse process,
the melanosomes begin their journey on the actin-based
transportation network and, somewhere along the way,
switch over to the MT-based network for continuing their
onward journey towards the cell center. This switching of
the transport system is similar to park-and-ride system-
one drives a car from the suburban areas to the near-
est station of the urban high-speed mass transit system
(railways or metro trains) for reaching the central part
of a city [45].

Cooperation of MT-based and actin-based transporta-
tion networks also play crucial roles in neuronal trans-

FIG. 2: Schematic description of the three possible mecha-
nisms of bidirectional traﬃc. The three ﬁgures from top to
bottom correspond to the three mechanisms (i), (ii) and (iii)
explained in the text. The open circle and the rectangular box
represent, respectively, a micron-size bead and a regulator of
bidirectional transport.

neously reverse its direction of motion on the same track.
It is also well known that some motors reverse the di-
rection of motion by switching over from one track to
another which are oriented in anti-parallel fashion.
In
contrast to these types of reversal of direction of mo-
tion, we consider in this section those reversals where the
cargo uses a “tug-of-war” between kinesins and dyneins
to execute bidirectional motion on the same MT track
[38, 39]. Several possible functional advantages of bidi-
rectional transport have been conjectured [38, 39].

Wide varieties of bidirectional cargoes have already
been identiﬁed so far; these include organelles (for exam-
ple, mitochondria) as well as secretaory vesicles and even
viruses. If motion in one direction dominates overwhelm-
ingly over the other, it becomes extremely diﬃcult to
identify the movement unambiguously as “bidirectional”
because of the limitations of the spatial and temporal
resolutions of the existing techniques of imaging.

The main challenge in this context is to understand
the mechanisms of this bidirectional transport and those
which control the duration of unidirectional movement in
between two successive reversals. This insight will also
be utilized for therapeutic strategies. For example, the
motor or the motor-cargo link may be targeted block-
ing the virus that hijacks the motor transport system to
travel towards the nucleus. On the other hand, a virus
executing bidirectional movements can be turned away
from the outskirts of the nucleus by tilting the balance
in favour of the kinesins.

At least three possible mechanisms of bidirectional
transport have been postulated (see ﬁg.2). (i) One pos-
sibility is that either only + end directed motors or only
- end directed motors are attached to the cargo at any
given instant of time. Reversal of the direction of move-

port. Actin ﬁlaments help in the transport of the cargo
to bridge the gaps between MT ﬁlaments [42]. The link-
ers of the two networks and the mechanisms of regulation
and control of the proper switchover of cargo from one
system to the other have received some attention in the
last few years [44, 46, 47].

V. COLLECTIVE TRANSPORT BY KINESINS:
MOLECULAR MOTOR TRAFFIC JAM

Most of the multi-motor phenomena we have consid-
ered in the preceeding section are restricted to suﬃciently
low densities where direct interaction of the cargoes did
not occur. As the cargoes are always much bigger than
the motors (in-vitro as well as in-vivo), direct steric in-
teractions of the cargoes become signiﬁcant when several
cargoes are carried by suﬃciently dense population of
motors along the same track. Such situations are remi-
niscent of vehicular traﬃc where mutual hindrance of the
vehicles cause traﬃc jam at suﬃciently high densities. In
analogy with vehicular traﬃc, we shall refer to the collec-
tive movement of molecular motors along a ﬁlamentary
track as “molecular motor traﬃc”; we shall explore the
possibility of molecular motor traﬃc jam and its possible
functional implications.

A. TASEP-like minimal models of molecular motor
traﬃc

Most of the minimal theoretical models of interacting
molecular motors [48, 49, 50, 51, 52] utilize the similari-
ties between molecular motor traﬃc on MT and vehicular
traﬃc on highways [53] both of which can be modelled
by appropriate extensions of driven diﬀusive lattice gases
[54, 55]. In such models the motor is represented by a
“self-propelled” particle and its dynamics is formulated
as an appropriate extension of the totally asymmetric
simple exclusion process (TASEP) which is one of the
simplest models of interacting driven particles. Many as-
pects TASEP and its extentions as well as generalizations
have been discussed in detail in the articles by Stinch-
combe [56], Kolomeisky [57] and Barma [58] in this pro-
ceedings. The novel feature of these models, which distin-
guish these from TASEP are the Langmuir-like kinetics
of adsorption and desorption of the motors.

Let us consider the model suggested by Parmeggiani et
al.[49]. In this model (see ﬁg.3) the self-propelled particle
can hope from one lattice site to the next immediately in
front of it, provided the target site is empty, with hopping
probability q per unit time. Moreover, a particle gets at-
tached to an empty site with probability A per unit time
time, whereas a particle attached to a site can get de-
tached with probability D per unit time. Furthermore,
the attachment probability at the entrance and the de-
tachment probability at the exit are denoted by α and β,
respectively, per unit time. In spite of the extreme sim-

4

FIG. 3: Schematic description of the model of cytoskeletal
motor traﬃc developed by Parmeggiani et al.[49]

FIG. 4: Biochemical cycle in the absence and presence of the
track. The symbols above (or below) the arrows are the rate
constants for to the chemical reactions represented by the
corresponding arrows.

plicity of this model, it predicted a novel jammed phase
on the α
β phase diagram. The progress made so far has
been reviewed in this proceedings by Lipowsky et al.[32].

−

B. KIF1A traﬃc: eﬀects of biochemical cycle

In reality, a molecular motor is an enzyme that hydrol-
yses ATP. In the presence of the track, usually the AT-
Pase activity of the motor increases by one or two orders
of magnitude; moreover, the mechanical movement of the
motor is coupled to its biochemical cycle that includes its
enzymatic activity (see ﬁg.4). Models developed for de-
scribing the mechanisms of operation of a single motor of
a speciﬁc type incorporate not only the mechanical states
of the motor but also its chemical states in each biochem-
ical cycle. On the other hand, the models of interacting
motors in traﬃc, which we mentioned in the preceeding
subsection, do not explicitly take into account the dis-
tinct chemical states of each motor during its biochemical
cycle. Therefore, one common theme of our recent works
on molecular motors has been to achieve a synthesis- we
incorporate the essential steps of the biochemical cycle,

in addition to the mutual interactions of the motors, to
develope models for their collective traﬃc-like dynamics.
In the low-density limit, the model describes single-motor
dynamics while the same model at higher densities pre-
dicts the collective spatio-temporal organization of the
motors.

In a recent paper [59] we considered speciﬁcally the
single-headed kinesin motor, KIF1A [60, 61, 62]; the
movement of a single KIF1A motor had already been
modelled with a Brownian ratchet mechanism [63, 64].
In contrast to the earlier models [48, 49, 50, 51, 52]
of molecular motor traﬃc, which take into account only
the mutual interactions of the motors, our model (from
now referred to as the NOSC model) explicitly incorpo-
rates also the Brownian ratchet mechanism of individual
KIF1A motors, including its biochemical cycle that in-
volves ATP hydrolysis.

The biochemical cycle of a single-headed kinesin mo-
tor KIF1A can be described by the four states shown in
Fig. 5 [60, 62]: bare kinesin (K), kinesin bound with ATP
(K.ATP), kinesin bound with the products of hydrolysis,
i.e., adenosine diphosphate and phosphate (K.ADP.P),
and, ﬁnally, kinesin bound with ADP (K.ADP) after re-
leasing phosphate.

Through a series of in-vitro experiments, Okada, Hi-

rokawa and co-workers established that
(i) each KIF1A motor, while weakly bound to a MT, re-
mains tethered to the MT ﬁlament by the electrostatic
attraction between the positively charged K-loop of the
motor and the negatively charged E-hook of the MT ﬁl-
ament.
(ii) In the weakly bound state, a KIF1A cannot wan-
der far away from the MT, but can execute (essentially
one-dimensional) diﬀusive motion parallel to the MT ﬁl-
ament. However, in the strongly bound state, the KIF1A
motor remains strongly bound to a motor binding site on
the MT.
(iii) A transition from the strongly bound state to the
weakly bound state is caused by the hydrolysis of the
bound ATP molecule. After releasing all the products of
hydrolysis (i.e., ADP and phosphate), the motor again
binds strongly with the nearest binding site on the MT.
In the NOSC model a single protoﬁlament of MT is
modelled by a one-dimensional lattice of L sites each of
which corresponds to one KIF1A-binding site on the MT;
the lattice spacing is equivalent to 8 nm which is the sep-
aration between the successive binding sites on a MT
[9]. Each kinesin is represented by a particle with two
possible internal states, labelled by the indices 1 and 2,
in which it binds strongly and weakly, respectively, to
the MT track. Attachment of a motor to the MT oc-
curs stochastically whenever a binding site on the latter
is empty. Such a two-state approximation to the full se-
quence of biochemical states (conformations) has been
successfully exploited also for conventional two-headed
kinesin and unconventional myosin-V both of which are
known to be processive [65, 66].

For the dynamical evolution of the system, one of the

5

FIG. 5: The biochemical cycle of a single-headed kinesin mo-
tor KIF1A.

L sites is picked up randomly and updated according to
the rules given below together with the corresponding
probabilities (Fig. 6):

Attachment : 0
Detachment : 1
Hydrolysis : 1

→
→

Ratchet :

→
2
20

→
→

(cid:26)

1 with ωadt
0 with ωddt
2 with ωhdt
1 with ωsdt
01 with ωf dt

Brownian motion :

20
02

(cid:26)

→
→

02 with ωbdt
20 with ωbdt

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

The physical processes captured by the rate constants
wf and ws can be understood as follows by analyzing
the Brownian ratchet mechanism illustrated in ﬁg.6. For
the sake of simplicity, let us imagine that the potential
seen by the motor periodically oscillates between the saw-
tooth shape and the ﬂat shape shown in ﬁg.6. When the
sawtooth form remains “on” for some time, the particle
settles at the bottom of a well. Then, when the potential
is switched “oﬀ”, the probability distribution of the posi-
tion of the particle is given by a delta function which, be-
cause of free diﬀusion in the absence of any force, begins
to spread. After some time the Gaussian proﬁle spreads
to such an extent that it has some overlap also with the
well in front, in addition to the overlap it has with the
original well. At that stage, when the sawtooth potentil
is again switched on, there is a non-vanishing probability
that the particle will ﬁnd itself in the well in front; this
probability is proportional to the area of that part of the
Gaussian proﬁle which overlaps with the potential well in
front and is accounted for in our model by the parameter
wf . There is also signiﬁcant probability that the particle
will fall back into the original well; this is captured in
our model by the parameter ws.

Let us denote the probabilities of ﬁnding a KIF1A
molecule in the states 1 and 2 at the lattice site i at time
t by the symbols ri and hi, respectively. In mean-ﬁeld
approximation the master equations for the dynamics of

FIG. 6: Schematic description of the Brownian-ratchet.

6

(8)

(9)

Assuming periodic boundary conditions, the solutions
(ri, hi) = (r, h) of the mean-ﬁeld equations (7) in the
steady-state are found to be

Ωh

r = −

−

Ωs

(Ωs
−
2K(1 + K)

−

1)K + √D

,

h =

Ωh + Ωs + (Ωs + 1)K

√D

−

2K

where K = ωd/ωa, Ωh = ωh/ωf , Ωs = ωs/ωf , and

D = 4ΩsK(1 + K) + (Ωh + Ωs + (Ωs

2
1)K)

.

(10)

−

The probability of ﬁnding an empty binding site on a
MT is Kr as the stationary solution satisﬁes the equation
r + h + Kr = 1. The corresponding ﬂux is given by [67]

J = W ωf

=

=

ωaωhωf
ωf (ωa + ωd) + ωa(ωs + ωh) + ωdωs

ωh(1 + K)
(1 + K)[(1 + K) + (Ωs + Ωh) + ΩsK]

.

(11)

We have also computed the average density proﬁle of
the motors along a MT track with open boundary con-
ditions. For a given ωa, the density of motors in state 2
away from the edges of the MT exceeds that of those in
state 1 as ωh increases beyond a certain value.

FIG. 7: A schematic representation of the NOSC model of
KIF1A traﬃc. The integer i denotes the discrete equispaced
binding sites for kinesin motors on the MT track. The sym-
bols 1 and 2 within circles at a given site i represent the
“chemical” (conformational) states of a kinesin at the same
spatial location.

0.60

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

0.40

0.20

0.60

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

0.40

0.20

0.00

0

200

400

600

200

400

600

0.00

0

site

site

motors in the bulk of the system are given by [59]

dri
dt

dhi
dt

= ωa(1

ri

hi)

ωhri

ωdri + ωshi

−

ri

−
−
+ωf hi−1(1

−
ωshi + ωhri

hi),

−
ωf hi(1

−

=

−

−
ri+1

ri+1

hi+1)

−

−

ωbhi(2

hi+1

ri−1

hi−1)

−
−
+ωb(hi−1 + hi+1)(1

−

−
ri

−
hi).

(7)

−

−

The corresponding equations for the boundaries, which
depend on the rate constants of entry and exit at the
two ends of the MT, are similar and will be presented
elsewhere [67].

The single KIF1A properties are reproduced by this
model [59] in the appropriate low-density limit. For
example, v, the mean speed of the kinesins, is about
0.2 nm/ms if the supply of ATP is suﬃcient, and that
v decreases with the lowering of ATP concentration fol-
lowing a Michaelis-Menten type relation.

(6)

FIG. 8: The stationary density proﬁles for ωh = 0.1 (left) and
ωh = 0.2 (right) in the case ωa = 0.001. The blue and red
lines correspond to the densities of state 1 and 2, respectively.
The dashed lines are the mean-ﬁeld predictions for periodic
systems with the same parameters.

−

−

In contrast to the phase diagrams in the α

β-plane re-
ported by earlier investigators [48, 49, 51], we have drawn
the phase diagram of our model in the ωa
ωh plane by
carrying out extensive computer simulations for realis-
tic parameter values of the model with open boundary
conditions [59, 67]. The phase diagram shows the strong
inﬂuence of hydrolysis on the spatial distribution of the
motors along the MT. For very low ωh no kinesins can ex-
ist in state 2; the kinesins, all of which are in state 1, are
distributed rather homogeneously over the entire system.
However, immobile (but ﬂuctuating) shock is observed in
the densiti proﬁles of kinesins if ωh is ﬁnite.

7

tRNA−Ef Tu Complex

EFG

5

1

Ribosome

Biochemical

Cycle

(Clockwise)

2

4

3

FIG. 9: Schematic description of the traﬃc of ribosomes
where each ribosome has been treated as an “extended” par-
ticle (ℓ = 2 in this ﬁgure.

EFG

VI. RIBOSOME TRAFFIC AND PROTEIN
SYNTHESIS

Translation, the process of synthesis of proteins [68]
by decoding genetic information stored in the mRNA,
is carried out by ribosomes. Understanding the physi-
cal principles underlying the mechanism of operation of
this complex macromolecular machine [69] will not only
provide insight into the regulation and control of protein
synthesis, but may also ﬁnd therapeutic applications as
ribosome is the target of many antibiotics [70].

Most often many ribosomes move simultaneously on
the same mRNA strand while each synthesises a protein.
In all the earlier models of collective traﬃc-like move-
ments of ribosomes [71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77], the entire
ribosome is modelled as a single “self-propelled particle”
ignoring its molecular composition and architecture. The
typical size of an individual ribosome is much larger than
that of a single codon (i.e., a triplet of nucleotides). This
feature of the ribosome is captured in most of the recent
theoretical models by postulating that the size of the self-
propelled particle is ℓ (ℓ > 1) where the unit of length is
set by the size of a codon. Moreover, in these models the
inter-ribosome interactions are captured through hard-
core mutual exclusion and the dynamics of the system is
formulated in terms of rules that are essentially straight-
forward extensions of the TASEP [55]. The qualitative
features of the ﬂow properties and spatio-temporal or-
ganisation in these models are very similar to those of
TASEP which corresponds to the special limit ℓ = 1.

In reality, a ribosome has a complex architecture. Each
ribosome consists of two subunits and has four binding
sites. Of these, three sites (called E, P, A), which are
located in the larger subunit, bind to tRNA, while the
fourth binding site, which is located on the smaller sub-
unit, binds to the mRNA strand. The translocation of
the smaller subunit of each ribosome on the mRNA track
is coupled to the biochemical processes (see ﬁg.10) occur-
ing in the larger subunit.

Let us begin the biochemical cycle with state 1 where
a tRNA is bound to the site P of the ribosome. A tRNA-
EF-Tu complex now binds to site A and the system makes
transition from the state 1 to the state 2. As long as the
EF-Tu is attached to the tRNA, codon-antiodon binding

Phosphate

FIG. 10: A simpliﬁed biochemical cycle of s ribosome.

can take place, but the peptide bond formation is pre-
vented. The EF-Tu has a GTP part which is hydrolized
to GDP, driving the transition from state 2 to 3. Fol-
lowing this, a phosphate group leaves, resulting in the
intermediate state 4. This hydrolysis, ﬁnally, releases
the EF-Tu, and the peptide formation is now possible.
After this step, EF-G, in the GTP bound form, comes
in contact with the ribosome. This causes the tRNAs
to shift from site P to E and from site A to P, site A
being occupied by the EF-G, resulting in the state 5.
Hydrolysis of the GTP to GDP then releases the EF-G
followed by conformatinal changes that are responsible
for pulling the mRNA-binding smaller subunit by one
step forward. Finally, the tRNA on site A is released,
resulting in completion of one biochemical cycle; in the
process the ribosome moves forward by one codon [3].

Very recently we [78] have developed a quantitative
model that not only incorporates the hard-core mutual
exclusion of the interacting ribosomes, but also cap-
tures explicitly the essential steps in the biochemical cy-
cle of each ribosome, including GTP (guanine triphos-
phate) hydrolysis, and couples it to its mechanical move-
ment during protein synthesis. The modelling strategy
adopted in ref.[78] for incorporating the biochemical cy-
cle of ribosomes is similar to that followed in our earlier
work [59] on single-headed kinesin motors KIF1A. How-
ever, the implementation of the strategy is more diﬃcult
in case of ribosome traﬃc not only because of the higher
complexity of composition, architecture and mechano-
chemical processes of the ribosomal machinery but also
because of the heterogeneity of the mRNA track [79]. The
details of our work on ribosome traﬃc has been reported
elsewhere [78].

8

VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In this paper we have presented examples of collective
behaviours of molecular motors that emerge from the co-
ordinations, cooperations and competitions at diﬀerent
levels in the sub-cellular world.
In our original works
so far we have synthesized the single-motor mechano-
chemistry and multi-motor interactions to develope the-
oretical models that make experimentally testable quan-
titative predictions.
In particular, we have developed
models of KIF1A traﬃc on a MT track and ribosome

traﬃc on a mRNA track.
Acknowledgements:
It is my great pleasure to ac-
knowledge enjoyable collaborations with Aakash Basu,
Ashoke Garai, Philip Greulich, Katsuhiro Nishinari, Ya-
sushi Okada and Andreas Schadschneider.
I thank
Aakash Basu for a critical reading of the manuscript.
I also thank Otger Campas, Erwin Frey, Frank
J¨ulicher, Stefan Klumpp, Anatoly Kolomeisky, Reinhard
Lipowsky, Gautam Menon and Alex Mogilner for useful
discussions over the last few years on various aspects of
molecular motors.

[1] M. Schliwa (ed.), Molecular Motors, (Wiley-VCH, 2002).
[2] D. D. Hackney and F. Tamanoi (eds.), The Enzymes,
vol.XXIII: energy coupling and molecular motors, (Else-
vier 2004).

[3] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raﬀ, K. Roberts
and P. Walter Molecular Biology of the Cell, (4th edition)
(Garland Science, a member of the Taylor and Francis
Group, 2002).

[4] M.K. levin and S.S. patel, in ref.[1].
[5] T.M. Lohmann, K. Thorn and R.D. Vale, Cell 93, 9

(1998).

[28] T.M. Lohmann, J. Hsieh, N.K. Maluf, W. Cheng, A.L.
Lucius, C.J. Fischer, K.M. Brendza, S. Korolev and G.
Waksman, in ref. [2].

[29] J.C. Liao, Y. J. Jeong, D. E. Kim, S. S. patel and G.

Oster, J. Mol. Biol. 350 452 (2005).

[30] M. Badoual, F. J¨ulicher and J. Prost, Proc. natl. Acad.

Sci. 99, 6696 (2002).

[31] A. Hilﬁnger, Ph.D. thesis, Dresden (2005).
[32] R. Lipowsky et al., This proceedings.
[33] S. Klumpp and R. Lipowsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,

102, 17284 (2005).

[6] P.J. Rothwell and G. Waksman,

in: Adv. in Protein
Chem., vol. 71: Fibrous Proteins, eds. J.M. Squire and
D.A.D. Parry (Elsevier, 2005).

[7] J. Gelles and R. Landick, Cell 93, 13 (1998).
[8] V. Ramakrishnan, Cell 108, 557 (2002).
[9] J. Howard, Mechanics of motor proteins and the cy-
toskeleton, (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, 2001) .
[10] K.C. Vermeulen, G.J.M. Stienen and C.F. Schmidt, J.

Muscle res. and cell motility, 23, 71 (2002).

[34] A. Roux, G. cappello, J. Cartand, J. Prost, B. Goud
and P. Bassereau, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5394
(2002).

[35] G. Koster, M. VanDuijn, B. Hofs and M. Dogterom,

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 15583 (2003).

[36] C. Leduc, O. Campas, K.B. Zeldovich, A. Roux, P.
Jolimaitre, L. Bourel-Bonnet, B. Goud, J.F. Joanny, P.
Bassereau and J. Prost, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101,
17096 (2004).

[11] K. Kruse and F. J¨ulicher, Curr. Op. Cell Biol. 17, 20

[37] R. Mallik, D. Petrov, S.A. lex, S.J. King and S.P. Gross,

(2005).

(2005).

[12] A. Vilfan and E. Frey, J. Phys. Cond. matt. 17, S3901

[13] D. Chowdhury, A. Schsdschneider and K. Nishinari,

Phys. of Life Rev. 2, 318 (2005).

[14] K. Ray, in this proceedings.
[15] R. Mallik and S.P. Gross, in this proceedings.
[16] N. Tuteja and R. Tuteja, This proceedings.
[17] G. Mei, A.Di Venere, N. Rosato and A. Finazzi-Agro,

FEBS journal, 272, 16 (2005).

[18] R.D. Vale and R.J. Fletterick, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.

13, 745 (1997).

[19] D. D. Hackney, in ref.[2].
[20] A. Yildiz and P.R. Selvin, Trends in Cell Biol. 15, 112

[21] R. A. Cross, Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 29, 301

[22] N.J. Carter and R.A. Cross, Nature, 435, 308 (2005).
[23] N. J. Carter and R. A. Cross, Curr. Op. in Cell Biol. 18,

[24] R. S. Rock, T.J. Purcell and J.A. Spudich, in:[2]
[25] J. R. Sellers and C. Veigel, Curr. Op. in Cell Biol. 18, 1

[26] K. Oiwa and H. Sakakibara, Curr. op. Cell Biol. 17, 98

(1005).

(2004).

1 (2006).

(2006).

(2005).

[27] R. Mallik and S.P. Gross, Curr. Biol. 14, R971 (2004).

15, 2075 (2005).

[38] M.A. Welte, Curr. Biol. 14, R525 (2004).
[39] S. P. Gross, Phys. Biol. 1, R1 (2004).
[40] S.P. Gross, Curr. Biol. 13, R320 (2003).
[41] K.R. Dell, J. Cell Biol. 160, 291 (2003).
[42] S. S. Brown, in: Annual Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 15, 63

[43] B.L. Goode, D.G. Drubin and G. Barnes, Curr. Op. Cell

(1999).

Biol. 12, 63 (2000).

[44] V. Rodionov, J. Yi, A. Kashina, A. Oladipo and S.P.

Gross, Curr. Biol. 13, 1837 (2003).
[45] M. Maniak, Curr. Biol. 13, R917 (2003).
[46] E. Fuchs and Y. Yang, Cell 98, 547 (1999).
[47] E. Fuchs and I. Karakesisoglou, Genes and Development,

15, 1 (2001).

[48] R. Lipowsky, S. Klumpp, and T. M. Nieuwenhuizen,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 108101 (2001); R. Lipowsky and
S. Klumpp, Physica A 352, 53 (2005) and references
therein.

[49] A. Parmeggiani, T. Franosch, and E. Frey, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 90, 086601 (2003); Phys. Rev. E 70, 046101 (2004);.
[50] E. Frey, A. Parmeggiani and T. Franosch, Genome Infor-

matics, 15(1), 46 (2004).

[51] M.R. Evans, R. Juhasz, and L. Santen, Phys. Rev. E 68,
026117 (2003); R. Juhasz and L. Santen, J. Phys. A 37,
3933 (2004).

9

[52] V. Popkov, A. Rakos, R.D. Williams, A.B. Kolomeisky,
and G.M. Sch¨utz, Phys. Rev. E 67, 066117 (2003).
[53] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen, and A. Schadschneider, Phys.

Rep. 329, 199 (2000).

[54] B. Schmittmann and R.P.K. Zia, in C. Domb and J.L.
Lebowitz (eds.), Phase Transitions and Critical Phenom-
ena, Vol. 17 (Academic Press, 1995).

[55] G.M. Sch¨utz, in C. Domb and J.L. Lebowitz (eds.), Phase
Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Vol. 19 (Academic
Press, 2001).

[56] R. Stinchcombe, This proceedings.
[57] E. Pronina and A.B. Kolomeisky, This proceedings.
[58] M. Barma, This proceedings.
[59] K. Nishinari, Y. Okada, A. schadschneider and D.

[66] A. B. Kolomeisky, E.B. Stukalin and A.A. Popov, Phys.

Rev. E 71, 031902 (2005).

[67] P. Greulich, A. Garai, K. Nishinari, Y. Okada, A. Schad-

schneider and D. Chowdhury, to be published.

[68] L.D. Kapp and J. R. Lorsch, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 73,

[69] A.S. Spirin, FEBS Lett. 514, 2 (2002).
[70] T. Hermann, Curr. Op. in str. biol. 15, 355 (2005).
[71] C.T. MacDonald and J.H. Gibbs, Biopolymers 7, 707

[72] G. Lakatos and T. Chou, J. Phys. A 36, 2027 (2003).
[73] L.B. Shaw, R.K.P. Zia and K.H. Lee, Phys. Rev. E 68,

[74] L.B. Shaw, J.P. Sethna and K.H. Lee, Phys. Rev. E 70,

657 (2004).

(1969).

021910 (2003).

Chowdhury, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 118101 (2005).

021901 (2004).

[60] Y. Okada and N. Hirokawa, Science 283, 1152 (1999);

[75] L.B. Shaw, A.B. Kolomeisky and K.H. Lee, J. Phys. A

Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 97, 640 (2000).

37, 2105 (2004).

[61] Y. Okada, H. Higuchi, and N. Hirokawa, Nature, 424,

[62] R. Nitta, M. Kikkawa, Y. Okada, and N. Hirokawa, Sci-

(2004).

[63] F. J¨ulicher, A. Ajdari, and J. Prost, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69,

published.

[64] P. Reimann, Phys. Rep. 361, 57 (2002).
[65] A. B. Kolomeisky and M. E. Fisher, Biophys. J. 84, 1642

S3871 (2005).

574 (2003).

ence 305, 678 (2004).

1269 (1997).

(2003).

[76] T. Chou, Biophys. J., 85, 755 (2003).
[77] T. Chou and G. Lakatos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 198101

[78] A. Basu and D. Chowdhury, (physics/0604075) and to be

[79] Y. Kafri and D.R. Nelson, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 17,

