6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Coarse-Grained Lattie Model for Moleular Reognition

Hans Behringer, Andreas Degenhard, Friederike Shmid

Fakultät für Physik, Universität Bielefeld, D (cid:21) 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

We present a simple model whih allows to investigate equilibrium aspets of moleular reognition

between rigid biomoleules on a generi level. Using a two-stage approah, whih onsists of a design

and a testing step, the role of ooperativity and of varying bond strength in moleular reognition

is investigated. Cooperativity is found to enhane seletivity. In omplexes whih require a high

binding (cid:29)exibility a small number of strong bonds seems to be favored ompared to a situation with

many but weak bonds.

PACS numbers: 87.15.-v, 87.15.Aa, 89.20.-a

Living organisms ould not funtion without the abil-

protein omplexes may di(cid:27)er onsiderably, a general pi-

ity of biomoleules to spei(cid:28)ally reognize eah other

ture of a standard reognition site ontaining approxi-

[1, 2℄. Moleular reognition an be viewed as the ability

mately 30 residues, with a total size of 1200-2000 Å

has

2

of a biomoleule to interat preferentially with a par-

emerged. Apart from notable exeptions, the assoiation

tiular target moleule among a vast variety of di(cid:27)er-

of the proteins is basially rigid, although minor rear-

ent but struturally similar rival moleules. Reognition

rangements of amino aid side-hains do our [9, 10℄.

proesses are governed by an interplay of non-ovalent

We desribe the struture of the proteins at the on-

interations, in partiular, hydrophobi interations and

hydrogen bonds. Suh non-ovalent bonds have typial

energies of 1-2 kal/mole (the relatively strong hydro-

gen bonds may ontribute up to 8-10 kal/mole) and are

therefore only slightly stronger than the thermal energy

kBTRoom ≃ 0.62 kal/mole at physiologial onditions.

Biomoleular reognition is thus only ahieved if a large

number of funtional groups on the two partner moleules

math preisely. This observation has lead to a (cid:16)key-

lok(cid:17) piture: Two biomoleules reognize eah other if

their shapes at the reognition site and/or the intera-

tions between the residues in ontat are largely omple-

mentary [3℄.

tat interfaes by two sets of lassial spin variables

σ = (σ1, . . . , σN ) and θ = (θ1, . . . , θN ), whose values
speify the various types of residues. The set σ har-

aterizes the struture of the reognition site on the tar-

get moleule, and θ that on the probe moleule, i.e., the

moleule that is supposed to reognize the target. The

position of site i on the surfaes an be spei(cid:28)ed arbi-
trarily. For simpliity, we assume that the positions i on

both surfaes math, and that the total number of on-

tat residues is equal N for both moleules. However,

we take into aount the possibility that the quality of

the ontat of two residues at position i may vary, e.g.,

due to steri hindranes or varying relative alignment of

In the present Letter, we introdue a oarse-grained

polar moments, aused by minor rearrangements of the

approah whih allows to investigate this (cid:16)priniple of

amino aid side-hains. This is modeled by an additional

omplementarity(cid:17) on a very general level, and use it to

study the role of di(cid:27)erent fators for the seletivity of

variable Si , i = 1, . . . , N . The total interation is thus de-
sribed by a Hamiltonian H(σ, θ; S), whih inorporates

interations between biomoleule surfaes. Spei(cid:28)ally,

in a oarse-grained way both the strutural properties of

we analyze two elements that have been disussed in the

the reognition site and the interation between residues.

literature: the ooperativity, and the interplay of inter-

To study the

reognition proess between two

Previous theoretial studies have mostly dealt with the

(cid:16)learns(cid:17) the target struture at a given (cid:16)design tempera-

ation strengths. We will show that our model an help

to understand some of the features of real protein-protein

interfaes.

adsorption of heteropolymers on random and strutured

surfaes [4, 5, 6℄. Some works have adapted the random

energy model from the theory of disordered systems to

biomoleules, we adopt a two-stage approah. We take

the struture of the target reognition site, σ(0) =
(σ(0)
N ), to be given. In the (cid:28)rst step, the probe

1 , . . . , σ(0)

. One obtains an ensemble of probe moleules

ture(cid:17) 1/βD
with strutures θ distributed aording to a probabil-
ity P (θ|σ(0)) = 1
ZD

S exp

, whih de-

−βDH(σ(0), θ; S)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

P

the problem of biomoleular binding [7, 8℄. In ontrast,

pends on the target struture. This (cid:28)rst design step is

in the present approah, we onsider expliitly systems

introdued to mimi the design in biotehnologial ap-

of two interating, rigid, heterogeneous surfaes. This is

pliations or the evolution proess in nature. The pa-

motivated by some basi (cid:28)ndings about the biohemial

haraterizes the onditions under whih the

rameter βD

struture of the reognition site, i.e., the ontat inter-

design has been arried out, i.e., it is a Lagrange pa-

fae between reognizing proteins.

In reent years the

rameter whih (cid:28)xes the ahieved average interation en-

strutural properties of proteins at the reognition site

ergy. A similar design proedure has been introdued

has been lari(cid:28)ed [2, 9, 10℄. Although di(cid:27)erent protein-

in studies of protein folding [11℄ and the adsorption of

2

(2)

polymers on strutured surfaes [12℄. In the seond step,

normalization fator, it is given by

i σ(0)

i σ(1)

i

P

the reognition ability of the designed probe ensemble

is tested. To this end the probe moleules are exposed

and a ompet-

at some temperature

to both the original target struture σ(0)
ing (di(cid:27)erent) rival struture σ(1)
1/β , whih in general di(cid:27)ers from the design tempera-
. The thermal free energy F (θ|σ(α)) for the
ture 1/βD
interation between σ(α)
(α = 0, 1) and a probe θ is
given by F (θ|σ(α)) = − 1
−βH(σ(α), θ; S)
β ln
Averaged over all probe moleules, we obtain hF (α)i =
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
θ F (θ|σ(α))P (θ|σ(0)). The target is reognized if the
average free energy di(cid:27)erene ∆F = hF (0)i − hF (1)i is
P

S exp

P

.

negative, i.e., probe moleules exposed to equal amounts

P (K) ∝

N
1
2 (N + K)(cid:19)

(cid:18)

exp

εβD
2

(cid:18)

K

.

(cid:19)

Its (cid:28)rst moment hKi =

K KP (K) = N tanh (εβD/2)

quanti(cid:28)es the quality of the design. For dereasing de-

sign temperatures 1/βD
site hKi /N approahes one, and thus the designed probe

the average omplementarity per

P

moleules are well optimized with respet to the target.

In the seond step the assoiation of the probe

moleules with the target and with a di(cid:27)erent rival

moleule is ompared.

Introduing the quantity Q =

of target and rival moleules preferentially bind to the

as a measure for the similarity between the

target. Note that our treatment does not aount for

reognition sites of the target and the rival moleules,

kineti e(cid:27)ets, only equilibrium aspets are onsidered.

the free energy di(cid:27)erene per site an be expressed in the

The assoiation of the proteins is aompanied by a re-

dution of the translational and rotational entropy. How-

ever, these additional entropi ontributions to the free

form ∆F (Q)/N = − 1
(1 − Q/N ). ∆F/N is
(cid:16)
negative, if the rival and the target are di(cid:27)erent and Q is
thus smaller than N . The probe moleule therefore binds

2 ε tanh

(cid:17)

εβD
2

energy of assoiation depend only weakly on the mass

preferentially to the target moleule, and thus the target

and shape of the rigid moleules, and an be onsidered,

in a (cid:28)rst approximation, to be of the same order for the

is spei(cid:28)ally reognized. The free energy di(cid:27)erene in-

reases with dereasing similarity parameter Q.

assoiation with the target and the rival moleule. Thus,

After this introdutory analysis of a simple system,

these ontributions anel in the free energy di(cid:27)erene.

we turn to onsider more omplex models whih allow to

Similarly, ontributions from the interation with solvent

investigate the in(cid:29)uene of di(cid:27)erent fators on the spei(cid:28)

moleules are also assumed to be of omparable size.

reognition between surfaes. We begin with studying

A modi(cid:28)ed HP-model an serve as a (cid:28)rst example to il-

the role of ooperativity.

lustrate this general desription. In the HP-model, whih

Systemati mutagenesis experiments have revealed

was introdued originally to study protein folding [13℄,

that ooperativity plays an important role in moleu-

residues are distinguished by their hydrophobiity only.

Hydrophobi residues are represented by σi, θi = +1, and
polar residues by σi, θi = −1. In addition, the variable
Si desribing the (geometri) quality of the ontat an
take on the values ±1 where Si = +1 models a good
ontat and Si = −1 a bad one. Only for good ontats

lar reognition proesses [15℄. Cooperativity in biologial

proesses basially means that the interation strength of

two residues depends on the interations in their neigh-

borhood. Physially, this an be aused by a physial re-

arrangement of amino aid side-hains or a readjustment

of polar moments as a funtion of the loal environment.

does one get a ontribution to the binding energy. The

In the simpli(cid:28)ed language of our model, ooperativity

Hamiltonian is then given by

thus means that the quality of a ontat depends on the

H(σ, θ; S) = −ε

1 + Si
2

σiθi

Xi

quality of the neighbor ontats. This an be inorpo-

(1)

rated in the HP-model by the following extension:

where the sum extends over the N positions of the
residues of the reognition site and ε being the inter-

ation onstant [14℄. Note that a (cid:16)good(cid:17) ontat an

H(σ, θ; S) = −ε

σiθi − J

SiSj.

(3)

N

Xi=1

1 + Si
2

Xhiji

nevertheless lead to an unfavorable energy ontribution.

The seond sum aounts for the ooperative interation

For this simple model, the di(cid:27)erent steps of the two-stage

approah desribed above an be worked out analytially.

First, we analyze the e(cid:30)ieny of the design step by

and runs over neighbor residue positions i and j . The in-
teration oe(cid:30)ient J is positive for ooperative intera-
tions and negative for anti-ooperativity. For J > 0, the

inspeting the ahieved omplementarities (of intera-

ooperative term rewards additional ontats in the viin-

tions) of the designed probe moleules with the target

ity of a good ontat between two residues. This leads to

moleule. To this end, we de(cid:28)ne a omplementarity pa-

i θi whih ranges from −N to +N ,
rameter K =
with K lose to +N signaling a large omplementarity

P

i σ(0)

P (θ|σ(0)) an be onverted to a distribution P (K) for
the probability of having a omplementarity K . Up to a

a better optimization of the side-hains and thus the om-

plementarity between the probe and the target moleule

is improved. Cooperativity is therefore expeted to en-

teration without ooperativity. Similarly, one expets

an improved reognition spei(cid:28)ity.

of the reognition sites. The probability distribution

hane the quality of the design step ompared to an in-

3

/

N
>
K
<

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

εβ

D

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

/

N
F
∆

0.5

1

1

2

3

-1

-0.5

0.5

1

0
Q/N

FIG. 1: Average omplementarity per site of the designed

probe ensemble for di(cid:27)erent values of J . For the lower dashed
urve J = 0, the upper dashed line represents the limit J →
∞, whih an be takled analytially [18℄. The urves in

between from bottom up belong to values 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75

of J in units of ε. The inset shows hKi /N for N = 256 (full
urve) and N = 36 (dashed line) with J = ε/2. Only minor

(cid:28)nite-size e(cid:27)ets are visible.

FIG. 2: Free energy di(cid:27)erene per site (in arbitrary units)

of the assoiation of the probe ensemble with the two om-

peting moleules as a funtion of their similarity for di(cid:27)erent

= β = 0.5). For the upper dashed
ooperativities J (with βD
line J = 0, the lower dashed line desribes the limiting ase
J → ∞ for Q/N lose to one [18℄. The full urves from top
to bottom orrespond to the same values of J as in Fig. 1.

For non-zero, but (cid:28)nite values of J , the model an no

expeted for ooperativity onstants J ≃ ε. The above

(cid:28)ndings were obtained for large interfaes. Although mi-

longer be solved analytially. Therefore, we alulated

nor (cid:28)nite-size e(cid:27)ets are visible for interfaes of realis-

numerially the density of states for the interation be-

ti size (with N ∼ O(30)) the general (cid:28)ndings disussed

tween two proteins as a funtion of the energy and the

above still hold qualitatively (ompare inset of Fig. 1).

omplementarity parameter using e(cid:30)ient modern Monte

In situations where one moleule is (cid:29)exible onforma-

Carlo algorithms [16℄. The density of states ΩJ (K, E) for
a (cid:28)xed target struture σ(0)
tions (θ, S) that have energy E = H when interating
with the target, and a omplementarity K with the tar-

is the number of on(cid:28)gura-

tional hanges our. However, ooperativity works on

the level of residue interations and thus we expet that

the favorable e(cid:27)et of ooperativity to moleular reogni-

tion is not spoilt by the entropi ontributions due to re-

get reognition site. The probability distribution of the

folding. This, however, needs further investigation. Note

For simpliity, we onsider asymptotially large inter-

tions for moleular reognition. This study is motivated

faes on a square lattie. (The atual alulations shown

by the observation that antibody-antigen interfaes have

omplementarity K is then (up to a normalization on-
E ΩJ (K, E) exp(−βDE).
stant) given by PβD

(K; J) ∼

P

here were arried out with N = 256, and we heked
that the results do not hange any more for larger N ).
Fig. 1 shows the average omplementarity hKi /N for
di(cid:27)erent ooperativities J . Cooperativity is found to in-

that (cid:29)exible binding has been addressed reently [17℄.

Next, we investigate the role of the interplay of intera-

very spei(cid:28) properties. Mutagenesis studies have re-

vealed that the strutural interfae in these omplexes

is di(cid:27)erent from the funtional reognition site made up

of those residues that ontribute to the binding energy.

rease the average omplementarity of the designed probe

Only approximately one quarter of the residues at the

moleules for large enough values of the parameter εβD
For εβD ∼ 1, a small hange in the ooperativity J

.

interfae ontribute onsiderably to the binding energy

[10, 19℄. These ontributing residues are sometimes alled

leads to a large di(cid:27)erene in the average omplementar-

(cid:16)hot spots(cid:17). In addition it has been shown that antigen-

ity, i.e., small hanges in J an have a large impat on
the reognition proess. As ε is typially of the order

antibody interfaes are less hydrophobi, ompared to

other protein-protein interfaes, so that the relatively

of 1 kal/mole, this regime indeed orresponds to phys-

strong hydrogen bonds are more important [10℄. In the

iologial onditions for reasonable design temperatures,

immune system moleular reognition must satisfy very

1/βD . 1/βRoom
per site ∆F (Q)/N of the assoiation of probe moleules

. Fig. 2 shows the free energy di(cid:27)erene

spei(cid:28) requirements. The immune system has to reog-

nize substanes that have never been enountered before.

with the target struture and a rival struture, for dif-

Thus antigen-antibody reognition has to exhibit a large

ferent values of the ooperativity onstant J .

Inreas-

(cid:29)exibility [9℄, and has to be able to adapt very rapidly

ing the ooperativity inreases the free energy di(cid:27)erene.

by evolution. These peuliarities of antibody-antigen in-

Relatively small ooperativities are su(cid:30)ient to obtain

terfaes suggest that seletive moleular interations are

an e(cid:27)et, and the maximum e(cid:27)et of ooperativity is al-

obtained most e(cid:30)iently with only a few strong intera-

ready reahed for a value J ≃ ε. Thus, we (cid:28)nd that

tions aross the interfae, so that a omplementarity with

ooperativity indeed improves the reognition ability as

the whole reognition site is not neessary.

/

N
>
F
∆
<

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2
0

4

reognition. A two-stage approah whih distinguishes

between the design of probe moleules and the test of

their reognition abilities has been adopted. We have

applied the approah to investigate the role of oopera-

tivity and of hydrogen bonding for moleular reognition.

It turned out that ooperativity an substantially in(cid:29)u-

ene the e(cid:30)ieny of both design and reognition ability

of reognition sites. Our model also reprodues the ob-

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

A/N

servation that the strutural reognition site has to be

distinguished from a funtional reognition site in highly

(cid:29)exible omplexes suh as antigen-antibody omplexes.

FIG. 3: Averaged free energy di(cid:27)erene per site (in arbitrary

The approah an readily be generalized to study other

units) as a funtion of the fration A/N of ative residues for
εHA/N = 0.1. The full urve orresponds to a ratio β/βD
= 1,
the dashed urve to β/βD

= 1/2.

aspets of moleular reognition. For example, it will be

interesting to investigate the in(cid:29)uene of the heterogene-

ity of the mixture of target and rival moleules in physi-

ologial situations. This an be inorporated by onsid-

ering ensembles of targets and rivals di(cid:27)ering in ertain

Within our two-stage approah, we an address the

properties as for example orrelations and length sales.

question whether few but strong bonds or many but weak

A reent study indeed showed that the loal small-sale

bonds are more favorable. To this end we onsider a

struture of moleules seems to be important for mole-

model whih distinguishes between ative and inative

ular reognition [6℄.

residues only. Only ative residues ontribute to a bond.

Finanial support of the Deutshe Forshungsgemein-

shaft (SFB 613) is gratefully aknowledged.

The variables σ and θ now take on the values σi, θi = +1
for ative and σi, θi = 0 for inative residues, and the

Hamiltonian is given by

H(σ, θ, S) = −εH

N

Xi=1

1 + Si
2

σiθi

(4)

[1℄ B. Alberts et. al, Moleular Biology of the Cel l, Garland

with Si speifying again the quality of the ontat of
residues, and εH

giving the interation strength. More-

Publishing, In., New York, 1994.

[2℄ C. Kleanthous, ed., Protein-Protein Reognition, Oxford

University Press, Oxford, 2000.

[3℄ L. Pauling, M. Delbrük, Siene 92, 77 (1940).

over, we extend the design step by (cid:28)xing the average

[4℄ A. K. Chakraborty, Phys. Rep. 342, 1 (2001).

number of ative residues A = h

i θii on the probe

ation energy E is also sub jet to restritions: It has to

P

moleules with a Lagrange parameter. The total inter-

120, 6246 (2004); 121, 4853 (2004).

[6℄ T. Bogner, A. Degenhard, F. Shmid, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[5℄ A. Polotsky, A. Degenhard, F. Shmid, J. Chem. Phys.

exeed the thermal energy to stabilize the omplex, but

93, 268108 (2004).

on the other hand it has to be small enough to ensure the

[7℄ J. Janin, Proteins 25, 438 (1986).

[8℄ J. Wang, G. M. Verkhivker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 188101

high (cid:29)exibility of the target-probe omplex that is ru-

(2003).

ial for the immune system. When inreasing the average

number of ative residues A, one must therefore redue
the interation energy εH
the produt E ≈ AεH

aordingly, e.g., by keeping

onstant.

Figure 3 shows as a funtion of A/N the average free
energy di(cid:27)erene per site ∆F/N of the assoiation with

the target moleule and a rival moleule, averaged over

all possible target and rival strutures σ . We (cid:28)nd that
h∆F i exhibits a minimum at a small fration A/N of

ative residues. The position of the minimum at small

frations of A/N is fairly insensitive to a variation of the

[9℄ S. Jones, J. M. Thornton, Pro. Natl. Aad. Si. USA,

[10℄ L. Lo Conte, C. Chothia, J. Janin, J. Mol. Biol. 285, 2177

93, 13 (1996).

(1999).

Phys. 72, 259 (2000).

94, 078103 (2005).

[11℄ V. S. Pande, A. Yu. Grosberg, T. Tanaka, Rev. Mod.

[12℄ A. Jayaraman, C. K. Hall, J. Genzer, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[13℄ K. A. Dill, Biohemistry 24, 1501 (1985).

[14℄ Note that the original HP-model does not ontain an ad-

ditional variable S to model the quality of ontats.

[15℄ E. di Cera, Chem. Rev. 98, 1563 (1998).

interation parameters. Hene this simple oarse-grained

[16℄ A. Hüller, M. Pleimling, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 13, 947

(2002); F. Wang, D. P. Landau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,

model already predits that moleular reognition is most

2050 (2001)

e(cid:30)ient if the funtional reognition site onsists only of

[17℄ J. Wang, Q. Lu, H. P. Lu, PLoS Comput. Biol. 2, e78

a small fration of the strutural reognition site, as is

(2006).

indeed observed in antibody-antigen omplexes.

[18℄ H. Behringer, A. Degenhard, F. Shmid, unpublished.

In onlusion, we have presented oarse-grained mod-

[19℄ B. C. Cunningham, J. A. Wells, J. Mol. Biol. 234, 554

els whih allow to study generi features of biomoleular

(1993).

