Role of the dihedral angle potential in the nucleation pathway of
protein folding

Y. S. Djikaev∗
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, SUNY at Buﬀalo,
Buﬀalo, New York 14260

(Received

.

Abstract.
A kinetic model for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding is proposed. A protein is modeled as a
heteropolymer consisting of hydrophobic and hydrophilic beads with equal constant bond lengths and bond
angles. The total energy of the heteropolymer is determined by the repulsive/attractive interactions of non-
linked beads and the contribution from the dihedral angles involved. Their parameters can be rigorously
deﬁned, unlike the ill deﬁned surface tension of a cluster of protein residues which is the basis of the previous
model. As a crucial idea of the model, the dihedral potential in which a selected bead is involved is averaged
over all possible conﬁgurations of neighboring beads along the protein chain. The resulting average dihedral
potential of the residue is constant far enough from the cluster, but increases monotonically with decreasing
distance below a threshold value. An overall potential around the cluster wherein a residue performs a
chaotic motion is a combination of the average dihedral and pairwise potentials. As a function of distance
from the cluster it has a double well shape. Residues in the inner well are considered as belonging to the
cluster (folded part of the protein) while those in the outer well are treated as belonging to the unfolded
(although compact) part of the protein. A double well shape of the potential around the cluster allows
one to determine its emission and absorption rates by using a ﬁrst passage time analysis and develop a
self-consistent kinetic theory for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding. Numerical calculations for
a protein of 2500 residues with the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of residues in the native state ranging from 10−6
cm2/s to 10−8 cm2/s predict folding times in the range from several seconds to several hundreds of seconds.

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗E-mail: idjikaev@eng.buﬀalo.edu

1

1

Introduction

Proteins play an overwhelmingly dominant role in life. If a speciﬁc job has to by done in a living
organism, it is almost always a protein that does it. Life depends on thousands of diﬀerent pro-
teins whose structures are fashioned so that individual protein molecules combine, with exquisite
precision, with other molecules. In order for a protein molecule to carry out a speciﬁc biologi-
cal function, it has to adopt a well-deﬁned three-dimensional structure.1,2 The formation of this
structure (of a biologically active globular protein) constitutes the core of a so-called “protein
folding problem”.3 Many thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the process remain obscure and
its mechanism elusive.4−8

Experiment and simulation suggest that there exist multiple pathways for the protein folding.6−15

It is believed that initially a denatured protein very quickly transforms into a compact (but not
native) conﬁguration with a few, insigniﬁcant amount of tertiary contacts. The transition from
such a compact conﬁguration to the native one has been suggested to occur via two distinct mech-
anisms. One of them can be referred to as a “transition state mechanism” whereby the tertiary
contacts of the native structure form as the protein passes through a sequence of intermediate
states thus gradually achieving its unique spatial conﬁguration.6−15 The protein in intermediate
states has a native-like overall topology but is stabilized by incorrect hydrophobic contacts. These
states correspond to misfolded forms of the native protein. The transition from these intermedi-
ate, misfolded states to the correctly folded, native structure is a slow process (because it involves
a large-scale rearrangement of the molecule) occurring on a relatively large time scales.14,15 Alter-
natively, the transition from the compact “amorphous” conﬁguration to the native state occurs
immediately following the formation of some number of tertiary contacts.14,15 This mechanism is
similar to nucleation, i.e., once a critical number of (native) tertiary contacts is established the
native structure is formed without passing through any detectable intermediate states.14

So far most of the work on protein folding has been done by using either Monte Carlo (MC) or
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. A rigorous theoretical treatment of the problem by means
of the statistical mechanics is hardly practicable because of the extreme complexity of the system,
although some approximate treatments were already reported.16,17 A theoretical model for the
nucleation mechanism of the process has so far remained underdeveloped.18,14,19 The model which
existed so far is a thermodynamic one considering the formation of a cluster of protein residues
and calculating its free energy change, much like the classical nucleation theory (CNT) does. The
cluster is characterized by ν, the total number of residues, with the mole fraction of hydrophobic
ones assumed to be known. As usual in CNT, the size of a critical cluster (nucleus) is provided by
the location of the maximum of the free energy of formation as a function of ν. Such an approach
necessarily involves the concept of surface tension for a cluster consisting of protein residues.
(Clearly, this quantity is an intrinsically ill-deﬁned physical quantity and can be considerer only
as an adjustable parameter; no direct experimental measurement thereof is possible.) After the
formation of the nucleus (critical size cluster of residues), the protein quickly reaches its native
state.

In what follows work I present a new, microscopic model for the nucleation mechanism of the
protein folding. The new model is based on “molecular” interactions, both long-range (due to
repulsion/attraction) and conﬁgurational (due bond and dihedral angles), in which protein residues
are involved. Their parameters can be rigorously deﬁned, and it should be possible (although not
straightforward) to determine them theoretically, computationally, or experimentally. The ill-
deﬁned surface tension of a cluster of protein residues does not enter into the new model which

2

is thus more advanced than the CNT-based one. The crucial idea underlying the new model
consists of averaging the dihedral potential in which a selected residue is involved over all the
possible conﬁgurations of neighboring residues. The resulting average dihedral potential depends
on the distance between residue and cluster. Its combination with the average long range potential
(due to pairwise interactions of the selected residue with those in the cluster) gives rise to the
overall potential which has generates a pair of potential wells around the cluster with a barrier
between them. Residues in the inner well are considered to belong to the cluster (part of the
protein with correct tertiary contacts) while those in the outer well are treated as belonging to
the mother phase (amorphous part of the protein with incorrect tertiary contacts). Transitions
of residues from the inner well into the outer one and vice versa are considered as elementary
emission and absorption events, respectively. The rates of emission and absorption of residues by
the cluster are determined by using the ﬁrst passage time analysis.20−25 Once these rates are found
as functions of the cluster size, one can develop a self-consistent kinetic theory for the nucleation
mechanism of folding of a protein. For example, the size of the critical cluster (nucleus) is then
found as the one for which these rates are equal. The time necessary for the protein to fold can
be evaluated as a sum of the times necessary for the appearance of the ﬁrst nucleus and the time
necessary for the nucleus to grow to the maximum size (of the folded protein in the native state).
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe a random heteropolymer chain
whereby a protein molecule is often modeled6,14 and outline a CNT-based model for the nucleation
mechanism of protein folding, whereof a new, microscopic model is proposed in Section 3. The
results of numerical calculations are presented in Section 4 and a brief discussion and conclusions
are summarized in Section 5.

2 Heteroplymer chain as a protein model and a CNT based model

for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding

2.1 A heteropolymer as a protein model

As a simple model of a protein in MD and MC simulations of protein folding dynamics, the
polypeptide chain of a protein is considered6,14 as a heteropolymer consisting of N connected
beads which can be thought of as representing the α-carbons of various amino acids. The het-
eropolymer may consist of hydrophobic (b), hydrophilic (l), or neutral (n). Two adjacent beads
are connected by a covalent bond of ﬁxed length η. This model (and its variants), augmented
with appropriate interaction, bond, and dihedral potentials described below, was shown6,14,16,18
to be capable of capturing the essential characteristics of protein folding process even though it
contains only some features of a real polypeptide chain. For example, this model ignores side
groups although they are known to be crucial for intramolecular hydrogen bonding.1 Besides, the
presence of solvent (water) in a real physical system has been usually accounted for too simplisti-
cally, although the protein dynamics was reported to be more realistic in MD simulations where
solvent molecules are explicitly present.26 Despite these limitations, various modiﬁcations of het-
eropolymer models5,16,18,27−30 shed light on some important details of the folding of polypeptide
chains, such as possible pathways for the protein transition from a denatured state to the native
one.6,14

The total energy of the heteropolymer (polypeptide chain) can contain the contributions of
three diﬀerent types. First, the contribution from repulsive/attractive forces between pairs of
non-adjacent beads (these can be, e.g., of Lennard-Jones type or others). The next contribution

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

can arise from harmonic forces related with the oscillations of bond angles. Finally, there is a
contribution from the dihedral angle potential due to the rotation around the peptide bonds.
There are various ways to model these three types of energetic terms.6,14,27−29

A pair interaction between two non-adjacent beads i and j at a distance rij away from each

other can be taken, for example, as6,14

φij(rij) = 


4ǫb[(η/rij )12
(η/rij )6]
4ǫl[(η/rij )12 + (η/rij )6]
4ǫn(η/rij )12

−

(i, j = b),
(i = l, j = b, l),
(i = n, j = b, l, n),

where η is the bond length (ﬁxed) and ǫb, ǫl, and ǫn are the energy parameters.



The angle β between two successive bonds (in the heteropolymer) can be regarded to be

subjected to a harmonic potential

φβ =

kβ
2

(β

β0),

−

where the spring constant kβ is relatively large (in refs.6,14 it was taken 20ǫb/(rad)2 = 105o so
that the deviation of the bond angles from the average value β0 is very small. Hence all bond
angles can be set to be equal to β0 (as argued in refs.6,14, the bond angle forces play a minor role
in the protein folding/unfolding).

The dihedral angle potential arises due to the rotation of three successive peptide bonds

connecting four successive beads, and is related to the dihedral angle δ as

φδ = ǫ

′
δ(1 + cos δ) + ǫ

′′
δ (1 + cos 3δ),

δ and ǫ′′

where ǫ′
trans conﬁguration at δ = 0 and two others in the gauche conﬁgurations at δ =
(the former one is lower than the latter two).

δ are independent energy parameters. This potential has three minima, one in the
δ)/12ǫ′′
ǫ′

arccos

(3ǫ′′

δ −

q

±

δ

The above structure of potential functions for a heteropolymer was suggested by Honeycutt
and Thirumalai,6 while Bryngelson and Wolynes16,18 used a random energy model and Skolnik and
co-workers27−29 developed discrete analogs (for a diamond lattice) of eqs.(1) and (3) augmented
It was shown6,14 by MD
with a “cooperativity potential” as a crucial element of the model.
simulations (employing low friction Langevin dynamics) that a proper balance between the above
three contributions to the total energy of the heteropolymer ensures that the heteropolymer folds
into a well deﬁned β-barrel structure. The balancing between these terms is performed by adjusting
the energy parameters ǫb, ǫl, ǫn, ǫ′
δ for each type of beads. It was also found6.14 that the balance
between the dihedral angle potential, which tends to stretch the molecule into a state with all
bonds in a trans conﬁguration, and the attractive hydrophobic potential is crucial to induce
folding int a β-barrel like structure upon cooling. Excessively dominant attractive forces make the
heteropolymer fold into a globule-like structure, while an overwhelming dihedral angle potential
makes the chain remain in an unfolded (elongated) state (even at low temperatures) with bonds
mainly in the trans conﬁguration.

δ, ǫ′

A possibility that the nucleation-like mechanism can constitute the most viable pathway for the
protein folding was ﬁrst suggested by Guo and Thirumalai14 (although Bringelson and Wolynes18
also drew the analogy between the results presented therein and the thermodynamics of cluster
formation in the framework of CNT). The formalism of the nucleation mechanism for the protein
folding is invoked to evaluate the size of the critical cluster (nucleus) of native protein residues
(whereof the formation leads to a quick transition of the whole protein into its native state).

4

Denoting the total number of residues in the protein by N0, let us consider a formation of a
cluster having a correct tertiary structure in an unfolded protein. The free energy of formation
of such a cluster of ν native residues (i.e., residues which are in the same state as they are in the
native protein) can be written (in the framework of CNT) as

W =

ν∆µ + σ4πλ2ν2/3,

−

(4)

≡

µd −

where δµ
µn is the diﬀerence between the free energy per residue in the denatured and
native states,respectively (marked with the subscripts “d” and “n”), σ is the “surface” tension
(energy) of the boundary between the cluster (having a native structure) and the unfolded part
of the protein, λ = (3v/4π)1/3, and v is a volume per protein residue in its native state.

In ref.14 it was argued that the initial stage of the protein folding is driven by a hydrophobic
attractive forces so that the volume term (i.e., the ﬁrst one) in eq.(4) was determined by the
1),
number of hydrophobic contacts in the cluster and hence could be speciﬁed as
where χ is the mole fraction of hydrophobic residues in the cluster (assumed the same as in the
whole protein). As a result the number of residues in the critical cluster was given as νc =
(8πσλ2/3χ2ǫb)(3/4) which for typical values of λ, σ, and ǫb was estimated14 to be of the order
In ref.16, ∆µ in the volume term of eq.(4) was evaluated to be of the order of 0.1kB T
of 10.
(kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature). The “surface” tension was argued
to arise because the amino acid residues located at the cluster surface interact stronger with the
cluster interior than with the unfolded part of the protein. Since the interaction energies in protein
folding are of the order of kBT , the surface tension σ multiplied by 4πλ2 was estimated to be
of the same order and the number of residues in the critical cluster was evaluated18 to be of the
order of 100 (for N0 = 150). Both estimates corroborate the idea that the nucleation mechanism
can constitute a viable pathway for the protein folding.31−35

(1/2)ǫbχν(χν

−

−

3 Kinetics of nucleation during protein folding

→ ∞

→ ∞

and the volume V

The CNT-based model for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding is limited to its thermo-
dynamics, namely to the free energy of formation of the cluster of native residues. For a system
in the thermodynamic limit (both the number of molecules N
), the
validity of expression (4) for the free energy of cluster formation in various [i.e., canonical (NVT),
grand canonical (µVT), and Gibbs (NPT)] ensembles was well established.36,37 If nucleation oc-
curs in a ﬁnite size system, there appear additional terms on the RHS of eq.(4) which depend not
only on the size of the system but also on the nature of the ensemble. However, a folding protein
(mostly containing much less than a couple of thousands of amino acids) can hardly be considered
to satisfy the thermodynamic limit. Furthermore, the cluster formation during protein folding
occurs under conditions which cannot be identiﬁed with either of commonly used thermodynamic
ensembles. Besides, the CNT based model (described above) has inherited a complicated problem
of CNT related to the surface tension of the cluster. It was argued that the concept of surface
tension may not be adequate for too small clusters (such as those of interest in nucleation),38,39
not to mention the assumption (of CNT) that it is equal to the surface tension of a planar in-
terface. Although CNT produces reasonable agreement with experiment on unary nucleation, its
application to multicomponent nucleation leads to several inconsistencies and large discrepancies
with experimental data40−45 which are blamed on the inadequate use of the concept of surface
tension. In the case of protein folding this problem is even more complicated because σ in eqs.(4) is

5

an ill-deﬁned quantity which is experimentally impossible to determine due to the non-existence
of bulk “folded protein” and “unfolded protein” as real physical phases, not to mention a ﬂat
interface between them.

In order to avoid the use of macroscopic thermodynamics in the kinetic theory of unary nu-
cleation, an alternative approach was proposed20−22 on the basis of the mean ﬁrst passage time
analysis. Unlike CNT, that theory20−22 is built upon molecular interactions and does not make
use of the free energy of formation of tiny clusters involved in nucleation. Instead, the theory20−22
exploits the fact that one can derive and solve the kinetic equation of nucleation (hence ﬁnd the
nucleation rate) if the emission and absorption rates of a cluster are known as functions of its
size. For the rate of absorption of molecules by the cluster, the new approach uses (as CNT does)
a standard gas-kinetic expression,46 but the rate of emission of molecules by the cluster is deter-
mined via a mean ﬁrst passage time analysis. This time is calculated by solving a single-molecule
master equation for the probability distribution function of a surface layer molecule moving in a
potential well around the cluster. The master equation is a Fokker-Planck equation in the phase
space which can be reduced to the Smoluchowski equation owing to the hierarchy of characteristic
time scales in the evolution of the single-molecule distribution function with respect to coordi-
nates and momenta.20−22 Recently, a further development of that kinetic theory was proposed
by combining it with the density functional theory (DFT)23,24 and extending it to binary24 and
heterogeneous25 systems.

Note that although the emission rate of the cluster in refs.20-25 was found by using a ﬁrst pas-
sage time analysis, for the absorption rate there was used an expression derived in the framework of
the gas-kinetic theory of gases46 which assumes a Maxwellian distribution of velocities of mother
phase molecules. This assumption being unquestionably valid for vapor-to-liquid nucleation in
dilute (if not ideal) gases, becomes increasingly inaccurate as the density of the mother phase in-
creases and molecular interactions therein become non-negligible. Clearly, this assumption (hence
the absorption rate based thereupon) is inadequate in considering the cluster formation during
the protein folding. Indeed, the amino acid residues of the protein are all successively linked by
bonds of virtually ﬁxed length each and ﬁxed angle between each pair.

In this section we will present a new, kinetic model for the nucleation mechanism of protein
folding based on the ﬁrst passage analysis which will be used for determining not only the rate
of emission (of native residues from the cluster) but also the rate of absorption (of non-native
residues by the cluster). The general formalism of our model is a mean ﬁrst passage time analysis,
but a crucial modiﬁcation (compared to refs.20-25) must be introduced thereto in order to make
it applicable to nucleation in a protein. This modiﬁcation concerns the potential well generated
around the cluster as a result of all its interactions with a residue which moves around the cluster
while being a part of the protein backbone (a bead in a heteropolymer).

3.1 Potential well around a cluster within a protein

A heteropolymer chain as a protein model, originally proposed in refs.6,14 and described above,
consists of three types of beads - neutral, hydrophobic, and hydrophilic. The neutral beads play
an important role in that model. Their interaction with each other is purely repulsive and the
dihedral angle forces are assumed to be weaker for the bonds involving them so that the bend
formation is enhanced in regions where they are present. In real proteins this kind of residues
can be thought to ensure the formation of loops and turns. MD simulations6,14 show that such
a heteropolymer acquires a β-barrel shape in the lowest energy structure, with neutral residues

6

appearing mostly in bend regions. This work is not aimed at obtaining a β-barrel structure of
the folded protein, so neutral beads will be removed from the model. Clearly, this will require to
rebalance ǫ’s in eqs.(1),(3) in order to facilitate the formation of loops and turns in a heteropolymer
chain.

Thus, the two-component heteropolymer chain as a model for a protein consists of only hy-
drophobic and hydrophilic beads without neutral ones with the pair interaction, bond angle, and
dihedral angle potentials given by eqs.(1)-(3). With this assumption, the formation of a cluster
consisting of native residues during the protein folding can be regarded as binary nucleation. We
shall therefore present a model for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding in terms of binary
nucleation by using a ﬁrst passage time analysis20−25 with a crucial modiﬁcation concerning the
potential well around the cluster.

Consider a binary cluster of spherical shape (with sharp boundaries and radius R) immersed
in a binary ﬂuid mixture.24 A molecule of component i (i = b, l) located in the surface layer of
the cluster was considered to perform thermal chaotic motion in a spherically symmetric potential
well φi(r) resulting from the pair interactions of this molecule with those in the cluster. Assuming
pairwise additivity of the intermolecular interactions, φi(r) is provided by

φi(r) =

Xj ZV

dr′

ρj(r

′

r′
)φij(
|

r
),
|

−

Here r is the coordinate of the surface molecule i, ρj(r)
(j = 1, 2) is the number density of
molecules of component j at point r′ (spherical symmetry is assumed, the cluster center chosen
r′
r
as the origin of the coordinate system), and φij(
) is the interaction potential between two
|
|
molecules of components i and j at points r and r′, respectively. The integration in eq.(5) goes
over the whole volume of the system, but the vapor phase contribution can be assumed to be
small and accounted for by a particular choice of the ǫb and ǫl.

−

For nucleation in proteins the potential ψi(r) for a residue of type i around the cluster is
determined not only by the potential φi(r), but also by two other contributions, φβ(r) and ¯φδ(r),
due to the bond angle and dihedral angle potentials, respectively:

ψi(r) = φi(r) + φβ(r) + ¯φδ(r).

Without aﬀecting the generality of the model, one can signiﬁcantly simplify the algebra and
eventual numerical calculations by assuming that all bond angles are ﬁxed and equal to β0 = 105o.
Under this assumption the contribution to the potential energy of the protein arising from the
bond angle potential is constant and does not depend on the distance r between the selected bead
and the center of the cluster. Therefore, the term φβ(r) on the RHS of eq.(6) can be disregarded
(or, equivalently, be chosen as a reference level for the potential energy), i.e.,

ψi(r) = φi(r) + ¯φδ(r).

δ(r)

The term φ′

φ′
δ(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) in ψi(r) is due to the dihedral angle potential of the
whole protein. Consider bead 1 (of type b or l) at a distance r from the center of the cluster (see
Figure 1). The total dihedral angle potential of the whole protein chain for a given conﬁguration
of beads 2,3,...,N can be written in the form

≡

′
δ(r) = φδ(δ642
φ

421(r)) + φδ(δ421

213(r)) + φδ(δ213

135(r)) + φδ(δ135

357(r)).

(5)

(6)

(7)

7

where δijk
jkl is a dihedral angle between two planes, one of which is determined by beads i, j, k
and the other by beads j, k, l. On the RHS of the above equation, an independent of r term is
omitted which represents the contributions from the dihedral angles involving beads 8, 9, ..., N
(hence φ′
δ(r) does not depend on coordinates of beads 8, ..., N0). It can be regarded as aﬀecting
only the reference level for ψi(r).

Consider bead 1 at a given distance from the cluster r. Various conﬁgurations of beads
2, 3, ..., N (subject to the ﬁxed bond length and bond angle constraints as well as to the constraint
of excluded cluster volume) lead to various sets of dihedral angles. However, variations in the
location of beads 8, 9, ..., N lead to variations in the dihedral potential which are independent
of r. Thus, the dihedral term ¯φδ(r) (less an independent of r term omitted hereafter) on the
RHS of eq.(7) can be obtained by averaging eq.(8) with the probability distribution function
p(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) for conﬁgurations of beads 2 to 7 with a ﬁxed location of bead 1 and
assigning the result to the latter:

¯φδ(r) =

′
δ(r)p(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7)
dr2dr3dr4dr5dr6dr7 φ

(8)

ZΩ18

where ri
18-dimensional space.

(i = 2, ..., 7) is the radius-vector of bead i and Ω18 is the integration region in an

It is convenient to choose a Cartesian system of coordinates with the origin in the cluster
center in such a way that the coordinates of bead 1 are x1 = 0, y1 = 0, z1 = r (see Figure 1). The
(i = 2, ..., 7). The Cartesian
Cartesian coordinates of other beads will be denoted by xi, yi, zi
coordinates of bead 2 are related to its spherical ones r2, Θ2, ϕ2 by

x2 = r2 sin Θ2 cos ϕ, y2 = r2 sin Θ2 sin ϕ, z2 = r2 cos Θ2.

(9)

At a given r (the location of bead 1 is ﬁxed), the polar angle Θ of bead 2 is uniquely determined

by r2 due to the constant bond length constraint:

˜Θ2 = Θ2(r, r2) = arccos[(r2 + r2

η2)/(2r2r)]

(0

2 −

˜Θ2 ≤

≤

π),

whereas the azimuthal angle 0

2π. The distance r2 varies in the range

φ2 ≤

≤

r2min

r2 ≤

≤

r + η,

(10)

(11)

where r2min = max(R, r
integration with respect to ϕ2 and r2 with ﬁxed Θ2 = ˜Θ2.

−

η). Thus the integration with respect to r2 in eqs.(8) reduces to

For given locations of beads 1 and 2, the possible locations of beads 3 and 4 lie on circles of
radius r0 = η sin β0 with their location and orientation completely determined by the coordinates
of beads 1 and 2. This is due to the constraints that all bond angles are equal to β0 and all bond
lengths are equal to η. Due to the same constraints, if the locations of beads 2 and 4 are given,
the possible locations of bead 6 lie on a circle of radius r0, whereof the location and orientation
are completely determined by the coordinates of beads 2 and 4. Further, for the given locations
of beads 1 and 3, the possible locations of bead 5 lie on a circle of radius r0 with the position
and orientation completely determined by the coordinates of beads 1 and 3. Finally, for the given
locations of beads 3 and 5, the possible locations of bead 7 are on a circle of radius r0, with the
location and orientation completely determined by the coordinates of beads 3 and 5.

Let us consider bead s with unknown coordinates and two other beads, c and n (closest to
and next to the closest to bead s) with known coordinates xc, yc, zc and xn, yn, zn. For example,

8

if s = 7, then c = 5, n = 3; if s = 4, then c = 2, n = 1. Bead s lies on a circle of radius r0 with the
coordinates of the center

x0 ≡

x0(xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = xn + (xc −

xn)

y0 ≡

y0(xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = yn + (yc −

yn)

z0 ≡

z0(xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = zn + (zc −
The coordinate xs of bead s can change in the range

zn)

p

(xc −

(xc −

(xc −

p

p

|

η(1 +
xn)2 + (yc −
η(1 +
xn)2 + (yc −
η(1 +
xn)2 + (yc −

)
cos Θ0|
yn)2 + (zc −
)
cos Θ0|
yn)2 + (zc −
)
cos Θ0|
yn)2 + (zc −

|

|

,

zn)2

,

.

zn)2

zn)2

where

xc −

xb ≤

xs ≤

xc + xb

(s = 3, ..., 7),

xb ≡

xb(xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = η sin Θ0

z0)2)
yn)2 + (zc −
For a given xs, the coordinate ys of bead s can have only one of two values,

((yc −
xn)2 + (yc −

y0)2 + (zc −

(xc −

s

zn)2 .

(16)

y

±
s ≡

±
s (xs, xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = y0 +

y

zc −
|

z0|

[(yc −

y0)2 + (zc −

q

x0)

(
−

(xc −
(yc −
z0)2]η2 sin2 β0 −
(yc −

x0)(yc −
y0)2 + (zc −
[(xc −
y0)2 + (zc −

y0)(xs −
z0)2
xn)2 + (yc −
z0)2

(17)

±
yn)2 + (zc −

zn)2](xs −

x0)2

,

For given xs and ys, the coordinate zs of bead s can have only a single value

±
z
s ≡

±

zs(xs, y

s , xn, yn, zn, xc, yc, zc) = z0 −

(xc −

x0)(xs −

y0)(ys −

y0)

.

(18)

x0) + (yc −
z0
zc −

Thus, the probability distribution function p(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) acquires the form

p(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) = f

−1δ(Θ2 −

˜Θ2)Π7

i=3[δ(yi −
′
δ(r, (r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7)],
φ

i ) + δ(yi −

y

−

exp[

−

y+
i )]δ(zi −

˜zi)

×

where f is a normalization constant determined by the condition

dr2dr3dr4dr5dr6dr7 p(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) = 1.

ZΩ18

Substituting eq.(19) into eq.(8) reduces an 18-fold integral to a 7-fold one:

¯φδ(r) = f

−1

2π

0
Xi,j,k,m,n=+,− Z

ZLj
2 sin Θ2(r, r2) ˜φijkmn(ϕ2, r2, x3, ..., x7) exp[
r2

ZLi

ZL2

4

3

dϕ2

dr2

dx3

dx4

dx5

dx6

ZLk

5

ZLm

6

ZLn

7

dx7 ×

˜φijkmn(ϕ2, r2, x3, ..., x7)/kBT ], (21)

−

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(19)

(20)

9

f =

0
Xi,j,k,m,n=+,− Z
r2
2 sin Θ2(r, r2) exp[

dϕ2

dr2

dx3

dx4

dx5

3

ZLi

ZLj
ZL2
˜φijkmn(ϕ2, r2, x3, ..., x7)/kBT ].

ZLk

5

4

ZLm

6

dx6

dx7 ×

ZLn

7

(22)

2π

−

In these equations each of the summation indices takes on two values, + and
, so that there are
52 terms in the sum diﬀering by the integrand as well as by the integration ranges (except for L2
which is independent of i, j, k, m, n).

−

The double inequalities (11) and (15) and eqs.(16)-(18) completely determine the integration
ranges (subject to the additionl constraint x2
(s = 2, ..., 7) of excluded cluster
volume) in eqs.(21) and (22). In order to transform the function φ′
φ′
δ(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7)
δ(r)
into the function ˜φijkmn(r, ϕ2, r2, x3, ..., x7), the variables ys (s = 3, ..., 7) and zs (s = 3, ..., 7) in
the former must be replaced by y±
s in all the possible combinations each of which gives rise
to a term in the sums in eqs.(21) and (22) (note that z+
s , ...)).
The polar angle of bead 2 must be replaced by ˜Θ2 = Θ2(r, r2).

s = zs(xs, y−

s , ...) and z−

s = zs(xs, y+

s and z±

s > R2

s + z2

s + y2

≡

−

−

For example, consider the term with i = +, j =

, k = +, m = +, n =

in the sum in

eqs.(21),(22). The corresponding integrand ˜φ+−++−(ϕ2, r2, x3, ..., x7) is obtained from
φδ(r, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r7) as follows:
y3 must be replaced by y+
3 ≡
−
y4 must be replaced by y
4 ≡
y5 must be replaced by y+
3 ≡
y6 must be replaced by y+
3 ≡
−
y7 must be replaced by y
7 ≡

y+
3 (x3, x2, y2, z2, x1, y1, z1) and z3 by z+
3 ≡
−
−
y
4 (x4, , x1, y1, z1, x2, y2, z2) and z4 by z
4 ≡
y+
5 (x5, x1, y1, z1, x3, y3, z3) and z5 by z+
5 ≡
6 (x6, x2, y2, z2, x4, y4, z4) and z6 by z+
y+
6 ≡
−
−
7 (x7, x3, y3, z3, x5, y5, z5) and z7 by z
y
7 ≡

z3(x3, y+
3 , x2, y2, z2, x1, y1, z1),
−
4 , x1, y1, z1, x2, y2, z2),
z4(x4, y
z5(x5, y+
5 , x1, y1, z1, x3, y3, z3),
z6(x6, y+
6 , x2, y2, z2, x4, y4, z4),
−
7 , x3, y3, z3, x5, y5, z5),
z7(x7, y

Figure 2 presents φδ(r), the contribution from the average dihedral potential to the total po-
tential around the cluster, provided by eqs.(21),(22). It has quite a remarkable behavior. Starting
with its maximum value at the cluster surface, it monotonically decreases with increasing r until
it becomes constant for some r
˜r (see section 4). This behaviour can be accounted for by the
entropic eﬀect on the average dihedral potential assigned to a selected bead. Actually, the closer
the selected bead (1) is to the cluster surface (for r < ˜r), the more restricted is the conﬁgura-
tional space available for the neighboring beads (2 through 7). This decreases the entropy of the
heteropolymer chain compared to the case where bead is far enough away from the cluster which,
in turn transpires as an increase in the average dihedral potential φδ(r), assigned to bead 1, with
decreasing r. With some degree of liberty, φδ(r) can be interpreted as a constrained (with bead
1 ﬁxed) free energy of the heteropolymer chain 1 through 7.

≥

3.2 Determination of the emission and absorption rates

Figure 3 presents typical shapes of the constituents φi(r) and φδ(r) of the potential well as
functions of the distance from the cluster center, as well as the overall potential well ψi(r) itself (for
details of numerical calculations see section 4). The contribution φi(r), arising from the pairwise
interactions, has a familiar form20−25 reminiscent of the underlying Lennard-Jones potential. Its
combination with the contribution φδ(r) from the average dihedral potential results in the overall
potential ψi(r) which has a double well shape: the inner well is separated by the potential barrier
from the outer well. This shape of ψi(r) is of crucial importance to our model for the nucleation
mechanism of protein folding because it makes it possible to use a mean ﬁrst passage time analysis
for the determination of the rate of absorption of beads by the cluster

Developing our model in the spirit of the mean ﬁrst passage time analysis,20−25 a bead (residue)

10

is considered as belonging to the cluster as long as it remains in the inner potential well (hereinafter
referred to as “i.p.w.”), and as dissociated from the cluster w hen it passes over the barrier between
the i.p.w. and the outer potential well (hereinafter referred to as “o.p.w.”). The rate of emission,
W −, is determined by the mean time necessary for the passage of the bead from the i.p.w. over
the barrier into the o.p.w. Likewise, a bead is considered as belonging to the unfolded part of
the heteropolymer (protein) as long as it remains in the o.p.w., and as absorbed by the cluster
when it passes over the barrier between the o.p.w. and the i.p.w.. The rate of emission, W +,
is determined by the mean time necessary for the passage of the bead from the o.p.w. over the
barrier into the i.p.w.

The mean ﬁrst passage time of a bead escaping from some potential well is calculated on
the basis of a kinetic equation governing the chaotic motion of the bead in that potential well.
The chaotic motion of the bead is assumed to be governed by the Fokker-Planck equation for the
single-particle distribution function with respect to its coordinates and momenta, i.e., in the phase
space.47−49 Prior to the passage event, the evolution of a bead in both the i.p.w. and o.p.w. occurs
in a dense enough medium (cluster folded residues or unfolded but compact part of the protein),
where the relaxation time for its velocity distribution function is extremely short and negligible
compared to the characteristic time scale of the passage process. Under favorable conditions,
the Fokker-Planck equation reduces to the Smoluchowski equation, which involves diﬀusion in an
external ﬁeld.48,49 Solving that equation,one can obtain24 the following expressions for W − and
W +, the emission and absorption rates, respectively:

−

W

= niwDiwωiw, W + = nowDowωow.

Here the subscripts “iw” and “ow” mark the quantities for the inner and outer potential wells,
respectively; n is the number of beads in the well, D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the bead, and
ωiw and ωow are deﬁned as

ωiw ≡

1/Diw ¯τiw, ωow

1/Dow¯τow,

≡

where ¯τiw and ¯τiw are the mean ﬁrst passage times for a bead in the i.p.w. to cross over the barrier
into the o.p.w. and vice-versa, respectively. Note that in the original work20−22 on the mean ﬁrst
passage time analysis in the nucleation theory and its recent development23−25 this method was
used only for determining W − but not W +. In the present model, the double well character of
the overall potential ψ(r) around the cluster allows one to apply the ﬁrst passage time analysis
also to determining W +.

Clearly, the quantities W −, W +, ωiw, ωiw, ¯τiw, ¯τiw are the functions of the cluster size and
composition (for the explicit form see ref.24). However, since the overall composition of the protein
(heteropolymer) is ﬁxed, one can assume that the cluster which forms during its folding has a
constant composition equal to the overall protein composition which leads to a unary nucleation
theory.
(Strictly speaking, one can develop a theoretical model for the nucleation mechanism
of protein folding without this assumption which would lead to a binary nucleation theory, but
this would drastically complicate the problem computationally.) Under this assumptions the
aforementioned quantities are functions of only the size of the cluster (say, its radius R or the
total number of beads ν therein).

(23)

(24)

3.3 The equilibrium distribution and steady-state nucleation rate

In terms of nucleation, during the protein folding clusters of various sizes may emerge and exist
simultaneously with diﬀerent probabilities. Let us denote the distribution of clusters with respect

11

to the number of beads in a cluster at time t by g(ν, t). Once the emission and absorption rates
W − = W −(ν) and W + = W +(ν) are known as functions of the cluster size, one can ﬁnd the
equilibrium distribution of clusters ge(ν, t) and solve the kinetic equation of nucleation to ﬁnd the
steady-state nucleation rate.

Actually, according to the principle of detailed balance, W +(ν

1)ge(ν

−

−

1) = W −(ν)ge(ν),

which can be rewritten as

By applying eq.(25) to (ν
equalities, one obtains

−

i) with i = 2, 3, ..., ν

1, multiplying the RHSs and LHSs of all

The equilibrium distribution of clusters ν = 1 is just the number density of residues in a compact
(but unfolded) protein, i.e.,ge(1) = ρu, so that equation (18) can be rewritten as

ge(ν)

ge(ν

1)

−

=

W +(ν

−
W −(ν)

1)

.

−

ge(ν)
ge(1)

=

ν−1

Yi=1

W +(ν

W −(ν

i)
−
i + 1)

.

−

ge(ν) = ρu

W +(1)
W +(ν)

ν−1

Yi=1

W +(ν
W −(ν

i + 1)
i + 1)

.

−
−

−

Let us introduce the function G(ν) =

kBT ln[ge(ν)/ρu]. Clearly, G(ν) in the present theory
plays a role similar to the the free energy of cluster formation in CNT50−52 Under favorable
conditions, G(ν) ﬁrst increases with increasing ν, attains its maximum at some ν = νc, and
then decreases.
In CNT, G(ν) has also a minimum following the maximum but only for an
NVT ensemble where the growth of the cluster (i.e., increase of ν) leads to the decrease in the
metastability of the mother phase. Since the folding protein cannot be considered as an NVT
ensemble, we will not consider this case. The essence of our model, as an alternative to the
CA-based theory, consists of constructing the equilibrium distribution of clusters, ge(ν) (and the
function G(ν) without employing the classical thermodynamics.

The kinetic equation of nucleation in the vicinity of the critical point can be written as50−52

∂g(ν, t)
∂t

= W +
c

∂
∂ν

∂
∂ν

(cid:20)

+

∂G
∂ν

(cid:21)

g(ν, t).

(subscript “c” marks quantities at the critical point) and the function G(ν) can be accurately
represented by its bilinear form. The steady-state solution of the kinetic equation (20) in the
vicinity of νc subject to the conventional boundary conditions

g(ν, t)
ge(ν) →

1

(ν

0),

→

g(ν, t)
ge(ν) →

0

(ν

),

→ ∞

where ge(ν) is the equilibrium distribution, provides the steady-state nucleation rate50−52 which
can be presented in the form

where

Js =

W +
c
√π∆νc

ρue

−Gc/kBT ,

∆νc =

−1/2

.

∂2G
∂ν2 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

12

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

c

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

3.4 Evaluation of the protein folding time

Knowing the emission and absorption rates as functions of ν as well as the nucleation rate Js,
one can estimate the time tf necessary for the protein to fold via nucleation. To do so we will
regard the protein folding (via nucleation) as a two stage process. At the ﬁrst stage, a critical
cluster of native residues form(nucleation proper). At this stage, i.e., for ν < νc, the emission
rate W − is larger than W +, but the cluster does attain the critical size by means of ﬂuctuations.
At the second stage the nucleus grows via regular absorption of native residues dominating their
emission, W − < W + for ν > νc. Thus, the folding time can be represented as

where tn is the time necessary for one critical cluster to nucleate within a compact (but still
unfolded) protein and tg is time necessary for the nucleus to grow up to the maximum size, i.e.,
attain the size of a folded protein.

The time tn of the ﬁrst nucleation event can be estimated as

where V0 is the volume of the unfolded protein in a compact state. The growth time tg can be
found by solving the diﬀerential equation

tf ≃

tn + tg,

tn ≃

1/JsV0,

dν
dt

= W +(ν)

−

W

(ν)

−

N0

tn ≃

νc

Z

W +(ν)

.

W −(ν)

dν

−

subject to the initial condition ν = νc at t = 0 and the condition ν = N0 at t = tn. The solution
of eq.(34) is given by the integral

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

4 Numerical evaluations

In this section we will present some numerical results of the application of our model to the folding
of a model protein, namely, a heteropolymer consisting of total 2500 hydrophobic and hydrophilic
residues, with the mole fraction of hydrophobic residues χ0 = 0.75. The interactions between a
pair of non-linked beads were modeled via the Lennard-Jones (LJ) type potentials (1), while the
potential due to the dihedral angle δ was modeled according to eq.(3). The presence of water
molecules was not taken into account explicitly but was assumed to be implemented into the
model via the potential parameter.

All numerical calculations were carried out for the following values of the interaction parame-

ters:

η1 = 5.39

×

−8cm,

10

ǫl = (2/700)ǫb, ǫ

′
δ = ǫ

′′
δ = 0.3ǫb, ǫb/kT = 1.

A typical density of the the folded protein was evaluated according to data in refs.53,54 and was
set to ρf η3 = 1.05, while a typical density of the unfolded protein in the compact conﬁguration
was set to be ρu = 0.25ρf (note that similar values for ρf and ρd are suggested in ref.18). Taking
into account the results in ref.55, the diﬀusion coeﬃcients in the i.p.w. and the o.p.w. were
assumed to be related as Diwρf = Dowρu. Because of the lack of reliable data on the diﬀusion

13

coeﬃcient of a residue in a protein chain, Diw was assumed to vary between 10−6 cm2/s and 10−8
cm2/s.

106 to 2

Figure 2 shows the average dihedral potential (assigned to a selected bead) ¯φδ(r) as a function
of r for three clusters of sizes (a) R = 3η, (b) R = 6η, and (c) R = 9η. The points represent the
106 point Monte Carlo integration in
actual numerical results obtained by using 1
calculating 7-fold integrals in eqs.(11),(12). The vertical dashed lines correspond to r′ (see above)
such that ¯φδ(r) is expected to be constant for r > r′. The solid lines are analytic ﬁts by an
d)2]. With the accuracy of our calculations the parameters a, b, and c
expression a + b exp[
of this ﬁt do not change with R, while the parameter d is roughly R+ η. Clearly, with an increased
accuracy of calculations we may eventually ﬁnd some dependence of a, b, c on R, but with our
current accuracy it appears that ¯φδ(r) has an universal shape independent on R. Undoubtedly,
the calculation of ¯φδ(r) will constitute the most time consuming procedure in applying our model
to real life problems. It takes about 24 hours to obtain one value of ¯φδ(r) (one point in Fig.2) on
a Dell/Pentium4/3Ghz/512Mb computer.

c(r

×

−

×

−

Figure 3 presents typical shapes of the potentials φb(r) (lower solid curve), ¯φδ(r) (upper solid
curve), and ψb(r) (dashed curve) for a hydrophobic bead around the cluster as functions of the
distance r from the center of the cluster of radius R = 3η. The potential φi(r) is due to the
pairwise interactions of the Lennard-Jones type, and has a shape reminiscent thereof. Previous
applications20−25 of the mean ﬁrst passage time analysis to nucleation had invariably lead to this
kind of the potential well around the cluster.

The average dihedral potential (assigned to a selected bead) ¯φδ(r) has a maximum value at
the cluster surface and decreases monotonically with increasing r until it becomes constant for
r
˜r which is the maximum distance between beads 1 and 6 (or beads 1 and 7) dependent on
R, η, and Θ0:

≥

˜r = R + η

1 +

2 cos Θ0 + 2

2(1

cos Θ0) sin

3
s

−





−

q

Θ0
2 

.



Such a behavior of ¯φδ(r) can be thought of as a consequence of an increase in the entropy of
the heteropolymer chain as the selected bead 1 approaches the cluster surface for r < r′ which
occurs because the conﬁgurational space available for the neighboring beads (2 through 7) becomes
more and more restricted. Once r becomes greater than r′, this piece of the heteropolymer chain
(beads 1 through 7) does not feel the presence of the cluster any more. With some degree of
liberty ¯φδ(r) can be interpreted as a constrained (with bead 1 ﬁxed) free energy of that piece of
the heteropolymer which includes beads 1 through 7.

As a result of the combination of φb(r) and ¯φδ(r) the overall potential ψb(r) has a double well
shape: the inner well is separated by the potential barrier from the outer well. The geometric
characteristics of the wells (widths, depths, etc...) and the height and location of the barrier
between them are determined by the interaction parameters ǫb, ǫl, ǫδ. For example, the larger the
ratio ǫδ/ǫb, the higher the barrier between the well, the wider the i.p.w. and the narrower the
o.p.w. Note that the barrier has diﬀerent heights for beads in the i.p.w. and o.p.w. The outer
boundary of the o.p.w.
is due to the conﬁning potential arising because all residues around the
cluster are successively linked and are bound thereto. Hence they are conﬁned within some volume
wherein the protein is encompassed and the location rcf of the conﬁning potential is assumed to
coincide with its outer boundary. For a given N0 the location rcf is determined by the the size
of the cluster and densities ρf and ρu. The existence of the o.p.w. allows one to consider the
absorption of a bead by the cluster as an escape of the bead from the o.p.w. by crossing over the

14

barrier into the i.p.w. This makes it possible to use the mean ﬁrst passage time analysis for the
determination of the rate of absorption of beads by the cluster. Since the use of the traditional
expression for the absorption rate (based on the gas-kinetic theory)46 is rather inadequate in the
cluster growth within the protein, the double-well shape of ψi(r) is of crucial importance to our
model for the nucleation mechanism of protein folding.

Figure 4 presents W − and W +, the emission and absorption rates, respectively, as functions
of the cluster size R. The location of the intersection of these functions determines the size of the
critical cluster, Rc. The emission rate is greater than the absorption rate, W −(r) > W +(r), for
small clusters with R < Rc, whereas for clusters larger than the nucleus the absorption dominates
over the emission, W −(r) < W +(r) for R > Rc. Note that both W − and W + increase with
increasing R, but W − increases roughly linearly with R whereas W + shoots up by several orders
of magnitude after the cluster becomes supercritical. This is a consequence of the fact that the
width of the o.p.w. quickly decreases as the cluster grows while the outer height of the barrier
between the i.p.w. and o.p.w. does not not virtually change, and it becomes increasingly easy for
a bead which is in the o.p.w. to cross over the barrier and fall into the i.p.w.

The behaviour of W − and W + also explains our numerical estimates for the characteristic
times of the ﬁrst nucleation event tn, growth time tg, and total folding time tf by eqs.(32),(33),
and (35). Although these depend very much on the location of Rc and the value of Diw (Rc itself
tg, i.e., the protein folding
does not depend on Diw but only on the ratio Dow/Diw), always tn ≫
time is mainly determined by the time necessary for the ﬁrst nucleation event. Physically, this
is the case because the increase of the cluster size from ν = 1 to ν = νc occurs only owing to
ﬂuctuations which have to overcome the natural tendency of a small cluster to decay (W + < W −
for ν < νc). For supercritical clusters W + so quickly immensely overwhelms W − that ﬂuctuations
are unable to impede the natural tendency of the cluster to grow (strictly speaking, this is true
only for ν > νc + ∆νc, but for rough estimates eq.(35) is acceptable). For the above choice
of system parameter and Diw in the range from 10−6 cm2/s to 10−8 cm2/s our model predicts
the characteristic time of the protein folding (for N0 = 2500) in the range from several seconds
to several hundreds of seconds which is in a very good agreement with expectations based on
experimental data.

5 Conclusions

So far most of the work on the protein folding has been done by using either Monte Carlo (MC) or
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The rigorous theoretical treatment of the protein folding
by means of the statistical mechanics is hardly practicable because of the extreme complexity
of the system. A number of simulations have suggested that there can exist multiple pathways
for a protein to fold one of which has been identiﬁed as reminiscent of nucleation. However, a
theoretical model for the nucleation mechanism of the process had so far remained underdeveloped.
The previous model, based on the approach of the classical nucleation theory (CNT), was a purely
thermodynamic one considered the formation of a cluster of protein residues and calculated the
free energy change thereupon.14,18 The number of a critical cluster (nucleus) was provided by the
location of the maximum of the free energy of formation as a function of a single independent
variable of state of the cluster. In such a model the free energy of cluster formation depends on
the surface tension of a cluster of protein residues. This quantity is an ill-deﬁned physical quantity
and can be considerer only as an adjustable parameter. According to the nucleation mechanism,

15

after the formation of the nucleus (critical size cluster of residues), the protein quickly reaches its
native state.

In the present work we present a new, microscopic model for the nucleation mechanism of
the protein folding. A protein is considered as a heteropolymer consisting of two type of beads
(hydrophobic and hydrophilic) linked with bonds of ﬁxed length. All bond angles are also assumed
to be ﬁxed and equal to 105o. All non-adjacent beads are assumed to interact via Lennard-
Jones like potential. Besides these interactions, the total energy of the heteropolymer contains
a contribution from dihedral angles of all triads of successive links. Unlike the old model, ours
is developed without recurring to CNT approach. Instead, it is based on the above “molecular”
interactions, both long-range and conﬁgurational. The parameters of these potentials can be
rigorously deﬁned, unlike the ill-deﬁned surface tension of a cluster of protein residues.

The crucial idea underlying the new model consists of averaging the dihedral potential in which
a selected residues is involved over all the possible conﬁgurations of neighboring residues. The
resulting average dihedral potential depends on the distance between the residues and the cluster
center. It has a maximum at the cluster surface and monotonically decreases with increasing dis-
tance therefrom. Its combination with the average potential due to pairwise interactions between
the selected residue and those in the cluster a double potential well around the cluster with a
barrier between the two wells. Residues in the inner well are considered to belong to the cluster
(part of the protein with correct tertiary contacts) while those in the outer well are treated as
belonging to the mother phase (amorphous part of the protein with incorrect tertiary contacts).
Transitions of residues from the inner well into the outer one and vice versa are considered as
elementary emission and absorption events, respectively. The rates of these processes are deter-
mined by using the mean ﬁrst passage time analysis. Once these rates are found as functions of
the cluster size, one can develop a self-consistent kinetic theory for the nucleation mechanism of
protein folding. For example, the size of the critical cluster (nucleus) is then found as the one
for which these rates are equal. The time necessary for the protein to fold can be evaluated as a
sum of the times necessary for the appearance of the ﬁrst nucleus and the time necessary for the
nucleus to grow to the maximum size (of the folded protein in the native state).

For numerical illustration we have considered a model protein consisting of 2500 beads with
the mole fraction of hydrophobic beads equal to 0.75. The composition of the cluster during its
formation and growth was assumed to be constant and equal to the composition of the whole
protein. This allows one to consider the model as a single component one. The size of the critical
cluster and the folding time predicted by the model depend very much on many parameters of
the system, such as interaction parameters, densities of the protein in the unfolded (but compact)
and folded states, diﬀusion coeﬃcients therein, etc. With an appropriate choice of interaction
parameters and densities, the size of the critical cluster predicted by our model is about 220
residues and with the free energy of nucleus formation being about 20kBT . This results suggest
that the quantity equivalent to the “surface tension” in the old model of nucleation in a protein,
should be smaller than the previous estimates14,18 of the latter by an order of magnitude. The
characteristic time of protein folding was estimated to be in the range from several seconds to
several hundreds of seconds depending on the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of native residues in the range
10−6 cm2/s to 10−8 cm2/s. This is consistent with experimental data55 on typical folding times of
proteins as well as with estimates obtained by other theoretical models18 and in simulations.6,14
A further development of our model will require the removal of several simplifying assumptions
that we recurred to in the present work. For example, it would be more appropriate to model
a protein as a three-component heteropolymer (including not only hydrophobic and hydrophilic

16

residues, but also neutral ones). This will result in more lengthy numerical calculations of the
average dihedral potential because the dihedral potential involving neutral beads is expected to
be lower and requires separate calculations. Next, the cluster composition during its formation
and growth can quite signiﬁcantly depend on the cluster size, particularly in the vicinity of the
critical size, so assuming it constant in the present work might have lead to serious inaccuracy in
the results. Including neutral beads in the model and allowing the cluster composition to diﬀer
from that of the protein will result in a binary or even ternary nucleation mechanism of protein
folding. However, besides some increase in computational eﬀorts there seem to exist no principal
diﬃculty in developing the model in these directions. Some other improvements of the model can
be also introduced in the model, but they will be discussed in our future papers on the subject.
Acknowledgments - I am grateful to Professors F.M.Kuni, A.P.Grinin, and E.Ruckenstein for many
helpful discussions of this work which was was supported by the National Science Foundation through the
grant CTS-0000548.

17

References

Francisco, 1984)

1T.E.Creighton, in Proteins: Structure and Molecular Properties, edited by W.H.Freeman (San

2L.Stryer, in Biochemistry, edited by W.H.Freeman (1988).

3C.Ghelis and J.Yan, Protein Folding (Academic Press, New York,1982).

4C.B.Anﬁnsen, Science 181, 223-230 (1973).

5J.D.Honeycutt and D.Thirumalai, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. USA 87, 3526-3529 (1990).

6J.D.Honeycutt and D.Thirumalai, Biopolymers 32, 695-709 (1992).

7J.S.Weissman and P.S.Kim, Science 253, 1386-1393 (1991) .

8T.E.Creighton, Nature (London) 356, 194-195 (1992).

9P.S.Kim and R.I.Baldwin, Annu.Rev.Biochem. 51, 459 (1982).

10P.S.Kim and R.I.Baldwin, Annu.Rev.Biochem. 59, 631 (1990).

11T.E.Creighton, Biochem. J. 240, 1 (1990).

12T.E.Creighton, Prog.Biophys.Mol.Biol. 33, 231 (1978).

13Z.Guo, D.Thirumalai, and J.D.Honeycutt, J.Chem.Phys. 97, 525-535 (1992).

14Z.Guo and D.Thirumalai, Biopolymers 36, 83-102 (1995).

15D.Thirumalai and Z. Guo, Biopolymers 35, 137-140 (1995).

16.J.D.Bryngelson and P.G. Wolynes, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.(USA) 84, 7524 (1987); J.Phys.Chem.

93, 6902 (1998).

17E.I.Shakhnovich and A.M.Gutin, Nature 346, 773 (1990); J.Phys.A 22, 1647 (1989).

18J.D.Bryngelson and P.G.Wolynes, Biopolymers 30, 177 (1990).

19K.A.Dill, Biochemistry 24, 1501 (1985); 29, 7133 (1990).

20G.Narsimhan and E. Ruckenstein, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 128, 549 (1989).

21E.Ruckenstein and B. Nowakowski, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 137, 583 (1990).

22B.Nowakowski and E. Ruckenstein, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 139, 500 (1990).

23Y.S.Djikaev and E.Ruckenstein, J.Chem.Phys. 123, 214503 (2005).

24Y.S.Djikaev and E.Ruckenstein, J.Chem.Phys. 124, 124521 (2006).

25Y.S.Djikaev and E.Ruckenstein, J.Chem.Phys. 124, 124521 (2006).

26M.Levitt and R. Sharon, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 85, 8557 (1988).

18

27J.Skolnik, A. Kolinski, and R. Yaris, Biopolymers 28, 1058 (1989).

28A.Kolinski, J. Skolnik, and R. Yaris, Biopolymers 26, 937 (1987).

29A.Sikorski and J. Skolnik, Biopolymers 28, 1097 (1989); ibid J.Mol.Biol. 213, 183 (1990).

30J.Skolnik and A. Kolinski, Science 250, 1121 (1990).

31C.Levinthal, in M¨ossbauer Spectroscopy in Biological Systems, edited by P.Debrunner, J.C.M.Tsibris

and E.M¨onck, (University of Illinois Press, 1968).

32D.Wetlaufer, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. USA 70, 697 (1973).

33T.Y.Tsong, R.Baldwin, and P.McPhie, J.Mol.Biol. 63, 453 (1972).

34J.Moult and R.Unger, Biochemistry 30, 3816 (1991).

35K.Dill, K.Fiebig, and H.S.Chan, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 90, 1942 (1993).

36D.J.Lee, M. M. Telo da Gama, and K. E. Gubbins, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 490 (1986).

37A.I.Rusanov, Phasengleichgewichte und Grenzﬂachenerscheinungen (Academie, Berlin, 1978).

38R.C.Tolman, J. Chem. Phys., 17, 333 (1949).

39J.G.Kirkwood and F.P. Buﬀ, J. Chem. Phys., 17, 338 (1949).

40C.Flageollet, M. Dihn Cao, and P. Mirabel, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 544 (1980).

41G.Wilemski, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 2492 (1987).

42B.E.Wyslouzil, J. H. Seinfeld, R. C. Flagan, and K. Okuyama, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 6827 (1991).

43A.Laaksonen, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 1983 (1992).

44G.Wilemski, J. Chem. Phys. 80, 1370 (1984).

45Y.S.Djikaev, I. Napari, A. Laaksonen, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 9752 (2004).

46F.F.Abraham, Homogeneous Nucleation Theory (Academic, New York, 1974).

47S.Chandrasekhar, Rev. Mod. Phys., 15 (1949) 1.

48C.W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods (Springer, New York/Berlin, 1983).

49N.Agmon, J. Chem. Phys., 81, 3644 (1984).

50J.Lothe and G. M. J. Pound, In Nucleation, edited by A. C. Zettlemoyer (Marcel-Dekker, New

51J.Schmelzer, G. R¨opke, and V. B. Priezzhev, Eds. Nucleation Theory and Applications (JINR,

52D.Kashchiev, Nucleation: Basic Theory with Applications (Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,

York, 1969).

Dubna, 1999).

2000).

19

53Y.Harpaz, M.Gerstein, and C.Chothia, Structure, 2, 641-649 (1994).

54D.M.Huang and D.Chandler, Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA, 15, 8324-8327 (2000).

55B.N¨otling, Protein Folding Kinetics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006).

20

2

6

1

3

7

4

8

5

9

11

η

οβ

10

r

R

21

Figure 1: A scheme of a piece of a heteroplymer chain around the spherical cluster (shown only partly) of
radius R. Bead 1 lies in the Fugure plane, whereas beads 2 through 7 may all lie in diﬀerent planes, but
all bond angles are equal to 105o and their lengths are equal to η. The distance between the selected bead
1 and the center of the cluster is r

a)

5

6
r(cid:144)Η

7

8

b)

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

10.5

r(cid:144)Η

b
Ε
(cid:144)
∆
Φ(cid:143)

4.2

4

3.8

3.6

3.4

3.2

3

4

b
Ε
(cid:144)
∆
Φ(cid:143)

3.8

3.6

4.2

4

3.4

3.2

4.2

4

3.8

3.6

3.4

3.2

b
Ε
(cid:144)
∆
Φ(cid:143)

R=3Η

R=6Η

R=9Η

c)

10

11

13

14

12
r(cid:144)Η

Figure 2: The average dihedral potential (assigned to a selected bead) ¯φδ(r) as a function of r for three
clusters of sizes (a) R = 3η, (b) R = 6η, and (c) R = 9η. The points represent the actual numerical results
obtained by using the Monte Carlo integration in eqs.(21),(22). The vertical dashed lines correspond to ˜r.
The solid lines are analytic ﬁts by an expression a + b exp[

d)2].

c(r

−

−

22

b
Ε
(cid:144)
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

4

3

2

1

0

-1

4

5

6

7

rcf

4

5

6
r(cid:144)Η

7

rcf

(cid:143)
Φ
∆

Ψb

Φb

23

Figure 3: Typical shapes of the potentials φb(r) (lower solid curve), ¯φδ(r) (upper solid curve), and ψb(r)
(dashed curve) for a hydrophobic bead around the cluster as functions of the distance r from the center of
the cluster of radius R = 3η. The outer boundary of the o.p.w. (rcf
12.99η) was assumed to coincides
with the outer boundary of the volume wherein the whole protein is encompassed.

≃

1000

800

600

400

200

L
2
-
m
c
H

w
i
D
(cid:144)
-
W
,
w
i
D
(cid:144)
+
W

W+

W-

3

4

5

6

7

R(cid:144)Η, cluster size

24

Figure 4: Figure 4 presents W − and W +, the emission and absorption rates, respectively, as functions
of the cluster size R. The location of the intersection of these functions determines the size of the critical
cluster, Rc

