Single DNA conformations and biological function

NORDITA—Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark and
Department of Physics, University of Ottawa, 150 Louis Pasteur, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5, Canada (New address)

NORDITA—Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark and
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139 (New address)

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Texas at Brownsville, 80 Fort Brown, Brownsville, TX 78520 and
Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75083

Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461

Ralf Metzler∗

Tobias Ambj¨ornsson

Andreas Hanke

Yongli Zhang

Stephen Levene

Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Technology and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX 75083

Abstract. From a nanoscience perspective, cellular processes and their reduced in vitro imitations
provide extraordinary examples for highly robust few or single molecule reaction pathways. A
prime example are biochemical reactions involving DNA molecules, and the coupling of these
reactions to the physical conformations of DNA. In this review, we summarise recent results
on the following phenomena: We investigate the biophysical properties of DNA-looping and the
equilibrium conﬁgurations of DNA-knots, whose relevance to biological processes are increasingly
appreciated. We discuss how random DNA-looping may be related to the eﬃciency of the target
search process of proteins for their speciﬁc binding site on the DNA molecule. And we dwell on
the spontaneous formation of intermittent DNA nanobubbles and their importance for biological
processes, such as transcription initiation. The physical properties of DNA may indeed turn out
to be particularly suitable for the use of DNA in nanosensing applications.

Key words: DNA, single molecules, DNA looping, DNA denaturation, knots, gene regulation

∗Electronic address: metz@nordita.dk

6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Physical properties and biological function of DNA 4

III. DNA-looping

A. Biological signiﬁcance of DNA looping
B. DNA loop model
C. Simpliﬁed protein geometries and ﬂexibility parameters 9

D. DNA loops having zero end-to-end distance and antiparallel helical axes 9

E. DNA looping with ﬁnite end-to-end distance, antiparallel helical axes, and in-phase torsional constraint10

F. DNA looping in synapsis
G. Conclusion

IV. DNA knots and their consequences: entropy and targeted knot removal13

3

7
7
9

11
13

18
20
21
23
25

38
40

40
40
41

42

42

43

45
46

48

A. Physiological background of knots
B. Classiﬁcation of knots
C. Long chains are almost always entangled.
D. Entropic localisation in the ﬁgure-eight slip-link structure.16

13
15
16

E. Simulations of entropic knots in 2D and 3D.
F. Flattened knots in dilute and dense phases.

1. Flat knots in dilute phase.
2. Flat knots under Θ and dense conditions.
G. 3D knots defy complete analytical treatment.

V. DNA breathing: local denaturation zones and biological implications26

A. Physiological background of DNA denaturation
B. The Poland-Scheraga model of DNA melting
C. Fluctuation dynamics of DNA bubbles: DNA breathing30

26
28

D. Probabilistic modelling—the master equation (ME) 31
32
E. Stochastic modelling—the Gillespie algorithm
33
F. Bacteriophage T7 promoter sequence analysis.
G. Interaction of DNA bubbles with selectively single-strand binding proteins34

VI. Role of DNA conformations in gene regulation

35

A. Physiological background of gene regulation and expression35

B. Binding proteins: Speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc binding modes36

C. The search process for the speciﬁc target sequence
D. A unique situation: Pure one-dimensional search of SSB mutants38

37

E. L´evy ﬂights and target search
F. Viruses—extreme nanomechanics

VII. Functional molecules and nanosensing

A. Functional molecules
B. Nanosensing

VIII. Summary

Acknowledgments

Biographical notes

A polymer primer.
Polymer networks.

References

I. INTRODUCTION

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the molecule of life
as we know it.1 It contains all information of an entire
organism.2 This information is copied during cell divi-
sion with an extremely high ﬁdelity by the replication
mechanism. Despite the rather high chemical and phys-
ical stability of DNA, due to constant action of enzymes
and other binding proteins (mismatches, rupture) as well
as potential environmentally induced damage (radiation,
chemicals), this low error rate, i.e., the suppression of the
liability to mutations, is only possible with the constant
action of repair mechanisms (1; 2; 3; 4). Although DNA’s
structural and mechanical properties are rather well es-
tablished for isolated DNA molecules (starting with Ros-
alind Franklin’s X-ray diﬀraction images (5)), the charac-
terisation of DNA in its cellular environment, and even in
vitro during interaction with binding proteins, is subject
of ongoing investigations.

Recent advances in experimental techniques such as
ﬂuorescence methods, atomic force microscopy, or opti-
cal tweezers have leveraged the potential to both probe
and manipulate the equilibrium and out of equilibrium
behaviour of single DNA molecules, making it possible
to explore DNA’s physical and mechanical properties as
well as its interaction with other biopolymers, such as the
DNA-protein interplay during gene regulation or repair
processes. An important ingredient is the coupling to
thermal activation due to the highly Brownian environ-
ment. Although mostly performed in vitro, these exper-
iments provide access to increasingly reﬁned information
on the nature of DNA and its environment-controlled be-
haviour.

In addition to chromosomal packaging inside the nu-
cleus of eukaryotic cells and the concentration of DNA
in the membraneless nucleoid region of prokaryotes, the
global structure of the DNA molecule can be aﬀected
by topological entanglements. Thus, by error or design
a DNA molecule can attain a knotted or concatenated
state, reducing or inhibiting biologically relevant func-
tions, for instance, replication or transcription. Such en-
tangled states can be actively reduced by enzymes of the
topoisomerase family. Their precise action, in particular,
how they determine the presence of an entangled state, is
not fully known. Current studies therefore aim at shed-
ding light on possible mechanisms, in particular, in view
of the importance of topoisomerase action (or better, its
inhibition) in tumour proliferation. Other applications
may be directed towards the treatment of viral deceases
by modifying the packaging of viral DNA to create knots

1 Our DNA world during biotic and prebiotic evolution was sup-
posedly preceded by an RNA world and, quite likely, by sugarless
nucleic acids.

2 A small fraction of genetic information is stored on DNA that
is kept at other regions of the cell and not replicated on cell
division, such as mitochondrial or ribosomal DNA.

3

in the virus capsid and prevent ejection of the DNA into
a host, and thereby infection. DNA knots are also be-
ing recognised as a potential complication in the use of
nanochannels for DNA separation and sequencing.
In
such conﬁned geometries DNA knots are created with
appreciable probability, aﬀecting the reliability of these
techniques. Similarly to DNA knots, DNA looping is
intimately connected to the function of DNA. Current
results on DNA looping and DNA knot behaviour are
summarised in the ﬁrst parts of this review.

The Watson-Crick double-helix represents the thermo-
dynamically stable state of DNA at moderate salt con-
centrations and below the melting temperature. This
stability is eﬀected by Watson-Crick hydrogen bonding
and the stronger base stacking of neighbouring base-pairs
(bps). However, even at room temperature DNA locally
opens up intermittent ﬂexible single-stranded domains,
so-called DNA-bubbles. Their size typically ranges from
a few broken bps, increasing to some 200 broken bps
closer to the melting temperature. The thermal melt-
ing of DNA has traditionally been used to obtain the
sequence-dependent stability parameters of DNA. More
recently, the role of intermittent bubble domains has
been investigated with respect to the liability of DNA-
denaturation induced by proteins that selectively bind to
single-stranded DNA. It has been speculated that due to
the liability to denaturation of the TATA motif bubble
formation may add in transcription initiation. The dy-
namics of single bubbles can be monitored by ﬂuorescence
methods, opening a window to both study the breathing
of DNA experimentally, but also to obtain high precision
DNA stability data. Finally, bubble dynamics has been
suggested as a useful tool in optical nanosensing. DNA
breathing is the topic of the second part of this work.

Essentially all the biological functions of DNA rely on
site-speciﬁc DNA-binding proteins locating their targets
(cognate sites) on the DNA molecule, and therefore re-
quire searching through megabases of non-target DNA in
a highly eﬃcient manner. For instance, gene regulation
is performed by speciﬁc regulatory proteins. On binding
to a promoter area on the DNA, they recruit or inhibit
binding of RNA polymerase and subsequent transcrip-
tion of the associated gene. The search for the cognate
site is in fact facilitated by the DNA molecule: in addi-
tion to three-dimensional search it enables the proteins
to also move one-dimensionally along the DNA while be-
ing non-speciﬁcally bound. Moreover, at points where
the DNA loops back on itself, this polymeric conforma-
tion provides shortcuts for the proteins in the chemical
coordinate along the DNA, approximately giving rise to
search-eﬃcient L´evy ﬂights. Target search is currently a
very active ﬁeld of research, and single molecule meth-
ods have been shown to provide essential new informa-
tion. Moreover, the architecture of more complex pro-
moters relying on the simultaneous presence of several
regulatory proteins is being investigated to create in sil-
ico circuits for highly sensitive chemical probes in small
volumes. Such nanosensing applications are expected to

be of great importance in microarrays or other nano- and
microapplications. The third part of this review deals
with diﬀusional aspects of gene regulation.

At the same time DNA’s role in classical polymer
physics is increasingly appreciated. With the possibility
to reproduce DNA with extremely low error rate by the
PCR3, monodisperse samples can be prepared. While
shorter single-stranded DNA can be used as a model
for ﬂexible polymers, the double strand exhibits a semi-
ﬂexible behaviour with a persistence length, that can be
easily probed experimentally. Moreover, DNA is orders
of magnitude longer than conventional polymers. Com-
bined with the potential of single molecule probing, DNA
is advancing as a model polymer.

After an introduction to the properties of DNA we ad-
dress these functional properties of DNA from the per-
spective of biological relevance, physical behaviour and
nanotechnological potential. Most emphasis will be put
on the single molecular aspects of DNA. We note that
this is not intended to be an exhaustive review on the
physical properties of DNA. Rather, we present some im-
portant features and their consequences from a personal
perspective.

II. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND BIOLOGICAL
FUNCTION OF DNA

Biomolecules, that occur naturally in biological sys-
tems, can be grouped into unspeciﬁc oligo- and macro-
molecules and biopolymers in the stricter sense (1). Un-
speciﬁc biomolecules are produced by biological organ-
isms in a large range of molecular weight and structure,
such as polysaccharides (cellulose, chitin, starch, etc.),
higher fatty acids, actin ﬁlaments or microtubules. Also
the natural ‘india-rubber’ from the Hevea Brasiliensis
tree, historically important for both industrial purposes
and the development of polymer physics (7) belongs to
this group.

Biopolymers in the stricter sense we are going to as-
sume here comprise the polynucleotides DNA and RNA
consisting of the four-letter nucleotide alphabet with
A-T and G-C (A-U and G-C for RNA) bps, and the
polypeptidic proteins consisting of 20 diﬀerent amino
acids, each coded for by 3 bases (codons) in the RNA
(1; 2; 3; 4). We will come back to proteins later when
reviewing binding protein-DNA interactions. Biopoly-
mers are copied and/or created according to the infor-
mation ﬂow sketched in ﬁgure 1, the so-called central
dogma of molecular biology, a term originally coined by
Frances Crick (9). Accordingly, starting from the genetic

4

DNA

RNA

PROTEIN

FIG. 1 Central dogma of molecular biology after F. Crick:
Potentially, information ﬂow is completely symmetric between
the three levels of cellular biopolymers (DNA, RNA, pro-
teins). However, the recognised pathways are only those rep-
resented here, where solid lines represent probable transfers,
and dotted lines for (in principle) possible transfers (8).

Sugar−
phosphate
backbone

Base pairs

Sugar−
phosphate
backbone

Hydrogen bonds

P

P

P

P

P

P

S

S

S

S

S

S

A

G

T

A

C

G

T

C

A

T

G

C

Base pair

Nucleotide

S

S

S

S

S

S

P

P

P

P

P

FIG. 2 Ladder structure of the DNA formed by its four
building-blocks A, G, C, and T, giving rise to the typical
double-helical structure of DNA. A-T bps establish 2 H-
bonds, G-C bps 3 H-bonds.

code stored in the DNA (in some cases in RNA) DNA
is copied by DNA polymerase (replication), and the pro-
teins as the actually task-performing biopolymers are cre-
ated via messenger RNA (created by DNA transcription
through RNA polymerase) and further by translation in
ribosomes to proteins.4

DNA is made up of the four bases (1; 2; 3; 4; 10;

3 Polymerase Chain Reaction: thermal denaturation of a DNA
molecule into two single strands and subsequent cooling in a
solution of single nucleotides and invariable primers, produces
two new complete double-stranded DNA molecules. Cycling of
this process produces large, monodisperse quantities of DNA.

4 Alternatively, the genetic code can be transcribed into transfer

and ribosomal RNA that is not translated into proteins.

11): A(denine), G(uanine), C(ytosine), and T(hymine)
that form the DNA ladder structure shown in ﬁgure 2.
These building-blocks A, G, C, T bp according to the
key-lock principle as A-T and G-C, where the AT bond
is weaker than the GC bond in terms of stability. Apart
from the Watson-Crick base-pairing energy, the stability
of dsDNA is eﬀected by the stacking interactions, the
speciﬁc matching of subsequent bps along the double-
strand, i.e., bp-bp interactions. In standard literature,
the stacking interactions are listed for pairs of bps (e.g.,
for AT-GC, AT-AT, AT-TA, etc.), see below.5

Based on this AGCT alphabet, the primary structure
of DNA can be speciﬁed. DNA’s six local structural ele-
ments twist, tilt, roll, shift, slide, and rise are eﬀected by
the stacking interactions between vicinal bps. In ﬁgure 3,
we show a map with the structure elements of the entire
E.coli genome, demonstrating the degree of structural in-
formation currently available. These structural elements
deﬁne the local geometrical structure of DNA within a
typical correlation (persistence) length6 of about 150 bps
corresponding to 50 nm (the bp-bp distance measures 3.4
˚A, reﬂecting the rather complex chemical structure of a
nucleotide in comparison to the monomer size of man-
made polymers such as polyethylene) (12; 13; 14; 15). On
a larger scale, much longer than the persistence length,
DNA becomes ﬂexible. On this level, tertiary structural
elements come into play. One example is DNA looping,
that is the formation of polymeric lasso loops induced
by chemical bonds between binding proteins attached to
the DNA at speciﬁc bps which are remote along the DNA
backbone (1; 2; 16; 17; 18; 19; 20). An extreme limit of
tertiary structure is the packaging of DNA onto histones
and further wrapping into the chromosomes of eukary-
otic cells (1; 21; 22). At the same time, dsDNA may
locally open into ﬂoppy ssDNA bubbles, with a persis-
tence length of a few bases.7 These ﬂuctuation-induced
bubbles increase their statistical weight at higher tem-
peratures, until the dsDNA fully denatures (melts). We
will come back to DNA denaturation bubbles below. De-
pending on the external conditions, DNA occurs in sev-
eral conﬁgurations. Under physiological conditions, one
is concerned with B-DNA, but there are other states such
as A, B’, Z, ps, triplex DNA, quadruplex DNA, cruciform,
and H, reviewed, for instance, in (12; 13). DNA occurs
naturally in a large range of length scales.
In viruses,
DNA is of the order of a few µm long. In bacteria, it al-
ready reaches lengths of several mm, and in mammalian

5 Longer ranging bp-bp interactions are most likely small in com-

parison.

6 The persistence length of a polymer chain deﬁnes the charac-
teristic length scale above which the polymer is susceptible to
bending induced by thermal ﬂuctuations, i.e., it is the length
scale above which the tangent-tangent correlation decays along
the chain, see the Appendix.

7 In fact, it has been questioned whether there is a meaningful
value of the persistence length of ssDNA at all, due to its signif-
icant apparent sequence dependence (23).

5

cells it can reach the order of a few m, roughly 2 m in a
human cell and 35 m in a cell of the South American lung-
ﬁsh, albeit split up into the individual chromosomes (3).
DNA in bacteria in vivo, or extracted from bacteria and
higher cells for our purposes can therefore be viewed a
fully ﬂexible polymer with a persistence length of roughly
50 nm, being governed by generic eﬀects independent of
the detailed sequence. On short scales DNA becomes
semiﬂexible and governed by the worm-like chain model
(Kratky-Porod model) (24); on even shorter scales, lo-
cal structural elements become important (in particular,
for recognition by binding proteins (1)), and eventually
molecular resolution is reached.

Stacking interactions govern the local structure of ds-
DNA. Globally, an additional constraint arises due to
the circular nature of the DNA, since it has to satisfy the
conservation law (25; 26; 27)

Lk = Tw + Wr,

(1)

where Lk stands for the linking number, Tw for the twist,
and Wr for the writhe of the double helix. The linking
number Lk is an integer and formally given by one-half
the number of signed crossings of one DNA strand with
the other in any regular projection of the molecule. Lk
is a topological property, and no deformation of a closed
DNA, without breaking and rejoining the DNA strands,
will alter it. T w is equal to the number of times that
the two strands of DNA wind about the central axis of
the molecule, and W r is a number whose absolute value
equals approximately the number of times that the DNA
axis winds about itself.8 Whereas Tw is a property of
the double-helical structure of DNA, Wr is a property
of the DNA axis alone. Tw and Wr do not need to be
integers and are not conserved, but coupled through Lk
by equation (1). A nicked circular DNA, i.e., when the
twist can fully relax, carries Lk0 = N/h links, where N is
the number of bp and h (h ≃ 10.5 in B-DNA) the number
of bps per turn.

The degree of supercoiling of DNA can be expressed in
terms of the linking number diﬀerence, ∆Lk = Lk − Lk0.
The DNA of virtually all terrestrial organisms is under-
wound or negatively supercoiled, i.e., ∆Lk < 0 (ﬁgures 4
and 5).9 Often, the superhelical density σ = ∆Lk/Lk0
is used; most supercoiled DNA molecules isolated from
either prokaryotes or eukaryotes have σ values between
−0.05 and −0.07 (29). Negative supercoiling is regulated
in prokaryotes by DNA gyrase; eukaryotes lack gyrase
but maintain negative supercoiling through winding of
DNA around nucleosomes and interactions with DNA-
unwinding proteins. There are two forms of intracellu-
lar supercoiling, the plectonemic form, characteristic of

8 For details about the calculation of Tw and Wr for representative

models of DNA, see (28).

9 An exception are thermophilic organisms living near undersea
geothermal vents that have positively supercoiled DNA in order
to stabilise the double helix at extreme temperatures.

6

FIG. 3 Structure atlas of the E.coli genome. Figure courtesy David Ussery, Technical University of Denmark. The structure
atlas is available under the URL www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/GenomeAtlas/.

DNA and is largely responsible for the extraordinary de-
gree of compaction required to condense typical genomes
into the cell’s nucleus.10 Negative supercoiling facilitates
the local unwinding of DNA by providing a ubiquitous
source of free energy that augments the unwinding free
energy accompanying the interactions of many proteins
with their cognate DNA sequences. The local unwind-
ing of DNA, in turn, is an integral part of many bio-
logical processes such as gene regulation and DNA repli-
cation (see section VI). Therefore, understanding the
interplay of supercoiling and local helical structure is
essential to the understanding of biological mechanisms
(15; 31; 32; 33; 34).

Ribonucleic acid (RNA) consists of the same build-
ing blocks as DNA, with the exception that T(hymine)
is replaced by U(racile) (11). RNA typically occurs in
single-stranded form. Therefore, its secondary structure

10 The nucleus of a human cell has a radius of circa 5 µm and stores

the 2 m of the human genome (30).

FIG. 4 Right-handed (negative), normal, and left-handed
(positive) superhelix. The DNA of virtually all terrestrial
organisms is negatively supercoiled.

plasmid DNA and accessible, nucleosome-free regions of
chromatin, and the toroidal or solenoidal form, where su-
percoiling is attained by DNA wrapped around histone
octamers or prokaryotic non-histone DNA-binding pro-
teins (ﬁgure 6). The former is the active form of su-
percoiled DNA and is freely accessible to proteins in-
volved in transcription, replication, recombination and
DNA repair. The latter is the stored form of supercoiled

7

from the glnALG operon (44). The size of DNA loops
formed in these systems varies between approximately
100 and 600 bps. In eukaryotes, a variety of transcrip-
tion factors bind to enhancers that are hundreds to sev-
eral thousand bps away from their promoters and inter-
act with RNA polymerases directly or through media-
tors in order to achieve combinatorial gene regulation
(45). DNA looping is required to juxtapose two recombi-
nation sites in intramolecular site-speciﬁc recombination
(46; 47; 48) and is also employed by a number of re-
striction endonucleases such as SﬁI and NgoMIV, which
recognise and cut two copies of well-separated cognate
sites simultaneously (49; 50; 51). Here we describe a re-
cent statistical-mechanical theory of loop formation that
connects global mechanical and geometric properties of
both DNA and protein and demonstrates the importance
of protein ﬂexibility in loop-mediated protein-DNA inter-
actions (52; 53).

A. Biological signiﬁcance of DNA looping

The biological importance of DNA loop formation is
underscored by the abundance of architectural proteins
in the cell such as HU, IHF, and HMG, which facili-
tate looping by bending the intervening DNA between
protein-recognition sites (54). Moreover, DNA looping
has been shown to be subject to regulation through the
binding of eﬀector molecules that alter protein conforma-
tion or protein-DNA interactions (55).

Two characteristics of DNA looping have been demon-
strated by in vitro and in vivo experiments. One is co-
operative binding of a protein to its two cognate sites,
which can be demonstrated by footprinting methods (56).
DNA looping can increase the occupancies of both bind-
ing sites; in particular, it can signiﬁcantly enhance pro-
tein association to the lower-aﬃnity site because of the
tethering eﬀect of DNA looping. This is a general mech-
anism by which many transcription factors recruit RNA
polymerases in gene regulation. Another hallmark is
the helical dependence of loop formation (38; 40), which
arises because of DNA’s limited torsional ﬂexibility and
the requirement for correct torsional alignment of the two
protein-binding sites. Although many methods have been
developed to directly observe DNA looping in vitro, such
as scanning-probe (44) and electron microscopy (10), and
single-molecule techniques (57), assays based on helical
dependence have been the only way to identify DNA
looping in vivo. In these experiments, the DNA length
between two protein binding sites is varied and the yield
of DNA loop formation is monitored, for example by the
repression or activation of a reporter gene (58). Using
this helical-twist assay, DNA looping in the ara operon
was ﬁrst discovered (40).

Our knowledge about the roles of DNA bending, twist,
and their respective energetics in DNA looping has come
largely from analyses of DNA cyclisation (38; 59; 60).
Circularisation eﬃciencies of DNA fragments, which are

FIG. 5 Electron micrographs of nicked (left) and supercoiled
(right) 6996-bp plasmid DNAs. The supercoiled example is
from a population of DNA molecules with an average super-
helix density, ¯σ= -0.027, close to the value expected in vivo.

FIG. 6 Toroidal (left) and plectonemic (right) forms of su-
percoiled DNA.

is richer, being characterised by sequences of hairpins:
Smaller regions in which chemically remote sequences
of bases match, pair and form hairpins which are stiﬀ
and energy-dominated, similar to dsDNA. The remain-
ing regions form entropy-dominated ﬂoppy loops, analo-
gous to the ssDNA bubbles. Additional tertiary struc-
ture in RNA comes about by the formation of so-called
pseudoknots, chemical bonds established between bases
sitting on chemically distant segments of the secondary
structure. In RNA-modelling the incorporation of pseu-
doknots is a non-trivial problem, which currently re-
ceives considerable interest; see, for instance, references
(11; 35; 36; 37).

III. DNA-LOOPING

The formation of DNA loops mediated by proteins
bound at distant sites along a single molecule is an es-
sential mechanistic aspect of many biological processes
including gene regulation, DNA replication, and recom-
In E. coli, DNA
bination (for reviews, see (38; 39)).
looping represses gene expression at the ara, gal, lac, and
deo operons (40; 41; 42; 43) and activates transcription

quantitatively described by J-factors, oscillate with DNA
length and therefore torsional phase (61; 62). The J-
factor is deﬁned as the ratio of the partition function
of a circularised polymer chain to that of an open chain.
Since there is a dimension reduction due to circularisation
constraints (two polymer ends have to meet), the ratio
has a unit of concentration, or 1/L3 with L represent-
ing length; see (52) for details. In the present context,
the J-factor is equal to the free DNA-end concentration
whose bimolecular ligation eﬃciency equals that of the
two ends of a cyclising DNA molecule (63). For short
DNA fragments J-factors are limited by the signiﬁcant
bending and twisting energies required to form closed cir-
cles, whereas for long DNA, the chain entropy loss during
circularisation exceeds the elastic-energy decrease and re-
duces the J-factor. Because of this competition between
bending and twisting energetics and entropy, there is an
optimal DNA length for cyclisation (52). Analogous be-
haviour has been expected for DNA looping, especially
with respect to the helical dependence discussed above.
Quantitative analyses of DNA looping and cyclisation
are challenging problems in statistical mechanics and
have been largely limited to Monte Carlo or Brownian
dynamics simulations (64; 65; 66; 67; 68). Analytical
solutions are available only for some ideal and special
cases. An important contribution in this area is the the-
ory of Shimada and Yamakawa (69), which is based on a
homogeneous and continuous elastic rod model of DNA.
This theory has been applied extensively to DNA cycli-
sation (61; 70) and also DNA looping (59; 60; 71). The
Shimada-Yamakawa theory makes use of a perturbation
approach, in which small conﬁgurational ﬂuctuations of
a DNA chain around the most probable conﬁguration are
accounted for in the evaluation of the partition function.
The elastic-equilibrium conformation is obvious for the
homogeneous DNA circle studied by Shimada and Ya-
makawa (69). However, the search for the elastic-energy
minimum of homogeneous DNA molecules with complex
geometry, such as in DNA looping, supercoiling, and
the case of inhomogeneous DNA sequences containing
curvature and nonuniform DNA ﬂexibility, is not triv-
ial (41; 72; 73). Recently, a statistical-mechanical theory
for sequence-dependent DNA circles has been developed
(52) and applied to the problem of DNA cyclisation (52)
and DNA looping (53). In this model, the DNA conﬁgu-
ration is described by parameters deﬁned at dinucleotide
steps, i.e., tilt, roll, and twist, which allows straightfor-
ward incorporation of intrinsic or protein-induced DNA
curvature at the bp level. Following Shimada and Ya-
makawa’s method, the theory ﬁrst determines the me-
chanical equilibrium conﬁguration in small DNA circles
(i.e., less than ∼ 1000 bp) under certain constraints; ﬂuc-
tuations around the equilibrium conﬁguration are then
taken into account using an harmonic approximation.
The new method is much more computationally eﬃcient
than Monte Carlo simulation, has comparable accuracy,
and has been applied successfully to analyse experimen-
tal results from DNA cyclisation (52).

8

The basis of the extension of the model to DNA looping
(53) is to treat the protein subunits as connected rigid
bodies and to allow for a limited number of degrees of
freedom between the subunits. Motions of the subunits
are assumed to be governed by harmonic potentials and
an associated set of force constants, neglecting the an-
harmonic terms often required for proteins undergoing
large conformational ﬂuctuations among their modular
domains. Indeed, the use of a harmonic approximation
is supported by the success of continuum elastic mod-
els that are based only on shape and mass-distribution
information in descriptions of protein motion (74). Sim-
ilar to the description used for individual DNA bps in
the model, protein geometry and dynamics are described
by three rigid-body rotation angles (tilt, roll, and twist).
Therefore, DNA looping can be viewed as a generalisa-
tion of DNA cyclisation in which the protein component
is characterised by a particular set of local geometric con-
straints and elastic constants. This treatment not only
uniﬁes the theoretical descriptions of DNA cyclisation
and looping, but also allows consideration of ﬂexibilities
at protein-DNA and protein-protein interfaces and appli-
cation of the concepts of linking number and writhe. In
previous work, proteins were considered rigid and their
eﬀects on DNA conﬁguration were represented by a set
of constraints applied to DNA ends (38; 75; 76). With
the present approach, programs developed for analysing
DNA cyclisation can be used to analyse DNA looping
with only minor modiﬁcations.

The new method (52; 53) is most applicable to the
problem of short DNA loops, in which the free energy
of a wormlike chain is dominated by bending and tor-
sional elasticity (52; 53). Possible modes of DNA self con-
tact and contacts between protein and DNA at positions
other than the binding sites are not considered. For large
loops contributions to the free energy from chain entropy
and DNA-DNA contacts can become highly signiﬁcant.
Several alternative treatments of DNA looping have ap-
peared recently. One of these addresses the excluded-
volume contribution to DNA looping within large open-
circular molecules (20), whereas two others consider the
eﬀect on looping of traction at the ends of a DNA chain
(77; 78). None of these treatments includes helical phas-
ing eﬀects on DNA looping. In contrast, a method based
on the Kirchhoﬀ elastic-rod model, which includes the
helical-phase dependence, has been presented (76; 79).
However, this approach does not include thermal ﬂuctu-
ations per se and therefore is not directly applicable to
calculations of the J-factor. The comprehensive treat-
ment of small DNA loops described in (52; 53) is thus far
unique to the extent that it accounts for sequence- and
protein-dependent conformational and ﬂexibility param-
eters, thermal ﬂuctuations, and helical phasing eﬀects.

9

B. DNA loop model

The protein subunits that mediate loop formation are
modelled as two identical and connected rigid bodies, as
shown in ﬁgure 7 (53). There are three additional sets of
rigid-body rotation angles that are deﬁned in addition to
those for dinucleotide steps: two sets for the interfaces
between protein and the last (DP) and ﬁrst bps (PD) of
the DNA and one set for the interface between the two
protein domains (PP), where the symbols in parentheses
are used to indicate the corresponding angles through
subscripts. The local Cartesian-coordinate frames for
protein subunits are deﬁned such that their origins co-
incide with vertices of a circular chain and their z-axes
point toward the next vertex in succession. Thus protein
dimensions can be modelled in terms of a non-canonical
value for the helix rise corresponding to particular seg-
ments within a circular polymer chain.

Angles are expressed in degrees, and length in units of
the DNA helical rise, ℓbp = 3.4 ˚A. All calculations used
canonical mechanical parameters for duplex DNA: helical
twist τ0 = 34.45◦, a sequence-independent twist-angle
standard deviation, or twisting ﬂexibility, στ = 4.388◦,
and standard deviations, or bending ﬂexibilities, for all
tilt and roll angles, σθ and σφ, respectively, of 4.678◦
(equivalent to a persistence length of 150 bp). Except for
speciﬁc cases where intrinsic DNA bending is considered,
the average values of tilt and roll are taken to be zero.

C. Simpliﬁed protein geometries and ﬂexibility parameters

For DNA loops with either zero or nonzero end-to-end
distances, constraints are directly applied to the DNA
ends, as in the case of DNA cyclisation. We modelled
DNA loops formed during site synapsis using protein-
dependent parameters roll = φDP = φP D = 90◦ and
twist = τDP = τP D = 34.45◦. The angle was consid-
ered an adjustable parameter that we denote the axial
angle and, unless speciﬁed, all other protein-related an-
gular parameters were set equal to 0◦. In these cases the
DNA ends (the centres of two protein-binding sites on
DNA) are separated by twice the protein-arm length ℓp
and displaced from one another along the +x direction,
or toward the major groove of DNA. Projected along the
x-axis, the axial angle is the included angle between the
tangents to the DNA at the two protein binding sites and
is altered by varying the twist between protein subunits
(ﬁgure 7 b, c). An axial angle equal to 0◦ corresponds to
antiparallel axes at the ends as shown in ﬁgure 7a. The
case of a rigid protein assembly is modelled by setting
the standard deviations of the DP, PP, and PD sets of
rigid-body rotation angles to 1 · 10−8 deg.

FIG. 7 Rigid-body models for studies of protein-mediated
DNA looping. (a) A prototype 137-bp DNA loop generated
by interactions with a pair of rigid, DNA-binding protein sub-
units is shown. DNA bps are represented by rectangular slabs
(red) with axes (blue) that indicate the orientation of the lo-
cal Cartesian coordinate frame whose origin lies at the centre
of each bp. Two sets of coordinate axes (green) represent
the local coordinate frames embedded in the protein subunits
(gold ellipsoids) that mediate DNA looping. The coupling
of protein and DNA geometry is characterised by tilt, roll,
and twist values for the DNA-protein, protein-protein, and
protein-DNA interfaces. Three of these variables are shown
here: the DNA-protein roll angle, φDP ; the protein-protein
twist angle, τP P ; and the protein-DNA roll angle, φP D. (b)
Prototype 179-bp loop with protein-protein twist angle, τP P ,
equal to −60 degrees. The view is from the base of the loop
toward the DNA apex. (c) Loop conformation shown in (b)
viewed from the side, perpendicular to the loop dyad axis.

D. DNA loops having zero end-to-end distance and
antiparallel helical axes

DNA loops containing N bps in which the two ends
meet in an antiparallel orientation can be empirically de-

scribed by the following formula:

Tilt :
Roll :
Twist :

θi = −Ai cos(180 + δ)
φi = Ai sin(180 + δ)
τi = τ 0

(2)

where τ 0 is the intrinsic DNA twist and δ an arbitrary an-
gle related to the unconstrained torsional degree of free-
dom of DNA. The coeﬃcients Ai are given by

Ai =

1
N

f

i
N − 1

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

,

i = 0, . . . , N − 1

(3)

with

where

f (x) =

(cid:26)

g(x) ,
g(0.5 − x) ,

0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5
0.5 < x ≤ 1

(4)

g(x) =

ai xi,

0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5 .

(5)

5

i=1
X

The coeﬃcients in equation (5) were obtained by ﬁt-
ting the space curve corresponding to the DNA heli-
cal axis that gives the minimum elastic energy confor-
mation of DNA loops of diﬀerent sizes and are as fol-
lows: a0 = −335.0142, a1 = 2318.881, a2 = −1299.164,
a3 = −4483.366, a4 = 38169.74, a5 = −54753.5. The
error for end-to-end distances computed using equation
(2) is less than 2% of DNA length from 50 bp to 100 bp,
and less than 0.5% from 100 bp to 500 bp. The torsional
phase angle between two ends is ξ = − (N − 2) τ − 2δ.
The entire loop lies in a plane, and the angle between
the normal vector of the plane and the x-axis of the ex-
ternal coordinate can be shown to be ψ = 180 + τ − δ.
The expressions for ξ and ψ suggest that δ is related to
DNA bending isotropy. Loop conﬁgurations with diﬀer-
ent δ values are related to each other by globally twisting
DNA molecules. Since the orientation of the ﬁrst bp is
ﬁxed, this global twist is equivalent to rotation of the
loop plane, which corresponds to the rotational symme-
try met in DNA cyclisation of homogeneous DNA with
bending isotropy (52). Therefore, J-factors for conﬁgu-
rations with diﬀerent δ values are identical.

If DNA looping needs to be torsionally in-phase, only
two degenerate loop conﬁgurations are available, break-
ing the rotational symmetry. These loop geometries can
be expressed by equation (2) with two diﬀerent δ values:
δ1 = −(N − 2)τ /2 and δ2 = 180 − (N − 2)τ /2, which
satisfy the torsional phase requirement ξ = 360 · n, n =
0, ±1, ±2, . . . In contrast to DNA cyclisation, no twist
change is involved in forming these ideal DNA loops for
any DNA length and thus the helical dependence van-
ishes in this case. From the expression given above for ψ
it is clear that the helical axes of the two loops are coin-
cident and their directions are reversed. Figure 8 shows
the bending proﬁle of the loop conﬁguration correspond-
ing to δ1 for a 150 bp DNA. Surprisingly, the maximal

10

FIG. 8 Conformation of an antiparallel, 150-bp DNA loop
(a) Computed space-ﬁlling
with zero end-to-end distance.
model of the loop generated with 3DNA (82). The ends of
the DNA juxtapose exactly with antiparallel helical axes and
exact torsional phasing. (b) Equilibrium roll and magnitude
of the loop shown in (a). The bending magnitude of each
dinucleotide step is deﬁned as
i where θi and φi are
the tilt and roll of i-th dinucleotide step, respectively.

θ2
i + φ2

p

J-factor occurs at approximately the same DNA length,
or 460 bp (data not shown), as in DNA cyclisation (52).
This can be partly explained by the fact that the total
bending magnitude of the loop is 290 degrees, close to a
full circle, instead of 180 degrees.

E. DNA looping with ﬁnite end-to-end distance,
antiparallel helical axes, and in-phase torsional constraint

Separation of the DNA ends breaks the rotational sym-
metry, restoring the dependence on helical twist. Figure
9a shows the J-factor as a function of DNA length for
end-to-end distances of 10 bp and 30 bp. The helical
dependence increases with end-to-end separation. Start-
ing from the two loop conﬁgurations (corresponding to δ1
and δ2) with zero end-to-end distance and in-phase tor-

11

sional alignment as initial conﬁgurations, two mechani-
cal equilibrium conﬁgurations are obtained by using the
iterative algorithm described in (52). The J-factor in
ﬁgure 9a is the sum of separate J-factors calculated for
the two conﬁgurations. Note that in all cases involving
conﬁgurations that diﬀer in linking number, equilibration
between the two forms requires breakage of at least one
of the protein-DNA interfaces. The contributions from
each of these conﬁgurations are shown in detail for the
case where the ends are separated by 10 bp. Interestingly,
the length dependence of J computed from the individual
conﬁgurations are out of phase and have a periodicity of
2 helical turns, which results from the half-twist depen-
dence of the phase angles δ1 and δ2. However, their sum
displays a periodicity of one helical turn. Figures 9 b and
c show two such conﬁgurations for DNA molecules that
are torsionally in-phase (N = 210 bp) or out-of-phase
(N = 215 bp).

In the case of cyclisation, the helical-phase dependence
of the J-factor persists at DNA lengths well beyond that
corresponding to the maximum value of J, which lies near
500 bp. This is clearly not the case for DNA looping. In
ﬁgure 9a, the periodic dependence of J on DNA length
for 10-bp end-to-end separation decays nearly to zero well
before the maximum J value is reached. Although the
periodicity of J is not attenuated quite as strongly for 30-
bp end separation, there is less than four-fold variation
in the value of J near 300 bp, as opposed to the more
than ten-fold variation in cyclisation J-factors expected
in this length range. The diﬀerences between looping
and cyclisation are largely due to substantial diﬀerences
in the relative contributions of DNA writhe in the two
processes, as discussed below.

F. DNA looping in synapsis

Intramolecular reactions of most site-speciﬁc recombi-
nation systems (46; 47; 48) and a number of DNA restric-
tion endonucleases such as SﬁI and NgoMIV (49), pro-
ceed through protein-mediated intermediate structures in
which a pair of DNA sites are brought together in space
and the intervening DNA is looped out. The intermediate
nucleoprotein complex involved in site pairing and strand
cleavage (and also exchange, in the case of recombinases)
is termed the synaptic complex.
In these systems, two
characteristic geometric parameters are of interest: the
average through-space distance between the sites and the
average crossing angle between the two ends of the loop,
which we denote the axial angle (see section III.C). The
latter quantity can be described in terms of the twist an-
gle between the protein domains, τP P (ﬁgure 7b), and we
use these terms interchangeably.

Figure 10 shows the helical dependence of looping (ﬁg-
ure 10a) and the elastic-minimum conﬁguration of DNA
loops (ﬁgure 10b) for diﬀerent values of the axial angle.
The most prominent feature of these results is that the
phase of the helical dependence is shifted as a function

FIG. 9 The DNA-length-dependent J-factor and loop conﬁg-
uration as a function of end-to-end separation (the J-factor is
deﬁned in section III.A). (a) The helical dependence of DNA
looping is shown for values of the end-to-end separation equal
to 10 bp and 30 bp. The two conﬁgurations for the 10-bp sep-
aration are obtained from corresponding conﬁgurations with
zero end-to-end separation by using an iterative algorithm.
Therefore the two conﬁgurations are designated by the initial
conﬁgurations with phase angles δ = −(N − 2)τ /2 + 0 (0◦,
dashed line) and δ = −(N − 2)τ /2 + 180 (180◦, solid line) as
described in the text. (b) and (c) show stereo models of the
two equilibrium conﬁgurations for 210-bp (b) and 215-bp (c)
antiparallel DNA loops with end-to-end separation equal to
10 bp. The 210- and 215-bp DNA correspond to an adjacent
peak and valley of the curve in (a), respectively. Conforma-
tions shown in blue correspond to δ = 0; those shown in red
are for δ = 180◦. Note that for N -bp DNA, the chain contour
length is equal to (N − 1)ℓbp.

of the axial angle, characterised by a relative global shift
of the curve along the x-axis. This implies that DNA
looping does not always occur most eﬃciently when two
sites are separated by an integral number of helical turns,
as has been suggested for some simple DNA looping sys-
tems studied previously. The axial angle also globally
modulates J-factors, which is apparent from the verti-
cal shift in the J versus length curve and eﬀects on the
amplitude of the helical dependence. The torsion-angle-
independent value of J, averaged over a full helical turn,
decreases with increasing axial angle, whereas the am-
plitude of the helical dependence increases. The above
observations can be qualitatively explained by analogous
results from DNA cyclisation. As in cyclisation, DNA
forms loops most eﬃciently when the number of helical
turns in the loop is close to an integer value. It is there-
fore appropriate to consider this issue in terms of the
linking number for the looped conformation, Lk, which
involves contributions from the geometries of both the
protein and DNA.

We deﬁne the loop helical turn Ht,loop as the sum of
the DNA twist and the twist introduced by the protein
subunits, divided by 360. Therefore, changing the twist
angle, the axial angle will shift the phase of the helical
dependence relative to that of the DNA alone. For a loop
with N = 179 bp and τP P = 0, the total twist is simply
equal to that for the DNA loop. Because this loop has
17.0 helical turns, only one loop topoisomer contributes
to the J-factor. The value of J is a local maximum at
τP P = 0 and, as shown in ﬁgure 11a, decreases mono-
tonically for both τP P > 0 and τP P < 0. Contributions
to J from other topoisomers of the 179-bp loop are less
than 5 percent over the range −135◦ < τP P < +120◦.
The twist for the planar equilibrium conformation of a
173-bp loop is 16.5 helical turns; thus there are two alter-
native loops that can be eﬃciently formed (ﬁgure 11a):
either a loop with Ht,loop = 17.0 and τP P > 0, or a loop
with Ht,loop = 16.0 and τP P < 0. The J value at τP P = 0
is a local minimum and there is a bimodal dependence
on axial angle for loops in which the DNA twist is half-
integral. We investigated the phase shift of the J-factor
and found that this quantity is a non-linear function of
the axial angle. From ﬁgure 10a, the calculated phase
shifts for 60◦ and 120◦ axial angles relative to 0◦ are ap-
proximately 52◦ and 103◦, respectively. Moreover, the
local maxima for the total J curve for N = 173 shown in
ﬁgure 11a are located at −58.5◦ and 63◦, positions that
are not in agreement with predicted angle values based
solely on Ht,loop (−166◦ and 194◦, respectively).

These deviations can be explained by the fact that
writhe makes an important contribution to the overall
Lk for the loop. This aspect of DNA looping is dra-
matically diﬀerent from that in the cyclisation of small
DNA molecules. The conformations of small DNA cir-
cles are close to planar and the writhe contribution is
small relative to DNA twist (52; 67; 80; 81). In the case
of protein-mediated looping, nonzero values of the axial
angle impose an intrinsically nonplanar conformation on

12

FIG. 10 Dependence of the J-factor on axial angle (the J-
factor is deﬁned in section III.A, and the axial angle is deﬁned
as the average crossing angle between the two ends of the loop,
see section III.C). (a) DNA-length dependence of J for axial
angles of 0◦, 60◦, and 120◦ with the end-to-end separation set
equal to 40 bp. Note that the positions of the extrema shift to
the left with increasing values of the axial angle. (b) Stereo
models of minimum elastic-energy conformations of 179-bp
loops colour coded in accord with the corresponding axial-
angle values in (a).

the DNA. The relative contributions of loop writhe and
twist for the Lk = 16 topoisomer of a 173-bp loop are
shown as a function of axial angle in ﬁgure 11b.

In ﬁgure 11c, we plot the axial-angle-dependent values
of the bending and twisting free energies for the Lk = 16
topoisomer and their sum, which is the total elastic-free
energy of the loop. The minimum value of the total elas-
tic energy occurs at τP P = −58.5◦, coincident with the
position of the J-factor maximum for this topoisomer
(ﬁgure 11a). This mechanical state can be achieved with
very little twist deformation of the loop, but at the ex-
pense of signiﬁcant bending energy. Further reduction of

13

way that the loop geometry can compensate for this is
through twist deformation. This asymmetry arises be-
cause we are considering the contribution of only one
loop topoisomer to the elastic free energy.

G. Conclusion

The statistical-mechanical theory for DNA looping dis-
cussed above (52; 53) suggests that the helical depen-
dence of DNA looping is aﬀected by many factors and
leads to the conclusion that whereas a positive helical-
twist assay can often conﬁrm DNA looping, a negative
result cannot exclude DNA looping. Since it is diﬃcult
to explore the architecture of DNA loops with current
experimental techniques, this theory will be useful for
more reliably analysing DNA looping with limited exper-
imental data. The model has advantages over previous
approaches based exclusively on DNA mechanics, partic-
ularly when protein ﬂexibility is taken into account. In
these cases, entropy eﬀects become important and are
responsible for the observed decay of looping eﬃciency
with DNA length.

IV. DNA KNOTS AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES:
ENTROPY AND TARGETED KNOT REMOVAL

Bacterial DNA occurs largely in circular form. No-
tably, instead of a simply connected ring shape (the un-
knot), the DNA often exhibits permanently entangled
states, such as catenated and knotted DNA. An example
for a DNA trefoil knot is shown in ﬁgure 12. Such conﬁg-
urations have potentially devastating eﬀects on the cell
development. Conversely, however, knots might have de-
signed purposes in gene regulation, separating diﬀerent
regions of the genome, or, alternatively, locking chemi-
cally remote parts of the genome proximate in geomet-
rical space. In eukaryotic cells additional topological ef-
fects occur in the likely entanglement of individual chro-
mosomes. Here, we concentrate on the prokaryotic case.

A. Physiological background of knots

The discovery how one can use molecular biological
tools to create knotted DNA resolved a long-standing ar-
gument against the Watson-Crick double helix picture of
DNA (12), namely that the replication of DNA could not
work as the opening up of the double helix would pro-
duce a superstructure such that the two daughter strands
could not be separated. In fact, the topology of both ss-
DNA and dsDNA is continuously changed in vivo, and
this can readily be mimicked in vitro, although the ac-
tivity of enzymes in vivo is much more restricted than in
vitro (85; 86): Diﬀerent concentrations of enzymes ver-
sus knotted DNA molecules accessible in vitro, that is,
makes it possible to probe topology-altering eﬀects by
enzymes which in vivo do not contribute to such eﬀects.

FIG. 11 J-factor, loop-geometry parameters, and elastic-free
energies as functions of axial angle; compare ﬁgure 10. (a)
J-factor values for loop topoisomers corresponding to 179-bp
and 173-bp loops in ﬁgure 10. The principal contribution to
J for N = 179 bp comes from a single loop topoisomer with
Lk = 17. For N = 173 bp, the overall J-factor is the sum
of contributions from two loop topoisomers with Lk values
of 16 and 17, generating a bimodal dependence of J on axial
angle as described in the text. (b) Excess helical twist, ∆Ht,
and writhe of the loop formed by the Lk = 16 topoisomer
for N = 173 bp as a function of axial angle. Excess twist
is computed from the expression Ht,loop − 16, where Ht,loop
is the loop helical turn value described in the text, and de-
pends linearly on the axial angle. The writhing number of the
loop was calculated using the method of Vologodskii (65; 83).
(c) Elastic-free energies of the Lk = 16 loop topoisomer for
N = 173 bp calculated according to equation 38 of Zhang and
Crothers (52). The individual contributions of bending and
twisting energies are shown along with their sum.

the axial angle requires even less twisting energy; how-
ever, the bending energy increases monotonically. In con-
trast, for τP P > −58.5◦, somewhat less bending energy is
required, but the twisting energy begins to increase sig-
niﬁcantly with increasing axial angle. Since the sense of
the bending deformation for τP P > 0 opposes the needed
reduction in loop linking number, the elastic energy can-
not be decreased by increasing the axial angle. The only

14

Topo I
Topo IV

Gyrase

Topo IV

Gyrase

(A)

(B)

(C)

Topo IV

Topo IV

FIG. 13 Enzymes changing the topology of dsDNA by cutting
and pasting of one or both strands (example for E.coli ): (A)
Torsional stress resulting from the Lk deﬁcit causes the DNA
double helix to writhe about itself (negative supercoiling). In
E.coli , gyrase introduces negative supercoils into DNA and
is countered by topoisomerase I (topo I) and topo IV, which
relax negative supercoils. (B) Topo IV unlinks catenanes gen-
erated by replication or recombination in vivo. (C) Topo IV
unknots DNA in vivo. After (85).

space. Finally, knots may lead to double-strand breaks,
as they weaken biopolymers considerably due to creation
of localised sharp bends (101; 102; 103; 104) as well as
macroscopic lines and ropes (105).12

Above we said that knots can be introduced, inter alia,
by the diﬀerent enzymes of the topoisomerase family. To
remove a knot from a dsDNA, it is necessary to cut both
strands, and then pass one segment through the created
gap, before resealing the two open ends.
In vivo, this
is usually achieved by topoisomerases II and IV. A re-
construction of topo II is shown in ﬁgure 14, indicating
the upper clamp holding a segment of the DNA, while
the bulge-clamp introduces the cut through which the
upper segment is passed. In the ﬁgure, the segment vis-
ible in the pocket of the lower clamp has already been
passed through the gap. After resealing, topo II de-
taches. This process requires energy, provided by ATP.
Notably, topo II is extremely eﬃcient, for circular ds-

FIG. 12 Electron microscope image of a DNA trefoil knot,
from (84). c(cid:13) Science, with permission.

Although it would be likely with a probability of
roughly 1
2 that the linear DNA injected by bacterio-
phage λ into its host E.coli would create a knot before
cyclisation, it turned out to be diﬃcult to detect (12).
First studies therefore concentrated on the fact that un-
der physiological conditions knots are introduced by en-
zymes, DNA replication and recombination, DNA repair,
and topoisomerisation, using these enzymes to prove
both knotting and unknotting (84; 87; 88; 89; 90; 91; 92).
DNA-knotting is also prone to occur behind a stalled
replication fork (93; 94). Some of the typical topology-
altering reactions undergoing in E.coli are summarised
in ﬁgure 13. Knots can eﬃciently be created from
nicked11 dsDNA under action of topoisomerase I at non-
physiological concentrations (95). Another possibility is
by active packaging of a DNA mutant into phage cap-
sids (96), and then denaturing the capsid proteins. Both
methods produce a distribution of diﬀerent knot types.
They can be separated by electrophoresis (97).

The existence of DNA-knots has far-reaching eﬀects
on physiological processes, and knottedness of DNA has
therefore to be eliminated in order to maintain proper
functioning of the cell. Among other possible eﬀects, it
is immediately clear that the presence of a knot in a cir-
cular DNA impedes replication of the DNA, i.e., the full
separation of the two daughter strands (1; 12). More-
over, even transcription is impaired (98). The presence
of knots inhibits the assembly of chromatin (99), knotted
chromosomes cannot be separated during mitosis (1), and
knots in a chromosome may serve as topological barri-
ers between diﬀerent sections of chromosomes, such that
the genomic structural organisation is altered, and cer-
tain sections of the chromosomal DNA may no longer
interact (100). Conversely, it is conceivable that knots,
analogously to protein induced DNA looping, lock re-
mote segments of the genome close together in geometric

11 One of the two strands is cut.

12 The weakness of strings at the site of the knot can be experienced
easily by pulling apart a linear nylon string in comparison to a
knotted one (102).

15

nection with the Bridges of K¨onigsberg problem (112),
determining a closed path by crossing each K¨onigsberg
bridge exactly once. However, the ﬁrst investigations of
topological problems in modern science is most proba-
bly due to Kepler, who studied surface tiling to great
detail (therefore the notion of Kepler tiling in mathe-
matical literature) (113). Further initial steps were due
to Leibniz, Vandermonde and Gauss, in whose collection
of papers drawings of various knots were found13 whose
linking (‘Umschlingungen’=windings) number is indeed
a knot invariant (114; 115; 116). Gauss’ student, List-
ing, in fact introduced the term ‘topology’, and his work
on knots may be viewed as the real starting point of
knot theory (117), although his complexions number was
proved by Tait not to be an invariant.

Inspired by Helmholtz’ theory of an ideal ﬂuid and
building on Listing’s early contributions to knot the-
ory, Scotsmen and chums Maxwell, Tait and Thom-
son (Lord Kelvin) started to discuss the possible im-
plications of knottedness in physics and chemistry, ul-
timately distilled into Thomson’s theory of vortex atoms
(118; 119). Out of this endeavour emerged Tait’s inter-
est in knots, and he devoted most of his career on the
classiﬁcation of knots. Numerous charts and still un-
resolved conjectures on knots document his pioneering
work (120; 121; 122; 123). The studies were carried on
by Kirkman and Little (124; 125; 126; 127). A more de-
tailed historical account of knot theory may be found in
the review article by van de Griend (128), and on the St.
Andrews history of mathematics webpages14.

Planar projections of knots were rendered unique by
Listing’s introduction of the handedness of a crossing,
i.e., the orientational information assigned to a point
where in the projection two lines intersect. With this
information, projections are the standard representation
for knot studies. On their basis, the minimum number of
crossings (‘essential crossings’) can be immediately read
oﬀ as one of the simplest knot invariants. To arrive at
the minimum number, one makes use of the Reidemeister
moves, three fundamental permitted moves of the lines
in a knot projection, as shown in ﬁgure 15. More com-
plex knot invariants include polynomials of the Alexan-
der, Kauﬀman and HOMFLY types (114; 115; 116).15
Here, we will only employ the number of essential cross-
ings as classiﬁcation of knots, in particular, we do not
concern ourselves with the question of degeneracy for a
given knot invariant. However, the bookkeeping of knot

13 Probably copies from an English original.
14 The MacTutor History of Mathematics

http://turnbull.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/∼history/

archive, URL:

15 These polynomials all start to be degenerate for higher order
knots, i.e., above a certain knot complexity several knots may
correspond to one given polynomial (114; 115). In the case of the
simpler knots attained in most DNA conﬁgurations and in knot
simulations, the Alexander polynomials are unique, in contrast to
the Gauss or Edwards invariant, compare, e.g., reference (129).

FIG. 14 Topoisomerase II. This enzyme can actively change
the topology of DNA by cutting the double-strand and pass-
ing another segment of double-stranded DNA through the gap
before resealing it. The image depicts a short stretch of DNA
(horizontally at the bulge of the enzyme, as well as another
segment in the lower clamp (perpendicular to the image) after
passage through the gap from the upper clamp. This mech-
anism makes sure that no additional strand passage through
the open gap can take place (110; 111). Figure courtesy James
M Berger, UC Berkeley.

DNA of length ≃ 10 kbp it was found that topo reduced
the knotted state in between 50 and 100-fold, in com-
parison to a ‘dumb’ enzyme, which would simply pass
segments through at random (106). We note that the
step-wise action of topoisomerase II was recorded in a
single molecule setup using magnetic tweezers (107; 108).
Topoisomerases are surveyed in the review of (109).

B. Classiﬁcation of knots

Knottedness can only be deﬁned on a closed (circular)
chain. This is intuitively clear as in an open linear chain
a knot can always be tied, or an existing knot released.
Mathematically, this means that knot invariants are only
well-deﬁned for a closed space-curve. However, a linear
chain whose ends are permanently attached to one, or two
walls, or whose ends are extended towards inﬁnity, can
be considered as (un)knotted in the proper mathematical
sense, i.e., their knottedness cannot change. In a loser
sense, we will also speak of knots on an open piece of
DNA, appealing to intuition.

The classiﬁcation of knots, or graphs in general, in
terms of invariants can essentially be traced back to Eu-
ler, recalling his graph theoretical elaboration in con-

16

n

N−n

FIG. 16 Figure-eight structure, in which a slip-link separates
two loops of size n and N − n, such that they can freely
exchange length among each other, but none of the loops
can completely retract from the slip-link. On the right, a
schematic drawing of a slip-link, which may be thought of as
a small belt buckle.

required to form a knot K, without the closing segment
(145). The tendency towards knotting during polymer
cyclisation creates problems in industrial and laboratory
processes.

D. Entropic localisation in the ﬁgure-eight slip-link
structure.

To obtain a feeling for how and when entropy leads
to the localisation of a permanently entangled structure,
we consider the simplest polymer object with non-trivial
(non-unknot) geometry, the ﬁgure-eight structure (F8)
displayed in ﬁgure 16.
In this compound, a pair con-
tact is enforced by a slip-link, separating oﬀ two loops
in the circular polymer, such that none of the loops can
fully retract, and both loops can freely exchange length
among each other. We denote the loop sizes by n and
N − n, where N is the (conserved) total length of the
polymer chain. For such an object, we can actually per-
form a closed statistical mechanical analysis based on
results from scaling theory of polymers, and compare the
result with Monte Carlo simulations of the F8.

The statistical quantities that are of particular interest
are the gyration radius, Rg, and the number of degrees of
freedom, ω (146). Rg, as deﬁned in equation (61), mea-
sures the root mean squared distance of the monomers
along the chain to the gyration centre, and is therefore
a good measure of its extension. It can, for instance, be
measured by light scattering experiment. The degrees of
freedom ω count all possible diﬀerent conﬁgurations of
the chain. For a circular polymer (i.e., a polymer with
r(0) = r(N )), the gyration radius becomes

Rg ≃ AN ν

(8)

FIG. 15 The three Reidemeister moves. All topology-
preserving moves of a knot projection can be decomposed
into these three fundamental moves.

types is vital in knot simulations.

C. Long chains are almost always entangled.

During the polymerisation and ﬁnal cyclisation of a
polymer grown in a solvent under freely ﬂoating condi-
tions, a knot is created with probability 1. This Frisch-
Wassermann-Delbr¨uck conjecture (130; 131) could be
mathematically proved for a self-avoiding chain (132;
133), compare also (134). This is consistent with nu-
merical ﬁndings that the probability of unknot forma-
tion decreases dramatically with chain length (129; 135).
Indeed, recent simulations results indicate that the prob-
ability of ﬁnding the unknot in such a cyclisised polymer
decays exponentially with chain length (136; 137; 138;
139):

P∅(N ) ∝ exp

−

N
Nc (cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

(6)

However, there exist theoretical arguments and simula-
tions results indicating that the characteristic number
of monomers Nc occurring in this relation may become
surprisingly large (140; 141; 142; 143). The probability
to ﬁnd a given knot type K on random circular poly-
mer formation has been ﬁtted with the functional form
(143; 144; 145)

PK(N ) = a

N − N0

exp

−

(7)

N c
d

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

b

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

where a, b, and d are free parameters depending on K,
and c ≈ 0.18. N0 is the minimal number of segments

with exponent ν = 1/2 for a Gaussian chain, and ν =
0.588 in the 3D excluded volume case (ν = 3/5 in the
Flory model, and ν = 3/4 in 2D). Whereas in 2D this
scaling contains truly a ring polymer, in 3D the exponent
ν emerges from averaging over all possible topologies, and

necessarily includes knots of all types (146; 147; 148).
For a circular chain, the number of degrees of freedom
contains the number of all possible ways to place an N -
step walk on the lattice with connectivity µ (e.g., µ = 2d
on a cubic lattice in d dimensions), µN , and the entropy
loss for requiring a closed loop, N −dν, involving the same
Flory exponent ν. For the Gaussian case, we recognise in
this entropy loss factor the returning probability of the
random walk. In the excluded volume case, N −dν is an
analogous measure (24; 146; 150). Thus, for a circular
chain embedded in d-dimensional space, the number of
degrees of freedom is

ω ≃ µN N −dν.

(9)

Let us evaluate these measures for the F8 from ﬁgure 16.
As a ﬁrst approximation, consider the F8 as a Gaus-
sian (phantom) random walk, demonstrating that, like
in the charged knot case (149), entropic eﬀects give rise
to long-range interactions. The two loops correspond to
returning random walks, i.e., the number of degrees of
freedom for the F8 in the phantom chain case becomes
(24; 146; 151)16

ωF8,PC ≃ µN n−d/2(N − n)−d/2,

(10)

where d is the embedding dimension. We note that nor-
malisation of this expression produces the probability
density function for ﬁnding the F8 with a given loop size
ℓ = na (L = N a),

pF8,PC(ℓ) ≃ N ℓ−d/2(L − ℓ)−d/2,

(11)

where N denotes a normalisation factor. The conversion
from expressing the chain size in terms of the number of
monomers to its actual length is of advantage in what fol-
lows, as it allows to more easily keep track of dimensions.
Here, we use the length unit a, which may be interpreted
as the monomer size (lattice constant), or as the size of
a Kuhn statistical segment.

To classify diﬀerent grades of localisation, we follow
the convention from references (152; 153). The average
ℓp(ℓ)dℓ is
loop size hℓi determined through hℓi =
trivially hℓi = L/2 by symmetry of the structure. Here,
we introduce a short-distance cutoﬀ set by the lattice
constant a. However, as the probability density func-
tion is strongly peaked at ℓ = 0 and ℓ = L, the two
poles caused by the returning probabilities, and there-
fore a typical shape consists of one small (tight ) and one

L−a
a

R

16 Here and in the following we consider two conﬁgurations of a
polymer chain diﬀerent if they cannot be matched by transla-
tion. In addition, the origin of a given structure is ﬁxed by a
vertex point (see below), i.e., a point where several legs of the
polymer chain are joint. In the F8-structure, this vertex natu-
rally coincides with the slip-link. For a simply connected ring
polymer, such a vertex is a two-vertex anywhere along the chain.

17

FIG. 17 Bead-and-tether chain used in Monte Carlo simula-
tion, showing a typical equilibrium conﬁguration for a self-
avoiding chain: the localisation of the smaller loop is distinct.
Note that in this 2D simulation the slip-link is represented by
the three tethered black beads.

large (loose) loop, compare ﬁgure 17. This can be quan-
tiﬁed in terms of the average size of the smaller loop,

In d = 2, we obtain

hℓi< ≡ 2

ℓp(ℓ)dℓ .

(12)

L/2

a
Z

hℓi< ∼

L
| log(a/L)|

,

(13)

such that with the logarithmic correction the smaller loop
is only marginally smaller than the big one. In contrast,
one observes weak localisation

hℓi< ∼ a1/2L1/2

(14)

in d = 3, in the sense that the relative size hℓi</L tends
to zero for large chains. By comparison, for d > 4 one
encounters hℓi< ∼ a, corresponding to strong localisation,
as the size of the smaller loop does not depend on L
but is set by the short-distance cutoﬀ a. Above four
dimensions, excluded volume eﬀects become negligible,
and therefore both Gaussian and self-avoiding chains are
strongly localised in d ≥ 4.17

To include self-avoiding interactions, we make use of
results for general polymer networks obtained by Du-
plantier (147; 154), which are summarised in the ap-
pendix at the end of this review. In terms of such net-
works, our F8-structure corresponds to the following pa-
rameters: the number N = 2 of polymer segments with
lengths s1 = ℓ = na and s2 = L − ℓ = (N − n)a, form-
ing L = 2 physical loops, connected by n4 = 1 vertex

17 Consideration of higher than the physical 3 space dimensions is

often useful in polymer physics.

of order four. By virtue of equation (79), the number of
conﬁgurations of the F8 with ﬁxed ℓ follows the scaling
form

ωF8(ℓ) ≃ µL(L − ℓ)γF8−1XF8

(15)

ℓ
L − ℓ

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

with the conﬁguration exponent γF8 = 1 − 2dν + σ4.
In the limit ℓ ≪ L, the contribution of the large loop
in equation (15) should not be aﬀected by a small ap-
pendix, and therefore should exhibit the regular Flory
scaling ∼ (L − ℓ)−dν (155; 156; 210). This ﬁxes the scal-
ing behaviour of the scaling function XF8(x) ∼ xγF8−1+dν
in this limit (x → 0 in dimensionless variable x), such
that

ωF8(ℓ) ≃ µL(L − ℓ)−dνℓ−c,

ℓ ≪ L,

(16)

where c = −(γF8 − 1 + dν) = dν − σ4. Using σ4 = −19/16
and ν = 3/4 in d = 2 (147; 154), we obtain

c = 43/16 = 2.6875,

d = 2.

(17)

In d = 3, σ4 ≈ −0.48 (155; 156; 157) and ν ≈ 0.588, so
that

c ≈ 2.24.

(18)

In both cases the result c > 2 enforces that the loop of
length ℓ is strongly localised in the sense deﬁned above.
This result is self-consistent with the a priori assumption
ℓ ≪ L. Note that for self-avoiding chains, in d = 2 the
localisation is even stronger than in d = 3, in contrast to
the corresponding trend for ideal chains.

We performed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of the
2D ﬁgure-eight structure, in which the slip-link was rep-
resented by three tethered beads enforcing a sliding pair
contact such that the loops cannot fully retract (see ﬁg-
ure 18). We used a 2D hard core bead-and-tether chain
with 512 monomers, starting oﬀ from a symmetric initial
condition with ℓ = L/2. Self-crossings were prevented by
keeping a maximum bead-to-bead distance of 1.38 times
the bead diameter, and a maximum step length of 0.15
times the bead diameter. As shown in ﬁgure 19, the size
distribution for the small loop can be ﬁtted to a power
law with exponent c = 2.68 in good agreement with equa-
tion (17).

An experimental study of entropic tightening of
a macroscopic F8-structure was reported in reference
(158). There, a granular chain consisting of hollow steel
spheres connected by steel rods was once twisted and
then put on a vibrating table. From digital imaging, the
distribution of loop sizes could be determined and com-
pared to a power-law with index 43/16 as calculated for
the 2D excluded volume chain. The agreement was found
to be consistent (158).

18

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

0

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

2e+07

4e+07

6e+07

8e+07

FIG. 18 Monte Carlo simulation of an F8-structure in 2D:
loop sizes ℓ and L − ℓ as a function of Monte Carlo steps for a
chain with 512 monomers. The symmetry breaking after the
symmetric initial condition is distinct.

slope=−2.68

10−4

1

10

100

FIG. 19 Power-law ﬁt to the probability density function of
the smaller loop. The ﬁt produces a slope of -2.68, in excellent
agreement with the calculated value.

ted chains. Before going further into the theoretical mod-
elling of knotted chains, we report some of the results
based on simulations studies of both Gaussian and self-
avoiding walks.18 Such simulations either start with a
given knot conﬁguration and then perform moves of spe-
ciﬁc segments, each time making sure that the topol-
ogy is preserved; or, each new conﬁguration emanates
from a new random walk, whose correct topology may
be checked by calculating the corresponding knot invari-
ant, usually the Alexander polynomial, and created con-
ﬁgurations that do not match the desired topology are
discarded. We note that it is of lesser signiﬁcance that
knot invariants such as the Alexander polynomials in fact
are no longer unique for more complex knots, because for
typical chain lengths with the highest probability simpler

E. Simulations of entropic knots in 2D and 3D.

Much of our knowledge about the interaction of knots
with thermal ﬂuctuations is based on simulations of knot-

18 Although per se a Gaussian chain cannot have a ﬁxed topology
due to its phantom character, such simulations introduce a ﬁxed
topology by rejecting moves that result in a diﬀerent knot type.

knots are created, for which the invariants are unique.
For more details we refer to the works quoted below.

In fact, the ﬁxed topology turns out to have a highly
non-trivial eﬀect on chains without self-excluded volume.
As conjectured in (159), a Gaussian circular chain, whose
permitted set of conﬁgurations is restricted to a ﬁxed
topology, will exhibit self-avoiding behaviour. This was
proved in a numerical analysis in (148). The required
number of monomers to reach this self-avoiding expo-
nent was estimated to be of the order of 500. Keeping
this non-trivial scaling of a Gaussian chain at ﬁxed topol-
ogy in mind, knot simulations on the basis of phantom
Gaussian chains were performed in (160), always making
sure that the conﬁgurations taken into the statistics fulﬁl
the desired knot topology.

The dependence of the gyration radius Rg on the knot
type was investigated for simpler knots in 3D in reference
(139). On the basis of the expansion

N 2νK, (19)

R2

g ≃ AK

1 + BKN −∆ + CKN −1 + o(1/N )
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

including a conﬂuent correction (139; 161; 162) in com-
parison to the standard expression (8), it was found that
the Flory exponent νK is independent of the knot type
K and has the 3D value 0.588. This was interpreted via
a localisation of knots such that the inﬂuence of tight
knots on Rg is vanishingly small.
In fact, ∆ is of the
order of 0.5 according to the investigations in references
(161; 162; 163; 164). Based on longer chains in compar-
ison to reference (139), the study of (165) thus corrobo-
rates the independence of νK ≈ 0.588 of the knot type K.
In recent AFM experiments analysing single DNA knots,
the Flory scaling Rg ≃ N ν was conﬁrmed for both simple
and complex knots (166).

For the number of degrees of freedom ωK, it was found

for the form19

ωK ≃ AKN αK−2µN
K

1 +

+ . . .

(20)

BK
N ∆K

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

with conﬂuent corrections, that while for the unknot with
α∅ ≈ 0.27 expression (20) is consistent with the standard
result (9) ([0.27 − 2]/3 ≈ −0.58 ≈ ν), for prime knots
αK = α∅ + 1, and for composite knots with Nf prime
components,

αK = α∅ + Nf .

(21)

This ﬁnding is in agreement with the view that each
prime component of a knot K is tightly localised and
statistically able to move around one central loop, each
prime component counting an additional factor N of de-
grees of freedom. The fact that for a chain of ﬁnite thick-
ness the size of the big central loop is in fact diminished

19

by the size of the tight knot is a conﬂuent eﬀect, such
that the conﬂuent exponent ∆ should be related to the
size distribution of the knot region. Not surprisingly,
the connectivity factor µK ≈ 4.68 was found to be in-
dependent of K, assuming the standard value for a cu-
bic lattice (167). Also the amplitude AK and the expo-
nent ∆K of the conﬂuent correction turned out to be K-
independent. We note that a similar analysis in (pseudo)
2D20 also strongly points towards tight localisation of the
knot (168).

In contrast to the above results, 3D simulations under-
taken in (169) (also compare (170)) show the dependence

Rg ≃ N 3/5C−4/15

(22)

of the gyration radius on the knot type, characterised
by the number C of essential crossings. Rg, that is,
decreases as a power-law with C, where the exponent
−4/15 = 1/3 − ν (169). The functional form (22)) was
derived from a Flory-type argument for a polymer con-
struct of C interlocked loops of equal length N/C by ar-
guing that each loop occupies a volume ≃ (N/C)3ν, and
the volume of the knot is given by V ≃ C(N/C)3ν (i.e.,
assuming that due to self-avoiding repulsion the volume
of individual loops adds up to the total volume). Equa-
tion (22) then follows immediately. This model of equal
loop sizes is equivalent to a completely delocalised knot.
It may therefore be speculated, albeit rather long chain
sizes of up to 400 were used, whether the numerical algo-
rithm employed for the simulations in (169) causes ﬁnite-
size eﬀects that, in turn, prevent a knot localisation. We
note that the Flory-type scaling assumed to derive ex-
pression (22) is consistent with a modelling brought for-
ward in reference (171), in which the knot is quantiﬁed
by the aspect ratio in a conﬁguration corresponding to a
maximally inﬂated tube with the given topology (i.e., a
state corresponding to complete delocalisation). In refer-
ence (169), the temporal relaxation behaviour of a given
knot was also studied. While regular Rouse behaviour
was found for the case of the unknot, the knotted chains
displayed somewhat surprising long time contributions to
the relaxation time spectrum (7; 172; 173; 174), a phe-
nomenon already pointed out by de Gennes within an ac-
tivation argument to create free volume in a tight knot in
order to move along the chain (175). Note that relatively
lose knots in shorter chains do not appear to exhibit such
extremely long relaxation time behaviour (176).

Simulation of a 3D knot with varying excluded vol-
ume showed, if only the excluded volume becomes large
enough, the gyration radius of the knot is independent
of the knot type (177). The picture of tight knots is fur-
ther corroborated in the study by Katritch et al. using

19 Note that we changed the exponent by 1 in comparison to the
original work, making the counting of non-translatable conﬁgu-
rations consistent with the counting convention speciﬁed in foot-
note 16.

20 The simulated polymer chain moves in 2D, however, crossings
are permitted at which one chain passes underneath another.
In that, the simulated polymers are in fact equivalent to knot
projections with a certain orientations of individual crossings.

a Gaussian chain model with ﬁxed topology to demon-
strate that the size distribution of the knot is distinctly
peaked at rather small sizes (144).

Apart from determining the statistical quantities Rg
and ωK from simulations, there also exist indirect meth-
ods for quantifying the size of the knot region in a knotted
polymer. One such method is to conﬁne an open chain
containing a knot between two walls, and measuring the
ﬁnite size corrections of the force-extension curve due to
the knot size. This is based on the idea that the gyration
radius for a system depending on more than one length
scale (i.e., apart from the chain length N ) shows above
mentioned conﬂuent corrections, such that (178)

N0
N

,

N1
N

Rg = AN νΦ

, . . .

≃ AN ν

1 − BN −∆

(23)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)
when only the largest correction is considered, and in 3D
∆ ≈ 0.5 is supposed to be universal (161; 162; 163; 164).
If this leading correction is due to the argument N0/N
in the scaling function Φ, the length scale N0 depends
on N through the scaling N0 ∼ N t with ∆ = 1 − t.
From Monte Carlo simulations of a bead and tether chain
model, it could then be inferred that the size of the knot
scales like (178)

Nk ∼ N t,

t = 0.4 ± 0.1

(24)

This, in turn, enters the force-extension curve f ′ = G(R′)
with the dimensionless force f ′ = f AN ν/(kBT ) and dis-
tance R′ = R/(AN ν) of the walls, in the form with con-
ﬂuent correction

f ′ ≃ G(R′)

1 + g(R′)N −∆

.

(25)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

From the simulation, t = 0.4 corresponds to the best
data collapsing, assuming the validity of the scaling ar-
guments. An argument in favour of this approach is the
consistency of the exponent t = 0.4 with the inferred
∆ = 0.6, which is close to the known value. Note that
the force-extension of a chain with a slip-link was dis-
cussed in reference (179) and shown that a loop sepa-
rated oﬀ by a slip-link is conﬁned within a Pincus-de
Gennes blob. We also note that results corresponding
to delocalisation in force-size relations were reported in
(180; 181). An entropic scale was conceived in (182):
Separating two chains with ﬁxed topology but allowing
them to exchange length (e.g., through a small hole in a
wall) would enable one to infer the localisation behaviour
of a knot by comparing the equilibrium balance of this
knot with a slip-link construct of known degrees of free-
dom until the average length on both sides coincides.
The preliminary results in (182) are shadowed by ﬁnite-
size eﬀects of the accessible system size, as limited by
computation power. The analysis in reference (183) of a
self-avoiding polygon model uses the method of closure
of a short fragment of the knot and subsequent determi-
nation of its Alexander polynomial to obtain the scaling
exponent t = 0.75; in a second variant, the authors ﬁnd

20

a consistent result by a variant of the knot scale method.
Another recent study uses a more realistic model for a
polymer chain, namely, a simpliﬁed model of polyethy-
lene; with up to 1000 monomers in the simulation, the
exponent t ≈ 0.65 is found (and delocalisation is obtained
in the dense phase) (184).

Thus, there exist simulations results pointing in both
directions, knot localisation and delocalisation. As the
latter may be explained by ﬁnite size eﬀects, it seems
likely that (at least simple) knots in 2D and 3D localise
in the sense that the knot region occupies a portion of
the chain that is signiﬁcantly smaller in comparison to
the entire chain. In particular, this would imply that the
average size of the knot region hℓi scales with the chain
length N a with an exponent less than one, such that

lim
N→∞

hℓi
N a

= 0.

(26)

Below, we show from analytical grounds that such a lo-
calisation is a natural consequence of interactions of a
chain of ﬁxed topology with ﬂuctuations. We note, how-
ever, that conclusive results for knot localisation may
in fact come from experiments: Manipulation of single
chains such as DNA can be performed for rather long
chains, making it possible to reach beyond the ﬁnite-size
corrections inherent in, e.g., the force-extension simula-
tions mentioned above. The aforementioned AFM stud-
ies on single DNA knots indeed reveal knot localisation
of ﬂattened knots (166); due to experimental limitations,
presently only one DNA length was investigated, such
that the scaling exponent t currently cannot be obtained.
Before proceeding to these analytical approaches, we
note that there have also been performed simulations of
knotted chains under non-dilute conditions (185; 186).
In (pseudo) 2D, these have found delocalisation of the
knot, i.e., limN→∞hℓi/N = const. We come back to
these simulations below in connection with the modelling
of dense and Θ-knots.

F. Flattened knots in dilute and dense phases.

Analytically, knots are a hard problem to tackle. Sta-
tistical mechanical treatments of permanently entangled
polymers are so diﬃcult to treat since topological restric-
tions cannot be formulated as a Hamiltonian problem but
appear as hard constraints partitioning the phase space
(24; 146; 187; 188).21 A segment of a 3D knot, in other
words, can move without feeling the constraints due to
the non-trivial topology of a knotted state, until it actu-
ally collides with another segment. The accessible phase
space of degrees of freedom is therefore characterised by

21 For comparison, self-avoidance in 3D is usually treated as a per-
turbation, i.e., as a “soft constraint”, in analytical studies (146).

inequalities.22

Consequently, only a relatively small range of prob-
lems have been treated analytically, starting with the
seminal papers by Edwards (189; 190),
in which he
considers the classiﬁcation of topological constraints in
polymer physics. De Gennes addressed the problem of
tight knot motion along a polymer chain using scaling
arguments for the activation of free length inside the
knot region, producing a double-exponential expression
for the corresponding time scale (175), which might ex-
plain the extreme long-time contributions in the relax-
ation time spectrum of permanently entangled polymers
(7; 172; 173; 174; 191). Some analytical results were ob-
tained for a pair, or an ‘Olympic’ gel of entangled poly-
mer rings, see for instance, (192; 193; 194; 195; 196).
In a mean ﬁeld approach based on the Kauﬀman invari-
ant the entropy of knots was investigated in references
(197; 198; 199). Similarly, some statistical properties of
random knot diagrams were investigated in (200; 201).
However, some insight can be gained on the basis of phe-
nomenological models, which we will come back to below.
Here, we continue with an analytical study of ﬂat knots.
One possibility to treat knotted polymer chains ana-
lytically is to conﬁne the degrees of freedom of the knot
to motion in 2D, only. The knot, that is, is preserved,
as at the crossings the chain is allowed to form an over-
/underpassing, while the rest of the knot is conﬁned to
2D. Such a conﬁnement can in fact be experimentally
realised in various ways. Thus, the chain can be con-
ﬁned between two close-by glass slabs, as demonstrated
in (202); it can be pressed ﬂat on a surface by gravita-
tion or similar forces, for instance in macroscopic sys-
tems (158; 203); the chain can be adhesively bound to a
membrane and still reach conﬁgurational equilibrium, as
experimentally shown for DNA in references (166; 204).
Or it can be adsorbed to a mica surface either by APTES
coating or by providing bivalent Mg ions in solution, as
shown in ﬁgure 20. From such ﬂat knots as discussed
in the remainder of this section, we will be able to infer
certain generic features also for 3D knots.

A ﬂat knot therefore corresponds to a polymer network
in 2D, but the orientation of the crossings is preserved,
such that the network graph actually coincides with a
typical knot projection (114; 115; 116), as shown in ﬁg-
ure 21 on the left. This projection of the trefoil, and sim-
ilar projections for all knots, displays the knot with the
essential crossings. A ﬂat knot can, in principle acquire
an arbitrary number of crossings by Reidemeister moves;
for instance, the bottom left segment of the ﬂat trefoil
can slide under the vicinal segment, creating a new pair
of vertices, and so on. However, we suppose that such

22 Although a similar statement is true for polymer networks in
3D, the ﬁeld theoretical results for their critical exponents are in
fact obtained as averages over all topologies. For instance, the
exponent ν entering the gyration radius of a a 3D polymer ring
counts all knotted states (147).

21

FIG. 20 AFM tapping-mode images of ﬂattened DNA-knot
adsorbed on a surface. The substrate surface used is AP-
mica (freshly cleaved mica reacted with an amino terminal
silane to make is positively charged). The DNA knots used
are extracted from bacteriophage P4; the DNA is a 11.4 kbp
molecule (with a 1.4 kbp deletion resulting in a ﬁnal length of
10 kbp) which has two cohesive ends. They are not covalently
closed, thus no supercoiling is present. The knot adsorbed out
of the 3D bulk on to the surface is strongly trapped, i.e., the
knot is ‘projected’ onto the surface without any equilibration.
The knot appears rather delocalised. Courtesy E. Ercolini, F.
Valle and G. Dietler (166).

transient additional loops are suﬃciently short-lived so
that we can neglect them in our analysis. Then, we can
apply results from scaling analysis of polymer networks of
the most general type shown in ﬁgure 79, see the primer
in the appendix. We note that from the Monte Carlo
simulations we performed it may be concluded that such
additional vertices can in fact be neglected.

1. Flat knots in dilute phase.

We had previously found that for the F8-structure the
probability density function for the size of each loop is
peaked at ℓ → 0 and ℓ → L. From the scaling anal-
ysis for self-avoiding polymer networks, we concluded
strong localisation of one subloop. For more complicated
structures, the joint probability to ﬁnd the individual
segments with given lengths si is expected to peak at
the edges of the higher-dimensional conﬁguration hyper-
space. Some analysis is necessary to ﬁnd the characteris-
tic shapes. Let us consider here the simplest non-trivial
knot, the (ﬂat) trefoil knot 31 shown in ﬁgure 21. Each
of the three crossings is replaced with a vertex with four
outgoing legs, and the resulting network is assumed to

s
3
s
4

s
5

s
1

s
6

s
2

FIG. 21 Flat trefoil knot with segment labels. On the right,
a schematic representation of a localised ﬂat trefoil with one
large segment is shown.

separate into a large loop and a multiply connected re-
5
i=1 si be
gion which includes the vertices. Let ℓ =
the total length of all segments contained in the multiply
connected knot region. Accordingly, the length of the
large loop is s6 = L − ℓ.

P

In the limit ℓ ≪ L, the number of conﬁgurations of this
network can be derived in a similar way as in the scaling
approach followed for the F8. This procedure determines
the concrete behaviour of the scaling form

ωIII ≃ µLWIII

L − ℓ, ℓ,

s1
ℓ

,

s2
ℓ

,

s3
ℓ

,

s4
ℓ

(cid:17)

(27)

(cid:16)

including the scaling function W that depends on alto-
gether six arguments. The index III is chosen according
to ﬁgure 22, where the ﬂat trefoil conﬁguration in the
dense phase appears at position III of the scheme (ex-
plained below). After some manipulations, the number
of degrees of freedom yields in the form (152)

ωIII(ℓ, L) ∼ µL(L − ℓ)−dνℓ−c,

(28)

with the scaling exponent

c = −(γIII − 1 + dν) − m,

m = 4.

(29)

Here, m = 4 corresponds to the number of independent
integrations over the segments si (i = 1, . . . , 4) of the
knot region, as we only retain the cumulative size ℓ =
5
i=1 si of the knot region. Putting numerical values, we

ﬁnd c = 65/16, i.e., strong localisation.
P
However, some care is necessary in performing these
integrations, since the scaling function WIII may exhibit
non-integrable singularities if one or more of the argu-
ments si/ℓ tend to 0. The geometries corresponding to
these limits (edges of the conﬁguration hyperspace) rep-
resent contractions of the original trefoil network GIII in
the sense that the length of one or more of the segments
si is of the order of the short-distance cutoﬀ a. If such a
short segment connects diﬀerent vertices, they cannot be
resolved on larger length scales, but appear as a single,
new vertex. Thus, each contraction corresponds to a dif-
ferent network G, which may contain a vertex with up to
eight outgoing legs. For the ﬂat trefoil knot, there exist
six diﬀerent contractions, as grouped in ﬁgure 22 around

22

the original ﬂat trefoil at position III. As an example,
in the top row of ﬁgure 22 contraction VI follows from
the original trefoil III if the uppermost segment becomes
very small, and similarly the network VII emanates from
contraction VI if one of the four symmetric segments be-
comes very small. For each of these networks, one can
calculate the corresponding exponent c in a similar way
as above, leading to the general expression

c = 2 +

nN

dν − 1

+

|σN | − dν

.

(30)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)(cid:27)

N
2

(cid:26)

(cid:16)

XN ≥4

The σN are given in equation (80).
In ﬁgure 22, the
various contractions are arranged in increasing exponent
c.

Our scaling analysis relies on an expansion in a/ℓ ≪ 1,
and the values of c determine a sequence of contractions
according to higher orders in a/ℓ: The smallest value of
c corresponds to the most likely contraction, while the
others represent corrections to this leading scaling be-
haviour, and are thus less and less probable (see ﬁgure
22). To lowest order, the trefoil behaves like a large ring
polymer at whose fringe the point-like knot region is lo-
cated. At the next level of resolution, it appears con-
tracted to the ﬁgure-eight shape GI. For more accurate
data, the higher order shapes II to VII may be found with
decreasing probability. Interestingly, the original uncon-
tracted trefoil conﬁguration ranks third in the hierarchy
of shapes.

These predictions were checked by MC simulations
with the same conditions as described above, to pre-
vent intersection. The ﬂat trefoil knot was prepared
from a symmetric, harmonic 3D representation with 512
monomers, which was collapsed and then kept on a hard
wall by the “gravitational” ﬁeld V = −kBT h/h∗ perpen-
dicular to the wall, where h is the height of a monomer,
and h∗ was set to 0.3 times the bead diameter. Conﬁgu-
rations corresponding to contraction I are then selected
by requiring that besides a large loop, they contain only
one segment larger than a preset cutoﬀ length (taken to
be 5 monomers), and similarly for contraction II. The
size distributions for such contractions, as well as for all
possible knot shapes are shown in ﬁgure 23. The tails of
the distributions are indeed consistent with the predicted
power laws, although the data (especially for contraction
II) is too noisy for a deﬁnitive statement.

Our scaling results pertain to all ﬂat prime knots. In
particular, the dominating contribution for any prime
knot corresponds to the ﬁgure-eight contraction GI, as
equation (30) predicts a larger value of the scaling ex-
ponent c for any network G other than GI. Accordingly,
ﬁgure 24 demonstrates the tightness of the prime knot
819. Composite knots, however, can maximise the num-
ber of conﬁgurations by splitting into their prime factors
as indicated in ﬁgure 24 for 31#31. Each prime factor
is tight and located at the fringe of one large loop, and
accounts for an additional factor of L for the number of
conﬁgurations as compared to a ring of length L without

Dilute

Dense

c

c

c

Θ−point

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

23

2.6875

3.375

4.0625

5.5

6.1875

9.0625

0.125

0.75

1.375

1.875

2

0.714

1.143

1.571

2.095

2.524

3.857

FIG. 22 Hierarchy of the ﬂat trefoil knot 31. Upper row: dilute phase. Middle row: Θ-phase. Bottom row: dense phase. To
the left of each row, the trefoil projection is shown. It splits up into the hierarchies of conﬁgurations, with exponents c below
each contraction. The small protruding legs represent the big central loop, compare, for instance, ﬁgure 21 on the right with
position III of the top row. See text for details.

fig. 8 slip−link
contraction I
trefoil knot
contraction II
slope=−2.7
slope=−3.4

mica surface, on which the knot is adsorbed. Variation
of the ionic strength in the solution determines whether
the knot is going to be strongly trapped on the surface
such that, once captured on the surface, it is completely
immobilised (small ionic strength); or whether the ad-
sorption is weaker such that the knot can (partially) equi-
librate while being conﬁned to 2D, i.e., equilibrate as a
ﬂat knot. Figure 20 shows a strongly trapped complex
knot, whereas ﬁgure 25 depicts a weakly adsorbed simple
knot, compare (166).

10

100

FIG. 23 Power law tails in probability density functions for
the size ℓ of tight segments: As deﬁned in the ﬁgure, we
show results for the smaller loop in a ﬁgure-eight structure,
the overall size of the trefoil knot, as well as the two leading
contractions of the latter.

a knot. Indeed, this gain in entropy leads to the tight-
ness of knots. Flat knots can experimentally be produced
by ‘projecting’ a dilute 3D knot from the bulk onto a

2. Flat knots under Θ and dense conditions.

In many situations, polymer chains are not dilute.
Polymer melts, gels, or rubbers exhibit fairly high densi-
ties of chains, and the behaviour of an individual chain
in such systems is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared to the
dilute phase (146; 172; 191). Similar considerations ap-
ply to biomolecules:
in bacteria, the gyration radius of
the almost freely ﬂoating ring DNA may sometimes be
larger than the cell radius itself. Moreover, under certain
conditions, there is a non-negligible osmotic pressure due
to vicinal layers of protein molecules, which tends to con-
ﬁne the DNA (205; 206; 207). In protein folding studies,
globular proteins in their native state are often modelled
as compact polymers on a lattice (see (208) for a recent

24

FIG. 25 Flat knot imaged by AFM, similar to the one shown
in ﬁgure 20. However, this knot is rather simple (most likely
a trefoil) and was allowed to relax while attaching to freshly
cleaved mica in presence of bivalent Mg counterions. Cour-
tesy E. Ercolini, F. Valle, and G. Dietler. Note the close
resemblance to the trefoil conﬁguration shown in ﬁgure 24.

mers) (217; 218; 219; 220).

As studied in reference (221), the value of the exponent

c for the 2D dense F8 is (compare to the appendix)

c = −γF8 = 11/8 = 1.375,

(31)

implying that the smaller loop is weakly localised . This
means that the probability for the size of each loop is
peaked at ℓ = 0 and, by symmetry, at ℓ = L. An analo-
gous reasoning for the 2D F8 at the Θ point gives

c = 11/7 = 1.571.

(32)

In both cases the smaller loop is weakly localised in the
sense that hli</L → 0. Figure 26 shows the symmet-
ric initial and a typical equilibrium conﬁguration for pe-
riodic boundary conditions obtained from Monte Carlo
(MC) simulations, see reference (221) for details. In ﬁg-
ure 26, the lines represent the bonds (tethers) between
the monomers (beads, not shown here). The three black
dots mark the locations of the tethered beads forming
the slip-link in 2D. The initial symmetric conﬁguration
soon gives way to a conﬁguration with ℓ ≪ L on ap-
proaching equilibrium. Figure 27 shows the development
of this symmetry breaking as a function of the number
of MC steps. We note, however, that the ﬂuctuations of
the loop sizes in the “stationary” regime appear to be
larger in comparison to the dilute case studied in refer-
ence (153), compare ﬁgure 18. We checked that for den-
sities (area coverage) above 40% the scaling behaviour
becomes independent of the density. (The above simu-
lation results correspond to a density of 55%.) The size
distribution data is well ﬁtted to a power law (for over
1.5 decades with 1024 monomers), and the corresponding

FIG. 24 Typical conﬁgurations of 256-mer chains for the tre-
foil 31, the prime knot 819, and the composite knot 31#31
consisting of two trefoils, in d = 2. The initial conditions
were symmetric in all cases.

review).

A polymer is considered dense if, on a lattice, the frac-
tion f of occupied sites has a ﬁnite value f > 0. This
can be obtained by considering a single polymer of total
length L inside a box of volume V and taking the limit
L → ∞, V → ∞ in such a way that f = L/V remains
ﬁnite (209; 210; 211). Alternatively, dense polymers can
be obtained in an inﬁnite volume through the action of
an attractive force between monomers. Then, for tem-
peratures T below the collapse (Theta) temperature Θ,
the polymers collapse to a dense phase, with a density
f > 0, which is a function of T (210; 212; 213; 214).
For a dense polymer in d dimensions, the exponent ν,
deﬁned by the radius of gyration Rg ∼ Lν, becomes
ν = 1/d. The limit f = 1 is realised in Hamiltonian
paths, where a random walk visits every site of a given
lattice exactly once (215; 216). Dense polymers may be
related to 2D vesicles and lattice animals (branched poly-

25

slope=−1.375

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

FIG. 26 Symmetric (ℓ = L/2 = 128) initial conﬁguration
of a 2D dense F8 (left) and equilibrium conﬁguration (right)
with periodic boundary conditions. The two diﬀerent grey
values correspond to the two subloops created by the slip-
link. The slip-link itself is represented by the three (tethered)
black dots.

exponent with 512 and 1024 monomers in ﬁgure 27 is in
good agreement with the predicted value (31).

For our MC analysis, we again used a hard core bead-
and-tether chain, in which self-crossings were prevented
by keeping a maximum bead-to-bead distance of 1.38
times the bead diameter, and a maximum step length
of 0.15 times the bead diameter. To create the dense F8
initial condition, a free F8 is squeezed into a quadratic
box with hard walls. This is achieved by starting oﬀ from
the free F8, surrounding it by a box, and turning on a
force directed towards one of the edges. Then, the op-
posite edge is moved towards the centre of the box, and
so on. During these steps, the slip-link is locked, i.e., the
chain cannot slide through it, and the two loops are of
equal length during the entire preparation. Finally, when
the envisaged density is reached, the hard walls are re-
placed by periodic boundary conditions, and the slip-link
is unlocked. After each step, the system is allowed to re-
lax for times larger than the localisation times occurring
at the main stage of the run.

A similar analysis as for the dense/Θ-F8 structure and
the dilute ﬂat trefoil above, reveals the number of degrees
of freedom for the ﬂat dense trefoil in the form (221)

ω3(ℓ, L) ∼ ω0(L)ℓ−c

(33)

with c = −γ3 − m, where γ3 = −33/8 from equation
(82) in the appendix (L = 4, n4 = 3) and m = 4 is the
number of independent integrations over chain segments.
Thus, c = 1/8 < 1 which implies that the dense 2D
trefoil is delocalised. As above, we have to consider the
various possible contractions of the ﬂat knot. For dense
polymers, the present scaling results show that both the
original trefoil shape (c = 1/8 < 1, see above) and posi-
tion II (c = 3/4 < 1) are in fact delocalised and represent
equally the leading scaling order (cf. top part of ﬁgure
22). The F8 is only found at the third position and is
weakly localised (c = 11/8 > 1). In an MC simulation of
the dense 2D trefoil, we predict that one mainly observes

10−5

1

10

100

1000

FIG. 27 The loop size probability distribution p(ℓ) at ρ =
55% area coverage, for the F8 with 512 (top) and 1024 (bot-
tom) monomers. The power law with with the predicted ex-
ponent c = 1.375 in equation (31) is indicated by the dotted
line.

delocalised shapes corresponding to the original trefoil
and position II in ﬁgure 22, and further, with decreasing
probability, the weakly localised F8 and the other shapes
of the hierarchy (top part) in ﬁgure 22.

These predictions are consistent with the numerical
simulations of reference (185), who observe that the mean
value of the second largest segment of the simulated 2D
dense trefoil conﬁgurations grows linearly with L, and
conjecture the same behaviour also for the other seg-
ments, corresponding to the delocalisation of the trefoil
obtained above.

An analogous reasoning can be applied to the 2D tre-
foil in the Θ phase. We ﬁnd that in this case that the
leading shape is again the original (uncontracted) trefoil,
with c = 5/7 < 1. This implies that the 2D trefoil is
delocalised also at the Θ point. All other shapes are at
least weakly localised, and subdominant to the leading
scaling order represented by the original trefoil. The re-
sulting hierarchy of shapes is shown in ﬁgure 22 (bottom
part).

G. 3D knots defy complete analytical treatment.

As already mentioned, 3D knots correspond to a prob-
lem involving hard constraints that defy a closed analyt-
ical treatment. It may be possible, however, that by a
suitable mapping to, for instance, a ﬁeld theory, an an-
alytical description may be found. This may in fact be
connected to the study of knots in diagrammatic solu-
tions in high energy physics (222). There exists a fun-
damental relation between knots and gauge theory as
knot projections and Feynman graphs share the same
basic ingredients corresponding to a Hopf algebra (115).
However, up to now no such mapping has been found,

and a theoretical description of 3D knots based on ﬁrst
principles is presently beyond hope. To obtain some in-
sight into the statistical mechanical behaviour of knotted
chains, one therefore has to resort to simulations stud-
ies or experiments.
In addition, a few phenomenologi-
cal models for both the equilibrium and dynamical be-
haviour of knots have been suggested such as in references
(141; 169; 171; 176; 180; 181; 223; 224).

When discussing numerical knot studies, we already
mentioned the Flory-type model brought leading to equa-
tion 22 (169; 170). One may argue that the diﬀerences in
the knot size for the diﬀerent knot types corresponding
to the same C may be included in the prefactor, that
is independent of the chain length N . Obviously, this
model of equal loop sizes is equivalent to a completely
delocalised knot. This statement is in fact equivalent
to another Flory-type approach to knotted polymers re-
ported in (171). In this model, the knot is thought of as
an inﬂatable tube: for a very thin tube diameter, the tube
is equivalent to the original knot conformation; inﬂating
the tube more and more will increasingly smoothen out
the shape until a maximally inﬂated state is reached. The
knot is then characterised by the aspect ratio

p =

, therefore 1 ≤ p ≤ N,

(34)

L
D

between length L and maximum tube diameter D.
It
appears that p is a (weak) knot invariant, and can be
used to characterise the gyration radius of the knot. It is
clear that, by construction, the aspect ratio described a
totally delocalised knot, and indeed it turns out that in
good solvent, the gyration radius shows the dependence
Rg ≃ AN 3/5τ 1/5p−4/15, where τ is the (dimensionless)
deviation from the Θ temperature (171). Obviously, the
aspect ratio appears to be proportional to the number
of essential crossings in comparison to expression (22).
We note that similar considerations are employed in ref-
erence (224), including a comparison to the entropy of a
tight knot, ﬁnding comparable entropic likelihood. The
modelling based on the aspect ratio p is further reﬁned
in (141).

Knot localisation is a subtle interplay between the de-
grees of freedom of one big loop, and the internal degrees
of freedom of the various segments in the knot region.
Under localisation, the number of degrees of freedom

26

being the fact that it should be possible to go towards
rather high chain lengths that are inaccessible in simula-
tions. To overcome similar diﬃculties in the context of
the entropic elasticity for rubber networks, Ball, Doi, Ed-
wards and coworkers replaced permanent entanglements
by slip-links (225; 226; 227; 228). Gaussian networks
containing slip-links have been successful in the predic-
tion of important physical quantities of rubber networks
(172), and they have been used to study a small num-
ber of entangled chains (229). In a similar fashion, one
may investigate the statistical behaviour of single poly-
mer chains in which a ﬁxed topology is created by a
number of slip-links. Such ‘paraknots’ can be studied
analytically using the Duplantier scaling results (153).
As mentioned previously, knowledge of the statistical be-
haviour of paraknots can be used to create a knot scale
for calibrating the degrees of freedom of real knots, and
therefore also important to understand or design indirect
experiments on knot entropy, such as by force-extension
measurements (179). Paraknots may also be useful in the
design of entropy-based functional molecules (230; 231).

V. DNA BREATHING: LOCAL DENATURATION ZONES
AND BIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS

”A most remarkable physical feature of the DNA helix,
and one that is crucial to its functions in replication and
transcription, is the ease with which its component chains
can come apart and rejoin. Many techniques have been
used to measure this melting and reannealing behaviour.
Nevertheless, important questions remain about the ki-
netics and thermodynamics of denaturation and renatu-
ration and how these processes are inﬂuenced by other
molecules in the test tube and cell” (3). This remark-
able quotation, despite 30 years old, still summarises the
challenge of understanding local and global denaturation
of DNA, in particular, its dynamics. In this section, we
report recent ﬁndings on the spontaneous formation of
intermittent denaturation zones within an intact DNA
double helix. Such denaturation bubbles ﬂuctuate in size
by (random) motion of the zipper forks relative to each
other. The opening and subsequent closing of DNA bub-
bles is often called DNA breathing.

ω ≃ µN N 1−dν

(35)

A. Physiological background of DNA denaturation

includes an additional factor N from the knot region en-
circling the big loop. For ﬂat knots, the competition
between the single big loop and the knot region is in-
deed won by the big loop. In the case of 3D knots, this
balance is presently not resolved for knots of all complex-
ity. Probably only detailed simulations studies of higher
order knots will make it possible to decide for the var-
ious models of 3D knots. Major contributions are also
expected from single molecule experiments, for instance,
from force-extension measurements along the lines of the
simulations study in (178), the advantage of experiments

The Watson-Crick double-helix is the thermodynami-
cally stable conﬁguration of a DNA molecule under physi-
ological conditions (normal salt and room/body temper-
ature). This stability is eﬀected (a) by Watson-Crick
H-bonding, that is essential for the speciﬁcity of base-
pairing, i.e., for the key-lock principle according to which
the nucleotide Adenine exclusively binds to Thymine,
and Guanine only to Cytosine. Base-pairing therefore
guarantees the high level of ﬁdelity during replication and
transcription. (b) The second contribution to DNA-helix
stability comes from base-stacking between neighbouring

27

θ
h

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

355

360

370

375

365

T [K]

FIG. 28 Fraction θh of double-helical domains within the
DNA as a function of temperature. Schematic representa-
tion of θh(T ), showing the increased formation of bubbles
and unzipping from the ends, until full denaturation has been
reached.

bps: through hydrophobic interactions between the pla-
nar aromatic bases, that overlap geometrically and elec-
tronically, the bp stacking stabilises the helical structure
against the repulsive electrostatic force between the neg-
atively charged phosphate groups located at the outside
of the DNA double-strand. While hydrogen bonds con-
tribute only little to the helix stability, the major support
comes from base-stacking (3; 233).

The quoted ease with which its component chains can
come apart and rejoin, without damaging the chemical
structure of the two single-strands, is crucial to many
physiological processes such as replication via the pro-
teins DNA helicase and polymerase, and transcription
through RNA polymerase. During these processes, the
proteins unzip a certain region of the double-strand, to
obtain access to the genetic information stored in the
bases in the core of the double-helix (3; 6; 232). This
unzipping corresponds to breaking the hydrogen bonds
between the bps. Classically, the so-called melting and
reannealing behaviour of DNA has been studied in solu-
tion in vitro by increasing the temperature, or by titra-
tion with acid or alkali. During thermal melting, the
stability of the DNA duplex is related to the content of
triple-hydrogen-bonded G-C bps: the larger the fraction
of G-C pairs, the higher the required melting tempera-
ture or pH value. Thus, under thermal melting, dsDNA
starts to unwind in regions rich in A-T bps, and then
proceeds to regions of progressively higher G-C content
(3; 233). Conversely, molten, complementary chains of
single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) begin to reassociate and
eventually reform the original double-helix under incu-
bation at roughly 25◦ below the melting temperature Tm
(3). The relative amount of molten DNA in a solution can
be measured by UV spectroscopy, revealing large changes
in absorption in the presence of perturbed base-stacking
(234). Careful melting studies allow one to obtain accu-

FIG. 29 Overstretching of double-stranded DNA. The black
curve shows the typical force-extension behaviour of DNA
following the rapid worm-like chain increase until at around 65
pN a plateau is reached. Crossing of the plateau corresponds
to progressive mechanical denaturation. See text for details.
Figure courtesy Mark C. Williams.

rate values for the stacking energies of the various combi-
nations of neighbouring bps, a basis for detailed thermo-
dynamic modelling of DNA-melting and DNA-structure
In fact, thermal melting data have
per se (235; 236).
been successfully used to identify coding sequences of the
genome due to the diﬀerent G-C content (237; 238; 239).
Complementary to thermal or pH induced denatura-
tion, dsDNA can be driven toward denaturation mechan-
ically, by applying a tensional stress along the DNA in
an optical tweezer trap (240). As shown in ﬁgure 29, the
force per extension increases in worm-like chain fashion,
until a plateau at approximately 65 pN is reached. This
plateau is sometimes interpreted as new DNA conﬁgu-
ration, the S form (241). By a series of experiments, it
appears more likely that the plateau corresponds to the
mechanical denaturation transition (242). To ﬁrst order,
the eﬀect of the longitudinal pulling translates into an
external torque T, whose eﬀect is a decrease in the free
energy for melting a bp:

∆GF = ∆GF =0 − Tθ0,

(36)

where θ0 = 2π/10.35 is the twist angle per bp of the
double helix (243).

An important application of thermal DNA melting is
the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). In PCR, dsDNA
is melted at elevated temperatures into two strands of
ssDNA. By lowering the temperature in a solution of in-
variable primers and single nucleotides, each ssDNA is
completed to dsDNA by the key-lock principle of base-
pairing (244; 245). By many such cycles, of the order of
109 copies of the original DNA can be produced within

the range of hours.23 Again, the error rate due to the
underlying biochemistry can be considered negligible for
most purposes. In particular, from the viewpoint of poly-
mer physics/chemistry, the obtained sample is monodis-
perse and free of parasitic reactions, creating (almost)
ideal samples for physical studies, in particular, as any
designed sequence of bases can be custom-made in mod-
ern molecular biology labs (2).

While the double-helix is the thermodynamically sta-
ble conﬁguration of the DNA molecule below Tm (at non-
denaturing pH), even at physiological conditions there
exist local denaturation zones, so-called DNA-bubbles,
predominantly in A-T-rich regions of the genome (234;
262). Driven by ambient thermal ﬂuctuations, a DNA-
bubble is a dynamical entity whose size varies by ther-
mally activated zipping and unzipping of successive bps
at the two forks where the ssDNA-bubble is bordered by
the dsDNA-helix. This incessant zipping and unzipping
leads to a random walk in the bubble-size coordinate, and
to a ﬁnite lifetime of DNA-bubbles under non-melting
conditions, as eventually the bubble closes due to the en-
ergetic preference for the closed state (234; 262). DNA-
breathing typically opens up a few bps (246; 247). It has
been demonstrated recently that by ﬂuorescence correla-
tion methods the ﬂuctuations of DNA-bubbles can be ex-
plored on the single molecule level, revealing a multistate
kinetics that corresponds to the picture of successive zip-
ping and unzipping of single bps.24 At room tempera-
ture, the characteristic closing time of an unbounded bp
was found to be in the range 10 to 100 µsec corresponding
to an overall bubble lifetime in the range of a few msec
(249). The multistate nature of the DNA-breathing was
conﬁrmed by a UV-light absorption study (250). The
zipping dynamics of DNA is also investigated by NMR
methods (251; 252; 253), revealing considerably shorter
time scales than the ﬂuorescence experiments. An in-
teresting ﬁnding from NMR studies is the dramatically
diﬀerent denaturation dynamics in B’ DNA, where more
than three AT bps occur in a row (254). It is conceiv-
able that ﬂuorescence correlation and NMR probe diﬀer-
ent levels of the denaturation dynamics. Our analysis of
the single DNA ﬂuorescence data reported below demon-
strates that, albeit the much longer time scale, the de-
pendence of the measured autocorrelation function on the
stacking along the sequence is very sensitive, and agrees
well with the quantitative behaviour predicted from the
stability data.

The presence of ﬂuctuating DNA-bubbles is essential

28

to the understanding of the binding of single-stranded
DNA binding proteins (SSBs) that selectively bind to ss-
DNA, and that play important roles in replication, re-
combination and repair of DNA (4). One of the key
tasks of SSBs is to prevent the formation of secondary
structure in ssDNA (1; 2). From the thermodynami-
cal point of view one would therefore expect SSBs to
be of an eﬀectively helix-destabilising nature, and thus
to lower Tm (255). However, it was found that neither
the gp32 protein from the T4 phage nor E.coli SSBs do
(255; 256; 257). An explanation to this apparent para-
dox was suggested to consist in a kinetic block, i.e., a ki-
netic regulation such that the rate constant for the bind-
ing of SSBs is smaller than the one for bubble closing
(257; 258). This hypothesis could recently be veriﬁed in
extensive single molecule setups using mechanical over-
stretching of dsDNA by optical tweezers in the presence
of T4 gene 32 protein (259; 260; 261), as detailed below.

B. The Poland-Scheraga model of DNA melting

The most widely used approach to DNA melting in
bioinformatics is the statistical, Ising model-like Poland-
Scheraga model (sometimes also referred to as Bragg-
Zimm model) and its variations (234; 262; 263); see also
(155; 156; 264; 265). It deﬁnes the partition function Z
of a DNA molecule in a grand canonical picture with ar-
bitrary many bubbles. For simplicity, we will restrict the
following discussion to a single bubble. Below the melt-
ing temperature Tm, the one bubble picture is a good
approximation: due to the high energy cost of bubble ini-
tiation, the distance between bubbles on a DNA molecule
is large, and bubbles behave statistically independently.
In typical experimental setups for measuring the bub-
ble dynamics (see below), the used DNA construct is
actually designed to host an individual bubble. For a
homopolymer stretch of double-stranded DNA with 400
bps, ﬁgure 30 shows the probabilities to ﬁnd zero, one
or, or two bubbles as a function of the Boltzmann fac-
tor u = exp(∆G/RT ) for denaturation of a single bp.25
Even at the denaturation transition ∆G = 0, it is quite
unlikely to ﬁnd two bubbles simultaneously.

The free energy ∆G to break an individual bp are
constructed as follows. We mention two diﬀerent ap-
proaches. Common for both is the Poland-Scheraga con-
struction of the partition function. We start with the
case that a linear DNA molecule denatures from one of its
ends. The corresponding partition function is (234; 262)

23 Most proteins denature at temperatures between 40 to 60◦C, in-
cluding polymerases. In early PCR protocols, after each heating
step new polymerase had to be washed into the reaction cham-
ber. Modern protocols make use of heat-resistant polymerases
that survive the temperatures necessary in melting. Such heat-
resistant proteins occur, for instance, in bacteria dwelling near
undersea thermal vents.

24 Essentially, the zipper model advocated by Kittel (248).

25 In biochemistry, energies are usually measured in calories per
mol. Instead of the Boltzmann factor β = 1/kB T commonly used
in physics and engineering, it is therefore convenient to replace
the Boltzmann constant kB by the gas constant R = kBNA,
where NA is the Avogadro-Loschmidt number.

P(0)

)
u
(
P

0.5

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

P(1)

u

P(2)

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

FIG. 30 Probability of having 0, 1, or 2 bubbles as a function
of u for a DNA region of chain length 400 bps. The coop-
erativity parameter was σ0 = 10−3 and the loop correction
exponent c=1.76 (see text).

m

Zend(m) =

e∆Gx,x+1/RT

(37)

x=1
Y
where m is the number of broken bps, and ∆Gx,x+1 is
the stacking free energy for disruption of the bp at posi-
tion x measured from the end of the DNA. The notation
explicitly refers to the stacking between the bp at x and
x + 1. The ﬁrst closed bp is located at x = m + 1. For
a homonucleotide, ∆Gx,x+1 = ∆G, while for a given se-
quence of bps, there come into play the diﬀerent stacking
energies for the possible combinations of pairs of bps in
sequence26 The stacking energies ∆Gx,x+1 have the fol-
lowing contributions.

The more traditional way to determine the stacking
interactions is by ﬁt of bulk melting curves of DNA con-
structs containing exclusively pairs of the speciﬁc bp-
bp combination such as (AT/TA)n (see, e.g., (233; 267)
and references therein). The free energy used in this
automated ﬁt procedure using the MELTSIM algorithm
(235),

∆GMix

x,x+1 = ∆H ST

x,x+1 − T ∆Sx,x+1,

(38)

combines the stacking enthalpy diﬀerence ∆H ST
x,x+1 for
both hydrogen bond and actual stacking energies, and
the entropy diﬀerence ∆Sx,x+1 chosen to explicitly de-
pend on the nature of the broken bp. A recent alterna-
tive to determine the stability parameters of DNA was
developed in the group of Frank-Kamenetskii, leading to

29

the free energy (247)

∆GSep

x,x+1 = ∆GST

x,x+1 + ∆GHB

x

(39)

x

x,x+1 and ∆GHB

where the Gibbs free energies ∆GST
x mea-
sure the stacking of bps x and x + 1 and the hydrogen
bonding of bp x including the entropy release on disrup-
tion. Note that ∆GHB
is chosen such that it only depends
on the broken bp and has two values for AT and GC bps,
irrespective of the orientation (3’ or 5’). The stacking free
energies ∆GST were determined from denaturation at a
DNA nick and show a pronounced asymmetry between
AT/TA and TA/AT bonds (247). For an end-denaturing
DNA both descriptions are equivalent (though somewhat
diﬀerent when one puts numbers), as the breaking of each
bp involves the disruption of one hydrogen bonds of bp
x and one stacking with its neighbour.

The diﬀerence between the two approaches becomes
apparent when we consider the initiation of a bubble, i.e.,
a denatured coil enclosed by intact double-helix. Now,
the partition function for a bubble with left fork position
at xL and consisting of m broken bps,

Zmid(xL, m) = ΛΣ(m)

e∆Gx,x+1/RT ,

(40)

xL+m

x=xL
Y

diﬀers from (37) in three respects: (i) While the bub-
ble consists of m molten bps, m + 1 stacking interactions
need to be broken to create two boundaries between in-
tact double-strand and the single-strand in the bubble;
the extra stacking interaction is eﬀectively incorporated
into Λ. (ii) The polymeric nature of the ﬂexible single-
stranded bubbles involves the entropy loss factor Σ(m) =
1/(m + D)c with critical exponent c and the parameter
D to take care of ﬁnite size eﬀects27 (235; 264; 266);
(iii) the factor Λ: In the standard notation, Λ ≡ σ0 =
exp(−Fs/RT ) ≃ 10−4 − 10−5 (234; 235; 262; 268), while
according to (247), Λ = ξ ≃ 10−3 is called the ring factor.
Interestingly, the cooperativity parameter σ0 is of the or-
der of what corresponds to the singular unbalanced stack-
ing enthalpy for breaking the ﬁrst bp to initiate the bub-
ble. The new stability data lead to a more pronounced
asymmetry in opening probabilities between diﬀerent bp-
bp combinations. The analysis in references (269; 270)
demonstrates that the parameters from (247) appear to
support better the biological relevance of the TATA mo-
tif28 in natural sequences, that is, show a more pro-
nounced simultaneous opening probability for the TATA
motif.

As demonstrated for the autocorrelation function mea-
suring the breathing dynamics in ﬁgure 32, the descrip-
tion in terms of the partition function Z based on the

26 I.e., an AT bp followed by another AT as diﬀerent from an AT

followed by a TA, etc.

27 Usually, D = 1 is chosen.
28 The four bp ·TATA·

·ATAT· sequence is one of the typical codes marking
where RNA polymerase starts the transcription process (1; 2).

stability parameters from (247) reproduces the experi-
mental data well. The analysis in (269; 270) also indi-
cates that the accuracy of the model predictions for the
bubble dynamics is rather sensitive to the parameters. It
is therefore conceivable that improved ﬂuorescence mea-
surement of the bubble dynamics may be employed to ob-
tain accurate DNA, stability parameters, complementing
the more traditional melting, NMR, and gel electrophore-
sis bulk methods. It should be noted that the dynamics is
strongly inﬂuenced by local deviations from the B conﬁg-
uration of the DNA double helix. Thus, in local stretches
of more than three AT bps in sequence, the B’ structure
is assumed, leading to pronouncedly diﬀerent zipping dy-
namics (254).

Two major questions remain in the thermodynamic
formulation of DNA denaturation and its dynamics.
Namely, the exact origin of the bubble initiation factor
σ0 (or, alternatively, the ring factor ξ from (247)), and a
method to properly calibrate the zipping rate k. The fac-
tor σ0 is related to the entropic imbalance on opening the
ﬁrst bp of a bubble: While this requires the breaking of
two stacking interactions, only one bp has access to an in-
creased amount of degrees of freedom. Still, these degrees
of freedom must be inﬂuenced by the fact that the single
open bp is coupled to two zipper forks. Currently, σ0 re-
mains a ﬁt parameter. The exact value of the zipping rate
k remains open. While NMR experiments indicate much
faster rates in the nanosecond range (≃ 108 sec−1), the
ﬂuorescence correlation measurements produce values in
the microsecond range (≃ 104 − 105 sec−1). This large
discrepancy may be based on the fact that both meth-
ods have diﬀerent sensitivity to the amplitude of intra-bp
separation. Currently, k is taken as a ﬁt parameter. In
the analysis in (269; 270), we use the stacking parame-
ters from (247) including the value of the ring factor ξ,
so that k (a shift along the logarithmic abscissa) is the
only adjustable parameter.

It has been under debate what exact value should be
taken for the critical exponent c entering in the entropy
loss factor for a denaturation bubble. This is connected
to the fact that c > 2 would imply a ﬁrst order denat-
uration transition on melting, while 1 < c < 2 would
stand for a second order transition (217; 264). Specula-
tions about a possible ﬁrst order transition are connected
to the rather distinct spikes in the diﬀerential melting
curves (234).29 Theoretical polymer physics approaches
to explain a c > 2 are either based on the inclusion of
polymeric self-avoidance interactions of the bubble with
the remainder of the chain (155); or built on a directed
polymer model (271). Despite the elegance of both ap-
proaches, it is an open question how truly they repre-
sent the detailed denaturation behaviour of real DNA

29 Due to the rather small DNA samples used in melting experi-
ments (5000 bp and less (234)), claims about the order of the
underlying thermodynamical phase transition should be consid-
ered with some care.

30

u st(1)

=stacking bond
=hydrogen bonds

u st(M+1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

u hb(1)
1

x=

0

2

3

Lx

Tx

Rx

(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

u hb(M)

M M+1

FIG. 31 Clamped DNA domain with internal bps x = 1 to M ,
statistical weights uhb(x), ust(x), and tag position xT . The
DNA sequence enters through the statistical weights ust(x)
and uhb(x) for disrupting stacking and hydrogen bonds re-
spectively. The bubble breathing process consists of the ini-
tiation of a bubble and the subsequent motion of the forks at
positions xL and xR. See (270) for details.

(272; 273). Applying the MELTSIM algorithm to typical
sequences, it was found that there is a connection be-
tween the ﬁt result for the cooperativity parameter σ0,
whose value is reduced from ≈ 10−5 to ≈ 10−3 by as-
suming c = 2.12 instead of 1.76 (236). Below the melting
transition, the typical bubble size is only a few bps, and in
that regime the polymeric treatment of the loop entropy
loss is of approximative nature. Indeed, in the analysis of
(247) no entropy loss due to polymer ring formation was
included. For the breathing dynamics, we include c, to
cover higher temperatures with somewhat larger bubbles,
but ﬁnd no signiﬁcant change in the behaviour between
c < 2 and c > 2, as long as the exponent is suﬃciently
close to 2. We therefore use the value c = 1.76, that is
consistent with the traditional data ﬁts employed in the
determination of the stacking parameters.

C. Fluctuation dynamics of DNA bubbles: DNA breathing

Below the melting temperature Tm, DNA bubbles are
intermittent, i.e., they form spontaneously due to ther-
mal ﬂuctuations, and after some time close again. DNA-
breathing can be thought of as a biased random walk in
the phase space spanned by the bubble size m and its
position denoted, e.g., by the left zipper fork position
xL (269; 270). The bubble creation can be viewed as
a nucleation process (274), whereas the bubble lifetime
corresponds to the survival time of the ﬁrst passage prob-
lem of relaxing to the m = 0 state after a random walk
in the m > 0 halfspace (269; 270; 275; 276; 277). Bub-
ble breathing on the single DNA-bubble level was mea-
sured by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy in (249).
This technique employs a designed stretch of DNA, in
which weaker AT bps form the bubble domain, that is
clamped by stronger GC bonds. In the bubble domain, a
ﬂuorophore-quencher pair is attached. Once the bubble
is created, ﬂuorophore and quencher are separated, and
ﬂuorescence occurs. A schematic of this setup is shown
in ﬁgure 31.

The zipper forks move stepwise xL/R → xL/R ± 1 with
L/R(xL/R, m). We deﬁne for bubble size decrease

rates t±

t+
L (xL, m) = t−

R(xL, m) = k/2

(m ≥ 2)

(41)

for the two forks.30 The rate k characterises a single bp
zipping. Its independence of x corresponds to the view
that bp closure requires the diﬀusional encounter of the
two bases and bond formation; as sterically AT and GC
bps are very similar, k should not signiﬁcantly vary with
bp stacking. The rate k is the only adjustable parameter
of our model, and has to be determined from experiment
or future MD simulations. The factor 1/2 is introduced
for consistency (269; 270; 276; 277; 278). Bubble size
increase is controlled by

t−
L (xL, m) = kust(xL)uhb(xL)s(m)/2,
t+
R(xL, m) = kust(xR + 1)uhb(xR)s(m)/2,

(42)

for m ≥ 1, where s(m) = {(1 + m)/(2 + m)}c. Finally,
bubble initiation and annihilation from and to the zero-
bubble ground state, m = 0 ↔ 1 occur with rates

t+
G(xL) = kξ′s(0)ust(xL + 1)uhb(xL + 1)ust(xL + 2)
t−
G(xL) = k.

(43)

The rates t fulﬁl detailed balance conditions. The an-
nihilation rate t−
G(xL) is twice the zipping rate of a sin-
gle fork, since the last open bp can close either from
the left or right. Due to the clamping, xL ≥ 0 and
xR ≤ M + 1, ensured by reﬂecting conditions t−
L (0, m) =
t+
R(xL, M −xL) = 0. The rates t together with the bound-
ary conditions fully determine the bubble dynamics.

In the FCS experiment ﬂuorescence occurs if the bps
in a ∆-neighbourhood of the ﬂuorophore position xT are
open (249). Measured ﬂuorescence time series thus corre-
spond to the stochastic variable I(t), that takes the value
1 if at least all bps in [xT − ∆, xT + ∆] are open, else it is
0. The time averaged ( · ) ﬂuorescence autocorrelation

2
At(xT , t) = I(t)I(0) − I(t)

(44)

for the sequence AT9 from (249) are rescaled in ﬁgure 32.
We note that an alternative method to obtain precise
DNA stability data may be provided by a DNA construct
with two AT-rich zones between which a shorter GC-rich
bridge is located. The ﬁrst passage problem correspond-
ing to bubble merging at temperatures between the melt-
ing temperatures of the AT and GC zones was recently
calculated (279), and provides the framework for mod-
iﬁed ﬂuorescence correlation setups similar to the one
from reference (249).

30 Due to intrachain coupling (e.g., Rouse), larger bubbles may in-

volve an additional ‘hook factor’ m−µ (276).

5’-GGCGCCCATATATATATATATATATGCGCtt-
3’-CCGCGGGTATATATATATATATATACGCGtt- (AT9)

31

22C
22C repeat
26C
30C
33C
37C
41C
45C
45C repeat
49C
ME 49C
ME 33C
ME 49Ccorr

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

f(τ)

)
t
(

A

T=49oC
T=33oC
T=22oC

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10  12  14

-0.2

 0.001

 0.01

 1

τ [k-1]

 0.1

t [1/k]

 

FIG. 32 Time-dependence of the autocorrelation function
At(xT , t) for the sequence AT9 measured in the FCS setup
of reference (249) at 100mM NaCl. The full lines show the
result from the master equation, based on the DNA stability
parameters from Krueger et al. (247). The inset shows the
broadening of the relaxation time spectrum with increasing
temperature.

D. Probabilistic modelling—the master equation (ME)

DNA breathing is described by the probability distri-
bution P (xL, m, t) to ﬁnd a bubble of size m located at
xL whose time evolution follows the ME (269; 270; 276;
277; 278)

∂
∂t

P (xL, m, t) = WP (xL, m, t).

(45)

the

transfer matrix W incorporates
rates
The
t.
Detailed balance guarantees equilibration to-
ward limt→∞ P (xL, m, t) = Z (xL, m)/Z , with
Z =
The ME and the
explicit construction of W are discussed at length in
references (270; 276). Eigenmode analysis and matrix
diagonalisation produces all quantities of interest such
as the ensemble averaged autocorrelation function

Z (xL, m) (280).

xL,m

P

A(xT , t) = hI(t)I(0)i − (hIi)2.

(46)

hI(t)I(0)i is proportional to the survival density that the
bp is open at t and that it was open initially (269; 270).
In ﬁgure 32 the blue curve shows the predicted be-
haviour of A(xT , t), calculated for T = 49◦C with the
parameters from (247). As in the experiment we as-
sumed that ﬂuorophore and quencher attach to bps xT
and xT + 1, that both are required open to produce a
ﬂuorescence signal. From the scaling plot, we calibrate
the zipping rate as k = 7.1 × 104/s, in good agreement
with the ﬁndings from reference (249). The calculated
behaviour reproduces the data within the error bars,
while the model prediction at T = 35◦C shows more
pronounced deviation. Potential causes are destabilising

eﬀects of the ﬂuorophore and quencher, and additional
modes that broaden the decay of the autocorrelation.
The latter is underlined by the fact that for lower temper-
atures the relaxation time distribution f (τ ), deﬁned by
A(xT , t) =
exp(−t/τ )f (τ )dτ , becomes narrower (ﬁgure
32 inset). Deviations may also be associated with the
correction for diﬀusional motion of the DNA construct,
measured without quencher and neglecting contributions
from internal dynamics (281).
Indeed, the black curve
shown in ﬁgure 32 was obtained by a 3% reduction of the
diﬀusion time;31 see details in (270).

R

A remark on a prominent alternative approach to DNA
breathing appears in order. This is the Peyrard Bishop
Dauxois (PBD) model (282; 283) based on the set of
Langevin equations (284)

m

d2yn
dt2 = −

dV (yn)
dyn

−

dW (yn+1, yn)
dyn

−

dW (yn, yn−1)
dyn

−mγ

= ξn(t).

dyn
dt

(47)

Here, V (yn) = Dn [exp(−anyn) − 1]2 is a Morse po-
tential for the hydrogen bonding, Dn and an assuming
two diﬀerent values for AT and GC bps; W (y, y′) =
k
2 [1 + ρ exp{−β(y + y′)}] (y − y′)2 is a nonlinear poten-
tial to include bp-bp stacking interactions between ad-
jacent bps y and y′. The parameters k, ρ, β, γ, and
m are invariant of the sequence. Usually, the stochas-
tic equations (47) is integrated numerically (284). Due
to its formulation in terms of a set of Langevin equa-
tions, the DPB model is very appealing, and it is a useful
model to study some generic features of DNA denatura-
tion. The disadvantage of the current formulation of the
DBP model is the fact that it does not include enough
parameters to account for the known independent sta-
bility constants of double stranded DNA (in fact, only
two parameters are allowed to vary with the sequence,
in contrast to the 12 independent parameters needed
to fully describe the bp stacking and hydrogen bonding
(247)). Moreover, there appear to be certain ambiguities
in the proper formulation of boundary conditions in the
stochastic integration (286), and also with respect to the
interpretation of the biological relevance and computa-
tional limitations of the PBD model (287). The master
equation and Gillespie approach brought forth in refer-
ences (269; 270; 276; 277; 278) bridges the gap between
the thermodynamic data for the bp stacking and hydro-
gen bonding obtained by various experimental methods,
and the dynamical nature of DNA breathing. It is hoped
that both dynamic models will synergetically be devel-
oped further and eventually lead to a better understand-
ing of DNA denaturation ﬂuctuations.

32

E. Stochastic modelling—the Gillespie algorithm

Despite its mathematically simple form, the master
equation (45) needs to be solved numerically by invert-
ing the transfer matrix (270; 276). Moreover, it produces
ensemble-averaged information. Given the access to sin-
gle molecule data, it is of relevance to obtain a model
for the fully stochastic time evolution of a single DNA-
bubble, providing a description for pre-noise-averaged
quantities such as the step-wise (un)zipping. With this
scope, we introduced a stochastic simulation scheme for
the (un)zipping dynamics, using the Gillespie algorithm
to update the state of the system by determining (i) the
random time between individual (un)zipping events, and
(ii) which reaction direction (zipping, ←, or unzipping,
→) will occur (288). This scheme is eﬃcient computa-
tionally, easy to implement, and amenable to generalisa-
tion.

To deﬁne the model, we denote a bubble state of m
broken bps by the occupation numbers bm = 1 and bm′ =
0 (m′ 6= m). The stochastic simulation then corresponds
to the nearest-neighbour jump process

b0 ⇄ b1 ⇄ . . . ⇄ bm ⇄ . . . ⇄ bM−1 ⇄ bM ,

(48)

with reﬂecting boundary conditions at b0 and bM . Each
jump away from state bm occurs after a random time τ ,
and in random direction to either bm−1 or bm+1, governed
by the reaction probability density function32 (289; 290)

P (τ, µ) = tµ(m)e−(t+(m)+t−(m))τ ,

(49)

where µ ∈ {+, −} denotes the unzipping (+) or zipping
(−) of a bp, and the jump rates t±(m) are deﬁned be-
low. From the joint probability density function (49),
the waiting time probability density function that a jump
µ P (τ, µ), i.e.,
away from bm occurs is given by ψ(τ ) =
it is Poissonian. The probability that the bubble size
does not change in the time interval [0, t] is given by
t
φ(t) = 1 −
0 ψ(τ )dτ . The fork position xL (and thereby
the sequence of bps) is straightforwardly incorporated
(269; 270).

P

R

We start the simulations from the completely zipped
state, b0 = 1 at t = 0, and measure the bubble size at
M
m=0 mbm(t). The time se-
time t in terms of m(t) =
ries of m(t) for a single stochastic realization is shown
P
in ﬁgure 33.
It is distinct that the bubble events are
very sharp (note the time windows of the zoom-ins), and
most of the time the zero-bubble state b0 prevails due to
σ0 ≪ 1. Moreover, raising the temperature increases the
bubble size and lifetime, as it should. By construction of

31 For diﬀusion time τD = 150µs measured for an RNA construct

of comparable length in (281).

32 The original expression for the reaction probability density func-
−τ
tion, P (τ, µ) = bmtµ(m) exp
, that is rele-
vant for consideration of multi-bubble states, simpliﬁes here due
to the particular choice of the bm.

m,µ bmtµ(m)
(cid:17)

P

(cid:16)

(a)

(b)

33

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 20

 18

 16

 14

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 20

 18

 16

 14

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 
)
t
(

m

 
 
)
t
(

m

 
)
t
(

m

 
 
)
t
(

m

 20

 18

 16

 14

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 20

 18

 16

 14

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 17.9852  17.9854  17.9856  17.9858  17.986  17.9862
time × 10-4 (in units of 1/k)

 39.5912  39.592  39.5928  39.5936  39.5944  39.5952
time × 10-4 (in units of 1/k)

FIG. 33 Time series of single bubble-breathing dynamics for σ0 = 10−3, M = 20, and (a) u = 0.6 and (b) u = 0.9. The lower
panel shows a zoom-in of how single bubbles of size m(t) open up and close.

the simulation procedure, it is guaranteed that an occu-
pation number bm = 1 (m 6= 0) corresponds to exactly
one bubble.

In a careful analysis, it was shown that the stochas-
tic simulation method provides accurate information of
the statistical quantities of the bubble, such as opening
probability and autocorrelation function (288).
It can
therefore be used to obtain the same information as the
master equation with the advantage of also giving access
to the noise in the system. With the Gillespie technique,
we also obtained the data points in the graphs in this
section.

F. Bacteriophage T7 promoter sequence analysis.

An example from the analysis of the promoter sequence

AAAA1AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA20
AAAA|AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA|AAAAAAAAAAAA
5’-aTGACCAGTTGAAGGACTGGAAGTAATACGACTC
AAAAGTATAGGGACAATGCTTAAGGTCGCTCTCTAGGAg-3’
AAAAA|AAA| AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA|AAA
AAAAA38AA41AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA68AAA

(50)

of bacteriophage T7 is shown in ﬁgure 34 (269). It depicts
the time series of I(t) for the tag positions xT = 38 at the

beginning of TATA, and xT = 41 at the ﬁrst GC bp af-
ter TATA. It is distinct how frequent bubble events are in
TATA in comparison to the vicinal GC-rich domain (note
that AT/TA bps are particularly weak (247)). This is
quantiﬁed by the waiting time density ψ(τ ), whose char-
acteristic time scale is more than an order of magnitude
longer for the xT = 41 position. In contrast, we observe
almost identical behaviour for the bubble survival den-
sity φ(τ ). Due to the proximity of xT = 41 to TATA, the
typical bubble sizes for both tag positions are similar,
and therefore the relaxation time. However, as shown in
ﬁgure 34 bottom, the variation of the mean lifetime ob-
tained from the master equation is quite small (within a
factor 2) for the entire sequence. The latter graph also
shows the insigniﬁcant variation according to the earlier
stability parameters by Blake et al. (235).

The results summarised in ﬁgure 34 and further stud-
ies in (269; 270) may indicate that it is not solely the in-
creased opening probability at the TATA motif, as stud-
ied in (291). Given the rather short bubble opening times
of order of a few k−1, it might be suﬃcient to induce bind-
ing of transcription enzymes (or other single stranded
DNA binding proteins) if only bubble events are repeated
often enough. In the present example, the waiting time
between individual bubble events is increased by a factor
of 25 inside the TATA motif. Guided by such results,

34

n=10

n=0

n=1

n=5

 

 2
τ∆=2 [1/k]

 4

 6

 8

 1000

 10000

 100000

 1e+06

average free energy,

(cid:12)F (m) = (cid:0) ln Z

(m), solid line (-)

ad

K
B

PSfrag replaements

 10

 20

 30

 40

 50

 60

10

20
m

30

40

0

0

0

0

)

(cid:27)
(
n
l

(cid:0)

)
n

;

m

(

Z
n
l

(cid:0)
=

)

(cid:27)
(
n
l

(cid:0)

)
n

;

m

(

F
(cid:12)

)

(cid:27)
(
n
l

(cid:0)

)
n

;

m

(

Z
n
l

(cid:0)
=
)

(cid:27)
(
n
l

(cid:0)

)
n

;

m

(

F
(cid:12)

25

20

15

10

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

5

0
0

φ(t), xT=38
φ(t), xT=41

ψ(t), xT=41
ψ(t), xT=38

38=3.00 k-1
τ
41=2.21 k-1
τ

38=2.29 104 k-1
τ
41=5.82 105 k-1
τ

1
4
/
8
3
)
t
(
I

)
t
(

ψ

 
 
,
)
t
(
φ

 2.2

 1.8

 1.4

 1

FIG. 34 Time series I(t) for the T7 promoter, with xT = 38,
41. Middle: Waiting time (ψ(τ )) and bubble survival time
(ϕ(τ )) densities. Bottom: Mean bubble survival time, ∆ = 2.

detailed future studies combining optical tweezers over-
stretching and monitoring transcription initiation may
be a step toward better understanding of this important
biochemical process.

We note that the inﬂuence of noise (e.g., due to rep-
etition of single molecule experiments) on the bubble
dynamics can also be studied in the weak noise limit
by a WKB method (292). This model provides infor-
mation, for instance, about the time it takes a DNA
to denature under temperatures above Tm (mathemat-
ically corresponding to a ﬁnite time singularity). Bubble
breathing can be mapped on the Coulomb problem of
the Schr¨odinger equation, and the corresponding phase
transition studied (293).

G. Interaction of DNA bubbles with selectively
single-strand binding proteins

Let us now come back to the destabilising eﬀect of
single-stranded DNA binding proteins (SSBs) mentioned
in section V.A.
In a homopolymer approach, this was
studied in a master equation approach in references
(276; 277). The quantity of interest is the joint prob-
ability P (m, n, t) to have a bubble consisting of m bro-
ken bps, and n SSBs bound to the two arches of the
bubble. In addition to the rates t± for bubble increase
and decrease, the rates r± for SSB binding and unbind-
ing are necessary to deﬁne the breathing dynamics in the
presence of SSBs. On the statistical level, the eﬀect of
the SSBs becomes coupled to the motion of the zipper
forks. Thus, the rate for bubble size decrease is propor-
tional to the probability that no SSB is located right next
to the corresponding zipper fork; and the rate for SSB
binding is proportional to the probability that there is
suﬃcient unoccupied space on the bubble. Binding is al-
lowed to be asymmetric, and is related to a parking lot

n=10

n=0

n=1

n=5

ad

20
m

average free energy,

PSfrag replaements

(cid:12)F (m) = (cid:0) ln Z

(m), solid line (-)

10

30

40

FIG. 35 Eﬀective free energy in the limit γ ≫ 1 (—), and
‘free energy’ for various ﬁxed n (u = 0.6, M = 40, c = 1.76,
λ = 5). Top: κ = 0.5; bottom: stronger binding, κ = 1.5.

problem in the following sense. The number λ of bps oc-
cupied by a bound SSB is usually (considerably) larger
than one. In order to be able to bind in between two al-
ready bound SSBs, the distance between these two SSBs
must be larger than λ. The larger λ the less eﬃcient
the SSB-binding becomes, similar to parking large cars
on a parking lot desgined for small vehicles. Apart from
the binding size λ of the SSBs, two additional physical
parameters come into play: the unbinding rate q of the
SSBs, and their binding strength κ = c0K eq consisting
of the volume concentration c0 of SSBs and the equilib-
rium binding constant K eq = v0 exp (β|ESSB|), with the
typical SSB volume and binding energy ESSB.

The coupled dynamics of SSB-binding and bubble
breathing is discussed in references (276; 277); similar
eﬀects in end-denaturing DNA was studied in (294) in
detail. Here, we report the behaviour of the eﬀective free
energy landscape in the limit of fast SSB-binding in the
sense that the dimensionless parameter γ ≡ q/k of SSB-
unbinding and bubble zipping rates is large, γ ≫ 1. This
limit allows one to average out the SSB-dynamics and to
calculate an eﬀective free energy, in which the bubble dy-

namics with the slow variable m runs oﬀ. The result for
two diﬀerent binding strengths κ is shown in ﬁgure 35,
along with the free energies corresponding to keeping n
ﬁxed. It is distinct that while for lower κ the presence of
SSBs diminishes the slope of the eﬀective free energy, for
larger κ the slope actually becomes negative. In the ﬁrst
case, that is, the bubble opening is more likely, but still
globally unfavourable. In the latter case, the presence of
SSBs indeed leads to full denaturation. One observes dis-
tinct ﬁnite size eﬀects due to λ > 1: only when the bubble
reaches a minimal size m ≥ λ, SSB-binding may occur, a
second SSB is allowed to bind to the same arch only once
m ≥ 2λ, etc. This eﬀect also produces the nucleation bar-
rier for full denaturation in the lower plot of ﬁgure 35.
Similar ﬁnite size eﬀects were investigated for biopoly-
mer translocation in references (295; 296). We note that
the transition to denaturation could also be achieved by
reaching a smaller positive slope of the eﬀective free en-
ergy in the presence of SSBs, and additional titration or
change of the eﬀective temperature through actual tem-
perature change or mechanical stretching as performed in
the experiments reported in references (259; 260; 261).

VI. ROLE OF DNA CONFORMATIONS IN GENE
REGULATION

Our current understanding of gene regulation to large
extent is based on the experiments by Andr´e Lwoﬀ at
Institut Pasteur more than 50 years ago (297). Lwoﬀ
and his collaborators discovered that while a strain of
E.coli, a common intestinal bacterium, divided regularly
when undisturbed, an unexpected phenomenon occurred
when the strain was exposed to UV light: the bacte-
ria stop growing and after some 90 minutes they burst
(lyse), releasing a load of viruses. These viruses then in-
vade new E.coli.33 Some of the newly infected bacteria
immediately lyse again, while the rest divides normally—
while carrying the virus in them. This dormant state
(lysogeny) of the bacterium can then be driven toward
lysis by renewed UV exposure.

The UV exposure-induced transition from lysogeny to
lysis occurs as sketched in ﬁgure 36. On infection, the
bacteriophage λ injects its DNA into E.coli . In the lyso-
genic pathway, the viral DNA is integrated into the host
DNA. During lysogeny, repressor dimers bind to certain
operator sites on the λ part of the DNA, recruiting RNA
polymerase to bind to the overlapping promoter region(s)
and blocking of the vicinal promoter for the divergent cro
gene. RNA polymerase then transcribes the cI gene to
the left of the operator, leading to the expression of new
repressor molecules. UV light, however, leads to cleavage
of the repressor dimers.34 Now the basal transcription of

35

FIG. 36 Gene regulation, here the example of the (diver-
gent) bacteriophage λ switch after infection of E.coli . Figure
from (16), with permission from M. Ptashne. This ﬁgure was
modiﬁed by the author from the corresponding ﬁgure in M.
Ptashne, A Genetic Switch: Phage Lambda and Higher Or-
ganisms, 2nd edition c(cid:13)Blackwell Science, Malden, MA and
Cell Press, Cambridge, MA, with permission.

the gene cro, opposite to the cI gene with respect to
the operator region, leads to the expression of the Cro
protein. Cro bound to the operator then recruits RNA
polymerase to the operator, stabilising the Cro produc-
tion and blocking cI. Simultaneously, a whole sequence of
genes is being expressed, and the virus reproduces itself
inside E.coli until lysis occurs. UV light ﬂips the switch
from transcription of the gene cI maintaining the dor-
mant lysogenic pathway, inducing lysis that is fostered
by transcription of the cro gene (16; 298).

The activity of a gene can be monitored even on the
single genome level, by combining the targeted gene gI
with the gene leading to synthesis of GFP, the green ﬂu-
orescent protein, i.e., when gI is transcribed, then so is
the gene for GFP. Occurrence of ﬂuorescence then reports
transcription of gI. Connected to questions such as the
stability of a genetic pathway is the search process of a
speciﬁc gene by regulatory proteins, that is, how dynam-
ically the binding protein actually locates the operator
on the genome. We address these points in what follows.

A. Physiological background of gene regulation and
expression

33 Often these viruses are called phages or bacteriophages—bacteria

eaters.

34 By activation of RecA proteins.

The λ switch from ﬁgure 36 is an example of a rel-
atively simple mechanism. Even simpler is the well-

studied Lac repressor. There, the lacZ gene is expressed
by recruitment through the CAP protein when E.coli is
starved of glucose and exposed to lactose. This enables
E.coli to digest lactose.
In absence of lactose, lacZ is
blocked by the rep protein. In general, the expression of
a certain gene is just one element in a cascade of simulta-
neous and/or hierarchical control units, such as in the de-
velopmental regulatory network of the sea urchin embryo
(299). The basic physiological background is common to
all of them:

Genes are the blueprints of proteins. They control
physiological processes but also developmental pathways:
from a fertilised egg cell, eventually all cell types (skin,
hair, liver, brain, etc cells) of a human body emerge, or
a skin cell changes colour on sunlight exposure. A gene
is but a stretch of a DNA molecule, typically comprising
some 200-1000 bps. Roughly speaking, a gene is on when
it is being transcribed by RNA polymerase, otherwise it
is oﬀ. RNA polymerase binds at the promoter region
consisting of some 60 bps close to the beginning of the
gene. It then converts the A, T, G, C code of the gene
into a complementary messenger RNA (from which, in
turn, the protein is produced during translation). The
stop of transcription is triggered by a certain sequence at
the end of the gene. Depending on speciﬁc conditions of
the recruitment by regulatory proteins, RNA polymerase
binding to the promoter of a certain gene is either blocked
(the gene is oﬀ), facilitated (high binding aﬃnity of RNA
polymerase due to the (simultaneous) presence of certain
protein(s)), or basal (in absence of any bound regulatory
protein, RNA polymerase can still have a minor aﬃnity
to the promoter and then autonomously start transcrip-
tion). The transcription mechanism is part and parcel
of the central dogma of molecular biology summarised in
ﬁgure 1.

Molecular switches such as the λ switch are surpris-
ingly stable against noise, despite the fact that there are
only about 100 repressor dimers in the entire bacteria cell
(300). Thus, apart from external induction, lysis occurs
by spontaneous induction due to absence of CI from the
operators (301; 302). Such noise-induced errors are esti-
mated to occur once in 107 cell generations (303; 304).
The stability of the λ switch against noise was analysed
in terms of a Wentzell-Freidlin approach (305) and by a
simulation analysis (306). The latter conﬁrmed that the
currently known molecular mechanisms used in modelling
the λ switch appear suﬃcient. While the classical Shea-
Ackers model based on a statistical mechanical approach
(307) is well established and studied numerically (308),
it relies on the knowledge of 13 fundamental Gibbs free
binding energies composed to 40 diﬀerent binding states
of regulatory proteins and RNA polymerase at the two
promoters of λ. Simulation of the complete λ regulatory
system proved the understanding of the mechanisms of
the switch (308). Two more recent studies show that the
λ switch remains stable even when each of the fundamen-
tal Gibbs free energies is varied within its (appreciable)
experimental error. Moreover, eﬀects of potential muta-

36

FIG. 37 Activity of the two λ promoters as function of re-
pressor concentration for vanishing Cro concentration. The
full line corresponds to wild type data, whereas the dashed
lines correspond to ”mutations”. The thin vertical line corre-
sponds to lysogenic CI concentration. See reference (309) for
details.

tions resulting in more signiﬁcant changes of the bind-
ing energies were studied, and it was shown that cer-
tain mutations can even be compensated by parallel mu-
tations inﬂuencing other binding energies (suppressors)
(309; 310). A typical result is shown in ﬁgure 37.

B. Binding proteins: Speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc binding
modes

Given their very speciﬁc function, DNA-binding pro-
teins must recognise a speciﬁc (cognate) sequence of nu-
cleotides along the genome. In fact, without opening the
double helix, the outside of the DNA can be read by pro-
teins, as the edge of each bp is exposed at the surface.
These patterns are unique only in the major groove of the
DNA, this being the reason why gene regulatory proteins
generally bind to the major groove. Apart from single
bp pattern recognition, the protein binding is sensitive
to the special surface features of a certain DNA region.
This local structure of DNA needs to be complementary
to the protein structure. Typical structure patterns (mo-
tifs) include helix-turn-helix, zinc ﬁngers, leucine zipper,
and helix-loop-helix motifs (1). In bacteria, typical DNA-
binding proteins cover some 20 bps or less. For instance,
the lac repressor has a cognate sequence of 21 base pairs,
the CAP protein 16, and the λ repressor cI 17 bps (1).
Although the interaction with a single nucleotide within
such a DNA-protein bond is relatively weak, the sum of
all matching nucleotides reaches appreciable values for
the overall binding enthalpy, see below. Moreover, reg-
ulatory proteins bound simultaneously can signiﬁcantly
enhance the stability of their individual bonds.

A simple model for the binding interaction goes back
to the work of Berg and von Hippel (311; 313). Ac-
cordingly, the binding free energy is comprised of two
contributions: (i) the (average) non-speciﬁc binding free
energy due to electrostatic interaction with the DNA;
and (ii) additional binding free energy if the sequence of
the binding site is suﬃciently close to the best (perfectly
matching) sequence. The transition to the non-speciﬁc
binding is supposed to occur via a conformational change
of the regulatory protein from one that allows more hy-
drogen bond-formation to another that permits closer
contact between the positive charges of the binding pro-
tein to the negatively charged DNA backbone (312). This
is supported by more recent structural studies: While in
the non-speciﬁc binding mode the Lac repressor is bound
to DNA in a rather loose and fuzzy way (314), it ap-
pears much more ordered in the speciﬁc mode. In fact, in
the latter the protein induces a bend in the DNA (315).
In case (ii), the additional binding free energy can, to
good approximation, be considered independent and ad-
ditive. reference (316) provides a review of these issues,
and derives the following result. Accordingly, to satisfy
both the thermodynamic and kinetic constraints of the
DNA-binding protein interaction, each additional base
mismatch in comparison to the best sequence amounts
to the loss of roughly 2 kBT , and the optimal value for
the transition between best speciﬁc binding to the cog-
nate site and non-speciﬁc binding is shown to be some
16 kBT below the energy of the best binding. This value
is quite close to the ≈ 14 kBT found for the diﬀerence
between speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc binding in (317; 318).

The fact that regulatory proteins bind with varying
aﬃnity is an important ingredient in gene regulation:
Not all promoters should have the same activity, because
some proteins are required by the cell at much higher
levels than others. Thus, one given regulatory protein,
that controls the recruitment to the promoters of several
genes, can act with diﬀerent strength depending on the
degree of matching with the local sequence.

Non-speciﬁc binding can become quite appreciable. It
was discovered in reference (319) that in the case of
the Lac repressor less than 10% of the proteins were
unbound.
In a more recent study using in vivo data
of the λ switch, it was found that in a lysogen nearly
90% of the repressor protein cI is non-speciﬁcally bound.
This implies that only 10-20 free cI dimers exist in the
E.coli cell at any time, pointing at the important role
of non-speciﬁc binding in the search process of the cog-
nate site addressed in the following subsection. Under
diﬀerent conditions, both cI and Cro are always non-
speciﬁcally bound by more than 50%. The corresponding
non-speciﬁc binding energies were estimated as 7 kBT
(317; 318).

We note that in contrast to regulatory proteins, restric-
tion enzymes have an approximate all-or-nothing match-
ing condition: If a deﬁned sequence matches the restric-
tion enzyme, it will cut, otherwise not. Even a single
mismatch reduces the action of the restriction enzyme

37

DB

Sliding

n

bulk

koff

Bulk
excursion
k
on

DL
Intersegmental
transfer

Target
finding

j(t)

O

FIG. 38 Schematic of the search mechanisms in equation (52).

by orders of magnitude. This distinction from regulatory
protein makes sense as restriction enzymes are survival
mechanisms and should not just cut the cell’s own DNA
(320). This does not mean that restriction enzymes do
not bind non-speciﬁcally—in fact, this is an important
ingredient of their search process in total analogy to reg-
ulatory proteins. However, their sole active role occurs
on complete matching.

C. The search process for the speciﬁc target sequence

To ﬁnd their speciﬁc (cognate) binding site along the
genome, DNA-binding proteins such as restriction en-
zymes or transcription factors have to search megabases
along the DNA molecule. The high accuracy of gene
expression control by binding proteins such as in the λ-
switch requires a fast search and recognition of the target
sequence by the proteins. A simple 3-dimensional (3D)
search of the target sequence by the proteins is not suf-
ﬁcient to explain experimentally measured target search
rates. It has been suggested relatively early (321; 322)
that additional search mechanisms such as 1D sliding
along the genome are needed to account for the actual
eﬃciency of the search process. In their pioneering work,
Berg, von Hippel and coworkers established a statistical
model for target search comprising the four fundamental
steps, as shown in ﬁgure 38: (i) 3D macrohops during
which the protein fully detaches from the genome un-
til after a volume excursion it rebinds to the DNA (as
a good approximation, the landing site on the DNA af-
ter a macrohop can be assumed to be equidistributed
and uncorrelated); (ii) microhops during which the pro-
tein detaches from the DNA but always stays very close
to it (i.e., the microhop takes place within a cylinder
whose radius corresponds to the escape distance of the
protein from the DNA, see (311)); (iii) 1D sliding along
the genome (while preserving a certain bonding to the
DNA due to nonspeciﬁc binding); and (iv) intersegmen-

tal jumps. The latter are mediated by DNA-loops bring-
ing two chemically remote segments of the DNA close
in Euclidean space, see, for instance, (20) and references
therein. A protein like Lac repressor, which can estab-
lish bonds to two diﬀerent stretches of dsDNA simulta-
neously, can then jump from one to the neighbouring
segment.35 This process might lead to a paradoxical dif-
fusion behaviour (323; 324). However, if the conforma-
tional changes in the DNA are not too slow, both the
bulk mediated macrohops and the intersegmental trans-
fer lead to fast mixing of the enzymes’ positions along
the chain (as it was shown for the related problem in
(325)), and on the mean-ﬁeld level can be described by a
desorption followed by the absorption at a random place.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in the target-
ing problem, both theoretically (see, for instance, (316;
326; 327; 328)) and experimentally (e.g., (329; 330)),
including single molecule studies (260; 261; 331). De-
spite the extensive knowledge of speciﬁc binding rates
and both speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc binding free energies,
the precise relative contributions of the diﬀerent search
mechanisms (and, to some extent, also the stringent cri-
teria to deﬁne these four elementary interactions) are not
fully resolved. Moreover, it has been suggested that un-
der tight(er) binding conditions, the sliding of the protein
becomes subdiﬀusive due to the local structure landscape
of a heteropolymer DNA (332). This complication, how-
ever, is expected to be relaxed in a more loosely bound
search mode of the searching protein (326). We here
adopt the latter view of normal diﬀusion, which is cor-
roborated by the experimental study in the next subsec-
tion.

D. A unique situation: Pure one-dimensional search of
SSB mutants

In previous studies, the 1D sliding problem had al-
ways been considered as a problem of 3D diﬀusion which
is enhanced by 1D diﬀusion. Thus, workers such as Berg,
Winter, and von Hippel (311) assumed that proteins non-
speciﬁcally bound would on average unbind before ﬁnd-
ing their speciﬁc binding sites. This results in an en-
hancement of speciﬁc binding rates that is proportional
to the 1D sliding rate, but the overall speciﬁc binding
rate depends linearly on protein concentration. These
studies neglect the possibility that the protein ﬁnds its
speciﬁc site before unbinding. Given the experimental
conditions under which transcription factor binding has
been previously studied, this approximation is appropri-
ate. However, as demonstrated in (333), this mechanism,
in which the unbinding rate is much lower than the spe-
ciﬁc binding rate, occurs for the 1D search of DNA by the

38

 100000

Simulation data
Experimental data, 100mM

]

1
-

s
[
 

a

k

 10000

 1000

 100

 10

 1
 1e-09

 1e-08

C [M]

 1e-07

FIG. 39 Dimensional binding rate ka in 1/s as function of
protein concentration C in M, for parameters corresponding
to 100 mM salt. The ﬁtted 1D diﬀusion constant for sliding
along the dsDNA is D1d = 3.3 · 10−9cm2/sec, located nicely
within the experimental value 10−8 . . . 10−9cm2/sec (259).

single-stranded DNA binding protein T4 gene 32 protein
(gp32). This fast 1D search rate is essential for gp32 to be
able to quickly ﬁnd speciﬁc locations on DNA molecules
that are undergoing replication, and which have large
sections of single-stranded DNA exposed for gp32 bind-
ing. The resulting nonlinear concentration dependence of
gp32 binding will likely have signiﬁcant eﬀects on gp32’s
ability to ﬁnd its replication sites as well as its ability to
If these non-
recruit other proteins during replication.
linear eﬀects also occur for TFs, this characteristic will
strongly aﬀect regulatory processes governed by protein
binding.

Results from the single DNA overstretching experi-
ment are shown in ﬁgure 39 along with the results from
the theoretical and simulations analysis from references
(333). The scaling of search rate as function of concen-
tration is described by the relation

ka = D1dn2
0

(51)

obtained for the pure 1D search of random walkers of
line density n2
0 searching along the DNA. For low con-
centrations, the McGhee and von Hippel isotherm (334)
predicts a linear relation between n0 and the volume con-
centration C; thus, ka ∝ C2. The experimental evidence
for the purely linear search process, as shown in ﬁgure 39
for 100 mM salt, was found for a large range of salt con-
centrations, see references (261; 333) for details. The case
of high line density of proteins was discussed in (335).

E. L´evy ﬂights and target search

35 Possibly, also other binding proteins are able to perform inter-

segmental jumps.

We now address the general search process with inter-
change of 1D and 3D diﬀusion, and intersegmental jumps.

To this end, we ﬁrst quickly review the deﬁnition of L´evy
ﬂights (336; 337; 338; 339; 340).

∞

L´evy ﬂights (LFs) are random walks whose jump
lengths x are distributed like λ(x) ≃ |x|−1−α with ex-
ponent 0 < α < 2 (150). Their probability density
to be at position x at time t has the characteristic
−∞ eiqxP (x, t)dx = exp (−DL|q|αt),
function P (q, t) ≡
a consequence of the generalised central limit theorem
R
(342; 343); in that sense, LFs are a natural extension
of normal Gaussian diﬀusion (α = 2). LFs occur in a
wide range of systems (338); in particular, they repre-
sent an optimal search mechanism in contrast to locally
oversampling Gaussian search (341). Dynamically, LFs
can be described by a space-fractional diﬀusion equa-
tion ∂P/∂t = DL∂αP (x, t)/∂|x|α, a convenient basis to
introduce additional terms, as shown below. DL is a
diﬀusion constant of dimension cmα/sec, and the frac-
tional derivative is deﬁned via its Fourier transform,
F {∂αP (x, t)/∂|x|α} = −|q|αP (q, t) (338; 339; 340).
LFs exhibit superdiﬀusion in the sense that h|x|ζ i2/ζ ≃
DLt2/α (0 < ζ < α) (338), spreading faster than the
linearly growing mean squared displacement of standard
diﬀusion (α = 2). A prime example of an LF is linear
particle diﬀusion to next neighbour sites on a fast folding
(‘annealed’) polymer that permits intersegmental jumps
at chain contact points (see ﬁgure 38) caused by polymer
looping (323; 324). In fact, the contour length |x| stored
in a loop between such contact points is distributed in 3D
like λ(x) ≃ |x|−1−α, where α = 1/2 for Gaussian chains
(θ solvent), and α ≈ 1.2 for self-avoiding walk chains
(good solvent) (154).

In our description of the target search process, we use
the density per length n(x, t) of proteins on the DNA
as the relevant dynamical quantity (x is the distance
along the DNA contour). Apart from intersegmental
transfer, we include 1D sliding along the DNA with dif-
fusion constant DB, protein dissociation with rate koﬀ
and (re)adsorbtion with rate kon from a bath of proteins
of concentration nbulk. The dynamics of n(x, t) is thus
governed by the equation (344)

∂
∂t

n(x, t) =

DB

∂2
∂x2 + DL
(cid:18)
+konnbulk − j(t)δ(x).

∂α
∂|x|α − koﬀ

(cid:19)

n(x, t)

(52)

Here, j(t) is the ﬂux into the target located at x = 0.
We determine the ﬂux j(t) by assuming that the tar-
get is perfectly absorbing: n(0, t) = 0 (346). Be ini-
tially the system at equilibrium, except that the tar-
get is unoccupied; then, the initial protein density is
n0 = n(x, 0) = konnbulk/koﬀ .36 The total number of
particles that have arrived at the target up to time t is
0 dt′ j(t′). We derive explicit analytic expres-
J(t) =
sions for J(t) in diﬀerent limiting regimes, and study the
R

t

36 Note that the dimension of the on and oﬀ rates diﬀer; while

[koﬀ ] = sec−1, we chose [kon] = cm2/sec.

39

(cid:11) = 3=2, Eq. (14)

(cid:11) = 3=4, Eq. (14)

(cid:11) = 1=4, Eq. (14)

(cid:11) = 3=4, Eq. (16)

(cid:11) = 1=4, Eq. (17)

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

t
p
o

n
o

(cid:11)
o

k
=

k

0
10

−2

PSfrag replaements

−1

10

0
10

1
10

2
10

(cid:11)=2

0(1(cid:0)(cid:11)=2)

D

=(D

k

)

L

on

B

FIG. 40 Optimal choice of oﬀ rate koﬀ as function of the LF
diﬀusion constant, from numerical evaluation of the model in
reference (344). The circle on the abscissa marks where kopt
oﬀ
becomes 0 in the case α < 1/2.

general case numerically. We use J(t) to obtain the mean
ﬁrst arrival time T to the target; in particular, to ﬁnd the
value of koﬀ that minimises T .

The various regimes of target search embodied in equa-
tion (52) are discussed in detail in references (344; 345).
The main result for the eﬃciency of the related search
process is summarised in ﬁgure 40, i.e., which protein
unbinding rate koﬀ optimises the mean search time T .
Three regimes can be distinguished:

(i) Without L´evy ﬂights, we obtain kopt

on: the
proteins should spend equal amounts of time in bulk and
on the DNA. This corresponds to the result obtained for
single protein searching on a long DNA (326; 327).

oﬀ = k′

(ii) For α > 1, i.e., when DNA is in the self-avoiding

regime, we ﬁnd

kopt
oﬀ ∼ (α − 1)k′

on :

(53)

The optimal oﬀ rate shrinks linearly with decreasing α.
(iii) For α < 1, i.e., when DNA leaves the self-avoiding
phase (e.g., by lowering the temperature or introducing
attractive interactions) the value of kopt
oﬀ approaches zero
as the frequency of intersegmental jumps (∝ DL) in-
creases: The L´evy ﬂight mechanism becomes so eﬃcient
that bulk excursions become irrelevant. At α = 1/2, the
case of the ideal Gaussian chain, we observe a qualitative
change: When α < 1/2, the rate kopt
oﬀ reaches zero for
ﬁnite values of the rate for intersegmental jumps. Note
that when α < 1, the spread of the L´evy ﬂight (≃ t1/α)
grows faster than the number of sites visited (≃ t),
rendering the mixing eﬀect of bulk excursions insignif-
icant. A scaling argument to understand the crossover
at α = 1/2 relates the probability density of ﬁrst arrival
with the width (≃ t1/α) of the Green’s function of a L´evy
ﬂight pfa ≃ t−1/α. We see that the associated mean ar-
rival time becomes ﬁnite for 0 < α < 1/2, even for the
inﬁnite chain limit considered here.

We remark that this model is valid for an annealed
DNA only. This means that the chain can equilibrate (at

least, locally) on the typical time scale between interseg-
mental jumps. Even though real DNA in solution might
not be fully annealed, features of this analysis will reﬂect
on the target search. A more detailed study of diﬀerent
regimes of DNA is under way.

the actual synthesis of catenanes and rotaxanes 38 suc-
ceeded in 1958 (357). Modern organic chemistry has seen
the development of reﬁned synthesis methods to generate
topological molecules.

40

F. Viruses—extreme nanomechanics

Viruses have played an important role in the discovery
of the mechanisms underlying gene regulation, see, for in-
stance, reference (297). From a nanoscience perspective,
viruses are of interest on their own part. During the as-
sembly of many viruses, the viral DNA of several µm
length is packaged into the capsid, the protein container
making up most of the virus, by a motor protein. This
motor packages the DNA by exerting forces of up to 60
pN or more, causing pressures building up in the capsid
of the order of 6 MPa (347; 348). The size of the cap-
sid spans few tens of µm, and is therefore comparable to
the persistence length of DNA (347; 349; 350; 351; 352).
Therefore, ﬂuctuation-based undulations are suppressed,
and the chain can be approximately thought of as being
wound up helically like thread on a bobbin, or like a ball
of yarn. Ultimately, a relatively highly ordered 3D con-
ﬁguration of the DNA inside the capsid is achieved, which
under certain conditions may even lead to local crystalli-
sation of the DNA (349; 350; 352; 353; 354; 355; 356). It
is generally argued that this ordered arrangement helps
to avoid the creation of entanglements or even knots of
the wound-up DNA, thus enabling easy ejection, i.e., re-
lease of the DNA once the phage docks to a new host cell;
this ejection is not assisted by the packaging motor, but
it can be facilitated by host cellular DNA polymerase,
which starts to transcribe the DNA and thereby pulls it
out of the capsid (1; 2; 96; 354). Details on the packaging
energetics can be found in reference (353), and the works
cited therein. Model calculations for the entropy loss,
binding and twist energy, and electrostatic forces that
need to be overcome on packaging reveal, that at higher
packaging ratios the packaging force almost exclusively
comes from the electrostatic repulsion.

A. Functional molecules

In parallel to the miniaturisation in electronics (358)
and the possibility of manipulating single (bio)molecules
(359), supramolecular chemistry which makes use of
chemical topology properties is coming of age (360; 361).
Thus, rotaxane-type molecules are believed to be the
building blocks for certain nanoscale machines and mo-
tors (362), so-called hermaphrodite molecules have been
shown to perform linear relative motion (“contraction
and stretching”) (363), and pirouetting molecules have
been synthesised (364). Moreover, topological molecules
are thought to become components for molecular elec-
tronics switching devices in memory and computing ap-
plications (365; 366). These molecular machines are usu-
ally of lower molecular weight, and their behaviour is es-
sentially energy-dominated in the sense that their confor-
mations and dynamical properties are governed by exter-
nal and thermal activation in an energy landscape. The
understanding of the physical properties and the theoreti-
cal modelling of such designer molecules and their natural
biological counterparts has increasingly gained momen-
tum, and the stage is already set for the next generation
of applications (358; 359; 360; 361; 362; 363; 364; 365;
366; 367; 368; 369; 370; 371; 372).

In reference (230) we introduced some basic concepts
for functional molecules whose driving force is entropic
rather than energetic, see also the more recent pub-
lications in chemistry journals (373; 374). Entropy-
functional molecules will be of higher molecular weight
(hundred monomers or above) in order to provide suf-
ﬁcient degrees of freedom such that entropic eﬀects can
determine the behaviour of the molecule. The potential
for such entropy-driven functional molecules can be an-
ticipated from the classical Gibbs Free energy

F = U − T S ;

(54)

VII. FUNCTIONAL MOLECULES AND NANOSENSING

Complex molecules can be endowed with the distinct
feature that they contain subunits which are linked to
each other mechanically rather than chemically (357).
The investigation of the structure and properties of such
interlocked topological molecules is subject of the grow-
ing ﬁeld of chemical topology (130); while speculations
about the possibility of catenanes 37 (Olympic rings) date
back to the early 20th century lectures of Willst¨atter,

in functional molecules, F is minimised mainly by vari-
ation of the internal energy U representing the shape
of the energy landscape of the functional unit. New
types of molecules were proposed for which F is min-
imised by variations of the entropy S, while the energies
and chemical bondings are left unchanged (230). The
entropy-functional units of such molecules can be speciﬁ-
cally controlled by external parameters like temperature,
light ﬂashes, or other electromagnetic ﬁelds (360; 361).
We note that DNA is already being studied as a macro-

37 catena (lat.), the chain.

38 rota (lat.), the wheel; axis (lat.), the axle.

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

3

2

1

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

FIG. 41 Molecular muscle consisting of two interlocked rings
1 and 2 with attached rod-like molecules. Within this struc-
ture, sliding rings, 3, can be placed, which, if activated, tend
to contract the muscle by entropic forces.

molecular prototype building block for molecular ma-
chines (369).

A typical example is the molecule shown in ﬁgure 41.
According to the arrangement of the sliding rings 1 and 2,
this compound exhibits the unique feature of a molecule
that it can slide laterally. Suggested as precursors of
molecular muscles (363), this compound could be pro-
pelled with internal entropy-motors, which entropically
adjust the elongation of the muscle. In the conﬁguration
shown in ﬁgure 41, the sliding ring 3 creates, if activated,
an entropic force which tends to contract the “muscle”;
at T = 300 K and on a typical scale x = 10 nm, the
entropic force kBT /x is of the order of pN, and thus
comparable to the force created in biological muscle cells
(375). Molecular muscles of such a make can be viewed
as the nano-counterpart of macroscopic muscle models
proposed by de Gennes (376), in which the contraction
is based on the entropy diﬀerence between the isotropic
and nematic phases in liquid crystalline elastomer ﬁlms
(377).

Similarly, one might speculate whether the DNA helix-
coil transition (262) in multiplication setups could be fa-
cilitated in the presence of pre-ring molecules which in
vitro attach to an opened loop of the double strand and
close, creating an entropy pressure which tends to open
up the vicinal parts of the DNA which are still in the he-
lix state. Finally, considering molecular motors, it would
be interesting to design an externally controllable, purely
entropy-driven rotating nanomotor.

Numerous additional nanoapplications of biopolymers
appear in current literature. An interesting example is
the nanomotor created by a DNA ring in a periodically
driven external ﬁeld, for instance, a focused light beam
inducing localised temperature variations (378; 379).
The speeds possibly attained by such a device are of the
order of those reached by biological organisms. Such a
nanorotor could be used to stir smallest volumes in higher
viscous environments.

B. Nanosensing

The advances in minituarization of reactors and de-
vices also brings along the need of probes, by which
smallest volumes can be tested. For instance, microar-
rays used in genomics require sensors to detect the pres-
ence of certain proteins (often at small concentrations)

41

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

x=xT

FIG. 42 Molecular beacon based on local DNA denaturation.
The green blobs may represent single-stranded DNA bind-
ing proteins, or more speciﬁcally binding proteins binding or
other molecule to a custom designed DNA sequence along the
denaturation fork. Bound proteins stabilize the denatured
fork and change the spectrum of the beacon.

in a microdish, without disturbing the environment in
the small volume too much. Similarly, single molecule
experiments require speciﬁc local detection possibilities.
A ﬁne example for a potential nanosensore is the blink-
ing behaviour of a ﬂuorophore-quencher pair mounted on
the denaturation wedge as shown in ﬁgure 42. This setup,
similar to the ones described in references (249; 281)
works as follows. As long as the dsDNA is intact, ﬂu-
orophore and quencher are in close proximity. Once
they come apart from one another when the denaturation
wedge opens up, the incident laser light causes ﬂuores-
cence of the dye. The on/oﬀ blinking of this ”molecular
beacon” can be monitored in the focus of a confocal mi-
croscope, or, depending on the intensity of the emitted
light, by a digital camera. The blinking renders immedi-
ate information about the state of the bp, that is tagged
by the dye-quencher pair. Fluorescence, that is, indi-
cates that the bp is currently broken. It is therefore ad-
vantageous to deﬁne the random variable I(t) with the
property

I(t) =

(cid:26)

0 if base-pair at x = xT is closed
1 if base-pair at x = xT is open

,

(55)

and in experiments one typically measures the corre-
sponding blinking autocorrelation function

A(t) = hI(t)I(0)i − hIieq2 ,

(56)

where hIieq is the (ensemble) equilibrium value, or its
spectral decomposition

A(t) =

f (τ ) exp

−

dτ,

(57)

∞

0
Z

t
τ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

κ=0.1

κ=0.5

κ=1

κ=3

no SSBs

γ=2

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

τ (in units of k−1)

)

p

τ
−
 
τ
(
 
δ
 

2

)

T
(
=
)
τ
(
f

0.5

p

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)
t
(

A

κ=0.1

κ=0.5

κ=1

κ=3

no SSBs

0
10

−2

−1

10

1
0
10
10
t (in units of k−1)

2
10

3
10

FIG. 43 Spectral response of the denaturation beacon in
the presence of single-stranded DNA binding proteins. Top:
Relaxation time spectrum, bottom: blinking autocorrelation
function.

where

f (τ ) =

T 2
p δ (τ − τp) .

(58)

Xp6=0

is called the relaxation time spectrum.

Figure 43 shows an example for the achievable sen-
sitivity of such nanobeacons, in an example where the
denaturation wedge is in solution together with a certain
concentration (proportional to κ, compare Sec.
IVG)
of selectively single-stranded DNA binding proteins, as
discussed previously.
It is distinct how both measur-
able signals, A(t) and f (τ ) change with varying SSB-
concentration.

VIII. SUMMARY

Biopolymers such as DNA, RNA, and proteins are
indispensable for their speciﬁcity and robustness in all
forms of life. Given their detailed physical proper-
ties such as DNA’s persistence length of some 50nm or
its local denaturation in nano-bubbles already at room

42

temperature, and biochemically relevant interfaces such
as 10-20 bps, they deeply stretch into the nanoscience
domain. This statement is twofold in the following
sense. Firstly, nanotechniques such as atomic force mi-
croscopes become important tools to manipulate and
probe biomolecules and their interaction even on the sin-
gle molecule level. Secondly, biomolecules are entering
the stage as nanotools such as nanosensors, functional
molecules, or highly sensitive force transducers.

The possibility to perform controlled experiments on
biomolecules, for instance, to measure the force-extension
curves of single biopolymers, also opens up novel possi-
bilities to test new physical theories. The foremost ex-
amples may be the exploration of persistence lengths and
other polymer physics properties, and the statistical me-
chanical concepts relevant for small system sizes. The
latter are known under the keyword of the Jarzynski re-
lation connecting the non-equilibrium work performed on
a physical system with the diﬀerence in the thermody-
namic (i.e., equilibrium) potential between initial and ﬁ-
nal states (380; 381). However, there exist by now several
similar theories addressing diﬀerent physical quantities,
such as the concept of entropy production along a single
particle trajectory (382).

This review summaries fundamental physical proper-
ties of DNA, and their relevance for both biological pro-
cesses and technological applications. The extensive list
of references will be useful for further studies on speciﬁc
topics covered herein. We are conﬁdent that the role of
biomolecules in technology, not at least for biomedical
applications, will experience a dramatic increase during
the coming years and will enable us to extend current
physical understanding of fundamental processes.

Acknowledgments

RM and TA acknowledge many helpful and enjoy-
able discussions with Audun Bakk, Suman Banik, Erika
Ercolini, Giovanni Dietler, Hans Fogedby, Yacov Kan-
tor, Mehran Kardar, Joseph Klafter, Oleg Krichevsky,
Igor
Michael Lomholt, Maxim Frank-Kamenetskii,
Sokolov, Andrzej Stasiak, Francesco Valle, and Mark
Williams. RM acknowledges partial funding from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC) of Canada and the Canada Research Chairs
programme. TA acknowledges partial funding from the
Wallenberg foundation. AH acknowledges funding by the
AFOSR (FA9550-05-1-0472) and by the NIH (SCORE
program GM068855-03S1). SDL acknowledges funding
by the Joint DMS/NIGMS Mathematical Biology Initia-
tive (NIH GM 67242) and by the National Foundation
for Cancer Research through the Yale-NFCR Center for
Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry.

Biographical notes

Ralf Metzler received his
doctoral degree
in physics
from the University of Ulm,
FRG. He then went to Tel
Aviv University as Humboldt
Feodor Lynen fellow and later
as Minerva Amos de Shalit
fellow, to work with Joseph
As DFG Emmy
Klafter.
Noether fellow, after a pe-
riod as visiting scientist at
the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign with Pe-
ter Wolynes, Ralf moved to
the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) in Cambridge, MA, where he worked
with Mehran Kardar. In 2002 Ralf was appointed As-
sistant Professor at the Nordic Institute for Theoretical
Physics (NORDITA) in Copenhagen, Denmark. In sum-
mer 2006, Ralf assumed his post as Associate Professor
and Canada Research Chair in Biological Physics at the
University of Ottawa, Canada. Ralf works extensively
on biological physics problems and anomalous stochas-
tic processes. These include DNA physics such as DNA
denaturation, DNA topology and the role of DNA confor-
mations in gene regulation, as well as anomalous diﬀusion
in biological systems. The latter questions are connected
with L´evy statistics leading to, respectively, subdiﬀusion
or L´evy ﬂights. In his spare time, Ralf enjoys the com-
pany of his daughter and wife, he listens to classical music
and is a keen reader of murder mysteries. In Canada, Ralf
is looking forward to nature walks, cross-country skiing
and ice-skating.

Tobias Ambj¨ornsson re-
ceived his PhD from Chalmers
and Gothenburg University,
where he worked on the
electromagnetic response of
matter.
In 2003 he be-
came a NORDITA postdoc-
fellow, working with
toral
Ralf Metzler on the modelling
of
single biomolecule prob-
lems such as DNA breathing
and biopolymer translocation
through nanopores. Tobias re-
recently received a prestigious fellowship from the Wal-
lenberg foundation, allowing him to join the group of
Robert Silbey at MIT in autumn 2006, to pursue studies
on nanosensors. Tobias enjoys listening to pop music,
travelling, and spending time with friends.

43

Institute

Andreas Hanke received
his doctoral degree in physics
of
from the University
Wuppertal
Germany,
in
FRG. He then went to the
Massachusetts
of
for his
Technology (MIT)
studies with
postdoctoral
Mehran Kardar.
After a
period as visiting scientist
with Michael Schick at the
University of Washington, Se-
attle, he moved to a postdoc-
toral position in John Cardy’s group at the University
of Oxford, UK, followed by postdocs with Udo Seifert in
Stuttgart, FRG, and again with John Cardy in Oxford.
In 2004 Andreas became Assistant Professor of Physics
at the University of Texas at Brownsville. He is also Ad-
junct Assistant Professor at the Department of Physics
at The University of Texas at Dallas and a member of
the Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Technology at
UT Dallas.
In addition, his research includes summer
appointments at the UT Dallas NanoTech Institute. An-
dreas has worked in the ﬁelds of mesoscopic quantum
systems, soft condensed matter physics, and biological
physics. Currently he is building up a theory division
in Molecular Biophysics and Nanoscience at the Univer-
sity of Texas at Brownsville. In his spare time, Andreas
enjoys latin and salsa music and dancing, all kinds of
outdoor activities, and excursions to Mexico.

Yongli Zhang is
a
postdoctoral
fellow of
the Jane Coﬃn Childs
Memorial Fund for Med-
ical Research in Carlos
Bustamantes group at
University of California
at Berkeley. He received
his Ph.D.
in Molecular
Biophysics and Biochem-
Biochemistry from Yale University in 2003, under super-
In December 2006, he will
vision of Donald Crothers.
move to the Department of Physiology and Biophysics
at Albert Einstein College of Medicine as an assistant
professor. Yongli has been doing both experimental and
theoretical research in DNA mechanics, chromatin dy-
namics, and mechanism of chromatin remodeling. His
lab will mainly use single-molecule techniques, such as
optical tweezers and atomic force microscopy, to study
mechanism of molecular motors and dynamics of macro-
molecular assemblies.

44

Stephen Levene
is
Associate
Professor
of Molecular and Cell
Biology at The Univer-
sity of Texas at Dallas.
Dr.
Levene received
his Ph.D. in Chemistry
from Yale University
in 1985 and was an
American Cancer Soci-
ety postdoctoral
fellow
with Bruno Zimm at
University of California,
San Diego until 1989. He then spent one year as a
staﬀ scientist at the Human Genome Center at Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory and was a Program in Mathematics
and Molecular Biology Fellow at University of California,
Berkeley in Nicholas Cozzarellis laboratory. Dr. Levene’s
research interests are in the area of nucleic-acid structure
and ﬂexibility, mechanisms of DNA recombination, the
structural organization of human telomeres, and applica-
tions of these areas to biotechnology. He leads the focus
group in Molecular Diagnostics and Bioimaging in the
UT-Dallas Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Technol-
ogy, is recipient of an Obermann Interdisciplinary Re-
search Fellowship, a member of the Biophysical Society,
and has served on several NIH study sections. In addi-
tion to scientiﬁc pursuits, Dr. Levene is an avid snow
skier and cyclist, having previously competed in both
disciplines.

APPENDIX: A polymer primer.

In this section, we introduce some basic concepts from
polymer physics. Starting from the random walk model,
we deﬁne the fundamental measures of a polymer chain,
before introducing excluded volume. For more details,
we refer to the monographs (24; 146; 191; 383).

The simplest polymer model is due to Orr (384). It
models the polymer chain a a random walk on a periodic
lattice with lattice spacing a. Then, each monomer of
index i is characterised by a position vector Ri with i =
0, 1, . . . , N . The distance between monomers i and i + 1
is called ai+1 = Ri+1 −Ri. Consequently, the end-to-end
vector of the polymer is

r =

ai.

(59)

i
X
Diﬀerent ai have completely independent orientations,
such that we immediately obtain the average (h·i over
diﬀerent conﬁgurations) squared end-to-end distance

R2

0 = hr2i =

hai · aji =

ha2

i i = N a2.

(60)

i,j
X

i
X

R0 ≃ N 1/2a is a measure for the size of the random walk.
An alternative measure of the size of a polymer chain
is provided by its radius of gyration Rg, which may be
measured by light scattering experiments. It is deﬁned
by

N

R2

g =

1
1 + N

h(Ri − RG)2i,

(61)

i=0
X
and measures the average squared distance to the centre
of gravity,

RG =

1
1 + N

N

Ri.

i=0
X
Expression (61) can be rewritten as

(62)

R2

g = (1 + N )−2

h(Ri − Rj)2i.

(63)

N −1

N

i=0
X

j=i+1
X

j
n=i+1 an, one can easily show that
g = a2N (N + 2)/[6(N + 1)]. For large N , that is,

With Rj − Ri =
R2
Rg ≃ a2

P

6 N , and therefore:

Rg ∼ R0 ∼ aN 1/2.

(64)

On a cubic lattice in d dimensions, each step can go
in 2d directions, and for a general lattice, each vector ai
will have µ possible directions. The number of distinct
walks with N steps is therefore µN . Denote NN (r) the
number of distinct walks with end-to-end vector r, the
probability density function for a given r is

p(r) =

NN (r)
r NN (r)

.

P

45

For large N , due to the independence of individual ai,
this probability density function will acquire a Gaussian
shape,

p(r) =

d
2πN a2

d/2

exp

−

dr2
2N a2

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(66)

where the normalisation is such that hr2i = N a2. From
this expression, we can deduce that the number of degrees
of freedom of a closed random walk chain is proportional
to N −d/2, the entropy loss suﬀered by a chain subject to
the constraint r = 0. On a general lattice,

ω ≃ µN N −d/2

(67)

with the connectivity constant µ, a measure for in how
many diﬀerent directions the next bond vector can point
(µ = 2d in a cubic lattice). At ﬁxed end-to-end distance,
the entropy of the random walk becomes S(r) = S0 −
dr2/(2N a2) where S0 absorbs all constants. For the free
energy F (r) = E − kBT S(r) we therefore obtain

F (r) = F0 +

dkBT r2
2R2
0

,

(68)

i.e., the random walk likes to coil, the restoring force
−∇F (r) being linear in r. This is often called the en-
tropic spring character of a Gaussian polymer. Note that
the ‘spring constant’ increases with temperature (‘en-
tropy elasticity’).

In this random walk model of a polymer chain, it is
straightforward to deﬁne the persistence length of the
chain. By this we mean that successive vectors ai are
not independent, but tend to be parallel. Over long
distance, this correlation is lost, and the chain behaves
like a random walk. Due to the quantum chemistry of
the monomers, an adjacent pair of vectors ai, ai+1 in-
cludes preferred angles, for carbon chains leading to the
trans/gauche conﬁgurations. This feature is captured
schematically in the freely rotating chain as depicted in
ﬁgure 44. Following (191), we can obtain the correlation
han · ami as follows. If we ﬁx all vectors am, . . . , an−1,
then the average haniam,am+1,...,an−1 ﬁxed = an−1 cos θ.
Multiplication by am produces

ham · aniam,...,an−1 ﬁxed = am · an−1 cos θ.

(69)

Averaging over the am, . . . , an−1 leads to the recursion
relation ham · ani = ham · an−1i cos θ. With the initial
condition ha2i = a2, we ﬁnd

ham · ani = a2 cos|n−m| θ.

(70)

Thus, if θ = 0, we obtain a rigid rod behaviour, while
for θ 6= 0, there occurs an exponential decay of the cor-
relation between any two bond vectors an and am. This
deﬁnes a length scale

(65)

ℓp ≡

a
log cos θ

,

(71)

FIG. 44 Freely jointed chain, in which successive bond vectors
include an angle θ.

Polymer networks.

a
n

a

n−1

n−2a

θ

It diverges for
the ‘persistence length’ of the chain.
θ → 0, while for θ = 90◦, it vanishes, corresponding to
the random walk model discusses above (‘freely jointed
chain’). As

= a2 1 + cos θ
1 − cos θ

,

!

∞

∞

han+k · ani = a2

1 + 2

cosk θ

 

Xk=1
Xk=−∞
(72)
0 = a2N (1 + cos θ)/(1 − cos θ), i.e., statistically,
we ﬁnd R2
the freely jointed chain behaves the same as the random
walk chain, but with a rescaled monomer length. The
statistical unit in a polymer chain is often taken to be
the Kuhn length ℓK = 2ℓp.

Above chain models are often referred to as being
phantom, i.e., the chain can freely cross itself. A physical
polymer possesses an excluded volume and behaves like
a so-called self-avoiding chain. Mathematically, this can
be modelled by self-avoiding walks. To include the ma-
jor eﬀects, it is suﬃcient to follow a simple argument due
to Flory. Consider a chain with unknown radius R and
internal monomer concentration cint ≃ N/Rd. Assum-
ing that the self-avoiding character is due to monomer-
monomer interactions, the repulsive energy is propor-
tional to the squared concentration, i.e.,

Frep =

T v(T )c2,

1
2

(73)

with the excluded volume parameter v(T ) (v(T ) ≡
(1 − 2χ)ad in Flory’s notation, where the θ condition
χ = 1/2 corresponds to ideal chain behaviour). To ob-
tain the total averaged repulsive energy Frep|tot, we need
to average over c2.
In a mean ﬁeld approach, we take
hc2i −→ hci2 ∼ c2

int. We therefore obtain

Frep|tot ≃ T v(T )c2

intRd = T v(T )

(74)

N 2
Rd ,

46

(75)

The total free energy becomes

F

T

≃ v(T )

N 2
Rd +

R2
N a2 ,

with a minimum at Rd+2
radius scales like

F = v(T )a2N 3, so that the Flory

RF ∼ AN ν , therefore ν =

(76)

3
2 + d

.

The values of the exponent ν(d = 2) = 3/4 and ν(d =
3) = 3/5 are extremely close to the best known values
0.75 and 0.588.39

A linear excluded volume polymer chain has the size

R2

g ≃ AN 2ν

(77)

with ν = 0.75 in d = 2, and ν = 0.588 in d = 3.
Its
number of degrees of freedom is given in terms of the
conﬁguration exponent γ such that

ω ≃ µN N γ−1,

(78)

where γ = 1.33 in d = 2 and γ = 1.16 in d = 3.

Remarkably, similar critical exponents can be obtained
for a general polymer network of the type shown in ﬁgure
79, as originally by Duplantier (147; 154), compare also
and in references (157; 385): In a network G consisting of
N chain segments of lengths s1, . . . , sN and total length
N
i=1 si, the number of conﬁgurations ωG scales as
L =

P

ωG(s1, . . . , sN ) = µLsγG−1

N YG

s1
sN

(cid:18)

, . . . ,

,

(79)

sN −1
sN (cid:19)

where YG is a scaling function, and µ is the eﬀective con-
nectivity constant for self-avoiding walks. The exponent
γG is given by γG = 1 − dνL +
N ≥1 nN σN , where ν is
the swelling exponent, L is the number of independent
loops, nN is the number of vertices with N outgoing legs,
and σN is an exponent associated with such a vertex. In
d = 2, this exponent is given by (147; 154)

P

σN =

(2 − N )(9N + 2)
64

.

(80)

In the dense phase in 2D (209; 210; 212; 213; 214; 386),
and at the Θ transition (387), analogous results can be
obtained.

favouring large values of R. This ‘swelling’ competes with
the entropic elasticity contribution Fel ≃ T R2/(N a2).

39 An interesting discussion about the ﬂaws underlying this reason-

ing can be found in reference (146).

47

monomers, a diﬀerent scaling behaviour emerges if the
system is not below but right at the Θ point (210). In
this case the number of conﬁgurations of a general net-
work G is given by

ωG(s1, . . . , sN ) ∼ µL s

γG −1
N

Y G

s1
sN

(cid:18)

, . . . ,

, (84)

sN −1
sN (cid:19)

with the network exponent

γG = 1 − dνL +

nN σN .

(85)

XN ≥1

FIG. 45 Polymer network G with vertices (•) of diﬀerent order
N , where N self-avoiding walks are joined (n1 = 5, n3 = 4,
n4 = 3, n5 = 1).

Overlined symbols refer to polymers at the Θ point. In
d = 2, ν = 4/7 and σN = (2 − N )(2N + 1)/42 (210).

First, consider the dense phase in 2D. If all segments
have equal length s and L = N s, the conﬁguration num-
ber ωG of such a network scales as (209; 210) 40

ωG(s) ∼ ω0(L) sγG ,

(81)

where ω0(L) is the conﬁguration number of a simple ring
of length L. For dense polymers, and in contrast to the
dilute phase or at the Θ point, ω0(L) (and thus ωG) de-
pends on the boundary conditions and even on the shape
of the system (210; 212; 213; 214; 386). For exam-
ple, for periodic boundary conditions (which we focus
on in this study) corresponding to a 2D torus, one ﬁnds
ω0(L) ∼ µL LΨ−1 with a connectivity constant µ and
Ψ = 1 (210). However, the network exponent

γG = 1 − L +

nN σN

(82)

XN ≥1

is universal and depends only on the topology of the
network by the number L of independent loops, and by
the number nN of vertices of order N with vertex expo-
nents σN = (4 − N 2)/32 (209; 210). For a linear chain,
the corresponding exponent γlin = 19/16 has been veri-
ﬁed by numerical simulations (210; 388). For a network
made up of diﬀerent segment lengths {si} of total length
N
i=1 si, equation (81) generalises to (cf. section 4
L =
in reference (210))

P

ωG(s1, . . . , sN ) ∼ ω0(L) sγG

N YG

, . . . ,

s1
sN

(cid:18)

sN −1
sN (cid:19)

,

(83)

which involves the scaling function YG.

For polymers in an inﬁnite volume and endowed
with an attractive interaction between neighbouring

40 Note that due to the factor ω0(L) the exponent of s is γG , and
not γG − 1 like in the expressions used in the dilute phase (154)
or at the Θ point, for which ω0(L) ∼ L−dν . However, for 2D
dense polymers one has dν = 1, so that both deﬁnitions of γG
are equivalent, cf. section 3 in reference (210).

[4] A. Kornberg and T. A. Baker, DNA Replication

Lett. 91, 198102 (2003).

[6] J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature 171, 737

Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 5017 (1984).

References

[1] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raﬀ, K. Roberts,
and P. Walter, Molecular biology of the cell (Garland,
New York, 2002).

[2] D. P. Snustad and M. J. Simmons, Principles of Genet-

ics (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003).

[3] A. Kornberg, DNA synthesis (W. H. Freeman, San

Francisco, CA, 1974).

(W. H. Freeman, New York, 1992).

[5] R. E. Franklin and R. G. Gosling, Nature 171, 740

[7] L. R. G. Treloar, The physics of rubber elasticity

(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975).
[8] F. Crick, Nature 227, 561 (1970).
[9] F. C. H. Crick, in Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol., The Biological

Replication of Macromolecules, XII, 138 (1958).

[10] V. A. Bloomﬁeld, D. M. Crothers, and I. Tinoco, Phys-
ical Chemistry of Nucleic Acids (Harper & Row, New
York, 1974).

[11] R. F. Gesteland and J. F. Atkins, editors, The RNA
world (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
Spring Harbor, New York, 1993).

[12] M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, Unraveling DNA: The Most
Important Molecule of Life (Perseus, Cambridge, MA,
1997).

[13] M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, Phys. Rep. 288, 13 (1997).
[14] J. F. Marko and E. D. Siggia, Macromolecules 28, 8759

[16] M. Ptashne and A. Gunn, Genes and signals (Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor,
New York, 2002).

[17] B. R´evet, B. v. Wilcken-Bergmann, H. Besset, A.

Barker, and B. M¨uller-Hill, Curr. Biol. 9, 151 (1999).

[18] C. E. Bell and M. Lewis, J. Mol. Biol. 314, 1127 (2001).
[19] C. E. Bell, P. Frescura, A. Hochschild, and M. Lewis,

Cell 101, 801 (2000).

[20] A. Hanke and R. Metzler, Biophys. J. 85, 167 (2003).
[21] H. Schiessel, J. Phys. Cond Mat. 15, R699 (2003).
[22] G. Kreth, J. Finsterle, J. von Hase, M. Cremer, and C.

Cremer, Biophys. J. 86, 2803 (2004).

[23] N. L. Goddard, G. Bonnet, O. Krichevsky, and A.

Libchaber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2400 (2000).

[24] A. Yu. Grosberg and A. R. Khokhlov, Statistical Me-
chanics of Macromolecules (AIP Press, New York,
1994).

[25] G. C˘alug˘areanu, Czech. Math. J. 11, 588 (1961).
[26] J. H. White, Am. J. Math. 91, 693 (1969).
[27] F. B. Fuller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75, 3557

(1953).

(1953).

(1995).

(1995).

(1971).

(1986).

(2000).

48

[33] A. V. Vologodskii, S. D. Levene, K. V. Klenin,
and N. R. Cozzarelli,

M. Frank-Kamenetskii,
J. Mol. Biol. 227, 1224 (1992).

[34] H. Tsen, A. Hanke, and S. D. Levene, in preparation

(2006).

011911 (2005).

[35] M. Pillsbury, H. Orland, and A. Zee, Phys. Rev. E. 72,

[36] H. Orland and A. Zee, Nucl. Phys. B 620, 456 (2002).
[37] M. Baiesi, E. Orlandini, and A. L. Stella, Phys. Rev.

[38] R. Schleif, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 199 (1992).
[39] K. S. Matthews, Microbiol. Rev. 56 123 (1992).
[40] T. M. Dunn, S. Hahn, S. Ogden, and R. F. Schleif, Proc.

[41] M. Geanacopoulos, G. Vasmatzis, V. B. Zhurkin, and

S. Adhya, Nat. Struct. Biol. 8, 432 (2001).

[42] M. C. Mossing and M. T. Record, Science 233 889

(1986).

[43] P. Valentin-Hansen, B. Albrechtsen, and J. E. Love

Larsen, Embo J. 5 2015 (1986).

[44] K. Rippe, M. Guthold, P. H. von Hippel, and C. Bus-

tamante, J. Mol. Biol. 270, 125 (1997).

[45] K. Ogata, K. Sato, and T. Tahirov, Curr. Opin. Struct.

[46] G. D. van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomolec.

Biol. 13, 40 (2003).

Struct. 30, 87 (2001).

[47] H. Benjamin and N. Cozzarelli, in The Robert A. Welch
Foundation Conferences on Chemical Research, vol. 26,
p. 107 (1986).

[48] H. Tsen and S. D. Levene, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.

94, 2817 (1997).

[49] M. A. Watson, D. M. Gowers, and S. E. Halford, J. Mol.

[50] M. L. Embleton, S. A. Williams, M. A. Watson, and

S. E. Halford, J. Mol. Biol. 289, 785 (1999).

[51] M. Deibert, S. Grazulis, G. Sasnauskas, V. Siksnys, and

R. Huber, Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 792 (2000).

[52] Y. L. Zhang and D. M. Crothers, Biophys. J. 84, 136

(2003).

[53] Y. Zhang, A. E. McEwen, D. M. Crothers, and S. D.

Levene, Biophys. J. 90, 1903 (2006).

[54] E. D. Ross, P. R. Hardwidge, and L. J. Maher, Mol.

Cell. Biol. 21, (2001).

[55] R. Schleif, Trends Genet. 16, 559 (2000).
[56] A. Hochschild, Method Enzymol. 208, 343 (1991).
[57] L. Finzi and J. Gelles, Science 267, 378 (1995).
[58] J. M¨uller, S. Oehler, and B. M¨uller-Hill, J. Mol. Biol.

257, 21 (1996).

[59] K. Rippe, P. H. von Hippel, and J. Langowski, Trends

Biochem. Sci. 20, 500 (1995).

[60] K. Rippe, Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 733 (2001).
[61] D. Shore, J. Langowski, and R. L. Baldwin, Proc. Nat.

Acad. Sci. USA. 78, 4833 (1981).

[62] D. Shore and R. L. Baldwin, J. Mol. Biol. 170, 957

(1983).

Method Enzymol. 212, 3 (1992).

[64] K. Klenin, H. Merlitz, and J. Langowski, Biophys. J.

[65] A. V. Vologodskii, V. V. Anshelevich, A. V. Lukashin,
and M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, Nature 280, 294 (1979).

[66] P. J. Hagerman, Biopolymers 24, 1881 (1985).
[67] S. D. Levene and D. M. Crothers, J. Mol. Biol. 189, 61

(1986).

[28] J. H. White and W. R. Bauer, J. Mol. Biol. 189, 329

[63] D. M. Crothers, J. Drak, J. D. Kahn, and S. D. Levene,

[29] W. R. Bauer, Ann. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 7, 287 (1978).
[30] H. B. Sun, J. Shen, and H. Yokata, Biophys. J. 79, 184

74, 780 (1998).

[31] C. J. Benham, Comput. Appl. Biosci. 12, 375 (1996).
[32] S. Goetze, A. Gluch, C. Benham, and J. Bode, Bio-

chemistry 42, 154 (2003).

[15] J. F. Marko and E. D. Siggia, Phys. Rev. E 52, 2912

Biol. 298, 461 (2000).

49

[69] J. Shimada and H. Yamakawa, Macromolecules 17 689

[98] J. Portugal and A. Rodriguez-Campos, Nucleic Acids

[68] L. M. Edelman, R. Cheong, and J. D. Kahn, Biophys.

J. 84, 1131 (2003).

(1984).

[70] A. Bacolla, R. Gellibolian, M. Shimizu, S. Amirhaeri,
S. Kang, K. Ohshima, J. E. Larson, S. C. Harvey, B. D.
Stollar, and R. D. Wells, J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16783
(1997).

(1996).

(1998).

V. Katritch, J. Dubochet, and A. Stasiak, J. Mol. Biol.
278, 1 (1998).

Res. 24, 4890 (1996).

[99] A. Rodriguez-Campos, J. Biol. Chem. 271, 14150

[100] P. Staczek and N. P. Higgins, Mol. Microbiol. 29, 1435

[71] S. M. Law, G. R. Bellomy, P. J. Schlax, and M. T.

[101] Y. Arai, R. Yasuda, K.-I. Akashi, Y. Harada, H. Miyata,

Record, J. Mol. Biol. 230, 161 (1993).

K. Kinosita Jr., and H. Itoh, Nature 399, 446 (1999).

[72] M. H. Hao and W. K. Olson, Macromolecules 22, 3292

[102] P. Pieranski, S. Kasas, G. Dietler, J. Dubochet, and A.

[73] B. D. Coleman, W. K. Olson, and D. Swigon, J. Chem.

[103] A. M. Saitta, P. D. Soper, E. Wasserman, and M. L.

[74] D. Ming, Y. Kong, M. A. Lambert, Z. Huang, and J.
Ma, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 8620 (2002).
[75] I. Tobias, B. D. Coleman, and W. K. Olson, J. Chem.

(1989).

Phys. 118, (2003).

Phys. 101, 10990 (1994).

Lett. 83, 4900 (1999).

71, 061905 (2005).

phys. J. 88, 1692 (2005).

[77] J. Yan, R. Kawamura, and J. F. Marko, Phys. Rev. E

[78] S. Blumberg, A. V. Tkachenko, and J. C. Meiners, Bio-

404, 901 (2000).

[79] A. Balaeﬀ, C. R. Koudella, L. Mahadevan, and K. Schul-

ten, Philos. Transact. A 362, 1355 (2004).

Wang, Nature 379, 225 (1996).

[80] D. Shore and R. L. Baldwin, J. Mol. Biol. 170, 983

[76] A. Balaeﬀ, L. Mahadevan, and K. Schulten, Phys. Rev.

[106] V. V. Rybenkov, C. Ullsperger, A. V. Vologodskii, and

Stasiak, New J. Phys. 3, 101 (2001).

Klein, Nature 399, 46 (1999).

[104] A. Stasiak, A. Dobay, J. Dubochet, and G. Dietler, Sci-

[105] T. McNally, The complete book of ﬂy ﬁshing (Mountain

ence 286, 11a (1999).

Press, Camden, ME).

N. R. Cozzarelli, Science 277, 690 (1997).

[107] A. Stasiak, Curr. Biol. 10, R526 (2000).
[108] T. R. Strick, V. Croquette, and D. Bensimon, Nature

[109] J. C. Wang, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 635 (1996).
[110] J. M. Berger, S. J. Gamblin, S. C. Harrrison, and J. C.

[111] J. C. Wang, Quart. Rev. Biophys. 31, 107 (1998).
[112] L. Euler, Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs per-
tinentis Comment. Academiae Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae
8, 128 (1736); English translation: Sci. Amer. 189, 66
(1953).

[113] J. Kepler, in W. v. Dyck and M. Caspar (Editors), Jo-
hannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke (Beck, M¨unchen,
1937).

[114] A. C. C. Adams, The knot book: an elementary intro-
duction to the mathematical theory of knots (Freeman,
New York, 1994).

[115] L. H. Kauﬀman, Knots and physics, Series on Knots and
Everything, Vol. I (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993).
[116] K. Reidemeister, Knotentheorie (Springer, Berlin, 1931)
[Knot theory (BSC Assocs., Moscow, Idaho, 1983)].
[117] J. B. Listing, Vorstudien zur Topologie, G¨ottinger Stu-

dien (Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1848).
[118] W. Thomson, Lord Kelvin, Phil. Mag. 34, 15 (1867).
[119] W. Thomson, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 27, 59 (1875-76).
[120] P. G. Tait, Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 28, 145 (1876-77).
[121] P. G. Tait, Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 32, 327 (1883-4).
[122] P. G. Tait, Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 33, 493 (1884-85).
[123] P. G. Tait, Scientiﬁc papers (Cambridge University

[124] T. P. Kirkman, Proc. Royal Soc. Edinb. 13, 120, 363

(1983).

(1984).

(2003).

(2000).

[81] D. S. Horowitz and J. C. Wang, J. Mol. Biol. 173, 75

[82] X. J. Lu and W. K. Olson, Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 5108

[83] K. Klenin and J. Langowski, Biopolymers 54, 307

[84] S. A. Wassermann, J. M. Dungan, and N. R. Cozzarelli,

Science 229, 171 (1985).

[85] R. W. Deibler, S. Rahmati, and E. L. Zechiedrich, Genes

& Development 15, 748 (2001).

[86] N. R. Cozzarelli and J. C. Wang, DNA topology and its
biological eﬀects (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1990).

[87] L. F. Liu, C.-C. Liu, and B. M. Alberts, Cell 19, 697

[88] K. Mizuuchi, L. M. Fisher, M. H. O. Dea, and M.

Gellert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 77, 1847 (1980).

[89] T. J. Pollock and H. A. Nash, J. Mol. Biol. 170, 1

[90] S. J. Spengler, A. Stasiak, and N. R. Cozzarelli, Cell

(1980).

(1983).

42, 325 (1985).

951 (1986).

[91] S. A. Wassermann and N. R. Cozzarelli, Science 232,

Press, London, 1898).

[92] S. A. Wassermann and N. R. Cozzarelli, Proc. Natl.

(1884-5).

Acad. Sci. USA 82, 1079 (1984).

[125] T. P. Kirkman, Proc. Royal Soc. Edinb. 32, 483 (1884-

[93] E. Viguera, P. Hernandez, D. B. Krimer, A. S. Boistov,
R. Lurz, J. C. Alonso, and J. B. Schvartzman, J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 22414 (1996).

[94] J. Sogo, A. Stasiak, M. L. Mart´ınez-Robles, D. B.
Krimer, P. H´ernandez, and J. B. Schvartzman, J. Mol.
Biol. 286, 637 (1999).

[95] F. B. Dean, A. Stasiak, T. Koller, and N. R. Cozzarelli,

J. Biol. Chem. 260, 4975 (1985).

[96] J. Arsuaga, M. Vazquez, S. Trigueros, D. Sumners, and

J. Roca, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5373 (2002).

85).

(1885).

[126] C. N. Little, Trans. Connecticut Acad. Sci. 18, 7, 27

[127] C. N. Little, Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 35. 771 (1890).
[128] P. van de Griend, in History and science of knots, edited
by J. C. Turner and P. van de Griend (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1996).

[129] A. V. Vologodskii, A. V. Lukashin, M. D. Frank-
Kamenetskii, and V. V. Anshelvich, Sov. Phys. JETP
39, 1059 (1974).

[97] A. V. Vologodskii, N. J. Crisona, B. Laurie, P. Pieranski,

[130] H. L. Frisch and E. Wassermann, J. Am. Chem. Soc.

50

83, 3789 (1961).

[131] M. Delbr¨uck, in Mathematical problems in biological sci-
ences (Proc. Symp. Appl. Math. 14, 55 (1962)), edited
by R. E. Bellman.

[132] D. W. Sumners and S. G. Whittington, J. Phys. A 21,

1689 (1988).

[133] N. Pippenger, Discrete Appl. Math. 25, 273 (1989).
[134] C. Vanderzande, J. Phys. A 28, 3681 (1995).
[135] M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, A. V. Lukashin, and A. V.

Vologodskii, Nature 258, 398 (1975).

[136] K. Koniaris and M. Muthukumar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66,

Madras, J. Phys. A 23, 1589 (1990).

[164] B. Li, S. N. Madras, and A. D. Sokal, J. Stat. Phys. 80,

661 (1995).

[165] E. Orlandini, M. C. Tesi, E. J. Janse van Rensburg, and
S. G. Whittington, J. Phys. A 31, 5953 (1998).
[166] E. Ercolini, F. Valle, J. Adamcik, R. Metzler, P. de los
Rios, J. Roca, and G. Dietler, to be submitted.

[167] A. J. Guttmann, J. Phys. A 22, 2807 (1989).
[168] E. Guitter and E. Orlandini, J. Phys. A 32, 1359 (1999).
[169] S. R. Quake, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3317 (1994).
[170] S. R. Quake, Phys. Rev. E 52, 1176 (1986).
[171] A. Yu. Grosberg, A. Feigel, and Y. Rabin, Phys. Rev.

[137] J. P. J. Michels and F. W. Wiegel, Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lon-

E 54, 6618 (1996).

don) A 403, 269 (1986).

[172] B. Erman and J. E. Mark, Structures and properties of

[138] J. P. J. Michels and F. W. Wiegel, Phys. Lett. 90A, 381

rubberlike networks (Oxford, New York, 1997).

2211 (1991).

(1982).

[139] E. J. Janse van Rensburg and S. G. Whittington, J.

New York, 1970).

Phys. A 24, 3935 (1991).

[140] M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, A. V. Lukashin, V. V. An-
shelevich, and A. V. Vologodskii, J. Biomol. Struct.
Dyn. 2, 1005 (1985).

[141] A. Yu. Grosberg, E-print cond-mat/0207427 (2002).
[142] K. V. Klenin, A. V. Vologodskii, V. V. Anshelevich,
A. M. Dykhne, and M. D. Frank-Kamenetskii, J.
Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 5, 1173 (1988).

[143] M. K. Shimamura and T. Deguchi, Phys. Lett. A 274,

184 (2000).

[173] J. D. Ferry, Viscoelastic properties of polymers (Wiley,

[174] I. M. Ward and D. Hadley, An Introduction to the Me-
chanical Properties of Solid Polymers (John Wiley and
Sons Ltd., New York).

[175] P.-G. de Gennes, Macromolecules 17, 703 (1984).
[176] P. K. Lai, Y. J. Sheng, and H. K. Tsao, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[177] M. K. Shimamura and T. Deguchi, Phys. Rev. E 64,

[178] O. Farago, Y. Kantor, and M. Kardar, Europhys. Lett.

87, 175503 (2001).

020801 (2001).

60, 53 (2002).

[144] V. Katritch, W. K. Olson, A. Vologodskii, J. Dubochet,

[179] R. Metzler, Y. Kantor, and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. E

and A. Stasiak, Phys. Rev. E 61, 5545 (2000).

66, 022102 (2002).

[145] A. Dobay, P. E. Sottas, J. Dubochet, and A. Stasiak,

[180] Y. J. Sheng, P. K. Lai, and H. K. Tsao, Phys. Rev. E

Lett. Math. Phys. 55, 239 (2001).

61, 2895 (2000).

[146] P. G. de Gennes, Scaling concepts in polymer physics
(Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1979).

[147] B. Duplantier, J. Stat. Phys. 54, 581 (1989).
[148] J. M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. E 59, R2539 (1999).
[149] P. G. Dommersnes, Y. Kantor, and M. Kardar, Phys.

Rev. E 66, 031802 (2002).

[150] B. D. Hughes, Random Walks and Random Environ-
ments, Volume 1: Random Walks (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1995).

[151] P. J. Flory, Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules

[181] P. K. Lai, Y. J. Sheng, and H. K. Tsao, Macromol.

Theor. Simul. 9, 578 (2000).

[182] R. Zandi, Y. Kantor,

and M. Kardar, E-print

[183] B. Marcone, E. Orlandini, A. L. Stella, and F. Zonta,

[184] P. Virnau, Y. Kantor, and M. Kardar, J. Amer. Chem.

cond-mat/0306587 (2003).

J. Phys. A 38, L15 (2005).

Soc. 127, 15102 (2005).

Rev. E 68, 031804 (2003).

[185] E. Orlandini, A. L. Stella, and C. Vanderzande, Phys.

(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989).

[186] E. Orlandini, A. L. Stella, and C. Vanderzande, J. Stat.

[152] R. Metzler, A. Hanke, P. G. Dommersnes, Y. Kantor,

Phys. 115, 681 (2004).

and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 188101 (2002).

[153] R. Metzler, A. Hanke, P. G. Dommersnes, Y. Kantor,
and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. E 65, 061103 (2002).

[154] B. Duplantier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 941 (1986).
[155] Y. Kafri, D. Mukamel, and L. Peliti, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[156] Y. Kafri, D. Mukamel, and L. Peliti, Eur. Phys. J. B

85, 4988 (2000).

27, 135 (2002).

Nucl. Phys. B 374, 473 (1992).

[187] T. A. Vilgis, Phys. Rep. 336, 167 (2000).
[188] A. L. Kholodenko and T. A. Vilgis, Phys. Rep. 298, 251

[189] S. F. Edwards, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) 91, 513

[190] S. F. Edwards, J. Phys. A 1, 15 (1968).
[191] M. Doi and S. F. Edwards The Theory of Polymer Dy-

namics (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986).

(1998).

(1967).

(1998).

[157] L. Sch¨afer, C. v. Ferber, U. Lehr, and B. Duplantier,

[192] M. Otto and T. A. Vilgis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 881

[158] M. B. Hastings, Z. A. Daya, E. Ben-Naim, and R. E.

Ecke, Phys. Rev. E 66, 025102(R) (2002).

[193] M. Otto and T. A. Vilgis, J. Phys. A 29, 3893 (1996).
[194] T. A. Vilgis and M. Otto, Phys. Rev. E 56, R1314

[159] J. des Cloizeaux, J. Phys. (France) Lett. 42, L433

(1997).

(1981).

[195] F. Ferrari, H. Kleinert, and I. Lazzizzera, Int. J. Mod.

[160] A. Dobay, J. Dubochet, K. Millett, P.-E. Sottas, and A.
Stasiak, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 5611 (2003).
[161] J. C. LeGuillou and J. Zinn-Justin, Phys. Rev. B 21,

Phys. B 14, 3881 (2000).

276, 31 (2000).

[196] F. Ferrari, H. Kleinert, and I. Lazzizzera, Phys. Lett. A

3976 (1989).

50, 1365 (1989).

[162] J. C. LeGuillou and J. Zinn-Justin, J. Physique (France)

1 (1993).

[163] E. J. Janse van Rensburg, S. G. Whittington, and N.

613 (1992).

[197] A. Yu. Grosberg and S. Nechaev, Adv. Polym. Sci. 106,

[198] A. Yu. Grosberg and S. Nechaev, Europhys. Lett. 20,

51

[199] A. Yu. Grosberg and S. Nechaev, J. Phys. A 25, 4659

15160 (1991).

(1992a).

[234] R. M. Wartell and A. S. Benight, Phys. Rep. 126, 67

[200] S. Nechaev, in Topological aspects of low dimensional
systems, Lecture notes of Les Houches 1998 sum-
mer school;
extended version available as E-print
cond-mat/9812205.

[201] O. Vasilyev and S. Nechaev, JETP 93, 1119 (2001).
[202] S. W. P. Turner, M. Cabodi, and H. G. Craighead, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 88, 128103 (2002).

[203] E. Ben-Naim, Z. A. Daya, P. Vorobieﬀ, and R. E. Ecke,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1414 (2001).

(1985).

(2003).

[235] R. D. Blake, R. D., Bizzaro, J. W., Blake, J. D., Day,
G. R., Delcourt, S. G., Knowles, J., Marx, K. A., &
SantaLucia, J., Jr. (1999) Bioinf. 15, 370 (1999).
[236] R. Blossey and E. Carlon, Phys. Rev. E 68, 061911

[237] E. Yeramian, Gene 255, 139 (2000).
[238] E. Yeramian, Gene 255, 151-168 (2000).
[239] E. Carlon, M. L. Malki, and R. Blossey, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[204] B. Maier and J. O. R¨adler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1911

94, 178101 (2005).

(1999).

(1995).

[205] H. Walter and D. E. Brooks, FEBS Lett. 361, 135

[206] V. V. Vasilevskaya, A. R. Khokhlov, Y. Matsuzawa, and
K. Yoshikawa, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 6595 (1995).
[207] L. Lerman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68, 1886 (1971).
[208] T. Garel, Remarks on homo- and hetero-polymeric
aspects of protein folding, E-print cond-mat/0305053
(2003).

[209] B. Duplantier, J. Phys. A 19, L1009 (1986).
[210] B. Duplantier and H. Saleur, Nucl. Phys. B 290, 291

[211] J. L. Jacobsen, N. Read, and H. Saleur, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[240] M. C. Williams, Biophys. Textbook online Op-
forces,

piconewton

measuring

tweezers:

tical
www.biophysics.org/btol/.

[241] S. B. Smith, Y. J. Cui, and C. Bustamante, Science 271,

795 (1996).

[242] M. C. Williams, I. Rouzina, and V. A. Bloomﬁeld, Ac-

cts. Chem. Res. 35, 159 (2002).

[243] T. Hwa, E. Marinari, K. Sneppen, and L.-H. Tang, Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 4411 (2003).

[244] C. W. Dieﬀenbach and G. S. Dycksler, PCR primer:
a laboratory manual (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1995).

[245] M. J. McPherson and S. G. Møller, PCR Basics

(Springer-Verlag Telos, New York, 2000.

[246] M. Gu´eron, M. Kochoyan, and J. L. Leroy, Nature 328

[247] A. Krueger, E. Protozanova, and M. D. Frank-

[248] C. Kittel, Am. J. Phys. 37, 917 (1969).
[249] G. Altan-Bonnet, A. Libchaber, and O. Krichevsky,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 138101 (2003).

(1987).

90, 090601 (2003).

Lett. 70, 951 (1993).

Lett. 71, 4275 (1993).

(1988).

(1998).

[212] B. Duplantier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4274 (1993).
[213] A. L. Owczarek, T. Prellberg, and R. Brak, Phys. Rev.

89 (1987).

[214] A. L. Owczarek, T. Prellberg, and R. Brak, Phys. Rev.

Kamenetskii, Biophys. J., at press. (2006).

[215] B. Duplantier and F. David, J. Stat. Phys. 51, 327

[216] J. Kondev and J. L. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2922

[250] Y. Zeng, A. Montrichok and G. Zocchi, J. Mol. Biol.

339, 67 (2004).

89 (1987).

(1995).

[217] M. E. Fisher, Physica D 38, 112 (1989).
[218] F. Orlandini, F. Seno, A. L. Stella, and M. C. Tesi,

[251] M. Gu´eron, M. Kochoyan, and J. L. Leroy, Nature 328,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 488 (1992).

[252] M. Gu´eron and J. L. Leroy, Methods Enzymol. 261, 383

[219] R. Dekeyser, E. Orlandini, A. L. Stella, and M. C. Tesi,

Phys. Rev. E 52, 5214 (1995).
[220] J. Cardy, J. Phys. A 34, L665 (2001).
[221] A. Hanke, R. Metzler, P. G. Dommersnes, Y. Kantor,
and M. Kardar, Eur. Phys. J. E 12, 347 (2003).
[222] R. Gambini and J. Pullin, Loops, knots, gauge theo-
ries and quantum gravity (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1996).

[223] R. Metzler, New J. Phys. 4, 91.1 (2002).
[224] A. Yu. Grosberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3858 (2000).
[225] R. C. Ball, M. Doi, S. F. Edwards, and M. Warner,

[253] I. M. Russu, Methods Enzymol. 261, 383 (1995).
[254] C. Chen and I. M. Russu, Biophys. J. 87, 2545 (2004).
[255] D. E. Jensen and P. H. von Hippel, J. Biol. Chem. 251,

7198 (1976).

[256] R. L. Karpel, in reference (232).
[257] D. E. Jensen, R. C. Kelly and P. H. von Hippel, J. Biol.

Chem. 251, 7215 (1976).

[258] R. L. Karpel, IUBMB Life 53, 161 (2002).
[259] K. Pant, R. L. Karpel and M. C. Williams, J. Mol. Biol.

327, 571 (2003).

Polymer 22, 1010 (1981).

[260] K. Pant, R. L. Karpel, I. Rouzina and M. C. Williams,

[226] M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans.

J. Mol. Biol. 336, 851 (2004).

274, 1802 (1978).

[227] S. F. Edwards and T. A. Vilgis, Polymer 27, 483 (1986).
[228] P. G. Higgs and R. C. Ball, Europhys. Lett. 8, 357

[229] J. U. Sommer, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 5777 (1992).
[230] A. Hanke and R. Metzler, Chem. Phys. Lett. 359, 22

(1989).

(2002).

[231] R. Metzler and T. Ambj¨ornsson, J. Comp. Theoret.

Nanosc. 2, 389 (2005).

[232] A. Revzin, Editor, The biology of non-speciﬁc DNA-
protein interactions (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
1990).

[233] S. G. Delcourt and R.D. Blake, J. Biol. Chem. 266,

[261] K. Pant, R. L. Karpel, I. Rouzina, and M. C. Williams,

J. Mol. Biol. 349, 317 (2005).

[262] D. Poland and H. A. Scheraga, Theory of Helix-
Coil Transitions in Biopolymers (Academic Press, New
York, 1970).

[263] C. R. Cantor and P. R. Schimmel, Biophysical Chem-
istry (W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, NY,
1980).

[264] C. Richard and A. J. Guttmann, J. Stat. Phys. 115, 925

(2004).

[265] A. Hanke, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17, S1731 (2005).
[266] M. Fixman and J. J. Freiere, Biopol. 16, 2693 (1977).
[267] J. SantaLucia Jr., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95, 1460

52

(1998).

[268] Yu. S. Lazurkin, M. Frank-Kamenetskii, and E. N. Tri-

fonov, Biopol. 9, 1253 (1970).

(2002).

[301] R. Metzler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 068103 (2001).
[302] R. Metzler and P. G. Wolynes, Chem. Phys. 284, 469

[269] T. Ambj¨ornsson, S. K. Banik, O. Krichevsky, and

[303] J. W. Little, D. P. Shipley, and D. W. Wert, EMBO J.

R. Metzler, accepted to Phys. Rev. Lett.

18, 4299 (1999).

[270] T. Ambj¨ornsson, S. K. Banik, O. Krichevsky, and

[304] D. V. Rozanov, R. D’Ari, and S. P. Sineoky, J. Bacte-

R. Metzler, in preparation.

riol. 180, 6306 (1998).

[271] T. Garel, C. Monthus, and H. Orland, Europhys. Lett.

[305] E. Aurell and K. Sneppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 048101

[272] A. Hanke and R. Metzler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 159801

[306] E. Aurell, S. Brown, J. Johanson, and K. Sneppen,

Phys. Rev. E. 65, 051914 (2002).

[307] M. A. Shea and G. K. Ackers, J. Mol. Biol. 181, 211

(Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 1981).

[308] A. Arkin, J. Ross, and H. H. McAdams, Genetics 149,

[273] S. M. Bhattacharjee, Europhys. Lett. 57, 772.
[274] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Physical Kinetics

[275] A. Hanke and R. Metzler, J. Phys. A 36, L473 (2003).
[276] T. Ambj¨ornsson and R. Metzler, J. Phys. Cond. Mat.

[309] A. Bakk, R. Metzler, and K. Sneppen, Biophys. J. 86,

[277] T. Ambj¨ornsson and R. Metzler, Phys. Rev. E 72,

[310] A. Bakk, R. Metzler, and K. Sneppen, Isr. J. Chem. 44,

[278] R. Metzler and T. Ambj¨ornsson, J. Biol. Phys. 31, 339

[311] O. G. Berg, R. B. Winter, and P. H. von Hippel,

Biochem. 20, 6929 (1981).

[279] T. Novotn´y, J. N. Pedersen, M. S. Hansen, T.

[312] R. B. Winter, O. G. Berg, and P. H. von Hippel,

Ambj¨ornsson, and R. Metzler, in preparation.

Biochem. 20, 6961 (1981).

[280] N. G. van Kampen, Stochastic Processes in Physics and

[313] P. H. von Hippel and O. G. Berg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

55, 132 (2001).

(2003).

17, S1841 (2005).

030901(R) (2005).

(2005).

(2002).

(1985).

1633 (1998).

58 (2004).

309 (2004).

(2002).

(1989).

(1998).

Chemistry (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1992).

[281] O. Krichevsky and G. Bonnet, Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 251

[282] M. Peyrard and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2755

[283] T. Dauxois, M. Peyrard, and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev.

E 44, R44 (1993).

[284] B. S. Alexandrov, L. T. Wille, K. Ø. Rasmussen, A. R.
Bishop, and K. B. Blagoev, E-print cont-mat/0601555.
[285] A. Campa and A. Giansanti, Phys. Rev. E 58, 3585

[286] S. Ares, N. K. Voulgarakis, Ø. Rasmussen, and A. R.
Bishop, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 035504 (2005); cf. reference
[19].

[287] T. S. van Erp, S. Cuesta-Lopez, J.-G. Hagmann, and
M. Peyrard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 218104 (2005).
[288] S. K. Banik, T. Ambj¨ornsson, and R. Metzler, Euro-

phys. Lett. 71, 852 (2005).

[289] D. T. Gillespie, J. Comp. Phys. 22, 403 (1976).
[290] D. T. Gillespie, J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340 (1977).
[291] Ch. H. Choi, G. Kalosakas, K. Ø. Ramsussen, M. Hiro-
mura, A. R. Bishop, and A. Usheva, Nucl. Acids Res.
32, 1584 (2004).

U.S.A. 83, 1608 (1986).

[314] C. G. Kalodimos, N. Biris, A. M. Bonvin, M. M. Levan-
doski, M. Guennuegues, R. Boelens, and R. Kaptein,
Science 305, 350 (2004).

[315] M. Lewis, G. Chang, N. C. Horton, M. A. Kercher,
H. C. Pace, M. A. Schumacher, R. G. Brennan, and
P. Lu, Science 271, 1247 (1996).

[316] U. Gerland, J. D. Moroz, and T. Hwa, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U.S.A. 99, 12015 (2002).

[317] A. Bakk and R. Metzler, FEBS Lett. 563, 66 (2004).
[318] A. Bakk and R. Metzler, J. Theor. Biol. 231, 525

(2004).

[319] Y. Kao-Huang, A. Revzin, A. P. Butler, P. O’Conner,
D. W. Noble, and P. H. von Hippel, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 74, 4228 (1977).

[320] G. D. Stormo, Bioinformatics 16, 16 (2000).
[321] G. Adam and M. Delbr¨uck, in A. Rich, and N. Davidson,
Eds., Structural Chemistry and Molecular Biology (W.
H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA, 1968).

[322] P. H. Richter and M. Eigen, Biophys. Chem. 2, 255

[323] I. M. Sokolov, J. Mai and A. Blumen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

R. Metzler, in preparation.

R. Metzler, in preparation.

17, S4305 (2005).

(2004).

[292] H. C. Fogedby, S. K. Banik, T. Ambj¨ornsson, and

[324] D. Brockmann and T. Geisel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,

[293] H. C. Fogedby, S. K. Banik, T. Ambj¨ornsson, and

[325] I.M. Sokolov, J. Mai, and A. Blumen, J. Luminesc. 76-

[294] T. Ambj¨ornsson and R. Metzler, J. Phys. Cond. Mat.

[326] M. Slutsky and L. A. Mirny, Biophys. J. 87, 4021

[295] T. Ambj¨ornsson, M. A. Lomholt, and R. Metzler, J.

[327] M. Coppey, O. B´enichou, R. Voituriez, and M. Moreau,

Phys. Cond. Mat. 17, S3945 (2005).

Biophys. J. 87, 1640 (2004).

[296] T. Ambj¨ornsson and R. Metzler, Phys. Biol. 1, 77

[328] J. Yan and J. F. Marko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 108108

[297] A. Lwoﬀ, Bacteriol. Rev. 17, 269 (1953).
[298] M. Ptashne, A Genetic Switch, 3rd edition (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New
York, 2004)

[299] E. H. Davidson et al., Science 295, 1669 (2002).
[300] L. Reichardt and A. D. Kaiser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

[329] A. O. Grillo, M. P. Brown, and C. A. Royer, J. Mol.

Biol. 287, 539 (1999).

[330] R. S. Spolar and M. T. Record, Science 263, 777 (1994).
[331] N. Shimamoto, J. Biol. Chem. 274, 15293 (1999).
[332] M. Slutsky, M. Kardar, and L. A. Mirny, Phys. Rev. E

69, 061903 (2004).

U.S.A. 68, 2185 (1971).

[333] I. M. Sokolov, R. Metzler, K. Pant, and M. C. Williams,

(1974).

79, 857 (1997).

048303.

77, 377 (1998).

(2004).

(2004).

[337] J. Klafter, M. F. Shlesinger and G. Zumofen, Phys. To-

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 39 (2000) 3284.

Biophys. J. 89, 895 (2005).

[334] J. D. McGhee and P. H. von Hippel, J. Mol. Biol. 86,

469 (1974).

[335] I. M. Sokolov, R. Metzler, K. Pant, and M. C. Williams,

Phys. Rev. E 72, 041102 (2005).

[336] M. F. Shlesinger, G. M. Zaslavsky, and J. Klafter, Na-

ture 363, 31 (1993).

day 49 (2), 33 (1996).

[338] R. Metzler and J. Klafter, Phys. Rep. 339, 1 (2000).
[339] R. Metzler and J. Klafter, J. Phys. A 37, R161 (2004).
[340] A. V. Chechkin, V. Yu. Gonchar, R. Metzler, and J.

Klafter, Adv. Chem. Phys., at press (2006).

[341] G. M. Viswanathan, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin,
M. G. .E . da Luz, E. P. . Raposo, and H. E. Stanley,
Nature 401, 911 (1999).

[342] P. L´evy, Th´eorie de l’addition des variables al´eatoires

(Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954).

[343] B. V. Gnedenko and A. N. Kolmogorov Limit Distribu-
tions for Sums of Random Variables (Addison–Wesley,
Reading, 1954).

[344] M. A. Lomholt, T. Ambj¨ornsson, and R. Metzler, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 95, 260603 (2005).

[345] M. A. Lomholt, T. Ambj¨ornsson, and R. Metzler, in

preparation

[346] A. V. Chechkin, R. Metzler, J. Klafter, V. Y. Gonchar,
and L. V. Tanatarov, J. Phys. A 36, L537 (2003).
[347] D. E. Smith, S. J. Tans, S. B. Smith, S. Grimes, D. L.
Anderson, and C. Bustamante, Nature 413, 748 (2001).

[348] R. Zandi and D. Reguera, Phys. Rev. E , (2005).
[349] C. E. Catalano, D. Cue, and M. Feiss, Mol. Microbiol.

53

[361] J.-P. Sauvage and C. Dietrich-Buchecker (editors),
Molecular catenanes, rotaxanes, and knots: a journey
through the world of molecular topology, Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, 1999.

[362] M.-J. Blanco, M. C. Jim´enez, J.-C. Chambron, V. Heitz,
M. Linke, J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Soc. Rev. 28 (1999) 293.
[363] M. C. Jim´enez, C. Dietrich-Buchecker, J.-P. Sauvage,

[364] L. Raehm, J.-M. Kern, J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Eur. J. 5

(1999) 3310.

[365] A. R. Pease, J. O. Jeppesen, J. F. Stoddart, Y. Luo, C.
P. Collier, J. R. Heath, Acc. Chem. Res. 34 (2001) 433.

[366] J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Eur. J. 6 (2000) 2097.
[367] C. Montemagno, G. Bachand, Nanotechnology 10

(1999) 225.

[368] R. K. Soong, G. D. Bachand, H. P. Neves, A. G.
Olkhovets, H. G. Craighead, C. D. Montemagno, Sci-
ence 290 (2000) 1555.

[369] B. Yurke, A. J. Turberﬁeld, A. P. Mills jr., F. C. Simmel,

J. L. Neumann, Nature 406 (2000) 605.

[370] R. Metzler, Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 12103.
[371] A. Ajdari, F. J¨ulicher, J. Prost, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69

(1998) 1269.

[372] A. Vilfan, E. Frey, F. Schwabl, M. Thormahlen, Y. H.
Song, E. Mandelkow, J. Mol. Biol. 312 (2001) 1011.
[373] G. Bottari, F. Dehez, D. A. Lehigh, P. J. Nash, E. M.
Perez, J. K. Y. Wong, and F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chemie
Intl. Ed. 42, 5886 (2003).

[374] S. Garaudee, S. Silvi, M. Venturi, A. Credi, A. H. Flodd,
and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Phys. Chem. 6, 2145 (2005).
[375] F. Gittes, E. Meyhofer, S. Baek, J. Howard, Biophys. J.

70 (1996) 418.

II 324 (1997) 343.

16, 1075 (1995).

(1997).

[350] H. Fujisawa and M. Morita, Genes to Cells 2, 537

[376] P.-G. de Gennes, Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Paris S´er.

[351] N. V. Hud and K. H. Downing, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

[377] D. L. Thomsen, P. Keller, J. Naciri, R. Pink, H. Jeon,

USA 98, 14925 (2001).

[352] N. V. Hud, Biophys. J. 69, 1355 (1995).
[353] M. E. Cerritelli, N. Cheng, A. H. Rosenberg, C. E.
McPherson, F. P. Booy, and A. C. Steven, Cell 17, 271
(1997).

[354] J. Kindt, S. Tzlil, A. Ben-Shaul, and W. M. Gelbert,

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 13671 (2001).

[355] P. K. Purohit, M. M. Inamdar, P. D. Grayson, T. M.
Squires, J. Kondev, and R. Phillips, Biophys. J. 88, 851
(2005).

[356] I. Ali, D. Marenduzzo, and J. M. Yeomans, J. Chem.

[357] G. Schill, Catenanes, rotaxanes and knots, Academic

Phys. 121, 8635 (2004).

Press, New York, 1971.

D. Shenoy, B. R. Ratna, Macromol. 34 (2001) 5868.

[378] I. M. Kulic, R. Thaokar, and H. Schiessel, Europhys.

Lett. 72, 527 (2005).

[379] I. M. Kulic, R. Thaokar, and H. Schiessel, J. Phys.

Cond. Mat. 17, S3965 (2005).

[380] C. Jarzinsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2690 (1997).
[381] O. Braun, A. Hanke, and U. Seifert, Phys. Rev. Lett.

93, 158105 (2004).

[382] U. Seifert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 040602 (2005).
[383] P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry (Cornell

University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1953).
[384] W. J. Orr, Trans. Faraday Soc. 43, 12 (1947).
[385] K. Ohno and K. Binder, J. Phys. (Paris) 49, 1329

[358] D. Bishop, P. Gammel, C. R. Giles, Phys. Today 54(10)

[386] B. Duplantier and F. David, J. Stat. Phys. 51, 327

[359] T. Strick, J.-F. Allemand, V. Croquette, D. Bensimon,

[387] B. Duplantier and H. Saleur, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 539

[360] J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry, VCH, Wein-

[388] P. Grassberger and R. Hegger, Ann. Phys. 4, 230 (1995).

(2001).

heim, 1995.

Phys. Today 54(10) (2001) 46.

(1988).

(1988).

(1987).

