6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolving Networks through Deletion and Duplication

Nadia Farid∗ and Kim Christensen†
Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London,
Prince Consort Road, London SW7 2BW, United Kingdom
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We introduce a minimalistic model based on dynamic node deletion and node duplication with
heterodimerisation. The model is intended to capture the essential features of the evolution of
protein interaction networks. We derive an exact two-step rate equation to describe the evolution
of the degree distribution. We present results for the case of a ﬁxed-size network. The results are
based on the exact numerical solution to the rate equation which are consistent with Monte Carlo
simulations of the model’s dynamics. Power-law degree distributions with apparent exponents < 1
were observed for generic parameter choices. However, a proper ﬁnite-size scaling analysis revealed
that the actual critical exponent in such cases is equal to 1. We present a mean-ﬁeld argument
to determine the asymptotic value of the average degree, illustrating the existence of an attractive
ﬁxed point, and corroborate this result with numerical simulations of the ﬁrst moment of the degree
distribution as described by the two-step rate equation. Using the above results, we show that the
apparent exponent is determined by the heterodimerisation probability. Our preliminary results
are consistent with empirical data for a wide range of organisms, and we believe that through
implementing some of the suggested modiﬁcations, the model could be well-suited to other types of
biological and non-biological networks.

PACS numbers: 02.50.-r, 05.40.-a, 87.23.Kg, 89.75.-k, 89.75.Hc

I.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, models of networks growing
via single-node duplication, divergence and mu-
tation of links, considered in isolation and com-
bination, have assumed prominence in the lit-
erature on complex networks. In a series of in-
dependent studies it was suggested that these
duplication-divergence-mutation models (here-
after called ‘duplication models’ for brevity) are
good candidates to describe the evolution and
large-scale topological features of real protein-
protein interaction networks (PINs) in several
organisms such as S.Cerevisiae and H.Pylori
[1–6].

In duplication models, proteins are repre-
sented by nodes, and a pairwise interaction be-
tween any two proteins is represented by an
undirected link between the associated nodes,
assumed to be fully operative at all times. In
a duplication event, a mother node is chosen
uniformly at random (u.a.r.) and each of its
links are copied to a newly created daughter
node. Divergence refers to the subsequent loss
of links from the daughter node [2, 4–7], and/or
the mother node [8], or a shared neighbour of
both the daughter and mother node [3]. Of-
ten, for simplicity, it is assumed that only the
daughter node diverges. In a mutation event,
new links are added between the daughter node

∗Electronic address: nadia.farid@imperial.ac.uk
†Electronic address: k.christensen@imperial.ac.uk

and all other nodes in the network which are not
already connected to the mother node. Typ-
ically, one duplication-divergence event occurs
at each update step, and mutations, when con-
sidered, are modelled at a rate much less than
the divergence rate – typically, one new link per
update step is added [4–6].

The idea of evolution through gene duplica-
tion is taken from biology [9–12], where it was
popularised in the 1970’s by Ohno who conjec-
tured that single and whole genome duplica-
tions could provide the raw material for evo-
lutionary diversiﬁcation [13]. Whilst there is
mounting evidence that duplicate genes do oc-
cur in genomes [1, 12, 14–17], it is widely ac-
knowledged that little is known about the de-
tails of the process of duplication itself, such
as the frequency of duplication events, the fate
of duplicate genes, and the frequency with
which duplicate genes acquire novel functions
[1, 9, 11, 18]. In fact, whilst the microscopic pa-
rameters are not yet known exactly, it has been
suggested by Berg et al.
[19] that the rate of
gain and loss of interactions through mutations
is at least an order of magnitude higher than
the growth rate due to duplications; as a result,
the link dynamics act as the dominant evolu-
tionary force shaping the large-scale statistical
structure of the network, and not the gene du-
plications; the slower gene duplication events
only really aﬀect the size of the network. Thus,
it is still unclear if, and to what extent, gene du-
plication is the dominant mechanism responsi-
ble for the observed statistical features of PINs.
Moreover, gene deletion and rearrangement are

known to play important roles in the long-term
evolution of genomes [10, 17, 20] but have re-
ceived comparatively little attention in the lit-
erature on networks addressing PINs [20, 21].

In this paper, in a move to go beyond the
duplication models and to expand upon the
emerging literature on network models of PINs
including gene deletion, we present a four-
parameter model addressing the scenario of net-
work evolution through dynamic total node re-
moval in conjunction with growth by node du-
plication and heterodimerisation. We refer to
our network model as a deletion-duplication-
divergence-heterodimerisation (DDDH) model
[22]. Although the model is primarily aimed at
describing the evolution of PINs, its description
is kept general enough so as to be applicable to
a diverse range of complex systems where com-
ponents are added and removed throughout the
system’s evolution.

In the wider literature on complex networks,
previous studies which have considered node
deletion have generally regarded it as a pertur-
bation eﬀect, used to test the tolerance of a net-
work to random and targeted attack [3, 25–27].
More recently, the mechanism of dynamic node
removal in conjunction with growth by prefer-
ential attachment has been explored in indepen-
dent studies by Chung and Lu [28], Cooper and
Frieze [29], and Wang [30]. They refer to such
models as growth-deletion models. Since we
consider growth by duplication as opposed to
growth by preferential attachment, our model
therefore also contributes to the literature on
growth-deletion models.

We focus our analysis on the degree distri-
bution, P (k), characterising the probability for
a node to have exactly k links [31–33]. The
degree distribution is the simplest topological
feature to measure and as a result, it has at-
tracted and received the most attention in the
It has been
literature on complex networks.
shown [2–4, 6–8] that the degree distribution of
networks generated by duplication models ex-
hibits a power-law tail, P (k) ∼ k−γ, for k ≫ 1,
where the critical exponent γ can be tuned such
that it is in agreement with observed exponents
which are found to be in the range 1 < γ < 3
[2, 34]. Importantly, it has also been shown that
the degree distribution is a robust and generic
property of PINs common across diﬀerent data
sets – an important consideration given that
current experimental techniques are notorious
for suﬀering from a high rate of false positives
and false negatives [19, 34].

The paper is organised as follows.

In Sec.
II, we present the formulation of the dynamics
which describe the rules of evolution of the net-

2

work, deﬁning the parameters and interpreting
the rates. In Sec. III, we present and discuss
the exact two-step rate equation for the evo-
lution of the degree distribution. In Sec. IV,
we present results obtained from Monte Carlo
(MC) simulations of the model and the exact
numerical solution of the rate equation for a
generic choice of parameter values. We discuss
our results in Sec. V and end with a conclusion
in Sec. VI.

II. DDDH MODEL

We consider undirected networks where loops
and multiple links are forbidden. We start with
a network of known size, N , and degree distri-
bution, P (k, t = 0), and allow it to evolve under
the following rules (see Fig. 1):

DELETION

DUPLICATION

p

p

p

del

dupl

(cid:18)

p

FIG. 1: (Colour online) A schematic representation
of a network evolving through deletion and dupli-
cation. (i) A node is chosen u.a.r. and deleted with
probability pdel (grey). (ii) A mother node is chosen
u.a.r. and duplicated with probability pdupl (green
→ red). The links are retained with probability p
(dashed red line), and a further link is established
between the daughter and mother node with prob-
ability θ (dotted blue line).

1. Deletion. With probability pdel, a node is
chosen u.a.r. This node and all of its links are
deleted from the network.

2. Duplication-Divergence-Heterodimerisation.
With probability pdupl, a mother node is cho-
sen u.a.r. and duplicated. This entails a new
daughter node being added to the network and
linking to each of the neighbours of the mother
node with probability p. A further link is
established between the daughter and mother
node with heterodimerisation probability θ.

The evolution of the network is thus governed
by four parameters: pdel, pdupl, p, θ. In Sec. III,
we cast these rules into a concrete mathemati-
cal framework. First, however, it is instructive
to discuss the motivation behind the choice of
dynamics and its implications.

The mechanism of growth by duplication is
preferred to the mechanism of growth by pref-
erential attachment in PIN network models as
well as many other network models since it re-
produces the eﬀects of preferential attachment

In other words,

without having to artiﬁcially put the mecha-
nism in.
it arises naturally
from the dynamics: nodes that have a large
number of links are more likely to be neigh-
bours of a duplicating node, and hence are more
likely to gain a link to the newly created node.
The DDDH model preserves this eﬀect and in-
troduces another one: implicit preferential de-
tachment. Nodes that have a large number of
links are more likely to be the neighbour of
a node chosen for deletion, and therefore will
be more likely to lose a link each time a node
is deleted. It is interesting to note that these
two eﬀects do not cancel out each other, as one
might intuitively expect. The inclusion of het-
erodimerisation, θ > 0, means that we do not
consider mutations in the traditional sense (as
described above), but rather we restrict the ad-
dition of new links to only occur between the
mother and the daughter node. Heterodimeri-
sation is preferred over mutations as it has been
noted that the former increases the likelihood
of clique-formation – a feature observed in real
PINs – whilst the latter, in order to form the
observed number of triads and higher cliques,
would require a prohibitively/physically unre-
alistic high rate [8]. Moreover, in duplication
models, whilst a lack of random linking (mu-
tations) has been found to destroy ﬁne struc-
ture such as the self-averaging and existence of
a smooth degree distribution [4], the large-scale
statistical features of the ﬁnal network do not
depend on the existence of mutations [3–5].

From the general deﬁnition of the model’s
dynamics given above, one can already deter-
mine speciﬁc features of the network, namely
its overall size, by focusing on particular choices
of the model’s parameter values. For exam-
ple, for a network that remains, on average,
ﬁxed in size, pdel = pdupl. We will refer to
this case as a ‘ﬁxed-size’ network. For a net-
work that is monotonically growing, on aver-

3

age, pdupl > pdel;
if pdel = 0 no nodes are
removed from the network. Moreover, if we
ﬁx θ = 0 and 0 < p < 1 and pdupl = 1 for
this case, the DDDH model is equivalent to
the duplication-divergence model [5, 6, 8, 35].
For pdel = 0, pdupl = 1, θ = 0 and p = 1
the duplication-divergence model is equivalent
to Polya’s Urn [2, 8, 36]. For an on average
monotonically shrinking network, pdupl < pdel;
if pdupl = 0 no new nodes or links are added
to the network [37]. For a network ﬂuctuat-
ing in size the values of pdel and pdupl would
be stochastic variables chosen anew at each up-
date step from a suitably chosen distribution
[38].
If p = 1, the daughter node inherits all
of the links; this is the case of perfect, or full
duplication. If 0 < p < 1, the daughter node
inherits only some of the links; this represents
imperfect, or partial duplication. If p = 0, the
daughter node inherits none of the links, that
is, an isolated node is added to the network.

In this paper, we study the case of ﬁxed-size
networks, pdel = pdupl = 1, with heterodimeri-
sation θ > 0 and perfect duplication p = 1, un-
less otherwise stated (in which case, similar to
Refs. [2, 4, 6] we assume that only the daughter
node diverges) [40].

In Sec. III, we apply the rate equation ap-
proach [4, 41] to study the evolution of the ex-
pected number of nodes with k links at time t,
f (k, t) = NtP (k, t) where Nt is the total num-
ber of nodes at time t.

III. DDDH MODEL: RATE EQUATION

In this section, we present a two-step rate
equation for the general DDDH model, and
then explain in detail the origin of each term.
The two-step rate equation for the DDDH

model is given by,

f (k, t+1) =f (k, t) − pdel

− pdel

f (k, t)
Nt

kf (k, t)
Nt

+ pdel

(k+1)f (k+1, t)
Nt

,

(1a)

f (k, t+2) =f (k, t+1) − pduplp

− pduplθ

kf (k, t+1)
Nt+1

f (k, t+1)
Nt+1
f (k−1, t+1)
Nt+1

+ pduplθ

p(k−1)(1−p)j−(k−1) f (j, t+1)

Nt+1

+ pduplp

+ pduplθ

(k−1)f (k−1, t+1)
Nt+1
j
k−1(cid:19)

(cid:18)

Xj≥(k−1)

+ pdupl(1−θ)

j
k(cid:19)

(cid:18)

Xj≥k

pk(1−p)j−k f (j, t+1)

.

Nt+1

(1b)

is exact and there are no
Equation (1)
approximations in its derivation.
It de-
scribes the DDDH process for all parameters,
pdel, pdupl, p, θ.
It holds for all k ≥ 0, with
f (−1, t) = 0 and f (k > kmax, t) = 0 for all t.
Moreover, f (k, t) satisﬁes the following normal-
isation conditions:
∞

f (k, t) = Nt,

kf (k, t) = 2Lt,

Xk=0
∞

Xk=0

(2a)

(2b)

where Lt is the total number of links at time t
in the network.

The distinct feature of the DDDH rate equa-
tion compared to rate equations for duplication
models is that it is deﬁned in two steps, and not
one, reﬂecting the fact that we now include a
node deletion in addition to node duplication.
To keep the notation simple, we have written
t + 1 and t + 2 in Eq. (1) but one might have
equally well written t + 1/2 and t + 1 to in-
dicate that we only observe the network after
both the deletion and the duplication steps have
been completed.

Moreover, each of these actions is exe-
cuted sequentially, highlighting the fact that
we clearly also make the distinction between
this process and the process of adding nodes at
an ‘eﬀective’ duplication rate, pdupl − pdel, or
merging nodes as is Refs. [23, 24], or substitut-
ing nodes where the duplication of a node au-
tomatically implies the deletion of some other
node as in Ref.
[20]. We note that the exact
correspondence between time, t, and real bio-
logical timescales is unclear, however, at this
stage.

In Eq. (1a) we consider the eﬀects on the net-
work of the deletion of a node and the removal
of its links. The probability a deletion event
occurs is given by pdel. The terms on the right-
hand side (RHS) are interpreted as follows. A
loss in the number of nodes with degree k at
time t + 1 from deletion will occur either if the
node deleted is of degree k at time t, or if a
neighbour (of arbitrary degree) of a k-node is
chosen for deletion, as the k-node will lose a
link and become a node of degree k − 1. Since
every node has an equal probability of being
deleted in a given time step, a node of degree
k is chosen with probability f (k, t)/Nt (second
term); the probability that a neighbour of a k-
node is chosen for deletion is kf (k, t)/Nt (third
term). The ﬁnal term on the RHS represents
a gain in the number of nodes with degree k
at time t. This can occur if the neighbour of a
node with degree k + 1 is deleted. Given that a

4

node of degree k + 1 has k + 1 neighbours, the
probability a neighbour is chosen for deletion is
(k + 1)f (k + 1, t)/Nt.

In Eq. (1b) we consider the eﬀects of node
duplication and subsequent heterodimerisation.
The probability a duplication event occurs is
given by pdupl, and the probability that subse-
quent heterodimerisation occurs is given by θ.
All but the two ﬁnal terms on the RHS repre-
sent changes a duplication-heterodimerisation
event has on the existing nodes in the net-
work; the last two terms represent the daughter
node’s contribution.

A loss in the number of nodes with degree k
at time t+2 from duplication and heterodimeri-
sation can occur in one of two ways. If one of
the neighbours (of arbitrary degree) of a node
of degree k at time t + 1 is duplicated, the k-
node will, with probability p gain a link from
duplication thus becoming a k + 1 node at time
t+2 (second term). Alternatively, if the mother
node to be duplicated is already of degree k at
time t + 1, it will become a node with degree
k+1 at time t+2 by gaining a link to the daugh-
ter node via heterodimerisation. The probabil-
ity a node of degree k is chosen for duplication
is given by f (k, t+1)/Nt+1, and the probability
of heterodimerisation is θ (third term).

We arrive at the fourth and ﬁfth terms which
describe the gain in the number of nodes with
degree k at time t + 2 by similar considerations.
If one of the neighbours of a node of degree
k − 1 at time t + 1 is chosen for duplication,
the k − 1 node will, with probability p, gain a
link from duplication, thus becoming a k node
at time t + 2 (fourth term). Alternatively, if the
mother node to be duplicated is of degree k − 1
at time t + 1, it will become a node with degree
k at time t + 2 by gaining a link to the daughter
node via heterodimerisation (ﬁfth term).

The ﬁnal two terms on the RHS of Eq. (1b)
account for the daughter node’s contribution.
The sixth term is to account for the contribu-
tion of the daughter node in the event it does es-
tablish a link, with probability θ, to the mother
node. The seventh term is to account for the
case where it does not, which happens with
probability (1 − θ). Note the lower limits on
these sums are not identical. This is because if
a link is established via heterodimerisation, in
order to become a node of degree k, the daugh-
ter node is restricted to copying k − 1 out of
j links, each with probability p. However, if
such a link is not established, the daughter node
is restricted to copying k out of j links of the
mother node.

Since the exact analytical solution to the rate
equation in Eq. (1) is not tractable at present,

5

in Sec. IV we present results obtained from the
numerical solution of the exact two-step rate
equation and compare them with MC simula-
tions of the model. Unless otherwise stated,
our analysis is based on the case of a ﬁxed-size
network, pdel = pdupl = 1, evolving through
perfect duplication, p = 1, with heterodimeri-
sation, θ > 0.

t=106

t=5000

)
t
,
k
(
P

10-2

10-4

10-6

10-8

10-10

10-12

IV. DDDH MODEL: RESULTS

t=1000

1. Comparison between exact numerical solution
of the rate equation and MC simulations

Figure 2 displays the evolution of the degree
distribution obtained from the exact numeri-
cal solution of the rate equation compared to
MC simulations of the model. The stationary
regime is deﬁned by P (k, t) = P (k, t + 2).

We start with an initial network of N = 400
nodes, with a random degree distribution cen-
tred around kinit = 100, and iterate the rules
with the following parameter settings: pdel =
pdupl = 1 (ﬁxed-size network), p = 1 (perfect
duplication), with heterodimerisation θ = 0.1.
The value for θ was chosen as such as it is be-
lieved that heterodimerisation occurs at a rate
not greater than 0.1 [8].
In Fig. 2, we show
two snapshots of the network in the transient
regime when t = 1000, 5000, respectively, and
one in the stationary regime for t = 106. The
MC simulations are averaged over 105 realisa-
tions for t = 1000, 5000 and 3 × 103 realisations
for t = 106.

There is excellent agreement between the ex-
act numerical solution and MC results, lending
support to our statement earlier that there are
no approximations involved in our derivation
of the rate equation. We have veriﬁed through
extensive simulations that the agreement holds
true over a range of pdel, pdupl, p, and θ values.
Hence, all remaining ﬁgures are generated using
data obtained from the exact numerical solu-
tion of the rate equation only, hereafter referred
to as ‘exact numerical results’. The interesting
feature to note is that even for the simplest re-
alisation of the DDDH model which we have
presented in Fig. 2, fat-tailed degree distri-
butions are obtained in the stationary regime
(t = 106 curve). This is in stark contrast to
the duplication models where only the case of
imperfect duplication leads to a power law [2].
In the following section, we describe quantita-
tively the exact form of the stationary degree
distribution.

100

101

k

102

103

FIG. 2: Exact numerical (solid line) and MC (open
circles) results of the degree distribution of a ﬁxed-
size network, pdel = pdupl = 1, with N = 400 nodes,
evolving under perfect duplication, p = 1, with het-
erodimerisation θ = 0.1. Snapshots were taken at
times t = 1000, 5000 (transient regime) and t = 106
(stationary regime). The MC simulations are aver-
aged over 105 realisations for t = 1000, 5000, and
3 × 103 realisations for t = 106. The exact nu-
merical results show excellent agreement with the
MC simulations. The distribution in the stationary
regime is well approximated by a power-law decay,
P (k) ∼ k−γ with an apparent exponent γ = 0.8 and
sharp cut-oﬀ at kcut-oﬀ = 399. Note that the max-
imum degree a node can attain in networks of the
type we consider is N − 1.

2. Scaling for pdel = pdupl = p = 1, 0 < θ ≤ 1/2

We are interested in quantifying the form
of the degree distribution,
in the stationary
regime, as a function of the model’s parameters.
Given that we are, for the moment, investigat-
ing ﬁxed-size networks evolving under perfect
duplication, pdel, pdupl and p are all ﬁxed. This
reduces the number of variables to just one: θ.
However, given that we are observing the de-
gree distribution for speciﬁc ﬁxed network sizes,
we have N as another variable in the problem.
Hence, we would like to know how P (k) de-
pends on θ and N . In order to investigate this,
we have performed numerical simulations for
the following two cases: (i) Fixed θ, varying
N , and (ii) Fixed N , varying θ. We discuss (i)
in this subsection, and (ii) in Sec. IV. 3.

Figure 3(a) shows the exact numerical re-
sults of the degree distribution, P (k; N ) versus
k on a double logarithmic plot in the station-
ary regime for θ = 0.1 and networks of increas-
ing N , speciﬁcally, N = 50, 100, 200, 400, 1000
nodes. There are clear power-law ﬂuctuations
in the node degrees present in the network, im-

(a)

as,

)

N
;
k
(
P

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-1

)

N
;
k
(
P
k

10-2

100

101

102

k

103

(b)

10-3

10-3

10-2

10-1
k/N

100

FIG. 3:
(a) Exact numerical results of the de-
gree distribution in the stationary regime for ﬁxed-
size networks, pdel = pdupl = 1, where N =
50, 100, 200, 400, 1000 (marked with lines of increas-
ing dash-length) each having evolved through per-
fect duplication p = 1 with heterodimerisation
θ = 0.1. There is no typical node-degree. For
large node-degrees, the degree distribution is well-
approximated by a power-law decay, P (k; N ) ∼
k−γ , with an apparent exponent γ = 0.8. The
power law is characterised by a sharp cut-oﬀ at
kmax = N − 1, which increases with increasing
system size. Note that the maximum degree a
node can attain in networks of the type we con-
sider is N − 1.
(b) Data collapse of the exact
numerical results of the degree distribution is ob-
tained by plotting the transformed probability den-
sity kP (k; N ) vs.
the rescaled degree k/N . The
curves collapse onto the graph of the scaling func-
Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ) (k/N )1−γ (1 − k/N )γ ,
tion,
see Eq. (10).
e

G(k/N ) =

1

plying an appreciable probability of ﬁnding a
node with degree, 1 ≤ k ≪ kmax in the network.
kmax marks the cross-over between a power-law
decay and a rapid decay in P (k; N ).
In par-
ticular, kmax represents a characteristic scale in
the node degree resulting from the ﬁnite size of
the networks we can study numerically. Hence,
we can say that P (k; N ) decays as a power law
for 1 ≤ k ≪ kmax and has a sharp cut-oﬀ for
k ≫ kmax, which can be expressed informally

6

P (k; N ) ∝

k−γ
sharp cut-oﬀ, k ≫ kmax.

1 ≤ k ≪ kmax

(cid:26)

(3)

From simulations, we ﬁnd that kmax = N − 1
which is equivalent to the maximum possible
degree that a node in the network can ac-
quire. This implies that kmax increases linearly
with increasing network size, N , hence, in the
limit of N → ∞, the characteristic scale di-
verges and a pure power law is recovered, as
expected. In the region, 1 ≤ k ≪ kmax, we ﬁnd
that the gradient of the lines in Fig. 3(a) are
well-approximated by an ‘apparent’ exponent,
γ = 0.8 and we will shortly demonstrate that
γ = 1 − 2θ. Generally speaking, an exponent
less than 1 is unusual, and seems to contradict
certain known results about scaling functions.
However, we will be able to resolve this appar-
ent contradiction in Sec. IV. 3.

With the above discussion in mind, we pro-
pose the following general ansatz for P (k; N ),

P (k; N ) = a(N )k−γG(k/N ),

(4)

and, assuming for simplicity that kmax is ap-
proximated by N , the equation is valid for
1 ≤ k ≤ N , where N ≫ 1 and γ < 1.
In
Eq.
(4), a(N ) is a prefactor, dependent on
the network size, and G(x) is the cut-oﬀ func-
tion, dependent on the rescaled variable k/N .
G(x) is required to fall-oﬀ fast enough to en-
sure P (k; N ) is ﬁnite and integrable. From Fig.
3(a) it seems reasonable to assume that G(x)
is constant for x ≪ 1 and decays abruptly for
x ≫ 1.

Note that Eq. (4) is not a ﬁnite-size scaling
(FSS) ansatz since the prefactor, rather than
being a constant (as is typical), is N -dependent.
This diﬀerence turns out to be important as it
leads to an interesting result about the critical
exponent which we will demonstrate below.

In theory, we can use the fact that the prob-
ability density function must be properly nor-
malised,

∞

Z
1

P (k; N )dk ≡ 1,

(5)

to derive an expression for a(N ). However,
without knowing a priori the correct scaling for
P (k; N ), we can only guess at the form of G(x).
For simplicity, we assume that the cut-oﬀ func-
tion, G(x), is of the form,

G(x) =

(cid:26)

(1 − k/N )γ for 1 ≤ k ≤ N
0

otherwise

(6)

(which is in-keeping with our stated require-
ments for the form of G(x) and is an excellent

ﬁt to the numerics). Substituting this into Eq.
(4) we ﬁnd that normalisation requires,

N

Z
1

a(N )k−γ(1 − k/N )γdk ≡ 1.

(7)

Evaluating the LHS of Eq. (7) we ﬁnd for N ≫
1,

a(N )N 1−γΓ(1 − γ)Γ(1 + γ) = 1,

(8)

and it immediately follows that,

a(N ) =

N γ−1
Γ(1 − γ)Γ(1 + γ)

.

(9)

Using this result for a(N ), we can recast Eq. (4)
into a scaling ansatz such that an actual critical
exponent equal to 1 is obtained, as follows,

P (k; N ) =

N γ−1
Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ)

k−γG(k/N )

= k−1

1
Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ)

= k−1

G(k/N ),

k1−γ
N 1−γ G(k/N )
(10)

1

e

G(x) =

e
Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ)x1−γG(x). Equation
where
(10) is our ‘proper’ FSS ansatz. We have shown
using consistent arguments that Eq. (4) can be
recast into Eq. (10) assuming the cut-oﬀ func-
tion, G(x) is of the form given in Eq. (6), and
using the requirement that the probability den-
sity function must be properly normalised to
derive an expression for the N -dependent pref-
actor, a(N ). The point of interest is that on the
LHS of Eq. (10) the leading power-law term has
attained a ﬁxed value equal to 1, independent of
γ. Thus, even if the apparent measured expo-
nent, γ, is in the range [0, 1) the actual critical
exponent is always equal to 1.

To test the validity of the scaling ansatz given
in Eq.(10), we have, in Fig. 3(b), plotted the
transformed probability density kP (k; N ) ver-
sus the rescaled variable k/N using the same
data as in Fig. 3(a). Multiplying both sides of
Eq. (10) by k we get,

kP (k; N ) =

G(k/N ).

(11)

e
1

e

G(k/N ) =

Therefore, we expect the curves to collapse onto
Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ)(k/N )1−γ(1 −
the curve
k/N )γ, with the gradient of the slope to be
equal to 1−γ. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a convinc-
ing data collapse is obtained, with all curves
collapsing onto the scaling function described
by
G(x) with γ = 1 − 2θ = 0.8. We have re-
peated the data collapse for diﬀerent values of
θ, and observed a convincing data collapse in all

e

7

cases, with all curves collapsing onto the scaling
function described by,

G(x) with γ = 1 − 2θ.

Together, Eq. (4) and the success of the data
e
collapse in Fig. 3(b) demonstrate that the de-
gree distribution for any network size, N , is de-
termined by the scaling function
G(x). This
means that we can deduce the degree distribu-
tion for any network size, N , without having
to actually perform the numerical simulation
itself. Hence, our results are applicable to net-
works larger than those which we have demon-
strated directly, that is for N > 103. This is
in contrast to the duplication models consid-
ered in [8] where the networks generated do not
attain power-law degree distributions even for
very large networks.

e

Thus far, we have not yet justiﬁed the rela-
tion given between the apparent exponent and
the parameter θ. In the following section, we
derive a result for the average degree, hki. We
then demonstrate how we can use this result to
ﬁnd an expression for the apparent exponent γ
in terms of the parameter, θ.

3. Mean-ﬁeld Equation for the Average Degree

The average degree, hki, can be determined
in various diﬀerent ways. Ideally, one would be
able to calculate it directly from the two-step
rate equation for the evolution of the degree dis-
tribution in Eq. (1). This would be achieved by
taking the ﬁrst moment of the normalised de-
gree distribution, P (k, t) = f (k, t)/Nt, accord-
ing to,

hkit =

kP (k, t)dk.

(12)

∞

Z
1

Strictly speaking, where we write integration
signs we should have sums, as we are dealing
with a discrete probability distribution. Ei-
ther way, the solution we are interested in is
limt→∞hkit = hki, which is analytically in-
tractable.
In order to get around this prob-
lem we have calculated this quantity numeri-
cally, and compared this result to the asymp-
totic value of hki obtained as a solution to a
mean-ﬁeld rate equation approach (described
below).

Figure 4 illustrates the exact numerical re-
sults for the time-evolution of hki for θ ∈
[0.01, 0.5] and clearly illustrates the existence
of a stationary asymptotic hki. We now de-
scribe our mean-ﬁeld argument to determine
the asymptotic value of the average degree, hki.
At each time step, for each node we delete we
lose on average, hkit links, and for each node

we duplicate we gain on average, phkit+1 + θ
links. Therefore, the net change in the num-
ber of links, ∆L = −hkit + phkit+1 + θ. For
the case of p = 1, we can rewrite this as,
∆L = − 2Lt
+ θ, where we have used
the standard relation, hki = 2L/N . Imposing
the condition ∆L = 0, which is valid in the
stationary regime, t → ∞, we ﬁnd,

Nt + 2Lt+1

Nt+1

hkiMF = θ(N − 1)

(13)

for a ﬁxed-size network evolving under per-
fect duplication for arbitrary θ. So, for a net-
work of size N = 200, for example, we pre-
dict, using Eq. (13), hki = 1.99, 19.9, 99.5 for
θ = 0.01, 0.1, 0.5 respectively. We can compare
this prediction with the exact numerical results
for the ﬁrst moment of the degree distribution.
As shown in Fig.4, there is exact agreement be-
tween the asymptotic value of the average de-
gree determined from the mean-ﬁeld calculation
and the exact numerical results (for t > 105).
Thus, both the mean-ﬁeld calculation and the

 100

 80

 60

t

>
k
<

 40

 20

 0

0

5e+04

1e+05

1.5e+05

2e+05

t

FIG. 4: Exact numerical results for the average de-
gree, hki, versus time for a ﬁxed-size network, pdel =
pdupl = 1, with N = 200 nodes, and kinitial = 50. The
network evolved through perfect duplication and
increasing θ = 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5
(marked with lines of decreasing dash-length). In
each case, hki reaches a stationary value whose
value is identical to that predicted analytically (cir-
cles), hkiMF = θ(N − 1), see Eq. (13).

exact numerical results, as illustrated in Fig. 4,
demonstrate the existence of an attractive ﬁxed
point in the average degree, hki. This is clearly
related to the existence of a stationary degree
distribution, that is, P (k, t) = P (k, t + 2).

Equation (13) highlights the importance of
accounting for the mechanism of heterodimeri-
sation for ﬁnite-sized networks, as it shows that
the network self-organises to a stationary state
where the average degree hki is constant, and
determined by the system size, N and the prob-
Since real
ability for heterodimerisation, θ.

8

PINs are of ﬁnite size, typically with no more
than 104 nodes (see Table I), the point of in-
formation regarding the role of θ in ﬁnite-sized
networks is of signiﬁcance.

We have also veriﬁed through further simu-
lations varying p such that p < 1 for constant
θ and N clearly dramatically reduces hki, as
one would expect, although the precise nature
of this eﬀect has not yet been quantiﬁed and
seems to be non-trivial. Thus, Eq. (13) actu-
ally gives an upper bound for hki.

An alternative method for calculating hki an-
alytically, is to calculate the ﬁrst moment of the
degree distribution as expressed in Eq.
(10),
hkiSF. This turns out to be very useful as far
as determining an expression for the apparent
exponent, γ, in terms of θ. We ﬁnd that,

hkiSF =

kP (k; N )dk

N

N

Z
1

Z
1
N
2
N
2

=

=

=

Γ(2 − γ)
Γ(1 − γ)

(1 − γ).

1

Γ(1−γ)Γ(1+γ) (cid:18)

1−γ

k
N (cid:19)

γ

k
N (cid:19)

dk

1−

(cid:18)

for N → ∞

(14)

Since we already know that hkiMF = θ(N − 1)
from Eq. (13), the RHS of Eq. (14) must be
equivalent to Eq. (13), hence,

γ = 1 − 2θ.

(15)

This justiﬁes our previous ﬁnding in Sec. IV. 2
that the apparent exponent is γ = 1 − 2θ. In
the following section, we investigate the eﬀect
on the degree distribution of varying θ ∈ (0, 0.5)
for ﬁxed N , completing the analysis of the two
scenarios outlined at the beginning of Sec. IV.
2.

4. Eﬀects of varying θ

Figure 5 illustrates the topological eﬀect of
varying the probability to heterodimerise in the
range 0 < θ ≤ 0.5, in a ﬁxed-size network (N =
200), evolving through perfect duplication.

We ﬁnd that the degree distribution exhibits
a power law with a slope that varies with θ ac-
cording to γ = 1−2θ, reaching a uniform distri-
bution at a value of θ = 0.5. We have repeated
the above simulations for a range of network
sizes, up to N = 1000, and conﬁrmed this be-
haviour. Hence, the result for γ is consistent
with our previous ﬁndings in Sec. IV. 2.

Current estimates from empirical data for
yeast, ﬂy and human PINs indicate that θ never

)
k
(
P

10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7

9

tribution were indeed described by a power-law
decay.

10-2

10-4

)
k
(
P

10-6

10-8

10-10

100

101

k

102

FIG. 5: Exact numerical results for the de-
gree distribution in the stationary regime for a
ﬁxed-size network, pdel = pdupl = 1, with N =
200 nodes, and kinitial = 50.
The network
evolved through perfect duplication and increasing
θ = 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.07, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5 (marked with
lines of decreasing dash-length). The value θ = 0.5
marks a change in behaviour from a power-law de-
cay with a negative exponent to a uniform distri-
bution.

exceeds 0.1 [8]. Since we observe power-law de-
gree distributions in the range 0 < θ < 0.5,
a value of θ < 0.1 in our model is consistent
with empirical data. The fact that γ = 1 − 2θ
might go some way towards explaining why in
the duplication model considered in Ref.
[8],
for realistic values of θ < 0.1 their results were
not aﬀected.

5. Eﬀects of varying p

Up until now, we have been investigating the
eﬀects of varying θ and N , for ﬁxed pdel =
pdupl = p = 1, on the degree distribution. We
now report our ﬁndings for a third possible sce-
nario: the eﬀect of varying p, for ﬁxed θ and N
(keeping pdel = pdupl = 1, as before).

Figure 6 illustrates the topological eﬀect of
varying p in a ﬁxed-size network with het-
erodimerisation θ = 0.1. There is clearly a
marked diﬀerence between the curve for p = 1
and the family of curves for p < 1. We es-
tablished in Sec.
IV. 2-4 that for p = 1 and
θ ∈ (0, 0.5), the degree distribution is well ap-
proximated by a power-law decay. We now
see that for p < 1, the power-law behaviour
is no longer observed and a characteristic de-
gree is present. We have conﬁrmed this re-
sult for a range of network sizes, speciﬁcally,
N = 50, 100, 400, 1000. Moreover, we have
found that the second moment hk2i does not di-
verge with increasing network size as one would
expect if, in the limit of N → ∞, the degree dis-

100

101

k

102

FIG. 6: Exact numerical results for the degree
distribution in the stationary regime for a ﬁxed-
size network, pdel = pdupl = 1, with N = 200
nodes, for increasing duplication probabilities p =
0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.975, 0.99, 1 (marked
with lines of decreasing dash-length) and het-
erodimerisation θ = 0.1. There is a marked diﬀer-
ence between the curves generated with p < 1 and
with p = 1. Whereas the latter is described by a
power-law decay, the former are not and a charac-
teristic degree is present.

We can oﬀer a simple heuristic argument
to account for the diﬀerence between the case
p = 1 and p < 1. We believe that it is di-
rectly related to the choices we have made for
the remaining parameters of the model, namely
pdel = pdupl = 1 and θ > 0. For p < 1 at each
duplication event only some of the links of the
mother node are copied by the daughter node,
whereas for p = 1, all of the mother node’s
links are copied. Given that pdel = 1 we delete
a node and all of its links at each time step,
and thus at each duplication event, if p < 1,
we do not compensate for the loss of links in-
curred through the deletion process. Hence, the
repeated application of duplication events with
p < 1, given that pdel = 1 accounts for the fact
that the observed degree distribution does not
follow a power-law decay but rather has a char-
acteristic degree present.

6. Comment on relation to biological data

We can test the suitability of the DDDH
model as a representation of the evolution of
PINs by comparing our results against empiri-
cal data. Using data cited in Ref.
[8] we can
obtain values of the number of proteins in the
network and estimates of the average degree of
the PINs for yeast, ﬂy, and human. From these,
we can derive estimates for θ using Eq. (13) and

the apparent scaling exponent, γ = 1 − 2θ. The
results are tabulated in Table I.

Data
Yeast (I)
Yeast (II)
Fly
Human

N
4873
5397
6954
5275

hki
6.6
29.2
5.9
5.7

θ
0.0014
0.0054
0.00085
0.0011

γ
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

TABLE I: Comparison between empirical data [8,
42] and the ﬁxed-size, perfect duplication DDDH
model. Values of θ and γ are quoted to 2 decimal
places.

For all data sets, the calculated value of θ
is of the order of 10−3 which agrees well with
the fact that it is believed heterodimerisation
occurs at a rate not greater than 0.1 [8]. More-
over, the corresponding apparent scaling ex-
ponent extracted in all cases is found to be
γ = 1.0. This is consistent with our FSS analy-
sis and corroborates Ref. [8] where a power law
with degree exponent γ ≈ 1.1 is given for the
data for yeast derived from [42].

V. DISCUSSION

The results in Sec. IV indicate that the de-
gree distribution of ﬁxed-size networks where
the rate of node deletion is equal to the rate of
node duplication, pdel = pdupl = 1, is depen-
dent on several features. We summarise these
as follows. (a) In order to observe a power-law
degree distribution it is necessary to have p = 1,
that is, perfect duplication, and 0 < θ < 0.5.
(b) No power-law is observed in the degree dis-
tribution for p < 1, or for p = 1 and θ ≥ 0.5.
(c) In all cases, it is necessary for θ to be non-
zero in order for a positive average degree to
be obtained in the stationary regime since for
θ = 0, hki = 0. (d) In cases where a positive av-
erage degree is obtained, it is notable that the
network self-organises into a stationary state.
We see this as an advantageous feature of this
model and comment that this is in contrast to
some other network models, such as in Ref. [19],
where the average degree is a ﬁxed parameter
in the model, or the duplication models where
the average degree scales with the network size.
(e) Our FSS analysis indicates that for ﬁxed
θ ∈ (0, 0.5), the scaling exponent of the asso-
ciated (proper) FSS ansatz is ﬁxed and equal
to 1. The new result is obtained through the
inclusion of a system-size dependency in the
prefactor, a(N ), necessary when the apparent
exponent γ < 1, which results in the scaling
function being recast in such a way that the

10

only relevant scale parameterising the system
is determined by the cut-oﬀ, given by N in our
case. This example illustrates that it is neces-
sary to be cautious when doing a FSS ansatz in
systems where the apparent exponent appears
to be less than 1 [43]. (f) Estimates of θ and γ
for networks for yeast, ﬂy and human are con-
sistent with estimates from empirical data and
our FSS analysis.

If we accept the fact that the ﬁxed-size ver-
sion of the DDDH model in spite of its sim-
plicity is able to reproduce certain observed
topological features of PINs, this in turn would
require us to revise the idea that the protein
repertoire has evolved over millions of years
from a small set of genes to the genomes we ob-
served today in multi-cellular organisms which
are typically composed of tens of thousands of
genes since the two are not compatible. Clearly,
this is a rather drastic measure. Rather than
accept such a state of aﬀairs, perhaps all that
the results of the ﬁxed-size DDDH model indi-
cate thus far is that we should exercise caution
when interpreting minimalistic network models,
as attractive as they are. Since we can con-
jure up many varied and simple network mod-
els, with and without growth, which are capa-
ble of reproducing observed features of complex
systems perhaps the only recourse when trying
to pick one network model over the other is to
carefully use our knowledge of the essence of
the original real system [44].

A. Extensions

As a ﬁrst step in investigating the behaviour
it seems reasonable to
of the DDDH model,
keep things as simple as possible, as we have
done here. We have reported on the case of
ﬁxed-size networks, and are currently investi-
gating how the topology is aﬀected by varying
the relative rates of node deletion and duplica-
tion. Moreover, sensitivity to initial conditions
is being probed further; we believe that for the
ﬁxed-size case, the network features are inde-
pendent of initial conditions.

However, beyond the steps we have men-
tioned, there are obvious extension of this
model which further investigations could ben-
eﬁt from including. For example, the model is
based on an undirected network – it would be
interesting to see how best to incorporate dy-
namics based on directed links and what aﬀect
this would have on the in-degree distribution
and out-degree distribution. Incorporating this
feature would make the model well-suited to de-
scribing genetic regulatory networks, for exam-

11

ple.

Moreover, the model assumes that the rate
of node deletion and duplication are indepen-
dent of one other, and independent of any fea-
ture of the network such as the size; one could
imagine the scenario where this is not the case.
Moreover, we consider single-node deletion and
single-node duplication – an interesting varia-
tion would be to consider multiple-node dele-
tion or duplication, or even duplication of whole
modules (motifs) as in Ref. [45], for example.

Finally, the only cause of an increase or de-
crease in the number of links is either due to a
node deletion or node duplication event: links
are not added or deleted through any other
mechanism. The scenario where (directed)
links are stochastically added or removed be-
tween already existing nodes would be an inter-
esting amendment to investigate, particularly
with regards to the resulting eﬀect on the de-
gree distribution and its corresponding expo-
nent [28, 30, 46].

A ﬁnal example is that there is no ﬁtness pa-
rameter in the model, nor any rule based on se-
lection – our results are independent of both of
these features at the gene/protein level, and at
the network level, yet it is widely believed that
both features are driving forces in the evolution
of most, if not all, biological systems. Includ-
ing these features in a meaningful way would
be a highly relevant step towards understand-
ing some of the thornier questions in modern
biology today.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have introduced and discussed a minimal-
istic model governed by four parameters, based

on dynamic node deletion and node duplication
with heterodimerisation. The model is intended
to capture some basic features in the evolution
of protein interaction networks but we believe
that it is also suited to other types of networks
in light of the suggested modiﬁcations.

Power-law degree distributions were observed
for generic parameter values, and a novel ﬁnite-
size scaling eﬀect was observed for the case of
ﬁxed-size networks evolving through perfect du-
plication and θ ∈ (0, 0.5). The existence of an
attractive ﬁxed point in the average degree was
derived based on mean-ﬁeld arguments, and
corroborated with numerical simulations of the
ﬁrst moment of the degree distribution as de-
scribed by the two-step rate equation. The
above results were then used to to derive a re-
lation for the apparent exponent, γ = 1 − 2θ.

Our results thus far indicate consistency
with empirical data. Further investigations are
required to fully explore and understand the
wider phase-space inhabited by this model, and
several suggestions have been made to this end.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the referees
for very useful comments on a previous version
of this manuscript. The authors are grateful
for helpful discussions with Henrik J. Jensen
and Simon Laird. The authors are also grateful
to Matthew Stapleton for insightful discussions
on ﬁnite-size scaling. N. Farid is thankful to
EPSRC DTG for funding.

[1] A. Wagner, Mol. Biol. Evol. 18(7), 1283

(2001).

[2] F. Chung, L. Lu, T. Gregory Dewey, and D. J.

Galas, J. Comp. Bio. 10(5), 677 (2003).

[3] A. V´azquez., A. Flammini, A. Maritan, and A.

Vespigniani, ComplexUs 1, 38 (2003).

[4] J. Kim, P. L. Krapivsky, B. Kahng, and S. Red-
ner, Phys. Rev. E 66, 055101(R) (2002).
[5] R. Pastor-Satorras, E. Smith, and R. V. Sole,

J. Theor. Biol. 222, 199 (2003).

[6] R. V. Sole, R. Pastor-Satorras, E.D. Smith,
and T. Kepler, Adv.Complex Sys. 5(1), 43
(2002).

[7] A. Raval, Phys. Rev. E 68, 0066119 (2003).
[8] I. Ispolatov, P. L. Krapivsky, and A. Yuryev,
New J. Phys. 7, 145 (2005); Phys. Rev. E 71,
061911 (2005).

[9] A. L. Hughes, Proc. Biol. Sci. 256, 119 (1994).
[10] W. J. Kent, R. Baertsch, A. Hinrichs, W.
Miller, and D. Haussler, PNAS 100 (300),
11484 (2003).

[11] M. Lynch, and J. S. Conery, Science 290, 1151

[12] J. Zhang, Trends in Ecol. and Evol. 18(6), 292

(2000).

(2003).

[13] S. Ohno, Evolution by gene duplication

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1970).

[14] R. Friedman and A. L. Hughes, Genome Re-

search 11, 373 (2001).

[15] Z. Gu, A. Cacalcanti, F.-C. Chen, P. Bouman,
and W.-H. Li, Mol. Biol. Evol. 19(3), 256
(2002).

[16] K. H. Wolfe and W.-H. Li, Nature Genetics 33,

255 (2003).

12

[17] M. Kellis, B. W. Birren and E. S. Lander, Na-

ture 428, 617 (2004).

Proteomics 4, 928 (2004).
Sole

[35] R. V.

and Pau Fernandez,

q-

[18] V. E. Prince and F. B. Pickett, Nature Re-

bio.GN/0312032v1.

views, Genetics. 3, 827 (2003).

[36] F. Chung, S. Handjani, and D. Jungreis, Ann.

[19] J. Berg, M. L¨assig, and A. Wagner, BMC

Comb. 7, 141 (2003).

[20] J. B. Axelsen, K.-K. Yan, and S. Maslov, q-

[21] V. van Noort, B. Snel, and M. Huynen, EMBO

Evol.Biol. 4, 51 (2004).

bio.GN/050702.

Rep. 5(3), 280 (2004).

[22] We diﬀerentiate between total node removal
from the network and removal via the merging
of nodes which has been considered elsewhere,
see for example [23, 24].

[23] P. Minnhagen, M. Rosvall, K. Sneppen, and A.

Trusina, Physica A 340, 725 (2004).

[24] S. N. Dorogvtsev, J. F. F. Mendes, and A. N.
Samukhin, Europhys. Lett. 57(3), 334 (2002).
[25] B. Bollob´as, O. Riordan, Mathematical re-
sults on scale-free graphs. Handbook of graphs
and networks (S. Bornholdt, H. Schuster eds.),
Wiley-VCH, Berlin (2002).

[26] H. Jeong, S. P. Mason, A.-L. Barab´asi, and Z.

W. Oltvai, Nature 411, 41 (2001).

[27] Z. Gu, L. M. Steinmetz, X. Gu, C. Scharfe,
R. W. Davis, and W.-H. Li, Nature 421, 63
(2003).

[28] F. Chung and L. Lu, Internet Mathematics

1(4), 409 (2004).

[29] C. Cooper, A. Frieze, and J. Vera, Internet

Mathematics 1(4), 464 (2004).

[30] C. Wang, Proc. of Combinatorial and Algo-
rithm Aspects of Networking (2005), to be pub-
lished in a special issue of Internet Math.
[31] R. Albert and A. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys.

[32] M. E. J Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167

74, 47 (2002).

(2003).

[37] For an appropriately chosen initial network
size one could imagine that this regime could
be used to compare the results of perturbation
eﬀects with the results of gene knock-out ex-
periments.

[38] A similar mechanism has been considered by

Slanina et al. [39].

[39] F. Slanina and M. Kotrla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
5587 (1999); Phys. Rev. E 62, 6170 (2000);F.
Slanina, M. Kotrla and J. Steiner, Europhys.
Lett. 60(1), 14 (2002).

[40] It is worth pointing out that originally, we
set out to present the case of a growing net-
work, evolving under dynamic node deletion
and node duplication with heterodimerisation,
and compare these results to those obtained
from duplication models. However, since we
found the results for a ﬁxed size network par-
ticularly striking and unusual, we have re-
stricted our results in this paper to this spe-
cial case; we defer the results for the case of a
growing network to a further publication.
[41] P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Phys. Rev. E

63, 066123-1 (2001).

[42] C. von Mering, R. Krause, B. Snel, M. Cornell,
S. G. Oliver, S. Fields, and P. Boork, Nature
417, 399 (2002).

[43] K. Christensen, N. Farid, Gunnar Pruessner,

and M. Stapleton, submitted.

[44] D. J. Watts, Six degrees: The science of a con-
nected age (W. W. Norton & Company, New
York, NY, 2003).

[45] E. Ravasz and A.-L. Barab´asi, Phys. Rev. E

[33] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F Mendes, Adv.

67, 026112 (2003).

Phys. 51, 1079 (2002).

[46] B. Tadi´c, Physica A 293, 273 (2001).

[34] S.-H.Yook, Z. N. Oltvai, and A.-L. Barab´asi,

