6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Defect formation of lytic peptides in lipid membranes and their inﬂu-
ence on the thermodynamic properties of the pore environment.

Vitaliy Oliynyk1,2, Udo Kaatze1 and Thomas Heimburg,2,∗
1Complex Fluids Group, Drittes Physikalisches Institut, Georg-August Universit¨at, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, D-37077 G¨ottingen, Germany
2The Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark

We present an experimental study of the pore formation processes of small amphipathic peptides in model phosphocholine lipid
membranes. We used atomic force microscopy to characterize the spatial organization and structure of alamethicin- and melittin-
induced defects in lipid bilayer membranes and the inﬂuence of the peptide on local membrane properties. Alamethicin induced
holes in gel DPPC membranes were directly visualized at different peptide concentrations. We found that the thermodynamic
state of lipids in gel membranes can be inﬂuenced by the presence of alamethicin such that nanoscopic domains of ﬂuid lipids
form close to the peptide pores, and that the elastic constants of the membrane are altered in their vicinity. Melittin-induced
holes were visualized in DPPC and DLPC membranes at room temperature in order to study the inﬂuence of the membrane state
on the peptide induced hole formation. Also differential scanning calorimetry was used to investigate the effect of alamethicin
on the lipid membrane phase behavior.

Keywords: Peptide pores, Lipid membranes, Alamethicin, Melittin, Atomic force microscopy, Differential scanning calorimetry

1 Introduction

The biological activities of membrane active peptides are deter-
mined to a large part by their interactions with the phospholipid
bilayer comprising the plasma membrane and the mutual struc-
tural effects induced within the peptide and lipid molecules.
Many native and synthetic peptides are known to, under certain
conditions, form spontaneously transmembrane defects, such
as pores, in lipid bilayers. Defect formation is promoted by a
combination of electrostatic interactions of the peptide residues
with the polar heads of anionic lipid molecules and hydropho-
bic interactions with the lipid acyl chains [1, 2, 3]. It is com-
monly believed that the defect formation is the mode of action
of antimicrobial peptides. These peptides are active, forming
pores, in some cell membranes but not in others, such that they
can function as host-defense agents, killing microbes. On cer-
tain conditions, however, they are just associated to the mem-
brane surface where they are inactive. Studies of defect forma-
tion and of the defect structures in lipid bilayers may be a key
step toward our understanding of how the activities of antimi-
crobial peptides are regulated in the biological world.

Amphipathic, α-helical peptides are abundant in nature, serv-

ing as membrane permeating agents in the host defense sys-
tem of many organisms. Antibiotic peptides, such as alame-
thicin, isolated from the Trichoderma viride fungus, and the bee
venom peptide melittin are among the most intensively studied
peptides [4, 5]. As the amino-acid sequence and the helical
structure in water as well as membrane environments of these
peptides is well known, they can serve as convenient models for
studies of interactions between membrane located proteins and

lipids. The crystal structures of alamethicin and melittin have
been solved more than twenty years ago by X-ray crystallogra-
phy [6, 8, 7]. At low peptide-to-lipid molar ratios alamethicin
preferentially adsorbs to the membrane surface where it is ar-
ranged parallel to the lipid headgroups and associated to the
bilayer surface. With increasing peptide concentration, alame-
thicin switches to an active state. It is then inserted into the
lipid membrane, forming transmembrane pores [9, 10]. Above
a certain critical concentration nearly all peptide molecules are
participating in the pore formation process [11, 12]. The struc-
ture of alamethicin channels is generally considered in terms of
the ”barrel-stave” model [13, 14, 15, 16, 17], in which multiple
peptide molecules form a helix bundle surrounding a central
pore. This model is capable to explain the occurrence of chan-
nel activity in discrete, multilevel conductance steps [18, 19,
20, 21] which is caused by a varying number of pore-forming
peptides. Nevertheless, in spite of the fact, that a large body of
experimental data was generated, the microscopic structure of
alamethicin pores and the organization of peptide pores in lipid
membranes is not completely understood presently.

Proteins and peptides inserted into membranes may inﬂu-
ence the chain melting transition of lipid membranes.
It is
known from calorimetric studies that gel-to-ﬂuid transition pro-
ﬁles are broadened and/or shifted to either lower or higher tem-
peratures by addition of proteins [22, 23, 24]. The shape of
the heat capacity proﬁles contains valuable information on the
modes of interactions between peptides and lipids [25, 22], for
example, about their spatial organization. It has been shown
that the effect of integral peptides on the phase behaviour of
lipid membranes strongly depends on the chain length of the

1

lipids [26]. This ﬁnding is discussed in terms of ”hydropho-
bic mismatch”, which implies that the interaction between in-
tegral proteins (or amphipathic peptides) and lipids depends
on the relative length difference of their hydrophobic cores. It
has been proposed that the hydrophobic mismatching controls
the peptide partitioning in lipid membranes via lipid mediated
forces [27, 28].

Atomic force microscopy [41, 29, 30, 31, 32] is extensively
used in recent studies for the characterization of lipid mem-
brane systems with resolution on the nanoscopic scale. This
method was successfully applied to investigate, with high spa-
tial resolution, the structure of pure lipid membranes as well as
peptide containing membranes under different conditions [33,
34, 35, 36, 37]. Direct visualization of peptide aggregates in
model membranes as well as the study of their structure and
their effect on lipid bilayers was reported for a number of na-
tive [38, 23] and synthetic peptides [36, 24]. The experiments
reported in this study focus on the characteristics of alame-
thicin as well as melittin association and aggregation within
lipid membranes. We found the appearance of pores or defects
in the membrane induced by such peptides. We loosely refer to
these features as ‘defects’ although they may be closely related
or indistinguishable from pores. The investigation demonstrates
that the structure of alamethicin- and melittin-induced trans-
membrane defects in gel membranes can be directly visualized
for different peptide concentrations. The inﬂuence of the pep-
tides on the phase behaviour of phosphocholine membranes is
also reported. In particular, we show that the physical behavior
of the lipid membrane is altered in the vicinity of the pores.

2 Materials and Methods

1,2- dipalmitoyl- sn- glycero- 3- phosphatidylcholine (DPPC),
1,2- dimyristoyl- sn- glycero- 3- phosphatidylcholine (DMPC)
and 1,2- dilauroyl- sn- glycero- 3- phosphocholine (DLPC) were
purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL). Alame-
thicin was provided by Sigma (St. Louis, MO) and melittin as
a powder from Alexis Biochemicals (San Diego, CA). All sub-
stances were used without further puriﬁcation. Ruby muscovite
mica was obtained from TED PELLA, inc. (Redding, CA).

For the preparation of lipid-peptide multilamellar vesicle
dispersions, lipids and peptides were separately dissolved in a
1:1 mixture of dichloromethane and methanol. The dissolv-
ing of lipids and peptides in the organic solvents, preceding the
preparation of aqueous solutions, was required for more exact
weighing of the substances in micrograms amounts and for bet-
ter mixing of peptides and lipids. Further, appropriate amounts
of the solutions of the target substances were mixed together,
dried under a weak ﬂow of nitrogen gas, and placed under vac-
uum overnight to remove the residual solvent. The dried pep-
tide/lipid mixtures were dispersed in Milli-Q water to a ﬁnal
concentration of 1–3 mM. Aqueous multilamellar vesicle dis-
persions were prepared by heating the samples above 50◦C ,
followed by vortexing.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments [39]
were performed using large unilamellar lipid vesicle (LUV)
suspensions. LUVs were obtained with the aid of a small vol-
ume extrusion apparatus [40] provided by Avestin (Ottawa, Ca-
nada). The multilamellar vesicles were extruded through poly-
carbonate ﬁlters with 100 nm pores size, mounted in the mini-
extruder and ﬁtted with two 1.0 ml syringes. Samples were 21
times passed through the ﬁlter membrane. An odd number of
passages was performed to avoid contamination of the sample
by multilamellar vesicles which might not have passed through
the ﬁlter. During the extrusion process the temperature of the
sample was kept above the melting point of the lipids that fa-
cilitates the pushing of the lipid suspension through the ﬁlter.
Right before the ﬁlling of the calorimeter the solution of ex-
truded vesicles was degassed for 15 minutes in order to remove
air microbubbles. DSC experiments were performed using a
VP-DSC from MicroCal (Northhampton, MA) on samples of 5
mM lipid LUVs at a scan rate of 2◦C/h. An appropriate base-
line was subtracted from the resulting thermograms.

Samples for atomic force microscopy (AFM) experiments
[41] were prepared utilizing direct fusion of small unilamellar
vesicles (SUVs) on mica [42]. Lipid SUVs were prepared in the
presence of the peptides by sonication with the aid of a Soniﬁer
Cell Disruptor B-15 (Branson, Germany) until the solution be-
came completely transparent. Transparency ensures that the so-
lution consists mostly of small unilamellar vesicles. The SUVs
were immediately rewarmed to temperature above 55◦C, and
40–80 µl of the vesicle suspension was added to a piece of
freshly cleaved mica. The samples were incubated for 20 min at
room temperature and rinsed by exchanging ten times the incu-
bation solution with 150 mM NaCl solution afterwards (rinsing
by Milli-Q water was found to be also effective). In doing so
the supported lipid membrane was never allowed to dry. The
mica-supported lipid bilayers were imaged in both contact and
tapping mode using a MultiMode atomic force microscope with
NanoScope IIIa controller (Digital Instruments, Santa-Barbara,
CA). Oxide-sharpened silicon nitride AFM probes (Digital In-
struments, Santa-Barbara, CA) with nominal spring constants
of 0.06 N/m and 0.12 N/m were used. To ensure that the force
was kept minimal during scanning, the force was frequently
decreased until the tip left the surface and was subsequently
slightly increased until just regaining contact. The scan rate
was 5-8 lines per second (Hz) for contact mode images and
1-3 lines per second (Hz) for tapping mode images. All im-
ages have 512 × 512 pixels. Analysis of AFM images was
performed with non-commercial software WSxM c(cid:13) (Nanotec
Electr´onica, http://www.nanotec.es).

3 Results

3.1 Atomic Force Microscopy

Without membrane active peptides, mica-supported lipid bilay-
ers in gel or ﬂuid phases display a very ﬂat surface when vi-

2

Figure 1: DPPC and DLPC mica supported bilayers without peptides added. (A) 3 × 3 µm scan size height image of DPPC
membrane obtained operating the AFM in contact mode and (B) cross-section plot along the white line on the height image (A),
from which thicknesses of the ﬁrst and the second bilayers are ∼ 6 nm and ∼ 8 nm. Simultaneously recorded tapping mode
height (C) and phase (E) images of a DLPC membrane with 2.2 × 2.2 µm scan sizes where white lines mark the position of
cross-section proﬁles shown in (D) and (F), respectively, and corresponds to the same scan line and the same position on the
sample surface. All images have 512 scan lines and 512 points per line.

sualized with AFM resolutions. It can show up rare structures
caused by defects in the crystal structure of the mica and by
contamination or partial fusion of lipid bilayers. A random ex-
ample indicating different modes of lipid membrane fusion on
mica is shown in Fig.1. Part A of this ﬁgure presents an AFM
height image of a DPPC membrane supported on mica. Very
dark regions of the image indicate the height level of the mica
support. Hence they reveal parts of mica which were not cov-
ered by lipid. Such defects may be due either to a too short in-
cubation time or to a too low lipid concentration in the droplet
of DPPC sample placed on the freshly cleaved mica surface.
Very bright areas show small pieces of a second lipid bilayer
laying on the top of the ﬁrst one. This view is supported by the
height proﬁle shown in part B of Fig.1. The height of the ﬁrst
DPPC bilayer in the gel phase is between 5 and 6 nm which
is in accordance with the accepted thickness of DPPC mem-
branes [37]. The distance between the upper surfaces of the

ﬁrst and the second bilayers is by about 2 nm larger, demon-
strating that it involves the thickness of a water layer between
both membranes [43, 44].

Parts C and E of Fig.1 present a height image and a phase
image, respectively, of the same area of a mica supported DLPC
membrane. Contrary to DPPC, with main phase transition tem-
perature Tm = 41.6◦C, the DLPC membrane (Tm = −2.1◦C)
is in the ﬂuid phase at room temperature. The DLPC bilayer
appears as a ﬂat leaﬂet in the height image. The height proﬁle
(D, Fig.1) indicates a membrane thickness of somewhat less
than 6 nm, as determined from the height difference between
the bilayer surface and the mica support surface at a membrane
defect.

In the phase image of the DLPC membrane area (E, Fig.1),
which has been recorded simultaneously with the tapping mode
height image, brighter coloring indicates larger phase shifts.
Hence the image shows larger phase shifts in the tapping os-

3

Figure 2: Atomic force micrographs of lipid membranes deposited on mica in the presence of pore forming peptides. (A)
Height image (5×5 µm scan size) of 1 mol % alamethicin in DPPC membranes in the gel state at 25–30◦C. Dark spots on the
brighter surface of the DPPC membrane represent the mica surface, which is accessible for AFM tip via alamethicin induced
transmembrane defects. White regions in all images correspond to the second sheet of lipid membrane which lies on the top
of the ﬁrst one. Height of DPPC membrane slightly varies across the image, which is caused by imperfectly adjusted scanning
parameters. (B) Height image (2×2 µm scan size) of 1 mol % melittin in DPPC membrane in the gel state. Dark regions represent
the mica surface, and the bright regions represent DPPC membrane segments. Linelike depressions in the membrane can be seen.
(C) Height image (1.5×1.5 µm scan size) of 1 mol % melittin in DLPC membrane in the ﬂuid state. A highly developed net
of depressions on the membrane surface is clearly demonstrated. A set of ﬁgures in the bottom panel (D, E and F) represents
images obtained under the same conditions and for the same lipid/peptide systems as shown above (for A, B and C, respectively)
but from completely different sample preparation.

cillations when probing the soft membrane instead of the stiff
mica support. Here phase imaging techniques will be used to
highlight lateral membrane structures, in particular to study the
effect of peptides upon the lateral distribution of viscoelastic
membrane properties. When 1 mol % of alamethicin is incor-
porated into a DPPC bilayer the surface of the membrane ap-
pears evenly perturbed in the AFM height images. As shown
by parts A and D of Fig.2 where results for two different sam-

ple preparations are presented, predominantly circularly shaped
transmembrane defects result. Some elongated defects exhibit
smooth round kinks, as will be discussed with more details be-
low (dark areas in Fig.2 A, D). We assume these defects to in-
dicate alamethicin induced membrane holes, ﬁlled with water.
We were also able to directly observe melittin induced hole for-
mation in phosphocholine lipid bilayers. Samples of DPPC and
DLPC were investigated between 25◦C and 30◦C, both with

4

and without 1 mol % of melittin added. Two different lipids
were used, because the AFM was not provided with a sufﬁ-
ciently stable temperature control. The temperature of mea-
surements was, therefore, slightly above 25◦C for both lipids.
DPPC at those temperatures is in gel phase, whereas DLPC is
in ﬂuid phase. Some representative results are again shown for
two different samples in parts B, E as well as C, F, respectively,
of Fig.2.

In contrast to the alamethicin, melittin forms in gel and ﬂuid
lipid bilayers (DPPC and DLPC, respectively) a widespread
net of prolongated transmembrane defects with close spacing
of defects sides. Already at such small amount of peptide the
bilayer looks disintegrated. As another noticeable result, the
pattern of melittin induced holes in DPPC and DLPC bilayers
is strikingly different. In the ﬂuid phase DLPC bilayer melit-
tin develops a net of transmembrane defects of high density
and displays a more disordered structure than in the gel phase
DPPC bilayer, containing the same amount of peptide.

When the samples of DPPC bilayers containing 1 mol % of
alamethicin shown in Fig.2A was scanned on a large scale, an
interesting defect structure emerged (Fig.3A). In this image the
diversity of defect formation by alamethicin is demonstrated in
details. Most holes appear preferentially as round transmem-
brane defects of different sizes. There is also a small number
of peptide induced elongated holes, some of which appear as
roundish kinks of speciﬁc radius.

Another interesting feature of alamethicin induced defects
exists at the membrane-hole interface. Close to almost all pep-
tide induced holes there exist kinds of shells, exhibiting a lower
height (darker areas in the height images) than the undisturbed
bilayer. From the height proﬁle across one of the holes (Fig.3C)
we found the height of the shell in the range of 3 to 4 nm,
whereas the bilayer thickness amounts to 5–6 nm. This feature
appears in all alamethicin-containing samples independent of
scan direction. It does not show up at the interface of pure lipid
membranes as shown in Fig. Fig.1. We therefore concluded
that these regions at the pore interfaces are no experimental ar-
tifacts but a rather a result of the interaction of the peptides
with the lipid membrane in its environment. As mentioned be-
fore, the latter bilayer height is in good agreement with liter-
ature values for the thickness of gel phase DPPC lipid bilay-
ers [45, 46, 47]. As the melting temperature of DPPC bilayers
without peptide added is around 41◦C the alamethicin contain-
ing membrane will be in the gel phase at room temperature.
The height of the shells close to the alamethicin induced holes
corresponds to the thickness of ﬂuid DPPC membranes [47].
Hence these are strong indications that these shells around the
peptide induced holes are nanoscopic ﬂuid phase lipid domains,
spontaneously formed to reduce the structural mismatch. The
length of alamethicin helices is about 3.5 nm which is sig-
niﬁcantly less than the thickness of DPPC membranes in the
gel state. In order reduce at the peptide-lipid membrane inter-
face the unfavourite interactions between the DPPC hydropho-
bic chains and water, phospholipid molecules near alamethicin

Figure 3: AFM images of gel DPPC membranes supported on
mica in the presence of alamethicin of different concentrations.
(A) Height image (2×2 µm scan size) of 1 mol % alamethicin
in a gel DPPC membrane. Selected section of the same sam-
ple as in Fig.2A, but with smaller scan range. Dark regions
represents the mica surface at the bottom of water ﬁlled de-
fects in the bright coloured DPPC membrane. (B) Height image
(2.2×2.2 µm scan size) of 4 mol % alamethicin in gel DPPC
membrane. Very bright regions correspond to the particles of
great height which are most probably pieces of titanium left
after sample soniﬁcation.
(C) and (D) are the cross-section
height proﬁles along white marker lines extracted across se-
lected alamethicin induced transmembrane defects in the ﬁg-
ures A and B, respectively. Black arrows point to stepwise
changes in the thickness of the gel DPPC membrane close to
the peptide hole. Measured height difference correlates well
with height difference between the thickness of a DPPC mem-
brane in gel and ﬂuid phase.

tend to exist in the ﬂuid phase with reduced membrane thick-
ness rather than in the gel phase with stretched hydrophobic
chains.

Increasing the alamethicin concentration in DPPC bilayers
up to 4 mol %, the peptide do no longer form circularly shaped
defects but rather such with an elongated, branched, and irreg-
ular shape (Fig.3B). Quite remarkable, the height reduction in
the membrane close to alamethicin induced holes are also de-
tected at this fourfold higher peptide concentration, as clearly
revealed by the height proﬁle (Fig.3D). These ﬁndings demon-
strate the similarity in the behaviour of membranes with dif-
ferent peptide concentration. In Fig.4 height and phase con-
trast images of a DPPC membrane containing 1 mol % alame-
thicin are presented. Again both images were simultaneously
recorded in the tapping mode. The phase image clearly re-
veals some sites close to the holes with a bright contrast. This

5

ture variations between the different experiments because the
atomic force microscopes were not provided with a temper-
ature control. Obviously, in the example shown in Fig.4 the
lipid, as judged from the membrane thickness, is still in the gel
phase but there exist already enhanced ﬂuctuations between the
two states as expected in the phase transition regime. For this
reason there exist regions near the peptide clusters in which
the compressibility of the membrane is enhanced, leading to
the more detailed phase image. In order to evaluate the hole

Figure 4: Atomic force microscopy scans of gel DPPC lipid
membrane with 1 mol% of alamethicin supported on mica. (A)
Height and (B) phase images, respectively, from the 1 x 1 µm
scan of the selected area from the Fig.2D. The white line in
both images depicts the cross-setion height (C) and phase (D)
proﬁles. Brighter areas close to peptide induced membrane de-
fects depict greater phase shifts in AFM tip vibrations as can be
seen also in phase cross-section plot (D).

feature is also illustrated by the phase proﬁle in Fig.4D. This
phase delay in the AFM tip vibrations indicates that the mem-
brane surface close to the peptide induced hole is softer than the
undisturbed lipid membrane. Such softening of the gel phase
DPPC bilayer close to the peptide aggregates shows the notice-
able effect of alamethicin on the local compressibility of the
membrane. This is again an indication of the DPPC molecules
near alamethicin to exist in an altered physical state close to
the transition range rather than in the gel phase that one ex-
pects at room temperature. The peptide induced softening of
the lipid membrane close to the holes is in conformity with
Monte Carlo simulations studies [23] which revealed increased
ﬂuctuations of the lipid phase near the peptide clusters. Larger
ﬂuctuations correspond to a higher compressibility and are ex-
pected in the phase transition regime. In the calorimetric mea-
surements in Fig. Fig.6 it is shown that the presence of the pep-
tides lowers melting points (see below). Although the height
image (Fig.4A) as well as the height proﬁle (Fig.4C) do not
reveal obvious changes in the membrane thickness near the
peptide clusters, this feature is clearly present in other alame-
thicin/DPPC samples (Fig.3). The slightly different appearence
of identical sample preparations is likely due to small tempera-

Figure 5: (A) and (B) are histograms of distribution of pep-
tide aggregation number per pore calculated for DPPC mem-
branes with 1 and 4 mol % of alamethicin from AFM height
images Fig.3A and B, respectively. Number of peptides per
pore was obtained from dividing the measured pore perimeter
by known from literature peptide-to-peptide distance of ∼11 ˚A.
The broadness of histogram bars equals about 33.

sizes as induced by alamethicin in gel phase DPPC bilayers
one can argue in terms of an ”aggregation number”, i.e., the
number of peptides in the cluster around a hole ﬁlled with wa-
ter. Measuring the length of the inner perimeter of every hole
in the DPPC bilayers shown in Fig.3A and 3B, we recorded the

6

number of pores exhibiting a certain perimeter length. Assum-
ing the peptide-to-peptide distance to equal ∼11 ˚A [10, 48],
it is possible to estimate the number of peptides that form a
hole by dividing the perimeter of the hole by the peptide-to-
peptide distance mentioned above. In doing so we obtained a
distribution of aggregation numbers shown by the histograms
in Fig.5A and 5B which are plotted for DPPC bilayer samples
containing 1 and 4 mol % of alamethicin, respectively. From
the histograms we obtained a ratio 1:3 for the total numbers of
aggregated alamethicin molecules in membranes with 1 mol %
and 4 mol % peptide concentrations, respectively. This ratio
is larger than the 1:4 concentration ratio, probably, at least in
parts, due to the experimental limitations. Height reductions
with an area smaller than ∼100 nm2 where not taken into ac-
count, since the used AFM tips had a radius of curvature of
about 10 nm. Peptide-induced holes, with dimensions smaller
than the characteristic size of the AFM tip, could indeed be de-
tected in height images, however, on such events the AFM tip
could not reach the bottom of the hole, namely the mica sur-
face. Therefore, the hole perimeter can only be estimated from
the height images.

3.2 Differential Scanning Calorimetry

Excess heat capacity proﬁles (further on called ”cP -proﬁles”)
of large unilamellar vesicle (LUV) suspensions from DPPC
and DMPC with different amounts of alamethicin added are
displayed in Fig.6, A and B. For a clear data representation,
plots of different alamethicin content were shifted along the
heat capacity axis using a constant offset. The heat capacity
curve of the pure DPPC vesicles normally displays a maxi-
mum at ∼41.6◦C, which is often called the main phase tran-
sition temperature, Tm. In the cP -proﬁles shown in Fig.6A, Tm
and the shape of the transition peak are increasingly affected
with the concentration of alamethicin within the DPPC mem-
branes. This ﬁnding is also demonstrated by the Tm values
listed in Tab. 3.2. The presence of peptide is reﬂected in those
heat capacity proﬁles by a slight shift to lower temperatures ac-
companied by a small asymmetry at the low temperature wing
and a transition peak broadening. However, at the highest mea-
sured peptide concentration of 4 mol %, the transition temper-
ature is decreased by less than 1K only. The lipid melting en-
thalpy, ∆H, which is determined as the area under the heat
capacity-versus-temperature proﬁles, decreases slightly when
the alamethicin concentration in the DPPC vesicles increases
up to 3 mol %. A similarly small inﬂuence of alamethicin on
the cP -proﬁles of DMPC vesicles was also observed (Fig.6B).
With DMPC membranes, however, ∆H increases slightly with
alamethicin content. A change in the transition enthalpy of the
DMPC system may, however, be caused by increasing uncer-
tainty to accurately determine the base line.

In cP -proﬁles of DPPC suspensions with alamethicin added
one can also observe that, at 2 mol % of peptide, a small second
peak appears at the high temperature slope of the main transi-

Figure 6: Alamethicin in phosphocholine lipid membranes. (A)
Heat capacity proﬁles of alamethicin in DPPC large unilamellar
vesicles with 1, 2, 3 and 4 mol % of peptide. (B) Heat capacity
proﬁles of alamethicin in DMPC large unilamellar vesicles with
0, 1 and 2 mol % of peptide.
In all DSC-scans addition of
alamethicin results in a minor shift to lower temperatures and
in a broadening of the main transition peak. For a better data
representation curves were shifted for a constant offset along
the heat capacity axis.

tion peak. It is more developed in the cP -proﬁle for 3 mol %
of peptide but almost disappears with further increasing alame-
thicin content. The heat capacity proﬁle of pure DPPC LUVs
normally does not show up a splitting of the transition peak.
However, in the case of extruded DMPC vesicles this feature
exists (see Fig.6B) and it is not noticeably affected by the pres-
ence of alamethicin. The splitting of the peak in cP -proﬁles

7

Peptide
content

0.0 mol
1.0 mol
2.0 mol
3.0 mol
4.0 mol

DPPC

Tm

∆H

DMPC
Tm ∆H

% 41.6[*]
% 41.18
% 41.17
% 40.98
% 40.79

39.3 [*]
34.8
34.6
29.7
32.4

22.2
23.6
22.5
23.4
22.9
23.1
— —
— —

Table 1: Melting temperatures Tm (◦C) and enthalpy changes
∆H (kJ/mol) determined from cP -proﬁles of alamethicin con-
taining membranes shown in Fig.6. ([*] values taken from [47])

of pure DMPC LUV suspensions is believed to be related to
changes of the vesicle geometry in the lipid melting regime, by
analogy to a transition between lipid vesicles and a bilayer net-
work during lipid phase transition of DMPG dispersions, as de-
tected in electron microscopy experiments [49]. Probably, such
appearance of an additional peak in cP -proﬁles of alamethicin
containing DPPC membranes reﬂects morphological changes
of free lipid vesicles in solution, similar to the behaviour of
DMPG vesicles [49]. This effect requires further investiga-
tions. Heat capacity proﬁles for melittin containing multil-
amellar vesicles from DPPC and DMPC are displayed in Fig.7.
These vesicles do not show the splitting as observes with the
LUVs. When melittin is added the phase transition tempera-
ture tends to decrease (Tab. 3.2). Again, however, the reduction
of Tm with peptide content is small. More evident is the low-
temperature shoulder in the cP -proﬁles which becomes more
pronounced when the melittin concentration is increased Fig.7.
Similar to alamethicin, melittin causes only small variations
in the enthalpy changes ∆H at the chain melting temperature
(Tab. 3.2).

4 Discussion and Conclusions

Atomic force microscopy offers a valuable tool to visualize
the spatial organization of peptide defects in membranes. For
alamethicin containing bilayers we found that the peptide in-
duces holes in gel state DPPC membranes, the hole structure
depending on the peptide concentration. Since in the litera-
ture [6, 7] pores are usually described as being very small we
losely refer to these holes as ‘defects’. However, we have no
evidence that the principle features of the peptide pores and
our defects are different. An increase of alamethicin content
up to 4 mol % in DPPC bilayers leads to the formation of
bigger and more irregularly shaped transmembrane defects in
comparison to the four times lower peptide concentration, at
which alamethicin aggregates preferentially into smaller and

Figure 7: Melittin in phosphocholine lipid membranes.
(A)
Heat capacity proﬁles of melittin containing DPPC multilamel-
lar vesicles with 0.5, 1, 3 and 4 mol % of peptide. (B) Heat ca-
pacity proﬁles of melittin in DMPC multilamellar vesicles with
0, 1 and 2 mol % of peptide. When melittin is added the phase
transition temperature tends to decrease accentuating the low-
temperature shoulder which becomes more pronounced when
the melittin concentration is increased. For a better data rep-
resentation curves were shifted for a constant offset along the
heat capacity axis.

almost circularly shaped holes. Such pore formation depen-
dence upon the peptide content in membranes ﬁts well to the
commonly accepted barrel-stave model of alamethicin pores,
in which multilevel conductance of alamethicin channels is as-
signed to a varying number of peptide molecules participating
in the pore formation [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. From calculations

8

of pore perimeters in AFM height images (see Fig.5, A and
B) we found that, at higher concentrations, alamethicin forms
holes with a greater number of aggregated peptide molecules
per pore. For 1 mol % of alamethicin the peptide aggregation
number varies from 30 to 300 alamethicin molecules per hole
with a maximum in the size distribution around 80, while at
4 mol % of alamethicin in DPPC membranes the number of
peptide molecules forming a single aqueous defect can reach a
value of up to 1200. However, such large numbers of alame-
thicin molecules, aggregated into a transmembrane hole, is not
characteristic for alamethicin. For example, it was shown pre-
viously by neutron-scattering experiments [10] that in DLPC
membranes pores are made of 8–9 monomers, with a water
pore diameter of ∼18 ˚A and with an effective outside diame-
ter of ∼40 ˚A. In diphytanoyl phosphatidylcholine membranes,
the pores are made of n ∼11 peptide molecules, with a water
pore ∼26 ˚A in diameter and with an effective outside diame-
ter of ∼50 ˚A [10]. On the other hand, it was suggested that a
barrel-stave model with a water pore greater than 3.0 nm in di-
ameter would consist of a bundle of 12 or more peptide helices,
which is most likely unstable against shape deformation [50].
The observation of a wide distribution of the alamethicin aggre-
gation number in our AFM experiments may suggest an effect
of the mica surface on which the membranes were spread dur-
ing the experiment. Contact with the mica crystal surface may
stabilize alamethicin pores and holes. It is known that the di-
rect contact of a membrane with mica can alter the occurance
of ripple structures in pure lipid membranes [35]. Therefore
an inﬂuence of the mica on the present results cannot com-
pletely beruled out. Additional experiments of multilayered
membranes, in which the inﬂuence of the supporting surface
is reduced, may be performed in future, in order to study this
phenomenon in more details. However, the formation of big
pores by alamethicin molecules may be the native property of
this peptide related to its antibiotic action. Alamethicin ag-
gregates, consisting of a large number of peptide molecules,
are difﬁcult to detect utilizing neutron-scattering, while atomic
force microscopy provides a possibility to inspect those pep-
tide pores. However, pores with a number of peptide molecules
smaller than about 30 (diameter smaller than 10 nm) can not be
resolved with AFM techniques because of the ﬁnite radius of
curvature of the tip.

In melittin containing membranes at 1 mol % peptide con-
centration transmembrane pores are formed in both DPPC and
DLPC mica supported bilayers. Since DPPC membranes are
in the gel phase at room temperature and DLPC membranes
in the ﬂuid phase, we conclude that the capability of melittin to
form transmembrane defects does not depend on the state of the
mica supported bilayer. The shape of the defects in both phases,
In DPPC bilayers melittin molecules
however, is different.
form elongated line-like structures, likely reﬂecting the high
degree of ordering of the lipid matrix in the gel phase (similar
structures were found for gramicidin A in the gel phase, [23]).
In DLPC membranes melittin molecules aggregate to a highly

disordered branched net of pores, in conformity with the less
ordered ﬂuid phase of the lipid membrane.

Another important result of this study of peptide contain-
ing lipid membranes is the existence of nanoscopic domains
of lower height in close vicinity to the peptide induced pores.
In AFM images of the gel DPPC bilayers with alamethicin
and also with melittin we found local height depressions close
to the peptide pores. The height in these areas correspond
to the thickness of DPPC membranes in the ﬂuid phase [47].
This led us to the conclusion that, in a gel lipid membrane, the
peptide induces melting of the surrounding lipids. Because of
this melting a hydrophobic mismatch around peptide molecules
is reduced and hereby the free energy of the system is mini-
mized. From an free energy point of view alamethicin helices
with lengths of ∼3.5 nm and a predominantly hydrophobic sur-
face [6] in water, tend to be rather surrounded by a DPPC
membrane in the ﬂuid phase with its thickness of ∼3.9 nm
than by a DPPC membrane in the gel phase with its larger
thickness of ∼4.8 nm [47]. Such an inﬂuence of peptide ag-
gregates on the thermodynamic state of contacting lipids was
also demonstrated in Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of peptide
containing membranes [23]. It has been shown by those stud-
ies that the ﬂuctuations of the lipid state at ﬁxed temperature
are higher close to the peptide aggregates embedded into the
gel lipid matrix, which means a higher probability to ﬁnd lipid
molecules in a ﬂuid state. Melting of peptide coupled lipids
occurs at lower temperatures than of phospholipid membrane
without peptides added. This is reﬂected by the heat capac-
ity proﬁles. cP -proﬁles of alamethicin containing membranes,
shown in this work, demonstrate a shift of the transition peak to
lower temperatures as compared to pure membranes. With in-
crease of peptide content the shift of cP -proﬁles is also larger.
Such trends in the measured heat capacity curves are linked
to the melting of certain fractions of lipids at lower tempera-
tures and to the formation of nanoscopic ﬂuid lipid domains
close to the peptide-induced defects which were detected in the
AFM experiments. The presence of peptide molecules in the
membrane, which have a hydrophobic length shorter than chain
length of the surrounding lipids in the gel state tend to reduce
the energetic barrier for changing their state from gel to ﬂuid.

In MC-simulations of gramicidin A containing membranes
it has been previously demonstrated [23] that peptide induced
shifts of cP -proﬁles can be explained in terms of peptide ag-
gregation in lipid membranes. It was shown that considerable
shifts of the transition peak to lower or higher temperatures cor-
respond to a preferential aggregation of the peptide either in the
gel or the ﬂuid phase, while the unchanged main transition tem-
perature is referred to the equally well aggregation of peptide in
both phases. For melittin containing membranes we found that
the peptide induces a shift of the transition peak in heat capacity
proﬁles similar to alamethicin. Applying the above mentioned
analysis one can predict melittin clustering (associated with
pore formation) in both gel and ﬂuid lipid membranes. This is
in agreement with the AFM images presented in this work for

9

DPPC (gel) and DLPC (ﬂuid) membranes containing 1 mol %
of melittin. Melittin aggregation into the transmembrane pores
was observed in both membranes. We demonstrated also that
the structure of melittin pores depends on the thermodynamic
state of the membrane. In the case of ﬂuid DLPC bilayer, melit-
tin develops a network of transmembrane pores of higher den-
sity and more disordered structure as compared to gel DPPC
bilayers containing the same amount of peptide. Therefore the
lytic power of melittin should depend on the thermodynamic
state of the membrane.

Hence, the peptides in model and biological membranes
can strongly affect the local state of the system, and the ef-
fect of the peptide may also depend on the overall state of the
membrane. Peptides like alamethicin tend to increase the per-
meability of biological membranes not only by forming water
pores, but also by shifting the surrounding bilayer to more dis-
ordered states which are more permeable for small molecules.
In turn, the state of the membrane can be a regulating factor of
the action of antibiotic peptides like melittin, inﬂuencing their
capability to form transmembrane pores.

5 Acknowledgements

We are indebted to Dr. T. Sch¨affer, University of M¨unster, for
introducing one of us (V.O.) into atomic force microscopy and
to Prof. T. Bjørnholm for generously making the equipment
of the Nano-Science Center at the University of Copenhagen
available for this study. Thanks are also due to Dr. M. Kon-
rad, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry in G¨ottingen, for the syn-
thesis of peptides. Financial support from the graduate school
”Neuronal Signalling and Cellular Biophysics”, Georg-August-
University of G¨ottingen, is also gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] G. Spach, H. Duclohier, G. Molle, J. M. Valleton, Structure and
supramolecular architecture of membrane channel-forming peptides.,
Biochimie 71 (1) (1989) 11–21.

[2] Y. Shai, Mechanism of the binding, insertion and destabilization of phos-
pholipid bilayer membranes by k-helical antimicrobial and cell non-
selective membrane-lytic peptides., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1462 (1999)
55–70.

[3] J. I. Kourie, A. A. Shorthouse, Properties of cytotoxic peptide-formed ion
channels., Am. J. Physiol., Cell Physiol. 278 (6) (2000) C1063–87.

[4] D. S. Caﬁso, Alamethicin: a peptide model for voltage gating and protein-
membrane interactions., Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23 (1994)
141–65.

[5] C. E. Dempsey, The actions of melittin on membranes, Biochim. Bio-

phys. Acta 1031 (2) (1990) 143–161.

[6] R. O. Fox, F. M. Richards, A voltage gated ion channel inferred from the
crystal structure of alamethicin at 1.5 ˚a resolution., Nature 300 (1982)
325–330.

[7] R. B. Gennis, Biomembranes, Springer (1989). 325–330.

[8] T. Terwilliger, L. Weissman, D. Eisenberg, The structure of melittin in
the form I crystals and its implication for melittin’s lytic and surface ac-
tivities., Biophys. J. 37 (1) (1982) 353–361.

[9] K. He, S. Ludtke, W. Heller, H. Huang, Mechanism of alamethicin inser-

tion into lipid bilayers., Biophys. J. 71 (5) (1996) 2669–2679.

[10] K. He, S. Ludtke, D. Worcester, H. Huang, Neutron scattering in the plane
of membranes: structure of alamethicin pores, Biophys. J. 70 (6) (1996)
2659–2666.

[11] M. J. Zuckermann, T. Heimburg, Insertion and pore formation driven
by adsorption of proteins onto lipid bilayer membrane-water interfaces.,
Biophys. J. 81 (5) (2001) 2458–2472.

[12] F.-Y. Chen, M.-T. Lee, H. W. Huang, Sigmoidal concentration depen-
dence of antimicrobial peptide activities: a case study on alamethicin.,
Biophys. J. 82 (2) (2002) 908–914.

[13] J. Hall, I.Vodyanoy, T. Balasubramanian, G. R. Marshall, Alamethicin. A
rich model for channel behavior., Biophys. J. 45 (1) (1984) 233–247.

[14] H. Duclohier, G. Molle, J. Dugast, G. Spach, Prolines are not essential
residues in the ”barrel-stave” model for ion channels induced by alame-
thicin analogues., Biophys. J. 63 (3) (1992) 868–873.

[15] D. Laver, The barrel-stave model as applied to alamethicin and its analogs

reevaluated., Biophys. J. 66 (2 Pt 1) (1994) 355–359.

[16] R. Cantor, Size distribution of barrel-stave aggregates of membrane pep-
tides: inﬂuence of the bilayer lateral pressure proﬁle., Biophys. J. 82 (5)
(2002) 2520–2525.

[17] H. Duclohier, H. Wr´oblewski, Voltage-dependent pore formation and
antimicrobial activity by alamethicin and analogues., J. Membr. Biol.
184 (1) (2001) 1–12.

[18] M. Eisenberg, J. Hal, C. Mead, The nature of the voltage-dependent con-
ductance induced by alamethicin in black lipid membranes., J. Membr.
Biol. 14 (1) (1973) 143–176.

[19] W. Hanke, G. Boheim, The lowest conductance state of the alamethicin

pore., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 596 (3) (1980) 456–462.

[20] S. L. Keller, S. M. Bezrukov, S. M. Gruner, M. W. Tate, I. Vodyanoy,
V. A. Parsegian, Probability of alamethicin conductance states varies with
nonlamellar tendency of bilayer phospholipids., Biophys. J. 65 (1993)
23–27.

[21] R. Taylor, R. de Levie, ”Reversed” alamethicin conductance in lipid bi-

layers., Biophys. J. 59 (4) (1991) 873–879.

[22] V. P. Ivanova, T. Heimburg, Histogram method to obtain heat capacities in
lipid monolayers, curved bilayers, and membranes containing peptides.,
Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 1914–25.

[23] V. P. Ivanova, I. M. Makarov, T. E. Sch¨affer, T. Heimburg, Analyzing heat
capacity proﬁles of peptide-containing membranes: cluster formation of
gramicidin A., Biophys. J. 84 (2003) 2427–39.

[24] T. B. Pedersen, T. Kaasgaard, M. . Jensen, S. Frokjaer, O. G. Mouritsen,
K. Jørgensen, Phase behavior and nanoscale structure of phospholipid
membranes incorporated with acylated C14-peptides., Biophys. J. 89 (4)
(2005) 2494–2503.

[25] T. Heimburg, R. L. Biltonen, A Monte Carlo simulation study of protein-

induced heat capacity changes., Biophys. J. 70 (1996) 84–96.

[26] Y. P. Zhang, R. N. Lewis, R. S. Hodges, R. N. McElhaney, Peptide models
of helical hydrophobic transmembrane segments of membrane proteins.
2. Differential scanning calorimetric and FTIR spectroscopic studies of
the interaction of Ac-K2-(LA)12-K2-amide with phosphatidylcholine bi-
layers., Biochemistry 34 (7) (1995) 2362–2371.

[27] O. G. Mouritsen, M. Bloom, Models of lipid-protein interactions in mem-

branes., Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 22 (1993) 145–71.

[28] M. Ø. Jensen, O. G. Mouritsen, Lipids do inﬂuence protein function —
the hydrophobic matching hypothesis revisited., Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1666 (2004) 205– 226.

[29] P. Hansma, J. Cleveland, M. Radmacher, D. Walters, P. Hillner,
M. Bezanilla, M. Fritz, D. Vie, H. Hansma, C. Parter, J. Massie, L. Fuku-
naga, J. Gurley, V. Elings, Tapping mode atomic force microscopy in
liquids, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64 (13) (1994) 1738–1740.

10

[30] A. Janshoff, C. Steinem, Scanning force microscopy of artiﬁcial mem-

branes., Chembiochem 2 (11) (2001) 798–808.

[31] S. D. Connell, D. A. Smith, The atomic force microscope as a tool for
studying phase separation in lipid membranes., Mol Membr Biol 23 (1)
(2006) 17–28.

[32] B. de Kruijff, J. A. Killian, D. N. Ganchev, H. A. Rinia, E. Sparr, Striated
domains: self-organizing ordered assemblies of transmembrane alpha-
helical peptides and lipids in bilayers., Biol Chem 387 (3) (2006) 235–
241.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/BC.2006.031

[33] L. K. Nielsen, A. Vishnyakov, K. Jørgensen, T. Bjørnholm, O. G. Mourit-
sen, Nanometre-scale structure of ﬂuid lipid membranes., J. Phys. Con-
dens. Matter 12 (8A) (2000) A309–A314.

[34] F. Tokumasu, A. J. Jin, G. W. Feigenson, J. A. Dvorak, Nanoscopic lipid
domain dynamics revealed by atomic force microscopy., Biophys. J. 84
(2003) 2609–18.

[35] C. Leidy, T. Kaasgaard, J. H. Crowe, O. G. Mouritsen, K. Jørgensen.,
Ripples and the formation of anisotropic lipid domains:
imaging two-
component supported double bilayers by atomic force microscopy., Bio-
phys. J. 83 (2002) 2625–2633.

[36] H. A. Rinia, B. de Kruiji, Imaging domains in model membranes with

atomic force microscopy., FEBS Lett. 504 (2001) 194–199.

[37] T. Kaasgaard, C. Leidy, J. H. Crowe, O. G. Mouritsen, K. Jørgensen,
Temperature-controlled structure and kinetics of ripple phases in one- and
two-component supported lipid bilayers., Biophys. J. 85 (1) (2003) 350–
360.

[38] J. Mou, D. Czajkowsky, Z.Shao, Gramicidin A aggregation in supported
gel state phosphatidylcholine bilayers., Biochemistry 35 (10) (1996)
3222–3226.

[39] V. V. Plotnikov, J. M. Brandts, L.-N. Lin, J. F. Brandts, A new ultrasensi-
tive scanning calorimeter, Anal. Biochem. 250 (2) (1997) 237–244.

[40] R. C. MacDonald, R. I. MacDonald, B. P. M. Menco, K. Takeshita, N. K.
Subbarao, L. rong Hu, Small-volume extrusion apparatus for preparation
of large, unilamellar vesicles, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1061 (1991) 297–
303.

[41] G. Binnig, C. Quate, C. Gerber, Atomic force microscope, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 56 (9) (1986) 930–933.

[42] Z. Shao, J. Yang, Progress in high resolution atomic force microscopy in

biology, Q. Rev. Biophys. 28 (2) (1995) 195–251.

[43] J. F. Nagle, Theory of the main lipid bilayer phase transition., Ann. Rev.

Phys. Chem. 31 (1980) 157–195.

[44] L. Makowski, J. Li, Topics in Molecular and structural Biology:
Biomembrane Structure and Function., Weinheim, 1984, Ch. X-ray
diffraction and electron microscope studies of the molecular structure of
biological membranes., pp. 43–166.

[45] L. K. Tamm, H. M. McConnell, Supported phospholipid bilayers., Bio-

phys. J. 47 (1) (1985) 105–113.

[46] J. Mou,

J. Yang, Z. Shao, Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
(C4H11NO3) induced a ripple phase in supported unilamellar phospho-
lipid bilayers., Biochemistry 33 (15) (1994) 4439–43.

[47] T. Heimburg, Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynamics. Esti-
mation of the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close to the
chain melting transition from calorimetry., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1415
(1998) 147–162.

[48] A. Spaar, C. M¨unster, T. Salditt, Conformation of peptides in lipid mem-
branes studied by X-Ray grazing incidence scattering., Biophys. J. 87
(2004) 396–407.

[49] M. F. Schneider, D. Marsh, W. Jahn, B. Kloesgen, T. Heimburg, Network
formation of lipid membranes: triggering structural transitions by chain
melting., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96 (25) (1999) 14312–7.

[50] L. Yang, T. A. Harroun, T. M. Weiss, L. Ding, H. W. Huang, Barrel-stave
model or toroidal model? A case study on melittin pores., Biophys. J.
81 (3) (2001) 1475–1485.

11

