6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The thermodynamics of general anesthesia

Thomas Heimburg,∗ and Andrew D. Jackson
The Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
∗corresponding author, theimbu@nbi.dk

keywords: anesthetics, freezing point depression, E.coli, lipid membranes, pressure reversal, nerves

It is known that the action of general anesthetics is proportional to their partition coefﬁcient in lipid membranes (Meyer-Overton
rule). This solubility is, however, directly related to the depression of the temperature of the melting transition found close to
body temperature in biomembranes. We propose a thermodynamic extension of the Meyer-Overton rule which is based on free
energy changes in the system and thus automatically incorporates the effects of melting point depression. This model provides a
quantitative explanation of the pressure reversal of anesthesia. Further, it explains why inﬂammation and the addition of divalent
cations reduce the effectiveness of anesthesia.

Introduction

More than 100 years ago Hans Meyer in Marburg [1] and Char-
les Ernest Overton in Z¨urich [2] independently found that the
action of general anesthetics is related to their partition coef-
ﬁcient between water and olive oil. Overton performed exper-
iments on tadpoles and recorded the critical drug concentra-
tion at which they stopped swimming. Assuming that the sol-
ubility of these anesthetics in olive oil is proportional to that
in biomembranes, he suggested that this critical concentration
corresponded to a ﬁxed concentration in biomembranes. Small
molecules, as different as nitrous oxide, chloroform, octanol,
diethylether, procaine, and even the noble gas xenon, all act
as anesthetics. Overton noted that this action is completely
unspeciﬁc, i.e. dependent only on the solubility of the anes-
thetic in oil and independent of its chemical nature. Surpris-
ingly, this ﬁnding is still valid for general and local anesthetics
[2, 3, 4, 5] but remains unexplained. Overton concluded that
this non-speciﬁcity requires a single mechanism based on phys-
ical chemistry and not on the molecular structure of the drugs.
Although the close relation between anesthetic effect and sol-
ubility in lipids led many scientists to believe that anesthetic
action is lipid-related, no model was proposed by Meyer and
Overton or by later research. It is known, however, that lipid
melting transitions are lowered in the presence of anesthetics
[6].

In the absence of a satisfactory physiological membrane
mechanism, many others prefer to view the action of anesthet-
ics as due to speciﬁc effects on proteins, e.g. sodium chan-
nels or luciferase [7, 8, 9]. Since anesthetics act on nerves and
the Hodgkin-Huxley theory for the action potential is based on
the opening and closing of ion channels, it seems natural to at-
tribute the action of anesthetics to interactions with these chan-
nels. Some anesthetics show a stereospeciﬁcity indicating that
the effective anesthetic concentration (ED50) is different for the

two chiral forms even though the partition coefﬁcient is not af-
fected to the same degree [10]. In this regard, however, we note
that lipid molecules are also chiral. While it widely believed
that local anesthetics are sodium channel blockers, a satisfac-
tory general model of how anesthetics act on proteins is again
lacking. The action of anesthetics is still mysterious. Some
lipid and protein theories on anesthesia are reviewed in [11, 7].
The general absence of speciﬁcity and the strong corre-
lation between solubility in lipid membranes and anesthetic
action seems to speak against speciﬁc binding and a protein
mechanism. On the other hand, there is clear evidence that the
action of some proteins is inﬂuenced by anesthetics. Data on
the inﬂuence of anesthetics on luciferase and on Na- and K-
channels are summarized in [12] and suggest that the action
of lipids and that of proteins are coupled in some simple man-
ner. Cantor has thus proposed that all membrane-soluble sub-
stances alter the lateral pressure in the hydrocarbon region and
thereby inﬂuence the structure of proteins [13, 14, 15]. Lee
proposed a coupling of protein function to the transition tem-
perature of a lipid annulus at the protein interface [16]. While
such mechanisms may provide a control of protein function, it
is nevertheless remarkable that all animals are affected to the
same degree by anesthetics, suggesting that anesthetic action
is largely independent of the speciﬁc protein composition of
membranes. (See [2], foreword to the English edition.) In ad-
dition to their effect on nerves, anesthetics also change mem-
brane properties such as permeability and/or the hemolysis of
erythrocytes [12, 5]. This indicates the need for a more general
view of anesthetic action.

In this paper we focus on a thermodynamic description of
general anesthesia based on lipid properties. We recognize that
this can seem heretical given the dominance of the ion chan-
nel picture. Nevertheless, there are a variety of reasons for
considering a macroscopic thermodynamic view. The strik-
ing fact that noble gases can act as general anesthetics speaks

1

against speciﬁc binding to macromolecules. In particular, the
Meyer-Overton rule would require all anesthetics to have ex-
actly the same partition coefﬁcient between lipid membrane
and protein binding sites for all relevant proteins. It is difﬁcult
to imagine that nature provides binding sites for such a vari-
ety of molecules on the same protein in precisely such a man-
ner that binding afﬁnity is independent of chemical nature [17].
An acceptable description should account for this evident lack
of speciﬁcity, and this suggests the utility of thermodynamic ar-
guments. Moreover, it is to be emphasized that thermodynam-
ics is not inimical to microscopic (e.g., ion-channel) descrip-
tions of the same phenomena. No one would claim, for exam-
ple, that the manifest successes of thermodynamics in describ-
ing the properties of real gases in any way contradicts the fact
that they are composed of interacting atoms. Thermodynamics
rather recognizes that many macroscopic phenomena are inde-
pendent of such microscopic details and that a large number of
microscopic systems can display features which are both quali-
tatively and quantitatively susceptible to more generic methods.
Precisely the absence of detail means that thermodynamic ap-
proaches are often capable of making testable quantitative pre-
dictions which are often inaccessible to or obscured by more
microscopic models. Thus, we wish to propose a simple ther-
modynamic explanation of the Meyer-Overton rule based on
the well-known physical chemical phenomenon of freezing-
point depression. We will show that this picture has the ben-
eﬁt of providing an immediate and intuitive mechanism for the
pressure reversal of anesthesia as a consequence of the pressure-
induced elevation of the melting point in lipid membranes and
can explain the effects of inﬂammation and divalent cations on
anesthetic action.

Materials and Methods

Lipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Birmingham,
AL) and used without further puriﬁcation. Octanol was pur-
chased from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). Multilamellar lipid
dispersions (5mM, buffer: 2mM Hepes, pH 7.4, octanol con-
centration adjusted) were prepared by vortexing the lipid dis-
persions above the phase transition temperature of the lipid. We
also performed experiments with halothane and other anesthet-
ics that yielded results similar to those of octanol. These data
are not shown here.

E. coli bacteria (XL1 blue with tetracycline resistance) and
bacillus subtilis were grown in a LB-medium at 37 ◦C. The bac-
terial membranes were then disrupted in a French Press at 1200
bar (Gaulin, APV Homogeniser GmbH, L¨ubeck, Germany) and
centrifuged at low speed in a desk centrifuge to remove solid
impurities. The remaining supernatant was centrifuged at high
speed in an Beckman ultracentrifuge (50000 rpm) in a Ti70 ro-
tor to separate the membranes from soluble proteins and nucleic
acids. This membrane fraction was measured in a calorimeter.
Lipid melting peaks and protein unfolding can easily be distin-

guished in pressure calorimetry due to their characteristic pres-
sure dependences. The pressure dependence of lipid transitions
is much higher than that of proteins and nearly independent
of the lipid or lipid mixture [18]. Further, in contrast to lipid
transitions, the heat unfolding of the proteins is not reversible.
More details regarding the E. coli measurements are given in an
MSc. thesis [19] and will be published elsewhere.

Heat capacity proﬁles were obtained using a VP-scanning
calorimeter (MicroCal, Northampton, MA) at scan rates of 5
deg/hr (lipid vesicles) and 30 deg/hr for E. coli membranes.

To calculate the theoretical heat capacity proﬁles we used
ideal solution theory, described in [20]. It was assumed that the
anesthetic is ideally miscible with the ﬂuid phase and immisci-
ble in the gel phase. These assumptions are in agreement with
experiment. Due to the partition coefﬁcient in the membrane
most of the anesthetic is found in the membrane (P=200 for
DPPC membranes [21]) if the amount of the aqueous phase is
small. Under such conditions, the anesthetic concentration in
the ﬂuid phase changes when lowering the temperature below
the onset of the melting transition. The chemical potentials of
the gel and the ﬂuid lipid membrane are given by

µg = µg
0

,

µf = µf

0 + RT ln(1 − xA)

(1)

where xA is the molar fraction of anesthetics in the membrane.
µg
0 and µf
0 are the standard state chemical potentials that obey
the relation

µf
0 − µg

0 = ∆H

1 − T

(cid:18)

Tm (cid:19)

(2)

with the excess enthalpy of the transition, ∆H, and the melting
temperature, Tm. With these assumptions, one can calculate
phase boundaries and melting point depression (see next sec-
tion). Using the lever rule one can deduce the the relative frac-
tions of gel and ﬂuid phase as a function of temperature [20].
When the fraction of ﬂuid phase, ff luid, is multiplied with the
excess melting enthalpy, ∆H, one obtains the enthalpy as a
function of temperature, ∆H(T ) = ff luid · ∆H. The excess
heat capacity is the derivative of this function. For details see
also [22].

Theory and results

The unspeciﬁc effect of anesthetics and other small solutes
on lipid melting transitions Biological membranes are
known to undergo a phase transition from a low-temperature
solid-ordered (SO or gel) phase to a liquid-disordered (LD or
ﬂuid) phase at temperatures slightly below physiological tem-
perature. This transition involves a volume change of ≈ 4%
and an area change of ≈ 25%. It is also known empirically that
nerve pulses are accompanied by density and heat [23] changes
consistent with forcing the lipid mixture through ≈ 85% of this

2

phase transition [24, 25]. When supplemented by the empir-
ical observation that the sound velocity in lipid mixtures in-
creases with frequency, this fact leads to the robust prediction
that localized piezo-electric pulses (or “solitons”) can propa-
gate stably in biological membranes [26, 27]. The lipid melt-
ing transition is essential for the existence of solitons. In the
transition from the LD to the SO phase, membranes become
more compressible and also permeable for ions and molecules
[28, 29, 30]. The biological membrane thus resembles a spring
that becomes softer upon compression. This non-linearity is
necessary for the formation of solitons, which can propagate in
cylindrical membranes without distortion even in the presence
of signiﬁcant noise. Such a description can account naturally
for the reversible heat and mechanical features of nerve pulses
and also predicts a pulse propagation velocity of ≈ 100 m/s,
which is comparable to that in myelinated nerves.

Given the existence of a lipid phase transition and its possi-
ble biological relevance, it is tempting to speculate that it plays
a functional role in unspeciﬁc anesthetic effects and that it is
central to understanding the Meyer-Overton rule. The basis for
such speculation is elementary. The introduction of any solute
(i.e., anesthetic) into membranes leads to a lowering of the tem-
perature of the melting transition which is proportional to the
molar concentration of the solute and largely independent of its
chemical nature.

Small molecules, peptides and proteins are not in general
readily soluble in the SO-phase due to its crystalline structure.
They are much more soluble in the LD phase. This leads to a
reduction of melting points, demonstrated in Fig. 1 for the arti-
ﬁcial lipid DPPC in the presence of the local anesthetic octanol.
This effect is known as freezing point depression [31]. For ex-
ample, the solubility of NaCl is high in water and low in ice.
Thus, salt lowers the freezing point of water. This effect is due
to the difference in mixing entropy of the ions in water and ice.
For low solute concentrations and with the reasonable assump-
tions of perfect miscibility of an anesthetic in the LD phase and
immiscibility in the SO phase, one arrives at the following rela-
tion between melting point depression and solute concentration
[31, 25]:

∆Tm = −

RT 2
m
∆H (cid:19)

(cid:18)

xA ,

(3)

where xA is the molar fraction of anesthetic in the membrane,
∆H is the lipid melting enthalpy (approximately 35 kJ/mol for
DPPC) and Tm is the lipid melting temperature (314.3 K for
DPPC,and 295 K for native E.coli membranes). An anesthetic
concentration of 1 mol% in the ﬂuid membrane leads to ∆Tm =
−0.24 K.

The heat capacity can be calculated as a function of tem-
perature for various solute concentrations using ideal solution
theory [20] with the assumption of complete insolubility in the
solid phase (Fig. 1, top). The peak in this ﬁgure corresponds
to the phase transition. We have assumed a small amount of
the water phase (as used experimentally) and an accumulation

of anesthetics in the ﬂuid phase. This leads to the broadening
of the proﬁles, which are remarkably similarity to experimental
results obtained for DPPC vesicles in the presence of various
as shown in the lower panel. The quality of this agreement
indicates that thermodynamic properties (e.g., the Gibbs free
energy) of the lipid mixture are dominated by the lipid phase
transition. We will make use of this fact below.

The anesthetic concentration in membranes at critical do-
sage can be calculated using the partition coefﬁcient, P , ex-
tracted from data collected in [12] for water-soluble anesthetics
and tadpole anesthesia. Solvents include octanol/water, PC or
egg-PC/water, and erythrocyte or PC+cholesterol/water. This
data includes 28 separate solute/solvent combinations for which
the partition coefﬁcients vary by a factor of 7000. Log-log
plots of P versus ED50, deﬁned as the concentration in mo-
lar units at which 50% of tadpoles are immobilized, reveal that
the data is consistent within error with a straight line of slope
−1. The Meyer-Overton rule is fulﬁlled independent of the ref-
erence system. Additional modern conﬁrmation of the Meyer-
Overton rule can be found in [6] and [2] (foreword to the En-
glish edition). The partition coefﬁcient of membranes high in
cholesterol is smaller than that of cholesterol-free membranes.
Since nerves have a relatively low cholesterol content (i.e., less
than 10%), we will use the partition coefﬁcient in PC or Egg-
PC as a reference in the following. The assumption of linear
dependence of anesthesia on the partition coefﬁcient is an ide-
alization. Characteristic deviations are roughly a factor of two
(comparable to that found for different chiral forms) and are not
large given the full range of partition coefﬁcients spanned by
the data. We use only data for tadpole narcosis, where the sig-
nature of anesthesia is unambiguous. A least-squares ﬁt yields

ln(P ) = −3.38−ln(ED50)

for PC or egg-PC/water. (4)

The molar fraction of anesthetics in the ﬂuid membrane at anes-
thetic dose is readily determined using eq. 4 as

xA = P (ED50)Vl ,

(5)

where the molar volume of ﬂuid lipids, Vl, is taken here to be
0.750 l/mol. This yields a membrane concentration of about
2.6 mol% of anesthetics in egg-PC membranes independent
of anesthetic. According to eq. 3 this corresponds to ∆Tm ≈
−0.60 K at anesthetic dose for tadpoles. Kharakoz [6] obtained
∆Tm ≈ −0.53 K directly from data for a series of alkanols,
which corresponds to an anesthetic concentration of 2.3 mol%
in membranes. The striking agreement of these results indicates
that the freezing point depression of eq. 3 provides an adequate
description of the experimental shifts in Tm.

The phenomenon of melting point depression, illustrated
here for octanol, allows us to re-express the Meyer-Overton
rule as: The efﬁcacy of a general anesthetic is determined by
its ability to lower the lipid transition temperature. Deviations
from the rule usually indicate that the assumptions of ideal
mixing in the ﬂuid phase and/or no mixing in the solid lipid

3

also Fig. 2. Luciferase, which is regarded as a model protein
for general anesthesia, does not display pressure reversal [39].

Free energy changes Although the internal energy (or en-
thalpy) of a lipid membrane above the melting temperature is
insensitive to changes in the lipid transition temperature, the
associated free energy change has signiﬁcant temperature de-
pendence. Given the lipid melting enthalpy, ∆H, the entropy
change associated with the transition is ∆S = ∆H/Tm. The
difference between the free energies of the LD and SO phases
at a body temperature T > Tm, ∆G(T ), is thus given as

∆G(T ) ≈ ∆H

Tm − T

(cid:18)

Tm (cid:19)

,

(7)

which is explicitly sensitive to changes in T . Including the ef-
fects of anesthetics and a hydrostatic pressure, this difference
in the Gibbs free energy for membranes becomes

∆G(T, ∆p) ≈ ∆H

Tm − T
Tm

(cid:18)

− RT
∆H

xA + γV ∆p

T
Tm (cid:19)

,

(8)
where Tm is the melting temperature of the membrane in the
absence of anesthetics and ∆p is the excess hydrostatic pres-
sure. Obviously, eq.
(8) can be extended to include the ef-
fects of other relevant intensive thermodynamic variables such
as the chemical potentials of hydrogen ions or calcium. The
Meyer-Overton rule indicates that the free energy difference is
increased by ≈ 5% by the addition of a critical dose of anesthet-
ics. Since this energy must be supplied from chemical sources,
it is natural to postulate that equal values of ∆G(T, ∆p) will
produce equal anesthetic effect. This postulate represents an
extension of the Meyer-Overton rule, and eq. 8 leads to a vari-
ety of speciﬁc and quantitative predictions regarding anesthetic
action and other phenomenon governed by this phase transition.

Pressure reversal of anesthesia From eq. (8), the pressure
required to reverse the action of an anesthetic is

∆p ≈ 1
γv

RTm
∆H

xA .

(9)

The hydrostatic pressure required to reverse the action of anes-
thetics on the phase transition is 9.6 bar/mol% using the values
of ∆H and Tm appropriate for DPPC. Here and below, the re-
versal of anesthetic effect would be complete if the heat capac-
ities shown in ﬁgure 1 were of zero width. In practice, this re-
versal is only approximate due to the broadening of the proﬁles.
Pressure reversal of anesthesia was ﬁrst demonstrated by John-
son and Flagler [34]. They anesthetized tadpoles in 3-6 vol%
ethanol. A hydrostatic pressure of 140-350 bars was found to
reverse anesthesia. According to [12], 190mM of ethanol (1.1
vol%) in the aqueous phase is necessary for tadpole narcosis.
This means that about 3-6 times the anesthetic ethanol concen-
tration was used in [34]. The concentration of ethanol in the
membrane in Johnson and Flagler’s experiments was therefore

4

Figure 1: The effect of octanol on the phase transition of
DPPC vesicles. Bottom: Calorimetric data with various
octanol concentrations in the membrane. Top: Calori-
metric proﬁles calculated for the same membrane con-
centrations of a solute assuming ideal mixing in the ﬂuid
phase and no mixing in the gel phase. The high tem-
perature end of the transition proﬁle corresponds to the
temperature calculated for melting point depression. The
calculation assumes a ﬁnite bulk ﬂuid phase. This leads
to an accumulation of anesthetics in the ﬂuid phase as the
temperature is lowered and to an asymmetric broadening
of the cp proﬁle.

In particular, small no-
phase are not quantitatively correct.
ble gases atoms are also likely to dissolve in the solid lipid
phase. Large anesthetics may display phase behavior on their
own, i.e., they may not mix ideally in ﬂuid lipids. In the fol-
lowing, we will be concerned with anesthetics that do follow
the Meyer-Overton rule. It is our expectation that the thermo-
dynamic consequences of Cantor’s model [13, 14, 32] will be
consistent with our picture.

The effect of pressure on transitions Anesthetics action can
be reversed by hydrostatic pressure [33]. In tadpoles, a bulk
pressure of 140-350 bars reverses the action of 3 -6 vol% etha-
nol narcosis [34]. It has been suggested that this effect is related
to the chain melting transition of lipid membranes [35, 20, 36,
37]. Melting transitions move to higher temperatures with bulk
pressure, ∆p, due to the fact that the volume of membranes in
the SO phase is reduced by about 4%. The shift is given as

∆Tm = γv∆p Tm .

(6)

Here, γv = 7.8 · 10−10 m2/N is constant within errors for a
variety of artiﬁcial and biological membranes [38, 18]. See

of these charges are protonated, and the electrostatic potential
of the lipid membrane is reduced. Complete protonation in-
creases the melting temperature by approximately 20 K. The
effects of pH and ionic strength on melting transitions have
been carefully investigated by [41, 42]. While these effects
depend on the precise composition of the membrane and on
ionic strength, they can be calculated using Debye-H¨uckel the-
ory or determined empirically. For example, the temperature
of the melting transition in native E.coli membranes (in the pH
range between 5 and 9) is raised by about 1.8 degrees if pH is
lowered by one unit (Fig.2). This shift is approximately that
which is produced by 72 bars hydrostatic pressure. Interest-
ingly, it is known that inﬂammation leads to the failure of anes-
thesia. The related lowering of pH in inﬂamed tissue, i.e., on
the order of 0.5 pH units [43], is widely assumed to be respon-
sible. According to the above, the lowering of pH from 7 to
6.5 leads to ∆Tm = +0.9 K, which is sufﬁcient to reverse the
action of anesthetics at the typical critical dose corresponding
to ∆Tm = −0.6 K.

Salts can also effect the melting transition through, e.g., the
binding of divalent cations such as Mg++ and Ca++. These
ions shift the melting temperatures of both charged and un-
charged lipids to higher temperatures. The presence of such
ions thus lowers the effectiveness of anesthetics, and appropri-
ate functions of pH and salt concentration should be added to
the right side of eq.(8).

Temperature effects Many processes in biology respond di-
rectly to temperature changes. Therefore it can be difﬁcult to
isolate individual temperature effects in vivo. It has been shown
by [44, 45] that cooling can trigger the action potential whereas
heating inhibits the nerve pulse.
If the body temperature is
changed from T to T + ∆T , the Gibbs free energy of the mem-
brane also changes. The action of anesthetics can be reversed
by changing body temperature by

∆T ≈ −

RT 2
m
∆H (cid:19)

(cid:18)

xA .

(10)

The effect of 2.6 mol% anesthetics is thus reversed by a 0.6 K
reduction of the body temperature for the parameters of DPPC
membranes. Interestingly, a well-known ﬁnding in clinical anes-
thesiology is hypothermia leading to a lowering of the body-
temperature during narcosis [46]. Conversely, the same argu-
ments say an equal rise in body temperature, e.g., by fever,
should produce the same effects as a critical anesthetic does.
Since this is not the case, a rise in body temperature must be
accompanied by other thermodynamic changes which tend to
counter this increase in the free energy difference (e.g. pH
changes) if our thermodynamic picture is to be maintained.
Further, a lowering of the temperature below the phase transi-
tion temperature (∆T more than −15 K) would lead to a com-
plete cessation of nerve activity as found in clinical experiments
[47]. Note that the chemical composition of lipids can also

Figure 2: Heat capacity proﬁles of native E.coli mem-
branes. Top: At 37◦ C. The growth temperature is indi-
cated. The large peak below growth temperature corre-
sponds to lipid melting. The smaller peaks above growth
temperature correspond to protein unfolding. Center:
The heat capacity as a function of T at a hydrostatic pres-
sure of 1 bar and 180 bar. The pressure induced shift
is ≈3.5 K. Bottom: Heat capacities for the same mem-
branes at various pH values. The transition temperature
increases by about 5.3 K when the pH is reduced from 7.4
to 5.0. Scans were halted at 40-43 ◦ C to prevent protein
unfolding.

7.5-15 mol%. According to eq.3, these concentrations corre-
spond to lowering Tm by 1.8-3.6 K. From eq.9, the pressure
necessary to reverse this anesthetic effect is 72-148 bars. Con-
sidering the uncertainty of the partition coefﬁcient for real bi-
ological membranes (which depends on the precise lipid mix-
ture), this is remarkably close to the order of the values found
by [34]. The fact the pressure increases Tm may be related to
the observation that nerves ﬁre spontaneously at high pressures
[40].

Effects of pH and salts
Ions also change the free energy.
Some 10% of the lipids of biological membranes are negatively
charged, primarily on the inner membrane. At lower pH, some

5

change in response to changes in other thermodynamic vari-
ables. It is well documented that the lipid composition and the
melting temperatures of bacterial membranes change as a re-
sponse to changing growth temperature (e.g. [48]. E.coli mem-
branes grown at different temperature shift their melting tem-
peratures to maintain a constant distance to growth temperature
(unpublished data from our laboratory)).

Acknowledgment We thank Prof. Benny Lautrup (Niels Bohr
Institute) for critical discussions. We also thank D. Pollakowski
(Niels Bohr Institute) and Dr. M. Konrad (G¨ottingen) for per-
mission to use their data on E.coli membranes prior to its de-
tailed publication. We also thank Dr. D. Kharakoz for making
his 2001 paper available to us.

Conclusion

We have proposed an elementary thermodynamic description
of the action of general anesthesia according to which constant
anesthetic effects are predicted whenever external thermody-
namic variables (e.g., solute concentration, pressure, tempera-
ture, pH and salt concentration) are adjusted to maintain con-
stant values of the free energy difference between the liquid and
gel phases of lipid membranes. We have demonstrated that the
heat capacity and free energy of biomembranes are dominated
by the well-known membrane melting transition, which is thus
seen to play a central role in anesthetic action. Indeed, the ef-
fect of an anesthetic is due solely to its ability to depress the
melting point of lipid membranes, which depends on its solu-
bility in lipid mixtures but is otherwise independent of its chem-
ical nature. The basis for the familiar Meyer-Overton rule thus
lies in the thermodynamics of biological membranes in general
and the properties of the lipid phase transition in particular. The
lowering of the membrane melting point results in a change of
the free energy of the lipid membrane, which is proportional to
the difference between body temperature and the melting tem-
perature of the membrane. This temperature difference, which
is on the order of 15 K, is to be compared with the shift in melt-
ing point temperature of ≈ -0.6 K at a typical critical anesthetic
dose. Anesthetic effect can be reversed in a quantitatively pre-
dictable manner by any mechanism that raises the transition
temperature and restores the free energy difference to its orig-
inal value. Such mechanisms include hydrostatic pressure, a
decrease of pH, an increase of calcium concentration, or the
lowering the body temperature. (The hydrostatic pressure nec-
essary to reverse anesthesia is on the order of 24 bars, the pH
change on the order of 0.4 pH units, and the hypothermic rever-
sal of anesthesia is about 0.6 K.) While these effects are well-
documented, they have not previously been placed in common
framework. Although we do not question the importance of a
better understanding of the microscopic mechanisms underly-
ing general anesthesia, these results support the view that the
thermodynamics of the lipid liquid-gel transition is important
for understanding the macroscopic effects of general anesthetic
action. Finally, we note that a variety of biological phenomena,
including fusion and membrane permeability, may reasonably
be assumed to have a similar connection to this phase transi-
tion and that such assumptions can be tested using approaches
similar to those presented here.

References

[1] Meyer, H. 1899. Zur Theorie der Alkoholnarkose. Erste Mittheilung.
Welche Eigenschaft der An¨asthetica bedingt ihre narkotische Wirkung?
Arch. Exp. Pathol. Pharmakol. 425:109–118.

[2] Overton, C. E., 1901. Jena, Germany. English translation: Studies of
Narcosis, Chapman and Hall, 1991, R. Lipnick, Ed. Studien ¨uber die
Narkose. Verlag Gustav Fischer.

[3] Langerman, L., M. Bansinath, and G. J. Grant. 1994. The partition co-
efﬁcient as a predictor of local anesthetic potency for spinal anesthesia:
Evaluation of ﬁve local anesthetics in a mouse model. Anesth. Analg.
79:490–494.

[4] Kreienb¨uhl, G., 2002. Charles Ernest Overton: Studien ¨uber die
Narkose (1901). Ein beinahe vergessener Pionier der Narkosetheorie. In
An¨asthesie in Z¨urich: 100 Jahre Entwicklung 1901-2001 (Pasch, T., E. R.
Schmid, and A. Zollinger, editors). Inst. An¨asthesiologie, Universit¨ats-
Spital Z¨urich, Z¨urich, 10–14.

[5] Urban, B. W., 2002. Die Meyer-Overton-Regel: Was ist geblieben? In
An¨asthesie in Z¨urich: 100 Jahre Entwicklung 1901-2001 (Pasch, T., E. R.
Schmid, and A. Zollinger, editors). Inst. An¨asthesiologie, Universit¨ats-
Spital Z¨urich, Z¨urich, 15–23.

[6] Kharakoz, D. P. 2001. Phase-transition-driven synaptic exocytosis: A
hypothesis and its physiological and evolutionary implications. Biosci.
Rep. 210:801–830.

[7] Peoples, R. W., C. Li, and F. W. Weight. 1996. Lipid vs protein theories
of alcohol action in the nervous system. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.
36:185–201.

[8] Franks, N. P., and W. R. Lieb. 1994. Molecular and cellular mechanisms

of general anesthesia. Nature 367:607–614.

[9] Franks, N. P., A. Jenkins, E. Conti, W. R. Lieb, and P. Brick. 1998. Struc-
tural basis for the inhibition of ﬁreﬂy luciferase by a general anesthetic.
Biophys. J. 75:2205–2211.

[10] Firestone, L. L., A. S. Janoff, and K. Miller. 1987. Lipid-dependent dif-
ferential effects of stereoisomers of anesthetic alcohols. Biochim. Bio-
phys. Acta .

[11] Roth, S. H. 1979. Physical mechanisms of anesthesia. Ann. Rev. Phar-

macol. Toxicol. 19:159–178.

[12] Firestone, L. L., J. C. Miller, and K. W. Miller, 1986. Tables of physical
and pharmacological properties of anesthetics. In Molecular and cellular
mechanism of anesthetics (Roth, S. H., and K. W. Miller, editors). Plenum
Press, 455–470.

[13] Cantor, R. S. 1997. Lateral pressures in cell membranes: a mechanism

for modulation of protein function. J. Phys. Chem. B 101:1723–1725.

[14] Cantor, R. S. 1997. The lateral pressure proﬁle in membranes: a physical

mechanism of general anesthesia. Biochemistry 36:2339–2344.

[15] Cantor, R. S. 2001. Breaking the Meyer-Overton rule: Predicting effects
of varying stiffness and interfacial activity on the intrinsic potency of
anesthetics. Biophys. J. 80:2284–2297.

[16] Lee, A. G. 1977. Local anesthesia: The interaction between phospho-
lipids and chlorpromazine, propranolol, and practolol. Mol. Pharmacol.
13:474–487.

6

[17] It is unlikely that one protein provides binding sites for all anesthetics.
Therefore, if a protein picture was to be maintained one has to abandon a
unique mechanism for anesthesia (Keith Miller, Harvard Medical School,
private communication, 2006).

[37] Galla, H.-J., and J. R. Trudell. 1980. Asymmetric antagonistic effects of
an inhalation anesthetic and high pressure on the phase transition temper-
ature of dipalmitoyl phosphatidic acid bilayers. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
599:336–340.

[18] Ebel, H., P. Grabitz, and T. Heimburg. 2001. Enthalpy and volume
changes in lipid membranes. i. the proportionality of heat and volume
changes in the lipid melting transition and its implication for the elastic
constants. J. Phys. Chem. B 105:7353–7360.

[38] Heimburg, T. 1998. Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynam-
ics. Estimation of the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close to
the chain melting transition from calorimetry. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1415:147–162.

[19] Pollakowski, D., 2004. Thermodynamische und strukturelle Unter-
suchungen an k¨unstlichen und biologischen Membranen. Grundlegende
Eigenschaften und der Einﬂuss kleiner Molek¨ule. Master’s thesis, Uni-
versity of G¨ottingen.

[20] Lee, A. G. 1977. Lipid phase transitions and phase diagrams. II. Mixtures

involving lipids. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 472:285–344.

[21] Jain, M. K., and J. L. V. Wray. 1978. Partition coefﬁcients of alkanols in

lipid bilayer/water. Biochem. Pharmacol. 275:1294–1295.

[22] Heimburg, T., 2007. Thermal biophysics of membranes. Wiley VCH,

Weinheim, Germany.

[23] Ritchie, J. M., and R. D. Keynes. 1985. The production and absorption of
heat associated with electrical activity in nerve and electric organ. Quart.
Rev. Biophys. 392:451–476.

[24] Kaminoh, Y., N. Kitagawa, S. Nishimura, H. Kamaya, and I. Ueda. 1991.
Two-state model for nerve excitation and local anesthetic action. Ann. N.
Y. Acad. Sci. 625:315–317.

[25] Kaminoh, Y., S. Nishimura, H. Kamaya, and I. Ueda. 1992. Alcohol
interaction with high entropy states of macromolecules: critical tempera-
ture hypothesis for anesthesia cutoff. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1106:335–
343.

[26] Heimburg, T., and A. D. Jackson. 2005. On soliton propagation in
biomembranes and nerves. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:9790–9795.

[27] Lautrup, B., A. D. Jackson, and T. Heimburg. 2006. The stability of

[39] Moss, G. W., W. R. Lieb, and N. P. Franks. 1991. Anesthetic inhibition of
ﬁreﬂy luciferase, a protein model for general anesthesia, does not exhibit
pressure reversal. Biophys. J. 60:1309–1314.

[40] Kendig, J. J., T. M. Schneider, and E. N. Cohen. 1978. Pressure, temper-
ature and repetitive impulse generatin and synaptic transmission. J. Appl.
Physiol. Respir. Envir. Exercise Physiol. 45:742–746.

[41] Tr¨auble, H., and H. Eibl. 1974. Electrostatic effects on lipid phase transi-
tions: Membrane structure and ionic environment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 71:214–219.

[42] Tr¨auble, H., M. Teubner, and H. Eibl. 1976. Electrostatic interactions at
charged lipid membranes. i. effects of ph and univalent cations on mem-
brane structure. Biophys. Chem. 43:319–342.

[43] Punnia-Moorthy, A. 1987. Evaluation of ph changes in inﬂammation of
the subcutaneous air pouch linig in the rat, induced by carreenan, dextran
and staphylococcus aureus. J. Oral Pathol. 16:36–44.

[44] Spyropoulos, C. S. 1961. Initiation and abolition of electrical response
of nerve ﬁber by thermal and chemical means. Am. J. Physiol. 200:203–
208.

[45] Kobatake, Y., I. Tasaki, and A. Watanabe. 1971. Phase transition in

membrane with reference to nerve excitation. Adv. Biophys. 208:1–31.

[46] Abelho, F. J., M. A. Castro, A. M. Neves, N. M. Landeiro, and C. C. San-
tos. 2005. Hypothermia in a surgical intensive care unit. BMC Anesth.
5. Doi:10.1186/1471-2253-5-7.

solitons in biomembranes and nerves. arXiv:physics/0510106 .

[47] Katz, Y., and I. Aharon. 1997. A thermochemical analysis of inhalation

anesthetics. J. Therm. Anal. 50:117–124.

[48] van de Vossenberg, J. L. C. M., A. J. M. Driessen, M. S. da Costa, and
W. N. Konings. 1999. Homeostasis of the membrane proton permeability
in bacillus subtilis grown at different temperatures. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1419:97–104.

[28] Papahadjopoulos, D., K. Jacobson, S. Nir, and T. Isac. 1973. Phase transi-
tions in phospholipid vesicles. ﬂuorescence polarization and permeabil-
ity measurements concerning the effect of temperature and cholesterol.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 311:330–340.

[29] Boheim, G., W. Hanke, and H. Eibl. 1980. Lipid phase transition in
planar bilayer membrane and its effect on carrier- and pore-mediated ion
transport. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77:3403–3407.

[30] Cruzeiro-Hansson, L., and O. G. Mouritsen. 1988. Passive ion perme-
ability of lipid membranes modelled via lipid-domain interfacial area.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 944:63–72.

[31] Silbey, R. J., and R. A. Alberty, 2001. Physical Chemistry. J. Wiley Sons,

New York, third edition edition.

[32] Cantor, R. S. 1999. Solute modulation of conformational equilibria in
intrinsic membrane proteins: Apparent ”cooperativity” without binding.
Biophys. J. 77.

[33] Halsey, M. J., and B. Wardley-Smith. 1975. Pressure reversal of narcosis
produced by anaesthetics, narcotics and transquilizers. Nature 257:811–
813.

[34] Johnson, F. H., and E. A. Flagler. 1950. Hydrostatic pressure reversal of

narcosis in tadpoles. Science 112:91–92.

[35] Trudell, J. R., D. G. Payan, J. H. Chin, and E. N. Cohen. 1975. The antag-
onistic effect of an inhalation anesthetic and high pressure on the phase
diagram pf mixed dipalmitoyl-dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72:210–213.

[36] Kamaya, H., I. Ueda, P. S. Moore, and H. Eyring. 1979. Antagonism be-
tween high pressure and anesthetics in the thermal phase transition of di-
palmitoyl phosphatidylcholine bilayer. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 550:131–
137.

7

