7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The inﬂuence of anesthetics, neurotransmitters
and antibiotics on the relaxation processes in
lipid membranes

Heiko M. Seeger†, Marie L. Gudmundsson and Thomas Heimburg∗
The Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark

In the proximity of melting transitions of artiﬁcial and biological membranes ﬂuctuations in enthalpy, area, volume and
concentration are enhanced. This results in domain formation, changes of the elastic constants, changes in permeability and
slowing down of relaxation processes. In this study we used pressure perturbation calorimetry to investigate the relaxation
time scale after a jump into the melting transition regime of artiﬁcial lipid membranes. This time corresponds to the
characteristic rate of domain growth. The studies were performed on single-component large unilamellar and multilamellar
vesicle systems with and without the addition of small molecules such as general anesthetics, neurotransmitters and
antibiotics. These drugs interact with membranes and affect melting points and proﬁles. In all systems we found that heat
capacity and relaxation times are related to each other in a simple manner. The maximum relaxation time depends on the
cooperativity of the heat capacity proﬁle and decreases with a broadening of the transition. For this reason the inﬂuence of a
drug on the time scale of domain formation processes can be understood on the basis of their inﬂuence on the heat capacity
proﬁle. This allows estimations of the time scale of domain formation processes in biological membranes.

keywords: lipid membrane, phase separation, domain formation, rafts, relaxation, pressure perturbation calorimetry

abbreviations: DSC, differential scanning calorimetry; PPC, pressure perturbation calorimetry; DMPC, 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine;
DPPC, 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine; halothane, 3-bromo-2-nchloro-1,1,1-triﬂuoroethane; serotonin, 5-hydroxytryptamine; MLV, multil-

amellar vesicle; LUV, large unilamellar vesicle

∗corresponding author, theimbu@nbi.dk, http://membranes.nbi.dk
†present address:National Center of CNR-INFM S3, NanoBioLab, Via G. Campi 213/A, 41100 Modena, Italy

Introduction

Artiﬁcial [1, 2, 3] as well biological membranes [1, 4, 5]
display melting transitions. In their vicinity ﬂuctuations in
lipid area, volume, enthalpy and concentration are enhanced.
As a result domains form, the elastic constants are increased
[6, 7] and the permeability is higher [8, 9, 10, 11]. A whole
variety of molecules like proteins, peptides or other small
molecules inﬂuence melting transitions. Nowadays biolog-
ical membranes are seen as being rather heterogenous [12]
instead of being homogenous ﬂuids as suggested in the ﬂuid-
mosaic model [13]. Heterogeneities of biological membranes
due to lipid domain formation have been postulated for many
years [14]. In the biology community, however, domain for-
mation has only gained a stronger interest since the discus-
sion about ‘rafts’ [15, 16]. Rafts are thought to be involved
into trafﬁcking processes [17]. Domain formation in general
is believed to trigger biochemical reaction cascades and to
inﬂuence enzyme activity [18, 19, 20, 21, 22].

Domains can form as a consequence of melting transi-
tions. Already in the 1970s melting transitions were mea-
sured in artiﬁcial [2, 3] and in biological membranes [4, 23]
using differential scanning calorimetry. The increased ﬂuctu-

ations in the melting regime of membranes are accompanied
by changes in the time-scales of the domain formation pro-
cess. Studies on the kinetics of phase transitions in artiﬁcial
membranes mainly use temperature and pressure jump tech-
niques [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31], but also volume pertur-
bation [32, 33, 34, 35, 36], pH or ion concentration changes
[37], ultrasonic measurements [38, 39] and ac-calorimetry
[40] were applied. The number of relaxation processes in
different studies varies from one to ﬁve. Relaxation times
in single-lipid membranes were reported to lie in the range
from ns to min [41], depending on the experiment and the
detection method. Most studies agreed on a slowing down of
relaxation processes in the transition regime [24, 26, 38, 27,
28, 41, 33, 31, 39, 34]. It was also pointed out that maximum
relaxation times were observed at the transition midpoint. In
[31] relaxation processes were connected to macroscopical
ﬂuctuations and it was shown that the relaxation times of the
cooperative processes and the heat capacity are connected in
a simple manner.

In earlier studies, an inﬂuence of cholesterol, dibucaine
and peptides was found [41, 30, 36, 31], but not systemati-
cally investigated. Molecules like general anesthetics, neu-
rotransmitters and antibiotics display a functional role in bi-

1

ological cells. The antibiotic gramicidin A is a hydropho-
bic, channel-forming peptide [42]. Dimers of this peptide
induce channels of an outer diameter of about 5 ˚A that is
mainly permeable for monovalent cations. Neurotransmitters
are molecules which mainly occur in the nerve system, but
can also be found in other parts of the body. They inﬂuence
nerve pulse propagation and are either inhibitory or excita-
tory. An example of an excitory neurotransmitter is sero-
tonin (5-hydroxytryptamine). Neurotransmitters have been
discussed to also act as anesthetics [43]. Anesthesia is the
state when pain, consciousness or other sensations are blocked.
General anesthetics such as 1-octanol or halothane (2-bromo-
2-chloro-1,1,1-triﬂuoroethane) lead to a reversible complete
loss of consciousness and sensation. The action of general
anesthetics is still not fully known. Theories favoring an di-
rect inﬂuence on protein function are at the moment favored
[44, 45, 46], but lipid membrane mediated mechanisms are
also discussed. Ueda and Yoshida [47] claim that anesthet-
ics action results from effects on both proteins and lipids and
they consider the lipid/water interface. Cantor [48, 49] re-
lates anesthetic function to the inﬂuence of anesthetics on the
lateral pressure proﬁle of lipid membranes. Heimburg and
Jackson [50, 51] attribute anesthetic action to the inﬂuence of
anesthetics on the lipid membrane state.

Peptides, neurotransmitters and anesthetics all display sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence on lipid melting transition. This immedi-
ately raises questions about these molecules on the macro-
scopic membrane properties. In this paper, we focussed on
the inﬂuence of anesthetics, neurotransmitters and antibiotics
on the time scales of domain formation processes. This is
an extension of a previous study by Grabitz and collaborators
[31]. Relaxation processes are related to the cooperative ﬂuc-
tuations. More speciﬁcally, it was shown that heat capacity
and relaxation times in pure lipid membranes are proportional
functions. Here, the study is extended towards lipid systems
with the incorporation of drugs. It will be shown that the ad-
dition of these molecules does not change the linear relation
between heat capacity and relaxation times, but systemati-
cally alter the details of the relaxation process. We discuss the
biological importance of our ﬁndings in relation to the inﬂu-
ence of domains on biochemical reaction cascades, enzyme
activity, sorting and trafﬁcking in biological membranes.

Materials and Methods

Sample preparation: Lipids were purchased from Avanti
Polar Lipids (Birmingham/AL, USA) and used without fur-
ther puriﬁcation. All lipid samples were dissolved in a 10
mM Hepes buffer with 1 mM EDTA at pH 7. Samples
of multilamellar vesicles (MLVs) were prepared by adding
buffer to the lipid powder and stirring the solution above the
main phase transition temperature using a magnetic stirrer for
at least one hour. During this time the lipid solution was
vortexed at least three times. Suspensions of large unilamel-

lar vesicles (LUVs) were prepared using an Avestin extruder
system (Avestin Europe GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Sus-
pensions of MLVs were extruded at 320.9 K using a ﬁlter
with a pore size of 100nm. DMPC/ neurotransmitter sys-
tems were made by adding serotonin (Hydrochloride; Sigma-
Aldrich Inc., St. Louis/MO, USA) to the buffer before dis-
solving the lipids in the buffer/neurotransmitter solution. In
the case of DMPC/anesthetics solutions 1-octanol (Sigma-
Aldrich Inc., St. Louis/MO, USA) or halothane (2-Bromo-2-
chloro-1,1,1-triﬂuoroethane, Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis/-
MO, USA) was added to the already prepared suspension of
MLVs. The solution was stirred for another 30 min. DMPC/-
peptide membrane systems were prepared by dissolving the
DMPC lipids and gramicidin A as powder in organic solvent
(dichloromethane: methanol 2:1). After mixing both solu-
tions the lipid/gramicidin A solution was dried through heat-
ing and a light nitrogen or air stream. The sample was kept in
a high vacuum desiccator over night. The rest of the prepara-
tion equaled the one of preparing suspensions of MLVs.

Calorimetry: Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
measurements were performed with a VP-DSC from Micro-
cal (Northhampton/MA, USA) using high feedback mode at
a scan rate of 5K/hr if not indicated otherwise. A concen-
tration of 10 mM was used to measure the excess heat ca-
pacity proﬁle of a sample directly in the calorimeter cell and
determining the transition enthalpy. In other cases sample so-
lutions were ﬁlled into self-built pressure cells (see below).
In these cases concentrations of either 40 mM or 50 mM
were prepared. The capillary volume was not exactly known,
but with the knowledge of the transition enthalpy we could
determine absolute excess heat capacity values. Heat capac-
ity proﬁles of DMPC/gramicidin A mixtures were determined
with scan rates of 1 K/hr. Due to hysteresis effects the scan
rate has an inﬂuence on the temperature of the maximum heat
capacity. Curves were corrected correspondingly. Sample so-
lutions and buffer solutions were degassed for at least 15 min
before the calorimetric experiments to avoid measurement ar-
tifacts arising from possibly evolving gas bubbles.

Pressure perturbation calorimetry: The same calorime-
ter was used for pressure perturbation calorimetry (PPC) ex-
periments in the isothermal mode of the calorimeter. Mea-
surements on solutions of MLVs were performed as previ-
ously described [31]. The sample solution was ﬁlled into a
self-built pressure capillary which can hold pressures up to
500 bar. This capillary was inserted into the sample cell of
the calorimeter. The melting transition regime shifts upon
addition of hydrostatic pressure by about 1K/40bar (see [52]
and [7] with citations therein). This is used to perturb the sys-
tem. Pressure is controlled through addition or release of high
pressure nitrogen by opening and closing manual or solenoid
pressure valves (Nova Swiss, Effretikon, Switzerland). The
change of pressure occurs on a time scale of around 100 ms.
Changing the pressure on the lipid dispersions by
40bar and
an appropriate choice of temperature allowed to jump to dif-

±

2

Figure 1: Left: Representative calorimeter responses after a negative pressure jump. The curves were obtained
after jumps to different temperatures within the lipid melting transition of DMPC vesicles. The further one jumps
through the transition (for negative pressure jumps the higher the temperature) the bigger is the integrated heat
absorption of the lipid membrane (left, upper panel). After normalization of the curves it can be seen that they
decay on different time scales (left, lower panel). Right: Representative temperature change after a positive
pressure jump recorded by a thin thermocouple. The total response is the sum of the response of the water ﬁlled
capillary (instrument response) and the response from the lipid sample (lipid response).

−

−

ferent points of the phase coexistence regime where domains
started to form. Jumps into the transition regime were either
from below the transition (
40 bar; negative pressure jump)
or from above the transition (40bar; positive pressure jump)e.
In the ﬁrst case the signal is endothermic, while in the other
case it is exothermic. After a pressure change the calorimeter
needs to compensate the heat absorption or release to keep
the sample temperature constant. This response contains in-
formation about the relaxation times of the domain formation
process. Representative calorimetric responses after negative
pressure jumps (
40 bar) are shown in the left panel of ﬁg. 1
(top). The curves are results after jumps to different points of
the transition deﬁned by different sample temperatures. The
area below the curves, i.e.
the total heat absorption of the
lipid membranes during the equilibration process increases
the further one jumps through the transition (here: increasing
temperature). The normalized signals show that the relax-
ation process occurs on different time scales (ﬁg. 1, bottom).
A sample cell containing buffer solution also results in a char-
acteristic response. This is the response function of the instru-
ment. The observed calorimetric signal from the equilibration
process is the convolution of the real signal (called the “sam-
ple response”) with the instrument response function. The
response after a pressure jump always contained one small
component that contain the perturbation of the pressure cell

−

itself and small contributions from lipid membrane processes
faster than the resolution of the instrument. The dominant
part of the signal consists of a single exponentially decaying
heat absorption or release from the lipid membranes after a
perturbation. Faster relaxation processes only contribute to a
minor degree to the overall signal (see discussion concerning
Fig. 6). The above method allows a time resolution of about
3

4 s.
The relaxation times of lipid dispersions are related to
the heat capacity. Broader melting proﬁles display smaller
heat capacity values in the transition. Under these conditions
faster relaxation processes are found (Grabitz2002) for which
the resolution of 3
4 s may not be good enough. For this
reason, a reﬁned experimental setup with increased time res-
olution was used especially for measurements on LUV dis-
persion that display melting peaks that are about 10 times
broader than the MLV transitions. We only performed pos-
itive pressure jumps. The pressure release or addition was
controlled by two computer controlled solenoid valves (Nova
Swiss, Effretikon, Switzerland) and the time scale of the pres-
sure relaxation was faster than 90 ms. The pressure cell con-
sisted of two capillaries instead of only one. A K-thermocou-
ple with a grounded hot junction of a diameter of 0.25 mm
(Thermocoax, Stapelfeld, Germany) was put into the sam-
ple capillary of the pressure cell. Relaxation times were de-

−

3

termined from a direct measurement of changes in temper-
ature of the sample solution after the pressure jump. The
thermocouple signal was ampliﬁed by a Nanovolt Preamp
Model 1801 (Keithley Instruments Inc., Cleveland/OH, USA)
and recorded by a Keithley Multimeter 2001 (Keithley Instru-
ments Inc., Cleveland/OH, USA).

As in the case analyzing the calorimeter response the to-
tal temperature change is seen as a convolution of the “instru-
ment response” and the “sample response”. This is displayed
in the right panel of ﬁg. 1. The total temperature change
(solid curve) after a positive pressure jump can be divided
into a change due to the “instrument response” (dotted curve)
and the “lipid response” (dashed curve). The latter one is
again modeled by a convolution of a single exponentially de-
caying heat release of the lipid membrane and the instrument
response. For details we refer to [31, 53]. The contribution
from the sample cell (only ﬁlled with water) was subtracted
from the total temperature change and only the remaining sig-
nal was analyzed.

Pressure perturbation calorimetry experiments were al-
ways conducted on a few successive days. Melting proﬁles
were controlled after each measuring day. During these days
heat capacity curves sometimes broadened slightly or shifted
towards higher or lower temperatures. The shift could be eas-
ily corrected later. Below it will become obvious that a broad-
ening of the curve means that relaxation times are inﬂuenced.
The broadening, however, was small so that the determination
of relaxation times was in the range of experimental error.

Theory

In an earlier paper from our laboratory a theory of the relax-
ation times of lipids in the melting regime was derived on
the grounds of non-equilibrium thermodynamics [31]. This
theory made use of the experimental fact that enthalpy, vol-
ume and area are proportional functions in this temperature
regime. Therefore, perturbation of the lipid samples by tem-
perature, bulk or lateral pressure results in the same relaxation
process. It was found that one expects a proportional relation
between relaxation time and excess heat capacity.

The theory is based on the assumption that the distribution
of enthalpy states at a given temperature can be described by
a Gaussian distribution. This is correct when the system is a
continuous transition that is neither of ﬁrst order nature nor at
a critical point:

P (H

H

) =
i

− h

1
σ√2π

e

− (H−hHi)2
2σ2

,

(1)

is the mean enthalpy and σ2 =
where H is the enthalpy,
2 is the variance. The Gibb’s free energy depends
H 2
h
i
logarithmical on this distribution [54]: G = RT ln P . Using
this one ﬁnds that the entropy S can be approximated as a

H
h

i − h

H

i

harmonic potential:

S(H

H

)
i

− h

≈ −

R(H

H

)2
i

,

− h
2σ2

(2)

where R is the gas constant.

Throughout a melting transition changes in area, volume
and enthalpy are proportional and, therefore, one only ﬁnds
. The ther-
one independent ﬂuctuation given by α = H
i
modynamic force driving the lipid sample back to equilibrium
(after a perturbation) is given by X = dS/d(H
), and
i
− h
the ﬂux of heat by J = d(H
)/dt. This is in fact the
i
observable in our calorimetric experiments. According to On-
sager [55, 56] the ﬂux is proportional to the thermodynamics
force. Therefore

− h

−h

H

H

H

d(H

H

)
i

− h
dt

=

L

−

R(H

H

)
i

)

− h
σ2

(3)

using the phenomenological constant L. This leads to a sim-
ple differential equation that is solved by an exponential de-
cay

t
τ

)

(4)

(H

H

) = (H
i

H

)0
i

exp(

·

≡

−

H

− h

τ =

)2/RT 2
i

− h
introducing the relaxation time τ . Using the identity cp =
σ2/RT 2 (ﬂuctuation theorem) one ar-
(H
− h
rives at

T 2
L
where T is the temperature and L is a phenomenological con-
stant. The constant L has to be obtained from experiments.
For the details of the derivation we refer to [31]. Note, how-
ever, that in the cited paper a factor of RT was omitted in the
derivation so that an unit error occurred. This, however, does
not change the message of the previous paper that relaxation
times and heat capacity are proportional functions.

cp,

(5)

Results

The non-equilibrium thermodynamics theory brieﬂy outlined
above predicts a proportionality between heat capacity and re-
laxation times for the cooperative processes with large excess
heat capacity. Important for this prediction is the cooperative
nature of the process rather than the chemical composition of
the membrane. In [31] it is shown for different one compo-
nent lipid systems (MLV and LUV) and a DMPC/cholesterol
mixture (MLV) that one ﬁnds a linear relationship between
heat capacity and relaxation times in pressure perturbation
calorimetry. Maximum relaxation times are up to about a
minute and they are decreased by the addition of cholesterol
in a manner closely related to the effect of cholesterol on the
heat capacity proﬁle. In the present study we extended the
range of the membrane systems. In particular, we investigated
the inﬂuence of small drugs on domain formation processes
and the related relaxation times. For this it was necessary

4

Figure 2: Heat capacity proﬁles of various multilamellar lipid dispersions in the presence of drugs. Left: DMPC
plus various concentrations of 1-octanol. Center: DMPC plus different concentrations of serotonin Right: DMPC
plus different concentrations of gramicidin A. In all three panels the drugs broaden the lipid melting proﬁle and
shift it to lower temperatures.

resolution of the setup is indicated by a dashed line. Relax-
ation times faster than this experimental response time cannot
be determined accurately.

to improve the time resolution of our calorimetric relaxation
measurements. The latter part is important for large unilamel-
lar membrane systems that display smaller heat capacities and
broader transitions than multilamellar preparations.

First, we determined the inﬂuence of molecules such as
general anesthetics, neurotransmitters and antibiotics on the
melting behavior of lipid membranes by differential scanning
calorimetry. In ﬁg. 2 the heat capacity proﬁles of 50 mM
multilamellar DMPC vesicles with different concentrations
of 1-octanol (left panel), serotonin (center panel) and grami-
cidin A (right panel) are displayed. The transition enthalpy of
these systems was determined to be 21.5 kJ/mol. The gen-
eral ﬁnding is that the addition of the respective molecules
broadened the transition proﬁle and shifted it to lower tem-
peratures. The total melting enthalpy remains unaltered. In
the following we wanted to understand in which way relax-
ation processes were inﬂuenced in the respective systems.

In ﬁg. 3 heat capacity proﬁles and relaxation times of
a 50 mM DMPC (MLV) solution are displayed. The heat
capacity curve shown is the same as in ﬁg. 2. Relaxation
times were determined from measurements using the same
lipid dispersion as for the DSC scans. The melting transi-
tion proﬁle of lipid membranes with increased pressure was
shifted to higher temperatures, whereas the shape of the pro-
ﬁle was not inﬂuenced. Therefore, the relaxation time proﬁle
obtained from positive pressure jumps were temperature cor-
rected with ∆T =
0.9 K (open squares). Results from
negative pressure jumps are given by open circles. The time

−

5

Figure 3: Heat capacity curve (solid curve) of a 50 mM
multilamellar DMPC sample and relaxation times (open
circles and squares) obtained from pressure perturba-
tion experiments on the same sample as measured by the
calorimeter. The different markers refer to different ex-
perimental situations where pressure is released (open
circles) or added (open squares). The change in relax-
ation times correlates nicely with the heat capacity pro-
ﬁle. The dashed line indicates the lower resolution limit
of the experiment (3-4 seconds).

±

Comparison of heat capacity and relaxation times shows
the linear relation of these two functions. In the proximity of
the melting transition relaxation processes slows down. The
1.5) s.
maximum relaxation time measured is about (31.0
With a maximum heat capacity value of 232 kJ/mol K and
the temperature at the transition midpoint of 296.77 K we
found a phenomenological constant (see eq. 5) of (6.6
0.5)
·
108 J K/mol s. The previous experiment was performed
while recording the heat compensation of the calorimeter (with
a time resolution of about 4 seconds). Performing experi-
ments on a new suspension of 40 mM DMPC (MLV) and
evaluating the temperature change with the thermocouple in-
serted into the pressure cell (with a time resolution of about
0.3 seconds) after a positive pressure jump of +15bar yielded
108 J K/mol s.
a phenomenological constant of (6.8
Both phenomenological constants obtained agree within er-
ror with each other. This demonstrates that our two different
setups record the same time scales.

0.3)

±

±

·

In the following we investigated in which way other small
molecules and peptides inﬂuence the relaxation behavior of
lipid membranes. Therefore, we performed experiments ad-
ding different concentrations of the anesthetic 1-octanol, the
neurotransmitter serotonin and the antibiotic gramicidin A to
the DMPC lipid membranes. As seen in ﬁg. 2 these molecules
broadened the melting transition regime and shifted it to lower
temperatures. This has also an inﬂuence on the relaxation be-
havior of the lipid membranes. In ﬁg. 4 measurements on the
three different systems are displayed. Heat capacity proﬁles
are taken from ﬁg. 2. Results were obtained from analyz-
ing the calorimetric response after jumps of
40bar. Results
from negative and positive pressure jumps are not indicated
by different symbols. The dashed line always indicates the
time resolution of the setup. Both heat capacity and relax-
ation time scale of the different panels are different. In all
cases we found a proportionality between heat capacity and
relaxation times. Phenomenological constants were calcu-
108 J K/mol s (DMPC plus 0.1
lated to be (6.3
108 J K/mol s (DMPC plus
wt % 1-octanol), (6.5
0.5)
·
108 J K/mol s (DMPC
0.5 mM serotonin) and (5.8
0.5)
±
plus 1.5 mM gramicidin A), i.e. within error L is independent
of the system. Note that deviations close to 3-4 seconds are
most likely a consequence of the ﬁnite time resolution of the
experiment.

·
±

0.3)

±

±

·

A series of PPC experiments were performed using dif-
ferent concentrations of the respective molecules (data not
shown). The maximum relaxation times obtained and the
phenomenological constants determined are displayed in ta-
ble . As it is seen in ﬁg. 2 the addition of the chosen small
drugs led to a broadening of the heat capacity curves and to a
decrease in the maximum heat capacity value. The maximum
relaxation time was inﬂuenced in the same way as is the max-
imum heat capacity value. The whole relaxation time proﬁle
behaves the same as does the heat capacity curve. The addi-
tion of molecules alter the relaxation behavior of lipid domain

Figure 4: Comparisons between heat capacity proﬁles
(solid curves) and relaxation times (open circles) of dif-
ferent multilamellar DMPC systems.
Top: 50 mM
DMPC plus 0.1 wt % 1-octanol. Center: 50 mM DMPC
plus 0.5 mM serotonin. Bottom: 50 mM DMPC plus
1.5 mM gramicidin. The drugs alter the temperature
dependence of the heat capacity and the magnitude and
temperature dependence of the relaxation times. The
dashed line indicates the resolution limit of the experi-
ment (3-4 seconds).

formation in a systematic way.

Further experiments were conducted on solutions with lar-
ge unilamellar vesicles. We investigated LUVs of DMPC
lipids with and without addition of the anesthetics halothane.
We also studied LUVs of DPPC. The respective heat capacity
values and relaxation times are plotted in ﬁg. 5. Relaxation
times were obtained using a thermocouple inserted into the
pressure cell using positive pressure jumps. The dashed line
represents the time resolution of the setup. In all cases we
found again that heat capacity and relaxation times are pro-
portional to each other. Halothane has a similar effect on the
melting behavior as the anesthetic octanol. It broadened and
shifted the heat capacity curve to lower temperatures. The
maximum relaxation time was again decreased compared to
that of the DMPC LUVs without halothane. The phenomeno-

6

to test whether there are contributions from faster relaxation
processes we analyzed the heat absorption after negative pres-
sure jumps as a function of temperature in comparison to the
transition enthalpy obtained from scanning calorimetry. The
transition enthalpy of the DMPC (MLV) solution (see the heat
capacity proﬁle in ﬁg. 2) is shown as a solid curve in the left
and right panel of ﬁg. 6. The total heat absorption is displayed
in the left panel of ﬁg. 6. It is proportional to the transition
enthalpy. All relaxation data contained contributions of a fast
component with a time scale corresponding to the instrument
response time. The heat absorption due to this component
also showed a proportionality to the transition enthalpy (right
panel of ﬁg. 6). This means that at least one faster relax-
ation process is present which occurs on a time scale faster
than our experimental time resolution. Analyzing all mea-
surements we found that the contribution of faster relaxation
processes is lower than 10 % of the total heat absorption. Us-
ing the thermocouple signal as a detection method we did not
detect faster relaxation processes.

Lipid Membrane System
DMPC (MLV)
+ 0.1 wt% 1-octanol (MLV)
+ 0.5 wt% 1-octanol (MLV)
+ 0.5 mM serotonin (MLV)
+ 3.0 mM serotonin (MLV)
+ 0.5 mol% gramicidin A (MLV)
+ 1.5 mol% gramicidin A (MLV)
DMPC (MLV)
DMPC (LUV)
+ 20 wt% halothane (LUV)
DPPC (LUV)

τm/s
31.0 ± 1.5
17.7 ± 0.4
14.8 ± 0.2
21.6 ± 1.2
9.0 ± 0.9
20.8 ± 0.8
13.1 ± 0.8
25.2 ± 0.1
1.5 ± 0.2
1.0 ± 0.1
2.0 ± 0.1

mol s )

L/(108 J K
6.6 ± 0.5
6.3 ± 0.3
6.3 ± 0.3
6.5 ± 0.5
7.5 ± 0.8
7.9 ± 0.5
5.8 ± 0.5
6.8 ± 0.3
15.7 ± 3.0
20.0 ± 1.0
18.4 ± 1.0

Table 1: Given are the relaxation times and phenomeno-
logical constants at the transition midpoint of the studied
systems. In the upper parts relaxation times were deter-
mined from the calorimeter response. In the lower part
they were obtained from the temperature change curve in
the sample capillary.

Figure 5: Heat capacity proﬁles (solid lines) and relax-
ation times (symbols) of three different large unilamellar
vesicle systems. Relaxation times were recorded with a
thin thermocouple. Top 40 mM DMPC. Center: 40 mM
DMPC plus 20 wt % halothane. Bottom: 40 mM DPPC.
Again a proportionality between heat capacity and re-
laxation times was found. Halothane acts similar on the
lipid membrane as 1-octanol. The dashed line indicates
the resolution limit of the experiment (around 350 mil-
liseconds).

logical constants for the LUV systems are somewhat higher
than those of the MLVs (see table 5). The phenomenolog-
ical constants obtained from measurements on MLVs sug-
gest that there is a constant independent of the lipid mem-
brane composition. The same is true for LUVs, while we cal-
culated different phenomenological constants for MLVs and
LUVs. From our results we calculated averaged phenomeno-
108 J K/mol s (MLVs) and
logical constants of (6.7
108 J K/mol s (LUVs). The reason for this is
(18.0
unknown. One can speculate on whether relaxation processes
are inﬂuenced by volume changes of the vesicles in the case
of LUV or by bilayer-bilayer interactions in the case of MLV.
In the literature up to ﬁve relaxation processes in the time
range from ns to s were reported for one lipid component
systems [41]. In this study we assumed only one relaxation
time, which describes domain formation processes. In order

0.7)

2.2)

±

±

·

·

In total we can state that domain formation processes are
related to ﬂuctuations in enthalpy at large excess heat capac-
ities. Relaxation times and heat capacity are linear functions
(within error). This linear relation is still true in the presence
of drugs. However, the temperature dependence of both heat
capacity and relaxation times are altered by drugs in a simple
systematic manner. Fast relaxation processes contribute less
than 10% to the overall heat. Thus, they probably do not rep-
resent the ﬂuctuations in domain size linked to the lipid chain
state.

Discussion

The melting of lipid membranes is a cooperative event in-
volving many lipid molecules. Within the melting transition
one ﬁnds domain formation, but also changes in the elastic

7

Figure 6: The solid curve in the left and right panel show the transition enthalpy of DMPC multilamellar vesicles
as obtained from integrating the excess heat capacity proﬁle. The total heat compensation of the calorimeter after
a pressure jump from below the transition to a given point within the transition is proportional to the transition
enthalpy (circles, left panel). The signal typically contains one single-exponential slow component and a minor
contribution from fast processes that show up as a signal with the characteristic time constant of the calorimetric
setup. The contribution from the fast processes (circles, right panel) also displays a proportionality to the integrated
heat. This means that there is at least one relaxation processes faster than the time resolution of our experiment.
Its contribution, however, is less than 8% of the overall signal. Thus, the relaxation process of the cooperative
events is well approximated by a single relaxation process.

constants. If pressure, temperature or any other relevant in-
tensive thermodynamic variable is slightly changed, the lipid
system changes its state and domains grow or shrink while
absorbing or releasing signiﬁcant amounts of heat. Thus, the
domain formation process can be followed by monitoring the
heat change. If we talk about relaxation times within the lipid
melting transitions we therefore basically refer to the time
scale of domain growth. These processes have been studied
by some groups before using calorimetry [33, 34, 35, 36, 31].
One typically ﬁnds slow relaxation in transitions. This phe-
nomenon is known as ‘critical slowing-down’.

Studies of relaxation processes in artiﬁcial membranes by
use of pressure perturbation calorimetry have been performed
by our group before [31]. We used the same and a reﬁned ver-
sion of the setup as described in [31] to extend the previously
published studies. Relaxation processes in LUVs and the in-
ﬂuence of small drugs on the relaxation behavior of lipid do-
main formation in LUVs and MLVs were investigated. The
typical time scales of domain formation processes are related
to cooperative ﬂuctuations in enthalpy and in all systems we
found a proportionality between heat capacity and relaxation
times. The relaxation processes depend on the ﬁnal state
rather than on the initial state. A remarkable ﬁnding is that the
drugs used modulate the time-scale of domain formation pro-
cesses in a similar manner as they inﬂuence the heat capacity

proﬁles. They tend to broaden both heat capacity proﬁles and
relaxation time proﬁles. After addition of anesthetics, neuro-
transmitters and antibiotics the maximum relaxation time is
decreased in the same way as is the maximum heat capacity
value . Therefore, these drugs alter static and kinetic aspects
of domain formation.

Our ﬁndings support the theoretical prediction from Gra-
bitz et al. [31] that heat capacity and relaxation time display
a linear relation not only for pure lipid membranes, but also
for membrane mixtures and mixtures with drugs that asso-
ciate with membranes. The proportional constant between re-
laxation time and heat capacity takes the form T 2/L, where
L is an phenomenological coefﬁcient originating from On-
sager’s phenomenological equations. We calculated average
108 J K/mol s
phenomenological constants to be (6.7
0.7)
·
108J K/mol s for LUVs made of
for MLVs and (18.0
DMPC and DPPC. The constant L is different for MLV and
LUV by about a factor of 2.5. Surprisingly, however, the addi-
tion of drugs does not change the phenomenological constant
for a given vesicular system even though they have signiﬁ-
cant inﬂuence on the heat capacity proﬁles. With measure-
ments on suspensions of multilamellar DMPC vesicles we
108 J K/mol s
obtained phenomenological constants of 6.6
108 J K/mol s using the two different detection
and 6.8
methods. They agree within error. Thus, the difference in re-

2.2)

±

±

·

·

·

8

sult does not seem to be related to the method of detection.
We do not know the origin the difference between MLV and
LUV. However, MLV display much more cooperative transi-
tions because of coupling between adjacent membranes. The
ﬂuctuations therefore contain a coupling in the third dimen-
sion that might cause small differences in the relaxation be-
havior. The difference may also be related to the change of
vesicle size while changing the lipid membrane state and area.
This may involve permeation of water into the vesicles.

Anesthetics, neurotransmitters and antibiotics inﬂuence
the melting behavior of lipid membranes. The anesthetic oc-
tanol shifts proﬁles to lower temperatures. Long chain alco-
hols (with chain length larger than 10) shift them to higher
temperatures [57]. The latter ones do not display anesthetic
potency. Other anesthetics like halothane (this study and un-
published data) or methoxyﬂurane [58] also lead to a decrease
of the melting temperature. It has been stated that clinically
relevant concentrations show effects on the shift of melting
temperatures [58]. The effective potency of an anesthetic
is correlated to its ability to deplete melting transition tem-
peratures [59]. Serotonin possibly also acts as an anesthetic
[43] and inﬂuences the phase melting transition. This has
also been shown for other neurotransmitters, like GABA (γ-
aminobutyric acid), dopamine, caffeine and ﬂuoxetin [60].
The interactions with peptides or proteins and other small
molecules like anesthetics and neurotransmitters inﬂuence the
domain structuring of lipid membranes in the phase melting
transition regime [61]. All these molecules inﬂuence relax-
ation processes in a systematical way.

In previous studies kinetic aspects of melting transitions
in artiﬁcial single-component lipid membranes have been stud-
ied with a whole variety of different techniques. This study,
however, is the ﬁrst one systematically investigating the ef-
fects of various small drugs on relaxation processes in single
lipid membranes and relating it to the enhancement of ﬂuctua-
tions in the transition regime. Van Osdol and co-workers [36]
studied the effect of the anesthetics dibucaine on relaxation
processes. They claimed that even though dibucaine clearly
shows an inﬂuence on the melting behavior only a small al-
teration of relaxation processes has been found. This ﬁnding
does not agree with ours, where we have found that the drugs
inﬂuence relaxation processes similar to their inﬂuence on the
heat capacity.

In other studies relaxation times faster than the ones we
measured and up to ﬁve relaxation processes were reported
[24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 62, 41, 38, 39]. Different spectroscopic
detection methods were used. Previously, it has been dis-
cussed that some of the experiments might have problems
with a well-deﬁned temperature, due to the necessity of hav-
ing windows for the detection. These might act as heat sinks
[31]. In favor of longer relaxation times are estimations us-
ing ac-calorimetry [40]. The authors found relaxation times
faster than 120s (MLV of DMPC) and 260s (MLV of DPPC).
They, however, did not give relaxation times in dependence of

temperature. As mentioned, relaxation processes have been
reported from the ns to minute regime. One reason might lie
in an inaccurate temperature control in many optical meth-
ods. However, another reason, which seems likely to us is that
the different detection methods probe different relaxation pro-
cesses. In [41] the different relaxation times where assigned
to relaxation processes reﬂecting chain properties like the for-
mation of kinks, free rotations of headgroups or the formation
of complex rotational isomers and to macroscopical proper-
ties, i.e. the formation of clusters. Our study does not exclude
the existence of several faster relaxation processes, but the fo-
cus was only on one relaxation process, namely the formation
of domains which is responsible for most of the heat absorp-
tion. We found evidence that there is at least one faster relax-
ation process which has a minor contribution to the total heat
absorption (less than 10%). Most previous studies agreed on
a slowing down of relaxation processes in the melting transi-
tion regime [24, 26, 38, 27, 28, 41, 33, 31, 39, 34].

Biological membranes also display melting transitions [4,
23]. From the knowledge of the phenomenological constant
and the excess heat capacity proﬁle were estimated relaxation
times in the melting transition regime of biological mem-
branes [31]. The authors used a DSC measurement of bovine
lung surfactant from Ebel et al. [7] and a phenomenologi-
cal constant similar to the one for DMPC and DPPC MLV
vesicles. They estimated that relaxation times in biological
membranes would lie in a time regime of up to 120 ms in
the transition regime. We have calculated two different phe-
nomenological constants for MLVs and LUVs but the order
of magnitude is unaffected. The time regime of these domain
formation processes is in a regime which seems to be impor-
tant in biology. These relaxation times do not only give the
typical time scales of domain formation processes, but also
the life time of domains. Domains are subject to ﬂuctuations
[61] and the smaller they are the shorter their life time. Very
broad melting proﬁles typically result in small domains. In
the ongoing discussion on ’rafts’ this may be of some rele-
vance. Their size is thought to be smaller than 100 nm [16]
and therefore should they display short life times. Additional
to their small size the short life time may make it difﬁcult to
really detect them.

Domain formation processes in general have been argued
to be important in the control of biochemical reaction cas-
cades in biological membranes [18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. Since
drugs like anesthetics, neurotransmitters and antibiotics also
alter the lateral membrane structure and relaxation times they
might show an indirect action on enzymatic processes. For
several enzymes it has been shown that the existence of do-
mains is necessary for their function [63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68,
69]. In the case of phospholipase A2 is was stated that the
magnitude of ﬂuctuations determines the activity of the en-
zyme [70]. It may be easier for the phospholipase to reach
the target site at the lipid when the ﬂuctuations are large. The
kinetics of lateral membrane structure might generally act as

9

a control of biochemical reactions and their time scales.

The action of general anesthetics is still not fully under-
stood. Many groups presently favor a picture where anes-
thetics directly inﬂuence the function of proteins [44, 45, 46].
Theories about the action of general anesthetics mediated by
the lipid membrane are put forward by several other groups
[48, 49, 50, 51]. The later models are in our opinion more
convincing because the action of anesthetics is known to be
linearly related to their solubility in lipid membranes, includ-
ing the noble gas Xenon that is inert and therefore unlikely
to have speciﬁc interactions with macromolecules. Think-
ing about lipid-mediated anesthesia, a possible implication
of our ﬁndings might be related to ion permeation through
lipid bilayers. The predicted relaxation time of biological
membranes in the several 10 ms range is just the typical time
scale of the opening and closing of ion channel proteins. Re-
cently, several groups started to argue that the lipid environ-
ment has a direct inﬂuence on the channel opening statistics
[71, 72, 73]. For this reason anesthetics and neurotransmitters
may display an indirect inﬂuence on these proteins via their
action on the lipid membrane. This implies that the chan-
nel lifetimes may be coupled to the relaxation time scales of
the lipid membranes, in particular since they are obviously of
right order. It was also reported that permeation through pure
lipid bilayers in the absence of proteins is enhanced in the
melting transition regime and reaches a maximum at a tem-
perature of maximum heat capacity. This ﬁnding was related
to the magnitude of ﬂuctuations [8, 9, 10]. Measurements
on black lipid membranes in the melting transition regime
yielded characteristic ﬂuctuations of the transmembrane ion
currents [74, 75, 76]. No such currents were found for lipid
membranes at temperatures well above or below the tran-
sition midpoint temperature of one component lipid mem-
branes [75]. The life times of these lipid pores within the
phase transition regime were found to be as long as several
seconds, in agreement with the relaxation time scales found
by us.

In this study we have shown that relaxation times of do-
main formation processes in simple model systems are pro-
portional to the excess heat capacity. Relaxation processes
slow down in the melting regime. Several drugs studied by us
broaden the melting transition proﬁles and shift them to lower
temperatures. This inﬂuences the relaxation behavior in a
simple manner. This is presumably true for all drugs, pep-
tides and proteins inﬂuencing the melting behavior of lipid
membranes. Clearly, the free energy of membranes includes
the chemical potentials of all membrane associated molecules
and it is therefore just a consequence of thermodynamics that
the functions of states change in a coherent manner due to the
change in one of these variables. This is likely to be of great
importance for the general understanding of the function of
biological membranes.

Acknowledgments
HM.S. was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-

schaft (DFG; grant HE1829/11-1).

References

[1] Steim, J. M., M. E. Tourtellotte, K. C. Reinert, R. N. McElhaney, and
R. L. Rader. 1969. Calorimetric evidence for the liquid-crystalline state
of lipids in a biomembrane. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 63:104.

[2] Chapman, D. 1971. Liquid crystalline properties of phospholipids and

biological membranes. Symp. Faraday Soc. 5:163–174.

[3] Hinz, H.-J., and J. M. Sturtevant. 1972. Calorimetric studies of dilute
aqueous suspensions of bilayers formed from synthetic l-α-lecithins. J.
Biol. Chem. 247:6071–6075.

[4] Melchior, D. L., and J. M. Steim. 1976. Thermotropic transitions in

biomembranes. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 5:205–238.

[5] Heimburg, T., and A. D. Jackson. 2005. On soliton propagation in
biomembranes and nerves. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:9790–
9795.

[6] Heimburg, T. 1998. Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynam-
ics. estimation of the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close
to the chain melting transition from calorimetry. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1415:147–162.

[7] Ebel, H., P. Grabitz, and T. Heimburg. 2001. Enthalpy and volume
changes in lipid membranes. I. The proportionality of heat and volume
changes in the lipid melting transition and its implication for the elastic
constants. J. Phys. Chem. B 105:7353–7360.

[8] Papahadjopoulos, D., K. Jacobsen, S. Nir, and T. Isac.

1973.
Phase transition in phospholipid vesicles. Fluoresence polarization and
permeability measurements conerning the effect of temperature and
cholesterol. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 311:330–348.

[9] Nagle, J. F., and H. Scott. 1978. Lateral compressibility of lipid mono-
and bilayers. Theory of membrane permeability. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 513:236–243.

[10] Cruzeiro-Hansson, L., and O. G. Mouritsen. 1988. Passive ion perme-
ability of lipid membranes modelled via lipid-domain interfacial area.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 944:63–72.

[11] Antonov, V. F., A. A. Anosov, V. P. Norik, and E. Y. Smirnova. 2005.
Soft perforation of planar bilayer lipid membranes of dipalmitoylphos-
phatidylcholine at the temperature of the phase transition from the liq-
uid crystalline to gel state. Eur. Biophys. J. 34:155–162.

[12] Jacobson, K., E. D. Sheets, and R. Simson. 1995. Revisiting the ﬂuid

mosaic model of membranes. Science 268:1441–1442.

[13] Singer, S., and G. L. Nicolson. 1972. The ﬂuid mosaic model of the

structure of cell membranes. Science 175:720–731.

[14] Sackmann, E., 1984. Biological Membranes, Academic Press, chap-
ter Physical Basis of Trigger Processes and Membrane Structure, 105–
143.

[15] Brown, D., and E. London. 1998. Functions of lipid rafts in biological

membranes. ARCDB 14:111–136.

[16] Simons, K., and W. L. Vaz. 2004. Model systems, lipid rafts, and cell

membranes. ARBMS 33:269–295.

[17] Helms, J. B., and C. Zurzolo. 2004. Lipids as targeting signals: Lipid

rafts and intracellular trafﬁcking. Trafﬁc 5:247–254.

[18] Melo, E. C., I. M. Lourtie, M. B. Sankram, and T. E. Thompson. 1992.
Effects of domain connection and disconnection on the yields of in-
plane bimolecular reactions in membranes. Biophys. J. 63:1506–1512.

[19] Vaz, W. L., and P. F. F. Almeida. 1993. Phase topology and percola-
tion in multi-phase lipid bilayers: Is the biological membrane a domain
mosaic? Curr. Opin. in Struct. Biol. 3:482–488.

10

[20] Thompson, T., M. Sankram, R. Biltonen, D. Marsh, and W. Vaz. 1995.
Effects of domain structure on in-plane reactions and interactions. Mol.
Membr. Biol. 12:157–162.

[39] Halstenberg, S., W. Schrader, P. Das, J. Bhattacharjee, and U. Kaatze.
2003. Critical ﬂuctuations in the domain structure of lipid membranes.
J. Chem. Phys. 118:5683–5691.

[21] Hinderliter, A., R. L. Biltonen, and P. F. Almeida. 2004. Lipid modu-
lation of protein-induced membrane domains as a mechanism for con-
trolling signal transduction. Biochemistry 43:7102–7110.

[22] Salinas, D. G., M. D. L. Feunte, and J. G. Reyes. 2005. Changes of
enzyme activity in lipid signaling phathways related to substrate re-
ordering. Biophys. J. 89:885–894.

[23] Jackson, M. B., and J. M. Sturtevant. 1977. Studies of the lipid phase
transitions of Escherichia coli by high sensitivity differential scanning
calorimetery. J. Biol. Chem. 252:4749–4751.

[40] Yao, H., H. Nagano, Y. Kawase, and K. Ema. 1994. Slow relaxation
process in the main phase transition of phosphatidylcholines studied
with heat capacity spectroscopy. I. Multilamellar vesicles. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1212:73–79.

[41] Holzwarth, J. F., 1989. The Enzyme Catalysis Process: Energetics,
Mechanism and Dynamics, Plenum Publishing Group, chapter Struc-
ture and Dynamics of Phospholipid Membranes From Nanoseconds to
Seconds, 383–411.

[42] Gennis, R. B., 1989. Biomembranes. Molecular Structure and Func-

[24] Tr¨auble, H. 1971. Phasenumwandlungen in Lipiden. M¨ogliche Schalt-
prozesse in Biologischen Membranen. Naturwissenschaften 58:277–
284.

[25] Tsong, T. Y. 1974. Kinetics of the crystalline-liquid crystalline phase
transition of dimyristoyl l-α-lecithin bilayers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 1974:2684–2688.

[26] Tsong, T. Y., and M. I. Kanehisa. 1977. Relaxation phenomena in
aqueous dispersions of synthetic lecithins. Biophys. Chem. 16:2674–
2680.

[27] Gruenewald, B., A. Blume, and F. Watanabe. 1980. Kinetic inves-
tigations on the phase transition of phospholipid bilayers. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 597:41–52.

[28] Elamrani, K., and A. Blume. 1983. Phase transition kinetics of phos-
phatidic acid bilayers. A pressure jump relaxation study. Biochemistry
22:3305–3311.

[29] Holzwarth, J. F., and F. Rys.

Beobachtung einer kri-
tischen Tr¨ubung und Verlangsamung am Hauptphasen¨ubergang
von
Laser-
der
Temperatursprungmethode. Prog. Coll. Pol. Sci. 69:109–112.

Phospholipid-Membranen,

bestimmt mit

1984.

[30] Blume, A., and M. Hillmann.

1986. Dimyristoylphosphatidic
acid/cholesterol bilayers. Thermodynamic properties and kinetics of
the phase transition as studied by the pressure jump relaxation tech-
nique. Eur. Biophys. J. 13:343–353.

[31] Grabitz, P., V. P. Ivanova, and T. Heimburg. 2002. Relaxation kinetics
of lipid membranes and its relation to the heat capacity. Biophys. J.
82:299–309.

[32] Johnson, M. L., T. C. Winter, and R. L. Biltonen. 1983. The measure-
ment of the kinetics of lipid phase transitions: A volume perturbation
kinetic calorimeter. Analyt. Biochem. 128:1–6.

[33] van Osdol, W. W., R. L. Biltonen, and M. L. Johnson. 1989. Mea-
suring the kinetics of membrane phase transition. J. Bioener. Biophys.
Methods 20:1–46.

[34] van Osdol, W. W., M. L. Johnson, Q. Ye, and R. L. Biltonen. 1991.
Relaxation dynamics of the gel to liquid crystalline transition of phos-
phatidylcholine bilayers .effects of chainlength and vesicle size. Bio-
phys. J. 59:775–785.

[35] van Osdol, W. W., O. L. Mayorga, and E. Freire. 1991. Multifrequency
calorimetry of the folding/unfolding transition of cytochrome c. Bio-
phys. J. 59:48–54.

[36] van Osdol, W. W., Q. Ye, M. L. Johnson, Q. Ye, and R. L. Biltonen.
1992. Effects of the anesthetic dibucaine on the kinetics of the gel-
liquid crystalline transition of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine multil-
amellar vesicles. Biophys. J. 63:1011–1017.

[37] Strehlow, U., and F. J¨ahnig. 1981. Electrostatic interactions at charged
lipid membranes. Kinetics of the electrostatically triggered phase tran-
sition. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 641:301–310.

[38] Mitaku, S., and T. Date.

1982. Anomalies of nanosecond ultra-
sonic relaxation in the lipid bilayer transition. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
688:411–421.

tion. Springer.

[43] Cantor, R. S. 2003. Receptor desensitization by neurotransmitters in
membranes: Are neurotransmitters the endogenous anesthetics? Bio-
chemistry 42:11891–11897.

[44] Franks, N., and W. Lieb. 1994. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of

general anaesthesia. Nature 367:607–614.

[45] Krasowski, M., and N. Harrison. 1999. General anesthetic action on

ligand-gated ion channels. Cell. Mol. Life Sc. 55:1278–1303.

[46] Bovill, J. G. 2000. Mechanisms of anaesthesia: Time to say farewell

to the Meyer-Overton rule. Curr. Opin. Anaesth. 13:433–436.

[47] Ueda, I., and T. Yoshida. 1999. Hydration of lipid membranes and
the action mechanisms of anesthetics and alcohols. Chem. Phys. Lip.
101:65–79.

[48] Cantor, R. S. 1997. The lateral pressure proﬁle in membranes: A phys-

ical mechanism of general anesthesia. Biochemistry 36:2339–2344.

[49] Cantor, R. S. 2001. Breaking the Meyer-Overton rule: Predicted effects
of varying stiffness and interfacial activity on the intrinsic potency of
anesthetics. Biophys. J. 80:2284–2297.

[50] Heimburg, T., and A. D. Jackson. 2007. On the action potential as a
propagating density pulse and the role of anesthetics. Biophys. Rev.
Lett. 2007, in print (arXiv:physics/0610117) .

[51] Heimburg, T., and A. D. Jackson. 2007. The thermodynamics of gen-
eral anesthesia. Biophys. J., in print (arXiv:physics/0510106) .

[52] Mountcastle, D., R. L. Biltonen, and M. Halsey. 1978. Effect of anes-
thetics and pressure on the thermotropic behavior of multilamellar di-
palmitoylphosphatidylcholine liposomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
75:4906–4910.

[53] Seeger, H. M., 2006. Kinetics of Domain Formation Processes in Lipid

Membranes. Ph.D. thesis, University of G¨ottingen.

[54] Lee, J., and J. Kosterlitz. 1991. Finite-size scaling and Monte Carlo
simulations of ﬁrst-order phase transitions. Phys. Rev. B 43:3265–
3277.

[55] Onsager, L. 1931. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. I.

[56] Onsager, L. 1931. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. II.

Phys. Rev. 37:405–426.

Phys. Rev. 38:2265–2279.

[57] Tamura, K., Y. Kaminoh, H. Kamaya, and I. Ueda. 1991. High pressure
antagonism of alcohol effects on the main phase-transition temperature
of phospholipid membranes: Biphasic response. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1066:219–224.

[58] Trudell, J. R., D. Payan, J. Chin, and E. Cohen. 1975. The antagonistic
effect of an inhalation anesthetic and high pressure on the phase di-
agram of mixed dipalmitoyl-dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72:210–213.

[59] Kharakoz, D. P. 2001. Phase-transition driven synaptic exocytosis: A
hypothesis and its physiological and evolutionary implications. Bio-
science Rep. 21:801–830.

11

[60] Pollakowski, D., 2003. Thermodynamische und Strukturelle Un-
tersuchungen an k¨unstlichen und biologischen Membranen. Grundle-
gende Eigenschaften und der Einﬂuss kleiner Molek¨ule. Master’s the-
sis, University of G¨ottingen.

[61] Seeger, H. M., M. Fidorra, and T. Heimburg. 2005. Domain size and
ﬂuctuations at domain interfaces in lipid mixtures. Macro. Symposia
219:85–96.

[62] Genz, A., and J. F. Holzwarth. 1986. Dynamic ﬂuorescence measure-
ments on the main phase transition of dipalmytoylphosphatidylcholine
vesicles. Eur. Biophys. J. 13:323–330.

[63] Kamp, J. A. F. O. D., J. D. Gier, and L. V. Deenen. 1974. Hydrolysis of
phosphatidylcholine liposomes by pancreatic phospholipase A2 at the
phase transition temperature. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 345:253–256.

[64] Kamp, J. A. F. O. D., M. T. Kauerz, and L. V. Deenen. 1975. Ac-
tion of pancreatic phopsholipase A2 on phosphatidylcholine bilayers
in different physical states. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 406:169–177.

[65] Gabriel, N. E., N. V. Agman, and M. F. Roberts. 1987. Enzymatic
hydrolysis of short-chain leithin/long-chain phospholipid unilamellar
vesicles: Sensitivity of phospholipases to matrix phase state. Biochem-
istry 26:7409–7418.

[66] Lichtenberg, D., G. Romero, M. Menashe, and R. L. Biltonen. 1986.
Hydrolysis of dipalmytoylphosphatidylcholine large unilamellar vesi-
cles by porcine pancreatic phospholipase A2. J. Biol. Chem. 261:5334–
5340.

[67] Burack, W. R., and R. L. Biltonen. 1994. Lipid bilayer heterogeni-
ties and modulation of phospholipase A2 activity. Chem. Phys. Lip.
73:209–222.

[68] Bolen, E. J., and J. J. Sando. 1992. Effect of phospholipid unsaturation

on protein kinase C activation. Biochemistry 31:5945–5951.

[69] Dibble, A. R. G., A. K. Hinderliter, J. Sando, and R. L. Bil-
tonen.
Lipid lateral heterogeneity in phosphatidyl-
choline/phosphatidylserine/diacylglycerol vesicles and its inﬂuence on
protein kinase C activation. Biophys. J. 71:1877–1890.

1996.

[70] Biltonen, R. L. 1990. A statistical thermodynamic view of cooperative
structural changes in phospholipid bilayer membranes: Their potential
role in biological function. J. Chem. Thermodynamics 22:1–19.

[71] Turnheim, K., J. Gruber, C. Wachter, and V. Ruiz-Gutierrez. 1999.
Membrane phospholipid composition affects function of potassium
channels from rabbit colon epithelium. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
277:83–90.

[72] Cannon, B., M. Hermansson, S. Gy¨orke, P. Somerharju, and J. A. Vir-
tanen. 2003. Regulation of calcium channel activity by lipid domain
formation in planar lipid bilayers. Biophys. J. 85:933–942.

[73] Schmidt, D., Q.-X. Jiang, and R. MacKinnon. 2006. Phospholipids
and the origin of cationic gating charges in voltage sensors. Nature
444:775–779.

[74] Antonov, V., V. Petrov, A. Molnar, D. Predvoditelev, and A. Ivanov.
1980. The appearance of single-ion channels in unmodiﬁed lipid bi-
layer membranes at the phase transition temperature. Nature 283:585–
586.

[75] Antonov, V. F., A. A. Anosov, V. P. Norik, and E. Y. Smirnova. 2005.
Soft perforation of planar bilayer lipid membranes of dipalmitoylphos-
phatidylcholine at the temperature of the phase transition from the liq-
uid crystalline to the gel state. Eur. Biophys. J. 34:155–162.

K., W. Hanke,

[76] Kaufmann,
Ion
Lipid
http://membranes.nbi.dk/Kaufmann/pdf/Kaufmann book3 ed.pdf.
Caruaru.

Ion
Membranes:

Fluctuation
Control

Channels.
Bilayer

Corcia,
in

and A.

Channel

by

1989.
Pure
Voltage.

12

