6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IFUG-10.23.96/HCR
physics/9610017

Note on the dynamic instability of microtubules
H.C. Rosu 1

Instituto de F´ısica - IFUG, Apdo Postal E-143, 37150 Le´on, Gto, M´exico

Abstract
If the dynamic instability of microtubules follows a gamma distribution then
one can associate to it a Cantor set.

Microtubules, the main protein polymeric ﬁlaments of the cell cytoskeleton,
are a well-deﬁned biological system where methods in condensed matter, statis-
tical mechanics and the theory of complex systems have been applied. Micro-
tubule dynamics play an important role in many fundamental cellular processes,
such as cell division and cell motility. A peculiar intrinsic dynamics of micro-
tubules consisting in extended growth (rescues) and shrinkage (catastrophes)
phases of variable duration with rapid switching between these two phases has
been known since about a decade [1] and is the subject of many investigations.
This spontaneous assembly-disassembly process has been called dynamic insta-
bility (DI) [1]. It is not clear why MTs should have such a behavior and what
is its true origin. There are currently several kinetic models trying to explain
DI, both from the side of biologists [2] (based on speciﬁc features of the MT
hydrolysis involving the GTP and GDP units) and from the side of physicists
[3] (based on purely one-step stochastic processes of constant rate).

Recently, Odde, Cassimeris, and Buettner [4] have found a high probability
of ﬁtting the published MT length life histories to a gamma distribution (f (t) =
θrtr−1e−θt/Γ(r), where r and θ are the shape parameter and the frequency
parameter, respectively, of the distribution) by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
for both growth and shrinkage. Their result is not ﬁrmly established because
the conclusion is based on a small number of phase times (14 growth times and
12 shrinkage times). The exponential distribution still cannot be ruled out. As
they remark, other nonnegative probability distributions (Weibull, lognormal,
or beta ones) may also be appropriate. However, the property of memory makes
all these distributions essentially diﬀerent from the exponential one. Citing the
textbook of Olkin, Gleser, and Derman [5], Odde and collaborators argue that
a gamma distribution implies a series of ﬁrst-order steps from the growth phase
to the shrinkage one, with the number of steps given by the shape parameter
r of the gamma distribution. For the plus end data, they have found r = 3,
and thus a series of three ﬁrst-order transitions each of constant rate θ (≈ 1.7
min−1). This would mean two intermediate metastable states. In their words,
“each of these transitions could potentially represent key chemical or physical
events occurring in the MT”.

The purpose of this note is to point out another connection of the gamma
distribution (actually going in the same direction as the aforementioned surmise
of Odde et al) that makes such a distribution very appealing in the case of MTs,
if proven. The connection may be found in the review paper of Carruthers and
Shih on the phenomenology of hadronic multiplicity distributions [6]. The point
is that the asymptotic form of negative binomial (already written down by Man-
del in 1959) is a special case of the gamma distribution (i.e., the case r = θ).
Moreover, Carruthers and Shih enumerate possible origins of the negative bi-
nomial distribution. The last origin in their list of six items is as a realization

1e-mail: rosu@ifug.ugto.mx

Additional address: IGSS, Magurele-Bucharest, Romania

1

of self-similar Cantor set structures. As they commented, the negative bino-
mial distribution can be put into one-to-one correspondence with self-similar
sequences whose limits lead to the (triadic) Cantor sets. The message of all
these connections might well be of great relevance for the MT dynamics, be-
cause Cantor sets are directly related to multifractal scaling properties [7] and
these would mean self-similar features in the MT dynamic instability. In case
the gamma ﬁts of Odde et al are conﬁrmed, further studies of the nature of the
energetic self-similar trees will be necessary.

***

I acknowledge a stimulating discussion in Houston and correspondence with
Dr. David Odde. He was also very kind in sending me his papers. I thank Prof.
Carruthers for promptly sending me his review with Shih [6].

References

[1] T.J. Mitchison and M.W. Kirschner, Nature 312, 237 (1984).

[2] See e.g., P.M. Bayley, M.J. Schilstra, and S.R. Martin, J. Cell Sci. 95, 33

(1990); Martin, Schilstra, Bayley, Biophys. J. 65, 578 (1993).

[3] M. Dogterom and S. Leibler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1347 (1993); H. Flyvb-

jerg, T.E. Holy, and S. Leibler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2372 (1994).

[4] D.J. Odde, L. Cassimeris and H.M. Buettner, Biophys. J. 69, 796 (1995);

D.J. Odde and H.M. Buettner, Ann. Biom. Eng. 23, 268 (1995).

[5] I. Olkin, L.J. Gleser, and C. Derman, “Probability models and applica-

tions”, (New York, Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1980).

[6] P. Carruthers and C.C. Shih, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 2, 1447 (1987).

[7] H.G.E. Hentschel and I. Procaccia, Physica D 8, 435 (1983); C. Chamon,
C. Mudry, and X.-G. Wen, “Gaussian ﬁeld theories, random Cantor sets
and multifractality”, cond-mat/9510088.

2

