1

7
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
9
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Parallel computing and molecular dynamics of biological membranes

G. La Penna, S. Letardi, V. Minicozzi, S. Morante, G.C. Rossi and G. Salina
Presented by G.C. Rossia

aDip. di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “Tor Vergata” and I.N.F.N., Sezione di Roma II,
Via della Ricerca Scientiﬁca 1, I-00133 Roma - Italy

In this talk I discuss the general question of the portability of Molecular Dynamics codes for diﬀusive systems
on parallel computers of the APE family. The intrinsic single precision arithmetics of the today available APE
platforms does not seem to aﬀect the numerical accuracy of the simulations, while the absence of integer addressing
from CPU to individual nodes puts strong constraints on the possible programming strategies. Liquids can be
very satisfactorily simulated using the “systolic” method. For more complex systems, like the biological ones at
which we are ultimately interested in, the “domain decomposition” approach is best suited to beat the quadratic
growth of the inter-molecular computational time with the number of elementary components of the system. The
promising perspectives of using this strategy for extensive simulations of lipid bilayers are brieﬂy reviewed.

1. Introduction

sity) grow only linearly with the number of atoms.

In simulating the behaviour of microscopic sys-
tems Molecular Dynamics (MD) faces two major
problems. One is the intrinsic limitation coming
from the use of classical mechanics to describe
the dynamics of the “elementary” components
of the system [1]. The second, not less impor-
tant, is of practical nature and it has to do with
the ﬁniteness of computer resources available at
any time. In recent investigations [2] [3] we ad-
dressed the second of these questions, showing
that parallel computers, particularly of the APE
family [4], can be successfully employed to speed
up in a substantial way MD simulations of diﬀu-
sive systems, i.e. of systems in which the “list” of
atoms that have a non-negligible interaction with
a given atom of the system changes with time. In
a solid (or in Lattice Quantum Chromo-Dynamics
- LQCD) the “list” is blocked and is assigned once
for all at the beginning of the simulation.

Static and dynamic properties of liquids can
be adequately studied [2], using the “systolic”
method [5]. For the more complex case of lipid bi-
layers we have developed new approaches, adapt-
ing to these systems the general “domain decom-
position” strategy. The latter has the virtue of
leading to CPU times for the computation of the
inter-molecular potential that (at constant den-

2. Liquid Butane

As a ﬁrst signiﬁcant test case, we have stud-
ied in great detail liquid butane (C4H10) [2], us-
ing a standard Multiple Time Step (MTS) inte-
gration algorithm [1] (with a “long” integration
time step ∆tL = 4 f s and a partition number
P◦ = 8). The results of the simulation of the
time evolution of a system of M = 512 molecules
conﬁrm that for a homogeneous diﬀusive system
the “systolic” method [5] is well suited for mas-
sive parallel production. The method consists in
computing the inter-molecular (Lennard-Jones)
interactions between atoms belonging to diﬀerent
molecules, by ﬁrst democraticaly distributing in
bunches among the N nodes of the machine the
molecules of the system. Coordinates and mo-
menta of the N bunches of molecules are copied
in transitory arrays and circulated through nodes.
By bringing them successively in contact with the
node-residing molecules, the crossed interaction
terms are all computed in N − 1 moves. The
method does not beat the M 2 growth of the inter-
molecular computational time, but decreases it by
a factor equal to the number of nodes.

On the 512-nodes APE conﬁguration (Torre) it
took in all 450 hours of CPU time to collect the

2

whole statistics of 10 ns presented in [2]. Com-
puter times of this size are certainly within the
current standards of MD and LQCD simulations.
For comparison, a system of 256 molecules has
been simulated, in double precision, on a DIG-
ITAL 200 4/233 α-station. To give an approxi-
mate reference ﬁgure we may quote a factor of 50,
as a gain in speed in going from the α-station to
the Torre.

Our code was written in TAO, the APE highest
level language. However APE simulation times
can be substantially reduced (by a factor from
3 to 4), if the APE-assembler micro-code of the
most time-consuming part of the program, where
the inter-molecular forces are computed, is prop-
erly optimized.

H (t)

(kJ/mol)

3.150

3.125

3.100

3.075

3.050

0

1000

2000

3000

t (ps)

Figure 1. The time evolution of the total energy
of a system of 512 molecules of liquid butane.

Very good agreement is obtained among the
various simulations.
Our results also com-
pare nicely with the available experimental
data [6] [7] [8] and with the pioneering simula-
tion of ref. [9], where 64 molecules of butane were
followed for up to 20 ps (after few ps of equilibra-
tion).

In our very long simulations we did not see
signs of instabilities nor of any systematic drift
in the value of the total energy of the system (see
Fig. 1). Single precision rounding problems were
sometimes held responsible for pathologies of that
kind.

3. Towards simulating realistic membranes

Simulating realistic cell membranes and study-
ing their interaction with small peptides (mim-
icking pharmaceuticals of possible therapeutical
interest) is of the utmost importance, if not for
immediate medical use, certainly for the devel-
opment of new conceptual and practical tools in
MD applications to biological systems. A lot of
work has gone in this direction (see e.g. [10] [11]
and references therein), but we are still far from
having a viable tool-kit for immediate practical
use.

Schematically a cell membrane is constituted
by an almost spherical bilayer of phospho-lipidic
molecules, separating the interior of the cell from
the external world. Various kinds of peptides
and proteins, responsible for the biochemical pro-
cesses necessary for the life and the functionality
of the cell, are plugged into the membrane.

Phospho-lipids are large Y-shaped molecules
(with more than 30 atoms, not counting carbon
bound hydrogens) with a hydrophilic head and
two hydrophobic tails. This hydropathicity con-
ﬁguration lead to a well deﬁned bilayer 3-D struc-
ture: the hydrophilic heads are in contact with
water, present both outside and inside the cell,
while the hydrophobic tails are more or less back-
to-back pair-wise aligned.

An important parameter governing the reac-
tion rate of many biological processes taking place
in the membrane is its “permeability”. In this re-
spect a membrane can be regarded as a liquid
crystal, with a permeability which depends “crit-
ically” on the temperature, on the detailed chem-
ical composition of the constituent phospho-lipids
and on the concentration of chemicals dispersed
in the membrane itself or in the solvent.

Even from this very crude picture, it is clear
that a detailed simulation of the dynamics of the
membrane of a living cell is just impossible and
we have to resort to a number of simpliﬁcations.
As it appears experimentally that the nature and
the location of the phase transitions, which con-
trol the physico-chemical properties of the mem-
brane, are related to the bulk ordering properties
of the hydrophobic tails, a ﬁrst step in the di-
rection of simulating a realistic system is to take

a suﬃciently large bilayer in a acqueous medium
and begin to study 1) the behaviour of the rele-
vant order parameters as functions of the temper-
ature, 2) the dependence of the position of critical
points upon the concentration of small intramem-
brane peptides.

We have started our investigation with a sys-
tem of 2 × 256 Dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine
(DMPC) molecules (each molecule is composed
by 37 atoms) in vacuum, neglecting in these ﬁrst
trial simulations Coulomb interactions1. We have
run the dynamics of the system at various tem-
peratures on the Torre. In each run the history of
the system was followed for several hundreds ps
(plus equilibration). At very low temperatures
(T < 200 K) the system appears to be stable,
although we know that, lacking Coulomb inter-
actions and in absence of solvent, it is actually
unstable and expected to “explode” at higher T .
Already in this oversimpliﬁed test case CPU
simulation times are exceedingly large, as the
computation of the inter-molecular forces require
the evaluation of a daring (2×256×37)2/2 terms!
Since the vast majority of them gives a negligi-
bly small contribution to the forces (the Lennard-
Jones potential decreases very fast with the dis-
tance), the obvious way to cope with this problem
is to avoid computing the very many eﬀectively
irrelevant terms. To this end the physical space in
which the system lives is ﬁrst decomposed into N
domains, each one attributed to one of the nodes
of the machine. The domains are in turn subdi-
vided in cells. The number of cells in each domain
and, hence, the spatial extension of each cell, is
chosen so that the interaction between atoms re-
siding in non-nearest-neighboring cells is negligi-
bly small. Then inter-molecular interactions are
computed only between the atoms of a cell and
those of the 26/2 nearest neighboring ones. Ev-
ery Nremap integration steps, the coordinates of
all the molecules are cross-checked node by node
and, if necessary, molecules that have wandered
away from the original cell are reassigned to the
cell to which they came up to belong. The remap-
ping of the system costs a time which only growth

1Special care must be exerced to deal with Coulomb inter-
action. I will not discuss this problem here. The interested
reader can have a look to [12] and references therein.

3

linerly with the number of particles.

A problem with this approach on APE plat-
forms is the lack of integer addressing to individ-
ual nodes, which makes impossible to assign lo-
cally to each node the set of indices representing
the number of interaction terms to be computed
between pairs of cells. This diﬃculty has been
overcome by assigning to all nodes the same set
of indices, namely the set of the largest values
taken by them throughout the machine. Nodes
with fewer than the maximal number of terms to
be computed will wait until other nodes have ﬁn-
ished their job.

Figure 2. α-station, Cubetto and Torre CPU
times

We have fully implemented these ideas on APE
computers in the case of butane, obtaining the
expected linear behaviour with the number, n,
of interacting particles and a perfect scalability
with the number of nodes in going from the Cu-
betto (N = 23) to the Torre (N = 29). CPU times
for simulating the dynamics of a system of 2048
molecules of butane for 1 ns with our standard
MTS algorithm were measured on the Digital 200
4/233 α-station, the Cubetto and the Torre, ob-
taining

CP U = 2.3 · 10−4[2.3n + 6·10−3
T α
T Cubetto
CP U = 2.3 · 10−5[5.4n + 1.4
T T orre

Nupdate
= 2.3 · 10−3[3.4n + 0.22
Nremap
n]

n2]

CP U

Nremap

days
n] days
days

(1)

Eqs. 1 with Nremap = Nupdate = 40 are plotted
in Fig. 2 as functions of n. Notice that in the case
of the α-station we have used the “list” method

4

to speed up the simulation. As the list updat-
ing time growths quadratically with n, for a suf-
ﬁciently large number of atoms the “list” method
curve will always cross the “domain decomposi-
tion” straight line.

Acknowledgments
Partial support from CNR and INFM (Italy)
and from the EC contract CHRX-CT92-0051 is
acknowledged.

REFERENCES

1. M.P. Allen and D.J. Tildesley, “Computer
Simulation of Liquids”, Clarendon Press - Ox-
ford (1990).

2. G. La Penna, V. Minicozzi, S. Morante, G.C.
Rossi and G. Salina, Comp. Phys. Comm.
(1997) to be published.

3. G. La Penna, S. Letardi, V. Minicozzi, S.
Morante, G.C. Rossi and G. Salina, in prepa-
ration.

4. The Ape Collaboration, Int. J. High Speed

Comput. 5 (1993) 637.

5. N. Petkov, “Systolic Parallel Processing” El-

sevier Science - Amsterdam (1993).

6. G. Houghton, J. Phys. Chem. 40 (1964) 1628.
7. R.H. Perry and D. Green, “Perry’s Chemical
Engineers’ Handbook” Mc Graw Hill - New
York (1984).

8. R.C. Weast (editor), “Handbook of Chemistry
and Physics” CRC Press - Boca Raton (1982).
9. J.P. Ryckaert and A. Bellemans, Chem. Soc.

Faraday Trans. Discuss. 66 (1978) 95.

10. H.J.C. Berendsen, invited talk at the Sym-
posium on “Multi-scale phenomena and their
simulation”, Bielefeld (1996).

11. H. Heller, M. Schaefer and K. Schulten, J.

Chem. Phys. 97 (1993) 8343.

12. A.Y. Toukmaji and J.A. Board, Jr., Ewald
summation Techniques in Perspective: a Sur-
vey, Elsevier Science (1996).

