8
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

First experimental tests of the Peyrard-Bishop
model applied to the melting of very short DNAs

Alessandro Campa∗
1Physics Laboratory, Istituto Superiore di Sanit`a and INFN Sanit`a
Viale Regina Elena, 299, 00161 Roma, Italy

Andrea Giansanti
2Physics Dept., Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza” and INFM Unit`a Roma 1
P.le Aldo Moro, 2, 00185 Roma, Italy

February 23, 1998

Abstract

The melting curves of short heterogeneous DNA chains in solution are
calculated on the basis of statistical thermodynamics and compared to
experiments. The computation of the partition function is based on the
Peyrard-Bishop hamiltonian, which has already been adopted in the theo-
retical description of the melting of long DNA chains. In the case of short
chains it is necessary to consider not only the breaking of the hydrogen
bonds between single base pairs, but also the complete dissociation of the
two strands forming the double helix.

There is a need for a theory of the melting of short DNA chains (oligonu-
cleotides). The melting is the highly cooperative thermal disruption of the
hydrogen bonds between complementary bases in the double helix, as usually
monitored by the UV absorption increment due to the unstacking of the sepa-
rated bases [1]. At the equilibrium melting temperature half of the bonds are
disrupted. Synthetic oligonucleotides of a ﬁxed length and base pairs sequence
have been used for a long time as model systems for the study of the structural
and thermodynamical properties of the longer and more complex natural forms
of DNA [2]. Many studies have shown the eﬀects of both sequence and sol-
vent composition on the melting curves of oligonucleotides in solution [3]. More
recently particular attention has been given to the study of sequence speciﬁc ef-
fects on the thermal stability of a variety of specially designed oligonucleotides,
due to their importance in the exploitation of molecular biological techniques
in gene therapy [4] and genome mapping [5]. Predictive information has been
gained through an extensive thermodynamical investigation on the melting be-
havior of oligonucleotides, based on the computation of the Gibbs free energy,
∗Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:campa@axiss.iss.infn.it

1

at a ﬁxed solvent composition, as a sum of contributions from nearest neigh-
bors in the sequences [6, 7]. This phenomenology and the predictive power of
the thermodynamical approach should then be confronted with a microscopic
theory of short, heterogeneous DNA chains.

Modellization of DNA melting was initially motivated by the study of the
important process of transcription, in which the double helix has to be locally
opened to allow reading of the genetic code. It was based, already many years
ago, on Ising-like models [8, 9], and more recently on an approach based on the
modiﬁed self-consistent phonon approximation [10] (see also [11] and references
therein). These methods allow only equilibrium estimates of the probability of
bond disruption. However, it is also important to consider DNA dynamics, both
at melting and pre-melting temperatures. There is an interest in relaxation and
kinetic phenomena, which are relevant for the pharmacological applications [4],
and in the study of nonlinear energy localization and transduction. With a
particular focus on the last problem, discrete nonlinear models of DNA (see,
e. g., [12, 13], and for a review [14]), have been introduced; sequence eﬀects
have been considered in [15]. These models are appealing, because they are
simpliﬁed microscopic models with a small number of degrees of freedom, and
thus are aﬀordable also for the simulation of very long times. The experimentally
available melting curves oﬀer a way to optimize the parameters of these models,
and therefore also increase the conﬁdence for their use in dynamical studies.

With a particular interest in thermal stability, a dynamical model was intro-
duced by Peyrard and Bishop in 1989 [16] (PB model). The authors have shown,
through statistical mechanics calculations and constant temperature molecular
dynamics [16, 17, 18], applied to the case of a very long homogeneous DNA
chain, that the model can give a satisfactory melting curve, especially after the
improvement introduced in [18]. The PB model has been successively applied
to heterogeneous chains, either modelling the heterogeneity with a quenched
disorder [19], or properly choosing basis sets of orthonormal functions for the
kernels appearing in the expression of the partition function [20], but compar-
ison with experimental data was not attempted.
In all these works the fact
that the DNAs considered are quite long was essential, for the following rea-
son. In a solution with two types of DNA single strands, A and B, there is a
thermal equilibrium between dissociated strands and associated double strands
(the duplexes AB), and a thermal equilibrium, in the duplexes, between broken
and unbroken interbase hydrogen bonds. The average fraction θ of bonded base
pairs can then be factorized as θ = θextθint [8, 9]. θext is the average fraction of
strands forming duplexes, while θint is the average fraction of unbroken bonds
in the duplexes. The dissociation equilibrium can be neglected in the case of
long chains, where θint and thus θ go to 0 when θext is still practically 1. On the
contrary, in the case of short chains the processes of single bond disruption and
strand dissociation tend to happen in the same temperature range; therefore,
the computation of both θint and θext is essential. In Ref. [20] the factorization
of θ is stated, but only the case of long chains is then considered.

The aim of this work is to show, through a comparison with experimental
data, that the onedimensional PB model can be used to compute the melting

2

curves of short DNAs.
dissociation equilibrium.

It will also be shown how to take into account the

The potential of the PB model [16, 17, 18] is given by:

U =

n

X
i

k
2 h1 + ρe

−α(yi+1+yi)

i (yi+1 −

yi)2 + Di

−aiyi

e
(cid:0)

1

2
(cid:1)

o,

−

(1)

where yi is the distance between the i-th complementary bases minus their equi-
librium separation. The parameters k, ρ and α refer to the anharmonic stacking
interaction, while the interbase bond is represented by a Morse potential, with
depth Di and width ai. In Refs. [16, 17, 18] there is only a single parameter D
because only homogeneous DNAs have been considered. The stacking interac-
tion, that in the ﬁrst attempts [16, 17] was purely harmonic (ρ = 0), decreases
when the complementary bases get farther (ρ positive): this ρ dependent non-
linear term was found to be relevant to give cooperativity to the melting process
[18].

To model heterogeneous DNAs, we have inserted two diﬀerent values of Di,
according to the two possible Watson-Crick base pairs: adenine-thymine (A-T)
and guanine-cytosine (G-C). The former has two hydrogen bonds, while the
latter has three. We have then chosen a depth for the G-C Morse potential 1.5
times that for the A-T Morse potential. The complete set of parameter values
that we have chosen is : k = 0.025 eV/˚A2, ρ = 2, α = 0.35 ˚A−1, DAT = 0.05
eV, DGC = 0.075 eV, aAT = 4.2 ˚A−1, aGC = 6.9 ˚A−1. These values have been
adjusted to reproduce the experimentally observed melting temperature of long
homogeneous DNA in the most usual solvent conditions [9, 21]. For a given set
of values, the melting temperatures can be deduced with the technique of the
transfer matrix method [16, 17, 18].

We have then made a statistical mechanics computation, in which partition
functions have been used to obtain both θint and θext. For the computation of
θint one has to separate the conﬁgurations describing a double strand on the
one hand, and dissociated single strands on the other. The very possibility of
dissociation makes this a non trivial problem. We have adopted the following
strategy. The i-th bond is considered disrupted if the value of yi is larger than
a chosen threshold y0. We have therefore deﬁned a conﬁguration to belong to
the double strand if at least one of the yis is smaller than y0. It is then natural
to deﬁne θint for an N base pair duplex by:

θint =

1
N

N

X
i=1

< ϑ(y0 −

yi) >

where ϑ(y) is the Heaviside step function and the canonical average <
> is de-
ﬁned considering only the double strand conﬁgurations. We have chosen a value
of 2 ˚A for y0. After a discretization of the coordinate variables and the introduc-
tion of a proper cutoﬀ on the maximum value of the yis [10], the computations
needed for the canonical averages are readily reduced to the multiplication of
ﬁnite matrices, since the potential (1) couples only nearest neighbors, and are
easily performed by suitable computer programs.

·

3

Let us now consider θext. At equilibrium the chemical potentials of the three
species A, B and AB [22] are related by the equation: µAB
µB = 0.
Using the deﬁnition of the chemical potentials as derivatives of the free energy,
and in turn the relation of the latter to the partition functions, we obtain an
equation involving appropriate partition functions. In the usual experimental
conditions the solutions can be considered ideal; with the further assumption
that the model takes into account eﬀectively the presence of the solvent, we get
the usual equilibrium condition:

µA

−

−

NABZ(A)Z(B)
NANBZ(AB)

= 1

where Nj is the number of molecules of species j in the volume V considered, and
Z(j) is the partition function of a molecule of species j in V [23]. The numbers
Nj are related by the constraints 2NAB + NA + NB = const
2N0 and ∆NA =
∆NB =
∆NAB. Considering the case NA = NB (the experimental curves that
we are presenting are made in these conditions, with the duplex obtained by
annealing equal concentrations of A and B), we arrive at the following expression
for θext

NAB/N0:

≡

−

≡

− p
where δ is given by the following expression:

θext = 1 + δ

δ2 + 2δ

δ =

Z(A)Z(B)
2N0Z(AB) ≡

Zint(A)Zint(B)
aavZint(AB)

aavZext(A)Zext(B)
2N0Zext(AB)

,

(2)

where in the rightmost side we have introduced the separation of the partition
functions in an internal and an external part [8, 9]; the meaning of aav will be
explained in a moment. For the calculation of the internal functions, that do not
include the overall translation of the molecules, we use the DNA model described
above (which is also simply adapted to the description of single strands, allowing
an analytical evaluation: only a harmonic stacking interaction remains, which
is weaker than in the duplex, since in this case the term involving ρ is 0).
We have chosen to insert in the last side of Eq. (2) aav = √aAT aGC to make
separately dimensionless both fractions, that therefore can not depend on the
choice of units. Without any such normalization the ﬁrst fraction would have
the dimensions of an inverse of a length, since the overall translation is not
included in Zint. It is included in the external functions, that, however, have to
take into account also the dynamics not described by the simple onedimensional
model, and related to conformational movements (like, for example, the winding
of the strands). This point has already been considered in Ising models: the
inﬂuence on the dissociation process of the degrees of freedom not described by
the model can not be neglected, and it must be accounted for in some way. In
analogy to what has been proposed for the Ising models [8, 9] on the basis of
the partition functions of rigid bodies [24], we make the following choice:

aavZext(A)Zext(B)
2N0Zext(AB)

=

N

n∗
n0

−pθint+q

(3)

4

where the parameters p and q can be ﬁxed by a comparison with experimental
melting curves; n0 is the single strand concentration N0/V , and n∗ is a chosen
reference concentration (we have taken 1 µM, a usual concentration in experi-
ments). We defer further comments about this equation after the presentation
of the results.

We show here the comparison of our calculations with the experimental
melting curves that have been obtained, in our lab, for three diﬀerent oligonu-
cleotides, in a 10mM Na phosphate buﬀer, 0.1 mM Na2EDTA, 200 mM NaCl,
pH 6.7. One of the oligonucleotides contained 27 base pairs, and the other two
had 21 base pairs. The sequences are given by:

s1)

s2)

s3)

′
5

′
5

′
5

CTTCTTATTCTTATTGTTCGTCTTCTC3′

CTCTTCTCTTCTTTCTCTCTC3′

GTGTTAACGTGAGTATAGCGT3′

and by the respective complementary strands. We have considered the case s3)
at two diﬀerent concentrations. The single strand concentration was: s1): 2.4
µM, s2): 1.7 µM, s3): 3.1 µM and 120 µM. In Fig. 1 we show the experimental
and computed melting curves. As it can be seen, there are sequence and concen-
tration eﬀects on the experimental melting curves, which are well reproduced by
the computed curves. Note that a 40 fold concentration increase for s3) yields
an increase of only 5 degrees in the melting temperature (a logarithmic depen-
dence on the concentration is expected [1]). Similar diﬀerences between curves
at the low concentrations should then be due to sequence and length eﬀects. We
would like to stress that in the case s3) the parameters p and q have been ﬁtted
to the experimental curve at the lower concentration. The comparison with the
experimental curve at the higher concentration has then been performed with
only the change of the value of n0 in Eq. (3), without changing the values of
p and q; this has reproduced the diﬀerence between the melting temperatures
of the two cases, that diﬀer by about 5 degrees. This fact indicates that the
concentration dependence of the left hand side of Eq. (3) is described by the
preexponential factor, while the parameters p and q are related to the molecular
conformation.

In conclusion, our comparisons show that it is feasible to compute the equilib-
rium melting proﬁle of DNA oligonucleotides with the PB nonlinear model. We
would also like to note that the modellization of the external partition functions
ratio as in Eq. (3) is very similar to that adopted in Ising models for medium
size DNAs (100-600 base pairs) [8, 9]. This conﬁrms that this term is related
to the conformational ﬂexibility of the double and single strands, not described
by a onedimensional model. The internal term is related to the onedimensional
hamiltonian and then to nearest neighbor interactions. For long DNAs (large
N ), at temperatures in which θint is already close to 0, the part in Eq. (2)
depending on the internal partition functions goes as e−γN for some positive
γ, and thus δ
1. This N dependence of the internal part can
be seen, for example, in the case of homogeneous sequences with the transfer
matrix method [16, 17, 18]. It is expected to be the same for heterogeneous

0 and θext

≈

≈

5

sequences.

a)

c)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

b)

d)

315

325

335

345

315

325

335

345

T (K)

T (K)

lines) and theoretical results
Figure 1: Experimental melting proﬁles (full
(dashed lines) for the three DNA chains. We have plotted the value of φ
θ.
Panel a): sequence s1; panel b): sequence s2; panel c): sequence s3 at the lower
concentration; panel d): sequence s3 at the higher concentration. The ﬁtted
parameters p and q have the following values: p = 32.43 and q = 29.30 for s1;
p = 36.77 and q = 34.89 for s2; p = 29.49 and q = 27.69 for s3.

≡

−

1

In very short chains like ours, it is not surprising that the speciﬁc sequence
has some inﬂuence on the parameters p and q, while in medium chains some self-
averaging eﬀects should already take place. In fact, as shown in the caption to
Fig. 1, we have found diﬀerences of about 25 percent in the parameters referring
to diﬀerent sequences. We are now working on a more extended set of melting
curves for a properly chosen set of oligonucleotides, that can help in the attempt
to ﬁnd the relation between the speciﬁc sequence and the optimized parameters.
Then it would be possible to test the predictive power of this model and confront
it with the predictions of purely thermodynamical calculations.

In a more extended paper in preparation we will show a more exhaustive
comparison with experimental curves. We will also check if a simple analysis
based on the number of occurrences of the diﬀerent intrastrand nearest neighbor
couples in the sequences is suﬃcient to obtain the parameters, similarly to what
happens in the calculations of Gibbs free energy in short oligonucleotides [6, 7].
We are very grateful to F. Barone, M. Matzeu, F. Mazzei and F. Pedone for

providing the experimental melting curves and for illuminating discussions.

6

f
f
References

[1] C. R. Cantor and P. R. Schimmel, Biophysical Chemistry, (W. H. Freeman

and Company, San Francisco, 1980). Vol. III.

[2] L. A. Marky, K. S. Blumenfeld, S. Kozlowski, and K. J. Breslauer, Biopoly-

mers 22, 1247 (1983).

[3] K. J. Breslauer, Methods Enzymol. 259, 221 (1995).

[4] E. T. Kool, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 25, 1 (1996).

[5] M. Doctycz et al., J. Biol. Chem. 270, 8439 (1995).

[6] K. J. Breslauer, R. Franck, H. Bl¨ocker, and L. A. Marky, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U. S. A. 83, 3746 (1986).

[7] J. SantaLucia, H. T. Allawi, and P. A. Seneviratne, Biochemistry 35, 3555

(1996).

[8] D. Poland and H. R. Scheraga, Theory of helix-coil transition in biopoly-

mers, (Acad. Press, New York, 1970).

[9] R. M. Wartell and A. S. Benight, Phys. Rep. 126, 67 (1985).

[10] T. Dauxois and M. Peyrard, Phys. Rev. E 51, 4027 (1995).

[11] Y. Z. Chen and E. W. Prohofsky, Eur. Biophys. J. 25, 9 (1996).

[12] L. V. Yakushevich, Studia Biophys. 121, 201 (1987).

[13] L. V. Yakushevich, Phys. Lett. A 136, 413 (1989).

[14] G. Gaeta, C. Reiss, M. Peyrard, and T. Dauxois, Rivista del Nuovo Cimento

17, 1 (1994).

[15] M. Salerno, Phys. Rev. A 44, 5292 (1991).

[16] M. Peyrard and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2755 (1989).

[17] T. Dauxois, M. Peyrard, and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. E 47, 684 (1993).

[18] T. Dauxois, M. Peyrard, and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. E 47, R44 (1993).

[19] D. Cule and T. Hwa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2375 (1997).

[20] Yong-li Zhang, Wei-Mou Zheng, Ji-Xing Liu, and Y. Z. Chen, Phys. Rev.

E 56, 7100 (1997).

[21] These temperatures diﬀer by about 40 K, and their exact values depend
on the solvent conditions, especially the ionic strength of the solution. This
means that in any eﬀective model, dynamical or thermodynamical, the
parameters should depend on the solvent conditions.

7

[22] We are considering non self-complementary strands, i. e., A

= B.

[23] To reproduce the experimental conditions one should use isobaric-
isothermal (P,T), rather than canonical isochoric-isothermal (V,T), par-
tition functions. The practical ideality of the solution allows the use of the
latter without appreciable diﬀerences.

[24] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics (Pergamon Press,

Oxford, 1980).

8

6
