Numerical observation of non-axisymmetric vesicles in ﬂuid

membranes

yan.tex

Yan Jie1, Liu Quanhui1, Liu Jixing1, Ou-Yang Zhong-can1,2

1Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,

P.O. Box 2735, Beijing 100080, China

2Center for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

By means of Surface Evolver (Exp. Math,1,141 1992), a software package of brute-

force energy minimization over a triangulated surface developed by the geometry center of

University of Minnesota, we have numerically searched the non-axisymmetric shapes under

the Helfrich spontaneous curvature (SC) energy model. We show for the ﬁrst time there

are abundant mechanically stable non-axisymmetric vesicles in SC model, including regular

ones with intrinsic geometric symmetry and complex irregular ones. We report in this paper

several interesting shapes including a corniculate shape with six corns, a quadri-concave

shape, a shape resembling sickle cells, and a shape resembling acanthocytes. As far as we

know, these shapes have not been theoretically obtained by any curvature model before. In

addition, the role of the spontaneous curvature in the formation of irregular crenated vesicles

has been studied. The results shows a positive spontaneous curvature may be a necessary

condition to keep an irregular crenated shape being mechanically stable.

PACS numbers: 87. 22. Bt, 62. 20. Dc, 02. 60. -x

8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Vesicles are bags of lipid bilayer membranes which form spontaneous in aqueous envi-

ronment under appropriate conditions. In order to study theoretically the morphology of

vesicles, a lipid bilayer which has liquid crystalline structures and characteristics have long

been considered as a model. The ﬁrst description of ﬂuid membrane by a curvature energy

model was given by Canham[1], in which the local energy density of the form (2H)2 was

introduced, where H is the mean curvature of the surface. From the current prospective,

this energy model is a faithful description of a vesicle which consists of a symmetric bilayer.

However, real lipid bilayers are not symmetric and thus there is not a genuine physical re-

alization of this model. Helfrich [2] proposed from curvature elastic theory in liquid crystal

the well-known spontaneous curvature (SC) energy model, in which the energy functional is

F =

κc Z

(C1 + C2 −

1
2

C0)2dA + ∆P

dV + λ

dA,

Z

Z

(1)

where dA and dV are the surface area and the volume elements, respectively,κc is an elastic

modulus,C1 and C2 are the two principal curvatures, and C0 is the spontaneous curvature

which describes the possible asymmetry of the bilayer membrane. Nonzero values of the

spontaneous curvature results from the fact that a lipid bilayer may have a tendency to

curve one way or the other, due, for example, either to intrinsic chemical asymmetry be-

tween the two leaves and/or to a chemical asymmetry between the interior and exterior

aqueous environments. The Lagrange multipliers ∆P and λ take account of the constraints

of constant volume and constant area, which can be physically understood as the osmotic

pressure between the ambient and the internal environment, and the tensile coeﬃcient, re-

spectively. Based on the model, many works have been done in the axisymmetric case. In

their pioneering work on the model, Deuling and Helfrich [3-4] numerically found a catalog

of possible axisymmetric vesicles shapes. In their papers they used the nomenclature devel-

oped in red blood cells to describe the shapes they found. Among these shapes were prolate

and oblate ellipsoid, stomatocytes, and discocytes, some of which resemble the shapes of

human red blood cells (RBCs).

2

Locating diﬀerent branches of shapes of minimal energy in the parameter space, then the

division of the parameter space represents the so-called phase diagram. In SC model, Seifert

et al [5] calculated the two-dimensional phase diagram for axisymmetric shapes in SC model

within a limited parameter space. The parameters they used are the reduced volume v and

the scaled spontaneous curvature c0, which are deﬁned as v =

, c0 = C0R0, where R0

V
(4/3)πR3
0

is deﬁned by A = 4πR2

0 and A,V are the real volume and area of the surface, respectively.

In addition, by performing the variation of the energy functional the general equilibrium

shape equation was derived [6]

∆p + 2λH

2kc[2H(H 2

K) + C0K + (C 2

0 /2)H + ∆H] = 0,

−

−

(2)

where the operator ∆ is the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆ = ( 1

√g ∂i(gij√g∂j), g is the de-
1, K = C1C2 is the Gaussian curvature and

terminant of the metric gij and gij = (gij)−

H = (1/2)(c1 + c2) is the mean curvature (Here we use a diﬀerent sign convention for H

from the original derivation of this general shape equation in [6]).

Solving the shape equation under the axisymmetric case (the corresponding shape equa-

tion can be transformed from (2) into an ordinary diﬀerential equation [7]), several analytical

solutions have been found. Among these solutions are the solution of biconcave shape, the

torus solution, and the beyond Delaunay surfaces [8]. The ﬁrst two solution have been

supported experimentally [9] and the third is believed to be a hunt for experiments. All

these studies concentrate on axisymmetric vesicle shapes. No axi-symmetric vesicle shapes

of spherical topology has been reported in SC model.

On the other hand, in other curvature energy models, some progress has been achieved

in ﬁnding non-axisymmetric vesicle shapes of spherical topology by means of brute-force

energy minimization over a triangulated surface. In area diﬀerence elastic (ADE) model,

non-axisymmetric ellipsoid shapes have been reported [10]. very recently, in a modiﬁed ADE

model including the contribution of the compressibility of the total area and volume, Wintz

et al [11] reported a catalog of starﬁsh shapes. Characteristic for such shapes is their ﬂatness

and their multi-fold symmetry. As far as we know, no other non-axisymmetric vesicle shapes

3

have been reported in literature by any curvature model.

However, on the experimental side, abundent non-axisymmetric RBC shapes of spherical

topology have been observed. They may take very complex shapes and many of them even

have no any intrinsic geometric symmetry. There are a lot of clear images obtained by

scanning electron microscope of RBCs in the book “Living Blood Cells and their Ultra-

structure” [12] including very complex vesicle shapes such as echinocyte type cells (Fig.98 in

[12]) which have a characteristic shape with crenations or spicules (nearly) evenly distributed

on the surface, acanthocyte type cells (Fig. 157, Fig. 159 in [12]) which bear a superﬁcial

resemblance to echinocytes but with much fewer spicules irregularly arranged and bent back

at their tips, Knizocytes (Fig 106, Fig. 107 in [12]) which are tri- and quadri-concave shapes,

and Sickle type cells (Fig.198 in [12]) which show a sickle-like shape, et al. These complex

shapes are not yet understood theoretically in the context of bending energy models. Some

researchers [13] guess that such exotic shapes maybe involve other energy contributions such

as higher-order-curvature terms and van der Waals attraction of the membrane. However,

the conjecture is not so obvious as it seems. Our question is: is it possible that these complex

shapes can be described by a simple curvature model, e.g., SC model? It is the purpose

of this paper to numerically search non-axisymmetric shapes of spherical topology in SC

model.

Because of its success in ﬁnding non-axisymmetric ellipsoidal shape and starﬁsh vesicle,

we will also employed the algorithm of brute-force energy minimization over a triangulated

surface in this study. Such a method directly minimizes the total energy. The resulting

shape is a local energy minimum, which depends in principle on the initial shape chosen.

We will also locate each shapes found by us in the phase diagram in order to know about

in which region of the parameter space these shapes exist. In addition, in order to describe

vesicle shapes, we will use the same nomenclature as in [12].

The plan of the paper is: Section II describes the algorithm and the procedure; Section

III gives the main results; Section IV is the discussion and conclusion.

4

II. THE MODEL, THE SOFTWARE AND THE PROCEDURE

In order to ﬁnd the the locally stable non-axisymmetric conﬁgurations of RBCs, we

evaluate the bending energy numerically with constraint of the constant volume or constant

area based on the SC model. The reason that we don’t require the constant volume and

constant area simultaneously is to avoid possible contradictions of the two constraints in our

procedure described below. Under the constraint of constant volume V , the parameter λ is

just be understood the tensile coeﬃcient, and, under the constraint of constant area A, the

parameter ∆P is understood as the osmotic pressure. Since our main purpose is to search

possible non-axisymmetric shapes in SC model instead of to study shape transitions, such

a choice is applicable. To our experience, by our procedure described below the software we

used in this study performances better at the constraint of constant volume than at that of

constant area, so in most cases we adopt the constraint of constant volume.

The software we used to searching the surfaces is “Surface Evolver” package of computer

programs [14], which is based on a discretization of the curvature energy, area, and volume

on a triangulated surface. The energy in the “Evolver” can be a combination of surface

tension, gravitational energy, squared mean curvature et al. Constraints can be geometrical

constraints on vertex positions or constraints on integrated quantities such as body volumes,

surface area, et al. The constraints are incorporated into the bending energy and the cor-

responding Lagrange multipliers will be reported. The resulting total energy is minimized

by a gradient descent procedure. The resulting shape is a local energy minimum. These

characteristics of the “Evolver” make it be an useful tool for for studying non-axisymmetric

shapes in SC model. In the “Evolver” the osmotic pressure is denoted by an internal pressure

P , and it can deal with the following energy functional conveniently

F = m1 Z

(H

−

H0)2dA + λ

Z

dA

P

Z

−

dV,

(3)

where m1 is called the “weight” of the bending energy. Under the deﬁnition of H =

(1/2)(C1 + C2), The model is identical to SC model by the transformations: m1 = 2κc,

5

P =

∆P , and H0 = C0/2. In addition, no particular units of measurement are used in the

−

“Evolver”. In order to relate the program values to the real world, then all values should be

within one consistent unit system.

The software has been employed to deal many geometry problems such as constant mean

curvature surfaces, equilibrium foam structure at al. for several years [15-17], so we can rely

on it safely. Just as an exercise, we have tested it for the equilibrium condition of a perfect

sphere with a given target volume evolved from a cube in the SC model. The equilibrium

condition for the energy functional (3) is

P r3 + 2λr2 + 2m1H0r(

1 + H0r) = 0,

−

−

(4)

where r is the radius of the sphere, which is identical to the results in [6]. Under the

parameters m1 = 1, H0 = 1, λ = 2, and the target volume V = 4.189, we obtained a stable

unit sphere with the area A = 12.5774, and the lagrange multiplier P = 4.0023, which is

obviously satisﬁed the equilibrium condition.

On the other hand, the resulting shape generated by such an algorithm depends in

principle on the initial shape one chooses. The dependence on the initial shape leads to a

real diﬃculty to choose appropriate initial shape for yielding interesting conﬁgurations. In

order to ﬁnd new kinds of non-axisymmetric shapes, the strength of the dependence on the

initial shape chosen must be reduced by some way. We adopt a procedure based on making

the target conﬁguration geometrically “far away” from an initial shape. Taking the constant

volume constraint as an example,the detailed procedure is illustrated in the following:

i). Under certain values of kc, C0, λ, get (for example) a stable sphere with a given target

value of the volume V0.

ii). Taking the sphere as an initial shape, change the target volume to a value V1 which

is far from V0. This is in order to break the stability of the sphere and make the target

shape not being “adjacent” to the sphere. It is hoped that such a sudden and big change

in the volume will trigger a “random walk” of the surface before it ﬁnally stops at a locally

stable conﬁguration with the volume V1.

6

iii). Each new generated shapes and the complex intermediate unstable shapes can also

be taken as initial shape, so the procedure can leads to many shapes with no “correlation”

among each other. Such a way is capable of ﬁnding many diﬀerent kinds of surfaces from a

simple initial shape.

section.

The above procedure have generated many striking shapes, as reported in the next

III. THE MAIN RESULTS

By the procedure described in the last section, many striking vesicle shapes were found.

Some of shapes qualititavily resemble the RBC shapes observed experimentally. In order to

describe these exotic shapes, we also adopt the nomenclature devoloped in red blood cells.

We want to report four types of shape in this paper which are corniculate shape, knizocyte

type shape, sickle type shape, and acanthocyte type shape. We drew our intention to the last

kind of shape, because it is strikingly irregular without any geometric symmetry and because

it shows other interesting features such as “budding” and “vesiculation” formation. The role

of the spontaneous curvature in the formation of acanthocyte type shapes is studied, which

shows a positive spontaneous curvature may be a necessary condition for the formation of

such exotic shapes. Each shape is mapped into the two dimensional phase diagram (Fig.8)

spanned by the reduced volume and the scaled spontaneous curvature.

Corniculate shape

Figure 1 shows a corniculate surface with six corns, whose location in the phase diagram

is (v = 0.93,c0 = 1.28) denoted by “*1” in Fig.8. We obtain it from a destabilized sphere

induced by osmotic pressure, without the constraints of constant area and constant volume.

The corresponding paprameters are (P =

4, λ = 0.5, H0 = 1, m1 = 0.5, A = 5.15, V =

1.02). This shape apparently has rotational symmetry which is identical to the octahedron

and thus isomorphic to S4, where SX denote the group of permutations of the set X [18].

−

7

Though we didn’t ﬁnd the shape in [12], we hope it will be a hunt for future experiments. In

addition, such a shape maybe indicate the way of formation of echinocyte III vesicle shapes

(Fig.98-Fig.100 in [12]) which have 10-50 corns evenly distributed on a nearly spherical

surface.

Knizocyte type shape

Knizocytes (Fig 106, Fig. 107 in [12]) are tri- and quadri-concave shapes found in the

experiments of RBCs. The shapes denoted by Figure 2 is a quadri-concave shapes and bears a

resemblance of the experimentally observed shape (Fin.106 in [12]). Its location in the phase

diagram is (v = 0.84, c0 =

1.41) denoted by “*2” in Fig.8. We obtained it by under the

−

constraint of constant volume from an initial shape of a smaller volume. The corresponding

paprameters are (P = 4.09, λ = 2, H0 =

0.5, m1 = 1, A = 25.10, V = 10). The shape

−

has rotational symmetry which is identical to the cube and also isomorphic to S4 [18]. Such

a shape may be seen under diﬀerent circumstances. In fresh blood, it may be observed in

certain hemolytic anemias. In addition, if a suspension of cells is examined between slide

and coverslip and an erythrocyte permitted to adhere to the slide, gentle deformation of the

cell by a current of liquid in the preparation may produce this appearance [19].

Sickle type shape

Figure 3 bears a resemblance of the sickle cells in echinocytic forms (Fig.198 in [12]). The

location in the phase diagram is (v = 0.74, c0 =

1.48) and denoted by “*3” in Fig.8. It is

−

obtained under the constraint of constant volume from an initial shape with much smaller

volume. The corresponding paprameters are (P = 5.03, λ = 1.75, H0 =

0.5, m1 = 1,

−

A = 27.50, V = 10). Sickle cell is related to sickle cell disease, a hereditary abnormality.

Sickle cells appear when aﬀected blood is exposed to a suﬃciently low oxygen tension.The

phenomenon can also be seen by sealing a preparation between slide and coverslip and

waiting a few hours or leaving the blood for 24 to 48 hours in a vessel without oxygen [20].

Acanthocyte type shape

8

Figure 4 shows a strikingly complex shape without any intrinsic geometric symmetry.

Characteristic for this shape is its irregular characteristic shape and the several irregular

distributed crenations, which are just the same as the so-called acanthocyte type cell shapes

(Fig. 157, Fig. 159 in [12]) observed experimentally. The location of this shape in Fig.8 is

(v = 0.56, c0 = 1.89) denoted by “*4”. It is obtained by applying the procedure described

in section II several times from a simpler initial shape under the constraint of constant

volume of 2. The corresponding parameters are (P = 8.21, λ = 2.25, H0 = 1, m1 = 1,

A = 11.24, V = 2). The designation acanthocyte was given by Singer et al.[21] to crenated

red cells found in an hereditary illness now characterized by the absence of beta-lipo-protein

and serious nervous system alterations. The abnormality appears to develop during the

lifespan of the cells within the circulation and to be absent or minimal in the youngest cells

[22]. Another interesting point is that this shape shows clear “budding” and “vesiculation”

formation, where the term “vesculation” has the same deﬁnition in [23], which distinguishes

the (singular) limit at which the radius of the neck connecting the mother and the daughter

vesicles becomes microscopic. Such abnormal shapes were found abundant in this study.

In addition, the formation of such irregular shapes and “budding” as well as “vesiculation”

seems closely related to the spontaneous curvature. We show this by the following several

shapes evolved from ﬁgure 4 by changing the value of the spontaneous curvature. Figure

5 is the result by increasing the value of H0 to H0 = 8, from which one can see that all

the buds and the crenations are evolved into “vesiculations”. The location of this ﬁgure

in Fig.8 is (v = 0.70, c0 = 14.1) which is beyond the region of the phase diagram. The

corresponding paprameters are (P = 182.00, λ = 2.25, H0 = 8, m1 = 1, A = 9.76, V = 2).

Figure 6 is the result evolved from ﬁgure 4 by setting H0 = 0, which is a perfect sphere with

(P = 5.75, λ = 2.25, H0 = 0, m1 = 1, A = 7.68, V = 2). The location in Fig.8 is (v = 1.00,

c0 = 0) denoted by “*6”, which is a perfect sphere. One can also check the parameters by

the equilibrium condition of a sphere in SC model. Figure 7 is the result evolved from ﬁgure

4 by setting H0 =

2, which is a pear like shape with (P = 24.88, λ = 2.25, H0 =

−

2,

−

m1 = 1, A = 8.31, V = 2). The location in Fig.8 is (v = 0.89, c0 =

3.25) denoted by “*7”.

−

9

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The algorithm used in this study has powerful ability to ﬁnd complex vesicle shapes,

providing that the dependence in the initial shape chosen can be broken by some way.

Though our procedure used in the study can not completely break the dependence in the

initial shape, many strikingly complex shapes in SC model have been found. Some shapes

we searched bear the resemblance of experimentally observed RBC shapes. Apparently the

procedure is also useful in searching new shapes of high genus and can be used in other

curvature models. Though the shapes provided in this paper are all new, We have the most

strong impression of the existence of irregular acanthocyte type in SC model, because this is

the ﬁrst irregular shapes described by a simple bending energy model. Our study shows that

adding new energy contributions, such as higher-order-curvature terms and van der Waals

attraction of the membrane, is not necessary to account for such anomous shapes. In fact,

taking Figure 4 as the initial shape, we have obtained several other irregular shapes which

are not included in this paper.

The reason why these shapes have not been reported by other researchers also employing

the same algorithm is simple: by gradually changing the control parameters such as the

reduced volume, the spontaneous curvature, et al. from a (simple/regular) initial shape, the

resulting set of shapes obtained are all strongly correlated to each other, i.e., all of them

belong to a ”bifurcation tree” in the phase diagram. However, there may have coexisting

stable conﬁgurations of diﬀerent symmetry corresponding to a set of control parameters,

each of them also leads to its own “bifurcation tree” in the phase diagram. Thus, a ”jump”

between these “trees” is required to ﬁnd complex shapes.

We are very interested in the role of the spontaneous curvature in the formation of

irregular crenated shapes like acanthocytes observed in RBC experiments (e.g., Fig.159,

Fig.157, Fig.110 in [12]). The crenations of the acanthocytes in fact can be considered as the

indication of budding formation. In literature, the theoretical study of budding transition

has focused on the axisymmetric case. Under the axisymmetric condition, the physical

10

origin of the budding transition from a sphere in SC model is easy to be understood. As

area increases (or, as volume decreases) an excess area (compared with the area of a sphere

with the same volume) is available. If this excess area becomes comparable to 4π(2/C0)2,

it becomes favorable to shed the excess area in the form of a bud with radius compared to

(2/C0, which costs very little energy [24]. According to the natural explanation of budding

transition, a positive spontaneous curvature should be a necessary condition. Though in our

case the shapes are not axisymmetric, the basic mechanism of shedding area into buds should

be the same. In addition, since heavily distorted shapes correspond to large excess area, it

is naturally to think that the mechanism of shedding area also accounts for the formation

of such a heavily distorted shape. Because of the above reasons, we guess that a positive

spontaneous curvature is also a necessary condition for the formation of acanthocytes. The

results shown by Figure 5, ﬁgure 6, and ﬁgure 7 support this conjecture. In addition, we

have tested the conjecture for several other irregular crenated shapes which are not included

in this paper, all the results also support the conjecture. From the locations of these shapes

in Fig.8, our shapes are mainly in the part of higher reduced volume. Fig.4 has the lowest

value of v among our shapes, which indicates that the most likely region of irregular shapes

is in lower part of v. It is equivalent to say that a large excess area A(1

v( 2

3 ) favours the

−

formation of heavily distorted shapes, which is appreciable.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are indebted to Professor Ken Brakke, Professor Karsten Grosse-Brauckmann and

Professor Rob Kusner for their guidance on the software and useful suggestions. We thank

Dr. Zhou Haijun, Dr. Zhao Wei for fruitful discussions. This work is partly supported by

the National Natural Science Foundation of China.

11

REFERENCES

[1] Canham,P.B. J.Theor. Biol. 26, 61-81 (1970).

[2] W. Helfrich, Z. Naturforsch. 28C, 693 (1973).

[3] H.J. Deuling and W. Helfrich, Biophysics J., 16, 861 (1976).

[4] H.J. Deuling and W. Helfrich, J. De Phys. ., 37, 1335 (1976).

[5] U.Serfeit ,K. Berndl, and Lipowsky, Phys. Rev. A 44, 1182 (1991).

[6] Ou-Yang Zhong-Can and W.Helfrich, Phys. Rev.Lett.59, 2486 (1987); Phys. Rev. A 39,

5280 (1989).

[7] Hu Jian-Guo and Ou-Yang Zhong-Can, Phys. Rev. E 47, 461 (1993).

[8] H.Naito, M.Okuda, and Ou-Yang Zhong-Can, Phys. Rev. E 48, 2304 (1993);Ou-Yang

Zhong-Can, Phys. Rev. A 41, 4517 (1990); H.Naito, M.Okuda, and Ou-Yang Zhong-

Can, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4345 (1995).

[9] M. Mutz and D.Bensimon, Phys. Rev. A 43, 4525 (1991); A.S.Rudolph et al, Nature

352, 52 (1991); Z.Lin et al, Langmuir 10. 1008 (1994);

[10] Jaric, M. et al, Phys. Rev. E 52, 6623 (1995).

[11] Wintz et al, EuroPhys. Lett. 23, 404-408 (1996).

[12] M.Bessis, Living Blood Cells and their Ultrastructure, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1973).

[13] Ling Miao, Udo Seifert, Michael Wortis, and Hans-Gunther Dobereiner, Phys. Rev. E.,

49,5389 (1994).

[14] Brakke, K.A., Exp. Math,1,141 (1992).

[15] Lucas Hsu, Rob Kusner, John Sullivan, Experimental Math., 1, Issue 3 (1992).

[16] Karsten Grosse-Brauckmann, Konrad Pothier, Experimental Math., 6, Issue 1 (1997).

12

[17] Robert Phelan, Denis Weaire, Kenneth Brakke, Experimental Math., 4, Issue 3 (1997).

[18] M. A. Armstrong, Groups and Symmetry, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988).

[19] Bull, B. S., Nouv. Rev. fr. Hemat., 12 (1972).

[20] Jensen, W. N. Rucknagel, D. L., Taylor, W. J., J.laborat. clin. Invest., 56, 854 (1960).

[21] Singer, K., Fisher, B., Perlstein, M. A., Blood, 7, 577 (1952).

[22] Reed, C., Ways, P., Simon, E., Nouv. Rev. fr. Hemat., 3, 59 (1963).

[23] Ling Miao, Bertrands Fourcade, Madan Rao, and Michael Wortis, Phys. Rev. A., 43,

6843 (1991).

[24] J. C. Luke and J.I.Kaplan, Biophys. J., 25, 107 (1979).

[25] U.Serfeit and Lipowsky, Morphology of Vesicles, 420. In: Structure and Dynamics of

Memberanes,Vol.1A, North-HOLLAND (1995).

[26] U.Serfeit, Advances in Physics 46, 35-37 (1997).

13

FIG. 1. corniculate shape obtained from a destabilized sphere induced by osmotic pressure

without constraints of constant area and volume. The corresponding location in the phase diagram

FIGURES

is (v = 0.93, c0 = 1.28).

FIG. 2. A quadri-concave shapes obtained by random searching under the constraint of constant

volume. Its location in the phase diagram is (v = 0.84, c0 =

1.41).

−

FIG. 3. A sickle like shape obtained by random searching. The corresponding location in the

phase diagram is (v = 0.74, c0 =

1.48).

−

FIG. 4. acanthocyte like shape obtained by random searching under the constraints of constant

volume. The corresponding location in the phase diagram is (v = 0.56, c0 = 1.89).

FIG. 5. The shape is obtained from Fig.4 by increasing the spontaneous curvature. All the buds

in Fig.4 are evolved into “vesiculations”, which shows a large positive C0 favours the formation of

“vesiculation”. The corresponding location in the phase diagram is (v = 0.70, c0 = 14.1).

FIG. 6. This is a perfectly sphere also obtained from Fig.4 by setting a zero spontaneous

curvature, which shows a non-zero spontaneous curvature may be a condition for the formation of

acanthocyte type shape. The corresponding location in the phase diagram is (v = 1.00, c0 = 0).

FIG. 7. The pear-like shape is also evolved from Fig.4 under a negative spontaneous curvature,

which shows a positive spontaneous curvature may be a necessary condition for the formation

of the acanthocyte type shapes. The corresponding location in the phase diagram is (v = 0.89,

c0 =

3.25).

−

FIG. 8. A schematic copy of the phase diagram in SC model given by Seifert et al.

in [5].

The location of the shapes found in the paper is denoted by

n where n corrsponds to Fig.n. In
∗

addition, Fig.5 (v = 0.70, c0 = 14.1) is not denoted in it because the parameters are beyond the

region of the phase diagram.

14

