EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR A POWER LAW
IN ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC α–WAVE DYNAMICS

Y. Georgelina, L. Poupardb, R. Sart`eneb and J.C. Walleta

a Division de Physique Th´eorique†, Institut de Physique Nucl´eaire
F-91406 ORSAY Cedex, France

b Laboratoire d’Explorations Fonctionnelles,
Hˆopital Robert Ballanger,F-93602 AULNAY-SOUS-BOIS

Abstract: We perform an experimental study of the time behavior of the α-wave
events occuring in human electroencephalographic signals. We ﬁnd that the fraction of
the time spent in an α-burst of time size τ exhibits a scaling behavior as a function of τ .
The corresponding exponent is equal to 1.75±0.13. We therefore point out the existence
of a new power law appearing in physiology. Furthermore, we show that our experimental
result may have a possible explanation within a class of Self-Organized Critical (SOC)
models recently proposed by Boettcher and Paczuski. In particular, one of these models,
when properly re-interpreted, seems to be consistent both with our experimental result
and a commonly accepted physiological description of the possible origin of α-wave events.

IPNO-TH-9806 (February 1998)

8
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
3
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

† Unit´e de Recherche des Universit´es Paris 11 et Paris 6 associ´ee au CNRS

1

Trying to understand and encode in rather simple models the fundamental proper-
ties underlying the richness and complexity of biological systems and functions has be-
come a major topics in modern biology. Despite their apparent complexity, some of these
systems/functions exhibit, among other features, a tendancy for organization as well as
self-organization which can occur at various levels. A simple example in morphogenesis is
provided by the organized variability observed in the branching structure of the lung which
can be explained by scaling arguments, ﬁrst introduced a long time ago in [1] and further
developped in [2]. The concept of scaling is now well established in biology and physiology
(for a review see e.g. [3]) and appears to be a usefull tool to understand features of many
processes. In particular, scaling shows up in the power law behavior of some observables.
The human brain is one of the most complex physiological systems. It involves bil-
lions of interacting physiological and chemical processes giving rise to the experimentaly
observed neuroelectrical activity. The corresponding dynamics exhibits a complicated
behavior which reﬂects itself in electrophysiological recordings, namely the electroen-
cephalographic recordings (EEG), which, roughly speaking, are assumed to capture the
mean/global electrical activity of the neurons located in the cortex, that is, the outer most
(2 mm thick) layer of the brain. The attempts to extract relevant information from the
neuroelectrical activity have generated a large amount of work for more than 20 years.
Former investigations were mainly based on the Fourier analysis of the time series stem-
ming from the EEG signal [4]. More recently, the use of more powerful methods inherited
from non linear physics have provided a deeper insight into the fundamental properties
ruling the observed neuroelectrical dynamics [5] and, in particular, the possible occurence
of self-organization in the cortical electrical activity has been suggested in recent works [5],
but so far no evidence for scaling laws in the corresponding dynamics has been reported.
One of the major diﬃculties to observe a power law in human neuroelectrical activ-
ity is to determine relevant observables from the EEG signal. Recall that the evolution
from a deep sleep to an (active) awakening level reﬂects itself into four dominant regimes
of the EEG signal which are conventionaly classiﬁed according to their frequency range
[6]. These four regimes are called δ-waves ([0.5Hz,4Hz]), θ-waves ([4Hz,8Hz]), α-waves
([8Hz,12Hz]) and β-waves ([13Hz,19Hz]) (the lowest frequency range δ corresponding to a
deep sleep level). It is known that α-waves occur when human awakening level drops down
slowly towards sleep while the eyes are keept open [7]. α-waves represent therefore an
electroencephalographic landmark of drowsiness. Successive α-wave events/bursts can be
observed for a rather long period (up to a few hours) with typical time size (lifetime) from
O(100)msec up to O(10)sec. They can be easily isolated from the background EEG activ-
ity so that they are good candidates for study. Figure 1 shows successive α-wave events
with diﬀerent lifetimes. Notice the irregular variations of the occurrence times between
the onset of two successive α events.

2

In this letter, we study the lifetime of α-wave events occuring in EEG signals. The
signal processing is performed using a standard wavelet transform analysis [8] which ap-
pears to be well-suited to deal with the transients involved in the EEG’s and in particular
to extract reliably the various α-wave events [9]. For each EEG signal, we measure the
cumulated time for α-events with ﬁxed time size τ , normalized to the total duration of
the EEG signal (which basically represents the fraction of the time spent in an α-burst of
time size τ ), hereafter denoted by Pexp(τ ). We ﬁnd that Pexp(τ ) has a power law form
given by Pexp(τ )∼τ −ω with ω=1.75±0.13. This provides a new example of a power law
with fractional exponent appearing in this area of physiology. Furthermore, we show that
this experimental result may have a possible explanation within a class of Self-Organized
Critical (SOC) models recently discussed in the physics litterature [10].
In particular,
one of these models, when properly re-interpreted, seems to be consistent both with our
experimental result and a physiological description of the possible origin of α-wave events.
Let us ﬁrst describe brieﬂy the pure experimental part of this work (i.e. the data
recording). The experimental procedure consists in recording the EEG activity of 10
subjects who all have had a four hours sleep deprivation during the previous night. It is
known that sleep deprivation (and thus drowsiness) reinforces the appearence of α-wave
events. Each subject was installed in the sitting posture for a two-hour EEG recording and
had to keep himself awake. Each EEG signal was obtained from temporal and occipital
electrode location and was further ﬁltered through a [0.5Hz,30Hz]-bandpass and digitally
converted at a rate of 200 samples/sec.

In order to get more insight into the dynamics governing the occurence of α-bursts,
we choose the α-events lifetime as a representative physical observable [11]. The various
α-events (and corresponding lifetimes) are easily extracted from any EEG signal s(t) using
standard wavelet analysis [8,9]. In particular, α-events correspond to those part of the
signal whose wavelet transform modulus is maximum in the α-frequency range [8Hz,12Hz].
Recall that the continuous one-dimensional wavelet transform is given by [8]

(Wψs)(b, a) = |a|

− 1
2

+∞

Z

−∞

dt s(t) ψ

∗

(

t − b
a

)

where the real parameters a (a > 0) and b are respectively the scale and time parameter,
ψ(t) is the so-called mother function and ∗ denotes complex conjugation. In what follows,
we choose ψ(x) = π1/4 exp(iθ0x). exp(−x2/2) where θ0 is a numerical constant [12], which
is particularly suitable for frequency characterization and oﬀers a good compromise be-
tween frequency resolution and time localization [9]. In the numerical analysis, we consider
the discrete version of (1) which can be written as

(1),

(2)

(Wψs)(n, a) =

1/2

δt
a (cid:1)

(cid:0)

′

∗

s(n

)ψ

(n′ − n)δt
a

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

N−1

Xn′=0

3

for any EEG signal s(nδt) (n integer) of total duration N δt, where δt is the time step.

It is convenient to consider the time average of the square modulus of (2). The

corresponding expression is given by

< |(Wψs)(mδt

′

, a)|2 >=

|(Wψs)(nδt, a)|2, k =

; m = 0, 1, ..., (

− 1)

(3)

δt′
δt

N
k

(m+1)k−1

1
k

Xn=mk

where k is a reduction factor from δt to δt′ [13], this later being identiﬁed with the uncer-
tainity in time localization. This permits one to disregard the events whose time duration
is shorter than δt′ (and also to eliminate spurious eﬀects due to EEG background noise).
Then, any α-burst will correspond to the part of the signal for which (3) is maximum when
the scale parameter a belongs to a range associated with the α-frequency range [8Hz,12Hz].
The corresponding lifetime can then be straighforwardly obtained from (3).

We have extracted all the α-events from the EEG activity in each of the 10 EEG
signals and determined the corresponding lifetimes. This allows us to deﬁne Pexp(τ ), the
fraction of the time spent in an α-burst of time size τ . As shown in Fig.2, this quantity
exhibits a scaling behaviour, Pexp(τ ) ∼ τ −ω. The corresponding exponent is found to be

ω = 1.75 ± 0.13

(4),

where the second term in (4) (standard deviation) reﬂects both the inter individual vari-
ability and artifacts such as eyes motions and /or muscular activity (which are inherent to
EEG measurement).

We now try to identify a simple model capturing some features of the usually ac-
cepted physiological description and whose predictions are in good agreement with our
experimental result. To do this, we adopt a phenomenological viewpoint. Let us ﬁrst start
with physiological considerations. Although α-wave occurence is an important feature of
the EEG activity, the corresponding generating mechanisms are far from being understood.
It is commonly accepted that α-waves have a cortical origin and are driven by presynaptic
inputs from the thalamic level to cortical neurons [6]. Now, when drowsiness occurs, the
transmission of information from the thalamus to the cortex may be partially altered by
some sleep inducing mecanisms so that small clusters of neurons (involving O(1000−10000)
neurons) may be prevented from receiving information from the thalamus. Then, any α-
burst will start when such a cluster becomes isolated from the rest of the surrounding
cortex and will last until information can be transmitted again to the cluster, due to some
reactivation mecanism.

This speciﬁc feature, where basically peculiar changes are concentrated in time in-
tervals interrupting periods of inactivity, is somehow similar to a punctuated equilibrium
behavior which appears in particular within a class of SOC models [10], called multi-trait
models, which can be viewed as extensions of the original Bak-Sneppen model [14]. These

4

therein): each site of
models are deﬁned as follows (for more details see [10] and ref.
a d-dimensional lattice is labelled by M numbers belonging to the unit interval. At ev-
ery time step, the smallest number in the lattice is replaced by a new number randomly
choosen from a ﬂat distribution in the unit interval, whereas one of the M numbers on
each neighboring site is also randomly replaced by a new random number taken from the
ﬂat distribution. Now assume crudely that the relevant part of the cortex that gave rise to
the α activity that we have observed here can be modeled by a 1-dimensional lattice, each
site of which is identiﬁed with a cluster of neurons. Owing to the fact that each cluster is
actually controlled by a large number of parameters (stemming from (external) neuronal
inputs, ion channels,...), it is reasonable to consider the limit M → ∞. The corresponding
multi-trait model has been considered in detail in [10] and is known to represent a diﬀerent
universality class than the Bak-Sneppen model. Its punctuated equilibrium behavior has
been characterized in particular through PF (τ ) the distribution of (time) sizes of periods
of inactivity (∼isolation) for a given site, which can then be identiﬁed with Pexp(τ ), keep-
ing in mind the physiological considerations developped above together with the fact that
Pexp(τ ), due to its very deﬁnition, is nothing but the distribution of time size of periods
of isolation of some neuronal cluster. The distribution PF (τ ) has been show [10] to obey
a power law given by

PF (τ ) ∼ τ

−7/4

(5),

whose exponant is in good agreement with the one (4) characterizing the scaling behavior
of Pexp(τ ) that we have determined experimentally, therefore indicating that the M → ∞
multi-trait model may well be of some relevance to describe the dynamics of the α-bursts
in the EEG activity. One remark is in order. The corresponding exponant in the d=2
Directed Percolation model is equal to 1.84 [15]. Strictly speaking, this model is still
consistent with our experimental result although the existence of a preferred direction in
the cortex is diﬃcult to reconcile with the present physiological knowledge. We therefore
consider this model as rather unsuitable for describing the α-wave dynamics.

Summarizing, we have pointed out the existence of a new power law occuring in the
α-wave dynamics. Our experimental result may be understood in the framework of a par-
ticular SOC model, namely the limit M → ∞ of the multi-trait model [10]. This suggests
that this model may be successfully applied to describe (some of) the dynamics of the
α-bursts for which, consequently, self-organization and punctuated equilibrium behavior
may well play a salient role.

Acknowledgments: We are very grateful to A. Comtet, D. Dean and O. Martin for

critical discussions and comments.

5

REFERENCES

162 (1915) 225.

1) F. Rohrer, Pﬂ¨uger’s Archiv f¨ur die gesammte Physiologie der Menschen une der Tiere

2) E.R. Wiebel and D.M. Gomez, Science 137 (1962) 577; see also J.B. Wess, A.L.

Goldberger and V. Bhargawa, J. Appl. Physiol. 60 (1986) 1089.

3) N. MacDonald, Trees and Networks in biological models (Wiley-Interscience, New
York, 1983); see also K. Schmidt-Nielson, Scaling (Cambridge University Press, Lon-
don, 1984), W.A. Calder, Size, Function and Life history (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA, 1984).

4) R.M. Harper, R.J. Scalbassi and T. Estrin, IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr. , vol. AC-19

N0 (1974) 932.

5) see e.g. in Non linear dynamics analysis of the EEG, B.H. Jansenand and M.E. Brandt

eds. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993).

6) see e.g. J. Frost in Handbook of electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology,

A. Remonds eds. (Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1976).

7) A. Belyavin and N. Wright, Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 66

(1987) 137.

8) Y. Meyer, Ondelettes (Hermann, Paris) 1990.
9) see e.g. R. Sart`ene, L. Poupard, J.L. Bernard and J.C. Wallet in Wavelets in Medicine
and Biology, A. Aldroubi and M. Unser eds. (CRC Press, 1996) and references therein.
10) S. Boettcher and M. Paczuski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 348; see also S. Boettcher

and M. Paczuski, Phys. Rev. E54 (1996) 1082 and references therein.

11) The amplitude of the α-waves, which is frequently used as a relevant observable,
depends strongly on the electrode positions on the scalp, whereas the corresponding
lifetime dependance is rather weak.

12) In the present numerical analysis, θ0=5.5. For a discussion on the Morlet-Grossmann
wavelet that we choose, see ref. [10]; see also D. Gabor, J. of the IEE., vol.93 (1946)
429.

13) Here we take δt′=0.2msec.
14) P. Bak and K. Sneppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 4083.
15) S. Maslov, M. Paczuski and P. Bak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994) 2162. For a review on
directed percolation, see Percolation Structures and Process, G. Deutsher, R. Zallen
and J. Adler eds., Annals of the Israel Physical Society vol.5 (Israel Physical Society
in association with AIP, Bristol, Jerusalem, 1983).

6

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1: On panel (a) is depicted the time average of the square modulus of the
wavelet transform of a typical EEG signal whose maxima, indicated by the darkest areas,
corespond to α-events. The corresponding lifetimes are collected on panel (b). An example
of successive α-events occuring in the EEG signal is presented in panel (c).

Figure 2: Log-log plot of the fraction of time spent in an α-burst of lifetime τ versus
τ . All the data for the subjects are collected on Fig.2a. The straight line depicted on
Fig.2a corresponds to an exponant equal 1.75, obtained by ﬁrst ﬁtting the data for each
subject by using the mean square method (see Fig.2b for a typical example for a given
subject) and then averaging the results over the 10 subjects. The corresponding standard
deviation is equal to 0.13.

7

