8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

KINETICS PROPERTIES OF VOLTAGE INDUCED
COLICIN Ia CHANNELS INTO A LIPID BILAYER

R. C´assia-Moura1 and A. Popescu2
The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics Trieste, Italy

1. Author to whom correspondence should be addressed at
permanent address:
Universidade de Pernambuco, Instituto de Ciˆencias Biol´ogicas,
DCF-Bioﬁsica, Caixa postal 7817,
Recife, PE, 50732-970, Brazil
E-mail address: rita@npd.ufpe.br

2. Permanent address: Department of Biophysics,
Faculty of Physics, University of Bucharest,
P.O. Box MG 11, Bucharest, 76 900 Romania
E-mail address: aure@scut.ﬁzica.unibuc.ro

Abstract

The activation kinetics of the ion channels formed by colicin Ia incorporated into a
planar bilayer lipid membrane (BLM) was investigated by the voltage clamp technique
using diﬀerent step voltage stimuli. The temporal behaviour of ion channels put in evi-
dence a gain or a loss of memory, revealed by a speciﬁc sequence of electrical pulses used
for stimulation.

PACS: 82.65.F , 87.22.B

1

INTRODUCTION

Planar bilayer lipid membrane (BLM) has been used extensively as a model of biomem-
branes (Taylor and Schultz 1996, Tien and Ottova 1998). This artiﬁcial membrane is a
self-assembling system in vitro, which constitutes the fundamental spatial structure of all
plasma membranes. In fact, the lipid matrix oﬀers the structural frame in which all the
membrane proteins are inserted (i.e., enzymes, transporters, speciﬁc receptors, etc.). The
advantage of the BLM is that both sides of membrane can easily be altered and probed
by electrodes. For long-term investigations and technological applications, planar BLMs
can also be made on either gel or metallic supports (Tien and Ottova 1998).

In our experiments, we incorporated colicin Ia into planar BLM. Colicin Ia is a protein
toxin secreted by Escherichia coli, which kills the other competing bacteria (Konisky
1982).
It forms voltage-gated ion-conducting channels both in the inner membrane of
target bacteria and in planar BLM (Kienker et al 1997). Colicin Ia is a protein belonging
to the class of bacterial toxins that share a common strategy: they are inserted into the
membrane of the target cells, punching huge holes into them. In vivo these holes allow the
entrance of foreign particles and the escape of intracellular components. The dramatic
exchange of charged particles have, as a result, the loss of electrochemical membrane
potential and the cellular death.

Colicin Ia is a protein of 626 amino acid residues rich in charged residues (conferring
to it hydrophylicity), except for a hydrophobic segment of 40 residues near the carboxyl
terminus (Wiener et al 1997, Kienker et al 1997). Maybe the amino acid sequence, rich in
charged residues, is necessary in the earlier stage of attachment of the colicin Ia molecule
to the membrane, whose external surface is also hydrophylic. Then colicin Ia binds with
the hydrophobic segment parallel to the membrane and this portion is inserted in a trans-
membrane orientation (Kienker et al 1997). Colicin Ia translocates a large hydrophilic
part of itself completely across a lipid bilayer in conjunction with the formation of a ion-
conduction channel (Jakes et al 1998). At least 68 residues ﬂip back and forth across the
membrane in association with channel opening and closing (Qiu et al 1996). Channel-
forming colicin contacts the inner and outer membranes simultaneously during function
(Qiu et al 1996).

The probability of the opening of voltage-gated ion channels is determined by the
transmembrane potential (Tzounopoulos et al 1998). This channel activation results from
a series of conformational transitions in the channel protein, particularly the movement
of charged residues within the membrane electric ﬁeld (Armstrong and Bezanilla 1973).
In this work an electrophysiological method is used in order to demonstrate that it is
possible to control the activation kinetics of the colicin Ia incorporated into planar BLM.
In this way it was found experimentally that this artiﬁcial membrane (BLM + colicin Ia)
can gain or can lose its memory.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

The experimental procedure was according to the method previously described (C´assia-
Moura 1993). The lipid bilayer was formed by opposing two lipid monolayers across a
small hole of 180-200 µm diameter, situated in a Teﬂon wall separating two aqueous so-
lutions. Lipid monolayers were formed using azolectin (L-α-phosphatidylcholine type II
- Sigma Chemical Co) dissolved in hexane, so that solutions of 1% concentration were
realised. During bilayer formation the peak current as response to constant voltage stim-
ulation (amplitude: ±10 mV; duration: 2-4 ms; frequency: 500 Hz) was continuously

2

monitored.

The aqueous solution consisted of 500 mM KCl+5 mM CaCl2+5mM HEPES+1mM
EDTA (ﬁnal pH 7.00). Deionized water, double distilled in glass, was used in the prepa-
ration of all solutions. All chemicals were of analytical grade.

Colicin Ia was added directly to the aqueous solution in one half of the device realising
a ﬁnal concentration of 1-5 g/ml. For the sake of clarity, we shall refer to the side of the
BLM containing colicin Ia as to a cis half, while the colicin-free side will be called trans
half. Two Ag/AgCl electrodes were used to connect the electronics to the solutions (one
electrode in each half) via salt bridges (2.5% agar in the chamber medium, electrodes
immersed in 3 M KCl). A pulse generator with a d.c. voltage of ±200 mV was connected
to the cis half. The ionic currents ﬂowing through the artiﬁcial membrane were measured
under conventional voltage-clamp conditions using an operational ampliﬁer (Burr-Brown
model OPA111) in the current-to-voltage converter conﬁguration. The converter input
was connected to trans half, and the output was connected to a physiograph (Gilson) either
directly or via a digital oscilloscope (Nicolet model 201). Experiments were performed at
room temperature, that is at 25 ± 2 ◦C.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

More than 2500 recordings of ionic current versus time were obtained from 40 artiﬁcial
membranes and analysed in this work. The current was produced by pulses of at least
20 s duration of the step voltage stimulus. We do not intend to present all these crude
experimental data, but merely their common aspects. The reason is that we noticed a
variability of the artiﬁcial membrane behaviour, in spite of the fact that the experimental
procedure was strictly respected in all the cases.

Although it was observed a slight diﬀerent quantitative current response of the artiﬁ-
cial membranes to the applied voltage pulses, however one can remark, in all cases, the
following common features:

- a lack of response to negative pulses (Figure 1a and 1b);

- an inconsistent response to positive pulses less than 50 mV;

- a brief response and an irreversible breakdown of membrane structure to positive

pulses greater than 90 mV;

- a “window” of positive pulses (V) between 50 mV and 90 mV, in which all records
obtained with the same positive pulse presented a sudden exponential rise of the
ionic current and a consecutive longer linear increase phase (Figure 1: R1 − R6).
On the other hand, some of them were diﬀerent both in the amplitude and time
course. At this “window”, a diﬀerent pattern of responses can be observed for
any single voltage value applied to the artiﬁcial membrane, but a single stimulus
always produce a unique response. The variability in this case is the result of
successive repetitive trials on the same preparation, of diﬀerent measurements on
several preparations or of the large time intervals between the measurements. The
time required to reach the end of the exponential phase varied from 7 to 50 s.

As concerning the repetitive stimulations, we have put in evidence a critical interval,
∆tc, between two identical successive pulses V interposed by a resting period (∆t), with
the following characteristics:

3

- it is less than 120 s and is speciﬁc to each particular membrane;

- the second pulse applied within ∆tc always performs the same current response if the
resting period is maintained. Moreover, the response manifests a greater amplitude
if the resting period between the pulses is smaller (Figure 1a: R1 − R3);

- the second pulse applied after ∆tc always conducts to a non controlled current response,

both in the exponential phase as in the linear one (Figure 1b: R4 − R6).

The results of this study were surprising in at least one aspect: namely, from Figure
1 one can observe that if ∆t1 < ∆t2 < ∆t3 < ∆tc, then the responses are decreasing in
the order R1, R2, R3, while if ∆t4 > ∆tc the response is no more unique.

On the other hand, from Figure 2, it results that when we apply a sequence of two
successive pulses (P1 and P2) separated by a resting period within ∆tc (∆t1−2 < ∆tc),
followed by a third one (P3) separated by a resting period after ∆tc (∆t2−3 > ∆tc), the
system will respond stochastically (R3). If by chance the response R3 is identical to R1
(see bold R3), then the application of a fourth pulse (P4) identical to the second one (P2)
and after the same resting period before P2(∆t3−4 = ∆t1−2), the last one will induce a
response identical to that elicited by the P2 pulse. Therefore, the experimental model
is “remembering” the previous state (installed after the P1 action). Moreover, this state
can be induced by a diﬀerent pulse but pertaining to the mentioned “window”. This is a
proof of the memory of this system. The memory here must be interpreted in the general
sense: if the actual state of a system depends on its previous states, then this system is
endowed with memory.

In the case of the “window” pulses, applied into an interval smaller than ∆tc, the
enhancement (see Figures 1 and 2) of response can be attributed to the “memory” of the
artiﬁcial membrane.

4

The interpretation of this artiﬁcial membrane behaviour to voltage pulses is a very
diﬃcult task. However, one could advance some hypotheses concerning this complex
behaviour.

- After the stimulation of the artiﬁcial membrane, some colicin Ia molecules, which are
forming membrane channels do not have enough time to relax themselves (i.e., to
perform a transition from the open state to a complete closed one). But, because
the order of magnitude of ∆tc is too high as compared with the time of allosteric
transition of protein, one could advance the additional hypothesis that the lipid
frame of the artiﬁcial membrane will prevent a fast transition of these molecules
between the two states (open and closed). As we already presented, at least 68
amino acid residues ﬂip back and forth across the membrane.

- Another possibility could be of the increase the density of colicin Ia incorporated into
the artiﬁcial membrane under the inﬂuence of the electric pulses themselves.

-

It could also be possible that the voltage pulses induce some colicin Ia molecule
aggregation, resulting thus some clusters formation with a higher ionic conductivity
than that of the individual channels.

As concerning the stochastic behaviour of the artiﬁcial membrane in response to “win-
dow” pulses, but applied at intervals longer than ∆tc, up to now we do not have a plausible
explanation. Perhaps one could interpret this strange behaviour also in the term of ionic
channels’ memory of a long term type.

All these hypotheses must be confronted in the future with new experimental data.
We intend to extend this study to BLM with diﬀerent chemical compositions and also
to biological membranes, in order to have a better understanding of the complex bioelec-
trogenesis of the specialised tissues (e.g. heart, brain, etc.) and to furnish data for an
improved electrodiagnosis and electrotherapy.

5

CONCLUSIONS

We used a quite simple model of biological membranes namely BLM with colicin Ia
incorporated, in order to test its kinetics properties. By an electrophysiological method,
we demonstrated that it is possible to control the activation kinetics of the experimental
model.
In this model the ion channel memory is experimentally induced and can be
controlled by a speciﬁc sequence of pulses used for electrical stimulation.

Acknowledgements

This work was concluded at and partially supported by the Abdus Salam International

Centre for Theoretical Physics, during the authors’ visit under Associate Scheme.

C´assia-Moura wishes to thank to Prof. Emanuel Dias for his constructive comments;
and also C´esar A S Andrade, Jos´e Ricardo S A Lima, Katarine S A Lima and Luciana S
Ventura for their stimulating discussions and valuable technical assistance.

The experiments were partially performed at Departamento de Bioﬁsica/UFPE. A

part of this work was supported by grants from CNPq and CAPES.

6

REFERENCES

Armstrong C M and Bezanilla F 1973 Movement of sodium ions associated with the

nerve impulse Nature 242 457-461

C´assia-Moura R 1993 Activation kinetics of the incorporation of colicin Ia into an ar-
tiﬁcial membrane: a Markov or a fractal model? Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 32
175-180

Jakes K S, Kienker P K, Slatin S L and Finkelstein A 1998 Translocation of inserted
foreign epitopes by a channel-forming protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95
4321-4326

Kienker P K, Qiu X, Slatin S L, Finkelstein and Jakes K S 1997 Transmembrane insertion

of the colicin Ia hydrophobic hairpin J. Memb. Biol. 157 27-37

Konisky J 1982 Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 36 125

Qiu X Q, Jakes K S, Kienker P K, Finkelstein A and Slatin S L 1996 Major transmem-
brane movement associated with colicin Ia channel gating J. Gen. Physiol. 107
313-328

Taylor R F and Schultz J S (eds) 1996 Bilayer lipid membranes and other lipid based
methods, in Handbook of chemical and biological sensors (Philadelphia: Institute
of Physics Publishing)

Tien H T and Ottova A L 1998 Membrane biophysics: as viewed from experimental

bilayer lipid membranes

Tien H T and Ottova A L 1998 From self-assembled bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs)
to supported BLMs on metal and gel substrates to practical applications (Colloids
and surfaces)

Tzounopoulos T, Maylie J and Adelman J P 1998 Gating of IsK channels expressed in

Xenopus oocytes Bhiophys. J. 74 2299-2305

Wiener M, Freymann D, Ghosh P and Stroud R M 1997 Crystal structure of colicin Ia

Nature 385 461-464

7

Figure Captions

FIGURE 1 - The time course response of our experimental model as a function of the
pulse characteristics (voltage applied and resting period). Upper curve: the time course
of step pulses applied.
a) The responses to pulses applied within ∆tc. In this case the responses are determinis-
tic.
b) The responses to pulses applied after a resting period greater than ∆tc. In this case
the responses are not predictable (R4, R5, R6 or any other responses).

FIGURE 2 - The ionic current time response (R1 − R4) of the experimental model as
a consequence of a speciﬁc temporal sequence of voltage pulses (P1 − P4). The applied
voltage P3 are in the range of P3min = +50 mV and P3max = +90 mV (that is, within the
“windows”). P1, P2 and P4 are also in this range as P3 but they are ﬁxed, while P3 has
any value in this range. ∆tc is speciﬁc to each artiﬁcial membrane (for details, see the
text). Note that ∆t2−3 > ∆tc and in this case, there are many uncontrolled possibilities
of R3 responses (but at a given pulse a single response is obtained). The response R3
(bolded in the ﬁgure) is identical with R1 (although it is possible that P3 that generates
it, is not identical to P1). In this case, the stimulation of the experimental model with a
P4 pulse after ∆t3−4 < ∆tc will produce the response R4 identical to the response R2, if
the resting period ∆t1−2 is equal to ∆t3−4, and if the applied voltage P4 is equal to P2.

8

9

10

