NEARLY CLOSED LOOPS IN BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS AS ELECTROMAGNETIC RECEPTORS

Dept. of Physics, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, ISRAEL

D. Eichler

and

Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, 93106-4030

It is noted here that when a nearly closed loop in a biological system, such as a self-

synapsing (autapsing) neuron or mutually synapsing pair, is exposed to an AC magnetic

ﬁeld, the induced electric ﬁelds in the insulating gaps can be many orders of magnitude

larger than the average values typically discussed in the literature.1,2 It is suggested that

animal nervous systems might possibly be aﬀected in selected spots by man-made alter-

nating magnetic ﬁelds at weaker levels than previously supposed. Radio and microwave

radiation should be considered particularly suspect.

8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The possible inﬂuence of ”everyday” electromagnetic (EM) ﬁelds on living systems

has been a topic of great interest in recent years, with many controversial claims and

counterclaims in the epidemiological, laboratory and theoretical arenas. Of particular

interest has been the theoretical question of whether, at typical levels experienced from

household appliances, trains, etc. such ﬁelds could conceivably aﬀect living systems at

levels that thermal electrical noise and molecular agitation might appear to override 1,2.

The claim in these references, which otherwise assume the conservative premise that EM

ﬁelds are suspect until proven safe, is that ﬁelds that are weaker than those caused by

thermal noise must be beyond suspicion. It is noted in this letter, however, that if the

eﬀective brightness temperature of the alternating electromagnetic ﬁeld greatly exceeds

the temperature of the system -i.e. if the thermally averaged electromagnetic energy per

cavity mode is much higher than kT - it cannot be rigorously demonstrated that such ﬁelds

are entirely safe.

Low frequency electric ﬁelds do not, on average, penetrate biological tissue eﬀectively

1,2,3. Magnetic ﬁelds B, which penetrate eﬀectively, exert a weaker instantaneous force on

individual charged particles as compared to electric ﬁelds E of the same magnitude (or,

equivalently, the same energy density) by a factor of order (v/c), which is much less than

unity. Here v is the velocity of the charged particle and c is the speed of light. The time

averaged eﬀect could of course be a more complicated matter, but this letter in any case

focuses on electric ﬁelds. Induced electric ﬁelds from alternating magnetic ﬁelds (AMF)

are limited in their curl by Faraday’s law but the electric potential gradient induced by

the AMF, via the rearrangement of charges, is not.

2

Consider a nearly complete, circular loop of electrically conducting material of radius

R. Assume that the loop contains an insulating notch (a slot gap) of length δ. When the

loop is exposed to a time varying magnetic ﬁeld Beiωt, the electromotive force around the

loop is

E · dℓ =

πR2Beiωt

iω
c

I

(1)

(We have neglected spatial dependence of the ﬁeld assuming it to be small on the scale R.

We have also assumed that the magnetic ﬁeld penetrates the biological tissue at frequencies

well below 1000 Mhz, as is generally recognized to be the case, and for higher frequencies

we note that the arguments presented here may apply only within a penetration depth of

the surface of the organism. Unless otherwise stated, we use cgs units in which E and B

have the same dimensionality, and remind the reader that in free space a 1 Gauss magnetic

ﬁeld has the same energy density as a 1 statvolt/cm electric ﬁeld, that the statvolt/cm

and Gauss have the same physical dimensionality in the primary dimensions of mass, space

and time, and that 1 statvolt/cm = 300 V/cm.

If the rate of charge redistribution is larger than ω, the contribution to the integral is

dominated by the gap, so that the peak electric ﬁeld in the gap is

E =

ω
c

πR2
δ

B.

(2)

Now consider a nearly closed biological loop of connected conducting solution, e.g., a

neuron of length 2πR that closes upon itself, making a synapse of width δ between its axon

and one of its own dendrites. A geometric idealization is illustrated in the ﬁgure. The

resistance across the synapse is probably dominated by the neuronal membrane on either

side of it (i.e. where the dashed and dotted line intersect), which has a surface resistivity

3

of order 104 ohms cm2. Because of ionic currents and polarization in the extracellular

ﬂuid at the gap, any potential diﬀerence across the synapse is likely to occur mostly in

the membrane itself (where in fact its biological signiﬁcance is possibly the greatest), and

with this understanding we shall for brevity refer to it as the potential diﬀerence across

the gap. The eﬀective value of δ to be used in equation (2) may in fact be only twice the

membrane thickness, and this reduction in δ will only serve to strengthen the arguments

presented here. Assuming a length scale of order several hundred Angstroms, and the area

of the synapse to be the square of that, the resistance of the synapse is then of order 1015

ohms, and easily dominates the total resistance of the circuit. The EMF generated around

the loop is then mostly in the synapse. An electric ﬁeld of

E =

ω

B

104hz (cid:17) (cid:18)

(cid:16)

1Gauss (cid:19) (cid:18)

2

R
1cm (cid:19)

10−6cm
δ

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

× 314

V
cm

is created at the synapse. Independent of the width of the synapse, a voltage of

V = 0.3mV

ω

B

104hz (cid:17) (cid:18)

(cid:16)

1Gauss (cid:19) (cid:18)

2

R
1cm (cid:19)

(3)

(4)

is created across it. This is similar to the result obtained by Polk (1992) except that he

assumes a loop composed of small individual cells so that there are approximately 3000

individual gap junctions in a loop of 1 cm radius. Thus, the electric ﬁelds envisioned across

a self-synapse can be larger by a factor of 3000 or so than in Polk (1992). While R is likely

to be less than 1 cm for a given neuron, it is reasonable that embedded in neural nets are

large loops containing N synapses in series (which I term an N-cyclic synapse sequence, N

at least two), and that ( R

1cm ) ≫ N . In this case E ≫

ω
104hz

B
1Gauss

N −1 statvolt/cm.

The maximum ω for which the above is valid is the inverse time scale

for charge

(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)

(cid:1)

1
ZC

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

redistribution around the loop where Z is the electrical resistance of the intraneuronal ﬂuid

4

(excluding the membrane) and C is the capacitance of the gap (including the membrane).

If the loop has a constant cross-section, then

1
ZC

is

δ

2πR ω2

pτc, where ω2

p = 4πnq2/m and

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

τc is the collision time. Here the quantities n, q and m are the number density, charge and

mass of the dominant charge carriers. By equation (3), the maximum electric ﬁeld is thus
2πR ω2
(cid:0)
cδ
ω2
pτcR
2c

πR2Bη

Emax =

pτc

Bη

(5)

=

(cid:1)

δ

The above assumes that the conducting medium of which the loop is composed is collisional,

i.e., ωτc < 1, which is usually the case. For a dissipationless loop the right hand side of

equation (5) would be replaced by ωp

c RB. A typical value of the conductivity ω2

pτc in

biological ﬂuid is 3 × 1010s−1, or equivalently, 1.4 mho/m = 1.4 S/m. For intraneuronal

ﬂuid in a squid, it can exceed 3 S/m, whereas for mammals, a more typical value is 0.8

S/m.5 In equation (5), η is the eﬀective ratio of cross-sectional areas between the loop –

over most of its length – and the gap. One expects that η is large. This allows a faster

charge redistribution by a factor η. Estimates for η in various physiological networks are

beyond the scope of this letter. Large neurons can have cross-sectional radii as high as 10

microns, whereas gap scales could be as small as 102 angstroms, so η could get as high as

106. For large arteries, which have cross sectional areas as large as millimeters, η could

conceivably be as high as 1010. Naively, this extends the validity of equations (3) and (4) to

include radio and possibly microwave and IR frequencies. However, the overall resistance

of the loop depends the hierarchical branching pattern of the network it is a part of, and

needs to be evaluated on a case by case basis.

The radii of loops, and the eﬀective slot gap widths δ within such loops that can

exist in large mammals (e.g. humans) is a non-trivial physiological question that is well

5

beyond the scope of this letter. Loops many (of order 10, say) cm in radius may exist in

the circulatory and nervous systems. The possibility of multiple coiling, as in a sparkplug,

would further extend the range in the eﬀective value of the loop area. By equation (3) and

subsequent discussion, electric ﬁelds could be created in slot gaps that are even greater in

magnitude than the alternating magnetic ﬁelds if the latter are applied at frequencies near
ω ∼ ω2

∼ 5 × 103

hz.

δ
10−6cm

pτcδ
2πR

1cm
R

(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)

(cid:1)

If the loop is a bacterial chromosome, or any large, closed polymeric molecule, we

suggest in a highly speculative spirit that there exists the possibility of persistent (dissi-

pationless) current being excited. Defects in the polymer could act as slot gaps. In this

case, the frequency of collective electronic oscillations could be of order 1015−16s−1. If the

scale of the polymer is 10−5 cm, and the defect of order 1˚A, electric ﬁelds at the defect

could be comparable to applied alternating magnetic ﬁelds at infrared frequencies, and in

any case higher than the average value allowed by Faraday’s law. Though infrared light

would not penetrate deeply into biological tissue, it may nevertheless be an issue for, say,

epidermal cells.

Field strengths of order of several Gauss, and frequencies ω of order 103, which obtain

in some household appliances, can give EMF’s of order a millivolt over a scale of several

cm. Sources of high frequency RF, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices,

celluar phones, and microwave ovens are especially suspect. Consider microwave emission

at about 2500 Mhz at the standard safety ceiling of 1 milliwatt cm−2. This corresponds

to a magnetic ﬁeld strength in air (essentially free space) of about 2 milligauss. The

penetration depth into biological tissue of waves at this frequency is of order 1 cm. The

6

EMF generated in a loop of 1 cm radius is about 4×10−3 gauss cm, or about 1 volt. If

this EMF is concentrated across a single or even several neuronal membranes, its physical

signiﬁcance could not be safely dismissed, as it is more than an order of magnitude more

than the natural range of membrane potentials. Similar concerns would exist for the RF

ﬁelds from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices, and cellular phones at a distance

of several cm, where the ﬁeld can change at a rate as high as 106 gauss/s.

It is not claimed here that even the maximal electric ﬁelds derived here are danger-

ous, or that various claims of carcinogenic eﬀects can be accounted for via the electric

ﬁeld concentration mechanism discussed here. We also note that the estimates1,2 on the

maximum average ﬁeld strength do not contradict the arguments presented here, and it

is emphasized that the ﬁeld attains signiﬁcantly higher than average values only in small

selected spots that comprise a small fraction of the total volume.

It is worth noting,

however, that neural network viability in theoretical models depends on sensitive balance

between inhibition and excitation. Slight systematic changes in the ﬁring rates of large

numbers of neurons could qualitatively change the behavior of the net in a similar way

that, say, bubble chambers and cloud chambers are aﬀected by very weak perturbations.

In each case, arguably, the system records information by existing in a delicate state. It is

also conceivable that self-synapsing neurons, because they can be eﬃcient feedback loops,

play a signiﬁcant role in the ”personality” of the neural net in which they are embedded.

Systematic interference in the function of self-synapsing neurons might therefore aﬀect the

global behavior of the network in addition to the chemistry of individual synapses.

In conclusion, the thermal noise limit needs to be used with caution when applied as

7

a safety guarantee for exposure to time varying magnetic ﬁelds. The physiology of living

systems may employ the same principles as the meters and oscilliscopes that measure

“safely weak” ﬁelds while at room temperature. Strictly speaking, the thermal noise

threshold is not necessarily established by the Johnson noise or thermal agitation 1,2,3

when the brightness temperature of the EM radiation exceeds kT.

note added: Autapsing neurons have been grown in culture and, though the autapses have

long been suspected to be an artifact of the culture growth, it has very recently been

reported 6 that they are common in developing neocorticies of young rats. Most neurons

of the investigated class (level 5 pyramidal) are found to autapse and have on the average

more than two autapses per neuron. The spatial dimensions of the autapse circuit can be

as large as several hundred microns across.A reasonable scaling to large mammals would

be that the spatial dimensions are roughly a factor of 3 to 20 larger. This estimate is

based on the fact that cell bodies are a factor of 3 or 4 larger in large mammals than in

small rats, and the axonal lengths could scale more in proportion to the linear size of the

animal (E. White, private communication). It is conjectured here that cyclic sequences of

synapses will eventually be found on still larger scales.

I thank R. Adair, J. Arons, R. Belmaker, R. Blandford, G. Erez, A. Weisel-Eichler, P.

Finklestein, F. Liebersat, A. Mizrahi, M. Gutnick, P. Israelovich, E.N. Parker, S. Stokar

and E. White for valuable conversations. I thank the Institute of Theoretical Physics at

the University of California, Santa Barbara for its hospitality while this paper was written.

This work was supported in part by the U.S. Israel Binational Science Foundation.

8

References

1. Adair, Robert K. Phys. Rev. A 43, 2 (1991).

2. Bennet, William R. Jr. “Cancer and Power Lines” in Physics Today, April 1994, pp 23-9.

3. Weaver, J.C. and Astumian, R.D. Bioelectromagnetics Suppl. 247, 459 (1990)

4. Polk, C. Bioelectromagnetics Suppl. 1, 209 (1992)

5. Kuﬄer, S. W., Nichols, J. G., and Martin, A. R. ”From Neuron to Brain” (Sinauer

Assoc. Inc., Sunderland, MA) 2nd edition (1984)

6. Lubke, J. Markram, H. Frotscher, M. and Sakmann, B. Journal of Neuroscience 16,

3209 (1996)

9

Firgure Caption: The idealized representation used in the text of a self-synapsing

neuron or other nearly closed looop is illustrated. The dotted line denotes the circuit of

integration in equation (1). The solid line denotes the neuronal membrane. The ﬁgure is

not drawn to scale and the solid boundary should in fact comprise a signiﬁcant fraction of

the gap.

10

