8
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
8
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DNA - Nanoelectronics: Realization of a Single Electron Tunneling Transistor and a
Quantum Bit Element

E. Ben-Jacob, Z. Hermon and S. Caspi
School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel.

Based on the understanding that chemical bonds can act as tunnel junctions in the Coulomb blockade
regime, and on the technical ability to coat a DNA strand with metal, we suggest that DNA can
be used to built logical devices. We discuss two explicit examples: a Single Electron Tunneling
Transistor (SET) and a Quantum Bit Element. These devices would be literally in the nano-meter
scale and would be able to operate at room temperature. In addition they would be identical to
each other, highly stable and would have a self assembly property.

The quest for smaller and faster logical devices has
persisted since the invention of the classical transistor. A
novel idea of using single organic molecules as electronic
circuit components has been proposed back in 1974 [1].
However, the diﬃculty to connect a single molecule to
external leads prevented experimental veriﬁcation of this
idea until recently, when molecular junctions (acting as
quantum dots) [2]- [4], and a carbon nanotube ﬁeld-eﬀect
transistor [5] have been fabricated.

Here we propose a new approach to make logical de-
vices from molecules, which is based on our understand-
ing [6] that the phosphate bridges in DNA can act as
tunnel junctions in the Coulomb blockade regime, and
on the technical ability to coat a DNA strand (and other
molecules) with metal, thus forming a conductive wire
with self assembly property [7]. Our understanding is
supported by the observations of Reed et al. [4], who
demonstrated experimentally that chemical bonds act as
tunnel elements. Combining the above conceptual and
technical developments, we suggest to utilize the chem-
ical bonds in DNA (or other molecules) to build logi-
cal devices. These would be literally in the nano-meter
scale and would be able to operate at room temperature.
The operation principle of the proposed devices is the
single electron eﬀect, which makes them extremely fast.
Since they are made from speciﬁc molecules, the devices
would be completely identical to each other. They would
also be highly stable due to the stability of the chemical
bonds. The devices would inherit the self assembly prop-
erty, which can be used to create complicated networks
consisting of many elements.

A DNA strand is made of units (or grains), composed
of a sugar and a base. The grains are connected by phos-
phorus bridges (P-bonds), while complementary bases in
diﬀerent strands are connected by hydrogen bonds (H-
bonds). We propose that a P-bond forms a tunnel junc-
tion for a net charge [6]. (By ’net’ charge we mean the
deviation from the charge distribution of the unperturbed
DNA.) The tunneling is either stochastic (like a normal
tunnel junction) or coherent (like a mesoscopic Josephson
junction), according to the coupling to the environmen-

tal degrees of freedom. The origin of this tunnel junc-
tion are the two oxygen atoms transversely connected to
the phosphorus atom (see Fig. 1). These oxygens share
three electrons with the phosphorus, giving rise to two σ
bonds and one π bond. As the π electron can be shared
with both oxygens, it resembles an electron in a double
well potential and occupies the lowest level. When an
additional electron approaches the well, it encounters a
barrier due to the energy gap to the next level of the well.
However, since this barrier is narrow and not very high,
the approaching electron can tunnel through it.

p

FIG. 1. A schematic image of two ’grains’ in DNA con-
nected by a P-bond. The dark circles represent carbon atoms
and the white circles oxygen atoms.

The H-bonds have a capacitive property. The proton
in the H-bond can eﬀectively screen a net charge density
on either side of the bond by shifting its position towards
this side. As a result, the net charge accumulates on the
sides of the H-bond, and the bond can be viewed as a
capacitor. The grains themselves have inductive proper-
ties, stemming from the hopping of additional electrons.
The notations are shown in Fig. 2.

According to the picture presented above, the DNA
molecule inherently possesses all the properties needed
for logical devices. The fabrication of these devices can
be done using available DNA manipulation techniques.
As an example we show how to build a classical SET tran-
sistor (see Fig. 2). One should start with two strands (a
main strand and a gate strand), and connect the end base
of the gate strand to a complementary base in the middle
of the main strand. Both strands should be metal-coated,
except the grain in the main strand which is connected to
the gate strand, and its two adjacent P-bonds. The con-

1

nective H-bond should be uncoated as well. To do this,
the method presented in Ref. [7] has to be generalized to
enable selective coating. We expect it to be feasible if
artiﬁcially made strands are used, so that the coated and
uncoated parts are composed of speciﬁc, yet diﬀerent se-
quences of bases. Before the coating the DNA molecule
should be in solution containing an enzyme which can
bound only to the parts which should not be coated. Af-
ter the coating the enzyme is released, and one obtains
the desired result. The metallic coated ends of the main
strand can be now connected to a voltage source ,V , and
the end of the gate strand to another voltage source, VG,
which acts as a gate voltage.

VG

V
G

P

P

V

H

V

L

0

C 0

C, E

T

L/2

L/2

C, E

T

FIG. 2. A schematic image of a DNA SET transistor
(above), and the equivalent electrical circuit (below). P de-
notes the P-bonds between the sugars, and H denotes the
H-bond between the bases. V and VG are the external and
the gate voltages, respectively. C and ET are the capacitance
and tunneling energy of the P-bond, C0 is the capacitance of
the H-bond, and L and L0 are the longitudinal and lateral
inductances, respectively.

This DNA-made device has the structure of a SET
transistor [8], i. e., a grain connected by two tunnel junc-
tions to a voltage source, and biased by a capacitive cou-
pling to a gate voltage. Usually, when discussing the
SET transistor, one neglects the inductive properties of
the grain. This neglect is equivalent to the claim that the
relaxation time in the grain is much shorter than the tun-
neling time. The values of L and L0 in the DNA molecule
are not known, but should be very small, probably in the
pico Henry range. Thus the relaxation time is very short,
and we can neglect the inductances here as well. We also
assume that the coupling to the environment is strong
such that the tunneling is incoherent. In this case the
voltages across the two junctions are

V1= V

V2= V

C2
C1 + C2
C1
C1 + C2

−

+

N e + VGC0
C1 + C2
N e + VGC0
C1 + C2

,

,

(1)

2

where N is the number of surplus electrons in the grain,
and e is the electron charge. We added suﬃxes to dis-
tinguish between the two tunnel junctions. The instan-
taneous rate of tunneling from the right across the ﬁrst
junction, say is calculated from the single electron energy
levels [9]:

r1(V1) =

∞

2π
¯h

2
|T (E)|

Dgr(E − Egr)Dr(E − Er)

−∞

Z
×f (E − Er)[1 − f (E − Egr)] dE ,

(2)

where T (E) is the tunneling matrix element for an elec-
tron in a state of energy E, f (E) is the Fermi distri-
bution function, Dgr(E) and Dr(E) are the density of
states for the grain and the right electrodes, respectively,
and similarly Egr and Er are their highest occupied en-
ergies. Their diﬀerence gives rise to a Coulomb blockade
of tunneling into the grain. The system obeys the Fermi
distribution due to the large coupling to the environment.
The other tunneling rates: r2(V2), l1(V1), and l2(V2) have
similar expressions. The probability that there are N
electrons in the grain at time t is governed by the master
equation:

∂ρ (N, t)
∂t

= [r1(N − 1) + l2(N − 1)] ρ(N − 1, t) +

[l1(N + 1) + r2(N + 1)]ρ(N + 1, t) −
[r1(N ) + l1(N ) + r2(N ) + l2(N )]ρ(N, t) , (3)

where the transition rates (2) are expressed as functions
of N using (1). The I-V characteristics of the SET are
obtained by solving Eq. (3) numerically using the appro-
priate initial and boundary conditions [8]- [10]. A typical
I-V characteristic for constant density of energy states
and identical junctions in the low temperature limit has
a voltage threshold. In order to operate as an transistor,
VG is varied around the threshold voltage. For well func-
tioning transistor characteristics, the current raise above
the threshold value should be as steep as possible. This
situation can be achieved if the tunneling rates (or RC
times) of the two junctions are diﬀerent, or if there is
a gap in the density of energy states of the grain. As
the DNA molecule is not conductive it possesses a nat-
ural energy gap. The gap can be enhanced by using a
larger section of DNA containing several grains instead
of a single one. This happens since long DNA chains have
non-linear eﬀects, resulting in the tendency of charges to
form solitons [6]. This method has also the advantage
that it is technically easier to leave a larger section of
DNA uncoated than a single grain. The tunneling rates
in the DNA SET are the same, as the two P-bonds are
identical. This situation can be amended by attaching a
chemical group to one of the P-bonds, thus altering its
properties.

As a second example for DNA-made logical device, we
discuss a possible realization of a quantum bit (qubit),

[7] E. Braun, Y. Eichen, U. Sivan and G. Ben-Yoseph, Nature

391, 775 (1998).

65, 339 (1989).

[8] M. Amman, K. Mullen and E. Ben-Jacob, J. Appl. Phys.

[9] Tunneling Phenomena in Solids, edited by E. Burnstein

and S. Lundqvist, (Plenum Press, New York, 1969).
[10] M. Amman, R. Wilkins, E. Ben-Jacob, P. D. Marker and

R. C. Jaklevic, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1146 (1991).
[11] A. Barenco, Contemp. Phys. 37, 357 (1996).
[12] J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4091 (1995).
[13] A. Shnirman, G. Sch¨on and Z. Hermon, Phys. Rev. Lett.

79, 2371 (1997).

which is the fundamental element needed for quantum
computation [11].
Several systems which can act as
qubits have been recently proposed, included trapped
ions [12] and Josephson junctions [13]. The tunneling
property of the P-bond enables to use DNA to form a
qubit realization similar to the one of Shnirman et al.
[13]. Since the main concern in the operation of qubits
is maintaining quantum coherence over long periods of
time, DNA-made devices can be used for quantum com-
putation when the interaction with the environment is
In Fig. 3 we suggest how to build a qubit us-
weak.
ing three DNA strands: one short strand, containing two
sugars and a P-bond in between, and two long metal-
coated strands connected to the two sugars by H-bonds.
This device has the same structure of a Josephson junc-
tion qubit [13], and should operate in the same manner.
A detailed study of a DNA-made qubit will be presented
elsewhere.

To conclude, we have shown that the DNA molecule
has the needed properties to make logical devices. We
have discussed speciﬁcally how to build a single electron
tunneling transistor and a quantum bit element. Due to
their nano-scale dimensions, conformity and availability,
DNA-made logical devices would have the advantage over
the current solid state ones. In addition, the DNA-made
devices would operate at room temperature and would
have a self assembly property.

H

H

P

R

V

L

FIG. 3. A qubit made of one short DNA strand, attached
to two long strands by two H-bonds. The long strands are
metal-coated and connected to an external voltage source, V ,
via resistance, R, and inductance, L.

This research is supported in part by a GIF grant G-

0464-247.07/95.

[1] A. Aviram and M. A. Radner, Chem. Phys. Lett. 29, 277

(1974).

[2] C. Joachim, J. K. Gimzewski, R. R. Schittler and C. Chavy,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2102 (1995).

[3] D. Porath and O. Millo, J. Appl. Phys. 81, 2241 (1997).
[4] M. A. Reed, C. Zhou, C. J. Muller, T. P. Burgin and

J. M. Tour, Science 278, 252 (1997).

[5] S. J. Tans, R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature 393,

[6] E. Ben-Jacob, Z. Hermon and S. Caspi, Europhys. Lett.,

49 (1998).

in press.

3

