8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Scaling Behaviour of Stochastic Minimization Algorithms
in a Perfect Funnel Landscape

K. Hamacher and W. Wenzel
Institut f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Dortmund,
D-44221 Dortmund, Germany

We determined scaling laws for the numerical eﬀort to ﬁnd the optimal conﬁgurations of a simple
model potential energy surface (PES) with a perfect funnel structure that reﬂects key characteristics
of the protein interactions. Generalized Monte-Carlo methods(MCM, STUN) avoid an enumerative
search of the PES and thus provide a natural resolution of the Levinthal paradox. We ﬁnd that
the computational eﬀort grows with approximately the eighth power of the system size for MCM
and STUN, while a genetic algorithm was found to scale exponentially. The scaling behaviour of a
derived lattice model is also rationalized.

Despite recent successes in the description of the molecular structure [1,2] and the folding process of small polypep-
tides [3,8] the ab-initio prediction of the molecular structure for larger proteins remains an elusive goal. Since se-
quencing techniques presently outperform available experimental techniques for protein structure prediction (PSP) by
a wide margin, the reservoir of sequenced proteins of unknown structure represents an ever growing pool of available,
but as of yet inaccessible, biological information. These observations motivate the search for ab-initio techniques to
predict the molecular structure of proteins from the amino acid sequence alone as one of the outstanding challenges
to biological physics.

In one widely pursued theoretical approach to PSP, the native structure of the protein is sought as the global
minimum of an appropriate potential/free energy-function of the molecule [2,9–11] often including interactions with
the solvent in an approximate, implicit fashion. As the folding process in nature takes place on a long time scale
(10−3 − 10 s), its direct simulation cannot be accomplished with the presently available computational resources.
It is therefore desirable to determine the global minimum of the potential function without recourse to the folding
dynamics. It has been argued that the resulting minimization problem is NP-hard [12–14], i.e. that the number of
low-energy local minima grows exponentially with the number of amino acid residues. For this reason stochastic
minimization procedures [15] are widely believed to be the most promising avenue to avoid an exponential increase
of the numerical eﬀort for the probabilistic “solution” to this problem. Since the available computational resources
fall short by orders of magnitude to treat large proteins, it is important to obtain an order-of-magnitude estimation
of the numerical eﬀort required. This question can be answered by addressing the scaling laws [16,17]:

nCPU(N ) ∼ A N α,

(1)

governing the dependence of the computational eﬀort (nCPU) on the system size (N ).

In this investigation we determined the scaling exponents for four diﬀerent global minimization methods, for a very
simple, idealized a model that reﬂects some key characteristics of the realistic problem. Our results demonstrate that
the Levinthal paradox [18–20], which arises from the enourmous number of low-lying conformations of the protein, is
naturally resolved in the presence of a funnel structure. For such models, stochastic, thermodynamically motivated,
minimization techniques are generically able to avoid the exponentially diﬃcult enumerative search of the potential
energy surface (PES) in favour of a power-law dependence. Our investigation of a novel stochastic tunnelling technique,
which removes the kinetic barriers between local minima of the PES, demonstrates that the scaling exponents α is
determined by the thermodynamic complexity of the model, not by the barrier height of the kinetic pathways. We ﬁnd
that the computational eﬀort of Monte-Carlo-based methods grows with approximately the eighth power of the system
size. The genetic algorithm we investigated was the most eﬃcient technique for small systems, but its computational
eﬀort grew exponentially with system size. This ﬁnding demonstrates that the investigation of the growth laws yields
a much stronger criterion for the selection of promising algorithms than the comparison of diﬀerent techniques for ﬁxed
system size. Finally, we provide the ﬁrst explicit demonstration that the scaling exponent of Monte-Carlo techniques
on a lattice model, which incorporates only the low-energy physics of the continuum model, is consistent with its
continuum equivalent.

Because a detailed direct experimental characterization of the protein PES is diﬃcult, there is ample controversy
[5,16,6] regarding its structure and deﬁning features. However, in recent years an consensus regarding the existence
of a “funnel structure” has emerged as the most important characteristic of the PES in the present paradigm for

1

protein folding [4,7,21]. In such a structure the global minimum can be reached via a multitude of pathways that
traverse a sequence of increasingly well-formed intermediates in the folding process. This observation implies a positive
correlation between the “distance” of a given local minimum from the native state to the relative energy diﬀerence
between the two minima. There is some evidence to suggest the existence of diﬀerent families of protein models within
this paradigm [16,6] which may be characterized with diﬀerent scaling laws in their folding time. However, since the
origins of these diﬀerences are presently not known they are diﬃcutl to incorporate into a simple continuum model
that remain amenable to treatment with present-day computational resources. In order to determine a lower bound
on the computational complexity, we therefore focus on the scaling laws governing the relaxation in a “perfect funnel”
landscape. Such a landscape is characteristic of the family of “fast folders” in the lattice models. In addition to the
existence of a funnel-structure we demand that the PES reﬂects two other characteristics of their realistic counterparts:
a near-solid packing density in the vincinity of the global minimum and the existence of two energy scales that are
derived from the two relevant types of interactions in polypeptides. The free-energy diﬀerence between low energy
protein conformations is small (10 kcal/mol), arising from hydrogen-bonding, dispersion and solvent interactions. In
contrast, the energy barriers separating such conformations are characterized by strong interactions (≫ 100 kcal/mol),
arising from covalent bonding and steric repulsion. Simplifying signiﬁcantly, the strong interactions are responsible
for the reduction of the phase space to a few energetically allowed “islands”, which are then diﬀerentiated in energy
by the weaker interactions.

Model: To obtain statistically relevant results for suﬃciently large systems, we have investigated a very simple
two-dimensional model, consisting of two types of particles that interact pairwise with Lennard-Jones potentials of
unit radius such that like particles attract twice as strongly as unlike particles. The local minima of the model PES
are slight distortions of a triangular lattice. There are exponentially many such minima, which are diﬀerentiated by
the small energy diﬀerence in the interaction strength of the two types of bonds, while the transition states between
the local minima are characterized by the large energy scale of steric repulsion. The problem is easily shown to be
NP-hard [13]. The dynamical process by which a random initial condition develops to the minimal conﬁguration
can be visualized as a “demixing” of the particles into two adjacent clusters of particles of the same type — the
ideal funnel structure of the global PES is thus obvious. The average distance any given particle must travel from
a random initial condition to its position in the minimal cluster grows with the system size, mirroring the “global”
transformations required to fold the protein from the coiled to the native state.

We stress that the similarity between this model and the PSP is purely abstract, there is no correspondence or
mapping between the coordinates of the particles and the coordinates of atoms or clusters of atoms in the protein.
Given that a “global” transformation is required this minimization problem is more diﬃcult than the minimization
of Lennard-Jones clusters studied previously [1], but lacks the speciﬁc one-dimensional constraints of various simple
protein models that have recently been studied on the lattice [22]. A lattice version of the model is easily derived by
associating each local minimum with its closest lattice conﬁguration.

Methods: As the basic technique we have investigated Monte-Carlo with minimization (MCM) [23,24], a generic
and parameter-free extension of simulated annealing [15], which accelerates the minimization-process by allowing the
conﬁgurations to relax locally before the Metropolis criterion is applied. Since only the energies of the local minima
are compared to one another the simulation can proceed at a suﬃciently low temperature to diﬀerentiate the local
minima. Our results for trial runs using straightforward Monte-Carlo and simulated annealing calculations and their
recent generalizations [25,26] showed that it would be impossible to obtain suﬃciently good statistics for NCPU for
large systems to estimate the scaling behaviour.

Secondly we investigated a novel stochastic tunnelling method(STUN) [27,28], where a transformed PES:

˜E(~x) = 1 − e

−γ[E(~x)−E(~x0)],

is used in the dynamical process (Fig. 1). Since this transformation compresses the energy interval above the currently
optimal energy E(~x0) into the interval [0,1], the high-energy scale of the problem is eﬀectively eliminated and the
simulation self-adjusts its “eﬀective temperature” as better and better conﬁgurations are found.

Thirdly we have investigated a genetic algorithm (GA) [29] as a radically diﬀerent approach to stochastic global

minimization. From a population of size P , we select P/2 pairs of conﬁgurations, each with probability

(2)

(3)

where Ei designates the energy of conﬁguration i and Emax the maximal energy of the present population. Two
new conﬁgurations are generated from each pair created by randomly exchanging consecutive subsets of coordinates
between the two conﬁgurations (crossover).

In addition a random alteration of one coordinate is made with a small probability (mutation). The latter step
insures the ergodicity of the method, but most novel conﬁgurations are generated by the crossover mechanism. As a

pi =

Emax − Ei
Pj(Emax − Ej )

,

2

reference we have gathered data for the multi-start algorithm (MS), where a sequence of independent random initial
conditions is subject to local minimization.

Results: As an unbiased measure of the eﬃciency of a particular algorithm NCPU we adopted the average number
of function evaluations (n90) that is required to locate the global minimum with 90% probability. Given a set of
parameters, we conducted between 100 and 500 independent runs. We heuristically determined a run-size nmax(N )
for which well over 90% of the runs were able to locate the global minimum. From this data we directly determined
the fraction of runs necessary to locate the minimum n90,raw. Because of the (asymptotic) time invariance of the
minimization algorithms, the ﬁrst-passage probability p(n) must obey an exponential distribution. The systematic
error to n90,raw is therefore small, the details of the data analysis will be published elsewhere [30]. For even system
sizes N = 4 − 16 we have optimized the parameters of the various methods. The optimal parameters were found to
be only slightly dependent on system size and could be extrapolated to larger system sizes where a full parameter
optimization was too expensive [30].

For just under a decade of system sizes (Figure 2) we obtain a power-law dependence of the computational eﬀort
with the system size with scaling exponents as αSTUN = 7.6(±1.8) and αMCM = 6.4(±1.5) for the continuum and
αMC/MCM = 4.7(±1.6) for the lattice model. The slight curvature of the MCM data for large system size correlates
with an increasing eﬃciency of the local minimization algorithm we used (inset of Figure 2). Taking into account
the exponents of the local minimization method, which scales almost linearly in the range of system size investigated,
we ﬁnd αMC,lattice ≈ αMCM − αconj.gradient. For the GA and MS an exponential increase of the computational eﬀort
n90,raw ∼ eξN with system size was observed., with exponents ξMS = 0.64 and ξGA = 0.37

Conclusions: The demonstration of power-law growth of the computational eﬀort for the Monte-Carlo method
(MCM) illustrates the fact that a the existence of a funnel structure is suﬃcient to avoid an exponentially expensive
search of the PES. This observation oﬀers a natural resolution of the Levinthal paradox in the context of thermody-
namically motivated, stochastic minimization methods: The exponential complexity in the Levinthal paradox results
from the assumption that the local minima appear as uncorrelated “holes” on an otherwise ﬂat PES. Obviously, the
enumerative search of such a PES is unavoidable. The two necessary ingredients for a power-law scaling of the “folding
time” are the existence of a hierarchy of the local minima and a method that can exploit this hierarchy by virtue of
the correlation of successive conﬁgurations. The key diﬀerence between MS and MCM lies in the lack of correlation
between the conﬁgurations of the former method and results in the expected exponential increase of the numerical
eﬀort for MS.

The equivalence of the exponents of MCM and the tunnelling method, which systematically eliminates kinetic
barriers in the minimization process, indicate that presence and height of such barriers do not aﬀect the scaling
behaviour of the method. It is therefore the thermodynamic complexity of the PES, as opposed to the presence of
kinetic constraints, which classiﬁes the folding process here. This observation raises the intriguing question, whether
the scaling exponents are diﬀerent if the structure of the minima of the PES is altered in the transformation, such as
in the diﬀusion equation method [31].

We note that the superiority of MCM over GA can only be established in the context of a scaling analysis, as the
GA is the superior method for small system size. The reasons for the failure of the GA are presently ill-understood.
Compounded with the N 2 eﬀort to evaluate a long-range pair-potential, the total minimization eﬀort grows with
the eighth power of the system size, which places the protein structure problem among the computationally hardest
problems studied today. In the context of recent discussion regarding the “foldability” [20,32,16] of diﬀerent families
of model-“proteins”, our model is a natural “fast-folder” by virtue of construction. It is therefore encouraging that our
results oﬀer the ﬁrst explicit conﬁrmation that the scaling behaviour of the continuum systems is consistent with the
behaviour of the derived lattice model, while the numerical eﬀort of the treatment of the latter is orders of magnitudes
less. It is further encouraging that the scaling exponent for the continuum model agrees within the statistical error
with estimations of the “folding-time” in polymer models [17] and some lattice models for proteins [16], provided that
the number of local minima visited in the ﬁrst-passage trajectory is proportional to the folding time. We hope that
our observations motivate the investigation of scaling laws for more realistic models and a wider variety of methods,
when the computational resources for such investigations become available. The study of models that incorporate
the one-dimensional connectivity of protein molecule in the presence of various types of interaction will allow to
diﬀerentiate between the various mechanisms that have been postulated to aide the folding process in nature. Beyond
the PSP problem, NP-hard minimization problems are ubiquitous in many scientiﬁc and industrial areas [12] and
it would be highly desirable to establish “universality classes” for such problems, which are characterized by their
scaling exponent α.

Acknowledgements: The authors gratefully acknowledge stimulating discussions with H. Keiter, J. Stolze, C. Gros,

M. Karplus and U. Hansmann. This work was supported by the state government of NRW.

3

[1] in Global Minimization of Nonconvex Energy Functions: Molecular Conformation and Protein Folding, Vol. 23 of DIMACS
– Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, edited by D. S. Panos M. Pardalos and G. Xue (AMS,
Princeton, 1995).

[2] K. D. Gibson and H. A. Scheraga, J. Comp. Chem. 15, 1403 (1994).
[3] W. van Gunsteren, private communication.
[4] P.E. Leopold, M. Montal, and J. N. Onuchic, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 8721 (1992); P.G. Wolynes, J.N. Onuchic, D.
Thirumalai, Science 267, 1619 (1995); J.N. Onuchich, P. G. Wolynesm Z. Luthey-Schulten, and N.D. Socci, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 92, 3626 (1995)

[5] C. Levinthal, J. Chim. Phys.65, 44 (1968); D. K. Klimov and D. Thirumalai: Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4070 (1996); A. V.

Finkelstein, A. M. Gutin, A. Y. badretdinov, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 50, 171 (1993)

[6] H. Li, C. Tang, and N.S. Wingreen: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 4987 (1998)
[7] K.A. Dill and H.S. Chan, Natur. Struc. Biol. 4, 10 (1997), K.A. Dill: Biochemistry 29, 7133 (1990)
[8] U. H. Hansmann, M. Masuya, and Y. Okamoto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 10652 (1997).
[9] H. A. Scheraga, Chemica Scripta 29A, 3 (1989).
[10] J. Skolnick and A. Kolinski, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 40, 207 (1989).
[11] P. Derreumaux, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 5260 (1997).
[12] C. H. Papadimitriou, Computational Complexity (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1994).
[13] L. Wille and J. Vennik, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 18, L419 (1985).
[14] J. Ngo and J. Marks, Protein Engineering 5, 313 (1992).
[15] S. Kirkpatrick, C. Gelatt, and M. Vecchi, Science 220, 671 (1983).
[16] A. M. Gutin, V. I. Abkevisch and E.I. Shaknovich, Phys. Rev. Letters 77, 5433 (1996).
[17] D. Thirumalai, J. Phys. I France 5, 1457 (1997).
[18] C. Levinthal, J. Chim. Phys. 65, 44 (1968).
[19] E. S. Andrej ˇSali and M. Karplus, Nature 369, 248 (1994).
[20] E. Shakhnovich, G. Farztdinov, A. Gutin, and M. Karplus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1665 (1991).
[21] T. Lazaridis and M. Karplus, Science 278, 1928 (1997).
[22] K. Lan and K. Dill, Macromolecules 22, 3986 (1989).
[23] A. Nayeem, J. Vila, and H. A. Scheraga, J. Comp. Chem. 12, 594 (1991).
[24] Z. Li and H. Scheraga, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 84, 6611 (1987).
[25] B. Berg, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C3, 1083 (1992).
[26] E. Marinari and G. Parisi, Europhys. Lett. 19, 451 (1992).
[27] A. V. Levy and A. Montalvo, SIAM J. Sci. Stat. Comput. 6, 15 (1985).
[28] J. Barhen, V. Protoposecu, and D. Reister, Science 276, 1094 (1997).
[29] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas-

sachusetts, 1989).

[30] K. Hamacher and W. Wenzel, to be published.
[31] L. Piela, J. Kostrowicki, and H. A. Scheraga, J. Phys. Chem. 93, 3339 (1989).
[32] A. Irb¨ack, C. Peterson, F. Potthast, and O. Sommelius, cond-mat/9610010 (1996); A. Irb¨ack, C. Peterson, F. Potthast,

and E. Sandelin, cond-mat/9711092 (1997).

)
x
(
E

 
 
)
 
0
 
 
x
 
 
(
 
E

x
FIG. 1. Schematic one-dimensional PES (full line) and its STUN eﬀective potential(dashed line), where the indicated mini-
mum E(~x0) is used as the reference. All energies ranging from the best present estimate to inﬁnity are mapped to the interval
[0, 1], while all the energies of all lower minima are exponentially enhanced.

x0

4

18

38

48

28
N

106

w
a
r
,
0
9
n

12.3

7.3

2.3

α

MCM=6.4

α

MC−Lat=4.7

(b)

4

6

8

10

12 14 16 18 20

106

105

104

103

102

N

(a)

108

107

105

104

109

108

107

105

104

w
a
r
,
0
9
 
n

106

5

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

N

FIG. 2. (a) log-log plot of the average number of function evaluations n90,raw as a function of system size N for Monte-Carlo
with minimization MCM (circles) and the stochastic tunnelling method STUN (open squares) in the continuum (left scale)
and for Monte-Carlo(triangles) on the lattice (right scale) with power-law ﬁts. The inset shows the average number of function
evaluations (in thousands) for the minimization of a cluster of N particles using the conjugate gradient algorithm. To demon-
strate that exponential and power-law scaling can be clearly distingusiched we show data for the exponentially scaling MS
algorithm (full squares). (b) log-linear plot of n90,raw(N) for the multi-start method (MS) (squares) and the genetic algorithm
(GA) (cirles) with exponential ﬁts.

