8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chance and Necessity in Evolution:
Lessons from RNA ⋆

Peter Schuster and Walter Fontana

Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501 USA

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Chemie und Strahlenchemie, Universit¨at Wien,
W¨ahringerstraße 17, A-1090 Wien, Austria

Abstract

The RNA folding map, understood as the relationship between sequences and sec-
ondary structures or shapes, exhibits robust statistical properties summarized by
three notions: (1) the notion of a typical shape (that among all sequences of ﬁxed
length certain shapes are realized much more frequently than others), (2) the notion
of shape space covering (that all typical shapes are realized in a small neighborhood
of any random sequence), and (3) the notion of a neutral network (that sequences
folding into the same typical shape form networks that percolate through sequence
space).

The concept of a neutral network is particularly illuminating. Neutral networks
loosen the requirements on the mutation rate for selection to remain eﬀective. What
needs to be preserved in a population is not a particular sequence, but rather a
shape. This mandates a reformulation of the original (genotypic) error threshold in
terms of a phenotypic error threshold conﬁrming the intuition that more errors can
be tolerated at higher degrees of neutrality.

With regard to adaptation, neutrality has two seemingly contradictory eﬀects:
It acts as a buﬀer against mutations ensuring that a phenotype is preserved. Yet
it is deeply enabling, because it permits evolutionary change to occur by allow-
ing the sequence context to vary silently until a single point mutation can become
phenotypically consequential. Neutrality also inﬂuences predictability of adaptive
trajectories in seemingly contradictory ways. On the one hand it increases the un-
certainty of their genotypic trace. At the same time neutrality structures the access
from one shape to another, thereby inducing a topology among RNA shapes which
permits a distinction between continuous and discontinuous shape transformations.
To the extent that adaptive trajectories must undergo such transformations, their
phenotypic trace becomes more predictable.

Key words: Genotype-phenotype relation, intrinsic punctuation, molecular
evolution, neutral networks, RNA secondary structure

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

9 February 2008

1 Introduction

In his provoking classic, Chance and Necessity [1], Jacques Monod expressed
the belief that a “universal theory”, despite anticipating the appearance of cer-
tain classes of objects (such as galaxies, planetary systems, molecules, atoms,
and the like), would not be able to account for the biosphere. The biosphere,
Monod says, does not contain a predictable class of objects. Essential unpre-
dictability from ﬁrst principles does not imply that the biosphere is not ex-
plicable through these principles: biological objects have, in Monod’s words,
“no obligation to exist, but they have the right to” ([1], p. 44). From a more
rigorous point of view, the problem of predicting the class of objects that are
outcomes of biological evolution, that is, species of organisms, is ill-posed as
long as we lack a formal speciﬁcation of this class [2]. A judgement on Monod’s
position must, therefore, remain open for the time being.

While the selection pressures of natural evolution arise endogenously, artiﬁcial
evolution allows to specify desired outcomes implicitly by ﬁxing those pres-
sures exogenously. For example, when RNA molecules are being intentionally
evolved in the test tube to perform certain functions or to bind certain tar-
gets [3], an outcome is being implicitly speciﬁed in advance. The evolutionary
problem then reduces to producing an actual RNA sequence folding into a
shape implementing some prespeciﬁed properties. This is an adaptative pro-
cess within a class of objects rather than the evolution of a class of objects
(the process which Monod believed to be intrinsically unpredictable). Issues
concerning the interplay of chance and necessity become smaller in scope but
also better deﬁned in the context of evolutionary adaptation. For example, is it
predictable whether a desired outcome can be attained? And how predictable
are adaptive trajectories given some level of abstraction?

When considering the production of antibodies during an immune response,
Monod – like many – was puzzled by the eﬀectiveness of adaptation as a
search engine driven by selection and mutation alone. The puzzle about the
eﬀectiveness of adaptation is, as we shall argue, only apparent. It results from
a misframing of the problem not unlike in the so-called Levinthal paradox [4]
of protein folding, where the puzzle is (or rather, was) about how proteins can
fold into their native structure despite a combinatorially large space of possible
conﬁgurations. The Levinthal paradox has come to be recognized as resulting
from a false dichotomy [5]: either the protein has to make an extensive search
through its conformation space to ﬁnd the lowest energy state (but then it
should not fold within observable times), or it folds “down” some energy path
(but then it should get stuck in a suboptimal trap). However, like protein

⋆ Submitted to Physica D , Special Issue on “Predictability: Quantifying Uncer-
tainty in Models of Complex Phenomena”

2

folding, both the limitations and the opportunties for evolutionary adaptation
derive from speciﬁc features of the “landscape” on which it occurs. The term
landscape denotes here a space of appropriately weighted pertinent conﬁgura-
tions - self-reproducing units and their ﬁtness in the context of evolutionary
adaptation, or molecular conformations and their (free) energy in the con-
text of protein folding. Paths on such landscapes are not equiprobable. The
stochastic dynamics of both the adaptive process (selection) and the folding
process (least action) is guided by the landscape structure and explores only
a tiny fraction of the possible conﬁgurations. This raises the issue about what
exactly a “folding pathway” or an “evolutionary trajectory” consist in, and
how well-deﬁned they are. The ability to address the problem of predictability
in adaptation depends on such a characterization.

Exploring the structure of landscapes is a very active area of empirical and
theoretical research [6]. Despite the similarity of certain questions, and de-
spite the fact that both processes crucially depend on special features of their
landscapes, the analogies between folding of an individual molecule and evolu-
tionary adaptation are limited. Landscapes underlying evolutionary processes
diﬀer fundamentally from energy landscapes, because biological entities are or-
ganized by a genotype-phenotype map. Replication and mutation occur at the
level of the genotype, but the selective ampliﬁcation of a genotype depends on
the performance of its phenotype. This dichotomy wouldn’t be fundamental, if
it were not for the fact that the genotype-phenotype map is characteristically
many-to-one. The fact that many genotypes form the same phenotype enables
(as it turns out) evolutionary adaptation to be successful. However, it also
constitutes a major source of uncertainty in evolutionary trajectories.

The split into genotype and phenotype implies two diﬀerent notions of “in-
novation”, and, hence, mandates care when speaking about “trajectories”.
Should an evolutionary trajectory refer to a temporal succession of genotypes
or of phenotypes? And how are the two related? It is important to realize here
that genotypic and phenotypic innovation are not on an equal footing. A phe-
notype cannot be modiﬁed directly, but only indirectly through variation of
its genotype. This indirection means that phenotypic innovation is mediated
and, hence, biased by the genotype-phenotype map. Genetic mutations are
random, but their consequences are far from random, as they depend on the
context in which they are expressed. Assume, for example, that all one-error
mutants of a gene are equally likely. Despite the absence of a bias at the genetic
level, the resultant protein shapes would, however, occur with biased probabil-
ities. Innovation is locally isotropic for genotypes, but the genotype-phenotype
map channels phenotypic change along speciﬁc and much fewer directions. We
should, therefore, expect regularities in the genotype-phenotype map to reduce
the “phenotypic uncertainty” of evolutionary trajectories as compared to their
“genotypic uncertainty”.

3

Imagine a game that is played on two boards, the g(enotype)-board and the
p(henotype)-board. The game allows the player to make local moves on the
g-board only, while the actual pay-oﬀ is determined by moves on the p-board.
Some unknown machinery transduces the g-board-moves into p-board-moves.
Even if the g-board-moves were entirely random, an observer of the p-board
would pick up statistical regularities reﬂecting the transducing mechanism.
Suppose further that an “invisible hand” holds the player’s stone on the p-
board ﬁxed. The transducing machine then acts back to conﬁne the player to
a subset of moves on the g-board which are compatible with the stone’s ﬁxed
position on the p-board. We call these moves neutral, as they don’t change pay-
oﬀ. The set of squares on the g-board that the player can access by moving
under this constraint we call a neutral network. Imagine now the invisible
hand softening its grip to allow moves on the p-board that do not decrease
pay-oﬀ (such as selection). If none of the neighboring squares of the player’s
position on the g-board yields a pay-oﬀ increase, the player won’t be stuck,
as moves to neighboring neutral squares are still an option. Their neighbors
might trigger pay-oﬀ increasing moves on the p-board. As long as the stone
on the p-board remains in a ﬁxed position, an observer of the p-board may
conclude that nothing is happening, and an observer of the g-board notes only
“more of the same” as the pay-oﬀ stays constant. The point, however, is that
by moving neutrally something does vary: the potential for change. Without
neutrality the game would quickly become stuck in a suboptimal trap, and
the “evolutionary Levinthal paradox” would be a real one. However, with a
suﬃcient degree of neutrality the very notion of a “trap” looses its relevance,
as “lateral” (ﬁtness-neutral) moves change opportunities at no cost.

In this contribution we review work on the most realistic molecular model for
the genotype-phenotype dichotomy available to date. RNA unites both the
genotypic and the phenotypic level in a single molecular object. The genotype
is the sequence which can be replicated in the test tube by suitable enzymes,
and the phenotype is the structure which can be subject to selection. We will
summarize the salient properties of the folding relation between sequences and
structures. This sets the stage for discussing some central aspects of evolution-
ary dynamics in models of evolving populations of RNA molecules. We shall
focus in particular on an emerging notion of “evolutionary trajectory” which
is far from being fully understood but which invites deeper investigation. This
will prompt us to think about what is and what is not predictable.

The main take-home should be an appreciation for the central and apparently
paradoxical role played by neutrality. On the one hand, neutrality (or redun-
dancy, for that matter) is conservative, because it buﬀers against inevitable
mutations ensuring that “nothing happens”, that once attained success is not
too easily lost. Yet at the same time neutrality is deeply enabling, because it
permits evolutionary change to occur by allowing the sequence context to vary
until a mutation can become phenotypically consequential. In the dynamics

4

picture neutrality sets the stage for adaptation in jumps, that is, intrinsic
punctuation. But neutrality does more: it endows the set of phenotypes with
a topological structure. A many-to-one map induces equivalence classes of
genotypes labelled by phenotypes. Nearness (or accessibility) between pheno-
types, then, should be deﬁned to reﬂect nearness between equivalence classes
of genotypes. Once we possess a topology we can start thinking about whether
and when evolutionary trajectories are “discontinuous”. While chance events
will not allow to predict when a discontinuity will happen, the topology en-
ables the prediction of what class of changes will be involved. We conclude by
placing the lessons learned from RNA into the larger perspective of evolution.

2 RNA: an experimental and theoretical model system

Understanding how notions like “evolutionary path” and “continuity” (or “dis-
continuity”) are shaped by adaptive landscapes, requires a model system that
captures essential properties of the relationship between genotype and pheno-
type. Since we don’t know these properties a priori, any theoretical model must
have a ﬁrm empirical grounding to begin with. In addition to being computa-
tionally tractable, the system should also be a laboratory model of evolution-
ary adaptation. This excludes multicellular organisms, since their complexity
does not permit at the present state of knowledge an empirical and theoreti-
cal tracking of how the genotype-phenotype relation (i.e., development) plays
out during an evolution experiment in the laboratory. Prokaryotic organisms
don’t undergo development but the cellular metabolism is still too complex to
be included in a genotype-phenotype map. Settling for less than organismal
complexity, we arrive at RNA as the simplest non-trivial molecular system
fulﬁlling “ideal model” requirements.

What makes RNA unique is the simultaneous presence of both levels, genotype
and phenotype, in a single molecule. RNA molecules are heteropolymers of
(predominantly) four units called ribonucleotides. Ribonucleotides have the
ribose phosphate in common, but diﬀer in the base attached to the sugar.
RNA molecules are represented as sequences over a four letter alphabet, with
each letter standing for a particular base - A for adenine, U for uracil, C for
cytosine, and G for guanine. Interactions mediated by hydrogen bond patterns
give rise to a stereoselective recognition between speciﬁc pairs of bases - A
U
C. This speciﬁc base pairing enables an RNA sequence to be copied via
and G
·
a complementary negative, and hence to function as a genotype. At the same
time it enables segments of a sequence to pair with other segments within the
same sequence, causing the sequence to fold back on itself into a structure.
U pairs are possible as well.)
(In the formation of intramolecular structure G
·
This structure mediates the chemical interactions of the sequence, and hence
constitutes its phenotype.

·

5

“Structure” can be seen at many levels of resolution, extending from atomic
coordinates to the mean radius of gyration. This raises the question of what
constitutes a relevant level of structure resolution for understanding adapta-
tion. We take a pragmatic stance here, but we shall return to this issue in con-
clusion. On the theoretical side we require computability from the sequence,
and on the empirical side we require usefulness in interpreting molecular func-
tion and evolutionary data. This leaves us with an empirically well established
level of resolution known as secondary structure. The secondary structure of
an RNA molecule refers to a topology of binary contacts arising from speciﬁc
base pairing, rather than a geometry cast in terms of coordinates and dis-
tances (Figure 1). The driving force behind secondary structure formation is
the stacking between contiguous base pairs. The formation of an energetically
favorable paired (or double-stranded) region implies, however, the formation
of an energetically unfavorable loop. This “frustrated” energetics leads to a
vast combinatorics of stack and loop arrangements spanning the structural
repertoire of an individual RNA sequence.

Fig. 1. An RNA secondary structure graph. Unpaired positions not enclosed
by base pairs, such as free ends or links between independent structure modules,
are called “external”. Here they are marked by ticks.

A secondary structure can be conveniently discretized as a graph representing
the pattern of base pair contacts (Figure 1). The nodes of the graph represent
bases at positions i = 1, . . . , n along a sequence of length n. The set of edges
consists of two parts. One is common to all secondary structure graphs, and
represents the covalent backbone connecting node i with node i + 1, i =
1, . . . , n
1. The other part is the secondary structure proper, and consists of
−
= j and j
a set P of edges i
, representing admissible
hydrogen bonds between the bases at positions i and j. The set P has to
satisfy two conditions: (i) every edge in P connects a node to at most one
other node, and (ii) if both i
l are in P , then i < k < j implies that
·
i < l < j. Failure to meet condition (ii) results in interactions (pseudoknots)
considered as belonging to the next - the tertiary - level of structure. Both
conditions distinguish RNA structure from protein structure, in particular

j and k

= i + 1

j, P =

{

}

j

i

i

·

·

|

·

6

6
6
condition (i) which builds RNA secondary structure exclusively from binary
interactions. We use a picture of the graph as the visually most immediate
representation of a secondary structure. It proves convenient to also use a line
oriented representation, such as “((((.(((...))).(((...))).))))”, where
a dot stands for an unpaired position, and a pair of matching parentheses
indicates positions that are paired with one another.

Observe that the building blocks of a secondary structure are classes of loops
(Figure 2): a hairpin loop is delimited by one base pair which encloses a
number of unpaired positions, a stack is delimited by two base pairs and has
no unpaired positions, while an internal loop is delimited by two base pairs
that enclose unpaired positions. An internal loop is called a bulge, if either
side has no unpaired positions. Finally, the class of multiloops consists of loops
delimited by more than two base pairs. A position that does not belong to
any loop class is called external, such as free ends or joints between loops (see
Figure 1). The importance of these loop classes derives from the reasonable
assumption that the overall energy of a secondary structure is the sum of its
loop energies, and from the fact that their free energies have been measured
and tabulated [7–10] as a function of loop size and the nature of the delimiting
base pairs.

Secondary structure graphs are formal combinatorial objects which can be
subject to mathematical treatment (they can be counted, for instance). Of
particular interest are secondary structures possessing some extremal prop-
erty with respect to a given sequence, such as minimizing the free energy.
The theoretical importance of RNA as a model system for sequence-structure
relations in biopolymers lies in the fact that structures of this kind can be
computed by dynamic programming [11–15]. This method produces a single
structure that minimizes free energy. Following an idea by Waterman [16]
we have recently extended the standard RNA folding algorithm to compute
all structures within some energy range above the minimum free energy [17].
However, for the present discussion the minimum free energy structure will
suﬃce, and we shall consider it to be the phenotype of an RNA sequence.

The secondary structure is not just an utter abstraction, but it provides both
geometrically and thermodynamically a scaﬀold for the tertiary structure.
Its free energy accounts for a large share of the overall free energy of the
full structure. This linkage puts the secondary structure in correspondence
with functional properties of the tertiary structure. Consequently, selection
pressures (and hence functional elements) become observable at the secondary
structure level in terms of conserved base pairs.

The extremely reduced ampliﬁcation time and the minimal complexity of the
phenotype make RNA a tractable laboratory model. RNA molecules can be
evolved in the test tube using a variety of techniques for ampliﬁcation, vari-

7

interior base pair

closing base pair

stacking pair

hairpin loop

5

3

5

3

G

C

closing base pair

U

A

A

U

interior base pair
G

G

C

G

closing base pair

G

C

A

U

C

5

3

5

3

closing base pair

C

A

G

A

CA

U

interior base pair

interior loop

bulge

C

G

interior base pairs

5

3

A

U

G

C

A

A

closing base pair

multiple loop

Fig. 2. Secondary structure elements.

ation and selection. In fact, such experiments have shown that evolutionary
optimization of RNA properties in the test tube occurs readily and eﬀectively.
Examples are the optimization of replicative eﬃciency [18,19], the production
of RNA molecules binding optimally to prespeciﬁed target molecules by means
of the SELEX technique [20,21], evolutionary induced changes in the activity
and speciﬁcity of catalytic RNA molecules [22] (so-called ribozymes), and the
evolutionary design of ribozymes with new functions [23,24]. Often the inter-
pretation of such experiments occurs by computing the secondary structure
and placing it in relation to molecular performance.

Until now the bulk of empirical interest has been directed at the outcomes of
evolutionary test tube experiments. However, we shall take here outcomes for
granted, and focus instead on dynamics and paths toward outcomes. These
aspects hold the key for understanding why (and which) desired outcomes
can be achieved at all. An emerging evolutionary technology will depend on a

8

comprehensive dynamical theory of molecular adaptation, much like chemical
engineering depends on chemical kinetics.

3 Characteristic features of the RNA folding map

The ﬁrst computer experiments on the adaptive dynamics of replicating and
mutating RNA populations [25] were very encouraging, but they also made
it clear that to understand adaptive dynamics, we must ﬁrst understand the
features of the landscape induced by RNA folding. The term “landscape”
emphasizes the folding map as a function from a space of sequences into
a space of structures (with possibly a further assignment of numerical val-
ues to each structure). The set of RNA sequences of length n comprises 4n
possible variations that are organized into a metric space by a natural dis-
tance measure reﬂecting the allowed physical interconversions of sequences.
The Hamming distance is a natural distance measure, if only point mutations
are allowed. It counts the number of positions in which two sequences diﬀer,
that is, the minimum number of point mutations required to convert one se-
quence into the other. In the case of a two-letter alphabet this space is the
well-known n-dimensional hypercube. The set of secondary structures can also
be made into a metric space. Structure distance functions are typically based
on some notion of minimum edit cost for transforming one structure into an-
other, such as the Hamming distance or the base pair distance [26] deﬁned on
the dot/parentheses representation of secondary structures, or the tree-edit-
distance [27]. If the structure space is metric, it becomes possible to assess the
“ruggedness” of the landscape by autocorrelation functions [28]. However, it
is not always necessary or useful to think of the set of secondary structures as
a metric space. In section 5 we shall think of it as a topological space.

Our interest is thus primarily aimed at extracting robust statistical proper-
ties pertaining to the mapping as a whole. Although we use state of the art
algorithms [14,26,29] that are routinely applied to predict the secondary struc-
ture of sequences occurring naturally or having evolved in the laboratory, our
main focus is not the accurate prediction of a structure from a particular
sequence. (This would anyway require an integration with data from phy-
logenetic comparison.) We seek qualitative and generic features of adaptive
dynamics in RNA, and these should not depend on whether the employed
algorithms reproduce the ﬁne details of the actual secondary structure in a
particular instance. Rather, we rely on the fact that the employed algorithms
are suﬃciently mature that they correctly capture the logic and basic ener-
getics of constrained base-pair optimization inherent in RNA folding. In fact,
the generic features of the folding map summarized below have been found
to be insensitive to the choice of structure formation criteria, such as mini-
mizing free energy, maximizing base pairing, or kinetic folding. They also are

9

numerically robust to variations in the set of empirical energy parameters or
the thermodynamic level of description (one minimum free energy structure
versus the Boltzmann ensemble for a given sequence) [30]. It is encouraging
that similar properties have also been recently discovered in lattice models of
protein folding [31–33]. For the remainder of this paper we shall - for the sake
of brevity - refer to secondary structures simply as “shapes”.

A systematic study of the mapping from RNA sequences to shapes was based
on the statistics of appropriately chosen samples [27,28,34] as well as on the
exhaustive folding of all sequences of a given length [35,36]. The regularities
found depend on two simple and fundamental facts. First, both the sequence
and the shape space are very high dimensional spaces (forget three-dimensional
caricatures), and, second, the sequence space is substantially larger than the
shape space. An upper bound along the lines of [37] yields only Sn = 1.48
×
n−3/2(1.85)n shapes vis `a vis 4n sequences [38]. It is clear that the mapping
from sequences to shapes is signiﬁcantly many-to-one, even if the alphabet
were binary. These, then, are the major generic properties that were found:

Property 1 (“typical shapes”) states that some shapes are supported by sig-
niﬁcantly larger equivalence classes of sequences (i.e., occur more frequently)
than others. These relatively few typical shapes are set apart from many rare
shapes which can hardly play a role in evolution. The property of being “typ-
ical” is made more precise by the observation that in the limit of long chains
the fraction of such shapes tends to zero (their number grows nevertheless ex-
ponentially), while the fraction of sequences folding into them tends to one. 1
A numerical example may help: The space of GC-only sequences of length
109 sequences folding into 218, 820 structures of which
n = 30 contains 1.07
22, 718 (= 10.4%) classify as typical (in the sense of “common”, see footnote
1). In this case 93.4% of all sequences fold into these 10.4% shapes. Property
1 also implies that any statistical statement we make about the folding map,
and a fortiori about adaptive dynamics, can only hold for the set of typical
shapes.

×

Property 2 (“neutral networks”) is a statement about the connectedness in
sequence space of sequences folding into the same shape. Typical shapes are
characterized by a high degree of neutrality expressed as the average fraction
of nearest neighbors of a sequence possessing a typical shape that retain that
shape. A large enough degree of neutrality, expressed as the mean fraction λ
of neutral neighbors with Hamming distance one, leads to percolation in se-
quence space, that is, to the existence of extended neutral networks connecting

1 This asymptotic condition for “typical” is fulﬁlled by a whole class of deﬁnitions.
A simple and straightforward one is that of a so-called “common shape” which
refers to a shape formed by more sequences than the average given by the number
of sequences divided by the number of realized shapes [39].

10

sequences with the same shape by one or at most two point mutations (Figure
3).

Fig. 3. Neutral networks in sequence space. The lower half exhibits a typical
structure with a connected network of sequences folding into it. The network reaches
through sequence space. In contrast, the upper half shows an “untypical” or rare
structure whose neutral sequences are far less in number. They are organized into a
so-called giant component and many small pockets. Connectivity of neutral networks
depends on the mean fraction of neutral neighbors (λ).

Property 3 (“shape space covering”) is a statement about the mutual entan-
glement of neutral networks belonging to diﬀerent shapes. All typical shapes
are realized within a small neighborhood (compared to sequence length) of
any arbitrarily chosen sequence (Figure 4). For example, 15 mutations are
suﬃcient on average for a chain of length n = 100 to ﬁnd at least one instance
of every typical shape.

These statistical properties, in particular neutral networks, have led to a math-
ematical model based on percolation in random graphs [40]. There is no doubt
that neutrality is an essential feature of adaptive topographies. It is, therefore,

11

Fig. 4. RNA shape space covering. To ﬁnd a sequence folding into a typical
structure, only a relatively small hyperspherical region around any random sequence
needs to be searched. The covering radius can be computed from properly chosen
samples of structures.

crucial that models of adaptive landscapes take neutrality into account, see
for example [41–46]. We shall explore some of its eﬀects in the following two
sections.

4 Error propagation in genotype and phenotype populations

The evolutionary dynamics of molecules based on replication, mutation and
selection induced by a constant population size in a ﬂow reactor has been an-
alyzed in terms of chemical reaction kinetics by Manfred Eigen [47], and was
further developed in subsequent studies [48,49]. Faithful copying and mutation
are treated on an equal footing by viewing the replication of an RNA sequence
as a branching reaction with many channels. In principle every sequence can
be obtained as a mutant from every sequence (although the probabilities vary
dramatically). The materials consumed by RNA synthesis are replenished by
a continuous ﬂow in a reactor resembling a chemostat for bacterial cultures
(Figure 5). The character of the dynamics of a sequence population depends
critically on two factors, the accuracy of replication which governs the “width”
of individual reaction channels and the degree of neutrality - a property of the
genotype-phenotype map - which governs the decoupling of the propagation
of a given phenotype from the propagation of its underlying genotypes. The
presence of neutrality mandates a distinction between a genotypic and a phe-
notypic error threshold [50]. The point of this section is to caricature the
essence of this distinction in a very simple way. This will set the stage for
discussing trajectories as inﬂuenced by the RNA genotype-phenotype map in
section 5.

12

Fig. 5. Flow reactor. The ﬂow reactor (continuously stirred tank reactor, CSTR)
is a device for recording chemical reactions with instantaneous replenishment of
consumed materials in continuous time. Like a chemostat for bacterial cultures, it
is used here to study the evolution of populations under replication and mutation.
The inﬂux of stock solution, containing the materials required for replication, is
compensated by an unspeciﬁc outﬂux of the reaction mixture which is kept homo-
√N
geneous by mechanical stirring. The ﬂow is adjusted to yield an average of N
RNA molecules in the tank. In the computer experiments described here the chain
length n of the molecules was kept constant by restricting variation to point muta-
tions. Parameters are the population size N , the chain length n, and the mutation
rate per nucleotide and replication, p.

±

Selection dynamics in sequence populations can be described by ordinary dif-
ferential equations. The variable xi, 0
1, denotes the relative frequency
≤
of a sequence type (i.e., genotype) Ii of length n. For the sake of brevity we
shall overload the word “sequence” to mean an individual instance or a type,
xi = 1.
depending on context. Since frequencies are normalized, we have
We further denote the population size with N, and the number of possible se-
quences with M = 4n. Let the rate constants for replication and degradation

xi ≤

P

13

of sequence Ii be ai and di, respectively. The time dependence of the sequence
distribution is then described by the kinetic equations

˙xi =

aiQii −

di −

(cid:18)

¯E(t)

xi +

(cid:19)

Xj6=i

ajQjixj ,

i, j = 1, . . . , M .

(1)

.
=

Qij; i, j = 1, . . . M

It has been assumed for simplicity that replication is direct, rather than pro-
ceeding through a complementary negative, as the base pairing rules would re-
quire (see [47,49] for details). The width of the reaction channel from sequence
Ii to sequence Ij is given by the mutation matrix Q
.
}
Qij denotes the likelihood that a replication of sequence Ii yields sequence Ij,
and the diagonal element Qii is the fraction of correct replicas synthesized on
˙xi = 0, the reactor outﬂow ¯E(t) matches exactly the
template Ii. To fulﬁll
average productivity, ¯E(t) =
di) xi(t). When degradation is negligi-
i=1(ai −
ble, as in the test tube evolution of RNA molecules or when all degradation
rates are essentially the same, d1
d, degradation has no
d2
inﬂuence on the selection dynamics and can be neglected. In this case the
quantities which determine the selection dynamics are given by the so-called
value matrix: W
, whose diagonal elements
wii were called selective values.

wij = aiQij ; i, j = 1, . . . M

dm ≈

.
=

. . .

≈

≈

≈

P

P

{

{

}

The selective value of sequence Ii amounts to its ﬁtness in the case of vanishing
i = 1, . . . , M.
mutational backﬂow,
Under these conditions the sequence Im with the maximal selective value

j6=i ajQjixj << aiQii xi = wii xi ,

∀

P

wmm = max

wii |
dominates a population in selection equilibrium, and is called the master se-
quence.

i = 1, . . . , M

(2)

{

}

,

The term quasispecies was introduced for the stationary sequence distribution,
whose values ¯xi are computed as the solutions of ˙xi = 0; i = 1, . . . , M, from
the eigenvalue problem [51,52]

(W

ω I) ¯x = 0 ,

−

(3)

where I denotes the unit matrix, ω an eigenvalue and ¯x = (¯x1, ¯x2, . . . , ¯xM )
the corresponding eigenvector.

4.1 Genotypic error threshold

To understand the diﬀerence between genotypic and phenotypic error thresh-
olds, we consider the so-called single peak landscape which assigns a higher
a
replication rate to the master and identical values to all others, am = σm ·
= m, where σm is the superiority of the master sequence.
and ai = a ,

i

∀

14

6
The assumption behind the single peak landscape is to lump together all mu-
tants into a cloud with average ﬁtness. The relative population frequency of
the cloud is simply xc =
xm, and the replication-mutation
problem boils down to an exercise in one variable, xm, the frequency of the
master. The approach has something in common with the mean ﬁeld approx-
imation often used in physics, since the mutant cloud can be characterized
by “mean except the master” properties. For example, the “mean except the
xm). The superiority
master” replication rate constant ¯a =

j6=i xj = 1

j6=m ajxj

(1

−

P

then reads: σm = am

¯a.

P

.

−

.

Neglecting muational backﬂow we can readily compute the stationary fre-
quency of the master sequence in a “zeroth-order” approximation:

¯xm =

¯a

amQmm −
¯a
am −

=

σmQmm −
σm −
1

1

.

¯xm=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

= Qmin = σ −1

In this expression the master sequence vanishes at some ﬁnite replication ac-
curacy, Qmm
m . A non-zero stationary frequency of the
master, that is, its indeﬁnite propagation, thus requires Qmm > Qmin. This
is the so-called error threshold condition. It is illuminating to introduce a
simple model for the elements of the mutation matrix, called uniform error
rate approximation [48]. It assumes the existence of a per nucleotide mutation
probability p that is independent of the nature of a nucleotide and its position
in the sequence. In terms of the single digit accuracy q = 1
p (the mean
fraction of correctly incorporated nucleotides) the elements of the mutation
matrix for a sequence of length n take the form:

−

(4)

(5)

Qij = qn

1

q
−
q !

 

dij

,

with dij being the Hamming distance (i.e., the number of mismatches) between
pmax =
two sequences Ii and Ij. The critical condition occurs at qmin = 1
. The replication accuracy of RNA viruses was indeed found

Qmin = σ −1/n

−

n

m

to occur near this critical value [53,54].
q

To study stochastic features of the population dynamics around the critical
replication accuracy, the replication-mutation system has been modeled by
a multitype branching process [55]. The main result of this study was the
derivation of an expression for the probability of survival to inﬁnite time for
the master sequence and its mutants. In the regime of suﬃciently accurate
replication the survival probability is non-zero and decreases with increasing
error rate. At the critical accuracy qmin this probability becomes zero, which
implies that all molecular species currently in the population will die out in
ﬁnite time and new variants will replace them. This scenario is tantamount to
migration of the population through sequence space.

15

Further details of the population structure require consideration of the muta-
tional backﬂow (and thus a solution to the eigenvalue problem, equation 3).
The two eigenvectors associated with the two largest eigenvalues at q > qcr
represent the quasispecies and the uniform distribution, ¯x1 = ¯x2 = . . . =
¯xM = 1/M, respectively. These eigenvectors show avoided crossing at the
critical accuracy q = qcr [56]. Since the oﬀ-diagonal elements are small and
decrease further with increasing chain length n, the zeroth order approxi-
qcr), and the
mation to the frequency of the master is fairly good (qmin ≈
transition from the quasispecies to the uniform distribution is sharp [49,57].
Obviously, the deterministic approach becomes meaningless at accuracies be-
low threshold, when the uniform distribution, 1/M = 1/4n, implies less than a
single molecule for each variant. This is already the case for fairly small chain
lengths of n > 24, when the population size required for the deterministic
approach (N = 4n) exceeds the feasible sizes realizable in test tube evolution
experiments (N

1015).

≈

4.2 Phenotypic error threshold

In the case of neutrality the superiority of the master becomes σm = 1, which
pushes the error threshold towards absolute replication accuracy, qmin = 1,
and the deterministic model must fail. Any sequence on a neutral network is
inevitably lost at non-zero mutation rates, but the phenotype associated with
that network may nevertheless persist. Neutrality, thus, shifts the focus from
genotypes to phenotypes, suggesting a treatment where phenotypes become
the relevant units by lumping together sequences with equal phenotype. Given
L possible phenotypes, we deﬁne new aggregate variables, ηα (α = 1, . . . , L),
by collecting the set of sequences with given phenotype α and replication rate
aα (latin letters refer to sequences and greek ones to phenotypes):

ηα =

xi ,

XIi with
phenotype α

(6)

P

P

L
α=1 ηα =

M
i=1 xi = 1. In analogy to the previous treatment we call the
with
phenotype µ with maximal ﬁtness aµ the master phenoptype. Since we are
heading again for a zeroth-order approximation, we only consider the master
phenotype. Without loss of generality we index the sequence types possessing
k
the master phenotype from 1 to k, so that ηµ =
i=1 xi. This yields the kinetic
equations for the set of sequences with master phenotype:

˙ηµ =

˙xi = ηµ

ajQjixj .

(7)

¯E

+

aµQkk −

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Xi=1

Xj6=i

k

Xi=1

P

k

16

The mean excess productivity of the population is, of course, independent of
the choice of variables:

¯E =

aαηα =

aixi .

L

Xα=1

M

Xi=1

(8)

To derive a suitable expression for the phenotypic error threshold, we split the
mutational backﬂow into two contributions, (i) a mutational backﬂow within
the neutral network of the master phenotype and (ii) a mutational backﬂow
on to the master network from sequences not belonging to it:

k

k

k

M

k

Xi=1

Xj6=i

ajQjixj =

aµ

Xi=1

Xj=1,j6=i

+

Qjixj














ajQjixj 


.

(9)

Xi=1

Xj=k+1

We approximate the within-network backﬂow by assuming that a sequence
on the network has a constant fraction λµ of neutral neighbors. We further
assume equal mutation rates (Qji = ¯Qj; i, j = 1, . . . , k; i
= j) on the master
network and ﬁnd:



k

k

Xi=1

Xj=1,j6=i

Qjixj ≈

λµ(1
k

λµ(1
k

Qkk)
1

Qkk)
1

−
−

−
−

k

k

Xi=1
Xj=1,j6=i
k
k

Xj=1,j6=i

Xi=1

=

xj =

(10)

xj = λµ(1

Qkk) ηµ .

(11)

−

To keep things comparable, we make the same approximation as in the geno-
typic error threshold and neglect mutational backﬂow from other networks
= µ) on to the master network. The kinetic equation (7) for the master
(ηα, α
phenotype can now be written as:

aµ ˜Qµµ −
where ˜Qµµ expresses an eﬀective replication accuracy of the master network
as such:

˙ηµ =

(12)

ηµ,

¯E

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

˜Qµµ = Qkk + λµ(1

Qkk) .

−

Proceeding in complete analogy with the derivation of the genotypic error
threshold, we ﬁnd

˜Qmin = Qkk + λµ(1

Qkk) = σ−1
µ

−

where σµ is the superiority of the master phenotype. The uniform error rate

(13)

(14)

17

6
6
model yields for the stationary frequency of the master phenotype:

¯ηµ(p) =

σµ Qµµ(p)
σµ −
1

1

−

(1

−

=

p)n σµ (1

λµ) + σµλµ −

1

.

(15)

−
σµ −

1

The “zeroth-order” approximation for the phenotypic error threshold (¯ηµ = 0)
now becomes:

˜qmin = (1

˜pmax) =

−

1
(1

 

−
−

λµσµ
λµ) σµ !

1/n

.

(16)

The function q = ˜qmin(n, λµ, σµ) is illustrated in Figure 6. In the limit of no
neutrality, λµ →
0, both phenotypic and genotypic error threshold are the
same, ˜qmin = σ−1/n
m . In the limit of “extensive” neutrality, λµ →
σ−1
µ , the minimal replication accuracy ˜qmin approaches zero. This means that
when the degree of neutrality exceeds the reciprocal superiority, the master
phenotype is never lost from the population, no matter what the mutation
rate is.

= σ−1/n

µ

Fig. 6. Phenotypic error threshold. The error threshold, ˜pmax, is shown as a
function of the error rate p and the mean degree of neutrality, λ. The line separates
the domains of a stationary distriution of phenotypes and migrating populations.
More erros can be tolerated at higher degrees of neutrality.

This section’s goal was to show that neutrality leads to populations whose
sequences drift randomly on the neutral network of the master phenotype, or,
for that matter, any temporary most ﬁt phenotype [50]. Even if the sequence
distribution drifts, the phenotype is maintained. However, if the replication
accuracy falls below a critical minimum value - the phenotypic error threshold
- the population drifts through both sequence and shape space. Interestingly,
if the neutrality associated with a phenotype exceeds a certain level, the phe-
notypic error threshold disappears, and that phenotype cannot be lost from
the population at any mutation rate.

18

Neutrality suggests a reformulation of Eigen’s original kinetic description and
its stochastic versions in terms of neutral networks as the units of aggregation.
The switch in variables is complicated by the fact that the sequence mutation
matrix Qji must be translated into a “mutation” matrix ˜Qαβ which refers to
transitions between neutral networks, i.e. phenotypes. This is where we heavily
glossed over in this section, since it requires an understanding of the sense in
which networks are “adjacent” to one another. One quite fruitful approach is to
deﬁne prototype landscapes [40,44,45,58], another is to analyze this adjacency
relation in the concrete case of RNA [59], and to extract regularities which
may guide the design of model landscapes. We shall turn to this in the next
section.

5 Adaptive paths and intrinsic punctuation

In this section we lay some groundwork for framing adaptive trajectories in
evolving RNA populations. To this end we must ﬁrst understand the organi-
zation of RNA shape space.

5.1 The topology of RNA shape space

We have seen in section 4 that neutrality loosens the requirements on the
replication accuracy for selection to remain eﬀective. This increases the un-
certainity of adaptive trajectories through sequence space, as populations with
tiny sizes compared to the number of all possible sequences undergo neutral
diﬀusion. At the same time, however, adaptive trajectories are subject to quite
speciﬁc constraints. To see this informally, consider that for phenotypes to
adapt, transitions between neutral genotype networks (that is, phenotypes)
must occur. Some transitions are easy, others not. If the replication accuracy
is suﬃciently high, so that most mutants are one-error mutants, the degree to
which a transition from one network to another is easy depends on how much
of their boundary both have in common. This suggests deﬁning a nearness
relation between phenotypes (a topology) based on the extent to which their
corresponding neutral networks are adjacent in genotype space [59,60]. Notice
that a so deﬁned nearness relation is independent of a notion of similarity
between phenotypes. Transitions between neutral networks sharing a small
fraction of their boundary will, then, act as bottlenecks, and the uncertainty
of adaptive trajectories will be reduced to the extent that they must pass such
bottlenecks. If we can characterize the set of possible bottlenecks, we should
be able to predict a class of phenotype transformations that any adaptive
trajectory must go through, although we may not be able to predict the exact
phenotypes involved or their temporal succession. We shall call this class a

19

class of “way points”.

In RNA, as in many biological situations, there are two mappings involved
which need to be kept distinct: the mapping from genotype to phenotype and
the mapping from phenotype to ﬁtness. Both are typically many-to-one and
induce neutrality. However, the map from phenotypes to ﬁtness depends on
the (exogenous or endogenous) selection criteria, while at least in the case
of RNA folding the genotype to phenotype map does not. Because the class
of phenotype transformations that we are seeking is an intrinsic property of
a given genotype-phenotype relation, it constrains adaptive trajectories in a
fashion that holds under any (non-trivial) ﬁtness assignment.

We shall now make these intuitions precise, and characterize the class of way
points for RNA secondary structures based on a statistical analysis of the fold-
ing map. We then juxtapose these results with adaptive trajectories obtained
from simulating a population of RNA sequences that replicate and mutate in
a ﬂow reactor under selection.

A particular adaptive path consists of a temporal succession of sequences
and their associated shapes. We refer to the temporal series of shapes as the
phenotypic trace. Whether a shape β succeeds a shape α will be strongly
inﬂuenced by ﬁtness. Yet for this to be an issue at all β must ﬁrst occur
somehow, that is, β must be accessible from α by a mutation of α’s sequence.
If β is very likely to be accessible from α, we shall call β “near” α. In the case
of neutrality a shape α is realized by a large set of sequences, and a robust
notion of accessibility then comes to mean that β must arise from α with a
high probability when averaged over all sequences folding into α. Only then
are the shapes in the phenotypic neighborhood of α a robust property of α
itself, independent of a particular sequence.

This notion of neighborhood is illustrated by considering a tRNA-like shape
of length 76 (inset of Figure 7). A sample of the many sequences folding
into this shape was obtained by an inverse folding procedure [26] available
with the Vienna RNA package [29]. For every sequence in the sample we
compute all shapes realized in its sequence space neighborhood, consisting of
all 228 one-error mutants. From this data we determine the fraction of sequence
neighborhoods in which a particular mutant shape appeared at least once.
The totality of these mutant shapes, irrespective of how often they occurred,
is termed the shape space boundary of the tRNA shape.

When rank-ordering the boundary shapes with decreasing frequency, we obtain
Figure 7. The most salient feature is a marked change in the scaling exponent,
suggesting a natural cut-oﬀ point for the deﬁnition of neighborhood. In the
present case, the high frequency range comprises some 20 shapes, which we
deﬁne to be near the tRNA shape [59]. These shapes constitute the character-

20

istic set of the tRNA, that is, its most speciﬁc neighborhood. The topmost 12
shapes are shown in Figure 8, and exhibit two properties we found to hold for
all shapes whose neighborhoods we studied. First, most shapes in the charac-
teristic set of a shape α are highly similar to α, typically diﬀering in a stack
size by single base pairs. Second, some shapes, such as tRNA8 (the shape
ranked 8th in Figure 8), diﬀer by the loss of an entire stack. The latter ﬁnding
illustrates that nearness of a shape to another does not imply their similarity.
More importantly, it illustrates that nearness is not a symmetric relation. In
fact, the tRNA shape was not found in the characteristic set of the tRNA8,
and it did not even occur in its boundary sample. Not surprisingly, the de-
struction of a structural element (in a random sequence bearing it) through a
single point mutation is easier than its creation. While the high frequency of
the event is surprising, it is ultimately a consequence of the average base pair
composition of stacks and the markedly diﬀerent stacking energies of AU and
GC base pairs [59].

1

10−1

)
α
(
f

10−2

10−3

100

101

102

103

104

105

Rank of α

Fig. 7. Rank-ordered frequency distribution of shapes in the tRNA bound-
ary. A sample of 2,199 sequences whose minimum free energy secondary structure
is a tRNA clover-leaf (inset) was generated. All their one-error mutants (501,372
sequences) were folded. 28% of the mutants retained the original structure (i.e. were
neutral). The remaining 358,525 sequences realized 141,907 distinct shapes. The fre-
quency f (α) is the number of one-error neighborhoods in which α appeared at least
once, divided by the number of sequences in the sample. The log-log plot shows the
rank of α versus f (α). Rank n means the nth most frequent shape. The dotted line
indicates a change in the slope which we take to naturally delimit the high frequency
domain (to the left) whose shapes form the characteristic set of the tRNA.

The nearness relation developed here deﬁnes a topology on the set of RNA

21

Fig. 8. Shapes near the tRNA shape. The ﬁgure shows the 12 highest ranked
shapes (left to right, top to bottom) in the characteristic set. See also Figure 7.

shapes. We call a transition from shape α to a near shape β continuous (in
the spirit of topology), if that transition is caused by a single point mutation
(since in that case the sequence of β is in the obvious sense near the sequence
of α).

Generalizing from this example, we can characterize continuous transforma-
tions as those structural rearrangements which ﬁne tune a shape architecture
in a sequential fashion by lengthening or shortening stacks, or which destroy a
stack element and the loop implied by it (Figure 9). This leaves the discontin-
uous transformations characterized by the two remaining possible structural
changes: (i) the creation of a long stack in a single step, and (ii) generalized
shifts (see Figure 9). As an example of a shift consider one strand of a stacked
region sliding past the other by a few positions (simple shift). Notice here
that structural similarity does not imply nearness. Both types of discontin-
uous transformations require the synchronous participation of several bases
(or base pairs) in a fashion that cannot be sequentialized on thermodynamic
grounds. An example for a discontinuous transition of type (i) is the forma-
tion of a multiloop (a loop issuing more than two stacking regions). Generally,
the free energy gain upon formation of a stack must oﬀset the free energy
loss from the loop caused by it. A stack closing a multiloop must, therefore,
come into existence with some minimum length (typically more than 5 bp)
in a single step. Likewise, the discontinuity of generalized shifts (type ii) has

22

thermodynamic and structural origins. Shifting a stack by shifting its base
pairs in random order would cause energetically unfavorable internal loops as
well as severe sterical conﬂicts, besides violating the formal no-knot condition
(section 2). As a consequence, the shifting of a stack requires that all base
pairs move synchronously.

We may visualize the neighborhood structure on the set of all shapes (the
topology) as a directed graph. Each shape is represented by a node. Directed
edges fan out from a node α to the nodes in its characteristic set. We can
think of a continuous transformation of shape α into a shape β that is not
nearby α as a path from α to β following the direction of the edges. Discon-
tinuous transformations are transitions between disconnected components of
the graph.

5.2 Adaptive dynamics in RNA

We next discuss how the topology of RNA shape space shapes adaptive his-
tories. Our simulation of replicating and mutating RNA populations is cast
in terms of stochastic chemical kinetics [61,62], and represents a continuous
time model of Spiegelman’s classic serial transfer experiments [19,63]. It’s im-
plementation is described elsewhere [25,64]. In the laboratory a goal might be
to ﬁnd an RNA aptamer binding to some molecule [65], and the evolution-
ary end product is typically unknown. In principle one can think of the end
product as some shape that is speciﬁed implicitly by the imposed selection
criterion. Since our intent is to study evolutionary trajectories rather than
end products, we short cut by simply deﬁning a target shape in advance. We
then assume the replication rate constant of a sequence to be a function of
the distance between its shape and the target. Given a distance measure d,
a shape replicates faster, the more it resembles the target. In all simulations
reported here, the replication rate ri of a sequence Ii of length n with shape α
at distance d(α, τ ) from a target shape τ is given by ri = (0.01 + d(α, τ )/n)−1.
Using an exponential or a linear function did not make any diﬀerence with
regard to the issues we are interested in. The error rate was p = 0.001 per
nucleotide. At this rate, the diﬀerence between parent and a mutant oﬀspring
is mostly one point mutation, and the topology described above applies. In
the examples reported here the target shape is a tRNA clover leaf, and the
distance between shapes is measured as the Hamming distance between their
line oriented representations cast in terms of dots and parentheses (see section
2).

Figure 10 and Figure 11 both show the approach toward the target shape
as indicated by the average Hamming distance in the population (inversely
related to ﬁtness, black curve). Aside from a short initial phase, the entire

23

Fig. 9. Continuous and discontinuous RNA shape transformations. The
ﬁgure illustrates transformations between RNA secondary structure parts. Solid
(dashed) arrows indicate continuous (discontinuous) transformations in our topol-
ogy. Three groups of transformations are shown. Top: the loss and formation of a
base pair adjacent to a stack are both continuous. Middle: the opening of a con-
strained stack (e.g. closing a multiloop) is continuous, while its creation is disconti-
nous. This reﬂects the fact that the formation of a long helix between two unpaired
random segments upon mutation of a single position is a highly improbable event,
whereas the unzipping of a random helix is likely to occur as soon as a mutation
blocks one of its base pairs. Bottom: generalized shifts are discontinuous transfor-
mations in which one or both strands of a helix shift ending up with or without an
overlap. Accordingly, we partition generalized shifts into the four classes shown. The
intersecting disks are a schematic representation of continuous and discontinuous
transitions between two shapes α and β. The disk with center α (β) stands for the
set of shapes that are near α (β). If β is a member of α’s disk (neighborhood), a
transition from α to β is continuous (solid arrow). A discontinuous transition leaves
the neighborhood of α (dashed arrow). Note that even if α and β are highly dissim-
ilar, α might nontheless be transformed continuously into β through intermediate
shapes whose neighborhoods have suﬃcient overlap.

24

history is dominated by steps, that is, ﬂat periods of no apparent adaptive
progress, interrupted by sudden improvements toward the target. The initial
relaxation period is understood by considering that many modiﬁcations of a
random initial shape increase its similarity to any randomly chosen target. Be-
yond this phase, however, adaptation becomes much harder, and the character
of adaptive dynamics changes.

Fig. 10. Simulation of an evolving RNA population. An RNA population
evolves towards a tRNA target shape (inset of Figure 7) in a ﬂow reactor logistically
constrained to a capacity of 1,000 sequences on average. The replication accuracy
per position is 0.999. The initial population consisted of 1,000 identical sequences
106
folding into a random shape. The target was reached after approximately 11
replications. The black trace shows the average structure distance of the shapes in
the population to the target. The relay series (see text) linking the initial shape to
the target comprises 43 shapes. To each of these corresponds one horizontal level
placed above the black curve. The topmost (bottom) level belongs to the initial
(target) shape. For these levels only the time axis has a meaning. At each level the
series of presence intervals for the corresponding shape is shown. The step curve
indicates the transitions between relay shapes, and hence the time spent by each
relay shape on the adaptive trajectory. Each transition was caused by a single point
mutation in the underlying sequences. The vertical dotted lines and the labels mark
transitions referred to in the text.

×

25

Fig. 11. Simulation of an evolving RNA population. Same situation as in
Figure 10, except for a diﬀerent initial random shape. The labels refer to shape
transformations shown in Figure 14

By adaptive trajectory we mean something like a path taken by the popula-
tion as a whole (caveats below), rather than a single lineage. We refer to its
projection on shape space as its phenotypic trace. In a simulation of this kind
one has to cope with a huge amount of data, and one possibility of obtain-
ing an approximation to the phenotypic trace of an adaptive trajectory is to
record only data about mutation events that generate an “innovation”, that
is, a shape which is new in the population at the time t of its appearance.
This does not neccesarily imply that the shape hasn’t been in the population
in the past; it could have become extinct at some earlier time, being “redis-
covered” at time t. For each shape innovation α we record entry times, lα
i ,
and exit (extinction) times hα
i . This yields for each shape ever seen during the
adaptive process a set of “presence intervals” Lα =
,
i+1}
marking the presence of shape α in the system’s history. After the target has
been found (or the simulation has been stopped), we trace back through the
history data in the following way. Each presence interval [lα
i ] of α has a
unique ancestor with shape β which spawned that interval at time lα
i , mean-
ing that a sequence folding into β produced at time lα
i a mutant which folded
into α, and α was not in the population at that time. Let ω be the target
shape, and lω
i the time of its ﬁrst appearance (the beginning of its presence
interval). Let the shape from which ω was derived at time lω
i be ω−1. In the

i < hα

i < lα

i , hα
[lα

i ], lα

i , hα

{

26

j

, hω−1
j

ω−n ω−n+1

set Lω−1 there is a unique presence interval [lω−1
] containing the time
, hω−1
i , and we proceed searching for the unique ancestor of [lω−1
instant lω
].
j
Upon repeating this procedure we eventually end up at one of the initial
shapes (see Figure 12). At this point we have reconstructed a succession of
shapes α
β connecting an initially present
ω−1 ω0
shape α with the target (or ﬁnal) shape β. This chain is uninterrupted in time,
in the sense that for every n
1, ω−i is ancestor of ω−i+1 and there exists
, hω−i
a pair [lω−i
. The chain depends
r
on the presence interval of the ﬁnal shape β from where the trace starts, but
it is unique for that interval. Typically we are interested in the chain that
originates in the ﬁrst instance of the target, and call it the “relay series”.

ω−i · · ·
i
] with lω−i

r < lω−i+1

≥
, hω−i+1
s

] [lω−i+1
s

< hω−i
r

· · ·

≡

≥

≡

s

r

j

shape

ω-5

ω-4

ω-3

ω-2

ω-1

ω0

Fig. 12. Relay series concept. The ﬁgure shows schematically the presence inter-
vals of 6 shapes, and the reconstruction of the uninterrupted chain of innovations
called the relay-series. See text for details.

Figures 13 and 14 show the complete relay series for the computer simulations
reported in Figures 10 and 11, respectively. While the discontinuities in the
ﬁtness trace of Figures 10 and 11 are apparent, it is their comparison with
the shape discontinuities along the relay series which yields insight. The re-
sult is that ﬁtness triggered selection events do not always line up with shape
transformations that are discontinuous in the sense of the previously deﬁned
topology. In Figure 10, events (a) and (b) are rapid successions of continuous
transitions shortening and elongating stacks by single base pairs. This shows
that sudden changes in ﬁtness do not imply discontinuous phenotypic trans-
formations. The reverse isn’t true either, as shown by the discontinuous shift
event (c) which is silent in terms of ﬁtness. All remaining ﬁtness changes do,
however, coincide with discontinuous shape transformations. These are the
simple shift events (e), (g), (h), (i), the double ﬂip (d), and the ﬂip (f). Sim-
ilar observations hold for Figure 11. Here we have an initial phase of rapid
improvments (a), four simple shift events (b), (f), (g), (h), a ﬂip (c), a double
ﬂip (e) as well as a “silent shift” (d) being a neutral discontinuous transitions,

Time

27

that is, a shift which does not change ﬁtness.

Fig. 13. Relay series of Figure 10. The full series of 45 relay shapes is shown.
Diﬀerent gray levels indicate diﬀerent classes of neighboring shapes which are ac-
cessible from the precursor class by a discontinuous transition only. The stretch
19 to 37 (corresponding to the long plateau e-f in ﬁgure 10) shows a sequence of
continuous transformations between closely related shapes some of them occurring
β
more than once in the relay series: α

α.

α

β

β

γ

γ

δ

→

→

→

→

→

→

→

→

To trigger a generalized shift or a multiloop closure by a single point mutation
puts constraints on the required sequence context, making such sequences rare.
When a shape α is under strong selection, neutral drift is the only means
for eventually producing such a sequence [50,66]. This is why discontinuous
transitions are preceded by extended periods of neutral drift in Figures 10 and

28

Fig. 14. Relay series of Figure 11. This series involves 42 relay shapes. Discon-
tinuous transitions classiﬁed as in Figure 9 are marked by letters referring to Figure
11. Again, shapes occur repeatedly in the series as indicated, for example, by the
white shapes on gray background.

11.

It is important to realize that the present reconstruction of an adaptive tra-
jectory is not identical to the succession of shapes associated with the actual
lineage of sequences that led to the target. The relay series reports for all n
from start to target that (some sequence folding into) shape ωn was suﬃcient
for giving rise to a new shape ωn+1. In the actual successful lineage ωn+1 may
not have arisen from the ﬁrst sequence with shape ωn; for that matter, it may
not even have arisen from any sequence with shape ωn. (Sequences with other
shapes may also have produced ωn+1, while ωn+1 was already present in the
population.) In sum, the relay series is a ﬁctitious path. The point is that it
is a possible path and a very useful representative of the ensemble of paths
shown to be possible by a population in a particular adaptive history. Let us

29

explain. At any given time t a population contains a number of individuals (in-
stances) for each of the sequence types present. Each individual has its unique
lineage of ancestors all the way back to the initial individuals. At the level of
individuals there would obviously be only one successful lineage or causal path
to the ﬁrst appearance of the target. However, it makes sense not to distin-
guish among identical individuals, and to think in terms of sequence types (or
molecular “species”) instead. The consequence is that a given sequence type
can be produced by more than one other sequence type, thus giving rise to a
network. At this level of resolution there is a combinatorics of paths relating
the ﬁrst sequence type possessing target shape to the sequence types present
intially. Although we have lost strict causality, each of these paths could have
been a causal one if the dice had rolled diﬀerently. We hence refer to this set
as the “ensemble of paths shown to be possible by a population in a particular
history”. To each path in this ensemble corresponds a phenotypic trace, and
the relay series is one of those. Now comes the salient point. All these diﬀerent
paths must coincide at least at the discontinuous transitions revealed by the
relay series. These transitions are seen, after the fact, as those key innovations
that enabled the population to reach the target in a particular experiment.
If such a transition is associated with a ﬁtness advantage, then we have a
typical founder eﬀect, where one (or a few related) sequences conveying this
advantage are ampliﬁed by selection, giving rise to all future lineages, while
the other lineages up to that epoch are terminated. If a discontinuous transi-
tion is not associated with a ﬁtness advantage we have what we might call a
silent founder eﬀect. All lineages other than those emanating from the silent
founder are doomed at some later point, since only a lineage from the silent
founder enables the next major transition. In other words, discontinuities in
the relay series indicate way points in shape space where ensembles of diﬀerent
paths coincide as they zero in (even in the absence of ﬁtness advantage) on
the target. The few paths reaching such a way point diversify afterwards on
shape neutral as well as ﬁtness neutral networks, until they are reduced again
at the next way point. To be sure, any ﬁtness improving transition has this
reducing eﬀect, whether it is associated with a discontinuous transformation
or not. The important point here is that ﬁtness improving transitions can be
anything depending on the selection criterion, and hence cannot be character-
ized in general. In contrast, the characterizable class of discontinuous shape
transformations is an intrinsic property of RNA folding, and constitutes a set
of potential way points for any selection criterion.

Preliminary results from simulations with diﬀerent population sizes (same ini-
tial conditions, same target) show roughly a constant number of discontinuous
transitions for diﬀerent adaptive trajectories, while consistently reducing the
number of continuous transitions.

To summarize, the emerging picture of an adaptive trajectory is not one of a
single path, but rather of an ensemble of diverse paths coming together at way

30

points characterizable as discontinuous shape transformations. (This “ensem-
ble view” contains imagery borrowed from [5,58].) Given a particular initial
condition and a target, diﬀerent simulations yield diﬀerent adaptive trajecto-
ries. However, all involve the same class of way points. Future work will have to
track several individual lineages throughout the adaptive process and “align”
them to corroborate this picture. A hint in this direction is provided by the
pattern of presence intervals of relay shapes during the history of a simulation
(see Figures 10 and 11). These patterns nicely visualize the nearness relation
between shapes and the way point concept. When a shape α is succeeded by
a shape β that is near α, β is present intermittently in the population well
prior to becoming part of the relay path. That is, once α is present, β is un-
avoidable, and a transition to β is continuous. Conversely, at a discontinuous
transition, when α is succeeded by a shape β that is not near α, β has almost
always its ﬁrst ever appearance just prior to that transition. Seen together, the
presence intervals of successive shapes on the relay path form blocks of continu-
ous (within-neighborhood) transitions, separated by discontinuous transitions
(neighborhood escapes). During within-neighborhood transitions many relay
shapes coexist and the ensemble of possible paths is distributed over these
shapes.

6 Conclusions

We have reviewed our theoretical understanding of evolutionary adaptation
in model populations of RNA sequences subject to selection at the level of
their secondary structures. The focus was on the evolutionary consequences
of neutrality. The issue of neutrality in estimating the rate of evolution was
brought to the fore by the Japanese population geneticist Motoo Kimura in
the late sixties [67,68], and was triggered by the observation of high aminoacid
substitution rates in proteins. Neutrality was recently emphasized again by
Sergey Gavrilets in the context of model landscapes [42], so-called “holey
adaptive landscapes” consisting of neutral networks with a “swiss cheese”-
like structure. The extreme case of stochastic dynamics on a ﬂat landscape
was approached by Peliti and Derrida [41], while recent progress focussed
on stochastic adaptive dynamics in piece-wise neutral prototype landscapes,
such as landscapes of a wedding-cake structure [44,45,69], “neutralized” NK-
type (Kauﬀman) landscapes [70,43], or landscapes based on random graphs
[46]. The term neutral network was coined in [34] where the phenomenon was
found in the context of the RNA folding map.

The interest in RNA secondary structure folding derives from providing a
compromise between landscapes designed for analytic tractability and land-
scapes grounded in molecular reality that are also suited as laboratory models
[71,72]. Our ﬁndings on RNA folding provide a microfoundation for Kimura’s

31

phenomenological approach, and led to insights which are hard to obtain with-
out a mechanistic model. We brieﬂy summarize these insights.

First, the important fact about neutrality in RNA is that sets of shape neutral
sequences are connected by single point mutations, and, hence, are not just
sets but networks. This alone means that adaptive populations can tolerate
higher mutation rates for transmitting a master phenotype over generations,
than if a particular genotype had to be transmitted.

Second, while neutrality means robustness against mutations, it also means
an increased ability to adapt. This is less paradoxical than it may look at ﬁrst
sight. The eﬀect of a mutation depends on the context in which it is expressed.
By permitting the sequence context to vary while preserving a shape, neutral-
ity is a prerequisite for making certain point mutations consequential, and
hence enables phenotypic innovation. Phrased in terms of landscape vocabu-
lary, neutral networks delocalize “local traps”, and change the way a “trap”
works. In a barrier-like trap nothing happens for a long time, while the system
is waiting for an improbable macromutation event (such as several point muta-
tions at once) to occur. In contrast, a neutral network is a diﬀusion-like trap in
which the population spends time drifting in sequence space (as well as in ﬁt-
ness neutral parts of shape space) until it hits some rare region of the network
where an adaptive transition to some other network becomes possible. Intu-
itively, converting a barrier-like trap into a (comparable) diﬀusion-like trap
increases the likelihood of a transition, but analytic calculations are required
to spell out the exact conditions for this to be the case [73]. (The terminology
of a barrier-like and diﬀusion-like trap is derived from the similar notions of
an energy barrier and an entropic barrier in entropic spin-glasses [74].) The
importance of extended neutral networks is nicely illustrated by our repeated
failure to evolve in computer simulations a tRNA shape with GC-only se-
quences. GC-only sequences with tRNA shape do exist, since we could obtain
thousands of them by inverse folding. Yet, each simulated adaptive process
starting from a random initial condition would get stuck far away from any
tRNA shape. Structure landscapes based on binary GC-only sequences are
very rugged [28], and do not have suﬃcient neutrality to remove the barrier-
like nature of local traps [34]. We had the same failure in the case of AU-only
sequences. However, we were unable to ﬁnd any AU-only sequence with tRNA
shape by inverse folding, and the failure to evolve one might well be due to
its non-existence.

Third, neutral networks suggest a topology for RNA shapes reﬂecting their
mutual “accessibility”. Accessibilty (by point mutation) of one shape from
another depends on the fraction of boundary shared by their corresponding
neutral networks. This is not a symmetric relation. A random step out of
Monaco has a very high probability of ending in France, but the reverse is
not true. In this topology a transition from shape α to β might be rare along

32

the direct route, but feasible in an incremental fashion by chaining together
frequent transitions. However, we found that there exist rare transitions whose
likelihood cannot be increased by any indirect route, and, hence, they are
irreducibly rare. These transitions are discontinuous in a topological sense,
and we did characterize that set as those structure transformations which
require the coordinated change of several parts of the molecule at once. This
characterization may apply to systems other than RNA as well. The fact that
for RNA that set also has a thermodynamic raison d’ˆetre, nicely illustrates
how the physics of biopolymer structure constrains adaptive trajectories quite
independently of external ﬁtness criteria.

Fourth, neutrality increases the uncertainty in the genotypic trace of adaptive
trajectories. However, their phenotypic trace must go through discontinuous
transitions, no matter what the target shape is made to be. This again reduces
to some extent the uncertainty of adaptive trajectories at the phenotypic level.

The same punctuated dynamics that we have observed in RNA, was also
found with evolving bacteria under precisely controlled constant conditions
in chemostats [75] stressing once more its intrinsic nature. Punctuation has
been reported as well in a quite diﬀerent context where cellular automata
are evolved to perform speciﬁc computational tasks (yet another kind of
“genotype-phenotype” map) [76,77]. This raises the possibility that neutral
networks giving rise to a punctuation dynamics are a quite general phe-
nomenon, not limited to materials or structures related to strictly biological
systems.

It is thought provoking to consider neutrality as a function of the resolution
at which we conceptualize “shape” (or “structure” in general). As we decrease
the resolution, formely distinct neutral networks will merge, and diversity is
lost until it makes no sense to speak of an adaptive process, since the features
captured by that level of resolution have all the same adaptive value, that is,
none. On the other hand, as we increase the level of resolution, a formerly
single neutral network splits into smaller networks. In view of the importance
we ascribe to neutrality for adaptability, it becomes meaningful to ask at which
level of resolution networks become so conﬁned as to destroy the adaptability
of a system. It is doubtful, for example, whether RNA could be evolvable at
all, if the full set of atomic coordinates of an RNA shape were to matter for
its function. In that case no two sequences were structurally the same. This
train of thought suggests that the ﬁrst appearance of percolating neutrality
on the structure resolution scale deﬁnes the evolutionary relevant notion of
“structure”.

33

Acknowledgements

Financial support of the work presented here was provided by the Austrian
Fonds zur F¨orderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung (Projects P-11 065 and
P-13 093), by the Commission of the European Union (Project PL-970 189),
and by the Santa Fe Institute.

References

[1] J. Monod. Chance and Necessity. Knopf, New York, 1971.

[2] W. Fontana and L. W. Buss. Bull. Math. Biol., 56:1–64, 1994.

[3] A. D. Ellington. Current Biology, 4:427–429, 1994.

[4] C. Levinthal. How to fold graciously. In P. Debrunner, J. Tsbiris, and E. Munck,
editors, M¨ossbauer Spectroscopy in Biological Systems, Peoceedings of a Meeting
Held at Allerton House, Monticelli, Illinois, pages 22–24, Urbana, IL, 1969.
University of Illinois Press.

[5] K. A. Dill and H. S. Chan. Nature Structural Biology, 4:10–19, 1997.

[6] H. Frauenfelder, A. R. Bishop, A. Garcia, A. Perelson, P. Schuster,
D. Sherrington, and P. J. Swart, editors. Landscape Paradigms in Physics
and Biology. Concepts, Structures and Dynamics. Collection of Articles from
Physica D, 107/2-4. Elesevier, Amsterdam, 1997.

[7] S. M. Freier, R. Kierzek, J. A. Jaeger, N. Sugimoto, M. H. Caruthers, T. Neilson,

and D. H. Turner. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA, 83:9373–9377, 1986.

[8] D. H. Turner, N. Sugimoto, and S. Freier. Annual Review of Biophysics and

Biophysical Chemistry, 17:167–192, 1988.

[9] J. A. Jaeger, D. H. Turner, and M. Zuker. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 86:7706–

[10] L. He, R. Kierzek, J. SantaLucia, A. E. Walter, and D. H. Turner. Biochemistry,

7710, 1989.

30:11124, 1991.

[11] R. Nussinov, G. Piecznik, J. R. Griggs, and D. J. Kleitman. SIAM J. Appl.

Math., 35:68–82, 1978.

[12] M. S. Waterman and T. F. Smith. Mathematical Biosciences, 42:257–266, 1978.

[13] R. Nussinov and A. B. Jacobson. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 77(11):6309–6313,

1980.

[14] M. Zuker and P. Stiegler. Nucleic Acids Research, 9:133–148, 1981.

[15] M. Zuker and D. Sankoﬀ. Bull. Math. Biol., 46:591–621, 1984.

34

[16] M. S. Waterman and T. H. Byers. Mathematical Biosciences, 77:179–188, 1985.

[17] S. Wuchty, W. Fontana, I. L. Hofacker, and P. Schuster. Biopolymers, 1998.

[18] D. R. Mills, R. L. Peterson, and S. Spiegelman. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,

58:217–224, 1967.

[19] S. Spiegelman. Quart. Rev. Biophys., 4:213–253, 1971.

[20] A. D. Ellington and J. W. Szostak. Nature, 346:818–822, 1990.

[21] C. Tuerk and L. Gold. Science, 249:505–510, 1990.

[22] A. A. Beaudry and G. F. Joyce. Science, 257:635–641, 1992.

[23] D. P. Bartel and J. W. Szostak. Science, 261:1411–1418, 1993.

[24] E. H. Ekland, J. W. Szostak, and D. P. Bartel. Science, 269:364–370, 1995.

[25] W. Fontana and P. Schuster. Biophys. Chem., 26:123–147, 1987.

[26] I. L. Hofacker, W. Fontana, P. F. Stadler, S. Bonhoeﬀer, M. Tacker, and

P. Schuster. Mh. Chem., 125:167–188, 1994.

[27] W. Fontana, D. A. M. Konings, P. F. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Biopolymers,

33:1389–1404, 1993.

[28] W. Fontana, P. F. Stadler, E. G. Bornberg-Bauer, T. Griesmacher, I. L.
Hofacker, M. Tacker, P. Tarazona, E. D. Weinberger, and P. Schuster. Phys.
Rev. E, 47:2083–2099, 1993.

[29] A public domain version of

the Vienna RNA package

at www.tbi.univie.ac.at. An RNA folding server
www.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi.

is available
can be accessed at

[30] M. Tacker, P. F. Stadler, E. G. Bornberg-Bauer, I. L. Hofacker, and P. Schuster.

Eur.Biophys.J., 25:115–130, 1996.

[31] S. Govindarajan and R. A. Goldstein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 93:3341–

3345, 1996.

proteins. in press, 1997.

[32] S. Govindarajan and R. A. Goldstein. The foldability landscape of model

[33] H. Li, R. Helling, C. Tang, and N. Wingreen. Science, 273:666–669, 1996.

[34] P. Schuster, W. Fontana, P. F. Stadler, and I. L. Hofacker. Proc. Roy. Soc.

(London) B, 255:279–284, 1994.

[35] W. Gr¨uner, R. Giegerich, D. Strothmann, C. Reidys, J. Weber, I. L. Hofacker,

P. F. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Mh.Chem., 127:355–374, 1996.

[36] W. Gr¨uner, R. Giegerich, D. Strothmann, C. Reidys, J. Weber, I. L. Hofacker,

P. F. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Mh.Chem., 127:375–389, 1996.

[37] P. R. Stein and M. S. Waterman. Discrete Mathematics, 26:261–272, 1978.

35

[38] I. L. Hofacker, P. Schuster, and P. F. Stadler. Discr. Appl. Math., 89:177–207,

1999.

[39] P. Schuster. Physica D, 107:351–365, 1997.

[40] C. Reidys, P. F. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Bull. Math. Biol., 59:339–397, 1997.

[41] B. Derrida and L. Peliti. Bull. Math. Biol., 53:355–382, 1991.

[42] S. Gavrilets. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 12:307–312, 1997.

[43] M. E. J. Newman and R. Engelhardt. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B, 265:1333–

1338, 1998.

[44] E. van Nimwegen and J. P. Crutchﬁeld. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, special
issue on Evolutionary and Genetic
Algorithms in Computational Mechanics and Engineering, D. Goldberg and K.
Deb, editors, submitted, 1998.

[45] E. van Nimwegen and J. P. Crutchﬁeld. Machine Learning, submitted, 1998.

[46] C. Reidys, C. Forst, and P. Schuster. Bull. Math. Biol., submitted, 1998.

[47] M. Eigen. Naturwissenschaften, 58:465–523, 1971.

[48] M. Eigen and P. Schuster. Naturwissenschaften, 64:541–565, 1977.

[49] M. Eigen, J. McCaskill, and P. Schuster. Adv. Chem. Phys., 75:149 – 263, 1989.

[50] M. A. Huynen, P. F.Stadler, and W. Fontana. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,

93:397–401, 1996.

[51] C. J. Thompson and J. L. McBride. Math. Biosc., 21:127–142, 1974.

[52] B. L. Jones, R. H. Enns, and S. S. Rangnekar. Bull. Math. Biol., 38:12–28,

1975.

[53] E. Domingo. Viral Hepatitis Reviews, 2:247–261, 1996.

[54] E. Domingo and J. J. Holland. Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 51:151–178, 1997.

[55] L. Demetrius, P. Schuster, and K. Sigmund. Bull.Math.Biol., 47:239–262, 1985.

[56] M. Nowak and P. Schuster. J.Theor.Biol., 137:375–395, 1989.

[57] J. Swetina and P. Schuster. Biophys.Chem., 16:329–345, 1982.

[58] E. van Nimwegen, J. P. Crutchﬁeld, and M. Mitchell. Theoret. Comp. Sci., in

press, 1998.

[59] W. Fontana and P. Schuster. J. Theor. Biol., 194:491–515, 1998.

[60] W. Fontana and P. Schuster. Science, 280:1451–1455, 1998.

[61] D. T. Gillespie. J. Comp. Phys., 22:403–434, 1976.

[62] D. T. Gillespie. J. Phys. Chem., 81:2340–2361, 1977.

36

[63] F. R. Kramer, D. R. Mills, P. E. Cole, T. Nishihara, and S. Spiegelman. J. Mol.

Biol., 89:719–736, 1974.

[64] W. Fontana, W. Schnabl, and P. Schuster. Phys. Rev. A, 40:3301–3321, 1989.

[65] C. Tuerk and L. Gold. Science, 249:505–510, 1990.

[66] M. A. Huynen. J. Mol. Evol., 43:165–169, 1996.

[67] M. Kimura. Nature, 217:624–626, 1968.

[68] M. Kimura. The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, UK, 1983.

[69] E. van Nimwegen, J. P. Crutchﬁeld, and M. Mitchell. Phys. Lett. A, 229:144–

150, 1997.

[70] L. Barnett. Tangled webs: Evolutionary dynamics on ﬁtness landscapes with
neutrality. Master’s thesis, School of Cognitive Sciences, University of East
Sussex, Brighton, 1997. http://www.cogs.susx.ac.uk/lab/adapt/nnbib.html.

[71] C. K. Biebricher and W. C. Gardiner. Biophys Chem, 66:179–192, 1997.

[72] N. Lehman and G. F. Joyce. Current Biology, 3:723–734, 1993.

[73] E. van Nimwegen, 1998. Personal communication.

[74] M. Newman, 1998. Personal communication.

[75] S. F. Elena, V. S. Cooper, and R. E. Lenski. Science, 272:1802–1804, 1996.

[76] J. P. Crutchﬁeld and M. Mitchell. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 92:10742–10746,

[77] J. P. Crutchﬁeld, M. Mitchell, and R. Das. Machine Learning, page submitted,

1995.

1998.

37

