Elastic Properties of Nematic Liquid Crystals
Formed by Living and Migrating Cells

Ralf Kemkemer∗, Dieter Kling∗, Dieter Kaufmann∗∗ and Hans Gruler∗

Department of bioPhysics∗ and Human Genetics∗∗
University of Ulm
D 89069 Ulm, Germany

e-mail: hans.gruler@physik.uni-ulm.de

PACS number(s): 87.10.+e, 87.22.Nf, 82.70.-y

February 2, 2008

8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In culture migrating and interacting amoeboid cells can form ne-
matic liquid crystal phases. A polar nematic liquid crystal is formed
if the interaction has a polar symmetry. One type of white blood cells
(granulocytes) form clusters where the cells are oriented towards the
center. The core of such an orientational defect (disclination) is ei-
ther a granulocyte forced to be in an isotropic state or another cell
type like a monocyte. An apolar nematic liquid crystal is formed
if the interaction has an apolar symmetry. Diﬀerent cell types like
human melanocytes (=pigment cells of the skin), human ﬁbroblasts
(=connective tissue cells), human osteoblasts (=bone cells), human
adipocytes (= fat cells) etc., form an apolar nematic liquid crystal.
The orientational elastic energy is derived and the orientational de-
fects (disclination) of nematic liquid crystals are investigated. The
existence of half-numbered disclinations show that the nematic phase
has an apolar symmetry. The density- and order parameter depen-
dence of the orientational elastic constants and their absolute values
are estimated. From the defect structure, one ﬁnds that the splay elas-
tic constant is smaller than the bend elastic constant (melanocytes).
The core of a disclination is either a cell free space or occupied by non
oriented cells (isotropic phase) or occupied by a cell with a diﬀerent
symmetry or occupied by another cell type.

2

Introduction

Investigations of the structure and physical properties of liquid crystals have
greatly increased in the last decades and are now an integral part of solid-
state physics. Certain organic materials do not show a single transition from
solid to liquid, but rather a cascade of transitions involving new phases.
The mechanical properties and the symmetry properties of these phases are
intermediate between those of a liquid and those of a crystal [1].

Depending upon the nature of the building blocks and upon external
parameters (temperature, solvents, etc.) a wide variety of phenomena and
transitions amongst liquid crystals are observed. To generate a liquid crys-
tal one must use anisotropic objects, like elongated molecules. Several ways
are known to achieve this: with small molecules; with long helical rods that
either occur in nature or can be made artiﬁcially; with polymers; with more
complex structure units like the capside of a virus [2] that are associated
structures of molecules and ions; likewise, with even more complex structure
units, like amoeboid cells which are complex structures far from thermo-
dynamic equilibrium and act as a machine [3, 4]. Here, the orientational
elastic properties of liquid crystal formed by migrating and living cells are
investigated.

Thermotropic nematic liquid crystals can be formed by small elongated
molecules like p-azoxyanisole (PAA) or N-(p-methoxybenzylidene)-p-butylaniline
0.5 nm
(MBBA) which can be regarded as rigid rods (
width). At low temperature one observes a crystalline phase. Heating up the
sample, a transition to a nematic phase is observed. With further heating
the transition to an isotropic liquid is observed.

2 nm length and

≈

≈

Lyotropic nematic liquid crystal can be formed by long elongated molecules
in suitable solvents. The anisotropic building blocks can have a rod-like con-
formation like (i) synthetic polypeptides (
2 nm width)
≈
and (ii) tobacco mosaic virus (
20 nm width).
−
At low concentration one observes an isotropic liquid but a transition to a
nematic phase is observed by increasing the concentration of the elongated
building blocks.

1000 nm length and

30nm length and

300

≈

≈

≈

The fundamental property of a nematic liquid crystal, which makes it
diﬀerent from an isotropic liquid and similar to a solid, is the presence of
an orientational degree of freedom which is characterized by a macroscopic
spatial ordering of the long axis of molecules. The statistical mechanics for
predicting the macroscopic spatial ordering is diﬃcult but can be approxi-

3

mated by applying mean-ﬁeld calculations. (i) The Onsager approach starts
with anisotropic steric repulsion. The free energy is minimum for oriented
rods (width << length): they show an orientational order of a nematic phase
at high rod density. But, at low rod density, the suspension is an isotropic liq-
uid, as expected. (ii) The Maier-Saupe theory approaches the intermolecular
interactions by a mean-ﬁeld which is proportional to the order parameter of
the nematic phase. The minimum of the free enthalpy yields the equilibrium
state. At high temperature an isotropic liquid without orientational order is
predicted, but a nematic liquid crystal with orientational order can occur at
low temperatures.

The above mentioned nematic liquid crystals are described by equilibrium
thermodynamic. This holds true even for tobacco mosaic virus since only the
anisotropic shape of the viruses is considered. The intracellular metabolism
can be neglected since the virus does not have the ability of self-motion.
Thus, the thermal motion is the stochastic source for the molecular dynam-
ics. However, liquid crystal phases can also be formed if the stochastic source
is created by energy consuming processes. A typical example are migrating
In the absence of a directing extra-
biological cells like white blood cells.
cellular signal, the single cells perform a random walk due to the existence
of stochastic processes in the intracellular signal transduction chain. The
migrating cells can form liquid crystal phases if each cell transmits extracel-
lular signals that are received by other cells. The symmetry of the cell-cell
interaction is important for the formed type of liquid crystal phase:

(i) A polar nematic liquid crystal is expected if the cell-cell interaction is
polar. This means that one cell transmits a signal which attracts another cell.
The cellular response is directed migration. For example: (a) Single slime
mould cells migrate as amoeboid cells on a surface and search for bacteria as
food. In the case of low bacteria concentration, the intracellular metabolism
of the slime mould cells alters in such a way that cyclic AMP is emitted as
an extracellular signal. Other slime mould cells can receive this chemical
signal and react accordingly to the received signal with directed migration.
At high enough cell density, the cells form a cluster where each cell tries to
move towards the center of the cluster [5]. (b) A similar process is observed
with migrating white blood cells [3].
If human leukocytes (granulocytes)
are expose to blood plasma they then migrate as single amoeboid cells on a
surface as shown in Fig. 1a. But if the calcium concentration is lowered, e.g.
by adding the chelator EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid, pKCa =
10.7) or EGTA (ethyleneglycol-(aminoethyl ether) tetraacedic acid, pKCa =

4

h

i

cosϕ

11) to the plasma, then the migrating granulocytes attract each other and
form a cluster, as shown in Fig. 1b. The emitted molecules (chemical signal)
is still unknown. The process is reversible since the clusters disappear if
In both examples, the cells in a
the calcium concentration is increased.
cluster form a polar nematic liquid crystal because (i) there is order in the
cell orientation,
, induced by the directed migration and (ii) no order
in the center of mass of the cells. The angle, ϕ, is the diﬀerence between
the actual migration direction and the direction towards the center of the
cluster. The cells in the cluster of Fig. 1b have a polar order of 0.82. A
singularity in the cell orientation is expected in the center of the cluster. A
common observation is that the cell in the center has a spherical shape and
the surrounding cells have a polar shape. Human monocytes (another type of
leukocytes) are immobile on a glass surface. If a mixture of granulocytes and
monocytes is investigated, the immobile monocytes act as nucleation center
as shown in Fig. 1b. The polar nematic liquid crystal formed by living and
migrating cells is a system far from thermodynamic equilibrium.

One can ask which temperature corresponds to the random movement
of the cells? This question can be answered by using the Einstein relation
which connects the random movement of an inert particle described by the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, the mobility R and the thermal energy kBT: DR =
kBT . The mobility of a spherical particle with radius r in a viscous medium
with viscosity η is given by Stokes: R = 6πηr. The random movement of
a migration granulocyte can be quantiﬁed by measuring the mean-squared
displacement as a function of time. The diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, is one ﬁtting
1000µm2/min). The calculated temperature for an
parameter (D = 200
−
inert particle which has the value of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the migrating
105 K (r = 10µm, η = 0.01P ) [6].
cells, is very high

(ii) An apolar nematic liquid crystal is expected if the cell-cell interaction
is apolar. This means that one cell can inﬂuence the orientation of another
cell. The cellular response is such that the cells like to be parallel. For ex-
ample, human melanocytes are elongated cells which distribute with their
dendrites the pigment melanin in the skin. Although the involved chemical
signal is unknown there exists an attractive cell-cell interaction because the
cell body of one cell attracts another cell body. There also exists a repulsive
cell-cell interaction since the dendrites avoid contact with each other. The
elongated cells try to be parallel oriented to each other and form at high cell
density a nematic liquid crystal. At low cell density the cells form cluster
with oriented cells as shown in Fig. 2a, however, with increasing cell con-

≈

5

centration the cells form a nematic liquid crystal. Fig. 2b shows a nematic
liquid crystal close to the nematic-isotropic transition. This observation is
not restricted to melanocytes. Other cell types like ﬁbroblasts, osteoblasts,
adipocytes etc. orient in the same way so that, in the mean, the cells are
parallel to each other. The cells form an apolar nematic liquid crystal be-
cause there is no order in the center of mass of the cells but order in the
cell orientation. The apolar symmetry of this phase will be demonstrated by
investigating orientational defects as shown below. A few words to the dy-
namic behavior: Time lapse movies of melanocytes show that the cell body
performs rhythmic movements and, in addition, each cell extend and retract
periodically its opposing dendrites. The dendrites ﬁnd their orientation with
minimum interaction with other cells [7].

A uniform oriented nematic liquid crystal is formed if a small extracellular
guiding signal is applied like parallel scratches in the surface (Fig. 2). With
this method oriented single nematic liquid crystals were produced which had
a size of several cm2. An isolated single cell is not oriented by such a weak
extracellular guiding signal [4]. The uniform oriented nematic liquid crystals
which are used in the liquid crystal display technology, are made in a very
similar way [1]. In the absence of an orienting extracellular guiding signal the
nematic phase contains numerous orientational point defects (disclinations).
An example is given in Fig. 3.

Summarizing this part, nematic liquid crystal phases can be formed ei-
ther by anisotropic interacting building blocks at thermal equilibrium or by
anisotropic interacting building blocks far from thermodynamic equilibrium.

Orientational Elastic Energy

±

~n) where the
An apolar nematic liquid crystal is an uniaxial system (
~n. In the case of an
molecules are on average aligned along the director
ideal nematic liquid crystal, the direction of the director ~n is the same all
over the sample. However, this ideal conformation will not be compatible
with the constrains that are imposed by limiting boundaries. There will be
some deformation of the alignment. The distance ℓ, over which signiﬁcant
variations of orientation occur, is of most interest, and is much larger than
the dimensions, a, of the building blocks. Thus, the deformations may be
described by a continuum theory disregarding the details of the structure
on the scale of the building blocks (a/ℓ << 1). To construct such a theory

±

6

one possible starting point would be the elastic distortion energy density Fd
([8, 9]). The spatial derivatives of ~n(~r) are used to construct Fd. They form
a tensor of rank two ∂αnβ. At any point we introduce a local system of
Cartesian co-ordinates, x, y, z with y parallel to ~n at the origin, x chosen
perpendicular to y (x-y plane are the plane where the cells migrate) and
z parallel to the normal of the plane. x, y, z form a right-handed system.
Referred to these axis, the two components of curvature, at this point, are the
splay and bend deformation s = ∂nx/∂x and b = ∂nx/∂y, respectively (see
Fig. 4). The distortion energy of a liquid crystal specimen in a particular
conﬁguration, relative to its energy in the state of uniform orientation, is
expressible at the area integral of distortion energy density g which is a
quadratic function of two diﬀerential coeﬃcients which measure the curvature
in two dimensions.

g = k1s + k3b +

k11s2 +

k13sb +

k33b2 +

1
2

1
2

1
2

· · ·

(1)

=

The spontaneous splay coeﬃcient, k1 is zero if the axis perpendicular to ~n is
). The spontaneous bend coeﬃcient, k3, is zero if the
a symmetry axis (
←
). The splay-bend coeﬃcient, k13,
axis parallel to ~n is a symmetry axis (
↑
. k11 and k33 are the orientational
is only unequal to zero for
and
↑6
elastic coeﬃcient for splay and bend deformation. These coeﬃcients are also
known as Frank elastic constants.

=
↓
=
↓

→6

→

←

=

The distortion energy can be written in the coordinate free notation

g = k1

~n + k3(curl~n)z +

k11(

k13(

~n)(curl~n)z +

1
2

~n)2 +

∇

1
2

∇

∇

k33(curl~n)2

z (2)

1
2

Orientational Elastic Constants

Splay and Bend Constants

The orientational elastic constant of a nematic liquid crystal (bulk) can be
estimated by purely dimensional arguments: one expects that the elastic
constants are to be in the order of U/a, where U is a typical interaction energy
between the molecules while a is a molecular dimension. A typical value of
10−20 J/molecule
the molecular interaction energy is
2000 K. A typical liquid crystal
which corresponds to a temperature of
10−12
molecule has a length of about 1.5 nm. It leads to a value of

8 kJ/mol or 1.3

≈

≈

×

8

≈

×

7

N which is in accordance with the experiments [1]. The orientational elastic
constant of a membrane can be estimated by taking this value times the
10−20 J which is again veriﬁed
thickness, d, of the membrane. It yields 3
by experiments [10].

×

The orientational elastic constant of a nematic liquid crystal formed by
living cells can be estimated in a similar way: In the case of migrating gran-
105 K. A condensed phase can only be
ulocytes the quasi temperature is
formed if the interaction potential, U, is in this order or even larger. This
10−19 J/cell. The bulk elastic con-
leads to an interaction energy of
5
stant is obtained by dividing this interaction energy by the length of a cell
10−14 N. The two dimensional elastic constant is
(
≈
20µm). The
obtained by multiplying this value with the cell thickness (
estimated orientational elastic constant of a quasi two dimensional nematic
liquid crystal is then

20µm). It yields 2.5

10−19 J.

×

≈

≈

×

≈

5

The dependence of the orientational elastic coeﬃcients on the apolar order
parameter, S, and the cell density, ρ, can be estimated in the following
way: The orientation angle of amoeboid cells is controlled by an automatic
controller which compares the actual angle with the desired one [12]. The
cellular response is in such a way as to minimize the deviation between the
actual angle and the desired one. The desired angle of one cell is to be parallel
to another cell. In the case of a nematic liquid crystal the information of the
desired angle is transferred to one cell by an extracellular guiding ﬁeld which
can be chemical, electrical or sterical. The extracellular guiding ﬁeld, E2, of
a nematic liquid crystal can be approached by the nematic mean ﬁeld where
one cell is considered in the ﬁeld produced by all the other cells. The strength
of the mean ﬁeld is assumed to be proportional to (i) the cell density, ρ, and
(ii) the mean apolar order parameter, S(=
), of the surrounding cells.

cos2Θ

≈

×

h
E2 = a2 ρ S

i

(3)

These assumptions are veriﬁed by experiments [4]. The extracellular guiding
ﬁeld is calibrated in cellular units by a2.

The cellular automatic controller acts in such a way as to minimize the
deviation between the actual angle and the desired one.
In the absence
of extracellular guiding ﬁeld, the cells alter their angle of orientation in a
random fashion. The response of the cellular automatic controller is hence
not simply described by the extracellular guiding ﬁeld but also by stochastic
processes in the cellular signal transduction chain [12]. The rate equation for

8

the orientation angle is a stochastic diﬀerential equation (Langevin equation):

dΘ
dt

−

=

k2 E2 sin2Θ + Γ2(t)

(4)

The orientation angle, Θ, is measured in respect to the director ~n of the ne-
matic liquid crystal. The cellular signal transformer is described by E2sin2Θ
and the cellular reaction unit by the coeﬃcient k2. The stochastic part of
the machine equation, Γ(t), is approximated by a white noise of the strength
t′)) . The Langevin equation can be trans-
q2 (
formed into a Fokker-Planck equation which describes the temporal varia-
tions of the angle distribution function [13, 6]. The predicted steady state
angle distribution function is

Γ(t) Γ(t′)

= q2 δ(t

= 0,

−

Γ

h

i

h

i

f2(Θ) = f20 eV cos2 Θ

with the generating function V

V =

2 k2 E2
q2

=

2 k2 a2 ρ S
q2

= A2 ρ S

(5)

(6)

R

f20 is determined by the normalization (
f (Θ) dΘ = 1). It is important to
realize that the steady state angle distribution function of living cells (system
far from thermodynamic equilibrium) have the same mathematical structure
as the Boltzmann distribution which describes the ﬂuctuations of a system at
thermal equilibrium. The predicted angle distribution function, f2(Θ), of a
nematic liquid crystal formed by migrating and orienting cells as well as the
density- and order parameter dependence of the extracellular guiding ﬁeld
are veriﬁed by experiments [4]. The unknown coeﬃcient, A2 (= 2 k2 a2 / q2),
can be determined by measuring the angle distribution function at diﬀerent
cell densities. For melanocytes one gets 1/A2 = 55 cells/mm2. Form the
self-consistency for the order parameter one gets the transition from the
nematic to the the isotropic phase [4]: A2 ρ0 = 2 with cell density, ρ0, at the
transition. This threshold cell density, ρ0, can be estimated by considering
random oriented cells without steric contact. One gets a threshold cell density
100µm long cells. This value is in accordance with
of
≈
ρ0 (= 110 cells/mm2) determined directly from A2.

100 cells/mm2 for

≈

The interaction potential, U, of a single cell with its environment is the

generating function, V , times cos 2 Θ

U = A2 ρ S cos 2 Θ = 2

S cos 2Θ

(7)

ρ
ρ0

9

This interaction potential of a single cell in the environment of a nematic
liquid crystal will be used to predict the order parameter dependence as
well as the density dependence of the orientational elastic coeﬃcients. The
calculation is made in analogy to the elastic coeﬃcients of nematic liquid
crystal formed by molecules [14].

The angle Θ alters by the distortion angle α if one moves in space (y-

direction). One obtains

For small distortion angle one gets

Θ

Θ + α

→

cos 2 (Θ + α) = (1

2 α2) cos 2 Θ

2 α sin 2 Θ

−
The mean interaction potential per area is obtained from Eqs. 7 - 9 as

−

In the case of a bend deformation, the distortion angle is on a molecular scale

ξy represents the characteristic length of a bend deformation. One expects
that ξy is the length of one elongated cell. The elastic distortion area density
is then

which has to be compared with the phenomenological derived bend distortion
energy

The splay elastic constant is then

u = 2

S2 (1

2 α2)

−

ρ2
ρ0

α =

∂Θ
∂y

ξy

u33 = 4 S2 ρ2
ρ0

ξ2
y

∂Θ
∂y !

 

2

g33 =

k33

1
2

2

∂Θ
∂y !

 

k33 = 8 b

(S ξy)2

ρ2
ρ0

10

A similar expression can be derived for the splay elastic constant, k11. One
expects that the elastic coeﬃcient increases with (i) increasing order pa-
rameter, (ii) increasing cell density and (iii) increasing cell dimension. A

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

≈

factor
tion (ρ0 = 110 cells/mm2 and S
ﬁlm of dense packed cells (ρ

500 is expected between the value at the nematic-isotropic transi-
0.5) and that of a nematic liquid crystal

10 ρ0 and S

1).

≈

The ratio of the elastic constants is determined by the ratio of character-

≈

istic length of the splay and bend deformation.

≈

2

k11
k33

=

ξx
ξy !

 

(15)

One expects that these characteristic lengths, ξx and ξy, are approximately
a. Only small diﬀerences between ξx and ξy are expected since a cluster of
cells will change their orientation if one tries to change the orientation of a
single cell.

The coeﬃcient b transforms the cell speciﬁc physical units into man-made
units. Up to now no orientational elastic measurements were performed and
consequently the coeﬃcient, b, is unknown. It can be estimated in the follow-
ing way: The orientational elastic coeﬃcient close to the nematic-isotropic
transition is expected to be the interaction potential, U, divided by the cellu-
lar length, a, and multiplied by the thickness, d, of the nematic ﬁlm (U
d/a)
as shown above. The orientational elastic coeﬃcient close to the transition is
predicted by Eq. 14 to 2 b ρ0 ξ2
0.5 at the transition). This leads
to

y (with S

·

1
2
10−20 J if one uses U

≈

b

≈
d
ρ0 a3 U
5

≈

×

100µm, ρ0 = 110 cells/mm2.

(16)

10−19 J/cell as estimated above

One gets b
and d

≈
×
20µm, a

5

≈

≈

Spontaneous Splay

The spontaneous splay coeﬃcient, k1 is zero if the axis perpendicular to ~n
is a symmetry axis. If the building blocks carry a preferred direction in the
direction of the long axis (e.g. wedge-shaped building blocks) there are as
many building blocks up (
) then the spontaneous
↑
splay coeﬃcient is zero. A (parallel) polar nematic liquid crystal with its
) is formed in case of a (parallel)
(parallel) polar distribution function (
↑6
polar cell-cell interaction. The (parallel) polar distribution and the (parallel)
polar shape asymmetry of the building blocks leads to a natural splay of the
structure and the spontaneous splay coeﬃcient, k1 is expected to be unequal

) as there are down (
↓

=

↓

11

to zero. If the (parallel) polar anisotropy of the building-blocks (e.g. wedge-
shaped cell, (parallel) polar organized cell structure) is connected with a
(parallel) polar distribution of the muscle proteins then the center of mass
of an area element moves in the direction of the director ﬁeld. In case of a
point defect div~v

= 0.

To proceed further one has to introduce the motor characteristics of the
migrating cells. The excess force, F (c, v), of a migrating cell depends on the
concentration, c, of the migration stimulating molecules in the extracellular
space and on the speed, v, of the cell [15].

F (c, v) = F0

c
c + Kc

(1

−

v
vmax

)

(17)

The ﬁrst term describes the maximum force, F0, which is 40 nN for a granu-
locyte. The second term describes the fraction of membrane-bound receptors
loaded with the migration stimulating molecule. The maximum speed, vmax,
is 24 µm/min for granulocytes. One expects movements as demonstrated in
Fig. 1b. The hydrodynamic equations for nematic liquid crystals formed by
migrating cells are not yet developed.

Spontaneous Bend

→

) as there are left (

The spontaneous bend coeﬃcient, k3, is zero if the axis parallel to ~n is a
symmetry axis. If the building blocks carry a preferred direction perpendic-
ular to the direction of the long axis (e.g. banana-shaped building blocks or
elongated cells with the leading front on one side (e.g. keratinocytes)), there
are as many building blocks right (
) then the spon-
taneous bend coeﬃcient is zero. A (transverse) polar nematic liquid crystal
) is formed in case of
with its (transverse) polar distribution function (
↑6
a (transverse) polar cell-cell interaction. The (transverse) polar distribution
and the (transverse) polar shape asymmetry of the building blocks leads to
a natural bend of the structure and the spontaneous bend coeﬃcient, k3 is
expected to be unequal to zero. Human keratinocytes (skin cells) plated on a
surface migrate and cluster in large islands. The elongated keratinocytes in
the cluster show the typical paving stone appearance [19]. If the (transverse)
polar anisotropy of the building-blocks (e.g. banana-shaped cell, (transverse)
polar organized cell structure) is connected with a (transverse) polar distribu-
tion of the muscle proteins then the center of mass of an area element moves

←

=

↓

12

6
perpendicular to the director ﬁeld.
curlz~v

= 0.

In case of a point defect one expects

Disclinations

The basic assumption of the used continuum theory concerns the smooth-
ness of the director ﬁeld, ~n(~r). In practice, however, textures are observed
originating from singularities in the orientational ﬁeld. These discontinuities
in the orientation are called disclinations. The energy of the disclinations
themselves is unknown and the energy of the surrounding distorted director
ﬁeld can be calculated by making use of the elastic continuum theory.

The director is given by

~n(~r) = [cos Φ(x, y), sin Φ(x, y)]

(18)

where Φ(x, y) is the angle between the director and the x-axis of a ﬁxed coor-
dinate system. In order to avoid complicated mathematics the one-constant
approximation is used k = k11 = k33.

The cylindrical coordinates (r, ψ) are used to describe the singularity.

g =

k (div ~n)2

1
2

g(r, ψ) =

k

1
2

2

∂Φ
∂r !

+

1
r2

∂Φ
∂ψ !

 



 



2





It is evident that this expression diverges at r = 0. The cause is a disconti-
nuity in orientation at r = 0.

The functional dependence of Φ on r and ψ is determined by requiring
that the distortion energy must be minimum with respect to variations of Φ.
This means that Φ must satisfy the Euler-Lagrange equation.

The trivial solution is Φ = const, where the cells form an uniform oriented
nematic liquid crystal. The general solution for the disclinations is

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

∂2Φ
∂r2 +

1
r

∂Φ
∂r

+

1
r2

∂2Φ
∂ψ2 = 0

Φ = m ψ + Φ0

13

6
For an apolar nematic liquid crystal 2m is an integer and for a polar nematic
liquid crystal m is an integer. Some examples are shown in Fig. 5.

The question whether the nematic liquid crystal formed by living and
migrating cells has a polar or an apolar structure can be decided by investi-
gating the types of defects. (i) Dense packed elongated melanocytes form an
apolar nematic liquid crystal since the half-number disclination (m =
1/2)
is found very often in the orientation pattern (Fig. 3). However, this result is
not speciﬁc for melanocytes. Other cell types like ﬁbroblasts [18], osteoblasts
(Fig. 6), etc. show half-number disclination and, thus, form an apolar ne-
matic liquid crystal. (ii) No half-numbered defects are found in the dense
packed clusters of migrating granulocytes and keratinocytes. Granulocytes
form a (parallel) polar nematic phase since this cell type like to create a
defect with m = 1 and Φ0 = 0 (Fig. 1). Keratinocytes form a (transverse)
polar nematic phase since this cell type like to create a defect with m = 1
and Φ0 = π/2.

−

Interacting Disclinations

The deformation energy, W, of an isolated disclination can be obtained by
integrating the elastic energy density in a circular area around the disclina-
tion.

W = Wc + π k m2 ln

R
Rc (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(23)

R, Rc and Wc are the radius of the circular integration area, the core radius
of the disclination and the core energy of the disclination, respectively. The
Wc, depends on the type of disclination. The elastic
elastic energy, W
1-disclination. Therefore,
energy of a
1-disclination.
the
This prediction is in accordance with the observation.

0.5-disclination should occur more frequently than the

0.5-disclination is a forth of that of a

±

±

−

±

±

The deformation ﬁeld of one disclination is altered if another disclination

is introduced. The elastic interaction energy, W12, is then [1]

W12 = 2kπm1m2 ln

(24)

R12
Rc (cid:19)

(cid:18)

where R12 is the distance between the two disclinations. As expected the
interaction between disclination of opposite strength like m1 = +0.5 and

14

0.5 is predicted to be attractive and repulsive for equal signs. The

m2 =
force between the two disclination is [1]

−

F12 =

2 k π m1 m2
R12

−

(25)

As expected the force is predicted to be large for small distances and small
for large distances.

−

The elastic interaction between two disclinations is orientation depen-
0.5 disclination and a +0.5
dent: Two possible orientations in the case of a
disclination where the interaction energy is minimum, are shown in Fig. 7.
The elastic interaction energy of the two orientations is the same in the case
of equal elastic constants (k = k11 = k33) is used. But, in the general case
(k11
= k33) the elastic interaction energy is minimum for one of the orienta-
tions [16]. The orientation as shown in Fig. 7a is energetically preferred in
the case of k11 > k33 since a lot of bend deformation is between the disclina-
tions. The orientation as shown in Fig. 7b is energetically preferred in the
case of k11 < k33 since a lot of splay deformation is between the disclinations.
The splay elastic constant, k11, is smaller than the bend elastic constant, k33,
for an apolar nematic liquid crystal formed by melanocytes since in the case
0.5 disclination the orientation as shown in Fig. 7b is prefer-
of a pair of
entially formed. But up to now, we are not able to determine the relative
value of the anisotropy, 2(k11

k33)/(k11 + k33), of the elastic constants.

±

−

Core of a Disclination

The nature of the core of nematic liquid crystals formed by anisotropic
molecules is not known. However, the core of a nematic liquid crystal formed
by migrating cells can be observed directly in the light microscope. Diﬀerent
types of cores are observed as shown in Fig. 8: (i) The core of a disclination
is an area free of cells. This type of core is frequently observed for very
elongated cells like melanocytes (Fig. 8a). (ii) The core of a disclination is
an area with isotropically distributed cell as shown in Fig. 8b. This type of
core is frequently observed for smaller cells like ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts.
(iii) The core of a disclination is occupied by a star-shaped cell as shown in
Fig. 8c. The cells which form the nematic liquid crystal are in an elongated
bipolar state.

The defect in the orientation ﬁeld attracts disturbances of the orientation
ﬁeld. One observes that other cell types or the same cell type with diﬀerent

15

6
shapes are trapped in the core of a disclination. For example, melanocytes
have usual two opposing dendrites. But some cells have three dendrites and
these cells disturb the nematic phase and are, therefore, attracted by the
orientational disclination (Fig. 8c).

In nematic liquid crystals formed by elongated molecules it is assumed
that the molecules in the core of a disclination are in the isotropic state. This
assumption can be veriﬁed for a nematic liquid crystal formed by elongated
migrating cells. There exist a sharp boundary between the nematic and the
isotropic phase. The nematic phase is destroyed if the elastic energy density
is larger than the mean ﬁeld.

The bend elastic constant divided by the calibration coeﬃcient b can be
expressed by Eq. 17. One gets

1
2

k33

2

∂Θ
∂y !

 

(ρ S)2
ρ0

2 b

≥

∂Θ
∂y ≥

1
√2

ξy

(26)

(27)

The maximal bending ∂Θ/∂y of a +1/2 disclination can be determined from
photographic pictures. The characteristic length, ξy, of a bend deformation
a). The
is expected to be in the order of the length of an elongated cell (ξy
observed angular change by going from one cell to the next is approximately
15 to 20 degrees. The angular change per cell as predicted by Eq. 27 is 29
degrees. The assumption that a strong bend deformation can destroy the
nematic phase is veriﬁed since the predicted angular change is in accordance
with the experimental observation.

≈

Outlook

The practical importance of this study lies in its objective description of the
liquid crystal phases formed by migrating and interacting cells. Two types
of nematic liquid crystals, a polar and an apolar phase, are found to be
formed by certain cell types in culture and such phases may be expected to
be present in many other cell types. In addition, the objective description
may be useful to deﬁne and elucidate cases of cellular dysfunction, and of
altered cellular function induced by speciﬁc molecules like pharmacological
active molecules, etc..

16

The major objective of current and future research is to go beyond this
phenomenological description of the thermodynamic phases formed by mi-
grating and interacting cells. How the cellular machinery works on a molec-
ular scale can be investigated by considering the technical data as a frame
ﬁlled with the biochemical events. The cell, regarded as a ﬂuid self-organized
molecular machine, represents a new and important ﬁeld in the triangle be-
tween physics, chemistry and life sciences. The knowledge that one essential
process in the cellular signal transduction chain is the supply of fresh recep-
tors to the plasma membrane could lead to the application of new techniques.
For instance the liquid crystal phase can be changed if special designed
molecules are added which interact with the intracellular signal transduc-
tion chain and alter cell-cell interaction either by the induced change in the
cellular shape or by the transmitted chemical signal.

The process by which migrating cells exchange information constitutes
one of the most intriguing areas of life sciences and physics. An individual
cell transmits signals and guides its migration and orientation according to
the signals it receives, these messages being chemical, sterical or electrical
in nature. The physical process of reducing a gas containing freely moving
molecules to a liquid form is understood to a large extent and the mean
behavior of a given molecule in the interaction ﬁeld of the other moving
molecules may be determined by Boltzmann statistics. Identical principle are
used to reduce freely migrating cells to a condensed state. The mean behavior
of a given cell in the interacting ﬁeld of other cells can be described in terms
of its automatic controller. The self-organization, involved in morphogenesis,
organogenesis and wound healing, takes in a new light.

The nematic liquid crystal formed by migrating cells opens new perspec-
tives in the ﬁeld of cellular tissue engineering. The two dimensional nematic
liquid crystal can be used as a template. For example: (i) Cells of another
type can migrate and orient on top of the liquid crystal to form more com-
plex structures. (ii) Cells of another type can be attracted and localized in
the orientational defects of the nematic liquid crystal. New types of liquid
crystals are expected in analogy to blue phases where orientation defects are
ordered in space. (iii) Complex structures formed by diﬀerent types of cells
can be altered if the phase of the template (cellular layer of the nematic
liquid crystal) is altered by a chemical signal from a nematic liquid crystal
phase to an isotropic phase.

17

Acknowledgments

We particularly like to thank Volker Teichgr¨aber for fruitful discussion. This
work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Fonds der
Chemischen Industrie.

Appendix

Cell Preparation

Melanocytes are one type of cells in the skin. They produce and distribute
the color pigment melanin via dendrites. Cultured human melanocytes form
the desired bipolar mode with two opposing dendrites when they are exposed
to melanocytes medium. Details are given in ref. [20]. Brieﬂy, skin biopsies
were obtained from healthy donors. The cells were cultured in TIC medium
(Ham F10, 16 % serum, 85nM PMA, 0.1 mM IBMX, 2.5 nM cholera toxin).
cm2 dishes (Nunclon,
Cells designated for the experiment were seeded in 25
Nunc, Germany) and cultured until conﬂuence (approx. 25-30 days).

−

The cells, being of spherical shape in the suspension, come down onto
the substrate and start to develop their dendrites. They stay in this shape
and crawl around on the surface. The cell body of diﬀerent melanocytes
attract each other but the dendrites repel each other. The orientation of the
dendrites occurs during a periodic retraction and elongation process in such
a way that each dendrite has a minimum of contact with the surrounding
cells.

We used a precision motorized x-y stage on a CCD-camera (Hamamatsu)
equipped microscope (Zeiss Axiovert) and scanned an area of several mm2
using a 10x magniﬁcation lens. The pictures were digitized with a Scion frame
grabber card on a Macintosh PPC and stored on the hard disk. The public
domain software NIH-IMAGE (developed at the US National Institute of
Health) was used for this purpose, as well as, for the further image processing.

Picture Evaluation

Our goal is to ﬁnd an algorithm which determines automatically the mean
orientation of the elongated cells in a small part of the picture. This task was
successfully solved by going into the Fourier space. First, a squared section
(64X64 pixels) of a picture is chosen, as shown in Fig. 9a. A two-dimensional

18

Fast Fourier Transformation implemented in NIH-IMAGE is applied to this
squared section of the picture. The result is a gray scale picture as shown in
Fig. 9b.

The Fourier transform arises as a diﬀuse cloud with a handle-shaped
contour. The maximum momentum of this elongated cloud is determined
and found to be parallel to the direction of the mean cell alignment. In order
to evaluate the exact orientation we apply a threshold procedure to remove
all pixels with a gray value below a certainthreshold value. The remaining
pixels are weighted with their gray value, g(x,y), and the angle, Θ, of the
orientation axis is found by maximizing the ”momentum of mass”. More
details to the procedure are given in [21].

Mxx

Myy +

(Mxx

Myy)2 + 4M 2
xy

tanΘ =

−

−

q

2Mxy

with

X
and Mxy and Myy analogous.

Mxx =

x2g(x, y)

xg(x, y)

−

(cid:16)X

2

(cid:17)

This procedure is repeated for the next squared section of the picture.
The scan was performed with overlapping squared sections. The shift length
was half of the square size.

(28)

(29)

References

[1] P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost . The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Claren-

don Press, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1995)

[2] B. Alberts, D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raﬀ, K. Roberts, J. D. Watson.
Molecular Biology of the Cell, Garland Pub. Inc. New York, London
(1994)

[3] H. Gruler anf A. de Boisﬂeury-Chevance, J. Phys. I France 4, 1085

(1994)

[4] H. Gruler, U. Dewald, and M. Eberhardt to be published

[5] P. R. Fisher, R. Merkl, and G. Gerisch, J. Cell. Biol. 108, 973 (1989)

19

[6] M. Schienbein, K. Franke, H. Gruler, Phys. Rev. E, 49, 5492 - 5471

(1994)

[7] R. Kemkemer, V. Teichgraeber, S. Schrank-Kaufmann, D. Kaufmann,

and H. Gruler to be published

[8] C. W. Oseen, Trans. Faraday Soc. 29, 883 (1933)

[9] F. C. Frank, Disc. Faraday Soc. 25, 19 (1958)

[10] E. Evans, D. Needham. J. Phys. Chem. 91 4219 (1987)

[11] M. Schienbein, H. Gruler, Phys.Rev. E,52, 4183 - 4197 (1995)

[12] H. Gruler. In: Biologically Inspired Physics. L. Peliti (Ed.), Plenum

Press, pp 217 - 227 (1991)

[13] H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck Equation, Springer Verlag Heidelberg

(1984)

[14] H. Gruler, Z. Naturforsch. 30a, 230 (1975)

[15] Vereycken, H. Gruler, C. Bucherer, C. Lacombe, J-P Leli`evre. J. Phys.

III France 5, 1469 (1995)

[16] I. E. Dzyalonshinsky, Sov. Phys. JETP 31, 773 (1970)

[17] G. Friedel, Ann. Physique 18, 273 (1922)

[18] R. D. Goldman, G. Berg, A. Bushnell, C-M Chang, L. Dickerman, N.
Hopkins, M. L. Miller R. Pollack and E. Wang. In Locomotion of Cells
Elsevier, North Holland Amsterdam (1973) pp. 83 - 107

[19] L. Hegemann, A. Wevers, B. Bonnekoh, and G. Mahrle. J. Dermatol.

Sci. 3, 103 (1992)

[20] J. Griesser, D. Kaufmann, D. Maier, R. Mailhammer, P. Kuehl and

W. Krone.J. Invest. Dermatol. 108, 275 (1997)

[21] J. C. Russ, The Image Processing Handbook , CRC Press Boca Raton,

Ann Arbor, London, Tokio (1995)

20

≈

Human leukocytes exposed to blood plasma are migrating on a
Figure 1:
20µm. The fringe at
glass surface. The gap between the two glass slides is
the front of the cells is the amoeboid motor which pulls the rest of the cell. a)
Single cell migration is observed at normal calcium concentration (2.5 mM).
70 pictures were digitized in a time period of 390 s. The trajectories of the
single cells are shown. b) The single migrating cells start to form a cluster
of dense packed cells if the calcium of the blood plasma is bound by EDTA
(< 5µM calcium). The direction of migrating granulocytes is marked by an
arrow. The immobile monocytes are marked by a circle. The monocycte
close to the center of the picture acts as nucleation center of the migrating
granulocytes. The polar order of the migrating cells in the cluster is very high
(0.82). The monocyte at the upper right corner starts to act as an additional
nucleation center.

Figures

21

Figure 2:
Human melanocytes on a plastic surface. The bar represents
100 µm: a) Melanozytes spread at low cell density. Small sized clusters with
oriented cells are formed. b) At high cell density the cell density becomes
more uniform and the cells are oriented over large distances.

Figure 3:
a) Human melanocytes exposed to a smooth glass surface do not
form an uniform apolar nematic liquid crystal. b) The calculated mean cell
orientation of a) is shown.

22

dnx

y

x

dx

dnx

dy

y

x

Figure 4: A splay deformation is shown on the top and a bend deformation
on the bottom. On the left side the change of the director described by ~n is
shown, if the space coordinate is changed by an increment dx or dy. The ﬂux
line of the director is shown on the right side (spay on the top and bend on
the bottom).

=

m

1
2

,

f

=

0

0

-=

m

1
2

,

f

=

0

0

m

=

,1

f

0

=

0

=m

,1

f =
0

p

2

Figure 5:
A schematic drawing of the ﬂux lines of the director ﬁeld is
shown for four possible disclinations: a) and b) shows the diclinations for
0.5 and Φ0 = 0 and c) and d) the disclinations for m = 1 and Φ0 = 0
m =
and π/2.

±

23

Figure 6: A disclination (m =

0.5) is shown for osteoblasts.

−

1-
2

1+
2

1-
2

1+
2

Figure 7:
Two possible orientations of a +0.5-disclination and -0.5-
disclination are shown. The left side is preferred for k11 > k33 where the
bend deformation is preferred and the ride side for k11 < k33 where the splay
deformation is preferred.

−

A m =

0.5 disclination is shown for melanocytes. The bar is
Figure 8:
100 µm. Diﬀerent possibilites are shown: a) The core of the disclination is an
area free of cells. b) The core of the disclination is an area with isotropically
distributed cell. c) The core of the disclination is occupied by a star-shaped
cell. The cells which form the nematic liquid crystal are in an elongated
bipolar state.

24

64 pixels was chosen in the real
Figure 9: A small rectangular frame of 64
space (photographic picture on the left side). The 2d-Fourier transformed of
this picture is shown on the right side. The mean cell orientation is calculated
by means of the Fourier Transformed and is shown by the bar.

×

25

