8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Note on Eye Movement

Oscar Bolina∗

Department of Mathematics

University of California, Davis

Davis, CA 95616-8633, USA

L. H. A. Monteiro†

Departamento de Engenharia Eletrˆonica

Universidade de S˜ao Paulo

05508-900 S˜ao Paulo, Brasil

Abstract

In a simpliﬁed fashion, the motion of the eyeball in its orbit consists of rotations around a ﬁxed

point. Therefore, this motion can be described in terms of the Euler’s angles of rigid body

dynamics. However, there is a physiological constraint in the motion of the eye which reduces

to two its degrees of freedom, so that one of Euler’s angles is not an independent variable.

This paper reviews the basic features of the kinematics of the eye and the laws governing its

motion.

Key words: Eye Movement, Rotations, Euler’s Angles, Listing’s Law, Donders’ Law.

PACS numbers: 42.66.Ct, 42.66.-p, 01.55.+b, 42.66.Ew

∗Supported by FAPESP under grant 97/14430-2. E-mail: bolina@lobata.math.ucdavis.edu

†Supported by FAPESP under grant 97/01645-0. E-mail: luizm@lac.usp.br

1

1 Introduction

The kinematics of the human eye has been extensively investigated in physics and medicine [1, 2, 3,

4, 5, 6]. From the wealth of material available we have selected a few topics of more direct interest

to physicists concerning with the description of rotational motion of the eye and its biological

constraints.

In the simpliﬁed model of the eye, the organ is considered to be a spherical surface held by six

muscles in a bony cavity known as orbit or eye socket. In the relaxed normal eye, the pressure of

internal ﬂuids maintains the radius of curvature of the eye at a constant value of approximately

12 mm. Since the actual size of the eyeball is in fact irrelevant to our analysis, as soon as it is

constant, we assume the eyeball to be a spherical surface of unit radius.

We also disregard any translational motion of the eye with respect to the head, and consider only

the rotary motions of the eyeball in the orbital socket. To a good approximation the center of

rotation is ﬁxed and coincides with the center of the eyeball O.

The basic rotations of the eye consist of its motions in looking from side to side along the horizontal

meridian (a rotation around a vertical axis), and up and down (a rotation around a horizontal axis).

These two motions are called cardinals.

There is a third possible motion called torsion, which is a rotation of the eye to compensate for an

eventual tilting of the head while keeping the same direction of vision. Torsion also occurs when

the pupil moves forcibly up or down, approaching the nose [7].

Instead of the cardinal angles just mentioned, we prefer to describe the motion of the eyeball in

terms of Euler’s angles.

2 Euler’s Description of Motion

Suppose one holds the head upright and looks directly toward a distant target object horizontally

straight in front. The line extending from O to the ﬁxation point is called the visual axis, and this

position deﬁnes the primary position of the visual axis, to which all other will be referred (See [8]

for some remarks on this). In changing the direction of the visual axis as the target object moves,

2

the eye rotates around the point O.

For the description of the rotational motion we set up a system of axis OABC attached to the

eyeball and moving with it. The position of the moving axes relative to a head-ﬁxed system OXYZ

is determined by Euler’s angles. Assume initially the two systems coincide, and take the primary

position of the visual axis to be the horizontal direction OZ or OC (The eye is looking to the

reader), as shown in Fig. 1.

Starting from the primary position a general displacement of the eyeball can be eﬀected by the

following sequence of rotations (all of which performed in anti–clockwise direction). The eyeball is

ﬁrst turned around the axis OZ through an angle ψ. This rotation brings the axes OX and OY to

the positions OX’ and OY’. A second rotation around the axis OY’ through an angle θ moves OZ

to the position OC and OX’ to the position OA’ both on the plane OZX’. A ﬁnal rotation around

OC through an angle φ brings OA’ to OA and OY’ to OB both on the same plane OA’Y’ [9].

In this representation, the torsion motion of the eyeball is simply the third rotation around the

visual axis by an angle φ.

3 Donders’ Law

around the visual axis.

According to Donders’ law [7]:

In the movements of the eye there is a physiological constraint that limits the motion of the eyeball

Every secondary position of the eyeball is associated with a deﬁnite and constant amount of

torsion, no matter how the position be reached.

This means that the eye needs only two parameters to be fully described, the value of the angle of

torsion φ being ﬁxed for given ψ and θ [10].

This natural reduction of the degrees of freedom is connected with the fact that when a target

object is viewed with the head in a certain position relative to it, the image of the object must

be formed on the same region of the retina whenever the gaze is directed to the same point of the

object, no matter what the movements the eye might have made between two gazes of the same

3

object [11].

It is easy to see that after the rotations by the angles ψ and θ, the eyeball at the position C will

have turned by an amount ψ relative to the object viewed in comparison with its relative position

at the primary position Z. In order that the gaze aﬀect the same elements of the retina the third

rotation around OC by an amount φ must restore the initial relative position of the eyeball and

the object. This is accomplished by performing a rotation φ = −ψ around OC.

4 Listing’s Law

Listing explained how the position of the eye could be described by only two independent quantities.

According to Listing’s law for the motion of the eyeball [10]:

Any movement of the eye from the primary position to any other secondary position is equiv-

alent to a single rotation around an axis perpendicular both to OZ and OC through an angle

ZOC.

In Fig. 1 this axis of rotation is the axis OY’, making an angle ψ (the meridional angle) with the

vertical plane in the primary position, and the angle of rotation is θ (also called the eccentricity).

This law does not speciﬁes how the eye actually moves from the primary position to any secondary

position. It is not even necessary that the motion be eﬀected in this way, but the result must be

the same whatever the path the gaze may have taken to reach that ﬁnal position [12] (Compare

with Euler’s theorem: The general displacement of a rigid body with one point ﬁxed is a rotation

around some axis).

In these terms, Donders’ law appears as a statement that the position of the eye as a whole is

uniquely determined by the direction of the visual axis.

The constraint on the movement of the eye expressed by Listing’s law can not be of mechanical

nature only, but may also have a neurological component, since it has been observed that the eyes

do not obey Listing’s law during sleep [12].

4

5 Torsion and False Torsion

In the motion of the eye away from the primary position in the manner prescribed by Listing’s law,

which is by a rotation around OY’ through an angle θ, the vertical meridian plane of the eye in

the primary position OYZ traces out the surface of a cone of vertex O and semi-angle ψ formed by

the axes OY and OY” and bisected by the axis of rotation OY’, as shown in Fig. 2. In its rotation

the axis OY moves to its new position Oy. The axes OY, OY” and Oy meet the unit sphere at

the points P,Q, R respectively. The straight line PQ cuts the axis OY’ at T deﬁning the lengths

P T = sin ψ and OT = cos ψ.

This motion is associated with a deﬁnite inclination (also called a tilt or torsion) of the vertical

meridian plane in its secondary position OyC with respect to the vertical plane OYC passing

through OY and the visual axis in the secondary position [13].

The inclination depends on the meridional and eccentricity angles in the following way. In Fig.

2, the vertical plane OYC is normal to the plane OTR, and cuts the line TR at S. The angle of

inclination ρ is the angle between ORS in the plane ORT. From the triangle OTR we have [7]

tan(ψ − ρ) =

ST
OT

,

where ST = P T cos θ and OT = cos ψ. Thus tan(ψ − ρ) = tan ψ cos θ. Solving for tan ρ we get

(Check it [7] and compare with [10, 13])

tan ρ =

tan ψ(1 − cos θ)
1 + tan2 ψ cos θ

.

(5.1)

In our use of Euler’ angles, the torsional rotation around OC by −ψ was intended to bring the

eyeball to the position it would assume under Listing’s law. Since the ﬁnal orientation of the eye

depends on the way rotations are carried out, had we chosen another set of axis to describe the

motion of the eye we would have to perform a torsion motion of diﬀerent magnitude. Because of

this, the torsional motion required to be performed in order to bring the eyeball to the position

speciﬁed by Listing’s law when using any other system of axis is often called a false torsion [10].

References

5

[1] H. L. F. Helmholtz, Treatise on Physiological Optics, vol. 3, Translated by James P.C. Southall,

Dover Publication, NY (1925) p.37-154.

[2] J. P. C. Southall, Introduction to Physiological Optics, Dover Publications, NY (1961) p.175.

[3] D. Heller, On the History of Eye Movement Recording in Eye Movement Research, Physiological

and Psychological Aspects, G. Luer, U. Lass, J. Shallo-Hoﬀmann, eds., vol.2, C.J. Hogrefe,

Toronto (1988) p. 36.

[4] H. Lamb, The Kinematics of the Eye, Phil.Mag. 6th Series, 38 (1919) 685.

[5] K. Hepp, On Listing’s Law, Commun. Math. Phys. 132 (1990) 285.

[6] T. Haslwanter, Kinematics of Three-Dimensional Eye Rotations, Vision Research 35 (1995)

[7] W. S. Duke-Elder, Textbook of Ophthalmology, vol. 1, The C.V. Mosby Co. St. Louis (1940)

[8] J. van Opstal, Representation of Eye Position in Three Dimensions. In Multisensory Control of

Movement, A. Berthoz, Ed., Oxford, Oxford University Press (1993) p.27-41

[9] J. B. Scarborough, The Gyroscope, Theory and Applications, Interscience Publishers, London

[10] R. H. S. Carpenter, Movements of the Eye, Pion, London (1977) p. 116-127.

[11] H. Davson, The Physiology of the Eye, Pergamon Press, NY (1990) p. 648-656.

[12] I. P. Howard, Human Visual Orientation, John Wiley, NY (1982) p. 180-186.

[13] M. Alpern, The Kinematics of the Eye, in The Eye (2nd edition) vol. III, H. Davson, ed.,

Academic Press, NY (1969).

1727.

Chapter III.

(1958) p.33.

6

Y ’

Y

A

B

φ

ψ

A’

X’

O

θ

Z

X

C

Figure 1: Rotary Motions of the Human Eye

7

Y ’

’’Y

Q

θ

S

R

T

y

ρ

Z

Y

P

O

Figure 2: The Tilt of the Vertical

8

