9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cooperative Model of Bacterial Sensing

Yu Shi and Thomas Duke
TCM Group, Cavendish Laboratory, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK

Bacterial chemotaxis is controlled by the signalling of a cluster of receptors. A cooperative model
is presented, in which coupling between neighbouring receptor dimers enhances the sensitivity with
which stimuli can be detected, without diminishing the range of chemoeﬀector concentration over
which chemotaxis can operate. Individual receptor dimers have two stable conformational states:
one active, one inactive. Noise gives rise to a distribution between these states, with the probability
inﬂuenced by ligand binding, and also by the conformational states of adjacent receptor dimers. The
two-state model is solved, based on an equivalence with the Ising model in a randomly distributed
magnetic ﬁeld. The model has only two eﬀective parameters, and uniﬁes a number of experimental
ﬁndings. According to the value of the parameter comparing coupling and noise, the signal can be
arbitrarily sensitive to changes in the fraction of receptor dimers to which ligand is bound. The
counteracting eﬀect of a change of methylation level is mapped to an induced ﬁeld in the Ising
model. By returning the activity to the pre-stimulus level, this adapts the receptor cluster to a new
ambient concentration of chemoeﬀector and ensures that a sensitive response can be maintained
over a wide range of concentrations.

PACS numbers: 87.10.+e, 87.22.-q, 05.20.-y

I. INTRODUCTION

One of the reasons why we think living things are special is that they show awareness of the environment: they
respond sensitively to stimuli and can adapt to changes in the surroundings. Such biological complexity is displayed
even by bacteria, which, in order to survive, have to be aware of their precarious environment where various conditions,
such as nutrient and toxin levels, acidity and temperature, may change rapidly [1]. In order to discover universal
principles, applicable at many levels of biological complexity, by investigating a simple system, Adler revived studies
on bacterial chemotaxis which had been intensively investigated a century ago [2]. Recent genetic engineering methods
have made it a paradigmatic system of cellular signaling and adaptation.

A bacterium such as Escherichia coli or Salmonella typhimurium swims smoothly by rotating a bundle of helical
ﬂagella counterclockwise, but tumbles chaotically if the ﬂagella rotate clockwise. When it moves towards a higher
concentration of attractant, such as aspartate, it tumbles less frequently. When it moves towards a higher concentration
of repellent, it tumbles more frequently. So the bacterium performs a biased random walk towards an attractant and
away from a repellent. This phenomenon is called chemotaxis [3]. It is mediated by receptors with extracytoplasmic
sensing domains, connected by transmembrane helices to signaling domains in the cytoplasm. The receptors, which
are predominantly dimeric, cluster at one pole of the cell [4]. There are several types of transmembrane receptors,
which respond to diﬀerent chemoeﬀectors but use the same signaling pathway [3,5,6], as shown in FIG. 1. Each
receptor dimer is joined to two CheA kinase molecules, via two CheW proteins, forming a 2:2:2 complex. CheA is
autophosphorylated at a rate that is greatly enhanced by the receptor. The phosphate is then passed from CheA
to a regulator protein, CheY. When phosphorylated CheY diﬀuses to a rotatory motor, the probability of clockwise
rotation of the motor, and consequently the tumbling frequency of the bacterium, increases. The binding of a
chemoeﬀector ligand to a receptor dimer can trigger a transmembrane conformational change which regulates the
autophosphorylation of CheA; attractant binding decreases the rate, while repellent binding increases it. In this way,
an extra-cellular stimulus, i.e. ligand binding to a receptor, can modify the tumbling frequency. It is generally thought
that there exist two stable conformational states of the receptor dimer: an “active” conformation which corresponds
to a very high rate of CheA autophosphorylation; and an “inactive” conformation which corresponds to a lower rate.
An important feature of chemotaxis is that the tumbling frequency does largely depends on recent changes of the
concentration of chemoeﬀector. This is achieved through an adaptation process, which returns the activity of the
system to the pre-stimulus level after a period of time. Adaptation is assured by a feedback loop which involves another
regulator protein, CheB. Like CheY, CheB also receives a phosphate group from CheA. Phospho-CheB mediates a slow
demethylation of the receptor, countering the action of CheR, which promotes methylation. Attractant binding also
makes the receptor a better substrate for CheR. Since methylation enhances the autophosphorylation rate of CheA,
the change in the rate of phospho-CheY production is gradually reversed by the feedback, and the the tumbling
frequency ultimately returns to the pre-stimulus level.

1

Each subunit of a receptor dimer consists of two helices. It has been proposed that the transmembrane signaling
involves a scissor-like or pivoting motion of the pair of subunits [7,8], or a piston-like motion involving a conformation
change within just one subunit [9–11]. The latter mechanism is favored by recent distance-diﬀerence analyses of
the aspartate receptor, which reveal that attractant binding induces a displacement of one helix, down towards the
cytoplasm, while the other three helices are not detectably perturbed [12,13].

The chemotactic response is extraordinarily sensitive; as little as a single attractant molecule can trigger a detectable
motor response [14,15,5]. Recently, Bray, Levin and Morton-Firth suggested that this sensitivity might be related
to the clustering of receptors on the surface of the bacterium. Without discussing any underlying mechanism, they
considered the possibility that the binding of a single molecule ligand aﬀects the activity of a number of receptors, so
that the response is augmented [16]. In this article, we present a physical model of collective signalling in a cluster of
receptors. We propose that the cluster responds as an entity, as a consequence of nearest-neighbor coupling between
individual receptor dimers. In our model, the inﬂuence of one dimer on another depends only on its activity, and
not on whether it is liganded. Noise causes each of the receptor dimers to ﬂuctuate between active and inactive
states. When a given receptor dimer binds a molecule ligand, the probability of it being active is altered. Owing
to the coupling, the probabilities of activity of adjacent receptor dimers is also modiﬁed and this eﬀect propagates
throughout the cluster. Thereby, the response to a stimulus is ampliﬁed. Moreover, ligand binding is a rapid process,
while which of the receptor dimers are liganded is random, thus the above eﬀect is averaged out, and the overall signal
is a statistical average quantity as a function of the fraction of liganded receptor dimers. The model can be cast as an
elementary neural network and reduced to the Ising model. Thus the paradigmatic system of cellular signaling and
adaptation is related to its counterpart in statistical mechanics. The model provides a simple, unifying framework to
understand a large amount of experimental data. Sensitivity to very small changes of concentration, together with
the ability to respond to gradients over a broad range of concentrations, can naturally be attained. The model might
be applicable to a variety of cellular signalling processes which demand a combination of low threshold of response
and wide dynamic range.

The organisation of the rest of the article is as follows. In Section II, we analyse various experimental results and
argue for the necessity of taking into account inter-dimer coupling, as well as noise. The neural network-like model
is constructed in Section III; it is solved in Section IV, by reducing it to the Ising model with a randomly distributed
magnetic ﬁeld. Adaptation, and subsequent signaling of the adapted system, is speciﬁcally discussed in Section V.
Section VI contains discussions and a summary.

II. COUPLING AND NOISE

A. COUPLING

The existence of coupling among receptor dimers is indicated by a number of experimental results. First, cooperation
among receptors in signaling and adaptation is hinted at by the fact that most of the chemotactic receptors cluster into
a patch, located at one pole of the cell [4,5]. From the viewpoint of evolution, we might formulate a useful biological
principle: An attribute that exists most probably confers advantages over possible alternatives, especially if the latter
have some apparent merit. In the present case, if there were no cooperation among receptors, a uniform distribution
over the surface would be optimal in eﬃciency for capturing molecules [17]. Since, in practice, they are found to
cluster together, there is most likely an advantage due to this feature. Therefore, coupling among the receptors might
well play a role in signaling and adaptation. Coupling among receptor dimers can certainly improve the sensitivity.
It can amplify the signal generated by a stimulus, as has been anticipated by some authors.

Second, it has been found that signaling can occur through receptor dimers that have been genetically engineered so
that one subunit lacks a signaling domain [9,18–20]. As mentioned above, a conformational change of only one subunit
has been observed in the crystal structure [12,13]. If the two subunits have essential diﬀerences and only one of them
is involved in the transmembrane signaling, then inter-dimer coupling is inevitable to explain the experimental results
on truncated subunits (with 50% probability the truncation would have been made on the signaling subunit, and no
signaling would occur if the dimers act independently). However, there is also the possibility that the binding of ligand
to one subunit automatically suppresses binding to the other subunit; then the transmembrane signal can always be
generated with either subunit. In this case, inter-dimer coupling is not essential to explain the above experiments.
Coupling is, however, necessary in order to reconcile the fact that dimers with a truncated subunit are functional with
the favored mechanism of methylation, which requires interactions between two subunits of the cytoplasmic domain
[5].

Third, it has been proposed, based on experiments, that at least in certain cases, receptor methylation is related
to dimer-dimer interactions, i.e. methyltransferase bound to one dimer can methylate other dimers [21] [5]. Another

2

support for coupling is the remarkable mobility of the P2 domain of CheA, which provides the docking site for CheY
and CheB. This mobility can serve to amplify the phosphorylation signal [5]. Finally, a recent in vitro experiment
by Liu et al. showed that kinase activation by a soluble signaling domain construct involves the formation of a large
complex, with about 14 receptor signaling domains per CheA [23]. This appears to be a strong support for the
coupling among receptor dimers in vivo.

B. NOISE

A proper consideration of noise is important for several reasons. Thermal noise is certainly a signiﬁcant issue since,
for biological molecules, the energy barriers between distinct conformational states are generally comparable to kT .
Thus there is a high probability of stochastic transitions from one conformation to another. Indeed, experiments have
indicated that there is considerable thermal motion in receptors. Disulphide trapping studies of the galactose/glucose
binding protein have revealed spontaneous, large amplitude thermal ﬂuctuations of the protein backbone structure
[5].

Moreover, noise can also provide beneﬁts. In the absence of noise, nearest-neighbour coupling amongst receptor
dimers would cause the activity to spread across the whole array and would inevitably make the response to diﬀerent
stimuli indistinguishable . If noise is taken into account, individual receptors ﬂicker between active and inactive states
and the overall signal is a statistical average, which naturally varies for diﬀerent numbers of liganded receptor dimers.
With the consideration of noise, it is worth emphasising that the signaling process should be understood within the
context of dynamic equilibrium: When the concentration of chemoeﬀector is stable, the conformational state and the
level of methylation of each receptor dimer ﬂuctuates microscopically, but the mean activity of the system remains
unchanged. This equilibrium is shifted when the concentration of chemoeﬀector is changed.

III. THE MODEL

We study the total signal of the cluster of receptors as a quasi-equilibrium property corresponding to a certain
concentration of chemoeﬀector and a certain level of methylation. This approach is justiﬁed by the wide separation of
time scales in this system: Ligand binding and protein conformational transitions occur within milliseconds. Changes
in protein phosphorylation occur on a time scale of ∼ 0.1s. The much slower adaptation process, associated with
modulations of methylation level, is on a scale of minutes [3,22].

The quasi-equilibrium state of a dynamics is determined by the minimum of a noisy “energy function” (a Lyapunov
function). This “energy” is not necessarily the actual physical energy, since it may describe an eﬀective dynamics that
“renormalizes” the underlying chain of physical processes. Similarly, the noise may not be due only to the temperature,
but in the present case it mostly is. Such a description, which reduces degrees of freedom, is especially eﬀective when
the underlying physical processes are complicated, or unclear in detail. A typical example is Hopﬁeld’s neural network
model [24,25]. Here we adopt this approach for chemotactic signaling, but with a diﬀerent interpretation and with
the emphasis placed on the determination of the equilibrium activity as a function of the external stimuli.

Consider a lattice of receptors, whose basic unit is the receptor dimer, or equivalently, the whole receptor-CheW-
CheA dimer complex. Initially, we consider a system that has adapted to zero concentration of the chemoeﬀector,
and investigate the response when the concentration changes so that a fraction c of receptor dimers are bound to
chemoeﬀector molecule ligands. The state of a receptor is a function of the eﬀect of ligand binding and the states of
the neighboring receptor dimers. Characterizing the state of receptor dimer i by a variable Vi (according to recent
observation, it is the vertical position of one of four helices, but we are open to possible re-interpretation according
to experimental ﬁndings), and the eﬀect of the ligand binding to receptor dimer i by Hi, most generally we have

Vi = Vi({Vj6=i}, {Hj}),

where {Hj} denotes the set of Hj for j = 1, 2, · · ·, {Vj6=i} denotes the set of all Vj for j 6= i. The natural assumption
is that Vi is aﬀected only by Hi and the states of the nearest neighbours. Furthermore, for the two-state model, in
which Vi has only two possible values, V 0 or V 1, the McCulloch-Pitts threshold model [26,25] is a natural assumption.
Thereby

(1)

(2)

Vi = ψ(

TijVj + Hi − Ui), with ψ(x) =

Xj

V 1 if x > 0
V 0 if x ≤ 0

,

(cid:26)

3

where Ui is a threshold value, and Tij describes the coupling among receptor dimers, which is assumed to be nonzero
only for nearest neighbours. We adopt the convention that V 0 is the active conformation and V 1 is the inactive one.
Then Hi > 0 for attractant binding, which tends to inactivate receptors and depress the autophosphorylation rate
of CheA, thereby decreasing the frequency of tumbling. Conversely, Hi < 0 for repellent binding.

It is well known that if Tij = Tji and Tii = 0, clearly valid in the present situation, the dynamics is determined

by a Lyapunov function (or Hamiltonian) [25],

(3)

(4)

H = −

TijViVj −

HiVi +

UiVi,

X<ij>

Xi

Xi

where < ij > represents pairs of nearest neighbours. Taking into account the noise, which induces a state distribution
which is nearly a Boltzmann distribution [25], the problem reduces to the statistical mechanics of a system with the
above Hamiltonian.

In the simplest interpretation, the noise is purely thermal, β = 1/kT , and Eq. (3) may be identiﬁed as the eﬀective
physical energy. According to recent observation, V 0 and V 1 are the two stable positions of one of the four helices.
Therefore Hi and TijVj are forces due to ligand binding and coupling, respectively. The “Zeeman energy” dependent
on ligand binding is due to the free energy exchange with bound ligand. Similarly, the coupling energy is due to free
energy exchange with the cytoplasm or membrane, which mediates the eﬀective coupling.

Eq. (3) may be transformed to the “spin” representation by writing Si = 2(Vi − V 0)/∆V − 1, where ∆V =

(V 1 − V 0). Then

H = −

Jij SiSj −

BiSi + H1 + E0,

X<ij>

Xi

where Jij = Tij∆V 2/4, Bi = Hi∆V /2, and E0 is a constant given a distribution of {Bi}. H1 is a “Zeeman energy”
due to an eﬀective “magnetic ﬁeld” independent of {Bi}, which determines the equilibrium conﬁgurations in the
absence of {Bi}, i.e. without ligand binding. Without loss of generality, we set H1 = 0. Thus in the absence of
{Bi}, and if the noise is suﬃciently high, Si is equally distributed between 1 and −1, and the “magnetization” is zero.
In other words, it is assumed that there is no energy diﬀerence between the active (Si = −1) and inactive (Si = 1)
conformations for an isolated, unliganded receptor dimer i. The physics does not change if this diﬀerence is set to be
nonzero. Ligand binding shifts the energy diﬀerence to 2Bi.

We have now reduced the model to an Ising model. The activity of the array of receptors corresponds to the average
magnetization of a lattice of spins, and ligand binding of a receptor dimer corresponds to a local magnetic ﬁeld at a
lattice site: Bi = B if receptor dimer i binds a chemoeﬀector ligand, otherwise Bi = 0. If the fraction of liganded
receptor dimers is c, then the value of Bi is randomly distributed between B and 0 with probability

p(Bi) = cδ(Bi − B) + (1 − c)δ(Bi).

(5)

This Ising model in a ﬁeld bimodally distributed between 0 and B is simpler than the so-called “random-ﬁeld Ising
model” [27–30], in which the possible values of the ﬁeld are symmetric with respect to zero, and nontrivial results arise
due to the ﬂuctuation of the ﬁelds. In our case, the average of the ﬁeld is nonzero, so there is a long-range order simply
as the result of the explicit symmetry breaking. For Eq. (4), Bi = cB, where the overbar denotes the average over
c(1 − c)B. Consider the formation
disordered conﬁgurations. The ﬂuctuation of the random distribution is ∆Bi =
of a domain of size L in the ferromagnetic ground state. According to the central limit theorem, the average Zeeman
energy is ∼ LdcB, much larger than its ﬂuctuation, which is ∼ Ld/2
c(1 − c)B. Therefore the energy gain is always
positive, and the ﬂuctuation of the ﬁeld cannot destroy long-range order.

p

p

IV. SOLUTIONS OF THE MODEL

The two-state model, which has been reduced to the Ising model in a randomly distributed ﬁeld, as described by
Eqs. (4) and (5), can be solved by the mean-ﬁeld method. One may obtain the result simply by considering that the
average magnetization, m = < si >, where < · · · > denotes the thermodynamic average, is determined by the local
ﬁeld B′
j Jij m + Bi with the random distribution. Alternatively one may ﬁrst obtain the free energy using the
replica method, then calculate the average magnetization [28,29]. It is found that m is the root of the equation

i =

P

m = tanh(βνJm + βBi)

=

2c
1 + exp[−2(βνJm + βB)]

+

2(1 − c)
1 + exp(−2βνJm)

− 1,

(6)

(7)

4

while the the noisy Lyapunov function is

F =

νJm2 −

{c ln[2 cosh(βνJm + βB))] + (1 − c) ln[2 cosh(βνJm)]} + E0.

(8)

1
2

1
β

Here, Jij has been assumed to have a single value J for nearest neighbors, ν is the number of nearest neighbors, and
β is a characterization of the noise.

The relation between the chemoeﬀector concentration and the activity of the system is now reduced to the m versus
c relation, determined by Eq. (7), since the activity of the system, here deﬁned as the fraction of receptor dimers in
the active state is A = (1−m)/2, and the pure response to the stimulus, i.e. the change of the activity, is ∆A = m/2.
Although Eq. (7) may possibly have more than one solution, the one corresponding to the lowest F is what we need.
Approximate analytical solutions may be found in limiting cases,

βcB
if β → 0
1−βνJ
1 − 2(1 − c) exp (−2βνJ) − 2c exp [−2(βνJ + βB)]
if β → ∞ and B > 0
−1 + 2(1 − c) exp (−2βνJ) + 2c exp −2[βνJ + β|B|) if β → ∞ and B < 0

m ≈ 




In general, the solution can only be obtained numerically. It can be seen that there are actually only two eﬀective
parameters in this model; one is α = βνJ, the other is γ = βB. Owing to symmetry, it suﬃces to give results for
B > 0. Solutions for typical values of parameters are shown in FIG. 2. First we choose α = 0.1, 0.8, 1.2; then for
each α, the dependence of m on c is determined for γ = 0.01, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100. Note that for c = 0, i.e., the Ising
model without a magnetic ﬁeld, α = 1 is the critical value dividing the “paramagnetic” phase, where m(c = 0) = 0,
and the “ferromagnetic” phase, where there is a “spontaneous magnetization”, m(c = 0) 6= 0.

The quantitative measure of sensitivity, denoted by S, is half of the slope at c = 0:

S =

∂(m/2)
∂c

|c=0

1
1+exp[−2(βνJm0+βB)] −

1
1+exp(−2βνJm0)

,

=

1 − 4βνJ exp(−2βνJm0)
[1+exp(−2βνJm0)]2

S =

1

1+exp(−2βB) − 1
1 − βνJ

2

,

where m0 = m(c = 0). It is clear that S can be made arbitrarily large by choosing appropriate value of βνJ so that
the denominator in the above expression is arbitrarily close to 0. For m0 = 0,

which is directly tuned by the diﬀerence between βνJ and 1, which is the critical value of phase transition for c = 0.
The case with m0 6= 0 is less favored since the range of possible m for diﬀerent c could be diminished, making it
more diﬃcult to distinguish between diﬀerent stimuli. Moreover, the sign of m0 would be determined by that of the
previous B, conﬂicting the fact that the pre-stimulus level is ﬁxed.

For a given α, S also increases with γ = βB, but with an upper bound. The fact that ∂m/∂γ → 0 when γ → ∞
indicates that, if ligand binding has a strong enough eﬀect, the response is independent of the exact value of γ. This
provides a sort of stability for the eﬀect of ligand binding.

Thus good sensitivity requires ﬁne tuning of the coupling: the greater the sensitivity demanded by the bacterium,
the more accurately α = βνJ has to be controlled. But γ = βB may vary widely without considerably aﬀecting the
response. This is reasonable, since the temperature range suitable for bacterial survival is rather restricted and, for
a given bacterium, νJ is a structural property, which could be optimized during evolution. On the other hand, the
eﬀect of ligand binding, B, depends on the external stimulus, which may vary considerably.

As an exercise, our model may be applied to the puzzling situation in which both attractants and repellents are

present [2]. In this case,

p(Bi) = crδ(Bi − Br) + caδ(Bi − Ba) + (1 − cr − ca)δ(Bi),

(12)

where cr and ca are the concentrations of the repellents and attractants, respectively, and Br and Ba are respectively
the measures of the attractant and repellent binding. Obviously the activity is dependent on both cr and ca.

(9)

(10)

(11)

5

V. ADAPTATION

Now we incorporate into this model the delayed adaptation due to the change of methylation level. This may
be achieved through an induced “ﬁeld” with an opposite sign to that associated with ligand binding, so that the
“magnetization” returns toward the pre-stimulus level. This assumption for the additivity of the eﬀect of ligand
binding and that of the change of methylation level is supported by the ﬁnding that in a receptor there is a region
which gathers, integrates, and interprets the multiple inputs transferred by the transmembrane signaling domain and
the methylated side chains, then transmits an output signal to the kinase regulation machinery [5].

Two points should be made clear. First, the time scale of the change of the level of methylation of the whole system
is much longer than the microscopic time scale, so the “magnetization” can still be obtained as the equilibrium
property of the noisy Lyapunov function, which quasi-statically changes with the level of methylation. Second, since
the ligand binding occurs on a time scale much shorter than the time needed for adaptation to be completely achieved,
we cannot simply change the value of B, but must introduce another “ﬁeld”. We denote this “induced ﬁeld” by {Mi},
with the distribution

p(Mi) = cmδ(Mi − M ) + (1 − cm)δ(Mi),

where cm is the fraction of the receptor dimers whose original level of methylation is modiﬁed. The sign of M is
opposite to that of B. Thereby the net ﬁeld is Di = Mi + Bi with the distribution

p(Di) = ccmδ(Di − B − M ) + c(1 − cm)δ(Di − B)

+(1 − c)cmδ(Di − M ) + (1 − c)(1 − cm)δ(Di).

The equilibrium state can be obtained by replacing Bi in Eq. (4) with Di. Adaptation is taking place if cm and/or
M vary slowly with time. This gives rise to a time-dependent “magnetization”, which may return to zeo. To get
a quantitative impression, by adopting the high noise limit β → 0, it may be estimated that when cmB + cM =
0, adaptation is completed; the “magnetization” returns to zero. Here, we shall simply assume that a molecular
mechanism exists which ensures that the state of zero “magnetization” is an attractor of the dynamics, so that
adaptation is exact. A more precise study of the adaptation process will be reported in the future.

Once the system has adapted, suppose that the concentration subsequently changes from c to c + δc. One can
obtain the new activity by substituting in Eq. (14) c + δc for c, and the values of cm and M at which the adaptation
was completed. In general, what is most important is the change of fraction of liganded receptor dimers since the last
adaptation. Under high temperature approximation, the result is Eq. (9) with c replaced by δc. Moreover, it can be
seen that if δc is negative, i.e if chemoeﬀector is removed, the eﬀect is similar to the addition of a chemoeﬀector whose
“ﬁeld” has opposite sign. Therefore the removal of attractant is equivalent to repellent binding, and vice versa. This
has indeed been observed in experiments [22].

(13)

(14)

VI. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS

In this article, we analyse relevant experimental results and draw the conclusion that both inter-dimer coupling
and noise are crucial in the mechanism of chemotactic signaling and adaptation. The ratio between their measures,
α = βνJ is one of the two eﬀective parameters in the cooperative model we construct. A second parameter is the
ratio between the measure of the eﬀect of ligand binding and that of the noise, γ = βB. The essential features
due to the balance of coupling and noise are well captured by the paradigmatic model of statistical mechanics, the
Ising model. We made an attempt to map the underlying mechanism of collective eﬀects in chemotactic signaling to
the Ising model in a randomly distributed ﬁeld, with the distribution reﬂecting the ligand occupancy. To complete
the mapping, we adopted the basis of Hopﬁeld’s neural network model. The great diﬀerence between time scales of
the various chemical and mechanical processes makes it feasible to obtain the signaling level as a quasi-equilibrium
property of a noisy Lyapunov function. This Lyapunov function describes the dynamics “renormalizing” underlying
complexity.

Our model provides the following picture. An individual receptor dimer has two stable conformational states, an
active one that corresponds to a high rate of CheA autophosphorylation, and an inactive one that corresponds to a
low rate. Noise gives rise to a distribution between these states and the partition is inﬂuenced both by ligand binding
and by the conformational states of the neighboring receptor dimers. In the simplest interpretation, the noise is purely
thermal, β = 1/kT , 2B corresponds to the shift of the energy diﬀerence between active and inactive states induced
by ligand binding, and J measures the eﬀective coupling energy between neighboring receptor dimers. The activity
of the receptor cluster is a statistical average quantity. A change in the fraction of liganded receptor dimers causes

6

the total activity to change from the pre-stimulus level. But the level of methylation also changes, on a slower time
scale. This causes an eﬀect opposite to that induced by ligand binding. Consequently, the total activity ultimately
returns to the pre-stimulus level.

The coupling between receptor dimers naturally provides the sensitivity to small stimuli observed in experiments.
Additionally, the noise makes the response to diﬀerent values of concentration changes distinctive. Sensitivity to small
changes in the environment requires ﬁne tuning of the parameter α, but γ may vary without considerably aﬀecting
the response. The equivalence between the removal of attractant and the addition of repellent, or vice versa, has a
natural explanation.

Among problems for further investigation are the eﬀects of ﬁniteness of the number of receptor dimers, potential
randomness in the coupling, and features that might be lost in the mean ﬁeld solution. Correlation between Bi, or
Mi, at diﬀerent sites i is also a possibility and might have useful consequences. The ﬁnite-size eﬀect and the “random
ﬁeld” due to the change of methylation level may destroy the “spontaneous magnetisation” that exists for α > 1, thus
relaxing the constraint on the precision to which α must be speciﬁed to give high sensitivity. The mean-ﬁeld solution
is least accurate when c → 1
c(1 − c)B, which increases to the greatest as c → 1
2 .
Thus maybe the sensitivity is lower at moderate values of the occupancy c, than at the extremes c → 0 and c → 1.
However, this is not necessarily a limitation. The fractional occupancy c is related to the ambient concentration of
ligand [L] by

2 , since the ﬂuctuation of the ﬁeld is

p

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

where Kd is the dissociation constant. Thus

c =

[L]
[L] + Kd

,

δc =

[L]Kd
([L] + Kd)2

δ[L]
[L]

= c(1 − c)

δ[L]
[L]

.

Given that the bacterium probably needs to detect a relative change in concentration, δ[L]
sensitivity to a change in occupancy is demanded when c → 0 or c → 1, and the least when c → 1
2 .

[L] , we see that the greatest

It is well known that the the two-state threshold neural network model is equivalent to a model with continuous

variables in the high gain limit [24], with the Lyapunov function

H = −

TijViVj +

X<ij>

Xi

Vi

1
Ri Z
0

g−1
i

(V )dV −

HiVi,

Xi

with ui = g−1

i

(Vi) determined by

C

dui
dt

=

X<ij>

TijVj −

+ Hi,

ui
Ri

where ui is interpreted as the soma potential, while C is the input capacitance of the cell membrane. When Eqs. (17)
and (18) are adopted for the network of chemoreceptor dimers, Vi is a variable characterizing the stable conformation,
i.e. the (vertical) position of the mobile helix of the receptor dimer, and ui is the instantaneous position. Thus Eq.
(18) could be the equation of motion describing the transient process of the movement of the mobile helix, in response
to a force Hi generated by ligand binding, as well as forces due to couplings with the neighboring receptor dimers.
Of course, whether modiﬁcation of (18) is necessary depends on future experimental results.

According to this interpretation, by measuring the force generated by ligand binding, H, and the displacement of
the mobile (signalling) helix ∆V = (V 1 − V 0), one may obtain the parameter B = H · ∆V /2. Note that H · ∆V is
the work done by the force H, consistent with the identiﬁcation of 2B with the shift in energy diﬀerence caused by
ligand binding. Similarly, 4J/∆V = Tij∆V is the force generated by the conformational change of one of the nearest
neighbours. To make a rough estimation, we take typical values α = 0.5, γ = 5 and 1/β ≈ 4pN · nm (assuming that
the noise is purely thermal). Then B ≈ 20pN · nm, νJ ≈ 2pN · nm. The measured displacement is 0.16nm [12]. It
is found that the force resulting from ligand binding is about 250pN and the force due to coupling between a pair of
nearest neighbours is about 10pN . These orders of magnitude are quite reasonable.

Since the continuum model can be realized in electric circuits, more insights might be provided from the viewpoint
of system control, where negative feedback has been well studied. On the other hand, the analogy with the neural
network model is possibly more than a mathematical one. From the viewpoint of evolution, there are common features
between bacterial sensing and sensing of higher animals. Perhaps a primitive or ancestral neural network works in

7

chemotaxis. Adler writes: “The basic elements that make behaviour possible in higher organisms are also present
in a single bacterial cell; they are sensory receptors, a system that transmits and processes sensory information and
eﬀectors to produce movement. Whether the mechanisms of any of these elements in bacterium are similar to those
in more complex organisms remains to be established” [2]. Margulis thinks: “ Thought and behaviour in people
are rendered far less mysterious when we realize that choice and sensitivity are already exquisitely developed in the
microbial cells that became our ancestors” [31]. We hope our approach is a small step in addressing these issues.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are very grateful to D. Bray for valuable discussions and comments, and for critically reading the manuscript.

Y.S. also thanks G. Fath and P. Littlewood for discussions.

FIG. 1. A schematic illustration of the chemotactic signaling pathway.

FIG. 2. The solution of the two-state model: “magnetization” m as a function of the fraction c of liganded receptor dimers.
Here we assume there was no ligand bound previously. The three ﬁgures are for three typical values of the parameter α = βνJ:
(a) α = 0.1; (b) α = 0.8; (c) α = 1.2.
In each ﬁgure, diﬀerent plots are for diﬀerent values of the parameter γ = βB:
3 : γ = 0.01; + : γ = 0.1; 2 : γ = 1; × : γ = 10; △ : γ = 100. Note that the critical pont, which separates “ferromagnetic” and
“paramagnetic” phases, is α = 1.

[1] J.S. Parkinson and E.C. Kofoid, Annu. Rev. Genet. 26, 71 (1992).
[2] J. Adler, Sci. American, 234(4), 40 (1976).
[3] J. Stock and M. Surette, in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology, ed. F.C.

Neidhardt, (ASM, Washington, 1996).

[4] J.S. Parkinson, J. S. and D.F. Blair, Science 259, 1701 (1993); M.R.K. Alley, J.R. Maddock, and L. Shapiro, ibid. 1754

(1993); J.R. Maddock and L. Shapiro, ibid. 1717 (1993).
[5] J.J. Falke et al., Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 13, 457 (1997).
[6] D.F. Blair, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 49 489 (1995).
[7] M.V. Milbourn et al., Science 254, 1342 (1991).
[8] A.G. Cochran and P.S. Kim, Science 271, 1113 (1996).
[9] D.L. Milligan and D.E. Koshland Jr., Science 254, 1651 (1991).
[10] A. Pakula and M. Simon, Nature, 355 496 (1992).
[11] B.L. Stoddard, J.D. Bui, and D.E. Koshland Jr., Biochemistry 31, 11978 (1992).
[12] S. Chervitz and J.J. Falke, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 2545 (1996).
[13] A.G. Hughson and G.L. Hazelbauer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 11546 (1996).
[14] S.M. Block, J.E. Segall, and H.C. Berg, J. Bacterial 154, 312 (1983).
[15] J.E. Segall, S.M. Block, and H.C. Berg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 8987 (1986).
[16] D. Bray, M.D. Levin, and C.J. Morton-Firth, Nature, 393, 85 (1998).
[17] H.C. Berg and E.M. Purcell, Biophys. J. 20, 193 (1977).
[18] P.J. Gardina and M.D. Manson, Science 274, 425 (1996).
[19] I. Tatsuno, M. Homma, K. Oosawa, and I. Kawagishi, Science 274, 423 (1996).
[20] J. Stock, Science 274, 370 (1996).
[21] J.R. Wu, J.Y. Li, G.Y. Li, D.G. Long, and R.M. Weis, Biochemistry 35, 4984 (1996).
[22] M.S. Springer, M.F. Goy, and J. Adler, Nature 280, 279 (1979).
[23] Y. Liu, M. Levit, R. Lurz, M.G. Surrette, and J. Stock, The EMBO Journal 16, 7231 (1997).
[24] J.J. Hopﬁeld, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 3088 (1984); Phys. Today, 47(2), 40(1994).
[25] D.J. Amit, Modeling Brain Function (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989).
[26] W.S. McCulloch and W.A. Pitts, Bull. Math. Biophys. 5, 115 (1943).
[27] Y. Imry and S.-K. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1399 (1975).
[28] T. Schneider and E. Pytte, Phys. Rev. B, 15, 1519 (1977).
[29] A. Aharony, Phys. Rev. B 18, 3318 (1978).

8

[30] D.P. Belanger and A.P. Young, J. Mag. Mag. Materials 100, 272 (1991).
[31] L. Margulis, in The Third Culture, ed. J. Brockman, (Simon & Schuster, NewYork, 1995).

9

Receptor  dimer 

CheR

CheB

P

CheW

CheA

CheW

CheA

P

P

Cytoplasm

P
         
CheY

Motor

m

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

1

c

(a)

0.8

m

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

1

c

(b)

0.8

m

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

1

c

(c)

0.8

