Driven Polymer Translocation Through a Narrow Pore

David K. Lubensky and David R. Nelson
Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138
(February 2, 2008)

9
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Motivated by experiments in which a polynucleotide is
driven through a proteinaceous pore by an electric ﬁeld, we
study the diﬀusive motion of a polymer threaded through
a narrow channel with which it may have strong interac-
tions. We show that there is a range of polymer lengths in
which the system is approximately translationally invariant,
and we develop a coarse-grained description of this regime.
From this description, general features of the distribution of
times for the polymer to pass through the pore may be de-
duced. We also introduce a more microscopic model. This
model provides a physically reasonable scenario in which, as
in experiments, the polymer’s speed depends sensitively on
its chemical composition, and even on its orientation in the
channel. Finally, we point out that the experimental distribu-
tion of times for the polymer to pass through the pore is much
broader than expected from simple estimates, and speculate
on why this might be.

INTRODUCTION

Modern polymer physics has achieved great success
with models in which the polymer is regarded as a ﬂexi-
ble, uniform “string” whose conformational entropy dom-
inates the system’s behavior (de Gennes, 1979; Doi and
Edwards, 1986). Although this is usually an excellent
description, in some situations other interactions can be-
come important. One example is the insertion of a poly-
mer into a pore of diameter comparable to the size of
the chemical repeat units that make up the polymer. Al-
though perhaps unusual with synthetic polymers, such
a situation can easily occur in biological systems. For
example, Kasianowicz, Brandin, Branton, and Deamer
(hereafter KBBD) have recently detected single strands
of RNA (polyuridylic acid) passing through a 1.5 nm
pore formed by a membrane-bound protein (Kasianow-
icz et al., 1996). Szab`o and coworkers (Szab`o et al.,
1997; Szab`o et al., 1998) and Hanss and coworkers (Hanss
et al., 1998) have studied similar systems. In addition to
their intrinsic interest, these experiments may eventu-
ally lead to a single-molecule RNA and DNA sequenc-
ing technique. More generally, most cells must transport
macromolecules across membranes in order to function;
in several cases, relatively “thick” molecules are believed
to pass through nanometer-scale channels. The translo-
cation of polynucleotides through proteic pores has been
implicated in a variety of processes, including phage in-
fection and bacterial conjugation (Dreiseikelmann, 1994),
the uptake of oligonucleotides by certain organs (Hanss
et al., 1998), and transport across the nuclear envelope

in plants (Citovsky and Zambryski, 1993). It has been
speculated that some of these transport pathways could
eventually prove important in gene therapy (Szab`o et
al., 1998; Hanss et al., 1998). Similarly, polypeptide-
conducting channels play an important role in protein
kinesis (Schatz and Dobberstein, 1996; Simon and Blo-
bel, 1991); in a few instances, the translocation may even
be driven by electrophoretic eﬀects (Attardi and Schatz,
1988).

There exists a considerable literature on the conﬁne-
ment of polymers in channels of diameter signiﬁcantly
larger than the polymers’ persistence length (de Gennes,
1979); well-developed scaling techniques can be used in
the theoretical treatment of this regime. Recently, theo-
rists have also shown an interest in the opposite limit of a
very narrow, almost point-like hole. For example, several
groups have studied the diﬀusion of polymers across ide-
alized, inﬁnitely thin membranes (Carl, 1998; Di Marzio
and Mandell, 1997; Yoon and Deutsch, 1995; Lee and
Obukhov, 1996; Park and Sung, 1998a; Park and Sung,
1998b; Sung and Park, 1996). The pore and the mem-
brane are viewed as hard walls whose only interaction
with the polymer is steric, and the emphasis is on how the
walls’ presence decreases the entropy and slows the dy-
namics of those parts of the polymer outside of the hole.
Possible mechanisms for the active transport of polymers
through pores in biological systems have also been stud-
ied (Peskin et al., 1993; Simon et al., 1992; Sung and
Park, 1996).

Inspired largely by the experiments of KBBD, in this
paper we consider an diﬀerent scenario: We study the
motion of a homopolymer threaded through a narrow
pore with which it has strong interactions. The pore
is taken to be suﬃciently small that no more than one
polymer diameter can ﬁt in it at a given time; in par-
ticular, “hairpin” bends are not allowed to pass through
the channel. We also put aside the question of how the
polymer ﬁrst enters the hole, focusing instead on the dy-
namics once one end has been inserted. We then ar-
gue that, in the presence of a force driving the polymer
through the pore, there should be a regime in which the
polymeric degrees of freedom outside of the pore can be
neglected, and the system is eﬀectively one-dimensional.
In this limiting case we propose a two-tiered picture: a
coarse-grained “macroscopic” description of wide valid-
ity and a simple “microscopic” model from which the
“macroscopic” parameters may be calculated. Our ap-
proach follows several authors (Peskin et al., 1993; Si-
mon et al., 1992; Park and Sung, 1998a; Park and Sung,
1998b; Sung and Park, 1996) in viewing the transloca-

1

tion process as essentially diﬀusion in one dimension; we
diﬀer, however, in emphasizing the role that interactions
with the pore itself play in this diﬀusion process. On the
more microscopic level, we include the eﬀects of these
interactions through a tilted washboard potential, simi-
lar to models of laser mode locking (Haken et al., 1967)
or phase dynamics in Josephson junctions (Ambegokar
and Halperin, 1969) (see ﬁgures 5 and 6). The periodic
modulation of the potential reﬂects the periodicity of the
polynucleotide’s sugar-phosphate backbone. The impor-
tance of polymer-pore interaction has previously be em-
phasized by Bezrukov and coworkers (Bezrukov et al.,
1996); our model also bears some similarity to work on
gel electrophoresis that examines the importance of local
“solid friction” forces between the polyelectrolyte and the
gel (Deutsch, 1987; Burlatsky and Deutch, 1993; Viovy
and Duke, 1994; Burlatsky and Deutch, 1995; Deutsch
and Yoon, 1997). Although the macroscopic parame-
ter values for KBBD’s system diﬀer in some respects
from those predicted by our microscopic model, we are
nonetheless able to make several fairly robust predictions.
More importantly, we show how a simple physical mecha-
nism can account for several striking features of the data
of KBBD. We thus hope that our work will provide a
useful contribution to our understanding of the translo-
cation of polyelectrolytes.

Since our analysis relies heavily on KBBD’s results,
the next section sketches some salient features of their
data. We then introduce a long length scale “hydrody-
namic” description of one-dimensional diﬀusion and use
it to calculate the distribution of passage times for a poly-
mer being driven through a pore. The arguments used
to arrive at these results are quite general; in particular,
they require few assumptions about the details of the mi-
croscopic dynamics of the system. There are, however,
circumstances when our approximations break down, and
we consider these next. This section also serves to em-
phasize several aspects of the experiments that will guide
our choice of the microscopic model in the succeeding sec-
tion. After introducing this microscopic model, we use
it to calculate a mean drift velocity and an eﬀective dif-
fusion coeﬃcient and compare them to values estimated
from KBBD’s data. These comparisons will reveal cer-
tain features that cannot be accounted for by our model
in its simplest form, so we then discuss possible reasons
for the discrepancy, as well as touching brieﬂy on several
applications of our calculations. We conclude by sum-
marizing our results and highlighting some issues that
remain open.

EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND

In the experiments of interest to us, KBBD worked
with a Staphylococcus aureus α-hemolysin ion channel in
an artiﬁcial lipid bilayer membrane (diphytanoyl-PC).
This channel has the advantage that for many pur-

poses it may be considered always to be open. The α-
hemolysin protein has recently been crystallized and an
x-ray structure obtained (Song et al., 1996). This reveals
a mushroom-shaped complex with a roughly 10 nm long
solvent-ﬁlled channel. The channel is 1.5 nm in diameter
at its narrowest constriction, barely larger than the diam-
eter of a single polynucleotide strand. After inserting a
single pore into a bilayer membrane and applying a trans-
membrane potential of between 110 and 140 mV, KBBD
added homopolymeric single-stranded DNA or RNA to
one side of the membrane, designated cis. The samples
of polynucleotides had mean lengths on the order of a few
hundred nucleotides∗ and were assumed to be close to
monodisperse. After adding the polynucleotides, KBBD
monitored the transmembrane ionic current as a function
of time. The time series shows a baseline current, modu-
lated by periods on the order of hundreds of microseconds
in which the current decreases almost to zero (ﬁgure 1,
inset). A variety of observations support the interpreta-
tion that these blockades were caused by the passage of a
polymer through the α-hemolysin channel. The data of
KBBD can thus be interpreted as giving measurements
of the times required for individual polynucleotides to
traverse the membrane under the inﬂuence of an electric
ﬁeld.

When these data are displayed as a histogram, with
the number of observed events plotted against the length
of the blockade (ﬁgure 1), one sees that the blockade
times fall into three distinct peaks. Of these, the ﬁrst
(“peak 1”) is caused by polymers that enter and retract
and thus do not completely cross the membrane, while
the other two (“peak 2” and “peak 3”) are both the re-
sult of a polymer’s actually passing through the channel.
The polymers in peak 3 evidently cross the membrane
roughly three times faster than those in peak 2. KBBD
made the intriguing suggestion that there are two charac-
teristic times associated with translocation because the
polynucleotide can enter the pore in two distinct direc-
tions: One peak corresponds to polymers that enter the
channel with their 3’ end ﬁrst, the other to polymers that
enter with their 5’ end ﬁrst. We will show in subsequent
sections how such behavior can arise from a simple mi-
croscopic model.

A quantity of considerable interest in what follows will
be the mean force F driving the polymer through the
pore.† Clearly F is primarily the result of the electric

∗Various groups have measured the persistence length of
single-stranded DNA in high salt concentrations to be be-
tween 0.75 nm and 1.5 nm (Achter and Felsenfeld, 1971; Smith
et al., 1996; Tinland et al., 1997), or roughly 1 to 2 nu-
cleotides, meaning that the polymers used were of order 100
persistence lengths long.
†One can deﬁne F more precisely as the mean force required
to immobilize a given monomer in the pore, where the av-
erage is taken over time and over all of the monomers in
a given polymer. Thus F does not include hydrodynamic

2

ﬁeld acting on the polymer. Since a long, narrow channel
has a much larger electrical resistance than the macro-
scopic volumes of solution on either side of the mem-
brane, any voltage V applied to the system should fall al-
most entirely across the α-hemolysin pore. The charge on
each nucleotide is just the electron charge e, so the elec-
trostatic energy gained by moving one nucleotide through
the pore is eV . This suggests that F is roughly

F

≈

eV
a ≈

5

kBT
a

,

(1)

6˚A is the length of a nucleotide, and the second
where a
≈
equality holds for V
125mV. For most of the rest of
the paper, we will assume that F takes this value, and
many of our arguments will be based on the fact that F
is thus quite large when expressed in appropriate units.
Some eﬀects that could modify F are considered in the
discussion section and in appendix C.

≈

Before presenting our model, we would ﬁnally like to
review the experimental evidence that the interactions
between the polymer and the α-hemolysin pore do in-
deed play the dominant role in KBBD’s experiments.
We have already mentioned the existence of two dis-
tinct characteristic times for the polymer to cross the
membrane. Such a result is easiest to interpret if one
believes that the polymer’s speed is determined by in-
teractions between the polymer and the narrow channel
constriction, where molecular scale asymmetries could
be important. Similarly, recent data show that homo-
polynucleotides of diﬀerent bases can move at strikingly
diﬀerent speeds (Dan Branton, Harvard University, per-
sonal communication): poly[U] is of order 20 times faster
than poly[dA]. Although chemical diﬀerences certainly
can lead to variations in polymer properties such as the
persistence length, we believe that such strong depen-
dence on molecular details can more easily be explained
if we focus on the pore region. Finally, even the fastest
polynucleotides pass through the pore far more slowly
than simple estimates of hydrodynamic drag would sug-
gest: Model the pore as a cylindrical hole of radius R
and the part of the polymer in the pore as a cylinder
of radius r. Then, when the polymer moves with speed
v, the drag force per length on the part in the pore is
roughly 2πηrv/(R
r). Electrophoretic eﬀects change
this result very little (see appendix C). For a polynu-
r) is some-
cleotide in an α-hemolysin channel, r/(R
what larger than unity, and the total length of the “cylin-
der” is roughly 50˚A. According to scaling arguments of
Lee and Obukhov (Lee and Obukhov, 1996), the contri-

−

−

drag forces, nor forces that vanish when averaged over all the
monomers. Equivalently, F can be deﬁned by requiring that
exp(F a/kBT ) be the ratio of the probabilities that the poly-
mer will move forward one base to the probability that it will
move backwards one base, again appropriately averaged over
all monomers.

3

×

bution to the drag force from the ends of the polymer
outside the channel is only 2
6πηbv, where η is the
solvent viscosity, and the Kuhn length b is between 15
and 30˚A. Even if hydrodynamic interactions are entirely
screened by the motion of counterions (as they are for the
electrophoresis of an isolated polymer in solution, with
screening length of order the monomer size), the drag on
those parts of the polymer in solution cannot be larger
than roughly 4πηLv. If one substitutes typical parame-
ter values for KBBD’s experiments and balances the sum
of these drag forces with the naive driving force of 5kBT
per nucleotide, one ﬁnds that the polymer would be ex-
pected to move through the pore at a rate of roughly
108nucleotides/second, 100 times faster than observed.
The three observations of this paragraph, taken together,
certainly suggest that we focus on the degrees of freedom
in the pore when trying to understand the experiments
of KBBD.

COARSE-GRAINED DESCRIPTION

Motivation and Governing Equation

This section, and most of the rest of the paper, is con-
cerned with predicting distributions of blockage times of
the sort shown in ﬁgure 1. It is now well-established in
condensed matter physics that the form of the slow, long
length-scale dynamics of a system is often determined by
the system’s symmetries and conservation laws. All mi-
croscopic details are subsumed in phenomenological cou-
pling constants and transport coeﬃcients. In this spirit,
we would like to obtain a coarse-grained equation for the
probability P (x, t) that a contour length x of the poly-
mer’s backbone has passed through the pore at time t.
(The variable x is deﬁned so that if the polymer backbone
has length L, x = 0 when the polymer has just started in
the pore and x = L when it has reached the other side).
For such a “hydrodynamic” description to make sense,
several conditions must be met. One is that the polymer
length L be much larger than the distance a between suc-
cessive nucleotides. We also demand that the dissolved
counterions (as well as the solvent and any other solutes
) relax quickly compared to the translocating polymer,
in order that we may ignore their dynamics. Since the
ions are much smaller than a polynucleotide, and conse-
quently diﬀuse much faster, this condition should not be
diﬃcult to satisfy. Finally, our task will be considerably
simpliﬁed if the microscopic system is (approximately)
invariant under translations by an integer multiple of a in
either direction. Then, after averaging over variations on
the scale of a single nucleotide, we must obtain a transla-
tionally invariant equation. We will give this assumption
a ﬁrmer basis in the next section. Roughly, however,
there should be translational invariance when we can ne-
glect the parts of the polymer outside of the channel,
and this in turn should be possible when the interactions

(2)

(3)

between the polymer and the pore are strong enough.

Under the conditions just outlined, the (probability)
density of the polymer is the only conserved variable, and
it is relatively straight-forward to write down the coarse-
grained hydrodynamic equation for P . Because there is
only a single polymer (or, equivalently, a “gas” of non-
interacting polymers going through the same hole), the
probability current j, deﬁned by ∂P/∂t+∂j/∂x = 0 must
be linear in P . The lowest order allowed terms are then
proportional to P and to ∂P/∂x:

j(x, t) = vP (x, t)

D

∂P (x, t)
∂x

.

−

The ﬁrst term is permitted because there is an electric
ﬁeld driving the system. P then satisﬁes the familiar
equation for diﬀusion with drift,

∂P
∂t

= D

∂2P
∂x2 −

v

∂P
∂t

.

Here v and D are respectively an average drift velocity
and an eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Their values are
determined by more microscopic physics; in particular,
they may depend nonlinearly on the applied electric ﬁeld.
Eq. 3 may alternatively be derived from a microscopic
master equation that is invariant under translations by
a. The coeﬃcients v and D are then related to the lowest-
lying eigenvalues of the master equation. This connection
will be illustrated in a subsequent section.

On the macroscopic level of Eq. 3, all information on
the competition between driving and diﬀusive spreading
is encoded in a parameter that we call the diﬀusive length
D/v. Roughly speaking, on length scales less than
ld ≡
ld, the polymer’s motion is little aﬀected by the pres-
ence of the bias from the electric ﬁeld, while on scales
larger than ld, the driving dominates. Indeed, if Eq. 3
described a rigid particle diﬀusing in one dimension un-
der the inﬂuence of a uniform force f , an Einstein re-
lation would hold, and we would have v = Df /(kBT ),
and ld = kBT /f . Thus, in this case, ld is precisely the
length over which the driving force does a quantity kBT
of work. In the remainder of this section, we will often
assume that the length L of the polymer is larger than
ld, a condition satisﬁed by KBBD’s data.

Distribution of Passage Times

We now propose to calculate a distribution of passage
times of the sort measured by KBBD. This section will
show that, for given v and D, the probability ψ(t) that
the polynucleotide takes a time t to pass through the
channel has only one peak. Thus, the presence of two
peaks in KBBD’s data must be explained by the assump-
tion that diﬀerent physical situations give rise to diﬀerent
values of v and D. Subsequent sections will argue that a
polynucleotide passing through the pore with its 3’ end

ﬁrst can indeed have an average velocity that is signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent from one passing through with its 5’ end
ﬁrst. This section, however, is conﬁned to the calcula-
tion of the passage times for ﬁxed parameter values. The
distribution ψ(t) we obtain should thus be compared to
a single peak in the data of KBBD.

i

i

(t

≈

)2

t
h

t
h

i ≈

i ≈

t
− h

One can easily estimate the ﬁrst few cumulants of this
distribution. If a polymer of length L moves with aver-
age velocity v, one expects that the mean time to pass
L/v. Likewise, the
through the channel should be
is (∆x)2 =
variance in the distance traveled in a time
. It would then seem reasonable that the variance
t
2D
h
i
in arrival times should be ∆t2
(∆x)2/v2,
≡ h
or ∆t2
2DL/v3. These conclusions are in fact roughly
correct for a suﬃciently long polymer. One might expect
corrections, however, because some fraction of the poly-
mers that enter the pore will leave again from the same
side instead of passing all the way through. On average,
these will be the “slower” molecules: Those that spend a
signiﬁcant time with only the tip of the polymer inserted
in the channel are far more likely to fall back out than
are those that are quickly driven through the hole. Thus,
only “faster” chains tend to enter into the calculation of
the mean transit time, decreasing
. This eﬀect is most
i
pronounced for small L/ld, because only molecules within
ld of the cis side have an appreciable chance of “backing
out” instead of exiting on the trans side. Indeed, when
L
ld, the driving should be negligible, and we expect
≪
to approach its v = 0 value L2/6D. To determine the
t
h
i
precise form of this crossover, we must turn to a more
detailed calculation.

t
h

This calculation can be formulated as one of a well-
studied class of problems known as ﬁrst-passage prob-
lems (Risken, 1984; van Kampen, 1992). Essentially, all
that is required is to solve Eq. 3 on the interval [0, L]
with absorbing boundary conditions P (0) = P (L) = 0.
Then, the current density j(L) at L gives the probability
per time that the polymer will leave the pore from the
far (trans) side, while
j(0) is the probability per time
−
that it will exit from the cis side from which it entered.
[0, L] of
One must also specify the starting point x0 ∈
the polymer; in what follows, we always take the limit
0, in keeping with the fact that the polymer starts
x0 →
entirely on the cis side of the membrane. The algebraic
details of the solution are summarized in appendix A;
here we include only a discussion of the main results.

i

t
h

Although exact expressions for

and ∆t may be ob-
tained, it turns out to be more instructive to consider
the distribution ψ(t) itself. For arbitrary L/ld, this can
only be expressed as an inﬁnite series, but if terms that
become exponentially small as L2/(vtld)
are ne-
glected, a comparatively simple analytic expression is ob-
tained:

→ ∞

ψ(t)

v
2 r

ld
π (cid:18)

≃

L2

ld(vt)5/2 −

2
(vt)3/2 (cid:19)

e−(vt−L)2/(4vtld).

(4)

4

∼ O

Note that this expression is not valid for suﬃciently large
t, and in particular not for t so large that it predicts that
ψ(t) becomes negative. Nonetheless, for values of t near
the maximum in ψ(t), i.e. those such that vt/L
(1),
it is accurate to within a percent for L/ld as small as
4, and correctly reﬂects the qualitative features of ψ(t)
for signiﬁcantly smaller L/ld. Figure 2 plots ψ(t) for
L/ld = 5; a Gaussian with the same mean and vari-
ance is included for comparison. Evidently, ψ(t) is quite
skewed, and its mean and maximum are correspondingly
well-separated. Thus,
and ∆t are not the best pa-
rameters for describing experimental data. Indeed, both
cumulants are sensitive to how ψ(t) decays for large t,
making them very hard to extract accurately from real-
istic data sets. A more useful choice of parameters to
characterize ψ(t) are the position tmax of its maximum
|tmax = 0) and the width δt of the
(which satisﬁes dψ/dt
peak. The latter is deﬁned as δt
tL)/2, where tR
(tR −
and tL satisfy ψ(tR, tL) = e−1/2ψ(tmax); we have chosen
a factor of e−1/2 instead of the more conventional 1/2 to
facilitate comparison with ﬁts of data to a Gaussian. One
, tmax and δt should approach
expects that as L/ld → ∞
and ∆t, respectively. For example, for large L/ld we
t
h
i
have,

t
h

≡

i

tmax =

L
1
v (cid:18)

−

5

ld
L

+

17
2

l2
d
L2 + 32

l3
d
L3 +

· · ·(cid:19)

.

(5)

The rapidly growing coeﬃcients indicate that although
tmax approaches L/v as L approaches inﬁnity, it falls
away from its asymptotic form quite rapidly for ﬁnite
L.

More generally, one can easily ﬁnd tmax and δt by nu-
merically solving the equations that deﬁne them. Fig-
ure 3 plots δt/tmax versus the polymer length L. This
ratio is especially interesting because it depends only on
L/ld, and not on v and D separately; one can thus use
it quickly to estimate L/ld. In KBBD’s data, δt/tmax is
usually of order 0.5 for a
200 nucleotide chain, suggest-
ing that L/ld ≈
5, or that ld is of order 40 nucleotides. As
ﬁgure 4 indicates, in this range tmax already deviates sig-
L/v. In particular,
niﬁcantly from the naive guess tmax ≈
tmax/L varies by a factor of 2 as L/ld increases from 5
to 25. With suﬃciently good data, this deviation from a
strict proportionality to L might well be observable, pro-
viding strong conﬁrmation of our quasi one-dimensional
picture.

∼

REGIME OF VALIDITY

In the previous section, we argued that a requirement
for the validity of a one-dimensional diﬀusion model was
that the system be (approximately) unchanged if the
polymer moves an integer number of monomers forwards
or backwards in the pore. This section discusses when
this condition is satisﬁed. We begin by dividing the poly-
mer into three parts: the roughly ten nucleotide long

piece that is actually inside the channel, and the two
“ends”, comprising the majority of the nucleotides, out-
side the channel. The pore always contains the same
number of bases, so, for the homopolymers, this part of
the polymer always satisﬁes the requirement of trans-
lational symmetry. The length of each end “dangling”
outside the pore, in contrast, changes with the transloca-
tion parameter x, destroying translational invariance. In
what follows, we shall argue that under certain conditions
this variation may be neglected. Our arguments assume
that the parts of the polynucleotide outside the pore may
be described by the theories usually applied to long, ﬂex-
ible polymers (de Gennes, 1979; Doi and Edwards, 1986);
we thus ignore, for example, hydrogen-bonding and other
speciﬁc interactions (Cantor and Schimmel, 1980). We
also assume that the ion channel is suﬃciently long and
narrow that any voltage drop falls almost entirely across
the channel (see appendix C). The electric ﬁeld and the
solvent ﬂow velocity outside of the channel can then be
ignored.

0.4ηR3

G/(kBT )

There are two criteria for ignoring the ends of the poly-
mer outside of the pore. First, they should have a char-
acteristic relaxation time that is much faster than the
characteristic time for the motion of a monomer through
the channel. In the absence of interactions between the
polymer and the pore, one would expect diﬀusion on the
scale of a few monomers to be much faster than the re-
laxation of a long polymer coil, and this inequality could
never be satisﬁed. However, since the nucleotides in the
pore can be expected to interact strongly with the con-
ﬁning protein, the requirement is not implausible. The
longest time scale of an isolated polymer in solution is
0.4ηN 3νb3/(kBT ),
the Zimm time tZ ≈
where ν is the Flory exponent,‡ b is the Kuhn segment
length (equal to twice the persistence length), η is the
solvent viscosity, and N = L/b. Substituting in numeri-
cal values for a single-stranded polynucleotide in water,
10−4 µsec). If we imagine
one ﬁnds that tZ ≈
that the polymer moves a monomer through the chan-
nel by hopping over an energetic barrier (an idea to be
considered in more detail when we introduce our micro-
scopic model), then in the limit of strong driving, the
translocation speed is simply v = a/tpore, where tpore is
the longest relaxation time of the part of the polymer
in the pore. Substituting numerical values for poly[U],
1.5µsec. Comparing this ﬁgure to
we ﬁnd tpore = a/v
tZ, we see that the two become of the same order when
N is of order 150, corresponding to a length of polymer
of roughly 300 nucleotides protruding from each side of
the pore. Of course, for polymers that traverse the mem-

N 3ν(3.2

≈

×

≈

‡In principle, ν
0.6 for a long polymer in a good sol-
vent. However, even with the longest available chains, ν is
never observed experimentally to be larger than 0.55 (Doi
and Edwards, 1986), so we use this value for speciﬁc numeri-
cal calculations.

≈

5

F

, d

tpore can be signiﬁcantly larger.

brane more slowly, as is the case for poly[dA], the value
of N above tZ >
∼

As long as the dynamics of the polymer outside of
the pore are fast compared to the dynamics in the pore,
one need not treat the external degrees of freedom ex-
plicitly. Instead, they aﬀect the motion of the polymer
(x) to its free energy and
only through a contribution
through the increased drag they contribute.§ Lee and
Obukhov’s scaling argument (Lee and Obukhov, 1996)
implies that their eﬀect on the drag is independent of
the length of polymer on a given side of the membrane.
On the other hand, in order for us to be able to ne-
glect
/dx must be small compared to the force F
driving translocation. Denote the free energy of the coil
on the cis side of the membrane by
F C(x) and that of
the coil on the trans side by
(x).
Sung and Park pointed out that
F T are simply
the free energies of a polymer grafted by one end to a
planar surface (Sung and Park, 1996). For a polymer
of length x, this entropic free energy is known to be pro-
portional to kBT ln(x/b), with a coeﬃcient of order unity
that depends on whether excluded volume eﬀects are im-
portant (Binder, 1983). Ignoring the few monomers actu-
ally in the channel, the lengths of polymer on the cis and
trans sides of the barrier are x and L
x, respectively,
so

F T(x); their sum is

F C and

−

F

F

F

(x)

kBT

F

∝

ln

(cid:20)

x
b (cid:17)

(cid:16)

+ ln

L

x
−
b (cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18)

.

(6)

F

F

for ﬁxed x/L), d

For a chain that is a ﬁxed fraction of the way through
the hole (i.e.
/dx vanishes like 1/L.
Further, it makes little sense to consider x < a, where a
is the length of a single monomer, so we must always have
/dx <
kBT /a. Typical values will be much smaller
d
∼
5kBT /a thus
than this bound. The driving force F
greatly exceeds d
/dx; indeed, since the polymers used
by KBBD are several hundred nucleotides long, F is more
than a factor of 100 larger than a typical value of d
/dx.
In sum, we have shown that in the window of polymer
lengths

≈

F

F

kBT
F a ≪

N

kBT a
ηb3v (cid:19)

≪ (cid:18)

1/3ν

(7)

the polymer is short enough to relax quickly, but long
enough that the entropic barrier to crossing the mem-
brane is not too steep. For lengths in this window, the
ends of the chain hanging outside of the pore can be ne-
glected compared to the monomers inside the pore. Since
the system studied by KBBD falls within this window,

we are justiﬁed in using simple one-dimensional models
to describe it.

MICROSCOPIC MODEL OF THE PORE

Until now, we have avoided specifying the physics of
the interactions within the pore.
In this section, we
present a simple phenomenological model of these in-
teractions. Our main goal is to understand physically
how the parameters v and D can vary suﬃciently to ex-
plain experimental facts like the diﬀerence in velocities
between polymers moving forwards and backwards.

Description of the Model

We begin by focusing on the polymer backbone, whose
coordinate x tells us what fraction of the polymer chain
If the motion of the
has passed through the channel.
backbone is suﬃciently slow compared to all the other
degrees of freedom in the pore, then we can take x to
be the only dynamical variable in the problem. The re-
maining degrees of freedom are then described by a free
energy Φ(x) that depends on the polymer translocation
parameter x. The potential Φ(x) can, for example, be
expected to have contributions from electrostatic inter-
actions between the polymer and the α-hemolysin hep-
tamer. Two unit charges separated by 1˚A in water have
an energy of about 6kBT at room temperature; since
both polynucleotide and protein have completely ionized
groups in physiological pH, it is thus plausible that typi-
cal values of Φ should be at least on the order of several
kBT . We split Φ into a mean slope F determined by
the applied voltage drop and a part U (x) that captures
the details of the polymer’s interactions with the pore:
F x.∗∗ For homopolymers (provided we
Φ(x) = U (x)
continue to neglect the degrees of freedom outside the
pore), U (x) is periodic, with period a = 1 nucleotide. F
is precisely the mean force introduced in Eq. 1, and is
equal to eV /a in the simplest picture.

−

Our problem is now formally no diﬀerent from that of
a point particle diﬀusing in a periodic potential U and
driven by a constant force F . The probability P (x) of
ﬁnding such a particle at a point x is governed by a
Smoluchowski equation,

∂P
∂t

= D0

∂
∂x (cid:20)

∂P
∂x

+

U ′(x)

F

−
kBT

P

(cid:21)

P .

≡ L

(8)

§Here, we assume that v is suﬃciently small that the parts
of the polymer outside the pore are essentially in equilibrium.
On purely dimensional grounds, this must be true when tZ
≪
N y(b/v) for some non-negative exponent y, a requirement
that is met in KBBD’s experiments.

∗∗In principle, U could depend on the applied voltage (and
hence on F ). We ignore this eﬀect; many of our conclusions
will in any case turn out to be insensitive to it.

6

The “bare” diﬀusion constant D0 is related through an
Einstein relation to some suitable drag force on the poly-
It is not to be confused with the
mer in the channel.
“eﬀective” diﬀusion constant D that includes the eﬀects
of U and describes the polymer’s motion on length scales
much larger than a.

It is helpful both for numerical work and for intuition
building to have a concrete idea of the simplest form U (x)
could take. In particular, such a simpliﬁed “cartoon” will
give us an idea of the minimum number of parameters
needed to describe the gross features of the potential. A
natural choice for such a U (x) is a sawtooth potential of
the sort sketched in ﬁgure 5. It is described by two di-
mensionless parameters, the peak height U0/kBT and the
asymmetry parameter α. When α = 1/2, the potential
is perfectly symmetrical, while α = 0 or 1 corresponds to
maximal asymmetry. In addition to U (x), the full poten-
tial Φ contains a term proportional to the driving force F ,
which ﬁgures in the dimensionless group F a/kBT . Thus,
to specify our potential fully, we require the three dimen-
sionless parameters U0/kBT , α, and F a/kBT , as well as
D0 and the repeat distance a, which set a time and a
length scale. More generally, we expect that any form
of U (x) with only one peak per period will be roughly
characterized by a peak height U0 (equal to the diﬀer-
ence between the minimum and the maximum values of
U (x)), and an asymmetry α (deﬁned as the distance be-
tween a minimum in U (x) and the next maximum to the
right, divided by a). While we have no a priori infor-
mation about α, we have suggested that U0 should be
of order several kBT , and have argued F a/kBT
5 for
KBBD’s experiments.

≈

−

Because the time required to diﬀuse over a barrier de-
pends exponentially on the barrier height, small diﬀer-
ences in U0 can lead to signiﬁcant changes in transloca-
tion speed, consistent with KBBD’s observations. Fur-
ther, if U (x) is asymmetrical, forces F and
F will lead
to diﬀerent barrier heights, and thus to diﬀerent mean
drift speeds for the diﬀusing polymer. Figure 6 illustrates
this point. It thus appears plausible that a polymer mov-
ing through the pore with its 5’ end ﬁrst could travel at
a very diﬀerent speed from one going through the pore 3’
end ﬁrst. There is, however, one additional complication.
As shown in ﬁgure 7, three diﬀerent “vector” quantities
can be oriented relative to the membrane: the applied
electric ﬁeld, the α-hemolysin pore, and the DNA. Each
can point towards the cis or the trans chamber. With,
say, the pore orientation held ﬁxed, there are thus four
possible situations. The two that have been realized in
the experiments of KBBD are related by a ﬂip of the
F (or equivalently
polymer, while transforming F
7→ −
U (x)
x) ) in our model amounts to changing the
direction of the ﬁeld. Thus, although a velocity diﬀerence
of a factor of 3 can clearly be accounted for by reasonable
choices of parameters, we cannot quantitatively address
how the two peaks in KBBD’s experiments are related.
Once all four possible situations have been explored ex-
perimentally, however, it should be possible, for example,

U (

7→

−

to estimate the value of α by comparing data for the ap-
propriate pairs of situations.

Eﬀective Mobility and Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient

We now turn to the task of calculating the parame-
ters v and D that describe the behavior of Eq. 8 on long
length scales. Several approaches are available; in this
section, we will describe the results of an analysis based
on ideas of Risken (Risken, 1984). Details of the calcu-
lation, which relies on an eigenfunction expansion, are
given in appendix B. In the most general case, v and D
have fairly complicated forms, but relatively simple lim-
iting cases capture most of the relevant behavior. For ex-
ample, one ﬁnds (le Doussal and Vinokur, 1995; Scheidl,
1995)

∞

1
v

=

1
D0 Z
0

a

dx
a

Z
0

dze−F z/kBT

e[U(x+z)−U(x)]/kBT , (9)

from which a number of limiting behaviors can be ex-
tracted. Several equivalent expressions for v, as well as a
similar, but more involved, expression for D, can also be
obtained.

Figure 8 plots the velocity v versus F for polymers
traveling in two diﬀerent directions in the same (asym-
metric) potential. At typical values of F , diﬀerences in
velocity between forwards and backwards motion of a
factor of 3 or more are easily obtained. Likewise, the cal-
culated velocities are much slower than they would have
been in the absence of a potential.

One can gain more quantitative insight into both of
these observations by studying how v and D behave
in various limiting cases. Relegating the derivations to
appendix B, we next consider several such expressions.
Three cases are particularly of interest: large and small
driving force F , and large potential barriers U0 (the case
of small U0 corresponds to the absence of a potential and
was discussed earlier). For small F , v and D must satisfy
an Einstein relation. Indeed, in this limit one ﬁnds,

v =

D = D0

D0F
kBT

1
I (0)
1 I (0)
1
1 I (0)
I (0)

(cid:20)

2

2

1 +

(cid:20)

(

F a
kBT

O

)
(cid:21)

1 +

(

F a
kBT

O

,

)
(cid:21)

(10)

where

eU(x)/kBT

I (0)
1 =

I (0)
2 =

a

a

Z
0

Z
0

dx
a
dx
a

e−U(x)/kBT .

(11)

Thus, v/D = F/kBT , as the ﬂuctuation-dissipation the-
orem requires, but the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is
reduced from its bare value D0 by a factor that grows

7

exponentially with the characteristic height of the po-
tential. Perhaps more surprising is the fact that a linear-
response-like regime is also reached for suﬃciently large
F . As F

,
→ ∞

v = D0F

1 +

(cid:20)

D = D0 (cid:20)

1 +

O

(

U0
F a

O

)2

(

U0
F a

)2

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

.

(12)

≈ −

The physical content of this result is that when F is
much larger than a typical force derived from U (x),
Φ′(x)
F , and contributions from U may be neglected
entirely.
In the opposite limit of large U0, one might
expect that the diﬀusion process can essentially be de-
scribed as hopping from one potential minimum to the
next. Approximate formulas based on the Kramers es-
cape rate (van Kampen, 1992) should then apply. In fact,
for large U0 one ﬁnds

v

≃

D0
1 I (0)
aI (0)

2

eαF a/kBT
h

−

e−(1−α)F a/kBT

(13)

i

and

D

≃

D0
1 I (0)
2I (0)

2

eαF a/kBT + e−(1−α)F a/kBT
h

i

.

(14)

≈

≈

≪

a/5

xmin = αa.

As before, we select the origin of U (x) so that its maxi-
mum and minimum in each period occur at points xmax >
xmin, with xmax −
We have already estimated from KBBD’s data that
40a. A striking feature of the asymptotic
D/v
ld ≡
forms Eq. 10 through Eq. 14 just obtained is that all three
imply a much smaller value. As we noted when we intro-
duced the parameter ld, the linear response results both
yield ld = kBT /F ; given our naive estimate F a/kBT
5,
40a. For U0 large enough that the
we ﬁnd ld ≈
“hopping” approximation of Eq. 14 applies, this order of
. Indeed, in
magnitude is little changed even as F
this limit Eq. 14 gives ld = a/2. It is of course possible
that some particular form of U (x) with ﬁnite U0 and F
might lead to a value of ld of order 40a. It seems more
likely, however, that ld interpolates reasonably smoothly
among its various limiting values. The inset to ﬁgure 8 il-
lustrates this point for the sawtooth potential introduced
earlier. Although v and D each separately can depend
strongly on the shape of U (x), their ratio is far less sensi-
tive. We are thus led to one of the central conclusions of
this paper: While many aspects of KBBD’s results can
be qualitatively explained by a model of diﬀusion in a
one-dimensional periodic potential, the observed width
of their peaks is inconsistent with this model if one takes
F a

→ ∞

5kBT .

≈

DISCUSSION

In the previous section, we argued that the peaks
in KBBD’s distribution of ﬁrst passage times are

∼

much wider than is consistent with our minimal one-
dimensional model. It is not diﬃcult to suggest reasons
why this might be the case. Perhaps the most obvious is
that F a/kBT could diﬀer signiﬁcantly from 5. Not only
would a decrease of a factor of 100 in F bring our pre-
diction for ld into line with experimental observations,
it would also explain the polymer’s unexpectedly slow
translocation speed. At least two eﬀects might decrease
F . First, unless the pore has inﬁnite resistance, not all
of the applied voltage drop V will be across the pore. Al-
though the large (
MΩ) resistance of the α-hemolysin
channel makes it unlikely that this mechanism could di-
minish F by orders of magnitude, it certainly leads to
some decrease. Second, the fact that there is a nonzero
ionic current ﬂowing through the pore while the polymer
is translocating means that the motion of the polymer
itself need not satisfy detailed balance. That is, the er-
ror rate, or ratio of the probabilities of moving forward
one base to moving backwards one base, is no longer
required to be equal to exp(eV /kBT ). To use a some-
what diﬀerent language, as the counterions are forced
through the pore by the electric ﬁeld, they entrain some
of the solvent along with them. This solvent ﬂow ex-
erts an additional drag force on the polymer, and this
drag contributes to the mean force F . As a result, the
electrophoretic mobility of the polymer in the channel is
not in general equal to its hydrodynamic mobility mul-
tiplied by its charge. Appendix C presents simple esti-
mates based on continuum mechanics that suggest that
both of these eﬀects are small. These estimates, how-
ever, make a number of simpliﬁcations; indeed, even the
validity of the continuum equations is not assured on the
nanometer scale. Given the importance of a large value
of F a/kBT to any attempts to sequence polynucleotides
using the α-hemolysin pore, it thus seems desirable to
verify experimentally that it is indeed approximately 5.
Although a smaller than expected driving force is cer-
tainly one mechanism that would generate wider peaks,
others exist that do not require a large error rate.
In
many ways, our most poorly justiﬁed assumption is that
the motion of the polymer backbone through the pore
is much slower than the relaxation of every other de-
gree of freedom in the system, so we begin by consider-
ing what might happen if this assumption were to break
down. For example, the protonation state of the open
α-hemolysin channel is known to ﬂuctuate on a much
slower time scale than the characteristic polymer time
a/v
1µsec (Kasianowicz et al., 1995), and the en-
ergy barrier to moving a base through the pore might
change signiﬁcantly when the protonation state changes.
It is instructive to consider a naive extension of our one-
dimensional model meant crudely to describe such a sit-
uation. Suppose that the pore + polymer system can
be in one of two states, state 1, in which the polymer
backbone can diﬀuse freely, and state 2, in which the
backbone is trapped and cannot move. Let there be a
transition rate (per time) ωij from state i to state j.
This situation bears some similarities to popular mod-

∼

8

els of motor proteins (J¨ulicher et al., 1997), but with
the important diﬀerence that the ratio ω12/ω21 need not
violate detailed balance; a similar description has also
recently been proposed for the one-dimensional motion
of RNA polymerase along a polynucleotide (J¨ulicher and
Bruinsma, 1998). If Pi(x) is the probability that the sys-
tem is in state i and that a length x of polymer has passed
through the pore, the long time diﬀusion of the system
is governed by equations of the form

∂P1
∂t
∂P2
∂t

= D1

∂2P1
∂x2 −

v1

∂P1
∂x −

ω12P1 + ω21P2

= ω12P1 −

ω21P2 .

In state 2, the motion is arrested, so both the velocity
and the diﬀusion coeﬃcient vanish. Just as in the one-
dimensional, periodic case (appendix B), this model leads
to a spreading Gaussian wave packet, with velocity and
diﬀusion coeﬃcient determined by the behavior of the
eigenvalues near zero. One ﬁnds a velocity

(15)

(16)

(17)

v =

v1
2 (cid:18)

1 +

∆ω
ω (cid:19)

,

and a diﬀusion coeﬃcient

D =

D1
2 (cid:18)

1 +

∆ω
ω (cid:19)

+

v2
1
1
2ω (cid:18)

(∆ω)2

−

ω2 (cid:19)

,

(18)

ω12 and ω = ω12 +ω21. Thus, if v1 6

= 0
where ∆ω = ω21 −
and ω and ∆ω are chosen properly, ld = D/v can be made
arbitrarily large. This is true even if D1/v1 remains of
order a.Thus, even in this simple example, broad peaks
are possible as soon as one relaxes the constraint that the
model only contain one degree of freedom.

In addition to the possibility that there is more than
one slow degree of freedom, many other factors could
contribute to the wide blockage time distributions ob-
served by KBBD. For example, the observed peaks could
reﬂect not the distribution in passage times for poly-
mers of a given length, but the length distribution of
the polymers themselves. Although the polydispersity of
the poly[U] samples used by KBBD was not well char-
acterized, no qualitative diﬀerences were seen with a
perfectly monodisperse sample of DNA (Dan Branton,
Harvard University, personal communication), suggest-
ing that polydispersity is not the culprit. Similarly, we
calculated the free energy
of the parts of the polynu-
F
cleotide outside the pore using a model that applies to
conventional polymers above the theta point. If
took
a diﬀerent form, we might not be able to neglect it. In
particular, signiﬁcant asymmetries between the two sides
of the membrane could result in a non-electrical contri-
bution to the driving force (Park and Sung, 1998b; Di
Marzio and Mandell, 1997; Carl, 1998). For example,
if the polynucleotide adsorbs weakly on one side of the
membrane, there would be a force towards the adsorbing
side of order f kBT /a, where f is the fraction of adsorbed

F

monomers. A similar eﬀect could be obtained by con-
ﬁning the polymer on only one side of the membrane.
Indeed, for sequencing applications, it might be useful
intentionally to introduce an asymmetry as a way to ma-
nipulate the polymer’s speed and error rate without af-
fecting the ionic current. Similarly, the current can in
principle be varied with little eﬀect on the polymer by
putting a high concentration of macroions (e.g. colloidal
particles) on one side of the membrane. This would in-
duce a concentration gradient in their counterions that
tended to drive the ions across the membrane.

→ ∞

Finally, we would like to touch on one other issue of
particular relevance to eﬀorts to sequence polynucleotides
as they pass through the pore. All of our results up to
this point have been strictly valid only for homopoly-
mers. Since it is known that diﬀusion in random media
can be qualitatively diﬀerent from diﬀusion in ordered
systems (Bouchaud and Georges, 1990), it is worth ask-
ing whether we expect any important changes when the
homopolymer is replaced by a random heteropolymer. As
long as the assumptions leading to our model of diﬀusion
in a one-dimensional, periodic medium hold, one can ar-
gue that the eﬀect of using heteropolymeric DNA would
be to modify the potential U (x). Rather than having
an identical form within each unit cell of length a, U (x)
might take one of four diﬀerent shapes, corresponding to
four diﬀerent bases. It is known that one-dimensional dif-
fusion becomes anomalous when [U (x)
as
, where the overbar indicates an average with re-
x
spect to the random distribution of bases (Bouchaud and
Georges, 1990; le Doussal and Vinokur, 1995; Scheidl,
1995). In biological DNA sequences, it is believed that
successive bases are either uncorrelated or have correla-
tions that decay algebraically with distance (Herzel et al.,
U (0)]2
1998; Stanley et al., 1992). In either case, [U (x)
remains bounded for large x. Thus, within the sim-
ple one-dimensional model, no qualitatively new behav-
ior would result from replacing homopolymers with het-
eropolymers. This is what one would expect to observe
for short polynucleotides like those used by KBBD. It is
worth mentioning, however, that this conclusion is sensi-
tive to other eﬀects. For example, the electrophoretic mo-
bility of the polymer in the pore presumably has some se-
quence dependence; this would lead to an eﬀective short-
range correlated random force on the polymer. Such
a random force, however small, would in principle re-
sult in anomalous diﬀusion on suﬃciently long length
scales (Bouchaud and Georges, 1990; Fisher et al., 1998).

U (0)]2

→ ∞

−

−

CONCLUSION

The central idea of this paper was ﬁrst presented in the
introduction: In the experiments of KBBD, and likely
in other examples of the translocation of biopolymers,
the channel through which the polymer passes cannot
be viewed simply as a set of hard, homogeneous walls.

9

Rather, more speciﬁc interactions between the polymer
and the channel must be taken into account. Indeed, we
have argued that there is a regime in which polymer-pore
interactions dominate, allowing a quasi-one-dimensional
description of the translocation process. One immediate
consequence of this observation is that on long enough
length scales, the transport of the polymer through the
pore is governed by a simple phenomenological equa-
tion. Starting from this equation, we have derived several
predictions about the polymer’s distribution of passage
times. For example, we have shown that the polymer’s
mean translocation time depends linearly on its length
only for an extremely long polymer. It is perhaps worth
reemphasizing that none of these results depend on any
particular microscopic model of the pore.
In contrast,
several important qualitative observations of KBBD can
be understood in terms of a more microscopic picture in-
volving a “tilted washboard” potential. The tilted wash-
board model also lead us to point out that the distri-
bution of passage times in KBBD’s experiments was far
broader than one might expect from simple estimates,
or indeed from any model with only one degree of free-
dom. We have suggested several ways that this discrep-
ancy might arise. Some, such as a serious mis-estimate
of the mean force F on the polymer, imply an error rate
in DNA sequencing of almost 50%. Several others, how-
ever, do not require revision of the estimated error rate.
Most notable among these are polydispersity in the poly-
mer lengths and a strong coupling between the polymer
and another degree of freedom in the pore with slow dy-
namics. Determining which mechanism is at work in the
experiments of KBBD remains an important experimen-
tal and theoretical challenge.

Our conclusions suggest several experimental avenues
that might be explored in KBBD’s or some analogous
system. Most obvious would be to try to measure the
error rate (or equivalently, the driving force F ). At least
a rough estimate of F a/kBT might be obtained in several
ways. Obviously, any experiment in which it is possible
to detect the passage of a particular nucleotide through
the pore gives one direct access to the error rate. Al-
ternatively, at small enough applied voltage V , it should
be possible to observe a linear response regime. Devia-
tions from linear behavior would then be observed at a
value of V such that F a/kBT
(1). With linear re-
sponse data from all four possible relative orientations, it
should also be possible to observe that dv/dV is the same
for pairs of peaks. More ambitiously, if one could exert a
non-electrical force on the polymer strong enough that its
mean velocity through the pore fell to zero, this would
give a direct measurement of F . Such an experiment
might be accomplished with modern micromanipulation
techniques.

∼ O

Other experiments of interest might test the existence
of a quasi-one-dimensional regime. With enough data
on the length dependence of tmax, for example, it should
be possible to observe the predicted deviation from the
L. Further, if this data could be
simple guess tmax ∝

10

extended to suﬃciently long polymers, deviations from
the curve of ﬁgure 4 would provide information on the
crossover to a regime in which the dynamics of the poly-
mer outside the pore are slower than those inside the
pore. Once the basic theory has been veriﬁed, a number
of diﬀerent directions remain open. For example, a study
of the ﬂuctuations of the ionic current with a polymer in
the pore could provide evidence about whether there are
important slow degrees of freedom other than the poly-
mer backbone itself. Adding a time varying component
to the applied voltage in the experiments of KBBD might
provide advantages in sequencing applications; the char-
acteristic frequency for motion from one base to the next
appears to be a relatively low 106 Hertz. The behavior of
polymers in very narrow channels is a rich subject that
has only begun to be investigated.

APPENDIX A: DETAILS OF CALCULATION OF
DISTRIBUTION OF BLOCKAGE TIMES

We wish to solve the equation

,

∂P
∂x

∂2P
∂x2 −

∂P
∂t′ = ld
where t′ = vt,
for P (x, t′) subject to the boundary
conditions that P vanish at x = 0, L and the ini-
tial condition P (x, t′ = 0) = δ(x
x0). The right
−
and left eigenfunctions of ld∂2/∂x2
∂/∂x are respec-
−
tively exp(x/2ld) sin(knx) and exp(
x/2ld) sin(knx), so
−
we have

(A1)

P (x, t′) =

e−λnt

e−x0/2ld sin(knx0)ex/2ld sin(knx) ,

′

2
L

∞

Xn=1

(A2)

with kn = nπ/L and λn = ldk2
n + 1/4ld. After taking a
derivative with respect to x, setting x = L, and simplify-
ing, one ﬁnds that the probability that the polymer will
exit the channel at x = L at time t′ is

ϕ(t′) = j(L) =

e(L−x0)/2ld

2ld
L

−

× Xn

′

e−λnt

kn sin[kn(x0 −

L)] .

(A3)

Note that for large L this is a very slowly convergent
series.
It is thus convenient to rewrite it using the
Poisson resummation formula. This formula states that
ˆf (2πm),
for any function f ,
where ˆf is the Fourier transform of f deﬁned by ˆf (q) =
dxf (x)eiqx. Rewriting the sum in terms of the Fourier
transform of the summand moves L from the denomina-
R
tor to the numerator of the exponential, yielding, after a
little algebra,

∞
n=−∞ f (n) =

∞
m=−∞

P

P

∞

Z
0

dt′ϕ(t′) =

e−x0/ld

e−(n−1)L/2ld

(cid:17) Xn=1,3,5,...

P (x, t) =

Xn ZBZ

dk eik(x−x0)uL

∗
n(k, x0)

n (k, x)e−λn(k)t .
uR

ϕ(t′) =

1
2√πldt′3

e(L−x0)/2lde−t

′

/4ld

e−(n−1)L/2ld

× Xn=1,3,5,...

(nL

x0)e−(t

−

′

′
−nL+x0)2/4ldt

(nL + x0)e−x0/lde−(t

′

′
−nL−x0)2/4ldt

× h

−

.

(A4)

i

∞

With ϕ written in this form, the ﬁrst term is exponen-
tially larger than all subsequent terms as L becomes
large, facilitating the analysis of limiting cases. With
the help of a few deﬁnite integrals a number of results
In particular, if one deﬁnes
can be obtained exactly.
1)2/4γy], then I(3/2) =
I(α) =
−
I(1/2) = 2√πγ. The ﬁrst equality can be proven with
the substitution z = 1/y, the second with the substitu-
tion u = (y
1)/√y; I(α) for other values of α may
be obtained by succesive integrations by parts. Using
these identities, one can show, for example, that the to-
tal probability that the polymer will exit from the trans
side (x = L) if it started at x0 is

0 dy/yα exp[
R

(y

−

−

1
(cid:16)

−

1
1

−
−

=

e−x0/ld
e−L/ld

.

(A5)

One can similarly obtain exact expressions for
for higher moments.

t′
h

i

and

Thus far, we have allowed the polymer’s starting point
x0 to be arbitrary. Since the polymer always starts en-
tirely on the cis side of the channel, the case of interest
0. Eq. (A5) shows that the probability
to us is x0 →
that the polymer passes through the pore vanishes in
this limit. This conclusion is, however, a pathology of
our model. We can still obtain a meaningful conditional
distribution of passage times (that is, a distribution of
passage times for those polymers that do leave at x = L)
by normalizing ϕ by the total probability of passage. In
the limit x0 →
ψ(t′) = lim

0, one obtains

e−L/ld
e−x0/ld

ϕ(t′)
(cid:21)

x0→0 (cid:20)

1
1

−
−

1
(cid:16)

= 2

r

ld
πt′3

× Xn=1,3,5,...

(cid:18)

e− L

ld

(cid:17)

−
n2L2
ldt′ −

2

(cid:19)

e− (n−1)L
2ld e

− (t′ −nL)2
4ld t′

. (A6)

,
All the terms but the ﬁrst are subdominant as L
→ ∞
and when they are dropped, we obtain (4). Note that not
only is Eq. 4 the correct asymptotic form for large L, but
also that all subsequent terms describe peaks centered at
increasingly larger values of t′. Thus, even when these
terms signiﬁcantly modify the behavior of ψ(t′) as t′

→
, they can have a very small eﬀect in the vicinity of

∞
tmax.

APPENDIX B: DETAILS OF CALCULATION OF
MOBILITY AND DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT

Exact Expressions

L

n (k, x), where

n (k, x) = eikxuR

In this appendix, we will derive the expression of Eq. 9
for the mean drift velocity v of a particle in a periodic
potential and an analogous expression for the eﬀective
diﬀusion coeﬃcient D. Since the linear operator
(de-
ﬁned by Eq. 8) is periodic, it must have eigenfunctions of
the Block form ψR
< π/a
and uR
n (k, x) is periodic with period a. The eigenfunc-
tion ψR
ψR
n (k, x).
n (k, x) is deﬁned by
Since
is a non-hermitian operator, right and left eigen-
functions are not equal, so we distinguish between them
with superscripts R and L. Likewise, the eigenvalues
λn(k) are not in general real. The eigenfunctions are
labelled by a band index n and a wavevector k in the
ﬁrst Brillouin zone. If the polymer starts at x = x0 at
t = 0, then P (x, t) may be expressed as an eigenfunction
expansion:

|
λn(k)ψR

n (k, x) =

k
|

−

L

L

(B1)

Because of the exponential decay e−λn(k)t, the smallest
values of Re λn(k) determine the behavior of P at long
times. One can prove that the lowest value occurs at
λ0(k = 0) = 0. Performing a saddle point integration
about this point, one thus ﬁnds that as t

,††

→ ∞

e−(x−x0−vt)2/(4Dt)uR

0 (k = 0, x) , (B2)

P (x, t)

1
√4πDt

≃

where

.

i

−

k=0

v =

(B3)

and D = 2

d2λ0
dk2 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

dλ0
dk (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
At long times P (x, t) is thus a spreading Gaussian, mod-
ulated by a periodic function uR
0 (k = 0, x) that gives de-
tailed structure on the scale of a. One can hence reason-
ably interpret the constants v and D in the expression for
the Gaussian envelope as the same constants that appear
in the macroscopic Eq. 3.

k=0

In light of these expressions, we obviously want to
study the behavior of λ0 in the vicinity of k = 0. To
do this, it is convenient to rephrase the eigenvalue con-
dition
n (k, x)
as

n (k, x) in terms of uR

n (k, x) = λn(k)ψR
ψR

L

††Note that this result is valid only for values of x such that
(√t) for large t, so that the
the diﬀerence x
≪ O
quantity in the exponential has a saddle point exactly at k = 0
instead of somewhere in the upper complex k half-plane.

x0

vt

−

−

11

D0 (cid:18)

∂
∂x

+ ik

+ ik

= D0 (cid:20)L
=

λn(k)uR

−

(cid:19) (cid:20)(cid:18)

∂
∂x
∂
2
∂x
(cid:18)
n (k, x) .

+ ik

+

(cid:19)
Φ′(x)
kBT (cid:19) −

+

Φ′(x)
kBT (cid:21)

uR
n (k, x)

k2

(cid:21)

uR
n (k, x)

(B4)

If we view the k-dependent part of the operator on the left
as a small perturbation on
, then ﬁnding the derivatives
L
of λ0(k) at k = 0 is formally the same as a problem in
quantum-mechanical perturbation theory.‡‡ As usual, we
pose the expansions

λ0(k) = k

0 (k, x) = uR
uR
0 (k, x) = uL
uL

+

k2
dλ0
dk (cid:12)
2
k=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
0 (0, x) + kuR,1
(cid:12)
0 (0, x) + kuL,1

d2λ0
dk2 (cid:12)
k=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
· · ·

(x) +

0
0 (x) +

+

· · ·

The “ground state” uR
problem can be obtained exactly by integrating
0, x) = 0 (Risken, 1984):

· · ·
0 (k = 0, x) of the unperturbed
uR
0 (k =

L

0 (k = 0, x) = N e−Φ(x)/kBT
uR

x

S
D0 Z
0

−

′

dx′ eΦ(x

)/kBT .

(B6)

The two constants of integration N and S are determined
by normalization and by requiring that uR
0 (k = 0, x) be
periodic. Physically, S is the (constant) probability cur-
rent density in the stationary state uR
0 (k = 0, x). Since
0 (k = 0, x) is clearly a con-
L
stant, which we choose to be 1. The ﬁrst correction to
λ0(k = 0) is then just the “expectation value” of the
perturbation in the “ground state”:

† = D0

∂x , uL

∂
∂x −

′
Φ
kBT

h

i

∂

a

= iv = i

dx

2
(cid:18)

Z
0

k=0

∂
∂x

+

Φ′(x)
kBT (cid:19)

uR
0 (k = 0, x) .

After a bit of algebra, one obtains

v = Sa = D0a

e−F a/kBT )
(1
−
a2[I1I2 −
(1

−

e−F a/kBT )I3]

,

(B8)

dλ
dk (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where

eΦ(x)/kBT ,

I1 =

I2 =

I3 =

a

a

a

Z
0

Z
0

Z
0

dx
a
dx
a
dx
a Z
0

x

dx′
a

e−Φ(x)/kBT , and

e−Φ(x)/kBT eΦ(x

)/kBT .

′

(B11)

and

‡‡There is a slight diﬀerence in that in our case the pertur-
has terms of order k2 as well
bation to the original operator
as of order k.

L

1

2

and I (0)

Note that the integrals I (0)
deﬁned in Eq. 11
are just I1 and I2 evaluated with F = 0. Finally, v may
be put in the form of Eq. 9 by everywhere rescaling a
as a
(le Doussal and Vinokur,
→ ∞
1995; Scheidl, 1995). This substitution is valid because
we could have originally thought of U (x) as having period
na instead of a for any positive integer n.

na and letting n

7→

O

To ﬁnd the

O
(k) correction to the ground state uR,1

(k2) correction to λ0(k = 0) requires
knowing the
(x).
This is typically expressed as a sum of eigenfunctions
of the unperturbed problem, which are assumed known.
by direct integration to ﬁnd an
Instead, we will invert
analytic expression for uR,1
(x). After substituting the
expansions of Eq. B5 into the eigenvalue equation and
equating terms of order k, we ﬁnd

L

0

0

.

(B5)

uR,1
0

(x) =

L

ivuR

0 (k = 0, x)
∂
∂x

+

2
iD0 (cid:18)

−

−

Φ′(x)
kBT (cid:19)

uR
0 (k = 0, x) .

(B12)

0

Everything on the right hand side of the equation is
known, so uR,1
(x) can be found by integrating twice.
The constants of integration are determined by demand-
ing that uR,1
(x) be periodic and that its inner product
with uL
(x) is known, we
can equate terms of order k2 to learn that

0 (k = 0, x) = 1 vanish. Once uR,1

0

0

D

D0 =

−

Z

0

a

0 (k = 0, x)∗ i
uL

∂
∂x

2
(cid:18)

+

Φ′(x)
kBT (cid:19)

uR,1
0

(x) .

(B13)

A certain amount of additional algebra ﬁnally leads to
an expression for D:

D
D0

= 1 + L

I2J1 −
I1I2 −
where the Ii are the same as before,

(1
(1

−
−

e−F a/kBT )J2
e−F a/kBT )I3 −

(B7)

J3 ,

(B14)

J1 =

Z
0

x

dx
a Z
0

dx′
a

eΦ(x)/kBT f (x′),

J2 =

Z
0

x

dx
a Z
0

dx′
a Z
0

′

x

dx′′
a

e−Φ(x)/kBT eΦ(x

)/kBT f (x′′) ,

′

a

a

a

(B9)

(B10)

J3 =

Z
0

x

dx
a Z
0

dx′
a

f (x′) ,

(B15)

(B16)

(B17)

f (x) =

uR
0 (k = 0, x) +

Sa
D0

∂uR

0 (k = 0, x)
∂x

S
D0

−

. (B18)

Just as with the expression of Eq. B8 for the velocity, we
can ﬁnd equivalent formulas for D by replacing a by na
and letting n

.
→ ∞

12

Approximate Expressions

Having obtained exact expressions for v and D, we will
now outline how the limiting forms of Eq. 10 through
Eq. 14 are derived. We will focus on the expressions for
v; the manipulations required to obtain the analogous
asymptotic forms for D are very similar.

The behavior of v for large and small F is most

easily studied starting from Eq. 9. Deﬁne A(z)
≡
a
U (x)/kBT ], and note that
0 dx/a exp[U (x + z)/kBT
−
A is a periodic function of z with period a. Expanding
R
A(z) in a Fourier series and Laplace transforming term
by term as demanded by Eq. 9 leads immediately to the
formula of Eq. 10 for the small F behavior; in particular,
the leading behavior is determined by the constant term
2 . Similary, we may
in the series,
ﬁnd the behavior of v for large F by successive integra-
tions by parts: D0/v = A(0)/F + A′(0)/F 2 +

0 dz/aA(z) = I (0)
R

1 I (0)

a

The starting point for ﬁnding the large U behavior is

.
· · ·

similar. Rewrite v as

dx e−U(x)/kBT eF x/kBT

a

D0a
v

=

Z
0

∞

× Z
x

dy eU(y)/kBT e−F y/kBT .

(B19)

First the inner, and then the outer integral can then be
evaluated by Laplace’s method as U becomes large. Note
that since U (x) is periodic, we must sum a geometric se-
ries over an inﬁnite number of extrema to ﬁnd the asymp-
totic expression for the inner integral. Also, the location
of the ﬁrst maximum depends on the lower bound of in-
tegration x. Once the two integrals have been evaluated,
an expression equivalent to Eq. 14 follows immediately.
The only diﬀerence is that in Eq. 14, we have chosen to
write I (0)

instead of their large U forms.

and I (0)

1

2

the Debye-H¨uckel screening length. Both conditions hold
in KBBD’s experiments. Then neither the steady-state
density n of ions nor the solvent velocity u parallel to
the cylinder axis vary too strongly with radial distance.
In particular, there is no Manning condensation. In the
presence of an applied electric ﬁeld E (of order the ap-
plied voltage V divided by the length of the channel), a
body force term enE must be added to the Stokes equa-
tion that describes very viscous ﬂow. Here e is the elec-
tron charge, and we have assumed that the only ions
present are monovalent cations; the ﬁgure we obtain for
the additional drag will thus be an upper bound on the
drag possible with ions of both signs. We may use the
component of the Stokes equation along the cylinder axis
to estimate

η

∼

enE

ui
δ2 ,
where η is the solvent viscosity. Since the Stokes equation
is linear, we have written the axial solvent velocity as
u = up + ui, where ui is driven by the electrical force
on the ions, and up by the motion of the polymer. The
electrical current density J due to the ions is then roughly

(C1)

e2nµE + en(up + ui) .

J

∼

(C2)

Here µ is the mobility of a single counterion. The ﬁrst
term describes motion of the counterions relative to the
solvent, and the second the convection of the counteri-
ons by solvent motion. The value of J is set by the fact
that the total current I
2πrδJ is known to be of order
10 pA in KBBD’s experiments; up must be of order the
polymer’s translocation speed. Thus, the problem is re-
duced to solving the two “equations” C1 and C2 in the
two unknowns n and up. By substituting reasonable pa-
rameter values, one ﬁnds that the term proportional to
up + ui in Eq. C2 may be dropped. Then, the extra drag
force per length on the polymer is

∼

APPENDIX C: ESTIMATE OF REDUCTION IN
THE DRIVING FORCE

drag
length ∼

2πr

ηui
δ ∼

I
µe

(C3)

In the discussion section, we mentionned two factors
that should reduce the driving force F on the polymer
from the naive value F a/kBT
5. In this appendix, we
present order-of-magnitude estimates of how large a cor-
rection these eﬀects cause. The estimates are based on
the equations of continuum mechanics in a simpliﬁed ge-
ometry and use bulk parameter values. They thus neglect
a number of subtleties, most notably the presence of sig-
niﬁcant numbers of charged groups on the α-hemolysin
pore itself.

≈

We begin by looking at the additional drag on the poly-
electrolyte due to the ﬂow of oppositely charged small
ions through the pore. Consider a cylindrical polymer
of radius r inside a cylindrical pore of radius R, and as-
r between the polymer
sume that the distance δ = R
and the pore satisﬁes δ <
κ−1, where κ−1 is
∼

−
r and δ <
∼

Substituting a typical value of an ionic mobility (in bulk
solution), and multiplying by the channel’s length lch ∼
50˚A, we obtain a drag force of order 10−7dyne due to
the ion-driven solvent ﬂow. This is to be compared to
10−6dyne. We conclude that the presence
5kBT /a
of the counterions in the channel does not signiﬁcantly
reduce F .

≈

×

3

Another factor that we should take into account con-
cerns the assumption that any applied voltage drop V
falls entirely across the channel. In reality, some electric
ﬁeld must “leak” out of the pore, decreasing the force
that drives the polymer. The simplest model in which
one can consider this problem assumes that the bulk so-
lution is neutral and has a constant conductivity σ, so
that the electrical current density and the electric ﬁeld
are related by J = σE. This picture of course does not
hold within a distance κ−1 of the membrane, but should

13

be reasonably accurate on longer length scales. Focus
only on one side of the membrane, so that the pore acts
as a current source injecting a current I at the bound-
ary of an inﬁnite half-space. Far way from the pore, the
current density, and thus the electric ﬁeld, should decay
like 1/r2. In the near ﬁeld, one expects this decay to be
cut oﬀ at a distance of order the pore radius R. Knowing
the current I, we can immediately obtain the electric po-
tential, and thus the voltage drop Vc across the channel,
in terms of the voltage V imposed at inﬁnity. Our rough
estimate gives (in cgs units)

V

Vc ∼

2

−

Z

∞

R

I
2πσr2 dr

∼

I
πσR

.

(C4)

The factor of 2 in front of the integral arises because we
must include the eﬀect of a voltage decrease on both sides
of the membrane. Substituting experimental values for
I, σ, and R, we ﬁnd that this calculation suggests that
Vc diﬀers from V by only a few percent.

It is a pleasure to thank Dan Branton and Jene
Golovchenko for introducing us to this problem and
for numerous helpful discussions. We would also like
to thank Armand Ajdari, Meredith Betterton, Jean-
Fran¸cois Joanny, Didier Long, and Sergei Obukhov for
insightful comments and for pointing out useful refer-
ences. This work was supported by the Harvard Ma-
terials Research Science and Engineering Laboratory
through Grant No. DMR94–00396 and by the National
Science Foundation through Grant No. DMR97–14725.
One of us (D.K.L.) also acknowledges support from a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellow-
ship.

Achter, E. K. and G. Felsenfeld. 1971. The conformation
of single-strand polynucleotides in solution: Sedimentation
studies of apurinic acid. Biopolymers 10: 1625–1634.
Ambegokar, V. and B. I. Halperin. 1969. Voltage due to Ther-
mal Noise in the DC Josephson Eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 22:
1364–1366.
Attardi, G. and G. Schatz. 1988. Biogenesis of mitochondria.
Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4:289–333.
Bezrukov, S. M., I. Vodyanoy, R. A. Brutyan, and J. J.
Kasianowicz. 1996. Dynamics and free energy of polymers
partitioning into a nanoscale pore. Macromolecules 29:8517–
8522.
Binder, K. 1983. Critical behavior at surfaces. In C. Domb
and J. L. Lebowitz eds., Phase Transitions and Critical Phe-
nomena, vol 8. Academic: London.
Bouchaud, J. P. and A. Georges. 1990. Anomalous diﬀusion
in disordered media: Statistical mechanisms, models, and
physical applications. Phys. Rep. 195: 127–293.

14

Burlatsky, S. F. and J. M. Deutch. 1993. Inﬂuence of solid
friction on polymer relaxation in gel electrophoresis. Science.
260: 1782–1784.
Burlatsky, S. F. and J. M. Deutch. 1995. Solid friction in gel
electrophoresis. J. Chem. Phys. 103: 8216–8227.
Cantor, C. R. and P. R. Schimmel. 1980. Biophysical Chem-
istry. Freeman: San Francisco.
Carl, W. 1998. A polymer threading a membrane: Model sys-
tem for a molecular pump. J. Chem. Phys. 108: 7921-7922.
Citovsky, V. and P. Zambryski. 1993. Transport of nucleic acis
through membrane channels: Snaking through small holes.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 47: 167–197.
de Gennes, P. G. 1979. Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics.
Cornell UP: Ithaca.
Deutsch, J. M. 1987. Dynamics of pulsed-ﬁeld electrophoresis.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 59: 1255–1258.
Deutsch, J. M. and Hyoungsoo Yoon. 1997. Macromolecular
separation through a porous surface. J. Chem. Phys. 106:
9376–9381.
Di Marzio, E. A. and A. J. Mandell. 1997. Phase transition
behavior of a linear macromolecule threading a membrane.
J. Chem. Phys. 107: 5510–5514.
Doi, M. and S. F. Edwards. 1986. The Theory of Polymer
Dynamics. Clarendon: Oxford.
Dreiseikelmann, B. 1994. Translocation of DNA across bacte-
rial membranes. Microbiol. Rev. 58: 293–316.
Fisher, D. S., P. le Doussal, and C. Monthus. 1998. Random
walks, reaction-diﬀusion, and nonequilibrium dynamics of
spin chains in one-dimensional random environments. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 80: 3539–3542.
Haken, H., H. Sauermann, Ch. Schmid, and H. D. Vollmer.
1967. Theory of Laser Noise in the Phase Locking Region.
Z. f¨ur Phys. 206: 369–393.
Hanss, B., E. Leal-Pinto, L. A. Bruggeman, T. D. Copeland,
and P. E. Klotman. 1998. Identiﬁcation and characterization
of a cell membrane nucleic acid channel. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 95: 1921–1926.
Herzel, H., E. N. Trifonov, O. Weiss, and I. Große. 1998. In-
terpreting correlations in biosequences. Physica A 249: 449–
459.
J¨ulicher, F., A. Ajdari, and J. Prost. 1997. Modeling molecu-
lar motors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 69: 1269–1281.
J¨ulicher, F. and R. Bruinsma. 1998. Motion of RNA poly-
merase along DNA: A stochastic model. Biophys. J. 74:
1169–1185.
Kasianowicz, John J. and Sergey M. Bezrukov. 1995. Proto-
nation dynamics of the α-Toxin ion channel from spectral
analysis of pH-dependent current ﬂuctuations. Biophys. J.
69: 94–105.
Kasianowicz, John J., Eric Brandin, Daniel Branton, and
David W. Deamer. 1996. Characterization of
individual
polynucleotide molecules using a membrane channel. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 93: 13770–13773.
le Doussal, P. and Vinokur, V. 1995. Creep in one dimension
and phenomenological theory of glass dynamics. Physica C
254: 63–68.
Lee, Namkyoung and Sergei Obukhov. 1996. Diﬀusion of a
polymer chain through a thin membrane. J. Phys II France
6:195–204.
Park, P. J. and W. Sung. 1998a. Polymer release out of a

spherical vesical through a pore. Phys. Rev. E 57: 730–734.
Park, P. J. and W. Sung. 1998b. Polymer translocation in-
duced by adsorption. J. Chem. Phys. 108: 3013–3018.
C.-K. Peng, S. V. Buldyrev, A. L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, F.
Sciortino, M. Simons, and H. E. Stanley. 1992. Long-range
correlations in nucleotide sequences. Nature 356: 168–170.
Peskin, Charles S., Garrett M. Odell, and George F. Os-
ter, 1993. Cellular Motions and Thermal Fluctuations: The
Brownian Ratchet. Biophys. J. 65:316–324.
Risken, H. 1984. The Fokker-Planck Equation. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin.
Schatz, G. and B. Dobberstein. 1996. Common principles of
protein translocation across membranes. Science 271:1519–
1526.
Scheidl, S. 1995. Mobility in a one-dimensional disorder po-
tential. Z. Phys. B 97: 345–352.
Simon, S.M. and G. Blobel. 1991. A protein-conducting chan-
nel in the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 69: 677–684.
Simon, S. M., C. S. Peskin, and G. F. Oster. 1992. What
drives the translocation of proteins? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(USA) 89: 3770–3775.
Smith, S. B., Y. Cui, and C. Bustamante. 1996. Overstretch-
ing DNA: The elastic response of individual double-stranded
and single-stranded DNA molecules. Science 271: 795–799.
Song, L., M. R. Hobaugh, C. Shustak, S. Cheley, H. Bay-
ley, and J. E. Gouaux. 1996. Structure of staphylococcal α-
hemolysin, a heptameric transmembrane pore. Science 274:
1859–1866.
Sung, W. and P. J. Park. 1996. Polymer translocation through
a pore in a membrane. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77: 783–786.
Szab`o, I., G. B`athori, F. Tombola, M. Brini, A. Coppola, and
M. Zoratti. 1997. DNA translocation across planar bilayers
containing Bacillus subtilis ion channels. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
25275–25282.
Szab`o, I., G. B`athori, F. Tombola, A. Coppola, I. Schmehl, M.
Brini, A. Ghazi, V. De Pinto, and M. Zoratti. 1998. Double-
stranded DNA can be translocated across a planar membrane
containing puriﬁed mitochondrial porin. FASEB J. 12:495-
502.
Tinland, B., A. Pluen, J. Sturm, and G. Weill. 1997. Per-
sistence length of single-stranded DNA. Macromolecules 30:
5763–6765.
van Kampen, N. G. 1992. Stochastic Processes in Physics and
Chemistry (2nd ed.). North-Holland, Amsterdam.
J.-L. Viovy and T. Duke. 1994. Technical comment. Science.
264: 112–113.
Yoon, Hyoungsoo and J. M. Deutsch. 1995. Dynamics of a
polymer in the presence of permeable membranes. J. Chem.
Phys. 102: 9090–9095.

FIG. 1. Histogram of number of observed blockade events
versus the lifetime of the blockade, for 210 nucleotide poly[U].
The numbers 1 through 3 label the diﬀerent peaks. From
KBBD (courtesy of Dan Branton, Harvard University). In-
set: Typical time series of the current versus time in the ex-
periments of KBBD, showing a transient blockade due to the
translocation of a polymer (courtesy of Dan Branton, Harvard
University).

FIG. 2. The distribution ψ(t) of passage times plotted
versus t for L/ld = 5. Both quantities are appropriately
non-dimensionalized, t as vt/L and ψ(t) as Lψ(t)/v. The
dashed curve is a Gaussian with the same mean and variance
as ψ(t).

FIG. 3. Plot of the relative width δt/tmax of the peak in the
distribution of passage times, versus ld/L. This curve may be
used to obtain the quick estimate ld
40 nucleotides for the
system studied by KBBD. The dashed curve gives the L
→ ∞
asymptotic behavior, δt/tmax
2ld/L. We have chosen to
∼
put ld/L instead of L/ld along the ordinate to allow smooth
p
contact with this large L behavior.

≈

FIG. 4. vtmax/L plotted versus L/ld. Note that vtmax/L
varies signﬁcantly over the range of L/ld relevant to the ex-
periments of KBBD, and in particular that it does not reach
its asymptotic value of unity until well outside the range of
this plot. Inset: Plot of tmax (nondimensionalized by ld/v)
versus L (nondimensionalized by ld). The dashed line gives
the large L limiting form L/v, the solid line the exact value.
Note that although tmax appears to the eye to depend lin-
early on L over much of the range of the plot, it still diﬀers
signiﬁcantly from L/v.

FIG. 5. Sketch of the sawtooth “cartoon” potential dis-
cussed in the text. The potential has period a, and αa is the
distance from one minimum to the next maximum. The pa-
rameter U0 gives the energy diﬀerence between minimum and
maximum.

FIG. 6. Sketch showing how asymmetry in the potential
can lead to diﬀerent speeds for forwards and backwards mo-
tion. A bias is applied to the unperturbed potential (A) at
top so that it has the same average gradient in the two bot-
tom pictures. The potential at right (B), however, has been
reﬂected through the vertical axis before the gradient is ap-
plied. It thus has larger barriers to hopping from one min-
imum to the next than the potential at left (C), leading to
slower dynamics.

15

FIG. 7. The four possible relative orientations of polymer,
pore, and applied electric ﬁeld. In KBBD’s experiments, the
relative orientation of the pore and ﬁeld is ﬁxed and the ori-
entation of the polymer is allowed to vary, corresponding to
cases B and D. In our microscopic model, the pairs (A, B)
and (C, D) are related by F

F .

7→ −

FIG. 8. Plot of the (nondimensionalized) average velocity
v from equation 9 versus the driving force F a/kBT ; v is calcu-
lated using our microscopic model with a sawtooth potential.
The parameter values are U0/kBT = 10; α = 0.7 for the upper
curve and α = 0.3 for the lower curve. The potentials for the
x). Inset: The
two curves are thus related by U (x)
diﬀusive length ld versus the barrier height U0 of the sawtooth
potential, for ﬁxed driving force F a = 5kBT and asymmetry
α = 0.7. Note that over the entire range of U0, ld <
∼

U (

7→

a.

−

16

1

2

4000

2000

s
e
d
a
k
c
o
B

l

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

1300

ms

A
p

0
5

3

0

0

2000

1000
Lifetime (ms)

1.5

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

v
(cid:144)
L
t
H
 
Ψ
L

0

0

0.5

1
vt (cid:144) L

1.5

2

0.8

0.6

x
a
m

t
 
(cid:144)

t
∆

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2
ld (cid:144) L

0.3

0.4

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

L
(cid:144)

 

x
a
m

t
 

v

d
l

(cid:144)

x
a
m

t
 

v

10

30

25

20

15

5

0

15
L (cid:144) ld

0

5

10

20

25

30

15
L (cid:144) ld

0

5

10

20

25

30

U0

a

a a

A.

Tilt

Reflect then tilt

C.

Large
Barrier

B.

Small
Barrier

pore

E

B.

D.

polymer

A.

C.

a
(cid:144)

d
l

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.14

0.12

0.1

0
D

 
(cid:144)
a
v

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

0

0

5

15

20

10
U0 (cid:144) kBT

1

2

4

5

6

3
Fa (cid:144) kBT

