9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬀect of histamine on the electric activities of cerebellar Purkinje cell

Lin Tang
Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
(January, 1999)

The eﬀect of histamine (HA) on the electric activities of Purkinje cell (PC) is studied on the
cerebellum slice. We ﬁnd that: (1) HA’s main eﬀect on PC is excitative (72.9%); there are also a
small amount of PC showing inhibitive (10.2%) or no (16.9%) response to HA. (2) Diﬀerent from the
conventional opinion, HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC is mutually conducted by H1 and H2 receptors;
the antagonist for H1 receptor could weaken HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC, while the antagonist for
H2 receptor could weaken or even block the excitative eﬀect of HA on PC. (3) PC’s reaction to HA
is related to its intrinsic discharge frequency; there exists a frequency at which PC is highly sensitive
to HA, and well above this frequency PC becomes stable against HA. These results indicate that the
histaminergic aﬀerent ﬁbre can adjust PC’s electric activities by releasing HA, and thereby inﬂuence
the global function of the cerebellar cortex; and that just like the γ region of cerebrum, cerebellum
may also have some sort of characteristic frequency.

Key words: cerebellar cortex; Purkinje cell; histamine; receptor; cerebellum slice

PACS number: 87.10.+e

I. INTRODUCTION

Cerebellum deserves more extensive studies than was
conventionally realized. Historically, cerebellum was
thought of as mainly a motor control organ, while re-
cent researches reveal that it has many other functions,
and it has more intimate connections to other parts of the
brain [1]. Histamine (HA), a neurotransmitter or neuro-
modulator in the brain, plays an important role in the
functions and interactions of various parts of the brain,
and also in the studies of these functions and interactions.
For instance, the neuroanatamic researches revealed the
existence of the hypothalamus-cerebellum histaminergic
path [2,3], and shows that hypothalamus has great in-
ﬂuence on the cerebellar activities and hence plays an
important role in coordinating the functions of the body
and viscera. Besides, HA has the possible role of control-
ling the cerebellar circulation, and HA receptors are also
found in the neurons of the cerebellar cortex [2,3].

Cerebellum is made up of the outer dark matter (cor-
tex), inner white matter, and three pairs of deep nuclei
lying in the heart of the white matter. These nuclei are
the fastigial nucleus FN, interposed nucleus IN, and den-
tate nucleus DN. The aﬀerent ﬁbres to the cerebellum are
mainly from the vestibule, spinal cord, and the cerebral
cortex. They form synaptic connections with the neurons
in the cerebellar deep nuclei and cortex. The synapses of
Purkinje cell (PC) make the eﬀerent ﬁbres of the cerebel-
lar cortex, they are mainly projected into the deep nuclei,
then the neurons there stick out ﬁbres which make the
cerebellar output; a small amount of PC synapses are
directly projected into the vestibular nucleus.

The cerebellar cortex can the divided into three lay-
ers: the (out-most) molecular layer, PC layer, and the
granular layer. It contains three kinds of aﬀerent ﬁbres
(musciform ﬁbre MF, crawl ﬁbre CF, and monoaminer-
gic ﬁbre), and ﬁve kinds of neurons (PC, granular cell

1

GR, basket cell BA, star-like cell ST, and Golgi cell GO).
Hence we see that the cerebellar aﬀerent ﬁbres and the
intermediate neurons, with PC acting as the core, consti-
tute the basic neural circular that is responsible for the
sensory function of the cerebellar cortex, and the cerebel-
lar cortex together with the deep nuclei undertake various
functions of the cerebellum.

In our laboratory there has been studies of HA’s eﬀects
on certain neurons of the cerebellum, such as the granular
cells [3,4], while HA’s eﬀect on the neurons in the cere-
bellar cortex is not yet intensively studied. Considering
that PC is the only eﬀerent neuron of the cerebellar cor-
tex, we are going to investigate HA’s eﬀect on the electric
activities of PC, based on our accumulated experiences
in studying the inﬂuences of aminergic materials such as
norepinephrine (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) on the spon-
taneous and induced discharge activities of the cerebellar
PC; so as to learn more about the role of aminergic af-
ferent system in the process of information treatment in
the cerebellar cortex.

II. EXPERIMENTAL MATERIAL AND METHOD

We use for our experiments 19 mature SD rats (200-
250g). Anaesthetize a rat by injecting betchloramines hy-
drochloride (4mg/100g) into the abdominal cavity, take
out the cerebellum right after cutting the head, wash
the cerebellum with frozen artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(ACSF, 4◦C), stick it onto the operating table of a micro-
tome (at which the cerebellum is soaked in frozen ACSF),
and cut a 400µm thick of arrow-like slice from the vermis.
The process of making the slice should be done within 20
minutes. Then move the so obtained slice into a record-
ing trough, and begin the experiment after 15 minutes of
hatching. The recording trough is continuously irrigated
(3ml/min) by ACSF (33±0.2◦C), and is aerated with the

mixed air of 95%O2 +5%CO2. The concentrations of var-
ious elements in ACSF are (mmol/l): NaCl 124, KCl 5,
KH2PO4 1.2, MgSO4 1.3, CaCl2 2.4, NaHCO3 26, glu-
cose 10. Put a tiny glass electrode (ﬁlled in with colored
conducting ﬂuid) at the PC layer of the X leaﬂet of the
cerebellar cortex to make out-cell records of PC’s dis-
charge activity. This is because the X leaﬂet received the
least mechanical wound in making the slice, and hence
the cerebellum slice should be so put in the recording
trough that the X leaﬂet be well hatched by the ACSF
and the mixed air.

We base on the following criteria to single out PC dis-
charge signals: (1) position of the electrode: PCs in the
cerebellar cortex are of linear type, namely, the cell bod-
ies concentrate at one end and the dendrites stick to the
other end, thereby form a PC layer in the cerebellar cor-
tex. We put the recording electrode at the out side of
the PC layer and near to the molecular layer, therefore
there is very little chance to catch a discharge signal of
the granular cell; (2) discharge wave shape: the PC ac-
tion potential has large magnitude (0.700±0.143µV) and
thick contour [5], moreover, the eﬀective recording dis-
tance of PC discharge is 50µm, much longer than that
of the granular cell (20-30µm) [4]; (3) cell numbers:
in
the cerebellar cortex there are much less GO, ST, and
BA than PC, and hence the discharge signals from these
cells may be ignored.

Because the nerve cells in the brain have the charac-
ter of continuously producing impulses, and often at the
frequency of tens of times per second, the physiological
status of a neuron is usually symbolized by its discharge
frequency. Under the environmental stimulation, the dis-
charge frequencies of central neurons will variate, and the
intrinsic potentials will also deviate. Hence we magnify
the PC discharge signal, choose a relatively small time
constant for the recording system, so as to diﬀerentiate
the input signal and transform the slowly increasing wave
into a sharp high peak wave, then use a pulse discrimina-
tor to convert the peak signal into TTL pulse and input it
into the computer, and then draw the post-stimulus his-
togram. Thus we can describe PC’s reaction to chemicals
by the post-stimulus histogram of its discharge frequency.
All the drugs here are contemporarily compounded us-
ing ACSF, and are used to irrigate the cerebellum slice
separately. When doing the experiments of studying the
receptor mechanism of HA’s eﬀect on PC, the slice is con-
tinuously irrigated by the receptor antagonist for over 10
minutes before by HA.

59 cells with relatively stable spontaneous discharge for
our study. Their spontaneous discharge frequencies range
from 4.48 to 78.32 Hz. We ﬁnd that of the 59 cells, 83.1%
(49/59) are aﬀected by HA, the other 16.9% (10/59)
show no response. And of the 49 responsive ones, 87.8%
(43/49) are excited, the other 12.2% (6/49) are inhib-
ited. (See Fig. 1) Therefore HA’s eﬀect on PC is mainly
excitative. From Figs. 1B, 1C, we can see that there is
an evident increase of the variation of the cell’s discharge
frequency as the irrigating concentration of HA increases.

Excited

Inhibited

No reaction

A

B

C

III. RESULTS

A. The eﬀect of HA on PC’s electric activities

FIG. 1. HA’s eﬀect on PC; (A) shows the percentage of
PC’s various reactions to HA; (B) and (C) show HA’s ex-
citative and inhibitive eﬀects on PC, respectively; numbers
above the bar represent HA’s irrigating concentration.

Because intermittent discharge is often due to the ill
state of PC or indistinguishability of cell discharge sig-
nal from other signals, we choose in 29 cerebellum slices

Another important observation is that whether or
not a PC shows response to HA may have some con-
nection with its spontaneous discharge frequency.
(cf.
Fig. 2) The spontaneous discharge frequencies of the 59

2

tested cells are 4.48-78.32 Hz, while that of the 49 cells
which show response to HA is 21.34±12.69 Hz (M±SD),
this is signiﬁcantly lower than the average frequency
(37.00±7.73 Hz) of the 10 cells unaﬀected by HA. How-
ever, whether a cell is excited or inhibited by HA seems
to have nothing to do with its intrinsic frequency. The
average frequencies of the 43 excited cells and of the 6
inhibited cells are 21.53±13.20 and 20.00±8.80 Hz, re-
spectively, which are not much diﬀerent (P>0.5, t test).
This diﬀers from how HA’s eﬀect on the cerebellar gran-
ular cells is related to their intrinsic frequencies [3]. We
also ﬁnd that among the 49 responsive cells, those who
have higher intrinsic discharge frequencies are more sen-
sitive to HA (there are 8 responsive cells with intrinsic
frequencies higher than 30 Hz, and 7 of them show re-
sponse to HA at the lowest HA concentration of less than
30µmol/l).

on PC. Since HA’s main eﬀect on PC is excitative, we
make study for the excitative eﬀect. For this purpose we
observe the inﬂuences of Triprolidine (hyper-speciﬁc an-
tagonist for H1 receptor) and Ranitidine (hyper-speciﬁc
antagonist for H2 receptor) on PC’s excitative reaction
to HA, and ﬁnd that low-concentration Triprolidine (0.5-
1.0µmol/l) could weaken HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC,
while low-concentration Ranitidine (0.9-1.0µmol/l) could
weaken or even block HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC. (cf.
Fig. 3).

H3 receptor is a presynaptic self-receptor, it adjusts
In this research we
the presynaptic release of HA [2].
have not investigated its role in HA’s excitative eﬀect on
PC.

A

B

C

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
l
l
e
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

s
l
l
e
c
 
e
v
i
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o
 
%

0~10

10~20

20~30

30~40

40~

Excitated

Inhibited

No reaction

A

Responsive

No reaction

B

0~10

10~20

20~30

30~40

40~

Frequency (Hz)

FIG. 2. PC’s discharge frequency and reaction to HA

B. The receptor conducting mechanism of HA’s
excitative eﬀect on PC

FIG. 3. Inﬂuence of receptor antagonist on HA’s excita-
tive eﬀect on PC; (A) shows the normal excitative eﬀect
of HA (50µmol/l) on PC; (B) shows that after irrigating
PC with ACSF containing 0.5µmol/l of Triprolidine for 15
minutes, HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC is signiﬁcantly weak-
ened; (C) shows that after irrigating PC with ACSF contain-
ing 0.9µmol/l of Ranitidine, HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC is
blocked.

IV. DISCUSSIONS

A. Data-taking system

It is known that there are three sub-types of HA recep-
tors in brain: H1, H2, and H3, therefore it is necessary to
study the receptor conducting mechanism of HA’s eﬀect

In this experiment we used the data-taking system:
oscillometer-pulse discriminator-computer, and drawn

3

the post-stimulus histogram, then evaluate PC’s reac-
tion to chemicals by the post-stimulus histogram of
the discharge frequency. The sampling bin width is 3,
point=900, interval=1000, one data represents the dis-
charge times of a cell in one second. Since a cell dis-
charges at very high frequency and its electric signals
transmit at very high speed, it gives very rich information
in one second. We know that the information carried by
a neuron is represented by its frequency distribution over
the action potential, therefore if we can obtain the fre-
quency spectrum, and make the combined analyses of the
frequency and power spectra, we will get greater amount
information. Besides, what we take in this experiment is
out-cell record of a cell’s discharge activities, and PC is
in connection with various other cells in the cerebellum
slice, the measurement in such case may be disturbed by
the environment, and the excitative or inhibitive reac-
tion of PC may actually be a combined result of various
inﬂuences including those from the environment. These
are to be improved in future studies.

B. HA’s eﬀect on PC

Histamine is an important neurotransmitter or neuro-
modulator, and acts as an inter-cell messenger. HA can
hardly penetrate the blood-brain barrier, hence must be
It can be re-
produced by the histaminergic neurons.
leased through depolarization and by means of calcium
dependence. The hypothalamus-cerebellum histaminer-
gic ﬁbres in the brain are casted by the hypothalamus
tuberous mastoid nucleus (HA pericaryon) into the cere-
bellar cortex and the cerebellar deep nuclei (HA nerve
end) [2,3]. Cerebellum-hypothalamus histaminergic sys-
tem can bring about many functions via the inter-cell
messenger HA. The hypothalamus-cerebellum histamin-
ergic projecting ﬁbres end at the cerebellar cortex as
spreading multi-layer ﬁbres, and their nerve ends mainly
spreadingly adjust the functions of the peripheral neu-
rons in the varix form; these are much like the serotonin-
ergic and norepinephrinergic aﬀerent ﬁbres of the cere-
bellum [2,4].

Purkinje cell is the only kind of eﬀerent neuron of the
cerebellar cortex, it is a deformation of the multi-pole
cell, and has very strong dentrite. Our research shows
that PC’s discharge activity is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by
HA. From our observations in Sec. IIIA, and associating
how the reaction of cerebellar granular cells to HA is re-
lated to their intrinsic discharge frequencies [3], we spec-
ulate that the cerebellar aﬀerent ﬁbres might be mainly
responsible for adjusting the basic discharge levels of the
cerebellar neurons: as the discharge frequency of a target
cell lies in a certain region it loses sensitivity to HA; and
as the discharge frequency lies out of this region the cell
reacts to HA, and thereby its frequency tends to that
region. Moreover, the high-frequency region is a low-
sensitivity region to HA, while for the responsive cells,

those with higher frequency are highly sensitive to HA.
We therefore speculate that there exists a critical fre-
quency, a cell with intrinsic frequency near to this critical
point will signiﬁcantly change its states by only a small
amount of HA, while as its frequency goes well above
this point, it becomes stable. In connection with the in-
ﬂuence of NA and 5-HA on the spontaneous and induced
electric activities of cerebellar PC [6], we go further to
speculate that histaminergic and other aminergic aﬀer-
ent systems might, through their coordinations and/or
antagonism, adjust the synaptic transmission eﬃciency
of MF-PF (parallel ﬁbre)-PC and CF-PC, or adjust PC’s
sensitivity to signals from MF and CF, and thereby take
part in the the global process of the sense movement of
the cerebellar neuron net. That many kinds of neural
active materials mutually act on the neuron is a com-
mon pattern of signal transmission of the nerve system;
such mutual action may happen at the presynapse, post-
synapse, or even postreceptor level. HA’s eﬀect on the
cerebellar PC is to adjust the excitativity level of the
neuron and the neuron’s sensitivity to input information
from outside of the cerebellum, and adjust the sleep or
awake state of the cortex. The aminergic aﬀerent ﬁbres
have synaptic or non-synaptic chemical transmission ef-
fect on the cerebellar cortex, their non-synaptic trans-
mission may not encode the fast phase-like information,
but hyperﬁnely adjusts the membrane potential and ba-
sic discharge level or the target neuron.

C. The receptor conducting mechanism of HA’s
excitative eﬀect on PC

Of the three sub-types of HA receptors in the brain
(H1, H2, and H3), H3 receptor is a presynaptic self-
receptor. The acting mechanism of H1 receptor is
through some sub-type of G protein to activate PLC,
hydrolize 4,5-PIP2 to be 1,4,5-IP3 and DG, these two sec-
ondary messengers go further to trigger various biological
eﬀects, such as stimulating endoplasmic reticulum to re-
lease Ca+and thence trigger the ion channels [2]. The H2
receptor brings eﬀect mainly via G protein-AC-cAMP:
HA combines with the H2 receptor of the cell membrane,
the H2 receptor is then deformed and triggers G protein
to give oﬀ its β and γ sub-radicals, and on the α sub-
radical GDP is replaced by GTP, then AC is activated
and catalyzes ATP to transform to cAMP, cAMP acts as
a secondary messenger and triggers a series of reactions,
such as activating PKA and then triggering ion channels,
or directly triggering ion channels. Because many highly
eﬃcient enzymes take part in these reactions, small sig-
nals are magniﬁed step by step.

It is usually thought that H1 and H2 receptors conduct
HA’s excitative and inhibitive eﬀects on neurons respec-
tively [2]. However, this is in contradiction with our re-
port in Sec. IIIB that low-concentration H1 receptor an-
tagonist could weaken HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC, while
low-concentration H2 receptor antagonist could weaken

4

or even block HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC. This makes
us to conjecture that both H1 and H2 receptors involve in
HA’s excitative eﬀect on PC, and H2 receptor is the main
conductor. There has been report that HA’s excitative
eﬀect on the granular cells of the cerebellar cortex and on
the cells of the vestibular inner-side nucleus is mutually
conducted by H1 and H2 receptors [2]. Histochemistry
researches also reveal that in the cerebellar cortex of rat
the density of H2 receptor is higher than that of H1 recep-
tor. All these partly support our conjecture. This may
suggest that the H2-related signal transmission chain in
cell diﬀers from one type of neuron to another, and such
diﬀerence determines whether the H2 receptor conducts
excitative or inhibitive eﬀect; but the particular mecha-
nism of signal transmission is still to be studied.

D. Mathematical simulation

To systematically study the biophysical or biochemi-
cal mechanisms of the reactions of cells, it is often help-
ful to make mathematical simulations of the reactions.
Here we give a simulation for the relation between PC’s
(excitative) reaction to HA (measured by its maximum
variation of discharge frequency under the action of HA
at a certain irrigating concentration) and its intrinsic dis-
charge frequency f0. To be concrete, we choose a ﬁxed
frequency variation A, and denote by u0 the irrigating
concentration of HA at which the maximum change of a
cell’s frequency would be A, then study the relation be-
tween u0 and f0. For this purpose we ﬁrst look at how
the maximum frequency f of a cell under the action of
HA is related to HA’s irrigating concentration u.

As we noted in Sec.

IIIA, PC’s reaction to HA has
something to do with its intrinsic discharge frequency:
high-frequency cells are insensitive to HA, while for the
cells aﬀected by HA, the higher-frequency ones are highly
sensitive to HA, and at low intrinsic frequencies f in-
creases steadily with u. We therefore assume that f is
an S-like function of u:

f (u) = fc/(1 + exp(−(u − uc))).

As u = 0, f (0) is just the intrinsic frequency f0:

f0 = f (0) = fc/(1 + exp(uc)).

(1)

(2)

According to our above explanations, we write

f (u0) = f0 + A = fc/(1 + exp(−(u0 − uc))).

(3)

From Eqs. (2,3) we can derive the u0-f0 relation:

u0 = ln(fc/f0 − 1) − ln(fc/(f0 + A) − 1).

(4)

Here the physiological meaning of fc is the maximum dis-
charge frequency of the cell, and A is an arbitrarily cho-
sen minimum frequency variation that can be observed

in the experiment.
It is straightforward to check that
u0 has a minimum value at an intermediate f0, just as
the experimental results show. Eq. (4) is much like the
relation in the Hopﬁeld model. But further study of the
connection to the Hopﬁeld model would require more de-
tailed knowledge about the relation between f and u,
which is not possible in the present experiment, for PC
cannot live through a long enough time to allow tests for
various HA concentrations; hence the simulation here is
merely a rough one.

E. Characteristic frequency in the cerebellum?

Eqs. (1,4) show a pattern very similar the character-
istic frequency of the cerebrum (the γ region of around
40 Hz): there exist a particular frequency at which the
target cell is highly sensitive to HA, and well above this
frequency the cell loses sensitivity to HA. For PC this
insensitive region is 25.00-46.24 Hz, with the average
37.00±7.72, which is close to the γ region. These suggest
that cerebellum might also exhibit some sort of character-
istic frequency to external stimulations. Further studies
of such characteristic frequency would necessarily take
into account of the interactions of various cell, such as
in the HR model [7]; these we hope to accomplish in the
future.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author owes special thanks to Prof. Jiang-Jun
Wang and Prof. Bing Zhu for valuable instructions, to
Le Tian and Jie Ma for collaborations in this experiment,
and to Feng Dong, Qin Xi, and Guo-Ning Hu for kind
help and suggestions.

[1] See, eg., J.H. Gao, L.M. Parsons, J.M. Bower, J. Xiong, J.
Li, P.T. Fox, Science 272, 545 (1996); Thompson, Science
238, 1729 (1987); and references therein.
[2] J.C. Schwartz et al, Physio. Rev. 71, 1 (1991).
[3] W.C. Li, J.J. Wang et al, Science Bulletin 41, 2269 (1996)

[4] W.C. Li, J.J. Wang et al, to be published.
[5] C.M. Huang, H. Mu and C.F. Hsiao, Brain Res. 619, 313

(in Chinese).

(1993).

[6] J.J. Wang, et al, J. Physio. 48, 581 (1996) (in Chinese).
[7] R.R. Llinas, Science 242, 1654 (1988).

5

