9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MECHANICAL ASPECT OF CHIRALITY

AND ITS BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE

G. Gilat

Department of Physics

Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract

Chirality is not just a structural artifact in biology but it may provide

for a genuine biological advantage. This is due to the phenomenon of chi-

ral interaction (CI) which is described here for mechanical-chiral devices.

The main mechanical feature of chiral interaction is its mode of selecting

one direction of rotation out of two possible and opposite ones. For exam-

ple, a given chiral device such as a rotating water sprinkler, rotates in one

direction. What does rotate in the opposite direction is the mirror of this

given sprinkler. This mode of operation indicates space-time (PT) invariance

which causes it to be also time-irreversible. This also causes a chiral device

to become non-ergodic on microscopic level. This prevents certain chiral sys-

tems from readily reaching thermal equilibrium, and causes the system to act

non-ergodically, which is crucial for living systems as well as for molecular

evolution.

1

I. Introduction

The phenomenon of structural chirality of crystals and molecules has been
recognized since the early 19th century when Arago1 and Biot2 did demon-
strate the eﬀect of optical activity in quartz crystals. Louis Pasteur3 was

the ﬁrst to observe chirality on a molecular level and speciﬁed it as “dis-
symmetry”. The term “Chirality” was ﬁrst proposed by Kelvin4, who also

deﬁned this concept as a property of any object that cannot superimpose, or

overlap, completely its mirror image. It is well known nowadays that most

biological molecules consist only of one out of two possible enantiomers, e.g.,

left-handed (L) amino-acids or right-handed (D) sugars. This phenomenon

leads to an interesting question concerning the origin of such a selection and

there exist several speculations that try to solve this enigma. A considerably

more constructive question to be asked is: “why are the molecules of life

chiral?”, or “is there any biological advantage in their chiral nature when

compared to achiral molecules?” And the answer to be given here is: “Yes”,

and this is regardless of their being L or D. The source of such an advan-

tage comes from a speciﬁc type of interaction that exists between various

mechanical devices and diﬀerent media such as ﬂow of air or water and even

light radiation. What is special about this interaction is the presence of

chiral structure in these devices which makes their mode of operation quite

diﬀerent from other interactions which are based on achiral objects such

as the Newtonian mass point. Such an interaction is to be labeled “chiral

interaction” (CI) and it has already been described and treated in several

2

publications.5−7

It is interesting to note that this phenomenon of chirality

is largely being overlooked in classical mechanics, and only a few physicists

are aware of it.

II Chiral Interaction in Mechanical Devices

As mentioned above Chiral interaction is not limited to molecular struc-

ture only but there exist various mechanical chiral devices that function ac-

cording to the same principle. The most spectacular example is the rotating

windmill. When wind blows at the rotors of a mill it “knows” immediately

in which direction to rotate, clock- or anti-clockwise. If the windmill, in par-

ticular its vanes, were symmetric with respect to their axis of rotation, the

mill would not be able “to make up its mind” in which direction to rotate.

The shape of the vanes that come in contact with the wind is designed to

break the L-D symmetry in order to choose one speciﬁc sense of rotation

out of two possible ones. In other words, the shape of the vanes where they

come in contact with the wind, is chiral. Another simple mechanical chiral

device is the rotating water sprinkler, or the wind propeller. The next ex-

ample, shown in Fig. 1, is somewhat more sophisticated, and it depends on

a diﬀerent mode of chirality. This device is a simple variant of the Crookes’

radiometer. The active medium in this case is light radiation and the element

of chirality consists of two diﬀerent colors on both sides of the rotating blades,

being black and silver, respectively. This is a special example of a physical
rather than a geometric chirality. Physical chirality7,8 is presented by a chiral

distribution of a physical property rather than of a chiral geometric shape.

3

Physical chirality diﬀers from a geometric one in its capability of interacting

with various media surrounding it. In the case of this special example of a

variant of the ordinary Crookes’ radiometer, the physical distribution of the

black and silver colors on the blades represents a large diﬀerence in the light

absorption coeﬃcient of the blades. The silver side reﬂects back the light,

whereas the black side absorbs the light and therefore becomes warmer in

comparison to the silver one. This causes the air at the black side to become

heated and as a result it expands and pushes back the black blade which

ends up in rotating the device in one preferred direction out of two possible

ones, that is, in the direction of the black side of the blade. The selection

of the sense of rotation of the blades is made by the variance of colors on
the blades and their interaction with light. The physical chirality7−8 here is

represented by the distribution of the optical absorption coeﬃcient on the

blades and not by their geometric shape.

So far, all the examples presented here are of mechanical nature, i.e., the

eﬀect of chiral interaction (CI) results in a mechanical rotation in one pre-

ferred direction out of two possible ones around a given axis of the device.

This is so because the source of the interaction, i.e. the medium, usually is

external to the chiral device. In the case of an electric device which gener-

ates a static current ﬂowing in one preferred direction out of two possible

ones, the source of the interaction may be embedded within the device. This

is the case, for instance, of an electric cell which consists of two diﬀerent

electrodes coming in contact with an electrolyte. It is obvious that in order

4

to reverse the direction of the current it is necessary to interchange the two

electrodes with one another, but this does not necessarily require any chiral

operation. This is so because the source of the current ﬂow is internal, so

that the structure of the device can be designed to be completely symmetric,

as is the case of a cylindric battery. In the case of an electric thermocouple,

the operation can still be regarded as CI since the source of the interaction,

i.e. the temperature diﬀerence, is external to the device.

To summarize the main features of CI in mechanical-devices let us no-

tice that in all these examples there exists a speciﬁc medium with which

the chiral device is interacting and this always happens at an interface sep-

arating the device from the active medium. The physical chirality is built

into this very interface. CI is a process by which energy is transferred from

the active medium into the chiral device which causes a rotational motion,

being usually of mechanical nature. The most signiﬁcant aspect of the chiral

interaction process is its mode of selecting only one direction of rotation out

of two possible ones, which is to be attributed to the chiral nature of the

device. The mirror image of the given chiral device, interacting with the

same medium, does produce the same rotational motion in the opposite

direction. This is to be regarded as a main feature of chiral interaction.

The eﬀect of CI on a molecular level is less recognized in comparison

to that of macro-chiral devices. The main reason for this is that CI occurs

5

mainly within the chiral system, or molecule, in the form of a small perturba-

tion which is not easy to detect experimentally. Much more recognizable are

the physical eﬀects associated with molecular chiral structure, such as optical

activity and related eﬀects. These are to be regarded as “chiral scattering”,

rather than CI, since the observable eﬀect concerns the polarized light being

scattered away from the chiral molecule rather than its eﬀect on the molecule
itself which is the chiral interaction7.

A physical model of chiral interaction (CI) in soluble proteins and amino-

acids has already been developed and described in detail in several
publications5−7,9−10. The description here contains only a few main features

of this model. The active medium in this model consists of random mo-

tion of ions throughout the solvent, being mostly regular water. The chiral

element that interacts with these ions is an electric dipole moment that ex-

ists in the protein structure. This interaction causes the moving ion to be

deﬂected away from its original track of motion, which creates a continu-
ous perturbation along the α-helix of which the proteins consist, and this

perturbation moves along the helix in one preferred direction out of two

possible ones. This is an abbreviated description of the model of the CI that

occurs in soluble proteins. A more detailed description appears in earlier
publications.5−7,9−11 The perturbation resulting from this CI is of electric

nature, rather than mechanical one. Another interesting aspect of this CI is

that it happens at an interface separating the interior of the protein molecule

6

from the solvent and this is due to the globular structure of the soluble pro-

tein. It is well known that all soluble proteins become globular before they
can function as enzymes12.

As mentioned above chiral interaction is not easy to observe experimen-

tally on a molecular level due to the smallness of this eﬀect. Nevertheless,

there exists a certain strong supporting evidence owing to an experiment per-
formed by Careri et al.13. This experiment concerns the eﬀect of dehydration

on the protonic, or ionic, motion throughout the hydration layers surround-

ing soluble proteins. The amount of water around each protein is crucial

for free protonic motion around the molecule. By dehydrating these water

layers, a level is being reached when protonic motion becomes awkward and

stops, and so does also, simultaneously, the enzymatic activity of the protein

molecule. On re-hydrating the molecule, protonic motion becomes possible

again and this, in turn, causes also the onset of enzymatic activity of the pro-

tein molecule. This experiment shows that free ionic motion around soluble

protein molecules is crucial for their enzymatic activity.

III Physical Aspects and Biological Signiﬁcance

The main objective of the present article is to draw several physical con-

clusions from the phenomenon of chiral interaction in macro-chiral devices

which are quite diﬀerent from the regular rules that exist in classical physics.

The source of these diﬀerences arises from the presence of chirality as a ma-

jor physical object instead of the Newtonian mass point that plays a basic

7

role in classical mechanics and is also of ideal spherical symmetry, that is,

completely achiral. From these conclusions analogies can be drawn for the

function of molecular chiral systems which may well be of considerable sig-

niﬁcance in molecular biology.

The ﬁrst conclusion concerns the symmetry operation of time-reversibility

that exists in many examples of classical physics. In the case of chiral devices

time-reversibility does not exist. The windmill, for example, rotates about

its axis in a given direction due to its chiral design. Upon reversing time,

the rotational velocity changes its direction, so that it rotates in the opposite

direction. This cannot happen mechanically, since there is no mechanism

in a windmill that can rotate it backward. What is rotating in an oppo-

site direction is the mirror-image of the given windmill but not the given

windmill itself. The meaning of this mode of symmetry operation is that a

windmill is time-irreversible, but it obeys space-time invariance. Let us now
express the space-time inversion by P and T , respectively:

then a windmill

does obey the PT-invariance transformation. The same is true for all the

examples given here of macro-chiral devices. The same is also true for the

protein molecule example. This rule of PT-invariance (or CPT invariance)

is recognized in physics due to the presence of a spin in quantum mechanics,

but is absent in classical physics because the concept of structural chirality in

physics it is largely ignored. This concept appears much more in chemistry

due to the presence of many chiral molecules in organic compounds, but chi-

rality is mostly regarded and treated in chemistry in terms of shape, rather

8

than in its physical properties and contents. For this reason the concept of

CI has so far been largely overlooked in researches concerning chirality.

These space-time symmetry operations for chiral devices contain also a

certain aspect of practicality. This is in contrast to their presence in the

domain of elementary particles in physics. From this view point any time-

reversible process is almost completely useless from any aspect of practical-

ity. For instance, any machine operation that produces a certain function or

object, or any information transfer process are completely time-irreversible.

These include also biomolecular functions such as enzymatic activity and

other processes which are totally time-irreversible. For such reasons of prac-

ticality the function of chiral devices or molecules is of special signiﬁcance in

comparison to the time reversible phenomenon that appears in many physi-

cal operations that involve the presence of the Newtonian mass point.

The next consideration involves the mode of selection where only one

direction of rotation is excited by CI, whereas the opposite direction remains

largely inactive. Judging it from a thermodynamical aspect, what is hap-

pening here is that only one half of the energy that can be activated by the

device is excited by CI whereas the other half remains inactive. On a molec-

ular level this means that only one half of the energy states of the system

are populated by CI become active, whereas the other half remains empty.

In other words the system does not readily reach thermal equilibrium. This

conclusion is of very substantial and signiﬁcant meaning for living systems

9

because reaching thermal equilibriuim means death.

Another way to look at this eﬀect is from the view-point of ergodicity.

This concept was introduced by Boltzmann about a century ago and it re-

gards the mode of approaching thermal equilibrium of a single particle. This

is done in a process of time average instead of an ensemble statistical average.

In view of this, the average velocity of such a particle in any given direction

approaches zero as a function of time. This is not the case if, for instance, the

average angular velocity of a windmill is regarded as a function of time. This

is, actually, true for any eﬀect of CI when averaged as a function of time. The

selection of one direction of motion out of two possible ones, which is typical

of CI, makes its mode of motion to become a non-ergodic entity, which again

causes it to avoid thermal equilibrium. This property of CI on a microscopic

level is, apparently, one of the most crucial advantages that chirality, or CI,

does contribute to molecular biology. It does postpone thermal equilibrium,

or death, for a considerable length of time, so that the biological function

of these molecules can go on and not be aﬀected by approaching thermal

equilibrium.

In this context it is interesting to mention also Schr¨odinger who became

interested in the phenomenon of life and wrote a book “What is Life?” in
194414. His main conclusion in this book was: “It feeds on negative entropy”,

and this is exactly what CI is performing in its mode of selecting only one

10

direction of motion. It is thus reducing the entropy of the system.

In relation to the phenomenon of non-ergodicity it is also important to

mention its relevance to the process of evolution, which is crucial in biology.

It is reasonable to deduce that systems that reach readily thermal equilib-

rium never undergo the process of evolution and remain basically unchanged

forever. Non-ergodic molecular systems have a better chance to undergo

evolutionary changes.

IV Discussion and Conclusions

Another aspect of CI regards the nature of this eﬀect, as well as the

amount of energy that is involved in such a process. In discussing this case

it is not relevant to consider macro-chiral devices and our main concern is

CI of biomolecular systems. Unfortunately, our knowledge, at present, of

this eﬀect is very limited and this is mainly because of the small amount of
energy involved in this eﬀect, being, in fact, subthermal in size5−6,10, which

is quite diﬃcult to observe experimentally. This may evoke criticism as to

its possible signiﬁcance. Such a criticism is rather common among scientists

who tend to attribute signiﬁcance to energy according to its size. What may

be much more signiﬁcant than the amount of energy involved in a process,

is its quality, or degree of sophistication. This is particularly so in complex

systems such as certain biomolecules, proteins for example. The feature of

time-irreversibility of CI does contribute a degree of sophistication. In addi-

tion to this there exist quite a few examples of highly sophisticated modes

11

of energy which require rather minute quantities of energy. For instance, an

information transfer process requires a high degree of sophistication in wave

modulation and its size of energy is relatively small. In comparison, boiling

a kettle of water requires much more energy, but what is its degree of sophis-

tication? Another example is the small amount of energy required to switch

on and oﬀ a much larger source of energy. This example can be regarded as a

mode of control mechanism energy which may also be the signiﬁcance of CI

in biology. Another, rather cruel example, concerns the magnitude of energy

change that occurs over a short time interval during which a creature ceases

to live. The change in energy is quite small but its signiﬁcance is impressive.

In these examples and many others, the amount of energy involved in their

performance is of little interest, but their main eﬀect is in their degree of

sophistication.

It is too early now to attempt to specify any deﬁnite mode of sophisti-

cated performance of CI on a biomolecular level. Such eﬀects have to be

studied further in order to become better understood. The experiment of
Careri et al.13 provides for a supporting evidence for the signiﬁcance of CI

in the enzymatic activity of proteins. It is quite reasonable to assume that

in biology, or in any living substance, the phenomenon of existence of such

modes of highly sophisticated and low energy signals may have an important

function in its life process.

12

In conclusion, let us mention again the signiﬁcance and importance of

the phenomenon of chirality in biology, in particular the features of chiral

interaction (CI) that diﬀer largely from those of classical physics that do

not contain chiral structure in their interactions. These include the PT-

invariance of chiral interaction, which causes it to be time-irreversible. The

selectivity nature of CI by preferring one mode of motion out of two possible

ones, enables CI to become non-ergodic, which is a crucial element in life

processes and biological evolution.

13

References

1. F. Arago, “Memoires de la Classe des Sciences Math. et Phys. de

l’Institut Imperial de France”, Part 1, p. 93 (1811).

2. J.B. Biot, “Memoires de la Classe des Sciences Math. et Phys. de

l’Institut Imperial de France, Part 1, 1 (1812).

3. L. Pasteur, Ann. Chim. 24, 457 (1848).

4. W.T. Kelvin, “Baltimore Lectures”, C.J. Clay & Sons, London (1904).

5. G. Gilat, Chem. Phys. Lett. 121, 9 (1985).

6. G. Gilat, Mol. Eng. 1, 161 (1991).

7. G. Gilat, “The Concept of Structural Chirality”, in “Concepts in Chem-

istry”, Ed. D.H. Rouvray (Research Studies Press and Wiley & Sons,

London, New York, 1996) p. 325.

8. G. Gilat, J. Phys. A.22, p. L545 (1989) ibid Found. Phys. Lett. 3,

189 (1990).

9. G. Gilat and L.S. Schulman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 121 13 (1985).

10. G. Gilat, Chem. Phys. Lett. 125, 129 (1986).

11. G. Gilat, to appear in the Proceedings of a Conference on “Biological

Homochirality”, Serramazzoni, Italy, September 1998.

14

12. H. Tschersche in “Biophysics”, Eds. W. Hoppe, W. Lohmann, H. Markl

& H. Ziegler (Springer Verlag, Berlin 1983) p. 37.

13. G. Careri, A. Giasanti and J.A. Rupley, Phys. Rev. A37, 2763 (1988).

14. E. Schr¨odinger, “What is Life”, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, 1944.

15

Figure 1: A variant of Crookes’ radiometer is an example of chiral interac-
tion (CI). The asymmetry in the optical absorption coeﬃcient between the
black and the silver blades generates a temperature diﬀerence between them
when light is shining at the device. This expands the air close to the black
blade which, in turn, pushes it around the axis AB in the preferred direc-
tion towards the black vane. This is an example of physical rather than of a
geometric chirality

16

