9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pattern formation by competition: a biological example

M. Bezzi
SISSA - Programme in Neuroscience
Via Beirut 2-4 I-34103, Trieste, Italy
bezzi@sissa.it

A. Ciliberto and A. Mengoni
Dipartimento di Biologia Animale e Genetica dell’ Universit`a di Firenze,
V. Romana 17, 50125 Firenze, Italy

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present a simple model based on a reaction-diﬀusion equation to explain pattern formation in a
multicellular bacterium (Streptomyces). We assume competition for resources as the basic mechanism
that leads to pattern formation; in particular we are able to reproduce the spatial pattern formed by
bacterial aerial mycelium in case of growth in minimal (low resources) and maximal (large resources)
culture media.

1

Introduction

Bacteria are unicellular organisms generally studied as isolated units, however they are interactive or-
ganisms able to perform collective behaviour, and a clear marker of the presence of a multicellular
organization level is the formation of growth patterns [1, 2]. Particularly it has been pointed out that un-
favorable conditions may lead bacteria to a cooperative behavior, as a means to react to the environmental
constraints [3].

Many studies about the multicellular level of organization of bacteria have been proposed and pattern
formation during colonies growth has been observed in Cyanobacteria [1], in Bacillus subtilis [1, 4, 5],
in Escherichia coli [1, 6], Proteus mirabilis [1, 2] and others. Some of these patterns have been studied
by mathematical models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], that explain the macroscopic patterns through the microscopic
observations.

There is a group of bacteria that diﬀers from those cited above because their normal morphological
organization is clearly multicellular: Actinomycetes, and Streptomyces is a genus of this group. Strep-
tomycetes are gram-positive bacteria that grow as mycelial ﬁlaments in the soil, whose mature colonies
may contain two types of mycelia, the substrate, or vegetative, mycelium and the aerial mycelium, that
have diﬀerent biological roles [8]. Vegetative mycelium absorbs the nutrients, and is composed of a dense
and complex network of hyphae usually embedded in the soil. Once the cell culture becomes nutrient-
limited, the aerial mycelium develops from the surface of the vegetative mycelium. The role of this type
of mycelium is mainly reproductive, indeed the aerial mycelium develops the spores and put them in a
favorable position to be dispersed [8, 9].

In our laboratory we have isolated a bacterial strain, identiﬁed with morphological criteria as belonging
to Streptomyces. This strain is interesting because its growth pattern diﬀers on maximal and minimal

1

culture media. On maximal culture medium (LB, Luria Broth) [10], after 3 − 4 days of growth at 30◦C,
the strain shows a typical bacterial growth with formation of the rounded colony characteristic of most
of the bacterial strains (Fig. 1) [8]. On minimal culture medium (Fahreus) [11] growth proceeds more
slowly than in maximal media and a concentric rings pattern of aerial mycelium sets up (Fig. 2). The
rings are centered on the ﬁrst cell that sets up the colony - we call it the founder - where usually the
aerial mycelium develops as well. The number of rings increases with time till 7 − 8 after 20 days of
growth at 30◦C. In both cases agar concentration was 1.5%.

The presence of concentric rings patterns is a quite common feature in bacterial and fungi colonies
[12]; many models can originate such patterns [14], a possible explanation was proposed in [13], where is
suggested that the interplay of front propagation and Turing instability can lead to concentric ring and
spot patterns. A diﬀerent approach based on competition for resources has been recently proposed [15, 16]
to study species formation as pattern formation in the genotypic space. We consider a similar mechanism
to investigate the spatial pattern formations observed in our laboratory in a Streptomyces colony.

2 The model

2.1 Biological constraints

Before introducing the mathematical model we have to go through some of the biological features of the
system. Aerial mycelia are connected through the vegetative hypae network. This network has a peculiar
structure in the Streptomyces isolated in our laboratory, indeed we observe that the growing boundary
of the substrate mycelium is made by many hyphae extending radially from the founder so that, in this
area, the substrate mycelium has a radial polarity, also if the hyphae have many branching segments.

Substrate mycelium has the biological objective to ﬁnd nutrients to give rise to spores, therefore we
expect that on minimal media a strong competition arises for the energetic resources between neighbor
substrate mycelia, whereas in maximal media, where there are suﬃcient nutrients, the competition is
weaker.

If the cells are connected mainly along the radial direction, then competition will be stronger along
this direction than along the tangential one.
In other words, in the growing edge of the colony, the
competition is not isotropic but, following the vegetative mycelium morphology, it will be stronger among
cells belonging to neighboring circumferences (radial direction) than among cells of the same (tangential
direction), and we will keep track of these aspects in the model. Although the radial polarity is lost inside
the colony, the asymptotic distribution of aerial mycelium is strongly aﬀected by the initial spots derived
by the growing boundary of the vegetative mycelium.

Finally another important feature of the biological system is the presence of a founder. The founder
behaves as every other aerial mycelium - it competes with the other cell -, moreover it is the center of
every circle. That means that every hypha originates from the founder: it is the source of the vegetative
hyphae, and as the colony grows the ring near the founder become increasingly densely packed. Moreover
during the enlargement of the colony no new center sets up and therefore substrate mycelium density is
highest near the founder and decreases radially away from it.

To summarize, in our model we make the following assumptions based on the previous considerations.

• There is competition among every aerial mycelium for some substances that we assume for sake of

simplicity uniformly distributed over the culture.

• We consider only the aerial mycelium: we do not introduce explicitly the substrate mycelium but

we take in account it assuming that

a) The competition is stronger along the radial direction than along the tangential one.

b) The probability for the aerial mycelium to appear is higher near the founder

2

Assuming this framework we show that a concentric rings pattern may be explained as a consequence
of strong competition, and a rounded pattern of weak competition. From the biological point of view
this result implies that the formation of concentric rings patterns is a mean that Streptomyces adopts to
control growth.

2.2 The mathematical model

In the following we propose a mathematical model to reproduce the aerial mycelium growth patterns
described in the Introduction. This model is derived from a similar model introduced, in a diﬀerent
framework, (species formation in genotypic space) in [15, 16].

Let us consider a two-dimensional spatial lattice, that represents the Petri dish. Each point x is
identiﬁed by two coordinates x = (x1, x2), we study the temporal evolution of the normalized probability
p(x, t) to have an aerial mycelium in x position at time t. The evolution equation for p(x, t), is in the
form:

p(x, t + 1) = A(x, p(x, t))p(x, t)

(1)

where A(x, p(x, t)) is the probability of formation of a new aerial mycelium in position x and we
suppose it can depend also on the distribution p(x, t). According to the hypothesis described above, it is
the product of two independent terms:

A(x, p(x, t)) =

A1(x)A2(x, p(x, t))
A

where A1(x) is the so-called static ﬁtness, and represents the probability of growth of an aerial
mycelium in presence of an inﬁnite amount of resources (no competition). The founder is the source of
every hypha, so we expect it will be a decreasing function of the distance |x| from the founder, with
|x| =

2, assuming the founder occupies (0, 0) position.

1 + x2
x2

p

The second term A2(x, p(x, t)) is the competition term, and in general it depends on the whole spatial
distribution p(x, t), moreover we suppose that two aerial micelia compete as stronger as close they are.
A is the average ﬁtness and it is necessary to have p(x, t + 1) normalized. It is deﬁned as following :

A(t) =

A(x, p(x, t))dx

Both terms are positive, therefore can be written in the exponential form

A1(x)A2(x, p(x, t)) = exp

H1(x) − J

K(d(x, y))p(y, t)dy

Zy

(cid:19)

where J is the intensity of competition (it will be large in presence of strong competition, i.e.
resource level) and K(d(x, y)) is a decreasing function of the distance between two mycelia d(x, y).

low

We also allow p(x, t) to diﬀuse to the nearest neighbors with diﬀusing coeﬃcient µ1.
Finally we get:

exp

H1(x) − J

p(x, t + 1) =

(cid:16)

y K(d(x, y))p(y, t)dy
A(t)

(cid:17)

R

p(x, t) + µ∇2p(x, t)

(2)

According to the assumptions stated in Section 2.1, we now introduce the particular forms for H1(x)
and K(d). H1(x) depends on the distance from the founder H1(x) = H1(|x|), and the competition kernel
K(d), depending on the distance d between mycelia. As mentioned above, we expected the probability

1The presence of diﬀusion is necessary to allow the bacteria to populate the whole lattice

Zx

(cid:18)

3

(3)

(4)

of growth for the aerial mycelium to be higher near the founder, therefore H1(|x|) has to be a decreasing
function of |x|. For the sake of simplicity we have chosen a single maximum, “almost linear” function,

H1(|x|) = h0 + b

1 −

−

|x|
r

1
1 + |x|/r

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

that has a quadratic maximum in x = (0, 0) (founder), in fact close to x = (0, 0) we have h(|x|) ≃
h0 − b|x|2/r2 and for |x| → ∞, is linear h(|x|) ≃ h0 + b(1 − |x|/r). b and r control the intensity of the
static ﬁtness.

The competition kernel K(d) has to be a steep decreasing function of d; we expect to have a ﬁnite
range of competition, i.e. two mycelia at distance d > R do not compete (or compete very weakly). A
possible choice is:

K(d) = exp

−

 

1
4

d
R

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

4

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

!

We have also chosen the form for the kernel (4) and static ﬁtness (3) because it is possible to derive
some analytical results [16] that assure us the existence of a non-trivial spatial distribution for exponential
kernel with exponent greater than 2; R is the range of competition. All the numerical and analytical
results described in this paper are obtained using (3, 4), but we have also tested similar potential obtaining
the same qualitative results.

Computing numerically from Eq. (2) the asymptotic probability distribution p(x) ≡ p(x, t)t→∞, we
get, for diﬀerent values of the parameters, two types of spatial patterns. In particular numerical and
analytical studies (see Ref. [16]) show that the crucial parameter is G = (J/R) / (b/r), i.e. the ratio
between the intensity of competition and the intensity of the static ﬁtness.

For small values of G, that is the competition is rather weak or in other words we have a maximal
medium, we get a single peak gaussian-like distribution centered on the founder (similar to the one showed
on the left in Fig. 5 (left) with G = 0.5).

For larger values of G we get a multi-peaked distribution (see Fig. 3, G = 248.0), where the central
peak (founder) is still present, but we get also some others peaks at an approximate distance R, range of
competition, between each other. This is the expected pattern for an isotropic competition, in fact the
presence of equally distanced spots is due to the competition term, that inhibits the growth of any aerial
mycelium around another one.

To obtain spatial patterns similar to the concentric rings observed in our experiments, some feature
of the peculiar spatial structure of Streptomyces has to be added. As stated before, we hypothesize that
due to the presence of the substrate mycelium morphology the competition is much stronger in the radial
direction (along the hyphae) than in the tangential direction.

Therefore we decompose the distance between any points x and y in a radial dR(x, y) and tangential

part dT (x, y)2 (see Fig. 4)

d(x, y)2 = dR(x, y)2 + αdT (x, y)2

(5)

where α is a parameter that allows to change the metric of our space.
For α > 1 the relative weight of tangential distance is larger than one due to the lack of cell com-
munications along this direction, the competition is mainly radial along the hyphae because the mycelia
do not compete if they are not directly connected by an hypha. For α = 1 we get the usual euclidean
distance.

Using the distance (5) in Eq.(2) with α > 1 and strong competition we are able to obtain a set of
rings composed by equally spaced spots at ﬁxed distances from the founder (see Fig. 5 (right) for α = 6),
while in presence of large resource we still have a single peaked distribution (Fig. 5 (left)). For larger

4

values of α the rings become continuous, while for low values, α → 1, the multi-peaked structure of p(x)
appears.

These results are in agreement with those presented in Ref. [16], where an one-dimensional system is
considered. In this case the genotypic space plays the role of the real space, and using and a gaussian
kernel

K(d) = exp

−

 

!

1
2

d
R

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

r
R

Gc(

) ≃ Gc(0) −

r
R

is possible to derive analytically the value of transition Gc between the two regimes (single peaked and
multi-peaked distribution). It is, for µ → 0 (slow diﬀusion) and r

R → 0 (static ﬁtness almost ﬂat)

with Gc(0) = 2.216 . . .. Thus for G > Gc( r
only the ﬁttest one survives (single-peaked distribution).

R ) we have a multi-peaked distribution, while for G < Gc( r
R )

3 Discussion and conclusions

We isolated a strain of Streptomyces that has a dual pattern of growth concerning the aerial mycelium:
it gives rise to concentric rings centered on the founder cell, or to the classic circular bacterial colony.
The medium is discriminant:
in minimal media the ﬁrst type of pattern arises, in maximal media the
second one.

The substrate mycelium follows a diﬀerent pattern: optical microscopy observations revealed that
every hypha originates from the primordial central colony (the founder). Moreover the growth of the
substrate mycelium growing edge proceeds in radial direction from the founder.

Using a simple mathematical model for the formation of aerial mycelium we are able to simulate both
aerial mycelium spatial patterns. The parameter we modulate to obtain these two diﬀerent patterns
is the competition intensity.
Indeed the main assumption of the model is that there is competition
among the hyphae of vegetative mycelia for the energetic sources necessary for the formation of the aerial
In a medium with low nutrient concentration there is a strong competition for the aerial
mycelium.
mycelium formation - and the model produces concentric rings patterns - instead in a maximal medium
the competition is weaker - and the model produces the classic circular bacterial colony.

The aerial mycelium is derived by the substrate mycelium, so we derived the constraints of the model
from the morphological observations concerning the substrate mycelium described in the Introduction.
The system has a radial geometry centered on the founder (the probability of formation of aerial mycelium
is higher near the founder), and we assumed that the competition is aﬀected by this feature. Indeed the
competition is stronger along an hypha due to the cell-cell communication typical of the “multicellular”
organization of Streptomyces. This implies that the competition is stronger along the radial direction
than along the tangential, at least in the outer boundary of the colony.

The growth pattern description above is referred to the presence of one single primordial colony. In
presence of two or more colonies close one another we have observed diﬀerent patterns with additive and
negative interactions among the colonies. Our minimal model is not able to reproduce these behaviors,
due to the fact that in presence of many founders the simple assumptions of radial growth centered on a
single founder is no more fulﬁlled.

In conclusion we have found some peculiar spatial patterns for the aerial mycelium of Streptomyces.
We have proposed a simple mathematical model to explain these patterns assuming competition along the
hyphae as the main ingredient that leads to pattern formation. Our numerical results are able to reproduce
spatial patterns obtained experimentally under diﬀerent conditions (minimal and maximal medium), while
to get more complex behavior (interference patterns, see Fig. 6) we expect more “chemical” species have
to be added to our minimal model.

5

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank F. Bagnoli, M. Buiatti, R. Livi and A. Torcini for fruitful discussions. M.B. and A.C.
thank the Dipartimento di Matematica Applicata “G. Sansone” for friendly hospitality.

6

References

[1] J. A. Shapiro, Sci. Am. 89 62, (1988).

[2] J. A. Shapiro, D. Trubatch, Physica D 49 214 (1991).

[3] E. Ben-Jacob, O. Shochet, A. Tenenbaum, I. Cohen, A. Czirok, T. Vicsek, Nature, 368, 46 (1994)

[4] T. M. Matsuyama, M. Matsushita, Crit. Rev. Microb. 19, 117 (1993).

[5] E. Ben-Jacob, I. Cohen, Cooperative formation of bacterial patterns. In Bacteria as multicellular

organisms. Eds. J. A. Shapiro and M. Dworkin, Oxford University Press (1997).

[6] E. Ben-Jacob, I. Cohen, O. Shochet, I. Aranson, H. Levine, L. Tsimiring, Nature 373 566 (1995).

[7] M. Matsushita, Formation of colony patterns by a bacterial cell population. In Bacteria as multicel-

lular organisms. Eds. J. A. Shapiro and M. Dworkin, Oxford University Press (1997).

[8] K.F. Chater: Morphological and physiological Diﬀerentiation in Streptomyces. In Microbial Devel-

opment, Ed. Lasick R. and Shapiro L., Oxford University Press (1984).

[9] E.M. Miguelez, C. Martin , M.B. Manzanal and C. Hardisson, FEMS Microbiology Letters 100 351

(1992).

Laboratory press, NY (1989).

[10] J. Sambrook, E.F. Fritsch, T. Maniatis, Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor,

[11] J.M. Vincent, A manual for the practical study of root-nodule bacteria. Blackweel Scientiﬁc Publica-

tions, Oxford (1970).

[12] J. Adler, Science 153, 708 (1966).

[13] L. Tsimring et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1859 (1995).

[14] Matsushita et al., Physica A, 249, 517 (1998).

[15] F. Bagnoli and M. Bezzi: Competition in a Fitness Landscape. In Fourth European Conference on

Artiﬁcial Life, Eds. P. Husbands and I. Harvey , MIT Press (1997).

[16] F. Bagnoli and M. Bezzi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3302 (1997).

7

Figure 1: Pattern formed by Streptomyces growing in maximal culture media. See details in the text.

Figure 2: Pattern formed by Streptomyces growing in minimal culture media. See details in the text.

8

Figure 3: Asymptotic distribution p(x) for isotropic competition (α = 1) plotted in inverse gray-scale,
i.e. black p(x) = 0, white p(x) = 1, in low resource case: µ = 0.015, h0 = 0, b = 0.05, r = 2, J = 56.0
and R = 9. The discretization of space (square lattice) for numerical solution of Eq. 2) is clearly evident.

(0 ,0 )

Figure 4: Decomposition of the distance between any points x and y in a radial dR(x, y) and tangential
part dT (x, y)2 with respect to a circle centered in the founder placed in (0, 0).

(y ,y )2

1

dd

(x ,x )
(x ,x )

2

1

d T

d

R

9

Figure 5: Asymptotic distribution p(x) for diﬀerent values of parameters, plotted in inverse gray-scale,
i.e. black p(x) = 0, white p(x) = 1. Left (large resources): µ = 0.015, h0 = 0, b = 0.1, r = 2, J = 0.1
and R = 4. Right (low resources): µ = 0.015, h0 = 0, b = 0.05, r = 2, J = 56.0 and R = 9.

Figure 6: Interference pattern formed by Streptomyces colonies growing in minimal culture media.

10

