IPT: October, 1999/ Abstract for APS Meeting/

A biological junction with quantum-like characteristics

Alex A. Samoletov
NASU - Institute for Physics and Technology
72 Luxembourg Str., 340114 Donetsk, Ukraine
samolet@kinetic.ac.donetsk.ua

A model of chemical synapse as an electric junction is proposed. Estimations and anal-
ysis of the model show that the junction has unique physical characteristics reminding
the Josephson junction. The basic assumption is made that the electric coupling across
the synaptic gap is indirectly provided by means of approximately quantized portions of
a chemical mediator, each the portion is content of a synaptic bubble. We suppose that
eﬀective quantum of charge is q, |q| ≫ |e|. The synapse characteristics are dominated by
electrostatic energy, Q2/2C, Q = qN, N = 0, 1, 2...; where C is electric capacity of mem-
brane. Estimations show that the integer-valued character of N must be explicitly taken
into account. The consistent theory of the junction is constructed on the basis of operator
realization of number-phase canonical pair in the Hardy space. The charge passing from one
side of the junction to other is described by the Toeplitz operators. The synapse state space
is constructed explicitly. The unique physics of the model is investigated in detail. We do
not exclude the possibility that the model is prototype of a molecular electronics device.

9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

IPT: March, 1999/ Conference Paper/ ICSSUR’99/

A model of mesoscopic junction:
The beneﬁts of number-phase operators
(application in biophysics)

Alex A. Samoletov
NASU – Institute for Physics and Technology
72 Luxembourg Str., 340114 Donetsk, Ukraine
samolet@kinetic.ac.donetsk.ua

In this talk we present a primary approach to the physical modeling of a chemical
synapse as the quantum-like junction in a nearly closed loop of a self-synapsing neu-
ron. We consider such kind of biological systems as a candidate for detecting and
processsing of microwave radiation. Explicit realization of the state space and the
junction Hamiltonian operator are constructed consistently.

The inﬂuence of electromagnetic waves, especially of microwave radiation, on biological
systems has attracted much interest for a long time. In particular, active areas of research
have been the study of the results of radio- and microwave radiation eﬀect in biological
populations, or the possible inﬂuence of usual household electrical appliances of the new
generation on humans and others living systems, or an accident prevention in industry.
These investigations are of interest mainly from a phenomenological viewpoint since the
works on cellular or molecular level are rare up to now. They are also of interest from
the point of view of understanding how the electromagnetic waves of diﬀerent frequency
and power aﬀect biological systems. By the way, there were the rumors that in the former
USSR the building of the USA Embassy in Moscow has been exposed to low-level microwave
radiation during of many years. On the other hand, it seems that the interest of physicists in
this subject is concentrated also in the ﬁeld of macroscopic electrodynamics phenomenology,
being quite less rich that electrodynamics of complex nonequilibrium cellular- and molecular-
level biological systems.

At the present time, at least in Donetsk, Ukraine, there is the oﬃcial medical institution
for therapy and research, Hospital ”Sitko”– MRT (microwave therapy), where treat patients
with extremely low-level microwave radiation by the special procedures. Thus, some aspects
of the microwave therapy are clinically tested.

The present work was originally motivated by the desire to understand a possible mech-
anism of the eﬀect of a low-level microwave radiation on biological objects such as humans
(or rats, for example),– and on a cellular level, beyond the phenomenology. It is in con-
nection with the microwave therapy. On the other hand, the desire was inspired by the
recent works in the ﬁeld of neurophysiology. Namely, our model accepts a hypothesis which
is based on the existence of in a sense mesoscopic self-synapsing neurons, neurological loops
with chemical synapses. The experimental evidence that such the loops are really existing
has been recently reported [1] (concerning young rats).

2

In the present talk, we set up the physical model and the basic theoretical framework
we shall need for the study of detection and processing of extremely low-level microwave
radiation by the biological systems on the cellular level. The results we present here will be
used in the following works.

Before starting to work out the physical model and its relations with the biological
system, it may be worth getting some idea of what it is about, in particular what is a
synapse and what is a junction. Of course, in a schematic, without any details, way.

Above all, let us to give some preliminary idea about the neurological system under
consideration. A typical neuron has about 103 ÷ 104 synapses. Self-synapsing neuron is a
nearly closed, circular loop of electrically excitable (neuron membrane) conducting material,
the biological loop of axon and its dendrite, of in a sense mesoscopic size (to be deﬁned
below). The thickness of a neuron membrane is about 50˚A and the electric capacity of
membrane is about 1µF/cm2. The loop contains a gap. It is the gap of a synapse (usually
∼ 102˚A). We suppose that it is a chemical synapse. It means that the electrical coupling
across the synaptic gap is indirectly provided by means of quantized portions of chemical
mediator. Each the portion, the content of a synaptic bubble, contains about 103 molecules
of a chemical mediator. We suppose that an eﬀective ”quantum” of charge in synapse is
about 103e. For further relevant and more detailed information concerning neurons, synapses
and all that we refer the reader to [2].

Then, the notion ’mesoscopic junction’ is generic for a wide class of the physical systems.
The tunnel junction is a prototype the junction class, of course the last has the matter
far beyond this, that illustrates the relevant physical phenomena and the corresponding
theoretical prolegomena. Physical systems like mesoscopic junctions are widely established
in current physical literature.

Here, beginning with the simple physical model of a complex biological junction, we
construct the consistent quantum-like theory of mesoscopic junctions including the explicit
realizations of the model state space and the Hamiltonian operator as an operator in this
space, and in what follows we describe in this frame the corresponding dominant physical
eﬀects together with application to the biological system, such as a self-synapsing neuron,
which is treated as a candidate on the role of detector and processor of microwave radiation
in biological systems.

The physical model consists in the following. A self-synapsing neuron system is idealized
as a circular loop of electrically conducting material. The synaptic gap in this loop is
modeled as a junction of relatively small capacity C . Really it is a system of two membrane
capacities connected by physiological solvent; however, it is easy to ﬁnd the arguments
that we can replace this system by single eﬀective capacity (e.g., the resistance across a
synapse is dominated by the membranes). But, on the other hand, the charge carriers in
this junction are ”quantized” due to chemical nature of the synapse.
It means that an
eﬀective elementary charge Q may be considerably greater then the charge of electron and
every additional charge Q will change electrostatic energy on the junction substantially.
Under the such conditions the role of charge energy on the junction increase and we must to
take the quantum-like nature of the eﬀective charge into account. All that is the ﬁrst part
of the system mesoscopicity condition mentioned above. The second one is the geometric
size (radius) of the loop. This second aspect is connected with the fact that magnetic ﬁelds

3

penetrate biological tissue much more eﬀectively then electric ﬁelds and thus the geometric
size of the loop is directly connected with magnetic ﬂux through the loop, and will dominate
in detection and processing of microwave radiation, for example, by means of a depolarization
of the membrane and an induced exit of a mediator into the synaptic gap. But it is the
topic of another paper.

In order that the model be more mathematically formulated, it is suﬃciently to deﬁne the
character of relevant macrovariables. We set the number N of Q carriers as the characteristic
macrovariable. Further, we assume that in respect of the characteristic macrovariable an
homogeneous state on the junction is realized. And also we take into account the discreteness
(”quantization” by Q) of a charge magnitude on the junction explicitly. This implies that
the relevant is setting as fundamental the canonical pair of the action-angle (number-phase)
operators realized on a proper state space; we realize the state space as the Hardy space H2
(e.g., [3]).

In this point the principal from the theoretical point of view and crucial for the theory
question is arising: How much a wealth of material can be extracted from the model to be
restricted to the fact of discreteness of a charge carriers and under conditions of a system
mesoscopicity (e.g., concerning electric capacity, inductance or geometric size)? The answer
to this question give us the key to a lot of the problems.

Then, there are usual arguments that after a coarse-graining procedure a quantum-like
energy operator, the Hamiltonian operator H, is a function of the variable N only. By the
way, it is in perfect harmony with Ginzbirg–Landau phenomenology. Indeed, if the canonical
pair of operators (N, Φ) , [Φ, N] = i, is deﬁned in the Hardy space H2 (it is reasonable way)
then using isometry H2 → L2 and the Wigner phase-space representation together with the
corresponding formula:

Tr exp (−βH) =
exp (−βF (ψ)) ≡ 2 [exp (−βH)]W (ψ) , ψ ∈ C1,

d2ψ exp (−βF (ψ)) ,

Z

where [· · ·]W denotes the Wigner–Weyl symbol of the corresponding operator (in L2),– and
with identifying F (ψ) as the Ginzbirg–Landau free energy, we obtain F (ψ) = F0 + A |ψ|2 +
2B |ψ|4+···, where F0, A, B, ... are explicitly given if there is given the operator H . Inversely,
1
by a given free energy F (ψ) we obtain H = H (N) = H0 − β−1
(n) ((−1)n /n!) KnN n,
where the coeﬃcients are explicitly given if there is given the function F (ψ); {Kn} have the
structure of cumulants. Note, that evaluation procedure of this point is of interest in its
own right.

P

Let us now return back to model of the biological junction together with the number of
Q carriers as the distinctive variable, and start from the problem of two sides, 1 and 2, of
a synapse coupled by this junction. Firstly, if we neglect the coupling between sides 1 and
2, the Hamiltonian operator breaks into two parts H1 + H2 . Further, if no external voltage
is applied on the junction, the chemical potential on the sides 1 and 2 are equal. It means
that between the states (N1, N2) and (N1 − ν, N2 + ν), ν ∈ Z , no diﬀerence.

Let us now allow a coupling between 1 and 2. It can be splited into two parts: (1) elec-
trostatic, with a capacity C; (2) a charge passing from one side to other with the extracting,
for example, of Q in 1 and bringing it in 2 .

4

Let us now realize the state spaces of 1 and 2 as the Hardy spaces H2 and deﬁne in
these spaces the pairs of the number-phase operators (N1, Φ1) and (N2, Φ2) , [Φk, Nl] = iδkl,
k, l = 1, 2; together with the Toeplitz partially isometric one-sided translation operators T 1
,

+
−

+
−

. And let

T 2
n
case we can construct the state space as H =H2

e(1)
n
n

e(2)
n

and

are the standard basis in H2

o

o

1⊗H2

1 and H2

2 correspondingly. In this

2, and deﬁne the following operators

N0 = N1 ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ N2, N = N1 ⊗ 1 − 1 ⊗ N2,

Φ =

(Φ1 ⊗ 1 − 1 ⊗ Φ2) ,

1
2

with the commutation relations

[Φ, N0] = 0,

[Φ, N] = i,

on a dense domain in H. We suppose also that N0 is ﬁxed. The pair (N, Φ) is principal
set of operators. It is easy to see that it is convenient to take H2
2 , where
∞
H2
− is the subspace of L2 = L2 (C1,dϕ/2π) spanned on {e−n}
0 . It implies some evident
overdetermination.

− instead of H2

At a given N0, N can takes (2N0 + 1) values. Under this condition we can explicitly
realize H as the subspace of the Laurent space L2. In this way we will be prepared to take
down a junction Hamiltonian explicitly:

H = H0 +

N 2 + T,

1
2C

T = t (T+ + T−) ,

where C is electric capacity and T is operator of extracting a charge in 1 and bringing it in
2: T = t1 (T+ + T−) + t2

+ ... , – most probably

+ + T 2
T 2
−

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

and we can choose t real.

As ﬁrst test of the model presented we can make passage to “classical” limit of the
corresponding equations of motion. Note, that using the Wigner phase-space representation
as well as the coherent states representation we obtain the equations are analogous to known
Josephson equations.

In conclusion, we hope that the model has enough wealth of detail relevant to biological

insight as well as interesting physics. But that is all for this primary presentation.

Acknowledgments This work was supported in part by National Foundation for Basic
Research (Grant No. F4/310-97).

————————————————————

[1] J. Lubke and oths, J. of Neuroscience 16, 3209 (1996).

[2] G.M. Sheppard, Neurobiology (Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1983).

[3] K. Hoﬀman, Banach Spaces of Analytical Functions (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, 1962).

5

