FRACTAL FEATURES OF DARK, MAINTAINED,
AND DRIVEN NEURAL DISCHARGES
IN THE CAT VISUAL SYSTEM

Steven B. Lowen
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Boston University
8 Saint Mary’s St., Boston, MA 02215
Email: lowen@bu.edu

Tsuyoshi Ozaki
The Rockefeller University
1230 York Ave., New York, NY 10021
Email: yoshi@camelot.mssm.edu

Ehud Kaplan
Department of Ophthalmology
Mt. Sinai School of Medicine
One Gustave Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029
Email: kaplane@rockvax.rockefeller.edu

Bahaa E. A. Saleh
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Boston University
8 Saint Mary’s St., Boston, MA 02215
Email: besaleh@bu.edu

9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Malvin C. Teich*
Departments of Electrical & Computer Engineering, and Biomedical Engineering
Boston University
8 Saint Mary’s St., Boston, MA 02215
Email: teich@bu.edu

*Corresponding author
(617) 353-1236 (telephone)
(617) 353-6440 (fax)

Running title: Fractal features of visual-system action potentials

1

1 Abstract

We employ a number of statistical measures to characterize neural discharge activity in cat
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and in their target lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) neurons
under various stimulus conditions, and we develop a new measure to examine correlations
in fractal activity between spike-train pairs. In the absence of stimulation (i.e., in the dark),
RGC and LGN discharges exhibit similar properties. The presentation of a constant, uniform
luminance to the eye reduces the fractal ﬂuctuations in the RGC maintained discharge
but enhances them in the target LGN discharge, so that neural activity in the pair no
longer mirror each other. A drifting-grating stimulus yields RGC and LGN driven spike
trains similar in character to those observed in the maintained discharge, with two notable
distinctions: action potentials are reorganized along the time axis so that they occur only
during certain phases of the stimulus waveform, and fractal activity is suppressed. Under
both uniform-luminance and drifting-grating stimulus conditions (but not in the dark), the
in contrast
discharges of pairs of LGN cells are highly correlated over long time scales;
discharges of RGCs are nearly uncorrelated with each other. This indicates that action-
potential activity at the LGN is subject to a common fractal modulation to which the RGCs
are not subjected.

2 Introduction

The sequence of action potentials recorded from cat retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and lateral-
geniculate-nucleus (LGN) cells is always irregular. This is true whether the retina is in the
dark [1, 2], or whether it is adapted to a stimulus of ﬁxed luminance [3, 4, 5, 6].
It is
also true for time-varying visual stimuli such as drifting gratings. With few exceptions,
the statistical properties of these spike trains have been investigated from the point-of-view
of the interevent-interval histogram [3], which provides a measure of the relative frequency
of intervals of diﬀerent durations. The mathematical model most widely used to describe
the interevent-interval histogram under all of these stimulus conditions derives from the
gamma renewal process [7], though point processes incorporating refractoriness have also
been investigated [3, 8, 9].

However, there are properties of a sequence of action potentials, such as long-duration
correlation or memory, that cannot generally be inferred from measures that reset at short
times such as the interevent-interval histogram [6, 10]. The ability to uncover features such
as these demands the use of measures such as the Allan factor, the periodogram, or rescaled
range analysis (R/S), which can extend over time (or frequency) scales that span many
events. RGC and LGN spike trains exhibit variability and correlation properties over a
broad range of time scales, and the analysis of these discharges reveals that the spike rates
exhibit fractal properties.

Fractals are objects which possess a form of self-similarity: parts of the whole can be
made to ﬁt to the whole by shifting and stretching. The hallmark of fractal behavior is power-
law dependence in one or more statistical measures, over a substantial range of the time or
frequency scale at which the measurement is conducted [11]. Fractal behavior represents
a form of memory because the occurrence of an event at a particular time increases the

2

likelihood of another event occurring at some time later, with this likelihood decaying in
power-law fashion. Fractal signals are also said to be self-similar or self-aﬃne.

This fractal behavior is most readily illustrated by plotting the estimated ﬁring rate of
a sequence of action potentials for a range of averaging times. This is illustrated in Fig. 1A
for the maintained discharge of a cat RGC. The rate estimates are formed by dividing the
number of spikes in successive counting windows of duration T by the counting time T .
The rate estimates of the shuﬄed (randomly reordered) version of the data are presented in
Fig. 1B. This surrogate data set maintains the same relative frequency of interevent-interval
durations as the original data, but destroys any long-term correlations (and therefore fractal
behavior) arising from other sources, such as the relative ordering of the intervals.

Comparing Figs. 1A and B, it is apparent that the magnitude of the rate ﬂuctuations
decreases more slowly with increasing counting time for the original data than for the shuﬄed
version. Fractal processes exhibit slow power-law convergence: the standard deviation of the
rate decreases more slowly than 1/T 1/2 as the averaging time increases. Nonfractal signals,
such as the shuﬄed RGC spike train, on the other hand, exhibit ﬂuctuations that decrease
precisely as 1/T 1/2. The data presented in Fig. 1 are typical of all RGC and LGN spike
trains.

3 Analysis Techniques

3.1 Point Processes

The statistical behavior of a neural spike train can be studied by replacing the complex
waveforms of each individual electrically recorded action potential (Fig. 2, top) by a single
point event corresponding to the time of the peak (or other designator) of the action po-
tential (Fig. 2, middle). In mathematical terms, the neural spike train is then viewed as an
unmarked point process. This simpliﬁcation greatly reduces the computational complexity
of the problem and permits use of the substantial methodology previously developed for
stochastic point processes [6, 10, 11].

The occurrence of a neural spike at time tn is therefore simply represented by an impulse

δ(t − tn) at that time, so that the sequence of action potentials is represented by

s(t) = X

δ(t − tn)

n

A realization of a point process is speciﬁed by the set of occurrence times of the events, or
equivalently, of the times {τn} between adjacent events, where τn = tn+1 − tn. A single real-
ization of the data is generally all that is available to the observer, so that the identiﬁcation
of the point process, and elucidation of the mechanisms that underlie it, must be gleaned
from this one realization.

One way in which the information in an experimental sequence of events can be made
more digestible is to reduce the data into a statistic that emphasizes a particular aspect of
the data, at the expense of other features. These statistics fall into two broad classes which
have their origins, respectively, in the sequence of interevent intervals {τn} illustrated at the
lower left of Fig. 2, or in the sequence of counts {Zn} shown at the lower right of Fig. 2.

3

3.1.1 Examples of Point Processes

The homogeneous Poisson point process, which is the simplest of all stochastic point pro-
cesses, is described by a single parameter, the rate λ. This point process is memoryless: the
occurrence of an event at any time t0 is independent of the presence (or absence) of events
at other times t 6= t0. Because of this property, both the intervals {τn} and counts {Zn}
form sequences of independent, identically distributed (iid) random variables. The homoge-
neous Poisson point process is therefore completely characterized by the interevent-interval
distribution (which is exponential) or the event-number distribution (which is Poisson) to-
gether with the iid property. This process serves as a benchmark against which other point
processes are measured; it therefore plays the role that the white Gaussian process enjoys in
the realm of continuous-time stochastic processes.

A related point process is the nonparalyzable ﬁxed-dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point
process, a close cousin of the homogeneous Poisson point process that diﬀers only by the
imposition of a dead-time (refractory) interval after the occurrence of each event, during
which other events are prohibited from occurring [9]. Another cousin is the gamma-r re-
newal process which, for integer r, is generated from an homogeneous Poisson point process
by permitting every rth event to survive while deleting all intermediate events [6]. Both
the dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point process and the gamma renewal process require two
parameters for their description. All the examples of point process presented above belong
to the class of renewal point processes, which will be deﬁned in Sec. 3.2.1.

However, spike trains in the visual system cannot be adequately described by renewal
point processes; rather, nonrenewal processes are required [6]. Of particular interest are
fractal-rate stochastic point processes, in which one or more statistics exhibit power-law
behavior in time or frequency [11]. One feature of such processes is the relatively slow
power-law convergence of the rate standard deviation, as illustrated in Fig. 1A. We have
previously shown that a fractal, doubly stochastic point process that imparts multiscale
ﬂuctuations to the gamma-r renewal process provides a reasonable description of the RGC
and LGN maintained discharges [6].

3.2

Interevent-Interval Measures of a Point Process

Two statistical measures are often used to characterize the discrete-time stochastic process
{τn} illustrated in the lower left corner of Fig. 2. These are the interevent-interval histogram
(IIH) and rescaled range analysis (R/S).

3.2.1 Interevent-Interval Histogram

The interevent-interval histogram (often referred to as the interspike-interval histogram or
ISIH in the physiology literature) displays the relative frequency of occurrence pτ (τ ) of
an interval of size τ ; it is an estimate of the probability density function of interevent-
interval magnitude (see Fig. 2, lower left). It is, perhaps, the most commonly used of all
statistical measures of point processes in the life sciences. The interevent-interval histogram
provides information about the underlying process over time scales that are of the order of
the interevent intervals. Its construction involves the loss of interval ordering, and therefore

4

dependencies among intervals; a reordering of the sequence does not alter the interevent-
interval histogram since the order plays no role in the relative frequency of occurrence.

Some point processes exhibit no dependencies among their interevent intervals at the
outset, in which case the sequence of interevent intervals forms a sequence of iid random
variables and the point process is completely speciﬁed by its interevent-interval histogram.
Such a process is called a renewal process, a deﬁnition motivated by the replacement of
failed parts (such as light bulbs), each replacement of which forms a renewal of the point
process. The homogeneous Poisson point process, dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point process,
and gamma renewal process are all renewal processes, but experimental RGC and LGN spike
trains are not.

3.2.2 Rescaled Range (R/S) Analysis

Rescaled range (R/S) analysis provides information about correlations among blocks of in-
terevent intervals. For a block of k interevent intervals, the diﬀerence between each interval
and the mean interevent interval is obtained and successively added to a cumulative sum.
The normalized range R(k) is the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum values that
the cumulative sum attains, divided by the standard deviation of the interval size. R(k) is
plotted against k. Information about the nature and the degree of correlation in the process
is obtained by ﬁtting R(k) to the function kH, where H is the so-called Hurst exponent [12].
For H > 0.5 positive correlation exists among the intervals, whereas H < 0.5 indicates the
presence of negative correlation; H = 0.5 obtains for intervals with no correlation. Renewal
processes yield H = 0.5. For negatively correlated intervals, an interval that is larger than
the mean tends, on average, to be preceded or followed by one smaller than the mean.

This widely used measure is generally assumed to be well suited to processes that exhibit
long-term correlation or have a large variance [12, 13, 14, 15], but it appears not to be very
robust since it exhibits large systematic errors and highly variable estimates of the Hurst
coeﬃcient for some fractal sequences [16, 17]. Nevertheless, it provides a useful indication
of correlation in a point process arising from the ordering of the interevent intervals alone.

3.3 Event-Number Measures of a Point Process

It is advantageous to study some characteristics of a point process in terms of the sequence
of event numbers (counts) {Zn} rather than via the sequence of intervals {τn}.

Figure 2 illustrates how the sequence is obtained. The time axis is divided into equally
spaced, contiguous time windows (center), each of duration T sec, and the (integer) number
of events in the nth window is counted and denoted Zn. This sequence {Zn} forms a random
counting process of nonnegative integers (lower right). Closely related to the sequence of
counts is the sequence of rates (events/sec) λn, which is obtained by dividing each count Zn
by the counting time T . This is the measure used in Fig. 1.

We describe several statistical measures useful for characterizing the counting process
{Zn}: the Fano factor, the Allan factor, and the event-number-based power spectral density
estimate (periodogram).

5

3.3.1 Fano Factor

The Fano factor is deﬁned as the event-number variance divided by the event-number mean,
which is a function of the counting time T :

F (T ) ≡

Var [Zn(T )]
E [Zn(T )]

.

This quantity provides an abbreviated way of describing correlation in a sequence of events.
It indicates the degree of event clustering or anticlustering in a point process relative to the
benchmark homogeneous Poisson point process, for which F (T ) = 1 for all T .

The Fano factor must approach unity at suﬃciently small values of the counting time T
for any regular point process [6, 11]. In general, a Fano factor less than unity indicates that a
point process is more orderly than the homogeneous Poisson point process at the particular
time scale T , whereas an excess over unity indicates increased clustering at the given time
scale. This measure is sometimes called the index of dispersion; it was ﬁrst used by Fano in
1947 [18] for characterizing the statistical ﬂuctuations of the number of ions generated by
individual fast charged particles. For a fractal-rate stochastic point process the Fano factor
assumes the power-law form T αF (0 < αF < 1) for large T . The parameter αF is deﬁned as
an estimate of the fractal exponent (or scaling exponent) α of the point-process rate.

Though the Fano factor can detect the presence of self-similarity even when it cannot
be discerned in a visual representation of a sequence of events, mathematical constraints
prevent it from increasing with counting time faster than ∼ T 1 [19].
It therefore proves
to be unsuitable as a measure for fractal exponents α > 1; it also suﬀers from bias for
ﬁnite-length data sets [20]. For these reasons we employ other count-based measures.

3.3.2 Allan Factor

The reliable estimation of a fractal exponent that may assume a value greater than unity
requires the use of a measure whose increase is not constrained as it is for the Fano factor,
and which remains free of bias. In this section we present a measure we ﬁrst deﬁned in 1996
[19], and called the Allan factor. The Allan factor is the ratio of the event-number Allan
variance to twice the mean:

A(T ) ≡

E n[Zn(T ) − Zn+1(T )]2
2E [Zn(T )]

o

.

The Allan variance was ﬁrst introduced in connection with the stability of atomic-based
clocks [21]. It is deﬁned in terms of the variability of diﬀerences of successive counts; as
such it is a measure based on the Haar wavelet. Because the Allan factor functions as a
derivative, it has the salutary eﬀect of mitigating linear against nonstationarities. More
complex wavelet Allan factors can be constructed to eliminate polynomial trends [22, 23].

Like the Fano factor, the Allan factor is also a useful measure of the degree of event
clustering (or anticlustering) in a point process relative to the benchmark homogeneous
Poisson point process, for which A(T ) = 1 for all T . In fact, for any point process, the Allan
factor is simply related to the Fano factor by

A(T ) = 2F (T ) − F (2T )

6

so that, in general, both quantities vary with the counting time T . In particular, for a regular
point process the Allan factor also approaches unity as T approaches zero. For a fractal-
rate stochastic point process and suﬃciently large T , the Allan factor exhibits a power-law
dependence that varies with the counting time T as A(T ) ∼ T αA (0 < αA < 3); it can rise
as fast as ∼ T 3 and can therefore be used to estimate fractal exponents over the expanded
range 0 < αA < 3.

3.3.3 Periodogram

Fourier-transform methods provide another avenue for quantifying correlation in a point
process. The periodogram is an estimate of the power spectral density of a point process,
revealing how the power is concentrated across frequency. The count-based periodogram is
obtained by dividing a data set into contiguous segments of equal length T . Within each
segment, a discrete-index sequence {Wm} is formed by further dividing T into M equal bins,
and then counting the number of events within each bin. A periodogram is then formed for
each of the segments according to

SW (f ) =

1
2
W (f )(cid:12)
M (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) f
(cid:12)
W (f ) is the discrete Fourier transform of the sequence {Wm} and M is the length
where
f
of the transform. All of the segment periodograms are averaged together to form the ﬁnal
averaged periodogram S(f ), which estimates the power spectral density in the frequency
range from 1/T to M/2T Hz. The periodogram S(f ) can also be smoothed by using a
suitable windowing function [24].

,

The count-based periodogram, as opposed to the interval-based periodogram (formed
by Fourier transforming the interevent intervals directly), provides direct undistorted infor-
mation about the time correlation of the underlying point process because the count index
increases by unity every T /M seconds, in proportion to the real time of the point process.
In the special case when the bin width T /M is short in comparison with most interevent
intervals τ , the count-based periodogram essentially reduces to the periodogram of the point
process itself, since the bins reproduce the original point process to a good approximation.
For a fractal-rate stochastic point process, the periodogram exhibits a power-law depen-
dence that varies with the frequency f as S(f ) ∼ f −αS ; unlike the Fano and Allan factor
exponents, however, αS can assume any value. Thus in theory the periodogram can be used
to estimate any value of fractal exponent, although in practice fractal exponents α rarely
exceed a value of 3. Compared with estimated based on the Allan factor, periodogram-based
estimates of the fractal exponent αS suﬀer from increased bias and variance [11]. Other
methods also exist for investigating the spectrum of a point process, some of which highlight
ﬂuctuations about the mean rate [25].

3.3.4 Relationship Among Fractal Exponents

For a fractal-rate stochastic point process with 0 < α < 1, the theoretical Fano factor, Allan
factor, and periodogram curves all follow power-law forms with respect to their arguments,
and in fact we obtain αF = αA = αS = α. For 1 ≤ α < 3, the theoretical Fano factor

7

curves saturate, but the relation αA = αS = α still obtains. The fractal exponent α is
ambiguously related to the Hurst exponent H, since some authors have used the quantity H
to index fractal Gaussian noise whereas others have used the same value of H to index the
integral of fractal Gaussian noise (which is fractional Brownian motion). The relationship
between the quantities is α = 2H − 1 for fractal Gaussian noise and α = 2H + 1 for fractal
Brownian motion. In the context of this paper, the former relationship holds, and we can
deﬁne another estimate of the fractal exponent, αR = 2HR − 1, where HR is the estimate
of the Hurst exponent H obtained from the data at hand. In general, αR depends on the
theoretical value of α, as well as on the probability distribution of the interevent intervals.
The distributions of the data analyzed in this paper, however, prove simple enough so that
the approximate theoretical relation αR = α will hold in the case of large amounts of data.

3.4 Correlation Measures for Pairs of Point Processes

Second-order methods prove useful in revealing correlations between sequences of events,
which indicate how information is shared between pairs of spike trains. Such methods may
not detect subtle forms of interdependence to which information-theoretic approaches are
sensitive [26], but the latter methods suﬀer from limitations due to the ﬁnite size of the
data sets used. We consider two second-order methods here: the normalized wavelet cross-
correlation function (NWCCF) and the cross periodogram.

3.4.1 Normalized Wavelet Cross-Correlation Function

We deﬁne the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function A2(T ) as a generalization of the
Allan factor (see Sec. 3.3.2). It is a Haar-wavelet-based version of the correlation function
It can be readily generalized by using other
and is therefore insensitive to linear trends.
wavelets and can thereby be rendered insensitive to polynomial trends. To compute the
normalized wavelet cross-correlation function at a particular counting time T , the two spike
trains ﬁrst are divided into contiguous counting windows T . The number of spikes Z1,n
falling within the nth window is registered for all indices n corresponding to windows lying
entirely within the ﬁrst spike-train data set, much as in the procedure to estimate the Allan
factor. This process is repeated for the second spike train, yielding Z2,n. The diﬀerence
between the count numbers in a given window in the ﬁrst spike train (Z1,n) and the one after
it (Z1,n+1) is then computed for all n, with a similar procedure followed for the second spike
train. Paralleling the deﬁnition of the Allan factor, the normalized wavelet cross-correlation
function is deﬁned as:

A2(T ) ≡

E {[Z1,n(T ) − Z1,n+1(T )] [Z2,n(T ) − Z2,n+1(T )]}
2 {E [Z1,n(T )] E [Z2,n(T )]}1/2

.

The normalization has two salutary properties: 1) it is symmetric in the two spike trains,
and 2) when the same homogeneous Poisson point process is used for both spike trains the
normalized wavelet cross-correlation function assumes a value of unity for all counting times
T , again in analogy with the Allan factor. To determine the signiﬁcance of a particular value
for the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function, we make use of two surrogate data sets:
a shuﬄed version of the original data sets (same interevent intervals but in a random order),

8

and homogeneous Poisson point processes with the same mean rate. Comparison between
the value of the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function obtained from the data at a
particular counting time T on the one hand, and from the surrogates at that time T on the
other hand, indicates the signiﬁcance of that particular value.

3.4.2 Cross Periodogram

The cross periodogram [27] is a generalization of the periodogram for individual spike trains
(see Sec. 3.3.3), in much the same manner as the normalized wavelet cross-correlation func-
tion derives from the Allan factor. Two data sets are divided into contiguous segments of
equal length T , with discrete-index sequences {W1,m} and {W2,m} formed by further di-
viding each segment of both data sets into M equal bins, and then counting the number
of events within each bin. With the M-point discrete Fourier transform of the sequence
{W1,m} denoted by
W1(f ) (and similarly for the second sequence), we deﬁne the segment
g
cross periodograms as

S2,W (f ) ≡

1
2M h

W1
g

∗

(f )

W2(f ) +
g

W1(f )
g

W2
g

∗

(f )i =

1
M

∗

Re h

W1
g

(f )

W2(f )i ,
g

where ∗ represents complex conjugation and Re(·) represents the real part of the argument.
As with the ordinary periodogram, all of the segment cross periodograms are averaged to-
gether to form the ﬁnal averaged cross periodogram, S2(f ), and the result can be smoothed.
This form is chosen to be symmetric in the two spike trains, and to yield a real (although
possibly negative) result. In the case of independent spike trains, the expected value of the
cross periodogram is zero. We again employ the same two surrogate data sets (shuﬄed and
Poisson) to provide signiﬁcance information about cross-periodogram values for actual data
sets.

The cross periodogram and normalized wavelet cross-correlation function will have dif-
ferent immunity to nonstationarities and will exhibit diﬀerent bias-variance tradeoﬀs, much
as their single-dimensional counterparts do [11].

4 Results for RGC and LGN Action-Potential

Sequences

We have carried out a series of experiments to determine the statistical characteristics of the
dark, maintained, and driven neural discharge in cat RGC and LGN cells. Using the analysis
techniques presented in Sec. 3, we compare and contrast the neural activity for these three
diﬀerent stimulus modalities, devoting particular attention to their fractal features. The
results we present all derive from on-center X-type cells.

4.1 Experimental Methods

The experimental methods are similar to those used by Kaplan and Shapley [28] and Teich
et al. [6]. Experiments were carried out on adult cats. Anesthesia was induced by intramus-
cular injection of xylazine (Rompun 2 mg/kg), followed 10 minutes later by intramuscular

9

injection of ketamine HCl (Ketaset 10 mg/kg). Anesthesia was maintained during surgery
with intravenous injections of thiamylal (Surital 2.5%) or thiopental (Pentothal 2.5%). Dur-
ing recording, anesthesia was maintained with Pentothal (2.5%, 2–6 (mg/kg)/hr). The local
anesthetic Novocain was administered, as required, during the surgical procedures. Penicillin
(750,000 units intramuscular) was also administered to prevent infection, as was dexametha-
sone (Decadron, 6 mg intravenous) to forestall cerebral edema. Muscular paralysis was
induced and maintained with gallium triethiodide (Flaxedil, 5–15 (mg/kg)/hr) or vecuro-
nium bromide (Norcuron, 0.25 (mg/kg)/hr). Infusions of Ringer’s saline with 5% dextrose
at 3–4 (ml/kg)/hr were also administered.

The two femoral veins and a femoral artery were cannulated for intravenous drug infu-
sions. Heart rate and blood pressure, along with expired CO2, were continuously monitored
and maintained in physiological ranges. For male cats, the bladder was also cannulated to
monitor ﬂuid outﬂow. Core body temperature was maintained at 37.5◦ C throughout the
experiment by wrapping the animal’s torso in a DC heating pad controlled by feedback from
a subscapular temperature probe. The cat’s head was ﬁxed in a stereotaxic apparatus. The
trachea was cannulated to allow for artiﬁcial respiration. To minimize respiratory artifacts,
the animal’s body was suspended from a vertebral clamp and a pneumothorax was performed
when needed.

Eyedrops of 10% phenylephrine hydrochloride (Neo-synephrine) and 1% atropine were
applied to dilate the pupils and retract the nictitating membranes. Gas-permeable hard
contact lenses protected the corneas from drying. Artiﬁcial pupils of 3-mm diameter were
placed in front of the contact lenses to maintain ﬁxed retinal illumination. The optical
quality of the animal’s eyes was regularly examined by ophthalmoscopy. The optic discs were
mapped onto a tangent screen, by back-projection, for use as a positional reference. The
animal viewed a CRT screen (Tektronix 608, 270 frames/sec; or CONRAC, 135 frames/sec)
that, depending on the stimulus condition, was either dark, uniformly illuminated with a
ﬁxed luminance level, or displayed a moving grating.

A craniotomy was performed over the LGN (center located 6.5 mm anterior to the earbars
and 9 mm lateral to the midline of the skull), and the dura mater was resected. A tungsten-
in-glass microelectrode (5–10-µm tip length) [29] was lowered until spikes from a single LGN
neuron were isolated. The microelectrode simultaneously recorded RGC activity, in the
form of S potentials, and LGN spikes, with a timing accuracy of 0.1 msec. The output was
ampliﬁed and monitored using conventional techniques. A cell was classiﬁed as Y-type if it
exhibited strong frequency doubling in response to contrast-reversing high-spatial-frequency
gratings, and X-type otherwise [30, 31].

The experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of
Rockefeller University, and was in accord with the National Institutes of Health guidelines
for the use of higher mammals in neuroscience experiments.

4.2 RGC and LGN Dark Discharge

Results for simultaneously recorded RGC and target LGN spike trains of 4000-sec duration
are presented in Fig. 3, when the retina is thoroughly adapted to the dark (this is referred to
as the “dark discharge”). The normalized rate functions (A) for both the RGC (solid curve)
and LGN (dashed curve) recordings exhibit large ﬂuctuations over the course of the recording;

10

each window corresponds to a counting time of T = 100 sec. Such large, slow ﬂuctuations
often indicate fractal rates [6, 11]. The two recordings bear a substantial resemblance to each
other, suggesting that the fractal components of the rate ﬂuctuations either have a common
origin or pass from one of the cells to the other.

The normalized interevent-interval histogram (B) of the RGC data follows a straight-line
trend on a semi-logarithmic plot, indicating that the interevent-interval probability density
function is close to an exponential form. The LGN data, however, yields a nonmonotonic
(bimodal) interevent-interval histogram. This distribution favors longer and shorter inter-
vals at the expense of those near half the mean interval, reﬂecting clustering in the event
occurrences over the short term. Various kinds of unusual clustering behavior have been
previously observed in LGN discharges [2, 32].

R/S plots (C) for both the RGC and LGN recordings follow the k0.5 line for sums less than
1000 intervals, but rise sharply thereafter in a roughly power-law fashion as kHR = k(αR+1)/2,
suggesting that the neural ﬁring pattern exhibits fractal activity for times greater than about
1000 intervals (about 120 sec for these two recordings).

Both smoothed periodograms (D) decay with frequency as f −αS for small frequencies,
and the Allan factors (E) increase with time as T αA for large counting times, conﬁrming the
fractal behavior. The 0.3-Hz component evident in the periodograms of both recordings is
an artifact of the artiﬁcial respiration; it does not aﬀect the fractal analysis. As shown in
Table 1, the fractal exponents calculated from the various measures bear rough similarity to
each other, as expected [11]; further, the onset times also agree reasonably well, being in the
neighborhood of 100 sec. The coherence among these statistics leaves little doubt that these
RGC and LGN recordings exhibit fractal features with estimated fractal exponents of 1.9±0.1
and 1.8 ± 0.1 (mean ± standard deviation of the three estimated exponents), respectively.
Moreover, the close numerical agreement of the RGC and LGN estimated fractal exponents
suggests a close connection between the fractal activity in the two spike trains under dark
conditions [6]. Curves such as those presented in Fig. 3 are readily simulated by using a
fractal-rate stochastic point process, as described in [6].

With the exception of the interevent-interval distribution, it is apparent from Fig. 3 that
the statistical properties of the dark discharges generated by the RGC and its target LGN
cell prove to be remarkably similar.

4.3 RGC and LGN Maintained Discharge

Figure 4 presents analogous statistical results for simultaneously recorded maintained-dis/-
charge RGC and target-LGN spike trains of 7000-sec duration when the stimulus presented
by the CRT screen was a 50 cd/m2 uniform luminance. The cell pair from which these
recordings were obtained is diﬀerent from the pair whose statistics are shown in Fig. 3.
As is evident from Table 1, the imposition of a stimulus increases the RGC ﬁring rate,
though not that of the LGN. In contrast to the results for the dark discharge, the RGC and
LGN action-potential sequences diﬀer from each other in signiﬁcant ways under maintained-
discharge conditions. We previously investigated some of these statistical measures, and
their roles in revealing fractal features, for maintained discharge [6].

The rate ﬂuctuations (A) of the RGC and the LGN no longer resemble each other. At
these counting times, the normalized RGC rate ﬂuctuations are suppressed, whereas those

11

of the LGN are enhanced, relative to the dark discharge shown in Fig. 3. Signiﬁcant long-
duration ﬂuctuations are apparently imparted to the RGC S-potential sequence at the LGN,
through the process of selective clustered passage [26]. Spike clustering is also imparted
at the LGN over short time scales; the RGC maintained discharge exhibits a coeﬃcient of
variation (CV) much less than unity, whereas that of the LGN signiﬁcantly exceeds unity
(see Table 1).

The normalized interevent-interval histogram (B) of the RGC data resembles that of a
dead-time-modiﬁed Poisson point process (ﬁt not shown), consistent with the presence of
relative refractoriness which becomes more important at higher rates [9]. Dead-time eﬀects
in the LGN are secondary to the clustering that it imparts to the RGC S-potentials, in part
because of its lower rate.

The R/S (C), periodogram (D), and Allan factor (E) plots yield results that are consistent
with, but diﬀerent from, those revealed by the dark discharge shown in Fig. 3. Although
both the RGC and LGN recordings exhibit evidence of fractal behavior, the two spike trains
now behave quite diﬀerently in the presence of a steady-luminance stimulus. For the RGC
recording, all three measures are consistent with a fractal onset time of about 1 sec, and a
relatively small fractal exponent (0.7±0.3). For the LGN, the fractal behavior again appears
in all three statistics, but begins at a larger onset time (roughly 20 sec) and exhibits a larger
fractal exponent (1.4 ± 0.6). Again, all measures presented in Fig. 4 are well described by a
pair of fractal-rate stochastic point processes [6].

4.4 RGC and LGN Driven Discharge

Figure 5 presents these same statistical measures for simultaneously recorded 7000-sec du-
ration RGC and LGN spike trains in response to a sinusoidal stimulus (drifting grating)
at 4.2 Hz frequency, 40% contrast, and 50 cd/m2 mean luminance. The RGC/LGN cell
pair from which these recordings were obtained is the same as the pair illustrated in Fig. 4.
The results for this stimulus resemble those for the maintained discharge, but with added
sinusoidal components associated with the restricted phases of the stimulus during which
action potentials occur. Using terminology from auditory neurophysiology, these spikes are
said to be “phase locked” to the periodicity provided by the drifting-grating stimulus. The
ﬁring rate is greater than that observed with a steady-luminance stimulus, particularly for
the LGN (see Table 1).

Again, the RGC and LGN spike trains exhibit diﬀerent behavior. The rate ﬂuctuations
(A) of the LGN still exceeds those of the RGC, but not to as great an extent as in Fig. 4.
Both action-potential sequences exhibit normalized interevent-interval histograms (B) with
multiple maxima, but the form of the histogram is now dominated by the modulation imposed
by the oscillatory stimulus.

Over long times and small frequencies, the R/S (C), periodogram (D), and Allan factor
(E) plots again yield results in rough agreement with each other, and also with the results
presented in Fig. 4. The most obvious diﬀerences arise from the phase locking induced by
the sinusoidal stimulus, which appears directly in the periodogram as a large spike at 4.2
Hz, and in the Allan factor as local minima near multiples of (4.2 Hz)−1 = 0.24 sec.

The RGC results prove consistent with a fractal onset time of about 3 sec, and a relatively
small fractal exponent (0.7±0.1), whereas for the LGN the onset time is about 20 sec and the

12

fractal exponent is 1.7 ± 0.4. For both spike trains fractal behavior persists in the presence
of the oscillatory stimulus, though its magnitude is slightly attenuated.

4.5 Correlation in the Discharges of Pairs of RGC and LGN Cells

We previously examined information exchange among pairs of RGC and LGN spike trains
using information-theoretic measures [26]. While these approaches are very general, ﬁnite
data length renders them incapable of revealing relationships between spike trains over time
scales longer than about 1 sec. We now proceed to investigate various RGC and LGN spike-
train pairs in terms of the correlation measures for pairs of point processes developed in
Sec. 3.4.

Pairs of RGC discharges are only weakly correlated over long counting times. This is
readily illustrated in terms of normalized rate functions such as those presented in Fig. 6A,
in which the rate functions of two RGCs are computed over a counting time T = 100 sec.
Calculation of the correlation coeﬃcient (ρ = +0.27) shows that the ﬂuctuations are only
mildly correlated.

Unexpectedly, however, signiﬁcant correlation turns out to be present in pairs of LGN
discharges over long counting times. This is evident in Fig. 6B, where the correlation coef-
ﬁcient ρ = +0.98 (p < 10−16) for the rates of two LGN discharges computed over the same
counting time T = 100 sec.

For shorter counting times, there is little cross correlation for either pairs of RGC or of
LGN spike trains (not shown). However, strong correlations are present in the spike rates of
an RGC and its target LGN cell as long as the rate is computed over times shorter than 15
sec for this particular cell pair.

The cross correlation can be quantiﬁed at all time and frequency scales by the nor-
malized wavelet cross-correlation function (see Sec. 3.4.1) and the cross periodogram (see
Sec. 3.4.2), respectively. Figure 6C shows the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function,
as a function of the duration of the counting window, between an RGC/LGN spike-train
pair recorded under maintained-discharge conditions, as well as for two surrogate data sets
(shuﬄed and Poisson). For this spike-train pair, it is evident that signiﬁcant correlation ex-
ists over time scales less than 15 seconds. The constant magnitude of the normalized wavelet
cross-correlation function for T < 15 sec is likely associated with the selective transmission
properties of the LGN [26]. Figure 6D presents the normalized wavelet cross-correlation func-
tion for the same RGC/LGN spike-train pair shown in Fig. 6C (solid curve), together with
that between two RGC action-potential sequences (long-dashed curve), and between their
two associated LGN spike trains (short-dashed curve). Also shown is a dotted line repre-
senting the aggregate behavior of the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function absolute
magnitude for all surrogate data sets, which resemble each other.

While the two RGC spike trains exhibit a normalized wavelet cross-correlation function
value which remains below 7, the two LGN action-potential sequences yield a curve that
steadily grows with increasing counting window T , attaining a value in excess of 1000.
Indeed, a logarithmic scale was chosen for the ordinate to facilitate the display of this wide
range of values. It is of interest to note that the LGN/LGN curve begins its steep ascent just
as the RGC/LGN curve abruptly descends. Further, the normalized wavelet cross-correlation
function between the two LGN recordings closely follows a power-law form, indicating that

13

the two LGN action-potential rates are co-fractal. One possible origin of this phenomenon
is a fractal form of correlated modulation of the random-transmission processes in the LGN
that results in the two LGN spike trains. Some evidence exists that global modulation of
the LGN might originate in the parabrachial nucleus of the brain stem; the results presented
here are consistent with such a conclusion.

Analogous results for the cross-periodograms, which are shown in Figs. 6E and F, provide
results that corroborate, but are not as deﬁnitive as, those obtained with the normalized
wavelet cross-correlation function.

The behavior of the normalized wavelet cross-correlation functions for pairs of driven
spike trains, shown in Fig. 7, closely follow those for pairs of maintained discharges, shown
in Fig. 6, except for the presence of structure at the stimulus period imposed by the drifting
grating.

5 Discussion

The presence of a stimulus alters the manner in which spike trains in the visual system
exhibit fractal behavior. In the absence of a stimulus, RGC and LGN dark discharges display
similar fractal activity (see Fig. 3). The normalized rate functions of the two recordings,
when computed for long counting times, follow similar paths. The R/S, Allan factor, and
periodogram quantify this relationship, and these three measures yield values of the fractal
exponents for the two spike trains that correspond reasonably well (see Table 1). The
normalized interevent-interval histogram, a measure which operates only over relatively short
time scales, shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the RGC and LGN responses. Such short-
time behavior, however, does not aﬀect the fractal activity, which manifests itself largely
over longer time scales.

The presence of a stimulus, either a constant luminance (Fig. 4), or a drifting grating
(Fig. 5), causes the close linkage between the statistical character of the RGC and LGN
discharges over long times to dissipate. The normalized rate functions of the LGN spike trains
display large ﬂuctuations about their mean, especially for the maintained discharge, while
the RGC rate functions exhibit much smaller ﬂuctuations that are minimally correlated with
those of the LGN. Again, the R/S, Allan factor, and periodogram quantify this diﬀerence,
indicating that fractal activity in the RGC consistently exhibits a smaller fractal exponent
(see also Table 1), and also a smaller fractal onset time (higher onset frequency). Both the
R/S and Allan-factor measures indicate that the LGN exhibits more ﬂuctuations than the
RGC at all scales; the periodogram does not, apparently because it is the only one of the
three constructed without normalization.

In the driven case (Fig. 5), the oscillatory nature of the stimulus phase-locks the RGC
and LGN spike trains to each other at shorter time scales. The periodogram displays a peak
at 4.2 Hz, and the Allan factor exhibits minima at multiples of (4.2 Hz)−1 = 0.24 sec, for
both action-potential sequences. The normalized interevent-interval histogram also suggests
a relationship between the two recordings mediated by the time-varying stimulus; both RGC
and LGN histograms achieve a number of maxima. Although obscured by the normalization,
the peaks do indeed coincide for an unnormalized plot (not shown).

In the presence of a stimulus, RGCs are not correlated with their target LGN cells

14

over the long time scales at which fractal behavior becomes most important, but signiﬁcant
correlation does indeed exist between pairs of LGN spike trains for both the maintained and
driven discharges (see Figs. 6 and 7, respectively). These pairs of LGN discharges, exhibiting
linked fractal behavior, may be called co-fractal. The normalized wavelet cross-correlation
function and cross periodogram plots between RGC 1 and LGN 1 remain signiﬁcantly above
the surrogates for small times (Figs. 6C and 6E). The results for the two RGCs suggest
some degree of co-fractal behavior, but no signiﬁcant correlation over short time scales for
the maintained discharge (Figs. 6D and 6F). Since the two corresponding RGC spike trains
do not appear co-fractal nearly to the degree shown by the LGN recordings, the co-fractal
component must be imparted at the LGN itself. This suggests that the LGN discharges may
experience a common fractal modulation, perhaps provided from the parabrachial nucleus
in the brain stem, which engenders co-fractal behavior in the LGN spike trains. Although
similar data for the dark discharge are not available, the tight linkage between RGC and
LGN ﬁring patterns in that case (Fig. 3) suggests that a common fractal modulation may not
be present in the absence of a stimulus, and therefore that discharges from nearby LGN cells
would in fact not be co-fractal; this remains to be experimentally demonstrated. Correlations
in the spike trains of relatively distant pairs of cat LGN cells have been previously observed
in the short term for drifting-grating stimuli [33]; these correlations have been ascribed to
low-threshold calcium channels and dual excitatory/inhibitory action in the corticogeniculate
pathway [34].

In the context of information transmission, the LGN may modulate the fractal character
of the spike trains according to the nature of the stimulus present. Under dark conditions,
with no signal to be transmitted, the LGN appears to pass the fractal character of the
individual RGCs on to more central stages of visual processing, which could serve to keep
them alert and responsive to all possible input time scales. If, as appears to be the case, the
responses from diﬀerent RGCs do not exhibit signiﬁcant correlation with each other, then the
LGN spike trains also will not, and the ensemble average, comprising a collection of LGN
spike trains, will display only small ﬂuctuations.
In the presence of a constant stimulus,
however, the LGN spike trains develop signiﬁcant degrees of co-fractal behavior, so that
the ensemble average will exhibit large ﬂuctuations [20]. Such correlated fractal behavior
might serve to indicate the presence of correlation at the visual input, while still maintaining
ﬂuctuations over all time scales to ready neurons in later stages of visual processing for any
stimulus changes that might arrive. Finally, a similar behavior obtains for a drifting-grating
stimulus, but with somewhat reduced fractal ﬂuctuations; perhaps the stimulus itself, though
fairly simple, serves to keep more central processing stages alert.

5.1 Prevalence and Signiﬁcance of Fractal and Co-Fractal

Behavior

Fractal behavior is present in all 50 of the RGC and LGN neural spike-train pairs that we
have examined, under dark, maintained-discharge, and drifting-grating stimulus conditions,
provided they are of suﬃcient length to manifest this behavior.

Indeed, fractal behavior is ubiquitous in sensory systems. Its presence has been observed
in cat striate-cortex neural spike trains [35]; and in the spike train of a locust visual in-

15

terneuron, the descending contralateral movement detector [36]. It is present in the auditory
system [37] of a number of species; primary auditory (VIII-nerve) nerve ﬁbers in the cat
[19, 38], chinchilla, and chicken [39] all exhibit fractal behavior.
It is exhibited at many
biological levels, from the microscopic to the macroscopic; examples include ion-channel be-
havior [40, 41, 42, 43], neurotransmitter exocytosis at the synapse [44], and spike trains
in rabbit somatosensory-cortex neurons [45] and mesencephalic reticular-formation neurons
[46]. In almost all cases, the upper limit of the observed time over which fractal correlations
exist is imposed by the duration of the recording.

The signiﬁcance of the fractal behavior is not fully understood. Its presence may serve
as a stimulus to keep more central stages of the sensory system alert and responsive to all
possible time scales, awaiting the arrival of a time-varying stimulus whose time scale is a
priori unknown. It is also possible that fractal activity in spike trains provides an advantage
in terms of matching the detection system to the expected signal [37] since natural scenes
have fractal spatial and temporal noise [47, 48].

6 Conclusion

Using a variety of statistical measures, we have shown that fractal activity in LGN spike
trains remains closely correlated with that of their exciting RGC action-potential sequences
under dark conditions, but not with stimuli present. The presence of a visual stimulus serves
to increase long-duration ﬂuctuations in LGN spike trains in a coordinated fashion, so that
pairs of LGN spike trains exhibit co-fractal behavior largely uncorrelated with activity in
their associated RGCs. Such large correlations are not present in pairs of RGC spike trains.
A drifting-grating stimulus yields similar results, but with fractal activity in both recordings
somewhat suppressed. Co-fractal behavior in LGN discharges under constant luminance
and drifting-grating stimulus conditions suggests that a common fractal modulation may be
imparted at the LGN in the presence of a visual stimulus.

7 Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the U.S. Oﬃce of Naval Research under grants N00014-92-J-1251
and N0014-93-12079, by the National Institute for Mental Health under grant MH5066, by
the National Eye Institute under grants EY4888 and EY11276, and by the Whitaker Foun-
dation under grant RG-96-0411. E. Kaplan is Jules and Doris Stein Research-to-Prevent-
Blindness Professor at Mt. Sinai School of Medicine.

References

598–612.

[1] Mastronarde, D. N. (1983) J. Neurophysiol. 49, 303–324.

[2] Bishop, P. O., Levick, W. R., and Williams, W. O. (1964) J. Physiol. (London) 170,

[3] Kuﬄer, S. W., FitzHugh, R., and Barlow, H. B. (1957) J. Gen. Physiol. 40, 683–702.

16

[4] Levine, M. W., and Troy, J. B. (1986) J. Physiol. (London) 375, 339–359.

[5] Troy, J. B., and Robson, J. G. (1992) Vis. Neurosci. 9, 535–553.

[6] Teich, M. C., Heneghan, C., Lowen, S. B., Ozaki, T., and Kaplan, E. (1997) J. Opt.

Soc. Am. A 14, 529–546.

[7] Robson, J. G., and Troy, J. B. (1987) J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4, 2301–2307.

[8] Levick, W. R. (1973) in Handbook of Sensory Physiology, VII/3, Central Processing of
Visual Information, Part A (Jung, R., Ed.), pp. 575–598, Springer-Verlag, New York.

[9] Teich, M. C., Matin, L., and Cantor, B. (1978) J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68, 386–402.

[10] Teich, M. C., and Khanna, S. M. (1985) J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 77, 1110–1128.

[11] Thurner, S., Lowen, S. B., Heneghan, C., Feurstein, M. C., Feichtinger, H. G., and

Teich, M. C. (1997) Fractals 5, 565–595.

[12] Hurst, H. E. (1951) Trans. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 116, 770–808.

[13] Feller, W. (1951) Ann. Math. Stat. 22, 427–432.

[14] Mandelbrot, B. B. (1983) The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, New York.

[15] Schepers, H. E., van Beek, J. H. G. M., and Bassingthwaighte, J. B. (1992) IEEE Eng.

Med. Biol. Mag. 11, 57–71.

[16] Beran, J. (1994) Statistics for Long-Memory Processes, Chapman and Hall, New York.

[17] Bassingthwaighte, J. B., and Raymond, G. M. (1994) Ann. Biomed. Eng. 22, 432–444.

[18] Fano, U. (1947) Phys. Rev. 72, 26–29.

[19] Lowen, S. B., and Teich, M. C. (1996) J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3585–3591.

[20] Lowen, S. B., and Teich, M. C. (1995) Fractals 3, 183–210.

[21] Allan, D. W. (1966) Proc. IEEE 54, 221–230.

[22] Teich, M. C., Heneghan, C., Lowen, S. B., and Turcott, R. G. (1996) in Wavelets in
Medicine and Biology (Aldroubi, A., and Unser, M., Eds.), pp. 383–412, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL.

[23] Abry, P. and Flandrin, P (1996) in Wavelets in Medicine and Biology (Aldroubi, A.,

and Unser, M., Eds.), pp. 413–437, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

[24] Oppenheim, A. V., and Schafer, R. W. (1975) Digital Signal Processing, Prentice-Hall,

Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ.

[25] Lange, G. D., and Hartline, P. H. (1979) Biol. Cybern. 34, 31–34.

17

[26] Lowen, S. B., Ozaki, T, Kaplan, E, and Teich, M. C. (1998) in Computational Neu-
roscience: Trends in Research, 1998 (Bower, J. M., Ed.), pp. 491–496, Plenum, New
York.

[27] Tuckwell, H. C. (1989) Stochastic Processes in the Neurosciences, Society for Industrial

and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia.

[28] Kaplan, E., and Shapley, R. M. (1982) J. Physiol. (London) 330, 125–143.

[29] Merrill, E. G., and Ainsworth, A. (1972) Med. Biol. Eng. 10, 662–672.

[30] Hochstein, S., and Shapley, R. M. (1976) J. Physiol. (London) 262, 237–264.

[31] Shapley, R. M., and Hochstein, S. (1975) Nature (London) 256, 411–413.

[32] Funke, K., and W¨org¨otter, F. (1997) Prog. Neurobiol. 53, 67–119.

[33] Sillito, A. M., Jones, H. E., Gerstein, G. L., and West, D. C. (1994) Nature (London)

[34] Kirkland, K. L., and Gerstein, G. L. (1998) Vision Res. 38, 2007–2022.

[35] Teich, M. C., Turcott, R. G., and Siegel, R. M. (1996) IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 15

[36] Turcott, R. G., Barker, P. D. R., and Teich, M. C. (1995) J. Statist. Comput. Simul.

[37] Teich, M. C. (1989) IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 36, 150–160.

[38] Kelly, O. E., Johnson, D. H., Delgutte, B., and Cariani, P. (1996) J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

369, 479–482.

(#5), 79–87.

52, 253–271.

99, 2210–2220.

[39] Powers, N. L., Salvi, R. J. (1992) in Abstracts of the Fifteenth Midwinter Research
Meeting of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology (Lim, D. J., Ed.), abstract
292, p. 101, Association for Research in Otolaryngology, Des Moines, IA.

[40] L¨auger, P. (1988) Biophys. J. 53, 877–884.

[41] Millhauser, G. L., Salpeter, E. E., and Oswald, R. E. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

(USA) 85, 1503–1507.

[42] Liebovitch, L. S., and T. I. T´oth (1990) Ann. Biomed. Eng. 18, 177–194.

[43] Lowen, S. B., and Teich, M. C. (1993) in Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f Fluctua-
tions, AIP Conference Proceedings 285 (Handel, P. H., and Chung, A. L., Eds.), pp.
745–748, American Institute of Physics, New York.

[44] Lowen, S. B., Cash, S. C., Poo, M.-m., and Teich, M. C. (1997) J. Neurosci. 17, 5666–

5677.

18

[45] Wise, M. E. (1981) in Statistical Distributions in Scientiﬁc Work 6 (Taillie, C. E. A.,

Ed.), pp. 211–231, Reidel, Boston.

[46] Gr¨uneis, F., Nakao, M., Mizutani, Y., Yamamoto, M., Meesmann, M., and Musha, T.

(1993) Biol. Cybern. 68, 193–198.

[47] Olshausen, B. A., and Field, D. J. (1996) Network 7, 333–339.

[48] Dan, Y., Atick, J. J., and Reid, R. C. (1996) J. Neurosci. 16, 3351–3362.

8 Table

Stimulus
Dark

Driven

Maintained RGC

Moments

Mean

Cell
RGC 112 msec
LGN 152 msec
32 msec
LGN 284 msec
27 msec
RGC
77 msec
LGN

Fractal Exponents
αS
1.89
1.75
0.58
2.01
0.54
2.10

αA
1.96
1.85
0.99
1.41
0.74
1.76

CV αR
1.71
1.54
1.66
1.62
0.53
0.52
0.89
1.63
0.79
1.21
1.35
1.15

Neural-discharge statistics for cat retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their associated
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) cells, under three stimulus conditions: dark discharge in
the absence of stimulation (data duration L = 4000 sec); maintained discharge in response
to a uniform luminance of 50 cd/m2 (data duration L = 7000 sec); and driven discharge in
response to a drifting grating (4.2 Hz frequency, 40% contrast, and 50 cd/m2 mean luminance;
data duration L = 7000 sec). All cells are on-center X-type. The maintained and driven
data sets were recorded from the same RGC/LGN cell pair, whereas the dark discharge
derived from a diﬀerent cell pair. Statistics, from left to right, are mean interevent interval,
interevent-interval coeﬃcient of variation (CV = standard deviation divided by mean), and
fractal exponents estimated by least-squares ﬁts on doubly logarithmic plots of 1) the rescaled
range (R/S) statistic for k > 1000, which yields an estimate of the Hurst exponent HR,
and of αR, in turn, through the relation αR = 2HR − 1; 2) the count-based periodogram
for frequencies between 0.001 and 0.01 Hz which yields αS; and 3) of the Allan factor for
counting times between L/100 and L/10 where L is the duration of the recording, which
yields αA.

9 Figure Captions

Figure 1: Rate estimates formed by dividing the number of events in successive counting
windows by the counting time T . The stimulus was a uniformly illuminated screen (with no
temporal or spatial modulation) of luminance 50 cd/m2. A) Rate estimate for a cat RGC
generated using three diﬀerent counting times (T = 1, 10, and 100 sec). The ﬂuctuations in
the rate estimates converge relatively slowly as the counting time is increased. This is char-
acteristic of fractal-rate processes. The convergence properties are quantiﬁed by measures

19

such as the Allan factor and periodogram. B) Rate estimates from the same recording after
the intervals are randomly reordered (shuﬄed). This maintains the same relative frequency
of interval sizes but destroys the original relative ordering of the intervals, and therefore any
correlations or dependencies among them. For such nonfractal signals, the rate estimate
converges more quickly as the counting time T is increased. The data presented here are
typical of the 50 data sets examined.

Figure 2: A sequence of action potentials (top) is reduced to a set of events (repre-
sented by arrows, middle) that form a point process. A sequence of interevent intervals
{τn} is formed from the times between successive events, resulting in a discrete-time, pos-
itive, real-valued stochastic process (lower left). All information contained in the original
point process remains in this representation, but the discrete-time axis of the sequence of
interevent intervals is distorted relative to the real-time axis of the point process. The se-
quence of counts {Zn}, a discrete-time, nonnegative, integer-valued stochastic process, is
formed from the point process by recording the numbers of events in successive counting
windows of duration T (lower right). This process of mapping the point process to the se-
quence {Zn} results in a loss of information, but the amount lost can be made arbitrarily
small by reducing T . An advantage of this representation is that no distortion of the time
axis occurs.

Figure 3: Statistical measures of the dark discharge from a cat on-center X-type retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) and its associated lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) cell, for data of
duration L = 4000 sec. RGC results appear as solid curves, whereas LGN results are
dashed. A) Normalized rate function constructed by counting the number of neural spikes
occurring in adjacent 100-sec counting windows, and then dividing by 100 sec and by the
average rate. B) Normalized interevent-interval histogram (IIH) vs normalized interevent
interval constructed by dividing the interevent intervals for each spike train by the mean, and
then obtaining the histogram. C) Normalized range of sums R(k) vs number of interevent
intervals k (see Sec. 3.2.2). D) Periodogram S(f ) vs frequency f (see Sec. 3.3.3). E) Allan
factor A(T ) vs counting time T (see Sec. 3.3.2).

Figure 4: Statistical measures of the maintained discharge from a cat on-center X-type
RGC and its associated LGN cell, at a steady luminance of 50 cd/m2, for data of duration
L = 7000 sec. This cell pair is diﬀerent from the one illustrated in Fig. 3. The results for the
RGC discharge appear as solid curves, whereas those for the LGN are presented as dashed
curves. Panels A)–E) as in Fig. 3.

Figure 5: Statistical measures of the driven discharge from a cat on-center X-type RGC
and its associated LGN cell, for a drifting-grating stimulus with mean luminance 50 cd/m2,
4.2 Hz frequency, and 40% contrast, for data of duration L = 7000 sec. This cell pair is
the same as the one illustrated in Fig. 4. The results for the RGC discharge appear as solid
curves, whereas those for the LGN are presented as dashed curves. Panels A)–E) as in
Figs. 3 and 4.

Figure 6: Statistical measures of the maintained discharge from pairs of cat on-center X-
type RGCs and their associated LGN cells, stimulated by a uniform luminance of 50 cd/m2,
for data of duration L = 7000 sec. RGC and LGN spike trains denoted “1” are those that
have been presented in Figs. 4 and 5, while those denoted “0” are another simultaneously
recorded pair. A) Normalized rate functions constructed by counting the number of neural
spikes occurring in adjacent 100-sec counting windows, and then dividing by 100 sec and

20

by the average rate, for RGC 1 and RGC 0. Note that the ordinate scale diﬀers from that
in (A). B) Normalized rate functions for the two corresponding target LGN cells, LGN
1 and LGN 0. C) Normalized wavelet cross-correlation function (NWCCF) between the
RGC 1 and LGN 1 recordings (solid curve), shuﬄed surrogates of these two data sets (long-
dashed curve), and Poisson surrogates (short-dashed curve). Unlike the Allan factor A(T ),
the normalized wavelet cross-correlation function can assume negative values and need not
approach unity in certain limits. Negative normalized wavelet cross-correlation function
values for the data or the surrogates are not printed on this doubly logarithmic plot, nor are
they printed in panel (D). Comparison between the value of the normalized wavelet cross-
correlation function obtained from the data at a particular counting time T on the one hand,
and from the surrogates at that time T on the other hand, indicates the signiﬁcance of that
particular value. D) Normalized wavelet cross-correlation functions between RGC 1 and
LGN 1 (solid curve, repeated from panel (C), the two RGC spike trains (long-dashed curve),
and the two LGN spike trains (short-dashed curve). Also included is the aggregate behavior
of both types of surrogates for all three combinations of recordings listed above (dotted line).
E) Cross periodograms of the data sets displayed in panel (C). F) Cross periodograms of
the data sets displayed in panel (D).

Figure 7: Statistical measures of the driven discharge from pairs of cat on-center X-
type RGCs and their associated LGN cells, stimulated by a drifting grating with a mean
luminance of 50 cd/m2, 4.2 Hz frequency, and 40% contrast, for data of duration L = 7000
sec. RGC and LGN spike trains denoted “1” are recorded from the same cell pair that have
been presented in Figs. 4–6, while those denoted “0” are recorded simultaneously from the
other cell pair, that was presented in Fig. 6 only. Panels A)–F) as in Fig. 6.

21

RATE FUNCTIONS (cid:21)

n

A) ORIGINAL DATA

B) SHUFFLED

40

40

30

30

T = 1 sec

T = 1 sec

20

20

40

40

30

30

T = 10 sec

T = 10 sec

20

20

40

40

30

30

T = 100 sec

T = 100 sec

20

20

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

WINDOW NUMBER n (each of duration T sec)

Lowen, Fig. 1

22

Lowen, Fig. 2

23

A) NORM. RATE FUNCTION (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

B) NORMALIZED IIH p ((cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ])

n

3

RGC

LGN

RGC

LGN

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

NORM. INTEREVENT INTERVAL (cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ]

C) NORM. RANGE OF SUMS R(k)

D) PERIODOGRAM S (f )

RGC

LGN

0:5

k

1000

LGN

RGC

1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

NUMBER OF INTERVALS k

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

E) ALLAN FACTOR A(T )

1000

RGC

LGN

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

COUNTING TIME T (sec)

2

1

0

1000

100

10

1

100

10

1

0.1

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

100

10

Lowen, Fig. 3

24

A) NORM. RATE FUNCTION (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

B) NORMALIZED IIH p ((cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ])

n

3

RGC

LGN

RGC

LGN

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

NORM. INTEREVENT INTERVAL (cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ]

C) NORM. RANGE OF SUMS R(k)

D) PERIODOGRAM S (f )

RGC

LGN

0:5

k

1000

LGN

RGC

1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

NUMBER OF INTERVALS k

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

E) ALLAN FACTOR A(T )

1000

RGC

LGN

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

COUNTING TIME T (sec)

2

1

0

1000

100

10

1

100

10

1

0.1

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

100

10

Lowen, Fig. 4

25

A) NORM. RATE FUNCTION (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

B) NORMALIZED IIH p ((cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ])

n

3

RGC

LGN

RGC

LGN

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

NORM. INTEREVENT INTERVAL (cid:28) =E[(cid:28) ]

C) NORM. RANGE OF SUMS R(k)

D) PERIODOGRAM S (f )

RGC

LGN

0:5

k

1000

LGN

RGC

1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

NUMBER OF INTERVALS k

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

E) ALLAN FACTOR A(T )

1000

RGC

LGN

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

COUNTING TIME T (sec)

2

1

0

1000

100

10

1

100

10

1

0.1

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

100

10

Lowen, Fig. 5

26

A) NORM. RGC RATE FCN. (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

B) NORM. LGN RATE FCN. (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

n

n

RGC 1

1.1

RGC 0

3

LGN 1

LGN 0

1

0.9

2

1

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

C) NWCCF: RGC 1 - LGN 1

D) NWCCF

3

3

10

10

DATA

RGC 1 - LGN 1

SHUFFLED

RGC 0 - RGC 1

1

1

10

10

SURROGATES

POISSON

LGN 0 - LGN 1

(cid:0)1

(cid:0)1

10

10

(cid:0)3

(cid:0)3

10

10

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

COUNTING WINDOW T (sec)

COUNTING WINDOW T (sec)

E) CPG: RGC 1 - LGN 1

F) CPG

7

7

10

10

DATA

RGC 1 - LGN 1

6

6

POISSON

LGN 0 - LGN 1

10

10

SURROGATES

SHUFFLED

RGC 0 - RGC 1

5

5

10

10

4

4

10

10

3

3

10

10

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

Lowen, Fig. 6

27

A) NORM. RGC RATE FCN. (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

B) NORM. LGN RATE FCN. (cid:21)

=E[(cid:21)]

n

n

RGC 1

3

LGN 1

RGC 0

LGN 0

1.1

1

0.9

2

1

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

WINDOW NUMBER n (T = 100 sec)

C) NWCCF: RGC 1 - LGN 1

D) NWCCF

3

3

10

10

DATA

RGC 1 - LGN 1

SHUFFLED

RGC 0 - RGC 1

1

1

10

10

SURROGATES

POISSON

LGN 0 - LGN 1

(cid:0)1

(cid:0)1

10

10

(cid:0)3

(cid:0)3

10

10

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

COUNTING WINDOW T (sec)

COUNTING WINDOW T (sec)

E) CPG: RGC 1 - LGN 1

F) CPG

7

7

10

10

DATA

RGC 1 - LGN 1

6

6

POISSON

LGN 0 - LGN 1

10

10

SURROGATES

SHUFFLED

RGC 0 - RGC 1

5

5

10

10

4

4

10

10

3

3

10

10

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

FREQUENCY f (Hz)

Lowen, Fig. 7

28

