9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Metastability of life

V.I. Marchenko
P.L. Kapitza Institute for Physical Problems, RAS, 117334, Kosygin str. 2, Moscow, Russia
Permanent address. e-mail: mar@kapitza.ras.ru
Institut f¨ur Festk¨orperforschung, Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, D-52425 J¨ulich, Germany

The physical idea of the natural origin of diseases and deaths has been presented. The fundamental
microscopical reason is the destruction of any metastable state by thermal activation of a nucleus
of a nonreversable change. On the basis of this idea the quantitative theory of age dependence
of death probability has been constructed. The obtained simple Death Laws are very accurately
fulﬁlled almost for all known diseases.

PACS numbers:87.90.+y, 89.90.+n

All of us will die, as well as all other living organisms
and plants. Each and every machine or construction will
breaks. Mountains will fall down or earthquakes will hap-
pen.

Why? Physics gives the general answer - all of these
systems are not in a full equilibrium. All the systems are
metastable, it means: 1) they are stable against small
external inﬂuences, but 2) each of them, as the worst
ones, as well as the best ones, has a ﬁnite probability
to be spontaneously destroyed without any external in-
ﬂuence even in the ideal environment and at the perfect
conditions. According to Gibbs [1] the fundamental rea-
son of the destruction is the thermal activation of critical
nucleus of nonreversable change in the system.

Let us consider a simple example - a stretched ideal
monocrystal string. If we wait suﬃciently long time the
temperature ﬂuctuations will produce a critical Griﬃth’s
crack [2] at some place and the string will break. It is
possible that the critical crack will appear earlier if there
are some defects in the crystal. Such a nucleation pro-
cess occurs in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent cases (activation
of point defects in the crystals, condensation in a super
saturated solution, nucleation of a new phase in a ﬁrst or-
der phase transition) and it is well studied in condensed
matter physics.

Any living organism is a much more complicated sys-
tem, but the described phenomena should occur in it also.
The thermal activation of critical nucleus is the last and
unremovable killer. Last - if we exclude all other origins
of diseases and deaths. Unremovable, but, one can hope
- not untreatable.

I want to stress here that the known qualitative and
quantitative facts about majority of diseases can be un-
derstood from the point of view of theoretical physics in
terms of metastability and activation of critical nucleus.
So, I do think that the thermodynamic killer works, and
it is the main killer.

Gompertz [3] discovered that a probability D(x) to die
at the age x in the time interval dt exponentially increases
with age

D ∝ exp

x
a (cid:17)

.

(cid:16)

(1)

1

According to modern mortal statistics Gompertz law is
valid at the age range 30÷70 years, and even more strong
increase appears at older ages. Exponential age depen-
dence of D, from my point of view, is the most crucial
sign on the nature of micro origin of diseases leading to
death.

I have no answer for many questions one can ask about
details of the relationship between a given disease and the
proposed idea of their natural micro origin. Only I can do
for the moment is to present a theory of age dependence
of probability of arising of the nucleus.

On a molecular (and macromolecular) level there are
few reasons of arising of almost non removable point
defects, for example, due to the process of oxidation
[4]. Thermal ﬂuctuations should produce conﬁgurational
transformations of individual molecules [5]. The same
eﬀect can be caused also by some external agents (pho-
tons, impurity atoms or molecules, elementary particles).
If a concentration of those point defects is small, then
the probability of arising of new defects does not depend
upon the interaction between them. It means that the
concentration of point defects should be simply propor-
tional to the age x. This linear law is known in an abso-
lutely analogies situation, Zeldovich stage of nucleation in
I order phase transition [6]. It is quite natural to assume,
that at any age the dimensionless molecular concentra-
tion of the point defects remains small, so at any age this
law is valid.

Growing concentration of the point defects gives rise to
small changes of physical parameters of body structures
on a macroscopic scale (membranes, cells, as well as on
a higher levels). One can imagine that some functionally
signiﬁcant defects are thermally activated on this scale
(example, arising of Griﬃth-like critical crack in a micro
cappilary, periodically stressed by oscillating blood pres-
sure) or point defects tend to precipitate into a condensed
state (as it is in supersaturated solutions), or even some
type of a structural phase transition occurs at some criti-
cal value of the defect concentration. Some of such types
of spontaneous changing in the body can have serious
functional consequences leading to diseases, and death.

The probability W of arising of such micro damages is

governed by Gibbs law

W ∝ exp

−

(cid:18)

U
T (cid:19)

,

(2)

where U is the minimum energetic barrier of the unre-
versible change (critical nucleus), and T is the tempera-
ture. Usually it is possible to expand energy of critical
nucleus in the small concentration, or equivalently in age:
U = U0 + U ′x, and if U ′ is negative, the barrier dimin-
ishes with the age, we obtain the exponential law, Eq.(1).
If U ′ is positive, one has the growth of the barrier, and
the stability of the body increases. It is possible that the
age decreasing of the infant mortality is partly related to
this circumstance.

The expansion of U in concentration is impossible in
the case of condensation in a supersaturated gas with
small concentration (as well as in the vicinity of I order
phase transition). In a two-dimensional condensation of
supersaturated gas the energy of the critical nucleus is in-
versely proportional to the concentration, or in our case
U ∼ x−1, corresponding to the second exponential law

In a three-dimensional condensation there should be U ∼
x−2, and the third exponential law is

W ∝ exp

− b
(cid:18)

x (cid:19)

.

W ∝ exp

− c
x2
(cid:16)

.

(cid:17)

(3)

(4)

Let us consider the US-97 death statistics speciﬁed by
selected causes [7].
If one plots ln(Di) v.s. x, or, v.s.
1/x, and 1/x2 it is easy to ﬁnd that almost all cases
have a clearly distinguishable age behaviors: 20 cases of
Gompertz exponential law, Eq.(1); 14 cases of second ex-
ponential law (3); 4 cases with more complicated behav-
ior, but the laws (1) or (3) are valid there in a wide age
range, and some strange crossover occurs to some other
behavior; 24 cases are not related with aging. Only in 3
cases statistics does not permit to make a deﬁnite con-
clusion on the type of the age dependence. Examples of
the clearly detactable exponential age behavior of death
rate presented in Fig.1-4.

Death rate here is the number of 1997 year deaths per
100.000 population of speciﬁed age groups 0-5, 5-14, ...
75-84, 85 years and over. There are a lot of intriguing
coincidences of parameters (a, b) for diﬀerent diseases.
It possibly means, that a number of discussed diﬀerent
micro origins is substantially smaller than a number of
diseases. Some of diseases arise presumably as a com-
bined eﬀect of two diﬀerent micro origins. This analysis
is in progress.

20

40

60

80

FIG. 1. Septicemia (038). Death rate

(038)
exp(-3.9+x/10)

(150-159)
exp(9.7-310/x)

150

100

50

450

300

150

90

60

30

20

40

60

80

FIG. 2. Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs and peri-

tonium (150-159). Death rate.

(188-189)
exp(8.5-350/x)

20

40

60

80

FIG. 3. Malignant neoplasms of urinary organs (188-189).

Death rate.

2

(410)
exp(-0.51+x/11.7)

1500

1000

500

20

40

60

80

FIG. 4. Acute myocardial infarction (410). Death rate.

The characteristic magnitude of function D in cases
with Gompertz law (1) at x = 0 is exp(−13 ÷ −22) per
year, or exp(−30 ÷ −39) per second. Let us compare
this value with Eq.(2). One should introduce some pre-
exponent value. Its most simple estimate is the charac-
teristic frequency of oscillations of atoms in condensed
matter ω ∼ kθ/¯h, where θ ∼ 102K is a Debye tem-
perature, k - Boltzmann’s constant, ¯h - Planck’s con-
stant. One should introduce an additional factor, an ef-
fective number N of possible places where the given crit-
ical nucleus can arise. The temperature of the body is
T = 273 + 36.6 ≈ 310K. The comparison gives a reason-
able estimation of barriers U ∼ (1.2÷1.4)∗104K +T lnN ,
or U ∼ 1.1 ÷ 1.3eV if N ∼ 1, and only U ∼ 3eV even if
N is equals to total amount of molecules in a body, this
eﬀective number is of course unrealistic, and I want just
to note here that in any case the barrier estimation gives
value usual in condensed matter physics.

In order to estimate the age change of barriers one
does need not to know the pre-exponent factor in the
expression (2). Typical 90 years increasing factor of

Di is exp(8). It corresponds to diminishing of barriers
δU ∼ 8T , this value is also reasonable δU ∼ 0.2eV ≪ U .
Two parameters, the small one δU/U ≪ 1, and the big
one U/T ≫ 1, are the main parameters of the theory.

In the framework of presented picture the small dif-
ference in barriers of the order of 0.02eV for male and
female corresponds to known ratio Dm/Df ∼ 2, and
can be directly related to the diﬀerence 1/23 in chro-
mosome compositions. The variation of parameters on
time, and speciﬁc groups of population, countries, races,
etc., should be of the same order of magnitude. The sit-
uation is similar to the usual one in condensed matter
physics, where experimental data are observably depen-
dent on sample preparation conditions.

Note, that there is no real contradiction between pre-
sented idea and the fact that there is a lot of diseases
cased by viruses and bacteria. The age dependence of
those diseases should be related to some micro origin of
the destruction of the immune system.

I think also, that discussed thermal activations should
play not the last role in a generation of congenital anoma-
lies.

[1] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Perga-

mon, New York (1980)

[2] A.A. Griﬁth, Phylos.Trans.R.Soc. London A221, 163

(1920)

[3] B. Gompertz, Phil.Trans.R.Soc. London A115, 513 (1825)
[4] T. Lindahl, Nature 362, 709-715 (1993)
[5] E. Shredinger, What is Life? Piper. Munchen (1989)
[6] E.M. Lifshitz, L.P. Pitaevskii, Physical Kinetics, Perga-

[7] D.H. Hoyert, et al., NVSR 47, 19 (1999). Web site:

mon, New York (1981)

www.cdc.gov/nchswww

3

