9
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
1
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Biological Advantage of Chirality1

by

G. Gilat

Department of Physics, Technion

Haifa 32000, Israel

e-mail: gilat@physics.technion.ac.il

Abstract

The presence of chirality in the main molecules of life may well be not

just a structural artifact, but of pure biological advantage. The possibility

of the existence of a phenomenon of a special mode of interaction, labeled

as ”chiral interaction” (CI), for which structural chirality is a necessary con-

dition, is the main reason for such an advantage. In order to demonstrate

such a possibility, macroscopic chiral devices are introduced and presented

as analogies for such an interaction. For this purpose it is important to make

a clear distinction between geometric and physical chiralities, where the lat-

ter are capable to perform chiral interactions with various media. Apart

from chirality, a few other structural elements are required. In particular,

the presence of an interface that separates between the chiral device and the
1to be published in “Advances in Biochirality”, Eds. G. Palyi, C. Zucchi & L. Caglioti,

Elsevier Science S.A.

1

medium with which it is interacting. The physical chirality is build into this

very interface where chiral interaction is taking place. On a molecular level,

soluble proteins in particular, the active medium is the presence of random

ionic motion in the aqueous solvent. As a result of chiral interaction a certain

perturbation, or current, is generated and ﬂowing along the coils of α-helix

structure in one preferred direction out of two possible ones. A model for

such a chiral interaction is presented and a few signiﬁcant consequences are

pointed out. In particular, it is important to emphasize the time-irreversible

feature of chiral interaction, which leads to its non-ergodic nature that is to be

considered a necessary condition for evolutionary processes in biomolecules.

As yet there exists no direct experimental evidence for the validity of chiral

interaction on a molecular level, but there are quite a few indirect supporting

evidences. In particular, there exists an experimental result by Careri et al.

who found a clear linkage between the free protonic motion in the hydration

layer of proteins and their enzymatic activity. A few direct experiments for

verifying the validity of chiral interaction on molecular level are proposed

hereby for hydrophobic amino acids at the water-air interface, where chiral

interaction may take place. Among these there is also a new approach of

applying a SQUID to detect a weak magnetic ﬁeld that is associated with

the chiral interaction eﬀect. If proven right, chiral interaction may open new

approaches and possibilities for better understanding of the rather complex

autocatalytic function of soluble proteins.

2

1. Introduction

The phenomenon of structural chirality has been recognized since the

early 19th century when Arago [1] and Biot [2] demonstrated the eﬀect of

optical activity in quartz crystals. It was Louis Pasteur [3] who ﬁrst observed

chirality on a molecular level and he referred to this eﬀect as dissymmetry.

It was Kelvin [4] who ﬁrst addressed this phenomenon as ”chirality”, since a

chiral structure of an object does not necessarily imply a total lack of symme-

try of such an object. According to Kelvin a given object or set is chiral if and

only if it cannot be made to superimpose, or overlap, exactly its mirror image

by any continuous transformation. (i.e. by any rotation and/or translation).

The concept of chirality is of geometric nature in principle, but currently this

very term is also being used in other domains such as high energy physics,

which may cause semantic problems in its usage.

In addition to this it is

also important to address chirality within its own dimensionality. The space

we live in is 3-dimensional (3d) so that chirality is usually regarded as a 3d

property. In fact, such property exists also in 2-dimensional (2d) space, that

is, within a plane. This can be demonstrated by two asymmetric triangles,

one being the mirror image of another. Although these two triangles are

geometrically identical, they cannot be made to superimpose one another by

any rotation and/or translation within the plane they are contained in. In

order to make them coincide with one another, it is necessary to take one of

these triangles out of this plane, rotate it around in 3d space and then bring

it back into the same plane. Then it becomes possible to make them overlap

precisely with one another. Such a triangle is an example of 2d chiral ﬁgure

3

or object. Any 2d chiral object is considered to be achiral in 3d space. As a

matter of fact, such a consideration is not limited to 2d space. In principle,

also a 3d chiral object ”can be made” to coincide with its mirror image by

”taking it out into a 4-dimensional (4d) space, rotating it around there and

then bringing it back to 3d space”. Such an operation is mathematically or

imaginatively possible, but not practically. the reason for this is that our

physical space is of 3-dimensions only.

In recent years there has been a considerable progress in the development

and understanding of the mathematical aspects of chirality [5-6]. Among

other things, there exist several attempts [7-9] of quantifying this very con-

cept. These attempts are still having certain problems of uniqueness, so that

a question such as: ”What is the most chiral triangle?” obtains at least three

diﬀerent answers [10,11]. As a matter of fact, most approaches of treating

chirality from mathematical aspects employ the geometric view-point of chi-

rality, which hardly contains any physical meaning. In reality, the concept

of chirality has a signiﬁcant physical basis and this is meant to be one of the

main features of the present article. For this reason it becomes necessary to

distinguish between so-called geometric and physical chiralities [11,12]. Geo-

metric chirality is referred to the shape of pure geometric bodies or sets, such

as triangles or tetrahedrons or any arbitrary shapes in 2- or 3-dimensional

spaces. Physical chirality is referred to the shape of any distribution in space

of a physical property such as mass, charge, energy potential, or even quan-

tum properties such as electronic wave-function distribution throughout a

4

molecule, or any other quantum mechanical property.

If such a distribu-

tion does not contain any reﬂection symmetry plane, then, by analogy, it

is to be referred to as a chiral physical distribution. There exist two ma-

jor distinctions between physical and geometric objects. Geometric bodies

are distributed homogeneously in space, whereas physical properties may be

of varying densities, such as mass distribution, which is not necessarily ho-

mogeneous in space. This diﬀerence may well complicate the mathematical

aspects of physical chiralities. A second distinction of major physical signiﬁ-

cance is the possibility of interaction that may exist between a distribution of

physical property and some medium that happens to be present at the same

vicinity. In the case of molecular structures it may be necessary to distin-

guish between various diﬀerent physical distributions such as nuclear masses,

(i.e. atomic locations within the molecule), or electronic distributions that

are presented by the wave-function distributions. The possibility of a chiral

distribution of a physical property is the origin of the biological advantage

of chirality. In order to clarify this statement it may be helpful to look ﬁrst

at macroscopic objects where chirality plays a necessary and useful role in

their function.

2. Macroscopic Chiral Devices

An intriguing question that is being repeated in may scientiﬁc publica-

tions concerns the ‘left’ (L) and ‘right’ (D) identity of chiral molecules, such

as: ”Why are amino-acids L and not D?”. There exist several speculations

that try to answer this interesting question. A more constructive question

to be asked presently is: ”why are the molecules of life chiral?”, and this is

5

regardless of their being L or D. Is there any biological advantage in their

chiral nature when compared to achiral molecules? And the answer given

here to this question is: ”Yes”. The source of such an advantage comes from

a speciﬁc type of interaction for which chirality is a necessary condition. Such

an interaction is to be labeled as: ”chiral interaction” (CI) and it has already

been treated in various publications [11,13-17].

Chiral interaction (CI) is not typical of molecular structure only, and there

exist various macrodevices which function according to the same principle.

The simplest and most spectacular one is the windmill. When wind blows

at the rotors of a mill, it ‘ knows’ immediately in which direction to rotate,

clockwise or anti-clockwise.

If the windmill, in particular its vanes, were

symmetric, it would not be able to ‘make up its mind’ to select a deﬁnite

rotational direction. The shape of vanes of a windmill, where contact is

made with the wind, is designed to break the L-D symmetry, i.e., it is chiral.

This structure is of useful dynamical advantage which enables the mill to

transform energy from the wind to, say, a rotating millstone. Another simple

mechanical device is a rotating water sprinkler, where the medium interacting

with the sprinkler is the ﬂow of water. The next example is somewhat more

sophisticated because it depends on a diﬀerent mode of chirality. This device

is a variant of the Crookes’ radiometer (see ﬁgure 1). The active medium in

this case is light radiation. The element of chirality here is in the diﬀerence

of the colors of the rotating blades, being black and silver, respectively, and

this is a special example of physical chirality. When light is shining on silver

faces it is reﬂected away, whereas it is absorbed by the black ones.

6

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

B

A

7

Figure 1: A variant of Crookes’ radiometer oﬀers an example of chiral in-
teraction. The asymmetry in the optical absorption coeﬃcient between the
black and the silver vanes generates a temperature diﬀerence between these
vanes when light is shining at the device. The air close to the black vanes
expands as a result, which pushes the vane around the axis AB in the pre-
ferred direction of the black vane. The physical chirality is built into this
device by the distribution of the black and silver colors, i.e. by the diﬀerence
in the optical absorption coeﬃcients in the vanes.

This causes the black faces to become warmer than the silver ones, which

in turn expands the air in their close vicinity, so that the black wing is pushed

backwards. The selection of the sense of rotation of this type of Crooke’s

radiometer is made by the variance of the colors of the vanes, that is, by

their respective optical absorption coeﬃcient. The physical chirality in this

device is presented by the distribution of the optical absorption coeﬃcient,

not by the shape of the vanes which is achiral.

All the examples presented here are of mechanical nature, i.e., the eﬀect

of chiral interaction (CI) results in a mechanical rotation in one preferred

direction out of two possible ones around a given axis of the device. This is

so because the source of the interaction, i.e. the medium, usually is external

to the chiral device. In the case of an electric device which generates a static

current ﬂowing in one preferred direction out of two possible ones, the source

of the interaction may be embedded within the device. This is the case, for

instance, of an electric cell which consists of two diﬀerent electrodes coming

in contact with an electrolyte.

It is obvious that in order to reverse the

direction of the current it is necessary to interchange the two electrodes with

one another, but this does not necessarily require any chiral operation. This

is so because the source of the current ﬂow is internal, so that the structure of

the device can be completely symmetric, as is the case of a cylindric battery.

In the case of an electric thermocouple, the operation can still be regarded

as CI since the source of the interaction, i.e. the temperature diﬀerence, is

external to the device.

8

Before proceeding to molecular systems, it becomes useful to summarize

the main features of CI in macrodevices. In all these examples there exists

a speciﬁc active medium with which each chiral device is interacting, and

this happens always at an interface separating the device from the medium,

where physical chirality is built into this interface. CI is a process by which

energy is transferred from the medium to the chiral device, where one out

of two possible modes of rotational motion is selected and generated. Such

a feature of selectivity can be considered as a mode of organization. Two

modes of diﬀerent natures, namely, mechanical or electric motions, can be

created within the device. The electric mode, i.e. the current, is of practically

massless charge motion ﬂowing along a conductor.

3. Chiral Interaction in Molecular Systems

3a. General Features and Physical Background.

The origin of CI in molecular systems is in the motion of free ions in

aqueous solutions. This is to be considered as the necessary medium for

CI, whereas the interacting ‘chiral device’, i.e.

the chiral molecule, must

include certain speciﬁc features which enable it to function as a ‘chiral device’.

These conditions ﬁt well soluble proteins that contain electric dipole moments

that interact electrostatically with moving ions in the solvent. Owing to the

large dielectric constant of water (ǫ = 81), the range of CI is limited to

approximately (10 − 20)˚A. The permanent electric dipole moment [18] of

the protein molecule consists of the amino (NH+) and the carbonyl (CO−)

groups along the peptide bonding chains. This dipole moment is presented

schematically by PN (see ﬁgure 2). Let us now examine the motion of a

9

Figure 2: The deﬂection of a positive ion Pi from a linear track, presented
by P1A, into a curved track P1B due to an electric dipole moment PN. The
curved motion of P1 induces a non-zero time-averaged electric ﬁeld Ek along
PN. A negative ion (not shown here)is deﬂected in the opposite direction,
but, being of opposite sign to P1, it will induce Ek in the same direction of
P1.

10

positive ion P1 approaching PN. Let Ek(t) be the time dependent com-
ponent of an electric ﬁeld ~E induced by P1 along PN. The time average of

Ek(t) is given by:

Ek =

Ek(t)dt

T

1
T Z
0

(1)

In the absence of any interaction P1 moves along a straight line P1A so

that for T → ∞, we have Ek → 0. Since PN is in fact an electric dipole

moment, the actual track of the ion P1 is now presented by the orbit of P1B

rather than P1A. This is so because the ion is being deﬂected away from P

and attracted by N. For this shape of an orbit, not being on a straight line,

Ek 6= 0 for T → ∞, and it is pointing in the direction of P . Let us now

look for the case of a negative moving ion, not shown in the ﬁgure. It is also

deﬂected by the electric dipole but in the opposite direction in comparison

to P1. Being also of opposite charge, it will induce an electric ﬁeld Ek in

the same direction as the positive ion. In other words, Ek remains in the

same direction for positive and negative ions alike. Another fact that is of

signiﬁcance is the independence of the motional direction of P1. For instance,

if P1 moves backward on the same track in the opposite direction, it will still

produce Ek in the same direction as before.

The electric ﬁeld Ek, caused by the deﬂection of random ionic motion in

the solvent, due to the existence of a permanent dipole moment, becomes

a source of repetitive perturbation of the molecular system. The system

responds to such an external perturbation, according to the Le Chatelier

law, in an attempt of maintaining an equilibrium state within the system,

11

i.e., it evokes an internal perturbation along closed loops of chemical bonds

in an attempt to neutralize the external perturbation. Such an internal

perturbation, or ‘current’, selects one out of two possible directions of motion

as in the case in macrodevices, in particular, the electric cell. This eﬀect is

to be regarded as ‘Chiral Interaction’ (CI), on a molecular level scale [19].

Since the molecules involved in such an interaction, i.e. soluble proteins, are

considerably heavier than the deﬂected ions in the solvent, any mechanical

eﬀects of CI can be neglected in comparison to its electric eﬀect.

3b. The Necessity of an Interface

In the description of chiral macrodevices the necessary existence of an in-

terface, where CI is taking place, has been emphasized. Surprisingly enough,

such an interface becomes also necessary for molecular chiral systems. This

is shown schematically in Figure 3. If moving ions approach a closed ring

attached to an electric dipole PN, from all possible directions, the induced

perturbation, i.e. CI, averages out to zero. This is so because IA cancels

out IB on the average, so that the net induced perturbation becomes zero on

the average. For this reason, in order to maintain a non-zero CI, it becomes

necessary to limit the access of ions approaching the ring to about half of

the space surrounding it, i.e., limit the access of P2, in comparison to P1.

This can be accomplished by an interface (denoted by S), that prevents the

access of free ions, i.e. P2 from the space above S, so that CI can go on in

one preferred direction, i.e. IA, for an indeﬁnite length of time.

In nature there exist several interfaces. Most obvious one is the solvent-air

interface, which is macroscopic. At this interface there exists a strong

12

Figure 3: Schematic representation of why it is necessary to have an interface
in order to maintain a non-zero chiral interaction. Let P1 be a moving ion
approaching an electric dipole moment PN ﬁxed, for simplicity, on the diam-
eter of a ring of closed chemical bonds. P1 is deﬂected from its linear track
according to its charge sign, and induces an electric ﬁeld Ek and a resultant
chiral current IA in the ring. A similar ion P2 approaches from above and
induces IB in the opposite direction along the ring, so that on the average
there exists no CI. In order to maintain a non-zero CI it is necessary to stop
or limit the approach of ions from one of these two semicircles. This can be
accomplished by a separating interface represented by S.

13

change, or gradient ~▽c, in the ionic strength c of the solvent. This pro-
vides for a variation | ~▽c · d| in the ionic strength across a loop of chemical
bonds such as Cα · COO− · NH +
attached to the water surface, where d ≈ few ˚A. The origin of the elec-

3 , of a hydrophobic amino acid molecule [13]

tric dipole moment along this loop is due to the existence of a zwitterion in

amino acids in the presence of water. A suﬃciently strong gradient in the

ionic strength at the close vicinity of the water-air interface can maintain CI

for molecules such as amino acids that are aligned normal to this interface.

Another natural interface of molecular size exists at the surface of globular

proteins. This interface intervenes between the solvent, where free ionic mo-

tion persists, and the the interior part of the molecule where no ionic motion

exists. Owing to this interface, CI can occur for globular proteins in the bulk

of the solvent. Somewhat surprising and encouraging is the observation that

soluble proteins must become globular in order to function as enzymes [20].

This fact may indicate a possible linkage between CI and enzymatic activity

of proteins, a possibility to be further discussed in what follows. Looking

at the secondary α-helix structure of proteins, each segment of such a loop,

containing the NH+ . . .CO− bond, can be considered as a ‘chiral element’

with which free ions in the solvent are interacting (see ﬁgure 4). This mode

of interaction, being CI on a molecular level, is schematically shown and

described in ﬁgure 5.

3c. Formal Treatment of Chiral Interaction

Next, a formal treatment of the intrinsic molecular perturbation, or ‘chiral

current’ Ic is presented for a single chiral element.

14

This is carried out by applying the Langevin equation [13,21]:

dIc
dt

= −γIc + F (t)

where γ = τ −1

R is the attenuation or dissipation constant of Ic and τR is

the relaxation time of the chiral perturbation or current Ic. F(t) represents

a series of stochastic events of random approaches of moving ions in the

solvent to the chiral element presented in ﬁgure 4 or 5. F(t) is presented

mathematically by:

F (t) = τ −1

αiδ(θ − θi) exp[−γ(t − ti)]

(3)

X

where αi is the i-th current, or perturbation increment occurring at time ti.

θ = t/τ , θi = ti/τ and τ is the stochastic time constant, being the average

time gap between two successive stochastic events of solvent ions approaching

the chiral element. The solution of equation 2 yields:

Ic =

αiΘ(θ − θi) exp[−γ(t − ti)]

X

where Θ(χ) is a step-function. The time-average hIci for long periods Ti >> τ

and (T1 − T2) >> τ is given by

For a steady-state situation it is assumed that hdIc/dti ∼= 0, so that [11,17]:

(2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

where α = hαii is the average chiral current perturbation generated per

each stochastic event, and α is proportional to the magnitude of the electric

hIci =

T2

1
T2 − T1 Z

Ti

Ic(t)dt

hIci =

α
γτ

=

ατR
τ

15

Figure 4: A segment of an α-helix structure which can be considered as a
segment in a globular protein. The H-bond connecting two successive coils
are presented by broken lines and they are all oriented in the same direction,
to N(+). The H-bonds together with the covalent bonds
i.e.
connecting N and O around the loop are considered as a ‘chiral element’.
(Original drawing by Irwin Geis).

from O(-)

16

Figure 5: A schematic representation of a chiral element in a globular protein.
The electric dipole moment sticking into the solvent, that is, on the left hand
side of the interface S, represents the H-bonds interconnecting the coils in
the α-helix. The possible motion of ions (only positive ones are shown) in
the solvent is shown, and so is the induced electric ﬁeld E that generates the
chiral current I in the chiral element. The interface S represents the surface
of the globular protein so that mobile ions exist only on the left side of S.

17

dipole-moment in the peptide bond. τ is inversely proportional to c, which

represents the ionic strength of the solvent, so that hIci is proportional to the

product ατRc, that is: hIci ∝ ατRc. From equation 6 it can be deduced that

if τR << τ then hIci → 0. In other words, if the relaxation time τR of the

chiral current perturbation is much shorter than the average stochastic time

τ , then CI vanishes. The physical meaning of this is that the ionic strength

c must be suﬃciently large to maintain the chiral interaction CI.

3d. Estimates and Conclusions

In the absence of any experimental data concerning CI in molecular sys-

tems, it is still not easy to make reliable estimates for the size of the eﬀect

of CI. It is obvious that, owing to the large mass ratio of the protein relative

to a moving ionic mass, only CI of the second kind can be invoked, i.e. of

electronic or massless motion. The estimate of the energy involved in this

process of CI is of the order of (10−2 − 10−3)kT per stochastic event (17),

which signiﬁes it is a ‘subthermal eﬀect’. The relatively small energy con-

tents does not mean that such an eﬀect can be ignored. On the contrary,

the smallness of this eﬀect, as well as the degree of its sophistication, may

provide for information transfer throughout a complex molecule such as pro-

tein, and may be signiﬁcant for its speciﬁc enzymatic function. This aspect

will be further discussed in what follows. The necessary ingredients of CI on

a molecular level may be now listed as:

1. The existence of a chiral element (or molecule) that includes an electric

dipole moment as part of the chiral structure;

18

2. The presence of a polar solvent that is suﬃciently rich in mobile ions;

3. The existence of closed loops of chemical bonds in the chiral element;

and

4. The presence of an interface that separates between two media that

diﬀer largely in their respective ionic strength and/or in their ionic

mobilities in the close vicinity of a chiral element.

It should be emphasized that CI in biomolecules is still a hypothesis await-

ing for experimental veriﬁcation. If conﬁrmed, it may become of considerable

signiﬁcance as a mode of self-organization that is pertinent to the intrinsic

control of enzymatic activity of proteins. It should also be stressed that all

the ingredients required for CI occur in nature for globular proteins as well

as for amino acids oriented at the water-air interface. It is also of interest

to point out the relevance, or necessity, of the presence of nitrogen atoms in

the structure of amino acids and proteins. The physical asymmetry between

the amino NH+ and the carbonyl CO− groups provides for the existence of

an electric dipole moment which is a necessary condition for CI. Hydrocar-

bons alone, lacking the presence of N, cannot participate in the generation

of CI. it is important to notice that physical eﬀects of chirality have well

been known for long [3], and they involve mainly optical phenomena, such as

optical activity [22] and related eﬀects. These eﬀects are to be considered as

‘chiral scattering’ rather than ‘chiral interactions’ because they concern only

the eﬀect of chiral systems on electromagnetic radiation. In the case of CI,

the main eﬀect to be considered is the generation of an intrinsic perturbation

19

within the chiral system, which is ignored in the case of chiral scattering. In

addition to this, CI is not limited to optical eﬀects only, as is the case in the

phenomena of chiral scattering. Needless to add that the distinction between

chiral scattering and CI does not mean that there is no relation between these

two concepts. The opposite is correct.

4. General Features and the Advantages of Chiral Interaction

4a Thermodynamic and Space-Time Symmetry Considerations

Thermodynamical aspects of CI have already been considered [11,16-17].

The basic eﬀect of CI, where a molecule is being perturbed and thus is devel-

oping a persistent current in a single selected direction, is thermodynamically

uncommon. Such a perturbation can be considered as an excited state of in-

deﬁnitely long lifetime. This means that however small is the energy of such

a perturbation, the system will never completely reach thermal equilibrium.

That is, as long as the chiral system is surviving. Such a phenomenon has

certain peculiar aspects and in order to better appreciate them let us now

look back at the example of a windmill. While so doing, macroscopic eﬀects

such as friction and other energy dissipative eﬀects are ignored. What we

see now is a signiﬁcant space-time symmetry feature of CI, being of time-

irreversible nature, in contrast to many common mechanical examples. For

instance, if ﬂow of time is reversed, a satellite moving in space ‘will move’

on the same track in the opposite direction. This is so because of the nature

of the forces acting on it in space. In the case of a windmill, or other chiral

devices, if time is reversed the windmill ‘will not be able’ to move in the

20

opposite direction because of the shape of its rotors, which is still pushing it

in the same direction. What does move backward is the mirror-image of the

same windmill. Thus, in order to obtain a complete-reversal, it is also neces-

sary ‘to reverse’ space. In the case of an electric cell, by reversing the ﬂow of

time the current ‘does ﬂow’ in the opposite direction even though the elec-

trochemical potential is still acting in the same direction, which contradicts

the sense of the current motion. In order to reverse the ﬂow of the current it

is necessary to interchange the electrodes, i.e. to reverse also the sense of the

electrochemical potential. To summarize on this symmetry consideration, CI

is not a time-reversal process but rather of space-time invariance, and this

is so because of the chiral nature of such an interaction. Let T represent a

time-reversal operation and P is a space (or parity) reﬂection operation, then

the main conclusion of this argument is that CI does not obey T-invariance

but rather PT-invariance.

Moving back to CI on a molecular level, it can readily be deduced that

such a symmetry consideration may have deep impact on the thermodynam-

ical aspects of CI. In the absence of T-invariance on a molecular scale it

means that CI does not obey the classical detailed balance principles [24].

Detailed balance implies that at equilibrium the number of occurrences of

each chemical reaction in the forward direction is the same as that in the

reverse direction.

In other words, equilibrium does exist not only macro-

scopically but also for each individual microscopic reaction. A necessary

condition for detailed balance is the conservation of time reversibility, which

is not being obeyed by CI. Moreover, the persistence of CI in one selected

21

direction prevents the molecular system from reaching thermal equilibrium.

This conclusion is related to the ergodic assumption introduced by Boltz-

mann over a century ago. According to this assumption, any property taken

as an average over a large ensemble of particles within a closed box, being at

thermal equilibrium with its environment, can also be obtained for a single

particle under the same conditions, if averaged over a suﬃciently long time.

The behaviour of CI presents, therefore, a non-ergodic system. The origin for

this is the generation of an intrinsic molecular perturbation that is moving in

one selective direction out of two possible ones, as a result of a continuous in-

teraction with random ionic motion in the solvent at the close vicinity of the

molecule. Such a behaviour is uncommon for ordinary molecular systems and

it is the consequence of several structural details listed above, in particular,

its chiral structure as well as the presence of a microscopic interface.

4b. Non-Ergodicity and Evolution

The subject of thermal equilibrium and ergodicity may become of prob-

lematic nature dealing with systems that contain more sophisticated ele-

ments. As long as relatively simple objects, such as mass points, or plain

molecules are concerned, the ergodic assumption seems to be fulﬁlled in gen-

eral. The problem arises when less simple systems are involved, in particular,

those which do not obey time reversal invariance. For example, suppose that

an aqueous solution reaches thermal equilibrium and then a bacterium is

thrown into it. A quasi-microscopic system, such as a living bacterium, is

certainly not time-reversible in its function, and as long as it stays alive

it also does not reach thermal equilibrium, i.e.

it is a non-ergodic system.

22

A similar conclusion can be reached for any microscopic living system that

happens to be immersed in a macroscopic surrounding being at thermal equi-

librium. The question that can be asked now is: “what is the smallest system

that can remain at a non-ergodic state within a macroscopic system being at

thermal equilibrium”. Such a question cannot be readily answered. It seems

reasonable to assume that any suﬃciently complex microscopic system, or

molecule, that can perform in a ‘machine-like’ mode of operation, being time-

irreversible in nature, will remain non-ergodic under such a condition for as

long time as it does not break down or decompose into simpler and smaller

elements. Soluble proteins, as well as other suﬃciently complex biomolecules,

seem to comply with this requirement. It seems to be the case, and this is

so to the best knowledge of the author, that only ‘machine-like’ biomolecules

can be considered as microscopic non-ergodic systems. It may well be the

case that also microelectronics systems may achieve such a state with further

development. In view of this it becomes of much interest to point out that

non-ergodicity may well be a phenomenon related to the microscopic level of

function of life in nature.

Another question of much interest concerns the possible signiﬁcance of

non-ergodicity in nature. Microscopic systems or molecules that reach easily

thermal equilibrium do not seem to be liable for any process of intrinsic

organization. Another signiﬁcant aspect of the function and operation of

complex molecular systems has to do with its usefulness. Any time reversal

activity can be regarded as completely ineﬀective from this view point of

usefulness. For this very reason the breaking of time-reversal invariance of

23

processes becomes necessary for a practical operation of any useful value.

All machine operations are time-irreversible, and these include microscopic

‘machines’ as well, such as molecular proteins. Non-ergodicity becomes a

feature closely related to time-irreversibility for sophisticated microscopic

systems. Upon combining together these various features, it seems reasonable

to deduce that the process of biomolecular evolution in nature is closely

related to them. For this reason it becomes plausible to assume that non-

ergodicity is to be regarded a necessary condition for molecular evolution

[11]. The CI hypothesis has similar features to those described hereby, and it

is based on well recognized structural details as well as on external source of

random ionic motion, which provides for a physical well explicable model. For

these reasons it is anticipated that CI may become of major value for better

understanding of the function of operative biomolecules, soluble proteins in

particular. This is so, provided that more experimental support is to be

found for its viability.

4c. Order of Magnitude Estimate

Another aspect of CI perturbation concerns the size of its energy content,

being of the order of (10−1−10−2)kT per chiral element, which is rather small

in comparison to thermal energy, being of the order of kT. The signiﬁcance of

such subthermal perturbation is not relevant to the size of its energy content,

but rather to its degree of ordering or sophistication. The energy content of

a biomolecule is considerably larger, and this can serve as source of energy

for its operational functions. The energy associated with CI can become

operational upon ‘switching on’ and ‘switching oﬀ’ the active groups in the

24

molecule. In other words, CI may be relevant to the control mechanism of

biomolecular function, rather than to its operational function, which requires

much more energy. A similar comparison of amounts of energy can be made

between a robot and a computer that controls its activity. The energy needed

for control is considerably smaller than that required for the function of a

robot, although its degree of sophistication is rather impressive. The rela-

tively low energy content of CI has an additional advantage as well. Being

of considerably lower energy than typical thermal energy of the order of kT,

does help to increase its length of relaxation time τR which contributes to

the persistence of CI. The reason for this eﬀect is related to the presence of

a large population of energy modes of similar energy levels, as is the case of

thermal energy, which decreases their ‘life-times’ lengths, owing to the high

liability of interactivity among such modes.

4d. Possible Magnetic Eﬀect

This concerns the possibility of CI to induce magnetic ﬁelds along the

axes of coils of the α-helix segments of which the globular protein consists.

The direction of this magnetic ﬁeld follows the axis of each segment sepa-

rately and its magnitude is crudely estimated to be of the order of 0.01T,

or 100 gauss.

It may well be too early to elaborate on the possible prac-

tical signiﬁcance of such an intrinsic molecular magnetic ﬁeld. However, it

has already been emphasized by Steiner and Ulrich [24] that magnetic ﬁelds

can have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the polarization of electronic and nuclear spins

during chemical reactions, which may considerably aﬀect chemical yields and

25

kinetics. It is important to emphasize that the size of magnetic ﬁelds, ap-

plied externally to chemical reactions, has negligible eﬀect on these reactions.

It is also important to point out that in contrast to regular chemical reac-

tions, where an external magnetic ﬁeld is applied in arbitrary direction with

respect to any molecule participating in such a reaction, the intrinsic ﬁeld

induced by CI happens to be acting at the optimal location and direction

where it is needed. This may well become a crucial feature of CI, which can

eﬃciently contribute to the autocatalytic function of soluble proteins. An-

other interesting feature of such an intrinsic magnetic ﬁeld induced by CI,

is related to the description of ‘chiral favourable environment’ introduced by

Barron [25], who proposes to apply a combination of electric and magnetic

ﬁelds parallel to one another in order to generate an enantiomeric excess in a

chiral synthesis performed in their close presence. Actually, such an intrinsic

combination exists in the globular state of soluble proteins in the presence of

CI. The electric ﬁeld is generated by the electric dipole moment that exists

along the peptide bond that comes into touch with the solvent surrounding

the globular protein, whereas the magnetic ﬁeld is induced in parallel to it

by CI along the axes of the coils of the α-helix.

5. Experimental Veriﬁcation and Support

5a. Background

The presence of CI perturbation along one selected direction may produce

an additional eﬀect. Although CI is largely still a hypothesis awaiting for an

experimental veriﬁcation, there exist several pieces of evidence supporting its

validity. Let us ﬁrst indicate that its very existence is based largely on general

26

physical principles which are hard to refute, as well as on general symme-

try arguments. All macroscopic examples are based on such considerations.

In addition, it is important to notice that CI is a special and uncommon

molecular phenomenon, which requires a set of structural constraints for its

possible validity, in analogy to macroscopic chiral devices. These include the

presence of an electric dipole moment, as well as an interface separating be-

tween the active medium in the solvent and the inner part of the molecule.

All these happen to exist for soluble proteins. Before looking at a possible

and practical experiment, we note two speciﬁc diﬃculties that may aﬀect the

observation of CI. The ﬁrst one concerns the size of the eﬀect, which is quite

small, and the second is the fact of its being an intrinsic molecular event,

which limits its experimental accessibility. The second diﬃculty concerns

proteins rather than amino acids, which are of more open structure. On the

other hand, there are good reasons why it is desirable to observe CI. Such

an eﬀect can provide for a better understanding of the complex nature and

operation of biomolecular function.

In the lack of any direct experimental evidence for the validity of CI it

may be helpful to look for existing experimental results that may bear certain

close relation to this phenomenon. For this very purpose an indirect experi-

ment has been proposed [17], based on an assumption that CI is a necessary

condition for enzymatic activity in soluble proteins. Such an assumption,

reasonable as it may sound, presents a certain constraint that at best can

provide for a strong positive experimental support of CI, rather than a di-

rect veriﬁcation of its validity. Such an experiment was actually performed

27

by Careri et al. [26,27]. This experiment concerns the eﬀect of dehydration

on the protonic motion throughout the hydration layers around soluble pro-

teins. The amount of water surrounding each protein molecule is of crucial

importance for free protonic motion around this molecule. This is associated

with the so-called ‘percolation transition’ involving water clusters around the

protein molecule. By dehydrating the water layers beyond the percolation

transition, the protonic motion stops, and so does also, simultaneously, the

enzymatic activity of the molecule. As soon as there exists enough water

within the hydration layer surrounding the molecule, free protonic motion,

or mobility, becomes possible and resumes again. This in turn causes also

the onset of enzymatic activity in the protein molecule. Protonic motion is

identical in fact, with free ionic mobility being a necessary condition for CI

in soluble proteins. This fact links closely between chiral interaction and

these experimental results. The close causal connection between protonic, or

ionic, mobility and enzymatic activity in soluble proteins, ﬁts precisely with

the assumption of the existence of CI.

5b. Enantiomeric Excess Experiment

A direct experiment to observe CI has already been proposed [11,17,28].

In order to perform such an experiment, it is necessary to make use of some

observable property that is generated by this eﬀect. Such is the case with

amino acid molecules attached to the water-air interface. For this purpose a

racemic solution of a hydrophobic amino acid, such as tryptophan, may be

employed, as is shown schematically in Figure 6. The side chain R attaches
itself to the water surface, and CI occurs around the loop NH+

3 .COO−.C,

28

which contains a zwitterion where an H-bond may exist between NH+

3 and

COO−. The ring of bonds may also contain a water molecule that relaxes

the angular strain of the bonds [28]. CI becomes possible there, close to
the water-air interface, owing to the gradient ~▽c 6= 0 of the ionic strength c

across the ring of bonds at the water surface. CI induces there a magnetic

dipole moment ~µ, which has opposite components for the L and D enan-

tiomers, respectively, with regard to the normal to the water surface. Next,
an external magnetic ﬁeld ~B is applied normal to the water surface and this

interacts with ~µ with energy Eµ:

where the ± signs depend on the L or D chirality respectively. This energy

adds to the hydrophobic energy Eh, i.e. E = Eh + Eµ or:

Eµ = ±~µ. ~B.

E = Eh ± ~µ. ~B,

which results in an energy diﬀerence of 2Eµ between the two enantiomers.

This, in turn, creates a small population change ∆n between the two enan-

tiomers according to Boltzmann law:

∆n = nL − nD

which depends on the direction of ~B. In order to estimate the size of this
L = n0
eﬀect, i.e. of ∆n/n, where n = n0

D is the racemic population, it is

necessary to estimate the magnetic dipole moment µ, and this is given [17]

by: µ ≈ (10−1 − 10−2)µB, where µB is the Bohr magneton. Then

∆n
n

=

2µB
kT

∼= 10−3 (for µ ∼= 10−1µB)

(10)

29

(7)

(8)

(9)

and B is of the order of a few teslas.

The measurement itself can be performed by removing monolayers from

the water surface [29] that contains the amino acid population and then by

measuring their optical activity elsewhere, not in the presence of the magnetic

ﬁeld. Other advanced technologies may also be available for this purpose [30].

The physical reasoning behind this experiment resembles the reasoning

leading to the natural selection of the L-anantiomer of amino acid in ter-

restrial biomolecular evolution. The mechanism may well be the same, but

instead of an applied magnetic ﬁeld there exists the vertical component of the

terrestrial ﬁeld. It is suggested that this process could have happened during

the prebiotic era over a localized region of the earth, where the vertical com-

ponent of the terrestrial magnetic ﬁeld had a well deﬁned component over a

suﬃciently time length, so that one enantiomer, presumably L, had a slight

energy advantage over D. The diﬀerence in energy is rather small, being of

the order of (10−8 − 10−9)kT . This energy estimate, although quite small, is

still considerably larger, by some 7 or 8 orders of magnitude, than the weak

nuclear current (WNC) interaction mechanism proposed by Kondepudi and

Nelson [31] for the natural selection of the L-anantiomer. The present mech-

anism does not give an a priori advantage to either L or D enantiomer. This

advantage is an accidental outcome of the direction of the normal magnetic

ﬁeld of earth that happened to exist at the speciﬁc region of the ocean where

and when natural selection happened to occur. Recently, Barron [25] has pro-

posed to apply a ‘chiral favorable environment’ of an electric and magnetic

ﬁelds parallel to one another, which may prefer one enantiomeric chirality

30

over the other. In order to perform such an experiment, Barron proposes

also to rotate charges mechanically, which would make it similar, though

considerably more awkward, to the approach of CI.

5c. Detection of Associated Magnetic Eﬀects

Apart from a possible enantiomeric excess eﬀect, owing to an external

magnetic ﬁeld applied on a racemic solution, there exist also other magnetic

eﬀects of CI that can be detected experimentally. These have already been

indicated above for the case of soluble globular proteins. Such a magnetic

structure may be detected, perhaps, by polarized neutron scattering. An-

other quite fascinating possibility is related to the SQUID apparatus, an

abbreviation of Superconducting Quantum Interference Device [32], which

can detect extremely small magnetic ﬁelds with resolution of the order of

one part in 1011 of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, or of femtotesla (10−15 tesla).

This is so in addition to its possibility of detection very minute changes,

or diﬀerences, in magnetic ﬁelds. For this purpose it is suitable to prepare

monomeric solution of a single enantiomer, say L, of a hydrophobic amino

acid in a suﬃciently large concentration. Such a solution will create a mag-

netic monolayer at the water-air interface. This is due to the presence of a

surface of magnetic moments induced by CI, all having parallel components

in the same direction normal to the water-air interface. (See ﬁgure 6). Such

a magnetic monolayer may generate a suﬃciently strong magnetic ﬁeld, nor-

mal to this surface, to be detectable by the SQUID. The size of the magnetic

ﬁeld produced by, say, 1012 molecules of amino acid per 1 cm2 of this surface,

31

Figure 6: Two hydrophobic amino acid enantiomers L and D are shown. The
side chain R penetrates the water-air interface LS. ~B is an external magnetic
ﬁeld applied normal to LS and interacts with the induced magnetic moments
~µ. Due to the opposite orientations of ~µ with respect to ~B to L and D
respectively, there exists a small energy diﬀerence of 2~µ. ~B between the two
enantiomers, at the water-air surface LS.

32

is estimated to be of the order of 10−12 to 10−14 tesla at a distance of 1

mm above the surface. Such a magnetic ﬁeld can, hopefully, be detected by

a SQUID [32].

6. The Reality of Chiral Interaction

The main motivation of the present treatment of CI comes form funda-

mental questions such as: ”why are the molecules of life chiral?” or, more

speciﬁcally, ”does chirality oﬀer any biological advantage to biomolecules?”.

CI may provide for a positive answer to such questions. For this very reason

it has been helpful to inspect macroscopic chiral devices and draw conclusions

for chiral molecules by pure analogy. Two modes of operation were found for

CI, namely, massive rotational motion of the chiral device and a circular ﬂow

of massless perturbation, such as a current, throughout the device. Of these,

only the massless mode of motion is found suitable for molecular CI. More-

over, given certain structural details, all happen to exist in soluble proteins,

certain chiral molecules have the capability of interacting with randomly

moving ions in a solvent. This interaction produces an intrinsic perturbation

that moves in one preferred direction out of two possible ones. Such a capa-

bility does not exist for achiral molecules. This mode of perturbation within

a chiral molecule gives rise to a certain degree of non-ergodicity, which may

also be regarded as a certain amount of negative entropy.

It is tempting

to compare this to the somewhat naive conclusion of Shrodinger [33] in his

book What is Life?, where he claims for such a phenomenon that: ‘it feeds on

negative entropy’. In the present context CI enables proteins to reduce their

33

entropy, i.e. to avoid thermal equilibrium by a minute amount, which is to

be regarded as a mode of ‘subthermal organization’. It is hereby conjectured

[11,17] that such a phenomenon of non-ergodicity is to be considered as a

necessary condition for evolutionary process in biomolecules. It is also im-

portant to observe that such features require CI to become a microscopically

time-irreversible [34] phenomenon. In fact, if proteins are to be regarded as

‘biological machines’, there must exist an element of time irreversibility in

their function.

These arguments are rather general and still somewhat speculative, since

as yet CI has not been proven to be real on molecular level. Moreover, it may

be quite plausible that such arguments are crucial to the function of proteins,

though it is still not easy to describe exactly how. We still need a much better

insight into their function. However, it is important to indicate that if CI is

indeed of signiﬁcance for protein function, then it can be useful to ascribe

biological signiﬁcance to various structural features of soluble proteins that

otherwise would remain plain facts. Among these features the chirality of

the protein molecule can be mentioned, in particular the charge distribution

on the peptide H-bonds connecting the loops along the α-helix coils, which

are of physical chiral nature. In addition, this also oﬀers a certain meaning

to the presence of nitrogen atoms in proteins and amino acid constitution,

where the asymmetry between N and O atoms is responsible for the dipolar

charge on the peptide H-bonds. By comparison, N atoms are totally absent

in hydrocarbons. Also structurally meaningful is the existence of closed loops

of chemical bonds in proteins, which provide for a means of delivering the

34

CI perturbation around the molecule. This holds for β sheets as well [19].

An additional meaningful fact is the parallelism, or consistency, of all dipolar

moments along the α-helix, which adds up to a total dipole moment in each

separate segment of a globular protein along the narrow zone that happens

to be in contact with the solvent. (see ﬁgure 4). All these structural details

have already been considered in the assumptions leading to the proposal of

CI, so that their biological signiﬁcance is not surprising. More surprising is

the fact that soluble proteins must become globular before they can function

as enzymes. This fact has not been considered previously. It links up neatly

with the necessity of an interface for the operation of CI. Another fact of

biological importance is the presence of free mobile ions in a solvent, which

leads to the preference of physiological, rather than pure or distilled water,

as the solvent material. These mobile ions are necessary for generating CI

in biomolecules. Most relevant and signiﬁcant, so far, is the contribution

made by the experiment [26,27] of Careri et al., which reveals the connection

between protonic motion in the hydration layer of proteins and the onset of

enzymatic activity. This experiment provides for an impressive support for

the CI hypothesis.

Apart from these facts there exist two related points that are of biomolec-

ular evolutionary signiﬁcance. One of these has to do with the possibility that

CI was playing an important role in the natural selection of the L-anantiomer

of amino acids. The other is the evolutionary signiﬁcance of the non-ergodic

nature of CI. Although in nature there hardly exists any thermal equilib-

rium, it seems very likely that non-ergodic systems, such as proteins, become

35

much more susceptible to evolutionary processes in comparison to systems

that readily reach thermal equilibrium. it is also interesting to indicate that

any living system is non-ergodic as well.

Another aspect of CI concerns the amount of energy involved in such a

process. This energy is rather small, subthermal in eﬀect, which may evoke

criticism as to its signiﬁcance. Such criticism is rather common among sci-

entists who attribute signiﬁcance to energy according to its size. What is

signiﬁcant in complex systems such as proteins, may well be the quality, or

the degree of sophistication of energy, rather than its size. For instance, in-

formation transferred by electromagnetic wave involves certain modulations

of this wave and their respective energy is much less than the energy of the

wave itself, though its content is of major importance and usefulness. An-

other example is the small amount of energy required to switch on and oﬀ

a much larger source of energy. This is to be regarded as a mode of control

energy which may be of main signiﬁcance in CI. In the case of a robot con-

trolled by a computer, we have a similar example. The quantity of energy

required by a robot is considerably larger than that of the computer, but

without this small quantity of energy, the robot cannot function coherently.

Another, rather cruel example, concerns the size of energy change that oc-

curs over the small interval during which a creature dies. This change in

energy is very small, but its signiﬁcance is enormous. This example may

well indicate the signiﬁcance of the content of such a small amount of en-

ergy. It is interesting, even fascinating, to point out that in the case of CI

all this ordered energy comes from chaotic random motion of ions, and this

36

is mainly due to the chiral nature of CI. In addition to all these, it may be

relevant to indicate that the density of energy states for subthermal energies

in molecular systems is considerably smaller than that within the thermal

range, which makes subthermal energies less convertible, or dissipative, than

thermal modes of energy, and therefore functionally more eﬃcient.

Another signiﬁcant feature of CI is its time irreversibility. It is important

to emphasize that any time-reversible operation is meaningless when regarded

from aspects of usefulness. Any productive machine function becomes au-

tomatically time-irreversible if its operation is of any merit. For instance,

even information transfer, which usually requires very little energy, is totally

a time-irreversible process. The source of time reversibility in physics comes

from the nature of the Newtonian mass point which is an ideally symmetric

object. If instead of such a symmetric point mass, an elementary physical

chiral object [11] is to be employed, then it becomes likely that instead of

time-reversal invariance the rule of PT-invariance will dominate. This may

well be the main source, or reason, for the biological advantage of chirality.

In conclusion, let it be reminded that in spite of strong but indirect sup-

port, such as that of the experiment of Careri et al. [26,27], the CI hypothesis

is still in its infancy and requires much more insight, understanding and de-

velopment, not to mention additional support from direct experiments as

discussed here and elsewhere [11,17,28].

37

7. Conclusions

The phenomenon of chiral interaction has been described and treated in

detail in this article. Various uncommon features of such an interaction are

described and discussed. It is also claimed that chiral interaction may well be

of signiﬁcant biological advantage, and this is due to its possible linkage and

relevance to enzymatic activity of soluble proteins. Another reason for such

an advantage is that chiral interaction may be the source of non-ergodicity in

biological molecules, which might be relevant to the process of biomolecular

evolution in nature.

Acknowledgement

The author wishes to thank Dr. Robert M. Clegg for his help in discover-

ing the work of Careri et al. He also wishes to thank Ms. Elizabeth Youdim,

and Ms. Gila Etzion for their considerable help in completing this article.

38

References:

1. F. Arago; “Memoires de la Classe des Sciences Math. et Phys. de

l’Institut Imperial de France”, Part 1, p. 93, (1811).

2. J.B. Biot; “Memoires de la Classe des Science Math. et Phys. de

l’Institut Imperial de France”, Part 1, 1, (1812).

3. L. Pasteur; Ann. Chim. 24, 457 (1848).

4. W.T. Kelvin; “Baltimore Lectures” (C.J. Clay & Sons, London, 1904).

5. P.G. Mezey; J. Math. Chem. 17, 185 (1995), Comput. Math. 34, 105

(1997), and references therein.

6. G. Gilat and Y. Gordon; J. Math. Chem. 16, 37 (1994).

7. G. Gilat; J. Phys. A, 22, L545 (1989), ibid. Found. Phys. Lett. 3, 189

(1990).

8. A.B. Buda and K. Mislow; J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114, 6006 (1992).

9. H. Zabrodsky and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 462 (1995).

10. A.B. Buda, T.P.E. Auf der Heyde and K. Mislow; Angew. Chem. Int.

Ed. Engl. 31, 989 (1992).

11. G. Gilat; The Concept of Structural Chirality, in “Concepts in Chem-

istry” Ed. D.H. Rouvray (Research Studies Press and Wiley & Sons,

London, New York, 1996), p. 325.

39

12. G. Gilat; J. Math. Chem. 15, 197 (1994).

13. G. Gilat; Chem. Phys. Lett. 121, 9 (1985).

14. G. Gilat and L.S. Schulman; Chem. Phys. Lett. 121, 13 (1985).

15. G. Gilat; Chem. Phys. Lett. 125, 129 (1986).

16. G. Gilat; Chem. Phys. Lett. 137, 492 (1987).

17. G. Gilat; Mol. Eng. 1, 161 (1991).

18. A.S. Davydov; “Biology and Quantum Mechanics”, (Pergamon Press,

Oxford, 1982).

19. For more details concerning the steric structure of globular proteins,

see R. Huber and W.S. Bennett Jr.

in “Biophysics” Eds. W. Hoppe,

W. Lohmann, H. Markl & H. Ziegler, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983),

p. 372. Globular proteins contain also β-sheets which are capable too

of generating CI in solvents.

20. H. Tschesche; in “Biophysics”, Eds. W. Hoppe, W. Lohmann, H. Markl

& H. Ziegler, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983), p. 37.

21. H. Haken; “Synergetics - an Introduction”, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

1977).

22. L.D. Barron; “Molecular Light Scattering and Optical Activity”, (Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982).

40

23. L.E. Reichl; “A Modern Course in Statistical Mechanics”, (University

of Texas Press, Austin, TX 91980, 1980), p. 468.

24. U.E. Steiner and T. Ulrich; Chem. Rev. 89, 51 (1989).

25. L.D. Barron; Science 266, 1491 (1994), and references therein.

26. G. Careri, A. Giasanti and J.A. Rupley; Phys. Rev. A37, 2703 (1988).

27. J.A. Rupley and G. Careri; Adv. Protein Chem. 41, 37, (1991).

28. G. Gilat; Chem. Phys. 140, 195 (1990).

29. M. Pomeranz, F.H. Docol and A. Segmuller; Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 2467

(1978).

30. G.L. Gaines, Jr.; “Insoluble Monolayers at Liquid-Gas Interfaces”, (Wi-

ley & Sons, New York 1966), p. 125 and references therein.

31. D.K. Kondepudi and G.W. Nelson; Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1023 (1983),

ibid. Phys. Lett. 106A, 203 (1984).

32. J. Clarke, Sci. Am. 271, 46 (1994).

33. E. Schrodinger; “What is Life” (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, 1944),

Press, 1974).

34. P.C.W. Davies; “The Physics of Time Asymmetry”, (Surrey University

41

