9
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
2
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Model of Convergent Extension in Animal
Morphogenesis

Mark Zajac∗ and Gerald L. Jones
University of Notre Dame, Department of Physics
Notre Dame, IN 46556

February 20, 2014

Abstract

In this paper we argue that the pattern of cell movements in the mor-
phogenetic process known as convergent extension can be understood as a
energy minimization process, provided the cell-cell adhesive energy has a
certain kind of anisotropy. This single simple property is suﬃcient cause
for the type of cell elongation, alignment, and intercalation of a cellular
array that is the characteristic of convergent extension. We describe the
type of anisotropy required. We show that the ﬁnal aspect ratio of the
array of cells is independent of the initial conﬁguration and of the degree
of cell elongation. We ﬁnd how it depends on the anisotropy.

In the development of the animal embryo great changes of form (morpho-
genesis) take place [1]. This is certainly true during gastrulation - a period of
embryonic development during which axial structures are formed by extensive
cell rearrangement. During these rearrangements groups of cells move coher-
ently over distances very large compared to cell dimensions. This process has
been extensively investigated by experiments, particularly on embryos of the
frog, Xenopus laevis, and particularly by R.E. Keller and his collaborators (see
[2] for a brief review and extensive references).

One characteristic and widespread type of rearrangement has been termed
“convergent extension” and occurs, for example, in the development of axial
structure such as precursors to the vertebrate spinal column. Here an active
group of cells undergoes a threefold process. The individual cells, originally
roughly isodiametric (Fig. 1a), elongate and their axes of elongation become
aligned.
If these were the only motions the ﬁnal conﬁguration would be as
in Fig. 1b. But at the same time, though on a somewhat slower time scale,
the cells intercalate between each other. The intercalation is in the direction
of alignment so that the number of cells in that direction decreases while the
number of cells in directions perpendicular to the alignment increases producing

∗mzajac@krypton.helios.nd.edu

1

a

c

b

Figure 1: Intercalation. Isodiametric cells (a) become elongated and aligned
(b)while simultaneously intercalating (c) so that an array of cells extends at
right angles to the direction of cell motion.

a ﬁnal conﬁguration as in Fig. 1c. The elongation process tends to increase the
overall length of the group of cells in the direction of alignment and tends
to decrease the length in orthogonal directions (since the volume stays roughly
constant). The process of intercalation does just the reverse but is the dominant
eﬀect so that the axis of net extension of the group of cells is at right angles
to the axis of individual cell elongation. In this paper we argue that certain
important aspects of convergent extension can be understood as a tendency of
the active cells to minimize their total energy, provided that one assumes that
they interact with a non-uniform surface (adhesive) energy satisfying certain
conditions which we explicate. We also develop a mean ﬁeld theory of this
process.

Minimum energy principles have been used to explain cell rearrangement
since Steinberg’s [3] suggestion that diﬀerential cell adhesion plus cell motility
can account for cell sorting patterns in mixtures of two or more cell types (see
[4] for a review and extensive references to the literature). Goel and Lieth [5]
have considered cell sorting for a simple geometrical model in the presence of
anisotropic surface adhesion between cells of ﬁxed shape. Cell sorting, driven by
energy minimization, has also been the subject of many computer simulations
[6, 7]. Drasdo, Kree, and McCaskill [8] have done simulations with anisotropic
surface adhesion. Anisotropic surface adhesion has not, so far, been used to
explain the convergent extension of a homogeneous group of cells. We do not
model here the dynamics of convergent extension. We assume, as in [3] and [5],
that cell motility will allow the system to explore its possible conﬁgurations and
that, as a strongly dissipative system, it will evolve towards the conﬁguration
of minimum energy.

In the embryo convergent extension usually takes place in an asymmetric
environment where the inactive cells bounding the active region are not the
same on all sides of that region. Thus one can argue that the extension, and
its orientation, may be determined by the interactions at the boundaries which
“channel” the active cells, rather than being an intrinsic collective property of
the group of active cells. Under these experimental circumstances there is little
doubt that the boundaries strongly inﬂuence active cell movements. Indeed, in
the physical model of Weliky, et.al. [9] the extension is driven by the observation

2

that active cells behave diﬀerently at the boundaries parallel to the elongation
from those at the boundaries perpendicular to the elongation. A subsequent
and elegant experiment by Shih and Keller [10] however strongly suggests that,
in addition, the active cells have a strong intrinsic collective mechanism driving
their convergent extension.

In these experiments a layer (essentially a monolayer) of active cells was
excised from a frog embryo, at a stage before convergent extension had begun,
and cultured on a uniform surface in a medium which allowed their normal
development. Subsequently the layer showed strong convergent extension in the
plane of the substrate - and this in the absence any plausible lateral anisotropy
either in the substrate or in the culture medium. This behavior thus appears
to be an example of “broken symmetry” so well known in condensed matter
physics, and asks for an explanation based on collective behavior induced by
cell-cell interactions.

To explain this behavior as an energy minimization process we assume that
cell-cell interactions take place through surface adhesion, which can be charac-
terized by an energy per unit contact area. We assume that the cell rearrange-
ments take place with negligible cell division and little change in cell volume, as
is observed in the later stages of the above experiment. There seems to be no
clear understanding in the literature of the trigger for the cell elongation which
initiates the convergent extension, and our model does not provide this. Our
main assumption is that the adhesive energy of the contact surface between two
cells will depend on how that surface is oriented relative to the axes of elongation
of the two cells. This would be the case, for example, were the surface density
of adhesive binding sites to be diﬀerent on the long side of a cell (parallel to the
axis of elongation) from that on the short sides (perpendicular to the axis of
elongation). We can ﬁnd in the literature no compelling evidence either for or
against this assumption. We argue here that a speciﬁc type of this assumption
is a suﬃcient cause of the elongation, alignment, and intercalation resulting in
convergent extension.

We give here a two dimensional version of our proposal since the convergent
extension takes place in the plane of the substrate and the height of the cells
does not seem to play an important role. Hence we consider a collection of
two dimensional cells of (nearly) the same ﬁxed area. We ﬁrst want to ﬁnd
the conditions which favor alignment. We assume a compact array of cells, so
large that array surface eﬀects can (for this argument) be neglected. Fig. 2a
is a cartoon of a few elongated cells in such a large ordered array of cells and
Fig. 2b is for a disordered array. Suppose that we can roughly distinguish, for
each cell, two long sides (parallel to the axis of elongation) and two short sides
(perpendicular).
It is clear in Fig. 2a that in the ordered array the cell-cell
contact surfaces are, for the most part, either roughly parallel to the common
axes of alignment or roughly perpendicular to that axis. We shall term these as
long-long (ll) or short-short (ss) contacts since they occur, primarily, at contacts
between a pair of long sides or a pair of short sides. In the disordered array of
Fig. 2b there are many contact surfaces that make intermediate angles with the
now diﬀerent axes of adjacent cells. We term these long-short (ls) contacts since

3

a

b

Figure 2: Cell alignment. For an ordered array (a) most cell attachments are
either end to end or side to side while a disordered array (b) exhibits signiﬁcant
binding between poles and lateral surfaces.

they tend to occur when the contact surfaces are between a long side of one cell
and a short side of a neighbor. If the energy density (per unit length) of the ls
contacts is enough larger than those of ll and ss contacts then the ordered array
will have the lower energy per cell (we assume that the array is large enough that
we can neglect the eﬀect of the array boundaries on the bulk ordering). More
quantitatively, let l and s be the average long and short side lengths of each
cell, which, for the moment, we take as ﬁxed. Suppose that all cell-cell contacts
can be characterized as ll, ss, or ls and that the total length of each type in the
array is Lll, Lss, and Lls. In a large array of N cells we have 2N l = 2Lll + Lls
and 2N s = 2Lss + Lls (again neglecting array boundaries where cells do not
contact other cells). Since N , l and s are ﬁxed these equations provide two
constraints between the three contact lengths. We assume that three energy
densities (Jll, Jss, and Jls) are adequate to characterize the interactions at the
various surfaces. Then the bulk energy of an array due to cell-cell interactions
is

(1)

(2)

E = LllJll + LssJss + LlsJls

= (2N l − Lls)Jll/2 + (2N s − Lls)Jss/2 + LlsJls
= (Jls − Jll/2 − Jss/2)Lls + N (lJll + sJss).

This energy is an increasing function of Lls if the ordering condition

γls = Jls − (Jll + Jss)/2 > 0

is satisﬁed. In this event ordered arrays (Lls = 0) will have lower bulk energies
than disordered (Lls > 0) arrays. Note that condition (2) is just that the ls
surface tension γls be positive.

The above argument is exact if the cells are assumed (unrealistically) to be
identical rectangles arranged in arbitrary tesselations of the plane and is similar
to that used in [5] in the cell sorting problem. For realistic cells it is a crude
but plausible representation of the assumed anisotropy of the surface adhesion.
It is interesting to consider the case where the adhesive energy density of a
two cell contact is the product of a factor from each cell. This might be so, for

4

Figure 3: Anisotropic binding.
Adhesive energy at the point of
contact between cells is assumed
to depend on (ˆn · ˆa)2 where ˆn
is the local unit normal while ˆa
gives alignment, assumed com-
mon to all cells.

Figure 4: Forfeited bonds. At an inter-
face with uniformly inert surroundings,
missing adhesive energy will vary with
the orientation of the surface cells, rel-
ative to the boundary.

example, if the variation in adhesive energy were caused by a variation in the
density of binding sites on the cell surface. If we make the natural assumption
that the density of adhesive bonds is proportional to the product of the density
of binding sites on the cell surfaces in contact, then we would have in the above
model Jll = −jljl, Jss = −jsjs, and Jls = −jljs, where the sign is chosen make
all J < 0 when all j > 0. It is easy to show that this choice satisﬁes the ordering
condition Eq. (1) whenever jl and js are positive and are not equal.

In addition to Eq. (1) let us suppose that the ll energy density is lower than

the ss energy density.

Jll < Jss (or jl > js).

(3)

Now the energy Eq. (1) of the array can be reduced by increasing the cell long
side lengths l and decreasing the short side length s causing, or at least favoring,
elongation of the cells. At equilibrium these surface eﬀects will presumably be
balanced by internal cellular forces opposing further elongation.

We can also argue that Eq. (3) will produce intercalation in the direction of
elongation. To see this we consider the eﬀect of the boundary on a ﬁnite array
of N cells. Suppose that there is no adhesive energy between the boundary
cells and the culture medium. Then the expression Eq. (1) underestimates
the array energy because it assumes all cell surfaces are in contact with other
cell surfaces and so overestimates the contact lengths Lll and Lss. From Eq.
(1) we should subtract the (negative) adhesive energy that is not present at
the contacts between the boundary cells and the surrounding medium. Fig. 1
shows arrays of twelve elongated cells. In Fig. 1c the array extension is at right
angles to the cell elongation and in Fig. 1b it is along the cell elongation. It

5

is clear that in 1c the boundary contacts are primarily through short cell sides
whereas in Fig. 1b they are primarily though long cell sides. Since the long
sides have lower (more negative) energy than the short, the energy (corrected
for boundaries) of the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1b is higher than that of Fig.
1c. Thus if we start with any compact initial array of unelongated cells we
expect cell motility and energy minimization to produce conﬁguration of type
1c by cell elongation, alignment, and intercalation parallel to the alignment. In
order for these processes to produce net extension in the direction perpendicular
to alignment the eﬀects of intercalation must dominate those of elongation. In
the case of a rectangular array of a large number of rectangular cells one can
show that this will be the case independent of the degree of elongation. One can
also show that the ratio of the array dimensions in the directions perpendicular
and parallel to the elongation is just Jll/Jss. We shall derive these results more
generally below.

The above arguments concerning surface eﬀects can be made somewhat more
realistic and quantitative by the following mean ﬁeld type of modeling. We
assume that we have a large array of N elongated and aligned cells. The total
energy of the array is the bulk energy due to cell-cell interactions plus the surface
correction for the absence of cells outside the boundary. The bulk energy is
proportional to N , or equivalently, the array area A, so we write it as λA, where
λ is the (negative) bulk energy per unit area in the aligned array. To model the
anisotropic cell-cell interaction we assume that J depends on the angle between
the direction of alignment, speciﬁed by the unit vector ˆa, and the unit vector ˆn
normal to the contact segment between the cells (see Fig. 3). More explicitly,
we assume that J(ˆn · ˆa) is negative, an even function (since ˆa, −ˆa and ˆn, −ˆn
specify the same physical situations), and is minimum at ˆn · ˆa = 0 (so that ll
interactions have the lowest energy). Figure 4 shows part of a ﬁnite array of
vertically aligned cells and their boundary with an external medium with which
we assume they have no adhesive energy. To get the energy of the ﬁnite array
we must subtract from the bulk energy half the energy the boundary cells would
have had with cells external to the array had the boundary been absent. Half,
since adhesive energy is shared between two cells. So

E = λA −

J(ˆn · ˆa) dl

(4)

where the integral is taken around a closed boundary. We want to minimize
this over all closed boundaries enclosing the same area A. Alternatively we can
interpret λ as a Lagrange multiplier and ﬁnd the extrema of 4 over all closed
curves at ﬁxed λ. To do this we assume the curves are parameterized as r(u)
with 0 ≤ u ≤ 1, and r(0) = r(1). Then, since dl = ( ˙x2 + ˙y2)1/2 du (where
1
˙r = dr/du), while (ˆn · ˆa) = (ay ˙x − ax ˙y)/( ˙x2 + ˙y2)1/2 and A =
0 y ˙x du we can
0 L(r, ˙r) du with L(r, ˙r) = λy ˙x − J(ˆn · ˆa)( ˙x2 + ˙y2)1/2/2.
R
write the energy as
R
The extremal curves are solutions of the usual Euler-Lagrange equations for L
and are degenerate with respect to translations in the x-y plane. This gives rise
to two ﬁrst integrals and two constants of integration (which we choose to be

1

1
2 I

6

zero), which ﬁx the position of the extremal curve. The integrated equations
have the form

2λr = ˆaJ ′(ˆn · ˆa) + ˆn[J(ˆn · ˆa) − (ˆn · ˆa)J ′(ˆn · ˆa)],

(5)

where J ′ is the derivative of J. These are two coupled ﬁrst order diﬀerential
equations whose solutions depend on the particular choice of the function J. We
have not been able to ﬁnd complete analytic solutions for any interesting choice
of J but some properties of the solutions can be found. First we note that for
ˆa = 0, or equivalently J = constant, the solution is a circle of radius J/(2λ).
Secondly, the turning points of any solution curve are where d(r · r)/du = 0.
Now

(r · r) = 2λ(˙r · r) = (˙r · ˆa)J ′(ˆn · ˆa)

(6)

d
du

where we have used (5) and that ˙r · ˆn = 0 for any curve. From (6) we see that
there are two types of turning points. 1) At ˙r·ˆa = 0, that is, where the boundary
is perpendicular to the alignment so that ˆn = ±ˆa. For any simple closed curve
this condition will be satisﬁed at two points on the curve. Because J is even
and J ′ is odd we have from (5) that these two points lie at ±J(1)/(2λ) on the
line through the origin and parallel to ˆa. 2) At ˆn · ˆa = 0 where J ′ = 0 and the
boundary is parallel to the alignment. For these (5) shows that 2λr = ˆnJ(0),
thus there are turning points at ±J(0)/(2λ) along a line through the origin and
perpendicular to ˆa. If we let D⊥ and Dk be the distances between the turning
points aligned respectively perpendicular and parallel to then the aspect ratio
of the boundary is

D⊥/Dk = J(0)/J(1).

(7)

If |J(0)| > |J(1)|, then the elongation is in the direction perpendicular to the
alignment as is observed in convergent extension. From Fig. 3 we see that J(0)
corresponds to our previous Jll while J(1) corresponds to Jss.

We have also studied the minimization of the energy functional Eq. (4)
numerically for the case where J is chosen to be a gaussian function. We ap-
proximate the boundary curve by a polygon of at least 100 sides and use an
iterative process that moves down the energy gradient at constant area. We
have started from many initial conﬁgurations, all of which are simple closed
polygons. The ﬁnal boundary curve is always the same and with the correct
aspect ratio Eq. (7). This could also be viewed as a model for the dynamics of
convergent extension. Indeed, with the addition of additive random forces, the
method would be essentially a Langevin dynamics for the evolution of a highly
dissipative system.

In conclusion, we have argued that convergent extension can be understood
as a energy minimization process, provided the cell-cell adhesive energy has a
certain kind of anisotropy. This single simple property is suﬃcient cause for
the cell extension, alignment, and intercalation in the direction of alignment,
that are the characteristics of convergent extension. We have characterized the
anisotropy required [Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)]. We have shown that the ﬁnal aspect

7

ratio is independent of the initial conﬁguration and have shown how it depends
on the anisotropy Eq. (7).

We believe our arguments are plausible but realize that they are not conclu-
sive. Our modeling neglects many degrees of freedom associated with cell shape
and arrangement, which we think, but cannot prove, are not crucial. Our pro-
cedure of separately minimizing the bulk and surface energies is accurate only
for a large array of cells. We do not see much possibility of doing a lot better
by purely analytic methods. We have initiated simulations of convergent exten-
sion, using the Potts model and Metropolis dynamics methods of references [6]
and [7], with anisotropic adhesive energies of the type described in this paper.
The use of anisotropic adhesive energies introduces technical diﬃculties in that
the energy becomes non-local on the scale of the size of a cell, which consider-
ably increases the simulation time. Nevertheless we believe the simulations will
eventually substantiate our conclusions. Even so, the more diﬃcult question of
whether this is the correct explanation of convergent extension remains. Experi-
ments that probe the possible anisotropy of cell adhesive energy would be useful,
as would experiments that show the ﬁnal conﬁguration is largely independent
of the initial conﬁguration.

References

York, 1998).

[1] L. Wolpert et al., Principles of Development (Oxford University Press, New

[2] R. Keller and J. Shih, in Interplay of Genetic and Physical Processes in the
Development of Biological Form at the Frontier of Physics and Biology, Les
Houches, edited by D. Beysens, G. Forgacs, and F. Gail (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1995), pp. 143–153.

[3] M. S. Steinberg, Science 141, 401 (1963).

[4] F. Graner, J. theor. Biol. 164, 455 (1993).

[5] N. S. Goel and A. G. Leith, J. theor. Biol. 28, 469 (1970).

[6] F. Graner and J. A. Glazier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2013 (1992).

[7] J. A. Glazier and F. Graner, Phys. Rev. E 47, 2128 (1993).

[8] D. Drasdo, R. Kree, and J. S. McCaskill, Phys. Rev. E 52, 6635 (1995).

[9] M. Weliky, S. Minsuk, R. Keller, and G. Oster, Development 113, 1231

(1991).

[10] J. Shih and R. Keller, Development 116, 887 (1992).

8

a

b

