0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

1
3

 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
7
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non equilibrium in statistical and ﬂuid mechanics.

Ensembles and their equivalence. Entropy driven intermittency.

Giovanni Gallavotti

Fisica, Universit`a di Roma 1

P.le Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italia

Abstract:We present a review of the chaotic hypothesis and discuss its applications to
intermittency in statistical mechanics and ﬂuid mechanics proposing a quantitative deﬁ-
nition. Entropy creation rate is interpreted in terms of certain intermittency phenomena.
An attempt to a theory of the experiment of Ciliberto–Laroche on the ﬂuctuation law is
presented.

§1. Introduction.
A general theory of non equilibrium stationary phenomena extending classical thermo-
dynamics to stationary non equilibria is, perhaps surprisingly, still a major open problem
more than a century past the work of Boltzmann (and Maxwell, Gibbs,...) which made
the breakthrough towards an understanding of properties of matter based on microscopic
Newton’s equations and the atomic model.
In the last thirty years, or so, some progress appears to have been achieved since the
recognition that non equilibrium statistical mechanics and stationary turbulence in ﬂuids
are closely related problems and, in a sense, in spite of the apparently very diﬀerent nature
of the equations describing them they are essentially the same.
The unifying principle, originally proposed for turbulent motions by Ruelle, [Ru78], in
the early 970’s, has been extended to statistical mechanics and eventually called the
“chaotic hypothesis”, [GC95]:

Chaotic hypothesis: Asymptotic motions of a chaotic system, be it a multi particle system
of microscopic particles or a turbulent macroscopic ﬂuid, can be regarded as a transitive
Anosov system for the purposes of computing time averages in stationary states.

It may be useful to make a few comments on how this is supposed to be interpreted.
The conclusions that we draw here from the chaotic hypothesis are summarized in §13
which might be consulted at this point. For a review on the subject seen from a diﬀerent
perspective see [Ru99a]

§2. Meaning of the chaotic hypothesis.
Anosov systems are well understood dynamical systems: they play a paradigmatic role
with respect to chaotic systems parallel to the one harmonic oscillators play with respect
to orderly motions. They are so simple, and yet very chaotic, that their properties are
likely to be the ones everybody develops in thinking about chaos, even without having
any familiarity with Anosov systems which certainly are not (yet) part of the background
of most contemporary physicists.1

1 Informally a map x → Sx is a Anosov map if at every point x of the bounded phase space M one
can set up a local system of coordinates with origin at x, continuously dependent on x and covariant
under the action of S and such that in this comoving system of coordinates the point x appears as
a hyperbolic ﬁxed point for S. The corresponding continuous time motion, when the evolution is
x → Stx, t ∈ R, requires that the local system of coordinates contains the phase space velocity ˙x as one
of the coordinate axes and that the motion transversal to it sees x as a hyperbolic ﬁxed point: note that
a motion in continuous time cannot possibly be hyperbolic in all directions and it has to be neutral in
the direction of ˙x because the velocity has to be bounded if M is bounded, while hyperbolicity would
imply exponential growth as either t → +∞ or t → −∞. Furthermore there should be no equilibrium

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

1

In general an Anosov system has asymptotic motions which approach one out of ﬁnitely
many invariant closed sets C1, . . . , Cq each of which contains a dense orbit,:one says that
the systems (Cj , St) are “transitive”. One of them, at least, must be an attractive set.
To say that “the asymptotic motions form a transitive Anosov system” means that

(1) each of the sets Cj which is attractive is a smooth surface in phase space and
(2) only one of them is attractive:

The last “transitivity” assumption is meant to exclude the trivial case in which there
are more than one attractive sets and the system de facto consists of several independent
systems.
The smoothness of Cj is a strong assumption that means that one does not regard
possible lack of smoothness, i.e. fractality, as a really relevant property in systems with
large number of degrees of freedom.
In any event one could consider (if necessary)
replacing “Anosov systems” with some slightly weaker property like “axiom A” systems
which could permit more general asymptotic motions. Here we adhere strictly to the
chaotic hypothesis in the stated original form, [GC95].

§3. Basic implications of the chaotic hypothesis and relation with the ergodic
hypothesis.

The chaotic hypothesis boldly extends to non equilibrium the ergodic hypothesis: applied
to equilibrium systems, i.e. to systems described by Hamiltonian equations, it implies
the latter, [Ga98]. This means that if a Hamiltonian system at a given energy is as-
sumed to verify the chaotic hypothesis, i.e. to be a transitive Anosov system, then for
all observables F (i.e. for all smooth functions F deﬁned on phase space)

T −1Z T

0

F (Stx) dt −−−−→T →∞ ZM

F (y) µL(dy)

(3.1)

where µL is the Liouville distribution on the constant energy surface M , and (3.1) holds
for almost all points x ∈ M , i.e. for x outside a set N of zero Liouville volume on M .
Being very general one cannot expect that the chaotic hypothesis will solve any special
problem typical of non equilibrium physics, like “proving” the Fourier’s law of heat
conduction, the Ohm’s law of electric conduction or the K41 theory of homogeneous
turbulence.
Nevertheless, like the ergodic hypothesis in equilibrium, the chaotic hypothesis accom-
plishes the remarkable task of giving us the “statistics” of motions. If M is the phase
space, which we suppose a smooth bounded surface, and t → Stx is the motion starting
at x ∈ M , the time average:
T −1Z T

F (Stx) dt −−−−→T →∞ ZM

0

F (y) µSRB(dy)

(3.2)

of the observable F exists for x outside a set N of zero phase space volume and it is
x–independent, thus deﬁning the probability distribution µSRB via (3.2).
Note, in fact, that the probability distribution µSRB deﬁned by the l.h.s. of (3.2) is
uniquely determined (provided it exists): it is usually called the “statistics of the motion”
or the “SRB distribution” associated with the dynamics of the system.
To appreciate the above property (existence and uniqueness of the statistics) the fol-
lowing considerations seem appropriate.

points and the periodic points should be dense in phase space. When the system has one or more
(the so called “hysteresis phenomenon”) attracting sets which do not occupy the whole phase space the
chaotic hypothesis can be interpreted as saying that each attracting set is a smooth surface on which
the time evolution ﬂow (or map) acts as an Anosov ﬂow (map).

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

2

3.1

3.2

An essential feature, and the main novelty, with respect to equilibrium systems is that
non conservative forces may act on the system: this is in fact the very deﬁnition of “non
equilibrium system”.
Since non conservative forces perform work it is necessary that on the system act also
other forces that take energy out of it, at least if we wish that the system reaches a
stationary state, showing a well deﬁned statistics.
As a consequence any model of the system must contain, besides non conservative forces
which keep it out of equilibrium by establishing “ﬂows” on it (like a heat ﬂow, a matter
ﬂow, ...), also dissipative forces preventing the energy to increase indeﬁnitely and forcing
the motion to visit only a ﬁnite region of phase space.
The dissipation forces, also called “thermostatting forces”, will in general be such that
the volume in phase space is no longer invariant under time evolution. Mathematically
this means that the divergence −σ(x) of the equations of motion will be not zero and
its time averageRM σ(y)µSRB(dy)
def
= σ+ will be positive or zero as it cannot be negative

(“because phase space is supposed bounded”: see [Ru96]).
One calls a system “dissipative” if σ+ > 0 and we expect this to be the case as soon as
there are non conservative forces acting on it.
We see that if a system is dissipative then its statistics µSRB must be concentrated on
a set of zero volume in M : this means that µSRB cannot be very simple, and in fact it
is somewhat hard to imagine it.

If the acting forces depend on a parameter E, “strength of the non conservative forces”,
and for E = 0 the system is Hamiltonian we have a rather unexpected situation. At
E = 0 the chaotic hypothesis and the weaker ergodic hypothesis imply that the statistics
µSRB is equal to the Liouville distribution µL; but if E 6= 0, no matter how small,
itwill not be possible to express µSRB via some density ρE(y) in the form µSRB(dy) =
ρE(y)µL(dy), because µSRB attributes probability 1 to a set N with zero volume in phase
space (i.e. µL(N ) = 0). Nevertheless natura non facit saltus (no discontinuities appear
in natural phenomena) so that sets that have probability 1 with respect to µSRB may be
all still dense in phase space, at least for E small. In fact this is a “structural stability”
property for systems which verify the chaotic hypothesis (see [Ga96c])

The above observations show one of the main diﬃculties of non equilibrium physics: the
unknown µSRB is intrinsically more complex than a function ρE(y) and we cannot hope
to proceed in the familiar way we might have perhaps expected from previous experiences:
namely to just set up some diﬀerential equations for the unknown ρE(y).
Hence it is important that the chaotic hypothesis not only guarantees us the existence
of the statistics µSRB but also that it does so in a “constructive way” giving at the same
time formal expressions for the distribution µSRB which should possibly play the same
role as the familiar formal expressions used in equilibrium statistical mechanics in writing
expectations of observables with respect to the microcanonical distribution µL.

For completeness we write a popular expression for µSRB. If γ is a periodic orbit in
phase space, xγ a point on γ, T (γ) the period of γ then

Z F (y)µSRB(dy) = lim

T →∞Pγ: T (γ)≤T e−R T (γ)

0

3.3

σ(Stxγ ) dt R T (γ)

0

σ(Stxγ ) dt T (γ)

Pγ: T (γ)≤T e−R T (γ)

0

F (Stxγ) dt

(3.3)

This is simple in the sense that it does not require, to be formulated, an even slight
understanding of any of the properties of Anosov or hyperbolic dynamical systems. But
in many respects it is not a natural formula: as one can grasp from the fact that it
is far from clear that in the equilibrium cases (3.3) is an alternative deﬁnition of the

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

3

4.1

4.2

microcanonical ensemble (i.e. of the Liouville distribution µL), in spite of the fact that
in this case σ ≡ 0 and (3.3) becomes slightly simpler.
To prove (3.3) one ﬁrst derives alternative and much more useful expressions for µSRB
which, however, require a longer discussion to be formulated, see [Ga99a], [Ga86c]: the
original work is due to Sinai and in cases more general than Anosov systems, to Ruelle
and Bowen.

§4. What can one expect from the chaotic hypothesis?
In equilibrium statistical mechanics we know the statistics of the motions, if the ergodic
hypothesis is taken for granted. However this hardly solves the problems of equilibrium
physics simply because evaluating the averages is a diﬃcult task which is also model
dependent. Nevertheless there are a few general consequences that can be drawn from
the ergodic hypothesis: the simplest (and ﬁrst) is embodied in the “heat theorem” of
Boltzmann.
Imagine a system of N particles in a box of volume V subject to pair interactions and to
external forces with potential energy WV , due to the walls and providing the conﬁnement
of the particles to the box. Deﬁne

T =average kinetic energy
U =total energy
p =average of ∂V WV

(4.1)

where the averages are taken with respect to the Liouville distribution on the surface of
energy U .
Imagine varying the parameters on which the system depends (e.g. the energy U and
the volume V ) so that dU, dV are the corresponding variations of U, V , then

(dU + p dV )/T = exact

(4.2)

expresses the heat theorem of Boltzmann.
It is a consequence of the ergodicity assumption, but it is not equivalent to it as it only
involves a relation between a few averages (U, p, V, T ), see [Bo66], [Bo84], [Ga99a]. Not
only it gives us a relation which is a very familiar property of macroscopic systems, but
it also suggests us that even if the ergodic hypothesis is not strictly valid some of its
consequences might, still, be regarded as correct.
The proposal is to regard the chaotic hypothesis in the same way: it is possible to imagine
that mathematically speaking the hypothesis is not strictly valid and that, nevertheless,
it yields results which are physically correct for the few macroscopic observables in which
one is really interested in.
The ergodic hypothesis implies the heat theorem as a general (“somewhat trivial”)
mechanical identity valid for systems of N particles with N = 1, 2, . . . , 1023, . . .. For
small N it might perhaps be regarded as a curiosity: such it must have been considered
by most readers of the key paper [Bo84] who were possibly misled by several examples
with N = 1 given by Boltzmann in this and other previous papers. Like the example of
the system consisting of one “averaged” Saturn ring, i.e. one homogeneous ring of mass
rotating around Saturn with energy U , kinetic energy T and “volume” V (improbably
identiﬁed with the strength of the gravitational attraction!). But for N = 1023 it is no
longer a curiosity and it is a fundamental law of thermodynamics in equilibrium: which,
therefore, can be regarded on the same footing of a symmetry being a direct consequence
of the structure of the equations of motion, [Ga99a] appendices to Ch.1 and Ch.9. It
reﬂects in macroscopic terms a simple microscopic assumption (i.e. Newton’s equations
for atomic motions, in this case).

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

4

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

No new consequences of even remotely comparable importance are known to follow from
the chaotic hypothesis besides the fact that it implies the validity of the ergodic hypoth-
esis itself (hence of all its consequences, ﬁrst of them classical equilibrium statistical
mechanics).
Nevertheless the chaotic hypothesis does have some rather general consequences. We
mention here the ﬂuctuation theorem. Let σ(x) be the phase space contraction rate and

σ+ be its SRB average (i.e. σ+ =R σ(x) µSRB (dx)), let τ > 0 and deﬁne

σ(Stx)

σ+

dx

(4.3)

p(x) = τ −1Z τ /2

−τ /2

and study the ﬂuctuations of the observable p(x) in the stationary state µSRB. We write
πτ (p) dp the probability that, in the distribution µSRB, the quantity p(x) has actually
value between p and p + dp as

πτ (p) dp = const eζτ (p) τ dp

(4.4)

Them limτ →∞ ζτ (p) = ζ(p) exists and is convex in p; and

Theorem: (ﬂuctuation theorem) Assume the chaotic hypothesis and suppose that the
dynamics is reversible, i.e. that there is an isometry I of phase space such that

and that the attracting set is the full phase space.2 Then

ISt = S−tI,

I 2 = 1

where σ+ = µSRB(σ).

ζ(−p) = ζ(p) − σ+ p,

for all p

(4.5)

(4.6)

It should be pointed out that the above relation was ﬁrst discovered in an experiment,
see [ECM93], where also some theoretical ideas were presented, correctly linking the
result to the SRB distributions theory and to time reversal symmetry. Although such
hints were not followed by what can be considered a proof, [CG99], still the discovery
has plaid a major role and greatly stimulated further research.
The interest of (4.6) is that, in general, it is a relation without free parameters. The
above theorem, proved in [GC95] for discrete evolutions (maps) and in [Ge97] for con-
tinuous time systems (ﬂows), is one among the few general consequences of the chaotic
hypothesis, see [Ga96a], [Ga96b], [Ga99b] for others.

§5. Non equilibrium ensembles. Thermodynamic limits. Equivalence.
The chaotic hypothesis gives us, unambiguously, the probability distribution µSRB which
has to be employed to compute averages of observables in stationary states.
For each value of the parameters on which the system depends we have, therefore a
well deﬁned probability distribution µSRB. Calling α = (α1, . . . , αp) the parameters
and µ α the corresponding SRB distribution we consider the collection E of probability

2 It is perhaps important to stress that we distinguish between attracting set and attractor: the ﬁrst is a
closed set such that the motions that start close enough to it approach it ever closer; an attractor is a
subset of an attracting set that
(1) has probability 1 with respect to the statistics µ of the motions that are attracted by the attracting
set (a notion which makes sense when such statistics exists, but for a zero volume set of initial data,
and is unique) and that
(2) has the smallest Hausdorﬀ dimension among such probability 1 sets. Hence density of an attracting
set in phase space does not mean that the corresponding attractor has dimension equal to that of the
phase space: it could be substantially lower, see [GC95].

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

5

distributions µ α obtained by letting the parameters α vary. We call such a collection
an “ensemble”.
For instance α could be the average energy U of the system, the average kinetic energy
T , the volume V , the intensity E of the acting non conservative forces, etc
Non equilibrium thermodynamics can be deﬁned as the set of relations that the vari-
ations of the parameters α and of other average quantities are constrained to obey as
some of them are varied. In equilibrium the heat theorem is an example of such relations.
In reversible non equilibria the ﬂuctuation theorem (4.6) is an example.
In non equilibrium systems the equations of motion play a much more prominent role
than in equilibrium: in fact one of the main properties of equilibrium statistical mechanics
is that dynamics enters only marginally in the deﬁnition of the statistical distributions
of the equilibrium states.
The necessity of a reversibility assumption in the ﬂuctuation theorem already hints at
the usefulness of considering the equations of motion themselves as “parameters” for
the ensembles describing non equilibrium stationary states: we are used to irreversible
equations in describing non equilibrium phenomena (like the heat equation, the Navier
Stokes equation, etc) and unless we are able to connect our experiments with reversible
dynamical models we shall be unable to make use of the ﬂuctuation theorem.
Furthermore it is quite clear that once a system is not in equilibrium and thermostat-
ting forces act on it, the exact nature of such forces might be irrelevant within large
equivalence classes: i.e. it might be irrelevant which particular “cooling device” we use
to take heat out of the system. Hence one would like to have a frame into which to set
up a more precise analysis of such arbitrariness. Therefore we shall set

Deﬁnition 1: A stationary ensemble E for a system of particles or for a ﬂuid is the
collection of SRB distributions, for given equations of motion, obtained by varying the
parameters entering into the equations.

It can happen that for the same system one can imagine diﬀerent models. In this case
we would like that the models give the same results, i.e. the same averages to the same
observables, at least in some relevant limit. Like in the limit of inﬁnite size in which
the number N , the volume V and the energy U tend to inﬁnity but N/V and U/V stay
constant. Or in the limit in which the Reynolds number R tends to inﬁnity in the case
of ﬂuids.
This gives the possibility of giving a precise meaning to the equivalence of diﬀerent
thermostatting mechanisms. We shall declare

Deﬁnition 2, (equivalence of ensembles): Two thermostatting mechanisms are equiv-
alent “in the thermodynamic limit” if one can establish a one to one correspondence
between the elements of the ensembles E and E ′ of SRB distributions associated with the
two models in such a way that the same observables, in a certain class L of observables,
have the same averages in corresponding distributions, at least when some of the param-
eters of the system are sent to suitable limiting values to which we assign the generic
name of “thermodynamic limit”.

In the following sections we illustrate possible applications of this concept.

§6. Drude–Lorentz’ electric conduction models.
Understanding of electric conduction is in a very unsatisfactory state.
It is usually
based on linear response theory and very seldom a fundamental approach is attempted.
Of course this is so for a good reason, because a fundamental approach would require
imposing an electric ﬁeld E on the system and, at the same time, a thermostatting force
to keep the system from blowing up and to let it approach a steady state with a current
JE ﬂowing in it, and then taking the ratio JE/E (with or without taking also the limit

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

6

as E → 0).
However, as repeatedly mentioned, it is an open problem to study steady states out of
equilibrium. Hence most theories have recourse to linear response where the problem of
studying stationary non equilibria does not even arise.
The reason why this is unsatisfactory is that as long as we are in principle unable to
study stationary non equilibria we are also in principle unable to estimate the size of the
approximation and errors of linear response.
In spite of many attempts the old theory of Drude, see [Be59], [Se87], seems to be among
the few conduction theories which try to establish a conductivity theory based on the
study of electric current at non zero ﬁelds.
We imagine a set of obstacles distributed randomly or periodically and among them
conduction electrons move, roughly with density of one per obstacle.
The (screened) interactions between the electrons are, at a ﬁrst approximation, ignored.
The collisions between electrons and obstacles (“nuclei”) will take place in the average
after the electrons have traveled a distance λ = (ρa2)−1 if ρ is the nuclei density and a
is their radius.
Between collisions the electrons, with electric charge e, accelerate in the direction of an
imposed ﬁeld E incrementing, in that direction, velocity by

δv =

eEλ
mv

=

eE(ρa2)−1

mpkBT /m

(6.1)

where kB is Boltzmann’s constant. At collision they are “thermalized”: an event that is

modeled by giving them a new velocity of size v =pkBT /m and a random direction.

The latter is the “thermostatting mechanism” which is a, somewhat rough, description
of the energy transfer from electrons to lattice which physically corresponds to electrons
losing energy in favor of lattice phonons, which in turn are kept at constant temperature
by some other thermostatting mechanism which prevents the wire melting. All things
considered the total current that ﬂows will be

JE =

e2

ρa2√mkBT

def
= χ E

E

(6.2)

obtaining Ohm’s law.
To the same conclusion we arrive by a diﬀerent thermostat model. We imagine that
the electrons move exchanging energy with lattice phonons but keeping their total energy
j = 3N kBT /2, where kB is Boltzmann’s

constant and equal to N kB T : i.e. 2−1PN
keep P m ˙x 2

constant. There are several forces that can achieve this result
we select the “Gaussian minimal constraint” force.3 This is the force that is required to
j strictly constant and that is determined by “Gauss least eﬀort” principle,
see [Ga99a], ch. 9, appendix 4, for instance: as is well known this is, on the i–th particle,
a force

j=1 m ˙x 2

−α ˙x i

def

= −

e E ·Pj ˙x j
Pj ˙x 2

j

˙x i ≡ −

m E · N J
3N kBT

˙x i

(6.3)

If there are N particles and N is large it follows that J = N −1ePj ˙x j is essentially

constant, see [Ru99b], and each particle evolves, almost independently of the others,
according to an equation:

3 Not because it plays any fundamental role but because it has been studied by many authors and because
it represents a mechanism very close to that proposed by Drude.We recall, for copleteness, that the
eﬀort of a constraint reaction on a motion on which the active force is f (with 3N components) and a
is the acceleration of the particles (with 3N components) and m is the mass is E( a ) = ( f − m a )2/m;
then Gauss’ principle is that the eﬀort is minimal if a is given the actual value of the acceleration, at
ﬁxed space positions and velocities.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

7

6.1

6.2

6.3

6.4

7.1

7.2

7.3

m ¨x i = e E − ν ˙x i

(6.4)

between collisions, with a suitably ﬁxed constant ν. If we imagine that the velocity of the
particles between collisions changes only by a small quantity compared to the average
velocity the “friction term” which in the average will be of order E2 will be negligible
except for the fact that its “only” eﬀect will be of insuring that the total kinetic energy
stays constant and the speeds of the particles are constantly renormalized. In other words
this is the same as having continuously collisions between electrons and phonons even
when there is no collision between electrons and obstacles. Hence the resulting current
is the same (if N is large) as in (6.2).

§7. Ensemble equivalence: the example of electric conduction theories.
We have derived three models for the conduction problem, namely

(1) the classical model of Drude, [Se87], in which at every collision the electron velocity
is reset to the average velocity at the given temperature, with a random direction, c.f.r.
(6.1) and (6.2).
(2) the Gaussian model in which the total kinetic energy is kept constant by a thermostat
force

m ¨x i = E −

m E · J
3kBT

˙x i + “collisional forces′′

(7.1)

where 3N kBT is the total kinetic energy (a constant of motion in this model). The model
has been widely studied and it was introduced by Hoover and Evans (see for instance
[HHP87] and [EM90]).
(3) a “friction model” in which particles independently experience a constant friction

m ¨x i = E − ν ˙x i + “collisional forces′′

(7.2)

where ν is a constant tuned so that the average kinetic energy is eN kBT /2. This model
was considered in the perspective of the conjectures of ensemble equivalence in [Ga95],
[Ga96b].

The ﬁrst model is a “stochastic model” while the second and third are deterministic: the
third is “irreversible” while the second is reversible because the involution I( x i, v i) =
( x i,− v i) anticommutes with the time evolution ﬂow St deﬁned by the equation (7.1):
ISt = S−tI (as the “friction term” is odd under I).
Let µδ,T be the SRB distribution for (7.1) for the stationary state that is reached starting
from initial data with energy 3N kBT /2. The collection of the distributions µδ,T as the
kinetic energy T and the density δ = N/V vary, deﬁne a “statistical ensemble” E of
stationary distributions associated with the equation (7.1).
Likewise we call ˜µδ,ν the class of SRB distributions associated with (7.2) which forms
an “ensemble” ˜E.
We establish a correspondence between distributions of the ensembles E and ˜E: we say
that µδ,T and ˜µδ′,ν are “corresponding elements” if

δ = δ′,

T =Z 1

2

(Xj

m ˙x 2

j ) ˜µδ,ν(d x d ˙x )

(7.3)

Then the following conjecture was proposed in [Ga96b].

Conjecture 1: (equivalence conjecture) Let F be a “local observable”, i.e. an observ-
able depending solely on the microscopic state of the electrons whose positions is inside
a ﬁxed box V0. Then, if L denotes the local smooth observables

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

8

7.4

lim

N→∞,N/V =δ

˜µδ,ν(F ) =

lim

N→∞,N/V =δ

µδ,T (F )

F ∈ L

(7.4)

if T and ν are related by (7.3).

This conjecture has been discussed in [Ga95], sec. 5, and [Ga96a], see sec. 2 and 5: and
in [Ru99b] arguments in favor of it have been developed.
Clearly the conjecture is very similar to the equivalence in equilibrium between canonical
and microcanonical ensembles: here the friction ν plays the role of the canonical inverse
temperature and the kinetic energy that of the microcanonical energy.
It is remarkable that the above equivalence suggests equivalence between a “reversible
statistical ensemble”, i.e. the collection E of the SRB distributions associated with (7.1)
and a “irreversible statistical ensemble”, i.e. the collection ˜E of SRB distributions asso-
ciated with (7.2).

Furthermore it is natural to consider also the collection E ′ of stationary distributions
for the original stochastic model (1) of Drude, whose elements µ′
ν,T can be parameterized
2Pj m ˙x 2
by the quantities T , temperature (such that 1
2 N kBT , and N/V = δ). This
is an ensemble E ′ whose elements can be put into one to one correspondence with the
elements of, say, the ensemble E associated with model (2), i.e. with (7.1): an element
µ′
ν,T ∈ E ′ corresponds to µδ,ν ∈ E if T veriﬁes (7.3). Then
Conjecture 2: If µδ,T ∈ E and µ′
then

δ,ν ∈ E ′ are corresponding elements (i.e. (7.3) holds)

j = 3

7.5

lim

N→∞,N/V =δ

µδ,T (F ) =

lim

N→∞,N/V =δ

µ′

δ,T (F )

F ∈ L

(7.5)

for all local observables F ∈ L.
Hence we see that there can be statistical equivalence between a viscous irreversible
dissipation model and either a stochastic dissipation model or a reversible dissipation
model, at least as far as the averages of special observables are concerned.
The argument in [Ru99b] in favor of conjecture 1 is that the coeﬃcient α in (6.3) is
essentially the average J of the current over the whole box containing the system of

particles, J = N −1 e Pj ˙x i: hence J should be constant with probability 1, at least if

the stationary SRB distributions can be reasonably supposed to have some property of
ergodicity with respect to space translations.

§8. Entropy driven intermittency in reversible dissipation.
A further argument for the equivalence conjectures in the above electric conduction
models can be related to the ﬂuctuation theorem: the quantity α(x) is also proportional
to the phase space contraction rate σ(x) = (3N − 1)α(x). Therefore, denoting in general
with a subscript + the SRB average (or the time average) of an observable, the probability
that σ(x) deviates from its average σ+ = (3N − 1) α+ can be studied as follows.
If the number N of particles is large the time scale τ0 over which σ(Stx) evolves will
be large compared to the microscopic evolution rates, because σt(x) is the sum of the
∼ 6N rates of expansion and contraction of the ∼ 6N phase space directions out of x
(sometimes called the “local Lyapunov exponents”).4

4 The exact number of exponents depends on how many constants of motion the system has: for instance
in the case of the conduction model (1) in §6 above the number of exponents is 6N − 1 because the
kinetic energy is conserved and the system has no other (obvious) ﬁrst integrals. Furthermore one of such
exponents is 0 since every dynamical system in continuous time has one zero exponent (corresponding
to the direction ˙x of the ﬂow).

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

9

8.1

8.2

Consider a large number m of time intervals I1, I2, . . . , Im of size τ0 and let σj be the
(average) value of σ(Stx) for t ∈ Ij. Then the fraction of the j’s such that σj − σ+ ≃ σ+p
will be proportional to

πτ0(p) ≃ eτ0ζ(p)

(8.1)

and ζ(p) < ζ(1) if p 6= 1. Since we can expect thatζ(p) is proportional to N we see that
the fraction of time intervals Ij in which σj 6= σ+ will be exponentially small with N .
For instance the fraction of time intervals in which σj ≃ −σ+ will be, by the ﬂuctuation
theorem

e−(3N −1)α+τ0

(8.2)

In order that the above argument holds it is essential that N is large to the point that
we can think that the time scale τ0 over which σ(Stx) varies is much larger than the
microscopic scales: so that we can regard τ0 large enough for the ﬂuctuation theorem to
apply. In this respect this is not really diﬀerent from the previously quoted argument in
[Ru99b]. However the change of perspective gives further information.

In fact we get the following picture: N is large and for most of the time the (stationary)
evolution uneventfully proceeds as if σ(Stx) ≡ σ+ (thus justifying conjecture 1). Very
rarely, however, it proceeds as if σ(Stx) 6= σ+, for instance with σ(Stx) = −σ+: such
“bursts of anomalous behavior” occur very rarely. But when they occur “everything else
goes the wrong way” because, as discussed in detail in [Ga99c], while the phase space
contraction is opposite to what it “should be” (in the average) then it also happens that
all observables evolve following paths that are the time reversal of the expected paths, This
is the content, see [Ga99c], of the following theorem which is quite close (particularly
if one examines its derivation) to the Machlup–Onsager theory of ﬂuctuation patterns
(note that, however, it does not require closeness to equilibrium)

Theorem(conditional reversibility theorem): If F is an observable with even (or odd),
for simplicity, time reversal parity and if τ is large then the evolution or “ﬂuctuation
pattern” ϕ(t) and its time reversal Iϕ(t) ≡ ϕ(−t), t ∈ [−τ0/2, τ0/2], will be followed with
equal likelihood if the ﬁrst is conditioned to an entropy creation rate p and the second to
the opposite −p.
In other words systems with reversible dynamics can be equivalent to systems with
irreversible dynamics but they show “intermittent behavior” with intermittency lapses
that become extremely rare very quickly as N → ∞. Sometimes they can be really
dramatic, as in the cases in which σ = −σ+: alas they are unobservable just for this
reason and one can wonder (see §9 below) whether this is really of any interest.
§9. Local ﬂuctuations and observable intermittency.
As a ﬁnal comment upon the analysis of the equivalence of ensembles attempted above
we consider a very large system with volume V and a small subsystem of volume V0 which
is large but not yet really macroscopic so that the number of particles in V0 is not too
large, a nobler way to express the same notion is to say that we consider a “mesocopic”
subsystem of our macroscopic system.
Here it is quite important to specify the system because we want to make use of as-
pects of the equivalence conjectures that are model dependent. Therefore we consider
the conduction models (2) or (3) of §5: these are models in which dissipation occurs
“homogeneously” throughout the system. In this case we can imagine to look at the part
of the system in the box V0: if j1, . . . , jN0 are the particles which at a certain instant are
inside V0 and ˙x j = f

( x ) are the equations of motion we can deﬁne

j

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

10

9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

9.5

σV0 (x) =

N0Xi=1

∂xjk

fjk (x)

(9.1)

which is (by deﬁnition) the part of phase space contraction due to the particles in V0.
Since the part of the system inside the microscopically large but macroscopically small
V0 can be regarded as a new dynamical system whose properties should not be diﬀerent
from the ones of the full system enclosed in the full volume V we may expect that the
subsystem inside V0 is in a stationary state and the quantity σV0 has the same ﬂuctuation
properties as σV , i.e.

(1)

(2)

hσV0i+ = V0 σ+,
τ (p) = eζ(p) τ V0 ,
πV0

hσV i+ = V σ+

πV
τ (p) = eζ(p) τ V

(9.2)

where ζ, σ+ are the same for V, V0 and p = τ −1R τ /2
p = τ −1R τ /2

−τ /2 σV0 (Stx)/hσV0i dt or respectively
−τ /2 σV (Stx)/hσV i dt. Here σV0 is naively deﬁned as the contribution to σ

coming from the particles in V0.

In other words in large stationary systems with homogeneous reversible dissipation phase
space contractions ﬂuctuate in an extensive way, i.e. they are regulated by the same
deviation function ζ(p) (volume independent).

This is very similar to the well known property of equilibrium density ﬂuctuations in a
gas of density ρ: if V ⊃ V0 are a very large volume V in a yet larger container and V0
is a small but microscopically large (i.e. mesoscopic) volume V0 then the total numbers
of particles in V and V0 will be N and N0 and the average numbers will be ρV and ρV0
respectively. Then setting

p = (N − ρ V )/ρV,

or,

p = (N0 − ρ V0)/ρV0

the probability that the variable p has a given value will be proportional to

πV (p) = eζ(p)V ,

πV0 (p) = eζ(p)V0

again with the same function ζ(p).

(9.3)

(9.4)

This means that we can observe ζ(p) by performing ﬂuctuations experiments in small
boxes, ideally carved out of the large container, where the density ﬂuctuations are not
too rare. A “local ﬂuctuation law” should hold more generally in cases of models in
which dissipation occurs homogeneously across the system, like the above considered
conduction models.
The intuitive picture for the above “local ﬂuctuation relation” inspired (and was sub-
stantiated) a mathematical model in which a local ﬂuctuation relation can be proved as
a theorem: it has een discussed in [Ga99c], see also below.
Going back to the conduction model we see that the intermittency phenomena discussed
above can be actually observed by looking at the ﬂuctuations of the contribution to phase
space contraction due to a small subsystem.
And such “entropy driven” intermittency will be model independent for models which are
equivalent in the sense of the previous sections provided the models used are equivalent
and one of them is reversible.
An extreme case is provided by models (1)%(3), §7, for electric conduction (conjectured
to be equivalent, see §7). In fact at ﬁrst the model (3), the viscous thermostat, might
look uninteresting as, obviously, in this case

σV (x) = 3N ν,

σV0 (x) = 3 N0 ν

(9.5)

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

11

and σV /V has no ﬂuctuations.
However the equivalence conjecture makes a statement about expectation values of the
same observable: hence we should consider the quantity ˆσV0 (x) = E · J V0 /Pj ˙x 2
j and
we should expect that its statistics with respect to an element of the ensemble E ′ is
the same as that of the same quantity with respect to the corresponding elements of the
ensembles E, ˜E. Hence in particular the functions ζ(p) which control the large ﬂuctuations
of σV (p) will verify

9.6

ζ(−p) = ζ(p) − phˆσV0i+/V0 = ζ(p) − 3ρν p = ζ(p) −

eEm J+

kBT

p

(9.6)

where the ﬁrst equality expresses the validity of a ﬂuctuation theorem type of relation
due to the fact that the small system, by the equivalence conjecture, should behave as a
closed system; the second equality expresses a consequence of the equivalence conjecture
between models (2) and (3) while the third is obtained by expressing the current via
Drude’s theory (again assuming the conjectures of equivalence 1,2 of §7).
§10. Fluids.
The chaotic hypothesis was originally formulated to understand developed turbulence,
[Ru78]: it is therefore interesting to revisit ﬂuid motions theory.
The incompressible Navier Stokes equation for a velocity ﬁeld u in a periodic container
V of side L can be considered as an equation for the evolution in time of its Fourier
coeﬃcients u k where the “mode” k has the form 2πL−1 n with n 6= 0 and n an integer
components vector.5 Furthermore u k = u − k and k · u k ≡ 0. If p is the pressure ﬁeld
and f a simple forcing we shall ﬁx the ideas by considering f ( x ) = f e sin k f · x
where k f is some preﬁxed mode and e is a unit vector orthogonal to k f .
The Navier Stokes equation is then

10.1

10.2

10.3

˙u + u

u = − ∂ p + f + ν∆ u

(10.1)

e · ∂
e

and it is convenient to use dimensionless variables u 0, p0, ϕ

, ξ , τ : so we deﬁne them as

0

u ( x , t) =f L2ν−1 u 0(L−1 x , L−2νt),
p( x , t) =f Lp0(L−1 x , L−2νt),
f ( x , t) =f ϕ

(L−1 x )

0

ξ = L−1 x , τ = L−2νt

def
= f L3 ν−2

R

(10.2)

0| = 1. The result, dropping the label 0 and calling again x , t the new
with max| ϕ
variables ξ , τ , is that the Navier Stokes equations become an equation for a divergenceless
ﬁeld u deﬁned on V = [0, 1]3, with periodic boundary conditions and equations

˙u + R u

u = − ∂ p + ϕ + ∆ u ,

∂ · u = 0

(10.3)

· ∂
e

e

with max| ϕ | = 1.
Equation (10.3) is our model of ﬂuid motion, where R plays the role of “forcing intensity”
and the term ∆ u represents the “thermostatting force”. As R varies the stationary
distributions µR which describe the SRB statistics of the motions (10.3) deﬁne a set E
of probability distributions which forms an “ensemble”.
The mathematical theory of the Navier Stokes equations is far from being understood:
however phenomenology establishes quite clearly a few key points. The main property

5 The value n = 0 is excluded because, having periodic boundary conditions, it is not restrictive to
suppose that the space average of u vanishes (galilean invariance). The convention for the Fourier

transform that we use is u ( x ) =P k

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

ei k · x u k .

12

is that if (10.3) is written as an equation for the Fourier components of u then one can
assume that u k ≡ 0 for | k | > K(R), for some ﬁnite K(R).
Therefore the equation (10.3) should be thought of as a “truncated equation” in mo-
mentum space by identifying it with the equation obtained by projecting also u
u on

the same function space.

e · ∂
e

Should one develop anxiety about the mathematical aspects of the Navier Stokes equa-
tion one should therefore think that an equally good model for a ﬂuid is the mentioned
truncation provided K(R) is chose large enough.
The idea is that for K(R) = Rκ, with κ larger than a suitable κ0 the results of the
theory, i.e. the statistical properties of µR become κ–independent for R large.
The simplest evaluation of κ0 gives κ0 = 9/4 as a consequence of the so called K41
theory of homogeneous turbulence, see [LL71].
If (10.3) is a good model for a ﬂuid when L is large then it provides us with an “ensemble”
E of SRB distributions (on the space of the velocity ﬁelds components u k of dimension
∼ 8πK(R)3/3).6
We should expect, following the discussion of the statistical mechanics cases, that there
can be other “ensembles” ˜E which are equivalent to E.
Here R plays the role of the volume in non equilibrium statistical mechanics, so that R →
∞ will play the role of the thermodynamic limit, a limit in which the eﬀective number
of degrees of freedom, ∼ 4πR3κ/3, becomes inﬁnite. The role of the local observables
will be plaid by the (smooth) functions F ( u ) of the velocity ﬁelds u which depend
on u only via its Fourier components that have mode k with | k | < B for some B:
F ( u ) = F ({ u k }| k |≤B).
We shall call L the space of such observables: examples can be obtained by setting
F ( u ) = |R ei k · x u ( x ) d x|2 or F ( u ) =R ψ ( x )· u ( x ) d x where the function has only
a ﬁnte number of harmonics, ψ ( x ) =R P| k |<B ei k · x u ( x ) d x , etc.

As in non equilibrium statistical mechanics we can expect that the equations of motion
themselves become part of the deﬁnition of the ensembles. For instance one can imagine
deﬁning the ensemble ˜E of the SRB distributions ˜µV for the equations

˙u + R u

u = − ∂ p + ψ + ν( u )∆ u

(10.4)

called GNS equations in [Ga97a], or “gaussian Navier Stokes” equations, where ν( u ) is
so deﬁned that

e · ∂
e
u )2 d x /(2π)3 =Xk

(∂

Ξ =ZV

e

k 2 | u k |2

(10.5)

10.4

10.5

10.6

is exactly constant and equal to Ξ. The equations (10.4) are interpreted as above with
the same momentum cut oﬀ K(R) = Rκ.
An element ˜µΞ of ˜E and one µR of E, SRB distributions for the two diﬀerent dynamics
(10.3) and (10.4), “correspond to each other” if

Ξ =Z µR(d u )(cid:0)ZV

u )2 d x /(2π)3(cid:1) def

= ΞR

(∂

e

where µR ∈ E is the SRB distribution at Reynolds number R for the previous viscous
Navier Stokes equation, (10.3), and we naturally conjecture

(10.6)

6 There are about 4πK(R)3/3 vectors with integer components inside a sphere of radius K(R), thus the
number of complex Fourier components with mode label | k | < K(R) would be 3 times as much, but
the divergenceless condition leaves only 2 complex components for u k along the two unit vectors
orthogonal to k and the reality condition further divides by 2 the number of “free” components.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

13

10.7

10.8

10.9

Conjecture 3(equivalence GNS–NS): If R → ∞ then for all local observables F ∈ L it
is µR(F ) = ˜µΞR(F ) if (10.6) holds.

It is easy to check that the GNS model “viscosity” ν( u ), having to be such that the
quantity Ξ in (10.5) is exactly constant must be

ν( u ) = RV (cid:0) ϕ · ∆ u − R∆ u · (u
e
RV (∆ u )2 d x

u )(cid:1) d x

· ∂
e

(10.7)

and we see that while (10.3) is an irreversible equation the (10.4) is reversible, with time
reversal symmetry given by

I u ( x , t) = − u ( x , t)

(10.8)

as one can check.
More generally one may wish to leave the “Kolmogorov parameter” κ as a free pa-
rameter: in this case the SRB distributions will form an ensemble whose elements can
be parameterized by R, κ and the equivalence conjecture can be extended to this case
yielding equivalence between µR,κ and ˜µΞ,κ. This is of interest, particularly if one has
numerical experiments in mind.

If κ > κ0 then the value of κ should be irrelevant: but if κ < κ0 the phenomenology
will be diﬀerent from the one of the Navier Stokes equation and equivalence might still
hold but one cannot expect either equation to have the properties that we expect for
the usual Navier Stokes equations (i.e. in this situation one would have to be careful in
making statements based on common experience).
If we take κ to be exactly equal to the value κ0 = 9/4 (i.e. if we take the ultraviolet
cut–oﬀ to be such that, according to the K41 theory, for larger values it is needlessly large
and for lower values it is incorrectly low and shows a phenomenology which will depend
on its actual value) then we may speculate that the “attracting set” is the full phase
space (available compatibly with the constraint Ξ = ΞR). Therefore the divergence of
the equations of motion, which is given by a rather involved expression in which only the
ﬁrst term seems to dominate at large R, namely

σ( u ) = ( X| k |<K(R)
· ∂
− R ∆ u · (∆(u
e
e

+ ν( u )∆ u · ∆2 u ]d x (cid:1) /ZV

k 2) ν( u ) −(cid:0)ZV
u )) − R(∆u
e

∆ ϕ · ∆ u d x(cid:1)(cid:0)ZV

[(∆ u )2−

) · (∆ u ) · (∂
e

(∆ u )2 d x

u ) − R∆ u · (∆∂
e

u )u

e

+

(10.9)

will verify the ﬂuctuation theorem, i.e. the rate function ζ(p) for the average phase space

contraction p = τ −1R τ /2

−τ /2 σ(St u )dt/τ σ+ will be such that ζ(−p) = ζ(p) − pσ+.

If the chaotic hypothesis is valid together with the equivalence conjecture the validity
of the ﬂuctuation relation can be taken as a criterion for determining κ:
it would be
the last κ before which the ﬂuctuation relation between ζ(p) and ζ(−p) holds. However
this conclusion can only be drawn if the attracting set in phase space is the full ellipsoid
Ξ = ΞR at least for K(R) = Rκ0.

The latter property might not be realized: and in such case the ﬂuctuation theorem
does not apply directly, although the equivalence conjectures still hold. In fact one can
try to extend the ﬂuctuation theorem to cover reversible cases in which the attracting set
is smaller than the full phase space left available by the constraints. In such cases under

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

14

suitable geometric assumptions, [BG97] and the earlier work [BGG97], one can derive a
relation like

10.10

ζ(−p) = ζ(p) − pσ+ ϑ,

0 ≤ ϑ ≤ 1

(10.10)

where ϑ is a coeﬃcient that can be related to the Lyapunov spectrum of the system,
c.f.r. [BG97], [Ga97a]. In fact numerical work to check the theory proposed in [Ga97a] is
currently being performed (private communication by Rondoni and Segre) with not too
promising results which, optimistically, can be attributed to the fact that the ultraviolet
cut oﬀ is too small due to numerical litmitations: clearly there is more work to do here.
The preliminary numerical results give, so far, the somewhat surprising linearity in p but
with a slope that, although of the correct order of magnitude, seems to have a value that
does not match the theory within the error bounds.

Coming back to the Navier Stokes equation we mention that we may imagine to write
it as (10.3) but with the diﬀerent constraint

10.11

10.12

U =ZV

u 2 d x = const

(10.11)

rather than (10.5).
This case has been considered in [RS99] and the multiplier ν( u ) is in this case

ν( u ) = RV ϕ · u d x
RV u 2 d x

,

σ( u ) = (3 X| k |<K(R)

| k |2 − 1) ν( u )

(10.12)

and we can (almost) repeat the above considerations and equivalence conjectures. This
constraint is a gaussian constraint that U is constant obtained by imposing its constancy
on the Euler evolution via Gauss’ principle with a suitable deﬁnition of the notion of
“constraint eﬀort” (this notion is not unique, see [Ga97a] for another deﬁnition) and we
do not discuss it here to avoid overlapping with §12 below.
Thd intuitive motivation for the equivalence conjectures is that for large R the phase
space contraction σ( u ) and the coeﬃcient ν( u ) 7 are “global quantities” and depend
on the global properties of the system (e.g. σ( u ) is the sum of all the local Lyapunov
exponents of the system whose number is O(K(R)3)): they will “therefore” vary over
time more slowly than any time scale of the system and can be considered constant.
The argument is not very convincing in the case of the equations with the constraint

(10.11) because the σ( u ) in (10.12) is proportional toRV ϕ · u d x which clearly depends

only on harmonics of u with k small, i.e. it is a “local observable”. Note that this does
not apply to the GNS equations with the constrained vorticity Ξ, (10.6) where the “main”
contribution to σ( u ), see (10.7), comes from the term proportional to R which contains
all harmonics. Therefore the result in [RS99] about the equivalence between the GNS
equations, (10.4) with the constraint (10.5), and the equations with constraint (10.11) is
interesting and puzzling: it might be an artifact of the smallness of the cut oﬀ that one
has to impose in order to have numerically feasible simulations.

Finally σ+( u )/σ+, i.e. essentially ν( u )/ν+ will ﬂuctuate taking values sensibly diﬀer-
ent from their average value 1, at very rare intervals of time: but when such ﬂuctuations
will occurr one shall see “bursts” of anomalous behavior: i.e. the motion will be “inter-
mittent” as in the case discussed in non equilibrium statistical mechanics.

7 Which in the case (10.9) are simply proportional and in the case of (10.4) they are related in a more

involved way, see (10.8),(10.9), but which are still probably proportional to leading order as R → ∞.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

15

11. Entropy creation rate and entropy driven intermittency.

Of course if R is large the number of degrees of freedom is large and intermittency on
the scale of the ﬂuid container will not be observable due to its extreme unlikelyhood
(expected and quantitatively predicted by the ﬂuctuation theorem).
Therefore we look also here, in ﬂuid motions, for a local ﬂuctuation relation. Fluids seem
particularly suitable for verifying such local ﬂuctuations relations because dissipation
occurs homogeneously, i.e. friction strength is translation invariant.
This implies that we can regard a very small volume V0 of the ﬂuid as a system in itself
(as always done in the derivation of the basic ﬂuid equations, e.g. see [Ga97b]) and we
can expect that the phase space contraction due to such volume elements is simply σ( u ),
given by (10.9) or (10.12) (“equivalently” because of our equivalence conjectures) with
the integrals in the numerator and denominator being extended to the volume V0 rather
than to the whole box, and expressing (essentially by deﬁnition) the “local phase space
contraction” σV0 ( u ).

Then p = τ −1R τ /2

under the same assumptions as in (10.10), a large deviation relation as

−τ /2 σV0 (St u )/hσV0i+ will have a rate function ζ(p) which will verify,

11.1

ζ(−p) = ζ(p) − phσV0i+ ϑ

(11.1)

for some ϑ: as mentioned the theoretical value of this slope ϑ seems currently inaccessible
to theory (as the theory proposed in [BG67], [Ga97a] may need substantial modiﬁcations,
c.f.r. comment following (10.10)). The hσV0i and ζ(p) will be proportional to V0: ζ(p) =
V0 ζ(p) with a V0–independent ζ(p). Note that ζ(p) depends also on R.

The small volume element of the ﬂuid will therefore be subject to rather frequent varia-
tions: in spite of ζ(p) being proportional to V0, because now V0 is not large. The conse-
quent intermittency phenomena can therefore be observed. And as in §9 once the phase
space contraction is intermittent all properties of the system show the same behavior.

And in fact intermittency in observations averaged ove a time span τ will appear with a
time frequency of the form eV0 (ζ(p)−ζ(1)) τ : the quantity p can be interpreted as a measure
of the “strength of intermittency” observable in easurements averaged over a time τ
because as noted in §9 and in [Ga99b] the size of p controls the statistical properties
of “most” other observables. Therefore the function ζ(p) (hence ζ(p)) might be directly
measurable and it should be rather directly related to the quantities that one actually
observes in intermittency experiments. And the diﬀerence ζ(p)− ζ(−p) can be tested for
linearity in p as predicted by the analysis above.

Note that in an extended system the volume V is much larger than V0 and we shall
see “for sure” intermittency (for observables averaged over a time τ ) of strength p in a
region of volume V0 somewhere within a volume W such that

11.2

W
V0

eV0 (ζ(p)−ζ(1))τ ≃ 1

(11.2)

At this point it seems relevant to recall that it is rather heatedly being debated whether
the name of “entropy creation rate” that some authors (including the present one) give
to the phase space contraction rate is justiﬁed or not, see [An82]. The above properties
not only propose the physical meaning of the quantity p and bring up the possibility
of measuring its rate function ζ(p) in actual experiments but also provide a further
justiﬁcation of the name given to σ as “entropy creation rate” and fuel for the debate
that inevitably the word entropy generates at each and every occurrence.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

16

§12. Benard convection, intermittency and the Ciliberto–Laroche experi-
ment.

A very interesting attempt at checking some of the above ideas has been made recently
by Cilberto and Laroche in an experiment on real ﬂuids which has been performed with
the aim of testing the relation (11.1) locally in a small volume element, [CL98]. By “real”
we mean here non numerical: a distinction that, however, has faded away together with
the XX–th century but that some still cherish: the system is physically macroscopic
(water in a container of a size of the order of a liter).
This being a real experiment one has to stretch quite a bit the very primitive theory
developed so far in order to interpret it and one has to add to the chaotic hypothesis
other assumptions that have been discussed in [BG97], [Ga97a] in order to obtain the
ﬂuctuation relation (10.12) and its local couterpart (11.1).
The experiment attempts at measuring a quantity that is eventually interpreted as the
diﬀerence ζ(p) − ζ(−p), by observing the ﬂuctuations of the product ϑuz where ϑ is the
deviation of the temperature from the average temperature in a small volume element ∆
of water at a ﬁxed position in a Couette ﬂow and uz is the velocity in the z direction of
the water in the same volume element.
The result of the experiment is in a way quite unexpected: it is found that the function
ζ(p) is rather irregular and lacking symmetry around p = 1: nevertheless the function
ζ(p)−ζ(−p) seems to be strikingly linear. As discussed in [Ga97a], predicting the slope of
the entropy creation rate would be diﬃcult but if the equivalence conjecture considered
above and discussed more in detail in [Ga97a] is correct then we should expect linearity
of ζ(p) − ζ(−p).
In the experiment of [CL98] the quantity ϑuz did not appear to be the divergence of
the phase space volume simply because there was no model proposed for a theory of the
experiment. Nevertheless Ciliberto–Laroche select the quantity R∆ ϑ uz d x on the basis
of considerations on entropy and dissipation so that there is hope that in a model of the
ﬂow this quantity can be related to the entropy creation rate discussed in §10,§11.
Here we propose that a model for the ﬂuid, that can be reasonably used, is Rayleigh’s
model of convection, [Lo63], [LL71] and [Ga97b] sec. 5. An attempt for a theory of the
experiment could be the following.
One supposes that the equations of motion of the system in the whole container (of
linear size of the order of 30 cm) are written for the quantities t, x, z, ϑ, u in terms of the
height H of the container (assumed to be a horizontal inﬁnite layer), of the temperature
diﬀerence between top and bottom δT and in terms of the phenomenological “friction
constants” ν, χ of viscosity, dynamical thermal conductivity and of the thermodynamic
dilatation coeﬃcient α. We suppose that the ﬂuid is 3–dimensional but stratiﬁed, so
that velocity and temperature ﬁelds do not depend on the coordinate y, and gravity is
directed along the z–axis: g = g e , e = (0, 0,−1). The temperature deviation ϑ is
deﬁned as the diﬀerence betwen the temperature T (x, y, z) and the temperature that the
ﬂuid would have at height z in absence of convection, i.e. T0− z δT /H if T0 is the bottom
temperature.
In such conditions the equations, including the boundary conditions (of ﬁxed temper-
ature at top and bottom and zero normal velocity at top and bottom), the convection
equations in the Rayleigh model, see [Lo63] eq. (17), (18) where they are called the
Saltzman equations, and [Ga97b] §1.5, become

Z uxd x =Z uyd x = 0

ϑ(0) = 0 = ϑ(H),

(12.1)

uz(0) = 0 = uz(H),

12.1

∂ · u = 0,
e · ∂
˙u + u
e
e · ∂
e

˙ϑ + u

u = ν∆ u − αϑ g − ∂ p′,
ϑ = χ∆ϑ +

uz

δT
H

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

17

The function p′ is related to the pressure p: within the approximations it is p = p0 −
ρ0gz + p′. We shall impose for simplicity horizontal periodic boundary conditions in x, y
so that the ﬂuid can be considered in a ﬁnite container V of side a for some a > 0 preﬁxed
(which in theoriginal variable would correspond to a container of horizntal size aH).
It is useful to deﬁne the following adimensional quantities

τ = tνH −2, ξ = xH −1, η = yH −1, ζ = zH −1,

ϑ0 =

R2 =

, u 0 = (pgHα δT )−1 u

αϑ
α δT
gH 3α δT

,

RP r =

ν2

ν
κ

and one checks that the Rayleigh equations take the form

u = ∆ u − Rϑ e − ∂ p,
ϑ = R−1

P r∆ϑ + Ruz,

˙u + Ru

˙ϑ + Ru

e · ∂
e
e · ∂
e
∂ · u = 0
uz(0) = uz(1) = 0,
uxd x =ZV
ZV

ϑ(0) = ϑ(1) = 0,

uyd x = 0

(12.2)

(12.3)

where we again call t, x, y, z, u , ϑ the adimensional coordinates τ, ξ, η, ζ, u 0, ϑ0 in (12.2).
The numbers R, RP r are respectively called the Reynolds and Prandtl numbers of the
problem: RP r =∼ 6.7 for water while R is a parameter that we can adjust, to some
extent, from 0 up to a rather large value.
According to the principle of equivalence stated in [Ga97a] here one could impose the
constraints

ZV (cid:0) u 2 +

1

RP r

ϑ2(cid:1) d x = C

(12.4)

on the “frictionless equations” (i.e. the ones without the terms with the laplacians) and
determine the necessary forces via Gauss’ principle of minimal eﬀort, see footnote 3
and [Ga96a], [Ga97a]. We use as eﬀort functional of an acceleration ﬁeld a and of a
temperature variation ﬁeld s the quantity

def

= (cid:0)( a + ∂ p − f ), (−∆)−1( a + ∂ p − f )(cid:1)+

with

E( a , s)
+(cid:0)(s − ϕ), (−∆)−1(s − ϕ)(cid:1)
= − Rϑ e ,

def
= Ruz

def

ϕ

f

(12.5)

and require it to be minimal over the variations δ ( x ) of a = d u
dt and τ ( x ) of s = dϑ
with the constraints that for all x it is ∂ · δ = 0, besides those due to the boundary
conditions. The result is

dt

˙ϑ + Ru

∂ · u = 0
u = Rϑ e − ∂ p′ + τ th
· ∂
˙u + R u
e
e
ϑ = Ruz + λth
e · ∂
e

ϑ(0) = 0 = ϑ(H),

uxd x =ZV

ZV

uyd x = 0

(12.6)

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

18

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

12.6

12.7

12.8

12.9

where the frictionless equations are modiﬁed by the thermostats forces τ th, λth: the
latter impose the nonholonomic constraint in (12.4) with the eﬀort functional deﬁned by
(12.5). Looking only at the bulk terms we see that the equations obtained by imposing
the con1straints via Gauss’ principle become the (12.3) with coeﬃcients in front of the
Laplace operators equal to νG, νGR−1
P r, respectively, with the “gaussian multiplier” νG

u )2+R−1

P r( ∂ ϑ)2(cid:1)d x

(12.7)

(12.8)

being an odd functions of u , see [Ga97a]: setting ˜CV ( u , ϑ) =RV (cid:0)(∂
e

νG = ˜CV ( u , ϑ)−1R(1 + R−1

one ﬁnds

uzϑ d x

P r)ZV

And the equations become, ﬁnally

∂ · u = 0
u = Rϑ e − ∂ p′ + νG ∆ u
· ∂
˙u + R u
e
e
ϑ = Ruz + νG
e · ∂
e

ϑ(0) = 0 = ϑ(H),

˙ϑ + Ru

Z uxd x =Z uyd x = 0

RP r

1

∆ϑ

If one wants the equivalence between the ensembles of SRB distributions for the equation
(12.8) and for (12.3) one has to tune, [Ga97a], the value of the constant C in (12.4) so
that the time average value hνGi+ of νG is precisely the physical one: namely hνGi = 1
by (12.3). This is (again) the same, in spirit, as ﬁxing the temperature in the canonical
ensemble so that it agrees with the microcanonical temperature thus implying that the
two ensembles give the same averages to the local observables.

The equations (12.8) are time reversible (unlike the (12.3)) under the time reversal map:

( u , ϑ) = (− u , ϑ)

(12.9)

and they should be supposed, by the arguments in [Ga97a] and §10,11: “equivalent” to
the irreversible ones (12.3),
The (12.8) should therefore have a “divergence” σ( u , ϑ) whose ﬂuctuation function ζ(p)
veriﬁes a linear ﬂuctuation relation, i.e. ζ(p) − ζ(−p) should be linear in p. Note that
the divergence of the above equations is proportional to νG if one supposes that the
high momenta modes with | k | > K(R) = Rκ with κ suitable can be set equal to 0 so
that the equation (12.8) becomes a system of ﬁnite diﬀerential equations for the Fourier
components of u , ϑ.
For instance the Lorenz’ equations, [Lo63] see also §17 of [Ga97b], reduced the number of
Fourier components necessary to describe (12.3) to just three components, thus turning
it into a system of three diﬀerential equations.
Proceeding in this way the divergence of the equations of motion can be computed as a
sum of two integrals one of which proportional to νG in (12.7). If instead of integrating
over the whole sample we integrate over a small region ∆, like in the experiment of
[CL98], we can expect to see a ﬂuctuation relation for the entropy creation rate if the
ﬂuctuation theorem holds locally, i.e. for the entropy creation in a small region.
As for the cases in §11 this is certainly not implied by the proof in [GC95]: however
when the dissipation is homogeneous through the system, as it is the case in the Rayleigh
model there is hope that the ﬂuctuation relation holds locally because “a small subsystem
should be equivalent to a large one”. As noted in §9 the actual possibility of a local
ﬂuctuation theorem in systems with homogeneous dissipation has been shown in [Ga99c],
after having been found through numerical simulations in [GP99], and this example was
relevant because it gave us some justiﬁcation to imagine that it might apply to the present
situation as well.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

19

The entropy creation is due to the term RR∆ uzϑ d x / ˜C∆( u , ϑ), where ∆ is the region

where the measurements of [CL98] are performed, hence we have a proposal for the
explanation of the remarkable experimental result. Unfortunately in the experiment
[CL98] the contributions not explicitly proportional to R to the entropy creation rates
have not been measured nor has been the ˆC in (12.7) which also ﬂuctuates (or might
ﬂuctuate). In any event they might be measurable by improving the same apparatus, so
that one can check whether the above attempt to an explanation of the experiment is
correct, or try to ﬁnd out more about the theory in case it is not right. If correct the
above “theory” the experiment in [CL98] would be quite important for the status of the
chaotic hypothesis.

§13. Conclusions.
The chaotic hypothesis promises a point of view on non equilibrium that has proved so
far of some interest. Here we have exposed the basic ideas and attempted at drawing
some consequences: admittedly the most interesting rely on rather phenomenological and
heuristic grounds. They are summarized below.

(1) The deﬁnition of nonequilibrium ensembles with the proposal that out of equilibrium
also the equation of motion should be considered as part of the deﬁnition of ensemble.
This is take into account that while in equilibrium the system is uniquely deﬁned by
its microscopic forces and constituents in non equilibrium it is not so. Systems must be
put in contact with thermostats if we want them to become stationary after a transient
time. And (for large systems) there may be several equivalent ways of taking heat out
of a system, i.e. several thermostats, without aﬀecting the properties of stationary state
that is eventually reached by the system itself.
(2) Equivalence of ensembles has the most striking aspect that systems which evolve with
equations that are very diﬀerent may exhibit the same statistical properties. In particular
reversible evolutions might be equivalent to non reversible ones, thus making it possible
to apply results that require reversibility, in particular the ﬂuctuation relations, to cases
in which it is not valid.
(3) An interpretation of the quantity p that intervenes in the ﬂuctuation theorems in
terms of an intermittency phenomenon and as a further quantitative measure of it.
(4) The possibility of applying the theory to strongly turbulent motions was the origin of
the Ruelle’s principle that evolved into the chaotic hypothesis: therefore not surprisingly
the ideas can be applied to ﬂuid dynamics. We have discussed a possible approach. The
approach leads again to a proposal for the theory of certain intermittency phenomena
which appear quantitatively related to entropy creation ﬂuctuations.
(5) The possibility of measurement of the rate ζ(p) leads to a a possible prediction of the
spatial frequency of internittent events of strength p or, as I prefer, with entropy creation
rate p (see (4) above, (11.2) and §12). This seems testable in concrete experiments (both
real and numerical).
(6) We have used the results in (2)%(8) to hint at an interpretation of the experiment
by Ciliberto and Laroche on Benard convection in water.

Although the theory is still at its beginning and it migh turn out to be not really of
interest it seems that at this moment it is worth trying to test it both in its safest, c.f.r.
§2%§8, and in its most daring, c.f.r. §9%§12, predictions.
Acknowledgements: I am greatly indebted to Professor R. Newton for giving me the
opportunity to collect the above thoughts which, collected together, go far beyond what I
originally planned after he proposed to me to write this review. Work partially supported
by Rutgers University and by MPI through grant # ??????????.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

20

References.

[An82] Andrej, L.: The rate of entropy change in non–Hamiltonian systems, Physics
Letters, 111A, 45–46, 1982. And Ideal gas in empty space, Nuovo Cimento, B69, 136–
144, 1982. See also The relation between entropy production and K–entropy, Progress in
Theoretical Physics, 75, 1258–1260, 1986.
[Be50] Becker, R.: Teoria dell’ elettricit`a, Sansoni, vol. II, 1950
[Bo66] Boltzmann, L.: ¨Uber die mechanische Bedeutung des zweiten Haupsatzes der
W¨armetheorie, in ”Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen”, ed. F. Hasen¨ohrl, vol. I, p. 9–33,
reprinted by Chelsea, New York.
[Bo84] Boltzmann, L.: ¨Uber die Eigenshaften monzyklischer und anderer damit ver-
wandter Systeme, in ”Wissenshaﬂtliche Abhandlungen”, ed. F.P. Hasen¨ohrl, vol. III,
p. 122–152, Chelsea, New York, 1968, (reprint).
[BGG97] Bonetto, F., Gallavotti, G., Garrido, P.: Chaotic principle: an experimental
test, Physica D, 105, 226–252, 1997.
[BG97] Bonetto, F., Gallavotti, G.: Reversibility, coarse graining and the chaoticity
principle, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 189, 263–276, 1997.
[CG99] Cohen, E.G.D., Gallavotti, G.: Note on Two Theorems in Nonequilibrium Sta-
tistical Mechanics, Journal of Statistical Physics, 96, 1343–1349, 1999.
[CL98] Ciliberto, S., Laroche, C.: An experimental veriﬁcation of the Gallavotti–Cohen
ﬂuctuation theorem, Journal de Physique, 8, 215–222, 1998.
[ECM93] Evans, D.J.,Cohen, E.G.D., Morriss, G.P.: Probability of second law violations
in shearing steady f lows, Physical Review Letters, 71, 2401–2404, 1993.
[EM90] Evans, D.J., Morriss, G.P.: Statistical Mechanics of Nonequilibrium ﬂuids, Aca-
demic Press, New York, 1990.
[GC95] Gallavotti, G., Cohen, E.G.D.: Dynamical ensembles in nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics, Physical Review Letters, 74, 2694–2697, 1995. And: Dynamical ensembles
in stationary states, Journal of Statistical Physics, 80, 931–970, 1996].
[Ga95] Gallavotti, G.: Topics on chaotic dynamics, in Third Granada Lectures in Com-
putational Physics, Ed. P. Garrido, J. Marro, in Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer
Verlag, 448, p. 271–311, 1995.
[Ga96a] Gallavotti, G.: Extension of Onsager’s reciprocity to large ﬁelds and the chaotic
hypothesis, Physical Review Letters, 77, 4334–4337, 1996.
[Ga96c] Gallavotti, G.: New methods in nonequilibrium gases and ﬂuids, Open Systems
and Information Dynamics, Vol. 6, 101–136, 1999 (original in chao-dyn #9610018).
[Ga96b] Gallavotti, G., Ruelle D.: SRB states and nonequilibrium statistical mechanics
close to equilibrium, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 190, 279–285, 1997.
[Ga97a] Gallavotti, G.: Dynamical ensembles equivalence in ﬂuid mechanics, Physica D,
105, 163–184, 1997.
[Ga97b] Gallavotti, G.: Ipotesi per una introduzione alla Meccanica dei Fluidi, “Quader-
ni del CNR-GNFM”, vol. 52, p. 1–428, Firenze, 1997. English translation in progress:
available at http:\\ipparco.roma1.infn.it.
[Ga98] Gallavotti, G.: Chaotic dynamics, ﬂuctuations, non-equilibrium ensembles,
Chaos, 8, 384–392, 1998. See also [Ga96c].
[Ga99a] Gallavotti, G.: Statistical Mechanics, Springer Verlag, 1999.
[Ga99b] Gallavotti, G.: Fluctuation patterns and conditional reversibility in nonequilib-
rium systems, Annales de l’ Institut H. Poincar´e, 70, 429–443, 1999.
[Ga99c] Gallavotti, G.: A local ﬂuctuation theorem, Physica A, 263, 39–50, 1999. And
Chaotic Hypothesis and Universal Large Deviations Properties, Documenta Mathematica,
extra volume ICM98, vol. I, p. 205–233, 1998, also in chao-dyn 9808004.

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

21

[Ge97] Gentile, G.: Large deviation rule for Anosov ﬂows, Forum Mathematicum, 10,
89–118, 1998.
[GP99] Gallavotti, G., Perroni, F.: An experimental test of the local ﬂuctuation theorem
in chains of weakly interacting Anosov systems, preprint, 1999, in http://ipparco. roma1.
infn. it at the 1999 page.
[HHP87] Holian, B.L., Hoover, W.G., Posch. H.A.: Resolution of Loschmidt’s para-
dox: the origin of irreversible behavior in reversible atomistic dynamics, Physical Review
Letters, 59, 10–13, 1987.
[Lo63] Lorenz, E.: Deterministic non periodic ﬂow, J. of the Athmospheric Sciences, 20,
130- 141, 1963.
[LL71] Landau, L., Lifchitz, E.: M´ecanique des ﬂuides, MIR, Moscou, 1971.
[RS99] Rondoni, L., Segre, E.: Fluctuations in two dimensional reversibly damped turbu-
lence, Nonlinearity, 12, 1471–1487, 1999.
[Ru76] Ruelle, D.: A measure associated with Axiom A attractors, American Journal of
Mathematics, 98, 619–654, 1976.
[Ru78] Ruelle, D.: Sensitive dependence on initial conditions and turbulent behavior of
dynamical systems, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 356, 408–416, 1978.
This is the ﬁrst place where the hypothesis analogous to the later chaotic hypothesis was
formulated (for ﬂuids): however the idea was exposed orally at least since the talks given
to illustrate the technical work [Ru76], which appeared as a preprint and was submitted
for publication in 1973 but was in print three years later.
[Ru96] Ruelle, D.: Positivity of entropy production in nonequilibrium statistical mechan-
ics, Journal of Statistical Physics, 85, 1–25, 1996. And Ruelle, D.: Entropy production
in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 189,
365–371, 1997.
[Ru99a] Ruelle, D.: Smooth dynamics and new theoretical ideas in non-equilibrium sta-
tistical mechanics, Journal of Statistical Physics, 95, 393–468, 1999.
[Ru99b] Ruelle, D.: A remark on the equivalence of isokinetic and isoenergetic ther-
mostats in the thermodynamic limit, preprint IHES 1999, to appear in Journal of Statis-
tical Physics.
[Se87] Seitz, F.: The modern theory of solids, Dover, 1987 (reprint).

Internet: Authors’ preprints downloadable (latest version) at:
http://ipparco.roma1.infn.it

e-mail: giovanni.gallavotti@roma1.infn.it

(link) http://www.math.rutgers.edu/∼giovanni

2/f ebbraio/2008; 1:06

22

