0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
2

 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
7
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Emergence of intense jets and Jupiter Great Red Spot as

maximum entropy structures.

F. BOUCHET1 and J. SOMMERIA2

1UMR 5582, Institut Fourier, BP 74, 38402 Saint Martin d’H`eres Cedex,
France

2CNRS, LEGI/Coriolis, 21 av. des Martyrs, 38 000 Grenoble, France

July 22, 2013

Abstract

We explain the emergence and robustness of intense jets in highly turbulent plan-
etary atmospheres, like on Jupiter, by a general approach of statistical mechanics of
potential vorticity patches. The idea is that potential vorticity mixing leads to the
formation of a steady organized coarse grained ﬂow, corresponding to the statistical
equilibrium state. Our starting point is the quasi-geostrophic 1-1/2 layer model, and
we consider the relevant limit of a small Rossby radius of deformation. Then narrow
jets are obtained, scaling like the Rossby radius of deformation. These jets can be
either zonal, or closed into a ring bounding a vortex. Taking into account the eﬀect of
the beta eﬀect and a sublayer deep shear ﬂow, we predict an organization of the turbu-
lent atmospheric layer into an oval-shaped vortex amidst a background shear. Such an
isolated vortex is centered over an extremum of the equivalent topography (determined
by the deep shear ﬂow and beta-eﬀect). This prediction is in agreement with analysis
of wind data in major Jovian vortices (Great Red Spot and Oval BC).

1

Introduction

Atmospheric and oceanic ﬂows are often organized into narrow jets. They can zonally ﬂow
around the planet like the jet streams in the earth stratosphere, or the eastward jet at 24
in the northern hemisphere of Jupiter ( Maxworthy 1984). Jets can alternatively organize
into rings, forming vortices, like the rings shed by the meandering of the Gulf-Stream in
the western Atlantic Ocean. The ﬂow ﬁeld in Jupiter most famous feature, the Great
Red Spot, is an oval-shaped jet, rotating in the anticyclonic direction and surrounding an
interior area with a weak mean ﬂow ( Dowling and Ingersoll 1989), see ﬁgure 1(a). Robust
cyclonic vortices have a similar jet structure ( Hatzes et al 1981 ), see ﬁgure 1(b).

Such jets and vortices are in a turbulent surrounding, and the persistence of their
strength and concentration in the presence of eddy mixing is intriguing. The explanation
proposed in this paper is based on a statistical mechanical approach: the narrow jet or
vortex appears as the most probable state of the ﬂow after a turbulent mixing of potential
vorticity, taking into account constraints due to the quantities conserved by the dynamics,

1

especially energy. Such a statistical theory has been ﬁrst proposed for the two-dimensional
Euler equations by Kuz’min (1982), Robert (1990) , Robert and Sommeria (1991), Miller
(1990). See Brandt et al (1999) for a recent review and discussion. This theory predicts an
organization of two-dimensional turbulence into a steady ﬂow (with ﬁne scale, ’microscopic’
vorticity ﬂuctuations). Complete vorticity mixing is prevented by the conservation of the
energy, which can be expressed as a constraint in the accessible vorticity ﬁelds. A similar,
but quantitatively diﬀerent, organization had been previously obtained with statistical me-
chanics of singular point vortices with the mean ﬁeld approximation, instead of continuous
vorticity ﬁelds (Onsager 1949, Joyce and Montgomery 1973).

Extension to the quasi-geostrophic (QG) model has been discussed by Sommeria et
al (1991), Michel & Robert (1994), Kazantsev Sommeria and Verron (1998). This model
describes a shallow water system with a weak vorticity in comparison with the planetary
vorticity (small Rossby number), such that the pressure is in geostrophic balance, and the
corresponding free surface deformation is supposed small in comparison with the layer thick-
ness. For Jupiter the free surface would be rather at the bottom of the active atmospheric
layer, ﬂoating on a denser ﬂuid, as discussed by Dowling and Ingersoll (1989), see Dowling
(1995) for a review. The gradient of planetary vorticity is accounted by a beta-eﬀect. An
additional beta-eﬀect, depending on the latitude coordinate y, is introduced to represent
the inﬂuence on the active atmospheric layer of a steady zonal ﬂow in the deep interior, as
discussed by Dowling and Ingersoll (1989).

The free surface deformability, representing the strength of the density stratiﬁcation, is
controlled by the Rossby radius of deformation R∗. The two-dimensional Euler equation is
recovered in the limit of very strong stratiﬁcation for which R∗ → ∞. We shall consider
in this paper the opposite limit of weak stratiﬁcation for which R∗ is much smaller than
the scale of the system L. This limit is appropriate for large scale oceanic currents, as the
radius of deformation is typically 10-100 km. For Jupiter, R∗ is estimated to be in the
range 500-2500 km, while the Great Red Spot extends over 20,000 km in longitude, and
10,000 km in latitude, so the limit R∗/L → 0 seems relevant. We show that in this limit
the statistical equilibrium is made of quiescent zones with well mixed uniform potential
vorticity, bounded by jets with thickness of order R∗. This provides therefore a general
justiﬁcation of jet persistence. Some of the ideas used have been already sketched in
Sommeria et al (1991), but we here provide a systematic derivation and thorough analysis.
In principle, the Quasi Geostrophic approximation breaks down for scales much larger
than the radius of deformation, so that the limit R∗/L → 0 seems inconsistent with the QG
approximation. However the relevant scale is the jet width, which remains of order R∗, so
that the Quasi Geostrophic approximation remains valid in this limit. This point has been
discussed by Marcus (1993) for the Great Red Spot, which he supposes to be a uniform
Potential Vorticity ( PV ) spot surrounded by a uniform Potential Vorticity background (
we here justify this structure as the result of Potential Vorticity mixing with constraints on
the conserved quantities ). Analyzing wind data in the Great Red Spot, Dowling & Ingersoll
(1989) concluded that the QG approximation is good up within typically 30% error, which is
reasonable to a ﬁrst approximation. Statistical mechanics of the more general shallow water
system (to be published), predicts a similar jet structure. The present Quasi Geostrophic
results therefore provide a good description as a ﬁrst approximation.

We ﬁrst consider the case without beta-eﬀect in section 2. We furthermore assume

2

periodic boundary conditions (along both coordinates) in this section to avoid consideration
of boundary eﬀects. Starting from some initial condition with patches of uniform PV, we
ﬁnd that these patches mix with uniform density (probability) in two sub-domains, with
strong density gradient at the interface, corresponding to a free jet. The coexistence of the
two sub-domains can be interpreted as an equilibrium between two thermodynamic phases.
We ﬁnd that the interface has a free energy per unit of length, and its minimization leads to
a minimum length at equilibrium. This results in a constant radius of curvature, in analogy
with surface tension eﬀects in thermodynamics, leading to spherical bubbles or droplets.
The range of the vortex interaction is of the order R∗, therefore becoming very small in
the limit of small radius of deformation, so the statistical equilibrium indeed behaves like
in usual thermodynamics with short range molecular interactions. This contrasts with
the case of Euler equation, with long range vortex interactions, analogous to gravitational
eﬀects (Chavanis Sommeria and Robert 1996, Chavanis 1998).

Figure 7 summarizes the calculated equilibrium states, depending on the total energy
and a parameter B representing an asymmetry between the initial Potential Vorticity patch
areas, before the mixing process. We obtain straight jets for a weak asymmetry and circular
jets for higher asymmetry. Such circular a jet reduces to an axisymmetric vortex, with
radius of order R∗, in the limit of low energy.

We discuss the inﬂuence of the beta-eﬀect or the deep zonal ﬂow in section 3. The
channel geometry, representing a zonal band periodic in the longitude x is appropriate for
that study. With the usual beta-eﬀect βy, linear in the transverse coordinate y, statistical
equilibrium is, depending on the initial parameters, a zonal ﬂow, or a meandering eastward
jet, or a uniform velocity vm = R2β whose induced free surface slope cancels the beta-eﬀect
( uniformization of Potential Vorticity ) on which circular vortices can coexist.

For more general beta-eﬀects, due to the deep zonal ﬂow, we ﬁnd that the jet curvature
depends on latitude y. In particular a quadratic beta eﬀect ay2 leads to oval-shape jets,
similar to the Great Red Spot. Using the determination of the sublayer ﬂow from Voyager
data by Dowling and Ingersoll (1989), we show in section 4, that such a quadratic eﬀective
beta-eﬀect is indeed a realistic model for Jupiter atmosphere in the latitude range of the
Great Red Spot and the White Ovals, the other major coherent vortices on Jupiter. Using
these data on beta-eﬀect, as well as the shear in the zonal ﬂow at the latitude of the Great
Red Spot, the jet width and its maximum velocity, we deduce all the parameters of our
model.

2 The case with periodic boundary conditions

2.1 The dynamical system

We start from the barotropic Quasi Geostrophic (QG) equation :

∂q
∂t

+ v · ∇q = 0

q = −∆ψ +

ψ
R2 − h(y)

3

(1)

(2)

v = −ˆz ∧ ∇ψ

(3)

where q is the potential vorticity ( PV ), advected by the non-divergent velocity v, ψ is
the stream function, R is the internal Rossby deformation radius between the layer of ﬂuid
under consideration and a deep layer unaﬀected by the dynamics. x and y are respectively
the zonal and meridional coordinates ( x is directed eastward and y poleward ). The
term h(y) represents the combined eﬀect of the planetary vorticity gradient and of a given
stationary zonal ﬂow in the deep layer, with stream function ψd(y): h(y) = −βy + ψd/R2.
This deep ﬂow induces a constant deformation of the free surface, acting like a topography
on the active layer. We shall therefore call h(y) the ’topography’, and study its inﬂuence
in section 3. Let us assume h(y) = 0 in this section. We deﬁne the QG equations (1,2)
in the non-dimensional square D = [− 1
2 ]2. R is then the ratio of the internal Rossby
deformation radius R∗ to the physical scale of the domain L.

2 , 1

Let hfi ≡ RD f d2r be the average of f on D for any function f . Physically, as the
stream function ψ is related to the geostrophic pressure, hψi is proportional to the mean
height at the interface between the ﬂuid layer and the bottom layer, and due to the mass
conservation it must be constant (Pedlosky 1987). We make the choice

hψi = 0

(4)

without loss of generality.

The total circulation is hqi = h−∆ψ + ψ/R2i = hψ/R2i due to the periodic boundary

conditions. Therefore

hqi = 0

(5)

We note that the Dirichlet problem (2) on D with periodic boundary conditions has a
unique solution ψ for a given PV ﬁeld.

Due to the periodic conditions for ψ, the linear momentum is also equal to 0,

The energy

hvi = 0

E =

1

2ZD

qψd2r =

[ (∇ψ)2 +

ψ2
R2 ]d2r

1

2ZD

(6)

(7)

is conserved ( we note that the ﬁrst term in the right hand side of (7) is the kinetic energy
whereas the second one is the gravitational available potential energy ).

The integrals

Cf (q) =ZD

f (q)d2r

(8)

for any continuous function f are also conserved, in particular the diﬀerent moments of the
PV. In the case of an initial condition made of a ﬁnite number of PV levels, the areas initially
occupied by each of these levels is conserved, and this is equivalent to the conservation of
all the constants of motion (8).

4

2.2 The statistical mechanics on a two PV levels conﬁguration.

2.2.1 The macroscopic description.

The QG equations (1) (2) are known to develop very complex vorticity ﬁlaments. Because
of the rapidly increasing amount of information it would require, as time goes on, a de-
terministic description of the ﬂow for long time is both unrealistic and meaningless. The
statistical theory adopts a probabilistic description for the vorticity ﬁeld. The statistical
equilibrium depends on the energy and of the global probability distribution of PV levels.
Various previous studies (Sommeria & al 1991), (Kazantsev & al 1998) indicate that a
model with only two PV levels provides a good approximation in many cases. The determi-
nation of the statistical equilibrium is then simpliﬁed as it depends only on the energy, on
the two PV levels, denoted q = a1 and q = a−1 and on their respective areas A and (1− A)
in D. The number of free parameters can be further reduced by appropriate scaling. Indeed
a change in the time unit permits to deﬁne the PV levels up to a multiplicative constant,
and we choose for the sake of simplicity :

and deﬁne the non-dimensional parameter B as :

a1 − a−1

2

= 1

B ≡

a1 + a−1

2

(9)

(10)

The condition (5) of zero mean PV imposes that a1A + a−1(1− A) = 0. This means that a1
and a−1 must be of opposite sign and, using (9) and (10), A = (1− B)/2. The distribution
of PV levels is therefore fully characterized by the single asymmetry parameter B, which
takes values between -1 and +1. The symmetric case of two PV patches with equal area
A = 1/2 corresponds to B = 0, while the case of a patch with small area (but high PV,
such that h q i = 0) corresponds to B → 1. Note that we can restrict the discussion to
B ≥ 1 as the QG system is symmetric by a change of sign of the PV.
The two PV levels mix due to turbulent eﬀects, and the resulting state is locally de-
scribed by the local probability (local area proportion) p(r) to ﬁnd the ﬁrst level at the
location r. The probability to ﬁnd the complementary PV level a−1 is 1− p, and the locally
averaged PV at each point is then

q(r) = a1p(r) + a−1(1 − p(r)) = 2(cid:18)p −

1

2(cid:19) + B

(11)

where the second relation is obtained by using (9) and (10).

As we consider the evolution of two PV patches, the conservation of all invariants (8)
is equivalent to the conservation of the area A of the patch with PV value a1 ( the area of
the other PV level a−1 being 1 − A ). The integral of p over the domain must be therefore
equal to the initial area A ( the patch with PV level a1 is mixed but globally conserved ),

A ≡

1 − B

2

=ZD

p(r)d2r

5

(12)

As the eﬀect of local PV ﬂuctuations is ﬁltered out by integration, the stream function
and the velocity ﬁeld are fully determined by the locally averaged PV q as the solution of

q = −∆ψ +

ψ
R2 ; ψ periodic

and v = −ˆz ∧ ∇ψ

Therefore the energy is also expressed in terms of the ﬁeld q :

E =

1

2ZD(cid:20) (∇ψ)2 +

ψ2

R2 (cid:21) d2r =

1

2ZD

qψd2r

(13)

(14)

Here the energy of the ’microscopic’ PV ﬂuctuations has been neglected (replacing q by
q), as justiﬁed in the case of Euler equation by Robert and Sommeria (1991).
Indeed,
considering a ’cutoﬀ’ for the microscopic ﬂuctuations much smaller than R, the small scale
dynamics coincides with the Euler case.

The central result of the statistical mechanics of the QG equations (1,2) is that, under
an ergodic hypothesis, we expect the long time dynamics to converge towards the Gibbs
states deﬁned by maximizing the mixing entropy

S = −ZD

[ p(r) ln p(r) + (1 − p(r)) ln(1 − p(r)) ]d2r

(15)

under the constraints of the global PV distribution (12) and energy (14). It can be shown
that the microscopic states satisfying the constraints given by the conservation laws are
overwhelmly concentrated near the Gibbs state, which is therefore likely to be reached
after a complex ﬂow evolution. A good justiﬁcation of this statement is obtained by the
construction of converging sequences of approximations of the QG equation (1,2), in ﬁnite
dimensional vector spaces, for which a Liouville theorem holds. This is a straightforward
translation of the work of Robert (1999) for 2D Euler equations. The sequence of such
Liouville measures has then the desired concentration properties as (1,2) enters in the
context considered in Michel & Robert (1994).

2.2.2 The Gibbs states

Following Robert & Sommeria (1991), we seek maxima of the entropy (15) under the
constraints (12) and (14). To account for these constraints, we introduce two corresponding
Lagrange multipliers, which we denote 2α and −C/R2 for convenience in future calculations.
Then the ﬁrst variation of the functionals satisﬁes :

δS − 2αδA +

C
R2 δE = 0

for all variations δp of the probability ﬁeld p. After straightforward diﬀerentiation we
obtain:

δS = −ZD

6

[ ln p − ln(1 − p) ]δpd2r , δA =ZD
δE =ZD

ψδqd2r =ZD

2ψδpd2r

δpd2r

(16)

where the expression of δE has been obtained by integrating by part and expressing q by

(11). Then we can write the ﬁrst variation under the form RD[ − ln p + ln(1 − p) − 2α +

2Cψ/R2 ] δp d2r which must vanish for any small variation δp. This implies that the
integrand must vanish, and yields the equation for the optimum state:

p =

1 − tanh(α − Cψ
R2 )

2

,

and using (11) and (13), the partial diﬀerential equation

q = −∆ψ +

ψ

R2 = B − tanh(cid:18)α −

Cψ

R2(cid:19)

(17)

(18)

determining the Gibbs states (statistical equilibrium). From now on we forget the q over-
line for the locally averaged PV and refer to it as the PV.

Therefore, we have shown that for any solution of the variational problem, two constants
α and C exist such that ψ satisﬁes (18). Conversely it can be proved that for any such
two constants, a solution to equation (18), in general not unique, always exists. Then p
associated with one of these solutions by (17) is a critical point of the ’free energy’ −S(p) +
2αA(p) − C
R2 E(p) (i.e. its ﬁrst variation vanishes). Then the Lagrange multipliers are not
given but have to be calculated by prescribing the constraints (12) and (14) corresponding
to the two parameters B and E respectively, given by the initial condition. Furthermore,
among the states of given energy E and asymmetry parameter B, we shall select the actual
maxima.

Finally, let us ﬁnd a lower bound for the parameter C of the Gibbs states with non-zero
energy (i.e. ψ is not constant on D). Multiplying (18) by −∆ψ, integrating by part and
deﬁning f (Cψ) ≡ B − tanh(α − Cψ

R2 ), we obtain :

C = RD(cid:0)(∆ψ)2 + 1

R2 (∇ψ)2(cid:1) d2r
RD −f ′(Cψ)(∇ψ)2d2r

From which, using 0 < −f ′(Cψ) ≤ 1

R2 it follows that when ψ is not constant :

C > 1

(19)

2.3 The limit of small Rossby deformation radius

As suggested by oceanographic or Jovian parameters, we seek solutions for the Gibbs states
equation in the limit of a small ratio between the Rossby deformation radius and the length
scale of the domain : R << 1 with our non-dimensional coordinates 1

1 Modica (1987) considered the minimization of the functional Eǫ(u) =RΩ[ǫ (∇u)2 + W0(u)]dx with the
constraint RΩ

u(x)dx = m in the limit ǫ → 0+ where W0 is a real function with two relative minima. He
proved, in a mathematical framework, working with bounded variations functions, that if (uǫ) are solutions
of this variational problem, for any subsequence of (uǫ) converging in L1(Ω) as ǫ → 0, this subsequence
converge to a function u0 which takes only the values where W0 reaches its minima ; with the interface
between the corresponding subdomains having minimal area ( See Modica (1987) for a precise statement ).
We note that the Euler equation of this variational problem may be the same as the Gibbs States equation
(18) for a convenient choice of W0. However as the variational problem itself is diﬀerent this beautiful result
cannot be used in our context.

7

2.3.1 The uniform subdomains

Then we expect that the Laplacian in the Gibbs states equation (18) can be neglected with
respect to ψ/R2, except possibly in transition regions of small area. This transforms (18)
into the algebraic equation :

q =

ψ

R2 = B − tanh(cid:18)α −

Cψ

R2(cid:19)

(20)

Depending on the parameters, this equation has either one, two or three solutions,
denoted ψ−1, ψ0 and ψ1 in increasing order (see ﬁgure 2 ). The case with a single solution
would correspond to a uniform ψ, which should be equal to 0 due to the condition hψi = 0.
This is only possible for E = 0. Otherwise, we have therefore two or three solutions, with
diﬀerent solutions occurring in subdomains. This condition of multiple solutions requires
that the maximum slope for the right hand side of (20) must be greater than 1/R2 ; this is
always realized due to the inequality (19). Furthermore α must be in an interval centered
in CB ( α = CB in the symmetric case of ﬁgure 2 ).

At the interface between two constant stream function subdomains, a strong gradient of
ψ necessarily occurs, corresponding to a jet along the interface. These jets give ﬁrst order
contributions to the entropy and energy, but let us ﬁrst describe the zero order problem.
Suppose that ψ takes the value ψ1 ( resp ψ−1 ) in subdomains of total area A1 ( resp
A−1 ). The reason why we do not select the value ψ0 will soon become clear. Using
(11) we conclude that the probability p takes two constants values p±1 in their respective
subdomains. The two areas A±1 ( measured from the middle of the jet ) are complementary
such that :

Furthermore the constraint (4) of zero domain average for ψ implies at zero order,

A1 + A−1 = 1

or equivalently, using q±1 = ψ±1/R2, (11) and (21) :

ψ1A1 + ψ−1A−1 = 0,

2A1(cid:18)p1 −

1

2(cid:19) + 2(1 − A1)(cid:18)p−1 −

1

2(cid:19) = −B

(21)

(22)

(23)

This can be obtained as well from the constraint on the (microscopic) PV patch area (12).
The energy inside the subdomains reduces to the potential term ψ2/2R2, since velocity
vanishes. This area energy EA can be computed in terms of p±1 using q±1 = ψ±1/R2 and
(11) :

EA ≡

1A1 + ψ2
ψ2
2R2

−1A−1

with e(p) ≡ R2 2(cid:18)p −

1

2(cid:19)2

8

= A1e(p1) + (1 − A1)e(p−1)
+ 2B(cid:18)p −

2(cid:19) +

1

B2

2 !

(24)

There is also an energy in the jet at the interface of subdomains, but it is small with respect
to EA. Indeed the velocity in the jet, of width R, is of order (ψ1 − ψ−1)/R ∼ ψ/R, and the
corresponding integrated kinetic energy is of order ψ2/R. This is small in comparison with
the area energy EA (mostly potential) of order ψ2/R2. A precise calculation will conﬁrm
this estimate in next sub-section.

We need to determine three unknown, the area A1 and the probabilities p±1 of the PV
level a1 in each subdomain, while the constraints (23) and (24) provide two relations. An
additional relation will be given by entropy maximization. As we neglect the jet area, the
entropy reduces at order zero to the area entropy :

SA ≡ A1s(p1) + (1 − A1)s(p−1)

with s(p) ≡ −p log p − (1 − p) log(1 − p)

(25)

Thus the zero order problem corresponds to the maximization of the area entropy (25)
with respect to the 3 parameters p±1 and A1, under the 2 constraints (23) and (24). A
necessary condition for a solution of this variational problem is the existence of two Lagrange
parameters α0 and C0, associated respectively with the circulation constraint (23) and with
the energy constraint (24), such that the ﬁrst variations of the total free energy,

FA ≡ −SA −

C0

R2 EA + α0hψi
R2 ,

vanish. Let us calculate FA using (23) and (24):

FA = A1f (p1) + (1 − A1)f (p−1),

1

2(cid:19)2

with f (p) ≡ −s(p) − 2C0(cid:18)p −

− 2 (C0B − α0)(cid:18)p −

(26)

(27)

1

2(cid:19) −

C0B2

2 − α0B.

The vanishing of the variations with respect to p1 and p−1 gives that f (p±1) are local
minima of the free energy f (p). It is easily proven that the function f has two local minima
and one local maximum ( for C0 > 1 and (C0B−α0) small enough ) ( see ﬁgure 3). The local
maximum is achieved for p0 corresponding to the value ψ0. It is the reason why it has not
been taken into account in this analysis. In addition, the vanishing of the ﬁrst variations
with respect to the area A1 imposes the free energies f (p±1) in the two subdomains to
be equal. This is like the condition of thermodynamic equilibrium for a chemical species
shared by two coexisting phases.

In the expression (27) of f (p), the entropy term s(p) is symmetric with respect to

2 , as well as the quadratic term. Therefore if the linear term in (cid:0)p − 1

p = 1
two maxima are equal, with p±1 symmetric with respect to 1
2 . The addition of a linear
term obviously breaks this condition of two equal maxima, so the coeﬃcient of the linear
term must vanish, thus :

2(cid:1) vanishes the

Since p±1 are symmetric with respect to 1

2 , we introduce the parameter u by :

α0 = C0B.

p±1 =

1
2

(1 ± u).

9

(28)

(29)

Using (11),(23) we deduce:

ψ±1 = R2(B ± u)

(30)

From (22) we state that the two constant stream function (30) have to be of opposite sign,
so that u > |B|. Introducing (29) in the circulation constraint (23), and using (21), we get
:

Using these results, the energy (24) becomes

A±1 =

1

2(cid:18)1 ∓

B

u(cid:19) .

E ≃ EA =

R2
2

(u2 − B2)

(31)

(32)

This relates the parameter u to the given energy E and asymmetry parameter B. Finally
the condition that f (p±1) are maxima of f leads to :

u = tanh(C0u),

(33)

which determines the ’temperature’ parameter C0, as represented in ﬁgure 4. Therefore all
the quantities are determined from the asymmetry parameter B and from the parameter
u, related to the energy by (32).

In the limit of low energy, u → |B|, when for instance B > 0, then A1 goes to zero,
so that ψ−1 tends to occupy the whole domain. This state is the most mixed one com-
patible with the constraint of a given value of B (or equivalently a given initial patch area
A = (1 − B)/2). In the opposite limit u → 1, we see from (30) that in the two subdomains
q = ψ/R2 tends to the two initial PV levels a1 = 1 + B and a−1 = −1 + B. Thus, this state
is an unmixed state. It achieves the maximum possible energy E = R2
2 (1 − B2) under the
constraint of a given patch area. We conclude that the parameter u, or the related ’tem-
perature’ C0, linked with the diﬀerence between the energy and the maximum accessible
energy for the two given initial PV levels, characterizes the mixing of these two PV levels.
We shall call u the segregation parameter, as it quantiﬁes the segregation of the PV level
a1 ( or its complementary a−1 ) between the two phases.

Let us now study the interface between the subdomains.

2.3.2

Interior Jets

At the interface between two constant stream function subdomains, a strong gradient of ψ
necessarily occurs, corresponding to a jet along the interface. To study these jets, we come
back to the Gibbs state equation (18). We expect the Lagrange parameters α and C to be
close to the zero order parameters α0 and C0, computed in the previous sub-section, so we
use α = α0 and C = C0 to calculate the jet structure. In such a jet, we cannot neglect the
Laplacian term in (18), but a boundary layer type approximation can be used: we neglect
the tangential derivative with respect to the derivative along the coordinate normal to the

10

interface, ζ. Accordingly, we neglect the inverse of the curvature radius of the jet with
respect to 1/R.

Thus, from the Gibbs states equation (18), using (28), we deduce the jet equation :

d2ψ
dζ 2 +

−

ψ

R2 = B − tanh(cid:18)C0(cid:18)B −

ψ

R2(cid:19)(cid:19)

(34)

As the stream function depends only on the normal coordinate ζ, the velocity is tangent to
the interface, forming a jet with a typical width scaling like R. We thus make the change
of variables deﬁned by :

τ ≡
leading to the rescaled jet equation:

ζ
R

; φ ≡ −B +

ψ
R2 ,

d2φ
dτ 2 = − tanh(C0φ) + φ

(35)

(36)

The jet equation (36) is similar to a one dimensional equation of motion for a particle
( with the position φ depending on a time τ ) under the action of a force −dU/dφ deriving
from the potential,

U (φ) =

ln(cosh(C0φ))

C0

φ2
2

,

−

represented in ﬁgure 2(b). In its trajectory the particle energy is conserved :

1

dτ(cid:19)2
2(cid:18) dφ

+ U (φ) = Cst

(37)

(38)

Let φi ≡ ψi/R2−B, i = −1, 0, 1, corresponding to the solutions ψi of the algebraic equation
(20). From (30), we have φ±1 = ±u. Note that the stationary limit of (36), which must
be reached for limτ →±∞, yields again (33). Moreover, the particle energy conservation (38)
imposes the integrability condition,

U (φ−1) = U (φ1),

(39)

which is indeed satisﬁed due to the symmetry of the potential U . We note that the Lagrange
parameter determination (28) and the symmetry of the probabilities (29) with respect to
1
2 could have been deduced from this integrability condition (39) instead of minimizing
the free energy (27) (we shall proceed in this way in section 3 to take into account the
beta-eﬀect).

The jet equation (36) has been numerically integrated. Figure 5 shows a typical stream
function and velocity proﬁle in the jets. Figure 6(a) shows how the jet width depends on
the segregation parameter u. We note that the width of the jet is an increasing function
of the mixing and therefore a decreasing function of the energy. Figure 6(b) shows the
−∞ (dφ/dτ )2 dτ and of the
dependence in u of the total non-dimensional energy e(u) = 1

2R +∞

11

maximum non dimensional jet velocity (dφ/dτ )max.

As the jet structure (36) does not depend on the coordinate tangent to the jet, we can
deﬁne the jet entropy ( respectively energy, free energy ) per unit length SJ et ( respectively
EJ et, FJ et ). Multiplied by the jet length, these quantities are the ﬁrst order corrections
to the entropy ( respectively energy, free energy ). Using the change of variables (35), we
calculate the jet entropy per unit length :

SJ et = RZ +∞

−∞

[s(p(τ )) − s(p±1)]dτ

where s is deﬁned in (25), and p±1 are deﬁned in (29). Using the probability equation (17)
and (35) we obtain :

SJ et = RZ +∞

−∞

[˜s(φ)) − ˜s(φ±1))]dτ

(40)

involving the function ˜s(φ) ≡ ln(cosh(C0φ)) − C0φ tanh(C0φ). Similarly we straightfor-
wardly calculate the potential and kinetic energy per unit length for the jet :

EP

J et =

R3

2 Z +∞

−∞

(φ2 − φ2

1)dτ

EK

J et =

R3

2 Z +∞

dτ(cid:19)2
−∞ (cid:18) dφ

dτ

We use the integral (38) to calculate dφ/dτ and conclude :

EJ et = R3Z +∞

−∞

[˜g(φ) − ˜g(φ±1)]dτ,

(41)

with ˜g(φ) = − ln(cosh(C0φ)
+ φ2. Due to the symmetry of the jets, the jets provide no
perturbation to the zero-order circulation, so there is no circulation term in the jet free
energy expression : FJ et = −SJ et − C0/R2EJ et. Then

C0

FJ et = C0RZ +∞

−∞

[˜h(φ) − ˜h(φ±1)]dτ

(42)

with ˜h(φ) = −φ(φ − tanh(C0φ)).
Let us study the sign of FJ et. As φ1 veriﬁes φ1 = tanh(C0φ1) and as φ(τ ) is an increasing
function of τ with limτ →+∞ φ(τ ) = φ1 we conclude that ˜h(φ) − ˜h(φ1) > 0 for any τ > 0.
Thus FJ et > 0. Using the analogy with usual thermodynamics, the ‘surface tension’ is
positive. This favors large ‘bubbles’ which minimize the interfacial length and therefore
the corresponding free energy (27). Our initial hypothesis of well separated domains with
uniform ψ is thus supported, as discussed more precisely in next subsection.

2.3.3 Selection of the sub-domain shape

The above analysis has permitted us to determine the areas of subdomains on which the
stream function ψ takes the constant values ψ±1, but the subdomains shape is still to be
selected. There is an analogy with two phases coexisting in thermodynamic equilibrium, for

12

instance a gas bubble in a liquid medium, for which a classical thermodynamic argument
explains the spherical shape of the bubble by minimizing its free energy, proportional to
the bubble area. Our system is isolated rather than in a thermal bath, but the jet energy
is small (of order R) with respect to the total energy. Therefore the subdomain interior
behaves like a thermal bath with respect to the jet, so the usual argument on free energy
minimization applies. We shall now show this more precisely by directly maximizing the
total entropy with constraints, taking into account the jet contribution.

The jet with length L has an entropy SjetL and energy EjetL. Since the total energy
E = EA(C) + LEJ et is given, the jet has also an indirect inﬂuence in the area energy
EA. This small energy change δEA results in a corresponding change in the area entropy
δSA = −(C0/R2)δEA, from the condition (2.2.2) of zero ﬁrst variations. Note that there is
no area change δA since the jet is symmetric and has therefore no inﬂuence in the condition
(12) of a given integral of p (the diﬀerence in p with the case of two uniform patches with
boundary at the jet center has zero integral). Therefore, adding the direct and indirect
contribution of the jet entropy leads to the total entropy

S = SA(C0) +(cid:18) C0

R2 EJ et + SJ et(cid:19) L = SA(C0) − FJ etL

(43)

where SA(C0) is the zero order, area entropy, obtained in the limit of vanishing jet width 2
We deduce from (43) that the maximization of the entropy is achieved by minimizing
the total free energy FJ etL, which we have proved to be positive at the end of previous
sub-section. Thus we conclude that the maximum entropy state minimizes the jet length,
with a given area of the subdomains (31). The subdomains shape will therefore be a circle
or a stripe. More precisely if A1 < 1/π the jet forms a circle enclosing the positive constant
stream function domain ( the jet bounds a cyclonic vortex ), if 1/π < A1 < 1 − 1/π two
straight lines jets form a stripe and if A1 > 1 − 1/π the jet form a circle enclosing the
negative constant stream function domain ( the jet bounds anti-cyclonic vortex ).
The diﬀerent types of solutions can be summarized in a (E,B) diagram : ﬁgure 7. The
outer parabola is the maximum energy achievable for a ﬁxed B : E = R2(1 − B2)/2. The
frontier lines between the straight jets and the circular jets corresponds to A1 = 1/π or
A−1 = 1/π. It has been calculated using (31) and (32) : E = R2B2(2π − 2)/(π − 2)2. Note
that the maximum accessible energy is in R2, but it has been scaled by the normalization
condition (9) on PV levels, so the real energy is not bounded.

All this analysis assumes that the vortex size is much larger than the jet width λ, given
by ﬁgure 6. In other words, the area A1 or A−1 (31) must be larger than (2λ)2. This is
satisﬁed on the right side of the dashed line represented in ﬁgure 7. The dashed line itself
corresponds to the equality, and the condition of large vortex is clearly not satisﬁed on its
left side, for low energy. The position of the dashed line depends on the numerical value of
R (it has been here numerically computed for R = 0.03), and it gets closer to the origin as
R → 0. We shall now determine the statistical equilibrium in this case of low energy.

2 This reasoning to obtain the ﬁrst order entropy can be precised by evaluating explicitly the ﬁrst order
modiﬁcation of the Lagrange parameter C ( let say C1 ≡ C − C0 ) due to the jet energy, and the ﬁrst order
modiﬁcation of the Lagrange parameter α ( let say α1 ≡ α − α0 ) due to the jet curvature and computing
the ﬁrst order entropy from its deﬁnition (15). We have calculated the ﬁrst order entropy in this way to
actually obtain (43).

13

2.3.4 Axisymmetric vortices

We have noted in subsection (2.3.1) that, when for instance B > 0, in the limit of small
energy (E → 0 or equivalently u → |B|, for ﬁxed B and R), the area A−1 occupied by ψ−1
tends to 1, the whole domain. Therefore, in this limit, the complementary area A1 tends to
0 and the vortex becomes smaller than the deformation radius, so we can no more neglect
the curvature radius of the jet.

In this limit u → |B|, as the vortex has a small area with respect to the total domain,
it is not aﬀected by the boundary conditions, so it can be supposed axisymmetric. From
the general Gibbs states equation (18), we deduce the axisymmetric vortex equation :

d2ψ
dζ 2 −

−

1
ζ

dψ
dζ

+

ψ

R2 = B − tanh(cid:18)α −

Cψ

R2(cid:19)

As R will be a typical scale of the vortex, we make the change of variable,

leading to the rescaled axisymmetric vortex equation :

ζ = Rr ; φ = −

α
C

+

ψ
R2 ,

d2φ
dr2 −

−

1
r

dφ
dr

+ φ +

α
C

= B + tanh(Cφ))

(44)

(45)

(46)

From now on, we shall consider the case B > 0 (the case B < 0 is just the symmetric case
of a negative vortex).

For this equation to describe a localized vortex, we impose limr→∞φ(r) = φ−1 ≡
−α/C + ψ−1/R2, where ψ−1 is the positive solution of the algebraic equation (20). Since
nearly the whole ﬂuid domain is covered by the asymptotic stream function ψ−1 outside
the vortex, the condition of zero total circulation hqi = hψi/R2 = 0 imposes that ψ−1 ≃ 0
(it is of order R), so that φ−1 = −α/C, and the algebraic equation (20) then leads to:

α = arg tanh(B)

(47)

We can thus eliminate α in (46), leading to an equation depending on two parameters,

B and C,

d2φ
dr2 = −

1
r

dφ
dr

dφ
dr − tanh(Cφ) + φ − B +
φ(r) = −

(r = 0) = 0 and lim
r→∞

arg tanh B

C

arg tanh B

C

(48)

where the regularity condition at r = 0 has been included. Let us consider, as in section
(2.3.2), the analogy of equation (48) with a one particle motion with ’position’ φ and ’time’
r.

The last four terms on the right-hand side of (46) can be written as the derivative

−dU/dφ of the potential,

U (φ) =

ln(cosh(Cφ))

C

φ2
2

−

+(cid:18)B −

arg tanh B

C

(cid:19) φ,

(49)

14

(represented in ﬁgure 8), while the ﬁrst term can be interpreted as a friction eﬀect. Indeed,
an integration of (48) leads to:

U (φ−1) − U (φ(r = 0)) = −Z +∞

0

1

dr(cid:19)2
r (cid:18) dφ

dr < 0

(50)

Thus, in ﬁgure 8(a), the hatched area on the right side must be greater than the one on
the left (since (U (φ1)− U (φ−1)) > U (φ(r = 0)− U (φ−1) > 0). It is clear from ﬁgure 8 that
this is possible only if φ0 < 0 and α/C < B, or, using (47), C > α/B = arg tanh B/B.
The value C = α/B corresponds to the integrability condition (39) when the eﬀect of jet
curvature is neglected. This eﬀect is now taken into account by the departure of C from
this value, which we shall denote ∆C ≡ C − arg tanh B/B. Then ∆C > 0 and we expect to
recover the results of section 2.3.2 in the limit ∆C → 0. Moreover, we must reach a uniform
stream function at large distance, solution of the algebraic equation(20), so it must have
three solutions. We see in ﬁgure 8 that the corresponding ∆C must not exceed a maximal
value, denoted ∆Cmax .

We can prove that for any B > 0 and arg tanh B/B < C < arg tanh B/B + ∆Cmax,
equation (48) has a unique solution. Such solutions have been numerically obtained for
B = 0.75 and 0 < ∆C < ∆Cmax. Corresponding stream function proﬁles are shown in
ﬁgure 9.

As ∆C is decreased from ∆Cmax to zero, two stages can be seen in ﬁgure 9. First the
maximum value for the stream function is increased while the mean width of the vortex
remains of the order of R. In a second stage, when ∆C goes to zero, as we are closer to
the integrability condition for big vortices (39), φ remains longer in the vicinity of φ1 so
the vortex size increases. Note that the energy monotically increases as ∆C is decreased,
ﬁrst by an increase in the vortex maximum stream function and then by an increase in size.
Finally the case of a jet with negligible curvature studied in subsection 2.3.2 is reached
when ∆C → 0.
In conclusion, we have shown that in the limit of small energy, with ﬁxed B and R, the
Gibbs states are approximated by axisymmetric vortices, whose radial structure depends on
the parameter ∆C, which monotonically decreases from ∆Cmax to 0 as energy is increased.

2.3.5 The linear approximation for the Gibbs states

The previous discussion of axisymmetric vortices was concerned with the limit of small
energy with ﬁxed B and (small) ﬁxed R. We consider now the limit of small E and B,
i.e.
the neighborhood of the origin in the phase diagram of ﬁgure 7. Then from (32),
u → |B| << 1. Figure 6 shows that for |u| << 1, the jet width diverges and therefore the
jet tends to develop on the scale of the whole domain, so the approximation of a localized
jet, or an isolated axisymmetric vortex, falls down.

In this limit of small E and B, we can however linearize the Gibbs states equation (18),
following the work of Chavanis and Sommeria (1996) for Euler equation. After linearization,
solutions are expressed in terms of the eigenmodes of the Laplacian, and only the ﬁrst
eigenmodes can be entropy maxima.

These results are unchanged by the linear deformation term ψ/R2, so the work of Cha-
vanis and Sommeria (1996) directly applies here. With the periodic boundary conditions,

15

the ﬁrst eigenmode of the Laplacian, a sine function of one of the coordinates, for instance
y, is thus selected. This corresponds to the low energy limit of the two jet conﬁguration
shown in ﬁgure 7. The next eigenmode, in sin(πx) sin(πy), has the topology of the vortex
states. A competition between these two modes is expected in the neighborhood of the
origin for small E and B. Note that the range of validity of the linear approximation is
limited to a smaller range of parameters than in the Euler case, and this range of validity
gets smaller and smaller as R → 0. The dominant solution with uniform subdomains and
interfacial jets relies by contrast on the tanh like relation between PV and stream function,
and it is genuinely non-linear.

3 The channel case

We now consider the channel geometry, which represents a zonal band around a given
latitude.
It is then natural to introduce a beta-eﬀect, or a mean sublayer zonal ﬂow (
topography ), with the term h(y) in (1). We shall study the two cases of a linear h(y)
( beta eﬀect and/or uniform velocity for the sublayer ﬂow ) or a quadratic h(y). We
shall follow the presentation for the periodic boundary conditions, stressing only the new
features.

3.1 The dynamical system
Let us consider the barotropic QG equations (1, 2 and 3) in a channel D = [− 1
2 ]2 with
the velocity v tangent to the boundary for y = ± 1
2 and 1-periodicity in the zonal direction.
Thus we choose for the boundary conditions a constant ψ, denoted ψb, the same on the two
boundaries y = ± 1
2 . We note that, due to these conditions, the physical momentum (6) is
equal to zero. It is always possible to satisfy this condition by a change of reference frame
with a zonal velocity V such that it moves with the center of mass of the ﬂuid layer, and a
corresponding change of the deep ﬂow, resulting in an additional beta eﬀect h → h + V y
R2 .
As in section (2), we need to specify the gage constant in the stream function ψ, and
we generalize the integral condition (4) as,

2 , 1

hψi
R2 − hh(y)i = 0.

(51)

The total mass hψi is then constant in time (but not the boundary value ψb in general).
With these conditions, the Dirichlet problem (2) has a unique solution ψ for a given PV
ﬁeld q. We note that the scale unit is chosen such that the area of D is equal to 1.

The integral of any functions of the potential vorticity (8) is still conserved. Let in

particular Γ be the global PV, or circulation :

Γ ≡ hqi =ZD −∆ψ d2r =Z∂D

v.dl

(52)

By contrast with the doubly periodic boundary conditions, the circulation Γ is not neces-
sarily equal to zero. The expression of the energy in terms of the PV (see equation (7)) is

16

therefore modiﬁed (due to the boundary term in the integration by parts) :

E =

1

2ZD(cid:20) (∇ψ)2 +

ψ2

R2 (cid:21) d2r =

1

2ZD

(q + h(y))ψd2r −

1
2

Γψb

(53)

Due to the invariance under zonal translation of the system, another conserved quantity
exists :

M =ZD

yqd2r

(54)

This constant moment ﬁxes the ‘center of mass’ latitude for the PV ﬁeld.

3.2 General form of the Gibbs states

et us consider the statistical mechanics on a two PV level conﬁguration : the initial states
is made of patches with two levels of potential vorticity, q = a1 and q = a−1, occupying
respectively the areas A and (1 − A) in D. We keep the normalization (9) and deﬁnition
(10) for B. Now, since the circulation Γ is non-zero, the area A is related to B by A =
(1 − B)/2 + Γ/2. The boundary term in the expression of the energy (53) leads to an
obvious change in the energy variation (16). Let γ be the Lagrange multiplier associated
with the conservation (54) of the momentum M .

Adapting the periodic case computations, we then calculate the probability equation

and the Gibbs state equation :

1 − tanh(cid:16)α′ − Cψ

R2 + γy(cid:17)

2

p =

(55)

ψ

Cψ

q = −∆ψ +

R2 − h(y) = B − tanh(cid:18)α′ −

R2 + γy(cid:19)
with α′ ≡ α + Cψb/R2. These results generalize (17) and (18) of section 2.
In the case of a Gibbs state depending on x, the Lagrange parameter γ is related to a
zonal propagation of the equilibrium structure. The statistical theory only predicts a set
of equilibria shifted in x, but introducing the result back in the dynamical equation yields
the propagation. Indeed the Gibbs state equation (56) is of the form q = f (ψ, y), which
can be inverted (as it is monotonous in ψ, see Robert and Sommeria (1991)) to yield:

(56)

ψ = g(q) + R2 γy
C

(57)

where g is a function of the potential vorticity. From this relation we calculate the velocity
using (3) : v = R2 γ

C ˆx − g′(q)ˆz ∧ ∇q. As PV is advected ( equation (1) ) we obtain :

∂q
∂t

+ R2 γ
C

∂q
∂x

= 0

(58)

Thus the PV ﬁeld is invariant in a frame propagating with the zonal speed Vsr = R2 γ
C .

17

3.3 The limit of small Rossby deformation radius.

In this sub-section we propose to analyze the Gibbs state equation (56) in the limit of small
deformation radius ( R << 1 ). The main diﬀerence with the periodic case resides in the
latudinally depending topography h(y), resulting in two eﬀects. Firstly the subdomains of
uniform PV are no more strictly uniform, and contain a weak zonal ﬂow. Secondly the
jet curvature is no longer constant in general, but depends on the local topography. Using
the same boundary layer approximation as in the periodic case, the Laplacian term in the
Gibbs state equation (56) will be neglected, except possibly in an interior jet and in the
vicinity of the boundaries y = ± 1

2 ( boundary jets ).

Outside such jets, (56) reduces to an algebraic equation, like previously :

ψ

R2 − h(y) = B − tanh(cid:18)α′ − C

ψ

R2 + γy(cid:19) .

(59)

This is like (20), replacing the constants B by B + h(y) and α by α′ + γy. The three
solutions can be still visualized by ﬁgure 8, but the position of the straight line with respect
to the tanh curve now depends on y, due to the terms h(y) and γy. We assume that this
dependence is linear in y or varies on scales much larger than R so that the Laplacian term
remains indeed negligible. The zero order Lagrange parameters α′, C, γ, involved in this
expression, can be obtained by directly maximizing the entropy by the same method as in
section (2.3.1). A relation between the jet curvature and topography is then obtained at
ﬁrst order. This approach is developed in appendix (A).

However it is more simple to proceed diﬀerently : we start from the jet equation and
show that its integrability condition provides the relation between the jet curvature and
topography. To catch this eﬀect, we take into account the radius of curvature of the jet,
denoted r, like in section 2.3.4, but state that r is constant across the jet, assumed thin.
From the Gibbs state equation (56), using the boundary layer approximation, we thus
obtain the jet equation in term of the transverse coordinate ζ :

d2ψ
dζ 2 − ǫ

1
r

dψ
dζ

−

+

ψ

R2 − h(y) = B − tanh(cid:18)α′ − C

ψ

R2 + γy(cid:19) .

(60)

We have introduced ǫ = ±1 to account for the direction of curvature (keeping r > 0). We
deﬁne ǫ = 1 (respectively -1) if the curvature of the jet is such that φ1 ( respectively φ−1 )
is in the inner part of the jet. Note that, in the case of a vortex, as in our notations ψ is
proportional to the opposite of the pressure the case ǫ = 1 ( resp ǫ = −1 ) corresponds to
a cyclone ( resp an anticyclone ).
The algebraic equation (59) depends on three Lagrange parameters, instead of two for
the periodic case of previous section, but we have three additional constraints, the condition
that ψ has the same value at the two boundaries, the circulation constraint (52) and the
momentum constraint (54). This will be achieved in general by boundary jets. Let us ﬁrst
study the interior jets.

To study the interior jet, we make the change of variables :

ζ
R

τ ≡

; φ ≡ −

α′ + γy

C

+

ψ
R2

(61)

18

We assume the variations of y in the jet width are negligible ( R << scale of variation of
h(y) ), so that y is treated as a constant. Then we obtain the jet equation :

d2φ
dτ 2 − ǫ

R
r

dφ
dτ

−

+ φ +

α′ + γy

C

= B + h(y) + tanh(Cφ)

(62)

with φ → φ±1 for τ → ±∞, where again φ±1 corresponds to the solutions of the algebraic
equation (59), rescaled as

φ +

α′
C − B +

γy
C − h(y) = tanh(Cφ).

(63)

Let us consider, as in section (2.3.4), the analogy of the equation (62) with the motion

equation of a particle in the potential :

U (φ) =

ln cosh(Cφ)

C

φ2
2

−

+(cid:18)B + h(y) −

α′ + γy

C (cid:19) φ.

(64)

Like in section 2.3.4., integration of (62) from −∞ to +∞ imposes the integrability condition
:

U (φ1) − U (φ−1) = ǫ

R

dτ(cid:19)2
r Z +∞
−∞ (cid:18) dφ

dτ

(65)

The second term of the l.h.s. of equation (62) can be interpreted as a friction term: if ǫ = 1,
the ’particle’ starting from rest at φ1 can reach a state of rest at φ−1 only if the diﬀerence
of ’potential’ corresponds to the energy loss (65) by friction (if ǫ = −1 the same is true in
the reversed direction).
As in the periodic case we have made the thin jet assumption R << r, so that the
friction term ( rhs of (65)) is a correction of order R/r : U (φ1) − U (φ−1) = O(R/r). We
ﬁrst neglect it to get the zero order results, so we write U (φ) = U (φ−1). Therefore the
two hatched areas in ﬁgure 8 must be equal, like in ﬁgure 2. Due to the symmetry of
the tanh function, this clearly implies that the central solution of the rescaled algebraic
equation (63) must be φ0 = 0, so that α′
0/C0 − B + γy/C0 − h(y) = 0 (denoting the zero
order Lagrange parameters by the index 0). This is possible at diﬀerent latitudes y only if
γy/C0 − h(y) = 0, or is of order R (so that it can be neglected at zero order). Then the
integrability condition becomes

α′

0 = C0B.

(66)

Furthermore φ±1 are symmetric with respect to 0, of the form φ±1 = ±u, determined by
equation (33), like in section 2.3. This parameter u is again related to the energy by (32).
Finally, the terms γy/C0 − h(y) = 0 and the curvature term disappears in the jet equation
(62), which therefore reduces to (36), discussed in section 2.3.2.
The ﬁrst order solution outside the jet is obtained as a small correction δφ±1 to the
0/C0

zero order solutions ±u, with also a small correction α1 and C1 to the parameters α′
and C0,

φ±1 = ±u + δφ±1(y) ,

α′
C

=

α′
0
C0

19

+ α1 , C = C0 + C1

(67)

From (65), we deduce that U (φ1) − U (φ−1) has the sign of ǫ. As may be seen in ﬁgure
2, when α1 is positive, the line φ + α′
C moves upward, so that U (φ1) < U (φ−1). Thus α1
has the sign opposite to the sign of U (φ1) − U (φ−1) ; and we conclude that −ǫα1 is always
positive.
Introducing this expansion (67) in the algebraic equation (63), using the zero
order results (33) and (66), we obtain :

C0δφ±1(y) = −α1C0 + C1[B ± C0u(1 − u2)] − γy + C0h(y)

1 − C0(1 − u2)

(68)

Coming back to the stream function ψ, using (61), we deduce the corresponding velocity
v by diﬀerentiation with respect to y. This velocity outside the jet is zonal, along the unit
vector ˆx, and veriﬁes:

v = R2


dh(y)

1 − C0(1 − u2) 
dy − γ(1 − u2)


ˆx

(69)

It is therefore a constant plus a term proportional to the local beta-eﬀect dh
dy . Notice that
d /dy2 = R2d2h/dy2 by the
the corresponding shear dv
factor [1 − C0(1 − u2)]−1 > 1. The integrability condition (65) now provides the curvature
of the jet. We can approximate the r.h.s. of this relation, of order R, by the zero order jet
proﬁle (36), denoting :

dy is stronger than the deep shear dψ

e(u) ≡

1

dτ(cid:19)2
2Z +∞
−∞ (cid:18) dφ

dτ.

(70)

( see ﬁgure 6(b) ). The l.h.s. can be expanded, using (67). We ﬁrst expand the ex-
pression (64) of the potential, U (φ) = U0(φ) + C1/C0 [φ tanh(C0φ) − log cosh(C0φ)/C0] +
[h(y) − γy/C0 − α1] φ. We can approximate φ ≃ ±u in the correction terms, and ex-
pand U0(φ) = U0(±u) + dU0/dφ(±u). The zero order equilibrium condition imposes that
dU0/dφ(±u) = 0, so that (65) becomes
ǫu(cid:18)h(y) −

C0 − α1(cid:19) = e(u)

R
r

(71)

γy

This equation (71), expresses the dependence in latitude y of the curvature radius r of the
curve on which the jet is centered, thus deﬁning the shape of the sub-domain interface as
a function of the topography.

Without topography and for γ = 0, we get a constant jet curvature. The same result
was obtained in sub-section 2.3.3 by a diﬀerent argument of free energy minimization. The
parameter u, related to the energy by (32) and to C0 by (33), quantiﬁes the strength of
the jet. By contrast, the vortex area is determined by the constraint on PV patch area
(parameter B), but it is also related to the jet curvature, proportional by (71) to the small
shift α1 in chemical potential and temperature. Likewise the equilibrium temperature at a
liquid-gas interface slightly depends on the bubble curvature, due to capillary eﬀects.

As explained in the end of section (3.2) the parameter γ is linked to the zonal propaga-
tion speed of the structure. The term γy in (71), combined with a usual beta eﬀect (linear

20

topography term h(y)), leads to an oscillation with latitude y of the jet curvature 1/r, i.e.
a meandering jet. Another possibility is an exact compensation of the beta-eﬀect by the γy
term, leading to a propagating circular vortex, and the selection between these two alter-
natives is discussed in next sub-section. An oval shaped, zonally elongated vortex, such as
on Jupiter, is obtained when this compensation occurs, but with an additional quadratic
topography h(y). Indeed, to get a zonally elongated vortex, supposed latitudinally centered
in zero, the radius of curvature of the jet must decrease for y > 0 and increase for y < 0. As
a consequence, we deduce from (71) that the topography must be extremal at the latitude
on which the vortex is centered (it actually admits a maximum in the cyclonic case and a
minimum in the anticyclonic case ). Moreover, we deduce from (72) that the surrounding
ﬂow must have a zero velocity at the latitude on which the vortex is centered and that
the shear is cyclonic when the vortex is a cyclone and anticyclonic when the vortex is an
anticyclone. More generally, the curvature can be related to the zonal velocity outside the
jet, eliminating the topography between (72) and (71),

v = R2(cid:18) γ

C0

+

ǫe(u)

u (1 − C0(1 − u2))

d

dy (cid:18) R

r(cid:19)(cid:19) ˆx

(72)

Let us recall our approximations. Writing down the jet equation (60), when making
the boundary layer approximation, we have assumed R << r. We also assumed that in
the jet width the topography can be considered as a constant. If 1/√a is a typical length
scale for the topography variation this gives aR2 << 1. Moreover we have assumed that
the eﬀective topography eﬀect h(y)− γy/C0 remains small along the jet. If LV denotes the
jet extension ( for example a vortex latitudinal size ) this approximation is valid as long as
aL2

V << 1.

3.3.1 Beta eﬀect or linear topography.

Let h(y) ≡ −βy in the following of this section. β may mimic the beta-eﬀect or a uniform
velocity in the sublayer ( but we will refer it as the beta-eﬀect ).

A ﬁrst class of equilibrium states corresponds to a single solution ψ(y) of the algebraic
equation (59). This determines a smooth zonal ﬂow, with possibly intense jets at the
boundaries y = ± 1
2 . The solution depends on the unknown parameters C, α′ and γ, which
are indirectly determined by the energy E, momentum M , and the condition hψi = 0. The
limit of small energy corresponds to C → ∞, for which we can neglect the term ψ/R2 on
the left hand side of (59), which then reduces to ψ = R2/C[arg tanh(βy − B) + γy + α′].
This corresponds indeed to arbitrarily small values of ψ (small energy) as C → ∞.
When the particular energy value E = R2β2/24 is reached, a uniform PV is possible,
with ψ/R2 = −βy. Then PV mixing is complete, which clearly maximizes the mixing
entropy. In this case, γ = −Cβ, so that γy cancels the term Cψ/R2 in (59). Physically,
the uniform westward zonal velocity,

tilts the free surface with uniform slope by the geostrophic balance, and the corresponding
topographic beta-eﬀect exactly balances the imposed beta-eﬀect.

vm = −R2β

(73)

21

For a still higher energy, a ﬁrst possibility is that again

γ = −Cβ

(74)

so that the beta eﬀect exactly balanced by the γy term in the jet equation of previous
subsection. This cancellation is directly obtained in the general Gibbs state equations (55)
and (56). Indeed the modiﬁed stream function ψ′ = ψ + R2βy satisﬁes the same equations
as in the doubly-periodic case. Therefore in the limit of small R, the Gibbs states are made
of subdomains with uniform ψ′ (uniform PV), separated by straight zonal jets or circular
vortices.

However jets or a vortex persist in this sea of uniform PV due to the constraint of energy
conservation. The vortex moves westward at the same velocity vm, according to (58) , so
they are just entrained by the background ﬂow, without relative propagation (this can be
physically understood by the cancellation of the beta-eﬀect).

The selection of the subdomain areas and PV values is given like in the periodic case
of section 2, just replacing ψ by ψ′ = ψ − βR2y. Therefore we get again probabilities
p±1 = (1 ± u) in the two subdomains with respective areas A±1 given by (31), and stream
function,

From this relation, we can calculate the energy E = 1
condition (32) then becomes

ψ±1 = R2(B ± u) − R2βy
2 (ψ2

(75)

−1A−1 + ψ2

1A1)/R2, so the energy

E =

R2
2

(u2 − B2) +

R2β2

24

(76)

Therefore these solutions with canceled beta eﬀect can be obtained only beyond a minimum
energy R2β2/24, corresponding to the potential energy of the surface tilting associated with
the drift velocity vm. Then the excess energy will control the organization in two uniform
PV areas.

The shape of these subdomains can be obtained again by minimization of the jet free
energy. However, unlike in the periodic case, jets occur at the boundaries y = ± 1
2 as well
as at subdomain interfaces. Indeed, such boundary jets are in general necessary to satisfy
hvi = 0, or equivalently that the stream function ψb must be equal at the two boundaries
y = ± 1
2 . In particular, the solutions (75) necessarily involve a stream function diﬀerence
(or mass ﬂux) −R2β associated with the drift velocity vm. This stream function diﬀerence
must be compensated by boundary eastward jets with opposite total mass ﬂux. We show in
Appendix B that for two PV levels with similar initial areas a single eastward jet, separating
two regions of uniform PV and weak westward drift, is the selected state (instead of two
opposite jets in the periodic case). In the case of a strong PV level with a small initial area,
the system organizes in a circular vortex like in the periodic case. In the limit u → |B|,
as one of the areas A±1 goes to zero, the jet approximation falls down. The corresponding
analysis of axisymmetric vortices and of the linear approximation for the Gibbs states, as
performed in section 2, is still valid here.

Up to now we have ignored the constraint of the momentum M (54). This constraint
imposes the latitude y0 of the equilibrium structure ( a circular patch or a zonal band with

22

uniform PV ). For instance in the case B > 0, for which A1 > A−1 (as seen from (31)), we

deﬁne y0 ≡RA1

yd2r/A1. Then

M ≡ZD

yqd2r =ZA1

y(B + u)d2r +ZA−1

y(B − u)d2r = 2uy0A1

We thus deduce the latitudinal position of the equilibrium structure :

y0 =

M

2uA1

(77)

(78)

In the case of a single eastward jet, the subdomain position has been already ﬁxed by
the area (y0 = A1/2). Then the only possibility to satisfy a moment M diﬀerent from uA2
1
is that the jet oscillates in latitude with some amplitude Λ (then M − uA2
1 ≃ uΛ2 ). This
is possible if γ 6= −βC according to (71), which becomes

1
r

= b(y − y0)

(79)

where b ≡ −(u(γ + βC))/(2Ce(u)R) < 0 and y0 ≡ α1/b. This equation clearly leads to a
jet oscillating around the mean latitude y0 ( as the curvature r is positive for y < y0 and
negative for y > y0 ; recall that the curvature is by deﬁnition positive when positive PV
is in the inner part of the jet ). Note that this oscillation propagates eastward at speed
R2 γ
C > −β, this speed is eastward with respect to the
background drift vm (73).

C ( given by (58) ). Since b < 0, γ

3.3.2 Quadratic sublayer topography

As explained in section (3.3), in the limit of small Rossby deformation radius R, the Gibbs
state equation has solutions consisting of a vortex bounded by a strong jet on the scale of
R. This corresponds to the case of an initial patch with strong PV and small area ( the
asymmetry parameter B is suﬃciently large ) with an energy suﬃciently strong to get a
structure of closed jet ( see ﬁgure 7). In the presence of a moderate topography h(y), this
internal jet is no more circular but its radius of curvature r << R depends on y according
to (71). We have seen in previous subsection that a linear topography h(y) = −βy leads to
jets oscillating ( or to circular jets when γ = −Cβ ). We shall discuss here how a quadratic
term in h(y) modiﬁes the shape of closed jets. We therefore assume a topography h(y) of
the form :

h(y) ≡ ay2 + by

(80)
This corresponds to a uniform deep zonal shear, with velocity vd = R2d(h − βy)/dy =
2aR2y + b− β. We focus our attention on vortex solutions, seeking close curves solutions of
equation (71). The vortices will be typically oval shaped as the ones seen on Jupiter. We
then study how this shape ( for instance the ratio of the great axis of the oval to the small
one ) depends on the topography ( sublayer ﬂow ) and on the jet parameters. Application
of these results to Great Red Spot observations will be discussed in next section.

To make equation (71) more explicit, let s be a curvilinear parameterization of our
curve, T(s) the tangent unit vector to the curve and θ(s) the angular function of the curve

23

deﬁned by T(s) = (cos θ(s), sin θ(s)) for any s. Then the radius of curvature r of the curve
is linked to θ(s) by 1/r = dθ/ds and (71) yields the diﬀerential equations :

( dθ
dS = −dY 2 + 1
dY
dS = sin θ(S)

and

dX
dS

= cos θ(S)

(81)

(82)

1u2), y0 ≡ e(u)R(C0b −
with c′X = x, c′Y = y − y0, c′S = s ; where d = (e2(u)R2a)/(ǫα3
γ)/(ǫα1C0u). The space coordinates X, Y and S are here non dimensional and have been
obtained by dividing the real coordinates by the scale c′ ≡ e(u)R/(ǫα1u). Note that as
explained in section (3.3) ǫα1 > 0, so that c′ > 0. We further assume that a > 0, so that
d > 0.

We ﬁrst note that the two variables θ and Y are independent of X. We will therefore
consider the system formed by the two ﬁrst diﬀerential equations (81). It is easily veriﬁed
that this system is Hamiltonian, with θ and Y the two conjugate variables and

H ≡ cos θ − d

Y 3
3

+ Y

(83)

the Hamiltonian. Thus H is constant on the solution curves. We look for vortex solutions
of our problem (81 and 82). Thus we require θ to be a monotonic function of S. Moreover
the curves must close, that is X and Y must be periodic. For symmetry reasons, it is easily
veriﬁed that the solutions of (82,81) with initial conditions θ(0) = π
2 , Y (0) = 0 ( H = 0 )
and some X(0) are periodic. We prove in appendix (C) that these initial conditions are the
only ones leading to closed curves. We also prove that the solutions of (81 and 82) when
d > dmax ≡ 4
9 does not deﬁne θ as a monotonic function of S. They contain double points
and thus are not possible solution for our problem. Once given these initial conditions, we
can easily prove that the structure has both a zonal symmetry axis and a latitudinal one
passing through y0.

To study the shape of the jets, we numerically solve equations (81,82) with initial
conditions : θ(0) = π
2 , y(0) = 0. We obtain closed curves with oval shapes, as shown in
ﬁgure 10. In ﬁgure 11 we have represented the width, the length and the aspect ratio of
these vortices versus the parameter d. When d tends to 4
9 , the vortex width tends to a
maximum value : wmax = 3
2 whereas the length diverges. In this limit, the vortices are
thus very elongated.

4 Application to the Jupiter’s Great Red Spot and Oval BC

In previous sections, we have found maximum entropy states with the following properties
:

• The ﬂuid domain is partitioned in two subdomains with weak velocity, separated by
jets whose width scales as the Rossby deformation radius. A strong initial PV level
occupying a small area mixes in a subdomain with the form of a vortex bounded by
an annular jet.

24

• In the presence of a parabolic topography h(y) (due to a sublayer zonal ﬂow with
uniform shear), outside the jet, exists a zonal ﬂow (69) with uniform shear. The
velocity at the latitude of the vortex center vanishes in the reference frame of the
vortex.

• The curvature of the jet is linked to the topography by (71). For the parabolic
topography, solutions are oval shaped vortices, symmetric in latitude and longitude.

These properties of our solutions are the main qualitative properties of the Jovian
vortices. Moreover, would this description be correct, it would predict that the topography
has an extremum at the center of the vortex.

Dowling and Ingersoll (1989) derive the bottom topography, using the GRS and Oval
BC velocity ﬁelds obtained from cloud motion. They analyze the results in the frame of a
1-1/2 shallow water model (SW), with an active shallow layer ﬂoating on a much deeper
layer. This deep layer is in steady zonal motion which acts like a topography h2. The
SW topography h2 is deﬁned by f vd = −1/Rl(λ)∂(gh2)/∂λ where vd is the deep layer ﬂow
and Rl(λ) is the latitudinal radius of curvature of Jupiter. Dowling and Ingersoll (1989)
have deduced this SW topography h2 by assuming the conservation of the shallow water
potential vorticity (ω + f )/h1 ( h1 is the upper layer thickness ) along the streamlines of the
observed steady vortex ﬂow. The vorticity ω is deduced from the measured velocity ﬁeld,
and the planetary vorticity f is known, so that the variation of h along each streamline is
deduced. The pressure ﬁeld is then obtained from the Bernoulli relation and the hydrostatic
balance, leading to the ﬁeld h2. The result depends on the radius of deformation of Rossby (
R∗ = gh0/f0, where h0 is the mean upper layer height and f0 the mean Coriolis parameter ),
a free parameter in this analysis. Three test values have been chosen, R∗
2 = 2200
and R∗
3 = 2000 km for the Oval
BC ( we denote by a star superscript the physical parameters, to distinguish them from the
non-dimensional quantities used earlier ). The height h2 under each vortex has been found
to depend only on latitude, and has been ﬁtted as a quartic the planetographic latitude λ:

3 = 2600 km for the GRS and R∗

2 = 1600 and R∗

1 = 1100, R∗

1 = 1700, R∗

gh2 = A0 + A1λ + A2λ2 + A3λ3 + A4λ4.

(84)

The values obtained for the coeﬃcients Ai in the vortex reference frame, for each of the
vortices and for each of the values R∗
3 are reported in table 1 of Dowling and Ingersoll
(1989).

1, R∗

2, R∗

Our model is the QG limit of this shallow water system. Starting from (SW) equations,
we can derive the QG equations (1) by assuming the geostrophic balance and weak free
surface deformation in comparison with the mean layer thickness h0. The validity of this
QG approximation has been discussed by Dowling and Ingersoll (1989) and was found
reasonably good as a ﬁrst approach, although not accurate. We furthermore use the beta-
plane approximation, linearizing the planetary vorticity around a reference latitude λ0 (
λ0 is taken to be −230 for the GRS and −33.50 for the Oval BC). Therefore we write
f = f0 + βy, with f0 = 2Ωsinλ0 and β ≡ 2Ω cos λ0/rz(λ0) ( Ω is the planetary angular
speed of rotation : 2π/Ω = 9 h 55 mn 29.7 s and rz(λ0) is the zonal planetary radius, which
slightly depends on the latitude λ0, due to the ellipsoidal planetary shape, see formula (4)
of Dowling and Ingersoll (1989) ) . We then obtain the QG potential vorticity (2) with the

25

QG topography h∗(y∗) linked to the SW topography (84) by:

h∗(y∗) =

gh2
f0R∗2 + βy∗

(85)

1, R∗

2 and R∗

We have computed the QG topography (85) using results of Dowling and Ingersoll
(1989) for the SW topography (84) for the three values of the Rossby deformation radius
R∗
3, for the GRS and for the Oval BC. The result in ﬁgure 12 shows that, for
both the GRS and the Oval BC, the QG topography has an extremum at a latitude which
is nearly the center of the vortex. As far as we know, this fact has not been noticed in the
literature. This result is in agreement with the predictions of our model. We note moreover
that the two extrema of the topography are minima, thus our model predicts anticyclonic
shears around the GRS and the Oval BC, as observed. Figure 85 shows a comparison of
the QG topography derived from Dowling results with a quadratic approximation, in the
2 = 2200 km. This shows that the quadratic approximation h∗(y∗) = a∗y∗2 is
case R∗ = R∗
a good approximation on the latitudinal extension of the GRS. This also provides values
of the parameter a∗ (80) : a∗ = 9.2 10−13, a∗ = 7.2 10−13 and a∗ = 6.4 10−13 km−2 s−1 for
R∗ = R∗

1, R∗

2 and R∗

3 respectively.

Let us deduce the corresponding non-dimensional parameters. First, the PV levels
were normalized by (9), so our time unit T ⋆ will depend on the real PV level diﬀerence
T ⋆ . The other parameters are the Rossby deformation radius R⋆, the
: (a⋆
segregation parameter u and the topography coeﬃcient a⋆ (80).

1 − a⋆
We will consider R⋆ as a free parameter and use the following data from GRS observation

−1)/2 ≡ 1

:

• The jet width l⋆. Let us deﬁne the width of the jet l⋆ as the width on which the
jet velocity is greater than one half of the maximum velocity. We use velocity mea-
surement within the GRS of Mitchell et al (1981). They have used small clouds as
tracers to measure velocities, and have observed that the velocity is nearly tangential
to ellipses. Using a grid of concentric ellipses of constant eccentricity, the velocities
have been plotted with respect to the semi-major axe A of the ellipse on which the
measurement point lies. Results have been ﬁtted by a quartic in A and may be seen
in ﬁgure 13. Using these results, assuming that the velocity proﬁle in the jet is sym-
metric with respect to its maximum, we choose as jet width l⋆ = 5.6 103 km. In our
model, the normalized jet width l = l⋆/R⋆ can be computed from the jet equation
(34) as shown in ﬁgure 6(a). This determines the parameter u from the parameter
R⋆. The corresponding theoretical jet velocity can be compared to observations in
ﬁgure 13, for R⋆ = 2500 km (the shape is not very sensitive to this parameter). The
computed results for u versus R⋆ is shown in ﬁgure 15.

• The maximum jet velocity v⋆

et al 1981). Using (35) and giving real dimension gives :

max. We will use the value v⋆

max = 110 ms−1 ( Mitchell

v⋆
max =

R⋆
T ⋆

dφ
dτ |max(u).

26

(86)

dφ/dτ|max(u) has been obtained by solving the non-dimensional jet equation (34),
and is shown in ﬁgure 6(b). This now determine T ⋆ from R⋆.

• The velocity shear surrounding the vortex. The ambient zonal shear measured at the
latitude of the GRS from Limaye et al. (1986) is σ⋆ = 1.5e − 5 s−1. Using (69) in its
dimensional form, for a quadratic topography gives :

a⋆ =

σ⋆

2R⋆ (cid:18)1 −

C0

cosh2(C0u)(cid:19)

(87)

This permits to compute a⋆ as a function of R⋆ (since u has been determined, as well
as C0, related to u by (33) ).

The computed results for a⋆ and T ⋆ versus R⋆ are shown in ﬁgure 14. This shows that
our determination of the topography is in agreement with the QG topography deduced
from the shallow water model of Dowling and Ingersoll (1989) within a factor of two. The
corresponding PV level diﬀerence a⋆
−1 is comparable to the planetary vorticity f0 at
the latitude of the center of the GRS when R ≃ 2400 km. For this value of R∗, ﬁgure 15
shows that u is very close to 1. Furthermore, as the GRS area is very small compared to
the global area of a latitudinal band centered around the GRS, the non dimensional area
occupied by the positive PV is very close to 1. Using this area expression (31) we conclude
that B is very close to 1. Using the deﬁnition of B (10), we conclude that a⋆
1 ≃ 0 and
a⋆
−1 ≃ −f0. As discussed below a forcing mechanism by convective plumes incoming from
the sublayer is expected to yield this result.

1 − a⋆

The shape of the jet depends on the parameter d = e2(u)
1u2

ǫα3

a⋆R⋆2
a⋆
−a⋆
1

−1

and on the length scale

′ ∗ ≡ e(u)R∗
ǫα1u . We can determine these two parameters from the previously determined values
c
of a∗,T ∗ and u, and from the observed half width of the Great Red Spot : y⋆
max = 4900km.
This permits to calculate c′∗, α1 and d versus R∗. Figure 16 show d versus R⋆. The dot line
represents the critical value d = 4
9 beside which a vortex solution exists. The ratio of the
length to the width of the GRS is approximatively 2, which would correspond to d = 0.441
( ﬁgure 11 ) ; this is very close to the critical value 4
9 . From ﬁgure 16, our model predicts
that the Rossby deformation radius is R⋆ = 1800 km. Figure 10 shows the actual shape of
the vortex for d = 0.441.

However, in the jet shape analyze, to obtain (81,82) we have supposed a⋆L⋆2

1 −
a⋆
−1)/2 where L⋆
V is the maximal latitudinal extension of the vortex ( the topography part
of the PV remains negligible with respect to the PV ). For the value of R⋆ calculated above,
−1 = 1.310−4s−1. We are thus at the limit of
we ﬁnd a⋆y⋆
validity of our assumption.

2 = 3.910−5s−1 whereas a∗

V << (a⋆

max

1 − a∗

Now we can reverse the procedure and propose a predictive model of the Great Red
Spot. Assume a steady deep zonal ﬂow with uniform shear, vd = 2a∗R∗2(y∗− y∗
I ), vanishing
at an origin yI depending on our reference frame (which we shall choose in order to cancel
the vortex drift). This ﬂow is presumably generated by deep thermal convection but we
are concerned here only with the dynamics of the upper layer, assumed stably stratiﬁed
(due to cooling by radiative eﬀects). We model this stratiﬁed upper layer as a shallow layer

27

with radius of deformation R⋆ ≃ 2400 km. This layer is submitted to a total beta eﬀect or
’topography’ h(y) = ay2 − (β + 2ayI )y.
Assume that PV spots with value −f0, occupying small area proportion are randomly
generated in this layer. This would be the result of intense incoming thermal plumes, as
recently discussed by Ingersoll et al (2000), : conservation of the absolute angular momen-
tum during the radial expansion leads to strong decrease of the local absolute vorticity,
which comes close to zero. This means that in the planetary reference frame, a local vor-
ticity patch with value −f0 is created. The opposite vorticity is globally created by the
subducting ﬂow, but it is close to 0 due the much larger area. This gives our time unit
(2f0)−1 and B = 1 − 2A.
The outcome of random PV mixing with the constraint of the conservation laws is then
a zonal velocity (69) in the observed upper layer and a vortex with area (31) with velocity
proﬁle shown by the dot curve in ﬁg 14. The vortex moves with the upper velocity at y = 0,
it drifts with respect to the deep layer at velocity (73) so that the beta eﬀect is suppressed.
The shape is an oval symmetric in x and y, with aspect ratio computed from the shape
parameter d ( ﬁgure 11 ).

Note that a slightly larger area , or stronger energy could lead to very elongated vortices.
Then argument of free energy minimization show that this would lead to a single eastward
zonal jet. This may explain the jet observed in the Northern hemisphere of Jupiter at the
same latitude as the GRS.

For smaller Jovian vortices such as the Oval BC, the size of the vortices is comparable
with the Rossby deformation radius. Thus such vortices may be described as done for
axisymmetric vortices ( section 2.3.4 ). This explain why such vortices do not have a
quiescent core as the GRS.

Let us describe dark brown cyclonic spots ( ’Barges’ ) at 14 N on Jupiter. Their ﬁrst
interest is to stress that cyclonic vortices embedded in cyclonic shear exist on Jupiter. Let
us go further. The greater of these barges is studied from Voyager observations by Hatzes
at al (1981). The meridional velocities measured at the latitude of the center of the barge
( Hatzes et al (1981), ﬁgure 7 ) show a boundary jet organization around the perimeter of
the barge ( vmax = 25 ms−1 ), see ﬁgure 1(b). The surrounding shear is such that the shear
velocity at the maximum latitude of the barge is the same as the maximum jet velocity.
Thus our approximation aL2
V << 1 is not good. We can however explain the elongated
shape, similar to ﬁgure 10(b) obtained for d very close to dmax.

We conclude that the Gibbs state equation (56) derived from maximization of entropy of
the QG model (1) is in the limit of small Rossby deformation radius a model that explains
the main qualitative features of Jovian vortices. The statistical mechanics itself explains
the organization of a turbulent ﬂow in coherent structures.

5 Conclusion

Our ﬁrst result is to provide a general explanation for the emergence and robustness of
intense jets in atmospheric or oceanic turbulent ﬂows.
In the absence of topography or
beta-eﬀect turbulence mixes potential vorticity in subdomains, and such jets occur at the

28

interface of these subdomains, with a width of the order of the deformation radius. From
a thermodynamic point of view, this is like coexistence of two phases. Indeed the vortex
interaction becomes short ranged in the limit of small deformation radius, and statistical
mechanics leads to a thermodynamic equilibrium between two ’phases’, with diﬀerent con-
centrations of the 2 Potential Vorticity levels. Another approach leading to the same result
is to consider the general partial diﬀerential equation (18) characterizing the equilibrium
states. This equation reduces to the algebraic equation (20) in the limit of small deforma-
tion radius. The two uniform subdomains correspond to two solutions ψ−1 and ψ1 of this
equation. At the interface of these subdomains, the general pde reduces to the equation
(36), whose solution determines the jet proﬁle. In addition, a solvability condition of this
equation conﬁrms the relation of equilibrium between the two ’phases’, which was obtained
in the thermodynamic approach.

All our results have been obtained for a 2 potential vorticity level case, but cases with
more levels would lead to qualitatively similar results, although the quantitative analysis
would be more involved due to the additional parameters.

In the presence of beta eﬀect or topography, for low energy, purely zonal ﬂows with
gentle variation in latitude are obtained. A critical energy is the energy of the state where
the zonal ﬂow just compensates the beta-eﬀect. For this state the PV is strictly uniform in
the whole domain. For greater energy, two well mixed domain separated by jets appears,
as in the without topography case. However the PV is no more strictly uniform in the well
mixed subdomain : a zonal ﬂow exists. Also the jet curvature depends on latitude. With
ordinary beta eﬀect this yields an intense eastward jet, purely zonal or wavy depending on
the constraint on the momentum M . With the quadratic beta-eﬀect generated by a deep
shear, this can produce an oval shaped vortex. This vortex then drift so as to compensate
the beta-eﬀect. In other words, in the vortex reference frame the equivalent topography
h(y) admits an extremum, and this is in agreement with the data of Dowling and Ingersoll
(1989).

Our quasi analytical approach therefore explains most of the basic features of the Great
Red Spot and other Jovian vortices. It can be developed into a more accurate predictive
model along the following lines. First the approximation R << r of thin jet is convenient
for a qualitative understanding but is only marginally satisﬁed. However this limitation
can be overcomed by numerical determination of the equilibrium state equation (18) by
methods like used by Turkington and Whitaker (1995) or using relaxation equations toward
the maximum entropy state as described by Robert et Sommeria (1992). Furthermore,
extension to the more general shallow water model is desirable, as the Rossby number (
≃ 0.36 where it a maximal ) is not very small. This can be formally achieved ( in preparation
).
Finally the results rely on an assumption of ergodicity, or complete potential vorticity
mixing consistent with the constraints on the conservation laws. Various numerical and
laboratory experiments in the case of Euler equations ( see e.g. Brands et al. 1989 )
indicate that mixing may not be global but be restricted to active regions. Organization
into local vortices, rather that at the scale of the whole domain, is more likely with a
small radius of deformation, as vortex interactions leading to coalescence are then screened.
This is observed for instance in the numerical computations of Kukharkin Orszag and
Yakhot (1995). By contrast, the zonal shear here promote vortex encounters ( as observed

29

in Voyager data ) and we expect a much better relaxation toward the global statistical
equilibrium, which involves always a single vortex in a given shear zone ( as it minimizes
the interfacial free energy ).

6 Acknowledgments

The authors thank R. Robert for collaboration on statistical mechanics approach and for
useful comments on the present work.

A Determination of the Gibbs state by direct entropy max-
imization, in the presence of a topography ( beta-eﬀect )
.

In section (3.3), we studied the limit of small Rossby deformation radius in the Gibbs state
equation (56) by considering the jet equation (60) and its integrability condition (65). We
deduced that the Gibbs states are composed of subdomains in which ψ veriﬁes the algebraic
equation (59) separated by an interfacial jet whose curvature veriﬁes (71). The aim of this
annex is to prove that these results can be obtained by directly maximizing the entropy,
adapting the method used in section (2.3.1).
Let us make the following assumptions :

1. In the limit of small Rossby deformation radius, the probability p of ﬁnding the PV
level a1 takes two values p±1(y), depending only on y. We are looking for vortex
solutions. The vortex shape is described by the length l(y) on which the probability
p takes the value p−1(y) ( See ﬁgure 17 ).

2. The two subdomains where p take the two values p±1(y) are separated by a jet. The
probabilities p±1(y) are supposed to be close to the their values without topography
p±1 = ±u, such that the free energy per unit length of the jet is well approximated
by the one calculated without topography (42). If LV denotes the vortex size, 1/√a
a typical length on which topography varies, we will show this approximation to be
valid as soon as aL2

V << 1.

3. The boundary conditions can be relaxed ; that is no boundary term appears in the
variation of the free energy at the order considered here. ( See discussion concerning
boundary jets in section (3.3).

Given these hypothesis, the Gibbs states is described by the 3 functions p±1(y) and
l(y). We will determine them by maximizing the entropy S (15) under the 3 constraints
: energy (53), mass conservation (51) and momentum (54). A necessary condition for a
solution to this variational problem is the existence of 3 Lagrange parameters C,α and γ
such that the ﬁrst variations of the free energy :

F ≡ −S −

C0

R2 E + α0hψi

R2 + γM

(88)

30

vanish. Using (15),(53),(51) and (54) ; (2) and (11) and the above hypothesis ( see ﬁgure
17 ), a direct calculation shows that the free energy (88) is up to a constant :

[f (p1(y), y)(1 − l(y)) + f (p−1(y), y)l(y)] dy +Z ymin

− 1
2

f (p1(y), y)dy +

ymin

F =Z ymax
Z

ymax

1
2

f (p1(y), y)dy + LFJ et(u)

with f (p, y) ≡ (p log p + (1 − p) log(1 − p)) − 2C0(cid:18)p −

2 (C0h(y) − γy)(cid:18)p −

1

2(cid:19)

1

2(cid:19)2

− 2 (C0B − α0)(cid:18)p −

1

2(cid:19) −

(89)

and where L is the jet length, FJ et(u) is the jet free energy per unit length (42), calculated
without topography.
Considering ﬁrst variations of the free energy (89) under variations of p1(y) ( resp p−1(y) )
proves that ∂f /∂p(p1(y), y) = 0 and that ∂f /∂p(p−1(y), y) = 0. A direct calculation shows
that :

2(cid:18)p±1 −

1

2(cid:19) = tanh(cid:18)2C0(cid:18)p±1 −

1

2(cid:19) + C0h(y) − γy + C0B − α(cid:19)

(90)

Using (11) and (2) ; recalling that we neglect the Laplacian term, a straight calculation
shows that (90) is equivalent to the algebraic equation (59).

Let us consider now ﬁrst variations of the free energy (89) under small variations δl(y)
4 (dl/dy)2dy, a
δl(y)/rdy where r is the radius of

of l(y). Using that the length of the jet is given by L = 2R ymax
straightforward calculation shows that δL = −R ymax

curvature of the jet. We thus deduce from ﬁrst variations of the free energy (89) :

ymin q1 + 1

ymin

FJ et(u)

r

= f (p1(y), y) − f (p−1(y), y)

(91)

V << 1 permitted us to consider FJ et(u) as independent of y.

Hypothesis (2) : aL2
In
accordance with this hypothesis we evaluate f (p1(y), y) − f (p−1(y), y) at order zero, with
p±1 = 1
2 (1± u) at this order. We obtain : f (p1(y), y)− f (p−1(y), y) = 2u(α1+ C0h(y)− γy).
Moreover using the free energy per unit length expression (42), (37) and (38), one can show
that FJ et(u) = 2e(u)C0R where e(u) is deﬁned by (70). These two last results show that (91)
is equivalent to (71) the expression for the radius of curvature r found by the integrability
condition for the jet.

B Boundary jets in the channel case. Beta-eﬀect or linear

sublayer topography.

Let us derive the boundary jet properties in the case of a beta-eﬀect (or linear sublayer
topography). For the sake of simplicity, we will treat the case of zero circulation Γ = 0.

31

b and φ−

b be the values of φ on the y = 1

Let φ+
2 boundary respectively. The
boundary jet satisﬁes the jet equation (36), but with boundary conditions φ(τ = 0) = φ±
b
and φ(τ → +∞) = φ1 or φ−1. Thus, using (38), we deduce that :

2 and y = − 1

1

2(cid:18) dφ

dτ(cid:19)2(cid:18)y = ±

1

2(cid:19) + U (φ±

b ) = U (φ1) = U (φ−1)

(92)

(where the last equality comes from the integrability condition for the interfacial jet).

We can relate dφ/dτ to the derivative dψ/dζ normal to the boundary ( denoting the

normal coordinate ζ = ± 1
2 ∓ y ), using (61),
dτ (cid:18)y = ±
1
dφ
R

2(cid:19) =

1

dψ

dζ (cid:18)y = ±

1

2(cid:19) ∓ R

γ
C

Furthermore the condition Γ = 0 imposes

dψ
dy

dx =

dψ

dζ (cid:18)y =

1

2(cid:19) +

dψ

dζ (cid:18)y = −

1

2(cid:19) = 0,

Γ = −Zy= 1

2

dψ
dy

dx +Zy=− 1
dζ (y = − 1

2

so that dψ

dζ (y = 1

2 ) = − dψ

2 ). Then (92) becomes :

U (φ±

b ) = U (φ1) −

so that

1

2(cid:18) 1

R

dψ

dζ (cid:18)y =

1

2(cid:19) − R

γ

C(cid:19)2

U (φ+

b ) = U (φ−
b )

(93)

(94)

(95)

(96)

Note that the two values φ±
condition of zero mass ﬂux (ψ+ = ψ−),
φ+
b − φ−

b = −γ/C

b cannot be equal. They must indeed satisfy, from (61) and the

To solve these two equations (95) and (96), let us have a look at the potential U in
b and φ1 − φ−1. We thus distinguish two cases.
b )/(φ1 − φ−1) = −γ/(2Cu). We recall

ﬁgure 19. We have to compare φ+
Using (96) and φ±1 = ±u, we calculate : (φ+
that u is of order unity.

b − φ−

b − φ−

• Low beta-eﬀect case : −γ/C < 2u.

For an x-independent statistical equilibrium, one possibility is a zonal band with φ−1
inside the band and φ1 near both boundaries, with φ+
b1 at the boundaries.
The symmetric solution, with φ+
b−1 at the boundaries and φ−1 near the
boundaries, has the same free energy ( due to the symmetry of the potential U ).
However the solution which maximizes the total free energy of the jets corresponds
to φ−1 in the lower part of the domain, and φ1 in the upper part, with φ+
b0 at the
upper boundary ( y = 1
2 ), and a single
eastward interior jet.

b0 at the lower boundary ( y = − 1

b−1 and φ−

2 ) and φ−

b1 and φ−

32

• High beta-eﬀect case : β > 2u
In this case, we note that φ+
b − φ−
b > φ1 − φ−1. Then the two equations (96) and (95)
determine a unique solution for (φ+
b , φ−
b ) ( see ﬁgure 19 ). We are then necessarily in
the case with φ = φ1 near the boundaries y = 1
2 and φ = φ−1 near the other one. It
again involves a single eastward internal jet. This jet can oscillate in latitude due to
the momentum constraint ( according to (79) ).

Once φ±
that α = − 1

b are ﬁxed, we use equation (61) on the two boundaries y = ± 1
2 (φ+

b ). Then using the integrability condition (66) we calculate :

b + φ−

2 to conclude

ψb = R2(cid:18)B +

φ+
b + φ−

b

2

(cid:19)

(97)

This closes the determination of our parameters.

C Boundary condition for the equation (81,82) of the oval-

shaped vortices boundary

We want to see whether equations (81,82) with d > 0, deﬁning the curve formed by the
jet, admit periodic solutions both in x and y corresponding to vortices, or not. As stressed
in section (3.3.2), equations (81) derive from the Hamiltonian (83) ; y and θ are the two
conjugated variables. Let us study the phase portrait of H. For θ in [0, 2π[, there are
4 critical points : P1 = (0, 1/d), P2 = (0,−1/d), P3 = (π, 1/d), P4 = (π,−1/d). By
linearization around these ﬁxed points, one easily prove that P1 and P3 are stable ﬁxed
points whereas P2 and P4 are hyperbolic ﬁxed points. This permits to draw the phase
portrait : ﬁgure 18. Using H (83), we obtain that the unstable manifolds are given by

1−2/(3√d) = H and −1+2/(3√d) = H respectively. The parameter d governs a transition

of the phase space structure. This transition occurs when the two unstable manifolds merge
; this permits to compute the transition value for d : d = 4
9 . We are looking for vortices
solutions of (81,82). We recall that θ is the angle with the x axe. We thus impose θ to be a
monotonic function of s on a trajectory. Thus areas c of the phase portrait (ﬁgure 18 ) are
forbidden ; they would correspond to θ varying in a ﬁnite interval. We won’t address their
analyze there, but oscillating jet solutions can be found in these areas. Area b2 :
it can
be shown that, as on such trajectories, as θ is not strictly increasing, double points exists,
thus forbidding area b2. Conversely areas a and b1 are admissible trajectories, giving y as
periodic functions of θ.We have to had the condition that x (82) must also be a periodic
function of θ for the curve to close. Let us denote ∆x the x variation when θ runs in [0, 2π].
We thus impose the condition ∆x = 0. Using (82) and (81) we calculate :

∆x =Z L

0

cos θds =Z 2π

0

cos θdθ

−dy2(θ) + 1

=Z

π
2

− π
2

cos θ

d[y2(θ) − y2(θ − π)]

(−dy2(θ) + 1)(−dy2(θ − π) + 1)

dθ = 0

(98)

2 , 3π

( The last expression is obtained rewriting the integral as a sum on (cid:2)− π
(cid:2) π

2(cid:3) plus a sum on
2 (cid:3) ; and performing a variable change ). Let us study the sign of y2(θ) − y2(θ − π).

2 , π

33

3 + y(θ) = H − cos θ and −d y3(θ−π)

2 , π

Using (83) we deduce that −d y3(θ)
3 + y(θ− π) = H + cos θ.
From these two relations we conclude that y(θ − π) = y(θ) implies cos(θ) = 0 and that
y(θ − π) = −y(θ) implies H = 0. Thus if H 6= 0 ; y2(θ) − y2(θ − π) does not change sign
on (cid:2)− π
2(cid:3). Moreover, on the areas a) and b1) (−dy2(θ) + 1) does not change sign. Thus
if H 6= 0, the argument of the last integral of (98) does not change sign and ∆x can not
be zero. We thus conclude that the only solution where x is a periodic function of θ is
the solution corresponding to H = 0. This solution is the one obtained from (81,82) with
initial conditions y(0) = 0 and θ(0) = π
2 . As we have previously excluded the area b2 ( when
d > 4
9 . We conclude that equations
(81,82) with d > 0, deﬁning the curve formed by the jet, admit one periodic solution both
in x and y corresponding to vortices, only when d < dmax = 4
9 . This solution corresponds
to H = 0 (83). The vortex then admits a latitudinal and a zonal axes of symmetry.

9 ) we conclude that no vortex solution exists when d > 4

References

[1] BRANDS, H. CHAVANIS, P-H. PASMANTER, R. and SOMMERIA, J. 1999 Maxi-

mum Entropy versus Minimum Enstrophy Vortices.

[2] CHAVANIS, P.H. & SOMMERIA, J. 1996a Classiﬁcation of self-organized vortices in
two-dimensional turbulence: the case of a bounded domain. J. Fluid Mech. 134, 267.

[3] CHAVANIS, P.H. SOMMERIA, J. & ROBERT, R. 1996b Statistical mechanics of

two-dimensional vortices and collisionless stellar systems. Astr. Jour. 471, 385-399.

[4] CHAVANIS, P.H. 1998 From Jupiter’s great red spot to the structure of galaxies:
statistical mechanics of two-dimensional vortices and stellar systems Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences. 867, 120-141.

[5] DOWLING, T.E 1995 Dynamics of Jovian Atmospheres, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech, 27,

293-334.

[6] DOWLING, T.E. & INGERSOLL, A.P. 1989 Potential vorticity and layer thick-
ness variations in the ﬂow around Jupiter’s Great Red Spot and White Oval BC.
J.Atmos.Sci. 45, 1380-1396 .

[7] HATZES, A. WENKERT, D.D. INGERSOLL, A.P. DANIELSON, G.E 1981 Oscilla-
tions and Velocity Structure of a Long-Lived Cyclonic Spot. J.Geop.Res. 86, (A10),
8745-8749.

[8] INGERSOLL, A.P. GIERASCH, P.J BANFIEL, D. VASAVADA, A.R. and the Galileo
Imaging Team. 2000 Moist convection as an energy source for the large-scale motions
in Jupiter’s atmosphere. Nature 403, 630-632

[9] JOYCE, G. & MONTGOMERY, D. 1973 Negative temperature states for the two-

dimensional guiding center plasma. J. Plasma Phys 10, 107-121

[10] KAZANTZEV, E. SOMMERIA, J. & VERRON, J. 1998 Subgridscale Eddy Param-
eterization by Statistical Mechanics in a Barotropic Ocean Model. J.Phys.Ocean. 28
(6) 1017-1042.

34

[11] KUKHARKIN, N. ORSZAG, S.A. and YAKHOT, V. 1995 Quasicrystallisation of Vor-

tices in Drift-Wave Turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 13 2486-2489.

[12] KUZ’MIN, G.A. 1982 Statistical mechanics of the organization into two-dimensional
coherent structures. in “Structural Turbulence” (ed M. A. Golgshtik), pp 103-114.
Acad. Naouk CCCP Novosibirsk, Institute of Thermophysics.

[13] LIMAYE, S.S. 1986. Jupiter : new estimates of the mean zonal ﬂow at the cloud level

Icarus 65 335-52.

[14] MARCUS, P.S. 1993. Jupiter’s Great Red Spot and other vortices. Annu. Rev. Astron.

Astrophys. 31 523-73.

[15] MAXWORTHY, T. 1984. The dunamics of a high-speed Jovian jet. Planet. Space Sci.

32 8. 1053-1058.

[16] MICHEL, J. & ROBERT, R. 1994a Statistical mechanical theory of the great red spot

of Jupiter. J. Phys. Stat. 77 (3/4), 645-666.

[17] MICHEL, J. & ROBERT, R. 1994b Large Deviations for Young measures and sta-
tistical mechanics of inﬁnite dimensional dynamical systems with conservation law.
Commun. Math. Phys. 159, 195-215.

[18] MILLER, 1990 Statistical mechanics of Euler’s equation in two dimensions. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 65 (17), 2137.

[19] MITCHELL, J.L. BEEBE, R.F. INGERSOLL, A.P. & GARNEAU, G.W. 1981 Flow
ﬁelds within Jupiter’s Great Red Spot and White Oval BC. J. Geophys.Res. 86,
8751-8757.

[20] MODICA, L. 1987 Gradient theory of phase transitions and minimal interface criteria.

Arch. Rational. Mech. Anal. 98 123-142.

[21] ONSAGER, L. 1949 Statistical hydrodynamics. Nuovo Cimento Suppl. 6 (3), 279.

[22] PEDLOSKY, J. 1987 Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, Second Edition. Springer Verlag

[23] ROBERT, R. 1990 Etat d’´equilibre statistique pour l’´ecoulement bidimensionnel d’un

ﬂuide parfait. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 311 (I), 575-578.

[24] ROBERT, R. 2000 On the statistical mechanics of 2D Euler and 3D Vlasov Poisson

equations, Comm. Math. Phys. in press.

[25] ROBERT, R. & SOMMERIA, J. 1991 Statistical equilibrium states for two-

dimensional ﬂows, J. Fluid. Mech. 229, 291-310

[26] ROBERT, R. & SOMMERIA, J. 1992 Relaxation towards a statistical equilibrium

state in two-dimensional perfect ﬂuid dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2776-2779

[27] ROBERT, R. & ROSIER, C. 1997 The modeling of small scales in 2D turbulent ﬂows:

a statistical mechanics approach. J. Stat. Phys. 86, 481-515

35

[28] SOMMERIA, J. NORE, C. DUMONT,T & ROBERT, R. 1991 Th´eorie statistique de

la Tache Rouge de Jupiter. C.R. Acad. Sci t. 312, Srie II p 999-1005.

[29] SOMMERIA, J. STAQUET, C. and ROBERT, R. 1991 Final equilibrium state of a

two dimensional shear layer J.Fluid Mech. 233, 661.

[30] TURKINGTON, B. and WHITAKER, N. 1996 Statistical equilibrium computations
of coherent structures in turbulent shear layers SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 17 (16), 1414.

36

Figure Captions.

Figure 1 : Annular jets observed in the atmosphere of Jupiter. a) Velocity ﬁeld in the
Great Red Spot of Jupiter (200 South), from Dowling and Ingersoll (1989). b) Velocity
ﬁeld in the cyclonic Barge of Jupiter (140 North) from Hatzes et al (1981)

Figure 2 : (a) Graphical representation of the algebraic equation (20), with the rescaled
variable φ ≡ −α/C + ψ/R2. The three solutions are at the intersection of the curve (left-
hand side) and straight line (right-hand side). Here the integrability condition α = C0B
for the diﬀerential equation (36)

Figure 3 : The free energy density f (p) (27) versus the probability p. For C0 > 1 and
(C0B − α0) small enough f (p) has two local minima and one local maximum, allowing to
obtain two values p±1 in the maximization of entropy under constraints.

Figure 4 : The parameter u versus the Lagrange parameter C0, as the solution of (33).

Figure 5 : Typical stream function proﬁle in a jet (u = 0.75 ) versus the transverse

coordinate τ = ζ/R ( Top ) and corresponding velocity proﬁle ( Bottom ).

Figure 6 : Jet properties versus the segregation parameter u. a) Jet width, deﬁned
as the width of the region with velocity greater than half the maximum jet velocity. b)
Maximum velocity (dφ/dτ )max and jet kinetic energy e(u) ( dotted line).

Figure 7 : Phase diagram of the Gibbs states versus the energy E and the asymmetry pa-
rameter B. The outer line is the maximum energy achievable for a ﬁxed B : E = R2
2 (1−B2).
The frontiers line between the straight jets and the circular jets corresponds to A1 = 1/π
or A−1 = 1/π. it as been calculated using (31) and (32) : E = R2B2(2π − 2)/(π − 2)2. The
dot line represents the frontiers between axisymmetric vortices and the circular jets. We
deﬁne it as the energy value for which the circular vortex area A1 or A−1 (31) is equal to
(2l)2, where l is the typical jets width ( ﬁgure 6 ). Such a line depends on the numerical
value of R the ratio of the Rossby deformation radius to the domain scale. It has been here
numerically calculated for R = 0.03.

Figure 8 : (a) Graphical representation of the algebraic equation (20), with the rescaled
variable φ ≡ −α/C + ψ/R2, like in ﬁgure 2, but in the case of a Gibbs state with an
axisymmetric vortex (∆C > 0). Then the rhs hatched area is greater than the lhs one.
(b) The corresponding potential U (φ), given by (49), is asymmetric to compensate for the
friction term in equation (50).

Figure 9 : Various axisymmetric stream-function proﬁles for decreasing ∆C ( ∆C =

[0.90.60.30.10.050.030.01] and B = 0.75.

Figure 10 : a ) Typical sub-domain shape with a topography h(y) = ay2. The parame-
ter d has been chosen such that the ratio of the length on the width be 2 ; as on Jupiter’s

37

GRS. b ) Typical sub-domain shape with a topography h(y) = ay2 when the parameter d id
very close to its maximum value d = 4
9 . The shape is then very elongated, with latitudinal
boundaries quasi parallel, as for instance the Jovian cyclonic vortices ( ’Barges’ ) described
by ( Hatzes et al 1981 ).

Figure 11 : a ) Sub-domain non dimensional length and width versus the parameter d

( topography h(y) = ay2 ). b ) Sub-domain aspect ratio versus the parameter d.

Figure 12 : QG topography ( units s−1 ) versus latitude computed from data of Dowling

and Ingersoll (1989) : a) under the GRS ; b) under the Oval BC.

Figure 13 : Velocity proﬁle within the GRS from ( Mitchell et al 1981 ). They have
observed that the velocity is nearly tangential to ellipses. Using a grid of concentric ellipses
of constant eccentricity, the velocities have been plotted with respect to the semi-major
axis A of the ellipse on which the measurement point lies. Results have been ﬁtted by a
quartic in A. l⋆ is the jet width, deﬁned as the width on which the jet velocity is greater
than half the maximum velocity.

Figure 14 : A) Coeﬃcient a for a quadratic topography h(y) = ay2 versus R⋆ com-
puted from our QG model (87). The three cross show the coeﬃcient a computed from
QG topography deduced from Dowling SW observed results. B) Diﬀerence of PV lev-
els a1 − a−1 versus R⋆ computed from our QG model (86). The dot line represents the
planetary vorticity f0 at the latitude of the center of the GRS. This show that one of the
PV levels may be interpreted as vorticity generated by convection-plumes from the sublayer.

Figure 15 : The segregation parameter u versus the Rossby deformation Radius R∗ for
the GRS. u has been computed using the actual jet maximum velocity and width ( see
section (4) ).

Figure 16 : The non dimensional parameter giving the shape of the curve : d ( see (81)
) with respect to R⋆ in our model of the GRS. The dot line represents the critical value
d = 4
9 below which a vortex solution exists. The ratio of the length to the width of the
GRS is approximately 2. From ﬁgure 11 we conclude that this correspond to d very close
to the critical value 4
9 . From this ﬁgure, our model predicts that the Rossby deformation
radius is R∗ = 1800 km ( see section (4) for comments ).

Figure 17 : Deﬁnition of l(y).

Figure 18 : Phase portraits of the Hamiltonian H (83) for y0 = 0, governing the jet
shape via diﬀerential equations (81) ( two periods in θ ). For vortices, we are looking
for periodic solutions in y. Thus only trajectories of areas a) and b) are under interest.
Conversely trajectories of area c) could correspond to oscillating jets. The parameters d
governs a transition between two type of phase portraits. A) For d < 4
9 ( here d = 0.075
), trajectories of area a) can deﬁne y as a function of θ corresponding to convex vortices.
B ) For d > 4
9 ( here d = 0.075 ), for trajectories of area a), the curve y(θ) admits double

38

points. Thus they can not deﬁne vortex boundaries.

Figure 19 : Resolution of the equations (94 and 96). The long-doted and the doted lines

represent the two cases discussed in appendix (B).

39

Figure 1: Annular jets observed in the atmosphere of Jupiter. a) Velocity ﬁeld in the Great
Red Spot of Jupiter (200 South), from Dowling and Ingersoll (1989). b) Velocity ﬁeld in
the cyclonic Barge of Jupiter (140 North) from Hatzes et al (1981)

.

40

Figure 2: (a) Graphical representation of the algebraic equation (20), with the rescaled
variable φ ≡ −α/C + ψ/R2. The three solutions are at the intersection of the curve (left-
hand side) and straight line (right-hand side). Here the integrability condition α = C0B
for the diﬀerential equation (36) is veriﬁed, so the two hatched areas are equal.
b) The corresponding potential U (φ), given by (37), integral from 0 to φ of the diﬀerence
between the two curves (hatched area in (a)).

a )

2

1

0

-1

-2

-2.5

b )

0.6

0.3

0.0
-2.5

φ + 

α/

C - B0

tanh

 φ
( C0   )

CB α

-

0

-0.5

0.5

φ

1.5

φ
1

2.5

−1φ

 

-1.5

φ)U(

φ
2.5

-1.5

-0.5

0.5

1.5

41

Figure 3: The free energy density f (p) (27) versus the probability p. For C0 > 1 and
(C0B − α0) small enough f (p) has two local minima and one local maximum, allowing to
obtain two values p±1 in the maximization of entropy under constraints.

f(p) 

  

0.0

p

1

0.5

p

-1

1.0

p 

Figure 4: The parameter u versus the Lagrange parameter C0, as the solution of (33).

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

u

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

C0

3.5

42

Figure 5: Typical stream function proﬁle in a jet (u = 0.75 ) versus the transverse coordinate
τ = ζ/R ( Top ) and corresponding velocity proﬁle ( Bottom )

φ = − Β + 

ψ/ R 2

1.1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1.1

-9

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00

-9

-6

 

-3

0

3

6

9

τ =

ζ/R

-6

 
 

-3

0

3

6

9

τ =

ζ/R

43

Figure 6: Jet properties versus the segregation parameter u. a) Jet width, deﬁned as the
width of the region with velocity greater than half the maximum jet velocity. b) Maximum
velocity (dφ/dτ )max and jet kinetic energy e(u) ( dotted line).

l 

  

a )

25

20

15

10

5

0.5

u 

1.0

0
0.0
φd__
τd

| max ; e(u)

b )

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

u 

44

Figure 7: Phase diagram of the Gibbs states versus the energy E and the asymmetry
parameter B. The outer line is the maximum energy achievable for a ﬁxed B : E = R2
2 (1 −
B2). The frontiers line between the straight jets and the circular jets corresponds to A1 =
1/π or A−1 = 1/π. it as been calculated using (31) and (32) : E = R2B2(2π − 2)/(π − 2)2.
The dot line represents the frontiers between axisymmetric vortices and the circular jets.
We deﬁne it as the energy value for which the circular vortex area A1 or A−1 (31) is equal
to (2l)2, where l is the typical jets width ( ﬁgure 6 ). Such a line depends on the numerical
value of R the ratio of the Rossby deformation radius to the domain scale. It has been here
numerically calculated for R = 0.03.

B

1
1

0
0

-1
-1

E

45

Figure 8: (a) Graphical representation of the algebraic equation (20), with the rescaled
variable φ ≡ −α/C + ψ/R2, like in ﬁgure 2, but in the case of a Gibbs state with an
axisymmetric vortex (∆C > 0). Then the rhs hatched area is greater than the lhs one.
(b) The corresponding potential U (φ), given by (49), is asymmetric to compensate for the
friction term in equation (50).

φ +  α /
tanh(
0C

0C
)φ

- B

φ

φ

2

1

0

-1

-2

-2.0

φ

−1

-1.2

-0.4

φ

0

0.4

φ(0)

φ

1

2.0

φU(

)

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

-2.0

-1.2

-0.4

0.4

1.2

2.0

46

Figure 9: Various axisymmetric stream-function proﬁles for decreasing ∆C ( ∆C =
[0.90.60.30.10.050.030.01] and B = 0.75.

φ(r)

1.200
1.200
1.200
1.200
1.200
1.200
1.200

0.765
0.765
0.765
0.765
0.765
0.765
0.765

0.331
0.331
0.331
0.331
0.331
0.331
0.331

-0.104
-0.104
-0.104
-0.104
-0.104
-0.104
-0.104

-0.538
-0.538
-0.538
-0.538
-0.538
-0.538
-0.538

-0.973
-0.973
-0.973
-0.973
-0.973
-0.973
-0.973

∆

C = 0.01

∆

C = 0.9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

4
4
4
4
4
4
4

5
5
5
5
5
5
5

6
6
6
6
6
6
6

7
7
7
7
7
7
7

8
8
8
8
8
8
8

10
10
10
10
10
10
10

11
11
11
11
11
11
11

12
12
12
12
12
12
12

13
13
13
13
13
13
13

14
14
14
14
14
14
14

15
15
15
15
15
15
15

r

9
9
9
9
9
9
9

 
 
 
 
 
 

47

Figure 10: a ) Typical sub-domain shape with a topography h(y) = ay2. The parameter d
has been chosen such that the ratio of the length on the width be 2 ; as on Jupiter’s GRS.
b ) Typical sub-domain shape with a topography h(y) = ay2 when the parameter d id
very close to its maximum value d = 4
9 . The shape is then very elongated, with latitudinal
boundaries quasi parallel, as for instance the Jovian cyclonic vortices ( ’Barges’ ) described
by ( Hatzes et al 1981 ).

a ) 

2

y 

0

-2

-3

b )

y 

4

0

-4

-6

  

0

  

0

48

x 

3

x 

6

Figure 11: a ) Sub-domain non dimensional length and width versus the parameter d (
topography h(y) = ay2 ). b ) Sub-domain aspect ratio versus the parameter d.

a )

b )

2.9
2.9
2.9

2.5
2.5
2.5

2.1
2.1
2.1

1.7
1.7
1.7

1.3
1.3
1.3

0.9
0.9
0.9

2.9
2.9

2.5
2.5

2.1
2.1

1.7
1.7

1.3
1.3

0.9
0.9

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2
0.2

Half length

0.3
0.3
0.3

0.4
0.4
0.4

Half width

4_
9

0.5
0.5
0.5

0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

0.3
0.3
 

0.4
0.4

0.5
0.5

49

Figure 12: QG topography ( units s−1 ) versus latitude computed from data of Dowling
and Ingersoll (1989) : a) under the GRS ; b) under the Oval BC.

h( λ) ( 10   s    )
-1

-4

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

GRS

-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2

-0.5
-0.5
-0.5
-0.5

-30
-30
-30
-30

-26
-26
-26
-26

-22
-22
-22
-22

-18
-18
-18
-18

R = 1700km
R = 1700km       a = 9.257E-13  km^-2s^-1

R = 2200km

λ

( degree )

-14
-14
-14
-14

R = 2600km

h( λ) ( 10   s    )
-1

-4

Oval BC

2.2
2.2
2.2

2.0
2.0
2.0

1.8
1.8
1.8

1.6
1.6
1.6

1.4
1.4
1.4

1.2
1.2
1.2

-38
-38
-38

-36
-36
-36

R = 1100km
R = 2000km

-34
-34
-34

-32
-32
-32
R = 1600km

-30
-30
-30

λ

( degree )

50

Figure 13: Velocity proﬁle within the GRS from ( Mitchell et al 1981 ). They have observed
that the velocity is nearly tangential to ellipses. Using a grid of concentric ellipses of
constant eccentricity, the velocities have been plotted with respect to the semi-major axis
A of the ellipse on which the measurement point lies. Results have been ﬁtted by a quartic
in A. l⋆ is the jet width, deﬁned as the width on which the jet velocity is greater than half
the maximum velocity.

*v   ( m.s    )

-1

110
110

90
90

70
70

50
50

30
30

10
10

-10
-10

*

l_
2

0
0

2
2

4
4

6
6

8
8

 
 

10
10

12
12

3

A ( 10  km )

51

Figure 14: A) Coeﬃcient a for a quadratic topography h(y) = ay2 versus R⋆ computed
from our QG model (87). The three cross show the coeﬃcient a computed from QG
topography deduced from Dowling SW observed results. B) Diﬀerence of PV levels a1−a−1
versus R⋆ computed from our QG model (86). The dot line represents the planetary
vorticity f0 at the latitude of the center of the GRS. This show that one of the PV levels
may be interpreted as vorticity generated by convection-plumes from the sublayer.

A ) 
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0

1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

-6

*
a  ( 10    m    s    )

-2

-1

2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0

2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5

 
 
 
 

3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0

3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5

*

R   ( 10  km)

3

-1
1a*  -a*   ( 10   s    ) 

   
-1

-5

35

30

25

20

15
f0
10

5
1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

52

*

R   ( 10  km)

3

Figure 15: The segregation parameter u versus the Rossby deformation Radius R∗ for the
GRS. u has been computed using the actual jet maximum velocity and width ( see section
(4) ).

u

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

*

3

R  ( 10   km )

Figure 16: The non dimensional parameter giving the shape of the curve : d ( see (81) )
with respect to R⋆ in our model of the GRS. The dot line represents the critical value d = 4
9
below which a vortex solution exists. The ratio of the length to the width of the GRS is
approximately 2. From ﬁgure 11 we conclude that this correspond to d very close to the
critical value 4
9 . From this ﬁgure, our model predicts that the Rossby deformation radius
is R∗ = 1800 km ( see section (4) for comments ).

d 

  

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.7

0.9

1.1

1.3

1.5

1.7

1.9

2.1

53

3

* ( 10  km )

R 

Figure 17: Deﬁnition of l(y).

p (y)
-1

p (y)
1

l(y)

y

54

Figure 18: Phase portraits of the Hamiltonian H (83) for y0 = 0, governing the jet shape
via diﬀerential equations (81) ( two periods in θ ). For vortices, we are looking for periodic
solutions in y. Thus only trajectories of areas a) and b) are under interest. Conversely
trajectories of area c) could correspond to oscillating jets. The parameters d governs a
transition between two type of phase portraits. A) For d < 4
9 ( here d = 0.075 ), trajectories
of area a) can deﬁne y as a function of θ corresponding to convex vortices. B ) For d > 4
9
( here d = 0.075 ), for trajectories of area a), the curve y(θ) admits double points. Thus
they can not deﬁne vortex boundaries.

A )

y

8.0

/21
d

P1

c

0.0

/21
d

-

P3

-8.0

0

B )

y

2.5

a
P2

b1

0

P
4

c

a

π

a

c

a

π

c

 0

/21
d

0.0

/21
d

-

b2

-2.5

0

d = 0.075

c

c

2π

3π

d = 2

c

3π

c

2π

55

c

c

θ

4π

θ

4π

Figure 19: Resolution of the equations (94 and 96). The long-doted and the doted lines
represent the two cases discussed in appendix (B).

1.0

0.6

0.2

-0.2

-0.6

-1.0

-1.4

U( φ)

φ
-1

φ

1

-4

φ

-
b-1

-2

φ +
b-1

φ

-
b 0

0

φ

φ

+
-
b 0 b 1

2

φ +
b 1

φ

4

56

