0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
4
2

 

 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
6
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Disjoining Potential and Spreading of Thin Liquid Layers in the Diﬀuse Interface

Model Coupled to Hydrodynamics

Len M. Pismen1 and Yves Pomeau2

(1) Department of Chemical Engineering and Minerva Center for Nonlinear Physics of Complex Systems,

Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.

(2) Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, associ´e au CNRS,

24 Rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.

(July 24, 2013)

The hydrodynamic phase ﬁeld model is applied to the
problem of ﬁlm spreading on a solid surface. The disjoin-
ing potential, responsible for modiﬁcation of the ﬂuid prop-
erties near a three-phase contact line, is computed from the
solvability conditions of the density ﬁeld equation with ap-
propriate boundary conditions imposed on the solid support.
The equation describing the motion of a spreading ﬁlm are
derived in the lubrication approximation.
In the case of
quasi-equilibrium spreading, is shown that the correct sharp-
interface limit is obtained, and sample solutions are obtained
by numerical integration. It is further shown that evapora-
tion or condensation may strongly aﬀect the dynamics near
the contact line, and accounting for kinetic retardation of the
interphase transport is necessary to build up a consistent the-
ory.

I. INTRODUCTION

One of long-standing hydrodynamic riddles is the na-
ture of viscous ﬂow in the vicinity of a three-phase
(gas-liquid-solid) contact line and the related problem of
“true” and “apparent” dynamic contact angles [1,2]. The
answer to the riddle must be, in fact, physico-chemical
rather than purely hydrodynamic, since it depends on
processes in the immediate vicinity of the three-phase
boundary. The early detected paradox of a logarithmi-
cally divergent force required to displace the contact line
[3] directly follows from the multivaluedness of the ve-
locity ﬁeld at the contact line – if standard viscous hy-
drodynamics with a no-slip condition on the solid surface
is to be believed. This paradox has been swept under a
carpet rather than resolved by introducing a boundary
condition with a stress or velocity dependent slip [4,5].
A drawback of hydrodynamic slip theories lies in their
inherent inability to predict the dynamic contact angle.
As a remedy, empirical relationships between the veloc-
ity and contact angle have to be introduced in model
computations.

Clearly,

intermolecular forces,

that determine the
static contact angle to begin with, should have a say
in a dynamic situation. Their direct action is, however,
restricted to an immediate vicinity of the contact line,

which is unobservable under available experimental res-
olution, so that an apparent contact angle seen at meso-
scopic distances has to be strongly inﬂuenced by outer
hydrodynamic conditions. Near the contact line itself,
the properties of the ﬂuid are diﬀerent from those in the
bulk, and even a common continuum description becomes
questionable.

Diﬀerent approaches to description of the ﬂuid motion
in the vicinity of the three-phase boundary have been
tried during the last two decades. The most straight-
forward way is to introduce intermolecular forces into
the hydrodynamic equations of motion. This would lead,
strictly speaking, to very diﬃcult nonlocal equations, in-
corporating also the eﬀects of variable density and diﬀuse
interfaces [6]. Even in the sharp interface limit, a non-
local dependence on the shape of the free interface leads
to integro-diﬀerential equations which nobody as yet at-
tempted to solve. A rational formulation is possible in
lubrication approximation [2], when the action of inter-
molecular forces reduces to a simple expression for dis-
joining pressure between parallel vapor-liquid and liquid-
solid interphase boundaries [7]. This, however, does not
eliminate the stress singularity, unless in the case of com-
plete wetting when a sharp contact line is replaced by a
gradual transition from a precursor ﬁlm to a liquid ﬁlm
of macroscopic thickness [2]. At the same time, the usual
expression for London–van der Waals forces leads to dis-
joining pressure divergent at small distances and neces-
sitating a molecular-scale cut-oﬀ and leaving the “true”
contact angle undetermined. This may be formally cor-
rected by taking account of surface inclination [8], but the
correction becomes eﬀective at non-physical submolecu-
lar distances.

A radical solution is abandoning the continuum ap-
proach altogether in the immediate vicinity of the contact
line. Slip is feasible on a microscopic scale where it may
follow from activated diﬀusion of a ﬁrst molecular layer
[9]. Direct numerical simulations of molecular dynamics
clearly demonstrate the eﬀects of a diﬀuse boundary and
eﬀective slip at molecular distances [10,11]. Such simula-
tions, however, cannot involve macroscopic volumes, and
no ways to incorporate them in a macroscopic descrip-
tion are known. An alternative approach is to retain
continuum description but to treat either vapor-liquid,
or ﬂuid-solid interface, or both as a separate phase with

1

properties diﬀerent from the bulk ﬂuid. This approach
was adopted by Shikhmurzaev [12] who relied also on de-
viation from thermodynamic equilibrium near the con-
tact line as well as on the presence of a residual ﬁlm to
avoid the divergences and explain the diﬀerence between
the static and dynamic contact angles.

Treating the vapor-liquid interface as a separate phase
may be, indeed, justiﬁed when surfactants are present,
but otherwise a more natural way to account for its spe-
cial properties of is to consider it as a region interpolating
between the two phases. The origin of this approach is in
the diﬀuse interface model going back to van der Waals
himself [13]. Much later, it became prominent in the
phase ﬁeld models [14], used mostly in phenomenologi-
cal theory of solidiﬁcation where a ﬁctitious phase ﬁeld,
rather than density, was used as a continuous variable
changing across the interphase boundary. The theory of
van der Waals was widely used for description of equi-
librium ﬂuid properties, including surface tension and
line tension in three-phase ﬂuid systems [15]. Applica-
tions of this theory to dynamical processes in ﬂuids is
much more diﬃcult, as it requires coupling to hydrody-
namics. The applicable equations were formulated rather
recently [16,17]. Seppecher [18] and Jacqmin [19] solved
the equations of the continuous density ﬁeld coupled to
the Stokes equation numerically in a small inner region
near the contact line, matching it to the outer region
where the standard sharp-boundary hydrodynamic limit
applies. The prominent feature of the ﬂow in the inner re-
gion was a substantial advective mass transport through
the interphase boundary which served as an eﬀective slip
mechanism relieving the viscous stress singularity.

The aim of this communication is a rational analysis
of the hydrodynamic phase ﬁeld (diﬀuse interface) model
based on the lubrication approximation. After formu-
lating the basic equations in Section II, we reiterate the
equilibrium relations deﬁning the surface tension on all
three kinds of interphase boundaries (Section III A) and
discuss appropriate boundary conditions on the solid sur-
face (Section III B). This is followed by approximate
computation of the density proﬁle, equilibrium chemi-
cal potential and energy of the ﬂuid layer (Sections III C,
III D). The results of 1d computations further serve as
a basic “vertical” structure of the lubrication theory of
Section IV, where a slow dependence on the “horizon-
tal” coordinate is added. We show that the equations
give a correct sharp-interface limit in both static and dy-
namic situation. The evolution equation derived in the
lubrication approximation can be integrated numerically
yielding the dependence of the spreading velocity on a
driving force. We shall see in Section IV D that no singu-
larities develop in the case when the boundary condition
ﬁxes a unique ﬂuid density at the solid surface.

This “quasi-equilibrium” theory is modiﬁed in Section
V where a change of chemical potential across the ﬂuid
layer is taken into account. We start with discussing

the “vertical” structure of chemical potential associated
with viscous and kinetic retardation of steady motion of
a vapor-liquid interface, and identify the dilute (vapor)
phase as the locus of substantial variation of chemical po-
tential. The potential drop is then computed numerically
in Section V B, yielding a relation between the disjoining
potential and the ﬂux across isodensity lines. This ﬂux,
which may be interpreted as incipient evaporation or con-
densation may help to alleviate viscous stress singularity
when the boundary conditions make a sharp three-phase
contact line necessary.

II. BASIC EQUATIONS

A general phase ﬁeld model coupled to hydrodynamics
includes the following elements: (1) a dynamic equation
of the phase ﬁeld variable(s) derived from an appropri-
ate energy functional; (2) a constituent relation deﬁning
the dependence of pressure or chemical potential on the
phase variable(s); (3) the continuity equation; (4) the
equation for a ﬂow ﬁeld u(x, t).

In a one-component system, the appropriate phase
ﬁeld variable is density ρ, General hydrodynamic equa-
tions for non-equilibrium systems with diﬀuse interphase
boundaries are found in the recent review by Anderson
et al [17].

The equation for the static density distribution is de-

rived from the energy functional

F =Z L d3x, L = ρf (ρ) + 1

2 K|∇ρ|2 − µρ,

(1)

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier (chemical potential)
that serves to insure the mass conservation condition.
The corresponding Euler – Lagrange equation is

K∇2ρ − ∂ρ(ρf (ρ)) + µ = 0,

(2)

We shall suppose that the function f (ρ) is such that
Eq. (2) admits two stable solutions, ρ = ρv and ρ = ρl,
separated by an unstable solution ρ = ρu and ρv < ρu <
ρl. The solutions are at Maxwell construction (i.e. have
equal energy ρf (ρ)) at µ = 0, so that the chemical po-
tential can serve as a bias parameter.

The density ﬁeld is coupled to hydrodynamics through

the capillary tensor

T = LI − ∇ρ ⊗ ∂L/∂∇ρ,

(3)

where I is the unity tensor. Eliminating the Lagrange
multiplier with the help of Eq. (2) yields

T = ( 1

2 K|∇ρ|2 + Kρ∇2ρ − p)I − K∇ρ ⊗ ∇ρ,

(4)

where the thermodynamic pressure is deﬁned as p =
ρ2f ′(ρ).

2

Neglecting the inertial eﬀects, the ﬂow is described by

g(ρ) = ∂ρ[ρf (ρ)],

the generalized Stokes equation

∇ · (T + S) + F = 0,

we have

(5)

(10)

(11)

where F = −∇V is an external force and S is the viscous
stress tensor with the components
Sjk = η(∂jvk + ∂kvj) + (ζ − 2

3 η)δjk∇ · v,

(6)

where η, ζ are dynamic viscosities (generally, dependent
on ρ), and vj are components of the velocity ﬁeld v. The
system of equations is closed by the continuity equation

ρ′′(z) − g(ρ) + µ = 0.

The two static solutions are approached at z → ±∞, and
the boundary is static at µ = 0.
The interfacial energy is computed most easily by using
2 ρ2
z.

as a dependent variable the distortion energy T = 1
Then Eq. (11) is rewritten as

T ′(ρ) − g(ρ) + µ = 0,

(12)

ρt + ∇ · (ρv) = 0,

(7)

Integrating this proves that the distortion energy equals
the potential energy at any point:

The Stokes equation (5) is rewritten using Eq. (3) as

− ∇(p + V ) + Kρ∇∇2ρ + ∇ · S = 0.

(8)

A more transparent equivalent form, which can be ob-
tained directly from Eq. (3), includes, instead of pressure,
the chemical potential deﬁned by Eq. (2):
− ∇V − Kρ∇µ + ∇ · (η∇v) + ∇[(ζ + 1

3 η)∇ · v] = 0.
(9)

Further on, we shall compute the density and velocity
ﬁeld assuming that the characteristic macroscopic length
L∗ of the ﬂow ﬁeld, as well as the scale of density varia-
tion in the tangential direction far exceed the character-
istic thickness (K/f ∗)1/2 of the diﬀuse interface, where
f ∗ is a characteristic value of f (ρ). This “thin interface”
approximation is apt to break down in the vicinity of
the contact line, unless it is complemented by the “lu-
brication” approximation, which assumes a small angle
between the (diﬀuse) interphase boundary and the solid
surface. The applicability of this approximation depends
as well on the boundary conditions at the solid surface.

III. EQUILIBRIUM RELATIONS

A. Surface tension and Young–Laplace relation

Before approaching our main task of the analysis of
motion in the vicinity of a three-phase boundary, it is
necessary to clarify relevant properties of the dynamic
phase ﬁeld model for the basic case of a diﬀuse inter-
face between semi-inﬁnite phases. For a static interface,
the phase ﬁeld determines in a usual way the equilibrium
surface tension [13,15]. The standard surface tension is
deﬁned as the energy per unit area of a ﬂat interface sep-
arating two semi-inﬁnite phases. Static solutions depen-
dent only on the coordinate z normal to the interface can
be easily found by solving Eq. (2). Rescaling the coordi-
nate by the characteristic width of the diﬀuse interface,
and denoting

1

2 ρ2

z = ρf (ρ) − µρ.

Using this “virial theorem”, we compute

σ =Z ∞

−∞

zdz =Z ρl

ρ2

ρv p2(ρf (ρ) − µρ)dρ.

(13)

(14)

Solid-ﬂuid interactions are characterized by an appro-
priate boundary condition at the solid surface, as elabo-
rated below. Generally, the density at the solid surface
will be diﬀerent in the vapor or liquid phase; we denote
the respective values as ρsv and ρsl. Accordingly, the
“liquid-solid” or “vapor-solid” surface tension σl or σl is
computed, respectively, by replacing one of the integra-
tion limits in Eq. (14) by ρsl or ρsv.

In the vicinity of a critical point, the appropriate func-
tion, restricted to small deviations from the critical den-
sity ρc, is a cubic g(ρ) = ρ − ρc − (ρ − ρc)3. Since our
aim is a qualitative description of a system far from crit-
icality involving the vapor phase with negligible density,
we shall choose a shifted cubic

g(ρ) = ρ(1 − 2ρ)(1 − ρ),

(15)

which is at Maxwell construction at µ = 0. Then
f (ρ) = 1
2 ρ(1 − ρ)2 and the equilibrium surface tensions
are computed as

0

σ =Z 1
σl =Z 1
σv =Z ρsv

ρsl

0

ρ(1 − ρ)dρ = 1
6 ,
ρ(1 − ρ)dρ = 1
ρ(1 − ρ)dρ = 1

6 (1 − ρsl)2(1 + 2ρsl),
6 ρ2

sv(3 − 2ρsv).

(16)

The ﬁrst formula can be also obtained directly using the
standard kink solution that approaches ρv = 0 at z → ∞
and ρl = 1 at z → −∞:

ρ0(z) = (1 + ez)−1 .

(17)

This solution may be, however, distorted in the vicinity
of a solid wall.

3

The expressions for σ and σ± combine to the Young–

B. Boundary conditions

Laplace formula

σv − σl = σ cos θ,

(18)

where θ is the “standard” contact angle that should be
observed at distances much larger than the thickness of
the transition layer, i.e. unity in the dimensionless units
of Eq. (11).

The Young–Laplace formula is a consequence of the
Noether theorem applied to solutions of Eq. (2). Suppose
that the solid surface is coincident with the x axis (z = 0)
and ρ(x, z) tends to ρg at z → ∞. Very far on the left
(x → −∞) the vapor is close to the solid, so that ρ(x, z)
tends to a solution ρ(z) of Eq. (11) with µ = 0, such
that ρ(0) = ρsv and ρ → ρv as z → ∞. On the other
end, for x → +∞, the liquid is close to the solid, that
is ρ(x, z) tends for x large positive and z ≪ x toward
a solution ρ(z) of Eq. (11) with µ = 0 and ρ(0) = ρsl
and ρ → ρl as z becomes very large. For a given x,
there is, however, a value of z, close to tan θ, such that
there is a liquid-vapor interface and for z ≫ x tan θ, ρ
becomes very close to ρv, as requested. If ρ(x, z) satisﬁes
these conditions, the liquid-vapor interface is inclined at
the angle θ to the solid on scales much larger than the
microscopic interface thickness (although this angle may
change at a closer approach).

The Young–Laplace formula follows from the invari-
ance of the problem with respect to translations in the
x direction. Multiply Eq. (2) (with K rescaled to unity)
by ∂ρ/∂x, and integrate over z from z = 0 to ∞. This
yields, after integrating by parts

d

dx(cid:26)Z ∞

0

(cid:2) 1

2 (ρ2

x − ρ2

z) − ρf (ρ)(cid:3) dz(cid:27) = 0.

(19)

The braced expression is constant along the x axis. This
constant can be computed for x very large negative and
very large positive in the conﬁguration just described.
Equating the results, one gets:

σv = σl +Z ∞
−∞(cid:2) 1

2 (ρ′

0(ζ))2(cos2 θ − sin2 θ) − ρf (ρ)(cid:3) dζ

cos θ

,

2 (ρ′

where ζ is the coordinate normal to the vapor–liquid in-
terface, and ρ′
0(ζ) is the standard kink solution. The
algebraic term reduces to 1
0(ζ))2 by Eq. (13), and the
ﬁnal result is the Young–Laplace formula (18). The result
is not inﬂuenced by possible deviations from the standard
contact angle at a close approach to the solid surface, but,
of course, hinges on the applicability of Eq. (2). Since the
actual inclination angle is apt to change at large distances
due to external forces, such as gravity or dynamic pres-
sure, the “standard” angle may be in fact unobservable
at either small or large distances from the solid.

If the action of the solid on the density ﬁeld is short-
range (compared to the thickness of the diﬀuse interface),
it can be accounted for by appropriate boundary condi-
tions at the solid surface. The boundary conditions are
usually assigned with the help of the Cahn construction
[14,2] balancing the distortion energy, distributed over
a layer of same order of magnitude as the thickness of
the diﬀuse interface, and the energy of ﬂuid–solid inter-
action concentrated at the boundary. A more consistent
way to arrive at the same boundary condition is to al-
low a non-vanishing variation of the density at the solid
boundary δρs when the energy functional (1) is varied.
In one dimension, this leaves, after integrating by parts,
the boundary term ρ′(0)δρs.
If the dependence of the
ﬂuid–solid interaction energy on the ﬂuid density near
the wall is expressed by a quadratic polynomial

γ(ρs) = γ0 − γ1ρs + 1

2 γ2ρ2
s,
the coeﬃcient at δρs vanishes, provided
γ1 − γ2ρs + ρ′(z)|ρ=ρs = 0.

(20)

(21)

which is the boundary condition equivalent to that ob-
tained through the Cahn construction (although the lat-
ter is expressed in an awkward integral form, including a
radical with an indeﬁnite sign).

If one assumes that the solid–ﬂuid interaction is short-
range compared to the thickness of the diﬀuse vapor-
liquid interface, it is likely prevail locally in the vicinity
of a solid wall. This corresponds to the limiting case
of very large γ1, γ2, when a simpler Dirichlet boundary
condition ρ = ρs is enforced on the solid surface. The
range ρv < ρs < ρl corresponds then to partial wetting.
With the latter boundary condition and the cubic g(ρ),
the contact angle is cos θ = −1+6ρ2
s,and is close to 0
or π when ρs is close, respectively, to 1 or −0. If ρs = 1−a
with 0 < a ≪ 1, we have θ = 2√3a. The contact angle
is zero (complete wetting) at ρs ≥ 1. This “standard”
angle has nothing to do with a “true” contact angle at
the solid surface. The later is not deﬁned at all in the
diﬀuse interface theory, since diﬀerent isodensity levels
behave in a qualitatively diﬀerent way as the solid surface
is approached. The only level that hits the solid surface
at the right angle is ρ = ρs; the levels with ρ < ρs are
asymtotically parallel, and those with ρ > ρs antiparallel
to the surface.

s−4ρ3

A more consistent way to derive the boundary condi-
tion is to start with a general expression for the energy
of molecular interactions

F =Z Z ρ(x)ρ(x′)V (|x − x′|)d3xd3x′

(22)

The mean-ﬁeld energy functional (1) can be obtained
from (22) assuming that the density changes on a char-
acteristic scale far exceeding the range of the potential

4

V (|x − x′|) and expanding ρ(x′) = ρ(x) + (x − x′) ·
∇ρ(x) + . . .. The algebraic term in the Lagrangian (1)
is obtained in the zeroth order, and the distortion en-
ergy in the second order of the expansion. These expres-
sions are modiﬁed when a solid boundary lies within the
range of the interaction potential. The inﬂuence of the
wall may be particularly strong in the standard case of
Lennard–Jones interaction potential or a simpliﬁed ex-
pression V ∝ (x − x′)−6 with a short-range hard-core
cut-oﬀ, which gives the interaction energy diverging as
z−3 with the distance from the solid surface. The di-
verging part of the energy may be taken as the surface
energy potential that has to be minimized to obtain the
density at the solid surface ρs. Under conditions when
the bulk potential has two minima corresponding to low
(vapor) and high (liquid) densities, the surface potential
may also have two minima but the respective values, say,
ρsl and ρsv, would be, generally, diﬀerent from the bulk
values ρl and ρv. This brings us to a Dirichlet boundary
condition similar to that postulated above, but with the
essential diﬀerence that two distinct values are allowed,
and are likely to be chosen at the solid surface contacting,
respectively, the liquid and vapor phase. Unlike the case
when the surface density is unique, all isodensity levels
in the range ρsv ≤ ρ ≤ ρsl hit the solid surface.
The boundary condition (21) also allows distinct den-
sity levels ρsv 6= ρsl in the areas of the solid surface bor-
dering either vapor of liquid. Assuming, for example,
0 < γ1 = a ≪ 1, γ2 = 0, we have ρsv ≈ a, ρsl ≈ 1 + a.
It appears, however, quite unnatural that the main term
in the density expansion ﬁxes the density gradient rather
than the density itself, so that non-monotonic density
proﬁles are forbidden in the above example and, on the
contrary, enforced when γ1 is negative.

C. Density proﬁle in a thin layer

The interaction between the solid surface and the in-
terphase boundary can be computed most easily in the
case when both surfaces are parallel and normal to the
z axis. The static solution ρ(z) can be found by solving
Eq. (11) subject to the appropriate boundary conditions
at the solid wall. Solving the one-dimensional phase ﬁeld
equation in the form Eq. (12) is elementary; for the cubic
g(ρ), the exact solution is expressed in elliptic functions.
Finding an approximate solution satisfying the bound-
ary condition ρ(0) = ρs = 1− a with |a| ≪ 1 is, however,
more elucidating.
We construct the solution by perturbing a standard
kink solution ρ0(z − h) centered at z = h, e.g. Eq. (17)
for the cubic g(ρ). The actual solution is approximated
to the zero order by the standard kink only when ρ0(−h)
is suﬃciently close to unity; thus, h must satisfy the con-
dition h > ln(1/a). The density proﬁle is expanded in
the small parameter a:

ρ = ρ0(z − h) + aρ1(z; h) + . . . .

(23)

For the time being, we assume µ = 0. Then the ﬁrst-
order equation is

ρ′′
1 (z) + g′(ρ0)ρ1 = 0,

subject to the boundary condition

ρ1(0) = −1 + a−1[1 − ρ0(−h)] ≈ −1 + ψ,

(24)

(25)

where ψ = a−1e−h ≤ 1.
Due to the exponential decay of interactions, the cor-
rection to the zero-order solution is actually of a higher
order of magnitude everywhere except an O(ln a−1) vicin-
ity of the wall, where ρ0 is close to unity. On this interval,
Eq. (29) can be replaced by the equation with constant
coeﬃcients

(26)

(27)

(28)

ρ′′
1 (z) − ρ1(z) = 0,
The solution decaying at z → ∞ is

ρ1(z) = −e−z (1 − ψ) .

At a > 0, h > ln(2/a), the combined function

ρa = ρ0 + aρ1 =(cid:0)1 + ez−h(cid:1)−1

− e−z(cid:0)a − e−h(cid:1)

reaches a maximum at z = 1
2 ln(aeh − 1) > 0 (Fig. 1).
Such a solution describes a liquid layer sandwiched be-
tween the vapor and the solid. At smaller values of h, the
maximum disappears, and the solution can be interpreted
as a pure vapor phase thickening near the solid wall. The
same solution applies at a < 0 when the density increases
at the solid surface, whether it is approached from the
liquid phase or directly from the vapor phase.The ap-
proximation breaks down at h < ln(1/a), which is, in
fact, below the minimal possible thickness of the dense
layer in this model.

r

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2

4

6

8

10

z

12

FIG. 1. Stationary density proﬁles. Numbers indicate the

values of the nominal thickness h.

5

If the boundary condition allows two alternative ﬂuid
densities, a solution with ρ(0) = av ≪ 1 may be also
possible. This solution, corresponding to vapor phase
adjacent to the solid surface, is simply ρ ≈ ave−z; this
solution can be viewed as a tail of the basic kink centered
at z = ln av < 0 (i.e. in the non-physical region).

Non-monotonic density proﬁles are unstable. Since,
however, the inﬂuence of the wall decays exponentially
with the distance, the dynamics is practically frozen
whenever the interphase boundary is separated from the
wall by a layer thick compared to the characteristic width
of the diﬀuse interface.

D. Equilibrium chemical potential and energy

A static solution with a ﬁxed h exists only at a certain
ﬁxed value of µ, which can be determined using a solv-
ability condition of the ﬁrst-order equation. In a wider
context, an appropriate solvability condition serves to ob-
tain an evolution equation for the nominal position h of
the interphase boundary. The technique of derivation
of solvability conditions for a problem involving a semi-
inﬁnite region and exponentially decaying interactions is
non-standard and therefore deserves special attention.

An inhomogeneous ﬁrst-order equation has a general

form

Lρ1 + H(z) = 0,

(29)

containing an inhomogeneity H(z) and the linear opera-
tor

d2
dz2 + g′(ρ0).

L =

(30)

When Eq. (29) is deﬁned on the inﬁnite axis, the solv-
ability condition of Eq. (29) appears due to the presence
of an eigenfunction of L with zero eigenvalue related to
the translational symmetry of the kink. The eigenfunc-
tion, obtained by applying the symmetry operator d/dz,
is simply ρ′
0(z). The solvability condition is ﬁxed by the
orthogonality of the inhomogeneity to this eigenfunction:

Z ∞

−∞

ρ′
0(z)H(z)dz = 0.

(31)

In the presence of a solid boundary, a diﬃculty arises,
however, since the translational invariance is broken and
no easily computable eigenfunction is available. In addi-
tion, the orders of magnitudes in the perturbative scheme
should be estimated in a non-standard way in view of the
exponential decay of interactions.

The diﬃculties are overcome with the help of asymp-
totic matching technique similar to that employed in the
theory of vortex dynamics [21]. The solvability condition
is computed, similar to Eq. (31), using the translational
eigenfunction on the inﬁnite axis, but the integration is

6

not carried out over the entire axis (which now extends
into the unphysical region z < 0), but starts at some lo-
cation z = z0 > 0 where ρ diﬀers from the asymptotic
value ρ = 1 by an O(a) increment. This generates bound-
ary terms in the solvability condition, which takes now
the form

Z ∞
dρ0(z − h)
(cid:20) dρ0(z − h)

dz

dz

z0

H(z)dz =

dρ1(z)

dz −

d2ρ0(z − h)

dz2

ρ1(z)(cid:21)z=z0

.

(32)

The boundary values of the ﬁrst-order solution ρ′

1(z)
are obtained by solving the ﬁrst-order equation (29) di-
rectly on the interval 0 ≤ z ≤ z0, where Eq. (29) can be
replaced by the equation with constant coeﬃcients (26)
with the added inhomogeneity H(z). The solution of this
equation is

ρ1(z) = ρ(h)

1 (z) +Z z

0 G(z − ζ)H(ζ)dζ,

(33)

1

where ρ(h)
is given by Eq. (27) and G(z − ζ) is Green’s
function of Eq. (26). The last term can be neglected for
certain inhomogeneities, provided the lower limit of the
integral in the left-hand side of Eq. (32) can be shifted to
−∞ without introducing a signiﬁcant error. The match-
ing is successful when Eq. (32) reduces to a form inde-
pendent of z0 in the leading order.

The simplest application of the above matching tech-
nique is the computation of a constant value of chemical
potential µ = µc required to keep the kink at equilib-
rium (possibly, unstable) at a given location z = h. In
this case, the inhomogeneity in Eq. (26) is just a constant
H = µc, and the integral in the left-hand side of Eq. (32)
is µc[ρ0(∞) − ρ0(z0)] = −µc + O(a). Since this expres-
sion remains unchanged in the leading order when z0 is
shifted to −∞, i.e. ρ0(z0) = 1 − O(a) replaced by unity,
it is suﬃcient to use in Eq. (32) the ﬁrst term of Eq. (33)
only. Retaining the leading term only, we obtain

µc ≡ a2M (h) = 2a2ψ(1 − ψ) = 2e−h(cid:0)a − e−h(cid:1) .

(34)

The ﬁrst expression demonstrates that the computed
chemical potentials in fact at most of O(a2), although
the equation is nominally of the ﬁrst order. The gained
order of magnitude is due to the fast decay of interac-
tions. Since the computed value is of a higher order,
there is no need to correct the equilibrium proﬁle com-
puted in the preceding subsection to O(a). For a > 0,
the function µc(h) passes a maximum at the same value
h = ln(2/a) = O(1) that marks the transition from
monotonic to non-monotonic density proﬁles. Sustain-
ing a static proﬁle requires a bias in favor of the liquid
state, and the value of µc at the maximum represents the
critical value of chemical potential required to nucleate a
thick liquid layer on the solid surface. For a < 0, µc in

Eq. (34) is negative and increases monotonically with h;
in this case, on the contrary, a bias in favor of the vapor
phase is necessary to keep the interface stationary.

For the boundary condition ρ′(0) = −a, the chemical
potential of the dense solution is equivalent to Eq. (34)
with the inverted sign of a. The rescaled value is

In two dimensions, the term ρxx is added to the inho-
mogeneity in the ﬁrst-order equation (29). In this order,
the vertical density proﬁle can be represented by the stan-
dard kink solution ρ0(z − h(x, t)), and the x dependence
is due to slow variation of h in the “horizontal” direction.
Thus,

M (h) = −2a−1e−h(cid:0)1 + a−1e−h(cid:1) .

The correction to energy, deﬁned as

E(h) =Z ∞

0

(cid:2)ρf (ρ) + 1

2 ρ2

z(cid:3) dz = σ + a2eE(h),

(35)

(36)

also turns out to be of O(a2). The “virial theorem” used
in Eq. (14) does not hold to this order when density is
deﬁned by the ﬁrst-order function ρa. The best way to
compute the energy is to use directly the variational for-
mulation to relate it with the computed chemical po-
tential. Requiring the one-dimensional energy functional
(1) to be extremal with respect to h and using in the last
term ρ(z) = ρ0(z − h), we compute

= −MZ ∞

0

deE

dh

ρ′
0(z − h) dz = M + O(a).

(37)

IV. MOTION IN A THIN LAYER

A. Double-scale expansion

Two-dimensional motion can be rationally treated in
the familiar “lubrication approximation”, assuming the
characteristic scale in the “vertical” direction (normal
to the solid surface) to be much smaller than that in
the “horizontal” (parallel) direction. When the inter-
face is weakly inclined and curved, the density is weakly
dependent on the coordinate x directed along the solid
surface. Respectively, the vertical velocity v is assumed
to be much smaller than the horizontal velocity u. The
scale ratio is determined by the contact angle, and should
be set at O(a) = O(√δ) to match the scaling of the
phase ﬁeld. The velocities v, u corresponding to weak
disequilibrium of the phase ﬁeld considered above will
be consistently scaled if one assumes ∂z = O(1), ∂x =
O(√δ), u = O(δ3/2), v = O(δ2). It is further necessary
for consistent scaling of the hydrodynamic equations that
the “constant” part of the chemical potential µ, associ-
ated with interfacial curvature, disjoining potential, and
external forces and weakly dependent on x, be of O(δ),
while the “dynamic” part varying in the vertical direc-
tion and responsible for motion across isodensity levels,
be of O(δ2). Further in this Section, we shall assume
therefore that µ + V is independent of z; this assumption
will be re-examined in Section V.

ρxx = −ρ′

0(z − h)hxx + ρ′′

0 (z − h)h2
x.

(38)

The respective contribution to the solvability condition
is, in the leading order,

− hxxZ ∞

−∞

[ρ′
0(z)]2dz = −σhxx,

(39)

while the contribution of the term containing h2
in the leading order by symmetry.

x vanishes

Another possible contribution to the solvability con-
dition may come from external forces. In the presence
of gravity directed against the z axis, the equilibrium is
achieved, according to Eq. (9), at µ = µ0 − a2Gz rather
than µ = µ0 = const. The rescaled acceleration of grav-
ity is denoted as a2G, which presumes that it matches
the other terms by the order of magnitude. The integral
in Eq. (32) involving the variable part of µ is mostly ac-
cumulated in the diﬀuse interface region, so that we have
in the leading order

− GZ ∞

0

zρ′

0(z − h)dz ≈ Gh.

(40)

Collecting Eqs. (39) and (40), we obtain the expression
for the hydrostatic chemical potential

µ = δ [M (h) − σhxx + G(h − z)] ,
where M (h) is deﬁned by Eq. (34) or (35).

(41)

B. Statics in lubrication approximation

Equation (41) will be used later on to investigate dy-
namical processes where motion of the contact line is
involved. In this subsection we investigate the statics of
this lubrication approximation, and show how it relates
to the general Young–Laplace result on the static contact
angle. It seems to be important for the general consis-
tency of the theory to have dynamical equations for the
contact angle that reduce to the usual equilibrium the-
ory in the absence of motion.
In most realistic cases,
the eﬀect of gravity is negligible near the contact line,
since gravitational forces are much weaker than molecu-
lar forces. Therefore, the statics of the contact angle, at
scales in between molecular length scales and the capil-
lary length (that is the length scale beyond which gravity
plays a role), depends on solutions of Equation (41) with-
out the gravity term G(h − z). Moreover, as we want to

7

study equilibrium situations where a liquid-vapor inter-
face merges with the solid surface, the chemical potential
µ is set to its equilibrium value, 0, so that the equation
under consideration is:

M (h) − σhxx = 0.

(42)

In order to derive from this equation the Young–
Laplace condition, one can use the relation (37) between
the energy and chemical potential computed in the end of
Section III D. We integrate Eq. (42) with the boundary
conditions for the function h(x) such that for x → −∞,
the vapor is close to the solid, while for x → ∞, the liq-
uid is close to the solid, until a height h(x) ≈ θx, θ ≪ 1
where a liquid-vapor interface is situated. The relevant
ﬁrst integral of Eq. (42) reads:

1

2 σh2

x = eE(h) − eE(h0),

(43)

where h0 is the root of M (h) that gives the thickness of
the precursor ﬁlm lying between the solid and the vapor
phase; h0 = ln(1/a) in the model with a cubic f (ρ) and
Dirichlet boundary condition. The structure of Eq. (43)
is obviously similar to the Young–Laplace formula. The

capillary energy at very large negative x, eE(h0), is noth-

ing but the solid-vapor surface tension, σv. The capillary
energy at very large positive x where the vapor-liquid in-
terface is far removed from the solid is the sum of the
independent contributions of the solid-liquid and a free
liquid-vapor interfaces. Integrating up to very large pos-

itive x, where h ≈ xθ, one gets therefore eE(∞) = σ + σl.

Using this in Eq. (43) and subtracting σ from both sides
yields

σ − 1

2 σθ2 ≈ σ cos θ = σv − σl,

(44)

which is the sought after Young–Laplace condition, de-
rived from the equations of the lubrication approximation
for the position of the liquid-vapor interface.

C. Equations of motion in lubrication approximation

O(√δ) to match by the order of magnitude the other
terms in the equation. The density proﬁle is given in the
leading order by the standard kink solution (17) centered
at the nominal interface position h(x) slowly varying in
the horizontal direction.

The solution of Eq. (45) satisfying the no-slip bound-
ary condition on the solid boundary and the no stress
condition at inﬁnity has a general form

u(z) = η−1PxΨ(z; h).

(47)

The function Ψ(z; h) depends on an assigned dependence
of viscosity on density, but the ﬂux uρ0 in the dense layer
(at z not much larger than h) is nearly the same for ei-
ther η = const or η ∝ ρ, and is close to the standard
lubrication solution Ψ = −z(h − 1
2 z) valid for incom-
pressible Poiseuille ﬂow in a layer of thickness h with a
free boundary.

Q

50

10
5

1
0.5

0.1

0.2

0.5

1

2

5

h

FIG. 2. The function Q(h), compared with the respective

function for the sharp interface Q0(h) = 1

3 h3 (dashed line)

The evolution equation of h is obtained by inserting
Eqs. (17), (47) in the continuity equation (7) and inte-
grating it from 0 to ∞. Using the relations

Z ∞

0

ρtdz = −htZ ∞
Z ∞

0

0

ρ′
0(z)dz = ht + O(a),

(ρv)zdz = 0,

The horizontal velocity u is determined from the hori-
zontal component of the Stokes equation. Adding gravity
as an external force, we write the leading order equation
as

− ρ0(z − h)Px + (ηuz)z = 0,

where the eﬀective pressure P is deﬁned as

P = Gαx + M (h) − σhxx + G(h − z),

(45)

(46)

This expression follows from Eq. (41), with the addition
of the gravity term acting when the supporting plane
is weakly inclined. The inclination angle α must be of

we obtain

where

ht = η−1∂x [Q(h)Px] .

Q(h) = −Z ∞

0

ρ0(z − h)Ψ(z, h) dz.

(48)

(49)

The function Q(h), computed numerically and plotted in
Fig. 2, diﬀers only slightly from the respective function
for the sharp interface Q0(h) = 1
3 h3 when h exceeds its
minimal admissible value h0 = ln(1/a). Taking into ac-
count small deviations from the standard kink solution
near the wall adds only a higher-order correction.

8

D. Quasi-equilibrium spreading

Apart from a slightly modiﬁed volumetric rate, the
speciﬁc contribution of the diﬀuse interface to Eq. (48) is
carried by the function M (h), which is dependent on the
boundary conditions on the solid surface and expresses
disjoining potential. It should be emphasized that this
function is not given a priori but computed in the frame-
work of the phase ﬁeld theory (Section III D). The struc-
ture of Eq. (48) is identical to that of standard equations
of motion of thin liquid ﬁlms, which are recovered at large
h when the disjoining potential becomes negligible. At
small h, the disjoining potential is not singular as in the
sharp-interface theories with van der Waals interactions
[2]. At the same time, the viscous stress singularity at
the contact line is relaxed as the latter’s location becomes
indeﬁnite.

Steady ﬂow of a liquid ﬁlm under the action of disjoin-
ing potential and gravity can be described by Eq. (48)
rewritten in the frame moving with a speed U . We
shall assume that the liquid layer thickens at x → ∞,
and assume U to be positive when the thick layer ad-
vances. Standard macroscopic arrangements ﬁxing the
asymptotic conditions at x → ∞ are possible, e.g. h →
∞, hx = −α for a liquid wedge with the angle α or
hx = 0, h =p3U/αG for an asymptotically ﬂat ﬁlm on
an inclined plane.
Admissible asymptotics at x → −∞ depends on the
form of the function M (h). If it is given by Eq. (34) with
a > 0, the layer may attain asymptotically at x → −∞
the state of lowest energy h = h0 = ln(1/a) (formally,
this is possible at zero inclination α, although gravity
eﬀects are negligible in ﬁlms of molecular thickness).

The starting point is Eq. (48) with the eﬀective pres-
sure given by Eq. (46). Removing extra parameters by
rescaling and integrating once yields

h′′′(x) − (M ′(h) + G) h′(x) − αG +

U (h − h0)

Q(h)

= 0,

(50)

where the integration constant has been introduced al-
lowing for a precursor ﬁlm with the thickness h0 at
x → −∞. A more convenient form of Eq. (50) is ob-
tained using as the dependent variable y = h2
x = 2T and
as the independent variable the nominal thickness h:

1
2

y′′(h) − (M ′(h) + G) +

1

√y (cid:18) U (h − h0)

Q(h) − αG(cid:19) = 0.

(51)

Equation (51) is free from singularities which are usu-
ally caused by divergences of either viscous stress, or dis-
joining potential, or both, in a layer of vanishing thick-
ness. It can be integrated numerically starting from the
asymptotics at x → −∞. The asymptotics of Eq. (51)

obtained by expanding near h = h0 is y ≍ c2(h − h0)2,
implying exponential decay to the “optimal” thickness
h − h0 ∝ eκx, where the constant κ is a positive root of
the characteristic equation

κ3 − M ′(h0)κ + U/Q(h0) = 0.

(52)

Fixing, say, the value of U , one can use the shooting
method to adjust the value of G satisfying the appropri-

ate boundary condition at inﬁnity, √y = −α. A very

ﬁne adjustment of the parameter is needed to advance to
moderate values of h. An example of a computed depen-
dence of the interface inclination angle on the nominal
thickness of a dense layer spreading on a horizontal sup-
port is shown in Fig. 3.

q

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.5

0.2

10

h

40

20

30

FIG. 3. Dependence of the interface inclination angle θ
on the nominal thickness h of a spreading dense layer for
3U = 0.5 and 3U = 0.2 (as indicated by numbers at the
respective curves). The values of G found by shooting are,
respectively, 0.035123081 and 0.0079817.

V. NON-EQUILIBRIUM MOTION

A. Viscously retarded motion

Equilibrium solutions with ρ varying along the z axis
exist only at a particular constant value of µ, equal to
zero in the adopted gauge. Any deviation of this value
sets the interface into motion; the interface shift corre-
sponds to evaporation or condensation retarded by vis-
cous friction. The simplest case is steady propagation of
the boundary between two semi-inﬁnite phases. The sta-
tionary one-dimensional equations in the frame moving
with the speed c of the steadily propagating interface are

(ρv)z = 0, −ρµz + (bηvz)z = 0
external forces are omitted and bη = ζ + 4

where v is the single velocity component in this frame;
3 η is the renor-
malized viscosity, accounting also for the divergence term
in Eq. (9). These equations are readily integrated yield-
ing

(53)

j ≡ ρv = const, µ = µc + jR(z),

(54)

9

where

R(z) =Z 1

ρ

dρ−1

dz (cid:19) dz.

(55)

d

dz (cid:18)bη

The ﬂux j is related to the propagation velocity c as
j = −c(ρl−ρv). The sign of c is chosen in such a way that
it is positive when the dense (liquid) state advances. The
constant µc, which may be ﬁxed by external conditions,
represents the driving force of the process.

It is reasonable to assume that the disequilibrium is
weak, so that both µc and the constant ﬂux j are multi-
plied by a book-keeping small parameter δ when Eq. (54)
is used in Eq. (11). The perturbed equation can be ex-
panded in a usual way, and the relation between the ﬂux
j and µc is obtained from the solvability condition (31):

µc = −cZ ∞

−∞

ρ′
0(z)R(z)dz.

(56)

The integral in the right-hand side can be interpreted
as the eﬀective friction factor. It depends on the basic
density proﬁle ρ0(z) as well as on the assumed depen-

dence of the viscosity on density. If ρ0 = ρc +eρ represents
a weakly perturbed critical density, R(z) = −ηcρ−3
c eρz,
and the integral in Eq. (56) is proportional to surface
tension.
In the case of vanishing vapor density which
interests us most, assuming η = const leads to a diver-
gent integral. The divergence is not eliminated also when
the viscosity is proportional to density. Taking, for ex-

ample, bη = νρ, Eq. (55) is evaluated using the relation
ρz = −ρ(1 − ρ) as R(z) = −ν ln(ρ0(z)/ρc). The weak di-
vergence on the vapor side can be eliminated by assuming
a small but ﬁnite vapor density ρv. Then evaluating the
solvability condition yields

ρ′
0(z)R(z)dz

µc = −cZ ∞
= −cνZ ρl

−∞

ρv

ln

ρ0(z)

ρc

dρ = −cν(1 + ln ρc).

(57)

where µc is the chemical potential at the location with a
chosen density level ρc.

The dense layer advances (c > 0) at µ > 0. This
causes the chemical potential to drop at at locations with
lower density ahead of the propagating interface, thereby
eﬀectively slowing down the advance of the dense layer.
A sharp drop in the dilute layer, leading to a divergent
friction factor (56), causes substantial deviations from
the zero-order density proﬁle, which will be taken into
account in the next section.

B. Evaporation ﬂux

We shall consider the case ρ(∞) → 0, in view of a
strong viscous resistance that has lead to the divergence

10

of the eﬀective viscosity in Eq. (56). Any vertical ﬂux
causes in this case a substantial change of the chemical
potential in the vertical direction, as well as a substantial
distortion of the vertical structure of the density ﬁeld, as
will be shown below.

In a one-dimensional setting, when the ﬂux j is con-
stant, the vertical structure is computed by solving simul-
taneously the vertical component of the Stokes equation

justiﬁed for the dilute phase, where the friction is most

together with Eq. (11). We assume bη = const (which is
important) and denote ǫ = bηj. Using ρ as the indepen-

dent variable and denoting ϕ(ρ) = ρ2
be rewritten as

z, this equation can

µ(ρ) = g(ρ) − 1

2 ϕρ.

(58)

This relation can be used in the second Eq. (53), yield-
ing a single equation deﬁning the density proﬁle in the
presence of evaporation or condensation. The right-hand
side of this equation can be transformed by replacing
vz = j dρ−1/dz = jρ−2√ϕ; an apparent change of the
sign of the last term is due to the fact that ρz is negative,
and has to be deﬁned as −√ϕ. The resulting equation

can be integrated once, yielding, after some algebra,

dρ(cid:18) ϕ
ρ2 d

2ρ − f ′(ρ)(cid:19) + ǫ

√ϕ
ρ2 = α.

(59)

The integration constant α can be computed by ap-
plying this relation deep in the dense layer where ϕ = ρ2
z
l f ′(ρl) ≡ −p(ρl). Thus,
vanishes. This gives α = −ρ2
α is identiﬁed with the reverse pressure in the bulk of
the liquid phase, but is not deﬁned numerically as yet,
since one has still to compute the shift of the liquid den-
sity ρl from its standard value ρl = 1 due to a shift of
the chemical potential µ. Assuming µ ≪ 1, one can see
that both ρl and α are of the same order of magnitude
in the bulk of the liquid. One can also observe that,
as expected, α > 0 at ρl < 1 when the dense layer re-
cedes (evaporates). Deep in the vapor phase, one should
set µ = 0, so that the standard vapor density is not af-
fected. Nevertheless, if the vapor density tends to zero,
the boundary condition at the vapor end cannot be ap-
plied in a straightforward way, since the term containing
ǫ in Eq. (59) is indeﬁnite. The solution strategy can be
outlined then as follows. Picking a certain value of α, we
integrate Eq. (59) numerically and compute µ(ρl) using
Eq. (58); then a new value of α is computed with the
help of the algebraic equilibrium relations for the liquid
phase, and the computation is repeated until it converges
to a self-consistent solution.

This procedure can be improved, keeping in mind that
both µ and ǫ are small, though the relation between them,
crucial for our theory, is still unknown. Equation (59)
divided by ρ2 can be formally integrated once more and
rewritten in the form

1

2 ϕ − ρf (ρ) + ρZ ρ

0

K(ρ′)dρ′ = 0

(60)

where

K(ρ) = ǫρ−4pϕ(ρ) − αρ−2.

(61)

Diﬀerentiating Eq. (60) yields, in view of Eqs. (10) and
(58),

µ(ρ) = ρK(ρ) +Z ρ

0

K(ρ′)dρ′.

(62)

The integral accumulates in the “boundary layer” at ρ →
0 where both terms in Eq. (61) diverge; thus, computing
ϕ(ρ) in this region is crucial. The scaling in the boundary
layer is ﬁxed by requiring all terms in Eq. (59) to be of
the same order of magnitude. The small parameter ǫ can
be, indeed, eliminated by setting

ρ = rǫ1/3, ϕ = Φǫ2/3, α = Aǫ2/3.

(63)

The rescaled form of Eq. (60) applicable in the boundary
layer is, in the leading order,
2√Φ
r4 −

r(cid:19) − 1 +

dr (cid:18) Φ

2A
r2 = 0.

(64)

d

m

e1ê3

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

5

10

15

r

20

FIG. 4. The chemical potential µ as a function of the
rescaled density r in the case of evaporation (ǫ > 0). The
curve corresponding to A = 0.677 with the asymptotic value
of µ(r) vanishing at r → ∞ is ﬂanked by two curves with
positive and negative values of µ(∞).

The relation between the chemical potential µ(ρl) and

ﬂux j = bη−1ǫ obtained above can be reverted, identifying
µ(ρl) = µc with the constant chemical potential in the
dense layer driving the mass ﬂux j ≈ (0.68bη)−1µ3/2
. In
the case of a steadily propagating interface, this can be
rewritten as a relation between µc and the propagation
velocity c = −j; unlike Eq. (56), this relation is now
nonlinear:

c

Applying the same scaling to Eq. (62), one can see,
however, that the generic estimate is µ = O(ǫ1/3), which
is inconsistent with the equilibrium relationships in the
bulk of the liquid. This can be repaired by adjusting α
in such a way that the asymptotic value of µ at r → ∞
vanishes in the leading order. This is, indeed, possible, as
proved by integrating Eq. (64) numerically. The integra-
tion starts at some r ≪ 0 using the asymptotic condition
Φ(r) = A2r4 at r → 0. A few sample curves µ(r) at
diﬀerent values of A are drawn in Fig. 4; all of them ap-
proach at r → ∞ at a certain asymptotic value which has
to be identiﬁed with µ(ρl). The asymptotic value van-
ishes at A ≈ 0.677. The residual O(ǫ2/3) value of µ(ρl)
satisfying the equilibrium relation µ(ρl) = α, can be ob-
tained in the next order by allowing an O(ǫ) deviation of
α from the chosen value αc ≈ 0.677ǫ2/3.
Now the solution is completely speciﬁed. The chemical
potential peaks sharply in the dilute phase (Fig. 4). This
is due to the constraint imposed by a constant ﬂux in one
dimension, requiring a large driving force in the transi-
tional layer where a large velocity gradient is necessary
to compensate the decreasing density. The asymptotics

dρ/dz = −√ϕ = −αρ2 corresponds to a rather slow den-
sity drop-oﬀ, ρ ∝ z−1 – a dramatic change, compared to
the exponential decay in Eq. (11).

c = −(0.677bη)−1µ3/2

c

.

C. Condensation ﬂux

(65)

The above computation is valid only in the case of
evaporation (j > 0 or c < 0). A constant condensation
ﬂux (j < 0) is, clearly, incompatible with vanishing va-
por density. A positive value of µ is required to enable
condensation, i.e. advance of the dense phase. This, in
turn, implies a ﬁnite vapor density, so that µ(ρv) ≈ ρv
at ρv ≪ 1.
The condensation ﬂux strongly depends on this resid-
ual density. Equation (59) is retained with the sign of
ǫ inverted, but, since the expression multiplying ǫ is no
more indeﬁnite at z → ∞, the integration constant α can
be directly related to ρv:

dρ(cid:18) ϕ
ρ2 d

2ρ − f ′(ρ)(cid:19) + ρ2

vf ′(ρv) − ǫ

√ϕ
ρ2 = 0.

(66)

The appropriate rescaled variables are again given by
Eq. (63), and the rescaled equation replacing Eq. (64)
reads, in the leading order

d

dr (cid:18) Φ

r(cid:19) − 1 −

2√Φ
r4 +

β2
r2 = 0,

(67)

where β = |ǫ|−1/3ρv. The asymptotics at z → ∞ or
r → β is

11

Φ = κ2(r − β)2, κ =

1

2β3 (cid:16)1 −p1 + 4β6(cid:17) .

(68)

equation containing a large relaxation time τ .
dimension, we have

In one

This asymptotics corresponds to an exponential decay of
density to its equilibrium value, r − β ∼ eκz at z → ∞.
Integrating Eq. (67) with the asymptotic condition
(68), one can see that also in this case the chemical po-
tential deﬁned by Eq. (58) reaches a constant asymptotic
value at r → ∞. Checking the asymptotics of Eq. (66) at
ρ → ρl, one can see that the thermodynamic pressure on
the liquid side, ρ2
l f ′(ρl) should be equal that on the vapor
side, ρ2
vf ′(ρv), and, hence, be of O(ǫ2/3). This is again
inconsistent with the generic estimate µ = O(ǫ1/3), im-
plying, through the equilibrium relationships, the same
order of magnitude of f ′(ρl). Hence, as in the preced-
ing subsection, the value of β has to be adjusted in such
a way that the asymptotic value of µ at r → ∞ van-
ishes in the leading order. The value found by shooting
is β ≈ 0.685 (see Fig. 5).

m

e1ê3

0.6

0.4

0.2

-0.2

5

10

15

0.69

0.68

r

20

FIG. 5. The chemical potential µ as a function of the
rescaled density r in the case of condensation (ǫ < 0). The
curve corresponding to β = 0.685 with the asymptotic value
of µ(r) vanishing at r → ∞ is ﬂanked by two curves with
positive and negative values of µ(∞).

D. Kinetically retarded motion

Taking into account “normal” viscous retardation only

(with bη ≈ η) may exaggerate the actual phase transition

rate, since transport through a sharp density gradient is
in fact an activated process, except, perhaps, in an im-
mediate vicinity of a critical point. When the interface is
treated as a sharp discontinuity, this may be accounted
for by introducing a ﬁnite evaporation rate (involving an
appropriate activation energy) and a condensation “stick-
ing coeﬃcient”. Both quantities are diﬃcult to estimate
quantitatively but, in principle, they insure a ﬁnite evap-
oration or condensation rate even under conditions when
viscous retardation is absent.

In the framework of the phase ﬁeld theory, kinetic re-
tardation can be accounted for by replacing the station-
ary equation (2) or (11) by the respective gradient ﬂow

12

τ ρt = ρzz − g(ρ) + µ.

(69)

On the inﬁnite axis, this equation (with µ = const)
has a solution steadily propagating with a speed depen-
dent on µ, and satisfying the stationary equation in the
comoving frame

− τ cρz + ρzz − g(ρ) + µ = 0.

(70)

In the case of weak disequilibrium, µ = O(δ) ≪ 1, the
propagation speed c = O(δ) is easily computed, as in the
preceding subsection, using the solvability condition of
Eq. (70) expanded in δ:

c =

µ(ρl − ρv)

τ σ

=

6µ
τ

,

(71)

where σ is deﬁned by Eq. (14) and the numerical value
is given for the cubic g(ρ).

Equations (56) and (71) represent two opposite limits
when, respectively, either viscous or kinetic retardation
is prevalent. A rough estimate for the lower bound of
the relaxation time is τ ∝ l2/D, where l is the thick-
ness of the diﬀuse interface and D is the diﬀusivity. The
characteristic time of viscous retardation on the same
length scale is τv ∝ l2/ν, where ν = η/ρ. For com-
mon liquids, the Prandtl number Pr = ν/D is large, and
τv/τ ∝ D/ν ≪ 1. Viscous retardation may be still felt
at larger scales, complementing the kinetic retardation
near the diﬀuse boundary. At Pr ≫ 1, the ﬂow velocity
is nearly constant throughout the transitional boundary
region, and the propagation velocity deﬁned by Eq. (71)
can be viewed as the velocity of the slow drift of the inter-
phase boundary due to the evaporation or condensation
in the frame moving with the local velocity of the ambi-
ent ﬂuid. At ﬁxed propagation velocity, the increments
due to the viscous and kinetic retardation are additive.
In the dense layer, the former is negligible at Pr ≫ 1,
although it becomes important in the dilute phase, as we
have seen in the preceding subsections.

The scaling of the lubrication approximation (Section
IV A) remains consistent only if the relaxation time τ in
Eq. (69) is of O(δ). With this scaling, the speed of the
vapor-liquid interface displacement is of O(δ2), i.e. of the
same order of magnitude as the vertical velocity.

E. Spreading assisted by interphase transport

The results of the computations that have been carried
out so far in this section for an inﬁnite ﬂuid layer sepa-
rated by a diﬀuse vapor-liquid interface can be applied to
the spreading problem after minimal modiﬁcation. In a
bounded layer, the chemical potential in the liquid phase

µc driving the evaporation or condensation ﬂux is de-
termined by the combined action of surface tension and
disjoining pressure. The disjoining potential can be com-
puted with the help of the solvability condition, as in Sec-
tion III D; the respective formulae remain in force, since
the ﬂux-related drop of the chemical potential occurs in
the dilute phase only, and is negligible in the diﬀuse in-
terface region, where the translational eigenfunction is
localized.

The basic equation of the lubrication approximation,
is modiﬁed in the case of non-equilibrium
Eq. (48),
spreading by an added evaporation or condensation term:

∂h
∂t

= j(P ) + η−1∂x [Q(h)Px] .

(72)

The expressions for the evaporation or condensation ﬂux
j(P ) and even the orders of magnitude vary depending on
the physical situation under consideration, according to
the calculations presented in the three preceding subsec-
tions, with the eﬀective pressure deﬁned by Eq. (46) re-
placing µc. This determines, in turn, the relative impor-
tance of the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (72).
In the case of viscously retarded motion with ﬁnite ρv,

representing the horizontal transport through the liquid

j happens to be proportional to bηP , although the term
phase is of order bη ∂2P/∂x2, and is negligible compared

to the evaporation or condensation term in the lubri-
cation limit, when the horizontal derivatives are small.
In this case, ﬂow across the isodensity levels associated
with evaporation or condensation, driven by the devia-
tion of the chemical potential from equilibrium, would be
larger by O(δ−1) than hydrodynamic “horizontal” mo-
tion. Therefore, it is likely that this does not represent
the most usual situations, where evaporation is hindered
by large activation energies. In the present model a way
to enter consistently this activation eﬀect is to make the
evaporation ﬂux and the horizontal transport of the same
of magnitude. This is done by imposing an O(δ−1) re-
laxation time τ . Although this connection between a
molecular quantity τ and a macroscopic length scale δ
may look a bit artiﬁcial, this represents a distinguished
limit where a balance between factors of diﬀerent physi-
cal origin is attained.

c

The last situation that we have to consider is the one of
a vapor phase of vanishingly small density when the evap-
oration ﬂux is related to the jump of chemical potential
as j ∝ µ3/2
. In this case, it is possible to have the evapo-
ration ﬂux and the horizontal transport of the same order
of magnitude with the choice of scaling τ = O(δ−1/2). A
slow density decay caused by evaporation, which might
lead to a weakly (logarithmically) divergent horizontal
ﬂux, may be a disturbing factor, but this is certainly an
artifact caused by a constant ﬂux in a one-dimensional
setting and not transferable to two-dimensional spread-
ing. It is of interest to notice at this point that, when j
is dominant, and in the absence of horizontal ﬂux (which

13

would happen far from a solid boundary), one recov-
ers the classical Thomson expression for the evaporation
driven by the curvature of the liquid-vapor interface.

Mass transport across isodensity lines should become
particularly important when the lubrication approxima-
tion breaks down. This should happen near the “contact
line” in the case when two alternative ﬂuid densities near
the solid wall are possible (see Section III B). If, say, the
boundary densities are ρsv ≪ 1 and ρsl = 1 − a, a ≪ 1,
the three-phase “contact line” can be viewed as a sharp
transition between O(1) positive and negative values of
the nominal thickness h, such that e−|h| ≪ 1 on either
side. This can be treated as a shock of Eq. (48) or (50).
The Hugoniot condition which should ensure zero net
ﬂux through the shock is the equality of chemical poten-
tials on both sides. Unfortunately, this condition cannot
be formulated precisely, since the sharp-interface limit
of the surface tension term is inapplicable in the shock
region. Moreover, our test computations of the proﬁle
of the dense layer using Eq. (51) with diﬀerent boundary
conditions imposed on the “shock” at h = h0 showed that
the spreading velocity is very sensitive to the conditions
on the shock.

It remains therefore essential to solve the full system
of density ﬁeld and hydrodynamic equation in the shock
region whenever a sharp transition between alternative
surface densities is possible. The outer limit of the re-
solved shock structure should be matched with the lubri-
cation equations (48), (50), or (72). The transport across
isodensity lines in the shock region alleviates the viscous
stress singularity remaining in the lubrication model. In
its turn, the latter provides a gradual transition to the
sharp-interface limit at large distances.

VI. SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES

As well known, the phase ﬁeld model provides a sound
theoretical basis for studying equilibrium capillary phe-
nomena in ﬂuids. It allows to derive in a straightforward
manner the classical formulae for the capillary pressure
and for the equilibrium contact angle, contrary to for-
mulations based upon the introduction of van der Waals
forces diverging at short distances. We have shown that
this model can be extended in a natural way to study a
thoroughly dynamical spreading process. The lubrication
limit, where the contact angle is small, allows to derive
consistently an equation of motion for the liquid-vapor
interface interacting with the solid surface. In the static
limit, this equation yields back the equilibrium Young-
Laplace theory.

Evaporation or condensation are processes that are in-
cluded in this model. The driving force for the evapora-
tion or condensation is the imbalance between the pres-
sure drop across the interface and its equilibrium value.
Similarly, and consistently with Seppecher’s [18] results,

[10] J. Koplik, J.R. Banavar and J.F. Willemsen, Phys. Fluids

A1, 781 (1989).

[11] P.A. Thompson and M.O. Robbins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63,

766 (1989).

[12] Yu.D. Shikhmurzaev, J. Fluid Mech. 334 211 (1997).
[13] J.D. van der Waals, Z. f. Phys. Chem. 13 657 (1894);
English translation J.S. Rowlinson, J. Stat. Phys. 20 197
(1979).

[14] J.W. Cahn and J.E. Hilliard, J. Chem. Phys. 31 688

(1959).

[15] J.S. Rowlinson and B. Widom, Molecular Theory of Cap-

illarity, Oxford University Press, 1982.

[16] D. Jasnow and J. Vi˜nals, Phys. Fluids 8, 660 (1996).
[17] D.M. Anderson, G.B. McFadden, and A.A. Wheeler,

Ann. Rev. Fluid. Mech. 30 139 (1998).

[18] P. Seppecher, Int. J. Engng Sci. 34 977 (1996).
[19] D. Jacqmin, Contact Line Dynamics of a Diﬀuse Fluid

Interface, preprint (1998).

[20] J.W. Cahn, J. Chem. Phys. 66 3667 (1979).
[21] L.M. Pismen, Vortices in Nonlinear Fields, Oxford Uni-

versity Press, 1999.

an advancing or receding contact angle diﬀering from its
equilibrium value makes the contact line a source or sink
for evaporation or condensation. We suggest to check
experimentally this interesting phenomenon by observ-
ing the accumulation of a non-volatile tracer diluted in
the liquid phase that would be left by evaporation near
a moving contact line.

Our analysis indicates that kinetic retardation of the
interphase transport is essential for a well balanced the-
ory away from the critical point. The available simula-
tions of the motion of a diﬀuse interface near a three-
phase contact line [18,19], taking into account viscous
retardation only and,
in eﬀect, assuming evaporation
or condensation to be as easy as plain advection, may
grossly overestimate the rate of interphase transport, but
the latter remains essential even when its order of mag-
nitude is reduced due to kinetic retardation.

The present theory extends itself in a very natural way
to problems like ﬁlm breaking. The latter situation is in-
teresting also because it should allow to approach exper-
imentally thermodynamical critical points, where phase
ﬁeld models certainly apply, although things should be-
come complicated if the solid-ﬂuid interaction is added
to the critical phenomena near a moving contact line.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the Israel Science
Foundation and the EU TMR network “Nonlinear dy-
namics and statistical physics of spatially extended sys-
tems”. A part of this work was carried out during the
stay of LMP at the Laboratoire de Physique Statistique
de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure supported by CNRS, the
visit of both authors to the Instituto Pluridisciplinar,
Universidad Complutense, Madrid, and the visit of YP
to the Technion; hospitality of all these institutions is
acknowledged.

[1] E.B. Dussan V., Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 11, 371 (1979).
[2] P.G. de Gennes, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 827 (1985).
[3] C. Huh and L.E. Scriven, J. Coll. Int. Sci. 35, 85 (1971).
[4] E.B. Dussan V., J. Fluid Mech. 77, 665 (1976)
[5] L.M. Hocking, J. Fluid Mech. 76, 801 (1976).
[6] G.J. Merchant and J.B. Keller, Phys. Fluids A4, 477

(1992).

[7] B.V. Derjaguin, N.V. Churaev and V.M. Muller, Surface

Forces (Consultants Bureau, New York, 1987).

[8] L.M. Hocking, Phys. Fluids A5, 793 (1993).
[9] E. Ruckenstein and C.S. Dunn, J. Coll. Interface Sci. 59,

135 (1977).

14

