0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
6

 

 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
2
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurements of the instantaneous velocity diﬀerence and local velocity with a

ﬁber-optic coupler

S. H. Yao

Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260

V. K. Horv´ath

Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078

P. Tong and B. J. Ackerson

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260

(February 2, 2008)

W. I. Goldburg

New optical arrangements with two single-mode input ﬁbers and a ﬁber-optic coupler are devised
to measure the instantaneous velocity diﬀerence and local velocity. The ﬁbers and the coupler are
polarization-preserving to guarantee a high signal-to-noise ratio. When the two input ﬁbers are
used to collect the scattered light with the same momentum transfer vector but from two spatially
separated regions in a ﬂow, the obtained signals interfere when combined via the ﬁber-optic coupler.
The resultant light received by a photomultiplier tube contains a cross-beat frequency proportional to
the velocity diﬀerence between the two measuring points. If the two input ﬁbers are used to collect
the scattered light from a common scattering region but with two diﬀerent momentum transfer
vectors, the resultant light then contains a self-beat frequency proportional to the local velocity at
the measuring point. The experiment shows that both the cross-beat and self-beat signals are large
and the standard laser Doppler signal processor can be used to measure the velocity diﬀerence and
local velocity in real time. The new technique will have various applications in the general area of
ﬂuid dynamics.

OCIS codes: 120.7250, 060.2420, 060.1810, 030.7060.

I. INTRODUCTION

Measurements of the velocity diﬀerence or the relative
velocity, δv(ℓ) = v(x + ℓ) − v(x), between two spatial
points separated by a distance ℓ have important appli-
cations in ﬂuid dynamics. For example, in the study of
turbulent ﬂows one is interested in the scaling behavior
of δv(ℓ) over varying distance ℓ, when ℓ is in the in-
ertial range, in which the kinetic energy cascades at a
constant rate without dissipation. [1,2] If the separation
ℓ is smaller than the Kolmogorov dissipation length, [1,2]
the measured δv(ℓ) becomes proportional to the velocity
gradient ∂v/∂r ≃ δv(ℓ)/ℓ (assuming ℓ is known), a useful
quantity which is needed to determine the energy dissi-
pation and ﬂow vorticity. In many experimental studies
of ﬂuid turbulence, one measures the local velocity as
a function of time and then uses Taylor’s frozen turbu-
lence assumption to convert the measured temporal vari-
ations into the spatial ﬂuctuations of the velocity ﬁeld.
[3] The frozen turbulence assumption is valid only when
the mean velocity becomes much larger than the velocity
ﬂuctuations. For isotropic turbulent ﬂows with a small
mean velocity, direct measurement of δv(ℓ) is needed.

Over the past several years, the present authors and
their collaborators have exploited the technique of ho-
modyne photon correlation spectroscopy (HPCS) to mea-
sure δv(ℓ). [4,5] With the HPCS scheme, small particles
seeded in a ﬂowing ﬂuid are used to scatter the inci-
dent laser light. The scattered light intensity I(t), which
ﬂuctuates because of the motion of the seed particles,
contains Doppler beat frequencies of all particle pairs in
the scattering volume. For each particle pair separated
by a distance ℓ (along the beam propagation direction),
their beat frequency is ∆ω2 = q · δv(ℓ), where q is the
momentum transfer vector. The magnitude of q is given
by q = (4πn/λ) sin(θ/2), where θ is the scattering angle,
n is the refractive index of the ﬂuid, and λ is the wave-
length of the incident light. Experimentally, the Doppler
beat frequency ∆ω2 is measured by the intensity auto-
correlation function, [6]

g(τ ) =

hI(t + τ )I(t)i

hI(t)i2

= 1 + bG(τ ),

(1)

where b (≤ 1) is an instrumental constant and henceforth
we set b = 1. The angle brackets represent a time average
over t.

1

It has been shown that G(τ ) in Eq. (1) has the form

cosine transform of P (δv, r).

[7]

G(τ ) = Z L

0

dr h(r)Z +∞

−∞

dδv P (δv, r) cos(qδvτ ),

(2)

where δv is the component of δv in the direction of
q, P (δv, r) is the probability density function (PDF) of
δv(r), and h(r)dr is the number fraction of particle pairs
with separation r in the scattering volume. Equation
(2) states that the light scattered by each pair of par-
ticles contributes a phase factor cos(qτ δv) (because of
the Doppler beat) to the correlation function G(τ ), and
G(τ ) is an incoherent sum of these ensemble averaged
phase factors over all the particle pairs in the scattering
volume. In many previous experiments, [7–10] the length
L of the scattering volume viewed by a photodetector was
controlled by the width S of a slit in the collecting optics.
While it is indeed a powerful tool for the study of tur-
bulent ﬂows, the HPCS technique has two limitations
in its collecting optics and signal processing. First, a
weighted average over r is required for G(τ ) because the
photodetector receives light from particle pairs having a
range of separations (0 < r < L). As a result, the mea-
sured G(τ ) contains information about δv(ℓ) over various
length scales up to L. With the single slit arrangement,
the range of L which can be varied in the experiment is
limited. The lower cut-oﬀ for L is controlled by the laser
beam radius σ. The upper cut-oﬀ for L is determined by
the coherence distance (or coherence area) at the detect-
ing surface of the photo-detector, over which the scat-
tered electric ﬁelds are strongly correlated in space. [6]
When the slit width S becomes too large, the photode-
tector sees many temporally ﬂuctuating speckles (or co-
herence areas), and consequently ﬂuctuations in the scat-
tered intensity I(t) will be averaged out over the range
of q-values spanned by the detecting area.

Recently, we made a new optical arrangement for
HPCS, with which the weighted average over r in Eq.
(2) is no longer needed and the upper limit for L can be
extended to the coherence length of the laser. In the ex-
periment, [5] two single mode, polarization-maintaining
(PM) ﬁbers are used to collect light with the same po-
larization and momentum transfer vector q but from two
spatially separated regions in a ﬂow. These regions are
illuminated by a single coherent laser beam, so that the
collected signals interfere when combined using a ﬁber-
optic coupler, before being directed to a photodetector.
With this arrangement, the measured G(τ ) becomes pro-
portional to the Fourier cosine transform of the PDF
P (δv, r).

The second limitation of HPCS is related to signal pro-
cessing. The correlation method is very eﬀective in pick-
ing up small ﬂuctuating signals, but the resulting corre-
lation function G(τ ) is a time-averaged quantity. There-
fore, the correlation method is not applicable to unstable
ﬂows. Furthermore, information about the odd moments
of P (δv, r) is lost, because the measured G(τ ) is a Fourier

In this paper, we present a further improvement for
HPCS, which is free of the two limitations discussed
above. By combining the new ﬁber-optic method with
the laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) electronics, we are
able to measure the instantaneous velocity diﬀerence
δv(ℓ, t) and local velocity v(x, t) at a high sampling rate.
With this technique, the statistics of δv(ℓ, t) and v(x, t)
are obtained directly from the time series data. The
new method of measuring v(x, t) oﬀers several advan-
tages over the standard LDV. The remainder of the paper
is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the ex-
perimental methods and setup. Experimental results are
presented and analyzed in Section 3. Finally, the work is
summarized in Section 4.

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A. Measurement of the velocity diﬀerence

Figure 1 shows the optical arrangement and the ﬂow
cells used in the experiment. A similar setup has been
described elsewhere, [5] and here we mention only some
key points.

FIG. 1. (a) Scattering geometry for the velocity diﬀerence
measurement. ki, incident wave vector; ks, scattered wave
vector; and q = ks − ki. (b) Experimental setup for the ve-
locity diﬀerence measurement in rigid body rotation. (c) Flow
cell and optical arrangement for a jet ﬂow.

As shown in Fig.

1(b), an incident beam from a
Nd:YVO4 laser with a power range of 0.5-2W and a wave-
length of λ=532 nm is directed to a ﬂow cell by a lens.
With the aid of a large beam splitting cube, two single-
mode, polarization-maintaining (PM) ﬁbers collect the
scattered light from two diﬀerent spots along the laser
beam with a separation L. The two PM ﬁbers are con-
nected to a ﬁber-optic coupler (purchased from OZ Op-

2

tics [11]), which combines the light from the two input
ﬁbers and split the resultant light evenly into two output
ﬁbers. A graded index lens is placed at each end of the
ﬁber to collimate the light entering (or exiting from) the
ﬁber core. Each input ﬁber is mounted on a micrometer-
controlled translation stage and the distance L can be
adjusted in a range of 0-25 mm in steps of 0.01 mm. The
output ﬁbers of the optical coupler are connected to two
photomultiplier tubes (PMT1 and PMT2). PMT1 is op-
erated in the digital mode and its output signal is fed to a
digital correlator (ALV-5000). PMT2 is operated in the
analogue mode and its output signal is fed to a LDV sig-
nal processor (TSI IFA655). An oscilloscope connected
to PMT2 directly views the analogue signals. A low-noise
preampliﬁer (Stanford Research SR560) further ampliﬁes
the analogue output of PMT2 before it goes to the LDV
signal processor.

As shown in Fig. 1(a), the electric ﬁelds detected by
each input ﬁber sum in the coupler and consequently in-
terfere. In the experiment, we obtain the beat frequency,
∆ω2 = q·v1−q·v2 = q·δv(L), in two diﬀerent ways. One
way is to measure the intensity auto-correlation function
g(τ ) in Eq. (1). With the ALV correlator, it takes ∼ 1
minute to collect the data with an adequate signal-to-
noise ratio. The other way is to use the LDV signal pro-
cessor to measure the instantaneous beat frequency ∆ω2,
giving velocity diﬀerences in real time. The LDV signal
processor is essentially a very fast correlator and thus re-
quires the beat signal to be large enough so that no signal
averaging is needed. In the experiment to be discussed
below, we use both methods to analyze the beat signals
and compare the results.

It has been shown that the correlation function g(τ )

has the form: [5]

g(τ ) = 1 +

1 + I 2
I 2
2
(I1 + I2)2 Gs(τ ) +
= 1 + bsGs(τ ) + bcGc(τ ),

2I1I2

(I1 + I2)2 Gc(τ )

(3)

where I1 and I2 are the light intensities from the two
input ﬁbers. When I1 = I2, one ﬁnds bs = bc = 0.5.
If one of the input ﬁbers is blocked (i.e., I2 = 0), we
have g(τ ) = 1 + Gs(τ ), where Gs(τ ) is the self-beat cor-
relation function for a single ﬁber. When the separation
L between the two input ﬁbers is much larger than the
spot size viewed by each ﬁber, the cross-beat correlation
function Gc(τ ) takes the form

Gc(τ ) ≃ Gs(τ )Z +∞

−∞

dδv P (δv) cos(qδv(L)τ ).

(4)

Two ﬂow cells are used in the experiment. The ﬁrst
one is a cylindrical cuvette having an inner diameter of
2.45 cm and a height of 5 cm. The cuvette is top mounted
on a geared motor, which produces smooth rotation with
an angular velocity ω = 2.5 rad/s. The cell is ﬁlled with
1,2-propylene glycol, whose viscosity is 40 times larger
than that of water. The whole cell is immersed in a large

square index-matching vat, which is also ﬁlled with 1,2-
propylene glycol. The ﬂow ﬁeld inside the cell is a simple
rigid body rotation. With the scattering geometry shown
in Fig. 1(b), the beat frequency is given by ∆ω2 = ksωL
with ks = 2πn/λ. The sample cell is seeded with a small
amount of polystyrene latex spheres. For the correla-
tion measurements, we use small seed particles of 1.0 µm
in diameter. By using the small seed particles, one can
have more particles in the scattering volume even at low
seeding densities. This will reduce the amplitude of the
number ﬂuctuations caused by a change in the number of
particles in each scattering volume. The particle number
ﬂuctuations can produce incoherent amplitude ﬂuctua-
tions to the scattered light and thus introduce an extra
(additive) decay to g(τ ). [16] Large particles 4.75 µm in
diameter are used to produce higher scattering intensity
for instantaneous Doppler burst detection. Because the
densities of the latex particles and the ﬂuid are closely
matched, the particles follow the local ﬂow well and they
do not settle much.

The second ﬂow cell shown in Fig. 1(c) is used to gen-
erate a jet ﬂow in a 9cm × 9cm square vat ﬁlled with
quiescent water. The circular nozzle has an outlet 2 mm
in diameter and the tube diameter before the contraction
is 5.5 mm. The nozzle is immersed in the square vat and
a small pump is used to generate a jet ﬂow at a constant
ﬂow rate 0.39 cm3/s. The mean velocity at the nozzle
exit is 12.4 cm/s and the corresponding Reynolds num-
ber is Re=248. This value of Re is approximately three
times larger than the turbulent transition Reynolds num-
ber, Rec ≃ 80, for a round jet. [12] Because of the large
area contraction (7.6:1), the bulk part of the velocity pro-
ﬁle at the nozzle exit is ﬂat. This uniform velocity pro-
ﬁle vanishes quickly, and a Gaussian-like velocity proﬁle
is developed in the downstream region, 2-20 diameters
away from the nozzle exit. [13] As shown in Fig. 1(c),
the direction of the momentum transfer vector q (and
hence the measured velocity diﬀerence) is parallel to the
jet ﬂow direction, but the separation L is at an angle of
45o to that direction.

B. Measurement of the local velocity

In the measurement of the velocity diﬀerence, we use
two input ﬁbers to collect the scattered light with the
same q (i.e. at the same scattering angle) but from two
spatially separated regions in the ﬂow. We now show
that with a diﬀerent optical arrangement, the ﬁber-optic
method can also be used to measure the instantaneous
local velocity v(x, t). Instead of collecting light from two
spatially separated regions with the same q, we use the
two input ﬁbers to collect light from a common scatter-
ing volume in the ﬂow but with two diﬀerent momentum
transfer vectors q1 and q2 (i.e. at two diﬀerent scatter-
ing angles). Figure 2(a) shows the schematic diagram
of the scattering geometry. The collected signals at the

3

two scattering angles are combined by a ﬁber-optic cou-
pler, and the resultant light is modulated at the Doppler
beat frequency: [14] ∆ω1 = q1 · v − q2 · v = ∆q · v(x),
where ∆q = q1 − q2. The magnitude of ∆q is given
by ∆q = (4πn/λ) sin(α/2), with α being the acceptance
angle between the two ﬁbers.

The principle of using the scattered light at two dif-
ferent scattering angles to measure the local velocity has
been demonstrated many years ago. [14] What is new
here is the use of the ﬁber-optic coupler for optical mix-
ing. The ﬁber-optic technique simpliﬁes the standard
LDV optics considerably. As shown in Fig. 2(b), in the
standard LDV arrangement the two incident laser beams
form interference fringes at the focal point. When a seed
particle traverses the focal region, the light scattered by
the particle is modulated by the interference fringes with
a frequency, [15] ∆ω1 = q1 · v − q2 · v = ∆q · v(x).
The magnitude of ∆q has the same expression ∆q =
(4πn/λ) sin(α/2) as shown in the above, but α now be-
comes the angle between the two incident laser beams.
The main diﬀerence between the standard LDV and the
new ﬁber-optic method is that the former employs two
incident laser beams and a receiving ﬁber [Fig. 2(b)],
while the latter uses only one incident laser beam and
two optical ﬁbers to measure each velocity component
[Fig. 2(a)]. Consequently, the beat frequency ∆ω1 in
Fig. 2(a) is independent of the direction (ki) of the inci-
dent laser beam, whereas in Fig. 2(b) it is independent
of the direction (ks) of the receiving ﬁber.

FIG. 2. (a) One-beam scattering geometry for the local ve-
locity measurement. ki, incident wave vector; (ks)1 and (ks)2,
two scattered wave vectors; q1 = (ks)1 − ki; q2 = (ks)2 − ki;
∆q = q2 − q1. (b) Two-beam scattering geometry for the
local velocity measurement.
(ki)1 and (ki)2, two incident
wave vectors; ks, scattered wave vector; q1 = ks − (ki)1;
q2 = ks − (ki)2; ∆q = q2 − q1. (c) Schematic diagram of a
one-beam probe for the local velocity measurement. S, mea-
suring point; P, lens; M, frequency modulator; C, ﬁber-optic
coupler.

With the one-beam scheme, one can design various op-
tical probes for the local velocity measurement. Figure

4

2(c) shows an example, which would replace the commer-
cial LDV probe by reversing the roles of the transmitter
and receiver. The two input ﬁbers aim at the same mea-
suring point S through a lens P, which also collects the
back-scattered light from S. The frequency modulator M
shifts the frequency of the light collected by the input
ﬁber 1, before it is combined via the ﬁber-optic coupler
C with the light collected by the input ﬁber 2. The re-
sultant light from an output ﬁber of the coupler contains
the beat frequency ∆ω1 and is fed to a photodetector.
Because the measured ∆ω1 is always a positive number,
one cannot tell the sign of the local velocity when zero
velocity corresponds to a zero beat frequency. The fre-
quency shift by the modulator M causes the interference
fringes to move in one direction (normal to the fringes)
and thus introduces an extra shift frequency to the mea-
sured beat frequency. This allows us to measure very
small velocities and to determine the sign of the mea-
sured local velocity relative to the direction of the fringe
motion (which is known). [15] The other output ﬁber of
the coupler can be used as an alignment ﬁber, when it is
connected to a small He-Ne laser. With the reversed He-
Ne light coming out of the input ﬁbers, one can directly
observe the scattering volume viewed by each input ﬁber
and align the ﬁbers in such a way that only the scattered
light from the same measuring point S is collected.

The one-beam probe has several advantages over the
usual two-beam probes. To measure two orthogonal ve-
locity components in the plane perpendicular to the in-
cident laser beam, one only needs to add an extra pair of
optical ﬁbers and a coupler and arrange them in the plane
perpendicular to that shown in Fig. 2(c) (i.e., rotate the
two-ﬁber plane shown in Fig. 2(c) by 90o). With this
arrangement, the four input ﬁbers collect the scattered
light from the same scattering volume but in two orthog-
onal scattering planes. Because only one laser beam is
needed for optical mixing, a small single-frequency diode
laser, rather than a large argon ion laser, is suﬃcient for
the coherent light source. In addition, the one-beam ar-
rangement does not need any optics for color and beam
separations and thus can reduce the manufacturing cost
considerably. With the one-beam scheme, one can make
small invasive or non-invasive probes consisting of only
three thin ﬁbers. One can also make a self-sustained
probe containing all necessary optical ﬁbers, couplers,
photodetectors, and a signle-frequency diode laser.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Velocity diﬀerence measurements

We ﬁrst discuss the measurements of the velocity dif-
ference in rigid body rotation. Figure 3(a) shows a sam-
ple oscilloscope trace of the analogue output from PMT2
when the separation L=1.0 mm. The signal is ampliﬁed
1250 times and band-pass-ﬁltered with a frequency range

of 1-10 kHz. This oscilloscope trace strongly resembles
the burst signals in the standard LDV. The only diﬀer-
ence is that the signal shown in Fig. 3(a) results from the
beating of two moving particles separated by a distance
L. Figure 3(a) thus demonstrates that the beat signal
between the two moving particles is large enough that a
standard LDV signal processor can be used to measure
the instantaneous velocity diﬀerence δv(ℓ, t) in real time.
Figure 3(b) shows the measured beat frequency ∆ω2
as a function of separation L. The circles are obtained
from the oscilloscope trace and the triangles are obtained
from the intensity correlation function g(τ ). The two
measurements agree well with each other. The solid
line is the linear ﬁt ∆ω2 = 41.78L (103 rad/s), which
is in good agreement with the theoretical calculation
∆ω2 = ksωL = 42.28L (103 rad/s). This result also
agrees with the previous measurements by Du et al. [5]
Because ∆ω2 increases with L, one needs to increase the
laser intensity at large values of L in order to resolve ∆ω2.
The average photon count rate should be at least twice
the measured beat frequency.

FIG. 3. (a) Oscilloscope trace of a typical beat burst be-
tween two moving particles separated by a distance L=1.0
mm. The signal is obtained in rigid body rotation. (b) Mea-
sured beat frequency ∆ω2 as a function of separation L. The
circles are obtained from the oscilloscope trace and the trian-
gles are obtained from the intensity correlation function g(τ ).
The solid line shows a linear ﬁt to the data points.

We now discuss the time series measurements of
δv(L, t) in a jet ﬂow using the LDV signal processor. The
jet ﬂow has signiﬁcant velocity ﬂuctuations as compared
with the laminar rigid body rotation. The measuring
point is in the developing region of the jet ﬂow, 3 di-
ameters away from the nozzle exit and is slightly oﬀ the
centerline of the jet ﬂow. Figure 4 shows the measured
histogram P (δv) of the velocity diﬀerence δv(L, t) in the
jet ﬂow, when the separation L is ﬁxed at L=0.5 mm (cir-
cles) and L=0.8 mm (squares), respectively.
It is seen
that the measured P (δv) has a dominant peak and its
position changes with L. Because δv(L, t) increases with
L, the peak position moves to the right for the larger

5

value of L. The solid curve in Fig. 4 is a Gaussian ﬁt
to the data points with L=0.5 mm. The obtained mean
value of δv(L, t) is hδvi = 1.87 cm/s and the standard
deviation σ = 0.171 cm/s. At L=0.8 mm, the measured
P (δv) peaks at the value hδvi = 2.73 cm/s.

FIG. 4. Measured histogram P (δv) of the velocity diﬀer-
ence δv(L, t) in the jet ﬂow. The values of L are: L=0.5 mm
(circles) and 0.8 mm (squares). The solid curve is a Gaussian
ﬁt to the circles.

In the above discussion, we have assumed that each
input ﬁber sees only one particle at a given time and
the beat signal comes from two moving particles sepa-
rated by a distance L. In fact, when the seeding density
is high, each input ﬁber may see more than one parti-
cle at a given time. The scattered light from these par-
ticles can also beat and generate a self-beat frequency
proportional to δv(ℓ0), where ℓ0 ≃ 0.15 mm is the laser
spot size viewed by each input ﬁber. [5] The self-beating
gives rise to a small peak on the left side of the measured
P (δv). Note that the peak position is independent of
L, because δv(ℓ0) is determined only by ℓ0, which is the
same for both measurements. It is seen from Fig. 4 that
the cross-beating is dominant over the self-beating under
the current experimental condition.

The intensity correlation function g(τ ) is also used to
analyze the beat signal. In the experiment, we measure
the histogram P (δv) and g(τ ) simultaneously, so that
Eq. (4) can be examined in details. Figure 5 shows the
measured g(τ ) − 1 (circles) as a function of delay time τ
at L=0.5 mm. The squares are the self-beat correlation
function Gs(τ ) obtained when one of the input ﬁbers is
blocked. As shown in Fig. 4, the measured P (δv) has a
Gaussian form and thus the integration in Eq. (4) can
be carried out. The ﬁnal form of g(τ ) becomes

g(τ ) = 1 + Gs(τ )hbs + bc cos[qhδviτ ]e−(qστ )2/2i .

(5)

The solid curve in Fig. 5 is a plot of Eq. (5) with bs = 0.5
and bc = 0.13. The values of hδvi and σ used in the plot
are obtained from the Gaussian ﬁt shown in Fig. 4. It is
seen that the calculation is in good agreement with the

measured g(τ ).

The ﬁtted value bs = 0.5 agrees with the expected
value at I1 = I2. The value of bc would be 0.5 if the
collected signals from the two input ﬁbers were fully co-
herent and the ﬁber-optic coupler mixed them perfectly.
The fact that the ﬁtted value of bc is smaller than 0.5
indicates that the collected signals are not fully corre-
lated. This is caused partially by the fact that in the
present experiment the scattered light suﬀers relatively
large number ﬂuctuations resulting from a changing num-
ber of particles in the scattering volume. These number
ﬂuctuations produce incoherent amplitude ﬂuctuations
to the scattered light and thus introduce an extra (addi-
tive) decay to g(τ ). [16] Because the beam crossing time
(proportional to the beam diameter) is much longer than
the Doppler beat time 1/∆ω2 (proportional to the wave-
length of the scattered light), the slow decay due to the
number ﬂuctuations can be readily identiﬁed in the mea-
sured g(τ ). This decay has an amplitude 0.4 and has
been subtracted out from the measured g(τ ) shown in
Fig. 5.

frequency. Consequently, many low-frequency self-beat
signals are ﬁltered out. This low-frequency cut-oﬀ is ap-
parent in Fig. 4. The measurements of g(τ ), on the other
hand, are carried out in the photon counting mode, and
therefore the measured g(τ ) is sensitive to all the self-
beat signals as well as the cross beat signals. With a
simple counting of particle pairs, we ﬁnd that the proba-
bility for cross beating is only twice larger than that for
the self-beating.

B. Local velocity measurements

We now discuss the local velocity measurements using
the new optical arrangement shown in Fig. 2(a). The ve-
locity measurements are conducted on a freely suspended
ﬂowing soap ﬁlm driven by gravity. Details about the ap-
paratus has been described elsewhere, [17–19] and here
we mention only some key points. 2% solution of deter-
gent and water is introduced at a constant rate between
two long vertical nylon wires, which are held apart by
small hooks. The width of the channel (i.e., the distance
between the two nylon wires) is 6.2 cm over a distance of
120 cm. The measuring point is midway between the ver-
tical wires. The soap solution is fed, through a valve, onto
an apex at the top of the channel. The ﬁlm speed ¯v, rang-
ing from 0.5 to 3 m/s, can be adjusted using the valve.
The soap ﬁlm is approximately 2-6 µm in thickness and
is seeded with micron-sized latex particles, which scatter
light from a collimated laser beam. The light source is an
argon-ion laser having a total power of 1W. The incident
laser beam is oriented perpendicular to the soap ﬁlm and
the scattered light is collected in the forward direction.

FIG. 5. Measured intensity correlation function g(τ ) − 1 as
a function of delay time τ at L=0.5 mm (open circles). The
squares are obtained when one of the input ﬁbers is blocked.
The solid curve is a plot of Eq. (5).

It is shown in Eq.

(5) that to accurately measure
the mean velocity diﬀerence hδvi, the beat frequency
∆ω2 = qhδvi must be larger than the decay rate Γs ≃
qδv(ℓ0) for Gs(τ ) and also larger than the decay rate
Γc ≃ qσ resulting from the ﬂuctuations of the velocity
diﬀerence. From the measurements shown in Figs. 4 and
5, we ﬁnd Γs ≃ 1.33 × 105 s−1 and Γc ≃ 3.8 × 104 s−1,
which are indeed smaller than the beat frequency ∆ω2 ≃
4.15 × 105 s−1. Because g(τ ) contains a product of Gs(τ )
and exp[−(qστ )2/2] [see Eq. (5)], its decay is determined
by the faster decaying function. It is seen from Fig. 5
that the decay of g(τ ) is controlled by Gs(τ ), which de-
cays faster than exp[−(qστ )2/2]. It should be noted that
in the measurements shown in Fig. 4, the beat signals
are analogue ones and we have used a band-pass ﬁlter
together with a LDV signal analyzer to resolve the beat

FIG. 6. Measured intensity autocorrelation function A(τ )
as a function of delay time τ with the measuring time T=30
ms. The inset (a) shows an enlarged portion of A(τ ) for small
values of τ up to τ = 20 µs. The inset (b) shows the frequency
power spectrum P (f ) of the measured A(τ ).

To measure the rapidly changing beat frequency ∆ω1,
we build a fast digital correlator board for PC.
[20]
With a fast sampling rate fs, the plug-in correlator

6

board records the time-varying intensity I(t) (number
of TTL pulses from the photomultiplier tube per sam-
ple time) over a short period of time T and then calcu-
lates the (unnormalized) intensity autocorrelation func-
tion, A(τ ) = hI(t + τ )I(t)i. Figure 6 shows an example
of the measured A(τ ) as a function of delay time τ with
T = 30 ms and fs = 14.32 MHz. Because the burst sig-
nal I(t) is a periodic function of t, the measured A(τ )
becomes an oscillatory function of τ . The frequency of
the oscillation apparent in the inset (a) is the beat fre-
quency ∆ω1. The amplitude of the oscillation decays at
large τ . The inset (b) shows the power spectrum P (f ) of
the measured A(τ ); it reveals a dominant peak at 755.1
kHz. The power spectrum is obtained using a fast Fourier
transform (FFT) program. [21]

FIG. 7. Measured intensity autocorrelation function A(τ )
as a function of delay time τ with the measuring time T=50
µs. The inset (a) shows the frequency power spectrum P (f )
obtained by FFT. The inset (b) shows the frequency spectrum
Q(f ) obtained by the Scargle-Lomb method.

To increase the sampling rate of the velocity measure-
ments, one needs to keep the measuring time T for each
A(τ ) as short as possible. The signal-to-noise ratio for
A(τ ) decreases with shorter measuring time T and with
lower mean photon count rate, which was ∼ 1 MHz in the
present experiment. It is found that the shortest useful
measuring time Tc is roughly 50 µs. For this value of T,
A(τ ) is quite noisy and the corresponding peak in P (f )
becomes less pronounced [see Fig. 7 and inset (a)]. It
is worth mentioning that if one only wants to know the
periodicity of a function, rather than its actual power at
diﬀerent frequencies, the Scargle-Lomb method [22] is a
better alternative to FFT. This method, which does not
require evenly spaced sampling, compares the measured
data with known periodic signals using the least-square
ﬁtting procedure and determines the relevant frequencies
by the goodness of the ﬁt Q(f ). It can even utilize the un-
even sampling to further increase the Nyquist frequency.
As shown in Fig. 7(b), the Scargle-Lomb method can
still clearly identify the periodicity of the signal, even
when the power spectrum P (f ) [Fig. 7(a)] becomes less

7

reliable. The total time required for the measurement of
the characteristic frequency is less than 1 ms. Using the
correlator board together with an average speed PC (300
MHz), we are able to conduct accurate measurements of
the local velocity with a sampling rate up to 1 kHz.

IV. SUMMARY

We have developed new optical arrangements with two
single-mode input ﬁbers and a ﬁber-optic coupler to mea-
sure the local velocity v(x) and the velocity diﬀerence,
δv(ℓ) = v(x + ℓ) − v(x), between two spatial points sepa-
rated by a distance ℓ. The ﬁbers and the coupler are po-
larization preserving to guarantee a high signal-to-noise
ratio. To measure the velocity diﬀerence δv(ℓ), the two
input ﬁbers are used to collect the scattered light with
the same momentum transfer vector q but from two spa-
tially separated regions in a ﬂow. These regions are il-
luminated by a single coherent laser beam, so that the
collected signals interfere when combined via the ﬁber-
optic coupler. The resultant light received by a pho-
tomultiplier tube therefore contains the beat frequency
∆ω2 = q · δv(ℓ). We analyzed the beat signals using two
diﬀerent devices and compared the results. First, the in-
tensity auto-correlation function g(τ ) was measured us-
ing a digital correlator. Secondly, a standard LDV signal
processor was used to determine the instantaneous beat
frequency ∆ω2. With this device, δv(ℓ, t) can be ob-
tained in real time. The technique can be further devel-
oped to measure one component of the local ﬂow vorticity
vector ~ω(x, t) = ∇ × v(x, t). [23]

To measure the instantaneous local velocity itself, one
needs only to reorient the two ﬁbers so that they point to
the same scattering volume. With this optical arrange-
ment, we have three alternatives to measure a velocity
component. They employ (i) an analog photodetector
and a standard LDV signal processor (burst detector),
(ii) a commercial photon correlator, such as that made
by ALV, and ﬁnally (iii) a home-made digital correlator.
This latter device completes a velocity measurement in
less than 1 ms and is orders of magnitude cheaper than
the other two alternatives. The new ﬁber-optic method
has several advantages over the standard LDV and can
be used widely in the general area of ﬂuid dynamics. Be-
cause only one laser beam is needed to obtain two veloc-
ity components, a compact single-frequency diode laser
can replace a large multi-frequency argon-ion laser. By
eliminating the color and beam separation units in the
standard LDV, the one-beam scheme is less costly to im-
plement. With more optical ﬁber pairs and couplers, one
can carry out multi-point and multi-component velocity
measurements in various turbulent ﬂows.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

69, 2066-2069 (1992).

We thank M. Lucas and his team for fabricating the
scattering apparatus and J. R. Cressman for his contribu-
tions. The work done at Oklahoma State University was
supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration (NASA) Grant No. NAG3-1852 and also in
part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant
No. DMR-9623612. The work done at University of
Pittsburgh was supported by NSF Grant No. DMR-
9622699, NASA Grant No. 96-HEDS-01-098, and NATO
Grant No. DGE-9804461. VKH acknowledges the sup-
port from the Hungarian OTKA F17310.

[1] U. Frisch, Turbulence: the legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995).

[2] K. R. Sreenivasan, “Fluid turbulence,” Rev. Mod. Phys,

71, S383-395 (1999).

[3] G. I. Taylor, “The spectrum of turbulence,”Pro. R. Soc.

London A, 164, 476-490 (1938).

[4] T. Narayanan, C. Cheung, P. Tong, W. I. Goldburg,
and X.-L. Wu, “Measurement of the velocity diﬀer-
ence by photon correlation spectroscopy: an improved
scheme,”Applied Optics, 36, 7639-7644 (1997).

[5] Yixue Du, B. J. Ackerson, and P. Tong, “Velocity dif-
ference measurement with a ﬁber-optic coupler,” J. Opt.
Soc. Am. A. 15, 2433-2439 (1998).

[6] B. J. Berne and R. Pecora, Dynamic light scattering (Wi-

ley, New York, 1976).

[7] P. Tong, W. I. Goldburg, C. K. Chan, and A. Siri-
vat, “Turbulent transition by photon correlation spec-
troscopy,” Phys. Rev. A, 37, 2125-2133 (1988).

[8] H. K. Pak, W. I. Goldburg, and A. Sirivat, “Measuring
the probability distribution of the relative velocities in
grid-generated turbulence,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 938-941
(1992).

[9] P. Tong and Y. Shen, “Relative velocity ﬂuctuations in
turbulent Rayleigh-B´enard convection,” Phys. Rev. Lett.

[10] H. Kellay, X.-l. Wu, and W. I. Goldburg, “Experiments
with turbulent soap ﬁlms,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3975-
3978 (1995).

[11] Oz Optics Ltd, 219 Westbrook Road, Carp ON Canada,

K0A 1L0 (http://ozoptics.com).

[12] J. W. Daily and D. R. F. Harleman, Fluid Dynamics,

p.421 (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1966).

[13] F. M. White, Viscous Fluid Flow, p.470 (McGrn-Hill,

New York, 1991).

[14] F. Durst and J. H. Whitelaw, “Optimization of opti-
cal anemometers,” Proc. of Royal Soc. A. 324, 157-181
(1971).

[15] L. E. Drain, The laser Doppler technique (John Wiley &

Sons, New York, 1980).

[16] P. Tong, K. -Q. Xia, and B. J. Ackerson, “Incoherent
cross-correlation spectroscopy,”J. Chem. Phys. 98, 9256-
9264 (1993).

[17] M. A. Rutgers, X. L. Wu, R. Bagavatula, A. A. Peterson,
and W. I. Gouldburg, “Two-dimensional velocity proﬁles
and laminar boundary layers in ﬂowing soap ﬁlms,”Phys.
Fluids 8, 2847 (1997).

[18] W. I. Goldburg, A. Belmonte, X. L. Wu, and I. Zus-
man, “Flowing soap ﬁlms: a laboratory for studying
two-dimensional hydrodynamics,”Physica A 254, 231-
247 (1998).

[19] V. K. Horv´ath, R. Crassman, W. I. Goldburg, and X. L.
Wu, “Hysteresis at low Reynolds number: Onset of two-
dimensional vortex shedding”, Phys. Rev. E 61, R4702-
4705 (2000) cond-mat/9903067.

[20] For a full description of the correlator board, see

http://karman.phyast.pitt.edu/horvath/corr/. The total
cost for the correlator board is less than $100. The de-
vice can be duplicated for non-proﬁt applications without
permission.

[21] see, e.g., W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky,
and W. T. Vetterling, Numerical Recipes, 2nd edition
(Cambridge University Press, UK, 1992).

[22] J. D. Scargle, “Studies in astronomical time series anal-

ysis III.”Astrophy. J. 343, 874-887 (1989).

[23] S. H. Yao, P. Tong, and B. J. Ackerson, “Instanta-
neous vorticity measurements using ﬁber-optic couplers,”
manuscript available from the authors.

8

