1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non-locality and Intermittency in 3D
Turbulence

J-P. Laval1, B. Dubrulle2,3, and S. Nazarenko4

February 2, 2008

1 IGPP, UCLA, 3845 Slichter Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

2 CE Saclay, F-91190 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France

3 CNRS, UMR 5572, Observatoire Midi-Pyr´en´ees, 14 avenue Belin, F-

31400 Toulouse, France

4 Mathematics Institute University of Warwick COVENTRY CV4 7AL,

UK

Abstract

Numerical simulations are used to determine the inﬂuence of the
non-local and local interactions on the intermittency corrections in
the scaling properties of 3D turbulence. We show that neglect of
local interactions leads to an enhanced small-scale energy spectrum
and to a signiﬁcantly larger number of very intense vortices (“torna-
does”) and stronger intermittency (e.g. wider tails in the probability
distribution functions of velocity increments and greater anomalous
corrections). On the other hand, neglect of the non-local interactions
results in even stronger small-scale spectrum but signiﬁcantly weaker
intermittency. Thus, the amount of intermittency is not determined
just by the mean intensity of the small scales, but it is non-trivially
shaped by the nature of the scale interactions. Namely, the role of
the non-local interactions is to generate intense vortices responsible
for intermittency and the role of the local interactions is to dissipate

1

them. Based on these observations, a new model of turbulence is pro-
posed, in which non-local (RDT-like) interactions couple large and
small scale via a multiplicative process with additive noise and the
local interactions are modeled by a turbulent viscosity. This model
is used to derive a simple toy version of the Langevin equations for
small-scale velocity increments. A Gaussian approximation for the
large scale ﬁelds yields the Fokker-Planck equation for the probability
distribution function of the velocity increments. Steady state solu-
tions of this equation allows to qualitatively explain the anomalous
corrections and the skewness generation along scale. A crucial role is
played by the correlation between the additive and the multiplicative
(large-scale) process, featuring the correlation between the stretching
and the vorticity.

2

A puzzling feature of three-dimensional turbulence are the large devia-
tions from Gaussianity observed as one probes smaller and smaller scales.
These deviations are usually believed to be associated with the spatial in-
termittency of small-scale structures, organized into very thin and elongated
intense vortices (“tornadoes”)[44, 49, 43]. They are responsible for anomalous
corrections to the normal scaling behavior of structure functions associated
with the Kolmogorov 1941 [25] picture of turbulence. In this picture, energy
containing structures (the so-called ”eddies”) at a given scale, interact with
other eddies of smaller but comparable size to transfer energy at a constant
rate down to the dissipative scale. A simple prediction of this local picture
of turbulence is the famous k−5/3 energy spectrum, which has been observed
in numerous high Reynolds number experimental data and numerical simu-
lations. The local theory of turbulence further leads to the prediction that
the nth moment of a velocity increment δuℓ = u(x + ℓ) − u(x) over a distance
ℓ should scale like ℓn/3. This behavior has never been observed in turbu-
lent ﬂows, and is it now widely admitted that anomalous corrections exist
at any ﬁnite Reynolds number. Various scenarii have been so far proposed
to explain and compute the anomalous corrections. To mention but a few:
spatial intermittency of the energy dissipation [26], multi-fractal scaling [40],
large deviations of multiplicative cascades [21], extremum principle [11], zero-
modes of diﬀerential operators [22], scale covariance [15] . These approaches
all try to model the breakdown of the exact local scale invariance underlying
the Kolmogorov 1941 picture. In a recent study of ﬁnite size eﬀects, Dubrulle
[17] showed that some properties of the structure functions (non-power law
behavior, nonlinear exponents,..) could be explained within a framework in
which ﬁnite size cut-oﬀs play a central role, and are felt throughout the so-
called ”inertial range”. Such ﬁnding is in clear contradiction with the ”local”
K41 theory, in which eddies in the inertial range are insensitive to the UV
and IR end of the energy spectrum, and only interact with their neighbors (in
the scale space) via ”local” interactions (involving triads of comparable size).
This observation motivated us to consider a new scenario for turbulence, in
which anomalous corrections and deviations from Gaussianity are the result
of non-local interactions between energy containing structures. By non-local
interactions, we mean interactions between well separated scales (or highly
elongated wavenumber triads). A numerical analysis on the role of the dif-
ferent triadic interactions in the energy cascade have been previously done
by Brasseur et al [7] and Domaradzkiet al [13]. We have recently demon-

3

strated via high resolution numerical simulations that in 2D turbulence, the
small scale dynamics is essentially governed by their non-local interactions
with the large scales [30], [31]. This feature seems natural in view of the
large-scale condensation of vortices [6]. As a result, the weak small scales are
more inﬂuenced by the strong large-scale advection and shearing, than by
mutual interactions between themselves. This makes non-local interactions
the dominant process at small scales.

2D turbulence is very special, because there is no vortex stretching. As a
result, there is no increase of vorticity towards smaller scales as is observed
in 3D turbulence. A quantitative feature underlying this diﬀerence is the
shape of the energy spectra at small scales: it is k−3 in 2D turbulence, much
steeper than k−5/3 3D energy spectra. In fact, a simple estimate shows that
the borderline between local and non-local behaviors is precisely this k−3
spectrum: only for energy spectra steeper than k−3 can one prove rigorously
than the dominant interactions are non-local. It is therefore not our intention
to claim that 3D turbulence is non-local, and in fact we do believe that local
interactions are responsible for the k−5/3 energy spectra. However, it is not
unreasonable to think that evolution of the higher cumulants (responsible for
deviations from Gaussianity at large deviations) is more non-local than it is
for the energy spectrum. Indeed, calculation of higher cumulants in Fourier
space involves integrations over larger sets of wavenumbers which (even if
close in values pairwise) cover larger range of scales than in the case of lower
order cumulants.

A natural tool to study the role of the non-local interactions is the numer-
ical simulation, because it allows a direct check of their inﬂuence by artiﬁcial
switching-oﬀ of the elongated wavenumber triads in the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions or, on the contrary, retaining only such triads. A limitation of this
approach lies in the restricted range of Reynolds number we are able to sim-
ulate. However, a recent comparison [3] showed that anomalous corrections
and intermittency eﬀects are quite insensitive to the Reynolds number. This
shows relevance of a low Reynolds number numerical study of intermittency.
This approach is detailed in the next section, where we examine the dynam-
ical role of the local interactions at the small scales using a simulation in
which these interactions have been removed. We show that, as compared
with a full simulation of the Navier-Stokes equations, such “nonlocal” simu-
lation exhibits a ﬂatter spectrum at small scales and stronger intermittency.
As a qualitative indicator of intermittency we use plots of the vortex struc-

4

tures whose intensity greatly exceeds the r.m.s. vorticity value (“tornadoes”)
and PDF’s plots, whereas to quantify intermittency we measure the structure
function scaling exponents. We show that main eﬀect of the local interactions
can be approximately described by a turbulent viscosity, while the non-local
interactions are responsible for development of the localized intense vortices
and the deviations of Gaussianity. To validate that the enhanced intermit-
tency is not merely a result of the increased mean small-scale intensity (which
could be also caused by some reason other than the non-locality) we perform
another numerical experiment in with the elongated triads were removed.
Such “local” experiment resulted in even stronger small-scale intensity but
the intermittency became clearly weaker. In the Section 2, we show how our
ﬁndings can be used to provide both a qualitative estimate of the intermit-
tency exponents, and a derivation of the Langevin equations for the velocity
increments.

1 Non-local interactions in 3D turbulence

1.1 The problematics

We consider the Navier-Stokes equations:

∂tu + u · ∇u = −∇p + ν∆u + f,

(1)

where u is the velocity, p is the pressure, ν is the molecular viscosity and f
is the forcing. In a typical situation, the forcing is provided by some bound-
ary conditions (experiments) or externally ﬁxed, e.g. by keeping a ﬁxed
low-wavenumber Fourier mode at a constant amplitude (numerical simula-
tion). This situation typically gives rise to quasi-Gaussian large-scale velocity
ﬁelds, while smaller-scale velocities display increasingly non-Gaussian statis-
tics. Presence of the forcing guarantees existence of a stationary steady state
in which the total energy is constant. In absence of forcing, the turbulence
energy decays steadily, due to losses through viscous eﬀects. However, start-
ing from a quasi-Gaussian large-scale ﬁeld, one can still observe development
of increasingly non-Gaussian small scales in the early stage of the decay. We
will study the eﬀect of the non-local interactions on the statistics of such
non-Gaussian small scales. For this, we introduce a ﬁlter function G(x) in
order to separate the large and small scales of the ﬂow. In our numerical

5

procedure, the ﬁlter G will be taken as a cut-oﬀ. We have checked that the
results are insensitive to the choice of the ﬁlter, provided the latter decays
fast enough at inﬁnity. Using the ﬁlter, we decompose the velocity ﬁeld into
large scale and small scale components:

u(x, t) = U(x, t) + u′(x, t),

U(x, t) ≡ u =

G(x − x′)u(x′, t)dx′.

(2)

Z

Equations for the large scales of motion are obtained by application of the
spatial ﬁlter (2) to the individual terms of the basic equations (1). They are:

∂tUi + ∂jUiUj + ∂jUiuj + Ujui + ∂juiuj =

∂jUj = 0,

−∂iP + ν∆Ui + Fi,

(3)

In these equations, we have dropped primes on sub-ﬁlter components for
simplicity; this means that from now on, any large-scale quantities are de-
noted by a capital letter, while the small-scale quantities are denoted by a
lower case letter. Equation for the small-scale component is obtained by
subtracting the large-scale equation from the basic equations (1); this gives

∂juj = 0,

∂tui + ∂j

(Ui + ui)(Uj + uj) − (Ui + ui)(Uj + uj)
(cid:17)
−∂ip + ν∆ui + fi,

(cid:16)

=

(4)

Several terms contribute to the interaction of scales: non-local terms, involv-
ing the product of a large scale and a small scale component, and a local
term, involving two small-scale components. One way to study the dynam-
ical eﬀect of these contributions at small scale, is to integrate numerically a
set of two coupled equations, in which the local small scale interactions have
been switched oﬀ at the small scales 1. This corresponds to the following set
of equations,

∂tUi + ∂jUiUj = −∂jUiuj − ∂jUjui − ∂juiuj

1We do not switch oﬀ the local interactions at the large scales: this would hinder the

cascade mechanism and prevent small scale generation from an initial large scale ﬁeld.

6

(5)
(6)

(7)

−∂iP + ν∆Ui + fi
∂tui + ∂j(Uiuj) + ∂j(uiUj) = −∂ip + ν∆ui + σi,
∂jUj = ∂juj = 0,

where

σi = ∂j

UiUj − UiUj + ujUi + Ujui

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

The later describes a forcing of the small scales by the large scales via the
energy cascade mechanism. This term is always ﬁnite even when the external
forcing f (which is always at large scales) is absent. The small scale equa-
tion is linear and it resembles the equations of the Rapid Distortion Theory
[47]. We shall therefore refer to this new model as the RDT model. The
corresponding solution was then compared with a reference simulation per-
formed at the same resolution, with the same initial condition. Note that this
comparison is rather expensive numerically: splitting the equations of mo-
tions between resolved and sub-ﬁlter component leads to additional Fourier
transforms, and increases the computational time by a factor 3. This sets a
practical limitation to the tests we could perform on our workstation. Also,
an additional limitation came from the need of scale separation between the
”large” and the ”small” scales. This scale separation is mandatory in or-
der to deﬁne ”non-local” interactions. Their inﬂuence on anomalous scaling
can be checked only if the typical small scale lies within the inertial range.
For this reason, we were led to consider a situation of decaying (unforced)
3D turbulence, with a ﬂat energy spectrum at large scale, and an ”inertial
range” mostly concentrated at small to medium scales (10 < k < 40 for a
2563 simulation). Indeed, at the resolution we could achieve, forced turbu-
lence developed an inertial range of scale around k = 8, too small for the
scale separation to be eﬀective (see [29] for a study and discussion of this
case and its relevance to LES simulations). Decaying turbulence does not,
by deﬁnition, achieve a statistically stationary state, with mathematically
well deﬁned stationary probability distribution functions (PDF). Therefore,
all the PDF were computed at a ﬁxed time which we have chosen to be at
the end of each simulation (at t=0.48).

7

1.2 The numerical procedure

1.2.1 The numerical code

Both the Navier Stokes equation (1) and the set of RDT equations (6) were
integrated with a pseudo-spectral code (see [49] for more details on the code).
In the RDT case, a sharp cut-oﬀ in Fourier space was used to split the velocity
ﬁeld into large and small-scale components in Fourier space and all non-
linear terms were computed separately in the physical space. The aliasing
was removed by keeping only the 2/3 largest modes corresponding to the
85 ﬁrst modes in our case. The calculations presented here were done with
2563 Fourier modes and a viscosity of 1.5 10−3 corresponding to a Reynolds
number 57 < Rλ < 80 (where Rλ is the Reynolds number based on the Taylor
micro-scale λ).

1.2.2 The simulations

The test was performed in a situation of decaying turbulence were the forc-
ing term fi is set to zero. The initial condition was computed by a direct
simulation using a Gaussian velocity distribution as a starting ﬁeld. We have
chosen the velocity ﬁeld after several turnover times to be the initial condi-
tion for our simulations: the direct numerical simulation (DNS), the RDT
simulation (eq. 6) and the “local” experiment (see the end of this section).
In order to allow enough energy at the large scales, the sharp cut-oﬀ ﬁlter
was taken at the wavenumber k = 24 corresponding to approximatly 5 Kol-
mogorov scales. Because of the very low speed of the RDT simulation (three
times more expensive than the DNS) the two simulations were performed
between t=0 and t=0.48 corresponding to approximately 2.5 turnover times.

1.3 Comparison of the RDT and DNS experiments

1.3.1 Spectra

The comparison of spectra is shown in Fig 1. In the DNS case, one observes
a classical evolution, in which the large scale energy decays while the inertial
k−5/3 range tends to move towards smaller scales. It can be seen that the
inertial range (characterized by the −5/3 slope) only marginally exists. In the
RDT case, one observes a similar evolution at large scale, while a tendency

8

Figure 1: Comparison of energy spectra at t=0.48 obtained via the DNS and
the RDT simulation.

towards a ﬂatter spectrum is observed near and beyond the separating scale
(beyond which local interactions are ignored). We checked that this behavior
is not sensitive to the resolution.

The range of computed scales is insuﬃcient to ﬁnd a reliable value of
the spectral slope in the RDT case. However, this slope can be predicted
by a simple dimensional argument. This argument was presented for the
2D case in [39], but it is essentially the same for 3D. Indeed, in the RDT
case the small-scale equations are linear and, therefore, the energy spectrum
E(k) must be linearly proportional to the energy dissipation rate, ǫ.
In
this case, the only extra dimensional parameter (in comparison with the
local/Kolmogorov case) is the large-scale rate of strain α. There is the only
dimensional combination of ǫ, α and wavenumber k that has the dimension
of E(k); this gives

Cǫ
α
where C is a non-dimensional constant. In our case, our resolution is too
low to be able to check whether the RDT spectrum follows a k−1 law, but

Ek =

k−1,

(8)

9

we clearly see the tendency to a ﬂatter than −5/3 slope. The RDT case is
reminiscent of the boundary layer, in which a k−1 spectra have been observed
[41]. This is not surprising because presence of the mean shear increases the
non-locality of the scale interactions corresponding to RDT. In fact, an exact
RDT analysis of the shear ﬂow does predict formation of the k−1 spectrum
[36].

1.3.2 Structures

3D turbulence is characterized by intense thin vortex ﬁlaments (“tornadoes”)
[44, 49, 50, 43]. Their radii are of order of the dissipative (Kolmogorov) scale
which in this case is determined by the balance of the large-scale straining
and viscous spreading. In this respect, these vortices are similar to the clas-
sical Burgers vortex solution. Fig. 2 shows a comparison of the “tornadoes”
observed in the DNS and in the RDT which visualized by plotting surfaces
of strong vorticity (|ω| > 3.5 ωrms). In both cases, thin ﬁlamentary struc-
tures are observed, but they appear to be much more numerous in the RDT
case. Obviously, local interactions tend to dissipate the “tornadoes” which
can be interpreted as a mutual distortion and entanglement of “tornadoes”
preventing their further stretching by the large scales. On the macroscopic
level, this can be regarded as an additional, “turbulent”, viscosity produced
by the local interactions. This is compatible with the ﬂattening of the en-
ergy spectrum in the RDT case, which we interpreted above in terms of the
turbulent viscosity eﬀect.

It is interesting that the Burgers vortex is essentially a linear solution
because of the cylindrical shape of this vortex which prevents appearance of
the quadratic (in vorticity) terms. Such a linearity is a typical feature of all
RDT solutions. On the other hand, there is another candidate which has
often been considered to be responsible for intermittency: this is a vortex
reconnection process which is believed to lead to a ﬁnite time singularity
formation (at least for inviscid ﬂuids). Note that the vortex reconnection
is an essentially nonlinear process in which the local scale interactions are
playing an important role and cannot be ignored. Indeed, there is no ﬁnite
time blow-up solutions in linear RDT. Likewise, the vorticity grows only
exponentially in the Burgers vortex and it does not blow up in a ﬁnite time.
From this perspective, our numerical results show that the local (vortex-
vortex) interactions mostly lead to destruction of the intense vortices and

10

Comparison of vortex structures

Figure 2:
(isoplot of vorticity
|ω| = 3.5 ωRM S = ωc at t=0.48) for a) DNS, b) RDT, c) RDT + con-
stant turbulent viscosity, d) RDT + the RNG-type turbulent viscosity. The
∞
ωc pdf (|ω|) dω are respectively
number of “tornedoes” estimated by N =
8245 (a), 21669 (b), 10226 (c) and 10779 (d).
R

prevention of their further Burgers-like (exponential) growth which has a
negative eﬀect on the intermittency. This process seems to overpower the
positive eﬀect of the local interactions on the intermittency which is related
to the reconnection blow-ups. At the moment, it is not possible to say if the
same is true for much higher Reynolds number ﬂows.

1.3.3 Turbulent viscosity

Comparison of the DNS and RDT results for the time evolution of the total
energy is shown in (Fig. 3). One clearly observes a slower decline of the total

11

energy in the RDT case, as if there was a lower viscosity. This results is not

Figure 3: Comparison of the time evolution of total energy.

surprising:
it is well known that the inﬂuence of energy motions onto well
separated large scales (see [27, 18, 51] for systematic expansions) is through
an eﬀective eddy viscosity, supplied by the < uu > term. Our result suggests
that, to a ﬁrst approximation, the diﬀerence between the RDT and the DNS
could be removed by including an additional ”turbulent” viscosity in the
RDT simulation. For the sake of simplicity, we decided to choose an isotropic
tensor, chosen as to conserve the total energy. We tried two simple viscosity
prescription: one in which νt is constant, and one (Fig. 4) in which the
viscosity prescription follows the shape dictated by Renormalization Group
Theory (see e.g. [9] ):

νt(k) =

ν2 + A

q−2E(q)dq

− ν

+∞

(cid:18)

k
Z

1/2

(cid:19)

(9)

The constants were adjusted as to obtain a correct energy decay (Fig. 5).
They are νt = 0.0002 for the constant νt prescription, and A = 0.02 for
the other one. We elaborate more on the choice of this turbulent viscosity

12

Figure 4: Spectrum of the turbulent viscosity computed by (9) at t=0.48

in Section 2.3. Yet another method we tried was to replace the neglected
nonlinear term (interaction of small scales among themselves) with its mean
value. Dividing this mean nonlinear term by k2 for each k one can compute
the turbulent viscosity νt(k). The result is interesting: νt turns out to be
nearly independent of k; this provides an extra justiﬁcation for the simple
model in which νt = const.

The energy spectra and energy decay obtained with this new RDT sim-
ulation are shown on Figs. 6 and 5. One sees that one now captures exactly
the energy decay of the DNS. The energy spectra become closer to the DNS
result at low and intermediate k, whereas at the high k they depart from
DNS indicating an over-dissipation of the smallest scales. The later is an
artifact of our crude choice for the turbulent viscosity ignoring its anisotropy
and possibility for it to take negative values. The turbulent viscosity also
inﬂuences the anomalous corrections, as we will now show it.

13

Figure 5: Time evolution of total energy obtained via the DNS and the RDT
simulation with the two diﬀerent turbulent viscosities.

1.3.4 PDF’s and exponents

We conducted a statistical study of our velocity ﬁelds corresponding to the
end of the simulations (t = 0.48). As usual for study of the anomalous
properties of turbulence, we consider the velocity increments over a distance
l,

δul = u(x + l) − u(x).

(10)

As usual, we will deal with the longitudinal and transverse to l velocity
increments, δulk = (δul · l)/l and δul⊥ = (δul × l)/l respectively, where
l = |l|. Figs. 7, 8 and 9 show the probability distribution functions (PDF) of
the longitudinal increments and Figs. 10, 11 and 12 the PDF of transverse
increments , for 3 values of l, obtained by the DNS, and our diﬀerent RDT
simulation (with and without turbulent viscosity).

At large scale, one observes a quasi-Gaussian behavior, with the develop-
ment of wider tails as one goes towards smaller, inertial scales. This widening
of the PDF’s is a classical signature of the anomalous scaling observed in tur-

14

Figure 6: Comparison of energy spectra obtained via the DNS and the RDT
simulation with two diﬀerent forms of the turbulent viscosity

bulence. It can be measured by studying the scaling properties of the velocity
structure functions,

Sp(ℓ) =< δup

ℓ > .

(11)

In the inertial range, the structure function vary like ℓζp. For low Reynolds
number turbulent ﬂows, the scaling behavior in the inertial range is very
weak or undetectable because the inertial range is very short. To exemplify
this point, we show in Fig. 13 and 14 the structure functions as a function
of the scale separation for the longitudinal and the transverse velocity incre-
ments (the structure functions from the RDT simulation were shifted by a
factor 10 for the clarity of the ﬁgures). Given the very weak scaling of our
structure functions, we may use the extended self-similarity (ESS) property
[5], which states that Sp(ℓ) ∼ Sζp/ζ3
even outside the inertial range of scales.
We use this property because it allows to ﬁnd the scaling exponents in a
more unambiguous way [5]. The measured exponents in our DNS are shown
in Fig 15 and in Table 1. In both the longitudinal and transverse case, they
are in agreement with the previously reported exponents [3] and they dis-

3

15

Table 1: scaling exponent of the velocity structure functions measured using
the ESS property, in various simulations, at t=0.48.

Order K41 DNS RDT RDT + Visc. 1 RDT + Visc. 2

Order K41 DNS RDT RDT + Visc. 1 RDT + Visc. 2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

0.333
0.667
1.
1.333
1.667
2.
2.333
2.667

0.333
0.667
1.
1.333
1.667
2.
2.333
2.667

0.353
0.687
1.
1.295
1.573
1.836
2.085
2.321

0.375
0.707
1.
1.258
1.484
1.680
1.849
1.991

0.361
0.695
1.
1.273
1.509
1.696
1.828
1.919

0.388
0.721
1.
1.223
1.390
1.499
1.560
1.591

0.354
0.687
1.
1.293
1.568
1.824
2.064
2.287

0.376
0.709
1.
1.253
1.468
1.645
1.782
1.882

local
0.344
0.678
1.
1.310
1.607
1.892
2.164
2.423

local
0.352
0.685
1.
1.297
1.578
1.843
2.094
2.333

longitudinal

0.353
0.687
1.
1.294
1.570
1.830
2.073
2.301
transverse

0.376
0.708
1.
1.255
1.477
1.664
1.822
1.952

16

Figure 7: Comparison of the PDF of the longitudinal velocity increments
(10) for ℓ = 2π/256 (5. 107 statistics at t = 0.48 for the
deﬁned by Eq.
velocity ﬁeld from the four simulations: DNS (circle), RDT (crosses), RDT
+ constant viscosity (diamonds) and RDT + viscosity computed from RNG
(triangles)

play a clear deviation from the ”non-intermittent” value ζp = p/3. However
the diﬀerence between transverse and longitudinal exponents appear to be
somewhat larger than the one observed by Dhruva et al [12] and Camussi
et al [8]. Corresponding quantities for the RDT simulation are shown in
Fig 15 and Table 1. One sees that the RDT statistics display larger and
more intermittent PDF tails for small scales, which makes the scaling expo-
nents to take smaller values corresponding to larger anomalous corrections.
Again, this situation is reminiscent of the case of the boundary layer.
In
fact, the measured values in our simulation are remarkably similar to those
reported in the atmospheric boundary layer [12] or in a turbulent boundary
layer [45]. They are in between the values two diﬀerent values measured
by Toschi ([46]) in and above the logarithmic layer in numerical DNS of a
channel ﬂow. A summary of these results is given in Table 2 When a tur-

17

Figure 8: Same caption as in Fig. 7 for ℓ = 2π/64

bulent viscosity is added to the RDT simulation, the intermittent wings are
less pronounced in the PDF’s and the anomalous correction decrease (Table
1), becoming similar to those observed in the DNS. This agrees with the
picture in which the anomalous corrections are determined by the non-local
interactions, while the local interactions act to restore the classical Gaussian
(Kolmogorov-like) behavior. Obviously, the shape of the turbulent viscosity
also inﬂuences the intermittency correction: for the transverse case, where
there is no asymmetry of the PDF’s, both the constant turbulent viscosity
and the RNG turbulent viscosity provide intermittency corrections which are
of the same level as the DNS. This is quite remarkable, since they include
only one adjustable parameter, tuned as to conserve the total energy. For
the longitudinal case, where an asymmetry is present, the two prescription
give noticeably diﬀerent result: as one goes towards lower scales, and as the
asymmetry becomes larger between the positive and the negative increments,
the PDF’s computed with RDT and constant turbulent viscosity display tails
which are very close to that of DNS, while the PDF’s of the RDT with tur-
bulent RNG viscosity have a tendency towards a symmetrical shape, thereby

18

Figure 9: Same caption as in Fig. 7 for ℓ = 2π/4

failing to reproduce the DNS behavior. This diﬀerence of behavior between
the RNG and constant turbulent viscosity will be further investigated in
Section 2.

1.4 Comparison of the “local” experiment with DNS

Given the comparison of the DNS and the RDT (“non-local”) simulation,
one could argue that the increase of the intermittency in RDT is mostly
due to the increased mean intensity of the small scales (which is seen on the
energy spectrum plot). A similar increase of the small-scale intensity could be
produced by other means which have nothing to do with non-locality, e.g. by
reducing viscosity in DNS. Will there be stronger intermittency in all of such
cases too? In order to prove that it is not the case, we perform a simulation
where, as the opposite of the RDT one, the non-local interactions at small
scales were removed from the NS equation and only the local interactions
were retained. In order to keep the local interactions which involve scales
close to the cutoﬀ scales, the velocity and the vorticity ﬁelds were split into

19

Figure 10: Comparison of the PDF of the transverse velocity increments
deﬁned by Eq. (10) for ℓ = 2π/256 (108 statistics at t = 0.48 for the ve-
locity ﬁeld from the four simulations: DNS (circles), RDT (crosses), RDT
+ constant viscosity (diamonds) and RDT + viscosity computed from RNG
(triangles)

three parts: the large scales , the medium scales near the cutoﬀ, and the
small scales. This decomposition is deﬁned in Fourier space as follows,

where

u(k) = uls(k) + ums(k) + uss(k),
ω(k) = ωls(k) + ωms(k) + ωss(k)

uls(k) = u(k)

ums(k) = u(k)

uss(k) = u(k)

= 0

= 0

= 0

for k < kc/C
for k > kc/C
for kc/C < k < C kc
for kc/C < k and k > C kc
for C kc < k
for k > C kc

20

(12)
(13)

(14)

Figure 11: Same caption as in Fig. 10 for ℓ = 2π/64

Using these deﬁnition, the equation for the “local” simulation was the fol-
lowing:

∂tu(k) + P (u · ∇ω)(k)

− [P (uls · ∇ωss)(k) + P (uss · ∇ωls)(k)]{k>kc} = ν∆u(k) (15)

Where P is the projector operator. In our simulation we choose C = 1.2 and
the same cutoﬀ scale kc = 24. The result of this simulation are compared to
the equivalent results from the DNS and the RDT simulation. The energy
spectra are compared in Fig. 16.
This “local” simulation contain more
energy at small scales than the DNS even the RDT. The bump of energy
near the cutoﬀ scale kc is due to the fact that the “local” approximation is
introduced only for scales smaller than kc. Despite the high level of energy at
small scales, the solution of this “local” simulation is much less intermittent
than the equivalent ﬁeld from DNS and RDT. A comparison of the scaling
exponents is shown Fig. 17 and table 1 for both the longitudinal and trans-
verse velocity increments. These results conﬁrm the idea that intermittency

21

Figure 12: Same caption as in Fig. 10 for ℓ = 2π/4

is caused by the non-local interactions and not just by mere presence of the
small scales.

22

Figure 13: Structure functions computed with the PDF of the longitudinal
velocity increments from DNS (circles) and the RDT (diamonds) for the ﬁrst
(solid line), second (dash-dotted line) and third (dash-dot-dot line) moments
(for convenience of presentation, the RDT structure functions have been
multiplied by 10)

23

Figure 14: Same plot as in the Fig. 13 for the transverse velocity increments

Table 2: scaling exponents of the velocity structure functions from : at-
mospheric turbulence at 10000 < Rλ < 15000 (Dhruva) [12], channel ﬂow
(Toschi) [46] near the wall (20 < y+ < 50) and far from the wall (y+ > 100)
at Re = 3000 and boundary layer at Rδ = 32000 (Zubair) [45, 54]

Order Dhruva Zubair Toschi 20 < y+ < 50 Toschi y+ > 100

longitudinal

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.366
0.700
1.000
1.266
1.493
1.692
-

-
0.70
1.00
1.20
1.52
1.62
1.96

0.44
0.77
1.00
1.17
1.31
1.44
1.55

24

transverse
Dhruva
0.359
0.680
0.960
1.200
1.402
1.567
-

0.37
0.70
1.00
1.28
1.54
1.78
2.00

Figure 15: Comparison of the scaling exponents computed from the DNS
(diamonds) and the RDT (circles) statistics. The longitudinal exponents are
plotted with empty symbols and the transverse exponents with ﬁlled symbols.

25

Figure 16: Comparison of energy spectra obtained via the DNS, RDT and
the “local” simulation at t=0.48

26

Figure 17: Comparison of the scaling exponents computed from the DNS (di-
amonds), RDT (circles) and the “local” simulation (squares) statistics. The
longitudinal exponents are plotted with empty symbols and the transverse
exponents with ﬁlled symbols.

27

2 Qualitative explanation of the intermit-

tency

Our results can be used to get a qualitative understanding of the intermit-
tency via the scale behavior of both the PDF of the velocity increments and
its moments. For this, we are going to build a toy model of turbulence,
mimicking the small scale non-local dynamics. In spirit, this amounts to an
”anti-shell” model of turbulence, because, here, we retain only interactions
between distant wave-numbers, by contrast with the ordinary shell model
[23, 52, 53] which theoretically only retains local interactions. In this con-
text, it is interesting to note that the ordinary shell model requires a certain
degree of non-locality between modes so as to generate intermittency: it can
indeed be proven that the intermittency correction disappear when the sep-
aration between two consecutive shell tends to zero [14]. Another known
pitfall of the shell model is its incapacity to describe the observed skewness
(asymmetry) generation along the scale of the PDF of the longitudinal in-
crements. This is annoying, since this skewness is directly related to the
non-zero value of the third order moment, and, hence, to the essence of the
Kolmogorov cascade picture via the 4/5 law. Finally, the original shell model
is very crude, since there is no spatial structure (everything is described by
Fourier modes). We now show how elaborate a cleaner toy model of turbu-
lence using localized wave-packets, leading to a description of the small-scale
statistics in term of Langevin processes subject to coupled multiplicative and
additive noise.

2.1 The Langevin model of turbulence

Our numerical simulations showed that both the energy spectrum (and de-
cay) and the intermittency quantities are well reproduces by a model in which
only the non-local interactions are left in the small-scale equations whereas
the local interactions of small scales among themselves are replaced by a
turbulent viscosity term. Such a model is described by equations (6) with ν
replaced by the turbulent viscosity coeﬃcient νt in the small-scale equations,

∂tui + ∂j(Uiuj) + ∂j(uiUj) = −∂ip + νt∆ui + σi,

(16)

∂juj = 0,

28

and σi is given by (7). We are interested in the contribution of non-local
interactions to the statistics of the non-Gaussian small scales. For this, we
assume that the large scale L quantities ( U and its derivative, and σi) are
ﬁxed external processes, with prescribed statistics (to be deﬁned later), and
derive an equation for the small scale l velocity ﬁeld u′, by taking into account
the scale separation ℓ/L = ǫ ≪ 1. For this, we decompose the velocity ﬁeld
into localized wave-packets via a Gabor transform (GT) (see [37])

ˆu(x, k, t) =

g(ǫ∗|x − x′|)eik·(x−x′)u(x′, t)dx′,

(17)

Z

where g is a function which decreases rapidly at inﬁnity and 1 ≪ ǫ∗ ≪ ǫ.
Note that the GT of u is a natural quantity for the description of the velocity
increments because of the following relation

u (x + l) − u (x − l) =

e−l·k

Im ˆu(x, k) dk.

(18)

1
2i Z

Thus, velocity increments are related to GT via the Fourier transform, and
all information about the l-dependence is contained in the GT dependence
on k (the main contribution to the above integral comes from k ∼ 2π/l.). On
purely dimensional ground, we see that ˆu ∼ k−dδu, where d is the dimension.
Therefore, in the sequel, we shall identify kdIm ˆu with the velocity increment.

Applying GT to (6) we have (see [38] for details):

Dt ˆu = ˆu · ˆξ + ˆσ⊥ − νtk2 ˆu,

where ξ and σ⊥ are random processes, given by

and

ˆξ = ∇

ˆσ⊥ = ˆσ −

2
 

k
k2 U · k − U
k
k2 (k · ˆσ),

,

!

Dt = ∂t + ˙x · ∇ + ˙k · ∇k,
˙x = U = ∇kH,
˙k = −∇(k · U) = −∇H,
H = U · k.

29

(19)

(20)

(21)
(22)
(23)

Because the large-scale dynamics is local in k-space, it is only weakly af-
fected by the small scales and the quantities ξ and σ in equation (19) can
be considered as a given noise. Also, because the equation is linear in ˆu, we
immediately see that kdˆu will also satisfy an equation similar to (19) subject
to a straightforward modiﬁcation of the force deﬁnitions. Before elaborating
more on (19), it is convenient to study in closer details the physical param-
eters of this equation.

2.2 The noises

In equation (19), the noise ξ and σ⊥ appearing as the projector of two quan-
tities, one related to the velocity derivative tensor, and another related to
the Gabor transform of the energy transfer from large to small scales. In the
sequel, we present a statistical study of these two noises in the physical space
(i.e. after inverse Gabor transforming ˆσ⊥ ). We will also consider the Fourier
spectra of the corresponding two-point correlations. Let us choose k to be
along one of the coordinate axis (without loss of generality because of the
isotropy). Then the components of ξ coincide (up to the sign) with the cor-
responding components of the velocity derivative tensor, and we will use this
fact in the rest of this section. The velocity derivative tensor has been studied
in the literature e.g. in [48, 2] in terms of correlations between the directions
of the anti-symmetrical part of the tensor (the vorticity) and the symmetrical
part (the strain). Over long time, the vorticity appears to be aligned with
the direction of largest stretching. Other studies focused on the PDF of the
modulus of one component. For example, Marcq and Naert [32] observe that
the derivative has a highly non-Gaussian distribution, but with a correlation
function which decays rapidly, and can be approximated by a delta function
at scales large compared to the dissipative scale. In the present case, we ob-
serve diﬀerent features. Because of the isotropy, we can concentrate only on
two quantities, say ξ11 and ξ12. Fig. 18 shows the equal-position, time corre-
lation C1i(t−t0) =< ξ1i(t)ξ1i(t0) > and αii(t−t0) =< σi(t)σi(t0) > as a func-
tion of t − t0. Note that these quantities are normalized to 1 at t = t0 in this
ﬁgure. Firstly, we see that C11 approximately coincide with C12 and α11 co-
incides with α22 which is a good indicator of isotropy (without normalization
there would be C12 = −3 C11). Secondly, we see that the correlations C11 and
C12 decay to zero over a time scale which is of the order of few turnover times
τ (τ = 0.19). On the other hand, the correlations of σ decay much faster,

30

Figure 18: The normalized auto-correlation in time for the two force compo-
nents σ and ξ (the turnover time τ is equal to 0.19)

over a time of the order of τ /2. Fig. 19 displays the Fourier transforms of the
equal-time two-point correlations D1i(x−x0) =< ξ1i(x, y, z, t)ξ1i(x0, y, z, t) >
and αii(x − x0) =< σi(x, t)σi(x0, t) >. One sees that all correlations are very
weak beyond 2kc. The correlation D12 appears to be the largest at large
scales, but it decays more rapidly than the other correlations. We have also
investigated the cross-correlations between the noises. The equal position
cross-correlation are displayed in Fig. 20. The correlation is rather weak,
but there is a tendency for σi to be correlated with ξ1i over a time scale of the
order of τ , while it is anti-correlated with the other component of the tensor,
over such a time scale. The equal time correlations are shown in Fig. 21.
Notice that the cross correlation are one order of magnitude weaker than the
direct correlations. The cross-correlation involving ξ12 are essentially zero,
while the correlations involving ξ11 display a ﬁrst overall decay up to k = kc,
followed by an extra bump up to the end of the inertial range (k = 40). In
the next Section, we will show that this feature is actually related to the
energy cascade.

31

Figure 19: Fourier transform of the space auto-correlation for the two com-
ponents of the force σ and ξ. Coordinates y and z are ﬁxed.

One may also note that the two noises are spatially very intermittent. In
Fig. 22, we show iso-surfaces of the modulus of the noises, corresponding
to 3.5 times the RMS value. For comparison, the same plot is made for
the vorticity. One observes well deﬁned patches of σ which are strongly
correlated with areas of strong vorticity. In the case of ξ, the patches are
much more space ﬁlling. The longitudinal component ξ11 is characterized by
smaller-scale structures than the transverse component ξ12.

To obtain an indication about the scale variation of the statistical proper-
ties of the noises, we also computed the PDF’s of the noise spatial increments
δσiℓ = σ(x + ℓ) − σ(x) and δξij ℓ = ξij(x + ℓ) − ξij(x). Note that the ﬁrst
of these quantities is directly related with the Gabor transform of the addi-
tive noise, whereas the second one contains some useful information about
the time correlations via the Taylor hypothesis (which is valid locally be-
cause the large-scale velocity is typically greater than the small-scale one).
Fig. 23 shows the results of the longitudinal and transverse increments for
the ﬁrst component of the additive noise σ1 and the equivalent results for

32

Figure 20: The cross-correlation in time between the forces σ and ξ (τ = 0.19)

the component ξ11 of the multiplicative multiplicative noise are shown on
Fig. 24. The PDF are displayed for ℓ = 2π/256 and 2π/4. One observes
wide, quasi-algebraic tails for the additive noise, similar to those observed
for the PDF’s of the velocity derivatives. The PDF of ξ11 are much closer to
Gaussian statistic.

2.3 The turbulent viscosity

In the previous Section, we have discussed the inﬂuence of two prescription for
the turbulent viscosity, one based on the RNG, one taken simply as constant.
In the sequel, we shall use the simple formula:

νt =

ν2
0 + B2

 

1/2

,

2

u
k (cid:19)

!

(cid:18)

(24)

where ν0 and B are a constant and u = kd Im ˆu is the velocity increment
over a distance 1/k (hereafter we drop δ in δu ). When B = 0, this for-
mula provides the constant turbulent viscosity. When ν0 = 0, it provides a

33

Figure 21: Fourier transform of the space cross correlation between the force
σ and the force ξ. Coordinates y and z are ﬁxed.

dimensional analog of the RNG viscosity, and tends to zero as k tends to
inﬁnity.

2.4 Statistical properties of the velocity increments

We are now going to derive qualitative results by adopting two complemen-
tary points of view: in a ﬁrst one, we will study the statistical properties of
the velocity increments in the frame of reference moving together with the
wave packets in (k, x) space. This corresponds to a Lagrangian description in
the scale space. In the second approach, we replace time with its expression
in terms of k, as it would follow from the ray equation (22). This will give
as an equation at a ﬁxed k which corresponds to an Eulerian description. As
a further simpliﬁcation, we shall leave for further study the possible corre-
lation between longitudinal and transverse velocity increments described for
example in [1] and consider a one-dimensional version of (19), treating the

34

Figure 22: Isovalue (3.5 times the RMS) at t0 = 0 of a) the absolute value
of vorticity, b) the corresponding additive force (|σ|) c) ξ11 = ∂Ux/∂x and
d) ξ12 = ∂Ux/∂y

quantity u = k Im ˆu as a “velocity increment” over the distance l = 2π/k,

Dtu = uξ + σ⊥ − νtk2u,

˙k = −kξ

(25)
(26)

Here, we assumed that the forcing to be symmetric such that it does not
produce any Re ˆu. This toy model can also be viewed as a passive scalar in
a compressible 1D ﬂow. Artiﬁcial introduction of compressibility is aimed at
modeling the RDT stretching eﬀect which appears only in the higher number
of dimensions for incompressible ﬂuids.

Study of the noises in Section 2.2 revealed their rich and complex behav-
ior. As a ﬁrst simplifying step, we disregard these complexities and use the

35

Figure 23: PDF of the increments σ1(x+ ℓ1, y, z) −σ1(x, y, z) for ℓ1 = 2π/256
(circles) and ℓ1 = 2π/4 (crosses) and σ1(x, y + ℓ2, z) − σ1(x, y, z) for
ℓ2 = 2π/256 (triangles) and ℓ2 = 2π/4 (diamonds) (the dotted line corre-
sponds to Gaussian statistics).

36

Figure 24: PDF of the increments ξ11(x+ℓ1, y, z)−ξ11(x, y, z) for ℓ1 = 2π/256
(circles) and ℓ1 = 2π/4 (crosses) and ξ11(x, y + ℓ2, z) − ξ11(x, y, z) for
ℓ2 = 2π/256 (triangles) and ℓ2 = 2π/4 (diamonds) (the dotted line corre-
sponds to Gaussian statistics).

Gaussian, delta correlated approximation, as will be done in the next two
sub-sections. Given a rather short time correlation of σ, our delta approxi-
mation is rather safe. The delta approximation for ξ is more debatable, and
the performance of such a model should be further examined in future. Also,
the Gaussian hypothesis is obviously only valid at large scale, and for ξ11.
Therefore, the generalization of ours results for non-Gaussian noises would
be very interesting, and is the subject of an ongoing research. In the sequel,
we consider the function α, D and λ as free parameters.

2.4.1 The Lagrangian description

In the frame of reference moving with the wave packets in (k, x) space, the
l.h.s. of (25) becomes simply the time derivative. On the other hand, k has
to be replaced in terms of its initial value k0 and time everywhere including

37

the noises σ and ξ. Such a transformation from the laboratory to the moving
frame can obviously change the statistics of σ and ξ.
In the Lagrangian
description we will assume that we deal with noises which are Gaussian in
the moving frame with correlations functions

< σ⊥(k(t), t)σ⊥(k′(t), t′) > = 2α δ(t − t′),
< ξ(k(t), t)ξ(k′(t), t′) > = 2D δ(t − t′),
< ξ(k(t), t)σ⊥(k′(t), t′) > = 2λ δ(t − t′),

(27)

where coeﬃcients α, D and λ depend on the scale via k0. With these noises,
(25) becomes a Langevin equation for the velocity increments, where ξ is
a multiplicative noise, σ⊥ is an additive noise, and νtk2u the ( non-linear)
friction. The multiplicative noise is produced by interaction of two small
scales with one large scale whereas the additive noise is due to a merger
of two large scales with into one small scale (therefore, the later acts at
the largest among the small scales). For Gaussian, delta correlated noises,
this Langevin equation leads to a Fokker-Planck equation for the probability
distribution Pk(u, t) of the velocity increment u,

∂tPk = ∂u

νtk2uPk

(cid:16)
(cid:17)
+ Dk∂u (u∂uuPk) − λk∂u (u∂uPk)
u (uPk) + αk∂2
− λk∂2

uPk,

where we have taken into account the fact that, due to homogeneity, ξ and σ
have a zero mean. Here, we dropped the the subscript 0 in k0 and dependence
of the all involved quantities on the scale is simply marked by the subscript k
(the scale dependence α, D and λ is still unspeciﬁed). The stationary solution
of (28) is:

Pk(u) = Ck exp

u

−νtk2y − Dy + λ
Dy2 − 2λy + α

dy,

0

Z

where Ck is a normalization constant. The integral appearing in (29) can be
explicitly computed in two regimes: in the ﬁrst one, for u << kν0, we have
(νt = ν0), and we simply get

(28)

(29)

(30)

Pk(u) =

C
(Du2 − 2λu + α)1/2+ν0k2/(2D) ,

38

The range of u for which the PDF follows this algebraic law decreases with
increasing scales.
It is the largest (and hence it is best observed) at the
dissipative scale, where the velocity increments are equivalent to velocity
derivative or to vorticity. Several remarks are in order about this expression.
First, notice that the distribution is regularized around u = 0 by the presence
of the parameter α, but then displays algebraic tails. These are well known
features of random multiplicative process with additive noise (see e.g [35]).
The occurrence of algebraic tails in vorticity PDF’s has been noted before by
[24, 34] in the context of 2D turbulence. However, processes with algebraic
tails are characterized by divergent moments. These divergences can be re-
moved by taking into account ﬁnite size eﬀects, like physical upper bounds
on the value of the process (see, e.g. [31] for discussion and references) which
introduce a cut-oﬀ in the probability distribution. This eﬀect is automat-
ically taken into account in our simple model, via the turbulent viscosity,
which prevents unbounded growth of velocity ﬂuctuations and introduces an
exponential cut-oﬀ.

Indeed, in the regime u >> kν0, we see that:

d ln P
du

≈

−u|u|
Du2 − 2λu + α

.

(31)

This mean that at large u the PDF decays like an exponential, or even faster
if D = 0 (see below). This feature had been noted by Min et al [34], and
ﬁnds here a detailed explanation.

Another important observation is that the PDF’s have an intrinsic skew-
ness, which can be traced back to the non-zero value of λ, i.e. to the correla-
tion between the multiplicative and the additive noise. The physical picture
associated with this correlation is related to the correlation between vortic-
ity (present in the large scale strain tensor) and stretching (associated with
the term U∇U, present in σ), which is the motor of the energy cascade [1].
The importance of the additive noise in the skewness generation has been
stressed before [16]. We ﬁnd here its detailed explanation. Note also that
the trends towards Gaussian large scale behavior of the velocity increments
can be easily accounted for if the multiplicative noise tends to zero at large
scale (D, λ → 0). In such case, the process becomes purely additive, and the
limiting PDF is Gaussian for u independent turbulent viscosity, or can also
fall faster than a Gaussian (like exp(−u3),for νt ∝ u). Such a supra Gaussian
behavior has been noted before [1]. In between the dissipative and the largest

39

scale, the transition operates via PDF’s looking like stretched exponential.

This qualitative feature can be tested by comparison with the numerical

PDF’s. Our model, predicts that d ln P/du should behave like the ratio:

d ln P
du

=

−u

(m1u)2 + m2
m4u2 − 2m3u + m5

2 − m4u + m3

.

q

(32)

Without loss of generality, we can factorize out the parameter m5. The ﬁt
Therefore only contains four free parameters, which can be easily related to
the physical parameters of the problem. We have computed this derivative
for the PDF of longitudinal and transverse velocity increments at various
scale, and performed the four parameters ﬁt. Examples are shown on Fig.
25. Observe the good quality of the ﬁt, but we stress that there is a rather
large uncertainty in the determination of the parameter of the ﬁts, which
sometimes cannot be determined better than up to a factor of two by our
ﬁt procedure (a standard least square ﬁt). The scale dependence of the
coeﬃcients of the ﬁt, is shown on Fig. 26 and 27. Note that since transverse
velocity increments are symmetrical by construction, we have set m3 = 0
in the ﬁt. Note that in the longitudinal case, m3 is smaller than the other
coeﬃcients by two orders of magnitude. This features the smallness of the
skewness, and the weakness of the correlation between the multiplicative
and the longitudinal noise (see Section 2.1). The parameters have a rough
power law behavior (see Fig. 26 and 27). Theoretically, one expects the ratio
m1/m2 to behave like 1/(ν0k), if (24) holds. The power-law ﬁts of Fig. 26
and 27 provides a dependence of k0.53 for the longitudinal case, and k−0.54
for the transverse case, corresponding to a scale dependence of ν0 given by
k1.53 and k0.46.

2.4.2 The Eulerian description

We now consider (25), again in the moving with the wave packet frame, but
now we change the independent variable from t to k = k(t) which satisﬁes
(26). We get

du
d ln k

= −Pu +

νtk2
ξ

−

σ⊥
ξ

,

(33)

where P is a number, accounting for the projection operator (a way to mimic
higher-dimensional eﬀects in our 1D toy model). Eq. (33) is again a Langevin

40

Figure 25: Fit of d ln P/du for the transverse increments, at 1/k = 2
(squares), 1/k = 32 (diamonds), 1/k = 42 (circles) and 1/k = 52 (trian-
gles). The ﬁts via formula 32 are given by lines. Note the good quality of
the ﬁt. Similar ﬁts for other scale separations, and in the longitudinal case
were obtained.

equation for velocity increments in the scale space, with multiplicative and
additive noises which is now expresses in an Eulerian form. Similar Langevin
processes have been proposed before to explain the scale dependence of ve-
locity increments [20, 33, 32] but without additive noise [19].

The noises in this Langevin equation are diﬀerent from the noises ap-
pearing in the Lagrangian representation and they would have a complicated
statistics if we assumed that σ and ξ were Gaussian in the Lagrangian repre-
sentation. However, we can simply assume here that the noises are Gaussian
and delta-correlated in the Eulerian representation (which is diﬀerent from

41

the assumption of the previous section) and re-deﬁne α, D and λ as

< σ⊥(k, t(k))ξ−1(k, t(k))σ⊥(k′, t(k′))ξ−1(k′, t(k′)) > = 2α δ(k − k′),
< ξ−1(k, t(k))ξ−1(k′, t(k′)) > = 2D δ(k − k′),

< ξ−1(k, t(k))σ⊥(k′, t(k′))ξ−1(k′, t(k′)) > = 2λ δ(k − k′),(34)

This allows one to derive the Fokker-Planck equation corresponding to (33),

k∂kP (u, k) = ∂u (PuP )

+ D∂u

− λ∂2
u

νtk2u∂u
(cid:16)
νtk2uP

νtk2uP
h
+ α∂2

uP.

i(cid:17)

− λ∂u

νtk2u∂uP

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(35)

(cid:17)
We may use (35) to derive an equation for the moments, by multiplication
by un and integration over u. With the shape of the turbulent viscosity given
by (24), we get:

(cid:16)

k∂k < un > = −ζ(n) < un >

+ nDB2k2 < un+2 > −λn(2n − 1)ν2k2 <

un−1
νt

>

− 2n2λB2 <

> +αn(n − 1) < un−2 >,

(36)

un+1
νt

where ζ(n) = nP − n2Dk4ν2 is the zero-mode scaling exponent. For n = 1
and taking into account the constraints that < u >= 0 (homogeneity), one
get a sort of generalized Karman-Horwath equation:

> .

> +

u2
νt

λν2
DB2 <

< u3 >=

2λ
Dk2 <

1
νt
As in the Lagrangian case, this means that skewness (related to non-zero <
u3 > is generated through non-zero value of λ, i.e. through correlations of the
multiplicative and the additive noise. However, due to the turbulent viscosity,
we cannot explicitly solve the hierarchy of equation. In many homogeneous
turbulent ﬂows, however, the skewness (proportional to λ) is quite small, and
moment of order 2n + 1 are generally negligible in front of moments of order
2n + 2. For even moments, this remark suggest that to ﬁrst order in the
skewness, and for 2n > 1 the dynamics is simply given by:

(37)

k∂k < u2n > = −ζ(2n) < u2n > +2nDB2k2 < u2n+2 >

+ α2n(2n − 1) < u2n−2 > +O(λ2).

(38)

42

Note that D/α is given by the parameter m4 in our ﬁt, and is such that
Dk2/α increases with k (see Figs. 26 and 27). Therefore, at small scales,

Figure 26: Coeﬃcient of the ﬁt of d ln(P )/du with (32) as a function of 1/k
for longitudinal velocity increments: m1 (squares), m2 (empty diamonds), m3
(circles) and m4 (ﬁlled diamonds). The lines are the power-law ﬁts: k−0.79
(long-dashed line); k−1.52 (short-dashed line); k−0.36 (dotted line) and k−1.2
(dash-dot line).

the dominant balance is:

k∂k < u2n >= 2nDB2k2 < u2n+2 > .

(39)

The solution is < u2n >∝ k−2n. This is the usual ”regular” scaling in the
dissipative zone. For larger scales, DB2k2 ≪ α, and if α varies like a power
law, the general solution of (38) is a sum of power-laws:

< u2n >=

apαn−pk−ζ(2p).

(40)

n

Xp=0

43

Figure 27: Coeﬃcient of the ﬁt of d ln(P )/du with (32) as a function of 1/k
for transverse velocity increments: m1 (squares), m2 (diamonds), and m4
(circles). The lines are the power-law ﬁts: k−1.56 (long-dashed line); k−1.04
(line); and k−1.45 (dotted line).

This solution illustrates the famous mechanism of ”zero-mode intermittency”
[22]. Here, the zero mode is the solution of the homogeneous part of eq. (38),
i.e. a power-law of exponent −ζ(2n). Without the zeroth mode, responsible
for the ﬁrst n − 1 scaling laws, the 2n-th moment will scale in general like
α(k)n (provided one assume that this dominates the other term), i.e. will be
related to the turbulent forcing. This is the standard Kolmogorov picture.
When the zeroth mode is taken into account, the moment now includes new
power laws, whose exponent is independent of the external forcing, and which
can be dominant in the inertial range, thereby causing anomalous scaling. In
the present case, the scaling exponent is quadratic in n, and reﬂects the log-
normal statistics induced by the Gaussian multiplicative noise, in agreement
with the latest wavelet analysis of Arneodo et al [4]. Note also that the

44

competition between the zeroth mode scaling and the scaling due to external
forcing forbids the moments to scale like a power-law, thereby generating a
breaking of the scale symmetry.

For odd moments, we cannot perform any rigorous expansion because all
the terms of the equation are of order λ. For low order moments, however,
the computation of < un+1/νt > mainly involve velocity increments close to
the center of the distribution, for which νt ≈ ν0. So, for low order, it is
tempting to approximate the equation for the odd-order moments by

k∂k < u2n+1 >≈ −ζ(2n + 1) < u2n+1 > −2n2λB2 < u2n+2 > ν−1.

(41)

This approximation is only valid in the inertial range, where the last term of
(36) can be neglected. An immediate consequence of this loose approximation
is that ζ(2n + 1) = ζ(2n + 2) in the inertial range. Odd moments (without
absolute values) are very diﬃcult to measure because of cancelation eﬀects
which introduce a lot of noise. In our case, due to our limited inertial range,
we cannot compute these exponent with a suﬃcient degree of accuracy. A
careful investigation performed in a high Reynolds number boundary layer
[45] however seem to be in agreement with our prediction, as is shown in Fig.
it is striking to observe that ζ(5) ≈ ζ(6), ζ(7) ≈ ζ(8), etc making the
28:
curve look as if odd and even scaling exponents are organized on a separate
curve [54]. A second independent experimental check of our prediction (41)
is that (ζ(2n + 2) − ζ(2n + 1)) < u2n+1 > / < u2n+2 > should scale, for n > 3
like n2. Fig. 29 shows that this is indeed the case.

3 Discussion

In this paper, we have shown that non-local interaction are responsible for
intermittency corrections in the statistical behavior of 3D turbulence. Re-
moval of the local interaction in numerical simulations leads to a substantial
increase in the number of the tornado-like intense vortex ﬁlaments and to
a stronger anomalous corrections in the higher cumulants of the velocity in-
crements.
It is also accompanied by a modiﬁcation of the energy transfer
in the inertial range, tending to create a ﬂatter energy spectrum. The in-
termittency corrections and the spectra are close to that observed in high
Reynolds number boundary layer, suggesting that the non-local interactions
prevail in this geometry. This could be explained by presence of the mean

45

Figure 28: Exponents of the structure function in a high Reynolds number
boundary layer [12]. Note the tendency for ζ(2n + 1) = ζ(2n + 2) for n > 3.

ﬂow, which geometrically favors non-local triads in the Fourier transform of
the non-linear interactions. We showed that replacing the removed local in-
teractions by a simple turbulent viscosity term allows to restore the correct
intermittency and the energy characteristics. Our results agree with the be-
lief that intermittency is related to thin vortices ampliﬁed by the external
large scale strain similarly to the classical Burgers vortex solution. Local in-
teractions can be viewed at mutual interaction of these thin intense vortices
which result in their destruction, which is also in agreement with our results.
To prove that the enhanced intermittency is not simply the result of
the stronger small-scale observed in the RDT simulation, we performed yet
another numerical experiment in which the non-local interactions were ne-
glected and only the local ones retained. This resulted in even higher (than
in RDT) level of the small scales but it exhibited much less intermittency,
which conﬁrms our view that non-locality is crucial for generation of the

46

(ζ(2n + 2) − ζ(2n + 1))A2n+1/A2n+2 as a function of n in a
Figure 29:
high Reynolds number boundary layer. Here An is the prefactor of the
(non-dimensional) structure function of order n. The line is n2, the pre-
diction of our toy model.

intermittent structures.

The result that the net eﬀect of the local interactions is to destroy the
intermittent structures is at odds with a very common belief that the inter-
mittency is due to the vortex reconnection process which takes a form of a
ﬁnite time vorticity blow-up. Indeed, the later is a strongly nonlinear pro-
cess in which the local vortex-vortex interactions are important. However,
this process seems to be dominated by another local processes the net re-
sult of which is to destroy the high-vorticity structures rather than to create
them. It would be premature to claim, however, that the same is true at any
arbitrarily high Reynolds number.

47

Our numerical approach sets severe limitations to the value of the Reynolds
number we are able to explore. In this context, it is interesting to point out
that preliminary tests regarding the importance of non-local interactions have
been conducted on a velocity ﬁeld coming from a very large Reynolds num-
ber boundary layer [10]. Even though the test is not complete (the probes
only permit the accurate measurement of special components of the veloc-
ity ﬁeld), it tend to suggest that non-local interactions dominate the local
interactions by several orders of magnitude. Our results would also explain
the ﬁndings of the Lyon team [42], who found that when probing ﬂuid area
closer and closer to a large external vortices, or to a wall boundary, one could
measure energy spectra moving from a k−5/3 law towards a k−1 spectra, while
anomalous corrections in scaling exponents would become more pronounced.
At the light of our study, this could be simply explain by a trend towards
more non-local dynamics via the mean-shear eﬀects at the wall.

Based on the conclusions of our numerical study, we developed a new
toy model of turbulence to study the intermittency.
It has the form of a
Langevin equation for the velocity increments with coupled multiplicative
and additive noise. We showed how this toy model could be used to under-
stand qualitatively certain observed features of intermittency and anomalous
scaling laws. Among other things, we showed how the coupling between the
two forces is related to the skewness of the distribution, and how algebraic
and stretched exponential naturally arise from the competition between the
multiplicative and the additive noise. We tested our qualitative predictions
with experimental and numerical data, and found good general agreement.
To be able to turn our toy model into a tool for ”quantitative” study of the
intermittency, several developments are needed. The ﬁrst one is to consider
the multi-dimensional version of our toy model, to be able to couple longi-
tudinal and transverse increments. The scale dependence of the turbulent
viscosity and of the forcing needs to be further investigated, possibly using
tools borrowed from the Renormalization Group theory (see e.g. [9]). Also,
the non-Gaussianity of the noises could be taken into account.

In 1994, Kraichnan [28] proposed an analytically solvable, new toy model
for the passive scalar, which provided a substantial increase of our under-
standing of the passive scalar intermittency. Our model, built using the
non-local hypothesis, is a direct heir of this philosophy in that, as in passive
scalars, all important intermittency eﬀects are produced via a linear dynam-
ics. The nonlinear (local) scale interactions are important too because they

48

are the main carrier of the energy cascade, but it is only their mean eﬀect
and not statistical details that are essential.

the present paper.

Acknowledgments
BD acknowledges the support of a NATO fellowship and J-P Laval is
thankful for the support of the Laboratoire de M´ecanique de Lille, France.
SN acknowledges the support of the TMR European network grant “Inter-
mittency in Turbulent Systems” (ERB FMR XCT 98-0175). SN thanks Bob
Kerr for useful discussion of the turbulent viscosity models. We thank Keith
Moﬀatt, Oleg Zaboronki and our referees for suggesting an additional “local”
numerical test which signiﬁcantly reinforced our results.

References

[1] B. Andreotti. Action et r´eaction entre ´etirement et rotation, du lami-

naire au turbulent. PhD thesis, Universit´e de Paris 7, 1997.

[2] B. Andreotti. Studying burger’s model to investigate the physical mean-
ing of the alignments statistically observed in turbulence. Phys. Fluids,
9:735–742, 1997.

[3] A. Arneodo, C. Baudet, F. Belin, R. Benzi, B. Castain, B. Chabaud,
R. Chavarria, S. Ciliberto, R. Camussi, and F. Chilla. structure func-
tions in turbulence in various ﬂow conﬁguration at Reynolds number
between 30 and 5000 using extended self-similarity. Europhys. Lett.,
34:411–416, 1996.

[4] A. Arneodo, S. Maneville, J. F. Muzy, and S. G. Roux. Revealing a log-
normal cascading process in turbulent velocity statistics with wavelet
analysis. Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society of London Se-
ries A-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Science, 357:2415–2438,
1999.

49

[5] R. Benzi, S. Ciliberto, R. Tripiccione, F Baudet, F. Massaioli, and
S. Succi. Extended self similarity in turbulent ﬂows. Phys. Rev. E,
48:R29, 1993.

[6] V. Borue. Spectral exponents of entrophy cascade in stationary homoge-
nous two dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 71:3967, 1994.

[7] J. G. Brasseur and C. H. Wei. Interscale dynamics and local isotropy
in high reynolds number turbulence within triadic interactions. Phys.
Fluids, 6:842, 1994.

[8] R. Camussi and R. Benzi. Hierarchy of transvers structure functions.

Phys. Fluids, 9:257–259, 1997.

[9] V. M. Canuto and Dubovikov. A dynamical model for turbulence. i.

general formalism. Phys. Fluids, 8:571–586, 1996.

[10] J. Carlier, J.-P. Laval, J. M. Foucaut, and M. Stanislas. Non-locality
of the interaction of scales in high reynolds number turbulent boundary
layer. CRAS S´erie IIb, 329:1–6, 2001.

[11] B. Castaing. Consequences of an extremum principle in turbulence.

Journal de Physique, 50:147, 1989.

[12] B. Dhruva, Y. Tsuji, and K. R. Sreenivasan. Transverse structure func-
tions in high-Reynolds-number turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 56:R4928–
R4930, 1997.

[13] J. A. Domaradzki, W. Liu, C H¨artel, and L. Kleiser. Energy transfer
in numerically simulated wall-bounded turbulent ﬂows. Phys. Fluids,
6:1583–1599, 1994.

[14] Th Dombre. Private communication. 2000.

[15] B. Dubrulle. Complex scaling laws and application. submitted to Euro-

pean Phys. J., 1998.

[16] B. Dubrulle. Aﬃne turbulence. Eur. phys. J. B, 13:1, 2000.

[17] B. Dubrulle. Finite size scale invariance. Eur. phys. J. B, 14:757–771,

2000.

50

[18] B. Dubrulle and U. Frisch. Eddy viscosity of parity-invariant ﬂow. Phys.

Rev. A, 43:5355–5364, 1991.

[19] R. Friedrich. At a turbulence in Dersden, in august 1998, R. Friedrich
however suggested the possibility of two interacting multiplicative and
additive noise in his presentation (unpublished). 1998.

[20] R. Friedrich and Peinke. J. Description of a turbulent cascade by a

Fokker-Planck equation. Phys. Rev. lett., 78:863, 1997.

[21] U. Frisch. Turbulence : The legacy of A.N. Kolmogorov. Cambridge

Univ. Press, 1995.

[22] K Gawedski and A. Kupianen. Anomalous scaling of passive scalar.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 75:3834–3838, 1995.

[23] E. B. Gledzer. Sov. Phys. Dokl., 18:216, 1973.

[24] J. Jimenez. Algebraic probability density tails in decaying isotropic two-

dimensional turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 313:223–240, 1996.

[25] A. N. Kolmogorov. The local structure of turbulence in imcompressible
viscous ﬂuid for very large Reynolds number. C.R. Acad. Sci URSS,
30:301–305, 1941.

[26] A. N. Kolmogorov. A reﬁnement of previous hypotheses concerning the
local structure of turbulence in a viscous incompressible ﬂuid at high
Reynolds number. J. Fluid Mech., 13:82–85, 1962.

[27] R. H. Kraichnan. Eddy viscosity in two and three-dimensions. J. At-

mosph. Science., 33:1521, 1976.

[28] R. H. Kraichnan. Anomalous scaling of a randomly advected passive

scalar. Phys. Rev. Lett., 72:1016–1019, 1994.

[29] J.-P. Laval and B Dubrulle. Numerical validation of a dynamical turbu-

lent model of turbulence. submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000.

[30] J.-P. Laval, B. Dubrulle, and S. Nazarenko. Nonlocality of interaction
of scales in the dynamics of 2D incompressible ﬂuids. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
83:4061–4064, 1999.

51

[31] J.-P. Laval, B. Dubrulle, and S. Nazarenko. Dynamical modeling of
sub-grid scales in 2D turbulence. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,
142:231–253, 2000.

[32] P. Marcq and A. Naert. A langevin equation for turbulent velocity

increments. submitted to Phys. Fluids, 2000.

[33] Ph. Marcq and A. Naert. A Langevin equation for the energy cascade

in fully-developped turbulence. Physica D, 124:368, 1998.

[34] I. A. Min, I. Mezic, and A. Leonard. L´evy stable distribution for velocity
and velocity diﬀerence in systems of vortex elements. Phys. Fluids,
8:1169–1180, 1996.

[35] H. Nakao. Asymptotic power law of moments in a random multiplicative
process with weak additive noise. Phys. Rev. E, 48:1691–1600, 1998.

[36] S. Nazarenko. Exact solutions for near-wall turbulence theory. Phys.

Lett. A, 264:444–448, 2000.

[37] S. Nazarenko, N. K.-R. Kevlahan, and B. Dubrulle. WKB theory for
rapid distortion of inhomogeneous turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 390:325–
348, 1999.

[38] S. Nazarenko, N. K.-R. Kevlahan, and B. Dubrulle. Nonlinear RDT

theory of near-wall turbulence. Physica D, 139:158–176, 2000.

[39] S. Nazarenko and J.-P. Laval. Non-local 2D turbulence and Batchelor’s

regime for passive scalars. J. Fluid Mech., 408:301–321, 2000.

[40] G. Parisi and U. Frisch. On the singularity structure of fully developed
turbulence. In M. Ghil, R. Benzi, and G. Parisi, editors, Turbulence and
Predictability in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, Proceed. Inter. School of
Physic ’E. Fermi’, 1983, Varenna, Italy. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1985.

[41] A. E. Perry, S. Henbest, and M. S. Chong. A theoritical and experimen-

tal study of wall turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 165:163–199, 1986.

52

[42] J. F. Pinton, F. Chill`a, and N. Mordant. Intermittency in the closed ﬂow
between coaxial corotating disks. Eur. J. Mech. B/Fluids, 17:535–547,
1998.

[43] Z. S. She, E. Jakson, and Orszag S. A. Intermittent vortex structures

in homogenous isotropic turbulence. Nature, 344:226, 1990.

[44] E. D. Siggia. Numerical study of small-scale intermittency in 3-

dimensional turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 107:375–406, 1981.

[45] G. Stolovidsky, K. R. Sreenivasan, and A. Juneja. Scaling functions and
scaling exponents in turbulence. Phys. Rev. E., 48:R3217–R3220, 1993.

[46] F Toschi, G. Amati, S. Succi, and R. Piva. Intermittency and structure
functions in channel ﬂow turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82:5044–5047,
1999.

[47] A. A. Townsend. The structure of turbulent shear ﬂow (second edition).

Cambridge university press, Cambridge, 1976.

[48] A. Tsinober, E. Kit, and T. Dracos. Experimental investigation of the
ﬁeld of velocity gradients in turbulent ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 82:169–192,
1992.

[49] A. Vincent and M. Meneguzzi. The spatial structure and statistical

properties of homogenous turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 225:1–20, 1991.

[50] A. Vincent and M. Meneguzzi. The dynamics of vorticity tubes in ho-

mogenous turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 258:245–254, 1994.

[51] V. Yakhot and S. A. Orzag. Renormalisation group analysis of turbu-

lence. I. basic theory. J. Sci. Comp., 1:3–51, 1986.

[52] M. Yamada and K. Ohkitani. Lyapunov spectrum of a model of two-

dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 60:983–986, 1988.

[53] M. Yamada and K. Ohkitani. Temporal intermittency in the energy cas-
cade process and local Lyapunov analysis in fully-developed turbulence.
Prog. Theor. Phys., 81:329–341, 1989.

[54] L. Zubair. PhD thesis, Yale University, 1993.

53

