1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interaction of two deformable viscous drops under

external temperature gradient

V. Berejnov, O. M. Lavrenteva, and A. Nir

Department of Chemical Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,

Haifa 32000, Israel

December 21, 2013

Abstract

The axisymmetric deformation and motion of interacting droplets in an im-

posed temperature gradient is considered using boundary-integral techniques for

slow viscous motion. Results showing temporal drop motion, deformations and

separation are presented for equal-viscosity ﬂuids. The focus is on cases when the

drops are of equal radii or when the smaller drop trails behind the larger drop. For

equal-size drops, our analysis shows that the motion of a leading drop is retarded

while the motion of the trailing one is enchanced compared to the undeformable

case. The distance between the centers of equal-sized deformable drops decreases

with time. When a small drop follows a large one, two patterns of behavior may

exist. For moderate or large initial separation the drops separate. However, if

the initial separation is small there is a transient period in which the separation

distance initially decreases and only afterwards the drops separate. This behavior

stems from the multiple time scales that exist in the system.

Key Words: droplets interaction; thermocapillary migration; drop deforma-

tion; boundary integral equations

1

1 Introduction

It has long been known that a viscous droplet submerged into another immiscible non-

isothermal liquid migrates in the direction of the temperature gradient, ∇T . This

droplet’s migration is due to the temperature-induced surface tension gradient ∇s(γ)

at the droplet interface S and it is addressed as a thermocapillary migration. Young et

al (1) were ﬁrst to investigate the mechanism of such migration both theoretically and

experimentally. These authors found conditions for the stabilization of a buoyant bubble

under gravity force by the thermocapillary force which was directed oppositely. They

obtained a theoretical prediction for the migration velocity of a single spherical bubble

of radius a, which is placed in a viscous ﬂuid of viscosity η1, with an imposed constant

temperature gradient A. In the limit of zero Marangoni number

(i.e., with neg-

ligible convective transport eﬀects) the droplet velocity U in the laboratory coordinate

∂γ
∂T

a2Aρ1
2
η1

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

frame is related to the uniform temperature gradient by

U =

a A
η1 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

∂γ
∂T (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

¯U ,

¯U =

2
(2 + 3 η) (2 + κ)

.

Here η = η2/η1 and κ = κ2/κ1 are the ratios of viscosities and thermal conductivities

between the internal and the surrounding ﬂuids, respectively,

is a constant derivative

of the surface tension with respect to the local temperature T on the interface, and ¯U is

∂γ
∂T

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

a dimensionless migration velocity. In the case when the droplet and the external ﬂuid

have equal viscosity and thermal properties ¯U = 2/15 ≃ 0.133. A review of the further

development of the subject can be found in (2).

Bratukhin (3) considered the migration of a deformable viscous droplet at the small

Marangoni number. Using perturbation techniques in a spherical coordinate system (r, θ)

with origin at the center of the droplet, he found an expression for the deformation of

the droplet’s shape r = R(θ):

R(θ) = 1 + Ma2s2P2(θ) + O(Ma3),
¯U 2 (1 − ρ)(1 + η)
5
4 + η
2

3
4γ0  

s2 = −

+

P r ¯U
63χ

49χ − 7χκ + 18κ
(3 + 2κ)(2 + κ) !

.

2

[1]

[2]

Here P r = ν1/χ1 is the Prandtl number, ρ = ρ2/ρ1 and χ = χ2/χ1 are the ratios of density

and thermal diﬀusivity between the internal and the surrounding ﬂuids, respectively,

γ0 = γρ1a/η1 is the dimensionless surface tension corresponding to the center of the

drop, and P2(θ) is the second order Legendre polynomial.

The ﬁrst term of s2 is related to the inertia term in the Navier Stokes equation, while

the second one is related to the convective term in the energy transport equation. It is

interesting to note that the expansion of the droplet deformation begins with the term

of O(Ma2), and that this term vanishes in the case that combines equal densities of the

phases (ρ = 1) and negligible convective heat transport (P r = 0). It follows from [2]

that the deformations are small also for large values of the reference surface tension γ0

(small capillary number).

Balasubramaniam and Chai (4) showed that the Young solution satisﬁes the full

Navier-Stokes equations if the temperature ﬁeld on the spherical interface is proportional

to cos θ, i.e.

in the case of negligible convective transport. The perturbation of the

spherical form constructed in (4) under the assumption of small capillary number has

the same form as [2].

In real applications, however, ﬂuid drops are not isolated and their motion is inﬂu-

enced by the presence of neighboring particles. This interaction of drops substantially

alters the migration velocities and it may cause drops’ deformations even in the case of

negligible convective transport. On the other hand, the second mechanism of the defor-

mations’ suppression (large surface tension) is expected to be valid in the multi body

case as well.

Most of the numerous theoretical studies of the interaction of bubbles and droplets

in the course of their thermocapillary migration were performed under the assumption

of nondeformable drops (zero capillary number). Meyyappan et al (5) and Feuillbois (6)

studied the Marangoni induced axisymmetric migration of two bubbles and Meyyappan

and Subramanian (7) studied the non-axisymmetric case. Acrivos et al (8), Satrape (9)

and Wang et al (10) examined ensembles of more than two bubbles. The remarkable

3

ﬁnding of these studies is that a bubble migrates in the presence of another bubbles of

the same size with exactly the same velocity as when isolated. Bubbles of diﬀerent sizes

aﬀect the motion of the neighboring bubbles. The inﬂuence of the presence of a larger

bubble on the motion of a smaller one is more pronounced than its inﬂuence on the

motion of the larger bubble.

These analyses were extended to the case of liquid drops by Anderson (11), Keh and

Chen (12, 13, 14) and Wei and Subramanian (15). In this case, the migration velocity of

a drop in the presence of another drops diﬀers from the velocity of an isolated drop even

when the drops are of equal size. Similar to the case of interacting bubbles, a larger drop

exerts more pronounced inﬂuence on the motion of a smaller one. The thermocapillary

motion of two non-conducting drops was studied by Loewenberg and Davis (16).

The literature on the thermocapillary motion of deformable drops is limited in contrast

to a somewhat related problem concerning the interaction of drops undergoing a buoyancy

driven motion. For the latter case numerous recent studies revealed a rich variety of

interaction patterns of deformable drops depending on the Bond number and the initial

conﬁguration of the system ( see e.g. Manga and Stone (17), Zinchenko et al (18)) and the

literature cited). Numerical simulations of an axisymmetric buoyancy-driven interaction

of a leading drop and a smaller trailing drop were recently reported by Davis (19). It

was demonstrated that the trailing drop elongates considerably due to the hydrodynamic

inﬂuence of the leading one. Afterwards, depending on the governing parameters, the

drops may either separate and return to spherical shape or the trailing drop may be

captured by the leading one, or one of the drops may break up.

For the thermocapillary induced motion, the eﬀect of deformability was studied mostly

by a perturbation technique assuming small deformations. Recently, Rother and Davis

(25) applied lubrication approximation to study the eﬀect of a slight deformability of the

interfaces on the thermocapillary-driven migration of two drops at close proximity.

Zhou and Davis (20) presented a recent study in which the drops are free to deform

in the course of their thermocapillary interaction. They used a boundary-integral tech-

4

nique to study the thermocapillary interaction of a deformable viscous drop with a larger

trailing drop making no a priori assumptions regarding the magnitude of deformations.

It was demonstrated that in this case the deformations are small and have a small eﬀect

on the drops motion at moderate separation. The inﬂuence of deformability becomes

signiﬁcant only when the drops are close together. Zhou and Davis (20) did not adjust

the surface tension to follow the migration of the drops in the external temperature ﬁeld

that would be stationary in the absence of a drop. Hence, the boundary conditions that

they used were not compatible with the continuous change of the positions of the drops.

The goal of the present work is to extend the analysis of the thermocapillary interac-

tion of deformable drops to the cases of equal-sized drops and the leading larger drop and

to study the inﬂuence of the deformations on the relative motion of the droplets. We have

applied the boundary integral method for the simulations of the thermocapillary induced

motion of two deformable viscous drops in the case of moderate capillary numbers and

equal viscosity and thermal properties of the dispersed and continuous phases.

2 Problem formulation

Consider two drops embedded in an immiscible viscous ﬂuid with a temperature gradient

applied along their line of center.

In the absence of gravity the drops migrate in the

direction of the applied temperature gradient one beyond another due to thermocapillary

forces. The trailing and the leading drop and the continuous ﬂuid are marked by indices

1, 2 and 3, respectively. All the ﬂuids are assumed to be Newtonian and incompressible.

The interface tension γ is assumed to depend linearly on temperature γ(T ) = γ(T0) −

∂γ
∂T (T − T0). The temperature ﬁeld approaches a given linear function T = Az + T0 far

from the dispersed species. The problem is considered in a laboratory coordinate system,

see Fig. 1.

Non-dimensional variables are introduced using the following scaling: the radius a1

of the ﬁrst droplet for the length, V ∗ =

a1A/η3 for the velocity, a1/V ∗ for the time,

∂γ
∂T

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

5

∂γ
∂T

A for the pressure and Aa1 for the temperature. The problem is governed by the

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
following dimensionless parameters: the Marangoni number, Ma, the Prandtl number,
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

P r, and the capillary number, Ca, where

Ma =

; P r =

; Ca =

[3]

a1

2A ρ
2
η3

∂γ
∂T (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

ν3
χ3

a1A
γ0

.

∂γ
∂T (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

The other dimensionless parameters are the ratios of the material properties of the ﬂuids,

η = ηi/η3, ρi/ρ3, κ = κi/κ3 and the geometric parameters R = a2/a1 and d = L/a1,

where L is the distance between the drops along their line of centers.

We shall be interested in the case of small Marangoni numbers and moderate values

of the other parameters. Following (3) one can see that, at the leading order in Ma, the

inertial and convective transport eﬀects are negligible, and the motion inside and outside

the droplets is governed by the Stokes equations:

where pi and vi are the pressure and velocity ﬁeld, respectively. The temperature ﬁeld

inside and outside of droplets satisﬁes the Laplace equation

∇p3 = △v3, x ∈ Ω3,

∇pi = η△vi, x ∈ Ωi,

i = 1, 2,

∇vi = 0, x ∈ Ωi,

i = 1, 2, 3,

△Ti = 0, x ∈ Ωi,

i = 1, 2, 3.

The continuous ﬂuid is quiescent far from the drops

v3 → 0, as x → ∞.

At the interfaces the velocity ﬁeld is continuous,

v0(x) = vi(x),

for x ∈ Σi,

i = 1, 2,

and the kinematic boundary conditions require that

ni · vi = Vni,

for x ∈ Σi,

i = 1, 2,

6

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

where Vni is a velocity of the interface Σi in the normal direction. The tangential stress

balance may be written as

τ i·(Π3 − Πi)·ni = −

, x ∈ Σi,

i = 1, 2,

∂Ti(x)
∂τ

and the balance of the normal stresses reads

ni · (Π3 − Πi)·ni =

− Ti(x)

Hi, x ∈ Σi,

i = 1, 2,

1
Ca

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Here Π3 = −p3I + T3 and Πi = −piI + η Ti with Ti being the rate of deformation tensor,

τ i is a unit vector tangential to the ith interface, and Hi = ∇ · ni is the mean curvature

on the ith interface.

The temperature and the heat ﬂux are continuous

Ti = T3, κ

for x ∈ Σi,

i = 1, 2,

∂Ti
∂n

=

∂T3
∂n

and at inﬁnity the temperature tends to a given linear function

T → z at

|x| → ∞.

method

3 Boundary-integral

formulation.

Numerical

The boundary-value problem outlined in the previous section may also be formulated in

an equivalent integral form (21). Following the classical potential theory (22) we can

obtain a system of boundary-integral equations for the temperature and velocities on the

interfaces. When the thermal properties and viscosities of the phases are equal for all

Ωi phases the boundary integral equations simplify considerably, and the solution to the

problem acquires an explicit form. Thus, the temperature and the velocities everywhere

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

are given by

T (x) = z,

7

v(x) = −

− T (y)

H(y)n +

dS(y).

[14]

1
8π I

Σ

J·

"(cid:18)

1
Ca

(cid:19)

∂T (y)
∂τ

τ

#

Here y ∈ Σ = Σ1 + Σ2 and the kernels for the single layer potentials for Stokes ﬂow are

with ξ = x − y and ξ = |ξ|. Note that the dimensionless surface tension equals 1/Ca − z,

and the natural restriction γ ≥ 0 implies that unequality z ≤ 1/Ca hold for all points

on the interfaces during the entire time of the process. Applying this unequality to the

initial moment t = 0 provides an upper bound for the capillary number

J(ξ) =

+

I
ξ

ξξ
ξ3 ,

Ca <

1
2R1 + 2R2 + d0

,

where d0 is an initial separation between the surfaces of the drops.

In the axisymmetric case, the integrations over the azimuthal angle in [14] can be per-

formed analytically, and the problem is reduced to the computation of a one-dimensional

singular boundary-integral for the interfacial velocity

v(x) =

B(x, y)·f(y)dl(y).

Zσ

Here x = (rx, zx) and y = (r, z) are vectors on an azimuthal (r, z) plane in a cylindrical

coordinate system, σ = σ1 + σ2 is the union of curves describing the drops’ surfaces in

this plane, and dl(y) denotes the diﬀerential arc length of the corresponding contour.

f(y) =

− T (y)

Hn +

τ = fnn + fτ τ

1
Ca

(cid:18)

∂T (y)
∂τ

(cid:19)

is a traction jump across the interface. The complete expressions for components of the

kernel B(x, y) are given in the Appendix. Note that the kernel [16] have a logarithmic

singularity at y → x. In the absence of Marangoni eﬀect, when the tangential stresses

are continuous ( ∂T /∂τ = 0), these singularities are often eliminated making use of a

subtraction technique (21), that is based on a well known equality

[15]

[16]

[17]

B(x, y) · n(y)dl(y) = 0.

Zσi

8

When the tangential Marangoni stresses associated with the temperature gradients on

the drops surfaces are present, this procedure cannot be simply incorporated into the

singularity-subtraction formulation. For the purpose of a study of the droplets migration

it is suﬃcient to compute the normal component of surface velocity Vn = n(x) · v(x).

We employed a subtraction technique (21, 24) in which the normal component of the

velocity on the interfaces can be evaluated as

Vn = n(x) · v(x) = n(x)·

B(x, y)·f(y)dl(y)

Zσ

=

fτ (y) n(x)·B(x, y)·τ (y)dl(y)

Zσ

Zσ

+ n(x)·

[fn(y) − fn(x∗] B(x, y)·n(y)dl(y),

[18]

where x∗ is an arbitrary chosen point in the bulk or on the interface. The choice x∗ = x

removes a singularity in the integral. The integrand of the ﬁrst summand in the right-

hand side of [18] tends to a ﬁnite limit at y → x (see the Appendix).

When the separation between the drops surfaces is small, ’near-singularities’ appear in

the integrand if the reference point x is located in the gap region. Following Loewenberg

and Hinch (24) we facilitate the calculation of integrals at such ’near singular’ using

[18], where x∗ is the image point across the gap region to x. This approach provides a

regularization of the ’near-singularity’ for the regions on the surfaces that are in close

proximity.

In our numerical computations, the drop boundaries in the azimuthal plane are dis-

cretized using marker points and are approximated by cubic splines. The number of

points on the two interfaces is equal. The marker points are distributed uniformly with

respect to the arc length (non-uniform distribution was not needed in our simulation

because the curvature of the interface remains moderate at all time). The normal and

tangent unit vectors at the interfaces and the mean curvatures are computed by taking

the derivatives of the position vector with respect to the arc length. When the normal

velocities on the interfaces are obtained, the positions of the marker points are advances

9

using Euler or Runge Kutta method. After that the cubic spline approximation of the

interfaces is reconstructed and the marker points are redistributed on the new surfaces

uniformly with respect to the arc length. The Krasny (23) ﬁltering procedure was used

to smooth the spatial frequency spectrum and to remove noise that was introduced by

the computation of high derivatives in the code. All Fourier modes below some ’tolerant

number’, which depends on the number of marker points were set to 0. At every step

the positions of the drops’ centers of mass were obtained. The velocities of the centers of

mass were consequently calculated via numerical diﬀerentiation with respect to time. The

calculations are stopped when the interfaces of the drops intersect or when the surface

tension at any point on the leading drop becomes negative.

4 Results and discussion

We consider the axisymmetric drift of two deformable droplets with diﬀerent size. For

simplicity we assume that the droplets and the continuous media have identical viscosity,

densities and thermal properties. This ensures that the temperature ﬁeld is continuous

and has continuous derivatives across the interfaces. The droplets are initially spherical

and start to move from an initial separation distance. The parameters considered include

the capillary number Ca, the initial droplets’ radii R1 and R2 and the initial distance

d0 between surfaces of the droplets. During the motion we observe the evolution of the

positions and of the form of the droplets, and the ﬂow patterns inside the droplets and in

the external ﬂuid. The relative position was measured by the distance between centers

of mass L(t) and by the distance between the nearest points on the surfaces of the two

drops d(t). The deformation of a droplet was characterized by the Taylor deformation

parameter

D =

2rmax − ∆z
2rmax + ∆z

,

where ∆z is the length of the drop along the axis of symmetry, and rmax is the maximum

radial dimension. Positive and negative values of D correspond to oblate and prolate

[19]

10

shapes, respectively.

4.1 Migration velocities. The case of non-deformable drops

We have tested our numerical code by comparing calculated drift velocities with available

analytic results. As it was mentioned above, there are analytical results (11, 13) for the

thermocapillary induced motion of non-deformable spherical drops in a uniform external

temperature gradient. These results can be applied for the axisymmetric cases of drift of

drops with diﬀerent radii R1 and R2, and for diﬀerent separation distances between the

centers of mass.

For the test of our code we considered a case of small capillary number, Ca = 0.001,

in which the expected deformation of initial spherical shape of the drops during the

evolution of the positions is negligibly small. The case of well-separated non-deformable

drops was consider by Anderson (11). He showed that for droplets of equal radii, the

Keh and Chen (13) considered also drops at small distance and derived a general formula

velocities are equal and have the form

U =

1 +

(cid:18)

1
L2 −

7
3

·

1
L6

|U|.

(cid:19)

for the velocities

U1 = M11|U1| + M12|U2|

U2 = M21|U1| + M22|U2|

[20]

[21]

where M11, M12, M21, M22 are mobility coeﬃcients that were calculated numerically, and

|U1|, |U2| are droplets’ velocities that each drop would have in the absence of another

drop.

The velocities of equal droplets calculated using the formulae [20],

[21] and our

Boundary-Integral code are depicted in Fig. 2 versus the separation distance. The

good agreement in all distance-limits is visible. In the case of large separations our cal-

culations, denoted by solid circles, coincide with Anderson’s asymptotic formula (curve

11

d), and in the limit of inﬁnite distance between the drops we recover the value of the drift

velocity 0.133 as in the Young-Bratukhin problem (1, 3). In the limit of a small separa-

tion distance our results are in good agreement with the calculations of Keh and Chen

as well (dashed curve). A comparison for the case of drops of diﬀerent radii is presented

in Fig. 3. We observe that the case of the drift velocities of the two non-deformable

diﬀerent droplets is in a good agreement with Keh and Chen predictions.

4.2 Deformation of equal-sized drops. Eﬀects of Ca and veloc-

ity patterns

Consider now the case of larger capillary numbers, where considerable deformations are

expected. The time evolution of the Taylor deformation parameter is shown in Fig. 4 for

diﬀerent values of the capillary number and of the initial separation distance. We observe

two qualitatively diﬀerent scenarios of the deformation development. For suﬃciently

large initial separations and small Ca (e.g. curves d and e), the deformation is small

and becomes almost stationary after a short transient period. On the other hand, for

the relatively small initial separations and large Ca (e.g. curves a and b), the evolution

of the deformation after the transient period becomes slower, but remains essentially

non-steady. During the initial period, with time scale of O(Ca), the deformations occur

because the non-uniform surface tension is not compatible with the initial spherical form

of the drop. The motion during this period is driven by the surface tension, rather than by

its gradient, and the deformation is controlled by the normal component of the interfacial

stress. At longer time scales the development of the deformations is induced mostly by the

changes in the mutual positions of the drops (characterized by the separation distance).

In Fig. 5 the deformation parameter is depicted versus separation distance for equal-

size drops and diﬀerent capillary numbers. The initial separation was kept constant at

L0 = 2.05. The leading drop becomes more deformed than the trailing one. This can be

explained by the fact that the leading drop is located in a hotter region and, thus, it has

a lower surface tension. The dependence of well developed deformations on the capillary

12

number is demonstrated in Fig. 6. Here we plotted the deformation parameter of the

more deformed leading drop in Fig. 5 when the separation distance reached L = 2.04.

The dependence on small Ca appears to be linear.

The deviation of the surfaces from the spherical shape

r2
i (θ) + (zi(θ) − Zi)2 − Ri is

demonstrated in Fig. 7 for diﬀerent values of time. One can see considerable deformations

q

in the gap region while the outer regions of the drops remain almost spherical. It is evident

from Figs. 4, 5 and 7 that the leading drop deforms to an oblate shape while the trailing

one becomes prolate. The mechanism of this deformation is shown in Figure 8 where

we plot the velocity ﬁeld for two equal drops at close proximity for time t = 10. The

reference frame moves with the rear point on the axis of the trailing drop as marked in

the ﬁgure. In this reference frame, the drops are almost at rest except for the gap region.

The motion is composed of a ﬂow past an aggregate of two drops and the deformation of

the gap region in the opposite direction. The elongation of the trailing drop to a prolate

shape and the ﬂattening of the leading drop to the oblate shape are clearly evident.

Similar to the deformation, the velocities of the drops’ centers of mass achieve quasi-

steady slowly changing values after a short transient period. For two equal drops at

Ca = 0.2 these are plotted in Fig. 2 versus the distance between the surfaces (points on

the curves a and c). One can see that, at large separations, the velocities of the two equal-

sized drops are almost equal and approach the velocities of the non-deformable drops.

In contrast to this, for suﬃciently small separation, the velocities of the two deformed

drops are diﬀerent. The leading oblate drop moves slower than the trailing prolate one.

The time evolution of the surface-to-surface distance d(t) and center-to center distance

L(t) for Ca = 0.2 and diﬀerent initial separations is shown in Fig. 9. We observe two

diﬀerent behaviors depending on the initial separation. At small initial separations,

surface to surface distance decreases with time (Figure 9 (e)). For larger separations,

surface-to surface distance shows a transient behavior in which it grows initially and

decreases after some period (Fig. 9(b)). This initial period of repulsion increases with

the initial separation, and for d0 = 0.5 (see Fig 9(c)) the surface-to-surface distance grows

13

during the entire time of the process. To understand this behavior recall that the leading

drop deforms into an oblate shape, thus, moving apart from the trailing one. The latter,

in turn, deforms into a prolate shape, however, its deformations are lower due to a higher

surface tension. As a result, the separation distance increases. The diﬀerence in the

eﬀective surface tension increases with the separation distance, hence, when the distance

is suﬃciently small, this eﬀect is overcome by the simultaneous approach of the droplets’

centers of mass (Fig. 9 (d) and (f)) and, after a period of repulsion, the drops surfaces

approach each other. The period of initial ’repulsion’ becomes wider for larger initial

separations, while when the initial distances are small enough, the diﬀerence in the rate

of deformation becomes negligible, the initial repulsion period vanishes (see Fig. 9 e) and

the drops approach during the entire time of the process. Note that the motion of the

droplets towards each other is quite slow, and in the cases that we considered drops that

were initially very close together do not progress to a complete collision.

4.3

Interaction of Drops of Diﬀerent Size.

The interaction of equal size drops is governed by the interplay of two eﬀects: rela-

tive motion caused by the oblate(prolate) shape of the leading(trailing) drop, and more

pronounced deformations of the leading drop in the gap region due to its lower surface

tension. These eﬀects take place also for unequal drops, but in this case they are combined

with the relative motion caused by the diﬀerent sizes. Similar to the case of equal drops,

after a short transient period the migration velocity of the trailing drop is enchanced

and the leading drop motion is retarded compared to the case with no deformations. If

the leading drop is smaller than the trailing one, the separation distance decreases with

time and the drops come to near contact. For this case, the larger drop remains almost

spherical, and the smaller one deforms considerably. The form of the drops in close prox-

imity and the velocity ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 10 (a) for Ca = 0.2, R1 = 1, R2 = 0.5.

The reference frame moves with the rear point of the trailing drop. The motion is a

superposition of a ﬂow past an aggregate of the drops and a motion and deformation of

14

the surface of the leading drop. The larger trailing drop deforms mostly in the near gap

region. The deformation pattern in this case agrees qualitatively with the one reported

by Zhou and Davis (20).

The situation is diﬀerent when the trailing drop is smaller than the leading one. In

this case the gap between nondeformable drops increases and the drops separate. The

deformability may result in a more complex interaction between such drops if the initial

separation is small enough. The velocity ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 10 (b) for Ca = 0.2, R1 =

1, R2 = 1.5. The reference frame moves with the point at the center of the gap region.

One can observe a very slow motion in the gap and considerable normal velocities at the

interfaces in the outer regions, indicating the developing deformations. The evolution

of the separation distances and the deformation parameter are shown in Figs 11, 12

and 13 for various drop size ratio and Ca. Diﬀerent curves on each plot correspond to

diﬀerent initial separations. It is seen that for the large initial separations, the surface-to-

surface distance increases during the entire duration of the process, as in the case when

the deformations are absent. When the initial separation is small the distance is ﬁrst

reduced and only increase at the later stages. The transition is controled by the capillary

number (see Fig.14) and it seems to occur at separation distance of O(10−2).

To understand this unusual behavior, consider the evolution of the deformation factor

that is shown in these ﬁgures. The smaller drop deforms much stronger than the larger

one assuming a prolate form. This is an anticipated result since the deformation of the

trailing drop is induced by the pulling presence of the leading one and vice versa. The

larger drop induces larger deformations. Since in our case the leading drop is larger,

higher deformations of the trailing drop are expected. At the depicted size ratios this

eﬀect overcomes the eﬀect of a lower surface tension over the leading drop that has an

opposite eﬀect in the case of equal drops, where the leading drop is more deformed.

The deformation of the smaller drop develops very fast during an initial transient

period and becomes slower afterwards. The interface of a larger drop is initially pushed

by the trailing one and assumes an oblate shape. These deformations are combined with

15

the relative motion of the drops apart from each other due to the diﬀerent radii. Unless

the drops are very close in size, after the initial period the elongation of the trailing

drop becomes slower, and the distance between the interfaces begins to grow. The drops

separate and the inﬂuence of the trailing drop on the leading one causes its deformation

to reverse itself and it also becomes prolate (see Figs. 12(c) and 13(c)). When the drops

are very close in size (see Fig. 11(c)), the evolution their shape is more symmetric and

resembles the one depicted in Fig. 4 for the equal-size case.

During the initial period the drops may come very close together and attractive

London van der Waals forces may results in the rupture of the inter-droplet ﬁlm and

cause an eventual coalescence. This process, however, is beyond the scope of our work.

The distance between the centers of mass of the drops increases monotonically while the

surface exhibits a transient behavior. During the early stages of the dynamics the gap

shrinks and the surfaces come to close proximity, while at later stages the drops separate

as in the case with no deformations. The time in which the initial perturbation of the

shape is relaxed and the gap acquires a minimum appears to depend linearly on the

capillary number. In this case the system may result in a higher coalescence rate due to

diminishing gap in the transient period.

5 Concluding remarks

The interaction between two drops in a temperature gradient shows a variety of behav-

ior patterns. Equal drops always approach each other, however, the surface-to-surface

distance has a transient behavior during which the separation ﬁrst grows and later di-

minishes. When two unequal drops are moving, with the bigger one leading, an opposite

transient behavior is observed if the initial separation distance is small. Here, the surfaces

ﬁrst approach each other and later depart while the drops are moving away from each

other. This non-trivial behavior takes place during an initial period of the process. Since

our calculations are based on the creeping ﬂow approximation that neglect inertia of the

16

ﬂuid, these results are applicable only if the ﬂow ﬁeld in the ﬂuid is established much

faster than an equilibrium form of the deformed surface. Three diﬀerent time scales are

present in the process under consideration: a viscous relaxation time tν = a2
lary surface relaxation time ts = η3a1/γ0, and the thermocapillary time t∗ = η3/
∂γ
∂T A
,
(cid:17)
that was chosen as the time scale in our considerations. Since tν/t∗ = Ma and ts/t∗ = Ca,

1ρ/η3, capil-

(cid:16)

the condition Ma << Ca is suﬃcient to ensure that the transient period can be described

in a creeping ﬂow approximation.

It is interesting to compare the magnitude of deformation in our case with diﬀerent

cases such as buoyancy-driven motion (19) and that resulting from non-linear dependence

of surface tension on the external ﬁeld (26). We found that the deformation in the case

of a thermocapillary migration causes behavior of the drops at close proximity that is

qualitatively diﬀerent from that observed in the other cases. The calculated magnitude

in the thermocapillary was relatively small for both leading and trailing drops and for

diﬀerent aspect ratios. The rich variety of interaction pattern typical for a motion driven

buoyancy is not observed. There are several reasons why it is so. The ﬁrst is a well-known

fact that the disturbances of the velocity ﬁeld, resulting from the thermocapillary-induced

motion of a single drop, decay with the distance from the particle as 1/r3. This is much

faster than the 1/r decay in the case of the gravity-driven motion. Thus, the inﬂuence

of the presence of a drop on the motion and deformation of the other one is expected to

be smaller and to decay more rapidly with the separation distance than the one in the

gravity-driven motion case. The other important diﬀerence of these two processes is that

the Bond number

Bo =

2

,

∆ρga1
γ0

that governs the deformability of the drops undergoing gravity-driven migration, may

take any values from 0 to inﬁnity, and the interesting behavior is observed when this value

is relatively large, Bo > 3 (see (19)). In contrast to this, the value of the capillary number

that governs the deformability of the drops in the course of their thermocapillary-driven

migration is restricted from above if only physically relevant cases of positive interfacial

17

tension are considered. In our calculations the non-vanishing values of Ca were typically

about 0.2.

Note that using the linear proﬁle of a surface tension – temperature dependence

results in restriction on the extent of collective drift of drops. Practically there is some

moment of time at which the calculation must stop, because after this time the surface

tension becomes zero at the front edge of the leading drop. In the case of temperature

dependence this situation implies a phase transition. However, when the surface tension

depends on concentration of a solute, zero surface tension cannot be achieved. In this

case the dependence of surface tension on concentration ( for some pairs ﬂuid-solute)

can be divided to two diﬀerent regions. In the ﬁrst region the dependence of tension on

concentration is strong and can be described by the linear model considered above. In

the second region, when the surface tension is diminished, its change with concentration

is very slow and it can be approximated by a constant (26).

We performed a calculation for the case of equal drops using this simple two-region

dependence of the interfacial tension letting the linear dependence down the value

= 10−2 and keeping it constant beyond this point. When the drops enter

γ/

dγ
dT

Aa1
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

the region of low surface tension the deformation pattern changes and more pronounced

distortion of the spherical shapes are obtained. This deformation pattern is accompanied

by a clear reduction of the drops’ speed and the entire migration is halted. A demonstra-

tion of such behavior is given in Figure 15. More detailed dynamics of such interactions

are left for the future study.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by The Israel Science Foundation founded by the Academy

of Science and Humanities. O. M. L. acknowledges the support of the Israel Ministry

for Immigrant Absorption. The authors wish to thank A. M. Leshansky for helpful

discussions.

18

Appendix: Kernels in Eqn. [16]

If rx 6= 0, i.e. the point x is not on the axis of symmetry

Bzz = 2k

1/2

r
rx (cid:19)

(cid:18)

F (k) +
"

Bzr = k

z − zx
(rxr)1/2

F (k) −
"

(z − zx)2

(rx + r)2 + (zx − z)2 E(k)
r2
x − r2 + (z − zx)2
(rx + r)2 + (zx − z)2 E(k)

,

,

#

Brz = −k

F (k) +

1/2

r
rx (cid:19)

"

z − zx

rx (cid:18)
1/2

Brr =

k
rxr (cid:18)

r
rx (cid:19)
2(z − zx)4 + 3(z − zx)2(r2

[r2
x + r2 + 2(zx − z)2]F (k)−
n

x + r2) + (r2

x − r2)2

(rx + r)2 + (zx − z)2

E(k)

,

)

#
r2
x − r2 − (z − zx)2
(rx + r)2 + (zx − z)2 E(k)

,

#

Here F and E are complete elliptic functions of the ﬁrst and second kind respectively,

k2 =

4rxr
(rx + r)2 + (zx − z)2 ,

axis z and r.

and nz and nr denote the projection of the normal vector in the azimuthal plane on the

If the point x is on the axis of symmetry, rx = 0, k = 0 and the kernels take the form

Bzz = 2πr

r2 + 2(z − zx)2
[r2 + (z − zx)2]3/2 , Brz = 0,

r2(z − zx)

Bzr = −2π

[r2 + (z − zx)2]3/2 , Brr = 0,

Asymptotic expansions as y tends to x (rx 6= 0):

Bzz = − ln[r2 + (z − zx)2] + czz + . . . Brz = crz + . . . ,

Bzr = czr + . . . , Brr = − ln[r2 + (z − zx)2] + crr + . . . ,

n(x)·B(x, y)·τ (y) = crznr(x)τz(x) + czrnz(x)τr(x) + . . . ,

where crr, crz, czr, and czz are constants.

If the curve σi is parametrized by the arc

length, the kernels are regular for rx = 0.

19

References

1. Young, N. O., Goldstein, J. S., and Block, M. J., J. Fluid Mech. 6, 350 (1959).

2. Subramanian, R. S., in “Transport Processes in Bubbles, Drops and Particles”(P.

Chhabra, D. DeKee), p.1. Hemisphere, New York, 1992

3. Bratukhin, Yu. K., Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR, Mekhanika Zhidkosti, Gaza. 5,

156 (1975)

94, 243 (1983).

4. Balasubramaniam, R. and Chai A., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 119 531 (1987).

5. Meyyappan, M., Wilcox, W. R., and Subramanian, R. S., J. Colloid Interface Sci.

6. Feuillbois, F., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 131, 267 (1989).

7. Meyyappan, M., and Subramanian, R. S., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 97, 291 (1984).

8. Acrivos, A., Jeﬀrey, D. J., and Saville, D. A., J. Fluid Mech. 212, 95 (1990).

9. Satrape, J. V., Phys. Fluids A 4 1883 (1992).

10. Wang, Y., Mauri, R., and Acrivos, A., J. Fluid Mech. 261, 47 (1994).

11. Anderson, J. L., Int. J. Multiphase Flow 11, 813 (1985).

12. Keh, H. J., and Chen, S. H., Int. J. Multiphase Flow 16, 515 (1990).

13. Keh, H. J., and Chen, L. S., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 151, 1 (1992).

14. Keh, H. J., and Chen, L. S., Chem. Eng. Sci. 48, 3565 (1993).

15. Wei, H., and Subramanian, R. S., Phys. Fluids A 5 1583 (1993).

16. Loewenberg, M., and Davis, R., J. Fluid Mech. 256, 107 (1993).

17. Manga, M., and Stone H. A., J. Fluid Mech. 256, 647 (1993).

20

18. Zinchenko, A. Z.. Rother M. A., and Davis, R. H, J. Fluid Mech. 391, 249 (1999).

19. Davis, R. H., Phys. Fluids A 11 1016 (1999).

20. Zhou, H., Davis, R. H, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 181, 60 (1996)

21. Pozrikidis, C., ”Boundary Integral and Singularity Methods for Linearized Viscous

Flow,” Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1992.

22. Ladyzhenskaya, O. A., “ The Mathematical Theory of Viscous Incompressible

Flow.” Gordon and Breach, 1969.

23. Krasny, R.,J. Fluid Mech. 167, 65 (1986).

24. Loewenberg, M. and Hinch E. J., J. Fluid Mech. 321 395 (1996).

25. Rother, M. A. and Davis, R. H., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 214 297 (1999).

26. Adamson A.W., “Physical Chemistry of Surfaces”, 3-Ed., Wiley-Interscience Pub-

lication, New York-London-Sydney-Toronto, (1976)

21

Figure legends

Figure 1. Geometric sketch of two viscous drops immersed in an external temperature gradi-

ent ∇T parallel of their axis of symmetry.

Figure 2. Center of mass velocities for equal drops R1 = R2 = 1. The solid line (d), dashed

line (b) and the points on these lines are the results of Anderson, Keh and Chen and

our computations for Ca = 0.001, respectively. The points (a) and (c) correspond

to leading and trailing deformable drops at Ca = 0.2.

Figure 3. Droplet velocities for Ca = 0.001 and diﬀerent aspect ratio.

In the case (a, b)

R1 = 1.0 and R2 = 2.0. In the case (c, d) R1 = 1.0 and R2 = 0.5. The lines b and

d correspond to the larger drop.

Figure 4. The evolution of Taylor deformation parameter deﬁned in Eqn.

[19]: (a) Ca =

0.2, d0 = 0.1; (b) Ca = 0.2, d0 = 0.5; (c) Ca = 0.1, d0 = 0.1; (d) Ca = 0.1, d0 =

0.5; (e) Ca = 0.1, d0 = 2. Positive and negative values correspond to oblate and

prolate shapes, respectively.

Figure 5. Deformation parameter for equal-size droplets versus the distance between cen-

ters of mass:

(a) Ca = 0.2, d0 = 0.05; (b) Ca = 0.1, d0 = 0.05; (c)

Ca = 0.05, d0 = 0.05. Positive and negative values correspond to oblate and

prolate shapes, respectively.

Figure 6. Deformation of the leading droplet versus the capillary number at L = 2.04 for

Figure 7. The local deformations for trailing (a) and leading (b) equal-size droplets for the

case Ca = 0.2 and d0 = 0.01. 1, 2 and 3 correspond to 0.5, 3.3, and 10 units of

equal-size droplets.

time, respectively.

Figure 8. Velocity patterns for Ca = 0.2, R1 = 1.0 and R2 = 1.0. The reference frame moves

with the speed of the marked point.

22

Figure 9. The evolution of the separation and center-to-senter distances for equal-size drops

at Ca = 0.2 as function of the initial separation (a). (b) Transient dynamics for

intermediate initial separation.

(c, d) Evolution of surface-to-surface separation

and center-to-center distance for relatively large initial separation. (e, f ) Evolution

of surface-to-surface separation and center-to-center distance for relatively small

initial separation.

Figure 10. Velocity patterns for (a) Ca = 0.2, R1 = 1.0 and R2 = 0.5; (b) Ca = 0.15, R1 = 1.0

and R2 = 1.5. The reference frame moves with the speed of the marked point.

Figure 11. Interaction between a leading larger drop and a trailing smaller one at close prox-

imity for Ca = 0.2, R1 = 1.0, R2 = 1.1: (a) evolution of center-to-center distance;

(b) evolution of surface-to surface separation; (c) evolution of Taylor deformation

parameter. The numbers 1 to 9 denote the diﬀerent initial separation.

Figure 12. Interaction between a leading larger drop and a trailing smaller one at close prox-

imity for Ca = 0.15, R1 = 1.0, R2 = 1.5: (a) evolution of center-to-center distance;

evolution of surface-to surface separation; (c) evolution of Taylor deformation pa-

rameter. The numbers 1 to 6 denote the diﬀerent initial separation.

Figure 13. Interaction between a leading larger drop and a trailing smaller one at close prox-

imity for Ca = 0.12, R1 = 1.0, R2 = 2: (a) evolution of center-to-center distance;

(b) evolution of surface-to surface separation; (c) evolution of Taylor deformation

parameter. The numbers 1 to 7 denote the diﬀerent initial separation.

Figure 14. The relaxation time tr with minimum separation distance as function of the capil-

lary number.

Figure 15. Deformation of equal-size drops migrating into a region of vanishing surface tension.

The upper plot shows the dependence of surface tension on distance. The lower

plot demonstrates migration and deformation pattern for various time. (a) t = 0;

(b) t = 5; (c) t = 19; (d) t = 25.

23

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig12.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig13.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig14.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

This figure "fig15.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0102072v1

