1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Topology and Turbulence

R. M. Kiehn
Mazan, France
rkiehn2352@aol.com
http://www.cartan.pair.com

Abstract: Over a given regular domain of independent variables
{x,y,z,t}, every covariant vector ﬁeld of ﬂow can be constructed
in terms a diﬀerential 1-form of Action. The associated Cartan
topology permits the deﬁnition of four basic topological equiva-
lence classes of ﬂows based on the Pfaﬀ dimension of the 1-form
of Action. Potential ﬂows or streamline processes are generated
by an Action 1-form of Pfaﬀ dimension 1 and 2, respectively.
Chaotic ﬂows must be associated with domains of Pfaﬀ dimen-
sion 3 or more. Turbulent ﬂows are associated with domains
of Pfaﬀ dimension 4.
It will be demonstrated that the Navier-
Stokes equations are related to Action 1-forms of Pfaﬀ dimension
4. The Cartan Topology is a disconnected topology if the Pfaﬀ
dimension is greater than 2. This fact implies that the creation of
turbulence (a state of Pfaﬀ dimension 4 and a disconnected Car-
tan topology) from a streamline ﬂow (a state of Pfaﬀ dimension 2
and a connected topology) can take place only by discontinuous
processes which induce shocks and tangential discontinuities. On
the otherhand, the decay of turbulence can be described by con-
tinuous, but irreversible, processes. Numerical procedures that
force continuity of slope and value cannot in principle describe
the creation of turbulence, but such techniques of forced continu-
ity can be used to describe the decay of turbulence.

1 INTRODUCTION

The turbulence problem of hydrodynamics is complicated by the fact that
there does not exist a precise deﬁnition of the turbulent state that is uni-
versally accepted. The visual complexity of the turbulent state leads to the

1

assumption that the phenomenon is in some way random and statistical. It
is however a matter of experience that a real viscous liquid which is isolated
from its surroundings, after being put into a turbulent state will decay into
a streamline state and ultimately a state of rest. This process of decay is
apparently continous

Although the turbulent state is intuitively recognizable, only a small num-
ber of properties necessary for the turbulent state receive the support of a
majority of researchers:

1. A turbulent ﬂow is three dimensional

2. A turbulent ﬂow is time dependent.

3. A turbulent ﬂow is dissipative.

4. A turbulent ﬂow may be intermittent.

5. A turbulent ﬂow is irreversible.

Still, a precise mathematical deﬁnition of the turbulent state has not been

established.

It sometimes is argued that a turbulent ﬂow is random, a quality that
has been reinforced by successes of certain statistical theories in describing
average properties of the turbulent state. Recent advances in non-linear
dynamics indicate a sensitivity to initial conditions can lead to deterministic
”chaos”, a quality which visually has some of the intuitive features often
associated with turbulence. Moreover, the theory of non-linear dynamics has
led to several new suggestions that describe the route to turbulence.

However, there are fundamental diﬀerences between irreversibility, chaos,
and randomness that suggest that the turbulent state is not simply a chaotic
regime. Similar statements can be made about the transition to turbulence
and the formation of ”coherent structures” in turbulent ﬂows. Although the
eye easily perceives the antithesis to turbulence as being a steady streamline
ﬂow, the transition from the pure streamline state to the turbulent state
is complicated by the fact that there may be intermediate chaotic states in
between an initial state of rest (or steady integrable streamline ﬂow) and a
ﬁnal state of turbulent ﬂow. The objective of this article is to focus attention
on and apply topological methods, rather than the customary geometric or

2

statistical methods, to the problem of deﬁning the transition to turbulence
and the turbulent state itself.

In hydrodynamics, it is generally accepted that the non-turbulent state
seems to be described adequately in terms of solutions to the Navier-Stokes
equations. The description of the turbulent state is not so clear, and to
this author the reason may be due to a lack of deﬁnition of what is the
turbulent state. As Ian Stewart [1988] states, ”the Leray Theory of tur-
bulence...asserts that when turbulence occurs, the Navier-Stokes equations
break down. ... turbulence is a fundamentally diﬀerent problem from smooth
ﬂow.” In other words, one option would be that the turbulent state is not
among the solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations. Counter to this op-
tion, and more in concurrence with the spirit of this article, would be the
inclusion of discontinuous solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations into the
class of evolutionary ﬂows under consideration. However it is possible to
show that there exist continuous solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations
which are thermodynamically irreversible.
Such solutions are irreducibly
four dimensional and can serve as candidates decscribing the decay of tur-
bulence. It is possible to demonstrate that the creation of turbulence cannot
be described by a continuous process.

The Kolmogorov theory of turbulence [Kolmogorov, 1941] is a statisti-
cal option motivated by the assumption that the turbulent state consists of
”vortices” of all ”scales” with random intensities, but otherwise it is a theory
which is not based upon the Navier-Stokes equations explicitly. The wavelet
theory of Zimin [1991] is a method that does use a speciﬁc decomposition of
the solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations, and a transformation to a set
of collective variables, which mimic the Kolmogorov motivation of vortices of
all scales. However from a topological view, scales can not have any intrinsic
relevance.

The Hopf-Landau theory [Landau 1959] claims that the transition to tur-
bulence is a quasi-periodic phenomenon in which inﬁnitely many periods are
sequentially generated in order to give the appearance of randomness.
In
contrast, the Ruelle-Takens theory [Berge, 1984] describes the transition to
turbulence not in terms of an inﬁnite cascade, but in terms of a few transi-
tions leading to a chaotic state deﬁned by a strange attractor. In other words,
it would appear that the presence of a strange attractor deﬁnes the turbulent
state, but again there is a degree of vagueness in that the ”strange attractor”
is ill-deﬁned. A basic question arises: ”Is chaos the same as turbulence?”
[Kiehn, 1990b].

3

In this article, topological methods will be used to formulate a deﬁnition of
the turbulent state. The method, being topological and not geometrical, will
involve concepts of scale independence, a concept in spirit recently utilized
by Frisch [1991] in an approach based on multi-fractals. However, at the
time of writing of the Frisch article, a speciﬁc connection between fractals
and solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations was unknown. Only recently has
the suggestion been made that those special characteristic sets of points upon
which the solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations can be discontinuous, and
which at the same time are minimal surfaces, may be the generators of fractal
sets [Kiehn, 1992].

A guiding feature of this article will be the idea that the abstract Cartan
topology of interest is reﬁned by the constraints imposed by the Navier-
Stokes equations on the equations of topological evolution. Questions of
smoothness and continuity are always related to a speciﬁc choice of a topol-
ogy, and the topology chosen in this article is the topology generated by a
constrained Cartan exterior diﬀerential system [Bryant, 1991]. The vector
ﬁeld solutions to the constrained topology (the Navier-Stokes equations) fall
into four equivalence classes that characterize certain topological properties
of the evolutionary system. Most of the mathematical details are left to
the Appendix, with the primary discussion presented in a qualitative man-
ner. The principle key feature of the constrained topology is that two of the
equivalence classes imply that the Cartan topology induced by the vector
ﬂow ﬁeld is disconnected, while the other two equivalence classes imply that
the induced topology is connected.

According to the theory presented herein, the key feature of the turbu-
lent state is that its representation as a vector ﬁeld can only be associated
with a disconnected Cartan topology, while the globally streamline integrable
state is associated with a connected Cartan topology. It is a mathematical
fact that a transition from a connected topology to disconnected topology
can take place only by a discontinuous transformation. This discontinuous
transformation is typically realized as a cutting or tearing operation of sep-
aration. However, a transition from a disconnected topology to a connected
topology can take place by a continuous, but not reversible, transformation
of pasting. The fundamental conclusion is that the creation of the turbulent
state is intrinsically diﬀerent from the decay of the turbulent state, but both
processes involve topological change.

4

2 THE CARTAN TOPOLOGY

To come to grips with the topological issues of hydrodynamics it is necessary
to be able to deﬁne a useful topology in a way naturally suited to the problem
at hand. On the set {x,y,z,t} it is possible to deﬁne many topologies. Indeed,
for many evolutionary systems, particularly those which are dissipative and
irreversible, the topology of the initial state need not be the same as the
topology of the ﬁnal state. Hence, not only is it necessary to construct a
topology for a hydrodynamic system at some time, t, it is also necessary that
the topology so constructed be a dynamical system in itself. The transition
to or from turbulence will involve topological change.

As mentioned above, topological change can be induced either by a pro-
cess that is discontinuous, or by a process that is continuous, but not re-
versible [Kiehn 1991a]. In this article attention is focused mainly on those
processes that are continuous but irreversible. Recall that continuity is a
topological property (not a geometrical property) that is deﬁned in terms of
the limit points of the initial and ﬁnal state topologies. The methods used to
deﬁne the topology used herein are based on those techniques that E. Cartan
developed for his studies of exterior diﬀerential systems [Bishop, 1968]. For
the hydrodynamic application it will be assumed that the evolutionary phys-
ical system (the ﬂuid) can be deﬁned in terms of a 1-form of Action built
on a single covariant vector ﬁeld. Typical of Lagrangian ﬁeld theory, the
equations of evolution are determined from a system of Pfaﬃan expressions
constructed from the extremals to the 1-form of Action when subjected to
constraints. The resultant Pfaﬃan system corresponds to a system of partial
diﬀerential equations of evolution. The extremal process is equivalent to the
ﬁrst variation in the theory of the Calculus of Variations. The Action 1-form,
A, may be composed from the functions that make up the evolutionary ﬂow
ﬁeld itself, as well as other functions on the set {x,y,z,t}. A unreduced typi-
cal format for the Action 1-form on the set {x,y,z,t} would be given by the
expression,

A = Axdx + Aydy + Azdz + Atdt,

(1)

where the functions Ak are constructed from the components of the ﬂow
ﬁeld, and other functions. Cartans idea was to examine the irreducible rep-
resentations of this 1-form of Action. For example, in certain domains, the
action may be represented by the diﬀerentials of a single function, A = dφ.
In other cases, the representation might require two functions, A = αdβ, and

5

so on. Given an arbitrary action, A, how do you determine its irreducible
represention? Is a given Action reducible? The answer to the last question
is given by the Pfaﬀ dimension or class of the 1-form A. The Pfaﬀ dimension
is computed by one diﬀerential and several algebraic processes producing a
sequence of higher and higher order diﬀerential forms. The construction of
these forms is detailed in the next section, but the remark to be made here is
that these objects may be used to construct a topological basis, and thereby,
a topology.

In short, a point set equivalent to the Cartan topology can be deﬁned in
terms of those functions that form the components of the covariant vector
ﬁeld use to deﬁne the Action 1-form, the ﬁrst partial derivatives of these
functions, and their algebraic intersections. The details of this coarse Cartan
topology over a space, {x,y,z,t}, are given in Appendix A, with the reﬁnement
that constrains the coarse topology to yield those evolutionary ﬁelds that are
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations.

3 PFAFF DIMENSION

The topological property of dimension is the key feature that distinguishes
precisely four Cartan equivalence classes of covariant vector ﬁelds on the set
{x,y,z,t}. The idea of Pfaﬀ dimension (called the class of the Pfaﬃan system
in the older literature [Forsyth, 1953] ) is related to the irreducible number
of functions which are required to describe an arbitrary Pfaﬃan form, in this
case the 1-form of Action. An Action 1-form that can be generated globally
in terms of a single scalar ﬁeld, and its diﬀerentials, is of Pfaﬀ dimension 1.
Over space time, this single function or parameter is often called the ”phase”
or ”potential” function, φ(x, y, z, t). When the Action is of Pfaﬀ dimension
1, then it may be expressed in the reduced form, A = dφ.

For the purposes described in this article, where the Action is deﬁned
in terms of the ﬂow ﬁeld itself, the constraint of Pfaﬀ dimension 1 implies
that the vector ﬁeld representing the evolutionary ﬂow is a ”potential” ﬂow.
Such gradient vector ﬂow ﬁelds represent a submersion from four dimensional
space-time to a parameter space of one dimension, the potential function
itself.

Actions constructed for ﬂows that admit vorticity (but are completely
integrable in the sense that through every point there exists a unique param-
eter function whose gradient determines the line of action of the ﬂow) can be

6

represented by a submersive map to a parameter space of two dimensions.
The reduced format for the 1-form of Action is A = ψ(x, y, z, t)dφ(x, y, z, t).
Such integrable ﬂows are deﬁned as globally laminar ﬂows (in the sense that
there exists a globally sychronizable set of unique initial conditions, or pa-
rameters). Such ﬂows are to be distinguished from ﬂows that may have,
for example, re-entrant domains, and are locally layered, but for which it
is impossible to deﬁne a global connected set of initial conditions. Globally
laminar ﬂows and potential ﬂows are of Pfaﬀ dimension 2 or less, and are
associated with a Cartan point set topology which is connected. This con-
cept is to be interpreted as implying that there exists an N-1 dimensional set
which intersects the ﬂow lines in a unique set of points. (As Arnold says, the
ﬁeld is of co-dimension 1.) For three dimensional space, N=3, this set is a
surface. For four-dimensional space, N=4, this set is a volume.

In a domain where the Cartan point set topology is connected (the 1-
form of Action is of Pfaﬀ dimension 2 or less) it is possible to deﬁne a single
connected parameter of evolution which plays the role of ”phase”. In three
dimensions, the parametric value is called ”time”. This idea of a uniquely
deﬁned global parameter N-1 surface is the heart of the Caratheodory theory
of equilibrium thermodynamics. For such systems, there are inﬁnitely close
neighboring points which are not reachable by closed equilibrium processes.
The equilibrium process is deﬁned to be a process whose trajectory is conﬁned
to the N-1 integrable hypersurface. The two irreducible functions of the
integrable Pfaﬀ representation are called temperature, T, and entropy, S, in
the Caratheodory setting. The parameter space is connected, but a constant
value of the parameter space does not intersect all points of the domain.
The evolutionary vector ﬁelds associated with completely integrable Pfaﬃan
systems are never chaotic [Schuster, 1984].

For a 1-form of Action that is associated with a disconnected point set
topology, such a globally unique parameterization as described above is im-
possible. Those 1-forms of Action, if not of Pfaﬀ dimension 2 (or less) glob-
ally, do not satisfy the Frobenius complete integrability conditions [Flan-
ders,1963] The evolutionary vector ﬁelds associated with non-integrable 1-
forms can be chaotic.
If the 1-form of Action is of Pfaﬀ dimension 3,
then it has an irreducible representation as A = dβ + ψdφ. The three
independent functions form a non-zero three form otf topological torsion,
H = AˆdA = dβˆdψˆdφ, and represents a covariant current of rank 3, with
a dual representation as a contravariant tensor density (the torsion current).
The torsion current has zero divergence on the domain of space {x,y,z,t}

7

which is of Pfaﬀ dimension 3 relative to the Action A. This result implies
that the ”lines” so generated by the solenoidal torsion current in {x,y,z,t}
can never stop or start within the domain interior. The lines representing
the topological torsion 4-current either close on themselves, or start and stop
on points of the boundary of the domain. The torsion lines never stop in the
interior of the domain where the Pfaﬀ dimension is 3. Such a torsion current
does not exist in domains of Pfaﬀ dimension 2 or less. Explicit formulas for
the torsion current will be given below.

For a four dimensional domain, the 1-form of Action may be of Pfaﬀ
dimension 4, and the irreducible representation of the Action is given by the
expression, A = αdβ + ψdφ. Each of these functions is independent, so the
topological torsion current is of the form,

AˆdA = αdβˆdψˆdφ + ψdφˆdαˆdβ

(2)

The topological torsion current is a 4 component vector ﬁeld. However,
the divergence of this vector ﬁeld is not necessarily zero! The lines of the
torsion current can start or stop in the interior of the domain when the Pfaﬀ
dimension is 4, but not when the Pfaﬀ dimension is 3.

In four dimensions, a solenoidal vector ﬁeld, if homogeneous of degree 0,
forms a minimal surface in space time. In fact, if a four dimensional vector
ﬁeld can be represented by a complex holomorphic curve, then the ﬁeld is not
only solenoidal, but also harmonic, and is always associated with a minimal
surface. It will be shown below, that in the hydrodynamics governed by the
Navier-Stokes equations, harmonic vector ﬁeld solutions are not dissipative,
no matter what the value of the viscosity coeﬃcient. For dissipative irre-
versible systems, attention is therefore focused on systems of Pfaﬀ dimension
4, for which the torsion current is not solenoidal.

The theory presented in this article insists that irreversible turbulence
must be time dependent and irreducibly three dimensional. The idea of ”two
dimensional” turbulence, for time dependent continuous ﬂows, is inconsis-
tent, for such ﬂows have a maximum Pfaﬀ dimension of 3. Flows of Pfaﬀ
dimension 3 can be chaotic, but they are deterministically reversible, hence
not turbulent. In agreement with the arguments expressed by Kida [1989],
the turbulent state is more than just chaos. A turbulent domain must be of
Pfaﬀ dimension 4, for in space-time domains of Pfaﬀ dimension 3, it is always
possible to construct ﬂow lines that never intersect. Hence such ﬂow lines are

8

always re-traceable, without ambiguity, and such ﬂows are not irreversible. In
order to break time-reversal symmetry, and hence to be irreversible, the ﬂow
lines must intersect in space-time such that they cannot be retraced without
ambiguity. Such a result requires that the Euler characteristic of the four
dimensional domain must be non-zero, for then it is impossible to construct
a vector ﬁeld without intersections. The Euler characteristic of space-time is
only non-zero on domains of Pfaﬀ dimension 4. Hence, the Pfaﬀ dimension
of turbulent domains on {x,y,z,t} must be 4, while the chaotic domains need
be only of Pfaﬀ dimension 3 [Kiehn, 1991b].

4 TOPOLOGICAL CONNECTEDNESS VS.

GEOMETRIC SCALES

In early studies of the turbulent state, from both the statistical point of
view and the point of view of the Navier Stokes equations, the geometric
concepts of large and small spatial scales, or short or long temporal scales,
have permeated the discussions. From a topological point of view, length
scales and time scales have no meaning. If things are too small, a topologist
stretches them out, and conversely. If turbulence is a topological concept,
then the ideas should be independent from scales. It is interesting to note
that the original Kolmogorov statistical analysis of the turbulent state is now
interpreted in terms of the multi-fractal concept of scale invariance [Frisch,
1991].

A key feature of the disconnected Cartan topology is that the domain
supports non-null Topological Torsion, and is of Pfaﬀ dimension 3 for chaotic
ﬂows, and of Pfaﬀ dimension 4 for turbulent ﬂows. Suppose the initial state
is a turbulent state in which there exist disconnected striated or tubular
domains that are of Pfaﬀ dimension 4 and are embedded in domains of Pfaﬀ
dimension 2 or less. Then if the hydrodynamic system is left to decay, these
striated domains can decay by continuous collapse into striations or ﬁlaments
of measure zero. The Topological Torsion of the striated domains cannot be
zero. The size of the striated domains is not of issue, but the existence of
such domains with non-zero measure is of interest, for if these domains do
not exist, the ﬂow is not chaotic and not turbulent.

The geometric idea of small domains versus large domains of space and/or
time is transformed to a topological idea of connected domains versus dis-

9

connected domains. Points in disconnected components are not reachable
[Hermann, 1968] in the sense of Caratheodory, hence are separated by ”large
scales”, while points in the same component are reachable, and hence are sep-
arated by ”small scales”, compared to points in disconnected components.
It is the view of this article that the geometric concept of scales is not ger-
mane to the problem of turbulence, but instead the basic issue is one of
connectedness or disconnectedness.

5 TOPOLOGICAL TORSION

The diﬀerence between chaotic ﬂows and turbulent ﬂows is that chaotic ﬂows
preserve time reversal symmetry and turbulent ﬂows do not. Chaotic ﬂows
can be reversible, while turbulent ﬂows are not. Both chaotic and turbulent
ﬂows support a non-zero value of Topological Torsion tensor. As constructed
in the Appendix for the Navier-Stokes system, the Topological Torsion 3-form
on space-time, H, has 4 components, {T, h} that transform as the compo-
nents of a third rank completely anti-symmetric covariant tensor ﬁeld, Hijk.
If the vector ﬁeld used to construct the Topological Torsion tensor is com-
pletely integrable in the sense of Frobenius, then all components, {T, h},
vanish, and the Pfaﬀ dimension of the domain is 2 or less. For the Navier-
Stokes ﬂuid, the torsion current is given by the engineering expression given
in the appendix as equation (20). As a third rank tensor ﬁeld, the Topo-
logical Torsion tensor is intrinsically covariant with respect to all coordinate
transformations, including the Galilean translation.

For engineers, the closest analog to the Topological Torsion tensor is the
charge-current, 4-vector density, J, of electromagnetism. The fundamental
diﬀerence is that where the electromagnetic 4-current always satisﬁes the
conservation law, div j + ∂ρ/∂t = 0, the Topological Torsion 4-current does
not, unless the vector ﬁeld use to construct the Topological Torsion tensor
is an element of an equivalence class with Pfaﬀ dimension less than 4. In
other words, for the turbulent state, the Topological Torsion tensor does not
satisfy a local conservation law, where for the chaotic state it does:

• div T + ∂h/∂t = 0 ... Pfaﬀ Dimension 3,

(a necessary condition for chaos),

• div T + ∂h/∂t 6= 0 ... Pfaﬀ Dimension 4,

10

(a necessary condition for turbulence).

The lines of torsion current, given by solutions to the system of ﬁrst order

diﬀerential equations,

dx/Tx = dy/Ty = dz/Tz,

(3)

can start or stop internally if the Pfaﬀ dimension is 4, but only on boundary
points or limit points of the domain, if the Pfaﬀ dimension is 3 . If the vector
ﬁeld is of Pfaﬀ dimension less than 4, then the integral over a boundary of the
Topological Torsion tensor is an evolutionary invariant, but some care must
be taken to insure that the integration domain is a boundary, and not just a
closed cycle. This result, which corresponds to a global helicity conservation
theorem, is independent of any statement about viscosity. However, the
invariance of the Topological Torsion integral over a boundary for a Navier-
Stokes ﬂuid implies that integral of the 4-form of Topological Parity must
vanish, which in turn implies that the Euler index of the Cartan topology
for this situation is zero. The compliment of this idea leads to a variable
Topological Torsion integral, and the requirement that the Euler index is
not zero for the irreversible decay of the turbulent state. For if the Euler
index is not zero, then every vector ﬁeld has at least one ﬂow line with
a singular point. If an evolutionary parameter carries the process through
the singular point, a reversal of the process parameter will retrace the path
only back to the singular point uniquely. Subsequently, the return path
then becomes ambiguous, and the evolution is not reversible. Recall that
a necessary condition for a vector ﬁeld to exist on a manifold without self
intersection singularities is that the Euler index of the manifold must vanish.
Hence a necessary condition for turbulence is that the Cartan topology must
be of Pfaﬀ dimension 4, and the topological torsion is not solenoidal.

It is remarkable to this author that experimentalists and theorists (includ-
ing the present author) have been so brain-washed by the dogma of unique
predictability in the physical sciences that they have completely ignored the
measurement and implications of the Topological Torsion tensor. Although
the solutions to a Pfaﬃan system of equations is a problem that has found
use in the older literature of diﬀerential equations (where it is known as the
”subsidiary” system) [Forsyth 1959 p.95], its utilization in applied dynami-
cal systems, especially hydrodynamics, is extremely limited. Of course, for

11

uniquely integrable systems, the equations of topological torsion are evanes-
cent, and not useful. The very existence of the Topological Torsion tensor is
an indicator of when unique predictability is impossible [Kiehn, 1976], and
attention should be paid to the Pfaﬀ dimension of a physical system described
by (1).

6 TORSION WAVES

One of the predictions of the Cartan topological approach is the fact that for
systems of Pfaﬀ dimension 4 it is possible to excite torsion waves. Torsion
waves are essentially transverse waves but with enough longitudinal compo-
nent to give them a helical or spiral signature. In the electromagnetic case,
where such waves have been measured, they are represented by four com-
ponent quaternionic solutions to Maxwell’s equations [Schultz, 1979; Kiehn,
1991]. Such electromagnetic waves represent diﬀerent states of left or right
polarization (parity) traveling in opposite directions. The wave speeds in
diﬀerent directions can be distinct. In ﬂuids, transverse torsion waves can
be made visible by ﬁrst constructing a Falaco soliton state [Kiehn 1991c]
and then dropping dye near the rotating surface defect. The dye drop will
execute transverse polarized helical motions about a guiding ﬁlamentary vor-
tex that connects the pair of contra-rotating surface defects. There is some
evidence that torsion waves can appear as traveling waves on Rayleigh cells
[Croquette, 1989].

7 THE PRODUCTION VS. THE DECAY

OF TURBULENCE

The Cartan topological theory predicts that the transition to turbulence from
a globally laminar state involves a transition from a connected Cartan topol-
ogy to a disconnected Cartan topology. From this fact it may be proved
that such transitions can NOT be continuous, but they may be reversible!
However, the theory also predicts that the decay of turbulence can be de-
scribed by a continuous transformation, but the transformation can NOT be
reversible.

The Cartan topology when combined with the Lie derivative may be
used to deﬁne partial diﬀerential equations of evolution [Kiehn, 1990], which

12

include the Navier-Stokes equations as a subset of a more reﬁned topology.
However, if the Cartan topology is constructed from p-forms and vector ﬁelds
that are restricted to be C2 diﬀerentiable, then it may be shown that all such
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations are continuous relative to the Car-
tan topology. The creation of the turbulent state must involve discontinuous
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations, which are generated only by shocks
or tangential discontinuities, and therefore are not describable by C2 ﬁelds.
On the other hand, the decay of turbulence can be described by C2 diﬀeren-
tiable, hence continuous, solutions which are not homeomorphisms, and are
therefore not reversible. In this article, the decay of turbulence by C0 and
C1 functions is left open.

Domains of ﬁnite Topological Torsion are topologically disconnected from
domains that have zero Topological Torsion. The anomaly that permits the
local creation or destruction of Topological Torsion is exactly the 4-form of
Topological Parity (see Appendix). If the Topological Parity is zero, then
the Topological Torsion obeys a pointwise conservation law. For a barotropic
Navier-Stokes ﬂuid, the anomaly, or source term for the Torsion current can
be evaluated explicitly, and appears as the right hand side in the following
equation:

div T + ∂h/∂t = −2ν curl v • curlcurl v.

(4)

It is remarkable that for ﬂows of any viscosity, the Topological Torsion
tensor satisﬁes a pointwise conversation law, and the integral over a bounded
domain is a ﬂow invariant, if the vorticity vector ﬁeld satisﬁes the Frobenious
integrability conditions, curl v • curlcurl v = 0.
It would seem natural
that the decay of turbulence would be attracted to such interesting limiting
conﬁgurations of topological coherence in a viscous ﬂuid. These limit sets
can be related to minimal surfaces of tangential discontinuities which can act
as fractal boundaries of chaotic domains [Kiehn 1992b, 1992c, 1993].

8 SUMMARY

The topological perspective of Cartan indicates that:

1. A necessary condition for the turbulent state is that the ﬂow ﬁeld must
generate a domain of support which is of Pfaﬀ dimension 4, and is to

13

be distinguished from the chaotic state, which is necessarily of Pfaﬀ
dimension 3. Moreover, the irreversible property of turbulence decay
implies that the Euler index of the induced Cartan topology must be
non-zero.

2. The geometric concept of length scales and time scales should be re-
placed by the topological concept of connectedness vs. disconnected-
ness.

3. The transition to turbulence can take place only by discontinuous so-

lutions to the Navier-Stokes equations.

4. The decay of turbulence can be described by continuous but irreversible
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations. The decay of domains for
which there exists ﬁnite Topological Torsion is dependent upon a ﬁnite
viscosity, and the lack of integrability for the lines of vorticity. One
model for the decay of turbulence might be described as the collapse
of tubular domains of torsion current, becoming ever ﬁner ﬁlamentary
domains without helicity until ultimately they have a measure zero.

5. A coherent structure in a turbulent ﬂow may be deﬁned as a connected
deformable component of a disconnected Cartan topology. For the
Cartan topology, these coherent structures are of two species. One
component will have null Topological Torsion and the other component
will have non-null Topological Torsion. Bounded domains for which the
integral of Topological Torsion is a ﬂow invariant can form in a viscous
turbulent ﬂuid. In particular, domains for which curl v • curlcurl v =
0, but v • curl v 6= 0, can have an evolutionary persistence in a viscous
ﬂuid. The existence of helicity density is a suﬃcient but not necessary
signature that the Cartan topology is disconnected

9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Energy Laboratory at the University
of Houston. The author owes the late A. Hildebrand, the director of the
Energy Lab, a debt of gratitude for ﬁrst, his skepticisms, then his conversion,
and ﬁnally his insistence that the Cartan ideas of diﬀerential forms would
have practical importance in physical systems.

14

The concepts actually began in 1975-1976 when due to the support of
NASA- Ames, the idea that the concept of Frobenius integrability delineated
streamline ﬂows from turbulent ﬂows was formulated [Kiehn 1976]. When
the Action 1-form satisﬁes AˆdA = 0, the Frobenius condition is valid and
the ﬂow is streamline. When AˆdA 6= 0 the Frobenius condition for uniquew
integrability fails. The 3-form AˆdA deﬁned as topological torsion is now
more popularly known in ﬁeld theories as the Chern-Simons term. Most of
the results were presented at an APS meeting in 1991.

10 APPENDIX A : THE CARTAN TOPOL-

OGY

Starting in 1899, Cartan [1899,1937,1945] developed his theory of exterior
diﬀerential systems built on the Grassmann algebraic concept of exterior mul-
tiplication, and the novel calculus concept of exterior diﬀerentiation. These
operations are applied to sets called exterior p-forms, which are often de-
scribed as the objects that form an integrand under the integral sign. The
Cartan concepts may still seem unconventional to the engineer, and only dur-
ing the past few years have they slowly crept into the mainstream of physics.
There are several texts at an introductory level that the uninitiated will ﬁnd
useful [Flanders, 1963; Bamberg, 1989; Bishop,1968; Lovelock, 1989; Nash,
1989; Greub, 1973]. A reading of Cartan’s many works in the original French
will yield a wealth of ideas that have yet to be exploited in the physical
sciences. It is not the purpose of this article to provide such a tutorial of
Cartan’s methods, but suﬃce it to say the ”raison d’ˆetre” for these, perhaps
unfamiliar, but simple and useful methods is that they permit topological
properties of physical systems and processes to be sifted out from the chaﬀ
of geometric ideas that, at present, seem to dominate the engineering and
physical sciences.

For hydrodynamics, the combination of the exterior derivative and the
interior product to form the Lie derivative acting on p-forms should be in-
terpreted as the fundamental way of expressing an evolution operator with
properties that are independent of geometric concepts such as metric and
connection [Kiehn, 1975a]. Cartan’s Lie derivative yields the equivalent of
a convective derivative that may be used to demonstrate that the laws of
hydrodynamic evolution are topological laws, not geometric laws. This phi-

15

losophy is similar to that championed by Van Dantzig [1934] with regard to
the topological content of Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics.

The details of the Cartan Topology may be found at [Kiehn 2001], but
for purposes herein recall that there the Pfaﬀ sequence built on a 1-form has
up to four terms deﬁned as:

T opo log ical ACT ION : A = Aµdxµ

(5)

T opo log ical V ORT ICIT Y : F = dA = Fµνdxµ ˆdxν

T opo log ical T ORSION : H = AˆdA = Hµνσdxµ ˆdxνˆdxσ

T opo log ical P ARIT Y : K = dAˆdA = Kµνστ dxµ ˆdxνˆdxσˆdxτ .

These elements of the Pfaﬀ sequence can be used to produce a basis collection
of open sets that consists of the subsets,

B = {A, Ac, H, H c} = {A, A ∪ F, H, H ∪ K}

The collection of all possible unions of these base elements, and the null set,
∅, generate the Cartan topology of open sets:

T (open) = {X, ∅, A, H, A ∪ F, H ∪ K, A ∪ H, A ∪ H ∪ K, A ∪ F ∪ H}.

These nine subsets form the open sets of the Cartan topology constructed
from the domains of support of the Pfaﬀ sequence constructed from a single
1-form, A. The compliments of the open sets are the closed sets of the
Cartan topology.

T (closed) = {∅, X, F ∪ H ∪ K, A ∪ F ∪ K, A ∪ F, H ∪ K, F ∪ K, F, A}.

16

From the set of 4 ”points” {A, F, H, K} that make up the Pfaﬀ sequence
it is possible to construct 16 subset collections by the process of union. It
is possible to compute the limit points for every subset relative to the Car-
tan topology. The classical deﬁnition of a limit point is that a point p is a
limit point of the subset Y relative to the topology T if and only if for every
open set which contains p there exists another point of Y other than p [Lip-
schutz, 1965]. The results appear in the given reference http://arXiv/math-
ph/0101033

By examining the set of limit points so constructed for every subset of the
Cartan system, and presuming that the functions that make up the forms are
C2 diﬀerentiable (such that the Poincare lemma is true, ddω = 0, any ω), it
is easy to show that for all subsets of the Cartan topology every limit set is
composed of the exterior derivative of the subset, thereby proving the claim
that the exterior derivative is a limit point operator relative to the Cartan
topology. For example, the open subset, A ∪ H, has the limit points that
consist of F and K.

It is apparent that the Cartan topology is composed of the union of two
subsets (other than ∅ and X) which are both open and closed, for X =
Ac ∪ H c, a result that implies that the Cartan topology is not connected,
unless the Topological Torsion, H, and hence its closure, vanishes. This
extraordinary result has a number of physical consequences, some of which
are described in [Kiehn, 1975, 1975a].

To prove that a turbulent ﬂow must be a consequence of a Cartan topol-
ogy that is not connected, consider the following argument: First consider
a ﬂuid at rest and from a global set of unique, synchronous, initial condi-
tions generate a vector ﬁeld of ﬂow. Such ﬂows must satisfy the Frobenius
complete integrability theorem, which requires that AˆdA = 0. The Tor-
sion current is zero for such systems. The Cartan topology for such systems
(H = AˆdA = 0) is connected, and the Pfaﬀ dimension of the domain is
2 or less. Such domains do not support Topological Torsion. Such glob-
ally laminar ﬂows are to be distinguished from ﬂows that reside on surfaces,
but do not admit a unique set of connected sychronizable initial conditions.
Next consider turbulent ﬂows which, as the antithesis of laminar ﬂows, can
not be integrable in the sense of Frobenius; such turbulent domains support
Topological Torsion (H = AˆdA 6= 0), and therefore a disconnected Cartan
topology. The connected components of the disconnected Cartan topology
can be deﬁned as the coherent structures of the turbulent ﬂow. The transi-

17

tion from an initial laminar state (H = 0) to the turbulent state (H 6= 0) is a
transition from a connected topology to a disconnected topology. Therefore
the transition to turbulence can NOT be continuous. However, the decay
of turbulence can be described by a continuous transformation from a dis-
connected topology to a connected topology. Condensation is continuous,
gasiﬁcation is not.

A topological structure is deﬁned to be enough information to decide
whether a transformation is continuous or not [Gellert, 1977]. The classical
deﬁnition of continuity depends upon the idea that every open set in the
range must have an inverse image in the domain. This means that topologies
must be deﬁned on both the initial and ﬁnal state, and that somehow an
inverse image must be deﬁned. Note that the open sets of the ﬁnal state may
be diﬀerent from the open sets of the initial state, because the topologies of
the two states can be diﬀerent.

There is another deﬁnition of continuity that is more useful for it depends
only on the transformation and not its inverse explicitly. A transformation is
continuous if and only if the image of the closure of every subset is included
in the closure of the image. This means that the concept of closure and the
concept of transformation must commute for continuous processes. Suppose
the forward image of a 1-form A is Q, and the forward image of the set F =
dA is Z. Then if the closure, Ac = A ∪ F is included in the closure of Qc =
Q ∪ dQ, for all sub-sets, the transformation is deﬁned to be continuous. The
idea of continuity becomes equivalent to the concept that the forward image
Z of the limit points, dA, is an element of the closure of Q [Hocking, 1961]:

A function f that produces an image f [A] = Q is continuous iﬀ
for every subset A of the Cartan topology, Z = f [dA] ⊂ Qc =
(Q ∪ dQ).

The Cartan theory of exterior diﬀerential systems can now be interpreted
as a topological structure, for every subset of the topology can be tested to
see if the process of closure commutes with the process of transformation. For
the Cartan topology, this emphasis on limit points rather than on open sets is
a more convenient method for determining continuity. A simple evolutionary
process, X ⇒ Y , is deﬁned by a map Φ. The map, Φ, may be viewed as
a propagator that takes the initial state, X, into the ﬁnal state, Y . For
more general physical situations the evolutionary processes are generated by

18

vector ﬁelds of ﬂow, V. The trajectories deﬁned by the vector ﬁelds may
be viewed as propagators that carry domains into ranges in the manner of a
convective ﬂuid ﬂow. The evolutionary propagator of interest to this article
is the Lie derivative with respect to a vector ﬁeld, V, acting on diﬀerential
forms, Σ [Bishop, 1968].

The Lie derivative has a number of interesting and useful properties.

1. The Lie derivative does not depend upon a metric or a connection.

2. The Lie derivative has a simple action on diﬀerential forms producing
a resultant form that is decomposed into a transversal and an exact
part:

L(V)ω = i(V )dω + di(V )ω.

(6)

This formula is known as ”Cartan’s magic formula”. For those vector
ﬁelds V which are ”associated” with the form ω, such that i(V )ω = 0,
the Lie derivative becomes equivalent to the covariant derivative of
tensor analysis. Otherwise the two derivative concepts are distinct.

3. The Lie derivative may be used to describe deformations and topolog-
ical evolution. Note that the action of the Lie derivative on a 0-form
(scalar function) is the same as the directional or convective derivative
of ordinary calculus,

L(V)Φ = i(V )dΦ + di(V )Φ = i(V )dΦ + 0 = V · gradΦ.

(7)

It may be demonstrated that the action of the Lie derivative on a 1-form
will generate equations of motion of the hydrodynamic type.

4. With respect to vector ﬁelds and forms constructed over C2 functions,
the Lie derivative commutes with the closure operator. Hence, the
Lie derivative (restricted to C2 functions) generates transformations
on diﬀerential forms which are continuous with respect to the Cartan
topology. To prove this claim:

First construct the closure, {Σ ∪ dΣ} . Next propagate Σ and dΣ by
means of the Lie derivative to produce the decremental forms, say Q
and Z,

L(V)Σ = Q and L(V)dΣ = Z.

(8)

19

Now compute the contributions to the closure of the ﬁnal state as
given by {Q ∪ dQ}. If Z = dQ, then the closure of the initial state
is propagated into the closure of the ﬁnal state, and the evolutionary
process deﬁned by V is continuous. However,

dQ = dL(V)Σ = di(V )dΣ + dd(i(V )Σ) = di(V )dΣ

as dd(i(V )Σ) = 0 for C2 functions. But,

Z = L(V)dΣ = d(i(V )dΣ) + i(V )ddΣ = di(V )dΣ

It follows that Z = dQ, and therefore
as i(V )ddΣ = 0 for C2 p-forms.
V generates a continuous evolutionary process relative to the Cartan
topology. QED

Certain special cases arise for those subsets of vector ﬁelds that satisfy
the equations, d(i(V)Σ) = 0. In these cases, only the functions that
make up the p-form, Σ, need be C2 diﬀerentiable, and the vector
ﬁeld need only be C1. Such processes will be of interest to symplectic
processes, with Bernoulli-Casimir invariants.

By suitable choice of the 1-form of action it is possible to show that
the action of the Lie derivative on the 1-form of action can generate the
Navier Stokes partial diﬀerential equations [Kiehn, 1978]. The analysis above
indicates that C2 diﬀerentiable solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations can
not be used to describe the transition to turbulence. The C2 solutions can,
however, describe the irreversible decay of turbulence to the globally laminar
state.

For a given Lagrange Action, A, Cartan has demonstrated that the ﬁrst
variation of the Action integral (with ﬁxed endpoints) is equivalent to the
search for those vector ﬁelds, V, that for any renormalization factor, ρ, satisfy
the equations

i(ρV)dA = 0

(9)

Such vector ﬁelds are called extremal vector ﬁelds [Klein, 1962, Kiehn, 1975a].
The Cartan theorem [Cartan, 1958] states that the extremal constraint fur-
nishes both necessary and suﬃcient conditions that there exists a Hamilto-
nian representation for V, on a space of odd Pfaﬀ dimension (2n+1 state

20

space). The resultant equations are a set of partial diﬀerential equations
that represent extremal evolution. The renormalization condition is common
place in the projective geometry of lines, and does not require the Rieman-
nian or euclidean concept of an inner product or a metric [Meserve, 1983].
Hamiltonian systems are not considered to be dissipative. The very strong
topological constraint can be relaxed on a space of even Pfaﬀ dimension and
still yield a Hamiltonian representation if i(ρV)dA = dθ. Moreover, it can be
shown that evolutionary processes V that satisfy the Helmholtz-Symplectic
constraint, (which includes all Hamiltonian processes)

d(i(ρV)dA) = 0,

(10)

are thermodynamically reversible, relative to the Cartan topology.

A more general expression for the Cartan condition is given by the transver-

sal condition,

i(ρV)dA = −f • (dx − Vdt) − d(kT ).

(11)

This extension of the Cartan Hamiltonian constraint is transversal for the
ﬁrst term is orthogonal to the vector ﬁeld, (V). The Lagrange multipliers,
f, are arbitrary for such a transversal constraint, but if chosen to be of the
form, f = ν curlcurl V, then the constrained Cartan topology will generate
the Navier-Stokes equations.

As an example of this Cartan technique, substitute the 1-form of action

given by the expression,

A =

vkdxk − Hdt,

(12)

where the ”Hamiltonian” function, H, is deﬁned as,

H = v • v/2 +

dP/ρ − λ div v + kT

(13)

into the constraint equation given by 11. Carry out the indicated operations
of exterior diﬀerentiation and exterior multiplication to yield a system of
necessary partial diﬀerential equations yields of the form,

3

X1

Z

21

(14)

(15)
(16)

(17)

∂v/∂t + grad(v • v/2) − v × curlv = −gradP/ρ + λ grad div v − ν curlcurl v.

These equations are exactly the Navier-Stokes partial diﬀerential equations
for the evolution of a compressible viscous irreversible ﬂowing ﬂuid.
By direct computation, the 2-form F = dA has components,

F = dA = ωzdxˆdy + ωxdyˆdz + ωydzˆdx
+axdxˆdt + aydyˆdt + azdzˆdt,

where by deﬁnition

ω = curl v,

a = −∂v/∂t − gradH

The 3-form of Helicity or Topological Torsion, H, is constructed from the

exterior product of A and dA as,

H = AˆdA = Hijkdxiˆdxjˆdxk

(18)
= −Txdyˆdzˆdt − Tydzˆdxˆdt − Tzdxˆdyˆdt + hdxˆdyˆdz, (19)

where T is the ﬂuidic Torsion axial vector current, and h is the torsion
(helicity) density:

T = a × v + Hω,

h = v • ω

(20)

The Torsion current, T, consists of two parts. The ﬁrst term represents
the shear of translational accelerations, and the second part represents the
shear of rotational accelerations. The topological torsion tensor, Hijk , is a
third rank completely anti-symmetric covariant tensor ﬁeld, with four com-
ponents on the variety {x,y,z,t}.

The Topological Parity becomes

K = dH = dAˆdA = −2(a • ω)dxˆdyˆdzˆdt.

(21)

22

This equation is in the form of a divergence when expressed on {x,y,z,t},

divT + ∂h/∂t = −2(a • ω),

(22)

and yields the helicity-torsion current conservation law if the anomaly, −2(a • ω),
on the RHS vanishes. It is to be observed that when K = 0, the integral of
K vanishes, which implies that the Euler index, χ, is zero. It follows that
the integral of H over a boundary of support vanishes by Stokes theorem.
This idea is the generalization of the conservation of the integral of helicity
density in an Eulerian ﬂow. Note the result is independent from viscosity,
subject to the constraint of zero Euler index, χ = 0.

The Navier-Stokes equations of topological constraint may be used to

express the acceleration term, a, kinematically; i.e.,

a = −∂v/∂t − gradH = −v × ω + ν curl ω.

(23)

Substition of this expression into the deﬁnition of the Torsion current yields a
formula in terms of the helicity density, h, the viscosity, ν, and the Lagrangian
function,

(24)

(25)

that may be written as:

L = v • v − H,

T = {hv − Lω}−ν {v × curl ω}

= {hv − (v • v/2 −

dP/ρ − λ div v)ω}−ν {v × curl ω} (26)

Z

Note that the torsion axial vector current persists even for Euler ﬂows, where
ν and λ vanish. The measurement of the components of the Torsion current
have been completely ignored by experimentalists in hydrodynamics.

Similarly, the Topological Parity pseudo-scalar for the Navier-Stokes ﬂuid

becomes expressible in terms of engineering quantities as,

K = 2ν(ω• curl ω)dxˆdyˆdzˆdt.

(27)

23

The Euler index for the Navier-Stokes ﬂuid is proportional to the integral of
the Topological Parity 4-form, which is the ”top Pfaﬃan” in Chern’s analysis
[Chern, 1944, 1988]. When

(ω• curl ω)

(28)

the Euler index of the induced Cartan topology must vanish. This result is
to be compared to the classic hydrodynamic principle of minimum rate of
energy dissipation [Lamb, 1932]. For a barotropic Navier-Stokes ﬂuid of Pfaﬀ
dimension 4, the viscosity cannot be zero, and the lines of vorticity must be
non-integrable in the sense of Frobenius.

11 REFERENCES

Baldwin, P. and Kiehn, R. M., 1991, ”Cartan’s Topological Structure”, talk
present at the Santa Barbara summer school (1991)

Bamberg, P. and Sternberg, S., 1990, A Course in Mathematics for Stu-

dents of Physics. Vol I and II, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge)

Berge, B., Pomeau, Y. and Vidal, C., 1984, Order within Chaos, (Wiley,

NY) p. 161.

(Dover, N. Y.) p. 199.

Bishop, R. L. and Goldberg, S. I., 1968, Tensor Analysis on Manifolds,

Bryant, R.L.,Chern, S.S., Gardner, R.B.,Goldschmidt, H.L., and Grig-

giths, P. A. 1991, Exterior Diﬀerential Systems, (Springer Verlag)

Cartan, E., 1899, ”Sur certaine expressions diﬀerentielles et le systeme de

Pfaﬀ” Ann Ec. Norm. 16, p. 329.

Cartan, E., 1937, La Theorie des Spaces a Connexion Projective, Her-

mann, Paris, (1937)

Cartan, E., 1945, ”Systems Diﬀerentials Exterieurs et leurs Applications

Geometriques”, Actualites sci. et industrielles , p .944.

Cartan, E., Lecons sur les invariants integrauxs, Hermann, Paris (1958).
Chern, S. S., 1944, ”A Simple intrinsic proof of the Gauss -Bonnet formula

for Closed Riemannian Manifolds”, Annals of Math. 45, p. 747- 752.

Chern, S.S. ,1988, ”Historical Remarks on Gauss-Bonnet”, MSRI 04808-

88, Berkeley, CA.

Croquette, V. and Williams, H., 1989, ”Nonlinear of oscillatory instability
on ﬁnite convective rolls”, in Advances in Fluid Turbulence, edited by G.

24

Doolen, R, Ecke, D. Holm and V. Steinberg, (North Holland, Amsterdam )
p. 300.

von Dantzig, D., 1934, ”Electromagnetism Independent of metrical ge-
ometry”, Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. v. Wet. 37, pp. 521-531, 644-652, 825-836
.

Flanders, H., 1963, Diﬀerential Forms, (Academic Press, New York (1963),

p. 92 .

p.96

Forsyth, A. R. (1959), Theory of Diﬀerential Equations (Dover, N.Y.)

Frisch, U., 1991, ”From global (Kolmogorov 1941) scaling to local (mul-
tifractal) scaling in fully developed turbulence” to appear in the Proc. Roy.
Soc. A

Gellert, W., 1977, et.al. Editors, The VNR Concise Encyclopedia of

Mathematics (Van Nostrand, New York ), p.686.

Greub, W., Halperin, S. and Vanstone, R., 1973, Connections, Curvature

and Cohomology, (Academic Press, New York).

Hermann, R., 1968, Diﬀerential Geometry and the Calculus of Variations,

(Academic Press, New York ), p. 254.

Hocking, J. G.,1961, Topology , (Addison Wesley, N.Y.), p.2.
Kida, S.,Yamada, M., and Ohkitani, K., 1989, ” A route to chaos and
turbulence” in Advances in Fluid Turbulence, edited by G. Doolen, R, Ecke,
D. Holm and V. Steinberg, (North Holland, Amsterdam ) p. 116.

Kiehn, R. M., 1974, ”Modiﬁcations of Hamilton’s Principle to include

Dissipation”, J. Math Phys

Lett. al Nuovo Cimento 14, p. 308.

Nuovo Cimento 12, p. 300.

Kiehn, R. M., 1975, ”Submersive equivalence classes for metric ﬁelds”,

Kiehn, R. M., 1975,a ”A Geometric model for supersymmetry”, Lett. al

Kiehn, R. M. , 1975a, ”Intrinsic hydrodynamics with applications to

space-time ﬂuids”, Int. J. of Eng. Sci. 13, p. 941.

Kiehn, R. M., 1976, ”Retrodictive Determinism”, Int. J. of Eng. Sci. 14,

p. 749

http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/retrodic.htm
Kiehn, R. M., 1990a ”Topological Torsion, Pfaﬀ Dimension and Coherent
Structures”, in: H. K. Moﬀatt and T. S. Tsinober eds, Topological Fluid
Mechanics, (Cambridge University Press), 449-458 .

Kiehn, R. M., 1990b, ”Irreversible Topological Evolution in Fluid Me-
chanics” in Some Unanswered Questions in Fluid Mechanics ASME- Vol.

25

89-WA/FE-5, Trefethen, L. M. and Panton, R. L. Eds.

Kiehn, R.M., Kiehn, G. P., and Roberds, R. B., 1991, ”Parity and Time-
reversal symmetry Breaking, Singular Solutions and Fresnel Surfaces”, Phys
Rev A, 43 , p. 5665

Kiehn, R. M. , 1991a, ”Continuous Topological Evolution”
http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0101032
Kiehn, R. M.,1991b ”Topological Parity and the turbulent state of a

Navier Stokes Fluid”, submitted to Fluid Dynamics Research

Kiehn, R. M., 1991c, ”Compact Dissipative Flow Structures with Topo-
logical Coherence Embedded in Eulerian Environments”, in: Non-linear Dy-
namics of Structures, edited by R.Z. Sagdeev, U. Frisch, F. Hussain, S. S.
Moiseev and N. S. Erokhin, (World Scientiﬁc Press, Singapore ) p.139-164.
Kiehn, R. M., 1992a ”Topological Defects, Coherent Structures and Tur-
bulence in Terms of Cartan’s Theory of Diﬀerential Topology” in ”Develop-
ments in Theoretical and Applied Mathematics” Proceedings of the SEC-
TAM XVI conference, B. N. Antar, R. Engels, A.A. Prinaris and T. H.
Moulden, Editors, The University of Tennessee Space Institute, Tullahoma,
TN 37388 USA.

Kiehn, R. M., 1992b ”Instabilty Patterns, Wakes and Topological Limit
Sets” Poitier IUTAM conference, published in 1993 in J.P.Bonnet and M.N.
Glauser, (eds) Eddy Structure Identiﬁcation in Free Turbulent Shear Flows,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, p. 363

http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/poitier.pdf
Kiehn, R. M., 1992c ”Hydrodynamic Wakes and Minimal Surfaces with
Fractal Boundaries” Barcelona ERCOFTAC meeting in J.M. Redondo, O.
Metais, (eds) Mixing in Geophysical Flows, CIMNE, Barcelona p.52.

http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/barcelon.pdf
Kiehn, R. M. 1976 NCA-2-OR-295-502
http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0101033
Klein, J., 1962, Ann. Inst. AIFUB Fourier, Grenoble 12, p. 1 .
Kolmogorov, A. V. ,1941, Dolkl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 31, p. 99 .
Lamb, H., 1937, Hydrodynamics, (Cambridge University Press) p. 617-

619.

London ) p.106.

Landau, L. and Lifshitz, M, (1959) , Fluid Mechanics, (Pergamon Press,

Lipschutz, S.1965, General Topology, (Schaum, New York) p.88.
Lovelock, D. and Rund, H., 1989, Tensors, Diﬀerential Forms and Varia-

tional Principles, (Dover, New York).

26

Meserve, B. E., 1983, Projective Geometry, (Dover, New York).
Nash, C. and Sen, S., 1989, Topology and Geometry for Physicists, (Aca-

demic Press, San Diego).

Schouten, J. A. and Van der Kulk, W.,1949, Pfaﬀ’s Problem and its

Generalizations, (Oxford Clarendon Press)

Schultz, A., Kiehn, R. M., Post, E. J., and Roberds, R. B., 1979, ”Lifting
of the four fold EM degeneracy and PT asymmetry”, Phys Lett 74A, p.384.

Schuster, H. G.,1984, Deterministic Chaos, Physics Verlag (1984)
Slebodzinsky, W., 1970, Exterior Forms and their Applications, (PWN

Warsaw).

Stewart, I., 1988, The Problems of Mathematics, (Oxford, NY) p 177.
Zimin, V., 1991, ”Hierarchical Models of Turbulence” in: Non-linear Dy-
namics of Structures, edited by R.Z. Sagdeev, U. Frisch, F. Hussain, S. S.
Moiseev and N. S. Erokhin, (World Scientiﬁc Press, Singapore ) p.273-288.

27

