1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Inverse Energy Cascade of
Two-Dimensional Turbulence

by

Michael K. Rivera

B.S., University of Miami, 1995
M.S., University of Pittsburgh, 1997

Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of
Arts and Sciences in partial fulﬁllment
of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

University of Pittsburgh
2000

University of Pittsburgh

Faculty of Arts and Sciences

This dissertation was presented

by

Michael K. Rivera.

It was defended on

and approved by

Dr. W. I. Goldburg

Dr. D. Jasnow

Dr. J. Mueller

Dr. A. Robertson

Dr. X.L. Wu
Committee Chairperson

ii

Copyright by Michael K. Rivera

c
(cid:13)

2000

iii

The Inverse Energy Cascade of Two-Dimensional Turbulence

Michael K. Rivera, Ph.D.

University of Pittsburgh, 2000

This thesis presents an experimental study of the inverse energy cascade as it occurs

in an electromagnetically forced soap ﬁlm.

It focuses on characterizing important

features of the inverse cascade such as it’s range, how energy is distributed over the

range and how energy ﬂows through the range. The thesis also probes the assumption

of scale invariance that is associated with the existence of an inverse cascade. These

investigations demonstrate that the extent of the inverse cascade range and the be-

havior of the energy distribution are in agreement with dimensional predictions. The

energy ﬂow in the inverse cascade range is shown to be well described by exact math-

ematical predictions obtained from the Navier-Stokes equation. At no time does the

energy ﬂow in the inverse cascade range produced by the e-m cell behave inertially or

in a scale invariant manner. Evidence that the cascade could become scale invariant

should an inertial range develop is presented, as are the requirements that a system

must satisfy to create such an inertial range.

iv

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The E-M Cell

1.1 The Inverse Energy Cascade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 History of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3 Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1 The E-M Cell

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 The Magnet Array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 External Dissipation: The Air Friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5 Particle Tracking Velocimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6 Cell Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

3.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 The Karman-Howarth Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Testing Karman-Howarth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1 Experimental Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.2 The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.3 Consistency Check: Energy Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

4.1 Distribution of Energy and the Outer Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Energy Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 The Anisotropic Third Moment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 Homogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

1

1

5

8

10

10

15

18

19

21

24

26

26

28

30

30

32

41

43

43

50

52

55

4.2.3 The Inertial Range and The Integral Scale . . . . . . . . . . .

60

5 High Order Moments

5.1 Scale Invariance and Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Disclaimer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 The PDF of Longitudinal Velocity Diﬀerence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusion

Bibliography

A Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

65

65

67

68

78

80

107

vi

List of Tables

4.1 Global constants for several runs of the e-m cell using Kolmogorov forcing 48

vii

List of Figures

2

6

7

11

13

14

1.1 Two pictures of the “eddy” concept for a 2D ﬂuid: (a) a single large

eddy and (b) a large eddy made from many interacting smaller eddies.

1.2 A 3D wind tunnel creating turbulence and it’s 2D equivalent: the soap

ﬁlm tunnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3 A 2D soap ﬁlm tunnel creating forced 2D turbulence.

. . . . . . . . .

2.1 Basic operation of the e-m cell.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Replenishing ﬂuid lost to evaporation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Film curvature near an edge and a plate.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Array of magnets creating the spatially varying external magnetic ﬁeld. 15

2.5 Top view of the magnet arrays which create the spatially varying ex-

ternal magnetic ﬁeld in the e-m cell: (a) the Kolmogorov array, (b) the

square array, (c) stretched hexagonal array, (d) pseudo-random array.

The direction of the current J is shown as is the coordinate axis. . . .

16

2.6 Fluid between a top plate moving with velocity U and ﬁxed bottom

plate produces a linear velocity proﬁle.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

2.7 A thick ﬁlm droops under the action of gravity, as shown by the dotted

line. A box enclosing the top of the e-m cell frame is brought to a lower

pressure than the surrounding environment to balance gravity.

. . . .

20

2.8 Timing of the CCD camera frames and laser pulses used in PTV. Frame

1 and Frame 2 denote a single PTV image pair from which velocity

ﬁelds are extracted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

3.1 Thin ﬁlm interference fringes demonstrate that the thickness of the

soap ﬁlm in the e-m cell is not constant but varies from point to point

in the ﬂow.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

viii

3.2 Typical velocity (a) and pressure (b) ﬁelds obtained from the e-m cell.

In the pressure ﬁeld green denotes positive and blue negative values. .

33

3.3

(a) Time dependence of urms and ωrms for a single run in the e-m cell.

This demonstrates that the e-m cell is in an approximately steady

state. (b) Time dependence of the enstrophy normalized mean square
divergence, D2/ω2
D2/ω2

rms, for a single run in the e-m cell. The fact that
. . . . . . . . .

rms is small indicates negligible compressibility.

35

3.4

(a) The mean ﬂow in the e-m cell averaged over 1000 vector ﬁelds.

The length of the reference vector in the upper right corresponds to

2 cm/s.

(b) The decay of the ﬂuctuations in the mean ﬂow as the

number of ﬁelds, N, in the average increases. The line corresponds to
the expected N −1/2 decay of a centered Gaussian variable.

. . . . . .

36

3.5 The RMS ﬂuctuations of (a) ux and (b) uy as a function of position in

the e-m cell. Green denotes large values of the ﬂuctuations while blue

denotes small values.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

3.6 Measured values of (a) Ay,y, (b) By,y, (c) Ay,y + By,y, and (d)

2αb(2)
y,y
from Eq. 3.13. Green denotes positive values and blue denotes negative

−

values.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

3.7 Cross sections of Ay,y + By,y (

) and

) along the lines (a)

r = rx (ry = 0), (b) r = ry (rx = 0) and (c) r = rx = ry. . . . . . . . .

40

3.8 Cross section of Ax,x + Bx,x (

) and

) along the line r = rx

(ry = 0).

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42

−·

−·

2αb(2)

y,y (

−

−

2αb(2)

x,x (

−

−

4.1 The energy spectrum, U(~k), for (a) Kolmogorov forcing, (b) square
forcing using 6 mm round magnets, (c) square forcing using 3 mm

round magnets and (d) stretched hexagonal forcing. Green denotes
large values of U(~k) while blue denotes small values. . . . . . . . . . .

45

4.2 The circularly integrated energy spectrum, E(k), for (a) Kolmogorov

forcing, (b) square forcing using 6 mm round magnets, (c) square

forcing using 3 mm round magnets and (d) stretched hexagonal forc-

ing. The dashed lines correspond to the Kraichnan prediction that
k−5/3 [1]. The arrows indicate the injection wavenumber kinj.

E(k)

46

∝

4.3 The circularly integrated energy spectrum, E(k), for the four cases of

Kolmogorov ﬂow labeled in Table 4.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

ix

4.4 Comparison of the outer scale obtained from the energy spectra by

rout = 2π/kout with that obtained using the dimensional prediction
rout = (ǫinj/α3)1/2 for all of the data sets in Table 4.1. . . . . . . . . .

49

4.5 The measured linear drag coeﬃcient, α, versus the magnet-ﬁlm dis-

tance, d, for the data sets reported in Table 4.1. The dotted line

represents the ﬁt α = ηair/ρhd + C with C = 0.25 Hz. . . . . . . . . .

50

4.6 Comparison of S(3)

a (r) (

⋄
beled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1.

),J(r) (⊳), and K(r) (

) for the data sets la-

◦

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57

4.7 Spatial variation of velocity ﬂuctuation for the four data sets labeled in

(a)-(d) Table 4.1. Green denotes large values of the ﬂuctuations while

blue denotes small values.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.8 Typical streamlines for the four cases labeled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1.

. .

4.9 Comparison of K(r) (

) with the independently measured right hand

◦
side of Eq. 4.10 ,R(r) (

−

),for the data sets labeled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1. 61

4.10 The right hand side of Eq. 4.10 ,R(r),for the data sets labeled (a)-(d)

in Table 4.1: (a)

, (b) ⊲, (c) ⊳, (d)

. R(r) has been normalized so

⋄

◦

that the peak value just after rinj is unity.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.11 The dimensionally predicted outer scale, (ǫinj/α3)1/2 vs. integral scale
rint (inset is the same plot on log-log scales). The line corresponds to
the power law ﬁt of r2

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

int.

5.1 P (δul(r), r) calculated from data set (c) in Table 4.1. Divisions in

the coloration increase on an exponential scale. The injection and

outer scale are marked by lines, in between which is the inverse energy

cascade range. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Cross sections at various r for P (δul(r), r) shown in Fig 5.1.

. . . . .

5.3

(a) S2(r) (log-log) and (b) S3(r) (lin-lin) calculated from data set (c)

in Table 4.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

5.4 The normalized high order moments, Tn(r), evaluated from data set

(c) of Table 4.1 for 4

5.5 Tn(r)/bn for odd n

≥

n

11.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

≤
3 evaluated using the data set (c) in Table 4.1. .

≤

72

73

5.6 The multiplicative constants an and bn/b3 for the data set (c) in Ta-

ble 4.1. The dotted line corresponds to the exact values of a purely

Gaussian distribution given by Eq. 5.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

74

58

59

63

64

69

69

x

5.7 Tn(r)/bn for odd n for (a) case (d) in Table 4.1 and (b) a run of the

e-m cell with a square array.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

76

5.8 The measured an and dn(= bn/b3) for three data sets using diﬀerent α

and diﬀerent types of forcing.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

77

xi

Chapter 1

Introduction

One of the curious predictions in turbulence theory is that there might possibly exist

a range of length scales in a two-dimensional (2D) turbulent ﬂuid over which kinetic

energy is transferred from small to large length scales. That this range could exist was

ﬁrst predicted in the late 1960’s by Kraichnan[1]. Numerical simulations that followed

yielded varying degrees of agreement with this prediction[2, 3, 4]. Experimental

veriﬁcation of the existence of such a range did not come about until much later due

to the diﬃculty inherent in building and maintaining a system which approximates a

2D ﬂuid[5, 6, 7]. This thesis presents an investigation of the 2D inverse energy cascade

in a new apparatus, the electromagnetically forced soap ﬁlm. What follows in this

chapter is a description of the phenomenology surrounding the inverse energy cascade

and a discussion of the experiments that have attempted to probe it’s properties.

1.1 The Inverse Energy Cascade

The phenomenology of turbulence, in three-dimensions (3D) or 2D, is usually phrased

in terms of “eddies”. An eddy itself is not a well deﬁned object, though there have

been many recent attempts using wavelets to better deﬁne the concept[8]. Loosely

speaking it is a region in a ﬂuid that is behaving coherently. The extent of an eddy is

dictated by boundaries within which an arbitrary determination is made that some

sort of structure exists. Thus an eddy can be a single large region of rotation, such

as the whirlpool which forms above a bathroom drain. Or an eddy can be a large

region containing many smaller eddies which are interacting with one another while

behaving distinctly (again by an arbitrary determination) from other neighboring

1

Chapter 1.

Introduction

2

Figure 1.1: Two pictures of the “eddy” concept for a 2D ﬂuid: (a) a single large eddy

and (b) a large eddy made from many interacting smaller eddies.

clusters of eddies. These two ideas are drawn in Fig. 1.1 for the case of a 2D ﬂuid.

Eddies in 3D are much more diﬃcult to picture. Two important properties that are

associated with an eddy are size and energy. These two properties allow predictions

about energy motion in ﬂuids to be made if some knowledge of how eddies interact

in the system is known.

In 2D ﬂuids, one way in which eddies (which assume the more familiar label

“vortices” in 2D) interact with each other is through a process known as “vortex

cannibalization”. A cannibalization event is when two neighboring eddies of like

rotational sense merge to form a single larger eddy. When cannibalization occurs

energy ﬂows out of the length scales of the initial eddies and into the length scale

of the ﬁnal eddy. Since the ﬁnal eddy is larger than the initial ones, cannibalization

results in the ﬂow of energy from small to large length scales.

In a 2D turbulent ﬂuid, many eddies are generally created at a small length scale

called the energy injection scale, rinj. The expectation is that through interaction

by cannibalization these small eddies cluster and merge into larger eddies. These

larger eddies are also expected to cluster and merge to form even larger eddies and so

on. This means that energy, initially injected into the turbulence at the length scale

rinj should gradually be moved by consecutive cannibalization events to larger length

scales. This type of energy motion constitutes an inverse energy cascade[1].

Using the eddy concept has the advantage of highlighting two important features

associated with the existence of an inverse energy cascade: scale invariance and local-

ity of interaction. The ﬁrst of these can be understood by looking again at Fig. 1.1(b)

which shows many smaller like signed eddies clustering to form a single larger eddy.

Chapter 1.

Introduction

3

Presumably, the small eddies in the ﬁgure are themselves formed by the clustering

of even smaller eddies, which in turn are formed by even smaller eddies. Likewise,

the large eddy cluster in the ﬁgure is most likely interacting with other eddy clusters

in the system. As long as the eddies at the very smallest scale, the injection scale,

are being continuously created to replenish those which are cannibalized, the inverse

cascade range is scale-invariant. That is to say that no length scale in the inverse

cascade range can be distinguished from any other length scale that is also in the

range. Scale invariance is exceedingly important from a theoretical stand point. The

assumption of scale invariance of ﬁelds, such as the probability of velocity diﬀerence

on a length scale r, allow important predictions about turbulence to be made (see

chapter 5)[9].

Before discussing locality, a delicate point must be made.

If the eddies at the

injection length scale are not being continuously replenished then the number of

eddies at the smallest scales gradually begins to decrease as more and more eddies

are lost to cannibalization events. To maintain an inverse cascade range, then, the

turbulence has to be continuously forced. That is, eddies must be continuously created

at the energy injection scale. If the turbulence is not forced then the cascade range

will eventually consume itself from small scales up, ultimately leading to a state

which can be described as a diﬀuse gas of large individual eddies (eddies not made of

clusters of smaller eddies)[10, 11]. The term “coarsening” is used to describe decaying

2D turbulence’s behavior in order to distinguish it from the inverse energy cascade.

The second property assumed to hold in the inverse cascade is locality of interac-

tion. This property refers to constraints on the manner in which eddies interact. If

an eddy of very small size is close to, or embedded in, an eddy of exceedingly large

size, the small eddy will merely be swept along by the large eddy and not strongly

deformed. Likewise the large eddy will not be signiﬁcantly eﬀected by it’s small com-

panion. Since neither of the eddies is strongly deformed, the cannibalization process

is expected to happen over a long period of time, if at all[9]. On the other hand, two

neighboring eddies of similar size interact and deform one another strongly, and thus

the cannibalization happens swiftly. Energy transfer by cannibalization is therefore

most eﬃcient when occurring between similarly sized length scales; this is what is

meant by locality. Due to locality, the kinetic energy at small scales in the inverse

cascade is expected to be moved to large scales in a continuous manner, stepping

through the intervening length scales by local interactions rather than making large

Chapter 1.

Introduction

4

length scale jumps by the merger of a small and large eddy. Hence the term cascade.

The picture of 2D turbulence and it’s inverse cascade is now almost complete.

Energy is continually injected into a ﬂuid in the form of small eddies. These small

eddies cluster to form large eddies moving energy to larger scales. In turn the eddy

clusters themselves cluster to form larger clusters of eddy clusters, etcetera.

It is

the etcetera that is of concern. At what point does the vortex merger process and

growth of larger and larger eddies stop? That is, how is the energy injected into a

2D turbulent ﬂuid thermostated?

Consider ﬁrst the thermostating mechanism in 3D turbulence. In 3D turbulence

there exists a direct energy cascade, where instead of energy being moved from small

to large scales by eddy merger the opposite happens; energy is moved from large

to small scales by eddy stretching (commonly called vortex stretching). Eventually,

through continuous vortex stretching, a smallest eddy scale is reached, at which point

the kinetic energy contained in these small eddies is dissipated into heat by the ﬂuids

internal viscosity. All of the energy that is injected into the large length scales of a

3D turbulent ﬂuid is eventually exhausted by viscosity at small length scales[9].

Internal viscosity is a short range force, only becoming a good thermostat when

the kinetic energy reaches small length scales[9]. Thermostating is not an issue in

3D where the direct cascade takes energy down to such small scales. In 2D, however,

the inverse cascade moves energy away from small scales. Therefore viscosity has

no chance to exhaust the injected energy. An ideal 2D turbulent ﬂuid driven to a

state of turbulence with a continuous forcing would never be in a steady state since

the total energy in the ﬂow would continue to build up as larger and larger eddies

form[12]. What is needed to maintain 2D forced turbulence in a steady state and stop

the inverse cascade process is some sort of external dissipation mechanism which is

an eﬀective thermostat at large length scales. In other words, some sort of dissipation

mechanism that is not internal to the ﬂuid itself must exist to take energy out of large

length scales and dictate the largest size eddies that can be formed by the cascade.

Fortunately, 2D experiments are almost always coupled to the surrounding 3D

environment by frictional forces[13, 14, 7]. In these experiments this external fric-

tional force provide the turbulence with an eﬀective large scale thermostat and sets

the largest length scales which can be reached by the inverse cascade process. The

inclusion of an external thermostat completes this phenomenological description of

the inverse energy cascade.

Chapter 1.

Introduction

5

1.2 History of Experiments

Laboratory experiments which have attempted to probe the inverse energy cascade

of 2D turbulence fall into two major categories: soap ﬁlms and stratiﬁed shallow

layers of ﬂuid. The soap ﬁlm experiments in 2D ﬂuid mechanics were initiated by

Couder in the early 1980’s[15]. This early work investigated coarse features of both

2D turbulence and 2D hydrodynamics. Further attempts at using the soap ﬁlm to

measure 2D turbulence in the search for an inverse cascade were done by Gharib and

Derango a few years later[16]. The experimental system that was used by Gharib

and Derango, called a soap ﬁlm tunnel, was later perfected by Kellay et al.[17] and

Rutgers et al.[14].

The soap ﬁlm tunnel is a 2D equivalent of the wind tunnel, which is the mainstay

of 3D turbulence research. The manner in which turbulence is created in each is

identical. A grid, or some other obstacle, is placed in the path of a swiftly moving

mean ﬂow. If the ﬂow speed is fast enough, the ﬂuid becomes turbulent downstream

from the grid. Such 2D and 3D tunnels are shown in Fig. 1.2. Soap ﬁlm tunnels would

seem to be ideal 2D ﬂuids for performing turbulence research in because their aspect

ratios are exceedingly large (many cm across to a few micrometers thick) and thus the

ﬂuid ﬂow is almost entirely two-dimensional. There are, however, diﬃculties inherent

in the use of soap ﬁlms. For example thin ﬁlms couple strongly to the air and the

magnitude of their internal viscosity is large compared to that of water. For the most

part these diﬃculties are thought to be mitigated by clever experimental techniques,

such as the use of vacuum chambers[14] or by using thick (

10µm) ﬁlms[11].

≈

Every attempt to study the inverse energy cascade in a 2D soap ﬁlm tunnel with

the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1.2 has met with failure. This is not a disparaging

comment about the researchers involved in the eﬀort. Indeed their considerable skill

eventually tamed the delicate and whimsical soap ﬁlms into a useful experimental

system. The lack of inverse cascade in these systems reﬂects the fact that the con-

ﬁguration shown in Fig. 1.2 creates decaying 2D turbulence. The eddies that are

injected at the grid are not replenished as the ﬂuid moves downstream. By the dis-

cussion in the last section this means that the system does not have the ability to

form the eddy clusters that is expected of an inverse cascade.

Once the understanding that 2D turbulence needs to be forced for an inverse

cascade to be present was reached, the ﬁlm tunnel design was modiﬁed to create

Chapter 1.

Introduction

6

Figure 1.2: A 3D wind tunnel creating turbulence and it’s 2D equivalent: the soap

ﬁlm tunnel

forced turbulence[6]. The design of the ﬁlm tunnel is identical to that shown before

except for the orientation of the turbulence producing grid. Instead of having a single

grid oriented perpendicular to the ﬂow direction, two grids were oriented at angles

to the ﬂow direction so that they formed two sides of a triangle with the tip of the

triangle oriented upstream. This modiﬁed form is shown in Fig. 1.3. An area of

forced turbulence exists in the interior between the two grids since it is here that

vortices created at the grids are able to diﬀuse into the interior and replenish those

lost to cannibalization.

Though certain properties of the inverse cascade can be investigated with such

a modiﬁed ﬁlm tunnel, the setup is not ideal because the turbulence it creates is

inhomogeneous. One can imagine that the ﬂuctuation in the driven turbulence area

near the grids are quite large compared to those in the interior. Homogeneity is a

critical simplifying assumption in almost all areas of turbulence theory. The inhomo-

geneity of the modiﬁed ﬁlm tunnel, then, has devastating consequences with regard

to comparing results with theory. A more ideal setup would involve the injection of

vortices directly into the body of the ﬂuid by some sort of external force, rather than

injecting from the boundaries. This is a diﬃcult task to do in soap ﬁlm tunnels.

A system which does achieve such an injection of vortices falls into the second class

of 2D turbulence experiments: stratiﬁed shallow layers of ﬂuid. For the most part, the

Chapter 1.

Introduction

7

Figure 1.3: A 2D soap ﬁlm tunnel creating forced 2D turbulence.

use of such layers in turbulence research has been pioneered by Tabeling and others

in the early 1990’s. A successful observation of an inverse cascade regime was reached

a few years later by the same group[18]. The stratiﬁed shallow layer apparatus, as

it’s name suggest, suspends a layer of pure water, above a higher density layer of salt

water. The layers in question are only a few millimeters thick, and the area tends to

be on the order of ten centimeters so that the aspect ratio, while not nearing that of

soap ﬁlms, is still large. The salt water layer is subject to a current ﬂowing in it’s

plane, and placed in a spatially varying magnetic ﬁeld. The resultant Lorentz force

acts directly on the ﬂuid layer driving it to a state of turbulence. Stratiﬁcation helps

to impose a measure of two-dimensionality to the ﬂuctuations, thus one has 2D forced

turbulence.

Note that in this system the force is acting directly on the ﬂuid, unlike the modi-

ﬁed ﬁlm tunnel where forcing happened near the grid. This restores homogeneity to

the system, allowing accurate comparison with theory. The place that shallow layers

suﬀer is in their approximation of a two-dimensional ﬂuid. The bottom of the ﬂuid

container in shallow layer systems enforces a no slip boundary on the lower surface

of the ﬂuid. If the velocity in the ﬂuid becomes large, a strong shearing can develop

between the upper and lower layers of ﬂuid. This inevitably causes mixing which

destroys the stratiﬁcation and sacriﬁces two-dimensionality. Thus, shallow layer sys-

tems are severely limited in the strength of the turbulent ﬂuctuations which they can

successfully explore.

Chapter 1.

Introduction

8

This brief experimental history, then, shows that there have been two systems used

to investigate the inverse cascade, neither of which are ideal. However, each system

complements the others diﬃculties almost perfectly. Film tunnels are great 2D ﬂuids,

but not easily forced homogeneously. Stratiﬁed layers are marginal 2D ﬂuids, but

easily forced homogeneously. What is needed then, as an ideal test apparatus for the

inverse cascade, is a combination of these two systems that takes advantage of their

beneﬁts without inheriting their diﬃculties. What is needed is the electromagnetically

forced soap ﬁlm, simply called the e-m cell.

1.3 Thesis Overview

This thesis presents an experimental study of the inverse energy cascade as it occurs

in an electromagnetically forced soap ﬁlm. In particular it focuses on characterizing

important features of the inverse cascade such as it’s range, how energy is distributed

over the range and how energy ﬂows through the range. The thesis also probes the

assumption of scale invariance that is associated with the existence of an inverse

cascade.

Chapter 2 describes the workings of the e-m cell and measurement apparatus. The

basic design and implementation of the e-m cell is reviewed in the ﬁrst two sections.

How the frictional coupling of the soap ﬁlm to the air is controlled is described in the

following section. The fourth section explains certain limitations on apparatus size

that are imposed by the existence of gravity. This size constraint is one of the chief

diﬃculties that limit results throughout the rest of the thesis. The ﬁfth section in

the chapter is an overview of the measurement system that was developed to extract

velocity information from the e-m cell. The chapter is concluded with a brief overview

of the operation of the e-m cell.

Chapter 3 is a systematic check that the e-m cell does behave as a 2D ﬂuid.

The ﬁrst section motivates the need for this test and the second derives the relevant

mathematical relationships necessary for such a test. The third section compares the

data from the cell to these derived relationships to verify that the e-m cell behaves as a

2D ﬂuid. This section also establishes a model for the external dissipation mechanism

in the e-m cell. A self consistency check is also performed to help strengthen this

veriﬁcation.

Chapter 4 begins the systematic investigation of the properties of the inverse

Chapter 1.

Introduction

9

energy cascade. The extent of the range and how energy is distributed over this

range is measured and presented in the ﬁrst section. The manner of energy transfer

is described in the following section. In particular, this second section attempts to

determine if the energy ﬂow is “inertial”, a property which is necessary if one wants

results which are universal to all 2D turbulence systems.

Finally, chapter 5 attempts to determine if the inverse cascade is scale invariant.

Predictions for structure functions in a scale invariant ﬂuid are presented in the ﬁrst

section. The next two sections attempt to extend results from the e-m cell to test these

predictions, as well as explain why one should be critical of such extensions. While

conclusions presented in earlier chapters are quite strong, the conclusions drawn in

this chapter are weak. This weakness stems from the size limitations presented in

chapter 2 and can not be overcome in the current apparatus.

Chapter 2

The E-M Cell

A ﬂuid which carries a current density, ~J, in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, ~B, is
~B which drives ﬂuid motion. This principle
subject to a force per unit mass ~F = ~J
has been used in earlier experiments to excite motion in shallow layers of electrolytic

×

ﬂuid[5, 19], and the techniques used in these experiments may be readily adapted

for use in soap ﬁlms. The result of such adaptation is the electromagnetically forced

soap ﬁlm, called brieﬂy an e-m cell. The e-m cell is a useful tool in the study of 2D

hydrodynamics, and in particular 2D turbulence[7]. This chapter reviews the design

and operation of the e-m cell, as well as the measurement technique used to obtain

velocity data from it.

2.1 The E-M Cell

The main component of the e-m cell is a free standing soap ﬁlm drawn from an

electrolytic soap solution across a square frame. The frame has two opposing sides

made from stainless steel, while the remaining sides are constructed from plastic or

glass. A voltage diﬀerence applied to the stainless steel sides results in a current

which lies in the plane of the ﬁlm. A spatially varying external magnetic ﬁeld is

then created and oriented so that it penetrates the ﬁlm plane perpendicularly. The

resulting Lorentz force lies in the plane of the ﬁlm and drives the ﬂuid motion. A

diagram of this is shown in Fig. 2.1.

The electrolytic soap solution which the ﬁlm is drawn from is made from 400 ml

distilled water, 80 g ammonium chloride salt, 40 ml glycerol and 5 ml commercial

liquid detergent (regular Dawn or Joy). To this solution particles are added up to a

10

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

11

Figure 2.1: Basic operation of the e-m cell.

volume fraction of about 10−3. These particles, either 10 µm hollow glass spheres or

lycopodium mushroom spores which appear as

40 µm particles, are of a density

comparable to the soap solution so that they closely follow the surrounding ﬂow.

These particles will be used in the measurement technique to be described later. The

∼

salt used to make the solution electrolytic, ammonium chloride, was chosen after

numerous trials which included sodium chloride and potassium chloride. Ammonium

chloride was chosen because high concentrations could be reached with little eﬀect

on the stability of the ﬁlm. This was found not to be the case with potassium or

sodium chloride. High concentrations of salt are necessary to keep the ﬁlms electrical

resistance as small as possible. This limits ﬁlm evaporation due to Joule heating

caused by the driving current, a necessity if a ﬁlm is to be studied for long periods of

time.

The soap ﬁlm, once drawn, is maintained at a thickness of around 50 µm. Earlier

soap ﬁlm work tended to use thin ﬁlms with thicknesses of 5 µm or less. There are a

number of advantages that come from using thick ﬁlms. First, for the e-m cell, it is

desirable to keep the electrical resistance low, again to limit evaporation due to Joule

heating. The larger the cross sectional area through which the current is passed, then,

the better. Another reason to use thick ﬁlms is that they lose a smaller percentage of

their energy than thin ﬁlms to frictional rubbing against the surrounding air. Recall

from chapter 1 that 2D driven turbulence requires an external dissipation mechanism

to maintain energy balance. Air friction plays this role in the e-m cell.

If the air

friction is strong then it can easily dissipate large amounts of energy. Therefore

the energy injected from the electromagnetic force must be exceptionally high to

maintain a state of strong turbulence. This would require large currents which would

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

12

enhance the Joule heating and evaporation of the ﬁlm. Using thick ﬁlms reduces

this coupling to the air and allows strong turbulence to be maintained for reasonable

values of the driving current. A ﬁnal reason for using thick ﬁlms arises from the

observation that a soap ﬁlms kinematic viscosity, ν, is dependent on it’s thickness.

Trapeznikov predicted that the eﬀective kinematic viscosity should depend on the

thickness, h, as ν = νbulk + 2νsurf /h, where νbulk is the kinematic viscosity of the soap

solution and νsurf is the 2D viscosity due to the soap ﬁlm surfaces[20]. The surface
10−5 cm3/s for soap ﬁlms
viscosity was recently measured1 to be around νsurf ≈
similar to that in the e-m cell[21]. Since the soap solution’s viscosity is .01 cm2/s the
eﬀective viscosity of a 50 µm thick soap ﬁlm is approximately 0.016 cm2/s. Using

1.5

×

thick ﬁlms, then, reduces the amount of energy lost to viscous dissipation, and by the

same argument given above, allows strong turbulence to be maintained for reasonable

values of driving current.

There are, of course, disadvantages to the use of thick soap ﬁlms. One is that

the speed of a 2D density wave in the soap ﬁlm is dependent on the thickness of the
ﬁlm2. Thicker ﬁlms contain more interstitial ﬂuid than thin ﬁlms, and therefore have

a lower wave velocity due to their increased mass. Therefore, as the ﬁlm becomes

thicker it begins to be more easily compressed. That is to say that it’s 2D density

couples more strongly to the velocity ﬁeld in the ﬁlm. A measure of the importance

of such compressibility eﬀects is the Mach number M = urms/c, where c is the density

wave speed in the medium. In the case of a 50 µm thick ﬁlm the wave velocity is

approximately 2 m/s. Velocity ﬂuctuations in the e-m cell are therefore kept less

than 20 cm/s so that M < 0.1. With such a small Mach number the system does not

develop shock waves and behaves approximately as an incompressible ﬂuid.

As noted earlier, Joule heating evaporates ﬂuid from the ﬁlm. This causes the

average thickness of the soap ﬁlm to change over time. Since thick ﬁlms were used to

minimize this eﬀect, thickness changes due to evaporation happen at a slow rate and

can be balanced by injecting small amounts of ﬂuid into the ﬁlm. In the e-m cell, soap

solution is injected by a syringe pump through a small needle inserted through the

plastic side of the frame as in Fig. 2.2. It is important that the ﬂuid be burst in, as

1This measurement utilized a ﬂowing soap ﬁlm tunnel to analyze the shedding of vortices from
a cylinder placed in the ﬂow. The vortex shedding frequency is sensitive to changes in the ﬂuids
viscosity and through proper normalization allows νsurf to be approximated.

2A 2D density wave in a soap ﬁlm is a thickness wave, where the ﬁlm bulges or shrinks in the

third dimension.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

13

Figure 2.2: Replenishing ﬂuid lost to evaporation.

a brief jet, and not slowly injected. Without initial momentum, ﬂuid builds up near

the injection point forming a droplet which eventually pops the ﬁlm. Fluid injected

with a burst shoots to the center of the e-m cell where it is quickly mixed into the

ﬁlm replenishing the lost ﬂuid. Though not used in the experiments reported here,

this process can be automated by monitoring the ﬁlm resistance. When the resistance

becomes to high a small burst of ﬂuid is shot into the ﬁlm raising the thickness and

lowering the resistance to an acceptable level.

The square frame that the ﬁlm is drawn across is limited in size to 7

7 cm2 in

×

all of the experiments reported here for reasons which will be made clear later. Both
the stainless steel and plastic sides are milled to a sharp edge of about 45◦, though

the stainless steel edge generally dulls over time by corrosion. Recent eﬀorts have

attempted to replace these edges with sheets of stainless steel and glass that are less

than 100 µm thick. The intent of this is to limit the size of the wetting region near

the edge of the frame, as shown in Fig. 2.3. Since the ﬁlm has a ﬁnite surface tension,

there must be a pressure jump across the ﬁlm surface if it is curved. A wetting region

induces a negative curvature near the edge of the frame, therefore the pressure inside

the ﬁlm near the frame edge is less than at the ﬁlm center where there is no curvature.

This causes ﬂuid to be forced through the ﬁlm to the edges, causing the center of

the ﬁlm to drain. Elimination of these wetting regions eliminates such drainage.

This eﬀect is relatively weak compared to other eﬀects which cause drainage so using

sheets instead of edges is a low priority, sheets being diﬃcult to work with due to

their delicacy. All experiments reported in this thesis use edges instead of thin sheets.

However, the preliminary work with sheets which is not reported here has provided

encouraging early results.

Using a 50 µm ﬁlm made from the above ammonium chloride solution on the 7

7

×

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

14

Figure 2.3: Film curvature near an edge and a plate.

cm2 frame results in resistance values of around 1 kΩ. Driving currents of between 10

and 45 mA are used depending on the strength of turbulence desired, strength of the

air dissipation, and strength of externally applied magnetic ﬁeld. In all turbulence

experiments, the applied voltage oscillates at 3 Hz with a square waveform. There are

several reasons for this, one is that the current in the ﬁlm causes chlorine gas bubbles

to accumulate on the positive electrode. By oscillating the current, the bubbles form

at both electrodes, slowing the inevitable bubble build up which eventually invades

the ﬁlm and renders it useless. Another reason for current oscillation is to eliminate

the formation of large vortices which form and dominate regions of the ﬂuid containing

a force ﬁeld which is sympathetic to it’s motion. Once formed, such structures induce

a spatially varying mean ﬂow, and thus a mean shear, rendering the turbulence in
the e-m cell inhomogeneous.3

A ﬁnal note: due to the conﬁguration of the e-m cell, the current which is driven in

the plane of the ﬁlm is unidirectional, namely parallel to the plastic edges of the frame

running from one electrode to another. For the rest of the paper the current direction

will be assumed to lie along the y axis. By the Lorentz law, this unidirectional

3Oscillating the current may also eliminate any polarization of charge in the e-m cell caused by
the net motion of ions in the ﬂuid. At this time it is unclear whether this polarization is important
in the e-m cell. Experiments done in both laminar and turbulent ﬂow with D.C. forcing do not
exhibit signs of charge polarization, such as the gradual decrease in applied force due to shielding of
the electrodes. However, these experiments where done over short (minutes) time scale. What eﬀect
polarization may have over a typical experiment time scale (around ﬁfteen minutes) is unknown
since such eﬀects are masked by the eﬀects of evaporation.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

15

Figure 2.4: Array of magnets creating the spatially varying external magnetic ﬁeld.

current creates a unidirectional electromagnetic force which lies on the x axis. Due to

this unidirectionality, the e-m cell can not behave isotropically, that is the system is

not rotationally invariant, regardless of the symmetry of the spatial variation of the

magnetic ﬁeld. This lack of isotropy will be an exceedingly important consideration

later in the thesis.

2.2 The Magnet Array

The spatially varying magnetic ﬁeld used in the creation of the Lorentz force is gen-

erated by an array of Neodymium rare earth magnets (NdFeB) placed just below the

ﬁlm as shown in Fig. 2.4. These magnets produce quite powerful ﬁelds, typically on

the order of 0.1 T at their surface. This ﬁeld decays away from the surface, however,

with a typical length scale of the order of the magnet size. Since the magnets are

small, generally less than 0.5 mm, they must be brought very close to the ﬁlm surface

to generate ﬁelds strong enough to drive ﬂow. One could use larger magnets to induce

motion. This is undesirable, though, since the magnet size dictates the energy injec-

tion scale, rinj. Recall from the discussion in chapter 1 that rinj must be signiﬁcantly

smaller than the system size for an inverse cascade region to exist in an experimental

2D turbulence system. For the e-m cell described above, the system size is the frame

size, which is limited to 7 cm. Therefore magnet arrays with injection scales less than

0.7 cm must be used to allow for a decade of inverse cascade range.

Several types of magnet arrays are used in the e-m cell, each distinguished by the

type of ﬂow it induces at small Reynolds number (it’s laminar behavior) or equiva-

lently by the characteristics of the force ﬁeld it produces in the e-m cell. The ﬁrst type

of array, and by far the most important, is the Kolmogorov array. This array is made

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

16

Figure 2.5: Top view of the magnet arrays which create the spatially varying external

magnetic ﬁeld in the e-m cell: (a) the Kolmogorov array, (b) the square array, (c)

stretched hexagonal array, (d) pseudo-random array. The direction of the current J

is shown as is the coordinate axis.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

17

of alternating north-south layers of long rectangular magnets of approximately 0.3

cm in width, as shown in Fig. 2.5 a. The magnetic ﬁeld it produces in the ﬁlm varies

approximately sinusoidally in space. The magnets are oriented so that this variation

lies in the direction of the current, causing the Lorentz force in the ﬁlm to have the

form Fx = f0sin(k0y) (Recall Fy = 0 because the force is unidirectional). Two mag-

nets make a single north-south oscillation, therefore the wavelength of the sinusoidal

variations in the force ﬁeld (which is the energy injection scale) is rinj = 0.6 cm. The
associated injection wavenumber is k0 = 2π/rinj = 10 cm−1. The laminar ﬂow this
forcing produces is one of alternating shear layers, a ﬂow which Kolmogorov proposed

investigating as an interesting model to study a ﬂuids transition from laminar to tur-

bulent motion (hence the name). The Kolmogorov array has several properties which

will be of importance in later analysis. The ﬁrst is that the forcing is divergence free,
~F = 0. This property will allow pressure ﬁelds to be approximated from
i.e. ~
velocity ﬁelds using Fourier techniques. Another property of importance is that the

∇ ·

forcing is invariant to translation along the ˆx direction. Chapter 3 will demonstrate

how this property may be used to obtain the energy injection rate from the forcing

without having to explicitly measure the magnitude of the forcing f0.

The next type of magnet array, shown in Fig. 2.5 b, is called the square array.

It is made of round magnets oriented in a tick-tack-toe arrangement with like poled

magnets along diagonals. There are two such arrays in the e-m cell arsenal made

from 0.3 cm and 0.6 cm magnets. The force ﬁeld created by these arrays has the form

Fx = f0(sin(k0(x + y)) + sin(k0(x
y))). Here the wavelength along the diagonals
is rinj = √2w where w is the magnet diameter, and again k0 = 2π/rinj. The 0.3 cm
square array has the smallest injection scale of all the arrays used with rinj = 0.42

−

cm. Unfortunately these magnets are exceptionally weak, limiting the magnitude of

the forcing one can create with reasonable currents. Also, the forcing created by these

arrays are not divergence free. Without the ability to account for pressure much the

usefulness of this array is limited to testing ideas of universality (Chapter 5).

The ﬁnal two arrays are seldom used and are mentioned here only for completeness.

The ﬁrst, shown in Fig. 2.5 c, is a stretched hexagonal array, called the hex array,

and the second, shown in Fig. 2.5 d, is a pseudo-random array. The former is

constructed from a mixture of both 0.3 cm round and 0.6 cm round magnets. The

result could be though of as a Kolmogorov ﬂow with a periodic variation along every

other magnet. The injection wavenumber associated with this array is quite large,

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

18

Figure 2.6: Fluid between a top plate moving with velocity U and ﬁxed bottom plate

produces a linear velocity proﬁle.

limiting it’s usefulness. The laminar behavior a hex array produces is a triangular

vortex crystal. The pseudo-random array is constructed from 0.3 cm round magnets

placed at random on an iron sheet. The positions of the magnets where generated

via a random number generator which attempted to maximize the magnet density.

It was constructed in a naive attempt to obtain more homogenous turbulence in the

e-m cell. The pseudo-random ﬂow has no well-deﬁned laminar ﬂow behavior.

2.3 External Dissipation: The Air Friction

The air friction has already been described as the external dissipation mechanism

in the e-m cell. Chapter 3 will demonstrate that the air friction can be adequately

modeled as a linear friction, that is if an element of the ﬁlm is moving with velocity
~u it experiences a drag force from the air of the form ~Fdrag =
discussion sets the basis for this linear drag model.

α~u. The following

−

A ﬂuid between two parallel plates separated in the x2 direction by a small distance

d, one ﬁxed and the other moving with velocity U in the x1 direction, assumes a linear

proﬁle of the form, u1 = Ux2/d (This assumes there are no other forces acting on

the ﬂuid, the plates are inﬁnite and boundary conditions are no slip at either plate).

This is shown in Fig. 2.6. The drag force per unit area exerted on the top plate by
the ﬂuid is fdrag = η ∂u1
d where η is the ordinary 3D shear viscosity of the ﬂuid
between the plates. In the e-m cell the role of the top plate is played by the soap

∂x2 |d = ηU

ﬁlm, while the role of the lower plate is played by the magnet array. The ﬂuid is the

surrounding air and the length d is just the distance of the magnets to the ﬁlm. Thus

raising the magnets closer to the ﬁlm increases the strength of the air drag in the e-m

cell.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

19

The drag force must be normalized by the ﬁlms 2D density so that the force per

unit mass can be considered. The 2D density of the ﬁlm is given by ρh where ρ is

the density of the soap solution (about that of water) and h is the ﬁlms thickness.
The force per unit mass caused by the air drag on the ﬁlm is then ~Fdrag =
η
ρhd~u.
This demonstrates a point that was made earlier in this chapter, that the frictional

−

coupling to the air depends not only on the magnet-ﬁlm distance but on the thickness

of the soap ﬁlm as well. Keeping the ﬁlm as thick as possible, then, minimizes this

coupling.

There are a couple of reasons to worry about the applicability of this linear friction

model. First is that the soap ﬁlm in the e-m cell is not an inﬁnite ﬂat plate moving

with a constant velocity, but has a velocity which ﬂuctuates from point to point in

the ﬂow. As long as the size of these velocity ﬂuctuations, that is the size of the

vortices, is larger than both the magnet-ﬁlm distance, d, and the ﬁlm thickness, h,

the approximation as an inﬁnite plate should apply. Recall from the discussion above

that the magnetic ﬁeld created by the array quickly decays within the width of a

single magnet. Therefore the magnets are always kept within one magnet width of

the ﬁlm, otherwise the magnetic ﬁeld would be too weak to drive turbulence. Since

the magnet width also dictates the smallest vortex size, rinj, the requirement that

d < rinj is always met in the e-m cell.

The second complication is the fact that there is more than one side to the ﬁlm.

The linear drag model accounts for the drag force exerted on the lower surface of the

soap ﬁlm. The upper surface of the ﬁlm is also dragging along a layer of air. The

velocity proﬁle of the air above the ﬁlm is not a simple linear shear as it is below the

ﬁlm, but a more complex Prandtl-like boundary layer due to the absence of a second

ﬁxed plate. Chapter 4 will show that this causes a non-negligible correction to the

above linear drag model.

2.4 Gravity

To this point there has been no discussion about the orientation of the soap ﬁlm

with respect to the earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. Vertical orientation, that is the ﬁlm

plane lying along the gravitational ﬁeld direction, is not desirable because it would

strongly stratify the soap ﬁlm, making it thinner on top than on the bottom. This

is tantamount to both a severe change in the 2D density and a change in the ﬁlms

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

20

Figure 2.7: A thick ﬁlm droops under the action of gravity, as shown by the dotted

line. A box enclosing the top of the e-m cell frame is brought to a lower pressure than

the surrounding environment to balance gravity.

kinematic viscosity from the top of the ﬁlm to the bottom. In other words the ﬁlm

becomes an inhomogeneous ﬂuid. Vertical orientation must therefore be discarded

and a horizontal orientation used to allow the ﬁlm to approximate a homogenous

ﬂuid.

A horizontally oriented soap ﬁlm droops under the force of the earth’s gravitational

ﬁeld. This eﬀect is exacerbated by the fact that the ﬁlm is 50 µm thick. To balance

gravity, a box enclosing the region on the top surface of the soap ﬁlm is evacuated

of a small amount of air, as in Fig. 2.7. This lowers the pressure in the box causing

a pressure gradient across the ﬁlm plane and thus a force opposing gravity. Enough

pressure is drawn to almost exactly balance the gravitational ﬁeld. Unfortunately the

larger the soap ﬁlm, the more delicate this balance becomes. This is the reason that

soap ﬁlms used in the e-m cell are limited to sizes under 7

7 cm.

×

This pressure balance is delicate and can be disrupted by the evaporation of ﬂuid

from the soap ﬁlm into the container above the ﬁlm. It must be constantly monitored

to make sure that the ﬁlm stays at the same level. This is done in the e-m cell by

reﬂecting a laser light oﬀ a portion of the ﬁlm near the middle of one of the edges.

A drooping ﬁlm deﬂects the beam, and this deﬂection can be monitored by various

techniques, for example using a position sensitive detector or a linear CCD array. A

feedback loop based on the deﬂection measurement can be easily constructed and ﬁlm

level kept steady, even for high current and large amounts of evaporation.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

21

2.5 Particle Tracking Velocimetry

Velocity information is obtained from the e-m cell using a particle tracking method

(PTV) which is similar to the standard technique known as particle imaging velocime-

try (PIV). The PIV technique uses a camera to capture images of small particles that

seed the ﬂuid ﬂow. Two consecutive images are separated in time by a small amount

∆t. These images are sectioned into small regions by a discrete grid. Corresponding

regions from the two consecutive images are compared to obtain the average motion
~∆x of the particles in that region over the time ∆t. Each region is then assigned
a velocity vector ~u = ~∆x/∆t, yielding an entire velocity ﬁeld on a grid. There are
many papers and review articles which describe the PIV technique [11, 22, 23, 24],

interested readers should refer to these for a complete description.

Where PIV attempts to track the average displacement of a number of particles

(usually around 10) in a square region formed by a grid, PTV attempts to determine

the displacement of individual particles. This allows PTV to obtain ﬁner spatial

resolution than PIV. Equivalently one could say that PTV has higher vector density.

Since the algorithms used in PTV and PIV to determine translation are identical

it might be expected that this increased resolution comes only with increased noise.

This is not the case, however, because PTV has a built-in self correction that allows

noise to be suppressed. There is one sacriﬁce though. Since PTV attempts to track

individual particles the technique is much more sensitive to particles leaving the

measurement volume than PIV. This is not a issue in 2D ﬂows such as are studied

here (except near the boundaries of the images), though in 3D it could be a signiﬁcant

problem. A copy of the PTV program is listed in Appendix A.

There are three main steps to PTV by which one goes from CCD images of

particles to velocity information: particle identiﬁcation, neighborhood comparison,

and matching. Before going into these, the manner in which images are acquired

should be described. As stated earlier the soap ﬁlm in the e-m cell is seeded with

small particles. These particles are illuminated by two pulsed Nd:Yag lasers that

yield 12 mJ of energy per nano-second pulse. Images of the particles illuminated by

the lasers are obtained using a 30 Hz, 8 bit CCD camera of resolution 768

480

rectangular pixels with aspect ratio 1 : 1.17. The lasers are slaved to the camera so

×

that the ﬁrst Nd:Yag laser pulses at the end of the ﬁrst image and the second laser

pulses a time ∆t later in the second image. In this manner two images of particles

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

22

Figure 2.8: Timing of the CCD camera frames and laser pulses used in PTV. Frame 1

and Frame 2 denote a single PTV image pair from which velocity ﬁelds are extracted.

separated by time ∆t are obtained on a camera with a ﬁxed time resolution of .03

ms. This timing is shown in Fig. 2.8.

To determine the positions of the particles in the ﬂow the background of each

image must be subtracted oﬀ. There are many routines by which one can do this; in

this thesis a high pass ﬁlter is used since the particles are spatially small compared

to the image size. Once the background is subtracted the particles in each image are

found by an exhaustive nearest neighbor searching algorithms. If the (i, j) pixel is

found to be non-zero then this serves as the base of a particle group. The four pixels

at (i + 1, j), (i

1, j),(i, j + 1), and (i, j

1) are said to neighbor the base pixel, and

−

−

any of these which are non-zero are added to the group. Any neighbor of a pixel in

the group is then considered, and if it is non-zero and not already part of the group,

it is added to the group. This process continues until no pixels are being added to

the group. The ﬁnal group of non-zero pixels is called a particle. This process is

performed until all non-zero pixels in each image are accounted for in a particle. In

what follows the particles in the ﬁrst image will be indexed by a and those in the

second image by b.

This manner of ﬁnding a particle does not distinguish between an individual par-

ticle and particles that are so close together that they form a continuous image on the

CCD camera. Since the turbulence in the e-m cell is only mildly compressible, par-

ticles which start initially very close should stay close over the short period of time,

∆t, between laser ﬂashes. The indistinguishability, then, should not be an issue.

There are three quantities which need to be determined for each particle:

it’s

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

23

centroid, pixel centroid and size. The centroid is the center of the group of pixels
which make the particle weighted by the intensity, I (z)
(i,j), of the pixels in the group (z
denotes the image). If there are N pixels, indexed by n, in the pixel group of particle
, y(a)
a in image one, then the centroid, (x(a)

c ), is given by:

c

(x(a)
c

, y(a)
c )

N

n=1(i(n), j(n))I (1)
n=1 I (1)

(i(n),j(n))

N

(i(n),j(n))

.

≡ P

P
Note that where the pixels themselves are discretized on a ﬁnite grid, the center of

mass of a particle need not be if there is more than one pixel contained in it’s group.

This phenomenon is called sub-pixel resolution since it allows particle position to be

tracked with a resolution ﬁner than the pixel size of the camera. Sub-pixel resolution

can be used to enhance the dynamic range of PTV measurement, though it is not

relied upon for results in this thesis. The pixel centroid of particle a is deﬁned as the
nearest pixel to the particles centroid, and will be denoted as (x(a), y(a)). Finally the
size of particle a is simply the 2nd moment of the intensity distribution given by

N
n=1((i(n)

−

c )2 + (j(n)
x(a)
n=1 I (1)

N

(i(n),j(n))

−

c )2)I (1)
y(a)

(i(n),j(n))

R(a)

P

≡ 


1/2

.





The particle size is used as a ﬁlter to discard particles which are too big or too small.

P

Once particles have been identiﬁed the challenge is to track them from one image

to the next. This is done by comparing the regions surrounding particles in the ﬁrst

image with regions around particles in the second to establish how well they correlate.

For particle a in the ﬁrst image and b in the second image the correlation number ca,b

is determined by

ca,b =

(

l
m=−l

l

n=−l( ˜I (1)
P

P

P

˜I (1)
((x(a)+m),(y(a)+n))

l
n=−l

l
m=−l
((x(a)+m),(y(a)+n)))2)1/2(

l
m=−l

P

˜I (2)
((x(b)+m),(y(b)+n))
n=−l( ˜I (2)
l

((x(b)+m),(y(b)+n)))2)1/2

.

In the above 2l is called the correlation box size. The intensities, ˜I (z)
mining the correlation number are the intensities of the images I (z)
i,j
over their respective correlation boxes so that ca,b assumes a value between

i,j , used in deter-
less their average

1 and

1. If the correlation number is close to 1 then the region around particle a is similar

−

P

P

to the region around particle b. The closer to 1 the more similar the regions.

One need not compare all particles in the ﬁrst image to all particles in the second.

Only a subset of particles within a certain distance of one another need be considered.

Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

24

That is if a particle a is found at (x(a)
the second, their correlation number need only be calculated if ((x(a)
−
y(b))2)1/2 < s, where s is some reasonable threshold displacement based on the RMS

c ) in the ﬁrst frame and b is at (x(b)

c , y(b)
x(b))2 + (y(a)

c ) in

, y(a)

−

c

velocity ﬂuctuations and ﬂash spacing.

Once all the particle comparisons have been performed, one need only match

particles in the ﬁrst frame to those in the second. This is done by an iterative mutual

maxima technique. Look at correlation number ca,b and determine if it is above some

initial threshold climit. If it is, then look to see if ca,b is the maximum correlation

value for both particle a and particle b. That is make sure ca,b > ca,x for any x

= b

and ca,b > cy,b for any y

= a. If so then then ca,b is the mutual maximum for particles

a and b and they are considered a match. Thus particle a has moved from position
(x(a)
c

c ) in the second. The fact that we have checked
that not only is particle a the best ﬁt for b, but that b is best ﬁt by a is the self-

c ) in the ﬁrst frame to (x(b)

c , y(b)

, y(a)

correction that PTV has that PIV does not (PIV can only check that a is best for b),

and the reason that PTV can achieve higher vector density without much sacriﬁce in

velocity resolution.

Once matched these particles and their correlation numbers are removed from

consideration. This is done for all correlation numbers above climit, and all mutual

maxima are obtained in this way. The climit is then lowered slightly and the procedure

performed over all particles which have not already been matched. This is done until

climit hits some speciﬁed lowest bound and the particles which have not been matched

at this point are discarded.

This leaves a ﬁnal list of particles which have been tracked from a point in the

ﬁrst image to a point in the second. The average velocity of the particle is determined

by the motion of it’s center of mass. This velocity is assigned to the average particle

position. This yields a ﬁeld of average velocities which is the ﬁnal ﬁeld from the PTV

technique. These ﬁelds are generally interpolated to a ﬁnite grid (binned) so that

derivatives may be taken. This interpolation can be performed by any number of

weighted averaging techniques.

2.6 Cell Operation

This section describes the procedure that was used to employ the features of the e-m

cell described above. First a marginally thick ﬁlm is pulled across the square frame.

6
6
Chapter 2. The E-M Cell

25

The plastic edges of the frame are dried to remove any ﬂuid bridges that might short

the electrical current. A small amount of air is removed from the box until the ﬁlm

is just level to the eye. This ﬁlm is then placed above the magnet array and a mixing

current, generally around 15 mA, is turned on. The feedback loops to inject ﬂuid and

pressure balance the ﬁlm are initiated. After a balance is reached the magnets are

raised (or lowered) to the desired level, and the current is adjusted until the target

urms is reached. Particle images are then acquired at a rate on the order of a few Hz

until a large number (between 500-1000) image pairs are obtained. These pairs are

then interrogated using the PTV algorithm to obtain velocity information.

Chapter 3

Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

A frustrating problem that arises when soap ﬁlms are used as an experimental system

for studying 2D ﬂuid dynamics is the lack of direct evidence that these ﬁlms obey the

2D incompressible Navier-Stokes equation,

∂ui
∂t

+ us

∂ui
∂xs

=

∂p
∂xi

−

+ ν

∂2ui
∂x2
s

+ F ext
i

,

∂us
∂xs

= 0.

(3.1)

(3.2)

In the above equations ui is the ith component of the ﬂuid’s velocity ﬁeld, p is the
represents the ith compo-
internal pressure ﬁeld normalized by ﬂuid density, and F ext

i

nent of any external force ﬁeld (per unit mass) acting on the ﬂuid. The constant ν

is the ﬂuid’s kinematic viscosity. Einstein summation convention is used, and will be

used throughout the thesis unless otherwise noted. These equations are the governing

equations for the time evolution of the velocity ﬁeld of an incompressible ﬂuid. If the

soap ﬁlm does not obey this equation then it is not behaving as an incompressible

Navier-Stokes ﬂuid and is therefore useless as a system for standard turbulence in-

vestigations. The purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate that the e-m cell does

indeed approximate a 2D Navier-Stokes ﬂuid.

3.1 Introduction

There are a number of reasons to be skeptical about soap ﬁlms behaving as an in-

compressible Navier-Stokes ﬂuids. Most of the problems arise from the presence of

26

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

27

Figure 3.1: Thin ﬁlm interference fringes demonstrate that the thickness of the soap

ﬁlm in the e-m cell is not constant but varies from point to point in the ﬂow.

thickness ﬂuctuations which are caused by the motion of the ﬁlm. Such thickness

ﬂuctuations can be imaged using thin ﬁlm interference as in Fig. 3.1 and are indica-

tive of compressibility in the soap ﬁlm. Compressibility constitutes a failure of Eq.

3.2 in soap ﬁlms. This has already been discussed somewhat in chapter 2 where it

was implied that keeping the Mach number small eliminates this problem. This is

a little misleading; a small Mach number does not mean that there are no thickness

ﬂuctuations. Rather it means that the thickness ﬂuctuations do not develop shock

fronts and vary in a smooth manner from point to point in the ﬂow. In the range

of Mach number present in the e-m cell the thickness ﬂuctuations tend to be around

20% the mean thickness of the ﬁlm [11]. One would like to determine if this is small

enough to allow Eq. 3.2 to hold approximately.

Aside from the incompressibility issue, thickness ﬂuctuations could cause soap

ﬁlms to deviate from a Navier-Stokes ﬂuid in a more sinister way. Recall from the

discussion in chapter 2 that the kinematic viscosity of the soap ﬁlm, ν, is dependent

on thickness. Since the ﬁlm thickness varies from point to point in the ﬂow, so should

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

28

the eﬀective viscosity of the ﬂuid. These thickness ﬂuctuations respond to velocity

gradients in the ﬁlm, therefore the viscosity is dependent on the local shear rate. A

ﬂuid with such a shear dependent viscosity is said to be non-Newtonian and does not

obey Eq. 3.1. Here again one would like to determine if the viscosity ﬂuctuations are

small enough to be considered negligible and Eq. 3.1 to hold approximately.

Another problem when dealing with soap ﬁlms is the external frictional coupling to

the air. It’s presence is important to attain an energy balance in 2D forced turbulence,

as discussed in chapter 1. Indeed its strength and form should dictate the outer scale

of the turbulence and aﬀect energy transfer at large scales. Because of its importance

the eﬀects of this coupling must be modeled and tested. The simplest model of the

frictional eﬀects of the air is to assume it acts as a linear drag on the ﬁlm. Therefore
the external force ﬁeld F ext
Lorentz force caused by current and magnetic ﬁeld, Fi, and the air drag F air
The constant α represents the strength of the frictional coupling of the air to the ﬁlm.

acting on the e-m cell can be broken into two parts, the

i =

αui.

−

i

This model must be tested if it is to be used in later investigations.

Though a direct test of the Navier-Stokes equations by inverse methods is not

easily performed, it is possible to test an equation known as the Karman-Howarth

relationship. This relationship can be derived from the Navier-Stokes equation with

a single assumption, and easily tested with data from the e-m cell.

It’s failure or

success in describing data from the e-m cell would then constitute an indirect test

of the Navier-Stokes equation as well as the linear drag model proposed for the air

friction.

[25].

3.2 The Karman-Howarth Relationship

Although the derivation of the Karman-Howarth relationship can be found in a num-

ber of texts on turbulence, it is performed here for two purposes: the relationship is

used extensively in later chapters and to present notation which will be used through-

out the thesis. It is also performed with the inclusion of a linear damping term in

the Navier-Stokes equation to represent the air friction as discussed earlier. The

derivation here, with the exception of the air drag, closely follows that found in Hinze

The Karman-Howarth relationship governs the time evolution of the two-point

velocity correlation,

ui(~x)uj(~x′)

h

i

, for a ﬂuid in a state of homogenous turbulence. The

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

29

...
i

h

brackets

represent an ensemble average. This relationship can be derived from

the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation using only the assumption of homogeneity
in the following manner. Multiply Eq. 3.1 which is evaluated for the ith component
of the velocity ﬁeld at the point ~x with the jth component of the ﬁeld at point ~x′:

u′
j

∂ui
∂t

+

∂
∂xs

(uiusu′

j) =

(pu′

j) + ν

∂
∂xi

−

∂2
∂x2
s

(uiu′

j) + u′

jFi −

αuiu′
j.

(3.3)

In the above, ﬁeld quantities at the point ~x′ are denoted by a
model has been explicitly inserted into the equation. The fact that the derivative at
point ~x commutes with multiplication by ﬁelds evaluated at ~x′ has been used to move
u′
j inside spatial derivatives. Incompressibility has also been used in the second term
on the left-hand-side to move us into the derivative.

and the linear drag

′

Add Eq. 3.3 with the corresponding equation evaluated by multiplying Eq. 3.1
evaluated for the jth component of the velocity ﬁeld at the point ~x′ with the ith
component of the ﬁeld at point ~x. This allows both velocity terms to be brought into

the time derivative,

∂
∂t

(uiu′

j) =

(uiusu′
j)

−

(uiu′

su′
j)

∂
∂xi

−

(pu′
j)

∂
∂x′
j

−

(p′ui)

(uiu′

j) + ν

(uiu′

j) + u′

jFi + uiF ′

2αuiu′
j.

(3.4)

j −

A coordinate transformation to relative, ri ≡
coordinates can now be performed. Grouping the appropriate terms yields:

xi, and absolute, ξi ≡

x′
i −

1/2(x′

i + xi),

∂
∂x′
s
∂2
∂x′2
s

∂
∂t

(uiu′

j) =

(uiusu′

j + uiu′

su′
j)

(uiu′

su′

uiusu′
j)

(pu′
j)

1
2

∂
∂ξj

−

(p′ui) +

(pu′
j)

(p′ui)

j −

∂
∂rj

−

−

∂
∂rs
∂
∂ri

(uiu′

j) + 2ν

(uiu′

j) + u′

jFi + uiF ′

2αuiu′
j.

(3.5)

j −

∂2
∂r2
s

Now an ensemble average is performed. Using the assumption of homogeneity

eliminates the derivative of averages with respect to absolute position, ξi, leaving

only derivatives with respect to relative position, ri. What remains is called the

Karman-Howarth relationship,

∂
∂t h

uiu′
ji

=

−

uiu′

su′

uiusu′
ji

+

j −

∂
∂ri h

pu′

ji −

∂
∂rj h

p′uii

uiu′
ji

+

u′
jFii

h

+

uiF ′

ji −

2α

uiu′
ji

.

h

h

(3.6)

∂
∂rs h
∂2
∂r2
s h

+2ν

∂
∂xs
∂2
∂x2
s

−

+ν

1
2
1
2
1
2

∂
∂ξs
∂
∂ξi
∂2
∂ξ2
s

ν

−

−

+

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

30

uiuj...u′

. Using this notation, the correlation on the left hand side of

In the future the n-term two-point velocity correlation functions will be denoted by
b(n)
k...
ij...,k... ≡ h
i
Eq. 3.6 is given by b(2)
i,j , while the ﬁrst term in the ﬁrst derivative on the right is given
by b(3)
i,sj.
This relationship can also be used to derive the energy balance equation for ho-

mogenous turbulence. Energy balance will be used in what follows as a self consis-

tency check for data that attempts to ﬁt the Karman-Howarth relationship. Taking

the limit of Eq. 3.6 as ~r

0 (or equivalently as ~x

~x′)yields

→

→

∂
∂t h

uiuji

= Πij −

ǫij +

uiFji −

h

2α

uiuji

.

h

In the above the tensors Πij and ǫij are deﬁned as

Πij ≡

(
lim
r→0

∂
∂ri h

pu′

ji −

∂
∂rj h

p′uii

),

ǫij ≡

lim
r→0

2ν

∂2
∂r2
s h

uiu′
ji

.

Taking half the trace of Eq. 3.7 eliminates the pressure term Πij and yields the energy

balance relationship

1
2

∂
∂t

u2
rms =

νω2

rms +

−

usFsi −

h

αu2

rms,

where the vorticity, ω, is deﬁned as the curl of the velocity ﬁeld (i.e. ω = ~
The ﬁrst term on the right, νω2

ǫν, is the amount of energy changed to heat

∇ ×

~u).

by internal viscous dissipation. The second,
external force. The ﬁnal term, αu2

usFsi ≡

h

ǫinj, is the work done by the

ǫair, is the energy lost to the linear drag.

rms ≡

rms ≡

Equation 3.10 is the statement that the change in energy in the system is simply the

amount gained from the external forcing less the amount lost to dissipative eﬀects.

3.3 Testing Karman-Howarth

3.3.1 Experimental Considerations

Recall that the objective of the experiments presented in this section is to demon-

strate that the dynamics of the e-m cell are governed by the Navier-Stokes equation,

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

31

Eq. 3.1, with the eﬀects of air friction modeled as a linear drag. This will be demon-

strated indirectly by showing that the Karman-Howarth relationship, Eq. 3.6, holds

for homogenous turbulence in the e-m cell. The number of terms which must be

measured to check Eq. 3.6 can be simpliﬁed by using speciﬁc characteristics of the

e-m cell. The ﬁrst is the elimination of the time derivative. This term can be ignored

if the turbulence is in a statistically steady state. Since the e-m cell was designed

speciﬁcally to study steady state turbulence it is easy to maintain energy and enstro-

phy approximately constant. Elimination of the time derivative in this manner is the

main reason that testing of the Karman-Howarth relationship is signiﬁcantly easier

than directly testing the Navier-Stokes equation.

Another term which can be dropped is the viscous term, if one considers length
(ν3/ǫinj)1/4. For typical values of energy
scales, r, greater than the viscous scale rν ≈
injection in the e-m cell rν = 200µm. Since the particle tracking measurements

focus on the inverse cascade regime, which occurs at length scales greater than a

millimeter in the e-m cell, most of the measurement resolution lies well above this

criteria. Since the viscous term is being ignored these experiments can draw no

conclusions about how thickness changes may be aﬀecting changes in viscosity. Small

scale investigations, outside the scope of this thesis, would have to be performed to

draw conclusions about this eﬀect.

What remains of the Karman-Howarth relationship after using these assumptions

is

well.

∂
∂rs

(b(3)

p′uii
Normally the assumption of isotropy would also be made to eliminate the pressure-

u′
jFii

pu′
ji

i,sj −

(3.11)

uiF ′

ji −

−

+

+

=

h

h

2αb(2)
i,j .

b(3)
is,j)

∂
∂ri h

∂
∂rj h

velocity correlations on the left-hand-side. Recall from the discussion in chapter 2

that this assumption cannot be made in the e-m cell due to unidirectional forcing.

Therefore to check Eq. 3.11 a pressure-velocity correlation must be measured, indi-

cating that not only is a velocity ﬁeld needed for the check but a pressure ﬁeld as

To obtain the pressure ﬁeld, the divergence operator is applied to Eq. 3.1 and Eq.

3.2 is used. What is left has the form

2p = 2Λ +

∇

~F

∇ ·

(3.12)

where Λ

∂ux
∂x

∂uy
∂y −

≡

∂ux
∂y

∂uy
∂x . If the Kolmogorov magnet array is used, the divergence

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

32

of the electromagnetic force on the right may be dropped (see chapter 2). This allows
the pressure to be approximated from the velocity ﬁeld using Fourier techniques1.

For this reason the Kolmogorov array will be used in these experiments.

With Kolmogorov forcing and the assumptions above, all the terms in Eq. 3.11

may be measured and tested as an indirect test of the Navier-Stokes equation and

linear drag model. One ﬁnal simpliﬁcation can be made. An exact measure of the

external electromagnetic forcing is diﬃcult at best. However, since the forcing is uni-

directional, along the ˆx direction, the force-velocity correlation terms can be dropped

if the (i, j) = (y, y) component of the tensor equation is considered. This is easily

done leaving the ﬁnal equation to be tested:

∂
∂rs

(b(3)

y,sy −

b(3)
ys,y)

−

∂
∂ry h

pu′
yi

+

∂
∂ry h

p′uyi

2αb(2)
y,y.

=

−

(3.13)

All of the terms in the above can be measured, and the constant α can be used as

a single free ﬁtting parameter. The quality of the ﬁt will determine if the Karman-

Howarth relationship holds in the e-m cell, and therefore by implication the Navier-

Stokes equation and linear drag model. Such a detailed comparison between theory

and experiment has not been performed before for 2D soap ﬁlm systems.

3.3.2 The Data

A single run of the e-m cell using Kolmogorov forcing was performed over a time

span of

300s during which one thousand vector ﬁelds were obtained by PTV. The

cell was driven at a voltage 40 V with a current of 40 mA oscillating with a square

∼

wave form at 5 Hz. The magnet array was placed approximately 1 mm below the

ﬁlm. This resulted in velocity ﬂuctuations of around 11 cm/s over the time of the

experiment. A typical velocity ﬁeld that is obtained by binning the particle tracks is

shown with the associated pressure ﬁeld derived using the method described above

in Fig. 3.2.

The ﬁrst order of business is to check that the assumptions of incompressibility

and that the system is in a steady state are accurate. Shown in Fig. 3.3a is the time

dependence of the velocity and vorticity ﬂuctuations for the run. The ﬂuctuations are

1This approximation of the pressure ﬁeld assumes periodic boundary conditions. Though the
velocity ﬁelds extracted from the e-m cell do not satisfy this boundary condition it is hoped that the
solution for the pressure ﬁeld will be insensitive to this approximation away from the boundaries

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

33

Figure 3.2: Typical velocity (a) and pressure (b) ﬁelds obtained from the e-m cell. In

the pressure ﬁeld green denotes positive and blue negative values.

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

34

not exactly constant, but the change is negligible due to the fact that it happens over

a long time, i.e. the average time derivative is approximately zero. The steady state

assumption is therefore approximately correct. The incompressibility assumption can

be tested by measuring the divergence of the ﬂow, D

~u, and normalizing its

square by the enstrophy Ω
be small if the divergence eﬀect is to be ignorable. In the e-m cell D2/Ω

rms. This forms a dimensionless quantity which must
0.1 over

≡

ω2

~
∇ ·

≡

the time of the run as shown in Fig. 3.3b. This indicates that the divergence is not

overly large and incompressibility can be assumed. Coincidentally this number is also

close to the Mach number of the system, which the reader will recall was kept small

≈

for the purpose of minimizing compressibility.

The ﬁnal assumption necessary to check before Karman-Howarth is applicable to

the system is homogeneity. That is the average quantities in the turbulence should

be invariant with respect to translation. A crude test of homogeneity is to measure

the mean,

~u(~x)
h

iN , and RMS ﬂuctuation, (
h|

~u(~x)

1

2

iN )

|

2 , of the velocity as a function

of position, where N denotes the number of ﬁelds the quantity is averaged over. Both

should be independent of position for homogeneity to hold. Moreover, since the ﬁlm

in the e-m cell does not have a net translation, the mean ﬂow everywhere should

be identically zero. Figure 3.4a shows the the mean ﬂow for the run after having

averaged over the thousand images (N = 1000). One can see that there still exists

a small mean. Though at ﬁrst this is discouraging, it is misleading since a ﬁnite

amount of data will almost never converge exactly to zero. Rather the magnitude
of the ﬂuctuations in the mean shear should decrease as N −1/2 if one assumes the

this end, the RMS ﬂuctuations of the mean ﬂow,

ﬂuctuations away from the mean are behaving as a centered Gaussian variable. To
iN rms, is plotted as a function
It is clear that the magnitude of the ﬂuctuations in the mean is

N in Fig. 3.4b.
decreasing almost perfectly as N −1/2, indicating that the mean ﬂow as N

~u(~x)
h

→ ∞

should go to zero as required by homogeneity.

Although the mean ﬂow is constant (since it’s zero) and satisﬁes the requirement

for homogeneity, the RMS ﬂuctuations, (

~u(~x)

2 , does not. This can be seen by

h|
looking at Fig. 3.5 which shows the RMS ﬂuctuations of the two velocity components

|

1

2

iN )

averaged over the thousand images. Although the ˆy component of the velocity ﬂuctu-

ations is approximately constant, the ˆx ﬂuctuations display strong striations. These

striations reﬂect the Kolmogorov forcing, as they must if the electromagnetic force

is to inject energy into the system. That is, some part of ux must be non-random

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

35

Figure 3.3: (a) Time dependence of urms and ωrms for a single run in the e-m cell. This

demonstrates that the e-m cell is in an approximately steady state. (b) Time depen-
dence of the enstrophy normalized mean square divergence, D2/ω2
in the e-m cell. The fact that D2/ω2

rms is small indicates negligible compressibility.

rms, for a single run

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

36

Figure 3.4: (a) The mean ﬂow in the e-m cell averaged over 1000 vector ﬁelds. The

length of the reference vector in the upper right corresponds to 2 cm/s.

(b) The

decay of the ﬂuctuations in the mean ﬂow as the number of ﬁelds, N, in the average
increases. The line corresponds to the expected N −1/2 decay of a centered Gaussian

variable.

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

37

Figure 3.5: The RMS ﬂuctuations of (a) ux and (b) uy as a function of position in

the e-m cell. Green denotes large values of the ﬂuctuations while blue denotes small

values.

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

38

and in phase with the forcing otherwise

~F
h
maintained in an energetically steady state. Since the forcing is oscillating in time so

= 0 and the e-m cell could not be

~u
i

·

must this in-phase component; thus it shows up in the RMS ﬂuctuations as a function

of position and not in the mean ﬂow. Fortunately the magnitude of the in phase part

of the ﬂuctuations is small, around 1.5 cm/s, compared to the total RMS ﬂuctuations

of 12 cm/s. Therefore they will be assumed to be ignorable. Other than these os-

cillations, the cell appears approximately homogenous in the RMS ﬂuctuations as a

function of position. The assumption of homogeneity can be said to weakly hold for

the turbulence in the e-m cell. This approximation will be reﬁned in later chapters.

The Karman-Howarth relationship is now in a position to be tested. For simplicity,

deﬁne

Ai,j ≡

∂
∂rs

(b(3)

i,sj −

b(3)
is,j),

Bi,j ≡ −

∂
∂ri h

pu′
ji

+

∂
∂rj h

p′uii

,

(3.14)

(3.15)

so that the (y, y) component of the Karman-Howarth relationship, Eq. 3.13, may

be written Ay,y + By,y =

y,y were
measured and a least squares algorithm used to obtain the α value which best ﬁt

y,y. The three separate terms Ay,y,By,y and b(2)

2αb(2)

−

the measured data to the Karman-Howarth equation. In this case α

0.7 Hz. The

results of these measurements are shown in Fig. 3.6 a,b,d.

In Fig. 3.6c the sum

≈

Ay,y + By,y is shown.

First note that By,y, the term involving pressure velocity correlations is non-zero,

as it would be if the turbulence were anisotropic. This conﬁrms what was earlier

assumed to be the case, that the unidirectional forcing does not allow isotropy to

be assumed. Next note that the images in Fig. 3.6c and d have very similar forms,

namely a central negative trough with two positive peaks on the rx axis. This is

evidence that the Karman- Howarth relationship is indeed holding in the e-m cell.

To get a better feel for the degree to which there is agreement, several cross-sections

of plots c and d are shown in Fig. 3.7. The noise in the terms Ay,y and By,y arises

from the fact that these terms are derivatives, which are always noisy and converge

slowly in experiment. In spite of the noise there is clearly agreement, and it is therefore

concluded that Karman-Howarth, and hence the Navier-Stokes equation with a linear

drag, holds for the e-m cell.

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

39

Figure 3.6: Measured values of (a) Ay,y, (b) By,y, (c) Ay,y + By,y, and (d)

−
from Eq. 3.13. Green denotes positive values and blue denotes negative values.

2αb(2)
y,y

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

40

Figure 3.7: Cross sections of Ay,y + By,y (

) and

) along the lines (a)

−·

2αb(2)

y,y (

−

−

r = rx (ry = 0), (b) r = ry (rx = 0) and (c) r = rx = ry.

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

41

A quick check to see if this conclusion is correct is to see if the measured coeﬃcient

for the linear drag, α, is viable. Using the discussion in chapter 2 the linear drag

coeﬃcient can be approximated as α = η/ρhd. Given a 50 µm thick ﬁlm, a magnet-

ﬁlm distance of 1 mm the coeﬃcient assumes the value 0.36 Hz. This value is at least

the right order of magnitude, and the diﬀerence between this predicted value and the

measured one may be accounted for by recalling that the drag on the top surface of

the ﬁlm has been ignored(see chapter 4).

3.3.3 Consistency Check: Energy Balance

The previous section has checked that the (y, y) component of the Karman-Howarth

equation is consistent with measurements made in the e-m cell. However, the ﬁt to

the data was somewhat noisy in spite of a thousand ﬁelds being used in the average.

What is needed to bolster conﬁdence in the equations is some sort of consistency

check. This is provided by the energy balance relationship, Eq. 3.10.

The energy balance statement for the time independent ﬂow simply states that the

energy injected into the system by the electromagnetic force, ǫinj, must be balanced

by the energy lost to the air friction, ǫair, and viscosity, ǫν. The later two of these can

≈

0.7 Hz and the kinematic viscosity of ν

now be measured using the deﬁnitions of the various ǫ’s given earlier, the extracted
0.016 cm2/s. The energy
85 cm2/s3, while the energy dissipated by
55 cm2/s3. Using energy balance this suggests that the energy
140 cm2/s3. An independent

value of α
dissipated by air is found to be ǫair ≈
viscous forces is ǫν ≈
injected by the electromagnetic force should be ǫinj ≈
measure of ǫinj would then yield a consistency check of the measured value of α and

≈

the quality of agreement of data to the (y, y) component of the Karman-Howarth

This check is provided by the (x, x) component of the Karman-Howarth relation-

ship which allows a measure of ǫinj. This component of the Karman-Howarth equation

relationship.

has the form

Ax,x + Bx,x =

u′
xFxi

h

+

uxF ′

h

xi −

2αb(2)
x,x.

(3.16)

Recall that the Kolmogorov forcing is invariant to translation in the ˆx direction, that

is, along the forcing. Let us then restrict the displacement vector ~r to lie along this

direction. Then

u′
xFxi

h

=

xF ′
u′
xi

h

which by homogeneity equals

uxFxi

h

=

uxF ′
xi

h

. But

Chapter 3. Modeling Flows in the E-M Cell

42

Figure 3.8: Cross section of Ax,x + Bx,x (

) and

) along the line r = rx

−·

2αb(2)

x,x (

−

−

(ry = 0).

h

uxFxi

. Using these relationships in Eq. 3.16 yields Ax,x + Bx,x = 2ǫinj −

2αb(2)
ǫinj =
x,x
along the ~r = rx cross-section. Thus the plots of Ax,x + Bx,x and 2αb(2)
x,x should look
similar to the ones shown earlier except oﬀset by a constant which is equal to 2ǫinj.

Figure 3.8 shows the plot of the rx cross-section of the (x, x) components of Ax,x +

2αb(2)

x,x. Clearly the plots are oﬀset by positive constant of 2ǫinj ≈

Bx,x and
−
cm2/s3. Thus ǫinj ≈
Systematic data discussed in the next chapter will show that the extracted values of α

240
120 cm2/s3 which is close to the expected value of 140 cm2/s3.

and ǫinj ﬂuctuate around

20%, thus the measured value of ǫinj is within experimental

error of the expected value. This is further supporting evidence that the Karman-

±

Howarth relationship does indeed work for data extracted from the e-m cell.

Chapter 4

Flow

Energy Distribution and Energy

In the last chapter the energy balance relationship, ǫinj −
a consistency check to determine if the Karman-Howarth relationship was applicable

ǫair = 0, was used as

ǫν −

to data from the e-m cell. Though it was not discussed there, these measurements

are the ﬁrst indication that an inverse cascade is present. Recall from the discussion

in chapter 1 that if an inverse cascade exists then energy is moved from small length

scales to large ones, away from length scales at which viscous dissipation is eﬀective.

Thus the bulk of the energy is expected to be dissipated by the external dissipation

mechanism acting at large scales, which in the case of the e-m cell is the air dissipation.

This is exactly the result that the measured energy rates in the e-m cell demonstrate,

i.e. ǫair > ǫν. This chapter begins the investigation of the inverse energy cascade in

the e-m cell by quantifying the length scales over which it exists (it’s range), measuring

how the energy is distributed over these length scales and determining the rate at

which energy ﬂows through these length scales.

4.1 Distribution of Energy and the Outer Scale

The energy spectrum, U(~k), provides a means for describing the manner in which
turbulent kinetic energy is distributed over diﬀerent wavenumbers (inverse length

scales) in the e-m cell. It is deﬁned as the average square modulus of the Fourier

43

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

44

transform of the velocity ﬂuctuations, U(~k)
gral, E(k)

1, and it’s circular inte-
U(~k)dθ, denotes the average amount of kinetic energy stored in
If an inverse cascade is present in the e-m cell, the

2π
0
wavenumbers of modulus k.
R

˜u(~k)˜u†(~k)

≡ h

≡

k

i

|

|

expectation is that energy would build up in wavenumbers smaller than the energy

injection wavenumber kinj.

This expectation proves to be the case in the e-m cell. Fig. 4.1 are plots of U(~k)
calculated from transforms of the PTV velocity ﬁelds for various types of driving

force in the e-m cell. Note that the peaks corresponding to the injection wavenumber

diﬀer as expected for the diﬀerent types of forcing. For example the two square arrays

produce peaks along the line kx =

ky, with the distance from 0 being dictated by

the size of the magnets used in the array. Also note that energy contained in small

±

wavenumbers is greater than that contained in large wavenumbers, as expected for

an inverse cascade. This can be better seen in Fig. 4.2 where the circular integrals

have been taken and a build up of energy at wavenumbers smaller than kinj can be

seen.

The Kraichnan prediction for the inverse energy cascade range is that E(k)
∼
ǫ2/3k−5/3 for k < kinj and ǫ a typical energy rate (in the case of the e-m cell this is
ǫair) [1]. This result is consistent with dimensional predictions for the scaling behavior

of E(k). Lines corresponding to this prediction have been drawn on the plots in Fig.

4.2. These lines should not be interpreted as a ﬁt to the data and are drawn only as

a guide. Only the Kolmogorov data set, (a), appears to be in qualitative agreement

with the dimensional prediction over slightly less than half a decade of wavenumbers

below the injection wavenumber. All the remaining data sets have a small range
directly below the injection wavenumber which could be interpreted as k−5/3, but

this is quickly lost to a broad peak in the spectrum at small k. This type of behavior

in the spectrum is in agreement with results reported in [13] where the build up of

energy at small k is associated with the saturation of energy in the largest length

scales in the system. Such saturation is not included in the Kraichnan prediction and

is therefore not indicative of failure of the theory, but rather a failure of the system
to satisfy the assumptions of the theory2. Since case (a) satisﬁes the assumptions of

denotes a complex conjugate.

1
†
2The assumption which is violated in a saturated system is that the velocity ﬂuctuations are
homogenous. A saturated system occurs when the outer scale which is determined by external
dissipation exceeds the system size, as it did for the data in Fig. 4.2(b)-(d). When this happens
large structures attempt to pack into a small area near the center of the system away from system

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

45

Figure 4.1: The energy spectrum, U(~k), for (a) Kolmogorov forcing, (b) square forcing
using 6 mm round magnets, (c) square forcing using 3 mm round magnets and (d)
stretched hexagonal forcing. Green denotes large values of U(~k) while blue denotes
small values.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

46

Figure 4.2: The circularly integrated energy spectrum, E(k), for (a) Kolmogorov

forcing, (b) square forcing using 6 mm round magnets, (c) square forcing using 3 mm

round magnets and (d) stretched hexagonal forcing. The dashed lines correspond to
k−5/3 [1]. The arrows indicate the injection

the Kraichnan prediction that E(k)

wavenumber kinj.

∝

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

47

Kraichnan’s theory one might conclude that the k−5/3 prediction is correct. However,

it should also be noted that the behavior in the measured E(k) depends on the type

of window function used when Fourier transforming the velocity ﬁelds. In the data

shown in the Fig. 4.2, a three term Blackman-Harris window has been used. By

changing this window one could get up to a 20% change in the slope of the energy

spectra. Due to the limitations imposed by windowing no conclusion may be drawn

from this data about possible corrections to the Kraichnan scaling prediction.

The low k limit of the inverse cascade range, denoted kout, is determined by the

size of the largest vortices which result from the inverse cascade, and corresponds to

the low k peak in E(k). The position of this peak should depend on the strength

of the air friction since this is the large scale external dissipation mechanism in the

e-m cell. In the chapter 3 the linear damping model for the air friction possessed a

coeﬃcient α which determines it’s strength. Using dimensional analysis, α, and ǫinj, a
(ǫinj/α3)1/2. The outer
length scale called the outer scale can be calculated by rout ≡
scale represents the size of the vortices at which more energy is lost to air friction

than is transferred to the next size larger vortices. The outer scale should be related

to the low k peak in E(k) by kout = 2π/rout.

To check this dimensional prediction, a systematic set of data using the Kol-

mogorov forcing with various magnet-ﬁlm distances was taken holding urms approxi-

mately constant. Kolmogorov forcing was used so that α and ǫinj could be extracted

using the techniques of chapter 3. Between 400 and 500 vector ﬁelds where obtained

for each magnet-ﬁlm distance. As in chapter 3, the energy in the e-m cell remained

approximately constant during the data acquisition time for each run. Table 4.1 lists

the various constants associated with each of the diﬀerent data sets.

The ﬁrst four data sets listed in Table 4.1 may be compared for the purpose of

error analysis. The ﬁrst and second of these were obtained using identical values of

the external control parameters and thus the extracted values of α and ǫinj should

be identical. This is found to be the case up to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures for the ﬁrst

two data sets. The third and fourth data sets are also taken under identical control

conditions diﬀerent from those used for the ﬁrst and second data sets (the magnet-ﬁlm

distance was slightly smaller). In these data sets the values of α and ǫinj vary around

the mean by about 10%. Thus, to be conservative, the error in the two quantities α

boundaries. This will be investigated in some detail later in this chapter.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

ǫinj (cm2/s3) α (s−1) urms (cm2/s2) ω2

2π/kout(cm)

rint(cm)

case

63

63

101

110

150

154

197

0.45

0.45

0.6

0.65

0.9

1.25

1.55

7.81

7.80

8.96

9.18

9.18

7.81

7.95

rms (s−2)
2049

2014

2901

3103

3579

3211

3567

3.14

3.14

2.72

2.63

1.56

1.31

1.31

48

a

b

c

d

0.63

0.64

0.59

0.58

0.51

0.41

0.38

Table 4.1: Global constants for several runs of the e-m cell using Kolmogorov forcing

and ǫinj will be assumed to be as much as 20% of the measured value.

The E(k) measured from the data sets labeled a,b,c and d are displayed in Fig

4.3. The low wavenumber peak, kout, moves to smaller and smaller wavenumber as

α decreases. This is in qualitative agreement with the dimensional prediction. Using

the position of this peak the outer scale is calculated by rout = 2π/kout and compared

to that obtained from the dimensional prediction using the measured values of α

and ǫinj. The results of this comparison are shown for all the data sets in Fig. 4.4.

The vertical error bars reﬂect the propagated error of ǫinj and α while the horizontal

represent the discretization inherent in ﬁnite Fourier transforms. From Fig. 4.4 one

can see that the dimensional prediction of the outer scale is not inconsistent with the

measured outer scale using the low k peak in E(k).

The measurements presented here clearly indicate that an inverse cascade is

present in the e-m cell for all types of forcing. The inverse cascade range is shown

to exist over wavenumbers k such that kout < k < kinj, where kinj is the energy in-

jection wavenumber determined by the electromagnetic forcing and kout is the outer

wavenumber determined by the external dissipation. kout is found to be not inconsis-
(ǫinj/α3)1/2. No strong conclusion can
tent with the dimensional prediction, kout ∼
be draw about the manner in which energy is distributed over this range due to win-
k−5/3 superﬁcially

dowing diﬃculties, however the Kraichnan prediction of E(k)

∼

holds for data sets in agreement with the assumptions of the prediction.

Before leaving this section, the systematic data set used in obtaining the outer

scale allow the external dissipation to be compared to the predicted value α =

ηair/ρhd. The measured values of α versus the magnet-ﬁlm distance are shown in

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

49

Figure 4.3: The circularly integrated energy spectrum, E(k), for the four cases of

Kolmogorov ﬂow labeled in Table 4.1.

Figure 4.4: Comparison of the outer scale obtained from the energy spectra by rout =
2π/kout with that obtained using the dimensional prediction rout = (ǫinj/α3)1/2 for all
of the data sets in Table 4.1.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

50

Figure 4.5: The measured linear drag coeﬃcient, α, versus the magnet-ﬁlm distance,

d, for the data sets reported in Table 4.1. The dotted line represents the ﬁt α =

ηair/ρhd + C with C = 0.25 Hz.

Fig. 4.5. The vertical error bars again reﬂect the 20% error in measurement while

the horizontal error bars denote the limit of control over magnet-ﬁlm distance. A line

corresponding to ηair/ρhd + C, where C = 0.25 Hz is also plotted with the data and

for the most part is within error of the measured values. According to this data the

prediction for the magnitude of the linear dissipation must be oﬀset by a small posi-

tive constant to be accurate. This constant can be accounted for by recalling that the

eﬀect of air friction on the top surface of the ﬁlm has been ignored. Approximations

of the frictional force on the top surface of the ﬁlm indicate that the measured value

of the oﬀset is appropriate, though more experimentation needs to be done to more

accurately account for this oﬀset.

4.2 Energy Flow

A simpliﬁed viewpoint of how kinetic energy might be transfered through the inverse

cascade range in the e-m cell is to imagine that the energy is ﬂowing like a liquid

through a pipe. Energy produced by the forcing is poured in at one end of the pipe

which characterizes the injection scale.

It is then moved along the pipe to larger

length scales by the mixing of ﬂuid (i.e. by vortex cannibalization). Finally energy

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

51

is exhausted from the pipe at the opposite end which characterizes the outer length

scale. Since the total energy in the system is constant, the amount of energy poured

into the pipe must be equal to the amount exhausted from the pipe. It is also expected

that the rate of energy being poured into the pipe is equivalent to the rate of energy

transferred across any length scale in the middle of the pipe. That is to say that the

energy ﬂux through the pipe is not dependent on the position in the pipe and remains

constant.

This viewpoint is a severe simpliﬁcation of what actually happens in 2D turbu-

lence. First it ignores losses of energy to viscous dissipation and assumes all energy

is lost to external dissipation. Since viscous losses are presumably smaller than losses

to external dissipation, let us accept for now that this simpliﬁcation is valid. A more

important simpliﬁcation, the one which is of concern in this section, is that the pipe

doesn’t leak. That is there are no holes drilled along the length of the pipe. That

is to say energy cannot be exhausted from the pipe by external dissipation until the

outer length scale is reached. To hope that this is actually the case in the e-m cell,

or for that matter any other laboratory 2D turbulence system is quite a stretch.

It is more likely that there exists a range in the pipe, probably close to the injec-

tion scale since external dissipation increases at large length scales, over which the

amount of energy lost to leaks is negligible compared to the energy ﬂux through the

pipe. This range will be called an “inertial” range since the energy ﬂow is almost

entirely dictated by the ﬂuid’s inertia and not the energy dissipation. The inertial

range is of interest due to it’s universality. Presumably two 2D turbulent systems

with completely diﬀerent external dissipation mechanisms will behave identically in

their inertial ranges. To use the pipe analogy, the inertial range of both systems

is completely closed and thus ﬂuid mixing and energy ﬂux should be the same in

this region. Outside of this range the pipe leaks, and the energy ﬂux depends on

how many holes of what size are drilled at what position in the pipe. Therefore the

characteristics of the turbulence may not be universal outside of the inertial range.

To determine if a range is inertial or not, a measurement of energy ﬂow must be

made. One way in which energy ﬂow may be characterized is by the third moment
of velocity diﬀerence. The third moment, labeled S(3)(r) for now, can be thought of

as the average energy per unit mass advected over a circle of radius r centered at ~x

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

52

per unit circumference of the circle:

S(3)(r) =

2π

1
2πr Z

0

h

E(~x + ~r)~u(~x + ~r)

~r

dθ.

·

i

Assume also that the reference frame is moving so that the velocity ~u(~x) = 0. As-

suming homogeneity the circle can be placed anywhere in the turbulence, so that
S(3) does not depend on ~x. E in the above is the energy per unit mass. If the third

moment is positive, then on average energy is being advected from inside the circle to

outside the circle, and vice versa if the third moment is negative. It is interesting to

note what happens if r is assumed to be in an inertial range. If this is the case then

no energy is lost to external dissipation at that length scale. Since the energy held in

the turbulence at a scale r is in a steady state then all of the energy injected by the

forcing into the circle must be advected over the surface of the circle. Call ǫ the rate

of energy injection per unit mass into the system. The rate at which energy is injected
into the circle is then πr2ǫ. Replacing the integral with this yields S(3)(r)

ǫr. Thus

a linear range in the third moment indicates inertial behavior of the energy transfer.

≈

The above derivation of a linear behavior in the third moment for an inertial range

can be put on much more solid foundation. Indeed the third moment is one of the

few quantities for which an exact prediction can be derived from the Navier-Stokes

equation. This derivation was ﬁrst done by Kolmogorov for 3D homogenous and

isotropic turbulence. To apply to results from the e-m cell Kolmogorov’s derivation

must be relaxed to the case of 2D homogenous but anisotropic turbulence with an

external linear drag. This relaxation is given below. Following this are measurement

and analysis of the third moment in the e-m cell for the data sets in Table 4.1.

4.2.1 The Anisotropic Third Moment

The starting point for the derivation of the third moment relationship for homogenous

anisotropic 2D turbulence is the Karman-Howarth relationship, Eq. 3.6, which was

derived in section 3.2. All of the notation and conventions used in that section will

be carried over without alteration. The notation and the ﬁrst step of the derivation

follows that given in a recent paper by Lindborg [26].

Add Eq. 3.6 evaluated for (i, j) to that evaluated for (j, i), and use Eq. 3.7 to

obtain

2Πij −

2ǫ(ν)

ij =

∂
∂rs

B(3)

isj +

∂
∂t

B(2)

ij −

∂
∂rj

Pi −

∂
∂ri

Pj

53

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

∂2
∂rs∂rs

2ν

−

B(2)

ij + 2αB(2)

Wij −

Wji.

ij −
δuiδuj...δuki
uip′

In the above, the n term moments B(n)
u′
δui ≡
i −
with δFj ≡
δuiδFji
h
in a number of places in the above step. Most notably, it sets

of velocity diﬀerence
and Wij ≡
Fj. Note that the homogeneity assumption has been used

ui have been deﬁned. Also deﬁned are Pi ≡ h

ij...k(~r)

i − h

u′
ip

j −

≡ h

F ′

i

∂
∂rs
Contracting Eq. 4.1 with the unit vectors ni(

b(3)
is,j) =

∂
∂rs

i,sj −

(b(3)

B(3)
isj .

the identities

ri/r = ri/

) and nj and using

~r
|

|

≡

ninjB(2)

ij = B(2)
rr ,

ninj

∂
∂rs

B(3)

isj =

(ninjB(3)
isj )

2
r

B(3)
rtt ,

ninj

Pi =

(ninjPi)

niPi,

∂
∂rj

∂
∂rs

∂
∂rj

−

1
r

−

ninj

∂2
∂rs∂rs

B(2)

ij =

B(2)

tt ) +

4
r

∂
∂r

B(2)
rr

2
r2 (B(2)
rr −
∂2
∂rs∂rs

+

B(2)
rr ,

where the subscripts r and t denote longitudinal, i.e. along ~r, and transverse direc-

tional coordinates, we obtain

ninj(Πij −

ǫ(ν)
ij )

1
2

∂
∂t

−

B(2)

rr =

(ninjB(3)
isj )

1
r

−

B(3)

∂
∂rj

(ninjPi)

niPi

1
r

−

rtt −
∂
4
∂r
r

B(2)

tt ) +

B(2)

rr +

∂2
∂rs∂rs

B(2)
rr

!

rr −
Eq. 4.7 is now in a form which may be easily integrated over a circle of radius

+αB(2)

ninj(Wij + Wji).

(4.7)

r. This procedure, along with incompressibility and the assumption of homogeneity

eliminates the pressure terms. Using the divergence theorem and rearranging the

1
2

∂
∂rs

ν
−

 

2
r2 (B(2)
rr −
1
2

terms yields
2
r Z

rrr(r)

S(3)

−

r

0

dr′S(3)

rtt (r′) =

dr′r′ ∂
∂t

S(2)
rr (r′)

S(2)

rr +

2
r Z

0

r

1
r Z
S(2)
rr +

0

ǫνr

−

+2ν

−
4
r

 

+

r

1
2πr Z

0

dr′

0
Z

∂
∂r
2π

r

2α
r Z
dr′(S(2)

0

−
r

dr′r′S(2)

rr (r′)

rr (r′)

S(2)
tt (r′))/r′

−

!

(4.8)

r′dθninj(Wij(~r′) + Wji(~r′)).

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

54

Here the circular averages of velocity moments have been denoted as S(n)
≡
1
ij...k(~r). Though this equation seems to explicitly contain an ǫr term,
2πr
it is somewhat superﬁcial as this term exactly cancels with terms contained in the

0 rdθB(n)
R

ij..k(r)

2π

ﬁrst and ﬁnal expressions on the right hand side. Removing these terms yields

S(3)

rrr(r)

r

2
r Z

0

−

dr′S(3)

rtt (r′) =

dr′

0

Z
rr +

S(2)

2π

∂
∂r

r′dθninjh
2
S(2)
rr +
r Z

r

0

2π

−

+2ν

r

1
2πr Z
0
4
r
∂
∂t

 
1
πr

iFj + uiF ′
u′

j + u′

jFi + ujF ′
i i

dr′(S(2)

rr (r′)

S(2)
tt (r′))/r′

−

!

(4.9)

2α
πr ! Z
Note that using the notation introduced here b(2)

+

+

 

r

0

dr′

0
Z

r,r (~r) is simply the two-point longitudi-
nal velocity correlation. The terms on the left hand side are deﬁned as the anisotropic
third moment of velocity diﬀerence, S(3)

a , and up to a constant play the role of the
third moment of the longitudinal velocity diﬀerence in the fully developed isotropic-

r′dθb(2)

r,r (~r′).

homogeneous turbulence derived by Kolmogorov [9]. The terms on the right account

for the energy ﬂux at some length scale due to external forces. Eq. 4.9 is essentially

the scale-by-scale energy balance relationship for the system. For large r the viscous

term in Eq. 4.9 can be ignored, as can the time derivative if the system is in an

energetically steady state, leaving the ﬁnal form which will be used in this thesis

S(3)

rrr(r)

r

2
r Z

0

−

dr′S(3)

rtt (r′) =

1
2πr Z
2α
πr Z

0
r

−

+

2π

r

dr′

0
Z
2π

dr′

r′dθninjh
r,r (~r′).
r′dθb(2)

iFj + uiF ′
u′

j + u′

jFi + ujF ′
i i

(4.10)

0
Z
Limits of this equation are now ready to be taken to establish that a linear range

0

can exist. First note that the force-velocity correlation term in Eq. 4.10 (ﬁrst term on

the right) should decay in magnitude as 1/r for r

rinj for F periodic in space. One

limit which can be considered is the case where this force-velocity term is neglected.

≫

u2
rms −

rr (r)
∝
rr (r)/2

r2/3 over some range of length scales for r > rinj, then b(2)

rms −
Ar2/3 in that range, where A is a constant. Since the longitudinal

In this case the only remaining term arises from the linear dissipation. Assuming
S(2)
S(2)
∝
velocity correlation, b(2)
≈
u2
rms in this range. Inserting this approximation into Eq. 4.10 and integrating yields
a = 2αu2
S(3)
rmsr = 2ǫairr, which is the extension of the earlier mentioned Kolmogorov
4/5 result for 3D turbulence to 2D anisotropic turbulence. Another limit of interest is

r,r (r), remains positive the ﬁrst term is dominant. Thus b(2)

r,r (r) = u2

r,r (r)

when both the force-velocity and velocity-velocity correlations have disappeared. In

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

55

this case the integrals on the right hand side become constant and the third moment
decays as S(3)

r−1.

a ≈

Notice that the ǫ found in the third moment relationship is ǫair, the energy dissi-

pated by the e-m cell’s external dissipation mechanism of air friction. One might have

expected that this should be ǫinj, the total energy injection rate. Recall that in the

previous discussion of the third moment, energy lost to viscous forces were ignored so

that ǫinj = ǫair. When viscosity is reintroduced, then the energy ﬂowing over a circle
of radius r is the energy injected less the amount dissipated by viscosity, i.e. ǫinj −
By energy conservation this is just ǫair, which dictates the remaining energy which

ǫν.

must ﬂow over the circle. This is why ǫair determines the third moment and not ǫinj.

4.2.2 Homogeneity

Before sliding headlong into S(3)

a measurements and blindly searching for positive
linear ranges, a word of caution is warranted. The assumption of homogeneity has
been used a number of times in the preceding derivation of S(3)
a , not to mention the
fact that it was used in deriving the Karman-Howarth equation. This makes S(3)
measurements extremely sensitive to inhomogeneity in the e-m cell.3

a

Fortunately the derivation of S(3)

a has provided a simple test of homogeneity. If
the turbulence in the e-m cell is homogenous then the following should be equivalent
representations for the anisotropic third moment, S(3)
a :

S(3)

a (r)

drS(3)

rtt (r),

≡

=

=

S(3)

rrr(r)

r

r

1
2πr Z
1
2πr Z

0

0

−

dr

dr

r

2
r Z

0
2π

0
Z

2π

0
Z

dθninj

B(3)

isj (~r),

dθninj

(b(3)

i,sj(~r)

b(3)
is,j(~r)).

−

∂
∂xs
∂
∂xs

(4.11)

(4.12)

(4.13)

The latter two forms will be denoted J(r) and K(r), respectively. Plots of all three

of these quantities for the data sets labeled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1 are shown in Fig.

4.6. It is clear that only case (d) of extremely heavy damping (large α) produces

approximate agreement for all three forms at length scales larger than the injection

3There might be some concern that results presented in chapter 3 might be inaccurate due to
inhomogeneity. Recall that in that chapter homogeneity was assumed and not exactly checked.
Using the analysis presented in this section on the data of chapter 3 demonstrates that these data
sets are approximately homogenous.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

56

scale. It is therefore the only approximately homogenous data set. It is also evident

that case (a) and (b) are strongly inhomogeneous, and case (c) is marginal.

To understand the nature of the discrepancies, ensemble averages of individual

velocity ﬁelds were performed over N images. Again the ensemble averaged velocity
at any given point in the ﬂow,
iN , though not identically zero was found to
decrease in magnitude as N −1/2 for all of the data sets indicating negligible mean

~u(~x)
h

ﬂow in the system. The inhomogeneity, then, stems from the spatial variation of the

velocity ﬂuctuations, (

~u(~x)

2 , which is shown in Fig. 4.7 for the four data sets

(a)-(d). The oscillating light and dark bands, corresponding to high and low urms

and inhomogeneity at the injection scale are again present in all four sets to a greater

1

2

iN )

|

h|

or lesser extent. As before these oscillations will be ignored. A closer inspection of

the urms ﬁelds for the four data sets also reveals a large-scale inhomogeneity which

increases in magnitude as α decreases. Note that for the most weakly damped case

(a), the ﬂuctuations near the corners are weak compared to those near the box center.

This large-scale inhomogeneity is the main source of the discrepancies for the three
diﬀerent forms of S(3)
a .

The reason that the velocity ﬂuctuations begin to form this large scale inhomo-

geneity for weak damping is connected to the growth of the outer scale of the turbu-

lence. As discussed before the outer scale indicates the largest sized vortices present

in the turbulence. This can be seen in Fig. 4.8 which shows typical streamlines for the

four cases (a)-(d). Clearly the heavy damping, case (d), has many small vortices but

few large ones compared to the case of weak damping, (a). These large vortices prefer

to exist in regions removed from solid boundaries, otherwise a large shear builds up

between the vortex and the boundary and quickly dissipates the vortex. Since the

largest vortices are of diameter rout, this preference causes an absence of ﬂuctuations

for distances smaller than rout from the wall. Should this boundary region invade the

PTV measurement area homogeneity is sacriﬁced.

For all of the data sets in Table 4.1 the distance between the PTV measurement

area and the boundary was approximately 1.5 cm, this sets the largest outer scale

possible before sacriﬁcing homogeneity. Table 4.1 reveals that the spectrally measured

outer scale, 2π/kout, of the case (a) and (b) are well above this value explaining their

strong inhomogeneity. Case (d) is below this value therefore the measurement volume

is homogenous. Case (c) has an outer scale just exceeding this limit, which explains

it’s marginal homogeneity.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

57

Figure 4.6: Comparison of S(3)

a (r) (

),J(r) (⊳), and K(r) (

) for the data sets labeled

⋄

◦

(a)-(d) in Table 4.1.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

58

Figure 4.7: Spatial variation of velocity ﬂuctuation for the four data sets labeled in

(a)-(d) Table 4.1. Green denotes large values of the ﬂuctuations while blue denotes

small values.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

59

Figure 4.8: Typical streamlines for the four cases labeled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1.

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

60

4.2.3 The Inertial Range and The Integral Scale

In the last section only one of the data sets which were analyzed strictly satisﬁed the

homogeneity condition, case (d). Case (c) was marginal in it’s homogeneity, so it can

be considered as well. Considering only these two cases it is apparent that there is no

inertial range in the e-m cell. Recall that from Eq. 4.10 an inertial range is indicated
by a linear range in S(3)

a . Since
both (c) and (d) have an inverse cascade range, this is the ﬁrst indication that the

a (r). Neither case (c) or (d) shows such a range in S(3)

inertial range is behaving distinctly from the inverse cascade range. However, since

neither case (c) or (d) has an extensive inverse cascade range, it would be helpful to

determine if either case (a) or (b), both of which exhibit large inverse cascade ranges,

has an inertial range in spite of their lack of homogeneity.

To that end consider Eq. 4.10. The left-hand side of this equation can be rep-
resented by any of the three forms S(3)(r), J(r), or K(r) from the last section if

the turbulence is homogenous. For the inhomogeneous case it would be useful to

ﬁnd if any of these three forms satisfy Eq. 4.10, eﬀectively relaxing the condition

of homogeneity on the left of the equation. To test this idea the right-hand side of

Eq. 4.10, denoted R(r), was independently measured and is displayed in Fig. 4.9

along with K(r) the third representation of the anisotropic third moment for the four

cases discussed earlier. The strongly and moderately damped cases produce mod-

erate agreement between K(r) and R(r) , while for the weakly damped cases there

is some disagreement which increases for large scales. The agreement for all cases,
however, is better for K(r) than if S(3)(r) had been used to represent the left hand

side. One can weakly conclude then that the homogeneity assumption used to obtain

Eq. 4.10 can be relaxed on the left for cases of moderate inhomogeneity if the K(r)

representation of the anisotropic third moment is used. For this reason we call K(r)

the quasi-homogenous part of the third moment.

Now the determination of the inertial range for weakly inhomogeneous turbulence

boils down to whether or not a linear range exists in the quasi-homogenous part

of the anisotropic third moment for r > rinj. Clearly, even for the cases of weak

damping, this does not happen.

Indeed over the majority of the range displaying

inverse cascade, the quasi-homogenous part of the anisotropic third moment decays
as r−1, which is indicative of a linear dissipation dominated regime. Therefore, none of

the inverse cascade ranges produced in the e-m cell are inertial, they are all dissipation

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

61

Figure 4.9: Comparison of K(r) (

) with the independently measured right hand side

of Eq. 4.10 ,R(r) (

),for the data sets labeled (a)-(d) in Table 4.1.

◦

−

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

62

dominated.

In the previous section, the outer scale of turbulence was determined to behave as
α3 )1/2. This length scale, obviously, does not determine the upward extent
rout ∝
of the range over which energy transfer is inertial, otherwise, a few of the data sets

( ǫinj

should display a linear range.

It is reasonable to ask what condition is required

in order for any linearly damped 2D system to have an inertial range. Equation

4.10 indicates that if a linear range is to exist it arises from the dominance of the

second integral on the right-hand side over the ﬁrst integral at large scales. The

ﬁrst integral, the force-velocity correlation, decays (as 1/r) at length scales larger

than the injection scale. Thus, if a typical length scale of the second integral greatly

exceeds the injection scale, the third moment should have some linear range. The

second integral contains the longitudinal two-point velocity correlation as one of its

functional arguments. This suggests that a measure of the typical length scale of this

integral is the so-called integral scale,

rint ≡

∞

1
b(2)
r,r (0) Z
0

drb(2)

r,r (r).

The size of the integral scale for the data sets is displayed in Table 4.1. Note that all

but the most weakly damped data sets have integral scales smaller than the injection
scale (rinj ≈
exceeded the injection scale. This is reﬂected in the quasi-homogenous part of the

0.6 cm). For the case of very weak damping the integral scale has just

third moment for the weakly damped cases (a) and (b), which show an extended

plateau right after the injection peak. To better visualize this plateau growth, the

right hand side of Eq. 4.10 for the four cases is displayed in the Fig. 4.10 with the

plots normalized by the value of the peak after the injection scale. Such a feature is

absent in the more heavily damped cases. Thus, the integral scale seems to govern

the upward extent of the inertial range, in contrast to the outer scale that governs

the upward extent of the inverse cascade in 2D.

One might believe that the integral scale and the outer scale should be linearly

proportional to each other. This may not be the case. Figure 4.11 is a comparison of

the the outer scale calculated using the dimensional argument with the integral scale.

Though the error in the plot does allow for the possibility of a linear ﬁt, it is more
likely a power law growth as shown by the r2

int curve drawn in the ﬁgure. Within
the error indicated on the plots, the integral scale seems to behave as the geometric

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

63

Figure 4.10: The right hand side of Eq. 4.10 ,R(r),for the data sets labeled (a)-(d) in

Table 4.1: (a)

, (b) ⊲, (c) ⊳, (d)

. R(r) has been normalized so that the peak value

just after rinj is unity.

⋄

◦

Chapter 4. Energy Distribution and Energy Flow

64

Figure 4.11: The dimensionally predicted outer scale, (ǫinj/α3)1/2 vs.
rint (inset is the same plot on log-log scales). The line corresponds to the power law
ﬁt of r2

integral scale

int.

average of the outer scale and injection scale (see the inset),

rint = √rinjrout =

r2
injǫinj
α3 !

 

1/4

.

(4.14)

It seems that this relationship should be predictable by inserting ﬁnite ranges in the

energy spectrum and inverse transforming to get the two-point correlation. At this

time such a calculation has not been performed.

Chapter 5

High Order Moments

Recall from the introduction that the inverse energy cascade range was expected to

have two important properties: locality and scale invariance. The experiments in the

e-m cell do not have enough inverse cascade range for any conclusion to be directly

drawn about either of these properties. However, some indirect conclusions pertaining

to scale invariance might be drawn if one assumes that certain measured properties

of the moments of velocity diﬀerence can be extended to the case of a large inverse

cascade range. Displaying these properties and demonstrating how such conclusions

may be drawn is the purpose of this chapter. First, to facilitate the extension of mea-

sured results, a brief discussion which describes the expected behavior for moments of

velocity diﬀerence assuming scale invariance is presented. This discussion is similar

to one in [9].

5.1 Scale Invariance and Moments

In the introduction the velocity diﬀerence over a length scale r, δ~u(~r)

−
~u(~x)), was said to be scale invariant in the inverse cascade range (Note that though

(~u(~x + ~r)

≡

δ~u depends on the absolute position, ~x, any statistical quantities formed from δ~u

does not if homogeneity is assumed). Here, scale invariance means that there exists
a unique scaling exponent h such that P (δ~u(λ~r)) = P (λhδ~u(~r)), where P denotes

a probability distribution function (PDF). For the moment, consider homogenous

isotropic 2D turbulence. Instead of using both components of δ~u(~r) in P , isotropy

allows for the simpliﬁcation to only a single component. For various reasons this

component is usually the longitudinal component, δu||(~r) = δ~u(~r)

ˆr. Also note that

·

65

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

66

isotropy allows dependence on ~r to be reduced to only dependence on r =
this the scaling relationship becomes P (δu||(λr)) = P (λhu||(r)).

~r
|

|

. From

The nth order moment of longitudinal velocity diﬀerence is deﬁned as

S(n)

rrr...(r)

(δu||(r))n

=

≡ h

i

−∞

Z

+∞

dδu||(r) (δu||(r))nP (δu||(r)).

(5.1)

Note that these functions were already deﬁned in chapter 4. Since longitudinal

ﬂuctuations will only be considered here the notation can be simpliﬁed by deﬁn-
ing Sn(r) = S(n)
rrr...(r). The scale invariance of the PDF’s directly results in the scale
invariance of the moments of velocity diﬀerence, with the scaling exponent nh for the
nth order moment. That is

Sn(λr) =

dδu||(λr) (δu||(λr))nP (δu||(λr))

dλhδu||(r) (λhδu||(r))nP (λhδu||(r))

λhdδu||(r) (δu||(r))nλ−hP (δu||(r))

+∞

−∞

Z

+∞

=

−∞

Z
= λnh

+∞

−∞

Z

= λnhSn(r).

(5.2)

Thus scale invariance implies that the moments of longitudinal velocity diﬀerence

behave as Sn(r)

rnh.

∝

Recall from the discussion in chapter 4 that there exists an exact result for the
third moment of velocity diﬀerence in an inertial range, S3(r) = 3
2ǫr. If an inertial
range exists, and if it is scale invariant, then this exact result ﬁxes the scaling exponent
h = 1/3 and the ﬁnal expectation for the scaling behavior of the nth order moment
rn/3. This result was ﬁrst reached by Kolmogorov in his 1941 theory

is that Sn(r)

of homogenous isotropic turbulence and will be called the K41 theory. The result

∝

can be ﬂeshed out a little more if one assumes that the only variables of importance

in the inertial range are the constant energy ﬂow rate, ǫ, and the length scale, r.
Cn(ǫr)n/3, where the
dimensionless Cn are assumed to be universal constants. Incompressibility sets C1 = 0

Under these assumptions dimensional analysis predicts Sn(r)

∝

and the previously mentioned exact result sets C3 = 3/2.

This analysis yields a simple way in which the scale invariance of the turbulent

ﬁelds can be veriﬁed. Simply make sure that the PDF’s of longitudinal velocity

diﬀerence for various r in the inertial range, when properly normalized, collapse to
a single curve. Equivalently, make sure that the nth order moments of longitudinal
velocity diﬀerence scale as rn/3 for all n. It should be pointed out that this analysis

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

67

holds for homogenous isotropic 3D turbulence, except for a change in coeﬃcients

Cn. Although one might expect the velocity diﬀerences in 3D turbulence to be scale

invariant as expressed above, it is an experimental fact that the moments steadily

deviate from the expected scaling behavior of the K41 theory as the order of the

moment is increased. The possibility of such deviations happening in 2D turbulence

is still an open experimental question, though what follows in this chapter might be

considered clues as to what the answer may be.

5.2 Disclaimer

The analysis in this chapter must begin by pointing out a couple of reasons not to

extend certain conclusion presented in it to cases of 2D turbulence beyond the e-m

cell. The ﬁrst of these reasons stems from the type of statistical quantities which

will be used in the determination of scale invariance. The analysis in the previous

section was phrased solely in terms of longitudinal velocity diﬀerences. In order to go

from full velocity diﬀerences to longitudinal diﬀerences without loss of information

it is necessary that the turbulence be fully isotropic. The fact that the forcing is

unidirectional, as discussed in chapter 2 does not allow isotropy to be assumed in the

e-m cell. This means that the analysis given above must be done for fully anisotropic

turbulence to be absolutely correct.

Unfortunately, this analysis becomes prohibitive for anisotropic turbulence as the

order of the moments increase since the number of moments containing transverse

velocity diﬀerences that need to be measured grows. Earlier experiments show that

the deviations from scaling prediction in 3D become apparent only for moments of

large order. Assuming that 2D might be similar means that a large number of quan-

tities would have to be accurately measured and compared, making fully anisotropic

analysis exceedingly diﬃcult. The fact that anisotropy does not allow the dependence

on the diﬀerence vector ~r to be simpliﬁed to dependence on r = ~r exacerbates this

diﬃculty. From an experimental point of view this is devastating since dependence

only on r allows statistics to be averaged over circles, increasing the number of points

used in evaluating the PDF’s by 2πr for each scale r. Without this buﬀering of the

statistics one cannot hope to obtain enough data to measure high order moments of

the PDF. For these reasons a fully anisotropic analysis must be abandoned. All results

in this chapter use only longitudinal diﬀerences, and it is hoped that the anisotropy

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

68

will not seriously aﬀect the ﬁnal results.

The second reason was hinted at in chapter 4. The results that will be discussed

will be coming from an inverse cascade range that is not inertial. This means that

the form of the external damping may be aﬀecting the results. Since the external

damping in the e-m cell is known to have a linear form, the results can strictly

be said to only apply to other linearly damped 2D turbulent ﬂuids. This fact, along

with the e-m cells anisotropy, raises serious questions about the universality of certain

results which are obtained. In spite of this, the author feels that many of the results

presented are robust due to similarities with data obtained from other experiments

[5] and simulation [27].

5.3 The PDF of Longitudinal Velocity Diﬀerence

Of the data sets presented in Table 4.1 the only two to display homogeneity or

marginal homogeneity by the analysis of chapter 4 are cases (c) and (d). These

will be the main data sets from which conclusions in this chapter will be drawn. In

particular, focus will be given to (c) since it has the largest inverse cascade range of the

two as shown in Fig. 4.3. The PDF of longitudinal velocity diﬀerence, P = P (δu||(r))
was calculated in a straightforward manner from data set (c) and is presented in the

color plot of Fig. 5.1. Several cross-sections of the plot for various r are shown in

Fig. 5.2.

It is clear from the cross-sections that P is approximately Gaussian at all r. Of

course it cannot be perfectly Gaussian since there must be some third moment as was

measured in chapter 4. The magnitude of the odd moments, such as the third, must

be small compared to the even order moments for P to have such a strongly Gaussian

character. The tails of P do not seem to strongly deviate from Gaussian decay into

either exponential or algebraic decay at any r in the inverse cascade range. In 3D,

deviations of the high order moments from the K41 theory is associated with slower

than Gaussian decay in the PDF tails. This behavior is commonly termed “intermit-

tency” since it indicates intermittent bursty behavior in the velocity ﬁeld. That no

such deviation in the PDF tails is seen in these experiments is an indication that the

scale invariant result may hold. The approximately Gaussian PDF’s measured here

are in agreement with both recent experiments [5] and simulations [27].

The moments of the longitudinal velocity diﬀerence are calculated from P using

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

69

Figure 5.1: P (δul(r), r) calculated from data set (c) in Table 4.1. Divisions in the

coloration increase on an exponential scale. The injection and outer scale are marked

by lines, in between which is the inverse energy cascade range.

Figure 5.2: Cross sections at various r for P (δul(r), r) shown in Fig 5.1.

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

70

Eq. 5.1. Since the two lowest order moments in 3D do not measurably deviate from

the K41 theory, and it is expected that this will be the case in 2D, the low order

moments are analyzed in the e-m cell ﬁrst. Displayed in Fig: 5.3 are S2(r) and S3(r)

for the data set (c). Clearly there is no range in the second moment which scales
as r2/3 in between the injection and outer scale as K41 predicts. There is no linear

behavior of S3(r) in this range either. This later result is hardly surprising considering

that a linear range is indicative of an inertial range which has already been shown

not to exist in the e-m cell (see chapter 4).

These graphs clearly violate the scaling prediction in the K41 theory, therefore

the e-m cell’s inverse cascade range is not scale invariant.

It might become scale

invariant if an inertial range was allowed to build in the cell. To better understand

what might happen, the higher order moments (i.e. n > 3) of the longitudinal velocity

diﬀerence are evaluated. These moments are more easily displayed if they are made

dimensionless by dividing out the appropriate power of the second moments. Deﬁne
Tn(r) = Sn(r)/(S2(r))n/2, so that T3 is the skewness, T4 is the ﬂatness etc. These
11. The error bars are
normalized moments are shown in Fig. 5.4 for 4

n

calculated by truncating the PDF wherever noise dominates the PDF measurement.

≤

≤

First consider the moments of even order. With the exception of a blow up at

small r, the even Tn(r) are essentially constant for r > rinj with the exception of

logarithmically small ﬂuctuations between rinj and rout. The constant values that

the even Tn assume at large r are only slightly less than those of a pure Gaussian

distribution, namely

an =

n!
2(n/2)(n/2)!

,

(5.3)

for n

2. These are shown on the even plots of Fig. 5.4 as dotted lines. This conﬁrms

the earlier visual observation that P was approximately Gaussian. The large blow

≥

up at small scales r < rinj is due to poor statistics. The ﬂuctuations of the even Tn

at scales in between rinj and rout seems to force the value slightly higher than the

Gaussian value.

It should be pointed out that a similar rise is seen in [5] though

without the ﬂuctuating character. Fluctuations are also seen in [27] near the outer

scale, though these settle back down to the Gaussian values once the inertial range is

reached. Since the ﬂuctuations are small the Gaussian values will be assumed to hold

for all r > rinj. From the measured constant values of the even Tn the higher order
an(S2(r))n/2 with the

even moments in the e-m cell can be approximated as Sn(r)

≈

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

71

Figure 5.3: (a) S2(r) (log-log) and (b) S3(r) (lin-lin) calculated from data set (c) in

Table 4.1.

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

72

Figure 5.4: The normalized high order moments, Tn(r), evaluated from data set (c)

of Table 4.1 for 4

n

≤

≤

11.

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

73

Figure 5.5: Tn(r)/bn for odd n

3 evaluated using the data set (c) in Table 4.1.

≥

an assuming the values of a Gaussian distribution.

Now consider the odd moments. Unlike the even moments, the odd Tn display a

complicated behavior for r > rinj. However, up to a multiplicative constant, which

will be denoted bn, the odd Tn have similar behaviors. To see this the multiplicative

constant has been removed and all odd Tn for n

3 have been plotted in Fig. 5.5. The

bn where chosen to be the value of Tn at rinj. This was completely arbitrary and more

≥

complicated procedures could be performed to get better ﬁts. Though the plots are

not identical, they clearly have the same trends, and agreement is within measurement

error. Using the T3 as a base function this experimental data indicates that Tn(r)
bn
b3
coeﬃcients bn
b3

≈
S3(S2)(n−3)/2. The
behave in a diﬀerent manner from their even counterparts, the an. The

T3(r). Or, in terms of the unnormalized moments Sn(r)

bn
b3

≈

two sets of coeﬃcients are plotted in Fig. 5.6 along with a dotted line representing

Gaussian values. Where the an are following the Gaussian prediction quite nicely, the

bn/b3 behave as an almost perfect exponential.

The experimental results lead to the conclusion that the higher order moments

can be expressed approximately in terms of the two lowest order moments as

Sn(r) = an(S2(r))

n
2

: n even,
m−3
2

Sm(r) = dmS3(r)(S2(r))

: m odd.

(5.4)

(5.5)

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

74

Figure 5.6: The multiplicative constants an and bn/b3 for the data set (c) in Table

4.1. The dotted line corresponds to the exact values of a purely Gaussian distribution

given by Eq. 5.3.

where dm ≡
invariance in the inertial range. In the inertial range it is clear that S3(r)

bm/b3. We are now in a position to draw some conclusions about scale

r as

the exact result from chapter 4 shows. Further, the range S2(r) is not expected to
deviate in an inertial range from it’s r2/3 behavior. Assuming these two scaling laws

∝

hold in an inertial range and assuming also that the above results can be extended

into the inertial range yields

Sn(r)

n
3

r

:

n.

∀

∝

(5.6)

This is precisely the statement of the K41 theory for r in an inertial range. Assuming,

then, that the extensions and assumptions made are correct, the inertial range of 2D

turbulence should behave in a scale invariant manner.

One might ask about the universality of the coeﬃcients an and dn. Recall that one

of the predictions of K41 is that these dimensionless numbers should be independent
of any external parameters, such as α or ~F which govern the turbulence. To test this
the procedure presented above is performed on data set (d) of Table 4.1 as well as a

set of data taken using a square magnet array instead of a Kolmogorov array. Similar

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

75

to the earlier data sets, the even moments display strong Gaussian characteristics.

The underlying structure of the odd normalized moments has changed, but they are

still marginally collapsible by extracting an arbitrary constant. The odd Tn/bn are

shown in Fig. 5.7(a) and (b) for the strongly damped Kolmogorov ﬂow (case (d) in

Table 4.1) and square array respectively. In Fig. 5.8 the coeﬃcients for all of the data

sets are displayed simultaneously. Note that the measured values do not signiﬁcantly

diﬀer from one data set to the next, the an remain close to the Gaussian values given

by Eq. 5.3, and the dn are exponential. This indicates that the coeﬃcients in the

K41 theory are indeed universal as predicted.

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

76

Figure 5.7: Tn(r)/bn for odd n for (a) case (d) in Table 4.1 and (b) a run of the e-m

cell with a square array.

Chapter 5. High Order Moments

77

Figure 5.8: The measured an and dn(= bn/b3) for three data sets using diﬀerent α

and diﬀerent types of forcing.

Chapter 6

Conclusion

The inverse energy cascade of 2D turbulence as it occurs in the e-m cell has been

measured and quantiﬁed in the preceding chapters. Clearly an inverse cascade exists

and it’s energy distribution and extent behave as predicted by dimensional analysis.

The energy ﬂow, when homogenous enough to be accurately compared with theory

agrees almost perfectly with exact predictions made using the 2D incompressible

Navier-Stokes equation. However, at no time is this energy ﬂow inertial.

That the inertial range and inverse cascade range are not coincident for a lin-

early damped 2D ﬂuid is perhaps the most important result in the thesis, from an

experimental and numerical stand point. This is because previous 2D turbulence ex-

periments and simulations did not attempt to diﬀerentiate between the two ranges,

and merely assumed that a
essary linear range in S3(r) (or S(3)
a depending on if the turbulence was isotropic or
not). This is now known not to be the case and casts doubt on some of the earlier ex-

5/3 range in E(k) must be accompanied by the nec-

−

perimental results. Finally, the inverse cascade range measured in the e-m cell is not

scale invariant, though there is some evidence that it might become so if an inertial

range ever developed.

This is perhaps as far as experimental results on the inverse cascade can be taken

in the current incarnation of the e-m cell. The lack of an inertial range being the most

signiﬁcant limiting feature. To get an idea of what would be needed to eliminate this

feature we can use the knowledge that has been gained that the inertial range grows

as the geometric average of the injection and outer scale (Eq. 4.14). If a decade of

inertial range is desired for accurate measurements of scaling behavior then by Eq.

4.14 the system size would have to be two decades larger than the injection scale,

78

Chapter 6. Conclusion

79

that is rout = 100

rinj . To get an idea what this would mean in the e-m cell, recall

that the Kolmogorov magnets produced an injection scale of 0.6 cm. Thus the e-m

×

cell frame would need to be 60 cm across to support a large enough system to have

a decade of inertial range while maintaining homogeneity. Moreover, the outer scale

would have to be forced higher by either increasing ǫinj, which is risky because velocity

ﬂuctuations would grow and sacriﬁce incompressibility, or by reducing α. Since α has

almost reached it’s asymptotic limit for the weakly damped cases considered in this

thesis, a partial vacuum must be employed to achieve lower α. The author need not

emphasize the diﬃculty in creating a half meter sized soap bubble, balancing it with

respect to gravity, and ﬁnally putting the whole system in a partial vacuum.

Some sort of happy medium might be reached by marginally increasing the system

size, say by a factor of two, and reducing the magnet size a bit. Some inertial

range would exist, though hardly enough to draw conclusions about scaling behavior.

However, if use of the e-m cell in inverse cascade investigations is to continue such

compromises must be made to obtain an inertial range.

Appendix A

Particle Tracking Velocimetry:

Program Listing

Included in this appendix is the program code, piv chk.cpp, for the particle tracking

routine presented in chapter 2. It has been written in the C program language for

no other reason than personal preference. The program has been successfully com-

piled with both the GNU C compiler and the Microsoft compiler. No performance

enhancement was found through use of diﬀerent compilers. Use of the code after

compilations is done from the command line by

piv chk foo1.tif

foo2.tif outfoo.vec

where “foo1.tif” and “foo2.tif” are the ﬁrst and second tif images to be compared

respectively and “outfoo.vec” is the output ﬁle holding the particle positions and dis-

placements. In “outfoo.vec” the origin of the coordinate system is assumed to be at

the upper left corner of the tif image, with the ˆx direction denoting the vertical coor-

dinate in the image and the ˆy direction denoting the horizontal coordinate. Values of

x increase as one goes down the tif image and values of y increase as one moves right.

If a matched particle set is found at position (x1, y1) in the ﬁrst image and (x2, y2) in

the second image it is saved in “outfoo.vec” as:

where ξx = 1/2(x1 + x2), ξy = 1/2(y1 + y2), ux = x2 −
in the output ﬁle are in pixels.

x1 and uy = y2 −

y1. All units

ξy, ξx, uy, ux

80

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

81

The various parameters in the routine that determine the characteristics of the

particles, the search radius, the correlation box size and other parameters are set by

#deﬁne statements at the beginning of the routine. These are commented in the

source code for clarity.

piv chk.cpp:

#include <stdio.h>

#include <stdlib.h>

#include <conio.h>

#include <math.h>

#define col 768

#define row 480

#define header 234

to be a particle.*/

#define abox 21

#define thresh 1.1

#define minsize .25

#define maxsze 600

/*****Control Parameters*****/

/*The three #define statements below determine the size and properties

of the pictures. For example, if your picture is (640x480) with 30

header bits prefacing the contiguous data block in the .tif file, then

header is 30, row is 480, and col is 640. (use 8 bit .tif)*/

/*The two variables below set your background subtraction properties.

abox is the size of the box to take a local average over and must

be odd. thresh is the multiple of the background to be subtracted

from the picture for the purposes of particle identification. Once

the background has been subtracted, any contiguous group of points

in the picture with pixel values greater than zero is a candidate

/*minsize (maxsze) is the minimum (maximum) rms of a candidate group

of points intensity distribution for that group to be labeled a

particle. One can think of this as the particle size in pixels.*/

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

82

/*The three variables below are the meat of the routine.

srad is the distance in pixels to search for the particle from

frame one to frame two. Set this as low as is reasonable.

If you know the particles travel no farther than 5 pixels from frame

one to frame two set srad to 5. cbox is the correlation box size.

This box must be big enough to contain at least 4 neighbors of

a particle and must be odd. cthresh is the lower bound of the

correlation. Any correlation above cthresh will be considered for

a match, and saved.*/

#define srad 15

#define cbox 17

#define cthresh 0.5

/*Most bad interogations happen near the boundaries.

Set brdr to approx cbox/2 to eliminate these.*/

#define brdr 12

/*The below just allocates memory. maxnum is the maximum # of

particles in a picture and maxsize is the maximum number of

contiguous pixels in the candidate block. These are set

unreasonably high since computer memory is cheap.*/

/*Do not go below here unless you have strongly correlated particle

motion. If you do not have strongly correlated motion cvstat should

be zero, which turns the below variables off.*/

#define maxnum 30000

#define maxsize 10000

#define cvstat 0

#define nbrstat 2

#define nrad 15

#define cvthresh 1.25

#define lbnd .6

/*****Declare Global Variables*****/

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

83

struct connection{

float val;

int plc;

};

struct object{

float size;

float x,y;

float theta;

int numnbr,numcan;

struct connection *nbr;

struct connection *can;

int status;

};

/*****Declare Functions*****/

void sort(struct connection *,int);

int mutmax(struct object *,struct object *,int,int);

void background(unsigned char **,float **,int);

struct object findparts(unsigned char **,unsigned char **,int,int);

void connect(struct object *,struct object *,int,int,int);

float correl(unsigned char **, unsigned char **, int);

void getbox(unsigned char **, unsigned char **, int,int,int);

void clean(struct object *,struct object *,int,int);

int check_vec(struct object *,struct object *,int,int);

/*****Main Function*****/

void main(int argv, char *argc[])

{

FILE *fin1, *fin2, *fout;

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

84

int i,j,k,l,m,n;

int x0,y0,r,s,t;

int n1,n2,flag;

float val;

float x,y,u,v;

float theta0,theta1,thetadiff;

float vorticity;

float dist1,dist2,xdiff,ydiff;

double rem,pos;

float **mean;

struct object *list1, *list2;

unsigned char **pic1,**pic2,**bfr1,**bfr2,*hdr;

if(argv<4){

exit(0);

printf("\nsyntax: piv <tif file #1> <tif file #2> <vec file>");

}

}

}

}

/*****Open tif and output files*****/

if((fin1=fopen(argc[1],"rb"))==NULL){

printf("Could not open %s",argc[1]);

exit(0);

if((fin2=fopen(argc[2],"rb"))==NULL){

printf("Could not open %s",argc[2]);

exit(0);

if((fout=fopen(argc[3],"w"))==NULL){

printf("Could not open %s",argc[3]);

exit(0);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

85

/*****Allocate some memory*****/

hdr = new(unsigned char[header]);

pic1 = new(unsigned char *[row]);

pic2 = new(unsigned char *[row]);

bfr1 = new(unsigned char *[row]);

bfr2 = new(unsigned char *[row]);

mean = new(float *[row]);

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

pic1[i] = new(unsigned char[col]);

pic2[i] = new(unsigned char[col]);

bfr1[i] = new(unsigned char[col]);

bfr2[i] = new(unsigned char[col]);

mean[i] = new(float[col]);

/*****Read picture files*****/

printf("Reading files\n");

}

}

}

}

exit(0);

exit(0);

exit(0);

exit(0);

}

}

if(fread(hdr,sizeof(unsigned char),header,fin1)!=header){

printf("Error stripping header from %s",argc[1]);

if(fread(hdr,sizeof(unsigned char),header,fin2)!=header){

printf("Error stripping header from %s",argc[2]);

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

if(fread(pic1[i],sizeof(unsigned char),col,fin1)!=col){

printf("Error reading %s",argc[1]);

if(fread(pic2[i],sizeof(unsigned char),col,fin2)!=col){

printf("Error reading %s",argc[2]);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

86

/*****Begin background subtraction*****/

printf("\nSubtracting background");

background(pic1,mean,abox);

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

for(j=0;j<col;j++){

if(thresh*mean[i][j] >= pic1[i][j]) bfr1[i][j] = 0;

else{

val = mean[i][j];

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

val =(float)pos;

bfr1[i][j] = pic1[i][j] - (unsigned char)val;

if(thresh*mean[i][j] >= pic2[i][j]) bfr2[i][j] = 0;

background(pic2,mean,abox);

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

for(j=0;j<col;j++){

else{

val = mean[i][j];

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

val =(float)pos;

bfr2[i][j] = pic2[i][j] - (unsigned char)val;

/*****A little housekeeping*****/

delete[] mean;

list1 = new(struct object[maxnum]);

list2 = new(struct object[maxnum]);

}

}

}

}

}

}

n1 = 0;

n2 = 0;

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

87

/*****Begin Finding particles*****/

printf("\nFinding particles");

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

for(j=0;j<col;j++){

if(bfr1[i][j] > 0){

list1[n1]=findparts(bfr1,pic1,i,j);

if(list1[n1].size < maxsze && list1[n1].size > minsize/2 ) n1++;

if(bfr2[i][j] > 0){

list2[n2]=findparts(bfr2,pic2,i,j);

if(list2[n2].size < maxsze && list2[n2].size > minsize/2 ) n2++;

}

}

}

}

/*****A little housekeeping*****/

delete[] bfr1;

delete[] bfr2;

/*****Start finding neighbors and candidates*****/

printf("\n%d\t%d\nEstablishing connections",n1,n2);

connect(list1,list2,n1,n2,srad);

bfr1 = new(unsigned char *[cbox]);

bfr2 = new(unsigned char *[cbox]);

for(i=0;i<cbox;i++){

bfr1[i] = new(unsigned char[cbox]);

bfr2[i] = new(unsigned char[cbox]);

for(j=0;j<cbox;j++){

bfr1[i][j] = 0;

bfr2[i][j] = 0;

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

88

/*****Calculate correlations for the candidates*****/

printf("\nBeginning correlations");

for(i=0;i<n1;i++){

if(i%100 == 0) printf(".");

m = list1[i].numcan;

if(m==0) continue;

if(kbhit()) break;

val = list1[i].x;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

x0 =(int)pos;

val = list1[i].y;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

y0 =(int)pos;

getbox(pic1,bfr1,x0,y0,cbox);

for(j=0;j<m;j++){

n=list1[i].can[j].plc;

val = list2[n].x;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

x0 = (int)pos;

val = list2[n].y;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem > .5) pos++;

y0 = (int)pos;

getbox(pic2,bfr2,x0,y0,cbox);

val = correl(bfr1,bfr2,cbox);

list1[i].can[j].val = val;

x0 = 0;

while(list2[n].can[x0].plc != i) x0++;

list2[n].can[x0].val = val;

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

89

/*****Sort by size of correlations*****/

printf("\nsorting");

for(i=0;i<n1;i++){

m = list1[i].numcan;

sort(list1[i].can,m);

m = list1[i].numnbr;

sort(list1[i].nbr,m);

for(i=0;i<n2;i++){

m = list2[i].numcan;

sort(list2[i].can,m);

m = list2[i].numnbr;

sort(list2[i].nbr,m);

}

}

/*****Start matching*****/

printf("\nmatching");

delete[] pic1;

delete[] pic2;

for(val=.9;val>cthresh;val-=0.01){

for(i=0;i<n1;i++){

if(list1[i].numcan==0) continue;

if(list1[i].status==1) continue;

m = list1[i].numcan - 1;

n = list1[i].can[m].plc;

if(mutmax(list1,list2,i,n)==1 && list1[i].can[m].val>=val){

if(cvstat == 1 && val < lbnd){

if(check_vec(list1,list2,i,n)==1){

list1[i].status = 1;

list2[n].status = 1;

clean(list1,list2,i,n);

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

90

else if(check_vec(list1,list2,i,n)==0){

list1[i].numcan--;

list2[n].numcan--;

list1[i].status = 1;

list2[n].status = 1;

clean(list1,list2,i,n);

}

}

else{

}

}

}

}

n=0;

/*****Print results*****/

for(i=0;i<n1;i++){

if(list1[i].status == 1){

j = list1[i].numcan-1;

m = list1[i].can[j].plc;

x = (list2[m].x + list1[i].x)/2;

y = (list2[m].y + list1[i].y)/2;

u = list2[m].x - list1[i].x;

v = list2[m].y - list1[i].y;

n++;

}

}

}

printf("\n%d",n);

/*****Some final housekeeping*****/

if(list1[i].size < minsize || list2[m].size < minsize) continue;

if(x > brdr && x <= row-brdr && y > brdr && y<= col-brdr){

fprintf(fout,"%f\t%f\t%f\t%f\n",y,x,v,u);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

91

/*This function attempts to loosen the correlation limit by comparing

candidate motions with previously matched neighbors.*/

int check_vec(struct object *list1,struct object *list2,int n1, int n2)

delete[] list1;

delete[] list2;

}

{

int num1,num2;

int nbrs,matched;

int i,j,m,n;

float x,y,u,v,val;

float xm,ym,um,vm;

float xp,yp,up,vp;

float jtr;

matched=0;

nbrs = list1[n1].numnbr;

xp = (list2[n2].x+list1[n1].x)/2;

yp = (list2[n2].y+list1[n1].y)/2;

up = (list2[n2].x-list1[n1].x);

vp = (list2[n2].y-list1[n1].y);

for(i=0;i<nbrs;i++){

m=list1[n1].nbr[i].plc;

if(list1[m].status == 1){

j=list1[m].numcan-1;

n=list1[m].can[j].plc;

x = (list2[n].x+list1[m].x)/2 - xp;

y = (list2[n].y+list1[m].y)/2 - yp;

val = sqrt(x*x + y*y);

if(val < nrad && x+xp > brdr && x+xp<=row-brdr

&& y+yp > brdr && y+yp <= col-brdr) matched++;

}

}

if(matched < nbrstat) return(2);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

92

xm=0;ym=0;um=0;vm=0;

for(i=0;i<nbrs;i++){

m=list1[n1].nbr[i].plc;

if(list1[m].status == 1){

j=list1[m].numcan-1;

n=list1[m].can[j].plc;

x = (list2[n].x+list1[m].x)/2 - xp;

y = (list2[n].y+list1[m].y)/2 - yp;

val = sqrt(x*x + y*y);

if(val < nrad && x+xp > brdr && x+xp<=row-brdr

&& y+yp > brdr && y+yp <= col-brdr){

xm += (list2[n].x+list1[m].x)/(2*(float)matched);

ym += (list2[n].y+list1[m].y)/(2*(float)matched);

um += (list2[n].x-list1[m].x)/(float)matched;

vm += (list2[n].y-list1[m].y)/(float)matched;

}

}

}

jtr=0;

for(i=0;i<nbrs;i++){

m=list1[n1].nbr[i].plc;

if(list1[m].status == 1){

j=list1[m].numcan-1;

n=list1[m].can[j].plc;

x = (list2[n].x+list1[m].x)/2 - xp;

y = (list2[n].y+list1[m].y)/2 - yp;

val = sqrt(x*x + y*y);

if(val < nrad && x+xp > brdr && x+xp<=row-brdr

&& y+yp > brdr && y+yp <= col-brdr){

u = (list2[n].x-list1[m].x) - um;

v = (list2[n].y-list1[m].y) - vm;

jtr += (u*u+v*v)/(float)matched;

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

93

}

}

jtr=sqrt(jtr);

u = up-um;

v = vp-vm;

val = sqrt(u*u + v*v);

if(val < cvthresh*jtr) return(1);

else return(0);

}

{

/*Cleans the objects i and j from any candidate list since they

have presumably been matched.*/

void clean(struct object *list1,struct object *list2,int n1, int n2)

int num1,num2;

int i,j,k,l,m;

struct connection temp;

num1 = list1[n1].numcan - 1;

if(num1 > 0){

for(i=0;i<num1;i++){

j = list1[n1].can[i].plc;

m = list2[j].numcan;

temp = list2[j].can[m-1];

k=0;

m--;

list2[j].can[k] = temp;

list2[j].numcan--;

sort(list2[j].can,m);

}

}

num2 = list2[n2].numcan - 1;

while(list2[j].can[k].plc != n1) k++;

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

94

if(num2 > 0){

for(i=0;i<num2;i++){

j = list2[n2].can[i].plc;

m = list1[j].numcan;

temp = list1[j].can[m-1];

k=0;

m--;

}

list1[j].can[k] = temp;

list1[j].numcan--;

sort(list1[j].can,m);

while(list1[j].can[k].plc != n2) k++;

}

}

{

}

int num1,num2;

int i,j;

num1 = list1[n1].numcan - 1;

num2 = list2[n2].numcan - 1;

i = list1[n1].can[num1].plc;

j = list2[n2].can[num2].plc;

if(i == n2 && j == n1) return(1);

else return(0);

/*Returns a 1 if the maximum correlation of list1[n1] and list2[n2]

point to one another. 0 otherwise. This routine assumes we

have already sorted the connections using "sort".*/

int mutmax(struct object *list1,struct object *list2,int n1,int n2)

/*Sorting routine used in object lists. This is used to sort the

nbr connections in order from closest to farthest away and the can

connection from lowest correlation to highest.*/

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

95

void sort(struct connection *ptr,int num)

/*Finds all the parts of an particle given that there is a bright spot

at x0,y0. Return the value of the centroid and the rms.*/

struct object findparts(unsigned char **ptr1,unsigned char **ptr2,

int x0,int y0)

{

int i,j;

struct connection temp;

for(j=1;j<num;j++){

temp = ptr[j];

i=j-1;

ptr[i+1]=ptr[i];

i--;

}

ptr[i+1] = temp;

while(i>=0 && ptr[i].val > temp.val){

}

}

{

int i,m=1,n=1;

int *x,*y;

int j,k,val;

unsigned char *intensity;

int brght=0;

float tx,ty,std;

struct object out;

x = new(int[maxsize]);

y = new(int[maxsize]);

x[0]=x0;

y[0]=y0;

ptr1[x0][y0]=0;

while(n<maxsize){

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

96

for(i=0;i<m;i++){

if(x[i] - 1 >= 0){

if(ptr1[x[i]-1][y[i]] > 0){

x[n] = x[i] - 1;

y[n] = y[i];

ptr1[x[n]][y[n]]=0;

n++;

}

}

n++;

}

}

n++;

}

}

if(x[i] + 1 < row){

if(ptr1[x[i]+1][y[i]] > 0){

x[n] = x[i] + 1;

y[n] = y[i];

ptr1[x[n]][y[n]]=0;

if(y[i] + 1 < col){

if(ptr1[x[i]][y[i]+1] > 0){

x[n] = x[i];

y[n] = y[i]+1;

ptr1[x[n]][y[n]]=0;

if(y[i] - 1 >= 0){

if(ptr1[x[i]][y[i]-1] > 0){

x[n] = x[i];

y[n] = y[i]-1;

ptr1[x[n]][y[n]]=0;

n++;

}

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

97

if(n==m) break;

else m=n;

intensity = new(unsigned char[n]);

for(i=0;i<n;i++){

intensity[i] = ptr2[x[i]][y[i]];

brght += (int)intensity[i];

out.x=0;

out.y=0;

for(i=0;i<n;i++){

out.x += (float)intensity[i]*(float)x[i]/(float)brght;

out.y += (float)intensity[i]*(float)y[i]/(float)brght;

std += (float)intensity[i]*(tx*tx+ty*ty)/(float)brght;

}

}

}

}

std = 0;

for(i=0;i<n;i++){

tx = (float)x[i]-out.x;

ty = (float)y[i]-out.y;

std = sqrt(std);

out.size = std;

out.numnbr = 0;

out.numcan = 0;

out.status = 0;

delete[] intensity;

delete[] x;

delete[] y;

return(out);

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

98

/*Creates float ** mean which contains the value of the mean

of a box of sizexsize around each point in pic.*/

void background(unsigned char **pic,float **back,int size)

{

int i,j;

int x,y,val=0;

int half = (size-1)/2;

float mean;

mean=0;

for(i=0;i<=half;i++){

for(j=0;j<=half;j++){

val++;

}

}

back[0][0]=mean;

for(j=0;j<row;j+=2){

if(j%64==0) printf(".");

for(i=1;i<col;i++){

y=i-half-1;

mean = (val*mean +(float)pic[i][j])/((float)val+1);

for(x=j-half;x<=j+half;x++){

if(y < 0 || x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

mean = (mean*val - (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val-1);

for(x=j-half;x<=j+half;x++){

if(y >= col || x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

mean = (mean*val + (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val+1);

val--;

y=i+half;

val++;

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

99

back[j][i]=mean;

x = j-half;

for(y=col-1-half;y<col;y++){

if(x < 0) continue;

mean =(mean*val - (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val-1);

x = j+1+half;

for(y=col-1-half;y<col;y++){

if(x >= row) continue;

mean =(mean*val + (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val+1);

back[j+1][col-1] = mean;

for(i=col-2;i>=0;i--){

y=i+half+1;

for(x=j+1-half;x<=j+1+half;x++){

if(y >= col || x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

mean = (mean*val - (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val-1);

for(x=j+1-half;x<=j+1+half;x++){

if(y < 0 || x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

mean = (mean*val + (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val+1);

back[j+1][i]=mean;

}

}

}

}

val--;

val++;

val--;

y=i-half;

val++;

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

100

mean =(mean*val - (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val-1);

mean =(mean*val + (float)pic[x][y])/((float)val+1);

/*Finds all the neighbors and candidates for a particle and then

stores this info in the appropriate spot in the lists.*/

void connect(struct object *list1,struct object *list2,

int n1,int n2,int maxdist)

x = j+1-half;

for(y=0;y<=half;y++){

if(x < 0) continue;

val--;

x = j+2+half;

for(y=0;y<=half;y++){

if(x >= row) continue;

val++;

if((j+2) >= row) continue;

back[j+2][0] = mean;

}

}

}

}

{

int x0,y0;

int i,j;

int x,y;

int m1,m2;

int **pic1,**pic2;

int *temp1,*temp2;

float val,dist,xdiff,ydiff;

double rem,pos;

pic1 = new(int *[row]);

pic2 = new(int *[row]);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

101

for(i=0;i<row;i++){

pic1[i] = new(int[col]);

pic2[i] = new(int[col]);

for(j=0;j<col;j++){

pic1[i][j] = -1;

pic2[i][j] = -1;

}

}

for(i=0;i<n1;i++){

val = list1[i].x;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem >.5) pos++;

x = (int)pos;

val = list1[i].y;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem >.5) pos++;

y = (int)pos;

pic1[x][y] = i;

for(i=0;i<n2;i++){

val = list2[i].x;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem >.5) pos++;

x = (int)pos;

val = list2[i].y;

rem = modf(val,&pos);

if(rem >.5) pos++;

y = (int)pos;

pic2[x][y] = i;

}

}

temp1 = new(int[maxdist*maxdist]);

temp2 = new(int[maxdist*maxdist]);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

102

for(x0=0;x0<row;x0++){

if(x0 % 64 == 0) printf(".");

for(y0=0;y0<col;y0++){

if(pic1[x0][y0] != -1){

m1=0;

m2=0;

if(pic1[x0][y0] == -1 && pic2[x0][y0]==-1) continue;

for(i=-maxdist;i<=maxdist;i++){

x = x0 + i;

if(x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

for(j=-maxdist;j<=maxdist;j++){

y = y0 + j;

if(y < 0 || y >= col) continue;

if((i*i + j*j)> maxdist*maxdist) continue;

if(pic2[x][y] != -1){

temp2[m2] = pic2[x][y];

m2++;

if(pic1[x][y] != -1){

if(x==x0 && y==y0) continue;

temp1[m1] = pic1[x][y];

m1++;

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].nbr = new(struct connection[m1]);

for(i=0;i<m1;i++){

xdiff = list1[temp1[i]].x - list1[pic1[x0][y0]].x;

ydiff = list1[temp1[i]].y - list1[pic1[x0][y0]].y;

dist = sqrt(xdiff*xdiff+ydiff*ydiff);

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].nbr[i].plc = temp1[i];

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].nbr[i].val = dist;

}

}

}

}

}

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

103

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].numnbr = m1;

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].can = new(struct connection[m2]);

for(i=0;i<m2;i++){

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].can[i].plc = temp2[i];

}

}

m1=0;

m2=0;

list1[pic1[x0][y0]].numcan = m2;

if(pic2[x0][y0] != -1){

for(i=-maxdist;i<=maxdist;i++){

x = x0 + i;

if(x < 0 || x >= row) continue;

for(j=-maxdist;j<=maxdist;j++){

y = y0 + j;

if(y < 0 || y >= col) continue;

if((i*i + j*j)> maxdist*maxdist) continue;

if(pic1[x][y] != -1){

temp2[m2] = pic1[x][y];

m2++;

if(pic2[x][y] != -1){

if(x==x0 && y==y0) continue;

temp1[m1] = pic2[x][y];

m1++;

}

}

}

}

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].nbr = new(struct connection[m1]);

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

104

for(i=0;i<m1;i++){

xdiff = list2[temp1[i]].x - list2[pic2[x0][y0]].x;

ydiff = list2[temp1[i]].y - list2[pic2[x0][y0]].y;

dist = sqrt(xdiff*xdiff + ydiff*ydiff);

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].nbr[i].plc = temp1[i];

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].nbr[i].val = dist;

}

}

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].numnbr = m1;

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].can = new(struct connection[m2]);

for(i=0;i<m2;i++){

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].can[i].plc = temp2[i];

list2[pic2[x0][y0]].numcan = m2;

}

}

}

delete[] pic1;

delete[] pic2;

delete[] temp1;

delete[] temp2;

}

{

int i,j;

float mean1,mean2;

float std1,std2,cor;

mean1=0;

mean2=0;

/*Returns the correlation number between two arrays of size x size.*/

float correl(unsigned char **ptr1,unsigned char **ptr2,int size)

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

105

for(i=0;i<size;i++){

for(j=0;j<size;j++){

mean1 += (float)ptr1[i][j]/(float)(size*size);

mean2 += (float)ptr2[i][j]/(float)(size*size);

for(i=0;i<size;i++){

for(j=0;j<size;j++){

std1 += (((float)ptr1[i][j] - mean1)*((float)ptr1[i][j] - mean1))

std2 += (((float)ptr2[i][j] - mean2)*((float)ptr2[i][j] - mean2))

cor += (((float)ptr1[i][j] - mean1)*((float)ptr2[i][j] - mean2))

/(float)(size*size);

/(float)(size*size);

/(float)(size*size);

cor /=(sqrt(std1)*sqrt(std2));

return(cor);

/*Gets a box from pic1 centered at x0,y0 and stores it in ptr1.

ptr1 should be at least size x size and size must be odd!!!.*/

void getbox(unsigned char **pic1, unsigned char **ptr1,

int x0,int y0,int size)

}

}

}

}

}

{

int i,j,x,y;

int half = (size-1)/2;

for(i=0;i<size;i++){

x = x0 + i - half;

if(x<0 || x>=row){

for(j=0;j<size;j++){

ptr1[i][j] = 0;

}

}

continue;

Appendix A. Particle Tracking Velocimetry: Program Listing

106

for(j=0;j<size;j++){

y = y0 + j - half;

if(y<0 || y>=col){

ptr1[i][j] = 0;

continue;

ptr1[i][j] = pic1[x][y];

}

}

}

}

Bibliography

Bibliography

[1] Robert H. Kraichnan. Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence. Physics of

Fluids, 10(7):1417–1423, July 1967.

[2] E.D. Siggia and H. Aref. Point-vortex simulation of the inverse energy cascade

in two-dimensional turbulence. Physics of Fluids, 24:1981, 1981.

[3] U. Frisch and P.L. Sulem. Numerical simulation of the inverse cascade in two-

dimensional turbulence. Physics of Fluids, 27:1921, 1984.

[4] M.E. Maltrud and G.K. Vallis. Energy spectra and coherent structures in forced

two-dimensional and beta-plane turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 228:321,

1991.

cember 1998.

[5] J. Paret and P. Tabeling. Intermittency in the two-dimensional inverse cascade

of energy: Experimental observations. Physics of Fluids, 10(12):3126–3136, De-

[6] Maarten A. Rutgers. Forced 2d turbulence: Experimental evidence of simulta-

neous inverse energy and forward enstrophy cascade. Physical Review Letters,

81(11):2244–2247, September 1998.

[7] Michael Rivera and Xiao-Lun Wu. External dissipation in driven two-dimensional

turbulence. Physical Review Letters, 85(5):976–979, July 2000.

[8] M. Farge, K. Schneider, and N. Kevlahan. Non-gaussianity and coherent vortex

simulation for two-dimensional turbulence using an adaptive orthogonal wavelet

basis. Physics of Fluids, 11(8):2187–2201, August 1999.

[9] U. Frisch. Turbulence: The Legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov. Cambridge University

Press, 1995.

108

[10] J. R. Chasnov. On the decay of two-dimensional homogenous turbulence. Physics

of Fluids, 9(1):171–180, January 1997.

[11] Michael Rivera, Peter Vorobieﬀ, and Robert Ecke. Turbulence in ﬂowing

soap ﬁlms: Velocity, vorticity, and thickness ﬁelds. Physical Review Letters,

81(7):1417–1420, August 1998.

[12] Victor Yakhot. Two-dimensional turbulence in the inverse cascade range. Phys-

ical Review E, 60(5):5544–5551, November 1999.

[13] J´erˆome Paret and Patrick Tabeling. Are ﬂows which are forced in thin stratiﬁed

layers two-dimensional? Physics of Fluids, 9(10):3102–3104, October 1997.

[14] M.A. Rutgers, Xiao-Lun Wu, R. Bhagavatula, A. Petersen, and W. Goldburg.

Two-dimensional velocity proﬁles in laminar boundary layers in ﬂowing soap

ﬁlms. Physics of Fluids, 8(11):2847–2854, November 1996.

[15] Y. Couder and C. Basdevant. Experimental and numerical study of vortex cou-

ples in two-dimensional ﬂows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 173:225–251, 1986.

[16] Morteza Gharib and Philip Derango. A liquid ﬁlm (soap ﬁlm) tunnel to study

two-dimensional laminar and turbulent shear ﬂows. Physica D, 37:406–416, 1989.

[17] H. Kellay, Xiao-Lun Wu, and W. Goldburg. Experiments with turbulent soap

ﬁlms. Physical Review Letters, 74(20):3975–3978, May 1995.

[18] J´erˆome Paret and Patrick Tabeling. Experimental observation of the two-

dimensional inverse energy cascade. Physical Review Letters, 79(21):4162–4165,

November 1997.

[19] J. Sommeria. Experimental study of the two-dimensional inverse energy cascade

in a square box. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 170:139–168, 1986.

[20] A.A. Trapeznikov. Proceeding of the Second International Congress of Surface

Activity. Academic, New York, 1957.

[21] P. Vorobieﬀ and R. Ecke. Cylinder wakes in ﬂowing soap ﬁlms. Physical Review

E, 60(3):2953–2956, September 1999.

[22] I. Grant. Particle image velocimetry: a review. Proceedings of the Institution of

Mechanical Engineers, 211:55–76, 1997.

[23] Mark P. Wernet and A. Pline. Particle displacement tracking technique and

cramer-rao lower bound in centroid estimates from ccd imagery. Experiments in

Fluids, 15:295–307, 1993.

[24] A.K. Prasad, R.J. Adrian, C.C. Landreth, and P.W. Oﬀutt. Eﬀect of resolution

on the speed and accuracy of particle image velocimetry interrogation. Experi-

ments in Fluids, 13:105–116, 1992.

[25] J.O. Hinze. Turbulence. Mcgraw-Hill Inc., 1975.

[26] Erik Lindborg. A note on kolmogorov’s third-order structure-function law, the

local isotropy hypothesis and the pressure-velocity correlation. Journal of Fluid

Mechanics, 326:343–356, 1996.

[27] G. Boﬀetta, A. Celani, and M. Vergasola.

Inverse energy cascade in two-

dimensional turbulence: Deviations from gaussian behavior. Physical Review

E, 61(1):R29–R32, January 2000.

[28] Armando Babiano, Claude Basdevant, and Robert Sadourny. Structure functions

and dispersion laws in two-dimensional turbulence. Journal of the Atmospheric

Sciences, 42(9):941–949, May 1985.

[29] Armando Babiano, Berengere Dubrulle, and Peter Frick. Some properties of two-

dimensional inverse energy cascade dynamics. Physical Review E, 55(3):2693–

2706, March 1997.

1969.

[30] G. K. Batchelor. Computation of the energy spectrum in homogenous two-

dimensional turbulence. The Physics of Fluid Supplement II, pages II233–II239,

[31] M. Beizaie and M. Gharib. Fundamentals of a liquid (soap) ﬁlm tunnel. Exper-

iments in Fluids, 23:130–140, 1997.

[32] Vadim Borue. Inverse energy cascade in stationary two-dimensional homogenous

turbulence. Physical Review Letters, 72(10):1475–1478, March 1994.

[33] Jean Marc Chomaz. 2d or not 2d, the soap ﬁlm dilemma. Journal of Fluid

Mechanics, submitted 2000.

Physica D, 37:384–405, 1989.

[34] Y. Couder, J.M. Chomaz, and M. Rabaud. On the hydrodynamics of soap ﬁlms.

[35] S. D. Denilov, F. V. Dolzhanski, and V. A. Krymov. Quasi-two-dimensional

hydrodynamics and problems of two-dimensional turbulence. Chaos, 4(2):299–

304, 1994.

[36] Ragnar Fjørtoft. On the changes in the spectral distribution of kinetic energy

for two-dimenional, non-divergent ﬂow. Tellus, 5(3):225–230, August 1953.

[37] Robert H. Kraichnan and David Montgomery. Two-dimensional turbulence. Re-

ports on Progress in Physics, 43:547–616, 1980.

[38] Leslie M. Smith and Victor Yakhot. Finite-size eﬀects in forced two-dimensional

turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 274:115–138, 1994.

[39] H. Schlichting. Boundary-Layer Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1968.

This figure "airdrag.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "alphavsd.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "arrays.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "consts.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "eddies.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "experimental1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "experimental2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "experimental4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "filmcurve.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "highmoms.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "homog1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "karmanhowarth_xx_cross.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "karmanhowarth_yy.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "karmanhowarth_yy_cross.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "longitudinalpdf1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "longitudinalpdf2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "lowmoms.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "lscales.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "magnetarray.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "meanflow.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "meanrmsflow.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "normoddmom.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "outerscale.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "outervelocity.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "rmsfluc.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "spectra.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "steadystate.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "thinfilm.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "thirdmom.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "thirdmom_norm.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "timing.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "tunnel1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "tunnel2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "typicalfields.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "universality1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "universality2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "var2dspectra.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

This figure "varspectra.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103050v1

