1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Turbulent Drag Reduction of polyelectrolyte (DNA) solutions: relation with the
elongational viscosity

C. Wagner1, Y. Amarouchene1,2 P. Doyle3, and D. Bonn1,∗
1 Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, UMR CNRS 8550, Ecole Normale Suprieure, 24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05,
France
2 Centre de Physique Molculaire Optique et Hertzienne, Universit Bordeaux 1 (UMR 5798), 351 cours de la liberation, 33405
Talence, France
3 Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
bonn at lps.ens.fr

∗

We report measurements of turbulent drag reduction of
two diﬀerent polyelectrolyte solutions: DNA and hydrolyzed
Polyacrylamide. Changing the salt concentration in the solu-
tions allows us to change the ﬂexibility of the polymer chains.
For both polymers the amount of drag reduction was found to
increase with the ﬂexibility. Rheological studies reveal that
the elongational viscosity of the solutions increases simulta-
neously. Hence we conclude that the elongational viscosity is
the pertinent macroscopic quantity to describe the ability of
a polymer to cause turbulent drag reduction.

PACS: 87.14.Gg 83.50.Jf 83.60.Yz

The phenomenon of turbulent drag reduction describes
the diminution of the dissipation in turbulent ﬂow by
adding tiny amounts of polymers. In this way for instance
the amount of liquid that is transported in a pipe for a
given pressure drop can be increased signiﬁcantly. This
implies a wide range of industrial applications, and con-
sequently the eﬀect, discovered in 1944 by Toms [1], has
been studied intensively over the past decades (see e.g.
Ref. [2]). In spite of this eﬀort, the underlying physical
mechanisms are ill understood and none of the existing
theories match the existing experimental data [3]. The
key macroscopic property of these solutions that is known
to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of the solvent is its
elongational viscosity. Therefore, drag reduction is usu-
ally attributed to the elongational viscosity; however the
precise connection remains unclear.

The elongational viscosity describes the resistance of a
liquid to an elongational ﬂow. In Newtonian liquids the
elongational viscosity is just given by the shear viscosity
times a geometrical factor of three, the Trouton ratio [4].
The addition of a small amount of polymers to the solvent
does not change the shear viscosity signiﬁcantly, however
the elongational viscosity can increase by several orders
of magnitude. Taking an elevated elongational viscosity
into account, qualitative explanation of drag reduction
has been given by Landahl [5]: He suggests the elonga-
tional viscosity can suppress the occurrence of streaks -
regions of ﬂow with a highly elongational part - in the
turbulent boundary layer. These boundary layer insta-
bilities lead to ”blobs” of ﬂuid that are ejected from the

boundary layer into the bulk of the liquid and which gen-
erate the turbulence. An observation that provides sup-
port for the idea that the boundary layer is important was
made by Cadot et al. [6]. They showed experimentally
that drag reduction occurs only in boundary layer driven
turbulence: if no boundary layers are present, indeed no
drag reduction is observed upon addition of polymers.
This implies that it is the way the turbulence is generated
by the boundary layers that is altered by the addition of
polymers. To our knowledge, however, an explicit experi-
mental proof of the relation between the the elongational
viscosity of a given polymer solution and its ability to
cause turbulent drag reduction is still missing mainly be-
cause the determination of the elongational viscosity of
drag-reducing polymer solutions has proven diﬃcult. It
is the aim of this Letter to provide this relation.

In order to do so, we study both the elongational vis-
cosity and turbulent drag reduction of polymers that al-
low us to tune their chain ﬂexibility. The large elon-
gational viscosity of dilute polymer solutions is usually
attributed to a resistance to stretching of the polymer
chains in an elongational ﬂow ﬁeld. Therefore, ﬂexible
polymers should have a higher elongational viscosity. If
in addition the phenomenon of drag reduction is indeed
related to the elevated elongational viscosity, drag reduc-
tion should also increase with increasing chain ﬂexibility.
We show here that this is indeed the case using polyelec-
trolytes, for which the chain ﬂexibility can be tuned by
the addition of salt to the solvent [7].In that way the chain
ﬂexibility is altered without changing either the polymer
chemistry or the chain length, the eﬀects on drag reduc-
tion of which are still ill understood.

The ﬁrst polyelectrolyte solution we use are aqueous
solutions of double stranded λ DNA (48.5 bp) at the
overlap concentration c∗ of 40 wppm. DNA is a model
polymer and its physical properties, for instance the re-
laxation time, are very well deﬁned [8]. Our solutions
contained a 10 mM TRIS and 1 mM EDTA buﬀer and
the NaCl concentration was varied from 0 to 10 mM,
changing the persistence length by a factor of three. The
second polyelectrolyte use was 40wppm hydrolyzed Poly-
acrylyamide (HPAA) with a molecular weight of 5 × 106
amu in water with NaCl concentrations varying from
1mM to 18mM [9].

1

February 20, 2014

2

To investigate turbulent drag reduction we measured
the drag of a turbulent ﬂow of the diﬀerent liquids in a
Couette Cell with a gap of δ = 1 mm. Even if the indus-
trial implications of turbulent drag reduction are more
likely to be pipe ﬂow, it is experimentally much more con-
venient to study Couette ﬂow; this is in fact a standard
way to characterize polymer solutions for their ability to
exhibit drag reduction [10]. The measurements were per-
formed on a standard (Reologica Stresstech) rheometer.
The rheometer was driven in controlled stress mode, and
Drag Reduction (DR) is deﬁned as the normalized diﬀer-
ence of the drag d exerted on the inner cylinder by pure
water and by the polymer solution respectively at same
Reynolds number DR = (dH2O − dpol) /dH2O × 100%.
η , Ω be-
The Reynolds number is deﬁned as Re =
ing the rotation speed of the inner cylinder, ρ the liquid
density and η the solvent viscosity.

Ωrδρ

The inset of ﬁg 1 shows the measured DR as a func-
tion of time for a constant applied stress of 8 Pa, the
highest value that could be obtained with our rheome-
ter. This yields a Reynolds number Re ≈ 2000. Both for
the DNA and for the PAA solution the DR is found to
depend on the salt concentration in the solvent: drag re-
duction increases with increasing salt concentration. For
the HPAA solution, for a salt concentration of 18 mM a
drag reduction of ∼ 20% is found. The more surprising
result is that for the lowest salt concentration no DR is
observed, but rather a drag enhancement. This strongly
suggests an important eﬀect of the ﬂexibility of the poly-
mer chains on the drag reduction. As can be observed
on the ﬁgure, there is a certain critical salt concentration
(i.e., ﬂexibility) necessary to observe DR. For the DNA
solution the results are qualitatively the same as for the
HPAA, but the eﬀects are less pronounced.

We believe the interesting temporal behavior for times
t ∼≤ 400 sec to be a rather complicated mixture of disen-
tanglement of diﬀerent polymer chains [6,11], rupture of
the individual polymer chains by the strong ﬂow [2], and
relaxation of the ﬂow towards a steady state. In addition
to the data shown here, at longer times we observe a ten-
dency to smaller values of DR, probably due to further
degradation of the polymers.

DR as a function of the Reynolds number is shown in
Fig 1. Here the DR was measured by stepwise increasing
the rotation speed of the inner cylinder. For each new
Reynolds number the system was given 60 sec. to reach
a steady state, a reasonable compromise in view of the
diﬀerent temporal eﬀects discussed above. For all the
solutions, we observe an increase of DR with increasing
Re, as also observed in pipe ﬂow [2]. The drag reduction
is again positive for the highest salt concentrations, but
goes from negative to positive for the lowest salt concen-
trations: we observe a drag enhancement turning into a
reduction when the Reynolds number is increased. We
checked that this is not due to our use of the Couette

cell, or the very moderate Reynolds numbers employed
here by repeating the experiments in the turbulence cell
of Cadot et al. [6]. These high-Reynolds number exper-
iments gave very similar results, and will be published
elsewhere [12].

The interesting dependence of the DR on the Reynolds
number Re is still completely unclear and opens many
questions for further investigation, both on the quanti-
tative explanation of turbulent drag reduction, and on
the transition to inertial turbulence in the presence of
polymers, which in principle may generate supplemen-
tary instabilities that are elastic in origin [13].

Having measured the eﬀect of salt on the drag reduc-
tion, we now turn to the elongational viscosity. As the ve-
locity ﬂuctuations in turbulence are violent, and rapidly
change direction, it is unlikely that the polymer exten-
sion in such ﬂows reaches a steady state. The pertinent
experiment is therefore to study incipient (startup) elon-
gational ﬂow, and measure the response of the polymer
solutions to that.

In order to measure the dynamic elongational viscos-
ity ηe(t) of our solutions we followed the method pro-
posed by Bazilevskii et al. [14] and further developed by
Amarouchene et al. [15]. Therein the authors describe
the detachment process of a droplet of a diluted poly-
mer solution from a capillary. The addition of a small
quantity of ﬂexible polymers to water inhibits the ﬁnite
time disruption process (see Ref. [16]) of the droplet, and
instead a cylindrical ﬁlament is formed between the cap-
illary and the droplet. The ﬂow proﬁle in the ﬁlament is
purely elongational and by balancing the surface forces
to the elastic stresses, the elongational viscosity ηe(t) can
be extracted from the measured ﬁlament diameter h(t).
The elongational viscosity ηe(t) measured in our experi-
ment is a time dependent quantity because the polymers
are more and more stretched with the time by the sur-
rounding ﬂow. The experiments reveal that the tempo-
ral behavior of h(t) is exponential. This means that the
elongational rate ˙ǫ = −2 ∂th
h remains constant, revealing
a subtle interplay between the polymer and the ﬂow [15].
For large times of course a steady state value of the elon-
gational viscosity (ηe = const) will be reached [17] that
depends only on the elongation rate ˙ǫ. But even if the
thinning process of the ﬁlament is exponential in time
at ﬁrst, an instability [18] that yields in ﬁlament rupture
occurs when the ﬁlament diameter reaches h(t) ≃ 10µm
and we did not observe a steady state.

The elongational rate diﬀers for the diﬀerent samples
and it is useful to introduce the so called Hencky strain,
the product of the elongation rate and the elapsed time
˙ǫt, which measures the total deformation of the ﬂuid el-
ement containing the polymer. We deﬁne the zero of
the Hencky strain for the moment when the ﬁlament is
formed, i.e. when the ﬂow is strong enough to interact
with the polymers.

It turns out that for the aqueous solutions used in the

February 20, 2014

3

DR experiments, the droplet detachment process is too
fast to observe, even using a rapid camera (Photonetics)
working at a 1000 frames/s. Increasing the solvent viscos-
ity slows down the dynamics of the ﬁlaments suﬃciently
so that these can be followed, and the elongational vis-
cosity can be determined. We will show below that these
measurements suﬃce also to deduce the elongational vis-
cosity of the aqueous solutions of the DR experiments.

To increase the solvent viscosity, glycerol-water mix-
tures were used with the same salt (and buﬀer for the
DNA) concentrations. Figure 2 shows the photographs
of the detachment process for the DNA solution for the
0 mM and the 10 mM salt concentration. The trend
can be observed directly on the experiments: the more
ﬂexible polymer has a higher elongational viscosity; it is
evident from the ﬁgure that the detachment process is
much slower.

Figure 3 shows the elongational viscosities of the dif-
ferent samples, for diﬀerent salinities as a function of the
Hencky strain. Again both for the DNA and the HPAA
ηe depends strongly on the salt concentration: the elon-
gational viscosity increases with increasing salt concen-
tration, i.e., increasing ﬂexibility of the polymer chains.
For the HPAA ηe changes more than a factor of three
between the lowest and the highest salinity, while there
is still a factor of almost two observed for the DNA solu-
tion.

As mentioned above, the concentration of salt changes
the ﬂexibility of the polymer chains and thus their resis-
tance to an elongational ﬂow. A useful model that takes
the ﬂexibility of the polymers into account is the FENE-
model [19]. For start-up ﬂow it can be solved only numer-
ically; this work is in progress [20]. One of the fundamen-
tal prediction of the FENE-model is that the elongational
viscosity scales linearly with the solvent viscosity. If this
were true, we can directly extract the elongational vis-
cosity of the aqueous solutions used in the turbulent drag
reduction experiments from the elongational viscosities of
the polymer glycerol-water solutions. To verify this, we
prepared a series of additional solutions of 300ppm PAA
in diﬀerent glycerol-water solutions, but with the same
salt concentration. This allows us to change the solvent
viscosity η in the range 10mP as ≤ 80mP as. The in-
set of ﬁgure 4 shows the Trouton ratio T r, the measured
elongational viscosity ηe of the polymer solutions divided
by three times the viscosity of the solvent (T r ≡ 1 for
Newtonian liquids). The Trouton ratio of the diﬀerent
solutions perfectly collapses on to a single master curve.
For even smaller viscosities slight discrepancies may be
observed, but here the dynamics becomes again too fast
to allow for a reproducible determination of ηe. The per-
fect collapse also indicates that the chain ﬂexibility is not
modiﬁed by the addition of diﬀerent amounts of glycerol.
Therefore we can obtain the elongational viscosities ηe
of the 40ppm aqueous solutions by dividing the data ob-
tained from the 40 ppm glycerol water solutions by the

ratio of the solvent shear viscosities.

It is therefore now possible to relate the drag reduc-
tion directly to the elongational viscosity. The result is
shown in ﬁgure 4. We plot the drag reduction for a given
Reynolds number as a function of the elongational vis-
cosity ηe at a Hencky strain of 1. The DR is shown to
increase monotonically with the elongational viscosity for
a given solutions and the data for the diﬀerent polymers
collapse together demonstrating that indeed the elonga-
tional viscosity is the pertinent quantity to account for
DR. As far as we can tell, this is the ﬁrst explicit demon-
stration that the turbulent drag reduction is directly con-
nected with the elongational viscosity of a polymer solu-
tion

These results, especially those on DNA, open the way
to a microscopic understanding of both the enormous
elongational viscosity dilute polymer solutions can have,
and the surprising results thereof: turbulent drag reduc-
tion. It has recently become possible to observe the de-
formation of the polymer chains due to ﬂow of single
DNA molecules using ﬂuorescence microscopy [8]. Per-
forming such an experiment on the ﬁlaments would allow
to relate the extension of the individual polymer chains,
to the macroscopic stresses the chain extensions gener-
ate. If subsequently the polymer conformation is visu-
alized in a turbulent boundary layer, an estimate of the
extra stresses in the boundary layer could be obtained,
which could be the key to the understanding of this phe-
nomenon. These experiments are in progress.

Acknowledgements LPS de l’ENS is UMR 8550 of the
CNRS, associated with the universities Paris 6 and 7 We
thank . This work is supported by the EEC IHP-MCFI
program.

[1] B. A. Toms, Proc. Int. Cong. Rheol. II, 135 (1949).
[2] P. S. Virk, AIChE 21, 625 (1975). J. L. Lumley, Ann.
Rev. Fluid Mech. 1 367 (1969). W. D. McComb, The
physics of ﬂuid turbulence (Clarendon, Oxford, 1990).
A. Gyr and H. W. Bewersdorﬀ, Drag reduction of tur-
bulent ﬂow by additives (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995).
R. Sreenivasan, C. M. White, J. Fluid Mech. 409, 149
(2000). R. Govindarajan, V. S. Lvov, I. Procaccia, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 87, 174501-1 (2001). The dependence of DR
on the salt concentration of a polyelectrolyte solutions
was also already reported by Virk in 1975: P. S. Virk,
Nature 253, 109 (1975).

[3] M. Tabor and P. G. de Gennes, Europhys. Lett
2,519 (1986). E. J. Hinch, Phys. Fluis 20, 22 (1997).
T. Becker and B. Eckhardt, Zeit. Physik 101, 461 (1996).
J. M. J. Den Tonder, M. A. Hulsen, C. D. C. Kuiken,
F. T. M. Nieuwstadt, Jour. Fluid Mech. 337, 193 (1997).

[4] F. T. Trouton, Phil. Mag. 19, 347 (1906).

February 20, 2014

4

800

1000

1200

1600

1800

2000

[5] M. T. Landahl, Phys. of Fluids 20, 55 (1977).
[6] O. Cadot, D. Bonn, S. Douady, Phys. Fluids 10, 426

(1998).

[7] C.G. Bauman, S.B. Smith, V.A. Bloomﬁeld, C. Busta-

mante, P.N.A.S. 94, 6185 (1997).

[8] T. T. Perkins, S. R. Quake, D. E. Smith, S. Chu, Science

264, 823 (1994).

[9] To obtain the the shear rate ˙γ dependent viscosity η ( ˙γ)
for our samples, standard rheological measurements were
−1 <
performed using a cone-plate cell. In the range 20s
−1 all HPAA samples show a shear thinning,
˙γ < 2000s
while the eﬀect becomes less pronounced at higher salt
concentrations. This was to be expected, as stiﬀer poly-
mers show in general a stronger shear thinning (D. Bonn,
J. Meunier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,2662 (1997)). The DNA
solutions showed only a slight shear thinning and no de-
pendence on the salt concentration could be detected.
˙γ = 2000s−1 - comparable with
At at a shear rate of
the highest shear rates used in the drag reduction ex-
periments - the shear viscosities for the HPAA solutions
varies in between 1.22mP as < η ( ˙γ) < 1.38mP as with
the salt concentration and for the DNA solutions always
η ( ˙γ) = 1.08mP as.

[10] V. N. Kalashnikov, J. Non-Newt. Fluid Mech. 75, 209
(1998). T. Nakken, M. Tande, A. Elgsaeter Phys. Fluids
10, 426 (1998).

[11] E. J. Hinch, Jour. Non-Newt. Fluid Mech. 54, 209 (1994).
[12] Y. Amarouchene, C. Wagner, D. Bonn, to be published.
[13] The turbulent drag reduction observed here has to be dis-
tinguished from the so called elastic turbulence (A. Gro-
isman, V. Steinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,1480 (1996)). It
refers to the occurrence of ﬂow instabilities at Reynolds
numbers Re ≪ 1 and driven by the elastic normal stress
eﬀects of the polymer solutions. Our rheological measure-
ments [9] did not reveal any measurable normal stresses
within the resolution of N1 ≃ 10P a of the rheometer for
the aqueus 40wppm solutions employed here.

[14] A. V. Bazilevskii, S.

I. Voronkov, V. M. Entov,

A. N. Rozhkov, Phys. Dokl. 26, 333 (1981).

[15] Y. Amarouchene, D. Bonn, J. Meunier, H. Kellay, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 86, 3558 (2001).

[16] D. T. Papageorgiou, Phys. Fluids 7, 1529 (1995). J. Eg-
gers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 865 (1997). X. D. Shi,
M. P. Brenner, S. R. Nagel, Science 265, 219 (1994).

[17] S. L. Anna, G. H. McKinley, J. Rheol. 45, 115 (2000).
[18] M. Renardy, J. Non-Newt. Fluid Mech. 97, 283 (2001).
[19] R. B. Bird, R. C. Armstrong, O. Hassager, Dynamics of
Polymeric Liquids (Wiley, NY, 1987) Vols. I and II.

[20] P. Doyle, to be published.

1400

Re

20

15

10

5

0

0

200

400

800 1000

600
time (s)

)

%

(

R
D

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

FIG. 1. The turbulent drag reduction DR as a function of
the Reynolds number Re. Inlet: The turbulent drag reduction
DR as function of time at a constant Stress of 8Pa yielding a
Reynols Number of Re ≈ 2000. Open symbols: HPAA 1mM
NaCl (circles), 2 mM (up triangles), 7mM (down triangles),
18mM(diamonds). Filled symbols: DNA 0 mM NaCl (up
triangles), 10 mM (down triangles). The error bars indicate
the statistics of three consecutive measurements.

FIG. 2. The detachement process of the droplet for the
DNA solution in 80/20wt% glycerol-water and a),b),c),d)
0mM Nacl and e),f),g),h) 10mM NaCl. The rows show diﬀer-
ent time steps t in regard to the moment tc when the ﬁlament
breaks. a),e): tc − 120ms; b),f): tc − 94ms; c),g): tc − 53ms;
d),h): tc −20ms. For this mixture, the viscosity of the solvent
was determined 10 mPas and the diameter of the capillary
used to study the droplet formation had a diameter of 1.2
mm. The time is taken in regard to the moment of ﬁlament
rupture tc.

February 20, 2014

5

Hencky strain

0

100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

10000

r
T

1000

FIG. 3. The elongational viscosity ηe for the diﬀerent poly-
mer solutions. The symbols are like in ﬁgure 1, only the sol-
vent is a 80/20wt% glycerol-water mixture. Inset: The Trou-
ton ratio TR for solutions of 300 ppm PAA in diﬀerent water
glycerol mixtures. The solvent viscoities are η= 80 (circles),
43 (squares), 20 (up triangles), 10 (diamonds) mPas.

10

)
s
a
P

(

e

h

1

)

%

(

R
D

15

10

5

he (Pa s)

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

FIG. 4. The drag reduction DR at a Reynolds number
Repoly = 1400 as a function of the elongational viscosities
of the aqueous polymer solutions for diﬀerent salinities at a
Hencky strain of ˙ǫt = 1. To allow for a comparison between
samples with a diﬀerent shear viscosities, the Reynolds num-
ber Repoly is calculated using the laminar shear viscosities
of the polymer solutions at a shear rate ˙γ = 2000. Filled
squares: DNA-solutions, open squares: HPAA solutions.

