1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

377

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability:
two and three dimensions

By Y.-N. Y O U N G1, H. T U F O2, A. D U B E Y1, and R.
R O S N E R1
1Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
2Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA

(Received 15 December 1999 and in revised form 5 December 2000)

We investigate the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instability in both 2 and 3 dimensions
using direct numerical simulations, where the working ﬂuid is assumed incompressible
under the Boussinesq approximation. We ﬁrst consider the case of randomly perturbed
interfaces. With a variety of diagnostics, we develop a physical picture for the detailed
temporal development of the mixed layer: We identify three distinct evolutionary phases
in the development of the mixed layer, which can be related to detailed variations in
the growth of the mixing zone. Our analysis provides an explanation for the observed
diﬀerences between two and three-dimensional RT instability; the analysis also leads us to
concentrate on the RT models which (1) work equally well for both laminar and turbulent
ﬂows, and (2) do not depend on turbulent scaling within the mixing layer between ﬂuids.
These candidate RT models are based on point sources within bubbles (or plumes) and
interaction with each other (or the background ﬂow). With this motivation, we examine
the evolution of single plumes, and relate our numerical results (of single plumes) to a
simple analytical model for plume evolution.

1. Introduction

The phenomenology of mixing due to the Rayleigh-Taylor instability, the instability
of an interface separating ﬂuids of diﬀerent densities subject to gravity (Chandrasekhar
(1961) and references therein), can be summarized as follows: Bubbles (spikes) of lighter
(heavier) ﬂuid penetrate into the heavier (lighter) ﬂuid, and leave behind them a region
of mixed ﬂuid. As the instability enters the nonlinear regime, ﬂuid motions in this mixing
region become highly irregular. The envelope, or edge, of the mixing region is observed
to be deﬁned by fast large-scale motion, which tend to be dominated by the merging of
expanding smaller bubbles (spikes). The irregular ﬂuid motions within the mixing zone
are often regarded as “turbulent” in the sense that the ﬂow is chaotic in the wake of the
bubbles (spikes).

A principal focus of experimental and theoretical study has been the general prop-
erties of this mixing zone, whose broadening in time is commonly characterized by the
“envelope velocity” (Ve) and the penetration lengths hb and hs (for bubbles and spikes,
respectively). Using simple analytical models for the interpenetration of the two ﬂu-
ids, one can show (Youngs (1984) and references therein) that in the nonlinear regime
Ve is proportional to time (t), and that the penetration depths hb,s are proportional
to t2 and depend linearly on the gravitational acceleration g and the Atwood number A
[≡ (ρ1 −ρ2)/(ρ1 +ρ2), where ρ1,2 is the density of the heavier (lighter) ﬂuid, respectively],
i.e.,

378

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

hb,s = αb,sgAt2 .
α can be thought of as a measure of the eﬃciency of potential energy release; experimental
measurements of α give results in the range of 0.03 ∼ 0.06 (see Sharp (1984), Read (1984)
and Youngs (1984)). Most recently, Schneider et al. (1998) show that α lies in the range
of 0.05 ∼ 0.06 for an Atwood number of 0.34; as the Reynolds number is high (∼ 105)
in these Linear Electric Motor (LEM) experiments, the instability enters the nonlinear
regime within several e-folding times (∼ 0.9 ms), so that the above scaling law seems to
hold from the time that the ﬁrst few measurements of mixing zone width are made.

(1.1)

There are many possible reasons for the observed variation of α found in the literature,
when scaling of the form Eq. (1.1) is observed during the experiment or simulation. Set-
ting aside problems such as incompletely controlled experiments or insuﬃciently resolved
computations, it is important to establish whether the nonlinear (long-time) evolution
of the instability is sensitive to details in the experiment such initial conditions; and to
what extent one can really talk about universal scaling of the mixed layer width. These
questions have been addressed to some extent in the literature. For example, Youngs
(1991) has studied the variation of α with time during the course of R-T evolution; he
reported that larger values of α ∼ 0.06 occur during the early phase of the 3-D prob-
lem, before any development of small-scale turbulence; however, as small-scale motions
develop, Youngs (1991) reports that the 3-D growth rate slows to that characteristic of
the 2-D case (α ∼ 0.04). It is also found that α may depend on the Atwood number A as
A → 1 (G. Dimonte, private communication). In a variation on this theme, it has been
observed in simulations that α can depend on dimensionality: α for three-dimensional cal-
culations is found to be larger than from 2-D simulations. Sakagami & Nishihara (1990)
have found α for three-dimensional calculations to be at least 4 times higher than for 2-D
simulations (in spherical systems); and more detailed phenomena can be found in Yabe
(1991), Li (1993) and He (1999). Town & Bell (1991) found larger values for α in 3-D only
during the early nonlinear stage, and showed that as small scale 3-D turbulence devel-
oped, the 3-D growth slows to that of the 2-D case, similar to results reported by Youngs
(1991). Other 3-D numerical simulations, including investigations of single-mode initial
perturbation (Dahlburg & Gardner (1990), Tryggvason & Unverdi (1990), Kane & Arnett
(1998)) and more general initial perturbations (Cook (1998)), obtain a range of values
for α generally restricted to 0.05 ∼ 0.06. In this paper we also explore the dependence
of the RT instability on dimensionality. We focus on quantitative comparisons between
two and three dimensions, and these comparisons provide more complete insights to the
understanding of RT instability. In the case of experiments conducted with gases, it has
also been shown that the interface perturbation growth can be measurably aﬀected by
mass diﬀusion eﬀects between the two layers Duﬀ et al. (1962). These experimental and
computational results argue strongly that the precise value of α is sensitive to a variety
of details in the experiments, ranging from the speciﬁc nature of the initial state to the
dimensionality of the perturbation. It is the aim of this paper to initiate a study of this
issue: In this paper we consider some of the eﬀects which inﬂuence the actual value of
the scaling coeﬃcient α as the Rayleigh-Taylor instability develops in time; a central
question we address is whether a single scaling regime is always to be expected during
the course of non-linear Rayleigh-Taylor development.

In order to make our study more tractable, we have focused only on the low Atwood
number regime. The advantage of this regime is that numerical techniques developed
for incompressible ﬂows can be readily applied to ﬂows satisfying the Boussinesq equa-
tions; such computations are substantially more economical than calculations of the fully

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

379

compressible problem, and thus allow a more extensive exploration of the parameter
space other than Atwood number. Physically, our calculations correspond to, for exam-
ple, cases in which the density contrast is introduced by the distribution of a scalar ﬁeld
(e.g., salt or temperature), for which the Atwood number is usually small because the
density varies weakly with the scalar “concentration”. Species or temperature diﬀusion
occurs in such systems, and is therefore included in our simulations; we are therefore
considering the miscible version of the Rayleigh-Taylor instability; in this Boussinesq
approximation, the Atwood number A → 0 and yet gA is a ﬁnite constant. An essential
element in computations in this regime is that the calculations remain fully resolved
throughout the evolution of the instability. This important constraint limits the range
of allowable Prandtl number P r (ratio of viscosity to thermal diﬀusivity) or Schmidt
number Sc (ratio of viscosity to species diﬀusivity) in our calculations; we typically take
these ratios to be of order unity. Tryggvason (1988) and Aref & Tryggvason (1989) have
adopted similar ideas in their earlier studies of immiscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability;
however, in their case, the density is not coupled to a scalar ﬁeld, and the buoyancy term
in the Boussinesq Navier-Stokes equations (induced by the sharp density gradient across
the interface) is the only term related to the weak stratiﬁcation.

There are unfortunately few experimental studies of this regime: Linden et al. (1994)
have studied the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability experimentally, and via simulations.
In their experiments, they place a layer of brine above a layer of fresh water, separated
by an aluminum barrier. The experiment is initiated by sliding the barrier horizontally
through one sidewall; the Atwood numbers in their experiments are in the range of 10−3 ∼
10−2 (as the density contrast due to the brine concentration is small when compared to
the ambient density) and the Schmidt number Sc is ∼ 103. Their experimental estimates
for α are around 0.044. Linden et al. (1994) also performed numerical simulations for an
Atwood number A = 0.2, and (numerical) Schmidt number of order unity. After imposing
various perturbations at the interface, and determining α as a function of the ratio of the
initial displacement of the ﬂuid to the perturbation wavelength, they concluded that the
smaller this ratio is, the higher the value of α. These authors argued that the removal
of the barrier in the experiment corresponds to a long wavelength perturbation at the
interface, and therefore the comparison between numerical simulation and experiments
makes sense only if the long wavelength perturbation is included as part of the initial
perturbation in the simulation. By implication, they thus suggest that the value of α
obtained even in the long-time limit can depend on the initial conditions; in other words,
these systems have long-term memory that is not erased by turbulent motions within the
mixing interface. The dependence of RT instability on the initial conditions has recently
been studied by Cook (2000). In this paper, we focus on a study of the physical eﬀects
which determin α, and in particular investigate eﬀects which lead to a departure from
simple t2 scaling of the mixing zone depth. A detailed study of the scaling law itself is
now in progress, and led by G. Dimonte (the α group).

Our paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst formulate the problem, outline the numer-
ics, and present evidence for the convergence and accuracy of our calculations. In the
following section (§ 3) we summarize our results for multi-mode interface perturbations.
We next discuss existing (analytical) models relevant to our studies (§ 4), which motivate
a synthesis of a new model; the following section (§ 5) we explore these ideas in more
detail via numerical studies of isolated plume evolution in both 2-D and 3-D. Our results
are discussed in § 6, while our conclusions are presented in § 7.

2. Formulation and Methods

380

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

2.1. Formulation of the problem

We consider two vertically stacked ﬂuid layers of diﬀerent density, governed by the Boussi-
nesq equations in a rectangular box (Chandrasekhar (1961)). We adopt periodic bound-
ary conditions along the horizontal directions; the top and bottom boundaries are no-ﬂux
and no-slip. Under the Boussinesq approximation, density variations only appear in the
buoyancy term, and are small when compared to the mean density. There are a vari-
ety of ways of achieving a small density jump across the horizontal inerface: one may
choose gasses of slightly diﬀerent mean molecular weight, or a single ﬂuid into which a
‘contaminant’ is added (such as temperature, sugar or salt in water) which changes the
ﬂuid’s density slightly. such vertical density variation depends linearly on temperature;
colder (heavier) ﬂuid sinks and warmer (lighter) ﬂuid ﬂoats as gravity points downwards.
Thus, in our formulation, the density jump across the interface is replaced by (for ex-
ample) a temperature diﬀerence: colder ﬂuid on top of warmer ﬂuid. The equations for
the miscible, incompressible, Rayleigh-Taylor instability in the Boussinesq limit are then
essentially the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations coupled to an advection-diﬀusion
equation for the ‘contaminant’, here temperature:

∂t~u + (~u · ~∇)~u = −~∇P + ν∇2~u + βg T ˆg,

∇ · ~u = 0,

∂tT + (~u · ~∇)T = κ∇2T,

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(ν is the kinematic viscosity, β is the volumetric expansion coeﬃcient, and κ is the thermal
diﬀusivity.) We remark that the initial, unperturbed temperature proﬁle diﬀuses on the
diﬀusion time scale. We further remark that one could alternatively treat the case of
weak stratiﬁcation via a vertically-imposed salinity (or any other type of concentration)
gradient; in this way, one is able to explore a wide range of Prandtl/Schmidt numbers.
There can be a variety of top and bottom boundary conditions for the scalars, such as
ﬁx values or ﬁx ﬂuxes at the boundaries. In our simulations, we adopt no-ﬂux boundary
conditions, which are typical in a run-down experiment. It is important to note here that
since our equations allow for temperature diﬀusion, they are equivalent to systems in
which the ‘contaminant’ is salt and allow for saline diﬀusion, or to systems describing
two miscible ﬂuids of slightly diﬀerent density and allow for mass diﬀusion.

In our simulations, we are interested only in regimes where the thermal diﬀusion time
is much longer than the dynamical time scales of interest. The reason for this constraint
is as follows: Unlike the case of immiscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability, the presence of
thermal diﬀusion formally does not allow for a static background temperature proﬁle prior
to any perturbation. Nevertheless, as we perturb the temperature at the interface, we
ﬁnd that if the diﬀusivity is suﬃciently small, then the initial growth of the perturbation
is exponential and thus mimics the linear regime in standard stability analyses for which
an initial static equilibrium exists. Thus, long thermal diﬀusion times are essential if
the dynamics is to be dominated by the Rayleigh-Taylor instability. The same kind of
argument applies in the saline case, or in the case where mass diﬀusion can occur. Thus,
we do not expect to see diﬀusion eﬀects as reported by Duﬀ et al. (1962); and our results
indeed show that at least in the linear regime, our growth rates are the same as in the
inviscid nondiﬀusive case.

Our problem is deﬁned by a number of distinct spatial and temporal scales: the pertur-
bation wavelength(s) λ (for single-mode perturbation) or spatial perturbation spectrum
(for multi-mode perturbation), the amplitude of the initial displacement of the ﬂuid at
the interface aλ, and the initial interface thickness d. Two timescales are of most inter-
ests here: the dynamical time deﬁned by the free-fall time and the scalar diﬀusion time.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

381

In the present study, we focus on cases where the dynamical time scale is much smaller
than the diﬀusion time scale. In this limit, the diﬀusive interface between the hot and
cold material remains more or less ﬁxed at width d throughout the evolution; the com-
putation’s spatial resolution is then required to at least resolve this interface throughout
the calculation. Furthermore, we impose perturbations of amplitude a such that a ≥ d in
order to capture the initial perturbation properly. Finally, the range of Atwood numbers
we explore is consistent with values obtained in laboratory experiments for the miscible
RT instability; and the ratio of viscosity to diﬀusivity is kept to values greater than or
equal to 1.

2.2. Numerics: methods and validation
We have used two distinct numerical codes to solve the above equations, based on our
desire to insure that our results are independent of the computational method used to
solve equations (2.1)-(2.3). We have compared both the mixing zone extent and the
evolution of ﬂuid structures (obtained from these two codes), as to determine the ﬁdelity
of our calculations: The two codes lead to results within expected range of errors for the
same initial conditions and boundary conditions.

Figure 1. Panel (a): Comparison between the spectral-element code (solid line) and the spectral
code (dashed line) for simulation of single mode perturbation at the interface. Plotted is the
mixing zone width h as a function of time τ . Panel (b): The spectral code shows exponential
convergence for a ﬁxed interface thickness of 0.15 in the single mode simulation. The error is
deﬁned as the deviation from the simulation with a resolution of 1024.

The ﬁrst code is based on the use of pseudospectral methods to simulate the RT in-
stability. The spatial discretization is Fourier in the periodic, horizontal directions and
Chebyshev in the gravitational direction. The temporal discretization is 3rd order Adams-
Bashforth for the nonlinear terms and Crank-Nicholson for the Laplacian terms. We use
Werne’s tau-correction scheme to achieve incompressibility (Werne (1995)); the code is
parallelized using MPI (Dubey & Clune (1999)), and has been run on the Cray-T3E su-
percomputer at PSC. The second code is based on the spectral element method (Tufo &
Fischer (1999)). It combines the spectral accuracy/eﬃciency and the geometric ﬂexibil-
ity of ﬁnite elements, and has been widely applied to a variety of problems. Figure 1 (a)
demonstrates the satisfactory agreement between the two codes. We plot the penetration
depth h of the single mode perturbation as a function of time τ . The solid line is from
spectral-element code, and the dashed line is from spectral code. The spectral resolution
is 256 by 512 and the spectral element code has an equival number of total grid points
for this comparison. The average diﬀerence in h is as small as 10−4. By comparing results
between spectral-element and spectral code, we have validated the usage of spectral code

382

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

N
7
9
11
13
15

E(t1)
1.11498657
1.11519192
1.11910382
1.11896714
1.11895646

error1
0.003963
0.003758
0.000153
0.000016
0.000006

errorg
0.313602
0.001820
0.004407
0.000097
0.000041

Table 1. Spatial convergence of the spectral-element code for the Orr-Sommerfeld problem:
K = 15, dt = .003125. E(t1) is the energy of the perturbation at t1 = 25.1437, the one period of
oscillation for the TS wave. error1 is the error in energy when compared to theory, and errorg
is the error in growth rate.

in this particular situation, where the small transitional region from one ﬂuid density
to another may undermine the spectral convergence. In addition to the code-code com-
parison, we have also performed standard convergence tests on the spectral code when
applied to the miscible RT simulation to assure ourselves of the spectral convergence with
the presence of a thin interface. We obtain the expected spectral convergence if the inter-
face is smooth and well resolved. The ideal density discontinuity (or, in our case, a sharp
temperature jump) cannot be resolved in spectral codes without special treatment; we
therefore use a hyperbolic tangent or an error function for the background temperature
ﬁeld to make sure that the initial temperature ﬁeld is smooth. From the smoothness of
the interface, we obtain spectral convergence as long as we resolve the interface. Figure
1 (b) shows the spatial convergence of the spectral code when we ﬁx the interface thick-
ness and use single mode perturbation as the initial condition. The convergence test for
the spectral element code is conducted separately for the Orr-Sommerfeld equation as
shown in table 1. The convergence is non-monotonic due to the fact that the growth rates
oscillate about the analytical value. However, spectral convergence is clearly attained.

Having demonstrated the validation of the spectral code, we present results from sim-
ulating the system with the spectral code in the rest of the paper. We adjust both the
resolution and the interface thickness so that there are enough grid points across the
background temperature proﬁle.

3. “Random” perturbations at the interface: 2-D versus 3-D

Figure 2. Initial random perturbation at the interface (z = 0.06). Panel (a) is the top view of
the perturbation and panel (b) is the power spectrum of the perturbation.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

383

In this section, we focus on the consequence of perturbing the interface with a spa-
tially randomized disturbance. The initial perturbation imposed at the interface in the
3-D simulation is shown in ﬁgure 2. This perturbation is the outcome of phase random-
ization of a spatial spectral distribution which peaks at k ∼ 8 and whose bandwidth is
approximately 4 centered at the peak. This initial perturbation has been deﬁned as one
of the canonical test problems of the “alpha group” collaboration (A. Cook & G. Di-
monte, private communication). The perturbation spectrum (ﬁgure 2 (b)) is designed so
that the fastest growing mode is well resolved for the given resolution (256 × 256 × 512).
The physical motivation for this initial condition is that we want to have “many” (for
our resolution, we have around 60 small plumes at the beginning), well resolved small
plumes seeded at the initial interface to study the mixing of the instability in details.
Later we also show that the growth rate of this mode (k ∼ 8) is close to the growth rate
for non-diﬀusive, inviscid ﬂuid (ﬁgure 9).

We place the position of the initial interface at z = 0.06 (−1 ≤ z ≤ 1), so that we can
compare the behavior of penetrating plumes as they approach the top and bottom walls
near the end of the simulations.† The corresponding initial temperature proﬁle used in
the 2-D simulations is taken from a planar cut through the 3-D initial proﬁle, e.g., the
y = 0 plane (T (x, y = 0, z)) (we also have conducted the 2-D simulations with other
planar cuts from the 3-D proﬁle and found no material diﬀerences). In all instances, we
treat the case ν = 10−3 and κ = ν.

3.1.1. Mixing zone width

3.1. Time evolution

We ﬁrst compare the 2-D and 3-D temporal evolution; the panels in ﬁgure 3 show the
2-D time evolution of the temperature, while ﬁgure 4 shows the time evolution of y = 0
slices from the 3-D simulations. Figure 5 provides the penetration depths as functions
of dimensionless time for 2-D and 3-D. (To scale our time according to Youngs’ time
scale (Youngs (1991)), we multiply t with (βg/l)1/2; thus τ ≡ (βg/l)1/2t, where l is the
half height of the box). The penetration depth is determined by measuring the distance
between boundaries of volume fraction of 1% of the hot ﬂuid and 99% of the cold ﬂuid.

† From our simulation, we conclude that the eﬀect of the top and bottom boundaries is not
important to the propagation of the mixing zone until the mixing zone width reaches ∼ 90% of
the box size.

384

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Figure 3. Time series of the temperature ﬁeld in a 1(x) by 2(z) box from the 2D simulations.
The interface between cold (black) and warm (white) ﬂuids is perturbed by the δT (x, y = 0)
slice taken from the spatially random disturbances in the 3D simulations.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

385

Figure 4. Time series of the temperature from the 3D simulations. The slices (T (x, y = 0, z))
are taken at the same times as those for the corresponding 2D frames (ﬁgure 3).

386

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Figure 5. Penetration depths from 2D (a) and 3D (b) simulations for the random perturbation
case. For the ascending structures, h is deﬁned as the maximum value where the temperature
reaches above 99% of the cold ﬂuid temperature. For the descending mixing zone boundary,
h is deﬁned as the minimum value where the temperature drops below 99% of the hot ﬂuid
temperature.

In ﬁgure 6 we show how h varies depending on diﬀerent volume cuts of hot and cold
ﬂuids, and we conclude that penetration depths are well deﬁned if the volume cuts
are narrower than 1 − 99% range, which is what we have adopted to calculate results
presented below. We plot the penetration depths against τ 2 instead of τ in order to
clarify the scaling behavior. For both 2-D and 3-D, h ∝ ατ 2 during early stage of the
evolution for 1.8 ≤ τ ≤ 4.4. The α for this period of time is ∼ 0.017 for the 2-D case,
and α ∼ 0.03 for the 3-D case. Thus, the 3-D mixing zone broadens much faster than its
2-D counterpart.

Figure 6. Penetration depths from 2D (a) and 3D (b) for diﬀerent volume cuts. The 2D curves
are from the ensemble average and show similar evolution as in ﬁgure 5(a). The diamonds are
for 0.5 − 99.5% volume cuts of hot-cold ﬂuids, the dashed lines are for 1 − 99% volume cuts, the
dash-dotted lines are for 3 − 97% volume cuts, and the dash-dot-dotted lines are for 5 − 95%.

We also observe that the scaling range 4 ≤ τ 2 ≤ 12 is twice the range found in Youngs’
work. The mixing zone ﬁlls the entire tank at around τ = 4.7 in our case, compared
to the values of 2.9 ∼ 3.1 from simulations with low Mach numbers and high Atwood
numbers in Youngs (1991). Finally, we observe that at time τ 2 ∼ 12, the increasing h
levels oﬀ; h then resumes τ 2 scaling at around τ 2 ∼ 16; we will discuss this phenomenon
in detail in the following subsection. We further remark that the alpha coeﬃcient for
both 2 and 3-D presented above is only for early evolution.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

387

3.1.2. 2-D ﬂows versus 3-D ﬂows: Finger geometry

In order to understand these results, we ﬁrst note that the structure of 2-D ﬁngers
(plumes) is horizontally stretched, whereas in 3-D, ﬁngers remain vertical until they
merge and form bigger plumes. This implies that the 2-D ﬂow has a signiﬁcantly larger
horizontal velocity component when compared to 3-D; we return to this observation
later when we discuss the evolution of single plumes. In both 2-D and 3-D, we ﬁnd one
large thermal pushing the envelopes at late times; however, in 3-D, we observe more
local, small-scale structures in the interior of the mixing region than in the 2-D case.
The large plumes push the edges of the mixing region, and dominate the expansion of
the mixing zone at late times. The interior of the mixing zone is also very diﬀerent
between 2-D and 3-D: In 2-D, the interior structure is dominated by the large plumes,
and therefore the general structure of the interior is simple. In 3-D, the interior is a
combination of boundaries between plumes, residuals of mergers, and the wake behind
the faster plumes; the interior of the 3-D mixing region is thus much more complicated
than that of the 2-D mixing zone. A simple quantitative measure of this diﬀerence in
structural complexity between 2 and 3-D can be constructed by measuring the stretching
of isothermal contours during the course of R-T instability. Thus, ﬁgure 7 shows the time
variation of the isothermal contour length (area) corresponding to T = 0 for 2-D (3-D).
The isothermal contour length is calculated as follows: we ﬁrst identify points on the
isothermal curves, we then calculate the length along the curve by linear interpolation
between points. Similar technique has been utilized to calculate the iso-surface in 3D.

Figure 7. Curvelengths of the isothermal contour (T = 0.0) for both 2D (a) and 3D (b).

Initially, the 2-D arclength increases much faster than the corresponding 3-D arclength;
this is because the 2-D isothermal contours are subject to horizontal stretching compara-
ble to their vertical stretching. At late times, however, the 2-D isothermal contour breaks
oﬀ into several connected contours, and thus a sharp decrease in the arc length results.
In the 3-D case, the arc length increases almost monotonically until a maximum value
is reached. This peak is due to the stretching by the shear ﬂow as the edge plumes push
the envelopes sideways. The break-oﬀ of this isolevel near the front explains the decrease
in the arc length at τ ∼ 4.2.

3.1.3. Energetics: 2-D versus 3-D

We now focus on the comparison between 2-D and 3-D energetics: We ﬁrst plot the ratio
of kinetic energy to potential energy available to the ﬂow as a function of time in ﬁgure
8. Our results show a remarkable feature: the 2-D nonlinear Rayleigh-Taylor instability is

388

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Figure 8. Ratio of kinetic energy to gravitational potential energy: 2D versus 3D. The kinetic
energy is the volume integral of the kinetic energy density, and the potential energy is the volume
integral of the potential energy available in the system. For τ ≤ 1.4, the growth is exponential
and is similar for both 2 and 3D, after this period, 2-D motions are much more eﬃcient in
extracting potential energy than 3-D motions.

more eﬃcient at extracting gravitational potential energy than its 3-D counterpart, yet
(as shown in §3.1), the 2-D mixing zone grows more slowly than its 3-D counterpart. As we
will show below, this apparent contradiction is resolved when one looks at how the kinetic
energy is partitioned. In Youngs (1991), Youngs found the two-dimensional ﬂow is less
dissipative than the three-dimensional ﬂow. In his simulations he found that the kinetic
energy reaches a maximum at τ ∼ 6 for both two and three dimensions. However, the 3-
D ﬂow is more “dissipative” and therefore the 3-D kinetic energy decreases signiﬁcantly
from the maximum after τ = 6. He also showed that in 3-D the diﬀerence between
potential energy and kinetic energy is greater than in 2-D. This is consistent with our
ﬁndings. Later we show the energy spectrum of the ﬂow inside the mixing zone from our
3-D simulations (ﬁgure 15). Similar energy spectrum can also be found in Youngs (1991).

Figure 9. Early evolution of the 3D random perturbation. The diamonds are data from the
numerical simulation. The solid line is the best ﬁt on the log-linear plot (for 0.28 ≤ τ ≤ 1.13),
and the duration of the linear growth is about 4 e-folding time with a grow rate of 8. The growth
rate obtained from the analytic results (n2 = gAk, with gA = 10 and k ∼ 8 from the power
spectrum of our initial perturbation at the interface), is 9.

In ﬁgure 9 we plot this energy ratio for the 3-D case at early times (the 2-D growth is
almost the same). The growth rate from ﬁgure 9 is ∼ 8, close to the growth rate (∼ 9) for

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

389

k = 8 (where the spatial perturbation spectrum peaks) from the analytic results for the
inviscid case (Chandrasekhar (1961)). Thus one concludes that the k = 8 mode dominates
the evolution of the initially randomly seeded perturbation. We also note that at around
τ ∼ 1.3, which is 6 e-folding times after the initiation of linear growth at τ ∼ 0.3, we
begin to observe saturation due to the nonlinear terms; this marks the beginning of the
nonlinear evolutionary stage. After this linear regime, the peak of the spectrum decreases
in amplitude and moves toward the small wavenumber end, an indication of formation
of large scales.

3.2. Average Quantities and the spatial structure of the mixing zone

3.2.1. Average Quantities

Here we focus on the evolution of the horizontally averaged quantities: the horizon-
tal components of the vorticities and the advective thermal ﬂuxes ~uT ; after horizontal
averaging, each of these quantities is only a function of the vertical coordinate (z) and
time (τ ). We note that the buoyancy ﬂux is the vertical component of the advective ﬂux,
while the buoyancy gradient is the vertical component of the advective thermal ﬂux.

First, we concentrate on the average horizontal components of the vorticity (ﬁgure 10).
The average of the horizontal vorticity is basically the vertical gradients of the horizontal
components of the velocity, as we adopt periodic boundary conditions in the lateral
directions. We note that the amplitude of the 2-D vorticity is almost 5 times larger than
that of the 3-D vorticity components. The evolution of the 2-D vorticity (panel (a)) is
indicative of the strong shear strength at the center of the mixing region. The patches
of interchanging shades of gray in the time-space plot of the 3-D vorticity components
indicate the merging events within the mixing region. We observe a similar pattern in
the plot of 2-D vorticity, but only at early times; at late times, the 2-D space-time plot
is more indicative of the roll-up of big thermals.

Figure 10. Horizontally averaged vorticity as functions of z and t. (a) is the 2D vorticity, (b)
is the mean horizontal 3D vorticities.

In ﬁgure 11 we show the time-space plot of the average advective thermal ﬂuxes in the
horizontal and vertical directions; the corresponding plots for 3-D are shown in ﬁgure
12. We note that in 2-D, the two ﬂuxes are comparable in amplitude, whereas in 3-
D, the horizontal advective ﬂuxes are of comparable amplitude yet are both smaller
than the vertical ﬂux (buoyancy ﬂux) by a factor of 5. This is a manifestation of the
fact that in 3-D, the ﬂow is dominantly in the preferred (i.e., vertical) direction, while
the corresponding ﬂow in 2-D is strongly sheared (and has comparable magnitude in
the horizontal and vertical directions). The space-time plots for the diﬀusive thermal

390

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

ﬂuxes basically reveal the same broadening structure of the mixing zone. The horizontal
components in 2-D and 3-D are comparable, and the 2-D vertical diﬀusive ﬂux is larger
than the 3-D vertical ﬂux, as found in the average advective ﬂuxes.

Figure 11. Average advective ﬂuxes (2D) as functions of z and t. (a) is the horizontal ﬂux
and (b) is the vertical (buoyancy) ﬂux.

Figure 12. Horizontally averaged advective ﬂuxes (3D) as functions of z and t. (a) is the
mean horizontal components and (b) is the vertical (buoyancy) ﬂux.

To brieﬂy summarize: We observe stronger 2-D vorticity generation compared to 3-D.
Consequently, we observe that the 2-D horizontal transport is much more eﬀective than
3-D. The relative eﬃciency of vertical advective transport to horizontal transport, in
contrast, is much higher in 3-D than that in 2-D.

3.2.2. Turbulence and mixing within the Mixing Zone

As shown in the time series for both 2 and 3-D, the spatial structure of the 2-D mixing
zone is relatively much simpler than 3-D: the 2-D mixing zone is dominated by one or two
big plumes while in 3-D the center of the mixing zone is full of small scale structures. This
is clearly manifested by the temperature ﬂuctuation probability distribution function
(PDF) within a thin horizontal slice of the 3-D mixing zone. In our analysis we ﬁnd a
thickness of ∆z = 0.06 (the initial interfacial thickness) suﬃces to provide good statistics
for the PDF. If we place this thin slice at the position of the initial interface, we ﬁnd the
PDF of the temperature ﬂuctuations (∆T ≡ T − T0) to be a gaussian centered at ∆T = 0
(ﬁgure 13). As we move this thin slice away from the initial interface, the PDF transitions

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

391

.001

−2

−1

0
T∆

1

2

Figure 13. PDF of the temperature ﬂuctuation (δT = T − T0) within the mixing zone
(∆z = 0.025) right at the position of the original interface (z = 0.06).

from a gaussian distribution to an exponential distribution (ﬁgure 14). Moving further

1.0

.1

F
D
P

.01

1.0

F
D
P

0.1

0.0

0.5

1.5

 2.0

1.0
T∆

Figure 14. PDF of the temperature ﬂuctuation (δT = T − T0) within the mixing zone
(∆z = 0.025) at z = 0.21.

than 1/3 of the mixing zone width from the center, the PDF of the thin slice transitions
again from an exponential distribution to a yet steeper distribution (more like a delta
function centered at either −2 or 2). The guassianity in the scalar PDF at the center of
the mixing zone (ﬁgure 13) implies turbulent mixing of the scalar near the center. For
the ﬂow inside the mixing zone, the direct evidence for turbulence is a −5/3 Kolmogorov
energy spectrum. Due to our numerical resolution (256 by 256 by 512) the scaling range
is small as shown in ﬁgure 15, where the energy spectrum shows an inertial range from
k ∼ 4 to k ∼ 18.

As we move from the center of the mixing towards the boundary, the exponential PDF
of the scalar at z = 0.5 implies that the ﬂow that mixes the scalar is dominated by
large scale. This indicates that, for the miscible RT instability and the parameters that
we explore, turbulent mixing exists only near the initial interface, and that most of the
mixing zone is still dominated by ﬁnger structures. These ﬁnger structures (plumes) near
the edge are responsible for the broadening of the mixing zone. As we will show in §5,
the propagation speed of a plume in an ambient environment is directly proportional to
its circulation. Also shown in §5 is that, if the drag is small, these plumes initiated by the
perturbation at the RT interface will be free falling (rising) without any turbulent scaling

392

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Figure 15. Energy spectrum of the ﬂow at the end of the simulatoin. The dashed line is the
Kolmogorov −5/3 scaling. The inset shows that the inertial range is from k ∼ 4 to k ∼ 20.

Figure 16. Average viscous dissipation rates as functions of z and t. (a) is the dissipation
rate due to the horizontal components of the ﬂow, and (b) is the vertical component.

involved. Furthermore, if the plumes pushing the edge of the mixing zone experience a
diﬀerent ﬂow in the background, we would expect a diﬀerent mixing zone broadening.
For example, if the horizontal components of the ﬂow are comparable to the vertical
component, we expect the propagation of the mixing zone to slow down. Therefore, the
transition of the ambient background ﬂows would serve as an indication of deviation from
the free falling phase of the mixing zone. In the next subsection we will provide evidence
for alteration of ﬂow patterns inside the mixing zone in the 3-D case. Combining all the
results, we are able to demonstrate the correlation between the transition of the interior
ﬂows and the transition of the mixing zone broadening.

3.3. Mixing Zone Broadening and the Internal Flow Structures

We now focus on the relationship between the propagation of the mixing zone and the
internal ﬂow structures at around τ 2 = 10 in the 3-D case. In ﬁgure 16 we show the
average horizontal and vertical components of viscous dissipation rate: the horizontal
component is simply ν(u1∇2u1 + u2∇2u2)/2 and the vertical component is ν(u3∇2u3).
In ﬁgure 17 we show the ratio of the volume integral of these two components.

Some observations from these results can help us gain insight into the mixing zone
evolution: we note that average buoyancy ﬂux (panel (b) in ﬁgure 12) reaches maximum
at τ ∼ 2.3, while the average vertical component of the dissipation rate (panel (b) in

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

393

o
i
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
i
s
s
i
d
 
s
u
o
c
s
i
v

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

5

10

τ 2

15

20

Figure 17. Ratio of the volume integrated viscous dissipation rates as a function of time (τ ):
the horizontal component of the dissipation rate to the vertical component.

ﬁgure 16) reaches maximum around τ ∼ 2.8. Right after τ = 2.8, we observe generation
of vorticity inside the mixing zone, as shown in panel (b) in ﬁgure 10. Moreover, the
horizontal component of the advective ﬂuxes (panel (a) in ﬁgure 12) starts to develop
structures around τ = 2.8 as well.

We can now summarize the evolution of the 3-D RT instability as follows: As the
interfacial random perturbations initiates some circulation (small vortices), the seeded
vortices increase in strength and begin free falling, accelerated by the density contrast
across the interface (as we discuss further below). This is the free-falling phase, where the
mixing zone is expanding due to a constant acceleration at the boundaries, and inside
the mixing zone, the interaction between vortices is not strong enough to alter the free
falling dynamics. At τ 2 ∼ 8, the dissipation rate begins to increase at a lower rate as a
result of increasing mixing inside the mixing zone. The development of structures is most
vigorous as the horizontal ﬂow is enhanced and the viscous dissipation rate plateaus at
τ 2 ∼ 10. Hence we mark τ 2 = 10 as the beginning of the mixing phase. From ﬁgure 17,
we also observe that the end of the mixing phase can be identiﬁed at τ 2 ∼ 16, when
the viscous dissipation rate resumes positive growth. The existence of this mixing phase
also manifests itself in the potential energy release rate and the kinetic energy partition
(ﬁgure 18). The potential energy release rate is deﬁned as the volume-averaged, vertical
advective ﬂux as follows:

wT d3x = ∂t ZΩ

ZΩ

zT d3x + κT |z=1

z=−1.

(3.1)

(We have utilized no-ﬂux boundary conditions in deriving the above equation.) The last
term on the right hand side is negligible for small κ, as the temperature diﬀerence is
always of order one in our simulation. In panel (a) of ﬁgure 18, we observe just before
the beginning of the mixing phase, the potential energy release rate reaches a plateau.
In panel (b), the partitions of kinetic energy remain more or less constant throughout
the mixing phase, after which they resume their original direction of varion with time.
Thus we conclude that this mixing phase (10 ≤ τ 2 ≤ 16) is a regime where horizontal
components amplify and the lateral transport is also enhanced in the ﬂow. After this
stage, the boundary of the mixing zone is not pushed outward by a collection of plumes
of the smaller sizes as in the free-falling phase, but by a small number of big plumes that
manage to survive the mixing phase and expand in size as they propagate outwards. It is
therefore important for us to understand the evolution of plumes and their propagation
in various kinds of ambient background ﬂows.

394

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Figure 18. Panel (a): Volume-averaged advective ﬂuxes as a function of time. Panel (b): Par-
tition of kinetic energy as functions of time. The solid line in panel (b) is the partition of the
kinetic energy in the vertical direction and the dashed line is along the horizontal directions.
The dash-dotted line is the normalized kinetic energy as a function of time.

We also note that, based on our discussion, we expect to see departures from simple τ 2
scaling only when the dynamics is dominated by a small number of (larger) plumes. As a
consequence, the aspect ratio of the experimental domain can be decisive in determining
whether such departures are actually observed: as the height-to-width ratio decreases,
we expect to see departures from τ 2 scaling at later and later times, so that plumes may
begin to interact with the box walls before such departures can be observed. Thus we
conclude that the dynamics and evolutions of single ﬁngers (plumes) are important to
the broadening of the mixing zone in both 2-D and 3-D RT instability. In the following
sections, we ﬁrst discuss RT models based on the point sources and interactions between
each source. We will introduce the buoyancy-drag plume model in the context of the
existent point source models, and uncover the connections between these models based
on the physical grounds.

4. Models for RT instability

Early analytic work on modeling the mixing zone broadening goes back to Fermi
(1951) (see also Sharp (1984)); more recent models can be found in Alon, Shvarts &
Mukamel (1993) and Alon et al. (1994). From the numerical simulations of the random-
perturbation cases, we observe that plumes near the edge of the mixing zone are re-
sponsible for the broadening. We also observe that for the parameters we adopt for our
simulations, the interior ﬂow of the mixing zone is not homogeneous and is not isotropic.
Instead, the ﬂow pattern inside the mixing zone has a preferred direction associated with
the plume structure inside the mixing zone and cannot be described as fully-developed
turbulence. Motivated by these observations, we focus on RT models that do not require
the existence of turbulence to achieve the free-fall scaling. We ﬁrst brieﬂy summarize two
such models for immiscible RT instability: the ﬁrst is for strongly stratiﬁed RT instabil-
ity (A = 1); the second is for weakly stratiﬁed RT instability (A → 0). The similarities
between these two models (as will be shown) lead one to conjecture that there may exist
a point-source model that incorporates both limits. Indeed, the long-existing buoyancy-
drag model, often used in modeling thermals or plumes, seems to capture the essential
physical features in both models; and we will argue that this model provides an adequate
framework for capturing the essential physics of nonlinear RT instability. We will discuss
this third model at the end of this section.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

395

4.1. Two models: Bubble competition model (A = 1)
and Point source model (A → 0, Ag ﬁxed).
Zuﬁria’s bubble competition model (Zuﬁria (1987)) assumes a 2-D potential ﬂow model
with an Atwood number of 1. In essence, this model is an extension of Wheeler’s model
(Sharp (1984)) to the strongly stratiﬁed limit. The model consists of variables that quan-
tify the internal potential ﬂow within each bubble (point source inside the bubble) and
the distances of the source of the internal ﬂow to the bubble boundaries (radii of cur-
vature of the bubble). For a system of 20 bubbles at the beginning, an estimated range
0.04 ≤ α ≤ 0.07 is obtained from this model.

A diﬀerent model for 2-D inviscid, but weakly stratiﬁed RT instability, is given by Aref
& Tryggvason (1989). This model focuses on the Boussinesq limit, i.e., A → 0 and Ag re-
mains constant. Following Tryggvason (1988), the inviscid 2-D Boussinesq RT instability
is formulated in terms of vortex sheet strength across the density interface. Vortex sheet
strength, deﬁned as the diﬀerence of the tangential velocity along the interface per unit
length, is driven by the density contrast across the interface. In their model, they are able
to capture the complicated vortex pair evolution with a simple evolutionary equation for
the circulation per arc length. They also successfully extend the single vortex pair model
to multi vortex pair systems, and the initial linear growth rate from their model is in fair
agreement with the analytic results.

4.2. Relating the models: The buoyancy-drag model
As pointed out by Aref & Tryggvason (1989), their vortex model is similar to the bubble-
competition model: the point source in the bubble model corresponds to the point vortices
in the vortex model, and the radii of curvature of the bubble correspond to the vertical
coordinates of the point vortices in the vortex model. The striking similarities stem from
the fact that bubbles, especially ones elongated in the stratiﬁed direction, have ﬂow
patterns that amount to a vortex ring near the elongated end and a point source inside
the bubble feeding the vortex ring. Therefore, the buoyancy-drag model used in modeling
plumes or thermals seems to be a natural candidate to connect the bubble picture, where
point sources are driven by a strongly stratiﬁed density contrast across the interface, to
the vortex picture, where the point sources are driven by inﬁnite gravitational acceleration
(with Ag constant).

The most simpliﬁed buoyancy-drag model (Lighthill (1986), Werne (1994)) describes

the propagation velocity (V ) of a plume as follows:

d(ρinV )
dt

= δρ αg − CDρoutV 2,

(4.1)

where αg is the eﬀective acceleration due to the buoyancy contained by the thermals to
drive the motion, δρ ≡ ρout − ρin is the density contrast between the inside and outside
of the thermals, and CD is the drag coeﬃcient which depend on the geometry of the
thermals and the ﬂuid viscosity. There are more elaborate forms of equation (4.1), such
as diﬀerent forms for CD, but the most essential feature is that if the correction term to
the constant acceleration is small when compared to the acceleration, free-fall scaling is
naturally obtained. Other variant forms of this simple model have been applied by Kane
& Arnett (1998) and Dimonte & Schneider (1999) for a variety of parameters such as
Atwood number and Mach number, and the value of α is claimed to be satisfactorily
in agreement with results from either experiments or numerical simulations. In the next
section, we perturb the RT interface with small, initial vortices: Such perturbations
generate single plumes expanding in size as they propagate away from the interface.
As will be shown, such plumes are well described by equation (4.1). By comparing the

396

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

propagation velocity with the circulation of the vorticity, we are able to connect the point
vortex model to the single plume model. We are also able to explain diﬀerences between
2-D and 3-D miscible RT instability (either the random cases in §3 or the single plume
cases in §5) by conducting simple energetic diagnostics on the single plumes.

5. The evolution of plumes

The above discussion of the buoyancy-drag model for the nonlinear development of
the Rayleigh-Taylor instability, and the observation of Rayleigh-Taylor “ﬁngers” in the
experiments (§3), strongly suggests an analogy between the ﬁnger structures in the mis-
cible version of the instability and the evolution of isolated thermals or plumes. These
latter structures have been investigated extensively in the past (Turner (1973)). Exper-
imentally, a bubble of hot ﬂuid is injected near the bottom of a container; the resulting
buoyant plume expands as it rises and moves away from the source. Moses, Zocchi &
Libchaber (1993) have explored various situations, which include injection of plumes
into a turbulent ﬂow. Experimental observations show that as a localized source of buoy-
ancy is injected into the ﬂuid, the resulting convection pattern consists of a cap which
forms at the outwards propagating front, and a stem which connects the cap and the
local source (Moses, Zocchi & Libchaber (1993)). In the case of the miscible RT insta-
bility, the perturbation at the interface serves equivalently as an injection of buoyancy
sources (or sinks) into colder (hotter) ﬂuids. The early development of the perturbation
then resembles a collection of plumes going up and down from the interface (ﬁgure 19).

Figure 19. Plume structures at the early development of miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability.
Initially a layer of cold ﬂuid (black) is on top of a layer of warm ﬂuid (white), and a random
perturbation is imposed at the interface.

As shown in this ﬁgure, each rising and falling bubble has a well-deﬁned cap and a
stem connecting the cap to the root at the interface, consistent with expectations for the
behavior of plumes.

We have numerically simulated plumes which are initiated by perturbing a Rayleigh-
Taylor interface with a vortex pair in 2-D or a single vortex ring in 3-D. Our interest is
primarily in plume propagation, the temporal development of the detailed geometry of
the plumes, the dynamics and energetics of the plumes, and the dimensionality of the
plumes. We remark in passing that 2-D plumes are referred to as planar vortex pairs in
three dimensions, i.e., three-dimensional plumes in which all motions are restricted to lie
in parallel, vertically-oriented planes.

In the following, we ﬁrst establish a connection between miscible RT vortex pairs and
the immiscible version (Tryggvason (1988)) by comparing the dynamics and the detailed

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

397

Run number βg ν × 103 κ × 103

1
2
3
4
5

2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5

0.5
1
1
0.5
1

a

d
0.1 0.14
0.1 0.14
0.1 0.14
0.1 0.11
0.1 0.11

aspect ratio
0.2 : 1
0.2 : 1
0.2 : 1
0.2 : 1
0.2 : 1

0.5
1
0.5
0.5
1

Table 2. Parameters for single plume simulations; d is the interface thickness, and a is the
amplitude of the perturbation.

vortex structures. We then present results of two-dimensional simulations (with param-
eters listed in Table 2), and then go on to compare these results with the corresponding
results for three-dimensional calculations. The parameters for our single plume simu-
lations are listed in Table 2. The 2-D plumes are planar, while the 3-D plumes have
cylindrical geometry. The initial perturbation imposed at the interface is a Gaussian
wave packet with amplitudes listed in Table 2.

5.1. 2-D single plumes

5.1.1. Connection to weakly stratiﬁed, immiscible R-T instability

Tryggvason (1988) utilized the vortex sheet strength to describe the evolution of single
mode perturbations in 2D immiscible RT instability. In the case of miscible R-T insta-
bility, one can construct a family of isothermal contours due to the diﬀusivity; we can
monitor the evolution of single plumes by evaluating various quantities (such as vortic-
ity, thermal ﬂux) on the isothermal (or, in Boussinesq ﬂuids, isodensity) contours. As

Figure 20. 2D vorticity contour plot (panel (a)) and the value of various physical quantities
along the T = 0.75 isothermal curve (panel (b)). In panel (b), vorticity (ﬁrst plot), the projection
of the thermal gradient on the isocurve (second plot), the horizontal heat ﬂux (third plot) and
the vertical heat ﬂux (fourth plot) are evaluated along the isocurve. For illustration, we place
numbers along the isocurve to display the important spatial features related to the ﬂow pattern.

398

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

long as the structure of the isothermal contours remains relatively simple (as shown in
panel (a) of ﬁgure 20), we can gain some understanding of the structure of the buoyant
plumes by considering the evolution of various physical quantities along the isothermal
surfaces. Panel (a) shows the spatial structure of the planar vortex pair for the ﬁrst
set of parameters in Table 2. The roll-up structure is reminiscent of those observed in
the weakly stratiﬁed, immiscible R-T instability (Aref & Tryggvason (1989)). To make
complete comparison, we ﬁrst introduce the circulation (Γ) along some closed curve: The
circulation Γ, deﬁned as the line integral of the ﬂow along a closed curve,

is related to the evolution of vortex pair as follows:

Γ ≡

ZC

~v · d~l,

dΓ
dt

=

Z ZA

1
ρ

∇

× ∇p · dA,

(5.1)

(5.2)

where A is the surface enclosed by the curve C. In the case of weakly stratiﬁed Rayleigh-
Taylor instability (Aref & Tryggvason (1989)), the above relation is modiﬁed by replacing
the right-hand-side integral with the potential energy density due to the interfacial den-
sity contrast. The propagation velocity (V ) of the vortex pair in a nonstratiﬁed ﬂuid is
then related to the circulation Γ as

V = Γ/η,

(5.3)

where η is basically the correlation length for vortices, and is a function of geometry
and dimensionality: one expects η for 2-D vortex pairs to be larger than for 3-D vortex
rings. Equation (5.3) is valid even in the case of weakly stratiﬁed R-T instability, where
vortices, originally initiated at the interface due to the density perturbation, propagate
in a uniform ambient background.

With equation (5.3), we can connect the bubble model to the point vortex model via
the buoyancy-drag plume model. To ﬁx ideas, we ﬁrst outline an evolutionary scenario
for the weakly stratiﬁed, miscible R-T instability: As we disturb the interface with some
temperature perturbation, vortices are generated as a result of lateral thermal gradient.
Thus some initial circulation is seeded inside the vortices and a propagation velocity is
acquired according to equation (5.3). The circulation then evolves according to equation
(5.2), and the propagation velocity is approximately given by equation (5.3) at each
time step for an updated circulation (Hill (1975)). We also observe that the acceleration
experienced by the vortex pair is proportional to the increase/decrease rate of change
of circulation Γ. Combining equations (5.2) and (5.3), we obtain the equation for the
acceleration for the planar vortex pair:

dV
dt

=

d(Γ/η)
dt

= gf (δρ, ˆs),

(5.4)

where g in equation (5.4) is the gravitational acceleration, and f is a function of density
contrast (δρ) and geometry of the interface (unit tangent vector along the interface ˆs).
For point vortices (Aref & Tryggvason (1989)), f = ˆg · ˆs where ˆg is the unit vector
along the gravitational direciton and ˆs is the unit tangent vector along the interface. In
our case, we expect f to be a constant (eﬀective acceleration) plus some correction term
due to viscous drag. This expectation rises from two facts: The ﬁrst is the observation
that the plume consists of a vortex pair inside the cap and a ﬂow sustaining the vortex
structure (the neck connecting the cap to the stem). Therefore, we expect the dynamics
of the vortex pair to be similar to the plume dynamics. The second fact is that the

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

399

Figure 21. Circulation Γ (along the T = 0.7 isothermal contour) and the propagation of a
2-D single plume. In panel (a), the solid line is from the simulation, and the dashed line is the
τ 2 ﬁt. In panel (b), the solid line is from the simulation, the dashed line is the τ 2 ﬁt, and the
dash-dotted line is the ﬁt to the single plume model.

propagation of buoyant plumes (not sustained by a constant source) in a homogeneous
ﬂuid is described by the buoyancy-drag model (equation 4.1), where the constant density
diﬀerence across the plume boundary provides buoyancy acceleration, and the viscous
drag experienced by the plume causes a deceleration. To be more speciﬁc, we expect f
to take the following form:

f = α + γ(ν, δρ, V ),

(5.5)

where the “constant” α may depend on the dimensionality and the initial perturbation,
and the correction terms are included in the function γ (a function of viscosity ν, the
propagation velocity V and the density diﬀerence δρ). If γ is chosen to be proportional to
−V 2 as in Werne (1994), the propagation velocity will reach a constant terminal velocity
(V = Vf is a constant) after a free falling period (V ∝ t and h ∝ t2).

To fully establish the correspondence between the immiscible point vortex model and
the miscible plume model, we calculate the circulation Γ along isothermal contours (not
necessarily closed) in our 2-D simulations. Figure 21 (a) shows the temporal evolution
of Γ along T = 0.7, and during 0.7 < τ < 2.1, we ﬁnd Γ to be proportional to τ 2.
Comparing with ﬁgure 21 (b), we note that this duration coincides with the free falling
phase when h scales to τ 2. This is similar to what is observed in Aref & Tryggvason
(1989): the propagation of the 2-D vortex pair is free-falling at the beginning, and it
decelerates due to the decrease of available potential energy per unit arclength as the
rollup continues (and also due to diﬀusion and viscous dissipation in our case) - thus
the decrease in circulation inside the vortex pair. We also note that, the constant initial
acceleration rate of Γ even in the miscible case indicates that the initial circulation is
due to the buoyancy-driven ﬂow around the cap head. As the circulation increases, drag
becomes important and the circulation saturates to a maximum. The circulation then
decreases at late times due to the strong enhancement of the horizontal motion, which is
typical of 2-D ﬂow and less so in 3-D ﬂow (we will discuss this diﬀerence later). We should
point out here that, despite the similarities already presented between point-vortex model
and plume model, there exists an essential diﬀerence: the plume has a stem structure
associated with the circulation around the neck, which closely resembles the ﬂow in the
vicinity of RT “ﬁngers”. Our future research problem is to understand how the presence
of multiple plumes aﬀects the circulation near the necks; this will be an important future

400

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

step in connecting these models to the RT ﬁnger evolution in more vigorous ﬂows (higher
Reynolds numbers).

We are now ready to compare the vortex structure between the miscible R-T insta-
bility and the immiscible version. From panel (b) of ﬁgure 20, we obtain the following
observations:
(1) The vorticity vanishes at the tip of the cap head. This implies that the ﬂow near the
cap is essentially irrotational, and explains why the potential ﬂow assumption adopted in
the derivation of the cap shape by Lighthill (1986) (see also Moses, Zocchi & Libchaber
(1993)) works so well in describing the head shape. This is also consistent with results
for the weakly stratiﬁed, inviscid R-T instability (Aref & Tryggvason (1989), Tryggvason
(1988)).
(2) The vorticity reaches extrema near the neck of the plumes, i.e., near the part of the
plume which connects the stem and the cap head; this is the location where circulation
is most vigorous. This is also consistent with the fact that circulation reaches extremum
at the inﬂection points along the interface (Aref & Tryggvason (1989)).
(3) The amplitude of the thermal gradient reaches extrema either near the cap heads or
near the neck of the plumes. This is consistent with the previous observation, because the
larger the thermal gradient is, the larger the rate of circulation is, and thus the vorticity
reaches extrema at these points.

5.1.2. Dynamics and energetics of 2-D plumes

In this subsection, we study the details of the single plume structures to uncover the
physical ingredients essential to model the RT ﬁngers. As in the point vortex model, we
ﬁnd the evolution of arclength of isothermal contour to be indicative of the detailed evolu-
tion of the plume structures. Here we ﬁrst focus on the evolution of the isolevels associated
with single plumes. Secondly we explore the dependence of the single plume evolution on
the various parameters such as the amplitude of the perturbation, the Reynolds number
and the Prandtl number.

Figure 22. Ampliﬁcation of arc length as a function of time for 15 diﬀerent isolevels (2D).

Figure 22 is an example of how the arc length evolves as a function of time for diﬀerent
levels from the 2-D simulation (run number 4 in Table 2). These are the time evolution of
arc length for 15 diﬀerent isothermal contours. These various evolutions in the isothermal
contours can shed light on the detailed, local structure of the ﬂuid. First we observe that,
among all the 15 curves, curve 11 (T = −0.4) has the longest curve length. Curves 1−6 in
ﬁgure 22 correspond to isolevels near the boundary between the plume and the ambient
ﬂuids. Before τ ∼ 1.0, the ﬂow inside the plume pushes these levels upward as the

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

401

plume rises. From τ ∼ 1.0 on, these contour levels begin to catch up with the ascending
boundary of the plume to the heavy ﬂuid, and the level sets break up into several smaller
connected loops. After this event (at τ ∼ 1.4), the plume has established its own shape
and the cap propagates in a shape-preserving fashion. At time 1.7 < τ < 2.1, small
vortex pairs near the original interface begin to roll up to bigger vortex pairs and thus
the increase in arc length. Curves 7 − 11 represent transition contours inside the plume.
The sudden drop at τ ∼ 2.1 correspond to the shedding of smaller vortex pairs. Curves
12 − 15 represent the evolution of the levels near the boundary of the ascending plumes,
and peaks in each curve represent break-oﬀs of isolevel curves.

We now focus on how the penetration depth h grows in time, and how this temporal
evolution depends on various control parameters in the simulations. Figure 23 shows
curves of h versus τ for our 2-D simulations. We ﬁrst note that at early time, the ascending
h (top panel of ﬁgure 23) does scale with τ 2 from τ 2 ∼ 0.2 to τ 2 ∼ 3.0. After τ 2 = 3.0, the

Figure 23. Penetration depth versus τ 2 for the 2D single plumes. The top panel is for the
ascending boundary and the bottom panel is for the descending boundary. The numbers are the
run numbers listed in Table 2.

plumes have reached a terminal velocity and therefore travel at a constant speed, which
is often observed in plumes without sustaining sources. We further note that the higher
the Reynolds number, the faster the plume penetrates (cf. curve 1 and curve 2). We
also observe faster penetration as we increase the diﬀusivity ratio (ν/κ) (cf. curve 2 and
curve 3), which is a direct result of weaker stabilization for smaller diﬀusivity. We have
also varied the initial perturbation amplitude (cf. curves 1 and 4, and curves 2 and 5):
For perturbation of amplitude below 8% of the total box height, we ﬁnd that the larger
the initial perturbation, the faster the plume penetrate. The penetration depth depends
linearly on the initial amplitude until τ ∼ 1.4, where nonlinearity may have set in to
amplify the dependence on the initial state (cf. curve 2 and curve 5). We also note that the
penetration of the heavy ﬂuid into the light ﬂuid remains more or less similar as we vary

402

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

these parameters. The strong dependence of the ascending structure on the parameters is
not reﬂected on the dynamics of the descending structures. This demonstrates that, with
this form of initial perturbation, the ascending structures have diﬀerent dynamics than
the descending structures despite the low Atwood number adopted under the Boussinesq
approximation. This is certainly not the case if we perturb the interface with symmetric
disturbances.

5.2. Comparison between 2-D and 3-D plumes

Figure 24. Comparison of 2D (panel (a)) and 3D plume (panel (b)) structures: geometric
shape. The solid line is the T = 0.7 isothermal contour.

In this section we present results from simulations of both 2-D and 3-D single plumes
for the ﬁrst set of parameters in Table 2. The diﬀerences between 2-D and 3-D plumes
are manifested in various aspects. In ﬁgure 24 we display the plume structures (at the
same penetration depth) in both 2-D and 3-D. We also compute various quantities along
the isothermal contours, and basically the same spatial structures are found in the 3-
D plumes: the vorticity goes to zero at the cap head, the maximum circulation occurs
around the neck, and positions of where temperature gradient have extrema are also
points where the vorticity have extrema. The only discernible diﬀerence between 2-D and
3-D is the magnitude: the 3-D thermal gradient has higher maximum at the cap head,
and the advective heat transport (both vertical and horizontal components) in 3-D is
much smaller compared to the 2-D heat transport. The latter (diﬀerence in the eﬃciency
of heat transport) explains the thinning of the 2-D stem as opposed to a constant width
of the 3-D stem observed in our simulations. From our simulations, we also conclude
that, for the same parameters, the cylindrically symmetric plumes (our 3-D plumes)
travel much faster than the planner plumes (our 2-D plumes). As seen in ﬁgure 25, the
penetration depth in 3-D increases faster with time than in the 2-D case, and eventually
reaches almost 2 times the 2-D penetration depth at the end our our simulations. In order
to understand this diﬀerence, we have calculated the temporal evolution of the ratio of
total kinetic energy to the potential energy, and the partition of kinetic energy (which
we break up into its two components, namely the total kinetic energy associated with

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

403

Figure 25. Penetration depth (panel (a)) and the arclength of T = 0 isothermal curve (panel
(b)): 2D (dashed lines) versus 3D (solid lines).

Figure 26. Panel (a): Ratio of total kinetic energy to total potential energy available in the
system as a function of τ . Panel (b): Vertical partition of the total kinetic energy and horizontal
partition of the kinetic energy as functions of τ . In both panels, we plot 2D (dashed lines)
together with 3D (solid lines).

vertical motions and with horizontal motions). Thus, in ﬁgure 26 (a) we plot the energetic
ratio versus τ , and show the evolution of the kinetic energy partition as a function of
time in ﬁgure 26 (b). First, we point out that the rate of conversion of potential energy
to kinetic energy is roughly the same in 2 and 3-D. Secondly, we note that partitioning of
the kinetic energy into horizontal and vertical components is diﬀerent in 2 and 3-D (with
a larger fraction of the kinetic energy going to horizontal motions in the 2-D case). Based
on these facts, we can now attribute the increased eﬀectiveness of plume penetration in
three dimensions to the fact that while more potential energy is released per unit time
in 2-D than in 3-D, the partitioning of the resulting kinetic energy into its components
drastically favors the directed vertical component in 3-D, but not in 2-D. into the vertical
component of the ﬂow kinetic energy, so that the 3-D plumes go faster and penetrate
deeper in the same amount of time than their 2-D counterparts.

5.3. Application of the single-plume model and future direction

We apply the plume model to our single plume simulations and ﬁnd “good” agreement
as we ﬁt the penetration depth h to the model (in the sense that the absolute error is less
than 1% over the whole evolution). A typical example is shown in ﬁgure 21(b), where the
dashed line is the least square ﬁt for the free-falling law, and the dash-dotted line is the

404

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

least square ﬁt for the plume model. We clearly see that the plume model captures the
whole evolution, and the deviation is small compared to the τ 2 ﬁt. When we apply the

Figure 27. The 3D random case revisited: the diamonds are from the simulations and the
dashed lines are the ﬁts of the analytic plume model to the data during the ﬁrst free-falling
phase.

plume model to the random case 27, the existence of three evolutionary phases prohibits
a physically meaningful ﬁt for the whole duration of the evolution, and a reasonably
good ﬁt is found for early evolution: 2.6 ≤ τ 2 ≤ 13.4, where the eﬀective acceleration
from this ﬁt is α ∼ 0.03. As shown in ﬁgure 27, the evolution deviates from the ﬁt at
τ 2 ∼ 11, right after the beginning of the mixing phase as discussed in §3. This is an
indication that the interaction of plumes with the background ﬂow is substantial enough
to arrest the free falling propagation of the mixing zone. To incorporate this interaction
with the background ﬂow into the single plume model, one needs an equation for the
energy evolution of the plume, and also an additional momentum term in equation 4.1 to
describe the momentum transfer between the horizontal motion and the vertical motion.
The interaction between plumes, such as merging, also has important contribution to the
evolution of plumes as they expand in size and getting closer to each other. This is a
challenging future direction and is currently under investigation.

6. Summary and Conclusions

We have performed numerical simulations in both 2-D and 3-D with relevant length
scales arranged such that the thickness of the interface between the two ﬂuids remains
the same throughout the simulations. We have found dramatic diﬀerences between 2-D
and 3-D ﬂows with the aid of average quantities.

We ﬁrst perturb the RT interface with “random” perturbations and investigate the
evolution of the mixing zone in both 2 and 3-D with the aid of averaged quantities.
Scaling of the mixing zone width with τ 2 is found in both 2 and 3-D, but only during
selected intervals of time. Moreover, we ﬁnd the 3-D mixing zone expands two times
faster than the 2-D mixing zone. An important ﬁnding in this respect is that we can
identify three phases of evolution for the 3-D mixing zone: the ﬁrst is the free-falling
phase right after the linear growth period (after 6 e-folding times, §3), the second is
the mixing phase where the free falling slows down and more mixing is generated as a
result of enhanced horizontal motions, as illustrated in §3; the third is another free falling
phase during which the broading of the mixing zone resumes the τ 2 scaling, when the big
plumes near the edge become decoupled from the mixing zone and propagate on their

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

405

own. Whether all of these phases are observed is likely to depend on the aspect ratio
of the experimental domain. In the 2-D single plume case, we explore the parameters
to demonstrate the eﬀect of initial conditions on the broadening of the mixing zone and
thus the eﬀective acceleration α. Through energetic analysis, we are able to attribute
the diﬀerence between 2 and 3-D ﬂows to the fact that in 2-D, more energy goes into
highly correlated horizontal and vertical motion (i.e., vortical motions) than into directed
motions along the gravitational direction (3-D).

We have discussed two analytic Rayleigh-Taylor models relevant to our computations
(the bubble-competition model (Zuﬁria (1987)) and the point-vortex model (Aref &
Tryggvason (1989)), which are eﬀectively two extreme limits of the 2-D incompressible
RT instability from the point-source point of view. The essential physical features found
in both models are also key constituents of the buoyant-drag plume model, in which
each single plume experiences an acceleration due to the density contrast, and also a
deceleration, which is due to a combination of viscous drag and the horizontal shear
ﬂows in the ambient background. We discuss how the plume model serves to connect the
two models on physical grounds, and point out that the plume model actually contains
more physical features, such as the coupling of the plumes with the mixing zone via the
interaction between a background ﬂow (inside the mixing zone) and ﬂows in the stems of
the plumes (whose heads are pushing the envelope of the mixing zone). Furthermore, we
show that for the miscible vortex pair, both circulation (Γ) and penetration depth (h)
scale with τ 2 for the same duration of time. This illustrates the close connection between
the plumes and the point vortex pairs. In addition, we also strengthen the connection by
comparing the evolution of RT interface in the miscible case with that in the immiscible
case. The extension of the single plume model to multi-plume systems is of great interest
and is now under investigation.

The success of the buoyant-drag model is an indication of the fundamental physical
ingredients of the RT instability. Each bubble can be considered as an internal point
source, and the curvature of the bubble evolves according to the internal source strength
and the relative position of the internal source to the bubble boundary. The internal point
source is fed by the ﬂow from below the bubble, namely the stem connecting the cap
head of the bubble. The coupling of the stem with the background ﬂow, then, determines
the strength of the internal source. All these features are ingredients of the plume model,
which is, strictly speaking, an empirical model for plumes in both laminar and turbulent
ﬂows. Therefore, we ﬁnd the buoyant-drag plume model to give an adequate description of
the various physical processes that we have observed. The extension of this single plume
model to incorporate the coupling of plumes, merger events, and the background ﬂow
interaction is challenging and will no doubt bring us more insight into the RT instability.

This work was supported as part of the validation program of the Center for As-
trophysical Thermonuclear Flashes, supported by the DOE/ASCI Alliances program at
the University of Chicago. We would like to acknowledge extensive discussions of the
Rayleigh-Taylor problem with N.J. Balmforth, J. Biello, A. Cook, G. Dimonte, B. Fryx-
ell and L. Howard. The motivation and stimulation were provided by the “alpha group”
project, led by G. Dimonte.

Aref, H. & Tryggvason, G. 1989 Model of Rayleigh-Taylor Instability Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,

749–752.

REFERENCES

406

Young, Tufo, Dubey, and Rosner

Alon, U., Shvarts, D. & Mukamel, D. 1993 Scale-invariant regime in Rayleigh-Taylor bubble-

front dynamics Physical Review E 48, 1008–1014.

Alon, U., Hecht, J., Mukamel, D. & Shvarts, D. 1994 Scale Invariant Mixing Rates of

Hydrodynamically Unstable Interfaces Physical Review Letters 72, 2867–2870.

Chandrasekhar, S. 1961 Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability (Clarendon, Oxford,

1961)

Cook, A. W. 1998 Numerical investigation of the scale similarity model for variable density

ﬂows J. Fluid Mech. accepted for publication.

Cook, A.W. 2000 Investigation of mixing eﬀects in incompressible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

Dahlburg, J.P. & Gardner, J.H. 1990 Ablative Rayleigh-Taylor instability in three dimen-

J. Fluid Mech. submitted for publication.

sions Phys. Rev. A 41, 5695–5698.

Dimonte, G. & Schneider, M. 1999 Density ratio dependence of Rayleigh-Taylor mixing for

sustained and impulsive acceleration histories Technical Report.

Dubey, A. & Clune, T. 1999 Optimization of a parallel pseudospectral MHD code Proceedings
of Frontiers, the seventh symposium on the frontiers of massively parallel computation,
1999.

Duff, R.E., Harlow, F.H. & Hirt, C.W. 1962 Eﬀects of Diﬀusion on Interface Instability

Between Gases Phys. Fluids, 5, 417–425.

Fermi, E. 1951 Taylor instability of an incompressible liquid The Collected Papers of Enrico

Fermi (edited by E. Segre) vol.2, pp. 816, 821.

He, X., Zhang, R., Chen S. and Doolen, G.D. 1999 On Three-dimensional Rayleigh-Taylor

Hill, F.M. 1975 A numerical study of the descent of a vortex pair in a stably stratiﬁed atmo-

instability Phys. Fluids, 11, 1143.

sphere J. Fluid Mech. 71, 1–13.

Kane, J. & Arnett, D. 1998 Scaling supernova hydrodynamics to the laboratory The Con-

ference Proceedings of the APS DPP98 meeting, Nov. 1998.

Li, X.L. 1993 Study of three-dimensional Rayleigh-Taylor instability in compressible ﬂuids

through level set method and parallel computatoin Phys. Fluids A, 5, 1904.

Lighthill, M. J. 1986 An Informal Introduction to Theoretical Fluid Mechanics. Oxford Uni-

versity Press.

Linden, P.F. & Redondo, J.M. and Youngs, D.L. 1994 Molecular mixing in Rayleigh-Taylor

instability J. Fluid Mech. 265, 97–124.

Moses, L., Zocchi, G. & Libchaber, A. 1993 An experimental study of laminar plumes

Read, K. I. 1984 Experimental investigation of turbulent mixing by Rayleigh-Taylor instability

J. Fluid Mech. 251, 581–601.

Physica 12 D, 45–58.

Sakagami, H. & Nishihara, K. 1990 Three-Dimensional Rayleigh-Taylor Instability of Spher-

ical Systems Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 432–435.

Schneider, M.B., Dimonte, G. & Remington, B. 1998 Large and Small Structure in

Rayleigh-Taylor Mixing Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3507–3510.

Sharp, D. H. 1984 An overview of Rayleigh-Taylor instability Physica 12 D, 3–18.
Town, R.J.P. & Bell, A.R. 1991 Three-dimensional simulations of the implosion of inertial

conﬁnement fusion targets Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1863–1866.

Tryggvason, G. 1988 Numerical simulations of the Rayleigh-Taylor instability J. Comput.

Phys. 75, 253–282.

Tryggvason, G. & Unverdi, O. 1990 Computations of three-dimensional Rayleigh-Taylor

instability Phys. Fluids A 2, 656–659.

Tufo, H. & Fischer, P.F. 1999 Fast parallel direct solvers for coarse grid problems J. Par.

Turner, J. S. 1973 Buoyancy Eﬀects in Fluids (University Press, Cambridge, 1973)
Werne, J. 1994 Plume Model for the Boundary-Layer Dynamics in Hard Turbulence Phys.

Dist. Comput. , accepted.

Rev. E 49, 4072.

Werne, J. 1995 Incompressibility and no-slip boundaries in the Chebyshev-tau approximation
- correction to Kleiser and Schumann inﬂuence-matrix solution J. Comp. Phys. 120, 260.
Yabe, T., Hoshino, H. and Tsuchiya, T. 1991 Two and three dimensional behavior of

Rayleigh-Taylor and Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities Phys. Rev. A, 44, 2756.

On the miscible Rayleigh-Taylor instability

407

Youngs, D. 1984 Numerical simulation of turbulent mixing by Rayleigh-Taylor instability Phys-

ica 12 D, 32–44.

Youngs, D. 1991 Three-dimensional numerical simulation of turbulent mixing by Rayleigh-

Taylor instability Phys. Fluids A 3, 1312-1320.

Zufiria, J. 1987 Bubble competition in Rayleigh-Taylor instability Phys. Fluids 31, 440–446.

