1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerical evidence of breaking
of vortex lines in an ideal ﬂuid

EVGENIY A. KUZNETSOV1,3, OLGA M. PODVIGINA2,3
& VLADISLAV A. ZHELIGOVSKY2,3

1L.D.Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics,
2 Kosygin str., 117334 Moscow, Russian Federation

kuznetso@itp.ac.ru

2 International Institute of Earthquake Prediction Theory

and Mathematical Geophysics,
79 bldg. 2 Warshavskoe ave., 113556 Moscow, Russian Federation;
Laboratory of general aerodynamics, Institute of Mechanics,
Lomonosov Moscow State University,
1, Michurinsky ave., 119899 Moscow, Russian Federation

3 Observatoire de la Cˆote d’Azur, CNRS UMR 6529,

BP 4229, 06304 Nice Cedex 4, France

Abstract Emergence of singularity of vorticity at a single point, not related to any
symmetry of the initial distribution, has been demonstrated numerically for the ﬁrst
time. Behavior of the maximum of vorticity near the point of collapse closely follows
the dependence (t0 − t)−1, where t0 is the time of collapse. This agrees with the
interpretation of collapse in an ideal incompressible ﬂuid as of the process of vortex
lines breaking.

1.

Introduction

The problem of collapse in hydrodynamics, i.e. of a process of sin-
gularity formation in a ﬁnite time, is essential for understanding of the
physical nature of developed turbulence. Despite a progress in construc-
tion of statistical theory of Kolmogorov spectra within both diagram and
functional approaches (see, e.g., Monin & Yaglom 1992; L’vov 1991 and
references therein), so far the question whether the Kolmogorov spec-
trum is a solution to the statistical equations of hydrodynamics remains
open. Another important problem, as yet unsolved, is the one of inter-
mittency. In statistical sense intermittency can be interpreted as a con-
sequence of a strongly non-Gaussian distribution of turbulent velocity,
resulting in deviation of exponents for higher correlation functions from
their Kolmogorov values (Frisch 1995). Non-Gaussian behavior implies

1

2

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

that odd correlation functions do not vanish; this indicates the presence
of strong correlations between velocity ﬂuctuations, suggesting existence
of coherent structures in turbulence. Analysis of both numerical and ex-
perimental data reveals (see Frisch 1995 and references therein) that
in the regime of fully developed turbulence distribution of vorticity is
strongly inhomogeneous in space – it is concentrated in relatively small
regions. What is the reason of this? Can such a high concentration be
explained by formation of singularity of vorticity in a ﬁnite time? How
can one derive from this hypothesis the Kolmogorov spectrum? This
it is well known that any singularity results
question is not rhetoric:
in a power-law kind of spectrum in the short-scale region. Thus, the
problem of collapse is of ultimate importance in hydrodynamics.

The most popular object in the studies of collapse in hydrodynamics
is a system of two anti-parallel vortex tubes, inside which vorticity is
continuously distributed (Kerr 1993), or in a more general setup – ﬂows
with a higher spatial symmetry (Boratav & Pelz 1994; Pelz 1997). It is
well known, that two anti-parallel vortex ﬁlaments undergo the so-called
Crow instability (Crow 1970) leading to stretching of vortex ﬁlaments in
the direction normal to the plane of the initial distribution of vortices and
to reduction of their mutual distance. It was demonstrated in numerical
experiments (Kerr 1993) that point singularities are formed in cores of
each vortex tubes at the nonlinear stage of this instability, and |ω| near
the point of collapse increases like (t0 −t)−1, t0 being the time of collapse
(see also Grauer, Marliani & Germaschewski 1998).

2.

Basic equations

In this paper we present results1 of a numerical experiment, which can
be interpreted as emergence of singularity of vorticity at a single point in
a three-dimensional ideal hydrodynamic system, where initial data lacks
any symmetry. The representation of the Euler equation for vorticity
ω(r, t) in terms of vortex lines is employed, which was introduced in
Kuznetsov & Ruban 1998:

ω(r, t) = (ω0(a) · ∇a)R(a, t)/J.

Here the mapping

r = R(a,t)

(1)

(2)

represents transition to a new curvilinear system of coordinates asso-
ciated with vortex lines, so that b = (ω0(a) · ∇a)R(a, t) is a tangent

1Preliminary results were communicated in Zheligovsky, Kuznetsov & Podvigina 2001.

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Numerical evidence of breaking of vortex lines

vector to a given vortex line, J = det k ∂R/∂a k is the Jacobian of the
mapping (2). Dynamics of the vector R(a,t) satisﬁes

∂tR = ˆΠ v(R,t),

where v(R,t) is the ﬂow velocity at a point r = R and ˆΠ is the transverse
projection to the vortex line at this point:

Παβ = δαβ − ξαξβ,

ξ = b/|b|.

Equations (1)-(3) are closed by the relation between vorticity and veloc-
ity:

ω(r, t) = ∇ × v(r, t); ∇ · v = 0.

The system of equations (1)-(5) can be regarded as a result of partial
integration of the Euler equation

∂tω = ∇ × [v × ω], ∇ · v = 0.

A vector ﬁeld ω0(a) incorporated in (1), ∇a· ω0(a) = 0, is the Cauchy in-
variant, manifesting frozenness of vorticity into the ﬂuid. If R(a, 0) = a,
ω0 is the initial distribution of vorticity.

The Jacobian J can take arbitrary values because the description un-
der consideration is a mixed, Lagrangian-Eulerian one (Kuznetsov &
Ruban 1998; Kuznetsov & Ruban 2000).
In particular, J can vanish
at some point, which by virtue of (1) implies a singularity of vortic-
ity. It was demonstrated by Kuznetsov & Ruban 2000 that collapses of
this type are possible in the three-dimensional integrable hydrodynamics
(Kuznetsov & Ruban 1998), where in the Euler equation (6) a modiﬁed
relation between vorticity and velocity (both generalized) is assumed:

v = ∇ × (δH/δω), H =

|ω|dr.

(7)

Z

Emergence of singularity of vorticity at a point, where J = 0, means
that a vortex line touches at this point another vortex line. This is the
process of breaking of vortex lines. Being analogous to breaking in a gas
of dust particles (dynamics of a gas with a zero pressure), this process
is completely determined by the mapping (2).

4

3.

Breaking of vortex lines

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

Let us assume now that collapse in the Euler hydrodynamics occurs
due to breaking of vortex lines. Denote by ˜t(a) > 0 a solution to the
equation J(a, t) = 0, and let t0 = mina ˜t(a), where the minimum is
achieved at a = a0. Near the point of the minimum (t0, a0) the Jacobian
can be expanded (cf. Kuznetsov & Ruban 2000):

J = α(t0 − t) + γij∆ai∆aj + ...,
where α > 0, γ is a positive deﬁnite matrix and ∆a = a−a0. The Taylor
expansion (8) is obtained under the assumption that J is smooth, which
is conceivable up to the moment of singularity formation. At t = t0 the
numerator in (1), i.e. the vector b, does not vanish: the condition J = 0
is satisﬁed when the three vectors ∂R/∂ai (i = 1, 2, 3) lie in a plane, but
generically none of them equals zero (that were a degeneracy) so that
near the point of singularity

(8)

ω(r, t) ≈

b(t0, a0)
α(t0 − t) + γij∆ai∆aj

.

(9)

Furthermore, J = 0 implies that an eigenvalue of the Jacoby matrix
(say, λ1) vanishes, and generically the other two eigenvalues (λ2 and λ3)
are non-zero. Therefore, there exist one “soft” direction associated with
λ1, and two “hard” directions associated with λ2 and λ3. It follows from
(8), that in the auxiliary a-space the self-similarity ∆a ∼ (t0 − t)1/2
is uniform in all directions. However, in the physical space the scales
are diﬀerent. Following Kuznetsov & Ruban 2000, we show how an
anisotropic self-similarity emerges in the ﬂow. The analysis for the Euler
equation coincides with that for the integrable hydrodynamics (7).

Decompose the Jacoby matrix ˆJ in the bases of eigenvectors of the
direct ( ˆJ ψ(n) >= λnψ(n)) and conjugate ( ˜ψ(n) ˆJ = λn ˜ψ(n)) spectral prob-
lems:

Jik ≡

∂xk
∂ai

=

3

Xn=1

λnψ(n)
i

˜ψ(n)
k .

(10)

The two sets of eigenvectors are mutually orthogonal:

( ˜ψ(n) · ψ(m)) = δnm.
In a vicinity of the point of collapse the eigenvectors can be regarded as
approximately constant.

Decompose the vectors x and ∇a in (10) in the respective bases, de-

noting their components by Xn and An:

Xn = (x · ψ(n)),

= ( ˜ψ(n) · ∇a).

∂
∂An

Numerical evidence of breaking of vortex lines

5

The vector ∆a can be represented in terms of An as follows:

∆aα =

α | ˜ψ(n)|2An.
ψ(n)

Xn

As a result, (10) can be expressed as

∂X1
∂A1
∂X2
∂A2

= τ + ΓmnAmAn,

= λ2,

= λ3,

∂X3
∂A3

(11)

(12)

where

Γmn = γαβ(λ2λ3)−1ψ(n)

α ψ(m)

β

| ˜ψ(n)|2| ˜ψ(m)|2

and τ = α(t0 − t)/(λ2λ3) is assumed to be small. Consequently, size
reduction along the directions ψ(2) and ψ(3) is the same as in the auxiliary
a-space, i.e., τ 1/2, but in the soft direction, ψ(1), the spatial scale is
∼ τ 3/2. Therefore, in terms of new self-similar variables ζ1 = X1/τ 3/2,
ζ2 = X2/τ 1/2 and ζ3 = X3/τ 1/2, integration of the system yields for ζ2
and ζ3 a linear dependence on η = ∆a/τ 1/2, and for ζ1 – a cubic one:

ζ1 = (1 + Γijηiηj)η1 +

Γ1iηiη2

1
2

1 +

Γ11η3
1,

1
3
ζ2 = λ2η2,

i, j = 2, 3

ζ3 = λ3η3.

(13)

(14)

Together with (9), relations (13) and (14) implicitly deﬁne the depen-
dence of ω on r and t. The presence of two diﬀerent self-similarities
shows, that the spatial vorticity distribution becomes strongly ﬂattened
in the ﬁrst direction, and a pancake-like structure is formed for t → t0.
Due to (1) and the degeneracy of the mapping (J = 0), vorticity ω lies
in the plane of the pancake. Near the singularity behavior of ω is deﬁned
by the following self-similar asymptotics:

ω = τ −1Ω(ζ1, ζ2, ζ3).

(15)

In essence, in the above analysis one is concerned with the behavior of the
mapping near a fold, and thus breaking of vortex lines can be naturally
explained within the classical catastrophe theory (Arnold 1981; Arnold
1989).

6

4.

Super-weak collapse

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

According to the collapse classiﬁcation of Zakharov & Kuznetsov 1986,
breaking of vortex lines is not a weak collapse but a super-weak one,
because already a contribution from the singularity to the enstrophy
|ω|2dr characterizing the energy dissipation rate due to viscosity is
I =
small, ∼ τ 1/2; a contribution to the total energy is ∼ τ 3/2. However, the
R
|∇ω|2dr is divergent as t → t0. Thus, the breaking solution
integral
v = v(r, t) cannot be continued beyond t = t0 in the Sobolev space
H 2(R3) with the norm k f kq≡ (
|∇qf |2dr)1/2. According to the
q≤2
theorem proved by Beale, Kato & Majda 1984, this suﬃces for

R

R

P

t0

sup
r

Z
0

|ω|dt = ∞

(16)

to hold. The condition (16) is necessary and suﬃcient for collapse in the
Euler equation, and it is satisﬁed for (15).

Another restriction follows from the theorem by Constantin, Feferman

& Majda 1996, stating that there is no collapse for any t ∈ [0, t0] if

t0

Z
0

sup |∇ξ|2dt < ∞,

(17)

where the supremum is over a region near the maximum of vorticity
|ω|. Occurrence of collapse implies divergence of the integral (17) for
τ → 0. Consequently, sup |∇ξ| has to increase at least like τ −1/2. It
is evident that, due to solenoidality of ω, either the derivative (ξ · ∇)ξ
in the direction along the vector ω in the pancake-like region should
have no a singularity at the scales of the order of τ 1/2 or larger, or the
singularity should be weaker than τ −1/2. However, this does not rule
out large gradients of ξ in a region separated in the soft direction from
the pancake-like region, for instance, with the behavior ∂ξ/∂X1 ∼ τ −α
with 1/2 ≤ α < 3/2. This conjecture is plausible, since transition from
the a-space to the physical one involves a signiﬁcant contraction in the
soft direction of the region near the point of breaking: a sphere of radius
∼ τ 1/2 is mapped into the pancake-like region. Thus, a sphere in the
r-space of radius ∼ τ 1/2 containing the pancake includes a large preim-
age of the region outside the sphere in the a-space of radius ∼ τ 1/2 (the
shape of the preimage is governed by higher order terms in the expansion
(8) ). Hence in the process of breaking of vortex lines three scales can
l1 ∼ τ 3/2, l⊥ ∼ τ 1/2 and an intermediate scale lin ∼ τ α with
appear:
1/2 ≤ α < 3/2 (the presence of which assures that there are no contra-
dictions with the theorem of Constantin, Feferman & Majda 1996).

Numerical evidence of breaking of vortex lines

7

5.

Numerical results

To verify the hypothesis that formation of singularity in the solutions
to the Euler equation can be due to vortex line breaking, we performed a
numerical experiment for the system of equations (1-5). Two features of
this system are notable. First, in contrast with the original Euler equa-
tion, possessing an inﬁnite number of integrals of motion – the Cauchy
invariants, – the system (1-5) is partially integrated and therefore con-
tains the Cauchy invariants explicitly. Hence, while the invariants are
guaranteed to be conserved when (1-5) is solved numerically, it is nec-
essary to test to which extent they are conserved in the course of direct
numerical integration of the Euler equation (6). Second, in the system
(1-5) integration in time (in (3) ) is separated from integration over space
(in (5) ), i.e. from inversion of the operator curl.

The system (1-5) is considered under the periodicity boundary condi-
tions and inversion of the operator curl can be performed by the standard
spectral techniques with the use of Fast Fourier Transform. The main
diﬃculty in numerical integration of the system stems from the necessity
of transition (both direct and inverse) between the variables r and a at
each time step. It was circumvented by the use of two independent grids
in the r-space: a moving one (the R-grid), the motion of whose points is
governed by (3), and a steady regular one (the r-grid), which coincides
with the a-grid. The numerical algorithm consists of the following steps:
(i) by integrating (3) in time, ﬁnd new positions of the R-grid points;
(ii) compute new values (1) of ω on the R-grid by ﬁnite diﬀerences;
(iii) by linear interpolation from the values of vorticity at nearby points
of the R-grid, determine ω on the r-grid (for that, for each point of the
regular grid it is necessary to ﬁnd a tetrahedron, containing the point,
whose vertices are the nearest points of the R-grid);
(iv) solve the problem (5) to determine ﬂow velocity v on the r-grid;
(v) by linear interpolation, determine v on the R-grid.

Computations are performed with the resolution of 1283 grid points.
In order to check numerical stability of the algorithm test runs are made
for several initial conditions, which are ABC ﬂows. Any ABC ﬂow is an
eigenfunction of the curl and hence it is a steady solution to the force-free
Euler equation (6). They are found to remain steady in computations
with the time step dt = 10−3 up to t = 4 with the relative error of
the solution being within the 10−14 threshold, and the Jacobian J being
reproduced with the 10−13 accuracy.

An initial vorticity which we consider is a solenoidal ﬁeld comprised
of random-amplitude Fourier harmonics with an exponentially decaying
spectrum; the decay is by 6 orders of magnitude from the ﬁrst to the

8

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

The spatial minimum of |ω|

−1 (vertical axis) as a function of time (hor-
Figure 1.
izontal axis) at the saturated regime close to the time of collapse. Pluses show the
values obtained in computations.

last spherical shell in the Fourier space, the cut-oﬀ being at wavenumber
8. It satisﬁes ω 6= 0 everywhere in the box of periodicity (this enables
one to perform the projection (4); it is checked that this condition is not
violated at all times during the run). This ﬁeld does not possess any
symmetry.
In the course of numerical integration we monitor energy
conservation: kinetic energy of the ﬂow remains constant with the accu-
racy better than 1%. For such an initial condition we observe formation
of a peak of |ω| at a single point. At this point the Jacobian J and |ω|−1
are minimal over space at all times close to the time of collapse, and the
minimal values decrease in time to a high precision linearly (Fig. 1). (In
this run the time step is dt = 10−4 for t ≤ 0.08, and dt = 5 · 10−6 after-
wards.) In this run the maximum of vorticity increased almost 20 times
before integration was terminated. The ﬁnal width of the peak of |ω| is
2-3 times the length of the interval of spatial discretization (Fig. 2 shows
a strong localization of |ω| at the end of the run). Figure 3 illustrates
concentration of vorticity lines and formation of a fold near the point
of singularity. Formation of similar peaks of vorticity accompanied by

Numerical evidence of breaking of vortex lines

9

Vorticity |ω| (vertical axis) as a function of the coordinates R1 and R2
Figure 2.
at the plane R3 =const, containing the point of minimum of J at t = 0.08055 (close
to the time of collapse).

a decrease of J to zero is also observed in several runs for other initial
conditions of vorticity in the same class.

At diﬀerent times the global (over space) minima of J and of |ω|−1
are achieved at four diﬀerent points. Behavior of the Jacobian in time
at one of these points (short-dashed line on Fig. 4) suggests that the
second singularity can also be developing; it is not traced down to the
time of its collapse, because this is prevented by formation of the ﬁrst
singularity.

The peak of vorticity turns out to be narrow from the moment of
it emerges not
its birth. In order to verify that it is not spurious (i.e.
due to a numerical instability of our algorithm) we have reproduced its
formation in computations by a modiﬁed algorithm, with diﬀerent inter-
polation techniques employed for linear interpolation at step (iv). These
techniques introduce some smoothing intended to inhibit formation of
a spurious singularity. However, in the new run all numerical data has
been reproduced with the relative precision 10−6.

10

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

Isolines of restriction of the function R1(a) on the plane a1 =const through
Figure 3.
the point a = (7π/32; 41π/32; 13π/8), where the collapse occurs. Small dashes show
downhill directons.

To check that the given process can be considered as breaking of
vortex lines we compute time dependencies of the Hessian of the Jacobian
∂2J/∂aα∂aβ at the point of the minimum of J. At the ﬁnal stage of the
saturated asymptotic linear behavior of the minimum we did not ﬁnd any
essential temporal variation of its eigenvalues. This agrees qualitatively
with the expansion (8). Figure 3 illustrates ﬁnal positions of vortex
lines near the point of collapse. Some anisotropy is observed in the
spatial distribution of ω(r, t) near the maximum of vorticity. However,

Numerical evidence of breaking of vortex lines

11

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.
Time (horizontal axis) dependencies of four local minima of J (a) and of
|ω|−1 (b). Line styles correspond to the same points on space. Solid line – the global
minima at the ﬁnal saturated regime.

due to an apparent lack of spatial resolution we cannot claim that two
essentially diﬀerent scales emerge. The following questions also remain
open: Why is the time of occurrence of collapse small compared to the
turnover time? Why is the peak of vorticity quite narrow basically from
the very moment of its appearance?

The obtained results can be interpreted as the ﬁrst evidence of the
vortex line breaking; the collapse, which is observed numerically, is not
related to any symmetry of the initial vorticity distribution and in par-
ticular the collapse occurs at a single point.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the Observatory of Nice, where this work
was initiated and the paper was completed. Visits of E.K. to the Ob-
servatory of Nice were supported by the Landau-CNRS agreement, and
those of O.P. and V.Z. – by the French Ministry of Education. Partici-
pation of E.K. in the project was also ﬁnanced by RFBR (grant no. 00-
01-00929), by the Program of Support of the Leading Scientiﬁc Schools
of Russia (grant no. 00-15-96007) and by INTAS (grant no. 00-00797).

12

E. A. Kuznetsov, O. M. Podvigina and V. A. Zheligovsky

References

Arnold, V.I. 1981 Theory of Catastrophe. Znanie, Moscow (in Russian) [English

transl.: Theory of Catastrophe 1986, 2nd rev. ed. Springer].

Arnold, V.I. 1989 Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics. 2nd ed., Springer-

Verlag, New York.

Beale, J.T., Kato, T. & Majda, A.J. 1984 Remarks on the breakdown of smooth

solutions for the 3-D Euler equations. Comm. Math. Phys. 94, 61–66.

Boratav, O.N. & Pelz, R.B. 1994 Direct numerical simulation of transition to
turbulence from high-symmetry initial condition. Phys. Fluids 6, 2757–2784.
Constantin, P., Feferman, Ch. & Majda, A.J. 1996 Geometric constrains on po-
tentially singular solutions for the 3D Euler equations. Commun. Partial Diﬀ. Eqs.
21, 559–571.

Crow, S.C. 1970 Stability Theory for a pair of trailing vortices. Amer. Inst. Aero-

naut. Astronaut. J. 8, 2172–2179.

Frisch, U. 1995 Turbulence. The legacy of A.N.Kolmogorov. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Grauer, R., Marliani, C., & Germaschewski, K. 1998 Adaptive mesh reﬁnement
for singular solutions of the incompressible Euler equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,
4177–4180.

Kerr, R.M. 1993 Evidence for a singularity of the 3-dimensional, incompressible

Euler equations Phys. Fluids A 5, 1725–1746.

Kolmogorov, A.N. 1941.The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous
ﬂuid for very large Reynolds number, Doklady AN SSSR 30, 9–13 (in Russian)
[reprinted in 1991 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 434, 9–13].

Kuznetsov, E.A. & Ruban, V.P. 1998 Hamiltonian dynamics of vortex lines for

systems of the hydrodynamic type, JETP Letters 67, 1076–1081.

Kuznetsov, E.A. & Ruban, V.P. 2000 Collapse of vortex lines in hydrodynamics.

JETP 91, 776–785.

L’vov, V.S. 1991 Scale invariant theory of fully developed hydrodynamic turbulence

– Hamiltonian approach. Phys. Rep. 207, 1–47.

Monin, A.S. & Yaglom, A.M. 1992 Statistical hydro-mechanics. 2nd ed., vol.2,
Gidrometeoizdat, St.Petersburg (in Russian) [English transl.: Statistical Fluid Me-
chanics. Vol. 2, ed. J.Lumley, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, ].

Pelz, R.B. 1997 Locally self-similar, ﬁnite-time collapse in a high-symmetry vortex

ﬁlament model. Phys. Rev. E, 55, 1617–1626.

Zakharov, V.E. & Kuznetsov, E.A. 1986 Quasiclassical theory of three-dimensional

wave collapse. Sov. Phys. JETP 64, 773–780.

Zheligovsky, V.A., Kuznetsov, E.A. & Podvigina, O.M. 2001 Numerical mod-
eling of collapse in ideal incompressible hydrodynamics. Pis’ma v ZhETF (JETP
Letters) 74, 402–406.

