1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
3
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
2
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Searching for vortex structures in high Reynolds number turbulence

S. I. Vainshtein
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637
(December 6, 2013)

In experimental study of very high Reynolds number turbulence, we found evidences that
there are distinguished vortex structures in the intermediate range, that is, between the
Kolmogorov and Taylor microscales, where they are indeed expected to be present. These
structures are responsible for the intermittency, and, in the same time, they contribute into
asymmetry of turbulent statistics, the latter following from the Kolmogorov law.

PACS number(s): 47.27.Ak, 47.27.Jv

I. INTRODUCTION

The presence of organized structures in fully developed
turbulence was demonstrated recently both in physical
experiments, and in numerical simulations. Most of the
studies are devoted to vortex tubes (or “worms”, or“
sinews”), see, e.g., [1]– [6].

Generally, these organized structures may be consid-
ered at the same time as a source (or manifestation)
of intermittency, because normally they correspond to
a small dimension (of the size of Taylor microscale, or
Kolmogorov microscale), although they are stretched in
the other directions over a “macroscopic” length.

One remarkable feature of these vortex structures is
that they present not only the intermittency of turbu-
lence, but also contribute into the asymmetry of the
PDF’s [3], [4]. As was suggested in [7], the asymmet-
ric statistics of the turbulence is indeed related to the
intermittency. This connection was summarized in the
so-called ramp-model, the latter being only empirical.
The considerations of the formation of vortex structures,
when the intermittency and asymmetry appear simulta-
neously, have resulted in the development of the ramp-
model into a more sophisticated version which is now
called the bump-model.

The data used in this paper are based on Taylor’s hy-
pothesis, and therefore do not provide direct measure-
ments of vortices. However, these vortices should be
manifested in diﬀerent ways, such as appearance of in-
termittency, etc. We provide here evidences that these
vortices are present in fully developed turbulence. We be-
lieve that the disadvantages of necessary indirect studies
of vortices presented in this paper, are outweighed by
the fact that we are studying a very high Reynolds tur-
bulence.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II is still in-
troductory, presenting (mostly known) notions of turbu-
lence statistics, related to the vortices. The main purpose
of this section is to explain, what can we expect to ob-
serve from experimental data if the vortices are present,
and also to introduce denotations we will use in the rest
of the paper; and thus some repetition of previous results
seems to be inevitable. On the other hand, the bump-

1

model is introduced in Sec. II B. Section III starts with
suggestions how to improve the two extreme cases, or
models, considered in Sec.
II. The answer is in the mid-
dle: an intermediate model is suggested. The rest of the
section is devoted to comparison of this model with the
experimental data, namely, with the observed structure
functions of low orders. Section IV presents evidences
of existing vortices. Namely, it is shown that the inter-
mittency is substantially enhanced in the intermediate
range: from studying the ﬂatness of the velocity incre-
IV A, and from the box counting,
ments statistics, Sec.
Sec. IV B. An extensive discussion of both extreme case
models, and also of the intermediate model is given in
Sec. V. It is argued that this model may give an insight
into the question of the intermittency formation, which
proves to be intimately connected with the asymmetry
of turbulence. Finally, concluding remarks are presented
in Conclusion, Sec. VI.

II. BASIC IDEAS AND DENOTATION

We consider structure functions,

Sn(r) = h(∆ru)ni,

where ∆ru = u(x + r) − u(x), and n is an integer, and
generalized structure functions,

Sq(r) = h|∆ru|qi,

where q > 0.

Navier-Stokes equation,

We mention an exact result, obtained directly from

S3(r) = −

εr + 6ν

S2(r),

(3)

4
5

∂
∂r

[8], and in inertial range where the viscosity term can
be neglected, we recover the 4/5-Kolmogorov law,

(1)

(2)

(4)

S3(r) = −

εr.

4
5

Data are from atmospheric turbulence measurements,
about 35 meters above the ground, obtained by hot-
wire anemometer, mean wind speed was 7.6 m/sec, root-
mean-square velocity 1.3 m/sec. Using Taylor’s hypoth-
esis and local isotropy assumption to obtain dissipation,
one obtains the Taylor microscale Reynolds number to be
9540 and the Kolmogorov microscale η to be 0.57 mm.
The data were sampled at 5 kHz and the ﬁle consisted
of 10 million data points (courtesy of Sreenivasan). The
data are treated in the spirit of the Taylor hypothesis,
that is, the time series is treated as one-dimensional cut
of the process (for more detail, see [9–11]).

A. No intermittency. Asymmetry in K41

Consider classical picture of turbulence due to K41
[12]. That is, the turbulence is presented with an en-
semble of multiscale cells, from integral scale ℓ to small-
est Kolmogorov scale η ∼ ℓ/R3/4, where R ≈ vℓ/ν, the
Reynolds number, and v =
z i, the mean
square velocity, with |∆ru| ∼ r1/3. Then, in inertial
range, i.e., at η < r < ℓ,

x + v2

y + v2

hv2

q

Sq(r) ∼ rq/3.

We deﬁne the Taylor microscale,

λ =

hu2i
h(∂xu)2i

,

s

see, e.g., [13]. Then,

λ ∼

ℓ
R1/2 ,
It follows from (6) that

and Rλ =

hu2i1/2λ
ν

∼ R1/2.

(7)

λ = 151/4ηR1/2
λ ,

see, e.g., [14], formula (3.2.18), we use this expression
below.

Let us proceed to the asymmetry, dictated by the Kol-
mogorov law (4). Denote λ1,2,3 – three eigen values of
the symmetric part of the matrix ∂jvi, and suppose that

λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ λ3.

(9)

It is known [15], that the quantity deﬁning skewness of
∂xu ﬁeld, namely h(∂xu)3i,
is = (8/35)hλ1λ2λ3i, and
therefore we calculate hλ1λ2λ3i. As λ1 + λ2 + λ3 = 0
(due to the incompressibility), (9) can be replaced by

−

λ3
2

≤ λ2 ≤ λ3.

(10)

We thus consider conditional mean value (λ3 is ﬁxed)

hλ1λ2λ3|λ3i = −h(λ2 + λ3)λ2λ3i =

(5)

(6)

(8)

2

λ3

−λ3/2

Z

p(λ2|λ3)[−(λ2 + λ3)λ2λ3]dλ2,

(11)

where p(λ2|λ3) is conditional probability distribution of
λ2. The quantity λ1λ2λ3 as a function of λ2 is highly
asymmetric and mostly negative in the range (10).
If,
for example, we suppose that p(λ2|λ3) is an uniform dis-
tribution, i.e.,

p(λ2|λ3) =

1
(3/2)λ3

,

which at ﬁrst sight seems to be quite a realistic assump-
tion, then, according to (11), hλ1λ2λ3|λ3i = −λ3
3/2 < 0.
In fact, the contribution of the negative part of λ1λ2λ3
is 10 times larger than the positive part; that is, in or-
der to make the integral in (11) positive, the distribution
p(λ2|λ3) should be highly asymmetric. Namely, p(λ2|λ3)
should be more than 10 times larger in the negative range
of (10) than in the positive. As this kind of assumption
concerning the PDF p(λ2|λ3) does not seem to be reason-
able, it follows from these considerations that h(∂xu)3i,
and therefore the skewness should be negative.

In a more natural way, one may consider the strain

parameter,

introduced by Moﬀatt et al. [2], and, according to (10),
0 ≤ ˜λ ≤ 3. Then,

˜λ =

λ1 − λ2
λ1 + λ2

=

2λ2 + λ3
λ3

,

λ1λ2λ3 =

(1 − ˜λ2).

λ3
3
4

The interval where this expression is positive (i.e., 0 ≤
˜λ < 1) is twice as short as where it is negative (i.e., 1 <
˜λ < 3), and therefore the mean value may be expected to
be negative. And indeed, for an uniform PDF p(˜λ|λ3) =
1/3, we recover

hλ1λ2λ3|λ3i =

p(˜λ|λ3)(1 − ˜λ2)d˜λ = −λ3

3/2 < 0.

λ3
3
4

3

0
Z

These considerations appear to be “too general”, and
therefore suspicious, because they do not incorporate the
equation of motion. And indeed, these considerations are
bias. Recall that λ3 (which is > 0) was previously ﬁxed;
if we now ﬁx λ1(< 0), then

λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ −

λ1
2

,

(12)

cf., (10). Calculating now hλ1λ2λ3|λ1i = −hλ1λ2(λ1 +
λ2)i, analogously to (11), we obtain hλ1λ2λ3|λ1i =
−λ3

1/2 > 0!
Finally, if we no longer require (9), i.e., if we do not re-
quire any ordering for the eigen values, then hλ1λ2λ3i =
0. Indeed, all probability distributions are expected to

be symmetric a priori in respect to the transformation
λ1,2,3 → −λ1,2,3, and therefore hλ1λ2λ3i = 0. Thus,
these “general considerations” fail to account for the
asymmetry, because they do not incorporate the equation
of motion. In the framework of K41, the asymmetry is
needed to account for the energy transfer to small eddies
[13], the asymmetry by itself being expressed through the
Kolmogorov law (4). However, the theory does not in-
dicate what dynamical processes lead to the asymmetry.
Another setback in this picture is that the turbulence
is completely non-intermittent, in contradiction with ex-
perimental data.

In particular, the asymmetry dictated by the Kol-
mogorov law, and observed (negative) skewness, are not
supposed to be related to the intermittency. That is, the
PDF for ∆ru is asymmetric, however, the asymmetry
has nothing to do with the tails of the PDF, that is with
possible intermittency. In other words, the asymmetry of
the PDF is expected to be manifested in the core. This
“ideal” PDF is constructed in [11], in order to compare
with observed properties of turbulence. The PDF,

p(˜u, r) ≡ I(˜u),

˜u =

(13)

∆ru
h(∆ru)2i1/2

has the following properties,

I(˜u)d˜u = 1,

˜uI(˜u)d˜u = 0,

˜u2I(˜u)d˜u = 1,

˜u3I(˜u)d˜u = −

4
5

1
C3/2
2

,

Z

(14)

where C2 is the Kolmogorov constant. But, most impor-
tantly, the PDF is constructed from two Gaussian func-
tions, so that it does not contain any tails. We will use
this “ideal” PDF below; we note for now that the exper-
imental asymmetry is related to the intermittency.
In
particular, the tails of real PDF give a substantial con-
tribution to the Kolmogorov law [11].

In addition, the experimental PDF p(˜u, r) is not self-
similar, that is, it is also a function of r (as well as of
˜u, cf. (13)), see, e.g., [9]. This in eﬀect implies presence
of intermittency. Direct study of intermittency can be
provided by cumulative moments,

S0,c(r) =

p(˜u, r)d˜u,

(15)

Z
and

and

S−,c(r) =

p(˜u, r)d˜u, S+,c(r) =

p(˜u, r)d˜u, (16)

Z
and by the tail moments,

c

0
Z

S0,t(r) =

p(˜u, r)d˜u +

p(˜u, r)d˜u = 1 − S0,c=t(r),

0

−c

−t

−∞

Z

c

−c

Z

∞

t
Z

and

−t

−∞

Z

∞

t
Z

S−,t(r) =

p(˜u, r)d˜u, S+,t(r) =

p(˜u, r). (18)

If c and t are not small (we will consider c = t = 3,
and c = t = 4), then (15) presents major events pro-
duced by the core of the PDF, and S0,c should be close
to unity, or rather Gaussian value with which it will be
compared. We denote the cumulative and tail moments
for Gaussian and “ideal” distributions with letters G and
I correspondingly. For example, S0,c(r) for Gaussian dis-
tribution is G0,c, and S−,t(r) for ideal distribution is I−,t,
etc. And, of course, S0,c should be independent of r, in
case of self-similarity. On the contrary, substantial devi-
ation from unity, and, what is more important, depen-
dence on the distance – increasing with growing r, would
indicate intermittency. In fact, super-Gaussian deviation
from unity suggests that the tails give considerable con-
tribution to the PDF, and this contribution is decreasing
IV B that
with growing distance. We will see in Sec.
that is what is indeed observed.

As to S±,c(r), they represent a more subtle way to
measure intermittency, and, of course, asymmetry. These
quantities are expected to be close to (and smaller than)
1/2, and S+,c being slightly larger than S−,c.

There is a geometrical interpretation of hλ1λ2λ3i < 0.
It implies that typically λ1 < 0, while λ2,3 > 0, that
is, the inﬂow is in one direction, 1, while the outﬂow
proceeds in two directions, 2,3. Statistically, these ﬂows
would generate vortex sheets rather than vortex ropes
[16]. However, it became clear that the presence of the
vortex itself changes the principal axes and eigen values
[3,4]. Consider an axisymmetric cell of a scale ℓ. At the
axis, there is an inﬂow in two directions, 1,2, that is,
to the axis, and outﬂow in one direction, 3, parallel to
the axis. Therefore, locally λ1λ2λ3 > 0 (λ1,2 < 0 and
λ3 > 0). To be more speciﬁc, in cylindrical coordinates
{r′, φ, z},

v = { − αr

′

, 0, 2αz},

(19)

α = −λ1 = −λ2 = λ3/2. Suppose now that there is a
symmetric vortex present, with initial scale ℓ. Then the
vortex is stretched by the strain motion (19), according
to equation

∂tωz − αr′∂r′ωz = 2αωz +

ν

r′ ∂r′r′∂r′ ωz.

This stretching proceeds until viscous eﬀects come into
play, resulting in Burgers vortex,

ωz(r′) = ωz(0)e−r

′2

2
/λ

,

(20)

(21)

Z

Z

B. Extreme intermittency

(17)

3

FIG. 1. Schematic presentation of bump model, and its comparison with the ramp-model. (a) Presentation of ∂xu for the
strain (19), solid line. The vortex is superimposed on this plot (dashed line). (b) Resulting motion, the strain plus the vortex.
(c) More realistic presentation of the same as in (b). (d) Corresponding motion u. Note typical bump. The dashed-dotted
line presents a bump in a “wrong place”, that is, this situation is statistically unlikely. (e) ∂xu for the ramp-model, and (f),
corresponding motion, which is indeed ramp-like. The dashed-dotted line depicts another ramp, which is supposed to appear
statistically rarely.

4

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

and

where

vφ =

ωz(0)λ2
2r′

1 − e−r

′2

2
/λ

,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

λ =

2ν
α

.

r

As α ∼ vℓ/ℓ, λ ∼ ℓR−1/2, and therefore λ coincides
with Taylor microscale (7). In order to estimate ωz(0) we
note that, neglecting viscosity, equation (20) conserves
the quantity

ωzr

′

′

dr

,

Z
and hence we estimate, ωz ∼ 1/r′2, that is,

ωz(0) ≈ ωℓ

ℓ2
λ2 = ωℓR,

where ωℓ is initial vorticity.

It was shown in [3,4] that the combination of the strain
motion (19) and the vortex results in negative skewness.
In order to get some simple estimates, we present ∂xu
corresponding to this motion in Fig.
1. Figure 1(a)
presents the strain (19) with α = 1. The probability
p(∂xu > 0) = 1/3 (where ∂xu = 2), while p(∂xu < 0) =
2/3 (and ∂xu = −1), and therefore

h∂xusti = 2p(∂xu > 0) − 1p(∂xu < 0) = 0,

h(∂xust)3i = 8p(∂xu > 0)−1p(∂xu < 0) = 8/3−2/3 = 2 > 0.

That is, the skewness is positive for the strain motion,
as mentioned above. The vortex corresponds to a sharp
odd function concentrated on a small scale λ. Therefore,
h∂xuλi = 0 and h(∂xuλ)3i = 0. Nevertheless, the sum
of these motions, depicted in Fig.
1(b), may possess
negative skewness. Indeed,

h∂xust + ∂xuλi = h∂xusti + h∂xuλi = 0,

and

while

h(∂xust + ∂xuλ)3i = h(∂xust)3i − 3 · 1h(∂xuλ)2i

(26)

(cf. [4]), which becomes negative if the second term on
the right-hand-side prevails. In particular, for the strain
(19) plus vortex (21),

h(∂xust + ∂xuλ)3i = 2α3 − 3αω2

ℓ R2 λ2

ℓ2 ≈ −3αω2

ℓ R, (27)

where we used the estimate (25), and the fact that the
vortex occupies only λ2/ℓ2 part of the space (naturally,
we also suppose that ωℓ is not small compared with α).

5

Figure 1(c) depicts essentially the same as Fig. 1(b),
but it suggests a more realistic presentation of ∂xu. The
integral of this latter function, that is, the velocity u itself
is depicted in Fig. 1(d). Note characteristic bump which
appears due to the vortex. Panels (e) and (f) are to be
compared with (c) and (d); they present ∂xu and u for
the ramp model (the details of this comparison are given
is Secs. IV B and V A).

Imagine now a statistical ensemble of the cells of the
scale ℓ, so that the ensemble as a whole is statistically
isotropic. Suppose that each of the cells contains a Burg-
ers vortex (21) with ωℓ ≈ α. Then,

h(∂xu)2i ∼ ω2

ℓ R2 λ2

ℓ2 ∼ ω2

ℓ R ∼

vℓ
ℓ

2

R,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

so that

νh(∂xu)2i ∼

∼ ε,

v3
ℓ
ℓ

(28)

(29)

as in K41 theory.

The Kolmogorov law (4) is also valid, of course. How-
ever, the “inertial range” for this ensemble, starting at
the scale ℓ is cut oﬀ already at the Taylor microscale λ,
rather then Kolmogorov microscale η, because the linear
in r term in (3) is larger than the viscous term only at
r > λ. At r < λ S3(r) ∼ r3, reaching at r = λ the am-
plitude S3(λ) ∼ ελ, as should be according to (4). In ad-
dition, the skewness, ∼ S3(λ)/λ3 ∼ −ε/λ2 ≈ −(vℓ/ℓ)3R,
which coincides with the estimate (27).

So far, this ensemble looks similar to the K41 the-
ory. However the intermittency in this model is much
ℓ R3,
too high. For example, h(∂xu)4i ∼ ω4
so that the ﬂatness,

ℓ R4λ2/ℓ2 ∼ ω4

F (0) =

h(∂xu)4i
h(∂xu)2i2 ∼ R,

(30)

which is many orders of magnitude above the experimen-
tal value (see, e.g., below Sec.

IV A).

III. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENTAL
DATA

Further discussion of these two models and the ramp
model is provided below in Sec. V. It is clear for now
that both extreme cases: no intermittency II A, and ex-
treme intermittency II B are not realistic, and it should
be accepted something in between. Let us accept the
K41 theory as a “ﬁrst approximation”, and we will try
to modify it by introducing ﬁnite intermittency. Then, in
II A, the cells are
addition to what is described in Sec.
generating vortices as in Sec.
II B above. The question
is, what are the initial magnitudes of ωr? It is clear that,
for example, ωℓ should be small compared with vℓ/ℓ: oth-
erwise the intermittency is too strong. Another possibil-
ity is to suggest that ωℓ ∼ vℓ/ℓ, however, only a small

fraction of the cells are generating these vortices. In addi-
tion, there is nothing special in the large scale eddies; in
fact, the cells with scales r < ℓ are generating the vortex
ropes as well. Namely, the scales of generated vortices
by the cells of the scale r are,

δr =

2ν
vr/r

s

= λ

1/3

,

r
ℓ

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(31)

cf. (23). Each cell is able to generate a vortex rope as
long as δr < r, i.e., according to (31), when r > ℓ/R3/4 ∼
η, that is, in the whole inertial range. Thus, the vortices
are generated in each cell, however, the scales of these
vortices, δr, are,

η ≤ δr ≤ λ.

(32)

We can call this range intermediate , and it is in this

range where the vortices are indeed observed [5].

We see that now the vortex is aligned along the inter-
mediate eigenvector. This feature was initially suggested
and shown in [6], and conﬁrmed both in numerical sim-
ulations [5], and in laboratory experiments [17].

In addition, the eigen values (33) result in correct sign
of the skewness (i.e., correct asymmetry of the PDF).
Indeed,

λ1λ2λ3 = 2α

α2 −

"

dvφ
dr′ −

vφ
r′

1
4

(cid:18)

2

#

(cid:19)

< 0,

if the amplitude of the vortex is large enough. This
formula is consistent with the estimate (27).
Indeed,
dvφ/dr′ − vφ/r′ ≈ ωℓR2, and averaging this expression
over the space would result in a factor ∼ 1/R, because
the vortex is occupying only 1/R fraction of space. As a
result, we recover (27).

A. The third moment

In order to understand what impact has this model
on the structure functions, we start with the third or-
der structure function. As mentioned, for the extreme
II B, S3 ∼ r3 for r < λ, while
intermittency case, Sec.
II A, S3 ∼ r3 is valid
for no-intermittency case, Sec.
for r < η. Naturally, the picture outlined above in this
section suggests intermediate situation.

Figure 2 depicts experimental S3(r), and it is com-
pared with what we would expect for the ensemble de-
scribed in Sec.
II B, namely, with the following function
constructed for this purpose

S(λ)
3

(r) = −

rε tanh

4
5

4
5

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2

.

2

,

r
λ

r
η

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

S(η)
3 (r) = −

rε tanh

which is what one would expect from K41. Note that
all three curves, one experimental and two constructed,
match at inertial range, i.e., at r > λ. In order to do this,
the constructed functions are matching experimental lin-
ear ﬁt with exponent ζ3 = 0.99 ± 0.01, quite close to the
Kolmogorov law (for which ζ3 = 1). The plots are given
in Kolmogorov microscale, that is, in r/η, and there is
also r/λ scale in the ﬁgure for comparison. It can be seen
that the inertial range indeed starts at r ≈ λ, and thus
the intermediate range (32) is clearly visible. Besides, the
experimental plot is situated between no intermittency
moment, S(η)
(r), –
as expected.

3 (r), and extreme intermittency, S(λ)

3

FIG. 2. Experimental and theoretical (somewhat simpliﬁed

The experimental S3(r) is also compared with

and sketchy) third moment, S3(r).

We note that, according to Sec.

II B, the vortex is
stretched along the stretching axis (with maximum value
of λ1,2,3), of course, that is, parallel to the z-axis. How-
ever, as mentioned at the beginning of Sec.
II B, when
the vortex is formed, the eigen values are changed. While
λ3 remains the same = 2α, the other two eigen values are
now

λ1,2 → −α ±

1
2

dvφ
dr′ −

vφ
r′

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

,

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where vφ is deﬁned in (22), see, e.g., [4]. We now have to
arrange the eigen values in order (9) to obtain

λ1 = −α −

,

λ2 = 2α,

1
2

dvφ
dr′ −

vφ
r′

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
dvφ
(cid:12)
dr′ −

vφ
r′

λ3 = −α +

1
2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(33)

6

FIG. 3. Panels (a) through (d): the generalized structure functions: starting from the ﬁrst and ending with the fourth.

7

FIG. 4. Generalized ﬂatness; several dimensionless ratios of diﬀerent moments to the ﬁrst. The plots are compared with the
Gaussian value (solid line), and with what would follow from the “ideal” PDF, see (13-14). Note that all plots are in log-log
scale. The ordinate in panel (a) is in log-scale as well; it seems indistinguishable from linear scale because the scale range is
relatively small.

8

FIG. 5. Same as in previous ﬁgure, only these are ratios of moments to the second order structure function.

9

B. Other moments

The inertial range is associated with scaling, that is,
in the log-log plotting the moments are presented with
straight lines. Figure 3 illustrates generalized structure
functions of diﬀerent orders, the ﬁrst, the second, the
third and the fourth (and, of course, the structure func-
tions of even orders coincide with the generalized struc-
ture functions). The intermediate range (32) is easily
separated from the inertial range (where the plots be-
come straight lines).

We may interpret this separation of the intermediate
range by the fact that this range contains vortices. This
interpretation is not unequivocal however. It is also pos-
sible that the depletion of the structure functions in this
range, as compared with the K41, is due to the action
of viscosity. Indeed, the viscosity is still acting even at
r ≫ η, in spite of the fact that the local Reynolds number
is there ≫ 1. The fact that the viscous eﬀect is stretched
up to r ∼ λ might be purely coincidental.

IV. INTERMITTENCY

A. Flatness

A real test to check if the intermediate range is related
to vortices is achieved by the measuring the intermit-
tency. Traditionally, the later is estimated by measuring
the ﬂatness, see, e.g., [13]. More speciﬁcally, the ﬂat-
ness, and related quantities, like generalized ﬂatness, are
compared with corresponding Gaussian values. Figure 4
presents dimensionless ratios of diﬀerent moments to the
ﬁrst moment. They can be called generalized ﬂatness.
We see that, ﬁrst, the intermediate range is clearly dis-
tinguished from inertial, the intermittency growing sub-
stantially in the intermediate range. The deviation from
Gaussian and “ideal” behavior is especially dramatic in
Fig. 4(d), which is hardly surprising taking into account
that it represents a relatively high moment.

Second, although the deviation from Gaussian and
“ideal” values in inertial range is not big, (a factor
of 2 or 3), there is a noticeable scaling for about two
decades. Recall that in the framework of K41, accord-
ing to (5), all these ratios would be ﬂat, that is, e.g.,
S2(r)/S1(r)2 = const, etc.
If however the structure
functions have anomalous scaling, Sq(r) ∼ rζq , where
ζq 6= q/3, then these ratios would possess some scaling,
which is indeed observed.

Finally, what may be called generalized skewness, de-
picted in Fig.
4(b), is presented by rather scattered
curve. This might be explained as follow. The third mo-
ment of the structure function, appearing only due to
the asymmetry (as opposed to the third order general-
ized structure function, depicted in panel (c)), contains
quite a substantial contribution coming from the PDF
tails, see, e.g., [10]. As the tails correspond to rare (but

stormy) events, the odd order structure functions are sub-
ject to substantial ﬂuctuations.

Essentially the same conclusions can be drawn from an-
alyzing Fig. 5, where the dimensionless ratios of diﬀerent
moments to the second order structure function are de-
picted. It is clear that the intermittency is substantially
In particular, for
increased in the intermediate range.
the ratio S1(r)/S2(r)1/2, the presence of intermittency
implies that the ratio is below the Gaussian value, see
Fig.
5(a), rather than otherwise for higher moments;
and still, the intermediate range is clearly distinguished
It is also clear from panel
by enhanced intermittency.
(b) that the skewness substantially exceeds that given
by the “ideal” PDF only in the intermediate range. In
the inertial range, the skewness is decreasing systemati-
cally with increasing distance r, although the deviation
from “ideal” behavior is not conspicuous (and the scaling,
if any, is rather poor). Finally, maximal ﬂatness (panel
(d)) reaches the value 32.28, well below what would be
expected from extreme intermittency model described in
Sec.

II B.

B. Box counting

Zeroth moment of structure function, that is box
counting, are very useful to study because, unlike high
moments, the statistic is as good as one can get, although
quite often the zeroth moment provides only trivial re-
sults. In order to extract some useful data in studying
intermittency, one can either analyze the cumulative (and
tail) moments, or separate negative values from the pos-
itive, and to study them separately (as, e.g., in [11]).

Panel (a) and (b) in Fig.

6 correspond to experi-
mental cumulative and tail moments, deﬁned in (15) and
(16) correspondingly, and we compare them with the-
oretical values. As mentioned in Sec.
II A, for self-
similar PDF’s, the cumulative moments are independent
of distance r, and they are expected not to deviate much
neither from Gaussian nor from “ideal” asymmetric dis-
tribution, - these two happen to be close to each other,
as seen from panel (a). On the other hand, the contri-
bution of the tails, that is, intermittency, if present, is
increasing with decreasing distance. That implies that
the cumulative moments, that is, the cores of the PDF’s
give a smaller contribution for decreasing distances. Fig-
ure 6(a) shows that this is indeed the case. It can be
seen that, ﬁrst, the cumulative moments noticeably devi-
ate from both Gaussian and “ideal” values. Second, this
deviation is higher in the intermediate range, and that
is the way this range is easily separated from the iner-
tial range. One can see analogous trends from panel (b),
where tail moments are depicted. The tails deﬁnitely
give larger contribution for small distances, and this is
especially true for the intermediate range, which is again
noticeable. Note also that the tail parts for t = 4 are
substantially larger than Gaussian values, especially for

10

FIG. 6. Cumulative and tail moments of zeroth order. (a) The probability of |˜u| ≤ 3, and of |˜u| ≤ 4 for diﬀerent r’s, which
coincide with S0,c=3(r) and S0,c=4(r) correspondingly. These quantities are compared with correspondent Gaussian and “ideal”
values, G0,c=4 being almost indistinguishable from unity. (b) Tail moments, with respect to correspondent Gaussian values,
and for the same values t = 3 and t = 4, are depicted. (c) The probability of ˜u < 0, corresponding to S−,c→−∞(r), probability
of −3 ≤ ˜u ≤ 0, or S−,c=3(r), and of −4 ≤ ˜u ≤ 0, or S−,c=4(r) are depicted, and compared with corresponding Gaussian values.
This time, G−,c=4 is practically indistinguishable from 1/2. (d) The probability of ˜u ≤ −3 (or S−,t=3(r)), and of ˜u ≤ −4 (or
S−,t=4(r)) are depicted in respect to their Gaussian values.

11

the intermediate range.

We now proceed to the analysis of the ± moments.
It is clear that there are several common features for
ramp model and bump model, that is, common features
in panels (c) and (e) of Fig.
1. As mentioned in Sec.
II B, for both cases, h∂xui = 0 and h(∂xu)3i < 0. This
actually implies that the positive part of the distribution
occupies larger space than the negative part. This is seen
directly from panel (e), and can be calculated for the
function depicted in panel (c), i.e. calculated directly
from the function ∂xust + ∂xuλ deﬁned in Sec.
II B. In
other words, S−,c→∞(r) should be less than S+,c→∞(r).
As, on the other hand, S−,c→∞(r) + S+,c→∞(r) = 1, by
deﬁnition, we have S−,c→∞(r) < 1/2, and this quantity is
typically increasing with growing r, while S+,c→∞(r) >
1/2, decreasing with r. This is exactly what is observed
in panel (c) of Fig. 6, although the curves are somewhat
scattered. In spite of the latter, there is no doubt that
S−,c(r) < S+,c(r), for all distances and all values of c.

The box counting S±,c=3(r) and S±,c=4(r) behaves
analogously. The intermediate range can be again distin-
guished in all of the curves depicted in panel (c), although
the range is not that pronounced. This range can be
better noticed from the tail moments, depicted in panel
(d). It is clearly seen that the tails are stronger at small
distances, and the intermediate range clearly noticeable.
Besides, the negative distribution is deﬁnitely more sin-
gular than the positive, or S+,t=3,4(r) < S−,t=3,4(r): and
that is what is seen from this panel. This diﬀerence in
singularity strength is obvious from the ramp model, Fig.
1(e), where the positive distribution is not singular at
all. It is also seen from Fig. 1(c), that is, for the bump
model, that the negative peak reaches higher absolute
values than the positive peak, and therefore the nega-
tive singularity is expected to possess higher strength.
Finally, again as in panel (b), the tails deviate quite sub-
stantially from Gaussian values for t = 4.

V. DISCUSSION OF THE MODEL

A. Intermittency formation

Let us return to the stretching process described in Sec.
II A. In more general case of axisymmetric stretching we
have,

∂vφ
∂t

+

vr′

1
r′

∂r′
∂r′ + vz

∂
∂z

vφ = ν

∂2
∂z2 +

∂
∂r′

1
r′

′

∂
∂r′ r

vφ.

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)
(34)
In the vicinity of stagnation line r′ = 0, this equation is
reduced to (20) if operator ∇× acts on (34). This equa-
tion is linear in respect to vφ, and, if vr′ and vz are given,
then the vortex stretching, described by equation (34)
can be considered kinematic. In fact, this equation coin-
cides with that for Aφ, φ-component of magnetic vector-
potential, i.e., Br′ = −∂zAφ, Bz = r′−1∂r′ r′Aφ, and B is

magnetic ﬁeld strength. The induction equation for Aφ,
coinciding with (34), is kinematic if the velocity is given.
The equations for r and z-components of the velocity

ﬁeld read,

∂vr′
∂t

+

vr′
(cid:20)

∂
∂r′ + vz

∂
∂z

vr′ −

(cid:21)

v2
φ
r′ =

−

1
ρ

∂p
∂r′ + ν

∂2
∂z2 +

∂
∂r′

1
r′

∂

∂r′ r′

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

vr′ + Fr′,

(35)

and

(36)

∂vz
∂t

+

vr′

∂
∂r′ + vz

∂
∂z

vz =

(cid:20)
∂2
∂z2 +
where ρ is density, and F is external forcing.

∂r′ r′

∂
∂r′

∂p
∂z

1
r′

+ ν

1
ρ

−

∂

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

vz + Fz,

In the vicinity of stagnation line r′ → 0 where there
is the strain (19) motion plus the vortex, all the terms
in equation (35) are functions of r′ only, and therefore
they can be compensated by the pressure. Analogously,
all the terms in (36) are functions of z only, and again
are compensated by the pressure. This means the “the
cell”, i.e., the r and z-components of the velocity can be
considered as given (and steady). In general, however,
vφ depends also on z, and therefore the third term in
(35) gives nontrivial contribution to the equation. Nev-
ertheless, as mentioned at the beginning of Sec.
III, the
velocity corresponding to the vortex is supposed to be
small compared with the strain motion. In other words,
the contribution of this term can be neglected. Besides,
the external forcing is always able to make the cell steady.
In any rate, if this term is neglected, then these two equa-
tions (35-36) are independent from existing vortex, and,
from the point of view of the vortex generation, the vr′
and vz-components can be considered as given.

In this – somewhat simpliﬁed – picture, the vortex gen-
eration responsible for appearance of the intermittency,
is kinematic, that is, passive. We may expect therefore
that there is some analogy between this generation of in-
termittency and that of a passive scalar gradient. It is
known that the latter is shown to be intermittent even if
the background, that is, the given velocity is not [18].

Generally, we have the following energy balance equa-

tion,

d
dt

hv2 + v2
ωi
2

= −νh(∇ × v)2 + (∇ × vω)2i,

(37)

where vω stands for the generated vortex. The ﬁrst
term on the right-hand-side corresponds to regular Kol-
mogorov cascade, and corresponding energy dissipation,
and the second one – to the dissipation of the vortices. In
the no intermittency model, Sec.
II A, the second term
is absent. On the contrary, in the extreme intermittency
model Sec. II B, the ﬁrst term can be neglected, because

12

of the large size of the cells, while the second makes up
for the Kolmogorov dissipation if the initial amplitude of
the vortex ωℓ is comparable with αℓ, see (29). In a more
realistic model described at the beginning of Sec.
III,
both dissipation terms contribute. More speciﬁcally, the
Kolmogorov cascade prevails, and the generated vortices
give a small contribution to the dissipation (otherwise
the intermittency is too strong). Let ωℓ ≈ f αℓ, where
f < 1, then

νh(∇ × vω)2i ∼ f 2 v3
ℓ
ℓ

∼ f 2ε,

(38)

It is because of the smallness of f 2 that the
cf. (28).
process of vortex generation can be considered kinematic.
Presumably, the most vulnerable part of this picture is
that the parameter f is essentially arbitrary. We can sug-
gest some speculation about the origin of this parameter.
Namely, the process of vortex formation, and vortex ex-
istence, are transitional. Indeed, the vortex cannot exist
longer than the cell itself, where the vortex is generated.
According to K41, a cell of the size ℓ exists only for a
time ∼ ℓ/vℓ. On the other hand, 1/αℓ ∼ ℓ/vℓ as well.
In other words, the vortex generation time, 1/αℓ, and
the life time of the cell, and therefore the life-time of the
vortex itself, are comparable. Of course, these are just
rough estimations. There is some dispersion both in the
life-times, and in the generation times. We may expect,
that a cell should be persistent, in order to have time
enough to generate a vortex. That is to say that only a
fraction of cells (which are persistent) would give rise to
vortices. Another restriction arises from geometry. We
may expect that there are vortex perturbations in each
II B, a cell would
cell. However, as described in Sec.
generate a vortex only if the initial perturbation is ax-
isymmetric, with the axis parallel to the stagnation line
of the cell. Generally, a perturbation, even with ωℓ ≈ α,
II B.
would not be exactly the way described in Sec.
Namely, it would not be expected to be axisymmetric at
all. Considering again the interaction to be kinematic,
we may expect that only axisymmetric part of the initial
perturbation, – being generally a small fraction of the
perturbation as a whole, – is transformed into a vortex,
considered in Sec.
II A. Another solution to this prob-
lem can be seen in the fact that the generation of the
vortices does not necessary proceeds in the largest cells.
Of course, ﬂatness according to (30) ∼ R is much too
high. If, however, the generation proceeds from a cell of
a size r, then, the ﬂatness would be

F (0) ∼ Rr = R

4/3

< R.

r
ℓ

(cid:17)

(cid:16)
Another diﬃculty in this model is that it predicts the
presence of intermittency only in the intermediate range,
(32) in Sec. III. However, we can see from practically all
the plots that the intermittency is present in the inertial
range as well, although, being less intense.
It can be
4 and 5, where ﬂatness
seen, for example, from Figs.

is depicted, that the latter has a decent scaling in the
inertial range (for two decades!). Nontrivial behavior in
inertial range can be also observed in Fig. 6, especially
in panels (a) and (b). The tail events are particularly
noticeable for the tails with t = 4, and their deviation
from Gaussian is substantial in numbers, as seen from
panel (b), although these events are less pronounced than
in intermediate range (and the curve is more scattered).
We may suggest the following explanations. First, as
noted above in this section, the vortices are transitional
events, being generated at large scales, and then, with
diminishing scales they reach their ﬁnal scale λ. Thus,
at some point in time, each vortex has a size comparable
with r, and therefore it may contribute to the distribu-
tion. Second, strictly speaking, the structures of smaller
(and larger) than r scales do contribute to the struc-
ture functions taken at a distance r. Therefore one may
expect that the structure functions for distances r corre-
sponding to the inertial range would reﬂect the intermit-
tency of smaller scales, or possibly the intermittency of
the intermediate range only.

B. Ramp model versus bump model

As we noticed in previous section, there are several
common features between these two models. Here, we
focus on diﬀerences. First, the estimates (26-27) diﬀer
for the ramp model. The ﬁrst moment is still zero, of
course, h∂xurampi = ω · (r − δ) − [(r − δ)/δ]ω · δ = 0.
Here δ is the size occupied by the negative part, and
therefore r−δ corresponds to the remaining positive part,
the amplitude of the positive part being ω, see Fig. 1(e).
The third moment is negative. Indeed,

h(∂xuramp)3i = ω3(r − δ) −

δ < 0

(39)

r − δ
δ

ω

3

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

which is negative if δ < r. Therefore, the skewness is
negative as in (26-27), but the parameters entering this
expression are diﬀerent.

The main conclusion about the ramp model is that the
strength of the negative singularity is higher than that of
the positive,

D−

q < D+
q ,

(40)

where D±
q are generalized dimensions, [7]. In the simpli-
ﬁed picture illustrated in Fig. 1(e), the positive part is
not singular at all, that is, D+
q ≡ 1. On the other hand,
the bump model does suggest that the positive part is
it is
singular, although the inequality (40) is satisﬁed:
seen from Fig. 1(c), and follows from discussion at the
end of previous section. The singularity of positive tails
is indeed observed, see Fig. 6(d), and that may be con-
sidered as a preference of the bump model as compared
with the ramp model.

Generally, the bump model can be considered as a
more subtle and sophisticated version of the ramp model,

13

Indeed, Fig.

the former suggesting essentially the same predictions as
the latter. Obviously, the ramp model is purely em-
piric, while the bump model describes some dynamical
processes in formation of vortices.
1(f)
presents two ramps, one is what is expected, and an-
other one (dashed-dotted line) corresponds to a statisti-
cally unlikely ramp. This statistical preference is so far
not understood.
It was suggested in [7] that the situ-
ation is analogous to a shock wave formation: a shock
would never develop in the shape like depicted with a
dashed-dotted line, and it evolves only into “real ramp”,
(solid line). This analogy is of little help, however, the
typical turbulence being incompressible, and the shocks
are therefore irrelevant. On the other hand, the bump
should appear on descending part of the curve, where
1(d),
the derivative is negative, as depicted in Fig.
solid line, as opposed to “unrealistic” bump depicted
with dashed-dotted line. This statistical preference can
be explained, as opposed to the ramp-model statistics.
Indeed, the ascending part of the curve (with positive
derivative) corresponds to a structure function with vec-
tor r parallel to the vertical direction, where the deriva-
tive (= 2α) is indeed positive, while the descending part
corresponds to r in horizontal plane (where the derivative
is = −α < 0). Now, the bump corresponds to the vor-
tex, and, of course, the corresponding velocity is suited in
the horizontal plane. Therefore, the bump would appear
only on descending part of the curve.

Finally, let us discuss the quantitative estimates for
the asymmetry. As mentioned in Sec.
II A, the non-
intermittency scenario does not account for the asym-
metry. The latter is easily explained in extreme inter-
II B. The corresponding
mittency approach, see Sec.
expression (27) does provide a realistic estimate of the
skewness, as noted at the end of
II B. However, this
estimate corresponds to extreme intermittency scenario,
i.e., to unrealistic intermittency. Still, the asymmetry
can be explained if we suggest that the vortex formation
proceeds all the time. That is to say that the transi-
tional stage mentioned in previous subsection is always
present. If there is enough time for the perturbation to
reach the Taylor microscale, then the vortex is complete,
and therefore the intermittency is generated. But, con-
sidering the fact that the intermittency is not that pro-
nounced in fully developed turbulence, we conclude that
the ﬁnal formation of a vortex is a relatively rare event.
More often, the vorticity of a perturbation is enhanced
for a while, and then the generating cell ceased to ex-
ist, and thus the generation stops. However, during this
ampliﬁcation, the vorticity of the generated vortex eas-
ily exceeds the causing this generation strain, and then,
according to (26), the third order structure function be-
comes negative. This is valid for any particular scale
r, if the vortex reaches it (and its vorticity exceeds the
strain). This may account for the Kolmogorov law.

VI. CONCLUSION

It is known that production of vorticity, or vortex
stretching, does not necessary implies that intermittency
is generated.
Indeed, in classical Kolmogorov picture
K41, the energy cascade from large eddies to small actu-
ally implies that small scale vortices are generated: be-
cause the vorticity production proceeds homogeneously.
In other words, each eddy decays into smaller eddies, each
of which in turn decays into smaller eddies, and so on.

As we argued above, the vortex stretching may be con-
sidered as kinematic, in some limited sense, of course.
For a passive scalar ψ, the classical Kolmogorov picture
is not much diﬀerent from what is described in the pre-
vious paragraph. That is, ψ2 is transported down the
scales, so that h(∇ψ)2i is growing (which is similar to
the vorticity production). The energy cascade is gradual
and continuous in this picture, meaning that the large
scale ﬂuctuations generate smaller scale perturbations,
which in turn generate even smaller scales, and so on,
until the perturbations reach diﬀusive scale where they
eventually disappear. We can imagine a direct cascade of
energy, without passing the intermediate scales in iner-
tial range, directly from the large scales to the dissipation
scale. To be more speciﬁc suppose, that the velocity tur-
bulence is presented by large scale cells only (of the size
ℓ): like in Sec.
II B, but the velocity ﬁeld is random in
time, unlike time-independent, i.e., steady cells from Sec.
II B. Generally, maxima of ∇ψ will be generated in the
vicinity of the stagnation lines and stagnation surfaces,
in a time-scale ∼ ℓ/vℓ. The ∇ψ-ﬁeld will have the scale
of Taylor microscale. However, if the life-time of the ed-
dies τℓ ≈ ℓ/vℓ, as in regular turbulence, then, ﬁrst, there
would not be enough time to produce a sharp and con-
centrated structure of the ∇ψ-ﬁeld during one turn-over
time, and second, in the next life-time, the concentrated
∇ψ-ﬁeld structure is formed in a diﬀerent place. As a
result, the ∇ψ-ﬁeld is generated homogeneously in sta-
tistical sense. In other words, there is no intermittency
generated. Suppose now that the turbulent cells are per-
sistent, or, at least, some of them are. Then, distinct
∇ψ-ﬁeld structures are generated, and they are as per-
sistent as the cells themselves. The scenario described in
Sec.

II B of vortex generation is essentially the same.
We presented an evidence of the presence of vortices
in high Reynolds turbulence. This is clear from the ﬁg-
ures: the intermediate scale range (32), where these vor-
tices are supposed to appear (see the beginning of Sec.
III, and also [5]), is clearly noticeable. The main feature
which distinguishes this range is a substantially enhanced
intermittency. The vortices are aligned to the interme-
diate eigen-vectors, [6], [5], [17]. And, most important,
these vortices account for negative skewness, that is, they
result in a right asymmetry of the PDF. This picture pro-
moted a development of the ramp model which is mod-
iﬁed now into the bump model. The latter not only ex-
plains more features than the former, but also the bump

14

[15] A. A. Townsend, Proc. R. Soc. London A, 208, 534
(1951); D. I. Pullin and P. G. Saﬀman, Phys. Fluids A
5, 126 (1993).

[16] R. Betchov, J. Fluid Mech., 1, 497 (1957).
[17] T. Dracos, M. Kholmyansky, E. Kit, and A. Tsinober,
in Topological Fluid Mechanics, edited by H. K. Moﬀatt
and A. Tsinober (Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 1989).
[18] Z. Warhaft, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 32, 203, (2000).

model seems to be dynamically substantiated, unlike the
ramp model, see Sec. V B.

The most important conclusion is that the intermit-
tency is related to the asymmetry of statistical properties
of turbulence, which was suggested in [7]. This give us
a powerful tool for studying the intermittency: because
the asymmetry is manifested in lower moments of struc-
ture function, while the intermittency normally manifests
itself in higher moments with poor statistics.

Still, the whole picture is far from complete. As men-
tioned in Sec.
III, this simple scenario, outlined again
above in this section, predicts too much intermittency.
There are some suggestions in Sec. III as to how to cure
this diﬃculty. But, so far, the theory is unable to predict
the numbers, e.g., we cannot predict the ﬂatness from the
asymmetry, or the other way. Nevertheless, we believe
that the paper provides a next step in understanding the
intermittency of turbulence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank K. R. Sreenivasan and B. Dhruva for the data
of high Reynolds number atmospheric turbulence used in
this paper. I also appreciate discussions with W. Gold-
burg, J. Gollub, X. L. Wu, and Z. Warhaft.

[1] S. Le Diz`es, M. Rossi, and H.K. Moﬀatt, Phys. Fluids,

8, 2084 (1996).

259, 241 (1994).

[2] H.K. Moﬀatt, S. Kida, and K. Ohkitani, J. Fluid Mech,

[3] J. Jim´enez, Phys. Fluids A, 4, 652 (1992); S. Kida,
Lecture Notes in Numerical Applied Analysis, 12, 137
(1993).

[4] N. Hatakeyama and T. Kambe, Phys. Rev. Letters, 79,

[5] A. Vincent and M. Meneguzzi, J. Fluid Mech, 225, 1

1257 (1997).

(1991).

[6] R. M. Kerr, J. Fluid Mech., 153, 31 (1985); W. T.
Ashurst, A. R. Kerstein, R. M. Kerr, and C. H. Gibson,
Phys. Fluids, 30, 3243 (1987).

[7] S.I. Vainshtein and K.R. Sreenivasan, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

[8] A.N. Kolmogorov, C.R. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R. 32, 16

73, 3085 (1994).

(1941).

[9] S.I. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev. E, 56, 6787 (1997).
[10] S.I. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev. E, 58, 1851 (1998).
[11] S. I. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev. E, 61, 5228 (2000).
[12] A.N. Kolmogorov, C.R. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R. 30, 301

(1941).

[13] A.S. Monin and A.M. Yaglom, Statistical Fluid Mechan-

ics, Vol. 2 (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1971)

[14] H. Tennekes and J.L. Lumley, A First Course in Turbu-

lence, (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1972).

15

