2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Vortex Ring Reconnections

Philippe Chatelain, Demosthenes Kivotides, and Anthony Leonard
Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
(Dated: December 16, 2013)

We investigate numerically the Navier-Stokes dynamics of reconnecting vortex rings at small Re
number. We ﬁnd that reconnections are dissipative due to the smoothing of vorticity gradients at
reconnection kinks and to the formation of secondary structures of stretched anti-parallel vorticity
which transfer kinetic energy to small scales where it is subsequently dissipated eﬃciently.
In
addition, the relaxation of the reconnection kinks excites Kelvin waves which due to strong damping
are of low wavenumber and aﬀect directly only large scale properties of the ﬂow.

PACS numbers: 47.32.Cc, 02.70.Ns

In ﬂow phenomena as diverse as quantum [1] magnetic
[2] and incompressible [3] ﬂuids, it is useful to study the
physics of turbulence by modeling the system as a col-
lection of tubular ﬂux loops which in the case of vortical
ﬁelds are called vortex ﬁlaments. An intrinsic property
of such highly structured systems is their ability to dy-
namically change their topology via reconnection mecha-
nisms. Does this change in topology aﬀect in turn prop-
erties of ﬂuid turbulence like the intermittency and the
scalar-mixing (which depend directly on the structure of
the ﬂow) or like the dynamics of energy in wavenum-
ber space? Or is it the case that reconnection events
are not generic and thus have no direct impact on the
mean properties of turbulent ﬂows? The aim of this letter
is to address these issues by fully resolving the Navier-
Stokes dynamics of interacting vortex rings for three sim-
ple geometries having great potential for illuminating the
physics of reconnection. Although the ﬂows considered
are not strictly turbulent, the hope is that in a future
structural approach to the problem of turbulence a sig-
niﬁcant part of the ﬂow complexity could be traced back
to the physics of similar vortex interactions.
Incompressible vortex reconnections have an extensive
bibliography (for a review of the work up to 1994, see
[4]). In [5, 6] reconnections of vortex tubes were consid-
ered with an emphasis on the possibility of singularity
formation as Re → ∞.
In [7] the strong interactions
between vortex rings were computed with the interest
in developing numerical methods and turbulence models
rather than in focusing on the physics of reconnection.
In [8] it is discussed how a linked vortex conﬁguration
could be achieved starting from an unlinked initial state
and in [9] it is considered how the mixing of a nondiﬀus-
ing passive scalar is aﬀected during vortex ring collision.
The reconnection of two approaching (but not colliding)
vortex rings was studied experimentally in [10] and the-
oretically in [11]. This letter extends these studies by
considering generic vortex conﬁgurations and by captur-
ing more features of vortex reconnections in a turbulent
ﬂow.

We solve the Navier-Stokes equations for an un-
bounded three-dimensional incompressible viscous ﬂow.
We employ the vorticity formulation:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ u · ∇

ω = (∇u) · ω + ν∇2ω ,

(cid:19)

∇ · u = 0 ,

where u is the velocity and ω is the vorticity. We use a
vortex particle method [12]. In this method, the vorticity
is discretized with Lagrangian elements. These elements
which carry a vector-valued Gaussian distribution of vor-
ticity are convected and stretched by the local velocity
obtained by the Biot-Savart law. The complexity of the
velocity computation is normally O(N 2) with N being
the number of particles; we have used a multipole algo-
rithm that reduces this complexity to O(N log(N )). The
viscous diﬀusion is modeled by the Particle Strength Ex-
change scheme.
We calculate some global quantities: the kinetic energy
E, the enstrophy Ω and the helicity H, deﬁned as

E =

u · u dx ,

Ω =

ω · ω dx ,

H =

ω · u dx .

1
2 Z

Z

Z

d
dt

E = −νΩ .

For unbounded ﬂows, the relation between kinetic energy
and enstrophy is

We also compute the evolution of the spectrum of the
kinetic energy E(k) which, in terms of the Fourier trans-
ω(r) e−i r·k dr, is deﬁned
form of vorticity ˆω = 1
as

(2π)3/2

R

E(k) =

(2π)3

ˆω · ˆω∗ dΩk ,

(7)

1
2

Z|k|=k

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2

FIG. 1: Vortex rings in an oﬀset collision: contours of vorticity;
from t = 0 to 2.4, the contour is ω = 0.15 ωt=0
max, for t > 2.4, it
is ω = 0.025 ωt=0
max

FIG. 2: Vortex rings in an oﬀset collision: kinetic energy and
enstrophy

where dΩk denotes sin θk dθk dφk, the solid angle element
in spherical coordinates. The calculation of the spectrum
requires a double summation over the vortex elements
which results to O(N 2) complexity. Because of this, the
calculation of the spectrum is much more costly than
the solution of the Biot-Savart law. Since the number
of particles grows substantially during our simulations,
from around N = 5 104 at t = 0 to 8 105 in the end, our
computational resources did not allow us to compute the
spectra for all times.

We consider three reconnection conﬁgurations at the
same Reynolds number: Re = Γ
ν = 250 where Γ is the
circulation of one ring and ν is the kinematic viscosity.
This small value of the Re was dictated by the compu-
tational cost and the need for well-resolved reconnection
regions. All the rings have the same initial Γ. All of our
conclusions are conditioned upon the small value of the
Re number, as well as, on the common initial circulation
and should not be extrapolated uncritically to other set-
tings. The vorticity distribution in the cross-section of
every ring is Gaussian with a cut-oﬀ

ωθ =

Γ
2πσ2 e

2
−r
2
2σ

(8)

where r is the distance to the core center, σ is the
core radius and ωθ is the azimuthal vorticity. We chose
σ = 0.05 R (where R is the radius of the ring), to en-
sure that the rings are still thin when reconnections oc-
cur. Our results were made dimensionless in the following
R , ω = R2 ω′
manner: t = Γ t′
Γ where t′, x′, ω′ are
dimensional.

R2 , x = x′

We study three conﬁgurations. In the ﬁrst case (Fig.
1, 2 and 3), the initial rings are placed at a distance of
R/4 apart in the z direction, oﬀset by R along the y axis
and they move in opposite directions along the z axis.
The second geometry (Fig. 4, 5 and 6), consists of two
rings of diﬀerent radii (R and R/2) moving in the same
direction along the z axis, with the center of the small

FIG. 3: Vortex rings in an oﬀset collision: evolution of the
energy spectrum

ring in collision course with the circumference of the large
one. The small ring has a larger self-induced velocity and
catches up with the large ring. Finally, in case three (Fig.
7, 8 and 9), the two rings are linked at 90o a ring going
through the other in its center. One is moving in the pos-
itive z direction; the other, in the positive y direction.
All three evolutions have basic common features which
will be discussed in the context of the ﬁrst conﬁgura-
tion for clarity. The spectrum at t = 0 (Fig.3) has the
characteristic oscillations of the spectrum of isolated vor-
tex rings and a cuf-oﬀ at the scale of ring core radius
σ = 0.05, k = 20. Our data suggest that the reconnec-
tion starts around t = 0.6 when an acceleration of energy
decay appears, and ends around t = 1.4. Speciﬁcally, as
the rings approach each other, they stretch and deform
near the collision points so that their respective vortic-
ities become locally anti-parallel. The two ends of this

FIG. 4: Vortex rings of diﬀerent radii: contours of vorticity;
from t = 0 to 2.4, the contour is ω = 0.15 ωt=0
max, for t > 2.4,
it is ω = 0.05 ωt=0
max

FIG. 5: Vortex rings of diﬀerent radii: kinetic energy and
enstrophy

3

rings are merely touching themselves rather than collid-
ing.
After some time (t = 1.6), we can say that two new rings
are formed. The pairs of ﬁlaments between the reconnec-
tion regions are stretched further as the new rings move
apart from each other (t = 1.6 to 5.6). Viscous diﬀusion
weakens the vorticity magnitude in these structures while
the reconnection kinks relax in the form of low wavenum-
ber Kelvin waves. These stretched vorticity structures
are responsible for a continued transfer of energy to the
smallest scales until these structures are dissipated away.
This we conclude by noticing that the high wavenumber
cut-oﬀ of the spectrum becomes a non-exponential one
(although still very steep) and that between t = 0.8 and
2.4 there is a signiﬁcant decay of the energy spectrum for
k < 20 but little change for k > 20.
It is conceivable that for Re numbers higher than 250 an
intermediate scaling range (that is in between the k−1
and k−7 regimes) could appear with inertial type of scal-
ing. It is also expected that with increasing Re number
the hump observed in the global enstrophy during the re-
connection could become more pronounced and (accord-
ing to the previous discussion) shorter in duration.
The initial helicity is non-zero in the linked conﬁgura-
tion. As the rings evolve and unlink themselves, the cor-
responding helicity increases as expected and one clearly
notices a slope steepening between t=3 and 5 (Fig.8)
when the reconnection action occurs in this case.

In conclusion, we studied three generic vortex ring
conﬁgurations and we found that in all cases the rings
reconnect. This suggests that reconnection is a common
phenomenon in vortex ﬁlament encounters and perhaps
In addition, we observe an
also in turbulent ﬂows.
intensiﬁcation of dissipation which is local
in time
and could be a mechanism contributing to turbulence
intermittency. A by-product of reconnection is the
formation of
stretched structures with anti-parallel
vorticity which transfer energy to the smallest scales
where it is rapidly dissipated. Without this energy

FIG. 6: Vortex rings of diﬀerent radii: evolution of the energy
spectrum

stretching region eventually become reconnection kinks
in which (in the absence of singularities), the strong vor-
ticity gradients are smoothed out by diﬀusion. This is
also seen in the graphs of the global quantities (Fig.2)
where the beginning of the reconnection process corre-
sponds to a hump in the graph of Ω and to a steepening
of the slope of E(t) between t = 0.6 and t = 1.4. The time
length of the reconnection is signiﬁcantly longer than the
viscous time scale tv = σ2/ν = 6.25 10−2 and of the same
order as the convective time tc = R2/Γ = 1. This con-
tradicts the ﬁndings of [10] where it is reported that the
viscous scale is much larger than the reconnection dura-
tion. However, in [10] the Re number was 1600. The
conclusion that the duration of reconnection is inversely
proportional to the Re number and thus to the circula-
tion of the vortices is plausible (also in agreement with
[5, 13]), but it is subject to the condition in [10] that the

FIG. 7: Linked vortex rings: contours of vorticity; ω =
0.025 ωt=0
max

FIG. 8: Linked vortex rings: kinetic energy, enstrophy and
helicity

4

Besides illuminating important physics,
the present
work will guide future introduction of phenomenological
reconnection models into vortex ﬁlament computational
methods.
In this way, the applicability of the latter
methods will be extended to ﬂows with complex vorticity
conﬁgurations.

Research partially supported by the Oﬃce of Naval

Research and the Department of Energy.

[1] D. Kivotides, C. J. Vassilicos, D. C. Samuels, and C. F.

Barenghi, Europhys. Lett. 57, 845 (2002).

[2] M. Christensson and M. Hindmarsh, Phys. Rev. D 60

[3] A. Leonard, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 17, 523 (1985).
[4] S. Kida and M. Takaoka, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 26,

[5] M. J. Shelley, D. I. Meiron, and S. A. Orszag, J. Fluid.

Mech. 246, 613 (1993).

[6] A. Pumir and R. M. Kerr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1636

(1999).

169 (1994).

(1987).

ford (1995).

[7] G. S. Winckelmans, Annual Research Briefs, CTR Stan-

[8] H. Aref and I. Zawadzki, Nature 354, 50 (1991).
[9] I. Zawadzki and H. Aref, Phys. Fluids A 3, 1405 (1991).
[10] P. R. Schatzle, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Tech-

[11] W. T. Ashurst and D. I. Meiron, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58,

nology (1987).

1632 (1987).

[12] G.-H. Cottet and P. Koumoutsakos, Vortex Methods,
Theory and Practice (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
[13] J. F. Garten, J. Werne, D. C. Fritts, and S. Arendt, J.

Fluid Mech. 426, 1 (2001).

[14] D. Kivotides, J. C. Vassilicos, D. C. Samuels, and C. F.

Barenghi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3080 (2001).

FIG. 9: Linked vortex rings: evolution of the energy spectrum

redistribution in wavenumber space the decay of global
kinetic energy would have been slower. This important
eﬀect depends directly on the details of the initial vortex
conﬁguration (compare with experiments in [10]). The
observed intensiﬁcation of small scale motions hints to
an enhancement of small scale mixing of passive scalars
with Sc ≥ 1. The excited Kelvin waves represent a fast
mechanism for energy transfer, but the small Re number
of our calculations is not suitable for understanding
their full importance.
In particular, they are conﬁned
to low wavenumbers in opposition to the Kelvin waves
observed in reconnections in quantum ﬂuids [14]. This is
because quantum ﬁlaments are inviscid and have a very
thin core (σ ∼ 0.1 nm) so that high wavenumber Kelvin
waves propagate without damping even for rings with
small circulation.

