2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Penta-Hepta Defect Chaos in a Model for Rotating Hexagonal Convection

Yuan-Nan Young and Hermann Riecke
Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics,
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
(Dated: January 21, 2014)

In a model for rotating non-Boussinesq convection with mean ﬂow we identify a regime of spatio-
temporal chaos that is based on a hexagonal planform and is sustained by the induced nucleation
of dislocations by penta-hepta defects. The probability distribution function for the number of
defects deviates substantially from the usually observed Poisson-type distribution. It implies strong
correlations between the defects in the form of density-dependent creation and annihilation rates
of defects. We extract these rates from the distribution function and also directly from the defect
dynamics.

PACS numbers: 47.20.Bp,47.54.+r,47.20.Ky,47.27.Te

Spatio-temporal chaos is at the focus of experimental
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and of theoretical [10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15] research in high-dimensional dynamical sys-
tems. Most of the extensive studies have been devoted
to variants of thermally or electrically driven convection
in thin liquid layers [3, 6, 7, 8, 11, 14]. Detailed exper-
imental studies have also been performed on vertically
vibrated layers of ﬂuids [4] and on chemical systems [2].
Theoretically, various regimes of spatio-temporal chaos
of the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation have been in-
vestigated [12, 16].

A striking feature of most spatio-temporally chaotic
states are defects in the pattern. They can be line defects
like domain walls, point defects like dislocations, disclina-
tions, and spirals, or composite defects like penta-hepta
defects. In particular dislocations have attracted great
Investigators
attention since they are easy to identify.
have utilized their statistical, geometrical and dynami-
cal aspects to quantify the chaotic states in which they
arise. For example, the number of dislocations (spirals)
in the wave patterns governed by the complex Ginzburg-
Landau equation has been found to obey Poisson-type
statistics [10]. This suggests the interpretation that in
this system dislocations are created randomly in pairs
with a ﬁxed probability, after which they diﬀuse through-
out the system without any mutual interaction until they
annihilate each other in collisions [10]. The correspond-
ing behavior and associated distribution function have
also been found experimentally in electrically driven con-
vection in nematic liquid crystals [1] and in thermally
driven convection in an inclinded layer [8], and theoret-
ically in simulations of coupled Ginzburg-Landau equa-
tions for parametrically excited standing waves [15].

Geometric aspects of dislocations have been investi-
gated in experiments on binary-mixture convection where
the possibility to reconstruct the patterns from the dis-
locations has been explored [7]. In another study the ge-
ometry and connectivity of the dislocations’ world lines
in space-time has been considered [15]. Through the cre-
ation and annihilation events the world lines form loops
in space-time. In studies of a type of defect-unbinding
transition it has been found that the degree of order of

the defected pattern is related to the statistics of the size
of the loops.

The dynamical relevance of dislocations has been sug-
gested in direct simulations of the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions of spiral-defect chaos in Raleigh-B´enard convection.
It was found that the chaotic state is by far most sensitive
to perturbations during the creation of dislocation pairs
[14]. The best evidence for the signiﬁcance of defects as
dynamical objects has been provided in simulations of
the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation where the con-
tribution of the defects to the Lyapunov dimension of the
chaotic attractor has been extracted [13].

Most of the detailed analyses of spatio-temporal chaos
and of its defects have been performed in disordered pat-
terns that are based on stripes (or rolls). Much less work
has been done on spatio-temporal chaos related to other
planforms like rectangles [5] (and, related to it, vector
waves [17]) or hexagons [2], and the role of the corre-
sponding defects has been barely touched upon.

In this Letter we describe a spatio-temporally chaotic
state that is based on a hexagonal pattern. Its disorder
is closely tied in with the appearance of penta-hepta de-
fects (PHDs), each of which consists of two dislocations
in two of the three modes making up the hexagon pat-
tern. In contrast to most other systems discussed above
it is not only the instability of the background pattern
that drives the chaotic state, but also the instability of
the PHDs themselves. Thus, in the presence of PHDs
new dislocations are created through induced nucleation.
As a consequence the probability distribution function
for the number of defects is considerably broader than
the Poisson-type distributions reported in previous stud-
ies [1, 8, 10]. We obtain this persistent, chaotic state in a
Swift-Hohenberg-type model for rotating non-Boussinesq
convection at low Prandtl numbers. While induced nucle-
ation itself has been reported previously [18, 19], without
rotation it did not sustain persistent chaotic dynamics
[18].

Motivated by the strong eﬀect of mean ﬂows and ro-
tation on convection roll patterns [3, 6] we have previ-
ously studied their eﬀect on the stability of hexagon pat-
terns and their PHDs within the framework of Ginzburg-

2

FIG. 1: a) Snapshot of penta-hepta defect chaos for α = 0.4,
γ = 2, β = −2.6, R = 0.17, and L = 233. b) Corresponding
space-time diagram of the radially integrated Fourier spec-
trum. A movie of the temporal evolution of the pattern and
of its defects can be found on the EPAPS server.

Landau equations [19, 20]. Since the Ginzburg-Landau
equations break the isotropy of the system they are not
suited for investigations of spatio-temporal chaos. In this
paper we therefore investigate a minimal extension of the
Swift-Hohenberg model,

∂tψ = Rψ − (∇2 + 1)2ψ − ψ3 + α (∇ψ)2 +
γ ˆez · (∇ψ × ∇△ψ) − U · ∇ψ,

(1)

∇2ξ = ˆez · ∇△ψ × ∇ψ + δ (cid:8)(△ψ)2 + ∇ψ · ∇△ψ(cid:9) ,

U = −β (∂yξ, −∂xξ) .

The quadratic terms proportional to α and γ break
the up-down symmetry ψ → −ψ and model the non-
Boussinesq eﬀects. The chiral symmetry is broken by
the terms involving γ and δ; thus, to leading order these
coeﬃcients are linear in the rotation rate. The mean-
ﬂow velocity and its stream function are given by U and
ξ, respectively, and β increases with decreasing Prandtl
number. We simulate (1) numerically using a parallel
pseudospectral code with periodic boundary conditions.
A typical snapshot in the chaotic regime (Fig.1a) shows
domains of hexagons of distinct orientations separated by
domain walls in which many PHDs are aggregated. Due
to the broken chiral symmetry most of the domains pre-
cess slowly counterclockwise. The corresponding space-
time diagram for the temporal evolution of the radially
integrated Fourier spectrum is presented in Fig.1b.

To identify the dislocations and PHDs we make use of
the fact that despite the disorder of the pattern its spec-
trum exhibits six peaks that are clearly separated most
of the time and that are rotated by 120o with respect to
each other (cf. Fig.1b). We demodulate the pattern using
three carrier wavevectors that slowly precess along with
3
j=1 Aj exp(iqj(t) · r) + h.o.t. + c.c..
the spectrum, ψ = P
Figs.2a-c show the temporal evolution of a smaller section
of the pattern with the dislocations in the three modes
marked by triangles, squares, and circles, respectively.
Open (closed) circles denote a positive (negative) topo-
logical charge of the dislocations.

FIG. 2:
Induced nucleation of dislocations. Enlargements
corresponding to the box in Fig.1 at times t = 747, t = 759
and t = 760. Dislocations in Ai, i = 1..3, marked by squares,
circles, and triangles, respectively. Open (ﬁlled) symbols in-
dicate positive (negative) topological charge. White (grey)
lines mark heptagons (pentagons) making up the PHDs.

0.15

0.1

0.05

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

0

0

P(n)
Poisson Fit

0.2

0.1

0
0

Poisson Fit
PHD
P(n)

10

20

10

20
Number  n  of dislocation pairs

30

40

FIG. 3: Probability distribution function for the number of
dislocation pairs in the pattern, the parameters are as in Fig.1
for L = 233. For the inset L = 114, α = 0.4, γ = 3, β = −5
and R = 0.09. Solid line is ﬁt to (4).

In various experimental and theoretical investigations
of stripe-based disordered patterns the probability distri-
bution function for the number of defects has been used
to obtain a ﬁrst characterization of the defect evolution
[1, 8, 10]. Except for the ordered chaotic state in [15],
the probability distribution function for the number of
defects were found to be close to a Poisson-type distribu-
tion, indicating that the dynamics are consistent with the
simple diﬀusive model described above with very weak
correlations between the defects [10]. In particular, the
creation rates depend only little on the defect density
[8]. However, this is not the case for the defect chaos in
hexagons. Fig.3 gives the distribution function for the
number of dislocations in the penta-hepta defect chaos
for two system sizes, L = 233 and L = 114 (inset), and
two sets of parameter values. The symbols give the rel-
ative frequency to ﬁnd n dislocation pairs in one of the
three modes, whereas the dashed line gives the best ﬁt to
the squared Poisson distribution (with the same mean)
corresponding to the uncorrelated dislocation dynamics
[10]. Clearly, in the penta-hepta defect chaos the defect
dynamics are far from uncorrelated.

A more detailed analysis of the defect dynamics re-
veals a strong tendency for dislocations to be created in

3

P6 dn−

12 ≡ n) ≡

peaked when its six arguments are equal.
Integrating
out the dependence of P6 on ﬁve of its arguments, one
therefore obtains a closed approximation for the change
in P(n+
12dn+
31 during a time in-
terval ∆t involving the creation and annihilation rates
Γ±
n ,
P(t + ∆t, n) = P(t, n) + ∆t (cid:8)Γ+
n+1P(t, n + 1) − (Γ−

n−1P(t, n − 1)+
n + Γ+
n ) P(t, n)(cid:9) .

23...dn−

(2)

Γ

R

−

In steady state the distribution function satisﬁes detailed
−
n+1 = P(n) Γ+
balance, P(n + 1) Γ
n . Assuming a ﬁxed
rate for the induced nucleation, the rate for the process
shown in Fig.2 depends linearly on the density of the
‘square-circle’ PHDs. It creates one ‘triangle-circle’ (and
one ‘triangle-square’) PHD and annihilates the original
‘square-circle’ PHD. This suggests a linear contribution
to the dependence of the annihilation and creation rates
on the defect density. The reverse process originates from
two PHD’s and therefore contributes quadratic terms.
Including also the spontaneous creation of dislocations,
which then form PHDs, we make the ansatz

Γ−
n = a1n + a2n2,

n = c0 + c1n + c2n2.
Γ+

(3)

Since the probability distribution depends only on the
relative rates we choose the overall time scale to normal-
ize the coeﬃcient a2 of the quadratic annihilation rate to
unity. The steady-state solution to (2,3) is then given by

P(n) = P(0)

n−1

Y
j=0

c0 + c1j + c2j2
a1(j + 1) + (j + 1)2 ,

(4)

with P(0) determined by the normalization condition. A
ﬁt of the numerical simulation results to (4) is shown as
solid line in Fig.3 and its inset. For both system sizes
the ﬁts are very good. For L = 114 we obtain c0 = 20.7,
c1 = 20.7, c2 = 0.12, and a1 = 8.6 (a2 is scaled to unity),
conﬁrming the strong dependence of the creation rate on
the number of defects.

By tracking each dislocation from its creation to its
annihilation we can also determine the creation and an-
nihilation rates directly from the numerical simulations.
Fig.5 shows these rates for a dislocation in a given mode
as a function of the number of dislocation pairs in the
same mode for a system of size L = 114 (same parame-
ters as in inset of Fig.3). In principle, the rates should
be given as functions of the number of PHDs involving
the other modes. However, due to the ﬁnite distance
between the dislocations within a PHD the grouping of
dislocations into PHDs is not always unique. Because the
numbers of dislocations in the three modes are strongly
correlated, taking the number of dislocations in the same
mode provides a good approximation. The large scatter
in the data for larger defect numbers is due to the lack of
statistics for events of that kind (cf. inset of Fig.3). Sim-
ilarly, there are only few events with few defects. Clearly,
in the intermediate range of n not only the annihilation

FIG. 4: Persistence limit for penta-hepta defect chaos as a
function of β and γ. Other parameters as in inset of Fig.3
(L = 114).

the vicinity of already existing PHDs. This is illustrated
in Fig.2. Due to the gradient terms involving α and γ,
which lead to nonlinear gradient terms in the Ginzburg-
Landau equations [21], the dislocations making up the
PHDs are spatially separated [18, 19] (cf. Fig.2a).
In
addition, a PHD in modes A1 and A2, say, leads to a
perturbation in mode A3. For suﬃciently large α and γ
the perturbation evolves into a dislocation pair in mode
A3 (in Fig.2b splitting of the cell between the ‘square’
and the ‘circle’ dislocation). The newly created disloca-
tions then recombine with the oppositely charged dislo-
cations in the original PHD to form two PHDs (Fig.2c),
which then typically move apart from each other. Such
induced defect nucleation has been found previously in
coupled Ginzburg-Landau equations [18, 19] and in a
Swift-Hohenberg-type model without rotation or mean
ﬂow [18]. However, in contrast to the case discussed in
[18], in the presence of rotation the nucleation is suﬃcient
to sustain a precessing chaotic state. As shown in Fig.4,
for small Prandtl numbers (β < 0) mean ﬂow enhances
the persistence of the chaotic state.

12, n+

12, n−

To establish a quantitative connection between the in-
duced defect nucleation and the defect distribution func-
tion we consider an extension of the simple kinetic model
for the dynamics of the defects presented in [10]. Since
there are three diﬀerent modes Aj and because the to-
tal topological charge of a PHD has to vanish [22], the
statistics of the defect dynamics are described by a com-
31, n−
23, n−
23, n+
bined distribution function P6(n+
31)
for the six diﬀerent kinds of PHDs. Here n+
12 denotes,
for instance, the number of PHDs involving a disloca-
tion with positive charge in mode A1 and a dislocation
with negative charge in mode A2.
In principle, there
are also dislocations that are not bound in a PHD. In
this kinetic model we assume that their dynamics are
fast enough to follow quickly the number of PHDs. The
change in P6 during a time interval ∆t can be expressed
in terms of creation and annihilation rates, which de-
pend on the various defect densities. The numerical sim-
ulations show that the densities are strongly correlated
at equal times [21], which implies that P6 is strongly

e
t
a
R

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

0.04

0.02

0

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

unstable

stable

0.75
Wavenumber q

0.9

1.05

Annihilation
Creation

5

10
Number  n  of dislocation pairs

15

20

FIG. 5: Creation (squares) and annihilation (circles) rates of
dislocations as a function of the number of dislocation pairs
in the same mode. Parameters as in inset of Fig.3 (L = 114).
Inset: wavenumber distribution function with stability limit
for hexagons according to weakly nonlinear theory (dashed).

rate but also the creation rate depends strongly on the
defect number.

To connect the directly measured rates with the dis-
tribution function (4) the solid curves in Fig.5 give the
creation and annihilation rates as determined from ﬁtting
the distribution function for the defect number using the
form (3). For this comparison the overall time scale is
adjusted to ﬁt the time scale of the simulations. Clearly,
the rates inferred from Fig.3 agree quite well with the di-
rectly measured ones over the statistically reliable range
of n and conﬁrm the interpretation of the deviation of
the distribution function from the squared Poisson dis-
tribution.

The creation rate for dislocations does not vanish for
n = 0, i.e. when no PHDs are present. This indicates the
spontaneous creation of dislocation pairs directly from an
instability of the hexagonal pattern, although the mean
wavenumber of the background pattern is clearly inside

[1] I. Rehberg, S. Rasenat, and V. Steinberg, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 62, 756 (1989).

[2] Q. Ouyang and H. Swinney, Chaos 1, 411 (1991).
[3] S. Morris, E. Bodenschatz, D. Cannell, and G. Ahlers,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2026 (1993).

[4] A. Kudrolli and J. Gollub, Physica D 97, 133 (1996).
[5] M. Dennin, G. Ahlers, and D. S. Cannell, Science 272,

[6] Y. Hu, W. Pesch, G. Ahlers, and R. E. Ecke, Phys. Rev.

[7] A. La Porta and C. M. Surko, Physica D 139, 177 (2000).
[8] K. E. Daniels and E. Bodenschatz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,

388 (1996).

E 58, 5821 (1998).

034501 (2002).

4

the stability balloon. However, the distribution function
for the local wavenumber (inset of Fig.5) shows that there
is a noticeable tail of the distribution function that ex-
tends beyond the low-q stability limit, as determined by
a weakly nonlinear analysis of (1). This suggests that
some dislocation pairs are created through a side-band
instability of the periodic pattern.

In conclusion, in a model for rotating non-Boussinesq
convection we have identiﬁed a spatio-temporally chaotic
state that is dominated by the dynamics of penta-hepta
defects of the underlying hexagon pattern. In contrast
to previously analyzed chaotic states, which are stripe-
based, the defect statistics of this penta-hepta chaos indi-
cate strong correlations between the defects. We identify
the origin of the correlations as the induced nucleation
of dislocations due to the presence of penta-hepta de-
fects. From the defect statistics we extract the depen-
dence of the creation and annihilation rates of defects on
the defect density and ﬁnd good agreement with the rates
measured directly by following individual defects in the
simulations. In ongoing direct simulations of the Navier-
Stokes equations for rotating non-Boussinesq convection
we have identiﬁed regimes exhibiting induced nucleation
of dislocations [23]. In the simulations performed so far
the induced nucleation either occurs only as a transient
and eventually leads to ordered hexagon patterns or it
leads to persistent chaotic dynamics that are somewhat
more complex than the dynamics found here for the ex-
tended Swift-Hohenberg model.

We wish to acknowledge useful discussion with A.
Golovin, A. Nepomnyashchy, and L. Tsimring. This work
was supported by grants from the Department of Energy
(DE-FG02-92ER14303), NASA (NAG3-2113), and NSF
(DMS-9804673). YY acknowledges computation support
from the Argonne National Labs and the DOE-funded
ASCI/FLASH Center at the University of Chicago.

[13] D. A. Egolf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4120 (1998).
[14] D. A. Egolf, I. V. Melnikov, W. Pesch, and R. E. Ecke,

Nature 404, 733 (2000).

[15] G. D. Granzow and H. Riecke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,

[16] I. S. Aranson and L. Kramer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 99

174502 (2001).

(2002).

[17] E. Hern´andez-Garcia, M. Hoyuelos, P. Colet, and M. S.

Miguel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 744 (2000).

[18] P. Colinet, A. A. Nepomnyashchy, and J. C. Legros, Eu-

rophys. Lett. 57, 480 (2002).

[19] Y.-N. Young and H. Riecke, Physica D (submitted).
[20] Y.-N. Young and H. Riecke, Physica D 163, 166 (2002).
[21] Y.-N. Young and H. Riecke, in preparation (2003).
[22] M. Rabinovich and L. Tsimring, Phys. Rev. E 49, 35

[23] Y.-N. Young, H. Riecke, W. Pesch, and V. Moroz, (un-

[9] E. Bodenschatz, W. Pesch, and G. Ahlers, Ann. Rev.

Fluid Mech. 32, 709 (2000).

[10] L. Gil, J. Lega, and J. Meunier, Phys. Rev. A 41, 1138

(1994).

(1990).

73, 648 (1994).

[11] W. Decker, W. Pesch, and A. Weber, Phys. Rev. Lett.

published).

[12] H. Chat´e and P. Manneville, Physica A 224, 348 (1996).

