A Lattice Boltzmann method for simulations of liquid-vapor

Raoyang Zhang and Hudong Chen

Exa Corporation, 450 Bedford Street, Lexington, MA 02420

thermal ﬂows

(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We present a novel lattice Boltzmann method that has a capability of sim-

ulating thermodynamic multiphase ﬂows. This approach is fully thermody-

namically consistent at the macroscopic level. Using this new method, a

liquid-vapor boiling process, including liquid-vapor formation and coalescence

together with a full coupling of temperature, is simulated for the ﬁrst time.

2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

After years of research, the Lattice Boltzmann Methods (LBM) has become an estab-

lished numerical approach in computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD). Many models and ex-

tensions have been formulated that cover a wide range of complex ﬂuids and ﬂows [1].

Furthermore, LBM has been extended to include turbulence models that have already had

a direct and substantial impact on engineering applications [3,4,5,6].

Among many desirable LBM features such as simplicity, parallelizability, and robustness

in dealing with complex boundary conditions, one recognized advantage is its capability of

simulating ﬂuid ﬂows with multiple phases [10,11,1]. The core mechanism in LBM modeling

of multiphase ﬂows is its microscopic level realization of non-ideal gas equations of state.

As a result, at suﬃciently low temperature and proper pressure, liquid-vapor like ﬁrst order

phase transitions are spontaneously generated. There is no need to explicitly tracking the

interfaces between immiscible phases. Furthermore, unlike static statistical physical models

[12], LBM also contains the momentum conservation, so that bubbles and liquid droplets

are formed along with ﬂuid hydrodynamic processes. The success and simplicity of LBM

for multiphase ﬂows has led to various applications that include simulations of oil-water

mixtures through porous media [7], Rayleigh-Taylor problems [8,11], and many more [1]. On

the other hand, there is an crucial missing piece. That is, so far all the existing multiphase

LBM models are limited to regimes in which the temperature dynamics is either negligible

or its eﬀect on ﬂow is unimportant. This limitation, along with the overall unavailability in

CFD, has prevented us from dealing with an important class of ﬂows, namely multiphase

ﬂows involving strong couplings with thermodynamics. Speciﬁc examples of such type of

ﬂows range from the common water boiling processes to thermal nuclear reactor applications.

Thus from both fundamental and practical point of views, extensions of the existing CFD

and LBM methods to simulation of thermal multiphase ﬂows is extremely important.

The LBM is originally evolved from lattice gas models obeying fundamental conservation

laws and symmetries [2,13,14,15]. Now it has also been shown to be systematically derivable

2

from the continuum Boltzmann equation [16]. The most commonly known lattice Boltzmann

equation (LBE) has the following form (adopting the lattice units convention in which

∆t = ∆x = 1),

fi(x + ˆci, t + 1) − fi(x, t) = Ci,

where time t takes on only positive integer values, and the particle velocity takes on a ﬁnite

set of discrete vector values (speeds), {ˆci;

i = 0, . . . , b}. These speeds form links among

nodes on a given lattice [2,9]. The collision term on the right hand side of eqn.(1) now often

uses the so called Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) approximation [17,9],

having a single relaxation time parameter, τ . Here, f eq
i

is the local equilibrium distribution

function that has an appropriately prescribed functional dependence on the local hydrody-

namic properties. The basic hydrodynamic quantities, such as ﬂuid density ρ and velocity

u, are obtained through simple moment summations,

Ci = −

fi − f eq
i
τ

,

ρ(x, t) = X
ρu(x, t) = X

i

i

fi(x, t),

ˆcifi(x, t).

In addition, one can also deﬁne a ﬂuid temperature T from,

ρ

D
2

T (x, t) = X

1
2

i

(ˆci − u(x, t))2fi(x, t),

where D is the dimension of the momentum space of the discrete lattice velocities [2]. It

has been theoretically shown that the hydrodynamic behavior produced from LBE obeys

the Navier-Stokes ﬂuid dynamics at a long wave-length and low frequency limit [9]. The

resulting equation of state is that of an ideal gas ﬂuid, namely the pressure p obeys a linear

relation with density and temperature,

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

p = ρT.

3

The kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid is related to the relaxation parameter by [2,4,9]

ν = (τ −

)T.

1
2

(6)

(7)

LBM has been extended to simulations of multiphase ﬂows [1,10,11]. The key step is

to introduce an additional term, ∆fi(x, t) on the right hand side of eqn.(1), to represent a

body-force. This force term is self-consistently generated by the neighboring distribution

functions around each lattice site, and it does not either violate the local mass conservation

nor the global momentum conservation. However, the local momentum is altered by an

amount,

F(x, t) = X

ˆci∆fi(x, t).

i

The appearance of the body force term can be physically, in a mean-ﬁeld sense, attributed

to a non-local interacting potential U among the particles [19]. The existence of such an

interacting potential is the essential mechanism in the non-ideal gas type of ﬂuids. Hence

with a suitable choice of U, spontaneous phase separations can be produced, and one can

use it conveniently to numerically study multiphase ﬂow phenomena. Through the years,

there have been many progresses in LBM models for multiphase ﬂows [1]. On the other

hand, as pointed out at the beginning, all the existing attempts are limited to isothermal

(or “a-thermal”) situations in which the dynamics of temperature in the ﬂuid is suppressed.

That is, T is either assumed a constant or, at best, a prescribed function of space (or time).

II. MULTIPHASE FLOWS WITH INCORPORATION OF THERMODYNAMICS

In this paper, we present an extension of multiphase LBM to include the full thermody-

namic process.

The most natural extension in LBM for thermodynamics has been to introduce a con-

served energy degree of freedom [20]. This is relatively straightforward for the ideal gas

type of models in which only pointwise collisions are involved and only kinetic energy is

4

considered. When a suﬃcient number of particle speeds is used, one can theoretically show

that LBM leads to the correct full set of thermohydrodynamic equations of an ideal-gas

ﬂuid [4,20,21]. Unfortunately, besides being considerably more expensive computationally

than the isothermal LB models, such an approach cannot be easily generalized to multiphase

thermodynamic ﬂows. The most obvious obstacle is the diﬃculty in tracking the energy evo-

lution while maintaining a total energy conservation: For a non-ideal gas system, the total

energy also contains an interacting energy part that is a function of the relative positions

among the particles. Without a total energy conservation, a temperature variable cannot be

deﬁned fully self-consistently at the microscopic level. In addition, it has been shown that,

unlike the isothermal models, an LBE with an energy degree of freedom does not guarantee a

global H-theorem [23]. As a consequence, the system can exhibit signiﬁcantly less stability.

Other undesirable features in this direct approach include 1) diﬃculty in changing Prandtl

number value from unity, unless a substantial generalization to the BGK collision term is

made; and 2) a rather limited temperature range (with the maximal allowable value only

about twice the minimal value), unless signiﬁcantly more speeds are added [4,21]. Because

of these reasons, the progress in LBM for thermal multiphase ﬂows has been rather slow.

Here we present a new LBM approach that can essentially avoid all of the above men-

tioned drawbacks. The fundamental idea can be brieﬂy summarized: First of all, the ﬂuid

dynamics part (i.e., the density and momentum evolution) is represented by a modiﬁed

isothermal LBE, while the energy evolution part is determined by an additional scalar en-

ergy transport equation [22]. The latter can be solved either via a ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme or

an auxiliary LBE. Secondly, the coupling of the two parts is through a properly deﬁned body

force term in the LBE (and the compression and dissipation terms in the energy equation).

As we shall realize below, although conceptually rather simple, the new model produces the

correct full thermohydrodynamic equations together with a non-ideal gas equation of state.

We choose a common isothermal LBE (e.g., D3Q19, [9]) as a starting basis. As discussed

earlier, an isothermal LBE model for ﬂuid density and velocity evolution is considerably

simpler compared to its energy conserving counterpart. This is certainly desirable for doing

5

eﬃcient ﬂuid ﬂow simulations. Furthermore, the equilibrium distribution in an isothermal

LB model is only a function of ﬂuid density and velocity. The lack of temperature dynam-

ics in the equilibrium distribution is the key for achieving a higher stability in LBE [23].

Having these in mind, it is much desirable to introduce a macroscopic mechanism to recover

thermodynamics. Speciﬁcally, instead of letting temperature to inﬂuence the equilibrium

distributions in an LB system, the thermodynamic eﬀect is obtained via a temperature-

dependent body-force [10]. Because of the “external” nature of the coupling, the LB system

and its equilibrium property remain to be microscopically isothermal. Nonetheless, as ex-

plained below, this alternative way of coupling achieves the desired thermodynamics at the

Ignoring the higher order contributions, the body-force term can be simply expressed as

macroscopic level.

[18],

∆fi(x, t) =

ˆci · F, (x, t)

wi
T0

where the constant weights wi and T0 are directly determined by the LBE model (e.g.,

D3Q19;, in which T0 = 1/3). One can easily verify that this gives rise to eqn.(7). The global

momentum conservation is preserved as long as F(x, t) is expressed as a spatial gradient of

a scalar function [24],

F(x, t) = −∇U(x, t).

It is straightforward to implement this condition in a discrete space by proper ﬁnite-diﬀerence

procedures. Based on the consideration for higher order isometry in surface tension, we

choose (for D3Q19) the following speciﬁc form,

∇U(x, t) ≈ X

D
bc2
i

i

ˆciU(x + ˆci, t)

With the additional body-force term, one can easily recognize that the overall eﬀective

pressure in the resulting ﬂuid momentum equation has become,

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

p = ρT0 + U

6

where the ﬁrst term is a result of the isothermal LBM. From (11), one can obtain any form

of equation of state, p = p(ρ, T ), simply by making a corresponding choice for U,

U(x, t) = p(ρ(x, t), T (x, t)) − ρ(x, t)T0.

(12)

The above quantity is determined once the local values of ρ(x, t) and T (x, t) are provided.

Obviously the resulting ﬂuid is no longer isothermal if the temperature T (x, t) varies. In

other words, because of the macroscopic way of coupling, the resulting ﬂuid dynamics is no

longer isothermal. In addition, with the high ﬂexibility of choosing the equation of state,

this approach can be applied to simulation of non-ideal gas ﬂuids and multiphase ﬂows.

Indeed, we conﬁrmed this basic feature through a set of spinodal decomposition tests based

on a Van de Waals gas model (Carnahan-Starling equation of state). Similar to the other

multiphase LBM, a spontaneous phase separation process is well observed at suﬃciently low

temperature values.

The evolution of the temperature T (x, t) in this new approach is obtained from solving

a supplemental scalar energy transport equation,

ρ(∂t + u · ∇)e = −p∇ · u + ∇ · κ∇T + Ψ

(13)

where e = cvT is the internal energy, and cv is the speciﬁc heat at constant volume of the

ﬂuid. The overall pressure p is deﬁned by the equation of state (11), and κ is the heat

conductivity that can be speciﬁed ﬂexibly. The term Ψ represents the viscous dissipation

of ﬂow and the contribution of surface tension. The energy evolution equation (13) is a

standard macroscopic description for thermal ﬂuids [19]. The computation of an isothermal

LB model along with a scalar energy equation is considerably less expensive than any mi-

croscopic attempts: for it neither requires many particle speeds nor complicated tracking of

the energy evolution. Moreover, the diﬃculties in stability and Prandtl number associated

with the original thermal LBM are not issues in this approach. Solving a scalar transport

equation is rather straightforward. There are many ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes for accurately

and eﬃciently solving the scalar transport equation. In our particular simulations, we have

7

used an extended Lax-Wendroﬀ scheme [5]. The combination of eqns. (1)-(3), (8)-(10), and

(12)-(13) forms the new LBM approach for modeling multiphase thermodynamic ﬂuid ﬂows.

The thermal boundary condition can be realized via standard numerical procedures so that,

κˆn · ∇T |w = q,

(14)

with a prescribed heat ﬂux q, that can either be ﬁxed or a function of local properties in

order to achieve a ﬁxed wall temperature. The unit vector ˆn denotes the surface normal

direction.

There is one more important feature in this model worth pointing out. That is, the new

approach avoids the fundamental limitation on the temperature range that has constrained

the other thermal LB models. Notice the temperature only appears in the body-force term

in a gradient function form. Hence, unlike that for equilibrium distribution functions, there

is no absolute upper or lower bound on the temperature values except that it should not

change too rapidly across a given resolution scale. Moreover, there is obviously no absolute

bound on temperature in the energy equation.

Based on the above discussions, one can realize that the new LB model generates a

fully macroscopically consistent description for thermodynamic ﬂows involving generalized

equations of state. Therefore, this approach oﬀers a convenient and eﬃcient numerical tool

for studying thermal multiphase ﬂow problems.

III. SIMULATION OF THE LIQUID-VAPOR BOILING PROCESS

In this section we present computational results of a typical multiphase thermodynamic

ﬂow simulation with the new LB approach.

In particular, a liquid-vapor boiling process

involving Rayleigh-Benard like convections, phase changes, together with a complex tem-

perature dynamics is simulated successfully, albeit qualitative. Although representative of a

wide range of important applications, boiling ﬂow problems have received little success from

CFD in general. Consequently, it is very important that the new approach can demonstrate

such a fundamental capability.

8

The Rayleigh-Benard convection process has been widely used as a benchmark for many

ﬂuid computations. It is the simplest representation of a boiling phenomenon in which a

complex buoyancy-driven convection process occurs at various values of the Rayleigh number

[25]. On the other hand, most of the boiling processes occur in nature also involve evolutions

of multiple thermodynamic phases. That is, besides thermal convection, the ﬂuid under goes

a phase transition process in which liquid droplets and vapor bubbles are generated. The

most obvious practical examples include the common water boiling in a pot.

We choose a standard Rayleigh-Benard setup, in which both the upper and the lower

solid plates obey no-slip boundary conditions, while the horizontal boundary condition is

periodic. To achieve more stable and second-order accurate numerical results, we have also

applied the new scheme to the modiﬁed LB discretization formulation of He et al [11]. As

discussed above, the Carnahan-Starling equation of state is used here for convenience. The

mean density value ρ = 1.36ρc. The temperature on the upper wall is ﬁxed at Tu = 0.795Tc

while on the lower wall Tl = 0.954Tc. Here Tc (= 0.55 in lattice units for the choice of the

model) is the critical temperature for formation of two phases [11]. The initial temperature is

set to be linearly distributed between the two plates and is consistent with their temperature

boundary conditions. The simulation volume is L × H = 256 × 128 grid points. The gravity

value g = 5×10−6 (lattice units) is used. In order to avoid unnecessary complications, a weak

surface tension eﬀect [8,11] is also applied in the LBM ﬂow simulation, so that the surface

tension contribution to the energy evolution can thus be neglected. Speciﬁcally, we choose

the surface tension coeﬃcient σ to be 0.01 for these simulations. The kinematic viscosity

and the Prandtl number are set at ν = 0.02 and P r = 10, respectively. For simplicity,

the heat capacity cv in our multiphase ﬂow is chosen as a constant (= 1). All the other

ﬂuid parameters are the same as in He et al [11]. Based on the choice of these parameter

values, the resulting Rayleigh number is Ra ∼ 3.0 × 105, which is much higher than the

ﬁrst threshold (Rac = 1708) for an onset of convection in the conventional single-phase

Rayleigh-Benard system [25].

The simulation starts from a uniform density distribution with one percent random

9

ﬂuctuations. To enhance bubble formation, small temperature ﬂuctuations are added to

the equation of state in the ﬁrst grid point layer near the bottom solid plate. Due to the

higher temperature, a lower density ﬂuid is been produced that subsequently leads to small

vapor bubbles at the bottom plate, and then these merge with each other to form larger

size ones. The phase formation process in the simulation is combined with the convection

process in which the hotter and lighter vapor phase rises while the colder and heavier liquid

phase descends due to gravity. With the above choice of parameter values, such a full

thermohydrodynamic cycle is seen to be able to sustain itself indeﬁnitely. Figure 1 shows

the density distributions at some representative nondimensionalized (by qH/g) times. One

can observe the formation of two streams of bubbles near the bottom plate. One can also

observe that two pairs of counter rotating convection rolls are locked between the bubble

streams. In addition, the convection rolls are seen to pinch oﬀ the small bubbles from the

bottom plate. As bubbles rise, their sizes are seen to increase slightly. Since small bubbles

move faster than large bubbles, collision and coalescence often occur among them. Figure 2

shows streamlines of the velocity ﬁeld at time 39.5, from which one can clearly see the two

pairs of counter rotating convection rolls. Figure 3 depicts the corresponding temperature

deviation from the linear distribution at the same time.

Interestingly, the temperature

exhibits a non-trivial behavior: Its value is seen to be relatively lower in the vapor phase

domains near their interfaces. As expected physically, this phenomenon is due to the p∇ · u

term in the energy equation (13) associated with the volume expansion from water to vapor

phases. All the above simulated phenomena are qualitatively correct for a realistic two phase

thermodynamic ﬂow.

We also ran another simulation with the exact same setup as the above, except that the

surface tension is made ten times stronger. As seen in ﬁgure 4, only one pair of counter

rotating convection rolls is produced at its asymptotic state. Diﬀerent from the standard

single phase Bernard convection, we see that other intrinsic properties such as the surface

tension can also alter the thermal convection characteristics in a multiphase ﬂow [25].

10

IV. DISCUSSIONS

In this paper, we present a novel approach that combines a multiphase lattice Boltzmann

method with a scalar temperature equation. The coupling is realized macroscopically via

a self-consistent body-force. The basic formulation is applicable to both 2D and 3D ﬂow

situations. It is directly veriﬁable theoretically that new LB model obeys the correct full

thermohydrodynamic equations with a non-ideal gas equation of state. The incorporation

of thermohydrodynamics in the new approach allows for simulations of complex multiphase

ﬂows coupled with temperature dynamics. Other important features of the new scheme

include its simplicity, eﬃciency and robustness for simulating thermal multiphase ﬂow pro-

cesses [26]. The latter has shown to be extremely diﬃcult with the other LBM based schemes

or the more conventional numerical methods [27]. Furthermore, like other LBMs, the new

approach can handle complex physical boundary conditions [3]. All these are highly desirable

for a practical computational model.

We have demonstrated the capability of our new approach for doing boiling ﬂow simula-

tions. This type of ﬂows has so far not been successfully handled via other methods. Thus

the new approach has opened a promising opportunity for numerically studying thermal

multiphase ﬂow problems. On the other hand, further improvements in the direction of

the new approach are necessary in order for it to become a more useful and quantitative

computational tool. Without going into detail, the major remaining issues include: 1) in-

corporating more realistic equations of state instead of the van der Waals type of gas model;

2) a more physical treatment of the heat capacity and latent heat; 3) further understand-

ing and modeling of surface tension and near interface physics; 4) further enhancement of

numerical stability to achieve signiﬁcantly higher density ratio and lower viscosity; and 5)

generalization of boundary conditions. Among all the above tasks, we consider (4) to be the

most challenging one for LBM in general.

11

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Drs. Xiaoyi He, YueHong Qian, Ilya Staroselsky, Adrian Tent-

ner, Steven Orszag, Sauro Succi, Rick Shock and Nick Martys for their useful discussions.

This work is supported in part by DOE SBIR grant No. 65016B01-I.

12

REFERENCES

[1] S. Chen and G. Doolen, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30, 329 (1998).

[2] U. Frisch, B. Hasslacher and Y. Pomeau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (1986) 1505; and U. Frisch,

D. d’Humi`eres, B. Hasslacher, P. Lallemand, Y. Pomeau and J-P. Rivet, Complex Systems

1 (1987) 649.

[3] H.D. Chen, C. Teixeira and K. Molvig, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. C 9, No.8, 1281 (1998); C.

Teixeira, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. C 9, No.8, 1281 (1998); R. Lietz, S. Mallick, S. Kandasamy,

H. Chen, SAE, No.2002-0154, (2002).

[4] H.D. Chen, C. Teixeira and K. Molvig, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 8, 675 (1997).

[5] S. Succi, H.D. Chen, C. Teixeira, G. Bella, A. De Maio, and K. Molvig, J. Comp. Phys.,

152, 493 (1999); M. Pervaiz and C. Teixeira, Proc. ASME PVP Conf., 2nd Intl. Sympo.

on Comp. Techno. for Fluid/Thermal/Chem. Appl., Aug. 1-5, Boston, 1999.

[6] S.-L. Hou, Ph.D. Thesis, Kansas State Univ., (1995).

[7] D. Rothman, Geophys. 53, 509 (1988); A. Gunstensen and D. Rothman, J. Geophys. Res.

98, 6431 (1993); D. Grunau, S. Chen, and K. Eggert, Phys. Fluids A 5, 2557 (1993).

[8] R. Zhang, X. He and S.Y. Chen, Comp. Phys. Comm. 129, 121 (2000).

[9] Y. Qian, D. D’Humieres, and P. Lallemand, Europhys. Lett. 17, 479 (1992); S.Y. Chen,

H.D. Chen, D. Martinez, and W. Matthaeus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3776 (1991); H.D.

Chen, S.Y. Chen and W. Matthaeus, Phys. Rev. A 45, 5339 (1992).

[10] X. Shan and H.D. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 47, 1815 (1993); X. Shan and H. Chen, Phys. Rev.

E 49, 2941 (1994).

Phys. 107, 309 (2002).

[11] X. He, S.Y. Chen and R. Zhang, J. Comp. Phys. 152, 642 (1999); X. He, R. Zhang, S.Y.

Chen and G.D. Doolen Phys. of Fluids, 11 1143 (1999). X. He and G.D. Doolen, J. Stat.

13

[12] L. Reichl, “A modern course in statistical physics”, Univ. Texas Press, Austin, (1980).

[13] G. R. McNamara and G. Zanetti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2332 (1988).

[14] Y. Qian, Ph.D. Thesis, Ecole Sup. Normale, Paris (1990).

[15] R. Benzi, S. Succi, and M. Vergassola, Phys. Rep. 222, 145 (1992).

[16] X. Shan and X. He, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 65 (1998); X. He and L. Luo, Phys. Rev. E 55,

6333 (1997).

[17] P. Bhatnagar, E. Gross, and M. Krook, Phys. Rev. 94, 511 (1954).

[18] N. Martys, X. Shan, and H. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 58, 6855 (1998).

[19] K. Huang, “Statistical Mechanics”, Wiley and Sons, 2nd Ed., New York (1987).

[20] F. Alexander, S. Chen, and J. Sterling, Phys. Rev. E 47, 2249 (1993); Y. Qian, J. Sci.

Comp. 8, No.3, 231 (1993).

[21] C. Teixeira, H. Chen and D. Freed, Comp. Phys. Comm. 129, 207 (2000).

[22] A. Bartoloni, C. Battista, S. Cabasino, PS Paolucci, J. Peter, et al., Int. J. Mod. Phys. C

4, 993 (1993); X. Shan, Phys. Rev. E 55, 2780 (1997).

[23] H.D. Chen, J. Stat. Phys. 81, 347 (1995); H.D. Chen and C. Teixeira, Comp. Phys.

Comm. 129, 21 (2000).

[24] Y. Qian and S. Chen, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. C 8, 763 (1997).

[25] S. Chandrasekhar, “Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic stability”, Clarendon Press, Ox-

ford (1961).

[26] H.D. Chen, Computers in Physics 7, No.6, 632 (1993).

[27] R. Scardovelli and S. Zaleski, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 31, 567 (1999).

14

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Density distributions at t = 39.5, 41.5, 43.5, and 45.5, respectively. Density ratio

between liquid and vapor is 3. Red color represents the liquid phase, bule color represents

the vapor phase.

FIG. 2. Streamline and vector plots of the ﬂow velocity ﬁeld at t = 39.5.

FIG. 3. Temperature deviation (Tdev = T −Tlinear

Ttop

) at t = 39.5. The color range is (-0.1, 0.02).

FIG. 4. Density distribution and velocity vector plot with surface tension coeﬃcient σ = 0.1.

15

FIG. 1.

16

FIG. 2.

17

FIG. 3.

18

FIG. 4.

19

