EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental
von K´arm´an type ﬂows

L. Mari´e1, J. Burguete1,2, F. Daviaud1, and J. L´eorat3,4
1 Service de Physique l’´Etat Condens´e, CEA/Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2 Departamento de F´ısica y Matem´atica Aplicada, Universidad de Navarra, E-31080 Pamplona, Spain
3 Observatoire de Paris-Meudon, F-92195 Meudon, France
4 ASCI, Universit´e Paris Sud, F-91403 Orsay, France

January 17, 2014

Abstract. A numerical study of the magnetic induction equation has been performed on von K´arm´an type
ﬂows. These ﬂows are generated by two co-axial counter-rotating propellers in cylindrical containers. Such
devices are currently used in the von K´arm´an sodium (VKS) experiment designed to study dynamo action
in an unconstrained ﬂow. The mean velocity ﬁelds have been measured for diﬀerent conﬁgurations and are
introduced in a periodic cylindrical kinematic dynamo code. Depending on the driving conﬁguration, on
the poloidal to toroidal ﬂow ratio and on the conductivity of boundaries, some ﬂows are observed to sustain
growing magnetic ﬁelds for magnetic Reynolds numbers accessible to a sodium experiment. The response
of the ﬂow to an external magnetic ﬁeld has also been studied: The results are in excellent agreement with
experimental results in the single propeller case but can diﬀer in the two propellers case.

PACS. 47.65.+a – 91.25.Cw

1 Introduction

Dynamo action [1,2], which converts kinetic energy into
magnetic energy in astronomical objects, is the manifes-
tation of the coupling between kinetic and magnetic exci-
tations in a conducting ﬂuid and, as such, could be con-
sidered as ordinary a physical phenomenon as is thermal
convection. This is in fact not the case, when one considers
the modest knowledge acquired from all the approaches
carried out up to now from theory, numerical computa-
tion or experiments. Since the recent results obtained by
the Riga [3,4] and Karlsruhe [5,6] experiments, the oc-
curence of dynamo action is no longer questionable, but
the nonlinear regimes are very poorly known: most basic
problems set for example by geomagnetism or heliomag-
netism remain without satisfying answers.

As for hydrodynamic turbulence, the experimental ap-
proach could represent an eﬃcient tool to study the non-
linear eﬀects in MHD ﬂows. We will here concentrate on an
analysis of a particular type of ﬂow - namely von K´arm´an
ﬂow - without trying to give a complete account of this
ﬁeld of activity. These ﬂows are used in the von K´arm´an
sodium (VKS) experiment [7,8] that is devoted to study
the approach towards a self-generating dynamo in an un-
constrained ﬂow. No self-excitation has been reported yet
and the ability of these ﬂows to generate a magnetic ﬁeld
remains an open question. Some numerical examples [9]
have shown that dynamo action is present in ﬂows for
magnetic Reynolds numbers Rm = µ0σU L ≥ Rc
m ≃ 100

where U and L are respectively the maximal speed of the
ﬂow and the typical size of the conducting volume, µ0 is
the magnetic permeability and σ the electrical conductiv-
ity. Using the best available ﬂuid conductor, liquid sodium
at about 150◦ C, the condition Rm = 100 implies that
U L = 10m2/s, which represents the main technical chal-
lenge to be achieved by any experimental ﬂuid dynamo.
In the natural dynamos, such as the Earth, large magnetic
Reynolds numbers are achieved with scales above 1000 km
and small velocities, while in an experimental device, cost
constraints ask for sizes not too far from one meter and
thus a relatively high speed is needed.

Note also that using liquid sodium as a conducting
ﬂuid, the kinetic Reynolds number of the ﬂow is Re =
U L/ν = Rm/Pm, where Pm = µ0σν is the magnetic
Prandtl number and ν the kinematic viscosity. As Pm ∼
10−5 for liquid metals, Re ≃ 105 ×Rm ≃ 107, which shows
that the ﬂow is in a regime of fully developped turbulence.
Moreover, as is well known, the threshold Rc
m for dynamo
action depends strongly on the characteristics of the ﬂow.
Three diﬀerent methods may then be used to select an
experimental conﬁguration:
(i) reproduce ﬂows already known to lead to dynamo ac-
tion, based on previous theoretical or numerical knowl-
edge. Very recently, this approach has been successfully
used in constrained ﬂows in recent experiments in Riga [4],
based on the Ponomarenko model [10], and Karlsruhe [6],
based on the G. O. Roberts model [11]. However, imposing

2

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

the desired ﬂow topology may require internal walls, which
may have an inﬂuence on the non-linear regime also. De-
spite diﬀerent attempts [12,13,7,8], dynamo action in an
unconstrained turbulent ﬂow has not yet been observed.
(ii) try various forcing mechanisms and geometries using
directly a conducting ﬂow prototype, and determine the
corresponding critical magnetic Reynolds numbers (e.g. by
measuring the decay times of an external magnetic ﬁeld
or the response to an external magnetic ﬁeld). This ap-
proach has been used in sodium by Gans [14], by Odier
et al. [15] in gallium and by Peﬄey et al. [12,13] in the
sodium Maryland experiment. The main drawback is the
lack of knowledge of the velocity ﬁeld: if the selected con-
ﬁguration leads to a threshold Rc
m being too high to be
feasible, there is no guide besides trials and errors to make
it smaller.
(iii) study various forcing mechanisms and geometries in
water models to measure the mean velocity ﬁelds which
are then introduced in the numerical computation of a
kinematic dynamo problem. This is the way chosen in par-
ticular by the Madison [16], the Perm [17] and the VKS
experiments [7,8].

In this work, a numerical study of the induction equa-
tion is performed on von K´arm´an type ﬂows similar to
those used in the VKS experiment. These ﬂows are gen-
erated by counter-rotating disks in a cylindrical geometry
and have been extensively studied in the past [18,19,20,
21,22,23]. They are supposed to be good candidates to
the realization of an experimental homogeneous ﬂuid dy-
namo. In particular, kinematic dynamo simulations in a
sphere [9] and direct numerical simulations of the Taylor-
Green geometry [24] have shown that similar ﬂows lead to
self-excitation for accessible Rc
m. No dynamo action has
been presently observed in these unconstrained geome-
tries, but two types of MHD measurements have been per-
formed: in a sphere ﬁlled with sodium, Peﬄey et al. [12]
have used pulse-decay rates to obtain an estimation of
Rc
m; the VKS experiment [8] has studied the response of
the ﬂow to an external ﬁeld and exhibited large magnetic
induction eﬀects. However, the dependence of the thresh-
old on the diﬀerent parameters of the problems remains
unknown. In this paper, the mean velocity ﬁelds are mea-
sured in a water model experiment for various conﬁgu-
rations and introduced in an axially periodic cylindrical
kinematic dynamo code. The dependence of the threshold
on the main characteristics of the ﬂow and on the bound-
ary conditions is then studied.

The paper is organized as follows. The setup and the
velocity ﬁelds of the model experiment are presented in
Section 2 and the numerical approach in Section 3. The de-
termination of threshold, the description of the self-excited
magnetic ﬁeld and the response of the system to an ex-
ternal magnetic ﬁeld are then reported in Section 4. The
results are ﬁnally discussed and compared to available re-
sults in Section 5.

2 Water model experiment

2.1 Experimental setup

The experimental setup shown in ﬁgure 1 is a half-scale
model of the sodium VKS experiment [8]. It consists of
a cylindrical container of internal radius Rc = 10 cm and
height Hc = 30 cm, ﬁlled with water. The system is driven
by two counter-rotating co-axial disks of radius Rd, with
their inner faces a distance Hd = 18 cm apart. Diﬀerent
disks have been used: smooth or rough disks, disks with
straight or curved blades with diﬀerent heights. In the
following, we report results concerning two diﬀerent pro-
pellers: Propeller TM28 (resp. TM60) has a 180 mm di-
ameter (resp. 185 mm), 8 blades (resp. 16) of 2 cm height.
The blades of TM60 have a curvature slightly larger than
those of TM28. Both propellers rotate as shown in ﬁgure 1.
The propellers presently used in the VKS experiment are
of the TM60 type. Baﬄes of diﬀerent width and length
can be introduced on the internal wall of the cylinder in
order to change the ratio of axial to azimuthal components
of the velocity ﬁeld.

Two 2 kW motors are used to drive the disks in oppo-
site directions at an adjustable frequency f in the range
0-25 Hz. The measurements reported here have been per-
formed in the range 0-10 Hz. A kinematic Reynolds num-
ber based on the driving is deﬁned as: Re = 2πf R2
c/ν,
where ν is the kinematic viscosity of water.

Global measurements such as torque or power and
pressure measurements have been performed in order to
characterize the turbulence. The results will be reported
in details elsewhere and show results typical of fully tur-
bulent ﬂows. In the following, we focus on the velocity
measurements which are used in the numerical study.

2.2 Velocity ﬁelds

2.2.1 Measurement of the velocity ﬁeld

Velocity ﬁelds have been obtained via laser Doppler ve-
locimetry (LDV) using a DANTEC system. The axial and
azimuthal velocities Vz and Vθ have been measured as
functions of r, z and time. At the rotation rates used in
the experiment, the ﬂow is highly turbulent: Re ≃ 6.105
for f = 10 Hz. Figure 2 shows the temporal evolution of
the local velocity at a given point: velocity ﬂuctuations
appear to be of the order of magnitude of the mean ve-
locity, and have a quasi-gaussian distribution. In fact, the
amplitude of the ﬂuctuations as well as the shape of their
probability density function strongly depend on the posi-
tion inside the ﬂow. The amplitude is particularly high in
the plane between the two recirculation cells, where the
strong toroidal shear maintains a vigorous mixing layer.
More quantitatively, the turbulence intensity deﬁned as
KV = Vrms/Urim, where Vrms is the order of magnitude
of the standard deviation of the velocity throughout the
ﬂow and Urim is the rim velocity of the disks, is roughly
40 %.

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

3

As a consequence, the velocity can be seen as a mean
ﬂow plus a turbulent part: V = U+ u. In the following, U
denotes a time averaged ﬂow, and V a velocity ﬁeld that
depends on time.

The LDV facility gives only the axial and azimuthal in-
stantaneous velocity, whereas the induction equation asks
for the three time-averaged components. The missing mean
radial velocity is derived as follows. Note that, although
U is not a solution of the Navier Stokes equations, it is a
solenoidal vector ﬁeld, and it can always be decomposed
into toroidal and poloidal components:

U(r, θ, z) = ∇ × (T ˆz) + ∇ × ∇ × (P ˆz) = Utor + Upol

where ˆz is the unitary vector in the axial direction. As-
suming now that U is axisymmetric (it is not strictly the
case when four axial baﬄes are used), its toroidal compo-
nent reduces to the azimuthal velocity, while its poloidal
component is found to lie in the meridian planes

Utor(r, z) = Uθ(r, z) ˆθ
Upol(r, z) = ∇ × (∂rP ˆθ) = ˆθ × (1/r ∇ψ(r, z))
Upol(r, z) = Ur(r, z) ˆr + Uz(r, z) ˆz

where ˆr and ˆθ are the unitary vectors in the radial and az-
imuthal directions. The poloidal scalar P is thus replaced
by the ﬂux function ψ(r, z), such that

Ur(r, z) = 1/r ∂zψ
Uz(r, z) = −1/r ∂rψ

so that ﬁnally Ur can be derived from the experimental
knowledge of the ﬁeld Uz(r, z).

The velocity ﬁeld input in the kinematic dynamo code
is obtained in the following way: (i) The time averaged
Uθ and Uz are measured on a 11 × 15 grid in the plane
θ = 0 of ﬁgure 1, outside the region swept by the propeller
blades. (ii) In the region swept by the propeller blades, we
interpolate lines z = 0, 16, 17, making the hypothesis
that Uz depends linearly in z and Uθ does not depend
on z. (iii) From the obtained 11 × 18 Uz velocity ﬁeld,
we compute the ﬂux function ψ by a radial integration
between the axis and the container wall. (iv) ψ and Uθ
are smoothed using a standard 3 × 3 convolution ﬁlter.
(v) ψ and Uθ are then periodized in the z-direction in
order to eliminate Gibbs phenomenon in the code. Axial
periodicity is obtained by completing the measured ﬂow
by its symmetric with respect to the plane of any of the
container tops (as translation of length L is obtained by
the product of two reﬂections by parallel planes distant of
L/2). (vi) ψ and Uθ are then interpolated linearly to the
ﬁnal 48(z) × 51(r) simulation resolution. (vii) Ur is then
derived from ψ.

Note that the periodization of the ﬂow implies that
the toroidal ﬂow can be decomposed on n′ odd modes,
while the poloidal ﬂow can be decomposed on n′ even
modes. The magnetic eigenmodes depend on these sym-
metry properties of the simulated ﬂow.

2.2.2 Characterization of the velocity ﬁeld

Diﬀerent driving devices have been tested and each con-
ﬁguration gives a diﬀerent velocity ﬁeld. Figure 3 shows
the toroidal and poloidal components of the mean velocity
ﬁeld for the propellers TM28 and TM60 without baﬄes.
The two velocity ﬁelds appear to be similar, but we will
see later that TM28 and TM60 display quite diﬀerent dy-
namo properties.

In table 1, the main characteristics of these velocity
ﬁelds are summarized. The spatial mean speed in the mea-
sured volume, including blades, is deﬁned as:

Umean =

|U(r, z)|dV

1
V

ZV
and the eﬃciency Ef of the propeller as: Ef = Umax/2πRcf .
Umax represents the maximum value of the speed in the
measured volume. Typically, Umax ≤ Urim.

As can be seen in table 1, the eﬃciency of propeller
TM28 is 25% larger than that of propeller TM60. Note
that the eﬃciency of a straight-blade propeller is closer to
unity. As could be expected from the curvature diﬀerence,
the poloidal-to-toroidal ratio of propeller TM60 is larger
than that of propeller TM28. This gain in poloidal-to-
toroidal ratio is however oﬀset by the loss in eﬃciency,
so that the poloidal ﬂow of TM60 is smaller than that of
TM28.

The largest values of the velocity can be found close to
the propeller rims. This is true for both the poloidal and
the toroidal velocities, regardless of the propeller used.

For a typical pair of propellers, we have performed ve-
locity ﬁeld measurements at diﬀerent rotation rates, 2.5,
5 and 7.5 Hz. At every location inside the ﬂow, the mea-
sured velocity is proportional to the rotation rate. This
result could be expected from standard hydrodynamics
arguments. As a further consequence, changing the mag-
netic Reynolds number by a simple scaling of the ﬂow
seems reasonable. This property will be used in the nu-
merical code.

3 Numerical resolution of the induction
equation

3.1 Scope of the numerical approach

The numerical dynamo problem asks for the resolution of
two coupled sets of equations, one for the velocity ﬁeld
and one for the induction equation. In the context of ex-
perimental dynamos using liquid sodium, at Rm = 100,
the kinetic Reynolds number of the ﬂow will reach 107,
which is far out of range of any direct numerical simu-
lation. This is why scaled down water experiments are
needed to measure the mean ﬂow velocity ﬁeld, to esti-
mate the mechanical torque necessary to drive the ﬂow as
well as the dissipated power. Although the chaotic proper-
ties of the ﬂow may play an essential role for the dynamo
action in speciﬁc conﬁgurations, there is presently no way
to determine the time dependent turbulent velocity ﬁeld.

4

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

An alternative to the fully nonlinear dynamo solution
is the ”kinematic” approach, where the ﬂow is considered
as given in the evolution equation of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Starting with a faint seed ﬁeld, this approximation is valid
as long as the magnetic force ﬁeld remains small. A bet-
ter contact with experiments may be obtained if the time
dependent solutions are obtained, instead of choosing to
solve an eigenvalue problem. In this case, for ﬂows at mag-
netic Reynolds numbers below the critical value, one may
study the magnetic response to external magnetic ﬁelds,
possibly time-dependent, in order to get an experimental
estimate of the critical Rm. Finally, note that while the
nonlinear simulations need a challenging amount of nu-
merical ressources, the parameter space may be explored
more rapidly and thoroughly using the kinematic solution.
When following an optimization procedure, this is a mean-
ingful practical point. A typical example is given below by
the variation of the thickness of an high conductivity blan-
ket, which allows to reduce the critical Rm.

3.2 The kinematic dynamo code

As explained above, we consider that the velocity ﬁeld is
known in a cylindrical container of radius Rc. Moreover
we assume that the conductivity σ of the ﬂuid inside the
cylinder is uniform, the external medium is insulating and
that the magnetic permeability is uniform in all space.

The induction equation is adimensionalized using the
cylinder radius as length unit and the ohmic diﬀusion time
td = µ0σR2
c as time unit. The induction equation reads
then

∂tB = Rm∇ × (U × B) + ∇2B.

axial and azimuthal modes. The spatial scheme is pseu-
dospectral in the azimuthal and axial directions, and uses
compact ﬁnite diﬀerences in the radial direction.

Let us summarize now the formal organisation of the
temporal scheme. Suppose that at time ti the internal
magnetic ﬁeld b(r, ti) is known: from the normal com-
ponent of the surface ﬁeld b⊥(S, ti), where S is a point on
the surface r = 1, one may get the external potential for
the next time step, φ(r, ti+1)(r > 1) and the correspond-
ing tangential magnetic ﬁeld is then obtained by diﬀeren-
tiation bk(S, ti+1) = ∇kφ(S, ti+1). These two components
are the two boundary conditions used for the integration
of the dynamo equation within the cylinder, which gives ﬁ-
nally the internal ﬁeld b(r, ti+1), (r < 1) at time step i+1.
The time scheme is second order Adams-Bashforth for the
non linear terms, while the purely multiplicative parts of
the diﬀusive terms are integrated exactly. The integration
variables are the three components of the magnetic ﬁeld,
and this allows to follow the growth of the divergence of
the magnetic ﬁeld, whose solenoidal property is not pre-
served under this algorithm (the discretized expression of
div curl is not zero). To keep the divergence small, the
numerical solution is projected, every 40 steps, say, on a
divergenceless ﬁeld. Other features of the code have been
described elsewhere [30].

Comparisons with a ﬁnite cylinder dynamo code (per-
formed by F. Stefani, RFZ, Dresden) have not shown sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences for the critical Rm with respect to the
simpler periodic solution having an identical aspect ra-
tio, at least for a few ﬂow conﬁgurations which have been
tested.

Notice that the initial magnetic ﬁeld must satisfy

4 Results

∇.B = 0.

Boundary conditions are implemented as follows. The mag-
netic ﬁeld must be continuous at the cylinder boundary,
from Maxwell equations. The external ﬁeld is curl-free and
derives from an harmonic scalar potential, which is com-
pletely deﬁned by, say, its gradient normal to the cylinder,
i.e. the magnetic ﬁeld orthogonal to the boundary. For a
given conducting volume, the numerical determination of
the external harmonic potential from its gradient at the
surface boundary may involve substantial numerical re-
sources, and this is in particular the case for a cylinder
of ﬁnite length. We have chosen here to avoid this prob-
lem by solving the induction equation for axially periodic
ﬂows, where there is an analytical solution for the external
potential, as is also the case for the spherical geometry.

The magnetic ﬁeld has thus the following representa-

tion,

B(r, ϕ, z, t) =

Bn,m(r, t) exp [i(mθ + nz)] ,

n,m
X

where the z coordinate (0 ≤ z ≤ 2π) has been scaled with
the axial period and the integers n et m characterize the

Dynamo action may take place if the energy generation by
stretching dominates the ohmic dissipation. This is mea-
sured in a loose way by the magnitude of the magnetic
Reynolds number Rm which appears after adimensional-
ization of the equation with the maximal ﬂow speed U and
a container typical scale L. This necessary condition is use-
less to select ﬂows which are indeed eﬃcient dynamos, i.e.
ﬂows with small critical magnetic Reynolds numbers. Nu-
merical kinematic dynamos are generally obtained from
successive attempts with ﬂows given by a few velocity
components selected for analytical simplicity (see e.g. [9]).
In this section, we present numerical results obtained with
the mean experimental velocity ﬁelds presented above.

As explained in paragraph 4.2.2, these velocity ﬁelds
present a slight experimental disymmetry, which has a
small inﬂuence on the obtained results. We have thus pref-
ered to ﬁrst present the results with a symmetrized veloc-
ity ﬁeld and then to study the inﬂuence of this additional
parameter. These results ﬁrst concern threshold determi-
nation and the inﬂuence of diﬀerent parameters on it. We
then give a description of the spatio-temporal character-
istics of the self-excited magnetic ﬁeld mode. In order to
compare the numerical results to available experimental
data, we ﬁnally study the response of the system to an

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

5

external magnetic ﬁeld for Rm below the dynamo thresh-
old.

4.1 Threshold determination

For a given experimental conﬁguration, the mean velocity
ﬁeld shape is ﬁxed, and cannot be varied. As indicated in
Section 2, varying the propellers rotation rate, we are only
modifying Rm in the induction equation, but not the ﬁeld
shape. The eﬀect of turbulence is not taken into account.
For each experimental velocity ﬁeld, we have performed
a series of numerical runs with the kinematic dynamo
code, at diﬀerent Rm, and checked the energy evolution
of each mode m, n, deﬁned as follows:

En,m(t) =

|Bn,m(r, t)|2rdr ∼ eσn,mt

1

0

Z

Note that the diﬀerent azimuthal m-modes are decoupled,
since only axisymmetric ﬂows are considered. Self excita-
tion is achieved when the energy En,m grows in at least
a single mode without external magnetic excitation that
is if σn,m > 0 for at least a pair n, m. If σn,m < 0 ∀n, m,
ohmic diﬀusion dominates.

Figure 4 displays the evolution in time of En,m for
m = 1 and n = 0, ..., 5 for the velocity ﬁeld labelled TM28
under and above threshold. The initial condition is:

En,m(t) =

when m = 0, 1, 2, 3; n = 0

1.0
0.2 when m = 0, 1, 2, 3; n = 1, ..., 7
0.0

in any other case

(

In both cases, a transient regime corresponding to the
relaxation of the initial ﬁeld is observed until t ≃ td. For
Rm < Rc
m, the energy in all modes decreases in time, i.e.
the growth rates are negative (ﬁgure 4a). For Rm ≥ Rc
m,
the energy of some modes begins to grow (ﬁgure 4b). The
critical magnetic Reynolds number Rc
m is deﬁned as the
value for which at least one growth rate is greater or equal
to zero. For the velocity ﬁelds tested, self-excitation al-
ways appears through the m = 1 mode. Remember that,
as the ﬂow is axisymmetric, an axisymmetric (m = 0) self-
excited magnetic ﬁeld is forbidden by anti-dynamo theo-
rems [1].

In the following, for numerical eﬃciency, a diﬀerent
initial condition has been used, namely the (solenoidal)
eigenmode of the vector laplacian which is closest in shape
to the most unstable mode of the induction equation (cf.
section 4.2). The energy is thus initially distributed on the
m = 1, n odd Fourier modes. This leads to the near elim-
ination of the transient regimes of ﬁgure 4. The variation
of the maximal growth rate is presented in ﬁgure 5 as a
fonction of Rm for the two velocity ﬁelds of ﬁgure 3. The
velocity ﬁeld corresponding to propeller TM28 exhibits
a growth rate that crosses the zero line for Rc
m ≃ 120
and gives rise to dynamo action. On the contrary, for the
propeller TM60, the growth rate remains negative: it sat-
urates for Rm ≃ 80, and then decreases again. This latter
result corresponds to a non-dynamo velocity ﬁeld. Per-
forming simulations for Rm up to 300, we have observed

that the growth rate for TM28 (resp. TM60) keeps in-
creasing (resp. decreasing). At those large values of Rm,
simulation results are not accurate enough to obtain a pre-
cise scaling of σ(Rm). A linear scaling of σ with Rm would
indicate a saturation of σ, if expressed with the convective
time unit td/Rm.

The existence and the exact value of Rc

m strongly de-
pends on the characteristics of the velocity ﬁeld and on
the boundary conditions. To investigate this dependence,
we have modiﬁed diﬀerent parameters. First, the veloc-
ity ﬁelds have been modiﬁed in a controled manner in
the numerical simulations, changing the ratio between the
poloidal and toroidal velocity components. We have then
investigated the eﬀect of a conducting layer (with various
thicknesses) surrounding the ﬂow container.

4.1.1 Ratio between the poloidal and toroidal velocity
components

Because of the ﬂow axisymmetry (see section 2.2), we can
keep the solenoidal character of the ﬂow, when changing
the ratio Γ = |Upol| / |Utor| where

|Upol,tor| =

|Upol,tor| r dr dz

ZV

and look at the eﬀect of Γ on the critical magnetic Reynolds
number. The Γ parameter strongly aﬀects the growth rates,
as can be observed in ﬁgure 6 for TM28 propeller: a nega-
tive growth rate can become positive and vice-versa. Most
of the studied velocity ﬁelds present a maximum growth
rate for Γ ≃ 0.75. This result is recovered for both dy-
namo and non-dynamo velocity ﬁelds such as the TM60.
The optimal value Γopt corresponds nearly to the experi-
mental value for the TM28 propeller (Γexp = 0.71), while
it is diﬀerent in the case of TM60 propeller (Γexp = 0.82).
In a von K´arm´an ﬂow, this parameter can be adjusted
within certain limits in various ways e.g. by changing the
diameter of the disc or the curvature of the blades (cf.
Table 1) or by ﬁtting baﬄes located on the cylinder wall.
Four baﬄes can be placed parallel to the cylinder axis at
azimuthal intervals of π/2. These baﬄes break the axisym-
metry of the problem, making it necessary to measure the
full three-dimensional velocity ﬁeld. This also imposes a
higher resolution in the azimuthal direction in the code,
making simulations more time-consuming. We have not
performed systematic exploration of these eﬀects, and will
not present here the corresponding results.

Figure 6 also reveals a diﬀerence in the variation of
the growth rate with Rm depending on the value of Γ .
For Γ ≃ 0.5, σ varies quasi-linearly with Rm, while for
Γ ≃ 1, σ seems independent of Rm.

4.1.2 Conducting layer

It is empirically known that a stagnant layer of conducting
material surrounding some ﬂuid dynamos may reduce the
critical magnetic Reynolds number. In the case of the Riga

6

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

experiment [3], this has also been numerically veriﬁed by
Stefani et al. [37]. The example of the Ponomarenko dy-
namo has been systematically examined in [39], varying
the thickness of the static conducting layer, and the au-
thors show that there is an optimal thickness leading to a
lowest critical Rm. A similar conﬁguration is available in
the VKS experiment [8] with a copper wall put inside the
stainless steel cylindrical container.

As indicated in Section 3, the numerical simulations
are performed with a conductivity which is uniform inside
a cylinder and insulating boundary conditions. A static
conductive shell of arbitrary thickness may thus be easily
introduced only if it has the same conductivity as the ﬂuid.
If the ﬂow lies within a radius Rc, the stationary shell
goes from r = Rc, to r = Rext, and we can use as control
parameter the relative width W = (Rext/Rc) − 1. Note
that we have chosen to present the numerical results with
the magnetic Reynolds deﬁned with the radius Rc.

Figure 7 displays the eﬀect of a conductive layer for
propeller TM28 and for propeller TM60. The ﬁrst eﬀect
concerns the growth rates that increase with W , until they
saturate for W = Ws ≃ 0.2. For propeller TM28, the
threshold Rc
m decreases from 120 for W = 0 to 70 for
W = 0.2 (cf. Figure 7a). The second important eﬀect con-
cerns the fact that the presence of a conducting layer can
actually change a non-dynamo velocity ﬁeld into a dynamo
velocity ﬁeld: Rc
m = 60 for propeller TM60 and W = 0.2,
which is actually smaller than the threshold for TM28 (cf.
Figure 7b).

4.2 Description of the self-excited magnetic ﬁeld

In the following, we describe the self-excited magnetic ﬁeld
numerically observed with propeller TM28. This ﬁeld ap-
pears to have a very complicated spatial structure and
its temporal behaviour depends on the symmetry of the
velocity ﬁeld.

velocity ﬁeld, in which symmetry has been artiﬁcially im-
posed. Figure 8a shows the zones where the magnetic ﬁeld
intensity is higher than 50% of its maximum value. The
magnetic ﬁeld appears to be strong principally in two
banana-shaped regions, located on either sides of the cylin-
der axis. Figure 8b shows the poloidal component of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the plane XOY of ﬁgure 1. In that plane,
the magnetic ﬁeld is roughly dipolar, oriented perpendic-
ularly to the cylinder axis. This corresponds to an m=1
angular dependency. On either sides of the dipole, we can
see in ﬁgure 8b the ends of the banana-shaped regions of
ﬁgure 8a. Figure 8c shows the poloidal component of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the plane XOZ of ﬁgure 1. The magnetic
ﬁeld has a large amplitude in a signiﬁcant portion of the
regions in this plane. The magnetic ﬁeld there is axial, and
has the expected m=1 angular dependency. Figure 8d and
8e show the components of the magnetic ﬁeld normal to
the XOY and XOZ planes, respectively.

From all these ﬁgures, we can gather that the mag-
netic ﬁeld of the most unstable mode is roughly a dipole,
oriented perpendicularly to the cylinder axis, in the plane
of ﬁgure 8b, normally into the plane of ﬁgure 8e. Around
this dipole, a group of magnetic ﬁeld lines comes upwards
from the bottom left-hand of ﬁgure 8d, follows the arrows
in the top half of ﬁgure 8c, and then goes downwards at
the top right-hand of ﬁgure 8d. The m=1 angular depen-
dency implies that another group of magnetic ﬁeld lines
goes in the converse way, going into the bottom right-hand
of ﬁgure 8d, to the left in ﬁgure 8c, and then upwards in
the top left-hand corner of ﬁgure 8d.

The electric current distribution associated to this mag-
netic ﬁeld structure is also quite similar in all situations.
The electric currents concentrate in an elongated cylindri-
cal region, located between the two regions of large mag-
netic ﬁeld amplitude. Inside this region, the currents point
perpendicularly to the axis, in the same direction as the
magnetic ﬁeld dipole.

4.2.1 Spatial characteristics

It is well known that a smooth velocity ﬁeld with a few
spatial modes gives generally rise to magnetic eigenmodes
with a broad band spectrum, and complex spatial conﬁg-
uration, and we have veriﬁed that it is indeed the case
for the ﬂows we have used. Although small variations of
the ﬂow may induce large changes in the value of the criti-
cal magnetic Reynolds number, we have observed that the
overall neutral mode topology is not much altered, so that
we choose to present a single example.

As noted above, in an axisymmetric ﬂow, the diﬀerent
azimuthal modes evolve independently and close to the
critical Rm, it is the mode m=1 which has the largest
growth rate (recall that m=0 modes always decay). The
magnetic axial modes (n) are coupled by the kinetic ones,
so that the axial spectrum is continuous from n=1 to the
ohmic dissipation wavenumber.

Figure 8 represents a typical example of the growing
mode structure, obtained for Rm = 140, with the TM28

4.2.2 Temporal characteristics

We have observed that the growth rate of the most unsta-
ble mode can have an imaginary part. The corresponding
frequency is associated with a rotation of the magnetic
ﬁeld around the cylinder axis. This frequency is very sen-
sitive to the level of symmetry of the velocity ﬁeld. In fact,
for a very symmetric velocity ﬁeld such as the TM28, the
neutral mode is nearly stationary, whereas for strongly
dissymetric ones the growth rate can have a much larger
imaginary part.

In order to study this dependency, we have separated
the TM28 velocity ﬁeld into two parts Ueven and Uodd de-
ﬁned by their parities with respect to the rotation around
the OP axis of ﬁgure 1.

In the case of TM28, we have checked that the velocity
ﬁeld odd component Uodd, being mainly due to experi-
mental imperfections, is small compared to the even com-
ponent Ueven: Uodd ≃ 0.1Ueven. We have then performed
simulations of the composite ﬂow U = Ueven + εUodd for
various values of ǫ, while keeping the Rm based on Ueven

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

7

at a constant value of 160. The value ε = 1 corresponds
to the experimental TM 28 ﬂow.

The dependency of the imaginary part of the growth
rate on ǫ is shown in ﬁgure 9. We can see that this depen-
dency is very nearly linear, and that ǫ = 0, which means a
perfectly symmetric ﬂow, is associated with a stationary
magnetic ﬁeld neutral mode. This behaviour is observed
with other velocity ﬁelds and seems to be robust in von
K´arm´an type ﬂows. Note that the real part of the growth
rate presents a small variation with ε.

4.3 Magnetic induction by an external ﬁeld

In the following, we want to address the following ques-
tion: is it possible to use the magnetic response of the
experimental ﬂow below Rc
m to an external magnetic ﬁeld
to predict the value of Rc
m?

The kinematic code and the experimental velocity ﬁelds
can be used to obtain the response of the system to an
external magnetic ﬁeld B0 and to perform a comparison
with sodium experiments. We have checked the response
to two diﬀerent external magnetic ﬁelds: an axial ﬁeld,
parallel to the axis of rotation (along X) or a transverse
ﬁeld, orthogonal to the rotation axis (along Y ).

In both cases, we have performed global and local mea-
surements. We have ﬁrst determined the decay times of the
energy of each mode, and the saturation value of the mag-
netic ﬁeld induced inside the numerical box. In order to
make a quantitative comparison with the results obtained
in the VKS experiment, we have then studied the local
components of the induced magnetic ﬁeld at a particular
point in the experiment (point P of ﬁgure 1).

4.3.1 Magnetic energy measurements

Each numerical run is performed for a given velocity ﬁeld
as follows. The initial condition corresponds to no mag-
netic ﬁeld inside the cylinder. At t = 0, an external mag-
netic ﬁeld is switched on and we let the system evolve in
time. This transverse ﬁeld is directed along Y. It is sinu-
soidal with a n = 1 axial dependency and its maximal
amplitude is 1. We have chosen this external ﬁeld struc-
ture because a uniform (n = 0) transverse ﬁeld, which
would have been easier to implement, as well as closer to
the experimental setup, is orthogonal to the growing mag-
netic ﬁeld eigenmodes we have observed. This feature is
speciﬁc to the axially periodic induction code.

For small t, the external ﬁeld enters the cylinder, until
it approaches asymptotically a stationary saturated state
of energy Esat (see ﬁgure 10, for t < 1, m = 1, n = 0 − 3):

E(t) = Esat (1 − exp(−t/τsat))

Where τsat is the saturation characteristic time. This time
diverges at the dynamo threshold of the TM28 system.
After the stationary state has been reached, the external
ﬁeld is disconnected, and we look at the magnetic energy
decay time (see ﬁgure 10, for t > 1):

Figure 11 shows the variation of the decay characteristic
times τdecay and the saturation value of the magnetic en-
ergy with Rm. Both quantities diverge for TM28 propeller
near Rc
m = 120 while they saturate near Rm = 80 and
then decrease for TM60 propeller. We found that, below
Rm = 60, theses features do not appear in practice to be
good candidates to discriminate between a dynamo and a
non dynamo velocity ﬁeld.

4.3.2 Local magnetic ﬁeld measurements

The spatial structure of the magnetic ﬁeld in the presence
of the transverse magnetic ﬁeld is represented in the plane
(XOZ) in ﬁgure 12. For Rm = 50, the structures of the
two magnetic ﬁelds look similar, and the intensity of the
induced ﬁeld appears to be slightly larger for TM28 than
for TM60 velocity ﬁeld. The diﬀerence between the two
ﬁelds increases with Rm. For Rm = 80, the amplitude of
the magnetic ﬁeld corresponding to TM28 appears to be
twice that corresponding to TM60. Spatially, a spreading
of the magnetic ﬁeld is observed in the case of TM60, while
strong gradients along X can be evidenced for TM28, with
an inversion of the magnetic ﬁeld close to the disks.

We have studied the magnetic ﬁeld induced at the
point P of ﬁgure 1 by an external axial or transverse ﬁeld
in the symmetrized TM28 and TM60 ﬂows. This point cor-
responds to the main measurement location in the VKS
experiment [8]. In ﬁgure 13, we have plotted the variation
of the three components of the magnetic ﬁeld as a function
of Rm. We can see that in all cases the Z-component of
the magnetic ﬁeld is equal to zero. We have checked that
this is a consequence of the symmetry of the ﬂow [25].

In the case of an axial external magnetic ﬁeld (ﬁgure 13
a and b), the magnetic ﬁeld components increase, then
saturate for Rm ≃ 30 and eventually decrease to zero for
both propellers. This behaviour is akin to the expulsion of
poloidal magnetic ﬁeld expected in poloidal circulation [1]
in spite of the existence of a toroidal ﬂow.

For a transverse ﬁeld, ﬁgures 13 c and d show that, for
the TM28 velocity ﬁeld which gives rise to dynamo action,
the amplitude of the induced magnetic ﬁeld components
diverges as one approaches the threshold. Conversely, in
the case of the TM60 velocity ﬁeld, which does not lead
to dynamo instability, the amplitudes remain bounded.
Indeed we can see that the magnetic ﬁeld components in-
crease for an interval in Rm, then saturate for Rm ≃ 80,
and eventually start to decrease. Inspection of the growth
rates shows that the magnetic ﬁeld growth rate, while re-
maining negative, has a maximum for the same value of
Rm (cf. ﬁgure 5).

5 Discussion

5.1 Status of the von K´arm´an ﬂow with respect to
other dynamo ﬂows

E(t) = Esat exp(−t/τdecay)

Starting from an experimentally produced ﬂow, we have
shown that it may produce kinematic dynamo action above

8

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

some critical Rc
m, which could no be reached up to now in
the VKS experiment due to insuﬃcient driving power. It
is instructive to examine how these results compare with
other known laminar axisymmetric dynamos, on the one
hand, and available experimental dynamos, on the other
hand.

Most numerical dynamo ﬂows in a ﬁnite volume are
produced in a spherical container, since the magnetic trans-
mission conditions at the conducting-insulating interface
are easier to implement. For example, the Von K´arm´an
ﬂow has the same symmetry properties as the spherical
conﬁguration denoted s2t2 by [9], which has a Rc
m = 54
with the particular radial function chosen by these au-
thors. The same spherical s2t2 conﬁguration has been cho-
sen for the Maryland [12,13] and the Madison experiment
[16], which use two counter-rotating coaxial turbines set
in motion by two motors to drive the ﬂow. The Maryland
experiment uses a 30 cm diameter sphere and has not pro-
duced dynamo action. The Madison installation is based
on a one meter diameter sphere, where the velocity ﬁeld
could be measured using water as a ﬂuid in a ﬁrst step and
the driving conﬁguration has been optimized with the help
of a kinematic dynamo code to get Rc
m = 100. The liquid
sodium installation is almost ready to be set in operation.
The two existing experimental dynamos in Riga and in
Karlsruhe were based on ﬂows of previous theoretical in-
terest as occurrence of dynamo action in these ﬂows may
be proved analytically. They are not axisymmetric but
involve helicoidal streamlines winding around unbounded
cylinders, the conducting ﬂuid ﬁlling all space. In the ex-
perimental devices, the ﬂow is constrained by cylindrical
pipes of ﬁnite length, with guiding blades (Riga) or inter-
nal helicoidal walls (Karlsruhe) and occupies obviously a
ﬁnite volume container. In both cases, the design studies
have concentrated on the search of a lower Rc
m. Although
the two conﬁgurations are very diﬀerent, they lead to com-
parable critical magnetic Reynolds numbers based on a
ﬂow maximal speed V and a typical scale for the conduct-
ing ﬂuid :

– Riga experiment : Rc

m ≃ 61, with V = 15 m/s, L = 0.4

m (L = external cylinder radius)

– Karlsruhe experiment : Rc

m ≃ 36, with V = 4 m/s,

L = 0.9 m (L = container radius)

Recall from Section 4 that Rc

m around 60 (resp. 70)
has also been found for the TM60 (resp. TM28) ﬂow with
the adjunction of a conducting shell W= 0.2, so that the
lowest Rc
m are indeed comparable for these cylindrical dy-
namos. There remains however a fundamental diﬀerence
between these MHD ﬂows at large Rm: the turbulence
level varies from a few percent for the ﬂows with internal
walls to 40% for the VKS conﬁguration, where the ﬂow is
not guided. In the latter case, it has been veriﬁed that the
power scales as R3
m [8], in agreement with dimensional
analysis arguments. To reach the numerically predicted
Rc
m, one has thus to overcome a power challenge: this is
the price to pay to drive a ﬂow without the constraint of
internal walls, such that its non linear saturation regime
could have a link with those observed in natural dynamos.

5.2 Threshold: comparison with VKS experiment

The kinematic dynamo simulations based on experimen-
tal mean velocity ﬁelds of von K´arm´an ﬂows exhibit the
existence of self-excitation in some range of parameters
that can be compared to experimental results of the VKS
experiment. The minimum threshold value Rc
m ≃ 60 is
found for the TM60 propeller, with a 20% layer of liq-
uid at rest. These numerical results correspond to a 4 cm
sodium layer of conductivity σNa at rest, whereas the ex-
periment is performed with a 1 cm thick copper boundary
of conductivity σCu ≃ 4σNa. Note that as far as the ohmic
diﬀusion time is concerned, we expect 4 cm of sodium to
correspond to 2 cm of copper.

Using the following deﬁnition for the experimental mag-

netic Reynolds number:

Rm = µ0σEf R2

c 2πf

(1)

Rc
m = 60 would correspond to a critical rotation frequency
f c = 44 Hz in the VKS experiment (Rc = 0.205 m, TM60
propeller [8]). This last value can be compared to the
maximum frequency obtained in the sodium experiment
f = 25 Hz. As the ﬂow is highly turbulent, the power
needed to maintain the ﬂow scales as [38]:

P = KP ρL2U 3

where KP is a dimensionless factor that depends on the
geometry of the container and of the shape of the pro-
pellers. We can write the magnetic Reynolds number as:

Rm = µ0σEf

1/3

.

P L
KP ρ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Going from 25 to 44 Hz thus implies to increase the power
or the scale of the experiment by a factor 5, that is P =
750 kW or Rc = 1 m.

In the case of the TM28 propeller, the minimum thresh-
old value is Rc
m ≃ 70 which corresponds to a critical
f c = 41 Hz. This lower value of the critical frequency of
rotation can be related to the eﬃciency of propeller TM28
that is superior to that of TM60. In fact, the important
parameter of a ﬂow conﬁguration is given by the ratio
Ef /K 1/3
m does not necessary corre-
sponds to the most easily achievable critical frequency.

, and a minimum Rc

p

(2)

(3)

5.3 Sensitivity to conﬁguration parameters

5.3.1 Propellers

One aim of this work is to test the eﬀect of various char-
acteristics of the velocity ﬁelds on the existence and the
value of the critical magnetic Reynolds number Rc
m. One
method would be to try diﬀerent velocity ﬁelds that can
be obtained from analytical expressions, or to modify con-
tinuously an experimental one. A continuous optimization
could be performed in this way until the velocity ﬁeld with
the minimum Rc
m is obtained. However, in a real system

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

9

with no guiding walls, it is a technological challenge to
design a propeller able to reproduce the numerically opti-
mized velocity ﬁeld.

We have taken an experimental approach having in
mind a possible sodium experiment. Consequently, we have
not varied a conﬁguration in a continuous manner but
tried several driving conﬁgurations. Although the presented
results concern only two diﬀerent propellers, we have tested
approximatively 30 other conﬁgurations. Various param-
eters have been varied: the height and curvature of the
blades, the propeller diameter, and other characteristics.
Nevertheless, the presented cases correspond to represen-
tative ones, and enlighten the fact that two very close
velocity ﬁelds can have very diﬀerent dynamo properties.
The results do not reveal which characteristics a propeller
must fullﬁll to produce dynamo action, but nevertheless
some conclusions can be drawn.

The poloidal to toroidal ratio appears to be a crucial
parameter to obtain a dynamo velocity ﬁeld, as already
known from other numerical studies, in various geome-
tries. The condition Γ ≃ 0.75 (see ﬁgure 6) corresponds
to a maximum growth rate for the explored velocity ﬁelds,
but it is not a suﬃcient condition. No dynamo action has
been observed with velocity ﬁelds with Γ < 0.6 or Γ > 0.9.
The intuitive idea is then to obtain propellers with an ap-
propriate Γ . This can be tried by changing the propeller
geometry, the curvature of blades or by placing baﬄes in
the inner part of the cylinder of the water experiment, i.e.
parallel to the generatrix. In this case, the toroidal com-
ponent of the velocity ﬁeld could be reduced, and, maybe,
converted into poloidal velocity. The cost to be paid is that
the velocity ﬁeld is no more axisymmetric. In fact, the in-
troduction of baﬄes greatly changes the ﬂow pattern, and
the results are far more complicated than expected: the
poloidal component — and consecutively Γ — can even
decrease with baﬄes.

The relation of Γ to the dynamo properties of the ﬂow
may be appreciated with the help of the following toy
model: Assume that the toroidal velocity at scale l is cou-
pled to the poloidal part of the magnetic ﬁeld to increase
the toroidal ﬁeld, as is the case in a pure diﬀerential rota-
tion:

dBtor
dt
and, conversely, for the poloidal component:

utor
l

)Bpol,

= (

dBpol
dt

= (

upol
l

)Btor.

For a given total “velocity”utor + upol, the fastest growth
rate (at scale l) is obtained when utor = upol, i.e. Γ =
1. This very crude argument based on two scalar vari-
ables may in principle be examined further using numeri-
cal computations.

5.3.2 Conducting layer

the induction equation is a linear equation, the energy
evolution can be described by the equation ∂tE = σn,mE
where σn,m is the growth rate of a given mode. This
growth rate comes from a competition between the mag-
netic ﬁeld generation, in some way proportional to Rm E
and the ohmic diﬀusion. This term takes into account the
dissipation produced by the currents j in the conductive
volume (−∇ × j = ∇2B), and then is proportional to
E/L2, where L is the spatial scale of the diﬀusion. For a
conducting shell (with the same conductivity of the ﬂuid)
of size L > Rc, we can write L = Rc(1 + W ) and then the
growth rate takes the form: σ ∼ Rm− 1
(1+W )2 , as shown in
ﬁgure 7. The eﬀect of the conducting wall saturates, but
the exact values at which this eﬀect is negligible depends
on the velocity ﬁeld, and we are not able to obtain it. This
eﬀect has been studied numerically in a recent work[39].
This work shows that, for time dependent solutions, this
eﬀect can be perturbated by a skin eﬀect, that reduces the
eﬀective volume where the dissipation takes place. In our
case, as we are looking for a stationary magnetic ﬁeld (see
Sec. 4.2.2), this skin eﬀect does not appear.

5.3.3 Symmetry

In order to explain the temporal characteristics presented
in ﬁgure 9, we develop the following argments based on
the symmetries of the ﬂow. When the ﬂow is exactly even
with respect to rotation of angle π around the OP axis of
ﬁgure 1, axial symmetry implies that it is even with re-
spect to rotation of angle π around any axis going through
O and perpendicular to the cylinder axis. If the magnetic
ﬁeld itself is even with respect to the rotation of angle π
around such an axis, so will its time derivative ∂tB. This
means that if a magnetic ﬁeld is even with respect to ro-
tation around such an axis, it will remain so. It is then
straightforward to see that such a magnetic ﬁeld must be
stationary, or consist of standing waves originating from
the symmetry axis.

For a symmetrized velocity ﬁeld and in the studied
parameter range (i.e. Γ > 0.5 and Rm < 200), the pre-
ferred structure for the magnetic ﬁeld eigenmode is invari-
ant with respect to rotation of angle π around the dipole
axis. The magnetic ﬁeld is then stationary at threshold. If
the ﬂow does not have the required symmetry, the above
argument does not apply. The most general case is then
that the magnetic ﬁelds will rotate around the cylinder
axis, hence be time-dependent.

We can check these arguments against the numeri-
cal results of Dudley and James[9]. In the case of their
s2t2 ﬂow, which has a structure close enough to that of
a von K´arm´an ﬂow, and possesses the required symme-
try properties, the magnetic ﬁeld eigenmode is stationary
at threshold. Conversely, in the case of the s2t1 and s1t1
ﬂows, in which no constraints prevent the magnetic ﬁeld
from rotating around the axis of the ﬂow, the most unsta-
ble mode is always oscillating for Rm 6= 0.

In the section 4.1.2, we have observed that the magnetic
energy growth rate increases with a conductive layer. As

In the VKS experiment as in the present water ex-
periment, the symmetry can be broken very easily, and

10

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

then generically we can expect a slightly rotating mag-
netic ﬁeld, if the dynamo threshold is reached. Depending
on the (slight) asymmetries, the frequency will be more or
less important.

5.4 Induction eﬀects: comparison with the VKS
experiment

The turbines that have been used in the ﬁrst runs of the
VKS experiment correspond to the TM60 propellers used
in this study. This should allow us to compare the experi-
mental data with the numerical results we have obtained,
and could provide us with a valuable check of the relevance
of our analysis process. Note however that this compar-
ison can only concern the mean values of the induction
and that the very fast and large ﬂuctuations observed in
the VKS experiment [8] cannot be taken into account.

5.4.1 Induced magnetic ﬁeld

The accuracy of the threshold determination can not be
checked, since the threshold expected with the TM60 tur-
bines is beyond available power, (see section 5.2). At most
can we say that the numerical results are not disproven.
Still, the response of the ﬂow to an externally imposed
magnetic ﬁeld has been measured in the VKS experiment,
and can be compared with the results of ﬁgure 13b and
13d.

Figure 14a shows the values of the magnetic ﬁeld com-
ponents measured at the point P of ﬁgure 1, with an ax-
ial external ﬁeld applied. On the same plot are shown
the numerical results obtained for an applied ﬁeld that
is axial and uniform outside the cylinder and with no
conducting layer. We can see that the measured values
of the Y-component agree fairly well with the simulation
results. The agreement is correct but not as good for the
X-component of the magnetic ﬁeld. Lastly, we can see that
the Z-component of the measured magnetic ﬁeld is signif-
icantly diﬀerent from zero, its expected value. This seems
to imply that the symmetry considered in paragraph 4.3.2,
which forces the Z-component to zero, is somehow broken
in the experiment.

The results obtained for a transverse external ﬁeld are
presented in Figure 14b. The transverse external ﬁeld is
this time uniform outside the cylinder, with no conduct-
ing layer. We can see a strong discrepancy between the
measured and the simulated values of the X-component.
Indeed, the measured values seem to be a factor of two
larger than the computed results. On the contrary, the
agreement is good for the Y-component. Finally, we can
see that the measured Z-component remains in this case
close to zero: either the symmetry is no longer broken in
these experimental runs, or the conﬁguration is less sen-
sitive to dissymetry. Numerical runs have also been per-
formed with a W = 0.2 (see paragraph 4.1.2) conducting
layer, showing only slight diﬀerences.

Finally, ﬁgure 15 shows the results obtained in the case
where only one TM60 turbine is rotating inside the ves-
sel, the second being at rest, with a transverse ﬁeld ap-
plied. The agreement is this time far better than in both
the above conﬁgurations, at least for small values of the
rotation rate. The Y-component of the magnetic ﬁeld de-
creases to zero. This corresponds to an expulsion of the
applied transverse magnetic ﬁeld [40,1,41]. The X- and Y-
components of the induced ﬁeld also exhibit a quadratic
dependency on the rotation frequency. Finally, we have
checked numerically that the velocity ﬁeld obtained for
one rotating disk does not give rise to dynamo action for
Rm < 200.

To sum up, we can see that the agreement between
simulation and measurements can be satisfactory in the
case where only one disk rotates, or less satisfactory in
the case where both disks rotate. The good agreement
in the case of one disk seems to imply that the numer-
ical code and the measurement process are relevant. In
the case where two disks rotate, however, we can see that
the measurement point lies precisely at the position where
the turbulence intensity is highest, and the average ﬂow
magnitude is weakest. It may be possible that the time-
averaged velocity ﬁeld is not suﬃcient to properly repro-
duce the experimental induction eﬀects at this position.

5.4.2 Decay rates

It would be interesting to check the decay times presented
in ﬁgure 11 against the experimental value. For the max-
imum value of the magnetic Reynolds number achievable
in the VKS apparatus, the magnetic ﬁeld energy decays
in ≃ 0.12µ0σR2
c ≃ 0.05 s for TM60 propeller with no con-
ducting layer. Propeller TM28 exhibits the same decay
time (within 2%) at Rm = 50. This means that, in an ex-
periment without conducting layer, it is very diﬃcult to
determine by pulse decay measurements alone if the tur-
bines are of the TM28 (i.e. capable of dynamo action) or
of the TM60 (i.e. incapable of dynamo action) type.

If a very large conducting layer (W = 0.2) surrounds
the experiment, however, the magnetic ﬁeld energy decays
in ≃ 0.12 s for TM28, and ≃ 0.23 s for TM60. In this case,
it would be possible to determine which velocity ﬁeld has
the smallest threshold by pulse decay measurements.

5.4.3 Turbulent eﬀects?

In the VKS apparatus, the ﬂow shows very large turbu-
lent ﬂuctuations, which in turn induce very large magnetic
ﬁeld ﬂuctuations [8]. It is expected that under certain cir-
cumstances, such ﬂuctuations could induce a large scale
component of the magnetic ﬁeld through what is termed
an α-eﬀect [1]. We have shown (ﬁgure 15) that, if only one
propeller rotates, our numerical results are quite close to
the experimental data, though the numerical simulations
have been performed with the time-averaged component
of the ﬂow only. This good agreement could imply that,

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

11

in that case, the leading contribution to the induction ef-
fects comes from the time-averaged component of the ﬂow.
Conversely, a discrepancy is observed in the case of two
counter-rotating disks, where the time-averaged compo-
nent of the ﬂow is weaker, and where large vortices sweep
the measurement location. This could possibly be ascribed
to turbulence eﬀects, either α-eﬀect or reduction of the
electric conductivity [1,42].

6 Conclusion

The existence of dynamo eﬀect has been recently con-
ﬁrmed in constrained ﬂows in the Riga and Karlsruhe
experiments. The case of experimental dynamos without
internal walls remains today an open question. The numer-
ical study of von K´arm´an type ﬂows shows the possibil-
ity to have self-generation of magnetic ﬁelds for magnetic
Reynolds numbers accessible to a homogeneous sodium
experiment. These ﬂows appear to be very sensitive to
the precise driving conﬁguration and to boundary condi-
tions. The comparison of the predictions concerning the
induction eﬀects with the data of the VKS experiment
exhibits paradoxical results: the agreement is excellent in
the case of one disk and intermediate Rm while the results
diﬀer in the case of two counter-rotating disks. This eﬀect
could be due to the existence of the turbulent shear layer
in the mid-plane, which is not accounted for in the mean
velocity ﬁelds.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the VKS team (M. Bourgoin, J.B.,
A. Chiﬀaudel, F.D., S. Fauve, L.M., P. Odier, F. Petrelis,
J.-F. Pinton) for fruitful discussions and to make avail-
able their not yet published data. We are grateful to F.
Stefani for providing us with numerical results in a non-
periodic cylindrical geometry. J.B. thanks the Ministerio
de Educaci´on y Ciencia (spanish governement) for a post-
doctoral grant when working at the CEA.

References

1. Moﬀatt H. K., Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically
conducting ﬂuids, Cambridge University Press (Cambridge
1978).

2. Moreau R., Magnetohydrodynamics, Kluwer Academic

Publishers, Dortrecht, (1990).

3. Gailitis A., Lielausis O., Dement’ev S., Placatis E., Cifer-
sons A., Gerbeth G., Gundrum T., Stefani F., Christen
M., H¨anel H., Will G., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4365, (2000).
4. Gailitis A., Lielausis O., Dement’ev S., Placatis E., Cifer-
sons A., Gerbeth G., Gundrum T., Stefani F., Christen
M., H¨anel H., Will G., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3024, (2001).
5. Stieglitz R., M¨uller U., Naturwissenschaften, 87(9), 381-

390, (2000).

7. L. Mari´e, J. Burguete, A. Chiﬀaudel, F. Daviaud, D.
Ericher, C. Gasquet, F. P´etr´elis, S. Fauve, M. Bourgoin, M.
Moulin, P. Odier, J.-F. Pinton, A. Guigon, J.B. Luciani, F.
Namer and J. L´eorat, MHD in von K´arm´an swirling ﬂows,
development and ﬁrst run of the Sodium experiment. in Dy-
namo and Dynamics, A Mathematical Challenge, Carg`ese
(France) August 21-26, 2000. Eds. P. Chossat, D. Arm-
bruster, I. Oprea, NATO ASI series, Kluwer Academic
Publ. (2001).

8. M. Bourgoin, L. Mari´e, F. P´etr´elis, J. Burguete, A. Chif-
faudel, F. Daviaud, S. Fauve, P. Odier, J.-F. Pinton. MHD
measurements in the von K´arm´an sodium experiment. ac-
cepted in Phys. Fluids (2002).

9. Dudley N.L., James R.W., Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., A425,

10. Ponomarenko Yu. B., J. Appl. Mech. Tech. Phys. 14, 755

11. Roberts G. O., Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A 271, 411

407,(1989).

(1972).

(1972).

12. Peﬄey N.L., Cawthrone A.B., Lathrop D.P., Phys. Rev.

E, 61(5), 5287 - 5294, (2000).

13. Peﬄey N.L., Cawthrone A.B., Lathrop D.P., Hunting
for dynamos: eight diﬀerent liquid sodium ﬂows, in Dy-
namo and Dynamics, A Mathematical Challenge, Carg`ese
(France) August 21-26, 2000. Eds. P. Chossat, D. Arm-
bruster, I. Oprea, NATO ASI series, Kluwer Academic
Publ. (2001).

14. Gans R.F., J. Fluid Mech. 45, 11-130 (1970)
15. Odier P. , Pinton J.-F., Fauve S., Phys. Rev. E, 58, 7397,

(1999).

16. R. O’Connell, R. Kendrick, M. Nornberg, E. Spence, A.
Bayliss ans C.B. Forest, On the possibibility of an homo-
geneous MHD dynamo in the laboratory. in Dynamo and
Dynamics, A Mathematical Challenge, Carg`ese (France)
August 21-26, 2000. Eds. P. Chossat, D. Armbruster, I.
Oprea, NATO ASI series, Kluwer Academic Publ. (2001).
17. P. Frick, S. Denisov, S. Khripchenko, V. Noskov, D.
Sokoloﬀ and R. Stepanov, A nonstationary dynamo ex-
periment in a braked torus. in Dynamo and Dynamics, A
Mathematical Challenge, Carg`ese (France) August 21-26,
2000. Eds. P. Chossat, D. Armbruster, I. Oprea, NATO
ASI series, Kluwer Academic Publ. (2001).

18. Picha, K. G. and Eckert, Proc. 3rd US Natl. Cong. Appl.

19. Welsh, W. E. and Harnett, J. P., Proc. 3rd US Nat. Cong.

Mech., 791-798 (1958).

Appl. Mech. (1958).

20. Zandbergen P. J., Dijkstra D., Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 19,

21. Fauve S., Laroche C., Castaing B., J. Phys. II 3, 271

22. Pinton J.-F., Labb´e R., J. Phys. II (France) 4, 1461-1468

465 (1987).

(1993).

(1994).

23. Mordant N., Pinton J.-F., Chill`a F., J. Phys. II 7, 1 (1997).
24. Nore C., Brachet M.-E., Politano H., Pouquet A., Phys.

Plasmas 4, 1 (1997).

25. F. P´etr´elis , M. Bourgoin, L. Mari´e, J. Burguete, A. Chif-
faudel, F. Daviaud, S. Fauve, P. Odier, J.-F. Pinton, sub-
mitted to Phys. Rev. Let. (2002)

26. Alemany A., Moreau R., Sulem L., Frisch U., J. M´ecanique

18, 278-313 (1979).

27. S. Fauve, C. Laroche, A. Libchaber, J. Phys. Lettres 42,

455 (1981) and 45, 101 (1984).

6. Stieglitz R., M¨uller U., Phys. Fluids, 13, 561, (2001).

28. Moreau R., Sommeria, J. Fluid Mech. , (1982).

12

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

29. Larmor J., Rep. Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci, 159-160 (1919).
30. L´eorat J., Proc. Pamir Conference, Aussois(France),

Tables

−1)

Utor(ms

Upol(ms
Mean Max Mean Max Mean Max
0.71
0.51
1.27
0.47

Upol/Utor

1.26
1.20

0.71
0.82

0.72
0.58

1.77
0.94

−1)

Ef

0.64
0.52

TM28
TM60

Table 1. Characteristics of two experimental velocity ﬁelds
corresponding to propeller TM28 and TM60. The deﬁnitions of
mean and maximum velocity, poloidal and toroidal components
are given in section 2.2. The eﬃciency corresponds to Ef =
Umax/2πRcf .

31. D. Sweet, E. Ott, T. Antonsen and D.Lathrop, Phys. Plas-

(1998).

mas 8, 1944-1952 (2001).

117, 181-190 (1998).

32. Dernoncourt, B., Pinton, J. F. and Fauve, S., Physica D,

33. Golitsyn, G. S., Sov. Phys. Dokl. 5, 536-539 (1960).
34. Moﬀatt H. K., J. Fluid Mech. 11, 625 (1961).
35. Martin A. , Odier P., Pinton J.-F., Fauve S., Eur. J. Phys.

36. Frisch U., Pouquet A., L´eorat J., Mazure A., J. Fluid

B18, 337-341 (2000).

Mech. 68, 769 (1975).

37. Stefani F., Gerbeth G., Gailitis A., Numerical simulations
for the Riga dynamo, in Laboratory Experiments on Dy-
namo Action, Riga (Latvia), 14-16 June 1998, Eds. O.
Lielausis, A. Gailitis, G. Gerbeth, F. Stefani.

38. Frisch U., Turbulence, Cambridge University Press (Cam-

39. Kaiser R., A. Tilgner, Phys. Rev. E 60, 2949 (1999).
40. Weiss N.O., Proc. Roy. Soc. A291, 60 (1966).
41. Odier, P., Pinton J.-F., Fauve S., Eur. Phys.J. B 16, 373

bridge 1995).

(2000).

42. A. Reighard, M. Brown, Phys. Rev. Let.86, 2794 (2002)

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

13

Figure Captions

ω

ω

ω

ω

Y

X

Z

P

r

θ

O

z

1
10

0
10

)

θ
U
−
)
t
(

θ
V

(
f

d
p

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

10

−4
−1

)
s
/
m

(
 

θ
U
−
)
t
(

θ
V

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.8

−1
0

Fig. 1. Top: experimental setup. The ﬂow is produced in a cylindrical container by two counter-rotating propellers driven by
two independent motors. (r, θ, z) are the usual cylindrical coordinates. P represents the point where the magnetic ﬁeld probe
is located inside the VKS apparatus. (X, Y, Z) are the cartesian coordinates corresponding to the probe measurement axes.
Bottom: schematic drawing of the von K´arm´an ﬂow showing the mean toroidal and poloidal ﬂows.

5

15

20

10
t (s)

−0.5

0
Vθ(t)−Uθ (m/s)

0.5

1

Fig. 2. (a) Temporal evolution of the ﬂuctuating part of the azimuthal velocity of TM60 propeller recorded using Laser Doppler
−1. (b) Probability
Velocimetry at r = 60 mm, z = 65 mm for f = 2 Hz. The value of the mean azimuthal velocity is Uθ = 0.42 ms
density function for the same signal: data (+) and gaussian ﬁt (solid line).

14

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

R
/
z

0.5

R
/
z

0.5

1

0

1

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12

-14

-16

-18

)
 
 
 
 
 

1
,
n
E

 
(
 
g
o

l

R
/
z

0.5

1

0

1

R
/
z

0.5

0.5

1

0

1

0

−0.5

−1

0.5

−0.5

−1

0

)
 
 
 
 
 

1
,
n
E

 
(
 
g
o

l

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12

(a)

−0.5

0.5

0
x/R

−0.5

0.5

0
x/R

−0.5

0.5

0
x/R

−0.5

0.5

0
x/R

Fig. 3. Mean velocity ﬁeld. TM28 propeller velocity ﬁeld: (a) toroidal and (b) poloidal component in a meridional plane. TM60
propeller velocity ﬁeld: (c) toroidal and (d) poloidal component.

n=0
n=1
n=2

n=3
n=4
n=5

n=0
n=1
n=2

n=3
n=4
n=5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

0

0.5

t / t   d

(b)

2

2.5

1.5

1
t / t   d

Fig. 4. Temporal evolution of the energy of modes m = 1; n = 0, .., 5 for TM28 propeller. (a) Rm = 100 < Rc
m (b) Rm = 140 >
Rc
m. The time unit corresponds to the ohmic diﬀusion time. Two diﬀerent regions can be distinguished: for t/td ≤ 1, relaxation
of the fast stable modes; for t/td ≥ 1, relaxation of the slow stable modes (a), or growth of the unstable modes (b). Note that
in both cases the evolution is exponential with a growth rate σ < 0 (a) and σ > 0 (b).

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

15

σ

r

−5

10

5

0

−10

−15

−20
0

2.5

0

−2.5

r

σ

−5

−7.5

−10

0.5

TM 60
TM 28

50

100

150

R

m

Fig. 5. Energy growth rates σr for the most unstable mode (n = 1 and m = 1) as a function of Rm. Crosses (resp. circles)
correspond to the symmetrized velocity ﬁeld of TM28 (resp. TM60) propeller. The TM28 propeller gives rise to dynamo action
for Rm ≃ 120 whereas TM60 does not.

TM28    
Rm = 80 
Rm = 100
Rm = 120
Rm = 140

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Γ

10

5

0

−10

−15

−20
0

TM28    
W = 0.00
W = 0.08
W = 0.14
W = 0.20

150

Fig. 6. Energy growth rates σr for the mode n = 1 and m = 1 as a function of the mean poloidal-to-toroidal ratio Γ = Upol/Utor
for various Rm. The plotted data correspond to the symmetrized TM28 velocity ﬁeld which as a natural ratio Γ = 0.71.

10

5

0

−10

−15

−20
0

σ

r

−5

σ

r

−5

50

100

R

m

50

100

R

m

Fig. 7. Conducting layer eﬀect: Maximal growth rate σr as a function of Rm for diﬀerent layer thicknesses W = (Rext/Rc) − 1;
symmetrized velocity ﬁeld of propeller (a) TM28 and (b) TM60.

TM60    
W = 0.00
W = 0.08
W = 0.14
W = 0.20

150

16

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

Z

Y

X

1

0.5

Z

0

−0.5

−1
−1

1

0.5

0.25

0.5

0

Z

0

−0.25

−0.5

1

0.5

Y

0

−0.5

−1
−1

1

0.5

Y

0

−0.5

0
X

0
X

−0.5

0.5

1

−0.5

0.5

1

0
X

0.5

0.25

0

−0.25

−0.5

−1
−1

−0.5

0.5

1

−0.5

−1
−1

−0.5

0
X

0.5

1

Fig. 8. Self-excited magnetic ﬁeld of propeller TM28 for Rm = 140. (a) Isosurface of the magnetic energy at 50 % of the
maximum value in the simulation volume. Poloidal component of the magnetic ﬁeld in (X,Y) plane (b) and (X,Z) plane (c). (d)
Z component of the magnetic ﬁeld in (X,Y) plane; red (resp. blue) corresponds to vectors pointing out of (resp. into) the plane.
(e) Y component in the (X,Z) plane; blue (resp. red) corresponds to vectors pointing out of (resp. into) the plane.

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

17

i

σ

0

1.5

1

0.5

−0.5

−1

−1.5

0.1

0.075

1
,
n

E

0.05

0.025

0
0

0
ε

0
10

1
,
n
E

−5

10

t/t
d

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1
,
1

t
a
s

E

1

0.75

t
/

d

y
a
c
e
d

τ

0.5

0.25

0
0

−1

−0.75 −0.5 −0.25

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Fig. 9. Imaginary part of the neutral mode growth rate σi for Rm = 160 as a function of the symmetry parameter of the
velocity ﬁeld ε as deﬁned in the text. Symmetrized velocity ﬁeld of TM 28 propeller which has a natural parameter ε = 1, is
deﬁned on the even component of the velocity ﬁeld.

−10

10

0.5

1

2

2.5

1.5
t/t
d

n=0
n=1
n=2
n=3

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Fig. 10. Response to an external transverse magnetic ﬁeld, varying sinusoidaly along the axis, of the symmetrized TM28
velocity ﬁeld: temporal evolution of the energy for the modes m = 1; n = 0, ..., 3 when Rm = 40 < Rc
m. The external ﬁeld is
applied for 0 < t < 1. It has an n=1 axial dependency, and has a maximal amplitude of 1.

TM 60
TM 28

TM 60
TM 28

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

R

m

R

m

Fig. 11. variation of (a) the energy decay time τdecay and (b) the saturation value of the magnetic energy En=1,m=1
as a
function of Rm for an external transverse magnetic ﬁeld . Crosses: TM28 propeller; circles: TM60 propeller. Note that both the
decay time and the energy diverge when TM28 approaches threshold (dotted line).

sat

18

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

1

0.5

Z

0

−0.5

−1
−1

1

0.5

Z

0

−0.5

−0.5

0.5

1

−0.5

0.5

1

0
X

0
X

1

0.5

2.5

1.5

Z

0

−0.5

0.5

−1
−1

1

0.5

1.5

Z

0

−0.5

0.5

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0

2.5

12

10

−2

−4

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−1
−1

−0.5

0
X

0.5

1

−1
−1

−0.5

0
X

0.5

1

Fig. 12. Representation in the plane (X,Z) of the BY component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the presence of an external transverse
magnetic ﬁeld varying sinusoidally along the axis (reprented schematically by the central cross). Propeller TM28: (a)Rm = 50
and (b) Rm = 80. Propeller TM60: (c)Rm = 50 and (d) Rm = 80. blue (resp. red) corresponds to vectors pointing out of (resp.
into) the plane

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

19

2

1.5

0

1

i

0.5

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

0

0

−0.5

−1
0

25

20

0
15

i

10
0

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

5

0

0

1.5

o

i

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

o

0.5

2

1

0

−0.5
0

50

100

R

m

150

−1
0

50

100

150

TM 60
  
B
X
B
  
Y
  
B
Z

TM 60
  
B
X
  
B
Y
  
B
Z

R

m

R

m

TM 28
  
B
X
B
  
Y
  
B
Z

TM 28
B
  
X
  
B
Y
  
B
Z

2

1.5

0

1

i

0.5

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

0

0

−0.5

25

20

0
15

i

10
0

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

5

0

0

1.5

o

i

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

o

0.5

2

1

0

−0.5
0

50

100

150

50

100

150

R

m

Fig. 13. Asymptotic values of three components of the magnetic ﬁeld at position P as a function of Rm. Diamonds, squares and
disks respectively refer to BX , BY and BZ. Response of the TM28 (a) and the TM60 (b) symmetrized velocity ﬁeld, to an axial
magnetic ﬁeld. Response of the TM28 (c) and the TM60 (d) velocity ﬁeld, to a transverse magnetic ﬁeld varying sinusoidaly
along the axis.

5

10

15

20

25

5

10

15

20

25

f (Hz)

f (Hz)

Fig. 14. Comparison with the VKS experiment in the case of 2 counter-rotating TM60 propellers. Response to an axial (a) and
a uniform transverse (b) magnetic ﬁeld. Diamonds, squares and disks respectively refer to BX , BY and BZ. The dark symbols
and solid lines correspond to the predicted behavior based on the velocity ﬁeld used in the experiment. The white symbols
correspond to the measured data.

20

L. Mari´e et al.: Numerical study of homogeneous dynamo based on experimental von K´arm´an type ﬂows

1

0.8

0.6

o

0.4

i

0.2

o

0

B

/
)
>
B
<
+

B

(

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.8
0

Fig. 15. Comparison with the VKS experiment in the case of one rotating TM60 disk. Diamonds, squares and disks respectively
refer to BX , BY and BZ . The dark symbols and solid lines correspond to the predicted response to a uniform transverse magnetic
ﬁeld based on the velocity ﬁeld used in the experiment. The white symbols correspond to the measured data.

5

10

15

20

25

f (Hz)

