3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Forced Stratiﬁed Turbulence:
Successive Transitions with Reynolds Number

J.-P. Laval,∗ J. C. McWilliams,† and B. Dubrulle‡
(Dated: July 27, 2013)

Numerical simulations are made for forced turbulence at a sequence of increasing values of
Reynolds number, R, keeping ﬁxed a strongly stable, volume-mean density stratiﬁcation. At smaller
values of R, the turbulent velocity is mainly horizontal, and the momentum balance is approximately
cyclostrophic and hydrostatic. This is a regime dominated by so-called pancake vortices, with only
a weak excitation of internal gravity waves and large values of the local Richardson number, Ri,
everywhere. At higher values of R there are successive transitions to (a) overturning motions with
local reversals in the density stratiﬁcation and small or negative values of Ri; (b) growth of a
horizontally uniform vertical shear ﬂow component; and (c) growth of a large-scale vertical ﬂow
component. Throughout these transitions, pancake vortices continue to dominate the large-scale
part of the turbulence, and the gravity wave component remains weak except at small scales.

PACS numbers: 47.20.-k, 47.27.-i, 47.55.Hd

I.

INTRODUCTION

−

O

(1)

− O

Most atmospheric and oceanic ﬂows on intermediate
(103) m are strongly inﬂuenced by the
scales of
stable vertical density stratiﬁcation, dρ(z)/dz < 0 (with
ˆz = e3 anti-parallel to gravity), but are less inﬂuenced
by Earth’s rotation than ﬂows on larger scales. Con-
sequently, the turbulence in this regime is quite diﬀer-
ent from unstratiﬁed shear turbulence, convection, and
geostrophic turbulence, all of which have been more ex-
tensively studied and whose behaviors are now relatively
familiar. It has been argued [13] that the main eﬀect of
strongly stable stratiﬁcation — i.e., small Froude num-
ber, F r = V /N Lv, where V is a horizontal velocity scale,
N =
(g/ρo) dρ/dz is the Br¨unt V¨a¨ıss¨ala frequency, and
Lv is vertical length scale — is to organize the ﬂow into
two distinct, non-interacting classes: nearly linear inter-
nal gravity waves and fully nonlinear stratiﬁed turbu-
lence. The ﬂow patterns of stratiﬁed turbulence are of-
ten called pancake vortices [10] or vortical modes [11]
because of their small aspect ratio, H/L (where L is a
horizontal length scale), and signiﬁcant vertical vortic-
ity, neither of which is generally true for internal grav-
ity waves. Pancake vortices have an anisotropic veloc-
ity (primarily horizontal) and shear ﬁeld (primarily ver-
tical), and they evolve principally under the nonlinear
inﬂuence of horizontal advection as in two-dimensional
turbulence. These motions cause little vertical turbulent
heat or mass ﬂux, and they have a highly anisotropic,
inhomogeneous energy cascade to small scales and dissi-
pation [7]. At moderate values of Reynolds number —
R = V Lh/ν, where ν is the kinematic viscosity and Lh is

∗CNRS UMR 8107, LML, Blv. Paul Langevin, F-59655 Villeneuve
d’Ascq, France
†IGPP, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1565, USA
‡CNRS, URA 2464, GIT/SPEC/DRECAM/DSM, CEA Saclay, F-
91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France

a horizontal length scale — stratiﬁed turbulence evolves
self-consistently, at least in freely decaying ﬂows, in the
sense that a bulk value for F r does not increase with
time as energy dissipation causes R to decrease [16]. At
leading order in F r, the inviscid dynamical balances for
stratiﬁed turbulence are equivalent to two-dimensional
turbulence [13] evolving independently at each vertical
level. The energy dissipation may be modeled by adding
a vertical eddy diﬀusion [4] that acts to couple vertically
adjacent levels and diﬀusively selects a limiting vertical
length scale. However, with the assumption of uniform
asymptotic validity as F r
0, stratiﬁed turbulence is
→
constrained by hydrostatic and cyclostrophic force bal-
ances that also act to couple adjacent layers and may
without
internally select a ﬁnite vertical scale as R
→ ∞
inducing any vertically overturning motions [15].

O

These behaviors have been studied both with labora-
tory experiments [5, 24] and with numerical simulations
(100); a review of this subject has recently
up to R =
been made by Riley & Lelong [19]. In the ocean and at-
mosphere, R values are generally several orders of magni-
tude larger than those commonly reached in experiments
or numerical simulations. Thus, an important open ques-
tion is whether the preceding wave-turbulence partition
remains valid at very large R. A central part of this ques-
tion is whether the pancake vortices persist and remain
“stable” with respect to overturning motions.

The dynamical stability properties of a stably stratiﬁed
shear ﬂow are usually related to the Richardson number,
Ri, locally deﬁned by

Ri =

g
ρo

∂ρ
∂z

−

∂uh
∂z

−2

=

N 2 +

∂θ
∂z

−2

,

∂uh
∂z

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

(cid:19)
(1)
gρ′/ρo is
where uh is the horizontal velocity and θ =
the normalized “temperature” associated with density
ﬂuctuations ρ′. Alternatively, Ri is deﬁned as a bulk
measure in an analogous fashion with N 2 in the numer-
ator and shear variance in the denominator (i.e., a bulk
F r−2). In the inviscid limit, a suﬃcient condition
Ri

−

∼

for stability of a parallel vertically sheared ﬂow (i.e., a
Kelvin-Helmholtz ﬂow) is that the local Ri exceed 0.25
throughout the ﬂow [9, 17]. Gage [6] reﬁned this criterion
for several simple viscid shear ﬂows and obtained values
of the critical Ri for linear instability between about 0.05
and 0.11 for large R. In a numerical simulation at very
high resolution (i.e., with a maximum Reynolds number
based on the shear layer thickness ReH = 24000) and
moderate stratiﬁcation, Werne & Fritts [23] show that
the turbulence organizes itself so that Ri never exceeds
0.25. In the more complex natural environment, velocity
variance and estimates of the vertical mixing eﬃciency
increase rapidly as Ri decreases through the range be-
tween about 0.5 and 0.0 [18]. On the other hand, Majda
& Shefter [14] stress the importance of temporal behavior
on ﬂow stability by constructing a family of time periodic
solutions that are unstable at arbitrarily large Ri.

In this paper we examine the behavior of stratiﬁed tur-
bulence at large R values by means of numerical simu-
lations of the Boussinesq Equations with forcing at the
larger scales of the computational domain. Some sim-
ulations of forced stratiﬁed turbulence have been per-
formed previously by Herring and M´etais [8], but the
available resolution did not allow clear conclusions for
ﬂows at high R. Most experiments and simulations for
stratiﬁed turbulence have been conducted on decaying
turbulence, with many focused speciﬁcally on the transi-
tion from isotropic to stratiﬁed turbulence after an initial
high-energy excitation event [5, 16, 21]. Because of the
large energy dissipation rate in both isotropic and strat-
iﬁed turbulence, this evolutionary path starts with large
R and F r and only brieﬂy resides in a fully developed
regime en route to small R and F r; this situation there-
fore provides a limited view of the equilibrium geophysi-
cal regime. One of our main purposes here is to analyze
the ﬂow regimes of stratiﬁed turbulence in terms of R
and F r varied independently in a controlled fashion.

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATION

ˆu(k) and Θ(k), are



i klPin(k)
(cid:1)

∂t + νk2
=
(cid:0)

−
∂t + κk2
i kn
=
(cid:0)

ˆui(k, t)

Pi3(k) Θ(k, t)

−

k+p+q=0 ˆun(p, t)ˆul(q, t) d3p + ˆFi(k, t),

R

Θ(k, t) + N 2 ˆu3(k, t)
k+p+q=0 ˆun(p, t) ˆΘ(q, t) d3p.
(cid:1)


−

(3)
R
kikj/k2 is the projection operator onto the
Pij = δij −
plane orthogonal to ˆu(k); δij is the Kronecker tensor,
repeated indices indicate summation; and i2 =
1 when
i does not appear as an index.

−

B. Energy Decomposition

As a simple means of separating turbulence (vortices)
and waves, as well as a horizontally uniform shear ﬂow
that is neither of these, we use Craya’s decomposition [1]
for the incompressible velocity ﬁeld in Fourier space into
orthogonal components ˆuv, ˆuw, and ˆus:

ˆu(k, t) = ˆuv(k, t) + ˆuw(k, t)
ˆu(k, t) = ˆus(k, t)

if kh 6
= 0,
if kh = 0,

where

and

ˆuv(k, t) = ˆφv(k, t) ϕv(k),
ˆuw(k, t) = ˆφw(k, t) ϕw(k)

ϕv(k) = [(k
ϕw(k) = [k

×
×
e3 and kh = k

e3)]/
(k

(k
e3)
,
×
|
|
(k
k
e3))]/
×
|

e3)
.
|

·

−

×

×
k3 = k
k3 are the components of the
wavenumber perpendicular and parallel to gravity. The
components ( ˆφv, ˆφw) were previously used by, e.g., Riley
et al. [19] and Lilly [12], and they are usually refered
to “vortical” and “wave” components. The emergence of
the “shear” component ˆus was emphasized by Smith and
Waleﬀe [20]. Associated with ˆφv, ˆφw and ˆus, we deﬁne
the kinetic energy spectra by

A. Governing Equations

Φv(k) =

v(p) ˆφv(p),
ˆφ∗

A pseudo-spectral code is used to integrate the Boussi-

nesq Equations on a triply periodic domain [22]; viz.,

Φw(k) =

w(p) ˆφw(p),
ˆφ∗

∂tu + u
∂tθ + u
u

∇ ·

· ∇
· ∇

u =
θ =

−∇
−
= 0.

·

p + θ e3 + ν∆u + F,
e3 + κ∆θ,

N 2u

(2)






In these equations, u is the three-dimensional velocity, p
is the pressure divided by ρo, κ is the conductivity, and F
is the imposed forcing. In Fourier space the equations for
the Fourier components of velocity and the temperature,

Φs(k) =

ˆu∗

s(p)ˆus(p),

sum

where
k
able potential energy” spectrum by

shell
done
< k + 1/2. We further deﬁne the “avail-

the
p
|
|

1/2 <

over

P

−

a

Φp(k) =

ˆΘ∗(p) ˆΘ(p)
N 2

,

1
2

p
X

1
2

1
2

1
2

p
X

p,ph6=0
X

p,ph=0
X
is

2

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

and the “total kinetic energy” spectrum by

Φ(k) =

ˆu∗(p)ˆu(p).

(13)

1
2

p
X

Total component energies (Ev, Ew, Es, Ep, and E) are
obtained by summing over all shells k. In addition to this
decomposition, we deﬁne the “vertical kinetic energy” Ez
as half the area-averaged square of the vertical velocity,
e3, and Φz as the vertical kinetic energy spectrum.
u

·

C. Posing the Problem

Our analysis is based on a single numerical solution
(designed after calculating many more exploratory so-
lutions than we wish to admit). An anisotropic grid
resolution is used to take advantage of the anisotropy
of the ﬂow that arises in response to the stable strat-
iﬁcation (i.e., a small aspect ratio). The calculation
is performed over a vertical fraction of a cubic domain
by imposing a 2π/M vertical periodicity of the velocity
(M = 8 in the present case). For a given number of grid
points, this increases the achievable R value without loss
of generality as long as the typical vertical scale is much
smaller than the horizontal periodicity length. The level
of stratiﬁcation is controlled by adjusting the spatially
uniform value of N in time. The forcing F is deﬁned by
F(k, t) dt = β(k, t) u(k, t), with β chosen so that the dif-
ference Φf (k, to) of the energy spectra before and after
the forcing (i.e., the energy injection rate) is constant in
time:

Φf (k, to) =

1
2

2
ˆu(p, t) + dt ˆF (p, t)
|
|
p n
X
= (1 + β(k, t))

Φ(k, t).

2

o

Φ(k, t)

−

The coeﬃcient β(k, t) is obtained from eq. (14) as

β(k, t) =

Φ(k, t) + Φf (k, to)
Φ(k, t)

1.

−

s

−

1)pνp∆p

= 0 for k = ko

We choose to force only the ﬁrst vertical and horizon-
tal modes (i.e., Φf (k, to)
v = M and
k = ko
h = 1). In order to reach a high enough R value, a
hyper-diﬀusion ((
h, with p=4 and a small coef-
ﬁcient of νp = 10−12) is added to the Newtonian dif-
fusion in the horizontal direction. Several additional
simulations at higher horizontal resolution demonstrate
that this modiﬁcation does not qualitatively aﬀect the
results presented here. Since most of the dissipation oc-
curs in association with shear in the vertical direction
(about 99.5% in the stable pancake regime; see below),
we use ordinary Newtonian diﬀusion in this direction
to have a clean deﬁnition of Taylor’s Reynolds number,
Rλ = Urmsλ/(ǫ/D) = 2√DE/ǫ, where Urms = √2E
is the RMS velocity, D is the enstrophy (i.e., vorticity

(14)

(15)

3

FIG. 1: Experimental path for the primary simulation: the
time evolution of Taylor’s Reynolds number Rλ (thick line),
the resulting Br¨unt V¨a¨ıss¨ala frequency N (thin line), and the
viscosity ν (dashed line). N and ν are adjusted to maintain
the Froude number at the constant value of 0.08 and make
Rλ follow the indicated history.

P

variance), λ =
2E/D is the Taylor scale, and ǫ the dis-
sipation rate). The Prandtl number ν/κ is set to 1. The
bulk Froude number is deﬁned by F rv = Urms/(HN ),
3 Φv(k3)) is the typical verti-
where H = 3π/4E(
cal scale.

k3 k−1

p

The primary simulation is adjusted in time to follow
a given experimental path in terms of Rλ and F rv by
adjustment in time of N and ν. The evolution of these
two parameters is shown in Fig. 1. F rv is maintained
at a small value of 0.08, and Rλ is changed from 200
to 1000 by steps of 100 after integration periods of 100
turnover times (i.e., T = L/Urms with L the integral
k k−1Φ(k))). This period
scale deﬁned by L = 3π/4E(
is approximately long enough to adjust to an equilibrium
state for each Rλ. This experimental path is designed to
expose a sequence of regime transitions with increasing
R.

P

×

×

×

×

256

×
×

h = (ν3/ǫh)−1/4 and kη

The equations are solved on a 2π
256

2π
2π/M domain
64 for Rλ < 500 and
with a spatial grid size of 256
256
128 for higher Rλ. The simulation appear to
be slightly under-resolved for the highest Reynolds num-
ber in the sense that the dissipation range is not extensive
in Φ(k). The ratios of the highest resolved (km
h = 96 and
km
v = 341) to the corresponding Kolmogorov wavenum-
bers (kη
v = (ν3/ǫv)−1/4) are 1.1
and 0.92, respectively, for Rλ = 500, and they are 0.4
and 0.2 for Rλ = 1000. The under-resolution in the hor-
izontal direction is compensated by the hyper-viscosity.
In the vertical direction, the kinetic energy at the reso-
lution scale is much smaller than at the largest scales in
the dissipation range (by a factor of 10−5 at the high-
4.10−4
est Rλ). The Ozmidoz scale (Lo = (ǫ/N 3)1/2
for Rλ = 700) is more than one order of magnitude
smaller than the smallest resolved vertical scales. This
ratio means that all the resolved scales are signiﬁcantly

≃

6
4

FIG. 2: Energy spectra with respect to horizontal and ver-
tical wavenumbers averaged over more than 100 times at
Rλ = 200 for the primary simulation.

FIG. 3: History of the energy components in the primary
simulation.

inﬂuenced by stratiﬁcation.

The simulations were made on one processor of a NEC
SX-5. The code uses optimized ASL libraries of Fast
Fourier Transforms and requires approximately 4 seconds
per time step at the highest resolution. The time step is
chosen to suﬃciently resolve the fastest wave oscillations
with period 2π/N . The simulation is integrated over a
total of 360,000 time steps and takes about 200 hours.

III. SOLUTION ANALYSIS

∼

The experimental path for the primary solution is
demonstrated in Fig.
1 as a function of the non-
dimensional time, τ = t/T , normalized by the turnover
time T . The corresponding histories of the energy com-
ponents are shown in Fig. 3. As Rλ increases, we see a
sequence of regime transitions.
At moderate Rλ, less than

400, the pancake motions
are stable (i.e., the local Ri is everywhere large), and the
vortical energy dominates all other energy components at
all wavenumbers (Fig. 2). The ﬁrst transition occurs for
Rλ ≈
400, and it is evident in the signiﬁcant growth of
energy in the shear component, Es (Fig. 3). The next
500, is evident in the intermittent
transition, for Rλ ≈
occurrence of regions with small local values of Ri be-
low the Kelvin-Helmholtz critical inviscid stability value
700,
of 0.25 (Fig. 4). A further transition, for Rλ ≈
is evident in local violations of the inviscid gravitational
stability critical value of Ri = 0.0 (Fig. 4). Finally, we
900, evident in the
see yet another transition for Rλ ≈
growth of vertical kinetic energy, Ez (Fig. 3).
Inter-
estingly, throughout all these transitions, the principal
measures of the internal-wave energy, Ew and Ep, show
little change relative to the vortical-mode energy, Ev.
Since Ev itself remains reasonably constant with time
and its horizontal spectrum Φv(kh) maintains a similar
shape and magnitude at low wavenumbers, we conclude

FIG. 4: Time evolution of Rλ (solid line) and the volume
fraction of the domain with local Ri < 0.25 (ﬁlled grey area)
and with local Ri < 0 (ﬁlled black area). There was no oc-
currence of Ri < 0.25 for 0 < τ < 300.

that pancake motions are indeed persistent throughout
the Rλ range we have been able to explore, even though
the structure and intensity of the ﬂow changes substan-
tially at high wavenumbers, in the horizontally uniform
vertical shear, and in the vertical velocity.

A. Growth of the Vertical Shear Component

In Fig. 3 the vortical energy is nearly steady over the
entire simulation. The wave energy is more variable, but
on average it is steady as Rλ increases. However, the
shear energy is a growing function of time.
It repre-
sents an inverse horizontal cascade of kinetic energy into
kh = 0. The intensity of the inverse cascade of shear en-
ergy is probably a function of the location of the energy
peak in the horizontal direction; in the present case, the
forcing is imposed at kh = 1, and a substantial part of
the energy is transformed into pure vertical shear. To as-

5

FIG. 5: History of Rλ(t) (solid lines) and Es(t) for three sim-
ulations. The primary simulation (with a dashed line for its
Es) has an increasing Reynolds number by steps of 100 from
200 to 1000, and the second and third simulations have con-
stant Reynolds numbers of Rλ = 300 (dash-dotted line) and
Rλ = 500 (dotted line), starting from the primary simulation
at τ = 200 and τ = 400, respectively.

FIG. 6: History of the global minimum value of local Ri
for the primary simulation. The ordinate scale is split into
three intervals to see both large and small values on the same
plot. Whenever the minimum Ri drops below about 0.02, it
continues to develop into overturning in the density proﬁle
(i.e., min[Ri] < 0); this ﬁrst occurs around τ ≃ 400.

sess the degree of equilibration for this inverse cascade,
two additional simulations are made. Both start from
the primary simulation and thereafter hold Rλ constant
for several hundred turnover times, but their starting
(τ, Rλ) values diﬀer. Fig. 5 shows that Es does in-
deed equilibrate over a period of less than 100 turnover
times at a level that increases systematically with Rλ.

This growth of shear kinetic energy has been seen
previously when the Froude number is below a critical
value [20]. For the alternative Froude number deﬁned
2)1/3/N ), our simulations have a value of
by F rs = (ǫ ko
v
approximately 0.025, more than an order of magnitude
below the identiﬁed critical value of 0.42. In this previous
study, the shear kinetic energy did not equilibrate even
after more than 1000 turnover times. This may be due to
its reliance on hyper-diﬀusion in all directions that exerts
only a weak damping on the shear component.

B. Onset of Overturning Motions

Overturning occurs when an unstable shear layer rolls
up, pulling high-density ﬂuid above low-density ﬂuid.
This instability can occur in a fairly localized way. Its
occurrence is detected with the local Ri deﬁned in eq.
(1), and an indication of the overturning instability is a
negative Ri value. Because of the Miles-Howard condi-
tion, we can expect that this Kelvin-Helmholtz instabil-
ity only occurs in regions where Ri is initially less than
0.25. The history of the fraction of the domain with the
local Ri below 0.25 is shown in Fig. 4. More events with
Ri < 0.25 happen as Rλ increases, although they evi-
dently remain intermittent. The regime of overturning
535). Even at the
events ﬁrst appears at Rλ = 700 (τ

≃

highest R value, only a small fraction of the domain is
actively overturning at any time, less than 0.7%. The
Probability Density Function (PDF) for Ri shows that
most of the domain remains far away from overturning,
with only a small tail in the PDF that extends to small
and negative Ri values. Because of the intermittency,
long averaging periods are required for stable statistics.
Nevertheless, we can say that there is a well determined
value of R for the onset of overturning events. To demon-
strate this, the regime just before the ﬁrst overturning
event in the primary simulation (Rλ = 500) is integrated
over a longer period (250 turnover times), and no over-
turning occurs despite several events with Ri < 0.25. To
characterize more precisely the critical Ri for instability,
we follow the history of the global minimum in local Ri
(Fig. 6). The minimum Ri value that does not immedi-
ately lead to local overturning is Ri
0.02. This value
is a bit smaller but of the same order of magnitude than
the values computed by Gage [6] for simple shear ﬂows.
The spatial distribution of small Ri events is organized
into thin sheets with large vertical shear in the horizontal
velocity. An example of a region with a negative vertical
density gradient is shown Fig. 7. The vertical size of
this region is very thin (a few grid cells) even though its
horizontal size at this time (
2π/3) is not much smaller
≃
than to the domain size. An intense vertical velocity is
associated with domain of negative vertical density gra-
dient (Fig. 8), but the present simulation has only a
marginally adequate resolution to expose the convective
overturning events.

≃

Fig. 9 shows the spectra for the energy components
at τ = 521, before any overturning occurs. The spectra
with respect to horizontal wavenumber are very steep,
with a slope close to k−5
for Φv, and the shape does
h
not vary much with Rλ in this stably stratiﬁed regime

6

FIG. 7: Instantaneous isolines of vertical density gradient at
τ = 741 (Rλ = 900) for two perpendicular slices of the whole
domain at z = cte (upper graph) and y = cte (lower graph) .

FIG. 8: Vertical slice (same than in Fig. 7) of vertical ve-
locity at τ = 741 (Rλ = 900) (upper graph) and a zoom of
the region of intense vertical velocity with the projection of
velocity vectors (lower graph) .

without overturning. The onset of the overturning in-
stability does not seem to aﬀect signiﬁcantly the overall
level of wave and vortical energy (Fig. 3). However, the
overturning events are easily identiﬁable as a peak in the
horizontal spectra at τ = 741 (Fig. 9). The peak is lo-
2π/50 that matches
cated at the horizontal scale Lh ≃
the typical vertical scale, Lv. At this particular time, the
instability is localized in a single region of the domain.

The energy at the largest horizontal scales is not af-
fected by the overturning instabilities that are localized
in both space and time.
10, time-averaged
vortical-energy spectra are compared for four values of
Rλ. The horizontal spectra are very similar up to the
typical scales of the overturnings. However, at both ﬁner
horizontal scales and at all vertical scales ﬁner than the
forcing scale, the spectrum amplitude increases system-

In Fig.

FIG. 9: Energy spectra with respect to horizontal and vertical
wavenumbers at τ = 521 (Rλ = 700) (upper graph) and τ =
741 (Rλ = 900) (lower graph) for the primary simulation.
The local energy peaks at τ = 741 for 40 < kh < 60 are an
indication of one or several overturning events(M in[Ri] > 0).

atically with Rλ. At the constant, small F r value in this
simulation, the vertical spectrum slope becomes quite
shallow as Rλ increases.

C. Growth of Large-Scale Vertical Motions

The energy histories in Fig. 3 expose another tran-
900, viz., the systematic
sition at an even larger Rλ ≃
growth of vertical kinetic energy Ez. Inspection of the
vertical energy spectrum reveals that the growth of Ez
after τ = 700 occurs principally at kv = 0 (Fig. 11).
This mode of instability is reminiscent of the “negative-
viscosity instability” observed in a Kolmogorov ﬂow [2],
further investigated by Dubrulle & Frisch [3] with a
multi-scale analysis. This analysis shows that a parallel
ﬂow with a small transverse scale develops a negative-
viscosity instability to large-scale perturbations in the
transverse direction when the viscosity becomes less than
the RMS value of the streamfunction of the primary
ﬂow.
In our simulation, it is diﬃcult to test precisely
this criterion of instability because the streamfunction is
ill-deﬁned. Crudely, we can expect an instability of this
type when ν < Φs(ℓv)1/2ℓv, where ℓv is the scale of the
vertical shear and Φs(ℓv) is the shear energy at this scale.
In our simulation this relation is satisﬁed on average for
τ > 700 if 2π/ℓv > 80. This scale is comparable in mag-
50.
nitude with the typical vertical wavenumber 2π/Lv ≃

However, due to the complexity of the forced stratiﬁed
ﬂow, it is diﬃcult to prove the nature of this instability
pending more apt stability analyses.

7

IV. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In our simulations of forced, equilibrium, stratiﬁed tur-
bulence, we see behaviors somewhat diﬀerent from many
previous studies of decaying stratiﬁed turbulence that
were not able to sustain a large value of the Reynolds
number, R. Most often the criteria for the occurrence of
pancake vortices and suppression of overturning motions
(i.e., Kelvin-Helmholtz and gravitational stability) have
been linked to the stratiﬁcation N but rarely to R. In-
deed, we ﬁnd that the stability of a solution is mainly
controlled by two parameters with opposite eﬀects on
stability:
increasing N (decreasing F r) leads to a more
stable solution and decreasing ν (increasing R) has the
opposite eﬀect. For a ﬁxed low value of F r, we follow
an experimental path of increasing R far enough to de-
tect several regime transitions beyond the familiar one of
stable pancake vortices. One transition is to the inter-
mittent occurrence of regions with small or negative Ri.
This refutes previous arguments [13, 15] that stratiﬁed
turbulence remains stable with uniformly small local val-
ues of F r at large R and with uniformly cyclostrophic,
hydrostatic diagnostic momentum balances. This tran-
sition may plausibly be associated with inviscid Kelvin-
Helmholtz and ensuing gravitational instabilities of the
pancake vortices, although in our simulations the viscous
eﬀects on the unstable scales are signiﬁcant. Neverthe-
less, the pancake vortices continue to be the energeti-
cally dominant component of the turbulence even up to
the highest R values examined here, and visualizations of
the large-scale potential vorticity ﬁeld (not shown) show
little change in spatial structure with Rλ.

Two other transitions to large-scale motions other than
pancake vortices do occur: a ﬁrst one to growth of the
shear kinetic energy at zero horizontal wavenumber and
a second one to growth of vertical kinetic energy with
its spectrum peak at zero vertical wavenumber for large
R. The former has been seen previously in stratiﬁed
turbulence [20], and the latter may be associated with
negative-viscosity instability seen previously in unstrat-
iﬁed shear ﬂow [2]. Each of these large-scale transitions
may be interpreted as an inverse energy cascade. How-
ever, they behavior is strongly constrained by the domain
size in our simulations where the forcing is imposed at the
gravest ﬁnite wavenumbers. We will explore beyond this
limitation in future reports.

In this paper we choose to focus on simulations at
very small Froude number, and we are able to reach a
Reynolds number high enough to destabilize the pancake
vortices in several ways. This leads us to advance the fol-
lowing proposition about the nature of equilibrium strat-
iﬁed turbulence: for any Froude number, no matter how
small, there are Reynolds numbers large enough so that

FIG. 10: Comparison of vortical (upper graph) and wave
(lower graph) energy spectra with respect to horizontal and
vertical wavenumbers for four diﬀerent Reynolds number.
Each spectrum is an average over more than 200 times for
each Rλ. The horizontal spectra are very similar at large
horizontal scales but diﬀer at small scales (kh > 10). The
situation is diﬀerent in the vertical spectra, where the typical
scale decreases with Rλ.

FIG. 11: Evolution in time of the total vertical energy (thin
line) and the vertical energy at the zero vertical mode (thick
line) for the primary simulation (parameters of Fig. 1). The
component of the zero vertical mode is several order of mag-
nitude smaller than the total vertical energy for τ < 700 and
become the dominant mode for τ > 800

8

en Informatique Scientiﬁque (IDRIS) and the IBM
RS6000/SP of the Centre de Ressource Informatique of
the University of Lille was used for additional simula-
tions. JPL and JCM acknowledge support from the Of-
ﬁce of Naval Research (grant N00014-98-1-0165).

a sequence of transitions to non-pancake motions will al-
ways occur, and, conversely, for any Reynolds number,
no matter how large, there are Froude numbers small
enough so that these transitions are suppressed. Obvi-
ously, this hypothesis warrants further testing, as do our
provisional interpretations of the dynamical nature of the
transitions.

Acknowledgments

The primary simulation was calculated on the NEC
SX-5 of the Institut du D´eveloppement et des Ressources

[1] A. Craya. Contribution `a l’analyse de la turbulence as-
soci´ee `a des vitesses moyennes. Technical Report 345,
Publ. Sci. Tech. Minist`ere de l’air, 1958.

[2] B. Dubrulle and U. Frisch. Eddy viscosity of parity-

invariant ﬂow. Phys. Rev. A, 43:5355–5364, 1991.

[3] B. Dubrulle, U. Frisch, and M. H´enon. Low-viscosity

lattice gases. J. Stat. Phys., 59:1187–1226, 1991.

[4] P. F. Embid and A. J. Majda. Low froude number limit-
ing dynamics for stably stratiﬁed ﬂow with small or ﬁnite
rossby number. Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn., 87:1–50,
1998.

[5] A. M. Fincham, T. Maxworthy, and G. R. Spedding. En-
ergy dissipation and vortex struture in freely decaying
stratiﬁed turbulence. Dyn. Atmos. Ocean, 23:155–169,
1996.

[6] K. S. Gage. The eﬀect of stable stratiﬁcation on the
stability of viscous parallel ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 47:1–
20, 1971.

[7] F. S. Godeferd and C Cambon. Detailed investigation
of energy transfers in homogeneous stratiﬁed turbulence.
Phys. Fluids, 6:2084–2100, 1994.

[8] J. R. Herring and M´etais O. Numerical experiments
in forced stably stratiﬁed turbulence. J. Fluid Mech.,
202:97–115, 1989.

[9] L. N. Howard. Note on a paper of John W. Miles. J.

Fluid Mech., 10:509–512, 1961.

[10] Y. Kimura and J. R. Herring. Diﬀusion in stably strati-
ﬁed turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 328:253–269, 1996.
[11] M. P. Lelong. Internal wave–vortical mode interactions in
strongly stratiﬁed ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 232:1–19, 1991.
[12] D. K. Lilly. On the computational stability of numerical
solutions of time-dependent, nonlinear, geophysical ﬂuid
dynamic problems. Mon. Wea. Rev., 93:11, 1965.

[13] D. K. Lilly. Stratiﬁed turbulence and the mesoscale vari-
ability of the atmosphere. J. Atmos. Sci., 40:749–761,
1983.

[14] A. J. Majda and M. G. Shefter. Elementary stratiﬁed
ﬂows with instability at large Richardson number. J.
Fluid Mech., 376:319–350, 1998.

[15] J. C. McWilliams. A note on a uniformly valid model
spanning the regimes of geostrophic and isotropic, strat-
iﬁed turbulence: balanced turbulence. J. Atmos. Sci.,
42:1773–1774, 1985.

[16] O. M´etais and J. R. Herring. Numerical simulation of
freely evolving turbulence in stably stratiﬁed ﬂuids. J.
Fluid Mech., 202:117–148, 1989.

[17] J. W. Miles. On the stability of heterogeneous shear

ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 10:496–508, 1961.

[18] H. Peters, M. C. Gregg, and J. M. Toole. On the param-
eterization of equatorial turbulence. J. Geophys. Res.,
93:1199–1218, 1988.

[19] J. J. Riley and M.-P. Lelong. Fluid motion in the presence
of stong stratiﬁcation. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 32:613–
657, 2000.

[20] L. M. Smith and F. Waleﬀe. Generation of slow, large
scales in forced rotating, stratiﬁed turbulence. J. FLuid
Mech., 451:145–168, 2002.

[21] C. Staquet and F. S. Godeferd. Statistical modelling
and direct numerical simulations of decaying stably strat-
iﬁed turbulence. part 1. ﬂow energetics. J. Fluid Mech.,
360:295–340, 1998.

[22] A. Vincent and M. Meneguzzi. The spatial structure and
statistical properties of homogenous turbulence. J. Fluid
Mech., 225:1–20, 1991.

[23] J. Werne and D. C. Fritts.

Stratiﬁed shear turbu-
lence: Evolution and statistics. Geophys. Research Lett.,
26:439–442, 1999.

[24] C. T. Yap and C. W. van Atta. Experimental studies of
the development of quasi-two-dimensional turbulence in
stably stratiﬁed ﬂuid. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans, 19:289–323,
1993.

