Using Drag to Hover

Z. Jane Wang

Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853

(Dated: March 20, 2003)

Abstract

Unlike a helicopter, an insect can, in theory, use both lift and drag to stay aloft. Here we

show that a dragonﬂy uses mostly drag to hover by employing asymmetric up and down strokes.

Computations of a family of strokes further show that using drag can be as eﬃcient as using lift at

the low Reynolds number regime appropriate for insects. Previously, asymmetric strokes employed

by dragonﬂies were viewed as an exception. Here we suggest that these asymmetric strokes are

building blocks of the commonly seen symmetric strokes, such as a ﬁgure-of-eight or a U-shape.

Therefore insects which use those symmetric strokes can also use some drag to hover. In a sense,

some insects are rowers or swimmers in air. However unlike oars in water, insects cannot lift their

wings out of air. This leads to two subtle consequences. First, a restriction on the degree of

asymmetry in the strokes in order to produce suﬃcient lift. It corresponding to an upper limit in

the inclined angle of the stroke plane, about 600, similar to the value observed in dragonﬂy ﬂight.

Second, a break of symmetry in the forces produced by symmetric strokes.

PACS numbers: 87.19.St,47.11.+j,47.32Cc

3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Airplanes and helicopters are airborne via aerodynamic lift, not drag. However, it is not

apriori clear that nature should design insects to ﬂy using only lift. In rowing and swimming,

we make use of drag to propel, so there is a reason to suspect that insects might do the

same.

It is well appreciated that micro-organisms (bacteria, sperm, and protozoa) use drag to

swim in low Reynolds number ﬂows[1, 2]. It is also known that some birds and ﬁsh use drag

to ﬂy and swim in high Reynolds number ﬂows[3, 4]. But recent research on insect ﬂight

has primarily focused on the unsteady mechanisms for lift enhancement[5, 6], and seems to

have overlooked the useful eﬀects of drag.

The separation of lift and drag, which are force components orthogonal and anti-parallel

to the instantaneous velocity of the wing relative to the far ﬁeld ﬂow, is natural for airplane

wings, propeller and windmill blades, and boat sails. This is because large wings and

sails ‘ﬂy’ at a relatively steady state and at small angles of attack, so lift is the dominant

component. But an insect uses large angles of attack to generate high transient lift, i.e.

taking advantage of dynamic stall[7]. At large angles of attack, high lift and high drag go

hand in hand, as expected for stalled ﬂow and as seen in recent experiments[8]. Therefore

the conventional separation of lift and drag is no longer of central interest. The relevant

force for hovering is the net vertical force which balances the gravity; thus it is convenient

to decompose the forces into vertical and horizontal components. If a wing is restricted to

move symmetrically along a horizontal plane, whether in circular helicopter-like or reciprocal

motions, the drag roughly cancels in each cycle. And the net vertical force to balance an

insect’s weight only comes from lift. In contrast, asymmetric up and down strokes along

an inclined stroke plane generate vertical forces which are oblique to the stroke plane. The

vertical force thus has contributions from both lift and drag.

So at least in theory, drag and lift can be of equal use to insect. But can using drag be

as eﬃcient as using lift at the range of Reynolds number appropriate for insects?

Strong evidence suggesting that some insects use drag to hover goes back to an early study

by Weis-Fogh[9] who noticed that true hover-ﬂies (Syrphinae) and dragonﬂies (Odonata) em-

ploy asymmetric strokes along an inclined stroke plane. This is in contrast to the symmetric

back and forth strokes near a horizontal plane, seen in the majority of hovering insects,

including fruit-ﬂies, bees, and beetles. What brought the asymmetric strokes to attention

was the failure of quasi-steady calculations in predicting enough vertical forces to support

2

an insect’s weight[7, 9, 10, 11, 12]. On the other hand, the plunging motion during the

down-stroke in the asymmetric strokes certainly indicates that large drag can be generated

in the upward direction.

Since the work of Weis-Fogh, the asymmetric strokes have been treated separately from

‘normal hovering’[7, 9]. Most studies have focused on symmetric strokes along a horizontal

plane. However, commonly seen insect wing strokes can deviate from the horizontal plane

and follow either parabola-like or ﬁgure-eight trajectories [13]. Here we suggest that these

strokes can be viewed, conceptually, as pairs of asymmetric strokes, illustrated in Fig. 1d and

1e. Because of this connection, we can focus on asymmetric strokes along straight inclined

planes, and deduce qualitative results for general symmetric strokes used by insects.

Let us ﬁrst consider two cases of hovering; one employs symmetric strokes along the

horizontal plane, a special case of normal hovering, the other asymmetric strokes along an
inclined plane of 60◦, suggested by the study of dragonﬂy free ﬂight(Aeschna juncea)[10].

Both cases belong to the family of wing kinematics described by

[x(t), y(t)] =

(1 + cos 2πf t)[cos β, sin β]

A0
2

α(t) = α0 + B sin(2πf t + φ),

where [(x(t), y(t)] is the position of the center of the chord, and β is the inclined angle of

the stroke plane (see Fig. 1a-1c). α(t) describes the chord orientation relative to the stroke

plane. f is the frequency, A0 and B are amplitudes of translation and rotation, and φ is

the phase delay between rotation and translation. α0 is the mean angle of attack, thus it

describes the asymmetry between the up and down strokes. α0 = π/2 and β = 0 correspond

to a symmetric stroke along a horizontal plane (Fig. 1c). The wake of this family of wing

motions was visualized previously using smoke trajectories[14].

The two dimensional ﬂow around a hovering wing is governed by the Navier-Stokes equa-

tion, which is solved here using a fourth order compact ﬁnite-diﬀerence scheme[15]. To

ensure suﬃcient resolution at the edge of the wing and eﬃciency in computation, elliptic

coordinates ﬁxed to the wing, (µ, θ), are employed and mapped to a Cartesian grid. The

two-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation governing the vorticity in elliptic coordinates is

(1)

(2)

(3)

∂(Sω)
∂t

+ (√Su

)ω =

∆2ω

1
Re

· ∇

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(√Su) = 0,

∇ ·

where u is the velocity ﬁeld, ω the vorticity ﬁeld, and S the scaling factor S(µ, θ) = cosh2 µ

−
cos2 θ. The forces are calculated by integrating the ﬂuid stress on the wing. Speciﬁcally,

F = Fp + Fν + ρW a, where Fp and Fν are pressure and viscous contributions, given below,

W is the area of ellipse, a the wing’s linear acceleration,

Fp = ρν

(sinh µ0 sin θ ˆx + cosh µ0 cos θˆy)dθ,

Fν = ρν

ω(

cosh µ0 sin θ ˆx + sinh µ0 cos θ ˆy)dθ.

∂ω
∂µ

−

Z

Z

The ﬁctitious forces introduced by the rotating frame, i.e. the centrifugal and Coriolis forces,

as well as the force due to rotational acceleration, integrate to zero and thus have no con-

tribution. The method was described in detail previously[12, 16].

The instantaneous forces are nondimensionalized by 0.5ρu2

rmsc, where ρ is the density

of air, urms the root mean square of the translational velocity of the center of the wing,

and c the chord, respectively. The dimensionless forces are called force coeﬃcients, CL and

CD denoting the lift and drag coeﬃcients, CV and CH are the vertical and horizontal force

coeﬃcients. Because the horizontal force cancels over a period, its absolute value is used

when taking averages.

The translational motion of the wing is completely speciﬁed by two dimensionless param-

eters, the Reynolds number, Re

umaxc/ν = πf A0c/ν, and A0/c. The typical Reynolds

number of a dragonﬂy is about 103, and a fruit-ﬂy is about 102. But since the conclusions

≡

drawn below does not crucially depend on the Reynolds number in this range, it is chosen

to be 150 for simplicity.

In the case of symmetric stroke (Fig. 1c and Fig. 2a), described by eq. (1) with α0 = π/2,

and β = 0, each half-stroke generates almost equal lift in the vertical direction, and almost

equal drag in the opposite horizontal direction. The drag in each stroke does not exactly

cancel even in the steady state due to a symmetry breaking, as will be discussed. The

averaged vertical and horizontal force coeﬃcients are 1.07 and 1.61, respectively, resulting
in a ratio of 0.66. In contrast, the asymmetric stroke with α = 60◦ β = 62.8◦ (Fig. 3a and

3b) generates most of its vertical force during the down-stroke, in which the lift and drag

coeﬃcients are 0.45 and 2.4, respectively; they are 0.50 and 0.68 during the upstroke. The

4

vertical and horizontal force coeﬃcients averaged over one period are 0.98 and 0.75, resulting

in a ratio of 1.31, twice the value of the symmetric stroke. In this case 76% of the vertical

force is contributed by the aerodynamic drag.

Another view of the diﬀerence between the symmetric and asymmetric strokes is revealed

by the averaged ﬂow around the wing. The vorticity and velocity ﬁelds around the wing at

four diﬀerent times are presented in Fig. 2c and 3c. Comparing the traveling distances of

vortex pairs in the two cases suggests a faster jet produced by the asymmetric stroke. A

better way to quantify these jets is to plot the time averaged velocity below the wing. The

averaged ﬂow shows the structure of the jets, as shown in Fig. 2d and 3d. The velocity is

plotted in physical space, which are interpretated from the computed velocity in the body

coordinates. The asymmetric stroke generates a faster jet of a width comparable to the

chord, and it penetrates downward for about 7 chords. In contrast, the symmetric stroke

generates a jet whose width is comparable to the ﬂapping amplitude, and it penetrates down

for about 4-5 chords. Thus we tentatively conjecture that dragonﬂies take advantage of the

ground eﬀects to hover above the water at a distance of 7 chords or less, as the jet is reﬂected

by the water.

Next we investigate how the forces and power vary with the degree of asymmetry. For

this purpose, it is convenient to ﬁx A0/c = 2.5, f = 1, Re = 150, B = π/4, φ = 0,

and vary α0 from π/4 to π/2, with ten α’s equally spaced. The time-averaged forces and

power are plotted against β, the angle of the stroke plane, in Fig. 4. For a given α0, β is

determined such that the net force averaged over a period is vertically up. Fig. 4 illustrates

two interesting points.

First, as the stroke plane tilts up, the vertical force coeﬃcient, CV , remains almost a
60◦. The horizontal force averages to zero, but its average magnitude,

constant up to β

∼

CH decreases with β. Thus, the ratio, CV /CH, increases by a factor of 2 as β increases from

00 to 600. Therefore by employing asymmetric strokes along an inclined plane, an insect

not only maintain the vertical force but also reduces horizontal forces. The averaged power

exerted by the wing to the ﬂuid is given by P =

, where FD(t) is the force parallel

FD(t)u(t)
h

i

to the translational velocity of the wing, u(t). Comparing this power with the ideal power

based on the actuator disk theory[17] gives a non-dimensional measure,

5

FD(t)u(t)
CP = h
FV (t)
h

i
3/2 q

2ρA0,

(7)

i
where the size of the actuator for a two dimensional wing is assumed to be the amplitude

A0, and FV is the vertical force. Similar to CV , CP is relatively independent of β up to
60◦. Up to 400, there is a slight decrease in power required to balance a given weight.

β

∼

Thus using drag to hover does not require extra work.

Second, the sharp decrease in vertical forces at β

60◦ suggests that asymmetric strokes

∼

along nearly vertical stroke planes would not generate suﬃcient force to hover. A quasi-

steady model of the forces would not predict such a cut-oﬀ[18]. The drop in vertical force

is due to the fact that an insect cannot lift its wing out of air, so the wing must interact

with its own wake. Such interaction reduces the net vertical force by more than half when
β > 70◦. Thus, one might expect that in natural ﬂight the angle of the stroke plane also

has an upper limit. Insects using inclined stroke planes appear to fall in this category. One
60◦, is observed in dragonﬂies (Aeschna juncea)[10]; other studies

of the largest angles, β

reported smaller inclined angles[19].

∼

The interaction between the wing and its wake at these Reynolds numbers has another

consequence. Namely, symmetric strokes do not necessarily generate symmetric forces, as

would be the case at zero Reynolds number ﬂow. At the Reynolds numbers studied here,

the symmetric stroke along the horizontal plane (Fig. 1b) produces a slightly nonzero

horizontal force. The symmetry is broken by the initial conditions, whose eﬀects persist in

time. Such persistence may seem peculiar at ﬁrst, but can be explained as follows. The

ﬁrst back and forth stroke generates two pairs of vortices, one at the leading edge and

another at the trailing edge. The strengths of these vortex pairs are asymmetric due to

the initial motion. Each newly generated vortex is paired with the previous vortex, thus

it ‘remembers’ the preceeding stroke. In other words, a sequence of vortices are ’zipped’

together. Consequently, the vorticity conﬁguration at a given instance can be traced back

to the ﬁrst stroke, thus preserving the initial asymmetry. The nonzero averaged horizontal

force, the pwalternating magnitude in the peaks of the lift (Fig. 2b), and the bas in the

average ﬂow (Fig. 2c) are manifestations of this asymmetry. Similar broken of asymmetry

was observed in a previous theoretical study of butteﬂy strokes[20]

Real insect wing motions are complex and diverse, and the view of the ﬂapping motion

6

taken here is simplistic. In addition, the computation is two dimensional, but insects live in

three dimensions. Nonetheless, the above analysis provides a new way of thinking about the

wing kinematics employed by the insects. In particular, what was perceived as an exception

in the biology literature, the asymmetric strokes along an inclined stroke plane, can be

viewed as building blocks of more commonly seen symmetric strokes, including the well-

known ﬁgure-of-eight strokes. Moreover, the upper limit of the stroke plane angle predicted

from the computation, 600, coincides with the maximal angle observed in insects[10]. It also

turns out that at least within the family of strokes studied here, using drag is as eﬃcient as

using lift. We thus hope that biologists will investigate insect wing kinematics with a new

question in mind, that is to what degree insects use drag? Our study further suggests two

general lessons. First, to theorists, it seems to be more natural to view insects as swimmers

in air rather than small airplanes. Thus instead of reﬁning the unsteady lifting line theory for

attached ﬂow, as was appropriate for airplanes, it is more relavent to ﬁnd a better theory for

separated ﬂow. The classical theory of separated ﬂow underpredicts the forces[21]. Second,

designing micro-scale ﬂapping mechanisms at very low Reynolds numbers need not follow

the traditional rule of optimizing lift, but instead could use both lift and drag.

[1] E. M. Purcell, Am. J. Phys. 45, 3 (1977).

[2] G. I. Taylor, Low Reynolds number ﬂows (video), (Encyclopaedia Britannica Educational

Corp. (1985).

[3] R. W. Blake, Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. 48, 29 (1981).

[4] S. Vogel, Life in Moving Fluids (Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., 1996).

[5] C. P. Ellington, C. van den Berg, A. P. Willmott, and A. L. R. Thomas, Nature 384, 626

(1996).

[6] M. H. Dickinson, F. O. Lehmann, and S. P. Sane, Science 284, 1954 (1999).

[7] C. P. Ellington, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 305, 1 (1984).

[8] S. Sane and M. H. Dickinson, J. Exp. Bio. 204, 2607 (2001).

[9] T. Weis-Fogh, J. Exp. Biol 59, 169 (1973).

[10] R. A. Norberg, In Swimming and Flying in Nature(ed. T. Y. Wu, C. J. Brokaw and C.

Brennen) 2, 763 (1975).

7

[11] C. Somps and M. W. Luttgers, Science, 228, 1326 (1985).

[12] Z. J. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2216 (2000).

[13] Figure-eight trajectories were reported in early ﬁlm studies of wing motion[7]. Recent studies

suggested that they are not as common as it was initially assumed (C. P. Ellington, R. Dudley,

and M. H Dickinson, private communications). For example, fruit-ﬂies use a plunging motion

along a parabolic-like plane (M. H. Dickinson, private communication).

[14] P. Freymuth, K. Gustafson, and R. Leben, in Votex method and vortex motion, edited by K.

Gustavson and J. Sethian (SIAM, Philadelphia, 1991), p. 143.

[15] W. E and J. Liu, J. Comp. Phys. 126, 122 (1996).

[16] Z. J. Wang, J. Fluid Mech. 410, 323 (2000).

[17] J. Leishman, Principles of Helicopter Aerodynamics (University of Cambridge, Cambridge,

2000).

[18] Z. J. Wang (unpublished).

[19] J. M. Wakeling and C. P. Ellington, J. Exp. Biol. 200, 557 (1997).

[20] M. Iima and T. Yanagita, Proceedings of the 50th Japan National Congress on Theoretical

[21] F. von Karman and J. M. Burgers, in Aerodynamic Theory, edited by W. Durand (Springer,

and Applied Mechanics 50, 237 (2001).

Berlin, 1963), pp. vol. 2, Div. E.

Acknowledgement I thank S. Childress, M. Dickinson, C. Ellington, and A. Ruina,

P. Lissaman for helpful discussions, and A. Anderson and R. Dudley for suggestions on the

manuscripts. The work is supported by AFSOR, NSF, and ONR.

8

FIG. 1: A family of asymmetric strokes studied in this paper. Solid lines represent chord positions

during a stroke. The leading edge is indicated by either a black dot (down-stroke) or an open circle

(up-stroke). The numbers next to the leading edges indicate the time sequence. The motion is

described by eq. (1) and (2), with A0 being the end to end amplitude of the stroke, β the inclined

angle of the stroke plane (dashed line), and α0 the initial orientation of the wing. a) deﬁnition of

the chord position and orientation, b) generic asymmetric strokes c) a special case of symmetric

strokes along the horizontal plane. d) symmetric strokes along a parabolic stroke plane, and e)

symmetric strokes along a ﬁgure-eight. The symmetric strokes in d) and e) can be decomposed into

symmetric pairs of the asymmetric strokes described in b). The numbers next to the wings both

indicate the time sequence during a stroke, and also identiﬁes the segments on the right hand side

in the original stroke. This decomposition allows one to deduce qualitative results for the general

symmetric strokes based on the results of asymmetric strokes studied here.

9

FIG. 2: A special case of normal hovering: symmetric strokes strictly along a horizontal plane.

a) wing kinematics given by eq. (1) and (2) with A0/c = 2.5, α0 = π/2, B = π/4, β = 0. The

averaged lift and drag over each stroke are shown in scale. In this case, drag almost cancels in two

consecutive strokes, and the vertical force is contributed primarily by aerodynamic lift. b) time

dependent vertical (CV ) and horizontal (CH ) force coeﬃcients, which are the same as lift (CL) and

drag (CD) coeﬃcients. c) snapshots of vorticity (red: counterclockwise rotation, blue: clockwise

rotation) and velocity ﬁeld (red vectors) near the wing, and d) time averaged velocity ﬁeld over one

period, characterized by a downward jet. umax, the maximum translational velocity of the wing is

the reference scale. The dashed square corresponds to the region shown in 1c).

10

FIG. 3: Hovering along an inclined stroke plane using asymmetric strokes, as seen in dragonﬂy

ﬂight[10]. a) wing kinematics given by eq. (1) and (2) with A0/c = 2.5, α0 = π/3, B = π/4, and

β = 0.35π. The averaged lift and drag over each stroke are shown in scale. In this case, the vertical

force is contributed primarily by the drag during the down-stroke. b) vertical (CV ) and horizontal

(CH ) coeﬃcients (solid lines), and contributions from lift (dashed line), and drag (solid line with

circle), c)-d) see the legend of Fig 2.

11

FIG. 4: Comparison of the averaged vertical (C V ), horizontal (C H), and power (C P ) coeﬃcients

as a function of the angle of the stroke plane, β, which characterizes the degree of asymmetry

in the up- and down- strokes and the relative contribution of lift and drag to the vertical force.

The vertical force remains roughly constant up to β = 600, but have a sharp cut-oﬀ beyond that,

due to the interaction between the wing and its own wake. The magnitude of the horizontal force
60◦. Up to 400, there is a slight

decreases with β. CP is relatively independent of β up to β

∼

decrease in power required to balance a given weight. Thus using drag to hover does not require

extra work.

12

