3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A mathematical model for top-shelf vertigo: the role of sedimenting otoconia in BPPV

Todd M. Squires1, Michael S. Weidman2, Timothy C. Hain3 and Howard A. Stone2
1Departments of Applied and Computational Mathematics and Physics,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
2Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
3Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV) is a mechanical disorder of the vestibular system,
in which calcite particles called otoconia interfere with the mechanical functioning of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled
semicircular canals normally used to sense rotation. Using hydrodynamic models, we examine the
two mechanisms proposed by the medical community for BPPV: cupulolithiasis, in which otoconia
attach directly to the cupula (a sensory membrane), and canalithiasis, in which otoconia settle
through the canals and exert a ﬂuid pressure across the cupula. Extending known hydrodynamic
calculations and making reasonable geometric and physical approximations, we derive an expression
for the transcupular pressure ∆Pc exerted by a settling solid particle in canalithiasis. By tracking
settling otoconia in a model two-dimensional geometry, the cupular displacement and associated
eye response (nystagmus) can be calculated quantitatively. Several important features emerge: 1) A
pressure ampliﬁcation occurs as otoconia enter a narrowing duct (almost twenty-fold in humans); 2)
An average-sized otoconium requires approximately ﬁve seconds to settle through the wide ampulla,
where ∆Pc is not ampliﬁed, which suggests a mechanism for the observed latency of BPPV; and
3) An average-sized otoconium can cause a volumentric cupular displacement on the order of 30
◦
pL, corresponding to a step increase in angular velocity of 2
/s, approximately the threshold for
sensation. Larger cupular displacement and nystagmus could result from larger and/or multiple
otoconia.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV) is the most commonly diagnosed vertigo syndrome [1], with a recent
study suggesting that it aﬀects 9% of older persons [2]. BPPV is characterized by sudden attacks of dizziness and
nausea triggered by changes in head orientation, and speciﬁcally aﬄicts the posterior canal responsible for sensing
‘forward rolling’ rotations. The disorder has earned the common name “top-shelf vertigo”, since attacks often occur
when the head is suddenly tilted back, such as when looking at objects on the top shelf. Other clinical features of
BPPV include a 5-10 second latency between the head tilt and the onset of vertigo, and a fatiguable response which
lessens with repeated head maneuvers [3]. Although the condition is not life-threatening, the disorientation brought
on by attacks is severely discomforting, and can cause nausea, accidents and injuries.

BPPV is caused by a mechanical dysfunction of the vestibular system in the inner ear, whose ﬂuid-ﬁlled semicircular
canals normally act to detect angular rotation via deﬂections of the sensory membraneous cupula. In BPPV, calcite
particles (otoconia) are believed to interfere with the normal operation of the semicircular canals, falsely inducing a
spinning sensation when in fact no rotary motion of the head is actually occurring.

Two primary theories for the cause of BPPV have been advanced by the medical community: cupulolithiasis, in
which otoconia are directly attached to the cupula, and canalithiasis, in which otoconia freely sediment through
the canals and exert a ﬂuid pressure on the cupula. A consensus is emerging that canalithiasis is the more likely
mechanism for BPPV, supported in part by the largely successful clinical technique used to treat BPPV treatment:
therapeutic head maneuvers [4, 5, 6] designed to drive otoconia all the way around and out of the canal, so that they
settle in the utricle. Further support for canalithiasis is reviewed in the work of Brandt and Steddin [3], who compare
the two mechanisms and conclude that canalithiasis is better able to explain the latency and fatiguability of the
disorder. Recently, however, Buckingham [7] questioned the canalithiasis interpretation for the maneuvers, suggesting
that settling particles should exert a transcupular pressure from the utricle as well as from the narrow duct. Finally,
House and Honrubia [8] cite various clinical observations, some of which are consistent with canalithiasis, and some
with cupulolithiasis, and suggest that in fact both mechanisms are viable.

Despite extensive quantitative modelling of normal vestibular functioning, the description and debate on BPPV
mechanisms have been purely qualitative. Without a quantitative analysis of these mechanisms, it is impossible to
know whether either mechanism is physically capable of producing a response of the magnitude experienced in BPPV.
Very recently, House and Honrubia [8] have taken an important ﬁrst step toward a quantitative mathematical model
of canalithiasis and cupulolithiasis. Speciﬁcally, their canalithiasis model predicts that a settling sphere exerts a

2

b
c

V
c

s

p

ampulla 

r
p

R 

g

e
||

duct 

b
d

FIG. 1: a) The human vestibular system consists of the semicircular canals for sensing rotation, the otolithic organs (saccule
and utricle) for sensing linear/gravitational acceleration, and the cochlea for auditory sensing. Displaced otoconia, perhaps
from the otolithic organs, are believed to collect in the posterior canal and cause BPPV. b) Schematic of the model geometry
for the semicircular canals (deﬁned in equation 21), which is chosen to resemble measurements [9]. A torus of major radius R
consists of a thin circular duct of radius bd, and a thicker region consisting of the ampulla and the utricle (located above the
cupula, not shown here). The ampulla and utricle are spanned and separated by the membraneous cupula of radius bc. The
position of a sedimenting otoconium is speciﬁed by its distance sp along the centerline of the canal and its distance rp from
the centerline of the canal. The translating otoconium exerts a pressure ﬁeld that displaces the cupula by a volume Vc.

transcupular pressure (see, however, equation 11 below for the hydrodynamically correct result)

∆PH =

1
3

Fk
A

,

(1)

where Fk is the component of the buoyant force oriented along the axis of the canal, and A is the cross-sectional area
of the canal at the location of the settling particle. This formula was argued intuitively based upon the following
assumptions: the component of the force perpendicular to the channels exerts no transcupular pressure; only the drag
on the sphere resulting from the pressure distribution contributes to the transcupular pressure; and the ﬂuid pressure
is uniform across each cross-section of the canal. A further assumption (not explicitly stated) is that the canal walls
do not aﬀect Stokes’ law for a settling sphere, so that the Stokes settling velocity and pressure drag for a sphere
settling in free space are used. While, strictly speaking, these assumptions are known to be incorrect, House and
Honrubia correctly predict three key features of canalithiasis: (1) the characteristic magnitude of the transcupular
pressure, (2) the ampliﬁcation of transcupular pressure when the particle enters a narrow section of the channel, and
(3) the inability of a force perpendicular to canal walls to result in a transcupular pressure.

The present work builds on and extends the results of House and Honrubia in several ways. First, we explicitly cal-
culate the transcupular pressure resulting from a small particle settling through a ﬂuid-ﬁlled channel using reasonable
geometrical approximations. Signiﬁcantly, both qualitative and quantitative corrections to equation (1) exist. Our
expression is quantitatively accurate, is independent of particle shape or even size (so long as the particle is small
compared to the channel), and is valid for a canal of arbitrary (but slowly-varying) geometry. Like equation (1), we
provide a quantitative measure of forcing due to canalithiasis without requiring a detailed solution of the complete
ﬂuid equations in a complicated, three-dimensional geometry. Second, we consider two-dimensional motion of the
otoconia (i.e. head maneuvers which are in the plane of the canal), so that otoconia settle out of the middle of the
canal towards canal walls. We simulate BPPV episodes by tracking cupular displacement due to transcupular pressure
∆Pc, and (using a model of central ‘velocity storage’ that allows for additional processing by the brain stem) the
nystagmus response ˙E. We compare this to a model of cupulolithiasis, and demonstrate that the former can actually
give a stronger nystagmus response, as found by House and Honrubia.

This article is organized as follows: In sections II A and II B, respectively, we describe the normal functioning of
the semicircular canals and mathematical models to describe it. In section III, we present the mathematical model

3

Physical parameters for human semicircular canals

R Major radius of semicircular canal
bd Duct radius
bc Mean radius of cupular partition
δ Angle over which channel tapers
βd Angle subtended by duct
βu Angle subtended by utricle
ρ Endolymph density
µ Endolymph viscosity
ρo Otoconium density
a Otoconium radius
τc Cupular time constant
τv Nystagmus time constant
K Cupular elastic constant

3.2 mm
0.16 mm
0.68 mm
.03π
150◦
◦
75
1.0 g/cm3
.01 g/cm/s
2.7 g/cm3
0.5–15µm, 7.5 µm avg.
4.2 s
21 s
13 GPa/m3

from Curthoys and Oman [9]
”
”
”
Van Buskirk et al. [10]
”
Bronzino [13]
”
”
Campos [14]
Dai et al. [15]
Malcolm [16]
Calculated using τc in (3)

TABLE I: Physical parameters and derived quantities for BPPV.

for canalithiasis based on the hydrodynamics of a settling particle, giving the resulting cupular response and, using
a velocity storage model of neural processing, the measurable nystagmus response. Two-dimensional simulations of
BPPV are provided in Section IV for two geometries: ﬁrst, we treat a particle settling in a straight, tapering channel
to demonstrate the geometric pressure ampliﬁcation; second, we simulate an attack of BPPV in a model semicircular
canal. The inﬂuence of otoconium size upon canalithiasis is discussed in Section V, and a model of cupulolithiasis is
presented for comparison in Section VI. Finally, a summary is provided in Section VII, where the main results of this
study are discussed.

II. THE SEMICIRCULAR CANALS: NORMAL FUNCTIONING AND MODELLING

A. Overview of normal vestibular functioning

The human vestibular system consists of two sets of organs: the otolithic organs, which sense linear acceleration and
gravity, and the semicircular canals, which sense angular velocity and acceleration. Each ear has three semicircular
canals that are oriented in a mutually orthogonal fashion in order to sense rotations about each of three axes, as
shown in ﬁgure 1a. The canals are ﬁlled with endolymph of density ρ and viscosity µ similar to that of water.

Figure 1b depicts a model semicircular canal of major radius R which consists of the duct, which is a narrow region
of radius bd subtending an angle βd, and a thicker region containing the ampulla and the utricle (spanning an angle
βu), which are in turn separated by the membraneous cupula of radius bc. We use βd and βu (not shown in the ﬁgure)
to be consistent with the geometry of Van Buskirk et al. [10]. The ﬁgure, though somewhat simpliﬁed from the actual
geometry, captures the most important shape variations, at least from the standpoint of the hydrodynamic analysis
given in this paper. Typical geometric and material parameters are given in Table I.

When the canal experiences an angular acceleration, inertia causes the endolymph to lag behind the motion of
the canal itself, distorting the cupula. The cupular distortion triggers embedded sensory hair cells to ﬁre, signalling
the angular acceleration/velocity to the brain and triggering a compensatory eye motion called nystagmus. Finally,
the restoring force of the cupula pushes the endolymph back through the canal, and the cupula slowly relaxes to an
undisplaced position.

Neural signal processing in the brain stem modiﬁes the transmitted signal in a process called velocity storage
[11, 12], lengthening the typical time constant of the associated sensation and nystagmus. The typical time constant
for cupular relaxation (τc ≈ 4 s) is transformed into a nystagmus time constant of about τv ≈ 21 s for yaw (side-
to-side) rotations, where the lateral semicircular canal is stimulated. Velocity storage may be less eﬀective in the
posterior canal, or might also be less eﬀective for an unnatural vestibular stimulation such as BPPV. Nevertheless,
since experimental data regarding the degree to which velocity storage applies in the posterior canal (indicated in
Figure 1a) is presently unavailable, we assume that the same velocity storage is present as in the well-known situation
with the lateral canals.

4

(2)

(3)

(4)

B. Mathematical models of the mechanics of semicircular canals

Steinhausen [17] developed the ﬁrst model of the mechanics of the semicircular canals, treating the angular dis-
placement θ(t) of the endolymph/cupula as an overdamped torsional pendulum, obeying the ordinary diﬀerential
equation

I ¨θ + B ˙θ + Kθ = −Iα,

where I reﬂects the inertia of the endolymph, B reﬂects viscous damping, K is the ‘spring constant’ of the elastic
cupula, α(t) is the angular acceleration of the system, and overdots denote time derivatives. In this description, the
response of the canals to stimuli is characterized by two time constants: (i) a long time scale T1 ≈ B/K, representing
the relaxation time of a displaced cupula, which arises from a balance of the cupula’s restoring force against the viscous
resistance of the duct to the ﬂuid pushed through it; and (ii) a short time scale T2 ≈ I/B, representing the time over
which the endolymphatic ﬂuid moves inertially, which arises from a balance of inertia against viscous resistance.

Subsequent theoretical papers have attempted to calculate these time constants T1 and T2 from the physical
parameters and length scales characteristic of the vestibular system. Van Buskirk, Watts and Liu [10] modelled
a semicircular canal as a torus with thin (duct) and thick (utricle) sections. Neglecting the ﬂuid ﬂow in the utricle,
and considering both transient and quasi-steady ﬂuid ﬂow through the duct, Van Buskirk et al. conﬁrmed that the
semicircular canals respond like an overdamped harmonic oscillator, and explicitly calculated the time constants in
terms of system dimensions and parameters,

where λ is the ﬁrst zero of the Bessel function J0(λ). In response to a step increase in angular velocity α(t) = Ω0δ(t),
the endolymph in the duct attains a maximum displacement of angle θm ≈ 4ρΩ0(1 + βu/βd)b2
1µ after a time of
approximately T2. This response corresponds to a maximum cupular displacement of volume

d/λ4

T1 =

8µβdR
πb4
dK

and T2 =

ρb2
d
λ2
1µ

,

Vc ≈ θmRπb2

d =

4ρΩ0(1 + βu/βd)πRb4
d
λ4
1µ

,

which decays back to zero on a time scale T1.

Equation (4) provides a convenient way to compare the cupular displacement due to a settling otoconium to that
driven by an equivalent rotation Ω. Using values from Table I, the volumetric cupular displacement V0 corresponding
to the measured detection threshold (Ωc ≈ 2◦/s) is approximately V0 ≈ 35 pL.

In this approach, all physical and geometrical parameters are known except for the cupular stiﬀness K, which
Van Buskirk et al. assumed to be K = 3.4 GPa/m3 in order to obtain a long time constant T1 = 21 s, as found
in nystagmus measurements by Malcolm [16]. This assumption is now known to be likely in error, as nystagmus is
believed to reﬂect a neural signal processed by the so-called ‘velocity storage mechanism’ [11, 12], as discussed shortly.
The human cupular time constant is believed to be approximately 4.2 s [18], which yields a corresponding cupular
stiﬀness constant K ≈ 13 GPa/m3.

Revisions to the approach of Van Buskirk et al. include the work of Oman, Marcus and Curthoys [19], who con-
sidered a more realistic description of the semicircular canals, using geometries that did not have constant, circular
cross-section, and Rabbitt and Damiano [20] who accounted for vestibular functioning at high accelerations by calcu-
lating the ﬂuid ﬂow near the cupula partition rather than assuming a Poiseuille proﬁle. Furthermore, Damiano [21]
allowed for ﬂuid to seep through a possibly porous cupula. Because the approach of Van Buskirk et al. gives results
that are largely consistent with these revised models in the low frequency and velocity regimes considered here, we
use a similarly simpliﬁed geometry in the present article. It would be straightforward to extend the present work to
a more complicated (but realistic) three-dimensional model of the semicircular canal.

III. MECHANICS OF THE SEMICIRCULAR CANALS AND CUPULA: MODIFICATIONS TO
INCLUDE OTOCONIA

In this section, we derive a simpliﬁed model that includes the physics of settling otoconia and the processing of
a velocity storage mechanism in order to quantitatively capture the essential characteristics of canalithiasis, without
requiring a detailed numerical investigation. We derive an expression for the long-range pressure ﬁeld exerted on the
cupula by a sedimenting particle, which yields a geometric pressure ampliﬁcation and a mechanism for latency. These
ﬁndings conﬁrm the feasibility of the canalithiasis mechanism for BPPV.

Four components are necessary in the analysis. In section III A, we derive an equation for the volumetric cupular
displacement Vc to an externally-applied transcupular pressure diﬀerence ∆Pc. In section III B, we derive an expression
for the ﬂuid pressure ﬁeld set up by a settling particle of a given size, density, and position, giving the pressure diﬀerence
∆Pc that drives the cupula. Third, the particle’s settling velocity is calculated in section III C, accounting primarily for
Stokes drag, but examining hydrodynamic interactions with channel walls and the eﬀect of background endolymph
ﬂow. These three elements are suﬃcient to characterize the impact of a sedimenting particle on the mechanical
response of the cupula, which is assumed to determine the neural signal ﬁred. Finally, section III D incorporates the
velocity storage mechanism that is assumed to process this neural signal and lengthen the (measurable) nystagmus
time scale beyond the cupular time scale.

A. Physical model for ﬂow in the semicircular canals

Throughout this study, we neglect ﬂuid inertia, whose inﬂuence over cupular dynamics occurs on millisecond
time scales, because the state of the ﬂuid, cupula, and otoconium all change on signiﬁcantly longer time scales.
Without inertia, the cupular membrane obeys a simple balance of pressures, in which three terms are important. A
cupular membrane that is distorted to displace a volume Vc exerts an elastic restoring force via a pressure diﬀerence
∆P = −KVc across the membrane. (Here we choose ∆P = Pu − Pa to represent the diﬀerence in pressure between
the utricular side and the ampullar side of the cupula, and Vc to be positive when the cupula is displaced into the
ampulla.) Second, in order for the cupular displacement to change in time, it must force the equivalent ﬂuid volume
through the semicircular canal, requiring a pressure drop ∆P = −γ ˙Vc, where γ represents viscous resistance and will
be calculated shortly. The last term to enter the pressure balance is an externally applied pressure diﬀerence ∆Pc,
which in our case is given by the ﬂuid pressure set up by a settling otoconium. These three pressures balance, giving
an equation for cupular displacement

replicating Steinhausen’s formula (2) without inertia.

Because the ﬂuid response is taken to be quasi-steady, we can derive the viscous resistance coeﬃcient γ in a
straightforward manner. Fluid in a straight channel of length L and circular cross-section of radius b, subject to an
applied pressure diﬀerence ∆P , moves with a parabolic velocity proﬁle [22],

− KVc − γ ˙Vc + ∆Pc(t) = 0,

u(r) =

b2 − r2

e||,

∆P
4µL

(cid:0)
directed along the cylinder axis e||, with ﬂow rate ˙Vc = πb4∆P/8µL. This provides the desired relation between
pressure drop and ﬂow rate, giving

(cid:1)

γ =

8µL
πb4 .
This result can be expected to provide a very good approximation for the low-Reynolds-number ﬂow in the slightly
curved canal duct and slowly-varying geometries of interest here, and several simplifying approximations can be
made. We approximate the viscous resistance in the canal as occuring in the duct alone, since the pressure drop
∆Pu,a ∼ b4
d/βd by approximately
10−3. Furthermore, we approximate the channel as locally straight, because the radius of curvature of the channel
R is large compared to the duct radius, introducing errors of magnitude O (bd/R) ≈ 0.05 in the axial ﬂow and
≈ 10−3 in the ﬂow rate [22]. Finally, although the channel radius is not constant, it typically varies slowly.
O
With these approximations, the viscous resistance coeﬃcient for the semicircular canals (equation 7) is given by

c/βu along the utricle and ampulla is smaller than that along the duct ∆Pd ∼ b4

d/R2
b2

(7)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

The cupular displacement Vc that results from an applied pressure ∆Pc(t) is given by the solution of equation (5),

γ =

8µβdR
πb4
d

.

Vc(t) =

∆Pc(t′)e−(t−t

)/τcdt′,

′

1
γ

t

−∞

Z

τc =

≡

γ
K

8µβdR
πb4
dK

,

where τc is time scale for cupular relaxation,

as found by Van Buskirk et al. [10].

5

(5)

(6)

(8)

(9)

(10)

B. Pressure drop exerted by sedimenting otoconia

The time-dependent pressure ∆Pc(t) in equation (9) is provided by the stress ﬁeld set up by a settling otoconium,
which we model as a sphere of radius a ≪ bd and density ρo settling through the ﬂuid due to gravity g. In viscous
(low Reynolds number) ﬂuid ﬂows, the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld around a translating particle is insensitive to the detailed
shape or size of the particle outside of the immediate vicinity of the particle. In fact, the long-range ﬂuid ﬂow depends
only on the total force exerted by the particle. Therefore, we can approximate the ﬂuid ﬂow due to the particle as
that of an equivalent ‘point force,’ since a <

∼ bd/15 even in the narrowest part of the curved duct.

In Appendix A, we demonstrate that the diﬀerence in pressure between the ﬂuid in front and behind a small particle

settling in a (possibly curved) circular cylinder of local radius W (s) is given by

∆P = 2

f · e||
πW (sp)2

r2
p
W (sp)2

,

!

1 −

 

f =

πa3∆ρg,

4
3

which is the hydrodynamically correct analog of House and Honrubia’s equation (1). Here e|| points along the (local)
cylinder axis, sp measures the distance along the centerline of the cylinder, rp measures the radial distance of the
particle from the centerline of the canal, and f is the net force exerted by the particle, given by

where ∆ρ = ρo − ρ is the density diﬀerence between the otoconium and the endolymph. Equation (11) was originally
derived for a straight circular cylinder [23], but the physics of low-Reynolds-number ﬂows allows it to be applied, as a
ﬁrst approximation, for channels whose geometry (e.g. radius or orientation) vary slowly. Due to the closed geometry
of the semicircular canals, the pressure diﬀerence ∆P set up by the ﬂow due to the settling sphere is exerted across
the cupula, so that the forcing ∆Pc(t) in (9) is given by equations (11) and (12).

Four signiﬁcant features emerge from equation (11). First, the transcupular pressure is indeed inversely proportional
to the (local) cross-sectional area of the channel, as assumed by House and Honrubia[8]. This results in an ampliﬁcation
of ∆Pc when the particle falls into a narrowing channel. Second, the component of the force perpendicular to the
channel axis gives no pressure drop, as was assumed by House and Honrubia. Third, the transcupular pressure
decreases as particles approach the side walls—a signiﬁcant feature for canalithiasis that is absent from House and
Honrubia’s formula. Fourth, (11) is six times larger than House and Honrubia’s expression.

The radial and axial positions (rp, sp) of the otoconium determine the pressure ∆Pc exerted on the cupula via (11),
to which the cupula responds via (9). Particle motion aﬀects the pressure exerted on the cupula in two ways: (i)
When otoconia fall from the ampulla (radius W (sp) = bc) into the narrow duct (radius W (sp) = bd), the pressure
they exert is ampliﬁed by a factor b2
d ∼ 18; and (ii) an otoconium falling straight down approaches the side of
the duct due to the duct’s curvature (see Figure 1), reducing the net force in equation (11) both due to the factor
(1 − r2

p/W (sp)2) and to the reduced force projection g · e||.

c/b2

C. Sedimentation velocity of otoconia

Here we give an approximate calculation of the sedimentation velocity of an otoconium, considering two corrections
to the standard Stokes settling velocity: hydrodynamic interactions with the walls and advection with the background
ﬂow. The advection velocity of the particle is shown to be about a thousand times smaller than its Stokes settling
velocity and is thus neglected. Hydrodynamic interactions are typically small in the bulk of the channel, yet become
signiﬁcant when the particle nears the channel walls.

Since the particle is small compared to the size of the channel, a good ﬁrst approximation to its settling speed is

given simply by Stokes’ formula [22]

using values from Table I.

We ﬁrst consider the inﬂuence of the background velocity of the endolymph, which is set into motion by the
displaced cupula. A cupula displacing a volume per unit time ˙Vc sets up a parabolic ﬂow in the duct (equation 6),
whose maximum velocity ve

max is twice its average, so that

Us =

2∆ρa2g
9µ

≈ 0.2mm/s,

ve
max =

2 ˙Vc
πb2
d

.

6

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

∼ 10 pL/s, giving a maximum endolymph velocity in the duct of order ve

From the simulations discussed below (e.g. in Figure 3), we estimate a cupular volumetric displacement rate of order
<
˙Vc <
∼ 0.3µm/s, which is smaller than
the Stokes settling velocity (13) by a factor of approximately 103. Therefore, throughout this work, we neglect any
particle advection by this background endolymph ﬂow.

max

It is straightforward to incorporate previously calculated hydrodynamic interactions [24, 25] between the particle
and the walls of an enclosing cylinder. Appendix B presents a description of our account of these hydrodynamic
interactions. We list here the most signiﬁcant features: 1) Hydrodynamic interactions are largely insigniﬁcant away
from channel walls — corrections to settling velocities for particles in cylindrical channels of radius W have the form
[25] U ≈ Us [1 − (a/W )f (rp/W )] , where a/W <
∼ 1/25, representing a 1-10% correction. 2) Hydrodynamic interactions
become important only as the particle gets very close to the wall, where the gap δ between the sphere and the wall
becomes comparable with the particle radius a. When δ ≪ a, the velocity of a sphere parallel to a wall, Uk, decreases
logarithmically [24], via

Uk ≈

Us
log(δ/a)

,

whereas the velocity of a sphere forced perpendicular to a wall, U⊥ ≈ Usδ/a, decreases linearly with δ, so that δ
decays exponentially in time. When δ ≪ a, however, the particle is very close to the walls and so exerts a vanishingly
small force upon the cupula. Consequently, the eﬀect that near-wall hydrodynamic interactions have on modifying
equation (11) for ∆Pc are insigniﬁcant for cupular dynamics, since ∆Pc is itself very small. 3) When the particle is so
close to the wall that δ ∼ a, many of the approximations we use do not hold: the non-spherical shape of real otoconia
may play a signiﬁcant role for otoconia very close to canal walls, and canal walls are coated with a membraneous
duct [9] rather than a smooth solid one. It seems likely that otoconia must slide along the duct walls, for otherwise
the therapeutic maneuvers would be geometrically impossible. Because of our uncertainty about the actual shape of
the particles and the nature of the otoconia/wall interactions when the two are extremely close, we have introduced
an arbitrary cutoﬀ distance δc ≈ 1µm in the numerical simulations shown below. When the gap between the particle
and the channel wall is within this distance δc, the particle is assumed to slide with the velocity given by equation
(15) with δ = δc. The resulting motion is insensitive to the particular value of δc: choosing δc to be ten times smaller
would only slow the ‘sliding’ velocity by a factor of log(10) ≈ 2.3 when the particle is close to the boundary.

D. Velocity storage as a model of neural processing

Our treatment thus far has concerned only the mechanical response of the system. Signal processing is believed
to occur in the brain stem in a process called velocity storage [11, 12]. While velocity storage does not aﬀect the
mechanical response of the semicircular canals, it does aﬀect the (measurable) nystagmus response, denoted ˙E (since
it refers to time-dependent eye movement), and we therefore include it in the present work. The eﬀect of velocity
storage is to lengthen the long time constant of the horizontal semicircular canal τc ≈ 4.2 seconds [15] to a longer time
scale τv ≈ 16 − 21 seconds [15, 26], which improves the performance of the canals for angular rate sensing, extending
their bandwidth to lower frequencies. The velocity storage mechanism is typically described in Laplace transform
space (indicated by tildes) using a transfer function [11, 12]

˜˙E(s)
˜Ωc(s)

=

1 + sτc
1 + sτv

.

where Ωc is the angular velocity perceived by the canal, according to cupular displacement (equation 4). Combining
equation (16) with the Laplace transform of equation (5), we arrive at an expression for nystagmus as a function of
transcupular pressure,

˙E(t) =

λ4
32ρ(βu + βd)R2

t

−∞

∆Pc(t′)e−(t−t

)/τv dt′.

′

Z
This expression allows us to translate the mechanical eﬀect of a sedimenting particle into an equivalent sensation of
motion, which is directly measurable as an eye movement.

As stated above, we have assumed that the well-known velocity storage mechanism, which operates in the lateral
canal, is also eﬀective for the posterior canal. However, in the absence of any experimental evidence — on humans
or animals — to guide us, we have assumed the same velocity storage mechanism exists in the posterior and lateral
canals.

7

(15)

(16)

(17)

8

(18)

(19)

(20)

IV. SIMULATIONS OF CANALITHIASIS

We model canalithiasis as follows: numerically place an otoconium below the cupula and follow its motion in time
as it enters the duct and intersects the channel wall. The ﬂuid pressure ∆Pc(t) exerted on the cupula are calculated,
and the cupular deﬂection and nystagmus are determined by numerically integrating equations (9-12) and (17). Two
examples are considered: Section IV A examines the cupular response to a particle settling in a circular cylindrical
channel which tapers from one constant radius to another. While the straight channel is physically unrealistic, this
simulation is instructive in highlighting the pressure-ampliﬁcation mechanism described by equation (11). Section
IV B presents a simulation of a attack of BPPV for an average-sized otoconium starting just below the cupula in a
model canal whose geometry (Figure 1) mimics the semicircular canals in that (i) it tapers from the ampulla to the
duct in approximately the same manner, and (ii) the canal curves with a major radius taken from measurements [9].
Such features of BPPV as latency, strength and duration are presented.

A. Cupular response to a particle settling in a straight, tapering channel

A straight, tapering channel provides a particulary simple illustration of the pressure ampliﬁcation provided by
a narrowing channel, which is expected to be a signiﬁcant dynamical feature accompanying sedimentation of an
otoconium, and highlights the hydrodynamic explanation for latency.

We consider a particle of radius a that settles along the midline of a straight vertical channel of varying radius

W (sp)

W (sp) =

bc + bd
2

−

(bc − bd)
2

tanh

s − s0
Rδ

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

so that W (−∞) = bc and W (∞) = bd (see the proﬁle sketched in Figure 2). The speciﬁc functional form in equation
(18) has been chosen for convenience but has the feature of narrowing from bc to bd over a distance Rδ, which captures
one signiﬁcant geometric feature of the semicircular canal (Figure 1). Neglecting hydrodynamic interactions with the
wall, the sphere settles at the Stokes settling velocity, so that its axial position is given by sp(t) = Ust, where Us
is given by equation (13). Viscous resistance to the settling sphere sets up a time-dependent pressure drop on the
cupula found by combining equations (11) and (18),

∆Pc(t) =

32a3∆ρg
3 {(bc + bd) − (bc − bd) tanh[(Ust − s0)/Rδ]}2 ,

which is plotted in Figure 2. As the particle settles through the narrowing portion of the channel, the pressure it exerts
c = 8a3∆ρg/3b2
on the cupula increases by a factor b2
d.
The cupular displacement is then given by equation (9) and is shown in Figure 2 as well. After many time constants
τc, the cupular displacement asymptotically approaches its limiting value

d ≈ 18, and asymptotically approaches a constant value ∆P ∞

c/b2

V ∞
c =

∆P ∞
c τc
γ

=

8a3∆ρg
3Kb2
d

≈ 57pL,

where we have evaluated V ∞
using equation (17), is also plotted in Figure 2 and responds over the longer time scale τv.

c using the typical values reported in Table I. The nystagmus response ˙E(t), calculated

This simulation is representative of basic hydrodynamic processes and corresponding cupular responses, but is
nevertheless unrealistic, as the real semicircular canal is curved and the forcing is truncated when the otoconium hits
the wall. It does, however, clearly demonstrate the pressure-ampliﬁcation eﬀect of the tapering canal. The eﬀect of
canal curvature in a more realistic model geometry is considered next.

B. Two-part toroidal model for semicircular canal

The above section demonstrated the force-ampliﬁcation eﬀect provided by a tapering channel (as would be found
by an otoconium falling from the ampulla into the duct). In this section, we consider a geometry which more closely
resembles a semicircular canal — a two-part torus with major radius R, with a thick ampulla region (of radius bc) and
a thin duct region (of radius bd and angular span βd), as shown in Figure 1. For analytical convenience, we represent

9

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

∆ P
(mPa)
c

Nystagmus 
(degree/s)

(10 pL)

V
c

Channel Radius W (10−1 mm)

5

10

15

20

FIG. 2: Cupular pressure ∆Pc(t), displacement Vc(t) and nystagmus response ˙E(t) as an otoconium falls through a straight,
tapering channel (whose proﬁle is also indicated). The settling otoconium sets up a pressure ﬁeld that is small when the
otoconium is in the wide part of the channel (t < 3 seconds) and jumps by a factor b2
≈ 18 when the otoconium enters the
narrow part of the channel. Correspondingly, the cupular displacement increases slowly while the force is small (≈ 3 seconds),
then increases over a timescale τc to the large, constant force as the otoconium falls through the duct. The nystagmus response
is similar, but increases over a much larger time τv. Several seconds of ‘latency’ can be seen as the particle settles through
the wide part of the channel, after which the force-amplifying eﬀect of the narrowing canal sets in. Geometrical and physical
parameters are given in Table I.

c/b2

d

the inner and outer radii of the canal as functions of angle (0 < θ ≤ 2π),

Rout = R + bd and Rin = R −

A + B tanh

(21)

θ − θ1
δ

,

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18)

(cid:20)

where A = 2bc + bd and B = 2bc − bd. The canal narrows from radius bc in the ampulla to bd in the duct (see Figure
3a). We deﬁne the cupula to be located at θ = 0, and the narrowing occurs roughly over an angle 2δ, centered around
θ1. Examining the measurements of Curthoys and Oman [9], we choose θ1 = 0.5π and δ = 0.03π, and bc = 0.68 mm
and bd = 0.16 mm so that the circular channels employed here have cross-sectional areas equal to the roughly elliptical
channels they measured. The pressure ampliﬁcation described in Section IV A occurs in this more realistic geometry
as well; furthermore, the curvature of the duct (with radius of curvature R) leads the otoconium to fall away from
the central axis of the duct, leading to a diminished pressure according to equation (11).

Figure 3a shows three otoconium trajectories (A, B, C) in the early time of an attack of BPPV when an otoconium
falls from the cupula onto the curved tapering region. Figure 3b shows the cupular displacement, pressure, and
nystagmus response corresponding to each trajectory. Dark dots are located every two seconds to make the time-
dependence along the trajectory more evident. Three distinct features can be seen in trajectory B: 1) an initial period
(approximately 5 seconds) in which the cupular displacement grows slowly, which occurs while the otoconium is in the
ampulla, 2) an intermediate period (approximately 4 seconds) where the cupular displacement increases rapidly, when
the otoconium has entered the narrow duct, yet not hit the wall, and 3) a ﬁnal period where the cupular displacement
decays with time constant τc, after the otoconium has hit the wall and no longer exerts a pressure on the cupula.
From the trajectories of the particles, it is evident that hydrodynamic interactions between the particles and the wall
are negligible until the particle is very close to the wall. Because the resistance to sliding along the wall decreases only
logarithmically with the separation distance (equation (15)), and because we have instituted a minimum particle-wall
separation δc, the particle continues to move signiﬁcant distances even when close to the wall (ﬁgure 3a).

a) 

A 

B 

C

b)

1

0.5

0
0

30

20

10

0
3

2

1

0
0

10

Cupular Pressure ∆ P
C
 (mPa)                     

A

A

A

10

15

20

25

Cupular Displacement V
C
 (pL)                   

10

15

20

25

Nystagmus 
 (deg/sec)

10

15

20

25

Time (s)

B

C

B

C

B

C

5

5

5

FIG. 3: Simulated canalithiasis episodes occuring when otoconia started at diﬀerent radial positions just below the cupula
fall through a tapering toroidal channel. a) Otoconia trajectories, with dots to indicate the location each otoconium every
2 seconds. b) Results for (i) the pressure exerted on the cupula for the three trajectories, (ii) the cupular displacement for
each of the three trajectories , and (iii) the nystagmus response, reﬂecting the sensed rotation velocity. The largest cupular
displacement occurs when the otoconium enters the narrow part of the canal, hydrodynamically amplifying the pressure it
exerts by a factor of up to 36 times the naive estimate of Fg/Ac (which would occur during cupulolithiasis). This occurs with
a 6-13 second latency for trajectories A and B, and never occurs for trajectory C, which hits the wall before entering the duct.

V.

INFLUENCE OF OTOCONIUM SIZE UPON CUPULAR PRESSURE AND DISPLACEMENT

Otoconia have been found in a range of sizes, typically between 0.5-15 µm [14]. In this section, we provide some
guidelines for the inﬂuence of otoconium size on the responses illustrated in the previous sections. We showed above
that hydrodynamic interactions with the walls do little to an otoconium’s trajectory until it comes very close to the
wall, at which time the pressure ﬁeld exerted at the cupula is negligible. Therefore, the dependence of the cupular
pressure ∆Pc(t) (and its time dependence) upon particle size a can be predicted, from which cupular and nystagmus
response follow.

An otoconium sets up a pressure ﬁeld proportional to its mass (∆P ∼ a3), but since its settling velocity varies with
a2, this pressure ﬁeld is set up for a time which varies with a−2. Thus the peak cupular displacement and nystagmus
increase linearly with particle size a, so long as the particles do not settle longer than τc or τv, respectively. Figure 4
shows a series of simulations where particles of varying radius a fell along trajectory B of ﬁgure 3, and the maximum
cupular displacement and nystagmus increase linearly with particle size a for particles larger than a few microns.

A large repertoire of eye movement responses are possible for the various sizes, trajectories, and collective behavior
of otoconia. Multiple otoconia may be clumped or dispersed. A clumped group of N otoconia would behave like a
single larger particle (of radius a′ ≈ N 1/3a), giving a maximum cupular displacement which is approximately N 1/3
times larger than for a single otoconium. On the other hand, a group of N dispersed otoconia settling independently
would give a total cupular displacement and nystagmus approximately N times greater than for a single otoconium.
Peak nystagmus typically decreases with repeated head maneuvers [1], a fact which is typically attributed to the
breaking and dispersion of particle clumps and/or particle margination. The dispersion explanation of fatiguability
seems at odds with the above results, which suggests that particle dispersion would increase the peak nystagmus:
the pressure exerted by each independently-moving particle would add linearly, giving the same total pressure, but
exerted over a longer time than a faster-moving particle clump.

We propose several mechanisms to reconcile these pictures: 1) Particle margination: repeated maneuvers presum-
ably break up clumps and disperse the particles, which when isolated might adhere to the membraneous canal walls.
2) If a particle clump is so large that it occupies a signiﬁcant fraction of the duct, it would exert a substantially larger
transcupular pressure, and would move signiﬁcantly more slowly, than individual particles and result in substantially
greater nystagmus. The breakup of such a large clump would result in a lesser nystagmus response. Whether such
large clumps exist or are reasonable is not known. 3) The response of dispersed particles could result in weaker

Time to peak
nystagmus (s) 

Max. Cupular         
 (pL)

Displacement V
c

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

Max.             
Nystagmus (deg/s)

5

10

Particle Radius a(µm)

15

FIG. 4: Simulations for particles of diﬀerent radii, all started on trajectory B in the model semicircular canal geometry of
Figure 3. The maximum nystagmus and cupular displacement are plotted, and increase linearly with particle size for particles
larger than a few microns. The time at which peak nystagmus occurs is plotted, and varies in proportion to 1/a2.

nystagmus than a single clumped stone if the dispersed particles follow diﬀerent trajectories. As shown in ﬁgure 3,
the nystagmus response is sensitive to the trajectory a particle takes, aﬀecting both transcupular pressure and the
time trajectory.

VI. CUPULOLITHIASIS

Most of this article has concerned the canalithiasis mechanism for BPPV. An alternate hypothesis for BPPV is
cupulolithiasis, in which otoconia are physically attached to the cupula, causing it to distort when the head is turned.
In cupulolithiasis, the pressure exerted by a head suddenly turned would be constant. The maximum possible cupular
displacement and nystagmus would occur if the head were tilted and held in a position such that gravity acts normal
to the cupula. In this ‘worst-case’ scenario, the transcupular pressure is given by ∆Pc = (4π/3)a3∆ρg/Ac, and the
corresponding cupular displacement is given by

with a nystagmus response

Vc(t) =

1 − e−t/τc

,

Fg
KAc

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

˙E(t) =

πλ4a3∆ρg
24ρ(βu + βd)R2Ac

τv

1 − e−t/τv

≈ 0.6◦/s

1 − e−t/τv

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Thus even if the head were tilted and held in place indeﬁnitely, the nystagmus response for an average otoconium
attached to the cupula would approach a constant ˙E ≈ 0.6◦/s. The cupular displacement (Vc → Fg/KAc ≈ 2 pL) is
an order of magnitude smaller than that which would occur due to an identical otoconium sedimenting through the
narrowing duct under the canalithiasis mechanism, and the maximum possible nystagmus is 3-4 times weaker than that
for canalithiasis. The nystagmus due to a single, average otoconium is below the detection threshold, meaning that
multiple and/or larger otoconia are required for cupulolithiasis. Furthermore, one would typically expect signiﬁcantly
weaker nystagmus than (23), since the head would typically not be held in the optimal orientation required, for the
20-60 seconds necessary to achieve this maximal response.

11

(22)

(23)

VII. CONCLUSIONS

12

In this paper we have developed a mathematical model for the transcupular pressure ampliﬁcation generated by a
sedimenting particle in a geometry characteristic of the semicircular canals. The hydrodynamic aspects of the motion
are treated within the constraints of the low-Reynolds-number-ﬂow representative of these systems and the model is
coupled to the velocity storage mechanism representative of neural signal processing in the brain stem.

Our results are qualitatively consistent with the recent study of House and Honrubia, though should be considered
quantitatively more accurate since the basic hydrodynamics are explicitly treated. House and Honrubia performed a
one-dimensional simulation (with otoconia constrained to fall along the canal centerline) using (1) for transcupular
pressure, and found that an otoconium mass mH ≈ 0.087µg (or 18 otoconia of radius 7.5µm) would be required to
˙E ≈ 42◦/s. For comparison, an analogous one-dimensional simulation using
achieve a (measured) peak nystagmus of
(11), the pressure drop we derived by solving the Stokes equations, would require about three otoconia (0.014 µg).
More realistically, however, otoconium fall to the side walls due to duct curvature, which diminishes the transcupular
pressure. From ﬁgure 3b, one average-sized otoconium can cause a nystagmus of approximately 2◦/s, so that approx-
imately 20 otoconia, or 0.1µg, would be required to account for the same measured nystagmus. That the two models
give similar results is fortuitous – the near cancellation of two eﬀects.

The model demonstrates that sedimentation from the wide region near the cupula to the narrow region representative
of most of the semicircular canal takes about 5-6 seconds for a typical case with an otoconium of average size, and that
the entry into the narrowing duct is accompanied by a pressure ampliﬁcation of a factor of approximately b2
d ≈ 18
relative to the pressure exerted while the otoconium is in the ampulla. Conversely, if an otoconium moves from the
narrow duct into the wider utricle, as is assumed to occur during therapeutic maneuvers, the pressure it exerts on
the cupula drops signiﬁcantly. This scenario provides a possible resolution to an issue raised by Buckingham [7],
who suggested that otoconia moved into the utricular region during therapeutic maneuvers should still exert a ﬂuid
pressure on the cupula and cause BPPV. This conjecture is at odds with the success of the maneuvers, and led
Buckingham to question the feasibility of canalithiasis. However, the pressure-ampliﬁcation mechanism discussed in
this article results in a pressure reduction in the utricle, so that the transcupular pressure set up by an otoconium
settling in the utricle may be small enough to escape detection.

c/b2

The results of the hydrodynamic modelling reported here are consistent with the observed latency of BPPV, and
provide a possible mechanism, as was also suggested by House and Honrubia. Furthermore, the pressure exerted by a
sedimenting otoconium (in canalithiasis) is ampliﬁed by a factor of up to 2b2
d ≈ 36 over that of a particle attached
to the cupula (as in cupulolithiasis). An average otoconium of radius 7.5 µm exerts a pressure on the cupula which
induces an equivalent step increase in angular velocity in the range of 2◦/s, approximately the threshold for sensation.
The stronger sensations experienced during real attacks of BPPV could result from larger or multiple otoconia.

c/b2

APPENDIX A: AN APPLICATION OF THE RECIPROCAL THEOREM FOR A POINT FORCE IN A
TUBE OF SLOWLY VARYING RADIUS

In this appendix we use the reciprocal theorem from low-Reynolds-number hydrodynamics [22] to determine the
pressure drop at large distances from a point force (Stokeslet) in a tube. This analysis was apparently ﬁrst given by
Brenner [23] for a point force in a circular cylinder and we show that the same ideas can be extended naturally to a
tube of arbitrarily varying cross section and orientation.

Recall that the reciprocal theorem relates two solutions (u, σ, f ) and (ˆu, ˆσ, ˆf ) to the Stokes equations

where σ is the stress tensor,

∇ · u = 0
∇ · σ + f = 0,

σij = −P δij +

µ
2

∂ui
∂xj

+

∂uj
∂xi (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

from which equation (A2) attains its more familiar form µ∇2u − ∇P + f = 0. Here u and f represent, respectively,
the velocity ﬁeld and force per unit volume acting on the ﬂuid. Then, within a volume V and corresponding bounding
surface S, these ﬁelds are related by

n · σ · ˆu dS −

n · ˆσ · u dS = −

u · ˆf dV +

ˆu · f dV ,

ZS

ZS

ZV

ZV

(A1)
(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

where n is the unit normal directed into the ﬂuid domain from the surface. Here we take (u, σ, f ) for ﬁelds associated
with a Stokeslet inside an inﬁnitely long tube of arbitrary cross-sectional shape and we use (ˆu, ˆσ, ˆf ) for the ﬂow caused
by a uniform uniaxial pressure gradient. In this case, the volume V corresponds to the interior of the tube. For a
circular pipe of uniform cross-section, the ‘hatted’ ﬂow is simply the well-known Poiseuille ﬂow. Now, due to the
no-slip condition on the walls of the duct, the surface integrals in equation (A4) are only nonzero at the ‘ends’ of the
duct, which we consider to be at a very large distance (many cylinder radii) from the point force.

We now simplify (A4) in steps. First, the pressure-driven ﬂow contains no body forces in V , ˆf = 0. Second, the
ﬂow due to a Stokeslet in a bounded cylindrical domain decays exponentially with axial distance from the singularity
[27], so u → 0 towards the ends of the duct. Further, since f corresponds to a Stokeslet of strength F, then f = Fδ(r),
where δ(r) denotes the Dirac delta function, and we may evaluate the second integral on the right-hand side of (A4)
as ˆus(xs)·F, where ˆus(xs) is the pressure-driven velocity ﬁeld at the location xs of the Stokeslet.

Since the ‘ends’ of the cylinder are considered far from the Stokeslet where u → 0, then the corresponding stress
ﬁeld is simply a pressure that remains constant across each ‘end’ section. If we denote the diﬀerence in pressures
between the two ‘ends’ as ∆p, then the ﬁrst term on the left-hand side of (1) reduces to ˆQ∆p, where ˆQ is the volume
ﬂux due to the pressure-driven ﬂow. Combining the above results gives

This holds for a tube of arbitrarily varying cross-section and orientation.

Finally, we invoke the lubrication approximation, which provides that for a circular tube of slowly varying radius

W (s) the ﬂow velocity is given by

∆p =

F · ˆus
ˆQ

.

ˆus = U0

1 −

(cid:18)

r2
s
W (s)2

e||,

(cid:19)

ˆQ =

πW (s)2U0
2

.

∆p =

2F · e||
πW (s)2

1 −

(cid:18)

r2
s
W (s)2

.

(cid:19)

with corresponding ﬂow rate

Using (A5), we ﬁnd the Stokeslet sets up a pressure diﬀerence

13

(A5)

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

APPENDIX B: SUMMARY OF RESULTS FOR A SPHERE SETTLING IN A CIRCULAR CYLINDER

This appendix summarizes several results for the hydrodynamic inﬂuence of the cylinder walls upon the motion of
a small sedimenting particle. Our motivation for including this appendix is twofold: 1) to explain how hydrodynamic
coupling between the wall and the particle can be treated in a reasonably straightforward yet accurate manner, and
2) to demonstrate that this hydrodynamic coupling is largely unimportant in modelling the sedimentation of small
particles in the semicircular canals. In regard to the second point, the walls only exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence upon the
motion of a sedimenting particle when the particle is very close to the wall. In this limit, however, the ﬂuid pressure
on the cupula due to the sedimenting particle (given by equation 11) is exceedingly small. Therefore, wall-particle
interactions are typically not signiﬁcant for modelling cupular displacement, but are important when the trajectories
of the particles are themselves of interest.

A simple expression for the sedimentation velocity of a sphere in a geometry as complicated as that of the semicir-
cular canals is unavailable. However, because the radius of curvature of the torus R is much larger than the radius of
the canals b, we approximate the canals as straight circular cylinders, which involves errors of order O (b/R). Even
for this comparatively simple geometry, no uniformly valid expression is known for the motion of a sphere through
a viscous ﬂuid in a circular cylindrical container. Rather, numerical and asymptotic formulae have been derived in
various limits. In this appendix, we summarize several results, which we use in our simulation of canalithiasis.

We consider a small spherical particle of radius a, with externally applied force f = Fzˆz + Frˆr, located at radius
rp in a circular cylinder of radius b. Following the notation of Hirschfeld, Brenner and Falade [25], we introduce
two dimensionless parameters, β = rp/b and κ = a/b to characterize the system. The parameter β indicates the
dimensionless radial position of the particle, and κ gives a dimensionless particle radius.

In modelling the sedimentation of otoconia in the semicircular canals, we are concerned with the motion of particles
that are small with respect to the size of the cylinder, and thus restrict our attention to the regime κ ≪ 1. Within

14

(B2)

(B3)

2

1

1.5

W

0.5

0
0

(1−β)W

 
11

(1−β)W

 
33

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

β

1

FIG. 5:
(From [25], Table 2.) Numerical factors for equations (B1) - (B1) giving corrections to the velocity of a sphere in an
inﬁnite, straight, circular cylinder which is forced radially (W11) or axially (W33). Here β = rp/b is a measure of the sphere’s
fractional distance to the wall. Both W11 and W33 diverge like (1 − β)−1 as the sphere nears the wall, which is the reason we
have plotted (1 − β)W11 and (1 − β)W33.

this limit, there are two primary regimes: 1) 1 − β ≫ κ, where the distance from the particle to the wall is large
compared to the particle size, and 2) 1 − β ∼ κ, where the particle is close to the wall.

When the distance between the sphere and the cylinder walls (b − rp) is large compared to the particle radius a, a
method of reﬂections can be used to perturbatively calculate the inﬂuence of the wall upon the motion of the sphere.
Hirschfeld, Brenner and Falade [25] give results accurate to O
for the velocity of a sedimenting sphere; we here
quote results only to O (κ):

κ2

U⊥(rp ≫ a) =

(1 − κW11) and U||(rp ≫ a) =

(1 − κW33) ,

(B1)

Fr
6πµa

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Fz
6πµa

where W11 and W33 are dimensionless functions, numerically computed in [25] and plotted in Figure 5.

A diﬀerent behavior is found when the sphere is close to the wall, and the gap δ = b − rp is smaller than a, and
correspondingly the cylinder radius is much larger than both the gap and the sphere. The leading-order approximation
to the settling speed of the sphere can be found by treating the cylinder wall as locally planar. Goldman, Cox and
Brenner [24] studied this system using a lubrication approach, ﬁnding

U|| ≈

2F||
6πµa

(cid:20)

ln(δ/a) − 0.9543
{ln(δ/a)}2 − 4.325 ln(δ/a) + 1.591

,

(cid:21)

as a leading-order asymptotic formula for the velocity of a sphere parallel to a wall. The velocity parallel to the wall
thus decays very slowly, with an approximately ∼ 1/ ln(δ) correction. Motion perpendicular to a planar wall due to
F⊥ can be found using the lubrication approximation in the limit δ ≪ a, giving

so that a sphere exponentially approaches the wall with time constant τ⊥ = 12πµa2/F .

U⊥ =

F⊥δ
12πµa2λ⊥

,

[1] T. Brandt, Vertigo: its multisensory syndromes (Springer-Verlag, London, 1991).
[2] J. S. Oghalai, S. Manolidis, J. L. Barth, M. G. Stewart, and M. A. Jenkins, Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 122, 630 (2000).
[3] T. Brandt and S. Steddin, J. Vest. Res. 3, 373 (1993).
[4] J. M. Epley, Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 107, 399 (1992).
[5] A. Semont, G. Freyss, and E. Vitte, Adv. Otorhinolaryngol. 42, 290 (1998).
[6] T. Brandt and R. B. Daroﬀ, Arch. Otolaryngol. 106, 484 (1980).
[7] R. A. Buckingham, Laryngoscope 109, 717 (1999).

15

[8] M. G. House and V. Honrubia, Audiol. Neurootol. 8, 91 (2003).
[9] I. S. Curthoys and C. M. Oman, Acta Otolaryngol. (Stockh) 103, 254 (1987).
[10] W. C. V. Buskirk, R. G. Watts, and Y. K. Liu, J. Fluid Mech. 78, 87 (1976).
[11] D. A. Robinson, Exp. Brain Res. 30, 447 (1977).
[12] T. Raphan, V. Matsuo, and B. Cohen, Exp. Brain Res. 35, 229 (1979).
[13] J. P. Bronzino, The Biomedical Engineering Handbook (CRC Press, 1995).
[14] A. Campos, Adv. Otorhinolaryngol. 45, 143 (1990).
[15] M. Dai, A. Klein, B. Cohen, and T. Raphan, J. Vest. Res. 9, 293 (1999).
[16] R. Malcolm, in 4th Symp. on Role of Vestibular Organs in Space Exploration (U. S. Government Printing Oﬃce, N.A.S.A.

SP-187, Washington, D.C., 1968).

[17] W. Steinhausen, Pﬂ¨ugers Arch. Ges. Physiol. 232, 500 (1933).
[18] C. Fernandez and J. M. Goldberg, J. Neurophysiol. 34, 635 (1971).
[19] C. M. Oman, E. N. Marcus, and I. S. Curthoys, Acta Otolaryngol. (Stockh) 103, 1 (1987).
[20] R. D. Rabbitt and E. R. Damiano, J. Fluid. Mech. 307, 333 (1996).
[21] E. R. Damiano, J. Biomech. Eng. 121, 449 (1999).
[22] L. G. Leal, Laminar Flow and Convective Transport Processes (Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1992).
[23] H. Brenner, Phys. Fluids 1, 338 (1958).
[24] A. J. Goldman, R. G. Cox, and H. Brenner, Chem. Eng. Sci. 22, 637 (1967).
[25] B. R. Hirschfeld, H. Brenner, and A. Falade, Physicochem. Hydrodyn. 5, 99 (1984).
[26] T. C. Hain and D. S. Zee, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 656, 297 (1992).
[27] J. R. Blake, J. Fluid Mech. 95, 209 (1979).

