3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Passive tracer patchiness and particle trajectory stability in
incompressible two-dimensional ﬂows

Francisco J. Beron-Vera, Mar´ıa J. Olascoaga and Michael G. Brown

RSMAS, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA

Camera-ready Copy for

Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics

Manuscript-No. 1

Offset requests to:
F. J. Beron-Vera
RSMAS/AMP, UMiami
4600 Rickenbacker Cswy.
Miami, FL 33149 USA

Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics (2003) 1:1–8

Nonlinear Processes
in Geophysics
c(cid:13)European Geophysical Society 2003

Passive tracer patchiness and particle trajectory stability in
incompressible two-dimensional ﬂows

Francisco J. Beron-Vera, Mar´ıa J. Olascoaga and Michael G. Brown

RSMAS, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA

Received: January 28, 2003 – Revised: October 11, 2013 – Accepted:

Abstract. Particle motion is considered in incompressible
two-dimensional ﬂows consisting of a steady background
gyre on which an unsteady wave-like perturbation is super-
imposed. A dynamical systems point of view that exploits
It is argued and
the action–angle formalism is adopted.
demonstrated numerically that for a large class of problems
one expects to observe a mixed phase space, i.e., the occur-
rence of “regular islands” in an otherwise “chaotic sea.” This
leads to patchiness in the evolution of passive tracer distri-
butions. Also, it is argued and demonstrated numerically
that particle trajectory stability is largely controlled by the
background ﬂow: trajectory instability, quantiﬁed by various
measures of the “degree of chaos,” increases on average with
increasing |dw /dI|, where w (I) is the angular frequency of
the trajectory in the background ﬂow and I is the action.

1 Introduction

This paper deals with the kinematics of ﬂuid particles in un-
steady incompressible ﬂows on the Cartesian plane. Namely,
we study properties of trajectories (x(t), y(t)) that satisfy
equations of the form

˙x = ¶ yy

,

˙y = −¶ xy

,

(1a)

where the overdot stands for time derivative and y (x, y,t) is
the streamfunction. Furthermore, we consider the latter to be
split into a steady background component and an unsteady
perturbation component, i.e.,

y = y

(0)(x, y) + ey

(1)(x, y,t),

(1b)

where e
is a dimensionless parameter. Equations (1) consti-
tute a canonical Hamiltonian system with y
the Hamiltonian
and (x, y) the generalized coordinate–conjugate momentum
pair.

Two related issues are addressed in this paper. First,
we investigate a cause of “patchiness” in passive tracer
distributions, i.e., distributions that are mostly vigorously
stirred but include poorly stirred regions (Sect. 3). Second,
we study the inﬂuence of the background ﬂow on particle
trajectory stability (Sect. 4). Prior to discussing these issues,
the kinematic models that we use to illustrate our results are
brieﬂy described in Sect. 2. The conclusions of the paper are
given in Sect. 5.

2 Kinematic models

Two background ﬂow structures in a region [0, L] × [0,W ] of
the b plane are considered here. One is chosen to represent
a large-scale single-gyre wind-driven ocean circulation with
streamfunction given by (Stommel, 1966)

S : y

(0) = a

beb+x + (1 − b)eb−x − 1
h

i

sin

p y
W

,

where a := t W /(pl D), b := (1 − eb−L)/(eb+L − eb−L), and
1
2 [(b /l )2 + (p /W )2]
b /l ± 1
b± := − 1
2 . Here, D is the
2
depth, t
the wind stress amplitude (per unit density), and
l
the bottom friction. The other background streamfunction
chosen corresponds to solid body rotation,

R : y

(0) =

(x − L/2)2 + (y − W /2)2

.

i

w R
2 h

The reason for this highly idealized choice will be discussed
below. Parameter values used in our numerical work are
listed in Table 1.

The perturbation streamfunction is constructed by su-
perposing standing Rossby-like modes with a power-law
spectrum, namely,

Correspondence to:
miami.edu)

F. J. Beron-Vera (fberon@rsmas.

y

(1) = a(cid:229)

Ae−g xsin(kx+f

k) sin(ly+f

l) cos(s t +f

s ), (2)

k,l

1

2

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Background ﬂow streamlines (dashed lines) along with streamlines corresponding to a snapshot of the total ﬂow at t ≈ 9 y (solid lines). Panels a
and b correspond to background ﬂow S with different wave-like perturbation ﬁelds superimposed; panel c corresponds to background ﬂow R with the same
perturbation that was used to produce panel a.

Table 1. Background ﬂow parameters.

Parameter
L
W
D
g
f0
b
t
l
w R

Value
10 Mm
2p Mm
200 m
9.8 m s−2
10−4 s−1
10−11 m−1s−1
2 × 10−3 m−2s−2
10−5 s−1
2p y−1

where

A(k, l) :=

s (k, l) := −

,

p 2(L−2 + W −2)
k2 + l2
b k
k2 + l2 + f 2

0 /(gD)

,

and the f (k, l)’s are random numbers uniformly distributed
between 0 and 2p . Here, Lk/p and W l/p are positive inte-
gers; g
is a constant; f0 is the reference Coriolis parameter;
and g is the acceleration of gravity.

Dashed lines in Figs. 1a,b and Fig. 1c are streamlines for
background ﬂows S and R, respectively. Solid lines in these
ﬁgures are total ﬂow streamlines corresponding to a snapshot
of the ﬂow at t ≈ 9 y. The perturbation in each case involves
10 × 10 = 100 modes. In Figs. 1a,c the perturbation has e =
0.05 and g = 0. In Fig. 1b the amplitude of the Lk/p = 1 =
W l/p mode is set to zero, f
l so the ﬂow vanishes
at the boundary, e = 0.25, and g = 0.4 Mm−1.

k = 0 = f

The ﬂows used to produce Fig. 1 and all of the numer-
ical particle trajectory simulations presented in this paper
were chosen to illustrate important aspects of Lagrangian
dynamics; the ﬂows are in many ways not representative of
realistic oceanic ﬂows. We note, however, that we focus on
ﬂows with complicated time dependence, and that the strong
perturbations to the background are considered. In Fig. 1b,
for example, it is seen that the perturbation leads to the
presence of an eddy-like structure in the ﬂow. Also, we note
that in the ﬂows that we have described, particle trajectories
are periodic in the limit of zero perturbation strength with

typical periods of about 1 y. Thus in an integration time
of 10 y most trajectories will have made approximately
10 revolutions around the gyre. The phenomena described
below are not limited to gyre-scale ﬂows.
In general,
the trends that we describe should be evident after times
in excess of a few periods of particle revolution in any
background gyre ﬂow on which a perturbation ﬁeld with a
broad band of frequencies is superimposed.

3 Passive tracer patchiness

In this section we present numerical evidence and a theoret-
ical argument that suggest that for a large class of systems
of the form (1) phase space (x, y) should be partitioned into
“regular islands” in a “chaotic sea.” Such a mixed phase
space leads to patchiness in passive tracer distributions.
Numerical results are presented for a time-periodic ﬂow
[n = 1 term in the sum in (2)] and subsequently for ﬂows
with complicated time dependence (n large).

Figure 2 shows, for the time-periodic case (n = 1), a
Poincar´e section and, in the same environment, two ad-
ditional trajectory diagnostics whose applicability is not
The Poincar´e section
restricted to time-periodic ﬂows.
was constructed by plotting the (x, y) coordinates of several
trajectories at integer multiples of the period of the stream-
function; it shows the usual mixture of “regular islands” in an
otherwise “chaotic sea” (cf., e.g., Tabor, 1989). The middle
panel shows, for a dense set of trajectories with x(0) = x0
ﬁxed and y(0) = y0 variable, a plot of y vs. y0 at a ﬁxed value
of t. The initial conditions chosen fall inside the region of
the Poincar´e section shown, and it is seen that both regular
islands and the chaotic sea evident in the Poincar´e section
can be identiﬁed in the y vs. y0 plot. The same structures
can also be seen in the lower panel of Fig. 2 which shows,
for the same trajectories used to produce the middle panel,
ﬁnite time estimates of Lyapunov exponents (described in
more detail below), n vs. y0. Plots of y vs. y0 and n vs. y0
are used below to distinguish between apparently regular and
apparently chaotic trajectories for ﬂows with complicated (n
large) time dependence i.e., in ﬂows for which a Poincar´e
section cannot be constructed.

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

3

bands diverge only very slowly (power law dependence on
time) from neighboring trajectories while chaotic trajectories
diverge at an exponential rate from neighboring trajectories.
The nonchaotic regions of ﬂows are important in applications
because they correspond to regions where the concentration
of a passive tracer will remain high for a long duration. The
existence of these regions leads to a large variance of tracer
concentration or “tracer patchiness” (cf., e.g., Pasmanter,
1988; Malhotra et al., 1998).

Another way to visualize passive tracer patchiness is
offered in Figs. 5 and 6. Both ﬁgures show discrete samples
of a material line of ﬂuid at t = 0 (vertical line segments in
the ﬁgures) and at t = 12 y, in the environments shown in Fig.
1. Initial conditions in Fig. 5 are as in Fig. 3, whereas those
in Fig. 6 are as in Fig. 4. These ﬁgures again show that while
most of the initial material line segment is vigorously stirred,
there are small portions of the initial segment, corresponding
to the island-like structures seen in Figs. 3 and 4, that are
poorly stirred.

We turn our attention now to explaining the occurrence of
island-like structures in Figs. 2–4. First, we note that in the
background ﬂow, particle motion is describable using action–
angle variables, reviewed below, and trajectories fall on tori.
For perturbed systems with periodic time dependence, as in
Fig. 2, it is well-known that particle trajectory dynamics
are constrained by the KAM theorem (cf., e.g., Arnold,
1989) which guarantees that for sufﬁciently small e some
of the original tori—and associated nonchaotic motion—
are preserved. Related theoretical results, generally known
as KAM theory (cf., e.g., Tabor, 1989), describe how the
nonsurviving tori break up to form chains of “islands”
surrounded by a “chaotic sea” as seen in Fig. 2. For a
large perturbation strength e all of the original tori will have
been broken up, but the secondary islands that are formed in
the process are robust and persist even when the magnitude
of the perturbation exceeds that of the background ﬂow. It
has been shown (Brown, 1998; Beigie et al., 1991) that for
multiply-periodic perturbations the situation is essentially
the same as for perturbations with simple periodic time
dependence. This follows from the observation that (1), with
y (x, y, s 1t, · · · , s nt) where s
it is deﬁned modulo 2p , can
be transformed to an autonomous Hamiltonian system with a
bounded phase space with (n + 1) degrees of freedom that is
constrained by n integrals. KAM theory (the KAM theorem
and related results) applies to the transformed system, so
phase space is generically partitioned into nonintersecting
regular and chaotic regions. A Poincar´e section could,
in principle, be constructed for such a system by using a
multiple slicing technique (cf. Parker and Chua, 1989) but
slicing is practical only when n = 1. The signiﬁcance of
the extension of KAM theory to multiply-periodic systems
is that in the system deﬁned by (1) with y
(1) given by (2),
phase space (x, y) is expected to be partitioned into “regular
islands” in an otherwise “chaotic sea.”
The numerical
evidence presented in Figs. 3–6 supports this expectation.

The coexistence of regular and chaotic ﬂuid particle tra-
jectories in mesoscale and large-scale oceanic ﬂows has been

Fig. 2. Poincar´e section (top), ﬁnal vs. initial meridional position (middle),
and ﬁnite-time estimate of the Lyapunov exponent as a function of initial
meridional position (bottom). The middle and lower plots were constructed
by tracking 104 particles (D y0 ≈ 5.5 km) for a duration of 150 y in
background ﬂow S with a time-periodic perturbation superimposed. Particle
initial positions fall on the horizontal line shown in the top panel. The
perturbation parameters chosen were e = 0.015 , g = 0, kL/p = 3 = lW /p ,
f ’s = 0, and 2p /s = 0.25 y.

Figure 3 shows plots of y vs. y0 and n vs. y0 for the
nonperiodic ﬂows used to produce Fig. 1. Trajectories in Fig.
3b are generally more unstable than in Fig. 3a. The enhanced
stability in Fig. 3a is reﬂected in a relatively unstructured
y(y0) plot and smaller (on average) Lyapunov exponents than
are seen in Fig. 3b.
In both cases the background ﬂow
structure is the same; the difference in the stability behavior
is due to the difference in the strength of the perturbation.
As expected, trajectory instability is seen to increase with
increasing perturbation strength.

The difference in trajectory stability seen in Figs. 3a,c has
a different explanation. The same perturbation was used in
both cases, so this cannot be the cause of the difference. The
cause is the inﬂuence of the background ﬂow; this topic will
be discussed in detail in the following section.

1b.

We return our attention now to Fig. 3b which corresponds
to the strongly perturbed ﬂow shown in Fig.
It is
3b that embedded among mostly chaotic
seen in Fig.
trajectories are bands of apparently nonchaotic trajectories.
These nonchaotic bands are most readily identiﬁed among
the trajectories whose initial positions are near the center of
the gyre; the reason for this will be discussed in the following
section. Bands of nonchaotic trajectories far from the gyre
center are also present, however. This is seen in Fig. 4
where two regions of Fig. 3b are blown up. These apparently
nonchaotic bands of trajectories are the counterparts of the
2. Trajectories in these
“regular islands” seen in Fig.

4

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. Trajectory ﬁnal meridional position y (top panels), ﬁnite-time estimate of the Lyapunov exponent n
parameter a
longitudinal positions x0 at the center of the background gyre. The integration time is 12 y and D y0 ≈ 5.5 km.

(middle panels), and absolute value of stability
(bottom panel) as a function of initial meridional position. Background and perturbation ﬁelds are as in Fig. 1. All particles have initial

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Blow up of two portions of the top and middle panels of Fig. 3b using D y0 ≈ 5 m.

suggested in some analyses of surface drifters and submerged
ﬂoats (Osborne et al., 1986, 1989; Richardson et al., 1989;
Brown and Smith, 1990). The preceding discussion provides
an explanation of the underlying physics.

4 Particle trajectory stability

In this section we describe the important inﬂuence of the
background ﬂow on particle trajectory stability that was
mentioned above in our discussion of Figs. 3a,c. The ideas
presented here apply to any canonical Hamiltonian system
in which the Hamiltonian consists of a superposition of
an integrable component and a nonintegrable perturbation.
Other applications are described in Beron-Vera and Brown
(2003a,b).

The explanation of this behavior makes use of the action–

angle description of the motion of particles in the background
ﬂow (cf., e.g., Abdullaev and Zaslavsky, 1991). Let

I :=

1
2p I

dxY (x; y

(0)),

where Y is the meridional coordinate of an isoline of y
(0),
be the action variable, and consider the canonical transfor-
mation (x, y) 7→ (J

, I), deﬁned implicitly by

y = ¶ xG, J = ¶ IG, G(x, I) :=

dxY (x; y

(0)),

Z

is the angle variable. According to the above

where J
transformation,

y (x, y,t) 7→ ¯y

(0)(I) + e ¯y

(1)(I, J

,t)

and Eqs. (1a) take the form
(1),

˙I = −e¶

¯y

J

˙J = w + e¶

I ¯y

(1),

(3)

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5. Initial position (straight segment) and position after 12 y of a discretely sampled (D y0 ≈ 5.5 km) material line of ﬂuid advected by the total (background
plus perturbation) ﬂows of Fig. 1. Colors indicate the initial meridional position of particles.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. Blow up of two portions of Fig. 5b corresponding to trajectories shown in Figs. 4a,b; here D y0 ≈ 5 m. Colors indicate the initial meridional position
of particles; the initial material lines are so short that they appear as dots.

where

called stability matrix Q(t), which is given by

w (I) := d ¯y

(0)/dI.

(4)

When e = 0, Eqs. (3), which have one degree of freedom,
are autonomous and the corresponding Hamiltonian, ¯y
(0),
is an integral of motion that constrains the dynamics. As a
consequence, the equations can be solved by quadratures and
the motion is periodic with angular frequency w
. Namely,
I = I0 and J = J 0 + w
t mod 2p , where I0 and J 0 are
constants. Every solution curve is thus a line that winds
around an invariant one-dimensional torus {I0} × T 1 ⊂ R ×
T 1, whose representation in (x, y)-space is the closed curve
given by the isoline y

(0)(I0).
With the perturbation term, the corresponding Hamilto-
nian, ¯y
(1), is no longer an integral of motion (the
equations are nonautonomous) and the system may be sensi-
tive to initial conditions, thereby leading to chaotic motion.
The distinction between regular and chaotic trajectories is
commonly quantiﬁed by the Lyapunov exponent (cf., e.g.,
Parker and Chua, 1989), a measure of the rate at which
neighboring trajectories diverge,

(0) + e ¯y

(0) = ¯y

n

:= lim
t→¥

1
t

ln |n Q|,

(5)

where n Q(t) is the largest of the two eigenvalues of the so-

Q :=

¶ I0 I
J ¶
¶ I0

(cid:20)

¶ J 0I
J 0

J (cid:21)

.

Because of the area preservation property of Eqs.
(1a) or
(3) the product of the two eigenvalues of Q is unity, so
there is no loss of generality in considering only the largest
eigenvalue. Each column of Q corresponds to a vector
perturbation (d I, dJ
) to a trajectory in the nonautonomous
system (3), and satisﬁes the so-called variational equations,

d ˙I
d ˙J (cid:19)

(cid:18)

=
(cid:20)

w

+e

−¶ IJ

d I
dJ (cid:19)

0 0
′ 0 (cid:21)(cid:18)

d I
dJ (cid:19)
(6)
′ := dw /dI. Equations (6) and (3) constitute a

(1) −¶ JJ
¶ IJ
(1)

(1)
(1) (cid:21)(cid:18)

¯y
¶ II ¯y

¯y
¯y

(cid:20)

,

where w
system of four coupled equations.

Variational equations that describe the growth of pertur-
bations using Cartesian coordinates (d x, d y) have the same
form as (6) except that in the Cartesian form all four elements
of the ﬁrst matrix on the r.h.s. of (6) are generally nonzero.
Our numerical ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponent estimates are
based on the Cartesian equivalent of Eqs. (6) and (3), which
is generally more convenient for numerical calculations. We
have chosen to show the (d I, dJ
) form of these equations to
highlight the important role played by w
′. An example of
a closely related study which does not exploit action–angle

¥
6

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Evolution of a material line of ﬂuid in background ﬂows S (a) and R (b). Upper-left plots depict rotational period, 2p /w
a function of initial meridional position.

, and stability parameter, a

, as

variables, and which consequently overlooks the critical
importance of w
′, is Richards et al. (1995).

is small and the second derivatives of ¯y

A simple but very important observation follows from
the action–angle formalism. Dependence of both particle
(3) and variational (6) equations on the background ﬂow
enters only through the function w (I). Equations (6) strongly
suggests that trajectory stability and w
′ are closely linked.
The following heuristic argument explains the mechanism by
which w
′ is expected to control trajectory stability. If one
assumes that e
(1)
are zero-mean random variables, then when w
′ = 0 these
terms should lead to slow (power-law) growth of dJ
and
d I. If |w
′| is large, this term will cause a rapid growth of
| for any nonzero |d I|. The perturbation terms will then
|dJ
lead to a mixing of |dJ
′ will lead,
in turn, to further growth of |dJ
| . As this process repeats
itself, both |d I| and |dJ
| are expected to grow rapidly.
The role played by w
′ in this process is to amplify small
perturbations caused by the second term on the r.h.s. of
is small, trajectory instability is
Eqs.
expected to be signiﬁcantly enhanced when |w
′| is large.
When e
is sufﬁciently large that the two terms on the r.h.s.
(6) have comparable magnitude, the role played
of Eqs.
by |w
′| in amplifying perturbations is expected to be much
less important. Increased trajectory instability should result
in larger numerical estimates of Lyapunov exponents. A
dynamical-systems-based argument on the role of w
in
controlling trajectory stability is given below; that argument
is consistent with the above heuristic argument.

| and |d I|. The term w

(6). Thus when e

′

The lower panels of Fig. 3 show the absolute value of the
stability parameter (Zaslavsky, 1998; Beron-Vera and Brown,
2003a,b)

a (I) :=

I

w

dw
dI

(7)

as a function of trajectory initial condition; recall that these
initial conditions correspond to variable y0 with x0 ﬁxed at
the gyre center. Comparison of the middle and lower panels
of Fig. 3a suggests that when the perturbation to the back-
ground steady ﬂow is weak, trajectory instability increases,
on average, with increasing |a |. Figure 3b shows that for
a strong perturbation this trend is less strong, although the

most stable trajectories are clearly those in the region of
the ﬂow where |a | is small. The background ﬂow R used
to produce Fig. 3c was chosen because it has the property
a = 0 ∀I. Because the same perturbation ﬂows were used to
produce Fig. 3a and 3c the difference between these ﬁgures
is entirely due to the difference in the background ﬂows. The
remarkable stability of trajectories in Fig. 3c is due to the
property a = 0 ∀I in ﬂow R. The same comment applies to
the difference between Fig. 5a and 5c, which were produced
using the same ﬂows that were used to produce Fig. 3a and
3c. All of the aforementioned observations relating to Figs.
3 and 5 are consistent with the heuristic argument given in
the preceding paragraph describing how |w
′| is expected to
control trajectory stability.

The physical interpretation of the stability parameter a
is illustrated in Fig. 7. Figures 7a,b show the evolution
of a material line of ﬂuid in background ﬂows S and R,
respectively. The material line is shown at t = 0 and at t = 12
y. Also shown is a plot of both 2p /w and |a | as a function of
y0 (for y0 > yC, the meridional coordinate of the center gyre)
in each environment. As a consequence of the uniqueness
of solutions to Eq. (1) and continuity of the velocity ﬁeld,
the material line of ﬂuid cannot break or intersect itself but
it can increase in complexity with time. Because the motion
in Fig. 7 is integrable (i.e., each point of the material line is
constrained to lie on a surface of constant I ∀t) and because
attention is restricted to background ﬂows for which y
(0) has
compact and closed level sets, i.e., gyre ﬂows, the length of
the material line can grow with time, at most, following a
power law. Background ﬂow R has a special property. In that
background ﬂow the material line just rotates clockwise at a
constant rate w = w R (= 2p y−1), independent of I, so a = 0
∀I. In contrast, w varies with I in background ﬂow S. The
monotonic decay of w as a function of I in background ﬂow
S induces a shear in phase space which causes the outermost
points of the material line to rotate more slowly than the
innermost ones and, hence, causes the material line to spiral.
In background ﬂow R there is no shear. In polar coordinates
radial shear can be deﬁned as

r¶ r

r−1uq
(cid:0)

,

(cid:1)

(8)

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

7

is the q -component
where r is the radial coordinate and uq
of the velocity ﬁeld. More correctly, this quantity is twice
the rq -component of the strain-rate tensor for rotational
motion (cf., e.g., Batchelor, 1964). The connection with
motion in phase space can be accomplished by identifying
I with r and w I with uq . The replacements r 7→ I and
7→ w I in (8) thus give the analogous expression Iw
′ for
uq
the shear in phase space. Notice that this expression is
(apart from the w −1-factor) the stability parameter a
. We
have chosen to include the w −1-factor in the deﬁnition of
a because of precedent (Zaslavsky, 1998; Beron-Vera and
Brown, 2003a,b) and because it is convenient to make a
dimensionless.

To see the importance of the shear in the background
ﬂow, compare Figs. 7a,b with Figs. 5a,c, which show the
evolution of the same initial material line segments in the
total (background plus perturbation) ﬂows. Notice the highly
complicated structure of the segment in the perturbed ﬂow S
(Fig. 5a) as compared to that in the unperturbed one (Fig.
7a). (Note that the number of particles used to produce Fig.
5a is far too small to resolve what should be an unbroken
In contrast,
smooth curve which does not intersect itself.)
observe that in environment R the perturbation has only a
very minor effect on the evolution of the material line (Figs.
5c and 7b).

Additional insight into why a

should be expected to
control trajectory stability comes from the following argu-
ment. The perturbation streamfunction ey
(1) has the effect
of introducing perturbations to the action I of a given particle
by the amount d I. If d I is assumed to be small and of the
same order as the perturbation streamfunction [d I = O(e ),
say], then w experiences the change

w

7→ (1 + ad

I/I) w

+ O(e 2). The perturbation to w depends on both the per-
turbation d I and the background ﬂow via a
. Under the
change I 7→ I + d I, a sufﬁcient condition for w
to remain
invariant at O(e ) is a = 0. This provides an explanation
for the remarkable stability of the particle trajectories in
ﬂow R. To O(e ) a nonvanishing shear (a
6= 0) appears as a
necessary condition to sustain the successive stretching and
folding of the material line of ﬂuid after it gets distorted by
the perturbation. (Of course, chaotic motion is still possible
when a = 0 provided that e
is sufﬁciently large.) It is thus
expected that where |a | is small (resp., large) there will be
less (resp., more) sensitivity to initial conditions and, hence,
the motion be more regular (resp., chaotic). Support for this
conjecture is given in the numerical simulations presented in
this paper.

Finally, the role of w

′ in dynamical systems theory de-
serves further comment. A nondegeneracy condition, w
′ 6= 0,
must be satisﬁed in order for the KAM theorem to apply
and, hence, to guarantee that some trajectories are nonchaotic
provided the strength of the time-dependent perturbation is
sufﬁciently weak. This theorem does not imply, however,
that trajectories are unstable when w
′ = 0; the KAM theorem

does not address this limit. The mechanism that leads to
chaos is the excitation of resonances at discrete frequen-
cies. For a sufﬁciently strong perturbation, neighboring
resonances overlap and chaotic motion results (cf., e.g.,
Tabor, 1989). The width in frequency of each resonance is
proportional to |w
′|1/2, so one expects, on average, motion
to become increasingly chaotic as |w
′| increases. This ex-
pected trend is consistent with the arguments and numerical
simulations that we have presented above. The trend toward
increasingly chaotic motion with increasing |w
′| does not,
of course, rule out some nonchaotic motion for ﬁxed but
large |w
′| . Note also that the trends that we have described
apply on average; details depend on details of the ﬂow, both
background and perturbation.

5 Concluding remarks

In this paper we considered particle motion in unsteady
incompressible two-dimensional ﬂows consisting of a steady
background gyre on which a highly structured unsteady
wave-like perturbation is superimposed. The numerical
simulations presented strongly suggest that: (i) phase space
is mixed, characteristic of near-integrable one-and-a-half-
degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian systems; and (ii) particle
trajectory stability strongly depends on the structure of the
background (steady) component of the ﬂow.

The mixed phase space structure,

in which “islands”
of stability emerge from an otherwise chaotic “sea,” was
explained as a consequence of the applicability of KAM
theory. The mixed phase space provides an explanation
for the occurrence of patches of poorly stirred ﬂuid in a
mostly vigorously stirred ﬂow. Trajectory instability was
shown to increase with increasing magnitude of a
,
where 2p /w (I) is the period of revolution of a particle in the
background gyre ﬂow and I is the particle’s action variable
in the background ﬂow.

:= Iw

′/w

These results provide important insight into the physics
underlying Lagrangian ocean dynamics. In addition to this
insight, the results described are potentially important in a
variety of practical problems. The occurrence of Lagrangian
“islands of stability” has important implications for the
transport and dispersal of tracers ranging from nutrients to
toxic pollulants. Knowledge that such “islands” are smaller
and less abundant, on average, in regions of ﬂows where |w
′|
is large might be exploited when deciding where to place a
sewage outfall, for example.

Acknowledgement. The comments of an anonymous reviewer have led to
improvements in the manuscript. This work has been supported by Code
321OA of the US Ofﬁce of Naval Research.

References

Abdullaev, S. S. and Zaslavsky, G. M., Classical nonlinear dynamics and
chaos of rays in wave propagation problems in inhomogeneous media,
Usp. Phys. Nauk, 161, 1–43, 1991.

8

Beron-Vera et al.: Tracer patchiness and particle stability

Arnold, V. I., Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer, 2nd

Batchelor, G. K., An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University,

edn., 1989.

1964.

Beigie, D., Leonard, A., and Wiggins, S., Chaotic transport

in the
homoclinic and heteroclinic tangle regions of quasiperiodically forced
two-dimensional dynamical systems, Nonlinearity, 4, 775–819, 1991.
Beron-Vera, F. J. and Brown, M. G., Ray stability in weakly range-
in press (e-print

dependent sound channels, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
nlin.CD/0208038), 2003a.

Beron-Vera, F. J. and Brown, M. G., Travel time stability in weakly
range-dependent sound channels, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., submitted (e-print
nlin.CD/0307002), 2003b.

Brown, M. and Smith, K., Are sofar trajectories chaotic?, J. Phys.

Oceanogr., 20, 139–149, 1990.

Brown, M. G., Phase space structure and fractal trajectories in 1 1

2 degree of
freedom Hamiltonian systems whose time dependence is quasiperiodic,
Nonlin. Proc. Geophys., 5, 69–74, 1998.

Malhotra, N., Mezi´c, I., and Wiggins, S., Patchiness: A new diagnostic for
Lagrangian trajectory analysis in time-dependent ﬂuid ﬂows, Int. J. Bif.
Chaos, 8, 1053–1093, 1998.

Osborne, A. R., Kirwan, A. D., Provenzale, A., and Bergamasco, L., A
search for chaotic behavior in large and mesoscale motions in the paciﬁc
ocean, Physica, 23D, 75–83, 1986.

Osborne, A. R., Kirwan, A. D., Provenzale, A., and Bergamasco, L., Fractal
drifter trajectories in the kuroshio extension, Tellus, 41A, 416–435, 1989.
Parker, T. S. and Chua, L. O., Practical Numerical Algorithms for Chaotic

Systems, Springer, 1989.

Pasmanter, R., Anomalous diffusion and anomalous stretching in vortical

ﬂows, Fluid Dyn. Res., 3, 320–326, 1988.

Richards, K. J., Jia, Y., and Rogers, C. F., Dispersion of tracers by ocean

gyres, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 873–887, 1995.

Richardson, P. L., Walsh, D., Armi, L., Schr¨oder, M., and Price, J. F.,
Tracking three meddies with SOFAR ﬂoats, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 19, 371–
383, 1989.

Stommel, H., The Gulf Stream, University of California, 2nd edn., 1966.
Tabor, M., Chaos and Integrability in Nonlinear Dynamics, John Wiley and

Zaslavsky, G. M., Physics of Chaos in Hamiltonian Systems, Imperial

Sons, 1989.

College, 1998.

