CALT-68-2470
physics/0312087

An Elementary Treatment of the Reverse Sprinkler

Alejandro Jenkins∗

California Institute of Technology,

Pasadena, CA 91125

Abstract

We discuss the notorious reverse sprinkler problem: How will a sprinkler turn if it is submerged

and made to suck in water? We propose an elementary solution that requires no more than the

knowledge of mechanics and ﬂuid dynamics that is provided in ordinary physics courses at the

secondary school or introductory university level. We also review the conﬂicting treatments of this

problem that have been published in the past, some of which have been wrong and many of which

have introduced unnecessary complications that obscure the basic physics involved.

3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: jenkins@theory.caltech.edu

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

R. P. Feynman, one of most dinstinguished and notorious physicists of his time, published

in 1985 a collection of autobiographical anecdotes that attracted much attention on account

of their humor and outrageousness [1]. While describing his time at Princeton as a graduate

student (1939-1942), Feynman tells the following story:

There was a problem in a hydrodynamics book 1 that was being discussed by all

the physics students. The problem is this: You have an S-shaped lawn sprinkler

[...] and the water squirts out at right angles to the axis and makes it spin in

a certain direction. Everybody knows which way it goes around; it backs away

from the outgoing water. Now the question is this: If you [...] put the sprinkler

completely under water, and sucked the water in [...] which way would it turn?

Feynman then goes on to say that many Princeton physicists, when presented with the

problem, judged the solution to be obvious, only to ﬁnd that others were arriving with equal

conﬁndence at the opposite answer, or that they themselves had changed their minds by

the following day. Feynman claims that after a while he ﬁnally decided what the answer

should be and proceeded to test it experimentally by using a very large water bottle, a piece

of copper tubing, a rubber hose, a cork, and the air pressure supply from the Princeton

cyclotron laboratory. Instead of attaching a vacuum to suck the water, he applied high air

pressure inside of the water bottle to push the water out through the sprinkler. According to

Feynman’s account, the experiment initially went well, but after he cranked up the setting

for the pressure supply the bottle exploded and

[...] the whole thing just blew glass and water in all directions throughout the

laboratory [...]

I’ll always remember how the great Professor Del Sasso, who

was in charge of the cyclotron, came over to me and said sternly “The freshman

experiments should be done in the freshman laboratory!”

1 It has not been possible to indentify the book to which Feynman was referring. As we shall discuss later on,
the matter is treated in Ernst Mach’s Mechanik, ﬁrst published in 1883. Yet this is not a “hydrodynamics
book” and the reverse sprinkler is presented as an example, not a problem. In [2], J. A. Wheeler suggests
that the problem occurred to them while discussing a diﬀerent question in the undergraduate mechanics
course that Wheeler was teaching and for which Feynman was the grader.

2

In his book, Feynman does not inform the reader what his answer to the reverse sprin-

kler problem was or what the experiment revealed before exploding. Over the years, and

particularly after Feynman’s autobiographical recollections appeared in print, many people

have oﬀered their analyses, both theoretical and experimental, of this reverse sprinkler prob-
lem 2. The solutions presented have often been contradictory and the theoretical analyses,

even when they have been fundamentally correct, have introduced unnecessary conceptual

complications that obscure the basic physics involved.

Any physicist, whether professional, aspiring or amateur, will probably know the frustra-

tion of being confronted by an elementary question to which he or she cannot give a ready

answer in spite of all the time dedicated to the study of the subject, often at a much higher

level of sophistication than what the problem at hand would seem to require. The solution

presented here was ﬁrst formulated by the author after one such “dark night of the soul”

during his ﬁrst term as a physics graduate student [5]. At the time the author knew only of

Feynman’s statement of the problem in [1].

Our intention here is to oﬀer an elementary treatment of this problem which should be

accessible to any bright secondary school student who has learned basic mechanics and ﬂuid

dynamics. We believe that our answer is about as simple as it can be made, and we discuss

it in light of theoretical and experimental analyses that have been reported.

II. WHICH WAY DOES IT TURN?

Feynman speaks in his memoirs of “an S-shaped lawn sprinkler.” It should not be diﬃcult,

however, to convince oneself that the problem does not depend on the exact shape of the

sprinkler, and for simplicity we shall refer in our argument to an L-shaped structure. In Fig.

1 the sprinkler is closed: water cannot ﬂow into it or out of it. Since the water pressure is

equal on opposite sides of the sprinkler, it will not turn: there is no net torque around the

sprinkler pivot.

2 In the literature it is more usual to see this identiﬁed as the “Feynman inverse sprinkler.” Since the
problem did not originate with Feynman and Feynman never published an answer to the problem, we
have preferred not to attach his name to the sprinkler. Furthermore, even though it is a pedantic point, a
query of the Oxford English Dictionary suggests that “reverse” (opposite or contrary in character, order,
or succession) is a more appropriate description than “inverse” (turned up-side down) for a sprinkler that
sucks water.

3

FIG. 1: A sprinkler submerged in a tank of water is seen from above. Here the L-shaped sprinkler

is closed, and the forces and torques exerted by the water pressure balance out.

Let us imagine that we then remove part of the wall on the right, as pictured in Fig. 2,

opening the sprinkler to the ﬂow of water. If water is ﬂowing in, then the pressure marked
P2 must be lower than pressure P1, since water ﬂows from higher to lower pressure. In both
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, pressure P1 acts on the left. But since a piece of the sprinkler wall is

missing in Fig. 2, the relevant pressure on the upper right part of the open sprinkler will be

FIG. 2: The sprinkler is now open. If water is ﬂowing into it, then the pressures marked P1 and

P2 must obey P1 > P2.

4

P2. It would seem then that the reverse sprinkler should turn towards the water, because
if P2 is less than P1 then there would be a net force to the right in the upper part of the
sprinkler, and the resulting torque would make the sprinkler turn clockwise. If A is the cross
section of the sprinkler intake pipe, this torque-inducing force is A(P1 − P2).

But we have not taken into account the fact that even though the water hitting the inside

wall of the sprinkler in Fig. 2 has lower pressure, it also has left-pointing momentum. The

incoming water is transferring that momentum to the sprinkler as it hits the inner wall.

This momentum transfer would tend to make the sprinkler turn counterclockwise. This is

one of the reasons why the reverse sprinkler is a confusing problem: there are two eﬀects in

play, each of which, acting on its own, would make the sprinkler turn in opposite directions.

The problem then is to ﬁgure out the net result of these two eﬀects.

How much momentum is being transferred by the incoming water to the inner sprinkler

wall in Fig. 2? If water is moving across a pressure gradient, then over a diﬀerential time
dt, a given “chunk” of water will pass from an area of pressure P to an area of pressure
P − dP . This is illustrated in Fig. 3. If the water travels down a pipe of cross-section A, it
is experiencing a net force A dP over a time dt, i.e., it is gaining momentum at a time rate
A dP . Therefore, over the entire length of the pipe, the water is picking up momentum at
a rate A(P1 − P2), where P1 and P2 are the values of the pressure at the endpoints of the
pipe. (In the language of calculus, A(P1 − P2) is the total force that the pressure gradient

across the pipe exerts on the water. We obtain it by integrating over the diﬀerential force

FIG. 3: As water ﬂows down a tube with a pressure gradient, it picks up momentum.

5

A dP .)

This is the same rate at which the water is transferring momentum to the sprinkler wall

in Fig. 2, because whatever left-pointing momentum the incoming water picks up it will
have to transfer to the inner left wall upon hitting it. Therefore A(P1 − P2) is the force that

the incoming water exerts on the inner sprinkler wall in Fig. 2 by virtue of the momentum

it has gained in travelling down the intake pipe.

Therefore the net force on the sprinkler, considering both pressure diﬀerence and momen-

tum transfer, is zero: the sprinkler will not turn at all. Notice, however, that we considered

the reverse sprinkler only after water was already ﬂowing continuously into it. In practice,

the sprinkler will turn towards the water initially, since it starts out empty of water and

therefore it is only the pressure diﬀerence eﬀect (and not the momentum transfer eﬀect)

which is initially relevant. Forces will be balanced only after water has begun to hit the

inner wall of the sprinkler.

Why couldn’t we similarly “prove” the patently false statement that a non-sucking sprin-

kler, if submerged in water, won’t turn at all? In that case the water is going out and hitting

the upper inner wall, not the left inner wall. It exerts a force, but that force produces no

torque around the pivot. The pressure diﬀerence, on the other hand, does exert a torque.

The pressure in this case has to be higher inside the sprinkler than outside it, so the sprinkler

turns counterclockwise, as we expect from experience.

III. CONSERVATION LAWS

Another relevant question is why, in the case of the regular sprinkler, the sprinkler-water

system should develop no net angular momentum around the pivot (with the angular mo-

mentum of the outgoing water cancelling the angular momentum of the rotating sprinkler),

while in the case of the reverse sprinkler the system should have a net angular momentum

given by the incoming water. The answer to this lies in the simple observation that if the

water in a tank is ﬂowing, then something must be pushing it.

In the regular sprinkler,

there’s a high pressure zone near the sprinkler wall next to the pivot, so it is this lower inner

wall that is doing the original pushing, as shown in Fig. 4(a).

In the case of the reverse sprinkler, the highest pressure is outside the sprinkler, so that

the pushing originally comes from the right wall of the tank in which the whole system sits,

6

(a)

(b)

FIG. 4: The force that pushes the water must originally come from a solid wall. The force that

causes the water ﬂow is shown for both the regular and the reverse sprinklers, when submerged in

a tank of water.

as shown in Fig. 4(b). The force on the regular sprinkler clearly causes no torque around

the pivot, while the force of the reverse sprinkler does. That the water should acquire net

angular momentum around the sprinkler pivot in the absence of an external torque might

seem at ﬁrst a violation of Newton’s laws, but this is only because we are neglecting the

movement of the tank itself. Consider a water tank with a hole in its side, such as the one

pictured in Fig. 5. The water acquires a net angular momentum with repect to any point

on the tank’s bottom, but this violates no physical laws because the tank is not inertial: it
recoils as water pours out of it. 3

3 This might seem like a trivial observation, but its consequences can be counterintuitive. The Zapruder
ﬁlm of the 1963 assassination of U.S. president J. F. Kennedy, shows Kennedy’s head snapping backward
after the fatal shot, even though the oﬃcial theory of the assassination asserts that the shot was ﬁred
from behind Kennedy by gunman L. H. Oswald. For several decades, conspiracy theorists have seized on
this element of the Zapruder ﬁlm as evidence that the fatal shot could not have been ﬁred by Oswald
and must have come instead from in front of the president’s motorcade. In 1976, Nobel Prize-winning
physicist L. W. Alvarez published an analysis of the Zapruder ﬁlm in which he explained that the jet of
brain tissue that emerged from president’s exit wound might easily have thrown his head in the direction
opposite to that of the incoming bullet. Alvarez demonstrated this to his satisfaction both theoretically
and experimentally, the latter by ﬁring at a melon and photographing it as it moved in the direction
opposite to what one would naively have expected [3].

7

But there is one further complication: in the reverse sprinkler shown in Fig. 4, the water

that has acquired left-pointing momentum from the pushing of the tank wall will transfer

that momentum back to the tank when it hits the inner sprinkler wall, so that once water

is ﬂowing steadily into the reverse sprinkler the tank will stop experiencing a recoil force.

The situation is analogous to that of a ship inside of which a machine gun is ﬁred, as shown

in Fig. 6. As the bullet is ﬁred, the ship recoils, but when the bullet hits the ship wall and

becomes imbedded in it, the bullet’s momentum is transferred to the ship. (We assume that

the collision of the bullets with the wall is completely inelastic.)

If the ﬁring rate is very low, the ship periodically acquires a velocity in a direction

opposite to that of the ﬁred bullet, only to stop when that bullet hits the wall. Thus the

ship moves by small steps in a direction opposite that of the bullets’ ﬂight. As the ﬁring

rate is increased, eventually one reaches a rate such that the interval between successive

bullets being ﬁred is equal to the time it takes for a bullet to travel the length of the ship. If

the machine gun is set for this exact rate from the beginning, then the ship will move back

with a constant velocity from the moment that the ﬁrst bullet is ﬁred (when the ship picks

up momentum from the recoil) to the moment the last bullet hits the wall (when the ship

comes to a stop). In between those two events the ship’s velocity will not change because

every ﬁring is simultaneous to the previous bullet hitting the ship wall.

FIG. 5: A tank with an opening on its side will exhibit a ﬂow such that the water will have an

angular momentum with respect to the tank’s bottom, even though there is no external source of

torque corresponding to that angular momentum. The apparent paradox is resolved by noting that

the tank bottom oﬀers no inertial point of reference, since the tank is recoiling due to the motion

of the water.

8

FIG. 6: In this thought-experiment, a ship ﬂoats in the ocean while a machine gun with variable

ﬁring rate is placed on one end. Bullets ﬁred from the gun will travel the length of the ship and

hit the wall on the other side, where they come to a stop.

As the ﬁring rate is made still higher, the ship will again move in steps, because at the

time that a bullet is being ﬁred, the previous bullet will not have quite made it to the ship

wall. Eventually, when the rate of ﬁring is twice the inverse of the time it takes for a bullet

to travel the length of the ship, the motion of the ship will be such that it picks up speed

upon the ﬁrst two shots, then moves uniformly until the penultimate bullet hits the wall,

whereupon the ship looses half its velocity. The ship will ﬁnally come to a stop when the last

bullet has hit the wall. At this point it should be clear how the ship’s motion will change
as we continue to increase the ﬁring rate of the gun.4

In the case of continous water ﬂow in a tank (rather than discrete machine gun bullets

being ﬁred in a ship), there clearly will be no intermediate steps, regardless of the rate of ﬂow.

Figure 7 shows a water tank connected to a shower head. Water ﬂows (with a consequent

linear and angular momentum) between the points marked A and B, before exiting via the

shower head. When the faucet valve is opened the tank will experience a recoil from the

outgoing water, until the water reaches B and begins exiting through the shower head, at

which point the forces on the tank will balance. By then the tank will have acquired a

left-pointing momentum. It will loose that momentum as the valve is closed or the water

4 Two interesting problems for an introductory university-level physics course suggest themselves. One is
to show that the center of mass of the bullets-and-ship system will not move in the horizontal direction
regardless of ﬁring rate, as one expects from momentum conservation. Another would be to analyze this
problem in the light of Einstein’s relativity of simultaneity.

9

FIG. 7: A water tank is connected to a shower head, so that water ﬂows out. Water in the pipe

that connects the points marked A and B has a right-pointing momentum, but as long as that pipe

is completely ﬁlled with water there is no net horizontal force on the tank.

tank becomes empty, when there is no longer water ﬂowing away from A but a ﬂow is still

impinging on B.

As this section is intended to show, the analysis of the reverse sprinkler based on con-

servation laws is somewhat tricky. In our opinion much of the confusion in past about this

elementary problem has come from attempting to apply conservation law arguments without

exercising due care in accounting for tank recoil.

IV. HISTORY OF THE REVERSE SPRINKLER PROBLEM

The literature on the subject of the reverse sprinkler is abundant and confusing. The

great Austrian physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach discusses the problem in heading 6,

section 3, chapter 3 of his book Die Mechanik in Ihrer Entwicklung Historisch-Kritisch

Dargerstellt of 1883 (ﬁrst published in English in 1893 as The Science of Mechanics: A

Critical and Historical Account of its Development). Mach speaks of “reaction wheels”

blowing or sucking air where we have spoken of regular or reverse sprinklers respectively:

It might be supposed that sucking on the reaction wheels would produce the

opposite motion to that resulting from blowing. Yet this does not usually take

10

(a)

(b)

FIG. 8: Illustrations from Ernst Mach’s Mechanik: (a). Figure 153 a in the original. (b). Figure

154 in the original. (Images in the public domain, copied from the English edition of 1893.)

place, and the reason is obvious. The air that is sucked into the spokes of the

wheel must take part immediately in the motion of the weel, must enter the

condition of relative rest with respect to the wheel; and when the system is

completely at rest, the sum of the mass-areas must be [equal to zero]. Gen-

erally, no perceptible rotation takes place on the sucking in of the air. The

circumstances are similar to those of the recoil of a cannon which sucks in a pro-

jectile. If, therefore, an elastic ball, which has one escape-tube, be attached to

the reaction-wheel, in the manner represented in [Fig. 8(a)], and be alternately

squeezed so that the same quantity of air is by turns blown out and sucked in,

the wheel will continue to revolve rapidly in the same direction as it did in the

case in which we blew into it. This is partly due to the fact that the air sucked

into the spokes must participate in the motion of the latter and therefore can

produce no reactional rotation, but it also results partly from the diﬀerence of

the motion which the air outside the tube assumes in the two cases. In blowing,

the air ﬂows out in jets, and performs rotations. In sucking, the air comes in

from all sides, and has no distinct rotation.

The correctness of this view is easily demonstrated. If we perforate the bottom

of a hollow cylinder, a closed band-box for instance, and place the cylinder on

11

[a pivot], after the side has been slit and bent in the manner indicated in [Fig.

8(b)], the box will turn in the direction of the long arrow when blown into and

in the direction of the short arrow when sucked on. The air, here, on entering

the cylinder, can continue its rotation unimpeded, and this motion is accordingly

compensated for by a rotation in the opposite direction.

[6] [Emphasis in the

original.]

It appears to us that Mach, in the passage quoted above, bases his treatment on the

experimental observation that a “reaction wheel” is not seen to turn when sucked on, and

that he then seeks a theoretical rationale for this without arriving at one that satisﬁes

him. Thus the bluster about the explanation being “obvious,” accompanied by the tentative

language about how “generally, no perceptible rotation takes place” and by the equivocation

about how the lack of turning is “partly due” to the air “participating in the motion” of

the wheel and partly to the air sucked “coming in from all sides.” Yet the experimental

observation about the turning of the device shown in Fig. 8(b) is extremely interesting: it

demonstrates that if the incoming water did not give up all its angular momentum upon

hitting the inner wall of the reverse sprinkler, then the device would turn towards the

incoming water, as we discussed at the beginning of the previous section. Mach’s explanation

of the behavior of the device in Fig. 8(b) seems to us entirely correct.

In his introduction to Mach’s Mechanik, mathematician Karl Menger describes it as “one

of the great scientiﬁc achievements of the [nineteenth] century” [6], but it would seem that

the passage we have quoted was not well known by any of the twentieth century scientists

who commented publicly on the reverse sprinkler. In [1] Feynman gives no answer to the

problem and writes as if he expected and observed rotation (though, as some have pointed

out, the fact that he cranked up the pressure until the bottle exploded suggests another

explanation: that he expected rotation and didn’t see it). In [7, 8], the authors bring up the

problem and claim that no rotation is observed, but they pursue the matter no further. In

[9], it is suggested that students demonstrate as an exercise that “the direction of rotation

is the same whether the ﬂow is supplied through the hub [of a submerged sprinkler] or

withdrawn from the hub,” a result which virtually all the rest of the literature discounts.

Shortly after Feynman’s memoirs appeared, A. T. Forrester published a paper in which

he concluded that if water is sucked out of a tank by a vacuum attached to a sprinkler then

12

the sprinkler will not rotate. But he also makes the bizarre claim that Feynman’s original

experiment at the Princeton cyclotron, in which he had high air pressure in the bottle push

the water out, would actually cause the sprinkler to rotate in the direction of the incoming

water [10]. An exchange on the issue of conservation of angular momentum between A. K.

Shultz and Forrester appeared shortly thereafter [11]. The following year L. Hsu, a high

school student, published an experimental analysis which found no rotation of the reverse

sprinkler and questioned (quite sensibly) Forrester’s claim that pushing the water out of the

bottle was inequivalent to sucking it out [12]. E. R. Lindgren also published an experimental

result which supported the claim that the reverse sprinkler did not turn [13].

After Feynman’s death, his graduate research advisor, J. A. Wheeler, published some

reminiscenses of Feynman’s Princeton days from which it would appear that Feynman ob-

served no motion in the sprinkler before the bottle exploded (“a little tremor as the pressure

was ﬁrst applied [...] but as the ﬂow continued there was no reaction”) [2]. In 1992 the

journalist James Gleick published a bestselling biography of Feynman in which he states

that both Feynman and Wheeler “were scrupulous about never revealing the answer to the

original question” and then claims that Feynman’s answer all along was that the sprinkler

would not turn [4]. The physical justiﬁcation that Gleick oﬀers for this answer seems to

us unenlightening and, indeed, wrong. (Gleick echoes one of Mach’s comments in [6]: that

the water entering the reverse sprinkler comes in from many directions, unlike the water

leaving a regular sprinkler, which forms a narrow jet. While this is true it doesn’t seem to

us particularly relevant to the question at hand.)

The most detailed work on the subject was published by R. E. Berg, M. R. Collier, and

R. A. Ferrell , who claimed that the reverse sprinkler turns towards the incoming water

[14]. The authors seem to have been somewhat confused by Schultz’s arguments about [11]

conservation of angular momentum, but their explanation of their results appears to be a

somewhat convoluted statement of the correct observation that the sprinkler picks up a bit

of angular momentum before reaching a “steady state” of zero torque once water is ﬂowing

steadily into the sprinkler.

The authors of [14] invoke turbulence to explain observed discrepancies between reverse

sprinklers that suck in water and those that suck in air. A search of the World Wide Web for

recent information on the reverse sprinkler problem yields an account from the University of

Maryland’s Physics Lecture Demonstration Facility in which video evidence is oﬀered of the

13

reverse sprinkler turning slowly towards the incoming water [15]. The Corridor Lab at the

Edgerton Center in MIT carries a demonstration with an air-sucking reverse sprinkler that

shows no rotation at all [16]. The explanation for this seems to us clear and unconnected with

turbulence: the air-sucking sprinkler is ﬁlled with air from the beginning and will therefore

not turn at all, even as the pump is being switched on, except for a tiny eﬀect associated

with the ﬁnite time it takes for the air ﬂow to become steady. There would be no discernible

discrepancy, we believe, if the entire experimental apparatus for the water-sucking sprinkler
sat in the bottom of a lake. 5

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have oﬀered an elementary explanation of why a reverse sprinkler should not rotate,

except for the eﬀect associated with the ﬂuid ﬂow into the sprinkler taking a moment to

begin hitting the inside of the device, a moment during which the sprinkler will turn towards

the incoming ﬂuid. We have considered this result in light of an analysis of forces, and also

in light of the laws of conservation of momentum and angular momentum. Finally, we have

commented on the convoluted and often perplexing history of the problem.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The historical section of this paper owes a great deal to the bibliography for the reverse

sprinkler which was found, through a Google search, at the website for the Michigan Techno-

logical University Physics Lecture-Demonstration Facility [23]. (In particular, we would not

have been aware of Mach’s treatment of the problem, or of its relation to “putt-putt” boats,

if it had not been for that list of references.) It was not possible to determine, however,

5 There are other references in the literature to the reverse sprinkler. For a rather humorous exchange,
see [17, 18]. Already in 1990 the American Journal of Physics had received so many conﬂicting analyses
of the problem that the editor had proposed “a moratorium on publications on Feynman’s sprinkler”
[19]. In the late 1950’s and early 1960’s, there was some interest in the related physics problem of the
so-called “putt-putt” (or “pop-pop”) boat, a fascinating toy boat that propels itself by heating (usually
with a candle) an inner tank connected to a submerged double exhaust. Steam bubbles cause water to be
alternately blown out of and sucked into the tank [20, 21, 22]. The ship moves forward, much like Mach
described the “reaction wheel” turning vigorously in one direction as air was alternately blown out and
sucked in [6].

14

whether the unknown author who collected those references had produced a treatment of

the problem and its history.

[1] R. P. Feynman, Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, Norton (1985).

[2] J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Today 42(2) 24 (1989).

[3] L. W. Alvarez, Am. J. Phys. 44 813 (1976).

[4] J. Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman, Pantheon (1992).

[5] A. Jenkins, private communication with P. Horowitz and T. C. Hayes, (2001).

(copy at http://www.its.caltech.edu/∼jenkins/sprinkler.txt)

[6] E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its Developments,

[9] Proceedings of the National Science Foundation Conference on Instruction in Fluid Mechanics,

6th English ed., Open Court (1960)

[7] P. Kirkpatrick, Am. J. Phys. 10, 160 (1942).

[8] H. S. Belson, Am. J. Phys. 24, 413 (1956).

5-9 September 1960, Exp. 2.2, p. II-20.

[10] A. T. Forrester, Am. J. Phys. 54 798 (1986).

[12] L. Hsu, Am. J. Phys. 56 307 (1988).

[13] E. R. Lindgren, Am. J. Phys. 58 352 (1990).

[11] A. K. Schultz, Am. J. Phys. 55 488 (1987); A. T. Forrester, Am. J. Phys. 55 488 (1987).

[14] R. E. Berg and M. R. Collier, Am. J. Phys. 57 654 (1989); R. E. Berg, M. R. Collier, and

R. A. Ferrell, Am. J. Phys. 59 349 (1991).

[15] R. E. Berg et al, University of Maryland Physics Lecture Demonstration Facility,

http://www.physics.umd.edu/lecdem/outreach/QOTW/arch4/q061.htm (as of 11 Dec. 2003).

[16] MIT Edgerton Center Corridor Lab: Feynman Sprinkler,

http://web.mit.edu/Edgerton/www/FeynmanSprinkler.html (as of 11 Dec. 2003).

[17] M. Kuzyk, Phys. Today 42(11) 129 (1989).

[18] R. E. Berg and M. R. Collier, Phys. Today 43(7) 13 (1990).

[19] A. Mironer, Am. J. Phys. 60 12 (1992).

[20] J. S. Miller, Am. J. Phys. 26, 199 (1958).

[21] R. S. Mackay, Am. J. Phys. 26, 583 (1958).

15

[22] I. Finnie and R. L. Curl, Am. J. Phys. 31, 289 (1963).

[23] Michigan Technological University Physics Lecture-Demonstration Facility,

http://www.phy.mtu.edu/LECDEMO/websit/refs/refsd.htm (as of 11 Dec. 2003).

16

