3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

1

Viscous heating eﬀects in ﬂuids with

temperature-dependent viscosity: triggering

of secondary ﬂows

By A. C O S T A1,2,3

A N D G. M A C E D O N I O2

†

1Osservatorio Vesuviano - INGV, Via Diocleziano 328, Naples, Italy

2Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bologna, Via Zamboni, Bologna, Italy

3Department of Earth Sciences, University of Pisa, Via S. Maria 53, 56126 Pisa, Italy

(Received ?? and in revised form ??)

Viscous heating can play an important role in the dynamics of ﬂuids with strongly

temperature-dependent viscosities because of the coupling between the energy and mo-

mentum equations. The heat generated by viscous friction produces a local temperature

increase near the tube walls with a consequent decrease of the viscosity and a strong

stratiﬁcation in the viscosity proﬁle. The problem of viscous heating in ﬂuids was inves-

tigated and reviewed by Costa & Macedonio (2003) because of its important implications

in the study of magma ﬂows.

Due to the strong coupling between viscosity and temperature, the temperature rise due

to the viscous heating may trigger an instability in the velocity ﬁeld, which cannot be

predicted by a simple isothermal newtonian model. When the viscous heating produces

a pronounced peak in the temperature proﬁle near the walls, with a consequent strong

increase in the viscosity gradient, a triggering of instabilities and the transition to sec-

ondary ﬂows can occur. Recent experimental results (White & Muller 2000) show that

† Present address: Osservatorio Vesuviano - INGV, Via Diocleziano 328, 80124 Naples, Italy.

2

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

in the case of a Taylor-Couette ﬂow viscous heating can reduce by an order of magnitude

the critical Reynolds number of the system.

In this paper we focus on the thermal and mechanical eﬀects caused by viscous heating.

We will show, as in certain regimes, these eﬀects can trigger and sustain a particular

class of secondary rotational ﬂows which appear organized in coherent structures similar

to roller vortices. This phenomenon can play a very important role in the dynamics of

magma ﬂows in conduits and lava ﬂows in channels and, to our knwoledge, it is the ﬁrst

time that it has been investigated by a direct numerical simulation.

1. Introduction

In this paper we show that the eﬀects of viscous heating can play an important role in

the dynamics of ﬂuids with strongly temperature-dependent viscosities such as silicate

melts and polymers. In fact, in these ﬂuids, viscous friction generates a local increase in

temperature near the tube walls with consequent viscosity decrease and increase of the

ﬂow velocity. This velocity increase produces a further growth of the local temperature.

As recently described in Costa & Macedonio (2003), there are some critical values of the

parameters that control this process above which this feedback cannot converge. In this

case the one-dimensional laminar solution, valid in the limit of an inﬁnitely long pipe,

cannot exist even for low Reynolds numbers. In pipes of ﬁnite lengths, viscous heating

governs the evolution from a Poiseuille regime with a uniform temperature distribution at

the conduit inlet, to a plug ﬂow with a hotter boundary layer near the walls downstream

(Pearson 1977; Ockendon 1979). When the temperature gradients induced by viscous

heating are very pronounced local instabilities occur and the triggering of secondary

ﬂows is possible.

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

3

Summarizing previous results (see Costa & Macedonio (2003) and references therein),

we know that, in steady state conditions for a fully developed Poiseuille or Couette ﬂow,

there is a critical value of a non-dimensional “shear-stress” parameter

Gcrit, for
Gcrit, the
Gcrit the system does not admit solution, while when
system has two solutions, one of which (the solution with greater temperature) may be

which when

=

<

>

G

G

G

unstable.

For ﬁnite length tubes, Costa & Macedonio (2003) have shown that these processes are

controlled principally by the Pecl´et number P e, the Nahme number N a (also called

Brinkman number), and the non-dimensional ﬂow rate q:

P e = ρcpU H/k; N a0 = µ0U 2β/k;

q = µ0Q/(ρgH 3)

(1.1)

with ρ density, cp speciﬁc heat, U mean velocity, H tube radius, k thermal conductivity,

µ0 reference viscosity (N a0 is based on this value), β rheological parameter (see eq.2.1)

and Q ﬂow rate per unit length (Q = U H).

When viscous heating is important, starting with uniform temperature and parabolic

velocity proﬁle at the inlet, the ﬂow evolves gradually to a plug-like velocity proﬁle with

two symmetric peaks in the temperature distribution. The most important are viscous

dissipation eﬀects: the more pronounced the temperature peaks, the lower the length

scale for the development of the plug ﬂow (Costa & Macedonio 2003; Ockendon 1979).

Because of the typically low thermal conductivity of these liquids (e.g. silicate melts),

the temperature ﬁeld shows a strong radial gradient. Due to the strong coupling between

viscosity and temperature, the thermal instability generated by viscous heating may

trigger an instability in the velocity ﬁeld that cannot be predicted by a simple isothermal

newtonian models. Flows with layers of diﬀerent viscosity were investigated in the past,

for their practical interest, and it is known that they are not always stable (Yih 1967;

Craik 1969; Renardy & Joseph 1985; Renardy 1987). The instabilities are generated by

4

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

the viscosity contrasts, and are similar to the Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities triggered

by density gradients. The stability of the plane Couette ﬂow was recently re-examined

by Yueh & Weng (1996), who improve the results previously obtained by Sukanek et al.

(1973). The ﬂow shows two diﬀerent instability modes: the former arises in the non-

viscous limit, and the latter is due to the viscosity stratiﬁcation (Yueh & Weng 1996). For

this last instability mode, it was demonstrated that the critical Reynolds number, above

which the ﬂow becomes turbulent, decreases with the increase of the Nahme number, that

is with the viscous heating. This behaviour has been conﬁrmed by recent experiments

(White & Muller 2000). In these experiments, the authors use a temperature-dependent

ﬂuid (glycerin) and a Taylor-Couette device which allows the tracking of vortex by a laser

particle tracer. Results clearly show that above a critical Nahme number an instability

appears at a Reynolds number one order of magnitude lower than the corresponding

Reynolds number predicted for isothermal ﬂow.

In this study, the fully two-dimensional transport equations for mass, momentum and

energy are numerically solved. In particular we focus our attention on the velocity and

temperature ﬁeld evolution in the case that viscous heating eﬀects completely control

physical processes of the ﬂow. We restrict our investigations to the physical regime with

low Reynolds number Re < O(102), high Nahme number N a

1, high Pecl´et number

≫

P e

1 and high Prandtl number P r

1.

≫

≫

2. Model description

We consider an incompressible homogeneous ﬂuid with a constant density, speciﬁc

heat and thermal conductivity. The ﬂuid viscosity µ is temperature-dependent and the

exponential (Nahme’s) law is assumed:

µ = µ0 exp[

β(T

T0)]

−

−

(2.1)

z H

0
T
=
T

−H

form:

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

5

U=0;  T=T0

 

gsin   −>α

x

U=0;  T=T0

Figure 1. Sketch of the studied system.

where T is temperature β a rheological factor and µ0 is the viscosity value at the reference

temperature T0. We investigate the two-dimensional ﬂow in a slab between two parallel

boundaries of length L separated by a distance 2H (with H/L

1) and inclined at an

≪

angle α with respect to the horizontal (see Figure 1). In these hypotheses, ﬂuid dynamics

in the tube are described by the following transport equations expressed in dimensionless

∂ui
∂ξi

= 0

∂ui
∂τ

+ vj

∂vi
∂ξj

=

1
F rc

g

∗
i −

∂ ˜p
∂ξi

+

∂θ
∂τ

+ vj

∂θ
∂ξj

=

1
P ec

∂
∂ξj

∂
∂ξj

θ +

1
Rec

−θ

e

∂
∂ξj (cid:20)
e−θ
2 (cid:18)

N ac
P ec

∂vi
∂ξj

(cid:18)

+

∂vj
∂ξi (cid:19)(cid:21)

∂vi
∂ξj

+

2

∂vj
∂ξi (cid:19)

where τ = tUc/H is the dimensionless time, (ξ1, ξ2) = (x/H, z/H) are the longitudinal

and transversal dimensionless coordinates, (u1, u2) = (vx/Uc, vy/Uc) represent the di-

mensionless ﬁeld velocity (scaled of a characteristic velocity Uc), (g∗

1, g∗

2) = (gx/g, gy/g)

the dimensionless gravitational ﬁeld (g is the gravitational acceleration), θ = β(T

the dimensionless temperature and p∗ = p/(ρU 2

c ) is the dimensionless pressure (index

Einstein’s convention was used). The meaning of the usual characteristic dimensionless

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

T0)

−

6

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

Name

Symbol Deﬁnition Value Symbol Deﬁnition Value

Reynolds number

Rec

ρUcH/µ0

4.5

Re

ρU H/µ

120

Nahme number

N ac

βµ0U 2

c /k

14.4

N a

βµU 2/k

2400

Peclet number

P ec

ρcpUcH/k 450

ρcpU H/k 7400

Froude number

F rc

U 2

c /(gH)

Prandtl number

P rc

µ0cp/k

P e

F r

P r

0.3

100

U 2/(gH)

µcp/k

84

62

Batchelor number Bac H/LB(Uc) 4.9

Ba

H/LB

45.5

Aspect ratio

γ

H/L

3/100

γ

H/L

3/100

Table 1. Typical dimensionless numbers. The calculated values on the left are based on the

mean Poiseuille velocity UP = ρgH 2 sin α/(3µ0). The calculated values on the right are instead

based the mean velocity U and mean viscosity µ.

numbers is reported in table 1.

The last term in the equation (2.4) represents the heat generation by viscous dissipation.

Since we have considered a symmetric geometry and symmetric boundary conditions,

we investigate only half channel (0 6 ξ2 6 1). As boundary conditions we considere

no-slip velocity and isothermal temperature at walls: ui = 0 and θ = 0 at ξ2 = 0. At

the inlet we assume free ﬂow conditions and the ﬂuid temperature to be the same as the

wall temperature: θin = 0. As initial conditions we set zero dimensionless velocity and

temperature.

We are interested to solve the problem of a free viscous ﬂow in an inclined slab-

tube (see Figure 1) in the case of low Reynolds number regime. In fact, considering the

geometry of Figure 1 and the isothermal case without viscous heating eﬀects, the Navier-

Stokes equations of a viscous liquid in the gravitational ﬁeld admit a simple solution

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

7

(Landau & Lifchitz 1994):

µ0

d2V
dz2 + ρg sin α = 0

dp
dz

+ ρg cos α = 0

(2.5)

In this case, the mean velocity is UP = gH 2 sin α/(3ν0) with ν0 = µ0/ρ. From this point

onwards we choose this velocity as the characterictic reference velocity: Uc = UP (in

table 1 UP = 0.3m/s was set).

The parameter values reported in table 1 are chosen in order that the computational

requests are not completely restrictive and the system can be considered belong to the

regime with Re <

(102), N a

1, P e

1 and P r

1. In fact, our aim is to fully

O

≫

≫

≫

simulate the ﬂow ﬁeld evolution when viscous heating eﬀects are very important. To

do this, there is a need to solve all the involved length scales of the problem: from the

integral length H up to the dissipative scale. In the ordinary direct numerical simulation

the dissipative scale is few times the Kolmogorov length:

LK =

1/4

ν3
ǫ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

LB =

LK
√P r

;

where ǫ is the energy dissipation rate (Smyth & Moum 2000a; Moin & Mahesh 1998).

Re3/4 and our integral-scale Reynolds number Re = HU/ν is small,

Since H/LK ∼
this condition does not appear very restrictive, but unfortunately when the Prandtl

number is large, P r

1, as in our case, the dissipative scale is the Batchelor length

≫

(Smyth & Moum 2000a):

Re3/4P r−1/2. When LK > LB temperature ﬂuctuations can occur at

hence H/LB ∼
scales smaller than the velocity ﬂuctuation scales (Smyth & Moum 2000a,b). Moreover,

since turbulence tends to be isotropic a very ﬁne horizontal resolution is required.

(2.6)

(2.7)

8

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

3. Solution method and numerical aspects

To solve equations (2.2)-(2.3)-(2.4), a fortran code based on the Finite Element Method

was used. Isoparametric 8-node elements with linear piecewise approximation of the ve-

locity and temperature ﬁelds were adopted. The velocity and the temperature ﬁelds

are assumed continuous across the element boundaries, whereas the pressure ﬁeld was

approximated by constant functions inside each element, and discontinuous across the

inter-element boundaries. This choice improves the stability of the numerical solution for

incompressible ﬂuids, according to the approach used by Brooks & Hughes (1982). More-

over, the Streamline Upwind Petrov-Galerkin method was adopted to reduce numerical

instabilities at high Reynolds and/or Peclet numbers. Although the studied regime is

characterized by low Reynolds number and we used a ﬁrst-order upwind scheme, high-

order-accurate schemes should be used (Rai & Moin 1991).

Equations 2.2-2.4 are solved using the Predictor/Multicorrector method as suggested

by Brooks & Hughes (1982), with the addition of the enthalpy equation in a similar way

as suggested by Heinrich & Yu (1988). The solution method is explicit in the velocity and

temperature and implicit in the pressure, this last being computed through the solution

of a Poisson equation.

Convergence of the algorithm is assured when the element Courant number Cr satisﬁes

particular conditions depending on the element Reynolds and Peclet numbers. Typically,

to assure the convergence, the element Courant number should satisfy the most restrictive

among the following relations (Brooks & Hughes 1982):

Cr 6 0.8,

if α > 100,

Cr 6 min(1, α),

if α < 100.

where Cr = v∆t/∆x, with v, ∆t and ∆x respectively element velocity, computational

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

9

time step and computational grid size, and α represents both the element Reynolds and

Pecl´et numbers. Unfortunately, the above convergence criteria are very restrictive, forcing

the choice of a very small time step to guarantee the convergence of the algorithm.

3.1. Numerical parameters evaluation

From a practical point of view, an estimation of LB requires the mean velocity U and,

since in our case the viscosity is variable, the mean kinematics viscosity ν. In fact, an

evaluation ǫ is given by:

ǫ =

CU 3
H

(3.1)

where C = 6.5

10−4 (Smyth & Moum 2000a). From previous results (Costa & Macedonio
·

2003), we know that a viscosity decrease induced by local viscous heating near the tube

walls can permit an increase of velocity. Obviously the steady mean velocity U is gener-

ally diﬀerent with respect to the isothermal case where U = UP . But the evaluation of

LB requires at least an estimation of the mean velocity U . To overcome this diﬀulty, we

used U = UP as a guess value for obtaining a ﬁrst estimation of L0

B that we used as a

minimum grid size ∆ξ(0) (or equal to the ﬁrst L0

B-fraction that guarantees a numerical

convergency). The use of this grid size gave a new value of U that was used to estimate

again L1

B and therefore ∆ξ(1). The process was repeated until the value of U appeared to

reach to a convergency value. The grid dependence on the dimensionless mean velocity

U/UP is shown in ﬁgure 2.

The ﬁnal dimensionless numbers and others parameters based on the mean velocity

and mean viscosity are reported in table 1.

The computational grid was formed by an uniform horizontal grid size ∆x/H and three

diﬀerent increasing vertical grid sizes ∆z1/H, ∆z2/H and ∆z3/H (the ﬁnest is close to

walls and largest is in correspondence to the channel center). The ﬁnal grid size values at

10

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

Figure 2. U -grid size dependence in the diﬀerent simulations performed by decreasing the

vertical grid size. Along the x−axis and y−axis the ﬁnest grid size and the mean velocity are

respectively reported.

which the computational algorithm appears to converge are given from ∆x/LB = 3.78

(∆x/H = 0.084) and ∆zi/LB = 0.76; 1.36; 2.12 (∆z/H = 0.0167; 0.0299; 0.0466). The

ﬁnest grid size is set near the wall, where gradients change suddenly and the viscosity is

very low.

4. Results and discussion

As the time increases the temperature starts to rise in the region near the outlet

because of viscous heating. At τ = τ∗

40 an instability is triggered in this region where

≈

the dimensionless temperature θ locally becomes greater than

5 (see ﬁgures 6). For

≈

τ > τ∗, as viscous heating eﬀects become more important even in the more internal region,

secondary ﬂows appear to organize themselves into coherent structures as rotational ﬂows.

This kind of secondary ﬂow looks like roller vortices which move from the region near

the outlet towards the inlet (see ﬁgures 6 where the streamlines are shown). This is the

behaviour of the entire velocity and temperature ﬁeld.

If we look at the temporal proﬁle evolution at a given distance (for example at 2/3 of

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

11

the tube length), from ﬁgures 3, we can see that θ, starting with a ﬂat proﬁle, gradually

increases near the wall forming a proﬁle with a maximum at a short distance from the

lower boundary. With increasing time this peak becomes more pronounced (θmax . 6)

ﬁlling, at the steady state, a narrow shell of values at a shorter distance of the wall (see

ﬁgure 3). As consequence the dimensionless viscosity proﬁle e−θ, strongly decreases in

correspondence to the temperature peak, reaching values very low with respect the initial

values (see ﬁgure 3). The layer where the molecular viscosity is very small is immediately

the colder layer adjacent to the wall and it corresponds to the region where the vortices

appear (see ﬁgure 6). This region is controlled by an eﬀective eddy viscosity instead of

the molecular viscosity.

The modulus velocity proﬁle U/Uc, starting with a parabolic proﬁle, evolves toward a

plug proﬁle ﬁlling at the steady state, a narrow region of values with a plug velocity . 18

(see ﬁgure 4). Instead, at the steady state, the vertical dimensionless velocity proﬁle is

characterised by the ﬁlling of an onion shape region (see ﬁgure 4).

Concerning the mean values of temperature, viscosity and velocity proﬁles, from ﬁg-

ures 5 we can see that the mean temperature rapidly increases (in an interval of τ

20),

then decreases reaching a steady state weakly oscillating value around θ

1. As a conse-

≈

quence, the dimensionless viscosity, rapidly decreases then increases reaching a weakly os-

cillating steady state around 0.6. However the dimensionless mean velocity U/Uc reaches

a steady state value in a longer time, assuming a value of about 16 only after τ

150.

The mean values of temperature, viscosity and velocity summarized in table 1, show that

the eﬀects of viscous heating drastically change the ﬂow properties. In fact the Reynolds

≈

≈

number based on the real mean velocity and viscosity, Re, is more than twenty times

greater than the corresponding Reynolds number for the isothermal case Rec. The Nahme

number N a is more than two orders of magnitude of N ac.

12

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

From these results, it is evident that in the case of ﬂows between two parallel planes,

cylindrical secondary ﬂows develop near the walls (for circular pipes we can infer that

toroidal secondary ﬂows can occur) without any unlimited increase in the temperature

as predicted by simpler unidimensional models.

The obtained simulations could be used to parameterize the eﬀective eddy viscosity that

control these kind of ﬂows in a simple way (e.g. using a Smagorinsky approach with a

diﬀerent constant), but obviously a larger amount of data are needed.

4.1. Validity and limits of the method

We have seen that when viscous heating is relevant, a special class of secondary ﬂows can

develop in ﬂuids with temperature dependent viscosities even at low Reynolds numbers.

This kind of “turbulence” is locally conﬁned near the wall where there is a large unstable

viscosity gradient and the viscosity is low.

The obtained results are valid in the limit of a two dimensional model based on the

full solution of the Navier-Stokes equations but turbulence is generally three-dimensional

even starting with an two-dimensional initial conditions. On the other hand, it is known

that the growth of three-dimensional instabilities is suppressed by a strong anisotropy

(Sommeria & Moreau 1982; Messadek & Moreau 2001). This anisotropy can be due to

the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld (Sommeria & Moreau 1982), a strong rotation and/or

a density stratiﬁcation (Lilly 1972; Hopﬁnger 1987; van Heijst 1993). A feature of 2D

turbulence is that two-dimensional vortices can form coherent structures on large scale

(van Heijst 1993).

In our case, the strong viscosity stratiﬁcation induce by viscous heating produces a strong

anisotropy that should imply the two-dimensional model we used is able to account for

the essential physical properties of the real systems.

Finally, concerning the used numerical scheme we must stress its limits for this study:

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

13

Figure 3. Temporal evolution from τ = 0 to τ = 250 of dimensionless temperature proﬁle (on

the left) and dimensionless viscosity proﬁle (on the right), at Hξ1 = 2/3L distance from inlet.

Figure 4. Temporal evolution from τ = 0 to τ = 250 of the dimensionless velocity modu-

lus proﬁle (on the left) and of the dimensionless transversal velocity proﬁle (on the right), at

Hξ1 = 2/3L distance from inlet.

the scheme has a ﬁrst-order upwind and to be accurate needs very restrictive conditions

and a large computational time. A more suitable scheme should be used to permit a more

detailed study and to investigate the role of each control parameter.

In any case, we hope that this paper stimulates further more accurate studies on this

intriguing topic, contributing to a more quantitative comprehension of this problem which

has many practical implications, e.g in magma ﬂows (see e.g. Costa & Macedonio (2003)

and refrences therein).

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
µ
µ

/

0.0

0.0

20.0

15.0

p
U
U

/

10.0

5.0

0.0

0.0

14

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

>
θ
<

0.0

0.0

reported (red line).

Conclusion

50.0

100.0

150.0

200.0

250.0

50.0

100.0

150.0

200.0

250.0

50.0

100.0

150.0

200.0

250.0

τ

τ

τ

Figure 5. Temporal evolution from τ = 0 to τ = 250 of the dimensionless mean temperature

(on the left), mean viscosity (in the centre) and mean velocity (on the right), at Hξ1 = 2/3L

distance from inlet. In the ﬁgure in the centre the minimum dimensionless viscosity value is also

The thermo-ﬂuid-dynamics of a ﬂuid with strongly temperature-dependent viscosity

in a regime with low Reynolds numbers, high Pecl´et and high Nahme numbers were in-

vestigated by direct numerical simulation.

Our results show that viscous heating can drastically change the ﬂow features and ﬂuid

properties. The temperature rise due to the viscous heating and the strong coupling be-

tween viscosity and temperature can trigger an instability in the velocity ﬁeld, which

cannot be predicted by simple isothermal newtonian models. We showed as viscous heat-

ing can be responsible of triggering and sustaining of a particular class of secondary

rotational ﬂows which appear organized in coherent structures similar to roller vortices.

We wish that our preliminary results can stimulate further more accurate studies on

this intriguing topic, contributing to a more quantitative comprehension of this problem

which has many practical implications for example in the dynamics of magma ﬂows in

conduits and lava ﬂows in channels.

Brooks, A. & Hughes, T. 1982 Streamline upwind/Petrov-Galerkin formulations for convec-

REFERENCES

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

15

Figure 6. Evolution of the dimensionless ﬂow ﬁelds. The ﬁgures show the simulated streamlines

with the temperature ﬁeld as background for diﬀerent τ -values. The blue colour indicates the

lowest dimensionless temperature (θ = 0) and the darkest orange corresponds to the highest

temperature (θ = 6). The symbol t on the upper right corner indicates the dimensionless time

τ . For visualization reasons the horizontal axis is contracted with respect to the vertical.

tion dominated ﬂows with particular emphasis on the incompressible Navier-Stokes equa-

tions. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 32, 199–259.

Costa, A. & Macedonio, G. 2003 Viscous heating in ﬂuids with temperature-dependent

viscosity: implications for magma ﬂows. Nonlinear Proc. Geophys. 10 (6), 545–555.

Craik, A. 1969 The stability of plane Couette ﬂow with viscosity stratiﬁcation. J. Fluid Mech.

van Heijst, G. 1993 Self-organization of two-dimensional ﬂows. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor

36 (2), 687–693.

Naturkunde 59, 321–325.

MIR.

II, 240–249.

30, 539–578.

16

A. Costa and G. Macedonio

Heinrich, J. & Yu, C. 1988 Finite elements of buoyancy-driven ﬂows with emphasis on natural

convection in horizontal circular cylinder. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 69, 1–27.

Hopfinger, E. 1987 Turbulence in stratiﬁed ﬂuids: a review. Phys. Fluids 92, 5287–5303.

Landau, L. & Lifchitz, E. 1994 Physique Theorique - Mecanique des ﬂuides, 3rd edn. Moscow:

Lilly, D. 1972 Numerical simulation of two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids Supplement

Messadek, K. & Moreau, R. 2001 Quelques resultats sur la turbulence MHD quasi-2D. In

Proc. XV Congr`es Francais de Mecanique. Nancy.

Moin, P. & Mahesh, K. 1998 DNS: A tool in turbulence research. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.

Ockendon, H. 1979 Channel ﬂow with temperature-dependent viscosity and internal viscous

dissipation. J. Fluid Mech. 93 (4), 737–746.

Pearson, J. 1977 Variable-viscosity ﬂows in channels with high heat generation. J. Fluid Mech.

Rai, M. & Moin, P. 1991 Direct simulations of turbulent ﬂow using ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes.

Renardy, Y. 1987 Viscosity and density stratiﬁcation in vertical Poiseuille ﬂow. Phys. Fluids

Renardy, Y. & Joseph, D. 1985 Couette ﬂow of two ﬂuids between concentric cylinders. J.

Smyth, W. & Moum, J. 2000a Length scales of turbulence in stably stratiﬁed mixing layers.

83 (1), 191–206.

J. Comp. Phys. 96, 15–33.

30 (6), 1638–1648.

Fluid Mech. 150, 381–394.

Phys. Fluids 12, 1327–1342.

Press.

Smyth, W. & Moum, J. 2000b Ocean turbulence. In Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences. Academic

Sommeria, J. & Moreau, R. 1982 Why, how and when MHD turbulence becomes two-

dimensional? J. Fluid Mech. 118, 507–518.

Sukanek, P., Goldstein, C. & Laurence, R. 1973 The stability of plane Couette ﬂow with

viscous heating. J. Fluid Mech. 57 (part 4), 651–670.

Viscous heating eﬀects in temperature-dependent viscosity ﬂuids

17

White, J. & Muller, S. 2000 Viscous heating and the stability of newtonian and viscoelastic

Taylor-Couette ﬂows. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (22), 5130–5133.

Yih, C. 1967 Instability due to viscosity stratiﬁcation. J. Fluid Mech. 27 (2), 337–352.

Yueh, C. & Weng, C. 1996 Linear stability analysis of plane Couette ﬂow with viscous heating.

Phys. Fluids 8 (7), 1802–1813.

