3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

STABILITY ANALYSIS OF PERTURBED PLANE COUETTE FLOW

Dwight Barkley
Mathematics Institute,
University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
barkley@maths.warwick.ac.uk

Laurette S. Tuckerman
LIMSI-CNRS, BP 133, 91403 Orsay Cedex, France
laurette@limsi.fr
(January 15, 2014)

Plane Couette ﬂow perturbed by a spanwise oriented ribbon, similar to a conﬁguration investi-
gated experimentally at the Centre d’Etudes de Saclay, is investigated numerically using a spectral-
element code. 2D steady states are computed for the perturbed conﬁguration; these diﬀer from the
unperturbed ﬂows mainly by a region of counter-circulation surrounding the ribbon. The 2D steady
ﬂow loses stability to 3D eigenmodes at Rec = 230, βc = 1.3 for ρ = 0.086 and Rec ≈ 550, βc ≈ 1.5 for
ρ = 0.043, where β is the spanwise wavenumber and 2ρ is the height of the ribbon. For ρ = 0.086,
the bifurcation is determined to be subcritical by calculating the cubic term in the normal form
equation from the timeseries of a single nonlinear simulation; steady 3D ﬂows are found for Re as
low as 200. The critical eigenmode and nonlinear 3D states contain streamwise vortices localized
near the ribbon, whose streamwise extent increases with Re. All of these results agree well with
experimental observations.

I. INTRODUCTION

It is well known that, of the three shear ﬂows most commonly used to model transition to turbulence, plane Poiseuille
ﬂow is linearly unstable for Re > 5772, whereas pipe Poiseuille ﬂow and plane Couette ﬂow are linearly stable for all
Reynolds numbers; see, e.g. [1]. Yet, as is also well established, in laboratory experiments, plane and pipe Poiseuille
ﬂows actually undergo transition to three-dimensional turbulence for Reynolds numbers on the order of 1000. For
plane Couette ﬂow, the lowest Reynolds numbers at which turbulence can be produced and sustained has been shown
to be between 300 and 400 both in numerical simulations [2,3] and in experiments [4,5].

The gap between steady, linearly stable ﬂows which depend on only one spatial coordinate and three-dimensional
turbulence can be bridged by studying perturbed versions of Couette and Poiseuille ﬂow. Plane Couette ﬂow perturbed
by a wire midway between the bounding plates and oriented in the spanwise direction has been the subject of laboratory
experiments by Dauchot and co-workers [6–8] at CEA-Saclay. Our goal in this paper is to study numerically the ﬂows
and transitions in a conﬁguration similar to that of the Saclay experiments.

Previous studies of plane channel ﬂows have used a variety of approaches. We brieﬂy review these, emphasizing

computational investigations and the plane Couette case.

One approach is to seek ﬁnite amplitude solutions at transition Reynolds numbers and to understand the dynamics of
transition in terms of these solutions. Finite amplitude solutions for plane Couette ﬂow have been found for Reynolds
numbers as low as Re = 125 by numerically continuing steady states or travelling waves from other ﬂows: the wavy
Taylor vortices of cylindrical Taylor-Couette ﬂow by Nagata [9,10] and Conley and Keller [11] and the wavy rolls of
Rayleigh-B´enard convection by Busse [12]. Most recently, Cherhabili and Ehrenstein [13,14] succeeded in continuing
plane-Poiseuille-ﬂow solutions to plane Couette ﬂow, via an intermediate Poiseuille-Couette family of ﬂows. They
showed that in proceeding from Poiseuille to Couette ﬂow, the wavespeed of the travelling waves decreases and their
streamwise wavelength increases, as does the number of harmonics needed to capture them. When the Couette limit is
reached, the ﬁnite amplitude solutions are highly streamwise-localized steady states. The minimum Reynolds number
achieved in these continuations is Re = 1500. None of these steady solutions of plane Couette ﬂow obtained so far
are stable.

A second, highly successful, approach has been to study the transient evolution of linearized plane Couette ﬂow.
Although all initial conditions must eventually decay and the most slowly decaying mode must be spanwise invariant
by Squire’s theorem, the non-normality of the evolution operator allows large transient growth. Butler and Farrell
[15] showed that a thousand-fold growth in energy could be achieved from an initial condition resembling streamwise
vortices which are approximately circular and streamwise invariant. Reddy and Henningson [16] computed the max-
imum achievable growth for a large range of Reynolds numbers. An interpretation is given by these authors and by
Trefethen et al. [17] in terms of pseudospectra: the spectra of non-normal operators display an extreme sensitivity to

1

perturbations of the operator. Thus, slightly perturbed plane Couette or Poiseuille ﬂows may be linearly unstable for
much lower Reynolds numbers than the unperturbed versions.

A third broad category of computational investigation is the study of nonlinear temporal evolution in relatively
tame turbulent plane channel ﬂows. Orszag and Kells [18] and Orszag and Patera [19] showed that ﬁnite amplitude
spanwise-invariant states of plane Poiseuille ﬂow are unstable to 3D perturbations; this is also true of quasi-equilibria
for plane Poiseuille and Couette ﬂow. Lundbladh and Johansson [2] showed that turbulent spots evolved from
initial disturbances resembling streamwise vortices if the Reynolds number exceeded a critical Reynolds number
between 350 and 375. Numerical simulations by Hamilton, Kim and Waleﬀe [3] of turbulent plane Couette ﬂow
at Re = 400 indicated that streamwise vortices and streaks played an important role in a quasi-cyclic regeneration
process. Coughlin [20] used weak forcing to stabilize steady states containing streamwise vortices and streaks. These
became unstable and underwent a similar regeneration cycle when the forcing or Reynolds number was increased. The
critical Reynolds numbers displayed in all of these numerical simulations are in good agreement with experiments by
Tillmark and Alfredsson [4] and by Daviaud et al. [5] who reported turbulence at Re >
∼ 370, respectively.
The last approach we discuss, and the most relevant to this study, is perturbation of the basic shear proﬁle,
to elicit instabilities that are in some sense nearby.
If a geometric perturbation breaks either the streamwise or
spanwise invariance of the basic proﬁle, then the ﬂow is freed from the constraint of Squire’s theorem, which would
otherwise imply that the linear instability at lowest Reynolds number is to a spanwise invariant (2D) eigenmode. A
perturbed ﬂow with broken symmetry may directly undergo a 3D linear instability. One can hope to understand
the behavior of the unperturbed system by considering the limit in which the perturbation goes to zero. For some
time, experimentalists [21] have used perturbations to produce spanwise-invariant Tollmien-Schlichting waves arising
subcritically. More recently, for example, Schatz et al. [22] inserted a periodic array of cylinders in a plane Poiseuille
experiment to render this bifurcation supercritical. In plane Couette ﬂow, Dauchot and co-workers at Saclay [6–8]
found that streamwise vortices could be induced for Reynolds numbers around 200 when a wire was placed in the ﬂow
(the exact range in Reynolds number for which the vortices occur depends on the radius of the wire). They suspected
that these vortices arise from a subcritical bifurcation from the perturbed proﬁle, but did not determine this.

∼ 360 and Re >

In this paper, we numerically study the destabilization of plane Couette ﬂow when a ribbon is placed midway in the
channel gap (Fig. 1). The ribbon is inﬁnitely thin in the streamwise (x) direction, occupies a fraction ρ of the cross-
channel (y) direction, and is inﬁnite in the spanwise (z) direction. This geometry is similar, though not identical, to
that used in the Saclay experiments. In the experiments, the perturbation is a thin wire with cylindrical cross-section.
Here we use a ribbon because it is much easier to simulate numerically. For the experimental or numerical results to
be of wider importance, the particular shape of the perturbation should not be important, as long as it is small.

We shall address the extent to which a small geometric perturbation of the plane Couette geometry aﬀects the
stability of the ﬂow. We will show that a small geometric perturbation does indeed lead to a subcritical bifurcation
to streamwise vortices, at Reynolds numbers and wavenumbers which agree well with the Saclay experiments.

FIG. 1.

Flow geometry considered in the paper. The upper and lower channel walls are separated by distance 2h and
move with velocities U0 ˆx and −U0 ˆx, repectively. An inﬁnitely thin ribbon (bold line) is located midgap in the channel and has
height 2ρh (ρ = 0.086 for the case shown). The computational mesh (macro elements) used in our calculations is shown, as is
the (ﬁne) collocation mesh for polynomial order N = 8 (three elements in the enlargement). The ribbon is formed by setting
no-slip boundary conditions on the edges of two adjoining elements. Periodic boundary conditions are imposed over length
2Lh in the horizontal direction. The full geometry shown has aspect ratio L = 10. The system is homogeneous in the spanwise
(z)-direction normal to the ﬁgure.

2

II. NUMERICAL COMPUTATIONS

The computations consist of three parts: (1) obtaining steady 2D solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations, (2)
determining the linear stability of these solutions to 3D perturbations, and (3) classifying the bifurcation via a
nonlinear stability analysis. Here we outline the numerical techniques for carrying out these computations.

A. 2D steady ﬂows

Our computational domain has been shown in ﬁg. 1. We non-dimensionalize lengths by the channel half-height h,
velocities by the speed U0 of the upper channel wall, time by the convective time h/U0. There are two nondimensional
parameters for the ﬂow, which we take to be the usual Reynolds number for plane Couette ﬂow, Re = hU0/ν, where
ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid, and the nondimensional half-height of the ribbon ρ, hereafter called its radius
for consistency with the Saclay experiments. We view the (nondimensionalized) streamwise periodicity length 2L
as a numerical parameter which we take suﬃciently large that the system behaves as though it were inﬁnite in the
streamwise direction.

The ﬂuid ﬂow is governed by the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations:

subject to the boundary conditions:

∂u
∂t

= −(u · ∇)u − ∇p +

∇2u in Ω,

∇ · u = 0

in Ω,

1
Re

u(x − L, y) = u(x + L, y)
u(x, y = ±1) = ±ˆx
u(x = 0, y) = 0,

for −ρ ≤ y ≤ ρ,

(1a)

(1b)

(2a)
(2b)
(2c)

where u ≡ (u, v, w) is the velocity ﬁeld, p is the nondimensionalized static pressure and Ω is the computational
domain. The pressure p, like u, satisﬁes periodic boundary conditions in x.

Time-dependent simulations of these equations in two dimensions (w ≡ 0, ∂/∂z ≡ 0) are carried out using the
spectral element [23] program Prism [24,25]. In the spectral element method, the domain is represented by a mesh
of macro elements as shown in Fig. 1. The channel height is spanned by ﬁve elements while the number of elements
spanning the streamwise direction depends on its length: 24 elements are used for L = 32 and 36 elements for L = 56.
The no-slip condition (2c) is enforced by setting zero velocity boundary conditions along the edges of two adjoining
mesh elements: this interface deﬁnes the ribbon. If continuity were imposed along this interface, as is done on all
other element boundaries, then the ﬂow would reduce to unperturbed plane Couette ﬂow. Thus the ribbon is modeled
by a small (but signiﬁcant) change in the boundary conditions on just two edges of elements in the computational
domain. Within each element both the geometry and the solution variables (velocity and pressure) are represented
using N th order tensor-product polynomial expansions. The collocation mesh in Fig. 1 (enlargement) corresponds to
an expansion with N = 8.

A time-splitting scheme is used to integrate the underlying discretized equations [26]. Based on simulations with
polynomial order N in the range 6 ≤ N ≤ 12 and timesteps △t in the range 10−3 ≤ △t ≤ 10−2 we have determined
that N = 8 and △t = 0.005 give valid results over the range of Re considered. These numerical parameter values
(typical for studies of this type) have been used for most of the results reported. Each velocity component is thus
represented by about 7500 scalars for L = 32.

Steady ﬂows used for our stability calculations have been obtained from simulations with Reynolds numbers in the
range 100 ≤ Re ≤ 600. In all cases, the simulations were run suﬃciently long to obtain asymptotic, steady velocity
ﬁelds. We shall denote these steady 2D ﬂows by U(x, y).

B. Linear stability analysis

Let U(x, y) be the 2D base ﬂow whose stability is sought. An inﬁnitesimal three-dimensional perturbation
u′(x, y, z, t) evolves according to the Navier–Stokes equations linearized about U. Because the resulting linear sys-
tem is homogeneous in the spanwise direction z, generic perturbations can be decomposed into Fourier modes with
spanwise wavenumbers β:

3

u′(x, y, z, t) = (ˆu cos βz, ˆv cos βz, ˆw sin βz)
p′(x, y, z, t) = ˆp cos βz

or an equivalent form obtained by translation in z. The vector ˆu(x, y, t) = (ˆu, ˆv, ˆw) of Fourier coeﬃcients evolves
according to:

∂ˆu
∂t

= −(ˆu · ∇)U − (U · ∇)ˆu − (∇ − βˆz)ˆp +

(∇2 − β2)ˆu in Ω,

(∇ + βˆz) · ˆu = 0

in Ω,

1
Re

where ∇, etc. are two-dimensional diﬀerential operators. Equations (4) are solved subject to homogeneous boundary
conditions:

ˆu(x − L, y) = ˆu(x + L, y)

ˆu(x, y = ±1) = 0
ˆu(x = 0, y) = 0,

for −ρ ≤ y ≤ ρ,

(3)

(4a)

(4b)

(5a)
(5b)
(5c)

Equations (4) with boundary conditions (5) can be integrated numerically by the method described in section II A.
For ﬁxed β, this is essentially a two-dimensional calculation [27,28]. After integrating (4)-(5) a suﬃciently long time,
only eigenmodes corresponding to leading eigenvalues remain. We use this to ﬁnd the leading eigenvalues (those with
largest real part) and corresponding eigenmodes for ﬁxed values of Re and β as follows. A Krylov space is constructed
based on integrating (4)-(5) over K = 8 successive (dimensionless) time intervals of T = 5. More precisely, we calculate
the ﬁelds ˆu(t), ˆu(t + T ), . . . ˆu(t + (K − 1)T ) and orthonormalize these to form a basis v1, v2, . . . vK. We then deﬁne the
K × K matrix Hij ≡ hvi, Lvji where L is the operator on the right-hand-side of the linearized Navier-Stokes equations
and h, i is an inner product. Approximate eigenvalues σ and eigenmodes ˜u(x, y, z) are calculated by diagonalizing H;
their accuracy is tested by computing the residual r ≡ ||σ˜u − L˜u||. If the eigenvalue-eigenmode pairs do not attain
a desired accuracy (r < 10−5 for the case here), then another iteration is performed. The new vector is added to
the Krylov space and the oldest vector is discarded. This is eﬀectively subspace iteration initiated with a Krylov
subspace. More details can be found in [22,27,29].

We conclude this section by considering the eﬀect of the streamwise periodicity length 2L on the computations.
Recall that we view L as a quasi-numerical parameter in that we seek solutions valid for large L. Figure 2 shows the
dependence of the leading eigenvalue σ on streamwise length at Re = 250, β = 1.3 (values near the primary 3D linear
instability). It can be seen that for L >
∼ 32 the eigenvalue is independent of L. This is consistent with the structure of
the base ﬂow and eigenmodes shown in the following section. Most of the computations reported have used L = 32.

FIG. 2. Leading eigenvalue as a function of streamwise periodicity half-length L for Re = 250, β = 1.3. For L >

∼ 32 the

eigenvalue is independent of L.

For the nonlinear stability analysis and for obtaining steady 3D ﬂows, we carry out 3D simulations of (1)-(2)
using the same spectral element representation in (x, y) described above together with a Fourier representation in the
spanwise direction z. We impose periodicity in the spanwise direction by including wavenumbers mβc for integers
|m| < M/2, where βc is the critical wavenumber found in the linear stability analysis. The simulations we report use
M = 16.

C. 3D simulations

4

III. RESULTS

A. 2D Steady ﬂows

A typical steady 2D ﬂow for the perturbed Couette geometry is shown in Fig. 3. It is representative of base ﬂows
for Reynolds numbers on the order of a few hundred with a ribbon of size ρ = 0.086. This was chosen to correspond
to the radius of one of the cylinders used in the Saclay experiments [6–8]. The Reynolds number Re = 250 of the
ﬂow shown is close to the threshold for the 3D instability that will be discussed in the next section. Unless otherwise
stated, results are for ρ = 0.086, Re = 250, and L = 32.

In Fig. 3(a) it can been seen that, except near the ribbon, the steady ﬂow is essentially the parallel shear of
unperturbed plane Couette ﬂow. The streamlines are as reported experimentally in [6]. As noted there, the Reynolds
number based on the radius of the ribbon and the local velocity near the ribbon is very small compared to Reynolds
numbers where separation or vortex shedding could be expected.
In Fig. 3(b) we plot the streamfunction of the
deviation U − UC where UC = yˆx is the unperturbed plane Couette proﬁle. The primary eﬀect of the ribbon is
to establish a region (|x| <
∼ 3) of positive circulation (opposing that of plane Couette ﬂow) surrounding the ribbon.
Figure 3(c) shows U − UC over a larger streamwise extent. Further from the ribbon are wider regions (3 <
∼ 24)
in which the deviation is weak, but has the same negative circulation as plane Couette ﬂow.

∼ |x| <

(a)

(b)

(c)

- 4

- 2

2

4

-12

- 6

6

12

0

0

5

FIG. 3. The steady two-dimensional base ﬂow U(x, y) at Re = 250 for a ribbon with ρ = 0.086. Only the central portion of
the full L = 32 domain is shown. (a) Streamfunction contours of U. The ﬂow is nearly identical to the parallel shear of plane
Couette ﬂow except very near the ribbon. (b) Streamfunction contours of the deviation U − UC highlighting the diﬀerence
between the perturbed and unperturbed Couette ﬂows. A region (|x| <
∼ 3) of positive circulation is established around the
ribbon. The ﬂow is centro-symmetric. (c) The deviation over a larger streamwise extent showing regions (3 <
∼ 24) further
from the ribbon whose circulation is negative, like that of UC. The ﬂow is very weak; contours of the dominant part of this
ﬂow are not shown. The slight lack of centro-symmetry is a graphical artifact.

∼ |x| <

The size of the counter-rotating region is remarkably uniform over the ribbon radii ρ and Reynolds numbers Re
that we have studied. We deﬁne the streamwise extent of the counter-rotating region as delimited by ψ(x, y = 0) = 0,
i.e. the x values at which the streamfunction at midheight y = 0 has the same value as at the channel walls y = ±1.

For ρ = 0.086, the counter-rotating region varies from |x| ≤ 2.18 for Re = 150 to |x| ≤ 3.00 for Re = 300, while
for ρ = 0.043 the counter-rotating region varies from |x| ≤ 2.10 for Re = 150 to |x| ≤ 2.87 for Re = 600. This
insensitivity to the size of ρ is signiﬁcant in light of the 2D ﬁnite-amplitude steady states calculated by Cherhabili
and Ehrenstein [13,14]. The states found by these authors in unperturbed plane Couette ﬂow strongly resemble that
in Fig. 3. These too have a central counter-rotating region surrounded by larger regions of negative circulation. At
Re = 2200, the counter-rotating region in their ﬂow occupies |x| ≤ 2.31 (see Figs. 10 and 11 of [13], Figs. 2 and 3
of [14]) The similarity between the 2D ﬂows for ρ = 0.086, ρ = 0.043, and, eﬀectively, ρ = 0 leads us to hypothesize
that our 2D perturbed plane Couette ﬂows are connected (via the limit ρ → 0) to those computed by Cherhabili and
Ehrenstein.

We may also quantify the intensity of the counter-circulation. One measure is the maximum absolute value of v,
which is attained very near the ribbon, at (x, y) = (±0.081, 0). This value is approximately independent of Reynolds
number, but decreases strongly with ribbon radius: vmax ≈ 0.031 for ρ = 0.086 and vmax ≈ 0.013 for ρ = 0.043.

An important qualitative feature of the ﬂow can been seen in Figs. 3(b) and (c): the ﬂow is centro-symmetric,
i.e.
it is invariant under combined reﬂection in x and y, or equivalently rotation by angle π about the origin. It
can be veriﬁed that the governing equations (1) and boundary conditions (2) are preserved by the centro-symmetric
transformation:

u(x, y) → −u(−x, −y).

(6)

The unperturbed plane Couette problem is also centro-symmetric. It is in fact symmetric under the Euclidean group
E1 of translations and the “reﬂection” consisting of the centro-symmetric transformation (6). The ribbon in the
perturbed ﬂow breaks the translation symmetry, but leaves the centro-symmetry intact. Note that reﬂections in x or
y alone are not symmetries of either the unperturbed or the perturbed plane Couette problem because either reﬂection
alone reverses the direction of the channel walls, violating the boundary conditions (2b).

In Fig. 4 we present streamwise velocity proﬁles near the ribbon. For |x| > 0.5, the Couette proﬁle is very nearly
recovered. Figure 4(b) shows streamwise velocity proﬁles of the deviation from the linear Couette proﬁle across the
full channel. Close examination reveals that these proﬁles are not odd in y, consistent with the fact that the system
is neither symmetric nor antisymmetric under reﬂection in y. The symmetric partners to the proﬁles shown are at
negative x values.

The proﬁles in Fig. 4 are similar to those Bottin et al. [8] obtained in the Saclay experiments under similar
conditions. It is not possible to compare directly with experiment because of the diﬃculty in obtaining experimental
velocity proﬁles and because the geometric perturbations diﬀer in the computations and experiments. The only
noticeable diﬀerence between experiments and computations is that the proﬁles Fig. 4(b) are very nearly odd in y,
whereas in experiment this lack of symmetry is more pronounced.

FIG. 4.

Streamwise velocity proﬁles in the perturbed geometry. (a) U (x, y) as a function of y for x = 0.081 (dotted),
x = 0.25 (dashed), and x = 0.5 (solid). Only the central portion of the channel is shown. Only very close to the ribbon does
the velocity diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the linear proﬁle. (b) Deviation U (x, y) − y over the full range of y.

6

1

−1 dy 1

Finally in Fig. 5 we quantify the deviation between perturbed and unperturbed plane Couette ﬂow by plotting the
2 |U(x, y) − UC(y)|2 as a function of x for −56 ≤ x ≤ 56. The data show
energy per unit length E(U − UC) ≡
a narrow central region, corresponding to the region |x| ≤ 2.76 of positive circulation seen in Fig. 3(b), where the
deviation falls sharply and approximately exponentially in x. For |x| > 2.76, the deviation, while very small, decays
very slowly (and not exponentially) with |x|. The boundaries x = ±23.78 terminating the outer region of negative
circulation can also be seen on ﬁg. 5. The precision of the computations is surpassed beyond |x| = 40. This ﬁgure
shows that for |x| > 32 the deviation of the base ﬂow from Couette is indeed very weak and this supports our choice
of L = 32 as an adequate domain size for most computations.

R

FIG. 5. Energy of deviation between perturbed and unperturbed Couette ﬂows as a function of x. Parameters are the same
as in Fig. 3 except that here L = 56. Abrupt changes in slope at |x| = 2.76, |x| = 23.78 correspond to changes in the sign of
the circulation of U − UC. For |x| >

∼ 40, the deviation is below the precision of the computations.

B. 3D Linear stability results

The two-dimensional steady ﬂows just discussed become linearly unstable to three-dimensional perturbations when
the Reynolds number exceeds a critical value Rec. To determine this value and the associated wavenumber, we have
performed a linear stability analysis of the steady ﬂows via the procedure described in Sec. II B.

Figure 6 shows the growth rate σ of the most unstable three-dimensional eigenmode ˜u as a function of Re and
spanwise wavenumber β for a ribbon with ρ = 0.086. For each value of Re, we have ﬁt a piecewise-cubic curve,
shown in ﬁg. 6, through the eigenvalue data to determine the wavenumber βmax(Re) which maximizes σ. The critical
Reynolds number Rec is then determined by linear interpolation of σ(βmax(Re), Re) through these maxima and ﬁnding
its zero crossing. From this we ﬁnd critical values for the onset of linear instability to be Rec = 230 and βc = 1.3
for the ribbon with ρ = 0.086. These values are consistent with what is seen experimentally, but we delay discussion
until the conclusion.

Figure 7 shows similar eigenvalue spectra for a ribbon half as large: ρ = 0.043. The critical wavenumber βc ≈ 1.5
is only slightly larger than the previous value. However, the critical Reynolds number is much larger: Rec ≈ 550.
The critical Reynolds number must increase as ρ is decreased since, when no ribbon is present, the problem reduces
to classical plane Couette ﬂow which is linearly stable for all ﬁnite Re, i.e. limρ→0 Rec(ρ) = ∞.

We note that Cherhabili and Ehrenstein [14] also calculate 3D instability for their 2D ﬁnite amplitude plane Couette
ﬂows. Despite the resemblance of their 2D ﬂows to ours, the spanwise wavenumber corresponding to maximal growth
is much larger in their case: β ≈ 23.

7

FIG. 6.

Growth rate σ of most unstable three-dimensional eigenmode as a function of spanwise wavenumber β for

Re = 150, 200, 250, 300 with ribbon radius ρ = 0.086. Critical values for instability are Rec = 230 and βc = 1.3.

FIG. 7. Growth rate of most unstable eigenmode as a function of β and Re for ρ = 0.043. Critical values are Rec ≈ 550 and

βc ≈ 1.5.

A computed eigenvector ˜u = (˜u, ˜v, ˜w) is shown in Figs. 8 and 9. This eigenvector is near-marginal: Re = 250, close
to Rec = 230. The spanwise wavelength is λ = λc ≡ 2π/βc = 4.83. The other parameters are ρ = 0.086 and L = 32.
Figure 8 shows (˜v, ˜w) velocity plots at four streamwise locations. In the x = 0 plane containing the ribbon, the ﬂow
is reﬂection-symmetric in y, and the ﬂow is primarily spanwise. The trigonometric dependence in z with the choice
of phase (3) can be seen. In the planes x = 1, x = 2, and x = 3, two counter-rotating streamwise vortices are present.
The ﬂow for negative x is obtained by reﬂection in y.

8

x=3

x=2

x=1

 z=0

 y=0

|

13

1

y

-

1

|

0

z

x=0

|

λ

FIG. 8. Velocity ﬁeld of near-marginal eigenvector in the planes x = 0, x = 1, x = 2, and x = 3. Parameters are Re = 250,
ρ = 0.086, L = 32, λ = 4.83. At x = 0, the velocity is reﬂection-symmetric in y and primarily spanwise. The ribbon is seen as
the area |y| < ρ = 0.086 with no ﬂow. Streamwise vortices are visible for x ≥ 1. The scale for distances in x is stretched by a
factor of 3.333 relative to distances in y,z.

y

1

-1

λ

z

0

|

-1

FIG. 9. Velocity ﬁeld of near-marginal eigenvector in the planes z = 0 and y = 0.

Figure 9 presents two complementary views of the eigenvector ˜u for −1 < x < 13. Above is a plot of (˜u, ˜v) in the
plane z = 0 where they are maximal (cf. eq. 3). Below is a plot of (˜u, ˜w) in the plane y = 0 at mid-channel height.
Figure 10 shows the x−dependence of the spanwise-averaged energy per unit length

x

9

E(˜u) ≡

1
λc Z

0

λc

+1

dz

−1

Z

dy

|˜u|2

1
2

Here, the eigenvector was computed in a larger domain (L = 56) in order to determine its long-range behavior. The
eigenvector is localized: the energy decays exponentially with |x| and does not reﬂect the counter- and co- rotating
regions of the 2D base ﬂow seen on Fig. 5. The ﬂow deﬁcit due to the ribbon produces the local minimum at x = 0.

FIG. 10. Energy of near-marginal eigenvector as a function of x. Parameters are the same as in Figs. 8 and 9 except that

here L = 56. Vertical scale is arbitrary.

We have also computed the vorticity of the eigenvector. Despite the streamwise vortices visible on Fig. 8, ωx is the

smallest vorticity component and ωz by far the largest over most of the domain.

C. 3D Nonlinear stability results

Our method of nonlinear stability analysis has previously been used to determine the nature of the bifurcation to
three-dimensionality in the cylinder wake [28]. The method is based on tracking the nonlinear evolution of the 3D
ﬂow starting from an initial condition near the bifurcation at Rec. “Near” refers both to phase space (i.e. a small 3D
perturbation from the two-dimensional proﬁle) and to parameter space (i.e. at a Reynolds number slightly above the
linear instability threshold). In essence we follow the dynamics along the unstable manifold of the 2D steady ﬂow
far enough to determine how the nonlinear behavior deviates from linear evolution. From this we can determine very
simply whether the instability is subcritical or supercritical.

Three-dimensional simulations are carried out for ρ = 0.086 at Re = 250, slightly above Rec = 230, starting with

an initial condition of the form:

u(x, y, z) = U(x, y) + ǫ˜u(x, y, z),

where U is the 2D base ﬂow at Re = 250, ˜u is its eigenmode at wavenumber βc = 1.3, and ǫ is a small number
controlling the size of the initial perturbation.

The restriction to wavenumbers which are multiples of βc accurately captures the evolution from initial condition
(8), since the Navier–Stokes equations preserve this subspace of 3D solutions. That is, we seek only to follow the
evolution in the invariant subspace containing the critical eigenmode. We do not address the issue of whether the
λc-periodic ﬂow is itself unstable to long-wavelength perturbations.

To analyze the nonlinear evolution, we deﬁne the (real) amplitude A of the 3D ﬂow as:

[A ≡

1
λc Z

0

"

λc

+1

+L

dz

dy

−1

Z

−L

Z

dx

|u1|2

,

1
2

1/2

#

where u1(x, y, z, t) is the component of the 3D velocity ﬁeld at wavenumber βc, i.e. A is the square root of the energy
of the ﬂow at wavenumber βc. (A complex amplitude, not required here, would include the phase of the solution in
the spanwise direction.)

10

(7)

(8)

(9)

Figure 11 shows the time evolution of A from our simulations. The value of ǫ is such that the initial energy of the

3D perturbation, ǫ˜u, is E = A2 = 1.66 × 10−5; the energy of the base ﬂow U is E = 21.3.

FIG. 11. Nonlinear growth of the amplitude A of the 3D ﬂow from simulation (solid) at Re = 250 plotted on linear and
logarithmic scales. First-order (dotted) and third-order (dashed) dynamics are shown with σ = 0.004669 and α = 0.9. The
faster than exponential nonlinear growth (i.e. positive α) shows that the instability at Rec is subcritical.

To interpret the nonlinear evolution, consider the normal form for a pitchfork bifurcation including terms up to

third-order in the amplitude:

˙A = σA + αA3

(10)

The leading nonlinear term is cubic because the 3D bifurcation is of pitchfork type (an O(2) symmetric pitchfork
If α > 0, then the
bifurcation). The Landau coeﬃcient α determines the nonlinear character of the bifurcation.
nonlinearity is destabilizing at lowest order and the bifurcation is subcritical; if α < 0, then the cubic term saturates
the instability and the bifurcation is supercritical.

Figure 11 includes curves for ﬁrst-order evolution (i.e.

˙A = σA) and the third-order evolution given by Eq. (10).
For the ﬁrst-order evolution, the eigenvalue σ for the bifurcation has been computed via the linear stability analysis in
Sec. III B. For the third-order evolution we have simply ﬁt the one remaining parameter, α, in the normal form. We
followed the approach in [28] of using the time series A(t) and the known value of σ to estimate α from α ≃ ( ˙A−σA)/A3.
This gives α = 0.9 ± 0.05, a constant value for T ≤ 500, which determines how long the third-order truncation is valid
in this case. The value of α is essentially unchanged when the mesh is reﬁned by increasing the polynomial order N
to 10 or the number M of Fourier modes to 32. The magnitude of α depends on the deﬁnition of A, but its sign does
not. The fact that α is positive indicates that the instability is subcritical. Figure 11 indicates that the 3D ﬂow has
become steady by t ≈ 1000. The nonlinear saturation seen in the time series is not captured by including a ﬁfth-order
term in the normal form.

We have veriﬁed that the instability is subcritical by computing nonlinear states below Rec. In Fig. 12, we show
the steady 3D ﬂow at Re = 200. This ﬁgure is analogous to ﬁg. 8 depicting the eigenvector, so we will emphasize
here the ways in which the two ﬂows diﬀer. Small streamwise vortices can be seen in each of the four corners of the
x = 0 plane containing the ribbon. The lower (y < 0) pair evolve with x into the strong pair of vortices at x = 1. The
vortices at x = 3 are tilted with respect to their counterparts in the eigenvector, attesting to the nonlinear generation
of the second spanwise harmonic 2β. The 3D ﬂow in the y = 0 and z = 0 planes (after subtraction of the dominant
2D base ﬂow) is suﬃciently similar to the eigenvector (ﬁg. 9) that we do not present it here.

11

x=3

x=2

x=1

1

y

|-
1

0

1

y

-1

0

z

x=0

|

λ

FIG. 12. 3D velocity ﬁeld in the planes x = 0, x = 1, x = 2, and x = 3. Parameters are Re = 200, ρ = 0.086, L = 32, λ = 4.83.
At x = 0, four small streamwise vortices can be seen in the corners of the domain. The lower (y < 0) vortex pair evolves into
the large vortices seen at x = 1. The scale for distances in x is stretched by a factor of 3.333 relative to distances in y,z.

FIG. 13. Streamwise velocity contours in the plane x = 2 for the 3D ﬁeld. Solid contours correspond to u > 0, dashed
contours to u < 0. u is small and nearly constant in the interior near z = 0, λ; elsewhere it varies approximately linearly with
y.

Streamwise velocity u-contours of the 3D ﬂow at x = 2 are shown in Fig. 13. The (v, w) projections of our 3D
ﬂow in Fig. 12, showing the tilted streamwise vortices, resemble the depictions of optimally growing modes by Butler
and Farrell [15], of instantaneous turbulent ﬂows by Hamilton et al. [3] and of weakly forced states by Coughlin [20].

λ

z

12

However, our streamwise velocity u pictured in Fig. 13 diﬀers signiﬁcantly from [3,20] in that their u contours are
much more strongly displaced at the vortex boundaries. This is probably due to the fact that our Reynolds number
of 200 is substantially lower than their Re = 400.

Far from the ribbon, the 3D ﬂow returns to plane Couette ﬂow. Fig. 14 compares the energy distribution E(U−UC)
deﬁned by (7) of the deviation of the 3D ﬂow from plane Couette ﬂow at Re = 200 with that at Re = 250. Note that
the 3D ﬂow is less localized than the corresponding eigenvector (Fig. 10). It can be seen that at the higher Reynolds
number the deviation has higher energy, and importantly, occupies a larger streamwise extent. This is in accord with
the experimental observation that the streamwise extent of vortices in the perturbed ﬂow increases with increasing
Reynolds number.

FIG. 14. Energy of deviation from plane Couette ﬂow of 3D velocity ﬁelds at Re = 200 (dashed) and Re = 250 (solid) as a
function of x. Plotted is the square root of energy per unit length in x. The range in x is taken larger than the computational
domain (L = 32) to match the range of Figs. 5 and 10.

We have attempted to determine the location of the saddle-node bifurcation marking the lower Reynolds number
limit of this branch of steady 3D states; we believe that it occurs just below Re = 200. There remains nevertheless a
slight uncertainty regarding the lower bound for these states because we have found evidence of two diﬀerent types of
branches of steady 3D states over the range 200 ≤ Re ≤ 250. The study of these states is further complicated by the
fact that the time evolution to many of them is oscillatory, indicating that their least stable eigenvalues are a complex
conjugate pair. Further investigation is required to ascertain the full nonlinear bifurcation diagram.

We have also sought to determine how the scenario changes as the ribbon radius ρ is decreased. Recall from
section III B that for ρ = 0.043, we found Rec ≈ 550. At these parameter values, 3D simulations display chaotic
time evolution. By decreasing Re, we have succeeded in computing a stable 3D steady state at Re = 350. Since the
simulation showed chaotic oscillation for a long time (3000 time units) before showing signs of approaching a steady
state, there remains the possibility that stable 3D steady states are also attainable for higher Re. Simulations at
Re = 300 result in decay to the basic 2D state (although we do not exclude the possibility of maintaining 3D states
by a more gradual decrease in Re). This is consistent with simulations of the unperturbed plane Couette geometry
(ρ = 0) by Hamilton et al. [3], who observed chaotic oscillation for Re ≥ 400 and plane Couette ﬂow UC = yˆx for
Re = 300. Other numerical [2] and experimental [4,5] investigations in the unperturbed plane Couette geometry also
indicate a critical Reynolds number of 360-375 for transition to turbulence. We plan to investigate the ρ-dependence
of the steady 3D states and their stability in a future publication.

We have performed a computational linear and nonlinear stability analysis of perturbed plane Couette ﬂow in order
to understand experiments recently performed at Saclay [6–8], and more generally, three-dimensional ﬂows in the
plane Couette system. We have accurately determined the extent to which the basic steady 2D proﬁle is modiﬁed by
the presence of a small spanwise-oriented ribbon in the ﬂow. We have determined that such a ribbon, comparable in
size to the cylinders used in the Saclay experiments, is large enough to induce linear instability of the basic proﬁle at

IV. CONCLUSION

13

Reynolds numbers of order a few hundred.

We elaborate further on how our analysis complements the Saclay results. An experimental diagram was obtained
[7,8] for the Reynolds number range of existence of various types of ﬂows: 2D, 3D with streamwise vortices, inter-
mittent, and turbulent. In these experiments it was not determined whether the 3D streamwise vortices arise from a
linear instability of the 2D ﬂow. Our results show that a small geometric perturbation does destabilize the 2D ﬂow
in a subcritical instability and that the bifurcating solution is a 3D ﬂow with streamwise vortices. Speciﬁcally, for a
nondimensional radius ρ = 0.086, we ﬁnd Rec = 230 and for ρ = 0.043, we ﬁnd Rec = 550. The computed spanwise
wavelength of the most unstable mode is in good agreement with the value seen experimentally. The streamwise
extent occupied by these vortices decreases with decreasing Reynolds number, as observed in experiment, and is ﬁnite
at the lower Reynolds limit of the 3D ﬂows.

The Reynolds number ranges for the steady 3D ﬂows we have computed diﬀer somewhat from those seen exper-
imentally. For ρ = 0.086, streamwise vortices were observed experimentally over the range 150 <
∼ 290. For
∼
ρ = 0.086, we have thus far found steady 3D ﬂows only if Re ≥ 200. In experiments with ρ = 0.043, streamwise
vortices have been observed over the range 190 <
∼ 310; we have thus far found steady 3D ﬂows only for Re near
∼
350. However, a full study of the 3D ﬂows is still pending and may resolve these discrepancies.

Re <

Re <

There are also minor qualitative diﬀerences between our results and the experimental ﬁndings. The ﬁrst is that 2D
ﬂows in our computations are more antisymmetric in the cross-channel direction y than in experiment (our Fig. 4 vs.
Fig. 4 of [8]). This is probably due to the fact that we perturb our ﬂow with an inﬁnitely thin ribbon and not a wire
(cylinder) as in the experiment. However, based on the existence of instability in both cases, this small diﬀerence in
the basic 2D ﬂow is probably not very signiﬁcant. The other diﬀerence is due to the fact that our 3D simulations
impose spanwise periodicity with a single critical wavelength λc. Experimentally, it is observed that the streamwise
vortices are not always regularly spaced in the spanwise direction.

As stated in the introduction, streamwise vortices can be made to appear in channel ﬂows via a number of ap-
proaches. Butler and Farrell [15] and Reddy and Henningson [16] show that under linear evolution modes of this type
can achieve very high amplitude before eventually being damped. In the pseudospectrum interpretation of Trefethen
et al. [17,16], non-normality leads to sensitivity of the spectrum: streamwise vortices are unstable modes of a slightly
perturbed linear stability matrix. Our results are entirely consistent with this interpretation: the ribbon or wire serves
as a speciﬁc realization of a perturbation to the stability matrix, and has indeed rendered the ﬂow linearly unstable
to streamwise vortices.

Future computational work is needed to explore these ﬂows. Calculating complete bifurcation diagrams for the two
cases ρ = 0.086 and ρ = 0.043 is the ﬁrst priority. We plan to study quantitatively and qualitatively the bifurcations
at which the steady 3D ﬂows terminate at low Re and lose stability at high Re. Our goal is to continue 2D and 3D
solutions of the perturbed system to the plane Couette case, ρ = 0.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was in part conducted while the authors were visitors at the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications (IMA) of the University of Minnesota, which is supported by the National Science Foundation. Some of
the results were obtained using the supercomputer facilities of the Institut du D´eveloppement et des Ressources en
Informatique Scientiﬁque (IDRIS). We thank S. Bottin, A. Cherhabili, O. Dauchot, and K. Coughlin for discussing
their results with us prior to publication. We also thank U. Ehrenstein, J. Guckenheimer, P. Manneville, M. Rossi,
and L. N. Trefethen for interesting discussions. We gratefully acknowledge R.D. Henderson for the use of Prism.

[1] B.J. Bayly, S.A. Orszag, and T. Herbert, “Instability mechanisms in shear-ﬂow transition,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 20,

[2] A. Lundbladh and A.V. Johansson, “Direct simulation of turbulent spots in plane Couette ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 229, 499

[3] J.M. Hamilton, J. Kim, and F. Waleﬀe, “Regeneration mechanisms of near-wall turbulence structures,” J. Fluid Mech.

[4] N. Tillmark and P.H. Alfredsson, “Experiments on transition in plane Couette ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 235, 89 (1992).
[5] F. Daviaud, J. Hegseth, and P. Berg´e, “Subcritical transition to turbulence in plane Couette ﬂow,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,

359 (1988).

(1991).

287, 317 (1995).

2511 (1992).

14

[6] O. Dauchot and F. Daviaud, “Streamwise vortices in plane Couette ﬂow,” Phys. Fluids 7, 901 (1995).
[7] S. Bottin, O. Dauchot and F. Daviaud, “Intermittency in a locally forced plane Couette ﬂow,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4377

(1997).

217, 519 (1990).

[8] S. Bottin, O. Dauchot, F. Daviaud, and P. Manneville, “Experimental evidence of streamwise vortices as ﬁnite amplitude

solutions in transitional plane Couette ﬂow,” Phys. Fluids 10, 2597 (1998).

[9] M. Nagata, “Three-dimensional ﬁnite-amplitude solutions in plane Couette ﬂow: bifurcation from inﬁnity,” J. Fluid Mech.

[10] M. Nagata, “Tertiary solutions and their stability in rotating plane Couette ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 358, 357 (1998).
[11] A.J. Conley and H.B. Keller, “Wavy Taylor vortices in plane Couette ﬂow,” preprint.
[12] R.M. Clever and F.H. Busse, “Three-dimensional convection in a horizontal ﬂuid layer subjected to a constant shear,” J.

Fluid Mech. 234, 511 (1992).

J. Mech. B/Fluids 14, 677 (1995).

[13] A. Cherhabili and U. Ehrenstein “Spatially localized two-dimensional ﬁnite-amplitude states in plane Couette ﬂow,” Eur.

[14] A. Cherhabili and U. Ehrenstein, “Finite-amplitude equilibrium states in plane Couette ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 342, 159

[15] K.M. Butler and B.F. Farrell, “Three-dimensional optimal perturbations in viscous shear ﬂow,”, Phys. Fluids A 4, 1637

[16] S.C. Reddy and D.S. Henningson, “Energy growth in viscous channel ﬂows,” J. Fluid Mech. 252, 209 (1993).
[17] L.N. Trefethen, A.E. Trefethen, S.C. Reddy, and T.A. Driscoll, “Hydrodynamic stability without eigenvalues,” Science

[18] S. A. Orszag and L.C. Kells, “Transition to turbulence in plane Poiseuille and plane Couette ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 96, 159

[19] S.A. Orszag and A.T. Patera, “Subcritical transition to turbulence in plane channel ﬂows,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 989 (1980).
[20] K. Coughlin, “Coherent structures and intermittent turbulence in channel ﬂows. Part 1. Coherent structures,” J. Fluid

[21] M. Nishioka, S. Iida, and J. Ichikawa, “An experimental investigation on the stability of plane Poiseuille ﬂow,” J. Fluid

[22] M.F. Schatz, D. Barkley, and H.L. Swinney, “Instability in a spatially periodic open ﬂow,” Phys. Fluids 7, 344 (1995).
[23] A.T. Patera, “A spectral element method for ﬂuid dynamics; laminar ﬂow in a channel expansion,” J. Comput. Phys. 54,

(1997).

(1992).

261, 578 (1993).

(1980).

Mech., submitted.

Mech. 72, 731 (1975).

468 (1984).

University, 1994.

[24] R.D. Henderson, “Unstructured spectral element methods; parallel algorithms and simulations,” Ph.D. thesis, Princeton

[25] R.D. Henderson and G.E. Karniadakis, “Unstructured spectral element methods for simulation of turbulent ﬂows,” J.

[26] G.E. Karniadakis, M. Israeli, and S.A. Orszag, “High-order splitting methods for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equa-

Comput. Phys. 122, 191 (1995).

tions”, J. Comput. Phys. 97, 414 (1991).

[27] D. Barkley and R. Henderson, “Floquet stability analysis of the periodic wake of a circular cylinder,” J. Fluid Mech. 322,

[28] R.D. Henderson and D. Barkley, “Secondary instability in the wake of a circular cylinder,” Phys. Fluids 8, 1683 (1996).
[29] C.K. Mamun and L.S. Tuckerman, “Asymmetry and Hopf bifurcation in spherical Couette ﬂow,” Phys. Fluids, 7, 80

215 (1996).

(1995).

15

