4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

First experimental observation and characterization of the magnetorotational
instability

Daniel R. Sisan, Nicol´as Mujica, W. Andrew Tillotson, Yi-Min Huang, William
Dorland, Adil B. Hassam, Thomas M. Antonsen and Daniel P. Lathrop∗
Department of Physics, IREAP,University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

Angular momentum transport in rotating, electrically conducting ﬂuids or plasmas is a central
problem in astrophysics and geophysics. Theoretical and numerical studies have established the
importance of magnetic ﬁeld dynamics to the instabilities and turbulence in such systems. Here,
we present the ﬁrst observations and a detailed experimental description of the magnetorotational
instability. Our system consists of liquid sodium conﬁned between diﬀerentially rotating spheres,
with an imposed coaxial magnetic ﬁeld. We characterize an array of observed patterns and dy-
namics and compare these to theoretical expectations. The instability increases the transport of
angular momentum through the sodium and diﬀers from prior theory by occurring from a turbulent
background.

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a, 47.20.-k, 95.30.Qd, 91.25.Cw

Diverse astrophysical and planetary phenomena in-
volve the close interplay of rotation and magnetic ﬁeld
generation. In particular, there is theoretical and compu-
tational evidence for the importance [1, 2] of small mag-
netic ﬁelds in destabilizing diﬀerential rotation in elec-
trically conducting ﬂows [3, 4, 5]: a process now often
called the magnetorotational instability. The instability
leads to radial outﬂow of angular momentum, which in
an astrophysical context implies the enhancement of the
rate of inward matter ﬂow [6]. Indeed, magnetic ﬁelds in
diﬀerentially rotating stars and planetary interiors [7, 8],
and the dynamics of accretion disks in protostellar sys-
tems and around compact objects such as black holes [9],
are thought to be aﬀected by this process. In a geophys-
ical or planetary context, the magnetorotational insta-
bility could serve as a mechanism for initial ﬁeld growth
leading to strong ﬁeld dynamos.

All our current understanding and appreciation of the
magnetorotational instability (MRI) derives from theory
and numerical simulation [1, 2, 10]. Until now, there
have been no direct observations of these phenomena in
nature or the laboratory, although the suppression of cen-
trifugal instabilities has been documented [11]. Laminar,
weakly magnetized, Keplerian accretion ﬂows are known
to be MRI-unstable. Simulations show that the associ-
ated MRI driven dynamics eﬃciently transports angular
momentum. However, the development of the MRI in
nature occurs in contexts considerably more complicated
than can be simulated, a primary problem being the vast
range of scales. A central issue addressed here is the
growth of the magnetorotational instability within tur-
bulent ﬂows. This is likely the norm rather than the
exception in nature. It is therefore of great interest to
study MRI dynamics in the laboratory. Our experiment,
which consists of a liquid metal ﬂow between concentric
spheres, oﬀers an excellent opportunity to verify and ex-
tend the theory and simulations of MRI dynamics.

The experimental device (see Fig. 1) consists of sodium
[12] ﬂowing between a rotating inner sphere (radius a =
5.0 cm), and a stationary outer sphere. The inner sphere
is made of high conductivity copper, mounted on a 2.50
cm dia. rotating nonmagnetic stainless steel shaft which
extends along the axis of rotation. The inner sphere ro-
tates between 2.5 to 50 revolutions per second (= Ωo/2π).
The 1.0 cm thick outer stationary vessel is non-magnetic
stainless steel shell (radius b = 15 cm). Due to its poor
electrical conductivity, the outer vessel is relatively pas-
sive in the magnetic ﬁeld dynamics [13]. An external
magnetic ﬁeld, from Bo = 0 to 0.2 T, is applied co-
axially using a pair of electromagnets. We observe the
induced ﬁelds using an array of 30 external Hall probes
[14] and the velocity using ultrasound Doppler velocime-
try [15, 16]. The high electrical conductivity of sodium,
the highest of the liquids [17], allows signiﬁcant inter-
actions between the ﬂuid ﬂow and the currents causing
induced magnetic ﬁelds, and allows an approach toward
geophysical realistic parameters.

In addition to the radius ratio a/b, three important di-
mensionless numbers characterize our experiment. The
magnetic Prandtl number, Pm = ν/η = 8.8 × 10−6, is the
ratio of kinematic viscosity ν to magnetic diﬀusivity η. A
small value of Pm is typical of liquid metals, planetary in-
teriors and other natural systems, but distinguishes them
from matter in accretion ﬂows, for which Pm ∼ 1. The
Lundquist number, S = Bob/η(ρµ)1/2 (where ρ is the
density and µ the magnetic permeability), is the ratio
of the Alfv´en frequency to the resistive decay rate. For
S ∼ 1, system-size magnetic ﬁeld oscillations within the
sodium damp in about one period; shorter wavelengths
are damped more strongly. The magnetic Reynolds num-
ber, Rm = Ωoab/η, characterizes the ability of the ﬂuid
motions to create induced magnetic ﬁelds. Our experi-
ments [18] access the relatively little-explored regime of
parameter space 0 < S < 10 and 0 < Rm < 25. Another

2

FIG. 1: The spherical apparatus and characteristic induced
magnetic ﬁeld instability patterns. The device (a) consists of
a thin stainless spherical outer vessel, a rotating inner copper
sphere, and liquid sodium in between. The line adjacent to
v indicates the location of the velocity measurements. The
resulting dynamics change character under the inﬂuence of an
externally applied magnetic ﬁeld coaxial with the rotation. As
the external ﬁeld increases, one sees states dominated by (b)
a rotating odd pattern with azimuthal wavenumber m = 1
(O1) at Rm = 26 (50 Hz), S = 4.19 (846 G), (c) an even
m = 0 pattern (E0) at Rm = 10.4 (20 Hz), S = 4.37 (881 G),
and (d) a rotating m = 1 even pattern (E1) at Rm = 10.4 (20
Hz), S = 7.08 (1429 G). Red and blue indicate outward and
inward radial (cylindrical) induced magnetic ﬁeld, and green
indicates the null values, in an equal area projection of the
induced magnetic ﬁeld just outside the outer sphere.

important (but dependent) parameter is the Reynolds
number, Re = Rm/Pm. Because of the smallness of
Pm, the Reynolds numbers for our experiments are large
(varying between 1.7 × 105 and 3.4 × 106), implying well-
developed hydrodynamic turbulence.

With no applied magnetic ﬁeld (our base state), we
have examined the mean ﬂow along a chord perpendic-
ular to the axis of rotation.
It has a proﬁle with the
index ζ = 2 + ∂ log Ω/∂ log r in the range ζ ∼ 0.4 − 0.6
except in thin boundary layers near the walls (see Fig.
2). Here, Ω(r) is the rotation rate at a cylindrical ra-
dius r. For astrophysical rotation proﬁles governed by
Kepler’s laws, ζ = 1/2; that is, Ω2r3 is constant. Ac-
cording to the hydrodynamic Rayleigh criterion, ﬂows
are linearly stable for ζ > 0. Nevertheless, we observe
10−20% turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations in the base state,
likely generated in the boundary layers, which will be
fully described elsewhere. Smaller turbulent ﬂuctuations
are also observed in the magnetic ﬁeld in the base state,
due to interactions between the ﬂuid turbulence and the
Earths relatively weak ﬁeld, which is always present in
the laboratory. Proﬁles with ζ < 2 are predicted to be
MRI-unstable, assuming a laminar base state. Precise
stability boundaries have been calculated for liquid met-
als (Pm ∼ 10−6) in cylindrical geometry in both local [19]

FIG. 2: The zero ﬁeld angular momentum and rotation rate
proﬁles for Ωo/2π = 30 Hz (Rm = 16). From ultrasound ve-
locimetry measurements, the mean angular momentum den-
sity (a) shows the system is stable to centrifugal instabili-
ties except for thin boundary layers. The rotation curve (b)
decreases with cylindrical radial distance from the center, a
necessary condition for the base state to be unstable to the
MRI. The smooth curve is a Keplerian proﬁle for comparison.
The inset (c) shows the exponent ζ with the Keplerian value
ζ = 1/2 indicated by a dashed line.

and global [20] limits and for Pm ∼ 1 ﬂows in spherical ge-
ometry [8], and are well understood. Aside from a simple
rescaling with Pm, the theoretical predictions are essen-
tially identical: application of an axial magnetic ﬁeld of
strength suﬃcient to overcome resistivity will destabilize
long-wavelength MRI oscillations.

Our primary observation is that for ﬁxed rotation rate
of the inner sphere, above some threshold external mag-
netic ﬁeld Bc, we observe spontaneous excitation of os-
cillating coupled magnetic and velocity ﬁelds (Fig. 3).
These take the form of a rotating pattern with azimuthal
wavenumber m = 1 (see Fig. 1b). At instability on-
set the applied torque increases (see Fig. 4), as increased
amounts of angular momentum are carried from the inner
sphere to the ﬁxed outer sphere. These observations are
evidence of the destabilization of the magnetorotational
instability.

The ﬁelds and ﬂows consist of toroidal and poloidal
components [21]. Their azimuthal mode numbers m and
their parity with respect to reﬂection through the origin
characterize these components. The primary observed
magnetic ﬁeld instability (Fig. 4) is dominated by an
m = 1 poloidal perturbation that has odd parity. A
toroidal magnetic ﬁeld disturbance is also likely, but our
Hall array, being outside the sodium, can only measure
poloidal components. We denote the poloidal modes with
the notation Em (azimuthal wavenumber m with even

3

FIG. 3: Coupled ﬂuctuations in the velocity and magnetic
ﬁelds. Here the amplitude of the induced ﬁeld for modes O1
and the amplitude of a velocity component below the outer
sphere substantiate that Lorentz forces are key to this insta-
bility. These data were taken at Ωo/2π = 7.5 Hz (Rm = 4);
the velocity was measured 11.5 cm from the outer wall. Each
mode with nonzero azimuthal wave number has two compo-
nents: when they oscillate π/2 out of phase the pattern pre-
cesses. The precession rate depends (nonlinearly) on both
applied ﬁeld strength and rotation rate.

Also shown in Fig.

parity) and Om (azimuthal wavenumber m with odd par-
ity). After our initial O1 instability, as the external mag-
netic ﬁeld strength is further increased, a number of other
modes appear. These include saturated states dominated
by E0 (Fig. 1c), E1 (Fig. 1d), and O2. For applied ﬁelds
many times Bc, the modes often show aperiodic changes
in pattern, rather than simple precession. By varying the
rotation rate and external ﬁeld independently, we have
navigated the (Rm,S) parameter plane and determined
the regions where these other modes dominate (Fig. 5).
5 are predicted MRI stability
boundaries, as obtained from the local, inviscid disper-
sion relation [19, 20] adapted to the present conﬁgura-
tion. The two curves represent the stability boundaries of
modes with kb = 1 (red) and kb = 2 (blue) for wavenum-
ber k. We take the peak rotation rate Ωp in the disper-
sion relation to be the experimentally inferred ﬂuid ro-
tation just outside the inner boundary layer Ωp = Ωo/3.
The correlation between the predicted stability bound-
aries and the experimental observation of the magnetic
ﬁeld oscillations with progressively more spatial structure
is strong evidence that we have observed the magnetoro-
tational instability in our experiment. Although local
stability estimates are formally crude, Goodman and Ji
[20] have shown that they agree surprisingly well with
more sophisticated calculations in cylindrical geometry.
Detailed calculations in a spherical geometry will be pre-
sented elsewhere.

Our primary instability consists of an m = 1 pattern,

FIG. 4: The torque increase and variance of induced ﬁeld co-
eﬃcients as the applied ﬁeld is varied. We characterize the
saturated state by the mode with the largest variance. These
measurements were taken for a ﬁxed rotation rate of 30 Hz
(Rm = 16). The data reﬂect ﬂuctuations in the coeﬃcients
from their means. The E0 state shows signiﬁcant mean ampli-
tude (squared average shown in green, variance of ﬂuctuations
in blue), and does so at the same applied ﬁeld values where it
shows ample ﬂuctuations. At zero ﬁeld, the base state torque
(including confounding errors due to seals) here is 1.14 N-m,
the black curve shows the increase in torque above this base
value.

in contrast to the axisymmetric instabilities that dom-
inate analogous cylindrical situations. Spherical calcu-
lations by Kitchatinov and R¨udiger have shown m = 1
instabilities in addition to axisymmetric instabilities [8].
This diﬀerences can be understood by contrasting the dif-
ferent symmetries of the base states. In the cylindrical
case, the base state is unchanged by axial translations
and rotations. Such situations generically show insta-
bilities to axially periodic patterns, and are known to
do so for the magnetorotational instability [20, 22, 23].
Our base state lacks the axial translation symmetry, but
has approximate rotational and reﬂectional symmetry.
In such situations, instabilities involving rotating non-
axisymmetric patterns (Hopf bifurcations) are generic
[24].
Indeed, the amplitude of our disturbance shows
the characteristic rise of a Hopf bifurcation, for both the
induced magnetic (see Fig. 4) and velocity ﬁelds. How-
ever, the onset is made imperfect by background turbu-
lence and possibly geometric imperfections. In a similar
system to ours, Hollerbach and Skinner [25] found, nu-
merically, rotating non-axisymmetric patterns, though at
much lower Reynolds number.

These measurements, beyond being the ﬁrst direct ob-
servation of the magnetorotational instability in a phys-
ical system, have important implications for our under-
standing of magnetohydrodynamic instabilities. They es-
tablish that the magnetorotational instability, and a sig-
niﬁcant increase in angular momentum transport, occur

4

[1] S.A. Balbus and J.F. Hawley, Astrophys. J. 376, 214

[2] S.A. Balbus and J.F. Hawley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1

[3] E.P. Velikhov, Sov. Phys. JETP 36, 1398 (1959).
[4] S. Chandrasekhar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 46, 253

[5] S. Chandrasekhar, Hyrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Sta-

bility, (Dover, New York, 1961).

[6] J.E. Pringle, Ann. Rev. of Astro. and Astrophys. 19, 137

(1991).

(1998).

(1960).

(1981).

[7] S.A. Balbus and J.F. Hawley, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.

[8] L.L. Kitchatinov and G. R¨udiger, Mon. Not. R. Astron.

[9] M.C. Begelman, Science 300, 1898 (2003).
[10] J.F. Hawley, S.A. Balbus and J.M. Stone, Astrophys. J.

[11] R.J. Donnelly and M. Ozima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 497

266, 769 (1994).

Soc. 286, 757 (1997).

554, L49 (2001).

(1960).

[12] The experiments were carried out in liquid sodium tem-

◦
perature controlled to 105 ± 5

C.

[13] N.L. Peﬄey, A.B. Cawthorne and D.P. Lathrop, Phys.

Rev. E 61, 5287 (2000).

[14] The induced ﬁeld data from the 30 probe array were pro-
jected onto the poloidal vector spherical harmonics of
orders one through four using least squares, giving 24
Gauss coeﬃcients: one per axisymmetric mode, two per
nonzero m mode. Typical experiments consisted of in-
creasing the applied ﬁeld from ambient to the maximum
external ﬁeld (typically 2000 G) in 22 G increments for
a ﬁxed rotation rate.

[15] Y. Takeda, Nuc. Eng. and Design 126, 277 (1991).
[16] The velocity measurements were obtained using pulsed
ultrasound Doppler velocimetry at 4 MHz. Oxide parti-
cles that occur inevitably in our sodium scatter sound
and track the ﬂow [15]. We constructed an ultrasound
transducer with a PTFE surface coated by a thin ﬁlm of
silicon rubber in order to ensure good wetting with the
sodium. The chord of velocity measurements was 6.3 cm
below the equatorial plane and oﬀ axis by 4.3 cm at the
nearest point.

[17] P.A. Davidson, An Introduction to Magnetohydrodynam-
ics, (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2001), pp. 417.
[18] D.R. Sisan, W.L. Shew and D.P. Lathrop, Phys. Earth

and Planet. Int. 135, 137 (2003).

[19] H. Ji, J. Goodman and A. Kageyama, Mon. Not. R. As-

tron. Soc. 325, L1 (2001).

[20] J. Goodman and H. Ji, J. Fluid Mech. 462, 365 (2002).
[21] E. Bullard and H. Gellman, Proc. Roy. Sec. A 247, 213

[22] W.T. Kim and E.C. Ostriker, Astrophys. J. 540, 372

(1954).

(2000).

[23] K. Noguchi, V.I. Pariev, S.A. Colgate, H.F. Beckley and

J. Nordhaus, Astrophys. J. 575, 1151 (2002).

[24] E. Knobloch, Phys. Fluids 8, 1446 (1996).
[25] R. Hollerbach and S. Skinner, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lon. A

257, 785 (2001).

FIG. 5: Phase diagram of saturated states. Regions are de-
ﬁned by the mode with the largest variance of ﬂuctuations
(see Fig. 4). Some secondary instabilities show hysteresis;
these data are for increasing S, for ﬁxed Rm. The states have
regions associated with background turbulence (tb), mode
O1 dominated, E0 dominated, followed by E1, O0, E1, and
O2 modes. The lowest Rm and S numbers for these states
((cid:3)) are obtained by extrapolating the maximum saturated
state amplitude versus Rm (a linear trend) to zero amplitude.
Also shown are theoretical stability boundaries for the longest
wavelength (red) and second longest wavelength (blue) insta-
bilities, calculated from the local MRI dispersion relation.

in the presence of pre-existing hydrodynamic turbulence.
We quantify the angular momentum transport and the
saturated values of magnetic ﬁeld over a range of pa-
rameter values. Direct tests of theoretical and numerical
predictions against these experimental data will likely in-
crease our understanding of these important phenomena.
The diverse dynamics we observe oﬀer many opportu-
nities for comparison. Finally, this geometry may well
be capable, at high Rm, of showing a dynamo instabil-
ity. While the dynamo instability is distinct from MRI,
it would be important to examine a system capable of
showing both.

Acknowledgements: We would like to acknowledge
helpful discussions with: John Rodgers, Yasushi Takeda,
James Stone, Eve Ostriker, James Drake, Edward Ott
and Rainer Hollerbach. This work was supported by the
National Science Foundation and the Department of En-
ergy of the United States of America.

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email:
dpl@complex.umd.edu

