Free Surface Deformation and Cusp Formation During the

Drainage of a Very Viscous Fluid

Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801 USA.

Sahraoui Cha¨ıeb∗

Abstract

We report an experimental study of the deformation of the free surface of a very viscous ﬂuid

when drained out of a container through a circular oriﬁce. At some critical height of the ﬂuid, the

free surface deforms and forms a dimple. At later times, this dimple becomes a cusp. We found

that the height of the dimple measured from the bottom of the tank as well as the curvature of

the dimple before the cusp formation, follows power laws behaviors. We found that this behavior

was due to an interplay between viscous pressure and surface tension.

PACS numbers: 47.20.Gv, 68.03.Cd, 52.55.Lf,47.15.Gf

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ email: sch@uiuc.edu

1

When a normal ﬂuid, such as water, is drained out of a container such as a bath tub

the free surface deforms and, if inertia dominates, a whirlpool forms. This whirlpool is in

the form of a vortex or a dimple which apex will be at the level of the bottom surface of

the tank just above the draining hole [1]. We have noticed that if the liquid we drain is

very viscous, or in other words, when viscous eﬀects dominate the ﬂow, the dynamics and

the form of the deformed free surface are no longer the same. The dimple appears far away

from the drainage hole in the vertical direction, and it evolves into a sharp dimple at early

stages of the draining. In this paper, we report such eﬀect where the free surface of a very

viscous ﬂuid deforms into a dimple when drained from a cylindrical container. At later times

this dimple evolves into a cusp. Such free surface deformations are also found in selective

withdrawal[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], where the ﬂow is steady whereas our ﬂow is gravity driven
and non-steady. We, however, ﬁtted the proﬁle of the dimple to a power law of the z ∝ xα

and found that the power α is a linear function of time. This might be an eﬀect of the

non-steadiness of the interface motion.

A scheme of the set up and the axis notation is displayed in ﬁgure 1. We used viscous

liquids (from the PDMS family: called also silicon oils) which viscosity ranges from 10 to

1000 Pa.s. (viscosity of water is 0.001 Pa. s.). The ﬂuids are drained out of the container

under the eﬀect of gravity through an axisymmetrically placed circular oriﬁce of diameter

ranging from 1 to 4 mm at the bottom of a 107 mm diameter cylindrical container.

As the liquid drains, the liquid-air interface dimples above the drain hole. In ﬁgure 2, we

show a sequence of how the smooth dimple evolves in time to become cusp-like. Notice the

transition from a smooth dimple in ﬁgure 2a to a sharp interface in ﬁgure 2b. In ﬁgure 2c

the free surface enters the hole and the bottom of the cusp is far below the bottom of the

container. As the level of the liquid falls during the liquid drainage, the dimple becomes

sharper. The dimple in the liquid-air interface breaks up at some critical height hf measured

from the bottom surface of the container and begins to entrain a thread of air. The moment

where the thread of air bubbles appear will be called tf and will be associated to hf . In

other words, at hf the interface undergoes a topological transition in a manner analogous

to the pinch-oﬀ of a viscous thread. At the transition, the curvature κ of the interface at

the dimple becomes inﬁnite, i.e. a cusp forms.

We measured the height of the dimple hf and its corresponding time tf with an error

of 1 mm and 1 sec respectively. This is checked by looking at the video frame just before

2

some air bubbles start nucleating at the dimple’s apex. We use standard video with a frame
frequency of 30 frames per second. We deﬁne the non dimensional number ˜h = h−hf

D where
D is the hole diameter as shown in ﬁgure 1. The ﬂow rate is varied by varying the hole
diameter. We measured the dependence of ˜h versus the dimensionless time scale deﬁned in
our case as τ = ν(t−tf )

. In this expression ν is the kinematic viscosity µ/ρ. The result is

D2

displayed in ﬁgure 3. The Log-Log plot shows a power law dependence and the line is best
ﬁt by a 2/3 power law: ˜h ∼ τ 2/3.

We monitored, h∞,which is the height of the liquid far away from the cusp region as

shown in Fig. 1, versus time and found the ﬂow rate which gives the velocity at the draining
is equal to 3.3 × 10−3 for the liquid of viscosity
hole. The Reynolds number deﬁned as ρU R
µ
10 Pa. s. and is equal to 2.7 × 10−6 for a liquid of viscosity 100 Pa.s. Where ρ is the density

of the liquid, U is the ﬂow velocity of the liquid at the hole and R is the exit-hole radius

This cusp formation is analogous to the selective withdrawal and to drop pinch oﬀ. Here

the critical dimple height hf is analogous to the point z0 for thread pinch-oﬀ [7]. The distance
between the current dimple height and hf , dh = h − hf , is analogous to the minimal thread

radius for thread pinch-oﬀ [5, 6]. As the interface’s dimple sharpens to a cusp, the capillary
stress γκ diverges. To check this ideas we measured the radius of curvature R of the dimple,

by ﬁtting it to a polynomial, while it is still smooth before the appearance of the bubbles,

deﬁned in the magniﬁed area of ﬁgure 1. The plot in ﬁgure 4 is the value of the curvature
˜R = (R − Rf)/D as deﬁned in ﬁg 1 versus the quantity τ . Similarly Rf is the radius of

curvature just before the nucleation of the bubbles. From ﬁgure 4, we notice that the cusp

radius of curvature scales like τ 2. Notice that the smallest radius we could measure is around

200 µm. Although it is expected that the cusp curvature increases above this value, we do

not have enough video resolution to go beyond this value at which numerical noise becomes

important. The inset of ﬁgure 4 shows how fast the radius of curvature drops in time and

is indeed a signature of a ﬁnite time singularity process.

If we suppose that, before the cusp is developed, the only forces present in the system

are the pressure drop at the hole and the pressure diﬀerence across the interface, then the

scaling can be self consistently derived as the following: The divergence in capillary stress is

balanced by a divergence in the viscous stress at the exit hole and which scales as βµQ/(dh)3

[9], where Q is the ﬂux of the ﬂuid out of the drain hole, β is a number of the order of unity

and µ is the viscosity. Here we are assuming that the ﬂow associated with the dimple

3

formation is a sink ﬂow which is veriﬁed experimentally by monitoring the ﬂow far and close

to the hole by monitoring the ﬂow using PIV (Particle Image Velocimetry) and we used

passive tracers such as small bubbles to monitor the displacement of a volume element of

the liquid. The air bubble we followed is around 200 µm in diameter with a rise velocity

smaller than 10 µm/sec measured by tracking the bubble path. Since the ﬂow at the hole

has a velocity of 1 -2 mm/sec, we suppose that the ascending velocity of the tracer bubble is

negligible over the time scale of the observation and the bubble follows essentially the ﬂow.

In ﬁgure 5, we depict the position r of the tracer versus the time before it reaches the

hole. Here r is the position of a point in the ﬂuid where the origin r = 0 is at the center
of the hole at the level of the bottom surface and t∗ is the time at which the tracer passes
through the hole. We plot r versus t∗ − t. The ﬁt to the plot in ﬁgure 5, shows that the
particle’s position scales like (t∗ − t).33 for long times and far away from the hole, and it
scales like (t∗ − t).5 for short times or closer to the hole. The scaling of r versus t∗ − t closer

to the hole can be explained by writing the equation for a stokes ﬂow, knowing that the

pressure drop at the hole is given by the poiseuille formula which gives the expression of the

pressure gradient along the hole and the ﬂow rate, the geometry and the ﬂuid properties

[11].

From this equation [11] we know that the only quantity on which v can depend, other

than z and t is ν. From these three quantities only one dimensionless combination can be

found which is η = z/(νt)2. From this scaling we note that the vertical distance z goes like
t1/2. This explain the behavior r ∝ (t∗ − t)1/2.

We interpret the second result with a simple (heuristic) argument as the following: When

the tracer is far from the singularity, the velocity ﬁeld is the due to a dipole, since the

singularity has an image across the horizontal plate, due to the no-slip condition. We know

from low reynolds number hydrodynamics [9] that the dipolar contribution to the velocity
ﬁeld, due to a sink ﬂow, is such that v ∼ 1/r2, and since the tracer is passive as we pointed it
out earlier in the text, the velocity is simply dr/dt, solving in t, we ﬁnd that r ∼ (t∗ − t)1/3,

which is the behavior found experimentally. This proves experimentally that the ﬂow in

the tank is indeed a sink ﬂow. This property will allow us to use the results of sink ﬂow

mainly the pressure drop at the sink which is given by βµQ/(dh)3. We will suppose our

process as quasi-static and we can balance capillary forces and viscous forces due to the sink
ﬂow at every step of the drainage. From the balance γκ ≈ βµQ/(dh)3 we see that close to

4

the formation of the cusp, κ ≈ 1/(dh)3. Measurements of κ and dh show that they have

the following power law scaling with the time remaining before the formation of the cusp:
κ ∝ (tf − t)−2 and dh ∝ (tf − t)2/3. Although the scaling is explained self-consistently, it is

unclear at present what determines the values of these exponents. These exponents and the

curvature drop in the inset of Fig. 4, are a signature of ﬁnite time singularity.

In summary, we have examined the motion of an air-liquid interface due to drainage at

very low reynolds numbers where viscosity is dominant. We found that the prior to cusp

formation, the interface height and the dimple curvature follow scaling laws dictated by the

interplay between surface tension and viscous pressure at the drainage hole.

SC thanks Martine Benamar, Howard Brenner, Michael Brenner, Denis Gueyﬃer for

helpfull discussions and G. H. McKinley for his support. This work was initiated during the

year 1999-2000 and supported by a NASA grant NAG3-2155.

[1] B. Lubin and G. Springer, J. Fluid. Mech. 29, 385 (1967).

[2] G. Hocking, J. Austral. Math. Soc. Ser. B 26, 470 (1985).

[3] S. Blake and G. Ivey, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 27, 153 (1986).

[4] J. Lister, J. Fluid Mech. 198, 231 (1989).

[5] I. Cohen, M. P. Brenner, J. Eggers, and S. Nagel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1147 (1999).

[6] X. Shi, M. Brenner, and S. Nagel, Science 265, 219 (1994).

[7] J. Eggers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3458 (1993).

[8] J. Eggers and T. Dupont, J. Fluid. Mech. 262, 205 (1994).

[9] J. Happel and H. Brenner, Low Reynolds Number Hydrodynamics (Prentice-Hall, Inc., New

York (USA), 1965).

[10] G.I.Taylor, Proc. 11th Intl. Congr. Appl. Mech. Munich (1964).

[11] The pressure gradient along the z axis of a cylinder if given by: ∂P

πD4 where the z axis
is the vertical axis along gravity, Q is the ﬂow rate, µ is the viscosity and D is the radius of

∂z = 8µQ

the cylinder. The Navier-Stokes equation becomes ∂v

∂t = 8νQ

πD4 + ν ∂2v
∂z2 .

5

Fig. 1: S. Chaieb and G.H. McKinley "How toencapsulate"

FIG. 1: The sketch of the set up and the deﬁnition of R and hf which is the radius of curvature

of the cusped surface and the height of the hollow dimple that evolves to a cusp respectively.

6

FIG. 2: Sketch of the time series of the drainage process. In a, we display early time of the drainage

process. Notice that the surface is smooth and the dimple is not singular. In b, Intermediate time

in the draining process. Notice the singular aspect of the dimple. This picture was taken just before

the break-up into a thread of droplets. In picture c, the tip of the dimple is now entering the hole

and is following the thread which is a hollow tube where air is being encapsulated. Another liquid

can be encapsulated too (later in the text.). The viscosity of the liquid used in these pictures is

103 Pa. s.

7

1

~

h

0.1

FIG. 3: The normalized height of the dimpled region just before “cusping” versus the normalized

time scale. The closed circles correspond to viscosity of 105 cSt and the open circles correspond to

a viscosity of 104 cSt. The data are best ﬁt by a 2/3 power law.

104

105

 τ

.

8

100

~
R

10

1

100

)
m
m
(
 
R

10

1

0.1

2000

1

9

0.1

0.1

3000

4000

t (sec.)

10

FIG. 4: The normalized radius of curvature of the dimple, as deﬁned in ﬁgure 1, versus the

normalized time scale. The line is the best ﬁt of the data to the power 2. Inset: The drop of the

radius of curvature versus time.

t
10

)

m
m

(
r

1

Hole Diameter

0.1

0.01

0.1

1
t*-t

10

100

FIG. 5: Position of a passive tracer versus the time elapsed between the onset of the draining
and the time t∗ when the tracer disappears in the hole of the container and the coordinates origin

(r = 0) corresponds to the center of the hole at the level of the bottom of the plate. The lines are

1/3 power law (open circles) and 1/2 power law (opened squares). The crossover between these

two tendencies lies at the hole diameter. These data points were obtained for the same run.

10

