4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Critical Fluctuation of Wind Reversals in Convective Turbulence

Rudolph C. Hwa1, C. B. Yang2, S. Bershadskii3, J. J. Niemela3, and K. R. Sreenivasan3
1Institute of Theoretical Science and Department of Physics
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-5203, USA
2Institute of Particle Physics, Hua-Zhong Normal University, Wuhan 430079, P. R. China and
3International Center of Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera 11, I-34100 Trieste, Italy
(Dated: January 17, 2014)

The irregular reversals of wind direction in convective turbulence are found to have ﬂuctuating
intervals that can be related to critical behavior. It is shown that the net magnetization of a 2D Ising
lattice of ﬁnite size ﬂuctuates in the same way. Detrended ﬂuctuation analysis of the wind reversal
time series results in a scaling behavior that agrees with that of the Ising problem. The properties
found suggest that the wind reversal phenomenon exhibits signs of self-organized criticality.

In turbulent thermal convection at high Rayleigh num-
bers (Ra) it has recently been observed that there exists
not only large-scale circulating motion, called mean wind,
but also abrupt reversals of the wind direction, whose
physical origin is still largely unknown [1]-[9]. For our
purposes, Ra is simply a non-dimensional measure of the
temperature diﬀerence between the bottom and the top
plates of the container within which the convective mo-
tion occurs. Metastable states have been suggested to
describe the two opposite directions of the wind, and the
reversal of its direction is to be understood in terms of
the imbalance between buoyancy eﬀects and friction [7].
Instead of searching for the origin of the wind reversals
in the framework of hydrodynamical considerations, we
investigate in this paper the possibility of understanding
the phenomenon in a totally diﬀerent context, namely:
critical phenomenon. We shall ﬁnd a measure to quantify
the ﬂuctuations in the wind direction, and then demon-
strate that its behavior corresponds to one exhibited by a
system undergoing a second-order phase transition. We
then perform a detrended ﬂuctuation analysis to deter-
mine the detailed properties of the ﬂuctuations of the
wind, more speciﬁcally its scaling behavior.

The experimental data that we analyze are the same
as those reported in [6] and studied in [7]. By varying
the pressure and lowering the temperature of the gas,
the Rayleigh number could be varied between 106 and
1016. Further details of the apparatus can be found in
[6]. We focus on the data that give the wind speed and
direction for a continuous period of up to one week at
Ra= 1.5 × 1011. Figure 1 shows a small segment of the
wind velocity data for 6.5 hr, starting at an arbitrary
time. Note how the wind changes direction suddenly in
the time scale of that ﬁgure. We proceed directly to an
interpretation of the ﬂuctuations of the wind velocity.

In a fully developed turbulent convection at high Ra
there are two opposing dynamical features. One is the
emission of plumes from the top and bottom boundary
layers; they occur at random locations and at random
times in varying sizes. The other is the existence of mean
wind that rotates in one direction or another, making
rapid reversals at seemingly random intervals. We regard
the former as the disordered motion of the components
of a complex system, and the latter as the ordered mo-

tion of the whole of the system. For low Ra (say below
109), the ordered motion is not suﬃciently impeded by
the disordered motion to cause reversals of the wind di-
rection. At high Ra, the cumulative eﬀect of the many
plumes that is strong enough to reverse the wind direc-
tion. The system then proceeds as before except that the
wind rotates in the opposite direction with varying mag-
nitude until another reversal occurs due to the collective
action of the disorganized plumes. If the system is at a
critical state, whether self-organized or not, the competi-
tion between the ordered and disordered motions leads to
the wind switching directions at irregular intervals of all
scale. The probability of occurrence of the wind duration
τ between reversals should satisfy a power law

p(τ ) ∼ τ

−γ

(1)

as a manifestation of criticality. Such a power law has
been found in the data [7]. The discussion above de-
scribes our view of the origin of such a scaling behavior.
We now advance the idea that the above description of
the wind and plumes in convective turbulence in terms
of ordered and disordered motions has its corresponding
counterparts in the 2D Ising model of critical behavior.
In the Ising system of near-neighbor interactions without
external magnetic ﬁeld the lattice spins tend to align in
the same direction except for the random disorientation
due to thermal ﬂuctuation. For a ﬁnite lattice the net
magnetization, M , is non-vanishing. For T < Tc, the
critical temperature, M is likely to persist in the same
direction for longer time in lattice-spin updating than at
higher T . At T > Tc the thermal interaction dominates,
and M is more likely to ﬂip sign more frequently upon
updating. The ﬂuctuation of the signs of M is therefore
a property that reﬂects the tension between the ordered
and disordered interactions of the whole system.

Since the mean wind is a global phenomenon in a vessel
of ﬁnite volume, it is sensible for us to associate the wind
direction with the sign of M of the Ising lattice of ﬁnite
size. We can then map wind reversal to the reversal of
M upon updating the lattice spins in a simulation. The
plumes are the disordered ﬂuctuations that correspond to
the spin ﬂuctuations due to thermal agitation, and the
wind is the ordered motion that can change direction just

]

1
-

s
 
m
c
[
 
)
t
(

V

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

time [hr]

FIG. 1: A segment of the data on wind velocity ﬂuctuation
at Ra= 1.5×1011. The data were obtained from an apparatus
that was essentially a cylindrical container of 50 cm diameter
and 50 cm height, ﬁlled with cryogenic helium gas. Two sen-
sors were placed outside the boundary layer on the sidewall
of the container near the middle section of the container, and
were separated vertically by a distance of 1.27 cm.

as the magnetization can change sign when enough lat-
tice spins change directions. The key connection between
the two problems is the mapping of the real time in tur-
bulence to the time of updating the Ising conﬁgurations.
It is therefore crucial that each conﬁguration has some
memory of the previous conﬁguration before updating;
hence we employ the Metropolis algorithm, which does
precisely this. It should be noted that we are entering
into a rather unexplored territory where the process of
computer simulation itself is endowed with some physical
signiﬁcance, quite unrelated to the large body of analyt-
ical work that has been devoted to the Ising model of
inﬁnite lattice. Our task is to show that the wind re-
versal problem corresponds to the Ising problem of ﬁnite
lattice at the critical temperature.

To be more speciﬁc, we consider a square lattice of size
L2, where L is taken to be 255, an odd number. We start
with the L2 site spins having a random distribution of ±1
values. We then visit each site and determine from the
usual near-neighbor interaction whether its spin should
be reversed: yes, if the energy is lowered by the ﬂip; if
not lowered, the ﬂip can still take place according to a
thermal distribution speciﬁed by temperature T . One
time step is taken by the whole system when all sites
are updated. We take 3 × 105 time steps in total, and
divide the whole series into 30 segments. The values of
M at each of the 104 time points in each segment are
discretized to ±1, according to M >
<0. A continuous string
of M of one sign, either +1 or −1, forms a duration that
is analogous to the mean wind rotating in one direction.
The reversals of M correspond to the reversals of wind.
Near the critical point, durations of all lengths can occur.

2

Before considering the issue of criticality for a ﬁnite lat-
tice, let us discuss the measure that we shall use for quan-
tiﬁying the duration ﬂuctuations appropriate for both
the wind and Ising problems. The experimental data
on wind consist of 8 segments, each having T = 10, 282
time points. For the Ising case we have 30 segments, each
having T = 104, roughly the same as wind data. Let N
denote the number of reversals in a segment. With the
locations of the reversals denoted by ti, i = 1, · · ·, N , de-
ﬁne τi = ti+1 − ti to be the ith duration (or gap), where
t0 and tN +1 are assigned to be the left and right ends of
the segment, respectively. Now, deﬁne the moment [10]

Gq =

1
N + 1

N

(cid:16)

X
i=0

q

τi
T (cid:17)

,

(2)

where q is any positive integer. Clearly, G0 = 1 and G1 =
1/(N + 1). Gq is a measure that quantiﬁes the pattern
of reversals in each segment. For large q, Gq is a small
number, since τi/T is small. Its value can be dominated
by a few large gaps, as when T < Tc, or may become
signiﬁcant from the sum over many small contributions
due to many small gaps, as when T > Tc. For a measure
of the ﬂuctuations of Gq from segment to segment, we
deﬁne an entropy-like quantity [10, 11]

Sq = − hGq ln Gqi ,

(3)

where h· · ·i implies an average over all segments. For
brevity we shall refer to the study of the time series in
terms of Sq as the gap analysis. In Fig. 2 we show by
ﬁlled circles the result of the gap analysis on the wind
data at Ra= 1.5 × 1011. It is evident that for q ≥ 2 the
points can be well ﬁtted by a straight line, shown by the
solid line, exhibiting an exponential behavior for Sq

ln Sq = −λq + λ0 ,

λ = 0.264 .

(4)

For the Ising simulation we must ﬁrst decide on the
proper value of the critical temperature Tc for a ﬁnite
lattice. For an inﬁnite lattice its value has been deter-
mined analytically to be 2.269 in units of J/kB, where
J is the coupling strength of near-neighbor interaction
and kB the Boltzmann constant [12]. For a ﬁnite lattice
the value of Tc should be higher. We have performed
the simulation of our Ising system at three values of T ,
In Fig.
and determined the properties of M reversal.
2 we show the results of our calculated values of Sq at
T = 2.305, 2.310 and 2.315. Only the one at T = 2.310
(lowered by a factor of 2 for clarity) shows a nearly linear
dependence in the plot. The dashed line is a linear ﬁt of
the points in open circle, giving a slope of λ = 0.261.
At the two neighboring values of T , the q dependencies
of logSq (shown by triangles and squares) are not linear,
the values at high q being higher than at T = 2.310.
The linear behavior at T = 2.310 is almost the same
as in the wind reversal problem, as can be seen visually
by the dash-dot line, which is a parallel transport of the
solid line for comparison, but displaced slightly from the

dashed line to avoid overlap. We regard T = 2.31 as the
critical temperature Tc in our Ising system, since it has
the unique property of being diﬀerent from those of the
neighboring T on both sides. When T < Tc, the gaps are
longer and Gq is larger at large q (but still ≪ 1) with
the consequence that Sq is larger. When T > Tc, the
gaps are shorter, but many gaps can contribute in the
sum in Eq. (2), resulting in Gq still being larger at large
q with the consequence that Sq is also larger. It is only
at the critical point that gaps of all sizes can occur, re-
sulting in Gq to be smaller and therefore Sq also smaller
at large q. Thus the exponential decrease of Sq is a sig-
nature of criticality. The value of Tc obtained here is in
accord with the result of another calculation, in which
the normalized factorial moments are found to exhibit
scaling behavior at the critical point, diﬀerent from the
non-scaling behaviors at neighboring T [13]. In that cal-
culation the measure studied quantiﬁes the ﬂuctuation of
the cluster sizes in an Ising system on a square lattice of
size L = 288, for which Tc is found to be 2.315.

−1

10

q

S

−2

10

−3

10

T=2.305
T=2.315
T=2.310 (/2)
wind

2

4

q

6

FIG. 2: Moments in the gap analysis of wind reversal (ﬁlled
circles) and magnetization reversal in Ising lattice (open sym-
bols) for diﬀerent temperatures. The open circles are lowered
by a factor of 2 to give space for clarity. The solid line is a
linear ﬁt of ﬁlled circles, and the dashed line is a linear ﬁt of
open circles. The dash-dot line is parallel to the solid line,
placed near the dashed line for comparison.

The normalizations of Sq for the wind and Ising prob-
lems are not the same, since the average numbers N of
reversals are diﬀerent. However, the exponential behav-
iors are remarkably identical. The q dependence of Sq is
a quantitative measure of the ﬂuctuation behavior of the
reversals. The fact that the slope λ is the same for both
the wind and magnetization problems suggests strongly
that the wind reversal in convective turbulence at high
Ra is a critical phenomenon. Moreover, since we have not
tuned any adjustable parameter in the wind problem to
bring the system to the critical point, as we have done for
the Ising system by varying T , we conclude that the wind
reversal phenomenon is a manifestation of self-organized

3

criticality (S0C) [14].

We now search for a power-law behavior that charac-
(For other such
terizes changes in the wind direction.
eﬀorts, see [7]). Our method is the detrended ﬂuctua-
tion analysis (DFA), which has been found to reveal the
scale-independent nature of time series in a variety of
problems, ranging from heartbeat irregularity [15] and
EEG [16] to economics [17]. In that analysis we look for
scaling behavior in the RMS deviation of the wind veloc-
ity from local linear trends. Given the time series of the
wind velocity V (t) over a total range of Tmax, we divide
it into B equal bins of width k, discarding the remainder
Tmax − Bk. Let ¯Vb(t) denote the linear ﬁt of V (t) in the
bth bin. The variance of the deviation of V (t) from the
local trend, ¯Vb(t), in bins of size k is deﬁned by

F 2(k) =

[V (t) − ¯Vb(t)]2 ,

(5)

1
B

B

t2

1
k

X
b=1

X
t=t1

where t1 = 1 + (b − 1)k and t2 = bk, measured in units
of ∆t = 5 sec, so that the values of t are dimensionless
integers that count the time points in the data. The goal
is to study the behavior of the RMS ﬂuctuations F (k),
as k is varied. If there is no characteristic scale in the
problem, then F (k) should have a scaling behavior

F (k) ∝ kα .

(6)

This power law cannot be valid for arbitrarily large k
because the series V (t) is bounded, so for very large k
the linear trend is just the V (t) = 0 line, and the RMS
ﬂuctuation F (k) must become independent of k. Thus we
expect lnF (k) to saturate and deviate from (6) at some
large k. We note parenthetically that we have applied
DFA to the unintegrated time series V (t), which is a
departure from the usual practice.

wind
seg1
seg2
seg3
seg4

8

6

4

2

0

−2

)
k
(
F
 
n

l

+1.0
+0.5

Ising
T=2.310

2

4

ln k

6

8

FIG. 3: Scaling behaviors of F (k) in DFA of wind reversal
(ﬁlled symbols) and magnetization reversal in Ising lattice at
the critical temperature (open circles). Lines are linear ﬁts.

In Fig. 3 we show F (k) in a log-log plot for four equal
segments of the complete wind data in solid symbols.

The segment seg1 is for time running from 0 to 116,435
s, corresponding to Tmax = 23, 287; other segments all
have the same length. We have limited the maximum
bin size to 2,580, so that even for the largest bin the ﬂuc-
tuations can be averaged over 9 bins. Evidently, there
is a good scaling for each segment. The points for seg3
and seg4 are shifted upwards by the quantities indicated
in order to give clarity without overlap. Note that the
seg1 data do not have the same magnitude of F (k) as
the other segments; yet the scaling exponents are essen-
tially the same. The deviation from the straight lines at
the upper end is the saturation eﬀect already discussed.
There is another short region of scaling with a higher
slope at low k. It is a consequence of ﬂuctuations of the
velocity within one direction of the wind, whose presence
is evident in Fig. 1. Since the critical behavior identiﬁed
here refers to wind reversals, and not to ﬂuctuations of
the wind velocity within one direction, we should ignore
the lower short scaling region.

In the scaling region to which we pay attention here,
the slopes are α=1.20, 1.20, 1.21 and 1.22, for seg1 to
seg4, respectively. The deviations among the segments
are obviously small. The average value is

α = 1.21.

(7)

This large value of α implies a smoother landscape com-
pared to the rough time series of white noise that is char-
acterized by complete unpredictability [15]. Indeed, the
ﬂuctuations of the wind reversal time series has gaps of
all sizes, the signature of critical behavior that is char-
acterized by 1/f noise [14]. It is interesting to compare
our result with the properties of the power spectral den-
sity for the velocity found in Ref. [18], where a scaling
behavior is shown to exist with a slope roughly -7/5 (not
by ﬁtting) in the region −3 < log f < −1.8. That range

4

of frequency corresponds to 4.1 < ln(1/f ) < 6.9. If we
identify the values of k in DFA to the time scale 1/f , then
that range of ln(1/f ) corresponds to the range of ln k in
Fig. 3, in which we ﬁnd the scaling behavior with the
exponent α given in Eq. (7). That value of α is not too
diﬀerent from 7/5. The scaling behavior found in DFA
uses shorter segments of the whole data and exhibits the
power law more precisely, from which the value of α can
be more accurately determined.

We now apply DFA to the Ising problem. We consider
10 segments of the M reversal time series of the Ising
lattice set at Tc, each segment having 104 time points.
From the F (k) determined in each segment, we average
over all segments and show the resultant dependence on
k in Fig. 3 by the open circles. Clearly, the points can
be well ﬁtted by a straight line. The slope is

αM = 1.22,

(8)

which is essentially the same as that in Eq. (7) for wind
reversal. With the equivalence of these two scaling be-
haviors established, we have found stronger evidence that
the wind reversal problem is a critical phenomenon.

To summarize, we have studied the time series of wind
reversal in convective turbulence by two methods (gap
analysis and detrended ﬂuctuation analysis) and applied
the same methods to the time series of the reversal of the
net magnetization of a 2D Ising lattice. The same results
are obtained for both problems. We therefore can assert
that wind reversal exhibits all the essential properties
characteristic of a critical behavior; apparently requiring
no tuning, it can be regarded as self-organized.

This work was supported, in part, by the U. S. Depart-
ment of Energy under Grant No. DE-FG03-96ER40972,
and by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
DMR-95-29609.

[1] R. Krishnamurti and L. N. Howard, Proc. Natl. Acad.

(2000).

Sci. U.S.A. 78, 1981 (1981).

[2] M. Sano, X.-Z. Wu, and A. Libchaber, Phys. Rev. A 40,

[3] S. Ciliberto, S. Cioni, and C. Laroche, Phys. Rev. E 54,

[4] X.-L. Qiu, S.-H. Yao, and P. Tong, Phys. Rev. E 61,

6421 (1989).

R5901 (1996).

R6075 (2000).

[5] L. Kadanoﬀ, Phys. Today 54(8), 34 (2001).
[6] J. J. Niemela , L. Skrbek, K. R. Sreenivasan, and R. J.

Donnelly, J. Fluid Mech. 449, 169 (2001).

[7] K. R. Sreenivasan, A. Bershadskii and J. J. Niemela,

Phys. Rev. E 65, 056306 (2002).

[8] J. J. Niemela and K. R. Sreenivasan, Physica A 315, 203

[9] J. J. Niemela and K. R. Sreenivasan, Europhys. Lett. 62,

(2002).

829 (2003).

[10] R. C. Hwa and Q. H. Zhang, Phys. Rev. D 62, 014003

(2002).

1963).

(1996).

364 (1988).

(2002).

[11] R. C. Hwa and Q. H. Zhang, Phys. Rev. C 66, 014904

[12] K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics (Wiley, New York,

[13] Z. Cao, Y. Gao, and R. C. Hwa, Z. Phys. C 72, 661

[14] P. Bak, C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. A 38,

[15] C.K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Gold-

berger, Chaos 5, 82 (1995).

[16] R. C. Hwa and T. C. Ferree, Phys. Rev. E 66, 021901

[17] K. Hu, P. C. Ivanov, Z. Chen, P. Carpena and H. E.

Stanley, Phys. Rev. E 64, 011114 (2001).

[18] J. J. Niemela, L. Skrbek, K. R. Sreenivasan and R. J.

Donnelly, J. Low Temp. Phys. 126, 297 (2002).

