Sharp vorticity gradients in two-dimensional hydrodynamic

turbulence

E. A. Kuznetsov

L.D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics,

2 Kosygin str., 119334 Moscow, Russia

V. Naulin, A. H. Nielsen, and J. Juul Rasmussen

Optics and Plasma Research Department,

OPL-128, Risø National Laboratory,

P.O.Box 49, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark

(Dated: 2004-07-16)

Abstract

The appearance of sharp vorticity gradients in two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence and

their inﬂuence on the turbulent spectra is considered. We have developed the analog of the vortex

line representation as a transformation to the curvilinear system of coordinates moving together

with the di-vorticity lines. Compressibility of this mapping can be considered as the main reason

for the formation of the vorticity discontinuities at high Reynolds numbers. For two-dimensional

turbulence in the case of strong anisotropy the vorticity discontinuities can generate spectra with
the fall-oﬀ at large k proportional to k−3 resembling the Kraichnan spectrum for the enstrophy cas-

cade. For turbulence with weak anisotropy the k dependence of the spectrum due to discontinuities
coincides with that of the Saﬀman spectrum: k−4. We have compared the analytical predictions

with direct numerical solutions of the two-dimensional Euler equation for decaying turbulence. We

observe that the di-vorticity is reaching very high values and is distributed locally in space along

piecewise straight lines. Thus, indicating strong anisotropy and accordingly we found a spectrum
close to the k−3-spectrum.

4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

This paper is concerned with investigations of two-dimensional (2D) hydrodynamical tur-

bulent ﬂows. In particular, we study the formation and dynamics of very sharp vorticity

gradients and their inﬂuence on the energy spectrum in the enstrophy cascade regime. We

may consider two kind of turbulent spectra. The ﬁrst one was suggested by Kraichnan in

1967 [1], it corresponds to the enstrophy cascade directed to the small-scale region where

viscous dissipation becomes essential. The Kraichnan spectrum follows, up to the logarith-

mic factor (see [2]), a power law for the scales intermediate between source and sink (the
inertial interval): E(k) ∼ η2/3k−3 where η is the enstrophy dissipation rate. Recall that 2D

turbulence additionally is characterized by an inverse energy cascade for large-scales leading
to E(k) ∼ k−5/3 (see e.g.

[1]). However, in the present paper we will only be concerned

with the small-scale region of the spectrum. The second spectrum suggested by Saﬀman in
1971 [3] yields another power dependence: E(k) ∼ k−4. According to Saﬀman, in decay-

ing 2D turbulence vorticity discontinuities (in absence of viscosity) will form because ﬂuid

elements with diﬀerent values of vorticity will be driven close together by the ﬂow. Due

to vorticity conservation the appearance of discontinuities will provide the conservation of

all other invariants involving vorticity,

ωndS, n = 3, 4, .... Accounting for a ﬁnite viscos-

ity Saﬀman considers the ”discontinuities” to have a small width δ, which results from the

R

balance between inertial and viscous forces. At high-Reynolds number this size is assumed

to be very small in comparison with the length along the discontinuities, L, which may be

assumed to be of the same order as the characteristic energy-containing length-scale. Under

the assumption of isotropy and a dilute distribution of discontinuities Saﬀman suggested

that the energy spectrum at large k could be constructed as a superposition of the spectra
from the individual discontinuities resulting in: E(k) ∼ k−4 .

From the ﬁrst sight, the spectra obtained by Kraichnan and Saﬀman look like two diﬀerent

answers, but indeed, as we show in this paper, it is possible to establish some connection

between them. This may be seen from the Fourier transform of a step function. Let us

assume that the vorticity has a jump Γ = Γ(x) along the line y = 0 and at ﬁrst neglect

eﬀects connected with bending of the line. Then we can write:

Hence it is immediately seen that the Fourier transform will have a power-law fall-oﬀ at large

∂ω
∂y

= Γδ(y).

2

k, i.e., inversely proportional to ky multiplied by some function of kx due to dependence

of Γ on x.

If we neglect the dependence on kx replacing it by some constant, then we

immediately obtain an energy spectrum with a power dependence similar to the Kraichnan
spectrum: E(k) ∼ k−3. This is an important conjecture demonstrating that a spectrum

similar to the Kraichnan spectrum, which is often observed in high resolution numerical

simulations, may be related to discontinuities of vorticity which can be considered as possible

candidates for singularities in ideal ﬂuids in two dimensions. However, for viscous ﬂuids,

i.e., in the framework of the Navier-Stokes equation, such singularities are impossible: the

initial smoothness of the solution will remain as proven ﬁrst by Olga Ladyzhenskaya many

years ago [4]. Within the 2D Euler equations for incompressible ﬂuids the vorticity is a

Lagrangian invariant and can never be singular, but its gradient might, in principle, become

inﬁnite in a ﬁnite time. Up to now this is an open question.

It is necessary to mention some examples of 2D ﬂows presented by Yudovich [5], where the

appearance of weaker singularities (vorticity is allowed to be discontinuous but bounded) are

possible, however, they are formed in inﬁnite time. Another approach based on the numerical

analysis of the complex singularities for the inviscid ﬂow with two-mode initial conditions

showed that the width of its analyticity strip follows a ln(1/t) law at short times [6, 7].

Additionally, many numerical experiments for 2D turbulence (see, [8]- [11]) show that with

a good accuracy the Saﬀman spectrum is formed at the initial stage, before the excitation

of the long-scale coherent vortices. The high-resolution numerical simulation performed
[12] demonstrated the power dependence k−3.5. Analytical calculations

by Legras et al.

presented by Gilbert [13] using arguments based on the existence of spiral structures give a

power dependence with exponent between −3 and −4 (see also [14] and [15]). In particular,

we would like to point to the very interesting paper by Ohkitani [16], where by means of the

Weiss decomposition [17] it was shown that the so-called h-regions (h - hyperbolic in the sense
of Ref. [17], i.e., regions where straining is dominating over vorticity) give the spectrum k−3,

i.e., coinciding up to a logarithmic factor with the Kraichnan spectrum, the contribution from
the e-regions (e - elliptic, i.e., vorticity dominated regions) yield the Saﬀman spectrum ∼ k−4.

Note, that similar ideas based on the wavelet analysis were developed in [18] to separate

2D turbulent ﬂow into regions having diﬀerent dynamical behaviors. The appearance of a

power type spectrum in the short-wave region has been connected with diﬀerent physical

mechanisms like vortex merging [20], [21] and vortex stripping [22], [23] which give a certain

3

conﬁrmation of the original idea of Saﬀman [3].

In this paper we present some qualitative physical arguments in favor of the formation

of vorticity discontinuities in the 2D Euler equations for smooth initial conditions. The

main idea in the description of 2D ﬂows is connected with using the vorticity as Lagrangian

invariants. Kuznetsov and Ruban [24] (see also [25]) developed a new kind of description

for three-dimensional vortical ﬂows - the so-called vortex line representation (VLR). This

representation is based on the mixed Lagrangian-Eulerian description and connected with

movable vortex lines. The VLR, which is a mapping to a curvilinear system of coordinates,

turns out to be compressible, this is considered to be the main reason for breaking in

hydrodynamics. Here we demonstrate how this approach can be modiﬁed for 2D Euler

hydrodynamics. The main observation is that for 2D ﬂows the curl of the vorticity, sometimes

referred to as the di-vorticity [9, 16, 17], represents a frozen-in ﬁeld, i.e., it satisﬁes the same

equation as, e.g., the equation for the magnetic ﬁeld in ideal 2D magneto-hydrodynamics

(MHD). Therefore the generalization to the 2D Euler equations becomes straightforward. In

the local case, as it was demonstrated for 2D MHD in Ref. [28], the vorticity plays the role

of a Lagrangian coordinate and the other variable coincides with the Cartesian coordinate,

say, x.

In terms of these variables [28] the 2D Euler equations transform into equations

of motion for a layered ﬂuid, similar to stratiﬁed ﬂuid, where each layer is labeled by its

vorticity ω. In terms of the new variables the ”new” hydrodynamics becomes compressible.

The derivative yω plays the role of density of each layer, as a function of time and coordinate

x. This characteristics is proportional to the width between two neighboring layers with

closed vorticity contours.

Another aim of this paper is to revisit the energy spectra for 2D turbulence with empha-

sis on the angle distribution, following the arguments of Saﬀman connected with vorticity

discontinuities. Using the stationary phase method we demonstrate that the contribution

from one discontinuity is very anisotropic: it has a sharp angular peak along the direction
perpendicular to the discontinuity. In the peak the energy spectrum falls-oﬀ like k−3 at large

k. After average over angles in the case of isotropic turbulence the spectrum coincides with

the Saﬀman spectrum [3].

In order to check whether the spectrum at large k is deﬁned by vorticity discontinuities we

have performed numerical experiments on decaying turbulence based on a direct numerical

solution of the 2D Euler equations. In the turbulent state when the formation of power tails

4

is observed we examine the structure of the di-vorticity. We found that the di-vorticity is

distributed very sharply in space concentrated on a random net of lines. In our opinion,

these results can be interpreted in favor of the Saﬀman mechanism for the formation of 2D

turbulent spectra due to discontinuities.

II. TWO-DIMENSIONAL ANALOG OF THE VLR

Consider a 2D ideal ﬂuid, described by the Euler equation for the vorticity ω(x, y, t),

∂ω
∂t

+ (v · ∇)ω = 0, div v = 0,

(1)

where the velocity ﬁeld v deﬁnes the vorticity:

Equation (1) shows that the vorticity is a Lagrangian invariant advected by the ﬂuid, i.e.,

ω = ∇ × v =

∂vy
∂x

−

∂vx
∂y

.

ω(x, y, t) = inv

dr
dt

= v(r,t), r|t=0 = a.

Bx =

, By = −

∂ω
∂y

∂ω
∂x

,

∂B
∂t

= curl [v × B].

dB
dt

= (B · ∇)v.

5

along a ﬂuid particle trajectory deﬁned as solution of the system of ordinary diﬀerential

equations (ODE’s),

Let us introduce the divergence-free vector ﬁeld B with the components

i.e., B = curl ωˆz. It is easily to see that this vector is tangent to the line ω(x, y) = const

because the vorticity gradient ∇ω = (∂xω, ∂yω) is normal to this line. The equation of

motion for the vector B can be obtained from Eq. (1) after diﬀerentiating with respect to

coordinates:

Thus, the vector B constitutes a frozen-in quantity. Sometimes, it is called as the di-vorticity

(see [9]). By introducing the substantial (material) derivative, d/dt = ∂/∂t + (v · ∇), Eq.

(4) can be rewritten as

(2)

(3)

(4)

Hence, we observe that |B| will locally increase due to stretching of the di-vorticity lines,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

i.e., when

where

dB2
dt

1
2

= (B · ˆSB) > 0,

ˆSik =

1
2  

∂vk
∂xi

+

∂vi
∂xk !

is the stress tensor. Increasing (or decreasing) the di-vorticity ﬁeld, based on the equation

(5), is not suﬃcient to clarify the physical mechanism for its growth. As is seen from

Eq. (3) only one velocity component, vn, normal to the vector B changes the ﬁeld B. In

this case the tangential component vτ (parallel to B) plays a passive role providing the

incompressibility condition: div vτ + div vn = 0. This observation is the key point for

introducing the vortex line representation (VLR) for the three-dimensional Euler equations

(see, e.g. [25]). To construct the analog of VLR for the 2D Euler equations we consider new

Lagrangian trajectories, given by the vn,

The solution of these ODE’s deﬁnes a new mapping

dr
dt

= vn(r, t), r|t=0 = a.

r = r(a, t)

which is diﬀerent from that given by Eq. (2).

In terms of this mapping the di-vorticity

equation (3) can be integrated (for details see, e.g. [28]):

where B0(a) is the initial di-vorticity, J is the Jacobian of the mapping (7):

B(r, t) =

(B0(a) · ∇a)r(a, t)
J

,

J =

∂(x, y)
∂(ax, ay)

.

According to the deﬁnition of this mapping its Jacobian is not ﬁxed, it may change in time

and space. In other words, the mapping r = r(a, t), as a change of variables, represents a

compressible mapping. This means that the di-vorticity lines can be compressed. In this

approach the velocity of motion of di-vorticity lines is nothing else than the normal velocity

vn.

It is interesting to note that this approach in slightly diﬀerent form what was suggested

in [28]. In this paper the basis of the approach is the mixed Lagrangian-Eulerian description

6

when all desired quantities are considered as functions of vorticity ω (or any other Lagrangian

invariant) and a Cartesian coordinate x.

The VLR given by (6), (7), (8) with the local change of variables r = r(a, t), does not

work at singular points where the B-ﬁeld vanishes,

B(r(t), t) = 0.

(9)

and where, respectively, the normal velocity is not deﬁned. For vorticity ω these points are

nothing more than maximal, minimal or saddle points. It is easy to see that the null points

are advected by the ﬂuid, but the velocity v at these points is deﬁned through the B-ﬁeld by
inverting the Laplacian operator: v = −∆−1B. The null-points for the normal vector ﬁeld

n(r) represent topological singularities. Topological constraints as additional conditions to

the system (6), (7), (8), are written as integrals of the vector ﬁeld n(r) along a loop enclosing

the null-points:

(∇ϕ · dr) = 2πm,

I

(10)

where ϕ is the angle between the vector n and the x-axis and m, being a topological charge,

is an integer equal to the total number of turns of the vector n while passing around the

closed contour with the null-point inside it (see also [28]). For instance, for X-points or

O-points, m = ±1 .

As well known from our knowledge in gas-dynamics compressibility of the mapping is

a main cause for steepening and ultimately breaking, resulting in the formation of sharp

gradients for the velocity and density of the gases. This happens in ﬁnite time and in the

general situation the singularity ﬁrst appears in one separate point, i.e., it may be related

to collapse. In gas-dynamics this process is completely characterized by the mapping deter-

mined by the transition from the Eulerian to the Lagrangian description. Vanishing of the

Jacobian corresponds to the emergence of a singularity. For three-dimensional incompress-

ible Euler equations compressibility of the VLR is a possible reason for appearance of inﬁnite

vorticity in one separate point that results in breaking of vortex lines. The ﬁrst study of

vortex-line breaking for three-dimensional integrable hydrodynamics with the Hamiltonian

|ω|dr was performed by Kuznetsov and Ruban [29]. Recent numerical experiments [26],

R
[27] have conﬁrmed the possibility of this type of scenario.

The Jacobian in dominator of the expressions (8) can become zero, which will result in

inﬁnite value of the di-vorticity. We do not see any restrictions by which this process can

7

be forbidden. In 2D hydrodynamics, however, compressibility of the mapping guarantees

only compression of di-vorticity lines corresponding to the formation of sharp gradients for

vorticity. Probably, the breaking process in 2D happens in inﬁnite time (see, for instance,

[5]). The most important point for us is that the tendency indeed does exist and it is possible

to imagine that this process may be accelerated in the presence of external forces driving

the turbulence.

III. 2D SPECTRUM

In the previous section we gave some arguments in favor of formation of sharp gradients

of the vorticity in 2D Euler ﬂows. Everywhere below we will suppose that this process is

possible and consider how it can eﬀect the form of turbulent spectrum. For 2D turbulence,

in the presence of ﬁnite viscosity and external forces, we will assume that the sharp vorticity

gradients have a ﬁnite value inversely proportional to the characteristic width of discontinuity

δ, which is deﬁned from the balance between inertial and viscous terms. At high Reynolds

number the width δ will be much less than the characteristic (energy-containing) scale L.

In the turbulent state such discontinuities are naturally assumed to form a set of vorticity

gaps with random positions of their centers, random forms and random distributions over

angles. Our aim is to calculate the contribution to the spectrum from such discontinuities.
We will be interested in the region of wave numbers k lying between L−1 and the inverse
width δ−1:

L−1 ≪ k ≪ δ−1.

To simplify the problem all gaps are supposed to be concentrated on pieces of straight lines

(ﬁnite intervals) with vorticity gaps vanishing at the endpoints of the intervals. As we will

see later this simpliﬁcation is not so essential. The answer, which we will get, will also

account for bends of the discontinuity lines.

To ﬁnd spectrum we need to calculate the Fourier transform from of pair correlation

function:

F (r) = hω(x)ω(x + r)i,

where angle brackets means average over the ensemble of discontinuities. Hence the energy

8

density spectrum ǫ(k) is given by the standard formula:

ǫ(k) =

Fk
2k2 =

|ωk|2
8π2Sk2

where ωk is the Fourier transform of the vorticity ω(r),

Z

∂ω
∂y

ωk =

ω(r)e−i(kr)dr, ω(r) =

ωkei(kr)dk,

1
(2π)2

Z

the over-bar denotes average with respect to random variables, and S is the average area,

which is assumed to be suﬃciently large.

Then for the y-derivative of ω we have,

Consider ﬁrst one discontinuity with the center at r0 = (x0, y0) oriented along the y-axis.

= Γ(x)δ(y − y0) + regular terms.

(11)

Here Γ(x) is a continuous function of x inside the interval [x1, x2] vanishing at the endpoints

x = x1,2 and equal zero outside the interval.

Hence, the Fourier transform from the singular part of ω is given by the integral:

ωk = −

e−ikyy0

Γ(x)e−ikxxdx

i
ky

x2

x1

Z
where k = (kx, ky). This is the contribution from one discontinuity. If we assume that the

discontinuities are not very densely distributed, they may be considered ”independent” and

the spectrum for the whole ensemble of discontinuities may be obtained by a superposition

of the spectra from the individual discontinuities, i.e., from the summation with respect to

all discontinuities which results in

ωk = −

i
(k · nα)

α
X

x2α

x1α

Z

e−i(k·nα)y0α

Γα(x)e−i(k·τα)xdx.

(12)

Here we have introduced two unit vectors: normal nα and tangent τα (nα

2 = τα

2 =

1, (nατα) = 0) characterizing the orientation of the α-th discontinuity. The coordinates

x1α, x2α, y0α together with the two unit vectors deﬁne completely the positions of the dis-

continuities.

To ﬁnd an enstrophy spectrum one needs to perform average of |ωk|2 with respect to

all random variables. Assuming the coordinates of the discontinuities to be randomly dis-

tributed uniformly in space, the ﬁrst average gives:

|ωk|2 = Nh

1
(k · n)2

x2

x1

2

i.

Γ(x)e−i(k·τ )xdx
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Z

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
9

(13)

Here N is the number of discontinuities in area S, angle brackets means the average with

respect to both x1, x2 and angle distribution.

Since we are interested in short-wave asymptotics of the spectrum, kL ≫ 1, the integrand

in (13) in this case represents a rapidly varying function of x. Therefore the integral in (13)

can be estimated by means of the method of stationary phase. This method can be applied

for all angles except for a narrow cone of angles, θk (θk is the angle between the vectors n

and k) where kLθk ≤ 1. In this region the integral can be considered as constant which

results in the following form for the energy distribution (before angle averaging!):

ǫ1(k) ≈

n
8π2k4 h

2

Γl
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i, θk ≤ θ0 ≡ (kL)−1,

(14)

where n is the density of discontinuities (= N/S) and

Γl =

Γ(x)dx,

l = x2 − x1, hli = L.

x2

x1

Z

For angles θk lying far from θ0 ≡ (kL)−1 the integral in (13) can be estimated by means of
the method of stationary phase. However, the leading order, proportional to (kτ )−1, gives

zero input because Γ(x1,2) = 0. Therefore one needs to keep the next order approximation

that gives:

ǫ2(k) ≈

N
4π2k2

h(Γ′)2i

(k · n)2(k · τ )4 , θk ≫ (kL)−1,

(15)

where Γ′ is the derivative of Γ taken at the endpoints xi. This formula demonstrates singular
behavior for ǫ(k) at angles θk close to 0 and π/2 (as well as, to π and −π/2). At small angles
θk ≤ (kL)−1 this expression has to be matched with (14). For the angle range close to π/2

the integral in (15) should be cut-oﬀ due to the bending of the line of discontinuity. This
factor switches on at angles |θk − π/2| ∼ (ka)−1 where a is a characteristic bending length of
discontinuity (roughly of the order of L). Thus, the energy density distribution ǫ(k) has a
very narrow angle maximum at θk near zero with decay at large wave numbers as ∼ k−4, this
results in the energy spectrum E(k) ∼ k−3, which, up to the logarithmic factor, corresponds
to the Kraichnan spectrum . For all other angles ǫ(k) decays proportionally to k−6 at large

k.

We would like to stress once more that the formulas (14) and (15) are the results of

non-complete average, i.e, the average with respect to coordinates x1α, x2α, y0α. In order to

get the ﬁnal answer for the energy spectrum it is necessary to average with respect to angles.

10

(16)

(17)

(18)

Let us assume ﬁrst that the angle distribution is isotropic. Then, integrating over angles

it is easily seen that from the ﬁrst region (14) we have the following contribution:

E1(k) = 2k

ǫ1(k)dθk ≈

θ0

−θ0

Z

n
2π2k4L

h

Γl

2

i.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Here the factor 2 appears because of two equal contributions from two regions near θk = 0

and θk = π. Averaging (15) over angles gives divergence at θ → 0 and θ → π/2. The main
contribution to the energy spectrum comes from the cut-oﬀ at small angles ∼ (kL)−1:

E2(k) ≈

nL3
3π2k4 h(Γ′)2i.

Thus, both regions of angles give contributions of the same order of magnitude. The com-

plete answer for the energy spectrum for isotropic turbulence (i.e., isotropic distribution of

discontinuities) is given by the sum of (16) and (17):

E(k) ≈

n
2π2k4L "

h

Γl
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2

i +

2L4
3

h(Γ′)2i

,

#

which coincides with the spectrum obtained by Saﬀman [3].

In order to ﬁnd the spectrum in the anisotropic situation one needs to average expressions

(14), (15) with the corresponding distribution function. In numerical experiments anisotropy

can be conditioned by box boundaries as well as by anisotropy of the pumping of turbulence.

In the case when such ordering is strong enough the spectrum may get some peculiarities

originating from non-averaged spectra given by (14), (15). If the width of the angle distri-
bution function ∆θ will be narrower than θ0 = (kL)−1, then in the angle cone θk < ∆θ the
energy spectrum E(k, θ) will have the fall-oﬀ ∼ k−3, i.e., the same power dependence as for

the Kraichnan spectrum. Note, however, that this asymptotics is only intermediate because
θ0 = (kL)−1 decreases with increasing k. Therefore starting from k = k∗ = (Lθ0)−1, the

average over angles becomes sensitive relative to the singularities of (15) that results in the

spectrum decreasing proportional to the Saﬀman fall-oﬀ. If the inﬂuence of anisotropy is not

so essential then we should expect the spectrum close to the Saﬀman one, of course, in the

case when the main contribution to the spectrum at large k is connected with discontinu-

ities. The most interesting observation following from the analytical results of this Section

is that in the very anisotropic case with strong ordering of discontinuities the sharp angular

maximum of the spectrum has the power fall-oﬀ coinciding with that for the Kraichnan

spectrum. While in the isotropic case our answer coincides with the Saﬀman answer. In the

11

next Section we present the results of numerical simulation of decaying 2D turbulence at

high-Reynolds numbers. In particular, the appearance of the power law tails in the energy

spectrum at large k can be explained rather by discontinuities, than by a cascading process

with constant enstrophy.

IV. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATIONS

To support the arguments of the previous sections and reveal the direct connection be-

tween the formation of the sharp vorticity gradients and the tail of the energy spectrum

we have performed a numerical study of the evolution of decaying 2D turbulence. The 2D

Euler equations (1) in the vorticity-streamfunction formulation are integrated numerically

on a double periodic domain by employing a high resolution fully de-aliased spectral scheme:

∂ω
∂t

+ {ω, ψ} = µ2n∇2nω,

(19)

where ψ is the streamfunction related to the vorticity by the Poisson equation: ω = −∇2ψ,

the velocity is given as v = (vx, vy) = ∇ψ × ˆz and the bracket

{ω, ψ} ≡ v · ∇ω =

∂ω
∂x

∂ψ
∂y

−

∂ψ
∂x

∂ω
∂y

.

In solving (19) we have included a hyperviscosity term on the right hand side of the equation
to keep the integration scheme stable (typically we have used n = 3 and µ6 = 10−20). This

term was observed to decrease the energy by less than 0.002% and the enstrophy by less

than 20%. We veriﬁed that the global features of our results were not dependent on the type

of viscosity (alternatively we used kinematic viscosity). In the present context we apply the

hyperviscosity to allow an as wide a dynamical range as possible with the given resolution.

The domain size is taken to be unity and the resolution is 2048 × 2048 modes. For the time

integration we employ a third order stiﬄy-stable scheme. We have chosen the time scale to
correspond to ω−1

0 , where ω0 corresponds to the maximum vorticity.

As initial condition we have placed a number of positive and negative vortices randomly

on the domain, ensuring that the total circulation is zero. Vortices of various shapes/proﬁles

from vortex patches (Rankine vortices) to Gaussian vortices form the initial condition. In

the simulation run described here, we have thus used 10 vortices of each sign with Gaussian

proﬁles:

ω(r, θ) = ±ω0 exp (−r2/R2

0),

(20)

12

where ω0 = 1 for all vortices, while their radii R0 are varying in the range 0.02 < R0 < 0.075.

In Fig. 1a we show the initial vorticity ﬁeld and Fig. 1b the vorticity ﬁeld at T = 95, which

corresponds to around 8 vortex internal turnover times (Tv ≡ 4π/ω0). The vorticity ﬁeld

has the typical structure for 2D turbulence; it consist of large scale structures (vortices)

with concentrated vorticity and strongly ﬁlamented structures between the vortices. At this

time there is still strong dynamics in the ﬂow evolution, with shearing and straining due to

mutual interactions of nearby structures. Corresponding to the vorticity ﬁeld we show the

instantaneous one-dimensional energy spectrum E(k) (total energy: E =

∞
o E(k)dk) in Fig.
2. The spectrum E(k) for T = 0 in Fig. 2 shows the spectrum of superimposed Gaussian
vortices. The spectrum is expanding to the high k-values and at T = 95 a k−α spectrum

R

is developed at high wavenumbers for the present case α ∼ 3, as clearly demonstrated in

Fig. 2, which show the compensated spectrum k3E(K) being constant over almost 2 decades

in k.

To investigate the details of the dynamics and how the k−α spectrum is generated, we

plot in Fig. 3 the di-vorticity ﬁeld B deﬁned in Sec. II, showing the length |B|, which

is equal to |∇ω|.

It is clear from the ﬁgure that very sharp vorticity gradients appears.

These are localized in stripes that are mostly along straight lines. The stripes are mainly

formed outside the dominating vortex structures, and their formation can be explained by

the analysis discussed in Sec. II. Furthermore it is evident that the concentration of the

stripes are relatively low. Following the time evolution of maximum value of |B|, Bmax, we

observe a very rapid growth to values more than 100 times the initial value. Bmax oscillates

in time with a typical period related to the vortex turnover time, Tv. The highest maximum

reached during this simulation approach 1000, which with a maximum value of the vorticity

ω0 = 1 corresponds to the width of the ﬁlaments δ < 0.001, it is evident that the growth of

|B| is arrested by the hyperviscosity, and indeed Bmax scales with µ

. We compare the

−1/6
6

structure of the di-vorticity ﬁeld with the high pass ﬁltered vorticity ﬁeld shown in Fig. 4.

The very similar structure of the high pass ﬁltered vorticity ﬁeld and the vorticity gradient

ﬁeld strongly suggests that the vorticity gradients are responsible for the large-k part of the
spectrum, i.e., the k−α part.

To further discuss the dynamics we show the Weiss ﬁeld [17] in Fig. 5, deﬁned by W =

13

1

4(s2 − ω2) where

s = [(

∂vx
∂x

−

∂vy
∂y

)2 + (

∂vy
∂x

+

∂vx
∂y

)2]1/2

is the rate of deformation. Comparing Figs. 3 and 5 we observe that the vorticity gradient

stripes are aligned with the contours of W in the strain dominated regions, W > 0, mainly

at the edge of the vortex structures and in between the structure. A careful inspection,

however, reveals that in the stripes W < 0, i.e., vorticity dominates. This is in line with the

original arguments of Weiss (see also [16, 19]) that vorticity gradients will tend to concen-

trate in the strain dominated regions. In particular in the work of Chen et al. [19] it was

demonstrated that the dynamics leading to the enstrophy cascade in driven 2D turbulence

is most signiﬁcant in strain dominated regions.

The spectra we have observed is characterized by having the exponent close to α = 3.

Thus, with reference to Sec. III this will correspond to the spectrum in the anisotropic regime

where the stripes of vorticity gradients are near straight lines. Indeed in Fig. 3 we see that

we have stripes that are close to straight lines and the observed spectrum is this in keeping

with the expectations. To illustrate the anisotropic nature of the spectrum directly we plot

in Fig. 6 the two dimensional spectrum, ǫ(kx, ky). We observe a clear anisotropy, which

become particular apparent in the compensated spectrum in Fig. 6b, which is obtained by
subtracting the angle average of ǫ(kx, ky) (i.e., (2π)−1

ǫ(kx, ky)dθ). Here we observe a clear

angular structure. We should emphasize that the spectra obtained here are instantaneous

2π
0

R

spectra obtained a one time and for one realization. Ensemble averaged spectra are expected

to show a much higher degree of – if not complete – angle isotropy.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have performed a detailed investigation of the relation between turbulent spectra and

possible singularities in 2D turbulent ﬂows. First, we have demonstrated that the k-behavior

of the spectra generated by sharp vorticity gradients, based on the compressible advection of

di-vorticity, depends signiﬁcantly on the anisotropy of the spectra. If the angular spectrum

distribution has one or more very sharp peaks then the one-dimensional spectrum has a tail
falling-oﬀ like k−3 at large k, which is resembling the Kraichnan spectrum, derived from

spectral cascade arguments. In the opposite case of an isotropic smooth angular dependence
the spectrum has an asymptotic behavior k−3 as for the Saﬀman spectra. These arguments

14

allow us to suggest interpretation of many numerical experiments where the spectral expo-

nent varies in the whole interval between −3 and −4. For instance, in the simulations by

Okhitani [16] the e-regions, because of their geometry, would give the main contributions

to the isotropic component of the spectrum which explain the Saﬀman exponents for the

observed spectrum in [16]. For h-regions the situation is diﬀerent: these regions contain

stretched vorticity level lines and their contribution to the spectrum should be expected to

be very anisotropic. This is why these regions produce the k-behavior as for the Kraichnan

spectrum. A similar situation takes place in our simulations in comparison with the nu-

merics performed before [20, 21]. In the both latter simulations the spectra were isotropic

resulting in spectral exponents like for the Saﬀman spectrum. In the simulations presented

in the present paper we have very strong vorticity gradients concentrated on the very narrow

stripes and therefore the exponent is close to that for the Kraichnan spectrum. Employing a

ﬁltering of the vorticity ﬁeld indicates, more or less one-to-one, that the tail of the spectrum

originates from the sharp vorticity gradients. A strong ampliﬁcation of di-vorticity of more

than hundred times is one of the main results of our simulations. A detailed investigation

of the growth of the di-vorticity maximum is beyond the main scope of this paper and will

be considered in future works. In conclusion, we stress that this ampliﬁcation has a natural

explanation due to compressibility of the mapping (7) providing the transfer from the Eu-

lerian description to the system of movable curvilinear di-vorticity lines as described in Sec.

II.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by INTAS (grant no. 00-00292). The work of E.K. was also

supported by the RFBR (grant no. 00-01-00929). E.K. wishes to thank Riso National Lab-

oratory, where this work was initiated, for its kind hospitality during the visit in November,

2003. JJR thanks the Landau Institute for kind hospitality during a visit in June 2004,

where the work was ﬁnalized.

[1] R.H. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 11, 1417 (1967).

[2] R.H. Kraichnan, J. Fluid Mech. 47, 525 (1971); J. Fluid Mech. 62, 305 (1974).

15

[3] P. G. Saﬀman, Stud. Appl. Maths 50, 49 (1971).

[4] O.A. Ladyzhenskaya. The mathematical theory of viscous incompressible ﬂow, Gordon and

Breach, 1969.

[5] V.I. Yudovich, Zh. Vychisl. Mat. Mat. Fiz., 3, 1032 (1963); Chaos,10, 705 (2000).

[6] U. Frisch, T. Matsumoto and J. Bec, J. Stat. Phys. 113, 761 (2003).

[7] T. Matsumoto, J. Bec, and U. Frisch, Fluid Dyn. Res. in Press (2004) (arXive:nln.CD/0310044

v2 1 Apr 2004.)

[8] J.C. McWilliams, J. Fluid Mech., 146, 21 (1984).

[9] S. Kida, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 54 2840 (1985).

[10] M.E. Brachet, M.Meneguzzi, P.L. Sulem, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 683 (1986).

[11] R. Benzi, S. Patarnello, P. Santangelo, Europhys. Lett. 3, 811 (1986).

[12] B. Legras, B. Santangelo, R. Benzi, Europhys. Lett. 5, 37 (1988); B. Santangelo, R. Benzi,

and B. Legras, Phys. Fluids A 1, 1027 (1989).

[13] A.D. Gilbert, J. Fluid Mech., 193, 475 (1988).

[14] H.K. Moﬀatt, Spiral structures in turbulent ﬂow, in New Approaches and Concepts in Turbu-

lence, eds. Th. Dracos and A. Tsinober (Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1993) p. 121.

[15] J.C. Vasilicos, and J.C.R. Hunt, Proc. R. soc. Lond. A 435, 505 (1991).

[16] K. Okhitani, Phys. Fluids A 3, 1598 (1991).

[17] J. Weiss, La Joila Institute Report No. LJ1-TN-81-121, 1981; Physica D 48, 273 (1991).

[18] M. Do-Khaca, C. Basdevantb, V. Perrierd and K. Dang-Tranc, Physica D, 76, 252 (1994).

[19] S. Chen, R.E. Ecke, G.L. Eyink, X. Wang and Z. Xiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 214501 (2003).

[20] A.H. Nielsen, X. He, J.J. Rasmussen, and T. Bohr, Phys. Fluids, 8, 2263 (1996).

[21] J.J. Rasmussen, A.H. Nielsen and V. Naulin, Phys. Scripta, 98, 29-33 (2002).

[22] D.G. Dritschel, Phys. Fluids A 5, 984 (1993); J. Fluid Mech. 293, 269 (1995).

[23] B. Legras and D. Dritschel, Applied Scientiﬁc Research, 51, 445-455, in Advances in Turbu-

lence IV, Ed. F.T.M. Neiuwstadt, Kluwer, 1993.

[24] E.A. Kuznetsov and V. P. Ruban, JETP Letters, 67, 1076 (1998); Phys. Rev. E, 61, 831

(2000).

physics/0209047.

[25] E.A. Kuznetsov, Pis’ma v ZHETF, 76, 406 (2002) [JETP Letters, 76, 346 (2002)];

[26] V.A. Zheligovsky, E.A. Kuznetsov, and O.M. Podvigina, Pis’ma v ZhETF 74, 402 (2001)

16

[JETP Letters, 74, 367 (2001)].

[27] E. A. Kuznetsov, O.M.Podvigina, and V.A.Zheligovsky, FLUID MECHANICS AND ITS AP-

PLICATIONS, Volume 71: Tubes, Sheets and Singularities in Fluid Dynamics. eds. K. Bajer,

H.K. Moﬀatt, Kluwer, (2003) pp. 305-316; physics/0110046.

[28] E.A. Kuznetsov, T. Passot, P.L. Sulem, Phys. Plasmas 11, 1410 (2004); physics/0310006.

[29] E.A. Kuznetsov, V.P.Ruban, ZhETF 118, 893 (2000) [JETP 91, 776 (2000)].

17

Figures

18

a)

b)

FIG. 1: a) Initial vorticity ﬁeld. b) Vorticity ﬁeld at time 95 corresponding to 10 vortex turnover

times. Red color designates positive vorticity and blue color negative vorticity; maximum value is

1 and minimum value is -1. ω0 = 1

19

FIG. 2: Compensated energy spectrum at diﬀerent times k3E(k) corresponding to the vorticity

ﬁeld shown in Fig. 1.

20

FIG. 3: The di-vorticity ﬁeld B at T = 95. Here the length of di-vorticity vector with the maximum

(red) value being 673.

21

FIG. 4: High pass ﬁltered vorticity ﬁeld from Fig. 1b, k > 10.

22

FIG. 5: Weiss ﬁeld for the vorticity ﬁeld show in Fig. 1b. Red designates positive values, i.e.,

strain dominated regimes. Blue designates negative values, i.e., vorticity dominated regimes.

23

a)

b)

24

