4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

100

Hydro-dynamical models
for the chaotic dripping faucet

By P. C O U L L E T1 , L. M A H A D E V A N2,3
A N D C. S. R I E R A2,3
1INLN, 1361 route des Lucioles, 06560 Valbonne, FRANCE
2DAMTP-CMS, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
3Present address, DEAS, Harvard University, 29 Oxford Street, Cambridge MA 02138 USA

(Received Feb 2004 and in revised form Aug 2004)

We give a hydrodynamical explanation for the chaotic behaviour of a dripping faucet
using the results of the stability analysis of a static pendant drop and a proper orthogonal
decomposition (POD) of the complete dynamics. We ﬁnd that the only relevant modes are
the two classical normal forms associated with a Saddle-Node-Andronov bifurcation and a
Shilnikov homoclinic bifurcation. This allows us to construct a hierarchy of reduced order
models including maps and ordinary diﬀerential equations which are able to qualitatively
explain prior experiments and numerical simulations of the governing partial diﬀerential
equations and provide an explanation for the complexity in dripping. We also provide a
new mechanical analogue for the dripping faucet and a simple rationale for the transition
from dripping to jetting modes in the ﬂow from a faucet.

1. Introduction

Almost since the beginning of the modern revolution in nonlinear dynamics and chaos,
the dripping faucet has served as a paradigm of chaotic dynamics (Shaw 1984). To explain
the transition to chaos, various ad-hoc mechanical models based on variable-mass and
spring systems have been used to derive return maps and Poincar´e sections for the time
between droplet emissions. Nearly twenty years on, this empirical approach still continues
(see (Kiyono et al 1999) for a recent example along with a review of earlier work), while
the connection to hydrodynamics remains tenuous. In contrast, over the last decade, the
hydrodynamical approach has been used with great success in studying the pinch-oﬀ
of a single drop using a combination of theory, numerical simulation and experiment
(for a review see (Eggers 1997)). Thus it is natural to bring this understanding of the
hydrodynamics of drop emission to bear upon the complex dynamics of dripping and
understand its origins. Two recent attempts in this direction are Fuchikami et al. 1999
and Ambravaneswaran et al 2000 who simulate the chaotic dynamics of dripping using
simpliﬁed lubrication-like approximations of the Navier-Stokes equations. However, the
mechanistic origins of the complexity in dripping still remain elusive.

Our goal in this paper is not as much to match the images of chaotic dripping seen
in experiments or numerical simulations as to see how we might qualitatively explain
what seems to be a complex dynamical process as simply as possible. With this in mind,
we derive a series of models culminating in a mechanical analogue, all of which cap-
ture the salient features of periodic and chaotic dripping and jetting, thus bringing a
focus on the physical mechanisms responsible while providing a guide to further work on

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

101

§

related problems. Some preliminary results of this nature were ﬁrst announced in a con-
ference proceedings (Coullet et al 2000) a few years ago. In
2, we revisit the equations
of equilibrium for a static pendant drop. In
3, we describe a Lagrangian model based on
§
lubrication theory for the evolution of the drop and use it to carry out a linearized anal-
ysis of the static drop shapes as a function of their volume. In addition, we also present
solutions of the complete dynamical evolution associated with dripping for a range of ﬂow
rates and evaluate the bifurcation diagram that shows the transition to chaos. In
4, we
analyze these chaotic solutions using proper orthogonal decomposition and a time-delay
method, both of which suggest that a low dimensional model should suﬃce to explain the
complexity of dripping. In particular, we show that the dynamics can be recast in terms
of a hierarchy of low-dimensional models, i.e. coupled ordinary diﬀerential equations and
maps, in
5 which are qualitatively consistent with prior experiments and yield a simple
physically consistent picture of the complex dynamics in terms of well known concepts
in dynamical systems. Guided by these models, we propose a new mechanical analogue
of the dripping faucet in
7 of how
our models can rationalize the transition from dripping to jetting.

6. We conclude the paper with a brief discussion in

§

§

§

§

2. Equations of equilibrium

We start with the case where the ﬂow rate is very small, so that a drop remains
attached to the faucet until its volume exceeds a threshold Vc. For a faucet of radius
R that is suﬃciently small, drops with a volume V < Vc are stable and axisymmet-
ric (Padday and Pitt 1973) which case we will restrict ourselves to. The shape of such
a pendant drop is determined by minimising the sum of its gravitational and surface
energy subject to the constraint of constant volume. Alternatively, we can write the
dimensionless equation for the balance of forces normal to the interface as

where the drop interface (r(s), z(s)) is determined by the kinematic conditions

dθ
ds −

cos θ
r

=

z,

−

cos θ

=

−
= sin θ

dz
ds
dr
ds






(2.1)

(2.2)

p

Γ/gρ for length, m0 = ρl3

Here the variables r, s, θ and z are deﬁned in Fig. (1a). The characteristic scales
0 for mass, t0 = (Γ/ρg3)1/4 for time, where Γ,
are : l0 =
ρ, g are the surface tension, density of the ﬂuid and gravity respectively. For water at
200C, l0 = 0.27cm, m0 = 0.020g, t0 = 0.017s. The boundary conditions at the bottom
of the drop are r(0) = 0, θ(0) = π/2 and z(0) = Pb/ρg, where Pb is the unknown
hydrostatic pressure at this position and serves as a control parameter that describes
the family of stationary drops. Choosing a value for Pb, we integrate (2.1,2.2) as an
initial value problem until r = R (R = cst) and ﬁnd the corresponding drop volume
πr2dz. For a given Pb when R < 1 the condition r = R may be satisﬁed for up to
V =
three diﬀerent drop volumes and lengths (Riera & Risler 2002). These pendant drops are
shown in Fig. (1) for diﬀerent faucet radii R. However, the only stable stationary drop
corresponds to the branch starting at the origin and ending at the ﬁrst turning point
(Padday and Pitt 1973) which denotes the critical drop volumes Vc for which the weight
of the drop is just balanced by the capillary forces. The corresponding shapes have a
waist where the dynamic instability associatedwith eventual pinch oﬀ ﬁrst starts.

R

102

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 1. a) Schematic of the static drop. b) The dimensionless hydrostatic pressure at the
bottom of the drop Pb as a function of the dimensionless volume V of the drop for diﬀerent values
of the dimensionless faucet radius R = 0.5 (left curve) and R = 1.0 (right curve). Solutions of
(2.1) and (2.2) yield the P − V curves shown, with the the solid line corresponding to stable
static drops and the dashed line corresponding to unstable stationary drops,

3. Equations of motion

To understand the mechanism of this linear instability dynamically, we consider the hy-
drodynamical equations linearized about a stationary solution. Instead of using the com-
plete Navier-Stokes equations for Eulerian one-dimensional lubrication theories (Eggers & Dupont 1994),
we simplify the analysis by using a new lubrication model embodied in a Lagrangian ap-
proach for the ﬂuid (Fuchikami et al. 1999). The inherent assumptions in this are the
following: (a) the drop remains axisymmetric during its motion, (b) the radial compo-
nent of the ﬂuid velocity is negligible compared to the axial component which depends
only on z, (c) there is no overturning of the interface r(z). These assumptions are asymp-
totically valid for slender drops of large viscosity, but recent simulations of the resulting
low-order equations (Fuchikami et al. 1999) have shown good agreements with experi-
ments even for fairly squat drops of low viscosity. The above assumptions lead to the
conclusion that there is no exchange of ﬂuid between neighboring horizontal slices of the
drop, so that the volume of a slice is constant during the motion and can be treated as
a Lagrangian variable. This yields a formulation that is essentially equivalent to earlier
Eulerian description. Explicitly, the volume between the planes zb(t) and za(t) is

ξ(za, zb, , t) =

πr(ζ, t)2dζ

zb(t)

Z

za(t)

(3.1)

where r is the radius of the drop. In terms of the Lagrangian variable ξ(za, zb, t), we
can write the kinetic energy Ekin, potential energy Ug and surface tension energy UΓ of
the system as

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

103

Figure 2. The evolution of the drop as a function of time computed by solving (3.6). The
snapshots are separated by 0.5 unit of normalised time, unless marked otherwise. Parameters
values for the simulation are R = 1, η = 0.02, g = 1, γ = 1, v0 = 0.1.

Ekin = ρ
2

Ug
UΓ

=

−
= Γ

2

(cid:17)

dξ

∂z(ξ,t)
∂t
z(ξ, t)dξ
4πz′ + (z′′)2

(z′)4 dξ

ξ0(t)
0
R
ρg

(cid:16)
ξ0(t)
0
ξ0(t)
R
0
R

q






(3.2)

(3.4)

(3.5)

Here ξ0(t) is the total volume of the drop at time t, and a prime corresponds to a partial
derivative with respect to the Lagrangian variable ξ. Then we can write the Lagrangian
of the system as

= Ekin −
The eﬀect of viscosity is then expressed using the Rayleigh dissipation function

Ug −

UΓ

L

(3.3)

˙Ekin =

3η

−

Z
0

ξ0(t)

2

v′(ξ, t)
z′(ξ, t) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

dξ

Then, Lagrange’s equation for the system is

d
dt

∂
L
∂v

=

∂
L
∂z

+

∂ ˙Ekin
∂v

1
2

For the purposes of computation we follow the method of Fuchikami et al. 1999 and
discretize the Lagrangian spatially so that the drop is eﬀectively sliced into N disks; each
disks is characterised by 3 variables : the position zi, the velocity vi = ∂zi
∂t and the mass
mi. A disk is divided in two when its relative thickness (ratio of its height to its width)
exceeds a threshold (0.05 in a typical simulation) to keep it slender. This occurs, either
because of the added volume at the faucet or the change in the shape of the drop in
the necking area. Two consecutive disks are combined when their relative thickness falls
below a diﬀerent threshold (0.075). The splitting and merging are done so as to conserve
. This auto-adaptive mesh leads to a variation of N between 50
volume and momentum
†
and 4000 during a typical simulation (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3).

The discretized Lagrangian then yields the N equations of motion

† Other quantities are not conserved as accurately, as in Fuchikami et al. 1999

104

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 3. Time interval between drops as a function of the exit velocity v0, obtained by solving
(3.6), with R = 0.5, η = 0.02, g = 1, γ = 1. The qualitative features that are apparent are the
oscillation of the time between drops as a function of the exit velocity v0, the single period-2
oscillations before the chaotic region and ﬁnally the transition to chaos via period doubling and
via a boundary crisis. All these features are robust functions of parameters, i.e. they persist for
a range of values. In the inset (i), we show the bifurcation diagram associated with increasing
ﬂow rate and in (ii) the corresponding diagram with decreasing ﬂow rate; we observe that there
is hysteresis.

d
dt

∂
L
∂vi

=

∂
L
∂zi

+

1
2

∂ ˙Ekin
∂vi

,

i = 1, N.

(3.6)

These equations of motion are then integrated using a ﬁfth-order Runge-Kutta method
with an adaptive timestep that is based on the local truncation error (see Fig. 2). The
initial condition is either a stable stationary solution of the equation of equilibrium
(2.1,2.2) or a hemisphere.

To determine the stability of the static solution we use the solutions determined in
2 via a shooting method (since there are no analytic solutions for the static shape)
§
and substitute them into the linearized equation of motion (3.6) in the neighbourhood
of the stationary solutions of (2.1,2.2) and determine the eigenvalues ωi, i = 1, N of
the resulting system. The value of the real part and imaginary part of the 3 largest
eigenvalues are plotted in Fig. (4). When V < Vc,
[ωi] < 0, so that these drops are
ℜ
stable. As V
Vc two complex conjugate eigenvalues become real by colliding on the
real axis (Fig. (5)) corresponding to the critically damped oscillator. As V increases
further, the eigenvalues split; but remain on the real axis. One of the eigenvalues then
moves away from the imaginary axis and the other moves towards it eventually reaching
the origin when V = Vc. This is consistent with Fig. (5) where we show the volume of
the drop as a function of Pb. The collision of two branches of stationary solutions one
stable and one unstable and the disappearance of the stationary solution when V > Vc
is a characteristic of a saddle-node bifurcation.

→

At low ﬂow rates, the shape of the drop is always close to that of a stationary drop.

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

105

Figure 4. Evolution of the real and imaginary part of the largest three eigenvalues
(ℜ[ωi], ℑ[ωi]) as a function of the scaled drop volume V shows that ℜ[ω1] ∼ 0.1ℜ[ω2]
(R = 0.5, η = 0.02, g = 1, γ = 1).

Figure 5. Sketch of the location of the ﬁrst few eigenvalues when V 6 Vc. The ﬁrst ”nose” of
the Pb − V curve corresponds to the collision between the unstable ”saddle” and stable ”node”
solutions and leads to a saddle-node bifurcation.

The spectrum of the linearized stable solutions with V 6 Vc, as shown in Fig. (4) in-
dicates that only two modes are dynamically relevant because the others are rapidly
damped. These modes correspond to a) an oscillatory damped mode given by the largest
two complex conjugate eigenpairs and b) a Saddle-Node bifurcation (Fig. (5)). To under-
stand the dynamics of drop emission and relaxation, we now turn towards the numerical
solution of the equations of motion (3.6) with the eventual goal of justifying a low order
approximation for this complex process.

4. Galerkin proper orthogonal decomposition

Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) (Holmes et al 1998)) allows us to project
a a high/inﬁnite dimensional system onto a ﬁnite number of basis functions or modes.
This may be done using the data from the direct numerical simulations, time series etc.
and allows us to try and understand the qualitatively important features of a complex
process. The optimality of POD derives from the fact that a truncated POD describes
typical members of the ensemble better than any other decomposition. We use POD
to determine if a low mode approximation of the dynamics of dripping is valid. As an
l0/τ0, ﬂow
example we carry out a POD in a regime with period-2 dripping (v0 = 1.025

≪

106

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 6. A proper-orthogonal decomposition (POD) of the numerical simulation of the hy-
drodynamical equations (3.6) for the dripping faucet (R = 0.5, η = 0.02 and v0 = 1.025). a)
Singular values are plotted for each ”mode”. b) The ﬁrst three modes from the POD superposed
on the average drop shape: 1 corresponds to V1 + ra, 2 corresponds to V2 + rav and 3 corresponds
to V3 + ra(the dashed line corresponds to the interpolated average drop shape ra) computed as
described in the text. Here Vi corresponds to the ith column of the matrix POD as indicated in
the text. We see that just the ﬁrst three modes capture much of the dynamical behavior of the
faucet.

rate q = πR2v0 and R = 0.5) where there is noticeable diﬀerence in the time required for
the formation of large and small drops, allowing us to clearly distinguish the two periods.
The shape of the drop r(z, t) is recorded periodically and a regular spaced mesh based
on the maximum drop length is used to interpolate the typically irregular mesh. If a
point in the interpolated regular mesh is outside the drop we set the radius r = 0. This
mesh is used to compute both the average shape of the drop and the variation from
this shape. This procedure allows us to follow the variance of the shape and leads to
n corresponding to m snapshots of the variation
a rectangular matrix M of size m
of the drop shape on a regular spaced mesh containing n points. The POD of M is a
decomposition of the form M = U DV T , where V is an n
n
matrix. The columns of the matrix V form an orthonormal basis corresponding to the
spatial modes of the drop. The columns of the matrix U also from an orthonormal basis
and correspond to the normalised projection of each snapshot onto the spatial modes
of the POD, i.e. M V = U D where the diagonal matrix D corresponds to the singular
values.

n matrix and U an m

×

×

×

In Fig. 6 we show that the singular values of the ﬁrst two modes are distinct from
the other clustered modes for the particular choice of parameters indicated earlier. This
separation of the singular values is strongly dependent on the scaled viscosity η; as η
decreases all the singular values cluster together. The ﬁrst mode ( 1 in Fig. 6) is associated
with the process of drop growth and emission (Fig. 7 solid line). The second mode (2 in
Fig. 6) corresponds to the largest damped oscillatory mode (Fig. 7 short dashed line).
Since the higher modes are rapidly damped, we see that the dynamics of the dripping
faucet can be well approximated using only the ﬁrst two modes of the basis obtained
using POD in this period-2 regime. Similar results are obtained in diﬀerent regimes.

We note that a priori there is no direct connection between the linearized modes and
the POD modes. Here we distinguish the two uses of POD. Traditionally, it is used
a method of simplifying the complex dynamics of high dimensional system. Here our
goal is slightly diﬀerent; what we want to show is that a low dimensional description is

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

107

Figure 7. Projection of the dynamics embodied in the solution to (3.6), onto the ﬁrst three
POD modes. The solid line corresponds to the ﬁrst mode U1D1, short dashed line the second
U2D2 and long dashed and dotted line the third U3D3, with Uj being the jth column and Dj
being the diagonal entry in the matrix POD as indicated in the text.

possible, and in following we use the linearly stable modes to construct a hierarchy of
low dimensional models.

We can also reconstructed the phase space of the dynamics by using the time delay
method (Eckmann and Ruelle 1985). We use the radius of the drop at a given position
above the usual location of the pinch-oﬀ so that the variable remains continuous during
the process. We choose diﬀerent delays T0 = 0, T1, ..., TN −1 to deﬁne our new variables
rk = r(t + Tk) which gives us a N -dimensional system. The minimum dimension N of
the system is chosen so that the ﬂow doesn’t cross itself in the phase-space and the
delays are chosen somewhat arbitrarily in order to obtain a reasonable projection. We
ﬁnd that N = 3 is suﬃcient to capture the dynamics suggested by both the linear analysis
and the POD. In the phase-space generated by the time-delay method shown in (Fig.
(8) we see two qualitatively diﬀerent regions: a large excursion corresponding to the
dynamics that lead to drop pinch-oﬀ, and a much more compact region corresponding to
the damped oscillations following the pinch-oﬀ event, that eventually leads the orbit to
the neighbourhood of the saddle-node area whence it escapes again.

5. Low dimensional models

We now consider the dynamics of dripping using simpliﬁed models. The time scale
R
for the formation of a pendant drop is τf ∼
v0 . Once the volume of the pendant drop
is Vc, it becomes unstable and pinches oﬀ in ﬁnite time. This process occurs in a time
ρR/Γ (Clanet and Lasheras 1999) which is much shorter than the time for a
τn ∼
new drop to form, and independent of the ﬂow rate. Therefore the dynamics of dripping
will not be aﬀected by the details of drop pinch-oﬀ.

p

R

V

∼

p

Γ/(ρ

) which varies with the volume

After pinch-oﬀ, the remaining liquid recoils due to capillary forces, oscillating with a
characteristic frequency f
and shape of the
residual drop. For a given ﬂow rate the volume of the pendant drop grows steadily, and
this frequency gradually decreases even as the oscillations are damped out by viscous ﬂuid
1/3 (Fig. 4). For very small ﬂow rates, these oscillations
motions at a rate 1/τd ∼
are completely damped out by the time the pendant drop attains the critical volume
Vc, so that in this case, droplets are emitted with a constant periodicity. As the ﬂow
rate is increased, these partially damped oscillations modify the onset of the instability
via a saddle-node bifurcation. Equivalently, the dimensionless ratio of the ﬁlling time
to the damping time τf /τd advances or delays the onset of necking and is responsible

f η/

p

V

V

108

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 8. Reconstruction of the ﬂow by the time delay method obtained by solving (3.6)
numerically with parameter values corresponding to those for Fig 2. The radius of the drop
r(t + iτ ) = r(0.5, t + iτ ), i = 1, 2, 3 so that it remains continuous during the process, and the
time delay τ = 1.0. We observe a long excursion followed by a damped oscillations before the
orbit returns to the neighbourhood of the saddle-node point. The arrow indicates the direction
of the ﬂow.

for the variation of the periodicity (or lack thereof) of drop emission. For example, as
the ﬂow rate is gradually increased, the constant periodicity “drop-drop” gives way to
a “drop-drip” scenario via a period-doubling bifurcation as follows. Once the pendant
drop reaches the critical volume Vc, a large droplet “drops” leading to a highly elongated
residual ﬁlament. If the ﬂow rate is large enough so that the oscillations are not completely
damped out, the next droplet will start the necking process when V < Vc or V > Vc
depending of the direction of the oscillation close to the critical volume, so that a smaller
or larger droplet “drips”. This leads to a smaller or larger residual drop whose oscillations
will be damped out much sooner or later, thereby (possibly) allowing the pendant drop
reach its maximum size Vc before or after it “drops”, and so on. The temporal spacing
between two drops arises from the damped oscillations close to the critical volume which
enables the drop to become smaller or larger before the pinching oﬀ regime.

Based on these observations, and the linear stability analysis consistent with the POD
we build a simple low dimensional model. Let X be a state variable characterising the
drop in a potential determined by the gravitational and surface energies as shown in
Fig. 9. Giving a physical interpretation of X is tricky; it can be related to the center
of gravity of the drop, as used for example by Kiyono et al 2003, but only indirectly
because diﬀerent shapes can have the same center of gravity. A better interpretation
of X relates it to the projection of the complete shape on a spatial mode of the drop
and indicates the location of the drop relative to its stationary solutions as shown in
Fig. 9 in the spirit of qualitative behaviour of dynamical systems. In the vicinity of the
minimum of the potential energy the drop oscillates stably with a frequency determined
by the curvature of the potential and damping rate determined by the spectrum of the
linearized equation of motion. Close to the saddle point S the drop can oscillate stably
or start necking, depending on the size of the perturbation. Indeed the height of the
barrier represented by the unstable branch U is the energy for drop nucleation. A simple
model potential characterising this is E = a(V )X + b(V )
3 X 3, where V is the drop volume.

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

109

Figure 9. Potential corresponding to the capillary-gravitational energy E = a(V )X +b(V )X 3/3
of the stable stationary pendant drop as a function of the drop volume V and the state of the
drop X. The stable position (solid line) for the pendant drop corresponds to the local minimum
of the potential, while the dashed line denotes the unstable solution.

This potential evolves with the drop volume so that the stable solution disappears via
a Saddle-Node bifurcation when a(Vc) = 0. Using these facts, we may then describe the
dynamical evolution of the drop via the equations

∂ttX + η(V )∂tX = a(V ) + b(V )X 2
∂tV

= q

(cid:26)

(5.1)

The ﬁrst equation describes the dynamics of the state variable X(t) with a scaled
damping η(V ) in the potential E, while the second equation quantiﬁes the increase in
the drop volume due to a ﬂow rate q. The ﬁrst equation of (5.1) charaterizes a simple
damped oscillator; the nonlinearity is the normal form for the saddle-node bifurcation
while the damped oscillations arise when we account for the stable oscillations of the
recoiling drop. Thus the equation is a natural consequence of the stability analysis and
the POD of the governing PDE. A mechanical analogue of (5.1) is a damped particle
moving on a curved surface forced in the direction V with a velocity q but free in the
orthogonal direction X. To ensure that the potential characterizes the drop close to its
stationary solution the spectrum of our dynamical system (5.1) must approximate that
obtained from the linear stability analysis of the stationary pendant drop described in
3. This leads to the following approximations for the functional form a, b, η for V 6 Vc :

§

2−V
2
c
V

a(V ) = V
b(V ) = α
V 3
η(V ) =

2β




2γ
δ+V

(5.2)

−



−
where α, β, γ and δ are ﬁtting parameters computed to match the spectrum of the
(3.6). The ﬁtting functional form for (5.2) of a, b, η are chosen to be simple and to have
a minimum of parameters. However other functional forms do not change the qualitative
behaviour of the solution to (5.1). The state variable X eventually diverges when it goes
over the unstable branch U or when V > Vc which event corresponds to the ejection
of a drop. The system is then reset bringing back X and V close to a stable solution
in the same way as the drop goes back to a volume V < Vc and close to a stable drop

110

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 10. (a) Total volume at the break up time as a function of the exit velocity v0 and
(b) the ratio of the volume of the emitted drop to the total volume of the drop. To a ﬁrst
approximation, this ratio varies linearly with the exit velocity v0.

Figure 11. Bifurcation diagram derived from (a) the full hydrodynamic model (3.6)
(R = 0.5, η = 0.02, g = 1, γ = 1). (b) the simple low-dimensional model (5.1,5.2)
(α = 10, β = 0.028, γ = −0.106, δ = −0.154). τn corresponds to the time between two drops and
v0 is the exit velocity. The two bifurcation diagrams are qualitatively very similar.

shape after pinch-oﬀ. In Fig. 10 by solving (3.6) numerically, we plot the total volume
V of the drop at the break-up point as well as the ratio of the ejected volume Ve to
the total volume V as functions of the exit velocity v0. We ﬁnd that ejected volume
v0V , so that the volume of the attached drop is a function of the total volume.
Ve ∼
Therefore, we choose the new value of X for the pendant drop keeping ∂tX the same
as at the break-up time; this last reinjection process is arbitrary but does not inﬂuence
the results qualitatively. Numerical simulations of the simple model (5.1-5.2) plotted in
Fig. 11b yields a bifurcation diagram for the time between droplets τn as a function
of v0. Comparing it qualitatively with the same data derived from the hydrodynamic
model (3.6) Fig. 11a shows that the transition to chaos occurs in a similar way as the
ﬂow rate increases, i.e. τn oscillates as a function of v0 followed by a simple period-
doubling and then by a transition to chaos via a period-doubling bifurcation. When
the dripping is chaotic we can also notice several qualitative similarities like a period-3
dripping between two chaotic regime, a reverse period-doubling bifurcation ending in a
period-2 dripping regime with a large diﬀerence in the interval of time between drops,
etc. The surprising similarities between the bifurcation diagrams suggest that simple
rationally derived models can capture much of the qualitative dynamics of dripping.

The model (5.1,5.2) is robust with the choice of the functional form a, b, η and respect
to the reinjection process emphasizing that the qualitative features of the dripping faucet

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

111

are due to primarily the Saddle-node bifurcation and the damped oscillations leading to
it. We note that although our model (5.1-5.2) may be reminiscent of the widely studied
family of mass-spring models ( see (Shaw 1984) as well as (Kiyono et al 1999) and refer-
ences therein) there is a qualitative diﬀerence. Unlike in all previous models, we account
for the all important Saddle-Node bifurcation represented by the nonlinear term in the
equation (5.1) and thus naturally account for the onset of the necking process.

An even simpler model which ignores the temporal dynamics and focuses exclusively

on the interval between drop emissions leads to a return map

∂tU = (iω
∂Z = ǫ + Z 2.

−

λ)U,

(cid:26)

−

Here U = X + iY is the amplitude of the oscillatory damped mode with the associated
eigenvalue iω
λ (λ > 0) and ǫ characterises the ﬂow rate and is associated with the
growing mode Z. As shown in Fig. (12) the return map is deﬁned using a parallelopiped
of length (A, A, B) in the phase-space (X, Y, Z) centred at the saddle-node point (Fig.
(12a)). We ﬁrst contruct the map from the plane Y = A, before the Saddle-Node area,
to the plane Z = B, after the Saddle-Node area. A point (Xi, A, Zi) is mapped into
(Xi+1, Yi+1, B) (see Fig. (12a)) via

A sin(ωτi))e−λτi
Xi+1 = (Xi cos(ωτi)
Yi+1 = (Xi cos(ωτi) + A sin(ωτi))e−λτi

−

(cid:26)

where τi is the return time.

arctan(B/√ǫ)

arctan(Zi/√ǫ)

τi =

−
√ǫ

In order to complete the construction of the dynamical model, we again need a global
reinjection process that resets the system and replaces the dynamics of pinch-oﬀ. The
simplest way to model the reinjection ﬂow is via a rigid rotation, as for instance

Xi+1 →
Yi+1 →

Xi+1
Zi+1

(cid:26)

Using (5.4) and (5.6), the Poincar´e map which models the process is then given by

arctan(B/√ǫ)

arctan(Zi/√ǫ)

τi

=

−
√ǫ
Xi+1 = (Xi cos(ωτi)
A sin(ωτi))e
Zi+1 = (Xi cos(ωτi) + A sin(ωτi))e

−

−λτi
−λτi






A numerical simulation of this return map shown in Fig. (12b) leads to a bifurcation
diagram very similar to that of the hydrodynamical model shown in Fig. (11a) and the
ODE modes (11b) .

6. A mechanical analogue of the dripping faucet

A natural mechanical analogue of the dripping faucet arises from the analysis presented
in the previous sections and is shown in Fig. 13a, where a frictional particle sits inside a
corrugated cogwheel rotating about an axis perpendicular to gravity. The particle may
start at the bottom of one of the local minima, but as the cogwheel rotates, this stable
static solution eventually disappears via a saddle-node bifurcation. The particle then

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

112

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 12. Bifurcation diagram for the simple return map (5.3). τn corresponds to the time
between two emitted drops and ǫ to the ﬂow rate (Here A = 1.4, B = 1, λ = 2.6 and ω = 20).
Again, we see the similarity to the bifurcation diagram obtained from the complete model (Fig.
11a) as well to that obtained from the ODE model (Fig. 11b).

escapes and performs damped oscillations about a new minimum similar to the previous
one, and the scenario is repeated. We see immediately that the rotation rate plays the role
of the ﬂow rate in the dripping faucet, while the periodic potential which is locally cubic
characterizes the capillary-gravity potential for the drop. The dripping then corresponds
to the large excursion of the particle from one minimum to another, accompanied by
inertial oscillations and damping. As the rotation rate becomes similar to the frequency
of the particle about its local minima, we can expect complex dynamics here just as in
the dripping faucet.

To quantify our mechanical analogue, we use an arc-length coordinate S(t) for the

position of the particle. Then its equation of motion, in dimensionless form, is

Here the vertical position of the particle y(S(t), t) is determined by the instantaneous
position of the cogwheel which is given as

∂ttS + ν∂tS =

∂sy

−

x(s, t) = (1 + a cos k(θ(s) + Ωt)) cos θ(s)
y(s, t) = (1 + a cos k(θ(s) + Ωt)) sin θ(s)

(cid:26)

As usual, here the relation between the cartesian coordinates and arc-length coordinates
is given by ds = (dx2 + dy2)1/2 which leads to

ds =

1 + 2a cos k(θ(s) + Ωt) + a2 cos2 k(θ(s) + Ωt) + a2k2 sin2 k(θ(s) + Ωt)dθ

(6.3)

q

In (6.2), Ω is the angular velocity of the cogwheel, k the wave number of the modulation
of the cogwheel a the amplitude of the cogs, and ν is the dimensionless friction parameter.
When Ω = 0 the particle sits in a stable static position in between two teeth. An unstable
solution close to the tip of the neighboring tooth separates the particle from another static
stable solution, and a large enough perturbation will enable the particle to go to this
solution just as a static drop with a volume less than Vc hanging from a faucet with the
ﬂow rate q = 0 will drip if perturbed strongly. When Ω
= 0 but is still small, the particle
moves from one local minimum to the next, accompanied by damped oscillations at a
typical frequency (∂sy)1/2, which varies with the location of the particle as for the drop.
This periodic transition between teeth eventually becomes chaotic when Ω becomes large
enough via a sequence of bifurcations as shown in Fig. 13b. We see that this bifurcation
diagram is qualitatively similar to those seen in the dripping faucet shown in Fig. 3, and

(6.1)

(6.2)

6
Chaotic Dripping Faucet

113

Figure 13. (a) A mechanical model for the dripping faucet consists of a damped particle moving
inside a cogwheel rotating with an angular velocity Ω. The teeth, i.e. the local minima correspond
to the local minima associated with static drops, and the angular velocity of rotation is similar
to the ﬂow rate. (b) The bifurcation diagram for the particle in a cogwheel showing τn the time
for the particle to move from one tooth to another as function of Ω obtained by solving the
equation (6.1,6.2) with k = 13, ν = 0.25, a = 0.01. Again, note the similarity of this bifurcation
diagram to that shown in Fig. 11,12.

the hierarchy of models considered earlier, i.e. the ODE model bifurcation diagram in
Fig. 11, and the return map bifurcation diagram shown in Fig. 12.

7. Discussion

Based on the study of the stability of a pendant drop and numerical simulations of a
lubrication-type model for the hydrodynamics of a dripping faucet, we have constructed
a hierarchy of simple models that qualitatively account for the various experimentally
observed behaviors of a dripping faucet. Following a numerical simulation of the lubrica-
tion equations that is used to obtain a bifurcation diagram for the dynamics of dripping,
we ﬁrst show that a simple ODE model based on the dynamics of just two modes is suf-
ﬁcient to capture the qualitative features of the bifurcation diagram. This led us to even
simpler model of a discrete map which also shows the same qualitative behaviour. Finally,
we propose a new mechanical analogue for the dripping faucet, one whose behaviour is
similar to that of the other models.

All our models diﬀer qualitatively from the many previous models proposed for drip-
ping over the last two decades, by focusing on the two key elements that govern the
dynamics of drop formation and ejection : a) the stability analysis of the static drop
close to its critical volume, b) the reinjection of the system back to the neighborhood
of a stable static solution. These models are corroborated by a POD of the numerical
solution determined by solving (3.6) and the spectral analysis of the static solution close
to the instability threshold. From the perspective of dynamical systems, our models in-
corporate a coupled system that invokes two classical normal forms associated with the
Saddle-Node bifurcation and the Shilnikov mechanism. As we have discussed, the former
corresponds to a loss of a stable ”Node” solution via the ”collision” with an unstable
”Saddle” in the context of the linear stability of a drop with V 6 Vc. The Shilnikov
mechanism for chaos is associated with the presence of damped oscillations and a global
reinjection (Guckenheimer and Holmes 1983, Arneodo et al 1985) which are physically
manifest in the damped capillary oscillations and the pinch-oﬀ process which eﬀectively
resets the system.

114

P. Coullet, L. Mahadevan and C.S. Riera

Figure 14. Location of the point of drop detachment zcut as a function of the exit velocity v0.
We see that as v0 increases, the shape of remaining drop which is originally close to that of the
stable solution with no waist, becomes closer to that of the ﬁrst unstable stationary solution
(the drop with one waist, also shown in Fig. 1). Our simple models are clearly not valid in
this regime, but by including this mode can be made better. As v) increases even further, the
remaining drop becomes long and slender, thus marking the transition from the dripping to the
jetting regime as seen above.

We conclude by pointing out the limitations and extensions of our simple hydro-
dynamical models for dripping. They are valid for small and intermediate ﬂow rates
when the dynamics of dripping is strongly inﬂuenced by the static solution, i..e the
remainder of the drop after ejection is still similar to the static solution. This notion
allows us to characterize and explain the transition from dripping to jetting, observed by
Clanet and Lasheras 1999, Ambravaneswaran et al 2004 and others, in a rational way.
Our simulations of the lubrication equations in
3 showed that the necking time τn is
independent of the exit velocity. During this time, the point where the drop eventually
v0τn (see Clanet and Lasheras 1999). As the ﬂow rate
detaches travels a distance ld ∼
increases the length of the remaining drop after ejection increases and so the shape is
no longer close to one of the stable stationary solutions shown in Fig. 1. At this stage
the dynamics of the dripping is not inﬂuenced by the stable stationary solution, an as-
sumption which is the main premise of all our models. This deﬁnes the transition from
dripping to jetting; in particular, the inﬂuence of the faucet on the dynamics is negligible
in this regime as the stable static solution ceases to inﬂuence the dynamical behavior of
the system. The long slender ﬂuid ﬁlament in the jetting regime also eventually breaks
into drops through the Savart-Plateau-Rayleigh instability, a regime that is qualitatively
diﬀerent from the one we have treated here.

§

More generally, our approach should be applicable to a variety of systems where we
see two relatively common ingredients: the loss of a static stable solution via a saddle-
node bifurcation and the dynamical return to a nearby state via a damped oscillatory

Chaotic Dripping Faucet

115

mode. Examples that come to mind readily include the chaotic nucleation of plumes in
convection, frictional oscillations at a rough interface etc.

REFERENCES

Ambravaneswaran, B. Phillips, S.D. & Basaran, O. A. 2000, Theoretical analysis of a dripping

faucet Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 5332-35.

Ambravaneswaran, B. Subramani, H.J. Phillips, S.D. & Basaran, O. A. 2004, Dripping-Jetting

Transitions in a Dripping Faucet Phys. Rev. Lett., 93 (3), 034501.

Arneodo, A. Coullet, P. Spiegel, E.A. & Tresser, C. 1985, Asymptotic chaos Physica D, 14,

Clanet, C. & Lasheras, J.C. 1999, Transition from dripping to jetting, J. Fluid Mech. , 383,

Coullet, P. Mahadevan, L. Riera, C.S. 2000, Return map for the chaotic dripping faucet, Prog.

Theo. Phys. Supp., 139 507-516.

Eggers, J. 1997, Nonlinear dynamics and breakup of free-surface ﬂows, Rev. Mod. Phys. , 69

327-347.

307-326.

(3), 865-929.

Eggers, J. & Dupont, T.F. 1994, Drop formation in a one-dimensional approximation of the

Navier-Stokes equation, J. Fluid Mech, 262, 205-221.

Eckmann, J.P. Ruelle, D. 1985, Ergodic-Theory of chaos and strange attractors, Rev. Mod.

Fuchikami, N. Ishioka, S. & Kiyono, K. 1999, Simulation of a dripping faucet, Phys. Soc. Japan,

Phys., 57 (3), 617-656.

68 (4), 1185-96.

Guckenheimer, J. & Holmes, P. 1983, Nonlinear Oscillations, dynamical systems and bifurcations

of vector ﬁelds, Springer-verlag, NY.

Holmes, P. Lumley, J.L. & Berkooz, G. 1998, Turbulence, coherent structures, dynamical systems

and symmetry, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kiyono, K. Fuchikami, N. 1999, Dripping faucet dynamics by an improved mass-spring model,

Phys. Soc. Japan, 68 (10), 3259-70.

Kiyono, K. Katsuyama, T. Masunaga, T. Fuchikami, N. 2003, Picture of the low-dimensional

structure in chaotic dripping faucets, Phys. Lett. A, 320, 47-52.

Padday, J.F. & Pitt, A.R. 1973, Stability of axisymmetric menisci, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. (A),

Riera, C.S. & Risler, E. 2002, Axisymmetric capillary surfaces as a dynamical system, Nonlin-

275, 489-528.

earity, 15, 1843-79.

Shaw, R.S. 1984, The dripping faucet as a model chaotic system, Aerial Press.

