4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spontaneous pinch-oﬀ in rotating Hele-Shaw ﬂows

R. Folch,1 E. Alvarez-Lacalle,2 J. Ort´ın,2 and J. Casademunt2
1Universiteit Leiden, Postbus 9506, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
2Departament ECM, Universitat de Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 647, E-08028, Barcelona, Spain

The dynamics of the interface between two immiscible ﬂuids in a rotating Hele-Shaw cell are stud-
ied experimentally, theoretically and by phase-ﬁeld simulations of the H-S equations using standard
boundary conditions. As the central, denser ﬂuid is centrifuged, it forms ﬁngering patterns with
long, thin radial ﬁlaments ended by a droplet, alternating with incoming ﬁngers of the outer, less
dense ﬂuid. Simulations show the length (width) of the ﬁlaments to grow (decay) roughly exponen-
tially, and the incoming ﬁnger tips to asymptotically approach a ﬁnite radius for n-fold symmetric
initial conditions; these thus tend to a stationary-shape “star-ﬁsh”, whose form is calculated. The
ﬁlament width decays with a time constant which depends only on the viscosity contrast, whereas
its length exhibits a completely universal growth rate; the latter is related to the run away of an
isolated droplet, for which we give an exact solution. The exponential behavior is clear for high
viscosity contrasts A, but important deviations are found for low A. Both experiments and simula-
tions show systematic pinch-oﬀ of the droplets at the tips of the ﬁlaments for low and not for high
A. A lubrication approximation is derived and successfully accounts for the ﬁlament thinning and
the diﬀerences with A; in particular, it explains why pure exponential thinning is not observed for
low A, and it could clarify the presence or absence of ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ itself, since the agree-
ment of experiments and simulations suggests that this phenomenon is contained in the Hele-Shaw
equations. This agreement includes both high- and low-A morphologies, and the growth rate of
the ﬁlament length for high A; for low A, the experimental time constant appears to be diﬀerent
from that predicted by standard Hele-Shaw boundary conditions and observed in simulations. An
eﬀective slip condition for the Poiseuille ﬂow of inner liquid across the cell gap in the case of two
liquids gives a possible explanation of this discrepancy.

PACS numbers: 47.55.Dz, 47.20.Ma, 47.11.+j, 68.03.Cd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Topological singularities such as interface pinch-oﬀ in
ﬂuid ﬂows have been the object of intense study in the
last decades [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The
pinch-oﬀ of a droplet from a volume of ﬂuid embedded in
another one is easy to observe in everyday life, and has
fascinated both physicists and applied mathematicians.
Because the interface between the two ﬂuids shrinks to
arbitrarily small scales at the point of detachment, a con-
tinuum, coarse-grained description must break down at
some stage. The failure of the macroscopic description is
reﬂected in the spontaneous generation of singular behav-
ior. In the neighborhood of such singularities, the prob-
lem might become scale-free, giving rise to self-similar
scaling behavior, for which some degree of universality
is naturally expected [1].
Interestingly, hydrodynamics
alone have been found suﬃcient to account for the oc-
currence of ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ in several cases.
It is
remarkable that the continuum, hydrodynamic descrip-
tion may correctly predict the occurrence of ﬁnite-time
singularities out of a smooth initial condition, and prop-
erly describe them all the way to the very microscopic
scales where atomic-scale forces take over. These forces
then implement the interface breakup and reconnection.
This is the case, for instance, of three-dimensional jets
[2]. The pursuit of this idea in the speciﬁc context of
rotating Hele-Shaw ﬂows is the basic motivation of the
present study.

Recently, macroscopic hydrodynamic equations have

also been used as a basic ingredient in the dynamics of
nanojets [3, 4], or in very thin membranes, where the
eﬀects of Van der Waals forces must be taken into account
[5, 6]. These are examples of nonlinear processes where
the macroscopic dynamics coupled with molecular forces
or thermal noise lead to pinch-oﬀ phenomena.

In the narrow gap between the two parallel glass plates
of a Hele-Shaw cell, the scale where the eﬀective two-
dimensional “macroscopic” description fails is basically
the thickness of the cell gap [7]. Although this cutoﬀ
is much larger (typically, of the order of the millime-
ter) than the microscopic cutoﬀ of the hydrodynamic de-
scription of 3d jets, it still makes sense to investigate to
what extent the 2d eﬀective dynamics in a Hele-Shaw cell
(playing the role of the “macroscopic” dynamics) lead to
the spontaneous occurrence of ﬁnite-time singularities.
The interface recombination will certainly introduce new
physics (not contained in the ordinary Hele-Shaw equa-
tions) which could easily depend on details that may not
be universal, such as wetting conditions, 3d structure of
the meniscus, contact line motion, etc.; the precise time
of the pinch-oﬀ may also depend on these details. How-
ever, the underlying idea is that the eﬀective cutoﬀ and
the details of the actual 3d pinch-oﬀ can in principle be
arbitrarily reduced, for instance changing the cell gap.
So, ultimately, the relevant question is what the pre-
diction of the eﬀective 2d (Hele-Shaw) dynamics is: If
the 2d dynamics lead themselves to ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ,
this would certainly assure the existence of ﬁnite-time
pinch-oﬀ in the real experiments, and would also deﬁne

an upper bound for the actual experimental pinch-oﬀ. If,
on the contrary, no ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ is obtained for
the Hele-Shaw dynamics, it will be relevant to study the
evolution of a thin neck as predicted by the eﬀective 2d
dynamics, in order to elucidate, in each particular case,
whether actual pinch-oﬀ would be expected invoking the
In this context, the simulations
additional 3d eﬀects.
performed within a phase-ﬁeld scheme are particularly
appropriate, because they incorporate a natural cutoﬀ
(the interface thickness) which controls the actual pinch-
oﬀ and which, like the cell gap in Hele-Shaw ﬂows, can
be modiﬁed at will to postpone the pinch-oﬀ of a narrow
ﬂuid ﬁlament.

It is well known that the eﬀective two-dimensional
Hele-Shaw dynamics can lead per se to pinch-oﬀ. In fact,
it was for this type of dynamics that ﬁnite-time pinch-
oﬀ singularities in a hydrodynamic description were ﬁrst
found [8, 9]. As opposed to the 3d case of a cylin-
drical interface, a 2d ﬂuid ﬁlament (two parallel inter-
faces) is stable to the Rayleigh criterion: The total in-
terface length (at constant area) is larger for any per-
turbation around straight interfaces. However, surface
tension alone has been shown to drive a conﬁguration of
two droplets of ﬂuid connected by a neck to ﬁnite-time
pinch-oﬀ in two-dimensional simulations, for certain ini-
tial conditions [10, 11]. A straight ﬁlament of ﬂuid can
also be made to pinch at inﬁnite time (and sometimes
also at ﬁnite time), with very speciﬁc boundary condi-
tions [8, 9, 12, 13, 14]. However, two-dimensional pinch-
oﬀ in unprepared situations emerging spontaneously in
externally driven dynamics, such as in traditional vis-
cous ﬁngering experiments, has not been addressed. One
of our main goals is to account for the spontaneous ap-
proach to pinch-oﬀ singularities often observed while a
highly nonlinear pattern develops following a morpho-
logical instability, in particular for rotating Hele-Shaw
ﬂows. Pattern formation and pinch-oﬀ singularities can
indeed be intimately related, as it will become apparent
in the case studied here.

≡

Another issue that it is worth addressing is the role
(µin −
of the viscosity contrast or Atwood ratio A
µout)/(µin + µout) (where µin and µout are the viscosities
of the inner and outer ﬂuids respectively) in the pinch-
oﬀ process. It is known that this parameter has a strong
inﬂuence on the interface shape near pinching in three
dimensions [6], but only recently has it been remarked
that the most studied limit A
1 might be a very spe-
cial case also in three dimensions [15]. In eﬀectively two
dimensions, experiments performed in this limit, with air
displacing a liquid in a channel geometry, show that the
ﬁngers formed due to the morphological instability com-
pete until a single ﬁnger is left [16]; the neck of the tran-
sient and ﬁnal ﬁnger(s) does not even pinch.
In con-
trast, when a denser liquid is put on top of a less dense
0–0.5) in the same
one of similar viscosity (typically A
but tilted channel, ﬁngers do not compete, but elongate
to form thin ﬁlaments with a droplet at their tip [17],
which can indeed pinch oﬀ [18]. One possible scenario

→

∼

2

to explain this diﬀerent tendency to pinch-oﬀ might con-
sist in relating the absence of competition for low A with
the formation of long ﬁlaments, which could then pinch
by mechanisms not qualitatively diﬀerent from those of
previous studies [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].

We have performed experiments in a rotating Hele-
Shaw cell, where a drop of the more dense ﬂuid is placed
at the center and the instability is driven by the cen-
trifugal force. The idea is to favor the formation of long
(radial) ﬁlaments by the use of a driving force which in-
creases as the ﬁngers become longer. The natural ques-
tion to pose is then whether these long ﬁlaments will also
pinch for high viscosity contrasts.

Long ﬁngers are indeed formed and they stretch and
narrow for any viscosity contrast A. However,
for
high values of A we only observe pinch-oﬀ sporadically,
whereas we ﬁnd it systematically for low ones. This rules
out the above scenario. It rather suggests that the pre-
cise nonlinear dynamics close to pinch-oﬀ, and not only
the overall morphology, is also dependent on the viscosity
contrast A. This dependence could either be contained in
the (2d) Hele-Shaw dynamics or, instead, enter through
diﬀerent wetting properties for air-oil (high A) and oil-
oil (low A) interfaces when the width of the ﬁlaments
becomes comparable to the cell gap in our experiments.

We have run phase-ﬁeld simulations of the two-
dimensional dynamics which lead to pinch-oﬀ singular-
ities for low, but not high viscosity contrast. Although
we can only track the ﬁrst stages of the approach, the ma-
jor dependence of the pinching dynamics on the viscosity
contrast thus seems to be contained in the Hele-Shaw
equations.
In particular, our simulations indicate that
ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ could be contained (at least) in low-
A Hele-Shaw dynamics for more general settings than
those originally studied in Refs. [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
Therefore, it is plausible that the eﬀect of the cutoﬀ (here,
the cell gap), although entering the problem earlier than
in usual three-dimensional cases, can still be regarded
as an implementation of pinch-oﬀ and reconnection, not
necessarily aﬀecting signiﬁcantly the approach to pinch-
oﬀ, which is governed by the Hele-Shaw dynamics.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II
we present the experimental results, with an indication of
scaling behavior. This is then explained in the following
section by simple theoretical arguments valid asymptot-
ically. In Sec. IV we test this basic picture by numerical
simulations of the Hele-Shaw equations. These conﬁrm
theory and experiments to agree for high viscosity con-
trasts, whereas puzzles remain for low ones. One of these
can be solved by rethinking the experimental time scale
as done in Sec. V, while another requires a reﬁnement
of the theory which is performed in Sec. VI. The results
are summarized and further discussed in Sec. VII.

II. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We have performed two sets of experiments in a rotat-
ing Hele-Shaw cell: one for high and one for low viscosity
contrast. These two types of experiments were already
performed for other purposes in [19] and [20]; we repeat
them here to address the scaling behaviors and the pres-
ence of pinch-oﬀ as functions of viscosity contrast. Our
cell consists of two horizontal glass plates, 7 or 10 mm
thick and 390 mm in diameter, separated by diﬀerent
spacers of height b = 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 1.0, 1.4 mm. The cell
is rotated around a vertical axis intersecting its center,
with a controlled frequency Ω, and the interface shape is
recorded with a CCD camera.

±

In a ﬁrst set of experiments, a silicone oil of viscosity
10kg/m3 at 20◦C
µin = 50cp and density ρin = 975
and air are used as inner an outer ﬂuids, respectively, in
a prewetted cell [21]. This yields A = 1 and ∆ρ = ρin −
0.98g/cm3, and an interfacial tension σ = 20.7
ρout ≃
mN/m. In a second set of experiments, we use another
10kg/m3) as
silicone oil (µin = 530
±
inner, and a vaseline oil (µout = 190
±
10kg/m3) as outer ﬂuid. In this case A = 0.45
0.05,
0.7mN/m. Mean values are
∆ρ
±
given at 20◦C, and the uncertainty in the viscosities (and
their contrast A) accounts for temperature variations.

0.10 g/cm3, σ = 1.8

50cp, ρout = 875

50cp, ρin = 975

±

±

±

≃

≃

Figures 1(a,b) and 1(c,d) show the typical patterns
formed at two diﬀerent stages, for high (A = 1) and low
0.45) viscosity contrast, respectively. Although the
(A
nonlinear dynamics depend signiﬁcantly on the viscosity
contrast, as we can see, let us focus for the moment on
those features which are generic to any value of A: After
some latency time, the linear instability leads to small
undulations on the initial circle of radius R0. These un-
dulations grow into radial ﬁngers of silicone oil. As they
are further centrifuged, the ﬁngers develop overhangs;
their tips evolve into diﬀerentiated droplets, whereas the
overhang regions themselves narrow and stretch to be-
come thin ﬁlaments, which continue to stretch and nar-
row. In parallel with this, incoming ﬁngers of less dense
ﬂuid advance towards the cell center. However, they do
not develop thin ﬁlaments nor droplets, and they slow
down as they approach the cell center.

The ﬁlament thinning and the dynamics of the incom-
ing ﬁngers are rather diﬃcult to measure accurately and
not very sharply deﬁned experimentally. In contrast, the
stretching of an individual ﬁlament, or, more precisely,
the radial coordinate of the droplet at its tip, R, is more
readily accessible. The squares (A = 1) and the circles
(A
0.45) in Fig. 2 indicate this droplet position (even
after pinch-oﬀ) in units of the radius R0 of the initial
circle and in log scale, as a function of time t in units of
the time scale

∼

t∗ =

12(µin + µout)
b2Ω2∆ρ

.

(1)

The open squares and circles indicate the evolution of the
furthest droplet in Figs. 1(a,b) and 1(c,d) respectively.

3

FIG. 1: Pattern evolution for A = 1, b = 0.5mm, Ω =
120rev/min and R0 = 50 mm (a,b), and A ≃ 0.45, Ω =
180rev/min and R0 = 38 mm (c,d). Snapshots (3R0 × 3R0)
16.5s (a) and 22.5s (b), and 122s (c) and 158s (d) after be-
ginning rotation.

As we can see, the growth tends to be roughly ex-
ponential, at least for R/R0 > 2. (Note that R/R0 < 2
corresponds rather to relatively small ﬁngers, rather than
droplets at the tip of thin ﬁlaments). It seems reasonable
to measure a growth rate —the slope of linear ﬁts (solid
lines) in Fig. 2; this yields m = 0.8–1.0 with good linear-
ity beyond R = 2R0 for A = 1, and m = 1.25
1.5
for A
0.45 curves tend to bend a bit
more, but this eventual bending is uncorrelated with the
droplet pinch-oﬀ: To check this, we have performed an
experiment with an isolated, oﬀ-center circular droplet;
it roughly keeps its circular shape and runs away at a
very similar rate (m = 1.45, triangles).

0.45. A

≃

≃

−

≃

The most striking diﬀerence between high (A = 1)
and low (A
0.45) viscosity contrast is the system-
atic droplet pinch-oﬀ observed for low, but not high A.
For the latter, ﬁlaments keep on growing and stretching,
while reaching a width comparable to the cell gap, that
is close to the natural cutoﬀ. While we have not spanned
the whole range of A, all previous evidence shows that
the so-called low contrast behavior is qualitatively un-
changed for most of the range of A, and only very close
to A = 1 signiﬁcant diﬀerences are found. This has been
recently discussed in Refs. [19, 22].

Another diﬀerence seems to be the growth rate of
droplets (connected or not to ﬁlaments). The uncertain-
ties in the viscosities are not suﬃcient to account for it:
droplets seem to be centrifuged faster in dimensionless
time for low than for high viscosity contrasts. Our dis-
cussion on this is postponed to Sec. V.

m=1.33

m=1.42

m=1.25

m=0.92

m=0.87

m=0.84

2.0

o

/

R
R

3.7

3.2

2.72.7
2.5
2.4

2.2

1.9

1.7

1.5

1.3

1.2

1.01.0

m=1.45

0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

1.8

t/t

*

FIG. 2: Droplet kinetics: Evolution (as a function of scaled
time) of the radial coordinate of (i) the center of mass of
the drop at the tip of three diﬀerent ﬁlaments for A ≃ 0.45,
before and after pinch-oﬀ (circles); (ii) the center of mass of
an isolated drop for A ≃ 0.45 (triangles); (iii) the tip of three
diﬀerent ﬁlaments for A = 1 (squares). Circles and triangle
have been translated to earlier times for comparison. Open
symbols correspond to the most excentric drops in Fig. 1; m
are the slopes of linear ﬁts.

III. THEORETICAL SCENARIO

We try to link here by continuity arguments the ﬁla-
ment thinning and stretching and the evolution of incom-
ing ﬁngers, and calculate the various growth and decay
rates in a certain approximation. Because the dynam-
ics of droplets at the tip of ﬁlaments should aﬀect their
stretching, we also construct an exact time-dependent
solution for an oﬀ-center isolated droplet. Finally, we ex-
plore the existence of stationary-shape solutions as possi-
ble asymptotic attractors suggested by the slowing down
of incoming ﬁngers.

A. Scalings

y

x=Rn

ρ

h(x)

vx

vx

vn

R

4

ρ
0

α

s^

x

^n

FIG. 3: Sketch of a ﬁlament of ﬂuid with a droplet at its tip.

ular, “star-ﬁsh” patterns have been observed in an ad
hoc geometrical model for the normal velocity of a front
with local mass conservation on the interface (+ a con-
stant ﬂux) [23]. However, incompressibility also generally
leads to non-locality, which will turn out to be crucial for
low viscosity contrasts and for the presence of pinch-oﬀ
singularities.

Let us ﬁrst address the ﬁlament dynamics by means of
a continuity equation in the overall direction of the ﬁla-
ment x, which reﬂects the incompressibility of the inner
ﬂuid:

∂th + ∂x(hvˆx) = 0,

(2)

where h(x, t) is the local y coordinate of either the upper
or the lower interfaces, and vˆx is the x component of the
ﬂuid velocity inside the ﬁlament (see Fig. 3).

Motivated by the experimental observations, we look

for a scaling solution of the form

h(x, t) = L(t)h0[xL(t)],

where L(t) is a dimensionless scaling factor. Substituting
this ansatz into Eq. (2), we ﬁnd

∂tL
L

−

=

h0∂xvˆx + vˆx∂xh0
h0 + x∂xh0

= K,

where K is independent of x.

If vˆx happens to be either (i) a constant along the
ﬁlament or (ii) proportional to x, vˆx = Kx, a per-
fectly straight ﬁlament (h0 independent of x) satisﬁes
Eq. (4) and hence stays straight. Moreover, if and only
if vˆx = Kx, any function h0(x) satisﬁes Eq.
(4) and
preserves its form. Interestingly, we will see that, for a
straight ﬁlament, (i) corresponds to the standard chan-
nel geometry, and that our setup mostly falls in case (ii).
In contrast, the radial case with injection, for example,
cannot exhibit this type of self-similar solutions.

We ﬁnd that, whenever the above scaling ansatz is
valid, and further assuming K to be constant in time,
then L = e−Kt. The initial condition h0(x) thus narrows
exponentially

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Fluid incompressibility imposes ﬂuid area conserva-
tion, which intuitively forces ﬁlaments to stretch and/or
feed the droplet at their tip as they narrow, and ﬁngers
of less dense ﬂuid to grow inwards as mass is transported
outwards through the ﬁlaments. Area conservation hence
seems an important feature of the dynamics. In partic-

and stretches

h = h0e−Kt

Rn = Rn(t = 0)eKt

|

(where Rn = x
∂th0(x, t) = 0) with a time constant
set by the inner ﬂuid velocity. Figure 3 schematically
shows the in- and outgoing ﬂow in this case. Eq. (6)
is a statement that a reference point on the interface is
advected with the ﬁlament as this is stretched. In partic-
ular, if applied to the neck of the ﬁlament just before the
droplet as represented in Fig. 3, it would predict the to-
tal ﬁlament length to grow with the same time constant
K with which its width decays. However, note that the
outgoing ﬂux of inner ﬂuid at the neck can go into the
droplet or contribute to the ﬁlament stretching. If some
fraction of it actually goes into the droplet (as observed
in the experiments), the scaling of the radial coordinate
of the neck will be delayed with respect to the thinning
rate K.

Finally, in order to relate this ﬁlament scaling with
the incoming ﬁngers, consider a reference circle of radius
Rref intersecting all ﬁlaments near their root, where they
begin to look straight. The outwards ﬂux of denser ﬂuid
through the circle and inside each ﬁlament is 2h(t)vˆx(x =
Rref ), and assuming again that vˆx(Rref ) does not depend
on time, we ﬁnd it to scale as e−Kt. In general, the area
of denser ﬂuid enclosed by this reference circle a should
hence asymptotically decay with the same rate,

a = a(t

) + [a(t = 0)

a(t

→ ∞

−

→ ∞

)] e−Kt.

(7)

A similar slowing down can then be expected for the
radial position of the tips of identical incoming ﬁngers.

B. Exponential behavior and time constant

We now show that, for a straight ﬁlament, vˆx is linear
in x as we anticipated, and we ﬁnd the time constant K,
which we have seen to set the time scale of the various
exponential behaviors discussed so far. For that purpose,
let us compute the tangential velocity jump across the
interface.

The 2d velocity ﬁeld ui is proportional to the gradients
of the pressure ﬁeld pi (Darcy’s law), where the subscript
i labels the inner (i =in) and outer (i =out) ﬂuids. For
a rotating cell [19]

~ui =

b2
12µi (cid:16)

~
∇

pi

−

ρiΩ2rˆr
(cid:17)

,

−

(8)

where r is distance to the rotation axis and ˆr is a unit
radial vector pointing outwards. Using the standard
boundary condition of Laplace law for the capillary pres-
|out = σκ, where
sure jump across the interface, p
the bar
stands for the limit value when approaching the
interface from either side and κ is the interface curvature
in the cell plane, we obtain

|in −

p

|

5

where s is a coordinate tangential to the interface and ˆs
the unit vector in that direction.

~u

|in ·

≃

ˆs, which

In our sketch (Fig. 3), we identify vˆx

|out ·

is a function of the local interface geometry and (1
−
A)~u
ˆs, the solution of a non-local problem. To keep
the problem local, we now assume that the outer ﬂuid
ˆs (Note
approaches the ﬁlament normal to it, ~u
that this assumption is not necessary for A = 1).

|out ⊥
ˆr) ﬁlament, we obtain

For a straight (κ = 0) radial (ˆx

the anticipated vˆx = Kx and the time constant

k

K =

b2∆ρΩ2
6(µin + µout)(1 + A)

=

2
1 + A

1
t∗ =

b2∆ρΩ2
12µin

(10)

[case (ii) above]. One might wonder how a scale-free so-
lution is possible without requiring the ﬁlament width to
be much smaller than any other length scale, as it is le-
gitimate to do close enough to pinch-oﬀ [1]. The answer
is that the assumption of ﬂatness has removed the capil-
lary length (proportional to σ) from the local problem; it
still sets, together with the radius of the initial condition
R0, the size of e.g. the droplet at the tip of the ﬁlaments,
but no external length scale can be felt when dropping
ˆs. This allows for scal-
the nonlocal term (1
1. It
ing solutions to exist well before pinch-oﬀ for A
is this approach to pinch-oﬀ, rather than the pinch-oﬀ
phenomenon itself, which will be further studied in this
article.

|out ·

A)~u

−

≡

For a tangential ﬁlament, K = 0 and the ﬁlament
is stationary [case (i) above], which is consistent with
our observations for the tangential segments of some ﬁl-
aments. These segments are found where a tip split (for
A = 0, see Fig. 1(c,d)) or at the point where an incom-
ing ﬁnger was overcome and stopped by its neighbors (for
A = 1, see Fig. 1(a,b)).

For the case of viscous ﬁngering in a channel, the linear
increase in the centrifugal force is replaced by a constant
gravity (or equivalent injection). We can easily track this
diﬀerence to yield a ﬂuid velocity inside a ﬁlament par-
allel to the gravity or injection direction vˆx independent
of x. The ﬁlament width will again be stationary [case
(i) above]. We see by comparison that rotation not only
ensures the formation of long ﬁlaments as we expected,
but also brings the two interfaces close together.
For not completely straight ﬁlaments h(x), vx

= Kx.
Therefore, strictly speaking, the scaling solution Eq. (3)
does not hold for any h0(x), but only for a straight ﬁl-
ament. It remains an approximate solution for slightly
curved ﬁlaments (see Sec. VI), but it makes little sense
for the droplets at the tip of the ﬁlaments. This raises the
issue of dynamics of the droplet, which could potentially
aﬀect the ﬁlament stretching.

C.

Isolated droplet

ˆs

(~u

·

|out −

~u

|in) =

b2
σ∂sκ
6(µin + µout)
(cid:0)
|out) ,
|in + ~u
(~u
+Aˆs

·

−

∆ρΩ2rˆr

·

ˆs
(cid:1)
(9)

The velocity found for the ﬁlament stretching has an
elementary interpretation: In the overdamped limit as-
sociated to Darcy’s law, all forces balance. The inner

6
ˆs

≃

ﬂuid velocity vx will hence be that which makes friction
balance the other external forces, namely the centrifugal
force and the force exerted by the outer ﬂuid through its
pressure gradients. The latter can be derived from an-
other force balance, now in the outer ﬂuid. There, the
viscous forces vanish in the x direction with our assump-
ˆx, or even without this assumption for
tion ~uout ⊥
A = 1, since it corresponds to µout = 0. Thanks to this,
the other forces in the outer ﬂuid (centrifugal and pres-
sure gradients) balance in this direction. Thus, back in
the inner ﬂuid, friction, 12µinvx/b2, only needs to com-
pensate for centrifugal forces, ∆ρΩ2x. This gives rise to
the velocity found, vx = Kx with K given by Eq. (10).
For a droplet (a closed interface), in contrast, the outer
ﬂuid needs to be moved in the x direction. The outer
viscosity and velocity ﬁeld enter the force balance, and
vˆx
Kx, where vˆx is now the velocity of the center
of mass of the droplet, and the equality holds only for
A = 1. Except for A = 1, it is clear that the ﬁlament
stretching will indeed be aﬀected by this lower droplet
velocity. Furthermore, vˆx will depend on the outer ﬂow
ﬁeld, and hence on the droplet shape.

≤

For a slightly oﬀ-center circular droplet, vˆx is known:
Such a droplet corresponds to the mode 1 in a linear
stability analysis of a circular, centered drop. Its growth
rate is K ′ = 1/t∗ = b2∆ρΩ2/[12(µin + µout)] [19], where
we readily see that it is the sum of viscosities, and not
only the inner one, what counts.

We now compute the velocity for a circular droplet
∂sκ = 0 rigorously. Preserving the circular shape re-
quires that ~uin = ˙R ˆx everywhere (R is distance from
the rotation axis to the center of the droplet), so that
the circle be just translated as a whole. We express the
unit vectors tangential (ˆs) and normal (ˆn) to the inter-
face and the radial vector ~r connecting the rotation axis
and a point on the interface in polar coordinates (ρ, α)
with respect to the center of the droplet (see Fig. 3),
R sin α.
and compute ˆs
For A = 1, Eq. (9) reduces to a simple geometric re-
lation between the two. Interestingly, like the ﬁlament
scaling, this is veriﬁed either for a channel under injec-
tion or gravity ( ˙R is then a constant) or for a rotating
˙R = K ′R, but not for a general
cell as presented here,
driving force or geometry. We hence ﬁnd that a circular
oﬀ-center droplet is a time-dependent solution in a chan-
nel or rotating cell for A = 1 as was previously found
using conformal mapping techniques in [24].

˙R sin α and ~r

|in =

ˆs =

−

−

~u

·

·

(9), we ﬁnd ˆs

For A < 1, the outer ﬂow enters the problem. If a cir-
cular droplet is to remain a solution, it has to match the
linear regime. At that stage, we will still have ˙R = K ′R,
regardless of the viscosity contrast. Substituting this into
~uin = ˙R sin α. Con-
Eq.
−
tinuity of normal velocities across the interface gives us
|out = ˙R cos α, and we thus ﬁnd the outer velocity
ˆn
|out = ˙R(ˆx cos 2α + ˆy sin 2α). We
on the interface to be ~u
then propose the outer velocity ﬁeld to be the product
of its value on the interface and a function of ρ only. We
ﬁnd that this can indeed fulﬁll incompressibility if the

|out =

~u

~u

ˆs

·

·

·

6

droplet is isolated, i.e., if there are no other boundary
conditions to be satisﬁed elsewhere. For the channel ge-
ometry, this corresponds to the limit in which the droplet
is much smaller than the distance between the walls. The
complete solution reads

~uin = ˙Rˆx,
~uout = ˙R(ρ0/ρ)2(ˆx cos 2α + ˆy sin 2α),

(11a)

(11b)

′

t.

R = R(t = 0)eK

(11c)
The corresponding streamlines in the outer ﬂuid ρ/ρ0 ∝
sin(α), are circles of diﬀerent radii tangential to y = 0
and passing through the center of the droplet, although
they change into horizontal lines inside it (see Fig. 10
bottom right).

Hence, an oﬀ-center circle turns out to be an exact
time-dependent solution for any viscosity contrast and
independent of it, even beyond the linear regime. For
A = 1, K ′ = K and the ﬁlament stretching and the
droplet runaway coincide regardless of the droplet shape
and whether it is near a ﬁlament or not. This single time
constant should hence be robust, and indeed an only
slightly lower value [(0.8–1.0)/t∗] is systematically ob-
served in our experiments (squares in Fig. 2). For A < 1,
in contrast, K ′ < K, and an isolated, circular droplet has
a time constant down to twice smaller (for A = 0) than
that of the ﬁlament stretching. For a droplet connected
to the tip of a ﬁlament (neither isolated nor circular), we
do not know its dynamics rigorously. Our experiments
are puzzling in this respect: Isolated droplets (triangles
in Fig. 2) and those connected to a ﬁlament (circles) dis-
play the same growth rate; consistency with the theory
then requires it to be K ′ (the same than for A = 1), since
the isolated droplet solution is exact. However, we seem
to ﬁnd a growth rate of K [(1.25–1.5)/t∗], and, in any
case, higher than the measured value for A = 1. Our
simulations will help clarify this point.

D. Stationary-shape solution

The various scaling behaviors derived so far point at an
asymptotic pattern enclosing a ﬁnite area [Eq. (7); see
Fig. 4] with radial, semi-inﬁnite [Eq. (6)] and straight
[Eqs. (6) and (5)] ﬁlaments of zero width [Eq. (5)] (see
Fig. 4) with a droplet at their tip.

In a stationary state, ~uin = ~uout = 0 by deﬁnition, and
the interface shape must balance exactly surface tension
with the centrifugal force in Eq. (9):

σ∂sκ = ∆ρΩ2~r

ˆs.

·

(12)

Noting that ˆs = d~r/ds, where s is arclength along the
interface, we can integrate the above equation once to
ﬁnd

κ(s) = κ(s = 0) + ∆ρΩ2/(2σ) [r2(s)

r2(s = 0)]. (13)

−

We see that the curvature of the interface κ increases
monotonically with the distance r to the rotation axis.

7

crossing. Therefore, for given experimental parameters,
the stationary-shape solutions only exist for discrete val-
ues of r(s = 0) (note that unequal arches cannot meet at
a single distance r(s = 0) from the center). This sets up
a selection problem for the values of r(s = 0).

Dynamically, such a solution will be approached with
a certain number of ﬁngers. This number may not be
unambiguously deﬁned for unequal ﬁnger conﬁgurations,
and it is indeed a dynamic variable for high viscosity con-
trasts. Furthermore, the initial condition is generically
nonsymmetric, with some ﬁngers competing and advanc-
ing over others. As a consequence, real experiments and
numerical simulations can evolve towards conﬁgurations
close to the above stationary-shape solutions during a
transient but will eventually depart from them. How-
ever, for initially equal ﬁngers as those one can produce
in simulations (see next section), the dynamics conserve
the number of ﬁngers regardless of the viscosity contrast.
Hence, only the stationary-shape solution of length scale
r(s = 0) with the number of ﬁngers of the initial condi-
tion can be approached. This then unambiguously selects
the scale r(s = 0) and the area enclosed by the stationary
interface a(t

) (Eq. 7).

We thus see that the combination of the scaling solu-
tions and the stationary state derived could specify the
asymptotic dynamics of equal ﬁngers and the ultimate in-
terface shape. As for its relevance for unequal ﬁngers, we
point out two facts: First, we ﬁnd reasonable agreement
between the exponential rate predicted by this simple
theory and that measured experimentally for the radial
position of the droplets at the tip of the ﬁlaments. Sec-
ond, the existence of the above symmetrical stationary
solutions could explain the experimental observation of
plateaux in the evolution of the area of inner ﬂuid con-
tained in a reference circle, as a function of time in Ref.
[19]. In fact, in those experiments the interface could suc-
cessively visit the neighborhood of stationary states for
diﬀerent numbers of ﬁngers, and correspondingly slow
down the dynamics close to them until some event (typ-
ically a pinch-oﬀ) would trigger again the dynamics.

→ ∞

IV. NUMERICAL TESTS

We test the basic picture presented above by phase-
ﬁeld simulations of the full Hele-Shaw dynamics. They
are compared to experimental results and to a numerical
solution for the stationary arches.

A. Method

First we adimensionalize the problem: lengths will be
measured in units of the initial drop radius R0, and time
in units of t∗ as given by Eq.
(1). All quantities ap-
pearing below will be dimensionless. The scaling laws
in the previous section can be casted into dimensionless

FIG. 4: Stationary solutions in a rotating H-S cell with four-
and six-fold symmetry.

In general, the interface will go from convex to concave
as r is increased. The solutions of Eq. (12) which do
change concavity do not resemble our observed patterns,
but have a petal shape and are unstable [25]. We hence
turn to purely convex stationary solutions of Eq. (12),
up to the point where κ = 0. These will represent the
asymptotic incoming ﬁngers. To connect them with the
radial, straight ﬁlaments, we impose locally radial and
straight ends at an arbitrary distance r(s = 0) from the
rotation axis as boundary conditions. Any other connec-
tion would cause ∂sκ in Eq. (12) to diverge.

For given experimental parameters ∆ρΩ2/σ, this com-
pletely determines the solution, an arch covering a certain
angle. This angle is a continuous function of the only di-
mensionless ratio we can construct, ∆ρΩ2r(s = 0)3/σ,
and hence only for discrete values of this ratio is the an-
gle a submultiple of 2π. This then allows one to connect
an integer number of equal arches to form an apparently
closed interface, as we show in Fig. 4. This could not
be a stationary solution on its own, since actually clos-
ing the interface would imply that the arches meet in
cusps. We continue each arch end by a straight, semi-
inﬁnite radial line, replacing each cusp with an inﬁnite,
straight ﬁlament of zero width. These ﬁlaments present
no ﬂux inside (ﬁnite velocity but zero width) nor induce
any ﬂow outside. They are hence compatible with sta-
tionary arches. Finally, the interface is closed by placing
a droplet of arbitrary size at the tip of each inﬁnite ﬁla-
ment. Although a moving droplet does induce an outside
ﬂow around it, this ﬁnite disturbance vanishes near the
center for an inﬁnite ﬁlament.

Thus, we have constructed a solution which shape is
stationary at ﬁnite distances. Its physical relevance, how-
ever, remains to be checked. The slowing down of in-
coming ﬁngers derived above and the ﬂattening of an
initially curved ﬁlament h(x) [Eqs. (6) and (5)] are sug-
gestive that such a solution can indeed be an attractor of
the dynamics for initial conditions with the appropriate
n-fold symmetry, and the numerical simulations in next
section and the results of Sec. VI further support this
idea.

A related issue is the selection of the length scale
r(s = 0) of the stationary arches. For ﬁxed boundary
conditions, only discrete values of the dimensionless ra-
tio ∆ρΩ2r(s = 0)3/σ allow equal arches to meet without

form just by considering all quantities appearing there
dimensionless and redeﬁning K = 2/(1 + A) and K ′ = 1.
The standard Hele-Shaw dynamics is deﬁned by the in-
compressibility condition already used before (~
~ui = 0),
∇·
together with the continuity of normal velocities across
the interface and the tangential velocity jump [Eq. (9)]
as boundary conditions. Thanks to incompressibility, we
can deﬁne a stream function ~u = ~
ψˆz (where ˆz is the
direction perpendicular to the plates), which is contin-
uous across the interface. We thus obtain the following
governing equations [26, 27]:

∇ ×

∂sψ

|in = ∂sψ
∂ψ
∂n |out −

2ψ = 0,
vn

∇
|out =
∂ψ
∂n |in = Γ,

−

(14a)
(14b)

(14c)

where the ﬁrst expresses that the ﬂow is irrotational in
each ﬂuid, the second is the continuity of normal veloci-
ties, and the third, their tangential jump. The magnitude
of this jump is the strength Γ of a divergent vorticity
peaked on the interface, Γ
|out),
where γ/2
ˆs is its local part. We see that
the dynamics are controlled only by two dimensionless
parameters: the viscosity contrast A and the dimension-
less surface tension B = σ/[∆ρΩ2R3
0] (the ratio of stabi-
lizing to destabilizing forces). Remarkably, none of the
scalings derived in the previous section depends on B.

|in + ∂nψ

γ + A(∂nψ

(B ~
∇

rˆr)

≡

≡

−

κ

·

Simulations were run using a phase ﬁeld model pre-

sented in [28] and extensively tested in [29]:

ǫ

∂ψ
∂t

=

2ψ + A~

(θ ~
∇

∇ ·

ψ) +

∇

1
ǫ

1
2√2

γ(θ)(1

θ2),(15a)

−

ǫ2 ∂θ
∂t

= f (θ) + ǫ2

~
2θ + ǫ2κ(θ)
θ
∇
|

|

∇

+ ǫ2ˆz

ψ

(~
∇

·

θ),

~
∇

×

(15b)

≡

×

where θ is the phase ﬁeld, an auxiliary ﬁeld distinguishing
between the two ﬂuids, f (θ)
(B ~
∇
and ˆs(θ)

θ2), γ(θ)
ˆn(θ), with ˆn(θ)

κ(θ) + ˆy) and κ(θ)

2 ≡
≡

ˆs(θ)
·
~∇θ
| ~∇θ|

≡
~
∇ ·

≡ −

ˆn(θ)

θ(1

ˆz.

−

Apart from the physical control parameters A and B,
the dynamics in this model also depend on an artiﬁcial
interface thickness ǫ and a relaxation time for the stream
function (which is diﬀusive, not Laplacian) ˜ǫ. In the limit
ǫ, ˜ǫ
0, the dynamics are strictly those of Eqs. (14a–
14c). For ﬁnite values of ǫ, ˜ǫ, an error bound is guaran-
teed for any given magnitude by conveniently decreasing
ǫ, ˜ǫ [29].

→

A very interesting feature of this type of model is that
both ﬂuids and the interface between them are treated
as bulk. One consequence of this is that the model is
well behaved as two interfaces break up and reconnect,
which enables us to study the dynamics after pinch-oﬀ
in a very natural way. This has been demonstrated very

8

recently [30] for the model used here [28, 29] reformu-
lated in terms of the velocity vector. Let us add a note
of caution: When two interfaces approach to distances
comparable to their thicknesses ǫ (more precisely, below
5ǫ from numerical tests) they attract each other. This
triggers the pinch-oﬀ. One could think of this eﬀect as a
phenomenological “pinch rule”. We nevertheless do not
pretend the phase-ﬁeld dynamics near pinch-oﬀ to rep-
resent the eﬀect of the third dimension nor the eventual
breakdown of a hydrodynamic description. Our approach
is to simulate only the bidimensional Hele-Shaw dynam-
(ǫ), and continue to simulate
ics down to distances of
them once the reconnected interfaces have separated a
distance of the same order, very much as in the experi-
ments, where the Hele-Shaw dynamics can be considered
to be accurate before and after the two interfaces were
separated a distance of
(b). The crossover from the
Hele-Shaw dynamics to interface interaction via their ﬁ-
nite thicknesses is very abrupt, enabling us to clearly
separate one from the other.

O

O

For reliable quantitative comparison with theory and
experiments, we explicitly check convergence of the time
constant K in ǫ, ˜ǫ, since ˜ǫ conveys some ﬁnite diﬀusion
time to the ﬂow, and ǫ delays the interface advance with
respect to the normal ﬂuid velocities [28]. We thus es-
tablish exponential rate values for the ǫ, ˜ǫ
0 limit, i.e.,
for the Hele-Shaw dynamics, and bounds for ǫ, ˜ǫ to ob-
tain those values in practice. For ˜ǫ, a value of ˜ǫ = 0.5
turns out to suﬃce, and it is used in the following unless
otherwise stated. Convergence in ǫ is discussed case by
case.

→

We numerically integrate the above model with an Eu-
ler scheme and centered diﬀerences. The time step dt is
taken to be close to the stability limit; dt = 0.2˜ǫdx2 un-
less otherwise stated, where dx is the mesh size. Conver-
gence of the solution is also tested changing dx (dx = ǫ
generally suﬃces as shown in [29]). Our initial condition
is some perturbation of a centered circle of unit radius,
i.e., r = 1 + ∆r(ϕ) where r, ϕ are polar coordinates
with respect to the rotation axis and ∆r(ϕ) < 1. In the
next two subsections, we consider only identical ﬁngers
(n-fold symmetry), ∆r(ϕ) = (2π/n)q cos(nϕ), where q is
the amplitude to wavelength ratio of the perturbation,
and n is the (integer) number of ﬁngers. Unless other-
wise stated, we use a dimensionless surface tension B for
which n is the most unstable mode in the linear regime
and q = 0.05.

B. Filament thinning

We test here the ﬁlament thinning scaling by looking
at a dumbbell-shaped pattern: two droplets connected
by a ﬁlament (n = 2, see Fig. 5). This case has two
advantages: a width can be unambiguously deﬁned as
that at the axis of rotation (the midpoint between the two
droplets); on the other hand, there are no neighboring
ﬁlaments to inﬂuence its dynamics.

9

FIG. 5: Filament thinning: Initial condition (top, q = 0.05)
and one later interface for B = 0.09, ǫ = 0.008, dx = ǫ/2 and
A = 1 (middle) or A = 0 (bottom).

Figure 5 displays the patterns thus obtained at the
end of our run (A = 1) or just after the ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ
(A = 0). In the last case, new pinch-oﬀ events quickly
further shorten the central ﬁlament from its ends. We
will refer to this phenomenon as “pearling”. The two
upper curves in Fig. 6 (B = 0.09) show the evolution
of the ﬁlament width at the midpoint for the whole run
(A = 1) or up to the relaxation of the last central segment
in a round shape, which makes the width increase again
(A = 0). The latter occurs when pearling reaches the
rotation axis, shortly after the ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ, indicated
by the vertical lines. We see that the asymptotic decay
is grossly exponential for A = 1 as predicted, although
it is only observed for roughly a decade. For A = 0, the
ﬁlament thinning is strictly not exponential since the ef-
fective exponential rate varies slowly in time. It should
be noticed that it is the ﬂatness, not the width of the
ﬁlament, what determines the goodness of the approx-
imation of last section. One might think that pinch-oﬀ
prevents the formation of long and hence straight enough
ﬁlaments for A = 0, but, indeed, just before it the A = 0
ﬁlament is just as straight as the A = 1 one at the same
time; the A = 1 ﬁlament already exhibits a clear expo-
nential behavior, whereas the A = 0 one does not.

A closer look reveals that the thinning rate is well re-
laxed to its asymptotic value for the last third of the run
for A = 1, with a value of K = 0.98 consistent with the
predicted K, but not for A = 0 because pearling reaches
the center when the rate begins to approach (from above)
a value of K = 2. No disturbance is observed from the
previous pinch-oﬀ events. Runs for A = 0.5 and A = 0.8
(not shown) are also in reasonable agreement with the
law K = 2/(1 + A).

One might blame the high dimensionless surface ten-
sion B = 0.09 used or the ﬁnite interface thickness ǫ or
relaxation time ˜ǫ in the model for either the slow relax-
ation of the exponential rate or the pinch-oﬀ itself in the
low-A case, since B enters the problem as long as the ﬁl-
ament is not perfectly straight. The lower curves in Fig.
6 for a lower dimensionless surface tension, B = 0.01,
and at diﬀerent values of ǫ and dx/ǫ rule out both possi-
bilities. Using a more deformed circle (q = 0.2), to avoid
the appearance of other modes which are linearly unsta-
ble, we can conﬁrm the results obtained for B = 0.09.
For high viscosity contrast, the good decay even for the
coarsest mesh and interface proﬁle allows to establish the

FIG. 6: Filament thinning: Width at rotation axis (in log
scale) vs. time. Dashed, solid and dotted line(s): dx = ǫ,
dx = ǫ/2 and dx = ǫ/4, respectively. Upper curves (B =
0.09): ǫ = 0.008 (runs in Fig. 5, q = 0.05). Lower curves
(B = 0.01, q = 0.2): three curves at ǫ = 0.02, 0.01 and
0.005 for dx = ǫ and three at ǫ = 0.02, 0.01, and 0.0067 for
dx = ǫ/2 shown for each value of A. For A = 0, lower curves
correspond to lower values of ǫ. The only dx = ǫ/4 curve is
for A = 1, ǫ = 0.02. The dashed (solid) vertical lines indicate
the interval during which the droplet at the tip pinches oﬀ for
dx = ǫ (ǫ/2).

value of the rate K unambiguously at K = 0.99
1.00 by
studying the convergence in ǫ and dx. For low viscosity
contrast runs (A = 0), the values of the rates again seem
to relax towards the end of the runs to a value compat-
ible with the theoretical value K = 2 although they are
again badly deﬁned.

−

Pinch-oﬀ is systematically observed for low (A = 0,
0.5), but not high (A = 0.8, 1) viscosity contrasts. For
the latter, a numerical instability due to noise in the (rel-
atively) inviscid ﬂuid often sets in abruptly at late times,
especially for the coarser discretization dx = ǫ. Because
it is so abrupt, it is easy to separate from valid data. For
the former, the pinch-oﬀ itself cannot be considered a
spurious eﬀect due to a ﬁnite interface thickness, since the
pinch-oﬀ time increases only marginally when decreasing
the interface thickness ǫ, and in any case stays bounded
by the vertical lines in Fig. 6. Only for the coarsest
interface proﬁle can we detect that the center of the ﬁla-
ment anomalously “anticipates” the ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ at its
tip; for lower values of ǫ it actually continues to narrow
unaﬀected after the ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ and until the subse-
quent pearling reaches it. Interestingly, when decreasing
the mesh size dx from dashed to solid lines, pinch-oﬀ is
appreciably accelerated, so that it must also remain in
the continuum limit.

We conclude that the theoretical exponential thinning
and the values of the exponential rates derived in last
section are a good approximation to the observed behav-
ior, especially for high viscosity contrasts. Deviations do
exist and are intrinsically much stronger for low viscos-
ity contrasts, but, because they are not less apparent for

10

the ﬁlament begins to look straight, and K = 0.9
1
for the incoming ﬁnger tip. Both are in good agreement
with the theoretical value K = 1. The area enclosed by
smaller circles decays with smaller exponents (0.93 for a
circle of radius Rref = 1 and 0.81 for Rref = 0.75), but
a worse agreement is understandable, since the ﬁlaments
are less straight at the latest times we can explore.

−

→ ∞

(13) predicts rmin = 0.133 and a(t

Regarding the tip of the incoming ﬁngers and the to-
tal enclosed area in the center, the numerical solution
of Eq.
) =
0.0937 respectively. The numerical simulations here pre-
sented show that the ﬁlament still contains a signiﬁcant
amount of inner ﬂuid, yielding an asymptotic enclosed
area which decreases with the radius of the reference cir-
cle (a(t
) = 0.27
) = 0.36 for Rref = 1.25, a(t
→ ∞
) = 0.20 for Rref = 0.75).
for Rref = 1 and a(t
As for the asymptotic tip position of the incoming ﬁn-
gers, we ﬁnd rmin = 0.2, with little sensitivity to the
time window used. We thus seem to ﬁnd that the tips
and the area enclosed reach roughly half of those pre-
dicted by Eq. (13). This mismatch is most probably due
to the fact that we do not yet probe close enough to the
stationary-shape solution. This is indeed the case regard-
ing the ﬁlaments since, as explained above, they have not
reached its zero-width asymptotic state because the ﬁnal
area is not independent of the reference circle radius (as
it should be if Rref < r(s = 0)).

→ ∞

→ ∞

However, the evolution of the interface for A = 0 af-
ter pinch-oﬀ does hint that this exact solutions have an
important eﬀect on the dynamics. After the pearling
process of the ﬁlaments for A = 0, the incoming ﬁngers
continue to approach the rotation axis and the droplets
left at the tip of the ﬁlaments recede. When they reach
the central region roughly delimited by the ends of the
arches of our predicted stationary-shape solution, surface
tension ﬁnally stops the advance of the incoming ﬁngers.
The whole drop left at the center relaxes towards a cir-
cular shape. The thicker solid line in Fig. 7 (right) cor-
responds to such a central shape at the time when the
incoming ﬁngers stop before the relaxation to a circular
shape. Although the shape displayed is not an asymp-
totic one, the remarkable resemblance of the tip of the
incoming ﬁngers and the steady-state asymptotic arches
(dashed lines) and the fact that incoming ﬁngers precisely
stop (their velocity crosses zero) when approaching this
shape is suggestive that our steady-shape solution (or
parts of the solutions found in [25] very similar to it)
is indeed the attractor for sets of initial conditions with
n-fold symmetry.

D. Unequal ﬁnger dynamics

Finally, we address the more realistic case of unequal
ﬁngers. The goal here is no longer to test our theoret-
ical results, but to directly compare with experimental
patterns. We thus check whether the diﬀerences between
low and high viscosity contrasts A observed in experi-

FIG. 7: Approach to the stationary shape for B = 0.0213
and ǫ = 0.01. Left:
initial (dotted) and latest (solid line)
interfaces for A = 1, dx = 0.5ǫ and ˜ǫ = 0.5. Right: Blow-up
of central region with intermediate interfaces (solid lines) at
constant time intervals. Thicker line: receding interface (after
pearling) for A = 0, dx = ǫ and ˜ǫ = 1. Dashed line: numerical
solution of Eq. (13) for the predicted stationary shape.

a surface tension almost one order of magnitude lower,
they cannot be due to it.

C. Stationary-shape solution

We now increase the number of ﬁngers arising from the
linear regime to n = 4, so that the incoming ﬁngers en-
close a ﬁnite area. This enables us to test the approach to
the stationary-shape composite solution derived in Sec.
III D.

Figure 7 (left) shows the initial condition (dotted line)
and the last interface (solid line) of our most reﬁned
(ǫ = 0.01, dx = 0.5ǫ and ˜ǫ = 0.5) run for A = 1, just
before spurious pinch-oﬀ occurs. The latter is unavoid-
able because the ﬁlament width reaches 0.05–0.07, at the
5ǫ). A = 0 runs
edge of diﬀuse-interface attraction (
pinch much faster, presumably due to a physical phe-
nomenon and not to the ﬁnite interface thickness, since
here, as well as for n = 2, this is not cured by decreas-
ing ǫ. Due to this diﬀerent behavior, A = 0 runs do
not lead to the star-like pattern shown here, but, after a
ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ event at moderate radii, they quickly emit
several droplets while the central drop recedes.

∼

The blowup in Fig. 7 (right) shows the last interfaces
for A = 1 at constant time intervals (thinner solid lines)
compared to a numerical solution of Eq. (13) for the com-
posite stationary pattern derived in Sec. III D (dashed
line). The latter seems a plausible asymptotic solution in
the sense that it has not been overcome by the incoming
ﬁngers of our run, although visually these seem to asymp-
totically approach less curved arches. For a quantitative
estimate, we ﬁt a slowing down of the type of Eq. (7)
[i.e., we ﬁt a(t
) and K] both
to the time evolution of the area enclosed by a reference
circle of various radii Rref , and to that of the radial coor-
dinate of the incoming ﬁnger tips. We ﬁnd K = 1.06 for
the area enclosed by a circle of radius Rref = 1.25, where

), a(t = 0)

→ ∞

→ ∞

a(t

−

ments, including systematic or not pinch-oﬀ events, can
be explained by the Hele-Shaw equations.

∼

In order to compare with the patterns shown in Fig.
1, which have 15–16 ﬁlaments for A = 1 [Figs. 1(a,b)]
0.45 [Figs. 1(c,d)], we use a di-
and 20-21 for low A
10−3, which
mensionless surface tension of B = 1.03
corresponds to a most unstable mode n = 18. The idea
is to use exactly the same initial condition and physi-
cal and computational parameters for both low and high
viscosity contrast A, except for A itself. Thus, any dif-
ference we observe can only be due to the diﬀerent values
of A.

×

We adopt the less reﬁned choices dx = ǫ and ˜ǫ = 1
with an interface thickness down to ǫ = 0.005, in order
to avoid possible spurious pinch-oﬀ events. As already
observed for the dumbbell-shaped pattern in Sec. IV B,
we ﬁnd that, whenever pinch-oﬀ occurs, a lower rate of
dx/ǫ does not prevent it, but even accelerates it.

As for the initial condition, if we start with a pertur-
bation where sine and cosine modes have uniformly or
Gaussian distributed random amplitudes up to a certain
cut-oﬀ (here n = 40), we cannot reproduce the strong
asymmetry of the experimental patterns for high viscos-
ity contrast A = 1 [Figs. 1(a,b)]. We traced this back
to the fact that, in the experiments, the deviations from
a circle ﬁrst become visible in particular spots, and not
uniformly on the interface. For the experiment of Figs.
1(a,b), this happens roughly on three spots. We mimic
this by multiplying our random initial condition by an ex-
ponential envelope peaked at three uniformly distributed
random angles, keeping ∆r(ϕ)
0.004. We do not at-
tempt to truly copy the experimental initial condition,
but to use a somehow “statistically” similar one.

≤

If some details look alike, these will then indicate some
general common trends representative of the dynamics,
as opposed to a particular initial condition.

This initial asymmetry in the deviations from a circle
is largely preserved throughout the whole evolution for
high [A = 1; Figs. 8(a,b)], but not low viscosity con-
trast [A = 0, 0.5 runs; Figs. 8(c,d) and Figs. 8(e,f),
respectively]. We hence conclude that both an asym-
metric initial condition and a high viscosity contrast are
necessary to obtain asymmetric patterns. This eﬀect of
the viscosity contrast is due to the incoming ﬁnger com-
petition for high A, although it is less apparent here than
in the channel geometry, due to the geometric decrease
of available room ﬁngers experience.

Figure 8 is indeed the simulation analogue of Fig. 1.
Experimental patterns in Fig. 1 were rotated at will to
make the “statistical” resemblance with the simulations
more apparent; simulations are presented with the ver-
tical and horizontal directions parallel to the computa-
tional grid, although lattice anisotropy is not appreciable
here.

Patterns are shown at two diﬀerent times: t = 1.32
[Figs. 8(a,c,e)] and t = 1.74 [Figs. 8(b,d,f)], for all vis-
cosity contrasts. Rather than comparing these simula-
tions with experiments at equal dimensionless times, we

11

FIG. 8: Pattern evolution for a random initial condition (see
−3, ǫ = 0.005, dx = ǫ, ˜ǫ = 1 and A = 1
text) and B = 1.03×10
(a,b), A = 0.5 (c,d) or A = 0 (e,f). Snapshots (3R0 × 3R0)
shown at t = 1.32 (left) and t = 1.74 (right).

present all the patterns when their envelope has roughly
attained twice [Figs. 1(a,c) and 8(a,c,e)] and three times
[Figs. 1(b,d) and 8(b,d,f)] the initial circle radius. Direct
comparison of the time scales is left for Sec. V.

Let us ﬁrst compare patterns at the earlier stage [Fig.
1(a) with Fig. 8(a), and Fig. 1(b) with Fig. 8(b)].
The similarity between experiments and simulations is
remarkable, especially if one takes into account that the
initial conditions were only “statistically” similar (see
above). Furthermore, the common features (overall mor-
phology, ﬁlament accomplished or frustrated branching,
droplet size, the already mentioned incoming ﬁngers) are
well reproducible in other simulation runs and experi-
ments. This all indicates that the excellent agreement in
the typical morphologies between experiments and sim-
ulations is not fortuitous. This is noteworthy, since a
change in the wetting conditions for the high viscosity
contrast experiments, for instance, completely changes
the observed morphology [20].

¿From this earlier stage it would seem that pinch-oﬀ
is not signiﬁcantly more present for the lower (A = 0.5)

than higher (A = 1) viscosity contrasts. However, sim-
ulation oﬀers us the possibility to go to the ideal limit
A = 0, in which both ﬂuids have strictly equal viscosi-
ties. Fig. 8(e) shows that most droplets have pinched-oﬀ
by the same time for A = 0. Comparing Figs. 8(a,c,e)
between them, it is clear that pinching arises as the vis-
cosity contrast is decreased.

≃

Another possibility is to go to later times. The ex-
periments still show no pinch-oﬀ for A = 1 [Fig. 1(b)],
but most ﬁlaments have emitted at least one droplet for
A
0.5 [Fig. 1(d)]. The simulations would seem less
conclusive, since they display some pinch-oﬀ events for
A = 1 [Fig. 8(b)]. However, these are most likely to be
spurious: They occur for very narrow ﬁlaments, whose
width is comparable to the interface thickness ǫ, and we
know from earlier work [28, 29] that overlapping diﬀuse
interfaces attract each other. Most importantly, pinching
is inhibited as ǫ is decreased (the same run with a larger
value of ǫ displays more pinching).

Simulations for low viscosity contrasts [A = 0.5, Fig.
8(d) and A = 0, Fig. 8(f)], show much more pinching
(the lower A, the more). The ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ at the tip
of a ﬁlament does not signiﬁcantly change with ǫ, very
much like we observed for the dumbbell-shaped pattern
IV B. Some pinch-oﬀ events disappear, while
in Sec.
other appear; some are reentrant in ǫ (they disappear
for a middle value of ǫ but reappear when ǫ is further
decreased), . We hence conclude that these ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ
events are not spurious. In any case, longer and thinner
ﬁlaments are achieved as ǫ is decreased.

Pearling (successive pinch-oﬀ events shortening a ﬁl-
ament from its outer end) is increased when decreasing
ǫ, even though it is less present in the experiments [Fig.
1(d)].
It is interesting to note the absence of pinching
at the base of the ﬁlaments, near the rotation axis, for
A = 0 [Fig 8(f)], as opposite to the A = 0.5 and A = 1
runs [Figs 8(b,d), respectively]. Since we saw pinching
to be spurious for the A = 1 run, this suggests that such
events at the base of a ﬁlament are also spurious. Fur-
thermore, they are not observed in the experiments.

We conclude that simulations reproduce very accu-
rately the experimental morphologies before pinching,
which strongly supports the idea that the dynamics can
be considered to be the standard Hele-Shaw for that pur-
pose. They also indicate that these bidimensional dy-
namics do lead to ﬁnite-time pinching for low, but not
high viscosity contrasts. The crossover occurs somewhere
between A = 0.5 and A = 1.

E. Filament stretching and droplet dynamics

We have postponed the study of the ﬁlament stretch-
ing and droplet scalings to present it in a uniﬁed way,
for all the cases (n = 2, 4 and 18 ﬁlaments) considered
above. Let us ﬁrst summarize what we can expect from
the theory in Sec. III: Droplets at the tip of a ﬁlament
should run away roughly exponentially in time, with a

12

rate comprised between K ′ = 1 (for an isolated droplet)
and K = 2/(1 + A) (the ﬁlament thinning rate). The
lower bound K ′ corresponds to the idealized case where
the ﬁlament does not perturb the droplet shape nor the
ﬂow created by it, so that the droplet still obeys the exact
solution for an isolated and circular one. This assump-
tion is more realistic for high viscosity contrasts, since we
have seen that in the A
1 limit the homogeneous ﬂow
inside an isolated circular droplet holds for any closed in-
terface, regardless of its shape and whether it is isolated
or not. Note, however, that a droplet at the tip of a ﬁl-
ament is not completely closed, so that a deviation from
K ′ is still possible.

→

The upper bound K is based on another idealization,
where no ﬂuid is fed into the droplet, so that all the
ﬂuid expelled by the ﬁlament as it narrows is used to
extend it. Therefore, the radial coordinate of the neck of
the ﬁlament just before the droplet scales with the same
exponent K as the ﬁlament width. If the shape of the
droplet is stationary, the radial coordinate of the droplet
center of mass is then just that of the neck of the ﬁlament
plus a constant.

The purpose of this section is to determine which is the
actual evolution of the radial coordinate of the droplets
center of mass. Our experiments have not clearly an-
swered this question: Droplets are seen to (i) run away
with roughly the same rate whether connected to a ﬁla-
ment or isolated, but (ii) this observed rate seems to be
K (ﬁlament thinning) rather than K ′ (isolated droplet).
The problem is that (ii) is inconsistent with the exact
isolated droplet solution.

Fig. 9 shows the evolution of the radial coordinate of
a droplet center of mass for the dumbbell-shaped pattern
in Fig. 5 (n = 2, dashed lines) and some of the furthest
droplets in Fig. 8 (n = 18, solid lines), compared to
that of an isolated circular droplet (n = 1, dotted lines).
Bold (thinner) lines correspond to A = 1 (0). Curves
are shown till the end of the respective runs, except for
the isolated droplet, which is shown only until it begins
to “feel” the ﬁnite simulation box. Note that for n
≥
2 curves make little sense for R < R0, and this part
has been removed for the n = 18 runs, since the code
actually detected a diﬀerent droplet at those early stages.
More details on how the curves were obtained can be
found below. Although the range of R/R0 monitored
decreases with increasing n, the ﬁnal aspect ratio of the
pattern (droplet radius to length of ﬁlament for n
2,
or droplet radius to radial coordinate of center of mass
of the isolated droplet) attained is similar.

≥

Clearly, all droplets scale with roughly the same rate
m, although runs with A = 1 show a good linearity,
whereas those for A = 0 do not. More precisely, for
A = 1 (0), one measures (in the straightest segment of
the curves) m = 0.8 (0.7) for n = 2, m = 0.82 (0.75)
for n = 18, and m = 0.88 (0.83) for n = 1. Runs for
n = 4, 6, 8, 11 and 12 ﬁngers, give similar results, also
for intermediate values of the viscosity contrast (A = 0.5,
0.8).

13

FIG. 9: Radial position (in log scale) of the center of mass
of various droplets vs. time, for A = 1 (bold) and A = 0
(thinner curves). Solid, dashed and dotted lines correspond
to the droplets indicated with an “x” in Figs. 8(a,b,e,f), those
in Fig. 5, and the isolated droplet in Fig. 10 bottom-right,
respectively. Curves are shown till the end of the respective
runs, except for the isolated droplet, which is shown only until
Inset: Linear
it begins to “feel” the ﬁnite simulation box.
regime of the isolated droplet, continued in the main plot after
translating the (dotted) curves to earlier times for comparison
with the others. The inset preserves slopes with respect to the
main plot.

Since all droplets scale with a same rate, roughly in-
dependent of A and close to K ′ = 1, it is clear that
the droplet scaling is dominated by that of an isolated
droplet. This rate is found to be insensitive to pinch-oﬀ,
and it also holds for the experimental isolated droplet in
Fig. 9 (dotted lines), which further supports this idea,
and conﬁrms this part of our experimental conclusions
(i). However, the fact that droplets scale roughly with
K ′ = 1 for any viscosity contrast A in our simulations
(m
0.8) and certainly not with K = 2/(1 + A) conﬁrms
that there is some problem with the statement (ii) that
the experimental growth rate be K = 2/(1 + A), as al-
ready expected from the exact isolated droplet solution.
We address this issue in the following section.

∼

∼

The mismatch between the droplet scaling (m

0.8)
and the ﬁlament thinning K = 2/(1 + A) accounts for
the ﬂuid fed into the droplet. This is relatively small
for A = 1 (K = 1), but not for A = 0 (K = 2). This
explains the experimental and numerical observation that
droplets grow faster and larger as A is decreased. The
bad linearity of the A = 0 runs is also probably due
this large mismatch, although we recall that the ﬁlament
thinning itself displays a less constant exponent for A = 0
than A = 1.

The center of mass of the droplets for n = 2, 18 in Fig.
9 was computed subtracting the ﬁnal droplet radius to
the droplet tip position, which is not rigorous, because
the droplet radius changes during the evolution. How-
ever, if one subtracts, say, the ﬁnal distance from the
droplet tip to the neck of the ﬁlament before the droplet
for comparison, rates increase by 0.1 only (not shown).

FIG. 10: Stream lines induced for A = 0 by a dumbbell-
shaped pattern as that in Fig. 5 (top; a quarter of the in-
terface shown, B = 0.09, ǫ = 0.0067, dx = ǫ/2, ˜ǫ = 0.5) or
by an oﬀ-center circular droplet (bottom right; a half shown,
B = 0.32, ǫ = 0.02, dx = ǫ, ˜ǫ = 0.1, dt = 0.25˜ǫdx2). Bottom
left: Blow-up (y enlarged 30× more than x coordinate) of the
forming neck in the top pattern. Interface (thicker lines) and
contour plot of the stream function (thinner lines) at equally
spaced levels (diﬀerent in each graph); x = y = 0 is the rota-
tion axis.

We have also extracted the neck position (not shown) of
the same droplets (marked with an “x”) in Fig. 8, and
measured an exponent up to m = 0.9 (for A = 0.5). We
also conﬁrmed that a droplet which pinches only at the
end of the run (marked with “+”) scales with the same
rate than one of the ﬁrst to pinch (marked with “x”).

In the end, the main eﬀect of the ﬁlament on the scal-
ing of the center of mass of the droplet seems to come
from the injection of inner ﬂuid into it, rather than per-
turbing the droplet environment. This should mean that
the ﬂow of the inner ﬂuid is much more aﬀected than
that of the outer by the presence of the ﬁlament. The
latter is illustrated for the most sensitive case (A = 0) in
Fig. 10, where stream lines are superimposed to the in-
terface for a quarter of a dumbbell-shaped pattern (top),
as that in Fig. 5, and for half an isolated droplet (bot-
tom right): The most remarkable diﬀerence is the higher
density of stream lines (higher velocity) at the entrance
of the droplet and inside it, which breaks the ﬂow uni-
formity within the droplet; the outer ﬂow is qualitatively
similar near the droplet (note that stream lines are not
shown at the same levels for a maximum resolution of
the ﬂow details in both cases, so that the modulus of the
velocity cannot be compared).

When a neck is formed (blowup, bottom left, in Fig.
10), the ﬂow is aﬀected also outside the droplet, but
mostly near the neck. Because pinching then also occurs
in a time scale sensibly shorter than that of the ﬁlament
stretching, the eﬀect is not perceived in the latter. The
A = 0 droplets tracked in Fig. 9, for instance, pinch dur-
(2.3, 2.4) for n = 2,
ing t
but they curve down well after or before it, respectively.
One could also wonder why the exponents measured
for the isolated droplet run are not strictly m = K ′ = 1,

(0.9, 0.96) for n = 18 and t

∈

∈

but this is certainly a ﬁnite-interface-thickness correction
due to the less reﬁned value used (ǫ = 0.02). Our purpose
here was merely to check that the exact solution for the
isolated droplet has some ﬁnite basin of attraction, as
we ﬁnd it to be the case: The droplet stays circular and
runs away exponentially with a very steady rate from
the linear (q = 0.005, inset of Fig. 9) to deep into the
nonlinear (main plot) regimes. The droplet depicted in
Fig. 10 bottom right corresponds to the end of the linear
(and beginning of the nonlinear) regime. The type of ﬂow
predicted by the exact solution [Eqs. (11)], is apparent
here.

V. TIME SCALE

In Sec. IV E we saw that the statement that the exper-
imental growth rate be K = 2/(1 + A) and not K ′ = 1 is
inconsistent not only with the exact isolated droplet so-
lution, but also with numerical simulations of the Hele-
Shaw equations. This statement relies only on the ob-
served A = 0.45 rates, since for A = 1 K = K ′ = 1 (in
good agreement with the measured values). This indi-
cates that our experiments for low A do not follow the
standard Hele-Shaw dynamics.

A three-dimensional study of the proper eﬀective
boundary conditions to apply on an idealized two-
dimensional interface, as performed for air displacing a
liquid [31], is lacking for the case of two liquids. This
low-A case might be diﬀerent, since a second viscosity
is involved when a layer of vaseline oil (outer ﬂuid) wets
the plates also inside the silicone oil (inner ﬂuid) domain.
Note that, for A = 1, such a wetting layer (in this case,
of silicone oil) is to be found in the air. However, diﬀer-
ent boundary conditions should in general not produce
experimental patterns so similar to the outcome of sim-
ulations using standard boundary conditions as those in
Sec. IV D. Especially, they should not necessarily pre-
serve the pinch-oﬀ for low A.

The inferred dimensionless rates for the experimental
droplet runaway rely on the measured rates and on the
time scale t∗. A modiﬁcation of the latter can hence al-
ready account for the observed discrepancy between the-
ory and simulations. To further realize this, it is instruc-
tive to compare again experimental (Fig. 1) and simula-
tion (Fig. 8) patterns: The similarity in the morpholo-
gies is obvious, but time scales are not straightforward
to compare, since the degree of deviation from a perfect
circle in the experimental initial condition is unknown.
This results in an eﬀective “latency time”, during which
no signiﬁcant departure from a circle is observed.

However, we can compare the time elapsed for the pat-
tern envelope to grow from a radius of 2R0 [Figs. 1(a,c)
and 8(a,c,e)] to 3R0 [Figs. 1(b,d) and 8(b,d,f)]. This is
∆t =6s(36s) for A=1(0.45) in the experiments. With the
measured values of the physical parameters, t∗ in Eq. 1
is t∗ = 15.5s(134s), which results in a dimensionless time
interval ∆t/t∗ = 0.39(0.27) for A=1(0.45). This is to

14

∀

be compared with ∆t/t∗ = 0.42
A in the simulations.
The mismatch between experiments and simulations is
not signiﬁcant (taking into account the viscosity uncer-
tainty and the subjectivity in the snapshots to compare)
for A = 1, but it is for A = 0.45. This is just a (sta-
tistical) conﬁrmation of the droplet scaling, since it is
this scaling what determines the growth of the pattern
envelope, but makes it clear that the main diﬀerence be-
tween experiments and simulations is the time scale for
A = 0.45.

A simple explanation is that the vaseline wetting layer
has a more obvious eﬀect than modifying the eﬀective
two-dimensional boundary conditions on the interface: it
changes the expression for Darcy’s law [Eq. (8)]. The
two-dimensional velocity in Darcy’s law results from an
average over the cell gap of the three-dimensional veloc-
ity ﬁeld. We simply point out that one should average
over the fraction of the gap actually ﬁlled with silicone
oil when computing the averaged silicone oil velocity. As-
suming stick boundary conditions for the vaseline on the
glass plates, and no-slip between vaseline and silicone,
we average the silicone velocity in a region closer to its
maximum (at the midplane between the two glass plates)
than in the absence of the vaseline wetting layer. This
results in a higher velocity, further enhanced by the fact
that vaseline is less viscous. More precisely, we ﬁnd

~uin =

b2[1 + ∆b2]
12µin

−

pi

(~
∇

−

ρiΩ2rˆr),

(16)

where

∆b2 =

2w
b

+

8 + 6

(cid:18)

2

µin
µout (cid:19) (cid:16)

w
b (cid:17)

,

(17)

with w the thickness of the vaseline wetting layer at
each glass plate. The eﬀect of this on the time scale
of the dynamics t∗ in Eq. (1) is to replace µin there by
µin/[1 + ∆b2] (~uout stays unchanged). For a wetting layer
of thickness w 10% of the total cell gap b, our A = 0.45
time scale should decrease by a factor 0.78. This re-
sets the rate at which droplets run away to m = 0.97–
1.17, in reasonable agreement with theory and simula-
tions. We have not measured the thickness of the wetting
layer w, and possibly other eﬀects like the eﬀective two-
dimensional boundary conditions on the interface might
play a role, but this gives a plausible explanation of our
observations.

VI. LUBRICATION THEORY

The purpose of this section is to derive the time evolu-
tion of a gently curved ﬁlament in a more systematic way.
In particular, we would like to account for the striking
diﬀerence between the ﬁlament thinning of high and low
viscosity contrast dynamics.

To do so, we perform a lubrication approximation for
the interface. This assumes the interface height h(x, t)

in Fig. 3 to vary in a scale ∆h much smaller than the
scale of horizontal variations ℓ, and expands formally all
quantities in powers of ε = ∆h/ℓ. We then ﬁnd an evo-
lution equation for h up to ﬁrst order in ε. The idea is
to see whether the viscosity contrast can aﬀect the rela-
tive importance of the various terms and to what order
it enters.

We begin by rewriting the free boundary problem of
Eqs. (14) into an exact evolution equation for h: Using
the vortex-sheet formalism of Refs. [26, 32], we have

∂th = Uˆy

Uˆxhx,

(18)

−
where U (x, t) = Uˆx ˆx + Uˆy ˆy is the mean ﬂuid velocity
at the interface, which we assume to vary only in the x
direction:

~U (x, t) = 1

2π P

′

′

(h(x

)−h(x),x−x

(x−x′)2+(h(x′)−h(x))2 Υ(x′)dx′

)

′

′

(−h(x
(x−x′)2+(h(x′)+h(x))2 Υ(x′)dx′,

)−h(x),x−x

)

(19)

+∞
−∞
R
1
2π P

+∞
−∞
R

−

where P is the Cauchy principal part and Υ = Γ(1 + h2
x)
(γdeﬁned in Sec. IV A) becomes

Υ/2 = B∂xκ

(ˆx + ˆy∂xh) + x + h∂xh.

(20)

A~U

·

−

We now scale h with ∆h, x with ℓ, and the interface
velocity ~U with V0 = (B/ℓ2)+ℓ. We expand any quantity
Q as Q = Q(0) + ǫQ(1) + ǫ2Q(2), so that the evolution
equation for h up to O(ε) becomes

∂th = U (1)

∂xhU (0)

ˆx + ε(U (2)

∂xhU (1)

ˆx ),

ˆy −

ˆy −
where we have anticipated that U (0)
ˆy = 0. ~U and Υ are
indeed expanded along the same lines as in Refs. [14, 32],
to further ﬁnd

(21)

U (0)

ˆx =

Υ(0)

U (1)

ˆx =

Υ(1) + H[∂x(hΥ(0))]

(22)

1
2

1
2

U (1)

ˆy =

1
2

−

[∂x(hΥ(0)) + h∂xΥ(0)]

(23)

U (2)

ˆy =

1
2

−

[∂x(hΥ(1)) + h∂xΥ(1)]

hH[∂2

x(hΥ(0))], (24)

−

Υ(0) =

2L
(1 + A)Vo

η(x)x

(25)

Υ(1) =

2B
(1 + A)VoL2 ∂3
xh

−

2A
1 + A

H[∂x(hΥ(0))],

(26)

+∞

where H(x) = π−1P
x′) is the Hilbert
−∞ f (x′)dx′/(x
transform of f (x), and η(x) is an arbitrary cut-oﬀ func-
tion in the centrifugal force to render H ﬁnite, which is 1
up to a certain distance xF and then decreases to zero in

−

R

15

an arbitrary way. We pursue the calculation and check
whether the result is independent of the shape of η. This
cut-oﬀ is necessary, as opposed to the channel case, be-
cause the zero order of the vorticity in a rotating cell
is neither zero nor a constant but, Υ(0)
x. The other
major diﬀerence between the weakly nonlinear expansion
performed in [32] and this lubrication approximation is
the appearance of the second integral in (19).
Its ex-
pansion is not trivial as pointed out in [14]; there it was
solved using limiting procedures, the Plemelj formula,
and delta function representations.

∝

Substituting these results into Eq.(21), undoing only
the scaling of the velocity, and dropping the cut-oﬀ func-
tion η(x), which is not necessary for ﬁnite or asymptoti-
cally straight inﬁnite ﬁlaments, we ﬁnally obtain

1+A
2 ∂th =

∂x(xh)

εB∂x(h∂3

xh)

−

ε (1−A)

1+A ∂x (hH[∂x(xh)]) .

−

−

(27)

We see that this is a simple continuity equation for h,
namely that already used in Sec. III A, ∂th =
∂x(hvˆx)
[Eq. (2)], but now with an inner ﬂuid velocity along the
x direction

−

2

vˆx =

1 + A (cid:18)

x + εB∂3

xh + ε

1
A
−
1 + A

H[∂x(xh)]

(28)

(cid:19)

which is no longer just vˆx = Kx as used in Sec. III B, but
takes into account all the terms entering the tangential
velocity jump there [Eq. (9)].

We now present a general solution when the order ε in
Eq.(27) is neglected. Any given initial condition h0(x)
evolves following a simple scaling h(x, t) = Lh0(Lx) [Eq.
(3)] with L = e−Kt and K = 2/(1 + A). This agrees with
the scaling found in Sec. III A for an initially straight in-
terface. Here, we ﬁnd that the result is more general and,
as a consequence, any interface approaches zero at least
at inﬁnite time.
In this way, rotation produces pinch-
oﬀ at inﬁnite time independently of the initial interface.
This is to be compared with the inﬂuence of a gravity jet
which only produces a shift in the moving frame.

This leading behavior smooths out the gradients both
by lowering height diﬀerences [Eq. (5)] and by stretching
neighboring points apart [Eq. (6)]. One would expect
straight ﬁlaments to be stable, and the solution to be-
come increasingly accurate in time. This smoothing ef-
fect of the centrifugal force through the zeroth order term
vˆx = Kx presumably competes with the higher order
terms: The term in dimensionless surface tension B, for
instance, is known to lead to ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ in the
absence of any other force and for an inviscid outer ﬂuid
(A = 1), for certain initial conditions [10, 11, 14]. The
analysis of the interplay between rotation and surface
tension and their competing eﬀects deserves an in-depth
separate analysis that will be carried out elsewhere.

However, we can address in this framework the system-
atic observation of pinch-oﬀ events in experiments and

simulations for low viscosity contrasts A = 0–0.5 and the
lack of them for high viscosity contrast. This fact cannot
be explained by the two ﬁrst terms in the r.h.s of (27).
If such singularities and diﬀerences are contained in the
Hele-Shaw dynamics as the simulations seem to indicate,
they should be linked to the remaining non local term
of order ε. Although this term does indeed play a role
for A < 1, we have seen that it enters at the same or-
der than the surface tension term. The question is then
how this, in principle, higher order term can aﬀect the
general asymptotic scaling of ﬁlaments which typically
become straight for any viscosity contrast.

The answer is in the non-local nature of the new term.
Hence, a locally straight ﬁlament is still inﬂuenced by a
curvature elsewhere. Real ﬁlaments are ﬁnite, and this
means that the upper and lower interfaces necessarily
meet in a highly curved region (in practice, a droplet at
the tip), where the ε expansion breaks down. Because
this will be felt by an elsewhere straight ﬁlament, the ε
expansion is much more delicate for low viscosity con-
trast, and signiﬁcant deviations from the scaling of Eqs.
(3) or (5) can be expected. The inﬂuence of a curved re-
gion decays with distance, so that these deviations should
decay for the central part of a ﬁlament as it grows long
enough for its ends to have little eﬀect on it.

Although it is diﬃcult to address the precise eﬀect of
the non-local term analytically, we can gain some in-
sight by considering the simplest possible situation: a
perfectly straight ﬁlament of time-dependent arbitrary
width. More precisely, we consider only an upper straight
interface given by y = h(t) in Fig. 3 and the region
y > 0, x > 0, with no-ﬂux boundary conditions on the
axis y = 0 and x = 0, exactly as in our simulations in
Sec. IV B. Proposing a stream function ψ (bi)linear in x
and y to solve the full Hele-Shaw equations [Eqs. (14)],
we ﬁnd

ψout = h(Kin −

ψin = Kinxy,
Kout)x + Koutxy,
h = h(t = 0)e−Kint,

Kin = K +

A)
(1
−
1 + A

Kout,

(29a)
(29b)
(29c)

(29d)

where we recall that K = 2/(1 + A).

For A = 1, we recover Kin = K because the inner
ﬂuid and interface dynamics are completely speciﬁed and
decoupled from the outer ﬂow. For A < 1, however, the
whole solution depends on the outer ﬂow, and hence on
actual external boundary conditions. For a semiinﬁnite
ﬁlament and no external breaking of the translational
symmetry, Kout = 0, and the scaling solution is again
valid and exact.

For a ﬁnite ﬁlament, though, there will necessarily be
a recirculation (not to speak of the ﬂow created by a
droplet): Stream lines going out of the ﬁlament at its tip
will come back to diﬀerent points of the interface, in a
loop of the size of the ﬁlament length R itself. The outer
ﬂow solution proposed will no longer be valid, but, for

16

≪

a long enough ﬁlament, we can assume that the solution
still holds for x
1. Given the fact that recirculation
requires a positive hyperbolic proﬁle close to the origin
(see Fig. 10), Kout must be positive and therefore Kin >
K, slowly approaching K as the ﬁlament grows longer.
This is consistent with the ﬁlament thinning exponent
for A = 0 observed in Fig. 6.

One could speculate that this eﬀect becomes stronger
as one approaches the ﬁlament tip (although the ﬂow
also looks diﬀerent), making the local, eﬀective thinning
(and its rate) increase. This would lead to the forma-
tion of a more shallow region (the neck) and thus initiate
the pinch-oﬀ. The forming neck then happens to receive
a much higher density of incoming stream lines that its
vicinity (see Fig. 10, blowup at the bottom left), pushing
it further down. Surface tension enters the problem as
the ﬁlament is locally curved, so that it is not possible
to tell whether the pinch-oﬀ itself is due to the non-local
term or to surface tension, or yet to a combination of the
two unless a careful analysis is performed. It is neverthe-
less clear that the non-local term does provide the initial
departure from the scaling solution needed to overcome
its smoothing eﬀect.

VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

We have studied viscous ﬁngering in a rotating Hele-
Shaw cell from the point of view of the dynamical ap-
proach to pinch-oﬀ singularities. We have found that this
is linked to a global scaling of the pattern: Radial ﬁla-
ments of denser inner ﬂuid narrow and stretch; they push
away the droplet at their tip, and incoming ﬁngers of less
dense, outer ﬂuid approach the rotation axis to compen-
sate for the ﬂux expelled through the ﬁlaments. For n-
fold symmetric patterns, the system can approach either
a steady shape in inﬁnite time or a ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ
singularity. The former consists of n convex arches end-
ing in straight, formally semiinﬁnite radial ﬁlaments of
zero width with a droplet at their tip (at inﬁnity) con-
necting each pair of arches and running away with inﬁnite
velocity.

Thus, we see that rotation enforces pinch-oﬀ as ex-
pected, at least in an inﬁnite time. More precisely, at
the lowest order in thickness variations of a lubrication
approximation for the ﬁlaments, they narrow exponen-
tially in time. Incoming ﬁngers slow down in the same
way, whereas the ﬁlaments stretch and the droplets at
their tips are centrifuged away also exponentially.

→

In the high viscosity contrast limit, A

1, all these
exponential behaviors have the same time constant, 1/t∗,
where t∗ is the characteristic time scale of the problem,
and we have been able to observe all of them and conﬁrm
this value by phase-ﬁeld simulations and experiments.
For low viscosity contrasts, the ﬁlament thinning has a
time constant of K = 2/[(1 + A)t∗] in absolute value,
whereas the droplet dynamics remain close to K ′ = 1/t∗
as for high viscosity contrasts. The droplet scaling is

thus universal in a ﬁrst approximation, i.e., only weakly
dependent on any dimensionless control parameter. Fur-
thermore, we have found it not to be much aﬀected by
whether the droplet is isolated or connected to a ﬁlament.
We have derived an exact time-dependent solution (pre-
viously found in the A
1 limit [24]) for the case of an
oﬀ-center isolated circular droplet which shows that this
universality is rigorous for isolated circular droplets.

→

In a second approximation, droplets at the tip of the
ﬁlaments are actually found to scale with a time constant
slightly below the theoretical value 1/t∗, so that this is
always below that of the ﬁlament thinning 2/[(1 + A)t∗].
Some fraction of the ﬂuid expelled by the ﬁlament as it
narrows is hence fed into the droplet. Because the time
constant for the thinning increases above 1/t∗ as A is
decreased, the lower A the more ﬂux the droplets receive,
as observed in both experiments and simulations.

For experiments with two liquids (low A), comparison
with the exact solution for an isolated circular droplet
and extensive simulations have shown the time scale of
the dynamics t∗ to be lower than its characteristic value
t∗ = 12(µin + µout)/(b2Ω2∆ρ). We explain this by an ef-
fective lower viscosity of the inner ﬂuid µin, which comes
from Darcy’s law corrected to take into account the pres-
ence of a wetting layer of the outer liquid. This results
in an increased inner liquid mobility.

Although rotation causes inﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ at the
lowest order in the variations of the ﬁlament thickness,
both the thickness decay and the stretching apart of
neighboring points smooth out thickness variations. Ro-
tation also enters the other next order term: a non-local
term proportional to 1
A. Because this term is non-
local and the interface is necessarily highly curved in the
droplets at the end of the ﬁlaments, it can overcome the
stabilizing eﬀect of the lowest-order contribution of rota-

−

17

tion, and thus initiate ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ. The role of
surface tension and the interplay with the local and non-
local terms associated with rotation remain interesting
open questions.

In any case, this non-local term can account for the dif-
ferences observed in both experiments and simulations,
where ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ singularities appear system-
atically for low values of A but not for high values of
A. Three-dimensional eﬀects like wetting do not seem to
account for the initiation of pinch-oﬀ, since simulations
are free of them and nevertheless reproduce well the ex-
perimental morphologies and the pinch-oﬀ phenomenon
itself. Corrections due to the non-local term are also the
main reason for obtaining a less clear exponential behav-
ior for low viscosity contrasts.

Note that, for the case of a channel under gravity or
pressure-driven injection, this non-local term still arises,
although it has another form. Therefore, it may also
explain the enhancement of ﬁnite-time pinch-oﬀ observed
for low A in these well known cases.

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

R. F. acknowledges ﬁnancial support through a Eu-
ropean Community Marie Curie fellowship. R. F. and
J. C. also thank the Benasque Science Center for hospi-
tality and the European Union high-level scientiﬁc con-
ference and the NATO Advanced Studies Institute pro-
grams for support during a summer school at which part
of this work was carried out. Financial support from
Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia (Spain) under project
BQU2003-05042-C02-02 and from European Commis-
sion’s Research Training Network HPRN-CT-2002-00312
(PHYNECS) are acknowledged.

[1] J. Keller and M. J. Miksis, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 43, 268

47, 4169 (1993).

(1983).

[2] J. Eggers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 865 (1997).
[3] M. Moseler and U. Landman, Science 289, 1165 (2000).
[4] J. Eggers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 084502 (2002).
[5] A. Oron, S. H. Davis, and S. G. Bankoﬀ, Rev. Mod. Phys.

[13] R.E. Goldstein, A.I. Pesci, and M.J. Shelley, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 75, 3665 (1995).

[14] R.E. Goldstein, A.I. Pesci, and M.J. Shelley, Phys. Fluids

[15] A. Sierou and J. R. Lister, J. Fluid Mech. 497, 381

[6] W. W. Zhang and J. R. Lister, Phys. Fluids 11, 2454

[16] P.G. Saﬀman and G.I. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. London A,

10, 2701 (1998).

(2003).

245, 312 (1958).

69, 931 (1997).

(1999).

[7] For a way to model scales below the cell gap, see H-G.
Lee, J.S. Lowengrub, and J. Goodman, Phys. Fluids 14,2
492 (2002), Phys. Fluids 14, 514 (2002) .

[8] R.E. Goldstein, A.I. Pesci, and M.J. Shelley, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 70, 3043 (1993).

[9] T.F. Duppont, R.E. Goldstein, L.P. Kadanoﬀ, and S-M.

Zhou, Phys. Rev. E 47, 4182 (1993).
[10] R. Almgren, Phys. Fluids 8,2 344 (1995).
[11] R. Almgren, A. Bertozzi, and M. Brenner Phys. Fluids

8,6 1356 (1996).

[12] P. Constantin, T.F. Duppont, R.E. Goldstein, L.P.
Kadanoﬀ, M.J. Shelley, and S-M. Zhou, Phys. Rev. E

[17] J. V. Maher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 54, 1498 (1985).
[18] We recall here that injection and gravity are completely
equivalent, since both can be reparametrized into a
unique driving force.

[19] E. Alvarez-Lacalle, J. Casademunt, and J. Ort´ın, Phys.

[20] E. Alvarez-Lacalle, J. Casademunt, and J. Ort´ın,

Fluids. 16 908 (2004).

(preprint).

[21] As demonstrated in [20], a thin uniform layer of the oil
wetting the glass plates is necessary to reproduce the nu-
merical results obtained with standard boundary condi-
tions. This is done in practice by generating an advancing

18

stable annulus of the same oil before the experiment is
performed (see [33]).

Hern´andez-Machado, Phys. Rev. E 61, 6632 (2000).
[28] R. Folch, J. Casademunt, A. Hern´andez-Machado and L.

[22] E. Paun´e, Interface dynamics in two–dimensional viscous
ﬂows Ph. D. thesis, Universitat de Barcelona (2002).
[23] Z. Csah´ok, C. Misbah and A. Valance, Physica D 128,

Ram´ırez-Piscina, Phys. Rev. E 60, 1724 (1999).

[29] R. Folch, J. Casademunt, A. Hern´andez-Machado and L.

Ram´ırez-Piscina, Phys. Rev. E 60, 1734 (1999).

[30] T. Biben, C. Misbah, A. Leyrat and C. Verdier, Euro-

[31] C.W. Park and G.M. Homsy, J. Fluid Mech. 139, 291

87 (1999).

(2000).

(1985).

[24] F.X. Magdaleno, Ph. D. thesis, Universitat de Barcelona

phys. Lett. 63, 623 (2003).

[25] E. Alvarez-Lacalle, J. Casademunt, and J. Ort´ın, Phys.

(1984).

Rev. Lett. 92, 054501 (2004).

[32] E. Alvarez-Lacalle, J. Casademunt, and J. Ort´ın, Phys.

[26] G. Tryggvason and H. Aref, J. Fluid Mech. 154, 287

Rev. E 64, 016302 (2001).

[33] L. Carrillo, J. Soriano, and J. Ort´ın. Phys. Fluids. 11 778

[27] For a step-by-step derivation (including a kind of vis-
cosity anisotropy), see R. Folch, J. Casademunt and A.

(1999).

