4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tacoma Bridge Failure– a Physical Model

Daniel Green and William G. Unruh
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1Z1
email: drgreen@stanford.edu, unruh@physics.ubc.ca

The cause of the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge has been a topic of much debate and
confusion since the day it fell. Many mischaracterizations of the observed phenomena have limited
the widespread understanding of the problem. Nevertheless, there has always been an abundance
of evidence in favour of a negative damping model. Negative damping, or positive feedback, is
responsible for many large amplitude oscillations observed in many applications.
In this paper,
we will explain some well-known examples of positive feedback. We will then present a feedback
model, derived from fundamental physics, capable of explaining a number of features observed in
the instabilities of many bridge decks. This model is supported by computational, experimental and
historical data.

I. INTRODUCTION

In teaching a Physics of Music class by one of us, one of the most surprising of physical phenomena is the ability
of certain physical situations to convert a steady condition into oscillations. This includes the steady blowing of air
through the reed of a clarinet, through the lips of a trumpet, or over the hole of a ﬂute or a beer bottle, or the
conversion of the steady pull of a bow across a string in a violin into a steady vibration. In some of these cases the
mechanism is clear. Just as with the conversion of a steady voltage supplied to an ampliﬁer into the howl caused by
feedback of loudspeaker sound to a microphone, the reed instruments and the violin bow operated under conditions
in which they act as ampliﬁers– sources of negative damping in which a small input signal is converted into a larger
output. In the case of the clarinet reed, there is a direct regime of operation of the reed where the reed acts directly
as an ampliﬁer. If the external pressure is high enough (but not so high as to close the reed), an increase in internal
pressure will open the reed and allow more air into the clarinet. A decrease in internal pressure will close the reed
and allow in less air. This negative slope in the pressure-ﬂowrate curve acts as a negative damping on any oscillations
within the instrument, causing them to increase until the reed enters a highly non-linear regime. Similarly, in the
violin bow, the presence of the rosin on the bow creates a regime of negative damping, in which the force on the string
decreases as the velocity increases. Again, the eﬀect is to amplify any oscillations in the string– and since the eﬀect
is greatest on the resonant modes of the string, this tends (if the bow is properly played) to create a large amplitude
oscillation at the resonant frequency of the string.

In the case of the ﬂute, or the coke bottle, the eﬀect is subtler. There is no direct source for the ampliﬁcation.
Rather it is an interaction between the oscillation of the air in the instrument, and the air ﬂow across the opening (see
ﬁgure 1). Assume that the time it takes air blown across the opening is roughly a quarter the period of the oscillation
of the air in the instrument. When the oscillation of the air is out of the bottle, the air blown over the surface will be
deﬂected upward, missing the bottle at the far edge. This is correspond with the point in the oscillation where the
internal pressure is lowest (a 1/4 period later). Similarly, the deﬂection of the air into the bottle will occur when the
pressure is at it’s highest. The eﬀect of the deﬂection of the air enhances the pressure in a way that is in sync with the
pressure itself. I.e. in this case there is a symbiotic relationship between the oscillation of the air in the instrument
and the feedback mechanism. Only those modes with the correct relationship between the oscillation period and the
time it takes the air to ﬂow across the hole are ampliﬁed, have a negative damping coeﬃcient.

There are two important aspects to note in all of these cases. While the natural oscillation period of the vibration
produced tends to be very close to the period of a natural resonance of the instrument (of the air within the tube
of a clarinet, ﬂute or beer bottle, or of the string of a violin) none of these correspond to the traditional notion of
resonance. There is no external oscillating force which is tuned to the natural period of the oscillation. Rather there
is a complex non-linear interaction between the oscillations and the external steady action which creates a condition
of negative damping (a force proportional to the velocity for the simple harmonic oscillator which is the mode of
vibration).

One of the most impressive examples of such a conversion of a more or less steady ﬂow of air into a large amplitude
vibration was that of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge. As Billah and Scanlan complained 13 years ago [2], physics text
books insisted in calling this large scale oscillation an example of resonance, when it was clearly no such thing. Already
in the report of the Federal Panel [1] struck to investigate the collapse, (a report issued only four months after the

1

collapse) it was recognised that the collapse was due to another example of negative damping, just as in the above
musical instruments. However that report, and much work in the years thereafter have left the physical origin of that
negative damping unclear. It is clearly due to some aspect of the turbulence in the ﬂow of the wind across the bridge,
but which aspect? This paper will report of recent work, which attempts to clarify the origin of that feedback which
resulted in such an impressive example of ”music”.

The Tacoma Narrows Bridge opened on July 1, 1940 and collapsed on November 7, 1940 under winds of approxi-
mately 40 mph. During that brief period, it became an attraction as it oscillated, at a relatively low amplitude (a few
feet) in a number of diﬀerent modes, in all of which the bridge deck remained horizontal. Low mechanical damping
allowed the bridge to vibrate for long periods of time. However, on November 7th at 10:00 am, tortional oscillations
began that were far more violent than those seen previously (measured at one time to have an amplitude of about 13
feet, or greater than .7 radians). At 11:10 am, the midspan of the deck broke and fell due to the large stresses induced
by the oscillation. The H-shape of the bridge cross section was attributed as a crucial component of the problem.
The post-facto study of instability of such bridge sections in wind tunnel tests, which formed the core of the Federal
Task force report, resulted in the realisation that such studies were crucial before building such bridges in the future.
That the inﬂuence of such feedback is still not under control is evidenced by the very public closing of the Millennium
footbridge in London in 2000 one day after opening due to feedback, this time between the bridge and people walking
across it.

At this point, one may ask, ”this happened so long ago, bridges today are stable, why do we care?” While this may
be suﬃcient for engineers, it is unsatisfying to a physicist. What exactly is the nature of the feedback which caused
the failure? In this paper we will examine such a physical model for the Tacoma Narrows Bridge. First, we will revisit
old explanations that gloss over the underlying problem. Second, the physical model will be presented, followed by
evidence in its favour obtained from historical, computational and experimental data.

II. HISTORICAL MISCONCEPTIONS

The underlying cause of the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge has been frequently mischaracterized. Although
evidence in favour of negative damping has been available since 1941 [1], oversimpliﬁed and limited theories have
dominated popular literature and undergraduate physics textbooks. Billah and Scanlan [2] describe and analyse many
of the frequently quoted explanations. Most commonly, the collapse is described as a simple case of resonance. There
exists a video tape (our copy unfortunately or otherwise has lost its attribution) in which the instability is modeled
by a fan blowing on ”wave train”, with the demonstrator inserting and removing a large piece of cardboard from in
front of the fan at the resonant frequency of the structure. However, making the comparison to a forced harmonic
oscillator requires that the wind generate a periodic force tuned to the natural frequency of the bridge. They remark,
”texts are vague about what the exciting force was and just how ...
it acquired the necessary periodicity.” In some
cases, the periodic vortex shedding of the bridge was used as the source of this periodicity (the Van Karman Vortex
Street). This assumes that the frequency of vortex shedding (Strouhal frequency) matches natural frequency of the
bridge. However, the Strouhal frequency of the bridge, under 42 mph wind is known to be 1Hz, far from the observed
0.2 Hz frequency of the bridge itself. The Van Karman Vortex Street could not produce resonant behaviour on the
day of the collapse.

Although Billah and Scanlan clearly outline the pitfalls of the resonance model, recent work [3] has attempted
to resurrect this model using non-linear oscillators. For a non-linear oscillator, the frequency is not independent
of amplitude, but can change as the amplitude changes. This can lead to complex, even chaotic behaviour of the
oscillator.

Let us look at the solution for the non-linear equation

d2y(t)
dt2 + .05

dy
dt

+ tanh(y(t)) = F sin(Ωt).

(1)

This is a simple model in which the restoring force goes from the linear dependence at small amplitudes to a constant
restoring force at large amplitudes. In ﬁgure 2 to 4, we plot some of the features of the long term behaviour of the
solutions to this equation. In general the system settles down to a ﬁxed long term approximately harmonic solution
(for Ω very diﬀerent from the small oscillation value of unity, and F near unity, one can also get highly non-harmonic
chaotic behaviour even at late times, but we will not go into that here). There is a discontinuity in the long term
solution of this equation as a function of F . Figure 2 is the contour plot of the long-term amplitude as a function
of the frequency Ω and the amplitude of the forcing term F, while ﬁgure 3 is a plot of Ω vs F along the line of
discontinuity. Note that as Ω goes to 1, the discontinuity disappears. In ﬁgure 4, we plot the size of the discontinuity
at various values of Ω. The solid line is the value of the long term amplitude of y across the discontinuity at the high

2

value of F while the dotted line is the long term value at the lower part of the discontinuity. In all cases the initial
value of y and dy
dt is zero. Other integrations showed that the location of the discontinuity (value of F for given Ω)
can depend on those initial values.

This eliminates one of the problems with the standard physics explanation of the bridge motion by resonance,
namely that the wind speed would have to be absurdly accurately tuned so that the resonance condition would
produce the incredibly high amplitudes of oscillation. Once the bridge entered the upper leg of the resonance curve,
it could remain there even as the frequency of the driving force frequency varied.

This would also explain one puzzling anomaly of the bridge motion on Nov 7th. Since about 6AM that morning
the bridge had been oscillation in a non-torsional mode, with a relatively low amplitude (1.5 feet or so), and with
about 8 or 9 nodes in the oscillation along the length of the bridge. Suddenly at around 10AM, while Kenneth Arkin
(Chairman, Washington Toll Bridge Authority) was trying to measure the amplitude of oscillations with a surveyor’s
transit,

“...Then the mid span targets disappeared to the right of my vision. Looking over the transit, mid span seemed to

have blown north approximately half the roadway width coming back into position in a spiral motion...”

I.e., the transition to the very large amplitude torsional oscillation was very abrupt. The bridge basically went from
no torsional oscillation to a very large torsional oscillation almost instantaneously. This seemed to occur with little
change in the wind velocity (the famously quoted 42mph for the wind was measured before the bridge went into its
torsional oscillation from on the deck of the bridge).

McKenna and coworkers have used this to argue that what happened at that moment was that the bridge suddenly

made a transition from the lower amplitude solution to the upper, perhaps due to the eﬀect of a gust of wind.

In their model for the bridge, they introduce the non-linearity by, instead of using a standard spring model for
the eﬀect of the cables on the bridge, the eﬀect of the cables are described by one-sided springs (mimicked by the
tanh force function in (1)). I.e., when the side of the bridge rises above its normal equilibrium position, the cables
on that side are assumed to go slack, putting the bridge into free fall (gravity being the only restoring force). As is
well known from watching a bouncing ball, the frequency of oscillation of an object under such conditions decreases
as the amplitude increases (ie, α in the above is negative). There is however no indication in any of the reports of
the engineers watching the oscillation. Farquason, one of the chief consultants on the bridge from the University of
Washington, went out onto the bridge during its violent torsional oscillation, both to observe the behaviour of the
bridge from close up, and to try to rescue the car and dog abandoned on the bridge. He reports that the riser cables
were not slack during the oscillation [1].

In addition to the original suggestion, McKenna suggests that perhaps the replacement of the small angle linear
approximation for the motion of the bridge by the proper trigonometric functions could provide suﬃcient non-linearity.
Through numerical calculations of the response of such a non-linear oscillator to a force with constant frequency and
amplitude, they argue that the non-linearities of the trigonometric functions alone can allow for the same kind of
bimodal response, with large amplitude oscillations when the linear case may not. However these would be similar to
the above model near Ω = 1 where the jump in amplitude of the oscillation is not very large. Although these models
provide a more complete analysis of motion, their analysis ignores the cause of the driving forces entirely. In particular,
it is assumed that there exist sinusoidal forces on the bridge with constant period and amplitude chosen, purely for
their ability to drive the resonance and without regard for their possible physical origin. However, even if such a
bimodal response is a component in understanding the detailed of the response of the bridge, without understanding
the origin of these forces, little insight into the cause of the collapse is gained by introducing the non-linearities.

In general, the above models do not address the wealth of data collected in wind tunnels and on the day of collapse.
In particular, the logarithmic decrement of the oscillation (eﬀective negative damping coeﬃcient) had already been
measured over an extensive range of wind speed in wind tunnel tests immediately after the collapse, and is reported in
the Federal Task Force report. These results reveal that the wind induced damping coeﬃcient changes from positive to
negative at a critical wind speed. Furthermore, above this critical wind speed, the behaviour of the negative damping
coeﬃcient appears to be linear in the wind velocity. One should be capable of explaining these and other results
with a realistic model. Most importantly, one should be able to describe what is diﬀerent in the case of the Tacoma
Narrows Bridge that caused it to collapse. Since non-linearities are present in all suspension bridges, why do other
bridges remain stable even in higher winds? Although non-linear models may provide some insight into the motion
of large span bridges (we in particular remain unconvinced of their importance), they do not address these physical
concerns.

3

III. VORTICES AGAIN?

A key clue to the bridge collapse is given in a few frames of the ﬁlms which were taken by E. Elliot of the Camera
Shop in Tacoma [4]. At one point the concrete in the bridge deck begins to break up and throws dust into the air.
This dust acts as a tracer for the airﬂow over the bridge. In ﬁgure 5 we can just see a large vortex moving across the
bridge beyond and to the right of the car abandoned on the bridge (the development in the movie is much clearer).
The vortex is ﬁrst observed at just about the point where the bridge has levelled out in its oscillation, and by the
time the bridge reaches its maximum counter clockwise excursion, the vortex has fallen apart and moved oﬀ the right
edge of the bridge.

Vortices form in the wake of an oscillating body from two diﬀerent sources. First of all, the Von Karman Vortex
Street forms at a frequency determined by the geometry and the wind velocity. These vortices form independently of
the motion and are not responsible for the catastrophic oscillations of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge. Vortices are also
produced as a result of the body’s motion. In most cases, the frequency of vortex formation matches the frequency of
the oscillation. The behaviour of these vortices will depend on the geometry and the motion of the body. The nature
of these motion-induced vortices played a central role in the collapse of the bridge.

Kubo et al. [5] were the ﬁrst to observe the detailed structure of the wake that forms around the bridge’s H-shaped
cross-section (H-section) and for a rectangular cross section (which is also prone to violent tortional oscillations). In
both cases a regular pattern of vortices appeared on both sides of the bridge deck. They speculated that the spacing
between consecutive vortices was the likely cause of diﬀerent vertical and tortional modes of oscillation observed
during the brief lifetime of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge.

Based on the observations of Kubo et al, and his own computer simulations, Larsen [6] produced the ﬁrst physical
model of the bridge collapse. Since this is a model of positive feedback, let us assume that the bridge is oscillating at
its resonant frequency with some amplitude. In this model, a vortex is formed at the leading edge of the deck, on the
side in the direction of motion, as the angle crosses zero (see ﬁgure 6). I.e., the vortex forms suddenly at the front
edge of the bridge just as the bridge passes the horizontal position, on the shadowed side of the deck. Since a vortex
is a low-pressure region, a force in the direction of the vortex is produced. Each time the bridge is level, another
is vortex is generated. Once the vortex forms, it will drift down the deck of the bridge producing a time-dependant
torque. Here Larsen makes two assumptions based on his observations at dimensionless wind speeds near U P/D = 4,
where U is the wind velocity, P is the period of oscillation, and D is the width of the bridge. First, the vortex drifts
at a constant speed of roughly 0.25U . Secondly, he assumes that the force produced by the vortex is independent of
time.

There are a number of attractive features of the Larsen model. Primarily, it can provide some insight into the
problem with only a few simple assumptions. Larsen analyzed this model by considering the work generated by
vortices as they drift over the bridge. Figure 6 shows the three cases he considered. The ﬁrst, at winds less than
the critical wind speed, the vortices do not cross the entire bridge in one-period and produce forces that will dampen
the oscillation. At the critical wind speed, the vortex crosses the bridge in exactly one period. The resulting work is
zero. At higher wind speeds, the vortex crosses the entire bridge in less than a period, doing work on the bridge. As
a result, the bridge would gain energy and the amplitude of oscillation would grow. If the drift speed is between 1
4 U
and 1
4.0, consistent with measurements. Kubo et al. showed that this
same pattern could be observed at lower wind speeds and may explain the other observed modes of oscillation. This
is an important result. Using only a simple model, the critical wind speed has been recovered. Further simulations
by Larsen show that by preventing these vortices from forming, by replacing the solid trusses with perforated ones,
the critical wind speed is increased by several times.

3.6 U , then the critical wind speed UcP

D = 3.6

−

Despite this success, this analysis is somewhat incomplete given the data available. In particular, it does not address
the wind speed dependence of the damping as a function of wind speed. Let us consider this in the context of the
4.0. Therefore
Larsen model. Working in dimensionless units, the drift time of the vortex across the deck is k = 3.6
we can write,

−

where A is the amplitude. We can also write the torque as

where F is the force generated by the vortex. Taking the inner product of ˙α and the torque (this is just the work,
t
t=0 F
R

vdt, written in a suggestive form),

·

α = A sin(2πt/P )

˙α =

cos(

A2π
P

2πt
P

),

T = F (1

2t/k) = F (1

t/2)

−

−

4

(2)

(3)

(4)

k

< T

˙α >=
|

Z

0

(T ˙α)dt =

F [sin[

] +

(cos[

2π
Ur

Ur
π

2π
Ur

]

−

1)],

−

Uc . Based on Bernoulli’s equation, one might assume that F is proportional to U 2. The resulting
where Ur = U
behaviour of the energy feed in by a vortex to the bridge as a function of Ur is shown in ﬁgure 7. This clearly does
not ﬁt the behaviour of the bridge at high wind speeds.

The combined work of Larsen and Kubo et al. suggests that this view may be accurate (or close enough) at low
wind speeds. However, a number of questions remain after analysing this model. First of all, how do the vortices
form and how to they drift? If they do move at 1/4 U, why? Secondly, is the force constant as a function of time?
Finally, can we adjust this model to reproduce the wind speed dependence of the damping?

IV. POTENTIAL FLOW MODELS

We will examine several potential ﬂows in order to address the previous questions. First of all, we will look at how
vortices drift near boundaries. Secondly, we will consider how a vortex drifts near the trailing edge of the bridge.
Finally, we will examine the production of vortices at the leading edge.

Potential ﬂows are solutions to the vector Laplace equation. As such, uniqueness of solutions allows one to use the
method images to solve simple problems. For example, a vortex at a solid boundary (no ﬂow through conditions) can
be solved using a vortex of the opposite orientation reﬂected across the boundary (see ﬁgure 8). This same model
will apply when the vortex is also placed in a uniform ﬂow. The vorticity transport equation in two-dimensional
incompressible ﬂow will have the form

where ω =
at its centre (ignoring it’s own contribution to the ﬂow). Therefore, in this case the vortex will drift at

u is the vorticity and ν is the viscosity. Since ν is small, the vortex will drift at the speed of the ﬂuid

∇ ×

∂ω
∂t

+ (u

)ω = ν

· ∇

2
∇

ω,

vd = U

γ
(4πa)

−

(5)

(6)

(7)

where γ is the vortex strength and a is the distance from the boundary to the centre of the vortex. Therefore, a
vortex on the bridge deck will drift at a reduced speed under an external ﬂow.

When the vortex reaches the back edge of the bridge, the local ﬂuid may not be along the bridge deck, as assumed
above. Any laminar-like ﬂow over the back edge must separate from the bridge in order to get over the back truss.
This will cause the vortex to move oﬀ the bridge deck. This will reduce the force generated by the vortex at the
surface. As a result, the force at the back edge of the deck should be lower than elsewhere on the bridge. Also, as the
vortex and the separation line leave the back edge, the reduced pressure within the vortex will pull in ﬂuid from the
lower side of the deck, often producing a counter ﬂow vortex beneath the detaching original vortex.

Although the formation of the vortices may seem intuitively obvious, it provides insight into the large wind speed
problems seen in the Larsen model. First let us consider what happens in the static case at the onset of an external
ﬂow. The ﬂuid will ﬁrst ﬂow around the solid truss at the leading edge, separating from the boundary (see ﬁgure 9).
Due to the reduced density, a low-pressure region will form behind the truss that will force the gas downward (the
U = 0 condition will have the same eﬀect in the incompressible case). Eventually, gas will be pulled backwards
∇ ·
into this region producing a vortex. When the bridge is not moving, the vortices remained ﬁxed behind the truss.
Furthermore, equal strength vortices form on either side of the deck. Therefore, the drifting of the vortices is a result
of the motion of the deck. As the deck moves upward, the size of the low-pressure region increases on the top of the
deck. During the upward part of the motion, the point on the deck where the ﬂow reattaches will move progressively
down the deck, producing a large low-pressure region from the truss to this point. Once the deck begins moving back
down, the vortex will ﬁnd itself in a region that looks progressively more laminar. This will push the vorticity oﬀ the
back edge. The speed at which this occurs will depend on the angle. However, it will increase the pressure on the
deck and separate the vortex from the front edge. For large wind speeds, all vortices will be pushed oﬀ the back edge
by 3/4 of a period as the entire deck is exposed to strong laminar ﬂow.

The opposite side of the bridge is aﬀected in the opposite way. As the deck moves, the point of reattachment moves
back towards the truss. This ﬁlls in the region where the vortex would otherwise form. At best a very small vortex
will form. As a result, we have a large vortex that forms on one side and a small vortex that forms on the opposite
side.

5

After considering these diﬀerent aspects of the vortex formation and motion, we get somewhat diﬀerent results than
the simple linear assumptions made by Larsen. First of all, the motion across the bridge deck will not be uniform. In
the ﬁrst quarter of the period, the vortex grows do to the movement of the point of reattachment. Since the vortex
is always touching the front truss, this means that the torque will have the same sign as the angular velocity for this
ﬁrst quarter period. The exact behaviour of the torque will depend on the wind speed. When the bridge reverses it’s
direction of motion, the vortex will begin to drift down the bridge. The local wind velocity will govern the drift speed.
This will depend on the angle of the bridge and the strength /position of the vortex. Finally, the force generated by
with vortex will drop as in moves oﬀ the back edge. The net result is that the torque is large at the beginning of
the period when the angular velocity is high. In the second part of the motion, the magnitude of the force decreases,
giving less of an impact when it is out of phase with the angular velocity of the bridge.

At very high wind velocities, the size of the vortex grows to the size of the bridge deck. At this range the behaviour
can once again be simpliﬁed. As the bridge moves, it creates a low pressure region which grows to cover the entire
deck. The resulting pressure looks like a step function that moves across the bridge until a uniform low pressure is
established. When the wake moves beyond the back edge, ﬂow entering from the opposite side of the bridge to ﬁll
in the low pressure region, dissipating the pressure almost uniformly. As a result, the pressure will decay without
producing many large asymmetries along the length of the bridge. As a result, the torque will remain approximately
zero.

In order to generate a single model on all scales, capable of describing the data, we combined the above formation
process into the sum of a point vortex and a step function. Linear and quadratic wind speed dependence was used
for the force generated by the vortex and step function respectively. Such a model is based on the separation of the
low pressure that generates the vortex and the reduced pressure generated by the vortex itself. This will allow us to
recover both models on appropriate scales. The constant pressure distribution cause by the separation moves along
the deck at the speed of the front edge of the vortex (U/2) while the vortex itself is centred on the region and thus
moves at U/4. The particular model is motivated by the two factors. First of all, it describes the additional torque
due to the extended low-pressure region behind the truss. As a result, the damping coeﬃcient is calculated using

< T

˙α > = A[u2
|

Z

0

2D
u

=

3

5
8π2 [u

−

((D2

(tu/2

D)2) ˙α)dt + 10u

−

−

−

48π
5u

)

48π
5u

4D
u

((D

tu/4) ˙α)]

Z
0

−

(24π cos(

5u sin(

) + 24π) + 2πu(48π sin(

) + 5 cos(

96π
5u

96π
5u

)

−

5u)]

(8)

where D is the width of the deck. This precise model is also motivated by our observations of the pressure in
numerical calculations described in section V. In particular, the relative value of 10 between the two terms was chosen
by observation of the relative inﬂuence of the vortex and step-function at diﬀerent wind speeds.

The results with this model are shown in ﬁgure 10. The asymmetry in the torque generated by the growing phase
allows us to recover the asymptotic linear behaviour that is expected. Furthermore, the critical wind speed is found
to be consistent with experimental values. By adjusting the overall amplitude, the model is found to be consistent
with data found in [1].

It should be observed that the linear model Larsen uses is a low wind speed approximation to this model. If the
wind speed is suitably low, the vortex remains on the bridge for at least one full period. As a result, the period where
the vortex is growing is less signiﬁcant given the long period of interaction. Furthermore, the diﬀerences in drift speed
become less signiﬁcant because the variation is occurring on a period much shorter than the period that the vortex
is on the bridge. Finally, the points of reattachment and separation are much closer to the trusses at low speeds,
reducing the eﬀects seen at both ends. The end result is that a time averaged force and speed would give essentially
the same results under these conditions. However at speeds in excess of UP
6 this approximation will likely not
hold.

D = 5

−

V. HISTORICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL EVIDENCE

We previously presented a model based mainly on simpliﬁed laminar ﬂows. However, more rigorous evidence is
required to support this model rather than just the ﬁt to the wind speed data. It must be shown that such a ﬂow
appears when one calculates the full ﬂow numerically or during experiments. In particular, we want to show the high
wind velocity ﬂow is diﬀerent from that observed by both Larsen and Kubo et al.

The most exciting, and useful evidence comes from the ﬁlm coverage of the November 7, 1940 incident. At one
point during the oscillation, the roadway appears to break up throwing cement dust into the air. In several frames
(ﬁgure 5) from the original movie, one such incident is seen. The cement and dust become caught in a vortex that
drifts along the bridge deck at a rate similar to that seen in simulations (it is not possible to determine the exact rate

6

relative to the wind velocity since the instantaneous wind velocity in unknown). This video evidence supports two
important points in this argument: (1) the existence of drifting vortices on the deck, and (2) the vortex crosses the
midway point in less than one period, a requirement for negative damping.

Unfortunately, the engineers present at the scene did not risk life and limb to get a more complete set of wind,
pressure or turbulence measurements. As a result, that one observation captured on ﬁlm seems to be the only historical
evidence from the bridge itself. Therefore, we are forced to rely on numerical simulations to ﬁll in the gaps. Our
simulations were conducted using VXF FLOW produced by Guido Morgenthal [7]. The code uses discrete vortex
methods to determine the ﬂow. The advantage of vortex models for this problem (compared to ﬁnite element methods)
is that it solves for the vortex transport explicitly. Finite element methods tend to introduce an eﬀective viscosity due
to the ﬁnite grid mesh. Since the Reynolds number of the ﬂow across the bridge was so high (of order 106) the high
grid viscosity could seriously change the physics of the modeled ﬂow. Finite element methods oﬀer the advantage of
removing such grid viscosity, modeling the ﬂow by a ﬁnite distribution of individual vortices. While such methods
suﬀer from the relatively poor convergence properties of ﬁnite element methods (tending to converge at a rate which
goes as the √N where N is the number of vortices), the ability of modern computers to handle large numbers (our
simulations typically had more than 105 vortices in play at any one time), and its ability to model the high Reynolds
numbers typical of the bridge without the introduction of artiﬁcial viscosity, made using such discrete vortex methods
the preferred procedure. The generosity of Morgenthal in allowing us to use his code in this investigation was thus
critical to the any success which we had.

Our simulations were conducted by manually oscillating the deck at some frequency and amplitude and observing
the resulting ﬂuid ﬂow. These tests covered a large range of incident wind speeds and amplitudes of oscillation. At
each time step, the location and velocity of every vortex was returned along with the pressure along the surface of the
bridge. From the pressures, the lift, drag and torque are calculated. Since the vortex drifts at the local wind speed,
the vortices can be used to visualize the ﬂuid ﬂow.

At wind speeds below 10 m/s, the pressure and ﬂuid ﬂow are very similar to those described by Larsen. In particular,
a vortex is generate at the front and drifts along the deck. This vortex seems to make the largest contribution to the
pressure. When the vortex is created a more extended low pressure region is created behind the truss as the bridge
rises. As the vortex begins to drift, the extended constant pressure slowly disappears leaving only the vortex.

At wind speeds around the 19 m/s (42 mph) that were observed on the day, turbulence begins to play a more
signiﬁcant role in the pressure. As the deck rises the extended pressure covers over half of the bridge deck. A large
vortex forms near the front of the region. The vortex makes an equal contribution to the extended constant low
pressure region behind the truss. As the vortex drifts oﬀ the deck, a low pressure covers the deck. This motion varies
with the angle of the bridge and does not appear constant. The ﬂow is turbulent as smaller vortices are shed behind
the ﬁrst. The pressure remains low until the deck is exposed entirely to the wind, at 3/4 of a period when the angle is
maximum in the opposite direction. The similarity between the simulation and the original ﬁlm can be seen in ﬁgure
11 where a frame form the simulation is shown at the same point as the video frame (ﬁgure 5).

At wind speeds above 30 m/s, turbulence dominates the ﬂow. As the deck rises, the low pressure moves across the
deck, covering it entirely before the deck reverses direction. A single vortex is formed at the front of this region a
similar to the slower wind speeds but it’s contribution to the pressure isn’t noticeable. However, unlike the slower
wind speeds, this is not the only large vortex that forms. Vortices are formed oﬀ the front edge at a high frequency
that drift a varying speeds. At times, these vortices can catch up with the front vortex. Large counter vortices are
formed at the back edge as air is pulled from the far side of the bridge to ﬁll in the low pressure. All these large vortices
interact through magnus forces and produce unpredictable ﬂuid behaviour. Such a highly turbulent ﬂow introduces
rapid noticeable changes in the pressure. This makes torque and work calculations highly erratic. However, because
the vortices are shed at a high frequency relative to that of the bridge, the contribution of the noise to the work over
many periods will be negligible.

The torque calculations were used to generate eﬀective damping coeﬃcients over a range of wind speeds (ﬁgure 10).
Over a range of wind speeds from 4 to 30 m/s, the damping coeﬃcient at .3 radians are similar to those measured
in the Federal Report. At wind speeds above 30 m/s, the negative damping coeﬃcient begins to drop. Particularly
at high wind speeds, the work is very sensitive to the time stepping and the time integration. For example, by
decreasing the time step we can be many points onto or near the line seen at lower wind speeds. Mogenthal noticed
this problem as well. His simulations of other bridge section had a turn over in the damping inconsistent with
measurements. Therefore, it is unknown whether the drop in the negative damping is a physical or computation
eﬀect. The diﬀerences between the experimental and simulated data in ﬁgure 10 are likely due to error. Because of
the noise in the data and the few periods we were able to simulate, error could be as high as 30 to 50 percent for some
points. Furthermore, the experimental data was taken when the bridge is allowed to oscillate out of control, unlike
the simulation.

Given these observations, how does our model compare? The generic description of the physics is consistent with

7

the behaviour of the bridge over the period of the bridge (ignoring the high frequency noise). The vortex forms in
a large low pressure region and separates from it as the bridge moves downward. A simpliﬁcation of this occurs at
very high wind speeds when the low pressure covers the entire bridge before the motion reverses. Furthermore, the
pressure generated by the vortex seems to decay somewhat at the far edge of the bridge. The advantage of this model
can be seen in ﬁgures 12 to 14. The Larsen model does not adequately explain data or simulations at around 23 m/s.
However, the ﬂuid ﬂow in these ﬁgures is in reasonable agreement with our model.

However, the speciﬁc mathematical model is not entirely consistent with the general behaviour. The diﬃculty is that
there is no obvious mathematical description of the torque generated by this behaviour that is consistent with a large
range of wind measurements. The mathematical model was taken to be consistent with the constant pressure motion
at high wind speeds and a single vortex at low wind speeds. The diﬃculty is that the behaviour of the associated with
this model in the intermediate wind speeds many not be accurate. In particular, at some intermediate wind speeds
(around 10 to 14 m/s), the constant part of the pressure (associated with the moving front of the wake) does not
cover the entire bridge. However, the model uses a step function that crosses the bridge nonetheless. Furthermore,
motions are still taken to be at constant velocities. This is clearly not the case, but will average out to something
near constant.

The reason that further modiﬁcations to this model have not been made is that any improvement will require a
number of new parameters (there are already four parameters in this model). Furthermore, assumptions about the
manner in which the pressure drops and the vortices move must be made. With such modiﬁcations, little is change
is observed in the damping coeﬃcient. Additional problems with making these changes are associated with making a
universal wind speed dependent model. Although a modiﬁcation may be made according to observations at one wind
speed, the wind speed dependence of the model is not restricted.

To this point, the amplitude dependence of the force has been assumed to be linear (a requirement for the to be
proportional to ˙α). This was tested using torque measurements over a range of amplitudes at a ﬁxed wind speed. The
work done in a period generally increases with amplitude. Over a range of amplitudes from 0.1 to 0.25 radians this
linear assumptions appears to be valid. At lower wind speeds this is not a certainty. The diﬃculty in determining the
behaviour is due to the large amount of noise generated by other features of the ﬂow. This problem is most signiﬁcant
at low amplitudes where the torque can be overshadowed by other eﬀects. Although these eﬀects will average out
to zero, the limited time of a simulations doesn’t ensure that these contributions are zero. As a result, the error in
measurement of work becomes too large to constrain the low amplitude dependence.

VI. CONCLUSION

Einstein once said ”Everything should be made as simple as possible- but no simpler”. For every problem, one
looks to explain a wide class of observed phenomena with a single basic cause. In trying to understand ﬂuid structure
interactions, like the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, accomplishing this goal is non-trivial. Fluid mechanics has typically
been the domain of experimentalists since the governing equations are notoriously diﬃcult to solve. As a result,
extracting any underlying simplicity is done without rigorous proof. Consequently, many attempts to explain insta-
bilities have been rejected on the basis that they are too simple to be the true cause. Nevertheless, these unsuccessful
attempts should not discourage researchers into believing that complex unpredictable forces that are generated in
high Reynolds ﬂows are at the heart of the matter.

The model presented is another step along the path towards the goal of a comprehensive single model of the
phenomena observed the morning of November 7, 1940. The majority of physical data can be adequately explained
using the vortex-induced model. The detailed method through which the oscillatory behaviour is establish may require
some further details, but it seems that the main features of the wind structure interaction over a large range of wind
speeds can be explained in the context of our vortex formation model. However, the range of wind speeds where the
model is applicable has not been fully established. At the extreme high and low values, computational calculations
become less reliable and experiments are diﬃcult. At very low wind speeds vortices may cease to form, while at high
wind speeds the structure of the wake may loss all periodicity. Nevertheless, this model seems appropriate over a
large enough range that it should be useful for many applications, and in particular may give a physics lecturers a
model to replace the naive and wrong ”resonance” model so often used in undergraduate lectures.

[1] O.H Ammann, T. Von Karman and G.B. Woodruﬀ. “The failure of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge” Report to the Federal

8

[2] K.Y. Billah, R.H. Scanlan. “Resonance, Tacoma Narrows bridge failure and undergraduate physics textbooks” Am. J. Phys.

[3] P.J. McKenna. “Large Torsional Oscillations in Suspension Bridges Revisited: Fixing an Old Approximation” Am. Math.

Works Agency, 28 March 1941

59 (2), 118-124 (1991)

M., January 1999

[4] Barnet Elliott, Harbine Monroe, Aug. von Boecklin (1940),“The Collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge” Film available in
VHS, PAL, and DVD from The Camera Shop, Tacoma Wa. Frames from the ﬁlm are used with permission of the copyright
holder.

[5] Y. Kubo, K. Hirata, K. Mikawa. “Mechanism of aerodynamic vibration of shallow bridge girder section” J. Inus. Aero. Wind

[6] A. Larsen. “Aerodynamics of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge - 60 Years Later” Struc. Eng. Intern. 4, 243-248 (2000)
[7] G. Morgenthal. “Aerodynamic Analysis of Structures Using High-resolution Vortex Particle Methods” Ph.D thesis, Cam-

Eng., 42, 1297-1308 (1992)

bridge University, October 2002.

Internal air
is moving
outward

Internal air
is moving
inward

External air is deflected outward

No air enters
when the Pressure is

Low.

1/4 Period

Low
Pressure

External air is deflected inward

More air enters
when Pressure is

High

1/4 Period

High
Pressure

FIG. 1. The positive feedback that occurs between the internal oscillations of a bottle and external air blown over the surface

at 1/4 the period of the internal oscillation is shown. The result is an exponentially increasing oscillation which we hear.

9

Amplitude

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0.2

0.8
Omega
FIG. 2. The contour plot of the long term amplitude of the oscillator with tanh(y) restoring force as a function of the

1.2

1.4

1

0.4

0.6

frequency and amplitude F of the driving sinusoidal force.

2

1
F

10

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Omega

FIG. 3. The discontinuity line in Ω − F plane for ﬁgure 2.

11

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Omega

FIG. 4. The discontinuity in long term response as a function of Ω of Figure 2. The solid line is the value of the long term
amplitude of y across the discontinuity at the high value of F while the dotted line is the long term value at the lower part of
the discontinuity.

12

FIG. 5. Frame from the ﬁlm taken by Elliot et al of the bridge collapse. To the right of the car is a large vortex outlined
by the cement dust from a section of the roadway that was apparently disintegrating. To the left sits Prof. Farquarson.
The behaviour of the vortex is much clearer in the ﬁlm itself. The roadway is almost level in its counter clockwise rotation.
Copyright ”The Camera Shop”. Used with permission.

13

Case 1: Vortex moves than D/2 in half a period

Case 2: Vortex reaches D/2 in half a period

W<0

W=0

W>0

Case3: Vortex moves more than D/2 in half a period

FIG. 6. Larsen’s model and analysis of the feedback mechanism. The work can be calculated from the force time the velocity
of the deck at the point of the force. When the vortex drifts across the deck in exactly one period, the force it produces does
no work on the bridge. This is the critical wind speed. Above this wind speed the work is positive. At slightly slower wind
speeds, this work is negative. Using a drift speed of U

4 , UcP

D is 4.

14

FIG. 7. Additional analysis of Larsen’s model is compared to wind tunnel data. Although the model agrees with the data

around the critical wind speed, problems occur at higher wind speeds.

15

1

0.5

0

–0.5

–1

–2

I

III

FIG. 8. The ﬂow of a vortex at a boundary with no-ﬂow through conditions is shown. Using the method of images, a counter

–1

0

1

2

vortex is placed across the boundary (y=0). Notice that the ﬁelds in the y direction cancel along the line y=0.

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
Low Pressure

Flow Reattaches

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
Point of Reattachement
moves down the deck as the
inclination increases

Vortex grows
and advances as
low pressure develops
behind the point of
reattachement

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

Low pressure pulls in air from the front,
forming a vortex almost immediately

II

IV

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
Air fills in
low pressure 
as deck moves
downward

Vortex begins to drift
as the wind travels over 
the surface of the deck

FIG. 9. Vortices are formed in the low-pressure wake of the front edge of the bridge deck. As the bridge deck rises, the point
where the ﬂow reattaches moves down the deck. The low pressure region that forms behind this point causes the vortex to
grow and move. When the deck begins to move downward, air begins to ﬁll in this low pressure region. This wind will also
cause the vortex to drift oﬀ the deck at a speed related to the angle of the bridge.

16

FIG. 10. The results of our model are compared to data taken from wind tunnel tests (points) and simulations using VXF
Flow (crosses and dotted line). This model does not suﬀer from the large wind speed deviations seen in Larsen’s model. It
also successfully describes low wind speed behaviour as well. The simulation, which guided the model, is further from the
experimental data. The error on the simulated data is likely substantial, since we were never able to simulate more than 10
periods. The simulated damping coeﬃcients shown are the average over all periods after the ﬁrst.

17

FIG. 11. Frame from the simulation using VXF Flow at 19 m/s. There is clearly a large vortex over halfway across the
bridge as in becomes level. This is very similar to the frame from the original movie. There is also a low-pressure region that
covers the length of the deck, which is consistent with the model presented in this paper.

FIG. 12. The ﬂow over the bridge cross section as the deck rises, as calculated with VXF Flow, at a wind of 23 m/s. Each
point represents a point vortex. (Top) A vortex begins to form behind the front edge as a low-pressure region forms. This
low pressure is due to the separation of the moving ﬂuid from the boundary of the deck. As the deck rises this region will get
larger. (Bottom) The vortex that formed on the bottom is being blown oﬀ the deck. The pressure on the bottom is dropping
uniformly.

18

FIG. 13. The ﬂow over the bridge cross section halfway through the rise of the front edge, as calculated with VXF Flow, at
a wind of 23 m/s. Each point represents a point vortex. (Top) The vortex has grown to cover half of the deck. Because the
deck is still rising, the low-pressure region extends from the front of the deck to backmost edge of the vortex. (Bottom) The
bottom of the deck has now been completely exposed to laminar ﬂow. Few vortices remain.

FIG. 14. The ﬂow over the bridge cross section after the full rise of the front edge, as calculated with VXF Flow, at a wind
of 23 m/s. (Top) As the deck descends from the maximum height, the vortex is now being to be pushed oﬀ the back edge. The
vortex has grown to cover a large part of the bridge. (Bottom) Laminar ﬂow dominates since the bottom has been completely
exposed to the wind.

19

