4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Extraction of coherent structures in a rotating turbulent ﬂow experiment

J. E. Ruppert-Felsot1, Olivier Praud, Eran Sharon2, H. L. Swinney1
1Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712
The Racah Institute of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

2

The discrete wavelet packet transform (DWPT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT) are used
to extract and study the dynamics of coherent structures in a turbulent rotating ﬂuid. Three-
dimensional (3D) turbulence is generated by strong pumping through tubes at the bottom of a
rotating tank (48.4 cm high, 39.4 cm diameter). This ﬂow evolves toward two-dimensional (2D)
turbulence with increasing height in the tank. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) measurements on
the quasi-2D ﬂow reveal many long-lived coherent vortices with a wide range of sizes. The vorticity
ﬁelds exhibit vortex birth, merger, scattering, and destruction. We separate the ﬂow into a low-
entropy “coherent” and a high-entropy “incoherent” component by thresholding the coeﬃcients of
the DWPT and DWT of the vorticity ﬁelds. Similar thresholdings using the Fourier transform and
JPEG compression together with the Okubo-Weiss criterion are also tested for comparison. We ﬁnd
that the DWPT and DWT yield similar results and are much more eﬃcient at representing the total
ﬂow than a Fourier-based method. Only about 3% of the large-amplitude coeﬃcients of the DWPT
and DWT are necessary to represent the coherent component and preserve the vorticity probability
density function, transport properties, and spatial and temporal correlations. The remaining small
amplitude coeﬃcients represent the incoherent component, which has near Gaussian vorticity PDF,
contains no coherent structures, rapidly loses correlation in time, and does not contribute signif-
icantly to the transport properties of the ﬂow. This suggests that one can describe and simulate
such turbulent ﬂow using a relatively small number of wavelet or wavelet packet modes.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Large-scale ordered coherent motions occur in a wide
variety of turbulent ﬂows despite existing in a rapidly
ﬂuctuating background turbulence [1]. These “coherent
structures”, which are associated with localized regions
of concentrated vorticity, persist for times that are long
compared to an eddy turnover time. The importance
of coherent structures in turbulence has become recog-
nized through the use of ﬂow visualization [2]. Exam-
ples of coherent structures identiﬁed in turbulent ﬂows
include hairpin vortices in boundary layer turbulence,
plumes in turbulent convection, and vortices in turbu-
lent shear ﬂows. Coherent structures play a major role
in the transport of mass and momentum, thus aﬀecting
transport, drag, and dissipation in turbulent ﬂows. Due
to their long lifetimes, coherent structures in the atmo-
sphere strongly inﬂuence the exchange of heat, moisture
and nutrients between diﬀerent locations.
In industry,
the prediction and control of transport, drag, and tur-
bulence is important in many processes [3], and in some
cases ﬂows can be modiﬁed through the control of coher-
ent structures [4].

The emergence of coherent vortices is especially strik-
ing in geostrophic turbulence, where the Coriolis force
plays a dominant role [5]. Under the eﬀect of rotation and
stratiﬁcation, geophysical ﬂows develop large and robust
coherent structures which can be identiﬁed and tracked
for time much longer than their characteristic turnover
time. Examples of such ﬂows are high and low pressure
systems, large vortical structures that are formed in Gulf
Stream meander, Mediterranean eddies (Meddies), and
the Earth’s jet stream; all can be observed and tracked
by satellite imaging of the atmosphere or the ocean sur-

face (e.g. satellite imaging websites [6]). Large coherent
structures are not limited to the Earth; the atmospheres
of other planets also reveal structures such as Neptune’s
dark spot and Jupiter’s zones, belts and Great Red Spot.

Three-dimensional (3D) turbulence subjected to strong
rotation develops columnar vortical structures aligned
with the rotation axis, as observed in the present experi-
ment and in previous laboratory experiments [7, 8, 9, 10].
Correlation in this direction becomes large when the
Coriolis force becomes large compared to inertial forces,
and the ﬂow proceeds towards a quasi-2D state. This
two-dimensionalization allows energy to proceed toward
larger scales through the inverse energy cascade and to-
ward smaller scales through the forward enstrophy cas-
cade [11], as observed in simulation [12] and experiments
on rotating [8, 9] and non-rotating quasi-2D ﬂows [13].
The cascades of energy and enstrophy lead to a spon-
taneous appearance of intense localized coherent vortices
containing most of the enstrophy of the ﬂow. Vorticity ﬁl-
aments outside of those coherent structures are distorted
and advected by the velocity ﬁeld induced by the vortices.
Thus, a rotating turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow can organize itself
into large-scale coherent structures that are often long-
lived compared to dissipative time scales. The presence of
long-lived coherent structures in turbulent rotating ﬂow
has been observed in both experiment [5, 8, 9] and in
simulation [14, 15]. These structures are larger than the
scale of the forcing. The large-scale coherent structures
break the homogeneity of the ﬂow and are thought to
dominate the ﬂow dynamics. The long lifetimes and spa-
tial extent allow coherent structures to play a signiﬁcant
active role in transport processes [16, 17].

Due to the dynamical importance of coherent struc-
tures, any analysis of ﬂow containing these structures

should take into account their existence. One approach
to analyze the coherent structures and the dynamics of
such ﬂow is to partition it into regions with diﬀerent dy-
namical properties. Okubo [18] derived a criterion to
separate ﬂow into a region where strain dominates (hy-
perbolic region) and a region where vorticity dominates
(elliptic region). The same criterion was later re-derived
by Weiss [19] and is now known as the Okubo-Weiss cri-
terion. The criterion has been widely used to analyze
numerical simulations of 2D turbulence. However, as
pointed out by Basdevant and Philipovitch [20], the va-
lidity of the criterion’s key assumption is restricted to
the core of the vortices that correspond to the strongest
elliptic regions. This limitation reduces the applicability
of a decomposition using this criterion.

Another method that has been found useful in ana-
lyzing ﬂow ﬁelds is principle orthogonal decomposition
(POD). This projects a ﬁeld onto a set of orthonormal ba-
sis functions where successive eigenvectors are obtained
by numerically maximizing the amount of energy cor-
responding to that eigenmode [21].
[POD is known by
other names, including Karhunen-Lo`eve decomposition,
principle component analysis (PCA), and singular value
decomposition (SVD).] Linear combinations of the basis
functions ideally correspond to the coherent structures
in the ﬂow. However, if the ensemble of ﬁelds is homo-
geneous, the basis functions become Fourier modes [21],
and many modes are necessary to reconstruct the ﬁeld.
This situation can occur if the structures are not sta-
tionary, as in the case of the current experiment. We
therefore do not include a POD analysis in our study.

This paper separates a ﬂow into coherent and incoher-
ent regions using wavelet transforms to extract localized
features at diﬀerent spatial scales. The most important
advantage of the wavelet representation over the more
usual Fourier representation is the localization of the ba-
sis functions. A Fourier analysis is not well suited to
pick out localized features such as intense vortices. The
basis functions of a Fourier transform are localized in
wavenumber space and hence spread out over the en-
tire domain in physical space. The basis functions of
the wavelet transform consist of dilates and translates of
a “mother” wavelet, which contains multiple frequencies
and has compact support (non-zero values only inside a
ﬁnite interval) in physical space. The basis functions are
well localized in both physical and wavenumber space;
hence only a few coeﬃcients suﬃce to describe localized
features of a signal.

The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [22, 23] has
been found to be well suited to analyze intermittent sig-
nals and systems containing localized features such as in-
tense vortices [22, 24, 25]. The coeﬃcients of the wavelet
transform contain not only amplitude but also scale and
position of the basis elements. Thus DWT coeﬃcients
can be used to track the size and location of features
that are well correlated with the wavelet bases [26].

The discrete wavelet packet transform (DWPT) [27] is
a generalization of the DWT; the possible wavelet packet

2

basis elements are a larger set which include spatial mod-
ulation of the mother wavelet. The advantage of the
DWPT is that the choice of basis is adaptable to the
signal to be analyzed.

Turbulent ﬂow can be considered as a superposition of
large-scale coherent motions, “ﬁne-scale” incoherent tur-
bulence, and a mean ﬂow with interaction between the
three constituents [28]. In numerical simulations of 2D
turbulence [24, 25, 29], the coherent and incoherent tur-
bulent background components have been separated us-
ing wavelet based decompositions operating on the vor-
ticity. The coherent part, represented by only a small
fraction of the coeﬃcients, retained the total ﬂow dy-
namics and statistical properties, while the incoherent
part represented no signiﬁcant contribution to the ﬂow
properties. This separation of the ﬂow into two dynam-
ically diﬀerent components suggests that the computa-
tional complexity of turbulent ﬂows could be reduced in
simulations with coherent structures interacting with a
statistically modelled incoherent background [25]. The
application, however, has been heretofore primarily lim-
ited to results obtained from numerical simulations.

In this paper, we use the wavelet technique to analyze
our Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) data on a rapidly
rotating turbulent ﬂow. Section II describes the exper-
imental system. Section III describes the resulting ﬂow
ﬁelds obtained in the experiment. Section IV presents
the techniques used to decompose the vorticity ﬁeld into
coherent and incoherent components. Section V presents
the results obtained by applying the method to measure-
ments on rotating turbulent ﬂow. The conclusions are
discussed in Section VI.

II. EXPERIMENT

A.

Instrumentation and measurements

An acrylic cylinder (48.4 cm tall, 39.4 cm inner diame-
ter) is ﬁt inside a square acrylic tank (40
40 cm cross sec-
tion, 60 cm tall) that has a transparent lid (Fig. 1) [30].
1◦C (ρ =
The tank is ﬁlled with distilled water at 24
10−3 cm2/s). The tank and the
0.998 g/cm3, ν = 9.5
data acquisition computer are mounted on a table that
can be rotated up to 1.0 Hz.

×

±

×

Fluid is injected at the bottom of the tank by pumping
water through a hexagonal array of tubes with grid spac-
ing 2.3 cm; there are 192 sources and 61 sinks, as shown
in Fig. 1. The source tubes are tee-shaped with a 2.5
cm shaft and 2.1 cm horizontal top (0.079 cm inside di-
ameter) [see inset of Fig. 1(a)]. Each tee is screwed into
the distributor. This design allows us to easily change
the type of connector or change the forcing geometry by
blocking or modifying sources or sinks. The tee source
geometry was chosen to produce horizontal velocities so
as to not directly inﬂuence the ﬂow ﬁeld at the top. The
sinks are 1.27 cm diameter holes in the bottom of the dis-
tributor [Fig. 1(b)]. The forcing system is versatile and

3

the local averaged Rossby number calculated from the
RMS vorticity, (ωRMS/2Ω), at such a ﬂow condition is
0.3. The depth of our system thus allows us to observe
more 3D (Rossby
0.3) ﬂow
without changing control parameters, such as rotation or
forcing.

20) or more 2D (Rossby

≈

≈

The water is seeded with polystyrene (ρ = 1.067
g/cm3) spherical particles with diameters in the range
90-106 µm. The small mismatch in density results in
10−2 cm/s in
a sedimentation terminal velocity of 4
the absence of ﬂow, which is insigniﬁcant compared to
the measured ﬂow velocities. The density mismatch also
causes a lag in the response of the particles in regions of
large acceleration [31, 32]. We estimate the largest lag to
be a 1% diﬀerence between the particle velocity and the
ﬂow velocity in the vortices at the top of the tank.

×

A 395 mW, 673 nm diode laser with attached light-
sheet optics (from Lasiris) illuminates the particles in
horizontal planes for ﬂow visualization and PIV measure-
ments. It is also possible to rotate the laser and optics by
90◦ to illuminate vertical planes for measurements of the
vertical velocities. The thickness of the sheet is about 1
cm and varies less than 10% across the diameter of the
tank. The laser is ﬁxed to a carriage which allows us
to adjust the vertical position of the light-sheet without
changing the pumping rate or system rotation rate.

×

Particles are imaged in the rotating frame with a
CCD camera (1004
1004 pixels, 30 frames per second)
mounted above the tank. The images are grabbed and
stored into a memory buﬀer by a computer on the ro-
tating table. A second, lower resolution camera with an
analog output allows us to view the ﬂow when not grab-
bing digital images.

The laser pulses were timed so that pairs of pulses were
imaged in successive frames of the CCD camera, which
had a dead time of 120 µs between consecutive frames.
The pulse duration was typically 10 ms with a 2 ms dark
interval between pulses.

The analog signal from the second camera and power
for the equipment on the table are sent through slip rings.
The entire experiment is controlled remotely with a wire-
less ethernet connection and remote access software (PC
Anywhere) by a computer in the non-rotating laboratory
frame. This allows us to take multiple data sets, adjust
the pumping rate, and adjust the position of the light
sheet without having to stop the table.

To determine the two-dimensional projection of the
velocity ﬁeld we use a type of Digital Particle Image
Velocimetry (DPIV) known as Correlation Image Ve-
locimetry (CIV) [33, 34]. The CIV algorithm uses cross-
correlations over small interrogation regions between a
pair of consecutive images to ﬁnd particle displacements
over known time intervals to obtain velocities. The CIV
algorithm also allows for possible rotations and defor-
mations of the interrogation region to take into account
nonlinear particle motions in between images. The re-
sulting velocity ﬁeld is interpolated to a uniform regular
grid by a cubic spline interpolation. The vorticity ﬁelds

(a) A schematic of the apparatus. The height of
FIG. 1:
the laser sheet is adjustable. Shown in the inset is a close-up
a single tee. (b) Horizontal cross section of the distribution
of pumping sources (open circles) and sinks (black dots) (po-
sitions are to scale; see text for relative size of sources and
sinks and tank diameter scale). (c) Overhead image of tank
bottom, showing the tees. Overlayed are lines indicating the
orientation of the tees.

allows us to inject nearly homogeneous turbulence at a
scale much smaller than the system size.

Flow rates can range up to 1400 cm3/s, correspond-
ing to ﬂow velocities up to 8 m/s out of the tees. This
corresponds to a Reynolds number of order 105 based on
the jet velocity and the grid spacing of the tees. The
Rossby number, U/2ΩL, based upon the same scales is
order 50 near the bottom of the tank, near the forcing.
However, the turbulence decays away from the forcing,
with increasing height, and becomes more 2D due to the
inﬂuence of rotation.

The data presented are for 0.4 Hz rotation rate and
ﬂow rates of 426 cm3/s, producing 2.4 m/s velocity jets
at the forcing tees. This corresponds to Reynolds and
104 and 20 respectively,
Rossby numbers of about 6
near the forcing. Near the top the RMS ﬂow velocity
is about 2 cm/s and the maximal characteristic velocity
length scale (twice the e-folding length of the velocity
spatial correlation function) is about 5 cm; hence near
the top the Reynolds number is about 1000. The Rossby
number calculated from characteristic scales is 0.08, while

×

are calculated from the coeﬃcients of the spline ﬁt.

C. Passive scalar advection

We can achieve a maximum data rate of 15 velocity
ﬁelds per second (using two images to calculate each ve-
locity ﬁeld). This time resolution is suﬃcient for our ﬂow
conditions. To capture the dynamics of the ﬂow, data
were taken for 20 s periods (limited by memory buﬀer
size), resulting in 300 ﬁelds in a single sequence. To cap-
ture statistical information, data were taken at 30 s inter-
vals (longer than measured decay time for our ﬂow) over
runs of 50 minutes in duration. The resulting velocity
128 grid with a spatial
and vorticity ﬁelds are on a 128
resolution of 0.30 cm when the whole tank is imaged and
0.19 cm when we zoom-in. Testing the CIV algorithm
against test particle images in known ﬂow ﬁelds [35, 36],
we found that the velocity ﬁelds determined by the algo-
rithm have about 2% RMS uncertainty.

×

B. Decay time

Characteristic decay times for our ﬂow were measured
by three diﬀerent types of experiments. In each experi-
ment, the measured decay time was taken as the e-folding
relaxation time of the mean kinetic energy in the ﬂow.

(i) Laminar (no forcing) spin-down experiments were
conducted with the tees removed and replaced with a
ﬂat horizontal boundary. The tank was subjected to a
sudden 10% decrease in rotation rate after the ﬂow had
reached solid-body rotation (no motion in the rotating
tank frame). The predicted decay time of motions in
laminar rotating ﬂows with rigid, ﬂat horizontal bound-
aries subject to small step changes in rotation is given by
the Ekman dissipation time, τ = H/(2√νΩ), where H is
the depth of the ﬂuid, ν is the kinematic viscosity and
Ω = 2πf is the angular frequency of the container [37].
The corresponding decay time for the energy in the ﬂow
is τ = H/(4√νΩ). For our closed cylindrical tank with-
out topography of depth H = 48.4 cm, ν = 0.095 cm2/s,
and a rotation rate of 0.4 Hz, this gives a decay time of
the energy as 78 s; the measured time was 64 s.

(ii) Laminar spin-down experiments were conducted in
the same way as in (i), except that the tees were installed
in the bottom of the tank. The characteristic decay time
measured with the tees installed in the bottom of the
tank for our ﬂow was 18
3 s. The reduced laminar spin
down time is due to the tees, which cause extra drag
and secondary circulations that quickly bring the ﬂuid
to solid-body rotation.

±

(iii) Turbulent decay experiments were conducted by
abruptly shutting oﬀ the forcing. For these experiments,
the ﬂow was allowed to reach a steady turbulent state
(typically many decay times) under a constant pump-
ing rate of 426 cm3/s and rotation rate of 0.4 Hz before
abruptly turning oﬀ the forcing. The measured decay
time of 13
3 s is long compared to the typical vortex
turnover time of 1 s.

±

4

To study the transport and mixing properties of our
ﬂow we examine numerically the motion of passive scalar
point particles and passive scalar ﬁelds in the velocity
ﬁelds obtained from the experiment. The velocity ﬁelds
that we measure are a two-dimensional projection of a
three-dimensional incompressible ﬂow ﬁeld. Therefore,
they have a non-zero divergence and do not satisfy any
ﬂuid dynamical equation of motion. Nonetheless, they
can give us useful information regarding the transport
properties of the ﬂow.

Initial locations are chosen for the point particles, the
positions of the particles are updated corresponding to
the velocity ﬁelds such that xn+1 = un∆t + xn where xn
is the position of the particle at time-step n, and un is the
velocity of the ﬂow ﬁeld at time-step n at the location of
the particle. Each velocity ﬁeld is interpolated in space
by a cubic-spline to calculate the ﬁeld at the location
of a given particle. The timestep, ∆t, is chosen by the
Courant condition [38], which avoids particles jumping
over grid points or going too far at a given iteration. For
our data this condition means ∆t < 0.02 s < 1/15 s;
therefore, ﬁelds must also be interpolated in time. The
measured velocity ﬁelds vary slowly in time compared
to our temporal resolution 1/15 s (measured correlation
time is
2.4 s; see section V A). We therefore justify the
use of a cubic spline interpolation in time to achieve ∆t

≈

≪

1/15 s (typically ∆t = 0.001 s).
We also examine the time evolution of a passive scalar
ﬁeld advected in the experimental velocity ﬁeld by nu-
merically integrating the advection-diﬀusion equation,

∂c
∂t

=

u

c + κD

2c,

(1)

−

∇

· ∇
where c = c(x, t) is the passive scalar concentration
and κD is a diﬀusion coeﬃcient, chosen as necessary for
numerical stability of the solution. The values of κD
used correspond to Schmidt numbers (κD/ν) near 0.05.
The numerical integration is performed using a pseudo-
spectral method in polar coordinates based upon meth-
ods given in [39]. The grid is 128 Chebyshev modes in the
radial direction and 256 Fourier modes in the azimuthal
direction. The velocity ﬁeld obtained by the CIV mea-
surement is interpolated via a cubic spline onto the simu-
lation grid. The numbers of radial and azimuthal modes
were chosen so as to not under-resolve our velocity ﬁelds
on the nonuniform polar grid.

The singularity at the origin was avoided by choosing
Chebyshev modes for the radial direction. The colloca-
tion points for Chebyshev modes have unit spacing on
1)), where xi is the ith grid-
a circle, xi = cos (πi/(N
point, and N the total number of gridpoints. The grid-
points are clustered at the boundaries and sparse in the
center of the domain. By deﬁning the radial coordinate
r
1, 1] and using only the r > 0 values, the radial
grid points are sparse near r = 0 and clustered at the

[
−

−

∈

5

)

m
c
(
 
 
y

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11

boundary r = R. For an even number of modes the ori-
gin, r = 0, is skipped. However, the azimuthal grid is
still dense at the origin, which requires us to use a very
10−4 s to avoid numerical insta-
short time step ∆t
bility. The experimentally determined velocity ﬁelds are
then interpolated in time by the method described above
for the tracer particle simulation.

×

∼

2

The diﬀusive term is calculated implicitly by a Crank-
Nicholson scheme, separately for the radial and az-
imuthal directions. The advection term is calculated ex-
plicitly by a predictor-corrector scheme using a third-
order Adams-Bashforth step followed by a fourth-order
Adams-Moulton step [38].

To perform the numerical analysis on the decomposed
ﬁelds we construct a velocity ﬁeld from a vorticity ﬁeld.
We make the assumption of 2D ﬂow that the total vor-
ticity is given by the measured vertical vorticity, ω = ωz.
We then use the 2D streamfunction-vorticity relation
ωz and solve Possion’s equation for the stream-
∇
function Ψ using Matlab’s PDE solver. The derivatives
of the streamfunction are then used to calculate the ve-
(Ψz) = u, where z is the
locity ﬁeld by the relation
unit vector in the vertical direction.

2Ψ =

∇ ×

−

The assumption above is clearly not valid close to the
source tees, where the ﬂow is 3D. However, close to the
top of the tank the assumption becomes valid as the ﬂow
is quasi-2D. To test the reconstruction and the validity
of the 2D approximation, we compare the original mea-
sured velocity ﬁelds to velocity ﬁelds reconstructed from
the vorticity ﬁelds. A region of an original velocity ﬁeld
and the reconstructed ﬁeld is shown in FIG. 2. The RMS
diﬀerence in the magnitudes of the original and recon-
structed ﬁelds is about 2%. The reconstruction calcula-
tion does well in regions where there is a strong uniform
ﬂow. It does less well where there are large gradients in
the velocity, in particular near vortices. However, on the
whole the reconstructed velocity ﬁeld follows the same
behavior as the original ﬁeld.

III. VELOCITY AND VORTICITY FIELDS

A. Transition to quasi-2D ﬂow

Near the forcing sources (tees) at the bottom of the

×

tank, the ﬂow is very turbulent (Reynolds number
∼
104) and three dimensional (Rossby number
6
1).
However, moving vertically away and up the tank from
the forcing, the turbulent velocities decay. The Reynolds
number near the top of the tank where our data were
collected is order 1000, based upon the RMS velocities
of 2 cm/s and typical structure size of 5 cm (estimated
from the velocity correlation function). The relative in-
ﬂuence of rotation also becomes larger so that the Rossby
number becomes about 0.3.

≫

Fig. 3 compares the magnitude of the divergence and
vertical vorticity of the ﬂow in our tank at two diﬀerent
heights. The divergence in our ﬂow ﬁelds is small rela-

32

34

36

38

x  (cm)

FIG. 2: (color on-line) Close-up of a vortex in our tank near
the boundary (bold line). The original ﬁeld is represented
by black vectors and the reconstructed ﬁeld by light-colored
vectors. The original and reconstructed ﬁelds are indistin-
guishable in the regions of uniform ﬂow. The largest vectors
correspond to 6.7 cm/s. The center of the tank is at (x,y) =
(19.2 cm, 18.9 cm).

∼

tive to the vorticity and 2Ω (
5 rad/s). The divergence
ﬁeld consists of small length-scales near the top and has
a weak correlation with the vorticity ﬁeld. The ratio of
the RMS divergence to the RMS vorticity is 0.2, of the
same order as the Rossby number. Near the bottom forc-
ing, however, the divergence ﬁeld becomes larger in am-
plitude, length-scale, and more strongly correlates with
structure in the vorticity ﬁeld. The inset in Fig. 3 shows
the ratio of the divergence to vorticity increases near the
forcing, where the ﬂow is more 3D and decreases near the
top, where the ﬂow is more 2D.

The particles in a plane near the top of the tank are
conﬁned primarily to the plane, and the particle streaks
follow persistent coherent jets, cyclones (a vortex with
rotation in the same sense as the tank), and anti-cyclones
without crossing, similar to a 2D streamline ﬂow [Fig. 4
(a) and (b)]. In contrast, the motions of the particles near
the bottom of the tank are much less organized; particles
pass through the plane frequently and the particle streaks
can cross and exhibit small ﬂuctuations due to increased
three-dimensionality and turbulence.

B. Persistent coherent structures

Localized coherent structures including large compact
regions of intense vorticity and wispy ﬁlaments of intense
vorticity are evident in Fig. 4 (c) and (d). We observe

Near lid

Near tees

Near lid

1.0

.
t

a
r
 
F
D
P

0.01

0

Vorticity

x  (s−1)

5

Divergence

Near tees

0
10

−1

10

−2

10

)
x
(
 

P

−3

10

−4

10

10

−5
0

5

10
x  (s−1)

15

20

FIG. 3: (color on-line) The PDF of the magnitude of vertical
vorticity and divergence at two diﬀerent heights in our tank,
4 cm below the lid (solid curves) and 10.4 cm above the top
of the tees (dashed curves). Inset: the ratio of the divergence
PDF to the vorticity PDF, showing the increase in the relative
magnitude of the divergence near the forcing.

more cyclones (rotation in the same sense as the tank)
than anti-cyclones, in accord with observations in previ-
ous experiments on rotating turbulent ﬂows [8, 9]. The
amplitudes of vorticity at the core of the intense cyclones
are typically more than ten times that of the surrounding
ﬂow [see Fig. 4 (d) for a close-up of an intense cyclone].
The anti-cyclones, however, have a typical core vorticity
amplitude only a few times that of the background.

The cyclones, anti-cyclones, and vorticity ﬁlaments are
long-lived and are active dynamically. The vortices and
vortex ﬁlaments can be tracked by eye as the ﬂow evolves
in time [Fig. 4 (e)]. Vortices are shed from the wall and
travel across the tank and interact with one another. Vor-
tex ﬁlaments occasionally peel oﬀ of vortices, advect with
the ﬂow, and sometimes roll up to form new vortices.
Structures may disappear by merging with other struc-
tures or by stretching in a jet region between opposite
sign vortices. Many of the small intense vortices with
very short turn around times (< 1 s) live on the order
of a characteristic decay time (
10 s) before shearing
apart or merging with neighboring structures.

∼

Additionally, we see persistent structures such as the
large cyclone (red) and anti-cyclone (blue) that appear
in Fig. 4. Such structures often appear in a preferred
location in the tank. Presumably such preferred loca-
tions exist because of inhomogeneities in the forcing by
the tees [cf. Fig. 1 (c)]. A vortex can be kicked oﬀ its
preferred location by a large perturbation when it inter-
acts with neighboring vortices.
If it begins to wander
around the tank, it will generally disappear within a few
characteristic decay times unless it returns to the pre-
ferred location.
If a structure moves oﬀ its preferred
location and disappears, a new structure will typically
form, replacing the pre-existing one within a few decay

6

times. Some long-lived coherent structures occasionally
persist throughout the entire duration of an experimen-
5000 vortex turnover times). Further, we ob-
tal run (
serve persistent structures as low as 5 cm above the tees.
Observations closer to the tees are diﬃcult because the
three-dimensional turbulent ﬂow rapidly moves particles
into and out of the laser sheet.

∼

A wide range of spatial scales is visible in the veloc-
ity and vorticity ﬁelds [Fig. 4 (c) and (d)]. The largest
features, approximately 10 cm in size, are coherent vor-
tices that have a much larger amplitude than their sur-
rounding region. There are also large amplitude vortex
ﬁlaments that stretch up to 10 cm; these can be as thin
as the grid resolution in the transverse direction. Small
scale persistent structures less than 1 cm in size yet large
in amplitude are also observed. The region between the
various large amplitude coherent structures is occupied
by relatively low amplitude vorticity [see the vorticity
trace in Fig. 4 (c)].

IV. DECOMPOSITION OF THE VORTICITY
FIELD

A. Wavelets and wavelet packets

The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is a multi-
resolution analysis that successively decomposes the sig-
nal into coeﬃcients which encode coarse and ﬁne details
at successively lower resolution [27]. The basis elements
of the transform ψs,p correspond to dilations and trans-
lations of a mother wavelet function ψ, where s is the
scale (dilations) of the wavelet and p its position (trans-
lations). Successive levels of the transform continue to
split the coarse detail coeﬃcients, eﬀectively analyzing
the signal at coarser and coarser resolution.

The discrete wavelet packet transform (DWPT) is a
generalization of the discrete wavelet transform. The ba-
sis elements of the wavelet packet transform include, in
addition to dilations and translations, spatial modulation
of the mother wavelet at diﬀerent resolutions. The basis
elements ψs,p,k take on an additional parameter k, which
roughly corresponds to the modulation of the wavelet
packet. In contrast to the DWT, the choice of basis of
the DWPT is not unique [23]. The wavelet basis is con-
tained within the possible choices of wavelet packet bases.
To select the particular basis to use, a natural choice is
the wavelet packet basis into which the coeﬃcients of the
transform most eﬃciently represent the signal. This is
known as the “best basis”. The best basis is typically
calculated based upon the minimization of an eﬀective
entropy measure of the coeﬃcients [27], thus minimizing
the “information cost” of the coeﬃcients in the best ba-
sis. The ﬂexibility in basis choice of the DWPT allows the
transform to adapt the basis to the particular signal be-
ing analyzed. For example, if the signal contains regions
of rapid ﬂuctuations, the basis choice will reﬂect that by
including more basis elements with high modulation.

7

FIG. 4: TOP: (a) [MOVIE] [40] Streak photo (400 ms exposure time) of the particle image ﬁelds in a horizontal plane 4 cm
below the lid of the tank. (b) Close-up of the boxed region (18.7 cm × 18.7 cm) showing a cyclone (circular closed particle
streaks) and an anti-cyclone (elliptical closed particle streaks to the upper-left of the cyclone). The time average of many ﬁelds
has been subtracted. (c) Vorticity ﬁeld ωz with the value along the dashed line shown in the trace below the ﬁeld. (d) Close-up
of velocity and vorticity ﬁelds in a 8 cm × 8 cm region near the boundary. The longest velocity vector corresponds to 6.7 cm/s.
The vorticity is indicated by the color map, where vorticity values are clipped at 5 s
to render visible weaker structures; the
vorticity in the core of the strongest cyclone is 22 s
. (e) [MOVIE] [41] A sequence showing the time evolution of the vorticity
ﬁeld.

−1

−1

8

We use the DWPT and DWT on our experimentally
obtained vorticity ﬁelds, as previous authors have done
using 2D turbulent ﬂow data from numerical simulations
in a periodic box (e.g.
[24, 29]). We use the Matlab
wavelet toolbox and the Coiﬂet 12 (coif2 in Matlab no-
tation) as the analyzing wavelet. The coiﬂet family of
wavelets has both compact support and can generate an
orthogonal basis. These two properties allow one to se-
lect the localized features of the coherent structures and
to treat the decomposition of the vorticity ﬁeld as two
orthogonal components. The choice of wavelet does not
alter the results signiﬁcantly as long as the basis is suﬃ-
ciently smooth [25].

performed by applying a threshold to the resulting coef-
ﬁcients of the transform. Coeﬃcients above the thresh-
old amplitude are assumed to correspond to the signal
while coeﬃcients below the threshold correspond to the
“noise”. The few large amplitude coeﬃcients are called
the “coherent” coeﬃcients, while the many small am-
plitude coeﬃcients are “incoherent”. The coherent and
incoherent parts of the vorticity are then reconstructed
by the inverse DWPT (IDWPT).

The choice of the threshold separating the coherent
and incoherent parts of the signal is based upon a mea-
sure of the number of signiﬁcant coeﬃcients No, which is
the theoretical dimension of the signal, deﬁned by

B. FFT, JPEG compression, and Okubo-Weiss
based techniques

To examine the relative eﬃciency of the wavelet-based
decompositions, we compare the DWPT and DWT to
three other algorithms; one based upon a Fourier trans-
form, a second on basic JPEG compression, and a third
on the method developed by Okubo [18] and Weiss [19].
For the Fourier transform algorithm we threshold the
coeﬃcients of a 2-dimensional fast Fourier transform
(FFT) of our vorticity. The coherent ﬁelds are then con-
structed via an inverse FFT of the largest amplitude coef-
ﬁcients. The incoherent remainder ﬁelds are constructed
by subtracting the coherent ﬁelds from the original ﬁelds.
The basic JPEG algorithm consists of subdividing an
image into 8
8 blocks and taking the discrete cosine
transform over the sub-blocks. The coeﬃcients are ar-
ranged based upon the global average of the amplitudes
among the sub-blocks. The average of the amplitudes is
used to determine which modes to keep. After the thresh-
old, each sub-block retains the same number of modes,
each in the same position. Thus the number of modes
retained must be a multiple of the number of sub-blocks
which compose the image (for our 128
128 ﬁelds, this
is 256).

×

×

The Okubo-Weiss criterion splits the ﬁelds into ellip-
tic and hyperbolic regions, dominated by vorticity and
strain respectively. The regions dominated by vorticity
and strain are then separated and taken to be the coher-
ent and incoherent ﬁelds.

C. Coherent structure extraction

We use an algorithm for coherent structure extraction
based upon an iterative de-noising algorithm presented
by Wickerhauser [27] (chapter 11) and used in [29] for
the DWPT. Successive iterations of the algorithm peel
oﬀ more of the coherent component of the ﬁelds. In the
de-noising, the assumption is that the original signal can
be represented by a few large amplitude coeﬃcients of the
DWPT, while the noise is contained in the many remain-
ing coeﬃcients of small amplitude. The de-noising is then

N0(f ) = eH(f )

(2)

where H(f ) is the entropy of a discrete signal f = [fi]
(where [fi] is the set of discrete values of an arbitrary
signal f ), deﬁned as

H(f ) =

pi log pi

(3)

N

−

X
i=1

f
||

fi
|

2/
|

2 is the normalized square modulus
where i =
||
of the ith element of the signal, with N the number of
2. N0 indicates how many
2 = Pi |
fi
elements and
|
||
of the largest coeﬃcients should be retained to give an
eﬃcient, low entropy, representation of the signal.

f
||

Thus, the decomposition algorithm is the following.
We take the transform of an individual measured vortic-
ity ﬁeld. For the DWPT, the best basis is used. Then
we ﬁnd the number of signiﬁcant coeﬃcients N0 of the
transformed vorticity ﬁeld in the transform basis. The
threshold is therefore based upon the value of the N th
0
largest coeﬃcient. Coeﬃcients whose modulus is larger
(smaller) than the threshold correspond to the coherent
(incoherent) part of the vorticity ﬁeld. We then take the
inverse transform to get the coherent part in physical
space. The incoherent ﬁeld is reconstructed by subtract-
ing the coherent from the total ﬁeld. The process is then
repeated for each of our vorticity ﬁelds. Our algorithm
contains no adjustable parameters other than the selected
wavelet and is based upon the assumption that the ﬂow
ﬁeld has a low entropy component, corresponding to the
coherent structures, and a high entropy component, cor-
responding to an incoherent background.

Our algorithm is diﬀerent than the various iterative
algorithms of Farge et al. [25] and others [27, 29].
In
the de-noising algorithm described in [27, 29], successive
iterations extract a fraction of the coherent coeﬃcients
until a stopping criterion is met. The fraction of retained
coeﬃcients at each step and stopping criterion are ad-
justable parameters. However, the basis of the DWPT
can change at each iteration. The number of coeﬃcients
retained therefore loses its meaning since coeﬃcients can
be selected from completely diﬀerent bases. Therefore,
we only perform a single iteration without changing the

basis for the DWPT. In the algorithm of Farge [25], an
a priori assumption is made of Gaussian white noise in-
coherent component superimposed upon a non-Gaussian
component of coherent vortices. The threshold is then
iteratively found to separate the two without adjustable
parameters.

V. RESULTS

A. Decomposed vorticity ﬁelds

The resulting coherent and incoherent vorticity ﬁelds
obtained from the DWPT, DWT, Fourier, and JPEG
techniques are compared in Fig. 5. The Okubo-Weiss
criterion was also tested to compare with the other de-
composition methods. The ﬁelds shown are constructed
with the same number of coeﬃcients for the DWPT,
DWT, and Fourier transforms, and the closest approx-
imate number for JPEG.

The coherent ﬁelds in Fig. 5 appear to retain the large
scale coherent structures [cf. Fig. 4(c) and (e)]. The
DWPT, DWT, and Fourier preserve the structure of the
total vorticity ﬁeld. The Okubo-Weiss criterion excises
primarily the regions of large amplitude vorticity, which
generally corresponds to the cores of vortices. However, it
extracts only the cores and leaves behind the peripheries.
The JPEG does poorly with so few coeﬃcients; it barely
picks out some of the stronger vortices in the ﬁeld.

For the same number of coeﬃcients, 2.4%, the DWPT
and DWT do a better job of extracting structure in
the ﬁelds than the Fourier decomposition, which leaves
more structure behind in the incoherent ﬁeld (Fig. 5
[MOVIE] [41]). The JPEG incoherent ﬁeld is large am-
plitude because of the few coeﬃcients retained in the
coherent ﬁeld. The incoherent ﬁelds resulting from the
DWPT, DWT, and the FFT are mostly devoid of large-
scale structures and are much smaller in amplitude. The
incoherent ﬁelds are also poorly correlated in time and
are devoid of large scale structures or any other fea-
ture which can be tracked by eye (Fig. 5 and associated
movie).

The Okubo-Weiss criterion selects the centers of the
vortices where vorticity dominates strain. This accounts
for a large portion of the enstrophy. It extracts about
74% of the enstrophy in the vorticity dominated regions,
which cover about 40% (not coeﬃcients) of the ﬂow.
However, the method leaves behind holes in the vortic-
ity ﬁeld that act as coherent structures and are often
surrounded by large values of vorticity. The resulting
“incoherent” ﬁeld thus retains coherent properties. The
Okubo-Weiss criterion also does poorly in recovering the
statistics of the total ﬁeld, as shown in Table I. Fur-
thermore, the decomposition shown in Fig. 5 was per-
formed without regard to the Okubo-Weiss validity cri-
terion, which restricts the application of the criterion to
the very centers of the vortices or regions of very large
vorticity [20]. As a result, much less of the ﬁeld is re-

9

tained, and the incoherent ﬁeld ends up with large values
of vorticity.

Statistical properties of the decompositions are shown
in Tables I and II. Table I lists the results from setting
the threshold of the various transforms based upon the
number of signiﬁcant coeﬃcients calculated from equa-
tion (2). On average about 2-3% of the large-amplitude
coeﬃcients of the wavelet-based decompositions were re-
tained in the coherent ﬁelds, which account for about
85% of the total enstrophy of the ﬂow. The Fourier re-
tains roughly the same enstrophy but requires more co-
eﬃcients, about 4%. The JPEG decomposition retains
only 67% of the total enstrophy with about 13% of the
large-amplitude coeﬃcients.

Owing to the compact support of their basis functions,
fewer coeﬃcients were needed for the DWPT and DWT,
based upon the entropy criterion in equation (3), than
for the Fourier and JPEG decompositions. Compression
curves for enstrophy of the various decompositions ap-
plied to our vorticity ﬁelds are shown in Fig. 6. The
DWPT and DWT both do similarly well at extracting
the enstrophy in the ﬁelds with only a small number of
coeﬃcients. The DWPT probably does slightly better
due to the adaptability of its basis. The Fourier based
methods do not saturate as rapidly as the wavelet-based
methods. This is likely due to the non-locality of the ba-
sis functions when applied to a ﬁeld which has localized
structures and sharp features.

The wavelet-based algorithms also do a better job pre-
serving the skewness and kurtosis of the total vorticity
in the coherent component, while the incoherent compo-
nents are much closer to a Gaussian distribution (skew-
ness = 0, kurtosis = 3). Table II displays the results
from setting the threshold on the transforms so that each
method retains 2.4% of the coeﬃcients in the coherent
component (since the coeﬃcients JPEG must be a multi-
8 blocks, 256, this restriction is re-
ple of the number of 8
laxed). For the same number of retained coeﬃcients, the
DWT and DWPT clearly outperform the Fourier method
in terms of preserving the statistics of the total vorticity
ﬁeld.

×

Figure. 7 shows that the coherent ﬁelds from the
wavelet packet and wavelet decompositions rapidly con-
verge to the statistics of the total vorticity ﬁeld. The co-
herent ﬁelds preserve the non-Gaussianity of the vorticity
PDF without having to extract many coeﬃcients. The
respective incoherent ﬁelds also rapidly converge to Gaus-
sian statistics. This suggests that wavelets and wavelet
packets do a good job of extracting the coherent struc-
tures from the vorticity ﬁeld. The near-Gaussianity of
the incoherent ﬁeld suggest that the transforms have left
the remainder without coherent structure.

The coherent components of the Fourier and JPEG de-
compositions, however, converge to the statistics of the
total ﬁelds much more slowly. To obtain the same level of
ﬁdelity, both the Fourier and JPEG must extract many
more coeﬃcients. This ineﬃciency would result in over-
transformed ﬁelds. Further, the insets in Fig. 7 (b) show

10

FIG. 5: Decomposed vorticity ﬁelds, TOP: Coherent BOTTOM: Incoherent remainder ﬁelds, all for the same number of
coeﬃcients retained (except for Weiss and approximate for JPEG). The colormap corresponds to the intensity of vorticity and
is the same for all images and the same as used in Fig. 4. [MOVIE] [42]

Decomposition
Quantity
coeﬃcients retained (%)

2.4
Enstrophy/ﬁeld (s−2 × 104) 4.33 3.63
0.78 0.80
7.09 7.03

Vorticity skewness
Vorticity ﬂatness

Wavelet packet

Wavelet

Fourier

JPEG

Weiss

Total coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent
100

97.6
0.63
0.02
3.88

2.7
3.67
0.85
7.58

97.3
0.62
0.04
3.42

4.1
3.68
0.62
5.37

95.9
0.56
0.20
7.85

13.1
2.92
0.53
5.27

86.9
1.33
0.24
6.55

40.2
3.21
1.22
11.81

59.8
1.12
-0.07
8.28

TABLE I: Statistical properties of the decomposed vorticity ﬁelds using entropy criterion.

that the kurtosis of the incoherent component never con-
verges to anything small, but increasingly deviates from
Gaussian. This suggests that the Fourier decomposition
is not separating the coherent structures from the back-
ground.

The probability distribution function (PDF) of vortic-
ity has broad wings (Fig. 8), which correspond to the
large vorticity values that occur in the coherent vortices
and vorticity ﬁlaments. The preference for cyclonic (posi-
tive vorticity) structures over anti-cyclonic structures ap-
pears as a large positive skewness (see also Table I or II).
While the PDF for the DWPT and DWT coherent vortic-
ity ﬁeld are nearly the same as that for the total vorticity
ﬁeld, the PDF for the corresponding incoherent ﬁeld has
a narrower and more symmetric PDF, indicating the lack
of high intensity structures.

Consider the enstrophy spectrum of the vorticity ﬁelds,
as shown in Fig. 8 (b).
It is clear from the enstrophy
spectra of the total ﬁeld that most of the enstrophy is
contained in long wavelengths (small k). This agrees well
with the observation of the vorticity ﬁelds and the dom-
inance of large structures with large amplitude vortic-
ity. The enstrophy spectrum, shown in Fig. 8, does not
contain a well deﬁned scaling region corresponding to a
cascade of enstrophy. A cascade would not be expected

for our quasi-2D ﬂow, which is forced by the broad-band
3D turbulence in the bottom of the tank rather than by
injection of energy at a single well-deﬁned wavenumber.
The presence of large structures which extend well into
the 3D region alone tells us that we must have a broad
spectrum energy injection.

The coherent ﬁeld contains the same large structures
that are present in the total ﬁeld. Accordingly, the en-
strophy spectrum of the coherent ﬁeld matches that of
the total ﬁeld at long wavelength [Fig. 8 (b)]. The inco-
herent ﬁeld contains negligible enstrophy at large scales,
indicating the lack of large scale features. This is ap-
parent in the vorticity decomposition (see Fig. 5). The
incoherent ﬁeld has only small structures and is the dom-
inant contribution to the enstrophy at large k.

The wavelet-based and the Fourier decompositions also
retain the spatial and temporal correlations in the coher-
ent ﬁeld, as Fig. 9 illustrates with the DWPT and DWT
yielding almost the same results. The long time correla-
tion is in part due to the presence of long lived coherent
structures. In contrast, for the incoherent ﬁeld the spa-
tial and temporal correlations are short ranged, indicat-
ing the absence of large scale and long-lived structures.

Wavelet packet

Wavelet

Fourier

JPEG

Decomposition
Quantity
coeﬃcients retained (%)

2.4
Enstrophy/ﬁeld (s−2 × 104) 4.33 3.63
0.78 0.80
7.09 7.03

Vorticity skewness
Vorticity ﬂatness

Total coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent coherent-incoherent
100

97.6
0.63
0.02
3.88

2.4
3.60
0.86
7.62

97.6
0.69
0.04
3.47

2.4
3.28
0.51
4.77

97.6
0.92
0.32
7.85

3.0
0.96
0.06
4.84

97.0
3.18
0.72
7.08

TABLE II: Statistical properties of the decomposed vorticity ﬁelds retaining the same number of modes, 2.4%, as the DWPT
decomposition (approximate for JPEG).

11

DWPT

DWT

Fourier

JPEG

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

i

d
e
n
a
t
e
r
 
y
h
p
o
r
t
s
n
e
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

0
0

0.1
Fraction of coefficients retained in coherent component

0.2

FIG. 6: (color on-line) The percent enstrophy retained in the
largest amplitude coeﬃcients as a function of the number of
coeﬃcients kept. In order from best (most eﬃcient) to worst:
wavelet packet, wavelet, Fourier, JPEG.

B. Transport of passive scalar particles and
concentration ﬁelds

Paths computed for some passive scalar “particles” in
the measured velocity ﬁelds are shown in Fig. 10 (a).
Over the 20 s duration of the measurement, the particles
are advected around a large portion of the tank. The
motion of the particles depends on their location in the
ﬂow. For example, a particle can spend time caught in a
vortex, following the motion of the vortex as it meanders
slowly in a localized region of the tank [path in upper
right of Fig. 10 (a)]. Occasionally the particle will escape
from a vortex and then be carried by a high velocity jet,
which can transport a particle large distances in a short
time. A particle may then be captured by a vortex [e.g.
path ending in lower right of Fig. 10 (a)].

The resulting mean squared displacement of the tracer
particles in the velocity ﬁelds obtained by experiment is
shown in Fig. 10 (b). It exhibits approximately t2 scaling
at short times, which looks “ﬂight-like” [17]. At long
times the ﬁnite size of the tank becomes signiﬁcant and
the scaling exponent becomes smaller.

Both the wavelet and wavelet packet coherent ﬁelds
disperse the tracer particles similarly around the tank;

the scaling behavior of the mean squared displacement,
not shown in this paper, is also the same. Diﬀerences
in the paths are due to the sensitive dependence upon
initial conditions of a turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld.

We ﬁnd a striking diﬀerence in the behavior of a nu-
merically integrated passive scalar particle in the coher-
ent and incoherent ﬁelds. The incoherent ﬁelds make
no signiﬁcant contribution to the transport properties;
rather, particles are conﬁned to a small region, as shown
in the inset in Fig. 10 (a). This is due to the rapid decor-
relation in time of the incoherent ﬁelds. The rapid ﬂuctu-
ations cause the tracers to jiggle around and the scaling
of the mean squared squared displacement of the trac-
ers in the incoherent ﬁelds approaches that of a random
walk.

The evolution of the passive scalar ﬁeld in the mea-
sured velocity ﬁeld is similar to that for tracer particles.
Results for the coherent and incoherent ﬁelds produced
by the DWPT are shown in Fig. 11, which illustrates the
stretching and folding; the results for the total ﬁeld are
similar. By four seconds the scalar has already been sig-
niﬁcantly stretched by the velocity ﬁelds. There is no
signiﬁcant advection in the incoherent ﬁelds and is simi-
lar to results obtained with pure diﬀusion (no advection
term). This is expected from the short time and space
correlations of the incoherent ﬁelds (Fig. 9). Similar re-
sults were obtained for the total ﬁeld and for the DWT
and FFT methods.

VI. DISCUSSION

We ﬁnd that ﬂow which is strongly forced near the bot-
tom of a deep rapidly rotating tank evolves with increas-
ing height in the tank from 3D turbulence into rotation-
dominated turbulence. This is due to the competition
between the turbulent forcing which is 3D, and the ro-
tation which tends to two-dimensionalize the ﬂow. Near
the forcing the turbulent velocities are large and the ﬂow
is 3D. Away from the forcing the spatial decay of tur-
bulence allows the rotation to become increasingly im-
portant with increasing height. Motions of the particles
in the ﬂow are more organized in the horizontal plane
near the top, consistent with two-dimensional columnar
vortices. The ﬂow in the rotationally dominated (Rossby
number
0.3) region of our tank has a strongly non-
Gaussian vorticity PDF and exhibits properties of 2D

≈

(a)

Coherent

Kurtosis

Total

0.5

0

1

0
0

−20

−10

1
0

Skewness

Kurtosis

Skewness

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
g
r
e
v
n
o
C

c
i
t
s
i
t

a

t
s
 
f

o

 

e
c
n
e
g
r
e
v
n
o
C

0
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.1
Fraction of coefficients retained in coherent component

0.2

(b)

Incoherent

0.5

1

(a)

0
10

−1

10

−2

10
P (ω)

−3

10

−4

10

10

−5
−10

(b)

0
10

Ω(k)

−1

10

−2

10

12

0
10

−2

10

10

−4
−5

Gaussian

0

5

Coherent

Incoherent

−5

0

10

15

20

5
ω  (s−1)

Total

Coherent

k1

Incoherent

−1

10

0
10

k  (cm−1)

0.1
Fraction of coefficients retained in coherent component

0.2

FIG. 7: (color on-line) Convergence of the skewness and kur-
tosis of the vorticity PDFs for the various decompositions.
The vertical line indicates the fraction of coeﬃcients retained
in the wavelet packet decomposition. (a) Convergence of the
coherent component. Plotted: kurtosis ratio:
|kcoh/ktotal|,
skewness ratio: |scoh/stotal|. (b) Convergence of the incoher-
ent component. Plotted: kurtosis ratio: −kincoh/3, skewness
ratio: 1 − |sincoh/stotal|. Note that unity on the graph rep-
resents the respective statistic for a Gaussian distribution:
skewness = 0, kurtosis = 3. The kurtosis of the Fourier and
JPEG incoherent ﬁeld is large and oﬀ the main plot. The
insets show the convergence behavior at large numbers of re-
tained coeﬃcients. The open circles on the curves correspond
to the fraction of coeﬃcients retained for the corresponding
techniques using the entropy criteria as a threshold.

turbulence, such as large-scale long-lived coherent vor-
tices, vortex ﬁlamentation, and merger.

We have shown that wavelet based transforms can be
used to separate the quasi-2D turbulent ﬂow into a non-
Gaussian coherent component represented by as few as
3% of the large-amplitude, low entropy coeﬃcients of
the transform and a nearly Gaussian incoherent com-

FIG. 8: (color on-line) (a) Vorticity PDFs of the total ﬁeld,
coherent ﬁeld, and incoherent ﬁeld, where the inset shows the
incoherent PDFs plotted together with a Gaussian ﬁt to the
wavelet packet results. (b) Enstrophy spectra of total, coher-
ent, and incoherent ﬁelds, calculated on a square subsection
of our circular domain. The solid, dashed, and dash-dotted
lines correspond to the wavelet packet, wavelet, and Fourier
decompositions respectively. The k
line is the spectral slope
for Gaussian white noise in 2D.

1

ponent, represented by the remaining small-amplitude,
high entropy coeﬃcients. We are able to obtain this re-
sult without an a priori assumption of Gaussianity or
non-Gaussianity of the two components.

The discrete wavelet packet transform (DWPT) and
the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) yield very similar
results, despite the adaptability of the DWPT basis. The
DWT is therefore made preferable by its faster compu-
tation.

Because our ﬂow ﬁelds contain compact structures, the
localized basis functions of the DWPT and DWT out-
perform Fourier and JPEG decompositions. Both the
DWPT and DWT have more rapid convergence of the
statistics of the extracted coherent component toward

that of the total ﬂow. The rapid convergence of the skew-
ness and kurtosis of the vorticity PDF suggest that the
wavelet based methods have eﬃciently captured the co-
herent structures. The Fourier and JPEG converge much
more slowly and are thus unable to eﬃciently capture the
large higher moments of the vorticity PDF. This suggests
that the Fourier and JPEG methods have not really ex-
tracted the coherent structures despite the appealingly
smooth visual appearance of the structures in the coher-
ent ﬁeld of the Fourier. The incoherent remainder of both
the DWPT and DWT converge rapidly towards Gaussian
statistics, while incoherent remainders of the Fourier and
JPEG do not converge to any value.

The coherent components of the DWPT and DWT re-
tain all of the properties of the total ﬁeld, including the
large-scale structures, shape of the vorticity PDF, long
spatial and temporal correlations, and transport proper-
ties. Further, the coherent component contains the large
skewness and kurtosis of the PDF which are due to the
coherent structures. In contrast, the incoherent remain-

13

der has only small-scale short-lived features and does not
contribute signiﬁcantly to the transport. Thus in analy-
sis of ﬂow dynamics and transport, it may be suﬃcient
only to consider the coherent component. These results
suggest that it is reasonable to reduce the computational
complexity of quasi-2D ﬂows by considering only the low-
dimensional coherent structures, which interact with a
statistically modelled incoherent background.

Acknowledgments

We thank Bruno Forisser and Emilie Regul for assis-
tance in the initial implementation of the Okubo-Weiss
criterion and wavelet analysis respectively. We thank
Ken Ball, Carsten Beta, Ingrid Daubechies, Marie Farge,
Phil Marcus, Kai Scheinder, and Jeﬀ Weiss for helpful
discussions. This research was supported by the Oﬃce of
Naval Research.

[1] A. K. M. F. Hussain, J. of Fluid Mech. 173, 303 (1986).
[2] K. R. Sreenivasan, Rev. of Mod. Phys. 71, S383 (1999),

[22] M. Farge, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 24, 395 (1992).
[23] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets

(SIAM,

[3] J. C. R. Hunt, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 23, 1

[24] M. Farge, E. Goirand, Y. Meyer, F. Pascal, and M. V.

[4] J. T. C. Liu, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 21, 285

[25] M. Farge, K. Schneider, and N. Kevlahan, Phys. Fluids

Wickerhauser, Fluid Dyn. Res. 10, 229 (1992).

[5] J. Sommeria, S. D. Meyers, and H. L. Swinney, Nature

[26] C. Schram and M. L. Riethmuller, Meas. Sci. and Tech-

Philadelphia, 1992).

11, 2187 (1999).

nol. 12, 1413 (2001).

331, 689 (1988).

[6] NOAA / NESDIS

interactive GOES

archive,

http://wist.ngdc.noaa.gov/wist/goes.html.

[7] A. D. McEwan, Nature 260, 126 (1976).
[8] A. C. de Verdiere, Geophys. Astrophys. Fl. 15, 213

[9] E. J. Hopﬁnger, F. K. Browand, and Y. Gagne, J. Fluid

Mech. 125, 505 (1982).

Texas at Austin (2003).

[10] S. C. Dickinson and R. R. Long, J. Fluid Mech. 126, 315

[11] R. H. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 10, 1417 (1967).
[12] L. M. Smith, J. R. Chasnov, and F. Waleﬀe, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77, 2467 (1996).

[13] J. Paret and P. Tabeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4162

(1997).

sp. Iss. SI.

(1991).

(1989).

(1980).

(1983).

(1997).

[27] M. V. Wickerhauser, Adapted Wavelet Analysis from
Theory to Software (A K Peters, Ltd. Wellesley, MA,
1994).

[28] A. K. M. F. Hussain, Phys. Fluids 26, 2816 (1983).
[29] A. Siegel and J. B. Weiss, Phys. Fluids 9, 1988 (1997).
[30] J. E. Ruppert-Felsot, Master’s thesis, The University of

[31] M. Raﬀel, C. Willert, and J. Kompenhans, Particle
Image Velocimetry, A Practical Guide (Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 1998).

[32] E. E. Michaelides, J. Fluid Eng. 119, 233 (1997).
[33] A. M. Fincham and G. R. Spedding, Exp. Fluids 23, 449

[34] A. Fincham and G. Delerce, Exp. Fluids 29, S13 (2000).
[35] T. S. K Okamoto, S Nishio and T. Kobayashi, Meas.
Sci. Technol. 11, 685 (2000), This work describes image
generation for PIV/CIV algorithm evaluation.
standard
http://piv.vsj.or.jp/piv/image-e.html.

[36] Particle

velocimetry

project,

image

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987).

[38] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T.
Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scien-
tiﬁc Computing (Cambridge University Press, New York,
1988).

[39] L. N. Trefethen, Spectral Methods in Matlab (SIAM,

Philadelphia, 2000).

[40] particlestreaks.avi.

[14] J. C. McWilliams, J. of Fluid Mech. 146, 21 (1984).
[15] L. M. Smith, Phys. Fluids 11, 1608 (1999).
[16] A. Provenzale, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 31, 55 (1999).
[17] T. H. Solomon, E. R. Weeks, and H. L. Swinney, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 71, 3975 (1993).

stracts 17, 445 (1970).

[19] J. Weiss, Physica D 48, 273 (1991).
[20] C. Basdevant and T. Philipovitch, Physica D 73, 17

(1994).

[21] P. Holmes, J. L. Lumley, and G. Berkooz, Turbulence,
Coherent Structure, Dynamical Systems and Symmetry
(Cambridge University Press, New York, 1996), chapter
3.

[18] A. Okubo, Deep Sea Research and Oceanographic Ab-

[37] J. Pedlosky, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, Second Edition

[41] vorticity.avi.
[42] decmpﬁelds.avi.

[43] pscalar.avi.

14

1

(b)

1.0

n
o

i
t

l

a
e
r
r
o
C

0.8

0.4

0.2

Coherent

0.01

Coherent

Total

0

1

2
Displacement

3

4

0.6

Total

−1

10

Displacement

0
10

Incoherent

Incoherent

15

0
10

−1

10

(a)

l

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
r
o
C

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2
0

1

2
Displacement  (cm)

3

4

0
0

1.0

2.0

Time  (s)

3.0

FIG. 9: (color on-line) (a) Space and (b) time correlations of the decomposed vorticity ﬁelds. The solid, dashed, and dash-dotted
curves correspond to the DWPT, DWT, and Fourier decompositions.

16

26

25

24

20

21

(a)

(b)

)

l

2
m
c
(
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
D
 
e
r
a
u
q
S
 
n
a
e
M

i

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

Coherent

Total

t1.97

t1.32

Incoherent

−1

10

−1

10

0
10

∆ t  (s)

1
10

FIG. 10:
(color on-line) (a) Simulated paths of numerical
tracer particles in the total ﬁeld (solid curves) and in the
coherent (dashed curves) and incoherent ﬁeld (red) for the
DWPT (total time 20 s). The inset shows an expanded view
of the path in the incoherent ﬁeld. (b) Mean squared displace-
ments for the tracers in the total, coherent, and incoherent
velocity ﬁelds. The exponents for the total and coherent ﬁelds
are 1.97 while for the incoherent remainder the exponent is
1.32 over the range indicated. Both results are for the wavelet
packet.

t = 0 s

t = 4 s

t = 8 s

17

t
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

t
n
e
r
e
h
o
c
n
I

FIG. 11: (color on-line) [MOVIE] [43] Advection of a passive
scalar ﬁeld in the velocity ﬁelds of the DWPT, as computed
from the advection-diﬀusion equation (1). By four seconds
the coherent ﬁelds have

