4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symmetry Breaking in Nonlinear Electrophoresis of Conducting Particles

Ehud Yariv∗
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion — Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Isreal

The electrophoretic motion of a conducting particle, driven by an induced charge mechanism,
is analyzed. The dependence of the motion upon particle shape is embodied in four tensorial
coeﬃcients that relate the particle velocities to the externally-applied electric ﬁeld. Several families
of particle shapes, whose members are unaﬀected by the applied ﬁeld, are identiﬁed via use of
symmetry arguments. Other particles translate and/or rotate in response to the imposed ﬁeld,
even if their net electric charge vanishes. The coeﬃcients are represented as surface integrals of the
electric potential over the particle boundary, thus eliminating the need to solve the ﬂow ﬁeld.

Traditionally, the term electrophoresis applies to the
motion of a colloidal particle, possessing a bound sur-
face charge, through an electrolyte solution. This mo-
tion results from the interaction between an applied elec-
tric ﬁeld, say E∞, and the net ionic charge accommo-
dated in the Debye cloud surrounding the particle bound-
ary (this charge being equal in magnitude and oppo-
site in sign to that adsorbed to the particle surface).
In many situations, the Debye-layer thickness is small
compared with particle size. The electrokinetic ﬂow is
then described by an approximated equations set, ob-
tained via use of singular perturbations [1].
In that
asymptotic description, the Debye screening length as-
sumes zero size. Thus, the electric potential ϕ and
velocity ﬁeld v in the electrically-neutral ﬂuid domain
are respectively governed by Laplace’s and Stokes’ equa-
tions, whereas the presence of of the layer is reﬂected
by the boundary conditions which apply at the parti-
cle boundary S. These conditions consist of the no-
ﬂux condition, ˆn (xs) · E (xs) = 0, governing the normal
component of the electric ﬁeld, and the slip condition,
vS (xs) = − (ε/µ) ζ (xs) E (xs), governing the relative
motion between the ﬂuid and particle.
(These condi-
tions respectively reﬂect the particle impermeability to
ionic current and the net action of the electric ﬁeld on
In these equations ˆn is an
the charged Debye layer.)
outward-pointing unit vector normal to S, xs is a po-
sition vector located on S, ε and µ respectively denote
the permittivity and viscosity of the solution, the “zeta
potential” ζ constitutes the local value of the potential
jump across the Debye layer, and E = −∇ϕ is the electric
ﬁeld.

This description is adequate for dielectric particles,
which are capable of carrying bound electric charge. Con-
ducting particles can also experience electrophoretic mo-
tion, albeit driven by a diﬀerent physical mechanism,
having to do with the mobility of the charge in the par-
ticle. The charge in a conducting particle is also situ-
ated on the surface; this, however, is not the result of
any physicochemical bonding (as in dielectric materials),
but rather a simple consequence of Gauss law [2]. More-
over, the surface charge in a conductor distributes over
its surface so as to guarantee zero electric ﬁeld inside the

particle. The resulting dependence of the zeta potential
upon E∞ give rise to a nonlinear slip mechanism, which
is responsible for a rich variety of physical phenomena [3].
The most important feature in this induced electrokinetic
eﬀect is the generation of electrokinetic ﬂow about an
initially-uncharged particle, such ﬂows having no coun-
terparts in conventional linear electrophoretic motion.

The simplest situation describing these ﬂows is that
of an initially uncharged conducting particle positioned
in a uniform and constant applied ﬁeld E∞. During a
short time interval, a Faradaic current charges the De-
bye layer in proximity to its surface, with an equal and
opposite charge being set up on the particle surface. The
induced potential diﬀerence across that layer, namely the
zeta potential, is proportional to E∞. Accordingly, the
electrokinetic slip that occurs at S is quadratic in E∞.
Given the linearity of the ﬂow problem, so are all the vari-
ables describing the resulting ﬂuid (and perhaps particle)
motion. (Needless to say, no ﬂow would be generated in
the comparable problem of an uncharged dielectric par-
ticle positioned in an external ﬁeld.) The prototypical
problem in this category of induced-charge electrokinet-
ics is that of a spherical particle, which was investigated
in [4] as a model for the electrokinetic ﬂow about mer-
cury drops. Owing to the fore-aft symmetry of the ﬂow
[5], no hydrodynamic force (or torque) is exerted on the
particle.

This dipolar symmetry is obviously absent in ﬂows
about more general particle shapes.
In principle, any
deviation from a spherical particle shape may lead to hy-
drodynamic force and toque, with a consequent particle
Indeed, such motion has been experimentally
motion.
observed [6]. The purpose of this paper is to elucidate
the interesting nonlinear properties of such motions. We
consider here a relatively simple case, addressing the elec-
trophoretic motion of a freely-suspended conducting par-
ticle in a uniform and constant externally-applied ﬁeld.
(The present results are easily generalized to the case
of AC ﬁelds.) We begin with the case of an initially-
uncharged particle and later discuss the eﬀect of particles
possessing non-zero net charge.

A detailed description of induced-charge electrokinet-
ics, including unsteady analysis for the case of external

AC ﬁelds, appeared in a recent paper by Squires and
Bazant [3]. These authors also suggested [7] that the
combination of nonlinear slip with symmetry breaking
can lead to useful conﬁgurations which can perform a
variety of microﬂuidic operations (such as pumping and
mixing). The focus of their work is in electro-osmotic
ﬂow relative to ﬁxed conducting elements (which may be
held at a constant electric potential), rather then in elec-
trophoretic motion of freely-suspended particles, which
is addressed herein. Nevertheless, electrophoretic anal-
yses tend to provides insight to the inverse problem of
electro-osmosis.

Consider an uncharged conducting particle of an ar-
bitrary shape and of linear dimension a, which is posi-
tioned in an electrolyte solution in the presence of an
externally-applied constant electric ﬁeld, E∞ = E∞ ˆE (ˆE
being a unit vector in the direction of E∞). When de-
scribing the governing ﬁeld equations, the position vector
is conveniently measured from an (arbitrary) point O at-
tached to the particle. It is also convenient to describe
the particle motion by the instantaneous velocity of point
O, UO, together with its angular velocity Ω.

For conducting particles which are impermeable to the
current carrying ions (as is usually the case) the no-
ﬂux condition governing the electric ﬁeld at S still holds.
Thus, the electrostatic problem governing the electric po-
tential ϕ consists of: (i) Laplace’s equation in the ﬂuid
domain, ∇2ϕ = 0; (ii) the Neumann-type condition on S,
ˆn · ∇ϕ = 0; and (iii) the far ﬁeld condition, ∇ϕ → −E∞.
This problem (which also describes the ﬁeld about a com-
parable dielectric particle) is linear and homogeneous in
ϕ and E∞, from which it follows that ϕ must be a lin-
ear function of E∞. The attendant ﬂow ﬁeld is governed
by (i) the Stokes equations; (ii) the slip condition at S,
v = UO + Ω × x + (εζ/µ) ∇ϕ; and (iii) the attenuation
condition at large distances from S, v → 0. For a freely
suspended particles, the requirement of vanishing hydro-
dynamic force and torque completely determine the ﬂow
ﬁeld, as well as the values of UO and Ω.

With no loss of generality, the uniform value of the
electric potential inside the particles may be chosen as
zero, whence ζ = −ϕ|S.
It is the nonlinear slip term
ϕ∇ϕ which is responsible to the peculiar characteristics
of induced-charge electrophoresis. Since the slip is the
driver of the the ﬂow, this term results in a quadratic
dependence of v upon E∞. Owing to the linearity of the
ﬂow problem, the particle translational and rotational
velocities must possess the following structure:

UO =

Ω =

CO : E∞E∞,

εa
µ
ε
D : E∞E∞.
µ

(1a)

(1b)

Here, CO is a dimensionless third-order tensor (which
depends upon the position of O) and D is a dimension-
less third-order pseudo-tensor. These objects are intrin-

2

e

E

FIG. 1: An axisymmetric particle possessing fore-aft symme-
try: in the absence of net charge, the particle remains station-
ary; in the presence of an initial charge, the particle translates
but does not rotate.

sic geometric properties of the particle, independent of
its size and its orientation relative to the imposed ﬁeld.
In a sense, they constitute a lump description of the elec-
trophoretic motion.

It is actually possible to demonstrate a variety of sym-
metry properties, expressed through the coeﬃcients CO
and D, for various families of particle shapes. These sym-
metry attributes may be obtained without the need to ex-
plicitly solve the governing ﬁeld equations. The simplest
example is that of isotropic particles (such as spheres).
For that family, no vector (or tensor) can specify the
particle geometry. Since no isotropic third-order tensor
exists [8], it is impossible to construct a candidate for CO.
Moreover, the only isotropic third-order pseudo-tensor is
ǫ, the alternating triadic, which yields zero when con-
tracted with the symmetric dyadic E∞E∞. Accordingly,
isotropic particles neither translate nor rotate.

A larger family is that of all axisymmetric particles
possessing fore-aft symmetries, such as spheroids and ﬁ-
nite cylinders of circular cross section (see Fig. 1). These
particles are characterized by a single vector e attached
to their axis of symmetry. The only third-order tensors
which may be constructed using e are eee and various
permutations of Ie (I being the idem-factor). These ten-
sors, however, are odd functions of e, and do not satisfy
the invariance to reversal of e required from a body pos-
sessing a fore-aft symmetry. Moreover, it is impossible
to construct a third-order pseudo-tensor using the single
vector e. Accordingly, particles belonging to that family
behave like isotropic particles: they neither translate nor
rotate.

It appears that the generation of particle motion re-
quires a stronger symmetry breaking. Consider the case
of axisymmetric particles lacking fore-aft symmetry, such
as cones and hemispheres. Again, these particles are
characterized by a single vector e attached to their axis
of symmetry, whence the single candidate for D is again
ǫ, which means that such particles do not rotate. Both
UO and CO are therefore independent of O, and may be
respectively denoted by U and C. As with the previous
family, the only candidates for C are eee and various per-
mutations of Ie. For bodies lacking fore-aft symmetry C
is not necessarily invariant to reﬂection. Thus, such par-

ticles may translate (without rotation) under the action
of an external ﬁeld.

In principle, both CO and D are obtainable from the
detailed knowledge of the velocity ﬁeld. In what follows,
we obtain integral expressions for these tensors in terms
of the electric potential. These expressions are calculated
using the Lorentz reciprocal theorem [9], thus avoiding
the formidable calculation of the ﬂow problem. For sim-
plicity of presentation, this procedure is demonstrated for
particles that do not rotate (e.g., axisymmetric particles),
for which the angular momentum balance is automati-
cally satisﬁed (the generalization to arbitrary particles
is trivial).
In what follows, it is convenient to employ
a dimensionless notation, wherein length variables are
normalized with a, velocities with εaE2
∞/µ, forces with
εa2E2
∞, and the electric potential with
aE∞.

∞, stresses with εE2

e

e

e

e

e

ϕ

∇

f

ϕ (

U −

Using this notation, the slip condition on S appears
v =
as
· · · denotes here the dimensionless
counterparts of the relevant physical quantity). The lin-
ear ﬂow problem is decomposed into two separate parts.
The ﬁrst describes pure translating of the particle with a
U (in the absence of any slip). In the second ﬂow
velocity
problem the particle is held ﬁxed, and the ﬂow is gener-
ated by the imposed slip on S,
In both
problems the velocity ﬁeld satisﬁes the Stokes equations
and attenuates at large distances from the particle.

v = −

∇

ϕ.

ϕ

e

e

e

e

e

The force resulting from the ﬁrst ﬂow ﬁeld is given
by a generalization of the Stokes drag on a sphere,
FI = −K ·
U, where the positive-deﬁnite dimensionless
translation tensor K is an intrinsic property of the par-
ticle geometry [9]. The force resulting from the second
ﬂow ﬁeld is obtained by the following quadrature:

e

FII = −

A ˆn · Σ† ·
d

∇

ϕ

(2)

IS

e

e

e

e
which follows from a variant of the reciprocal theorem
[10]. Here, d
A is a dimensionless area element (nor-
malized with a2) and the (dimensionless) “translational”
stress triadic ﬁeld Σ (deﬁned in [9]) depends only upon
the particle geometry and the position vector of the ﬂuid
point on S: explicitly, Σijk denotes the ij component of
the stress tensor that would result from a pure transla-
tion of the particle with a unit velocity in the k direction.
(The superscript † signiﬁes right transposition.)

The requirement of a force-free particle, FI + FII = 0,

yields the following result:

U = −K−1 ·

A ˆn · Σ† ·
d

ϕ

∇

ϕ.

(3)

e

IS

e

Owing to the linearity of the electrostatic problem, it is
x) · ˆE, where Φ, a dimensionless vector
clear that
function of position, can only depends upon the particle
shape. Use of the deﬁnition (1a) readily yields

ϕ = Φ (

e

e

e

e

e

C = −K−1

·

A ˆn · Σ† ·
d

∇Φ Φ.

(4)

IS

e

e

3

The preceding analysis is valid only for a particle which
does not possess an initial charge. Consider now the case
of a particle possessing an initial charge Q (or, equiva-
lently, a net charge Q). In the presence of such charge,
the zeta potential is not quadratic in E∞ and the rela-
tions (1) are invalidated. We deﬁne an “eﬀective” poten-
tial by ψ = Qλ/Aε, where λ is the Debye-layer thickness
S dA is the surface area of the particle. While
and A =
H
it is customary to identify ψ with the zeta potential, we
avoid any such a priori interpretation.

The ﬂow about an initially-charged particle under the
action of an applied ﬁeld has been discussed in [3] for
the case of low zeta potentials, where the layer acts as
a linear capacitor. In that approximation, additivity in
charge implies additivity in the zeta potential. Accord-
ingly, the initially-charged situation was represented as a
combination of two diﬀerent ﬂows: the ﬁrst is associated
with a quadratic slip condition, and the second is that in-
volved in a linear electrophoretic motion corresponding
to a uniform zeta potential ψ. It is important to note,
however, that the situation discussed in [3] — with a view
towards microﬂuidic devices — is focused upon the spe-
ciﬁc case of a circular cylinder (a similar representation
is also valid for the case of spherical particles). Is that
interpretation valid for more general shapes?

In the presence of initial charge, the additional scale
ψ modiﬁes the translational and rotational relations (1),
which, following dimensional arguments, are replaced by:

UO =

Ω =

AO : E∞E∞ +

εa
µ
ε
B : E∞E∞ +
µ

ε
µa

ψMO · E∞ +

ε
µ
ψN · E∞ +

ε

ε
µa

µa2 ψ2Q.

2PO,(5)

ψ

(6)

The dimensionless objects AO, MO, and PO respectively
denote a triadic, dyadic, and a vector, whereas the di-
mensionless objects B, N, and Q respectively denote a
pseudo-triadic, pseudo-dyadic, and a pseudo-vector. All
six quantities are intrinsic geometric properties of the
particle, independent of the applied ﬁeld and the value
of ψ.

In the case E∞ = 0 the translational and rotational ve-
locities are respectively proportional to PO and Q. Since
the applied ﬁeld is the driver of the motion, PO and Q
must vanish in that case. These quantities, however, are
independent of E∞, and must therefore vanish identi-
cally. Similar logic can be applied via the case ψ = 0,
which yields relations similar to (1). Since AO and B are
independent of ψ, they must be respectively identical to
the coeﬃcients CO and D, which describe the motion of
particles of zero net charge.

To understand the role of MO and N we consider the
asymptotic limit aE∞/ψ ≪ 1, which corresponds to the
case where the quadratic eﬀect (associated with the ac-
tion of E∞ on charge induced by E∞) is negligible rel-
ative to the linear eﬀect (associated with the action of
E∞ on the initial charge distribution). In this case one

obtain:

(7a)

Ω =

UO =

ψN · E∞.

ψMO · E∞,

ε
µ
ε
µa
These relations are identical to the mobility relations
which describe conventional electrophoresis (with no in-
duced charge eﬀects), except for one important diﬀerence
which will be identiﬁed shortly. Since MO and N are in-
dependent of ψ and E∞ (and , speciﬁcally, of the above-
mentioned limit), they may be obtained using a linear
electrophoretic analysis.

(7b)

As in [3], we consider the case where ζ is suﬃciently
low to be proportional to the local surface charge density
In such situations, it is tempting to say
q: ζ = qλ/ε.
that the mobility relations (7) are the same as those for
a linear electrophoresis of particles having a zeta poten-
tial ψ (see [3]), which would imply that MO and N are
governed by the Smoluchowski relation U = (εψ/µ) E∞
and Ω = 0. That would yield M = I and N = 0.

It is important, however, to emphasize that the linear
electrophoretic motion in the limit aE∞/ψ ≪ 1 corre-
sponds to a charge distribution in a conducting particle in
the absence of any imposed ﬁeld (the eﬀect of the applied
ﬁeld on the charge distribution does not appear in terms
linear in E∞). Only for the case of a sphere (or a circular
cylinder) this distribution is uniform, corresponding to a
uniform value (namely ψ) of the zeta potential. Thus,
MO and N would not be identical in general to those pre-
dicted by the Smoluchowski relations.
It appears that
the traditional focus on spherical and cylindrical shapes
leads to a loss of physical eﬀects which characterize non-
linear slip. As such, conclusions drawn from the analyses
of such speciﬁc shapes are rather restrictive.

As in the case of the quadratic relations (1), which
apply in the absence of charge, it is possible to deduce
symmetry properties of MO and N for various families of
particle shapes. For example, in the case of axisymmetric
particles MO must be a combination of I and ee, whereas
N must be proportional to ǫ · e. In the low-ﬁeld limit,
aE∞/ψ ≪ 1, such particles do not rotate, but in general
may translate.

It is a simple matter to represent both MO and N as
quadratures of the electric ﬁeld, without the need to
solve the ﬂow problem. As with the preceding anal-
ysis which has led to the representation (4), we con-
sider the case of non-rotating (e.g., axisymmetric) par-
ticles, for which N = 0 and MO is independent of O
(again, the generalization to the general case is trivial).
In the limit aE∞/ψ ≪ 1 the slip velocity is given by
(εζ/µ) ∇ϕ, with ζ being the zeta potential associated
with the initial charge distribution (which is a function
of the position vector on the particle surface). It is con-
venient to use the previously employed dimensionless no-
tation, with which the slip condition on S appears as
v =
ζ = ζ/ψ). The concomi-

U + (ψ/aE∞)

ϕ (with

∇

ζ

e

e

e

e

e

e

4

tant ﬂow ﬁeld is decomposed into two parts, the ﬁrst
U in the ab-
describing pure translation with a velocity
sence of slip, and the second describing a stationary par-
ticle on which the velocity slips with the prescribed value
(ψ/aE∞)
ϕ. A similar procedure to that leading to
ζ
(3) then readily yields
e

∇

e

e

e

U =

ψ
aE∞

K−1 ·

IS

d

A

ζ ˆn · Σ† ·

∇

ϕ.

(8)

e

e
e
e
e
ϕ = Φ · ˆE, together with
Use of the linear representation,
the deﬁnition (7a) furnishes the desired expression,

e

MO = K−1 ·

d

A

ζ ˆn · Σ† ·

∇Φ.

(9)

IS

e

e

e

It should be re-emphasized that the zeta-potential distri-
bution appearing in (9) corresponds to a surface charge
arrangement on a conducting particle in a vacuum (in the
absence of any applied ﬁeld), whereas the electric ﬁeld is
identical to that around a dielectric particle in a vacuum.
For a sphere of radius a, the initial charge spreads uni-
formly, giving rise to a charge density Q/A. Thus, ψ is
ζ ≡ 1. The potential
identical to the zeta potential, and
distribution under the action of an applied external ﬁeld
E∞ is given by a combination of a uniform ﬁeld and a
x · E∞, from which it follows
dipole, ϕ = −
∇Φ|S = (3/2) (ˆn ˆn − I). Also, from the solution
that
of the Stokes equations for a translating sphere [9], it is
known that ˆn · Σ = − (3/2) I and K = 6πI. Use of the
A ˆn ˆn = (4π/3) I
A = 4π and
integral relations
readily yields the Smoluchowski relation M = I.
e

1 + a3/2r3
(cid:0)

S d
H

S d
H

e

e

e

(cid:1)

Electronic address: yarive@technion.ac.il

∗
[1] R. W. O’Brien, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 92, 204 (1983).
[2] This would be true even in unsteady situations, the rea-
son being the large ratio between typical conductivities
of metallic conductors (say 6 × 107S/m for copper) to
those characterizing ionic solutions (where the conductiv-
ity, which depends upon the ionic concentration, usually
does not exceed 10

−6S/m).

[3] T. M. Squires and M. Z. Bazant, Journal of Fluid Me-

chanics 509, 217 (2004).

[4] V. G. Levich, Physicochemical Hydrodynamics (Prentice-

Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., 1962).

[5] V. A. Murtsovkin, Colloid Journal 58, 341 (1996).
[6] N. I. Gamayunov and V. A. Murtsovkin, Colloid Journal
of the Ussr 49, 543 (1987); V. A. Murtsovkin and G. I.
Mantrov, Colloid Journal of the Ussr 52, 933 (1990).
[7] M. Z. Bazant and T. M. Squires, Physical Review Letters

92 (2004).

[8] R. Aris, Vectors, Tensors, and the Basic Equations of

Fluid Mechanics (Dover, New York, 1962).

[9] J. Happel and H. Brenner, Low Reynolds Number Hydro-
dynamics (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., 1965).

[10] H. Brenner, Chem. Eng. Sci. 19, 703 (1964).

