4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A numerical study of the alpha model for two-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic turbulent ﬂows

Pablo D. Mininni1, David C. Montgomery2 and Annick G. Pouquet1
1 Advanced Study Program, National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307, U.S.A. and
2 Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, U.S.A.

We explore some consequences of the “alpha model,” also called the “Lagrangian-averaged” model, for
two-dimensional incompressible magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence. This model is an extension of the
smoothing procedure in ﬂuid dynamics which ﬁlters velocity ﬁelds locally while leaving their associated vor-
ticities unsmoothed, and has proved useful for high Reynolds number turbulence computations. We consider
several known effects (selective decay, dynamic alignment, inverse cascades, and the probability distribution
functions of ﬂuctuating turbulent quantities) in magnetoﬂuid turbulence and compare the results of numeri-
cal solutions of the primitive MHD equations with their alpha-model counterparts’ performance for the same
ﬂows, in regimes where available resolution is adequate to explore both. The hope is to justify the use of
the alpha model in regimes that lie outside currently available resolution, as will be the case in particular in
three-dimensional geometry or for magnetic Prandtl numbers differing signiﬁcantly from unity. We focus our
investigation, using direct numerical simulations with a standard and fully parallelized pseudo-spectral method
and periodic boundary conditions in two space dimensions, on the role that such a modeling of the small scales
using the Lagrangian-averaged framework plays in the large-scale dynamics of MHD turbulence. Several ﬂows
are examined, and for all of them one can conclude that the statistical properties of the large-scale spectra are
recovered, whereas small-scale detailed phase information (such as e.g. the location of structures) is lost.

PACS numbers: 47.27.Eq; 47.27.Gs; 47.11.+j

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most persistent difﬁculties in the computation of
the turbulent behavior of ﬂuids and magnetoﬂuids is the wide
range of dynamically interacting length and time scales that
have to be evaluated. At large Reynolds number, many orders
of magnitude in length scales are implied, for example, in the
dynamical behavior of the atmosphere, the oceans, or the so-
lar wind, to take some familiar situations. For many purposes,
it might be adequate to compute only the long-wavelength
components of the spectra of the ﬁelds involved if some more
economical representation or model of the small scale behav-
ior could be given which would not do violence to the accu-
racy with which the large scales are computed. Such topics
as “large eddy simulation” and “eddy viscosity,” designed to
cope with this difﬁculty, have generated a vast literature, one
which we make no attempt to survey here (see e.g. Refs. [1]-
[4]).

A novel offering along these lines which has appeared in
recent years is the so-called “alpha model” of Holm, Foias,
Margolin, Marsden, Olson, Ratiu, Titi, Wynne and especially
Chen, whose comparisons with turbulent channel and pipe
ﬂow called the most attention to the alpha model’s possi-
bilities (e.g. , Refs.
[5]-[12]; many other references could
also be cited). The model is also variously called the “La-
grangian averaged model” or, in some of the earliest papers,
the “Camassa-Holm” equations. This alpha model is subject
to a variety of derivations, interpretations and connections,
ranging from the mathematically sophisticated [5, 10, 11] to
the intuitive and simple [13].
It is of interest to subject its
predictions to tests against both experimental data (see Ref.
[8]) and numerical solutions of the relevant continuum equa-
tions to which alpha modeling has not yet been applied (see
e.g. Ref. [9] for the Navier-Stokes equations in three dimen-
Its extension to the case of coupling to a magnetic
sions).

ﬁeld in the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) limit and in the
In that con-
non-dissipative case can be found in [10, 14].
text, the main purpose of this article is to carry out some of
the numerical tests that have not previously been done for the
case of MHD.

It is to be emphasized that there is no derivation of the al-
pha model that is completely systematic and deductive. Every
presentation of it has involved steps that call for justiﬁcation
by their consequences, and that is the spirit in which we are
proceeding here. In Ref. [13], which seems the most eco-
nomical derivation possible, the point of view is taken that
we smooth the ﬁelds (e.g. , the velocity ﬁeld v and, in MHD,
the magnetic ﬁeld B) but not their “sources” (e.g. , the vor-
ticity ﬁeld ω and, in MHD, the electric current density j). By
“sources,” we mean here the curls of v and B which, given a
set of boundary conditions, determine them through the Biot-
Savart law or solutions to Poisson’s equation. The assumption
is that the large-scale dynamics are relatively insensitive to
small changes in the positions of the sources, but are sensi-
tive to the strengths and approximate positions of them. Said
another way, the large-scale ﬁelds alone are assumed to be
responsible for those motions of their sources which signiﬁ-
cantly affect those large-scale ﬁelds. This assumption is by no
means self-evident, but does have the advantage of reducing
the derivation to a single algebraic step, in contrast to some
more involved derivations which have been given, and which
seem logically no more compelling. Our focus here is on nei-
ther presenting unarguable alpha-model derivations or com-
paring the possible variants of it, but rather on exploring the
consequences of the primitive version of it given here [Eqs.
(11) and (12) in what follows].

Modeling MHD ﬂows with the Lagrangian-averaged
methodology has been barely explored with no emphasis on
the turbulence regime. This article thus focuses on several
such predictions, numerically obtained, for the case of two-

dimensional magnetohydrodynamics, or hereafter 2D MHD
(see e.g. for a brief review, Ref. [15]). Several effects have
been studied phenomenologically, theoretically and numeri-
cally in the past, and may be identiﬁed in the literature by
the names selective decay, dynamic alignment, direct and in-
verse cascades, and the characterization of probability dis-
tribution functions (pdfs) for the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld variables.
There are several Reynolds-like numbers which can be at-
tributed to MHD turbulent ﬂows, since there are two possible
velocities which may appear in the numerators (the ﬂow speed
and the Alfv´en speed) and two diffusivities that may appear
in the denominators (kinematic viscosity and magnetic diffu-
sivity). Some length scale characteristic of the initial ﬁelds
is usually present in the numerators. All these Reynolds-like
numbers can be made to appear in the places of reciprocals
of the transport coefﬁcients in front of the dissipative terms in
various dimensionless representations of the MHD equations.
In general, the larger the values of these Reynolds-like num-
bers (or equivalently, the smaller the transport coefﬁcients),
the greater the required numerical resolution to follow their
solutions. Values of a Reynolds number like 104 usually strain
available computer resources even in two space dimensions
(2D), and while the attainable total number of degrees of free-
dom with computers has been steadily increasing over several
decades, there are situations in which one might be curious
about results in cases of far higher values of direct interest
for geophysical ﬂows and yet not attainable in the foresee-
able future. The alpha model, if it can be veriﬁed to give cor-
rect predictions in the range of accurate, un-modelized solu-
tions, will acquire a certain credibility in providing the behav-
ior (at least of the long-wavelength Fourier components) in
situations with Reynolds-like numbers so high as to put them
presently far out of reach of direct numerical solutions (DNS),
particularly so in three space dimensions (3D). Another set of
regimes where modeling is needed is when widely disparate
time and length scales occur, such as for either a small or large
magnetic Prandtl number; this is the case for the former in liq-
uid metals as encountered in laboratory dynamo experiments
and in breeder reactors, in the core of the earth and planets,
and in the convective zones of the sun and stars, or for the
latter in the interstellar medium.

In Section II, we write down the alpha-model equations that
we assume for incompressible, one-ﬂuid MHD with a min-
imum of theoretical justiﬁcation, following Ref.
[13]; they
include the effects of true viscous and dissipation. We pro-
vide expressions for ideal invariants that are conserved by the
alpha model when the viscous and Ohmic dissipation coefﬁ-
cients are dropped, and decay laws for them when the dissipa-
tion coefﬁcients are present and ﬁnite. Much of the approach
to and vocabulary of the way turbulence problems have his-
torically been formalized for MHD (a subject where computa-
tional data vastly exceeds experimental or observational data)
can by now be taken for granted. In Section III, we describe
results for the problem of selective decay in 2D. In Section
IV, we turn our attention to that of dynamic alignment of the
velocity and magnetic ﬁelds in turbulent decays. In Section V,
we focus on inverse cascade computations. In all these cases,
there are comparisons to be made between the alpha-modeled

2

FIG. 1: (a) Magnetic energy (upper curves) and kinetic energy (lower
curves) as a function of time until t = 5, and (b) cross helicity as a
function of time until t = 20, for the selective decay runs 1-4 (see
Table I). The temporal evolutions of DNS and alpha runs appear
similar.

results and direct solutions of the primitive MHD equations.
In Section VI, we address ourselves to the problem of quanti-
tatively assigning errors to the alpha model, as compared with
well-resolved full MHD as well as with unresolved MHD, of
resolution comparable to that used for the alpha model. In
Section VII, we sample a few effects at Reynolds-like num-
bers that are too high for any immediately foreseeable DNS
code to approach. Finally, in Section VIII, we brieﬂy summa-
rize the results and suggest future problems in which the alpha
model may have some utility.

To anticipate the conclusions of the paper, we note some
features of the DNS solutions that the alpha model apparently
ﬁnds out of reach. For instance, the location, in the plane, of
speciﬁc features of evolving turbulent ﬁelds such as contour
plots of vorticity or vector potential are virtually never accu-

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

rately reproduced after short times (contours of constant mag-
netic vector potential in 2D are magnetic ﬁeld lines). Like-
wise, the spectral details at the small scales are not accurate
and are not expected to be, since it is modiﬁcations of the dy-
namics at small scales that make the alpha model possible in
the ﬁrst place. But as far as the long wavelength component
behavior for the turbulent kinetic and magnetic spectra is con-
cerned, the alpha model seems to recover the main features of
MHD turbulent ﬂows in two space dimensions.

One technical feature of the computations peculiar to two-
dimensional (2D) MHD should be commented upon. Because
of the inherent tendency of 2D magnetic excitations to mi-
grate to longer wavelengths, treatment of initial value prob-
lems requires beginning with excitations located in interme-
diate length scales, rather than at the longest wavelengths. In
wavenumber space, this means that any ﬁltering that is done
must be done above wavenumbers corresponding to shorter
wavelengths than those in the initial conditions. For this rea-
son, very low resolution alpha-model calculations are not pos-
sible, unless the initial conditions themselves are to be left
outside the basic box in Fourier space. This contrasts with
the situation in three-dimensional hydrodynamics, where the
emphasis is typically on cascades to shorter length scales, and
where for the above reasons, it is possible to attempt large
eddy simulations (LES) with very low maximum wavenum-
bers, and the initial excitations may all reside at the largest
scales. While the ratio of our maximum retained wavenum-
ber to the wavenumber where the ﬁltering begins is about
8, it should be noted that larger ratios are feasible for three-
dimensional Navier-Stokes LES and alpha model computa-
tions.

II. THE ALPHA MODEL FOR MHD

mass density and then expressed in the units of the dimension-
less velocity. The mass density is assumed to be constant and
uniform. The viscosity ν and the magnetic diffusivity η can be
considered to be reciprocals of the mechanical and magnetic
Reynolds numbers, respectively, in these units. Anticipating
that the computations will be carried out inside a periodic box
of edge 2π, the unit of length will in general be taken to be
equal to unity, or about 1/6 of a box dimension.

In the dimensionless units, the curl of the velocity is ω,
the vorticity ﬁeld, and the curl of the magnetic ﬁeld is j, the
electric current density. The magnetic ﬁeld B can be written
as the curl of a vector potential A, which, removing a curl
from Eq. (2), obeys

∂A
∂t

= v × B − ηj − ∇Φ

(3)

where the scalar potential is Φ. Φ can be determined by taking
the divergence of Eq. (3), imposing the Coulomb gauge on A
(i.e. writing ∇ · A = 0), and solving the resulting Poisson
equation for Φ, involving v and B in the source term. (In a
similar way, the pressure P can be found by taking the diver-
gence of Eq. (1), using the vanishing of the divergence of the
time derivative of the velocity ﬁeld v, and solving the result-
ing Poisson equation for the pressure. These Poisson solutions
are easy to solve in Fourier space.)

To obtain the alpha-model version of Eqs. (1-3), we may
divide v and B into smoothed values plus ﬂuctuations about
those values. Thus

v = us + δv

B = Bs + δB .

and

deﬁned by

A. The equations

Here, the smoothed values of the ﬁelds, us and Bs, are

We write the three dimensional version of the equations ﬁrst
for the primitive incompressible MHD equations, and then for
the alpha model. We will then specialize them to two dimen-
sions for the purposes of this paper. The basic variables are the
velocity ﬁeld v and the magnetic ﬁeld B, functions of space
and time coordinates (x, t). In dimensionless (Alfv´enic) units,
the equations are:

∂v
∂t
∂B
∂t

+ v · ∇v = −∇P + j × B − ν∇ × ω

+ v · ∇B = B · ∇v − η∇ × j

(1)

(2)

together with ∇ · v = 0 and ∇ · B = 0.

The velocity ﬁeld may be considered to be expressed in
units of an r.m.s. value of the initial ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁeld,
which we typically take to be 1. The magnetic ﬁeld is made di-
mensionless by solving for the magnetic ﬁeld value that would
lead to an Alfv´en speed equal to the r.m.s. velocity ﬁeld and
dividing the magnetic ﬁeld in laboratory units by that. The
mechanical pressure is P, which has ﬁrst been divided by the

us =

Bs =

Z

Z

d3x′ exp[−|x − x′|/α]
4πα2|x − x′|

v(x′

, t) ,

d3x′ exp[−|x − x′|/α]
4πα2|x − x′|

B(x′

, t) ,

with α at this point an arbitrary length; α−1 is typically to be
chosen as larger than the wavenumbers whose behavior it is
desired to reproduce accurately.

In general, we use the same values of α for smoothing v
and B, though we note the possibility of assigning a priori
one value for v and a different value for B (respectively, αk
and αm). Another possibility is to choose αm = 0 for B,
which in that case will leave us with an unsmoothed magnetic
ﬁeld. We will show such an example later.

We now take the curl of Eq. (1) to obtain the equation of

motion in the vorticity representation,

∂ω
∂t

+ v · ∇ω = ω · ∇v + ∇ × (j × B) + ν∇2ω

(8)

4

FIG. 2: (a) Magnetic energy and (b) kinetic energy spectra, for selective decay runs 1-4 (see Table I), at t = 5; and (c) magnetic energy
and (d) kinetic energy spectra at t = 100. The vertical line gives kα ∼ 1/α. The crosses (+) indicate the place on the spectrum where an
under-resolved DNS run (2562 grid points) departs signiﬁcantly from the resolved computed DNS spectra. This convention will also be used
in subsequent ﬁgures: crosses always indicate part of the under-resolved DNS spectrum for the same initial conditions and times.

and then substitute into Eqs. (1) and (8) the ﬁelds expressed
in Eqs. (4) and (5). Note that we do not smooth the vorticity
ω which can be regarded as the source, in a Poisson or Biot-
Savart sense, of v. Nor do we smooth j, which bears the same
mathematical relation to B as ω does to v. The result is:

FIG. 3: Square vector potential energy spectrum shown at t = 300,
for the same selective decay runs as in Fig. 2. By this late time,
essentially all of A is concentrated in k = 1.

and

Eq. (9)):

and

∂ω
∂t

+ (us + δv) · ∇ω = ω · ∇(us + δv) + ∇ × [j × (Bs + δB)] + ν∇2ω

∂t(Bs + δB) + (us + δv) · ∇(Bs + δB) = (Bs + δB) · ∇(us + δv) − η∇ × j ,

(10)

upon which no approximations have as yet been made. That
is, they are equivalent to Eqs. (1)-(2).

Noting that only one component of A, the z-component, is
relevant to two dimensions, the result is:

Taking a modeling or heuristic point of view [13], the
essence of the alpha model is to neglect the ﬂuctuations δv
and δB in relation to the smoothed ﬁelds us and Bs in Eqs.
(9) and (10), while leaving the source terms ω and j alone.
This is one way of looking at the alpha approximation. Its re-
lation to other, more complicated derivations will not be dis-
cussed here, since our intent is to test the alpha model rather
than to justify it from anything like ﬁrst principles. Further
discussion of the above approximation, which is the only one
in our formulation, can be expected elsewhere.

The alpha model equations are then (removing a curl from

2
+ us · ∇ω = Bs · ∇j + ν∇

ω ,

(15)

∂ω
∂t

∂Asz
∂t

+ us · ∇Asz = −ηj ,

(16)

where there are stream functions ψ and vector potentials
Az that bear Poisson relations to their sources, both for the
smoothed and unsmoothed versions:

∂tv + us · ∇v + vj∇uj

s = −∇P + j × Bs − ν∇ × ω (11)

∇2Ψ = −ω , ∇2Ψs = −ωs ,

∂tBs + us · ∇Bs = Bs · ∇us − η∇ × j .

(12)

∇2Az = −j , ∇2Asz = −js .

Note that the smoothed quantities bear the subscript letter s,
and the unsmoothed ones do not. We shall follow this con-
vention throughout. Eq. (12) could be viewed alternatively
as a hyper-resistivity approximation on Bs. The connection
between the smoothed and unsmoothed ﬁelds may be stated
in differential form as

and

2
v = (1 − α

2
∇

) us

B = (1 − α2∇2) Bs .

(13)

(14)

We may associate smoothed values of ω and j with the un-
smoothed ones according to the same recipe; even though
they do not enter directly into the dynamical equations, they
are at some points convenient to think and talk about. Thus
∇ × us ≡ ωs, similarly ∇ × Bs ≡ js, and ∇ × As ≡ Bs.
A smoothed vector potential As may be regarded as having
a curl Bs, while obeying a Poisson relation to js, namely
∇2As = −js. We stress that ωs and js do not enter the alpha
model equations we use.

(1) or specializing Eq.

Specialization to two dimensions is achieved by taking the
curl of Eq.
(3) to the
two dimensional geometry in which there are only two (x, y)
non-zero components of v and B, and only one component
(z) of ω or j, and carrying out the smoothing approximations
so described. All ﬁelds are independent of the z coordinate.

(1) and Eq.

To re-iterate, the principal intent of this paper is to compare
typical solutions of Eqs. (15) and (16) with solutions, for the
same initial and boundary conditions, of the well-known 2D
MHD equations, unsmoothed.

B. The invariants

There are three ideal invariants for both sets of equations:
the total energy E, the total cross helicity HC , and the total
mean-square vector potential A. The alpha model expressions
for these are, respectively,

E =

1
2 Z

d2x (us · v + Bs · B) ,

(19)

and

HC =

1
2 Z

2x v · Bs ,
d

A =

1
2 Z

d2x A2

sz .

Note that the energy invariant E involves both the smoothed
and unsmoothed velocity and magnetic ﬁeld, whereas only the

5

(9)

(17)

(18)

(20)

(21)

Run

α−1
m

−1
α
k

N

1024

1024

512

256

512

512

128

256

256

256

256

128

256

256

256

Rλ

215

235

240

240

280

305

300

28

30

29

28

30

940

980

Figs.

1–5

− − −

− · · · −

· · · · · ·

6–9

− − −

· · · · · ·

10–14

− − −

− · −

− · · · −

· · · · · ·

− · · · −

· · · · · ·

1024

1,150

15–18

1,170

− − −

∞

40

40

40

∞

20

20

∞

20

30

20

30

∞

50

50

∞

∞

40

40

40

∞

20

20

∞

20

30

∞

30

∞

50

∞

∞

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

300

300

2048

5,200

19–20

and α

−1
−1
TABLE I: Main characteristics of the runs. α
m are the re-
k
ciprocal of the alpha lengths for the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld;
N is the grid resolution before dealiasing, Rλ is the Taylor Reynolds
number (see Eq. 25) at peak dissipation, and the last column gives
the ﬁgures relating to the different runs, namely: runs 1–4 for selec-
tive decay, runs 5–7 for dynamic alignment, runs 8–12 for the inverse
cascade of magnetic potential and runs 13–17 for large-scale turbu-
lence. In the ﬁgures, solid lines are for fully resolved DNS (runs 1,
5, 8 & 13), dashed lines for runs 2, 6, 9 & 14, dashed-triple dots for
runs 3, 11 & 15, dotted lines for runs 4, 7, 12 & 16, and a dash-dot
line for run 10.

smoothed magnetic variables appear in the expressions of HC
and A, due to the linearity of the induction equation, once
the velocity ﬁeld is given; however, the decay rates of HC
and A involve both the smoothed and unsmoothed magnetic
variables whereas the decay rate of energy only involves the
unsmoothed current density (see below).

The decay laws for these quantities are, in periodic bound-

ary conditions,

dE
dt

= −ν

Z

2x ωωs − η
d

2x j
d

2

,

Z

(22)

dHC
dt

= −

η

Z

1
2

2x ωj −
d

2x ωjs ,
d

(23)

1
2

ν

Z

6

(25)

(26)

and

dA
dt

= −η

Z

d2x Asz j = −η

d2x ∇Asz · ∇Az .

(24)

Z

These three invariants will be at the core of the numeri-
cal tests to be reported in the next three Sections. Finally, it
should be noted that Eqs. (19)-(24) differ from their full MHD
equivalents in detail, but approach them as α → 0.

For convenience and later reference, the main characteris-
tics of all the runs described in this paper are given in Table I,
together with the number of the ﬁgures related to the different
category of runs. N is the grid resolution before dealiasing,
using the standard 2/3 rule in all the runs described in this pa-
per (hence, for a run on a grid of N × N points, the maximum
wavenumber attainable is equal to N/3). Finally, Rλ is the
Taylor Reynolds number deﬁned as

Rλ =

λvrms
ν

;

it is based on the r.m.s. velocity and on the Taylor scale

λ = 2π

< v2 > / < ω2 > ,

p

computed at the peak of the dissipation. The viscosity is
equal to 5 × 10−4 for the selective decay runs 1–4, with ini-
tial conditions with non-vanishing Fourier coefﬁcients (see
Eq. (27)) for wavenumbers between k1 = 10 and k2 = 30.
Runs 5–7 are for dynamic alignment, with ν = 10−3 and
k1 = 5, k2 = 10. Runs 8–12 are for the inverse cascade of
magnetic potential, with ν = 10−3, the forcing occurring in
the interval k1 = 18, k2 = 22. Runs 13–16 deal with large-
scale turbulence with ν = 5 × 10−4 and the initial conditions
conﬁned between k1 = 1 and k2 = 3, whereas for run 17,
ν = 2 × 10−5. In the ﬁgures, solid lines are for fully resolved
DNS (runs 1, 5, 8 & 13), dashed lines for runs 2, 6, 9 & 14,
dashed-triple dots for runs with αk 6= 0, αm ≡ 0 (runs 3, 11
& 15); ﬁnally, dotted lines are for runs 4, 7, 12 & 16, and a
dash-dot line for run 10. Note that all runs have unit magnetic
Prandtl number; the initial conditions are such that kinetic and
magnetic energies are equal and of order unity with random
phases. All runs are decaying (i.e. no forcing), except for the
inverse cascade runs, which have zero initial conditions and
forcing in the induction equation only.

III. SELECTIVE DECAY

By “selective decay,” we mean turbulent processes (see e.g.
[16]-[18]) in which one or more ideal invariants are dissipated
rapidly relative to another, due to the transfer of the dissipated
quantities to short wavelengths where the dissipation coefﬁ-
cients become effective. In 2D MHD, with negligible cross-
helicity, the selectively dissipated quantity is energy, while
the nearly-conserved quantity is mean square vector potential.
The limit deﬁnes a variational problem which seeks the state
in which the dissipated quantities are as close to zero as they
can be for the surviving value of the nearly-conserved quan-
tity. There are no constraints on the cascade of kinetic energy

7

FIG. 4: Contour plots of vector potential (left) and current density (right) at t = 400 for the DNS run (top) and alpha run 3 (middle) and 4
(bottom), with positive and negative values respectively in solid and dashed lines. Large scales are almost in the form of bars parallel to the
axes.

to short wavelengths, so the asymptotic state is expected to be
one that is largely magnetic and has the surviving magnetic
excitations peaked at the longest wavelengths. In particular,
the vector potential spectrum should have a sharp maximum
at the lowest wavenumber of the computation, here kmin = 1.
This effect has been demonstrated repeatedly in the past ([16]-
[18]).

In this Section, we compare the full MHD (α ≡ 0) results
for a selective decay run of a familiar type with the conse-

quences of the alpha model for the same initial conditions but
ﬁnite α. We specify the initial conditions in Fourier space,
with v and B represented as the Fourier series,

v(x, t) =

ˆv(k, t)eik·x

, B(x, t) =

ˆB(k, t)eik·x

,

Xk

Xk

(27)
with similar decompositions for the other vector ﬁelds. The
non-vanishing initial Fourier coefﬁcients are conﬁned to a ring
in k-space between k1 = 10 and k2 = 30. The amplitudes in

8

FIG. 6: (a) Temporal evolution of magnetic energy (top curves) and
kinetic energy (bottom curves), and (b) of normalized cross helicity,
for all dynamic alignment runs (see Table I). Note that only the ﬁrst
ﬁve units of time for the run are shown in (a); the solid line is for the
DNS run.

Reynolds numbers, kinetic and magnetic, are then formally
equal respectively to 2000, based on a unit length scale in the
basic box of edge 2π, whereas the Taylor Reynolds number
at peak of dissipation is equal to 215 for the DNS run, and
slightly larger for the alpha runs (see Table I). The time will
be measured in units that are deﬁned by the ratio of unit length
to the initial r.m.s. velocity; based on the energy containing
scale, one time unit can be several initial eddy turnover times,
a number which may increase or decrease as the kinetic en-
ergy is dissipated.

Figure 1a displays the computed magnetic energy (upper
curves) and kinetic energy (lower curves) versus time, show-
ing the ultimate dominance of the magnetic energy over the
kinetic, by an order of magnitude at this time.

The solid lines are the results of the full MHD computa-

FIG. 5: Pdfs at t = 15 of (a) the current density, and (b) ln(νω2 +
ηj2), for all selective decay runs (see Table I). Note the larger values
of current density for the alpha runs compared to the DNS (solid
line).

this ring are chosen equal, for both v and B, and the phases
are chosen from a random-number generator. The overall nor-
malization is such that the initial kinetic and magnetic ener-
gies are both 0.5, referred to a unit (two-dimensional) volume.
The maximum value of k is, after the de-aliasing, kmax = 341
and the time step is ∆t = 5 × 10−4; the dimensionless vis-
cosity and resistivity are both equal to 5 × 10−4; the initial

9

FIG. 7: (a) Magnetic and (b) kinetic energy spectra, for the three dynamic alignment runs (see Table I), at t = 2; (c) Magnetic and (d) kinetic
energy spectra at t = 30. As elsewhere, crosses (+) indicate points on the computed under-resolved DNS spectrum (1282 grid points) for the
same initial conditions, and indicate the values of k where the ﬁrst signiﬁcant departures occur from the well-resolved DNS.

tion (i.e. , α = 0), with 10242 grid points. The dashed lines
are the results of the alpha model with 10242 grid points and
with α = 1/40. The dotted line (barely distinguishable from
the dashed one) shows the results for an alpha-model run with
2562 grid points and the same value of α. Note that a full
MHD run with the lower number of grid points, i.e. an under-
resolved computation of MHD turbulence, would display dis-
agreement with the other three runs. We shall discuss this
question in Section VI.

Fig. 1b shows the cross helicity (which remains very small,
relative to the energy, because the random phases for the two
ﬁelds imply negligible correlation between them) as a func-
tion of time. The alpha model computations disagree with the
exact MHD run, but since all the quantities are so small, this
disagreement is not deemed to be signiﬁcant, but rather oc-
curs as ﬂuctuations around values close to zero. We should
remark that in both cases, the comparison between the full
MHD quantities and their alpha-model analogues has been
done after a rescaling of initial data which makes the ener-
gies agree exactly at t = 0 (with the full, unsmoothed MHD
values); the original MHD energy is not quite the same as the
energy integrals deﬁned in Section II involving the smoothed
ﬁelds, because of the smoothing, though the difference is only
a few percent.

Figures 2a,b show the omni-directional energy spectra for

the magnetic and kinetic energies (as deﬁned in Section II
when α is non-zero), respectively, at t = 100. The same con-
ventions adopted in Fig. 1 (i.e., solid lines mean full MHD,
dashed lines mean alpha model with α = 1/40 and 10242 grid
points, and dotted lines mean runs done with the same value
of α but with 2562 grid points) will be followed throughout.
The alpha-model spectra that are plotted result from taking
the spectral density of the invariants in Equations (19)-(21).
The vertical line indicates the wavenumber kα corresponding
to the length α. Note that the under-resolved spectra begin to
differ at k ∼ kα/2, but the α-model and well-resolved DNS
agree up to k ∼ kα.

Figure 3 displays a spectrum in log-lin scales, of the vec-
tor potential at very late times, when the selective decay is
nearly complete and the magnetic excitations are concentrated
in the longest wavelength allowed by the boundary conditions
(kmin = 1). The alpha model has reproduced this feature,
with only a small disagreement in the values at k = 1 (see
also Section VI for a more complete discussion of errors).

The suppression of the small scales is quite apparent for
both quantities, but the large scales, like the global energies
exhibited in Fig. 1a, do not appear to be signiﬁcantly affected.
The lower resolution alpha model run reproduces the same
result. This is what can be realistically hoped for from the
alpha model, although we note that the disagreement between

10

FIG. 8: Right column: Contour plots of the (unsmoothed) stream function at t = 60 for dynamic alignment, with the DNS run at the top, run 6
in the middle and run 7 at the bottom (see Table I). Left column: contours of the (smoothed) vector potential at the same time. In all three runs,
contours of magnetic potential and stream function are similar by that time, more so for the DNS run, and concentrated in the large scales.

the true MHD run and the alpha runs starts at a scale roughly
twice as large as α−1.

Figures 4 display contour plots of curves of constant vector
potential Asz (Fig. 4, left) and constant current density j (Fig.
4, right) at time t = 100. The top panel is for full MHD, the
middle one for α = 1/40 and 5122 grid points, and the bot-
tom one for α = 1/40 and 2562 grid points. The ﬂow may
evolve toward a state reminiscent of those found in [19] in
the case of 2D Navier-Stokes turbulence, with structures par-

allel to either axis. While there are marked similarities in the
kinds of structures present in the DNS and in the alpha runs,
there are clearly no one-to-one correspondences as to speciﬁc
features, either as to location, orientation, or intensity. From
these and many similar ﬁgures we have looked at, we have
concluded that while the alpha model does an excellent job of
reproducing long-wavelength spectra, the pointwise details of
the solution are not well tracked by it, at least in the absence
of constraining material boundaries.

11

FIG. 9: Pdfs at t = 50 of (a) the current density, and (b) ln(νω2 +
ηj2), for all dynamic alignment runs (see Table I). Note again the
high values of |j| for the alpha runs.

In Figs. 5, we display normalized probability distribution
functions (pdfs) of the current density j in Fig. 5a, and in Fig.
5b of the spatial density of the dissipation rate of energy given
in Eq. (22); note that the local (spatial) dissipation of kinetic
energy differs in its expression, involving the symmetrized ve-
locity gradient instead of the local squared vorticity density.
The conventions with the lines are the same as those in the
preceding three ﬁgures. It is apparent that the pdfs of the al-

FIG. 10: (a) Temporal evolution of the magnetic energy (top curves)
and kinetic energy (bottom curves) until t = 50, and (b) of the
squared vector potential until t = 400, for all inverse cascade runs
(see Table I, runs 8-12). Whereas energies are in good agreement
with the DNS (shown as usual with a solid line), the growth of
squared magnetic potential is slower for all alpha runs (see also Fig.
14).

pha model do a good job for the lower values of |j| but do
not reproduce the tails accurately, in particular at lower res-
olution, i.e. intermittency is not fully reproduced, and is not
expected to be (for a study of intermittency in the context of

LES, see e.g. Ref. [20]). The same is true of the dissipation
density, although discrepancies appear smaller.

IV. DYNAMIC ALIGNMENT

A perfectly “aligned” solution to the ideal version of Eqs.
(1) and (2) results whenever v = +B or v = −B everywhere.
Previous computations [21]-[23], inspired by observations in
the quiet solar wind [24], have shown that MHD turbulence in
which a signiﬁcant degree of initial alignment, or correlation
between the v and B ﬁelds, exists will evolve toward a state
of greater and greater alignment as time goes on. The physi-
cal origins of this process are not completely clear, except that
we may note that an aligned state involves no spectral transfer
to higher wave numbers where viscous and Ohmic dissipation
are effective, so that those patches where alignment exists ini-
tially may have a tendency simply to outlive the more active,
unaligned patches where spectral transfer makes dissipation
more likely. Similar alignment, this time between velocity
and vorticity, can be observed for three-dimensional Navier-
Stokes ﬂows (see e.g. Ref. [25] for an experimental study).

A useful index of the global degree of alignment of v and B
may be taken as the “fractional alignment”: it is deﬁned taking
2HC and dividing it by the square root of < us · v >< Bs ·
B >, where angle brackets mean spatial averages. When this
ratio is unity, the ﬁelds may be regarded as perfectly aligned.
In Fig. 6, we display the results of a run which starts with
the Fourier amplitudes chosen to be equal in a ring with 5 ≤
k ≤ 10, with unit r.m.s. values of v and B and with phases
chosen so that the fractional alignment is initially 0.3. Finally,
∆t = 10−3 and ν = η = 10−3; the Reynolds numbers are
equal to 1000, based upon unit length, unit r.m.s. velocity at
t = 0 and the transport coefﬁcient, and the Taylor Reynolds
number at peak dissipation is equal to 280 for the DNS run,
and again slightly higher for the alpha runs (see Table I).

In Fig. 6a, we show that the energies, magnetic (top curves)
and kinetic (lower curves), as functions of time, have compa-
rable evolutions. The ﬁelds, however, become progressively
more aligned during their decay as can be seen in Fig. 6b,
where the alignment index gradually increases from 0.3 to
about 0.85. As before, the α = 0, or full MHD (with 5122 grid
points), results are exhibited as solid lines, the dashed lines are
the results for α = 1/20 and 5122 grid points, while the dot-
ted line is for the same alpha but with only 1282 grid points.
The rather large discrepancies for long times for the corre-
lation coefﬁcient may come from the fact that it involves a
normalization; the cross-helicity HC themselves do not differ
signiﬁcantly (not shown); it also may imply that small scales,
which are modiﬁed by the alpha modeling process, play a role
in the growth of large-scale correlations between the velocity
and the magnetic ﬁeld.

The spectra in Figs. 7 show that in the aligning situation,
the alpha model continues to do a good job of reproducing
the long wavelength components of the MHD spectrum. Fig-
ure 8 shows contour plots of the unsmoothed stream function
(right) at t = 60, for full MHD (top), for the alpha model with
α = 1/20 and 5122 grid points (middle), and for the alpha

12

FIG. 11: (a) Squared vector potential, (b) magnetic, and (c) kinetic
energy spectra, for all inverse cascade runs (see Table I, runs 8–12)
at t = 160, with as usual a solid line for DNS runs; the two ver-
tical arrows correspond to the two values of alpha. The line with a
−7/3 slope follows the phenomenological prediction for the mag-
netic potential spectrum derived in [34]. As α gets closer to the forc-
ing wavenumbers, the inverse cascade is slowed down more signiﬁ-
cantly.

model with α = 1/20 and 1282 grid points (bottom); Figs. 8
(left) show the corresponding contours for the smoothed vec-
tor potential. The pointwise alignment is more visible in the
top contours (i.e. for the full MHD run) than in the ﬁnite α
runs.

Figure 9 shows pdfs of (a) the current density j, and (b)
ln(ηj2 + νω2) i.e. the spatial density of the energy dissipation
rate; the units scales are lin-log; note the exponential depen-

13

the energy-containing scales, are considered as externally ex-
cited or stirred. The excitations can be injected either into the
In stud-
mechanical or the magnetic part of the dynamics.
ies of the three-dimensional dynamo problem, the injection is
typically into the velocity ﬁeld, and involves the conversion
of mechanical helicity into magnetic helicity, which is then
transferred back into the long-wavelength part of the spectrum
(see, e.g. , Refs. [28]-[31]).

In two dimensions, the helicities are identically zero, and
the anti-dynamo theorem prohibits the generation of persis-
tent magnetic excitations by mechanical means, so the band-
limited injections are magnetic and typically are considered
to be the addition of mean square vector potential or magnetic
ﬂux, added randomly at the small scales (see, e.g. , Refs. [32]-
[37]). Here, we write a random forcing function on the right
hand side of Eq. (16), which may be described as follows. We
adopt a random forcing f only in the induction equation for
the vector potential, of the form

f (x, t) =

ˆf (k, t)eik·x

.

(28)

Xk

The sum runs from k1 = 18 to k2 = 22. The amplitudes of
all the coefﬁcients ˆf (k, t) in this ring are chosen equal, but the
phases at each k are changed randomly with a correlation time
larger than the time step, but smaller than the eddy turnover
time. The phases are uniformly distributed between −2π and
2π. For the runs we will discuss in this Section, the correlation
time was τ = 2 × 10−1. One would expect that the relation
of the forcing band of wave numbers to the reciprocal of α
would be a sensitive one in the outcome of an inverse vector
potential cascade computation. This proves to be the case,
and only in the situation where the forcing band lies at lower
wave numbers than the reciprocal of α are recognizable results
achieved. Even there, as will be seen in what follows, the
agreement is less satisfactory than it has been for the selective
decay and dynamic alignment tests.

Figures 10a,b show the time histories of a magnetically
forced run that started from an otherwise empty spectrum,
with a time step ∆t = 2 × 10−2, and η = ν = 10−3; the
Taylor Reynolds numbers at peak dissipation is for all runs
∼ 30. The upper curves in Fig. 10a are magnetic energies
and the lower set are kinetic energies. The curves in Fig. 10b
are mean square vector potentials as functions of time. The
solid lines are for a full MHD run (α = 0) with 2562 grid
points. The dashed lines are for α = 1/20 and 2562 grid
points. The dashed-dotted lines are for α = 1/30 and 2562
grid points. The dashed-triple-dotted lines are for the me-
chanical αk = 1/20, but with the alpha parameter appearing
in the induction equation αm set equal to zero (i.e. the mag-
netic variables are unsmoothed). The dotted lines are for 1282
grid points and both alphas = 1/30. The forcing functions
are identical in all cases. Both kinetic and magnetic energies
are similar in amplitudes. The biggest disparity will be noted
in Fig. 10b, where the growth rates of the global mean-square
vector potential differ signiﬁcantly, resulting in A for the DNS
run remaining about a factor of 2 larger than for any of the al-
pha approximations at the end of the runs.

Most of the discrepancy is accounted for by the values of

FIG. 12: Flux of squared vector potential in Fourier space ΠA(k)
deﬁned in Eq. (30) at t = 400; same runs and symbols as in Fig.
11. Note the lesser amount of ﬂux in the alpha runs compared to the
DNS (solid line).

dency at low values, as already found in [26], and also visible
in Fig. 5. As in Section III, the only signiﬁcant disagree-
ment occurs in the tails, and the statistical properties of the
turbulence are once again rather well reproduced by the alpha
model approximation, even if the pointwise features shown in
Fig. 8 are not particularly well reproduced.

V.

INVERSE CASCADE OF VECTOR POTENTIAL

One might guess that one of the more demanding tests of
alpha-modeled 2D MHD would be its performance in an in-
verse cascade situation. The essence of the alpha model is
that it suppresses the small scales to some degree. In direct
cascade situations, the transfer is largely from the large scales
to the small, and intuitively, it has often been reasoned that as
long as the small scales can be made simply to disappear at
that point, there should be no harm done in the large scales.
Accurate or not, this reasoning is behind the use of Large
Eddy Simulations (see e.g. Ref. [4] for a recent review), eddy
viscosities and eddy resistivities that are sometimes employed
to decrease the amount of resolution required for turbulence
computations. In inverse cascades, it is the small scales which
feed some cascadable quantity to the large scales, and any de-
parture from proper dynamics at the small scales might be ex-
pected to have non-trivial implications for the evolution of the
large scales.

The way inverse cascades have been studied numerically
in the past, starting apparently with Lilly [27], is to write,
on the right hand sides of the dynamical equations, forcing
terms which are external to the ﬂuid or magnetoﬂuid equa-
tions, and which are there to inject excitations in some ﬁeld
or another. These terms are typically band-limited in Fourier
space, so that only a narrow range of k-values, well above

14

the kmin = 1 modes, the fundamentals, which are known
from previous MHD inverse cascade computations to run
away, at long times, from their nearest neighbors until lim-
ited by their own dissipation rates [37]. Throughout the rest
of the spectra below the forcing band, the disagreement is not
so severe, as seen in Figs. 11a (vector potential spectra), 11b
(magnetic energy spectra) and 11c (kinetic energy spectra).
The resolutions, values of α, and plotting conventions are the
same as in Figs. 10. The magnetic potential is seen to follow a
power law in agreement with the Kolmogorov-like estimation
derived in Ref. [34], viz. ∼ k−7/3; the ensuing spectrum for
the magnetic energy is almost ﬂat, ∼ k−1/3. The kinetic en-
ergy spectrum on the other hand follows approximately a k1/3
law, also found in [26]; because the velocity ﬁeld is (partially)
slaved to the magnetic ﬁeld (kinetic energy is ∼ 20% of its
magnetic counterpart), at longer times, Alfv´en waves can put
in rough equipartition the kinetic and magnetic modes, except
in the forcing band, and it is expected that Ek ∼ Em below
the forcing band. We also note that, at the onset of the inverse
cascade process at early times, the spectra develop at large
scales ﬁrst a k5 spectrum, followed in time by a k3 spectrum
(not shown), both for the full MHD run and for the alpha runs.
These spectra are expected because of back-scatter (see also
Ref. [26] for similar results).

Comparably wide disparities are visible in the spectral ﬂux
function ΠA(k) for the squared vector potential, shown as
functions of wavenumber k in Fig. 12 at time t = 400. Deﬁn-
ing ﬁrst the transfer of magnetic potential TA(k), in Fourier
space, we have as usual for the DNS run:

TA(k) =

Z

∗
ˆA
k · F([Ψ, A])kdθk + c.c. ,

(29)

with a similar deﬁnition for the alpha model; c.c. means com-
plex conjugate, all ﬁelds in the above equations are taken to
be smooth, the ∗ indicates complex conjugate, and F () stands
for taking a Fourier transform of the whole Jacobian bracket.
The ﬂux is then deﬁned as usual from the transfer as:

ΠA(k) =

dp TA(p) .

(30)

k

Z
0

The plotting conventions are the same as in Figs. 10 and 11.
None of the alpha-model attempts comes close to the true
MHD ﬂux function (solid line), a phenomenon exempliﬁed
by the linear scale used here.

In Figs. 13, we display contour plots of curves of constant
Asz at several different times. The small-scale waviness of
the large scale contours is due to the forcing near k ∼ 20. We
can see that the details of the Asz -contours cease to be well
reproduced by the alpha-model approximations, despite the
agreements through most of the long-wavelength parts of the
spectra. As in the earlier cases, the accurate reproduction by
the alpha model seems to be conﬁned to the long-wavelength
spectral components, but does not include the detailed loca-
tions of individual features in conﬁguration space.

Finally, note that the inverse cascade phenomenon in two-
dimensional Navier-Stokes turbulence has been studied using
the alpha model in Ref. [38] where it is argued that, in that

FIG. 13: Contour plots of the (smoothed) vector potential at t = 400
for inverse cascades (top: DNS; middle and bottom: runs 11 and
10 respectively). By that time, similar large-scale structures have
formed in all runs, but note that they have different locations in the
DNS and alpha runs.

15

FIG. 14: Residual energy spectrum Ek(k) − Em(k) normalized by
the total energy Ek(k) + Em(k) at t = 400, with plotting conven-
tions as in Fig. 11. The two vertical arrows correspond to the two
values of alpha, one of which is in the middle of the forcing band
(run 9, dashed line). Note the strong dominance of kinetic energy in
the small scales for all runs except the DNS run (solid line) and for
the alpha run in which no smoothing occurs for the magnetic ﬁeld,
i.e. with αm = 0 (dash-triple dotted line).

run

ED
1

ED
2

16m

.15

.03

14m

.08

.005

15m

.15

.03

16k

.17

.03

14k

.12

.02

15k

.15

.02

TABLE II: Errors (see eq. (33)) for selective decay alpha runs 14–16,
the subscripts m and k indicating respectively, the error computed on
the magnetic and kinetic energy spectra.

FIG. 15: Averaged (a) enstrophy, (b) square current and (c) total
dissipation for all runs for large-scale decay (runs 13-16, see Table
I). Note that the maxima are reached at the same time, but with an
over estimation of gradients in the alpha runs.

case, the inverse cascade of energy to large scales is enhanced,
quite substantially, when the alpha model is switched on; how-
ever, the fact that in Ref. [38] both a sink at long wavelengths
and hyperviscosity at short wavelengths are utilized may be at
the source of this difference in behavior, compared to the case
studied here. In that spirit, we can examine the kinetic energy
defect in the small scales deﬁned as

R(k) = Ek(k) − Em(k) ,

(31)

normalized by the total energy density Ek(k) + Em(k) at
that wavenumber, with Ek and Em the kinetic and magnetic
energy spectra; as usual, when α 6= 0, the spectral density
corresponding to the invariant (here, the total energy) will
be taken. This energy imbalance (31), when integrated over
small scales, is known to be a source of the large-scale mag-
netic enhancement exempliﬁed by the inverse cascade of mag-
netic potential, through a mechanism akin to a negative eddy
diffusivity (here, resistivity), as shown in Ref. [34] using a
second-order closure of turbulence, or in [35]-[36] using an

assumption of scale separation. In other words, it represents
non-linear non-local interactions in Fourier space, but it does
not say anything about the local interactions themselves. In
Figure 14, we plot R(k)/[Ek(k) + Em(k)] for several runs,
with as usual the solid line for the MHD run and the dash-
triple-dot line for the alpha run without smoothing of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. Note ﬁrst that in all the runs, the fundamental mode
is completely dominated by the magnetic energy, and in all the
alpha-runs except the one without smoothing of the magnetic
ﬁeld (αm = 0), the small scales are completely dominated
by the velocity; this effect is enhanced by the normalization,
but little energy resides in the smallest scales, beyond alpha,
so that the inverse cascade can still take place in alpha runs,
albeit at a slower pace.
In other words, we see that in the
framework of the alpha model, this energy defect is modi-
ﬁed from the usual MHD case, and more importantly it even
changes sign for the larger values of α at high wavenumber,
becoming positive and thus indicative of too high a dissipation

16

potential we observe here (see Fig 10b). Thus, such an effect
presumably linked to the fact that the magnetic ﬁeld is decay-
ing with a scale dependency that is leaning more heavily on
the small scales (like an effective k4-type hyper-resistivity),
may be at the source of the different behavior we observe be-
tween the different alpha-runs and the DNS run; if only non-
local transfer (in Fourier space) is active in the inverse cas-
cade in the case of the alpha runs, this could be at the origin
of the slower growth of A. This point will require further in-
vestigation in the three-dimensional case, in relation with the
large-scale dynamo problem, since the growth rate associated
with the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity is the relative
(kinetic helicity minus magnetic current helicity) in the small
scales [29]. In the limit of very large α, the dynamics become
trivially simple; see Ilyin and Titi [39].

VI. QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATES OF ERROR

Two separate questions of accuracy are addressed in this
Section. First, we attempt quantitative comparisons of alpha
model computations run on a 2562 grid with the standard pro-
vided by a well-resolved MHD run at a resolution of 10242
for the same initial conditions and the same Reynolds num-
bers. Secondly, we compare the same alpha-model runs with
DNS solutions on a 2562 grid in which no smoothing has been
applied and which are undoubtedly unresolved, in that the dis-
sipation wavenumbers (estimated on the basis of viscous and
Ohmic enstrophy dissipation) exceed the maximum values of
k retained in the computation; such runs correspond to under-
resolved computations. This latter test is necessary if one is
to argue that accuracy has been improved by the alpha model
in computations of comparable resolution. Error estimates are
provided ﬁrst for freely-decaying turbulence at early times,
near the peaks of the dissipations (runs 13–16 of Table I), and
then for the situations described in Secs. IV and V, where later
times (and hence greater accumulated errors) are involved.

First we examine the case of freely decaying turbulence
at an early time, which could be considered to be the early
stages of a selective decay computation. The turbulence ini-
tially is conﬁned to a band of wavenumbers between k1 = 1
and k2 = 3.
In Figure 15, we show the computed mean-
square vorticity (a), mean square current density (b), and mean
square dissipation ν < ω2 > +η < j2 > as functions of
time. We show runs under all four circumstances, starting
from the same initial conditions: fully-resolved 10242 MHD,
an alpha model run at 2562 with α = 1/50 for both ﬁelds, an
alpha model run with an unsmoothed magnetic ﬁeld (αm = 0)
and αk = 1/50 for the velocity ﬁeld at 2562, and an under-
resolved but unsmoothed DNS run at 2562; we see that time
scales of growth of ﬁeld gradients, and the amplitudes of such
gradients are comparable but not identical.

FIG. 16: Averaged (a) magnetic energy and (b) kinetic energy spectra
for the large-scale turbulence runs 13–16 (see Table I) between t = 3
and t = 7 (ﬁrst and second peak of the enstrophy). The wavenumber
corresponding to α is indicated by the vertical line, and the under-
resolved run is shown with a dotted line. At these early times, spectra
are in close agreement except at small scales.

of the magnetic ﬁeld in the presence of alpha-smoothing of
small scales, i.e. with αm = 0. Even though alpha modeling
is about the dynamical evolution of scales larger than alpha,
the scales smaller than alpha nevertheless participate into the
dynamics of the ﬂow including at large scale and are responsi-
ble for the discrepancy in the growth rate of squared magnetic

17

run

EI
1

EI
2

Em: 12

Em: 9

Em: 10

Em: 11

Ek: 12

Ek: 9

Ek: 10

Ek: 11

.30

.13

.49

.41

.31

.14

.28

.11

.28

.09

.33

.13

.26

.08

.26

.09

TABLE III: Errors as deﬁned in eq. 33 for the inverse cascade alpha runs 9–12 (see Table I); Em and Ek indicate respectively the magnetic
and energy spectra. Note the larger errors for run 9 corresponding to the alpha wavenumber (kα = 20) embedded in the forcing band.

Note that for the fully resolved DNS run, kmax = 341 to
be contrasted with the dissipation wavenumber based on the
magnetic variables (computed using a Kolmogorov spectrum)
of kdiss ∼ 280 at the peak of dissipation i.e. for t ∼ 7 (and
kdiss ∼ 250 when based on the velocity); this shows that
the run is well resolved at all times, and indeed no “bottle-
neck” appears in the compensated spectra, where by bottle-
neck is meant an accumulation of energy in the small scales,
seen as a bump in the compensated spectra for k ∼ kmax;
this phenomenon has sometimes appeared in the presence of
under-resolved computations, or when using hyper-viscous or
hyper-resistive dissipative operators [26]. At the same time
t ∼ 7, the Taylor Reynolds number (see equation (25)) is
Rλ ∼ 1150, with a Taylor wavenumber kλ ∼ 20 (with
kλ ∼ 17 when based solely on the current density); in this
case, only run 14 (with both alphas non zero) has a slightly
higher Rλ at that time, whereas runs 15 (with αm = 0) and
run 16 (under-resolved DNS) have slightly lower Rλ.

Figure 16 shows the energy spectra, for the freely decaying
run, averaged over the period of time when the dissipation
remains quasi-constant (t = 3 to t = 7), and Fig. 17 displays
the relative error spectrum, deﬁned as

er(k) =

E∗(k) − E(k)
E(k)

.

(32)

Here, E(k) is the well-resolved energy spectrum (either ki-
netic or magnetic), summed over all k-vectors with the same
magnitude, regarded as the “truth,” and E∗(k) is the energy
computed from any one of the stated three approximations to
it.

Both ﬁgures show that the under-resolved ﬂow displays sys-
tematically a greater error than the alpha model run, at large
scales (k = 1 to k = 3) as well as at small scales near the
cut-off, 1/α. Finally, in Fig. 18, are plotted the pdfs of (a) the
current and (b) the spatial density of the dissipation of energy,
the former in lin-log scales, and the latter in log-log scales.
The same line conventions as in Fig. 16 have been adopted.
The alpha model clearly reproduces better the gradients, at a
given resolution, than the under-resolved ﬂows.

Two possible global quantiﬁcations for measuring the er-

rors are E1 and E2, deﬁned by the relations:

E1 =

1/α
1

Σ

|E∗(k) − E(k)|
Σ

1/α
1 E(k)

, E2 =

1/α
1

Σ

(E∗(k) − E(k))2
Σ

1/α
1 E2(k)

.

(33)

Thus a small value of E1 or E2 will indicate a closeness on
the part of the MHD approximations (alpha-modeled or unre-
solved) to the full MHD DNS results.

E1 and E2 are exhibited as Table II for the freely decaying
runs just described (and indicated by the superscript “D”). The
conventions used in the Table are that the number of the run is
followed by a subscript, where m stands for magnetic spectra
whose error is being assessed, and k for kinetic ones. Time
averages have been performed from t = 3 to t = 7, the vicin-
ity of the main peaks in the dissipation rates. This is thought
to be the time when the turbulence is of its most broad-band
character, when the alpha model would be having its strongest
impact.

The errors so deﬁned are smaller for these early times for
this freely decaying situation than they are for the situations
studied in Sections III, IV, and V which examine late-time
evolutions. We note that the lowest error (by a factor of ∼ 2
compared to the unresolved run) occurs for the alpha run with
both alphas equal (run 14, see Table I). Note also that Fig.
17 shows errors at each k, whereas the errors in Table II are
normalized by the total energy (truncated at 1/α) and hence
are smaller.

In Table III, we show the errors E1 and E2 for the inverse
cascade situation of Sec. V and as indicated by the super-
script I; the runs are the same as those in Sec. V, and given
by their number (see Table I), with Em and Ek standing as
usual for magnetic and kinetic energy spectra. These errors
are computed at late times, when the true solution may be ex-
pected to have drifted further from the 10242 run and hence
lead to larger errors than in the freely decaying runs of Table
II. Moreover, as expected, when the alpha cut-off is too close
to the forcing band, the errors are larger, both for the kinetic
and the magnetic spectra.

Finally, in Table IV, the E1 and E2 errors are shown for
the dynamic alignment runs 6 and 7 of Sec. IV, with a super-
script “DA” and a supplementary index “e” or “l”, in order to
indicate early or late times in the run; speciﬁcally, early signi-
ﬁes that the average is taken for for 5 ≤ t ≤ 10, and late for
55 ≤ t ≤ 60. Again, the type of spectrum for which the error
is displayed (either Em or Ek) is given before the run number.
The low-resolution computation (run 7) does not have signif-
icantly higher errors at early times, but errors accumulate at
later times, more so for the lower resolution computation (run
7). The reason for time averaging the magnitude of the er-
rors is that, when plotted as functions of time, the error curves
cross each other repeatedly. Time intervals can be found when

either one is smaller than another. Time averaging, over inter-
vals long enough to contain many of these crossings but short
compared to the duration of the runs, has seemed to provide
the most objective number for addressing which error is “typ-
ically” smaller.

VII. VERY HIGH REYNOLDS NUMBERS

The eventual utility of the alpha model if it can be justiﬁed
will be that it will permit explorations of Reynolds number
regimes that are far above those that can be obtained from di-
rect numerical solutions of the MHD equations.
It may be
noted that extimates have been given for the number of de-
grees of freedom of the Navier-Stokes alpha model [40]; see
also [12]. Whereas most of this paper has been devoted to
regimes in which direct MHD solutions can be compared to
alpha model solutions, we have thought it interesting to show
one alpha model computation that goes beyond what can be
contemplated from unsmoothed solutions presently. We do
this without any deﬁnitive claims for accuracy, but just as a
suggestion of what the alpha model might provide in the way
of future predictions. A detailed analysis of high Reynolds
number runs at higher resolutions than what is performed here
and using the alpha model will be presented elsewhere.

We display results for a run with η = ν = 2 × 10−5, a time
step of ∆t = 2.5 × 10−4, and 20482 grid points. The value
of α−1 is chosen to be 300 ∼ kmax/2, with kmax ∼ 682
for this run. The initial (equal) kinetic and magnetic energies
are loaded with random phases into the ring from k1 = 1
to k2 = 3 in Fourier space, and the r.m.s. values of v and
B are unity. Computed at t = 7, i.e. close to the maximum
of dissipation (see Fig. 19b), the Taylor Reynolds number
Rλ ∼ 5200. This is roughly comparable with what can be
accomplished with a DNS on a grid of more than 108 points.
Fig. 19a shows the evolution of the total kinetic energy
(dashed line) and total magnetic energy (solid line), referred
as usual to unit volume, as functions of time. Fig. 19b shows
the evolution of the mean square vorticity (dashed line) and
mean square current density (solid line) as functions of time.
The qualitative behavior of all quantities in Figs. 19 will be
seen as not signiﬁcantly different from that observed at lower
resolutions, although oscillations in the kinetic and magentic
energies are persistent until t ∼ 6. But the idea has been to
extend the inertial range as much as possible. It will be noted
that the magnetic and kinetic energies are far from equiparti-
tioned, with magnetic energy in excess by a factor ∼ 3 by the
end of the run. The peak value of mean dissipation at t ∼ 7
(¯ǫ ∼ 0.074) is comparable with that at the lower Reynolds
number (runs 13-16), conﬁrming previous results (see e.g. Fig.
7 in Ref. [41]) of lack of dependency of ¯ǫ with Reynolds num-
ber, at least at a magnetic Prandtl number of unity.

Compensated energy spectra are displayed in Figs. 20. Fig.
20a is the kinetic energy spectrum, multiplied by k5/3, and
averaged between t = 2 and t = 6, i.e. the times at which
the energies are oscillating with little dissipation yet. Fig
20b shows the magnetic energy spectrum averaged over the
same time interval and similarly multiplied by k5/3. Fig. 20c

18

FIG. 17: Normalized errors, shown up to α−1, in time-averaged (a)
magnetic and (b) kinetic energy spectra for the large-scale turbulence
runs 13–16. Larger discrepancies occur both at small and at large k,
in particular for the unresolved run (dotted line).

runs

EDAe
1

EDAe
2

EDAl
1

EDAl
2

Em: 7

Em: 6

Ek: 7

Ek: 6

.17

.03

.33

.13

.19

.04

.27

.07

.23

.08

.43

.33

.22

.06

.44

.23

TABLE IV: Errors on the magnetic Em and kinetic Ek energy spec-
tra for dynamic alignment runs (see Table I) for early (e) and late (l)
phases of the evolution. As expected, errors are larger at later times,
and are larger for the low resolution computation (run 7).

shows the total energy spectrum, similarly compensated and
time averaged over the same time interval. In all three ﬁg-
ures, the horizontal dotted line has zero slope, and so would
coincide with a k−5/3 Kolmogorov inertial range spectrum so
compensated. In all three ﬁgures, the dashed line has slope
1/6, and so would be tangent to a k−3/2 spectrum (as pro-
posed by Iroshnikov and Kraichnan [42, 43]) which had been
multiplied by k5/3. It would appear from these ﬁgures that

k−5/3 would ﬁt the computed spectra signiﬁcantly better than
k−3/2 would. We do not attach any ﬁnality or conclusiveness
to this observation, because intermittency is known to steepen
energy spectra obtained from dimensional analysis, and it is
known that high-order structure functions computed for sta-
tistically steady 2D-MHD ﬂows display a behavior that dif-
fers from that of turbulent neutral (3D) ﬂuids [44]. The total
energy spectrum computed with the alpha model agrees with
other ﬁndings (see e.g. [44, 45] [26]) at lower Taylor Reynolds
numbers. In that light, we conclude that the alpha model does
not alter previously known results, suggesting that intermit-
tency is worth further investigation in the context of the alpha
model, both in two and three dimensions. In the same spirit,
we note the absence of any “bottle-neck” in the spectra, even
at these high Reynolds numbers, in contrast to what is found
in [26].

Finally, it is worth noting that, computed at the maximum
of dissipation at t ∼ 7, the Taylor wavenumber in the al-
pha run is kλ ∼ 55, i.e. well below the alpha wavenum-
ber of 300, whereas the dissipation wavenumber, based on
the alpha-enstrophy < ωωs > and the square current <
j2 >, are respectively 1300 and 1500, i.e. well beyond the
largest resolved wavenumber (kmax = 682) for this compu-
tation; however, even when plotting the dissipation spectrum
k2[Ek(k) + Em(k)], no bottle-neck is observed (not shown).

VIII. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

The intent of this article has been an empirical study of
the extent to which the alpha model, or Lagrangian-averaged
model, equations predict the results of computed incompress-
ible 2D MHD behavior in which no further modeling or ap-
proximations are made. Our primary motivation has been to
acquire conﬁdence in the alpha model in hopes that it can be
used for problems with such high Reynolds-like numbers that
they cannot be computed in the framework of the primitive
MHD equations. A useful starting point has seemed to be
to work on classical problems in rectangular periodic condi-
tions where some information about solutions has accumu-
lated over the last thirty years. These problems include those
often grouped under the terms selective decay, dynamic align-
ment, direct and inverse cascades, and tabulating frequency
distributions or pdfs for ﬂuctuating ﬁeld quantities. We have
compared the results of direct numerical solutions for these
problems with the solutions of alpha-model equations for the
same initial and boundary conditions, both for freely decay-
ing and for forced turbulence. In order to do so at sufﬁciently
high Reynolds numbers, we have kept our comparisons to the
two-dimensional geometry for which reasonable resolutions
can be obtained without overly taxing available computer re-
sources.

The principal success we have to report is in the satisfac-
tory reproduction of the long-wavelength spectral behavior
for magnetic and velocity ﬁeld evolution, in nearly all cases.
Also, characteristic length scales of the ﬂow, as the Taylor
scale, are well reproduced by the alpha modeled simulations.
The only exception is that some discrepancies remain for the

19

FIG. 18: Normalized pdfs of (a) the current density, and (b) ln(νω2+
ηj2), for the large-scale turbulence runs (see Table I). At this time,
small-scale structures are less developed in the alpha runs than in the
DNS run (solid line).

longest-wavelength behavior in the case of driven cascades
of mean-square magnetic vector potential at late times. The
model has not proved accurate in the detailed reproduction of
speciﬁc spatial features of the turbulence at earlier times. Nor
does the alpha model reproduce accurately the pdfs of inter-
mittent ﬂuctuations of large amplitude, and likely because of
the deliberate suppression of small spatial scales, is not ex-

20

FIG. 19: (a) Magnetic and kinetic energy, and (b) enstrophy and
square current as a function of time for run 17 (see Table I) with
−1 = 300. Note the several peaks in the
20482 grid points and α
enstrophy and the mean square current density, as well as the excess
in magnetic excitation, both at large scale and at small scale.

pected to.

It should be remarked that there is the more difﬁcult prob-
lem of obtaining a clear physical understanding of the nature
of the alpha approximation itself. It was originally arrived at
by mathematics of considerable sophistication and complex-
ity, which left intuitive gaps in just what was being assumed.
This is a very different perspective than the one used in Ref.
[13] or Section II of this paper, where the recipe of smoothing
the v and B ﬁelds but not their sources, and then neglect-
ing the ﬂuctuations in those ﬁelds about their averages was
invoked. Neither prescription seems clear enough to us at a
physical level to argue for it strenuously on any basis other
than its satisfactory consequences. Nor is it clear why two
such apparently different procedures should end at the same
place, despite the happy fact that they seem to do so. Clari-

FIG. 20: (a) Kinetic energy spectrum, (b) magnetic energy spectrum,
and (c) total energy spectrum compensated with k5/3, for run 17 (see
Table I). Temporal average is performed between t = 2 and t = 6.
−5/3 spectrum, and the
The horizontal dotted line corresponds to a k
−3/2 law. A clear inertial range extends for more
dashed line to a k
than one decade in wavenumber.

fying the conceptual foundations of such modeling at an intu-
itive physical level is a serious but stimulating challenge.

In summary, our judgment of the alpha model is that it re-
produces satisfactorily the time development given by well-
resolved DNS computations for spectra up to about k ∼ 1/α
and does well enough at reproducing the probability distribu-
tion functions of ﬂuctuations. What it does not do satisfacto-
rily is to reproduce the locations, trajectories, and shapes of
structures in conﬁguration space.

We see several directions in which to extend this work. For
example, there is the natural one of three-dimensional com-
putations, still in rectangular periodic boundary conditions,
where such problems as the inverse cascade of magnetic helic-
ity (an inherent part of the large-scale dynamo problem), the
spectral anisotropy induced by the presence of a dc magnetic
ﬁeld [46, 47], and the small magnetic Prandtl regime remain

to be investigated (see for recent studies in the latter case e.g.
[48, 49]). Finally, the questions of material boundaries with
non-ideal boundary conditions and departure from rectangular
to spherical or cylindrical symmetry seem necessary as well.
The only work published so far involving material boundaries
and the alpha model seems to be that of Chen et al. [6, 8]. It
is our intent to move in these directions in the near future.

Acknowledgments

We thank Darryl Holm for helpful and stimulating discus-
sions concerning the alpha model, both for Navier-Stokes and

21

MHD, Jean-Franc¸ois Pinton and Duane Rosenberg for a care-
ful reading of the manuscript, and Henry Tufo for letting us
compute on the NSF-ARI cluster at the University of Col-
orado. The NSF grants ATM-0327533 at Dartmouth College
and CMG-0327888 at NCAR supported this work in part and
are gratefully acknowledged. Computer time was provided by
equipment purchased under NSF ARI Grant CDA-9601817 at
the University of Colorado, and under NSF sponsorship of the
National Center for Atmospheric Research.

[1] R. Rogallo and P. Moin, “Numerical simulations of turbulent

Physics “Plasma Astrophysics” 468, 163-212 (1996).

ﬂows,” Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 16, 99-137 (1984).

[2] J. Fertziger, “Large Eddy Simulations: An Introduction and
Perspective,” Lecture Notes New tools in turbulence modeling,
29-47, Les Houches School May 1996, Eds. O. M´etais and J.
Fertziger, Les ´Editions de Physique (1997).

[3] S. B. Pope, Turbulent Flows, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, UK (2000).

[4] C. Meneveau and J. Katz, “Scale-invariance and turbulence
models for large-eddy simulation,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 32,
1-32 (2000).

[5] D.D. Holm, J.E. Marsden and T.S. Ratiu, “The Euler-Poincar´e
Equations and Semidirect Products with Applications to Con-
tinuum Theories,” Adv. in Math. 137, 1-81 (1998).

[6] S.Y. Chen, D.D. Holm, C. Foias, E.J. Olson, E.S. Titi, and S.
Wynne, “The Camassa-Holm equations as a closure model for
turbulent channel and pipe ﬂows,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5338-
5341 (1998).

[7] S.Y. Chen, C. Foias, D.D. Holm, E. Olson, E.S. Titi, S. Wynne,
“The Camassa-Holm equations and turbulence,” Physica D 133
49-65 (1999).

[8] S.Y. Chen, C. Foias, D.D. Holm, E.J. Olson, E.S. Titi, and S.
Wynne, “A connection between the Camassa-Holm equations
and turbulence in pipes and channels,” Phys. Fluids 11, 2343-
2353 (1999).

[9] S.Y. Chen, D.D. Holm, L.G. Margolin, and R. Zhang, “Di-
rect numerical simulations of the Navier-Stokes alpha model,”
Physica D 133, 66-83 (1999).

[10] D.D. Holm, “Averaged Lagrangians and the mean dynamical
effects of ﬂuctuations in continuum mechanics,” Physica D 170,
253-286 (2002).

[11] D.G. Andrews, and M.E. McIntyre, “An exact theory of non-
linear waves on a Lagrangian-mean ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 89,
609-646 (1978).

[12] C. Foias, D.D. Holm, and E.S. Titi, “The Navier-Stokes-alpha
model of ﬂuid turbulence,” Physica D 152, 505-519 (2001).
[13] D. Montgomery and A. Pouquet, “An alternative interpreta-
tion for the Holm ‘alpha model’,” Phys. Fluids 14, 3365–3366
(2002).

[14] D. D. Holm, “Lagrangian averages, averaged Lagrangians, and
the mean effects of ﬂuctuations in ﬂuid dynamics,” Chaos 12,
518-530 (2002).

[15] A. Pouquet, Turbulence, Statistics and Structures: an Introduc-
tion, V th European School in Astrophysics, San Miniato; C.
Chiuderi & G. Einaudi Eds, Springer–Verlag, Lecture Notes in

[16] W.H. Matthaeus and D. Montgomery, “Selective decay hypoth-
esis at high mechanical and magnetic Reynolds numbers,” Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 357, 203 (1980).

[17] A.C. Ting, W.H. Matthaeus, and D. Montgomery, “Turbulent
relaxation processes in magnetohydrodynamics,” Phys. Fluids
29, 3261 (1986).

[18] R. Kinney, J.C. McWilliams and T. Tajima, “Coherent struc-
tures and turbulent cascades in two-dimensional incompressible
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence,” Phys. Fluids 2, 3623–3639
(1995).

[19] Z. Yin, D.C. Montgomery, and H.J.H.Clercx, “Alterna-
tive statistical-mechanical descriptions of decaying two-
dimensional turbulence in terms of ’patches’ and ’points’,”
Phys. Fluids 15, 1937-1953 (2003).

[20] E. L´evˆeque and C.R. Koudella, “Finite-mode spectral model
of homogeneous and isotropic Navier-Stokes turbulence: a
rapidly depleted energy cascade,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4033-
4036 (2001).

[21] R. Grappin, A. Pouquet, and J. L´eorat, “ Dependence on Cor-
relation of MHD Turbulence Spectra,” Astron. Astrophys. 126,
51-56 (1983).

[22] A. Pouquet, M. Meneguzzi, and U. Frisch, “ The Growth of
Correlations in MHD Turbulence,” Phys. Rev. A 33, 4266-4276
(1986).

[23] S. Ghosh, W.H. Matthaeus, and D.C. Montgomery, “The evo-
lution of cross helicity in driven/dissipative two-dimensional
magnetohydrodynamics,”, Phys. Fluids 31, 2171-2184 (1988).
[24] J.W. Belcher and L. Davis, Jr., “Large-amplitude waves in
the interplanetary medium,” J. Geophys. Res. 76, 3534-3563
(1971).

[25] A. Tsinober, J. Eggels and F. Nieuwstadt, “On alignments and
small-scale structures in turbulent pipe ﬂow,” Fluid Dyn. Res.
16, 297-310 (1995).

[26] D. Biskamp and E. Schwarz, “On two-dimensional magnetohy-

drodynamic turbulence,” Phys. Plasmas 8, 3282-3292 (2001).

[27] D.K. Lilly, “Numerical simulation of two-dimensional turbu-

lence,” Phys. Fluids Suppl. II 12, 240-249 (1969).

[28] U. Frisch, A. Pouquet, J. L´eorat, & A. Mazure, “On the pos-
sibility of an inverse cascade in MHD helical turbulence,” J.
Fluid Mech., 68, 769–778 (1975).

[29] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch, & J. L´eorat, “Strong MHD helical tur-
bulence and the non–linear dynamo effect,” J. Fluid Mech., 77,
321–354 (1976).

[30] Meneguzzi, M., U. Frisch, & A. Pouquet, “Helical and non–

helical turbulent dynamos,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 47, 1060–1064
(1981).

[31] D.C. Montgomery, W.H. Matthaeus, L.J. Milano and P.
Dmitruk, “Apparent suppression of turbulent magnetic dynamo
action by a dc magnetic ﬁeld,” Phys. Plasmas 9, 1221-1225
(2002).

[32] D. Fyfe and D. Montgomery, “High beta turbulence in two-
dimensional magnetohydrodynamics,” J. Plasma Phys. 16,
181-191 (1976).

[33] D. Fyfe, D. Montgomery, and G.R. Joyce, “Dissipative forced
turbulence in two-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics,” J.
Plasma Phys. 17, 369-398 (1977).

[34] A. Pouquet, “ On two–dimensional magnetohydrodynamic tur-

bulence,” J. Fluid Mech. 88, 1-16 (1978).

[35] D. Biskamp and H. Welter, “Negative anomalous resistivity–a
mechanism of the major disruption in tokamaks,” Phys. Lett.
96A, 25-28 (1983).

[36] D. Montgomery and H. Hatori, “Analytical estimates of turbu-
lent MHD transport coefﬁcients,” Plasma Phys. and Contr. Fu-
sion 26, 717-730 (1984).

[37] M. Hossain, W.H. Matthaeus, and D. Montgomery, “Long-time
states of inverse cascades in the presence of a maximum length
scale,” J.Plasma Phys. 30, 479-493 (1983).

[38] B. T. Nadiga and S. Shkoller, “Enhancement of the inverse
cascade of energy in the two-dimensional Lagrangian-averaged
Navier-Stokes equations,” Phys. Fluids 13, 1528-1531 (2001).
[39] A.A. Ilyin and E.S. Titi, “Attractors to the two-dimensional
Navier-Stokes-α model: An α-dependence study,” J. Dynam-
ics Diff. Equ. 15, 751-777 (2003).

[40] C. Foias, D.D. Holm, and E.S. Titi, “The three-dimensional vis-

22

cous Camassa-Holm equations and their relation to the Navier-
Stokes equations and turbulence theory,” J. Dynamics and Diff.
Equ. 14, 1-35 (2002).

[41] H. Politano, A. Pouquet and P.L. Sulem, “Inertial ranges and
resistive instabilities in two–dimensional MHD turbulence,”
Physics Fluids B 1, 2230–2239 (1989).

[42] P.S. Iroshnikov, “ Turbulence of a conducting ﬂuid in a strong

magnetic ﬁeld,” Sov. Astron. 7, 566-571 (1963).

[43] R.H. Kraichnan, “Inertial-range spectrum of hydromagnetic

turbulence,” Phys. Fluids 8, 1385-1387 (1965).

[44] H. Politano, A. Pouquet and V. Carbone, “Kolmogorov–like or
wave–like turbulence in MHD: An investigation of the behavior
of structure functions in the two–dimensional case,” EuroPhys.
Lett. 43, 516-521 (1998).

[45] T. Gomez, H. Politano and A. Pouquet, “On the validity of a
non–local approach for MHD turbulence,” Phys. Fluids, 11,
2298-2306 (1999).

[46] J.V. Shebalin, W.H. Matthaeus

and D. Montgomery,
“Anisotropy in MHD turbulence due to a mean magnetic
ﬁeld,” J. Plasma Phys. 29 525-547 (1983).

[47] Oughton, S., Priest, E.R., Matthaeus, W.H., “The inﬂuence of
a mean magnetic ﬁeld on three-dimensional magnetohydrody-
namic turbulence,” J. Fluid Mech. 280, 95-117 (1994).

[48] A. Schekochihin, S. Cowley, J. Maron and J. McWilliams,
“Critical magnetic Prandtl number for small-scale dynamo,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 054502-1-4 (2004).

[49] Y. Ponty, H. Politano and J.F. Pinton, “Simulation of induction
at low magnetic Prandtl number,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 144503-
1-4 (2004).

