4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Generalized Boltzmann Equation: Slip-No -Slip
Dynamic Transition in Flows of Strongly
Non-Linear Fluids

Victor Yakhot1, Hudong Chen2, Ilia Staroselsky2,
John Wanderer1 and Raoyang Zhang2,
1 Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
2 EXA Corporation, 450 Bedford Street, Lexington, MA 02420

February 17, 2014

Abstract

The Navier-Stokes equations, are understood as the result of the low-order
expansion in powers of dimensionless rate of strain ηij = τ0Sij, where τ0
is the microscopic relaxation time of a close-to- thermodynamic equilibrium
ﬂuid. In strongly sheared non-equilibrium ﬂuids where |ηij| ≥ 1, the hydrody-
namic description breaks down. According to Bogolubov’s conjecture, strongly
non-equlibrium systems are characterized by an hierarchy of relaxation times
corresponding to various stages of the relaxation process. A ”hydro-kinetic”
equation with the relaxation time involving both molecular and hydrodynamic
components proposed in this paper, reﬂects qualitative aspects of Bogolubov’s
hierarchy. It is shown that, applied to wall ﬂows, this equation leads to qual-
itatively correct results in an extremely wide range of parameter η-variation.
Among other features, it predicts the onset of slip velocity at the wall as an
instability of the corresponding hydrodynamic approximation.

1

1 Introduction

Strongly sheared ﬂuids,
in which the usual Newtonian hydrodynamic description
breaks down, are commonly encountered in biology, chemical engineering, micro-
machinery design [1]-[2]. Extensive eﬀorts that largely relied upon physical intuition
and qualitative considerations to incorporate corrections at the hydrodynamic level
of description have been made during the years and have achieved various successes.
However, these attempts generally fail when the non-linearity of a ﬂuid is strong.
Furthermore, theoretical understanding of these highly non-linear systems remains a
major challenge.

The Navier-Stokes equations, which can be derived from the Boltzmann kinetic
equation as a result of a low -order truncation of an inﬁnite expansion in powers of
dimensionless length-scale Kn , have been extremely successful in describing Newto-
nian ﬂuid ﬂows [3]-[7]. The parameter Kn is deﬁned as a ratio between the so called
relaxation time τ0 associated with molecular collisions and the time of the molecular
convection, namely

Kn = τ0/(L/cs) = τ0cs/L

where L is a characteristic length scale a ﬂow inhomogeneity, and cs is the sound
speed (i.e., an average speed of the molecules). According to kinetic theory, parameter
λ = τ0cs represents the so called mean free path in a system and τ0 is the time-scale for
the system to relax to its local thermodynamic equilibrium. Since the ratio L/cs is a
characteristic time-scale of deviation from equilibrium due to density (concentration)
perturbations, the Knudsen number Kn is a measure of departure of a ﬂuid system
from thermodynamic equilibrium in [4]-[6].

For the purpose of understanding the eﬀects of non-linearity, it is desirable to
re-express Kn in terms of the rate of strain (velocity gradient) in the ﬂuid. Using the
estimation for the hydrodynamic (macroscopic) length scale,

we can also write Kn in an alternative form,

L ∼ U/|S|

Kn = τ0|S|/Ma ≡ η0/Ma

(1)

In the above, U represents the characteristic velocity, and |S| is the magnitude of the
2SijSij). Ma = U/cs is the Mach
rate of strain tensor Sij of the ﬂow ﬁeld (|S| =
number. The rate of strain tensor is commonly deﬁned as,

q

Sij =

1
2

[

∂ui
∂xj

+

∂uj
∂xi

]

2

The dimensionless rate of strain, η0 ≡ τ0|S| (in what follows we, instead of η0, will
use the parameter η = τ S where τ is a physically relevant relaxation time) can
be viewed as a measure of degree of inhomogeneity and shear in the ﬂow.
It is
equivalent to a parameter η ∼ W ≡ Uτ0/L commonly used in hydrodynamics of
polymer solutions. Eqn.(1) indicates that Kn can be large if η is large, specially
for low Mach number ﬂows. In many situations η is not a small parameter and the
Newtonian ﬂuid based description breaks down. For example, capillary ﬂows or blood
ﬂows through small vessels, rariﬁed gases and granular ﬂows cannot be quantitatively
described as Newtonian ﬂuids. A ﬁnite η can either be a result of a large relaxation
time associated with the intrinsic ﬂuid property (such as in some polymer solutions),
or a result of strong spatial variations like turbulent and micro or nano-ﬂows. This
latter eﬀect is particularly important at a solid wall where the velocity gradient is
often quite signiﬁcant. It is known that the no-slip boundary condition is only valid
in the limit of vanishing Kn. Experimental data indicate that the no-slip condition
breaks down when Kn ≥ 10−3 [8] and the Navier-Stokes description itself becomes
invalid at Kn ≥ 0.1. For example, the experimentally observed velocity proﬁle in a
simple granular Couette ﬂow does not resemble the familiar linear variation of velocity
predicted from the Navier-Stokes equation with no-slip boundary conditions [9]. The
wall slip is an indication of an extremely strong local rate of strain.

The Navier-Stokes equations can be perceived as a momentum conservation law
with a linear (Newtonian ﬂuid) stress-strain relation [3], [5]-[7], i.e. the deviatoric
part of the stress tensor takes on the following form,

σij ≡ hv′

iv′

ji −

hv′2iδij ≈ νSij,

i, j = x, y, z

(2)

1
3

where coeﬃcient ν is the kinematic viscosity. In the above, v′ (≡ v −u) is the relative
velocity between the velocity of molecules (v) and their locally averaged velocity (u)
namely the ﬂuid velocity. It is expected that v′ and u represent, respectively, the fast
(kinetic) and the slow (hydrodynamic) velocity ﬁelds. In an unstrained ﬂow where
the rate of strain is equal to zero (Sij = 0) , the relation (2) is simply interpreted as
the ﬁrst term of an expansion in powers of small rate of strain. Therefore, to describe
rheological or micro-ﬂows with high rate of strains, such a linear approximation must
be modiﬁed to include non-linear eﬀects. However, this task is highly non-trivial if
not impossible.

The hydrodynamic approximations can be derived from kinetic equations for the
distribution function with the intermolecular interactions accounted for through the
so called collision integral [3], [5]-[7]. One can formally write the Bogolubov chain
of equations for the distribution function and, in addition to the high powers of the
dimensionless rate-of-strain η, generate an inﬁnite number of equations for the multi-
particle contributions to collision integral [3],[10]. For a strongly sheared ﬂows where

3

the expansion parameter η is of order unity, this chain cannot be truncated. An
additional diﬃculty is that the consistent expansion includes the high-order spatial
derivatives , which unfortunately means that, even if we were able to develop the
procedure, the resulting un-truncated inﬁnite- order hydrodynamic equation requiring
an inﬁnite set of initial and boundary conditions would be useless.

In this paper, based on Bogolubov’s concept of the hierarchy of relaxation times,
we propose a compact representation of the inﬁnite- order hydrodynamic formulation
in terms of a simple close-form hybrid (“hydro-kinetic”) equation. The power of the
approach is demonstrated on a classical case of stronly sheared non-Newtonian ﬂuids.
It is shown that in our “hydro-kinetic” approach, the formation of a slip velocity
at a solid wall and the simultaneous ﬂattening of velocity distribution in a bulk is
a consequence of an “instability” of the corresponding hydrodynamic equation with
the no-slip boundary conditions. This “instability” is the result of the non-universal
details of the ﬂow such as the local values of dimensionless rate of strain η.

2 Basic formulation

Following the standard Boltzmann kinetic theory, we introduce a density distribution
function f (x, v, t) in the so called single particle phase space (x, v) (≡ Γ). A formally
exact kinetic equation, involving an unspeciﬁed collision integral C, can be given [11]

∂tf + vi

f = C

∂
∂xi

(3)

Generally speaking, the detailed expression for C involves multi-particle distribution
(correlation) functions f (n)(Γ1, Γ2, . . . , Γn, t) (with n > 1). This results in the famous
Bogolubov chain of inﬁnite number of coupled equations [3],[10] . This chain cannot
be closed when ﬂuid density is not small. On the other hand, the collision integral
C can be modeled in a relatively simple form in the case of a rariﬁed gas where only
the binary collisions are important [ 11]

C =

w′(f ′f ′

1 − f f1) dΓ1dΓ′dΓ′

1 =

urel(f ′f ′

1 − f f1)dσd3p

(4)

Z

Z

In this model, C depends only on the single particle distributions. Here C dΓ is the
rate of change of the number of molecules in the phase volume dΓ = d3xd3v, urel is
the relative velocity of colliding molecules and dσ and p are the diﬀerential scattering
cross-section and momentum of the molecules, respectively. The state variable Γ
describes all degrees of freedom of a molecule and w′ stands for the probability of a
transition of two molecules initially in states Γ and Γ1 to states Γ′ and Γ1
as a result
of collision. The kinetic equation (3) together with the speciﬁc collision integral (4)
forms the celebrated Boltzmann equation.

′

4

It is well known that Boltzmann equation admits an H-theorem in that the system
monotonically decays (relaxes) to its thermodynamic equilibrium. The corresponding
local thermodynamic equilibrium distribution function, f eq, is determined from the
solution C(f eq) = 0. If deviation from the equilibrium is small, we can write f =
f eq + δf and

C = −

+

urelf

′

′
1dσd3p ≈ −
f

f
τ0

Z

f − f eq
τ0

(5)

with

τ0 ≈

urelf eqdσd3p

Z

Equation (5) is often referred to as the “BGK” (mean-ﬁeld) approximation [12] which
is a natural reﬂection of the Boltzmann H-theorem. Furthermore, when perturbation
from equilibrium is weak, it indicates that the relaxation to equilibrium is realized for
each of the distribution functions individually having a common relaxation time. At
this point, it is important to make the following clariﬁcation: Even though as shown
above that (5) was deduced from the Boltzmann binary collision integral model, its
applicability can be argued to go beyond the low density limit. Indeed, the model
process is consistent to the more general principle of the Second law of thermody-
namics: A perturbed ﬂuid system always monotonically relax to thermal equilibrium,
regardless whether the system has low or high density. Furthermore, in accord with
Bogolubov [10] the general process of return-to-local equilibrium is true even when
the deviation from equilibrium is not small.

In the classical kinetic theory, the relaxation time τ0 (≈ const) represents a char-
acteristic time of the relaxation process in a weakly non-homogeneous ﬂuid and the
smaller value of τ0, the faster the process of return to equilibrium. The formal expan-
sion of kinetic equations in powers of dimensionless rate of strain (Chapman-Enskog
(CE) expansion [3], [6]) developed many years ago, leads to hydrodynamic equations
for the macroscopic (”slow”) variables. When applied to (3), the ﬁrst order trancation
of the formally inﬁnite expansion gives the Navier-Stokes equations with kinematic
viscosity:

ν0 = τ0θ.

(6)

Development of the expansion based on the full Boltzmann equation is an extremely
diﬃcult task. On the other hand, the simpliﬁed Boltzmann-BGK equation (5) for the
single-particle distribution function allows extension of the Chapman-Enskog expan-
sion to include higher powers of dimensionless parameter η. Considering the higher-
order terms of the Chapman-Enskog expansion, a simple scalar relaxation term in (5)
combined with advection contribution, is expected to generate an inﬁnite number of
anisotropic contributions as contracted products of Sij. Indeed, by expanding equa-
tion (5) up to the second order in the Chapman-Enskog series, we can explicitly show

5

that the deviatoric part of the momentum stress tensor takes on the following form
[13]

σij = 2τ θSij − 2τ θ(∂t + u · ∇)(τ Sij)

1
d
where the vorticity tensor is deﬁned as,

−4τ 2θ[SikSkj −

δijSklSkl] + 2τ 2θ[SikΩkj + SjkΩki]

(7)

Ωij =

1
2

[

∂ui
∂xj

−

∂uj
∂xi

]

Note the ﬁrst O(η) term in (7), resulting from the ﬁrst order Chapman-Enskog (CE)
expansion, corresponds to the Navier-Stokes equations for Newtonian ﬂuid, while the
non-linear corrections to the Navier-Stokes hydrodynamics are generated in the next
(O(η2)) order of the CE expansion.
It is important to further point out that the
memory eﬀects, which appeared in the hydrodynamic approximation (7) as a result
of the second-order CE expansion, are contained in a simple equation (5) which can
be regarded as a generating equation for hydrodynamic models of an arbitrary-order
non-linearity .

The hydrodynamic approximation (6), (7) has been derived from the equation
(5) for the single-particle distribution function valid for a weakly non-equilibrium
ﬂuid (small η). In strongly sheared ﬂuids both the assumption of local equilibrium
and the low-order trancation of the Bogolubov chain (single-particle collisions) fail
and the accurate resummation of the series is impossible. Indeed, even in the low-
density ﬂuids, the strong shear (η ≥ 1) introduces local ﬂuxes facilitating long-range
correlations between particles, invalidating the ﬂuid description in terms of the single-
particle distrubution functions. To account for these eﬀects, we have to modify kinetic
equation (5) in accord with some general ideas about the relaxation processes.
Our goal is to reformulate the kinetic equation (5), by modifying the relaxation time
τ and come up with the eﬀective kinetic equation qualitatively accounting for the
eﬀects of the neglected high-order contributions to the Bogolubov chain dominating
the dynamics far from equilibrium.

In his seminal 1946 book [10] Bogolubov proposed the hierarchy of the time-scales
that describe relaxation to equilibrium for a system initially far from equilibrium.
According to his picture, these initially strong deviations from equilibrium rapidly
decrease, thus allowing an accurate representation of the entire collision integral in
terms of the single-particle distribution functions. This dramatically simpliﬁed repre-
sentation is suﬃcient for an accurate description of the later, much slower, process
of relaxation to thermodynamic equilibrium.

6

To make this plausable assumption operational, we have to represent a Bogolubov
hierarchy of relaxation times in terms of observable dynamical variables characterizing
the degree of deviation from equilibrium. Since the most natural parameter governing
the dynamics far from equilibrium is the rate of strain |Sij|, we propose that both
the close-to-equilibrium relaxation time τ0 and inverse rate-of-strain 1/|Sij| deﬁne the
Bogolubov hierarchy of the relaxation times. The simplest Galileo invariant relaxation
model that is compatible with the above physical considerations is:

1
τ

=

1
τ 2
0

s

1
τ0 q

+ γ|Sne|2 ≡

1 + γη2
ne

(8)

ij ≈ σij
where we deﬁne in accord with (2), Sne
ν0 and ηne = τ0|Sne| (i 6= j). In what
follows, wherever it cannot lead to misunderstandings, we will often omitt the suﬃx
ne. The new collision integral (i.e., (5) with τ0 replaced by τ in (8)) now describes a
relaxation process that involves a rate of strain-dependent relaxation time.

The proposed hydro-kinetic model ((3)-(8)) is chosen to reﬂect some of the princi-
ple elements in the Bogolubov hierarchy. That is, far from equilibrium where the rate
of strain is large, the essential time-scale τ is dominated by |S|−1 which corresponds to
a rapid ﬁrst stage of the relaxation process. Later on, when the rate of strain becomes
small, the relaxation process is governed by a close-to-equilibrium relaxation time τ0,
as used in the conventional BGK equation (5) leading to the Navier-Stokes formula-
tion. It is clear from relation (7) that even though, by restricting our model to the
scalar relaxation times in (8), the anisotropic contributions to the stress do appear in
the hydrodynamic description which is a result of the Chapman- Enskog expansion.
Since the rate of strain is a property of the ﬂow, the model (8) which includes both
molecular and hydrodynamic features can be called a hybrid hydro-kinetic approach
to non-linear ﬂuids. It is shown below that even with such a speciﬁc form in (8), the
hydro-kinetic equation is capable of producing some quite non-trivial but physically
sensible results at the hydrodynamic level.

To sumamrise the main points of this section:

it is analytically impossible and
practically useless to attempt to describe the strongly non-linear (non-equilibrium)
ﬂow physics at the hydrodynamic level. As indicated above, not only the resulting
“diﬀerential equation” does not have a ﬁnite form, it also requires an inﬁnite number
of boundary conditions. The reason for this fundamental diﬃculty is that the expan-
sion in powers of parameter η becomes invalid when η is not small. Thus, to deal
with strongly sheared and time-dependent non-linear ﬂows, it is desirable to use the
simple “hydro-kinetic” description (3)-(8). Clearly, this hybrid representation has a
ﬁnite form, while it formally contains all the terms in the inﬁnite expansion for the
hydrodynamic level. As argued above, the hydro-kinetic formulation is applicable to
both large and small η, corresponding to large and small deviations from equilibrium.

7

3 Wall ﬂows of non-Newtonian ﬂuids

To illustrate the beneﬁts of the hybrid representation of (3)-(8), let us ﬁrst consider a
laminar unidirectional ﬂow in a channel between two plates separated by distance 2H
and driven by a constant gravity force g. In a steady state, the Navier-Stokes equation
for the channel ﬂow can be derived from (5), (8) in the lowest order of the expansion
in powers of dimensionless rate of strain η = τ |Sij|. Repeating the procedure leading
to (7) and restricting the expansion by the ﬁrst term gives the Navier-Stokes equation
having a ”renormalized” viscosity corresponding to (8) ,

(9)

(10)

(11)

where

∂tu − g = ∂y ˜ν∂yu

˜ν = τ θ = ν0/

1 + γτ 2

0 |S|2

q
for the special unidirectional situation, |S| = |∂u/∂y|. In the above, we have chosen
u to be the streamwise velocity component, while coordinates x and y are along the
streamwise and normal directions of the channel, respectively.

One important point must be mentioned: the expansion in powers of η0 = τ0S
corresponds to the classic CE expansion. The equation (9) has been derived by
expanding in powers of η = τ |S| = η0/
0, which means that even the low-
order perturbation theory in powers of the ”dressed ” parameter η corresponds to an
q
inﬁnite series in powers of ”bare” parameter η0. Thus, it is extremely interesting to
assess the accuracy of the derived hydrodynamic approximation (9)-(10).

1 + γη2

Subject to no-slip boundary conditions, the exact steady-state analytic solution

for (9) is given by:

u(y) =

(

1 − β(

)2 −

1 − β)

gH 2
ν0β

r

y
H

q

where β ≡ γ(τ0gH/ν0)2 is a dimensionless parameter which can be either positive
or negative, for γ can in principle have either positive or negative signs. One can
immediately see that this particular ﬂow solution breaks down for β > 1. A direct
indication of this is that the steady state Navier-Stokes equation (9) is no longer
valid to describe such a ﬂow, and we have to return back to the full hydro-kinetic
representation (3)-(8). It is interesting that the equation (9)-(10) allows an unsteady
singular solution:

where φ(y) = 1 for |y| < H and φ(y) = 0 on the walls where |y| = H. The transition
between the two (no-slip (11) and slip (12)) solutions will be demonstrated below.

u = gt + u0φ(y)

(12)

8

In the rest of the paper, we present solution of the full hydro-kinetic system for the
channel ﬂow for the entire range of parameter variation of γ with initial velocity proﬁle
u(y, t = 0) = 0. For this purpose, equations (3)-(8) have been numerically solved
using a Lattice Boltzmann (LB) algorithm [14]. On each time step the relaxation
time in (8) was calculated with the non-equilibrium rate of strain Sne

ij , deﬁned as:

Sne

ij =

1
ν0 Z

dvidvj(vi − ui)(vj − uj)(f − f eq)

(13)

with i 6= j and u standing for the local value of the mean velocity. It is clear from
this deﬁnition that in thermodynamic equilibrium, the rate-of-strain Seq
ij = 0 and,
according to (7), not far fom equilibrium Sij ≈ Sne
ij . The computationally eﬀective
and widely tested “bounce-back” collision process giving, on the hydrodynamic level
of description, rise to the no-slip boundary condition in the Kn → 0 limit, was imposed
on a solid wall. According to the ”bounce back” algorithm, the momentum of the
”molecule” colliding with a solid surface changes according to the rule: p ⇒ −p.

H

When parameter β = 0 , the familiar steady state parabolic solution u(y) =
gH 2
ν0 (1 − ( y
2) was readily derived. Figs.1 present the analytical (i.e., (11)) and the
numerical (i.e., (3)-(8)) solutions of the velocity proﬁles in the plane channel ﬂow
for, respectively β = 0.4. As we can see, for this value, the diﬀerence between the
solutions of (11) and simulations of the full hydro-kinetic model ((3)-(8)) is negligible.
This means that in this regime, the lowest order trancation of the Chapman-Enskog
expansion in powers of the ”dressed” parameter η (7) is extremely accurate. The
same conclusion was shown to hold for all β < 0.5.

The numerical results for β ≥ 0.51 revealed an interesting instability theoretically
predicted , for β ≥ 1. The results of very accurate numerical simulation (960 cells
across the channel) are presented on Figs. 2-3.

We can notice qualitatively new features not captured by the steady-state hy-
drodynamic approximation:
initially, formation of aly narrow wall-boundary layer,
accompanied by a strong ﬂattening of the velocity proﬁle in the bulk can be observed.
Later in evolution, the boundary layer becomes unstable with formation of the slip
velocity at the wall. The ﬂow accelerates, eventually becoming a free -falling plug
ﬂow, predicted by equation (12). All these phenomena have been experimentally
observed in the ﬂows of rariﬁed gases and granular materials.

A clariﬁcation of the set up is in order: The simulations were performed on an ef-
fectively inﬁnitely long (periodic boundary conditions along the streamwise direction)
channel, and the ﬂow was driven by an externally imposed constant gravity. This set
up diﬀers quite substantially from a pressure-gradient-driven ﬂow of a nonlinear ﬂuid
where a steady state can be achieved by formation of a non-constant (x-dependent)
streamwise pressure gradient. Unlike pressure, gravity is not a dynamical variable
and hence the ﬂow lacks the mechanism for establishing a force balance needed to

9

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

U

0
−1

−0.5

0
Y

0.5

1

Figure 1: Steady state velocity proﬁle: comparison of hydrodynamic solution Eq. 11
(×) with the LBM simulation ◦. β = 0.4.

achieve a steady state. This can be associated with the experimentally observed in-
ability of the gravity-driven granular ﬂows in ducts to reach steady velocity proﬁles
[14]. In accord with this theory, the steady velocity proﬁle similar to those shown
on Figs. 2-3 can also be observed in a gravity- driven ﬁnite-length-pipe or channel
ﬂows . In this case we expect the velocity distribution to vary with the length of the
pipe/channel.

10

0.015

0.01

U

0.005

0
−1

−0.5

0
Y

0.5

1

Figure 2: Short-time evolution of unstable velocity proﬁle β = 0.51. The values of
dimensionless time in arbitrary units: from bottom to top: T=0; 2; 4; 6.

4 Conclusion

It has recently been shown that the Lattice Boltmann ( BGK ) equation with the
eﬀective strain-dependent relaxation time can be used for accurate description of
high Reynolds number turbulent ﬂows in complex geometries [16]. In this work, this
concept has been generalized to ﬂows of strongly non-linear ﬂuids. Although the
simple relaxation model (8) was proposed here on a qualitative basis, it has shown to
be capable of producing non-trivial predictions for ﬂows involving strong non-linearity.
To the best of our knowledge, this hybrid (”hydro-kinetic”) model is the ﬁrst attempt
of incorporating the principle elements of the Bogolubov conjecture about inﬁnite
hierarchy of relaxation times. The most interesting result of application of this model
is the appearance of the slip velocity on the wall as a result of dynamic transition
driven by increasing rate of strain. Since this transition depends on the wall geometry,
it cannot be universal. Thus, to predict this extremely important eﬀect, the model (3)-
(8) does not require empirical, externally imposed boundary conditions. The classical
incompressible hydrodynamics relies upon one externally determined parameter, the
viscosity coeﬃcient which can be obtained either theoretically (sometimes) or from
experimental data. The hydro-kinetic approach proposed in this paper needs a single
additional parameter γ describing physical properties of a strongly non -linear ﬂuid
, which can readily be established from a low Reynolds number ﬂow in a capillar by

11

0.25

0.2

0.15

U

0.1

0.05

0
−1

−0.5

0.5

1

0
Y

Figure 3: Long time velocity proﬁle evolution β = 0.51. The values of dimensionless
time in arbitrary units: from bottom to top: T=0; 8; 16;32;.........80.

comparing the measured velocity proﬁle with the theoretical prediction (11). Further
applications of the model (3)-(8) to the separated highly non-linear ﬂows, will show
how far one can reach using this simple approach.

Acknowledgements. One of the authors (VY) has greatly beneﬁtted from stim-
ulating discussions with R. Dorfman, I. Goldhirsch, K.R. Sreenivasan, W. Lossert, D.
Levermore, A.Polyakov.

References

York.

bridge.

[1] Brodkey, R. S. (1967): The phenomena of ﬂuid motions, Dover publications, New

[2] Larson, R. G. (1992): Instabilities in viscoelastic ﬂows, Rheol Acta 31, 213-263.

[3] Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M.

(1995): Physical Kinetics, Butter-

worth/Heinemann.

[4] Lamb, H. (1932): Hydrodynamics, 6th edition, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

12

[5] Cercignani C. (1975): Theory and application of the Boltzmann equation, Elsevier,

New York.

York, 1980.

[6] Chapman, S. and Cowling, T (1990): The mathematical theory of of non–uniform

gases, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[7] Boon, J. P. and Yip, S. (1980): Molecular Hydrodynamics, Dover Publishers, New

[8] Thompson P. and Trojan, S. M. (1997): A general boundary condition for liquid

ﬂow at solid surfaces, Nature, 389, 360.

[9] Lossert, W., Bocquet, L., Lubensky, T. C. and Gollub, J. P. (2000): Phys. Rev.

Lett. 85, 1428

[10] Bogolubov, N. N. (1946): Problemy dinamicheskoii teorii v statisticheskoi

phisike, (in Russian), Moscow.

[11] Boltzmann L. (1872): Weitere studien ueber das warmegleichgewicht unter gas-
molekulen, Sitzungber. Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math. Naturwiss. Classe 66, 275–
370.

[12] Bhatnagar, P. L., Gross, E. P., and Krook, M. (1954): A model for collision pro-
cesses in gases. I. Small amplitude processes in charged and neutral one–component
systems, Phys. Rev., 94, 511–525.

[13] Chen, H. (2003): Second order Chapman-Enskog expansion derivation of the

momentum stress form (unpuliblished notes).

[14] Chen, S. and Doolen, G. (1998): Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30, 329.

[15] Lossert, W. (2002): private communication.

[16] Chen, H., Kandasamy, S., Orszag, S., Shock, R., Succi, S., and Yakhot, V. (2003):
Extended-Boltzmann kinetic equation for turbulent ﬂows, Science 301, 633–636.

13

