5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Autocatalytic chemical smoke rings

Michael C. Rogers and Stephen W. Morris
Department of Physics, University of Toronto, 60 St. George St., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A7
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Buoyant plumes, evolving free of boundary constraints, may develop well-deﬁned mushroom
In normal plumes, overturning ﬂow in the head entrains less buoyant ﬂuid from
shaped heads.
the surroundings as the head rises, robbing the plume of its driving force. We consider here a new
type of plume in which the source of buoyancy is an autocatalytic chemical reaction. The reaction
occurs at a sharp front which separates reactants from less dense products. In this type of plume,
entrainment assists the reaction, producing new buoyancy which fuels an accelerating plume head.
When the head has grown to a critical size, it detaches from the upwelling conduit, forming an accel-
erating, buoyant vortex ring. This vortex is analogous to a rising smoke ring. A second-generation
head then develops at the point of detachment. Multiple generations of chemical vortex rings can
detach from a single triggering event.

PACS numbers: 47.20.Bp, 47.70.Fw

Hydrodynamic ﬂows driven by chemical reactions have
been studied since the discovery of ﬁre, the oldest tech-
nology of humankind [1]. Exothermic combustion reac-
tions produce buoyant ﬂames in the form of rising, re-
acting plumes and thermals which are often highly tur-
In this Letter we examine a much simpler,
bulent [2].
yet still very rich, new system in which relatively gentle
autocatalytic reaction fronts give rise to laminar plumes
and thermals in the form of free vortex rings. Unlike con-
ventional non-reacting plumes and thermals arising from
localized heat sources, these ﬂows have an internal source
of buoyancy which is enhanced by subsequent entrain-
ment, leading to ﬂow acceleration similar to combustion.
They provide a new and especially elegant model system
in which to study instabilities in reacting ﬂows.

Many autocatalytic chemical reactions exhibit sharp
fronts. The well-studied reaction we employed was the
iodate oxidation of arsenous acid [3]. The short range
diﬀusion of the autocatalyst, here the iodide ion, limits
the reaction to a very thin front separating reacted and
unreacted solution. The front region of active reaction
is typically only a few tens of microns thick, and is by
far the smallest lengthscale in the system. Under gravity,
hydrodynamic convection can be driven by buoyancy due
to the density jump across the front. Density change
is created both by thermal expansion due to the slight
exothermicity of the reaction, and by the partial molal
density decrease of the product solution [4]. Ascending
fronts are hydrodynamically unstable because they put
less dense products below denser unreacted solution [3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].

In our plume experiments, we increase the viscosity
of the water solution by adding glycerol. An ascending
front is allowed to escape from a capillary tube into a
much larger volume, so that boundaries no longer con-
strain the shape of the front.
In the larger volume, a
rising plume with a well-deﬁned head is formed. During
the early stages of the evolution of the head, its growth

is due to both a volume ﬂux of upwelling product solu-
tion and by the entrainment of reactant solution. Later,
the plume head detaches and becomes a rising vortex
ring, analogous to a chemically reacting smoke ring. The
upwelling conduit that is left behind forms a new head
which also eventually detaches, leading to generations of
accelerating vortex rings. This surprising behaviour is in
contrast to conventional buoyant vortex rings, which do
not accelerate. It may have application as a laboratory
analog of plumes in internally heated ﬂuids, such as the
Earth’s mantle [14, 15].

The propagation of iodate-arsenous acid (IAA) reac-
tion fronts has enjoyed considerable theoretical and ex-
perimental attention. It has been well-studied in capil-
lary tubes [4, 5, 8], in thin slots [6, 7, 9, 10, 11], and
in the presence of a superposed ﬂow [12, 13].
In suf-
ﬁciently narrow vertically oriented capillary tubes, con-
vection is suppressed and the sharp reaction front is ob-
served to propagate at constant speed in either direction.
If the tube radius a is increased beyond a critical size, the
front deforms and upward propagation is accompanied by
convection [16]. Within a simple thin front approxima-
tion [12], the relative importance of buoyancy is described
by a dimensionless quantity

S =

δga3
νDc

,

(1)

where g is the acceleration due to gravity, ν is the kine-
matic viscosity, Dc is the diﬀusion constant of the auto-
catalyst, and δ = (ρu/ρr)− 1 is the dimensionless density
jump between the reacted (ρr) and unreacted (ρu) solu-
tions. In practice, for the IAA reaction, δ ∼ 10−4. The
critical tube radius for convection corresponds to a crit-
ical value Sc ∼ 90. At slightly larger values S > Sc, a
transition to an axisymmetric mode of convection can be
identiﬁed [4]. In the plume experiments described below,
a very large tube was used, corresponding to S ≈ 108.

In all previous studies of the IAA reaction [3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], convection eﬀects were severely

constrained by the viscous interaction with nearby solid
boundaries. We set out to ﬁnd the reaction-driven ﬂow
phenomenology for an unbounded solution in which the
reaction is initiated at a point, as nearly as possible. Two
experimental diﬃculties immediately arise. For a water
solution, the IAA reaction produces fronts that are suﬃ-
ciently buoyant that the resulting plumes ascend quickly
to the upper boundaries of any tank of managable size.
These plumes also had Reynolds numbers, Re ∼ 7 and
therefore had a rather complex internal ﬂow structure.
We therefore explored the reaction in a water-glycerol
solution in which the increased viscosity acts to limit the
Reynolds number to Re ∼ 0.1, and to allow for an ef-
fectively longer evolution time within the experimental
tank. These experiments reveal plumes with well-deﬁned
heads which eventually pinch-oﬀ to form essentially free
vortex rings.

The second diﬃculty concerns initiating the front at a
localized point. When the front is released from a very
narrow capillary tube with diameter 0.9 mm into a much
larger volume, we found that the front did not propa-
gate. This “front death” phenomenon [17] is apparently
due to the requirement of a minimum critical concen-
tration of autocatalyst near the initiation region, which
therefore cannot be too small. To our knowledge, this
eﬀect has not been observed in the IAA reaction before.
This constraint is easily overcome by using a large enough
capillary tube to launch the reaction into the unbounded
region. A diameter of 2.7 mm proved to be suﬃcient.

Reactant solutions were prepared using reagent grade
chemicals and distilled water with 40% glycerol by vol-
ume. Iodate stock solutions were prepared by dissolving
KIO3 powder in distilled water. Arsenous acid stock so-
lutions were prepared from As2O3 powder. These stock
solutions were diluted so that the working solution con-
−
tained [IO
3 ]=0.005M and [As(III)]=0.020M. These con-
centrations were not varied in the experiments we report
here. Congo red indicator was used to visualize the re-
action fronts. Congo red has a pH range of 3.0 to 5.0,
where the acid form is blue and the base form is red.
The reaction front leaves in its wake a product solution
with pH of ∼ 2.7 so that the upwelling blue products are
easily visible within the red unreacted solution.

The apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. The reaction tank
was a large glass cylinder sealed by large rubber stoppers.
A capillary tube entered through a hole in the lower stop-
per. The outside end of the capillary tube was sealed with
a short rubber tube clamped at one end which formed
the initiation volume. The rubber tube was ﬁlled by a
porous plug made of loosely packed cotton. Reactions
were initiated by inserting a thin needle into the rubber
tube and then injecting a very small amount of product
solution into the plug. The plug served to quench any
hydrodynamic disturbance of the reactant solution dur-
ing reaction initiation. The reaction proceeded up the
capillary tube, which is large enough that S > Sc and

2

unreacted
solution

support

,(++%
-&".+

glass
0%",,
!’%$/1+&
tube

rubber
,(++%
bungs
-&".+

capillary
!"#$%%"&’
()*+
  tube

!%$#

initiation
volume

&)**+&
()*$/0
porous
plug

FIG. 1: A schematic of the apparatus. The main volume is
a cylinder 32 cm long and 8.9 cm in diameter. The capillary
tube has an inner diameter of 2.7 mm.

some convection is already present. It then escapes into
the larger tank. The apparatus was illuminated from be-
hind and still images of the evolving front were captured
using a digital camera. The temperature was constant at
24.0 ± 0.2◦ C.

The various stages in the evolution of the resulting
free autocatalytic plume are shown in Fig. 2.
Initially
the plume rises out of the capillary tube and its head
remains roughly spherical and grows slowly. This stage
of growth is shown in Fig. 2a. In this initial stage, there
is essentially no entrainment of reactant solution into the
plume head.

At a well-deﬁned point, entrainment sets in. Fig. 2b
shows a plume head well past the onset of entrainment.
This shows the familiar mushroom-shaped head for a
plume in which the surrounding ﬂuid is being drawn into
the head by a single overturning vortex ring.

Once the entraining autocatalytic plume head reaches
a second critical size, the plume head begins to pinch-oﬀ
from the upwelling conduit. The pinch creates a bottle-
neck in the conduit which then swells as it ﬁlls with rising
product solution. During the swelling below the bottle-
neck, what was formerly the head of a starting plume
becomes an essentially free vortex ring. As shown in
Fig. 2c, the vortex ring detaches from the conduit, and
is eventually connected only by a very thin ﬁlament of
product solution. The swelling in the conduit develops
into a new, second generation plume head. In Fig. 2d,
a new pinch-oﬀ process has started again below the sec-
ond generation plume head. Yet another bottleneck is
formed when the second generation head pinches-oﬀ and
becomes a vortex ring. The new bottleneck swells and
the process is repeated. We have observed four genera-
tions of pinch-oﬀ and subsequent vortex ring formation
in autocatalytic plumes. The fourth generation plume
head eventually reaches the top boundary of the reaction
vessel, closing the possibility of further pinch-oﬀ [18].

¿From the digital images of plume evolution, we de-

3

100

200

300

400

500

time (s)

(a)

(b)

4

3

2

1

)

m
c
(
 
h
t
d
i
w

0
0

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

)

m
c
(
 
t
h
g
i
e
h

FIG. 2: A sequence of images showing the evolution of the
plume structure. (a) 202 s, (b) 328 s, (c) 458 s and (d) 554 s
after release.

termined the height and width of the ascending buoyant
plume as a function of time. Height was measured from
the top of the front to where it exited the capillary tube,
and the width refers to the maximum width across the
head or vortex ring.
It is useful to deﬁne the dimen-
sionless ratio α = wh/wc, where wh is the width of the
head and wc is the width of the conduit. Only the ﬁrst
generation head and vortex ring were considered in this
analysis.

We found that the initial stage of growth ends and
entrainment begins once α reaches a critical value of
αc1 = 2.6 ± 0.1. Similarly, once the entraining plume
head reaches a second critical size, αc2 = 4.6 ± 0.1, the
plume head begins to pinch-oﬀ from the upwelling con-
duit.

Typical width and height data for ﬁrst generation head
formation of an autocatalytic plume is shown in Fig. 3.
We observed that the head accelerates during its ascent.
The acceleration of the plume head continues after it
has pinched-oﬀ, even though it is almost entirely discon-
nected from the conduit. This acceleration is in contrast
to the constant velocity rise behavior previously observed
in conventional plumes [19]. The continued acceleration
of the head once it pinches-oﬀ and becomes a thermal is
also unique to autocatalytic plumes; normal vortex rings
expand and slow down after they have pinched-oﬀ [20].
Fig. 3a shows that the width of the plume goes through
three distinct regions of approximately linear growth.
The initial, and slowest, growth rate obtains when α <
αc1 and there is no entrainment into the plume head
and it remains roughly spherical. A transition to a sec-
ond, increased growth regime occurs once entrainment
begins and αc1 < α < αc2. Finally, the third and fastest
growth regime commences once α > αc2 and the plume
head detaches and becomes a thermal. In experiments
on conventional plumes the growth rate of the head has

100

200

300

400

500

time (s)

FIG. 3: (Color online) The growth of the plume as a function
of time, up to the completion of the ﬁrst pinch-oﬀ, showing
(a) the width of the head, and (b) its height. Colored lines in
(a) show the nearly linear evolution of the width in the three
regimes indicated. Vertical arrows indicate the positions of
images (a), (b) and (c) from the previous ﬁgure.

been determined [19] to scale with time t as tβ, where
β = 0.54 ± 0.05. This is clearly not the case for autocat-
alytic plumes.

To our knowledge, our experiments mark the ﬁrst
study of buoyant plumes that are directly driven by an
autocatalytic reaction. Of course, buoyant plumes [15,
19, 21, 22, 23] and buoyant vortex rings [20, 23, 24]
have been the subjects of extensive previous study.
Refs. [25, 26, 27] review much of the older work. Some
clariﬁcation of nomenclature is useful here. A plume is a
continuous region of buoyancy supplied by a point source.
A starting plume is a plume with a well-deﬁned, advanc-
ing head. These cases of buoyancy driven ﬂow may be
distinguished from a thermal, which is a freely evolving
buoyant object disconnected from its source. Thermals
may take the form of vortex rings, similar to smoke rings.
There is great diversity in past experiments on passive
plumes, where we use passive to mean ﬂows that do not
react internally to produce buoyancy. In typical experi-
ments, passive plumes are formed from buoyant ﬂuid that
has been injected into a less-buoyant medium at a point
source. The buoyancy may be due to a temperature or
composition diﬀerence or both. In this case, however, all
the buoyancy is derived from processes external to the
experiment and arrives with the volume of injected ﬂuid.
Subsequent stirring can only dilute and reduce this buoy-
ancy. In the case of autocatalytic plumes, the volume of
buoyant ﬂuid injected is negligible and all of the buoy-
ancy is generated by the conversion of dense ﬂuid into

buoyant ﬂuid at the thin reaction front. The volume of
buoyant ﬂuid is steadily increasing, particularly in the
head.

Symmetrical plume heads similar to those we observe
can be found in passive starting plumes [15]. Moreover,
the heads of passive buoyant plumes can be observed to
pinch-oﬀ to form buoyant thermals in the form of vortex
rings. The formation thermals by pinch-oﬀ has been the
subject of theoretical and of experimental interest in pas-
sive systems [28, 29, 30, 31]. The formation of discrete
thermals is a characteristic of systems in which the ratio
of the viscosities of the buoyant ﬂuid and its surroundings
is of order 1 [32].

There is a critical diﬀerence between the passive vor-
tex rings formed by pinch-oﬀ and those that we observe
in autocatalytic reactions. As the head or vortex ring
rises, it entrains surrounding unreacted ﬂuid, stirring it
into the plume head and accelerating the production of
new buoyancy. This feedback mechanism is unique to
autocatalytic plumes. In our plumes, this stirring is lam-
inar, rather than turbulent, and presumably involves the
extreme stretching of the thin reaction front within the
vortex ring.

Autocatalytic plumes may have a useful analogy to im-
portant geophysical processes. Conventional plumes have
been the subject of numerous laboratory analog exper-
iments aimed at understanding how material upwelling
from deep in the mantle forms oceanic and continen-
tal hotspots [15]. In addition to plumes, instabilities in
the bottom layer of the mantle are also likely to give
rise to thermals. Such thermals may incorporate inter-
nal sources of buoyancy due to the heat supplied by the
breakdown of radionuclides. Internally heated thermals
are one plausible explanation for ocean island volcan-
ism [33]. The buoyancy-producing capabilities of auto-
catalytic thermals could serve as an interesting labora-
tory analog of this process.

We have described a study of buoyant,

three-
dimensional plumes driven by the iodate-arsenous acid
reaction. In a water solution that was made more vis-
cous with the addition of glycerol, we found that a ris-
ing plume with a well-deﬁned head was formed. The
plume head grew to a critical size and subsequently de-
tached from the upwelling conduit to form a buoyant
vortex ring. The entrainment of reactant solution into
the autocatalytic chemical plume head and subsequent
vortex ring produced additional buoyancy by assisting
the chemical reaction, leading to an acceleration of the
vortex ring. This behavior reverses the usual role of
entrainment, which normally acts to reduce buoyancy
in conventional passive plumes and thermals. Autocat-
alytic chemical smoke rings oﬀer some simple insights
into combustion-driven ﬂow and certain geophysical pro-
cesses.

We thank M. Menzinger, A. De Wit, and A. M. Jellinek
for helpful discussions and constructive comments. This

research was supported by the Natural Science and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada.

4

[1] J. Warnatz, U. Maas, and R.W. Dibble, Combustion, 3rd

ed., Springer (2001).

[2] S. R. Tieszen, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 33, 67 (2001). 84,

[3] A. Hanna, A. Saul, and K. Showalter, J. Am. Chem. Soc.

4357 (2000).

104, 3838 (1982).

[4] J. A. Pojman, I. R. Epstein, T. J. McManus, and K.

Showalter, J. Phys. Chem. 95, 1299 (1991).

[5] D. Vasquez, J. Wilder, and B. Edwards, Phys. Fluids A

[6] J. W. Wilder, D. A. Vasquez and B. F. Edwards, Phys.

4, 2410 (1992).

Rev. E 47, 3761 (1993).

[7] J. Huang, D. A. Vasquez, B. F. Edwards and P. Kolodner,

Phys. Rev. E 48, 4378 (1993).

[8] J. Maser, D. A. Vasquez, B. F. Edwards, J. W. Wilder
and K. Showalter, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 6505 (1994).
[9] M. R. Carey and S. W. Morris and P. Kolodner, Phys.

Rev. E 53, 6012 (1996).

[10] M. Bockmann and S. C. M¨uller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

2506 (2000).

[11] A. De Wit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 054502 (2001).
[12] B. F. Edwards, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 104501 (2002).
[13] M. Leconte, J. Martin, N. Rakotomalala, and D. Salin,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 128302 (2003).

[14] G.F. Davies, M.A. Richards, J. Geology, 100, 151 (1992).
[15] R. W. Griﬃths, I. H. Campbell, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.

[16] D. A. Vasquez, B. F. Edwards, and J. W. Wilder, Phys.

99, 66 (1990).

Rev A 43, 6694 (1991).

[17] E. Jakab, D. Horv´ath, J. H. Merkin, S. K. Scott, P. L.
Simon and A T´oth, Phys. Rev. E., 66, 016207 (2002).

[18] For a movie of this process, see

http://www.physics.utoronto.ca/nonlinear/movies/plume.html

[19] E. Moses, G. Zocchi, A. Libchaber, J. Fluid. Mech. 251,

581 (1993).

[20] J. S. Turner, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 239, 61 (1957).
[21] B. R. Morton, G. Taylor, and J. S. Turner, Proc. R. Soc.

Lond. A 234, 1 (1956).

[22] J. S. Turner, J. Fluid. Mech. 13, 356 (1962).
[23] J. S. Turner, Buoyancy Eﬀects in Fluids, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press (1973).

[24] T. S. Lundgren, N. N. Mansour, J. Fluid. Mech. 224, 177

(1991).

[25] J. A. Fay, Ann. Rev. Fluid. Mech., 5, 151 (1973).
[26] E. J. List, Ann. Rev. Fluid. Mech., 14, 189 (1982).
[27] B. Gebhart, D. S. Hilder, M. Kelleher, Adv. Heat Trans-

[28] T. S. Lundgren, J. Yao, N. N. Mansour, J. Fluid. Mech.

[29] D. Fabris and D. Leipmann, Phys. Fluids 9, 2801 (1997).
[30] M. Gharib, E. Rambod, and K. Shariﬀ, J. Fluid Mech.

[31] M. Shusser and M. Gharib, J. Fluid Mech. 416, 173

fer 16, 1 (1984).

224, 177 (1992).

360, 121 (1998).

(2000).

[32] A. M. Jellinek, A. Lenardic, M. Manga, Geophys. Res.

Lett. 29, 10.1029/2001GL014624.

[33] R. W. Griﬃths, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 78, 435 (1986).

