5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Conﬁnement of hydrodynamic modes on a free surface and their quantum analogs

M. Torres∗,1 J. P. Adrados,1 P. Cobo,2 A. Fern´andez,2 C. Guerrero,3 G.
Chiappe,4 E. Louis,4 J.A. Miralles,4 J. A. Verg´es,5 and J.L. Arag´on†6
1Instituto de F´ısica Aplicada, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, Serrano 144, 28006 Madrid, Spain.
2Instituto de Ac´ustica, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, Serrano 144, 28006 Madrid, Spain
3Laboratorio de F´ısica de Sistemas Peque˜nos y Nanotecnolog´ıa,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, Serrano 144, 28006 Madrid, Spain.
4Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada and Unidad Asociada del Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas,
Universidad de Alicante, San Vicente del Raspeig, Alicante 03690, Spain.
5Departamento de Teor´ıa de la Materia Condensada, Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, Cantoblanco, Madrid 28049, Spain.
6Centro de F´ısica Aplicada y Tecnolog´ıa Avanzada,
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, Apartado Postal 1-1010, Quer´etaro 76000, M´exico.
(Dated: November 23, 2013)

A subtle procedure to conﬁne hydrodynamic modes on the free surface of a ﬂuid is presented here.
The experiment consists of a square vessel with an immersed square central well vibrating vertically
so that the surface waves generated by the meniscus at the vessel boundary interfere with the bound
states of the well. This is a classical analogy of a quantum well where some fundamental phenomena,
such as bonding of states and interference between free waves and bound states, can be visualized
and controlled. The above mentioned interference leads to a novel hydrodynamic transition from
quasiperiodic to periodic patterns. Tight binding numerical calculations are performed here to
show that our results could be transferred to design quantum conﬁnements exhibiting electronic
quasiperiodic surface states and their rational approximants for the ﬁrst time.

The interest in experiments of classical analogs, which
accurately model the salient features of some quantum
systems or other fundamental undulatory phenomena,
was ﬁrstly raised by the acoustic experiments of Maynard
[1], where the analogy between both the acoustic and
Schr¨odinger equations is invoked. In a general overview,
a hydrodynamic analogy has also been used to describe
the ﬂow of electrons in quantum semiconductor devices
[2]. Some experiments with liquid surface waves have
been reported later and they presented abstract concepts,
such as Bloch states, domain walls and band-gaps in peri-
odic systems [3, 4], Bloch-like states in quasiperiodic sys-
tems [5] or novel ﬁndings as the superlensing eﬀect [6] in
an visually clear manner. On the other hand, the corre-
spondence between the shallow water wave equation and
the acoustic wave equation has also been demonstrated
[4, 7]. Such correspondences could be exploited to in-
vestigate and address formally similar quantum eﬀects
as those observed in quantum corrals [8], where an opti-
cal analogy has already been proposed [9], and in grain
boundaries or simple surface steps [10]. Our main goal is
to build up the hydrodynamic analogy of the interference
between bound states in a ﬁnite quantum well and free
states. Then we realized an experimental set up consist-
ing of a square vessel with a single square well drilled at
its bottom; both squares are concentric and well diag-
onals are parallel to the box sides. The immersed well

∗Electronic address: manolo@iec.csic.es
†Electronic address: aragon@fata.unam.mx

was expected to work as a weak potential binding surface
waves upon dependence on the liquid depth. When the
vessel vibrated vertically with such amplitudes that the
Faraday instability was prevented, such geometry pro-
duced three kinds of linear or weakly non-linear patterns
on the free surface of the liquid. The ﬁrst pattern is a
sort of bound state restricted to the surface area occu-
pied by the immersed well that works as a weak poten-
tial binding standing plane waves. The second pattern is
produced by the meniscus at the vessel walls [11] and it
can invade the region of the well depending on the liq-
uid depth and the vessel vibration frequency. Finally,
the last pattern arises from the interference between the
vessel meniscus waves and the bound states of the well.
Patterns observed depend on the liquid depth h1, which
plays the role of an order parameter by controlling the
amplitudes of the bound states inside the immersed well.
2(a),
which clearly shows the binding of the surface wave
produced by the drilled well when the vibration am-
plitude is 60 µm. This pattern will be detailed below
but the physics of its origin can be discussed as fol-
lows. The bound states arise from an inertial hydro-
dynamic instability, balanced by the liquid surface ten-
sion [12], that grows over the square well region [5].
The bound state amplitudes increase on increasing 1/a2;
where a2 = T /ρg, a is the capillary length, T is the liquid
αω2
surface tension, ρ is the liquid density and g = g0
is the eﬀective gravity; g0 is the acceleration due to grav-
ity, α is the vessel vibration amplitude and ω is the vi-
bration angular frequency of the vessel. On the contrary,
the meniscus wave amplitude depends on the variation of

Our main observation is summarized in Fig.

±

the meniscus volume during each vessel oscillation and,
it grows accordingly when a2 increases [11, 12]. In our
experiment α is about 60 µm and the meniscus wave
amplitude reaches a maximum at a vessel vibration fre-
quency of 64 Hz. On the other hand, the vessel vibra-
tion frequency represents the wave state energy. The
frequency and the wavelength are related through the
well known dispersion relation of the gravity-capillary
waves [3, 4, 5, 12]. The present experiment is essentially
monochromatic as it occurs in the optical analogs [9] of
quantum corrals. To show that Fig. 1(a) is not a Faraday
pattern, we present a snapshot of the system vibrating at
about 70 µm in Fig. 1(b), when the Faraday instability
is really triggered in the square well. Figure 1(b) shows a
higher wavelength that matches with the corresponding
period doubling related to a Faraday wave pattern.

We chose a square vessel and the orientated square
well conﬁguration to verify that the immersed well con-
ﬁned wave states. Then we used a square methacrylate
box with side L of 8 cm where a single square well with
depth d of 2 mm and side l of 3.5 cm was drilled at its
bottom. The bottom of the vessel was covered with a
shallow ethanol layer of depth h1. The liquid depth over
the well was then h2 = h1 + d.

As it was already mentioned, the vessel vibration am-
plitude was 60 µm, below the Faraday instability thresh-
old set at about 70 µm. The vessel vibrated vertically
at a single frequency lying within the range from 35 to
60 Hz. An optimum frequency value was 50 Hz. De-
pending on the depth h1, our experimental results can
be separated into three cases.

Case I. For h1 lower than 1 mm, the experiment shows
two square lattices rotated 45o between them, namely
the lattice of the immersed square well is separated from
the vessel square lattice (Fig. 1a). The external wave
amplitudes are lower than the wave amplitudes within
the well and, furthermore, the external wave reﬂection
at the well step [13, 14, 15] is strong. For very shallow
liquid layers, waves are only present within the well at
the vibration amplitudes of the experiment.

Case II. At a vessel vibration frequency of 50 Hz,
when h1 is 1.2 mm, a quasicrystalline standing wave pat-
tern appears inside the immersed square region whereas
the outer wave pattern is a square network (Fig. 2(a)).
The immersed square well works as a weak potential and
binds standing plane waves with eigenvectors k2u′
x and
k2u′
y, parallel to the well sides. Nevertheless, it is trans-
parent for the standing waves of the square box which
tunnel the immersed well framework under the experi-
mental conditions. Inside the square region, the vessel
eigenstates have eigenvectors k2ux and k2uy, parallel to
the outer box sides. Thus, the standing state is ﬁnally de-
scribed by ψ2(k2)+ ψ′
2(k2) = A2[exp(ık2x)+ exp(ık2y)]+
A′
2[exp(ık2x′)+exp(ık2y′)] inside the region of the square
well. Equal phases along x and y, and x′ and y′, respec-
A2
tively, were assumed and
for the mentioned
|

A′
2|
|

=

|

2

liquid depth and vibration frequency. The interference of
standing patterns ψ2 with ψ′
2 increases the symmetry in
the well from square crystalline to octagonal quasicrys-
talline. Such pattern matches well with the outer one de-
scribed by ψ1(k1) = A1[exp(ık1x) + exp(ık1y)]. Accord-
ing to the dispersion relation for gravity-capillary waves
described elsewhere [3, 4, 5, 12], the diﬀerence between k1
and k2 is about 2% and the refraction bending of about
1.1o at the boundary of the central window is negligible.
Furthermore, the external wave reﬂection at the well step
[13, 14, 15] is also negligible with such parameters. On
the other hand, slender outgoing evanescent waves are
emitted at the boundary of the well and they play an
important role in the matching between patterns. It is
important to remark that the parameters of the exper-
iment do not allow through the well known dispersion
relation [3, 4, 5, 12] that the wave inside the inner well
were a subharmonic Faraday wave and the outer wave
were a harmonic meniscus wave. If this were the case,
then k1 and k2 should be very diﬀerent.

Case III. When h1 is increased, the potential of the
immersed well is seen increasingly weaker by the system,
and A′
2 decreases accordingly. Under such conditions,
transitional patterns from a quasicrystalline form to a
crystalline one appear gradually on the hydrodynamic
window. Figure 2(b) shows a transitional pattern corre-
sponding to a liquid depth h1 of 1.5 mm and an excitation
frequency of 50 Hz. According to crystallographic tech-
niques of image processing described elsewhere [5], the
Fourier transforms of the experimental patterns are cal-
culated (Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)) and they are used to depict
2 is shown on
Fig. 3, where the fast decay of
|
increasing h1. Figure 4 shows four frames of the numer-
ical simulation of the quasicrystal-crystal transition on
the hydrodynamic central square window. The complete
movie is available as Auxiliary Material.

A′
|

2/A2

The appearance of a quasiperiodic pattern inside the
immersed square region, in Case II, conﬁrms that the
square well is binding standing plane waves. Such a pat-
tern can only be produced by the interference of two
square patterns rotated by 45o, namely the pattern of
bound standing waves of the square well is transparent
to the pattern of standing meniscus waves of the vessel if
the adequate conditions of the experimental parameters
are fulﬁlled. On the other hand, the square pattern of
the vessel is only observed beyond the region of the cen-
tral square well. Moreover, there are evanescent waves
coming out of the boundary of the square well. The ob-
servation of such waves also conﬁrms the analogy with a
quantum well [16].

The description of the observed standing wave pat-
terns given in Case II is the same as the used to describe
the stationary states of a particle moving in a potential
given by a square well. Using these functions, we show
a numerical simulation of the observed quasicrystalline
pattern in Fig. 3(b). A trial and error numerical method

3

is gratefully acknowledged. This work has been partially
supported by the Spanish MCYT (BFM20010202 and
MAT2002-04429), the Mexicans DGAPA-UNAM (IN-
108502-3) and CONACyT (D40615-F), the Argentineans
UBACYT (x210 and x447) and Fundaci´on Antorchas,
and the University of Alicante.

[1] S. He and J.D. Maynard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1888
(1989); J.D. Maynard, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 401 (2001).

[2] C.L. Gardner, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 54, 409 (1994).
[3] M. Torres, J.P. Adrados and F.R. Montero de Espinosa,

Nature (London) 398, 114 (1999)

[4] M. Torres, J.P. Adrados, F.R. Montero de Espinosa, D.
Garc´ıa-Pablos and J. Fayos, Phys. Rev. E 63, 11204
(2000).
[5] M. Torres,

J.P Adrados, J.L. Arag´on, P. Cobo
90,
Phys. Rev.
(2003). See also Physical Review Focus:

and
114501
http://focus.aps.org/story/v11/st11

S. Tehuacanero,

Lett.

[6] X. Hu, Y. Shen, X. Liu, R. Fu, and J. Zi, Phys. Rev. E
69, 030201(R) (2004); M. Peplow, Nature (London) 428,
713 (2004).

[7] T. Chou, J. Fluid Mech. 369, 333 (1998).
[8] M.F. Crommie, C.P. Lutz and D.M. Eigler, Nature (Lon-
don) 363, 524 (1993); M.F. Crommie, C.P. Lutz and
D.M. Eigler, Science 262, 218 (1993).

[9] G´erard Colas des Francs, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4950
(2001); C. Chicanne, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 097402
(2002).

[10] Y. Hasegawa and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1071

(1993).

[11] S. Douady, J. Fluid Mech. 221, 383 (1990).
[12] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics (Perg-

amon Press, London, 1959).

[13] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics (Cambridge University Press,

[14] E.F. Bartholomeusz, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 54, 106

Cambridge, 1932).

(1958).

[15] J.W. Miles, J. Fluid Mech. 28, 755 (1967).
[16] A. Messiah, M`ecanique Quantique (Dunod, Paris, 1962).
[17] E. Cuevas, E. Louis, and J. A. Verg´es Phys. Rev. Lett.

77, 1970 (1996).

was used to ﬁt at the boundaries and a better matching
is obtained if slender outgoing evanescent waves emitted
at the boundary of the well are considered.

To test the viability of a quantum scenario analogous
to our experimental results, we numerically studied the
quantum conﬁnement of a double square well by using a
L cluster of the square
tight-binding Hamiltonian in a L
lattice with a single atomic orbital per lattice site [17],

×

ˆH = X

ǫm,n

m,n

m, n
|

ih

m, n

|

−

X
<mn;m′n′>

tm,n;m′n′

m, n
|

ih

m′, n′

,
|

i

m, n
|

represents an atomic orbital at site (m, n),
where
and ǫm,n its energy. In order to simulate the inner square
we have explored several possibilities. Outside the in-
ner square, the energy of all orbitals are taken equal
to zero. Besides, the hopping energies between nearest-
neighbor sites (the symbol <> denotes that the sum is
restricted to nearest-neighbors) were all taken equal to
1.
Instead, inside the inner square, we either changed
the orbital or the hopping energies. Some illustrative
results are shown in Fig. 5. Figures 5(a) and (b) cor-
respond to wavefunctions close to the band bottom, i.e.,
long wavelengths and high linearity.
In Fig. 5(a) the
octagonal symmetry within the inner square is clearly
visible. Figure 5(b) illustrates an eﬀect that is purely
quantum, namely, the eﬀect of the outer square is visible
even on a wavefunction localized in the inner square. Al-
though one cannot expect a one-to-one correspondence
between the experiments discussed here and this simple
quantum simulation, the results clearly suggest that sim-
ilar eﬀects could be observed in a suitable quantum sys-
tem. Figure 5(c) shows a peculiar null energy state which
is not located at the band bottom. In this state the hop-
ping energy outside the square is equal to 1, whereas
it is 0.7 inside the square and the general pattern con-
spicuously resembles our experiment. The Fourier spec-
trum of the inner square pattern has been performed
and it corresponds to a rational approximant of an oc-
tagonal quasicrystal generated by the following vectors:
(2/√5, 0), (0, 2/√5), 2(2/√5, 1/√5), 2(2/√5,
1/√5),
1/√5, 2/√5).
2(1/√5, 2/√5), 2(
Fourier spectra of
Figs. 5(a) and (b) correspond to quasicrystalline states.
This suggests that the hopping energy could be a param-
eter to induce quasicrystal-crystal transitions in conﬁned
quantum states.

−

−

In conclusion, we have described here a hydrodynamic
experiment that gives rise to the conﬁnement of wave
states on a free surface. It constitutes a stirring macro-
scopic experimental scenario which models some salient
features of a quantum well and stimulates the study and
visualization of conﬁned quasiperiodic quantum states for
the ﬁrst time.

Technical support from C. Zorrilla and S. Tehuacanero

4

FIG. 1: (a) Snapshot of the system below the Faraday in-
stability onset, vibrating at 35 Hz with h1 = 0.35 mm. Two
clearly separated wave patterns are shown. The amplitude of
the meniscus wave is much lower than that of the well-bound
states. The reﬂexion coeﬃcient at the well step is about 0.5.
(b) Snapshot of the system at the onset of the Faraday insta-
bility in the square well.

2
2/A2|

FIG. 3: (a) Decay of |A′
when the depth of the liquid
layer increases; the spots ((cid:7)) on the ﬁgure are experimental
points. (b) Simulation of the pattern in Fig. 2(a) by means
of a numerical trial and error ﬁtting of the standing waves of
the box and those waves bound by the square well, as well as
the evanescent waves outgoing from the well boundary.

FIG. 2: (a) Snapshot of the system vibrating at 50 Hz for
h1 = 1.2 mm. The well is transparent for the meniscus wave.
The interference between such wave and the well-bound states
gives rise to a perfect quasicrystalline pattern (Top). Fourier
transform of the quasicrystalline wave pattern. Some sec-
ondary rings with a lower intensity appear. Such rings are
due to weak nonlinearities corresponding to the parametri-
cally driven experiment (Bottom). (b) Snapshot of the sys-
tem vibrating at 50 Hz for h1 = 1.5 mm. The amplitude of
the bound states is lower than that of the meniscus wave.
A quasicrystal-crystal intermediate state appears on the well
(Top). Fourier transform of the transitional pattern. In the
main octagonal ring there are four brighter spots (Bottom).

FIG. 4: Four frames of the numerical simulation of the
quasicrystal- crystal transition are shown as the liquid depth
h1 increases. The corresponding Fourier transforms are shown
as insets. A complete movie is available as Auxiliary Material.

FIG. 5: Quantum wavefunctions of the tight binding Hamil-
tonian described in the text.

This figure "figure1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0501091v1

This figure "figure2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0501091v1

This figure "figure3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0501091v1

This figure "figure4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0501091v1

This figure "figure5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0501091v1

