5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shell to shell energy transfer in MHD,
Part II: Kinematic dynamo

Pablo D. Mininni,∗ Alexandros Alexakis,† and Annick Pouquet
National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307
(Dated: January 13, 2014)

We study the transfer of energy between diﬀerent scales for forced three-dimensional MHD turbu-
lent ﬂows in the kinematic dynamo regime. Two diﬀerent forces are examined: a non-helical Taylor
Green ﬂow with magnetic Prandtl number PM = 0.4, and a helical ABC ﬂow with PM = 1. This
analysis allows us to examine which scales of the velocity ﬂow are responsible for dynamo action,
and identify which scales of the magnetic ﬁeld receive energy directly from the velocity ﬁeld and
which scales receive magnetic energy through the cascade of the magnetic ﬁeld from large to small
scales. Our results show that the turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations are responsible for the magnetic
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation in the small scales (small scale dynamo) while the large scale ﬁeld is ampliﬁed
mostly due to the large scale ﬂow. A direct cascade of the magnetic ﬁeld energy from large to small
scales is also present and is a complementary mechanism for the increase of the magnetic ﬁeld in
the small scales. Input of energy from the velocity ﬁeld in the small magnetic scales dominates over
the energy that is cascaded down from the large scales until the large-scale peak of the magnetic
energy spectrum is reached. At even smaller scales, most of the magnetic energy input is from the
cascading process.

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a; 47.27.Gs; 95.30.Qd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Dynamo action is often invoked to explain the genera-
tion and sustainment of magnetic ﬁelds in astronomical
objects. In the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) dynamo,
an initially small magnetic ﬁeld is ampliﬁed by currents
induced solely by the motion of a conducting ﬂuid [1].
In typical astrophysical situations where ampliﬁed mag-
netic ﬁelds are met, the velocity ﬁeld is composed of a
large scale ﬂow (e.g. rotation and/or meridional ﬂows)
together with turbulent ﬂuctuations in smaller scales. As
an example, in the sun both large and small scale mag-
netic ﬁelds are observed. The large scale components of
the magnetic ﬁeld are generated by a large-scale ﬂow [2].
Simulations also show that the small scale magnetic ﬁelds
can be generated by turbulent ﬂuctuations in the convec-
tive region [3]. Understanding the generation of magnetic
ﬁelds under these conditions and the role played by the
two components of the ﬂow (large scale and turbulent) is
today a crucial aspect of dynamo theory.

Dynamos are often classiﬁed as small-scale and large-
scale dynamos, depending on the properties of the am-
In large-scale dynamos, the
pliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld [4].
focus is on whether a ﬂow can amplify and sustain mag-
netic ﬁelds at scales larger than the velocity integral
scale. This interest is motivated by astrophysical prob-
lems where large scale magnetic ﬁelds are actually ob-
served, such as the dipolar component in stars and plan-
ets. The ampliﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld in these
scales is usually explained by invoking a turbulent α-

∗Electronic address: mininni@ucar.edu
†Electronic address: alexakis@ucar.edu

eﬀect and/or ampliﬁcation due to a large scale ﬂow. The
linear (or kinematic) regime of large-scale dynamo action
has been studied with the use of mean ﬁeld theory [5, 6],
MHD closures [7], and with the aid of numerous direct
numerical simulations (DNS) (see e.g.
In
theoretical investigations of large-scale dynamo action,
helical ﬂows are generally considered, that are thought
of as better candidates for amplifying the magnetic ﬁeld
at larger scales. However the presence of helicity is not
necessarily needed to generate large scale magnetic ﬁelds
[11]; they can also be ampliﬁed in non-helical ﬂows if
anisotropy [12], or other mean ﬁeld eﬀects [13, 14] are
present.

[8, 9, 10]).

Small-scale dynamos on the other hand amplify mag-
netic ﬁelds on scales smaller than the energy containing
scales of the turbulence [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Theoretical
investigations usually involve assumptions of non-helical
velocity ﬁelds, δ-correlated in time (as a simplifying ap-
proximation to a turbulent ﬂow), and often the limit of
large magnetic Prandtl number PM > 1 is considered.
Numerically small-scale dynamos have been investigated
in Refs. [8, 18, 19]. Here we note that an argument due to
Batchelor [20] suggests that this dynamo can only oper-
ate if PM > 1. However, there are reasons to believe the
small-scale dynamo can work even when PM < 1 if the
magnetic Reynolds number RM is large enough [21, 22].

However,

this separation between large-scale and
small-scale dynamos is in some cases artiﬁcial and may
be misleading. Most astronomical objects display a large
scale ﬂow with turbulent ﬂuctuations at smaller scales,
and both large and small scales magnetic ﬁelds are ob-
served. The transition between the two magnetic ﬁelds
is often smooth and a clear distinction between the two
cannot be made. This has led some authors to develop
models trying to unify the two regimes [23]. Further-

more, the two ampliﬁcation mechanisms in the small
and large scales are coupled in many cases and cannot
be considered independently. According to mean ﬁeld
theory [6, 16], the large scale magnetic ﬁeld in a tur-
bulent dynamo results from the small scale (helical) ve-
locity ﬁelds. Moreover, concerning the ampliﬁcation of
small scale magnetic ﬁelds, it has been argued that when
a large scale magnetic ﬁeld is present, small scales can be
generated by the distortion of large scale ﬁeld lines (see
e.g.
[1]), even in the absence of self-excitation (small-
scale dynamo action). This is a common assumption in
mean ﬁeld dynamos, where it is often considered that
the needed small scale magnetic ﬁelds are only fed by
the large scale ﬁeld through a nonlinear cascade process.

In the presence of both a large scale ﬂow and turbu-
lent ﬂuctuations, the role played by the diﬀerent scales
involved in the ampliﬁcation process is thus of crucial
importance and is not well understood. When magnetic
ﬁelds are present at scales both smaller and larger than
the energy containing scales of the velocity ﬁeld, it is not
clear what portion of the small scale magnetic ﬁeld is
generated by direct cascade of magnetic energy from the
large scales, and what from self-excitation. Furthermore
it is not well understood what portion of the ampliﬁ-
cation of the large or small scale dynamo is due to the
forced component of the ﬂow and what part is due to
the turbulent ﬂuctuations which emerge through nonlin-
ear interactions at high Reynolds number. To answer
these questions, a detailed study of the energy transfer
from the diﬀerent velocity scales to the diﬀerent mag-
netic scales is required. This kind of approach naturally
raises the question of the locality (in Fourier space) of the
interactions that are taking place in a turbulent dynamo.

In a companion paper [24] (hereafter referred to as
Paper I), the transfer of energy between the velocity
and magnetic ﬁeld at diﬀerent scales was studied for
mechanically forced MHD turbulence in a steady state
where both ﬁelds are in quasi equipartition, by intro-
ducing the energy transfer functions between diﬀerent
shells of wavenumbers in Fourier space.
In this paper,
we present shell-to-shell energy transfers during the kine-
matic regime of two diﬀerent MHD dynamos. Our main
interest is to identify which velocity ﬁeld scales are re-
sponsible for the ampliﬁcation of the large and small
scale magnetic ﬁeld, which scales of the magnetic ﬁeld
receive most of the energy, and how the magnetic energy
cascades among the diﬀerent scales.

In Sec. II we present a brief review of the equations
and deﬁnition of transfer functions needed to study this
problem, and in Sec. III we give the results from simula-
tions; we also discuss in this section some details of the
nonlinear saturation of the dynamo. Finally, in Sec. IV
we present the conclusions of our work.

2

II.

THE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

We will consider the incompressible MHD equations,

∂tu + u · ∇u = −∇p + b · ∇b + ν∇2u + f

(1)

∂tb + u · ∇b = b · ∇u + η∇2b,

(2)

where u is the velocity ﬁeld, b is the magnetic ﬁeld, ν
is the kinematic viscosity, η is the magnetic diﬀusivity,
p is the total pressure and f a constant external force.
This equations are accompanied by the conditions ∇ ·
u = 0 = ∇ · b. Equations (1) and (2) are solved in
a periodic domain using a pseudospectral method with
the 2/3 dealiasing rule and second order Runge-Kutta to
advance in time.

We are interested in the kinematic regime of the dy-
namo, where a small magnetic seed is ampliﬁed exponen-
tially without modifying the velocity ﬁeld (i.e., the eﬀect
of the Lorentz force on the velocity ﬁeld is negligible).

To this end, we made two numerical simulations us-
ing a grid of 2563 points under the following procedure.
First, a hydrodynamic simulation was performed to ob-
tain a turbulent steady state. Then, a random small
magnetic ﬁeld was introduced and the simulation was
carried to observe exponential ampliﬁcation of the mag-
netic energy. The data were analyzed during this stage
and as the systems approached saturation.

Two expressions for the external

force were used:
Taylor-Green (hereafter called TG), and ABC. The TG
forcing is non-helical (f · ∇ × f = 0 pointwise), while the
ABC forcing is of maximum helicity and the resulting
ﬂow has non-negligible helicity (for a description of the
resulting ﬂows see e.g. [25, 26]). In both simulations, the
amplitude of the external force was set to obtain a unity
r.m.s. velocity, and the characteristic wavenumber of the
force was chosen to obtain a large scale ﬂow at kF ∼ 3.
The TG simulation had ν = 2 × 10−3 and η = 5 × 10−3
(the magnetic Prandtl number in this simulation was
PM = ν/η = 0.4). In the ABC run, ν = η = 2 × 10−3
(PM = 1). The mechanical Reynolds numbers reached
by the two ﬂows are Re = 675 for the Taylor Green ﬂow
and Re = 820 for the ABC [25, 26].

As we stated in the introduction, we are interested in
quantifying the rate of energy transfer from the diﬀer-
ent scales of the velocity ﬁeld to the diﬀerent scales of
the magnetic ﬁeld. To rigorously deﬁne the velocity and
magnetic ﬁeld at diﬀerent scales we introduce the shell ﬁl-
tered velocity and magnetic ﬁeld components uK(x) and
bK(x), where the subscript K indicates that the ﬁeld
has been ﬁltered to keep only the modes in the Fourier
shell [K, K + 1) (hereafter called the shell K). Clearly
the sum of all the K components gives back the original
ﬁeld. We are interested therefore in the rate that energy
from the velocity or magnetic ﬁeld at a given shell Q is
transferred into kinetic or magnetic energy at another
shell K. From the MHD equations, by doting Eq. (2)

with bK and integrating over space, we obtain the evolu-
K/2 dx3 in the
b2
tion of the magnetic energy Eb(K) =
shell K:

R

∂tEb(K) =

[Tub(Q, K) + Tbb(Q, K)] − ηDb(K), (3)

XQ

where we have introduced the two transfer functions
Tub(Q, K) and Tbb(Q, K) as deﬁned below. The trans-
fer rate of kinetic energy at the shell Q into magnetic
energy at the shell K is deﬁned as:

Tub(Q, K) =

bK(b · ∇)uQdx3,

(4)

and the transfer rate of magnetic energy from the shell
Q into the shell K is deﬁned as:

Tbb(Q, K) = −

bK(u · ∇)bQdx3

.

(5)

Z

Z

The transfer Tub(Q, K) is due to the stretching of mag-
netic ﬁeld lines by the velocity ﬁeld gradients and leads to
energy input in the magnetic ﬁeld. This term is respon-
sible for dynamo action, i.e. conversion of kinetic energy
into magnetic energy. The function Tbb(Q, K) is due to
the advection of magnetic ﬁeld vector components by the
velocity ﬁeld and it does not amplify the total magnetic
energy.
Instead, it is responsible for the redistribution
of magnetic energy among the diﬀerent shells and it is
related with the cascade of magnetic energy from larger
to smaller scales. Finally, we introduced the dissipation
rate Db(K) in the shell K deﬁned as:

Db(K) = −

Z

|∇ × bK|2dx.

More detailed deﬁnitions of these transfer terms and their
general properties can be found in Paper I.

We measured the transfer functions based on Eqs. (4)
and (5) using ten diﬀerent outputs for each run during
the kinematic regime. The transfers were normalized us-
ing the total magnetic energy, and were then averaged.
As the system was approaching saturation and was de-
viating from the exponential growth, single time out-
puts were used and the transfer functions were normal-
ized using the total magnetic energy but were not aver-
aged, since in this stage the normalized magnetic energy
spectrum is changing with time. From here on, we will
use the notations Tub(Q, K) and Tbb(Q, K) for the nor-
K ′ Eb(K ′) and
malized transfer functions Tub(Q, K)/
Tbb(Q, K)/

K ′ Eb(K ′), unless otherwise noted.

P

P

III.

RESULTS

A. The kinematic regime

We begin by describing the general properties of the
two dynamos investigated in this work. Figure 1 shows

3

FIG. 1: Spectra of kinetic energy (thick solid line) and mag-
netic energy (thin solid line) scaled up by a factor 106 for
the Taylor Green runs during the kinematic dynamo regime.
The dashed line indicates the Kolmogorov slope as a refer-
ence. Note that during this stage, all the magnetic modes
grow with approximately the same rate.

FIG. 2: Spectra of kinetic energy (thick solid line) and mag-
netic energy (thin solid line) scaled up by a factor 102 for the
ABC runs. The dashed line indicates the Kolmogorov slope
as a reference.

the kinetic and magnetic energy spectra for a TG simu-
lation in the kinematic dynamo regime. In Figure 2 we
show the same spectra for the ABC run. Note that the
kinetic energy spectrum peaks in both cases at kF ∼ 3,
where a well-deﬁned large scale ﬂow is present. For
larger wavenumbers the spectrum presents a short in-
ertial range, with Kolmogorov scaling. During the kine-
matic regime, the magnetic energy spectrum peaks at
small scales (k ∼ 9 for TG and k ∼ 12 for ABC) and all
the modes grow exponentially with the same rate. As a
result, all the spectra (and transfer functions) preserve
their dependence with wavenumber (up to an amplitude
normalization) as time evolves.

To study the kinematic regime, the MHD simulations
were started with a random magnetic ﬁeld with values of
magnetic energy as low as EM /EK = 5 × 10−9, to ensure
that the Lorentz force was negligible at all wavenumbers

4

FIG. 3: Transfer functions (a) Tub, and (b) Tbb (see Eqs. (4) and (5)), as a function of Q and K in the TG run during the
kinematic regime. Tub is positive for all values of Q and K shown. Each point (Q,K) in panel (a) represents the rate of transfer
of energy from the velocity mode Q to the magnetic mode K. Each point (Q,K) in panel (b) represents the rate of transfer of
energy from the magnetic mode Q to the magnetic mode K. The dashed line indicates the diagonal K = Q.

even with the magnetic energy spectrum peaking at small
scales.

We ﬁrst start with some general properties of the
two transfer functions. Contour plots of the transfers
Tub(Q, K) and Tbb(Q, K) during the kinematic regime of
the TG run are shown in Figure 3. The gray scale indi-
cates magnitude of the transfer, with ‘dark’ being pos-
itive and ‘bright’ negative. The ﬁgure should be inter-
preted as follows: At a given point (Q, K) on Fig. 3(a),
where the transfer is positive (negative), energy is given
(received) by the velocity ﬁeld at the scale Q to (from)
the magnetic ﬁeld at scale K. Similarly at a given point
(Q, K) on Fig. 3(b), where the transfer is positive (neg-
ative), energy is given (received) by the magnetic ﬁeld at
the scale Q to the magnetic ﬁeld at scale K.

Note that Tbb is by deﬁnition anti-symmetric along the
diagonal K = Q and is mostly concentrated in the sur-
roundings of the diagonal. The Tub transfer is concen-
trated on a triangle below the diagonal and is positive
everywhere. The fact that Tbb is concentrated along the
diagonal implies as we will show later locality of inter-
actions, while the “triangular” shape of Tub implies long
range interactions in Fourier space.

To draw conclusions from the functional form of the
transfers we need to examine their behavior for diﬀer-
ent ﬁxed values of K or Q. Figures 4 and 5 show the
Tub(Q, K) function at constant values of Q, for the TG
and ABC simulations respectively. The transfer is al-
ways positive, implying that kinetic energy is transfered
from all the velocity wave numbers Q to magnetic en-
ergy at diﬀerent K-shells. The transfer is maximum for
wavenumbers close to Q, and then slowly decays. Note
that in the ABC run the ﬂow at Q = 3 gives more en-
ergy than the turbulent ﬂuctuations (Q = 5, 10, 20, 30)
when compared with the TG simulation. This is related

FIG. 4: Transfer function Tub(Q, K) (from the kinetic energy
at Q to the magnetic energy at K) for ﬁxed values of Q during
the kinematic regime of the TG run.

FIG. 5: Transfer function Tub(Q, K) for ﬁxed values of Q
during the kinematic regime of the ABC run.

5

FIG. 6: Transfer function Tub(Q, K) for ﬁxed values of K
during the kinematic regime of the TG run.

FIG. 8: Transfer function Tbb(Q, K) (from magnetic energy
at shell Q to magnetic energy at shell K) at ﬁxed values of
Q, during the kinematic regime of the TG and ABC runs.

the turbulent ﬂuctuations is again observed to be smaller
than in the TG runs when compared with the large scale
ﬂow at Q ∼ 3.

The transfer of magnetic energy between diﬀerent
scales is shown in Figure 8. As previously mentioned,
this transfer is associated with the cascade of energy to
smaller scales. Each shell Q is giving energy to a slightly
larger wavenumber K (the positive peak of the curves)
and receiving energy from a slightly smaller wavenumber
K ′ (the negative peak of the curves). There is an increase
of the amplitude of the transfer as the wavenumber Q is
increased up until the peak of the spectrum is reached
and then it drops again. This transfer function drops
fast for wavenumbers K and Q far apart and therefore
indicates a local transfer of energy.

We are ready now to answer some of the questions
posed in the introduction. First we want to consider if
it is the large scale ﬂow that drives the dynamo or the
turbulent ﬂuctuations. On average the contribution to
the injection of magnetic energy from the large scale ﬂow
is 16% for the TG ﬂow, and 25% for the ABC ﬂow. Note
that this fraction is much smaller than what is obtained
in the saturated regime (60% for TG, and 75% for ABC
in [24]). Furthermore, the inﬂuence of the large scale ﬂow
becomes smaller as we are deeper in the inertial range.
In Figure 9 we show the ratio:

RLS(K) =

Tub(Q, K)/

Tub(Q, K)

XQ=2,3,4

XQ

that expresses the fraction of energy a magnetic shell K
receives only from the the large scale ﬂow (the peak at
Q = 2, 3, 4 in Figs. 6 and 7), to the total energy received
by the same shell from the velocity ﬁeld at all scales. For
both ﬂows the energy input from large scales becomes
smaller as the wavenumber K is increased and the large
scale ﬂow only dominates the injection of magnetic en-
ergy over a small range KF < K < KLS, with KLS ≃ 5.
Another question we posed in the introduction is
whether the small scale magnetic ﬂuctuations are the re-

FIG. 7: Transfer function Tub(Q, K) for ﬁxed values of K
during the kinematic regime of the ABC run.

with the fact that in the ABC run the Q = 3 shell con-
tains most of the kinetic helicity of the ﬂow, an ingredient
known to be relevant for dynamo action [1, 6]. We note
here that since the transfers are normalized by the total
magnetic energy and the two runs have diﬀerent mag-
netic energy spectra, a direct comparison of the values of
the transfers between the two runs cannot be made.

In Figures 6 and 7 we show the same transfer function
Tub but now for constant values of K. The transfer is
positive at all scales, pointing to the fact that all velocity
shells are giving energy to the magnetic ﬁeld (compare
this result with the turbulent steady state in Paper I,
where energy is being transfered from the magnetic ﬁeld
to the velocity ﬁeld at small scales). A peak at Q = 3 can
be identiﬁed at all wavenumbers K, indicating that the
large scale ﬂow gives energy non-locally to all magnetic
shells. For wavenumbers Q > 3 also a plateau can be
identiﬁed, where Tub as a function of Q is approximately
constant. The plateau drops at K & Q. This region
of constant Tub corresponds to all kinetic energy shells
at 3 < Q . K (the turbulent ﬂuctuations) transferring
the same amount of energy to the magnetic ﬁeld at the
In the ABC simulations, the role played by
shell K.

6

FIG. 9: Ratio RLS of energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld
at wave number K from the forced wavenumbers against all
the wavenumbers, and ratio RC of energy received by the
magnetic ﬁeld at wave number K from the magnetic ﬁeld
at larger scales through a cascade process against energy re-
ceived from the velocity ﬁeld. The solid lines correspond to
the TG run while the dashed lines correspond to ABC, both
in the kinematic regime.

sult of a cascade of energy from the large scale magnetic
ﬁeld, or from a direct input of energy (ampliﬁcation) from
the velocity ﬁeld. To answer this question, in Figure 9
we also plot the ratio:

RC (K) =

Tbb(Q, K)/

Tub(Q, K)

XQ

K

XQ=0

that expresses the fraction of energy a magnetic shell
K receives from the cascade of energy from larger mag-
netic scales to the total energy received in the same shell
directly from the velocity ﬁeld. The cascading term ap-
pears to be smaller up to a wavenumber KC ≃ 12 close to
the peak of the magnetic energy spectrum. For K > KC
there is more energy input from the cascade than the in-
put from the velocity ﬁeld. Between these two processes,
a range of wavenumbers KLS < K < KC exists where
the ampliﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld is purely domi-
nated by injection from the turbulent velocity scales.

We also investigate the growth rate of large scale mag-
netic ﬁelds restricted to the shells K = 1, 2. In order to
obtain the highest possible Reynolds numbers in the sim-
ulations, the scale separation between the forcing band
and the large scale magnetic ﬁeld was chosen to be small
and therefore an investigation of the alpha dynamo eﬀect
is not possible in the present study. Here we just limit
ourselves to investigate which scale of the velocity ﬁeld
is responsible for the input of energy in the large scales
K = 1 and K = 2 of the magnetic ﬁeld.
In ﬁgure 10
we show the transfer of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to
these large scale modes. Although there is a contribution
from the turbulent ﬂuctuations, the bulk of the energy
originates from the forced modes. A similar result was
obtained in Ref. [9], in simulations with larger scale sep-
aration (kF ≃ 5) but lower Reynolds numbers.

FIG. 10: Energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld at scales larger
than the forcing band (K = 1 and 2) from the velocity ﬁeld
at wavenumbers Q.

FIG. 11: Terms determining the growth rate of magnetic
energy [see Eq. (6)] as a function of wavenumber K for the
TG run during the kinematic regime. The dashed line is the
energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld from the velocity ﬁeld,
and the dash-dotted line is the cascade of magnetic energy.
The solid line is the total energy received by the magnetic
ﬁeld, while the dotted line is the Ohmic dissipation. The
diﬀerence between the last two curves gives the growth rate.

Finally, in both simulations, all wavenumbers are ob-
served to grow with the same growth rate during the
kinematic regime. To investigate this we can write the
energy budget using the induction equation (2) in Fourier
space. Taking the dot product with the magnetic ﬁeld
bK at the shell K, and dividing by the magnetic energy
Eb(K) in that shell, we ﬁnally obtain

1
Eb(K)

∂
∂t

1

Eb(K) XQ

Eb(K) =

[Tub(Q, K) + Tbb(Q, K)]

2

,

−ηK

(6)
where the simpliﬁcation D(K) ≃ K 2Eb(K) was used.
The left-hand side of equation (6) gives the growth rate
σ. The ﬁrst two terms in the right hand side are the
energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld at the shell K from

7

FIG. 12: The budget of magnetic energy giving rise to the
growth rate for the ABC run during the kinematic regime.
Labels are as in Fig. 11.

FIG. 13: Transfer function from the kinetic energy at Q to
the magnetic energy at K = 20 for three diﬀerent times as
the magnetic ﬁeld approaches saturation in the TG run.

the velocity ﬁeld and from the magnetic ﬁeld at all scales.
The last term is the Ohmic dissipation. In ﬁgures 11 and
12 we show each term of this budget as a function of the
wavenumber K for the TG and ABC runs. The diﬀerence
between the solid line and the dotted line is the growth
rate. In spite of the ﬂuctuations, the growth rate seems to
be constant in a wide range of wavenumbers. This is more
clearly observed in the ABC run because of the larger
growth rate in this simulation. The constant growth rate
over all scales therefore is the result of a balance between
the energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld at each shell K
locally (from the direct cascade), non-locally (from the
stretching of ﬁeld lines), and of the Ohmic dissipation.
Note that when integrated over all Q, the direct cascade
Tbb(Q, K) gives a negative contribution (up to k ≃ 20 in
the TG run, and larger wavenumbers for the ABC case),
indicating that each magnetic shell K gives locally more
energy to smaller scales than what it receives from the
larger scales. This is compensated by the energy injected
by the velocity ﬁeld through the transfer Tub.

B. The saturation of the dynamo

In this section we discuss the evolution of the transfer
function for the TG run as the dynamo approaches the
nonlinear saturation. The ABC run shows similar fea-
tures except for a slow growth of the magnetic ﬁeld at
K = 1 that ﬁnally dominates the magnetic energy. The
transfer of magnetic energy at the large scales in this case
has been studied in [9]. For details of the transfer in the
ﬁnal state reached by the two simulations, we refer the
reader to Paper I.

Figure 13 shows the Tub transfer at K = 20 as a func-
tion of time, as the nonlinear saturation takes place.
Each transfer has been normalized by the total magnetic
energy at that time. The transfer at t = 13.5 corre-
sponds to the kinematic regime. At t = 73.5, the small

FIG. 14: Transfer function from the kinetic energy at Q = 16
to the magnetic energy at K for three diﬀerent times as the
magnetic ﬁeld approaches saturation in the TG run.

FIG. 15: Transfer of magnetic energy at shell Q to shell K
(for K = 10 and K = 20) for three diﬀerent times as the
magnetic ﬁeld approaches saturation in the TG run.

scale magnetic ﬁeld saturates and stops growing (see
[25]). The velocity ﬁeld turbulent ﬂuctuations are par-
tially quenched, and the kinetic energy at small scales is
reduced. This suppression of turbulence by the magnetic
ﬁeld has been previously observed [9, 25], and as a result
the transfer of energy to the magnetic ﬁeld at wavenum-
ber K from the velocity ﬁeld between 3 < Q . K is also
strongly reduced. However, the large scale velocity ﬁeld
at Q = 3 keeps transferring energy to the magnetic ﬁeld.
In this stage, the large scale magnetic ﬁeld keeps grow-
ing until the large scales are dominated by magnetic en-
ergy, and suppress even more the turbulent ﬂuctuations.
At t = 178.5, the system has ﬁnally reached the steady
state. The magnetic ﬁeld at each shell K is sustained by
both the large scale ﬂow and the turbulent ﬂuctuations,
but now the amplitude at all scales has been reduced due
to the Lorentz force. Note also that the transfer at scales
Q & K is now negative, pointing out to the fact that
the magnetic energy is feeding the velocity ﬁeld at small
scales.

In ﬁgure 14, we show the transfer Tub(Q, K) for a ﬁxed
velocity wave number Q = 16 for the same times as in
ﬁgure 13. Again, the transfers have been normalized by
the total magnetic energy at each time. In the kinematic
regime, the velocity ﬁeld at Q = 16 gives energy (posi-
tive transfer) to the magnetic ﬁeld at all scales. When
the small scale magnetic ﬁeld saturates (t = 73.5) the ve-
locity ﬁeld at Q = 16 gives energy only to magnetic shells
with K ≥ Q, and modes with K < Q receive almost no
energy. This regime corresponds to the case where the
magnetic ﬁeld at small scales has saturated and its en-
ergy is sustained by the dynamo without further ampli-
ﬁcation. The large scale ﬁeld keeps growing, mostly fed
by the large scale ﬂow at Q = 3 as previously discussed.
Finally, in the saturated regime (t = 178.5) the magnetic
ﬁeld at Q = 16 receives energy from all the kinetic shells
Q with K ≥ Q, while it gives energy (negative transfer)
to all kinetic shells with K < Q.

Finally, in Figure 15 we show the transfer of magnetic
to magnetic energy Tbb as a function of time. The local
transfer between magnetic shells is not changing as much
as Tub as the dynamo saturates, except for a change in
the amplitude. The amplitude is decreasing as saturation
is approached, an eﬀect that appears ﬁrst in the small
scales. We note that the role of the local direct cascade
Tbb becomes more dominant when compared with the Tbb
term as saturation is approached [24].

8

summary of our most important results, and discuss the
implications for dynamo theory.

It has been shown that the magnetic ﬁeld grows as the
result of a complex interaction between large and small
scales. Both large and small scales of the ﬂow give a con-
tribution to the dynamo. The ampliﬁcation of the large
scale magnetic ﬁeld during the kinematic regime is due
to the large scale ﬂow (large scale dynamo). At smaller
scales, most of the injection of energy from the velocity
ﬁeld during the kinematic regime is due to the turbulent
ﬂuctuations of the velocity ﬁeld (small scale dynamo). A
competing mechanism for the ampliﬁcation of the mag-
netic ﬁeld at the small scales is the cascade of magnetic
ﬁeld energy from the large scales to the small scales that
is also transferring energy to the small scales. The rate
that energy is transfered to the small scales through the
cascading process is smaller than the rate that the ve-
locity ﬁeld is injecting energy at the small scales for a ﬁ-
nite range of wave numbers. For suﬃciently small scales
(close to the scale at which the peak of the magnetic en-
ergy spectrum is reached), the cascading term becomes
larger than the small scale dynamo term.

The results in this paper and the formalism used help
us understand and classify the dynamo processes involved
in the ampliﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld. In this formal-
ism, we were able to measure and compare each compo-
nent in the dynamo process that is involved in the am-
pliﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld in both small and large
scales. Therefore, we can distinguish between diﬀerent
dynamos based on whether the cascading terms domi-
nate over the injection terms in the small scales and on
whether the turbulent ﬂuctuations are more dominant
for the generation of the magnetic ﬁeld when compared
with the input from the large scale ﬂow. Of course, this
is not the only possible distinction that can be made be-
tween dynamos; however, it is an important step towards
classifying dynamos in the presence of both a large scale
ﬂow and turbulent ﬂuctuations.

Finally we would like to note that the investigation of
the growth of large scale magnetic ﬁeld with enough scale
separation between the forced scale and the domain size
is required to study processes such as the dynamo α-eﬀect
and the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity. A similar
analysis will be performed in this context in future works.

Acknowledgments

IV.

DISCUSSION

In this work, the transfer of energy from the diﬀerent
scales of the velocity ﬁeld to the diﬀerent scales of the
magnetic ﬁeld has been studied. We now give a brief

The authors are grateful to J. Herring for valuable
discussions and his careful reading of this document.
Computer time was provided by NCAR. The NSF grant
CMG-0327888 at NCAR supported this work in part and
is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] H. K. Moﬀatt, Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically
conducting ﬂuids (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,

1978).

9

[2] M. Dikpati and P. Charbonneau, Astrophys. J. 518, 508

[3] F. Cattaneo, Astrophys. J. 515, L39 (1999).
[4] S. I. Vainshtein and Y. B. Zeldovich, Sov. Phys. Usp. 15,

(1999).

159 (1972).

[16] Y. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin, and D. D. Sokoloﬀ,
Magnetic ﬁelds in astrophysics (Gordon and Breach Sci-
ence Pub., New York, 1983).

[17] A. A. Schekochihin, S. Boldyrev, and R. M. Kulsrud,

Astrophys. J. 567, 828 (2002).

[5] M. Steenbeck, F. Krause, and K.-H. Raedler, Z. Natur-

[18] N. E. L. Haugen, A. Brandenburg, and W. Dobler, As-

[8] M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

McWilliams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 054502 (2004).

forsch. 21a, 369 (1966).

[6] F. Krause and K.-H. Raedler, Mean-ﬁeld magnetohy-
drodynamics and dynamo theory (Pergamon Press, New
York, 1980).

[7] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch, and J. L´eorat, J. Fluid Mech. 77,

321 (1976).

Lett. 47, 1060 (1981).

[9] A. Brandenburg, Astrophys. J. 550, 824 (2001).
[10] D. O. G´omez and P. D. Mininni, Nonlin. Proc. Geophys.

11, 619 (2004).

trophys. J. 597, L141 (2003).

[19] A. A. Schekochihin, S. C. Cowley, S. F. Taylor, J. L.
Maron, and J. C. McWilliams, Astrophys. J. 612, 276
(2004).

[20] G. K. Batchelor, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 201, 405 (1950).
[21] A. A. Schekochihin, S. C. Cowley, J. L. Maron, and J. C.

[22] Y. Ponty, P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, J.-F. Pinton,
H. Politano, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 164502
(2005).

[23] K. Subramanian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2957 (1999).
[24] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

[11] A. Gilbert, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet, Geophys. Astro-

phys. Fluid Dynamics 42, 151 (1988).

E (2005), submitted.

[12] C. Nore, M. E. Brachet, H. Politano, and A. Pouquet,

Phys. Plasmas Lett. 4, 1 (1997).

[13] V. Urpin, Phys. Rev. E 65, 026301 (2002).
[14] U. Geppert and M. Rheinhardt, Astron. Astrophys. 392,

[25] P. D. Mininni, Y. Ponty, D. C. Montgomery, J.-F.Pinton,
H. Politano, and A. Pouquet, Astrophys. J. (2005), in
press, astro-ph/0412071.

[26] P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, and A. Pouquet, Phys.

1015 (2002).

[15] A. P. Kazanstev, Sov. Phys. JETP 26, 1031 (1968).

Rev. E 71, 046304 (2005).

