5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shell to shell energy transfer in MHD,
Part I: steady state turbulence

Alexandros Alexakis,∗ Pablo D. Mininni,† and Annick Pouquet‡
National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We investigate the transfer of energy from large scales to small scales in fully developed forced
three-dimensional MHD-turbulence by analyzing the results of direct numerical simulations in the
absence of an externally imposed uniform magnetic ﬁeld. Our results show that the transfer of
kinetic energy from the large scales to kinetic energy at smaller scales, and the transfer of magnetic
energy from the large scales to magnetic energy at smaller scales, are local, as is also found in the
case of neutral ﬂuids, and in a way that is compatible with Kolmogorov (1941) theory of turbulence.
However, the transfer of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld is a highly non-local
process in Fourier space. Energy from the velocity ﬁeld at large scales can be transfered directly
into small scale magnetic ﬁelds without the participation of intermediate scales. Some implications
of our results to MHD turbulence modeling are also discussed.

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a; 47.27.Gs; 95.30.Qd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Most astrophysical and planetary systems,

e.g.
solar/stellar winds, accretion disks and interstellar
medium, are in a turbulent state and coupled to mag-
netic ﬁelds. Understanding and quantifying the statis-
tical properties of magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) tur-
bulence is crucial to explain many physical processes in
the cosmos, and in industrial ﬂows as well [1]. Although
the phenomenology of hydrodynamical (HD) turbulence
is understood to some extent, and the theory has been
able to make predictions like Kolmogorov’s 4/5th law and
the functional form of the energy spectrum in the inertial
range, that have been well veriﬁed in experiments and nu-
merical simulations, a similar statement cannot be made
for MHD turbulence at the same level. In MHD ﬂows,
the two ﬁelds (velocity and magnetic) and two associ-
ated energies involved in the dynamical processes allow
for many possibilities for the energy to transfer between
smaller or larger scales, making the dynamics more com-
plex to address in both theory and modeling.

We brieﬂy describe some phenomenological aspects of
HD turbulence to point out some of the diﬃculties usu-
ally encountered when the formulation of HD turbulence
is applied in the MHD case. To follow Kolmogorov (1941)
theory [2] (hereafter, K41), we need to assume a statis-
tically isotropic and homogeneous ﬂow in steady state in
which the energy is cascading from eddies of scale l to
smaller eddies, and so on until energy reaches the dis-
sipation scales. Since we are considering a statistically
steady state, the ﬂux of energy to smaller scales has to
be constant. We can further assume that the ﬂux at some
scale can depend only on the scale l and the amplitude

∗Electronic address: alexakis@ucar.edu
†Electronic address: mininni@ucar.edu
‡Electronic address: pouquet@ucar.edu

of the velocity ﬁeld |ul| at this scale. This assumption
is justiﬁed by the argument that larger eddies will only
advect smaller eddies without signiﬁcantly altering their
scale and only when eddies of similar size interact do
they produce a cascade. Therefore, only “local” inter-
actions among the diﬀerent scales control the cascade.
Here we use the term “local” in terms of the diﬀerent
scales involved (i.e.
scales of similar size) and not as
locality in physical space. With these assumptions we
obtain that the energy |ul|2 at the scale l will cascade to
smaller scales in a time l/|ul|, and since the energy cas-
cade rate ǫ is constant, we obtain ǫ ∼ |ul|3/l that implies
|ul| ∼ l1/3, which ﬁnally leads to the well veriﬁed K41
spectrum dE/dk ∼ k−5/3 to within small intermittency
corrections.

The assumptions of the HD theory of turbulence have
been tested in the literature. Ref.
[3] ﬁrst tested the
assumption of locality using direct numerical simulations
(DNS) of 643 grid points. Their work has been followed
by a number of authors with higher resolution simula-
tions [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Refs.
[8, 11, 12] have
also investigated the eﬀect of long-range interactions and
anisotropy induced by an anisotropic large scale ﬂow. Al-
though some issues still remain regarding the eﬀect of
long range interactions, the locality of the energy trans-
fer has been conﬁrmed.

However, there are two important assumptions used in
the HD case that are not necessarily true for the MHD
case. First, the assumption of isotropy breaks down if
an imposed uniform magnetic ﬁeld is considered. We
will not investigate such eﬀects in the present work and
b dx3 = 0. The second
will only consider ﬂows with
assumption, that of locality of interactions among the
diﬀerent scales is what motivates our work. Unlike the
HD case where the eﬀect of larger eddies on smaller ones
is the advection of the later ones (an eﬀect that can be
taken away by a Galilean transformation), in MHD the
eﬀect of a large scale ﬂuctuation of the magnetic ﬁeld
cannot be so eliminated. Therefore, in MHD it is pos-

R

sible for small scales to interact directly with the large
scales. If this is the case, we can not consider a “con-
tiguous” transfer of energy in wave number space and
cannot a priori follow the same arguments Kolmogorov
used for HD turbulence. Therefore knowledge of the en-
ergy transfer among diﬀerent scales is important for the
construction of any phenomenological model of turbu-
lence.

⊥

Present phenomenological models follow Kolmogorov
like arguments that take into account the eﬀect of the
magnetic ﬁeld. Iroshnikov [13] and Kraichnan [14] pro-
posed the ﬁrst models to describe isotropic-MHD tur-
bulence, predicting a spectrum of k−3/2 (hereafter, IK).
Goldreich and Shridar [15] proposed a new model for
anisotropic MHD turbulence that takes into account the
anisotropy introduced by a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B0,
predicting a spectrum of k−5/3
, where k⊥ refers to the
direction perpendicular to B0.
Several models have
been proposed that combine the two spectra (see e.g.
[16, 17, 18]), suggesting that the index of the energy
spectrum is sensitive to the presence and intensity of
B0. Some aspects of non-locality of interactions are taken
into account in the afore-mentioned models by consider-
ing that large scale ﬂuctuations of the magnetic ﬁeld act
as a uniform magnetic ﬁeld to the smaller scales, and as
a result they speed up or slow down the rate at which the
energy is cascading. However, in these models, although
non-local interactions are taken into account, the energy
is transfered locally from one scale to a slightly smaller
scale, like in Kolmogorov’s HD turbulence model.

The locality of the interactions and the energy transfer
in MHD turbulence has been investigated through vari-
ous closure models. The energy transfer has been stud-
ied within the EDQNM closure model by [19] and more
recently by [20] where non-local interactions have been
noted. Using ﬁeld theoretical calculations the transfer of
energy has been estimated by [21, 22, 23]. As far as we
know, the locality of the energy transfer in MHD has been
investigated through three dimensional direct numerical
simulations (DNS) only very recently [24] (see also [25]
for the two-dimensional case). These authors measured
the transfer of energy between diﬀerent scales and ﬁelds
using free decaying MHD turbulence simulations with
5123 grid points. Their results showed that there is lo-
cal transfer of energy between the same ﬁelds, while the
transfers involving the two diﬀerent ﬁelds showed a less
local behavior, in the sense that a wider range of scales
was involved in the interactions.

In our work we use the results of DNS of mechanically
forced MHD turbulence (unlike the free decaying case
studied in [23]) to study the locality of the energy trans-
fer between diﬀerent scales and ﬁelds.
In all the cases
studied we consider a mechanic external forcing that gen-
erates a well deﬁned large scale ﬂow and small scale tur-
bulent ﬂuctuations. This is a regime of interest for several
astrophysical and geophysical ﬂows where magnetic ﬁelds
are believed to be sustained against Ohmic dissipation by
a dynamo process [26], and the only external source of

2

(2)

(3)

energy driving the system is mechanical (e.g. convection
and rotation). There is an important diﬀerence between
the case studied in [24] and the case considered in our
work. In our case energy is forced through the velocity
ﬁeld and the system reaches a steady state with equipar-
tition between the two ﬁelds. For this to happen there
must be a non-zero ﬂux for all times from the velocity
ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld. This is not necessarily true
for the case of decaying turbulence and as our results
show this signiﬁcantly modiﬁes the energy transfers from
the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld.

In Sec. II we introduce the deﬁnitions of the transfer
terms for MHD, and in Sec. III we present the code we
use for the numerical simulations as well as the results of
the analysis. Finally, in Sec. IV we summarize the main
results of our work.

II.

THEORY AND DEFINITIONS

The equations that describe the dynamics of an incom-
pressible conducting ﬂuid coupled to a magnetic ﬁeld in
the MHD approximation are given by:

∂tu + u · ∇u = −∇p + b · ∇b + ν∇2u + f ,

(1)

∂tb + u · ∇b = b · ∇u + η∇2b,

∇ · u = 0, ∇ · b = 0,

where u is the velocity ﬁeld and b is the magnetic ﬁeld.
p is the (total) pressure and ν and η are the viscosity
and the magnetic diﬀusivity respectively. Here, f is the
external force that drives the turbulence and the dynamo.
The largest wavenumber of the Fourier transform of f is
going to be denoted as kF and we are going to refer to
|kF |−1 as the forced scale. We are also going to deﬁne
the viscous dissipation scale as k−1
ν = (ǫ/ν3)−1/4 and
η = (ǫ/η3)−1/4 where ǫ is
resistive dissipation scale as k−1
the energy dissipation rate. A large separation between
the two scales (|kF |−1 ≫ max{{k−1
η }) is required
for the ﬂow to reach a turbulent state.

ν , k−1

To investigate the transfer of energy among diﬀerent
scales of turbulence we use the Fourier transforms of the
ﬁelds:

u(x) =

˜u(k)eikx , ˜u(k) =

u(x)e−ikxdx3

and

Xk

Xk

b(x) =

˜b(k)eikx , ˜b(k) =

b(x)e−ikxdx3 ,

where the domain is taken to be a triply periodic cube
of size L = 2π. We can now introduce the shell ﬁlter

1
(2π)3 Z

1
(2π)3 Z

decomposition:

where

u(x) =

uK(x), b(x) =

bK(x)

XK

XK

and similar for the ﬁeld b

uK(x) =

˜u(k)eikx,

XK<|k|≤K+1

bK(x) =

˜b(k)eikx.

XK<|k|≤K+1

The ﬁelds uK and bK are therefore deﬁned as the part
of the velocity and magnetic ﬁeld respectively, whose
Fourier transform contains only wave numbers in the
shell (K, K + 1] (hereafter called the shell K) and repre-
sent “eddies” of scale K −1. The evolution of the kinetic
energy in a shell K, Eu(K) =

K/2 dx3 is given by:
u2

∂tEu(K) =

−uK·(u · ∇) · uQ + uK·(b · ∇) · bQ

R

Z XQ h
−ν|∇uK|2 + f · uK dx3 ,

the shell K through the magnetic advection term. The
Lorentz force is responsible for the transfer of energy from
the magnetic ﬁeld to the velocity ﬁeld. The resulting
transfer rate is deﬁned as:

Tbu(Q, K) ≡

uK(b · ∇)bQdx3.

(10)

Finally the term responsible for the stretching of the mag-
netic ﬁeld lines results in the transfer from kinetic energy
to magnetic energy, given by:

Tub(Q, K) ≡

bK(b · ∇)uQdx3.

(11)

Z

Z

In summary, the functions Tvw(Q, K) (for arbitrary ﬁelds
v and w) represent the rate of transfer of energy from the
ﬁeld v (ﬁrst index) in the shell Q (ﬁrst argument), into
energy of the ﬁeld w (second index) in the shell K (second
argument). If Tvw(Q, K) > 0, then a positive amount of
v−energy is transfered from the shell Q to w−energy in
the shell K. If Tvw(Q, K) < 0, then a negative amount
of v−energy is transfered from the shell Q to w−energy
in the shell K, or in other words, energy is transfered
backwards from the shell K to the shell Q.

In eqs. (6-7) we have also introduced two dissipation

functions: the kinetic energy dissipation rate

and for the magnetic energy Eb(K) =
obtain

R

K/2 dx3 we
b2

νDu(K) ≡ ν

|∇uK|2dx3,

∂tEb(K) =

−bK·(u · ∇) · bQ + bK·(b · ∇) · uQ

and the magnetic energy dissipation rate

Z

Z

ηDb(K) ≡ η

|∇bK|2dx3.

Z XQ h
−η|∇bK|2 dx3 .

The above equations can be written in the more compact
form:

Finally,

∂tEu(K) =

[Tuu(Q, K)+Tbu(Q, K)]−νDu(K)+F (K),

F (K) ≡

f · uK dx3

Z

3

(12)

(13)

(14)

i

(4)

i

(5)

(6)

XQ

XQ

∂tEb(K) =

[Tub(Q, K) + Tbb(Q, K)] − ηDb(K). (7)

Here we have introduced the functions Tuu(Q, K),
Tub(Q, K), Tbb(Q, K), and Tbu(Q, K) that express the en-
ergy transfer between diﬀerent ﬁelds and shells.

Tuu(Q, K) expresses the transfer rate of kinetic energy
lying in the shell Q to kinetic energy lying in the shell K
through the velocity advection term and is deﬁned as:

Tuu(Q, K) ≡ −

uK(u · ∇)uQdx3.

(8)

We similarly deﬁne

Tbb(Q, K) ≡ −

bK(u · ∇)bQdx3,

(9)

Z

Z

is the energy injection rate to the velocity ﬁeld through
the forcing term.

Before presenting the results from numerical simula-
tions, let us discuss some of the properties of the transfer
functions. If Tvw(Q, K) (where v, w can be either u or
b) is expressing the rate of energy transfer from the ﬁeld
v in the shell Q to the ﬁeld w in the shell K, then the
following identity should hold

Tvw(Q, K) = −Twv(K, Q).

(15)

The interpretation of eq.(15) is that the rate at which the
shell Q is giving energy to the shell K must be equal to
the rate the shell K is receiving energy from the shell Q.
Eq. (15) can be easily shown to hold for all the transfer
functions we deﬁned (eqs. [8-11]). It is this property that
allows us to interpret the functions Tuu, Tbu, Tub, and Tbb
as the energy transfer between diﬀerent scales and ﬁelds.
For a turbulent ﬂow in a statistically steady state,

equations (6) and (7) imply that:

which expresses the rate of energy transfer of magnetic
energy lying in the shell Q to magnetic energy lying in

XQ

hTuu(Q, K) + Tbu(Q, K)i = hDu(K)i − hF(K)i, (16)

hTub(Q, K) + Tbb(Q, K)i = hDb(K)i,

(17)

where h·i stands for a time average or an ensemble av-
erage. For ﬁxed K outside the forcing band, and in the
limit of ν, η → 0, we have that

hTuu(Q, K) + Tbu(Q, K)i = 0

(18)

Eu(k) dk/

TABLE I: Simulations. L is the integral length-scale of the
Eu(k)k−1 dk; ν is the kine-
ﬂow, deﬁned as L =
matic viscosity, and η the magnetic diﬀusivity. The kinetic
and magnetic Reynolds numbers Re and RM are based on L
and the rms velocity, while the ratio of magnetic to kinetic
energy Eb/Eu is the average in the turbulent steady state.

R

R

Forcing
ABC
TG

L
1.64
1.35

ν
2 × 10−3
2 × 10−3

η
2 × 10−3
5 × 10−3

Re RM Eb/Eu
820
675

0.84
0.72

820
270

4

and

XQ

and

XQ

XQ

hTub(Q, K) + Tbb(Q, K)i = 0.

(19)

However, limited resolution will allow us to be in the
regime where these last two equations hold only for a
small range of wavenumbers.

Finally we need to comment on the deﬁnitions of the
various transfer functions we are using in this paper and
the connection to the triad of wave numbers (k, p, q) that
satisfy the relation k + p + q = 0 (because of the convo-
lution term resulting from the quadratic nonlinearities of
the primitive equations); such triad is the basis for mode
to mode interactions (see e.g.
[27]). Our approach is
equivalent to considering all triad interactions with the
one wavenumber k ∈ K and q ∈ Q and summing over
all p satisfying k + p + q = 0 in all shells, where p is the
wave-number of the advecting ﬁeld, and k and q are the
wavenumbers of the modes energy is transfered to and
from. Although the approach we are using gives us infor-
mation on whether the energy is transfered locally or not,
it cannot give deﬁnite conclusions on whether the inter-
actions themselves are local. For example, even if energy
is transfered locally from a wavenumber k to a wavenum-
ber q ∼ k, the wavenumber p that is responsible for the
transfer is not necessarily of the same order of magnitude
as |k| and |q|.
Ideally, one would investigate transfer
uK (uP · ∇)uQdx3
terms of the form: Tuu(K|P |Q) ≡
that contain information about the third wave number
involved in the interactions taking place. However the
diﬃculty of manipulating data from high resolution runs
and the diﬃculty of interpreting the results of transfer
functions that depend on three arguments restricts us
for the present time, to examine just the locality of the
energy transfer.

R

III.

RESULTS

To study the transfer of energy in MHD turbulence
we use the turbulent steady state of several mechanically
forced three dimensional MHD direct numerical simula-
tions. The simulations and details of the code can be
found in [28, 29]. The runs were performed in a triply pe-
riodic domain with a resolution of 2563 grid points, using
a pseudo-spectral scheme with the 2/3-rule for dealiasing.

The equations were evolved in time using a second order
Runge-Kutta method.

Turbulence was generated by two diﬀerent types of
forcing.
In the ﬁrst case a non-helical Taylor-Green
force (hereafter referred as TG) was used fTG(k0) =
( sin(k0x) cos(k0y) cos(k0z), − cos(k0x) sin(k0y) cos(k0z), 0)
with k0 = 2 [28].
In the second case a helical
ABC force was used fABC (k0) = ( B cos(k0y) +
C sin(k0z), C cos(k0z) + A sin(k0x), A cos(k0x) +
B sin(k0y) ) with k0 = 2 [29]. All simulations were
done with constant in time external
force. First a
hydrodynamic simulation was carried using each force,
to reach a turbulent steady state. Both external forces
generate a well deﬁned large scale ﬂow at |KF | ∼ 3,
and small scale turbulent ﬂuctuations following to a
good approximation a 5/3 Kolmogorov law. Then MHD
simulations were carried, and a small magnetic ﬁeld was
ampliﬁed and sustained to equipartition by a dynamo
process. The results in this paper are based on the
saturated stage of the dynamo, which we will refer in
the following as the MHD turbulent steady state.

The transfers were calculated based on the deﬁnitions
(8–11). The transfer of energy during the early stages of
the MHD simulations, when the magnetic energy is small
and the velocity ﬁeld is not modiﬁed by the Lorentz force
(often referred to as the kinematic dynamo regime) are
examined in a companion paper [30] (hereafter referred
as Paper II). Table I gives several relevant parameters for
each run, and ﬁgure 1 shows the resulting energy spectra.

Both simulations display a large scale magnetic ﬁeld,
although the spectrum of magnetic energy in the ABC
simulation shows a stronger peak at k = 1. This peak
is related with the dynamo α-eﬀect and the inverse cas-
cade of magnetic helicity. Details of this process will be
discussed in Paper II. However, it is important to note
that in the ABC simulation the large scale magnetic ﬁeld
is strongly helical, while in the TG simulation the mag-
netic helicity is negligible. This large scale magnetic ﬁeld
is self-sustained by the turbulence. In both simulations,
the net cross helicity (correlation between the velocity
and the magnetic ﬁeld) is small and can be neglected.

FIG. 1: Spectra of kinetic energy (solid line) and magnetic en-
ergy (dashed line) of the ABC and Taylor Green runs, where
the Taylor Green spectra have been shifted down by a factor
of 20 for clarity. The Kolmogorov slope is showed as a ref-
erence. Note that the magnetic Prandtl number PM ≡ ν/η
diﬀers for the two runs.

5

FIG. 3: The transfer of energy Tuu(Q, K) for the ABC run.
The ﬁgure shows the rate that energy is transfered from the
modes Q = 3, 10, 20, 30 to all the other modes K.

slightly smaller wavenumbers (negative Tuu) and give en-
ergy to modes with slightly larger wave number (positive
Tuu). The locality of the transfer is expressed from the
fact that the transfer of energy from the modes in the
shell Q to modes in shells K with K ≪ Q or K ≫ Q
is very small, and decreases fast with the separation of
the two wave numbers. Finally, as the shell wavenumber
K and Q is increased, there is a drop in the amplitude
of the transfer. If the transfer functions were self-similar
then an increase of the wave numbers K and Q to λK
and λQ would imply Tuu(λQ, λK) = λ−2Tuu(Q, K) [27].
This scaling could explain this drop of amplitude. How-
ever the inertial range in our DNS is too small to test
self-similarity and a large part of the drop is due to the
presence of viscosity.

The forced mode has a slightly diﬀerent behavior. The
transfer rate from the forced wave number to its nearby
shells has a considerably larger amplitude. Also, for
both ﬂows there is some backscattering from the forced
wave number to shells with smaller wavenumber. This is
clearer in the helical (ABC) ﬂow.

FIG. 2: The transfer of energy Tuu(Q, K) for the Taylor-
Green run. The ﬁgure shows the rate that energy is transfered
from the modes Q = 3, 10, 20, 30 to all the other modes K.

A. Hydrodynamic Turbulence

Locality of interactions in hydrodynamic turbulence
have been investigated before in the literature [4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10]. Although some open issues still remain
[8, 11, 12] it has been shown that energy is transfered
mostly locally. Here, for reasons of comparison we show
the transfer Tuu(Q, K) from hydrodynamical simulations
using the same external forces and parameters used in
the MHD simulations. The results are in good agree-
ment with previous works.

In ﬁgure 2 we show the energy transfer for a few modes
for the TG ﬂow and in ﬁgure 3 the energy transfer for
the ABC ﬂow.
In both cases the transfer of energy
is direct and local: all the curves (with the exception
of the forced mode Q = 3) are negative for K smaller
than Q and positive for K larger than Q. As a result,
all inertial range modes receive energy from modes with

B. Magneto-Hydrodynamic Turbulence

We are now ready to examine results from the en-
ergy transfer for MHD turbulence. First we examine the
transfer of kinetic energy from large scales to kinetic en-
ergy in small scales through the term Tuu(Q, K), and
magnetic energy from large scales to magnetic energy
in small scales through the term Tbb(Q, K). These two
transfer functions bare some signiﬁcant similarities with
the hydrodynamic case.

In ﬁgures 4 and 5 we show Tuu (top panel) and Tbb
(bottom panel) for the non-helical TG ﬂow and the heli-
cal ABC ﬂow. The velocity to velocity transfer has not
changed drastically (other than a decrease in amplitude)
from the pure hydrodynamic case. As in Sec. III A, the
transfer implies a local direct cascade. All the curves are

6

FIG. 4: Top panel:The transfer of energy Tuu(Q, K) for the
Taylor-Green run.The ﬁgure shows the rate that kinetic en-
ergy is transfered from the modes Q = 3, 10, 20, 30 to kinetic
energy to all the other modes K. Bottom panel: The trans-
fer of energy Tbb(Q, K) for the same ﬂow. The ﬁgure shows
the rate that magnetic energy is transfered from the modes
Q = 3, 10, 20, 30 to magnetic energy to all the other modes
K.

FIG. 5: Same as ﬁgure 4 for the ABC run

negative for K smaller than Q, and positive for K larger
than Q. Each mode is therefore receiving energy from the
larger scales (negative transfer) and giving energy to the
smaller scales (positive transfer). The decrease in am-
plitude (when compared with the hydrodynamic case) is
partly because the magnitude of the velocity ﬁeld is de-
creased when magnetic ﬁeld comes to equipartition, and
partly because now there is a net transfer of energy from
the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld, making the avail-
able energy to cascade to small velocity scales smaller.

The transfer of magnetic energy to magnetic energy
Tbb(Q, K) seems to follow the same behavior as the ve-
locity ﬁeld transfer. The results show a direct cascade
with local transfer of energy from large scales to small
scales. We note that for the helical case the transfer of
magnetic energy is larger than the transfer of kinetic en-
ergy. The likely reason for this behavior is that in the

FIG. 6: The transfer of kinetic energy to magnetic energy
Tuu(Q, K) for the Taylor Green run.The ﬁgure shows the rate
that kinetic energy is transfered from the modes Q = 3, 4, 5
(inset modes Q = 15, 17, 20) to magnetic energy in the modes
K.

ABC ﬂow the magnetic energy at large scales and inter-
mediate scales saturates at higher values than in the TG
ﬂow, due to the presence of helicity or the dynamo α-
eﬀect. This process will be discussed in more detail in
Paper II.

Next we investigate the transfer of energy from one
ﬁeld to the other, by examining the terms Tub and Tbu.
Because of the anti-symmetric property Tub(Q, K) =
−Tbu(K, Q),
it is suﬃcient to just study the trans-
fer of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic
ﬁeld. However, we need to remark that unlike the
Tuu(Q, K), Tbb(Q, K) terms that their dependence on K
and Q is the same up to a minus sign, the behavior of
Tub(Q, K) as we vary K is not the same as if we vary Q.
Therefore the two behaviors need to be studied separately
(i.e., the transfer of energy from a velocity mode to two
diﬀerent magnetic modes is diﬀerent from the transfer
of energy from two diﬀerent velocity modes to a mag-
netic mode). In ﬁgure 6 (TG), and 7 (ABC), we show
the transfer of kinetic energy from the velocity modes
Q = 3, 4, 5, 15, 17, and 20 to all the examined magnetic
modes K.

A few things should be noted. First, in both runs
(ABC and TG) the modes associated with the large scale
ﬂow (Q = 3) seem to play a dominant role in the transfer
of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld.
Note also that there is a wider range of magnetic ﬁeld
modes into which the forced velocity ﬁeld modes input
energy.

This is more apparent for the helical ﬂow, that seems
better at stretching and folding the magnetic ﬁeld. The
cascade in the modes inside the inertial range is direct in
both cases but with a small diﬀerence. In both cases the
large scale velocity ﬁeld is transferring energy to smaller
scale magnetic ﬁeld and receiving energy from larger scale
magnetic ﬁeld. However, for the Taylor-Green case there
is very small transfer from one ﬁeld to the other in the

7

FIG. 7: The transfer of kinetic energy to magnetic energy
Tub(Q, K) for the ABC run. The ﬁgure shows the rate that
kinetic energy is transfered from the modes Q = 3, 4, 5 (inset
modes Q = 15, 17, 20) to magnetic energy in the modes K.

FIG. 9: The transfer of kinetic energy to magnetic energy
Tub(Q, K, ) for the ABC run. The ﬁgure shows the rate that
kinetic energy is transfered from the modes Q (x-axis) to mag-
netic energy in the modes Q = 10 (top panel), Q = 20 (middle
panel), Q = 30 (bottom panel).

energy (observe the peak at k = 3). In fact, most of the
energy that is transfered from the velocity ﬁeld to the
magnetic ﬁeld originates from the velocity ﬁeld modes at
Q = 3 (around 60% for the TG run and 75% for the ABC
run.) This energy turns into magnetic energy at several
wavenumbers K which locally cascades to smaller scales
through the Tbb term. This bigger contribution of the
large scale ﬂow to Tub (compared with the contribution
of the turbulent components) is in good agreement with
the suppression of small scale velocity ﬂuctuations by the
large scale magnetic ﬁeld, as observed in [28]. However,
we need to note that as the scale of the magnetic ﬁeld be-
comes smaller there is more energy input from the turbu-
lent components of the velocity ﬁeld than from the large
scale (forced) ﬂow. This just follows from the fact that
for K large enough, the area below the curve with con-
stant Tub is larger than the peak at Q = 3. It is possible
therefore that in the limit of large inertial range the eﬀect
of the forced velocity scales in the small magnetic scales
will not be as strong. Finally we note that this mecha-
nism described above is diﬀerent in a kinematic dynamo
regime, as is shown in Paper II.

In summary, the existence of the long plateau with
constant Tub(Q, K) at each ﬁxed value of K, and the
fact that all the magnetic wavenumbers K receive energy
from the large scale ﬂow at Q = 3 points that interactions
between the velocity ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld are non-
local in Fourier space.

This non-local behavior of energy transfer from the ve-
locity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld seems to be absent from
the decaying MHD turbulence case studied by [24]. In
that case although the Tub and Tbu were more non-local
than the Tbb and Tuu terms (since energy was transfered
from the former ones in a wider range of shells than the
later ones), eventually at large separation of wave num-
bers the transfer goes to zero. This is very diﬀerent from
the plateau behavior we observe in the forced turbulence

FIG. 8: The transfer of kinetic energy to magnetic energy
Tub(Q, K, ) for the Taylor Green run. The ﬁgure shows the
rate that kinetic energy is transfered from the modes Q (x-
axis) to magnetic energy in the modes Q = 10 (top panel),
Q = 20 (middle panel), Q = 30 (bottom panel).

same shell. On the other hand, in the ABC ﬂow the peak
of the transfer from the magnetic ﬁeld to the velocity ﬁeld
(the negative peaks in ﬁgure 7) is for the same shell. Note
also that for the K-shells larger than Q, the transfer for
all Q follows the same curve. This implies that all the
small scale velocity modes give energy to the magnetic
ﬁeld modes at the same rate. This is clearer when we
examine the dependence with Q.

In ﬁgures 8 and 9 we show the same transfer function
Tub(Q, K) for three values of K = 10, 20, 30. The energy
cascade is also direct (energy going from large scales to
small scales), however it is clear from these ﬁgures that
the transfer from the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld
is a highly non-local process. Each magnetic ﬁeld mode
Q is receiving energy (positive Tub) from all the veloc-
ity modes with wave number K smaller than Q, with
the same rate! The only exception is the mechanically
sustained large scale velocity ﬁeld that gives even more

8

10:

FIG.
transfers
Tuu(Q, K), Tbb, (Q, K)Tub(Q, K) and Tbu(Q, K) for Q = 15
for the Taylor Green ﬂow.

A comparison

the

of

FIG. 12: A comparison of the large K tails of transfers
Tuu(Q, K), Tbb(Q, K) and Tub(Q, K) in a log-linear plot for
Q = 10 for the Taylor Green ﬂow ﬂow.

Figure

u. In the case of the ABC ﬂow the magnitude of the b
to b transfer seems to be twice the magnitude of the u
to u transfer. This is due to the fact that the magnetic
energy in this run is larger than in the TG run at large
and intermediate scales.
12

functions
transfer
illustrates
Tuu(Q, K), Tbb, (Q, K) and Tub, (Q, K) as
in ﬁgure
10 (TG ﬂow), but we focus here on the large K tail of
the transfer and we consider Q=10. The fastest drop is
for the transfer Tuu(Q, K) making it the most ’local’ one,
next come the Tbb(Q, K) transfer, and ﬁnally Tub(Q, K)
has the slowest drop. The same result was obtained for
the ABC ﬂow (not shown here).

the

Figures 10, 11, and 12 (as well as a comparison of the
nonlocal transfers shown in ﬁgures 8 and 9 with the local
transfers in ﬁgures 4 and 5 respectively) show that local
interactions between the same ﬁelds are much stronger
than nonlocal interactions between diﬀerent ﬁelds. How-
ever, nonlocal interactions spread over several shells, and
the magnetic ﬁeld at a given scale K can receive (give)
energy from (to) several velocity ﬁeld Q wavenumbers
(instead of mostly the nearest neighbors as is the case
for local interactions). Figure 13 shows the ratio

N L
L

K

XQ=1

K

(cid:30)

XQ=1

(K) =

Tub(Q, K)

Tbb(Q, K).

(20)

This is the ratio of the total energy that the mag-
netic ﬁeld at the shell K receives from the velocity ﬁeld
through non-local transfer, to the total magnetic energy
received at the same scale through the local direct cas-
cade of (magnetic) energy. Although in individual shells
the local interactions are one order of magnitude larger
than the non-local transfer, the net amount of energy re-
ceived at a given scale K by the two processes is compara-
ble (this ratio is diﬀerent in a kinematic dynamo regime,
as will be shown in Paper II). At small scales, the ratio
seems to settle to a value close to 0.2, indicating that

11:

transfers
FIG.
Tuu(Q, K), Tbb, (Q, K), Tub(Q, K) and Tbu(Q, K) for Q = 15
for the ABC ﬂow.

A comparison

the

of

runs. We suspect that this diﬀerence is due to the fact
that in the mechanically forced turbulence there is a net
ﬂux of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬁeld
that is responsible for the formation of the plateau which
does not exist in the decaying turbulence case.

C. A comparison between the transfers

In the previous section we showed that the transfer
of energy from the velocity ﬁeld to velocity ﬁeld and
from the magnetic ﬁeld to magnetic ﬁeld exhibit a lo-
cal behavior similar to the transfer in hydrodynamic tur-
bulence, and the transfer from one ﬁeld to the other is
exhibiting a non-local behavior. In order to draw conclu-
sions we need to compare the magnitude of these trans-
fers. Figures 10 and 11 show a comparison of the trans-
fers Tuu(Q, K), Tbb(Q, K), Tub(Q, K) and Tbu(Q, K) with
Q = 15 for the TG and ABC runs respectively. The
local transfers u to u and b to b appear to be of larger
magnitude than the non-local transfers u to b and b to

F

E

u

E

b

9

k

k

k=q

FIG. 14: A sketch of the energy transfer between diﬀerent
scales and diﬀerent ﬁelds. The thickness of the lines is an
indication of the magnitude of the transfers. The ﬁgure il-
lustrates how energy is transfered to magnetic modes with
wavenumber k = q in the inertial range. The transfers be-
tween same ﬁelds is always local and direct. Each magnetic
mode receives energy from all larger in scale velocity modes
and gives to slightly smaller in scale velocity modes.

FIG. 15:
A comparison of the Els¨asser energy transfer
Tz+z+ (Q, K) with the transfers from the local Tuu + Tbb and
the non-local Tub + Tbu contributions. The inset is showing a
blow up of the small K tail where the non-local interactions
are more dominant.

Also the number of quadratic ideal invariants is larger,
and inverse cascades (not present in three dimensional
hydrodynamics) can take place. This suggests that in
MHD ﬂows the particular way the system is set-up (e.g.
mechanically or magnetically forced, free decaying cases
without external forces), or even the scale at which the
energy is injected (compared with the length of the box),
might have a direct eﬀect in the evolution of the ﬂow and
lead to diﬀerent transfers.

We would also like to comment on the implica-
tions of our results to the diﬀerent models of magneto-
hydrodynamic turbulence.
In the present phenomeno-
logical models of MHD-turbulence [13, 14, 15, 16, 17],
locality of the energy transfer is assumed. That is to
say, these models are derived assuming that scales of dif-
ferent magnitude do not strongly interact. While this
assumption seems to be valid for HD-turbulence, this is
not necessarily true for MHD. As we have shown non-
local interactions are present in MHD turbulence and
control the u to b transfers of energy. However, these
non-local interactions are smaller in amplitude and most

FIG. 13: The ratio N L/L of energy received through the
non-local transfer Tub to local Tbb, for the ABC and TG sim-
ulations. The small scales receive 20% of their energy through
the non-local transfer Tub.

20% of the energy received by these scales is through the
non-local transfer Tub.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we examined the transfer of energy in
forced MHD turbulence between the diﬀerent scales and
ﬁelds involved using the results from numerical simula-
tions in a turbulent steady state sustained by a mechani-
cal external force. No qualitative diﬀerences in the trans-
fer of kinetic to kinetic (or magnetic to magnetic) energy
has been observed, when compared against the transfer
of energy in a hydrodynamic simulation. These transfers
were found to be always local and direct. However, all
kinetic energy modes have been observed to give energy
to magnetic modes non-locally, in the sense that a small
scale magnetic ﬁeld receives the same amount of energy
from all larger scales of the velocity ﬁeld in the inertial
range. Also each magnetic mode was found to receive a
signiﬁcant amount of energy from the large scale ﬂow at
|kF | ∼ 3 (the scale of the forcing), an eﬀect that seems
to become smaller as we move to smaller scales in the
inertial range. We note that it is the non-local inter-
actions that actually sustain the magnetic ﬁeld against
Ohmic dissipation. A summary of our results is sketched
in ﬁgure 14.

We have already noted that a diﬀerent behavior for
the non-local transfers Tub and Tbu was obtained for the
mechanically forced turbulence investigated in this work,
when compared with the decaying turbulence case stud-
ied by [24]. Compared with incompressible hydrody-
namic turbulence, involving only one ﬁeld and one trans-
fer function, MHD turbulence is richer and more com-
plex. It involves two interacting ﬁelds, several transfer
functions, and as a result the energy injected at large
scales can travel to small scales through several channels.

of the input of energy to the magnetic ﬁeld comes from
the large scale ﬂow and then cascades to smaller scales
making the assumption of locality justiﬁed to some ex-
tend. However non-local u − to − b need to be considered
to have a proper description of the energy cascade. To
illustrate this we show in ﬁgure 15 the energy transfer in
terms of the Els¨asser variables z± = u ± b, often used
in turbulence models and we compare it with the contri-
butions from u to u, b to b, b to u, and u to b. In the
z+
Qdx and compare
ﬁgure we plot Tz+z+ ≡ −
it with the energy transfer due to the local transfer terms
Tuu + Tbb and the non-local transfer terms Tub + Tbu. The
local transfer terms appear to be dominant, except in the
tails where the transfer of Els¨asser variables is dominated
by the non-local transfers between the magnetic and ki-
netic energies. This tails, although with small amplitude,
cannot be completely neglected, as shown by the N L/L
ratio of ﬁgure 13. The non-local tail in the transfer gives
a net contribution of energy at magnetic small scales of
roughly 1/5 when compared with the local transfer.

Kz−∇z+

R

Finally, we would like to say that our results were based
on numerical simulations of moderate Reynolds number

10

much smaller than what is observed in most physical phe-
nomena. We already noted that due to the small inertial
range we cannot test self similarity that would require
to compare the transfers (i.e. Tuu(Q, K1), Tuu(Q, K2) )
to wave numbers that are both signiﬁcantly away from
each other (K1 ≪ K2) and away from the forced and
dissipative scales (KF ≪ K1 and K2 ≪ kη).

Finally the transfer of magnetic helicity and cross-
helicity and their eﬀect on the turbulence dynamics is
also worth studying, but we leave these issues however
for our future work.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to J. Herring for valuable
discussions and his careful reading of this document.
Computer time was provided by NCAR. The NSF grant
CMG-0327888 at NCAR supported this work in part and
is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] P. A. Davidson, An introduction to magnetohydrodynam-

physics/0504207.

ics (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2001).

[19] A. Pouquet, U. Frish, and J. L´eorat, J. Fluid Mech. 77,

[9] Y. Zhou and P. Yeung, Phys. Reviw E 53, 1261 (1996).
[10] S. K. K. Kishida, K. Araki and K. Suzuki, Phys. Rev.

(2001).

[25] M. V. G. Dar and V. Eswaran, Physica D 157, 207

[2] A. N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 30, 9 (1941).
[3] J. A. Domaradzki, Phys. Fluids 31, 2747 (1988).
[4] J. A. Domaradzki and R. S. Rogallo, Phys. Fluids A 2,

321 (1976).

(2002).

413 (1990).

[5] K. Ohkitani and S. Kida, Phys. Fluids A 4, 794 (1992).
[6] Y. Zhou, Phys. Fluids A 5, 1092 (1993).
[7] Y. Zhou, Phys. Fluids A 5, 2511 (1993).
[8] P. K. Yeung, J. Brasseur, and Q. Wang, J. Fluid Mech.

283, 43 (1995).

Lett. 83, 5487 (1999).

[11] P. K. Yeung and J. Brasseur, Phys. Fluids A 3, 884

[12] J. Brasseur and C. H. Wei, Phys. Fluids 6, 842 (1994).
[13] P. S. Iroshnikov, Sov. Astron. 7, 566 (1963).
[14] R. H. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids. 8, 1385 (1965).
[15] P. Goldreich and P. Sridhar, Astrophys. J. 438, 763

(1991).

(1995).

(1989).

[16] W. H. Matthaeus and Y. Zhou, Phys. Fluids B 1, 1929

E 71, 046304 (2005).

[17] S. Boldyrev, astro-ph/0503053.
A. Pouquet,
[18] S. Galtier,

and A. Mangeney,

(2005), submitted.

[20] O. Schilling and Y. Zhou, J. Plasma Phys. 68, 389

[21] M. Verma, Phys. Rev. E 64, 026305 (2001).
[22] M. Verma, Pramana 61, 577 (2003).
[23] M. Verma and A. Ayyer, J. Fluid Mech. (2005), to be

[24] O. Debliquy, M. Verma, and D. Carati, Phys. Plasmas

published.

12, 042309 (2005).

[26] H. K. Moﬀatt, Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically
conducting ﬂuids (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1978).

[27] R. H. Kraichnan, J. Fluid Mech. 47, 525 (1971).
[28] P. Mininni, Y. Ponty, D. Montgomery, J.-F.Pinton,
H. Politano, and A. Pouquet, Astrophys. J. (2005), in
press, astro-ph/0412071.

[29] P. Mininni, D. Montgomery, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

[30] P. Mininni, A. Alexakis, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev. E

