The return branch of viscous ﬁngers

Francisco Vera∗ and Mauricio Echiburu
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´olica de Valpara´ıso, Av. Brasil 2950, Valpara´ıso, Chile

We report a simple experiment of two-dimensional pattern formation in a circular Hele-Shaw cell,
showing the appearance of a return branch that is equivalent to the upward-connecting leader of
lightning. Injecting water from the center into a foam ﬁlled cell, we obtained patterns similar to
dendrites of two-dimensional dielectric breakdown experiments. When we repeat this experiment
allowing the presence of water in the outer (low pressure) region, dendrites grow initially as in a
normal experiment, but when a branch is near the outer boundary, the low pressure water begins
to penetrate the foam against the pressure ﬁeld, forming several return branches.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 47.54.+r, 47.53.+n

Typical experiments in a two-dimensional region be-
tween two parallel plates or Hele-Shaw cell[1], consist of
injecting a less viscous ﬂuid into a more viscous ﬂuid.
These systems develop patterns that were discovered for
the ﬁrst time when water was injected to extract the
remaining oil deposited in the bottom of natural wells.
Contrary to what was expected, water invaded the oil
forming patterns and frustrated the extraction.
It is
very easy to produce these patterns in the laboratory,
and many experiments have been reported for many dif-
ferent geometries and ﬂuids[2]. We report a new class of
patterns obtained in a radial geometry Hele-Shaw cell,
injecting water from the center into a foam that ﬁlls the
two-dimensional region between the plates. The novel in-
gredient is to allow the presence of water at atmospheric
pressure at the outer boundary.

In thunderstorms[3, 4], air currents separate negative
and positive charges producing regions of high electric
ﬁelds, when this ﬁeld exceeds the value for breaking the
air, a lightning stroke is produced. A typical negative
cloud to ground stepped leader has an overall duration
of 35 ms and a current between 100-200 A. As the tip
of this negative leader get close to the earth surface, one
or more upward-moving discharges are initiated from the
ground, and an attachment with the downward-moving
leader occurs some tens of meters above ground. In this
work, we obtained the equivalent of this eﬀect in a simple
experiment using ﬂuids under pressure, this experiment
shows that the return branch is universal, and provides
an essential step towards the quest for an uniﬁed mecha-
nism that explains the basic features of diﬀerent pattern
forming systems. To our knowledge, no experiment has
ever been reported showing the appearance of a return
branch in a system diﬀerent from lightning.

There are previous experimental works showing the ap-
pearance of universal patterns in completely diﬀerent sys-
tems: The Couder bubble[2, 5] provided the mechanism
for patterns typically formed in solidiﬁcation[6, 7, 8], to
be found in experiments injecting a less viscous ﬂuid to-
wards a more viscous one in a Hele-Shaw cell; Carving a
lattice in one of the plates of a Hele-Shaw cell, produce
dendritic patterns that look like snow crystals[9]; Bacte-

Figure 1: Schematic view of the experimental setup

rial colonies in a Petri dish[10, 11] under some conditions
of nutrients and hardness of the gel, produce beautiful
patterns resembling fractals and spirals. Nature also pro-
vides many examples of patterns showing some kind of
universality[12, 13, 14]: The blood vessels in our retina,
the form of plants and simple animals, the fracture pat-
terns in solids, dielectric breakdown, the river networks,
etc.

Motivated by the possibility for the existence of an
uniﬁed mechanism relating the appearance of dendrites
in dielectric breakdown[15] and in viscous ﬁngers, we be-
gan to explore the idea of trying to obtain the return
branch that is typically found in natural lightning, in
simple viscous ﬁngers experiments. In a normal viscous
ﬁnger experiment using a radial Hele-Shaw cell, a low
viscosity ﬂuid (water for example) is injected from the
center towards a high viscosity ﬂuid that ﬁlls the gap
between the upper and lower plates. This setup is not
favorable for our purposes, because if we put water at
the outer boundary, the continuous outwards ﬂux of the
high viscosity ﬂuid will prevent water to advance against
this ﬂux. Some years ago people began to explore the
eﬀects of using more complex ﬂuids in viscous ﬁngers
experiments[2]. Experiments where the high viscosity
ﬂuid was replaced by foams revealed dendritic growth

2

plates was set to a separation of 0.2 mm and ﬁlled with a
commercial shaving foam, a constant pressure of 47 mm
of Hg was used in this experiment. This pattern is simi-
lar to that shown in ﬁgure 1 of ref [16] corresponding to a
leader discharge in a gas conﬁned between two plates, the
fractal dimension[17] measured for that experiment was
D = 1.7. During this experiment we obtained a series
of high resolution images using a digital camera, in the
image shown, we have cut the region outside the circular
boundaries of the plates and ﬁlled that region with a gray
color, the inner region was converted to gray levels and
only the brightness and contrast were modiﬁed.

Using the previous parameters, a typical experiment
lasts for about thirty seconds, this slow evolution makes
very easy to observe how patterns grow and to capture
images with a camera. When the left branch shown in
ﬁg. 2 is near the boundary, water from the low pres-
sure region begin to invade the foam, but as this branch
advances towards the boundary it swept the foam out-
wards, preventing the return branch to be formed. Nev-
ertheless, in the upper region (see the arrow) near the tip
of this branch, there is clear evidence for the appearance
of the return branch, in this region and in the lower re-
gion near the tip, one can see the water that invaded the
foam. The eﬀect is more evident when one analyze the
sequence of high resolution images, advancing forwards
and backwards in time makes clear the two competing
eﬀects: water from the low pressure region invades the
foam and the foam is swept outwards by the advancing
main branch. To obtain the return branch, it is crucial to
eliminate this second eﬀect. By this reason, we used wa-
ter and foam and not water and oil as in a normal viscous
ﬁnger experiment. We expect that by using other kind
of foams we could make the eﬀect more impressive and
more similar to the equivalent upward-connecting leader
of lightning, we have tried many separations between the
plates and several combinations of water, oil, gels and
white of egg, with no success.

The return branch is very easy to produce, in fact at
early stages of our experiment we used two acrylic plates
instead of the glass plates, and the return branch was
formed under similar conditions. This return branch in-
duce to think that there is an universal mechanism that
governs lightning and viscous ﬁngers. The appearance
of the return branch in this experiment is important be-
cause it shows universality, but it also goes against in-
tuition, water from the outer boundary advances against
the pressure ﬁeld to meet the main branch. Our explana-
tion for the appearance of this return branch, is that the
system is lowering its energy by releasing the stress, and
the return branch is a local eﬀect that allow the system to
lower its energy globally. Although this experiment was
motivated by numerical results from a model of one of
the authors[15], we have not included that model in this
paper to explain the appearance of the return branch,
because the theory behind the model is controversial.

Figure 2: Dendrites obtained in our experiments showing the
initial stages of formation of a return branch.

instead of soft viscous ﬁngers, with structures persist-
ing in the limit of zero velocity. Because the dendrites
obtained in experiments using foams are similar to the
structures obtained in dielectric breakdown, and because
it is possible to eliminate the outwards ﬂux, this kind of
experiment is adequate for our purposes. It was not clear
that we could observe the appearance of a return branch
in experiments using foams, because in real lightning the
main branch measures several hundred meters and the
return branch is in the order of thirty meters.

We constructed our radial Hele-Shaw cell using a 44 x
44 cm acrylic tray with raised edges of 5 cm to contain
two circular plates and the low viscosity ﬂuid, that will
be present at the outer boundary of the plates (see ﬁg.
1). A circular glass plate 0.8 cm thick and 38 cm in
diameter was glued to the bottom of the tray, a similar
glass plate with a 0.8 mm hole at its center was put on
top of the lower plate and was ﬁxed to the bottom of
the tray by four handles, a small cylindrical container for
the low viscosity ﬂuid was attached to the central hole
and connected to a constant pressure source. The main
characteristics of this setup are: to allow the presence of
the low viscosity ﬂuid at the boundary, a clean boundary
because the handles are attached to the upper side of the
top glass plate, the surfaces in contact with the foam are
ﬂat and rigid. We used four calibrated spacers to set the
separation between the plates, then we adjusted the four
handles, removed the spacers and ﬁxed the handles.

Figure 2 shows a pattern obtained injecting colored
water from the central hole, the circular boundary is un-
der water at atmospheric pressure, the gap between the

We used thick glass plates to eliminate the possibility
of bending. To be sure that the return branch was not
caused by an induced separation of the plates, at late
stages of some experiments we applied an upwards force
to a point near the boundary of the upper plate, this force
was similar in strength to the force driving the constant
pressure source used in our experiments, no eﬀect on the
already formed pattern or in the water at the boundary
was observed.

Electronic address: fvera@ucv.cl

∗
[1] H. S. S. Hele-Shaw, Nature 58, 34 (1898).
[2] K. V. McCloud and J. V. Maher, Physics Reports 260,

139 (1995).

[3] V. A. Rakov and M. A. Uman, “Lightning: physics and

eﬀects” (Cambridge University Press, 2003).

[4] M. A. Uman and E. P. Krider, Science 246, 457 (1989).
[5] Y. Couder, N. G´erard and M. Rabaud, Phys. Rev. A 34,

5175 (1986).

3

[6] W. W. Mullins and R. F. Sekerka, J. Appl. Phys. 34, 323

(1963).

[7] J. S. Langer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 1 (1980).
[8] H. Biloni and W. J. Boettinger, “Solidiﬁcation”, (Physi-
cal Metallurgy, 4th edition, edited by P. Haasen and R.
W. Cahn, North Holland, Amsterdam, p. 669-842, 1996).
[9] E. Ben-Jacob, R. Godbey, N. Goldenfeld, J. Koplik, H.
Levine, T. Mueller and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. Lett.
55, 1315 (1985).

[10] E. Ben-Jacob, Contemporary Physics 34, 247 (1993).
[11] E. Ben-Jacob, I. Cohen and H. Levine, Adv. Phys. 49,

[12] P. Ball, “The self-made tapestry: Pattern formation in

nature”, (Oxford University Press, 2001).

[13] T. A. Witten and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47,

[14] M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65,

395 (2000).

1400 (1981).

851 (1993).

[15] F. Vera, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0505075 (2005).
[16] L. Niemeyer, L. Pietronero and H. J. Wiesmann, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 52, 1033 (1984).

[17] B. Mandelbrot, “Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimen-

sion” (Freeman, San Francisco, 1977).

