5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Low magnetic Prandtl number dynamos with helical forcing

Pablo D. Mininni1 and David C. Montgomery2
1 National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307 and
2 Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755
(Dated: January 9, 2014)

We present direct numerical simulations of dynamo action in a forced Roberts ﬂow. The behavior
of the dynamo is followed as the mechanical Reynolds number is increased, starting from the laminar
case until a turbulent regime is reached. The critical magnetic Reynolds for dynamo action is found,
and in the turbulent ﬂow it is observed to be nearly independent on the magnetic Prandtl number in
the range from
0.1. Also the dependence of this threshold with the amount of mechanical
helicity in the ﬂow is studied. For the diﬀerent regimes found, the conﬁguration of the magnetic
and velocity ﬁelds in the saturated steady state are discussed.

0.3 to

∼

∼

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a; 47.27.Gs; 95.30.Qd

I.

INTRODUCTION

M , as a function of P

In a previous publication [1], a driven turbulent mag-
netohydrodynamic (MHD) dynamo was studied numer-
ically, within the framework of rectangular periodic
boundary conditions. The emphasis was on the dynamo’s
behavior as the magnetic Prandtl number PM (ratio of
kinematic viscosity to magnetic diﬀusivity) was lowered.
As PM is lowered at ﬁxed viscosity, the magnetoﬂuid
becomes more resistive than it is viscous, and it is in-
tuitively apparent that magnetic ﬁelds will be harder
to excite by mechanical motions. The principal result
[1] was a curve of critical magnetic
displayed in Ref.
−1
Reynolds number, Rc
M , at ﬁxed
kinetic energy. The (turbulent) kinetic energy was the
result of an external mechanical forcing of the Taylor-
Green type (hereafter, “TG”), a geometry well known to
be eﬃcient at the rapid generation of small scales in the
ﬂuid ﬂow [2]. Ref. [1] contains a lengthy bibliography of
its antecedents, not all of which will be listed again here.
The TG geometry injects no net mechanical helicity
into the ﬂow. In the long history of the dynamo problem,
mechanical helicity has been seen often to be an impor-
tant ingredient for dynamo action, and it is the intent of
this present paper to consider a helically-forced dynamo
in the same spirit as in Ref. [1], to see what changes oc-
cur relative to the TG ﬂow, further properties of which
were displayed in a subsequent astrophysical paper [3].

A natural candidate for a highly helical velocity ﬁeld
is what has come to be called the “Roberts ﬂow” [4, 5].
This ﬂow shares some similarities with the dynamo ex-
periments of Riga and Karlsruhe [6, 7]. In a pioneering
paper [8], Feudel et al. characterized mathematically var-
ious magnetic-ﬁeld-generating instabilities that a forced
Roberts ﬂow can experience. The present paper expands
these investigations, while discussing numerical simula-
tion results for magnetic excitations in the mechanically
turbulent regime, with an emphasis on the nonlinearly-
saturated magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration. As in Ref. [8], we
will force the system at nearly the largest scale available
in the periodic domain. As a result, magnetic ﬁelds will
be only ampliﬁed at scales smaller than the energy con-

taining scale of the ﬂow. The behavior of the large-scale
dynamo (i.e. when magnetic perturbations are ampliﬁed
at scales larger than the energy containing eddies) as PM
is varied will be studied in a future work.

Section II lays out the dynamical equations and deﬁ-
nitions and describes the methodology to be used in the
numerical study. Section III presents results and com-
pares some of them with the corresponding TG results.
Section IV summarizes and discusses what has been pre-
sented, and points in directions that we believe the results
suggest.

II. MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK AND
METHODOLOGY

In a familiar set of dimensionless (“Alfv´enic”) units the

equations of magnetohydrodynamics to be solved are:

∂v
∂t
∂B
∂t

+ v

v =

· ∇

+ j

B + ν

2v + f ,

−∇P

×

∇

+ v

B = B

v + η

· ∇

· ∇

2B,

∇

(1)

(2)

P

∇ ·

∇ ·

∇ ×

B = j.

v = 0,

B = 0. v is the velocity ﬁeld,
with
regarded as incompressible (low Mach number). B is
the magnetic ﬁeld, related to the electric current den-
sity j by
is the normalized pressure-to-
density ratio, obtained by solving the Poisson equation
for it that results from taking the divergence of Eq. (1)
v = 0. In
and using the incompressibility condition
these units, the viscosity ν and magnetic diﬀusivity η can
be regarded as the reciprocals of mechanical Reynolds
numbers and magnetic Reynolds numbers respectively,
where these dimensionless numbers in laboratory units
are RV = LU/νlab, RV = LU/ηlab. Here U is a typical
turbulent ﬂow speed (the r.m.s. velocity in the following
sections), L is a length scale associated with its spatial
variation (the integral length scale of the ﬂow), and νlab,
ηlab are kinematic viscosity and magnetic diﬀusivity, re-
spectively, expressed in dimensional units. The external
forcing function f is to be chosen to supply kinetic energy
and kinetic helicity and to maintain the velocity ﬁeld v.

∇ ·

For f , we choose in this case the Roberts ﬂow [4, 8]:

f =

ν

−

∇

2vR = 2νvR

(3)

where

vR = (g sin x cos y,

g cos x sin y, 2f sin x sin y).

(4)

−

The coeﬃcients f and g are arbitrary and their ratio
determines the extent to which the ﬂow excited will be
helical. The ratio f = g/√2 is maximally helical for a
0 is a (two-
given kinetic energy, and the case f /g
dimensional) non-helical excitation. We have concen-
trated primarily upon the cases f = g (following Feudel
[8]) and f = g/√2. No dynamo can be expected
et al.
f /g
unless
|

We impose rectangular periodic boundary conditions
throughout, using a three-dimensional periodic box of
edge 2π, so that the fundamental wavenumber has mag-
nitude 1. All ﬁelds are expanded as Fourier series, such
as

> 0.

→

|

v = v(x, t) =

v(k, t) exp(ik

x)

(5)

Xk

·

·

with k
v(k, t) = 0. The Fourier series are truncated at a
maximum wavenumber kmax that is adequate to resolve
the smallest scales in the spectra. The method used is the
by-now familiar Orzag-Patterson pseudospectral method
[9, 10, 11]. The details of the parallel implementations of
the Fast Fourier Transform can be found in Ref. [12].

k
|
|

The forcing function (4) injects mechanical energy at
= √2, which leaves very little room
a wavenumber
k
= 1
in the spectrum for any back-transfer of helicity (
|
|
is the only possibility). The phenomena observed will
therefore be well-separated from those where an “inverse
cascade” of magnetic helicity is expected to be involved.
Rather, a question that can be answered (in the aﬃrma-
tive, it will turn out) is, To what extent does the presence
of mechanical helicity in the large scales make it easier to
excite magnetic ﬁelds through turbulent dynamo action?
Equations (3) and (4) deﬁne a steady state solution
of Eqs. (1) and (2), with B = 0. It is to be expected
that for large enough ν and η, this solution will be stable.
As the transport coeﬃcients are decreased, it will be the
case that the ﬂow of Eq. (4) can become unstable, either
purely mechanically as an unstable Navier-Stokes ﬂow,
or magnetically as a dynamo, or as some combination of
these. Thus rather complex scenarios can be imagined as
either of the Reynolds numbers is raised.

In the following, the emphasis will be upon discov-
ering thresholds in RM at which dynamo behavior will
set in as RV is raised, then further computing the non-
linear regime and saturation of the magnetic excitations
once it does. The “growth rate” σ can be deﬁned as
2/2 is the
B(k, t)
σ = d ln(EM )/dt, where EM =
|
|
total magnetic energy. The appearance of a positive σ
for initially very small EM is taken to deﬁne the critical
magnetic Reynolds number Rc
M for the onset of dynamo

P

k

2

△

FIG. 1: (Color online) Critical magnetic Reynolds Rc
M as a
function of RV for diﬀerent Roberts ﬂows (thick lines): f = g
(✸), f = g/√2 (✷), f = g/0.77 (
). The dark (red) area cor-
responds to the region where the Roberts ﬂow is hydrodynam-
ically stable. For a comparison with Ref.
[8], our Reynolds
numbers should be divided by 2π. The light (orange) area
corresponds to the region of hydrodynamic oscillations, while
the white area corresponds to the turbulent regime. The thin
lines connected with crosses are shown as a reference and
correspond to the threshold for dynamo instability in Taylor-
Green ﬂow [1]: DNS (solid line) and α-model (dashed line).

action. σ is typically expressed in units of the reciprocal
of the large-scale eddy turnover time L/U where U is the
1/2
u2
r.m.s. velocity (U =
, and the brackets denote
spatial average), and L is the integral length scale,
(cid:11)
(cid:10)

L = 2π

−1

k

2
u(k, t)
|
|

2.
u(k, t)
|

(cid:30) Xk |

Xk

(6)

In the next Section, we describe the results of the
computations for both the “kinematic dynamo” regime
[where j
B is negligible in Eq. (1)], and for full MHD
where the Lorentz force modiﬁes the ﬂow.

×

III. DYNAMO REGIMES FOR THE ROBERTS
FLOW

We introduce the results for the Roberts ﬂow through a
plot of the threshold values of critical magnetic Reynolds
number Rc
M vs. mechanical Reynolds number RV (Fig.
1). All Reynolds numbers have been computed using the
(6)], averaged
integral scale for the velocity ﬁeld [Eq.
over the duration of the steady state in the hydrodynamic
simulation. For this same time interval, an overall nor-
malization factor has been multiplied by Eq. (3) to make
the r.m.s. velocity U turn out to have a time-averaged
value of about 1.

Figure 1 contains considerable information. There are
basically three qualitative behaviors exhibited for diﬀer-
ent RV , indicated by the (colored) background shading.

For RV . 100, the laminar Roberts ﬂow is hydrodynami-
cally steady-state and laminar, but dynamo action is still
possible for large enough RM . For 100 . RV . 1000,
Roberts ﬂow treated purely hydrodynamically is tempo-
rally periodic but not turbulent. For RV & 1000, the
Roberts ﬂow develops a full turbulent spectrum hydrody-
namically. In all three regimes, dynamo action is exhib-
ited, but is diﬀerent in the three regimes. The laminar
regime was extensively studied in Ref.
[8]. Our deﬁ-
nitions for the Reynolds numbers are diﬀerent, but the
results displayed in Figs. 1 and 2 are consistent with pre-
vious results in the range PM = [0.5, 1] if our Reynolds
numbers are divided by 2π (corresponding approximately
to the integral scale of the laminar ﬂow).

The threshold curve connecting diamonds (✸) is for
the Roberts ﬂow with f = g (helical, but not maximally
so). The segment connecting squares (✷) is for f = g/√2
(maximal helicity). The segment connected by triangles
) is for f = g/0.77, a less helical ﬂow than f = g. The
(
△
) is the threshold
threshold curve connecting crosses (
curve for the Taylor-Green (TG) ﬂow from Ref. [1]. All
of these are direct numerical simulation (DNS) results.
(We regard the fact that the Taylor-Green curve and the
Roberts ﬂow curve with f = g have a common region
100 to be coincidental). The curve connect-
above RV ∼
ing crosses (
) with a dashed line is the result from Ref.
×
[1] for the “α-model”, or Lagrangian averaged model, of
MHD.

×

Noteworthy in Fig. 1 is the qualitative similarity of
the behavior of the threshold curve between the Roberts
ﬂow and the TG results from Ref.
[1]: a sharp rise in
Rc
M with the increase in the degree of turbulence in the
velocity ﬁeld, followed by a plateau in which further in-
creases in RV show little eﬀect upon Rc
It must be
kept in mind that for both situations, the amplitude of
the forcing ﬁeld f is being adjusted so that U and the to-
tal kinetic energy remain approximately constant, even
though RV is increasing. Whether such a procedure cor-
responds to a physical driving force must be decided on
a case-by-case basis.

M .

Figure 2 shows the threshold curve for the Roberts ﬂow
with f = g as a function of the inverse of the magnetic
−1
Prandtl number, P
M . This curve shares some similari-
ties with the TG ﬂow, but also important diﬀerences. As
[1], between the laminar and turbulent regimes
in Ref.
a sharp increase in Rc
M is observed. Also, in the tur-
bulent ﬂow Rc
M seems to be independent of the value of
the magnetic Prandtl number. But while the TG force
is not a solution of the Euler equations and was designed
to generate smaller and smaller scale ﬂuctuations as the
Reynolds number RV is increased, the Roberts ﬂow goes
through several instabilities as RV is varied. As a result,
−1
the threshold for dynamo action in the RM vs. P
M plane
−1
is double-valued. For a given value of P
M two values of
Rc
M exist according to the hydrodynamic state of the hy-
drodynamic system, (e.g. laminar, periodic, or turbulent
ﬂow).

Figure 3 is a plot of the kinetic energy spectra for the

3

−1
FIG. 2: Critical magnetic Reynolds Rc
M
for the Roberts ﬂow with f = g (thick lines). The solid line
corresponds to the laminar regime, the dashed line to the pe-
riodic ﬂow, and the dotted line to the turbulent regime. (The
double-valuedness results from the eﬀects of two diﬀerent val-
ues of RV .)

M as a function of P

FIG. 3: Kinetic energy spectra as a function of RV . The
Kolmogorov’s spectrum is showed as a reference.

values of RV shown in Fig. 1, for f = g, normalized so
that EV (k = 1) is unity for all cases. This is done to
display the gradual widening of the spectrum as RV in-
creases. Figure 4 shows corresponding magnetic spectra,
normalized somewhat diﬀerently: the energy contained
in the interval 1
5 is the same in all cases. This
is done to emphasize the fact that the peak in the mag-
netic energy spectrum migrates to higher values as RV
increases: the excited magnetic ﬁeld develops more and
more small-scale features. This may be related to the fact
that because the forcing occurs at such low wavenumbers,
inverse magnetic helicity cascades are eﬀectively ruled
out.

≤

≤

k

Figure 5 shows how the thresholds (σ = 0) for the Rc
M
curves were calculated. For small initial EM , broadly

4

FIG. 4: Magnetic energy spectra during the kinematic regime,
for diﬀerent values of RV . The values of RM for each curve
correspond to the smallest value for which dynamo action was
observed (see Fig. 5).

FIG. 5: Growth rates as a function of RM . Each line corre-
sponds to several simulations at constant RV (ﬁxed ν), and
each point in the line indicates the exponential growth (or
decay) rate at a ﬁxed value of RM . The point where each
curve crosses σ = 0 gives the threshold Rc
M for dynamo in-
stability. RV = 62.7 (✷), RV = 125.5 (
), RV = 416.2
), RV = 974.4 (✸), RV = 1108.1 (
(
), RV = 1327.7 (+),
△
RV = 1912.5 (

), and RV = 3276.6 (

∗
).

×

◦

▽

distributed over k, η was gradually decreased in steps
to raise RM in the same kinetic setting until a value of
0 was identiﬁed. That provides a single point on
σ
such curves as those in Fig. 1.

≈

Each simulation at a ﬁxed value of ν and η (or ﬁxed
RV and RM ) was extended for at least 100 large-scale
turnover times to rule out turbulent ﬂuctuations and ob-
tain a good ﬁt to the exponential growth. All the sim-
ulations were well-resolved and satisﬁed the condition
kν /kmax < 1, where kν = (ǫ/ν3)1/4 is the Kolmogorov
lengthscale, ǫ is the energy injection rate, kmax = N/3

FIG. 6:
(Color online) Time history of the total kinetic
[thick (blue) lines] and magnetic energy (thin lines) in dy-
namo simulations. The dashed lines correspond to RV = 62.7
and RM = 78.4 (laminar ﬂow), while the solid lines are for
RV = RM = 416.2. The shaded region indicates the period of
time when the ﬂow is oscillating in this simulation. The inset
shows the time history for a turbulent run with RV = 3276.6
and RM = 1092.2.

is the largest resolved wavenumber, and N is the lin-
ear resolution of the simulation. When this condition
was not satisﬁed, the resolution N was increased, from
N = 64 until reaching the maximum spatial resolution
in this work of 256 grid points in each direction, and a
maximum mechanical Reynolds of RV = 3276.6.

Figure 6 illustrates an interesting behavior that occurs
when there is a transition from the laminar to the peri-
odic regime of the Roberts ﬂow (f = g). Figure 6 shows
the evolution of total kinetic energies EV and magnetic
energies EM for RV = 62.7 and RV = 416.2. The ﬂat
part of the kinetic [thick (blue)] curve for RV = 416.2 is
characterized by small periodic oscillations too small to
see on the logarithmic plot (they will be shown in Fig. 7).
Meanwhile, the EM curve of magnetic energy is growing,
somewhat irregularly. Rather suddenly, at about t = 70,
EV drops by more than a factor of 2 (see Fig. 7), and by
300 the magnetic energy has saturated at a level of
t
about 1 per cent of the initial kinetic energy. Both ﬁelds
oscillate irregularly after that, and are weakly turbulent.
It is unclear how such a small magnetic excitation suc-
ceeds at shutting down such a large fraction of the ﬂow.
As will be shown later, this large drop is associated with
the instability of the large scale ﬂow. The inset shows
the full time history of EV and EM , for RV = 3276.6
and RM = 1092.2 when the turbulence is fully devel-
oped. The dashed line illustrates, for comparison, how
simply the magnetic energy exponentiates and saturates
in the laminar steady-state regime (RV = 62.7). Figure
7 shows in detail the suppression of the ﬂow, manifested

≈

5

FIG. 7: Time history of the total energy in the dynamo sim-
ulation with RV = RM = 416.2. The shaded area is a blow
up of the shaded region in Fig. 6 and corresponds to the
hydrodynamic oscillations.

as a drop in the total energy, at t

70.

≈

These oscillations between the hydrodynamic laminar
and turbulent regime in the Roberts ﬂow have been pre-
viously found by Feudel et al. [8]. The authors pointed
out that in this regime, close to the threshold Rc
M the
dynamo exhibits an intermittent behavior, with bursts
of activity. The oscillatory ﬂow is stable to small per-
turbations (e.g. numerical noise in the code), but as
the magnetic energy grows the ﬂow is perturbed by the
Lorentz force and goes to a weakly turbulent regime. As
[8], if RM is close to Rc
noted in Ref.
M then the mag-
netic ﬁeld decays, the ﬂow relaminarizes and the process
is repeated. However, as observed in Fig. 6, if RM is
large enough the weakly turbulent ﬂow can still excite a
dynamo, and the magnetic ﬁeld keeps growing exponen-
tially until reaching the non-linear saturation even after
the hydrodynamic instability takes place.

≈

Figure 8(a) shows the temporal growth of several
Fourier components of the magnetic ﬁeld in the laminar
regime (RV = 62.7). A straightforward exponentiation,
followed by a ﬂat, steady-state, leveling-oﬀ exhibits the
same growth rate for all harmonics. This indicates the ex-
istence of a simple unstable normal mode which saturates
abruptly near t
180. The behavior is much noisier for
RV = 416.2 and 3276.6 as shown in Figs. 8(b) and 8(c).
Note that in the simulation with RV = 416.2, for t < 70
all the magnetic modes oscillate with the same frequency
as the hydrodynamic oscillations. In Figure 8, the dot-
ted line and solid line above are, respectively, for k = 1
and k = 2. The remaining four are for k = 9 through
11. The modes in between occupy the open space in be-
tween more or less in order. The same modes are shown
for RV = 416.2 in Fig. 8(c), which illustrates a broad
sharing of EB among many modes and a consequent ex-
citation of small-scale magnetic components.

Plots of the kinetic and magnetic ﬁelds are shown in
Figs. 9. The left column shows the velocity ﬁeld in the
saturated state for RV = 62.7, and the right column

FIG. 8: Evolution of the magnetic energy in diﬀerent shells in
Fourier space: (a) RV = 62.7 and RM = 78.4 (laminar ﬂow),
(b) RV = RM = 416.2 (periodic case), (c) RV = 3276.6 and
RM = 1092.2 (turbulent regime). The dotted line corresponds
to k = 1, solid line to k = 2, and the dashed lines to k =
9, 10, 11, 12.

shows the magnetic ﬁeld at the same time. The arrows in-
dicate the vector components in the planes shown and the
colors indicate the strengths of the perpendicular compo-
nents. Figures 9(a) and (b) are for the plane z = 0 and
Figs. 9(c) and (d) are for the plane y = 0. Figs. 9(e) and
(f) are for the plane y = π/2. The velocity conﬁguration
shown in Fig. 9(a) is quite similar to the way it looks at
t = 0, but the z-dependences apparent in Figs. 9(c), (d),
and (f) are not present in the initial ﬂow.

Figs. 10 are similar color plots for the saturated regime
for RV = 416.2. All the same quantities are being dis-
played at the same planes as in Figs. 9. The initial con-
ditions are no longer recognizable in the saturated state,
but is not yet suﬃciently disordered that one would be
forced to call it “turbulent”. Moreover, note that the four
“cells” characteristic of the laminar Roberts ﬂow [Fig.

6

FIG. 9: (Color online) Plots of the kinetic and magnetic ﬁelds for the saturated regime of the run with RV = 62.7 and
RM = 78.4: (a) cut at z = 0, vz in color and vx, vy indicated by arrows, (b) same as in (a) for the magnetic ﬁeld, (c) cut at
y = 0, vy in color and vx, vz indicated by arrows, (d) same as in (c) for the magnetic ﬁeld, (e) same as in (b) but for a cut at
y = π/4, and (f) same as in (e) for the magnetic ﬁeld.

9(a)] are not present in this late stage of the dynamo.
During the early kinematic regime, when the hydrody-
namic oscillations are observed, a slightly deformed ver-
sion of these cells can be easily identiﬁed in the ﬂow (not
shown). When the magnetic energy grows due to dynamo
action, the ﬂow is unable to maintain this ﬂow against
the perturbation of the Lorentz force. This causes the
large-scale ﬂow to destabilize, and the kinetic energy in
the shell k = 1 drops by a factor of two. This instability
of the large-scale modes is associated with the large drop
of the kinetic and the total energy at t

70 (Fig. 7).

≈

By contrast, the same ﬁelds are exhibited in the same
planes in Figs. 11 in the saturated regime for RV =
3276.6. Here the truly turbulent nature of the ﬂow is now
apparent, particularly in the highly disordered magnetic
ﬁeld plots in the right-hand column.

Figure 12 is a three-dimensional perspective plot of the
kinetic and magnetic energy density for RV = 62.7 at a
late time in the saturated regime. The kinetic energy
distribution (on the left) is not much diﬀerent than it
was at t = 0. The helical properties of the Roberts ﬂow
can be directly appreciated in the ﬁeld lines indicated in
black.
In this regime, the ﬂow is still laminar as pre-
viously indicated. The magnetic ﬁeld is stretched and
magnetic energy ampliﬁed in the four helical tubes, and
then expelled out of the vortex tubes, accumulating in
the stagnation points [4, 8]. Since the velocity ﬁeld has
no dependence in the z-direction, the magnetic ﬁeld that
can be sustained by dynamo action has to break this sym-
metry and displays a clear periodicity in this direction.
The same energy densities are exhibited at a late time
for the case of RV = 3276.6 in Fig. 13, and the highly

7

FIG. 10: (Color online) Plots of the kinetic and magnetic ﬁelds for the saturated regime of the run with RV = RM = 416.2.
Labels and ﬁelds are as in Fig. 9.

ﬁlamented and disordered distributions characteristic of
the turbulent regime are again apparent. Note however
that still some helicity can be identiﬁed in the velocity
ﬁeld lines shown.

In Ref. [3] a suppression of small scale turbulent ﬂuc-
tuations and an evolution of the system to a state with
eﬀective magnetic Prantdl number of order one was ob-
served in the nonlinear saturation of the turbulent dy-
namo. Here a similar eﬀect is observed, although the
suppression of small scales is weaker probably due to the
presence of the external forcing at k
1 which does not
leave room for a large scale magnetic ﬁeld to develop.
Figure 14 shows the time evolution of the kinetic and
magnetic energy spectra in the run with RV = 3276.6
and RM = 1092.2. While at early times the magnetic
energy spectrum peaks at small scales (k
9), at late
times the magnetic spectrum is ﬂat for small k and drops
together with the kinetic energy. The kinetic spectrum

≈

≈

is strongly quenched and has a large drop at small scales.

IV. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

One apparent outcome of these computations has been
to conﬁrm the intuitive impression that dynamo ampliﬁ-
cation of very small magnetic ﬁelds in conducting ﬂuids
is easier if mechanical helicity is present. This is true in
velocity ﬁelds which are both turbulent and laminar. The
values of Rc
10) are well
M which are the lowest found (
below those in several existing experimental searches.

∼

It is also somewhat reassuring to ﬁnd that the qual-
itative behavior of dynamo thresholds with decreasing
viscosity (increasing Reynolds number at ﬁxed U ) is as
similar as it is to that found for the non-helical TG
ﬂow in Ref.
In particular, since the simulations
discussed here were forced at almost the largest scale

[1].

8

FIG. 11: (Color online) Plots of the kinetic and magnetic ﬁelds for the saturated regime of the run with RV = 3276.6 and
RM = 1092.2. Labels and ﬁelds are as in Fig. 9.

FIG. 12: (Color online) Visualization of the kinetic (left) and
magnetic energy density (right) for the saturated regime of
the run with RV = 62.7 and RM = 78.4. Velocity ﬁeld lines
are indicated in black.

FIG. 13: (Color online) Visualization of the kinetic (left) and
magnetic energy density (right) for the saturated regime of
the run with RV = 3276.6 and RM = 1092.2. Velocity ﬁeld
lines are indicated in black.

available in the periodic domain, a turbulent regime for
PM < 1 where Rc
M is approximately independent of PM

was reached using only DNS, while for the TG ﬂow two
diﬀerent models [13, 14] for the small scales were needed.
The similarities in the behavior of the threshold for the

9

That being said, it should be admitted that the Roberts
ﬂow in a way exhibits a richer set of possibilities in that
the dynamo activity is somewhat diﬀerent in each of the
three regimes (laminar and steady-state, oscillatory, and
turbulent).

Dynamo action is to be regarded as of many types
[3] and situation-dependent. The forms of the magnetic
ﬁelds developed and their characteristic dimensions are
determined to a considerable extent by the mechanical
activity that excites them and by the geometric setting
If it is desired to apply the
in which they take place.
theoretical and computational results to planetary dy-
namos or laboratory experiments, then rectangular peri-
odic conditions appear to be a constraint that should be
dispensed with as soon as feasible.

FIG. 14: (Color online) Kinetic [thick (blue) line] and mag-
netic energy spectra for diﬀerent times for the simulation with
RV = 3276.6 and RM = 1092.2.

Acknowledgments

two ﬂows for PM small enough brings more conﬁdence
to the ability of subgrid scale models of MHD turbulence
to predict results in regimes of interest for astrophysics
and geophysics that are today out of reach using DNS.

The authors are grateful for valuable comments to Dr.
Annick Pouquet. The NSF grants ATM-0327533 at Dart-
mouth College and CMG-0327888 at NCAR supported
this work in part and are gratefully acknowledged. Com-
puter time was provided by the National Center for At-
mospheric Research.

[1] Y. Ponty, P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, J.-F. Pinton,
H. Politano, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 164502
(2005).

[2] G. I. Taylor and A. E. Green, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A

158, 499 (1937).

[3] P. D. Mininni, Y. Ponty, D. C. Montgomery, J.-F.Pinton,
H. Politano, and A. Pouquet, Astrophys. J. (2005), in
press, astro-ph/0412071.

[4] G. O. Roberts, Phil. Tran. R. Soc. Lond. A 271, 411

(1972).

A 425, 407 (1989).

[6] A. Gailitis, O. Lielausis, E. Platacis, S. Dement’ev,
A. Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum, F. Stefani,
M. Christen, and G. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3024
(2001).

[7] R. Stieglitz and U. Muller, Phys. Fluids 13, 561 (2001).
[8] F. Feudel, M. Gellert, S. Rudiger, A. Witt, and N. See-

hafer, Phys. Rev. E 68, 046302 (2003).

[9] S. A. Orszag, Stud. Appl. Math. 51, 253 (1972).
[10] S. A. Orszag and J. G. S. Patterson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28,

76 (1972).

[11] C. Canuto, M. Y. Hussaini, A. Quarteroni, and T. A.
Zang, Spectral methods in ﬂuid dynamics (Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1988).

[12] D. O. G´omez, P. D. Mininni, and P. Dmitruk, Phys.

[13] P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, and A. Pouquet, Phys.

[14] Y. Ponty, H. Politano, and J. Pinton, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Rev. E 71, 046304 (2005).

92, 144503 (2004).

[5] M. L. Dudley and R. W. James, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.

Scripta T116, 123 (2005).

