5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Double-component convection due to diﬀerent boundary conditions in an inﬁnite slot
diversely oriented to the gravity

N. Tsitverblit∗
Department of Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv 69978, Israel
(February 20, 2014)

Onset of small-amplitude oscillatory and both small- and ﬁnite-amplitude steady double-component
convection arising due to component diﬀerent boundary conditions in an inﬁnite slot is stud-
ied for various slot orientations to the gravity. The main focus is on two compensating back-
ground gradients of the components. The physical mechanisms underlying steady and oscilla-
tory convection are analyzed from the perspective of a universally consistent understanding of
the eﬀects of diﬀerent boundary conditions. In a horizontal slot with inviscid ﬂuid addressed by
Welander [Tellus, Ser. A 41, 66 (1989)], oscillatory convection sets in with the most unstable wave
number and oscillation frequency being zero. Exact expressions for the critical unstable ﬁxed-value
background gradient and the respective group velocity at zero wave number are derived from the
long-wavelength expansion both for the horizontal slot with independently varying background gra-
dients and for the inclined slot with the compensating gradients. In the horizontal slot with viscous
ﬂuid, the dissipation of along-slot perturbation-cell motion reduces eﬃciency of the oscillatory in-
stability feedback and thus prevents the most unstable wavelength from being inﬁnite. Based on
this interpretation, three-dimensional (3D) nature of the oscillatory instability for an interval of long
two-dimensional (2D) wavelengths is predicted in an inclined slot, and such 3D instability is indeed
shown to arise. Related general conditions for three-dimensionality of most unstable disturbances
are also formulated. As the slot orientation changes from the horizontal by angle θ(≥ π/2), the
oscillatory 2D marginal-stability boundaries in inviscid and viscous ﬂuid are expected to eventually
transform into respective steady ones. Oscillatory instability in the vertical slot with viscous ﬂuid,
ﬁrst reported by Tsitverblit [Phys. Rev. E 62, R7591 (2000)], is of a quasisteady nature. Its (new)
mechanism is identiﬁed.
It is underlain by diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion. As the horizontal slot
at θ = π, addressed by Tsitverblit [Phys. Fluids 9, 2458 (1997)], changes its orientation to vertical,
the wave number interval of linear steady instability shrinks to the vicinity of the most unstable zero
wave number and vanishes. Consistently with the basic nature of ﬁnite-amplitude steady convection
being the same in the horizontal and vertical slots, the respective convective ﬂows are continuously
transformed into each other. The dissimilarity between the nature of ﬁnite-amplitude steady convec-
tive ﬂows in the horizontal slot with θ = 0, revealed by Tsitverblit [Phys. Lett. A 329, 445 (2004)],
and that in the vertical slot is shown to eventually give rise to a region of hysteresis in θ ∈ (0, π/2).

PACS number(s): 47.20.Bp, 47.20.Ky, 47.15.Fe, 47.15.Rq.

∗

I. INTRODUCTION

This work, some of whose aspects were promulgated
in [1], addresses onset of double-component, buoyancy-
driven inﬁnite-slot convection resulting from the bound-
ary conditions for one component being diﬀerent from
those for the other. The main emphasis of this study
is on understanding the eﬀects of diﬀerent orientation
of the compensating across-slot background gradients of
two density-aﬀecting components to the gravity.

Double-component convection is relevant to the phe-
nomena in small-scale oceanography [2], geology [3], geo-

∗Address for correspondence: 1 Yanosh Korchak Street, apt.
6, Netanya 42495, Israel; e-mail: naftali@eng.tau.ac.il

It has technological
dynamo [4], and astrophysics [5].
applications as well, in particular to crystal growth [6].
Double-component convection has also been suggested as
a possible cause of layering phenomena in colloidal sus-
pensions [7] and as the origin of pattern formation in
soap ﬁlms [8]. Early reviews of some of the above appli-
cations of the eﬀects of diﬀerent component diﬀusivities
in double-component convection can be found in [9].

In addition, convective ﬂows are commonly used in fun-
damental studies of transition to turbulence and nonlin-
ear pattern formation [10,11]. Double-component ﬂows
where a distinction between the components comes from
component diﬀerent boundary conditions are also of basic
signiﬁcance in the context of their applications to large-
scale environmental and turbulent processes. In partic-
ular, such processes are Langmuir circulations [12] and
the global ocean thermohaline circulation [13,14]. Ex-
cept for limited aspects of the latter context, however,
two-component convection in pure ﬂuid has been pre-
viously addressed mostly in the framework of only the

1

eﬀects of diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcients [15–17].

Welander [18] was the ﬁrst to highlight the onset of
oscillatory convection resulting from an unequal eﬀect of
diﬀerent boundary conditions on the component diﬀu-
sion gradients in perturbed state. Such convection was
demonstrated in [18] to arise in a horizontal layer of
inviscid double-component ﬂuid with a statically stable
net vertical stratiﬁcation. The instability mechanism de-
scribed in [18] has later been recognized by the present
author [19,20] as being conceptually analogous to that
driving oscillatory convection in the diﬀusive regime of
It has also been
the classical double-diﬀusion [15,16].
suggested in [19–21] that such analogy between the eﬀect
of diﬀerent boundary conditions and that of unequal dif-
fusivities is of a generic nature. Near a boundary towards
which across-slot perturbation motion is directed, the
component with its boundary value ﬁxed would have a
higher perturbation gradient than the component whose
boundary condition is speciﬁed in terms of the ﬂux. The
diﬀerent rates of gradient diﬀusion resulting from such
disparity could thus trigger double-component convec-
tion analogously to the eﬀect of unequal component dif-
fusivities in conventional double-diﬀusive convection.

In terms of the analogy just described, the mecha-
nism of steady convection under the stratiﬁcation in-
verse to that in [18] has been shown in [19,20] to be
conceptually reminiscent of the ﬁnger instability in the
classical double-diﬀusion [15]. (The mathematical prob-
lem discussed in [19,20] also happens to describe double-
component Langmuir circulations [12].)
In application
to two horizontal gradients, the eﬀect of diﬀerent bound-
ary conditions was also demonstrated in [21] to apply
to a laterally heated stably stratiﬁed slot (LHSSS). The
latter conﬁguration had been studied before only in the
context of the classical double-diﬀusion [22].

The above eﬀect of boundary conditions was also
demonstrated in [23] to result in steady convection when
two compensating horizontal gradients maintained by
diﬀerent boundary conditions are applied to a vertical
layer of Boussinesq ﬂuid at rest. In the latter conﬁgu-
ration, however, ﬁnite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows
arise without the respective linear instability of the con-
duction state, as in the scenario ﬁrst proposed in [24].
This is qualitatively diﬀerent from the analogous prob-
lem of the classical double-diﬀusion [25], where the re-
spective linear instability is concomitant of subcritical
steady convection. The ﬁnite-amplitude manifestation of
convection uncovered in [23] was also found to take place
under a stable vertical solute stratiﬁcation. In addition,
the scenario in [23] unveiled the existence of an oscilla-
tory linear instability. It thus suggested the possibility of
an oscillatory manifestation of convection due to diﬀerent
boundary conditions for two horizontal gradients.

Diﬀerential diﬀusion due to unequal perturbation gra-
dients of the components (diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion
[18–21,23]) is not the only class of the phenomena by
means of which diﬀerent boundary conditions can trigger
convection from the state of rest. As reported in [1,26],

ﬁnite-amplitude steady convection could arise well be-
fore the onset of the respective linear instability in the
viscous version of the problem considered in [18]. In this
case, the disparity between component stratiﬁcations re-
sulting from ﬁnite-amplitude perturbation generates con-
vective ﬂows due to the feedback coming from nonlin-
ear Rayleigh—Benard convection. Such ﬁnite-amplitude
convection was found in [26] to coexist with oscillatory
linear instability in viscous ﬂuid.

The main objective of the present study is to provide
a comprehensive understanding of the manifestation of
inﬁnite-slot convection resulting from diﬀerent bound-
ary conditions for diverse slot orientations to the gravity.
The central issue in achieving this objective is oscillatory
small-amplitude manifestation of such convection. Re-
sulting from this work, consistent understanding of this
issue has required uncovery and analysis of inviscid and
viscous transformations of the oscillatory instability into
respective steady one. In addition, it required identiﬁca-
tion of a new physical mechanism of oscillatory instabil-
ity. The latter arises in the vertical slot with viscous ﬂuid
[23]. The key physical eﬀects underlying transformation
between the inviscid mechanism of horizontal-slot oscil-
latory instability in [18] and the new vertical-slot mecha-
nism in viscous ﬂuid are thus also described in this work.
Implications of the provided interpretations, in particular
for the existence of a three-dimensional oscillatory insta-
bility in an inclined slot, are analyzed as well. This study
also completes the understanding of steady convection
due to diﬀerent boundary conditions when a horizontal
slot is transformed into an inclined and vertical slot.

II. THE PROBLEM FORMULATION AND
SOLUTION PROCEDURES

A. The problem and governing equations

Let

the compensating gradients of

two density-
aﬀecting components be maintained by diﬀerent bound-
ary conditions at the walls of a slot whose orientation to
the gravity is characterized by angle θ. This is a par-
ticular case of the problem illustrated in Fig. 1, where
θ (> 0 in Fig. 1) is the angle between the direction
opposite to the gravity and that of the across-slot co-
ordinate axis. The background gradients in Fig. 1 are
represented by the Rayleigh numbers Ra = gα∆T d3/κν
and Ras = −gβ(∂S/∂x)d4/κν ≡ µRa. Here, x is the
(dimensional) across-slot coordinate, d is the width of
the slot, ∆T is the (dimensional) diﬀerence between the
values of temperature (standing for the component with
ﬁxed-value boundary conditions) at the boundaries with
smaller and larger across-slot coordinates, ∂S/∂x is the
boundaries-prescribed (dimensional) across-slot deriva-
tive of solute concentration (standing for the component
with ﬂux boundary conditions), α is the coeﬃcient of
thermal expansion, β is the coeﬃcient of the density vari-

2

ation due to the variation of solute concentration, g is
the gravitational acceleration, ν is the kinematic viscos-
ity, and κ = κT = κS is the diﬀusivity of both com-
ponents. The bar means that the respective variable is
dimensional. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, Ra > 0
and Ras > 0 as well as µ = 1 are assumed.

The component diﬀusivities are set equal to eliminate
the eﬀects of the classical double-diﬀusion. The eﬀects of
diﬀerent boundary conditions could thus be analyzed sep-
arately from those of unequal diﬀusivities. Such approach
is analogous to that used in previous studies of conven-
In most such stud-
tional double-diﬀusive convection.
ies, the components with unequal diﬀusivities have not
been distinguished from each other in terms of bound-
ary conditions. As indicated in [27], equal diﬀusivities
can in principle be experimentally modeled with two so-
lutes. The Prandtl number, however, would then be sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent from the P r = 6.7 speciﬁed in the
caption of Fig. 1. Equal diﬀusivities could also be in-
terpreted as eddy transport coeﬃcients, as in [12,14]. In
this case, P r = 6.7 is not outside the range of realistic
values corresponding to all diﬀusion coeﬃcients being of
the eddy type.

The condition that the component gradients be exactly
compensating (µ = 1) eliminates the along-slot back-
ground motion arising when the slot orientation diﬀers
from horizontal. In the absence of such a base ﬂow, com-
parison of the results for an inclined or vertical slot with
those for the horizontal slot is substantially facilitated.
The same could also be said about the comparison be-
tween the viscous and inviscid problems, for the along-
slot base ﬂows would have been dissimilar in such prob-
In particular, these comparisons are relevant for
lems.
understanding the physics of transformation between os-
cillatory convection in inviscid ﬂuid at θ = 0 in [18] and
that in viscous ﬂuid at θ = π/2 in [23].

The equations describing the two-dimensional (2D)
problem in Fig. 1 in which an along-slot solute strati-
ﬁcation is also present can be written as follows:

∂ζ
∂τ

+

∂ψ
∂x

∂ζ
∂y

−

∂ψ
∂y

∂ζ
∂x

=

1
P r

(

∂t
∂x

∂s
∂x

−

) sin θ−

1
P r

(

∂t
∂y

∂s
∂y

−

) cos θ +

∂2ζ
∂x2 +

∂2ζ
∂y2 ,

ζ =

∂2ψ
∂x2 +

∂2ψ
∂y2 ,

∂t
∂τ

+

∂ψ
∂x

∂t
∂y

−

∂ψ
∂y

∂t
∂x

=

1
P r

(

∂2t
∂x2 +

∂2t
∂y2 ),

∂s
∂τ

+

∂ψ
∂x

(

∂s
∂y

− RaS) −

∂ψ
∂y

∂s
∂x

=

1
P r

(

∂2s
∂x2 +

∂2s
∂y2 ), (4)

where the across-slot, u, and along-slot, v, velocities are

(1)

(2)

(3)

3

u = −

∂ψ
∂y

,

v =

∂ψ
∂x

,

vorticity

solute concentration

temperature

ζ =

∂v
∂x

−

∂u
∂y

,

S = −RaSy + s,

T =

T1 + T2
2

+ t,

P r = ν/κ is the Prandtl number, λ = λ/d is the speciﬁed
along-slot period, x ∈ (−1/2, 1/2), y ∈ (−λ/2, λ/2), and
τ is the time.

Unless explicitly emphasized otherwise, the along-slot
solute stratiﬁcation, characterized by the Rayleigh num-
ber RaS = gβ|∂S/∂y|d4/κν, is assumed to be zero. The
formulation with RaS 6= 0 is used only for facilitating the
discussion related to results in [21,23], where the prob-
lems with RaS 6= 0 have been addressed.

The above equations were considered along with (no-

slip) wall boundary conditions

ζ =

∂2ψ
∂x2 ,

ψ = 0,

t = ±

Ra
2

,

∂s
∂x

= −µRa = −Ras (x = ∓1/2, −λ/2 < y < λ/2) (5)

and periodic boundary conditions in the along-slot direc-
tion

ξ(x, λ/2) = ξ(x, −λ/2),

∂ξ(x, λ/2)
∂y

=

∂ξ(x, −λ/2)
∂y

(−1/2 < x < 1/2),

s(x, λ/2) = s(x, −λ/2),

∂s(x, λ/2)
∂y

=

∂s(x, −λ/2)
∂y

(−1/2 < x < 0, 0 < x < 1/2),

s(0, ±λ/2) = 0,

(6)

where ξ stands for ζ, ψ, and t. As indicated in the caption
of Fig. 1, P r = 6.7 was used throughout the present
study. As at the middle points of across-slot boundaries
in (6), speciﬁcation of the values of s is needed to identify
the solute concentration scale and select the phase of a
nontrivial ﬂow. Technical diﬃculties that still exist with
the employed approach will be discussed in Sec. III B 2a.
The steady version of Eqs. (1)—(4) and boundary con-
ditions (5) and (6) was discretized by central ﬁnite dif-
ferences. The Euler—Newton and Keller [28] arclength
continuation algorithms were used [21] to trace out bi-
furcating branches of steady convection using the Har-
well MA32 Fortran routine. In all these computations,

the along-slot period λ = 2 was prescribed. The grid
with 33 nodes in the across-slot direction was used in
the computations [nx × λ(nx + 1) with nx = 33], as in
[19,21,23,26]. Temporal behavior of the linearized version
of Eqs. (1)—(4) and boundary conditions (5) and (6) was
also examined, in particular near the onset of conduction-
state oscillatory instability. For this purpose, the implicit
method was employed to compute time evolution of the
respective linear system with time step δτ = 0.05.

B. Linear stability calculations

1. Two-dimensional disturbances

With the state of rest being the background ﬂow for
µ = 1, the Fourier mode of a 2D marginally unstable
oscillatory perturbation with angular frequency ω and
wave number k can be written as

[u′(x), t′(x), s′(x)]T · ei(ωτ ±ky) + cc.

(7)

Here [u′(x), t′(x), s′(x)]T is the Fourier-mode part de-
pending on the across-slot coordinate alone, the prime
near a ﬂow variable denotes such part in the perturba-
tion of the variable. Expression (7) has been introduced
into the linearized Eqs. (1)—(4) rewritten for RaS = 0
in terms of across-slot velocity u, relative temperature t,
and solute concentration s. This leads to:

(

d2
dx2 − k2)(

d2
dx2 − k2 − iω)˜u =

∓Ra{ik

[˜t − (1 +

)˜s] sin θ±

d
dx

ǫ
Ra

k2[˜t − (1 +

)˜s] cos θ},

ǫ
Ra

(

d2
dx2 − k2 − iωP r)˜t = ˜u,

(

d2
dx2 − k2 − iωP r)˜s = ˜u,
where ˜u = −u′P r, ˜t = t′/Ra, ˜s = s′/Ras, and ǫ =
Ras − Ra = 0. Very small nonzero values of ǫ could be
used for veriﬁcation of the results obtained at ǫ = 0, as
described below.

(10)

The variables ˜u, ˜t, and ˜s are subject to the following

set of boundary conditions:

˜u =

= ˜t =

= 0

(x = ±1/2)

(11)

d2 ˜u
d2x

d˜s
dx

when the boundaries are stress-free. For no-slip bound-
aries, the set of boundary conditions is as follows:

(8)

(9)

4

˜u =

= ˜t =

d˜u
dx

d˜s
dx

= 0

(x = ±1/2).

(12)

For ﬁnding the marginally stable values of Ra and
it is suﬃcient to consider only positive values of
ω,
ω and k in one such traveling wave as (7).
If
[˜u(x), ˜t(x), ˜s(x)]T is a solution of the mode ei(ωτ +ky) ver-
sion of Eqs. (8)—(10) at some Rac and ωc, then the mode
ei(ωτ −ky) version of these equations would be satisﬁed by
±[˜u(−x), ˜t(−x), ˜s(−x)]T at these same Rac and ωc. This
property is due to two reﬂection symmetries of the lin-
earized equations. One of these symmetries arises from
the respective symmetry of the nonlinear problem, it cor-
responds to the minus sign before [˜u(−x), ˜t(−x), ˜s(−x)]T .
It is thus only the mode ei(ωτ +ky) version of linear stabil-
ity equations that is hereafter implied when such equa-
tions are referred to.

For examination of the linear stability of the conduc-

tion base state in inviscid ﬂuid,

iω(

d2
dx2 − k2)˜u = Ra{ik
ǫ
Ra

k2[˜t − (1 +

d
dx

[˜t − (1 +

)˜s] sin θ+

ǫ
Ra

)˜s] cos θ}

(13)

was used along with

(

d2
dx2 − k2 − iω)˜t = ˜u

(14)

and

(

(15)

d2
dx2 − k2 − iω)˜s = ˜u,
where the Rayleigh numbers are deﬁned as Ra =
gα∆T d3/κ2 and Ras = −gβ(∂S/∂x)d4/κ2 = Ra + ǫ.
Here ω is nondimensionalized with κ/d2 as opposed to
ν/d2 in Eqs. (8)—(10). Although the deﬁnitions of Ra,
Ras, and ω for inviscid ﬂuid are diﬀerent from the re-
spective deﬁnitions for viscous ﬂuid, the same notations
are used for these parameters. It is implied below that
the deﬁnitions of Ra and Ras as well as the time nondi-
mensionalization scale (in ω) correspond to the type of
ﬂuid in question.

The boundary conditions for inviscid ﬂuid are

˜u = ˜t =

= 0

(x = ±1/2).

(16)

d˜s
dx

The inviscid problem at θ = 0 was also examined for
the Ra and Ras being independent of each other. That
is, equation

iω(

d2
dx2 − k2)˜u = k2(Ra˜t − Ras˜s)
was considered along with Eqs. (14) and (15) and bound-
ary conditions (16) for speciﬁed values of Ras.

(17)

For veriﬁcation of results, two diﬀerent approaches
were used. The marginally stable values of Ra and ω, Rac

and ωc, were computed with ǫ = 0 and with ǫ → 0 (i.e.,
when ǫ 6= 0 but is a very small number). Although the
respective solution procedures are diﬀerent, they are ex-
pected to lead to approximately the same outcome. ǫ 6= 0
is physically irrelevant for θ 6= 0, π, since the assump-
tion of the no-ﬂow background steady solution would no
longer apply then. Small ǫ can however be used for a
mathematical comparison between the respective results
for such ǫ 6= 0 and ǫ = 0.

If ǫ = 0, the general solution of Eqs. (8)—(10) can be
obtained analytically. Eqs. (9) and (10) are ﬁrst solved
for ˜t − ˜s, upon which the resulting general solution is in-
troduced into Eq. (8). The latter equation is then solved
for ˜u, and the general expressions for ˜t and ˜s are thus ob-
tained from Eqs. (9) and (10). For a ﬁxed k, Rac and ωc
are then found by searching in the Ra-ω domain for the
smallest Ra at which the complex matrix resulting from
the application of boundary conditions (11) or (12) to
the obtained general solution is singular. NAG Fortran
routines were employed for this purpose.

The above values of Rac and ωc were compared with
those obtained for a very small ǫ 6= 0. For ǫ 6= 0, the
general solution of Eqs. (8)—(10) depends on the roots of
the characteristic polynomial of the ordinary diﬀerential
equation for Ra˜t − Ras˜s. Such equation is obtained after
the Eq. (10) multiplied by Ras is subtracted from the Eq.
(9) multiplied by Ra and the resulting expression for ˜u
is introduced into Eq. (8). The roots of this polynomial
were calculated by the perturbation expansion in ǫ, which
allowed to obtain the general solution of Eqs. (8)—(10)
and compute Rac and ωc for a given k. Rac and ωc thus
computed were found to be practically identical to those
obtained from the above procedure with ǫ = 0.

The veriﬁcation procedure just described was also ap-
plied to Eqs. (13)—(15) for θ 6= 0. For θ = 0, the general
solution of Eqs. (13)—(15) can be obtained analytically
both for ǫ = 0 and for ǫ 6= 0 [for ǫ 6= 0, see also Eqs. (14),
(15), and (17)]. Upon application of boundary conditions
(16) to such general solutions, Rac and ωc (obtained by
the above search in the Ra-ω domain) were also found
to be practically insensitive to whether the procedure for
ǫ = 0 or that for a very small ǫ 6= 0 was used.

Once Rac(k0) and ωc(k0) have been found for a given
k0, the corresponding values of these parameters, Rac(k)
and ωc(k), at a nearby k = k0 + δk can be computed by
the Euler—Newton continuation method. This method
was applied to the solution of equation

F [Ra(k), ω(k), k] = 0,

(18)

where F [Ra(k), ω(k), k] stands for the (complex) deter-
minant of the matrix resulting from the application of
boundary conditions (11), (12), or (16) to the general so-
lution of the respective set of diﬀerential equations. As
mentioned above, such determinants were computed with
the use of standard Fortran routines. Numerical diﬀer-
entiation was thus employed to compute the Jacobian of
{Re[F (Ra, ω, k)], Im[F (Ra, ω, k)]}T (with respect to Ra
and ω) and ∂F (Ra, ω, k)/∂k.

The procedure just described proved to be extremely
eﬃcient for calculating the curves corresponding to the
eigenvalues with a zero real part. Such curves are de-
scribed by the equations of marginal stability. However,
one also needs to ensure that no disconnected branches of
[Ra(k), ω(k)]T satisfying the real and imaginary parts of
Eq. (18) arise for the values of Ra that are smaller than
those computed by the continuation procedure. For this
purpose, Rac(k) and ωc(k) were independently obtained
for several values of k by the search in the Ra-ω domain
outlined above.
In this case, however, the values of k
could be relatively scarcely spaced within the considered
wave number interval. The results of such searches were
found to be entirely consistent with those obtained by
the Euler—Newton continuation.

For viscous ﬂuid, the linear stability to steady distur-
bances was also considered, as θ ∈ (π/2, π). For this
purpose, ω = 0 was set in the Eqs. (8)—(10) for ǫ = 0
and the general solution of (resulting) equations

(

d2
dx2 − k2)2 ˜u =

−Ra[ik

(˜t − ˜s) sin θ + k2(˜t − ˜s) cos θ],

(19)

d
dx

(

d2
dx2 − k2)˜t = ˜u,

(20)

and

(

(21)

d2
dx2 − k2)˜s = ˜u
was obtained analytically. Either boundary conditions
(11) or (12) were then applied to this general solution and
the smallest Ra, Rac(k), at which the resulting matrix
becomes singular were searched for at diﬀerent k. The
results were veriﬁed by rewriting Eqs. (19)—(21) as two
equations for t − s and (t + s)/2. Such two equations
were accompanied by the boundary conditions (11) or
(12) formulated in terms of these new variables. Rac(k)
thus calculated were the same as those obtained from
Eqs. (19)—(21) and boundary conditions (11) or (12).

Some steady marginal-stability boundaries for inviscid

ﬂuid can be identiﬁed by examining

P r(

d2
dx2 − k2)2 ˜u =

−Ra[ik

(˜t − ˜s) sin θ + k2(˜t − ˜s) cos θ]

(22)

d
dx

along with Eqs.
(20) and (21) as well as stress-free
boundary conditions (11) at P r → 0. Here the deﬁ-
nition of Ra for inviscid ﬂuid is implied. In particular,
Rac(k) = 0 for inviscid ﬂuid if there exist ﬁnite Rac(k) for
the respective viscous problem. This approach, however,
may not yield the steady marginal-stability boundaries
that have no respective prototypes in viscous ﬂuid.

5

2. Three-dimensional disturbances

For θ 6= 0, π, a three-dimensional (3D) structure of
perturbation can generally become relevant in the linear
stability analysis. This study is mainly focused on 2D dis-
turbances, for which understanding of the basic physical
eﬀects of diﬀerent boundary conditions can be most con-
veniently obtained. Unless explicitly stated otherwise,
therefore, it is the 2D linear instability that is implied
below. However, 3D disturbances were also considered:
in some cases, their analysis was found to be useful for
understanding the 2D results.

With the same nondimensionalization as in ˜u, ˜t, and
˜s, the Fourier mode of a 3D disturbance is described as

[˜u(x), ˜t(x), ˜s(x)]T ei(ωτ +kyy+kzz) + cc,

(23)

where ky and kz are the y and z components, respectively,
of the full wave number k = (k2
z)1/2. (The z axis is
orthogonal to the x-y plane in Fig. 1 and is directed to-
wards the reader.) Expression (23) was then introduced
into the appropriately nondimensionalized, linearized 3D
governing equations for viscous and inviscid ﬂuid.

y + k2

With the deﬁnition of wave number k just generalized
for 3D disturbances, the marginal linear stability in vis-
cous ﬂuid is described by the equations formally identical
to Eqs. (9) and (10) along with

(

d2
dx2 − k2)(

d2
dx2 − k2 − iω)˜u = −Ra[iky
k2(˜t − ˜s) cos θ],

d
dx

(˜t − ˜s) sin θ+

(24)

where the above deﬁnition of Ra and the ω nondimen-
sionalization scale for viscous ﬂuid are implied. Likewise,
the 3D marginal linear stability in inviscid ﬂuid is de-
scribed by the equations formally identical to Eqs. (14)
and (15) along with

iω(

d2
dx2 − k2)˜u = Ra[iky
k2(˜t − ˜s) cos θ],

d
dx

(˜t − ˜s) sin θ+

(25)

where the above deﬁnition of Ra and the ω nondimen-
sionalization scale for inviscid ﬂuid are implied. For ﬁxed
values of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky) were obtained with the
same procedure as described above for 2D disturbances.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Oscillatory convection

1. General

For interpretation of the ﬁndings on oscillatory insta-
bility, only a reﬂectionally symmetric oscillatory pertur-
In a horizontal slot, such
bation is considered below.

6

perturbations are often referred to as standing waves.
They are then characterized by convection cells changing
their sense of rotation periodically in time. As suggested
by [29], both reﬂectionally and translationally symmet-
ric oscillatory perturbations are expected to arise from
the Hopf bifurcation in a system whose background state
possesses both these symmetries. Translationally sym-
metric oscillatory perturbations are often referred to as
traveling waves. However, it is suﬃcient to understand
the physical mechanism of such oscillatory instability in
terms of only one of the types of perturbation just men-
tioned. Amplitude growth of the oscillatory perturbation
of the other type can then be viewed merely as a math-
ematical consequence of the respective results in [29].

2. Inviscid ﬂuid

a. Eﬀect of the across-slot gravity. Let us ﬁrst con-
sider the problem in a horizontal slot addressed in [18]
(θ = 0), whose linear stability is described by Eqs.
(14), (15), and (17) and boundary conditions (16). The
marginal-stability curves, Rac(k) and ωc(k), are illus-
trated in Fig. 2. They exhibit two basic features. The
ﬁrst is that the most unstable wave number is zero for any
Ras. This wave number is also characterized by zero os-
cillation frequency. The second feature is the existence of
a minimal horizontal wavelength, decreasing with the in-
crease of Ras, below which the instability does not arise.
As highlighted in [18], to comply with ﬂux boundary
conditions, the isolines of solute perturbation tend to be
orthogonal to the boundary towards which the vertical
component of perturbation motion is directed. The ﬁxed-
value boundary conditions would however ensure a nearly
horizontal orientation of the perturbation isotherms. In
application to the steady instability in a horizontal slot,
such isoline behavior was illustrated in [20]. The dispar-
ity between across-slot perturbation gradients thus re-
sults in the temperature of a perturbation-cell ﬂuid ele-
ment being adjusted by diﬀusion to that of the ambient
ﬂuid much faster than the solute concentration. Since
the background solute stratiﬁcation is stable, a rising
(sinking) ﬂuid element experiences the buoyancy force
directed downwards (upwards).

Diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion in perturbed state thus
results in the buoyancy forces acting against the sense
of rotation of a small-amplitude perturbation cell. This
damps the rotation of such a convective cell in the initial
sense but would intensify cell rotation immediately after
the rotation sense has changed [18]. The potential energy
of component perturbation stratiﬁcations generated in
the end of the previous rotation cycle is transformed into
the energy of rotation in the new sense. This takes place
until the component perturbation stratiﬁcations are reset
to oppose the cell rotation in the new sense.

The potential energy of component perturbation strat-
iﬁcations is thus generated by and, due to diﬀerential

gradient diﬀusion, transferred to a rotating perturbation
cell. The maximal amount of such energy depends on the
time available for a ﬂuid element of the cell to change its
vertical coordinate. This time is speciﬁed by the horizon-
tal scale of instability. For this reason, Rac(k) decreases
with the increase of the horizontal wavelength and as-
sumes its minimal value for a given Ras as k → 0 (i.e.,
as wavelength λ → ∞).

Below a certain critical wavelength, on the other hand,
the amount of potential energy that can be utilized by a
perturbation cell becomes insuﬃcient for bringing about
growth of the perturbation amplitude. The increase of
Ras and associated growth of Rac enhance the dispar-
ity between the respective gradients in perturbed state.
This makes the energy transfer to the perturbation cells
more intensive. For this reason, the minimal unstable
wavelength decreases as Ras grows (Fig. 2).

Eﬃciency of utilization of the potential energy ac-
quired by a perturbation cell depends on the frequency
with which the marginally unstable cells change their
sense of rotation. This frequency thus has to be such
that the time for vertical diﬀusion naturally speciﬁed by
the instability wavelength be resonantly matched. Since
such time is expected to grow with wavelength increase,
ωc(k) → 0 as k → 0 and ωc(k) grows with the increase of
k from 0. As the wave number is further increased, the
wavelength time for manifestation of diﬀerential diﬀusion
eventually becomes insuﬃcient for generating growth of
the cell oscillation amplitude. As a consequence, ωc(k)
begins to decrease when certain values of k are exceeded
(Fig. 2), to aﬀord more time for the diﬀusion.

The decrease of ωc(k), however, leads to inconsistency
between the perturbation-frequency diﬀusion time and
the diﬀusion time speciﬁed by the instability wavelength.
This results in the eﬃciency of utilization of the energy
transferred to a perturbation cell by diﬀusion being re-
duced. In particular, Rac(k) exhibits a particularly sig-
niﬁcant increase in the interval of k where ωc(k) decreases
with growing k (Fig. 2). The additional amount of po-
tential energy the perturbation cells can actually utilize
due to such frequency decrease is thus expected to be
limited. As the wave number exceeds a critical value,
therefore, the decrease of ωc(k) and increase of Rac(k)
cannot further enhance the eﬀect of diﬀerential diﬀusion.
The instability thus fails to develop.

The fact that the most unstable wave number is zero
makes the determination of exact values of Rac(0) and
group velocity ωc
k(0) ≡ ∂ωc(0)/∂k relevant. Also appli-
cable to Eqs. (13)—(15) for θ > 0, the long-wavelength
expansion used for this purpose is as follows:

Rac(k) = Ra0 + k2Ra2 + ...,

ωc(k) = k(ω0 + k2ω2 + ...),

˜u(k) = k(˜u0 + k˜u1 + k2 ˜u2 + ...),

˜t(k) = ˜t0 + k˜t1 + k2˜t2 + ...,

˜s(k) = ˜s0 + k˜s1 + k2˜s2 + ....

(26)

In the brackets of the above expansion for ωc(k), term
kω1 is absent because it can be shown that ω1 = 0. In
particular, this follows from the ﬁrst of the conditions
that ωc(k) = −ωc(−k) and Rac(k) = Rac(−k). The
second condition also explains the absence of kRa1 in
the expansion for Rac(k) irrespective of that k = 0 is a
minimum for Rac(k) in Fig. 2.

Upon introduction of (26) into Eqs.

(14),(15), and
(17), and use of boundary conditions (16), ˜t0, ˜s0, and
˜u0 are ﬁrst obtained. The k1 order of Eq. (15) and the
ﬂux-free boundary conditions for ˜s1 from (16) then yield

ωc

k(0) ≡

∂ωc(0)
∂k

= ω0 = pRas/12.

(27)

Having derived the expressions for ˜s1 and ˜t1 and on in-
troduction of these into the k1 order of Eq. (17), one
obtains the expression for ˜u1. With such ˜u1, the k2 or-
der of Eq. (15) and the ﬂux-free boundary conditions for
˜s2 from (16) thus yield

Rac(0) = Ra0 = (2Ras + 5040)/51.

(28)

The numerical data underlying the marginal-stability
curves in Fig. 2 were found to accurately coincide with
Eqs. (27) and (28). For the case of two compensating
gradients this work is aimed at, Rac(0) = Ras,

Rac(0) = Ra0 = 12 · 60/7, ωc

k(0) = ω0 = p60/7. (29)

b. Eﬀect of the along-slot gravity. For the horizontal
and inclined slots with two compensating across-slot gra-
dients, Rac(k) and ωc(k), obtained from Eqs. (13)—(15)
and boundary conditions (16), are shown in Fig. 3. As
in the horizontal slot [Figs. 2 and 3(a)], k = 0 remains
the most unstable wave number up to the orientation of
the slot being nearly vertical [Figs. 3(b)—3(f)]. With
increasing θ, however, Rac(k) and ωc(k) mostly decrease
and qualitative changes arise in the shape of these curves
[Figs. 3(e)—3(i)]. This suggests the emergence of an
additional factor destabilizing the system.

As suggested by [19,20], if θ = 0 a viscous ﬂuid in the
region of Ra < 0 is expected to develop a steady insta-
bility whose mechanism is conceptually analogous to the
ﬁnger instability in the classical double-diﬀusion [15]. As
discussed in Sec. III B 1a below, such mechanism is the
only cause of linear steady instability for 0 < θ < π/2 as
well. This steady instability would thus have ﬁnite neg-
ative values of the marginally unstable Rayleigh number
for viscous ﬂuid [20] (see also Sec. III B 1b). Eqs. (20)—
(22) then suggest that in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) = 0 for
the respective wave number interval. Ra < 0 would thus
be the unstable region, with the instability mechanism
being similar to that discussed in [19,20]. Ra > 0 is there-
fore the region of stability to the eﬀect of the across-slot
gravity component on steady disturbances.

7

As the along-slot gravity component arises with θ
growing from 0, however, another mechanism of diﬀer-
ential gradient diﬀusion becomes increasingly relevant.
This mechanism favors a monotonic growth of distur-
bances. For viscous ﬂuid, it has been discussed in [21,23].
In the absence of dissipation, such mechanism is reason-
ably expected to be eﬀective for small-amplitude distur-
bances at any Ra. (As discussed just below, in particular,
the results in Fig. 3 suggest that the vertical slot with
inviscid ﬂuid is linearly unstable to steady disturbances
for a continuum of wavelengths at any Ra.) So long as
θ < π/2, however, it should not give rise to steady lin-
ear instability for Ra > 0. The diﬀerential diﬀusion due
to the across-slot gravity component opposes amplitude
growth of the perturbation cells whose sense of rotation
does not change (Sec. III A 2a). The monotonic-growth
mechanism identiﬁed in [21,23] is however expected to
contribute to the growth of oscillatory perturbations.

For 0 < θ < π/2, the perturbation-cell amplitude could
thus grow on account of a combination of two factors.
One factor is release of the potential energy of perturba-
tion stratiﬁcation due to the across-slot gravity compo-
nent. Such potential energy is generated in the previous
cycle of rotation. However, rotation of a perturbation
cell is also intensiﬁed by the energy directly contributed
via the along-slot gravity component in the current cy-
cle, by means of the mechanism discussed in [21,23]. In
the end of a cell rotation cycle, both parts of the ro-
tation energy are transformed into the potential energy
of across-slot perturbation stratiﬁcation. Depending on
the relative roles of the across-slot and along-slot gravity
components, ωc(k) thus decrease with increasing θ. ωc(k)
are speciﬁed by the time needed for most eﬀective absorp-
tion of the direct contribution of the along-slot gravity
component to oscillatory growth of the perturbation am-
plitude. Such time is larger than that specifying eﬀective
action of the across-slot gravity component alone.

For 0 < θ < π/2, the across-slot gravity component
alone can bring about growth of oscillatory perturbations
only for Ra cos θ > Rac(k) where Rac(k) are taken from
Fig. 3(a). The along-slot gravity component is however
expected to cause monotonic growth of a continuum of
perturbation wavelengths at any Ra. For Ra cos θ being
between 0 and Rac(k) from Fig. 3(a), the growth of
oscillatory perturbations is therefore largely due to the
direct contribution of the along-slot gravity component.
The relative role of the across-slot gravity component in
such growth on a given wavelength is speciﬁed by the
respective eﬀectiveness of transformation of the energy
of cell rotation into the potential energy of across-slot
perturbation stratiﬁcation. (Such process maintains the
oscillatory nature of instability.) This eﬀectiveness can
be judged based on the behavior of Rac(k) in Fig. 3(a).
Compared to the vicinity of the inﬁnite wavelength,
ﬁnite wavelengths are less eﬀective in transforming the
energy of cell rotation into the potential energy of across-
slot perturbation stratiﬁcation. This makes the relative
role of the along-slot gravity component on such ﬁnite

scales more pronounced than for the longer wavelengths.
[As θ grows from 0 in Figs. 3(a)—3(d), in particular,
Rac(k) decrease for k >∼ 1.1 and, due to the decrease
of the across-slot gravity component, increase slightly for
k <∼ 1.] The shape of marginal-stability curves thus be-
gins to change as θ approaches π/2. This is ﬁrst clearly
distinguishable for ωc(k) [Figs. 3(e)—3(i)], but eventu-
ally is seen in the behavior of Rac(k) as well [Figs. 3(f)—
3(i)]. In the immediate vicinity of θ = π/2, a set of ﬁnite
wavelengths thus becomes more unstable than the neigh-
borhood of the inﬁnite wavelength [Figs. 3(g)—3(i)].

With the across-slot gravity component vanishing as
θ → π/2 [Figs. 3(e)—3(i)], however, both Rac(k) and
ωc(k) decrease for all k. For θ > π/2, therefore, the slot
with inviscid ﬂuid is expected to be unstable to a contin-
uum of the wavelengths of steady disturbances for any
Ra > 0, and it ought to be unstable for any Ra 6= 0
at θ = π/2. As mentioned above, this would be con-
sistent with the interpretations in [21,23] if the absence
of dissipation is allowed for. The oscillatory and steady
instabilities due to the respective eﬀects of diﬀerential
gradient diﬀusion in inviscid ﬂuid are thus continuously
transformed into each other around θ = π/2.

Long-wavelength expansion (26) can also be used in
the inclined slot. Upon introduction of (26) into Eqs.
(13)—(15), the k1 order of these equations and boundary
conditions (16) yields

Ra2

0 sin2 θ + 720Ra0 cos θ − 8640ω2

0 = 0,

(30)

which is consistent with (27) for θ = 0. As for the hori-
zontal slot, an additional relation between Rac(0) = Ra0
and ωc
k(0) = ω0 could also be derived. This would in
principle allow to obtain the numerical values of these
critical parameters. Examination of the k2 order, how-
ever, showed that the second algebraic relation for Ra0
and ω0 is expected to be complex enough to make the
explicit values of Ra0 and ω0 analytically unachievable
and its utility highly questionable. For these reasons,
this relation is not pursued here. The values of Ra0
and ω0 estimated from the numerical data underlying the
marginal-stability curves in Fig. 3 were however found
to be consistent with Eq. (30) to a fairly high accuracy.

3. Viscous ﬂuid

a. Eﬀect of the across-slot gravity. The curves of
marginal stability for viscous ﬂuid under stress-free and
no-slip boundary conditions are illustrated in Figs. 4
(8)—(10) and
and 5. They were obtained from Eqs.
boundary conditions (11) and (12), respectively. As one
could anticipate, Rac(k) increase compared to the in-
viscid problem. (For the inviscid deﬁnition of Ra, such
increases are only greater.) For the no-slip boundary
conditions, this increase is thus also greater than for the
stress-free conditions. From the qualitative perspective,
however, the most prominent feature of the curves in

8

Figs. 4 and 5, compared to the above results for inviscid
ﬂuid, is that k = 0 is not the most unstable wave number
and ωc(k) > 0 as k → 0.

In the context of the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity
component, the obtained stability of the inﬁnite wave-
length may at ﬁrst sight appear to be counterintuitive.
The overall dissipation of perturbation motion is mini-
mized when the wavelength becomes inﬁnite. (The entire
dissipation of along-slot motion does not depend on the
wavelength, whereas the dissipation of across-slot mo-
tion vanishes along with this component of motion as
λ → ∞.) Since the eﬀect of diﬀerential gradient diﬀu-
sion is maximized for λ → ∞, one may think that the
inﬁnite wavelength has to remain most unstable in vis-
cous ﬂuid as well. In particular, k = 0 is most unstable
to steady disturbances in the horizontal-slot viscous ﬂuid
problem identiﬁed by θ = π and Ra > 0 [19,20,30].

The relative stabilization of long wavelengths [seen in
Figs. 4(a) and 5(a), for example] with respect to the
action of the across-slot gravity component is associated
with a special feature of the eﬀect of dissipation. This
feature arises when the instability is oscillatory. Before
describing such feature, however, it is worth illustrat-
ing details of the oscillatory instability mechanism in the
horizontal slot. This mechanism was discussed in Sec.
III A 2a above only in general terms. Such illustration is
provided in Fig. 6.

The potential energy of perturbation stratiﬁcation uti-
lized by a convective cell is generated by such cell in
the previous cycle of rotation (Sec. III A 2a). Fig. 6(a)
represents the stage when such potential energy is re-
leased after the sense of cell rotation has changed. At
this stage, cell motion is favored by horizontal solute per-
turbation stratiﬁcation and opposed by horizontal tem-
perature perturbation gradients. Such component per-
turbation distributions have arisen from the respective
background stratiﬁcations when the cells rotated in the
opposite sense, in the previous rotation cycle.

With temperature values being ﬁxed at the slot bound-
aries, perturbation isotherms are forced to be horizontal
as the walls are approached. Flux boundary conditions,
however, lead to a nearly vertical orientation of solute
perturbation isolines throughout the whole width of the
slot. Due to the resulting diﬀerential (across-slot) gra-
dient diﬀusion, the temperature opposition to convective
motion in Fig. 6(a) is overcome. Such motion thus in-
tensiﬁes [see ψ in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b)].

During the part of oscillation period just described,
release of the previously accumulated potential energy
is eﬀected via a mechanism similar to that discussed in
[20], where an inversely stratiﬁed problem was consid-
ered. This is particularly apparent as one compares the
present Fig. 6(a) with Fig. 2(a) in [20]. In the present
problem, however, the intensiﬁcation of convective mo-
tion [ψ in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b)] is inevitably accompanied
by changing distributions of the component perturbation
isolines [s and t in Fig. 6(b)]. With the lower background
values of the components at the upper wall, the clockwise

(counterclockwise) rotation gives rise to the relatively
smaller respective perturbations in the right (left) part
of a rotating cell. The component perturbation isolines
are thus gradually reset so that convective cell motion
be favored and opposed by the temperature and solute
perturbation stratiﬁcations, respectively [Fig. 6(c)].

Due to the interaction of a rotating perturbation cell
with ﬂux boundary conditions, the solute perturbation
isolines become more and more vertically oriented, in
contrast to the orientation of perturbation isotherms [s
and t in Figs. 6(d) and 6(e)]. The resulting diﬀerential
gradient diﬀusion acts against the sense of rotation of a
convective cell. This damps cellular motion [Figs. 6(c)—
6(e)]. The energy of cell rotation is thus transformed into
the potential energy of component perturbation stratiﬁ-
cations. Such potential energy is released [Figs. 6(f) and
6(g)] after the sense of cell rotation has changed.

The events in Figs. 6(f)—6(j) are thus qualitatively
identical (up to the inverse perturbation sign) to those
in Figs. 6(a)—6(e). The streamline pattern in Fig. 6(j)
appears to be diﬀerent from the respective pattern in Fig.
6(e). This is associated with the instances of change in
the sense of cell rotation being slightly diﬀerent in these
ﬁgures. Fig. 6(j) thus shows that the change of rotation
sense is initiated via the formation of small cells of the
opposite sense of rotation near the boundaries, where
diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion is most eﬀective.

The oscillatory instability thus arises when the poten-
tial energy generated during the rotation of a pertur-
bation cell in one sense is suﬃcient to increase the cell
amplitude while the energy is released. The release of
potential energy is eﬀected via diﬀerential gradient diﬀu-
sion during the cell rotation in the opposite sense. Part
of such energy, however, is inevitably spent on dissipa-
tion of along-slot perturbation-cell motion. This part is
greater the larger the wavelength is. Eﬃciency of the
(oscillatory instability) feedback is thus reduced by the
dissipation. [Such feedback forms between the perturba-
tion gradient disparity in one cycle of cell rotation and
the amplitude of rotation (giving rise to such a disparity)
in the next cycle.] The feedback eﬃciency, therefore, also
tends to zero when the wavelength becomes inﬁnite.

Although increase of the instability wavelength de-
creases the overall dissipation, it enhances the role of the
unchanged part of dissipation (i.e., of the dissipation of
along-slot cell motion) in the oscillatory instability feed-
back. For suﬃciently long wavelengths, the latter fac-
tor dominates the overall eﬀect of dissipation. To avoid
zero feedback eﬃciency when ωc → 0, ωc(k) thus remains
greater than zero as k → 0. In the long-wavelength limit,
therefore, an increasing portion of ﬂuid particles under-
going a cycle of diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion fail to ac-
quire a suﬃcient potential energy for their perturbation
amplitude to grow in the next cycle. In the context of
the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component, this ex-
plains the relative stabilization of long wavelengths in
Figs. 4(a)—4(d) and 5(a)—5(d) compared to the respec-
tive inviscid-ﬂuid problems [Figs. 3(a)—3(d)].

9

y +k2

b. 3D eﬀects. The above interpretation of the eﬀect
of viscous forces on the oscillatory instability suggests
that three-dimensionality of the disturbances might be
relevant in viscous ﬂuid. Let the 2D perturbation wave-
length, λy, be large enough for the eﬀect of dissipation
on eﬃciency of the instability feedback to dominate the
overall eﬀect of dissipation. Such eﬃciency increases
as the orientation of the axis of rotation of a convec-
tive cell changes and the total wavelength decreases with
the emergence of a z component of the wave number:
λ = 2π/(k2
z)1/2 < λy = 2π/ky. The critical Rayleigh
number could thus decrease compared to the 2D problem.
The horizontal-slot linear stability problem depends
only on the absolute value of the wave number. This im-
plies that Rac(ky, kz) = Rac[(k2
z)1/2, 0]. Let ky(> 0)
be ﬁxed, with respect to the selected coordinate sys-
tem, in the interval where Rac(ky)|kz=0 decreases with
increasing ky. Then Rac(ky)|kz >0 < Rac(ky)|kz =0 for
some kz > 0. That Rac(ky)|kz >0 > Rac(ky)|kz =0 for all
positive ky and kz in inviscid ﬂuid also follows from the
Rac(ky) in Fig. 3(a) only increasing with increasing ky.
When θ > 0, the wave number orientation becomes
physically meaningful.
For small θ > 0, however,
Rac(ky)|kz≥0 are still largely determined by the linear
stability equations for θ = 0. These describe the zero-
order perturbation expansion in θ of such equations for
θ > 0. When θ is small, therefore, most unstable distur-
bances with small ky are still expected to be of 3D and
2D nature in viscous and inviscid ﬂuid, respectively.

y + k2

Such 3D nature of instability hinges on the existence
of an interval of growing k with decreasing Rac(k) in a
parametrically close system of marginal-stability equa-
tions that depends only on the wave number modulus. It
could thus also apply to diﬀerent problems, where such
formal conditions are met due to other physical eﬀects.
For a ﬁnite θ > 0, the role of 3D disturbances is no
longer formally predictable. However, the above physical
interpretation of the eﬀect of dissipation on the instabil-
ity feedback still suggests 3D nature of the most unstable
disturbances with relatively small ky. This eﬀect is also
due to the action of across-slot gravity alone. It therefore
has to vanish as the slot orientation approaches vertical.
Examination of 3D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid
ﬂuid (Fig. 7) shows that the disturbances with kz up to
3 are more stable than the respective 2D perturbations
(kz = 0). Meaning that small-amplitude 3D disturbances
of any physical nature are not expected to arise in the
range of parameters considered in Fig. 7, this result is
consistent with the interpretation just mentioned.

As also anticipated from the above interpretation, 3D
oscillatory disturbances are most unstable in viscous ﬂuid
for an interval of ky adjoining ky = 0 (Figs. 8 and 9). In
addition, the data in Figs. 8 and 9 indicate that 3D dis-
turbances are the ﬁrst to arise only when the across-slot
gravity component is present. [2D disturbances (kz = 0)
are most unstable for all ky presented in Figs. 8(d) and
9(d).] Consistent with the above interpretation of the ef-
fect of the across-slot gravity component, Figs. 8(d) and

9(d) thus also suggest that the along-slot component does
not introduce an additional 3D oscillatory instability.

c. Eﬀect of the along-slot gravity.

c.1. General. As the results in Figs. 4(e) and 5(e),
apart from the respective ﬁndings in [23], suggest, 2D
oscillatory instability also arises due to the eﬀect of the
along-slot gravity component alone. The mechanism of
such instability can be identiﬁed by careful examination
of Fig. 10. In this ﬁgure, temporal behavior of an unsta-
ble perturbation mode possessing one of the reﬂectional
symmetries of the linearized problem is illustrated.

The perturbation ﬂow structures illustrated in Fig. 10
suggest that their dynamics is underlain by two counter-
propagating patterns. Either such pattern is dominant
near one of the slot sidewalls. The pattern propagat-
ing in (against) the gravity direction, i.e. downwards
(upwards), is dominant near the left (right) sidewall in
Fig. 10. This could be viewed as manifestation of such
a perturbation being a superposition of two counter-
propagating traveling waves. In particular, let q(τ, x, y)
stand for the reﬂectionally symmetric perturbation of ψ,
t, and s, nondimensionalized say consistently with Eqs.
(1)—(4). If Rac(k) < Rac(nk) (n = 2, 3, ...), in the large-
τ marginally unstable state of such wave number k,

q(τ, x, y) = Re[aq

1q′(x)ei(ωcτ +ky) + aq

2q′(−x)ei(ωcτ −ky)]

aq
2
aq
1
aq
1
aq
2

q′(−x)
q′(x)

q′(x)
q′(−x)

= Re{aq

1q′(x)ei(ωcτ +ky)[1 +

e−2iky]}

= Re{aq

2q′(−x)ei(ωcτ −ky)[1 +

e2iky]}.

(31)

1 and aq

Here coeﬃcients aq
2 specify the symmetry of the
respective variable, and q′(x) is the part of the Fourier
mode of the variable depending on x alone. It is seen from
Eq. (31) that when |q′(x)| ≪ |q′(−x)| for x > 0, the slot
half near the left (right) sidewall is dominated by the
downwards-(upwards-)propagating traveling wave. Dy-
namics of such a reﬂectionally symmetric mode restricted
to a slot half is thus largely due to the dominant part of
the respective propagating pattern.

Such dominant parts of the downwards- and upwards-
propagating streamline perturbation patterns are distin-
guishable as the along-slot sequences of counter-rotating
cells in the left and right halves, respectively, of Figs.
10(d) and 10(i). Near the left (right) sidewall, the regions
of the clockwise-rotating cells from such along-slot cell
sequence are seen from Fig. 10 to propagate downwards
(upwards) concurrently with mostly negative (positive)
perturbation values of both components. The regions of
such counterclockwise-rotating cells are also seen to prop-
agate downwards (upwards) concurrently with mostly
positive (negative) component perturbation values. Why
such component perturbation distributions take place is
analyzed below.

10

c.2. Component perturbation distributions.
Let us consider the dominant part of either traveling
streamline perturbation pattern [Figs. 10(d) and 10(i)] in
the respective frame of reference moving with it. In the
reference frame moving with the downwards-(upwards-
)propagating pattern, the laboratory-frame convective
cell velocities (Fig. 10) oriented downwards (upwards)
decrease. Such velocities oriented upwards (downwards)
thus increase. For an adequate speed of propagation, the
component perturbations are therefore transported ver-
tically only against the direction of propagation of the
respective pattern.

The distributions of temperature and solute perturba-
tions in Figs. 10(d) and 10(i), in particular, are in part
the result of the vertical transport just highlighted. They
are also due to the advection associated with across-slot
laboratory-frame velocities. The orientation of such ad-
vection is the result of addition of the along-slot compo-
nent of motion against the respective direction of propa-
gation to the laboratory-frame across-slot velocities.

Allowing for the along-slot periodicity, the regions
near the upper and lower domain boundaries in Fig.
10(d) are in the wake of the downwards-propagating
clockwise-rotating cells. Such a cell is seen in the left
central part of the ﬂow domain in this ﬁgure. These re-
gions are also in the wake of the upwards-propagating
counterclockwise-rotating cells represented by such cell
in the right central part of the ﬂow domain [Fig. 10(d)].
The component perturbations are thus transported into
the upper- and lower-boundary regions by the velocities
whose (laboratory-frame) orientation in such convective
cells is against the respective direction of propagation.

The component perturbations in the upper- and lower-
boundary regions in Fig. 10(d) are also aﬀected via the
advection caused by (laboratory-frame) across-slot veloc-
ities. On addition of the along-slot component of mo-
tion against the respective direction of propagation, such
across-slot velocities in the left (right) half of the slot are
relevant only where they are oriented in Fig. 10(d) from
(towards) the respective sidewall.

In all transport processes just outlined, the temper-
ature and solute perturbations are transferred into the
upper- and lower-boundary regions [Fig. 10(d)] only from
the near-left-wall and middle areas of the slot. In such
areas, the background values of the components are in
the upper half of their interval.
The central region in Fig.

10(d), occupied by the
full counter-rotating cells,
is also in the wake of two
counter-propagating convective cells. One of these is
the upwards-propagating clockwise-rotating cell partly
seen in the right upper corner of the domain in
Fig. 10(d). The other is the downwards-propagating
counterclockwise-rotating cell partly seen in the left lower
corner of the domain. The component perturbations
are thus transported into the central region of the do-
main in Fig. 10(d) by the velocities whose (laboratory-
frame) orientation in such convective cells is against the
respective direction of propagation. Advection due to

the (laboratory-frame) across-slot velocities just below
(above) the domain central region in the left (right) slot
half in Fig. 10(d) also aﬀects the component perturba-
tions in this region.

In all transport processes just outlined, the temper-
ature and solute perturbations are transferred into the
central region of the domain in Fig. 10(d) only from the
near-right-wall and middle areas of the slot. In such ar-
eas, the background values of the components are in the
lower half of their interval.

The central region of the domain in Fig.

10(d) is
thus characterized by the relatively smaller values of the
component perturbations while the larger values are in
the upper and lower regions of the domain. The dom-
inant parts of counter-propagating streamline perturba-
tion patterns distinguished in Fig. 10(i) are about half of
the wavelength ahead of their locations in Fig. 10(d) in
the respective directions. The component perturbation
distributions in Fig. 10(i) are consistent with the above
understanding [described for Fig. 10(d)] of the transport
processes given rise to by the cells in this ﬁgure.

The component perturbations in Fig. 10(i) can also
be viewed as resulting from their dominant parts being
about half of the wavelength ahead of their locations in
Fig. 10(d) in the respective directions. These dominant
parts are however indistinguishable in Figs. 10(d) and
10(i), where they merge into the respective slot-wide pat-
terns of component perturbations. They are only approx-
imately discernible in Figs. 10(a) and 10(e).

As co-rotating cells in the dominant parts of two
counter-propagating streamline perturbation patterns
[Figs. 10(d) and 10(i)] have close vertical locations, they
merge into a single slot-wide cell. This is seen in Figs.
10(a)—10(c),10(e),10(f)—10(h), and 10(j). The temper-
ature and solute perturbations in these ﬁgures result from
superposition of their respective counter-propagating
perturbation patterns [whose dominant parts are roughly
discernible in Figs. 10(a) and 10(e)]. The latter accom-
pany the counter-propagating streamline patterns [whose
dominant parts are discerned in Figs. 10(d) and 10(i)].

The component perturbation distributions in Figs.
10(a)—10(c),10(e),10(f)—10(h), and 10(j) are thus also
consistent with the transport processes given rise to by
the patterns of convective cells in these ﬁgures. Such
processes have to be interpreted as in the above analy-
sis of Figs. 10(d) and 10(i). The component perturba-
tion distributions in Fig. 10(b), for example, are aﬀected
by the along-slot transport generated by the clockwise-
rotating (slot-wide) cells alone. [Only such cells have the
velocities whose (laboratory-frame) orientation is against
the respective direction of propagation.] The advection
caused by across-slot laboratory-frame velocities is how-
ever due to both counter-rotating cells in Fig. 10(b). In
assessing the eﬀect of such advection, one has to allow
for addition of the along-slot velocities oriented upwards
and downwards in the left and right halves of the ﬂow
domain, respectively.

11

c.3. Feedback.

In the pattern dominant part prop-
agating downwards (upwards) near the left (right) side-
wall, the clockwise-rotating cells thus steadily coincide
with the regions of mostly negative (positive) perturba-
tion values of the components. Such counterclockwise-
rotating cells then steadily coincide with the regions of
mostly positive (negative) component perturbation val-
ues [Figs. 10(d) and 10(i)]. In the vicinity of a sidewall,
perturbation isotherms are however prone to be parallel
to the boundary, where temperature perturbation van-
ishes.
In contrast to this, solute perturbation isolines
tend to be orthogonal to the sidewalls, because of the
ﬂux-free boundary conditions.

Such disparate isoline behavior gives rise to diﬀer-
ential gradient diﬀusion. As a consequence, a near-
slot-middle streamline point in the downwards-(upwards-
)propagating clockwise-rotating cells [Figs. 10(d) and
10(i)]
is typically heavier (lighter) than the respec-
tive streamline point near the left (right) sidewall at
Likewise, a near-slot-
the same vertical
middle streamline point in the downwards-(upwards-
)propagating counterclockwise-rotating cells is typically
lighter (heavier) than the respective streamline point
near the left (right) sidewall at the same vertical loca-
tion. [In particular, see Figs. 11(d) and 11(i).]

location.

The ﬂow perturbation structures illustrated in Fig. 10
are expected to result from superposition of the counter-
propagating patterns whose dominant parts have just
been described. They are all thus characterized by a hor-
izontal density diﬀerence between two streamline points
that is consistent with the sense of rotation of the respec-
tive convective cell. This can be inferred from Fig. 10
and is explicitly illustrated in Fig. 11.

In a quasisteady sense, therefore, the energy that
drives small-amplitude oscillatory convection in Fig. 10
has essentially the same nature as that driving small-
and ﬁnite-amplitude steady convection in [21,23]. In con-
trast to small-amplitude steady convection, such oscilla-
tory convection arises for µ = 1 because the oscillatory
perturbation gives rise to a more favorable ratio between
the maximal absolute values of relative perturbations of
the components. This is discussed in Sec. III B 1a below,
in the context of steady convection.

The streamline disturbance resulting from superposi-
tion of certain counter-propagating convective ﬂow pat-
terns thus generates such distribution of component per-
turbations that favors its convective motion. For ampli-
tude growth of such disturbance to be maintained, how-
ever, the counter-propagation of the convective patterns
also has to be sustained. This underlies oscillatory nature
of the instability.

It was assumed above that the laboratory-frame con-
vective velocities oriented in the respective direction of
streamline-pattern propagation have a practically negli-
gible eﬀect on the distribution of component perturba-
tions. This holds when the speed of streamline-pattern
propagation adequately matches such convective veloc-
ities in the marginally unstable state. The streamline

points whose laboratory-frame velocity orientation in the
marginally unstable state coincides with their direction of
propagation are thus expected to have their component
perturbation values practically steady.

In the counter-propagating sequences of convective
cells [Figs. 10(d) and 10(i)], practically steady values
of the component perturbations arise for ﬂuid particles
in the near-wall regions of the counterclockwise-rotating
cells. The values of component perturbations in these
cell sequences also have to be practically steady in the
middle slot regions of the clockwise-rotating cells. For
all these regions, the laboratory-frame velocities are ori-
ented in the direction of propagation of the respective
streamline pattern. In the middle slot regions, the eﬀects
of temperature and solute perturbations on the density
perturbation largely oﬀset each other. Due to diﬀerential
gradient diﬀusion, however, the density perturbation in
the near-wall regions is speciﬁed primarily by the respec-
tive values of solute perturbation alone.

The solute (density) perturbation values in the near-
wall regions of counterclockwise-rotating cells in Figs.
10(d) and 10(i) [Figs. 11(d) and 11(i)] are expected to
be steadily positive and negative in the left and right
parts of the slot, respectively. The time instances when
such counter-propagating counterclockwise-rotating cells
merge into a single counterclockwise-rotating cell are il-
lustrated in Figs. 10(a)—10(c),10(e),10(f)—10(h), and
10(j). The values of solute (density) perturbation in such
a slot-wide cell near the left sidewall are also always larger
than those near the right sidewall (Fig. 11).

It is the steady horizontal density diﬀerence arising
between two halves of the slot that sustains the counter-
propagation underlying dynamics of the reﬂectionally
symmetric disturbance. The counter-propagating con-
vective streamline patterns thus give rise to such feed-
back distribution of component perturbations that, due
to diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion, enhances their convec-
tive motion and sustains their counter-propagation.

c.4. Marginal stability boundaries. Diﬀerential
gradient diﬀusion is most eﬀective when a convective cell
particle has maximal time available at a particular wave-
length to unequally change its component values while its
across-slot location is changed. This time is larger the
longer the wavelength is.
In order that the oscillatory
instability mechanism just described be eﬀective, such
diﬀusion time has to be adequately matched by the time
during which the wavelength is passed by either travel-
ing perturbation pattern. The latter time speciﬁes the
marginal instability frequency. Such frequency in Figs.
4(e) and 5(e) thus decreases as the wavelength increases.
Dissipation of the along-slot component of perturba-
tion motion is part of the feedback for the steady instabil-
ity caused by diﬀerent boundary conditions in a vertical-
slot geometry [23] (see also Sec. III B 1a below). Such a
dissipation is also part of the feedback for oscillatory in-
stability in the horizontal slot at θ = 0 (see Sec. III A 3a

12

above). The eﬃciency of both such feedbacks thus has to
decrease as the wavelength increases. In particular, this
factor was found to be responsible for the shape of the
marginal-stability curves in Figs. 4(a) and 5(a). In con-
trast to the respective curve in inviscid ﬂuid [Fig. 3(a)],
the long wavelengths in Figs. 4(a) and 5(a) are not most
unstable and ωc(k) is a ﬁnite nonzero value at k = 0.

In view of the vertical-slot oscillatory instability be-
ing of a quasisteady nature, its feedback eﬃciency is also
progressively reduced by the dissipation of along-slot per-
turbation motion when the wavelength increases. As in
the horizontal-slot oscillatory instability, the feedback ef-
ﬁciency would also decrease to zero if the time available
for across-slot diﬀusion as λ → ∞ (k → 0) were fully
utilized. In the long-wavelength limit, therefore, ωc(k) in
Figs. 4(e) and 5(e) remains a ﬁnite nonzero value. How-
ever, diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion, being a basic ingredi-
ent of the vertical-slot oscillatory instability mechanism,
would then have to progressively decrease its eﬀectiveness
as k approaches 0. This explains why Rac(k) increase as
k decreases near k = 0 in Figs. 4(e) and 5(e) and the
marginal-stability curves in these ﬁgures [as well as those
in Figs. 4(b)—4(d) and 5(b)—5(d)] remain qualitatively
the same as in Figs. 4(a) and 5(a).

As θ increases above π/2, emergence of the across-slot
gravity component makes the associated mechanism of
linear steady instability, identiﬁed in [19,20], potentially
relevant. In the framework of steady disturbances, the ef-
fectiveness of this mechanism is only reduced by the pres-
ence of the along-slot gravity component. As discussed
in Sec. III B 1b below, this is associated with failure of
the along-slot gravity component alone to give rise to lin-
ear steady instability. However, onset of the oscillatory
instability due to the eﬀect of the along-slot gravity com-
ponent is still aﬀected for θ > π/2 by the mechanism of
steady instability arising from the across-slot component.
For a particular wavelength, the diﬀusion time has to
optimally match a combination of the steady manifes-
tation of the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component
and the oscillatory one of the along-slot component. It
therefore has to be larger than that matching the eﬀect
of the latter gravity component alone. The marginally
unstable frequency, ωc(k), is thus generally expected to
decrease as θ exceeds π/2. As the wavelength increases,
however, such frequency speciﬁed by the eﬀect of the
along-slot gravity component alone progressively exceeds
that corresponding to the maximal time available at the
wavelength for the respective manifestation of diﬀeren-
tial gradient diﬀusion. This allows to avoid an overly
large reduction of feedback eﬃciency, resulting from the
dissipation of along-slot perturbation motion, when such
maximal time is utilized to a greater extent.

So long as the eﬀect of the along-slot gravity com-
ponent is dominant, the dissipation of along-slot per-
In-
turbation motion remains of primary importance.
termediate and long wavelengths could not thus signiﬁ-
cantly decrease their marginally unstable frequency. For
this reason, ωc(k) decreases noticeably only in the region

of relatively large k in Figs. 4(f)—4(i) and 5(f)—5(i),
whereas it remains practically unchanged in the vicinity
Intermediate and long wavelengths thus fail
of k = 0.
to substantially absorb steady manifestation of the eﬀect
of the across-slot gravity component. It is only for the
relatively large wave numbers, therefore, that Rac(k) de-
crease with increasing θ. In contrast to this, the decreas-
ing eﬀect of the along-slot gravity component leads even
to slight increases of Rac(k) in the interval of relatively
small wave numbers in Figs. 4(f)—4(i) and 5(f)—5(i).

With θ increasing above π/2, the decrease of the along-
slot gravity component still enhances room for the grow-
ing across-slot component. The lower bound of the re-
gion of k with decreasing Rac(k) is thus found to decrease
[Figs. 4(f)—4(i) and 5(f)—(i)]. Around θ ≈ 1.5π/2, how-
ever, Rac(k) are still increasing (with increasing θ) when
k ≤∼ 2.5 for both stress-free and no-slip boundary con-
ditions. In particular, development of a new minimum in
the shape of Rac(k) [Figs. 4(i) and 5(i)] is a manifesta-
tion of the opposing trends exhibited by Rac(k) within
the diﬀerent parts of the interval of k.

For θ ≈ 1.55π/2, ωc(k) in the regions of the smallest
and largest values of k in Figs. 4 and 5 could not be
continued into each other. Slope |∂ωc(k)/∂k| also seemed
to exhibit inﬁnite increases around an interval of middle
values of k. No marginally unstable curve with ωc(k) > 0
was then found within this interval of middle k. These
ﬁndings suggest that at θ ≈ (1.5−1.55)π/2 the oscillatory
marginal-stability boundaries in Figs. 4(i) and 5(i) begin
to transform into the respective curves characterized by
a zero real eigenvalue.

B. Steady convection

1. Linear steady instability

a. Eﬀect of the along-slot gravity. The vertical slot
with inviscid ﬂuid was found in Sec.
III A 2b above
to be unstable to steady inﬁnitesimal disturbances for
a continuum of wave numbers at any Ra.
In viscous
ﬂuid, however, dissipation of the along-slot component
of perturbation-cell motion is part of the feedback for
steady instability, if any, in the vertical-slot geometry. In
particular, across-slot motion of a perturbed ﬂuid particle
gives rise to component gradient disparity and resulting
diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion. Such across-slot motion is
however maintained only due to along-slot motion in the
rotating perturbation cell, rather than via an emerging
across-slot component of the force acting on the particle.
This along-slot cell motion is driven by the across-slot
density diﬀerences between respective streamline points.
Such density diﬀerences arise from diﬀerential gradient
diﬀusion [21,23], the process responsible for feedback.

Increase of the disturbance wavelength, in particular,
would not thus just decrease the overall dissipation. It
would also reduce the feedback eﬃciency. This is similar

13

to the eﬀect of dissipation on the horizontal-slot oscilla-
tory instability feedback (see Sec. III A 3a above).

For viscous ﬂuid, linear steady instability of all wave-
lengths in a vertical-slot geometry is thus generally less
likely than in the horizontal slot where the component
stratiﬁcation favors steady instability [19,20].
In addi-
tion, if such instability does arise due to diﬀerent bound-
ary conditions in a vertical-slot geometry (as in [21], for
example, where the across-slot background gradients are
not exactly compensating), long wavelengths are not ex-
pected to be most unstable. This is associated with the
feedback eﬃciency tending to zero as λ → ∞. As seen
from Figs. 12 and 13, however, the long wavelengths are
most unstable for all illustrated θ. Their instability is
also most persistent as the interval of unstable wave num-
bers shrinks and vanishes when θ → π/2. Even when θ
is very close to π/2, therefore, the instability could come
only from the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component.
This eﬀect is known to result in such long-wavelength in-
stability [19,20,30].

Manifestation of the viscous linear instability in the
vertical-slot geometry seems to be limited to a more fa-
vorable background ratio between the opposing compo-
nent gradients. As highlighted in [23], enhancement of
the relative background across-slot solute scale with re-
spect to that in a LHSSS (RaS > 0, µ = 0), taking place
as µ increases from 0, is expected to be unfavorable for
development of the LHSSS linear steady instability. In
particular, the relative increase of the solute perturbation
amplitude, associated with such solute scale enhance-
ment, would result in a decrease of the horizontal density
diﬀerences between respective streamline points of the
perturbation pattern illustrated in Fig. 2(a) of [21]. This
was conﬁrmed in trial computations for RaS = 30000 and
λ = 2. The streamline perturbation pattern in Fig. 2(a)
of [21] was indeed found in such computations to change
with growth of the relative solute perturbation amplitude
as µ was increased from 0 to ∼ 0.7.

As seen from Fig. 14, essentially the same ﬁndings
are reported for RaS = 0 as well, when µ increases from
∼ 0.92 to ∼ 0.98. The streamline perturbation pattern
in Fig. 14(a), which is similar to that in Fig. 2(a) of
[21], could not be maintained as the background solute
scale grows when µ is increased towards 1. Such pattern
is thus found to undergo changes [Figs. 14(b)—14(d)].
The changed streamline pattern in Fig. 14(d), however,
only enhances the unfavorable role of dissipation, which
results in vanishing of the instability.

The reported analysis of linear steady instability for
RaS = 0 was possible in view of the existence of a nar-
row interval of µ (∼ 0.86 ≤ µ ≤∼ 0.98) for which λ = 2
is unstable to steady inﬁnitesimal disturbances. This in-
terval has been uncovered in the present study. When
µ is decreased below ∼ 0.86, the linear steady instabil-
ity disappears. Vertical shear motion, intensifying with
decreasing µ, becomes an important factor in the nature
of background ﬂow. This prevents the manifestation of
small-amplitude diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion. As µ ex-

ceeds ∼ 0.98, on the other hand, the ratio between the
background component scales becomes insuﬃciently fa-
vorable for manifestation of small-amplitude steady con-
vection. Such ratio matters so much because of the eﬀect
of dissipation on instability feedback just emphasized.

The quasisteady nature of oscillatory instability in the
vertical-slot geometry suggests that the relative values
of component perturbations have critical importance for
manifestation of such instability as well. In particular,
the streamline perturbation patterns in Figs. 10(c),10(g),
and 10(h) are reminiscent of those in Fig.
14. The
maximal absolute values of solute perturbation in Figs.
10(c),10(g), and 10(h) are however smaller, compared
to the respective temperature perturbation values, than
those in Fig. 14. Counter-propagation of the streamline
disturbance constituents prevents such disturbance from
coherently maintaining the maximal absolute values of
solute perturbation exceeding those of temperature per-
turbation. The dominant part of either traveling stream-
line perturbation pattern also interacts only with one of
the sidewall boundary conditions. In contrast to this, the
steady disturbance interacts with both such conditions.
b. Eﬀect of the across-slot gravity. When Ra > 0 and
θ = π, diﬀerent boundary conditions result in the steady
linear instability whose physics is conceptually analogous
to the ﬁnger instability in conventional double-diﬀusive
convection [19,20]. The mechanism of this instability has
to be entirely responsible for small-amplitude steady con-
III B 1a just
vection for θ ∈ (π/2, π) as well (see Sec.
above). It is expected to give rise to such convection so
long as the across-slot gravity component is present.

At any θ ∈ (π/2, π) illustrated in Figs. 12 and 13,
the instability is restricted to the wave numbers that are
smaller than a certain critical value. From qualitative
point of view, this is consistent with enhancement of the
overall dissipation by the wave number increase. How-
ever, such largest unstable wave number decreases to zero
as θ approaches π/2. This does not seem to be a neces-
sary consequence only of the vanishing of the across-slot
gravity component. In addition, the increases of Rac(k)
in the vicinity of the largest unstable k for a given θ in
Figs. 12 and 13 are noticeably more abrupt than one
could expect from the behavior of Rac(k) at the same
k and larger θ. These observations suggest that the be-
havior of Rac(k) would also have to be aﬀected by an
additional stabilizing factor.

The curves in Figs. 12 and 13 are aﬀected by the along-
slot gravity component. In the presence of this gravity
component, the steady perturbation maintained by the
across-slot component would have to change its pattern.
However, the along-slot gravity component alone fails to
give rise to linear steady instability. Such perturbation
change could thus be only stabilizing, for the resulting
pattern would no longer be optimal with respect to the
eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component. In particular,
the perturbation change could result in the across-slot
perturbation-cell path acquiring a slope with respect to
the across-slot coordinate. This would enhance the dis-

14

sipation of across-slot motion. Such stabilizing eﬀect is
also most pronounced for small wavelengths, and its rel-
ative signiﬁcance decreases as the wavelength increases.
Another feature of Figs. 12 and 13 is that the interval
of unstable wave numbers is longer for no-slip bound-
ary conditions (Fig. 13) when π > θ ≥ 1.4π/2. For
π/2 < θ ≤ 1.3π/2, it is the stress-free conditions (Fig.
12) that give rise to a longer interval of unstable wave
numbers. In the latter case, all unstable wavelengths are
large enough for the dissipation of along-slot perturba-
tion motion to dominate the overall dissipation. Stress-
free boundary conditions thus allow to maintain a longer
interval of unstable wavelengths. As the slot orientation
is far enough from vertical, however, the shortest unsta-
ble wavelengths are such that the dissipation of across-
slot motion becomes relevant. The respective compensat-
ing critical component gradients are then larger for no-
slip boundary conditions. This factor proves to be more
important for maintaining the instability of the shortest
wavelengths than the dissipation decrease due to stress-
free boundary conditions.

To obtain the dependence of Rac(0) on θ,

Rac(k) = Ra0 + Ra2k2 + ...,

˜u(k) = k2(˜u0 + ˜u2k2 + ...),

˜t(k) = ˜t0 + ˜t2k2 + ...,

˜s(k) = ˜s0 + ˜s2k2 + ...

(32)

were introduced into Eqs. (19)—(21). t0 = 0 and s0 =
const were thus obtained from the k0 order of Eqs. (20)
and (21) and the boundary conditions for t0 and s0. Such
t0 and s0 were then introduced into the k1 order of Eq.
(19). Along with either (stress-free) boundary conditions
(11) or (no-slip) boundary conditions (12), this resulted
in the respective expressions for ˜u0. With the use of these
expressions, the k2 order of Eq. (21) and the respective
boundary conditions for s2 lead to

Rac(0) = Ra0 = −Raπ

c / cos θ = Raπ

c / sin(χπ/2).

(33)

Here Raπ
izontal slot (θ = π): Raπ
conditions and Raπ

c is the value Rac(0) would take on in the hor-
c = 120 for stress-free boundary
c = 720 for the no-slip conditions [30].
The derivation of Eq. (33) shows that the terms as-
sociated with the along-slot gravity component in the
right-hand side of Eq. (19) have no impact on Eq. (33).
This is consistent with the above interpretations that the
eﬀect of this gravity component is not among the causes
of linear steady instability for θ ∈ (π/2, π) and that any
role of this eﬀect vanishes as k → 0. Eq. (33) was also
found to accurately coincide with the numerical data un-
derlying Figs. 12 and 13.

2. Finite-amplitude steady convection

a. General. Speciﬁcation of solute concentration
at the middle points of the across-slot boundaries was
found to numerically permit two pairs of periodic steady
convective solutions arising from the conduction state.
Within the selected along-slot period, one of such so-
lution pairs is characterized at the onset of linear in-
stability by two full counter-rotating cells. Except for
the horizontal-slot geometry, the corresponding ﬁnite-
amplitude solutions are generally reﬂectionally asym-
metric. This is the result of asymmetry between their
counter-rotating cells [23] (see also Sec. III B 2b below).
In the other solution pair, a clockwise-(counter-
clockwise-)rotating cell
in the center of the period
is combined with parts of counterclockwise-
interval
(clockwise-)rotating cells near the across-slot bound-
aries.
This pair possesses the reﬂection symmetry
identiﬁed by LS[ψ(−x, −y), t(−x, −y), s(−x, −y)]T =
[ψ(x, y), −t(x, y), −s(x, y)]T for all θ. The eigenvectors
in Fig. 14, in particular, correspond to the solutions that
are LS-symmetric for the illustrated along-slot interval.
The only essential diﬀerence between the branch pairs
is however the along-slot phase shift between their so-
lutions. In particular, when linear steady instability is
present for a given θ (say for θ = π or for θ = 0 as µ < 1),
these solution pairs bifurcate from the conduction state
at the Rayleigh numbers the diﬀerence between which is
practically negligible. When the bifurcation is subcrit-
ical, the limit points are also formed at practically the
same Ra. These pairs of branches can thus be viewed as
standing for a single physically relevant pair of solution
branches arising from the respective conduction state.

The two pairs of convective solution branches were
however found to undergo dissimilar secondary steady
bifurcation phenomena, as Ra or θ were varied. Such
phenomena were detected by changes in the solution Ja-
cobian sign, monitored during the continuation proce-
dure. This dissimilarity could arise, in particular, from
the diﬀerent symmetries of the respective convective so-
lutions, only one pair of which is LS-symmetric. Some
of the bifurcations were also associated with intersection
between the solution branches of the two pairs. In terms
of the ﬂow structure, however, the encountered secondary
bifurcation phenomena were often found to give rise only
to along-slot phase shifts of the respective convective pat-
terns. The presence or absence of secondary steady bi-
furcations, and of the instabilities associated with them,
in real ﬂuid could not thus be established with certainty
in the framework of the present numerical approach.

In addition, the stability of ﬁnite-amplitude steady
convective branches to oscillatory disturbances was found
to depend on which of the two numerically present pairs
of solutions is examined. This proved to hold even for
the horizontal-slot geometry, where the ﬂow pair with
full counter-rotating cells also has a reﬂection symmetry.
As already emphasized in [26], the prescribed across-

15

slot-boundary values of s can prevent traveling-wave dis-
turbances from being detected in the present formula-
tion. However, ﬁnite-amplitude traveling-wave branches
could intersect steady convective branches and thus af-
fect the stability of the latter. In particular, such ﬁndings
have been previously reported for binary ﬂuid convection
[31] and for conventional double-diﬀusive convection [32].
The presence of traveling-wave branches also aﬀects the
stability of reﬂectionally symmetric oscillatory branches
[29]. This could have an additional eﬀect on the stabil-
ity of ﬁnite-amplitude steady solutions. The stability of
steady convective branches to secondary oscillatory dis-
turbances may therefore anyway change if the existence
of traveling waves is properly allowed for.

The solution structures reported below thus refer to
the two pairs of steady convective branches arising in
numerical computations as one, as has been done for the
periodic solution computations in [21,23,26] as well. The
focus of this study is also on the physical mechanisms of
conduction-state instability. For the reasons just men-
tioned, therefore, the issues of secondary (steady and
oscillatory) instability of the computed ﬁnite-amplitude
steady ﬂows were left outside the scope of this work.

b. θ ∈ [π/2, π]. For a large enough perturbation am-
plitude at θ = π/2, an appropriate streamline pattern is
maintained by the combined action of diﬀerential gradi-
ent diﬀusion and along-slot gravity. This is possible de-
spite the eﬀects of dissipation, due to the energy coming
from the nonlinear terms in Eqs. (1)—(4). Such ﬁnite-
amplitude convection in a vertical slot was illustrated in
Fig. 3 of [23], where it was found to arise without the
respective linear instability for RaS > 0 as well.

As θ changes from π to π/2, the mechanism of diﬀeren-
tial gradient diﬀusion discussed in [19,20] thus gradually
gives way to that considered in [23]. Via supercritical
bifurcation, the former mechanism gives rise to a convec-
tive steady pattern of symmetric counter-rotating cells.
The steady convection pattern resulting from the ﬁnite-
amplitude mechanism in [23] has however only clockwise-
rotating cells. The along-slot gravity component has an
asymmetric eﬀect on the senses of rotation of counter-
rotating cells.

In particular, let a perturbation pattern of symmet-
ric counter-rotating cells be generated in a vertical slot
with two opposing across-slot background gradients and
the higher component values at the left sidewall. The
clockwise-rotating cells would then create locally unsta-
ble solute perturbation stratiﬁcation. Such stratiﬁcation
would however be stable where the cells rotate counter-
clockwise. Due to diﬀerential diﬀusion (whether of gradi-
ent or classical nature), the clockwise-rotating cells have
to intensify with respect to the cells rotating counter-
clockwise [21–23,25]. The clockwise-rotating cells would
thus be dominant in the ﬁnite-amplitude steady pattern.
At the onset of linear steady instability, the counter-
rotating cells are bound to be symmetric. The asymme-
try between them could therefore arise, as θ changes from
π to π/2, only with growth of the convection amplitude.

The latter is expected to grow when the Rayleigh number
increases above the onset of linear instability. The eﬀect
of the along-slot gravity component is itself also enhanced
as the Rayleigh number is increased. For Ra = 31000
and λ = 2, in particular, the ﬂow patterns are thus en-
tirely dominated by the clockwise-rotating cells when θ is
still greater than 1.9π/2 [Figs. 15(a)—15(e)]. The rem-
nants of the counterclockwise-rotating cells also vanish
for θ ∈ (1.7π/2, 1.75π/2) [Figs. 15(f)—15(j)].

For θ ∈ [π/2, π], diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion under-
lies the convective mechanisms resulting from both the
along-slot and the across-slot gravity components. The
mechanism at θ = π/2, however, gives rise only to nonlin-
ear instability. As θ changes from π to π/2, primary con-
trol over ﬁnite-amplitude convection is thus continuously
transformed from the convective mechanism arising from
the across-slot gravity component to that associated with
the along-slot component. Linear steady instability re-
mains however under control of the decreasing across-slot
gravity component alone. At some θ[≈ (1.6 − 1.7)π/2 for
λ = 2], this renders the steady bifurcation subcritical, as
seen from Figs. 16(a) and 16(b). As the across-slot grav-
ity component further decreases with θ being decreased
[to θ ∈ (1.3π/2, 1.4π/2) for λ = 2], the linear steady in-
stability vanishes. Finite-amplitude steady convection is
however maintained by the growing eﬀect of the along-
slot gravity component [Figs. 16(c) and 16(d)].

c. θ ∈ [0, π/2]. For θ ∈ [0, π/2], linear steady in-
stability for µ = 1 can arise neither from the eﬀect of
the along-slot gravity component nor from that of the
across-slot component. The latter eﬀect favors growth
only of the small-amplitude convective cells whose sense
of rotation changes periodically in time [18,26] (see also
Secs. III A 2a and III A 3a above). In addition, diﬀeren-
tial gradient diﬀusion is not among the causes of ﬁnite-
amplitude steady convection at θ = 0. Rather, it plays
only a stabilizing role in the mechanism of such con-
vection. This mechanism consists of component gradi-
ent disparity, arising in perturbed state due to diﬀer-
ent boundary conditions, and the feedback coming from
ﬁnite-amplitude Rayleigh—Benard convection [26].

The nature of ﬁnite-amplitude steady convective ﬂows
at θ = 0 is thus basically diﬀerent from that at θ = π/2.
As the convection amplitude becomes large enough, with
the Rayleigh number being increased, such dissimilarity
in the nature of convection prevents continuous trans-
formation of one of the convective steady ﬂows into the
other. In particular, a region of hysteresis in θ is formed
for Ra >∼ 20000 (Fig. 17). The ﬁnite-amplitude con-
vective ﬂows for θ ∈ [π/2, π], where they are driven only
by diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion, are continuously trans-
formed into each other at least up to Ra = 31000.

As θ increases from 0, ﬁnite-amplitude steady convec-
tion at Ra = 31000 remains under primary control of
the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component. Playing
a stabilizing role in this eﬀect [26], diﬀerential gradient
diﬀusion reduces the relative signiﬁcance of its destabi-
lizing role in the emerging eﬀect of the along-slot gravity

16

component. The counterclockwise-rotating cells thus re-
tain their horizontal-slot pattern along the whole branch
18(a) and 18(b)]. For Ra = 31000 and
A2h [Figs.
λ = 2, this branch extends to about θ ≈ 0.51π/2 [Fig.
17(c)]. For θ ∈ [π/2, π], the horizontal-slot pattern of
counterclockwise-rotating cells at Ra = 31000 (λ = 2)
practically vanishes when θ diﬀers from π by less than
0.1π/2 [Figs. 15(a)—15(e)].

With θ decreasing from π/2, on the other hand, ﬁnite-
amplitude convection remains under primary control of
the eﬀect of the along-slot gravity component. This ef-
fect is underlain by diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion [21,23].
Such process reduces the eﬀectiveness of the convective
mechanism by means of which the emerging across-slot
gravity component acts [26]. This gravity component
thus fails to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the convective
pattern (i.e., to generate counterclockwise-rotating cells).
The whole branch A2v, extending to θ ≈ 0.38π/2 for
Ra = 31000 and λ = 2, is therefore characterized only by
clockwise-rotating cells [Fig. 18(e)]. Along branch A2hv
[Fig. 17(c)], such convection pattern is transformed into
that with counter-rotating cells [Figs. 18(c) and 18(d)].

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

This work provides a comprehensive understanding of
the manifestation of double-component convection due to
the eﬀects of diﬀerent component boundary conditions in
an inﬁnite slot having diverse orientations to the gravity.
To eliminate other physical eﬀects, the primary focus has
been on the problem with compensating gradients of the
components and equal component diﬀusivities. Small-
amplitude oscillatory convection as well as small- and
ﬁnite-amplitude steady convection have been considered.
Although the study was primarily focused on 2D con-
vection, small-amplitude 3D eﬀects were also examined
where the obtained physical insight suggested their po-
tential relevance.

The main aspect of the provided understanding is a
consistent interpretation of the physics underlying small-
amplitude oscillatory convection. For all slot orienta-
tions, the physical nature of such convection both in in-
viscid and in viscous ﬂuid proved to be underlain by dif-
ferential gradient diﬀusion. However, the speciﬁc mecha-
nisms by means of which the manifestation of this eﬀect
takes place vary signiﬁcantly with the slot orientation.
Their features also depend substantially on whether the
involved ﬂuid is of inviscid or viscous nature.

In the horizontal slot at θ = 0 with inviscid ﬂuid and an
independently prescribed stable background ﬂux strati-
ﬁcation, Ras, the marginal-stability boundaries behave
consistently with the physical mechanism of oscillatory
instability ﬁrst highlighted in [18].
In particular, the
most unstable wave number is zero and the instability
arises within a ﬁnite wave number interval. The width of
this interval increases with increasing Ras. The oscilla-

tion frequency also decreases with decreasing wave num-
ber and becomes zero at k = 0. By means of the long-
wavelength expansion, the critical unstable ﬁxed-value
background stratiﬁcation, Rac, and the group velocity,
∂ωc/∂k, for k = 0 were expressed in terms of Ras.

For two compensating across-slot background gradi-
ents in inviscid ﬂuid, the most unstable wave number
remains equal to zero up until the slot orientation be-
comes nearly vertical (θ = π/2). The analytical relation
between Rac and ∂ωc/∂k at k = 0 was derived for such
inclined slot at any θ ∈ [0, π/2) as well. For θ growing
from 0 to π/2, the oscillatory instability is however in-
creasingly aﬀected by the along-slot gravity component.
The eﬀect of this gravity component is associated with
the mechanism of steady instability identiﬁed in [21,23]
for viscous ﬂuid. Behavior of the oscillatory marginal-
stability curves for θ ∈ (0, π/2) was found to be consis-
tent with the assumption that the corresponding mecha-
nism in inviscid ﬂuid is eﬀective at any Ra. This assump-
tion was then shown to be justiﬁed. In particular, the os-
cillatory marginal-stability boundary was found to trans-
form into the steady one with Rac(k) = 0 as θ → π/2.

In the horizontal slot (θ = 0) with viscous ﬂuid, Rac(k)
(naturally) increase for all k compared to inviscid ﬂuid.
However, the vicinity of zero wave number is no longer
the region of most unstable k. ωc(k) also tends to a
nonzero value as k → 0. These ﬁndings were still found
to be consistent with the interpretation of the oscillatory
instability for inviscid ﬂuid. In particular, the dissipation
of along-slot perturbation motion was found to be part of
the feedback in the horizontal-slot oscillatory instability
mechanism. Increase of the instability wavelength thus
reduces the eﬃciency of such feedback. As k approaches
0, this stabilizing factor becomes more important than
the destabilizing decrease of the overall dissipation.

The suggested interpretation of the role played by
the dissipation of along-slot perturbation motion in the
horizontal-slot oscillatory instability feedback apparently
applies to the classical double-diﬀusion as well. In par-
ticular, zero wave number has to be most unstable in the
diﬀusive regime of conventional double-diﬀusive convec-
tion when both background gradients in inviscid ﬂuid
are maintained by ﬂux boundary conditions.
Indeed,
Fig. 4(b) in [33] seems to suggest that the most unstable
wavelength tends to inﬁnity and the oscillation frequency
tends to zero as P r → 0. For a ﬁnite P r, however, both
the most unstable wavelength and the corresponding os-
cillation frequency in Fig. 4(b) of [33] are ﬁnite.

For relatively large λy, most unstable disturbances of
the oscillatory instability in an inclined slot [θ ∈ (0, π/2)],
where the across-slot gravity component is involved in
driving the instability, are of a 3D nature. This was also
suggested to result from the eﬀect of dissipation of along-
slot perturbation motion. In particular, the feedback ef-
ﬁciency increases when λ decreases due to orientation
change of the 2D axis of rotation of a perturbation cell.
All relevant ﬁndings proved to be consistent with such in-
terpretation of the 3D instability nature. For small θ > 0,

17

this interpretation was also found to be a manifestation
of more general conditions for three-dimensionality of in-
stability. Such conditions were formulated independently
of the physics underlying a speciﬁc problem.

Another important outcome of this study is identiﬁca-
tion of the oscillatory instability mechanism arising from
the eﬀect of the along-slot gravity component in viscous
ﬂuid. Such oscillatory instability was ﬁrst reported in
[23], for a vertical slot (θ = π/2). The reﬂectionally sym-
metric perturbation mode of this instability consists of
two counter-propagating patterns either of which is domi-
nant near one of the slot sidewalls. The counter-traveling
convective streamline patterns give rise to such feedback
distribution of component perturbations that generates
their amplitude growth and a nearly steady density dif-
ference across the slot. This density diﬀerence sustains
the counter-propagation of the convective patterns. Such
growth of the convection amplitude and formation of the
across-slot density diﬀerence are underlain by diﬀerential
gradient diﬀusion. In a quasisteady sense, the manifes-
tation of such diﬀerential diﬀusion is analogous to that
in the respective steady instability [21,23].

The identiﬁed mechanism of vertical-slot oscillatory in-
stability is apparently also relevant under the conditions
other than those considered in this work. In particular,
Fig. 5 in [34] suggests that oscillatory instability arises in
the vertical slot ﬁlled with a porous medium even when
diﬀerent boundary conditions could be the only cause
of this instability. In addition, the instability mechanism
identiﬁed in the present study may also be eﬀective when
the role of diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion in it is played by
classical double-diﬀusion. Indeed, the directions in which
counter-propagating ﬂow patterns travel in Fig. 8 of [34]
seem to be consistent with the respective directions in
Fig. 10 of the present work. The eigenfunctions of trav-
eling waves illustrated in Fig. 7 of [34] are also dominated
by their patterns near the respective slot boundaries.

The quasisteady nature of oscillatory instability in the
vertical slot suggests that the dissipation of along-slot
perturbation motion is part of the instability feedback,
as also highlighted for the respective mechanism of steady
instability. Since such a dissipation is part of the oscil-
latory instability feedback at θ = 0 as well, the same
shape of the oscillatory marginal-stability boundaries for
all θ ∈ [0, π/2] is thus explained. In contrast to small-
amplitude steady vertical-slot convection, manifestation
of such quasisteady oscillatory convection is permitted
due to a relatively more favorable ratio between the max-
imal absolute values of the component perturbations.

As θ exceeds π/2, the mechanism of linear steady in-
stability arising from the eﬀect of the across-slot gravity
component [19,20] becomes increasingly involved in the
manifestation of oscillatory instability due to the along-
slot component. Behavior of the oscillatory marginal-
stability curves above θ ≈ 1.5π/2 was thus found to
suggest their transformation into the respective curves
characterized by a zero real eigenvalue.

tiﬁed in [19,20] is the only cause of linear steady insta-
bility for θ ∈ (π/2, π]. Driven by diﬀerential gradient
diﬀusion, such instability arises within a ﬁnite interval
of wave numbers that extends from the most unstable
zero wave number. Obtained from the long-wavelength
expansion, Rac at k = 0 is not aﬀected by the along-
slot gravity component at all. However, the along-slot
gravity component still has a stabilizing eﬀect on small-
amplitude steady perturbations with k > 0. This eﬀect
is manifested in that the interval of unstable wave num-
bers shrinks to the vicinity of k = 0 and vanishes with θ
decreasing from π to π/2.

The eﬀect of the along-slot gravity component still
gives rise to ﬁnite-amplitude steady convection.
In
contrast to the ﬁnite-amplitude pattern of symmetric
counter-rotating convective cells at θ = π, the convec-
tion pattern at θ = π/2 comprises only clockwise-rotating
cells. Underlain by diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion, the ba-
sic nature of ﬁnite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows at
θ = π/2 is however the same as that at θ = π. Continu-
ous transformation between these ﬂows was thus demon-
strated to take place at least up to Ra = 31000. This
transformation is eﬀected via progressive weakening and
vanishing of the counterclockwise-rotating cells as θ de-
creases from π.

In contrast to θ ∈ [π/2, π], ﬁnite-amplitude convec-
tive steady ﬂows at θ = 0 could not be continuously
transformed into those at θ = π/2 for Ra = 31000.
Rather, a region of hysteresis in θ was demonstrated to
develop above Ra ≈ 20000. Such hysteresis phenomenon
is a manifestation of the basic nature of ﬁnite-amplitude
steady convection at θ = 0 being diﬀerent from that at
θ = π/2. In particular, the feedback for ﬁnite convective
perturbations at θ = 0 comes from nonlinear Rayleigh—
Benard convection [26]. Diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion is
thus a stabilizing factor with respect to the eﬀect of the
across-slot gravity component on ﬁnite-amplitude steady
It is the opposite roles of
convection for θ ∈ [0, π/2).
this physical process in the eﬀects of the across-slot and
along-slot gravity components that prevents continuous
transformation between the ﬁnite-amplitude steady ﬂows
at θ = 0 and θ = π/2.

The reported mechanisms of double-component con-
vection due to diﬀerent component boundary conditions
thus comprise two basic ingredients. These are the dis-
parity between component stratiﬁcations caused by a
convective perturbation and the resulting feedback that
maintains amplitude growth of such perturbation. For
all slot orientations, the feedback in small-amplitude os-
cillatory and steady convection is underlain by diﬀeren-
tial gradient diﬀusion. In particular, such universality of
the nature of small-amplitude convection is manifested
in the transformations of oscillatory marginal-stability
curves into steady ones. Finite-amplitude steady convec-
tion can however arise due to two dissimilar feedbacks.
The role of diﬀerential gradient diﬀusion is destabilizing
in one of them and stabilizing in the other.

The eﬀect of the across-slot gravity component iden-

The disparity between component gradients in per-

18

turbed state is thus the only universal feature of the
eﬀects of diﬀerent boundary conditions. This feature
is however also independent of physical nature of the
forces responsible for feedback. It could therefore be ex-
pected to give rise to instabilities when the component-
dependent forces are other than the buoyancy forces.
Analysis of such possibilities could provide a further in-
sight into the eﬀects of diﬀerent boundary conditions.

[1] N. Tsitverblit, ”Mechanisms of steady and oscillatory
double-component convection due to diﬀerent boundary
conditions,” Geophys. Res. Abs. 4, CD-ROM (2002);
see also http://www.copernicus.org/EGS/egsga/nice02/
programme/overview.htm.

[2] R. W. Schmitt, ”Double diﬀusion in oceanography,”

Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 26, 255 (1994).

[3] H. E. Huppert and R. S. J. Sparks, ”Double-diﬀusive
convection due to crystallization in magmas,” Annu. Rev.
Earth Planet. Sci. 12, 11 (1984).

[4] F. H. Busse, ”Is low Rayleigh number convection possi-
ble in the Earth’s core?” Geophys. Res. Lett. 29, 1105
(2002).

[5] E. A. Spiegel, ”Convection in stars II. Special ef-
fects,” Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 10, 261 (1972);
D. W. Hughes and M. R. E. Proctor, ”Magnetic ﬁelds in
the solar convection zone: magnetoconvection and mag-
netic buoyancy,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 20, 187 (1988);
V. M. Canuto, ”Turbulence in stars. III. Uniﬁed treat-
ment of diﬀusion, convection, semiconvection, salt ﬁn-
gers, and diﬀerential rotation,” Astrophys. J. 524, 311
(1999).

[6] S. R. Coriell and R. F. Sekerka, ”Eﬀects of convective ﬂow
on morphological stability,” PCH, PhysicoChem. Hydro-
dyn. 2, 281 (1981); W. R. Wilcox, ”Transport phenomena
in crystal growth from solution,” Prog. Cryst. Growth
Charact. 26, 153 (1993).

[7] D. M. Mueth, J. C. Crocker, S. E. Esipov, and
D. G. Grier, ”Origin of stratiﬁcation in creaming emul-
sions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 578 (1996).

[8] B. Martin and X. L. Wu, ”Double-diﬀusive convection in
freely suspended soap ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1892
(1998).

[9] J. S. Turner, ”Double-diﬀusive phenomena,” Annu. Rev.
Fluid Mech. 6, 37 (1974); ”Multicomponent convection,”
ibid. 17, 11 (1985).

[10] R. P. Behringer, ”Rayleigh-B´enard convection and turbu-
lence in liquid helium,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 657 (1985).
[11] M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, ”Pattern formation
outside of equilibrium,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 851 (1993);
E. Bodenschatz, W. Pesch, and G. Ahlers, ”Recent de-
velopments in Rayleigh-B´enard convection,” Annu. Rev.
Fluid Mech. 32, 709 (2000).

[12] S. Leibovich, ”The form and dynamics of Langmuir cir-
culations,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 15, 391 (1983); S. A.
Thorpe, ”Langmuir circulation,” ibid. 36, 55 (2004).

19

[13] H. Stommel, ”Thermohaline convection with two stable
regimes of ﬂow,” Tellus 13, 224 (1961); G. Walin, ”The
thermohaline circulation and the control of ice ages,”
Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 50, 323 (1985).
[14] C. Quon and M. Ghil, ”Multiple equilibria in thermoso-
lutal convection due to salt-ﬂux boundary conditions,”
J. Fluid Mech. 245, 449 (1992); H. A. Dijkstra and
M. J. Molemaker, ”Symmetry breaking and overturning
oscillations in thermohaline-driven ﬂows,” ibid. 331, 169
(1997).

[15] M. E. Stern, ”The ”salt-fountain” and thermohaline con-

vection,” Tellus 12, 172 (1960).

[16] G. Veronis, ”On ﬁnite amplitude instability in thermo-
haline convection,” J. Mar. Res. 23, 1 (1965); ”Eﬀect of
a stabilizing gradient of solute on thermal convection,”
J. Fluid Mech. 34, 315 (1968); R. L. Sani, ”On ﬁnite am-
plitude roll-cell disturbances in a ﬂuid layer subjected to
heat and mass transfer,” AIChE (Am. Inst. Chem. Eng.)
J. 11, 971 (1965).

[17] M. E. Stern, ”Lateral mixing of water masses,” Deep-Sea

Res. 14, 747 (1967).

[18] P. Welander, ”A new type of double-diﬀusive instabil-

ity?” Tellus, Ser. A 41, 66 (1989).

[19] N. Tsitverblit, ”The ﬁnger regime of double-diﬀusive con-
vection with the equal diﬀusion coeﬃcients and mixed
boundary conditions,” in Double-Diﬀusive Processes,
edited by S. Meacham, Woods Hole Oceanographic In-
stitution, Technical Report No. WHOI-97-10, 1997, pp.
145-159.

[20] N. Tsitverblit, ”On the nature of direct instabilities in
double-component convection with diﬀerent boundary
conditions,” Phys. Fluids 9, 2458 (1997).

[21] N. Tsitverblit, ”Multiplicity of equilibrium states in later-
ally heated thermosolutal systems with equal diﬀusivity
coeﬃcients,” Phys. Fluids 11, 2516 (1999).

[22] S. A. Thorpe, P. K. Hutt, and R. Soulsby, ”The eﬀect
of horizontal gradients on thermohaline convection,” J.
Fluid Mech. 38, 375 (1969); J. E. Hart, ”On sideways
diﬀusive instability,” ibid. 49, 279 (1971); ”Finite ampli-
tude sideways diﬀusive convection,” ibid. 59, 47 (1973);
S. Thangam, A. Zebib, and C. F. Chen, ”Transition from
shear to sideways diﬀusive instability in a vertical slot,”
ibid. 112, 151 (1981); Y. Young and R. Rosner, ”Linear
and weakly nonlinear analysis of doubly diﬀusive ver-
tical slot convection,” Phys. Rev. E 57, 5554 (1998);
O. S. Kerr and K. Y. Tang, ”Double-diﬀusive instabil-
ities in a vertical slot,” J. Fluid Mech. 392, 213 (1999).
[23] N. Tsitverblit, ”Finite-amplitude double-component con-
vection due to diﬀerent boundary conditions for two com-
pensating horizontal gradients,” Phys. Rev. E 62, R7591
(2000).

[24] S. Rosenblat and S. H. Davis, ”Bifurcation from inﬁn-
ity,” SIAM (Soc. Ind. Appl. Math.) J. Appl. Math. 37, 1
(1979).

[25] S. Xin, P. Le Qu´er´e, and L. S. Tuckerman, ”Bifurcation
analysis of double-diﬀusive convection with opposing hor-
izontal thermal and solutal gradients,” Phys. Fluids 10,
850 (1998); see also the references therein.

[26] N. Tsitverblit, ”Mechanism of ﬁnite-amplitude double-
component convection due to diﬀerent boundary condi-

tions,” Phys. Lett. A 329, 445 (2004).

[27] A. A. Predtechensky, W. D. McCormick, J. B. Swift,
Z. Noszticzius, and H. L. Swinney, ”Onset of travel-
ing waves in isothermal double diﬀusive convection,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 218 (1994); A. A. Predtechensky,
W. D. McCormick, J. B. Swift, A. G. Rossberg, and
H. L. Swinney, ”Traveling wave instability in sustained
double-diﬀusive convection,” Phys. Fluids 6, 3923 (1994).
[28] H. B. Keller, ”Numerical solution of bifurcation and non-
linear eigenvalue problems,” in Applications of Bifurca-
tion Theory, edited by P. H. Rabinowitz (Academic, New
York, 1977), pp. 359-384.

[29] J. D. Crawford and E. Knobloch, ”Symmetry and
symmetry-breaking bifurcations
in ﬂuid dynamics,”
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 23, 341 (1991); M. Golubitsky
and I. Stewart, ”Hopf bifurcation in the presence of sym-
metry,” Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 87, 107 (1985).
[30] D. A. Nield, ”The thermohaline Rayleigh—Jeﬀreys prob-
lem,” J. Fluid Mech. 29, 545 (1967); S. Leibovich,
S. K. Lele, and I. M. Moroz, ”Nonlinear dynamics in
Langmuir circulations and in thermosolutal convection,”
ibid. 198, 471 (1989).

[31] W. Barten, M. L¨ucke, M. Kamps, and R. Schmitz, ”Con-
vection in binary ﬂuid mixtures. I. Extended traveling-
wave and stationary states,” Phys. Rev. E 51, 5636
(1995).

[32] A. E. Deane, E. Knobloch, and J. Toomre, ”Travel-
ing waves and chaos in thermosolutal convection,” Phys.
Rev. A 36, 2862 (1987).

[33] M. Mamou, P. Vasseur, and M. Hasnaoui, ”On numerical
stability analysis of double-diﬀusive convection in con-
ﬁned enclosures,” J. Fluid Mech. 433, 209 (2001).
[34] M. Mamou, ”Stability analysis of thermosolutal convec-
tion in a vertical packed porous enclosure,” Phys. Fluids
14, 4302 (2002).

20

δρ
ρσ
=
t = - Ra/2

0

-

Sδ
δT
s
xS  = - Ra

1

x

y
θ

g

t = Ra/2

s
S  = - Ra

x

FIG. 1. Geometry of the problem. δρ = ρ − ρ0 is the variation of the (dimensionless) density, ρ, due to the variations δS and
δT of solute concentration S and temperature T = (T1 + T2)/2 + t with respect to their reference values, at which the density
is ρ0; T1 and T2 are the boundary temperatures, σ = gd3/κν. P r ≡ ν/κ = 6.7, Le ≡ κT /κS = 1; κT and κS(= κ) are the
component diﬀusivities. The ﬂuid is of the Boussinesq type.

21

(k)
Ra
c

100

ω
c

(k)

ω

50

5

10

5

10

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

0
0
30

ω
c

(k)

60

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

40

20

0
0
20

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
0
15

10

5

0
0
6

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

4

2

0
0

Ra
c

(k)

Ra
c

(k)

Ra
c

(k)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

ω
(k)
c

ω
(k)
c

0
0
60

ω

40

20

0
0
60

ω

40

20

ω

20

10

0
0

22

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 2. θ = 0. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid for independently
(a) Ras = 50000; (b) Ras = 20000; (c) Ras = 10000; (d) Ras = 5000; (e)

prescribed Ras, Rac(k) and ωc(k); Le = 1.
Ras = 1000; (f) Ras = 500; (g) Ras = 200; (h) Ras = 50.

1.5

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

1

0.5

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

0.5

0
0
1

0
0
1

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0.5

0
0
0.25

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0.2

0.15

0.1
0

Ra
c

(k)

ω
(k)
c

15

10

5

ω

2

4

0
0
10

(k)
Ra
c

ω

5

2

ω
c

(k)

4

1

2

3

1

2

3

Ra
c

(k)

ω

(k)
Ra
c

ω

1

ω
c

(k)

ω
c

(k)

0
0
6

4

2

0
0
2

0
0

1

2

3

1

2

3

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

0.5

1

1.5

0.5

1

1.5

k

k

FIG. 2. θ = 0. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid for independently
(a) Ras = 50000; (b) Ras = 20000; (c) Ras = 10000; (d) Ras = 5000; (e)

prescribed Ras, Rac(k) and ωc(k); Le = 1.
Ras = 1000; (f) Ras = 500; (g) Ras = 200; (h) Ras = 50.

23

5
10

4
10

3
10

a
R

2
10
0
5
10

a
R

4
10

3
10

2
10
0
4
10

a
R

3
10

2
10
0

Ra
c

(k)

ω

ω
c

(k)

(a)

2

4

6

2

4

6

(k)
Ra
c

ω

20

ω
(k)
c

(b)

2

4

6

2

4

6

(k)
Ra
c

ω

(c)

ω
(k)
c

60

40

20

0
0
40

30

10

0
0
25

20

15

10

5

0
0

24

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 3. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1,
Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g) θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2;
(i) θ = 0.999π/2.

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω
(k)
c

ω
(k)
c

ω
(k)
c

(d)

(e)

(f)

4

3

2

1

0
0
2

0
0
1

0
0

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

1.5

1

0.5

0.8

3
−

0
1

 

a
R

⋅

0.6

0.4

0.2

(k)
Ra
c

Ra
c

(k)

(k)
Ra
c

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 3. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1,
Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g) θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2;
(i) θ = 0.999π/2.

15

10

ω

5

0
0
6

0
0
3

4

2

2

1

0
0

ω

ω

25

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω
c

(k)

(g)

ω
c

(k)

(h)

(i)

ω
c

(k)

2

4

6

k

200

150

a
R

100

50

0
0
100

a
R

80

60

40

20

0
0
40

30

10

0
0

a
R

20

(k)
Ra
c

Ra
c

(k)

Ra
c

(k)

2

4

k

0.8

0.6

ω

0.4

0.2

0
0
0.4

0.3

ω

0.2

0.1

0
0
1

0.8

0
1
ω

⋅

0.6

0.4

0.2
0

6

26

FIG. 3. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1,
Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g) θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2;
(i) θ = 0.999π/2.

8
10

6
10

4
10

a
R

2
10
0
8
10

a
R

6
10

4
10

2
10
0
6
10

a
R

5
10

4
10

3
10
0

(k)
Ra
c

ω

ω
c

(k)

(a)

2

4

6

2

4

6

Ra
c

(k)

ω

10

ω
c

(k)

(b)

2

4

6

2

4

6

10

ω

ω
(k)
c

(c)

Ra
c

(k)

30

20

10

0
0
20

15

5

0
0
15

5

0
0

27

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 4. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2.

6
10

5
10

4
10

a
R

3
10
0
6
10

a
R

5
10

4
10

3
10
0
6
10

a
R

5
10

4
10

3
10
0

(k)
Ra
c

ω
(k)
c

(d)

2

4

6

2

4

6

Ra
c

(k)

ω

ω
(k)
c

(e)

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω

ω
c

(k)

(f)

(k)
Ra
c

12

10

ω

2
0
10

8

6

4

8

6

4

6

5

4

3

2
0
7

2
0

28

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 4. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2.

6
10

5
10

4
10

a
R

3
10
0
6
10

a
R

5
10

4
10

3
10
0
6
10

a
R

5
10

4
10

3
10
0

Ra
c

(k)

ω

4

ω
(k)
c

(g)

2

4

6

2

4

6

(k)
Ra
c

ω

ω
c

(k)

(h)

2

4

6

2

4

6

(k)
Ra
c

ω

2

ω
c

(k)

(i)

6

5

3

2
0
4

3

2

1
0
4

3

1

0
0

29

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

k

FIG. 4. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2.

10

10

a
R

8
10

6
10

4
10

0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0

(k)
Ra
c

(k)
Ra
c

Ra
c

(k)

k

ω

10

(a)

ω
(k)
c

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω
c

(k)

(b)

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω

ω
(k)
c

(c)

ω

10

5

20

15

5

0
0
15

0
0
12

10

8

6

4

2
0

30

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

FIG. 5. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.

7
10

6
10

5
10

a
R

4
10
0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0

ω

ω
c

(k)

(d)

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω

ω
c

(k)

(e)

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω

4

ω
c

(k)

(f)

Ra
c

(k)

Ra
c

(k)

Ra
c

(k)

k

10

8

6

4

6

4

2
0
8

2
0
6

5

3

2
0

31

2

4

6

2

4

6

k

FIG. 5. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.

Ra
c

(k)

(k)
Ra
c

7
10

6
10

5
10

a
R

4
10
0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0
7
10

a
R

6
10

5
10

4
10
0

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω
c

(k)

(g)

(h)

ω
c

(k)

2

4

6

2

4

6

ω
c

(k)

(i)

Ra
c

(k)

2

4

k

0.5
0

6

2

4

6

k

FIG. 5. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot boundaries,
Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g)
θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.

5

4

3

ω

2
0
4

3.5

2.5

3

2

1.5
0
3

2.5

1.5

2

1

ω

ω

32

−1.22

1.24

−1.22

)
a
(

−8.56

8.67

−8.56

−2.28

2.27

−2.28

)
b
(

−15.9

15.9

−15.9

21.8

−2.21

2.18

−2.21

27.3

)
c
(

−15.5

15.3

−15.5

−1.52

1.47

−1.52

)
d
(

−10.6

10.3

−10.6

−0.39

0.349

)
e
(

−2.73

2.44

−0.39

−2.73

ψ

−17.8

−107

17.8

−35.5

−88.9

107

88.9

−53.3

−71.1

−71.1

−53.3
−35.5

−88.9
−107

−17.8

−10.9

−32.7 −21.8

10.9

35.5
53.3
71.1

71.1
53.3
35.5

88.9
107
32.7 21.8

17.8

10.9

65.3

54.4

−65.3

−54.4

−10.9
−21.8

32.7 43.5
−32.7−21.8

−10.9

−43.5

−32.7

10.9

21.8

32.7

−27.3

54.6

81.9

164

−164

136

−136

−109

−54.6

−81.9

109

71.9

216

36

71.9

108

144 180

−36
−71.9

−36

−216
−108
−144 −180

36

−71.9

68.9

−34.4

−103

34.4
68.9

103

207

172

138

103

−68.9

−103

−207

−172

−138

−68.9
−34.4

34.4
s

−17.4

−104

−34.8

−52.2

17.4

104

34.8

52.2

−87

−69.6

87

69.6

13.3

−13.3

26.6

66.6

−79.9

79.9

40

53.3

−66.6

−53.3

−26.6

−40

30.3

60.6

182

90.9

152

121

38.7

232

77.4

116

194

155

−30.3

−60.6

−182

−90.9

−152

−121

−38.7

−77.4

−232

−194

−155

−116

36.1

72.3

217

108

145

−36.1−72.3

−217

−108

181

−181

−145

t

FIG. 6. θ = 0. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the oscillation period
τp ≈ 24δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was obtained from the numerical simulation of
evolution of the linearized Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state
after initial time τi ≈ 19000 has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 30060, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes other
than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 24δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of solute concentration
−3 times
perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10
the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation,
respectively. (a) τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 6δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 8δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 10δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 12δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 14δτ ; (g)
τ = τi + 17δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 20δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 22δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 24δτ .

33

0.85

−0.874

0.85

)
f
(

5.95

−6.12

5.95

23.2

116

23.2

−69.5

−92.7

23.3

46.3

139

69.5

−116

−23.2

92.7

−46.3

−116

92.7

69.5

−23.2

−139

−46.3

140

46.6

117

69.9 93.3

−23.3

−140

−117

−93.3

−46.6

−69.9

2.15

−2.15

2.15

)
g
(

15.1

−15.1

15.1

2.15

−2.1

2.15

)
h
(

15

−14.7

15

1.36

−1.3

1.36

)
i
(

9.54

−9.1

9.54

46.3

−92.7

−69.5

116

51.5

34.3

42.9

−42.9

−34.3

−51.5

−25.7

17.2

−8.58

25.7

8.58
−25.7 −17.2
8.5817.2

17.2

−17.2 −8.58
25.7
−17.2

8.58

25.7

−25.7

−34.3

34.3

51.5

42.9

−42.9

−51.5

−8.58

−29.4

−58.9

−177

−147

−88.3
−118

29.4

177

58.9

88.3

147

118

−29.4

29.4

−36.5

−109

36.5

72.9

−146

−182

−219

−72.9

−72.9

−36.5

219

182

72.9

109

146

−66.3

−99.5

33.2

36.5

33.2

66.3

−0.671−0.134
0.193
1.35

)
j
(

0.77

−0.134

0.193

0.193
−0.94 −0.134

−0.671

0.193

0.77

−0.134

−0.134

ψ

−0.671

−166

1.35

−33.2

−0.671

66.3

199

99.5

166

133

99.5

−199

−133

−66.3

−99.5

−33.2
s

−6.61

−13.2

−39.7

−19.8

−33.1

−26.4

−32.5

−64.9

−195

−97.4

−162

−130

−39.1

−78.1

−234

−117

−156

195

−195

13.2

19.8

6.61

39.7

33.1

26.4

32.5

195

64.9

97.4

162

130

39.1

234

156

78.1

117

−34.6

−69.2

−208

−173

−104

−138

69.2

173

104

34.6

208

138

t

FIG. 6. θ = 0. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the oscillation period
τp ≈ 24δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was obtained from the numerical simulation of
evolution of the linearized Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state
after initial time τi ≈ 19000 has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 30060, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes other
than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 24δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of solute concentration
−3 times
perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10
the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation,
respectively. (a) τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 6δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 8δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 10δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 12δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 14δτ ; (g)
τ = τi + 17δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 20δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 22δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 24δτ .

34

2
10

0
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

)
(k
Ra
y
c

2

3

0

1

0.5

−2
0

10
2
10

(k
Ra
y
c

)

2

3

0

1

0.5

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
10

(k
Ra
y
c

)

3

2

1

0.5

−2
0

10
1
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
10

0
−1
0

10
2
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
10

10

−2
0

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

4

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

60

40

20

ω

0.5
0
0
40

ω

20

0.5

0
0
20

ω
c

)
(k
y

3

2

0

1

ω
)
(k
y
c

2

0

1

2

ω
(k
y
c

)

3

3

ω

10

2

0

1

0.5

0
0
15

10

5

0
0

35

2

4

6

2

4

6

)
(k
Ra
y
c

0.5 1

0

3

2

ω

2

0.5 1

0

)

ω
(k
y
c
3

k
y

2

4

6

2

4

6

k
y

FIG. 7. Inviscid ﬂuid. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory disturbances for diﬀerent values of kz, Rac(ky)
and ωc(ky); µ = 1, Le = 1. The numbers give the values of kz corresponding to their nearest curve they do not intersect. (a)
θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4; (c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = 0.95π/2.

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

1

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

12

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

12

2

2

2

2

ω
(k
y
c

)

3

2

1

2

k
y

0

4

0

4

0

4

0

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

6

6

6

6

4
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0

2
10

0
10
0
4
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

2
10

0

0
10
0
4
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

2
10

0

0
10
0
4
10

Ra
c

(k
y

)

3

12

2

2

2

Ra
c

(k
y

)

3

12

Ra
c

(k
y

)

3

12

0

4

0

4

0

4

0

4

Ra
c

(k
y

)

ω

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

2
10

3

0
10
0

2

1

2

k
y

ω

30

20

10

0
0
20

ω

10

0
0
15

ω

10

5

0
0
15

10

5

0
0

6

6

6

6

36

FIG. 8. Viscous ﬂuid and stress-free slot boundaries. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory disturbances
for diﬀerent values of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The numbers give the values of kz corresponding to
their nearest curve they do not intersect. (a) θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4; (c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = π/2.

4
10

0

2
10

1

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
10
0
4
10

0
1

2
10

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

0
10
0
4
10

20

Ra
c

(k
y

)

3

2

1

0

ω

10

2

4

6

Ra
c

(k
y

)

3

2

1

0

2

4

6

0
0
15

ω

10

5

0
0
15

ω

10

5

6

0
0
10

0

2
10

3

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

Ra
c

(k
y

)

2

1

2

3
−

0
1
 
a
R

⋅

2
10

3

Ra
c

(k
y

)

2

1

0
10
0
4
10

0
10
0

0

4

0

4

ω
(k
y
c

)

ω

5

3

2

1

2

k
y

6

0
0

2

k
y

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

1

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

2

1

ω
c

)

(k
y

3

2

1

2

2

2

2

0

4

0

4

0

4

0

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

6

6

6

6

FIG. 9. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory disturbances for
diﬀerent values of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The numbers give the values of kz corresponding to their
nearest curve they do not intersect. (a) θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4; (c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = π/2.

37

−0.0645

0.0879

0.58

−0.0619

−0.397

0.397

0.0618

0.791

0.0619

0.557

−0.0441

0.0441

0.0441

−0.0441

−0.556

−0.0619

0.309

−0.309

−0.0618

0.0618

−0.557

0.0619

−0.0441

0.0441

0.556

0.397

−0.397

−0.0618

1.39
2.09

2.09
1.39

6.5

5.41

2.17

4.33

−1.23

−3.7

−4.93

−7.39

−6.16

3.25
1.08

−2.46

−2.12

−1.23

1.08

2.17

2.79

−2.82

−3.53

−4.23

−1.41

−2.12
−1.41
−0.705

0.696
1.39

2.09

2.79

2.09

5.63

5.63
3.75

1.88

0.938

4.69
2.81

−1.06
−3.17

3.02
1.21

1.81

1.21

2.42

3.63

0.605

1.81

2.42

−2.39

−1.79

−3.58

−2.98

−2.39

−1.19

−2.12

−4.23

−6.35

−5.29

−0.596−1.19

−2.46

−4.23
−3.17 −2.12 −1.06

−2.98
−3.58 −1.79

−3.52

1.39

3.48

4.18

4.33

1.88

5.41

6.5

3.25

3.75

5.63

5.63

0.938
2.81
4.69

1.21

−0.596

2.42
1.81

1.81

2.42

1.21

0.605

3.02

3.63

−0.0645

ψ

0.0645

−0.58

0.0645

−0.0879

−0.791

−2.94

−0.587

−1.76

0.696

4.18

−2.35
−1.17

−0.705

3.48

−3.52

−0.587
−1.17

−2.35

−1.76

0.579

1.16

s

3.48

3.48

2.9

2.32

1.74
2.32

2.9
1.16
0.579

−2.94

−1.17
−1.76

−1.17

−2.35

−1.76

−0.587

1.74
−0.587
−2.35

−0.333

−0.666

−0.999

−2
−1.67

−1.33

0.303

0.605

0.908

1.21

1.82

1.51

t

0.908
1.21

1.51

−0.333
−0.666

1.78

5.33
4.44

2.66

3.55

0.888

−0.864
−1.73
−2.59

−3.46

−5.18

−4.32

8.05
1.34
2.68 4.02

6.71

1.03

2.06

3.09

6.19

5.16

4.12

−1.04

5.36

−1.33

−2.67

−4

−5.33

−8

−6.67

1.34

2.68
4.02

5.36

6.71 8.05
(c)

0.354

0.708
1.06

−0.32

2.12

1.77

−0.64

−1.92

1.42

−0.961

−1.6

−1.28

−1.28

−1.6
−1.92

0.354

0.708
1.06

2.12

1.77

1.42

(e)

−2.09

−3.13

−6.27

−4.18

−5.22

1.03

2.06

3.09

4.12

5.16

6.19
(d)

−0.999

0.888

−2

1.82

−1.33

−1.67

(a)

1.78

2.66

4.44

3.55

5.33
(b)

FIG. 10. θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the oscillation
period τp ≈ 34δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was obtained from the numerical simulation
of evolution of the linearized Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background
state after initial time τi ≈ 2000 has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 17411, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation
modes other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 34δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of solute
concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation are equal
−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise
to 10
rotation, respectively. (a) τ = τi +3δτ ; (b) τ = τi +7δτ ; (c) τ = τi +11δτ ; (d) τ = τi +15δτ ; (e) τ = τi +19δτ ; (f) τ = τi +22δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 25δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 28δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 31δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 34δτ .

38

0.0824

−0.772

−0.742

−0.0858

ψ

0.0858

−0.0824

0.0824

0.0528

−0.0528

−0.475

0.0528

0.396

−0.396

0.044

0.044

−0.308

0.308

−0.044

−0.044

−0.051

0.459

−0.051

0.051

0.772

0.742

−0.0824

0.475

−0.0528

0.396

−0.396

0.051 −0.459

−0.488

−2.76

−5.53
−3.68 −4.61

−4.4

−3.3

−6.59

−5.5

−2.2

−1.84

−0.921

1.26

−1.1

3.77

1.09

2.51

5.02

3.03

4.05

−0.488

−0.976

−2.93

−1.46

−0.976
−1.95

−1.46

2.18

−1.95
2.18

1.74

1.74

1.31

−0.488
s

−0.976
−1.46

2.62

0.872

−1.95

−2.93

−1.46

−2.44

−2.44
−1.95
−0.976

−0.488

1.31

0.872

6.07

5.06

−2.44

−2.44

1.01

2.02

2.02

0.436

1.01

−1.84

−0.921

−4.61

0.436

−3.68

−2.76

−5.53

7.54

6.28

3.77
2.51

−1.1−2.2 −3.3

−4.4

−5.5

−6.59

1.26

1.09

−5.77

−5.77

−4.81
−3.85 −2.88
−0.961

3.27

2.18

6.54

4.36

3.27

−4.1

−3.42

−2.74

−3.42

−1.92

−2.74

−0.684

−1.37

−2.05

2.69

3.36

0.672

1.34

2.01

4.03

4.36

5.45

2.18

−1.92
−3.85

4.03

2.01

2.69

0.672

−2.05
−3.42 −4.1

3.36
1.34
−0.684

−0.961
−2.88
−4.81 −5.77 −5.77

−1.37
−3.42 −2.74

−2.74

−3.73

−2.48

−3.11

−1.86
−1.24

0.595

1.19

1.78

−0.621

t

2.38

2.97

3.57

−0.621

−1.24
−1.86

−2.48

(f)

−3.11

−3.73

1.16

−1.17

2.31

3.47

6.93

4.62

5.78

−1.17

−2.35
−3.52

−4.69
−5.87

−7.04

(g)

−5.87

−7.04

−4.69

−3.52
−2.35

−5.37

−8.05

−4.03
−2.68

−6.71

−1.34

1.34

−1.07

−6.43

−2.14
−3.21

−4.28

−5.36

1.08

2.17

3.25

4.33

−1.07

−2.14

−3.21
−4.28

6.5

5.42

−5.36

−6.43

(i)

0.489

0.977

−2.58 −3.1
−2.06
−1.55
−1.03
−0.516

1.47
1.95

2.44

−0.516
−1.03
−1.55
−2.06
−2.58

2.93

−3.1

(j)

2.68

4.01

5.35

8.03

6.69

−1.34

−2.68

−4.03

−6.71

−8.05

−5.37

(h)

FIG. 10. θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the oscillation
period τp ≈ 34δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was obtained from the numerical simulation
of evolution of the linearized Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background
state after initial time τi ≈ 2000 has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 17411, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation
modes other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 34δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of solute
concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation are equal
to 10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation, respectively. (a) τ = τi +3δτ ; (b) τ = τi +7δτ ; (c) τ = τi +11δτ ; (d) τ = τi +15δτ ; (e) τ = τi +19δτ ; (f) τ = τi +22δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 25δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 28δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 31δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 34δτ .

39

−2.57

−1.66

3.37

−2.3

3.37

4.52

−1.26

2.65

−3.6

ρ
3.55

2.29

ρ

−2.3

−1.94

3.55

2.04

−3.6

2.18

−2.3

−2.36

2.29

2.04

−3.21

−1.94

3.37

−2.36

3.56

2.18

4.52

3.7

−4.42

−3.65

4.52

2.65

4.4

4.1

−3.21

−4.42

4.4

3.56

−3.65

3.7

4.1

−2.57

(a)

−1.66

(b)

−2.3

(c)

3.37

−1.26

4.52

(d)

1.31

0.982

−1.68

2.18

−3.7

2.54

−3.7

−4.5

1.89

−4.5

(e)

0.585

−4.16

−3.57

1.31

0.982

(f)

2.18

(g)

−3.7

−1.68

2.54

(h)

−3.7

−4.5

1.89

(i)

−4.5

−3.57

0.585

−4.16

(j)

FIG. 11. Same as in Fig. 10. ρ: isolines of the perturbation in s − t. The solid and dashed isolines are equally spaced within

the positive and negative density perturbation intervals, respectively.

40

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

5
−

⋅

0
1
a
R

χ=0.9

θ=π/2+χ⋅π/2

χ=0.8

χ=0.7

0.05

χ=0.03

χ=0.05

χ=0.1

χ=0.2

χ=0.3

χ=0.6

χ=0.5

χ=0.4

0
0

1

2

3

5

6

7

8

FIG. 12. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D steady disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free slot boundaries,
Rac(k), for diﬀerent θ = (1 + χ)π/2, 0 < χ < 1; µ = 1, Le = 1. The data for the wave numbers very close to k = 0 (where
stable data were numerically diﬃcult to obtain) are not presented.

4
k

41

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

5
−

⋅

0
1
a
R

θ=π/2+χ⋅π/2

χ=0.9

χ=0.8

χ=0.7

χ=0.6

χ=0.03

0.2

χ=0.05

χ=0.1

χ=0.2

χ=0.3

χ=0.5

χ=0.4

0
0

1

2

3

5

6

7

8

FIG. 13. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D steady disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot boundaries,
Rac(k), for diﬀerent θ = (1 + χ)π/2, 0 < χ < 1; µ = 1, Le = 1. The data for the wave numbers very close to k = 0 (where
stable data were numerically diﬃcult to obtain) are not presented.

4
k

42

−0.6

−5.3

−0.5

−4.3

−0.4

−3.2

−0.15

−1.3

0.6

0.5

0.4

ψ

5.3

4.3

−5.3

−0.6

−4.3

−0.5

−0.4

1.3

3.2

−3.2

11.3

5.65

22.6

22.6

33.9

−5.65

16.9

28.2

s

11.3
−5.65

−11.3

−22.6

16.9
5.65
−16.9
−22.6 −33.9 −28.2
−11.3
−16.9

5.65

−5.65

4.94

9.88

14.8

19.8

29.6

24.7

t

−4.94

−9.88

−14.8

−19.8

−29.6

−24.7

(a)

11.3

5.65

33.9

22.6

22.6
11.3

−5.65

−11.3

−22.6

−16.9

−33.9

5.65

−5.65

−5.65

16.9

28.2

16.9

5.65
−16.9

−28.2

−22.6
−11.3

5.65

16.9

33.9

22.6
11.3

−5.65

−11.3

−22.6

−33.9

−22.6

−11.3

11.3
22.6

28.2

16.9
5.65
−16.9

−28.2

−16.9

4.66

9.32
14

28

18.6 23.3

−4.66

−9.32

−14

−28

−23.3

−18.6

(b)

−5.65

4.43

8.85

26.6

13.3

22.1

17.7

−4.43

−8.85

−13.3

−26.6
−22.1

−17.7

(c)

0.15

−0.15

−1.3

16.9

11.3

33.9

22.6

5.65

11.3

−11.3

−22.6

−33.9

−16.9

−5.65

5.65

22.6

28.2

16.9

−5.65
−16.9
−28.2
−22.6
−11.3

−4.26

4.26

25.5

8.51

21.3

12.8

17

−4.26

−8.51

−12.8

4.26

−25.5

−21.3

−17
(d)

FIG. 14. θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Singular eigenvectors corresponding to the wavelength λ = 2 at
the onset of small-amplitude steady convection within a narrow interval of µ where the linear steady instability for λ = 2 arises;
P r = 6.7, Le = 1. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The
variables are nondimensionalized as in Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation
−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and
are equal to 10
counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a) µ = 0.92, Rac = 6139; (b) µ = 0.94, Rac = 6930; (c) µ = 0.96, Rac = 8900; (d)
µ = 0.98, Rac = 22469.

43

Ψ

0.73

−0.647

0.766

−0.342

0.852

−0.272

0.706

0.432

0.158

−0.117
−0.391

0.455

0.179

−1.76

−2.04

−0.0961

−1.2

−1.75

0.489

−0.619

0.212

−0.896

S

0.158
0.432

−1.49

−1.21
−0.939

−1.47

0.179
0.455

−2.02

−0.922

−0.0652

0.212
0.489

−1.73

−2

−1.45

0.571

0.29
0.00863

0.571

−1.4

−1.68

−1.12

−1.96

−0.835

0.894

−0.804

0.611

−1.09

0.328

−0.521

−1.37

−1.65

−0.238

0.611

−1.94

0.706

−0.665

−0.372

0.766

−1.17

−0.554

0.894 0.045

0.73
1.29

0.775

−0.258

−0.775

1.29
0.775

−0.517

−0.775

1.29

−0.517

0.775

0.852
1.29

0.775

1.29

0.775

0.258

−1.29

−0.517

t

−0.258

0

−1.03

0.517
1.03

−0.775

(a)

−1.03

−1.29

0

0.258

0.517

1.03

−0.517

(b)

−0.258

0

−1.29

0.258

−1.03

0.517

1.03

(c)

−0.775

0.258

−1.03

−0.258

0

−1.29

0.517

1.03

−0.517

(d)

0.258

−1.29

−0.258

−1.03

0

0.517

1.03

(e)

−0.775

FIG. 15. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries.

Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (π/2, π); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The steady solu-
tions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot coordinate axes are directed rightwards and
upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal
to 104 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation, respectively. (a) θ = 1.99π/2; (b) θ = 1.98π/2; (c) θ = 1.97π/2; (d) θ = 1.95π/2; (e) θ = 1.94π/2; (f) θ = 1.9π/2; (g)
θ = 1.8π/2; (h) θ = 1.75π/2; (i) θ = 1.7π/2; (j) θ = 1.1π/2.

44

Ψ

−0.422

1.01
0.726

−0.709

1.11
0.819

−0.903

0.827

−0.888

−0.616

1.11

−0.316

1.11

−0.596

1.02

−0.594

−1.67

0.152

0.439

−0.329

S

0.726

1.01

−0.996

−1.86

−1.57

−0.042

−1.76

−0.0305

1.11

−1.19

0.245

1.11

0.255

−0.602

−1.46
−1.74

−0.135

−1.28

1.29

−1.03

0.775

0.517

0.258

−1.29

t

0

−0.775

−0.517

0.532
1.29
0.775

−1.48
−0.258

0.541
1.29
0.775

−1.17
−0.517

0.258

−1.03

−0.517

−1.29

0

0.517

−1.29

−0.258

0

−1.03

0.258

0.517

1.11

−0.881

1.02

−1.45

−0.312

−0.0277

0.257

0.541

0.825

−1.16

−1.73

1.29

−0.775

0.775

0.517

0.258

−1.03

−1.29

0
−0.258

−0.324

−0.0549

−1.13

−1.67

−1.4

0.215

0.484

0.754

−0.864
−0.775

1.29

0.775

0.517

0.258

−1.03

−1.29

0
−0.258

−0.517

1.03

(f)

−0.258

1.03

(g)

−0.775

1.03

(h)

−0.775

1.03

−0.517

(i)

1.03

(j)

FIG. 15. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries.

Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (π/2, π); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The steady solu-
tions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot coordinate axes are directed rightwards and
upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal
to 104 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation, respectively. (a) θ = 1.99π/2; (b) θ = 1.98π/2; (c) θ = 1.97π/2; (d) θ = 1.95π/2; (e) θ = 1.94π/2; (f) θ = 1.9π/2; (g)
θ = 1.8π/2; (h) θ = 1.75π/2; (i) θ = 1.7π/2; (j) θ = 1.1π/2.

45

θ=(χ+1)∗π/2

χ=0.8

A2

θ=(χ+1)∗π/2

χ=0.3

A2

A1

(d)

(a)

L

5000

10000

15000

5000

10000

15000

A2

(b)
  

L

(e)
 

A2

A1

5000

10000

15000

5000

10000

15000

Φ

Φ

Φ

B

L

A1
B

A2

(c)

L

A1

B

A2 

(f)

A1

Ra
χ=−0.3

Ra
χ=−0.7

L

Ra

Ra
χ=0.6

Ra
χ=0.4

Ra

5000

10000

15000

5000

10000

15000

FIG. 16. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Schematic diagrams illustrating structures of the steady ﬂows representing
onset of linear and ﬁnite-amplitude steady instability of the conduction state as Ra is increased for diﬀerent θ = (χ + 1)π/2,
−1 < χ < 1; λ = 2, µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. Φ is an abstract measure of the steady ﬂows that distinguishes between diﬀerent
steady solutions, speciﬁes the location of the singularities (limit points and symmetry-breaking bifurcations), and represents
the ﬂows arising from a symmetry-breaking bifurcation as a single branch. The solid (dashed) lines represent the branches
expected to be stable (unstable) to the disturbances associated with the eigenvalues that give rise to steady instability of the
conduction state. Secondary oscillatory and steady bifurcations, if any, are not shown. B is the symmetry-breaking bifurcation
standing for the steady linear stability boundary for wave number k = π (λ = 2). L is the limit point. A1 and A2 are the lower-
and higher-amplitude branches associated with the limit point, respectively. (a) θ = 1.8π/2; (b) θ = 1.6π/2; (c) θ = 1.4π/2;
(d) θ = 1.3π/2; (e) θ = 0.7π/2; (f) θ = 0.3π/2.

Φ

Φ

Φ

46

Φ

Φ

Φ

θ = η∗ π/2

Ra=19000

A2

(a)

(b)

(c)

0.25

0.5

η

0.75

1.0

Ra=22000

A2

v

L2

A2 hv
L1

A2

h

0.25

0.5

η

0.75

1.0

Ra=31000

A2

v

L2

A2

h

A2

hv
L1

0.25

0.5

η

0.75

1.0

47

FIG. 17. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Schematic diagrams illustrating structures of the steady ﬂows of the
higher-amplitude convective branch, A2, with the minimal along-slot period λ = 2 as θ = ηπ/2 is varied for diﬀerent Ra,
η ∈ [0, 1]; µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. Φ is an abstract measure of the steady ﬂows that distinguishes between diﬀerent
steady solutions and speciﬁes the location of the singularities (limit points). The dashed lines imply that the respective
branches are unstable to steady disturbances. A2h and A2v are the convective branches continuously transformed into the
higher-amplitude branches in the horizontal and vertical slot, respectively. A2hv is the unstable (to steady disturbances) branch
connecting branches A2h and A2v via limit points L1 and L2. Secondary instability, if any, of the depicted steady branches
to the oscillatory and steady disturbances other than the (steady) disturbances destabilizing branch A2hv is not shown. (a)
Ra = 19000; (b) Ra = 22000; (c) Ra = 31000.

Ψ

0.445
0.308
0.172

0.0353

S

0.0353

0.172
0.308
0.445

1.29
1.03
0.775
0.517
0.258

t

0

−0.258

−0.101
−0.238

−0.511

−0.647
−0.784
−0.921

−0.374

−0.517
−0.775
−1.03

−1.29

0.453
0.313
0.173

−0.246

0.0333
−0.107
0.0333

0.173
0.313
0.453

1.29
1.03
0.775

0.517
0.258
0
−0.258

0.47
0.321

0.172
−0.126
0.0234

−0.274

0.172
0.321
0.47

1.29
1.03
0.775
0.517
0.258

0
−0.258

−0.526

−0.666
−0.806

−0.946

−0.386

−0.775

−1.03
−1.29

−0.517

(a)

(b)

(c)

0.608
0.418

−0.529
−1.1
−0.909

0.86
0.613

−0.572

−0.721

−0.87

−1.02

0.229
0.0391
−0.15

0.229
0.418

−0.719

−0.909

0.366

0.119

−1.1

0.86

−0.869

−0.622

−1.12

−1.36

−0.423

0.608

−0.34

−1.29

−0.128

−0.375

−1.61

1.29
1.03
0.775
0.517
0.258
0
−0.258

−1.29

−0.517

−0.775
−1.03

(d)

1.29
1.03

0.775

0.517

0.258
0

−1.29

−1.03

−0.258

−0.517

−0.775

(e)

−0.775

−1.29

−0.517

−1.03

FIG. 18. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries.

Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (0, π/2); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The steady solu-
tions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot coordinate axes are directed rightwards and
upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal
to 104 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation, respectively. (a) θ = 0.2π/2, branch A2h; (b) θ = 0.4π/2, branch A2h; (c) θ = 0.5π/2, branch A2hv; (d) θ = 0.4π/2,
branch A2hv; (e) θ = 0.5π/2, branch A2v.

48

List of Figures

1

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

4

5

5

5

6

Geometry of the problem. δρ = ρ − ρ0 is the variation of the (dimensionless) density, ρ, due to the
variations δS and δT of solute concentration S and temperature T = (T1+T2)/2+t with respect to their
reference values, at which the density is ρ0; T1 and T2 are the boundary temperatures, σ = gd3/κν.
P r ≡ ν/κ = 6.7, Le ≡ κT /κS = 1; κT and κS(= κ) are the component diﬀusivities. The ﬂuid is of the
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Boussinesq type.
θ = 0. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid for
independently prescribed Ras, Rac(k) and ωc(k); Le = 1. (a) Ras = 50000; (b) Ras = 20000; (c)
Ras = 10000; (d) Ras = 5000; (e) Ras = 1000; (f) Ras = 500; (g) Ras = 200; (h) Ras = 50.
. . . . . .
θ = 0. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid for
independently prescribed Ras, Rac(k) and ωc(k); Le = 1. (a) Ras = 50000; (b) Ras = 20000; (c)
Ras = 10000; (d) Ras = 5000; (e) Ras = 1000; (f) Ras = 500; (g) Ras = 200; (h) Ras = 50.
. . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k);
µ = 1, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2; (i) θ = 0.999π/2.
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k);
µ = 1, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g)
θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2; (i) θ = 0.999π/2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in inviscid ﬂuid, Rac(k) and ωc(k);
µ = 1, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d) θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = 0.9π/2; (f) θ = 0.95π/2; (g)
θ = 0.99π/2; (h) θ = 0.995π/2; (i) θ = 0.999π/2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free
slot boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2. . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free
slot boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2. . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free
slot boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.35π/2; (h) θ = 1.45π/2; (i) θ = 1.49π/2. . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot
boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.
. . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot
boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.
. . . . . . . . . .
Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D oscillatory disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot
boundaries, Rac(k) and ωc(k); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. (a) θ = 0; (b) θ = π/8; (c) θ = π/4; (d)
θ = 3π/8; (e) θ = π/2; (f) θ = 5π/8; (g) θ = 1.3π/2; (h) θ = 1.4π/2; (i) θ = 1.48π/2.
. . . . . . . . . .
θ = 0. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the
oscillation period τp ≈ 24δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was
obtained from the numerical simulation of evolution of the linearized Eqs.
(1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in
response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state after initial time τi ≈ 19000
has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 30060, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes
other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 24δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s:
isolines of solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values
of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The
solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a)
τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 6δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 8δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 10δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 12δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 14δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 17δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 20δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 22δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 24δτ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

49

9

8

7

6

10

θ = 0. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the
oscillation period τp ≈ 24δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was
(1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in
obtained from the numerical simulation of evolution of the linearized Eqs.
response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state after initial time τi ≈ 19000
has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 30060, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes
other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 24δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s:
isolines of solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values
of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The
solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a)
τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 6δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 8δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 10δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 12δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 14δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 17δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 20δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 22δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 24δτ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Inviscid ﬂuid. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory disturbances for diﬀerent values
of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky); µ = 1, Le = 1. The numbers give the values of kz corresponding to their
nearest curve they do not intersect. (a) θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4; (c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = 0.95π/2.
. . . . .
Viscous ﬂuid and stress-free slot boundaries. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory
disturbances for diﬀerent values of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The numbers give
the values of kz corresponding to their nearest curve they do not intersect. (a) θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4;
(c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = π/2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Curves of the marginal linear stability to 3D oscillatory
disturbances for diﬀerent values of kz, Rac(ky) and ωc(ky); µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. The numbers give
the values of kz corresponding to their nearest curve they do not intersect. (a) θ = π/8; (b) θ = π/4;
(c) θ = 3π/8; (d) θ = π/2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the
oscillation period τp ≈ 34δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was
(1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in
obtained from the numerical simulation of evolution of the linearized Eqs.
response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state after initial time τi ≈ 2000
has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 17411, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes
other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 34δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s:
isolines of solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values
of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The
solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a)
τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 7δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 11δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 15δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 19δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 22δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 25δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 28δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 31δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 34δτ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Perturbation temporal behavior throughout the
oscillation period τp ≈ 34δτ (δτ = 0.05) just beyond the onset of 2D oscillatory instability. It was
obtained from the numerical simulation of evolution of the linearized Eqs.
(1)—(4) (RaS = 0) in
response to the initial disturbance proportional to the background state after initial time τi ≈ 2000
has passed; λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 17411, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. With this τi, all perturbation modes
other than the unstable mode (τp ≈ 34δτ ) are practically negligible. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s:
isolines of solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The actual relative values
of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to 10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The
solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a)
τ = τi + 3δτ ; (b) τ = τi + 7δτ ; (c) τ = τi + 11δτ ; (d) τ = τi + 15δτ ; (e) τ = τi + 19δτ ; (f) τ = τi + 22δτ ;
(g) τ = τi + 25δτ ; (h) τ = τi + 28δτ ; (i) τ = τi + 31δτ ; (j) τ = τi + 34δτ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Same as in Fig. 10. ρ: isolines of the perturbation in s − t. The solid and dashed isolines are equally
spaced within the positive and negative density perturbation intervals, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . .
12 Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D steady disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with stress-free slot
boundaries, Rac(k), for diﬀerent θ = (1 + χ)π/2, 0 < χ < 1; µ = 1, Le = 1. The data for the wave
numbers very close to k = 0 (where stable data were numerically diﬃcult to obtain) are not presented.
13 Curves of the marginal linear stability to 2D steady disturbances in viscous ﬂuid with no-slip slot
boundaries, Rac(k), for diﬀerent θ = (1 + χ)π/2, 0 < χ < 1; µ = 1, Le = 1. The data for the wave
numbers very close to k = 0 (where stable data were numerically diﬃcult to obtain) are not presented.

11

10

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

50

14

θ = π/2. Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Singular eigenvectors corresponding to the wave-
length λ = 2 at the onset of small-amplitude steady convection within a narrow interval of µ where the
linear steady instability for λ = 2 arises; P r = 6.7, Le = 1. ψ: perturbation streamlines; s: isolines of
solute concentration perturbation; t: perturbation isotherms. The variables are nondimensionalized as
in Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The actual relative values of the streamfunction perturbation are equal to
10−3 times the respective values in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise
and counterclockwise rotation, respectively. (a) µ = 0.92, Rac = 6139; (b) µ = 0.94, Rac = 6930; (c)
µ = 0.96, Rac = 8900; (d) µ = 0.98, Rac = 22469. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15 Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (π/2, π); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7,
Le = 1. The steady solutions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot
coordinate axes are directed rightwards and upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute
concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal to 104 times the respective values
in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation,
respectively. (a) θ = 1.99π/2; (b) θ = 1.98π/2; (c) θ = 1.97π/2; (d) θ = 1.95π/2; (e) θ = 1.94π/2; (f)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
θ = 1.9π/2; (g) θ = 1.8π/2; (h) θ = 1.75π/2; (i) θ = 1.7π/2; (j) θ = 1.1π/2.
15 Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (π/2, π); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7,
Le = 1. The steady solutions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot
coordinate axes are directed rightwards and upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute
concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal to 104 times the respective values
in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation,
respectively. (a) θ = 1.99π/2; (b) θ = 1.98π/2; (c) θ = 1.97π/2; (d) θ = 1.95π/2; (e) θ = 1.94π/2; (f)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
θ = 1.9π/2; (g) θ = 1.8π/2; (h) θ = 1.75π/2; (i) θ = 1.7π/2; (j) θ = 1.1π/2.
16 Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Schematic diagrams illustrating structures of the steady
ﬂows representing onset of linear and ﬁnite-amplitude steady instability of the conduction state as Ra
is increased for diﬀerent θ = (χ + 1)π/2, −1 < χ < 1; λ = 2, µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. Φ is an
abstract measure of the steady ﬂows that distinguishes between diﬀerent steady solutions, speciﬁes the
location of the singularities (limit points and symmetry-breaking bifurcations), and represents the ﬂows
arising from a symmetry-breaking bifurcation as a single branch. The solid (dashed) lines represent
the branches expected to be stable (unstable) to the disturbances associated with the eigenvalues that
give rise to steady instability of the conduction state. Secondary oscillatory and steady bifurcations,
if any, are not shown. B is the symmetry-breaking bifurcation standing for the steady linear stability
boundary for wave number k = π (λ = 2). L is the limit point. A1 and A2 are the lower- and higher-
amplitude branches associated with the limit point, respectively. (a) θ = 1.8π/2; (b) θ = 1.6π/2; (c)
θ = 1.4π/2; (d) θ = 1.3π/2; (e) θ = 0.7π/2; (f) θ = 0.3π/2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17 Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Schematic diagrams illustrating structures of the steady
ﬂows of the higher-amplitude convective branch, A2, with the minimal along-slot period λ = 2 as
θ = ηπ/2 is varied for diﬀerent Ra, η ∈ [0, 1]; µ = 1, P r = 6.7, Le = 1. Φ is an abstract measure
of the steady ﬂows that distinguishes between diﬀerent steady solutions and speciﬁes the location of
the singularities (limit points). The dashed lines imply that the respective branches are unstable to
steady disturbances. A2h and A2v are the convective branches continuously transformed into the
higher-amplitude branches in the horizontal and vertical slot, respectively. A2hv is the unstable (to
steady disturbances) branch connecting branches A2h and A2v via limit points L1 and L2. Secondary
instability, if any, of the depicted steady branches to the oscillatory and steady disturbances other than
the (steady) disturbances destabilizing branch A2hv is not shown. (a) Ra = 19000; (b) Ra = 22000;
(c) Ra = 31000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18 Viscous ﬂuid and no-slip slot boundaries. Finite-amplitude convective steady ﬂows representing the
higher-amplitude branch, A2, for diﬀerent θ ∈ (0, π/2); λ = 2, µ = 1, Ra = 31000, P r = 6.7,
Le = 1. The steady solutions were obtained from Eqs. (1)—(4) (RaS = 0). The across- and along-slot
coordinate axes are directed rightwards and upwards, respectively. Ψ: streamlines; S: isolines of solute
concentration; t: isotherms. The actual values of t and s are equal to 104 times the respective values
in the ﬁgure. The solid and dashed streamlines designate the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation,
respectively. (a) θ = 0.2π/2, branch A2h; (b) θ = 0.4π/2, branch A2h; (c) θ = 0.5π/2, branch A2hv;
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(d) θ = 0.4π/2, branch A2hv; (e) θ = 0.5π/2, branch A2v.

43

44

45

46

47

48

51

