5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
2
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The hydraulic jump as a white whole

G.E. Volovik
Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki University of Technology
P.O.Box 2200, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland
and
L.D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Moscow

February 9, 2014

Abstract

In the geometry of the circular hydraulic jump, the velocity of
the liquid in the interior region exceeds the speed of capillary-gravity
waves (ripplons), whose spectrum is ‘relativistic’ in the shallow water
limit. The velocity ﬂow is radial and outward, and thus the relativistic
ripplons cannot propagating into the interior region. In terms of the
eﬀective 2+1 dimensional Painlev´e-Gullstrand metric appropriate for
the propagating ripplons, the interior region imitates the ‘white-hole’.
The hydraulic jump represents the physical singularity at the white-
hole horizon. The instability of the vacuum in the ergoregion inside
the circular hydraulic jump and its observation in recent experiments
on superﬂuid 4He by E. Rolley, C. Guthmann, M.S. Pettersen and C.
Chevallier [3] are discussed.

1 Introduction

Starting with the pioneering acoustic black hole [1], there appeared
many suggestions to simulate the black and white holes in various lab-
oratory systems (see review paper [2] and references therein). Here we
discuss the most perspective analog, which has been actually realized

1

in recent experiments with superﬂuid 4He [3]: the circular hydraulic
jump in superﬂuid 4He simulates the 2+1 dimensional white hole for
the surface waves in the shallow liquid which have the “relativistic”
spectrum.

In Sec. 2 we discuss the eﬀective space-time emerging for the
surface waves – ripplons – in the shallow water limit. In Sec. 3 we
introduce interaction of ripplons with the walls. The walls provide the
absolute reference frame. In the region where the ﬂow of the liquid
with respect to this frame exceeds Landau critical velocity for rip-
plon radiation, the surface of the liquid becomes unstable. For the
relativistic ripplons the boundary of this region serves as analog of a
black-hole or white-hole horizon. The instability of the liquid towards
generation of ripplons inside the horizon is the main mechanism of
the decay of this 2+1 dimensional analog of the black or white hole.
Similar instability of the vacuum inside the astronomical black hole is
possible. In Sec. 4 we show that the hydraulic jump is the realization
of the white hole horizon for the relativistic ripplons in normal liquids,
In Sec. 5 the discussion is extended for the hydraulic jump in super-
ﬂuids in relation to the recent experiment [3]. Some open questions
require further investigations,

2 Eﬀective metric for ripplons

The general dispersion relation ω(k) for ripplons – the waves on the
surface of a liquid – is

M (k)(ω

k

2
v)

= ρg + k

σ .

2

−

·

Here σ is the surface tension ; ρ is mass density of the liquids; ρg is the
gravity force; and v is the velocity of the liquid. The quantity M (k)
is the k-dependent mass of the liquid which is forced into motion by
the oscillating surface:

(1)

(2)

M (k) =

ρ
k tanh kh

,

where h is the thicknesses of the layer of the liquid.

The spectrum (1) becomes “relativistic” in the shallow water limit

kh

1, k

k0:

≪

(ω

k

−

·

≪
2
v)

2
= c

k

2

2
+ c

k

4

1
k2
0 −

1
3

2
h

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

2
, c

= gh , k

2
0 = ρg/σ . (3)

2

If the k4 corrections are ignored, the spectrum of ripplons is described
by the eﬀective metric [4]

gµν kµkν = 0 , kµ = (

ω, kx, ky) ,

−

with the following elements

00

g

=

1 , g

0i =

2
vi , gij = c

δij

vivj .

−

−

−

(4)

(5)

The interval describing the eﬀective 2+1 space-time in which ripplons
propagate along geodesics and the corresponding covariant compo-
nents of the eﬀective metric are

2

ds

= gµν dxµdxν , g00 =

v2
c2 , g0i =

vi
c2 , gij =

1
c2 δij .

−

1 +

−

(6)

The spectrum (1) is valid for the prefect ﬂuid, where dissipation
due to friction and viscosity is neglected, and it must be modiﬁed when
the dissipation is added. For the ripplons propagating at the interface
between two superﬂuids the dissipation leads to a simple extra term
on the right-hand side of Eq.(1) [5, 6]:

M (k)(ω

k

2
v)

−

·

= ρg + k

σ

iΓω .

2

−

(7)

For the ripplons at the interface between 3He-A and 3He-B the friction
parameter Γ > 0 depends on temperature and is proportional to T 3
at low T . The important property of the added dissipative term is
that it introduces the reference frame of the horizontal wall. The ω-
dependence of the dissipative term in Eq. (7), which has no Doppler
shift, implies that this spectrum is written in the frame of the wall. We
may expect that under some conditions this description is applicable
to the normal viscous liquid, where the phenomenological parameter Γ
is determined by Reynolds number of the ﬂowing liquid and probably
depends on ω and k.

3 Instability in the ergoregion

If the non-zero Γ is taken into account, from the spectrum ω(k) in Eq.
(7) it follows that the instability to the formation of the surface waves
occurs when the velocity v of the ﬂow with respect to the wall exceeds
the critical velocity vL. At v = vL the imaginary part Im ω(kc) of

3

the energy spectrum of the critical ripplon with momentum kc crosses
zero and becomes positive, i.e. the attenuation of ripplons at v < vL
due to dissipation transforms to ampliﬁcation at v > vL [5, 6]. The
critical velocity vL and the momentum of the critical ripplon kc do
not depend on the friction parameter Γ. They are diﬀerent in the
“relativistic” and “non-relativistic” regimes:

vL = c , kc = 0 ,

if hk0 < √3 ,

vL = c

2/hk0 , kc = k0 ,

if hk0

1 .

≫

q

(8)

(9)

In both regimes the frequency of the critical ripplon is ω(kc) = 0, i.e.
the critical ripplon must be stationary in the wall frame.

The fact that the threshold velocity vL does not depend on Γ
demonstrates that the main role of the dissipative term is to provide
the reference frame of the wall with which the liquid interacts. The
ﬂow of a superﬂuid liquid with respect to this reference frame does not
experience any dissipation if its velocity is below vL. The dissipation
starts above the instability threshold when the surface of the liquid
is perturbed, i.e. ripplons are radiated due interaction of the liquid
with the wall. This indicates that the critical velocity of the ﬂow with
respect to the wall coincides with the Landau criterion for ripplon
nucleation:

vL = mink

E(k)
k

, E(k) =

(ρg + σk2)/M (k) .

(10)

q

In the case of the interface between 3He-A and 3He-B, the critical
velocity of instability towards the growth of critical ripplon has been
measured in the nonrelativistic deep-water regime [7], and has been
found in a good agreement with the theoretical estmate of the Landau
velocity (modiﬁed for the case of two liquids [5, 6]) wihout any ﬁtting
parameter.

The region, where the ﬂow velocity v exceeds vL, represents the
ergoregion, since in the wall frame the energy of the critical ripplon is
negative in this region, E(k) + k
v < 0. For the relativistic ripplons,
the ergoregion – the region where v exceeds c – is expressed in terms
of the eﬀective metric in Eq.(6): in the ergoregion the metric element
g00 changes sign and becomes positive. If the ﬂow is perpendicular to
the ergosurface (the boundary of the ergoregion), then the ergosurface
serves as the event horizon for ripplons. It is the black hole horizon, if

·

4

the liquid moves into the ergoregion, since ripplons cannot excape from
the ergoregion (if the non-relativistic k4 corrections to the spectrum
are ignored). Correspondingly, if the liquid moves from the ergoregion,
the boundary of the ergoregion represents the white hole horizon.

The discussed instability of the ﬂow towards formation of ripplons
in the supercritical region does not depend on whether the horizon
is of a black hole or of a white hole. This mechanism also does not
resolve between the ergosurface and horizon. The instability comes
from the interaction with the ﬁxed reference frame and occurs in the
region where the energy of the critical ﬂuctuation is negative in this
frame. Such kind of instability is also called the Miles instability [8].
In principle, Miles instability may take place behind the horizon of
the atsronomical black holes if there exists the fundamental reference
frame related for example with Planck physics [5, 8]. It may lead to
the decay of the black hole much faster than the decay due to Hawking
radiation.

4 White-hole horizon in hydraulic jump

The situation with a white hole horizon is achieved in the so-called
hydraulic jump ﬁrst discussed by Rayleigh in terms of the shock wave
[9]. The circular hydraulic jump occurs when the vertical jet of liquid
falls on a ﬂat horizontal surface. The ﬂow of the liquid at the surface
exhibits a ring discontinuity at a certain distance r = R from the jet
(observation of the non-circular hydraulic jumps with sharp corners
has been reported in Ref. [10]). At r = R there is an abrupt increase
in the depth h of the liquid (typically by order of magnitude) and
correspondingly a decrease in the radial velocity of the liquid. The
velocity of the liquid in the interior region (r < R) exceeds the speed of
‘light’ for ripplons v > c = √hg, while outside the hydraulic jump (r >
R) one has v < c = √hg. Since the velocity ﬂow is radial and outward,
the interior region imitates the ‘white-hole’ region. The interval of
the 2+1 dimensional eﬀective space-time in which the “relativistic”
ripplons “live” is

2

ds

=

2

2
c

dt

+ (dr

2
v(r)dt)

+ r

2

2
dφ

.

(11)

−

The similar 3+1 dimensional space-time in general relativity, the

−

5

so-called Painlev´e-Gullstrand metric [11]

2

2

2

2

2

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

=

−

−

dt

ds

dθ

2
c

, v

+ r

+ (dr

(r) =

2
θ dφ

2
+ sin

2
v(r)dt)

2GM
r
(12)
is popular now in the black hole physics (see Ref. [12] on the “River”
model of black hole and references therein). In general relativity the
In our case there is a real
metric is continuous across the horizon.
physical singularity at the white-hole horizon – the jump in the ef-
fective metric (6). However, the discussed mechanism of the Miles
instability in the ergoregion (or behind the horizon) does not depend
on whether the horizon/ergosurface is smooth or singular.

,

5 Hydraulic jump in superﬂuids

The analogy between the instability of the surface inside the hydraulic
jump and the instability of the vacuum behind the horizon can be
useful only if the liquid simulates the quantum vacuum. For that, the
liquid must be quantum, and its ﬂow should not exhibit any friction in
the absence of a horizon. That is why the full analogy could occur if
one uses either the ﬂow of quantum liquid with high Reynolds number,
or the superﬂuid liquid which has no viscosity. Quantum liquids such
as superﬂuid or normal 3He and 4He are good candidates.

The ﬁrst observation of the circular hydraulic jump in superﬂuid
liquid (superﬂuid 4He) was reported in Ref.
[3]. The surface waves
generated in the ergoregion (in the region inside the jump) were ob-
served. The critical ripplon appeared to be stationary in the wall frame
in agreement with the Miles instability towards ripplon radiation in-
side the ergoregion discussed in Sec. 3. This is the ﬁrst experiment,
where the analog of the instability of the vacuum inside the horizon has
been simulated. The growths of the critical ripplon is saturated due to
the non-linear eﬀects, and then the whole pattern remains stationary
(though not static). This is diﬀerent from the case of the instability
observed at the interface between 3He-A and 3He-B, where the insta-
bility is not saturated and leads to the crucial rearrangement of the
vacuum state: Quantized vortices penetrate into the 3He-B side from
3He-A, they partially screen the 3He-B ﬂow and reduce its velocity
back below the threshold for the ripplon formation [7].

Under the conditions of experiment [3] the hydraulic jump in su-

6

perﬂuid 4He is very similar to that in the normal liquid 4He. The
position R of the hydraulic jump as a function of temperature does
not experience discontinuity at the superﬂuid transition. This sug-
gests that quantized vortices are formed, which provide the mutual
friction between the superﬂuid and normal components. As a result
even below the λ-point, the liquid moves as a whole though with lower
viscosity because of the reduced fraction of the normal component. To
avoid the eﬀect of the normal component it would be desirable to re-
duce the temperature or to conduct similar experiments in a shallow
superﬂuid 3He.

The advantage of superﬂuid 3He is that, as distinct from the su-
perﬂuid 4He, vortices are not easily formed there: the energy barrier
for vortex nucleation in 3He-B is about 106 times bigger than temper-
ature [13]. In addition, in superﬂuid 3He the normal component of
the liquid is very viscous compared to that in superﬂuid 4He. In the
10−4 cm2/s in liquid 4He,
normal state the kinematic viscosity is ν
1 cm2/s in liquid 3He. That is why in many practical arrange-
and ν
ments the normal component in superﬂuid 3He remains at rest with
respect to the reference frame of the wall and thus does not produce
any dissipation if the ﬂow of the superﬂuid component is sub-critical.
One can also exploit thin ﬁlms of a superﬂuid liquid, where the normal
component is ﬁxed. The ripplons there represent the so-called third
sound (recent discussion on the third sound propagating in superﬂuid
3He ﬁlms can be found in Ref. [14]). In 1999 Seamus Davis suggested
to use the third sound in superﬂuid 3He for simulation of the horizons
[15].

∼

∼

In normal liquids it is the viscosity which determines the position
R of the hydraulic jump (see [16]). The open question is what is the
dissipation mechanism which determines the position R of the white-
hole horizon in a superﬂuid ﬂow with stationary or absent normal
component when its viscosity is eﬀectively switched oﬀ. Since there
is no dissipation of the superﬂuid ﬂow if its velocity is below vL, one
may expect that the same mechanism, which is responsible for dis-
sipation in the presence of the horizon, also determines the position
R of the horizon. If so, the measurement of R as function of param-
eters of the system will give the information on various mechanisms
of decay of white hole. If the Miles vacuum instability towards rip-
plon radiation inside the horizon is saturated as in experiment [3],
the other mechanisms will intervene such as the black-hole laser [17],

7

and even the quantum mechanical Hawking radiation of ripplons. The
latter should be enhanced at the sharp discontinuous horizon of the
hydraulic jump and maybe near the sharp corners of the non-circular
(polygonal) hydraulic jump observed in Ref. [10].

It is also unclear whether it is possible to approach the limit of a
smooth horizon, without the shock wave of the hydraulic jump; and
whether it is possible to construct the inward ﬂow of the liquid which
would serve as analog of the black hole horizon.

I thank Etienne Rolley and Michael Pettersen who sent me their
experimental results prior to publication and Marc Rabaud and Tomas
Bohr for discussions. This work is supported in part by the Russian
Ministry of Education and Science, through the Leading Scientiﬁc
School grant #2338.2003.2, and by the European Science Foundation
COSLAB Program.

References

[1] W.G. Unruh, Experimental black-hole evaporation?, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 46, 1351-1354 (1981).

[2] C. Barcelo, S. Liberati, M. and Visser, Analogue Gravity, gr-

qc/0505065.

[3] E. Rolley, C. Guthmann, M.S. Pettersen and C. Chevallier,
The Hydraulic Jump in Liquid Helium, to be published in Pro-
ceedings of the 24-th Conference on Low Temperature Physics,
physics/0508200.

[4] R. Sch¨utzhold and W.G. Unruh, Gravity wave analogs of black

holes, Phys. Rev. D 66, 044019 (2002).

[5] G.E. Volovik, The Universe in a Helium Droplet, Clarendon Press,

Oxford (2003).

[6] G.E. Volovik, On Kelvin-Helmholtz instability in superﬂuids,
JETP Lett. 75, 418-422 (2002), cond-mat/0202445; Black-hole
horizon and metric singularity at the brane separating two slid-
ing superﬂuids, JETP Lett. 76, 240-244 (2002), gr-qc/0208020.
[7] R. Blaauwgeers, V.B. Eltsov, G. Eska, A.P. Finne, R.P. Haley, M.
Krusius, J.J. Ruohio, L. Skrbek, and G.E. Volovik, Shear ﬂow and
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability in superﬂuids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
155301 (2002).

8

[8] R. Sch¨utzhold and W.G. Unruh, Hawking radiation in an electro-

magnetic wave-guide?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 031301 (2005).

[9] L. Rayleigh, On the theory of long waves and bores, Proc. Roy.

Soc. Lond. A, 90, 324 (1914).

[10] C. Ellegaard, A.E. Hansen, A. Haaning, K. Hansen, A. Mar-
cussen, T. Bohr, J.L. Hansen, and S. Watanabe, Creating corners
in kitchen sink ﬂows, Nature, 392, 767–768 (1998); Cover illustra-
tion: Polygonal hydraulic jump, Nonlinearity 12, 1-7 (1999).

[11] P. Painlev´e, La m´ecanique classique et la th´eorie de la relativit´e,
C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 173, 677-680 (1921); A. Gullstrand, Allge-
meine L¨osung des statischen Eink¨orper-problems in der Einstein-
schen Gravitations-theorie, Arkiv. Mat. Astron. Fys. 16(8), 1-15
(1922).

[12] Andrew J.S. Hamilton, Jason P. Lisle, The river model of black

holes, gr-qc/0411060.

[13] ¨U. Parts, V.M.H. Ruutu, J.H. Koivuniemi, Yu. N. Bunkov, V.V.
Dmitriev, M. Fogelstr¨om, M. Huenber, Y. Kondo, N.B. Kopnin,
J.S. Korhonen, M. Krusius, O.V. Lounasmaa, P.I. Soininen, and
G.E. Volovik, Single-vortex nucleation in rotating superﬂuid 3He-
B, Europhys. Lett. 31, 449-454 (1995).

[14] A. Vorontsov, J.A. Sauls, Spectrum of third sound cavity modes
on superﬂuid 3He ﬁlms, J. Low Temp. Phys. 134, 1001 (2004);
cond-mat/0309599.

[15] Seamus Davis, private communication at NEDO 2nd Interna-
tional Workshop on Quantum Fluids and Solids, Hawaii, January
1999.

[16] T. Bohr, P. Dimon, and V. Putkaradge, Shallow water approach
to the circular hydraulic jump, J. Fluid Mech. 254, 635 (1993);
T. Bohr, C. Ellegaard, A.E. Hansen, and A. Haaning, Hydraulic
jump, ﬂow separation and wave breaking: an experimental study,
Physica B 228, 1-10 (1996).

[17] S. Corley, and T. Jacobson, Black hole lasers, Phys. Rev. D 59,

124011 (1999).

9

