5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Viscous ﬁngering of miscible slices

A. De Wit,1 Y. Bertho,1, 2 and M. Martin3
1Service de Chimie Physique and Center for Nonlinear Phenomena and Complex Systems,
Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, CP 231, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
2Microgravity Research Center, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, CP 165/62, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
3Laboratoire PMMH-ESPCI (UMR 7636), 10 rue Vauquelin, 75 231 Paris Cedex 05, France

Viscous ﬁngering of a miscible high viscosity slice of ﬂuid displaced by a lower viscosity ﬂuid is
studied in porous media by direct numerical simulations of Darcy’s law coupled to the evolution
equation for the concentration of a solute controlling the viscosity of miscible solutions. In contrast
with ﬁngering between two semi-inﬁnite regions, ﬁngering of ﬁnite slices is a transient phenomenon
due to the decrease in time of the viscosity ratio across the interface induced by ﬁngering and
dispersion processes. We show that ﬁngering contributes transiently to the broadening of the peak
in time by increasing its variance. A quantitative analysis of the asymptotic contribution of ﬁngering
to this variance is conducted as a function of the four relevant parameters of the problem i.e. the
log-mobility ratio R, the length of the slice l, the P´eclet number P e and the ratio between transverse
and axial dispersion coeﬃcients ε. Relevance of the results is discussed in relation with transport
of viscous samples in chromatographic columns and propagation of contaminants in porous media.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Viscous ﬁngering is an ubiquitous hydrodynamic in-
stability that occurs as soon as a ﬂuid of given viscosity
displaces another more viscous one in a porous medium
[1]. As such, the typical example usually presented for
this instability is that of oil recovery for which viscous
ﬁngering takes place when an aqueous solution displaces
more viscous oil in underground reservoirs. This explains
why numerous articles devoted to the theoretical and
experimental analysis of ﬁngering phenomena have ap-
peared in the petroleum engineering community [1]. For
what concerns the geometry, theoretical works typically
focus on analyzing the stability properties and nonlin-
ear dynamics of an interface between two semi-inﬁnite
domains of diﬀerent viscosity. In the same spirit, exper-
imental works done either in real porous media or in a
model Hele-Shaw system (two parallel plates separated
by a thin gap width) consist in injecting continuously a
low viscous ﬂuid into the medium initially ﬁlled with the
more viscous one. The attention is then focused on the
dynamics of the interface between the two regions. The
instability develops and the ﬁngers grow continuously in
time until the displacing ﬂuid has invaded the whole ex-
perimental system. As long as the experiment runs (i.e.
until the displacing ﬂuid reaches the outlet), the insta-
bility develops. Dispersion of one ﬂuid into the other
may lead to a slight stabilization in time nevertheless
this stabilization is usually negligible on the time scale of
the experiment and for high injection rates.

The situation is drastically diﬀerent in other impor-
tant applications in which viscous ﬁngering is observed,
such as in liquid chromatography or groundwater con-
tamination. Liquid chromatography is used to separate
the chemical components of a given sample by passing it
through a porous medium. In some cases, and typically
in preparative or size exclusion chromatography, the vis-
cosity of the sample is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than that
of the displacing ﬂuid (the eluent). Displacement of the

sample by the eluent of diﬀerent viscosity leads then to
viscous ﬁngering of either the front or the rear interface
of the sample slice, leading to deformation of the initial
planar interface. This ﬁngering is dramatic for the per-
formance of the separation technique as it contributes to
peak broadening and distortions. Such conclusions have
been drawn by several authors that have shown either
experimentally [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] or numerically [7, 8]
the inﬂuence of viscous ﬁngering on peak deformations.
In groundwater contamination and more generally soil
contamination, it is not rare that the spill’s extent is ﬁnite
due to a contamination localized in space and/or time. If
the spill’s ﬂuid properties are diﬀerent than that of water,
and in particular, if they have diﬀerent viscosity and/or
density [9, 10], ﬁngering phenomena may inﬂuence the
spreading characteristics of the contaminated zone. For
ecological reasons, it is important then to quantify to
what extent ﬁngering will enlarge the broadening in time
of this polluted area.

Nonlinear simulations of ﬁngering of ﬁnite samples
have been performed in the past by Tucker Norton, Fer-
nandez et al.
[7, 8] in the context of chromatographic
applications, by Christie et al.
in relation to “Water-
Alternate Gas” (WAG) oil recovery techniques [11] as
well as by Zimmerman [12] and have shown the inﬂuence
of ﬁngering on the deformation of the sample without
however investigating the asymptotic dynamics. Man-
ickam and Homsy, in their theoretical analysis of the sta-
bility and nonlinear dynamics of viscous ﬁngering of mis-
cible displacements with nonmonotonic viscosity proﬁles
have further stressed the importance of reverse ﬁngering
in the deformation of ﬁnite extent samples [13, 14]. Their
parametric study has focused on analyzing the inﬂuence
of the endpoint and maximum viscosities on the growth
rate of the mixing zone.

In this framework, the objectives of this article are
twofold: ﬁrst, we analyze the nonlinear dynamics of vis-
cous ﬁngering of miscible slices in typical analytical chro-
matographic and groundwater contamination conditions

in order to underline its speciﬁcities and, second, we
quantify the asymptotic contribution of viscous ﬁnger-
ing to the broadening of the output peaks as a function
of the important parameters of the problem. From a nu-
merical point of view, the only diﬀerence with regard to
most of the previous works devoted to viscous ﬁngering
[15, 16, 17] is the initial condition which is now a sample
of ﬁnite extent instead of the traditional interface be-
tween two semi-inﬁnite domains. As we show, this has
an important consequence: if the longitudinal extent of
the slice is small enough with regard to the length of the
migration zone, dispersion becomes of crucial importance
as it leads to such a dilution of the displaced sample into
the bulk ﬂuid before reaching the measurement location
that ﬁngering just dies out. As a consequence ﬁngering is
then only a transient phenomenon and the output peak of
the diluted sample may look Gaussian even if its variance
is larger than that of a pure diﬀusive dynamics because
of transient ﬁngering. This explains why the importance
of ﬁngering phenomena in chromatography and soil con-
tamination has been largely underestimated or ignored in
the literature. We perform here numerical simulations to
compute the various moments of the sample distribution
as a function of time when ﬁngering takes place. This
allows us to extract the contribution of viscous ﬁnger-
ing to the variance of the averaged concentration proﬁle
and to understand how this contribution varies with the
important parameters of the problem which are the log-
mobility ratio R between the viscosity of the sample and
that of the bulk ﬂuid, the P´eclet number P e, the dimen-
sionless longitudinal extent l of the slice and the ratio
ε between the transverse and longitudinal dispersion co-
eﬃcients. The outline of the article is the following. In
Sec. II, we introduce the model equations of the problem.
Typical experimental parameters for liquid chromatogra-
phy and groundwater contamination applications are dis-
cussed in Sec. III. The characteristics of the ﬁngering of
a miscible slice are outlined in Sec. IV, while a discussion
on the moments of transversely averaged proﬁles is done
in Sec. V. Eventually, a parametric study is conducted
in Sec. VI before a discussion is made.

II. MODEL SYSTEM

Our model system is a two-dimensional porous medium
of length Lx and width Ly (Fig. 1). A slice of ﬂuid 2 of
length W is injected in the porous medium initially ﬁlled
with carrier ﬂuid 1. This ﬂuid 2, which is a solution of
a given solute of concentration c2 in the carrier, will be
referred in the following as the sample. This sample is
displaced by the carrier ﬂuid 1 in which the solute concen-
tration c is equal to c1 = 0. Assuming that the viscosity
of the medium is a function of the concentration c and
that the ﬂow is governed by Darcy’s law, the evolution
equations for the system are then:

u = 0,

∇ ·

(1)

2

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

FIG. 1: Sketch of the system.

p =

∇

−

∂c
∂t

+ u

c = Dx

· ∇

u,

µ(c)
K
∂2c
∂x2 + Dy

∂2c
∂y2 ,

where µ is the viscosity of the ﬂuid, K is the permeability
of the medium, p is the pressure and u = (u, v) is the two-
dimensional velocity ﬁeld. The displacing ﬂuid is injected
in a uniform manner with a mean velocity U along the
x direction. Dx, Dy are the dispersion coeﬃcients along
the ﬂow direction and perpendicular to it respectively.
The characteristic speed U is used to deﬁne a charac-
teristic length Lc = Dx/U and time τc = Dx/U 2. We
nondimensionalize space, speed and time by Lc, U and
τc respectively. Pressure, viscosity and concentration are
scaled by µ1Dx/K, µ1 and c2, where µ1 is the viscosity
of the displacing ﬂuid and c2 the initial concentration of
the sample. The dimensionless equations of the system
become

u = 0,
p =

∇ ·
∇

∂c
∂t

+ u

c =

· ∇

µ(c)u,

−
∂2c
∂x2 + ε

∂2c
∂y2 ,

where ε = Dy/Dx. If ε = 1, dispersion is isotropic while
ε
= 1 characterizes anisotropic dispersion. Switching to
a coordinate system moving with speed U , i.e. making
the change of variables x′ = x
ix with
ix being the unit vector along x, we get, after dropping
the primes:

t, y′ = y, u′ = u

−

−

u = 0,
p =

∇ ·
∇

∂c
∂t

+ u

c =

· ∇

µ(c)(u + ix),

−
∂2c
∂x2 + ε

∂2c
∂y2 .

We suppose here that the viscosity is an exponential func-
tion of c such as:

µ(c) = eRc,

(10)

where R is the log-mobility ratio deﬁned by R =
ln(µ2/µ1), where µ2 is the viscosity of the sample and,
as said before, µ1 is the viscosity of the displacing ﬂuid
(Fig. 1). If R > 0, then we have a low viscosity ﬂuid dis-
placing a high viscosity sample and the rear interface of
the sample will be unstable with regard to viscous ﬁnger-
ing. If R < 0, then the sample is the less viscous ﬂuid and

6
the front interface of the slice will then develop ﬁngering.
In our simulations, we consider the R > 0 situation.

Introducing the stream function ψ such that u =
∂ψ/∂x, taking the curl of Eq. (8), we

∂ψ/∂y and v =
get our ﬁnal equations [18]:

−

2ψ = R

∇
∂c
∂t

+

∂ψ
∂y

∂ψ
∂x

(cid:18)
∂c
∂x −

∂c
∂x
∂ψ
∂x

+

∂ψ
∂y

∂c
∂y

=

,

∂c
∂y (cid:19)

+

∂c
∂y
∂2c
∂x2 + ε

∂2c
∂y2 .

(11)

(12)

×

×

This model is numerically integrated using a pseudo-
spectral code introduced by Tan and Homsy [15] and
successfully implemented for various numerical studies
of ﬁngering [19, 20]. The two-dimensional domain of in-
L where
tegration is, in dimensionless units, of size P e
P e = U Ly/Dx is the dimensionless width which is noth-
ing else than the P´eclet number of the problem, while
L = U Lx/Dx. The dimensionless length of the sam-
ple is l = U W/Dx. The initial condition corresponds to
a convectionless ﬂuid (ψ = 0 everywhere) embedding a
rectangular sample of concentration c = 1 and of size
P e
l in a c = 0 background. The middle of the sample
is initially located at x = 2L/3. In practice, for the sim-
ulations, the initial condition corresponds to two back to
back step functions between c = 0 and c = 1 with an
intermediate point where c = 1
r, r being a random
number between 0 and 1 and A the amplitude of the noise
(typically of the order of 10−3). This noise is necessary
to trigger the ﬁngering instability on reasonable comput-
ing time. If A = 0, numerical noise will ultimately seed
the ﬁngering instability but on a much longer time scale.
The boundary conditions are periodic in both directions.
This is quite standard along the transversal direction y.
This does not make any problem along the x-axis as c = 0
at both x = 0 and x = L. The problem is controlled by
four dimensionless parameters: the log-mobility ratio R,
the P´eclet number P e, the initial length of the injected
sample l and the ratio between transverse and longitudi-
nal dispersion coeﬃcients ε.

2 + A

·

III. EXPERIMENTAL VALUES OF
PARAMETERS FOR TWO APPLICATIONS

In order to perform numerical simulations, let us com-
pute the order of magnitude of the main parameters
(P´eclet number P e, length of the sample l) for both a
liquid chromatography experiment and for the propaga-
tion of contaminants in a porous medium (groundwater
contamination).

A. Chromatographic applications

First of all, let us note that in most chromatographic
applications, heterogeneous chemistry (particularly ad-
sorption and desorption phenomena) is crucial to the

3

≃

separation process and will undoubtedly aﬀect possible
ﬁngering processes. We neglect such physicochemical in-
teractions in this ﬁrst approach focusing on the eﬀect of
viscous ﬁngering on an unretained compound. A typical
chromatographic column has a diameter d = 4.6 mm, a
length Lx = 150 mm and consists of a porous medium
packed with porous particles, the total (intraparticle and
interparticle) porosity being equal to 0.7. The volume of
the sample introduced in the column is of the order of
1 ml min−1. The ex-
20 µl, injected at a ﬂow rate Q
1.7 10−3 m and
tent of the injected sample is then W
1.4 10−3 m s−1. The longitu-
the speed of the ﬂow U
dinal and transverse dispersion coeﬃcients are typically
Dx = 1.43 10−8 m2 s−1 [21] and Dy = 5.65 10−10 m2 s−1
[22]. These parameters allow one to deﬁne a character-
istic length Lc = Dx/U and a characteristic time τc =
Dx/U 2. As a result, the P´eclet number P e = U d/Dx
is here nothing else than the dimensionless diameter i.e.
460, while the dimensionless longitudinal
P e = d/Lc
170. The dis-
extent of the sample becomes l = W/Lc
persion ratio is equal to ε = Dy/Dx
0.04. As a typical
transit time from inlet to outlet takes roughly τ = 100 s,
the dimensionless time of a simulation should be of the
order of T = τ /τc
15000 to account for a realistic time
to characterize the properties of the output peaks.

≃

≃

≃

≃

≃

≃

B. Soil contamination

The eﬀects of ﬂuid viscosity and ﬂuid density may
be important in controlling groundwater ﬂow and so-
lute transport processes. Recently, a series of column
experiments were conducted and analyzed by Wood et
al. [10] to provide some insight into these questions. The
experiments were performed in fully saturated, homo-
geneous and isotropic sand columns (porosity equals to
0.34 and ε = 1) by injecting a 250 ml pulse of a known
concentration solution at a ﬂow rate Q = 0.015 m3/day.
Their experimental setup consists of a vertical pipe Lx =
0.91 m in length with a diameter of d = 0.15 m. As-
suming the medium to be homogeneous and the disper-
sion coeﬃcient D as isotropic, a typical value for the
aquifer dispersion coeﬃcient is D = 0.1 m2/month i.e.
3.86 10−8 m2 s−1 [23]. In the same spirit as above,
D
we compute the P´eclet number to be of the order of
110, while the dimensionless length of the sample
P e
30.
is l

≃

≃
≃

Based on these two examples, let us now investigate the
properties of ﬁngering of ﬁnite slices for typical values
of parameters in the range computed above i.e. P e
100
0.04
500, ε
to be of order one.

∼
500, while R is supposed

1, l

−

∼

−

∼

−

0

4

FIG. 3: Transverse average proﬁles of concentration at suc-
cessive times t=0, 500, 700, 1000, 1500, 2000, 5000 and
15000. Insert: transverse average proﬁle of concentration at
t = 60000 (P e = 512, l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1).

proﬁles of concentration deﬁned as

¯c(x, t) =

c(x, y, t)dy.

(13)

P e

1
P e Z
0

As seen on Fig. 3, we ﬁrst start with two back to back
step functions deﬁning an initial sample of extent l. Dur-
ing the ﬁrst stages of the injection, there is a ﬁrst diﬀu-
sive regime quickly followed by the ﬁngering of the rear
interface corresponding here to the left front. While the
right (i.e.
frontal) interface features the standard error
function characteristic of simple dispersion, the left one
shows bumps signaling the presence of ﬁngering. Because
the extent of the sample is ﬁnite, dispersion and ﬁngering
contribute to the fact that the maximum concentration
becomes smaller than one, eﬀectively leading to a viscos-
ity ratio between the sample and the bulk that decreases
in time. As a consequence, ﬁngering dies out and the
transverse proﬁle starts to follow a distorted Gaussian
shape. If one waits long enough, the asymmetry of the
bell shape diminishes which explains that output peaks
in chromatographic columns may look Gaussian even if
ﬁngering has occurred during the ﬁrst stages of the travel
of the sample in the column. As computed in the pre-
ceding section, a typical dimensionless time of transit
in a real chromatographic setup corresponds to 15000
units of time. Figures 2 and 3 show that, after 15000
units of time, ﬁngering is disappearing for this speciﬁc
set of typical values of parameters, and that dispersion
becomes again the dominant mode. As chromatographic
columns are generally opaque porous media, it is there-
fore not astonishing that the presence of viscous ﬁngering
has long been totally ignored until recent experimental
works which have visualized ﬁngering by magnetic reso-
nance or optical imaging [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Similarly,
tracing of the spatial extent of a contaminant plume at a
distance far from the pollution site may lead to measure-
ments of Gaussian-type spreading even if ﬁngering has

FIG. 2: Density plots of concentration at successive times in
the frame moving at the velocity U . From top to bottom: t=0,
500, 700, 1000, 1500, 2000, 5000, 15000 and 60000 (P e = 512,
l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1).

IV. FINGERING OF A FINITE WIDTH
SAMPLE

Figure 2 shows in a frame moving with the injection
velocity U the typical viscous ﬁngering of the rear inter-
face of a sample displaced from left to right by a less vis-
cous ﬂuid. The system is shown at successive times using
density plots of concentration with black (resp. white)
corresponding to c = 1 (resp. c = 0). While the front in-
terface is stable, the back interface develops ﬁngers such
that the center of gravity of the sample is displaced in the
course of time towards the back with regard to its initial
position. This dynamics results from the fact that the
stable zone acts as a barrier to ﬁnger propagation in the
ﬂow direction leading therefore to reverse ﬁngering. Such
a reverse ﬁngering has been well characterized by Man-
ickam and Homsy in their numerical analysis of ﬁngering
of nonmonotonic viscosity proﬁles [14]. After a while,
dispersion comes into play and dilutes the more viscous
ﬂuid into the bulk of the displacing ﬂuid. As the sample
becomes more and more diluted, the eﬀective viscosity
ratio decreases in time weakening the source of the in-
stability. Ultimately, dispersion becomes dominant and
the sample goes on diluting in the bulk without witness-
ing any further ﬁngering phenomenon. These successive
steps can clearly be observed on the transverse averaged

occurred at early times. The only inﬂuence of such ﬁn-
gering appears in the larger variance of the sample than
in the case of pure dispersion as we show it next.

V. MOMENTS OF THE TRANSVERSE
AVERAGED PROFILE

The averaged proﬁles of concentration c(x, t) allow to
compute the three ﬁrst moments of the distribution: the
ﬁrst moment m

m(t) =

R

L
0 ¯c(x, t)xdx
L
0 ¯c(x, t)dx
R

(14)

(15)

(16)

is the position of the center of mass of the distribution as
a function of time. The second moment is the variance
σ2

σ2(t) =

L
0 ¯c(x, t)[x
R

−
L
0 ¯c(x, t)dx

m(t)]2dx

R

giving information on the width of the distribution.
Eventually, we compute also the third moment, i.e. the
skewness

a(t) =

m(t)]3dx

L
0 ¯c(x, t)[x
R

−
L
0 ¯c(x, t)dx
R

that gives information concerning the asymmetry of the
peak with regard to its mean position.

The variance σ2 is the sum of three contributions:

σ2(t) = σ2

i + σ2

d + σ2
f ,

(17)

i +σ2

i = l2/12 is the variance due to the initial length
where σ2
of the sample, σ2
d = 2t is the contribution of dispersion in
dimensionless units and σ2
f is the contribution due to the
ﬁngering phenomenon. If R = 0, the displacing ﬂuid and
the sample have the same viscosity and no ﬁngering takes
place. Hence, in that case, σ2 = σ2
d = l2/12+2t. We
have checked that this result is recovered by numerical
simulations for R = 0. The integrals in the computation
of the moments (14)–(16) are evaluated numerically by
using Simpson’s rule. The numerical result is very good if
the spatial discretization step dx is small. Typically, we
get the exact result for dx = 1. Unfortunately, dx = 1 is
a resolution too high for ﬁngering simulations especially
if one wants to look at the dynamics at very long times.
As an example, previous simulations on viscous ﬁngering
phenomena [15, 19] were done with larger dx as typical
dimensionless ﬁngering wavelengths are around 100 for
R = 3 for instance. Using typically dx = 4 gives roughly
25 points per wavelength which is numerically reasonable.
For what concerns the variance, simulations with R = 0
and dx = 4 give the correct σ2
i at t = 0 but a constant
shift appears so that σ2(t)
l2/12
2t = C, with C
−
being a constant of the order of 0.1% of l2/12. As we are

−

5

FIG. 4: First three moments of the distribution: (a) Mean
position m of the center of mass, (b) Variance σ2, (c) Skewness
a (P e = 512, l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1).

mostly interested in the rate of variation of σf , where σf
is deﬁned as

σf (t) =

σ2
f (t) =

σ2(t)

σ2
i −

−

σ2
d,

(18)

q

q
all simulations are done here with dx = 4. The slight C
shift does not aﬀect the value of σf as we have checked
it for decreasing values of dx.

Figure 4 shows the temporal evolution of the ﬁrst three
moments i.e. the deviation m(t)
m(t = 0) of the center
of mass in comparison to its initial location at t = 0, the
total variance σ2(t) and the skewness a(t) for the typical
example of Figs. 2 and 3. As ﬁngering occurs quicker
than dispersion, the center of gravity of the sample m(t)

−

6

FIG. 5: Mixing zone Ld as a function of time realized with
the same parameters (P e = 512, l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1)
and three diﬀerent values of the amplitude A of the noise
) A = 0.1, (- -) A = 0.01,
seeding the initial condition: (
(—) A = 0.001; (–
–) theoretical curve of a pure diﬀusive
√t. Insert: zoom on the ﬁrst stages on the
behavior Ld
∝
injection. The onset time t∗
, corresponding to the time at
which the mixing zone departs from the pure diﬀusive initial
transient, is a decreasing function of A.

· · ·

·

is displaced towards the back (smaller x values) because
of reverse ﬁngering of the rear interface of the sample
[Fig. 4(a)]. Fingering contributes to the widening of the
peak and thus σ2(t) increases [Fig. 4(b)] while the skew-
ness a(t) becomes non zero due to the asymmetry of the
ﬁngering instability with regard to the middle of the sam-
ple [Fig. 4(c)]. After a while, ﬁngering dies out and the
ﬁrst moment m(t) saturates to a constant indicating that
dispersion becomes again the only important dynamical
transport mechanism. Note that the skewness a is ob-
served to revert back towards 0 at very long times.

Onset of ﬁngering is also witnessed in the growth of
the mixing zone Ld deﬁned here as the interval in which
¯c(x, t) > 0.01 (Fig. 5). An important thing to note is
that, after a diﬀusive transient, ﬁngering appears on a
characteristic time scale t∗, deﬁned as the time for which
the mixing zone temporal dependence departs from the
pure diﬀusive regime.

As has already been discussed before [16, 20], the char-
acteristics of the ﬁngering onset time t∗ and of the de-
tails of the nonlinear ﬁngering regime are dependent on
the noise amplitude A. The higher the noise intensity A,
the quicker the onset of the instability (Insert in Fig. 5).
To get insight into the inﬂuence of the relevant physical
parameters of the problem, it is therefore necessary to
ﬁx the amplitude of the noise to an arbitrary constant
as this is not a variable that is straightforwardly experi-
mentally available. In that respect, our results have here
typically been obtained for a noise of ﬁxed A = 0.001.
The number of ﬁngers appearing at early times is related
to the most unstable wavenumber of the band of unstable
modes, nevertheless the location and subsequent nonlin-
ear interaction of the ﬁngers depend on the speciﬁc real-

FIG. 6: σf as a function of time for 15 numerical simula-
tions realized with the same values of parameters (P e = 512,
l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1) but diﬀerent noise r realizations of
−3. The dotted and dashed curves
identical amplitude A = 10
correspond to the simulations of Figs. 2 and 7 respectively.

ization of the random numbers series. As a consequence,
it is necessary to compute a set of realizations to get sta-
tistical information on σf , the main quantity of interest
here. Figure 6 shows the temporal evolution of σf for
15 diﬀerent noise realizations of identical amplitude for
ﬁxed values of the parameters R, P e, l and ε. As can be
seen, if ﬁngering starts always at the same onset time t∗
for ﬁxed A, the contribution to the variance due to ﬁn-
gering saturates to diﬀerent asymptotic values σ∞. This
corresponds to slightly diﬀerent nonlinear interactions of
the ﬁngers as can be seen on Figs. 2 and 7 which show
the temporal evolution of the ﬁngers for the respectively
dotted and dashed curves of Fig. 6. If the patterns ob-
served are very similar during the initial linear phase of
viscous ﬁngering, the evolution of the ﬁngers is slightly
diﬀerent in the nonlinear regime, leading to diﬀerent val-
ues of σ∞. In particular, merging is observed in Fig. 7
leading to the fast development of one ﬁnger and, then,
spreading of the stripe of viscous ﬂuid leading to a larger
value of σ∞.

As a consequence, to understand the inﬂuence of ﬁn-
gering on the broadening of ﬁnite slices, it is necessary to
study the parametric dependence of < σ∞ >, the statis-
tical ensemble averaged asymptotic value of the ﬁngering
contribution to the variance.

VI. PARAMETER STUDY

The quantity < σ∞ > gives information on the inﬂu-
ence of viscous ﬁngering on the broadening of ﬁnite sam-
ples.
In applications such as chromatography and dis-
persion of contaminants in aquifers, such a broadening is
undesirable and it is therefore important to understand
the optimal values of parameters for which < σ∞ > is
minimum given some constraints.
In that respect, let
us ﬁrst consider a porous medium in which dispersion is

7

FIG. 8: Inﬂuence of the sample length l on σ∞ for (H) P e = 64
and (

) P e = 128 (R = 2, ε = 1).
•

ical value of σ∞. The smaller the extent l of the sample,
the sooner the dilution of the more viscous solution into
the bulk of the eluent and thus the less eﬀective ﬁngering.
Above a given extent lc, σ∞ is found to saturate. At ﬁrst
sight, this might appear counterintuitive as one could ex-
pect that, for longer samples, ﬁngering is maintained for
a longer time thereby enhancing the ﬁngering contribu-
tion to the variance. A closer inspection to the ﬁnger
dynamics shows on the contrary that, after a transient
where several ﬁngers appear and interact, only one single
ﬁnger remains (see Figs. 2 and 7). In the absence of tip
splitting, the stretching of the mixing zone becomes then
exclusively diﬀusive as already discussed previously by
Zimmerman and Homsy [16, 17]. This is clearly seen in
Fig. 5 which shows that the mixing length grows as √t at
long times after a linear transient due to ﬁngering. Once
the asymptotic diﬀusive regime is reached, the contribu-
tion of ﬁngering to the broadening of the peak dies out
and σf saturates to σ∞. Above a given critical length lc
of the sample, the same asymptotic single ﬁnger growing
diﬀusively is reached before the left and right interfaces
interact. Hence the same value σ∞ is obtained for any
l > lc. Let us note that the switch from the ﬁngering
to the diﬀusive dynamics appears later in time when P e
is increased. Indeed larger P e means more ﬁngers that
can interact for a longer time before the diﬀusive regime
becomes dominant. As a consequence, lc is an increasing
function of P e as can be seen on Fig. 8. Further studies
need to be done to understand the role of ε and of pos-
sible tip splitting occurring for large P e on the existence
and value of the critical length lc.

The fact that the contribution of ﬁngering to the
broadening of the peak saturates beyond a critical length
of the sample has important practical consequences for
chromatography:
if ﬁngering is unavoidable, one might
as well load samples of long extent as the contribution
of ﬁngering is saturating beyond a given lc. For long
samples, the eﬃciency of the process depends then on
the competition between σ2
∞ and l2/12, the respective

FIG. 7: Density plots of concentration for the same values of
parameters and same times as in Fig. 2, but a diﬀerent noise
r in the initial condition.

isotropic (ε = 1) and let us analyze the subsequent inﬂu-
= 1) will
ences of l, R and P e. The anisotropic case (ε
eventually be tackled. The mean value < σ∞ > is plot-
ted for various values of the parameters, the bar around
this mean value spanning the range of asymptotic data
between the minimum and maximum observed.

A.

Inﬂuence of the sample length l

The sample length l has been measured to have practi-
cally no inﬂuence on the onset time t∗ of the instability.
Although Nayfeh has shown that the stability of ﬁnite
samples could be aﬀected if the two interfaces are close
enough [24], we note that, for the smallest value of sam-
ple length l considered here (l = 32), the rear interface
features the same initial pattern as the one appearing on
the interface between two semi-inﬁnite regions of diﬀer-
ent viscosities for a same random sequence in the seeding
noise. Our samples are thus here long enough for the
onset time t∗ to depend only on the amplitude A of the
noise seeding the initial condition and not feel the ﬁnite
extent of the sample. The length l inﬂuences nevertheless
the broadening of the peak and thus < σ∞ > in partic-
ular for small l. The points reported in Fig. 8 for two
diﬀerent P e are obtained for one realization and a same
seeding noise r in the initial condition, leading to a typ-

6
8

FIG. 9: Onset time t∗
of the instability for increasing val-
ues of R (P e = 256, l = 128, ε = 1). (—) Best ﬁt of the
experimental points: t∗

R−2.

∝

FIG. 11:
(l = 128, R = 2, ε = 1).

Inﬂuence of the P´eclet number P e on < σ∞ >

for samples of low viscosity, ﬁngering might not be ob-
served during the transit time across small chromato-
graphic columns or on small scale contamination zone.
When R is increased, the viscous ﬁngering contribution
to peak broadening < σ∞ > is more important (Fig. 10)
with a linear dependence suggesting a power law increase
for larger R.

C.

Inﬂuence of the P´eclet number P e

The P´eclet number P e is typically experimentally in-
creased for a given geometry by increasing the injection
ﬂow rate U . As can be seen on Fig. 11, < σ∞ > is found
to increase linearly with P e. Fingering induced broad-
ening can thus be minimized by small carrier velocity U
as expected. However, the exact inﬂuence of the car-
rier velocity U is diﬃcult to trace because practically, a
change in U also modiﬁes the dispersion coeﬃcients and
hence the value of ε. In our dimensionless variables, U
also enters into the characteristic time and length corre-
sponding respectively to Dx/U 2 and Dx/U . The concrete
inﬂuence of the carrier velocity is thus more complicated
to trace in reality. For a ﬁxed injection speed, the P´eclet
number can also be varied by changing the width Ly of
the system. The linear dependence of < σ∞ > on P e
is then related to the fact that in a wider domain, more
ﬁngers can remain in competition for a longer time so
that a more active ﬁngering is maintained. This also
implies that lc is an increasing function of P e. In chro-
matographic applications, increasing the diameter of the
column (i.e.
increasing Ly here in our model) is thus
expected to dramatically increase the inﬂuence of ﬁnger-
ing in broadening. This explains why ﬁngering really
becomes an issue for wide contamination zones and in
preparative chromatography where columns of very large
diameter (up to one meter) are sometimes constructed.

FIG. 10: Inﬂuence of the log-mobility ratio R on < σ∞ >
) P e =
for (
256, l = 128, (N) P e = 256, l = 512 (ε = 1).

) P e = 128, l = 128, (
◦

) P e = 128, l = 512, (
•

△

ﬁngering and initial length contributions to the peak’s
variance. We can thus predict that for lc < l < σ∞/√12,
the contribution of ﬁngering is constant and dominates
the broadening while for l > σ∞/√12, the initial sample
length becomes the key factor.

B.

Inﬂuence of the log-mobility ratio R

It is easy to foreseen that the larger R, the more im-
portant the viscous ﬁngering eﬀect [8]. First of all, linear
stability analysis of viscous ﬁngering at the interface be-
tween two semi-inﬁnite domains [18] predicts that the
characteristic growth time of the instability decreases as
R−2. Although already inﬂuenced by the nonlinearities
and dependent on the amplitude of the noise, the on-
set time t∗ measured in our simulations shows the same
trend (Fig. 9). Note that, for very small values of R,
the onset time becomes very large which explains why,

9

FIG. 12: Onset time t∗
of the instability for increasing values
of ε for diﬀerent values of the log-mobility ratio: (▽) R = 1,
(

) R = 2, (△) R = 3 (P e = 128, l = 128).
◦

FIG. 13: Inﬂuence of the ratio between transverse and longi-
tudinal dispersion ε on < σ∞ > for (▽) R = 1, (
) R = 2,
◦
) R = 3 (P e = 128, l = 128). Insert: same data on loga-
(
△
rithmic scale for ε.

D.

Inﬂuence of the ratio of dispersion coeﬃcients ε

Figure 12 shows the inﬂuence of the ratio of dispersion
coeﬃcients ε = Dy/Dx on the onset time of the instabil-
ity. As expected from linear stability analysis [18], de-
creasing ε has a destabilizing eﬀect as ﬁngering appears
then quicker. This is due to the fact that small trans-
verse dispersion inhibits the mixing of the solutions and
favors longitudinal growth of the ﬁngers allowing them to
survive for a longer time. As a consequence, the less vis-
cous solution instead of being transversely homogeneous
invades the more viscous ﬂuid preferably in the longitu-
dinal direction leading to larger mixing zones and hence
larger < σ∞ >. Figure 13 illustrates that decreasing ε
has a dramatic eﬀect on the broadening of the peak. The
insert shows the same graphics in logarithmic scale for ε.
< σ∞ > seems to vary as ln(ε) at least for small values
of ε. Peak broadening due to ﬁngering is therefore ex-
pected to be particularly dramatic for chromatographic
applications where ε

0.04.

∼

VII. CONCLUSION

Viscous ﬁngering leads to a mixing between miscible
ﬂuids of diﬀerent viscosity. In the case of viscous slices
of ﬁnite extent, ﬁngering is a transient phenomenon be-
cause the mixing of the two ﬂuids leads to an eﬀective
decrease of the log-mobility ratio in time. Transient ﬁn-
gering can nevertheless play an important role because it
contributes to distortion and broadening of the sample.
In particular, we have shown that, even if the spreading
of the sample may look Gaussian at long times because
dispersion has again become the leading transport phe-
nomenon, the variance of the peak is larger than expected
because of ﬁngering at early times. We have demon-
strated this inﬂuence by numerical simulations of viscous
ﬁngering of miscible ﬁnite slices characterizing the onset

time of the instability t∗ and the contribution of ﬁnger-
ing to the sample’s variance.
It is important to note
that quantitative comparison with experimental data is
diﬃcult because the exact amplitude of the ﬁngering con-
tribution to the temporal variation of the peak’s variance
depends both on the amplitude and spatial realization of
the noise seeding the initial condition which varies from
one experiment to the other.
In this respect, we have
computed the ensemble averaged asymptotic ﬁngering
contribution to the peak broadening as a function of the
four relevant parameters of the problem i.e. the initial
length of the sample l, the initial log-mobility ratio R,
the P´eclet number P e and the ratio between transverse
and longitudinal dispersion coeﬃcients ε. The broaden-
ing of the peaks due to ﬁngering is most important for
large R and P e but small ε while it saturates above a
given initial length l of the sample. In chromatographic
columns for which ε
0.04, ﬁngering is thus of crucial
importance particularly in preparative chromatography
for which the large diameter of the columns lead to large
P e and the high concentration of the samples usually im-
plies large R. Similarly, for soil contamination, ﬁngering
will be a major problem in the case of stratiﬁed media
such that ε < 1. More work is now needed to explore the
generalization of this ﬁrst approach to the case where
both viscosity and density variations as well as heteroge-
neous chemistry may interplay as is usually the case in
the applications analyzed here.

∼

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank G.M. Homsy, P. Colinet, A. Vedernikov and
B. Scheid for fruitful discussions. Y. Bertho beneﬁts
from a postdoctoral fellowship of the Universit´e Libre de
Bruxelles sponsored by the Francqui Foundation which is
gratefully acknowledged. A. De Wit thanks also FRFC
(Belgium) and the “Communaut´e fran¸caise de Belgique

- Actions de Recherches Concert´ees” programme for ﬁ-

nancial support.

10

[1] G.M. Homsy, Viscous ﬁngering in porous media, Ann.

pore, 2004).

Rev. Fluid Mech. 19, 271 (1987).

[2] B.S. Broyles, R.A. Shalliker, D.E. Cherrak and G. Guio-
chon, Visualization of viscous ﬁngering in chromato-
graphic columns, J. Chromatogr. 822, 173 (1998).

[3] L.D. Plante, P.M. Romano and E.J. Fernandez, Vis-
cous ﬁngering visualized via magnetic resonance imaging,
Chem.Eng. Sci. 49, 229 (1994).

[4] E.J. Fernandez, C.A. Grotegut, G.W. Braun, K.J.
Kirschner, J.R. Staudaher, M.L. Dickson, and V.L. Fer-
nandez, The eﬀects of permeability heterogeneity on
miscible viscous ﬁngering: A three-dimensional magnetic
resonance imaging analysis, Phys. Fluids 7, 468 (1995).
[5] D. Cherrak, E. Guernet, P. Cardot, C. Herrenknecht and
M. Czok, Viscous ﬁngering: a systematic study of vis-
cosity eﬀects in methanol-isopropanol systems, Chro-
matographia 46, 647 (1997).

[6] M. Czok, A. Katti and G. Guiochon, Eﬀect of sample
viscosity in high-performance size-exclusion chromatog-
raphy and its control, J. Chromatogr. 550, 705 (1991).
[7] E.J. Fernandez, T. Tucker Norton, W.C. Jung and J.G.
Tsavalas, A column design for reducing viscous ﬁngering
in size exclusion chromatography, Biotechnol. Prog. 12,
480 (1996).

[8] T. Tucker Norton and E.J. Fernandez, Viscous ﬁngering
in size exclusion chromatography: insights from numeri-
cal simulation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 35, 2460 (1996).
[9] C.Y. Jiao and H. Hotzl, An experimental study of mis-
cible displacements in porous media with variation of
ﬂuid density and viscosity, Trans. Porous Media 54, 125
(2004).

[10] M. Wood, C.T. Simmons and J.L. Hutson, A break-
through curve analysis of unstable density-driven ﬂow
and transport in homogeneous porous media, Water Re-
sour. Res. 40, W03505 (2004).

[11] M.A. Christie, A.H. Muggeridge and J.J. Barley, 3D
simulation of viscous ﬁngering and WAG schemes, SPE
21238, presented at the 11th Symposium on Reservoir
Simulation, Anaheim, California, February 17-20, 1991.
[12] W.B.J. Zimmerman, Process Modelling and Simulation
with Finite Element Methods (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-

[13] O. Manickam and G.M. Homsy, Stability of miscible dis-
placements in porous media with nonmonotonic viscosity
proﬁles, Phys. Fluids A 5, 1357 (1993).

[14] O. Manickam and G.M. Homsy, Simulation of viscous
ﬁngering in miscible displacements with nonmonotonic
viscosity proﬁles, Phys. Fluids 6, 95 (1994).

[15] C.T. Tan and G.M. Homsy, Simulation of nonlinear vis-
cous ﬁngering in miscible displacement, Phys. Fluids 31,
1330 (1988).

[16] W.B. Zimmerman and G.M. Homsy, Nonlinear viscous
ﬁngering in miscible displacement with anisotropic dis-
persion, Phys. Fluids A 3, 1859 (1991).

[17] W.B. Zimmerman and G.M. Homsy, Viscous ﬁngering in
miscible displacements : uniﬁcation of eﬀects of viscosity
contrast, anisotropic dispersion, and velocity dependence
of dispersion on nonlinear ﬁnger propagation, Phys. Flu-
ids A 4, 2348 (1992).

[18] C.T. Tan and G.M. Homsy, Stability of miscible displace-
ments in porous media: rectilinear ﬂow, Phys. Fluids 29,
3549 (1986).

[19] A. De Wit and G.M. Homsy, Nonlinear interactions of
chemical reactions and viscous ﬁngering in porous media,
Phys. Fluids 11, 949 (1999).

[20] A. De Wit, Miscible density ﬁngering of chemical fronts
in porous media: nonlinear simulations, Phys. Fluids 16,
163 (2004).

[21] J.H. Knox, Band dispersion in chromatography - a new
view of A-term dispersion, J. Chromatogr. A 831, 3
(1999).

[22] J.H. Knox, G.R. Laid and P.A. Raven,

Interaction of
radial and axial dispersion in liquid chromatography in
relation to the ”inﬁnite diameter eﬀect”, J. Chromatogr.
122, 129 (1976).

[23] S.E. Serrano, Propagation of nonlinear reactive contam-
inants in porous media, Water Resour. Res. 39, 1228
(2003).

[24] A.H. Nayfeh, Stability of liquid interfaces in porous me-

dia, Phys. Fluids 15, 1751 (1972).

