5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
2
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Hydraulic Jump in Liquid Helium

Étienne Rolley∗, Claude Guthmann∗, Michael S. Pettersen† and Christophe
Chevallier∗

∗Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, École Normale Supérieure, 75231 Paris, France
†Department of Physics, Washington and Jefferson College, Washington, PA 15301, USA

Abstract. We present the results of some experiments on the circular hydraulic jump in normal and superﬂuid liquid helium.
The radius of the jump and the depth of the liquid outside the jump are measured through optical means. Although the scale
of the apparatus is rather small, the location of the jump is found to be consistent with the assumption that the jump can be
treated as a shock, if the surface tension is taken into account. The radius of the jump does not change when going down in
temperature through the lambda point; we think that the ﬂow is supercritical. A remarkable feature of the experiment is the
observation of stationary ripples within the jump when the liquid is superﬂuid.

When a jet of liquid falls on a horizontal surface, as
one often observes in the kitchen sink, a discontinuity
may occur in the depth of the out-ﬂowing ﬂuid: at a cer-
tain distance R j from the jet, there is an abrupt increase
in the depth of the liquid, and a decrease in the average
velocity of the liquid. This discontinuity is called the hy-
draulic jump, and was discussed in 1914 by Rayleigh.[1]
Although the hydraulic jump is a popular undergraduate
experiment,[2] the theory is challenging because of the
free boundary, and it remains a problem of current the-
oretical interest.[2-7] Many experimental measurements
of the jump radius R j have been performed over the years
(see the references cited in ref. [6]), mostly with ﬂuids
such as water or ethylene glycol. In this article, we report
the results of observations of the hydraulic jump using
liquid helium-4. Helium differs from the liquids that have
previously been studied in having a much lower viscos-
ity (n ∼ 2 × 10−8 m2/s), so jet Reynolds numbers up to
Re ∼ 4 × 104 can be achieved. Another difference is the
scale: typical values of R j in our apparatus are a few mm,
an order or two smaller than in previous experiments on
the hydraulic jump. This has the effect of increasing the
importance of the surface tension.

The cell used in the experiment was mounted in a
pumped helium optical cryostat, to permit direct imag-
ing of the jump with a digital camera, as seen in Fig. 1.
The jet was formed by admitting helium through a cupro-
nickel capillary tube of 100 m m inner diameter. The cap-
illary was aligned so that the jet would be perpendicular
to the surface of impact. The circular symmetry of the
jump attested to the correctness of the alignment. The
substrate surface was a sapphire disc (chosen for its high
thermal conductivity), optically ﬂat and aluminized.

FIGURE 1.
oblique angle.

Image of the hydraulic jump viewed from an

The ﬂux of liquid Q was determined from the rate gas
was admitted to the cell, measured with a ﬂowmeter at
room temperature. Four heat exchangers (copper capil-
laries 0.5 m long with 1 mm inner diameter) cooled, liq-
ueﬁed and thermalized the gas. The resulting impedance
limits the maximum ﬂow rate in the experiment.

The radius of the jump R j was determined directly
from the images taken by the digital camera. In order
to permit measurement of the depth of the liquid, a
horizontal wire was placed above the liquid. The image
of the wire in the mirrored surface is displaced due
to the index of refraction of the liquid on the surface.
Measuring the displacement of the image relative to the
wire thus permitted a measurement of the depth liquid
outside the jump, d, to within a few m m.

Fig. 2 shows a comparison between the measurement
of R j above the lambda transition and various models.
To analyze the data, we have considered three models.

Below the lambda transition, one might hope to ob-
serve a transition in the jump to the value predicted by
Rayleigh in the inviscid case. However, we did not ob-
serve such a transition. We believe the ﬂuid velocity in
our experiment exceeds the critical velocity for superﬂu-
idity. For a ﬂuid depth on the order of 10 m m, such as
we expect within the jump,[3] the critical velocity is on
the order of 50 mm/s,[9] corresponding to Q less than 1
mm3/s. Unfortunately, at such low ﬂuxes, the jet becomes
unstable and drips instead. However, even if the helium
in our experiments is normal below the lambda point,
the viscosity of the normal ﬂuid drops rather abruptly
as the temperature is lowered from 2.17 K to 1.5 K. In
this regime, we start to observe stationary ripples inside
the jump, as seen in Fig. 1. These can be explained as
waves generated at the jump and travelling upstream at
the same velocity the ﬂuid ﬂows downstream. The ripple
wavelength can be used to estimate the depth of the liquid
inside the jump by equating the phase velocity of shallow
water capillary waves with the ﬂuid velocity. The result-
ing estimate is in rough agreement with the prediction[3]
and is much smaller than the depth outside the jump. The
temperature dependence of the decay length is not yet
completely understood. Presumably, the lower viscosity
below the lambda point allows the ripples to propagate
further upstream from the jump, so they become more
prominent. Analysis of this phenomenon is ongoing.

In summary, our experimental results agree with the
shock model of the hydraulic jump. The effect of surface
tension is important, but the model of Bush and Aristoff
overestimates it. No abrupt change in the jump is ob-
served at the lambda transition. The appearance of rip-
ples inside the jump below the lambda point likely re-
ﬂects the decreased viscosity of the normal ﬂuid.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l’École Nor-
male Supérieure is associated with Universités Paris 6 et
Paris 7. M. S. Pettersen is grateful for the support of the
École Normale Supérieure and the Université de Paris 7.

REFERENCES

1. Lord Rayleigh, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 90, 324 (1914).
2. B. L. Blackford, Am. J. Phys. 64, 164 (1996).
3. E. J. Watson, J. Fl. Mech. 20, 481 (1964).
4. T. Bohr, P. Dimon and V. Putkaradze, J. Fl. Mech. 254, 635

5. P. Godwin, Am. J. Phys. 61, 829 (1993).
6. S. Watanabe, V. Putkaradze and T. Bohr, J. Fl. Mech. 480,

7. J. W. M. Bush and J. M. Aristoff, J. Fl. Mech. 489, 229

(1993).

233 (2003).

(2003).

FIGURE 2. Experimental measurements of the hydraulic
jump radius compared with models of Watson (open symbols)
and Bush (solid symbols). Circles: 2.45 K; squares: 3.0 K;
triangles: 4.25 K.

Two of the models, those of Watson[3] and of Bush and
Aristoff,[7] follow Rayleigh in treating the jump as a
shock discontinuity, where mass and momentum ﬂuxes
are conserved. They improve on Rayleigh in including
the viscosity of the liquid. Near the jet impact, the ﬂuid
ﬂow is modelled as a uniform ﬂow near the free surface,
and a growing boundary layer near the substrate; beyond
the point where the boundary layer reaches the free sur-
face, the ﬂow is modelled with a similarity proﬁle. (The
matching is not exact, but close.) Bush and Aristoff’s
model is similar to Watson’s, but includes the effect of
the surface tension, whose curved surface exerts a force
at the jump and must be included in the momentum ﬂux
conservation condition. The model of Bohr et al.[4] dif-
fers in attempting to model the ﬂow at the jump more ac-
curately. They use a one-parameter polynomial model of
the ﬂow proﬁle; both the proﬁle parameter and the height
of the surface are variables, which vary continuously at
the jump. This model is capable of representing the roll
which is known to develop beyond the jump.[8]

In Fig. 2 it is seen that the predictions of Watson are
slightly higher than the experimental results, and the pre-
dictions of Bush and Aristoff are slightly too low. It
would appear that the effect of surface tension is impor-
tant, but that the model of Bush and Aristoff is too crude,
and overestimates the size of the effect. (Curiously, the
experiments of Bush and Aristoff seem to indicate that
their estimate of the effect of surface tension is not large
enough.) The predictions of the model of Bohr et al. for
our experiment are similar to those of Watson; this is not
surprising in view of the fact that in practice, in all of our
runs except at the highest temperatures and lowest ﬂow
rates, the jump is rather sharp.

8. I. Tani, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 4, 212 (1949).
9. J. Wilks, Properties of Liquid and Solid Helium, Oxford:

Oxford, 1987, pp 388-392.

