5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SUBCRITICAL TURBULENT TRANSITION IN
ROTATING AND CURVED SHEAR FLOWS

————–

Pierre-Yves Longaretti1, Olivier Dauchot2

1LAOG, BP 53X, F-38041, Grenoble, France
2GIT/SPEC/DRECAM/DSM CEA Saclay, F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Abstract

The effects of global ﬂow rotation and curvature on the subcritical transition to
turbulence in shear ﬂows are examined. The relevant time-scales of the problem
are identiﬁed by a decomposition of the ﬂow into a laminar and a deviation from
laminar parts, which is performed for rotating plane Couette and Taylor-Couette
ﬂows. The usefulness and relevance of this procedure are discussed at the same
time. By comparing the self-sustaining process time-scale to the time-scales
previously identiﬁed, an interpretation is brought to light for the behavior of the
transition Reynolds number with the rotation number and relative gap width in
the whole neighborhood (in parameter space) of the non-rotating plane Couette
ﬂow covered by the available data.

1.

Introduction:

In the last decade or so, a number of breakthroughs have been achieved in
the understanding of the onset of turbulence in subcritical shear ﬂows, such as
the plane Couette ﬂow and Poiseuille ﬂow, both from an experimental point
of view (e.g., Bottin et al., 1998), and a numerical and theoretical one (e.g.,
Nagata, 1990; Clever and Busse, 1997; Hamilton et al., 1995; Waleffe, 1997;
Waleffe, 1998; Waleffe, 2003; Faisst and Eckardt, 2003). In this context, the
present contribution has two main objectives: characterize the effects of global
ﬂow rotation and curvature in subcritical ﬂows from the available data, and
show that these characteristics can be understood at a semi-quantitative level
from time-scale considerations. Understanding these questions is essential for
geophysical and astrophysical applications, which is one of the motivations of
this work. Data on rotating plane Couette ﬂows and Taylor-Couette ﬂows are
used in this investigation.

Section 1.2 is devoted to the identiﬁcation of rotation and curvature char-
acteristic quantities, and relating them to the gross dynamics of the ﬂow. Not

2

surprisingly, the associated dimensionless numbers reduce to the shear-based
Reynolds number, the rotation number, and the relative gap width (for Taylor-
Couette ﬂows); the novel point is that the relative gap width is interpreted in
terms of a ratio of dynamically relevant time-scales. The experimental data
are then reviewed in section 1.3, and the characterization of the available data
in terms of the previously deﬁned dimensionless numbers is performed in sec-
tion 1.4. The last section brieﬂy summarizes the most important results, and
discusses their astrophysical implications.

2.

The physics of the advection term revisited:

The main objective of this section is to pinpoint the relevant time-scales
in globally subcritical, rotating and curved ﬂows, and to relate them to the
various contributions of the advection/acceleration term. This turns out to be
essential to develop a semi-quantitative understanding of the available data on
such ﬂows. In practice, we consider only rotating plane Couette and Taylor-
Couette ﬂows. Incompressibility is assumed throughout.

Equations of motions

The relevant time-scales are well-known in rotating plane Couette ﬂows,
and follow immediately from the expression of the Navier-Stokes equation in
the rotating frame, which reads

∂u
∂t

∇π
ρ

+ u.∇u = −

− 2Ω × u + ν∆u,

(1)

with obvious notations (in particular, the centrifugal term has been included in
the pressure gradient). They are the shear1 time-scale ts = |S−1|, the viscous
one tν = d2/ν (d is the gap in the experiment), and the rotation time-scale
related to the Coriolis force tΩ = (2Ω)−1 (Ω is the rotation velocity of the
ﬂow in an inertial frame), and relate to the advection term, the viscous term,
and the Coriolis force, respectively. Correlatively, the ﬂow is described by two
dimensionless numbers, the Reynolds number2 Re = tν/ts = |S|d2/ν, and
the rotation number RΩ = sgn(S)ts/tΩ = 2Ω/S.

The situation is less straightforward for Taylor-Couette ﬂows, where the
dimensionless number usually associated to the ﬂow geometry, η = ri/ro (ri
is the inner cylinder radius, ro the outer one) does not obviously correspond to
a ratio of time-scales of the ﬂow. However, on closer inspection, it appears that

1The convention adopted here is that the sign of S is chosen to be positive when the ﬂow is cyclonic, i.e.,
when the contributions of shear and rotation to the ﬂow vorticity have the same sign. With the usual choice
of axes in plane Couette ﬂows, this implies that S = −2Sxy, where Sij is the usual deformation tensor.
2This deﬁnition differs from the usual one by a factor of 4; this convention is adopted here for consistency
with the treatment of Taylor-Couette ﬂows.

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

3

this situation arises from a partially incorrect assimilation of the shear time-
scale to the advection term. Indeed, in the case of solid body rotation, the shear
vanishes, while the advection term does not, due to the global curvature of the
ﬂow. One must therefore devise a way to isolate the global shear contribution
to the advection term from other contributions.

It turns out that one convenient way to operate such a distinction is to de-
compose the total ﬂow into its laminar part, and a (not necessarily small) devi-
ation:

u = uL + w.
Although the dynamical relevance of the laminar ﬂow to the turbulent one is
not a priori obvious, this procedure is suggested and justiﬁed by the following
considerations:

(2)

Inasmuch as this is feasible, a distinction between global shear, rotation
and curvature cannot be operated by a tensorial decomposition of the
advection term. For example, it is well-known that both a pure global
shear and a global rotation, such as the ones present in rotating plane
Couette ﬂows, contribute to the vorticity tensor. In fact, a direct Taylor
expansion of the deformation for small displacements shows that one
needs to go at least to second order to distinguish the two contributions.
Therefore, no tensor constructed from the ﬂow velocity ﬁrst derivatives
will establish the required distinction, by construction.

The global characteristics of the ﬂow are the same for the laminar and
turbulent solutions (geometry, global time-scales, nature of the bound-
ary condition, etc). Therefore, one way to make them appear explicitly
in the Navier-Stokes equation is precisely to make the proposed decom-
position, as the laminar solution depends everywhere explicitly on these
global characteristics. In particular, the laminar and turbulent ﬂows share
the same boundary conditions (velocity difference on the boundary, gap
width, etc), so that the relative difference between the laminar and tur-
bulent solution is of order unity. This means that the laminar solution is
a convenient measure of the turbulent one, although their detailed mech-
anisms and characteristics are of course essentially different. For exam-
ple, it turns out that the transition Reynolds number is highly sensitive
to various global and/or qualitative characteristics of the laminar ﬂow,
such as time-scales, or “distance” in parameter space to the linear stabil-
ity limits (see section 1.3).

It is useful to point out where this decomposition leads to for the rotating
plane Couette ﬂow. This is most naturally done in the rotating frame, so that
Eq. (1) becomes

4

∂w
∂t

+ w.∇w = S · y

+ (2Ω + S)wyex − 2Ωwxey −

+ ν∆w, (3)

∇δπ
ρ

∂w
∂x

where the pressure gradient balancing the laminar ﬂow Coriolis force has been
subtracted out to form the effective generalized pressure δπ. Note that on
the walls, which specify the global characteristics of the ﬂow, the boundary
condition becomes w = 0, quite a featureless constraint: the effect of these
boundaries is now explicitly included in the Navier-Stokes equation through
the dynamical linear forcing terms on the right-hand side. The real usefulness
of this change of point of view comes out when considering Taylor-Couette
ﬂows, as we shall now argue.

In this ﬂow, the laminar solution takes the form uL(r) = rΩ(r)eθ. Note that
the rotating plane Couette ﬂow can be viewed as a limit of small relative gap
width d/¯r → 0 (¯r is some characteristic radius of the ﬂow), at constant shear,
and constant rotation. Then, the effect of the global curvature and rotation will
be more easily distinguished from one another if one chooses a formulation of
the Navier-Stokes equation which makes the difference with Eq. (3) explicit.
To this effect, one must deﬁne a characteristic rotation velocity ¯Ω, and a char-
acteristic shear3 ¯S of the laminar ﬂow. A convenient way to do this is to choose
a characteristic radius ¯r, and impose ¯Ω = Ω(¯r), ¯S = S(¯r); the choice of ¯r does
not need to be further speciﬁed for the time being (this point is discussed in the
next subsection). Deﬁning δΩ = Ω(r) − ¯Ω and δS = S(r) − ¯S, the decompo-
sition of the Navier-Stokes equation of the Taylor-Couette ﬂow leads to (r, φ, z
is the coordinate system in the rotating frame)

∂w
∂t

′
+ w.∇w = − δΩ∂
φ

w − (2 ¯Ω + ¯S)wreφ + 2 ¯Ωwφer −

− (2δΩ + δS)wreφ + 2δΩwφer,

∇δπ
ρ

+ ν∆w

(4)

w+δΩwreφ+2δΩwφer, with ∂′
φ

where one has used ∂φw = ∂′
φ
(∂φwφ)eφ + (∂φwz)ez; this deﬁnition is introduced so that the contributions
of order 1/¯r of the derivatives in the linear terms are separated from the con-
tributions of order 1/d. This equation is similar4 to Eq. (3), except for the
last two terms, which consequently are connected to the global ﬂow curvature.
Note that, although the deﬁnition of δΩ and δS depends on the choice of ¯r, the
overall variation of these quantities throughout the ﬂow, ∆(δΩ) and ∆(δS),

w ≡ (∂φwr)er+

3The shear of the laminar ﬂow is deﬁned as S = rdΩ/dr = 2Srφ in order to maintain the sign convention
adopted for rotating plane Couette ﬂows for cyclonic and anticyclonic rotation.
4In the identiﬁcation of the two equations, note that r ←→ y and φ ←→ −x. Also, δΩ ≃ ¯S(r − ¯r)/¯r,
an approximation which holds to ∼ 10% for the range of η explored in the available experiments, a feature
needed in the comparison of Eqs. (3) and (4).

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

5

In fact, |∆(δΩ)| ∼ |∆(δS)| ∼ | ¯S|d/¯r, as can be checked from
does not.
the laminar ﬂow proﬁle Ω(r) = A + B/r2. In the process, four time-scales
of the incompressible Taylor-Couette ﬂow have been identiﬁed: they are the
shear time-scale ts = | ¯S−1|, the rotation time-scale tΩ = (2 ¯Ω)−1, a curvature-
related time-scale that one can deﬁne as tC = | ¯S−1|¯r/d, and, of course, the
viscous time-scale tν = d2/ν. This also shows that the dimensionless geomet-
ric number η can be related to the ratio of the shear and curvature time-scales.
Taking the limit d/¯r → 0 (η → 1), one recovers the rotating plane Couette
relation Eq. (3).

Characteristic quantities, dimensionless numbers, and the
curvature and rotation concepts:

Taylor-Couette ﬂows possess three dimensionless control parameters, which
are usually chosen as the Reynolds numbers associated to the inner and outer
cylinder rotation velocities, Ri and Ro, and η, the ratio of their two radii. The
preceding discussion suggests that one should use instead ratios of time-scales,
which have a more direct dynamical meaning. This deﬁnes the shear-based
Reynolds number5 Re = tν/ts, the rotation number RΩ = sgn(S)ts/tΩ, and
a “curvature" number RC = ts/tC. Once a choice of ¯r is operated (see below),
the procedure is completely speciﬁed. This three-dimensional parameter space,
in which notable curves and surfaces are drawn, is represented in ﬁgure 1.

However, the physical meaning of this procedure is less straightforward than
one would like, and this is related to an obvious weakness of Eq. (4):
the
distinction between the rotation and curvature terms is not absolute when the
Indeed, any change of
related time-scales are both dynamically signiﬁcant.
deﬁnition of ¯Ω and ¯S results in a correlative change of δΩ and δS. Never-
theless, the physical meaning is to a large extent unambiguous in at least two
different contexts:

If one changes the rotation velocity of the inner and outer cylinders by
the same quantity, this will change ¯Ω by the same amount (indepen-
dently of the choice of ¯r), while leaving all other quantities ( ¯S, δΩ, δS)
unchanged. Such changes are obviously an effect of changes in the ﬂow
rotation.

On the other hand, when changes in the ﬂow are operated while main-
taining tΩ . tC, the physical meaning of the distinction between the
characteristic quantities ( ¯Ω, ¯S) and the deviations from these (δΩ, δS)

5We use the same Reynolds number deﬁnition for rotating plane Couette and Taylor-Couette ﬂows, based
on the total gap width and total velocity difference. Consequently, the quoted Reynolds numbers for plane
Couette ﬂows differ from the ones in the literature by a factor of 4.

6

is blurred. This is the case in particular when the cylinders are counter-
rotating, or when one cylinder is at rest, for any choice of ¯r. In such a
context, changes in both parameters (the rotation number and the cur-
vature number) describe the effect of a change in the ﬂow curvature, as
they are both proportional to d/¯r, and vanish if the limit of vanishing
global curvature is taken while enforcing the tΩ . tC relation.

This clearly shows that rotation and curvature are not interchangeable con-
cepts, although they have a non-negligible overlap. In this context, the denomi-
nations “rotation number" and “curvature number" are somewhat conventional
and partially misleading, even if justiﬁed to some extent by the preceding con-
siderations. In the (RΩ, RC) plane, changes along lines of constant RC cor-
respond to changes of rotation, but there are inﬁnitely many paths involving
changes of both parameters and corresponding to changes of curvature from
a physical point of view. Furthermore, most paths do not lead to any clear-
cut distinction between curvature and rotation changes in the ﬂow. Of course,
once a reference curvature path is chosen (e.g., the path with the inner cylin-
der at rest, corresponding to the inviscid linear stability limit on the cyclonic
side, shown as curve (4) on ﬁgure 1), every point in the (RΩ, RC) plane can be
connected to the non-rotating plane Couette ﬂow (the origin in the plane), ﬁrst
through a change of curvature along the chosen curvature path until the desired
curvature number is reached, and then through a change of rotation at constant
RC. However, this distinction is only relative.

Obviously, this situation is intrinsic, as one cannot curve a straight ﬂow,
without at the same time making it rotate. The procedure outlined here nev-
ertheless leads to the deﬁnition of well-deﬁned parameters, which have a dy-
namical interpretation.
It is their physical meaning in terms of rotation and
curvature which is partially ambiguous. Furthermore, these parameters turn
out to be useful to understand basic features in the data on the subcritical tran-
sition to turbulence, as discussed in the next section.

The remaining point to be addressed relates to the choice of ¯r. The preced-
ing discussion makes it clear that this choice is not unique. The deﬁnition we
have adopted here is ¯r ≡ (riro)1/2, as suggested in Dubrulle et al., 2004 (ri
and ro are the inner and outer radius, respectively). This choice is partially mo-
tivated by the compactness of the resulting expressions for the dimensionless
numbers introduced above:

Re =

2¯r
ro + ri

¯r|Ωo − Ωi|d
ν

=

2
1 + η

|ηRo − Ri|,

RΩ =

riΩi + roΩo
rori

d
Ωo − Ωi

= (1 − η)

Ri + Ro
ηRo − Ri

,

(5)

(6)

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

RC =

=

d
¯r

1 − η
η1/2

.

7

(7)

Note that, for the range of values of η explored in the available experiment,

Re ≃ ¯r|∆Ω|d/ν, and RΩ ≃ (2 ¯Ω/¯r)(d/∆Ω) (within a few percents).

3.

Subcritical transition in rotating plane Couette and
Taylor-Couette ﬂows:

Considering a laminar ﬂow of given dimensionless numbers (rotation, cur-
vature, and Reynolds), two different things can happen when increasing the
Reynolds number: either the ﬂow will undergo a linear instability ﬁrst (super-
critical transition), or it will undergo a laminar-turbulent transition ﬁrst (glob-
ally subcritical transition). The second option may happen whether the ﬂow is
linearly unstable or not.

The Reynolds number characterizing subcritical transition in a system is not
a quantity that can be measured with absolute precision, as it depends to some
extent on the experimental protocol used in its determination. For example,
the laminar-turbulent transition Reynolds number is generically larger than the
turbulent-laminar one. Furthermore, the ﬂow is intermittent over a range of
Reynolds numbers in the vicinity of this transition. This leads to some differ-
ences in the determined Reynolds transition values, even when the same data
are used by different authors; however, the dispersion of the data in a given au-
thor’s choice is much smaller. Overall, the resulting range of values (at given
dimensionless numbers) is uncertain within less than a factor of ∼ 2; we shall
ignore this problem here, as we are only interested in characterizing qualitative
trends and orders of magnitude.

With this convention, both supercritical (Re = Rc) and globally subcritical
(Re = Rg) transitions are characterized by surfaces in the three dimensional
space (RΩ, RC, Re). Only particular lines on these surfaces have been probed
by the available experiments. Obviously, the supercritical and subcritical sur-
faces meet somewhere in this space, so that one needs to characterize both
surfaces.

It turns out, from a practical point of view, that the supercritical surface
(manifold (1) in ﬁgure 1) is sufﬁciently well captured by the analytic approx-
imation derived by Esser and Grossmann, 1996, for Taylor-Couette ﬂows, al-
though it relates only to axisymmetric perturbations (in other words, the non-
axisymmetric perturbations seem to play little role in the deﬁnition of the su-
percritical transition). The rotating plane Couette ﬂow is included in the limit
η → 1. For the relatively high Reynolds numbers of interest for subcritical
transitions to turbulence (> 1000), the dependence of the supercritical surface
on the Reynolds number is very steep, and the surface is well-approximated
by the inviscid linear stability limit (curves (2) of ﬁgure 1). This explains that

8

Figure 1.
Stability boundaries in the (Re, RΩ, RC) parameter space (η is used as a measure
of RC on this graph).Manifold (1): linear stability threshold. Dark curves (2): linear stability
threshold in the inviscid limit. Manifold (3): extrapolation of the inviscid criteria throughout the
full Reynolds space (partially shown for readability). Curve (4): globally subcritical threshold
obtained with inner cylinder at rest (see text). Other curves: globally subcritical thresholds
obtained at ﬁxed value of η [(5): η = 0.7; (6): η = 1] (see text).

the limit of the subcritical regime in the (RΩ, RC) plane is well-approximated
by the inviscid limit. Linear instability follows somewhere in the ﬂuid in this
limit if

−1 6

6 0,

2Ω(r)
S(r)

(8)

at this location (this is equivalent to the constraint put by the Rayleigh discrim-
inant). Asking that the ﬂuid is everywhere stable with respect to this criterion
translates into RΩ < −1, or RΩ > (1 − η)/η.

The data on subcritical transition discussed here are those of Wendt (1933),
Taylor (1936), Tillmark and Alfredsson (1996), and Richard (2001); they are
represented on ﬁgure 2. One could also include data on counter-rotating cylin-
ders (Andereck, Liu and Swinney, 1986; Prigent et al., 2003), but these occupy

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

9

1
0,01

0,02

0,03

0,05 0,07 0,1

0,2

0,3 0,4 0,5

0,02

0,04

0,06

0,08

0,1

RC

8

 RΩ - RΩ

)
 
3
0
1
x

 

 
(
 

e
R

100

70

50
40

30

20

10

7

5
4

3

2

16

12

8

4

)
 
3
0
1
 
x
 
(
 
e
R

0
-0,8

)
 
3
0
1
 
x
 
(
 

e
R

)
 
3
0
1
 
x
 
(
 
e
R

3,5

2,5

4

3

2

1,5

1

0

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

0

-0,6

-0,4

-0,2

0

0,05

0,1

0,15

0,2

0,25

8

 RΩ - RΩ

8

 RΩ - RΩ

Figure 2. Data on subcritical transition. Upper left: data of Wendt (1933) and Taylor (1936),
for cyclonic rotation, with the inner cylinder at rest, for varying η; this shows the dependence
on the curvature number in cyclonic ﬂows. Upper right: data of Tillmark and Alfredsson (1996)
for rotating plane Couette ﬂows (η = 1). Lower left and lower right: data of Richard (2001),
for anticyclonic and cyclonic rotation, respectively (η = 0.7). On the last three graphs, the
curvature number is held ﬁxed, so that the data show the dependence of the transition Reynolds
number on the rotation number. The solid lines represent best quadratic or linear ﬁts to the data.
R∞

Ω = (1 − η)/η for cyclonic ﬂows, and R∞

Ω = −1 for anticyclonic ones.

only a small area in the (RΩ, RC) plane, and bring little constraint on the trend
of the transition Reynolds number with the rotation and curvature numbers (see
Longaretti and Dauchot, 2004 for a discussion o couter-rotating data).

The data are well parameterized by the following approximate formula (the

+ and − sign refer to cyclonic and anticyclonic ﬂows, respectively)

10

R

±
±
P C + a

±
g (RΩ, RC) = R
−

P C ≃ 1400, R

(9)
(η)|RΩ − R
P C, 21000 . a± . 61000, 2 × 105 .
P C ≃ 1100 ∼ R+
with R+
∞,−
∞,+
b+ . 6 × 105, b− ≪ b+, and where R
Ω = −1.
Ω = (1 − η)/η, and R
This is discussed in detail in Longaretti and Dauchot, 2004, and Dubrulle et
al., 2004.

∞,±
Ω | + b

R2
C,

±

The most notable characteristics of this dependence are the following:

The linear dependence on the rotation number, and quadratic one on the
curvature number.
The rather steep dependence with both numbers (a± and b+ are large
numbers).

The apparent symmetry between cyclonic and anticyclonic rotation num-
ber dependence, and the absence of dependence on the curvature on the
anticyclonic side (b− ≃ 0).

The next section discusses these features; in particular, the strength of this
dependence is explained in order of magnitude on the basis of time-scale con-
siderations.

4.

Data interpretation:

The linear and quadratic dependence just pointed out can be viewed as the
result of a Taylor expansion. For cyclonic rotation, this expansion is performed
around the non-rotating plane Couette ﬂow, ﬁrst in terms of RC along curve
(4) on ﬁgure 1, and then away from it, at constant RC, in terms of RΩ. For
anticyclonic rotation, the expansion depends only on RΩ, at least for η > 0.7,
and is performed from the marginal stability state, at RΩ ≃ −1.

Linear dependence

The linear dependence with RΩ is neater on the cyclonic data than on the an-
ticyclonic one, but the data extend less far on the cyclonic side, unfortunately.
The increased dispersion on the anticyclonic side has several reasons:

Both cylinders need to be rotating at much higher speed than on the
cyclonic side to reach the subcritical turbulent transition. This automat-
ically reduces the precision of the measurements.

The quantity RΩ ampliﬁes the uncertainty due to small errors in the de-
termination of the cylinder angular velocities at transition.

There is an important intrinsic difference between the cyclonic and an-
ticyclonic marginal stability limits. On the cyclonic side, instability be-
gins at a single location (the inner radius), whereas on the anticyclonic

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

11

side, marginal stability applies throughout the ﬂuid (this follows because
the constant angular momentum solution is a laminar solution of the
Taylor-Couette ﬂow). Equivalently 2δΩ(r) + δS(r) = 0 at the anticy-
clonic marginal stability limit. Therefore, the ﬂuid is much more sensi-
tive to a potential linear instability. In particular, the unavoidable Eck-
mann circulation can much more easily make the criterion Eq. (8) satis-
ﬁed somewhere in the ﬂow on the anticyclonic side than on the cyclonic
one. We believe that this feature most likely explains why Richard’s
data show only a weak dependence of the transition Reynolds number
on the rotation number out to |1 + RΩ| ≃ 0.35, and then a sharp increase
to reach back the linearly varying regime. The related data points are
shown as thin dots in the lower left quadrant of Fig. 2, and not used in
the linear ﬁt.

Note that the mutual cancellation of a part of the curvature terms in Eq. (4) at
the anticyclonic marginal linear stability limit just pointed out also provides a
natural explanation for the apparent absence of dependence of the anticyclonic
data on the curvature number.

Quadratic dependence

The quadratic dependence of the data on the gap width when keeping the
inner cylinder at rest has already been pointed out by Zeldovich, 1981, and
Richard and Zahn, 1999. At least three explanations of this behavior have been
put forward in the literature (Zeldovich, 1981; Dubrulle, 1993; Longaretti,
2002). These will be commented below.

Let us ﬁrst note that, in plane Couette ﬂows, transition occurs at a constant
Reynolds number Re = ¯Sd2/ν. Therefore, at a given shear ¯S, the scale d is the
characteristic scale of turbulence in such a system. Conversely, in the quadratic
asymptotic regime, [Re ∝ (d/¯r)2], transition occurs at constant Re∗ = ¯S ¯r2/ν
(= b+), a point already made by Richard and Zahn, 1999. Consequently, the
characteristic radius ¯r instead of the gap d characterizes the transition at a given
shear. This unambiguously points out curvature and not rotation as the source
of this behavior, consistently with the discussion of section 2.

Dubrulle, 1993, explains the quadratic behavior by considering the growth
of ﬁnite amplitude local defects in the laminar proﬁle. However, only WKB
modes of instability created by the defects are considered, for which the scale
¯r cannot play any role. This is why we believe that this analysis cannot capture
the transition mechanism.

Zeldovich, 1981, phenomenological explanation is based on the following

two ideas:

The transition Reynolds number may depend on the single time-scale
ratio T y(r) = 4κ2(r)/S2(r) at some appropriately chosen radius in the

12

ﬂow: Rg = f (T y); κ(r) = [2Ω(2Ω + S)]1/2 is the epicyclic frequency,
i.e., the frequency of oscillation of the whole ﬂuid, under the combined
action of the shear and the Coriolis force.

A “split-r«egime" of instability may occur, in which the inner portion of
the ﬂow undergoes a transition to turbulence at lower Reynolds number
than the whole ﬂow, once a large enough relative gap width is reached.

Considering the relative ambiguity in the distinction between the rotation
and curvature time-scale discussed in section 1.2, one may indeed ask whether
a single time-scale would be sufﬁcient to understand the data. This would
imply that Taylor-Couette ﬂows possess a hidden redundancy, and could be
described by two appropriately chosen parameters, and not three. However,
the extended set of data used here does not support this idea, although a larger
body of experimental results is probably needed to ascertain this result.

Longaretti, 2002 has developed an alternate phenomenology of subcriti-
cal shear ﬂow turbulence. It relies on the one hand on a turbulent viscosity
description, in which the characteristic length is identiﬁed to the top of the
Kolmogorov cascade; on the other hand it makes use of the constraint that
a subcritical shear ﬂow is out of thermodynamic equilibrium and tries to re-
store equilibrium by transporting momentum across the shear, and, to do so,
chooses the most efﬁcient of the two means at its disposal (laminar or turbulent
transport). This provides scaling laws for the characteristic length and velocity
of turbulent eddies, by relating them to the Reynolds number of transition to
turbulence. By further noting that for large enough gap widths, the turbulent
eddies must unavoidably scale with the radius and not the gap, the quadratic
r«egime is recovered.

Orders of magnitude

The last point we wish to address is the origin of the large values the co-
efﬁcients a and b which appear in the characterization of the data performed
in Eq. (9). We mostly consider cyclonic ﬂows, for which the physics is best
understood

As mentioned in the introduction, an important breakthrough in the under-
standing of subcritical turbulence in non-rotating plane Couette ﬂow comes
from the work of Waleffe, 1997, who analyzed by the means of quasi-linear
theory a turbulent self-regeneration process previously observed in the numer-
ical simulations of Hamilton et al., 1995. These last authors have tracked down
turbulence to the smallest unit where it is self-sustained by reducing appropri-
ately the simulation box size and the Reynolds number. A very important
feature of the identiﬁed self-sustaining process is that it has a rather long time-
scale compared to the shear:

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

ssp ∼ 100 ¯S
t+

−1.

13

(10)

and that the scales involved in the self-regeneration mechanism are compara-
ble to the ﬂow width. This time-scale is the shortest of all the mechanisms
found in the systematic reduction of the ﬂow, and thus corresponds to the most
robust one, which involves two streamwise rolls in the spanwise direction.
These streamwise rolls, ﬁrst observed by Dauchot and Daviaud, 1995, typi-
cally scale on the gap width. Accordingly, it is very likely that such a long
time-scale is a generic feature in non rotating plane Couette ﬂows, because of
the large (R+
P C ∼ 1500) Reynolds number of transition to turbulence which
are always observed in these systems. Such a large Reynolds number con-
strains the viscous diffusion time at the scales involved in the self-regeneration
mechanism. Typically for a length-scale d/4, the equality of the viscous time
tν = (d/4)2/ν with t+
ssp would indeed leads to Rg = 1600. Such a scale
(d/4) is characteristic of the thickness of the streaks, apparently the smallest
characteristic scale of the process.

From a physical point of view, one expects that the contributions of either
rotation or curvature become comparable to R+
P C in Eq. (9) when the rotation
or curvature time-scales decrease to become comparable to t+
ssp. Correlatively,
the fact that this happens when the rotation and curvature numbers are ≃ 1/20
comes as no coincidence. Indeed, the timescale associated with the Coriolis
term is tΩ ≃ (2 ¯Ω)−1, while the timescale associated with the curvature terms
is tC ≃ (δΩ)−1 ∼ ¯S ¯r/d. They become comparable to t+
ssp as deﬁned in
Eq. (10) when RΩ or RC exceeds 10−2, which is remarkably close to the actual
value of 1/20, considering the qualitative nature of the argument. This physical
constraint is also what primarily determines the magnitude of a+ and b+ (once
the form of the dependence on RΩ and Rc is known). Indeed, in rotating plane
Couette ﬂows, requiring a+RΩ & Re+
P C when RΩ & 1/20, implies that
C & Re+
a+ ∼ 104. Similarly, in Taylor-Couette ﬂows, requiring that b+R2
P C
when RC & 1/20 leads to b+ ∼ 105.

One can see that the rather large values of the transition Reynolds num-
ber, as well as of the coefﬁcients characterizing the effect of rotation (a+) and
curvature (b+) can be ascribed to a single origin: the rather large ratio of the
turbulence self-regeneration process to the shear time scale. Still, we do not
infer that the self-sustaining mechanism proposed by Waleffe is valid in the
presence of rotation. We just use the fact that in order to modify or even sup-
press this mechanism, the rotation or curvature effects must have timescales of
the same order. On the contrary, the above analysis clearly indicates that a bet-
ter understanding of this process in the framework of curved shear ﬂows, and
identifying it in the presence of rotation, is of primary importance for future
progress.

14

The self-sustaining process has not yet been identiﬁed at the anticyclonic
marginal stability limit, and its nature is not known. However, one can reverse
the reasoning expressed right above to reach the conclusion that its character-
istic time-scale is also ∼ 100 ¯S−1. Testing this conjecture would bring support
to the framework developed here to analyze and understand the data.

5.

Conclusions and implications:

We feel that this work brings to light a few important points, which we
believe to be of potentially more general applicability than what was done
here:

It is both meaningful and useful to decompose the Navier-Stokes equa-
tion into a laminar part of the ﬂow, and a deviation from the laminar ﬂow.
This helps identifying the relevant time-scales in the ﬂow, and isolating
which “portion" of the advection term is directly related to the physics
described by the Reynolds number. The same procedure is also useful to
relate various ﬂows to one another.

The general trends and features of the transition Reynolds number data
can be understood with the help of the previously identiﬁed time-scales,
and over a reasonably extended fraction of the parameter space, once the
turbulence self-sustaining process time-scale is identiﬁed at one point in
the parameter space. The procedure in turns constrains to some extent
the time-scale of the self-sustaining process in the domain where data
are available, a point we have only brieﬂy touched upon in the preceding
section.

In the process, we have tried to elucidate a little more the relation between
the ﬂow global rotation and its global curvature. We found that rotation and
curvature effects most probably cannot be accounted for by a single time-scale,
as suggested by Zeldovich, 1981, but that two time-scales are required, in ac-
cordance with the fact that Taylor-Couette ﬂows are characterized by two di-
mensionless numbers besides the Reynolds number.

The data described here, and the analysis we have developed, have some
bearing to a related astrophysical problem, namely, the existence of subcritical
turbulence in keplerian accretion disks, a question which has been the object
of an important debate in the astrophysical community over the three or four
past decades. Such disks are observed in relation to the formation of young
stars; they are also believed to be present in a variety of other astrophysical
objects, such as active galactic nuclei, microquasars, and so on. A large scale
keplerian proﬁle (Ω(r) ∝ r−3/2) follows if the disk is cold enough. The proﬁle
can nevertheless stochastically deviate from keplerian on scales comparable to
the disk scale height h ≪ r. Young (proto-)star disks are also probably not

Rotation, Curvature, and Subcritical Shear Turbulence

15

ionized enough for MHD processes to be relevant over a signiﬁcant fraction of
their extent.

The microscopic transport in these disks is known to be many orders of
magnitude smaller than the one inferred from the observations, so that these
disks are believed to be turbulent. Hydrodynamic Keplerian disks are linearly
stable in their most simple ﬂavors. It was believed until the mid-90’s that they
were nevertheless hydrodynamically turbulent, on the basis of the experimental
evidence of subcritical turbulence in non-rotating Couette ﬂows.

This belief was challenged by the numerical simulations of Balbus et al.,
1996, and Hawley et al., 1999. These authors have studied whether keple-
rian disks are locally turbulent, by reducing the Navier-Stokes equation in the
disk to Eq. (3), with “shearing-sheet” boundary conditions (they ignore the
disk vertical stratiﬁcation), thus asking the question in a framework which is
extremely close to the one studied here. They found that a dynamically signif-
icant and stabilizing Coriolis force prevents the appearance of turbulence for
keplerian-like ﬂows (RΩ = −4/3), up to to the highest resolution achieved in
the simulation (2563 with ﬁnite-difference codes; see the referenced papers for
detail).

These simulations have had a very large impact in the astrophysics commu-
nity, where the now most largely spread opinion is that a linear instability is
needed for turbulence to show up, a somewhat excessive position. However,
the experimental results of Richard, 2001, seem to imply that keplerian-like
ﬂows should be turbulent at very modest (in astrophysical standards) Reynolds
numbers. The problem is currently reinvestigated from a numerical point of
view (Lesur and Longaretti, in preparation). Preliminary results indicate that
the Coriolis force does not prevent the existence of turbulence in rotating plane
Couette ﬂows, but of course alters the turbulence properties, as one would
expect. However, the relevance of subcritical hydrodynamic turbulence to ac-
cretion disk transport remains to be more precisely investigated.

References

Andereck, C.D., Liu, C.C., and Swinney, H.L. (1986). Flow regimes in a circular Couette system

with independently rotating cylinders. J. Fluid Mech., 164: 155-183.

Balbus, S.A., Hawley, J.F., and Stone, J.M. (1996). Nonlinear stability, hydrodynamical turbu-

lence, and transport in disks, Astrophys. J., 467: 76-86.

Bottin, S., Dauchot, O., Daviaud, F., and Manneville P. (1998). Experimental evidence of stream-
wise vortices as ﬁnite amplitude solutions in transitional plane Couette ﬂow. Phys. Fluids,
10, Issue 10: 2597-2607.

Clever, R.M., and Busse, F.H. (1997). Tertiary and quaternary solutions for plane Couette ﬂow.

J. Fluid Mech., 344: 137-153.

Dauchot, O., and Daviaud, F. (1995). Finite amplitude perturbation and spot growth mechanism

in plane Couette ﬂow, Phys. of Fluids 7: 335-343.

16

Dubrulle, B. (1993). Differential rotation as a source of angular momentum transfer in the Solar

Nebula, Icarus, 106: 59-76.

Dubrulle, B., Dauchot, O., Daviaud, F., Longaretti, P.-Y., Richard, D., and Zahn, J.-P. Stability
and turbulent transport in rotating shear ﬂows: prescription from analysis of cylindrical and
plance Couette ﬂow data. Submitted to Phys. of Fluids.

Esser, A., and Grossmann, S. (1996). Analytic expression for Taylor-Couette stability boundary,

Phys. Fluids, 8: 1814-1819.

Faisst, H., and Eckardt, B. (2003). Travelling waves in pipe ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett., 91: 224502.
Hamilton, J.H., Kim, J., and Waleffe, F. (1995). Regeneration mechanisms of near-wall turbu-

lence structures. J. Fluid Mech., 287: 317-348.

Hawley, J.F., Balbus, S.A., and Winters, W.F. (1999). Local hydrodynamic stability of accretion

Longaretti, P.-Y. (2002). On the phenomenology of hydrodynamic shear turbulence, Astrophys.

disks, Astrophys. J., 518: 394-404.

J., 576, 587-598.

Longaretti, P.-Y., and Dauchot, O. Global rotation-curvature time-scales, and the subcritical

transition to turbulence in shear ﬂows. Submitted to Phys. of Fluids.

Nagata, M. (1990). Three-dimensional ﬁnite-amplitude solutions in plane Couette ﬂow: bifur-

cation from inﬁnity. J. Fluid Mech., 217: 519-527.

Prigent, A., Gr«egoire, G., Chat«e, H., and Dauchot, O. (2003). Long wavelength modulation of

turbulent shear ﬂows. Physica D, 174: 100-113.

Richard, D. (2001). Instabilit«es hydrodynamiques dans les «ecoulements en rotation diff«erentielle.

PhD thesis. Universit«e de Paris VII.

Richard, D., and Zahn, J.-P. (1999). Turbulence in differentially rotating ﬂows, Astron. Astro-

phys., 347: 734-738.

546-564.

Taylor, G.I. (1936) Fluid friction between rotating cylinders, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A 157:

Tillmark, N., and Alfredsson, P.H. (1996). Experiments on rotating plane Couette ﬂow. In Ad-

vances in Turbulence VI. (eds, Gavrilakis et al.), p. 391-394; Kluwer.

Waleffe, F. (1997). On a self-sustaining process in shear ﬂows. Phys. Fluids, 9: 883-900.
Waleffe, F. (1998). Three-dimensional coherent states in plane shear ﬂows. Phys. Rev. Lett.,

Waleffe, F. (2003). Homotopy of exact coherent structures in plane shear ﬂows. Phys. Fluids,

Wendt, G. (1993). Turbulente Str-omung Zwischen Zwei Rotierenden Konaxialen Zylindern,

Zeldovich, Y.B. (1981). On the friction of ﬂuids between rotating cylinders, Proc. Roy. Soc.

81:4140-4143.

15: 1517-1534.

Ing. Arch., 4: 577-595.

London A, 374: 299-312.

