5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

1

Retraction dynamics of aquous drops upon
impact on nonwetting surfaces.

By DENIS BARTOLO1 CHRISTOPHE JOSSERAND2 and
DANIEL BONN1,3
1Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l’ENS, 24 Rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris cedex 05, France
2Laboratoire de Mod´elisation en M´ecanique, CNRS-UMR 7606, Case 162, 4 place Jussieu,
75252 Paris C´edex 05-France
3 van der Waals-Zeeman Institute, University of Amsterdam, Valckenierstraat 65, 1018 XE
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

(Received 2 February 2008)

We study the impact and subsequent retraction dynamics of liquid droplets upon high-
speed impact on hydrophobic surfaces. Performing extensive experiments, we show that
the drop retraction rate is a material constant and does not depend on the impact
velocity. We show that when increasing the Ohnesorge number, Oh = η/√ρRIγ, the
retraction, i.e. dewetting, dynamics crosses over from a capillaro-inertial regime to a
capillaro-viscous regime. We rationalize the experimental observations by a simple but
robust semi-quantitative model for the solid-liquid contact line dynamics inspired by the
standard theories for thin ﬁlm dewetting.

1. Introduction: Drop Impact on Solid Surfaces

Drops impacting onto solid surfaces are important for a large number of applications:
for instance, almost all spray coating and deposition processes rely ultimately on the
interaction of a droplet with a surface. A large variety of phenomena can be present
during drop impacts, from splashes to spreading, and from large wave surface deformation
to rebound (see (Rein 1993) and references therein).

Research on drop impacts has a long history, starting with the pioneering studies of
Worthington and later on with the famous photographs of Edgerton(Worthington 1876;
Edgerton & Killian 1954). Most of the previous work on drop impact focused on deter-
mining the maximum diameter a drop is capable of covering upon impact (Fukai et al.
1993; Roisman et al. 2002; Clanet et al. 2004). However, the practical problem of deposi-
tion can be very diﬀerent if one wants to eﬃciently deposit some material on the surface.
This is especially grave when the surface is not wetted by the liquid, as is illustrated
by the high-speed video pictures in Fig.1 for the impact of a water droplet. It can be
observed that the drop expands rapidly, due to the large speed with which it arrives at
the surface. However, due to the hydrophobicity of the surface, subsequently the drop
retracts violently, leading to the ejection of part of the droplet from the surface: we ob-
serve droplet rebound. It is this ”rebound” that is the limiting factor for deposition in
many applications, for instance for the deposition of pesticide solutions on hydrophobic
plant leaves (Bergeron et al. 2000). We study here the impact and subsequent retraction
of aqueous drops onto a hydrophobic surface, and seek to understand the dynamics of
expansion and retraction of the droplets.

2

Denis Bartolo, Christophe Josserand and Daniel Bonn

Figure 1. Temporal evolution of the contact radius of droplets upon impact and retraction.
The radii are normalized by those of the spherical droplets before impact. The pictures show
the shape of the droplets at the diﬀerent stages of retraction. Droplet radius is 1 mm, impact
speed is 2 m · s

−1: a) pure water, b) viscous water-glycerol mixture, viscosity 50 mPa · s.

In general, these problems are diﬃcult because for most practical and laboratory sit-
uations, three forces play an important role: the capillarity and viscous forces, and the
inertia of the droplets. We try and disentangle the eﬀects of the three forces here by
performing systematic experiments, varying both the importance of viscous and inertial
forces.

We provide experimental evidence for the existence of two distinct retraction regimes.
In both regimes, capillary forces are the motor behind the droplet retraction, and are,
for the ﬁrst regime countered by inertial forces. In the second regime the main force
slowing down the retraction is viscous. We also show that, perhaps surprisingly, the drop

Drop Retraction upon impact

3

retraction rate (the retraction speed divided by the maximum radius) does not depend on
the impact velocity for strong enough impacts. The dimensionless number that governs
the retraction rate is found to be the Ohnesorge number, Oh = η/√ρRIγ, with η the
viscosity, ρ the liquid density, RI the impacting drop radius, and γ the surface tension.
The Ohnesorge number therefore compares the dissipative (viscous) forces to the non-
dissipative (capillary and inertial) forces. The crossover between the two regimes is found
to happen at a critical Ohnesorge number on the order of 0.05 .

In order to develop a better understanding for the diﬀerent regimes that are encoun-
tered, particularly the retraction dynamics in these regimes, we propose two simple hy-
drodynamic models inspired by the standard description of thin ﬁlm dewetting dynamics.
These simple models provide a simple but quite robust picture that allows us to ratio-
nalize the retraction rate in both regimes.

In order to be able to say something about the speed of retraction, one also needs to
understand the maximum radius to which the droplet expands. Combining our results
with those obtained by (Clanet et al. 2004) for the maximum radius, we propose a phase
diagram delimiting four regions for the spreading and retraction dynamics of impacting
drops.

2. Drop retraction dynamics: Generic Features

As the impact dynamics of liquid droplets on a solid surface happens usually in a few
tens of milliseconds, we use a high-speed video system (1000 frames/second, Photonetics)
to analyze the drop-impact events. When necessary, we use an ultrahigh-speed system
allowing to go up to 120,000 frames/second (Phantom V7). We study aqueous drops
impacting on a solid surface; the surface we used is Paraﬁlm, which provides us with a
80◦). In addition, the surface
hydrophobic surface (receding contact angle for water θR
has a low contact angle hysteresis with water, and allows us to obtain highly reproducible
results. The liquids we used are diﬀerent water-glycerol mixtures. Varying the glycerol
concentration, we vary the liquid viscosity, keeping the liquid density and its surface
tension almost constant. For the highest concentration of glycerol, the surface tension
has decreased from 72 (pure water) to 59 mN m−1, whereas the density has increased
to 1150kg/m3. The viscosity is varied between 1 and 205 mPas. Viscosity, density and
surface tension were measured before each impact experiment. Drops were produced
using precision needles, and the initial radius of the drops RI have been systematically
measured on the images (1.1 < RI < 1.4 mm). From the high-speed images such as the
ones shown in Fig.1, we follow the contact radius R in time. This section summarizes
the results of more than 80 diﬀerent drop impact experiments, each of which have been
repeated at least two times.

≈

Two series of experiments were performed: ﬁrst, letting the droplets fall from a ﬁxed
height, but increasing the viscosity, we increase the Ohnesorge number while keeping the
inertial forces constant. The second series of experiments is performed at ﬁxed viscosity
and upon increasing the height from which the droplets falls; the droplet turns out to be
in free fall (as is veriﬁed in the experiment to within a few percent) and so the relation
between fall height h and impact velocity is simply V I = √gh, with g the gravitational
acceleration. Increasing the impact velocity increases the Weber number, keeping the
Ohnesorge number ﬁxed, where the Weber number, We, compares the inertial forces to
the capillary forces, We

ρRIV 2

I /γ.

In all that follows, we restrain ourselves to high-speed impact conditions. More pre-
cisely, the Weber and Reynolds numbers are chosen so that We > 10 and Re > 10, where
ρRIV I/η is the Reynolds number. This implies that inertial forces are at least one
Re

≡

≡

Denis Bartolo, Christophe Josserand and Daniel Bonn

4

(cid:1)(cid:0)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:6)

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:16)

(cid:18)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:15)

)

(

’

"

&

%

$

#

"

(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:26)

(cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:25)

(cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:24)

(cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:23)

(cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:20)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:0)

(cid:2) (cid:0)

(cid:3) (cid:0)

(cid:4) (cid:0)

(cid:20)

(cid:27)

(cid:26)(cid:20)

(cid:26)(cid:27)

(cid:22) (cid:20)

(cid:22) (cid:27)

(cid:28) (cid:20)

(cid:28) (cid:27)

(cid:23) (cid:20)

(cid:10) (cid:11)

(cid:14)

(cid:12) (cid:13)

(cid:29) (cid:30)(cid:31)  

!

−2,
Figure 2. Temporal evolution of the contact radius for a water-glycerol drop Oh = 9.1 10
RI = 1.2 mm (a) contact radius vs. time, (b) contact radius normalized by the maximum spread-
−1,(cid:3):
ing radius vs. time Impact velocities : ×: VI = 2.4ms
VI = 1.7ms

−1, +: VI = 2.2ms

−1, ∆: VI = 1.4ms

−1, ◦: VI = 1.9ms

−1, ⋄: VI = 1ms

−1

order of magnitude larger than both the capillary and the viscous forces. Such conditions
imply large deformations of the drop when the liquid impinges on the solid substrate.
On the other hand, we also restrain our experiments to impact speeds that are far from
the ’splashing’ regime in which the drop disintegrates after impact to form a collection
of much smaller droplets (Mundo et al. 1995).

The pictures in Fig.1 show that two distinctly diﬀerent regimes exist for the shape of
the droplets after impact. For low ﬂuid viscosity, we typically obtain the images shown
in Fig.1(a). At the onset of retraction, almost all of the ﬂuid is contained in a donut-
shaped rim, with only a thin ﬁlm of liquid in the center. On the other hand, for high
viscosities the deformation of the drop is less important, and the pancake-shaped droplet
of Fig.1(b) results. These visual observations allow to distinguish the capillary-inertial
and the capillary-viscous regimes that are described in detail below directly.

2.1. Drop Retraction Rate: inﬂuence of fall height and viscosity
Fig. 2 summarizes the most important ﬁndings of this study. The temporal evolution of
the drop contact radius R(t) for diﬀerent impact velocities, shown in (a), is normalized in
(b) by its maximal value at the end of the spreading Rmax. Two important observations
are made. (i) A well deﬁned retraction velocity Vret can be extracted from each experi-
ment; this is a non-trivial observation that will be rationalized below. (ii) Independently
of the impact speed, all the R(t)/Rmax curves collapse onto a single curve for diﬀerent
impact velocities. This shows that the retraction rate, rather than the retraction speed is
the natural quantity to consider, and that this rate is independent of the impact velocity.
These results hold for all the viscosities tested in our experiments.

Drop Retraction upon impact

5

˙ǫ

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:2) (cid:3)

Figure 3. Retraction Rate plotted versus Impact Weber number for various water glycerol
−2, (cid:3):
droplets. ×: Oh = 2.510
Oh = 2.310

−3, +: Oh = 3.910

−2, △: Oh = 1.610

−3, ◦: Oh = 1.510

−2, ⋄: Oh = 7.110

−2

−

≡

We1/2

V ret/Rmax versus the impact Weber
In Fig. 3 we have plotted the retraction rate ˙ǫ
≡
˙R(t)]. Clearly, the drop retraction rate
number, where V ret is deﬁned by V ret
max [
does not depend on the impact velocity. One might think that the explanation for this
observation is rather obvious: the initial kinetic energy of the droplet is transformed into
surface energy (which ﬁxes Rmax/RI ∝
), and is then transformed back into kinetic
VI ). This naive explanation is unfortunately wrong fro
energy (which in turn ﬁxes Vret
the following reasons. First, it has been observed recently that, at the onset of retrac-
tion, low viscosity liquids undergo vortical motion in the drop (Clanet et al. 2004). This
residual ﬂow in the drop reveals that a part of the initial kinetic energy is still available
then, and thus that a simple energy balance argument cannot work. This was indeed
already suggested by previous observations of a clear disagreement between experiments
law(Fukai et al. 1993; Roisman et al. 2002; Okumura et al.
and the Rmax/RI ∝
2003). The second reason why the simple energy-balance argument does not work follows
directly from Fig. 3, where it is shown that the retraction rate depends on the viscosity
and consequently that the previous inviscid picture is not correct.

We 1/2

∝

We therefore performed experiments that elucidate the role of the viscosity, or, equiva-
lently, of the Ohnesorge number. For what follows, it is convenient to deﬁne two intrinsic
time scales for the droplet: a viscous one and an inertial one. The viscous time is the
(ηRI)/γ, whereas the
relaxation time of a large-scale deformation of a viscous drop: τv
inertial time scale: τi = ( 4
I /γ)1/2 corresponds to the capillary oscillation period of
a perturbed inviscid droplet. Since τi is independent of V I and η, this quantity is almost
constant for all tested drops.

3 πρR3

≡

Fig. 4 shows the retraction rate, made dimensionless using the inertial time, as a func-
tion of the Ohnesorge number. It can be observed in the ﬁgure that two diﬀerent regimes
exist for the retraction rate. The ﬁrst region where the retraction rate ˙ǫ is independent of
the viscosity points to an inertial regime and ˙ǫ
. The retraction rate is consequently
found not to depend on the impact speed, a result similar to that obtained recently by
(Richard et al. 2002) who show that the contact time is independent of the impact speed.
For higher viscosities, typically Oh > 0.05, the retraction rate decreases strongly. In this
regime, capillary and viscous forces govern the dynamics: we ﬁnd ˙ǫ

τ −1
v .

−1
τ
i

∝

∝

6

Denis Bartolo, Christophe Josserand and Daniel Bonn

10

1

0.1

e˙ǫτi

0.01

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

Oh

Figure 4. Circles: Normalized retraction rate ˙ǫτi plotted versus the Ohnesorge number, exper-
imental values. Error bars represent the maximum deviation from the mean value. Full line:
(left) ˙ǫτi evaluated using Eq. 3.2, (right) ˙ǫτi evaluated using Eq. 3.6. Dashed line :(left) Fit
obtained taking the mean value of the ﬁve ﬁrst experimental points,(right) Best ﬁt according to
the predicted 1/Oh power law.

3. Two simple models for the drop retraction dynamics

We have consequently established the existence of two diﬀerent regimes for the retrac-
tion rate: a viscous one and an inertial one. We now develop some simple arguments
allowing for a semi-quantitative description of the dynamics, using ideas already existing
for the dynamics of dewetting, a problem closely related to the current one.

3.1. Inertial regime
We employ a Taylor-Culick approach commonly used for the inertial dewetting of thin
ﬁlms (Taylor 1959; Culick 1960; Buguin et al. 1999) to describe the drop retraction rate.
For high-velocity drop impacts, liquid spreads out into a thin ﬁlm of thickness h and
radius Rmax. The liquid subsequently dewets rapidly the surface, and in doing so forms
a rim that collects the liquid that is initially stored in the ﬁlm. The shape of the drop
surface shape is therefore never in a steady state and consists of a liquid ﬁlm formed
during the spreading stage and a receding rim. The contact angle at the outer side of the
rim is taken to be very close to the receding contact angle (θR) since viscous eﬀects can
be neglected small (Buguin et al. 1999). The dynamics is consequently determined by a
competition between capillary tension coming from the thin ﬁlm and the inertia of the
rim. If we write down momentum conservation for the liquid rim:

d
dt (cid:18)

m

dR(t)

dt (cid:19)

= FC

(3.1)

with m the mass of the liquid rim and FC the capillary force acting on it, FC
2πγR(t) [1

∼
cos(θR)]. The stationary solution of Eq.3.1 can be obtained writing ˙m(t) =

−

Drop Retraction upon impact

7

∼

(3.2)

2πρRV reth, and gives: V ret =
3 R3
4
max, it follows that:

I R−2

p

−

γ[1

cos(θR)]/(ρh). Using volume conservation, h

V ret
Rmax ∼

−1
τ
i

π [1

cos θR)]

−

p
Which is the ﬁnal result. Comparing with the experimental data, it turns out that this
equation not only gives the correct scaling behavior for the retraction in this regime
rate but also provides a rather accurate estimate of the numerical prefactor (see Fig 4).
Indeed, the ratio between the experimental and the predicted numerical prefactors is
found to be 0.6 Repeating the experiment for water on a polycarbonate surface, which
changes the contact angle value to 60◦, we retrieve exactly the same ratio of 0.6.

3.2. Viscous regime
In the opposite limit of very viscous liquids, the drops adopt pancake shapes upon im-
pact. During the ﬁrst stages of retraction, the pancake shape rapidly relaxes towards a
roughly spherical cap, and the drop shape remains like this during the retraction since
the capillary number is small. During the retraction, it is only the contact angle that
varies slowly: it is mainly this slow contact angle dynamics that dictates the drop evolu-
tion during the retraction. Contrary to the previous analysis, the slow receding velocity
allows to assume a quasi-static dynamics for the surface shape during the retraction.
In this regime, it is then natural to assume that the work done by the capillary force
FC is dissipated through viscous ﬂow near the contact line. Since we focus our study
on high-speed impacts, Rmax is always much larger that RI which justiﬁes a small θ(t)
approximation at the onset of retraction. The viscous eﬀects near the contact line then
lead to the well-known linear force-velocity relation (DeGennes 1985):

FV =

6πη
θ

−

ln

Λ
λ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

R(t)

˙R(t)

where Λ and λ are respectively a macroscopic and a microscopic cutoﬀ lengths. Λ is
1mm. λ is a microscopic length, and is
typically of the same order as the drop size
usually taken to be on the order of λ
1nm (DeGennes 1985). On the other hand, the
∼
capillary force drives the retraction. Near the contact line it can be written:

∼

(3.4)
Volume conservation gives: 4
4 θ(t)R3(t), where we have taken the small angle
limit. Eqs. 3.3 and 3.4 together with the volume constraint leads to the following relation
for the variation of the contact radius:
1

FC = 2πR(t)γ [cos θ(t)
3 πR3

cos θR]

−

∼

π

I

˙R(t)
R(t)

=

1
− (cid:2)

−

2 θ2(t)
cos(θR)
(144)1/3 ln(Λ/λ)
(cid:3)

−

θ(t)4/3

−1
τ
v

the above equation is obtained in the small angle limit and is only valid for short time
after the onset of retraction. We estimate the retraction rate ˙ǫ as the maximum value of
˙R(t)/R(t) so that:

V ret
Rmax ≈ (cid:18)

3
25 (cid:19)

1/3

(1

cos θR)5/3

−
5 ln(Λ/λ)

−1
τ
v

Comparing again to the experiments, good agreement is found: the retraction rate is
solely set by the viscous relaxation time τv and consequently ˙ǫτi
. Beyond this
correct scaling prediction, Eq. 3.6 provides a quite accurate estimate for the numerical
prefactor as is shown in Fig 4. Indeed, the ratio between the experimental and the

Oh

∝

−1

(3.3)

(3.5)

(3.6)

Denis Bartolo, Christophe Josserand and Daniel Bonn

$

(cid:29)

34

(cid:27) (cid:28) (cid:29) (cid:30)

!(cid:29) (cid:30)

(cid:31)

 

"#

,

’

+

*

)

(

’

<

7

;

:

9

8

7

012

- . /

8

(cid:26)

(cid:25)

(cid:24)

(cid:23)

(cid:22)

(cid:15)

(cid:20) (cid:21)

(cid:15)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:15)

(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)

(cid:6)

(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:5)

(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:4)

(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3)

(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:2)

$

3

(cid:0)

(cid:7)

(cid:6)(cid:0)

(cid:6)(cid:7)

(cid:2)(cid:0)

$

$

$

(cid:29)

(cid:29)(cid:29)

(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)

34

344

3444

(cid:8)(cid:9)

(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:13)(cid:14)

(cid:1)

%&

5

6

Figure 5. (a) Normalized maximum spreading radius plotted vs. the impact number. (b) Rmax
(normalized by the radius before impact) plotted vs. Weber number for small values of the im-
pact number. Full line: power-law ﬁt. (c) Rmax (normalized by the radius before impact) plotted
vs. Reynolds number for large values of the impact number. Full line: predicted power-law de-
pendence with power 0.2. ∗: η = 10−1P a.s, +: 9.510−2, ◦: η = 4.810−2P a.s, △: η = 2.810−2P a.s,
(cid:3): η = 10−2P a.s

predicted numerical prefactors is found to be 1.5. Again, repeating the experiment on a
polycarbonate surface, this ratio changes only slightly from 1.5 to 1.8.

4. Conclusions and perspectives

Our experiments reveal that the retraction rate is independent of the impact speed.
To account for the retraction speed, the maximum radius to which the droplet expands,
has to be known also. A number of studies have been devoted to the understanding of
the maximum spreading radius (see for instance (Fukai et al. 1993; Roisman et al. 2002;
Clanet et al. 2004)). However, no clear and uniﬁed picture emerges from previous ex-
perimental investigations. A recent experimental study of Rmax, combined with recent
theoretical ideas in the same spirit of the ones presented here was done by Clanet et al.
(2004). They obtain a zeroth order (asymptotic) description of the spreading stage, com-
pare it with experiments and suggest that two asymptotic regimes exist for Rmax. The
ﬁrst is given by a subtle competition between the inertia of the droplet and the capillary
forces; if only these two are important, it follows that Rmax/RI
. In the second
regime, Rmax is given by a balance between inertia and viscous dissipation in the expand-
ing droplet, leading to Rmax/RI
. Consequently, a single dimensionless number
∝
is deﬁned that discriminates between the two regimes: P = WeRe
referred to as the
Impact number. The crossover between the two regimes happens at a P of order unity.
Our experimental data are in qualitative agreement with their prediction, as is shown in
We1/4
Fig. 5.a. At low P, the scaling Rmax/RI
is clearly observed. However, for impacts
corresponding to P > 1, we observe only a very slow variation of the maximum spreading
radius as a function of P . Therefore, the relation between Rmax and the Reynolds number
is not very clear from our data (Fig 5. c). Although the main trend is not in strong
contradiction with the prediction Rmax/RI
, a power-law ﬁt of our data gives
exponents that are always smaller than the predicted value of 0.2. Perhaps even more
important- in view of the small range of the maximal expansion Rmax that we cover- is
that the diﬀerent water-glycerol mixtures do not appear to collapse on a single master

We1/4

Re 1/5

Re 1/5

−4/5

∝

∼

∝

Drop Retraction upon impact

9

curve, as would be predicted by the above argument. However, since the maximum value
of P that we reach is on the order of 10, it may be that we have not reached the
purely viscous regime. In that case, the capillary, inertial and viscous forces are still
of comparable amplitude and have to be taken into account together. Note also that
the more sophisticated models reviewed in Ukiwe & Kwok (2004) do not provide better
agreement with our experimental measurements.

Despite this small problem, we are now able to develop a simple uniﬁed picture for drop
impact dynamics accounting for both the spreading and the retraction dynamics. The two
natural dimensionless numbers that have been identiﬁed are the impact number P, that
quantiﬁes the spreading out of the droplet, and the Ohnesorge number Oh that quantiﬁes
the retraction. We can thus construct a phase diagram in the experimentally explored
(Oh, We) plane, which is shown on Fig. 6. The experimentally accessible plane is divided
in four parts, where the main mechanisms at work during the impact process are diﬀerent.
These four parts are separated by the curves Oh = 0.05 and We = Oh
. They are
labeled as follows: ICCI the drop dynamics is given by a competition between inertia and
capillarity both for the spreading and the retraction. IVCV: inertia and viscous forces
dominate the spreading, capillary and viscous forces dominate the retraction. These two
regimes have been studied in detail here. The two more intriguing regions are the IVCI
(viscous spreading, inertial retraction) and ICCV (capillary spreading, viscous retraction)
that are unfortunately diﬃcult to explore in detail. For the IVCI- regime, the large inertia
at impact, combined with a small surface tension, will make the droplets undergo large
non-axisymetric deformations and they will eventually splash and disintegrate. On the
other end of the phase diagram, the ICCV region corresponds to very low impact speeds
and important capillary forces, implying very small deformations of the droplets. If the
deformations are small, pinning of the contact line of the droplets will become important,
and all our simple scaling arguments for both the maximum radius and the retraction
rate are invalidated.

−4/3

A numerical investigation of droplet impact would be very helpful for two reasons.
First, numerics would allow to vary RI while keeping all the other physical parameters
constant. This would allow to check the robustness of our results, since experimentally
it is not easy to vary RI over a wide range. Second, as emphasized above, the viscous
regime for the maximum radius is diﬃcult to characterize precisely due to the smallness
of the variation of Rmax for viscous drops. If precise numerical simulations could be done,
these diﬀerent remaining problems could be resolved.

In sum, we have studied the retraction dynamics of liquid droplets upon high-speed
impact on non-wetting solid surfaces. Perhaps the strongest conclusion from our inves-
tigation is that the rate of retraction of the droplet is a drop constant which does not
depend on the impact velocity. Two regimes for the retraction rate have been iden-
tiﬁed: a viscous regime and an inertial regime. We have in addition shown here that
simple hydrodynamic arguments can be formulated that give very reasonable agreement
with experiments in the two diﬀerent regimes. Acknowledgments: Benjamin Helnann-
Moussa is acknowledged for help with the experiments. Denis Bartolo is indebted to the
CNRS for providing a post-doctoral fellowship. LPS de l’ENS is UMR 8550 of the CNRS,
associated with the universities Paris 6 and Paris 7.

Bergeron, V., Bonn, D., Martin, J.-Y. & Vovelle, L. 2000 Controlling droplet deposition

with polymer additives. Nature 405, 772–775.

REFERENCES

10

Denis Bartolo, Christophe Josserand and Daniel Bonn

IV-CI

IV-CV

1000

e

W

100

IC-CI

10

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

IC-CV

Oh

Figure 6. Phase diagram in the (We, Oh) plane for the impact and retraction dynamics of
droplets. The four regions are discussed in the text, and the symbols represent the parameters
of the data reported in this paper. Diﬀerent symbols have been assigned for each region.

Buguin, A., Vovelle, L. & Brochard, F. 1999 Shock in inertial dewetting. Phys. Rev. Lett

83, 1183–1186.

Clanet, C., B´eguin, C., Richard, D. & Qu´er´e, D. 2004 Maximal deformation of an im-

pacting drop. J. Fluid Mech. 517, 199–208.

Culick, F. E. C. 1960 Comments on a ruptured soap ﬁlm. J. Appl. Phys. 31, 1128.
DeGennes, P. G. 1985 Wetting: statics and dynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 827.
Edgerton, H. & Killian, J. 1954 Flash. Charles T. Brandford Company, Boston.
Fukai, J., Zhao, Z., Poulikakos, D., Megaridis, C. M. & Miyatake, O. 1993 Modeling
of the deformation of a liquid droplet impinging upon a ﬂat surface. Phys. Fluids 5, 2588–
2599.

Mundo, C., Sommerfeld, M. & Tropea, C. 1995 Droplet-wall collisions: Experimental stud-

ies of the deformation and breakup process. Int. J. Multiphase Flow 21, 151.

Okumura, K., Chevy, F., Richard, D., Qu´er´e, D. & Clanet, C. 2003 Water spring: A

model for bouncing drop. Europhys. Lett. 62, 237–243.

Rein, M. 1993 Phenomena of liquid drop impact on solid and liquid surfaces. Fluid Dyn. Res.

Richard, D., Clanet, C. & Quere, D. 2002 Contact time of a bouncing drop. Nature 417,

12, 61.

811–811.

Roisman, I., Riboo, R. & Tropea, C. 2002 Normal impact of a liquid drop on a dry surface:

model for spreading and receding. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 458, 1411–1430.

Taylor, G. I. 1959 The dynamics of thin sheets of ﬂuid iii. disintegration of ﬂuid sheets. Proc.

Roy. Soc. London A 253, 253–313.

Ukiwe, C. & Kwok, D. Y. 2004 On the maximum spreading diameter of impacting droplets

on well-prepared solid surfaces. Langmuir 21, 666–673.

Worthington, A. 1876 On the form assumed by drops of liquids falling vertically on a hori-

zontal plate. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 25, 261–271.

