What governs rivulet meanders on an inclined plane ?

Nolwenn LE GRAND-PITEIRA,∗ Adrian DAERR, and Laurent LIMAT
Laboratoire de Physique et M´ecanique des Milieux H´et´erog`enes,
10 rue Vauquelin 75005 Paris France, UMR CNRS 7636
and Mati`ere et Syst`emes Complexes, University Paris 7, UMR CNRS 7057
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We performed experiments on streams of water ﬂowing down a Mylar substrate, for various plate
inclinations and ﬂow rates, and we focused on the regime of stationary meanders. We found that
(i) the ﬂow is highly hysteretic : the shape of the meanders varies with ﬂow rate only for increasing
ﬂow rates, and the straight rivulet regime does not appear for decreasing ﬂow rate. (ii) A simple
model, including inertia and capillary forces, as well as hysteresis of wetting, accounts well for the
experimental instability threshold as well as for the ﬁnal radius of curvature of the meanders.

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: Valid PACS appear here

Meanders are ubiquitous in nature and are most famil-
iar from rivers, but can also be seen at a much smaller
scale on rivulets ﬂowing down inclined surfaces, as for
instance on window-panes during a rainfall. Recently,
Drenckhan et al.
[1] have identiﬁed remarkably regular
meandering patterns on rivulets conﬁned between two
vertical plates and charged with surfactants to mimic
undulations of foam Plateau borders. This observation
conﬁrms the generality of this pattern, and suggests that
a well deﬁned mechanism is at work in rivulets, able to
select a given meandering length scale. Understanding
this mechanism and the properties of the resulting me-
anders is by itself a fundamental challenge, that can also
have implications in other ﬁelds of physics. For instance
Bruinsma [2] pointed out a possible analogy with the
statistics of directed polymers inside a random matrix.

In the case of rivers [3, 4], it seems asserted that erosion
is the key mechanism, but as opposed to this, the mean-
dering on non-erodible surfaces is still an essentially open
problem. Surprisingly, very few studies of meandering
rivulets have been done. Culkin [7] and later Nakagawa
and Scott [8] reported signiﬁcant experimental work on
streams running down an inclined plate. They identiﬁed
three regimes for increasing ﬂow rates : a drop regime, a
meandering regime, and an unstable regime (the main
rivulet oscillates and splits into several smaller ones).
They also stress that they never obtain straight rivulets,
though this regime has been reported by Schmuki and
Laso [9] who also investigated the eﬀects of viscosity and
surface tension. Exploratory studies have been done on
the unstable rivulet regime [9, 10]. Stability analyses
of rivulets, some neglecting longitudinal ﬂow [5, 6], are
mainly focused on varicose modes and not sinuous modes,
i.e. are not dealing with meandering instability. Only two
recent papers deal with meandering threshold [2, 11].

Concerning technical applications, rivulets play an im-
portant role in aerospace industries, decreasing aerody-
namic eﬃciency and controlling the pattern of ice forma-
tion on the wings of airplanes under freezing conditions
In heat exchangers, the changes between diﬀer-
[12].

ent ﬂow regimes can cause drastic modiﬁcations of heat
transfer [13]. Rivulet formation can also be an undesir-
able feature in coating processes [14], except for possible
speciﬁc applications. Therefore, knowledge on their sta-
bility and characteristics would be of great help in opti-
mizing several industrial processes.

This paper studies the shape and behavior of mean-
dering rivulets as a function of our control parameters
(ﬂow rate and plate inclination), and discusses physical
interpretations, focusing on the role of hysteresis.

Experimental set-up – Figure 1a shows a schematic di-
agram of the experimental set-up. De-ionized water is

a)

b)

FIG. 1: a) Experimental setup b) Stationary meanders for
◦
α = 32
. Q=1.08 mL/s for the left picture and Q=1.40 mL/s
for the right one.

injected at the top of an inclined plate (1.20 m long and
50 cm wide). The substrate is a Mylar sheet, ﬂattened
on a rigid plate, insuring partial wetting conditions for
water (with advancing and receding contact angles of re-
spectively θa = 70◦ and θr = 35◦) and also reducing
problems of static electricity compared to other common
plastics. The tilt angle α of the plate can be changed at
will between 0◦ and 87◦. The water is collected in a tank
and pumped back to the top of the plate by a gear pump
providing an adjustable and constant ﬂow rate Q. The

constancy of the ﬂow rate is crucial in achieving stable
meanders, and is checked through the use of a precision
ﬂow-meter. Pictures and movies of the experiments were
taken by a digital camera placed 1 m above the plate and
perpendicular to the latter.

(i) Drops.

Meandering thresholds – For increasing ﬂow rates, the
Individual
following regimes are observed.
drops periodically detach from the injector [15].
(ii)
Straight rivulets. The liquid ﬂows down forming a
straight continuous ridge along the direction of steep-
est descent. (iii) Meandering rivulets. Above a critical
ﬂow rate Qc1, depending on the plate inclination, the
straight liquid ridge is unstable. Perturbations (surface
defects, injection noise, air movement, . . . ) appear as
small bends of a typical size comparable to the rivulet
width w. These bends initially amplify laterally and
downwards but eventually reach a stationary shape. It
takes 10 minutes to one hour for a rivulet to fully develop
along the whole length of the plate, but then the resulting
meander is completely stationary (Fig. 1b). Snapshots of
a settled meander have been taken every 2 minutes during
24 hours, and it did not move at all throughout that time
lapse. Using a highly steady pump, a carefully designed
injector and a long support to check whether the behav-
ior of the rivulet depended on the distance to the injec-
tor, we have been able to verify that meandering regime
for rivulets does exist independently of injection condi-
tions, conﬁrming previous ﬁndings by other groups. (iv)
Dynamic regime. Above a second critical ﬂow rate Qc2,
meanders no longer remain stable. The rivulet sweeps
from side to side below the injector similar to the free
edge of a garden hose [16], frequently breaking up into
sub-rivulets and running down along unsteadily changing
paths.

a)

b)

FIG. 2:
b) Forces acting on a meander, in the plane of the plate

a) Meandering thresholds for increasing ﬂow rates

Figure 2a displays the dependency of the two criti-

2

cal ﬂow rates on the plate inclination α, for stationary
meanders. The decrease of the second critical ﬂow rate
Qc2 with α is similar to that of Qc1, and we have no
explanation for that yet. The dependency of Qc1 on α
can be understood from the balance of the forces act-
ing on the rivulet: gravity, surface tension, inertia and
contact line pinning forces. For the lateral stability of
a straight rivulet gravity does not intervene (2b). The
surface tension opposes the bending of the rivulet and,
once integrated across the cross-section, can be seen as
a line tension Tγ of the liquid rim [17]. This line ten-
sion creates a normal force Fγ straightening the rivulet,
and taking into account the interfacial energies and the
capillary pressure inside the rivulet, reads Fγ = Cγw/rc,
θ2/3 in the limit of a small
where C is a constant (C
≈
average contact angle θ), γ the surface tension, w the
width of the rivulet and rc the initial radius of curva-
ture. Pinning forces are reactive, therefore stabilizing
forces, and act normal to the contact line. They have
an upper bound given by the advancing and receding
contact angles: Fh ≤
In-
stability will arise when inertia (Fi = ρSv2/rc where
ρ stands for the density of the liquid, S for the cross-
section of the rivulet and v for the RMS velocity inside
the rivulet) becomes stronger than both line tension and
). The onset of meandering is
pinning (Fi ≥
therefore given by :

= γ(cos θr −

Fγ + F max

F max
h

cos θa).

h

Q2
c1
Src

ρ

= γ

Cw
rc

(cid:20)

+ (cos θr −

cos θa)
(cid:21)

(1)

Without the pinning term, this balance was also sug-
gested by Drenckhan et al.
[1] for their meanders in
foams. If the pinning term can be neglected, or else if
rc scales as w with ﬂow rate, the ﬁrst critical ﬂow rate
scales as ρQ2
γw. Let us now assume that the ﬂow
w2g sin α/ν),
inside the rivulet is a Poiseuille ﬂow (v
where ν denotes the kinematic viscosity), and approxi-
mate the cross-section of the rivulet to a disc segment
with π/4 contact angle (S = w2/8). Using the ﬂow rate
conservation (Q = Sv), leads to the scaling

c1/S

∝

∝

4/5

(γ/ρ)

(ν/g)

3/5

.(sin α)

−3/5

,

(2)

Q1c ∝ h

i

which is plotted for comparison with the experimental
ﬁndings in ﬁgure 2a, and seems to match the data fairly
well, with a prefactor of order 1. This result is close to
the one predicted by Bruinsma [2]. Rough estimates of
the force terms in equation (1) using experimental data
for typical threshold conditions show that pinning is not
completely negligible [18]. The pinning term of equation
(sin α)−1/2, so the
1 alone would lead to the scaling Qc1
apparent exponent is in fact expected to be in between
-3/5 and -1/2, which remains consistent with our data.

∝

3

FIG. 3: Experimental data for the mean radius of curvature, wavelength and amplitude for numerous plate inclinations.

If the ﬂow rate is now decreased when in the mean-
dering regime, we observe a remarkable stability of the
meanders: rivulets conserve their path, becoming thin-
ner, until the rivulet breaks up into drops. In particular
there is no sinuous/straight rivulet transition Qc1 and
the rivulets meanders instead of becoming straight again
below Qc1. This strong hysteresis is a consequence of pin-
ning eﬀects. For all features of a meander with a radius
2w/5,
of curvature greater than Cw/(cos θr −
i.e. for all but very small scales, contact line pinning
forces (now acting in the opposite direction) will dom-
inate restoring capillary forces (cf. equ. (1)) even if iner-
tial forces tend to zero.

cos θa)

≈

Shape of the stationary meanders – All the experimen-
tal data presented here were obtained for increasing ﬂow
rates. For numerous meanders achieved for plate inclina-
tions varying between 6◦ and 87◦, we measured the mean
radius of curvature
at the apex of the curves (mean
Rci
h
taken over all curves of a given rivulet), mean wavelength
(see ﬁgures 1b and 3). All
A
, and mean amplitude
λ
h
i
h
i
three parameters increase monotonically with the incli-
nation of the plate α and the ﬂow rate Q.

The magnitude of inertial and capillary forces depends
on the shape of the rivulet path. The equilibrium of grav-
ity, inertia, capillarity and pinning forces can therefore be
used to solve for the expected radius of curvature of sta-
tionary meanders. Again, gravity does not matter if we
are interested in the curvature at the vertical segments
of the meander. The force balance at the threshold of
depinning/motion then reads:

ρQ2/S
(cid:0)

−

(cid:1)

Cγw

/Rc = γ (cos θr −

cos θa)

(3)

This is the same as equ. (1) except that Rc is now the
ﬁnal radius of curvature of the bends in the meander.

An order of magnitude calculation [18] shows that the
contribution of inertia ρQ2/S is bigger than the capillary

FIG. 4: Comparison of the data to the model for the mean
radius of curvature.
Insert: ratio of the wavelength to the
radius of curvature for all plate inclinations α.

contribution Cγw. We therefore neglect the latter, and
assuming a Poiseuille ﬂow, we get the following scaling
law for the radius of curvature:
ρ(g/ν)1/2

Q3/2√sin α

(4)

Rci ∝
h

γ(cos θr −

cos θa)

We have tested this expression on our data (Fig. 4) and
the scaling law ﬁts the data reasonably well.

Some sets of data, for a given inclination, seem to have
a slightly diﬀerent slope from the proposed scaling law.
A ﬁrst possible explanation lies in the neglected capil-
lary term, which would add a contribution to the radius
−1/4
of curvature in
α, which is more impor-
tant at low inclinations and low ﬂow rates, and dimin-
ishes the ﬁnal radius. A second important point is the
reduction of the eﬀective slope through sinuosity
(ra-
tio of total length of the rivulet to the distance between

Q1/4 sin

−

S

S

S

in eq. (4), and since

its endpoints). The slope sin α has to be replaced by
sin α/
increases with Q and α
[8], the exponents of Q and α should be smaller than
the ones in equation 4. Last but not least, the Poiseuille
ﬂow assumption probably needs to be corrected. Indeed
ﬂow visualizations with methylene blue dye show regions
with zero or even backward recirculating ﬂow [19]. The
Reynolds number based on the rivulet size is of order 103,
so some turbulence can be expected.

Discussion – The scenario for the development of me-
anders may be summed up as follows. Stable rivulets be-
come unstable when inertia dominates capillary forces,
through the ampliﬁcation of perturbations (to be accu-
rate, pinning forces have to be added to the balance). Be-
cause the destabilizing terms diminish as a perturbation
grows (and so its radius), the hysteresis of wetting even-
tually re-stabilizes the perturbation. In the ﬁnal state,
the pinning forces should therefore be maximally mobi-
lized, with the critical advancing contact angle on the
outside of the curve and the critical receding contact an-
gle on the inside. Cross-section measurements by Nak-
agawa and Scott [8] seem to corroborate this, but more
quantitative measurements are planned.

As appears in ﬁgure 1b, the ﬁnal meanders are made
up of circular segments and the relationship
Rci
h
should be expected from meanders made of half-circles
possibly followed by horizontal segments. This is con-
4 plotting the ratio
ﬁrmed by the insert in ﬁgure
versus ﬂow rate Q : the measurements are a
/
λ
h
i
bit scattered, but indeed close to 1.

Rci
h

λ
i
h

= 4

In order to understand how the rivulet switches from
one bend to the next, gravity has to be taken in account
to explain why the rivulet does not follow the circular
path back uphill. If weight is strong enough, it will ex-
ceed pinning at a critical orientation of the rivulet with
cos θa)/ρgS sin α.
respect to the slope, sin Φ = γ(cos θr −
If pinning always remains stronger, the rivulet can be-
come horizontal without slipping.
In the ﬁrst case the
critical orientation will deﬁne the inﬂection points on the
In the second case, horizontal segments appear,
path.
in which the velocity decreases and the cross-section in-
creases until gravity becomes dominant. Both scenari
seem to correspond to observed patterns, but the eﬀect
on the amplitude of the meanders is not clear.

A last point remains to be discussed: above Qc1 per-
turbations must be stabilized at large scales because the
de-stabilizing forces decrease for smaller curvatures, but
why do no new perturbations appear at small scales if
we are above the threshold Qc1 ? The formation of a
meandering path decreases the mean velocity: injection
of some methylene blue dye into the rivulets revealed
that the mean velocity of the ﬂow drastically drops at
the transition from straight-to-meandering. Therefore,
the rivulet becomes stable in the meandering part, and
remains unstable in the parts which have not yet devel-
oped bends. It would be interesting to perform velocity

4

measurements to see whether the second threshold Qc2
is deﬁned by the same critical local velocity as Qc1.

Acknowledgments –: We thank B. Andreotti and M.
Argentina for stimulating discussions and B. Andreotti
for a critical reading of the manuscript.

(1984).

(1990)

256 (2004)

∗

Electronic address: nlegrand@pmmh.espci.fr

[1] W. Drenckhan, S. Gatz and D. Weaire, Phys. Fluids, 16,

[2] R. Bruinsma, J. Phys. France, 51, 829-845 (1990).
[3] L.B. Leopold and M.G. Wolman, Bull. Goel. Soc. Am.,

3115-3121 (2004).

71, 769-794 (1960)

[4] T.B. Liverpool and S.F. Edwards, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

75(16), 3016-3019 (1995)

[5] S. H. Davis, J. Fluid Mech., 98(2), 225-242 (1980) ; K.
Sekimoto, R. Oguma and K. Kawazaki, Ann. Phys., 176,
359-392 (1987)

[6] G.W. Young and S.H. Davis, J. Fluid Mech., 176, 1-31
(1987) ; R.V. Roy and L.W. Schwartz, J. Fluid. Mech.,
391, 293-318 (1999)

[7] J. B. Culkin, Ph. D. Northern University, Illinois, (1982)
[8] T. Nakagawa and J. C. Scott, J. Fluid Mech., 149, 89-99

[9] P. Schmuki and M. Laso, J. Fluid Mech., 215, 125-143

[10] T. Nakagawa, J. Multiphase Flow, 18, 455-463 (1992).
[11] H. Kim, J. Kim and B. Kang, J. Fluid Mech. 498, 245-

[12] J.S. Marshall and R. Ettema, Proceedings of the Fifth Mi-
crogravity Fluid Physics and Transport Phenomena Con-
ference, 1217-1227, (2000)

[13] E. N. Ganic and M. N. Roppo, ASME J. Heat Transf.,

102, 342-346 (1980)

[14] S. F. Kistler and P. M. Schweizer, Liquid ﬁlm coating -
Scientiﬁc principles and their technological implications,
edited by Chapmann & Hall (1997)

[15] N. Le Grand, A. Daerr and L. Limat, J. Fluid Mech.,

[16] S. Kuronuma and M. Sano, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn, 72, 3106-

541, 293-315 (2005)

3112 (2003)

[17] Two forces act normal on a transverse section of area S
through the meander: pressure −S∆p and surface ten-
sion. The surface tension is made up of two parts: the
water-air interface of length ℓ contributes a term γℓ, the
straight mylar-water interface of length w (rivulet width)
contributes a term −γw cos θ corresponding to the energy
diﬀerence of wet and dry mylar, θ being an average con-
tact angle. The eﬀective rivulet string tension is Tγ =
γ(ℓ − w cos θ) − S∆p. Approximating the water-air inter-
face by a circular arc of radius r intersecting the mylar-
water interface at the equilibrium contact angle θ, we ﬁnd
that ℓ = 2θr, w = 2r sin θ, ∆p = γ/r (neglecting the lon-
2 − (1/2)wr cos θ.
gitudinal rivulet curvature) and S = θr
With these relations, the rivulet string tension becomes
Tγ = (1/2)γw(θ/ sin θ − cos θ) = Cγω.

[18] For the contact angles given in the text, the pinning
. Inertial and capillary
2
/S = 50 g.cm.s
and
−1
, w = 4 mm.

force is around Fh = 35 g.s
terms evaluate to ρSv
Cγw = 6 g.cm.s

for Q = 1 mL.s

= ρQ

−1

−2

−1

2

[19] J. Walker, Am. Sci., 253, 132-137 (1985).

