Turbulent-laminar patterns in plane Couette ﬂow

Dwight Barkley
Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom∗

Laurette S. Tuckerman
LIMSI-CNRS, BP 133, 91403 Orsay, France†

Regular patterns of turbulent and laminar ﬂuid motion arise in plane Couette ﬂow near the lowest
Reynolds number for which turbulence can be sustained. We study these patterns using an extension
of the minimal ﬂow unit approach to simulations of channel ﬂows pioneered by Jim´enez and Moin.
In our case computational domains are of minimal size in only two directions. The third direction
is taken to be large. Furthermore, the long direction can be tilted at any prescribed angle to the
streamwise direction. We report on diﬀerent patterned states observed as a function of Reynolds
number, imposed tilt, and length of the long direction. We compare our ﬁndings to observations in
large aspect-ratio experiments.

Published version appears as D. Barkley and L.S. Tuckerman, Turbulent-laminar patterns in
plane Couette ﬂow, in IUTAM Symposium on Laminar Turbulent Transition and Finite Amplitude
Solutions, T. Mullin and R. Kerswell (eds), Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 107–127 (2005).

I.

INTRODUCTION

In this chapter we consider plane Couette ﬂow – the ﬂow between two inﬁnite parallel plates moving in opposite
directions. This ﬂow is characterized by a single non-dimensional parameter, the Reynolds number, deﬁned as Re =
hU/ν, where 2h is the gap between the plates, U is the speed of the plates and ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid.
See ﬁgure 1. For all values of Re, laminar Couette ﬂow uC ≡ yˆx is a solution of the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations satisfying no-slip boundary conditions at the moving plates. This solution is linearly stable at all values
of Re. Nevertheless it is not unique. In particular, for Re greater than approximately 325 [7], turbulent states are
found in experiments and numerical simulations. Our interest is in the ﬂow states found as one decreases Re from
developed turbulent ﬂows to the lowest limit for which turbulence exists.

Our work is motivated by the experimental studies of Prigent and coworkers (2001,2002,2003,2005) on ﬂow in
a very large aspect-ratio plane Couette apparatus. Near the minimum Re for which turbulence is sustained, they
ﬁnd remarkable, essentially steady, spatially-periodic patterns of turbulent and laminar ﬂow. These patterns emerge

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FIG. 1: Plane Couette geometry. Plates separated by a gap 2h move at speeds ±U . The coordinate system we use is as shown,
with y = 0 corresponding to midgap.

∗Electronic address: barkley@maths.warwick.ac.uk, www.maths.warwick.ac.uk/˜barkley
†Electronic address: laurette@limsi.fr, www.limsi.fr/Individu/laurette

2

FIG. 2: Turbulent-laminar pattern at Reynolds number 350. Isosurfaces of streamwise vorticity (ω = ±0.5) are shown at one
instant in time. For clarity the bottom plate is shown in black while the top plate is transparent. The streamwise and spanwise
extent of the region shown are 60 times the plate separation 2h.

spontaneously from featureless turbulence as the Reynolds number is decreased. Figure 2 shows such a pattern
from numerical computations presented in this chapter. Two very striking features of these patterns are their large
wavelength, compared with the gap between the plates, and the fact that the patterns form at an angle to the
streamwise direction.

Fluid ﬂows exhibiting coexisting turbulent and laminar regions have a signiﬁcant history in ﬂuid dynamics. In the
mid 1960s a state known as spiral turbulence was ﬁrst discovered [4, 5, 26] in counter-rotating Taylor–Couette ﬂow.
This state consists of a turbulent and a laminar region, each with a spiral shape. The experiments of Prigent et
al. (2001,2002, 2003,2005) in a very large aspect-ratio Taylor–Couette system showed that in fact the turbulent and
laminar regions form a periodic pattern, of which the original observations of Coles and van Atta comprised only one
wavelength. Cros and Le Gal (2002) discovered large-scale turbulent spirals as well, in the shear ﬂow between a sta-
tionary and a rotating disk. When converted to comparable quantities, the Reynolds-number thresholds, wavelengths,
and angles are very similar for all of these turbulent patterned ﬂows.

II. METHODS

Our computational technique [2] extends the minimal ﬂow unit methodology pioneered by Jim´enez and Moin (1991)
and by Hamilton et al. (1995) and so we begin by recalling this approach. Turbulence near transition in plane Couette
and other channel ﬂows is characterized by the cyclical generation and breakdown of streaks by streamwise-oriented
vortices. The natural streak spacing in the spanwise direction is about 4–5h. In the minimal ﬂow unit approach,
the smallest laterally periodic domain is sought that can sustain this basic turbulent cycle. For plane Couette ﬂow
at Re = 400, Hamilton et al. (1995) determined this to be approximately (Lx, Ly, Lz) = (4h, 2h, 6h). This domain is
called the minimal ﬂow unit (MFU). The fundamental role of the streaks and streamwise vortices is manifested by the
fact that the spanwise length of the MFU is near the natural spanwise streak spacing. Figure 3(a) shows the MFU in
streamwise-spanwise coordinates.

We extend the MFU computations in two ways. First we tilt the simulation domain in the lateral plane at angle
θ to the streamwise direction [Figure 3(b)]. We use x′ and z′ for the tilted coordinates. We impose periodic lateral
boundary conditions on the tilted domain. To respect the spanwise streak spacing while imposing periodic boundary
conditions in x′, the domain satisﬁes Lx′ sin θ ≃ 4h for θ > 0. (For θ = 0, we require Lx′ & 6h.) Secondly, we greatly
extend one of the dimensions, Lz′, past the MFU requirement [Figure 3(c)], in practice between 30h and 220h, usually
120h.

This approach presents two important advantages, one numerical and the other physical. First, it greatly reduces
the computational expense of simulating large length-scale turbulent-laminar ﬂows. Our tilted domains need only be

3

FIG. 3: Simulation domains. The wall-normal direction y is not seen; Ly = 2h. The bars represent streamwise vortex pairs
with a spanwise spacing of 4h. (The vortices are schematic; these are dynamic features of the actual ﬂow.) (a) MFU domain
of size 6h × 4h. (b) Central portion of a domain [on the same scale as (a)] tilted to the streamwise direction. α, α′ and β,
β′ are pairs of points identiﬁed under periodic boundary conditions in x′. (c) Full tilted domain with Lx′ = 10h, Lz′ = 120h,
θ = 24◦. On this scale the MFU domain, shown for comparison, is small.

FIG. 4: Simulation domain. The (x′, y) grid is the actual spectral-element mesh used for the case Lx′ = 10. Only part of the
z′ direction is shown. In practice we use 32 history points in the z′ direction.

long perpendicular to the turbulent bands. In the direction in which the pattern is homogeneous, the domains are of
minimal size, just large enough to capture the streamwise vortices typical of shear turbulence. Second, the approach
allows us to impose or restrict the pattern orientation and wavelength. We can thereby investigate these features and
establish minimal conditions necessary to produce these large-scale patterns.

We now present some further details of our simulations. We consider the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations
written in the primed coordinate systems. After nondimensionalizing by the plate speed U and the half gap h, these
equations become

+ (u′

′
· ∇

′
= −∇

p

′

+

′2u′

∇

in Ω,

1
Re

∂u′
∂t

)u′
· u′

′
∇

(1a)

= 0 in Ω,
(1b)
where u′(x′, t) is the velocity ﬁeld and p′(x′, t) is the static pressure in the primed coordinate system, and ∇′ is used
to indicate that derivatives are taken with respect to primed coordinates. Ω is the computational domain. In these
coordinates, the no-slip and periodic boundary conditions are

′

u′
u′
u′

′
(x
′
(x
′
(x

′

′

, y = ±1, z
+ Lx′, y, z
′
, y, z

) = ±(cos θ, 0, sin θ)
) = u′
′
(x
′
+ Lz′) = u′
(x

(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
The equations are simulated using the spectral-element (x′-y) – Fourier (z′) code Prism [12]. We use a spatial
resolution consistent with previous studies [10, 27, 28]. Speciﬁcally, for a domain with dimensions Lx′ and Ly = 2,
we use a computational grid with close to Lx′ elements in the x′ direction and 5 elements in the y direction. Within
each element, we usually use 6th order polynomial expansions for the primitive variables. Figure 4 shows a spectral
element mesh used for the case of Lx′ = 10. In the z′ direction, a Fourier representation is used and the code is
parallelized over the Fourier modes. Our typical domain has Lz′ = 120, which we discretize with 1024 Fourier modes
or gridpoints. Thus the total spatial resolution we use for the Lx′ × Ly × Lz′ = 10 × 2 × 120 domain can be expressed
as Nx′ × Ny × Nz′ = 61 × 31 × 1024.

, y, z
, y, z

)
)

′

4

FIG. 5: Space-time diagram. Kinetic energy E(x′ = 0, y = 0, z′) at 32 equally spaced points in z′ in a domain with Lx′ × Ly ×
Lz′ = 10 × 2 × 120 with tilt θ = 24◦. The Reynolds number is decremented in discrete steps (right). Three long-lasting and
well-separated laminar regions emerge spontaneously from uniform turbulence as Re is decreased.

We shall always use (x, y, z) for the original streamwise, cross-channel, spanwise coordinates (Figure 1). We obtain
usual streamwise, and spanwise components of velocity and vorticity using u = u′ cos θ + w′ sin θ and w = u′ sin θ −
w′ cos θ, and similarly for vorticity. The kinetic energy reported is the diﬀerence between the velocity u and simple
Couette ﬂow uC, i.e. E = 1

2 ((u − uC)2 + v2 + w2).

We have veriﬁed the accuracy of our simulations in small domains by comparing to prior simulations [10].
In
large domains we have examined mean velocities, Reynolds stresses, and correlations in a turbulent-laminar ﬂow
at Re = 350 and ﬁnd that these reproduce experimental results from Taylor–Couette [5] and plane Couette
[11] ﬂow. While neither experimental study corresponds exactly to our case, the agreement supports our claim
that our simulations correctly capture turbulent-laminar states.

The procedure we use to initiate turbulence is inspired by previous investigations of plane Couette ﬂow in a
perturbed geometry. We recall that laminar plane Couette ﬂow is linearly stable at all Reynolds numbers. It has been
found, experimentally [3] and numerically [1, 25], that the presence of a wire [3] or a ribbon [1, 25] oriented along
the spanwise direction causes the ﬂow in the resulting geometry to become linearly unstable to either a steady or a
turbulent state containing streamwise vortices. We simulate such a ﬂow with a ribbon which is inﬁnitesimal in the
x′ direction, occupies 30% of the cross-channel direction y and spans the entire z′ direction. At Re = 500, the eﬀect
of such a ribbon is to produce a turbulent ﬂow quickly without the need to try diﬀerent initial conditions. Once the
turbulent ﬂow produced by the ribbon is simulated for a few hundred time units, the ribbon can be removed and the
turbulence remains. This procedure is used to initialize turbulent states for the simulations to be described below.

III. APPEARANCE OF TURBULENT-LAMINAR BANDS

A. Basic phenomenon

We begin with one of our ﬁrst simulations, in a domain tilted at angle θ = 24◦. This angle has been chosen to
be close to that observed experimentally near pattern onset. The simulation shows the spontaneous formation of
a turbulent-laminar pattern as the Reynolds number is decreased. We initiated a turbulent ﬂow at Re = 500 by
perturbing laminar Couette ﬂow with a ribbon as described in Section II. Time zero in Figure 5 corresponds to the
removal of the ribbon. The ﬂow is simulated for 500 time units at Re = 500 and the kinetic energy E is measured at
32 points equally spaced in z′ along the line x′ = y = 0 in the mid-channel shown in Figure 4. The corresponding 32
time series are plotted at the corresponding values of z′. At Re = 500, there is no persistent large-scale variation in
the ﬂow, a state which we describe as uniform turbulence. (This is not the homogeneous or fully developed turbulence

5

that exists at higher Reynolds numbers or in domains without boundaries.) At the end of 500 time units, Re is
abruptly changed to Re = 450 and the simulation continued for another 500 time units. Then Re is abruptly lowered
to Re = 425 and the simulation is continued for 1000 time units, etc. as labeled on the right in Figure 5.

At Re = 350 we clearly see the spontaneous formation of a pattern. Out of uniform turbulence emerge three regions
of relatively laminar ﬂow between three regions of turbulent ﬂow. (We will later discuss the degree to which the ﬂow
is laminar.) While the individual time traces are irregular, the pattern is itself steady and has a clear wavelength of
40 in the z′ direction. This Reynolds number and wavelength are very close to what is seen in the experiments.

B. Visualizations

Figure 6 shows visualizations of the ﬂow at the ﬁnal time in Figure 5. Shown are the kinetic energy, streamwise velocity,
and streamwise vorticity in the midplane between the plates. The computational domain is repeated periodically to
tile an extended region of the midplane. The angle of the pattern is dictated by the imposed tilt of the computational
domain. The wavelength of the pattern is not imposed by the computations other than that it must be commensurate
with Lz′120. The vorticity isosurfaces of this ﬂow ﬁeld were shown in Figure 2. Spanwise and cross-channel velocity
components show similar banded patterns.

Clearly visible in the center ﬁgure are streamwise streaks typical of shear ﬂows. These streaks have a spanwise
spacing on the scale of the plate separation but have quite long streamwise extent. We stress how these long streaks
are realized in our computations. A streak seen in Figure 6 typically passes through several repetitions of the
computational domain, as a consequence of the imposed periodic boundary conditions. In the single tilted rectangular
computational domain, a single long streak is actually computed as several adjacent streaks connected via periodic
boundary conditions.

Figure 7 shows the streamwise vorticity and velocity ﬁelds between the plates. The two leftmost images correspond
to the same ﬁeld as in Figure 6. The streamwise vorticity is well localized in the turbulent regions. Mushrooms of
high- and low-speed ﬂuid, corresponding to streamwise streaks, can be seen in the turbulent regions of ﬂow. Dark
velocity contours, corresponding to ﬂuid velocity approximately equal to that of the lower and upper moving plates,
are seen to reach into the center of the channel in the turbulent regions. In the center of the laminar regions, where
the ﬂow is relatively quiescent (Figure 5), there is very little streamwise vorticity and the streamwise velocity proﬁle
is not far from that of laminar Couette ﬂow. In particular, no high- or low-speed ﬂuid reaches into the center of the
channel in these laminar regions.

In Figure 8 we show the mean and rms of the streamwise and spanwise velocity components obtained from averages
over T = 2000 time units. These results show that the mean ﬂow is maximal at the boundaries separating the
turbulent and laminar regions while the ﬂuctuations are maximal in the middle of the turbulent bands. This agrees
with the experimental observations of of Prigent et al.
(2001,2002, 2003,2005) Note further that the regions of high
ﬂuctuation have approximately the same rhombic shape as the turbulent regions shown by Coles and van Atta (1966)
in experiments on Taylor–Couette ﬂow. Finally, Figure 9 shows a space-time plot of streamwise velocity along the
spanwise line x = y = 0. Speciﬁcally, data is taken from reconstructed ﬂows as in Figure 6. Time zero in Figure 9
corresponds to the ﬁeld in Figure 6. Time is taken downward in this ﬁgure to allow for comparison with a similar
ﬁgure from the experimental study by Hegseth (1996: ﬁgure 6) showing the propagation of streaks away from the
center of turbulent regions. Our results agree quantitatively with those of Hegseth. We ﬁnd propagation of streaks
away from the center of the turbulent regions with an average spanwise propagation speed of approximately 0.054
in units of the plate speed U . Translating from the diﬀusive time units used by Hegseth, we estimate the average
spanwise propagation speed of streaks in his data to be approximately 0.060 at Reynolds number 420. This space-time
plot again shows the extent to which there is some small activity in the regions we refer to as laminar.

C. Average spectral coeﬃcients

We have determined a good quantitative diagnostic of the spatial periodicity of a turbulent-laminar pattern. We use
the same data as that presented in Figure 5, i.e. velocities at 32 points along the line x′ = y = 0 in the midplane along
the long direction, at each interval of 100 time steps: 100∆t = 1. We take a Fourier transform in z′ of the spanwise
velocity w, yielding ˆwm. We take the modulus | ˆwm| to eliminate the spatial phase. Finally, we average over a time T
to obtain h| ˆwm|i. Figure 10 shows the evolution of h| ˆwm|i for wavenumbers m = 3, m = 2, m = 1, and m = 0 during
one of our simulations (shown below in Figure 11, which is a continuation of that shown in Figure 5). As before,
the vertical axis corresponds to time, and also to Reynolds number, which was decreased in steps of ∆Re = 10. We
average successively over T = 10, T = 30, T = 100, T = 300, and T = 1000 and observe the short-term ﬂuctuations

6

FIG. 6: Turbulent-laminar pattern at Re =
350. The kinetic energy, streamwise velocity, and
streamwise vorticity are visualized in the y = 0
plane, midway between and parallel to the mov-
ing plates. The computational domain (outlined
in white, tilted at angle θ = 24◦) is repeated peri-
odically to tile an extended region in x-z coordi-
nates. Streamwise streaks, with spanwise separa-
tion approximately 4h, are visible at the edges of
the turbulent regions.

shows

FIG. 7: Turbulent-laminar
pattern at Re = 350
viewed between the mov-
ing plates (x′ = 0 plane).
Left plot
stream-
wise vorticity. The other
three plots show contours of
streamwise velocity at three
times separated by 100 time
units (time increasing left to
right). The vorticity plot
and the ﬁrst velocity plot
correspond to the ﬁeld seen
in Figure 6.

7

FIG. 8: Mean and rms velocity ﬁelds for the turbulent-laminar pattern. From left to right: mean streamwise velocity, mean
spanwise velocity, rms streamwise velocity and rms spanwise velocity. The rms velocities are maximal in the lightest regions.
Only the central half (30 ≤ z′ ≤ 90) of the computational domain is shown.

FIG. 9: Space-time plot showing dynamics of the turbulent-laminar pattern. Streamwise velocity is sampled along a spanwise
cut through the ﬂow ﬁeld (the line x = y = 0 in the reconstructed ﬂows in Figure 6). Time zero corresponds to the time of
Figure 6. The streaks propagate away from the center of the turbulent regions toward the laminar regions.

gradually disappear, leaving the long-term features which will be discussed in the next section. We have chosen
T = 500 as the best compromise between smoothing and preserving the detailed evolution.

IV. DEPENDENCE ON REYNOLDS NUMBER

We have investigated in detail the Reynolds-number dependence of the θ = 24◦ case. To this end, we have carried out
two simulations, shown in Figure 11. In each the Reynolds number is lowered at discrete intervals in time, but following
a diﬀerent sequence in the two cases. For each case, we present a space-time diagram of E(x′ = 0, y = 0, z′, t) at 32

8

FIG. 10: Evolution of h| ˆwm|i, which is an average over time T of the modulus of the Fourier transform in the z′ direction of
32 spanwise velocity samples taken along the line (x′ = 0, y = 0). The components with wavenumber m = 3 (solid curve),
m = 2 (long-dashed curve), m = 1 (short-dashed curve) and m = 0 (dotted curve) can be used as a quantitative diagnostic of a
turbulent-laminar pattern. For example, the dominance of the m = 3 component indicates a pattern containing three turbulent
bands. From left to right, the average is taken over T = 10, T = 30, T = 100, T = 300, and T = 1000.

values of z′. The Reynolds-number sequence is shown on the right of each diagram and the time (up to T = 59, 000) on
the left. Each space-time diagram is accompanied by a plot showing the evolution of its average spectral coeﬃcients,
as deﬁned above.

Careful observation of Figure 5 already shows a laminar patch beginning to emerge at Re = 390, consistent with
experimental observations: Prigent et al. (2001, 2002,2003,2005) observed a turbulent-laminar banded pattern with
wavelength 46 and angle 25◦ when they decreased Re below Re = 394. The space-time diagram on the left of
Figure 11 shows a continuation of this simulation. (Here, the Reynolds numbers intermediate between 500 and 350
are not shown to reduce crowding.) We see a sequence of diﬀerent states: uniform turbulence and the three-banded
turbulent-laminar pattern already seen are succeeded by a two-banded pattern (at Re = 310), then a state containing
a single localized turbulent band (at Re = 300), and ﬁnally laminar Couette ﬂow. These features are reﬂected in the
average spectral coeﬃcients. The ﬂow evolves from uniform turbulence (all components of about the same amplitude)
to intermittent turbulence, to a pattern containing three turbulent bands (dominant m = 3 component) and then two
turbulent bands (dominant m = 2 component), then a single band (dominant m = 1 and m = 2 components), and
ﬁnally becomes laminar (all components disappear).

In the simulation on the right, the Reynolds number is decreased more slowly. A state with three bands appears
at Re = 390. (Although a laminar patch already appears at Re = 400, it is regained by turbulence when Re is
maintained longer at 400; this is not shown in the ﬁgure.) Based on the previous simulation shown on the left, we
had expected the three turbulent bands to persist through Re = 320. However here, instead, we see a rapid loss of
two bands, leaving only a single turbulent band. This band moves to the left with a well-deﬁned velocity, emitting
turbulent spurs toward the right periodically in time. Finally, after a time of T = 36000, one of these spurs succeeds
in becoming a second turbulent band and the two bands persist without much net motion. It would seem that the loss
of the second band was premature, and that at Re = 320 one band is insuﬃcient. We then resumed the simulation
on the left, maintaining Re = 320 for a longer time, and found that two bands resulted in this case as well. Both

9

FIG. 11: Two time series at θ = 24◦. The Reynolds number is lowered in steps, but at diﬀerent instants to generate the two
evolutions shown. For each case, we show w at 32 points along the z′ direction on the right and the spectral components h| ˆwm|i
on the left. Left: uniform turbulence is succeeded by the formation of three bands, then two, then a single band (a localized
state) and ﬁnally by laminar Couette ﬂow. Right: two bands disappear almost simultaneously at Re = 320. The remaining
band moves toward the left, periodically emitting turbulent spurs, of which one ﬁnally becomes a second turbulent band.

simulations show two bands at Re = 310, one band at Re = 300, and laminar Couette ﬂow at Re = 290.

A. Three states

The turbulent-laminar patterned states shown in Figure 11 are of three qualitatively diﬀerent types [2]. We demon-
strate this by carrying out three long simulations, at three diﬀerent Reynolds numbers, that are shown in Figure 12.
In this ﬁgure, the energy along the line x′ = y = 0 for the 32 points in z′ has been averaged over windows of length
T = 500 to yield a value shown by the shading of each space-time rectangle.

The simulations at Re = 350 and Re = 300 are carried out by increasing the long direction of our domain, Lz′,
in regular discrete increments of 5 from Lz′ = 50 to Lz′ = 140. At Re = 350, a single turbulent band is seen when
Lz′ = 50. This band divides into two when Lz′ = 65 and a third band appears when Lz′ = 130: the periodic pattern
adjusts to keep the wavelength in the range 35–65. This is close to the wavelength range observed experimentally by
Prigent et al., which is 46–60. When the same protocol is followed at Re = 300, no additional turbulent bands appear
as Lz′ is increased. We call the state at Re = 300 localized and note that turbulent spots are reported near these
values of Re in the experiments. The small Lx′ of our computational domain does not permit localization in the x′
direction; instead localized states must necessarily take the form of bands when visualized in the x-z plane.

The instantaneous integrated kinetic energy proﬁle

is plotted at the ﬁnal time for both cases. For Re = 350, ¯E does not reach zero and the ﬂow does not revert to the

¯E ≡

Z

′
dx

′
dy E(x

′

, y, z

)

10

FIG. 12: Simulations at Re = 350, Re = 300, and Re = 410 illustrating three qualitatively diﬀerent regimes. For the simulations
at Re = 350 and Re = 300, Lz′ is increased from 50 to 140. The state at Re = 350 is periodic: the turbulent band divides as
Lz′ is increased to retain a wavelength near 40. The ﬁnal kinetic energy proﬁle ¯E(z′) is bounded away from zero. The state at
Re = 300 is localized: a single turbulent band persists, regardless of domain size and ¯E(z′) decays exponentially to zero away
from the band. The simulation at Re = 410 is carried out at Lz′ = 40. The state is intermittent: laminar regions appear and
disappear and the average spectral coeﬃcients corresponding to m = 1 (solid) and m = 0 (dashed) oscillate erratically.

simple Couette solution between the turbulent bands, as could also be seen in the earlier visualizations (Figures 7,
9). In contrast, for Re = 300, ¯E decays to zero exponentially, showing that the ﬂow approaches the simple Couette
solution away from the turbulent band. In this case, there is truly coexistence between laminar and turbulent ﬂow
regions.

The simulation at Re = 410 illustrates another type of behavior. In a domain of length Lz′ = 40, laminar or, rather,
weakly-ﬂuctuating regions appear and disappear. The spectral coeﬃcients corresponding to m = 1 (wavelength 40)
and m = 0 oscillate erratically. Similar states at similar Reynolds numbers are reported experimentally by Prigent
and coworkers (2001,2002,2003,2005), where they are interpreted as resulting from noise-driven competition between
banded patterns at equal and opposite angles, a feature necessarily absent from our simulations.

11

FIG. 13: Patterns as a function of Reynolds number Re and θ, the angle between the Lx′ direction of our rectangular
computational domain and the streamwise direction. The domain is of size Lx′ × Ly × Lz′ = (4/ sin θ) × 2 × 120. For each
angle, upper and lower limits in Re are shown for each regime. T: uniform turbulence (lower limit in Re). I: intermittent
turbulence. 3: pattern containing three turbulent-laminar bands, each of approximate wavelength 40. 2: pattern containing
two bands of approximate wavelength 60. L: pattern containing one turbulent region, possibly localized. C: laminar Couette
ﬂow (no patterns observed below this Re). Open symbols show experimental observations of Prigent et al. Triangles: patterns
with wavelength between 46 and 50. Squares: patterns with wavelength between 50 and 60.

V. DEPENDENCE ON ANGLE

A. Angle survey

We have explored the angles with respect to the streamwise direction at which a turbulent-laminar pattern may exist.
The results are plotted in Figure 13. We keep Lz′ = 120 and Lx′ = 4/ sin θ. The transition from uniform turbulence
to laminar Couette ﬂow occurs via intermediate states which occupy a decreasing range of Re as θ is increased. The
sequence of states seen for increasing θ at Re = 350 is qualitatively the same as that for decreasing Re at θ = 24◦:
uniform turbulence at θ = 0◦, a turbulent-laminar pattern with three bands at θ = 15◦ to θ = 24◦, two bands for
θ = 30◦ and θ = 45◦, a localized state for θ = 66◦, and laminar Couette ﬂow for θ◦ ≥ 72. Thus far we have obtained
patterns for angles between 15◦ and 66◦ and the number of bands decreases with angle.

Experimental data from Prigent and coworkers (2001,2003,2005) is also shown in Figure 13. The wavelengths,
angles, and Reynolds numbers reported ranged from λz′ = 46.3 and θ = 25.3◦ at Re = 394 to λz′ = 60.5 and
θ = 37◦ at Re = 340. In these ranges of angle and Reynolds number, we observe a similar trend, since our wavelength
(constrained here to be a divisor of Lz′ = 120) increases from 40 to 60 as the number of bands decreases from 3
to 2. Between Re = 325 and Re = 280, experiments showed spots, which may correspond to some of the states we
have labeled as localized in Figure 13. At present, we do not systematically distinguished localized states from others
containing one turbulent region but which may not behave like Figure 12. The threshold for intermittency is also
diﬃcult to deﬁne and to determine.

The most striking diﬀerence between our computations and the experimental data is that the range of angles over
which we ﬁnd periodic turbulent-laminar patterns (from θ = 15◦ to at least θ = 45◦) is far greater than that seen in
the experiment. Patterns with angles outside of the experimental range are likely to be unstable in a large domain in
which the angle is unconstrained.

Our computational technique requires that the size of the domain be increased as θ decreases according to Lx′ =
4/ sin θ in order to respect the spanwise vortex or streak spacing; see Figure 3. Hence the computational cost increases
with decreasing θ and for this reason we have not as yet investigated θ between 15◦ and 0◦. For θ exactly 0◦, this
trigonometric constraint is lifted, since the streamwise vortices and streaks would not extend diagonally across the
rectangular domain, but parallel to its boundaries. As θ increases, the domain size Lx′ = 4/ sin θ decreases, as does
the computation cost. For θ between 45◦ and 90◦, for which Lx′ is between 5.7 and 4, we reduce the number of
spectral elements in the x′ direction from 10 to 4 (see Figure 4).

12

FIG. 14: Evolution for θ = 90◦. Two simulations at Re = 400 are shown, in domains with Lx′ = Lz = 4. The domain shown
on the right has Lz′ = Lx = 220; that on the left has Lz′ = Lx = 6, close to the minimal ﬂow unit (the two are not shown
to scale). The large domain supports a transient pattern as an intermediate state between uniform turbulence and laminar
Couette ﬂow, whereas the turbulence persists in the small domain.

B. Long streamwise direction

For θ = 90◦, the domain has a long streamwise direction Lz′ = Lx and a short spanwise direction Lx′ = Lz. Figure 13
shows that, for θ = 90◦ and Lx = 120, we obtain direct decay from uniform turbulence to laminar Couette ﬂow at
Re = 385. We have varied Lx and show the results in Figure 14. When Lx = 220, the turbulence is extinguished at
Re = 400; a transient pattern of wavelength 110 can be seen. But when Lx = 6, we ﬁnd that the turbulence persists
down to a value of Re ≈ 370. We recall that the minimal ﬂow unit was proposed by Hamilton et al. (1995) as the
smallest which can support the streak and streamwise-vortex cycle and maintain turbulence; the ﬂow becomes laminar
when either of the dimensions are reduced below their MFU values. However, Figure 14 shows that turbulence can
also sometimes be extinguished by increasing Lx. Simulations in domains with a long streamwise and a short spanwise
dimension have also been carried out by Jim´enez et al. [14] with the goal of understanding the role of the streamwise
dimension, e.g. streak length.

C. Long spanwise direction

In the case θ = 0◦, the domain has a long spanwise direction (Lz = Lz′ = 120) and a short streamwise direction
(Lx = Lx′ = 10).
In decreasing the Reynolds number by ∆Re = 5 after each interval of T = 1000, we observe
turbulent regions far below Re = 300, terminating only at Re = 210, as shown in Figure 15. At several times, the
turbulence seems ready to disappear, only to spread out again. In order to conﬁrm this surprising result, we have
carried out longer simulations at each of these low values of Re. Turbulence persisted over T = 4200 (in the usual
advective time units) at Re = 220, over T = 3000 at Re = 225, and even over T = 15000 for Re = 230.

Experiments [7] and numerical simulations in large domains (Lx × Ly × Lz = 128 × 2 × 64) [16] and numerical
simulations in periodic minimal ﬂow units (Lx × Ly × Lz = 4 × 2 × 6) [10] have produced long-lived turbulence only for
Re > 300. A number of studies [8, 9, 21, 22] have examined turbulent lifetimes as a function of initial perturbation
amplitude, Reynolds number, and quenching rate (rate of Reynolds number decrease) in minimal ﬂow units. In these
studies, turbulence with a lifetime greater than T = 2000 was counted as sustained; experiments [7], however, are
carried out on timescales several orders of magnitude longer than this. Schmiegel and Eckhardt (2000) studied the
eﬀect of quenching rate on turbulent lifetimes. For rates of Reynolds number decrease comparable to ours, they found
that turbulence could in some cases subsist to Re = 280 or 290 for times on the order of T = 1000 to 10000; for
quenching rates ten times faster than ours, turbulence was occasionally sustained to Re = 240.

If we compare our results to the previous simulations, then the conclusion would be that turbulence is favored by
a short streamwise direction Lx = 10 and a long spanwise direction Lz = 120. When either of these two conditions
are lifted, the turbulence disappears. We note, however, that our simulations do not systematically vary the initial
conditions and thus do not determine the probability of long-lived turbulence at these low Reynolds numbers near
220.

We also note that Toh and colleagues [23, 24] have recently reported results from simulations of Couette ﬂow in
domains with long spanwise extent compared with the MFU geometry. These simulations are for higher values of Re
than those considered here.

We observe an approximately periodic oscillation in time, shown on the right of Figure 15. The oscillation period

13

FIG. 15: Evolution for θ = 0◦ with Lx′ = Lx = 10 and Lz′ = Lz = 120. Re is lowered by steps of ∆Re = 5; not all intermediate
values of Re are shown. The ﬂow continues to have turbulent regions far below Re = 300. Left: evolution over the entire
domain, showing the formation and disappearance of turbulent domains. Right: evolution of w(x = 0, y = 0, z = 60, t), showing
irregular periodic cycles.

of about 200 time units has the same order of magnitude as the minimum turbulent cycle [10], but further analysis
of our results is required before we can identify the streak and streamwise-vortex cycle in our ﬂow.

VI. SUMMARY

We have used an extension of the minimal-ﬂow-unit methodology to study large-scale turbulent-laminar patterns
formed in plane Couette ﬂow. Turbulent-laminar patterns are obtained as solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations
in domains with a single long direction. The other dimensions are just large enough to resolve the inter-plate distance
and to contain an integer number of longitudinal vortex pairs or streaks. We have presented various visualizations of
the computed turbulent-laminar patterns as well as space-time plots illustrating the formation and dynamics of these
patterns. The time-averaged modulus of the spatial Fourier spectrum is shown to provide a quantitative diagnosis of
the patterns. Periodic, localized, and intermittent states occur in our simulations where similar states are observed
experimentally.

We have explored the patterns’ dependence on Reynolds number, domain length and tilt angle. The patterned
states do not appear to depend sensitively on how the turbulence is initialized nor on the route taken to a particular
point in parameter space. It is, however, possible that some parameter combinations may support diﬀerent numbers
of turbulent bands (although we have not yet observed this). All states are bistable with respect to laminar Couette
ﬂow and if parameters are changed too abruptly, then reversion to laminar Couette ﬂow occurs.

It appears that large-scale patterns are inevitable intermediate states on the route from turbulent to laminar ﬂow
in large aspect-ratio Couette ﬂow. A key open question is what mechanism causes laminar-turbulent patterns. These
patterns are not only interesting in and of themselves, but may provide clues to the transition to turbulence in plane
Couette ﬂow.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

14

We thank Olivier Dauchot for valuable discussions and Ron Henderson for the use of Prism. We thank the CNRS
and the Royal Society for supporting this work. The two CPU decades of computer time used for this research were
provided by the IDRIS-CNRS supercomputing center under project 1119, and by the University of Warwick Centre
for Scientiﬁc Computing (with support from JREI grant JR00WASTEQ).

[1] Barkley, D. and Tuckerman, L.S. (1999). Stability analysis of perturbed plane Couette ﬂow. Phys. Fluids 11, 1187–1195.
[2] Barkley, D. and Tuckerman, L.S. (2005). Computational study of turbulent laminar patterns in Couette ﬂow. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 94, 014502.

[3] Bottin, S., Dauchot, O., Daviaud, F. and Manneville, P. (1998). Experimental evidence of streamwise vortices as ﬁnite

amplitude solutions in transitional plane Couette ﬂow. Phys. Fluids 10, 2597–2607.

[4] Coles, D. (1965). Transition in circular Couette ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech. 21, 385–425.
[5] Coles, D. and van Atta, C.W. (1966). Progress report on a digital experiment in spiral turbulence. AIAA J. 4, 1969–1971.
[6] Cros, A. and Le Gal, P. (2002). Spatiotemporal intermittency in the torsional Couette ﬂow between a rotating and a

[7] Dauchot, O. and Daviaud, F. (1995). Finite-amplitude perturbation and spots growth-mechanism in plane Couette ﬂow.

stationary disk. Phys. Fluids 14, 3755–3765.

Phys. Fluids 7, 335–343.

[8] Eckhardt, B. and Faisst, H. (2005). Dynamical systems and the transition to turbulence. In Proceedings of the IUTAM
Symposium on Non-Uniqueness of Solutions to the Navier–Stokes Equations and Their Connection with Laminar-Turbulent
Transition, T. Mullin and R. Kerswell (eds), Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 35–50.

[9] Faisst, H. and Eckhardt, B. (2004). Sensitive dependence on initial conditions in transition to turbulence in pipe ﬂow. J.

[10] Hamilton, J.M., Kim, J. and Waleﬀe, F. (1995). Regeneration mechanisms of near-wall turbulence structures. J. Fluid

[11] Hegseth, J.J. (1996). Turbulent spots in plane Couette ﬂow. Phys. Rev. E 54, 4915–4923.
[12] Henderson, R.D. and Karniadakis, G.E. (1995). Unstructured spectral element methods for simulation of turbulent ﬂows.

[13] Hof, B., Juel, A. and Mullin, T. (2003). Scaling of the turbulence transition threshold in a pipe. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,

Fluid Mech. 504, 343–352.

Mech. 287, 317–348.

J. Comput. Phys. 122, 191–217.

244502.

[14] Jim´enez, J., Kawahara, G., Simens, M.P. and del Alamo, J.C. (2005). The near-wall structures of turbulent wall ﬂows. In
Proceedings of the IUTAM Conference on Elementary Vortices and Coherent Structures, S. Kida (ed.), Springer, Dordrecht.

[15] Jim´enez, J. and Moin, P. (1991). The minimal ﬂow unit in near-wall turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 225, 213–240.
[16] Lundbladh, A. and Johansson, A.V. (1991). Direct simulation of turbulent spots in plane Couette ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech.

229, 499–516.

Thesis, University Paris-Sud.

Physica D 174, 100–113.

[17] Prigent, A. (2001). La spirale turbulente: Motif de grande longueur d’onde dans les ´ecoulements cisall´es turbulents. PhD

[18] Prigent, A., Gr´egoire, G., Chat´e, H., Dauchot, O. and van Saarloos, W. (2002). Large-scale ﬁnite-wavelength modulation

within turbulent shear ﬂows. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 014501.

[19] Prigent, A., Gr´egoire, G., Chat´e, H. and Dauchot, O. (2003). Long-wavelength modulation of turbulent shear ﬂows.

[20] Prigent, A. and Dauchot, O. (2005). Transition versus front turbulence in subcritical Couette ﬂows. In Proceedings of the
IUTAM Symposium on Non-Uniqueness of Solutions to the Navier–Stokes Equations and Their Connection with Laminar-
Turbulent Transition, T. Mullin and R. Kerswell (eds), Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 193–217.

[21] Schmiegel, A. and Eckhardt, B. (1997). Fractal stability border in plane Couette ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 5250–5253.
[22] Schmiegel, A. and Eckhardt, B. (2000). Persistent turbulence in annealed plane Couette ﬂow. Europhys. Lett. 51, 395–400.
[23] Toh, S. and Itano, T. (2005). Interaction between a large-scale structure and near-wall structure in channel ﬂow. J. Fluid

Mech. 524, 249–262.

[24] Toh, S., Itano, T. and Satoh, K. (2005). Co-supporting cycle: Sustaining mechanism of large-scale structures and near-
wall structures in channel ﬂow turbulence. In Proceedings of the IUTAM Symposium on Non-Uniqueness of Solutions to
the Navier–Stokes Equations and Their Connection with Laminar-Turbulent Transition, T. Mullin and R. Kerswell (eds),
Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 71–83.

[25] Tuckerman, L.S. and Barkley, D. (2002). Symmetry breaking and turbulence in perturbed plane Couette ﬂow. Theoret.

Comput. Fluid Dynam. 16, 43–48.

[26] van Atta, C.W. (1966). Exploratory measurements in spiral turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 25, 495–512.
[27] Waleﬀe, F. (2003). Homotopy of exact coherent structures in plane shear ﬂows. Phys. Fluids 15, 1517–1534.
[28] Waleﬀe, F. and Wang, J.(2005). In Proceedings of the IUTAM Symposium on Non-Uniqueness of Solutions to the Navier–
Stokes Equations and Their Connection with Laminar-Turbulent Transition, T. Mullin and R. Kerswell (eds), Springer,
Dordrecht, pp. 85–106.

