5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dry microfoams:
Formation and ﬂow in a conﬁned channel

Jan-Paul Raven,∗ Philippe Marmottant, and Fran¸cois Graner
Laboratoire de Spectrom´etrie Physique, B.P. 87, F-38402 St Martin d’H`eres Cedex, France †
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

We present an experimental investigation of the assembly of microbubbles into a 2D foam and its
ﬂow in a rectangular microchannel. Using a ﬂow-focusing method, we produce a foam in situ on a
microﬂuidic chip for a large range of liquid fractions, down to a few percent in liquid. The channel
height is 250 µm, resulting in bubbles whose height to diameter aspect ratio ranges between 0.3 and
1. We can monitor the transition from separated bubbles to the desired microfoam, in which bubbles
are closely packed and separated by thin ﬁlms. We ﬁnd that bubble formation frequency is limited
by the liquid ﬂow rate, and that it creates a modulation of the foam ﬂow, rapidly damped along
the channel. The average foam ﬂow rate depends non-linearly on the applied pressure, displaying a
threshold pressure due to capillarity. Strong discontinuities in the ﬂow rate appear when the number
of bubbles in the channel width changes, reﬂecting the discrete nature of the foam topology. For a
given foam structure the pressure drop scales with the ﬂowrate to the power 2/3. We compare this
dependance with the case of macroscopic foams pushed without a coﬂowing liquid. We also produce
an ultraﬂat foam (channel height about 8 µm) reducing the bubble aspect ratio to 0.02; we notice
a marked change in bubble shape during the ﬂow.

PACS numbers: 47.55.Dz, 47.60.+i, 83.50.Ha, 83.80.Iz

Microbubbles and microdrops presently attract con-
siderable attention [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Their application in
a lab-on-a-chip context provides the possibility for indi-
vidual handling of gas pockets, and allows to create mi-
crochemical reactors that are both very rapid and highly
parallelized. Speciﬁcally, the gas-liquid interface of mi-
crobubbles provides a transport location for amphiphilic
molecules, with a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic
tail. A decrease in size increases the surface to volume
ratio; hence, microbubbles could be used as an eﬃcient
carrier for proteins or lipids at high concentration.

Microbubbles can be produced using a microﬂuidic
ﬂow-focusing device: a ﬂowing gas thread is forced, by
the co-ﬂowing surrounding liquid, into a small oriﬁce,
where the gas thread breaks up at regular time intervals
[3, 4, 6]. A set of basic operations necessary for indi-
vidual bubble manipulation, termed “discrete microﬂu-
idics”, has been demonstrated at the millimeter scale [5]
in a “dry” foam, where the liquid content is low compared
to the gas content. To down-scale these operations and
adapt them for microﬂuidics requires producing a micro-
foam. One of the interesting properties of foams is that
they can exist over a large range of sizes [7]. We know
the size-dependency of their main physical properties, in-
cluding structure (governed by their surface tension) [7]
and dissipation (dominated, in what follows, by friction
on the channel walls) [8]. We would like to determine
how these foam properties extrapolate to the microme-
ter range.

Here, we investigate the continuous production of bub-

∗Electronic address: jpraven@spectro.ujf-grenoble.fr
†CNRS - UMR 5588, Universit´e Grenoble I

bles in a ﬂow-focusing device, and the transitions between
diﬀerent regimes of bubble formation, so as to reach mi-
crofoams, thereby extending the studies of Ref.
[3] to
low liquid fractions. The absence of vertical drainage on
the small length scales of a microﬂuidic system creates
constant and stable liquid proﬁles in the foam ﬁlms. At
the low Reynolds numbers involved, the amounts of gas
(bubble volume distribution) and of liquid (liquid frac-
tion) can be reproducibly controlled. We measure the
pressure drop and non-linear dissipation along the mi-
croﬂuidic set-up: an oriﬁce, followed by a long channel
ending with a free exit. We ﬁnally open perspectives for
the study of structure and dissipation of ultra-ﬂat micro-
foams.

We produce the microﬂuidic device by soft lithography.
We ﬁrst create a mold in a negative photosensitive mate-
rial (SU-8 2100, MicroChem), with a channel height h =
250 µm, width w = 700 µm, oriﬁce width wor = 100 µm.
We then imprint this pattern in a polymer (polydimethyl-
syloxane, PDMS) to create the actual channel, and glue
it to a glass cover slide using a home-built ozone-cleaner.
We also use a sample where, at a distance of 6 mm after
the entrance oriﬁce, the foam has to ﬂow through a sec-
ond constriction, of width w = 125 µm. Finally, we will
present the useof a positive photo-resist (ma-P 100, Mi-
cro Resist Technology) to produce an ultra-ﬂat channel,
height h = 8 µm and width w = 400 µm.

The continuous phase is water with 10 % commercial
dishwashing detergent (Dreft, Procter & Gamble);
its
surface tension is σ = 38 ± 1 mN/m, measured by the
Wilhelmy balance method. The use of this surfactant re-
sulted in an increased wettability of the solution to the
PDMS surfaces [9]. Two diﬀerent syringe pumps were
used to push the liquid (11 Pico Plus, Harvard Appara-
tus, and KDS 100, KD Scientiﬁc) at ﬂowrates Ql ranging

from 4 to 167 µl/min, constant with ±0.5% accuracy.
The dispersed phase is nitrogen. We drive it either at
constant ﬂow rate Qg, using a similar Pico Plus syringe
pump; or at constant pressure Pg, ranging from 1 to 21
kPa, using a pressurized tank and a pressure-reduction
valve (precision ±0.15 kPa).

(a)

80

]
l

n

[
 

e
m
u
o
v
 

l

l

e
b
b
u
b

60

i

40

20

0

0
10

(b)

ii

iii

iv

v

1
10
pressure [kPa]

liquid

gas

2

250 µm high channel, near the oriﬁce at the channel
entrance. We capture still images and movies with a
camera (Marlin F131B, Allied Vision Technologies) con-
nected to an inverted optical microscope (IX70, Olym-
pus). By analysing these images we extract the bubble
formation rate (break-up frequency f ), with a precision
of a few percent. We estimate the bubble volume Vb by
measuring the apparent area A occupied by the gas in
the images, multiplied by h. The edge of the measured
area (measured with a precision ±1%) was taken in the
middle of the dark line around the bubble, systematically
underestimating (with up to 10% for non-touching bub-
bles) the actual gas volume. We estimate simultaneously
the gas ﬂow rate as Qg = Vbf .

The proportion αl = Ql/Q of liquid injected in the
system is measured with a precision of ±10%, where Q =
Qg + Ql is the total two-phase ﬂow. It can diﬀer from
the foam volume liquid fraction Φl.

The minimum pressure for which bubble formation was
observed at the liquid ﬂow rate is Pc = 0.9 ± 0.15 kPa
(Fig. 1a). This is probably due to the capillary pressure.
For a curved interface in the oriﬁce at the limit of bubble
detachment, the Laplace pressure is σ(1/r1 + 1/r2) =
1.1 ± 0.2 kPa, where r1 = h/2 and r2 = wor/2 are the
principal radii of curvature.

For pressures Pg above Pc, bubbles form. The pressure
drop across the oriﬁce creates a gas-liquid coﬂow. A gas
thread is forced into the oriﬁce and ﬁlls a bubble after
the oriﬁce. This thread pinches and releases the bubble.
After break-up, the gas-liquid interface retracts, as re-
ported in [4]. The interface returns completely into the
upstream part (dripping ﬂow (i), Fig. 1b). At higher Pg,
there is a coexistence, probably indicating a ﬁrst-order
transition, with a second mechanism, where the interface
remains in the oriﬁce instead of retracting. For given Pg
and Ql, both mechanisms give diﬀerent volumes V1, V2.
This results in a ﬂow of period T1 +T2 [3], with bidisperse
bubbles (ii, Fig. 1b).

Increasing Pg, we observe microfoams, with only the
second pinch-oﬀ mechanism, without rapid interface re-
traction, hence no inertial non-linearities, period dou-
bling or chaotic bubbling as in [6]. This results in a
monodisperse foam, with three possible structures ac-
cording to the ﬂow rate: bubbly ﬂow (iii), alternate foam
with two rows (iv), or bamboo foam with one row only
(v). The bubble volume correlates with the ﬂuid frac-
−0.95±0.02
tion (except for the lowest Ql): Vb/w3
or ∼ α
l
(Fig. 2). This correlation is similar to the one observed
in axisymmetric conditions by [10, 11] who measured
or ∼ (Ql/Qg)−1.11±0.02, in the opposite case of high
Vb/w3
liquid fraction with Ql/Qg higher than 5. It diﬀers from
the Vb ∼ Pg/Ql scaling observed with ﬂat bubbles in
channels by [3]: we will see further that the gas ﬂow
rate and applied pressure are not proportionnal within
a low ﬂuid fraction microfoam. To increase the number
of bubble rows would require to decrease Vb at given αl,
for instance with an oriﬁce aspect ratio wor/h closer to 1
to restrict liquid ﬂow, or a lower ratio of oriﬁce to chan-

(i) dripping

(ii) bidisperse
bubbles

(iii) bubbly
ﬂow

(iv) alternate
foam

(v) bamboo
foam

FIG. 1: From wet to dry microfoams. (a) Bubble volume Vb
versus gas pressure Pg. Liquid ﬂow rate is kept constant at
Ql = 167 µl min−1. Numbers identify the diﬀerent regimes:
(i) dripping ﬂow; (ii) bidisperse bubbles (two symbols are
plotted for each pressure); (iii) bubbly ﬂow; (iv) alternate
foam (2 rows) with ﬁlled symbols; (v) bamboo foam (1 row)
with grey symbols. (b) Photographs of these regimes. Crossed
symbols in (a) correspond to pictures in (b).

Fig.

(1) shows examples of the observations in the

nel width wor/w to enlarge the space available for newly
formed bubbles.

l

f
/
f

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

/(2σ/w
P
g

)
or

2

4

6

8

3

set-up: oriﬁce and channel (Fig. (3)). The threshold in
pressure for bubbly ﬂow (found to be 1.0 ± 0.1 kPa, if this
parameter is left free in the ﬁt) is compatible with the
above explanation by a capillary eﬀect (1.1 ± 0.2 kPa) at
the oriﬁce. On the other hand, the slope originates from
dissipative eﬀects in the channel:
in presence of a sec-
ond constriction (data not shown), we obtain for regimes
(iii) and (iv) the same result as in Fig. (3), translated by
about 0.45 kPa along the P -axis (compatible with the ex-
pected Laplace pressure necessary to pass the second con-
striction, 0.6 kPa). We thus write the total pressure drop
as the sum of two contributions, Pg = Pc + ∆Pchannel,
where Pc is the static oriﬁce contribution and ∆Pchannel
is due to dynamic dissipation in the channel.

r
o

3
w

 
/

b

V

2
10

1
10

−1

10

α
l

0
10

FIG. 2: The bubble volume Vb, in units of w3
or = 1 nl, de-
pends only on the injected liquid fraction αl: the solid line
is a linear ﬁt to all data except the lowest Ql, log(V /w3
or) =
(−0.95 ± 0.02) log αl + (1.78 ± 0.05). Insert: the bubble for-
mation frequency f in units of fl = Ql/w3
or vs. gas pressure
Pg in units of 2σ/wor showing a plateau for high Pg. The
dotted line is a piecewise linear ﬁt. Symbols correspond to
diﬀerent values for the liquid ﬂow rate Ql: (o) 4, (⋄) 15, ((cid:3))
20, (⊲) 30 and (▽) 40 µl min−1, for bubbly ﬂows (open sym-
bols), alternate foams (ﬁlled symbols), bamboo foams (grey
symbols).

The frequency f of bubble formation, determined by a
liquid mediated pinch-oﬀ time that scales like 1/Ql [4],
also depends on the gas pressure. We can express the
frequency through the non-dimensional Strouhal num-
ber, St = f /fl where 1/fl = τl = w3
or/Ql (insert of Fig.
3). All data collapse on a single curve where St is a
function of gas pressure only. Two regimes appear: St
is ﬁrst proportional to gas pressure above the threshold
St ≃ 0.1(Pg − Pc)/(2σ/wor) then saturates to a con-
stant value St ≃ 0.16. This suggests that the only lim-
iting time at high Pg is τl, the time to pinch oﬀ the
gaseous thread when the liquid ﬂow is blocked by the
bubble at the outlet [4]. At low Pg the limiting time
varies as τf ill ∼ [Ql(Pg − Pc)]−1. Fast framing sequences
conﬁrm that liquid ﬂow is restricted by the gas bubble
only after the ﬁlling of the oriﬁce. This ﬁlling time τf ill
decreases with increasing Ql, consistently with the obser-
vation that ﬂow focusing contracts the available space for
the gas thread; it also decreases with increasing Pg since
the gas pushes the ﬂuid with a velocity increasing with
Pg. Note that the transition from a τf ill to a τl domi-
nated break-up frequency is accompanied by the regime
change from bubbly ﬂow to foam. In the foam state, the
liquid ﬂow restriction seems more eﬃcient (see ﬁgure 1b,
iv and v).

We now turn to the gas pressure drop across the whole

300

250

200

150

100

50

µ

]
n
m

i

/
l

[
 

e

t

a
r
w
o

l
f
 
s
a
g

a
C

−3

10

−4

10

0
10

 /(σ/h)

channel

∆P

1
10

2
10

0

0

1

2

3
gas pressure [kPa]

4

5

6

FIG. 3: Gas ﬂow rate Qg vs. gas pressure Pg showing a cap-
illary threshold and discontinuity at the transition from alter-
nate to bamboo foam (Ql = 20 µl min−1). Insert: adimen-
sional axes using Ca = µQg/Sσ versus ∆Pchannel = Pg − Pc
with superimposed data for diﬀerent liquid ﬂow rates Ql =
(⋄) 4, ((cid:3)) 20, (⊲) 30 and (▽) 40 µl min−1. The solid lines
on both plots are ﬁt on alternate and bamboo foams at Ql =
20 µl min−1 with the power law ∆Pchannel/(σ/h) = β Ca2/3,
with β = 1.7 × 103 (alternate) and β = 2.5 × 103 (bamboo).

The structure transition from an alternate to a bam-
boo foam induces a discontinuous decrease of the gas
ﬂow rate (Fig. 3). This is a signature of the discrete
character of the foam. It can be interpreted by assum-
ing that dissipation mainly occurs in the liquid ﬁlms,
close to the walls [8]. Introducing the capillary number
Ca = µv/σ (of order 10−4 − 10−3) containing the bub-
ble velocity v (estimated as v ≃ Qg/S in the dry foam
state) and liquid viscosity µ, the pressure drop writes
∆Pchannel = λ nLproj
σCa2/3, with n the total number of
bubbles, Lproj the projection on the cross section of the
wetting perimeter per bubble, S the cross section area,
and λ a numerical constant [8]. We ﬁnd by image analy-
sis that the transition to bamboo structure is associated
with an increase in the bubble number n of 15 % (com-

S

pactiﬁcation) together with an increase of the projected
length Lproj of 50 % (this length is measured between
vertices centers, for contacts with the walls parallel to
the image plane, neglecting side walls), consistent with
the observed increase of ∆Pchannel by 50 %. The dissi-
pation in the liquid ﬁlms touching the walls is λ = 22 ± 5.
This value can be compared with the one measured on
a millimetric foam in a channel with a comparable as-
pect ratio: λ = 38 ± 04 [8]. In our case liquid is injected
continuously, possibly explaining the lower value for λ.

The liquid ﬂow, varying by a factor 10, does not in-
ﬂuence much the gas pressure drop in our geometry (see
insert in ﬁg 3). As we see no change in the thickness
of lubricating liquid ﬁlms between gas and walls, which
would change drag forces, we assume that liquid ﬂows
mostly in the corners [12], and is not as obstructed by
bubbles in the channel as with a cylindrical geometry
[13]. The actual liquid content Φl can be estimated by
the bubble volumes. Another method is to measure si-
multaneously the time and space averaged bubble veloc-
ity hugi together with the gas ﬂowrate; the liquid fraction
then follows from Qg = (1 − Φl)hugiS. Both methods
provide a liquid fraction Φl ≃ αl: the liquid fraction is
controlled by the injection parameters. Similarly, the av-
erage liquid velocity can be estimated from Ql = ΦlhuliS,
which yields huli/hugi = αl
. Here we obtain
(1−αl)
huli/hugi ≃ 1: there is no substantial relative drainage
of the liquid within the foam.

(1−Φl)
Φl

x (mm)

1

4

5

t (s)

0.5

a)

b)

FIG. 4: Space-time diagrams of the foam ﬂow in the constric-
tion sample. The vertical axis is the time, ﬂowing downwards;
the horizontal axis is a (small zone of) the axis of the channel,
with the foam ﬂowing from left to right, Ql = 16.7 µl min−1
and P = 4.9 kPa. Dark pixels indicate a bubble edge. (a)
The channel entrance. (b) Just before the exit constriction.

The above ﬂow rate measurements are in fact time-
averaged ﬂows. Due to the periodic creation of bubbles,
the pressure in the entrance oriﬁce probably varies at
frequency f . Each new bubble has to push the foam to
create a place for itself; thus the foam velocity at en-
trance also oscillates at frequency f (Fig. 4a), between
3.1 and 8.3 cm/s. However, this oscillation is damped
over a few mm along the channel (data not shown). Very
little oscillation is observed after the entrance (Fig. 4b).
Friction, probably mainly at the channels walls, thus ho-
mogeneizes the ﬂow at the micrometer scale.

4

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIG. 5: Ultraﬂat foams in the 8 µm high channel: (a) Flow-
(c) 2-rows and
ing, wet and (b) static, dry 3-rows foams.
(d) 1-row ﬂowing dry boomerang foams, ﬂowing from left to
right.

The ultra-ﬂat channel represents a 30-fold decrease in
height, to 8 µm, and a 18-fold decrease in aspect ratio
for the channel section, to 0.02. We can continuously
produce various foams in such a channel (Fig. 5), in-
cluding one with 3 bubble rows (Fig. 5a). We can dry
it, using the following batch method. We shut the liquid
inlet and pull the syringe at the gas inlet. As long as
the underpressure is smaller than the Laplace threshold
(here 11 kPa), the bubbles are blocked by the oriﬁce and
only liquid ﬂows out of the foam. This forced drainage
yields hexagons with a standard deviation in the edge
length of only 1.8 % (Fig. 5b). Since the apparent wall
thickness on images (10 µm) is comparable to the height,
the bubble walls are probably very curved, and with no
ﬂat ﬁlm between bubbles, contrary to the previous set-up.
Thus the actual liquid fraction Φl of the central bubble
row is probably smaller than, but close to, the appar-
≃ 10−1.
ent one (fraction of black pixels) Φ ≈ Φimage
This contrasts with usual foams with larger aspect ratio,
where the same picture of hexagons with straight walls
and small vertices would correspond to much lower ﬂuid
fractions, Φl ≃ 10−2 < Φimage

[7].

l

l

Foams ﬂowing in this ultraﬂat channel undergo an un-
usual boomerang-like distortion (Fig. 5c,d). We expect
a larger friction at the center, where bubble walls along
the top and bottom plates are thin, than on the channel
sides, where water accumulates. These edges are likely
more entrained by the liquid ﬂow than the centers, as-
suming that for small aspect ratios corner sections are
less expandable, providing huli/hugi > 1. Now within the
reference frame moving at the liquid velocity, the bubbles
move in the opposite direction, from right to left. The
distortion of bubble shapes is then similar to the obser-
vations of millimetric bubbles pushed without any liquid
ﬂow [5].

We would like to thank W. Drenckhan for stimulating
discussions, and T. Podgorski for his help on microchan-
nel production.

5

[1] D. Link, S. Anna, D. Weitz, and H. A. Stone, Phys. Rev.

University Press, 1999).

Lett. 92, 054503 (2004).

[2] T. Cubaud and C.-M. Ho, Phys. Fluids 16, 4575 (2004).
[3] P. Garstecki, I. Gitlin, W. DiLuzio, and G. Whitesides,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2649 (2004).

[8] I. Cantat, N. Kern, and R. Delannay, Europhys. Lett.

65, 726 (2004).

[9] Y.-H. Dou, N. Bao, J.-J. Xu, and H.-Y. Chen, Elec-

trophoresis 23, 35583566 (2002).

[4] P. Garstecki, H. Stone, and G. Whitesides, Phys. Rev.

[10] A. Ganan-Calvo and J. Gordilloa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,

Lett. 94, 164501 (2005).

[5] W. Drenckhan, S. Cox, G. Delaney, D. W. H. Holste,
and N. Kern, Colloids and surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng.
Aspects 263, 52 (2005).

[6] P. Garstecki, M. J. Fuerstman, and G. M. Whitesides,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 234502 (2005).

[7] D. Weaire and S. Hutzler, The physics of foams (Oxford

[11] A. Ganan-Calvo, Phys. Rev. E 69, 027301 (2004).
[12] H. Wong, C. J. Radke, and S. Morris, J. Fluid. Mech.

274501 (2001).

292, 71 (1995).

[13] F. P. Bretherton, J. Fluid. Mech. 10, 166 (1961).

