A model of laminated weak turbulence

Elena Kartashova∗
RISC, J.Kepler University, Linz, Austria
e-mail: lena@risc.uni-linz.ac.at

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

A model of laminated weak turbulence (WT) is presented. This model contains two co-
existing layers - one with continuous spectra, covered by KAM tori and Kolmogorov-like
spectra, and one with discrete spectra, covered by discrete classes of waves and Clipping
method. Some known laboratory experiments and numerical simulations are explained in
the frame of this model. A few problems which might appear in numerical simulations of
WT due to their principal discreteness are pointed out.

1 WT in inﬁnite domains

In [12] Kolmogorov presented energy spectrum of turbulence describing the distribution of
the energy among turbulence vortices as function of vortex size and thus founded the ﬁeld
of mathematical analysis of turbulence. Kolmogorov regarded some inertial range of wave
numbers, between viscosity and dissipation, and suggested that at this range, turbulence
is (1) locally homogeneous (no dependence on position) and (2) locally isotropic (no de-
pendence on direction) which can be summarized as follows: probability distribution for
the relative velocities of two particles in the ﬂuid only depends on the distance between
particles. Using these suggestions and dimensional analysis, Kolmogorov deduced that
energy distribution, called now Kolmogorov´s spectrum, is proportional to k−5/3 for wave
numbers k.

−

Results of numerical simulations and real experiments carried out to prove this theory
are somewhat contradictious. On the one hand, probably the most spectacular example
of the validity of Kolmogorov´s spectra is provided in [3] where measurements in tidal
currents near Seymour Narrows north of Campbell River on Vancouver Island were de-
5/3 spectra appeared at the range of almost 105 (energy dissipation at
scribed and
a scale of a millimeter and energy input - at 100 meters). On the other hand, Kol-
mogorov´s spectra have been obtained under the assumptions opposite to Kolmogorov´s
5/3 corresponds to both direct and inverse cascades. Some well-
[4] so that exponent
known physical phenomena are not allowed by Kolmogorov´s theory, for instance, Faraday
instability or zonal ﬂows (ﬂows in latitudinal direction) in atmosphere and ocean, orga-
nized structures spanning over many scales. Example of power spectrum is given in [18]
5/3. This diﬀerence in exponents is principal for the
with exponent γ =
5/3 was obtained as the only solution
whole Kolmogorov´s theory because the exponent
for energy spectrum of a form kγ. A very interesting phenomena was discovered in di-
rect numerical simulation with dynamical equation in [17] - so-called ”frozen turbulence”

19/4, not

−

−

−

−

∗Author acknowledges support of the Austrian Science Foundation (FWF) under projects SFB F013/F1304.

1

concentrated at region of low wave numbers and decreasing fast for large wave numbers.
Kolmogorov-like power spectra are observable in the region of large wave numbers but for
low enough level of nonlinearity frozen turbulence is dominant and it provides no energy
ﬂux to big wave numbers. This phenomenon is regarded as a manifestation of discreteness
of wave spectra due to periodicity of boundary conditions. Obviously, Kolmogorov´s ap-
proach does not include discrete turbulent systems and they should be studied separately.

With a hope to diminish established unclearness of Kolmogorov´s theory in a more
simple setting of weak turbulence, KAM theory has been developed ([14],[1],[16]) for
small smooth perturbations and suﬃciently irrational dispersion function ø. KAM theory
establishes that these systems contain an inﬁnite set of invariant tori which carry quasi-
periodic motions which in phase space are conﬁned to the tori. These results are based
on the Thue theorem, giving low estimate for the distance between any algebraic number
α of degree n > 2 and a rational number p/q

∈
c(α)
qε+1+n/2 ,
where c(α) is a constant depending on α and ε can be arbitrary small. KAM theorem
states then that almost all tori (excluding those with rational frequency vectors) are
preserved. Since the union of invariant tori has positive Liouville measure and Q has
measure 0, rational dispersions are excluded from KAM theory, as well as, for instance,
dispersions of the form ø = qk2
y and others, corresponding to algebraic numbers of
degree 2. Summing up, main result of KAM theory is: spectral space is decomposed into
disjoint invariant sets, and though it contradicts ergodicity but not very substantially as
the size of the system tends to inﬁnity [2].

x + k2

ε > 0

p
q |

α
|

Q:

−

>

∀

2 WT in bounded domains

For the ﬁrst time theory of WT in the systems with discrete spectra was presented in [10]
while in [11] necessary theorems had been proved. It turned out that discrete systems
possess some qualitatively new properties: (a) all interacting waves with wave vectors ki
satisfying condition

ø(~ki) = 0

X
i

±

are divided into disjoint classes, (b) major part of the waves do not interact, (c) in-
teractions are local, (d) number of interacting waves depends on the form of boundary
conditions and for the great number of boundary conditions interactions are not possible.
Classes can be constructed as a one-parametric set with a parameter q, called class index,
derived as a function of dispersion ø. Notice that (a) is necessary condition: if vectors ki
satisfy Eq.(1), then they belong to one class; this condition gives no information about the
existence of a solution itself. Thus, though each class contains inﬁnite number of waves
but only a small number of them do interact. For instance, for three wave interactions
of planetary waves on a sphere it was established [6] that about 80% of all interacting
wave are parts of only one triad and less then 2% of waves take part in 4 triads or more,
i.e. chains of the coupled triads soon break. It means that within each class there exist
only a few small groups of interacting waves, mostly separate triads, and periodic energy
exchange between them is demonstrated theoretically and also can be observed in numeric
simulations ([10]). All properties (a)-(d) keep true for approximate interactions, i.e. when

(1)

(2)

ø(~ki) = ε

X
i

±

2

with small enough discrepancy 0 < ε << 1 and it gave rise to Clipping method ([9]) which
allows ”to clip out” all non-interacting waves from the whole spectra and study only those
which do interact, exactly or approximately. Notice that approximate resonances are un-
derstood on discrete lattice, i.e. wave vectors of approximately interacting waves are also
integers.
In the frame of this approach it would be very interesting to study Faraday
instability regarding capillary waves with dispersion corresponding to a circle interaction
domain and zero boundary conditions.

Though Kolmogorov´s approach does not apply for discrete systems, some of these
results are in a sense similar to those of KAM theory, for instance, theorem on the partition
[7] can be regarded as an analog of KAM theorem for discrete systems.

3 Transition from bounded to inﬁnite domain

Two limits of WT has been brieﬂy presented above - inﬁnite domain (Kolmogorov´s spec-
tra and kinetic equations) and bounded domain (Clipping method and dynamic equa-
tions). In order to connect these two limits we need ﬁrst to construct a transition from
a discrete system to a system with continuous spectrum in the frame of corresponding
dynamic equation. Such a transition is often regarded in somewhat over-simpliﬁed way:
if say, real-valued wave vectors ~k = (kx, ky) have dispersion ø(kx, ky) with kx, ky ∈
R, then
the same function of integer variables, ø(m, n) with m, n
Z, describes corresponding
discrete waves. In general, it is not true. We demonstrate it taking barotropic vorticity
equation (BVE), also known as Obukhov-Charney-Hasegawa-Mima equation, as our main
example motivated by its wide applicability for describing a great number of physically
important phenomena in astrophysics, geophysics and plasma physics.

∈

BVE for planetary waves has dispersion øsphere =
x +k2

2m/[n(n+1)] on a unit sphere, dis-
persion øplane = kx/(1+k2
y) on an inﬁnite plane and dispersion øsquare = 1/√m2 + n2
in a square domain (constant multipliers are omitted because they disappear due to ho-
mogeneous form of Eq.(1). It is easy to see that no wave vectors ~k = (m, n) : m, n
Z
satisfy Eq.(1) with ωsphere and with ωplane simultaneously or correspondingly with øsquare
and ωplane. It means that discrete waves do not have images on inﬁnite plane when such
a ”naive” transition is regarded.

−

∈

More intrinsic construction of the transition from spherical to plane planetary waves

[6] can be derived in following way. A linear spherical wave in this case has form

ψsphere = AP m

n (sin φ) exp i[mλ +

2m
n(n + 1)

t],

where P m
plane wave is

n (x) is the associated Legendre function of degree n and order m; and a linear

ψplane = A exp i(kxx + kyy + ω).

Regarding m
can ”convert” (not always but in a bounded latitudinal belt with the width
spherical wave into a linear combination of two plane waves

n >> 1 and using asymptotic approximation for Legendre functions, one
n−1) one

∼

∼

A exp i(k(ϕ0)xx
where local wave numbers k(ϕ0)x, k(ϕ0)y ∈
number m, n and of the so-called interaction latitude ϕ0:
n2
2 + n2
2) + m2
3 −
1 + n4
(n4
1n2
n2

1) + m2
n2
1n2
2 + n2

2(n2
3 + n2

k(ϕ0)yy + ω),

cos2 ϕ0 =

1(n2

3 −

m2

1 + n2
2n2
3 −

3(n2
2 + n4

1 + n2
3)/4

2 −

n2
3))

.

±
R are functions of the initial spherical wave

3

If interaction latitude exists, 0 < cos2 ϕ0 < 1, plane images of spherical waves interact
as in classical β-plane approximation. In particularly, this means (1) transition from a
spherical domain to an inﬁnite plane is transition to a one-parametric family of inﬁnite
planes, and (2) such a transition is not always possible. Very interesting fact is that plane
wave system keeps memory about spherical interactions: coupling coeﬃcient of the plane
n7/6 otherwise. The same reasoning
n3/2 and
images with interaction latitude is
allows to construct transition from a square domain to β-plane where diﬀerence in mag-
n2 for plane images of the
nitudes of coupling coeﬃcients is even more substantial:
n otherwise [8]. These results hold for discrete approx-
waves from square domain and
imate interactions in following way:
long-wave part of spectrum is dominated by a few
resonantly interacting waves with huge amplitudes while short-wave part of the spectrum
consists of many approximately interacting waves with substantially smaller amplitudes.

∼

∼

∼

∼

Construction of such a transition is a non-trivial task which should be carried out
separately for each equation and each form of interaction domain. This hard work may
be well awarded by discovering some eﬀects leading to possible explanations of known
physical phenomena, for instance, zonally extended vortices in case of spherical planetary
waves.

4 Laminated WT

We summarize now results of the previous sections. Continuous WT (CWT) describes
energetic behavior of a wave system for the whole spectrum excluding nodes of rational
lattice thus leaving some gaps in the spectrum which are supposed to be not important
in short-wave part. Discrete WT (DWT) ﬁlls these gaps all over the spectrum. In fact
we have two layers of turbulence - CWT (layer I) and DWT (layer II), which are mu-
tually complementary and should be regarded simultaneously, i.e. turbulence is laminated.

Layer I provides KAM tori and stochastic enough turbulence in short-waves range
with Kolmogorov´s spectra in the inertial interval; direct and/or inverse energy cascades
are possible; wave-numbers range of energy pumping inﬂuences the results.

Layer II provides a countable number of waves with big amplitudes all over the wave
spectrum; some of the waves do not change their energies (non-interacting waves) and
others do exchange energy within small independent groups as it was demonstrated at
Fig.3 and Fig.1 correspondingly in [10]; there is no energy cascade at this layer; results
do not depend on the wave-numbers range of energy pumping.

Very clear example of the co-existence of these two layers is given in [17] where turbu-
lence of capillary waves was studied in the frame of simpliﬁed dynamical equations for the
potential ﬂow of an ideal incompressible ﬂuid. A stationary regime of so-called ”frozen
turbulence” had been discovered: in small wave-numbers region wave spectrum consists of
”several dozens of excited low-number harmonics” which construct ”ring structures in the
spectrum of surface elevation”. It was also detected that ”the observed picture of station-
ary spectra was invariant with respect to the damping and pumping parameters change in
an acceptable range”. Obviously, these ring structures are due to non-interacting waves of
layer II and they were also observed in laboratory experiments and identiﬁed as such [5].
In the big wave-numbers region, interacting waves of layer I play major role. As it was
noticed in [17], ”in all our computations the Kolmogorov´s spectrum coexists with the
spectrum of another, ”frozen” type, concentrated in the region of low wave-numbers and

4

fastly decreasing to large wave-numbers. If the level of nonlinearity is low enough, such
”frozen” regimes are dominant.” We conclude that laminated WT was observed both
in laboratory experiments and in numerical simulations with capillary waves. Weaker
spectrum k−19/4 < k−5/3 might possibly be attributed due to the fact that countable
number of waves with substantial energy are excluded from consideration. Notice that
3/2
as there exists no exact three-wave interactions among capillary waves with ø =
|
[11], we observe in regime of frozen turbulence only discrete waves with constant ampli-
tudes. Similar experiments/simulations with, say, four-waves interactions among gravity
1/2, will demonstrate that frozen turbulence partly ”thaws out” because also
waves, ø =
|
changes in the amplitudes of resonantly interacting discrete waves should be observed (cf.
”bursty” spectrum in [15])

~k
|

~k
|

At the end of this letter we would like to make a couple of remarks. (1) All computer
simulations can principally be carried out only with ﬁnite numbers which means that any
computational lattice can be transformed to integer lattice by re-scaling and therefore
might automatically generate some artiﬁcial changes of layer II. We demonstrate it by
a simple example: plane planetary wave with wave-numbers (2, 4) interacts in a square
domain but not in a domain with sides´ ratio 1/4. It means that if for numerical simula-
tions such a rectangular lattice is used, some of exact resonances will be lost. (2) Another
complicated question is how to demonstrate the very existence of KAM tori in the results
of numerical simulations carried out on a rational lattice.

Author is grateful to V.E. Zakharov for his permanent interest to this work and for

encouraging author to work on the subject.

References

[1] V.I. Arnold. ”Proof of a theorem by A.N. Kolmogorov on the invariance of quasi-
periodic motions under small perturbations of the Hamiltonian.” Russian Math. Sur-
veys, 18, pp.9-36 (1963)

[2] V.I. Arnold. ”Instability of dynamical systems with many degrees of freedom.” Soviet

Mathematics, 5(3), pp.581-585 (1964)

[3] H.L. Grant, R.W. Stuart, A. Moilliet. ”Turbulence spectra from tidal channel.” J.

Fluid. Mach., 12, pp.241-263 (1961)

[4] A. Chorin. Vorticity and Turbulence, Springer (1994)

[5] These experiments have been carried out by J.Hammack and his colloborators, and
we discussed them during my visit to PennState University in 1995. I do not know
where these results are published.

[6] E.A. Kartashova, L.I. Pieterbarg, G.M. Reznik. ”Weakly nonlinear interactions be-
tween Rossby waves on a sphere.” J. Oceanology, 29, pp.405-411 (1990). Published
by American Geophysical Union

[7] E.A. Kartashova. ”Partitioning of ensembles of weakly interacting dispersing waves

in resonators into disjoint classes.” Physica D, Vol.46, pp.43-56 (1990)

[8] E.A. Kartashova, G.M. Reznik. ”Interactions between Rossby waves in bounded re-
gions.” J. Oceanology, 31, pp.385-389 (1992). Published by American Geophysical
Union

[9] E.A. Kartashova. ”Clipping – a new investigation method for PDE-s in compact

domains”, J. Theor. Math. Phys., 99, pp.675-680(1994)

5

[10] E.A. Kartashova. ”Weakly nonlinear theory of ﬁnite-size eﬀects in resonators”. J.

Phys. Rev. Letters, 72, pp.2013-2016 (1994)

[11] E.A. Kartashova. ”Wave resonances

In:
V.E.Zakharov (Ed.) Nonlinear Waves and Weak Turbulence, Series: Advances
in the Mathematical Sciences, AMS, pp.95-129 (1998)

in systems with discrete spectra”.

[12] A.N. Kolmogorov. ”The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous ﬂuids
at very large Reynolds numbers”. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 30, pp.301-305 (1941).
Reprinted in 1991: Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 434, pp.9-13

[13] A.N. Kolmogorov. ”A reﬁning of previous hypotheses concerning the local structure
of turbulence in a viscous incompressible ﬂuid at high Reynolds numbers”. J. Fluid
Mech., 13, pp.82-85 (1962)

[14] A.N. Kolmogorov. ”On the conservation of conditionally periodic motions for a small
change in Hamilton´s function”. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 98, pp. 527-530 (1954).
English translation in: Lecture notes in Physics 93, Springer (1979)

[15] Y.V. Lvov, S. Nazarenko, B. Pokorni. ”Water-wave turbulence: statistics beyond the

spectra.” Eprint arXiv:math-ph/0507054 v3 (2005)

[16] J. Moser. ”On invariant curves of area preserving mappings of an annulus.” Nachr.

Akad. Wiss. G¨ott., Math. Phys. Kl., pp.1-20 (1962)

[17] A.N. Pushkarev, V.E. Zakharov. ”Turbulence of capillary waves - theory and numer-

ical simulations.” Physica D, 135, pp.98-116 (2000)

[18] V.E.Zakharov, N.N. Filonenko.”Weak turbulence of capillary waves.”J. Appl. Mech.

Tech. Phys., 4, pp.500-515 (1967)

6

