Induced radiation processes in single-bubble sonoluminescence

Institute of Microelectronics and Informatics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
21 Universitetskaya, Yaroslavl 150007, Russia∗

Fedor V.Prigara

(Dated: July 24, 2013)

Abstract

According to the recent revision of the theory of thermal radiation, thermal black-body radiation

has an induced origin. We show that in single-bubble sonoluminescence thermal radiation is emitted

by a spherical resonator, coincident with the sonoluminescing bubble itself, instead of the ensemble

of elementary resonators emitting thermal black-body radiation in the case of open gaseous media.

For a given wavelength, the diameter of the resonator is ﬁxed, and this explains the very high

constancy in phase of light ﬂashes from the sonoluminesing bubble, which is better than the

constancy of period of a driving acoustic wave.

PACS numbers: 78.60.Mq, 42.65.Re, 47.40.-x

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Sonoluminescence is the emission of light ﬂashes in continuum from an oscillating micron-

size bubble at a pressure anti-node of a sound wave in a liquid [1-4]. Sonoluminescence has

been discovered as early as in 1930s and remained so far an enigmatic phenomenon. Recent

computation of the spectrum intensities from an optically thin model of emitting gas in a

sonoluminescing bubble [5] have shown the great discrepancies between the calculated values

and experimental results for a single-bubble sonoluminescence.

It was shown, however,

recently [6, 7] that thermal black-body radiation has an induced origin and the emitting gas

is automatically thick with respect to the emission process. Here we show that the account

for stimulated origin of thermal radiation is required to explain the observed properties of

single-bubble sonoluminescence.

The induced origin of thermal radio emission follows from the relations between Einstein’s

coeﬃcients for a spontaneous and induced emission of radiation [6]. The strong argument

in a favor of an induced origin of thermal black-body radiation is that the spectral energy

density in the whole range of spectrum is described by a single Planck’s function. So if

thermal radio emission is stimulated, then thermal radiation in other spectral regions also

should have the induced character.

According to this conception, thermal emission from non-uniform gas is produced by an

ensemble of individual emitters. Each of these emitters is an elementary resonator the size

of which has an order of magnitude of mean free path , l, of photons,

where n is the number density of particles and σ is the absorption cross-section. The emission

of each elementary resonator is coherent, with the wavelength

(1)

(2)

where a is a dimensionless constant, and thermal emission of gaseous layer is incoherent sum

of radiation produced by individual emitters. An elementary resonator emits in the direction

opposite to the direction of the density gradient. The wall of the resonator corresponding to

the lower density is half-transparent due to the decrease of absorption with the decreasing

gas density.

In the case of single-bubble sonoluminescence, an elementary emitter of thermal black-

l = 1/ (nσ) ,

λ = al,

2

body radiation is a spherical resonator, coincident with the sonoluminescing bubble itself,

instead of the ensemble of elementary resonators characteristic for open non-uniform gaseous

media. For a spherical electromagnetic wave in the resonator, the electric ﬁeld strength in

the wave is given by the formula

(3)

(4)

E = Asin (kr) /r,

where A is a constant, k = 2πnr/λ is the wave number, λ is the wavelength in vacuum,

nr is the refraction index, and r is the radial coordinate. At the surface of the spherical

resonator, we have a node, so

where R is the radius of the bubble.

R = λ/ (2nr) ,

It is clear from the last equation that, for a given wavelength λ, the radius of the bubble

at which the radiation with the wavelength λ is emitted is ﬁxed. This explains the very high

constancy in phase of sonoluminescence ﬂashes with respect to the period of driving sound

wave, exceeding the constancy of period of the acoustic wave itself [2-4].

The measured emission duration [8] seems to correspond to narrow spectral bands and

is determined in fact by the bandwidth. The full duration of the sonoluminescence ﬂash in

continuum is given by the formula

τ = ∆λ/ (2nrv) ,

(5)

where ∆λ = λmax − λmin is the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum values of

the wavelength respectively, and v is the velocity of the implosion shock wave at the time

of light emission.

The initial velocity of the bubble imploding is equal to the velocity of sound in the liquid.

During the implosion process, the velocity of the implosion shock wave increases [2]. The

kinetic energy of particles in the shock wave is

ε = mv2/2,

(6)

where m is the mass of a molecule, and can achieve the value of about 1eV at the time of

light emission. This kinetic energy converts into the thermal energy of a gas in the bubble

3

by generation of plasma waves at suﬃcient small radii of the bubble when the density and

ionization degree of the gas in the bubble are suﬃciently large.

The addition of small amounts of noble gases, such as helium, argon, or xenon, to the

gas in the sonoluminescing bubble increases the intensity of the emitted light dramatically

[9]. This eﬀect seems to be analogous to the argon catalysis of the excessive Balmer line

broadening in gas discharges [10]. Since the emission is produced by a single resonator, it

can be ampliﬁed by a laser mechanism. The argon doping seems to play an important role

in the creation of the inversion of the energy level population which is required for such an

ampliﬁcation.

—————————————————————

[1] J.Maddox, Nature 361, 397 (1993).

[2] B.P.Barber and S.J.Putterman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3839 (1992).

[3] R.Hiller, S.J.Putterman, and B.P.Barber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1182 (1992).

[4] B.P.Barber, S.J.Putterman, Nature 352, 318 (1992).

[5] L.Yuan, Phys. Rev. E 72, 046309 (2005).

[6] F.V.Prigara, E-print archives, astro-ph/0110483.

[7] F.V.Prigara, E-print archives, quant-ph/0501103.

[8] M.J.Moran, R.E.Haigh, M.E.Lowry et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. B 96, 651 (1995).

[9] R.Hiller, K.Weninger, S.J.Putterman, B.P.Barber, Science 266, 248 (1994).

[10] M.Kuraica and N.Konjevic, Phys. Rev. A 46, 4429 (1992).

∗ Electronic address: fprigara@imras.yar.ru

4

