6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Giant bubble pinch–oﬀ

Raymond Bergmann1, Devaraj van der Meer1, Mark Stijnman1,
Marijn Sandtke1, Andrea Prosperetti1,2, and Detlef Lohse1
1 Physics of Fluids Group and J.M. Burgers Centre for Fluid Dynamics,
University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Johns-Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA

Self-similarity has been the paradigmatic picture for the pinch-oﬀ of a drop. Here we will show
through high-speed imaging and boundary integral simulations that the inverse problem, the pinch-
oﬀ of an air bubble in water, is not self-similar in a strict sense: A disk is quickly pulled through
a water surface, leading to a giant, cylindrical void which after collapse creates an upward and
a downward jet. Only in the limiting case of large Froude number the neck radius h scales as
h(− log h)1/4 ∝ τ 1/2, the purely inertial scaling. For any ﬁnite Froude number the collapse is slower,
and a second length-scale, the curvature of the void, comes into play. Both length-scales are found
to exhibit power-law scaling in time, but with diﬀerent exponents depending on the Froude number,
signaling the non-universality of the bubble pinch-oﬀ.

PACS numbers: 47.55.df, 47.55.db,47.20.Ma

The pinch–oﬀ of a liquid drop is a prime example of
a hydrodynamic singularity and has been studied exten-
sively in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. It has become
paradigmatic for self–similar behavior in ﬂuid dynamics:
After appropriate rescaling, the shapes of the pinching
neck at diﬀerent times can be superimposed onto a single
shape [4, 5, 6, 7]. With the exception of some pioneering
work [8, 9], the inverse problem of the collapse of a gas–
ﬁlled neck surrounded by a liquid has not attracted much
attention until very recently, with the analysis of the
pinch–oﬀ of a bubble rising from a needle and the break–
up of a gas bubble in a straining ﬂow [10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
The time–evolution of these collapsing gas–ﬁlled necks is
found to follow a power law. If the dynamics near the
singularity are solely governed by liquid inertia, then the
radius of the neck h expressed in the time τ remaining
τ 1/2 [8, 9, 10, 11], or, with a
until collapse scales as h
τ 1/2 [14]. De-
logarithmic correction, as h(
viations from this exponent of 1/2 are reported to occur
only due to the inclusion of other eﬀects. The collapse
may be slowed down by viscosity (h
τ [10, 11, 12]) or
∝
τ 2/3 [13]), or accelerated by the iner-
surface tension (h
τ 1/3
tia of the gas ﬂowing inside the neck, leading to h
[14].

log h)1/4

∝

∝

−

∝

∝

In this paper we focus on another example of this “in-
verse pinch-oﬀ”, namely the violent collapse of the void
created at a ﬂuid surface by the impact of an object.
Here we ﬁnd exponents which deviate substantially from
1/2, even though the dynamics are shown to be purely
governed by liquid inertia, without signiﬁcant contribu-
tions from the eﬀects mentioned above. The self-similar
τ 1/2 appears to hold only in the
behavior h(
∝
asymptotic regime of very high impact velocities.

log h)1/4

−

In our experiment, a linear motor is used to drag metal
disks with radii hdisk between 10 and 40 mm through an
air/water interface with a well-controlled, constant veloc-
ity V between 0.5 and 3 m/s (see Fig. 1a). A rod running
through a seal in the bottom of a large water tank con-

nects the disk with the linear motor. This arrangement
generates giant voids in a very controlled fashion. The
advantage of this setup is that the velocity is a control
parameter and not the response of the object to the ﬂuid
forces upon impact. Secondly, due to the large scale of
the experiment, viscosity and surface tension play a neg-
ligible role [24]. Therefore the only important dimension-
less parameter is the Froude number Fr = V 2/(hdiskg),
the ratio of kinetic to gravitational energy, which ranges
from 0.6 to 90. The large scale of the experiment is also
advantageous for the observation of details during the
impact and collapse process, which is imaged with dig-
ital high-speed cameras with frame rates up to 100, 000
frames per second.

A typical series of events is seen in Fig. 1a-d. The im-
pact of the disk creates an axisymmetric void which ﬁrst
expands until the hydrostatic pressure drives the walls
inward. The inward moving walls collide and cause a
pinch-oﬀ at some depth below the undisturbed free sur-
face. The energy focusing of this violent collapse cre-
ates a strong pressure spike on the axis of symmetry
which releases itself in a downward and an upward jet
[15, 16]. The latter reaches heights exceeding 1.5 m for
the higher impact speeds in this experiment. It is this
dominating role of inertia that makes our system diﬀer-
ent from other pinch-oﬀ processes in the literature. At
higher recording speeds the pinch-oﬀ can be investigated
in more detail as in Fig. 1e-h. There is a clear loss of both
azimuthal and axial symmetry in Figs. 1f and 1g, which
can be attributed to a combination of the same conver-
gence eﬀect that causes an instability in a collapsing bub-
ble [17, 18, 19], and a Kelvin-Helmholtz instability due
to the rapid air ﬂow in the neck. The latter increases
with increasing Froude number and limits the range of
our experiments. Another factor which limits the Froude
number range is the so-called surface seal, in which the
void closes at the water surface as the crown-like splash
is entrained by the air ﬂowing into the expanding void

2

FIG. 1: Snapshots of the formation and collapse of a surface void for the plunger experiment: A linear motor pulls down a
disk of radius hdisk = 30 mm through the water surface at a constant velocity V = 1.0 m/s (Fr = 3.4). (a-d) The collapse of
the void imaged at a 1000 frames per second. The white lines (overlay) are the void proﬁles obtained from boundary integral
simulations with the same initial condition, and without the use of any free parameter. (e-f) Details of the collapse imaged at
12800 frames per second. (g-h) Details of the collapse imaged at 48000 frames per second. Note that the ﬁeld of view decreases
with increasing frame rate. In the very last stages of the collapse (f-g) there is a Kevin-Helmholtz instability that complicates
the determination of the time of collapse. Immediately after the collapse air is entrapped, both in the form of a large bubble
above disk (d) and as a cloud of microbubbles at the collapse point (h).

[20, 21]. This process, which occurs at large Froude num-
bers, changes the pinch-oﬀ considerably since in this case
the gas pressure inside the void diﬀers appreciably from
that of the ambient air.

In view of these experimental

limitations, we per-
formed numerical simulations using a boundary integral
method based on potential theory without ambient gas.
There is an excellent agreement between the numerical
calculations and the experiments, as seen in Fig. 1a-c.
Here, the numerical void proﬁles (the solid white lines)
coincide very well with the experimental proﬁles in the
pinch-oﬀ region without the use of any adjustable param-
eter, either in space or in time.

To further quantify the pinch-oﬀ process, we now turn
to the time evolution of the neck radius h(τ ), measured
at the depth at which the void eventually closes. Because
both length and time scales become very small close to
collapse, it is not feasible to experimentally observe the
collapse with only one high-speed camera recording [25].
Due to the reproducibility of the experiment, we over-
came this diﬃculty by matching several data sets im-
aged at diﬀerent frame rates, increasingly magnifying the
region around the pinch-oﬀ. Figure 2a contains a dou-
bly logarithmic plot of h(τ ) (compensated with τ 1/2) for
both the high-speed imaged experiments and the numer-

ical calculations, again showing excellent agreement for
diﬀerent Froude numbers. In this graph, a straight line
corresponds to the power law behavior h = h0τ αh . The
exponent αh is plotted as a function of Fr in Fig. 2c.
Clearly, there are large deviations from the suggested
behavior αh = 1/2. Can these be explained by a log-
arithmic correction as proposed in [14]?

Let us ﬁrst establish the origin of this logarithmic cor-
rection in our system. Near the neck, the ﬂow induced
by the collapsing void looks very much like that of a col-
lapsing cylinder, while it must look like that of a sink,
plus its image in the free surface (i.e., a dipole) in the
far region. In the language of singular perturbations, the
former would be the inner region and the latter the outer
region; a complete descriptions would require the match-
ing of these two regions. If we disregard the outer region,
we can use a two-dimensional version of the Rayleigh-
equation, which describes the collapse of an inﬁnite cylin-
drical cavity under uniform pressure [9, 16, 22]

d(h ˙h)

"

dτ #

log

h
h∞

1
2

+

˙h2 = gZ .

(1)

The pressure diﬀerence driving the collapse has been
equated to ρgZ, where Z denotes the depth below the
ﬂuid surface, which implies that the system is composed

3

FIG. 2: (a) The radius of the void at the depth of closure h, compensated with τ 1/2, as a function of the time τ remaining
until collapse in a doubly logarithmic plot, for three diﬀerent values of the Froude number Fr. Experiment (blue symbols) and
numerical simulations (red symbols) are seen to agree very well for Fr = 3.4 and 10.1. For Fr = 163 only numerical data are
presented, because for this Froude number experiments are hindered by the surface seal (see text). The error bars, indicating
the error in the experimental data, are usually small, but occasionally become very large for frames very close to the collapse
time. (b) Doubly logarithmic plot of the radius of curvature of the void proﬁle R compensated with τ 1/2 as a function of τ for
the numerical simulations of (a). Both h and R are well described by power laws for up to four orders of magnitude in τ . (c)
Power-law exponents αh for the radius of the void at closure depth h(τ ), αy for the radius of the void including the logarithmic
correction y(τ ) = h(− log h)1/4, and αR for the radius of curvature of the void at closure depth R, all as a function of the
Froude number.

of non-interacting horizontal layers of ﬂuid, with a neg-
ligible vertical velocity component [26]. Although the
quantity h∞ must in principle be determined by the
matching process alluded to before, it is expected to be
of the order of a typical length scale of the process, such
as the cavity depth. Thus, strictly speaking, h∞ is a
function of time and of the Froude number. However,
near pinch-oﬀ, the time scale for the neck motion is much
faster than that for the evolution of the other parts of the
cavity so that h∞ may be considered only a function of
Fr. After an initial expansion of the void, the collapse
starts from rest at a maximal radius hmax (of the order
of hdisk). Using this as an initial condition, and treating
h∞ as a constant, the energy integral of Eq. (1) can be
readily found:

2

d˜h
d˜τ !

 

=

1
log(˜h/˜h∞)

(1/˜h)2

,

(2)

1

−

h

i

≡

where we have introduced the non-dimensional variables
˜h
h/hmax, ˜h∞
max.
≡
˜h−2.
Close to pinch-oﬀ, ˜h2
With this approximation, we can integrate Eq. (2) once
more to arrive at

τ
1, such that ˜h−2

h∞/hmax, and ˜τ

gZ/h2
1

p
−

≪

≈

≡

π
2

2 ˜τ = ˜h2

log(˜h∞/˜h) +

˜h2
∞ erfc

2 log(˜h∞/˜h)

.

r

q

(cid:19)
(3)
For small ˜h the term with the complementary error func-
tion is always small compared to the ﬁrst one and their
ratio vanishes for ˜h
0. Neglecting this term we ﬁnd two

(cid:18)q

↓

asymptotic regimes

1/4

1/4

˜h

˜h

log(˜h∞)
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
log(˜h)
(cid:17)

−

(cid:16)

= √2 ˜τ 1/2

for ˜h

1/˜h∞ , and(4)

= √2 ˜τ 1/2

for ˜h

1/˜h∞ .

(5)

≫

≪

From Eqs. (4) and (5) we conclude that the scaling de-
pends crucially on the value of h∞: Initially, for the in-
h2
max/h∞, we expect to ﬁnd a
termediate regime h
≫
τ 1/2, since log(˜h∞) is constant. For
strict power law h
∝
h2
max/h∞, loga-
times closer to the pinch-oﬀ, when h
rithmic corrections play a role, and the power law should
be modiﬁed into Eq. (5).

≪

≪

As h∞

hmax in our experiments, the latter inequal-
≈
ity can be read as h
hmax, which is satisﬁed in most of
the region where h(τ ) asymptotically behaves as a power
law (cf. Fig. 2a). We conclude that in our system the
logarithmic correction cannot be neglected.
If we plot
log h)1/4 vs. time, we again ob-
the quantity y = h(
τ αy , but with a slightly diﬀerent
serve a power law y
exponent αy than the one found for h. In Fig. 2c we com-
pare αh and αy as functions of the Froude number. As
discussed before, αh is substantially larger than 1/2, but
even if the logarithmic term is included we continue to
ﬁnd a slower collapse for low Froude numbers. Although
the logarithmic correction does bring the result closer to
the suggested value 1/2, it cannot account for all of the
observed deviations.

−
∝

Clearly, the observed anomalous power law behavior of
the neck radius must reﬂect itself in the time-evolution of
the free-surface proﬁles of the collapsing void. If the pro-
cess were self-similar, the free-surface proﬁles at diﬀerent
times τ would superpose when scaled by any character-
istic length, e.g., the neck radius h. Actually, it is found

4

that the depth of minimum radius increases somewhat
as the collapse progresses and it is therefore necessary
to translate the proﬁles in the vertical direction so as to
match the position of the minimum radius point before
attempting this operation. Even if this is done, how-
ever, the results fail to collapse onto a single shape. The
rescaled proﬁles become more and more elongated as the
pinch-oﬀ is approached which proves that the collapsing
void is not self-similar in a strict sense.

The free-surface shapes near the minimum point
should thus not only be characterized by h(τ ), but also by
a second length-scale, the radius of curvature R(τ ) in the
vertical plane (see Fig. 1e). The spatial resolution of the
high-speed camera images limits the accuracy with which
R can be extracted from the experimental observations,
but this quantity is easily determined from the numerical
calculations (see Fig. 2b). When the radial dimensions
(H, cf. Fig. 1e) are scaled by h and vertical ones (Z)
by √hR, the proﬁles do collapse, which may only sig-
nal that their shape is very close to parabolic [27]. The
time-evolution of this radius of curvature is also found
to follow a power law, R = R0τ αR , the exponent αR of
which increases with the Froude number as can be seen
in Fig. 2c [28].

The essence of the time-evolution of the void proﬁle
and the departure from self-similarity in the strict sense
is captured in the aspect ratio h/R of the collapsing void,
h(τ )/R(τ ) = (h0/R0) τ (αh−αR), in which the prefactor
h0/R0 and the exponent (αh −
αR) both are found to
It is seen in Fig. 2c
depend on the Froude number.
αR > 0 for any ﬁnite Froude number, caus-
that αh −
0.
ing the ratio h(τ )/R(τ ) to vanish in the limit τ
This means that in this limit R(τ ) becomes large with re-
spect to the neck radius, elongating the proﬁles more and
more towards the cylindrical shape close to the pinch-oﬀ,
thereby justifying the assumptions made in the deriva-
tion of Eq. (1) in the limit τ
0. A numerical ﬁt gives
−0.14, which indicates that h and R have
Fr
(αh −
the same time dependence as F r
and, therefore,
that self-similarity is recovered in this limit.

→ ∞

αR)

A second numerical ﬁt shows that h0/R0 ∝

−0.60,
which tends to zero as Fr
. This feature expresses
the experimental observation that the initial elongation
of the neck is larger for large Froude number, which eﬀec-
tively increases the time-interval for which the assump-
tion of pure radial ﬂow is valid [cf. Eq. (1)].

→ ∞

→

→

Fr

∝

In conclusion, our experiments on the collapse of a gi-
ant surface void are in excellent agreement with bound-
ary integral calculations without the use of any ad-
justable parameter. Even when we exclude the eﬀects of
air, viscosity, and surface tension, the collapse is found
to be not self-similar in a strict sense, but governed by
power laws with non-universal, Froude-dependent expo-
nents. Self-similarity is recovered only in the limit of
inﬁnite Froude number, where the inﬂuence of gravity
becomes negligible and the collapse is truly inertially
driven.

This work is part of the research program of the Sticht-

ing FOM, which is ﬁnancially supported by NWO.

[1] A. L. Bertozzi, M. P. Brenner, T. F. Dupont, and L. P.
Kadanoﬀ, in Trends and Perspectives in Applied Mathe-
matics, edited by L. Sirovich (Springer, New York, 1993),
Vol. 100, p. 155.

[2] H. A. Stone, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 26, 65 (1994).
[3] M. P. Brenner, X. D. Shi, and S. R. Nagel, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 73, 3391 (1994).

[4] J. Eggers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 865 (1997).
[5] R. F. Day, E. J. Hinch, and J. R. Lister, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[6] W. W. Zhang and J. R. Lister, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1151

80, 704 (1998).

(1999).

[7] I. Cohen, M. P. Brenner, J. Eggers, and S. R. Nagel,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1147 (1999).

[8] M. S. Longuet-Higgins, B. R. Kerman, K. Lunde, J. Fluid

Mech. 230, 365 (1991).

[9] H. N. Oguz and A. Prosperetti, J. Fluid Mech. 257, 111

(1993).

[10] P. Doshi, I. Cohen, W. W. Zhang, M. Siegel, P. Howell,
O. A. Basaran, S. R. Nagel, Science 302, 1185 (2003).
[11] J.C. Burton, R. Waldrep, and P. Taborek, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 94, 184502 (2005).

[12] R. Suryo, P. Doshi, and O. A. Basaran, Phys. Fluids 16,

[13] D. Leppinen and J. R. Lister, Phys. Fluids 15, 568

4177 (2004).

(2003).

[14] J.M. Gordillo, A. Sevilla, J. Rodriguez-Rodriguez, and
C. Martinez-Bazan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 194501 (2005).
[15] B.W. Zeﬀ, B. Kleber, J. Fineberg, and D.P. Lathrop,

Nature 403, 401 (2000).

[16] D. Lohse, R. Bergmann, R. Mikkelsen, C. Zeilstra, D.
van der Meer, M. Versluis, K. van der Weele, M. van
der Hoef, and H. Kuipers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 198003
(2004).

[17] M.S. Plesset and A. Prosperetti, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech

[18] Y. Hao and A. Prosperetti, Phys. Fluids 11, 1309 (1999).
[19] S. Hilgenfeldt, D. Lohse, and M.P. Brenner, Phys. Fluids

9, 145 (1977)

8, 2808 (1996).

[20] G. Birkhoﬀ, and E. H. Zarantonello, Jets, Wakes, and

Cavities., Academic Press, New York (1957).

[21] S. Gaudet, Phys. Fluids 10, 2489 (1998).
[22] A. Prosperetti, Phys. Fluids 16, 1852 (2004).
[23] G.I. Barenblatt, Scaling, self-similarity, and intermedi-
ate asymptotics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1996).

[24] Viscosity and surface tension eﬀects are quantiﬁed by the
magnitude of the Reynolds (Re) and Weber (We) num-
bers, which are considerable (> 102) during the pinch-oﬀ
process. This holds when they are deﬁned globally, i.e.,
with respect to the impact velocity and the disk radius
(Re = hdiskV /ν and We = hdiskV 2ρ/σ), but also when
they are deﬁned locally using the neck radius and velocity
at a speciﬁc time (Re = h ˙h/ν and We = h ˙h2ρ/σ).
[25] We image the pinch-oﬀ process over four orders of magni-
tude in time and two in space. As the ﬁeld of view of the
camera corresponds to 103 pixels, this would leave only
10 pixels for the last stage of the collapse. Moreover, the

hole sequence should then be imaged at a frame rate cor-
responding to the smallest timescale (10µs), i.e., 100 kHz
requiring at least 10 GB of fast storage capacity, greatly
exceeding the physical capabilities of our cameras.
[26] A similar equation is used in [14], without the term h∞
and also without the hydrostatic driving pressure gZ.
[27] At the minimum 1/R(τ ) = d2H/dZ2|Z=Zmin and the
shape of the interface can be taken to be locally parabolic,
which implies H = (δZ)2/R(τ ) + h(τ ) with δZ = Z −
Zmin. The scaling of the radial direction H with h(τ )

then leads to the scaling
h(τ )R(τ ) for the axial direc-
tion Z. The aspect ratio of the void is then given by
H/Z = (h(τ )/R(τ ))1/2.

p

[28] The fact that both h and R are described by power laws
suggests that we may be dealing with self-similarity of the
second kind, in which the radial and axial coordinates are
rescaled by diﬀerent power laws of time [23]. At present
there is however insuﬃcient experimental and theoretical
ground to substantiate such a claim.

5

