Viscous Fluids and Quantum Mechanics

Jo˜ao Belther Junior
Instituto de F´isica, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Brasil∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

From a simple analysis of particle orbits and ﬂuid ﬂows in presence or not of dissipation, some connections
between apparently uncorrelated research areas are made. The main results point out for a deep relation between
quantization of classical conservative systems and the dissipative version of these systems.

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The aim of this work is to point out that different areas of
research can mutually beneﬁt from each other if an appropri-
ate translation is made. To make an intelligible translation
the fundamental deductions will be introduced by the using
of widely known concepts and the consequences will be more
speciﬁc. The so called fundamental concepts are input and
output information, and some evolution (dynamical) law. For
example, with the input information of the postion and veloc-
ity at some instant of a particle obeyng Newton’s second law,
it is possible to determine the future positions and velocities
for some quantity of time, in general not inﬁnite, if the force
(potential) ﬁeld satisﬁes some (smoothness) conditions. If the
input information is, for example, the positions in two differ-
ent instants, it is not possible in general to assign a deﬁnite
orbit as output information. For periodic systems, even with
a huge ammount of positions in different instants as input, it
is not possible to decide the output orbit, if the positions and
instants been measured are rational numbers, as is ever the
case for (ﬁnite precision=) physical measurements. The very
dynamical law can possess some undecidibility, as is the case
for singularities in the force ﬁeld or if one tries to describe
physical motion of a particle by ﬁrst-order autonomous ordi-
nary differential equations in position only: the simple one-
dimensional harmonic oscillator would present some prob-
lems, for would exist two velocities associated to the the same
point. This latter description is very important for conserva-
tive forces, for in this case the velocity in cartesian coordinates
is equivalent to the gradient of the action function, solution of
the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. This point will be made clear
in the sequence, but before some important equations will be
deduced.

If the orbit is sufﬁcient smooth in some region, it is possible

to consider it as the integral curve for some vector ﬁeld

˙x(t) = v(x(t), t).

For a conservative force ﬁeld, where the force can be written
as (minus) the gradient of some potential V (x(t), t), a time
differentiation of the last equation leads to

(1)

(2)

∂v
∂t

+ v · ∇v = −∇V,

wich is the Euler equation of ﬂuid dynamics, if a identiﬁca-
tion between the potential and the pression p(x, t) is made.

∗Electronic address: belther@ﬁg.if.usp.br

The Euler equation has the additional requirement of incom-
pressibility, ∇ · v = 0, and appropriate boundary conditions.
It is simple to show that for a gradient velocity ﬁeld, v = ∇S,
the Euler equation reduces to the Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) one

∂S
∂t

1
2

+

∇S · ∇S + V = 0.

(3)

Altough the equations (dynamical law) are formally the same,
there is a fundamental difference in their commom use: for
the HJ equation, the potential (pression) is given, it is part of
the input information, and the incompressibility condition is
not imposed. In fact, apparently there is no study even if the
HJ equation admit harmonic solutions for general boundary
conditions. As is widely known, the name action function is
ascribed for the relation between the solution of HJ equation
and the action, generally given by the functional of the La-
grangian. Here is the moment for another observation. It is
generally said that the minimum action principle is equivalent
to the Newton’s second law. This is true if the velocity and
position are given at the same instant in the two descriptions.
Strictily, the minimum action is stated for two different points
in space-time, the velocity should be considered as additional
input information. For very near instants and positions it can
be said the two descriptions are equivalent, but it is impor-
tant to emphasize this local character for the equivalence. The
problem is analogous to that of geodesics for a given metric:
for very near points, the geodesics are in fact the minimum
distance curves connecting this points, but this cannot be ex-
tended to arbitrary points. For ﬁxed energy E, in a gradient
force ﬁeld, the orbits are the geodesics of the Maupertois met-
ric: gij = (E − V )δij . It is a simple task, not generally made,
to calculate some geometrical quantities from this metric, like
an invariant density, a connection compatible with the metric
and the curvature. This geometrical analysis will be treated
after the introduction of dissipation.

The Euler equation is a good tool for describing long wave-
length (low frequency) phenomena, where the effects of tur-
bulence, a short-range viscosity dependent phenomenon, can
be neglected. It is the case for the waves in the ocean or in a
pond, where the wavelenghts varies from fractions of a meter
to several hundred meters. If one considers the photon ﬂuid
(gas) of blackbody radiation, for low frequency the classical
prediction for the energy density is in good agreement with
experimental data, but not for very higher ones, when quan-
tum mechanics turns out to be a necessity. In the sequence will
be explored the possibility to explain these “quantum effects”
in the photon ﬂuid, or possibly any other system, by a similar
approach as for the ocean waves: considering dissipation in

+

∇S · ∇S −

2S = 0,

∇

1
2

~

2

implies

(4)

(5)

(6)

the system. For the photon ﬂuid is something like to suppose
a dissipation coefﬁcient so small that for low frequencies it
can be, for almost every purpose, be ignored, but not for very
high frequencies. As is generally known, the HJ equation is in
some sense the “classical” version of the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion, it was from the HJ equation that Schr¨odinger obtained
his wave equation, in a heuristic derivation. What is not ap-
parently explored is the fact that Schr¨odinger equation is the
Navier-Stokes (NS) equations, if a irrotational (gradient) ve-
locity ﬁeld is considered and a appropriate simple transforma-
tion is made. One can readly see this by considering the wave
equation for unity mass and imaginary time, t → −it

~ ∂Ψ
∂t

+ V Ψ −

2
∇

Ψ = 0,

~2

2

and making the transformation Ψ = e

S
~ to obtain

∂S
∂t

∂v
∂t

wich is the NS equation

+ v · ∇v + ∇p − ∇

2v = 0,

for an irrotational velocity ﬁeld. It is important to notice that
if the condition of incompressibility is imposed on v for NS
equation with a gradient ﬁeld, the NS equation reduces to the
Euler equation, except for the boundary conditions. In a anal-
ogous situation encountered before, it is important to remark
that apart the formal equality between the equations, there is
the fundamental difference that in Schr¨odinger equation the
potential is generally given. By this way, one can consider the
(irrotational) NS equation as a Schr¨odinger equation where
the potential is not given from the start, it is not part of the
input information. Apart from the connection with the NS
equation, this kind of analysis for the Schr¨odinger equation
without a deﬁnite potential is encountered in two different ar-
eas: random matrix theory and soliton equations.

Random matrix theory is many times called a new kind
of statistical mechanics, where one works with a ensemble
of Hamiltonians satisfying certain properties. It was born in
physics in the attempts to analyze the complicated spectra of
heavy nuclei, where the phenomenom of repulsion of energy
levels is apparent. Its range of application has been expanded
intensively in many directions, like number theory, quantum
chaos and integrable systems. The applications to these two
later areas will be important for this work.

Quantum chaos can be roughly deﬁned as the analysis of
the behavior of classical chaotic systems when quantized. In
other words, the analysis of the Schr¨odinger equation for a
potential wich produces chaotic behavior classicaly. Some re-
searchers dislike the name quantum chaos with the allegation
that the Schr¨odinger equation is linear, then it cannot produce
chaotic behavior. I think this is not a consistent criticizing, for
there is a fundamental difference between ﬁnite and inﬁnite
dimensional dynamical systems: it is clear that a ﬁnite dimen-
sional linear system is integrable, i.e, it possesses a quantity

2

(7)

(8)

(9)

of integrals of motion equal to its dimension (number of de-
grees of freedom), but the Schr¨odinger equation does not pos-
sesses inﬁnite conservation laws, i.e, inﬁnite densities com-
muting with the Hamiltonian, except for some few potentials.
This is a problem of language, as already emphasized in [1] To
make this point clearer, some facts will be recalled. Suppose
the dynamical law

where X is some dynamical variable, like a function on clas-
sical phase space, and the symbol [, ] denotes, as usual, the
commutator (Poisson bracket, Lie bracket...). Suppose some
structure that enable one to talk about adjoint (transpose, her-
mitean conjugate...) and that H is self-adjoint (symmetric,
hermitian...), then it is readly seen that

dX
dt

= [H, X],

[H, X] = λX,

[H, XX ∗

] = 0,

where the symbol ∗ denotes adjoint. One can think in the
harmonic oscillator as an example, but this simple statement
is general. Instead of eigenfunctions, one can think of con-
served quantities, and this latter concept is in my sense more
natural and physically intellegible. It is important to insist in
this point. The eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian operator are
given by

λn = hΨn|H|Ψni .

(10)

Tough this deﬁnition is equivalent to usual one H| Ψni =
λn| Ψni for time-independent potentials, it is well suitable for
time-dependent potentials and makes clear the density charac-
ter of the eigenvalues. With all this in mind, another impor-
tant connection can be made: for one dimension only, what
is the potentials wich give discrete time-independent eigen-
values? With appropriate boundary conditions, this poten-
tials are the solutions of the KdV equations for shallow water
waves. In [2] the appearance of the Schr¨odinger operator is
considered as merely a coincidence. In fact, other nonlinear
equations possessing soliton solutions like mKdV and nonlin-
ear Schr¨odinger possesses as Hamiltonian densities, this kind
of Schr¨odinger densities, altough the Hamiltonian (symplec-
tic) structure is not ever the same. To make all these notions
clearer, two simple systems will be used: the free particle and
the harmonic oscillator.

The pressurelles version of the NS equations is known by
Burgers equation. In fact, for more than one dimension it is
called generalized Burgers equation. In the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion this is simply the free-particle, with the well known prop-
agator. It is important to notice that the propagator is some-
thing that maps densities. If one knows the particle is in some
position at an initial time, the initial density is an delta func-
tion. The propagator gives the probability this particle stay
at some later time t in an arbitrary position x. This propa-
gator is the same as if one considered the Brownian motion

of this particle, with the Planck’s constant making the role of
the viscosity coefﬁcient. This can led one to wonder if the
Planck’s constant is some kind of fundamental viscosity coef-
ﬁcient. This is also a fact pointing to the connection between
dissipation and quantization.

Now some analysis of the harmonic oscillator. It is readly
seen that the abstract construction of the eigenvectors for an
Hamiltonian, in the case of the harmonic oscillator, these
eigenvectors are given by the so-called step operators a, †a.
Backing to the geometrical side, it is instructive to consider

these operators as covariant derivatives. It is immediate that
the invariant density is the Gaussian function. More interest-
ing is that if one tries to calculate the “curvature”, we get the
curvature of the circle, wich is in fact the harmonic oscillator
topologically.

This work is an attempt to show that research in ﬂuid dy-
namics, quantum mechanics and quantum chaos can mutually
beneﬁt from each other if a commom language is used.

We would like to Capes for ﬁnancial support.

3

[1] Schr¨odinger’s Mechanics, D. B. Cook, World Scientiﬁc Lecture

[2] Gardner, C. S., et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1095, 1967

Notes in Physics, Vol. 28, 1988

