Journal of Turbulence
Vol. 00, No. 00, January 2006, 1–35

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

Arkadiusz K. Kuczaj(1) , Bernard J. Geurts(1,2)

(1) Multiscale Modeling and Simulation, NACM, J.M. Burgers Center, Faculty
EEMCS, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
(2) Anisotropic Turbulence, Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Department of Applied
Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven,
The Netherlands

(January 21, 2014)

A new computational framework for the simulation of turbulent ﬂow through complex objects and
along irregular boundaries is presented. This is motivated by the application of metal foams in com-
pact heat-transfer devices, or as catalyst substrates in process-engineering. The ﬂow-consequences of
such complicated objects are incorporated by adding explicit multiscale forcing to the Navier–Stokes
equations. The forcing represents the simultaneous agitation of a wide spectrum of length-scales
when ﬂow passes through the complex object. Two types of forcing procedures are investigated;
with reference to the collection of forced modes these procedures are classiﬁed as ‘constant-energy’
or ‘constant-energy-input-rate’. It is found that a considerable modulation of the traditional energy
cascading can be introduced with a speciﬁc forcing strategy. In spectral space, forcing yields
strongly localized deviations from the common Kolmogorov scaling law, directly associated with
the explicitly forced scales. In addition, the accumulated eﬀect of forcing induces a signiﬁcant
non-local alteration of the kinetic energy including the spectrum for the large scales. Consequently,
a manipulation of turbulent ﬂow can be achieved over an extended range, well beyond the directly
forced scales. Compared to ﬂow forced in the large scales only, the energy in broad-band forced
turbulence is found to be transferred more eﬀectively to smaller scales. The turbulent mixing of
a passive scalar ﬁeld is also investigated, in order to quantify the physical-space modiﬁcations of
transport processes in multiscale forced turbulence. The surface-area and wrinkling of level-sets of
the scalar ﬁeld are monitored as measures of the inﬂuence of explicit forcing on the local and global
mixing eﬃciency. At small Schmidt numbers, the values of surface-area are mainly governed by
the large scale sweeping-eﬀect of the ﬂow while the wrinkling is inﬂuenced mainly by the agitation
of the smaller scales.

This paper is associated with the focus-issue Multi-scale Interactions in Turbulent Flows.

1 Introduction

Various multiscale phenomena in turbulent ﬂows arise from the passage of
ﬂuid through and along geometrically complex objects placed inside the ﬂow-

To whom correspondence should be addressed (a.k.kuczaj@utwente.nl)

2

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

domain. The corresponding perturbations of the ﬂow arise simultaneously on
a range of length-scales and ﬁnd their origin in the complexity of the bound-
aries of these objects. A motivating example is the ﬂow through a porous re-
gion such as a metal foam depicted in Fig. 1. Many more examples can readily
be mentioned, arising in diﬀerent technological applications or in numerous
natural ﬂows, including ﬂow over forest canopies [1, 3, 12].

Figure 1. A porous nickel foam contains various geometrical complexities on diﬀerent
length-scales [29].

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the computational modeling of
ﬂows through complex regions via the introduction of explicit forcing terms
in the Navier–Stokes equations. Consistent with the many shape-details of
the obstructing objects, such forcing will need to represent the perturbation
of the ﬂow on various length-scales simultaneously. This distinguishes the pro-
posed computational modeling from more conventional forced turbulence pro-
cedures. In the latter the ﬂow agitation is restricted to a few large scales only
with the aim to observe the development of a natural inertial range at smaller
scales in the turbulent ﬂow [24,46]. Instead, in this paper we allow the forcing
of a collection of widely diﬀerent modes. The consequences for transport and
dispersion in such turbulent ﬂows will be studied both in spectral - as well as
in physical space. We will primarily establish the degree by which the spec-
tral properties of a turbulent ﬂow can be modiﬁed relative to the classical
Kolmogorov scaling, and quantify the eﬃciency with which embedded scalar
ﬁelds can be mixed by the modulated ﬂow.

Complementary to the proposed explicit forcing approach, two alternative
formulations have been put forward in literature to capture the ﬂow in and
around complex objects. These include the explicit boundary modeling [49]

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

3

as well as an approximation in terms of eﬀective boundary conditions and
(surface) roughness parameters [20, 22]. The roughness parameterization has
been introduced for situations in which the roughness length-scales are much
smaller than the boundary layer thickness [44]. For geometries which display
both large- and small-scale contortions of the shape of the object, compared
to the boundary layer thickness, the surface-roughness parametrization may
not be suﬃciently accurate [10]. Alternatively, in case of explicit boundary
modeling, no-slip conditions are imposed at all the intricate shape-details of
the object. This computational approach can in principle achieve full accuracy
but is limited to cases of modest complexity in view of the elaborate geometric
modeling and the high computational expenses that are required [4, 5].

Flow through complex gasket structures may give rise to self-similar turbu-
lence spectra which do not follow the well known Kolmogorov −5/3 slope [27].
Such non-Kolmogorov turbulence was observed in ﬂows over tree canopies,
and is reminiscent of a spectral short-cut feature that was also observed exper-
imentally [12]. In this paper we investigate the potential of multiscale forcing
to accurately characterize such dynamic ﬂow-consequences of complex domain
boundaries without the need to explicitly account for their intricate geometri-
cal shape. We consider the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations with mul-
tiscale forcing working as a stirrer whose dynamical eﬀects are controlled by
a distribution of simultaneously perturbed length-scales.

To arrive at a multiscale modeling that is quantitatively linked to actual
complex objects several steps need to be taken. In this paper we address
a ﬁrst step in which we examine in some detail the inﬂuence diﬀerent forc-
ing procedures have on the energy dynamics in spectral space and the mixing
characteristics in physical space. Special attention is devoted to the mixing
eﬃciency of a passive tracer by monitoring the surface area and wrinkling of
level-sets of these scalar ﬁelds [14]. Speciﬁcally we look at the instantaneous
and accumulated eﬀect on surface area and wrinkling caused by broad-band
forcing.

Diﬀerent divergence-free forcing procedures will be applied to directly per-
turb a large number of ﬂow-scales. The alterations of the ﬂow dynamics express
themselves clearly in the kinetic energy. The transfer of energy toward smaller
scales is found to increase considerably, compared to the case in which only
large scales are forced. When a speciﬁc narrow band of scales is agitated by
the forcing, then the locally higher spectral energy is not ‘compatible’ with
the molecular dissipation-rate and an accelerated transfer is observed toward
smaller scales. This eﬀect is found for both families of forcing methods, i.e.,
constant-energy and constant-energy-input-rate. The kinetic energy spectrum
is also modiﬁed non-locally, in a range of scales that are larger than the di-
rectly forced scales. Consequently the agitation of a band of small length-scale
features can accumulate and also induce signiﬁcant alterations of the largest

4

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

ﬂow-features, e.g., by contributing to an increased backscatter.

The changes in the ﬂow-dynamics due to the application of broad-band forc-
ing application also has consequences for the turbulent transport properties
of the ﬂow. This may be expressed in terms of the mixing eﬃciency of embed-
ded passive scalars. In particular, monitoring the surface-area of level-sets of
the passive scalar allows to characterize changes in the large-scale sweeping of
the ﬂow, due to the forcing. Likewise, the more localized motions directly aﬀect
the ‘wrinkling’ of the passive scalar level-sets. The dependence of these mea-
sures for the mixing eﬃciency on forcing parameters can be used to quantify
the mixing eﬃciency arising from agitation of diﬀerent bands of ﬂow-structures
with diﬀerent forcing strengths. Speciﬁcally, we investigate the dispersion of
strongly localized initial scalar concentrations. The direct numerical simulation
of the forced turbulence shows that the maximal surface-area and wrinkling
as well as the time at which such a maximum is achieved can be controlled
by variation of forcing parameters. The time-integrated surface-area and wrin-
kling are indicators of the accumulated eﬀect. The simulations show that at
small Schmidt numbers, a higher emphasis on small-scale ﬂow agitation yields
a signiﬁcant increase in the time-integrated total mixing of the ﬂow.

The organization of this paper is as follows. In section 2 the simulation
method, together with the explicit forcing strategies are introduced. Section 3
is devoted to the modulation of the cascading process associated with the dif-
ferent forcing methods. The consequences of forced turbulence for transport
and dispersion in physical space will be quantiﬁed in section 4. Concluding
remarks are collected in section 5.

2 Simulation of forced turbulence

In this section we will ﬁrst introduce the governing equations (subsection 2.1)
and subsequently describe the explicit forcing strategies that are used to drive
the ﬂow (subsection 2.2). Two types of deterministic forcing strategies will be
included: procedures which yield constant-energy in the collection of forced
modes, and procedures which correspond to a constant-energy-input-rate for
these modes. Subsequently, the computational method, its validation and par-
allel performance will be described (subsection 2.3).

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

5

2.1 Governing equations

The dimensionless system of nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations which gov-
erns the ﬂow of a viscous incompressible ﬂuid is given by:

+

v(x, t) · ∇

v(x, t) = −

∇p(x, t) + ν∇2v(x, t) + f (x, t)

(1)

1
ρ

∂v(x, t)
∂t

∇ · v(x, t) = 0

(cid:16)

(cid:17)






where v is the velocity ﬁeld, ρ is the constant mass-density and p the pres-
sure. The dimensionless viscosity is the inverse of the computational Reynolds
number Re, i.e., ν = 1/ Re, and f is the external forcing which we will specify
in subsection 2.2. This system of equations may be rewritten in terms of the
vorticity ω(x, t) = ∇ × v(x, t). Making use of the identity:

v(x, t) · ∇

v(x, t) = ω(x, t) × v(x, t) +

∇

|v(x, t)|2

(2)

1
2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

we may express (1) as:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

− ν∇2

(cid:19)

v(x, t) = w(x, t) − ∇

p(x, t) +

|v(x, t)|2

+ f (x, t)

(3)

1
ρ

(cid:18)

1
2

(cid:19)

where we introduced the nonlinear term w(x, t) = v(x, t) × ω(x, t).

The ﬂow domain is assumed to be periodic with the same period in each of
the three coordinate directions. An eﬃcient representation of the solution in
terms of Fourier modes can be adopted [6, 33, 52] in which the velocity v(x, t)
is expanded as:

v(x, t) =

u(k, t)eık·x

Xk

(4)

and the wavevector k (k = |k|) has components kα = 2πnα/Lb,
nα = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . for α = 1, 2, 3. The dimensionless length of the periodic
domain is denoted by Lb and uα(k, t) is the Fourier-coeﬃcient correspond-
ing to the k-th mode of vα(x, t). The equation governing the evolution of
the Fourier-coeﬃcients is given by:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ νk2

(cid:19)

u(k, t) = W(k, t)−ıkF

p(x, t) +

|v(x, t)|2, k

+F(k, t) (5)

1
ρ

(cid:18)

1
2

(cid:19)

where F(a(x, t), k) denotes the Fourier-coeﬃcient of the function a(x, t) cor-

6

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

responding to wavevector k:

F(a(x, t), k) = A(k, t)

if a(x, t) =

A(k, t)eık·x

(6)

Xk

In addition, W(k, t) and F(k, t) denote the k-th Fourier-coeﬃcient of the non-
linearity w(x, t) and forcing f (x, t), respectively.

In spectral space the pressure term may be eliminated from (5) if use is
made of the incompressibility condition. This is equivalent to the well-known
practice of solving a Poisson equation for the pressure in physical space for-
mulations [48]. If we multiply (5) by k, use the continuity equation in spectral
space, i.e., k · u(k, t) = 0, and assume that the forcing itself is divergence-free,
so that k · F(k, t) = 0, the pressure term can be written as:

F

1
ρ

(cid:16)

p(x, t) +

1
2

|v(x, t)|2, k
(cid:17)

=

k · W(k, t)
ık2

The equation for the Fourier-coeﬃcients of the velocity ﬁeld (5) may now be
written as:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ νk2

(cid:19)

u(k, t) = W(k, t) − k

+ F(k, t)

(8)

k · W(k, t)
k2

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

This may be expressed in a more compact form in terms of the projection
operator D deﬁned by:

(7)

(9)

Dαβ = δαβ −

kαkβ
k2

This operator restricts the solution to the space of divergence-free ﬁelds,
represented by Fourier-coeﬃcients u(k, t) which lie in the plane normal to
the wavevector k. We obtain the governing equation for the desired Fourier-
coeﬃcients as:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ νk2

(cid:19)

u(k, t) = DW(k, t) + F(k, t)

(10)

A more detailed discussion of this spectral approach to the Navier–Stokes
equations is available in [33]. It forms the basis for the numerical treatment
that will be speciﬁed in subsection 2.3.

In various applications the dispersion of a passive scalar by a turbulent ﬂow
is of central importance. Passive scalar transport may be used to characterize
the physical space consequences of multiscale forced turbulence. The governing

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

7

equation for the evolution of the scalar concentration C(x, t) contains advec-
tion by the velocity ﬁeld v(x, t) as well as diﬀusion. In physical space this may
be expressed as:

∂C(x, t)
∂t

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

+

v(x, t) · ∇

C(x, t) = κ∇2C(x, t)

(11)

where κ is the non-dimensional molecular diﬀusivity of the scalar. Compared
to the dimensionless viscosity in (1) we adopt κ = ν/ Sc where the Schmidt
number Sc characterizes the scalar diﬀusion. Roughly speaking, if Sc > 1 then
the scalar ﬁeld displays a wider range of dynamically important length-scales,
compared to the turbulent velocity ﬁeld, while values Sc < 1 indicate a com-
parably smoother scalar ﬁeld. The equation which governs the development of
the Fourier-coeﬃcients c(k, t) of the scalar ﬁeld C(x, t) can readily be found as:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ κk2

(cid:19)

c(k, t) = Z(k, t)

where Z(k, t) = F

(v(x, t) · ∇)C(x, t), k

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
(12)
The changes in the turbulent transport properties of the ﬂow due to the mul-
tiscale forcing can be investigated by considering the evolution of the scalar
concentration at diﬀerent Schmidt numbers. The structure of the left-hand
side of (12) is identical to the Navier–Stokes equations in (10). This allows to
adopt the same time-stepping method, as will be speciﬁed in subsection 2.3.
To quantify the spectral-space eﬀect of multiscale forcing, and also to be
able to concisely formulate the diﬀerent forcing procedures in the next subsec-
tion, we consider the kinetic energy. The equations which govern the Fourier
coeﬃcients (10) can be written in index notation as:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+ νk2

(cid:19)

uα(k, t) = Ψα(k, t) + Fα(k, t)

(13)

where Ψα(k, t) = DαβWβ(k, t) is the nonlinear term. Multiplying this equation
by the complex-conjugate u∗
α(k, t) and summing over the three coordinate
directions, we obtain the kinetic energy equation:

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

+ 2νk2

E(k, t) = u∗

α(k, t)Ψα(k, t) + u∗

α(k, t)Fα(k, t)

(14)

where E(k, t) = 1
tation for the rate of energy transfer T (k, t) = u∗
energy injection by the forcing TF (k, t) = u∗

2 |u(k, t)|2 is the kinetic energy in mode k. Introducing the no-
α(k, t)Ψα(k, t), the rate of
α(k, t)Fα(k, t) and the energy dis-

8

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

sipation rate ε(k, t) = 2νk2E(k, t), we can write (14) equation as:

∂E(k, t)
∂t

= −ε(k, t) + T (k, t) + TF (k, t)

(15)

This formulation clariﬁes that the rate of change of kinetic energy E(k, t) is
connected with dissipation, expressed by the viscous term ε(k, t), with transfer
to/from diﬀerent wavenumbers, expressed by T (k, t), and with the forcing term
TF (k, t).

The diﬀerent contributions to the rate of change of the kinetic energy typi-
cally act in distinct wavenumber regions. The forcing term TF (k, t) is non-zero
in the forced modes only. In this paper the collection of forced modes will al-
ways contain a low wavenumber band corresponding to large-scale forcing of
the ﬂow. In addition, possible higher wavenumber contributions can be in-
cluded in TF (k, t). In contrast, energy dissipation ε(k, t) is deﬁned in the en-
tire spectral space, but it is dynamically important primarily for the high
wavenumber range, i.e., acting on structures below the dissipation length-
scale. Finally, the transfer term T (k, t) is basic to the development of an en-
ergy cascade and is a dominant contribution for wavenumbers in an inertial
range [33]. In the multiscale forcing cases, we will also introduce forcing gener-
ally in the same region as where the transfer T (k, t) is dynamically important.
Hence, the eﬀects of the multiscale forcing relate directly to the ‘competition’
between the dynamics introduced by the forcing procedure and the ‘natural’
transfer of energy to other modes in the spectrum.

In the formulation of forcing procedures and in the evaluation of the kinetic
energy dynamics, one frequently adopts shell-averaging. The basic operation
consists of averaging over spherical shells of thickness 2π/Lb centered around
the origin. The n-th spherical shell is given by 2π
(n + 1/2)
Lb
and will be denoted by Kn. Applying shell-averaging to a function h(k, t)
deﬁned in spectral space we obtain:

(n − 1/2) < |k| ≤ 2π
Lb

h(n, t) =

h(k, t)

; Pn =

1

(16)

1
Pn XKn

XKn

where Pn is the number of modes in the n-th shell. Applying the shell-averaging
(16) to the energy equation (15) we end up with:

∂E(n, t)
∂t

= −ε(n, t) + T (n, t) + T F (n, t)

(17)

which indicates that the interpretation of the various contributions to the rate
of change of the kinetic energy at mode k also applies to the shell-averaged

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

9

formulation. In literature it is common to introduce a numerical correction
factor when averaging over shells. This is used to compensate for the nonuni-
form distribution of modes within the discrete spherical shells [11,26]. We will
follow the convention used in [11, 51, 52] when presenting the energy-spectra.
This implies that we multiply h(n, t) by a factor 4πn2 which is associated with
the ‘expected number modes’ within the discrete shell. The deﬁnition of the
Kn E(k, t).
energy spectrum that we will adopt is given by En =
Finally, summing (15) over all wavevectors k or, equivalently, (17) over all
shells yields the evolution equation for the total energy in the system:

4πn2/Pn

(cid:17) P

(cid:16)

d

E(t)
dt
b

= −

ε(t) +

TF (t)

;

h(t) =

Pnh(n, t) =

Xn

k h(k, t)

(18)

X

b

b

b

where use was made of the fact that the contribution of the transfer term
T (k, t) is such that it only re-distributes energy over the various modes, which
implies that its sum over all wavenumbers

T (t) = 0.

Next to spherical shells, it is convenient to introduce spherical wavenum-
ber bands which consist of several adjacent shells. We denote the wavenum-
(p + 1/2) by Km,p, where
ber band which consists of 2π
Lb
m ≤ p. The corresponding average over Km,p of a function h(k, t) is given by:

(m − 1/2) < |k| ≤ 2π
Lb

b

h(m,p)(t) =

e

1
Pm,p

p

Xn=m

1

Pm,p XKm,p

Pnh(n, t) =

h(k, t)

; Pm,p =

Pn (19)

p

Xn=m

To complete the computational model, we will next introduce the explicit

forcing strategies that will be investigated in this paper.

2.2 Explicit forcing procedures

Forced turbulence in a periodic box is one of the most basic numerically
simulated turbulent ﬂows. It is achieved by applying large-scale forcing to
the Navier-Stokes equations. As a result, at suﬃciently high Reynolds number
the well-known turbulent cascade develops in an inertial range of scales which
are much smaller than the length-scale of the forced modes [27,28,33]. The sta-
tistical equilibrium that is reached is characterized by a balance between the
input of energy through the large-scale forcing and the viscous dissipation at
scales beyond the Kolmogorov dissipation scale.

Various forcing procedures have been proposed in literature. Generally,
if the forcing is restricted to large scales only, the speciﬁc details of the proce-
dure do not have such a large eﬀect on the properties of the developing inertial
range at suﬃciently ﬁner scales. However, since we wish to extend the forcing

10

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

to act on a wide range of scales simultaneously, including parts of an iner-
tial sub-range, the diﬀerences between alternative forcing procedures become
more pronounced. Investigating these diﬀerences is an essential step toward
quantitative modeling of ﬂow through complex gasket structures and forms
the main focus of this paper. In this subsection, we will recover the deﬁnition
and some of the motivation for several characteristic forcing procedures.

E

I

 

G
N
C
R
O
F
E
L
A
C
S
E
G
R
A
L

-

I

G
N
C
R
O
F

FLOW

I

G
N
C
R
O
F

0

k0

k1 k2

k

(a)

z

y
x

(b)

Figure 2. Deﬁnition of two-band forcing in spectral space (a) and localization of forcing within
a slab in physical space (b).

In multiscale forcing, the ﬂow is agitated over a wide range of modes. To in-
vestigate the eﬀects of such forcing we will focus on cases in which one addi-
tional spherical band of scales is forced, next to the common forcing of the large
scales. We consider the general situation as depicted in Fig. 2(a). The large
scales are in the range k ≤ k0 and an additional band of small scales is deﬁned
by k1 < k ≤ k2. The forcing method can also incorporate cases in which only
part of the domain is occupied by a complex obstruction, as sketched for the
case of a slab in Fig. 2(b). In fact, by introducing an ‘indicator’ function Θ(x, t)
to locate the complex object within the ﬂow domain (Θ = 0 outside the re-
gion occupied by the object and 1 elsewhere), the forcing can accommodate
such spatial localization in a ﬂexible manner. In spectral space, the introduc-
tion of Θ(x, t) implies that the forcing term in spectral space is represented by
the convolution product of the actual forcing F (k, t) and the Fourier-transform
of the indicator function. However, in the present paper such complications
will not be included and we will only consider forcing procedures applied in
the entire physical domain.

Forcing procedures may be classiﬁed in diﬀerent ways. We ﬁrst distinguish
forcing schemes which keep the total energy in the collection of forced modes
identical to its value in the initial condition. This will be referred to as class ‘A’
forcing procedures. Next, we identify forcing schemes which are characterized
by a constant energy input rate, introduced via the collection of forced modes.

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

11

This group will be referred to as class ‘B’. In either class of schemes, the ﬂows
develop around a well deﬁned statistically stationary state, but time-dependent
variations in the total energy and in the energy input rate may occur.

Apart from a distinction concerning the way energy is introduced into
the ﬂow, one may classify forcing schemes as ‘deterministic’ or ‘stochastic’.
Stochastic forcing schemes may introduce an element of uncorrelated random-
ness, e.g., by restricting the forcing to a random subset of the collection of
forced modes every time the forcing is invoked. However, the primary ques-
tion of locality of the modulation of the energy spectrum can be addressed
more directly using deterministic schemes and in this paper we will restrict
to these procedures. We next introduce some characteristic forcing schemes in
either class ‘A’ or class ‘B’.

Class ‘A’: constant-energy forcing. Various methods can be formulated
which are such that the kinetic energy in the forced modes remains constant.
The simplest possibility arises by requiring that uα(k, t) itself remains constant
for all k in the collection of forced modes. This was ﬁrst proposed in [43] and
implies for the forcing in spectral space:

A1 : Fα(k, t) = νk2uα(k, t) − Ψα(k, t)

(20)

One readily veriﬁes, using (13), that ∂tuα(k, t) = 0 and in particular this
implies that ∂tE(k, t) = 0 for each of the forced modes. Hence, also the total
kinetic energy contained in all the forced modes stays constant in time. The en-
ergy input rate corresponding to (20) is given by TF (k, t) = ε(k, t) − T (k, t)
for each of the forced modes. This input rate may vary considerably in time, as
the unsteady ﬂow will lead to a strong time-dependence of the energy transfer
T for the forced modes.

The basic method (20) has motivated the formulation of a number of ex-
tensions which relax the requirement that the Fourier-coeﬃcient is strictly
constant. In [8] the method was modiﬁed to require that |u(k, t)| = const, i.e.,
equal to its initial value, for the forced modes. This allows for the possibility
that the phases of the Fourier-coeﬃcients may evolve in time. The correspond-
ing forcing is given by:

Fα(k, t) =

νk2 −

(cid:18)

T (k, t)
2E(k, t) (cid:19)

uα(k, t) = (ε(k, t) − T (k, t))

(21)

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

One may readily verify that this implies ∂tE(k, t) = 0 for the forced modes.
Forcing expressed in (20) or (21) was found to yield quite large ﬂuctuations
in the energy input rate [45].

12

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

Typically, the forced modes are ordered according to the wavenumber shell to
which they belong. A shell-oriented simpliﬁcation of (21) was proposed [25,26]:

Fα(k, t) =

ε(k, t) − T (k, t)
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

(22)

This forcing also preserves the total kinetic energy in the forced modes.
The three forcing procedures (20), (21) and (22) are quite comparable, both
in terms of their ﬂuid-physics motivation and in terms of their turbulent ﬂow
predictions. Therefore, we will only present actual simulation results obtained
with (20), which are quantitatively representative for the other two forcing
procedures in this group.

The forcing methods described so far preserve the kinetic energy that is
contained in the collection of forced modes. However, considerable variations
in the total energy in the system can still arise. The reverse can also be real-
ized, i.e., forced turbulence in which the total kinetic energy in the system is
constant, but the energy in diﬀerent modes may vary in time. For this pur-
pose, the forcing should not be formulated in terms of quantities related to
individual modes or shell-averaged values, but rather contain averages over all
modes [18, 30]. The case of forcing in a single shell with P modes can readily
be speciﬁed. Speciﬁcally, if we replace the shell-average (·) in the amplitude
T = 0,
factor in (22) by the average over all modes
we obtain the forcing

(·) and use the fact that

A2 : Fα(k, t) =

c

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

ε(t)
P
b

b

(23)

ε(t) and thus by (18)
The A2-forcing implies an energy input rate
d
E/dt = 0. This method corresponds exactly to the negative viscosity pro-
cedure used to maintain quasi-steady turbulence direct numerical simulations
results reported in [21, 23, 24, 50]. Extension of A2-forcing to multiple shells
can be realized in a number of ways. This will be described in more detail
momentarily. A2-forcing will be compared to A1-forcing in the next section.

TF =

b

b

b

Next to forcing methods
Class ‘B’: constant-energy-input-rate forcing.
that can be associated with constant-energy, one may deﬁne forcing procedures
in which the total energy input rate
TF is constant. We ﬁrst present such
forcing methods with reference to a single band of forced modes. The way
in which the energy input is distributed over several bands will be speciﬁed
afterwards.

b

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

13

A central example in the class of constant-energy-input-rate forcing methods
ε(t) in (23) into the constant energy input-

was presented in [16]. Changing
rate εw, the corresponding forcing term may be written as

b

B1 : Fα(k, t) =

εw
P

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

(24)

b

b

The energy input-rate is found to be
TF (t) = εw, as desired by construc-
tion. The total energy in the system is no longer constant but governed by
d
ε(t) + εw which implies that the statistically stationary state
E(t)/dt = −
that develops will show a dissipation rate that ﬂuctuates about εw. This type
of forcing was also studied in [7,36,52]. Further extensions of the basic forcing
procedure (24) can be proposed in which an extra factor k−q; q > 0 arises in
the deﬁnition of Fα. Such an extra factor implies that the forcing of higher
wavenumber shells can be made to correspond to a speciﬁc shape (usually
k−5/3 to more directly ‘impose’ Kolmogorov turbulence). These forcing proce-
dures will not be considered in this paper; for further details see [9, 37].

b

Similar to A-forcing methods, one may formulate related procedures which
are deﬁned in terms of shell-averaged quantities. For example, analogous to
(22), we may replace E(k, t) in (24) by E(n, t) to deﬁne the forcing of modes
in the n-th shell. This type of forcing was found to yield basically the same
results as those based on (24) and will not be presented explicitly in the rest
of this paper.

The ﬁnal forcing procedure that we will include in this paper was proposed
recently in [32]. It was motivated as a model of ﬂow through a fractal gasket
which functions as a multiscale stirrer. This particular forcing may be asso-
ciated with a constant energy input rate for the entire system. We modify
the original forcing procedure slightly and considered in particular

B2 : Fα(k, t) =

eα(k, t)

(25)

εwkβ

2E(k, t)kβ

k∈K

P

p

where K denotes the set of forced modes. In this formulation, the complexity
of the object is parameterized by the exponent β which is related to the fractal
dimension Df of the object through β = Df − 2. The vector e(k, t) has the
form:

e(k, t) =

u(k, t)
|u(k, t)|

+ ı

k × u(k, t)
|k||u(k, t)|

(26)

which contains a part in the direction of u and a part that is perpendicular to u.

14

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

Since u∗

αeα = |u| =

2E(k, t) we ﬁnd for the energy input rate:

p

TF (k, t) = εw

kβ
p
k∈K kβ

2E(k, t)

2E(k, t)

P

p

(27)

In contrast to B1-forcing in which the energy input rate is constant in time for
each of the forced modes separately, this ‘fractal forcing’ procedure only implies
a constant energy input rate for the entire system. In fact, after summation
over all forced modes the total energy input rate is found to be equal to
TF (t) = εw. Correspondingly, we ﬁnd for the evolution of the total kinetic
ε(t) + εw, i.e., identical as obtained before for B1-forcing.
energy d
b
In the original formulation in [32] the energy input rate εw was replaced by
the total dissipation rate

ε(t), which implies that

E is constant in time.

E/dt = −

b

b

b

b

So far, the B1- and B2-forcing methods were deﬁned with reference to a sin-
gle band of modes. This band was assumed to contain P modes and was
identiﬁed by K. The total energy input rate εw was available to this band. In
case more bands are forced simultaneously, the way the energy input-rate is
divided over the individual bands, and among the modes within each band,
needs to be speciﬁed. For two forced bands Km1,p1 and Km2,p2 with Pm1,p1
and Pm2,p2 modes respectively, such a partitioning involves two steps. First,
a fraction εw,1 = aεw of the total energy input-rate is ‘allocated’ to the ﬁrst
band and the remainder εw,2 = (1 − a)εw is used in the forcing of the second
band (0 ≤ a ≤ 1). Second, we divide the energy input-rate that is available for
each band equally over all modes in the corresponding band. As an example,
two-band B1-forcing may be deﬁned as

B1 : Fα(k, t) =

aεw
Pm1,p1

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

;

k ≤ k0

=

(1 − a)εw
Pm2,p2

uα(k, t)
2E(k, t)

= 0

;

otherwise

;

k1 < k ≤ k2

(28)

The two-band formulation of B2-forcing can be speciﬁed analogously, replac-
ing εw by either aεw or (1 − a)εw and K by Km1,p1 or Km2,p2, respectively.
Extending A2-forcing to more bands can be done in a similar way in which
ε(t) is associated with the large-scale band and the remainder with
a fraction a
the second band. The speciﬁc choice of Pm1,p1 and Pm2,p2 above implies that
the energy is equally distributed between all modes within a forced band. We
can go one step further and require the equal distribution of εw over the forced
shells contained in the bands. This implies changing Pm1,p1 and Pm2,p2 into the

b

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

15

number of modes Pn for each forced shell. Extension to more forced bands can
be formulated analogously.

In the next subsection the numerical method will be speciﬁed in some detail,
to complete the description of the physical and computational modeling used
in this paper.

2.3 Computational method and parallelization

In this subsection we ﬁrst specify the time-stepping method, then sketch
some aspects of the implementation and subsequently describe the validation
of the method.

To simulate the spectral solution governed by equations
Time evolution.
(10) and (12) we ﬁrst rewrite these equations in a more general form having
in mind that the evolution due to the diﬀusive terms can be computed exactly
by introducing integrating factors eνk2t and eκk2t, respectively [6]. In fact, (10)
and (12) may be expressed as:

∂U(k, t)
∂t

= G (U(k, t))

(29)

where

U =

u(k, t)eνk2t
c(k, t)eκk2t (cid:21)

(cid:20)

; G =

(DW(k, t) + F(k, t)) eνk2t
Z(k, t)eκk2t

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

We use a constant time-step ∆t to obtain the solution at times tn = t0 + n∆t.
A four-stage, second-order, compact-storage Runge-Kutta method was imple-
mented. The advancement of the solution over a full time-step requires four
steps of the form:

U(k, tn+γ) = U(k, tn) + γ∆t G(U(k, tn+ξ))

(30)

The intermediate solutions in the diﬀerent stages can be found as follows.
In stage 1 we adopt (γ, ξ) = (1/4, 0), stage 2 requires (γ, ξ) = (1/3, 1/4),
stage 3 uses (γ, ξ) = (1/2, 1/3) and stage 4 completes the step with (γ, ξ) =
(1, 1/2) [15].

We consider turbulence in a cubic box of side Lb with periodic boundary
conditions and assume that the ﬂow is statistically isotropic which implies
that we require the same resolution in each coordinate direction. The direct
numerical simulations will employ a resolution of N 3, where N is the num-
ber of spectral-space grid-points that is used in each direction. This restricts

16

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

the set of wavenumbers to nα = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . , ± (N/2 − 1) , −N/2. The cut-
oﬀ wavenumber is given by kmax = πN/Lb. In physical space this corresponds
to a uniform grid xα = jLb/N , where j = 0, 1, 2, ..., N − 1 in each coordinate
direction.

We use the pseudo-spectral discretization method, i.e., the spatial derivative
terms in the Navier–Stokes and passive scalar equations are computed via sim-
ple multiplications in the spectral space. The nonlinear terms in the equations
are evaluated in physical space to avoid the evaluation of several computation-
ally intensive convolution sums [6]. This procedure requires three steps. First,
the Fourier-coeﬃcients u(k, t) and c(k, t) are used to obtain the velocity and
scalar ﬁelds in the physical space. Subsequently, the velocity-velocity products
and the velocity-scalar products are determined in physical space and ﬁnally
the associated Fourier-coeﬃcients of these products are obtained.

The ﬁnite resolution may give rise to well-known aliasing errors. In fact,
the product of two Fourier-series based on a resolution with N points gives
rise to more small-scale modes than can be supported by the grid. As a result,
these contributions can appear on the N -point resolution as seemingly lower
wave-number modes. A detailed discussion of techniques allowing the partial or
full removal of the aliasing error can be found in [6]. Several of these methods
were tested, as described in the appendix, closely following [40,41]. The method
of two shifted grids and spherical truncation was used in actual simulations.
This removes the aliasing error completely which was found to be essential,
especially to maintain the characteristics of the small turbulent scales.

Data decomposition and fast Fourier transforms. The simulation software
was implemented in Fortran 90 and parallelized based on the framework given
in [52] using the Message Passing Interface (MPI) [38]. Data are stored using
the Hierarchical Data Format (HDF5) [19] which is a ﬁle format and library
designed for scientiﬁc data-storage and handling. The choice of HDF5 was
motivated by the ﬂexible data-exchange between diﬀerent platforms and its
support of parallel I/O. High performance computations were done at SARA
Computing and Networking Services (Amsterdam) on Silicon Graphics (SGI)
Altix 3700 and Origin 3800 CC-NUMA systems (for more details see [42]).

in the parallel

The critical performance factors

implementation of
the pseudo-spectral discretization method are the domain decomposition
and the algorithm for the three-dimensional Fast Fourier Transform (FFT).
These two implementation decisions are essential since they determine almost
all aspects of the data-exchange between domains and most of the ﬂoating
point operations. It is important to obtain a data decomposition which permits
for fast transfer of data between processors. To obtain parallel Fourier trans-
forms we adopted procedures from two libraries: SCSL [17] and FFTW [13].

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

17

Moreover, since access to memory and the number and speed of available
CPU-s may diﬀer considerably among diﬀerent computational platforms, sig-
niﬁcant improvements in the processing time can be achieved by platform-
dependent optimization.

The speedup of the parallel implementation was checked by simulating de-
caying turbulence at a resolution of 2563. A time-interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.05 was
considered. This case corresponds to 28 time-steps with 5 data evaluation and
reporting stages. In a non-dedicated SGI Altix 3700 environment we obtained
on 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 processors the following speedup numbers: 3.9, 7.5, 14, 26, 47,
respectively. The best performance results were obtained by a cache-unfriendly
parallelization along the second array dimension. This gives the opportunity
of minimal data exchange and reshuﬄing between processors and illustrates
that the speed of the processors overwhelms the abilities of direct access to
the memory. This was found to be the critical issue for the hardware that was
available.

To validate the implementation of the pseudo-spectral
Code validation.
method, decaying homogeneous isotropic turbulence was simulated at two dif-
ferent Reynolds numbers. The initial condition was taken from [35], which
was generated on the basis of the Pao spectrum [39]. For further details we re-
fer to [34]. This ﬂow was studied extensively using high-order ﬁnite-volume
discretization and explicit Runge-Kutta time-stepping. Special attention was
given to the degree of convergence that could be achieved using the ﬁnite
volume approach. These data provide a clear point of reference with which
the present pseudo-spectral ﬂow-solver can be compared.

Rλ/N 3
50
100

323
0.56
0.20

483
963
643
0.83 1.11 1.67
0.59
0.39
0.29

1283
2.22
0.79

1923
3.34
1.18

2563
4.45
1.57

3843
6.67
2.36

5123
8.90
3.15

Table 1. The value of kmaxη associated with diﬀerent resolutions. The Kolmogorov scales are
η = 5.87 · 10

for Rλ = 50 and Rλ = 100, respectively.

and η = 2.07 · 10

−3

−3

A ﬁrst, global assessment of the resolution that is achieved may be inferred
by evaluating the product of the cut-oﬀ wavenumber and the observed Kol-
λ/20)−3/4 in terms of the Taylor
mogorov dissipation length-scale η = L(3R2
Reynolds number Rλ computed for the initial condition (see (33) for the deﬁni-
tion) and integral length L = 1/2. In order to resolve all dynamically relevant
length-scales, including the dissipation length-scale it is required that kmaxη
is suﬃciently large. A commonly accepted criterion of adequate spatial reso-
lution is that kmaxη > 1. When the focus is on higher-order statistics, it is
preferred to use larger values (kmaxη > 3/2) [11, 46]. In Table 1 the values of

18

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

kmaxη are presented for the two computational Reynolds numbers considered
Re = 1060.7 and Re = 4242.6 which correspond to Rλ = 50 and Rλ = 100.
We observe that in the ﬁrst case a resolution of at least 643 is required to
achieve full resolution, while in the second case the minimal required resolu-
tion moves up to 1923.

For validation of the code, the ﬂow was simulated for more than two eddy-

turnover times and a number of quantities were monitored:

Total energy :

E(t) =

k E(k, t)

Taylor microscale :

b
λ(t) =

X
E(t)/
5
(cid:16)

b

k k2E(k, t)

1/2

(cid:17)

X

Taylor Reynolds :

Rλ(t) = λ(t)u(t)/ν

;

u(t) =

E(t) (33)

(31)

(32)

(34)

2
3

r

b

Longitudinal skewness :

S1(t) = −

(∂v1(x, t)/∂x1)3
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
h(∂v1(x, t)/∂x1)2i3/2

The operator h·i in (34) refers to volume averaging.

Figure 3. Prediction of total energy

E, Taylor microscale λ, Taylor Reynolds number Rλ and

longitudinal skewness S1 at an initial Rλ = 50 (a) and Rλ = 100 (b) with a
ﬁnite-volume [35] (solid) and the present pseudo-spectral (dotted) code.

b

(a)

(b)

In Fig. 3, a comparison is made between simulation results obtained with
the pseudo-spectral method at N = 512, and with the high-order ﬁnite-volume
discretization method [35]. For each of the quantities an almost perfect agree-
ment may be observed. In Fig. 4 we assessed the convergence of the predictions
as function of the spatial resolution. In this ﬁgure we replaced the longitudinal

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

19

(b)
Figure 4. Convergence of predictions for the Taylor-Reynolds number Rλ and the skewness S at
an initial Rλ = 50 (a) and Rλ = 100 (b) for diﬀerent resolutions
N = 32 · 48 · 64 · 96 · 128 · 192 · 256 · 384 · 512.

(a)

skewness S1 by the skewness:

S(t) =

3

2
35 (cid:18)

λ(t)
u(t) (cid:19)

k k2T (k, t)

X

(35)

For homogeneous isotropic turbulence the value of S should be equal
to 0.5 [2],which is quite well approximated in the simulations. This quantity is
quite sensitive to the spatial resolution and is therefore a good indicator of ap-
propriate spatial resolution. We observe that the diﬀerent predictions display
a clearly distinguishable convergence toward the grid-independent solution.
Speciﬁcally, results obtained for resolutions higher than 643 at Rλ = 50 and
1923 at Rλ = 100 are quite indistinguishable, consistent with the criterion
that kmaxη > 1.

In the next section we turn to the eﬀects that diﬀerent multiscale forcing
procedures have on the developing turbulent ﬂow. We will focus in particular
on the modiﬁcations that arise in the kinetic energy spectrum.

3 Modulated cascading by broad-band forcing

The explicit forcing in diﬀerent wavenumber bands can have a strong eﬀect
on the developing turbulent ﬂow. We discuss the modiﬁcations of the energy
spectrum arising from ‘constant-energy’ (class ‘A’) or ‘constant-energy-input-
rate’ (class ‘B’) procedures. The various forcing strategies will be shown to
qualitatively correspond to each other, provided the total dissipation-rate εw
and the spectral energy distribution are commensurate for the diﬀerent class

20

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

‘A’ and ‘B’ forcing strategies. We will specify this inter-relation in more detail
momentarily. As point of reference, we will ﬁrst turn our attention to forcing
of the large scales only. Subsequently, we consider two-band forcing and inves-
tigate in particular the eﬀects of variation of the strength and location of the
small-scales band on the developing ﬂow.

In the sequel, we consider time-averaged properties of the developing turbu-

lent ﬂow deﬁned by:

hhit = lim
t→∞

1
t − t0

t

Z
t0

1
T − t0

T

Z
t0

h(τ )dτ ≈

h(τ )dτ

(36)

where T is suﬃciently large. In all cases t0 = 5 in order to allow the averaging-
process to start from a properly developed quasi-stationary state. The aver-
aging is continued up to T = 25, which corresponds to approximately 40
eddy-turnover times. This was found to provide an accurate representation of
the long-time averages, leading to relative errors below 5 percent, measured in
terms of the ratio of the standard deviation and the mean signal. This proce-
dure was applied to obtain the time-averaged kinetic energy spectra as well,
which are very eﬀective for monitoring changes in the kinetic energy dynamics
due to the forcing.

Large-scale forcing. To create a point of reference, we ﬁrst consider forced
turbulence in which energy is introduced to the system only in the ﬁrst
shell K1,1. We adopt k0 = 3π referring to Fig. 2(a) and force all 18 modes in-
side this band. The computational Reynolds number Re = 1060.7 and the size
of the computational domain Lb = 1. The spatial resolution was taken to
be 1283, which provides ample resolution of these cases, similar to what was
established in subsection 2.3.

In order to be able to quantitatively compare results obtained with the
diﬀerent forcing strategies, care should be taken of properly ‘assigning’ a level
for the energy dissipation-rate and the spectral energy distribution. For this
purpose, we may consider simulations with the A2-method to be central in the
sense that the other three forcing strategies may be speciﬁed with reference to
it. In fact, if we generate an initial condition with a certain total kinetic energy,
then A2-forcing yields an evolving ﬂow which becomes statistically stationary
after some time, while maintaining the same level of total energy. The A2-
forced simulation can be used to specify the ‘corresponding’ class-B forcing
strategies. In fact, the constant dissipation-rate εw in class ‘B’ forcing is taken
equal to the time-average value of the dissipation-rate that is found from the
εit. This procedure was adhered to
A2-forced simulation, i.e., we adopt εw = h

b

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

21

in all cases presented in this section. Finally, in the developed stages of either
these A2- or B-forced ﬂows, any instantaneous solution may be used to arrive
at a full speciﬁcation of the ‘corresponding’ A1-forcing. The actual choice of
this instantaneous solution is arbitrary. However, when comparing simulations
based on A1-forcing that adopt diﬀerent realizations of the turbulent ﬂow-ﬁeld,
we observed that the statistical properties of all these A1-forced cases were
the same.

Figure 5. The evolution of the total kinetic energy

E (a) and energy-dissipation-rate

ε (b) for

the large-scale forcing: A1 (dashed), A2 (dotted), B1 (dash-dotted), B2 (solid).
b

b

(a)

(b)

b

b

E(t) and energy dissipation rate

The evolution of the total kinetic energy

ε(t)
is shown in Fig. 5. As initial condition for the A2- and B-forced simulations, we
adopted the velocity ﬁeld obtained at t = 0.5 from the decaying homogeneous
turbulence simulation discussed in subsection 2.3. To be able to qualitatively
compare with the A1-forced ﬂow at a similar energetic level we took as initial
condition the solution from B1-forcing at t = 5. The total kinetic energy is seen
to ﬂuctuate around its long-time mean value (of course, apart from A2-forcing).
As can be seen, the system rapidly develops into a statistically stationary
state characterized by the input of energy, its transfer to smaller scales and
dissipation in the viscous range. In A1-forcing the Fourier-coeﬃcients in the
forced band are all kept constant, i.e., equal to their initial values. The energy
in the system ﬂuctuates very signiﬁcantly, which was considered a disadvantage
of this forcing in [11]. The energy and dissipation levels in A1-forcing diﬀer
considerably from those obtained with the other forcing strategies. To compare
∼=
A2-forcing with B-forcing, the energy dissipation rate was taken as εw = hεit
0.2. The total kinetic energy for B1-forcing is seen to ﬂuctuate around the
constant value associated with A2-forcing. A similar impression is observed
when use is made of the fractal B2-forcing in which the fractal dimension of

22

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

the stirrer was taken equal to Df = 2.6 [32] which corresponds to an exponent
β = 3/5 in (25).

In general, when applied to the largest scales only, all forcing procedures
mentioned in subsection 2.2 yield similar results. As a further example, the tails
of the time-averaged spectra were found to be virtually identical to each other,
which indicates that the properties of the smaller turbulent length-scales are
not very strongly dependent on the details of the speciﬁc forcing. This was also
established by various other quantities that were investigated. Speciﬁcally, the
Taylor-Reynolds number Rλ for the simulated cases was seen to ﬂuctuate in
the range between ≈ 50 up to ≈ 60 for all methods. The time-averaged value
of the skewness was also investigated and found to be very close to 0.5. This
indicates that a well developed isotropic ﬂow was attained [2].

In the simulations that adopt two-band forcing we con-
Two-band forcing.
sider situations in which we introduce energy into the system in a band con-
sisting of four shells, next to the already described large-scale forcing in the
ﬁrst shell. We ﬁrst compare the diﬀerent class ‘A’ and ‘B’ forcing strategies,
within this two-band setting. As second, forced band we consider K17,20. This
band corresponds to k1 = 33π and k2 = 41π in Fig. 2(a) and contains in
total 17284 diﬀerent modes that are all explicitly forced. The comparison of
the diﬀerent forcing strategies shows that the ﬂow-predictions are qualitatively
comparable. Subsequently, we therefore focus on the B2-forcing strategy and
investigate the eﬀects arising from changes in the strength or the location of
the second forced band.

Forcing of a second band implies that we need to additionally specify how
the energy input is distributed over the bands, the shells within the bands
and, ﬁnally, the modes within the shells. The speciﬁcation of the A2-forcing
requires the fraction of the energy-input that is allocated to the diﬀerent bands.
We consider the case in which a = 1/5 in (28) which corresponds to equi-
partitioning of the energy-input over the ﬁve shells that are forced. The forcing
within the second band is further speciﬁed by assigning an equal energy-input
rate to each of the four shells contained in it. Finally, each of the modes
in a particular shell n receives an equal share of the energy-input to that
shell, taking the number Pn of modes in the particular shell into account. To
compare the ‘A’ with ‘B’ forcing strategies we adopt the same method as above
for specifying the parameter εw. Speciﬁcally, the total energy injection for the
εit ∼= 1, in terms of the time-average of the
‘B’ methods was given as εw = h
total dissipation rate in the A2-forcing. Moreover, the same equi-partitioning
of the energy-input as in A2-forcing was adopted. Finally, the A1-forcing is
derived from the ﬁeld that was obtained at t = 5 with the B1-forcing. We
veriﬁed that the statistical properties of the A1-forced ﬂow are insensitive to

b

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

23

the particular choice of initial ﬁeld used to deﬁne this forcing method.

Figure 6. The evolution of the total kinetic energy

E (a) and energy-dissipation-rate

ε (b) for

two-band forcing: A1 (dashed), A2 (dotted), B1 (dash-dotted), B2 (solid).

b

b

(a)

(b)

As may be noticed by comparing Fig. 5 with Fig. 6, the two-band forcing
leads to a strong increase in the total energy dissipation-rate, while the to-
tal kinetic energy present in the ﬂow is quite unaﬀected by the second forced
band. The increase in the dissipation-rate is particularly strong for A1-forcing.
Hence, the high-k forcing changes mainly the distribution of energy over
the scales and not so much the actual energy content. By changing the strength
and location of the forcing, we have the possibility to control, and to some
extent manipulate the way the energy is distributed and hence indirectly in-
ﬂuence the large- and small-scale transport properties of the ﬂow. We turn to
this aspect next, by focusing explicitly on the kinetic energy spectrum.

−2/3
εi
t

b

The compensated kinetic energy spectra E(k) = h

k5/3 hEkit that are
obtained with the diﬀerent two-band forcing methods are collected in Fig. 7.
The modiﬁcations in the spectrum, relative to the case of large-scale forc-
ing only, are localized primarily in the region close to the forced band. All
forcing methods are seen to yield qualitatively quite similar results. Next to
the expected modiﬁcations near the explicitly forced band, we observe that
the two-band forcing also aﬀects a much wider set of larger scale modes. In
fact, a signiﬁcant depletion of the kinetic energy in a range of scales ‘ahead
of’ the forced region, is readily appreciated. This indicates that the agitation
of a small band of modes can induce large changes in a rather wide part of
the spectrum which further characterizes the type of turbulence-control that
one may achieve with explicit forcing.

We next turn to the second part of this section and consider the eﬀects
of varying the spectral support and the strength of the second forced band.

24

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

Figure 7. Compensated energy spectrum for two-band forced turbulence (k ≤ 3π and
33π < k ≤ 41π) with diﬀerent methods: A1 (dashed), A2 (dotted), B1 (dash-dotted), B2 (solid).

Figure 8. Compensated energy spectrum for two-band forced turbulence with the B2-method and
the same energy inputs εw,1 = εw,2 = 0.15 to the k ≤ 3π band and various locations of the second
band: 9π < k ≤ 17π, 17π < k ≤ 23π, 33π < k ≤ 41π, 49π < k ≤ 57π (dashed, dash-dotted, ⊲, ⋄).
The spectrum obtained with large-scale forcing at εw = 0.15 in k ≤ 3π band (solid).

The qualitative similarity of the diﬀerent two-band forcing methods as seen
in Fig. 7 allows to concentrate on only one of the forcing methods. We adopt
B2-forcing in the sequel. In Fig. 8 we illustrate the eﬀect of variation of the
spectral support of the second band. Relative to the case of large-scale forcing
only, we observe that the tails of the spectra are quite unaﬀected. However,
the injection of energy in the second band is seen not only to increase the en-
ergy in the forced scales but also to deplete the energy in all the larger scales.
Moreover, the ‘up-scale’ eﬀect of energy-depletion is more pronounced in case
the second band is moved toward smaller scales.

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

25

(a)

(b)

Figure 9.
(a) Compensated energy spectrum for two-band forced turbulence with the B2-forcing
method and energy input rate εw,1 = 0.15 in k ≤ 3π band for diﬀerent strengths of forcing in the
33π < k ≤ 41π band: εw,2 = 0.075, 0.15, 0.30, 0.45, 0.60, 0.75, 0.90 ((cid:3), dotted, dashed, dash-dotted,
⊲, ⋄, ◦). Large-scale forcing with εw = 0.15 in the k ≤ 3π band is denoted by the solid line. (b)
Corresponding time-averaged total kinetic energy with standard deviations.

The control over the ﬂow that is available with two-band forcing is examined
further by investigating the eﬀects of varying the strength of the forcing in the
second band. We kept the energy input rate for the ﬁrst k ≤ 3π band equal
to εw = 0.15 and varied the strength of forcing in the second 33π < k ≤ 41π
band adopting εw = 0.075 . . . 0.90. The corresponding compensated energy
spectra from these simulations are shown in Fig. 9(a). We observe that a higher
energy input-rate in the second band leads to a more pronounced peak in the
spectrum which shifts to lower values of kη with increasing εw of the second
band. Simultaneously, the value of E(k) decreases for the low-k modes with
increasing εw. This forcing of the second band allows to quite independently
control the spectrum, at roughly the same total energy content in the ﬂow.
In fact, variation of εw of the second band by a factor of about 10 is seen to
lead to a comparably strong increase in the peak value of the spectrum while
the total energy level h

Eit is increased by only ≈ 15% as seen in Fig. 9(b).

In the next section we will examine how the changes in the ﬂow properties
due to the two-band forcing in spectral space inﬂuence the physical space mixing
eﬃciency of a passive scalar.

b

4 Small and large scale mixing eﬃciency

The consequences of explicit broad band forcing not only express themselves
in modulated energy cascades. The mixing properties of the evolving turbulent
ﬂow in physical space also depend signiﬁcantly on the forcing that is applied.

26

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

In this section we quantify the mixing-eﬃciency by monitoring geometric prop-
erties of evolving level-sets of an embedded passive scalar. The numerical inte-
gration method that is used to determine these level-set properties is described
in subsection 4.1. The ensemble-averaged simulation results are discussed in
subsection 4.2; we establish to what extent the two-band forcing can be used
to control the maximal rate of mixing and the total accumulated degree of
mixing.

4.1 Level-set evaluation to quantify mixing

To illustrate and quantify the inﬂuence of two-band forcing on the turbulent
dispersion of a passive scalar ﬁeld we analyze the evolution of basic geomet-
ric properties of its level-sets. As a result of the turbulent ﬂow these level-
sets become highly distorted and dispersed across the ﬂow-domain. Speciﬁ-
cally, we concentrate on the surface-area and the wrinkling of these level-sets.
We adopt a specialized integration method to determine these geometric prop-
erties, as developed in [14]. This method is based on the Laplace transform
and avoids the explicit construction and integration over the complex and
possibly fragmented scalar level-sets. With this method an accurate and eﬃ-
cient evaluation of the evolving mixing eﬃciency can be achieved which allows
to quantify the increased complexity of the ﬂow in relation to the two-band
forcing that is used.

Basic geometric properties of a level-set S(a, t) = {x ∈ R | C(x, t) = a} of
the scalar C(x, t) may be evaluated by integrating a corresponding ‘density
function’ g over this set. In fact, we have:

Ig(a, t) =

ZS(a,t)

ZV

dA g(x, t) =

dx δ(C(x, t) − a)|∇C(x, t)|g(x, t)

(37)

where the volume V encloses the level-set S(a, t) [31]. Setting g(x, t) = 1,
g(x, t) = ∇ · n(x, t) or g(x, t) = |∇ · n(x, t)|, we can determine the global
respectively. Here
surface-area,
n(x, t) = ∇C(x, t)/|∇C(x, t)|
locally perpendic-
ular to the level-set. The divergence of this vector-ﬁeld is directly related to
the local curvature of the level-set.

is a unit normal vector,

or wrinkling

of S(a, t)

curvature

We will focus on the evolution of the surface-area A and the wrinkling W .
The scalar C is scaled to be between 0 and 1; we will primarily consider
the level-set a = 1/4. In particular we monitor:

ϑA(a, t) =

; ϑW (a, t) =

(38)

IA(a, t)
IA(a, 0)

IW (a, t)
IW (a, 0)

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

27

By determining ϑA and ϑW we may quantify the rate at which surface-area
and wrinkling develop, the maximal values that are obtained and the time-
scale at which these are achieved. The corresponding cumulative eﬀects are
given by

ζA(a, t) =

ϑA(a, τ )dτ

;

ζW (a, t) =

ϑW (a, τ )dτ

(39)

t

Z
0

t

Z
0

These cumulative measures express the total surface-area and wrinkling that
has developed in the course of time. In particular applications, e.g., involving
combustion in diﬀusion ﬂames, the cumulative surface-area and wrinkling ex-
press the total ‘chemical processing capacity’. Here, we will determine these
cumulative eﬀects in order to characterize the diﬀerent two-band forcing pro-
cedures.

To establish the inﬂuence of forcing on turbulent mixing properties we sim-
ulated the spreading of a passive tracer at Schmidt number Sc = 0.7. The sim-
ulations were started from a spherical tracer distribution of radius r = 3/16.
The scalar concentration was set equal to 1 inside this sphere and 0 outside.
A localized Gaussian smoothing of this C-distribution was applied near the
edge of the initial sphere to avoid resolution problems. The fractal forcing B2-
procedure as deﬁned in (25) was adopted. We performed numerical simulations
in which the energy input-rate εw and the spectral support of this two-band
forcing were varied.

As point of reference we adopted large-scale forcing in the K1,1 shell with
an energy injection-rate εw = 0.6. The resolution requirements were satisfac-
torily fulﬁlled: kmaxη ranges from 2.3 to 3.5 using a resolution in the range
1283 − 1923 grid-cells. For the passive scalar these resolutions correspond
to kmaxηOC in the range from 3 to 4.5, where ηOC is the Obukhov-Corrsin
scale [47]. To study the inﬂuence of two-band B2-forcing we applied supple-
mentary forcing either in a region situated near the largest scales of the ﬂow,
i.e., K5,8 or further separated, i.e., K13,16. In case two bands are forced, the en-
ergy input-rate for the K1,1 shell is εw,1 = 0.15, while the second band is forced
using εw,2 = 0.45. In this way the total energy level is kept at comparable lev-
els in the diﬀerent cases. A qualitative impression of the eﬀect of these forcing
procedures may be observed from the snapshots shown in Fig. 10. The veloc-
ity and passive scalar display considerably more small-scale features in case of
two-band forcing, particularly in case of high-k forcing. To quantify this qual-
itative impression we apply the level-set analysis discussed above. The results
will be presented in the next subsection.

28

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 10. Snapshot of vertical velocity ﬁeld iso-surfaces (left) and passive scalar concentration
(right) at t = 0.5 for large-scale forcing K1,1 with εw = 0.6 (a), or with εw,1 = 0.15 in the ﬁrst shell
and complementary forcing εw,2 = 0.45 in K5,8 (b) or K13,16 (c). In the velocity ﬁeld snapshots the
red iso-surface corresponds to u2 = 0.2 and the blue iso-surfaces to u2 = −0.2. The iso-surface at
C = 0.25 is shown for the passive scalar.

4.2 Surface-area and wrinkling

In this subsection, we compare instantaneous and accumulated mixing prop-
erties for large-scale forcing and diﬀerent two-band forcing. The total energy
input rate to the ﬂow is kept constant at 0.6; a fraction εw,1 is allocated to the
ﬁrst shell and εw,2 to the second band such that εw,1 + εw,2 = 0.6 and εw,1 is
varied from 0.05 up to 0.6. The characterization of the mixing-eﬃciency was
based on averaging 20 simulations, each starting from an independent real-
ization of the initial velocity ﬁeld. The diﬀerent initial conditions were each

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

29

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 11. Evolution of decaying passive scalar growth parameters: a) surface-area ϑA,
b) wrinkling ϑW , c) accumulated surface-area ζA, d) accumulated wrinkling ζW . Large-scale
forcing K1,1 with εw = 0.60 (solid) and complementary two-band forcing (εw,1 = 0.15 and
εw,2 = 0.45) in K5,8 (dashed), K13,16 (dash-dotted).

separated by two eddy-turnover times.

The instantaneous and cumulative eﬀects arising from both the large-scale
and the two-band forcing are shown in Fig. 11. The development of the in-
stantaneous surface-area and wrinkling is qualitatively similar in each case.
The concentrated initial tracer distribution is in the ﬁrst stages primarily dis-
persed by convective sweeping in the turbulent ﬂow. As a result, the level-set
corresponding to a = 1/4 becomes distorted and both ϑA and ϑW show a rapid
increase. However, since no source of scalar was included in the computational
model, molecular diﬀusion dominates the long-time behavior and leads to ϑA
and ϑW to decrease to zero as t → ∞. In between, ϑA and ϑW reach their
maximum. The rapid initial growth is also clearly expressed in Fig. 11(c-d).
In addition, the cumulative measures ζA and ζW show a clear saturation as

30

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.

(a) Evolution of the decaying passive scalar accumulated surface-area parameter ζA

for two-band forcing (K1,1 – K13,16) with diﬀerent equi-partitions of energy between bands:
(0.60 – 0.00) (◦), (0.45 – 0.15) (solid), (0.30 – 0.30) (dashed), (0.15 – 0.45) (dot-dashed),

(0.05 – 0.55) (dotted). (b) Total surface-area ζ ⋆
W at t = 2 for diﬀerent εw,2 in
K13,16 (results normalized by the total surface-area and wrinkling for the large-scale forcing).

A and wrinkling ζ ⋆

t & 1.

We observe from Fig. 11(a-b) that forcing of the large scales only, creates the
highest growth-rate of surface-area and wrinkling. The surface-area reaches its
maximum value both sooner and at a higher value in this case. In the initial
stages convective spreading of the tracer dominates over the decay caused by
molecular diﬀusion; hence in these stages the agitation of the larger scales plays
a crucial role in the evolution of the surface-area. The higher band forcing needs
to compete more directly with the viscous eﬀects and does not induce very
strong sweeping motions over large distances. Correspondingly, high-k forcing
is found less eﬀective in producing surface-area. The more localized distortions
of the scalar level-sets, as expressed by the development of the wrinkling, are
less aﬀected by the competition with viscosity, as seen in Fig. 11(b).

The interpretation of the eﬀectiveness of the mixing in relation to the spe-
ciﬁc forcing alters if we compare the accumulated values for surface-area and
wrinkling. As may be appreciated from Fig. 11(c-d), a signiﬁcant enhancement
of the accumulated long-time surface-area and wrinkling arises as a result of
the explicit agitation of the smaller scales in the ﬂow. Evidently, forcing of
the smaller scales does not yield a more intense mixing, judging from the in-
stantaneous values, but does yield an increase in the total surface-area and
wrinkling, accumulated over time.

To measure the inﬂuence of variations in the strength of the forcing in
the high-k band, we focus on the K1,1 and K13,16 two-band forcing. In par-
ticular, we keep εw,1 + εw,2 = 0.6 and vary the values of εw,2. The eﬀects on
the cumulative mixing-eﬃciency are shown in Fig. 12(a). We observe that an

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

31

increase in εw,2 implies a slight decrease in the initial growth rate of instan-
taneous surface-area, but an increase in the long-time cumulative eﬀect. The
dependence of the long-time cumulative eﬀect on εw,2 is clariﬁed in Fig. 12(b).
These simulation results establish the degree of control that may be achieved
with two-band forcing and the feasibility of such computational modeling. This
approach may help to identify optimal stirring procedures to which future re-
search will be devoted.

5 Summary and concluding remarks

Various deterministic forcing methods that perturb a turbulent ﬂow in a cho-
sen range of length-scales were examined. The presented modeling framework
incorporates the explicit forcing as an integral part. We have shown that with
a relatively simple forcing model basic properties of complex ﬂows can be
captured. For example, an enhancement of the energy dissipation by small-
scale forcing was seen to produce so-called spectral short-cut features, quite
similar to what was observed experimentally in ﬂow over canopies [12] where
the kinetic energy is immediately transferred to the smallest scales of the ﬂow.
Forcing methods agitating the ﬂow in a wide range of scales induce signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences in the developing ﬂow, compared to the case obtained classi-
cally in which only the large scales are forced. Various forcing methods were in-
troduced and shown to produce qualitatively similar results, provided the forc-
ing parameters correspond to turbulence at comparable total kinetic energies.
We classiﬁed the methods according to constant-energy or constant-energy-
input-rate and examined these procedures by simulating forced turbulence
with energy injected in two diﬀerent bands. The modulation of the turbulent
ﬂow was investigated for various locations of the second high-k band in spec-
tral space. It was shown that the forcing in the second band induces nonlocal
modulation of the energy spectrum. This was further examined by simulations
done with diﬀerent strength of forcing in the high-k band controlled by the
energy injection rate.

We devoted special attention to a recently proposed multiscale forcing that
models a ﬂow under the inﬂuence of an additional perturbation by a multiscale
object [32]. We performed numerical simulations of the dispersion of a passive
scalar ﬁeld in a turbulent ﬂow that is driven by such forcing. A level-set integra-
tion method was adopted to quantify general characteristics of mixing quality
and eﬃciency. It was found that broad-band forcing causes additional produc-
tion of smaller scales in the ﬂow which is directly responsible for the localized
enhancement of the wrinkling of the level-set. In contrast, the surface-area of
a level-set of the tracer is found to be mainly governed by convective sweeping
by the larger scales in the ﬂow and hence it is governed to a greater extent by

32

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

the energy input-rate allocated to the small-k range. Future study will include
the spatial localization of the forcing. This can help to model ﬂows that are
more closely related to realistic physical situation observed in experiments and
applications.

Acknowledgments

The work is supported by the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter
(FOM), Utrecht, the Netherlands. Simulations were performed at SARA; spe-
cial thanks go to Willem Vermin for support with the parallelization. The com-
putations were made possible through grant SC-213 of the Dutch National
Computing Foundation (NCF). AKK would like to thank David McComb for
many stimulating discussions during research visits at the University of Ed-
inburgh. BJG gratefully acknowledges support from the Turbulence Working
Group (TWG) at the Center for Non-Linear Studies (CNLS) at Los Alamos
National Laboratory which facilitated an extended research visit in 2005 and
allowed many fruitful discussions. Special thanks go to Darryl Holm.

Appendix A:

To eradicate the aliasing error we study in more detail (i) the random phase
shifts method and (ii) the method employing two-shifted grids with spheri-
cal truncation [6, 40, 41]. In the ﬁrst case, the aliasing error is only partially
removed. With additional truncation of the Fourier velocity ﬁeld coeﬃcients
the remaining error can be reduced to O(∆t2). In the method employing two-
shifted grids and spherical truncation, the aliasing error can be fully removed
from the simulations. This speciﬁc approach doubles the computational costs
and memory requirements, compared to the random shifts method. The well-
known 3/2 method can be used as well, by going to higher resolution and
truncating the ﬁeld. This can be done with the lowest number of operations,
but has higher memory requirements.

The aliasing error for higher-resolution runs aﬀects mainly the small-scale
statistics. This is visualized in Fig. A1 where we have shown the Taylor-
Reynolds number and the longitudinal skewness for decaying turbulence sim-
ulations with initial Rλ = 100 and two resolutions 1283 and 1923. The partial
dealiasing removes the main aliasing error and with the additional truncation
reduces it to the accuracy associated with the adopted Runge-Kutta scheme.
There is a small diﬀerence between the full and partial removal of the aliasing
error for the lower resolution of 1283, but this largely vanishes for the well-
resolved 1923 case.

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

33

(a)

(b)

(d)
Inﬂuence of aliasing error for resolution 1283 (a-b) and 1923 (c-d) on Taylor-Reynolds

(c)

Figure A1.

number Rλ(t) and longitudinal skewness S1(t) at an initial Rλ = 100 case. Simulations with
aliasing error (dotted), partial dealiasing without truncation (dashed), partial dealiasing with
the truncation (dash-dotted), full dealiasing by two grid shifts (solid). Results for the partial
dealiasing with truncation (dash-dotted) are almost identical to fully dealiased results (solid).

References
[1] J. Banhart, M.F. Ashby, and N.A. Fleck. Cellular metals and metal foaming technology. Verlag

MIT, Bremen, 2001.

[2] G. K. Batchelor. Theory of homogeneous turbulence. Cambridge University Press, 1953.
[3] K. Boomsma, D. Poulikakos, and F. Zwick. Metal foams as compact high performance heat

exchangers. Mech. Mater., 35:1161–1176, 2003.

[4] W. P. Breugem and B. J. Boersma. Direct numerical simulations of turbulent ﬂow over a per-

meable wall using a direct and a continuum approach. Phys. Fluids, 17, 2005.

[5] W. P. Breugem and D. A. S. Rees. A derivation of the volume–averaged Boussinesq equations

for ﬂow in porous media with viscous dissipation. Transp. Porous Media, to appear.

[6] C. Canuto, M. Hussaini, A. Quarteroni, and T. Zang. Spectral Methods in Fluid Dynamics.

Springer Verlag (Berlin and New York), 1988.

[7] D. Carati, S. Ghosal, and P. Moin. On the representation of backscatter in dynamic localization

[8] J. R. Chasnov. Simulation of the Kolmogorov inertial subrange using an improved subgrid model.

models. Phys. Fluids, 7(3):606–616, 1995.

Phys. Fluids, 3(1):188–200, 1991.

34

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

[9] S. Chen and X. Shan. High-resolution turbulent simulations using the Connection Machine-2.

[10] H. Cheng and I. P. Castro. Near wall ﬂow over urban-like roughness. Boundary-Layer Meteorol-

Comput. Phys., 6(6):643–646, 1992.

ogy, 104(2):229–259, 2002.

bulence. Comput. Fluids, 16:257, 1988.

[11] V. Eswaran and S. B. Pope. An examination of forcing in direct numerical simulations of tur-

[12] J. Finnigan. Turbulence in plant canopies. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 32:519–571, 2000.
[13] M. Frigo and S. G. Johnson. FFTW: An adaptive software architecture for the FFT. In Proc.
1998 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, volume 3, pages 1381–1384,
http://www.ﬀtw.org, 1998.

[14] B. J. Geurts. Mixing eﬃciency in turbulent shear layers. J. Turbul., 2:2–24, 2001.
[15] B. J. Geurts. Modern Simulation Strategies for Turbulent Flow. R.T. Edwards, 2001.
[16] S. Ghosal, T. S. Lund, P. Moin, and K. Akselvoll. A dynamic localization model for large-eddy

simulation of turbulent ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 286:229–255, 1995.
user’s

guide. TechPubs

[17] Silicon Graphics.

SCSL

Library

of

Silicon Graphics,

[18] S. Grossman and D. Lohse. Scaling in hard turbulent Rayleight-Be´nard ﬂow. Phys. Rev. A,

[19] HDF5 Group. HDF5 user’s guide. National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA),

University of Illinois, http://www.hdfgroup.org.

[20] J. O. Hinze. Turbulence: An Introduction to its Mechanism and Theory. New York, McGraw-

http://techpubs.sgi.com.

46(2):903–917, 1992.

Hill, 1975.

[21] T. Ishihara and Y. Kaneda. High resolution DNS of incompressible homogeneous forced turbu-
lence - time dependence of statistics. In Y. Kaneda and T. Gotoh, editors, Statistical Theories
and Computational Approaches to Turbulence. Springer, 2003.

[22] J. Jimenez. Turbulent ﬂow over rough walls. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 36:173–196, 2004.
[23] J. Jimenez, A. A. Wray, P. G. Saﬀman, and R. S. Rogallo. The structure of intense vorticity in

isotropic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 255:65–90, 1993.

[24] Y. Kaneda, T. Ishihara, M. Yokokawa, K. Itakura, and A. Uno. Energy dissipation rate and
energy spectrum in high resolution direct numerical simulations of turbulence in a periodic box.
Phys. Fluids, 15(2):21–24, 2003.

[25] R. M. Kerr. Higher-order derivative correlations and the alignment of small-scale structures in

isotropic numerical turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 153:31–58, 1985.

[26] R. M. Kerr. Velocity, scalar and transfer spectra in numerical turbulence. J. Fluid Mech.,

211:309–332, 1990.

[27] A. N. Kolmogorov. The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous ﬂuids at very

large Reynolds numbers. C.R. Acad. Sci. URSS, 30:301–305, 1941.

[28] A. N. Kolmogorov. A reﬁnement of previous hypothesis concerning the local structure of tur-
bulence in a viscous incompressible ﬂuid at high reynolds number. J. Fluid Mech., 13:82–85,
1962.

[29] F. Li, L. Leﬀerts, and T. H. van der Meer. Study on heat transfer enhancement by metallic foams
with carbon nano ﬁbers (CNFs). In Proceedings of the 6th World Conference on Experimental
Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics, and Thermodynamics, Matsushima, Miyagi, Japan, April 17-
21, 2005.

[30] L. Machiels. Predictability of small-scale motion in isotropic ﬂuid turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett.,

79(18):3411–3414, 1997.

[31] V.G. Maz’ja. Sobolev spaces. Springer Verlag – Berling, 1985.
[32] B. Mazzi and J. C. Vassilicos. Fractal generated turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 502:65–87, 2004.
[33] W. D. McComb. The Physics of Fluid Turbulence. Oxford University Press, 1990.
[34] J. Meyers. Accuracy of Large-Eddy Simulation strategies. PhD thesis, Katholieke Universiteit

[35] J. Meyers, B. J. Geurts, and M. Baelmans. Database analysis of errors in large-eddy simulation.

[36] A. Misra and D. I. Pullin. A vortex-based subgrid stress model for large-eddy simulation. Phys.

Leuven, 2004.

Phys. Fluids, 15(9):2740–2755, 2003.

Fluids, 9(7):2443–2454, 1997.

[37] K. Mohseni, B. Kosovic, S. Shkoller, and J. E. Marsden. Numerical simulations of the La-
grangian Averaged Navier-Stokes equations for homogeneous isotropic turbulence. Phys. Fluids,
15(2):524–544, 2003.

[38] MPI. Message Passing Interface standard. http://www.mpi-forum.org.
[39] S. B. Pope. Turbulent Flows. Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Mixing in manipulated turbulence

35

[40] R. S. Rogallo. An ILLIAC program for the numerical simulation of homogeneous incompressible

turbulence. Technical Report NASA-TM-73203, NASA, 1977.

[41] R. S. Rogallo. Numerical experiments in homogeneous turbulence. Technical Report NASA-TM-

81315, NASA, 1981.

[42] SARA. Computing and Networking Services. http://www.sara.nl.
[43] E. D. Siggia and G. S. Patterson. Intermittency eﬀects in a numerical simulation of stationary

three-dimensional turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 86:567, 1978.

[44] A. A. Townsend. The Structure of Turbulent Shear Flows. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1976.
[45] A. Vincent and M. Meneguzzi. The spatial structure and statistical properties of homogeneous

turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 225:1–20, 1991.

[46] L. P. Wang, S. Chen, J. G. Brasseur, and J. C. Wyngaard. Examination of hypotheses in the
Kolmogorov reﬁned turbulence theory through high-resolution simulations. Part 1. Velocity ﬁeld.
J. Fluid Mech., 309:113–156, 1996.

[47] T. Watanabe and T. Gotoh. Statistics of a passive scalar in homogeneous turbulence. New J.

[48] P. Wesseling. An introduction to multigrid methods. Wiley, New York, 1992.
[49] S. Whitaker. The Forchheimer equation: a theoretical development. Transp. Porous Media,

Phys., 6(40):1–36, 2004.

25:27–61, 1996.

[50] Y. Yamazaki, T. Ishihara, and Y. Kaneda. Eﬀects of wavenumber truncation on high-resolution

direct numerical simulation of turbulence. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 71(3):777–781, 2002.

[51] P. K. Yeung and J. G. Brasseur. The response of isotropic turbulence to isotropic and anisotropic

forcing at the large scales. Phys. Fluids A, 3(5):884–897, 1991.

[52] A. J. Young. Investigation of Renormalization Group Methods for the Numerical Simulation of

Isotropic Turbulence. Phd thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1999.

