6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Large scale ﬂow eﬀects, energy transfer, and self-similarity on turbulence

P.D. Mininni, A. Alexakis, and A. Pouquet
NCAR, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307-3000, U.S.A.
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

The eﬀect of large scales on the statistics and dynamics of turbulent ﬂuctuations is studied
using data from high resolution direct numerical simulations. Three diﬀerent kinds of forcing,
and spatial resolutions ranging from 2563 to 10243, are being used. The study is carried out
by investigating the nonlinear triadic interactions in Fourier space, transfer functions, structure
functions, and probability density functions. Our results show that the large scale ﬂow plays an
important role in the development and the statistical properties of the small scale turbulence. The
role of helicity is also investigated. We discuss the link between these ﬁndings and intermittency,
deviations from universality, and possible origins of the bottleneck eﬀect. Finally, we brieﬂy describe
the consequences of our results for the subgrid modeling of turbulent ﬂows.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The nature of the interactions in a turbulent ﬂow has
been a long standing problem. Most investigations are fo-
cused on statistically homogeneous and isotropic turbu-
lence. However, in most cases in nature this assumption
is not necessarily true. Instead, one usually ﬁnds turbu-
lence to be embedded in a large scale ﬂow. In these cases,
turbulence originates from some instability (e.g. convec-
tion) and is not uniformly distributed in space and time.
To what extend the ﬂow is approaching a statistically
homogeneous and isotropic state as smaller and smaller
scales are developed is still an open problem.

Due to insuﬃcient computational resources (e.g in as-
trophysics, weather and climate prediction, for tokamaks,
and in industrial applications) the computational eﬀorts
to study turbulent ﬂows at these high Reynolds numbers
are compelled to resort to modeling of the smaller scale
turbulent ﬂuctuations for which numerical resolution is
not available. However, in order to accurately model the
small scales a good understanding of the impact of the
large scale ﬂow in the small scales is needed, in addition
to the knowledge of what (if any) is the feedback of the
small scale turbulent ﬂow on the large scale structures.
This latter process is usually modeled by an eﬀective vis-
cosity, or other forms of subgrid modeling of the Reynolds
stress tensor. These two types of interactions (from large
to small and from small to large scales, or “downscal-
ing” and “upscaling”) are often considered to take place
only through a local cascade of energy, although there is
evidence that nonlocal interactions between widely sep-
arated scales are also relevant.

Studies of local and nonlocal interactions have been
done previously in direct numerical simulations (DNS),
although at moderate spatial resolutions and Reynolds
numbers [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. While some
of these studies supported the existence of nonlocal in-
teractions, it was argued by later studies that their pres-
ence was associated with moderate values of the Reynolds
number in the simulations, or that it was linked to the
precise deﬁnitions used for transfer functions and the in-
terpretation of the results. In some cases [5, 6, 7] large
eddy simulations (LES) were also used to extend the

range of Reynolds numbers studied, although if nonlocal
interactions are present the impact of the subgrid model
on the transfer is unclear and is a point of study in it-
self. Some of these studies also considered the eﬀect of
anisotropic or coherent large scale forcing (see e.g. Refs.
[4, 9, 10]). Evidence of nonlocal interactions between
large and small scales has been found also in experiments
[12, 13, 14]. Observations of the persistence of anisotropy
at small scales in experiments at large Reynolds numbers
[15, 16] and in the atmosphere [17] also suggest the exis-
tence of a direct coupling between disparate scales. The
presence of nonlocal interactions has also been associ-
ated in numerical studies with departures from univer-
sality and the development of intermittency [18]. Re-
cently, a new study at high resolution [19] presented a
detailed analysis of nonlocal interactions using DNS for
large Reynolds numbers, although for a particular and
coherent forcing function.

In this work we examine three diﬀerent kinds of ﬂows
in DNS in triple periodic boxes, generated by diﬀerent
body forces. We explore external forcings with and with-
out helicity, and forcings with either inﬁnite or short cor-
relation times. The energy injection scale is varied, as
well as the viscosity and spatial resolution of the runs, to
explore a wide range of Reynolds numbers and conﬁgu-
rations. In all cases, we observe the presence of nonlocal
interactions coexisting with a local direct cascade of en-
ergy. The intensity of the nonlocal interactions depends
on the transfer function studied. For a particular (highly
symmetric) forcing, we also observe a correlation between
regions of large scale shear and strong small scale gradi-
ents, supporting previous studies that linked intermittent
eﬀects with interactions with the large scale ﬂow.

II. SETUP AND THEORY

A. Equations, code, and simulations

For an incompressible ﬂuid with constant mass density,

the Navier-Stokes equations are:

∂tu + u · ∇u = −∇p + ν∇2u + f ,

(1)

2

velocity in the steady state of all the runs is U ≈ 1. To
asses the eﬀect of diﬀerent large scale stirring forces, we
used three expressions for the external force f . The ﬁrst
expression corresponds to a Taylor-Green (TG) ﬂow [22]
fTG = f0 [sin(kF x) cos(kF y) cos(kF z)ˆx−
− cos(kF x) sin(kF y) cos(kF z)ˆy] ,

(7)

where f0 is the force amplitude. This expression is not
a solution of the Euler’s equations, and as a result small
scales are generated fast when the ﬂuid is stirred with
this forcing. The resulting ﬂow has no net helicity, al-
though regions with strong positive and negative helicity
develop.

In order to study directly the eﬀect of helicity and its
transfer between diﬀerent scales, we also did simulations
using the Arn’old-Childress-Beltrami (ABC) forcing

fABC = f0 {[B cos(kF y) + C sin(kF z)] ˆx+
+ [A sin(kF x) + C cos(kF z)] ˆy +
+ [A cos(kF x) + B sin(kF y)] ˆz} ,

(8)

with A = 0.9, B = 1, and C = 1.1. The ABC ﬂow
is an eigenfunction of the curl and an exact solution of
the Euler equations. When the ﬂow is forced using this
expression, turbulence develops after an instability sets in
[23]. Unlike TG forcing, ABC forcing injects net helicity
into the ﬂow.

The amplitude and phase of these two forcings is kept
constant during the simulations, and as a result the ex-
ternal force has an inﬁnite correlation time. It is a com-
mon practice in studies of isotropic and homogeneous
turbulence to force in Fourier space injecting energy in
all modes in a Fourier shell and changing the phase of
each mode with a short correlation time. To compare
with the results of TG and ABC forcing, we also imple-
mented a random forcing

fRND = f0

ik × ˆx eik·x+φk

(9)

X|k|=kF

where the phase φk of each mode with wavevector k was
changed randomly with a correlation time τc that was
taken to be τc = 0.1T .

B. Scale interactions and transfer

∇ · u = 0,

(2)

where u is the velocity ﬁeld, p is the pressure divided by
the mass density, and ν is the kinematic viscosity. Here, f
is an external force that drives the turbulence. The mode
with the largest wavevector in the Fourier transform of
f is going to be denoted as kF and we are going to refer
to 2πk−1
F as the forcing scale. We also deﬁne the viscous
dissipation wavenumber as kν = (ǫ/ν3)1/4, where ǫ is the
energy injection rate (as a result, the Kolmogorov scale
is η = 2π/kν). A large separation between the two scales
(k−1
ν ) is required for the ﬂow to reach a turbulent
state.

F ≫ k−1

In the absence of external forcing and viscosity, the
Navier-Stokes equations in three dimensions have two
ideal invariants: the energy

and the helicity

E =

u2dx3 ,

1
2 Z

H =

u · ∇ × u dx3 .

1
2 Z

All the results discussed in the following sections result
from analysis of data from direct numerical simulations
of the Navier-Stokes equations. We solve Eqs. (1) and
(2) using a parallel pseudospectral code in a three dimen-
sional domain of size 2π with periodic boundary condi-
tions [20, 21]. The pressure is obtained by taking the
divergence of Eq. (1), using the incompressibility con-
dition (2), and solving the resulting Poisson equation.
The equations are evolved in time using a second order
Runge-Kutta method. The code uses the 2/3-rule for
dealiasing, and as a result the maximum wavenumber is
kmax = N/3 where N is the number of grid points in each
direction. All simulations presented are well resolved, in
the sense that the dissipation wavenumber kν is smaller
than the maximum wavenumber kmax at all times.

The Reynolds number is deﬁned as Re = U L/ν, where
U is the r.m.s. velocity and L is the integral lengthscale
of the ﬂow

L = 2π

E(k)k−1dk
E(k)dk

,

R

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

R
where E(k) is the energy spectrum. The large scale
turnover time can then be deﬁned as T = U/L. We
can also introduce the Taylor based Reynolds number
Rλ = U λ/ν, where the Taylor lengthscale λ is given by

E(k)dk
E(k)k2dk (cid:19)

1/2

.

λ = 2π

(cid:18) R
R

Several simulations were done with diﬀerent resolu-
tions (from N = 256 to 1024) and kinematic viscosities.
Table I shows the parameters for all the runs. The rms

To investigate the interactions between diﬀerent scales
we split the velocity ﬁeld into spherical shells in Fourier
vK where vK is a
space of unit width, i.e. v =
ﬁltered velocity ﬁeld such that only the Fourier modes in
the shell K ≤ |k| < K + 1 (from now on called shell K)
are kept. From equation (1), the rate of energy transfer
T3(K, P, Q) (a third-order correlator) from energy in shell
Q to energy in shell K due to the interaction with the
velocity ﬁeld in shell P is deﬁned as usual [19, 24, 25, 26]
as:

P

K

T3(K, P, Q) = −

vK · (vP · ∇)vQdx3 .

(10)

Z

TABLE I: Parameters used in the simulations. N is the linear
grid resolution, f the forcing used, kF the forcing wavenum-
ber, ν the kinematic viscosity, Re the Reynolds number, and
Rλ the Taylor based Reynolds number.

Run
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII

N
256
512
1024
256
256
512
1024
256

f
TG
TG
TG
ABC
ABC
ABC
ABC
RND

kF
2
2
2
10
3
3
3
1

ν
2 × 10
1.5 × 10
3 × 10
2.5 × 10
2 × 10
6.2 × 10
2.5 × 10
1.5 × 10

−3

−3

−4

−3

−3

−4

−4

−3

Re
675
875
3950
275
820
2520
6200
2030

Rλ
300
350
800
230
360
670
1100
650

Note that this term does not give information about the
energy the shell P receives or gives to the shells K and
Q. The computation of T3 for the three shells K, P , and
Q from 1 up to a wavenumber Kmax requires ∼ K 3
maxN 3
operations and is therefore demanding in computer re-
sources. For example, in the 10243 simulations, to com-
pute T3(K, P, Q) for all wavenumbers up to Kmax = 80
it takes the equivalent in computing time than to evolve
the hydrodynamic code for two turnover times.

If we sum over the middle wave number P we obtain
the total energy transfer T2(K, Q) from shell Q to shell
K:

T2(K, Q) =

T3(K, P, Q) = −

vK · (v · ∇)vQdx3 .

XP

Z

(11)
Positive transfer implies that energy is transfered from
shell Q to K, and negative from K to Q; thus, both T3
and T2 are antisymmetric in their (K, Q) arguments (see
Ref.
[26]). T2(K, Q) gives information on the shell-to-
shell energy transfer between K and Q, but not about
the amplitude of the triadic interactions themselves.

If we further sum over the wave number Q we obtain

the transfer

Z

Z

XQ

k

XK=0

K

XK ′=0

that expresses the rate the shell K receives energy from
the velocity ﬁeld (all shells).

The energy ﬂux is reobtained from these transfer func-

tions as

Π(k) = −

T1(K) = −

K(v · ∇)vK dx3
v<

(13)

where the notation

v<

K =

vK ′ and v>

K =

vK ′

(14)

∞

XK ′=K+1

is used (see Ref. [27]).

3

We can further deﬁne the ﬂux of energy at some given

scale due to the interactions with some other scale as

ΠP (k) = −

T3(K, P, Q) = −

K·(vP ·∇)v>dx3 ,
v<

Z

k

XK=0 XQ

(15)
which expresses the ﬂux of energy at the scale K −1 due
to the interactions with the scale P −1 or in other words
the energy ﬂux at the scale K −1 if the velocity ﬁeld was
advected just by the velocity ﬁeld at scale P −1. As will
be discussed later, the question of locality depends on
which of the diﬀerent transfer functions or ﬂux is under
investigation.

It is worth noticing that through the study of the three
functions T1, T2, T3, and the ﬂuxes ΠP , we can measure
the nature and intensity of the interactions directly, and
therefore we avoid introducing a non-locality parameter
as was done e.g. in Refs. [6, 7].

The total energy balance equation for a given shell is

written as

∂tE(K) = T1(K) + νD(K) + F (K)

(16)

where we have also introduced the dissipation function

νDu(K) ≡ ν

|∇uK|2dx3,

(17)

Z

and the energy injection rate to the velocity ﬁeld through
the forcing term

F (K) ≡

f · uK dx3 .

Z

(18)

Finally, we will also investigate the transfer of helicity
among diﬀerent scales. Taking the inner product of the
Navier-Stokes equation 1 with the vorticity at a scale
K −1 (wK = ∇ × uK) and adding the inner product of
the velocity at the same scale K −1 with the curl of 1 and
space averaging we obtain:

Q
R
wK · F dx3 + ν

P

R

R

wK · ∇ × wKdx3. (19)

Each term of the sum in the ﬁrst term in the r.h.s of the
equation above can be written as:

TH (K, Q) =

wK · (u × wQ)dx3 ,

(20)

Z

Note that the anti-symmetric property TH(K, Q) =
−TH(Q, K) holds for TH(K, Q) i.e. the rate the shell K
is gaining helicity from the interaction with the ﬁeld wQ
and u is equal to the rate the shell Q is loosing helicity
through the same interaction. This allows us to interpret
TH(K, Q) as the transfer of helicity from the scale Q−1
to the scale K −1 (see [28] for the equivalent deﬁnition of
the magnetic helicity transfer).

T1(K) =

T2(K, Q) = −

vK · (v · ∇)vdx3

(12)

∂tH(K) =

wK · (u × wQ)dx3 +

4

FIG. 1: (Color online) Rendering of enstrophy density in a
1024 × 64 × 1024 slice of Run III. Bands of strong (1,2,3,4)
and weak (A,B,C,D) shear in the external Taylor-Green force
are indicated. The bars at the bottom show respectively the
integral, Taylor, and dissipation scales.

III.

INFLUENCE OF THE LARGE SCALE

FLOW ON TURBULENCE

We discuss in this section properties of Run III. First
we describe the geometry of the resulting ﬂow and we
present general statistical results, such as probability
density functions and structure functions. Then, we ana-
lyze in detail the scale interactions using the formulation
discussed in the previous section. Preliminary results for
this ﬂow were presented in [19]. The results discussed
here will be used as a reference to compare with the rest
of the simulations in the following sections.

A. Statistical properties, structure functions, and
scaling exponents

Run III is a 10243 simulation using TG forcing. Af-
ter reaching a turbulent steady state, the simulation was
continued for 10 turnover times. The expression of the
forcing has several spatial symmetries, and some of these
symmetries are recovered in the ﬂow in a statistical sense.
Figure 1 shows a rendering of enstrophy density in a thin
slice of 1024 × 64 × 1024 grid points. Thin and elongated
structures (vortex tubes) can be identiﬁed. As observed
in previous studies, these structures are characterized by
one large lengthscale in one direction (ranging from the
Taylor to the integral scale) and a short lengthscale (close
to the viscous dissipation scale) in the other two direc-
tions.

FIG. 2: (Color online) Zoom on a region with large enstrophy
density and ﬁeld lines inside (above) and in its surrounding
(below) in Run III. Flow ﬁeld lines are helical inside and in
the vicinity of the tube. Note the merging of two tubes in the
south west corner. The side of the region shown is approxi-
mately one tenth of the side of the total domain.

Since kF = 2, there are four planes in the z direction
where the external force is zero (see Eq. 7) and the shear
is maximum. In the steady state turbulent ﬂow, these
planes can be easily recognized since four bands where
the vorticity is stronger are formed around them. Re-
gions with less (or weaker) vortex tubes separate these
planes, regions centered around the planes where the
large scale shear has a minimum. Together, these regions
form a large scale pattern that is observed to persist for
long times, giving four “quiet” stripes and four stripes
of “stronger” turbulence (the boundary between these
regions is not well deﬁned and ﬂuctuates in space and
time, see Fig. 1). Considering the persistence of these
statistical symmetries of the ﬂow, the velocity increments
for this Run will be computed for displacements only in
the x-y plane.

When individual vortex tubes are studied, it is seen
that the ﬂow inside and surrounding the vortex tube is
helical, as noted before [29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. Figure 2
shows a rendering of a small region in the domain (ap-
proximately one tenth of the box). A region of large
enstrophy density is indicated by dark (blue) colors, and

5

FIG. 3: Energy spectrum compensated by k−5/3 for Run III.
The inset shows the energy ﬂux.

FIG. 5: Probability density functions of transverse velocity
increments with l = 10η for Run III. The solid line corre-
sponds to the whole domain, dashed lines to regions 1 to 4
(strong shear), and dotted lines to regions A to D (weak shear;
see Fig. 1). Notice the weak but systematic diﬀerences.

FIG. 4: Probability density functions of transverse velocity
increments for Run III, for increments l = 20η (· · · ), l = 10η
(− − −), l = 4η (− · −), l = 2η (− · · · −), and l = η (solid
line), where η is the Kolmogorov dissipation scale.

ﬁeld lines inside and in the vicinity of the enstrophy con-
taining region are shown. In this region and its surround-
ings, ﬁeld lines are helical, while the ﬂow far from the
region is not. This feature has been veriﬁed for a large
set of vortex tubes in the complete domain. It has been
claimed in the past [34, 35] that the development of these
helical structures in a turbulent ﬂow can lead to the de-
pletion of nonlinearity and a quenching of local interac-
tions. We will come back to this issue in the following
sections.

In spite of the presence of the large scale pattern, many
features often associated with isotropic and homogeneous
turbulence can be observed in this simulation. Figure 3
shows the angle-averaged Fourier energy spectrum and
energy ﬂux. An inertial range with constant energy ﬂux
is observed, together with a Kolmogorov-like scaling and

FIG. 6: Probability density functions of transverse velocity
increments with l = 2η for Run III. Same labels as in Fig. 5.

a bottleneck as the dissipative range is reached. When
probability density functions (pdfs) of transverse velocity
increments

δv⊥(x, l) = ˆr × [v(x + lˆr) − v(x)] ,

(21)

are computed in the whole domain (Fig. 4), we observe
distributions close to Gaussian for large increments, and
the development of exponential and stretched exponen-
tial tails as the increment l is decreased.

6

δvk(x, l) = ˆr · [v(x + lˆr) − v(x)] .

(22)

Figures 7 and 8 show respectively the second and third
order longitudinal structure functions, where the struc-
ture function of order p is deﬁned as

Sp(l) =

δvp

k(x, l)
E

.

D

(23)

At scales smaller than the dissipation scale the ﬁeld is
smooth and the structure function of order p scales as lp.
Kolmogorov’s 1941 theory of turbulence predicts in the
inertial range a scaling Sp(l) ∼ lp/3, although corrections
due to intermittency are known and in general Sp(l) ∼
lζp, where ζp are the scaling exponents.

As with pdfs of velocity increments, a clear trend sep-
arating regions of strong and weak shear is observed. In
the range of scales corresponding to the inertial range,
the four regions with strong shear (regions 1,2,3 and
4) show a larger slope than the four regions with weak
shear. The slope of the structure function computed in
the whole box lies between these two values. Consider-
ing the results from both pdfs and structure functions,
a correlation is observed between small scale gradients
and large scale shear. Note that a correlation between
stronger tails in the pdfs of velocity increments and vor-
tex tubes has already been observed in [33, 36]. Here,
a correlation between these quantities with large scale
[18]
shear is further observed, in agreement with Ref.
that suggests intermittency is related with interactions
with the large scale ﬂow.

B.

Interactions, energy transfer, and ﬂux

Figure 9 shows the functions T3(K, P, Q) and T2(K, Q)
evaluated at Q = 40 in the turbulent steady state of Run
III. When triadic interactions between shells are stud-
ied, the strongest interactions are with the shell P = 3,
where the large scale forcing is. Local interactions be-
tween Fourier shells (K ∼ P ∼ Q) are two orders of mag-
nitude smaller than nonlocal interactions with P ∼ kF .
As a result, when T3(K, P, Q) is summed over all P to
obtain the shell-to-shell energy transfer T2(K, Q), the en-
ergy is observed to be transfered to small scales locally
between shells, but with a step proportional to kF . In
T2(K, Q), the negative peak at K ∼ Q−kF means energy
is transfered from this shell to the shell Q, while the pos-
itive peak at K ∼ Q + kF indicates energy is transfered
to this shell from the shell Q.

The function T3(K, P, Q) was studied in the steady
state of this run also for Q = 10 and Q = 20, obtaining
the same quantitative results: a dominance (when com-
pared in amplitude) of triadic interactions with the large
scale ﬂow over local triadic interactions. The T2(K, Q)
function for all values of Q between 10 and 80 also peaks
at K ≈ Q ± kF (see Ref.
[19]). These peaks at ﬁxed
values of K − Q in T2(K, Q) are just the signature of the

FIG. 7: First order structure function S1(l) for Run III. The
solid line corresponds to the whole domain, dashed lines to
regions 1,2,3, and 4, and dotted lines to regions A,B,C, and D.
The Kolmogorov scaling and the linear slope corresponding
to a smooth ﬂow are shown as a reference. The arrow indi-
cates the Kolmogorov scale η. Notice again the systematic
diﬀerences between the two regimes identiﬁed in Fig. 1.

FIG. 8: Second order structure function S2(l) for Run III.
Labels are as in Fig. 7.

Figures 5 and 6 show pdfs of transverse velocity incre-
ments with l = 10η and 2η respectively, but discriminat-
ing between bands of strong and weak shear (as indicated
in Fig. 1). Bands with strong shear (1,2,3, and 4) have
slightly but systematically stronger tails (i.e. a larger
probability of strong gradients) than regions A,B,C, and
D. Note this behavior is true for each individual region,
and the diﬀerence increases as the increment l is de-
creased. This conﬁrms statistically what can be inferred
from Fig. 1: regions of strong shear have a larger density
of vortex tubes and stronger gradients.

We can also compute longitudinal velocity increments

7

FIG. 9: (Color online) Above: amplitude of triadic interac-
tions as given by T3(K, P, Q) at Q = 40 for Run III. Solid
lines correspond to positive contour levels, and dotted lines
to negative values. The dark (red) shaded region indicates
shells in P close to the forcing shell, while the light (orange)
shaded region indicates shells in P outside the local octave.
Below: total shell-to-shell energy transfer T2(K, Q), trans-
fer T LS
(K, Q) due to interactions with P close to the forcing
shell (dashed line), and diﬀerence between these two transfers
(dash-dotted line).

2

strong triadic interactions with the large scale forcing. If
we compute the shell-to-shell transfer between shells K
and Q due only to interactions with the large scale ﬂow

T LS
2

(K, Q) =

T3(K, P, Q) ,

(24)

6

XP =0

we obtain most of the shell-to-shell transfer (see Fig. 9).
The remaining transfer T2(K, Q) − T LS
2 (K, Q) still peaks
at larger wavenumbers, although it still does not peak at
K ∼ Q = 40. This is due to nonlocal interactions outside
the octave band not related with the large scale forcing
(light shaded region in Fig. 9). Note that the deﬁnition
of the range summed over P in Eq. (24), or of octave
bands (here deﬁned as Q/2 . K . 2Q) is somewhat
arbitrary.

As previously mentioned, while individual triadic in-
teractions as described by T3(K, P, Q) are dominantly
nonlocal, the shell-to-shell transfer T2(K, P, Q) describes
a local transfer of energy although through interactions
with the large scale ﬂow. Clearly when we sum over
shells, the larger number of modes in the small scales
start dominating over the large scale modes. Summing
further over K and Q, from Eq. (13) we can obtain the
total energy ﬂux. In analogy with Eq. (24) we can also
deﬁne the ﬂux due to interactions with the large scale

FIG. 10: Total energy ﬂux Π(k) in Run III (solid line), ﬂux
ΠLS(k) due to interactions with the large scale ﬂow (dashed
line), and nonlocal ﬂux ΠNL(k).

ﬂow (dark shaded region in Fig. 9)

ΠLS(k) =

ΠP (k) ,

(25)

and the nonlocal ﬂux due to interactions outside an oc-
tave band (light shaded regions in Fig. 9)

ΠNL(k) =

ΠP (k) ,

(26)

6

XP =0

k/2

XP =7

where ΠP (k) is deﬁned in eq. (15).

Figure 10 shows these three ﬂuxes in the steady state
of Run III. The large scale ﬂow is only responsible for a
small (but not insigniﬁcant) fraction of the total energy
ﬂux (ΠLS ≃ 0.2Π). Furthermore although the ampli-
tude of the nonlocal ﬂux ΠNL(k) depends on the deﬁ-
nition of an octave band, it is remarkable that it peaks
at wavenumbers close to the peak of the bottleneck in
the energy spectrum (see Fig.
3). This gives a di-
rect conﬁrmation that the bottleneck is due to the de-
pletion of the energy transfer due to local interactions
with K ∼ P ∼ Q. These interactions are inhibited be-
cause of the presence of a numerical and/or viscous cut-
oﬀ in wavenumber, and nonlocal triads become dominant
[37, 38, 39, 40]. Indeed, in Ref. [37] it was shown using
the eddy-damped quasinormal Markovian (EDQNM) ap-
proximation that the bottleneck dissapears if nonlocal in-
teractions are excluded from the computation. Note that
the spurious drop of the ﬂuxes ΠLS and ΠNL at k = 80 in
Fig. 10 is because the functions T3(Q, P, Q) and T2(K, Q)
were only computed up to this wavenumber.

Therefore there seems to be a hierarchy concerning
the importance of nonlocality when one investigates the
transfer functions. At the most basic level when one in-
vestigates the transfer function T3 the interactions with
the large scale ﬂow are the strongest ones. When aver-
aged over the middle wave number the resulting energy

8

FIG. 11: Scale variation of the ﬂux ratio ΠLS/Π for increasing
Reynolds numbers; Runs I (dash-dot line), II (dash line), and
III (solid line). Note the wavenumber range where ΠLS/Π
becomes constant only for the highest resolution run.

transfer T2 becomes local but not self-similar with a max-
imum at K − Q ∼ kF . When averaged further to obtain
the energy ﬂux the non local interactions are only respon-
sible for 20% of the ﬂux.

FIG. 12: Compensated energy spectrum k5/3E(k) (solid
line) and helicity spectrum k5/3H(k)/kF (dashed line) in the
steady state of Run VII, where kF is the forcing wavenumber.

higher Reynolds number than what is accomplished here
are needed to determine how does this ratio scale with
the Reynolds number.

V. EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT FORCING
FUNCTIONS

IV. SCALING WITH REYNOLDS

A. Forcing expression and correlation time

In this section we discuss results from runs I, II, and
III. The three runs are forced using Eq. 7, and the only
parameters changed between the runs are the spatial res-
olution and the kinematic viscosity. This investigation
allows us to study how the results about the non-local
interactions change as we increase the Reynolds number.
Qualitatively the functions T3(K, P, Q) and T2(K, Q) are
similar for all the three runs: the strongest interactions
(T3(K, P, Q)) are with the large scale ﬂow and the en-
ergy transfer (T2(K, Q)) is local with the two peaks at
K − Q ∼ kF . For this reason we focus here in the study
of the local and nonlocal ﬂux of energy as the Reynolds
number is changed.

In Figure 11 we show the ratio of the ﬂux ΠLS(k) to
the total ﬂux Π(k). As discussed in the previous section,
the ﬂux due to interactions with the large ﬂow gets di-
minished as we sum over more and more modes. As a
result, in the inertial range of Run III interactions with
the large scale ﬂow are only responsible for ∼ 20% of
the energy ﬂux.
In the smaller Reynolds number runs
(I and II), the amount of ﬂux due to interactions with
the large scale ﬂow is larger. This implies that as we
increase the Reynolds number the fraction of the energy
ﬂux in the inertial range due to interactions with the
large scale ﬂow decreases. However, note that in Run
III a region in the inertial range where the ratio ΠLS/Π
is approximately constant is observed. This region with
constant ratio ΠLS/Π is not present in the simulations
with lower Reynolds number. Therefore DNS with even

Nonlocal interactions discussed in the previous section
were observed for runs with large scale non-helical forc-
ing with inﬁnite correlation time. It is of interest to know
how much of these results translate to other kind of forc-
ings.
In this section we compare results for runs III,
VII and VIII. Run VII is a 10243 simulation with con-
stant helical forcing, and as runs I-III, it also displays a
well deﬁned large scale ﬂow (for descriptions of the ABC
ﬂow, see e.g. Ref.
In Run VIII the phases of
the forcing function are changed randomly with a short
correlation time. Although the resolution in this run is
smaller (2563), we will focus here on the eﬀect of the forc-
ing, since a systematic study of changing the Reynolds
number for ﬁxed forcing was presented in the previous
section.

[41]).

Figure 12 shows the compensated energy and helic-
ity spectrum in the turbulent steady state of Run VII.
As previously observed [42, 43, 44, 45] the spectrum of
helicity follows a Kolmogorov’s law and is proportional
to kF E(k). The transfer of helicity will be discussed in
Section VI.

Figure 13 shows the scaling exponents ζp of the longitu-
dinal structure functions, computed for runs III and VII.
The extended self-similarity (ESS) hypothesis [47, 48]
was used to compute the anomalous exponents which
show similar behavior for both runs . However, the re-
sulting exponents for p > 3 from Run IV (ABC forcing)
are slightly smaller than the exponents from Run II (TG
forcing). Note that the diﬀerence between the scaling ex-

9

FIG. 13: Scaling exponents of velocity structure functions ζp
as a function of order p in Runs III (TG forcing) and VII
(ABC forcing). The Kolmogorov K41 scaling is indicated,
as well as the She-Leveque (SL) prediction [46]. Note the
diﬀerence between TG and ABC.

FIG. 14: Shell-to-shell energy transfer function T2(K, Q) for
Run III. Each curve corresponds to a diﬀerent value of Q,
from 10 to 80.

ponents for TG and ABC at order p = 4, though small,
is nevertheless an order of magnitude larger than the er-
ror arising from measuring them by virtue of the ESS
hypothesis which leads to negligible errors (e.g.
in Run
III ζ4 = 1.2737 ± 0.0005 and ζ8 = 2.136 ± 0.006, while in
Run VII ζ4 = 1.2647 ± 0.0005 and ζ8 = 2.026 ± 0.008).
However, it is unclear whether this observed diﬀerence
is due to departure from universality between these two
ﬂows or to problems linked with using the ESS methodol-
ogy. This point will necessitate further study with better
resolved ﬂows.

The shell-to-shell energy transfer T2(K, Q) for Run VII
is shown in Fig.
14. As for non-helical forcing (see
Sec. III and Ref. [26]) the shell-to-shell transfer function
peaks at K ≈ Q ± kF , indicating the transfer of energy
is local but mediated by nonlocal interactions with the
large scales. If we sum over K and Q to obtain the en-
ergy ﬂux, we reobtain the results discussed in Sec. IV
for Run III: most of the energy ﬂux is local, although

FIG. 15: Shell-to-shell energy transfer function T2(K, Q) for
runs with diﬀerent forcing wavenumbers kF as indicated by
the vertical lines; Run VIII with kF = 1 (a), Run V with
kF = 3 (b), and Run IV with kF = 10 (c). In each panel,
the several curves correspond to diﬀerent values of Q in the
inertial and dissipative ranges. Note that for each run, the
peak of energy transfer is centered close to kF .

in the inertial range ∼ 20% of the total ﬂux is due to
interactions with the large scale forcing.

The transfer function T2(K, Q) was also computed in
the turbulent steady state of Run VIII (see Fig. 15.a).
In this run the phases of the external force are changed
randomly with a short correlation time. It is noteworthy
that even in this case with isotropic and random forcing,
evidence is found of nonlocal interactions with the large
forcing scale: the T2(K, Q) function peaks at K ≈ Q±kF
for all wavenumbers Q studied (note that in this run kF =
1).

B. Forcing scale

Through all this work we have shown transfer functions
indicating the energy is locally transfered between scales
but with a ﬁxed step that we associated with the forcing
scale. In this subsection we compare the transfer function
T2(K, Q) in simulations forced at diﬀerent wavenumbers.
Figure 15 shows T2(K, Q) for several values of Q com-
puted in the steady state of runs VIII (kF = 1, IV
(kF = 2), and V (kF = 10). A clear correlation is ob-
served between the position of the peaks (|K − Q|) in the
shell-to-shell transfer function, and the forcing wavenum-
ber kF . In the last case, the peaks at |K − Q| slightly
smaller than kF could be associated with low Reynolds
number eﬀects.

10

FIG. 16: The spectrum of relative helicity H(k)/kE(k) com-
pensated by k−1. Note that the region where the spectrum is
ﬂat indicates a power law of k
A k1/2 slope is shown only as a reference. The increase at
−5/3 law for the
large k is indicative of a breakdown of the k

−1 in the relative helicity.

helicity spectrum.

FIG. 17: Energy spectrum compensated by k−5/3 for Runs V
(dashed line), VI (dotted line), and VII (solid line). All runs
are for ABC forcing at diﬀerent Reynolds numbers. Note the
wavenumber on the x-axis has been divided by the dissipation
wavenumber to make all dissipation ranges coincide. A slope
of 1/3 close to the bottleneck (corresponding to a power law
−4/3 in the energy spectrum) is shown as a reference.
of k

VI. HELICITY TRANSFER

The transfer of helicity is readily studied in Run VII,
since the external forcing injects maximum helicity and
all scales are dominated by the same sign of helicity. We
will make no attempt here to separate the diﬀerent signs
of helicity in the simulations (see e.g. Refs. [43, 44, 49]).
Before discussing the transfer of helicity, it is of interest
to study some of its spectral properties. As previously
discussed, the spectrum of helicity follows an approxi-
mate k−5/3 law (see Fig. 12). As a result, the relative
helicity H(k)/E(k)k follows in the inertial range a k−1
slope [25] (i.e.
small scales are less helical than large
scales). It was predicted in Refs. [50, 51] that the dissi-
pation scale of helicity should be larger than the energy
dissipation scale, giving as a result a drop in the spectrum
of relative helicity faster than k−1 for small scales. This
argument would be in agreement with the idea that small
scales slowly recover the mirror symmetry broken by the
injection of helicity in the large scales. However, previ-
ous simulations [45] and this high resolution run suggest
there is an excess of relative helicity in the small scales,
when compared with the k−1 drop. Note that this slower
than predicted recovery of symmetries in the small scales
is also in agreement with the slower than expected recov-
ery of isotropy observed in experiments [15, 16].

Figure 16 shows the spectrum of relative helicity
H(k)/kE(k) compensated by k−1 (i.e., H(k)/E(k)). A
scaling of k−1 thus corresponds to a ﬂat spectrum in Fig.
16, as observed through the inertial range. However, at
small scales the compensated spectrum of relative helic-
ity grows, indicating the spectrum of helicity H(k) at
small scales is dropping slower than the spectrum of en-
ergy E(k) (see also Fig. 12). This can be associated with
the presence of vortex tubes, that are known to be helical
(see Fig. 2). It has also been claimed [35] that the pres-

ence of helicity is associated with nonlocal interactions.
In fact, in a maximally helical ﬂow interactions are de-
pleted because the nonlinear term in the Navier-Stokes
equation is exactly zero.

The eﬀect of helicity (and indirectly of nonlocal inter-
actions through the introduction of a second time-scale in
the problem, to distinguish between the eddy turn-over
time and a helical characteristic time) has also been used
to explain the development of the bottleneck eﬀect that
occurs at the onset of the dissipative range, see e.g. [52].
Ref. [52] predicts a k−4/3 energy spectrum for the bottle-
neck, that we found compatible with our spectra for runs
V-VII (Fig. 17). However, we also observe a k−4/3 range
close to the bottleneck in the Taylor-Green ﬂow that has
no net helicity. Furthermore, the transition from the in-
ertial range to the bottleneck seems to be dependent on
the Reynolds number, suggesting the bottleneck is of a
dissipative nature, instead of an inertial range feature as
[52] suggest. It is worth noting
the arguments in Ref.
that while at resolutions of 2563 mostly a bottleneck is
observed, in the 10243 runs a short Kolmogorov-like scal-
ing is found before the bottleneck takes place. The ori-
gin of the bottleneck based on the dominance of nonlocal
interactions in the dissipative range has also been inves-
tigated [37, 38, 39, 40] as we discussed in Sec. III, and
is independent of the presence of helicity. However, the
prediction in Ref. [38] for the spectral shape of the bot-
tleneck is in disagreement with the spectra obtained in
all simulations here. These points deserve further study
at higher resolution if one is to be able to distinguish
between the diﬀerent ranges that may be occurring.

Finally, we discuss the shell-to-shell helicity transfer
TH(K, Q) in Run VII (Fig. 18). As for the transfer of
energy, the helical transfer function peaks at K ≈ Q±kF ,
although this transfer is noisier. The helicity cascades di-

11

tion was observed to be persist even at scales as small
as the dissipation scale. Small diﬀerences were also ob-
served in the anomalous scaling of the structure func-
tions for TG and ABC forcing. However, it is unclear
whether this is related with non-universal eﬀects asso-
ciated with interactions with the large scale forcing, or
with the use of the ESS hypothesis. For individual vor-
tex tubes in several ﬂows, we veriﬁed that the ﬂow in-
side and surrounding the vortex tube is helical, as found
before [29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. Note that the development
of helical structures in a turbulent ﬂow can lead to the
depletion on nonlinearity and a quenching of local inter-
actions [34, 35].

Concerning the energy transfer and triadic interac-
tions, we conﬁrmed for several forcing functions that the
cascade of energy is local between Fourier shells, although
it is strongly mediated by individual triadic interactions
which are nonlocal in nature. As a result, the energy
cascades from one shell to the next with a ﬁxed step pro-
portional to the forcing wavenumber kF . This eﬀect was
observed even in simulations using random forcing with a
correlation time one order of magnitude smaller than the
large scale turnover time. No qualitative diﬀerences have
been observed as the Reynolds number was changed.

However, the degree of nonlocality observed depends
on the quantity studied. A hierarchy is found in the
relative amplitude of nonlocal eﬀects in triadic interac-
tions, the shell-to-shell energy transfer, and the energy
ﬂux. Triadic interactions are dominated by interactions
with the large scale ﬂow. As more modes are summed to
deﬁne the shell-to-shell transfer and the ﬂux, the larger
population of small scale modes starts dominating, and
in the 10243 simulations the large scale ﬂow is responsible
for only ∼ 20% of the total ﬂux.

An increase of the relative contribution of nonlocal
interactions (with the large scale ﬂow and with modes
outside the octave band studied) in the total ﬂux is ob-
served as the dissipative range is reached. This result is
in good agreement with claims that the bottleneck eﬀect
is due to the quenching of local interactions at the end
of the inertial range because of the presence of a cut-oﬀ
in wavenumbers [37, 39, 40].

It is worth noting that the local energy cascade through
nonlocal interactions, or non negligible nonlocal interac-
tions, have been observed in the past in simulations at
lower Reynolds numbers (see e.g. Refs. [2, 5, 9, 10]). Our
results conﬁrm the presence of interactions between dis-
parate scales in a turbulent ﬂow at much larger Reynolds
numbers, and for a variety of forcing functions and forc-
ing scales. The results discussed here also shed some light
on the controversy in the literature about the relevance
of the nonlocal interactions. It has been claimed that in-
teractions are local if a diﬀerent measure for the locality
is introduced [6, 7], or if wavelets or a binning of Fourier
space in octaves is used [11] (note that wavelets naturally
introduce a binning in octaves of the spectral space). The
hierarchy found in the diﬀerent transfer functions is the
reason for this apparent inconsistency between previous

FIG. 18: Shell-to-shell helicity transfer TH (K, Q) in Run VII,
for all values of Q from 10 to 80.

rectly to smaller scales as the energy, conﬁrming previous
studies [42, 43, 44, 45]. The helicity is not a positive def-
inite quantity, and as a result both signs of the transfer
can indicate a direct cascade depending on the sign of
the helicity itself. Moreover, as we study smaller scales
and the relative helicity decreases, both signs have more
predominance increasing the noise observed in TH(K, Q).

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We start by summarizing our results. The energy
transfer, triadic interactions, and statistical ﬂow prop-
erties were studied in several high resolution DNS with
periodic boundaries. The spatial resolution ranged from
2563 to 10243. The Reynolds number based on the in-
tegral scale spanned values from Re ≈ 275 to 6200,
while the Taylor-based Reynolds number varied between
Rλ ≈ 230 and 1100. Three forcing functions were used,
two coherent functions with zero and maximum net he-
licity respectively, and a random forcing with a short cor-
relation time. The energy injection scale was also varied
to study its impact on the energy transfer.

Most statistical studies were done for Run III, a high
resolution simulation with Rλ ≈ 800 and TG forcing.
The forcing and the resulting ﬂow have spatial symme-
tries that allow us to identify planes with strong and weak
large scale shear easily. While in the whole domain the
standard results were reobtained (e.g. exponential and
stretched exponential tails in the pdfs of velocity incre-
ments, and anomalous scaling of the structure functions),
when studying individual regions a correlation between
large scale shear and small scale gradients was found. In
regions of strong shear, the tails of the pdfs of velocity in-
crements are stronger than in regions of weak shear, even
at scales as small as twice the dissipation scale. Also,
structure functions show a slightly larger slope in regions
of strong large scale shear.

A correlation between stronger tails in the pdfs of ve-
locity increments and the presence of vortex tubes has
already been observed in diﬀerent decompositions of the
ﬂow [33, 36]. Here, we observed a correlation between
these quantities and the large scale shear. The correla-

results. As more modes are summed (e.g. to deﬁne oc-
taves in spectral space, or to deﬁne our partial ﬂuxes
ΠP ), the small scales overcome the triadic interactions
with the large scale ﬂow, and local interactions give the
largest contribution. This is also in agreement with re-
cent theoretical results about the locality of the energy
ﬂux [53], or the locality of the shell-to-shell energy trans-
fer in Fourier octave bands [54, 55].

The fact that in simulations with Rλ ∼ 1000 most
of the ﬂux is due to local interactions, does not preclude
however the existence of strong nonlocal interactions with
the large scale ﬂow at the triadic interaction level, and
it should be kept in mind that even at large values of
Rλ these interactions are responsible for a non-negligible
fraction of the total ﬂux. The presence of nonlocal inter-
actions are a deviation from the standard hypothesis of-
ten associated with Kolmogorov’s (K41) theory [56], and
can possibly explain departures from self-similar models
of the higher order structure functions and controversial
results observed in experiments, such as the slower than
predicted recovery of isotropy in the small scales [16].

Similar results were obtained for the helicity transfer.
The injection of net helicity in the large scales breaks
down the mirror symmetry in the ﬂow. While conﬁrming
the direct cascade of helicity [42, 43, 44, 45], we also
found a slower than expected recovery of the symmetries
in the small scales, with an excess of relative helicity at
small scales compared with the k−1 expected drop. As
in the energy cascade, the cascade of helicity takes place
in ﬁxed steps proportional to the forcing scale, indicating
strong nonlocal triadic interactions.

Nonlocal interactions can also be responsible for ob-
served departures from universality. In [19] it was shown
with a simple dimensional argument how nonlocal inter-
actions can still be consistent with a k−5/3 energy spec-
trum. Vortex tube stretching by the large scale ﬂow plays
a signiﬁcant role, and the argument has points in com-
mon with multifractal models of intermittency, such as
the β model (see e.g. [27]). As previously mentioned, in

12

this work we showed evidence of a positive correlation of
large scale shear and small scale gradients, both in pdfs
of velocity increments and in structure functions. Ref.
[18] showed that the anomalous scaling of the structure
functions is reduced when nonlocal interactions with the
large scale ﬂow are artiﬁcially suppressed in a simulation.
Both results suggest that departures from K41 theory can
be associated with the imprint of the large scale forcing
in turbulence.

Finally, as previously indicated in [19], the existence
of non-negligible nonlocal interactions in a variety of tur-
bulent ﬂows gives support to models involving as an es-
sential agent of the nonlinear energy transfer the distor-
tion of turbulent eddies by a large-scale ﬂow (e.g. as in
rapid distortion theory and its variants [18, 57], or as in
the Lagrangian averaged Navier-Stokes equations [58, 59]
where the turbulent ﬂow interacts with a smooth velocity
ﬁeld). We believe the understanding of scale interactions
in turbulence can lead to the development of a new gen-
eration of subgrid models, beyond the usual hypothesis
of locality done in most Large Eddy Simulations.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to express their gratitude to
J.R. Herring for valuable discussions and his careful read-
ing of the manuscript. Computer time was provided by
NCAR and by the National Science Foundation Terascale
Computing System at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center. The NSF grant CMG-0327888 at NCAR sup-
ported this work in part and is gratefully acknowledged.
Three-dimensional visualizations of the ﬂow were done
using VAPoR, a software for interactive visualization and
analysis of terascale datasets [60]. The authors are grate-
ful to A. Norton and J. Clyne (SCD/CISL) for help with
the visualizations.

[1] J. A. Domaradzki, Phys. Fluids 31, 2747 (1988).
[2] J. A. Domaradzki and R. S. Rogallo, Phys. Fluids A 2,

[3] R. Kerr, J. Fluid Mech. 211, 309 (1990).
[4] P. K. Yeung and J. G. Brasseur, Phys. Fluids A 3, 884

pp. 437–472 (1997).

413 (1990).

(1991).

[5] K. Ohkitani and S. Kida, Phys. Fluids A 4, 794 (1992).
[6] Y. Zhou, Phys. Fluids A 5, 1092 (1993).
[7] Y. Zhou, Phys. Fluids A 5, 2511 (1993).
[8] J. G. Brasseur and C. H. Wei, Phys. Fluids 6, 842 (1994).
[9] P. K. Yeung, J. G. Brasseur, and Q. Wang, J. Fluid Mech.

283, 43 (1995).

[14] J. Carlier, J. P. Laval, and M. Stanislas, Compt. Rend.

de l’Academ. des Sci. Ser. II 329, 35 (2001).

[15] K. Sreenivasan and R. Antonia, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.

[16] X. Shen and Z. Warhaft, Phys. Fluids 12, 2976 (2000).
[17] R. Stewart, Radio Sci. 4, 1269 (1969).
[18] J.-P. Laval, B. Dubrulle, and S. Nazarenko, Phys. Fluids

[19] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

13, 1995 (2001).

Lett. 95, 264503 (2005).

Res. 35, 899 (2005).

[20] D. O. G´omez, P. D. Mininni, and P. Dmitruk, Adv. Sp.

[10] Y. Zhou and P. K. Yeung, Phys. Rev. E 53, 1261 (1996).
[11] K. Kishida, K. Araki, S. Kishiba, and K. Suzuki, Phys.

[21] D. O. G´omez, P. D. Mininni, and P. Dmitruk, Phys.

Scripta T116, 123 (2005).

Rev. Lett. 83, 5487 (1999).

[22] G. Taylor and A. Green, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Ser. A

[12] J. Wiltse and A. Glezer, J. Fluid Mech. 249, 261 (1993).
[13] J. Wiltse and A. Glezer, Phys. Fluids 10, 2026 (1998).

158, 499 (1937).

[23] O. Podvigina and A. Pouquet, Physica D 75, 471 (1994).

13

[24] R. Kraichnan, J. Fluid Mech. 47, 525 (1971).
[25] M. Lesieur, Turbulence in ﬂuids (Kluwer Acad. Press,

[26] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

(2004).

Dordrecht, 1997).

E 72, 046301 (2005).

[44] Q. Chen, S. Chen, G. L. Eyink, and D. D. Holm, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 90, 214503 (2003).

[45] D. O. G´omez and P. D. Mininni, Physica A 342, 69

[46] Z. S. She and E. L´evˆeque, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 336

[27] U. Frisch, Turbulence:

the legacy of A.N. Kolmogorov

(1994).

(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1995).

[47] R. Benzi, S. Ciliberto, C. Baudet, G. R. Chavarria, and

[28] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Astrophys.

R. Tripiccione, Europhys. Lett. 24, 275 (1993).

J. (2006), in press, physics/0509069.

[29] A. Tsinober and E. Levich, Phys. Lett. A 99, 321 (1983).
[30] H. Moﬀatt, J. Fluid Mech. 159, 359 (1985).
[31] H. Moﬀatt, J. Fluid Mech. 166, 359 (1986).
[32] E. Levich, Phys. Rep. 151, 129 (1987).
[33] M. Farge, G. Pellegrino, and K. Schneider, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 054501 (2001).

[48] R. Benzi, S. Ciliberto, R. Tripiccione, C. Baudet, F. Mas-
saioli, and S. Succi, Phys. Rev. E 48, R29 (1993).

[49] F. Waleﬀe, Phys. Fluids A 4, 350 (1991).
[50] P. D. Ditlevsen and P. Giuliani, Phys. Fluids 13, 3508

[51] P. D. Ditlevsen and P. Giuliani, Phys. Rev. E 63, 036304

(2001).

(2001).

[34] H. Moﬀatt and A. Tsinober, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 24,

[52] S. Kurien, M. Taylor, and T. Matsumoto, Phys. Rev. E

281 (1992).

[35] A. Tsinober, An informal

introduction to turbulence

(Kluwer Acad. Press, Dordrecht, 2001).

[36] T. S. Levi and D. C. Montgomery, Phys. Rev. E 63,

056311 (2001).

[37] J. R. Herring, D. Schertzer, M. Lesieur, G. R. Newman,
J. P. Chollet, and M. Larcheveque, J. Fluid Mech 124,
411 (1982).

[38] G. Falkovich, Phys. Fluids 6, 1411 (1994).
[39] D. Lohse and A. Mueller-Groeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,

1747 (1995).

[40] D. Mart´ınez, S. Chen, G. Doolen, R. Kraichnan, L.-P.
Wang, and Y. Zhou, J. Plasma Phys. 57, 195 (1997).
[41] S. Childress and A. Gilbert, Stretch, twist, fold: the fast

dynamo (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1995).

[42] V. Borue and S. A. Orszag, Phys. Rev. E 55, 7005 (1997).
[43] Q. Chen, S. Chen, and G. L. Eyink, Phys. Fluids 15, 361

(2003).

69, 066313 (2004).

[53] G. L. Eyink, Physica D 207, 91 (2005).
[54] G. L. Eyink, Physica D 78, 222 (1994).
[55] M. K. Verma, A. Ayyer, O. Debliquy, S. Kumar, and
A. V. Chandra, Pramana J. Phys. 65, 297 (2005).
[56] A. N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 30, 9 (1941).
[57] B. Dubrulle, J.-P. Laval, S. Nazarenko, and O. Zaboron-

ski, J. Fluid Mech. 520, 1 (2004).

[58] D. Holm, J. Marsden, and T. Ratiu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,

4173 (1998).

[59] S. Y. Chen, D. D. Holm, C. Foias, E. J. Olson, E. S. Titi,

and S. Wynne, Phys. Rev. Lett. pp. 5338–5341 (1998).

[60] J. Clyne and M. Rast, in Visualization and data analysis
2005, edited by R. F. Erbacher, J. C. Roberts, M. T.
Grohn, and K. Borner (SPIE, Bellingham, Wash., 2005),
pp. 284–294, http://www.vapor.ucar.edu.

